Small Animal
Toxicology
Essentials
Robert H. Poppenga
and Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant
vebsite
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Contents
Preface
Contributors
Section
1:
Fundamentals
of
Veterinary
Clinical
Toxicology
1 General Toxicologic Principles
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
CLASSIFICATION OF TOXICANTS
SPECTRUMOFUNDESIREDEFFECTS
INTERACTIONOFCHEMICALS
CHARACTERISTICSOFEXPOSURE
DOSE-RESPONSERELATIONSHIP
DEVELOPMENTAL
AND
REPRODUCTIVE
TOXICITY
TOXICOKINETICS
REFERENCES
2 Incidence of Poisoning in Small Animals
2
INTRODUCTION
DEMOGRAPHICS
AGENTS
SIGNS AND OUTCOMES
CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
3 Toxicology Information Resources
INTRODUCTION
EVALUATION OF RESOURCES
TYPES OF RESOURCES
REFERENCES
4 Taking a Toxicologic History
INTRODUCTION
PATIENT PRESENTATION
MEDICALRECORD
TELEPHONETRIAGE
CONCLUSION
3
REFERENCE
5 Essential Calculations
INTRODUCTION
DEFINITIONS
DETERMININGEXPOSUREAMOUNTS
SAMPLEANDPRACTICECALCULATIONS
REFERENCES
6 Initial Management of Acute Intoxications
TELEPHONE TRIAGE
HOSPITALPRESENTATION
VASCULAR
ACCESS
AND
THE
EMERGENCY
DATABASE
CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
7 Decontamination Procedures
SOURCES
CLINICAL EFFECTS
MANAGEMENT OF EXPOSURES
4
PROGNOSIS
REFERENCES
8 Antidotes
INTRODUCTION
CHEMICALANTIDOTES
PHARMACOLOGICALANTIDOTES
FUNCTIONALANTIDOTES
REFERENCES
9 Investigating Fatal Suspected Poisonings
INTRODUCTION
CAUSES OF SUDDEN DEATH
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
10 Toxicologic Testing and Using Diagnostic Laboratories
SOURCES
DIAGNOSTICS
MANAGEMENT OF EXPOSURES
REFERENCE
Section 2: A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
11 Nervous System
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
MECHANISMSOFTOXICOLOGICINJURY
PATTERNSOFTOXICOLOGICINJURY
HEALINGANDREPAIR
REFERENCES
12 Cardiovascular System
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
MECHANISMSOFTOXICINJURYTOTHEHEART
PATTERNS OF TOXIC INJURY TO THE HEART
CARDIOTOXIC AGENTS
Beta-adrenergic Blocking Agents
6
MECHANISMS
OF
TOXIC
INJURY
TO
THE
VASCULAR SYSTEM
CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
13 Pulmonary System
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
MECHANISMSANDPATTERNSOFRESPIRATORY
TRACT INJURY
HEALING AND REPAIR
LUNG CANCER
REFERENCES
14 Hepatobiliary System
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
MECHANISMSOFTOXICOLOGICINJURY
PATTERNSOFTOXICOLOGICINJURY
HEALINGANDREPAIR
REFERENCES
15 Urinary System
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGICAL INJURY
PATTERNSOFTOXICOLOGICALINJURY
HEALINGANDREPAIROFTHEURINARYSYSTEM
REFERENCES
16 Other Systems
ALIMENTARY TRACT
HEMATOPOIETIC
INTEGUMENTARY
MUSCULOSKELETALSYSTEM
REFERENCES
Section 3: Specifi c Toxicants
17 Rodenticides
INTRODUCTION
ANTICOAGULANTRODENTICIDES
8
BROMETHALIN
CHOLECALCIFEROL
STRYCHNINE
ZINC PHOSPHIDE
REFERENCES
18 Insecticides
AMITRAZ
ORGANOCHLORINES
ORGANOPHOSPHORUS
AND
CARBAMATE
INSECTICIDES
PYRETHRINSANDPYRETHROIDS
NEONICOTINOIDS
REFERENCES
19 Other Pesticides
INTRODUCTION
MISCELLANEOUS
INSECTICIDES
AND
REPELLANTS
FUNGICIDES
HERBICIDES
AVICIDES
LARGEPREDATORCONTROL
REFERENCES
20 Plants
INTRODUCTION
DIGESTIVESYSTEM
CARDIOVASCULARSYSTEM
LIVER
URINARY SYSTEM
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
MULTISYSTEMIC EFFECTS
NONTOXICPLANTS
REFERENCES
Intermet Resources
 21 Dietary Supplements and Herbs
INTRODUCTION
10
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
METHYLXANTHINES
HYPOGLYCEMICS
MISCELLANEOUS HERBS
ESSENTIAL OILS
HERBSANDPETS
REFERENCES
22 Zootoxins
HYMENOPTERA:BEES,WASPS,ANDHORNETS
HYMENOPTERA:IMPORTED FIRE ANTS
BUFO TOADS
ARACHNIDS-LATRODECTUS AND LOXOSCELES
ARACHNIDS-SCORPIONS
SNAKES—ELAPIDS
SNAKES-PITVIPERS
REFERENCES
23 Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
11
INTRODUCTION
MUSHROOMS
CAUSING
GASTROINTESTINAL
SIGNS
MUSCARINIC MUSHROOMS
HALLUCINOGENIC MUSHROOMS
IBOTENIC
ACID
AND
MUISCIMOL-CONTAINING
MUSHROOMS
GYROMITRIN-CONTAINING MUSHROOMS
HEPATOTOXICMUSHROOMS
MYCOTOXINS
AFLATOXINS
VOMITOXIN OR DEOXYNIVALENOL (DON)
OTHERS
REFERENCES
24 Food-Associated Intoxications
ALLIUM SPECIES
AVOCADO
GRAPES AND RAISINS
12
MACADAMIA NUTS
METHYLXANTHINES
TREMORGENICMYCOTOXINS
ALCOHOL
YEAST DOUGH
XYLITOL
REFERENCES
25 Drugs of Abuse
ALCOHOL
AMPHETAMINES
BARBITURATES
BENZODIAZEPINES
COCAINE
MARIJUANA
OPIATES AND OPIOIDS
REFERENCES
26 0TC Drugs
13
ACETAMINOPHEN
ANTIHISTAMINES
ASPIRIN AND OTHER SALICYLATES
DECONGESTANTS
NONSTEROIDAL
ANTIINFLAMMATORY
MEDICATIONS
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE
VITAMINS
REFERENCES
27 Prescription Drugs
ALBUTEROL
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
BACLOFEN
CARDIAC DRUGS
5-FLUOROURACII
ORALDIABETICMEDICATIONS
REFERENCES
28 Household and Industrial Toxicants
14
ASPIRATION
CLINICALEFFECTS
ALCOHOLS
GLYCOLS
BRAKEFLUIDANDCLUTCHFLUIDS
DETERGENTS
ESSENTIALOILS
DIPHENYLMETHANEDIISOCYANATEADHESIVES
DEICING SALTS
REFERENCES
29 Metals and Minerals
INTRODUCTION
LEAD
REFERENCES
30 Miscellaneous Toxicants
INTRODUCTION
PETROLEUM-BASEDPRODUCTS
15
SIGNS
FERTILIZERS
MULCHES
COMPOST PILES
CHARCOAL BRIQUETTES
FIRELOGS
MATCHES
FIREWORKSANDFLARES
EXPLOSIVES
REFERENCES
Appendices
Appendix 1: Drugs Used in Toxicology
Appendix 2: Additional Toxic Plants and Associated
System-Based Effects
GASTROINTESTINAL
CARDIOVASCULAR
LIVER DAMAGE
16
EMACIATION, ASCITES, EDEMA OF DEPENDENT
EXTREMITIES;
JAUNDICE;
HEPATOENCEPHALOPATHY
CONTACT
DERMATITIS,
EYE
IRRITANTS,
ALLERGENS
SUDDENDEATH
Appendix 3: Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic2
Index
17
Small Animal
Toxicology
Essentials
Editors
Robert H.Poppenga,DVM, DABVT, PhD
SharonGwaltney-Brant,DVM,PhD,DABVT,DABT
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A Job Wiley & Sons,Ine, Publication
18
This edition first published 2011 @ 2011 by John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons,
formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical   and
 Medical
businesswithBlackwell
Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium.
Southern Gate, Chichester, West
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa
50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate,
Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford,
0X4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book
please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
19
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal
use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base
fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 0l923. For those
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license
by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged.
The fee codes for users of the Transactional
Reporting Service are ISBN-13:
978-0-8138-1538-1/2011.
products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names,
service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication
IS
designed
to
  provide
 accurate  and  authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or
other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general
scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and
are not intended and should not be relied upon as
recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis,
or treatment by practitioners for any particular patient. The
20
publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of
the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
warranties, including without
t   limitation  any  implied
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. In view of
ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in
governmental regulations, and the constant flow of
information relating to the use of medicines, equipment,
and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the
information provided in the package insert or instructions
for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other
things, any changes in the instructions or indication of
usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The
fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this
work as a citation and/or a potential source of further
information does not mean that the author or the publisher
endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers
should be aware that Intermet Websites listed in this work
may have changed or disappeared between when this work
was written and when it is read. No warranty may be
created or extended by any promotional statements for this
work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable
for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Small animal toxicology essentials/editors,
Robert H. Poppenga, Sharon Gwaltney-Brant.
p.; cm.
21
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1538-1 (pbk.: alk.paper) 1. Veterinary
toxicology. 2. Pet medicine. I. Poppenga, Robert H. II.
GwaltneyBrant, Sharon.
[DNLM: 1. Poisoning-therapy. 2. Poisoning-veterinary. 3.
Pets. SF 757.5]
SF757.5.S63 2011
636.089'59-dc22
2010049403
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library.
Set in 9.5/12 pt Times by Toppan Best-set Premedia
Limited
22
Dedication
A special thank-you to my wonderful family (Amy, Mia.
and Zoe), to all the pets who depend on us to provide them
with a safe and healthy environment, and to all of the
dedicated veterinary technicians who enrich the veterinary
profession.
-Robert H. Poppenga
This book is dedicated to my husband, Tom Brant, who
provides unwavering support to all of my endeavors.
-Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
23
Preface
As vital members of their veterinary medical teams,
potential or real animal poisonings in several ways. In
many
cases,veterinary
technicians   are    asked    for
information about the safety of a product, food, or plant.
They may be the first to talk to a distraught client on the
telephone and make initial decisions regarding the severity
of a situation and the need for immediate action. They may
        
decontamination procedures when a poisoned patient is
presented to a veterinary hospital. They may provide initial
stabilization of a critically ill patient or collect samples to
submit to a laboratory for confirmation of exposure or
intoxication.For
all
of
these  reasons,  veterinary
technicians need to have a resource to help them in these
tasks. Although several textbooks pertaining to veterinary
toxicology have been published over the last several years.
Small Animal Toxicology Essentials is a valuable resource
for you. We have enlisted the help of veterinary
toxicologists, emergency service technicians, and animal
poison control specialists to help make this textbook as
useful as possible. Our focus is on pet animals and the
S       
Because of their inquisitive natures, pets may be exposed
to a wide variety of agents with varying levels of toxicity.
However, only a small fraction of exposures have the
potential to cause clinically significant effects, and an even
smaller fraction of exposures require extensive medical
intervention. In order to assist in differentiating between
24
significant and insignificant exposures, it is imperative that
veterinary technicians have a handy resource available to
provide information and guidance when needed. This is
our objective in formulating and compiling Small Anima!
ToxicologyEssentials.
Robert H. Poppenga
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
25
Contributors
Mindy Bough, CVT, BA
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Rhian Cope, BVSc, BSc, PhD, DABT
ERMA New Zealand
New Zealand
Camille DeClementi, DVM, DABVT, DABT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Joanna Delaporte, CVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Kiran Dhakal
Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, Iowa, USA
26
Eric Dunayer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
St. Matthews University School of Veterinary Medicine
Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands
Joyce Eisold, DVM
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Tamara Foss, CVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Erin Freed, CVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
Veterinary Information Network
Mahomet, IL, USA
Safdar A. Khan, DVM, PhD, DABVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
27
Urbana, IL, USA
Carrie Lohmeyer, CVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Bridget McNally, CVT, VTS
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Irina Meadows, DVM, DABT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Charlotte Means, DVM, MLIS, DABVT, DABT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Michelle Mostrom, DVM, DABVT, DABT
North Dakota State University
Fargo, ND, USA
Lisa Murphy, DVM, DABT
28
University of Pennsylvania
Kennett Square, PA
Elisa Petrollini-Rogers, CVT, VTS
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
John Pickrell, DVM, PhD, DABT
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, DABVT, PhD
CAHFS Toxicology Laboratory
Davis, CA, USA
Mary M. Schell, DVM, DABT, DABVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
Karla R. Smith, DVM
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
29
Petra A. Volmer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
Summit VetPharm
Champaign, IL, USA
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABT, DABVT
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, IL, USA
30
Section 1
Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
31
General Toxicologic Principles
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant and Robert H.Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
Toxicology is the study of the nature, effects, and detection
of poisons and the treatment of poisoning. Although the
toxicology, for the purposes of this textbook, we define
clinical toxicology as the diagnosis and treatment of the
poisoned patient. Many of the basic principles of
toxicology, such as the inherent toxicity of various forms
of a chemical, variations in dose-response curves, different
mechanisms of toxic action, variations in individual and
species sensitivities to chemicals, and how differences in
kinetics  of chemicals   (sometimes  referred
toas
"toxicokinetics") need to be applied to the successful
diagnosis and treatment of poisoning. In addition, in many
instances, in clinical toxicology there is a need for the
application of good critical care and medical practices
(e.g., stabilizing, monitoring, and treating a patient) to
achieve a successful outcome.
DEFINITIONS
All special areas of study have unique terminology that is
important to master in order to fully appreciate the
discipline. The following definitions provide some needed
32
terminology in order to more effectively utilize this
textbook.
Toxicant
A poison or poisonous agent; an intoxicant; any solid.
liquid or gas that, when introduced into or applied to the
body, can interfere with the life processes of cells or the
organism by its own inherent qualities (toxicity) without
acting mechanically and irrespective of temperature.
Toxin
A poisonous material that is synthesized or derived from
an animal or plant; also referred to as a biotoxin.
Zootoxins, bacterial toxins, and phyto (or plant) toxins are
subcategories of toxins.
Toxicity
The poisonous characteristics of a substance; the degree to
which something is poisonous. Perhaps the best known
measure of toxicity of a chemical is its lethal dose or LD50
(Table 1.1).
Acute Toxicity
Intoxication that results from the effects of a single dose or
multiple doses of a toxicant given during a 24-hour period
(e.g., dog got into a box of chocolates or dog was left in a
room contaminated by  chemical fumes overnight).  The
LDso of a chemical is most often determined during acute
33
exposure studies in which a single dose of a chemical is
given.
Subacute Toxicity
Exposure to multiple doses of a toxin or toxicant given for
''a) saep oe ueqn iahuot ou inq sinou th uu haieaa
animal owner administers ibuprofen to dog for a week).
Table 1.1. Classification scheme for relative toxicity
Classification
Toxicity (LDso in mg/kg body weight)
Extremely toxic
<1mg/kg
Highly toxic
1 to 50mg/kg
Moderately toxic
50 to 500mg/kg
Slightly toxic
0.5 to 5.0g/kg
Practically nontoxic
S to 15g/kg
Relatively harmless>1Sg/kg
Subchronic Toxicity
Repeated or continuous exposures to toxicants for a
duration of 1 to 3 months (e.g., patient on weekly
chemotherapy for cancer).
Chronic Toxicity
Intoxication that results from prolonged exposure, with the
duration of exposure being 3 months or longer (e.g.,
repeated exposure of a cat to low levels of lead as a result
of
environmental  contamination  and
　groomingof
contaminated paws or hair).
34
Dose
The quantity of drug or toxicant administered at one time
irrespective of body weight.
Dosage
The regimen governing the size, amount, frequency, and
number of doses of a therapeutic agent to be administered
to a patient.
Lethal Dose (LD)
  a       
expressed as a percentage of individuals dying (e.g., an
LD10, or, most commonly, an LD50)
Median Lethal Dose (LD5o)
The quantity of an agent that will kill 50% of the test
subjects to which it is administered.
ppm
Abbreviation for parts per million; a weight-for-weight (w/
w) concentration equal to 1 mg/kg or 1 g/tonne. Used most
commonly to express the concentration of toxicants or
trace elements in water, feeds, solvents, and tissues. Note
that mg/kg can refer to either a concentration or a dosage;
its meaning is dependent on the context of its use.
Parts per million (ppm), parts per billion (ppb), and parts
per trillion (ppt) are the most commonly used terms to
35
describe very small amounts of contaminants in our
environment. They are measures of concentration or the
amount of one material in a larger amount of another
material; for example, the weight of a toxic chemical in a
certain weight of food. The following example might help
conceptually. If you divide a pie equally into 10 pieces.
each piece would be one part per ten or one-tenth of the
total pie. If, instead, you cut this pie into a million pieces.
each piece would be very small and would represent a
millionth of the total pie or one part per million of the
original pie. If you cut each of these million pieces into a
thousand little pieces, each of these new pieces would be
one part per billion of the original pie. To give you an idea
of how little this would be, a pinch of salt in ten tons of
() sd   ()   o i  
In the pie example, the pieces of the pie are made up of the
same material as the whole. However, if there were a
contaminant in the pie at a level of one part per billion, one
of these invisible pieces of pie would be made up of the
contaminant and the other 999,999,999 pieces would be
pure pie. Similarly, one part per billion of an impurity in a
biological  or  environmental  sample represents  a tiny
fraction of the total amount of the sample (e.g., water,
food, whole blood, urine, or tissue).
Hazard (Risk)
The likelihood that a chemical will cause harm under
certain conditions. The hazard can vary for the same
chemical. For example, the hazard or risk of intoxication is
greater if a potentially toxic product or chemical is not
stored properly and thereby the chance for accidental
exposure 1s increased due to greater accessibility.
36
Other relevant definitions are provided below (i.e., toxic
dose, effective dose, margin of safety).
CLASSIFICATIONOFTOXICANTS
Toxins and toxicants are classified in a variety of ways; no
onewayisbetterthananotherandacombinationof
classification schemes is used in this textbook. Poisons can
be classified based upon the organ systems that are
primarily affected (e.g., hepatotoxicants, neurotoxicants,
nephrotoxicants, etc.). The limitation to this scheme is that
many toxins or toxicants affect more than one organ
system. Altermatively, poisons can be classified based upon
their chemical structure. For example, alkaloids are cyclic
compounds that contain a nitrogen molecule within the
ring. Toxic alkaloids are common in plants (e.g., nicotine
in Nicotiana spp. or conine in Conium maculatum). A
third classification scheme categorizes poisons according
to their use or location. For example, pesticides are
subcategorized into rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides,
fungicides, avicides, parasiticides, etc. based upon the type
of target organism for which they were developed. Poison
categories based upon location might include those found
in homes, yards, or industrial sites. Within each of these
categories are chemically diverse compounds with quite
distinct target organs or mechanisms of toxic action.
Finally, poisons can also be categorized according to their
mechanism of toxic action. For example, some poisons
cause damage via free radical formation or lipid
peroxidation of cellular membranes and others inhibit
protein synthesis.
SPECTRUMOFUNDESIREDEFFECTS
37
Toxicants cause damage through a variety of mechanisms
including altering cell and organelle membrane integrity,
altering cell energy production, inhibiting protein synthesis
or enzyme activity, or damaging DNA (Osweiler 1996).
Other undesired effects that need to be considered are
discussed below.
Idiosyncratic Reactions
Idiosyncratic reactions to chemicals are defined as
genetically determined abnormal reactivity to a chemical
(Eaton and Gilbert 2008). Most commonly, this is caused
by an acquired or congenital enzyme deficiency that
prevents a toxicant from being processed properly. In some
cases, the reason for an idiosyncratic reaction is unknown.
See the discussion on Genetic Polymorphisms below.
Immediate vs. Delayed Reactions
Immediate effects can be defined as those that occur
rapidly after a single exposure to a chemical. In contrast,
delayed toxic effects are those that occur after some period
of time (often, but not always, following repeated
exposures). For example, many chemicals can induce
cancer, but only after a long latency period of years
(Osweiler 1996) (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). The focus of
this textbook is on immediate adverse effects.
Reversible vs. Irreversible Damage
If a chemical damages a tissue, the ability of that tissue to
regenerate largely determines whether the effect is
reversible or irreversible. Tissuessuch  as  the
38
gastrointestinal tract and the liver, which have high
irreversible damage than other tissues, such as nervous
tissue, which has much more limited regenerative capacity
However, it is important to point out that even highly
regenerative tissues such as the liver can suffer irreversible
damage, particularly as a result of fibrosis in response to
chemically induced damage.
Local vs. Systemic Effects
Local effects of a chemical are those that typically occur at
the site of first contact between the biological system and
the chemical. Good examples of chemicals with primarily
local effects include acid and alkali corrosives. Systemic
effects require the absorption and distribution of a
chemical to a distant site where damage occurs. Most
chemicals discussed in this textbook have systemic effects.
It is possible for some chemicals to have both local and
systemic effects. A good example of this occurs following
exposure to iron salts. The reactivity of iron damages
mucosal cells along the gastrointestinal tract; systemic
absorption of iron results in more systemic and widespread
damage.
INTERACTION OF CHEMICALS
Because animals and people are exposed to multiple
chemicals at any given time, it is necessary to consider
how different chemicals might interact with each other to
modify toxic responses. Chemical interactions occur by a
number of mechanisms that can include alterations of
absorption,  biotransformation,  protein  binding,  or
39
elimination (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). An example of two
chemicals interacting to affect toxicity of one involves the
combination    of  piperonyl   butoxide  and   pyrethrin/
pyrethroid insecticides. Piperonyl butoxide interferes with
the metabolism, and therefore the detoxification, of the
insecticides (Volmer 2004)
In general, types of interactions between chemicals that
can influence the toxicity of one or more of the chemicals
are classified as additive, synergistic, or antagonistic.
Additive interaction means the effect of two chemicals is
equal to the sum of the effect of the two chemicals taken
separately (e.g., 2 + 3 = 5). This is usually due to the two
chemicals acting on the body in the same way. An example
of additive toxicity would be exposure to two different
organophosphorus insecticides at the same time. Both have
the same mechanism of toxic action (i.e., inhibition of
acetylcholinesterase   activity).  Synergistic   interaction
means that the effect of two chemicals taken together is
greater than the sum of their separate effect at the same
doses (e.g., 2 + 2 = 20). One example of synergism is
simultaneous exposure to the hepatotoxicants ethanol and
carbon tetrachloride. In this case the damage to the liver is
greater than that expected from summing the toxicities of
each individual chemical. Antagonistic interaction means
that the effect of two chemicals is less than the sum of the
effect of the individual chemicals (e.g., 4 + 6 = 8). This
can be due to the second chemical increasing the excretion
of the first or perhaps as a result of the first directly
blocking the toxic actions of the second. Antagonism
forms the basis for many antidotal drugs. For example.
atropine blocks cholinergic receptors that are stimulated
40
following exposure to organophosphorus or carbamate
insecticides.
One other term, potentiation, is used to describe chemical
interactions. Potentiation occurs when one substance does
not have a toxic effect on a certain organ or system but,
when added to another chemical, makes the second
chemical much more toxic (Eaton and Gilbert 2008). For
example, isopropanol is not hepatotoxic. However, when
combined with carbon tetrachloride, the hepatoxicity of
carbon tetrachloride is greatly enhanced.
Finally, tolerance is another term worth noting. It is
defined as the state of decreased responsiveness to the
toxic effect of a chemical as a result of prior exposure to
that chemical or to a structurally related chemical (Eaton
and Gilbert 2008). Tolerance can occur either as a result of
a decreased amount of a chemical reaching its site of toxic
action or as a result of reduced responsiveness of a target
to the chemical. The former can occur, for example, when
a chemical induces metabolic enzymes in the liver that
results in enhanced metabolism and detoxification of that
chemical with subsequent exposures. The latter can occur
as a result of down-regulation of receptor numbers for
chemicals that cause adverse effects due to receptor
stimulation.
CHARACTERISTICS OFEXPOSURE
Every day, animals (including humans) are exposed to
poisons in the air they breathe, the food they eat, and the
water they drink. Even agents necessary for life such as
oxygen, water, and sodium can be toxic under certain
41
circumstances. The fact that we don't all develop signs of
poisoning on a daily basis underscores the basic concept of
toxicology: the dose makes the poison. However, many
factors are involved in determining whether a sufficient
dose of a poison reaches its site of action in order to
invoke a toxicosis. Agent factors to consider include the
toxicant, its physical properties (i.e., liquid vs. solid vs.
gas, pH, etc.), its chemical structure, and its stability or
reactivity. Host factors to consider include species and/or
breed of animal, age, weight, and general health status.
The most important factors that must be considered in
determining whether a toxicosis will develop are those
surrounding the introduction of toxicant to host: the
exposure. Without an exposure to a poison, there will be
no poisoning, so it is important to understand the
determine whether a toxicosis will develop.
Route and Site of Exposure
When a poisoning occurs, most people automatically
assume
thatthe
exposure  was via ingestion
(gastrointestinal tract), and, indeed, the gastrointestinal
tract is the site of exposure for the majority of toxicoses
dealt with in a veterinary setting. However, exposures to
toxicants can occur via other routes, including inhalation
(lungs), transdermal (skin), injection, ocular, and other
minor parenteral routes (intramammary, etc.) Toxicants
injected intravenously produce the most rapid response,
with
inhalation,  intraperitoneal,
subcutaneous,
intramuscular, intradermal, oral, and dermal following in
descending order of speed of response (Eaton and Gilbert
2008). Not all poisons are toxic by all routes of exposure;
42
in fact most toxicants have a narrow range of routes by
which they can gain access to the body. For instance,
elemental mercury (quicksilver) is virtually nontoxic by
dermal or oral routes; however, inhalation of the vapors
can result in respiratory irritation as well as systemic
absorption of mercury vapors via the lungs, which can,
over time, result in central nervous system dysfunction
from mercury toxicosis (Merrill et al. 2008)
Duration and Frequency of Exposure
Some toxicants can cause clinical effects with a single
exposure, but others may require repeated exposures over
time before a toxicosis develops; the clinical syndromes of
each of these types of exposures may be quite different. In
small animal medicine, most toxicoses that present to the
veterinary hospital are acute because they are most often
due to a single exposure to a toxicant.
There can be significant differences between clinical
syndromes demonstrated by patients, depending on
whether the exposure was acute or chronic. For example.
acute arsenic toxicosis  causes severe gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, shock, and, often, death in dogs, whereas
chronic toxicosis is expected to cause renal failure.
The frequency of exposure also can dictate the degree and
severity of a toxicosis. For mstance, a cat given 10 mg/kg
of aspirin on a daily basis will quickly develop a toxicosis,
but if the same dose is given every third day, toxicosis is
unlikely.
DOSE-RESPONSERELATIONSHIP
43
As mentioned, the basic concept in toxicology is "the dose
makes the poison." This concept is essential in assessing
the risks of exposures to toxicants, and it is often
overlooked by the lay public, who typically perceives
substance can  be toxicunder  the appropriate
circumstances. A veterinary technician who understands
and is able to apply the basic concepts of toxicology to
clinical situations will be able to provide objective and
rational input into development of risk assessments for
patient exposures to potential toxicants.
The dose-response relationship is the correlation between
the characteristics of the exposure with the spectrum of
toxic effects that a particular toxicant can produce.
Knowing the dose-response relationship allows us to
         
potential exposure. For example, methylxanthines in
chocolate can cause serious clinical effects if sufficient
amounts are ingested (Gwaltney-Brant 2001). A patient
ingesting chocolate equal to 5 mg/kg of methylxanthines is
not expected to have any serious clinical problems, but a
dosage of 50 mg/kg could put the dog at risk for serious
cardiovascular effects.
There are two components to the dose-response
relationship: the population component and the individual
component. Most dose-response relationships are made by
grouping the responses of individuals to develop a
population dose-response curve. As with all statistical
studies of populations, the curve is bell-shaped, and the
majority of individuals (the “normal" population) fall
under the middle area of the curve. However, there are
44
always individuals on the lower or upper limits of the
curve (i.e., outliers), meaning they are more or less
sensitive, respectively, to the toxicant and they will
population (Figure 1.1). For instance, most dogs ingesting
20-30 mg/kg of methylxanthines from chocolate will
develop agitation,
restlessness,  polydipsia,  and
gastrointestinal upset (Gwaltney-Brant 2001). However, at
this dose, some dogs will show none of these clinical
effects and appear clinically normal (less sensitive), while
other dogs may develop signs at doses below 20 mg/kg
(more sensitive). So, while knowing the doseresponse
relationship for a toxicant, it is important to also realize
that there will be occasions when an individual patient fails
spodsan pu sn po isar aun se ooq as au pea, on
differently than the norm. Some potential reasons for these
individual variations will be discussed later in the chapter.
Figure 1.1. Mllustration of dose-response curve. The
majority of responders fall into the "Normal" range, but a
small percentage of "Sensitive” individuals will respond at
lower doses and another small percentage of "Resistant'
individuals will not respond until the dose is much higher.
45
25%
20%
sponding
15%
10%
Sensitive
Normal
Resistant
5%
0%
R
10
12
14
16
18
Dose
Therapeutic Index
Medicationsprovide
anexcellent
exampleofthe
doseresponse relationship. If too small a dose of
medication is taken, it will not have the desired therapeutic
effect, and if too high a dose is taken, signs of toxicosis
may be seen. The goal is to find a dose that is effective and
yet carries a low risk of intoxication. When comparing the
relative safety of two similar drugs, a measurement called
the therapeutic index is often used. This index is a ratio of
the dose known to produce a toxic effect in 50% of the
population (TDso) to the dose known to produce a
desirable therapeutic dose in 50% of the population (ED50)
(Eaton and Gilbert 2008). The larger the ratio, the greater
the relative safety.
Another parameter that also compares a toxic dose (TD1;
the dose at which 1% will experience toxic effect) with an
effective dose (EDg9; dose that is effective in 99% of the
population) is the margin of safety. A drug with a wide
46
margin of safety will have low risk of adverse effects in
the vast majority of patients.
Variation in Toxic Responses
In discussing dose-response, one must keep in mind that
there will always be individuals who do not respond to a
xenobiotic in the same fashion as the majority of the
population. An individual may show a higher or lower
sensitivity to toxicosis than expected or may not show a
therapeutic effect from a medication. Some reasons for
these individual variations have been elucidated, but others
still remain to be discovered (see idiosyncratic definition
above).
Species Differences
      
different species, with compounds that are relatively
nontoxic to one species being quite toxic in a different
species. These species differences can be the result of
differences in physiology   or  toxicant absorption,
metabolism, and/or elimination. For instance, cats evolved
as true carnivores that did not needto metabolize
plant-derived compounds such as phenols, and they did not
evolve the necessary
yenzymesrequiredtoeliminate
phenolic compounds from the feline body. As a result, cats
have diminished ability to metabolize certain phenolic
compounds, making them more susceptible to toxicosis
from xenobiotics (such as acetaminophen) that contain
phenols. Cats are also highly susceptible to developing
methemoglobinemia and Heinz body anemia because their
hemoglobin  contains 8  reactive  sulfhydry] 
groups
47
  m (sq  h  so   o )
to  oxidative agents that can denature hemoglobin.
Additionally, a relative deficiency of methemoglobin
reductase in their red blood cells makes it difficult for
them to reverse the hemoglobin damage (Osweiler 2006).
      s s 
fully elucidated, care must be taken when attempting to
another.
Genetic Polymorphisms
The influence of genetics on an individual's response to
xenobiotics is the subject of much study in the human
pharmaceutical world. Genetic polymorphism is the term
for hereditary differences in a single gene that occur in
more than 1% of the population (Eaton and Gilbert 2008).
Genetic  polymorphisms  are   significant  causes 
6of
individual variation in response to toxicants. Although a
large number of genetic polymorphisms relating to
xenobiotics have been identified in humans, less study has
been done in companion animals. Perhaps the best known
toxicology related genetic polymorphism in the veterinary
world is the sensitivity of dogs to macrolide antiparasitic
agents (e.g., ivermectin, moxidectin, etc.). Individuals
within certain genetic lines of collies, Shetland sheepdogs,
Old English sheep dogs, and several other related breeds
carry an autosomal recessive defect in a gene that codes
for a blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein (Mealey 2006;
Lanusse et al. 2 009). This defect results in a faulty
“pump”that  normally  excludes certain  xenobiotics
(including macrolides) entering from the central nervous
system. As a result, macrolide agents are able to enter the
48
CNS and cause clinical signs of intoxication at dosages
that are not toxic to dogs without this defect. Likewise,
other drugs that are normally excluded from the CNS by
this pump but can gain access to the CNS in
P-glycoprotein-defective
dogs
include
digoxin,
doxorubicin, and vincristine (Mealey 2006)
Age
Age-related responses to toxicants must be considered
when dealing with pediatric and geriatric patients, because
behavioral, physiological, and pathological differences in
these special populations can have a profound influence on
sensitivity to toxicants. When assessing the risk of an
exposure to a toxicant, pediatric and geriatric animals
should be considered at increased risk, and treatment
should be considered at lower levels of exposure than
would occur with a young adult animal.
Pediatric Patients
Nursing puppies and kittens may be exposed to toxicants
not only through ingestion or inhalation of toxicants in
their environments but are also subject to exposure to
  psa a   hs  nn s
toxicants are passed through the milk (Boothe and
Peterson 2006). By their inquisitive nature, young animals
         
environment that adult animals have learmed to avoid (e.g.,
skunk spray). Younger animals have a variety  of
physiological differences making them more susceptible to
toxicosis, including
49
·Increased intestinal permeability to some toxicants (e.g-,
lead)
· Increased gastric pH, which enhances the absorption of some
toxicants
·Decreased intestinal motility, which allows toxicants to stay
in the gastrointestinal tract longer and provides more
opportunity for absorption of toxicants
· Decreased plasma protein concentrations to bind toxicants,
allowing more free toxicant in the blood to reach target
tissues
· Less body fat to sequester lipid soluble toxicants
·Decreased glomerular filtration rate, which results in
decreased excretion of toxicants and their metabolites
·Decreased hepatic function and metabolic enzymes to
detoxify toxicants
Geriatric Patients
As animals age, they experience physiological and
         
to toxicants. Additionally, these animals may be on
animals (e.g., arthritis), and interaction with the medication
and toxicant may occur. Aging results in decreased renal
and hepatic function. Because these two organ systems are
the predominant means of toxicant elimination, the aging
animal has a decreased capacity to efficiently remove
toxicants from the body. Geriatric animals share some of
the same metabolic derangements seen in pediatric
animals, including decreased intestinal motility, decreased
plasma protein production, decreased glomerular filtration
rate, and decreased hepatic function. Additionally, elderly
animals may have decreases in cardiovascular function,
making them less able to handle the stresses of
intoxication. Concurrent disease processes are more
50
       
susceptibility   to  organ
damage
by toxicants (e.g,
preexisting renal dysfunction may make a patient more
susceptible to the toxic effects of NSAIDs) or compromise
the animal's ability to respond to a toxicant. The behavior
of a geriatric patient on some medications might be altered
such that there is an increased risk for toxicant exposure
(e.g., dogs on corticosteroid therapy often experience
polyphagia and may ingest something they normally would
avoid).
DEVELOPMENTAL
AND
REPRODUCTIVE
TOXICITY
Pregnant animals exposed to toxic agents represent a
special case when doing a risk assessment. Not only do the
immediate needs of the patient need to be considered, but
the potential effects of the toxicant (and any agents used to
treat the mother) on the fetuses must be taken into account
before a treatment plan is initiated. Pregnancy itself can
cause some physiological changes in the mother, including
decreased intestinal motility, decreased plasma protein
concentrations, and alterations in renal and hepatic
       
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination of
toxic compounds, making the dam more or less susceptible
to  a particular  toxicant. Pregnant  animals
may
spontaneously abort their pregnancies due to stress, direct
effects of toxicants on the reproductive organs, or fetal
death from hypoxia secondary to hypotension or other
hemodynamic aberrations.
51
Toxicants may have minimal effect on the pregnant female
but result in significant harm to the fetuses. Whether a
toxicant has a direct effect on the fetuses will depend on
several factors. Most importantly, in order for a toxicant
circulating in the blood to directly impact the fetus, it will
need to cross the placenta in sufficient quantities to cause
fetal damage. Whether a toxicant can pass the placenta will
depend on the physical and biochemical properties of the
toxicant as well as the structure of the placenta, which
varies according to species. Toxicants reaching the fetuses
can result in fetal death, fetal malformation (teratogenesis),
or
functional
abnormalities
(e.g.,
behavioral
abnormalities),  depending
onthe
 toxicant, species
involved, and stage of gestation when the exposure occurs.
Throughout
 gestation,
there
are
peak
times
of
susceptibility for organ malformation, generally coinciding
with organogenesis. Organ-specific teratogens introduced
od o  a a  siso   m od
on the developing fetus, (Rogers and Kavlock 2008).
Toxicants administered during gestation may cause a wide
range of fetal defects. For example, feeding carbaryl
(Sevin(@)to
dogs
during
gestationresulted
1n
abdominal-thoracic
fissures,   intestinal 
agenesis,
brachygnathia, and a  variety of appendicular skeletal
abnormalities (Smalley et al. 1968).
Unfortunately, the potential effects of many toxicants on
pregnant animals or their offspring are not known. When
presented with a pregnant patient who has been exposed to
a potential toxicant, it is always safest to err on the side of
caution and attempt decontamination when it can be
performed safely.
52
TOXICOKINETICS
Toxicokinetics refers to the movement of a toxicant
through the body. The principles of toxicokinetics are the
same as pharmacokinetics (the movement of drugs in the
body) with the exception that the agent moving through the
body is considered a toxicant rather than a therapeutic
agent. The ultimate disposition of a toxicant in the body
depends on  the
fourcomponentsoftoxicokinetics:
absorption,  distribution,  metabolism   (also  called
components are often abbreviated as ADME for ease of
use. The ADME characteristics will vary with the toxic
agent, species, and individual.
Absorption
Other than caustic and corrosive agents that inflict their
damage locally, most toxicants must enter the body to
exert their effects (Evans 2006). Absorption is the process
by which toxicants pass through the various barriers to
enter the systemic circulation. The degree and extent to
which a toxicant will be absorbed is dependent upon the
physical and chemical characteristics of the toxicant
(molecular weight, pH, lipid solubility, etc.), the route of
exposure, and species of animal. With the exception of
intravenous injection, it is unlikely that 100% of a toxicant
to which an animal is exposed will be absorbed.
Bioavailability is a term that refers to the fraction of a
toxicant that is actually absorbed.
The passage of toxicants into the body requires transport
across cellular membranes to reach the general circulation;
53
this transport can be passive (e.g., simple diffusion) or
active, requiring energy to facilitate absorption (Evans
2006). Passive transport mechanisms do not require energy
expenditure and include simple diffusion and filtration
across membranes. Both of these processes require a
concentration gradient for the toxicant to move along. The
rate of toxicant movement is determined by the degree of
difference in concentration between the two sides of the
membrane, i.e., the larger the concentration differential,
the faster the rate of movement. Simple diffusion is the
primary means of toxicant passage across cell membranes,
and it is most effective with small, lipid-soluble.
nonionized molecules. Filtration is the movement of
molecules through pores in cellular membranes and is
dependent upon the size of the pores and size of the
toxicant molecule. Facilitated diffusion is mediated by
carrier molecules, which assist in carrying molecules
across membranes.  Active transport processes are
energy-dependent and do not depend on a concentration
gradient; in fact, most active transport mechanisms work
against concentration gradients (i.e., take a molecule from
anarea of low concentrationto anarea of high
include the Na'-K+ ATPase transporter in nerve cell
membranes
and
the
P-glycoprotein-dependent
multidrugresistant “pumps" in the blood-brain barrier.
intermalization of molecules through the “"pinching off’ and
engulfment of fragments of cell membranes.
Absorption can be influenced by a variety of factors
including route of exposure and the chemical and physical
properties of the toxicant. The route of exposure plays a
54
major role in determining how and to what extent a
toxicant will be absorbed. In the gastrointestinal tract, the
majority of molecules are absorbed by passive diffusion or
carrier-mediated processes (Lehman-McKeeman 2o08).
Gastrointestinal absorption is highly dependent on the pH
of the toxicant, with weak acids being better absorbed in
the stomach and weak bases being better absorbed in the
proximal small intestine. Absorption of toxicants across
the skin requires that the toxicant pass through the
lipophilic stratum corneum (the major barrier to absorption
of toxicants via the skin) and then through the hydrophilic
dermis to reach the bloodstream. Solvents such as dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) greatly enhance absorption of topically
applied agents by increasing the permeability of the
stratum corneum. Absorption of toxicants (primarily gases,
vapors, and aerosols) via the lungs is second only to
intravenous injection in regard to the speed and efficiency
of absorption. Toxicants reaching the alveoli have only a
thin wall to pass through in order to reach the systemic
circulation. Fortunately, the structure of the respiratory
tract can filter out many toxicants and prevent them from
reaching the alveoli
Some toxicants undergo what is termed a first pass effect
whereby toxicants absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
are taken via portal circulation to the liver, where a
fraction of toxicant is removed from the blood prior to
reaching the systemic circulation. The first pass effect can
dramatically decrease the bioavailability of toxicants. For
example, a dog ingesting its owner's nitroglycerine
sublingual tablets will be at low risk of toxicosis as long as
the dog swallows all of the tablets. The nitroglycerine
absorbed from the stomach will be largely removed by the
55
liver and will not enter the systemic circulation. However,
if the dog has one or more tablets that remain in the oral
cavity (e.g., adhered to the oral mucosa), absorption across
the oral mucosa will allow the nitroglycerine to enter the
systemic circulation and the dog will develop signs of
hypotension because compounds absorbed from the oral
cavity do not enter the portal circulation
Distribution
Once a toxicant enters the body it may remain within the
systemic circulation, or it may distribute to organs and
tissues. Distribution is the translocation of the toxicant to
various organs and tissues throughout the body. The
degree and extent to which a particular toxicant will
distribute to tissues is dependent upon a variety of toxicant
properties, including lipid solubility, molecular weight,
and the affinity of the toxicant for various tissues (Evans
2006; Lehman-McKeeman 2008). The body has several
physiologic barriers that may limit the distribution of
certain xenobiotics, such as the blood-brain barrier, which
excludes a large number of molecules from the central
nervous system. The distribution characteristics of a
toxicant are important in determining the clinical effects
that a toxicant will produce. For example, the herbicide
paraquat selectively concentrates in the lungs, where it is
converted into toxic metabolites that induce severe lung
damage and fibrosis. A related compound, diquat, has a
similar mechanism of action, but does not selectively
locate to the lung and therefore does not cause the
pulmonary lesions that are seen with paraquat
56
The storage of some toxicants within the body can actually
aid in decreasing the acute toxicity of the compound. Some
common storage depots for toxicants include bone (e.g.,
lead, cadmium), fat (e.g., organochlorine pesticides such as
DDT), liver (e.g., copper) and kidney (e.g., cadmium). The
toxicants in these storage depots are in equilibrium with
the plasma, but certain metabolic situations can sometimes
disrupt the equilibrium. For example, in chronic, low-level
exposure to lead, much of the lead is stored in the bones,
which may protect the animal from manifestations of acute
toxicosis; blood lead concentrations may be only slightly
above the normal range in these cases. However, any
condition that causes an increase in bone remodeling (e.g.,
lactation, fracture) may result in a sudden release of lead
from the storage depot and precipitate an acute toxicosis.
Plasma proteins are a special storage depot for toxicants
and are important in determining the toxicity of an agent.
There are a large number of proteins in the blood that can
bind toxicants, but albumin is the major protein
responsible for the binding of xenobiotics (drugs and
toxicants). Because only a free (unbound) toxicant can
reach its site of action, plasma proteins essentially “bind
up" the toxicant, preventing it from exerting its toxic
effect. Toxicants that are highly protein-bound have a
lower level of toxicity than similar toxicants, which have
poor protein binding. Species differences in types and
amounts of plasma proteins are one reason for species
differences in toxicity of various toxicants. An important
consideration when dealing with a highly protein-bound
compound is the potential interaction that may occur with
other highly protein-bound agents. For instance, a dog that
is on carprofen (a highly protein-bound drug) for arthritis
57
is exposed to a warfarin-based rodenticide. Because
warfarin is also highly protein-bound, the two xenobiotics
are in competition for plasma proteins, resulting in higher
unbound concentrations of both, which may result in
clinical signs of warfarin toxicosis at doses lower than
those normally associated with warfarin. Additionally.
there also might be increased risk of adverse effects from
the carprofen (i.e., gastrointestinal upset or bleeding).
Metabolism
Metabolism refers to the fate of a toxicant within the body
and is often used synonymously with the term
biotransformation, which more correctly refers to the
metabolic processes involved  in  creating a more
water-soluble form of xenobiotics (Evans 2006). In order
to prepare toxicants for elimination from the body, they
must be converted into forms that are excretable. In most
circumstances, this entails making the toxicant more
water-soluble so that it can be eliminated by the kidneys;
less commonly, compounds are made more lipid-soluble
and eliminated via the bile into the feces. The body has a
limited range of metabolic enzymes that can act on a wide
      s  s
tissues but are most concentrated in organs with highest
exposure  to xenobiotics, 
including
the
liver,
 gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and lung.
There are two levels of biotransformation, termed Phase I
and Phase Il reactions, used to make toxicants more
excretable. Not all toxicants undergo both reactions; some
toxicants are eliminated with little or no metabolism, and
others undergo one of the two reactions. Phase I reactions
58
generally involve hydrolysis, oxidation, or reduction and
are designed to make a compound more water-soluble and/
or expose a functional group for a subsequent Phase HI
reaction. Phase I reactions include the oxidation reactions
mediated by cytochrome P450 enzymes, which are the
basis for much of the individual variation in susceptibility
to adverse drug reactions (Parkinson and Ogilvie 2008)
Phase II reactions involve attachment (conjugation) of a
functional group (sulfate, glucuronide, amino acid,
glutathione, methyl group, acetyl group) to a parent
compound or one of its metabolites that results in a
compound that has greatly increased water solubility.
Species differences in Phase HI reactions include the
defective glucuronidation in cats that makes them sensitive
to phenolic compounds such as acetaminophen
Bioactivation
Although biotransformation is generally thought of as a
detoxifying process, allowing the body to eliminate
potential toxicants, in some instances Phase I or Phase II
reactions might result in a compound that is more toxic
than the parent compound. This conversion of a low or
nontoxic parent compound to a toxic metabolite is termed
bioactivation. Examples include the conversion of ethylene
glycol to metabolites that induce acidosis and renal failure
and the conversion of acetaminophen to a highly reactive
intermediate that causes liver damage.
Elimination
Elimination is the process of removing toxicants and their
metabolites from the body. As has been mentioned, most
59
biotransformation reactions are geared toward making
toxicants more water-soluble so that they can be excreted
via the kidneys. Renal excretion is the most common
elimination pathways include fecal (via bile), exhalation
(via lungs), saliva, sweat, and milk. Toxicants and their
metabolites can be eliminated by more than one route (e.g.,
fecal and urinary).
The elimination half-life of a toxicant is the amount of
time it takes for the original absorbed dose to be reduced
by one-half. Compounds with shorter half-lives will be
eliminated from the body more quickly than those with
longer half-lives. Two processes that can prolong halflives
of a toxicant include enterohepatic recirculation and
saturationof
metabolic
enzymes.
 Enterohepatic
recirculation is the repeated cycling of a toxicant between
the liver and the gastrointestinal tract. The toxicant passes
from the systemic circulation into the liver, where it is
excreted via the bile duct into the small intestine from
where it is reabsorbed to reenter the systemic circulation.
This continued cycling can greatly prolong the amount of
time that a toxicant stays in circulation. For example, in
dogs, the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug naproxen
undergoes extensive enterohepatic recirculation and has a
half-life of 74 hours, whereas in humans naproxen does
not undergo enterohepatic recirculation, is eliminated
primarily via the urine, and has a half-life of 6 hours (Frey
and Rieh 1981; Lees 2009; Talcott 2006).
Toxicants  that
mustbe1
 metabolized
　through
enzymemediated processes  can have  their  half-lives
  ae       
60
the enzyme system to catalyze the conversion of toxicant
to metabolite. In these situations, the toxicant “backs up"
as the enzyme system becomes saturated with substrate.
For toxicants that can be eliminated as parent compound as
well as metabolites (e.g., ethanol), saturation may only
mildly affect half-life, but for compounds that cannot be
eliminated without first being converted to metabolites, the
half-life can be significantly impacted. An example is
aspirin, which requires glucuronidation for elimination. In
cats, the half-life of aspirin ranges from 22 to 45 hours
depending on the dose administered. As the dose increases,
the half-life increases due to saturation of the cat's
defective glucuronidation system. This is why the dosing
intervalof aspirin for cats is every 48 to 72 hours
compared to every 8 to 12 hours for dogs.
CHAPTER 1 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Banjo, a 2-year-old, 25-pound, neutered male
dachshund mix ingested a 25 mg propranolol tablet
that his owner accidentally dropped on the floor.
When researching this drug, which of the following
information would be LEAST helpful to you in
determining whether Banjo is at risk for serious
clinical effects?
a. The minimum toxic dose for dogs
b. The maximum tolerated dose for dogs
61
c. The LD50 for dogs
d. The minimum lethal dose for dogs
e. The therapeutic index for dogs
2. Ranger, a 3-year-old golden retriever, was just
prescribed phenobarbital to control his epilepsy.
Ranger's owner called later that day to say that
Ranger was acting groggy and wants to know
whether this is expected with the phenobarbital.
Ranger's veterinarian tells you to relay to the
owner that this is an expected event and that
Ranger should adapt to his medication after several
days. A call back to the owner a week later finds
that Ranger is no longer acting groggy after
receiving his phenobarbital. Ranger's decreased
sensitivity to the sedative effects of phenobarbital
 over time is an example of
a. Potentiation
b. Tolerance
c. Synergism
d. Antagonism
e. Additivity
62
3. The fundamental principle of toxicology is “the
dose makes the poison." When determining
whether the dose of a particular compound poses a
risk of toxicosis to an animal, which of the
following must be taken into account?
a. Physical properties of the compound (e.g.;
physical state, pH, reactivity, etc.)
b. Species exposed to the compound
c. Route of exposure
d. Age, sex, and weight of the patient
e. All of the above must be considered
4. In general, the most rapid response to a toxicant
will occur if it is administered
 a. Intravenously
b. Intradermally
c. Orally
d. Intramuscularly
e. Subcutaneously
63
5. The  dose-response curve represents
the
characteristics    of   a   xenobiotic    within
a
but
variation can result in  increased  or decreased
 response at a particular dose.
a. Species, normal
b. Population, individual
c. Species, individual
d. Population, normal
e. Class, statistical
6. When compared to humans, the increased
susceptibility of cats to acetaminophen toxicosis is
related primarily to species differences in which of
the following:
a. Absorption of acetaminophen
b. Distribution of acetaminophen
c. Metabolism of acetaminophen
d. Elimination of acetaminophen
e. Bioavailability of acetaminophen
64
7. Some Doberman pinschers have an increased
susceptibility to liver injury when they receive
sulfonamide  antibiotics  at  therapeutic  doses.
Because this susceptibility in Doberman pinschers
is familial (ie., runs in families), it is suspected
that this trait is inherited. If so, this would be an
example of
a. Species difference
b. Genetic polymorphism
c. Age-related response
d. Gender difference
e. Fetal toxicity
8. In cats, organogenesis is complete in the first
trimester (first 3 weeks) of pregnancy. At week 8
 of pregnancy, a queen was exposed to a medication
known to adversely affect fetuses. Which of the
following would NOT be a potential outcome of
this exposure?
a. Anencephaly
b. Abortion
c. Stillborn kittens
65
d. Mummified fetuses
e. Premature parturition
9. T he percentage of an ingested toxicant that is
absorbed into the circulation is a measure of its
a. Toxicity
b. Distribution
c. Metabolism
d. Teratogenesis
e. Bioavailability
10. Select the incorrect statement.
Distribution
refers to themovement of
xenobiotics throughout the body and includes
binding of xenobiotics to plasma proteins and
storage of xenobiotics in various tissues including
bone, liver, and kidney.
b. The "first pass effect" refers to the inability of
some  toxicants
 to   cross  the  gastrointestinal
mucosal barrier and enter the systemic circulation.
66
c. Metabolic activity that results in a metabolite
that is more toxic than the parent compound is
referred to as bioactivation.
d. T he predominant goal of metabolism is to make
xenobiotics more water-soluble so that they can be
more easily excreted via the urine.
e. Enterohepatic recirculation of a xenobiotic can
result in prolongation of the xenobiotic's half-life.
bital, the nzymes that metabolize the drug are
orthe lowcstdscatwhich deathmightbc pos
(or a similar chemical）.In the caseof phenobar
beexpected t develpiinumtexie e）
2.b.Teleronce is the reduced responsiveness toa
withoutshowingclinical signsmaxiun loler-
LDn
therisk flloxing an acute posure thanis the
paramcters are far morehepful in detormining
1.cTheIDsicentifies thedose at which 50%of
ANSWERS
xenobictie can reach the syse mie circulation
chscrbcd intc the portal cireulation bcfcre thc
Cats lack csscntial cnzymes for mctabolizing
ofa frxtion of a xenobiotic hat has ben
10.b.The fist passeffect efers tc the hepaicrem oval
Bioavailability
9.e.
teristicsfaxeobiticvitpoputionbt
organcgenesis).
5. b.The dosc-respoa aurve rqresnts the chara-
brain had formed (ie.,after completion of
of action in the body
mostrapid distributicnofa tcxicant toits site
B.a.
lntravenous administration will produce the
result n difere nces in respnse t xennhiorics.
All of these factors are impotant in determining
doscs of acctaminophen
and decreased aav crse cffcct
reaiveesuling  tiusis atelativelylw
phenobarbital uetabolisu,lower tlood levels.
induced in the liver, resulting in increase in
REFERENCES
Boothe, Dawn M. and Peterson, Michael E. 2006
Considerations in pediatric and geriatric poisoned patients.
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited
Iby
67
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 165-177.
St. Louis: Saunders.
Eaton, David L. and Gilbert, Steven G. 2008. Principles of
toxicology. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology, the Basic
Science of Poisons, 6th edition, edited by Curtis D.
Klaasen, pp. 11-43. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
Evans, Tim J. 2006. Toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 18-28. St.
Louis: Saunders.
Frey, H.H. and Rieh, B. 1981. Pharmacokinetics of
naproxen in the dog. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 42(9):1615-1617.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2001. Chocolate intoxication
Veterinary Medicine 96(2):108-110.
Kutzler, Michelle A. 2006. Considerations in pregnant or
lactating patients. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd
edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
Talcott, pp. 178-190. St. Louis: Saunders.
Lanusse, Carlos E., Lifschitz, A.L., and Imperiale, F.A.
2009. Macrocyclic lactones: endectocide compounds. In
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edition,
edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp.
1119-1144. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Lees, Peter. 2009. Analgesic, antiinflammatory, antipyretic
drugs. In Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th
68
edition, edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp.
457-492. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Lehman-McKeeman,
，LoisD.2008.Absorption,
distribution, and excretion of toxicants. In Casarett and
Doull's Toxicology, the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th
edition, edited by Curtis D. Klaasen, pp. 131-159. New
York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
Mealey, Katrina L. 2006. Ivermectin: Macrolide
antiparasitic agents. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd
edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
Talcott, pp. 785-794. St. Louis: Saunders.
Merrill, Jill C., Morton, Joseph, and Soileau, Stephen D
2008. Metals.In Principles and Methods of Toxicology
5th edition, edited by A. Wallace Hayes, pp. 841-896.
New York: Informa Health Care.
Osweiler, Gary D. 1996. Toxicology. The National
Veterinary Medical Series, Philadelphia: Williams and
Wilkins.
 2006. General toxicological principles. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E.
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 2-17. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Parkinson,  Andres and Ogilvie, Brian  W. 2008.
Biotransformation of xenobiotics. In Casarett and Doull's
Toxicology, the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th edition.
edited by Curtis D. Klaasen, pp.161-304. New York:
McGraw-Hill Medical.
69
Rogers,  John M and Kavlock, Robert J. 2008
Developmental toxicology. In Casarett and Doull's
Toxicology, the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th ed., edited
      
McGraw-Hill Medical.
Smalley, H.E., Curtis, Jack M., and Earl, F.L. 1968.
Teratogenic action of carbaryl in beagle dogs. Toxicology
and Applied Pharmacology 13(3):392-403.
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antinflammatories.
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933.
St. Louis: Saunders.
Volmer, Petra A. 2004. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by K.H. Plumlee,
pp. 188190. St. Louis: Mosby.
70
2
Incidence of Poisoning in Small Animals
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
Animals are exposed to potentially toxic products every
day, yet the actual incidence of poisoning in animals is
relatively low when compared to other causes of illness,
such as infectious and metabolic diseases, allergy, trauma,
neoplasia, etc. Animals presenting with signs that pet
owners may suspect are related to poisoning need to be
fully evaluated in order to rule out the possibility of an
unrelated illness. Veterinary technicians can assist in
sorting out the cause of illness by obtaining thorough
details on the suspected exposure as well as a complete
     d   as 
information and the results of a thorough physical
examination, the determination as to the likelihood of a
poisoning can be made.
Recall from Chapter 1 that the fundamental tenet of
toxicology is "the dose makes the poison,” meaning that
only when a sufficient amount of a toxicant is involved
will a poisoning take place. Obviously the dose required to
induce a poisoning will depend on a variety of factors.
including the agent in question, route of exposure, and
species, age, and weight of the animal. Most of the
information on animal poisonings comes from human and
animal poison control center data; because there is no
71
reporting requirement nor is there a central reporting
agency for animal poisonings, the actual incidence of
animal poisonings is not known. However, information
from poison control centers is still helpful in understanding
the most common features of animal poisonings, which
can aid in instituting measures that may help in minimizing
exposures of animals to toxicants.
DEMOGRAPHICS
Demographic    information    on    companion
animal
poisonings has largely come from calls to human or animal
poison control centers contacted about exposures of the
animal to potentially toxic agents (Forrester and Stanley
2004; Haliburton and Buck 1983; Hornfeldt and Murphy
1992, 1997, 1998; Hormfeldt and Borys 1985) or from
surveys of  veterinary emergency  centers or teaching
hospitals (Cope et al. 2006; Osweiler 1975). In all these
reports, dogs and cats are the species for which assistance
is most commonly sought regarding potential poisonings,
accounting for 95%-98% of all reported calls (Forrester
and Stanley 2004; Guiliano Albo and Nebbia 2004; Xavier
et al. 2 002; Hormfeldt and Murphy 1998). These
percentages have changed considerably since 1983, when
dogs and cats accounted for only 44% of calls to an animal
poison control center (Trammel et al. 1985).
Dogs account for up to 80% of animal-related calls to
human poison control  centers (Hornfeldt and Murphy
centers  (ASPCA  Animal Poison  Control Center
unpublished data, 2009). Calls regarding cats comprise
another 12%-15% ofthe total, with the remaining cases
72
involving food animals, horses, birds, pocket pets, wildlife.
etc. (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). Exposures of animals to
potentially toxic agents are more common in the summer,
although peaks around the winter holiday seasons have
been noted (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). The majority of
poisonings are accidental in nature and occur at or near the
animal owner's home (Hornfeldt and Murphy 1992, 1998;
Khan et al. 1999). Malicious poisonings are relatively rare,
accounting for less than 1% of all exposures to potentially
toxic agents (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). In most (>75%)
poisonings of dogs and cats, the route of exposure is due to
ingestion of the toxicant, with dermal exposures
accounting for 4%-15% (Hormfeldt and Murphy 1997).
Less than 1% of exposures are by routes other than oral or
dermal, including inhalation, bites/stings, injection, or
ocular. Ninety-nine percent of reported exposures are acute
in nature and 97% involve a single toxicant (Hornfeldt and
Murphy 1998).
Dogs are inquisitive creatures with a propensity for
investigating the world with their mouths, which makes it
reports of exposures to potentially toxic agents. There is no
gender predisposition to poisoning exposures, with males
and females being equally represented (Gwaltney-Brant
2007). The average age for cases involving dogs is
approximately 4 years, suggesting that young adults are
most often involved in potential poisonings. Some breeds.
particularly Labrador retrievers, are considered to be more
‘poison-prone” than others, and a review of over 68,000
animal poison control center cases involving purebred
dogs showed that cases involving Labrador retrievers were
three times higher than the next most common breed
73
(Gwaltney-Brant 2007). However, the overall percentage
of cases involving Labradors (17.6%) was not significantly
different than the overall popularity of Labradors based on
American Kennel Club registrations (15%). In other
words, it may very well be that there are three times more
cases involving Labradors because there are three times
more Labradors in the population. Some breeds that do
compared  to  their  overall popularity  include cocker
spaniels and bichon frises (Gwaltney-Brant 2007).
Unlike dogs, cats have discriminating habits and appetites.
making them less likely to ingest things that are not good
for them. Calls to poison centers involving cats occur at
less thanonethird the rate of callsinvolving dogs
(Hornfeldt and Murphy 2006), even though cat ownership
exceeds dog ownership in the United States, with over 81
million owned cats vs. 72 million owned dogs in 2007
(AVMA 2007). There are no gender or age differences
      
and the most commonly reported purebreds were Siamese,
Persians, Maine coon, and Himalayan. Because of their
grooming habits, cats are more at risk than dogs from
agents that come into contact with their fur. For example,
many ethylene glycol exposures in cats are thought to
occur when cats walk through or lie in puddles and then
groom the ethylene glycol off their hair.
AGENTS
There is a virtually unlimited number of agents to which
animals may be exposed, and the potential for an exposure
to turn into an actual poisoning depends on a number of
74
factors, including the inherent toxicity of the agent, the
sensitivity of the animal to the effects of the agent, the
amount of the agent to which the animal is exposed, and
the route of exposure (e.g., ingestion vs. dermal). The
potential for exposure to specific agents may vary with the
time of the year; for instance, chocolate exposures increase
around holidays where chocolate is traditionally featured
and pesticide exposures are more frequent during the
spring and summer, when use of these products increases.
Based on reports from human and animal poison control
centers, the most frequent exposures of companion animals
tend
to
 involve
rodenticides,
chocolate,
and
pharmaceuticals
(Gwaltney-Brant 2007).The most
include
analgesics
(especially
nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents) and central nervous system
drugs (e.g., antidepressants, sedatives, stimulants, etc.)
Exposures to pesticides, once the most common cause of
animal-related calls, have declined significantly, possibly
due to the introduction of newer, less toxic products and
better public awareness of the potential hazards of
pesticides to pets. Plant exposures are also common both
inside and outside the house. Household cleaning agents,
automotive products, and food products are other common
causes of animal-related calls to poison control centers.
SIGNS AND OUTCOMES
In spite of the wide range of potentially toxic agents to
which animals may be exposed, the vast majority of
exposures result in no signs for the patient, based on
poison control center data (Gwaltney-Brant 2007). In
75
many cases, the animal may not have been exposed to a
sufficient amount to cause toxicosis, while in other cases
successful decontamination by animal caretakers may have
prevented the development of clinical signs. Mild signs
that develop are expected to be self-limiting and generally
do not require treatment (e.g., mild vomiting), and they
occur in ~25% of poison control center cases involving
animals. Moderate signs occur in about 7% of exposures;
these signs generally require some form of treatment (e.g.,
       
to be life threatening. Major signs are those in which
life-threatening conditions occur or there is potential for
significant residual disability or disfigurement following
recovery; fortunately, toxicoses associated with major
signs generally account for about 1% of animal poisoning
cases. The overall mortality rate for animal cases reported
(Hornfeldt and Murphy 2006). Agents most commonly
associated with severe signs and deaths include
rodenticides, pesticides, pharmaceuticals, plants, and
ethylene glycol.
CONCLUSION
Poisoning is a serious cause of morbidity and mortality in
animals, particularly in dogs and cats. Based on
information obtained by veterinary clinics and human and
animal poison control centers, the incidence of animal
poisoning does not appear to be waning, although the
agents to which animals are exposed does appear to change
with time. While significant pesticide exposures may be on
the decline due to the development of newer and less toxic
pesticides, exposures to other agents, such as chocolate
76
and pharmaceutical agents, may be on the rise. Knowing
what agents have the potential to be involved in serious
toxicoses should allow veterinary technicians to better
educate clients on means of preventing animal poisonings
through the appropriate use of household products and the
removal of potential hazards from  the animals'
environments.
CHAPTER 2 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Which of the following best characterizes the
regard to species involved, time of year, location of
exposure, intent, and route of exposure?
a.
 Feline, fall, veterinary clinic, malicious,
intramuscular injection
b. Canine, summer, home, accidental, oral
ingestion
c. F eline, summer, home, malicious, oral ingestion
d. Canine, fall, home, malicious, oral ingestion
e. Canine, spring, accidental, dermal exposure
2. Which one of the following includes toxicants
most often involved in pet poisonings?
a. Pool chemicals, insecticides, and chocolate
77
b. Plants, chocolate, and lawn chemicals
c. Antifreeze, rodenticide, and chocolate
d. Rodenticides, pharmaceuticals, and chocolate
e. Pharmaceuticals, automotive products, and lawn
chemicals
3. Which of the following statements is incorrect?
a. The majority of exposures of animals to
potentially toxic agents result in no clinical signs.
b.  Most  animals developing  clinical  signs
following exposure to potentially toxic agents
develop mild effects only.
c. Toxicants most commonly associated with
mortality in dogs and cats include pharmaceuticals.
rodenticides, and ethylene glycol.
d. The incidence of poisoning due to exposure of
pets to pesticides has increased dramatically over
the past 25 years.
e. According to cases reported to poison control
centers, deaths occur in less than 5% of all reported
animal poisonings.
78
has dec lined signifi cantly.
3.d The incidence of pesticide poisoning of pets
PZ
ingest poisons in or near the home.
involve dogs that most commonly accidentally
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
AVMA (American Veterinary Medical Association). 2007
U.S.PetOwnership
& Demographics Sourcebook,
Schaumburg: AVMA.
Cope, Rhian, White, K.S., More, E., Holmes, K., Nair, A.,
Chauvin, P., and Oncken, A. 2006. Exposure-to-treatment
intervaland clinical severity in canine poisoning: a
retrospective analysis at a Portland veterinary emergency
center.JournalofVeterinary
Pharmacology
and
Therapeutics29:233-236.
Forrester, Mathias and Stanley, Sharilyn K. 2004. Patterns
of animal poisonings reported to the Texas Poison Center
Network: 1998-2002.Veterinary and Human Toxicology
46:96-99.
Guiliano Albo, A. and Nebbia C. 2004. Incidence of
poisonings in domestic carnivores in Italy.  Veterinary
ResearchCommunications 28:83-88.
79
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2007. Epidemiology of animal
poisonings. In Veterinary Toxicology: Basics and Clinical
Principles, edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 67-73. New
York: Academic Press Elsevier.
Haliburton, John C. and Buck, William B. 1983. Animal
poison control center: summary of telephone inquiries
during the first three years of service. Journal of the
American
Veterinary
Medical
Association
182(5):514-515.
Hornfeldt Carl S. and Borys, Douglas J. 1985. Review of
veterinary cases received by the Hennepin Poison Center
in 1984. Veterinary
and
Human
Toxicology
27(6):525-528.
Hornfeldt, Carl S. and Murphy, Michael J. 1992. 1990
report of the American Association of Poison Control
Centers: Poisonings in animals. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 200(8):1077-1080.
1997. Poisonings in animals: The 1993-1994
report of the American Association of Poison Control
Centers.
Veterinary
and
Human
Toxicology
39(6):361-365.
1998. American Association of Poison Control
Centers report on poisonings of animals, 1993-1994.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
212(3):358-361.
. 2006 Summary of small animal poison exposures.
In Small Animal Toxicology, Second Edition, edited by
80
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 563-577.
St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Khan, Safdar A., Schell, Mary M., Trammel, Harold L.,
Hansen, Steven K., and Knight, Michael W. 1999.
Ethylene glycol exposures managed by the  ASPCA
National Animal Poison Control Center from July 1995 to
December 1997. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
41(6):403-406.
Osweiler, G.D. 1975. Sources and incidence of small
animal poisoning. Veterinary Clinics of North America
5(4): 589-604.
Trammel, Harold, Buck, William, and Beasley, Val. 1985
National Animal Poison Control Center: Seven years of
service.29thAnnualProceedingsoftheAmerican
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians,pp
183-191.
Xavier, F.G. and Kogika, M.M., de Sousa, Spinosa H
2002 Common causes of poisoning in dogs and cats in a
Brazilian veterinary teaching hospital from 1998 to 2000.
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 44, 115-116.
81
3
Toxicology Information Resources
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
In the past several years, the amount of toxicology
information has grown tremendously, as has the ability to
access this information, whether through peer-reviewed
publications, textbooks, or computer-based resources. The
primary challenge is determining which sources provide
the most up-to-date, accurate, and reliable information.
Additionally, diagnostic laboratories and poison control
centers can provide invaluable information when dealing
with a toxicological problem. This chapter provides an
overview  of toxicology  information resources that are
available to assist in dealing with toxicology questions.
EVALUATION OF RESOURCES
When choosing a toxicology information resource, it is
important that the veterinary technician be aware of any
potential  issues
sregarding qualityor bias ofthe
information. In general, peer-reviewed resources (e.g.,
veterinaryjournals)thatoutlinethe methodsbywhich
conclusions are reached are
more reliable
than
non-peer-reviewed resources (lay jourmals, nonfiction
literature, the Internet) which tend to summarize data,
often adding personal opinion to, or in place of, scientific
theory or facts. Even peer-reviewed resources may show
82
some bias, because the research may have been sponsored
by a corporation or group with a particular agenda. It is
wise to check the institutions from which the author(s)
came to determine whether there might be some conflict of
interest. That is not to imply that all research funded by
industry or other interest groups is suspect; the reader
should keep an open mind while reading the material
critically.
Computer-based resources, such as bibliography searches
(e.g., Medline, offered by the National Institutes of Health)
can be extremely valuable and reliable, whereas personal
or corporate web pages may be fraught with inaccurate,
outdated, biased, or outright damaging information,
depending on the agenda of the page owner. Because
anyone  can post a  well-designed website full of
misinformation, close scrutiny of the source of the
information is imperative. In general, sites sponsored by
reputable governmental, educational, and institutional
agencies will contain information that is up-to-date, is
accurate, and tends to provide balanced views, even on
controversial subjects.  Sites that engage in polarized,
emotional, or dogmatic discourse should be read with
skepticism; in these cases, attempting to verify the
statements made on these sites through other independent
resources is highly recommended.
Items to consider in evaluating the information available
on websites include
· The author's credentials and institutional affiliations
·The date the material was posted
83
· The clarity and comprehensiveness of the information
provided
·The relevance of hyperlinks to other sites
· The inclusion of clear references, preferably peer-reviewed
  is o       
often with outrageously exaggerated claims, and they have
the unfortunate tendency to become widely disseminated.
  o d    n   
surprisingly, many of these rumors involve poisonings of
humans or pets, often by seemingly innocuous agents, such
as shampoos, household cleaners, and the like. An example
of an Internet rumor that has had wide dissemination (and
several resurrections over the years) is the 2004 rumor that
Swiffer WetJet cleaning solution poses a hazard to dogs
 ,       
away from antifreeze” and has caused liver failure in dogs
and deaths in cats. The ingredient in question, propylene
glycol n-propyl ether, is of low toxicity especially at the
concentrations present in cleaning agents (it is present in a
large number of common household cleaners) and it will
not cause liver injury. The rumor has been discredited by a
 pun mou Aiaaa dn sdo Hs in nq saonos jo Aaa
(Oehme and Hare 2009). In general, a good rule of thumb
is to treat unsolicited warnings received via email or fax
with skepticism until further research can be done to verify
their authenticity. The Urban Legends References Page
(www.snopes.com) is a good first stop in the search for the
truth of a particular story. This website has compiled and
researched thousands of rumors, Intermet or otherwise, and
rates them on their veracity as true, false, or undetermined.
TYPESOFRESOURCES
84
Peer-Reviewed Journals
Peer-reviewed journals provide detailed accounts of recent
studies being done in a variety of specialized areas. They
have the advantage of providing the most up-to-date
information as well as describing the study in detail,
allowing the reader to assess the conclusions drawn from
the work. One disadvantage to this type of resource is that
the information is new and may be revised over time based
on the results of subsequent studies or scientific review.
There are no veterinary toxicology jourmals currently being
published; however, animal toxicology information may be
found in a variety of human toxicology journals as well as
select veterinary journals. See Table 3.1l for a listing of
some jourmals that publish clinically relevant toxicology
articles.
Textbooks
In the past several years, the number of available
veterinary toxicology texts and toxicology-related chapters
in veterinary medical texts has expanded greatly. In
general, these resources focus on the most commonly
encountered toxicology issues, making them useful and
convenient for those in clinical practice who lack the time
to do detailed searches on individual topics. Textbooks are
an economical and effective means of having toxicology
information readily available. On the downside, texts may
present abbreviated information due to limited space, some
information may be outdated by the time the text is
published, and newer discoveries must await the
publication of newer editions. Table 3.2 provides a short
85
list  of  some currently  available  toxicology  textbooks
applicable to small animal veterinary medicine.
Table 3.1. Journals with veterinary toxicology articles
American Journal of Veterinary Research
Canadian Journal ofVeterinary Research
Canadian Veterinary Journal
Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice
Compendium: Continuing Education for Veterinarians
Journal ofthe American Animal Hospital Association
Journal oftheAmerican Association ofVeterinary Laboratory
Diagnosticians
Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association
Journal ofMedical Toxicology
JournalofSmall Animal Practice
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
Journal ofVeterinaryPharmacology and Therapeutics
Journal of Zoo and WildlifeMedicine
North American Veterinary Conference Clinician's Brief
PreventiveVeterinary Medicine
Veterinary Clinics ofNorth America,Small Animal Practice,Exotic Animal
Practice
Veterinary and Human Toxicology (discontinued 2005)
Veterinary Journal
Veterinary Medicine
VeterinaryPathology
Veterinary Quarterly
Veterinary Record
86
Computer Databases and Internet Sites
        
provide quick access to a wide variety of toxicology
information. Some of these are more geared toward human
toxicology, but
thereoftenwill
1be some
animal
information included. At the very least they can give the
reader a rough estimate of potential for toxicity based on
how hazardous some products are for humans. Proprietary
databases such as Poisindex? or Tomes? (both by
Micromedex) are available by subscription and would be
of minimalavailability to those working in veterinary
practice. However, Poisindex? is used by all U.S. poison
control centers, so the information would be available
through a regional poison control center.
Table 3.2. Veterinary toxicology textbooks
Title,Author/Editor,Year
Publisher
Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion: Small Amimal Toxicology,
Wiley-Blackwell
Osweiler, Hovda, Brutlag and Lee, 2011.
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, Plumlee, 2003
Mosby
Field Guide to Common Animal Poisons,Murphy,
Iowa StatePress
1996
Handbook of Small Animal Toxicology and
Mosby
Poisonings, Gfeller, 2003
Handbook of Toxic Plants of North America,
Blackwell
Burrows and Tyrl, 2006
Natural Toxicants in Feeds, Forages and Poisonous
In terstate Publishers
Plants, Cheeke, 1998
Small Animal Toxicology, Peterson and Talcott,
Saunders
2006
87
Toxicology (National Veterinary Medical Series),
Williams & Wilkins
Osweiler, 1996
Toxic Plants of North America, Burrows & Tyrl,
Iowa State Press
2001
Veterinary Toxicology, Gupta, 2007
Academic Press
Veterinary Toxicology,Roder, 2001
Butterworth-Heinemann
Other accurate and up-to-date databases are accessible via
the Internet, and many of these are provided for low to no
cost. Other websites maintained by government agencies,
academia, and organizations can provide a wealth of
toxicology information, and most are available at no cost
to the web surfer. As stated earlier, the veracity of the
information available on websites can be in question, so
some degree of healthy skepticism is merited when
browsing information
on
 websites   maintained  by
individuals or organizations that may have underlying
agendas (e.g., selling a product). Table 3.3 includes some
websites providing reliable toxicology information
Poison Control Centers
There are approximately 66 poison centers in the United
States that provide 24-hour/7-day assistance to the public
and health care providers in cases of human exposures to
potentially toxic agents (McNally et al. 2006). These
centers are generally staffed by nurses and pharmacists,
many with specialized training in toxicology (Specialists 1n
Poison Information or SPIs), and are funded through tax
dollars. Most are members of the American Association of
Poison Control Centers, an organization that oversees the
education and training of poison control specialists and
provides public education by promoting awareness of the
88
importance of poison prevention. Individuals can reach
their regional
poison
 control
center by calling
1-800-222-1222 from anywhere in the United States;
callers using land lines (not cell phones) will automatically
be routed to the appropriate poison control center for their
region.
Human poison control centers can be of assistance to
veterinary staff in helping to identify unknown human
medications through their database of imprint codes.
Although some centers permit their staff to manage animal
cases, most lack the information and financial resources to
be primary resources for veterinary patients. Extrapolation
of information from the human poison database to animals
can
sometimes
 result
1n
 erroneous
treatment
recommendations and is not generally recommended
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison Control Center (APCC)
was the first animal oriented poison control center in the
United  States. The  Center  provides   24-hour/7-day
assistance and is staffed by 30 veterinarians, 15 of whom
have achieved specialty-board certification in general and/
or veterinary toxicology. In addition to their extensive
experience in dealing with animal toxicology emergencies.
the veterinary staff at the APCC has access to a database
that incorporates over 30 years of cases of animal
poisonings to assist them in managing animal toxicoses.
The APCC is a member of the American Association of
Poison Control Centers and works with human poison
control centers, governmental agencies, zoos, and other
organizations    to   provide    accurate    and   up-to-date
information on newly discovered hazards to animals. The
89
ASPCA-APCC  can be  contacted by  telephone at
1-888-426-4435; in most cases a per-case consultation fee
will apply, but there is no cost if the product involved is
covered by the manufacturer through the Animal Product
Safety Service division of the APCC.
Pet Poison Helpline is another 24-hour/7-day animal
poison control center in North America. This poison
a jo d  e  s s  [s
who are board certified in veterinary toxicology (ABVT),
internal medicine (ACVIM) and emergency and critical
care (ACVECC) with the added benefit of having experts
in human toxicology (PharmDs). Pet Poison Helpline is
operated by SafetyCall Intermational, the world's largest
services  to   consumers  of veterinary  and
human
pharmaceuticals, household goods, pesticides, personal
care  products,  agricultural  products  and  dietary
supplements; it is also affiliated with the University of
Minnesota. Pet Poison Helpline's toxicologists have been
serving the veterinary community for over 30 years and
have managed 2.5 million poisonings. The Pet Poison
Helpline can be consulted by telephone at 1-800-213-6680.
All consultation fee of S35 per case may apply; this
consultation fee includes unlimited follow-up. The website
for Pet Poison Helpline is www.petpoisonhelpline.com.
Table 3.3. Internet websites with toxicology information
Name
URL
Description
Utilize avariety
General Search
of indexing
Engines
programs to
90
search and return
websites based
on keywords.
All The Web
www.alltheweb.com
Alta Vista
www.altavista.com
Ask.com
www.ask.com
Bing
www.bing.com
Dogpile
www.dogpile.com
Goodsearch
www.goodsearch.com
Google
www.google.com
Hotbot
www.hotbot.com
Lycos
www.lycos.com
MetaCrawler
www.metacrawler.com
WebCrawler
www.webcrawler.com
Yahoo
www.yahoo.com
Toxicology
Information
Multidisciplinary
organization
uniting scientists
and clinicians in
American Academy of
the advancement
Clinical Toxicology
of research,
www.clintox.org
education,
(AACT)
prevention and
treatment of
diseases caused
by chemicals,
drugs, and toxins
Provides
American Association
oversight and
of Poison Control
www.aapcc.org
coordination of
Centers (AAPCC)
U.S. poison
control centers
91
American Board of
Certifying body
Veterinary
www.abvt.org/public/index.html
for veterinary
Tox icologists (ABVT)
toxicologists
Certifying board
American Board of
www.abtox.org
for general
Toxicologists (ABT)
toxicology
Health agency of
the U.S.
 Department of
Health and
Agency for Toxic
Human Services
Substances & Disease
www.atsdr.cdc.gov
(USDHHS)
Registry (ATSDR)
providing public
health
information on
science related to
toxic substances
Evaluates agents
of public health
concern by
developing and
applying tools of
National Toxicology
modern
ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov
Program (NTP)
toxicology and
molecular
biologyDivision
of National
Institutes of
Health
Veterinary/Medical
Information
Primary U.S.
federal agency
Centers for Disease
for conducting
Control and
www.cdc.gov
and supporting
Prevention (CDC)
public health
activities within
the U.S.
Search engine
PubMed
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed
for biomedical
92
literature from
MEDLINE, life
science journals,
and online books
Online
community of
veterinarians
with
Veterinary
board-certified
Information Network
www.vinl.com
specialist
(VIN)
consultants,
diagnostic tools,
andresearch
materials
Online
community for
Veterinary Support
veterinary
Personnel Network
www.vspn1.org
support staff
(VSPN)
providing expert
consultants and
continuing
education
Directing and
coordinating
www.who.org
authority for
WHO
health within the
United Nations
System
Pesticide Information
Collaborative
effort by several
U.S. universities
to provide
Extension Toxicology
objective,
ex tox net. orst. edu
Network (ExToxNet)
science-based
information
about pesticides,
written for
nonexperts
93
Provides
objective,
science-based
information
about pesticides
National Pesticide
and
Information Center
npic.orst.edu
pesticide-related
(NPIC)
topics; operates
toll-free
telephone
service for
questions related
to pesticides
U.S.agency
charged to
protect human
US Environmental
 health and the
Protection Agency
www.epa.gov
environment by
working for a
cleaner, healthier
environment
Food/Drug
Information
Computer-based
decision system
designed to
provide
Food Animal Residue
information on
Avoidance Databank
www.farad.org
avoiding drug.
(FARAD)
pesticide, and
environmental
contaminant
residue problems
in food animals
Provides
Internet Drug
information on
www.rxlist.com
Index(RxList)
prescription
drugs
USHHS agency
US Food and Drug
www.fda.gov
charged with
Administration
overseeing
94
safety of food,
drugs, and
medical devices
Portal for
reporting safety
issues regarding
foods (human or
FDA Safety Portal
www.safetyreporting.hhs.gov
pet), animal
drugs, or NIH
gene-transfer
research
Offers
information
Dietary Supplements
about ingredients
http://dietarysupplements.nlm.nih. gov/
in >3000
Labels Database
dietary!
selected brands
of dietary
supplements
Plant/Mushroom
Information
Searchable site
that outlines
ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center
www.aspca.org/pet-care/
plants that are
poison-control/plants/
toxic and
plant list
nontoxic to
animals
Website listing
information on
MushroomExpert.Com
www.mushroomexpert.com/
toxic and
index.html
nontoxic
mushrooms
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories
Veterinary diagnostic laboratories are invaluable tools in
dealing with animal poisonings (Galey and Talcott 2006).
Most
states
have
their
own
veterinary diagnostic
laboratories, often associated with veterinary colleges.
Many are staffed with veterinary toxicologists, who can
95
assist in case management (treatment, prognosis, etc.) as
samples to submit in order to obtain a diagnosis of toxicant
exposure or intoxication. Even if the diagnostic laboratory
within a particular state is unable to perform a specific
toxciologic analysis, samples often can be sent to other
state laboratories for testing. Typically there are fees that
are charged for such analytical tests, but in general they are
relatively modest compared to the actual expense to the
diagnostic laboratory performing the test.
rs osd, a tu si  tq rndod r 
that will test for all known toxic agents. Because there are
a variety of tests available to detect various toxicants, it is
important that the most appropriate test be selected in
order to minimize the time and cost associated with
testing. When presented with a sample for testing, the
toxicologist will weigh all of the available information,
including history, clinical signs, and any physical
characteristics of the agent in question in order to
determine which analysis is most appropriate. For this
reason, the more information provided to the toxicologist
the more likely it will be that he/she will be able to
determine the most appropriate testing for that case. The
    n s   s
that the submission forms are filled out as completely and
legibly as possible.
Summary
A wide range of toxicology information resources is
available to assist veterinary staff in the identification,
diagnosis, and management of animal poisonings.
96
Judicious care should be taken to confirm the reliability of
information sources, particularly those found in the lay
literature or on the Intermet.
CHAPTER 3 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A dog owner calls to say that Sarge, her
70-pound German shepherd dog, has just ingested
an herbal supplement containing valerian. Which
of the following would be the LEAST desirable
source of information on this supplement?
a. Peer-reviewed veterinary jourmnal article on
valerian use in dogs
b. Veterinary herbal medicine text book
c. Animal poison control center
d. Intermet website selling valerian for use in dogs
e. Veterinary diagnostic laboratory toxicologist
2. Which of the following would be the least
reliable  source
e of  information   on  potential
toxicants for pets?
a. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website
b. U.S. Food and Drug Administration website
97
c. Medline literature search
d. University website
e. Pet owner's personal website
3. Poison control centers can provide vital,
life-saving  information   in  cases  of   animal
poisonings. Which of the following is  false
regarding the use of poison control centers by
veterinary professionals?
a. In the U.S., there are currently two animal
poison  control
 centers   staffed   by   veterinary
professionals on a 24-hour/7-day basis.
b. Human poison control centers are just as capable
of managing  animal poisonings because both
animal and human poison control centers employ
veterinary professionals and use information from
the same databases.
c.Poison control centers can assist in the
identification of unknown medication through their
database of imprint codes.
d. T he National Poison Control Hotline number is
1-800-222-1222 and will route land line callers to
their appropriate regional poison control center.
98
databases.
tech nicians and use their own animal-oriented
orienteddatabase,animal poison control
3.b.Human poison control centers rarely employ
2e.
a product. In addition, such sites rarely ha ve
state benefits and downplayrisksin order to sell
1.d.Internet websites selling products may over-
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Galey, Francis D. and Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Effective
use  of a diagnostic laboratory.InSmall Animal
Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 154-164. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
McNally, Jude, Boesen, Keith, Tong, Theodore G. 2006.
Toxicological information resources.  In Small  Animal
Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 29-37. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
Oehme, Fred W. and Hare, William R. 2009. Urban
legends of toxicology: Facts and fiction. In Current
99
Veterinary Therapy XIV, edited by John D. Bonagura, pp.
109-111. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
100
4
Taking a Toxicologic History
CarrieLohmeyer
INTRODUCTION
Obtaining a thorough history is critical in effectively
treating patients that have been or are suspected of being
exposed to a toxic agent. The history-taking process begins
from the moment the client walks through the front door of
the veterinary hospital or calls in on the telephone. The
most important reason for obtaining a thorough history
though is to provide the safest and most appropriate care
for the patient (Fitzgerald 2006). It is the veterinary
technician's responsibility to acquire a reliable and
accurate history to prevent the loss of money, time, energy,
and resources in the hospital setting. This chapter offers
guidelines to assist veterinary technicians in developing
the skills necessary to be successful in obtaining a
toxicological history.
PATIENT PRESENTATION
Depending on the circumstances, the technician may not
know that the patient has been exposed to a toxic agent
upon its presentation to the veterinary hospital. When
dealing with toxic exposures the case will reflect one of
   n      
asymptomatic, the agent is known and the patient is
symptomatic, the agent is not known and the patient is
101
symptomatic (aka “"mystery poisoning"), the agent is not
known and the patient is asymptomatic. The general
historytaking process will be the same for all four cases
but may need adjustment according to the current situation
at hand.
As with any medical emergency, it is important to be
prepared and organized in the event a toxicology case
presents. Some toxicants can act very quickly; therefore,
time plays a key role in treatment implementation. Patients
that present with clinical signs need to be assessed and
stabilized as needed. Identifying ahead of time which staff
member will assist in emergent patient care and which will
obtain the historical information can save time and
confusion. Having a predetermined protocol established
for toxicological exposures enables the hospital staff to
stabilize and treat the patients efficiently and effectively.
MEDICALRECORD
The medical record for a toxicology case is composed of
six sets of required data: client information, patient
information, clinical status, agent information, exposure
information, and implemented treatment. The first three
categories are usually a component of any history-taking
process, whether a poisoning is involved or not. Agent
information, exposure information, and implemented
treatment are going to be additional elements. A written
protocol  can be  very  helpful  in  guiding  veterinary
   s   
overlooking  important    information   relating
toa
toxicological exposure. Each protocol is going to vary
from  veterinary  hospital  to veterinary  hospital  due to
102
individual preferences, but the six key components of a
toxicological  history  should be incorporated  into the
protocol and documented in a medical record. Once a
written protocol is developed, it should be readily available
to everyone in the hospital setting: this will prevent
Client Information
The first component of any medical record is the client
information. This should include the name of client, a
billing address, and a telephone number where the client
can be reached. If the client is not the owner of the patient
(e.g., extended family member or pet sitter), the contact
information for both parties should be obtained. When
obtaining contact information, it is important to ensure that
the record includes all possible means of contacting the
client to assure that veterinary staff will be able to
communicate changes in clinical status in a timely fashion
Patient Information
Patient signalment is the second component of the medical
history. The patient's name, breed, age, reproductive
status, and weight should all be noted in the medical
record. The vaccination status, environment, date of last
veterinary visit, current medications and supplements
(including dosage), diet, and preexisting health conditions
should also be included. Each item of patient signalment
has a purpose. Breed identification is important because
some breeds can be more or less sensitive to certain agents.
A dose of ivermectin considered nontoxic for a Labrador
retriever could potentially be problematic for a collie
103
because some collies possess a defective P-glycoprotein in
the blood-brain barrier that makes them more sensitive to
jvermectin. Similarly, the age of the patient is going to
play a role in determining toxicity and recommended
treatments. Very young or very old patients may have
limited organ function, which can influence absorption,
metabolism, and elimination of toxicants. For instance, a
dog that is 14 years old may be at higher risk of
developing kidney failure from an overdose of naproxen
than a healthy 3-year-old dog ingesting the same dose. The
reproductive status of a patient is also an essential element
in a toxicological history. Pregnant or lactating females
exposed to toxic
C agents may require additional  or
alternative  treatment  than 
malesornonpregnant,
nonlactating females. The potential effects of the toxicant,
as well as any drugs used to treat the toxicosis, on the
fetuses must be considered when the case involves a
pregnant animal. Some toxicants (e.g., some anticoagulant
rodenticides) can be passed to offspring through the milk;
an important consideration when dealing with lactating
animals is whether they have nursed their young
subsequent to being exposed to the toxic agent.
The basic tenet of toxicology is “"the dose makes the
poison,”" meaning that some exposures will result in no
toxic consequences because a toxic dose is not achieved.
For instance, a 0.5 oz bar of a 0.01% bromethalin
rodenticide will not pose a toxic hazard for an 80 lb dog,
but the same bar ingested by a 5 1b dog has potential to
cause  marked  clinicalsigns if treatment is  not
implemented. Obviously, a current, accurate weight of the
patient is critical for calculating doses of active ingredients
104
of toxicants as well as for calculating appropriate
medication dosages.
The patient's vaccination status, date of last veterinary
visit, current medications and supplements, diet, and
preexisting health conditions can be grouped into the
general category of overall health. Knowing the
vaccination status of the patient gives the veterinary
technician an idea of how well the patient is cared for and
may aid in ruling in or out infectious causes of a patient's
clinical signs. For example, a 5-month-old, unvaccinated
puppy presents to the veterinary hospital with severe
vomiting and  diarrhea.  A  toxicological  history  was
obtained, but the vaccination status of the patient was not
asked. According to the owners, the dog ingested a few
crystals from a silica gel packet that came out of a shoebox
a few hours before the signs began. Silica gel is a
minimally toxic agent that may, at worst, cause mild and
self-limiting stomach upset. Without knowing that silica
gel
1exposures
do not cause serious toxicosis, the
assumption may be made that the puppy's signs are related
to the ingestion of the silica gel while overlooking a more
serious potential cause, such as parvoviral enteritis
The date of the patient's last veterinary visit also provides
information on the patient's prior health care. The prior
health of patients that have not been examined by
veterinarians for many years is going to be relatively
unknown compared
1  to patients that receive regular
veterinary care. The results of any prior clinical pathology
evaluations may be useful to determine whether any
significant changes have occurred that may be attributable
to the current exposure. Conversely, the lack of prior
105
clinical pathology information may make it difficult to
determine whether, for example, an elevation in liver
enzyme values is due to the patient's current issue or
whether preexisting liver disease is present.
Current medications and preexisting health conditions are
two other components of a toxicological history that
should not be overlooked. Medications that the patient is
taking can influence a toxicology case in several ways.
Some medications may increase sensitivity to certain
toxicants. For instance, a dog that is being treated with a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug for arthritis pain and
then ingests ibuprofen may be at a higher risk for the
development of gastrointestinal ulcers  and acute renal
failure. Medications may also influence the treatment plan
for a given case, because possible interaction of the
medication with a drug in a treatment protocol may result
in the need to alter the protocol for that patient. Although
less common, it is also possible that the patient's clinical
signs in a "mystery poisoning” are due to an adverse
reaction to a prescribed medication. Preexisting health
conditions also come into play when deciding what
treatment to implement. A patient that has a heart murmur,
megaesophagus, or seizure disorder may require different
or additional treatment and monitoring than a healthy
patient. Decontamination is indicated in many exposures to
toxicants; however, emesis may be contraindicated in a
patient that has a history of seizures, heart problems, or
megaesophagus. Patients with histories of prior organ
       
affecting those organs, and may therefore require more
aggressive treatment at lower dosages than would healthy
animals.
106
Clinical Status
Some patients may present to the hospital showing no
clinical signs, but signs may have occurred prior to the
presentation. Careful questioning of the client can help
identify the signs that the patient has developed, when the
signs began, and their severity. For example, a 10 lb dog
ingested 3 oz of semisweet chocolate approximately 1.5
hours prior to presentation to the veterinary hospital. Upon
presentation the dog is BAR and the physical exam is
unremarkable. Since
the
dog
isasymptomatic,the
veterinarystaff wishes
to
initiate  treatment  by
administering a dose of apomorphine to induce emesis.
However, the history indicates that the patient had already
vomited 5 times at home, recovering a large amount of
chocolate. Since the patient has already spontaneously
vomited, induction of emesis is not indicated because
additional vomiting is unlikely to result in significant
further decontamination.
Environmental Information
The environment in which the patient lives is important
when identifying possible contributing causes of clinical
signs a patient has developed. A domestic animal that is
indoor/outdoor or strictly outdoors will have additional
opportunities to be exposed to toxic substances, infectious
agents, trauma, and other hazards when compared to
patients   that
live
strictlyindoors.Environmental
information is especially essential in determining the cause
of a patient's clinical signs when dealing with an unknown
toxicant. For example, a previously healthy 2-year-old
German shepherd presents to a veterinary hospital with
107
severe vomiting and lethargy. Diagnostic testing indicates
that the dog is in liver failure. The owner is unaware of any
toxic exposure that may have occurred and is certain that
the dog was not exposed to anything inside the home.
When questioned more thoroughly, the owner remembers
that the dog was unattended in the yard for approximately
6 hours on the previous day. The owner has a wide variety
of plants in the yard as well as occasional mushrooms
growing in the grass. The plant varieties in the yard
include juniper, sago palm, daffodils, rosebushes, and
tulips. From this information, the possibility that the sago
palm or a hepatotoxic mushroom may be the cause of the
dog's signs must be considered. Without questioning the
owner about possible exposures that may have occurred
outside the home, the potential exposure to sago palm or
mushrooms would have been overlooked
For indoor animals, information that may be useful
includes the areas of the house to which the animal has
access, including recent access to areas the pet does not
normally go (e.g., attic). The types of medications/herbal
products (human and veterinary, prescription, illicit and
OTC) in the household, and whether there have been
recent visitors who may have dropped medication are
important queries to make. It is best to ask for a list of all
medications/herbals that are in the household, even if the
client is sure that the patient did not have access to it. The
types of houseplants in the home should be listed; and it is
best to try to obtain the scientific name of the plant
whenever possible because many different plants share
common names. The presence of children or teenagers in
the household is important to know, because the
youngsters may have left items in the pet's reach or
108
allowed the pet access to a toxicant; sometimes children on
  d    a p  
taking it themselves. The presence of rodenticides or
insecticides in the home is an important bit of historical
information. Recent redecorating or renovation may
expose toxicants (e.g., old bags of rodenticide, lead in
paint chips or flakes) that were not previously accessible to
the animal. The presence of other pets and whether the
other pets in the house appear normal should also be
ascertained.
For outdoor animals confined by fences or other means,
identification of potentially toxic agents in outbuildings,
garages, or sheds to which the pet may have access is
important. Other potential hazards found in yards include
compost piles, plants, and yard treatments (especially some
systemic  insecticides
  and
1crabgrass
killers).  For
free-roaming animals, the challenge
is muchgreater
because the number of potentially toxic agents available is
quite large. Determining whether the animal is in an urban.
       
of the animal's immediate surroundings (e.g., wooded
areas vs. parks and lawns) may help in narrowing down the
agents to which the roaming animal may have been
exposed.  The   presence   of  1
livestock in the pet's
environment should stimulate questioning to determine the
pet's access to the barns or feed bins; whether medicated
feeds, fly baits, or feeds with growth promoters (e.g,
ionophores) in them are present; whether the livestock
have recently been medicated or dewormed; or whether
any livestock have recently been euthanized and buried on
the property.
109
Agent Information
The next data set required for the toxicological medical
record is the toxic agent, if known. The trade name of the
product or medication, active and inactive ingredients,
ingredient concentrations, scents or  flavors, EPA
registration
1 numbers,  and
manufacturercontact
information should all be documented in the medical
record. This information is easy to obtain if the packaging
(prescription bottles, containers, boxes, etc.) is brought to
the veterinary hospital with the patient. In many cases,
       
the
 package may have been ingested, discarded, or
destroyed or may never have been available. In some cases
it may be necessary to send clients back home or to the
store where the agent was purchased to obtain package
information.  Imprint codes from  individual medication
tablets or capsules can be used to identify a drug in cases
        
Physician's Desk Reference can help to decipher imprint
codes; if a PDR is not available, there is a variety of
Internet resources
S(e.g.，drugs.com)toobtainthis
information, or a poison control center could be contacted.
Rodenticide exposures provide excellent examples of why
ingredient information is essential. There are three main
types of commonly used rodenticides, and each has a
different  level  of   toxicity and  treatment   protocol.
Bromethalin exposure and bromadiolone exposures will
not be managed in the same manner, because these
rodenticides have different mechanisms of action and toxic
dosages (bromethalin affects the central nervous system,
but bromadiolone inhibits the normal blood coagulation
process). Knowing the name brand of the product is often
110
not sufficient to determine the active ingredient, because
products with the same brand name may have different
active ingredients (e.g., Rampage? rodenticide may
contain either cholecalciferol or bromethalin as an active
ingredient). Rodenticide pellets and bars come in a variety
of colors, but, unfortunately, there is no way to identify the
active ingredient by color or shape
Exposure Information
Once the identity of an agent has been confirmed, the next
step in the history-taking process is to obtain a detailed
account of events surrounding the exposure. Knowing only
the name of the agent, or the active ingredients, may not
provide sufficient information to determine whether an
exposure is likely to result in problems for the patient. The
veterinary staff needs to have an accurate picture of what
occurred before, during,  and after the exposure.
Information to be documented in the medical record
includes amount of the agent ingested (count, volume or
weight); physical form of the agent; calculated doses of
active ingredients in mg/kg body weight; route, time, and
location of the exposure; location of the owner when the
exposure occurred; reason that the agent was administered
(if applicable); original source of the agent; person(s)
responsible for administering the agent (if applicable); and
potential for other animals to be exposed. Many clients
toxicant to which the patient may have been exposed, but
patient questioning can sometimes help to get an
approximation. For medication, if the original prescription
amount is known, remaining pills (if any) can be counted
out and subtracted from the original prescribed amount;
111
calculating the dose taken and the number of days from the
time that the prescription was filled may enable the
veterinary technician to estimate the maximum number of
pills that may be missing. For other products (e.g.,
rodenticide pellets, granulated material, liquids, etc.),
information be gleaned by asking how much might be
missing
gfrom the original and subtracting out a
worstcase-scenario amount: "Complete this question: I
know it could not have been more than (blank)."
Narrowing down the amount with questions (i.e., "Was it
as much as a tablespoon? Less? How about a teaspoon?
More? Maybe two teaspoons?") can sometimes help to get
 s   n     
estimating in this way it is important to err on the side of
than underestimating
include:
[          
appeared normal?
Was the onset of signs gradual or sudden?
What was the location of the animal in the last few hours
prior to the development of clinical signs?
Is there any history of administration of medications/herbal
products/flea or tick control products to this animal or
other animals in the household in the past 24 hours?
112
The answers to these questions may assist in narrowing
down the possible toxicants to which the patient might
have been exposed.
Implemented Treatment
Once the where, how, and why of the exposure is known,
the next step for the historv-taker is to determine whether
the owner had already implemented any treatment at home
before calling the vet hospital or bringing the patient into
the hospital setting. Implemented treatment may include
induction of emesis, bathing the patient for dermal
exposures, or giving over-the-counter medications to help
prevent the development of signs or to treat current signs.
Some owners will be knowledgeable about treatment that
can be implemented at home, such as inducing emesis. If
an owner has already been successful at inducing
vomiting, this is an important piece of information to note
vomiting, how much, when it was given in relation to time
of exposure, and the results (including what was observed
in the vomitus) also need to be documented. In certain
     s   n
can complicate the case. For example, salt and syrup of
  a n n sn s a n
Administration of salt can cause serious electrolyte
abnormalities, and large doses of syrup of ipecac can cause
prolonged  gastrointestinal upset  and  possible   cardiac
effects.
TELEPHONETRIAGE
113
Some clients may call seeking advice about a toxicological
exposure before bringing the patient into the veterinary
hospital. In these cases, having a telephone questionnaire
for obtaining a toxicological history may help to determine
which patients need to be treated at a veterinary hospital
and which patients can be monitored at home. The largest
disadvantage to taking a history over the phone is that the
clinical status of the
epatientmaybeunknownor
inaccurate. Unlike when a patient is presented to the
hospital, the components of a physical exam cannot be
implemented over the phone. To the owner, the patient
may look normal, and subtle clinical signs such as
mydriasis or abnormal mucous membrane color can be
overlooked. Heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and
respirations are generally unavailable, as many animal
owners are unaware of or lack the equipment to accurately
obtain these vital statistics
Another disadvantage to taking a history over the phone is
determining the reliability of the owner; indeed, this can
often be a challenge when dealing with clients in person.
When speaking with a client over the phone, the veterinary
technician has to rely solely on verbal communication.
Observing a client's body language can at times provide
more information about a particular situation than what is
communicated verbally. Reliability can be poor due to a
number of reasons.  Clients may purposely withhold
pertinent information as a result of feeling ashamed that
their animal was exposed to a potentially toxic agent,
whether by accident or simply due to a lack of knowledge
as to what might be toxic. Clients may also feel they might
be reprimanded by veterinary professionals for applying a
 uo e pa m u Aq o A npod
114
home by giving over-the-counter human medications to
their animal. Clients sometimes withhold information
merely to avoid having to bring their patients into a
veterinary hospital due to finances or inconvenience
When illicit substances are involved, clients may be
reluctant to provide information due to fear of being
"turned in" to law enforcement by veterinary staff. Tactful
the veterinary staff is the well-being of the patient can
reminder that knowing what the toxicant is will allow the
patient to be treated much more effectively and cheaply.
because knowing the toxicant may well reduce the number
of diagnostic tests that may need to be performed.
Veterinary technicians should be aware of reasons that
client information may be less than accurate and use their
common sense and instinct to try to determine whether the
historical information provided does not seem to fit the
circumstances.
CONCLUSION
It is a veterinary technician's responsibility to provide an
o   s    
treatment decisions can be made. Taking an accurate
history requires patience and attention  to detail. In
situations where aggressive patient care is required, it is
sometimes tempting to skip parts of the history-taking
process. However, if details in the history are overlooked.
the patient's overall welfare could be compromised, and
that key piece of information that could be vital to the case
may be overlooked
115
CHAPTER 4 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. The veterinary medical record is composed of
basic data sets, including client information, patient
signalment, and clinical status of the patient. When
dealing with a suspected poisoning case, additional
data that should be obtained for the medical record
include which of the following?
a. Agent information
b. Exposure history
c. Implemented treatments
a and b only
a, b, and c
2. Patient signalment includes all of the following
except:
a. Breed
b. Age
c. Reproductive status
d. Vaccination history
e. Weight
116
3. Give three reasons why the patient's age and
prior health history are important information to
obtain when dealing with a poisoning case.
4. Sparky, a 5-year-old, neutered male, 12-pound
Jack Russell terrier presents to the emergency
clinic with a history of vomiting. According to the
owner, Sparky has a habit of “eating everything
within reach, but was not witnessed ingesting
anything out of the ordinary by the owner. In spite
of his history of dietary indiscretion, the owner
reports that Sparky has never been ill and is current
on his vaccination and heartworm status. What
questions that should be asked about Sparky's
clinical status?
5. Referring to the patient in Question 4, what
questions
should 
be  asked about Sparky's
environment?
insectlcides us d in the house or yand ?
 
mallyDoes Sparky have access to animals other
thel ifsrey fening
agparentDidhparlethrgicbeforehabegn
mA
frc gmsdirhren
any medic atissupplemcnts, painthalls, sgar
How longhas Sparky beenvomitingHave there
cont affects the patien
meicaion,
paient is curremly taking my alter how thetoxi
response to certain toxicants,medicationstha the
in Sparky's env ironmen? Have any new weeds cr
in ducec): putients may be moe or less susceptible
Prior medical comiins may afet low e
petient ismanaged （cg.whcther cmesis is
Has he been allowed acceg to ary area that he
indoor or outdoor dogTowhat areascf the hcuse
m d q s
vation.etc.? Is Sparky on any medications
malieal reurl
hold changes in the pa few days (visitors,renc
1.c. Al of tre lised tata shonld he chzined for the
ANSWERS
REFERENCE
117
Fitzgerald KT. 2006. Taking a toxicological history. In
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael
E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott PA, pp. 38-44. St.
Louis: Saunders.
118
5
Essential Calculations
CamilleDeClementi
INTRODUCTION
Dosage
calculation is critical to clinical veterinary
toxicology. This process allows one to answer two very
important questions about an exposure. First, is the
exposure going to cause adverse effects? And second, if
adverse effects develop, how serious will they be? The
relationship between the dosage and the effect or response
to a poison is a crucial concept in toxicology (Osweiler
1996). Dosage is the most important factor in determining
response (Osweiler 2006). As the amount or dosage of the
toxicant increases, the toxic response is also expected to
increase in degree or severity (Osweiler 1996).
Philipus
Aureolus
Theophrastus
Bombastus
von
Hohenheim
(Paracelsus),
a
sixteenth-century
is none which is not a poison. The right dose differentiates
a poison from a remedy” (Osweiler 2006). Water
illustrates this concept well. Having adequate water is a
requirement for animals; however, ingesting too much
water leads to water intoxication and can be deadly.
Another  example  is  carprofen, 
anonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory (NSAID) medication commonly used in
veterinary medicine. At therapeutic doses, this medication
improves the quality of life of dogs suffering from
119
osteoarthritis (Jenkins and Kanara 1998). But if a dog
receives an overdose, one needs to determine whether the
dosage can cause the adverse effects potentially associated
with an overdose of any NSAID. These include
 gastrointestinal irritation and ulceration and adverse renal
effects (Talcott 2006).
Determining the dosage helps one decide how to proceed
with the case and to answer the following questions:
Is any treatment needed?
What, if any, method of decontamination should be
performed?
Should this patient be hospitalized for monitoring?
What clinical signs may develop?
Is there an antidotal therapy and if so, is this patient a good
candidate?
What are the likely costs associated with treatment?
DEFINITIONS
Understanding a few definitions will make it easier to
comprehend the concepts and examples presented in this
chapter. Dose is the total amount of toxicant that is
received per animal, whereas dosage is the amount of
toxicant per unit of body weight (Spoo 2004). For
example, if a 13 lb dog is given a 25 mg pill of antibiotic,
the dose is 25 mg and the dosage is 25mg/13lb or 1.9mg
120
Ib. In most cases, dosage will be expressed in mg/kg, so in
this example, the dosage is 4.2 mg/kg
A few additional commonly used definitions in toxicology
are toxicity, threshold dose, LDso, and NOEL. Toxicity is
the amount of a toxicant that, under a specific set of
conditions, causes toxic effects or results in detrimental
biologic changes. (see Chapter 1,Table 1.l for
classifications of relative toxicities.) The threshold dose is
the highest dose of a toxicant at which toxic effects are not
observed (Spoo 2004). The lethal dose 50% (LD50) is the
dose at which 50% of the animals die during an acute
toxicity study (Spoo 2004). This value is used to compare
the toxicity of compounds with one another (Osweiler
2006). The no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) is
the highest dose at which significant effects could not be
found (Spoo 2004).
DETERMINING EXPOSURE AMOUNTS
Taking a thorough history is an important step in
effectively calculating the dosage of an exposure. Find out
when the exposure occurred and the largest amount to
which the patient may have been exposed. It can
sometimes be difficult for owners to determine the worst
pet. One can be of assistance by asking certain questions.
It may be helpful to ask them to read the label to determine
the amount originally in the container. This is especially
helpful with over-the-counter medications. If it can be
determined how many were originally in the container,
how many have been taken previously and how many are
121
left, one can come to a good approximation of the largest
possible amount of the exposure.
If the agent is a prescription medication, the following
questions are also often helpful:
When was the prescription filled?
How often are the pills taken?
    s    
missed?
If these questions are not effective, it is sometimes useful
to ask a question to help narrow down the possible amount.
For example, is the amount likely to be closer to 100 or
10? Once they answer that question, one can attempt to
narrow it down further. These types of questions are also
helpful with other products including candies, gum,
 granular baits, fertilizer, insecticides, and pesticides. If the
product is a liquid, ask whether it was spilled. If it was
spilled, ask whether the spill was on a soft surface like a
carpet or bedding that would absorb the liquid making it
less available for ingestion, whether the area is still wet,
and, if the liquid spilled on a hard surface, whether there is
any liquid on the surface now. All these questions will help
determine a worst case amount that can be used to
calculate a possible dosage.
Sample Calculation 1
122
An owner contacts you on the phone and is frantic
Her Pomeranian ingested some of her Adderall
capsules 1 hour ago and now is racing all over the
house and is hyperactive. She just had the
prescription refilled a few days ago and has used 5
capsules  from the  60
  capsules    originally
prescribed. She is able to count out 30 intact
capsules on the floor and in the bottle. The
capsules are 20 milligrams each and the dog
weighs 15 pounds. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg.
Determine dog's weight in kilograms:
151bs/2.2kg = 6.8kg
Determine the total milligrams ingested:
60 capsules in original prescription minus 5 taken
by owner minus 30 found capsules = 25 capsules
missing
25 pills × 20mg/pill = 500mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage
500mg/6.8kg = 73.6mg/kg
Discussion
Adderall is a combination medication containing
four amphetamines. It is used for the treatment of
123
attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder in humans.
Clinical signs, including cardiovascular and central
nervous system (CNS) stimulation, can be seen at
doses at or below 0.5 mg/kg (Youssef 2006). Since
the dosage is very high and the patient is
symptomatic, you advise the owner to bring her
dog in immediately for treatment.
SAMPLEANDPRACTICECALCULATIONS
In the following boxes some sample dosage calculations
are shown. There will be an example that has been solved
followed by a practice question. The answers to the
practice questions can be found at the end of the chapter. It
will be tempting just to read the samples, but to get the
most from this chapter work through the practice
questions. When following along with the examples and
working through the practice questions, refer to Table 5.1,
which contains commonly used conversions.
Calculating dosages  involving  medication  in  tablet or
capsule form is fairly straightforward as long as the dose in
each tablet/capsule is known and a worst case scenario can
be determined as to the number of tablets/capsules
ingested.
Table 5.1. Useful conversion factors
Sources: Osweiler 2006; Spoo 2004.
124
Unit
Abbreviation
Equivalent
Unit
Abbreviation
Equivalent
1a
Concentration
C.
Rev.
1mg/kg or 1μg/g (solids)
1 lex
IN1
5y
1part per
ppm
millicn
1mg/l (liquid)
15g
10,000ppm
Liquid
Ipercent
%
10mg/g (sclid)
1 fi cnce
29.6ml
10mg/ml (liquid)
1 ar
q
0.9461.
1 proof
0.5%
1gallon
gal
4qt
(alcohol)
5mg/ml
8pt
Dry
128oz
1ounce
28.35g
3785ml
3.735liter
1 gram
名
15.43 grains
1000mg
8.531b_
1 grain
g
65mg
1 cup
237 ml
1 pcund
454g
8fl oz
b
0.454kg
16T
16oz
I liter
L
1.057q
1 kilogram
2.21b
1 teaspocn
kg
tsp
5ml
1000g
1 tablespoon
T,Ibsp
15ml
1 milliliter
ml
0.0340Z
1 milligram
mg
0.001g
1000
1g
Practice Calculation 1
An owner brings her cat into your clinic. She had
dropped 1 500 mg acetaminophen tablet and her
cat ran over and ingested it before the owner could
The cat weighs 12 pounds
The exposure happenec
10 minutes ago. You
are aware that any
 of acetaminophen is a
concern in a cat. Doses of 10 mg/kg have produced
toxicosis
in cats (Richardson
2000a). Potential
clinical
effects
 include
depression,  weakness.
methemoglobinemia, dyspnea, and facial or paw
edema. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. Will this cat
need treatment?
When dealing with solid toxicants such as foods, it is best
      
ingested. In the case of exposures to chocolate, it is
125
important to kmow what type of chocolate was ingested
because the various forms of chocolate (white, milk, dark,
etc.) have different amounts of chocolate in them, with the
darker forms of chocolate being more toxic (see Chapter
24). When there is a mixture of chocolate types, use the
darkest form in the mix and calculate the dosage using the
worst case scenario.  Although this will somewhat
overestimate the dosage of methylxanthines, it is definitely
better to err on the side of caution
Sample Calculation 2
It is the day after Halloween and an owner calls
your clinic for assistance. Her rottweiler ingested 2
candy bars and she has heard that chocolate is
poisonous for dogs. The ingestion occurred up to 3
hours ago and the dog seems fine now. The dog
weighs 90 pounds. The candy bars are solid milk
chocolate and weigh 1.5 ounces each. Chocolate
contains two methylxanthine stimulants: caffeine
and theobromine. Although the exact amounts of
the methylxanthines vary in different types and
brands of chocolate, a good estimate of the
methylxanthine content in milk chocolate is 64 mg/
oz (58 mg theobromine and 6 mg caffeine).
Calculate the dosage in mg/kg
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
901bs/2.2kg = 41kg
126
Determine the total milligrams of methylxanthines
ingested:
3 oz × 64mg/0z= 192mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
192mg/41kg = 4.7mg/kg
Discussion
Mild signs of methylxathine intoxication can occur
at dosages of 20 mg/kg and severe effects can
occur at 40-50mg/kg (Gwaltney-Brant 2001).
Since this patient's dosage is <5mg/kg, no
treatment is warranted at this time. You advise the
owner to monitor the dogat home
 for
 gastrointestinal upset and signs of pancreatitis
Practice Calculation 2
On a weekend, a dog is presented to your hospital
for treatment. The dog is pacing, panting, and
agitated on presentation and the owners believe he
may have ingested some semisweet chocolate
morsels a few hours ago. Twenty-four ounces of
the morsels are missing. The dog weighs 42
pounds. Although the exact amounts of the
methylxanthines vary in different types and brands
of
chocolate,  a  good
estimate ofthe
127
methylxanthine content in semisweet chocolate is
160mg/oz (138mg theobromine and 22mg caffeine)
(Gwaltney-Brant 2001). Calculate the dosage in
mg/kg. Could the chocolate be causing the signs
the dog is exhibiting?
With exposure to rodenticide pellets or bars, it is important
to try to estimate the amount ingested as closely as
possible. Again, it is better to slightly overestimate the
exposure than to underestimate. Bars of rodenticide can be
examined to determine how much of the bar is missing,
and pellets often come in packets with the amounts stated
on the packaging. If the ingestion was witnessed, attempt
to get the person who witnessed the exposure to estimate
how much may have been ingested (e.g., 1 tsp vs. 1 Tbsp
vs. 1/4 cup. etc.). Packets or bars brought into the
veterinary clinic can be weighed if no packaging is
available.
Sample Calculation 3
One hour ago, a 16 lb pug chewed on two small
packages  of  a  pelleted rodenticide  containing
0.01% bromethalin. Each package originally
contained 0.75 oz. The owner brought in the
remains of the packages, and the remaining pellets
weighed 0.5 oz. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg
Will this patient require decontamination?
128
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
161bs/2.2kg = 7.3kg
Calculate the amount ingested:
(0.75oz/packet x 2 packets) = 1.5oz
1.5oz minus 0.5oz (weighed) = 1oz missing
Convert to amount ingested to grams:
1oz × 28.35g = 28.35g
Convert rodenticide % to mg/g by moving the
decimal point one place to the right:
0.01% = 0.1mg/g
Determine the milligrams ingested:
0.1mg/g × 28.35g = 2.84mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
2.84mg/7.3kg = 0.39mg/kg
Discussion
Bromethalin is a neurotoxin. Signs of intoxication
are most pronounced in the CNS and can include
129
hindlimb weakness, ataxia, depression, tremors,
paralysis, seizures, and death. In canine patients
ingesting dosages between 0.1-0.49 mg/kg emesis
or one dose of activated charcoal is recommended
(Dunayer 2003). In this case, emesis 
is
recommended with 3% hydrogen peroxide and is
very successful. The dog vomits up many pellets.
which weigh 1.2 oz. The extra weight is likely due
to absorption of liquid by the pellets while they
were in the stomach. No additional treatment is
required.
Practice Calculation 3
A 75 1b Labrador retriever is observed ingesting 4
ounces of a rodenticide bait containing 0.o05%
brodifacoum. The dog has had no previous access
to the bait. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. Will this
patient require decontamination if a toxic dose of
brodifacoum for dogs is 1 mg/kg body weight?
What other treatments may be needed?
Sample Calculation 4
An owner calls your clinic and informs you her 32
1b mixed breed dog ingested approximately 1/2 cup
of snail bait containing 2.75% metaldehyde 15
minutes ago. Calculate the dosage in mg/kg. Is
decontamination required?
130
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
321bs/2.2kg = 14.5kg
Convert % to mg/g by moving the decimal point
one place to the right:
2.75% = 27.5mg/g
Convert amount ingested to grams:
1/2 cup = 4oz × 28.35g =113.4g
Determine the milligrams ingested:
27.5mg/g x 113.4g = 3118.5mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
3118.5mg/14.5kg = 215mg/kg
Discussion
The dosage for this dog is well above the LDso in
dogs of 100 mg/kg. The clinical signs that may
develop   include   tachycardia,   hyperesthesia,
mydriasis,  hypersalivation,  vomiting,  ataxia,
metabolic  acidosis, tremors, seizures,  and
hyperthermia (Dolder 2003). Since the exposure
was recent and the owner lives 30 minutes from the
clinic, emesis was recommended at home but the
131
owner was instructed to bring the dog in
immediately if the dog began to act anxious or
excited. Emesis was successful at home. Since the
dosage was so large, the owners brought the dog in
for activated charcoal and overmight monitoring.
Practice Calculation 4
Your dog is at work with you and finds one ant bait
station in the bathroom. You find her chewing the
bait. She has ripped open the bait and ingested the
contents. She weighs 60 pounds and the bait is 1.98
g and contains 0.01% fipronil. Calculate the dosage
in mg/kg. What treatments, if any should be
considered?
Calculating dosages for topical (dermal, ocular, otic)
although the risk for intoxication is dependent 
on
bioavailability.
Sample Calculation 5
A 2-year-old, 71b
  neutered male  domestic
short-haired cat presents at your clinic with muscle
fasciculations and tremors. The owner applied a
dermal flea spot-on product, labeled for dogs, 10
hours earlier. The active ingredient in the product
132
is 45% permethrin and the applicator contained 2
ml. Calculate the dermal dosage in mg/kg. Is this
exposure the likely cause of the cat's clinical
signs? What treatments should be performed?
Determine the weight of the cat in kilograms:
71bs/2.2kg = 3.2kg
Convert liquid % to mg/ml by moving the decimal
point one place to the right:
45% = 450mg/ml
Determine the milligrams placed on the skin:
2ml × 450mg/ml = 900mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
900mg/3.2kg = 281mg/kg
Discussion
Even a small amount of a concentrated permethrin
product applied dermally to a cat can cause
significant effects including tremors and seizures.
Methocarbamol is very helpful in controlling these
adverse effects. This cat was admitted to the
hospital and given methocarbamol intravenously.
The tremors resolved and then the cat was
133
decontaminated  by  bathing  with  a  liquid
dishwashing detergent (Richardson 2000b).
Practice Calculation 5
A cat in your practice is being treated for ear mites
with  ivermectin.
Thecatis
toreceivea
subcutaneous dose of 0.1 ml of a 1% ivermectin
injectable product. The cat weighs 12 pounds. By
mistake, the cat is given 1 ml instead. Calculate the
dosage in mg/kg. What decontamination methods
should be considered if any?
For some toxicants, toxic doses have been determined for a
reference compound, and toxicants that are similar need to
be converted to an equivalent in order to determine the risk
based on the reference compound. For instance, most toxic
  n     n  so
containing compounds must be converted to an elemental
iron equivalent before calculating a dosage so that
comparison with known toxic dosages of iron can be
made. Table 5.2 lists the elemental iron level of various
iron-containing
compounds. Similarly, vitamins are
frequently listed as intermational units (IU) rather than
milligrams and a conversion to milligrams will need to be
performed in order to determine the risk of a given
exposure. Table 5.3 lists conversion factors for vitamins.
Other
toxicants
requiring
  conversion
include
salicylate-containing
compoundssuchas
bismuth
subsalicylate, which are converted to "aspirin-equivalent"
dosages to determine the risk.
134
Sample Calculation 6
An owner brings her 65 1b boxer into your clinic.
He has  vomited
1   twice  but   is  normal  on
presentation. Earlier in the day the owner was
 gardening and was using a fertilizer. Her dog was
outside with her and she caught him playing with
the fertilizer bag. The contents were spilled all over
the ground but she estimates 2 cups are missing
and is concermed the dog may have ingested them.
His vomit contained material that looked like the
fertilizer. The fertilizer contains 0.4% ferrous
sulfate (anhydrous). Calculate the elemental iron
dosage in mg/kg (see Table 5.2 for conversion
factor). Is the vomiting expected with this
ingestion? What is the best treatment plan?
Determine the weight of the dog in kilograms:
651bs/2.2kg = 29.5kg
Convert % to mg/g by moving the decimal point
one place to the right:
0.4% = 4mg/g
Convert amount ingested to grams:
2 cups = 16oz × 28.35g = 453.6g
135
Determine the milligrams ingested:
4mg/g × 453.6g = 1814mg
Convert ferrous sulfate to elemental iron = 1814mg
× 37% (0.37)= 671mg
Determine the mg/kg dosage:
671mg/29.5kg = 22.7mg/kg
Discussion
Doses of elemental iron approximately 20 mg/kg
can cause mild clinical effects including vomiting
and anorexia; therefore, the vomiting is likely due
to the exposure (Albretsen 2004). The treatment
plan should include managing the vomiting if
needed
and
preventing
dehydration.
Life-threatening signs are not expected.
Practice Calculation 6
A 45 lb basset hound got into his owner's vitamins
and ingested up to 85 of each of the following:
emulsified vitamin A capsules (2500 IU/capsule),
vitamin D capsules (10oo IU/capsule), and vitamin
E
capsules (looo  IU/capsule). Calculate the
dosages in mg/kg by using the conversion factors
136
in Table 5.4. What clinical signs may develop?
What treatments should be considered?
Not all calculations in toxicology relate to calculating
exposure dosages. Often, calculations need to be done
when administering symptomatic or antidotal medications.
Most frequently, this entails diluting solutions to a given
concentration prior to administration to the patient.
Sample Calculation 7
A veterinarian needs 7% ethanol solution to treat a
cat for ethylene glycol exposure. The veterinarian
has 60 proof ethanol (30%) available for dilution.
Calculate the “recipe” for mixing the ethanol with
the fluids to produce 1 L of 7% solution (Plunkett
2001).
Discussion
Use the following equation:  Concentration1  X
Volume1 = Volume2 x Concentration2
(% stock ethanol solution)(X ml) = (1000ml)(7%)
where X ml is how much ethanol needed
=([W X)(E'0) 10 (%L)([w0001) = ((W X)(%0g)
(1000ml)(0.07)
137
Solve for X: X ml = ((1000ml)(.07))/(.3)
X ml = 233ml
Remove 233 ml from a liter bag of fluids and
replace it with 233ml of the ethanol.
Practice Calculation 7
A 70 lb dog has been admitted to your hospital for
treatment of acetaminophen toxicosis. The dog will
be receiving a loading dose of 140 mg/kg of a 5%
solution of n-acetylcysteine (NAC) followed by
seven additional doses of 70 mg/kg given every 6
hours (Plumb 2005). You are starting with 20%
NAC and will be diluting it with 5% dextrose. How
much 20% NAC will you need? How much 5%
dextrose will you mix it with?
Table 5.2. Percentage of elemental iron in various iron
salts
Source: Albretsen 2004.
Iron Form
%Elemental Iron
Ferric Hydroxide
63
Ferrous Carbonate (Anhydrous)48
Ferric Phosphate
37
Ferrous Sulfate (Anhydrous)
37
Ferric Chloride
34
138
FerrousFumarate
Ferric Pyrophosphate
30
Ferrous Lactate
24
Ferrous Sulfate (Hydrate)
20
Peptonized Iron
17
Ferroglycine Sulfate
16
Ferric Ammonium Citrate
15
Ferrous Gluconate
12
Ferrocholinate
12
Table 5.3. Conversion of vitamin International Units to
milligrams
Source:Debraekeleer 2000
Vitamin
Milligrams (mg)International Units (TU)
Vitamin A
1
3333
Vitamin D3
1
40,000
Vitamin E
1
0.67_
CHAPTER 5 REVIEW EQUATIONS
1. Max, an 80-pound Labrador retriever ingested
the entire contents of a 6.8 g tube of horse
dewormer paste. The concentration of ivermectin
in the paste is 1.87%. Calculate a dosage (mg/kg)
ofivermectin.
2. Mrs. Garner is concerned because the report
from the county extension office indicated that the
139
level of the herbicide atrazine in her well water,
which was measured at 0.010 ppm, exceeds the
EPA recommended upper limits of.003 ppm. She
wants to know if this level will be a problem for
her 45-pound, female spayed German shorthaired
pointer named Sissy. We know that the no
observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) of
atrazine for dogs is 5 mg/kg/day and that dogs
drink approximately 30 ml/lb/day. Does the level
of atrazine in the water pose a hazard for Sissy?
3. Theo, a 12-pound domestic shorthair cat was
given 1 tablet of Percocet by its owner. The
medication contains 5 mg of oxycodone and 500
mg acetaminophen per tablet. What is the dosage in
mg/kg for each of the ingredients? What types of
clinical signs might be expected from each
ingredient in the Percocet? (Hint: see Chapter 25,
"Drugs of Abuse,”" and Chapter 26, "OTC Drugs.")
4A. Billy and Banjo are bloodhounds. Billy is a
neutered male, 9 years old, and 90 pounds; Banjo is
an intact male, 18 months old, and 95 pounds. Billy
is on chewable carprofen for arthritis. The dogsi
owner came home to find Billy's carprofen bottle
chewed up on the floor and all of the tablets
missing. What information do you need to know to
help determine whether this exposure is serious?
140
4B. The owner is sure that Banjo is the culprit
because Billy's arthritis would not have allowed
him to get to the medication, which was on the
kitchen counter. Which of the following is the best
way to handle this situation?
a. A ssume Banjo got all of the medication since
the owner thinks he is the most likely culprit.
Calculate a dose for Banjo only, assuming he got
all of the tablets.
b. A ssume the dogs shared the medication and
calculate a dosage for each dog based on each
eating V of the missing tablets.
c. A ssume each dog may have ingested the
medication and calculate dosages as if each dog got
the entire amount of medication.
4C. Seventy-five days ago, Billy's owner refilled
tablets. The owner has administered 1 tablet twice
daily since the refill, and there are now no
remaining tablets. Calculate a worst-case-scenario
dosage for each dog.
5. Bailey, a 3-year-old, 16-pound Cavalier King
Charles  spaniel  chewed up  three  ant baits,
ingesting the contents. The ant baits contained
abamectin b1 at 0.01% and the package indicates
141
each bait station contains 0.o7 oz of bait. Calculate
a dosage (mg/kg) for Bailey's exposure.
6. A veterinarian needs 585 ml of 7% ethanol
solution to treat a cat for ethylene glycol exposure.
The veterinarian has 60 proof vodka available for
dilution. Calculate the “recipe" for mixing the
ethanol with fl uids to produce 585 ml of 7%
solution.
7. Hooch, a 62-pound golden retriever got into the
owner's garden shed and was found eating out of
the bag of cocoa bean mulch. The owner estimates
that no more than 1-2 cups of mulch could have
been eaten based on what's left in the bag and the
amount of time the dog was alone in the shed.
What
the
 approximate  dosage
of
methylxanthines that the dog ingested? (Hint:
Cocoa
beans
contain
from
0.5%-0.85%
theobromine.)
8. Buddy, a 25-pound beagle mix ingested 1.5 oz
of an unknown rodenticide. Calculate the dosage if
the rodenticide was:
0.01 % bromethalin
0.005% brodifacoum
0.075% cholecalciferol
142
9. Two miniature schnauzers, Click and Clack,
ingested no more than 3 Tbsp of fi re ant killer
granules containing 0.04% lambda cyhalothrin.
Calculate the dosages if the dogs weigh 14 and 17
pounds, respectively.
10. Mara is an 8-pound, 12-year-old Siamese cat
whose owner applied 5% minoxidil solution to an
area of alopecia on Mara's back. Now the owner is
concerned that she should not have done that. She
estimates she used no more than 1/10 tsp of liquid
The area where the minoxidil was applied is an
area that Mara cannot reach to groom. Calculate a
topical dosage of minoxidil.
143
JorBanjo:3000mg/43kg-(9mg/kg
For Billy:3000mg/41kg =73m/kg
30tabletsx100mg/tabla=3000mg
[5mg/kgay shows us that this cncentratin of ata-
Coparingcu reils w he kow NOAEL fordogs
Calcnate thmximumnumberof tabletsingested:
Discuin
Billy:90b/2.2ky/b-41kg
4C.Calat ewei fh og i lilo:
0.0135m/lay dividedby20.5kg-.00066mg/
sspeat is the gilty aty.
4B.lhe correc answe is c;often the lest likey
0.0135mg/day
hse.
tablets mixsing,and any heath isa the dog
y3woo=uldono
AMiligra strenth of the cprofe, the mmber of
Determine the daily xpse tatrazire:
saaa
oxyoodone ceuld mse dtion isnct lily to
30m1Ibx451=1350ml per day=1.35 liter/
2.Determine Sis sys daily water intak e
Thislevel of ceminophenis sufcient causmet
12716mg/364kg-1.49mg/kg
Disemion
Caloulate the dosage ingested:
9=/1x99
-p
1.7%-18.7mg/
Calulate e de ofivemctiningse
C'alculate the dosaes for each ingeden
8ps2.2kgpund=36.4kg
121b/22kg/b5.5kg
1. Convert Max's weight to kilograms:
3.Convert the cal's wagh to kg:
ANSWERS
144
35885mg/28.2kg= 136.7mg/kg
Clack:18mg/7.3kg=25mg/kg
Caleua ecch’a dosage nf frechromine
Click18m/64kg-28mg/kg
Calculate dosiges fer each dog
Calculae mg theobromina ing sed
g=/+0x+
/g=0
Calculatemilligms ngested
Convert0.5 tomg/g
3Tbspx15g/s.-45g
Convert 3 table spoonstogms
Cowert 2cups to gmms:
u=%00
621b/2.2kg/b=28.2kg
Coer peromlanba cyhaori wmgg
Coert Hch'sveit  kiloans
Clack:17pound/22kg/pound=7.3kg
thecbromine.
 
7. A ssmc a worst-ease scenari f 2 cs nd 0.85%
9.Coer weight frm pos okilga:
ubtn 585 ml of7%eaol.
na the levels ele vate
Xml=（7×585mly30=136.5ml
should be monitored every 1224 heurs for 4 days and
30%（xml）-7%（55ml)
bxcome elevaled Sem calium ad poslorou
60pvokais30%ethanl
hors an rhe dng placad on vinmin K if the PT
Volme,xConcnmtion
should be obtzined. P1 can be rep cated in 48 and 72
6.Lse this tocmula:Concentration × Volume
bin time(F）seum caumad srum phusp
smd as rasn m ap s 
charoooldminisraticn isneded.Baseline prcthrom
Pglyeoprotein deficiency h been dccumented,this
would be suthcient,but fcr the oter two activated
dogs, etc.) Bocanse Bailey is not a reed wherein
Pyoptindicient g,llshetlad sh
known Buddy should bemnagedasife ingedall
Thisingestion mcrits decontmination gadessof the
about 0326m/kg of ivermec tin, 1his dose ot iver-
2.8mg/kg
potent as ivermec tin, aithough kinetic information is
xeinI s uht  be abu 4 ties as
2
la  cmpods such as iverminmilhemyein.
Bmifm:(0.05mg/gX425gV14kg=019
Ahametin ismecrlide antiparasiticidalage
Bromethalin:（0.1mg/g×425gy11.4kg =0.37
Discusslon
Calculate dosagex:
200=2x/as6s0
ingested
0.005%brodfacum=0.05mgg
595gx0.1m/g=0.595mgtbmectinb
0.01%hmchlin=0.1mg/g
001%=n1mge
Convert percentages to mg/s:
-x
15oz×28.35g/oz=42.5g
Convert 1.5 cce  grms
25152.2kg/b-114kg
161b/2.2kg/b-73kg
8.Comer Buly's weight tokiloal
5. Covert Bailey's weight to kilogras:
smptomatic care for any signs thar develop.
teatment.
Ied will red dcontmnetion,monitoring,and
dogs. Both Billy an Banjo nced to come in for
crdivascular anl ceural nervo sysem effects.
Dses of theubie uver 60ng/kg ancase seo
Doses fcprfenver40mgg lve the ptentil 
DNiscussion
1tap=5grams，o1/10s=0.5gram
o e  e
mS=%S
absopticn caries arisk of systemicivolvement,the
etabished for cats,nd itisnotcleawhther derml
pouns/2.2kpud-35k.g
10. Cuvet Mar weigt o lga:
zrowthbutit can akc havepiofoun cardiovascular
 
lednpens ue mos aou suas ie
25mg/3.6kg =6.9mg/kg
in .2.5mk/ay causearlea3.5m/kgay
Calerate Mhras topie dosge
mederatedegreeoftxicity Inchroni feding stuies
0.5g×5Umg/g-25mg
Caleulate the dcse cf minoxidil:
Discusslon
REFERENCES
145
Albretsen, Jay C. 2004. Iron. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 202-204. St
Louis: Mosby.
Debraekeleer, Jacques. 2000. Appendices. In Small Animal
Clinical Nutrition, 4th ed., edited by Michael S. Hand,
Craig D. Thatcher, Rebecca L. Remillard and Philip
Roude-bush, p. 1001. Topeka: Mark Morris Institute.
Dolder, Linda K. 2003. Metaldehyde toxicosis. Veterinary
Medicine 98(3):213-215.
Dunayer, Eric K.2003. Bromethalin: The other
rodenticide. Veterinary Medicine 98(9):732-736.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2001. Chocolate intoxication.
Veterinary Medicine 96(2):108-111.
Jenkins, C.C. and Kanara, E.W. 1998. First-year clinical
experience with Rimadyl (carprofen): Assessment of
product safety.Pfizer Animal Health Technical Bulletin,
May 1998. Exton, Pennsylvania
Osweiler Gary D. 1996. Toxicology. Philadelphial
Lippincott Williams & Wilkens.
. 2006. General toxicological principles. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson
and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 2-17. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
146
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Acetylcysteine. In Plumb's
Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed., pp. 9-10. Ames,
Iowa: Blackwell Publishing Professional.
Plunkett, Signe J. 2001. Ethylene glycol intoxication. In
EmergencyProcedures for theSmall AnimalVeterinarian,
2nd ed., pp. 319-326. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Richardson, Jill A. 2000a. Management of acetaminophen
and ibuprofen toxicoses in dogs and  cats. Journal
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 10(4):285-291.
2000b. Permethrin spot-On toxicoses in cats.
JournalVeterinary
Emergency andCriticalCare
10(2):103-106.
Spoo, Wayne. 2004. Concepts and terminology. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp
2-7. St. Louis: Mosby.
Talcott,  Patricia A.  2006.  General nonsteroidal
antiinflam-matories. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed.,
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp.
902-933. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Youssef, Hany. 2006. Hyperactivity and disorientation in a
cat. NAVC Clinican's Brief4(12):49-56
147
Initial Management of Acute Intoxications
Elisa Petrollini-Rogers and Bridget McNally
TELEPHONETRIAGE
The initial contact with a patient client is often over the
telephone. It is imperative that reception asks the
appropriate questions to better instruct the client on what
further steps need to be taken. One of the first queries
should be to obtain the animal's signalment: species,
breed, age, and approximate body weight. The information
obtained from this question can greatly impact the course
of treatment. A toxicant that may not affect a 1oo-pound
Great Dane could greatly harm a 5-pound Devon Rex.
Other information that should be obtained includes the
type of exposure or ingestion, the length of time elapsed
since the said exposure or ingestion, and the amount of
potential toxicant. It is also important for reception to ask
about the patient's mental state (i.e., alert, disoriented,
reduced responsiveness, unresponsive). Although a client's
estimation of the pet's mentation may not be completely
accurate, a general idea about the pet's level of
consciousness can be formulated. After this information is
obtained, reception can then ask a veterinary medical staff
member on duty whether the patient should seek medical
attention. If there is a doubt on the patient's stability, the
client should be advised to seek medical attention
immediately.
148
        s
  's      a  s
also advised that any vomitus from the patient be collected
 in a sealed container and brought into the hospital.
HOSPITALPRESENTATION
Triage and History
An emergency can be described as any situation that arises
suddenly and unexpectedly resulting in a sudden need for
action. Upon presentation to the hospital/clinic, a member
of the medical team should triage the patient. Triage refers
is performed immediately on presentation and should take
less than 5 minutes. Triage involves a cursory evaluation
of the four major organ systems (cardiovascular,
respiratory, neurological, and renal) while simultaneously
obtaining an abbreviated history. Conversation should be
limited to significant points only, avoiding unrelated
details. The history should include the primary complaint.
duration of the problem, and any current drug therapy. The
basic principles of emergency patient assessment should be
applied even in the face of a potential poisoning.
The goal of triage is to determine whether the patient can
be categorized as stable or unstable, allowing appropriate
prioritization of care. A stable patient is one that is not in
an immediate life-threatening condition. An unstable or
emergent   patient   is    one  that   is   experiencing
life-threatening signs and requires quick judgment and
timely action. If any of the major body systems are
significantly abnormal, the patient should immediately be
149
taken to the main treatment room of the emergency room
to be assessed by the veterinarian.
In the emergent patient who has been exposed to a
toxicant, the history is one of the most valuable pieces of
information  (Fitzgerald,  2006).  Acquiring  a detailed
history can be the most difficult step, and further
information on history-taking is found in Chapter 4. It is
not uncommon for clients to be unaware that the patient
was exposed to a toxicant. Recognizing clinical signs of
common toxicants is an important skill in emergency
medicine. The diagnosis of toxicant ingestion is generally
based on a history of a witnessed exposure and/or
suspicious clinical signs exhibited by the patient. It is not
an uncommon occurrence for clients to believe that the
patient has been poisoned in the face of an acute illness.
Common diseases may imitate toxicant ingestion, and vice
versa
If a toxic substance is known or suspected, but treatment
options are not known or are immediately unavailable, a
poison control center should be contacted. The ASPCA
Animal Poison Control Center (1-800-548-2423) has the
largest   accumulation   of    veterinary   toxicologists
specializing in the effects of toxicants in animals (rather
than people). Pet Poison Helpline (800-213-6680) is
staffed with an array of board specialized veterinarians
(toxicology, critical care, intermal medicine) as well as
toxicologists specializing in human toxicology (PharmDs).
Both poison control centers charge consultation fees. More
information on this and other toxicology information
resources can be found in Chapter 2. Treatment can then
150
be initiated in accordance with the recommendations
provided for the specific toxicant.
Initial Assessment
The initial assessment should include assessment of the
major organ systems and vital signs, obtaining vascular
access, and an initial database followed by development of
the emergency plan
Respiratory System
One always determines the patency of the airway first.
Ideally, patent and clear breath sounds should be heard. If
the patient is in distress, upper airway noise (stridor/
stertor) and/or distress with inspiration associated with
stridor may be noted. This can be assessed without the use
of a stethoscope.
The respiratory rate should be also be noted; normal for
dogs and cats is considered to be 12-32 respirations per
minute (rpm). If tachypnea (increased respiratory rate);
slow, prolonged breathing; or apnea (no respiration) is
noted, the patient should be immediately assessed by a
veterinarian. Other abnormal findings include labored
inspiration   and/or   labored   expiration   or  paradoxical
respiration (chest wall and abdominal wall do not move
synchronously).  Postural   adaptations  associated  with
respiratory distress may be seen is distressed patients as
well (e.g., standing rather than sitting, abducted elbows,
abdominal effort, extended neck, head lifted, etc.).
Cardiovascular System
151
Assessment of  the cardiovascular system includes
determination of mucous membrane color, capillary refill
time, heart rate, and rhythm and pulse quality.
Normal mucous membrane color should be pink. Muddy
or gray color suggests poor perfusion. Pale or white color
suggests anemia, shock or pain; brick red mucous
membrane color (hyperemic) is seen in situations including
sepsis, hyperdynamic states, and hyperthermia. Dark blue
(cyanotic) mucous membranes suggest hypoxemia from a
variety  of
fcauses (cardiac dysfunction, pulmonary
insufficiency, etc.). Yellow or icteric mucous membranes
occur in cases of hepatic dysfunction, hemolysis, or biliary
obstruction. Brown mucous membranes and blood are seen
in cases of methemoglobinemia, which in companion
animals is most commonly seen with acetaminophen
tox1cos1s.
Normal capillary refill time (CRT) is 1-2 seconds. If the
CRT is prolonged, this indicates poor perfusion. Rapid
CRT indicates a hyperdynamic state or hemoconcentration.
Normal pulse rates for canines are 80-l20 beats per
minute (bpm) with <70bpm suggesting bradycardia and
>140bpm suggesting tachycardia (Plumb 2005). For
felines, normal pulse rates range from 130-140 bpm with
<100
0bpmsuggesting
bradycardia  and  >180bpm
suggesting tachycardia. When assessing heart rate, it is
important to consider the animal's mental status, because
excitement from being transported and handled may
spuriously elevate the rate, and sleeping or comatose
animals may have lower heart rates.
152
The pulse quality should be strong and synchronous with
heart rate. Weak pulses indicate poor perfusion. Pulse
quality feels "tall and thin" when associated with anemia;
"bounding" pulses suggest hypertension.
Central Nervous System
The patient's central nervous system can initially be
assessed by the evaluation of its gait (ataxia, loss of motor
function), level of consciousness, and pupil size and
position. Muscle twitching may be observed with some
toxic exposures such as pyrethroid, chocolate, or ethylene
glycol toxicoses. The following levels of consciousness
can be observed:
Alert: Normal
Depressed: Quiet, unwilling to perform normally; responds
to environmental stimuli
Obtunded: Minimally responsive to auditory or tactile
stimuli
Stuporous:
 Unresponsive
toenvironmentalstimuli;
responds to painful stimuli
Comatose: No response to environmental and painful
stimuli
Renal System
On triage, the renal system is assessed with abdominal
palpation when urinary blockage is suspected. Other
153
emergencies affecting the renal system are identified while
assessing the patient's cardiovascular status.
VASCULAR
ACCESS
ANDTHE
EEMERGENCY
DATABASE
Intravenous access should be obtained in any critically ill
patient for administration of fluids and drugs. The most
      
the cephalic or lateral saphenous veins. Central venous
access the medial femoral or jugular vein allows for a
larger diameter catheter to be placed, which is ideal for
allowing achievement of higher drug concentrations in the
coronary vessels as well as rapid fluid administration.
These vessels are not as accessible as the peripheral
vessels. In neonates, the easiest and most expeditious way
to obtain vascular access is via intraosseous catheter
placement. Ideally, at this time a blood sample may be
collected and stored for future toxicological analysis,
because some medications that may subsequently be
administered may interfere with diagnostic tests (e.g.,
propylene glycol in diazepam injectable solutions will
cause a false positive on ethylene glycol tests (Thrall et al.
2006))
After the patient has been stabilized and decontaminated
(if appropriate) and vascular access obtained, a medical
problem list should be generated in the order of most to
least life-threatening.  Each problem  should then be
addressed in that order. Categories that should be covered
include fluid therapy, medications, diagnostics, and
treatment orders.
154
Emergency Database
have the ability to provide in-house diagnostics. Using
these tools, rapid evaluation of the poisoned patient's
metabolic and hydration status can be performed. This
        
outcome for these patients. If the exact toxicant has
already been determined, the direct effects and any
secondary consequences of it can be predicted. In
situations where the toxicant is not known, the diagnostic
approach must be based upon clinical signs, a thorough
history, and response to symptomatic therapy.
[ p  e q sr d a 
signs stabilized, a systematic approach to diagnostics
should be taken. If possible, during venous access, blood
samples should
I be  collected.
.A  serum chemistry/
electrolytes, blood gas, and complete blood cell count
(CBC) should be analyzed as a baseline assessment
Depending on the history and clinical signs, ECG, blood
smear, coagulation panel, and urinalysis may also reveal
further evidence of a toxicosis. Other diagnostics that may
provide useful information include radiographs, illicit drug
screening, or ethylene glycol testing
Blood Gases
Blood gas analysis is a great tool used to assess the
patient's acid-base status. Many intoxicated patients will
present with a history of vomiting, diarrhea, respiratory
distress, or seizures. Although these clinical signs may be
secondary, patients will likely present with some degree of
155
acid-base derangement. The rapid evaluation of blood gas
parameters is highly useful and can provide great insight to
the patient's acid-base status.
Metabolic acidosis is characterized as a pH of <7.2 with a
base excess of <4 (Waddell 2004). Mild acidosis may be
corrected with intravenous fluid therapy and management
of the underlying disease, whereas more severe metabolic
acidosis may require sodium bicarbonate therapy.
Respiratory acidosis may be present in the intoxicated
patient, this is characterized by a pH of <7.2 and PCO2 of
>45 (Waddell 2004). Respiratory acidosis may be due to
the effect of the toxicant on the respiratory center in the
central nervous system (CNS) as well as interference with
innervation of the intercostal muscles. There is also the
potential for respiratory acidosis to occur with the use of
medications causing respiratory depression, resulting in
hypoventilation. This is especially important with patients
treated with high doses of anticonvulsants or opioids.
Lactic acidosis is due to the large amounts of lactic acid
produced in response to excessive muscle activity. This
can occur with seizure activity or with toxicants causing
tremorgenic activity  such as pyrethroid  toxicosis or
tremorgenic mycotoxin ingestion. This type of acidosis
will generally resolve on its own once the seizures or
tremors have been controlled. In other situations,
hypoperfusion may result in lactic acidosis, requiring
intravenous fluid therapy to resolve.
If a patient presents with severe vomiting or diarrhea, a
blood gas may reveal a metabolic alkalosis (pH >7.4, base
156
excess >4). In the case of ongoing gastrointestinal losses
(i.e., potassium, chloride), it is important to treat the
 de de  p s 
vomiting and diarrhea to resolve the metabolic alkalosis.
Hyperventilation can cause a respiratory alkalosis. Based
on a blood gas, this can be defined as a PCO2 of <35
mmHg. This type of disturbance is most commonly seen in
patients presenting hypoxemic or who have ingested
something causing excitement, therefore stimulating the
respiratory system. Respiratory alkalosis can also result
from excessive ventilation in the patient that is being
mechanically ventilated.
Hematocrit and Total Solids
The packed cell volume (PCV; aka hematocrit [Hct]) and
total solids (TS) are generally interpreted in conjunction
with each other. The changes in the two parameters often
parallel each other in situations of free water loss or
hemorrhage. Decrease in both PCV and TS suggests
hemorrhage. Acute blood loss will not immediately affect
PCV and Ts because it takes time for interstitial fluid to
move into the vascular space and dilute out the remaining
red   blood  cells  and
proteins. In  canines, splenic
contractions secondary to catecholamine release may
          
acute hemorrhage. The changes in packed cell volume will
become  immediately apparent with  intravenous fluid
replacement. Because of this phenomenon, some consider
TS to be a more sensitive indicator of blood loss than
PCV. A decreased PCV with normal TS indicates red
blood  cell destruction or decreased red blood  cell
157
production. Anemia of chronic disease is characterized by
a decreased PCV with normal Ts. The foremost clinical
significancetoa
decreased   PCV is
reduced
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. Decreased total
solids may occur due to loss from hemorrhage, protein loss
into third spaces, or extermal loss through the intestines or
kidneys.  Hypoproteinemia   results
 in    decreased
intravascular oncotic pressure. This may result in loss of
fluid from the intravascular space and decreased ability to
maintain vascular volume and blood pressure. Increases in
both TS and PCV are most commonly due to dehydration.
Blood Glucose
Blood glucose readings are an essential portion of the
emergency data base. Normal blood glucose ranges from
80-120 g/dl, and severe aberrations (either elevations or
depressions)  can  be life-threatening
to the patient.
Hypoglycemia can occur due to conditions such as sepsis,
liver dysfunction, neonatal/juvenile hypoglycemia, insulin
or insulin-like factor secreting tumors, xylitol ingestion
(dogs)   or   alpha-lipoic 
 acid
ingestion.  A  transient
hyperglycemia can  occur  in  overly  stressed  patients
(particularly    felines).  True   hyperglycemia   is  most
commonly due to diabetes mellitus.
Blood Urea Nitrogen
Determination of the BUN provides an estimate of renal
and hepatic function as well as hydration status. Low BUN
concentration may be the result of fluid diuresis. Other
causes can be polydipsia/polyuria or decreased production
of BUN due to liver disease or a portal-caval vascular
158
shunt. BUN can be elevated due to prerenal, renal, or
postrenal mechanisms, and all of these should be
considered when an increase in BUN is detected.
The amount of information obtained from the emergency
database in regard to the patient's status should not be
underestimated. This information combined with a solid
history and thorough physical exam can often assist in
confirming a diagnosis or providing direction for further
investigation.
Serum Chemistry and Electrolytes
Serum chemistry and electrolyte panels are important to
assess because some alterations in these measurements
may be a direct result of the toxicant. Many toxicants
affect renal function (i.e., ethylene glycol). If there is
evidence of azotemia or acute renal failure, one then can
move forward with diuresis and other appropriate therapy.
Some toxicants (e.g., xylitol) may result in acute hepatic
failure or necrosis, which will be reflected in the liver
enzymes. Blood glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, or
chloride concentrations can also be altered by various
toxicants, such as calcium channel blockers, digitalis, or
vitamin  D-based rodenticides.  Evaluation of   serum
chemistry and electrolyte results can provide clues into the
original cause of the abnormalities and provide feedback
on response to therapy.
Hematology
Complete blood cell count (CBC) and peripheral blood
smear
analysis   are
useful
1 toolsindiagnosing
159
hematological   abnormalities.   The    CBC   provides
information on the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood
by measuring red blood cell parameters. The CBC helps
classify anemia as acute or chronic as well as determine
whether regeneration is occurring, all of which can assist
formulating
alistofdifferentialdiagnoses.
Measurement of white blood cell parameters can assist in
identifying and characterizing inflammatory or infectious
mechanisms.
Peripheral blood smear analysis is performed to evaluate
the appearance of the cellular components of the blood
(red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets), identify the
presence of hematologic infectious agents (e.g., Dirofilaria
or Babesia) and identify any other changes that may assist
in diagnosis. For example, the presence of Heinz bodies
and methemoglobinemia can put acetaminophen toxicosis
on the list of differential diagnoses. During acute toxicosis,
some changes may not be evident in the first 24-48 hours
and it may be necessary to reevaluate a CBC at a later
time. For patients who may need a transfusion, blood
typing  should be  performed  and  potential  appropriate
donor animals identified. If blood typing is unavailable,
the “universal donor" blood may be administered (DEA
1.1 Negative in dogs and Type A in cats).
Urinalysis
Urine should be collected for a baseline screening in the
toxic patient, especially in patients who have ingested or
have been exposed to nephrotoxic substances such as
ethylene glycol or lilies. A complete urinalysis will
provide useful information in determining the ability of the
160
kidneys
Stoconcentrate urine.Thepresenceof
hemoglobinuria, glucosuria, proteinuria, cellular or
granular casts, pigments, and crystals can aid in narrowing
down the cause of renal dysfunction. For example, patients
with ethylene glycol toxicosis may develop calcium
oxalatecrystalluria within6-8hours of exposure;
however, absence of oxalate crystals does not rule out
ethylene glycol as a potential toxicant, because not all
patients will develop detectable crystalluria.
Additional Testing
During the course of patient management, additional
testing may be indicated based on the clinical status of the
patient or changes in historical information received from
clients. Tests such as coagulation profiles, illicit drug
screening, other drug or chemical screening, radiography,
electrocardiography, and
ultrasound  can   assist
identifying causes and measuring response to therapy.
Coagulation profiles are used to detect changes in the
clotting parameters of the blood, especially prolonged
prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time
(aPTT). These profiles (or individual tests) are often
performed at the clinic and are helpful in diagnosing
coagulopathy from a variety of causes, including
anticoagulant
 rodenticide
 toxicosis.Anticoagulant
rodenticides interfere with recycling of vitamin K in the
body, leading to depletion of clotting factors, which results
in uncontrolled hemorrhage. Because most animals have a
"reserve” of clotting factors, exposure to these rodenticides
generally will not result in prolongation of PT or aPTT
until 36-48 hours postingestion.
161
Illicit drug screening has become an invaluable tool used
in cases where illicit drug ingestion is suspected. There are
several types of these tests available at most pharmacies,
designed for home monitoring of drug use. The tests are
easy to perform, inexpensive, require only a small amount
of urine, and provide results within a matter of minutes.
The kits can screen for two to ten substances including
amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cocaine,
methadone,  methamphetamine,
micotine,  opiates,
phencyclidine, and tricyclic antidepressants. Most of the
tests
 amphetamines
will
cross-react
with
sympathomimetic drugs such as pseudoephedrine or ma
huang, so they can sometimes be helpful if ingestion of
these legal  drugs
is suspected.
 Based on clinical
experience, in many kits, the test for marijuana apparently
does not give consistent results (i.e., gives false negatives),
possibly due to differences inthe metabolites excreted
between humans and dogs. Other than the issue with
marijuana, the kits appear to work very well in a clinical
setting. These tests have not been validated in nonhumans,
meaning they would not stand up in a court of law, but
they have great utility in assisting veterinary staff in
diagnosis of suspected drug ingestion. Keep in mind that
any positive result based upon the use of a drug screening
kit is not considered confirmatory, and false positive or
negative results can occur. If someone wishes to pursue a
case legally following a positive on an OTC test kit (i.e.,
suspected malicious poisoning), blood and urine should
subsequently be submitted to a  validated  diagnostic
laboratory for analysis that will be acceptable in a court of
law. Some clients may be reluctant to have the test
performed for fear of police authority involvement. As an
animal care provider, it is very important to reassure
162
clients that the only concern is for appropriate therapy for
their pet. The cooperation of the client and the ability to
provide illicit drug screening allows for a targeted
treatment plan that can greatly improve the overall
outcome of these patients.
Ethylene glycol testing is used in detecting the presence of
high serum concentrations of ethylene glycol. Ethylene
glycol (EG) is the major component found in many
commercial antifreeze products. This test is most reliable
in the first 4 hours after ingestion; however, based on the
amount of EG ingested, levels may be detectable in excess
of 12 hours postingestion. False negatives and false
positives can occur with the existing tests available for
in-house use in veterinary clinics. Details of these issues
can be found in the discussion on ethylene glycol in
Chapter 28.
Human hospital laboratories may be helpful in determining
exposure to a variety of toxicants, including EG and
acetaminophen. When in-house EG testing is not available,
or there is concern that the test result may be a false
positive, human hospital laboratories can run an EG test
that will give a specific level of EG in the blood. For dogs.
the level of concern is 50 mg/dl or greater and for cats the
level of concern is 20 mg/dl or greater. Tests run in human
hospitals for EG are very sensitive and specific, so the
false positives and negatives seen in the in-house
veterinary EG tests are not an issue. In many situations.
there is concern that a cat or dog may have been exposed
to acetaminophen. In these cases, human hospitals can
analyze blood for acetaminophen levels, which can tell
whetherthe
e animal
was exposed;  unfortunately,
163
subtoxic doses from toxic doses, but these test can help
with the question "Did he/she eat it?"
Radiography may be useful in providing evidence of a
metallic  foreign body.  Common  radiopaque materials
include batteries, screws, galvanized metal, and coins.
Some heavy metals are proven to be highly toxic. For
example, a patient presenting with acute hemolytic anemia
should have radiographs taken to look for coins (pennies
minted after 1982) to rule out zinc toxicosis. If radiographs
are diagnostic, an endoscopy or a gastrotomy will be
required after patient stabilization
Electrocardiography (ECG) may help detect arrhythmias a
patient may be experiencing. Many patients intoxicated
with substances such as methylxanthines, amphetamines,
cocaine, or albuterol will present with sinus tachycardia ot
ventricular
tachyarrhythmias.
Bradycardia
 and
bradyarrhythmias may present in patients exposed to
substances such
  as  organophosphorous  insecticides,
pharmaceuticals (e.g., beta-adrenergic blockers), and
alcohol. Bradyarrhythmias can also occur in patients with
severe  electrolyte  abnormalities  (e.g.,  hyperkalemia)
secondary to a toxicosis (e.g., digitalis toxicosis). The use
of appropriate antiarrhythmic medication will be dictated
by the veterinarian based on the type and severity of the
abnormal   rhythm.   Continuous
sECGmonitoring
gis
recommended when treating these patients.
CONCLUSION
164
There are a variety of reasons that animals may present to
an emergency service, including infectious, inflammatory,
metabolic and toxic processes. In many circumstances
involving poisoning, the cause of the animal's condition
may not be known, particularly in cases where exposure to
a toxicant was not witnessed. Having a systematic
approach to these patients is paramount to identifying the
major health  issues present.  Patient stabilization  is
essential to keeping the patient alive while the underlying
problem is diagnosed and treated. Evaluation of the
patient's clinical status and detailed historical information
are often necessary to identify the inciting cause and
provide prompt and appropriate treatment.
CHAPTER 6 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Initial triage of a poisoning patient includes
quick assessment of the function of which of the
following systems?
a. Neurologic
b. Renal
c. Cardiovascular
d. Respiratory
e. All of the above
165
2. List the four parameters that are used during the
assessment of cardiovascular function.
3. Tiffany, a 10-week-old female intact Siamese
kitten presents 3 hours after the owner applied a
spot-on canine flea control product containing
amitraz to the kitten's skin. During the initial
assessment, Tiffany is found to be recumbent and
drooling. She appears minimally aware of her
surroundings but does react to sudden noises (such
as the sound of a cage door closing) or to being
touched by lifting her head and jerking slightly.
Her level of consciousness is best assessed as
a. Alert
b. Depressed
c. Obtunded
d. Stuporous
e. Comatose
4. Tiffany has a heart rate of 70 bpm, capillary
refill time of 5 seconds, gray mucous membranes,
and thready pulses. Which of the following
assessments best match Tiffany's cardiovascular
status?
166
a. Bradycardic, hypertensive
b. Bradycardic, hypotensive
c. Normal heart rate, hypotensive
d. Tachycardic, hypertensive
e. Tachycardic, hypotensive
5. Tiffany's body temperature is 96°F and her
blood glucose (via quick enzymatic strip test) is
>200mg/dl. Which of the following is the correct
assessment for Tiffany?
a. Hyperthermic, hyperglycemic
b. Hyperthermic, hypoglycemic
c. Hypothermic, hyperglycemic
d. Hypothermic, normoglycemic
e. Hypothermic, hypoglycemic
6. What is the most appropriate next step to take
after Tiffany's initial assessment?
a. Obtain a detailed history from Tiffany's owner.
b. Put Tiffany in a cage with a hot water bottle
167
c. Give Tiffany some insulin to drop the blood
glucose.
d. Insert intravenous catheter and initiate IV fluid
therapy using warmed fluids.
e. Bathe the flea product off of Tiffany.
7. Tiffany is stabilized, bathed, and placed in a
cage with a heating pad. What parameters should
be monitored closely over the next several hours?
a. Heart rate
b. Capillary refill time
c. Fluid ins and outs
d. Body temperature
e. All of the above
arv cursisen witi hiypoteaeion.
d o
dia,and the prolonged capillry rehill time
All of thesc parmeters shonld e
heartrate of<1o0bpm ina kittenisbradycr
q
s si   e ro
taeile and suditory stimuli.
  
TE
stail ize e paie ln is case.luid erpy is
lary reilltime, heart rate and thythm, and pulse
Fllwing asme step euld he tak
h.d.
Derermination of muccu membranecolor.copil
pelient triage.
1.All of e ssm nust be asssel durig
Body temperatue <10 1 is hy pcthermia, and
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
168
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Plumb's Veterinary Drug
Handbook, 5th ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Fitzgerald, Kevin T. 2006. Taking a toxicological history.
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed, edited by Michael E.
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcot, pp. 38-44. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Thrall, Mary A., Connally, Heather E., Grauer, Gregory F.,
and Hamar, Dwayne. 2006. Zinc phosphide. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed, edited by Michael E. Peterson
and Patricia A. Talcot, pp. 38-44. St. Louis: Saunders
Waddell, Lori S. 2004. Evaluation and Interpretation of
Blood Gases.Proceedings of the Western Veterinary
Conference, Reno Nevada.
169
1
Decontamination Procedures
Lisa Murphy
SOURCES
Companion animals may need to be decontaminated due to
a variety of exposures to potentially harmful substances.
The  most
tcommonscenarios that mayrequire
decontamination and follow-up veterinary care are oral,
inhalation, dermal, and ocular exposures.
Oral exposures in the animal's environment may include
consumption of contaminated food or water, ingesting
dropped pills or other items, licking puddles of unknown
liquids, grooming, and swallowing particles that are first
inhaled then returned to the pharynx from the lower
respiratory   tract
 by the
 mucociliary apparatus
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2003).
Inhalation exposures can result from exposures to dusts.
ash, gases, and toxic fumes (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2003).
Gases and toxic fumes are most dangerous in enclosed
spaces, so animals confined indoors may be at the greatest
risk for dangerous levels of exposure. Animals can easily
inhale dust, ash, and other particulates when displaced by
either their own movement or that of people walking
through a contaminated area with animals located nearby.
Fires are another important source of inhaled smoke, toxic
gases, and other hazardous substances.
170
Dermal exposures can occur in many ways including direct
application of sprays, drops, ointments, or other substances
by the owner. In addition animals may roll or walk in
puddles, spills, or other sources of contamination that they
find in their environment, or they may be exposed during
intentional uses or accidental releases of various chemicals
if the pet is in the vicinity and located downwind (Murphy
et al. 2008). As mentioned previously, dermal exposures
can become oral exposures as a result of grooming. It is
also important to realize that animals may directly transfer
potentially harmful substances from their feet and haircoat
to any people, other animals, surfaces, and other objects
they come in contact with prior to being decontaminated.
Ocular exposures can occur with liquids, solids, and gases.
Liquids can enter the eyes through splashes, immersions,
or instillation (accidental or intentional) by the owner.
Solid objects and particles that are blown or rubbed into
the eyes can cause cormeal abrasions and other mechanical
trauma. Depending on the compound involved direct
chemical effects and even systemic signs may be possible.
 e       ss 
and surrounding ocular structures and result in a variety of
clinical signs.
CLINICAL EFFECTS
Clinical signs  caused by toxic  compounds will  vary
depending on the substance(s) involved, the animal's age
and health history, the amount the animal comes in contact
with, the duration of exposure, and sometimes the route of
exposure as well (Poppenga 2004). Table 7.1 shows a
variety of local and systemic effects that can result from
171
exposures to hydrocarbons. Common hydrocarbons that
companion animals may come in contact with include
lighter fluid, furniture polish, kerosene, gasoline, other
automotive fluids, and chemical solvents such as mineral
spirits. Small exposures of short durations result in mild
local irritant effects; larger exposures of longer durations
may potentially result in life-threatening systemic signs.
Table 7.1. Range of clinical effects associated with
hydrocarbon exposures
Affected
Possible Syndromes
Systems
Skin
Dermatitis, skin eruptions, burns, epidermal necrosis
Eyes
Conjunctivitis, corneal irritation, corneal necrosis
Gastrointestinal
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain
tract
Vascular endothelial damage, petechiation and
Respiratory tract
hemorrhage, atelectasis, dyspnea
Central nervous
Disorientation, seizures, coma
system
Signs
Animals exposed to toxicants may show no signs,
immediate problems, or delayed clinical effects depending
on the type and amount of substance involved. Signs may
also be either local (e.g., confined to the footpads if an
animal walks through a toxic substance) or systemic if
significant absorption occurs.
Mild local effects associated with oral exposures to
toxicants may be limited to drooling, gagging, and
foaming (especially in cats); rubbing and pawing at the
172
mouth; vomiting; and diarrhea. More severe signs, such as
deep ulcerations and sloughing of the tongue and mucous
membranes   can  occur
with
ingestions  of   alkaline
substances such as drain cleaners and electric dishwasher
detergents. In severe cases, potential sequelae include
scarring or perforations of the esophagus or other
structures of the gastrointestinal tract. Severe vomiting and
gagging can also put animals at risk of aspiration and
subsequent respiratory problems.
Inhalation of particulates and gases can result in immediate
coughing, respiratory distress, and damage to the lining of
the respiratory tract.
When small quantities of toxic or irritating substances
come in contact with the skin, the only signs may be
redness, itching, or mild transient hair loss. More extensive
or prolonged exposures may result in deep chemical burns,
scarring, and permanent hair loss, and put the animal at
risk for infection and thermoregulatory problems.
As shown using the example of hydrocarbons in Table 7.1
ocular exposures may result in signs ranging from mild
conjunctivitis,   cormeal
irritation,
tearing,  and
blepharospasm to corneal necrosis, perforation, and
permanent blindness.
MANAGEMENTOFEXPOSURES
The goal of decontamination is to minimize exposures to
potentially toxic substances. This can be accomplished by
preventing  or  minimizing  absorption  or  enhancing
elimination.
173
Precautions
Proper safety measures should be taken before admitting a
patient that is suspected to have been exposed to a toxic
substance. Not only are human personnel potentially at
risk, but other animals on the premises could also be
harmed.  The minimum  personal  protective equipment
(PPE)   for   veterinary   personnel   performing  animal
decontamination includes gloves, an apron or other water
resistant clothing, and eye protection (Murphy et al. 2008).
Specific substances such as pepper spray and other riot
control agents also require the use of respiratory protection
and adequate ventilation, preferably in an area of the
hospital that is isolated from other staff members and
patients.
Oral Decontamination
Induction ofVomiting(Emesis)
Induction of vomiting (emesis) is used to remove
potentially
harmfulsubstances  from the stomach.
Complete stomach emptying is generally not possible.
though the total amount of toxicant available for
absorption can be significantly reduced. Emesis in
companion animals is typically most useful within 30 to 90
minutes of the ingestion.
There are certain circumstances under which emesis
should not be induced (DeClementi 2007). Following
ingestions of caustic substances or hydrocarbons an animal
could aspirate these substances into its respiratory tract if
vomiting occurs. Animals that are already demonstrating
174
clinical signs, such as dyspnea, disorientation, or seizure
activity, could also aspirate or develop more severe
problems if they are then also made to vomit. Vomiting
can
1also cause anacute worsening
ofpreexisting
conditions   in
 patients 
with
ial
known   history
cardiovascular or seizure disorders.
Table 7.2. Hydrogen peroxide dosing recommendations
for the induction of vomiting in dogs and cats
Source: DeClementi 2007
Body weight
Volume of 3% hydrogen peroxide
< 2.3 kilograms (<5 pounds)
Sml (1 teaspoon)
2.3-4.5 kilograms (S-10 pounds)
10ml (2 teaspoons)
4.5-9.1 kilograms (10-20 pounds)
20ml (1.3 tablespoons)
9.1-13.6 kilograms (20-30 pounds)
30ml (2 tablespoons)
13.618.2 kilograms (30-40 pounds)
40ml (2.7 tablespoons)
>18.2 kilograms (> 40 pounds)
4Sml (3 tablespoons)
Hydrogen  peroxide
(3%
USP)  can
be safely and
effectively used to induce vomiting. Acting by local
irritation  of  the  stomach,  3%
6hydrogen
peroxide
dissociates into nonharmful oxygen and water after it has
finished foaming.
Table
7.2
outlines general dosing
recommendations for dogs and cats. Some clinicians do
not recommend using hydrogen peroxide in cats due to the
possibility of an increased risk of severe gastritis and
reduced efficacy. If no vomiting occurs after 5 to 10
minutes a second oral dose may be administered
Hydrogen peroxide often works most effectively if given
after a small soft meal such as bread or canned pet food.
175
Potential adverse effects of the use of hydrogen peroxide
include protracted vomiting, hematemesis, and gastritis;
these effects are generally the result of overdosing of
hydrogen peroxide.
Apomorphine is a centrally acting emetic that is commonly
used orally or intravenously, though mild sedation and
prolonged vomiting may occur as a side effect. These
adverse effects can be minimized by instead instilling
apomorphine into the subconjunctival sac and then
flushing it out with sterile saline solution when vomiting
begins.
Although xylazine will often cause vomiting in cats its
effects can be inconsistent and it can result in excessive
sedation. The sedation caused by xylazine can be reversed
with atipamezole or yohimbine.
Extra precautions should be taken and no unnecessary
personnel should be allowed in the treatment area if it is
suspected that the
eanimal has  ingested something
especially noxious, such as zinc phosphide. In these
human exposures to the noxious material (e.g., phosphine
gas in the case of zinc phosphide). Induction of emesis
outdoors or  in a well-ventilated area is highly
recommended in these cases.
Other substances that are not generally recommended for
the induction of emesis include liquid dishwashing
detergent, powdered mustard, syrup of ipecac, and salt.
Detergents and mustard are not particularly effective in
companion animals
sandcan
 cause   significant
176
gastrointestinal irritation. Syrup of ipecac does not
consistently induce vomiting in animals and has been
associated with adverse cardiovascular effects in people;
there is also a significant delay of up to 40 minutes for
emesis to occur. Salt is another substance that also often
fails to induce emesis after oral administration and if not
vomited up can put the animal at risk for potentially
life-threatening sodium ion toxicosis.
If vomiting cannot be successfully induced following the
ingestion of significant quantities of potentially harmful
substances,  other  decontamination  options include
diluents, adsorbents, and cathartics.
Diluents
ingested compounds less irritating. Other diluents such as
milk and liquid antacids can have the added benefit of
soothing and coating damaged mucous membrane
surfaces. For all diluents, only limited amounts should be
offered to reduce the risk of excessive distention of the
stomach and subsequent vomiting and possible aspiration.
Volumes similar to those recommended for hydrogen
peroxide in Table 7.2 based on body weight can be safely
offered or administered to otherwise  stable and
asymptomatic animals.
Activated Charcoal
Activated charcoal is an adsorbent that binds most organic
compounds, reducing their absorption and facilitating their
elimination in the feces. Available in powder, gel, or liquid
177
formulations the recommended oral dose for all species is
1 to 3 grams per kilogram of body weight. It can be offered
to some animals in a dish or administered with a large
syringe or stomach tube. Repeated doses may be useful for
minimizing the severity and duration of clinical signs
associated with ingestions of compounds that undergo
enterohepatic recirculation such as barbiturates and
ivermectin.
Cathartics
Cathartics enhance elimination of substances, including
activated charcoal, by moving
them through the
gastrointestinal tract more quickly. Bulk cathartics such as
psyllium (Metamucil), canned pumpkin, and whole grain
          
lower gastrointestinal tract and produce bulkier stools.
Bulk cathartics can also be useful in facilitating the
passage of ingested foreign bodies such as coins, rocks,
gastrointestinal  tract  and decrease  total  gastrointestinal
transit time. The most frequently used osmotic cathartic is
70% sorbitol and is often combined with activated
charcoal products. Saline cathartics such as sodium sulfate
(Glauber's salts) and magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts)
work by stimulating gastrointestinal motility and require
careful monitoring   to   avoid   harmful   electrolyte
disturbances. Cathartics should not be administered to
animals  with
1 preexisting  dehydration, electrolyte
imbalances, or diarrhea (DeClementi 2007).
Other Gastrointestinal Decontamination Techniques
178
Enemas, such as warm soapy water or dioctyl sodium
sulfosuccinate (DSS), can be useful in eliminating
toxicants from the lower gastrointestinal tract. Phosphate
enemas should be avoided, particularly in cats.
Gastric lavage requires general anesthesia and the use of a
cuffed endotracheal tube, but may be necessary in cases of
potentially life-threatening oral exposures. The use of
anesthesia also provides an extra measure of safety for
animals that may unexpectedly begin to seizure or develop
other neurologic signs as a symptom of intoxication. After
the lavage has been completed and before the endotracheal
tube is removed activated charcoal can be instilled directly
into the stomach. Gastric lavage should not be used to
remove caustic substances or hydrocarbons due to the risk
of aspiration
General anesthesia is also required for endoscopy, but if
available this technique can be extremely useful for the
removal of coins, batteries, toys, and other items before
they can pass out of the stomach.
Decontamination for Inhalation Exposures
The initial treatment for exposure to inhaled toxicants is
removing the patient to fresh air. In the veterinary clinic,
symptomatic and
supportive
care mayinclude
administration of supplemental oxygen, intravenous fluid
therapy, and pain management if local injury has occurred.
Monitoring may consist of blood gas measurements, pulse
oximetry, and serial thoracic radiographs. Antidotal
treatments and additional diagnostics may be needed for
some specific chemical exposures.
179
Dermal Decontamination
Most dermal exposures are treated by washing the affected
area or bathing the entire animal. Liquid dishwashing
detergent, used for hand-washing of dishes and distinct
from highly alkaline electric dishwasher detergents, is very
safe and effective for removing a variety of contaminants,
especially greasy or oily substances (DeClementi 2007). It
is readily available and relatively nonirritating to skin and
mucous membranes. If an animal licks a small amount
during bathing, brief drooling or gagging may be expected.
Repeated baths may be needed for heavily contaminated
animals or if the initial washing needs to be curtailed
because the patient begins to shiver or appears stressed. An
animal such as a cat that may be particularly fearful of a
direct spray of water may be more easily wetted down for
washing and subsequent rnsing by gently immersing 1t up
to its neck in a bucket or other suitable container of warm
water while carefully supporting its body. After bathing all
animals should be carefully monitored in a draft free
environment to prevent hypothermia
Vacuuming or combing is helpful for removing powders
and other dry compounds from the haircoats of animals
that will tolerate it. This is especially useful for products
that would otherwise become sticky or clumped with the
addition of water. Shaving or clipping is appropriate for
dried paint, tar, and other similar substances.
Oily substances such as mineral oil, vegetable oils, and
peanut butter can be used to remove items such as glue
traps, asphalt, and tree sap. After applying these to the
contaminated skin or hair it can then be gently massaged to
180
work the contaminant into small gummy balls that can then
either be combed out or washed away with liquid
dishwashing detergent.
Ocular Decontamination
Eyes should be flushed with sterile saline solution or clean
room temperature water. Careful irrigation of the nostrils
can also facilitate the removal of substances that may have
entered the nasolacrimal ducts. Sterile eye wash solutions
are available in small handheld bottles. Bagged or bottled
intravenous solutions can also be used to flush eyes after
removing the needle from the end of the intravenous drip
set. Although prolonged or especially dangerous ocular
exposures may require the eyes to be flushed as long as 20
to 30 minutes, in many cases it may not be necessary for
small splashes involving only mildly irritating chemicals.
When more extensive decontamination is needed some
animals may tolerate repeated flushings of short durations
paired with rest periods in between.
Fluorescein staining should be performed after flushing if
the patient history or physical examination suggests a
significant ocular exposure or injury. Staining should then
be repeated 12 to 24 hours later even if initial staining fails
to detect any cormeal defects. Instillation of lubricant
ointments can then follow the fluorescein staining.
PROGNOSIS
The likelihood of a full recovery for otherwise healthy
animals  that  are promptly  decontaminated  before
significant clinical signs develop is generally excellent.
181
Even animals that display adverse effects may still have a
good prognosis if they are closely monitored and receive
appropriate symptomatic and supportive care.
CHAPTER 7 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Barney, a 75-pound, neutered male, 7-year-old
golden retriever presents within an hour of his
owner finding Barney gobbling down the contents
of a 2-pound bag of semisweet chocolate morsels.
What is the first step in managing this case?
a. Assess the patient.
b. Induce vomiting.
c. Administer IV fluids
d. Radiograph the abdomen.
e. Administer PO activated charcoal.
2. Barney has melted chocolate smeared on his
muzzle, but
other than abad caseof
"chocolate-breath, he is bright, alert, and
responsive. His heart rate is 120, he is panting and
his body temperature is 102.5°F. It is determined
u oi An oi sua anp mi as si l e
some chocolate. Which of the following is/are
NOT recommended as an emetic?
182
a. 3% hydrogen peroxide
b.  Apomorphine 
e administered PO, IV, or via
conjunctival sac
c. Syrup of ipecac
d. Salt
e. c and d
3. Emesis is induced and Barmey vomits up a large
volume of chocolaty liquid with some clumps of
solid chocolate. It is decided to administer
activated charcoal because a significant amount of
chocolate is still unaccounted for. The rationale
behind   administering
g  activated  charcoal  in  a
toxicity case is to
a. Cause more vomiting to get more of the toxicant
back.
b. Increase gastrointestinal motility to move the
toxicant through the digestive tract faster.
c. Dilute the toxicant in the digestive tract, making
it less toxic.
d. Adsorb the toxicant to the charcoal in the
digestive tract, thereby decreasing absorption of the
toxicant.
183
e. Adsorb the toxicant to the charcoal in the
plasma, preventing the toxicant from reaching its
site of action.
4. Which contaminant is correctly matched with
the best means of removing it from the hair/skin of
a dog or cat?
a. Motor oil: plain water
b. Latex paint: mineral oil
c. Latex paint: paint thinner
d. Glue-based mouse trap: vegetable oil
e. Dried tar: soapy water
5. Smurf, a 6-pound, 1-year-old, male Persian cat is
boarding at a veterinary clinic. Smurf was being
treated with a topical ophthalmic solution for a
preexisting eye condition. By mistake, a staff
member   accidentally   instilled    an    ear    mite
medication containing ivermectin into Smurf's eye.
The ear mite medication insert indicates that the
product may  cause mild irritation if ocular
exposure occurs. Which of the following is the best
course of action?
184
a. Flush Smurf's eye with sterile saline for 1-2
minutes and monitor for redness or irritation.
b. Flush Smurf's eye with soapy water for 1-2
minutes and monitor for redness or irritation
c. Flush Smurf's eye with soapy water for 10-20
minutes and then stain with fluorescein.
d. Flush Smurf's eye with sterile saline for 10-20
minutes and then stain with fluorescein
e. Flush Smurfs eye with mineral oil for 10-20
minutes and then stain with fluorescein.
lngis acceptable
 p uopd ds
u detergent is included to brak up the oil, s
tion indicated that oaly mild irritatio w
waer-hesad compounds[anviceversa]nnless
qpn pm on
Sterile saline is the agent ef choice for ocila
5.
 p
Vgtable il (orthr ily cmnd）ean help
compounds bu cften mr dried in ahair cout may
from the gasrointestinl tra
p
preventing the compounde from being abscrbed
rect. Dried tarensware}will not be reoved by
Activacd charaalaisorhs certrin ccmpounds
sae ur ustntlyeffecive eetics for dog
removed by paint thinner makes ane wer c Incor
2.eNeither salt nor syup ef ipec s considared
A ssess the psticnt.
l.a
or cat skin beeause chemical bums can develop:
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
DeClementi, Camille. 2007. Prevention and treatment of
poisoning. In Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Ramesh C.
Gupta,
pp.
1139-1158.
San
Diego:
Academic
Press-Elsevier.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M., Murphy, Lisa A., Wismer,
Tina A., andAlbretsen, Jay C. 2003. General toxicologic
185
hazards and risks for search-and-rescue dogs responding to
urban disasters. Journal of the American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation,222(3):292-295
Murphy, Lisa A., Slessman, Dawn, Mauck, Bob. 2008.
Decontamination of Large Animals. In Technical Large
Animal Emergency Rescue, edited by Rebecca Gimenez,
Tomas Gimenez, and Kimberly Anne May, pp. 293-310.
Ames,Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.
Poppenga, Robert. 2004. Treatment. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 13-21. St.
Louis: Mosby.
186
8
Antidotes
TinaWismer
INTRODUCTION
Antidotes are remedies to counteract poisons. They can
prevent, reverse, or decrease the action of a toxicant.
     , s  
some very real obstacles to this in many situations (Post
and Keller 1999). First, the vast majority of toxicants have
no specific antidote, so treatment is symptomatic and
supportive. Second, even in situations where an antidote
exists, there are often obstacles to its use (cost, availability.
etc.). Many manufacturers do not produce antidotes
because there is little profit to be made. Third, antidotes
Unfortunately, there is no universal antidote and choices
must be made depending on the specific situation. Almost
all antidotes are off-label use in veterinary patients.
There are three major classifications of antidotes:
chemical, pharmacological, and functional (Bateman and
Marrs 1999). The chemical antidotes include the chelators.
commercial antibodies, and enzvme inhibitors. Chemical
antidotes act directly on a toxicant to decrease toxicity or
to
increase
eexcretion.l
Pharmacological
antidotes
antagonize or compete with the toxicant at its receptor site
or through other macromolecules. They can bind to the
toxicant itself or to the target to prevent the toxicant from
187
binding. Functional antidotes treat the symptoms caused
by the toxicant (symptomatic care). Antidotes can be in
different classification groups depending on which toxic
substance they are treating.
CHEMICAL ANTIDOTES
Chelators
Chelators, from the Greek word for claw, bind toxicants
(usually metals) in a ring structure to increase their water
solubility and excretion (Bateman and Marrs 1999).
Chelators decrease levels of free toxicant in the blood,
decrease tissue concentrations, and increase elimination. A
chelator  should
Ibe chosen thatis resistant
tto
biotransformation, is able to reach sites of toxicant storage,
forms nontoxic complexes with toxic substances, has a low
affinity for essential metals, and is easily excreted from the
body. Unfortunately, no chelators can fulfill all of these
requirements.
Calcium Disodium EDTA (Riker, Versenate?)
Calcium disodium EDTA (CaEDTA, sodium calcium
edentate, calcium disodium edathamil, calcium disodium
edetate, calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetra-acetate,
calciumdisodiumversenate，
disodium    calcium
tetracemate) is used to chelate many heavy metals. It is
used mostly in the treatment of lead and zinc toxicoses, but
it can also chelate cadmium, copper, cobalt, iron, nickel,
chromium, manganese, plutonium, thorium, uranium,
yttrium, and possibly vanadium (Chisolm 1992). The
divalent or trivalent metal displaces the calcium in
188
CaEDTA to form a water-soluble complex that is excreted
in theurine
All metal should be removed from the Gl tract before
administration, because CaEDTa will increase absorption
of metal from the GI tract. It is recommended that
CaEDTA is given slowly IV, because IM injections are
 s   s   
and GI irritation. Maintaining hydration will help decrease
the renal toxicity. Calcium disodium EDTA can also
chelate essential metals (e.g., zinc, iron), resulting in
deficiency; this is especially problematic when chelation is
required for an extended period of time (Plumb 2008).
Chronic use of CaEDTA may lead to zinc and iron
deficiency and supplementation should be implemented.
Monitor animals closely when starting CaEDTA therapy
        
or precipitate signs in asymptomatic animals with high
body burdens of lead. Calcium disodium EDTA and BAL
may be used together in severe cases. Do not use sodium
EDTA (edentate disodium); it chelates calcium and can
cause severe hypocalcemia (Plumb 2008)
Deferoxamine (Ciba, Desferal?)
Deferoxamine (DFO, desferoxamine mesylate) is a
  s u n  padd  
treatment of acute and chronic iron poisoning and
aluminum overload in patients on chronic dialysis (Westlin
1971). It has also been used to treat doxorubicin, paraquat,
189
aminoglycoside,   and    acetaminophen
poisonings.
       
toxicosis in animals (Plumb 2008)
Deferoxamine chelates free iron, which is then excreted in
the urine and bile. Early administration, within the first 24
hours, is most effective. The dose is given IM every 48
hours. If using the IV route, the animal should be
monitored for development of pulmonary edema  and
hypotension (loannides and Panisello 2oo0). Pink to
orange-red urine ("vin rose") indicates excretion of
chelated iron (Plumb 2008). Excretion of deferoxamine
can be increased by giving ascorbic acid after the gut has
been cleared of iron. Therapy may be stopped if
asymptomatic and the urine is clear. Deferoxamine will
artificially elevate total iron-binding capacity and depress
serum iron levels, so these diagnostic parameters are no
longer valid measurements during treatment (Gevirtz and
Wasserman 1966).
One advantage of using deferoxamine includes the lack of
chelation of other trace metals (except aluminum)
Adverse effects include pain at the injection site, vomiting.
and diarrhea; chronic high doses can cause hypocalcemia
and thrombocytopenia. Animals treated with deferoxamine
are at risk to develop certain infections. Deferoxamine
supplies the iron siderophore growth factor needed by both
Yersinia bacteria and Rhizopus fungus to grow (Melby et
al.  1982). Humans have reported cataracts, retinal
abnormalities, night blindness, and hearing loss after
treatment (Levine et al. 1997). Although these effects have
not yet been reported in dogs and cats, the potential for
190
their development should be taken into consideration when
choosing this compound for use in companion animals.
Dimercaprol (Taylor, BAL in Oil?)
Dimercaprol
(BAL,
British
anti-Lewisite,
dimercaptopropanol, dithioglycerol) provides sulfhydryl
groups to chelate heavy metals. It was originally developed
during WWII as an antidote to the blistering agent
Lewisite (Kosnett 2005a). Dimercaprol can be used to
chelate lead, arsenic, gold, inorganic mercury, antimony,
bismuth, chromium, nickel, copper, zinc, and tungsten
(Kosnett 2005a). In veterinary medicine, BAL is most
commonly used to treat arsenic toxicosis and occasionally
lead, mercury, and gold intoxications. It should not be used
with iron, cadmium, and selenium poisoning, because the
chelated complex is more toxic than the metal alone.
Dimercaprol can remove lead from the brain and red blood
cells and may be the recommended chelator in small
animal cases where severe CNS signs are present. Binding
to dimercaprol is not irreversible and metals can dissociate
in an acidic environment. Alkalinizing the urine will
increase excretion and decrease renal toxicity. BAL is
nephrotoxic  and   is  extremely   painful  on  injection.
Hypertension, hyperpyrexia, tachycardia, vomiting, and
seizures can occur with higher dosages (Kosnett 2005a).
Intravenous Lipid Solutions (Intralipid?, Lipsosyn?)
Intravenous lipid solutions (ILS) are intravenous fat
emulsions used to provide parenteral nutrition. These
emulsions canbeused to treat systemic drug toxicoses.
191
Highly fatsoluble drugs will bind to the lipids and be
(Waitzberg et al. 2006). Intravenous lipid solutions have
been used to treat local anesthetics, bupropion, barbiturate,
propranolol, verapamil, tricyclic antidepressants, and
avermectin toxicoses (Turner-Lawrence and Kerns 2008)
D-penicillamine (Merck, Cuprimine?; Wallace, Depen?)
D-penicillamine
(D-3-mercaptovaline,
beta,
beta-dimethylcysteine)
isahydrolytic product of
penicillin, but has no antimicrobial action. It is used to
chelate a variety of heavy metals such as copper, cadmium,
mercury, iron, and lead (Lyle 1981). D-penicillamine is
used most commonly in veterinary medicine to treat
copper-storage hepatopathies (dogs), but can also be used
in lead poisoning.
D-penicillamine is less effective than other  chelating
agents (CaEDTA or dimercaprol) for the treatment of
severe lead poisoning, but it has the benefit of being given
orally. Penicillamine should be given on an empty stomach
because food decreases the bioavailability. Vomiting is a
common side effect that may be minimized by splitting
doses or pretreating with dimenhydrinate (Plumb 2008).
Penicillamine should not be given if metal is still present
in GI tract because it will increase absorption.
Penicillamine will also chelate essential metals, including
zinc, cobalt, and manganese. Pyrexia, depression,
anorexia,   diarrhea,   proteinuria,   lymphadenopathy,
immune-complex glomerulonephropathy, and
blood
dyscrasias are rare but can be seen.
192
Protamine sulfate (Various, Generic)
Protamine
sulfate
combines
with
 acidic
glycosaminoglycans and is used in the treatment of heparin
       
inactive stable salt (Plumb 2008). Protamine can also be
        
(dalteparin, enoxaparin), but it does not completely inhibit
their activity (Plumb 2008). Protamine begins to neutralize
heparin within 5 minutes after IV administration (Plumb
2008). Protamine should be given over 1-3 minutes
because too rapid administration of protamine can cause
hypotension, bradycardia, and dyspnea (Plumb 2008).
Succimer (Sanofi-Synthelabs, Chemet?)
Succimer (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid, DMSA) is an oral
heavy metal chelator used primarily in the treatment of
childhood lead poisoning (Kosnett 2005b). It has also been
(Kosnett 2005b). Succimer is used off-label to treat lead
poisoning in dogs, cats, other small mammals, and birds
(Plumb 2008). It can be given orally or per rectum if the
animal is vomiting. Dosing for caged birds is critical
because overdoses have caused death in cockatiels (Denver
et al. 2000).
The advantages of succimer include less nephrotoxicity
than BAL, oral administration, and lower incidence of GI
upset, and it is also less likely than the others to induce
zinc, iron, calcium, or magnesium deficiency. Unlike other
chelators, succimer will not increase the absorption of lead
from the GI tract, so it can be used in situations where the
193
GI tract may not be free of metal. Succimer is more
expensive than penicillamine or CaEDTA. Succimer can
be used alone or following CaEDTA or BAL. Concurrent
use with other chelating agents is not recommended.
Succimer can cause a sulfurous odor to the breath, saliva,
feces, 0r urine (Kosnett 2005b).
Trientine (Merck, Syprine?)
Trientine (TETA, triethylenetetramine) is an oral copper
chelator. It is used in the treatment of copper-associated
       g
       g
compounded into smaller dosages, but it has fewer adverse
  s q  a sp  () s
dermatitis. Trientine also chelates zinc and iron and so
supplementation may be needed during treatment.
Commercial Antibodies
Commercial antibodies include antitoxin-specific  serum
and monoclonal antibodies. These products decrease the
free form of the toxicant, decrease tissue concentration.
and increase elimination. Commercial antibodies are dosed
depending on plasma concentrations of the agent to be
removed, not the patient's body weight. Commercial
antibodies also do not penetrate tissue so they need to be
given early in the syndrome while there is still circulating
toxicant. New technology employing Fab fragments has
decreased the antigenicity (allergic reactions) seen with
commercial antibodies, but it also increases their excretion.
194
Fab fragment products may require a larger volume due to
this short half-life (Sevcik et al. 2007).
Antivenin, Black Widow (Merck, Sharp, and Dohme;
Lyovac?)
Black widow antivenin neutralizes Latrodectus mactans
(black widow spider) venom. Antivenin is used only to
treat patients with severe signs because most cases will
recover with just supportive care. Antivenin administration
is recommended if severe hypertension is present, or if
pain is not controlled (Clark et al. 1992). Antivenin will
reverse muscle cramping, pain, central nervous system
effects, and hypertension (Clark et al. 1992). With most
veterinary patients, usually one vial is sufficient. As with
any antivenin of equine origin, anaphylactic reactions may
occur.
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent (Equine) (Boehringer
Ingelheim)
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent is approved for use in
dogs. It is used to neutralize the venom of crotalids (pit
vipers) native to North, Central, and South America. It can
be usedto treat envenomations
fromCrotalus
(diamondback   rattlesnake,   Cascabel),   Bothrops
(fer-de-lance), Agkistrodon (copperhead, cottonmouth),
and Lachesis (bushmaster). Early use (within 4 hours) is
recommended but if clinical signs are present, antivenin
therapy should be implemented. The antivenin should be
reconstituted in sodium chloride or 5% dextrose and given
intravenously. As this product is from equine origin,
monitor closely for anaphalytic reactions.
195
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab (Ovine)
(Protherics, CroFab@)
Antivenin, Crotalidae Polyvalent Immune Fab (Ovine) is
approved in humans for the management of North
American crotalid snake envenomation (Sevcik et al.
2007), animal use is off-label. The antivenin can be used to
treat envenomation by ten different North  American
crotalid species (see Table 8.1). Early use (within 6 hours
of snakebite) is best, but if coagulation abnormalities exist,
administration of antivenin can still be beneficial after this
time period. Crotalid Fab has good efficacy in dogs
although some did require more than 1 vial (average
dosing was 1.25 vials) (personal communication, Michael
Peterson). However, there are fewer reactions to this
product when compared to the IgG antivenin. The biggest
drawback to using this antivenin is the cost.
Table 8.1.
Cross-reactivity  of  Crotalidae  polyvalent
immune Fab
Scientific Name
Common Name
Agkistrodon picivorus
Cottonmouth, water moccasin
Agkistrodon contortrix contortrixCopperhead
Crotalus adamanteus
Eastern diamondback rattlesnake
Crotalus atrox
Western diamondback rattlesnake
Crotalushorridus atricaudatus
Canebrake rattlesnake
Crotalus horridus horridus
Timber rattlesnake
Crotalus molossus molossus
Northern blacktail rattlesnake
Crotalus scutulatus
Mojave rattlesnake
Crotalus viridis helleri
Southern Pacific rattlesnake
196
Sistrurusmalariusbarbouri
Pygmy rattlesnake
Antivenin, North American Coral Snake (Wyeth-Ayrst
Elapid Polyvalent, Horse, Antivenin?
Antivenin (Micrurus fiulvius) neutralizes the venom of
Eastern (M. filvius fiulvius) and Texas (M. filvius tenere)
coral snakes, fer-de-lance, and Central and South
American rattlesnakes. This antivenin is NOT effective for
Arizona or  Sonoran  coral snakes (M. euryxanthus)
 n      
potential seriousness of a coral snake bite (size of victim,
bite site, number of bites, species of snake, etc.). Bites in
which the snake “hangs on” and “chews” result in a higher
venom exposure (Kitchens and Van Mierop 1987). Early
administration of antivenin is recommended because once
clinical signs appear it is not always possible to stop the
progression.The
antivenin
1isexpensive.Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals has recently stopped manufacturing of
Elapid Antivenin, and there is currently no altermative
FDA-approved supplier of this product.
Digoxin Specific Antibody Fragments (GalaxoSmithKline,
Digibind?)
Digoxin-immune Fab will bind directly to digoxin or
digitoxin and inactivate it. Antidigitoxin Fab fragments
can also be effective against bufotoxins from Bufo toads
and against cardiac glycosides from plants (see Table 8.2)
(Binder and Lewander 1998). Patients who fail to respond
to supportive care should be given antidigitoxin Fab
fragments, which are expensive but can be lifesaving
(Ward et al. 1999). They can reverse severe ventricular
197
arrhythmias
(ventricular
tachycardia,
ventricular
fibrillation), progressive bradyarrhythmias (severe sinus
bradycardia), and second- or third-degree heart block not
responsive to atropine (Megarbane et al. 2005). Monitor
potassium closely because reactivation of ATPase may
lead to hypokalemia (Megarbane et al. 2005)
Table 8.2. Cross-reactivity of antidigoxin Fab fragment
with plant cardiac glycosides
Scientific Name
Common Name
Acokantheraoblongifolia
Adenium sp
Desert Rose
Adonis microcarpa
Pheasant's eye
Asclepias sp
Milkweed
Byrophyllum tubiftorum
Mother of millions
Calotropis procera
King's crown
Carissa laxifora
Cerbera manghas
Sea mango
Convallaria majalis
Lily of the valley
Crytostegiagrandioflora
Rubber vine
Digitalis sp
Foxglove
Helleboros sp
Nerium oleander
Oleander
Ornithogalum sp
Star of Bethlehem
Seilla hyacinthoides
Scilla hyacinth
Strophanthus sp
Corkscrew Flower
Thevetia nerifolia, T. peruvianaYellow oleander
Urginea maritima
Squill
Enzyme Inhibitors
198
Enzyme inhibitors inhibit formation of toxic metabolites
by either competitive inhibition or irreversible inhibition.
They are used to treat substances that become toxic
through in vivo metabolism by decreasing the amount of
toxic metabolite. They may increase the time needed for
elimination of the parent drug and need to be dosed before
excessive toxic metabolites are produced (Dalefield 2004).
Ethanol (Various, Generic)
Ethanol (etoh, ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol) may be used to
treat ethylene glycol (EG; antifreeze) toxicosis. Ethanol is
a competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase. By
competing for this enzyme, ethanol delays the breakdown
of EG to its more toxic metabolites (Dalefield 2004;
Mathews 2006). Ethylene glycol is then excreted in the
urine unchanged. Ethanol sources include medical or
laboratory grade alcohol or clear commercially available
liquors (Everclear?, vodka)
Ethanol is well absorbed orally, but is administered
intravenously for management of EG toxicosis. Ethanol
can be dosed in boluses or as a constant-rate infusion
(Plumb 2008). Ethanol must be given very early after
ingestion of EG for it to be effective. In dogs it should be
given within the first 6-8 hours, in cats, before 3 hours
(Connelly et al. 2002). Ethanol is inexpensive and readily
available, but it can worsen metabolic acidosis and CNS
depression.
Fomepizole (Paladin Labs, Antizol-vet?)
199
Fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole, 4-MP) is approved for use
in the treatment of EG toxicity in dogs. It is a competitive
inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase. By inhibiting this
enzyme, EG is excreted unchanged in the urine, without
being biotransformed into the more toxic metabolites
responsible for metabolic acidosis and renal tubular
necrosis. The benefits of using fomepizole rather than
ethanol are that it does not induce CNS depression,
hyperosmolality, or diuresis (Gaddy 2001). While
immediate treatment holds the best prognosis, dogs may be
treated as late as 8 hours postingestion and can still have a
favorable prognosis.Fomepizole slows down  the
metabolism of EG and so serum EG levels may still be
detectable at 72 hours after ingestion. Continue treatment
if the EG test is still positive. Fomepizole is expensive, but
each vial will treat a 60 lb dog. Fomepizole is not labeled
S   o pas a  a si   
(Connally et al. 2002). Cats will become ataxic and
depressed at these high doses. With EG poisoned cats,
therapy must be started within 3 hours or the prognosis is
grave.
PHARMACOLOGICAL ANTIDOTES
Atipamezole (Pfizer, Antisedan?)
Atipamezole is an α2-adrenergic antagonist approved for
use in dogs as the reversal agent for medetomidine
(Domitor?). It can also be used off-label to treat several
toxicoses. Atipamezole will reverse other α2-adrenergic
agonists (amitraz, xylazine, imidazoline decongestants.
bromonidine, clonidine, and tizanidine) (Gwaltney-Brant
2004). Atipamezole quickly
reverses  the sedation,
200
hypotension, and bradycardia seen in these toxicoses. It
can be given IM or IV. Atipamezole reversal lasts about
2-3 hours and may need to be repeated (Plumb 2008)
Atropine (Various, Generic)
Atropine
(tropine
tropate,
dl-tropyl
 tropate,
dl-hyoscyamine) may be used to treat the muscarinic signs
caused by anticholinesterase pesticides (OPs, carbamates)
(see Table 8.3), physostigmine excess, antimyasthenic
agents, nerve gas agents (sarin, soman, tabun, VX),
synthetic choline esters, cholinergic agonists, and clitocybe
and inocybe mushrooms (Balali-Mood and Balali-Mood
2005). Atropine blocks the effects of accumulated
acetylcholine at the synapse. Atropine is also used as an
adjunct in treating
 bradyarrhythmias. Muscarinic
(SLUDDE) signs include salivation, lacrimation, urination,
defecation, dyspnea, and emesis. Atropine sulfate does not
control nicotinic signs (muscle tremors, muscle weakness).
Table 8.3. Selected organophosphates and carbamates
Allicah
Brmos
Carharyl
Chlorpifus
Diazinon
Dicrotophos
Dioxathion
Disulfoton
Fensulfothion
Fenthion
Fumcrate
Malathion
Methidathion
Methiccarb
Methony1
Parathion
Paraxon
Prcpoxur
Terbufos
Tetracthylpyrophosphate
Atropine should be used to treat bradycardia and dry up
either of these signs do not require atropine. Atropine is
not indicated if drooling or miosis are the only clinical
signs. Atropine may be given IV, IM, SQ, endotracheally,
or intraosseously (Prete et al. 1987). Atropinization may
need to be maintained for hours to days, depending on the
201
toxicant. Overdoses of atropine can cause CNS
stimulation, seizures, sinus tachycardia, hypertension, and
ileus (Plumb 2008).
Atropine can also be used as a diagnostic test for poisoning
by cholinesterase inhibitors (e.g., organophosphorus or
carbamate insecticides). The heart rate is measured before
and after a preanesthetic dose of atropine is given. If the
heart rate increases, it is not a cholinesterase inhibitor
toxicosis, because it takes about ten times this amount to
raise the heart rate in poisoned patients (Fikes 1990).
Calcium Salts (Various, Generic)
Calcium salts (calcium chloride, calcium gluconate,
calcium
1borogluconate,  calcium
lactate,calcium
phosphate) can be used in veterinary toxicology for
treating various toxicoses. Calcium salts can be used in
treating fluoride, hydrofluoric acid, ethylene glycol,
calcium channel blocker (verapamil, diltiazem, etc.), beta
blocker,  and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
agent poisonings (see Table 8.4) (el Saadi et al. 1989;
        
hypocalcemia,  hyperkalemia,  hypermagnesemia,  oxalic
acid, and oxalate poisoning. Calcium salts can also be
helpful in relieving muscular spasm associated with black
widow spider bites (Henninger and Horst 1997; Roder
2004a)
Folinic Acid (Lederle, Leucovorin?)
Folinic acid (calcium folinate, citrovorum factor) is the
reduced active form of folic acid. It is used to treat
202
methotrexate，
 trimethoprim,  pyrimethamine,  and
Gyromitra esculenta mushroom ingestions (Lambie and
Johnson 1985; Leathem and Dorran 2007). These toxins
stop conversion of folic acid to folinic acid (active form)
by blocking the enzymes needed for this reaction. By
administering the active form, these enzyme blockades are
bypassed. Folinic acid should be given as soon as possible
for the best results.
Table 8.4.
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
agents
Atracurium
Curare
Gallamine
Metocurine
Pancuronium bromide
Tubocurarine
Vecuronium
Flumazenil (Roche, Romazicon?)
Flumazenil  (flumazepil)
)is a competitive blocker of
benzodiazepines and reverses sedation and respiratory
depression within 1-2 minutes (Gwaltney-Brant 2002).
The dose may need to be repeated because the half-life for
flumazenil is about 1 hour. Flumazenil is usually limited to
animals at risk of respiratory depression. Flumazenil is
contraindicated in animals with tricyclic antidepressant
overdoses because it can cause seizures (Plumb 2008).
Glucagon (Bedford, GlucaGen@)
203
Glucagon (HGF) is a hormone with glycemic and inotropic
actions. It is used in beta adrenergic blockers, calcium
channel blockers, and tricyclic antidepressant overdoses
that produce severe bradycardia, AV block, or hypotension
(Love and Howell 1997). Glucagon can also be used to
treat hypoglycemia from insulin and oral hypoglycemic
agents (sulfonylureas, etc.) because it stimulates hepatic
glycogenolysis. Glucagon is administered as an IV bolus,
followed bv a CRl. Patients should be monitored for
hyperglycemia with secondary hypokalemia (Plumb 2008)
Hydroxocobalamin (EMD, Cyanokit?)
Hydroxocobalamin (vitamin Bl2a, alpha-cobione) is a
vitamin B12 precursor. It is used to treat cyanide toxicosis.
Hydroxocobalamin combines
with
cyanidetoform
cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) (Hall and Rumack 1998).
Cyanocobalamin is eliminated through the urine. Cyanide
poisoning
canbe
seen secondary
to nitroprusside.
acetonitrile, cyanogenic glycoside plant (see Table 8.5)
ingestion,
and
hydrogen
 sulfide
inhalation.
Hydroxocobalamin
does
not
produce
either
methemoglobinemia or hypotension, as sodium nitrite
does. Administration of hydroxocobalamin can interfere
with AST, total bilirubin, creatinine, magnesium, and iron
measurements (Curry 1992).
Table 8.5. Cyanide-containing plants
Scientific
Common Name
Name
Acacia
Acacia
Alocasia
Elephant's Ear
204
Amelanchier
Serviceberry,Shadebush,Juneberry
Canavalia
Wonder Bean
Cercocarpus
Mountain Mahogany
Chenopodium
Goosefoot,Wormseed
Contoneaster
Contoneaster
Cynodon
Stargrass, Bermudagrass
Drosera
Sundew
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus
Glyceria
Mannagrass
Heteromeles
Christmas Berry, California Holly
Hydrangea
Hydrangea
Juncus
Rushes
Lotus
Bird's-foot Trefoil, Nevada Deer Vetch
Manihot
Cassava
Nandina
Bamboo
Panicum
Switchgrass, Kleingrass, Millet
Phalaris
Canarygrass
Prunus
Apricot, Cherry, Plum, Chokecherry, Peach, Almond, Mock
Orange
Pyracantha
Firethorn
Ranunculus
Buttercup
Rhodotypos
Jetbead
Sambucus
Elderberry
Sorghum
Sorghum, Sudangrass
Sorghastrum
Indiangrass
Spirea
Spirea, Bridal Wreath
Suckleya
Suckleya
Stillingia
Stillingia
Trifolium
Clovers
205
Triglochin
Arrowgrass
Hyperbaric Oxygen
Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy can be used in the
treatment of carbon monoxide, methylene chloride, carbon
tetrachloride, cyanide, and hydrogen sulfide toxicosis to
reverse methemoglobinemia (Tomaszewski and Thom
1994). By delivering 100% oxygen at pressures greater
than 1 atmosphere, it displaces CO and increases the
elimination of other toxicants. Hyperbaric chambers may
be available at larger veterinary referral centers.
Methylene Blue (Various, Generic)
Methylene blue (tetramethylthionine chloride trihydrate) is
an
 oxidation-reduction
agent
that  helps
convert
methemoglobin (Fe′+) to hemoglobin (Fe^+) (Plumb
2008). Methylene blue is used in small animal medicine to
treat methemoglobinemia from aniline dyes, nitrites,
nitrates, naphthalene, and local anesthetics (benzocaine,
etc.) (Plumb 2008). Methylene blue should not be given
unless methemoglobinemia is evident, especially in cats,
because methylene blue can induce methemoglobinemia in
normal animals. The new methylene blue found in
laboratory dyes can NOT be substituted for methylene
blue, because new methylene blue can be toxic if injected.
N-acetylcysteine (Apothecon, Mucomyst?; Cumberland
Pharmaceuticals, Acetadote?)
N-acetylcysteine (NAC, mercapturic acid) is a mucolytic
that can also reduce the extent of liver injury and
206
methemoglobinemia after ingestion of acetaminophen
NAC is a precursor of glutathione, provides organic sulfate
needed for the sulfation pathway and directly binds with
acetaminophen metabolites to enhance elimination (Plumb
2008). N-acetylcysteine has been used in high doses to
treat Amanita phalloides (death cap mushroom) poisoned
people. It was effective in preventing permanent hepatic
injury in 10 of 11 people (Montanini et al. 1999). NAC can
also be used to treat white/yellowphosphorus.
cyclophosphamide, and carbon tetrachloride toxicoses.
NAC may be given orally (use a taste masking agent) or
slow IV. Oral administration can cause vomiting. When
treating acetaminophen toxicosis, especially in cats, it is
recommended that acetylcysteine be dosed before the
activated charcoal.
Naloxone (DuPont, Narcan?)
Naloxone (N-allylnoroxymorphone hydrochloride) is an
opioid antagonist that competes with and displaces
narcotics from their receptor sites (mu, kappa, and sigma)
(Plumb 2008). Naloxone is most commonly used to
reverse opiates (buprenorphine,
butorphanol, codeine.
fentanyl,  hydrocodone,
hydromorphone,  methadone,
morphine, oxycodone, oxymorphone, tramadol, etc.). It
can also be used to reverse CNS depression associated
with dextromethorphan, benzodiazepines, ACE inhibitors,
alpha2-agonists, imidazoline decongestant overdoses, and
ethanol (Jefferys and Volans 1983). Naloxone may be
administered IV, IM, SQ, intraosseous, and even
sublingual. Naloxone acts within minutes and has a
duration of action from 45-90 minutes (Plumb 2008).
207
When treating long-acting substances, naloxone may need
to be repeated.
Pralidoxime (Wyeth-Ayerst, Protopam?)
Pralidoxime (2-PAM, 2-pyridine aldoxime methylchloride.
2-formyl-1-methylpyridinium chloride oxime) is an oxime
used to controlthe nicotinic signs (muscle and
diaphragmatic weakness, fasciculations, muscle cramps,
etc.) seen in organophosphate toxicoses (Fikes 1990).
2-PAM is a cholinesterase reactivator, which displaces the
acetylcholinesterase enzyme from its receptor site. It binds
with the insecticide and is excreted in the urine. 2-PAM
works best if administered as soon as possible; however,
this can vary with some compounds (Vale 2005). Once the
organophosphate receptor bond “ages," oximes are no
longer effective. Since “aging” varies with the compound,
oximes may be effective even hours to days after exposure
(Vale 2005). Oximes are generally not recommended for
use in carbamate poisoning, due to the lack of "aging” in
these compounds (Vale 2005).
Pyridostigmine (ICN, Mestinon?; Various, Generic)
Pyridostigmine  is an  anticholinesterase.  Pyridostigmine
competes   with
  acetylcholine
for
binding   to
acetylcholinesterase so acetylcholine accumulates in the
synapse. It is used to treat nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agents (see Table 8.4) and botulism. It may also
be used in the treatment of atropine, avermectin, Coral
(Micrurus) and Cobra (Naja) snake bites, tetrodotoxins
(Porcupine fish [Diodon]), and anticholinergic alkaloid
plants poisonings (see Table 8.6) (Martinez and Mealey
208
2001).  Other (
drugs
in  this
group（
(neostigmine
edrophonium, physostigmine, etc.) can also be used to treat
these toxicoses, but they have a much shorter duration of
action.
Table 8.6. Anticholinergic alkaloid plants
Scientific Name Common Name
Atropa
Belladonna
Cestrum
Jasmine
Datura
Jimsonweed
Hyoscyamus
Henbane
Lycium
Boxthorn
Lycopersicon
Tomato
Mandragora
Mandrake
Physalis
Ground Cherry
Solanum
Nightshade, Bittersweet Various mushrooms
Pyridoxine (Various, Generic)
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) is used in the management of
coma and seizures associated with overdoses of isoniazid
or hydrazines, seizures due to Gyromitra mushroom (false
morel) poisoning, penicillamine-induced seizures, and as
an adjunct therapy for EG toxicosis (Dyer and Shannon
2005).
Silymarin (Various, Generic)
Silymarin (milk thistle) is a nutraceutical that can be used
as a hepatoprotectant agent. It has been shown to be
effective as an adjunct in the treatment of cyclopeptide
209
mushroom (Amanita) and acetaminophen toxicoses (Jahn
et al. 1980; Fakurazi et al. 2008).
Silymarin should be started within the first 48 hours and
continued for several weeks. Oral silymarin can cause
vomiting but  is otherwise well tolerated. Because
silymarin is considered a nutritional supplement by the
FDA, quality and content can vary between different
formulations. Choose a product that states the
concentration (usually 70%-80%) of silymarin contained
in the product.
Yohimbine (Lloyd, Yobine @)
Yohimbine (aphrodine hydrochloride) is an α2-adrenergic
antagonist approved as a reversal agent for xylazine in
dogs, but it can also be used to treat other α2-adrenergic
agonist toxicoses (amitraz, clonidine, etc). The onset of
action is within minutes, and yohimbine has a short halflife
(1.5 to 2 hours), so repeated dosing may be required
(Jermigan et al. 1988). Dogs receiving five times the
recommended dose developed muscle tremors and seizures
(Plumb 2008).
FUNCTIONAL ANTIDOTES
Acepromazine
(Ft.
Dodge,  PromAce?;  Vetus,
Aceproject?)
Acepromazine
(ace,
acetazine,
acetopromazine,
acetylpromazine)  is  a neuroleptic phenothiazine.  It  is
 qd si p so u asn g adde
Acepromazine is used to decrease the CNS stimulation
210
associated   with   amphetamine,   methamphetamine,
serotonergic drugs, 4-methylimidazole, and metaldehyde
toxicosis (Andrews and Humphries 1982). Intravenous
  s     n
can be given IM, SQ, or orally. Acepromazine can cause
hypotension at high doses, and blood pressure should be
monitored after administration
Bicarbonate, Sodium (Various, Generic)
Sodium
  bicarbonate
(sodium
hydrogen  carbonate,
monosodium carbonate, sodium acid carbonate, baking
 n  '   s a s s
systemic alkalinizer, which can be used to correct
metabolic  acidosis,
QRS
prolongation,   and
rhabdomyolysis and to alkalinize urine in poisonings
(Kolecki and Curry 1997). Administration of sodium
bicarbonate to a serum pH of 7.45-7.55 will help decrease
thecardiac toxicityof  tricyclic antidepressants
(amitriptyline, doxepin, imipramine, nortriptyline, etc.)
and type 1  antidysrrhythmics (quinidine) (Kolecki and
Curry 1997).
Urinary alkalinization with sodium bicarbonate traps weak
acids and enhances the
eelimination of salicylates,
phenobarbital,  chlorpropamide,  and  chlorophenoxy
herbicides (Wax 2011). Oral sodium bicarbonate may
decrease the absorption of anticholinergics, histamine 2
blockers (cimetidine, ranitidine, etc.), iron, ketoconazole,
and tetracyclines, but increase the amount of naproxen
absorbed and reduce the efficacy of sucralfate (Plumb
some drugs (e.g., quinidine, amphetamines, ephedrine).
211
Chlorpromazine (SmithKlineGlaxo, Thorazine?; Various,
Generic)
Chlorpromazine (aminazine) is a phenothiazine used in the
treatment of monamine oxidase inhibitor, amphetamine.
and metaldehyde toxicoses (Grantham et al. 1964;
Kisseberth and Trammel 1990). It is used to decrease the
stimulatory signs. Chlorpromazine is less potent than
acepromazine, but has a longer duration of action.
Chlorpromazine can be given orally, IV or IM. Do not
administer IM in rabbits because it causes severe muscle
pain  and swelling (Plumb 2008).Do not
use
chlorpromazine with physostigmine or paraquat toxicoses
because it may increase the toxicity (Plumb 2008).
Cyproheptadine (Merck, Periactin?; Various, Generic)
Cyproheptadine has been used traditionally in veterinary
medicine for its antihistaminic and appetite-stimulant
effects (cats) but is now being used to help treat serotonin
syndrome (Gwaltney-Brant 2002). Serotonin syndrome is
characterized by tremors, seizures, hyperthermia, ataxia,
vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdominal
pain,  excitation or
depression, and hyperesthesia. Serotonin syndrome is seen
   snp o s a mn aos
serotonin levels (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
amphetamines,
tricyclic
antidepressants,
5-hydroxytryptophan, etc.) (Gwaltney-Brant 2002). The
dose may be given PO or per rectum (if vomiting or
activated charcoal already given). Discontinue if no effect
after the second dose (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000)
212
Dantrolene is used in veterinary toxicology to treat the
malignant hyperthermia-like syndrome seen in dogs after
ingestion of hops (Humulus lupulus) (Duncan et al. 1997).
It is a direct acting muscle relaxant that reverses muscle
rigidity and associated hyperthermia. Dantrolene can be
given orally or IV (injectable is expensive). Hepatotoxicity
has been seen in humans with high dose chronic therapy
(Plumb 2008). It is unknown if this occurs in animals.
Dapsone
(Wyeth-Ayerst,
Avlosulson?;  Jacobus,
Dapsone?)
Dapsone
(diaminodiphenylsulfone,  diphenylsulfone)
decreases neutrophil chemotaxis, complement activation,
lysosomal enzyme synthesis, and antibody production
(Plumb 2008). Because of these leukocyte inhibitory
effects, dapsone is used for adjunctive treatment of Brown
recluse spider (Loxosceles sp.), Wolf spider (Lycosidae
sp.), and Funnel Web spider (Dipluidae sp.) bites (Hansen
and Russell 1984). It is thought to decrease the tissue
necrosis seen after these envenomations. Dapsone should
be used cautiously in cats due to the possibility of
neurotoxicity and hemolytic anemia. All patients should be
monitored for hepatotoxicity, anemia, thrombocytopenia.
neutropenia, gastrointestinal effects, neuropathies, and
cutaneous drug eruptions (photosensitivity) (Plumb 2008).
Dextrose (Various, Generic)
Dextrose is used in the treatment of hypoglycemia, which
may result directly from toxicants (alpha lipoic acid.
213
biguanides, insulin, sulfonylureas, xylitol) or indirectly
(clonidine, ethanol, salicylates, organophosphates, Ackee
[Blighia], Sneezeweed [Helenium], Desert Marigold
Baileya],   Paperflowers  [Psilostrophe],   Sartwellia
Sartwellia], Periwinkle [Catharanthus], Balsam Apple and
Pear [Momordica], Castor Bean [Ricinus], Bitterweed and
Rubberweed [Asteraceae]) (Browning et al. 1990).
Multiple bolus doses or a CRI may be required.
Methocarbamol (Fort Dodge, Robaxin?, Robaxin?V)
Methocarbamol (guaiphenesin carbamate) is approved in
animals as a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant. It is
used in toxicology to treat tremors associated with
permethrin,   metaldehyde,   strychnine,  tetanus
(Clostridium), White Snakeroot (Eupatorium), ergot
alkaloids (Claviceps), Penicillium, and other tremorgenic
mycotoxins (Richardson 2000; Richardson et al. 2003;
Gwaltney-Brant 2002; Schell 2000). Methocarbamol
depresses pathways in the spinal cord without interfering
with muscle function. It may be given intravenously,
orally, or rectally (crush tablets in saline).
Nitroprusside (Various, Generic)
Nitroprusside—(OC-6-22)-pentakis(cyano-C)nitrosylferrate
dihydrate, sodium nitroferricyanide dehydrate——is used for
treatment of severe hypertension secondary to poisonings
(phenylpropanolamine, etc.). It causes peripheral arterial
and venous vasodilation. Nitroprusside has an immediate
onset and short duration of action, which allows accurate
titration of blood pressure (Plumb 2008). Blood pressure
should be monitored closely because it will return to
214
pretreatment levels within 1-10 minutes once the CRI is
stopped. Prolonged use may lead to potential cyanide
toxicosis, especially in patients with hepatic or renal
insufficiency. Metabolic acidosis and delirium are early
signs of cyanogen toxicosis (Plumb 2008).
Norepinephrine (Sanofi-Sybthelabo, Levophed?)
Norepinephrine  (noradrenalin)  is  an  alpha-adrenergic
agonist used to reverse hypotension by increasing systolic
and diastolic blood pressure through vasoconstriction. It is
used to treat alpha adrenergic blockers (see Table 8.7) and
mushrooms [Amantia], beta blockers, calcium channel
blockers, ergot alkaloids, lily of the valley [Convallaria],
periwinkle [Vinca], phenothiazines, (
quininesulfate.
tetrodotoxins, tricyclic antidepressants, Yew [Taxus]]
(Brent et al. 2005). Norepinephrine must be given IV
because extravasation causes severe necrosis.
Table 8.7. Alpha-adrenergic blockers
Generic Name
Trade Name
Atipamezole
Antisedan?
Doxazosin
Cardura?
PhenoxybenzamineDibenzyline?
Phentolamine
Prazosin
Minipress?
Tamsulosin
Flomax?
Terazosin
Hytrin?
Tolazoline
Tolazine?
Yohimbine
Yobine?
215
Pamidronate (Novartis, Aredia?; Various, Generic)
Pamidronate (ADP sodium) is a synthetic bisphosphonate
that binds to the hydroxyapatite found in bone. It inhibits
osteoclastic bone resorption and is used in veterinary
toxicology to treat hypercalcemia secondary to vitamin D
and its analogs (cholecalciferol, calcipotriene, calcitriol)
(Pesillo et al. 2002). Pamidronate is administered as a slow
IV infusion over 2-4 hours. It has an advantage over
salmon calcitonin in that it has long-lasting effects (may
need to repeat once in 5-7 days). Do not use in
combination with calcitonin, because it increases mortality
(Rumbeiha et al.1997). Pamidronate can cause
hypomagnesemia, renal toxicity, and arrhythmias (Kadar
et al. 2004).
Salmon Calcitonin (Sandoz, Calcitonin Micalcin?;
Lennod, Salmonine?)
Calcitonin is a hormone used to control hypercalcemia. It
inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption and reduces tubular
reabsorption of calcium (Plumb 2008). Calcitonin is used
   o    
Calcitonin's use is limited by expense, availability,
frequent dosing schedule, pain at injection site, and
development of resistance to its effects after several days.
Bisphosphonates are frequently used instead.
SAMe (Nutramax, Denosyl?; Vetoquinol, Zentonil?)
SAMe   (S-Adenosyl-Methionine,   ademetionine)   is
anutraceutical used as a treatment for acetaminophen
toxicity in small animals (Plumb 2008; Wallace et al.
216
2002). It has also been used for liver support in chronic
hepatitis, hepatic lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, feline triad
disease, and osteoarthritis. SAMe is formed from the
amino acid methionine and ATP. It plays an essential role
1n
 major biochemical
1 pathways (transmethylation.
transsulfuration, and aminopropylation). Through these
pathways SAMe provides compounds (sulfur, glutathione)
important in liver support (Plumb 2008).
SAMe should be given on an empty stomach, because food
will greatly reduce the amount of drug absorbed. SAMe is
well tolerated and adverse effects are rare. Because SAMe
is considered a nutritional supplement by the FDA, there
are no standards for potency, purity, safety, or efficacy.
Due to this lack of oversight, a well-known brand name
should be used.
Vitamin K1 (Merck, Mephyton?; Various, Generic)
Vitamin
K1
(phytonadione,
phylloquinone,
phytomenadione)
　is used
  to  treat anticoagulant
rodenticides, coumarin, and sulfaquinoxaline toxicoses
(Plumb 2008). Vitamin K1 is needed for the regeneration
of blood clotting factors II, VIl, IX, and X. After
administration it takes about 6-12 hours for new clotting
factors to be synthesized. Vitamin Kl can be given PO.
IM, or SQ. IV use is not recommended due to a high
incidence of anaphylactoid reactions. Giving vitamin K1
with a fatty meal will increase bioavailability (Plumb
2008). Because vitamin Kl does not accumulate in the
liver and it may take several weeks to eliminate some of
the anticoagulant rodenticides from the body, the drug
must be dosed daily.
217
CHAPTER 8 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Functional antidotes differ from chemical or
pharmacological antidotes in that
a. They increase the excretion of toxicant from the
body.
b. They decrease the absorption of the toxicant
from the gastrointestinal tract.
c. They treat the clinical signs caused by the
toxicant.
d. They increase the metabolism of the toxicant.
e. They decrease the metabolism of the toxicant
2. Which of the following best describes the
mechanism of action of chelators?
the toxicant from binding.
b. They bind to a toxicant to increase the toxicant's
water solubility and enhance excretion.
c.They enhance excretion of a toxicant by
increasing toxicant metabolism.
218
d. They bind to a toxicant to decrease absorption of
the toxicant from the gastrointestinal tract
e. They bind to a toxicant and cause the toxicant to
be sequestered with a specific organ (e.g., spleen).
3. When using chelators to treat heavy metal
toxicoses, it is necessary that the gastrointestinal
tract be free of any metal or the chelator will
actually increase the further absorption of metal
from the gastrointestinal tract into the bloodstream.
This statement is true for all chelators and metals
with which exception?
a. Use of calcium disodium EDTA to treat lead
poisoning
b. Use of deferoxamine to treat iron poisoning
c. Use of dimercaprol to treat lead poisoning
d. Use of d-penicillamine to treat lead poisoning
e. Use of succimer to treat lead poisoning
4.Antibodies have been developed to treat
intoxication from all of the following except
a. Rattlesnake venom
b. Digitalis
219
c. Coral snake venom
d. Fire ant venom
e. Black widow spider venom
5. W hen treating ethylene glycol toxicosis.
fomepizole has all of the following advantages
over ethanol except that
a. Fomepizole does not cause significant CNS
depression.
b. Fomepizole does not cause hyperosmolality and
diuresis.
c. Fomepizole is less expensive than ethanol.
d. Fomepizole administration and monitoring are
less labor-intensive than ethanol.
e. Fomepizole is FDA-approved for use in dogs.
220
significant.
fluids,the cost of nursing care for ethanol may
obtain; however,because ethanol requires more
Fomepizole is more expensive than ethanol to
fire ants.
4.d.Noantivenom exists to treatenve nomationfrom
le ad from the gastrointe st inal tract.
3e.Succimer does not enhance the absorption of
bility and enhance excretion.
Che latois bind toxicants to incre ase water solu-
2.b.
le vel of to xicant in the body.
1.c. Fu nctional antidotes help manage clinical signs
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Anthony H. Andrews, David J. Humphreys. 1982.
Poisoning in Veterinary Practice, 2nd ed. pp. 76-77, 112.
Middlesex: National Office of Animal Health Ltd.
Kia Balali-Mood, Mahdi Balali-Mood. 2005. Atropine. In
Critical Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of
the Critically Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent.
Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J.
Ward Donovan, pp. 1517-1521. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Nicholas Bateman, Timothy Marrs. 1999. Antidotal
studies. In General and Applied Toxicology, vol. 1, 2nd
ed., edited by Bryan Ballantyne, Timothy C. Marrs, Tore
221
Syversen, Pp. 425-435. New York: Nature Publishing
Group.
W.D. Binder, William J. Lewander. 1998. Digoxin. In
Emergency toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Peter Vicellio,
Tod Bania, pp. 707-722. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott
D. Phillips, J. Ward Donovan. 2005. Critical Care
Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of theCritically
Poisoned Patient. pp. 35, 410, 421, 1258. Philadelphia:
Mosby.
Randall G. Browning, David W. Olson, Harlan A.
Stueven, James R. Mateer. 1990. 50% Dextrose: Antidote
or toxin? Ann Emerg Med 19(6):683-687.
J. Julian Chisolm Jr. 1992. BAL, EDTA, DMSA, and
DMPS in the treatment of lead poisoning in children. Clin
Toxicol 30:493-504.
R.F. Clark, S. Wethern-Kestner, M.V. Vance, R. Gerkin
1992. Clinical presentation and treatment of black widow
spider envenomation: A review of 163 cases. Ann Emerg
Med Jul;21(7):782-787.
Heather E. Connally, Dwayne W. Hamar, Mary Anna
Thrall. 2002. Safety and efficacy of high dose fomepizole
        
IVECCS, San Antonio, TX. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:191.
Steven C. Curry. 1992. Hydrogen cyanide and inorganic
salts.InHazardous MaterialToxicology:Clinical
222
Principles of Environmental Health,edited by John B
Sullivan, Gary R. Krieger, pp. 698-709. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins.
Rosalind Dalefield. 2004. Ethylene glycol. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
150-154. St. Louis: Mosby.
M.Denver, Lisa A.Tell, Frank D. Galey, JG
Trupkiewicz, Philip H. Kass. 2000. Comparison of two
heavy metal chelators for treatment of lead toxicosis in
cockatiels. Am J Vet Res 61:935-940.
Karen L.Duncan, William R. Hare, William B. Buck
1997. Malignant hyperthermia-like reaction secondary to
ingestion of hops in five dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc Janl;
210(1):51-54.
K. Sophia Dyer, Michael Shannon. 2005. Pyridoxine. In
Critical Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of
the Critically Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent,
Kevin L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J.
Ward Donovan, pp. 1537-1538. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Magdi S. el Saadi, Alan H. Hall, Priscilla K. Hall, Betty S.
Riggs, W. Lynn Augenstein, Barry H. Rumack. 1989.
Hydrofluoric acid dermal exposure.  Vet Hum Toxicol
Jun;31(3):243-247.
Sharida Fakurazi, Ithnin Hairuszah, U. Nanthini. 2008.
Moringa oleifera  Lam prevents acetaminophen  induced
liver injury through restoration of glutathione level. Food
Chem Toxicol Aug; 46 (8): 2611-2615.
223
James D. Fikes. 1990. Organophosphorus and carbamate
insecticides. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:
353-367.
Jonathan Gaddy. 2001. Pharm profile fomepizole.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet X 1073-1074.
Norman R. Gevirtz, Louis R. Wasserman. 1966. The
measurement of iron and iron-binding capacity in plasma
containing deferoxamine. J Pediatr 68:802-804.
Julie Grantham, W. Neel, R.W. Brown. 1964. Toxicity
reversed:   Reversal of imipramine-monamine  oxidase
inhibitor induced toxicity by chlorpromazine. J Kans Med
Soc 65:279-280.
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant. 2004. Amitraz. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
177-178. St. Louis: Mosby.
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, Jay Albretsen, Safdar Khan.
2000. 5-hydroxytryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases
(1989-1999). JAVMA 216:1937-1940.
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, Wilson Rumbeiha. 2002. Newer
antidotal therapies. In The Veterinary Clinics of North
America Small Animal Practice, edited by Robert H
Poppenga, Petra A. Volmer, pp. 323-339. Philadelphia:
Saunders.
Alan H. Hall, Barry H. Rumack. 1998. Cyanide and related
compounds. In Clinical Management of Poisoning and
Drug Overdose, 3rd ed., edited by Lester M. Haddad,
224
Michael W. Shannon, James F. Winchester, pp. 899-905.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Ronald C. Hansen, Findlay E. Russell. 1984. Dapsone use
for Loxosceles envenomation treatment. Vet Hum Toxicol
26:260.
Richard W. Henninger, J. Horst. 1997. Magnesium
toxicosis in two
horses.JAm Vet MedAssoc
Jul1;211(1):82-85.
Adonis S. Ioannides, Jose M. Panisello. 2000. Acute
      s n
poisoning: The role of intravenous desferrioxamine. Eur J
Pediatr 159:158-159.
Wolfgang Jahn, Heinz Faulstich, Thomas Wieland. 1980.
Pharmacokinetics
of
(3H)-methyl-dihydroxymethyl-amanitin in the isolated
perfused rat liver, and the influence of several drugs. In
Amanita Toxins and Poisoning, edited by Heinz Faulstich,
Burkhard Kommerell, Thomas Wieland, pp. 80-85.
Baden-Baden, Germany: Witzstrock.
David B. Jefferys, Glyn N. Volans. 1983. An investigation
of the role of the specific opioid antagonist naloxone in
clinical toxicology. Hum Toxicol Apr; 2 (2): 227-231.
Antoinette D. Jernigan, Robert C. Wilson, Nicholas H.
Booth, Roger C. Hatch, Ali Akbari. 1988. Comparative
pharmacokinetics of yohimbine in steers, horses and dogs
Can J Vet Res Apr; 52 (2): 172-176
225
Elissa Kadar, John E. Rush, Lois Wetmore, Daniel L.
Chan.  2004.  Electrolyte   disturbances  and  cardiac
arrhythmias in a dog following pamidronate, calcitonin,
and  furosemide  administration  for hypercalcemia  of
malignancy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc Jan-Feb;40(1):75-81.
Willam C. Kisseberth, Harold L. Trammel. 1990. Hllicit
and abused drugs. In The Veterinary Clinics of North
America Small Animal Practice, edited by Val R. Beasley,
pp. 405-418. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Craig S. Kitchens, Lodewyk H.S. Van Mierop. 1987.
Envenomation by the Eastern coral snake (Micrurus
fulvius fulvius). Astudy of 39victims. JAMA
Sep25;258(12): 1615-1818.
Paul Francis Kolecki, Steven C. Curry. 1997. Poisoning by
sodium channel blocking agents. Crit Care Clin Oct;13(4):
829-848.
Michael J. Kosnett. 2005a. Dimercaprol (BAL). In Critical
Care Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of the
Critically Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin
L. Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward
Donovan, pp. 1499-1501. Philadelphia: Mosby.
2005b. Succimer (DMSA). In Critical Care
ToxicologyDiagnosisandManagementoftheCritically
Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L
Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward
Donovan, pp. 1505-1507. Philadelphia: Mosby.
226
D.G. Lambie, R.H. Johnson.1985.J Rheumatol Suppl
Jan-Feb:7:96-99.
Anne M. Leathem, Thomas J. Dorran. 2007. Poisoning due
to raw Gyromitra esculenta (false morels) west of the
Rockies. CJEM Mar;9(2):127-130
Jon E. Levine, Aaron Cohen, M. MacQueen, M. Martin,
Patricia J. Giardina. 1997. Sensorimotor neurotoxicity
associated with high-dose deferoxamine treatment. J
Pediatr Hematol Oncol Mar-Apr;19(2): 139-141.
Jeffrey N. Love, John M. Howell. 1997. Glucagon therapy
in the treatment of symptomatic bradycardia. Ann Emerg
Med Jan;29(1):181-183.
W.H. Lyle. 1981. Penicillamine in metal poisoning. J
Rheumatol Suppl Jan-Feb;7:96-99.
Elizabeth A. Martinez, Katrina A. Mealey. 2001. Muscle
relaxants. In Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, edited by Dawn Merton Boothe, pp.
473-481. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Karol A. Mathews. 2006. Ethylene Gycol Intoxication. In
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Manual, edited
by Karol A. Mathews, pp. 655-659. Guelph, Ontario:
Life-learn Inc.
Bruno Megarbane, Stephen W. Borron, Frederic J. Baud.
2005. Anti-Digitalis fab Fragments. In Critical Care
Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of the Critically
Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L
227
Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward
Donovan, pp. 1575-1579. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Kjetil Melby, Sofie Slordahl, Tore Jarl Gutteberg, Svein
Arme Nordbo.1982. Septicemia due to Yersinia
enterocolitica after oral overdoses of iron. Br Med J
285:467-468.
S. Montanini, D. Sinardi, C. Pratico, A.U. Sinardi, G
Trimarchi. 1999. Use of acetylcysteine as the live-saving
antidote in Amanita phalloides (death cap) poisoning. Case
report
11
patients.
Arzneimittelforschung
49:1044-1047.
S.A. Pesillo, Safdar A. Khan, Elizabeth A. Rozanski, John
E.Rush. 2002. Calcipotriene toxicosis in a dog
successfully treated with pamidronate disodium. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 12:177-181.
Donald C. Plumb. 2008. Plumb's Veterinary Drug
Handbook, Sixth Edition. pp. 3-5, 10-12, 79-80, 83-86,
121-122,186-187,240-241, 250-253, 256-257,334-335,
365-366, 396, 425-426, 597-599, 641-642, 659-661,
734-736,783-784,809-810,822-824,839-840,868-870,
906-907, 938-939. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell
Lynn O. Post, W.C. Keller. 1999. An update of antidote
availability  in  veterinary medicine.  Vet Hum Toxicol
41:258-261.
M.R. Prete, C.J. Hannan, F.M. Bunce. 1987. Plasma
atropine concentrations via intravenous, endotracheal, and
intraosseous administration. Am J Emerg Med 5:10l-104.
228
Jill A. Richardson. 2000. Permethrin spot-on toxicoses in
cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 10:103-106.
Jill A. Richardson, Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, Joel D.
Huffman, Marcy E. Rosendale, Sharon L. Welch. 2003.
Metaldehyde toxidoses in dogs. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 25:376-379.
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
111-112. St. Louis: Mosby.
2004b. Calcium Channel Blocking Agents. In
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H
Plumlee, pp. 308-309. St. Louis: Mosby.
Wilson K. Rumbeiha, J. Kruger, S. Fitzgerald, J. Render,
R. Nachreiner, J. Kaneene, R. Vrable, M. Richter, C.
Chiapuzio. 1997. The use of pamidronate disodium for
treatment of vitamin D3 toxicosis in dogs. Proceedings
40th Annual Meeting AAVLD, Louisville, Kentucky. pp.
71.
Mary
M.Schell.
. 2000.  Tremorgenic  mycotoxin
intoxication. Vet Med 95:283-286.
Carlos Sevcik, Victor Salazar, Patricia Diaz, Gina D'Suze.
Initial volume of a drug before it reaches the volume of
distribution: Pharmacokinetics of F(ab')2 antivenoms and
other drugs. Toxicon 2007 Oct;50(5):653-665.
229
Christian A. Tomaszewski, S.T. Thom. 1994. Use of
hyperbaric oxygen in toxicology. Emerg Med Clin North
Am 12(2):437-459.
D.E. Turner-Lawrence, Ii W. Kerns. 2008. Intravenous fat
emulsion: A potential novel antidote. J Med Tox
4(2):109-114.
Toxicology Diagnosis and Management of the Critically
Poisoned Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L
Wallace, Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, J. Ward
Donovan, pp. 1523-1530. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Dan L. Waitzberg, Raquel Susana Torrinhas, Thiago
Manzoni Jacintho. 2006. New parenteral lipid emulsions
for clinical use. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 30:351-367.
Kevin P. Wallace, SharonA. Center, Fiona H. Hickford,
Karen
L.
Warner,  Scott:
 Smith.
2002
S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe) for the treatment of
acetaminophen toxicity in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
May-Jun;38(3):246-254.
Daniel L. Ward, S. Dru Forrester, T.C. DeFrancesco,
Gregory C. Troy. 1999. Treatment of severe chronic
digoxin toxicosis in a dog with severe cardiac disease,
using ovine digoxin-specific immunoglobulin  G Fab
fragments. JAVMA 215(12):1808-1812.
Paul M. Wax. 20l1. Sodium bicarbonate. In Goldfrank's
Toxicologic Emergencies, edited by Lewis S. Nelson et al.,
PP. 520-527. China: McGraw-Hill.
230
W.F. Westlin. 1971. Deferoxamine as a chelating agent
Clin Toxicol 4:597-602
231
6
Investigating Fatal Suspected Poisonings
Safdar A. Khan
INTRODUCTION
Veterinary staff may encounter situations where they are
asked to investigate cause of death of a companion animal
that was apparently healthy when observed last but was
later found dead by the owner. In many such situations, the
animal may have had clinical signs that went unnoticed by
the owner, or the animal may not have been observed
during the time of illness. Investigating sudden death in
dogs and cats in the absence of clinical signs can be quite
challenging. The definition of sudden death in terms of
time may vary from person to person. For the purpose of
this discussion, sudden, unattended, or unexplained death
is defined as death occurring in an apparently healthy
animal within a 12-to 24-hour period with no premonitory
clinical signs or with minimal clinical signs (Casteel and
Turk 2002). The purpose of this chapter is to outline the
approach to take in the investigation of sudden death and
to provide some common toxicologic rule-outs that should
be included for investigating sudden acute unattended
death in dogs and cats (Table 9.1).
CAUSES OF SUDDEN DEATH
A list of common causes of acute sudden death is available
for large animals. However, for small animals, limited
232
information is available on this topic. Animal poisoning
(accidental or malicious) in dogs, according to one 10-year
retrospective study, is the second most cause of sudden
death in dogs after heart diseases (Table 9.2) (Olsen and
Allen 2000).
In cats, however, poisoning has not been listed as a cause
of acute sudden death (Table 9.3) (Olsen and Allen 2001)
Investigation of sudden death in a dog or a cat is no
different than investigation of any other disease condition.
Nontoxicologic rule-outs including infectious, metabolic,
considered along with poisoning when investigating
sudden death in a pet.
It is important to realize that the effects of a toxicant on the
body are dose-dependent. Many of the toxicants listed in
the rule-out list from Table 9.1 may not be expected to
cause acute sudden death with small exposures. However,
possess the potential to cause acute sudden death with the
right amount (dose) of exposure. The reader is encouraged
to review more detail about a particular topic or agent
listed in this text once a reasonable cause of death has been
narrowed down.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
History
The investigation of acute sudden death involves close
cooperation between client, veterinary staff, and diagnostic
233
laboratory personnel. A complete and thorough case
history is essential for such investigations. A good case
history can help expedite the process of putting together all
the pieces and eliminate several unnecessary steps early.
Obtaining a recent case history from the client may
sometimes be difficult, especially in situations where the
animal  was unsupervised i
immediately  prior  to  death.
Clients may be too distraught to have good recollection of
recent events, and it is not umcommon for them to focus on
one particular event (e.g., herbicide recently applied to
lawn) as the potential cause of death. Patient and tactful
questioning is paramount to getting a history that is as
accurate as possible.
Table 9.1. Common toxicants that can cause sudden death
in dogs and cats
Agent
Comments
Topically used anticancer medication; seizures,
S-Flurouracil
vomiting, cardiac arrhythmias; acute death possible
withlarge ingestion
Used as OTC sleep aid and antidepressant; seizures,
S-hydroxytryptophan
(S-HTP)
hyperthermia; acute death with large ingestions
possible
Acetaminophen
Death due to methemoglobinemia within hours with
largeingestion; cats more sensitive
Prescription bronchodilator for asthma; acute death
Albuterol
with large ingestion possible; cardiac arrhythmias,
hypokalemia
Recreational or human prescription; hyperthermia,
hyperactivity, circling, hypertension,
Amphetamines
tachyarrhythmias; acute death with large ingestion
possible
Anticoagulant
Internal bleeding 3-5 days postingestion; acute death
rodenticides
due to pulmonary hemorrhage possible
234
Common human prescription medications; acute
Antidepressants
 death possible with large ingestion; CNS and cardiac
effects
Arsenic
Toxicosis uncommon; watery diarrhea, abdominal
pain, shock, acute death possible
Baclofen
Prescription drug; coma, hypothermia, respiratory
depression; death with large ingestion
Common anticonvulsant, accidental ingestion of large
doses; farm dogs eating flesh/carcass of animals
Barbiturates
euthanized by barbiturates; coma, hypothermia, and
death
Blue-green algae
History of drinking from a lake/pond; algae on the
muzzle; collapse, shock, seizures, liver failure, death
Acute death rare; ingestion of preformed toxins from
Botulism
eating a carcass; progressive weakness, paralysis,
death
Brunfelsia spp
Strychnine-like signs (seizures, rigidity); dogs
attracted to fruit/seed pods/flowers; acute death
ingestion
possible with large ingestion
Common in Florida and other Southern states; acute
Bufo toad
collapse, salivation, cardiac arrhythmias, seizures,
death
Ingestion of chocolate or caffeine pills; acute death
Caffeine
with large ingestion possible; vomiting, CNS signs,
cardiac arrhythmias
Carbon monoxide
Uncommon; bright red mucous membranes
Cardiac
glycosides-containing
Acute death uncommon; evidence of plant ingestion
plants
Acute death unlikely; only possible if several seeds
Castor beans
have been ingested
Cocaine
Recreational drug; acute death possible
Acute death with large ingestions possible; cats more
Ethylene glycol
sensitive
235
History of eating garbage; acute death possible with
Garbage poisoning
some Salmonella, E. coli toxins; vomiting,
progressive shock and death
Hepatotoxic
Vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, shock, liver
mushrooms
failure, death
Hops (used for beer
Malignant hyperthermia-like syndrome in dogs; acute
flavoring)
death possible
Ionophores (e.g,
Eating cattle feed; farm dog; acute death with large
monensin, lasalocid)
ingestion (premix) possible
Iron
Multivitamins; large ingestions, acute death
uncommon, vomiting, shock, liver damage
Isoniazid ingestion
Antituberculosis drug; seizures, acute death possible
Lidocaine and other
Uncommon toxicosis; CNS, and cardiovascular
local anesthetics
effects
Used mostly as slug bait; seizures, hyperthermia,
Metaldehyde
acute death with large ingestion possible
Moldy food ingestion
(tremorgenic
History of ingestion of moldy food; seizures,
hyperthermia,vomiting, acute death possible
mycotoxins)
Nicotine
Acute death with large ingestion possible; GI, CNS
and cardiac effects
Organochlorine type
Lindane, eldrin, dieldrin; use not common anymore;
pesticides
cats more sensitive; seizures, tremors, and acute death
Organophosphates/
Some highly toxic OPs/carbamates like methomyl,
Carbamate
aldicarb (tres pasitos), disulfoton; usually SLUD
insecticides
signs present; acute rapid death possible
Paint ball ingestion
Ingestion of large amounts; acute death not common,
(glycols)
seizures due to hypernatremia possible
OTC decongestant; amphetamine-like signs; acute
Pseudoephedrine
death with large overdose possible
Pyrethrins/
Cats more sensitive to concentrated products;
pyrethroids
tremors, seizures, death
(permethrin in cats)
Acute death unlikely, only possible if several seeds
Sago palm
have been ingested; seizures, liver failure
236
Homemade play-dough ingestion; some use for
Salt (sodium
inducing emesis; seizures, hypernatremia, death
chloride)
possible
Smoke inhalation
History of pet trapped in the house during fire
Mohave rattle snake, eastern rattle snake; acute death
Snake bite
possible
Used as a rodenticide bait; rapid onset, seizures,
Strychnine
hyperthermia, rigidity, death, rapid onset rigor mortis
Tetrodotoxins
Acute death rare; ingestion of dried puffer fish, pet
salamander, paresis, respiratory failure, death
History of being on the beach/swimming;
Water intoxication
hyponateremia, hypochloremia, polydipsia
Acute death due to severe hypoglycemia possible;
Xylitol ingestion
acute liver failure possible 1-3 days after ingestion
Available as gopher bait; vomiting, CNS effects;
Zinc phosphide
acute death with large ingestion possible
Important historical
questions
must include
 animal
signalment (breed, sex, weight, and age); previous medical
history, vaccination history, and any medications the pet
was taking; information regarding other animals present in
the household; timeline of death (i.e., when the pet was last
seen alive, where and when the pet was found dead);
where pet had been in the hours/days prior to death (e.g.,
traveling, beach, park, neighbors, pet sitter, party);
evidence of clinical signs
s (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea,
seizure); number of affected animals (i.e., any other sick
animals in the household); information about the animal's
environment (indoor vs. outdoor, free-roaming vs. fenced),
location (urban vs. rural), time of the year (summer vs.
winter); recent renovations,
 construction or updates;
availability of recreational drugs (amphetamines, cocaine)
or 1
human medications in the animal's environment
(antidepressants,
painkillers,  stimulants,  nutritional
237
supplements,
overmight   visitors 
taking
prescription
medications); the presence of insecticides, flea/tick control
products, herbicides, or rodenticides in the house or yard;
recent visits by pest control or lawn care companies; and
information about presence of indoor or outdoor plants and
lawn/garden fertilizers or chemicals) (Cote and Khan
2005). Information about disputes involving the neighbors
coworkers, family members, or others may help determine
if the death could be malicious.
Table 9.2. Underlying causes of sudden and unexpected
deaths in 151 dogs as reported in the literature
Source: Olsen and A1len 2000
General Cause of Death
Number of Cases % of Total
Heart disease
21.9
Toxicosis
25
16.6
Gastrointestinal disease
20
13.2
Trauma
19
12.6
Hemorrhage not associated with trauma
10
6.6
Malnutrition or dehydration
8
5.5
Respiratory disease
6
4.0
Urogenital disease
5
Central nervous system disease
2
1.3
Peritonitis
2
1.3
Pancreatic disease
2
1.3
Undetermined
19
12.6
Total
151
100
Sample Collection
238
The best way to investigate acute sudden death is by
having a complete necropsy (gross and histopathologic
examination) performed, preferably by a board certified
veterinary pathologist (Volmer and Meerdink 2002). After
obtaining an initial history, multiple digital pictures of the
dead   animal  with  any
/lesions (hemorrhage, mucous
membrane color, broken skin/bones etc.) along with
incriminating agent (if any) and surrounding environment
(plants, chewed-up container, bait, feed, water etc.) should
be taken. Stringent written documentation and chain of
custody protocols should be followed for all potential
medicolegal cases; if necessary, contact local animal
control  or  law  enforcement
t for details on securing
potentiallegal evidence. For shipment to a diagnostic
laboratory, triple-bag the dead animal and ship it to a
diagnostic laboratory on ice or dry ice through an express
mail. Inform the diagnostic laboratory about the shipment
before shipping. Avoid shipping over the weekends or
holidays. Talk to the shipping carrier before shipping the
animal to discuss packaging and labeling requirements.
Table 9.3. Underlying causes of sudden and unexpected
deaths in 79 cats as reported in the literature
Source: Olsen and Allen 2001
General Cause of Death
Number of Cases % of Total
Trauma
31
39.2
Heart disease
16
20.3
Intestinal disease
6
7.6
Respiratory disease
6.3
Urinary tract disease
4
5.1
239
Feline leukemia virus-related disease
3.8
Menengioencephlitis
1.3
Hepatic necrosis
1.3
Sepsis
1
1.3
Hemorrhage not associated with trauma
1.3
Undetermined
10
12.7
Total
79
100.2a
aExceeds 100 due to rounding
Unfortunately, in many situations the options for a
complete necropsy may not be feasible due to economics,
animal
]size,or
shipment
constraints.
 Insuch
circumstances, appropriate postmortem samples should be
obtained from the animal and the environment. Collection
of  inappropriate
 type
or amount of samples, and
inadequate preservation techniques are some of the most
common errors that hinder investigation by diagnostic
laboratories. To avoid cross-contamination, all samples
should be collected in separate containers, properly labeled
with the patient's and owner's name, and dated. For
histopathologic examination, a full set of tissues from all
major organ systems should be cut 4-5 mm thick and
placed in 10% formalin.
Most toxicologic analyses require frozen or refrigerated
samples. Important samples for toxicologic investigations
include liver, kidney, stomach contents, urine, abdominal
fat, brain, heart clot blood and serum, hair, feed, water, or
suspected bait (if available). The preferred anticoagulant
for storage of whole blood is EDTA, although heparin is
also acceptable in some case. Whole blood, serum, or urine
240
samples should be refrigerated or chilled until analyzed.
The amount of samples should be reasonable. Generally,
the larger the amount, the better it may be. You can always
discard the excessive amount or extra samples later if not
needed. Larger amounts can allow the toxicologist to
repeat an analysis, test for additional potential toxicants,
and confirm the results with a different method if
necessary. An entire set of samples must be collected for
obvious or apparent (Casteel and Turk 2002; Volmer and
Meerdink 2002).
Sample Submission
A concise history of events should be submitted to the
diagnostic laboratory along with your request for analyses.
accredited
1 diagnostic laboratory should be utilized
whenever possible. Most laboratories now have websites
that detail sample submission requirements. Discuss cost,
turmaround time, limitations of analytical methods if any,
and
1  interpretations  of  results 
withthediagnostic
toxicologist if needed. The latter is especially important,
because with modern analytical equipment it is possible to
detect a wide variety of compounds at levels far below
those  that   would have  clinical  significance.  The
toxicologist can assist in determining whether the levels
found are consistent with a toxicosis.
CONCLUSION
The sudden death of a companion animal can be an
emotionally challenging time  for animal owners and
241
veterinary staff. It is important that the veterinary staff
understand the steps that need to be taken to investigate the
cause of death so that the right questions can be answered
and the appropriate samples are collected.
CHAPTER 9 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A client brings a dead adult male cat into the
hospital. What is the first step in dealing with this
case?
a.Collect samples for toxicology.
b. Perform a necropsy.
c. Obtain a history.
d. Take radiographs.
e. Draw some blood for a chemistry profile
2. The client says that the cat was a stray that she
and several neighbors had been feeding for several
months. One neighbor had taken the cat to be
neutered and vaccinated 2 months ago, and the cat
appeared generally healthy. The client had fed the
cat last night and he seemed fine; this morming he
was lying dead on her porch. The client called the
neighbors who were helping to feed the cat; no one
saw anything out of the ordinary in the past 24
242
hours, and none had administered medication or
flea control to the cat within the past week. The
client is suspicious that the cat has been
maliciously poisoned and wants to know why the
cat died. A cursory extermal exam of the shows no
lesions or evidence of why the cat may have died.
What is the next step?
a. Collect samples for toxicology
b. Perform a necropsy.
c. Take radiographs.
d. Draw some blood for a chemistry profile.
3. A necropsy is performed and samples are taken
for  histopathology.  Additional   samples   are
collected for toxicology, but are kept at the clinic
pending the results of  the necropsy and
histopathology. What is the preferred means of
storage of these samples until they are ready to be
submitted to the toxicology laboratory?
a. Frozen
b. Refrigerated
c. Fixed in 1o% buffered formalin solution
d. a and b
243
e. a, b, and c
4. The necropsy and histopathology on the cat were
highly suggestive of ethylene glycol (antifreeze)
toxicosis. What is the next step?
a.C all the diagnostic laboratory  to determine
which sample(s) to submit for ethylene glycol.
b.C all animal  control to report a malicious
poisoning.
c.C all the neighbors to see whether they suspect
anyone of poisoning the cat.
5. T he toxicologic analysis of the submitted
samples confirmed the presence of ethylene glycol
in the cat's stomach contents, fat, and kidney. Is
this proof that the cat was maliciously poisoned?
Why or why not?
aoaq m mm p
ma.licious or aocldental.
y lheca ded
Anecrcps holds the best chnce of determining
Nu.Woul  witsed eposue l is l p
L.cObtanahistoryto atemine themostapropriate
course ofinvestigation
4.aLetermine which sanples to sub mit and heve
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Casteel S.W., Turk J.R. 2002. Collapse/sudden death. In
Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd edition, edited by
B.P. Smith, pp. 246-253. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier.
244
Cote E., Khan S.A. 2005. Intoxication versus acute,
nontoxicologic illness: Differentiating the two. Ettinger
and Feldman's Text Book of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
6th edition, pp. 242-245. St. Louis: Elsevier-Saunders.
unexpected death in dogs: A 10-year retrospective study.
Canadian Veterinary Journal 41:873-875.
. 2001. Causes of sudden and unexpected death in
cats: A 10-year retrospective study. Canadian Veterinary
Journal42:61-62.
Volmer P.A., Meerdink G.L. 2002. Diagnostic toxicology
for the small animal practitioner. Veterinary Clinics of
North America Small Animal 32:357-365
245
10
Toxicologic Testing and Using Diagnostic Laboratories
Lisa Murphy
SOURCES
Toxicologic testing may be available at many levels: in the
veterinary clinic (for example, ethylene glycol testing), at a
localor regional
commercial
1veterinarydiagnostic
laboratory, or at a veterinary diagnostic laboratory
associated with a veterinary school or state department of
agriculture. When selecting a diagnostic laboratory the
following criteria should be considered: cost, turnaround
time, experience with the sample type, available detection
limits for the toxicant of concern, quality assurance and
quality  control programs, and
 assistance inthe
interpretation of results (Galey 2004)
The use of specialized instruments and highly trained
personnel  will  often  make  toxicologic  testing  quite
expensive compared to other diagnostic tests routinely
performed for small animal patients. Many laboratories
also charge additional fees for samples that are sent from
another state, so be sure to ask about any additional fees
that may apply.
Turmaround time refers to how long it will generally take
to receive test results once samples arrive at the laboratory.
Since some toxicologic tests may take several days or
sometimes more than a week to complete, it will still be
246
necessary to stabilize, decontaminate, and begin to treat
the patient while waiting for results. Since some analyses
can be completed more quickly, especially if the laboratory
receives prior notice, it is important to contact the
laboratory directly before submitting samples for critically
ill patients.
Common sample types submitted for toxicologic testing in
veterinary medicine include blood, urine, stomach
contents, tissues, food, baits, water, and plant material.
s o i    s  s
type of processing and analysis to detect the same toxic
substance. Not all sample types may be appropriate for
obtaining reliable results for all toxicologic  tests.
Diagnostic laboratories should be able to recommend
which sample types are best or preferred for specific
toxicologic tests.
Detection limits refer to the minimum amount of a toxic
substance that must be present to reliably produce a
positive test result. Detection limits will often be listed on
a diagnostic report as the MDL, the minimum detection
limit or method detection limit. When a toxic substance is
 i nsd aq oi sadde no gs e u pun ro s
very low level below the MDL that is not confirmable, the
result may be reported as either "none detected" or less
than the MDL. If a specific level of detection of a toxicant
is needed for either diagnostic or treatment purposes it is
probably worthwhile to contact the veterinary toxicology
laboratory ahead of time to be sure that its method is able
to adequately provide the desired information.
247
Quality assurance and quality control are the practices
laboratories use to ensure that the results they report are
consistent and accurate. This reliability is typically
accomplished by the use of standard reference materials.
standard data curves, spiked samples, regular use of check
samples, and participation in multilaboratory proficiency
s      sn  in
time, it may be prudent to inquire about its quality
assurance and quality control program.
Once a test has been completed, interpretation of the
results by a trained professional such as a veterinary
toxicologist, can be critical in determining its significance
to the case as a whole and may be used to direct additional
patient care or diagnostic testing. To determine whether a
patient's result is abnormal or diagnostically significant,
something should be known about what "normal" results
are expected to be for an animal of a particular species,
age, or gender. As an example anticoagulant rodenticides
would not be expected to be present in the blood of an
unexposed animal, while a low level of lead in the same
animal's blood could be considered normal and not
expected to be associated with signs of lead toxicity.
Table 10.1. Environmental sample types and amounts for
toxicologic testing
Sample
Amount
Collection/Storage
Type
Method
Human or
 Refrigerate or freeze in a
animal
500 grams (approx imately 2 cups)
well-sealed plastic bag or
foods
con tainer.
248
Refrigerate or freeze in a
Entire amount present up to 500
Baits
well-sealed plastic bag or
grams (approximately 2 cups)
con tainer.
Whole green plant including the
Press or wrap in
roots; a fresh tree, or shrub branch
newspaper, place in a
with leaves (and flowers if
sealed plastic bag, and then
Plants
present); entire mut, fruit, berry, or
send to the diagnostic
other characteristic part of the
laboratory either fresh or
plant
frozen.
Keep relatively cold and
Whole mushroom or as much as
dry in a paper bag to
possible if the only remaining
Mushrooms
reduce moisture
source is from the animal's
accumulation and
vomitus or stomach contents
subsequent spoilage.
Ideally, collect into a new.
0.S -1 L (approximately 2 -4
unused, clean, and dry
Water
cups)
glass container that is free
of any detergent, chemical,
food,or beverage residues
Other
unidentifiedRepresentative amount of what is
 Refrigerate or freeze in a
substances
present up to s00 grams
well-sealed plastic bag or
or
(approximately 2 cups)
con tainer.
medications
An experienced veterinary toxicology laboratory will be
able to provide reliable, accurate, and useful results in a
timely matter.
DIAGNOSTICS
The appropriate selection of diagnostic tests in cases of
suspected intoxications will rely heavily on obtaining a
good case history. Based on the historical information
provided, a veterinary toxicology laboratory's professional
staff should be able to assist veterinary clinics with
questions about which tests should be selected for a given
249
case, the best and appropriate sample types to submit, and
the desirable sample quantities needed to run the requested
analyses
Environmental Samples
Many toxicants cannot be successfully detected in animal
tissues or bodily fluids, so the collection and submission of
environmental samples may be critical to identifying an
animal's access to a potentially toxic substance. Common
environmental samples that could represent sources of
intoxication to small animals include foods, baits, plants.
mushrooms, water, and other unidentified substances or
medications. For a description of typical sample amounts
and how they should be collected, stored, and submitted
for toxicologic testing, see Table 10.1.
Antemortem
Common sample types that can be obtained from a live
patient for toxicology testing include whole blood, serum,
urine, vomitus, stomach contents, feces, biopsy specimens,
and hair. Samples should be obtained preferably at the
earliest feasible opportunity after the animal arrives at the
clinic. If specimens cannot be collected before extensive
or treatments given should be noted as part of the case
history when submitting toxicology samples for testing
Suggested sample amounts and how they should be stored
and transported are described in Table 10.2. The sample
size that can be safely collected from tiny patients such as
neonates and exotic species may be limited. Some form of
toxicologic testing can still be performed in most cases,
250
though the number and types of tests along with the ability
to verify any positive results may be severely limited.
Table 10.2. Suggested antemortem samples for toxicologic
testing
Sample
AmountCollection/Storage Method
Type
Whole blood
24 ml
Refrigerate in calcium EDTA or heparin tube
Spin and refrigerate or freeze the serum in a plain
Serum
2-4 ml
glass or plastic blood tube to separate from the red
blood cells.
Use a special all-plastic royal blue top for accurate
zinc levels.
At least
 Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
Urine
10-20
container.
ml
Vomitus or
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
stomach
10-20
ml
bag or container.
contents
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
Feces
100
bag or container.
grams
Biopsy
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
2-5
specimens
bagorcontainer.
grams
S-10
Place in a clean, tightly sealed plastic bag or
Hair
grams
container.
Table 10.3. Postmortem samples for toxicologic testing
Sample
Amount
Storage Method
Type
Stomach
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
contents
10-20 ml
bag or container.
251
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
Liver
5-10 grams
bag or container.
At least
Kidney
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
5-10 grams
bag or container.
Half of the
Cut in half sagittally, leaving the other half and the
Brain
brain
midlineintact forhistopathology.
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
bag or container.
At least
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
Body fat
S-10 grams
bag or container.
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
Eye
One globe
bag or container; allows testing of either ocular fluid
or retina
Injection
Surrounding
Refrigerate or freeze in a clean, tightly sealed plastic
site
tissue
bag or container
Postmortem
When patients have died as a result of a suspected
        
samples for potential toxicologic testing while awaiting
results of other diagnostic tests such as complete blood
counts,
 serum
chemistries,
gross
necropsies,
 and
histopathology.
These
results
may
provide
valuable
information
about
possible
cause(s)
of
death
and
subsequently what specific toxicologic analyses should be
same household or neighborhood are sick or at risk. In
these cases toxicologic testing may
 be pursued more
quickly when the history and clinical signs observed are
strongly  supportive  of 
or
suspicious for
r poisoning
Common postmortem sample types are described in Table
10.3. Rarely, collection of other post-mortem sample types
may be necessary for the detection of some compounds
252
[ds go p sr  nbd  nssn iun sn qns
testing information can be obtained by consulting with the
toxicology laboratory.
MANAGEMENT OF EXPOSURES
Diagnostic testing should not be substituted for general
patient care and case management. All patients should be
evaluated as individuals and life-threatening signs such as
respiratory  distress,  cardiovascular
compromise, and
central  nervous system  abnormalities  such as seizures
should be addressed first. Once the patient has been
stabilized, diagnostic tests can be performed and specific
care can be provided. Even in the event that diagnostic
toxicologic testing is not readily available, most
intoxicated animals can recover if close monitoring,
symptomatic  treatment,  and  good 
nursing care are
provided.
CHAPTER 10 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Manny, a 6-year-old, intact male, 65-pound
German shepherd dog, presents to the veterinary
hospital with a history of vomiting and muscle
tremors that began about 2 hours ago. Prior to
development of signs, Manny had been roaming
free on the owner's farm. The owners are
concerned that Manny may have gotten into the
shed that houses the farm pesticides. They also
noted that Manny was seen digging in the compost
253
pile in the pasture. Besides blood or serum, list two
   n  a  ss 
aid in diagnosis.
2. For each of the two samples selected in Question
1, indicate the amount to collect and the besi
method of storage/handling of the sample for
submission to a diagnostic laboratory.
3. Which of the following is not correct regarding
diagnostic toxicology samples?
a. Freezing or refrigeration is an acceptable means
of preserving samples prior to submission to the
diagnostic laboratory.
b. Veterinary diagnostic laboratory personnel can
assist the veterinary technician in determining the
best test and sample for a particular suspected
toxicology case.
c. When determining whether a laboratory result is
clinically significant, the diagnostic toxicologist
will compare the result with a range of "normal'
values.
d. Toxicology testing should always be the first
step in attempting to diagnose the cause of death in
a suspected poisoning case.
254
e. Environmental samples that may be submitted in
a suspected toxicology case include animal foods,
plants, mushrooms, and water.
4. Which of the following is true regarding the
MDL (minimum detection limit)?
a. Refers to the minimum amount of toxicant in an
animal that will cause a toxicosis
b. Refers to the highest amount of toxicant that the
diagnostic test can detect in a sample
c. Refers to the minimum amount of a toxic
sub-stance that must be present to reliably produce
a positive test result
d. Refers to the lowest level of toxicant that will be
toxic to a particular animal
e. Refers to the smallest amount of a nontoxicant
(i.e., contaminant) that will give a false positive
result
5. The appropriate selection of diagnostic tests in
cases of suspected intoxications will rely heavily
on
the
diagnostic    laboratory   obtaining
a. An adequate blood sample
255
b. A good case history
c. A freshly dead animal
d. Frequent calls from the veterinary clinic asking
for results
e. Payment in advance
for a particular case.
what ki nd of te stin g wou ld be most appropriate
5.b.A good case history is essential in knowing
4.C
c an ts to a naly ze for.
in order to help naro w down the potential tox i-
3.d.In most cases to xico logy testing should be per-
sealed plastic container.
container. Feces, submit at leas 100g and
erated or frozen ina clean,tightly sealed plastic
collect at leas 10-20ml or g and sub mit re frig-
plastic container. Vomitus (stomach contents）,
re figerated or froze n in a clean, tightly sealed
Urine,collect at least 10-20ml and submit
Urine, vomitu s (stomach content), fece s.
ANSWERS
REFERENCE
256
Galey, Frank D. 2004. Diagnostic Toxicology. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
22-27.St. Louis: Mosby.
257
Section 2
A Systems-Affected Approach to Toxicology
258
11
Nervous System
Tina Wismer
INTRODUCTION
The nervous system is a target for an extremely large
number of toxic agents including drugs, environmental and
industrial chemicals, and “natural
 products such as
bacterial toxins and animal venoms (Tables 11.1-l1.4).
  s       
system's protective blood-brain
barrier  and   cause
neurologic dysfunction. Many agents that affect the
nervous system, especially psychotropic drugs, exert their
effects through biochemical mechanisms that do not leave
any telltale clinical pathologic changes or anatomic lesions
to aid in diagnosis in animals experiencing a toxicosis.
Because the nervous system has a limited number of
responses to injury, the clinical effects of toxicoses
affecting nervous system function will resemble effects
from other causes of neurologic dysfunction such as
infectious, metabolic, traumatic, and neoplastic injury.
Definitive diagnosis of nervous system toxicosis can
therefore be quite challenging
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
The nervous system encompasses both the central nervous
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS)
The CNS coordinates the activity of all parts of the body
259
and consists of the brain and spinal cord. The PNS
connects the CNS with the limbs and organs.
The basic functional unit of the nervous system is the
neuron. Neurons initiate and conduct nerve stimuli. The
basic structure of a neuron contains the body (soma),
dendrites, and axons. The dendrites are short branches off
the body that receive stimuli from other neurons and
transmit it to the soma. The axon carries impulses away
from the soma, and is often covered by myelin, a fatlike
substance that increases the speed of impulse conduction
(Spencer 2000). Nervous impulses cross the synapses
between neurons by the release of chemicals termed
neurotransmitters (Anthony et al. 2o01). Neurotransmitters
include   acetylcholine,  catecholamines 
(dopamine,
norepinephrine, epinephrine), amino acid derivatives
(serotonin, gamma amino butyric acid or GABA, glycine,
histamine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid), and various other
neuropeptides  (substance
 P,  orexins, endorphins,
vasopressin, thyroidreleasing hormone) (Beasley 1999;
Spencer 2000)
Neurotransmitters can be excitatory and/or inhibitory.
Excitatory
  neurotransmitters   stimulate   postsynaptic
make less likely) the transmission of an impulse
Acetylcholine is both excitatory and inhibitory. It has
inhibitory effects on the heart but stimulatory effects on
other organs. The catecholamines are hormones that are
released by the adrenal glands in reaction to stress.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine are associated with the
sympathetic nervous system (fight or flight response).
Dopamine is found in the brain and affects muscle control
260
and autonomic functions. GABA is the main inhibitory
neurotransmitter.  GABA  regulates  neuronal  excitability
throughout the nervous system. Glycine is also an
inhibitory  neurotransmitter  found  in  the  spinal  cord,
brainstem, and retina.
The major protective mechanism in the CNS is the
blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier forms a "wall
between capillaries in the brain and the nervous tissue. The
tight junctions allow small molecules and lipid soluble
molecules to enter easily, but keep other substances out of
the brain. The PNS is not protected by the blood-brain
barrier, leaving it exposed to toxicants.
Table 11.1. Pesticides
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous
System
4-aminopyridine (Avitrol@)
Stimulation, tremors, seizures
Amitraz
Depressant
Anticholinesterase insecticides
Seizures
(organophosphates, carbamates)
Weakness, ataxia, tremors,
Avermectins (ivermectin,moxidectin)
seizures, coma
Stimulant at high doses;
Bromethalin
depressant at low doses
3-chloro-p-toluidine hydrochloride
Depressant, weakness, paralysis
(Starlicide?)
DEET (diethyltoluamide)
Seizures
Metaldehyde
Seizures, tremors
Organochlorine insecticides (lindane,
Seizures
DDT)
Pyrethrins
Tremors
261
In termittent seizures,
Sodium fluoroactate (1080)
stimulation
Strychnine
Seizures
Zinc phosphide
Ataxia,seizures
Table 11.2. Biologic agents
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
Asclepias spp. (Milkweed)
Weakness, tremors, seizures
Atropa belladonna (Deadly
Tremors, paralysis, hallucinations
nightshade, Belladonna)
Black widow spider
Flaccid paralysis
envenomation
Blue-green algae (amatox in-a,
Tremors,seizures
anatoxin-a[s]
Botulism
Flaccid paralysis
Brunfelsia spp. (Yesterday,
Tremors (can last for weeks), seizures
Today,and Tomorrow)
Calycanthus spp. (Bubby bush)
Seizures
 Depressant, atax ia, coma; possible
Cannabis sativa (Marijuana)
agitation
Cicuta spp. (Water hemlock)
Seizures
Initial stimulation, followed by
Con ium spp. (Poison hemlock)
depressive signs
Coral snake envenomation
Ataxia, tremors, paralysis
Datura spp. (Jimsonweed, Angel
Tremors, paralysis, hallucinations 
(adunn s,
Depressant, ataxia, weakness, tremors;
Essential oils
seizures with large doses
Eupatorium rugosum (White
Tremors, ataxia, stiff gait, weakness
snakeroot)
Ipomoea spp. (Morning glory)
Stimulation,hallucinations
262
Initial stimulation,followed by
Lobelia spp. (Lobelia)
depressive signs
Initial stimulation, followed by
Lupinus spp. (Lupine)
depressive signs
Macadamia muts
Weakness, tremors (dogs only)
Alternating CNS stimulation and
Mushrooms, isoxazole
depression
Mushrooms,
Tremors, seizures, coma
monomethylhydrazines
Mushrooms, psychedelic
Ataxia, tremors, hallucinations
Nerium oleander(Oleander)
Tremors, seizures
Nicotine (cigarettes, Nicotiana
Initial stimulation, followed by
spp.)
depressive signs
Tetanus
Muscle rigidity
Tick paralysis
Weakness, paralysis
Tremorgenic mycotox ins
Tremors,seizures
(Penitrem A, roquefortine)
Table 11.3. Pharmaceuticals
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the
Nervous System
Amphetamines (Ritalin?, Adderall?, crack
Stimulation
methamphetamine, MDMA)
Antihistamines (diphenhydramine,
Stimulant at high doses;
hydroxyzine, loratadine)
depressant at low doses
Atropine
Seizures with high doses
Barbiturates (phenobarbital)
Depressant
Depressant, ataxia, rarely
Benzodiazepines (diazepam, alprazolam)
agitation
Bromide
Depressant, weakness, atax ia
Stimulant at high doses;
Bupropion (Wellbutrin?)
depressant at low doses
263
Stimulant at high doses;
Buspirone
depressant at low doses
Cocaine
Stimulation
Stimulant at high doses;
Cyproheptadine
depressant at low doses
Decongestants (pseudoephedrine,
Stimulation
phenylephrine, Ma huang, ephedra)
S-fluorouracil (Efudex ?)
Seizures
General anesthetics (isoflurane, halothane,
Depressant
propofol)
Seizures, coma with high
Ibuprofen
doses
Isoniazid
Seizures
Lithium
Seizures
Local anesthetics (lidocaine, benzocaine)
Seizures with high doses
LSD
Stimulation, hallucinations
Stimulant at high doses;
MAO inhibitors (Anipryl@)
depressant at low doses
Methylxanthines (caffeine, theobromine.
Stimulation
theophylline)
Stimulant at high doses;
Mirtazepine (Remeron@)
depressant at low doses
Stimulant at high doses;
Nefazadone, trazodone
depressant at low doses
Opiates (hydrocodone, morphine, codeine,
 Depressant; rarely agitation
butorphanol, tramadol)
and seizures
Phenothiazines (acepromazine,
Depressant
chlorpromazine)
Piperazine
Ataxia, tremors
Salicylates
Seizures with high doses
Serotonergic drugs (Prozac@, Paxil@,
Stimulant at high doses;
S-hydroxytryptophan, Effexor@)
depressant at low doses
264
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline,
Stimulant at high doses;
clomipramine)
depressant at low doses
Table 11.4. Nonmedicinal agents
Toxicant
Possible Effect on the Nervous System
Alcohol
Depressant
Carbon monoxide
Depressant, weakness, ataxia
Ethylene glycol
Depressant effect, ataxia, tremors, seizures
Lead
Intermittent stimulation and depression
Liver toxicants
Secondary to hepatic encephalopathy
Organic alkyl mercury
 Blindness, ataxia, paralysis, coma
Phenol
Tremors, seizures with large doses
Propylene glycol
Depressant effects, atax ia, seizures
Sodium
Tremors, seizures
Thiaminase(raw fish)
 Depression, ataxia, paresis
Thallium
Tremors, weakness, seizures
Turpentine
Depressant, weakness, ataxia, coma
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGICINJURY
In small animal toxicology, most toxicants work directly
on the neurons or affect the release and/or binding of
neurotransmitters.
Toxicant-induced
alteration
of
neurotransmitters can result in stimulation or inhibition of
postsynaptic neurons, resulting in excitatory or depressive
clinical effects depending on the type of neurotransmitter
affected, type of postsynaptic
neuron, and amount of
neurotransmitter and
1receptors
involved. For instance,
CNS stimulation (manifested as hyperactivity, agitation
and/or seizures) may be caused by increasing the synaptic
levels of an excitatory neurotransmitter (e.g., stimulation
265
of acetylcholine release by organophosphorus insecticides)
or by decreasing the synaptic levels of an inhibitory
neurotransmitter  (e.g.,  strychnine-induced  decrease  in
glycine neurotransmission).
The brain is very susceptible to injury because it requires a
blood flow for an organ of relatively small mass. Hypoxia
is a common cause of neuronal injury. It may be secondary
to systemic hypotension, cerebral infarction, vascular
injury, or oxygen deprivation. Respiratory compromise
many toxic exposures causing alterations of consciousness
(Anthony et al. 200l). Brain damage can also occur
secondary to hypoglycemia. During periods of low blood
sugar, neuronal damage to dentate and granule cells
occurs. Hypoglycemia can result in either cerebral cortex
or brainstem deficits. Other mechanisms of toxicologic
injury to the nervous system include ion balance disruption
(excessive    intracellular    accumulation   of   calcium),
cytoskeleton damage, decreased protein synthesis (loss of
rough endoplasmic reticulum), and glial  cell damage
(Anthony et al. 2001).
Disruption or dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier may
result in normally excluded compounds entering the CNS.
PATTERNSOFTOXICOLOGICINJURY
Toxicological insults to the nervous system produce a wide
range of clinical signs when compared to other organ
systems. Toxicants can affect multiple areas of the nervous
266
system depending on the dose, route of exposure, and
species of animal. To make diagnosis more difficult,
toxicants can cause a progression of clinical signs (e.g.,
initial CNS depression, followed by CNS stimulation).
Many neurotoxicants effect neurotransmission and leave
no obvious lesions. Functional neurotoxicants can affect
the CNS, PNS, and autonomic nervous system (ANS).
They act by preventing synthesis, storage, release, binding,
reuptake, or degradation of neurotransmitters. Functional
neurotoxicants may also interfere with axonal transmission
via sodium, potassium, chloride or calcium channels, and
alter action potentials (Spencer 2000)
There  are  a few  structural
 changes  caused    by
neurotoxicants. These include neuronopathy, anoxopathy.
and
1  myelinopathy.   In  neuronopathy, neurotoxicants
directly target the cell body, causing cell death and
secondary axonal degeneration. The response to the loss of
neurons is gliosis, proliferation of astrocytes, and/or
microgilial cells (Anthony et al. 200l). Neuronopathies
can be selective or diffuse.
In axonopathy, in contrast to neuronopathy, the neuronal
cell body remains intact, but the portion of the axon distal
to the lesiondegenerates
(Wallerian degeneration)
(Mandella 2002). Histologic changes can be seen in the
Nissl substance. These  changes include  chromatolysis
(dissolution of the Nissl substance) as well as movement of
the nucleus to the periphery of the cell body. Neurons with
axons of the greatest length are most susceptible to axonal
damage.
267
Myelinopathy occurs when toxicants cause a loss of
myelin (demyelination) or edema in the myelin sheath and
subsequent separation of myelin layers. This slows down
nerve transmission.
HEALINGANDREPAIR
Damage to the nervous system is frequently irreversible
because the adult neuron does not divide. With peripheral
neuronopathies the prognosis for at least partial
regeneration is good. However, this is not true in the CNS.
Central neuronopathies, with few exceptions, are not
reversible.
In axonopathies, glial cells debride the area. The cell body
death. If the cell body does not die, axonal regrowth may
demyelination can be seen with axonal injury (Mandella
2002). Remyelination can occur in some cases, more often
in the PNS than in the CNS.
CHAPTER 11 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Many psychotropic drugs alter nervous system
function  by changing
g  the   brain   biochemistry
through alterations of
a. Hormones
268
b. Neurotransmitters
c. Cytokines
d. Tight junctions
e. Glial cells
2. The functional unit of the nervous system is the
composed of
that receive
stimuli from other cells,
that carry
impulses away from the cell body, and the cell
body, also known as the
a. Soma, dendrites, axons, neuron
b. Dendrites, soma, axons, neuron
c. Neuron, axons, dendrites, soma
d. Neuron, dendrites, axons, soma
e. Soma, axons, dendrites, neuron
3. GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter within
the CNS. The most significant effect of inhibition
of the action of GABA would be expected to be
a. CNS depression and coma
b. CNS stimulation and seizures
269
c. Fight or flight response
d. Corticosteroid release
e. Immunosuppression
4. The blood-brain barrier
a. Keeps all foreign compounds out of the CNS
regardless of size
b. Protects the CNS and PNS from entry of
 potentially damaging compounds
c. Repels negatively charged compounds, keeping
them from entering the nervous system
d. Is readily traversed by inflammatory cells
e. Is composed of tight junctions that allow the
passage   of  small  molecules  and lipid-soluble
5. Which of the following is not a potential cause
of brain injury?
a. Hypoglycemia
b. Hypoxia
c. Blood-brain barrier disruption
270
d. Disruption of ion balance
e. All of the above are potential causes of brain
injury.
十
3.b.Inhibition of CNS inhibitory neurotransmitters
and the soma, or cell body.
receive stimuli, ax ons that transmit impu lse s
2.dThe neuron is composed of dendrites that
1.b.Neurotransmitters
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Douglas C. Anthony, Thomas J. Montine, William M.
Valentine, Doyle G. Graham. 2001. Toxic responses of the
nervous system." In Casarett & Doull's Toxicology: The
Basic Science of Poisons, 6th ed., edited by Curtis D.
Klassen, pp. 535-563. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Val R.
Beasley.
1999.
Veterinary
Toxicology.
International
Veterinary
Information
Service.
www.ivis.org/advances/Beasley/toc.asp.
Rosemary C. Mandella. 2002. Applied neurotoxicology. In
Handbook of Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael J.
271
Derelanko, Mannfred A. Hollinger, pp. 371-399. Boca
Raton: CRC Press.
Peter S. Spencer. 2000. Biological principles of chemical
neurotoxicity.
In
 Experimental
 and
Clinical
Neurotoxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Peter S. Spencer,
Herbert H. chaumburg, pp. 3-54. New York: Oxford
University Press.
272
12
Cardiovascular System
Karla R.Smith
INTRODUCTION
Cardiovascular toxicity can be broadly defined as adverse
effects on the heart and blood vessels following exposure
to toxic agents. These toxicants can produce direct or
indirect effects on the heart and/or vascular system. Agents
       e  
(cardiotonic or positive inotropic effect), may increase the
rate of contraction (positive chronotropic effect), or may
have cardiac depressant effects (negative inotropic or
chronotropic effects).
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The cardiovascular system can be divided into two
categories: the heart and the blood vessels. The heart is
made up of two large pumps; the right and left ventricle,
which work in concert to pump blood through the blood
vessels.
The right ventricle pumps blood through the lungs where it
is oxygenated. The left ventricle pumps blood through the
systemic circulation. The smaller pumps, the right and left
atria, move blood into their associated ventricles. The right
atrium houses the sinoatrial (SA) node, which is
responsible for initiating cardiac impulses.
273
Electrical impulses begin in the SA node and are
transmitted throughout the atria, causing them to contract
and force blood into the ventricles. When the electrical
impulse reaches the atrioventricular (AV) node, there is a
slight delay in conduction, which allows complete filling
of the ventricles before the impulse is transmitted
throughout the ventricles via the AV bundle and Purkinje
fibers (Fox et al. 1999).
The cardiac muscle (myocardium) does the work of the
heart. The myocardium is a type of involuntary striated
muscle found only in the walls of the heart. It shares some
similarities with skeletal muscle but is unique in many
ways. The striations observed in cardiac muscle are due to
altermating thick (myosin) and thin (actin) protein
filaments. It is the sliding of actin filaments past myosin
filaments that causes contraction of the myocardium. This
action requires both ATP and an adequate concentration of
sodium and calcium (Kittleson and Kienle 1998).
The blood vessels make up the circulatory system, which
transports blood throughout the body.  The arteries
transport blood away from the heart, the capillaries are
small vessels that allow the exchange of oxygen and
nutrients and connect the arterial and venous sides of the
vascular system, and the veins transport blood back toward
the heart. The blood vessels have limited ability to
contribute to forward blood flow. Arteries can regulate
their inner diameter by contraction or relaxation of the
vascular smooth muscle layer. This vasoconstriction or
cardiovascular toxicity, contributing to hypertension or
hypotension. All blood vessels are lined with endothelial
274
cells that interface between circulating blood and the
vessel wall. The endothelial cells have multiple functions,
including helping to control blood pressure and forming
specialized barriers, such as the blood brain barrier.
MECHANISMS OF TOXICINJURY TOTHEHEART
Toxicologic injury to the cardiovascular system may
develop by either direct or indirect means. Direct means
or biomechanical properties of the heart and vascular
system. An example would be the tricyclic antidepressant
clomipramine, which inhibits myocardial sodium channels,
leading to cardiac dysrhythmias. Indirect toxicity arises
when the cardiovascular system is secondarily affected by
toxicosis to another body system. For example, ingestion
of bromodialone, an anticoagulant rodenticide, can cause
significant blood loss leading to hypovolemic shock. The
fall in blood volume causes a drop in systemic blood
pressure.  Reflex   vasoconstriction   causes    splenic
contraction in an effort to increase the circulating blood
volume, and the heart rate elevates as the heart attempts to
move the remaining blood through the circulatory system
more rapidly.
PATTERNS OF TOXIC INJURY TO THE HEART
Direct Myocardial Injury
Some toxicants can cause degeneration and necrosis of the
myocardium, either by direct injury to the myocardial cells
or by hemodynamic alterations resulting  in ischemic
injury. Depending on the toxicant, the pattern of injury on
275
the heart can vary from small areas of necrosis to massive
necrosis of the myocardium, resulting in congestive heart
failure (CHF), cardiomyopathy, conduction disturbances.
or death. Areas of myocardial necrosis will appear as pale
spots or streaks in the heart muscle; older lesions may be
more pronounced due to fibrosis or mineralization. Agents
pue shop un Ainfu [eipiooa jo ada stul asno uo pe
cats include doxorubicin, thallium, sodium fluoroacetate (a
pesticide also known as 1080), and minoxidil (DeClementi
et al. 2004).
Conduction Disturbances
It is important to recognize when specific cardiac
arrhythmias and ECG findings may be related to exposure
to a cardiotoxic agent. Three mechanisms contribute to
production and maintenance of arrhythmias: (1) abnormal
impulse initiation, (2) abnormal triggered rhythms, and (3)
abnormal   impulse   conduction.
Toxicantscausing
myocardial conduction disturbances leave few to no
lesions in the heart unless significant cardiac ischemia
occurs during the toxicosis, in which case areas of
myocardial necrosis may be identifiable.
increased automaticity of  the atrial or  ventricular
myocardial cells unassociated with the SA or AV nodes.
This area is generally referred to as an ectopic focus. If the
firing rate of the ectopic focus is greater than the SA node,
the ectopic focus will become the predominant pacemaker
of the heart. The drugs digitoxin and digoxin are digitalis
glycosides, which are used in both human and veterinary
medicine to treat congestive heart failure and atrial
276
fibrillation. They act by depressing the rate of cardiac
impulses initiated by the SA node, and increasing
intracellular calcium, leading to slower and more forceful
cardiac contraction. While they are effective drugs used in
treating atrial fibrillation commonly seen with dilated
cardiomyopathy, they have a narrow margin of safety, with
both acute and chronic toxicity being observed. Toxic
doses cause marked slowing of conduction through the AV
node, potentially allowing an ectopic focus to take over as
the prominent pacemaker of the heart. Increased
intracellular calcium can also cause cardiac arrhythmias to
develop. Clinicalsigns typically include ventricular
tachycardia and preventricular contractions.
Abnormal triggered rhythms occur from either potassium
channel blockade  or intracellular calcium overload
Barium salts, which are used to create green colors in
fireworks, cause intracellular trapping of potassium along
with cardiac dysrhythmias, including preventricular
contractions, ventricular tachycardia, or bradycardia
Abnormal  impulse  conduction  occurs  when  electrical
 n   a n a ssn
that, due to ischemia, disease, or toxicant exposure is not
appropriately able to conduct these impulses. When these
impulses are completely blocked, bradyarrhythmias may
occur. Slow conduction may trigger a reentry circuit,
causing either supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia
The sympathomimetic drug phenylpropanolamine has been
shown to cause myocardial necrosis when ingested at toxic
doses. This myocardial necrosis may  be partially
responsible for arrhythmias seen following toxicity (Pentel
et al. 1987).
277
CARDIOTOXIC AGENTS
Many substances cause cardiac toxic responses directly or
indirectly. However, the next section will focus on drugs
that have primary cardiac toxicity.
Calcium Channel Blockers
There are several classes of calcium channel blocking
drugs that are currently in use in both human and
veterinary medicine. The formulations most likely to be
encountered in a clinical veterinary medicine setting are
verapamil, amlodipine, nifedipine, and diltiazem. These
drugs   are  used
to
0treat angina, supraventricular
arrhythmias, and myocardial infarction in humans and
supraventricular   
arrhythmias,
hypertension,  and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  in domestic pets.  The
calcium channel blockers affect both the myocardium and
cardiac pacemaker cells. Ultimately there is slowing of
impulse initiation by the SA node, conduction through the
AV node, and decreased cardiac contractility. Clinical
signs of overdose may include hypotension, bradycardia or
tachycardia, heart block or other arrhythmias, electrolyte
imbalances, vomiting, and lethargy.
Beta-adrenergic Blocking Agents
The beta-blocking drugs act by inhibiting catecholamine
binding to beta receptors in the heart, kidneys, and
vascular smooth muscle. They are common drugs, used to
treat hypertension, tachycardia, congestive heart failure,
and glaucoma. Formulations include atenolol, esmolol.
metoprolol, and propranolol. Overdose of a beta-blocking
278
agent is most likely to cause hypotension, bradycardia and
metabolic acidosis.
Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme
Inhibitors
(ACE
Inhibitors)
The ACE inhibitor enalapril is often one of the first drugs
administered to dogs suffering from CHF, hypertension, or
valvular disease. The ACE inhibitors work by blocking
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor
and mediator of sodium reabsorption in the kidneys.
Ultimately this leads to increased blood volume and blood
pressure. By blocking angiotensin II the ACE inhibitors
lower blood pressure. In an overdose situation the primary
concern is for hypotension.
Angiotensin II Antagonists
The angiotenisn II antagonists are very similar to the ACE
inhibitors but are not used in veterinary medicine. They are
used to treat hypertension by blocking the vasoconstricting
effects of angiotensin II. Clinical signs in small animal
patients are not expected to be severe, but they may
include    hypotension   and    reflex    tachycardia.   The
angiotensin II antagonists will also act synergistically with
ACE inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and beta
blockers to cause hypotension.
Cardiac Glycosides
Digoxin and digitoxin are used in veterinary medicine to
treat CHF, atrial fibrillation, and supraventricular
tachycardias. The glycosides act by increasing intracellular
279
calcium concentrations, leading to increased myocardial
contractility. They also decrease conduction through the
AV node, slowing the heart rate and allowing for more
complete filling of the ventricles. Digoxin and digitoxin
have narrow
therapeutic indices, meaning that the
therapeutic dose and toxic dose are very close together. In
      s  g s
or acute toxicity from these agents. Clinical signs may
include those related to the cardiovascular system, such as
heart block, tachycardia, or preventricular contractions.
Other clinical signs may include gastrointestinal upset,
depression, and electrolyte changes.
Pimobendan
Pimobendan is a selective phosphodiesterase (PDE) IHI
It has positive inotropic and vasodilator effects, leading to
increased cardiac output and reduction in systemic
vascular resistance. Pimobendan appears to have a wide
margin of safety, with tachycardia, lethargy, and
hypotension being the most  common clinical signs
associated with overdose.
Sympathomimetics
The sympathomimetics have been available as a drug class
since the lst century AD when Pliny used ephedrine to
treat bleeding. Sympathomimetics currently  used in
veterinary medicine include phenylpropanolamine (PPA),
albuterol, dopamine, ketamine, and terbutaline. Pet owners
may have sympathomimetics in their houses either legally
1n
the
form
 methylphenidate (Ritalin?),
280
dextroamphetamine  (Adderall?), pseudoephedrine and
phenylephrine or illegally in the form of cocaine or
methamphetamine.
Sympathomimetics  are  defined  as  catecholamine-like
substances that have physiologic actions similar to those
observed with activation of the sympathetic nervous
system. They have an overall excitatory effect on the heart,
and those formulations that cross the blood brain barrier
cause CNS stimulation. In general signs of overdose
include   mydriasis,  tachycardia,
hypertension,  and
agitation.
In large overdoses, phenylpropanolamine may cause such
  xa   is 
develop rather than the expected tachycardia (Hoffman and
Nelson 2005). Phenylpropanolamine has also been shown
to cause focal cardiac necrosis when administered to rats at
Methylxanthines
Theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine are naturally
occurring plant alkaloids. They are found in food
(chocolate) and drinks (colas) for human consumption,
over-the- counter medications that promote wakefulness,
and as therapeutic agents to treat asthma. Clinical signs of
methylxanthine
overdose
may include  tachycardia,
premature ventricular contractions, and hypotension.
Ingestion of medications containing both caffeine and
ephedrine (a sympathomimetic) can cause hemorrhagic
myocardial necrosis (Nyska et al. 2005).
281
MECHANISMSOF TOXIC INJURYTO THE
VASCULAR SYSTEM
The potential for toxic injury to the vascular system may
be underestimated  in  veterinary medicine when it is
considered that all toxicants, following absorption, contact
the vascular system. The vascular endothelial cells are
frequently the immediate target of toxic agents, followed
by the vascular smooth muscle cells. Both of these cells
types are metabolically active, and systems present in these
cells may bioactivate some toxicants. Oxygen-derived free
radicals  formed
during
bioactivation may
imjure
      
Toxicants can also cause alterations in the structure of the
vessels. Hypertonic intravenous solutions can cause the
endothelial cells  to  shrink,  leading
toincreased
permeability (Weddle and Morgan 2004).
Cholecalciferol
Cholecalciferol or vitamin D3 is the most common agent
seen in veterinary medicine that does significant, lasting
damage to the vascular system. Cholecalciferol (or its
analogues) can be found in rodenticides, vitamins, and
prescription creams
for
r  the treatment of psoriasis.
Cholecalciferol overdose causes an increase in serum
calcium and phosphorus levels due to increased renal
tubular reabsorption
1 of calcium, increased intestinal
absorption of calcium, and increased release of calcium
from bone. This excess calcium and phosphorus in the
blood causes deposition of these minerals within the
vascular wall. The vessel then becomes hard and rigid, and
sudden death may result (Weddle and Morgan 2004).
282
Carbon Monoxide
Small animal patients may be exposed to carbon monoxide
due to accidental exposures to automobile exhaust or
household fires. Short-term exposure to carbon monoxide
can cause direct damage to vascular endothelial cells and
smooth muscle cells. Carbon monoxide also causes a direct
vasodilatory response on coronary circulation. The primary
toxic effect of carbon monoxide is due to its reversible
interaction  with hemoglobin. It binds preferentially  to
hemoglobin, impairing oxygen delivery, which leads to
cellular hypoxia (Ramos et al. 2001). Clinical signs in the
pet may include tachycardia, dyspnea, lethargy. and coma.
CONCLUSION
Ultimately any toxic exposure may cause some effect on
the cardiovascular system, and an important aspect of
managingtoxicosis
isproviding
gsupport tothe
cardiovascular system. This typically includes intravenous
fluid therapy and appropriate drugs to regulate heart rate
and blood pressure.
CHAPTER 12 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. A cardiac drug that increases the rate of heart
contraction and decreases the strength of heari
contraction would be classified as
a. Negative chronotrope, positive inotrope
283
b. Negative chronotrope, negative inotrope
c. Positive chronotrope, positive inotrope
d. Positive chronotrope, negative inotrope
e. Cardiotonic
2.
. Cardiac electrical  impulses stimulate the
coordinated contraction of myocardial cells. These
impulses are initiated by the
a. Interventricular node
b. Sinoatrial node
c. Submandibular node
d. Atrioventricular node
e. Popliteal node
3. Missy, a 12-pound, 2-year-old, spayed female
Maltese presents with lethargy, vomiting, and
weakness. Her body temperature is 98 ° F, her
heart rate is 65, and her mean arterial blood
pressure (MAP) is 55 mmHg. Missy's condition is
best described as
a. Hypothermic, bradycardic, hypotensive
284
b. Hyperthermic, bradycardic, hypertensive
c. Hypothermic, tachycardic, hypotensive
d. Hyperthermic, tachycardic, hypertensive
e. Hypothermic, tachycardic, normotensive
4. Missy's owner is concermed that the dog may
have ingested one of the husband's heart
medications. She is able to tell you the general
class of drugs that her husband takes. Which of the
following is LEAST likely to be responsible for
Missy's condition.
a. Beta blocker
b. Calcium channel blocker
c. Cardiac glycoside
d. Sympathomimetic
e. ACE inhibitor
5.
Cholecalciferol   rodenticides   affect
the
cardiovascular system by
a. Causing massive blood loss through disruption
of normal blood coagulation.
285
b. Causing direct myocardial necrosis and fibrosis.
c. Causing mineralization within the walls of blood
vessels.
d. Causing necrosis of pulmonary endothelial cells,
resulting in pulmonary edema.
e. Causing dilation of peripheral vessels, resulting
in hypotension.
5.C.
lants, so they would be expected to cause
4.d Sympatomimetics are cardiovasc ular stimu-
her heart rate are all below normal.
3.aMissy'sbody temperature,blood pressure,and
tiation of myocardial contiaction.
The sinoatrial (SA) node is responsible for ini-
inotropes).
increase the force of co ntraction (i.e.,positive
refers to force of contraction.Cardiotonic drugs
1.d Chronotropy refers to heart rate and inotropy
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Camille DeClementi, Keith L. Bailey, S.C. Goldstein, and
M.S. Orser. 2004. Suspected toxicosis after topical
administration of minoxidil in 2 cats. Journal of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care 14(4):287-292
286
Philip R. Fox, David Sisson, and N. Sydney Moise. 1999.
Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology Principles and
Clinical Practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
Company.
Robert J.  Hoffman and Lewis S. Nelson. 2005.
Sympathomimetic agents. In Critical Care Toxicology
Diagnosis and Management of the Critically Poisoned
Patient, edited by Jeffrey Brent et al. pp. 465-473.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Mosby.
Mark Kittleson and Richard D. Kienle. 1998. Small Animal
Cardiovascular Medicine. St. Louis: Mosby.
Abraham Nyska et al. 2005. Acute hemorrhagic
myocardial necrosis and sudden death of rats exposed to a
combination of  ephedrine and  caffeine. Toxicological
Sciences 83(2): 388-396.
Paul R. Pentel, Jeffrey Jentzen, and Jenny Siever. 1987.
Myocardial necrosis due to intraperitoneal administration
of phenylpropanolamine in rats. Fundamental and Applied
Toxicology 9:167-172.
Kenneth S. Ramos, J. Kevin Kerzee, Napoleon F.
Alejandro, and Kim P. Lu. 2001. Vascular toxicity: A
cellular  and  molecular  perspective.  In  Cardiovascular
Toxicology, edited by Daniel Acosta Jr. pp. 479-524.
London: Taylor and Francis.
Diann L.  Weddle and Sherry J.  Morgan. 2004.
Cardiovascular System. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology,
edited by Konnie H. Plumlee. pp. 48-54 St. Louis: Mosby.
287
13
Pulmonary System
John
A.
Pickrell,
Kiran
Dhakal,
and Sharon
Gwaltney-Brant
INTRODUCTION
Inhalation toxicology refers to the pulmonary route of
exposure; pulmonary toxicity refers to toxicity to the lung
Lung toxicity is most commonly caused by inhaling
airborne poisons, but some toxicants can locate primarily
in the lung from other exposure routes (e.g., paraquat from
oral exposure) and cause lung toxicity. In addition to the
lung, inhaled toxicants can cause injury in other areas of
the respiratory tract such as the nasal cavity or conducting
airways.
ANATOMYANDPHYSIOLOGY
Anatomy of the Respiratory Tract
The nares are the extermal openings into the nasal cavity.
The nares lead to the nasal cavity, which is largely filled
with the nasal turbinates, which moisten and warm inhaled
air as well as filter out larger particulates. The nasal cavity
is lined by ciliated and olfactory epithelium. Air passes
through the nasal cavity into the nasopharynx. The
nasopharynx is lined by pseudostratified columnar ciliated
epithelium with goblet cells (Dungworth 1993). The
eustachian tubes extend from the middle ear to the nasal
288
cavity (Dungworth 1993). Many animals, especially horses
and small laboratory rodents, are obligate nose breathers.
Other animals, such as dogs and cats, can breathe with
either their nose or mouth. Brachycephalic dog breeds
have a variety of upper respiratory abnormalities that can
result in respiratory compromise, including stenotic nares,
elongated soft palate, and hyperplastic tongue (Dupre
2009).
Conducting airways consist of trachea, bronchi, and
progressively smaller generations of bronchioles as the
airways extend deeper into the lung. Animals performing
for speed have progressively larger diameter airways to
accommodate additional needed airflow. Some toy and
brachycephalic dogs
S may  have  hypoplastic
and/or
collapsing tracheas that limit airflow and contribute to
respiratory  compromise
(Dupre
2009).  Terminal
bronchioles lead to alveoli, where gas exchange with blood
occurs. All of the airways but the alveoli are lined with
ciliated   and   nonciliated
pseudostratified    columnar
epithelial cells with a few goblet cells interspersed
(Dungworth 1993). Mucus secreted by these cells traps
inhaled particulates, and ciliary action propels the mucus
and particulates upward toward the pharynx, where they
 o n so  os  n  
alveolar epithelia are type II epithelial cells, which make
the surfactant that forms a single layer and keeps the
alveoli open and functioning. Release of significant serum
protein will flood the alveoli (edema), reduce surfactant
function,and allow the alveoli to stick together
(atelectasis).
Deposition of Inhaled Particulates
289
Inhaled particulates that are >5 micrometers in diameter
deposit in the nasopharyngeal region and larger conducting
airways (Witschi et al. 2008). Smaller particles are
transported to the deeper airways and alveoli; those
deposited in bronchioles are phagocytized by bronchiolar
macrophages, which travel via the mucociliary escalator to
the pharynx, whereas those entering the alveoli are
interstitium or local lymph nodes.
TRACT INJURY
Respiratory toxicants can exert their adverse effects to the
respiratory tract in a variety of ways (Woods and Wilson
2004). Displacement asphyxia results when gases such as
methane, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen displace oxygen in
the immediate environment, resulting in hypoxia and
hypoxemia. Gases that interfere with oxygen transport in
the blood or oxygen release to tissues, such as cyanide or
carbon monoxide, cause asphyxia in the presence of
adequate environmental oxygen. Many inhaled toxicants
exert their effect through irritation of the respiratory
mucosa, resulting in damage to respiratory epithelium.
Inhalation of respiratory irritants can result in loss of
mucosal cells and breakdown of the protective barriers
(e.g.,  mucociliary
escalator）within
theairways.
Respiratory irritants that reach the alveoli can damage
alveolar epithelium, resulting in loss of surfactant and
atelectasis; in severe cases, necrosis of alveolar cells can
result in leakage of serum or blood into alveoli and lower
airways. Loss of alveolar surface area results in decreased
290
lung via the blood and may cause damage to the alveolar
capillaries, resulting in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Other bloodborne toxicants cause damage to alveolar
epithelial cells. Damage to alveolar epithelium or alveolar
capillary endothelium may not manifest until several hours
after the toxic insult, resulting in a delay in the onset of
pulmonary edema of up to 24 hours following exposure to
the toxicant (Smith 2005).Table 13.1
listssome
respiratory toxicants and their action on the respiratory
tract.
HEALING AND REPAIR
Epithelial Hyperplasia
Healing by epithelial hyperplasia (primary intent) is quite
frequently the normal course of events following lung
microinjury. In the smallest of these injuries, epithelial
rearrangement is so successful that the tissue seems
entirely normal. Function is normal and no veterinary
intervention is needed.
Fibrosis
Healing by secondary intent, often called “pulmonary
fibrosis,” may
  be  either   reversible  or  irreversible
depending on the degree of injury to the lung. When lung
injury is too high, or intense or persists too long to heal
spontaneously (e.g., with high levels of paraquat),
fibroblasts will attempt to fill the void caused by death of
the alveolar  epithelial cells. Fibroblast  proliferation
impairs gas exchange, making a portion of the lung
volume less functional than normal. If minimal to
291
moderate alterations in pulmonary architecture are present
the lung will spontaneously resolve (Pickrell et al. 1983).
If greater alterations have been made to pulmonary
architecture in response to high levels of alveolar damage,
the interstitial fibrosis may become irreversible and form
dense fibrous scars (Pickrell et al. 1 983). The clinical
implication of this change depends on the amount of lung
tissue that is lost. In the case of paraquat, for example, the
pulmonary injury tends to be progressive and ultimately
the patient dies of asphyxia as fibrous connective tissue
replaces functional lung tissue.
Table 13.1. Respiratory toxicants
Mechanism
Toxicant
Displacement asphyxiation
Carbon dioxide
Methane
Natural gas
Nitrogen gas
Oxygen transport
Carbon monoxide
asphyxiation
Cyanide
Airway irritation
Ammonia
Chlorine
Phosphine(zinc/aluminum phosphide)
Increased bronchial
Anticholinesterase insecticides
secretions
Muscarinic mushrooms (<i>Clitocybe,
Inocybe</i>)
Pneumonia, aspiration
Hydrocarbons
Iatrogenic (e.g., barium, activated charcoal)
Pulmonary edema
Chlorine
292
Cisplatin (cats)
Paraquat
Pine oil
Sulfluryl fluoride(Vikane?)
Pulmonary fibrosis
Paraquat
Emphysema
Emphysema has been defined as enlarged air space with
tissue destruction (Pickrell 2007; Witschi et al. 2008). Loss
of gas exchange membrane, specifically alveolar capillary
membrane, causes a reduction in the gas exchange area; as
the alveoli collapse, air spaces become distended and
irregular, and the possibility of trapping air increases. This
makes it difficult to get enough air to exchange (sometimes
place in these alveoli. It is even more difficult to expel the
air once it is in the distended alveoli. Clinically, dyspnea
with forced expirations will be present. Emphysema is
usually a progressive, ultimately terminal, condition as the
airways continue to deteriorate over time.
LUNG CANCER
 In humans, it has been estimated that 80%-90% of all lung
tumors are caused by inhaling cigarette smoke (Witschi et
al. 2 008). Dogs are companion animals that live with their
owners over long periods of time. The most frequent
tumors in dogs are mammary tumors, which may
metastasize to the lung. Spontaneous lung tumors in
companion animals such as dogs are much less frequent.
293
Although infrequent, some dogs have developed either
s umo ma mi pasodxa suaq iae sio sunl so [es
second-hand cigarette smoke (Reif et al. 1992). These
malignant. Dogs with long noses (dolichocephalic breeds)
deposit the tumor-causing (carcinogenic) particles in the
nasal  cavity and develop nasal  carcinomas.  Dogs  with
shorter noses (brachycephalic breeds) allow the cigarette
smoke particles to deposit in the upper airways and
develop bronchogenic carcinomas (Reifet al. 1992).
CHAPTER 13 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. The function of the mucociliary escalator of the
respiratory tree is to
a. Filter out particulates to prevent them from
entering deeper into the lung.
b. Move trapped particulates up the respiratory tree
to the pharyngeal area where they are coughed up
or swallowed.
c. Move particulate matter deeper into the bronchi
where the particulates are engulfed by bronchiolar
macrophages.
d. Move particulates to the rostral nasal area, where
they are sneezed out.
294
e. Prevent aspiration pneumonia by moving inhaled
ingesta out of the lungs.
2. Small particulates entering  the pulmonary
alveoli undergo which fate?
a. The particulates are moved up the respiratory
tree via the mucociliary escalator.
b. The particulates cross the alveolar wall and enter
the bloodstream.
c. The particulates are translocated to the alveolar
interstitium, where they reside for the life of the
animal.
d. The particulates are coughed up out of the lung
to the pharyngeal area where they are swallowed.
e. The particulates are engulfed by pulmonary
macrophages.
3. Direct injury to the respiratory tissues can result
in all of the following except
a. Loss of alveolar surfactant
b. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
c. Dysfunction of mucociliatory escalator
295
d. Displacement asphyxia
e. Atelectasis
4. Alterations to the respiratory system following
injury may be reversible or permanent. Which of
the following is a reversible change?
a. Nasal carcinoma
b. Epithelial hyperplasia
c. Pulmonary fibrosis
d. Emphysema
e. Tracheal stricture
cino ma are perm ane nt changes.
or trac heal stricture), emphysema and nasal car-
re versible chan ge. Fibrosis (pul monary fibrosis
Hyperplasia is an increase in cell numbers
hypo xic env ironme nt.
as methane displaces oxygen,resulting in a
Displacement asphyxia cccurs when a gas such
3.d.
mac rophages.
intraalveolar
bypulmonary
areremoved
Particulates that manage to reach the alveoli
1.b.
ANSWERS
296
REFERENCES
Dungworth, D. 1993. The respiratory system. In Pathology
of Domestic Animals, 4th ed., edited by K.V.F. Jubb, P.C.
Kennedy, and N. Palmer, pp. 539-699. New York:
Academic Press.
Dupre, G.P. 2009. Brachycephalic obstructive syndrome:
diagnosis and underlying pathology. Proceedings of the
BritishSmallAnimalVeterinaryCongress.Vienna,
Austria.
Pickrell, JA. 2007. Respiratory toxicity. In Veterinary
Toxicology, Basic and Clinical Principles, edited by
Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 193-205. New York: Elsevier.
Pickrell, John A., Diel, J.H., Slauson, D.O., Halliwell
W.H., and Mauderly, JL. 1983. Radiation-induced
are not formed. Experimental and Molecular Pathology
38(1): 22-32.
Reif, J.S., Dunn, K., Ogilvie, G.K., and Harris, C.K. 1992.
Passive smoking and canine lung cancer risk. American
Journal ofEpidemiology 135(3):234-239.
Smith, Dorsett D. 2005. Irritant and toxic respiratory
injuries. In Critical Care Toxicology, edited by Jeffrey
Brent et al., pp. 1011-1028. Philidelphia: Mosby-Elsevier.
Witschi, HansPeter, Pinkerton, Kent E., Van Winkle,
Laura S., and Last, Jerold A. 2008. Toxic responses of the
respiratory system. In Casarett and Doull's Toxicology
297
the Basic Science of Poisons, 6th ed., edited by Curtis D.
Klaasen, pp. 609-630. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
Woods, Leslie W. and Wilson, Dennis W. 2004.
Respiratory System. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology,
edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 80-88. St. Louis:
Mosby.
298
14
Hepatobiliary System
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The liver is situated in the proximal-most area of the
peritoneal cavity immediately distal to the diaphragm and
is divided into grossly distinguishable lobes. Closely
associated with the ventral aspect of the liver in the dog
and cat is the gall bladder. The liver plays a critical role in
a variety of functions including nutrient homeostasis.
filtration of particulates, protein synthesis, bioactivation,
and detoxification, formation of bile and biliary secretion
(Jaeschke 2008). Hepatic injury due to chemicals and
drugs is the most common cause of acute liver failure in
humans in the United States and is the leading cause of
regulatory action against drugs (Watkins and Seef 2006).
Epidemiologic studies into the incidence of drug- and
chemical-induced liver injury in animals is lacking, but as
the number of pharmaceuticals, neutraceuticals, and
"'natural" remedies for our companion animals increases, it
is likely that the incidence of drug-induced liver injuries in
companion animals will also increase.
Understanding the toxicologic changes that can occur in
the liver requires understanding of its structural and
functional anatomy. When viewed microscopically, the
liver appears to be composed of hexagonal lobules
surrounding a central blood vessel (central vein) and
299
bordered by six portal triads at the outer edge of each
lobule; each portal triad consists of a branch from each of
the hepatic artery, portal vein, and bile duct (Figure 14.1).
Between  the portal  triads and central
veinare
single-cell-wide cords of hepatocytes arranged radially
around the central vein. Between the hepatocellular cords.
sinusoids carry blood from the portal triads to the central
vein. In this lobule model of the liver, the lobule is divided
into three areas: the centrilobular region surrounding the
central vein, the periportal region at the periphery of the
lobule that incorporates the portal triads, and the midzonal
region between the centrilobular and periportal regions.
Pathology reports on liver histology frequently use these
From a functional point of view, the hepatic lobule can be
divided differently based on the flow of blood as it passes
through the liver. Blood enters the liver lobule through
branches of the hepatic artery (carrying oxygen) and the
portal  vein  (carrying
nutrientsandotherabsorbed
compounds, including toxicants, from the gastrointestinal
tract) of the portal triads. The blood then filters within the
sinusoids along the cords of hepatocytes until emptying
into the central vein, giving up oxygen and picking up
wastes as it passes from triad to central vein. Using the
acinar model of the liver, the acinus is centered on a line
from portal triad to portal triad. The area immediately
around this line is termed Zone I and is equivalent to the
periportal region. Zone 2 is equivalent to the midzonal
region and Zone 3 is equivalent to the centrilobular region.
Zone 1 receives blood with the highest oxygen and nutrient
content, and Zone 3 is relatively oxygen and nutrient
depleted. For instance, blood in Zone 1 contains
300
approximately 9%-13% 0xygen compared to 4%-5% in
Zone 3 (Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007)
From a toxicological perspective, the acinar model tends to
be more relevant because it can help predict where in the
liver toxicant-induced damage may occur (Table 14.1).
Toxicants that are directly injurious to cells (e.g., iron
salts, white phosphorus) will cause damage to the first
hepatocytes they encounter, thus injury from these types of
toxicants appears primarily in Zone 1 (periportal). Zone 3
contains a higher level of cytochrome P450 metabolic
enzymes, making this area most prone to injury from
compounds that are bioactivated by these enzymes (e.g.-
acetaminophen).   Some
toxicants
can
produce
hepatocellular injury so severe that zonal patterms are lost
as the entire lobule undergoes massive necrosis, with
necrosis extending from portal triads to central veins.
Figure 14.1. Schematic illustration of the microanatomy of
the liver. Each hexagon represents a hepatic lobule
centered around a central vein with portal triads at the
periphery. The portal triads are each composed of a portal
vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct. The central lobule is
divided into the three anatomic and functional zones: Zone
1 or periportal region, Zone 2 or midzonal region, and
Zone 3 or centrilobular region.
301
O
Porta Tilac:
Hepetric Artary
CentalVeln
Purla Vein1
Bile Duct
In contrast to blood flow through the hepatic acinus, bile
flows from the canaliculi between hepatocytes into
channels that empty into the bile ducts within the portal
triad; these bile ducts in turn empty into the gall bladder,
which stores and concentrates bile prior to emptying the
bile into the duodenum (Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007). Bile
is a complex mixture of bile acids, phospholipids, proteins,
and other compounds that is important in the uptake of
lipids from the small intestine, protection of the small
intestine from oxidative injury, and the excretion of
endogenous and xenobiotic compounds (Jaeschke 2008).
Biliary excretion is an important route of elimination for
certain xenobiotics (e.g., ivermectin, naproxen in dogs)
that are poorly excreted through the urine. Compounds
excreted through the bile may undergo enterohepatic
recirculation whereby the compound that is excreted into
302
the duodenum from the bile duct is then reabsorbed and
reenters the portal and systemic circulations. Compounds
that undergo enterohepatic recirculation  tend  to have
half-lives that are measured in days rather than hours. For
example, naproxen in humans is eliminated primarily
through the kidneys and has a half-life of about 6 hours. In
dogs, naproxen is eliminated through the bile, undergoes
enterohepatic recycling and has a half-life of 74 hours
(Frey and Rieh 1981; Talcott 2006)
Table 14.1. Patterns of hepatotoxicity
Sources: Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007, Haschek et al. 2007.
Causes ofNonzonal HepaticInjury
NSAIDs
Cyclophosphamide
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Sulfonamides
Ketoconazole
CausesofZoneI(Periportal)HepaticInjury
Aflatoxin
Iron salts
Organic arsenic
White phosphorus
Causes of Zone 2 (Midzonal) Hepatic Injury
Cisplatin
Hexachlorophene (cats)
Causes of Zone 3 (Centrilobular) Hepatic Injury
Acetaminophen
303
Aflatoxin
Blue-green algae
Castor bean (Ricinus)
Chloroform
Cycad palms (Cycas, Zamia)
Diazepam (cats)
Hepatotoxic mushrooms (e.g.,Amanita phalloides) Naphthaene
NSAIDs (e.g., carprofen, ibuprofen)
Phenols
Xylitol
Causes of Massive Hepatic Necrosis
Acetaminophen
Cisplatin
Cycad palms (Cycas, Zamia)
Diazepam (cats)
Iron
Mebendazole (dogs)
Microcystin LR (Microcystis aernuginosa)
MECHANISMS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
The mechanisms behind hepatic injury can be divided into
two categories: intrinsic and idiosyncratic. Intrinsic liver
injury  is a dose-dependent, predictable reaction  to a
toxicant and it is the most common type of liver injury in
animals (Bischoff and Ramaiah 2007). There is frequently
a predictable latent period between exposure to  the
toxicant and the development of clinical signs of liver
insufficiency. Intrinsic liver injury is often caused by
highly  reactive by-products  of  xenobiotic metabolism,
especially free radicals and electrophiles. Idiosyncratic
304
liver injury is an unpredictable response to a xenobiotic
Idiosyncratic reactions are rare and non-dose-dependent
and may   be  associated  with
 extrahepatic lesions
Idiosyncratic  reactions
frequently
occur following
unremarkable initial exposure (sensitization) and manifest
upon reexposure to the xenobiotic. With idiosyncratic drug
reactions, it is not uncommon for there to be a delay of a
few weeks to several months between the time of initial
exposure and development of liver injury. Extrahepatic
changes may include fever and dermal erythema or rash.
Free Radical-Induced Injury
The generation of free radicals within hepatocytes can
occur  during
xenobiotic  biotransformation, normal
metabolic   processes
  involving 
 oxidation/reduction
reactions, inflammatory states (mediated by nitric oxide
(NO)), and exposure to ionizing radiation (Bischoff and
Ramaiah 2007). Free radicals have unpaired electrons,
which make them highly susceptible to binding to other
macromolecules, including lipoproteins of cell membranes,
enzymatic proteins, and DNA. Binding of free radicals to
cellular macromolecules generates even more free radical
production, resulting in an escalating effect. Normally cells
have scavenger molecules (e.g., glutathione) to react with
and detoxify free radicals, but excessive free radical
production can result in depletion of scavenger stores,
resulting in increased binding of free radicals to vital
cellular structures. Free radical damage can cause
alterations of cell membrane permeability, inactivation of
membrane associated proteins, and loss of polarity to
mitochondrial membranes.   Inactivation  of  enzymatic
proteins can interfere with normal cellular metabolism,
305
leading to cellular degeneration or necrosis. Free
radical-induced DNA damage can result in interference
with transcription or translation, resulting in decreased
protein synthesis.
Calcium Homeostasis Disruption
Within the cell, calcium is sequestered within organelles
such as mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, which
maintain a relatively low level of calcium within the
cytosol. Xenobiotics that interfere with the pumps that
maintain calcium balance can result in increased release of
calcium into the cytosol. The released calcium ions impede
normal  cytoskeletal function and activate a  variety of
cytosolic enzymes including ATPases, phospholipases and
proteases.   Subsequently,   mitochondrial   membrane
permeability increases, which causes induction of necrosis
and apoptosis (programmed cell death) (Bischoff and
Ramaiah 2007).
Mitochondrial Injury
Mitochondria are the source of energy production within
the cell, and toxicants that disrupt mitochondrial function
can result in cell death. Toxicants induce mitochondrial
injury by altering mitochondrial DNA, interfering with
oxidative   phosphorylation,   damaging  mitochondrial
membranes, or inactivating mitochondrial enzymes.
Cytoskeletal Disruption
The cytoskeleton of the cell is vital to maintaining normal
shape and position of hepatocytes. Agents that damage
306
cytoskeletal structure result in cellular deformation and
detachment. The blue-green algae toxin microcystin-LR,
produced by Microcystis aeruginosa causes hepatocellular
cytoskeletal injury and severe liver damage (Haschek et al.
2007).
Cholestasis
Toxicants that interfere with bile transport can result in
cholestasis, leading to injury to biliary ducts and
hepatocytes. Bile duct hyperplasia and biliary fibrosis may
result.   Cholestasis   can    also
occur  secondary to
hepatocellular swelling due to degeneration or lipidosis.
Clinically, cholestatic disorders can result in dermal
photosensitization, whereby areas of skin exposed to the
sun develop burms similar to sunburn. Epidermal and
dermal burns from photosensitization are rapid in onset
and occur following exposure to wavelengths of light that
would cause no injury in normal animals. Animals with
white areas on their haircoats and upigmented skin are
most susceptible to photosensitization. In veterinary
medicine, photosensitization is more commonly seen in
large animals grazing plants that cause bile stasis, but it
has occasionally been reported in dogs with hepatic injury.
Idiosyncratic Reactions
Many idiosyncratic drug reactions are considered to be
immune-mediated, triggered by the formation of adducts
of reactive drug metabolites with cellular macromolecules
These adducts are identified by the immune system as
foreign, and an immune response is mounted, leading to
death of individual hepatocytes ("piecemeal necrosis").
307
This mechanism has been postulated, but not proven, as
the  mechanism 
by
which
  the  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory   drug  carprofen  causes  idiosyncratic
liver injury in dogs (McPhail et al. 1998). The exact
mechanisms of other types of idiosyncratic liver injury
await further study to be elucidated
PATTERNS OF TOXICOLOGIC INJURY
Toxic  hepatic  injury  can  manifest  as hepatocellular
degeneration, hepatocellular necrosis, immune-mediated
injury, biliary disorders, and sinusoidal disorders
Hepatocellular Degeneration
Hepatocellular degeneration is a common, nonspecific
response of the liver to toxic insult. Hepatocellular
degeneration represents a sublethal insult to the liver that
can often resolve if the inciting cause is removed.
Although some cellular processes may be altered, the
degenerative hepatocyte  still retains  some degree of
functional
 integrity.
Degenerating
 hepatocytes   are
generallyswollen
and
mayaccumulatevarious
compounds, including metals, pigments, water, and lipids.
It is important to realize that in most situations the
accumulation of these compounds is a result of some form
of hepatocellular dysfunction rather than the primary cause
of hepatocellular degeneration.
Hepatic Lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis (steatosis, fatty liver) is a form of
hepatocellular degeneration characterized by accumulation
308
of lipid within the hepatocyte cytosol. Lipidosis can be the
result of transient disruptions in lipid metabolism, or it can
reflect a more serious metabolic condition. Severe lipid
accumulation can result in sufficient hepatocellular
swelling to cause cholestasis.
Hepatocellular Necrosis or Apoptosis
of hepatocytes with the difference being that apoptosis is a
controlled, orderly “shutdown" of cellular processes
leading to death of the cell. Necrosis occurs when cells are
subject to insurmountable insults resulting in loss of
cellular membrane  integrity and disruption of cellular
machinery. What follows is cellular swelling, leakage of
cellular    contents
into
 adjacent
t environment,
disintegration of nuclear material and an influx of
inflammatory cells to remove cellular debris (Jaeschke
2008). Because the necrotizing insult is generally locally
intense, whole groups of hepatocytes, as well as support
structures, may be affected. In contrast, apoptosis results
when enzymes termed caspases trigger the activation of
varlous
cytosolic
and
nuclear
enzymesthat
compartmentalize cellular structures and proceed to shut
down cellular activity. Apoptotic cells are shrunken, with
condensed cytosol and fragmented nuclei that pinch off
along with the cell membrane (which has remained intact)
to form apoptotic bodies. Apoptotic bodies are then
phagocytized by hepatic macrophages (Kuppfer cells) or
inflammatory response. Apoptosis is the means by which
normal tissues eliminate unneeded or senescent cells, and
it generally affects single cells. Apoptosis can be triggered
309
by a variety of external stimuli, including ionizing
radiation, (
drugs(NSAIDs,(
 corticosteroids),  and
physiologic conditions such as stress.
HEALING AND REPAIR
The liver has a tremendous capacity for regeneration—so
much so that human liver transplants can be done from
liver lobes donated by living donors. Following successful
    i  s
regenerate sufficient hepatic parenchyma to have normal
liver function. As with most organs that have regenerative
ability, the capacity to regenerate is dependent upon the
retention of the basic tissue scaffold. Conditions that result
in loss of this scaffold can result in hepatic healing via
fibrosis instead. Fibrosis occurs most commonly along the
terminal plates at the edges of the hepatic lobule and
surrounding the central vein. Fibrous tissue that bridges
between portal triad and central vein can result in loss of
functional integrity of the acinus. Regenerative nodules of
hepatocytes within bands of fibrous tissue are often
disconnected from access to central veins and are
minimally functional. Cirrhosis is the term in human
medicine for the end-stage form of liver injury, with
irregular patches of fibrous tissue surrounding rounded
nodules of hepatocytes.
Although the liver has a high regenerative capacity,
massive acute loss of hepatocytes can result in death from
liver failure if insufficient hepatocytes remain to allow the
to begin to function.
310
CHAPTER 14 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Milo, a 2-year-old, 135-pound, neutered male St.
Bernard dog has been successfully treated for acute
hepatic insuffi ciency. A liver biopsy had been
 r p da od a p 
was substantial centrilobular necrosis. All of the
following toxicants are potential causes for Milo's
liver injury except
a. Iron
b. Blue-green algae
c. Acetaminophen
d. Hepatotoxic mushrooms
e. Xylitol
2. In what way does enterohepatic recirculation
alter the kinetics of a xenobiotic?
a. Increases elimination
b. Increases absorption
c. Shortens the half-life
d. Lengthens the half-life
311
e. Enhances metabolism
3. Intrinsic liver injury is characterized by all of the
following except
 a. Dose-dependent
b. Predictable latent period
c. Rare in animals
d. Often caused by free radicals and electrophiles
e. Predictable clinical course
4. Blue-green algae induce liver injury by which of
the following mechanisms?
a. Free radical formation
b. Disruption of calcium homeostasis
c. Cytoskeletal damage
d. Immune-mediated mechanisms
e. Cholestasis
312
of he patocytes resulting in cytosk eletal failure.
liver injury iden tified in anima ls.
Intrinsi c liverinjuryis themostcommon type of
life of a xenobiotic.
Enterohepatic recirculation increases the half-
in the liver.
1a. Iron causes primarily periportal or Zone 1injury
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Bischoff, Karen and Ramaiah, Sashi K. 2007. Liver
toxicity.In Veterinary Toxicology:Basic and Clinical
Principles, edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 145-160. New
York: Elsevier.
Frey, H.H. and Rieh, B. 1981. Pharmacokinetics of
naproxen in the dog. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 42(9):1615-1617.
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig
Matthew A. 2007.The liver.InFundamentals of
Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp. 197-235. San Diego:
Academic Press-Elsevier.
Jaeschke, Hartmut. 2008. Toxic responses of the liver. In
Casarett and Doull' s Toxicology, the Basic Science of
Poisons, 6th ed., edited by Curtis D. Klaasen, pp. 557-582.
New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.
313
McPhail, C.M., Lappin, M.R., Meyer, D.J., Smith, S.G.,
Webster, C.R., and Armstrong, P.J. 1998. Hepatocellular
toxicosis associated with administration of carprofen in 21
dogs.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association 212(12):1895-1901.
Moeller, Robert B. 2004. Hepatobiliary system: Toxic
response of the hepatobiliary system. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
61-68. St. Louis: Mosby.
Plumlee,  Konnie H.  2004. Hepatobiliary system:
differential diagnosis. In Veterinary Clinical Toxicology,
edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, p. 61. St. Louis: Mosby.
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antinflammatories.
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E.
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Watkins, P.B., Seef, L.B. 2006. Drug-induced liver injury:
summary of a single topic clinical research conference.
Hepatology 43:618-631.
314
15
Urinary System
ErinFreed
INTRODUCTION
This chapter focuses on the basic anatomy and physiology
of the urinary system, the mechanisms and patterns of
toxicological injury including common toxic substances
that affect the urinary system, and the healing and repair
after toxicological damage.
ANATOMY ANDPHYSIOLOGY
The urinary system of dogs and cats consists of the
kidneys, ureters, bladder, and the urethra. The function of
the urinary system is to filter blood, reabsorb important
nutrients, and eliminate wastes in the form of urine. The
kidneys regulate the amount of water reabsorbed and
excreted, maintain the pH of the blood, and control the
concentration of electrolytes (Na, K, Ca, and Cl), proteins,
and hormones in the blood. Additionally, the kidneys
secrete hormones that regulate blood pressure, water
balance, red blood cell production, and calcium
homeostasis (Haschek et al. 2007).
The kidneys receive approximately 25% of the cardiac
output and can be divided into three main parts: the outer
cortex, which receives 90% of the renal blood flow; the
medulla, which receives 6%-10% of blood flow; and the
315
renal papilla, which receives 1%-2% of the total renal
blood flow.
The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron, which is
composed of a glomerulus, proximal convoluted tubule,
loop of Henle, distal tubule, and collecting duct. The
glomerulus is composed of an anastomosing tuft of
fenestrated endothelial cells that form a filter for the blood,
with the initial filtrate flowing into Bowman’ s space
surrounding the glomerulus and progressing into the
proximal tubule. The renal tubules reabsorb 60%-80% of
the filtered solute, including water, electrolytes, glucose,
amino acids, small peptides, and organic acids. In the
medulla, the loops of Henle play a major role in the
concentration of urine and maintenance of the blood' s
electrolyte balance. The filtrate then passes into collecting
ducts, which control the excretion rates of electrolytes and
urea as well as further maintain acid/ base and water
balances. The renal papilla empties the urine through the
renal pelvis into the ureters. From the ureters the urine
passes into the bladder where it is stored until it is excreted
through the urethra
Renal function is largely measured clinically by the serum
renal markers blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine;
due to reserve capacity of the kidney, approximately
50%-75% of nephrons must be damaged before these
values become significantly elevated. Azotemia, the term
for elevations of serum BUN and creatinine, can occur due
to prerenal, renal, and postrenal causes. Prerenal azotemia
is most commonly the result of dehydration and occurs
without renal insufficiency. Renal azotemia is caused by
kidney dysfunction, generally due to injury by infectious,
316
metabolic, toxic, or neoplastic processes. Postrenal
azotemia is usually associated with obstruction of urine
outflow (e.g., bladder “stones"), resulting in a back
pressure of urine within the kidney that decreases
glomerular filtration. Determination of whether azotemia is
prerenal, renal, or postrenal is essential to aid in diagnosis
and therapeutic management of the patient. When
azotemia is present along with the clinical signs associated
with renal failure (vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding,
gastritis, oliguria/anuria/polyuria), the condition is termed
uremia.
MECHANISMSOFTOXICOLOGICALINJURY
Renal tubular injury is the most common form of
nephrotoxic insult in animals (Haschek et al. 2007).
Tubular damage may result from direct injury to the
epithelial cells by the toxicant or its metabolites, from
mechanical obstruction of the tubules, from mineralization
of the basement membrane, or from ischemia due to
vasoconstriction of renal blood vessels. Toxicants such as
lead, arsenic, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and many
epithelium. Renal epithelium, particularly in the proximal
tubules, contains high levels of metabolic enzymes that can
detoxify some compounds present in the filtrate. However,
other compounds (e.g., diquat, acetaminophen) can be
bioactivated into toxic metabolites by these same enzymes
and result in injury to the epithelial cells. Pigments such as
hemoglobin (e.g., due to intravascular hemolysis from zinc
toxicosis) or myoglobin (e.g., due to muscle damage from
monensin toxicosis in dogs) are also directly injurious to
renal tubular epithelium.
317
Some toxicants will result in the precipitation of crystals
into the urine as the tubular filtrate becomes more
concentrated. Overdoses of drugs such as penicillins.
cephalosporins, and acyclovir may result in transient
crystalluria, and the crystals can cause mild epithelial
damage, which is usually reversible. Tubular obstruction
by calcium oxalate crystals is a major cause of renal injury
in ethylene glycol intoxication; however, direct tubular
epithelial injury due to acidosis also contributes to lesions
seen
in ethylene
glycol
1 toxicosis.  Mineralization
(deposition of calcium) of renal tubules can result from
hypercalcemia associated with some toxicoses (e.g.,
cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis) and can also occur as
a sequel of uremia. Mineralization along the tubular
basement membrane, within epithelial cells, and within
renal blood vessels (impeding blood flow) results in
degeneration and necrosis of tubular epithelial cells, cell
sloughing, and decreased tubular regenerative ability
Agents that cause vasoconstriction can impede glomerular
filtration as well as cause ischemic damage to the renal
tubules. The renal papilla is especially susceptible to
ischemic injury because it normally receives only 1% of
total renal blood flow, but any portion of the nephron may
be affected.  Nonsteroidal
 anti-inflammatory
drugs
(NSAIDs; e.g., ibuprofen, aspirin, phenylbutazone)
decrease prostaglandin levels within the kidney, decreasing
prostaglandin mediated vasodilation and resulting in vessel
constriction (Sebastian et al. 2007). Other agents (e.g., the
antifungal  amphotericin  B)  induce  vasoconstriction  by
direct interaction with renal arterioles (Sawaya et al.
1995)
318
reabsorption, resulting in dilute urine (isosthenuria) due to
loss of concentrating ability, as well as spillage of amino
acids, glucose, small peptides, and other solutes into the
urine. Polyuria will occur unless the tubules become
obstructed by swollen tubular epithelium, crystals,
sloughed epithelial cells, pigments, or other debris; in
these instances oliguria or anuria can occur. When
blockages occur, increased tubular pressure counteracts the
capillary hydrostatic pressure in the glomerulus, resulting
in further decrease in glomerular filtration. A nephron that
has damaged tubules can leak filtrate into the systemic
circulation, contributing to azotemia as BUN and
creatinine are reintroduced into the bloodstream from the
damaged tubules.
PATTERNS OF TOXICOLOGICAL INJURY
Nephrotoxic agents can cause renal insufficiency that may
progress to acute renal failure (ARF) or chronic renal
failure (CRF) depending on the toxicant involved, dose,
and duration of exposure. ARF often results from exposure
to a relatively high dose of a nephrotoxic agent, causing
sudden loss of kidney function, whereas CRF tends to
occur more insidiously and may be the result of repeated
insults to the kidney (e.g., from repeated exposures to
nephrotoxins over time) or it may reflect progression of
acute disease. An individual may be more or less
susceptible to toxic renal damage due to genetic factors,
age, prior renal disease, general overall health, or
concurrent medication administration. Patients with CRF
oftentimes adapt to their renal disease and may maintain a
relatively normal clinical appearance for quite some time
319
in spite of fairly high elevations of serum BUN and
creatinine (compensated CRF). Generally, these patients
display polyuric renal failure and are able to maintain
themselves, provided they have access to adequate fresh
water in order to compensate for the increased fluid losses.
However, with progression of the renal disease or sudden
change in hydration status, these patients may suddenly
decompensate and present with clinical signs similar to an
ARF patient.
Because of its high blood flow, high metabolic activity and
concentration of  wastes,  the kidney  is  especially
susceptible to toxic injury. While the glomeruli and
proximal tubules are exposed to large amounts of
bloodborne toxicants, the more distal aspects of the
nephron and lower urinary tract are exposed to higher
concentrations of toxicants for a greater period of time as a
result of accumulation of toxicants within tubular lumens
Renal toxicants may cause glomerular damage, resulting in
a decrease in glomerular filtration and resulting in
azotemia, or increasing the "pore” size of the glomerular
filter resulting in the leakage of proteins into the urine.
Renal toxicants affecting glomeruli are rare in animals,
although some rattlesnake venoms have been associated
with glomerular injury (Fitzgerald and Rumbeiha 2004).
Their relatively high metabolic activity, high content of
metabolic enzymes, and closer proximity to glomerular
filtrate make the proximal tubules more susceptible to a
wider range of toxicants than the rest of the nephron
(Sebastian et al. 2007). In domestic animals, the proximal
renal
tubulesaremost
 commonly affected
[by
320
nephrotoxicants, although the distribution of tubular
lesions can vary depending on the toxicant involved. For
example, tubular injury from melamine:cyanuric acid
crystals, the lesion seen in kidneys of animals affected by
melaminecontaminated pet foods in the U.S. in 2007, tends
to occur in the distal tubules and collecting ducts, whereas
calcium oxalate crystals from ethylene glycol metabolism
tend to affect primarily the proximal tubules (Puschner et
al. 2007). In nephrons undergoing degeneration necrosis.
affected tubular cells will swell (degeneration) and then
shrink and slough. Cellular debris from damaged tubules
manifests as granular casts in the urine sediment
Damage to the renal papilla can disrupt loops of Henle.
resulting in loss of urine-concentrating ability as well as
electrolyte imbalances.
Toxic damage to the distal areas of the urinary tract—renal
pelvis,  ureters,  urethra,  and  bladder—is  relatively
uncommon. The rapid flushing of urine through the pelvis.
ureters, and urethra may explain their relative resistance to
toxicologic injury. The urinary bladder, because it stores
urine, has occasionally been associated with syndromes
arising from toxicants (e.g., cyclophosphamide-induced
Cystitis).
HEALING AND REPAIR OF THE URINARY SYSTEM
Because much of the nephron is comprised of epithelial
cells there is potential for cellular regeneration following
toxic injury, provided the tubular basement membrane has
remained intact and adequate residual epithelial cells are
present. Regeneration of tubular epithelium is usually
321
visible microscopically within 3 days of insult, but it can
take up to 3 weeks for the tubules to return to normal
 as    (  a  s
weeks for return to full renal function. The glomerulus
tends to be less forgiving, and glomeruli damaged by toxic
insults may be permanently dysfunctional (Table 15. 1).
Table 15.1 . Nephrotoxicants
Lesion
Toxicant
Species
Nephrosis (renal
tubular degeneration
Metals (lead, mercury, arsenic, cadmium)
Dogs, cats
and necrosis)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(e.g., ibuprofen, aspirin, phenylbutazone,
Dogs, cats
carprofen, deracoxib)
Lilies (Lilium or Hemerocallis)
Cats only
Dogs,
Grapes/raisins/Zante currants/Sultanas
(cats
(Vitis spp.)
anecdotal
only)
Antineoplastics (e.g., cisplatin)
Dogs, cats
Diquat/paraquat
Dogs, cats
Ethylene glycol
Dogs, cats
Zinc phosphide
Dogs, cats
Melamine
Dogs, cats
Amphotericin B
Dogs, cats
Cholecalciferol and analogues (vitamin
Mineralization
D3, cholecalciferol rodenticides,
Dogs, cats
calcitriol,calcipotriene)
Glomerular injury
Rattlesnake venom
Dogs, cats
Bladderinjury
Cyclophosphamide
Dogs, cats
322
CHAPTER 15 STUDY QUESTIONS
1. The most common form of renal injury in
 animals is
a. Glomerular injury
b. Renal tubular injury
c. Interstitial injury
d. Tubulointerstitial injury
e. Papillary necrosis
2. In renal tubular injury, the most common
manifestation  is 
except when
massive necrosis of tubular epithelial cells results
in occlusion of the lumens of renal tubules, in
which
case
or
may occur.
a. Anuria, polyuria, oliguria
b. Oliguria, polyuria, anuria
c. Oliguria, anuria, polyuria
d. Polyuria, oliguria, anuria
e. Anuria, oliguria, polyuria
323
3. Cellular debris from damaged renal tubules can
be seen in the urinary sediment in the form of
a. Hyaline casts
b. Oxalate crystals
c. Granular casts
d. Struvites
e. Dhole bodies
4. The ability of renal tubular epithelium to
regenerate depends on the presence of suffi cient
 residual cells and on the integrity of the
a. Renal papilla
b. Interstitium
c. Glomerular mesangium
d. Renal tubular basement membrane
e. Vascular endothelium
324
injury.
is considered an essential factor in whether
4.d.The integrity of the tubular basement membiane
3.c.Granular cass.
ma nifestation of renal tubular injury.
2.d.Polyuric renal insuffic iency is the most com mon
injury in animals.
1.b.Tubular injuryis the most common form ofrenal
ANSWERS
REFERENCES
Fitzgerald, S.D. and Rumbeiha, W.K. 2004. Urinary
system. In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by
Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 91-96. St. Louis: Mosby.
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig
Matthew A. 2007. Kidney and lower urinary tract. In
Fundamentals of Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed.,pp.
261-371. San Dieg0: Academic Press.
Puschner, Birgit, Poppenga, Robert H., Lowenstine, L.J.,
Filigenzi, M.S., and Pesavento, P.A. 2007. Assessment of
melamine and cyanuric acid toxicity in cats. Journal of
Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 19(6):616-624.
Sawaya, B.P., Briggs, JP., and Schnemann, J. 1995.
Amphotericin B nephrotoxicity: The adverse consequences
of altered membrane properties. Journal of the American
Society of Nephrology 6(2):154-164.
325
Sebastian, M.M., Baskin, S.I., Czerwinski, S.E. 2007.
Clinical Principles, edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp.
161-176. San Dieg0: Elsevier.
326
16
Other Systems
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant DVM, PhD
ALIMENTARY TRACT
Making a diagnosis of alimentary tract toxicosis is difficult
because, in dogs and cats, there are numerous conditions
that
cancause
gastrointestinal
signs
(nausea,
hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and
diarrhea) that are not toxic in nature. When presented with
a patient displaying gastrointestinal signs, the list of
potential differential diagnoses is quite long and not easily
shortened; one must avoid the temptation to decide "it
immediately   forthcoming.   Patients   presenting   with
gastrointestinal signs should be worked up thoroughly to
rule out 
other
potential
etiologies.
Infectious,
inflammatory, metabolic, nutritional, neoplastic, and
mechanical (e.g., foreign body) diseases need to be
considered in addition to toxic agents. Table 16.1 lists
toxicants that have a primary effect on the gastrointestinal
tract.
Many agents that damage the alimentary tract do so by
causing erosion or ulceration to the tissues (Haschek et al.
2007). Erosion is the loss of integrity of the superficial
mucosal  (epithelial)  layer of  the  alimentary  tract.
Ulceration occurs when the lesions extend deeper into the
tissues, penetrating into the blood vessels and tissues of the
327
submucosa. Perforation is a full thickness defect in the
wall of the gastrointestinal tract leading to leakage of
ingesta  into  the  pleural (esophageal  perforation) or
peritoneal cavity.
Oral Cavity
The most common toxicological injuries to the oral cavity
are direct irritation or corrosion. Irritants (e.g., insoluble
calcium oxalate crystals) cause discomfort and possibly
mild erythema but do not compromise the integrity of the
oral mucosa. Corrosive agents (acids, alkalis, cationic
detergents) cause chemical burns to the tissues of the oral
cavity which can result in severe pain, extensive tissue
damage and, potentially, sloughing of oral tissues (e.g,
tongue). In severe cases, damage to pharyngeal and/or
esophageal tissues may also occur.
Gastrointestinal Tract
Toxic injury to the gastrointestinal tract can occur through
several  mechanisms  (Haschek  et  al.  2007). Mild
gastrointestinal irritation can occur from agents such as
hydrocarbons, household detergents, and insoluble calcium
oxalate containing plants. These agents will cause local
irritation, leading to nausea
(often  manifestedby
hypersalivation), vomiting, and/or diarrhea, but they are
not appreciably absorbed and are not expected to cause any
systemic signs (note: volatile hydrocarbons such as
gasoline have a high risk of aspiration if vomiting occurs,
which can result in aspiration pneumonia; see Chapter 28,
"Household and Industrial Toxicants"). Intense vomiting
caused by these agents may result in rupture of gastric
328
blood vessels, leading to blood-tinged vomitus. Corrosive
injury resulting in erosion, ulceration, and/or perforation of
the gastrointestinal tract can occur through ingestion of
corrosive agents such as acids or alkalis (e.g., leaking
alkaline  batteries),
resulting
in
gastrointestinal
hemorrhage. Agents
 that alter
blood
supplytothe
gastrointestinal
mucosa
(e.g.,
nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, arsenic) can cause injury due to
hypoxia, resulting
1m
necrosis,
 ulceration, 
and/or
perforation. Toxicants that damage the rapidly dividing
cells of the mucosal crypts (e.g., colchicine, 5-fluorouracil)
can result in villous atrophy and loss of absorptive capacity
of the gastrointestinal tract; this type of injury is
sometimes
 termed
radiomimetic
because the lesion
resembles that seen following exposure to ionizing
radiation. Some
gastrointestinal toxicants  alter  the
absorption of water or nutrients without causing significant
physical  derangement  of  gastrointestinal  tissues.  For
example, cadmium can alter the absorption of calcium
from the gastrointestinal tract (Haschek et al. 2007), while
compounds having a laxative effect (e.g., high viscosity
hydrocarbons) can result indecreased nutrient absorption
due to rapid gastrointestinal transit time as well as
increased water loss due to diarrhea. Other toxicants can
reduce (e.g., opioids) or increase (e.g., organophosphorous
insecticides) motility  by altering
 the neuromuscular
activity of the gastrointestinal tract.
Table 16.1. Toxicants affecting the gastrointestinal tract
Mechanism (Clinical Toxicant
Comment
Effects)
329
Irritation
(hypersalivation,
Household bleaches are irritants;
nausea, vomiting,
Bleach
industrial/commercial strength
diarrhea, abdominal
may be corrosive
discomfort)
Boric acid
Ant baits, borax powder
Cycad palms
 Primary concern is liver injury
Household cleaners, shampoos,
Detergents
and soaps
Other ingredients (e.g.,
Fertilizers
insecticides, herbicides) may
pose other risks
Hydrocarbons/
Risk of aspiration of volatile
petroleum
hydrocarbons
products
Ice melts
See corrosive injury
Aglaonema,Alocasia,
Colocasia,Anthurium,
Arisaema,Arum,Caladium,
Insoluble calcium
Calla,Dieffenbachia
oxalate-containing
Epipremnum,Monstera,
plants
Philodendron,Seindapsius,
Spathiphyllum,Symplocarpus,
Syngonium,Xanthosoma,
Zantedeschia and others
Amaryllus,Crocus,Hyacinthus,
Ornamental bulb
Iris, Narcissus, Tulipa,and
plants
others
U.S. pennies minted after 1983
Zinc
(also cause hemolysis), zinc
oxide ointments
Corrosive injury
(similar to irri tants
Car/boat batteries, drain openers,
but more severe; can
oven cleaners, etching
Acids
see oral, pharyngeal,
compounds, gun barrel cleaners,
or esophageal burns;
pool sanitizers, rust removers
gastric ulceration,
330
hematemesis,melena,
or hematochezia)
Anhydrous lime, cement, drain
openers, fabric softeners,
industrial strength bleaches,
Alkalis
liquid dishwasher detergents,
low phosphate laundry
detergents, pool chemicals
Car/boat batteries contain acid;
Batteries
alkaline and disk batteries
contain alkali
Calcium chloride
ice melts
Corrosive to GI tract and skin
Cationic
Disinfectants, sanitizers, pool
detergents
algicides
Concentrated forms can be
Essential oils
corrosive
Concentrations<S% are
corrosive; lower concentrations
Phenols
are found in household cleaners,
sore-throat lozenges, gargles,
ointments, mouthwashes
Altered mucosal
Damages endothelium of
blood flow (leads to
Arsenic
gastrointestinal mucosa causing
gastrointestinal
submucosalhemorrhage
hemorrhage)
Inhibition of prostaglandin
Cadmium
formation, resulting in decreased
blood flow
Inhibition of prostaglandin
NSAIDs
formation, resulting in decreased
bloodflow
Epithelial cell
necrosis (hemorrhagic
S-Fluorouracil
Topical treatments for skin
gastroenteritis,
cancers, dermatosis
±mucosal shreds)
331
Abrus precatoris
Damage to seed coat (e.g,
(precatory pea,
chewing) allows toxin release
rosary pea)
Pharmaceutical,autumn crocus
Colchicine
(Colchicum), glory lily
(Gloriosa)
Corrosives
See above.
Iron salts
Vitamins, fertilizers, hand
warmers
Rheumatoid arthritis
Methotrexate
medications, anticancer therapy
Quercus spp.
Tannins are toxic principle
(Oak)
precipitate proteins
Ricinus communis
Damage to seed coat (e.g-,
(Castor bean)
chewing) allows toxin release
Impeded mutrient or
Cadmium
Inhibits calcium absorption,
water absorption
alters fat and protein metabolism
(weight loss,
Reduces absorption of B
Ethanol
dehydration)
vitamins and carbohydrates
Increases gastrointestinal transit
time resulting in decreased time
Laxatives
for mutrient absorption; osmotic
laxativescan decreasefreebody
water stores
Altered motility
 Decreases gastric emptying and
Hypomotility
Opioids
gut contractility through local
(constipation,
and central effects
obstipation, ileus)
OrganophosphorusOverstimulation of cholinergic
Hypermotility (watery
diarrhea, ±blood)
or carbamate
receptors enhances GI smooth
insecticides
muscle contraction
HEMATOPOIETIC
Alteration in the number, structure, or function of hematic
cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets) can
332
occur from a variety of toxicants (Haschek et al. 2007a)
Some agents (e.g., estrogen, 5-fluorouracil) can result in
suppression of bone marrow with decreased red and/or
white blood cell production. Other agents (e.g., lead) can
cause anemia by inhibition of enzymes that allow normal
red blood cell maturation. Certain oxidative compounds
(e.g., acetaminophen metabolites, garlic) can denature
hemoglobin to form methemoglobin within red blood cells.
Other
oxidants
{e.g.,
zinc,
naphthalene)
cause
non-immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Platelet function
can be altered by toxicants such as aspirin, and platelet
numbers can be reduced through the action of toxicants
such as estrogen. Alteration of coagulation factors can
result in uncontrolled hemorrhage, such as that seen with
anticoagulant rodenticides
 Anticoagulant rodenticides
inhibit vitamin K epoxide reductase, preventing the
recycling of vitamin K and the formation of vitamin
K-dependent clotting factors. When existing clotting
factor stores are depleted, hemorrhage occurs. Some
toxicants inhibit the ability of the blood to carry oxygen or
to deliver oxygen to tissues (e.g., carbon monoxide,
cyanide). Table 16.2 lists some common hematopoietic
toxicants.
Table 16.2. Toxicants affecting the hematopoietic system
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Onions, garlic, etc., powdered,
Hemolytic anemia
Allium spp.
concentrated forms more toxic
Crotalid snake
Direct RBC membrane damage
venom
Mothballs, urinal disks, toilet bowl
Naphthalene
blocks
333
 Propylene glycol Heinz body anemia in cats
U.S. pennies minted after 1983;
Zinc
other zinc-containing hardware;
zinc oxide ointments
Primarily cats; dogs with high
Methemoglobinemia
Acetaminophen
doses
Benzocaine/
Primarily cats
lidocaine
Chlorates
Matches, fireworks, gunpowder
Phenols
Primarily cats
Decreased formation
Bone marrow suppression;
of RBC, WBC, and/
S-fluorouracil
primarily WBC ± RBC
orplatelets
Suppresses bone marrow formation
Estrogen
of RBC and platelets
Methotrexate
Bone marrow suppression
Lead
Interferes with RBC maturation
Anticoagulant
Prevents vitamin K recycling
Coagulopathy
rodenticides;
resul ting in clotting factor
Warfarin
deficiency
Aspirin
Inhibits platelet function
Contains platelet aggregation
Crotalid snake
inhibitors and inhibitors of fibrin
venom
formation
Asphyxiants
Carbon dioxide
Displacement of oxygen
Carbon
Interference with oxygen delivery
monoxide
to tissues
Uncoupling of cellular respiratory
Cyanide
chain
Paralysis of respiratory center in
HydrogenSulfide
CNS
Methane
Displacement of oxygen
334
The sensitivity of the feline red blood cell to oxidative
injury is well known, and it is no surprise that cats are
more sensitive to oxidant-induced hemoglobin damage. A
large part of this sensitivity is due to the fact that cats have
8 sulfhydryl groups on each hemoglobin molecule,
(o oqst) sn  h p sop  t  o
These sulfhydryl groups are highly reactive areas of the
molecule  and
interact  with oxidants such  as  the
acetaminophen
metabolite  para-aminophenol,  which
denatures
the hemoglobin molecule to form
methemoglobin (McConkey et al. 2009). Additionally,
compared to other species, cat red blood cells are relatively
deficient in methemoglobin reductase, resulting in a
diminished ability  to convert methemoglobin back to
hemoglobin (Bischoff 2007).
INTEGUMENTARY
The skin is the largest organ in the body and acts as a
barrier against exogenous injury and excessive water loss
(Haschek et al. 2007b). The skin has an outer epidermis
composed of an outer stratum corneum that consists of
keratinized epithelium and an inner basal laver of
proliferating epithelial cells that replenish the stratum
corneum as they mature into keratinocytes. The thickness
of the epidermis varies significantly between species and is
relatively thin in dogs and cats compared to many other
species. The dermis is the tissue immediately under the
epidermis and is composed of fibrous connective tissue,
blood vessels, and adnexal structures such as hair follicles
and sebaceous glands. Beneath the dermis is the
subcutaneous adipose tissue.
335
Table 16.3. Toxicants affecting the skin
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Direct injury
Car/boat batteries, drain openers, oven
(irri tation, erosion
Acids
cleaners, etching compounds, gun barrel
or ulceration of
cleaners, pool sanitizers, rust removers
skin)
Anhydrous lime, cement, drain openers,
fabric softeners, industrial strength
Alkalis
bleaches, liquid dishwasher detergents,
low phosphate laundry detergents, pool
chemicals
Cationic
Disinfectants, sanitizers, pool algicides
detergents
Concentrated d-limonene, tea tree oil,
Essential oils
eugenol
Hydrocarbons
Volatile hydrocarbons (e.g., kerosene,
(e.g. motor
mineral spirits) very damaging to canine
oil, mineral
and feline skin
spirits)
Immune-mediated|Essential oils
D-limonene
Medications
Idiosyncratic; penicillins, cephalosporins,
levamisole, thrimethoprim-sulfa, others
Toxicants that are lipophilic can more readily penetrate the
outer layers of the epidermis to reach
the more
metabolically active cells in the lower epidermis (Haschek
et al. 2007b). These cells have the ability to metabolically
deactivate many potential toxicants, preventing them from
reaching the dermis. Compounds reaching the dermis may
be removed through the blood or lymphatics. In this way,
the skin serves as an effective barrier against a large
number of potential  toxicants.  Some highly lipophilic
organic solvents (e.g., dimethyl sulfoxide) have the ability
336
 ,         s
aid other molecules in passing through the integument.
There are three basic mechanisms of toxic skin injury: (1)
direct injury to the skin, (2) immune-mediated injury, and
(3) phototoxic injury (Haschek et al. 2007b). Direct injury
from a topically applied agent results in irritation that can
range from mild dermatitis to severe corrosive injury
depending on the toxicant and degree of exposure.
Immune-mediated skin injury results from stimulation of
the immune system by exposure to a compound that is
ingested, inhaled, or injected; only rarely is this reaction
seen due to topical exposure. As with any other reaction
involving the immune system, immune-mediated skin
  n s   
reaction will occur. Phototoxic injury is a direct immediate
interaction between light and photosensitizing compound
within the dermis. The photosensitizing compound may be
a toxicant or its metabolite, and it interacts with certain
wavelengths of light to produce free radicals in the skin.
resulting in damage to cellular structures. The net effect
resembles  a  severe  sunburm. Phototoxicity is less
commonly seen in dogs and cats than humans or grazing
animals due to their protective hair coats and lack of
exposure to the types of compounds (plant toxins, some
pharmaceuticals) that cause photosensitization. Table 16.3
lists toxicants that affect the skin.
MUSCULOSKELETALSYSTEM
The musculoskeletal system is composed of bones, joints,
and skeletal muscle (Plumlee 2004). Bones and joints are
relatively spared from the effects of acute toxic insults and
337
most toxic changes are due to chronic exposure to
toxicants. Toxicants affecting bone or cartilage can alter
their formation or remodeling. Skeletal muscle is similar to
cardiac muscle in structure and function, and many
toxicants that affect the myocardium will also affect
skeletal muscle cells. Skeletal muscle toxicants can alter
neuromuscular action, interfere with myofiber biochemical
processes, or cause direct myofiber degeneration or
necrosis. Table 16.4 contains a listing of musculoskeletal
toxicants.
Table
16.4.
Toxicants affecting
 the musculoskeletal
system
Mechanism
Toxicant
Comments
Alteration of
Fluoroquinalones (e.g-,
Growing animals
cartilage formation
enrofloxacin)
Muscle weakness,
Ionophores (e.g..
Dogs
paralysis
monensin)
Macadamia muts
Dogs
Muscle tremors,
Tremorgenic
Dogs most commonly
fasciculations
mycotoxins
affected
Concentrated pyrethroids,
Pyrethroids
especially in cats
REFERENCES
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of over-the-counter drugs.
In Veterinary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles,
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 363-390. San Dieg0:
Elsevier.
Haschek, Wanda M., Rousseaux, Colin G., and Wallig,
Matthew A. 2007. Gastrointestinal tract. In Fundamentals
338
of Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp.163-196. San
Diego: Academic Press-Elsevier.
.2007a.Hematopoietic system.InFundamentals of
Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp.491-512. San Diego:
Academic Press-Elsevier.
.2007b.Skin and oral mucosa. In Fundamentals of
Toxicologic Pathology, 2nd ed., pp. 135-162. San Diego:
Academic Press-Elsevier.
McConkey, S.E., Grant, D.M., and Cribb, A.E. 2009. The
role   of   para-aminophenol  in  acetaminophen-induced
methemoglobinemia  in dogs  and  cats.  Journal  of
Veterinary
Pharmacology
and
Therapeutics,
32(6):585-595.
Plumlee, Konnie H. 2004. Musculoskeletal system. In
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H.
Plumlee, p. 69. St. Louis: Mosby.
339
Section 3
Specific Toxicants
340
17
Rodenticides
EricDunayer
INTRODUCTION
Rodenticides are pesticides that are intended to kill rodents
and other small mammals. Frequently, however, dogs,
cats, pet rodents, and other "nontarget" animals ingest the
agent either unintentionally or due to malicious poisoning.
At the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (APCC),
     
anticoagulant rodenticides (AR) were the ninth most
common exposure reported in cats (Merola and Dunayer
2006).
There are several different rodenticides currently available
They come in various forms including pellets, blocks, dust,
and place packs (paper packages left out for the rodents to
chew open). Some rodenticides are mixed with seeds or
grain to attract the rodents. Many rodenticides are dyed
green or blue, but other colors such as red, tan, and white
are also common. Rodenticides cannot be identified by
their color or form; they can be identified only by locating
their active ingredient or the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) registration number (EPA Reg. no.) on the
packaging. Properly identifying the agent is necessary for
determining the appropriate treatment for the ingestion.
However, even if the agent cannot be identified, treatment
341
should not be delayed while trying to obtain the
information.
ANTICOAGULANT RODENTICIDES
Sources/Formulations
Anticoagulant rodenticides (AR) were originally derived
from studying the effects of moldy clover on cattle. Mold
infecting sweet clover (Melilotus officinalis and M. alba)
converted the harmless chemical coumarin into the toxic
metabolite dicoumarol. Chronic ingestion of the infected
hay led to coagulopathy and death in cattle (Knight and
Walter 2001). Warfarin, the first commercially available
anticoagulant rodenticide, was developed in the 1940s as a
derivative of dicoumarol; it was named for the Wisconsin
Alumni Research Foundation (WARF), the organization
that uncovered the link between dicoumarol and
coagulopathy (Merola 2002; Murphy 2007). Warfarin is
also used therapeutically as an anticoagulant in human and
veterinary medicine
While warfarin was the original anticoagulant rodenticide,
others were soon synthesized. Warfarin requires many
days of ingestion to cause signs. Also, rodents developed
resistance to warfarin's effects. To overcome these
drawbacks, second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides
were developed. These are capable of being lethal with a
single feeding (Murphy 2007). The various compounds are
listed in Table 17.1.
AR are sold in various forms (as discussed in the
introduction) and under dozens of trade names. Warfarin
342
baits generally contain 0.025% of active ingredient or 7
mg of warfarin per ounce of bait. Second-generation
anticoagulant rodenticides come as a 0.005% bait (1.4 mg
of active ingredient per ounce of bait) with the exception
of difethialone, which is 0.0025% (0.7 mg of difethialone
per ounce of bait).
Due to the unintended poisoning of children, pets, and
wildlife by rodenticides, the EPA in 2008 announced a
regulationto
ban  the over-the-counter saleof
secondgeneration anticoagulant  rodenticides directly  to
consumers. The use of AR will be restricted to licensed
Pest Control Operators, and the rodenticide must be in a
tamperproof bait station. Other rodenticides will still be
available for direct purchase by consumers, but they can
only be sold in a bait station; loose pellet baits are banned
(USEPA 2008).
Table 17.1. Anticoagulant rodenticides
First-GenerationSecond-Generation
Warfarin
Brodifacoum
Chlorophacinone
Bromadiolone
Diphacinone
Difenacoum
Pindone
Difethialone
Kinetics
Most AR are well absorbed after ingestion. Once absorbed.
a large percentage is bound to plasma proteins. Ingestion
of other highly protein-bound drugs (such as NSAIDs,
thyroid supplements, and corticosteroids) can increase the
toxicity of the anticoagulant by displacing it from the
343
protein. The half-lives of the agents vary but, in general,
first-generation agents have a much shorter half-lives (14
hours) than second-generation products (up to 6 days)
(Merola 2002).
Mechanism of Action
AR interfere with the ability of the liver to recycle vitamin
K, which is necessary for the production of the active
forms of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X. Without
continuous production of new factors, the animal depletes
          sg
depleted (generally 3 to 7 days or more after ingestion),
spontaneous hemorrhage begins (Merola 2002).
Toxicity
The toxicity of these products varies greatly by compound
and by form (Murphy and Talcott 2006). Often, when the
chemical is incorporated into bait, its toxicity is greatly
increased. Warfarin requires a much higher single dose to
Because of the wide variation in toxic doses in the
literature, the APCC recommends using 0.02 mg/kg as a
dosage of concern for all second-generation agents.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The initial signs of AR toxicosis are generally vague and
include anorexia, weakness, and lethargy. Once bleeding
begins, signs depend on where the hemorrhage has
344
occurred. For instance, hemorrhage into the chest can lead
to signs of dyspnea. Heavier dogs, due to pressure on their
joints, might bleed into joint spaces and subsequently
swelling of limbs. Bleeding into the brain and spinal cord
can cause a sudden onset of paralysis and seizures. Most
commonly, hemorrhage occurs into body "spaces" such as
pleural or peritoneal cavities. Some dogs die suddenly
without any obvious signs. Bleeding generally will not
start until 3-7 days after the exposure due to the
requirement that existing vitamin-K-dependent clotting
factors be consumed. Younger animals, which have less of
a reserve of coagulation factors, potentially start to develop
coagulopathy sooner. Also, animals with preexisting liver
disease are also more susceptible to intoxication (Merola
2002).
Laboratory
Depending on the length of time bleeding has occurred, the
animal might be anemic with a decreased hematocrit
Platelet counts are often slightly decreased as platelets are
     os    
coagulation parameters prothrombin time (PT) and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) are the most consistent
findings. Factor VII (critical for the extrinsic coagulation
pathway) has the shortest half-life in dogs (6.2 hours) and
 e     e    
and common coagulation pathways) will become abnormal
first, generally by 48-72 hours (Murphy 2007). A second
test kmown as PIVKA (proteins induced by vitamin Ki
antagonism) can be used instead of the PT to monitor the
patient but it may not be as readily available.
345
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include naturally occurring bleeding
defects such as hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, and
other inherited or acquired clotting disorders. Because the
liver produces the clotting factors, liver failure can lead to
spontaneous bleeding. Finally, bleeding due to trauma
should be ruled out.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
A diagnosis of AR toxicosis is based on history and results
of coagulation testing. In some cases, particularly where
there is no history of exposure, analysis of whole blood or
serum for the presence of a specific AR can confirm
exposure (Murphy 2007).
Postmortem
Typically, no microscopic lesions are noted. The animal
will have widespread hemorrhage into body cavities,
joints, skin, CNS, or other tissues. AR can be detected.
most typically in liver tissue, to confirm exposure (Murphy
2007).
Management of Exposures
In animals with recent exposures (< 4 hours), emesis
should be performed. This can be followed with a single
dose of activated charcoal; multiple doses of activated
charcoal have not been shown to be beneficial. Next, one
346
of two courses should be followed (Merola 2002). Vitamin
K 1 can be started at a dose of 3-5 mg/kg divided twice a
   s   n  
ingested. For warfarin, a minimum of 14 days is
recommended;  for  bromadiolone, the  recommended
treatment period is 21 days; and for all other first and
second-generation agents, at least 30 days of treatment
should be done. Injections of vitamin K1 should not be
used if possible as this increases the risk of allergic or
anaphylactic reactions. Oral vitamin K1 should be given
with a small, fatty meal, such as canned dog or cat food,
because this enhances absorption. For rodents and small
puppies or kittens, the injectable vitamin K1 solution can
be given orally if appropriately sized tablets are not
available. Approximately 48 and 72 hours after stopping
the vitamin Ki, a PT should be run to see if additional
treatment is necessary (Merola 2002).
Alternatively, instead of starting vitamin K1 immediately.
the patient's PT can be monitored. A baseline PT level
should be obtained and then rechecked at 48 and 72 hours
after the exposure. If the PT becomes prolonged, vitamin
K1 therapy, as indicated above, should be instituted
(Merola 2002). As mentioned above, the PIVKA test, if
available, can be used instead of the PT to monitor the
patient.
A study done at the University of Pennsylvania showed
that over 90% of dogs decontaminated with emesis and/or
activated charcoal after anticoagulant  ingestion did not
need treatment with vitamin Ki when their PT was
monitored; none of the animals developed signs during the
period that the PT was being run (Pachtinger et al. 2008).
347
Therefore, waiting to monitor PTs rather than immediately
starting vitamin K1 is an acceptable treatment plan.
In patients that are actively bleeding, emesis should not be
performed as exposure likely occurred several days before
presentation. The animal should be stabilized for shock
with fluids. If the anemia is severe, a blood transfusion
should be performed (Merola 2002). Vitamin K1 therapy
should be started as soon as possible. However, since
vitamin K1 takes 6-12 hours before new clotting factors
can be produced, the patient should receive a fresh frozen
plasma an/or whole blood transfusions to supply clotting
factors until the body manufactures a sufficient quantity on
its own (Murphy and Talcott 2006). Strict cage rest should
be enforced. For animals that are dyspneic due to bleeding
into the pleural cavity, the chest can be carefully tapped to
relievepressure (Merola  2002).  Blood from
a
thoracocentesis can be autotransfused back to the patient
especially if anemia is present.
Prognosis
For asymptomatic animals, vitamin K1 therapy is effective
and should prevent signs from developing. If bleeding has
begun, the prognosis is more guarded, depending on extent
and location  of the hemorrhage.  However, most
symptomatic  animals  can recover  with  appropriate
therapeutic intervention.
BROMETHALIN
Sources/Formulations
348
Bromethalin was developed to kill AR-resistant rodents
Despite its name being similar to some of the AR
(bromadiolone, brodifacoum), it is not an anticoagulant; it
is neurotoxic. As with AR, bromethalin is sold in various
forms and under many different brand names. It generally
comes as a 0.01% concentration (2.84 mg bromethalin per
oz of bait) (Dunayer 2003). For mole control, it is also sold
     ,  o   
bromethalin concentration is 0.025%.
Kinetics
Bromethalin is rapidly absorbed after ingestion and plasma
levels peak in about 4 hours. In the liver, bromethalin is
converted  to a  toxic metabolite desmethylbromethalin
Bromethalin is excreted in the bile and undergoes
enterohepatic recirculation. The half-life of bromethalin is
about 6 days in rats (Dunayer 2003; Gupta 2007).
Mechanism of Action
Bromethalin and its metabolite desmethylbromethalin
uncouple   oxidative   phosphorylation.   This  leads  to
decreased production of energy in cells so levels of ATP
fall. Without ATP, Na-K ATPase pumps in the cell
membrane are unable to pump sodium out of the cell.
Because sodium builds up inside the cell, water is pulled in
and the cell swells. Nerves cells are the most sensitive
tissue and so signs of neurotoxicity are seen. In the CNS.
myelin sheaths that surround nerve cells swell and
vacuoles form within the nerve cell. As the cells and the
myelin sheaths swell with fluid, internal pressure
increases; there is also an increase in cerebrospinal fluid
349
pressure. Together, these changes cause nerve dysfunction
(Dunayer 2003, Gupta 2007).
Table 17.2. Toxicity of bromethalin in various species
Source: Van Lier and Cherry 1988.
Species
Oral LDso (mg/kg)
Rat
2.0
Mouse
5.3
Rabbit
13.0
Guinea pig
<1000
Dog
4.7
Cat
1.8
Toxicity
For most species, the toxicity of bromethalin is very
similar (see Table 17.2). However, cats are much more
sensitive to the effects of bromethalin than dogs. Guinea
pigs are relatively insensitive to bromethalin as they are
unable
to
produce
the
tox1c
metabolite
desmethylbromethalin (Dunayer 2003). Interestingly, if
 guinea pigs are fed desmethylbromethalin, the toxic dose is
similar to bromethalin (Van Lier and Cherry 1988). Based
on cases reported to the APCC, dogs have died at dosages
of 0.95 mg/kg and cats have developed signs at 0.24 mg/kg
(Dunayer 2003).
Clinical Effects
Signs
350
In dogs, the onset of signs depends on the dose ingested
At lower doses, the onset is slow, taking from 24-86 hours
to be seen. Initial signs include hindlimb weakness, which
can progress to paresis and paralysis. CNS depression also
develops. Once signs develop, they may last for days to
weeks before they resolve (Dorman et al. 1990b). In dogs
ingesting doses at or above the LD50, the onset of signs is
more  rapid,  from 4-36
5hours.  In these dogs,
hyperexcitability develops followed by tremors, seizures,
and death (Dorman et al. 1990b).
In cats, the most common sign is ataxia. Other signs
include focal motor seizures, recumbency, abdominal
distension, decreased conscious proprioception, and a
decerebrate posture. Onset of signs occurs from 3-7 days
after exposure. As noted with dogs, higher ingested doses
generally lead to earlier onset of signs (Dorman et al.
1990a).
Laboratory
There are no significant laboratory changes expected with
bromethalin toxicosis. (Dorman et al. 1990b)
Differential Diagnoses
For the paralytic form of bromethalin toxicosis, toxic
differentials include botulism, ivermectin toxicosis, and
ionophore toxicosis. In seizing patients, differentials
include metaldehyde (snail bait), strychnine, zinc
phosphide, and sodium fluoroacetate (Compound 1080)
intoxications.
351
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and
occurrence of compatible clinical signs. Although blood
can be tested for the presence of bromethalin, this is not a
standard test and results are typically not available prior to
the need to institute treatment.
Postmortem
Bromethalin can be detected in various organs including
the brain and liver. Histopathology of the CNS shows
spongy degeneration of the white matter with an
accumulation of fluid within the myelin sheaths (Dunayer
2003)
Management of Exposures
There is no antidote for bromethalin, so the management
of
 exposure
is
focused
on（
decontamination.
Decontamination recommendations vary depending on the
species, dosage, and time since ingestion. Tables 17.3a and
summarize  the  APCC's recommendations  for
decontamination (Dunayer 2003). Since bromethalin is not
an anticoagulant, vitamin K1 is not indicated as a
treatment.
Once signs begin, treatment is supportive 
and
symptomatic. Recumbent animals should be well padded
to prevent pressure sores. Seizures should be controlled as
needed. Mannitol, furosemide, and corticosteroids have
352
been suggested to treat the cerebral edema. Although these
might slow progression of signs, they do not prevent their
occurrence. In addition, when the treatment is stopped, the
animal may deteriorate rapidly (Dunayer 2003).
Prognosis
Prompt decontamination can often prevent signs from
occurring. In mild cases, recovery is possible but full
recovery can take weeks. Animals who are paralyzed or
having seizures have a guarded prognosis, although even
these animals can recover with intensive care.
Table 17.3a.
Decontamination
recommendations
for
bromethalin ingestion: Recommendations for dogs
Time since
Dosage IngestedAction
Exposure
(mg/kg)
<4 hours
0.10.49
Emesis or one dose of activated charcoal
>4 hours
0.1-0.49
One dose of activated charcoal
<4hours
Emesis and three doses of activated
0.5-0.75
charcoal over 24 hours
Three doses of activated charcoal over 24
>4hours
0.5-0.75
hours
<4hours
>0.75
Emesis and three doses of activated
charcoal a day for 48 hours
>4 hours
Three doses of activated charcoal a day
>0.75
for 48hours
CHOLECALCIFEROL
Sources/Formulations
353
Cholecalciferol is a form of vitamin D3. It is generally
found in a 0.075% bait (21.3 mg cholecalciferol per 0z of
bait). As with other rodenticides, it is available in different
forms and from different manufacturers (Morrow 2o01).
Vitamin D toxicosis can also occur due to chronic
overdosing with vitamin D supplements or as a result of
improperly formulated dog or cat foods. Although
over-the-counter daily multivitamins contain vitamin D, it
is generally present in such low concentrations (<looo IU
per capsule) that vitamin D toxicosis from acute overdoses
of these products is rare. However, prescription products
containing between 5,000 and 50,000 IU per capsule may
result in toxicosis if sufficient numbers are ingested.
Additionally, certain medications that contain vitamin D
analogs such as calcipotriene, a topical cream for treating
psoriasis, can cause toxicosis similar to cholecalciferol
(Rumbeiha 2006).
Kinetics
Cholecalciferol is rapidly absorbed after ingestion. It is
mainly excreted by the liver and undergoes enterohepatic
recirculation (Morrow 20o1). Vitamin D3 is highly
fatsoluble so it can be stored in body fat. After absorption,
D-binding proteins. In the liver, cholecalciferol is
metabolized to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol, also known as
calcifediol. Calcifediol circulates in the blood and, in the
kidneys, 
is
further
metabolized
to
1,25-dihdroxycholcalcerifol or cacitriol, which is the most
active form of vitamin D (Morrow 2001; Rumbeiha 2006)
354
Table17.3b
. Decontamination recommendations for
bromethalin ingestion: ecommendations for cats
Source: Dunayer 2003.
Time since
Dosage IngestedAction
Exposure
(mg/kg)
<4 hours
0.05-0.1
Emesis or one dose of activated charcoal
>4 hours
0.05-0.1
One dose of activated charcoal
<4 hours
0.1-0.3
Emesis and three doses of activated
charcoal over 24 hours
0.10.3
Three doses of activated charcoal over 24
>4 hours
hours
<4hours
Emesis and three doses of activated
>0.3
charcoal a day for 48 hours
Three doses of activated charcoal a day
>4 hours
>0.3
for 48hours
Mechanism of Action
Calcitriol increases blood calcium and phosphorus levels
via
 various
mechanisms:
increased
gastrointestinal
absorption of calcium, increased calcium reabsorption by
the kidneys, and increased bone resorption and release of
phosphorus and calcium into the blood (Morrow 2001;
Rumbeiha 2006). The overall effect is to increase blood
phosphorus and calcium levels. When the calcium X
phosphorus product exceeds 60, soft tissue mineralization
may occur. Mineralization of the kidneys can lead to acute
renal failure although any tissue can be affected. (Morrow
2001).
Toxicity
355
In dogs dosages of 10 mg/kg have been fatal (Gupta 2007)
Based on experience at the APCC, dosages of 0.5 mg/kg
can cause signs (Morrow 200l). Therefore, the APCC
recommends that decontamination and monitoring for
signs be performed on dogs ingesting more than 0.1 mg/
kg.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Onset of signs is usually within 12 to 36 hours of
ingestion.  Initial  signs  include  vomiting and diarrhea
(possibly bloody). The animal will then show depression,
polyuria, and polydipsia. Acute renal failure can occur in
as little as 24 hours (Morrow 2001).
Laboratory
After ingestion, serum phosphorus usually increases first,
generally around 12 hours. The serum calcium increases
        gs
consistent with renal failure can begin shortly after the
phosphorus and calcium product exceeds 60 (Morrow
2001).
Differential Diagnoses
Any condition that increases serum calcium levels should
be considered as a differential. This includes primary
hyperparathyroidism  in  which  the  parathyroid  gland
produces excessive levels of parathormone (PTH), usually
due to a tumor of the gland. In addition, certain tumors,
356
such as lymphoma and anal gland carcinomas can secrete a
protein that acts like PTH. In these syndromes, unlike
cholecalciferol toxicity, phosphorus levels are usually
normal (Rumbeiha 2006).
Diagnostics
Antemortem
In addition to measuring serum calcium, phosphorus, and
assessing renal function, vitamin D3 and calcitriol levels
can be measured in blood. In cholecalciferol toxicosis,
these are markedly elevated. In addition, PTH levels
should be determined since they willbe reduced
(Rumbeiha 2006)
Postmortem
Lesions
 on  postmortem 
examination include
mineralization of soft tissues, especially the kidneys.
However, this can occur with any condition that causes
hypercalcemia. The bile and kidneys can be tested for
calcifediol levels to confirm toxicity (Rumbeiha 2006).
Management of Exposures
If ingestion is within 6-8 hours, emesis can be performed.
Since
cholecalciferol
undergoes
enterohepatic
recirculation, multiple doses of activated charcoal (every
6-8 hours) might increase clearance. Baseline levels of
calcium, phosphorus, BUN, and creatinine should be
obtained and monitored daily for at least 4 days (Morrow
2001).
357
In patients with elevated calcium and phosphorus
concentrations, intensive therapy is indicated to prevent
renal failure and other signs. The animal should receive
0.9% saline IV at twice maintenance rates; sodium
competes for reabsorption with calcium in the kidney and
increases calcium loss. Furosemide should be administered
as it increases calcium excretion by the kidneys.
Corticosteroids such as prednisone will decrease bone
resorption  and decrease  intestinal absorption while
increasing renal excretion of calcium. In addition, a low
calcium/phosphorus diet should be fed and phosphate
binders, such as aluminum or magnesium hydroxide, can
be given (Morrow 2001; Rumbeiha 2006)
If these measures are not successful in reducing calcium
levels, other treatments should be initiated. Salmon
calcitonin is a hormone that lowers calcium levels.
However, it must be given several times a day and some
animals develop a tolerance to it. The preferred treatment
is pamidronate, a bisphosphonate used to lower serum
calcium in people with hypercalcemia due to malignancy.
Pamidronate is given in normal saline by slow IV infusion
over 2 to 4 hours. Its effects can last up to a week. It can be
repeated as needed. Other bisphosphonates such as
clodronate also appear to be effective (Ulutas et al. 2006).
Calcitonin and pamidronate (or other bisphosphonates)
should not be used together (Morrow 2001).
Treatment should be continued until the calcium X
phosphorus product is less than 60. At that point.
treatments can be slowly reduced while the calcium and
phosphorus  values are watched closely for signs of
358
recurrence over the course of several weeks (Morrow
2001).
Prognosis
The prognosis is good with prompt decontamination and if
no signs develop. The prognosis is guarded once signs
develop because mineralization  is poorly reversible.
Chronic renal failure can be a permanent sequela. Sudden
deaths have occurred weeks later, probably due to cardiac
arrhythmias from calcified heart muscle or the rupture of a
major artery like the aorta (Morrow 2001).
STRYCHNINE
Sources/Formulations
Strychnine is an alkaloid obtained from the seeds and bark
of the strychnine tree (Strychnos nux-vomica and
S.ignatti). These trees grow in Southeast Asia and
Australia (Gupta 2007). Strychnine is one of the oldest
rodenticides; it was first used in the 16th century (Talcott
2006). Strychnine is sold in various formulations, usually
mixed with grain. It is often dyed red or green.
Formulations contain 0.5%-3% strychnine. It is intended
for killing rodents as well as porcupines, rabbits, and
pigeons (Talcott 2004). Strychnine is labeled for use
underground in animal burrows (Talcott 2004).
Kinetics
Strychnine is rapidly absorbed from the small intestine
(Gupta 2007). It is metabolized in the liver, but up to 20%
359
(Talcott 2004). It rapidly distributes to many different
tissues and has a half-life of about 6 hours (Gupta 2007).
Mechanism of Action
Strychnine competitively blocks the effects of the amino
acid glycine, an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the spinal
cord. Normally, glycine prevents repetitive nerve activity
that stimulates
musclecontractions.Without this
inhibition, the nerve continues to fire rapidly and leads to
muscle spasms. Eventually, the animal develops muscle
rigidity (tetanic spasms) (Talcott 2004; Gupta 2007).
Because extensor muscles are stronger than flexor muscles
in the limbs and neck, an extensor rigidity develops.
Toxicity
Strychnine is considered extremely toxic. In dogs, the
minimum lethal dosage is about 0.75 mg/kg (Gupta 2007);
this is about 0.15 g/kg of a 0.5% bait or about 0.5 teaspoon
in a 35 1b (16 kg) dog. In cats, the LD50 is about 2 mg/kg
(Talcott 2004).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Signs can occur from 10 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion
depending on when the stomach empties since strychnine
is better absorbed in the intestines (Talcott 2004)
Vomiting is uncommon (Gupta 2007). Initially, the animal
may be anxious, tachypneic, and salivating heavily. Signs
360
then progress to ataxia followed by collapse with violent
muscular seizures. The legs will be extended and rigid and
the neck may be arched. Stimulation by noise or lights
typically causes signs to worsen. The animal can be
hyperthermic due to extreme muscle activity. Death is
likely due to respiratory arrest from paralysis of the
diaphragm (Talcott 2004; Gupta 2007)
Laboratory
There are no specific changes associated with strychnine
toxicosis (Talcott 2004)
Differential Diagnoses
Many toxicants and conditions can cause severe tremors
similar
to   strychnine. These imclude metaldehyde.
bromethalin, tremorgenic mycotoxins, zinc phosphide,
tetanus, organochlorine insecticides, anticholinesterase
insecticides, and Brunfelsia spp. (Talcott 2006).
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Strychnine can be detected in urine and stomach contents
from gastric lavage (Gupta 2007; Talcott 2004). However,
some animals die so quickly that strychnine can't be
detected in their urine (Beasley et al. 1999). In addition,
the results of the tests are not likely to be available before
the patient has either died or recovered.
Postmortem
361
There are no specific lesions associated with strychnine
toxicosis. Strychnine can be detected in stomach contents,
urine, bile, liver, and kidney to confirm exposure (Talcott
2004)
Management of Exposures
Emesis can be induced before the animal is symptomatic;
however, due to rapid onset of signs in most cases, this
may not be practical. Activated charcoal may be useful but
general, treatment is aimed at controlling the tremors and
seizures. Barbiturates, methocarbamol, propofol, and gas
anesthesia may be used to control signs. In severe cases,
 e sas  p   p  d a
hours.  IV fluids  to  support hydration should be
minimum to prevent worsening of the signs. Treatment
should be continued until signs have resolved, which may
take 24-72 hours (Talcott 2004; Gupta 2007).
Prognosis
Prognosis is guarded once signs have begun
ZINC PHOSPHIDE
Sources/Formulations
Zinc phosphide is an inorganic rodenticide that has been
available for over 70 years (Albretson 2004). It is sold as a
2% bait (566 mg zinc phosphide per oz of bait). Zinc
phosphide can be found in several different forms such as
362
in pellets, in place packs, and mixed with grains. In
addition to mice and rats, it is also used to kill voles,
moles, rabbits, and other rodents (Gupta 2007)
Kinetics
After ingestion, zinc phosphide reacts with acids in the
stomach to produce phosphine gas, which can be absorbed
from the stomach or may be inhaled as it escapes the
stomach (Albretson 2004). Intact zinc phosphide may be
absorbed as well from the gastrointestinal tract.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of zinc phosphate and phosphine gas
intoxication is not known. It is thought that phosphine gas
blocks the enzyme cytochrome oxidase, which decreases
energy production by cells. Without energy, cells are
unable to maintain normal function and cell death occurs
(Albretson 2004; Gupta 2007). Phosphine gas is also
thought to be directly irritating, especially to the lungs
(Albretson 2004).
In addition to its immediate effects, zinc phosphide can
cause delayed liver and kidney failure. It is not known
whether this is due to phosphine gas or the absorption of
intact zinc phosphide.
Toxicity
The LD50 of zinc phosphide is about 40 mg/kg in dogs and
cats. The LD 50 in rats is 12 mg/kg. Because zinc
phosphide is a strong emetic, dogs and cats are less
363
sensitive to zinc phosphide than rodents because they can
vomit and  partially decontaminate  themselves after
ingestion (Albretson 2004).
Clinical Effects
Signs
The onset of signs varies from 15 minutes to 4 hours.
Rapidity of onset appears to be influenced by whether or
not the animal has food in its stomach. The presence of
food increases the production of hydrochloric acid, which
in turn increases the production of phosphine gas
(Albretson 2004). Vomiting, often bloody, is common. The
animal's breath or its vomitus can have a garlicky or rotten
fish smell from the phosphine gas (Knight 2006). Severe
gastrointestinal pain can develop. CNS signs include
anxiety, initial depression progressing  to increased
activity, tremors, and seizures. Increased respiratory
sounds and rate are common (Knight 2006).
Laboratory
There are no specific clinical laboratory changes noted
(Albretson 2004).
Differential Diagnoses
The differential
1diagnoses are similar to those for
strychnine.  These
e  include metaldehyde, bromethalin,
tremorgenic  mycotoxins,  zinc
Cphosphide,  tetanus,
organochlorine
insecticides,
anticholinesterase
insecticides, and Brunfelsia spp.
364
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Diagnosis is based on history and the presence of the
characteristic smell of phosphine gas. Stomach contents
samples can be tested for the presence of phosphine
Postmortem
Diagnosis can be made by the detection of phosphine in
stomach contents.
Management of Exposures
If exposure was recent, the patient should be given oral
liquid antacids to neutralize stomach acid and reduce the
production of phosphine gas. Emesis can be performed
early but a centrally active emetic such as apomorphine
should be used rather than hydrogen peroxide, which could
(o s) s ds o   
        
vomited. In patients who are seizuring, gastric lavage can
be considered. Activated charcoal has been recommended,
     o    
vomiting animals, activated charcoal may increase the risk
of aspiration and it may delay healing of gastric erosions.
There are no antidotes for zinc phosphide toxicosis.
Treatment should be directed to providing support and
controlling signs such as fluids for shock, seizure control,
and correcting acid-base imbalances. Liver protectants
such as n-acetylcysteine, B-vitamins, SAMe, and dextrose
365
may be useful but proof of efficacy is lacking (Albretson
2004; Knight 2006).
When presented with a poisoned animal, there is a real risk
to attending medical staff. Phosphine gas coming from the
patient's stomach or vomitus can affect human personnel
in the room. The odor of phosphine gas can be detected by
the human nose at about 2 ppm. However, levels of 1 ppm
or less, depending on the length of exposure, can be toxic
(Knight 2006). If possible, induction of emesis should be
performed outdoors or in a well-ventilated room. Vomitus
or gastric lavage material should be cleaned up rapidly and
placed in an airtight bag. If the smell of phosphine gas is
detected, personnel should be evacuated and the room
aired out thoroughly
Prognosis
In asymptomatic animals, the prognosis is good. If signs
do develop, the prognosis is guarded especially for the first
48 hours. Even those animals that survive the initial period
may develop acute renal and hepatic failure over the next 2
weeks.
REFERENCES
Albretson, Jay C. 2004. Zinc phosphide. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
456-458. St.Louis: Mosby.
Beasley, Val R., Dorman, David C., Fikes, James D.,
Diana, Stephen G., and Woshner, Victoria. 1999. A
366
Systems Affected Approach to Veterinary Toxicology.St
Louis: Mosby.
Dorman, David C., Parker, Alan J., Dye, Janice A., and
Buck, William B. 1990a. Bromethalin neurotoxicosis in
the cat. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 1(2):189-196.
Dorman, David C., Parker, Alan J., and Buck, William B
1990b. Bromethalin toxicosis in the dog: Part I: Clinical
effects. Journal of the American Animal Hospital
Association26:589-594.
Dunayer, Eric. 2003. Bromethalin: The other rodenticide.
Veterinary Medicine 98(9):732-736
Gupta, Ramesh C. 2007. Non-anticoagulant rodenticides.
In Veterinary Toxicology: Basics and Clinical Principles,
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 548-563. New York:
Elsevier.
Knight, Anthony P. and Walter, Richard G. 2001. A Guide
to Plant Poisoning of Animals in North America. Jackson,
Wyoming: Teton New Media.
Knight, Michael W. 2006. Zinc Phosphide. In Small
Animal Toxicology, Second Edition, edited by Michael E.
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 1101-1118. St. Louis:
Elsevier Saunders.
Meadows, Irina and Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2006. The
10 most common toxicoses in dogs. Veterinary Medicine
101 (3):142-148.
367
Merola, Valentina. 2002. Anticoagulant rodenticides:
Deadly to pests, dangerous to pets. Veterinary Medicine.
101(6): 339-342.
Merola, Valentina and Dunayer, Eric. 2006. The 10 most
common toxicoses in cats. Veterinary Medicine 101
(10):905-911.
Morrow, Carla. 2001. Cholecalciferol poisoning.
Veterinary Medicine 96(12):905-911.
Murphy, Michael. 2007. Anticoagulant rodenticides. In
Veterinary Toxicology: Basics and Clinical Principles,
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 525-547. New York:
Elsevier.
Murphy, Michael J. and Talcott, Patricia A. 2006.
Anticoagulant Rodenticides. In Small Animal Toxicology,
2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
Talcott, pp. 563-577. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Pachtinger, Garret E., Otto, Cynthia M., and Syring,
Rebecca S. 2008. Incidence of prolonged prothrombin time
in dogs following gastrointestinal decontamination  for
acute  anticoagulant rodenticide  ingestion.  Journal  of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 18(3):285-291.
Rumbeiha, Wilson K. 2006. Cholecalciferol. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson
and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 629-642. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
368
Talcott, Patricia A. 2004. Strychnine. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
454-456. St. Louis: Mosby.
2006. Strychnine. In Small Animal Toxicology,
2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
Talcott, pp. 1076-1082. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Ulutas, B., Voyvoda, H., Pasa, S. and Alingan, M.K. 2006.
Clodronate treatment of vitamin D-induced hypercalcemia
in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care 16(2):141-145.
USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2008.
Final  Risk Mitigation Decision  for Ten  Rodenticides.
Accessed at http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/
rodenticides/finalriskdecision.htm#proposed on December
20,2008.
Van Lier, Robert B.L., Cherry, Linda D. 1988. The
toxicity and mechanism of action of bromethalin: A new
singlefeeding  rodenticide.  Fundamental  and  Applied
Toxicology 11:664-672.
369
18
Insecticides
Petra A. Volmer
AMITRAZ
Sources/Formulations
Amitraz is a formamidine acaricide with activity against
ticks, mites, and lice. It is used in veterinary medicine for
the control and eradication of demodex mites and for the
prevention of tick infestations. For small animals amitraz
is commercially available under the trade names Mitaban
@ dip (19.9% for dilution), Preventic @ collar (9.0%), and
ProMeris @ topical solution (15%). It is also available as
an emulsifiable concentrate (12.5% for dilution) for use on
pigs and cattle.
Kinetics
Amitraz is rapidly absorbed following oral administration
of technical material. Clinical signs can be seen by 1 hour
of ingestion and peak plasma concentrations occur by 5
hours. The elimination half-life is approximately 23.4
hours (Hugnet et al. 1996). Absorption and duration of
effects following ingestion of amitraz-impregnated collars
tend to be prolonged due to slow release of the active
ingredient from the collar. Although dermal absorption is
low, intoxication has been reported following topical
application in dogs (Paradis 1999).
370
Mechanism of Action
The alpha-2 adrenergic agonist characteristics of amitraz
account for its sedative and hyperglycemic effects. The
effects on blood glucose are thought to be due to alpha2--
mediated inhibition of insulin release (Plumb 2005).
Toxicity
Amitraz is classified by the EPA as slightly toxic to
mammals if ingested orally. The oral LDso for amitraz in
rats is 523-800 mg/kg and for mice is greater than 1600
mg/kg. The dermal LD5o for rats and rabbits is greater than
1600 mg/kg and greater than 200 mg/kg, respectively
(Extoxnet 1995). Cats tend to be more sensitive than dogs
to the effects of amitraz.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Signs of amitraz toxicosis can begin within 1 to 4 hours.
but can be delayed as long as 12 hours. Intoxicated dogs
and cats exhibit vomiting, depression, somnolence, ataxia,
disorientation，
1leus,
bradycardia,  hypertension,
，or
hypotension, coma, hypothermia, and seizures. Some of
the neurological signs might be attributed to the xylene
carrier found in dip formulations. Equids may display
similar neurological signs and are at risk of developing
lifethreatening ileus and impaction.
Laboratory
371
Biochemical changes include hyperglycemia and elevated
hepatic enzymes.
Differential Diagnosis
Toxicants causing central nervous system depression
should be considered. These include ethanol, methanol.
isopropanol, the avermectins, marijuana, ethylene glycol,
barbiturates,  benzodiazepines,
opioids,
and
antidepressants. Other differentials include CNS trauma
and primary CNS disease.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Amitraz can be detected in stomach contents, urine, feces,
and skin, although laboratories performing the analysis are
limited.
Postmortem
No specific gross or histopathological lesions are expected
on necropsy. Tissue analysis for the presence of the
compound can confirm exposure.
Management of Exposures
The most common routes of exposure are dermal and oral.
In either case, patients should be stabilized if necessary,
clinical signs treated, and further exposure prevented.
372
For dermal exposures, the animal should be stabilized
according to clinical signs and then bathed in a liquid dish
detergent to remove any product remaining on the skin.
Care should be taken to prevent the development of
hypothermia subsequent to bathing. Mild signs following
label use often do not require treatment and resolve in
24-72 hours. For more severe signs, yohimbine and
atipamizole  are  alpha-2 adrenergic  antagonists  that
effectivelyreverse
bradycardia,  CNS  depression,
hyperglycemia, and ileus (Plumb 2005). Atipamezole is
thought to have fewer cardiorespiratory effects than
yohimbine (Andrade and Sakate 2003). Atropine should
not
tbe used in the treatment of amitraz-induced
bradycardia, because it can potentiate hypertension and
ileus (Hsu et al. 1986). Seizures can be treated with
diazepam or a barbiturate. Animals should be closely
monitored for severe CNS depression following use of
these drugs. In all cases exhibiting clinical signs,
symptomatic and supportive care including IV fluids and
thermoregulation is indicated.
Oral exposures are usually the result of ingestion of either
spot-on  or concentrated  dip  formulations containing
volatile hydrocarbons, or from ingestion of an amitraz
containing collar. The induction of emesis should be
avoided or done with care for products containing solvents
due to the risk of aspiration and subsequent chemical
pneumonitis. Emesis is recommended for asymptomatic
animals that have ingested a collar. Activated charcoal
binds amitraz; however, administration may also aggravate
an already upset stomach and cause vomiting and possible
aspiration. Activated charcoal is more suitable for cases in
which a collar has been ingested. However, if surgery is
373
required to remove collar pieces, activated charcoal can
obscure the surgical field. Yohimbine and atipamezole
might hasten passage of collar fragments from the
gastrointestinal tract by reversing depressed GI motility.
Saline cathartics can also enhance elimination.
Prognosis
Animals receiving prompt, aggressive treatment have a
good prognosis. Animals exhibiting severe signs such as
coma or seizures, have a guarded to poor prognosis.
ORGANOCHLORINES
Sources/Formulations
The organochlorine insecticides (OCs) (also referred to as
"chlorinated hydrocarbons") reached the height of their
popularity as insecticides from approximately the 1950s to
the 1970s. They were prized because of their effectiveness
as insecticides and relatively low acute mammalian
toxicity (compared
1  to theorganophosphorusand
carbamate compounds at the time). Additionally they were
lipophilic    and 
1slow
/to degrade,
requiring
fewer
applications.   These
 characteristics,
however, also
contributed  to  their  environmental
persistence  and
biomagnification through the food chain. Because of this.
the OCs have been replaced by newer and safer
insecticides. However, old containers may resurface from
storage in sheds, barns, and other structures, thus posing a
hazard.
374
There are three main categories of OCs based on chemical
structure.  The  diphenyl  aliphatic  compounds  include
agents such as DDT, methoxychlor, perthane, and dicofol.
The aryl hydrocarbons include lindane, mirex, kepone, and
paradichlorobenzene. The cyclodiene insecticides include
aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, chlordane, heptachlor, and
toxaphene. Although DDT and most of the other OCs have
[  ss n a u sn  pa 
products are still available as “second line if "first line'
treatments are not effective. Lindane-based dips for dogs,
though not popular, continue to be available.
Kinetics
The OCs are well absorbed through most exposure routes.
Blood concentrations initially
 increase  following
absorption, but then they decline rapidly as distribution
takes place to liver, kidney, brain, and lipid-rich tissues
such as adipose where OCs are stored. Body fat may serve
as a source of OC poisoning if weight loss occurs and
stored OCs are released into the general circulation.
Because of their lipophilicity, OCs will be secreted into
milk and eliminated from the body via this route. Some
OCs are excreted through the bile and reabsorbed
(enterohepatic recirculation), contributing to persistence in
the body.
Mechanism of Action
The OCs exert their effects through two main mechanisms.
In general, the diphenyl aliphatics interfere with sodium
channel kinetics, resulting in partial depolarization. The
aryl hydrocarbons and cyclodienes act  to inhibit the
375
binding of GABA (an inhibitory neurotransmitter) to
GABA receptors. For both of these mechanisms, clinical
signs reflect nervous stimulation. DDT metabolites also
cause selective necrosis of the adrenal gland zona
fasciulata and
 zona reticularis.TheOCs have
demonstrated  potent  estrogenic  and  enzyme-inducing
properties, which interfere with fertility and reproduction
in wildlife and laboratory animals.
Toxicity
The acutely toxic dose varies depending upon the OC, but
1n
general thegroup is less toxic than the
organophosphorus or carbamate insecticides. The one
exception is endrin with a rat acute oral LD5o of 3 mg/kg
(Buck et al. 1976).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Signs can occur anywhere from minutes to days following
exposure. Initial signs include salivation, nausea, vomiting,
followed by agitation, apprehension, hyperexcitability,
incoordination, nervousness, and tremors. These can
progress to clonic-tonic seizures, opisthotonus, paddling.
and clamping of the jaw. Seizure activity can persist for
2-3 days (due to lipophilicity and enterohepatic
recirculation). Coma and death are possible.
Laboratory
376
No diagnostic or suggestive changes occur. Although
performing CBC and chemistry profiles will not rule in or
out a diagnosis of an OC toxicosis, they are recommended
to determine the overall health of the poisoned patient.
Differential Diagnosis
Any agent or disease process causing neurological
stimulation should be included in the differential diagnosis
list. Such conditions include infectious encephalitis, lead
poisoning, rabies, eclampsia, canine distemper, strychnine.
metaldehyde, 4-aminopyridine, methylxanthines, and other
toxicants causing seizures.
Diagnostics
Confirmation of an OC poisoning is based on history of
exposure  and  appropriate  clinical  signs  along  with
detection of the compound in tissues. Samples for OC
analysis should be collected and submitted in clean glass
containers or wrapped in aluminum foil (dull side toward
sample) to prevent contamination from plasticizers which
can interfere with analysis.
Antemortem
Blood, milk, or adipose tissue (from a biopsy), or suspect
feed or product can be analyzed. However, finding OC
residues is not alone diagnostic because of the widespread
persistence of these compounds in the environment.
Postmortem
377
Liver, brain, adipose tissue, and ingesta collected during
necropsy can be analyzed.
Management of Exposures
Treatment is aimed at controlling neurological signs and
preventing further exposure. No specific antidote exists, so
therapy
is largely
symptomatic and  supportive.
Neurological stimulation can be addressed with antiseizure
medications (e.g., diazepam, barbiturates, gas anesthetics,
propofol, etc.) but may be difficult to control. For dermal
exposures animals should be bathed with a liquid dish
exposures. Personnel should use protective measures to
prevent self-exposure.
Prognosis
The prognosis is dependent upon the OC involved, the
dose, and how quickly treatment is initiated. Those
animals with few or mild signs and that receive prompt
treatment have a good prognosis. Animals with prolonged
or severe signs, or for which treatment has been delayed
have a guarded prognosis.
ORGANOPHOSPHORUS
AND
CARBAMATE
INSECTICIDES
Sources/Formulations
This group of compounds is characterized by their ability
to inhibit the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. There are a
number  of organophosphorus (OP) and carbamate
378
insecticides developed for use on animals and crops, as
well as around buildings or in structures such as ships and
airplanes. The development of newer and safer insecticides
has limited the use of this class of compounds to some
extent, but many of these products are still available and in
use. Older formulations can turn up from storage in old
outbuildings such as sheds and barns. Most OP and
carbamate insecticides are applied topically to the animal
or plant, but some are designed to be absorbed and act
systemically. The OPs and carbamates can be found in
various formulations including dusts, wettable powders,
and emulsifiable concentrates. They have been used in
dips, sprays, flea collars, shampoos, flea foggers, and ant
and roach baits.
The organophosphorus insecticides are aliphatic carbon.
cyclic, or heterocyclic phosphate esters. They can be
identified by the presence of the terms phosphate,
phosphorothioate,
phosphoramidate,phosphonate,
phosphoryl, or phosphorothiolate somewhere in their long
chemical name. Carbamates are derivatives of carbamic
acid and generally
1have the terms carbamate,or
carbamoyl, somewhere in their long chemical name.
Tables 18.1 and 18.2 provide common and chemical
names of some representative OPs and carbamates, and
their acute oral LD50.
Kinetics
Ultimately, absorption is dependent upon lipid solubility
and carrier formulation, but in general, the cholinesterase
inhibitors tend to be well absorbed from any exposure
379
route. They are rapidly distributed to tissues throughout the
body.
The cholinesterase inhibitors are metabolized primarily in
the liver. In most cases the metabolic process detoxifies
the compound but some organophosphorus insecticides
may be activated or have an increase in activity following
metabolism.  In  particular,   phosphorothioates  and
phosphorodithioates  (sulfur-containing   compounds)
undergo oxidative desulfuration reactions to form the oxon
derivatives that have increased potency. General oxidation
and hydrolysis reactions, in particular the cleavage of the
ester linkage, markedly reduce toxicity (Taylor 2001).
Most OPs and carbamates are excreted as degradation
products in the urine.
Mechanism of Action
The OP and carbamate insecticides inhibit the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (AChE). AChE functions to break
down the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) into
acetate and choline, which are then recycled to form more
acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter found
between preganglionic and postganglionic neurons of the
autonomicnervous
 system;
at
the junction 
of
postganglionic parasympathetic neurons in smooth muscle.
cardiac muscle, or exocrine glands; at neuromuscular
junctions of the somatic nervous system; and at cholinergic
synapses in the CNS. AChE is also found on the surface of
red blood cells, although its function there is uncertain.
Inhibition of AChE results in excess ACh at the
postsynaptic receptor, and thus exaggerated stimulation.
Normally, depolarization and transmission of the action
380
potential occurs with temporary binding of acetylcholine
and ends upon degradation. When AChE is phosphorylated
(due to binding of OPs) or carbamylated (due to binding of
  isd   s  (
is
not broken 
down.
Continued
 stimulation
and
depolarization of  the postsynaptic
 membranes
may
progress to paralysis because repolarization cannot occur.
Table 18.1. Common organophosphorus compounds
Compound
Chemical Name
Acute Oral LDso
(mg/kg; rat)
0,O-diethyl
Chlorpyrifos
O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridyl)
135
phosphorothioate
0,0-diethyl
Diazinon
O-(2-isopropyl-4-methyl-6-pyrimidyl)
300
phosphorothioate
Dichlorvos
2,2-dichloro-vinyl dimethyl phosphate
25
Disulfoton
O,O-diethyl S-2-[(ethylthio) ethyl]
2
(aka Disyston) phosphorodithioate
Phosmet
O,O-dimethyl S-phthalimidomethyl
147
phosphorodithioate
S[{tert-butylthiomethyl]
Terbufos
1.6
O,O-diethylphosphorodithioate
Dimethyl
Trichlorfon
(2,2,2-trichloro-1-hydroxyethyl)
630
phosphonate
Table 18.2. Common carbamate compounds
Compound | Chemical Name
Acute
Oral
LD50
(mg)
381
kg:
rat)
Aldicarb
2-methyl-2-(methylthio)propionaldehyde-O-(methylcarbomoyljox ime0.9
Carbaryl
1-naphthyl methylcarbamate
307
Carbofuran
2,3-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-7-benzofuranyl methylcarbamate
Methomyl
S-methyl N-(methylcarbamoyloxy) thioacetimidate
17
Propoxur
O-isopropoxyphenyl methylcarbamate
95
The OPs and carbamates occupy the anionic and esteratic
sites of AChE. The binding of OPs to AChE is considered
"irreversible" since the phosphorus atom of the OP
attached to the esteratic site of AChE is a fairly strong
bond with a half-life of hours or days. The binding of the
carbonyl structure of carbamates to the esteratic site is
considered a "reversible" bond because of its relatively
shorter half-life of 30 to 40 minutes. The phenomenon of
"aging" can occur with some OPs but not with carbamates.
Aging occurs when the phosphorus atom attached to the
esteratic site is demethylated or deethylated, resulting in a
stable, unbreakable bond. (Sultatos 1994; Fukuto 1990)
The rate at which aging occurs varies with the OP. Once
aging has occurred, the enzyme will no longer be active
and the body must synthesize new enzyme over days to
weeks.Reexposure
a
a  cholinesterase-inhibiting
compound during this time will cause further depression of
already  compromised AChE  activity  with potentially
devastating results
Toxicity
The acute oral toxicity of this class of compounds varies
widely, from highly toxic (<lmg/kg) to practically
nontoxic (> 5 gm/kg) depending upon formulation, route,
382
and species. Cats and fish tend to be very sensitive to the
cholinesterase inhibitors. The minimum oral lethal dose of
chlorpyrifos  in catsis  10-40mg/kg  (Fikes 1992).
Information on toxicities of specific insecticides can be
found on MSDSs, other product data literature, and
reputable websites. In most cases, acute toxicosis is the
most likely problem encountered. Tables 18.1 and 18.2
n  s     dg
OPs and carbamates.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical signs can be related to either muscarinic or
nicotinic effects, and the predominance of a particular sign
as well as the rate of its progression can vary with the OP
and species involved. Muscarinic signs are the classic
cholinergic or SLUDDE signs (salivation, lacrimation,
urination, diarrhea, dyspnea, and emesis). In addition,
animals can exhibit
m1os1s
 and/or  bradycardia
Alternatively, due to sympathetic override, mydriasis or
tachycardia can be seen. Dyspnea is the result of excess
bronchial secretions. Nicotinic signs are related to effects
at the neuromuscular junction and can manifest as muscle
fasciculations or tremors, generalized tetany, and paralysis.
CNS signs, though less common, can include depression or
hyperstimulation, and seizures.
Adelayed neuropathy syndrome (Organophosphorus
Induced Delayed Neuropathy, OPIDN) was described in
humans  during  prohibition  following  ingestion  of
Jamaican  Ginger  tainted  with  triorthocresylphosphate
383
("Ginger Jake paralysis"), with signs starting 1 week to 1
syndrome (intermediate syndrome) has been reported in
cats exposed to chlorpyrifos, with signs accompanied by
persistentlydepressed
1 blood  cholinesterase activity,
starting within days of exposure.
Laboratory
No diagnostic changes are noted on routine CBC or
chemistry evaluations. Although performing CBC and
chemistry profiles will not rule in or out a diagnosis of OP
or carbamate toxicosis, they are recommended
1to
determine the overall health of the poisoned patient.
Differential Diagnosis
Differential
diagnoses
include
 agents
causing
neuromuscular effects as  well as those producing
muscarinictype signs including tremorgenic mycotoxins,
amitraz, pyrethrins/pyrethroids, pancreatitis, and garbage
intoxication.
Diagnostics
Confirmation of an OP or carbamate poisoning is based on
history of exposure and appropriate clinical signs,
detection of the compound in tissues, and suppression of
cholinesterase
 activity.  Samples   for  cholinesterase
determination should be chilled, not frozen.
Antemortem
384
A test dose of atropine can be used to help differentiate an
OP/carbamate toxicosis from another cause of signs.
Administration of a preanesthetic dose of atropine (0.02
mg/kg IV) will not produce signs of atropinization in these
  s       
treatment).
Appropriate samples for chemical detection are ingesta,
bait, urine, and hair (if dermal exposure is suspected).
Whole blood should be collected in the clinical patient for
determination of cholinesterase activity. Whole blood
should be refrigerated, not frozen. Depression of
cholinesterase activity of 50% to 80% of normal is typical
and is consistent with exposure and intoxication.
Postmortem
Liver, ingesta, hair, urine, and any suspect bait should be
collected  on  necropsy  for   chemical  identification.  In
addition, collect retina (collect entire globe of eye), and
brain (entire brain or hemisphere) for cholinesterase
determination. Retina and brain should be chilled, not
frozen.
Management of Exposures
The  clinical
course of
many  OP and carbamate
and intensive therapy. The goals of treatment are to correct
and  support  respiratory  and  cardiovascular  function,
control nervous stimulation, and eliminate further exposure
throughdecontamination.
385
Respiratory compromise is the most common cause of
deathfromthisclassof
compounds due  to
bronchoconstriction, increased bronchial secretions, and
bradycardia. Oxygen  therapy should
1be instituted.
Atropine is indicated for life-threatening muscarinic signs
(Mensching and Volmer 2008). Give to effect, but do so
cautiously, because atropine toxicosis can occur with
overzealous administration.  Atropine is not effective
against nicotinic signs
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM; Protopam chloride), a
cholinesterase reactivator, at 10-15 mg/kg IM or SC twice
daily is indicated for the treatment of neuromuscular
(nicotinic) signs (Plumb 2005). Pralidoxime binds to the
OPAChE complex, liberating the enzyme. It is not
effective for treatment of muscarinic signs, or if aging has
occurred. However, because the aging process varies with
the OP, administration of 2-PAM is worthwhile. If no
improvement is seen after 3 consecutive doses, 2-PAM
should be discontinued, because at high doses (150 mg/kg)
itcan also inhibit AChE. Diazepam or another
anticonvulsant medication is indicated for seizures.
The goal of decontamination is to prevent further
absorption. Care should be taken to protect personnel from
exposure. Animals exposed dermally should be bathed in a
liquid dish detergent. Care should be taken to maintain
normal body temperature. Insecticide collars should be
removed. Clipping may be necessary for animals with long
or matted hair.
Because clinical signs can develop rapidly with some
agents, and the carriers for some products may be
386
hydrocarbon-based, induction of vomiting should be done
with caution following oral exposures (see Chapter 7,
"Decontamination Procedures"). Gastric lavage might be
preferable in some cases. Activated charcoal is effective in
binding OP and carbamate insecticides
In all cases of exposure, animals should be monitored and
provided with appropriate supportive therapy if necessary.
Prognosis
The prognosis is dependent upon the OP or carbamate
involved, the dose and time of exposure, formulation, and
species. The more potent AChE agents can produce
clinical signs and death within minutes to hours. For these
cases, the prognosis is guarded even with prompt and
aggressive intervention.
PYRETHRINS AND PYRETHROIDS
Sources/Formulations
Because of concern for toxicity and environmental
persistence of the organochlorine and organophosphorus
insecticides, there was a shift toward greater use of
pyrethrins and pyrethroids in the 1970s. Recent estimates
state that pyrethrins and pyrethroids currently make up
more than 25% of the world insecticide market (Vais et al.
2001). This class of insecticides is effective against a
number of insect pests and products are marketed as
sprays, dusts, dips, shampoos, spot-ons, gels, foggers, ear
tags, pour-ons, back rubbers, and face rubbers.
387
Pyrethrum is a mixture of six active insecticidal
compounds termed pyrethrins: pyrethrin I and II, cinerin I
and II, jasmolin I and II. Pyrethrum occurs naturally in the
flowers of Chrysanthemum species. Chemically, pyrethrins
are esters of alcohols and acids. Synthetic modification of
the basic pyrethrin structure has resulted in a series of
potency and are more environmentally stable than the
pyrethrins. Potency is enhanced with the addition of a
cyano group, leading to the classification of the type I
(lacking a cyano group) and type II (containing a cyano
group) pyrethroids
Kinetics
The pyrethrins and pyrethroids tend to have poor dermal
1   ) (s  %) udos
However, the grooming behavior of animals results in oral
exposure even when products are applied dermally.
Carriers and solvents can also influence absorption
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are incompletely absorbed
following oral exposure, with approximately 40%-60% of
an oral dose absorbed (ATSDR 2001). Once absorbed they
are rapidly distributed and because of their lipophilicity
will accumulate in nervous tissue (Anadon 2009).
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are hydrolyzed in the GI tract
and metabolized by a variety of tissue types throughout the
body. Metabolites and parent compounds are eliminated
via bile and urine.
Mechanism of Action
388
The primary mode of action of the pyrethrins and
pyrethroids is through disruption of normal sodium
channel function, resulting in a prolongation of sodium
channel opening, a less polarized membrane, and ultimate
repetitive firing of action potentials. Differences in type I
and type II mechanisms have been identified with type HI
pyrethroids more likely to cause depolarization, but this
has little significance in either the occurrence of clinical
signs or the treatment of the poisoned patient. Pyrethrins
also act on GABA receptors at high doses, but this
mechanism also appears to be of little clinical significance
(Anadon 2009).
Toxicity
Toxicity
yvaries widely and is dependent upon the
individual pyrethrin or pyrethroid, species of animal,
formulation, and route of exposure. In general, the
pyrethroids are considered less acutely toxic than the OP
and carbamate insecticides. Adverse effects are often the
result of extralabel use, but can also occur from individual
hypersensitivity reactions and genetic-based idiosyncratic
reactions (Hansen 2006). Animals that are weak or
debilitated from a large flea burden or from other causes
are at increased risk. Fish are highly sensitive to this class
of compounds. Care should
1betaken toavoid
contamination of water bodies when using these
compounds outdoors. Indoor aquaria should be protected
when using foggers or sprays in the home. The air pump
intake should be turmned off and the tank and intake covered
during application. The home must be well ventilated
before returning to use (Volmer 2004). Cats are exquisitely
389
sensitive to concentrated permethrin products, likely
because of their reduced ability to metabolize permethrin
Clinical Effects
Signs
    s  s  
dermal route, most signs are attributed to skin sensitivity.
Cats sprayed with a pyrethrin-based spray might exhibit
paw shaking, ear twitching, flicking of the tail, and
twitching of the skin on their backs. Some cats hide or are
reluctant to move or walk, holding a leg out to the side.
Signs
Sgenerally
begin 
within
minutes tohours
postapplication, and resolve with minimal treatment by
24-48 hours (Volmer 2004). Hypersalivation can occur
from grooming soon after application. This might be due
to the unpleasant taste or to a tingling sensation on the
tongue and mouth. Dermal reactions might also be due to a
tingling sensation (paresthesia) produced by the product.
Cats mistreated  with  concentrated permethrin  spot-on
products (36%-65% permethrin) intended for dogs can
develop life-threatening seizures. Cats can also develop a
toxicosis following grooming of freshly treated dogs
before the product has dried. Signs develop within 12-18
hours and include initial apprehension and agitation,
hypersalivation, and vocalization, progressing to tremors
and seizures by 18-24 hours. Convulsions are severe and
can be difficult to control. Death can occur in untreated
cats (Volmer 2004).
390
Dogs can also develop signs associated with dermal
hypersensitivity. They act uncomfortable, lick or chew at
their skin, roll on the floor, or rub their backs.
Occasionally an episode of vomiting or diarrhea occurs,
and is not considered a true toxic effect but a nonspecific
stress effect.
Laboratory
No specific clinical pathological alterations are associated
with exposure to the pyrethrins and pyrethroids. However,
for animals with severe signs, a CBC and chemistry is
recommended to assess the overall health of the poisoned
patient.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis list should include any toxic
agents or other conditions that cause nervous stimulation.
Tox1c
 agents
 include  strychnine,  metaldehyde,
methylxanthines, illicit drugs (cocaine, amphetamines),
and organophosphorus or carbamate insecticides.
Diagnostics
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and appropriate
clinical signs.
Antemortem
Analysis for pyrethrins and pyrethroids is limited to a few
laboratories. Preferred samples include whole blood.
serum, and urine. Unfortunately, concentrations are not
391
well correlated to clinical signs. Hair samples can be
analyzed for permethrinto verify exposure in cats
suspected of receiving an inappropriate application. A
spot-on application should be considered if a greasy or oily
area is noted on the animal's fur.
Postmortem
Hair, brain, and liver can be used for chemical analysis
Because analyses for pyrethrins and pyrethroids are not
widely available, consultation with a diagnostic laboratory
is recommended prior to submission. No pathognomonic
lesions are expected on gross necropsy or histopathology.
Management of Exposures
Treatment is aimed at controlling excess neurological
stimulation and preventing further exposure. For mild
effects such as hypersalivation, ear twitching, and paw
shaking that are often associated with use of a pyrethrin
spray, no treatment is usually required. Offering a tasty
treat such as milk or tuna juice can alleviate
hypersalivation. If mild signs persist the animal can be
bathed in a liquid dish detergent and kept warm. Rinsing
alone will not remove most topical products. Clinical signs
usually resolve rapidly following bathing. Animals with
moderate to severe discomfort may require treatment with
an antihistamine. In addition, vitamin E oil applied to the
application site might help to alleviate the irritation.
Cats mistreated with a permethrin product intended for
dogs should be considered a medical emergency. If the
exposure was recent and the animal is not exhibiting
392
clinical signs, the cat should be thoroughly bathed in a
liquid dish detergent, dried well, and kept warm. The
animal should be monitored for the next 12-18 hours for
the development of clinical signs. If the cat is already
exhibiting tremors or seizures, hospitalization is required.
Methocarbamol, a centrally acting
skeletal muscle
relaxant, is effective in controlling the tremors and
seizures. One-third to one-half of the dose is administered
as a bolus (not exceeding 2 ml/min). As the cat begins to
relax the administration is paused, and the remainder is
given to effect. Methocarbamol can be repeated as needed
to a maximum dailydose of 330 mg/kg. Complete
termination of the tremors might not occur and is not
necessary (Volmer 1998a,b) Diazepam alone is ineffective
in controlling severe signs. Barbiturates, gas anesthetics,
and propofol have also been used with varying results to
control the signs.
Once stabilized the cat should be bathed in liquid dish
detergent to remove any residual permethrin, dried well,
and kept warm. Activated charcoal is not indicated unless
the permethrin product was administered orally to the cat.
General supportive care should be instituted including IV
fluids, blood glucose monitoring and correction, and
thermoregulation. For most cats receiving appropriate
treatment, recovery is achieved by 24 to 72 hours, and
permanent sequelae are not expected. Fine muscle tremors
may linger for several days. However, this should not
preclude releasing the patient to the owners as long as the
animal is able to eat, drink, and use the litter box. Atropine
is not indicated.
Prognosis
393
Most  animals  experiencing  a  pyrethrin  or  pyrethroid
toxicosis are expected to have an excellent prognosis. Cats
exposed to concentrated permethrin products have a good
prognosis if timely and intensive treatment is initiated.
Cats exhibiting severe or prolonged signs, or for which
timely treatment is denied, have a guarded prognosis.
NEONICOTINOIDS
Sources/Formulations
Neonicotinoids, the only major new class of insecticides
developed in the past 3 decades, have been synthesized for
use against insect pests on crops and companion animals.
Worldwide annual sales of neonicotinoids account for
11%-15% of the total insecticide market (Tomizawa
2005). Of the 7 neonicotinoids in use today, only 3 are of
primary significance to companion animals: imidacloprid
(Advantage?), nitenpyram (Capstar?), and dinotefuran
(Vectra?).  Imidacloprid and dinotefuran are used in
topical formulations, and nitenpyram is the active
ingredient in an oral product. Imidacloprid and nitenpyram
are chloronicotinyl compounds developed based on  the
structure of nicotine. Dinotefuran is a furanicotinyl
compound developed using acetylcholine as the lead
compound. The chloronicotinyl compounds are considered
first generation neonicotinoids, and the furanicotinyl
compounds are third generation. The second generation
neonicotinoids are thianicotinyl compounds and are used
primarily for crop protection (Wakita 2003)
Kinetics
394
The neonicotinoids tend to be rapidly absorbed following
oral exposure. There are a number of pathways for
metabolism depending upon the specific neonicotinoid and
species. Elimination is primarily via urine with some fecal
excretion. The neonicotinoids tend to have short half-lives
in the body and thus pose little risk for bioaccumulation.
Mechanism of Action
The neonicotinoids are considered neurotoxins that bind to
the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR). They have a
much higher binding affinity to the nAChR of insects than
mammals (Tomizawa and Casida 2005). Dinotefuran is
thought to bind to a unique location on the receptor
compared to imidacloprid and nitenpyram (Wakita et al. 2
005). In normal nerve tissue, the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine is rapidly broken down by AChE to end the
synaptic transmission and return the membrane to its
normal resting state. The neonicotinoids bind at or near the
site  where  nicotine  binds,  producing
unregulated
stimulation and ultimately death of the insect.
Table 18.3.
 Toxicological  profiles  of   neonicotinoid
insecticides
Source: Tomizawa 2005.
395
Rat
Acute Oral
NOAEL
Acute Oral
Compound
LDso (mg/kg)(mg/kg/day)LD (mg/kg)
Imidacloprid
450
5.7
31
Nitenpyram
1628
>2250
Dinotefuran
2400
127
>2000
Toxicity
Because of their low affinity for mammalian nicotinic
receptors and rapid metabolism, the neonicotinoids in
general have a wide margin of safety. Table 18.3 lists
some toxicity values of the 3 common neonicotinoids.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Because of their wide margin of safety, toxic effects from
imidacloprid, nitenpyram, and dinotefuran are rare and are
likely due to other components of the formulation. Oral
exposures can result  in self-limiting vomiting. Dermal
exposures can result in erythema, pruritus, and alopecia.
Laboratory
No clinical laboratory changes are expected  from the
neonicotinoids.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
396
There are no routine diagnostic tests for the neonicotinoids
in tissues. Consultation with a diagnostic laboratory is
recommended prior to submission.
Postmortem
No lesions
are
expected ongross necropsy
or
histopathology.
Management of Exposure
For most clinical cases the signs are transient and require
no
treatment.
 Bathing  and administration  of
an
antihistamine may be required for some cases of dermal
discomfort. Oral exposures can be treated by diluting with
milk or water. If vomiting occurs, food and water should
be removed for a brief period (1-2 hours) to allow the GI
tract to settle down.
Prognosis
Because of their exceptional safety profiles, rapid
metabolism, and their availability only in limited quantities
for companion animals, exposures carry an excellent
prognosis.
REFERENCES
Anadon, A., Martinez-Larranaga, M.R., and Martinez,
M.A. 2009. Use and abuse of pyrethrins and synthetic
pyrethroids in veterinary medicine. The Veterinary Journal
182:7-20
397
Andrade, S.F. and Sakate, M. 2003. The comparative
efficacy of yohimbine and atipamezole to treat amitraz
intoxication in dogs, Veterinary and Human Toxicology
45(3): 124-127.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry). 2001. Toxicological profile for pyrethrins and
pyrethroids: draft for public comment, Washington, D.C..
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service.
Buck, William B., Osweiler, Gary D., Van, Gelder, and
Gary, A. 1976. Organochlorine insecticides. In Clinical
and Diagnostic Veterinary Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited
by Gary A. Van Gelder, pp. 191-204. Dubuque: Kendall
Hunt.
EXTOXNET. Pesticide information profile for amitraz,
1995, Oregon State University, http://extoxnet.orst.edu/
pips/amitraz.htm
Fikes, J.D. 1992. Feline chlorpyrifos toxicosis. In Current
Veterinary Therapy XI: Small Animal Practice, edited by
Robert W Kirk and John D Bonagura. p. 188. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders.
Fukuto, TR.1990.Mechanismof actionof
organophosphorus and
carbamate
 insecticides.
Environmental Health Perspectives 87:245-254.
Hansen, Steve R. 2006. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In
Small Animal Toxicology, edited by Michael E. Peterson
398
and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 1002-1010. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Hsu, W.H., Lu, Z.X., and Hembrough, F.B. 1986. Effect of
amitraz on heart rate and aortic blood pressure in
conscious dogs: Influence of atropine, prazosin, tolazoline,
and yohimbine. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology
84(2): 418-422.
Hugnet, C., Buronrosse, F., Pineau, X., Cadore, JL.
Lorque, G., and Berny, P.J. 1996. Toxicity and kinetics of
amitraz in dogs, American Journal of Veterinary Research
57(10): 1506-1510.
Mensching, Donna, Volmer, Petra A. 2008. Insecticides
and Molluscicides. In Handbook of Small Animal Practice,
edited by Rhea V. Morgan, pp. 1197-1204. St. Louis:
Saunders Elsevier.
Paradis, M. 1999. New approaches to the treatment of
canine demodicosis. Veterinary Clinics of North America
Small Animal Practice 29(6):1425-1436.
Plumb, D.C. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3d ed
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing
Sultatos, LG.  1994.  Mammalian  toxicology
of
organophosphorus pesticides. Journal of Toxicology and
EnvironmentalHealth43(3):271-289
Taylor, Palmer. 2001. Anticholinesterase agents. In
Goodman and Gilman's thePharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 10th edition, edited by Joel G. Hardman,
399
Lee E. Limbird, and Alfred G. Gilman, pp. 175-192. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Tomizawa, Motohiro, Casida, John E. 2005. Neonicotinoid
insecticide toxicology: Mechanisms of selective action.
AnnualReviewofPharmacologyandToxicology45:
247-268
Vais, H., Williamson, M.S., Devonshire, A.L., Usherwood.
P.N. 2001. The molecular interactions of pyrethroid
insecticides with insect and mammalian sodium channels.
Pest Management Science 57(10j:877-888
Volmer, P.A., Kahn, S.A., Knight, M.W., and Hansen,
S.R. 1998a. Warning against use of some permethrin
productsincats.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinary
Medical Association 213(6):800-801.
 1998b. Permethrin spot-on products can be toxic
in cats. V eterinary Medicine 93(12):1039.
Volmer, Petra A. 2004. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In
Clinical  Veterinary Toxicology. edited by Konnie H.
Plumlee, pp. 188-190. St. Louis: Mosby.
Wakita T., Kinoshita, K., Yamada, E., Yasui, N.,
Kawahara, N., Naoi, A., Nakaya, M., Ebihara, K.,
Matsuno, H., and Kodaka, K. 2003. The discovery of
dinotefuran: A novel neonicotinoid. Pest Management
Science 59(9):1016-1022.
400
Wakita, T., Yasui, N., Yamada, E., Kishi, D. 2005.
Development of a novel insecticide, dinotefuran. Journal
ofPesticideScience30(2)122-123.
Woollen, B.H., Marsh, J.R., Laird, W.J., Lesser, J.E. 1992.
The metabolism of cypermethrin in man: Differences in
urinary metabolite profiles following oral and dermal
administration. Xenobiotica 22(8):983-991.
401
19
Other Pesticides
Robert H.Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
A pesticide is defined as any substance or mixture of
substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling,
substance, a biological agent (such as a virus or
bacterium), an antimicrobial, a disinfectant, or a device
used
La
against any pest. Pests include insects, plant
pathogens, weeds, molluscs, birds, mammals, fish
parasites, and microbes that destroy property, spread
disease, or are a vector for disease or cause a nuisance.
Pesticides can be categorized based upon the type of pest
they are intended to control (i.e., insecticides, rodenticides.
herbicides, fungicides, avicides, etc.). There are literally
hundreds of different chemicals used as pesticides with
diverse chemical structures, formulations, and toxicities.
Although there are obvious benefits to the use of
pesticides, there are also potential risks such as potential
toxicity to humans and other animals.
Insecticides and rodenticides are commonly involved in
animal intoxications and are discussed  in separate
chapters. This chapter is intended to discuss several other
diverse pesticides that have been associated with pet
intoxication; it is not intended to be comprehensive in its
scope. Interested readers are referred to an excellent
402
website under the auspices of the National Pesticide
Information   Center
(NPIC) that
thas awealth
of
information  on  various  pesticides:  http://npic.orst.edu/
index.html.
. This website has numerous pesticide fact
sheets and toxicity information and a section specifically
addressing pesticide use on or around animals. The
USEPA-sponsored publication entitled Recognition and
Management of Pesticide Poisonings, 5th edition, is a
valuable source of information regarding the toxicology
and general treatment approaches for a large number of
pesticides typically not discussed in veterinary textbooks
(Riegart and Roberts 1999). The entire manual is available
in mind that there is limited species-specific toxicity data
for many pesticides and that for the majority of pesticides
discussed below, treatment of poisoned animals involves
appropriate  and  timely  decontamination along  with
symptomatic and supportive care; specific antidotes are
typically not available.
MISCELLANEOUS
INSECTICIDES
AND
REPELLANTS
Boric Acid and Borates
Sources and Formulations
  a      r o
insectlarvae  in livestock
K confinement areas and
cockroaches, ants, and other insects in residences. Powders
and tablets scattered on floors present a hazard for pets;
cats can be exposed by grooming paws after contact with
powders spread on floors.
403
Kinetics and Toxicity
Absorption of boric acid from the GI tract is rapid (Welch
2004). Following absorption it is found at highest
concentrations in the brain, liver, and kidneys. It is
eliminated unchanged by the kidneys with a half-life of 5
to 21 hours. The acute oral LDso reported for rats range
from 2 to approximately 5 g/kg. Thus, it is considered
slightly toxic. However, chronic exposure to lower doses is
a potential problem.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action of boric acid is unknown, but it
is considered to be cytotoxic.
Clinical Effects
The GI tract, vascular system, brain, and kidneys are
primary target organs. In acute, single-dose, oral
exposures,  signs
include hypersalivation, vomiting,
depression, anorexia, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Depending on the dose ingested, weakness, ataxia,
tremors, focal or generalized seizures, oliguria or anuria,
renal tubular nephrosis, and liver damage may occur,
although the latter is uncommon (Welch 2004). Seizures
can be followed by metabolic acidosis, depression, coma,
and death. Chronic, toxic exposures cause anorexia, weight
loss, vomiting, loose stools, rashes, alopecia, anemia, and
death.
Diagnostics
404
Antemortem
A history of exposure, occurrence of compatible clinical
signs, and possibly the detection of elevated levels of
boron in blood, plasma, or urine support a diagnosis.
Postmortem
Significant lesions can be found in target organs such as
the GI tract, kidneys, brain, liver, and skin. No lesions are
unique to boric acid, but a constellation of lesions might
support a diagnosis. Measurement of boron in kidneys and
liver might also be helpful to confirm exposure.
Management of Exposures
Standard decontamination procedures should be followed
with suspected exposures. Exposed hair and skin should be
washed with mild soap or shampoo and water followed by
thorough rinsing. Emetics or cathartics might not be
a  a  sr s   n
diarrhea. Activated charcoal is generally not administered
due to poor adsorption of boric acid. Symptomatic and
supportive care is often needed. Intravenous balanced
electrolyte solutions and glucose are administered as
needed. GI protectants and antiemetics might be indicated.
Maintaining urine flow is important to prevent or correct
kidney damage. Although dialysis (hemo- or peritoneal
dialysis) might be indicated if renal failure occurs, it does
not appear to increase borate clearance. Benzodiazepines
can be given to control seizures.
Prognosis
405
cases the prognosis is good. With large acute ingestions or
chronic exposures, the prognosis is more guarded.
Diethyltoluamide (DEET)
Sources and Formulations
DEET is a widely used liquid insect repellant suitable for
application to skin or fabrics. Products contain a range of
concentrations from 5% to 100%
Kinetics and Toxicity
DEET is well absorbed following dermal or oral exposures
(Dorman 2004). The amount absorbed increases with
increasing concentrations, and the solvents used in many
o n r a s s  s
1999). The clearance of absorbed DEET is rapid with a
half-life measured in hours. It is primarily eliminated via
the urine. The toxicity of DEET is low with rat oral LD50
ranging from 1.8 to 2.7 g/kg body weight. Dermal toxicity
is also low based on studies in rabbits where single
applications of 2 to 4 g/kg did not cause any clinical signs.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of toxic action of DEET is unknown.
Signs
Repeated topical exposures can cause dermal and ocular
irritation. Clinical signs observed in dogs and cats with
406
suspected acute DEET intoxication include vomiting,
tremors, excitation, ataxia, and seizures (Dorman 1990)
There are no characteristic laboratory findings associated
withDEET intoxication.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
An antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of exposure
(perhaps noticing a residue on skin or hair). Testing fot
DEET is not widely available, although contacting a
veterinary    diagnostic  laboratory   might   be   helpful;
detection of residues on hair or in biological specimens
only confirms exposure and not necessarily intoxication.
Postmortem
There are no characteristic postmortem findings
Management of Exposures
Treatment involves standard dermal, ocular, and GI
decontamination procedures including induction of emesis
if early after an oral ingestion, washing skin and hair with
mild soap and water followed by a thorough rinse, and
flushing eyes following an ocular exposure. Initially,
seizures should be treated with a benzodiazepine such as
diazepam. Other symptomatic and supportive care is
provided as needed.
Prognosis
407
Most animals with mild DEET intoxication recover
uneventfully in several days.
Macrocyclic Lactone Parasiticides
Sources and Formulations
Macrocyclic
lactone
parasiticides  (also
kmown
macrolides) are compounds used to treat or prevent a
variety of parasitic diseases in domestic animals and
humans. These products are derived from fermentation
products of Streptomyces avermitilis and S. cyaneogriseus.
They are often referred to as endectocides due to their
ability to kill both intermal (endo) and external (ecto)
parasites (Lanusse et al.
2009). Macrolides  include
ivermectin,
 abamectin,
doramectin,
eprinomectin,
milbemycin oxime, moxidectin, and selamectin. These
products are used for prevention of heartworms in dogs
and cats, treatment of feline ear mites, prevention of
intermal nematode infestation, and management
ofa
variety of other parasitic diseases such as scabies and
infestations of lice (Mealey 2006). Several macrolides are
used in food animals and horses for the prevention and
treatment of internal and extermnal parasites. Abamectin b1
is a macrocyclic lactone that is present in some household
insecticides, in ant and roach bait stations, and in
agricultural insecticides.  Products containing macrolides
include tablets, chewable tablets, spot-on products, gels,
pour-on liquids, injectable solutions, otic solutions,
premixes, and granules.
Kinetics and Toxicity
408
In general, macrolides are well absorbed orally and some
(e.g., selamectin) are also well absorbed dermally (Mealey
2006). Many of these compounds are lipophilic, with
moxidectin being the most lipophilic of the group (Lanusse
et al. 2009). The macrolides have relatively long half-lives
due to their wide tissue distribution, lipophilicity (fat
storage), extensive biliary, and intestinal secretion and
enterohepatic recycling (Lanusse et al. 2009).
The macrolides have a wide margin of safety in mammals
due to the fact that they do not cross the bloodbrain barrier
under normal circumstances (Lanusse et al. 2o09).
Animals with blood-brain barrier defects are at increased
affect animals with intact blood-brain barriers. A genetic
polymorphism in some breeds of dogs causes a defect in
the P-glycoprotein of a multidrug resistant pump (coded
for by the MDR1, or ABCB1, gene) in the bloodbrain
barrier. As a consequence of this defect, the bloodbrain
barriers of affected dogs do not exclude certain xenobiotics
(including the macrolides) from the brain. Additionally,
the same P-glycoprotein acts within the intestine to limit
absorption of macrolides, so dogs with the MDR1 defect
may absorb more drug after ingestion and attain higher
blood concentrations of macrolides (Lanusse et al. 2o09)
Higher blood and CNS concentrations of macrolide put
MDR-l defective dogs at risk for toxicosis at dosages of
macrolides that are well tolerated by dogs without this
genetic polymorphism. However, the doses of macrolides
commonly used for heartworm preventative are well below
the levels expected to cause clinical signs in MDR-l
defective dogs, and no problems are expected with the
monthly heartworm treatments even in affected dogs.
409
Table 19.1 lists the dog breeds that to date have had the
MDR1 defect confirmed through genetic testing. Because
this defect is an autosomal recessive trait, only a fraction
of dogs within these breeds would be expected to be
affected.
Table 19.1.Breeds knowntocarry
the MDR
P-glycoprotein genetic polymorphism
Collie
Waller
Longhaired whippet
White Swiss shepherd
Shetland sheepdog
Old English sheepdog
Miniature Australian shepherdBorder collie
Australian shepherd
German shepherd dog
The minimum toxic dose of ivermectin in MDRldefective
dogs is 100 mcg/kg, which is approximately 16 times
higher than the monthly heartworm preventive dose
moxidectin toxicosis has been reported in a collie at 90
mcg/kg (30 times the monthly heartworm preventive
dose); milbemycin  toxicosis
  has  been    reported  in
MDR1defective collies at 5 mg/kg (10 times the monthly
heartworm preventive dose); and selamectin caused ataxia
when administered orally to MDR1 -defective collies at 2.5
times the therapeutic dose. In contrast, dogs without the
MDR1 defect can generally tolerate ivermectin dosages up
to 600 mcg/kg and milbemycin dosages up to 1.6 mg/kg
for treatment of ectoparasites (Mealey 2006). Based on
results in laboratory dogs, the minimum toxic dosage of
ivermectin had been reported to be 2.5 mg/kg. A recent
review of ivermectin toxicosis in dogs revealed that some
individuals are intolerant of dosages as low as 0.2 mg/kg in
410
spite of them belonging to breeds not associated with the
MDR1 defect (Merola et al, 2009), so the potential for
individual sensitivity to macrolides needs to be considered
whenever treatment with higher doses is contemplated.
Mechanism of Action
The macrolides cause death of parasites by paralyzing
nematodes and arthropods through actions on chloride
channels of the pharyngeal pump and somatic musculature
of the parasites. As a result, the parasite loses the ability to
obtain nutrients and its muscular movements are inhibited
Macrolides also may stimulate some parasite GABA
receptors.
Mammals are largely protected from the actions of
macrolides on the nervous system, as the target receptors
exist only within the central nervous system in mammals,
         
P-glycoprotein pump of the blood-brain barrier (Gramer
2010). Animals with defects in the blood-brain barrier due
to inflammation, anatomic anomaly or trauma can be at
increased risk of macrolide toxicosis. Additionally, the
MDR1 pump can be overwhelmed in cases of macrolide
overdose, allowing excessive amounts of macrolide into
the CNS and resulting in toxicosis. Once in the CNS, the
macrolides alter chloride channels and GABA activity,
resulting in CNS depression.
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs associated with macrolide toxicosis include
mydriasis, ataxia, CNS depression, hypersalivation,
411
vomiting, clinical blindness, coma, tremors and seizures
(Roder 2004). Hypothermia may develop secondarily in
recumbent animals. Signs generally occur soon after an
overdose, but in animals being treated with daily doses
signs may not develop until several days of treatment have
passed. Additionally, dogs being treated with injectable
macrolides may have a delay in onset and delay in peak
effect as the macrolide is slowly absorbed from the
subcutaneous injection site.
Diagnostics
Macrolides can be detected in various body tissues, but the
utility of such analysis in aiding in diagnosis of emergent
cases is minimal.  Diagnosis is based on history of
exposure and consistent clinical signs. There are no
expected consistent  postmortem
lesions in animals
succumbing to macrolide toxicosis.
A DNA test is available to detect dogs with MDRl
polymorphisms. The test uses cheek swabs and can be
helpful in identifying dogs that are at increased risk for
macrolide toxicosis.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing exposures to macrolides are patient
stabilization, decontamination, and supportive care for
recumbent animals. In recent ingestions with no serious
clinical signs, induction of emesis should be considered.
Because of the rapid absorption of macrolides from liquids
 psd a s o  o    s 
ingestion, it may be more beneficial to administer activated
412
charcoal. Repeated doses of activated charcoal should be
administered to all animals showing more than mild signs
in order to try to reduce the half-lives of the macrolides.
Animals that become comatose will need intensive nursing
care to prevent hypothermia, decubital ulcers, and
aspiration. Recently, intravenous lipid solution infusions
(ILS) have been used to successfully manage severe
macrolide toxicosis (Crandell 2009), although anecdotally
not all animals appear to respond to this treatment
modality.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the dosage ingested, the MDR1
status of a dog, and the availability of good nursing care to
manage comatose animals. Comatose animals surviving
more than 24 hours have a reasonable chance of recovery
if adequate nursing care is provided.
FUNGICIDES
Fungicides constitute  a  chemically diverse  group of
pesticides. The risk of intoxication from fungicides is low
given use restrictions, available formulations, and low
bioavailability of these compounds (Osweiler, 1996;
Riegart   and   Roberts  1999).   Many fungicides are
formulated as suspensions of wettable powders or
granules, which prevent rapid and efficient absorption
from sites of exposure. Most pets are likely to be exposed
to fungicides as a result of their application to lawns. The
reader is referred to several sources  for additional
information (Gerken 1995; Osweiler 1996; Riegart and
Roberts 1999; and Yeary 2000; the NPIC website)
413
Toxicity
Fungicides vary in terms of their acute toxicity. Many are
almost nontoxic with rodent LD5o greater than 0.5 g/kg
body weight (Osweiler 1996). However, some have
relatively low rodent oral LD5o (e.g., cyclohexamide with
a rat LDso of 2 mg/kg). The four fungicides listed by
Yeary (20o0) for lawn use—flutolonil, iprodione,
propiconazole and thiophanate-methyl—have rat oral
LD50 0f >5000mg/kg, >2000mg/kg, 1517mg/kg, and
6640mg/kg, respectively.
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs are most often nonspecific and include
anorexia, depression, weakness, and diarrhea (Osweiler
1996). Many fungicides are irritating to skin, eyes, and
mucous membranes. There are no characteristic laboratory
findings.
Diagnostics
A diagnosis of intoxication primarily relies on a history of
exposure. Testing for specific fungicides in biological
samples is typically not available.
Management of Exposures
Treatment involves standard decontamination procedures.
For known exposures to fungicides that have low toxicity,
GI decontamination is probably not necessary due to the
unlikely occurrence of clinical signs. There are no
414
antidotes, so in the unlikely event of intoxication.
symptomatic and supportive care is indicated.
HERBICIDES
Herbicides are widely used around farms and homes and
constitute a diverse group of chemicals. They come in a
     s  
from growing (preemergent herbicides) or kill plants that
are
already
growing(postemergent
herbicides)
Preemergent herbicides are typically incorporated into soil
to prevent germination, and postemergent herbicides are
applied directly to the growing plant. Several major
categories of herbicides include chlorophenoxy herbicides
(e.g., 2,4-D), nitrophenolic and nitrocresolic herbicides
(e.g., dinitrocresol, dinitrophenol, dinocap, and dinoseb,
among others), triazine herbicides (e.g., atrazine and
simazine), and bipyridyls (e.g., paraquat and diquat). An
extensive list of other herbicides with associated toxicity
information can be found in Riegart and Roberts (1999).
Only chlorophenoxy and dipyridyls are discussed below.
Chlorophenoxy Herbicides
Sources and Formulations
These compounds are used alone  or  mixed into
commercial fertilizers to control broadleaf weeds. There
are
numerouscommercial
products   that   contain
chlorophenoxy herbicides; 2,4-D is one of the most
commonly used herbicides around the home. 2,4-D is
available in several chemical forms including salts, esters,
and an acid form; toxicity is dependent on the chemical
415
form. Also, products containing 2,4-D can be in liquid.
dust, or granular formulations.
Kinetics and Toxicity
Following ingestion, 2,4-D is rapidly absorbed; the degree
of dermal absorption varies with the formulation of 2,4-D
and species (Yeary 2006). Absorbed 2,4-D is widely
distributed throughout the body, but it does not accumulate
in fat. Elimination is via the renal anion transport system
of the kidney; this system is not as efficient in dogs as
other species, making dogs more susceptible to exposures
to 2,4-D. In dogs, oral dosages of 2,4-D exceeding 175
mg/kg resulted in toxicosis, characterized primarily by
myotonia. Although dosages this high are possible if dogs
were exposed to very concentrated solutions, at the
concentrations used in residential areas (<l%) exposure of
dogs to toxic levels of 2,4-D is extremely unlikely. A
NOAEL of 1 mg/kg/day has been established for dogs in a
chronic study (Yeary 2006).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Chlorophenoxy herbicides are moderately irritating to skin
and mucous membranes. Inhalation of sprays can cause a
burning sensation in the nasopharynx and chest and result
in coughing. Manifestations of systemic toxicity of these
herbicides are known mainly from deliberate, suicidal
exposures in people (Riegart and Roberts 1999). Most
reports of fatal outcomes involve acidosis, electrolyte
imbalances, renal failure, and multiple organ failure. Early
416
signs following exposure include vomiting, diarrhea.
confusion, behavioral changes, and tachycardia. Muscle
weakness, moderate increases in body temperature.
hyperventilation, and seizures can also occur, but they are
less common. Laboratory changes include low arterial pH
and bicarbonate, elevated serum CPK concentrations due
to muscle damage, elevated BUN and creatinine, and
electrolyte disturbances (hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia).
Mild leukocytosis and liver enzyme elevations have also
been noted.
Clinical signs of 2,4-D toxicosis in dogs include vomiting,
anorexia, reluctance to move, muscle rigidity, ataxia, CNS
depression, and muscle weakness (Yeary 2006). Spastic
movements or clonic spasms may occur in severe cases.
Diagnostics
A diagnosis relies on a history of recent exposure.
Depending on the nature of the exposure, a peculiar odor
might be noted on the hair or breath of an exposed animal.
Although antemortem or postmortem analysis of biological
specimens is possible, such testing is not widely available
Management of Exposures
Initial  management  should  include consideration  of
standard    skin   and
d   gastrointestinal  decontamination
would make induction of emesis contraindicated. Other
treatment   is   largely    symptomatic   and    supportive
Antiemetics should be used as needed to control vomiting.
   nq A  n d sio
417
of muscle relaxants such as methocarbamol. Intravenous
fluid administration to induce diuresis is warranted. Forced
alkaline diuresis has been used successfully in the
management of attempted suicides in people (Riegart and
Roberts 1999).  Alkalinizing the urine with sodium
bicarbonate dramatically accelerates excretion of 2,4-D
Prognosis
The prognosis is typically good. However, in people,
myotonia and muscle weakness can persist for months
after acute poisonings.
Dipyridyl Herbicides
Paraquat
Sources and Exposure
Paraquat is widely used as an herbicide for weed and grass
control. In the U.S., paraquat is available primarily as a
liquid in various strengths. It is classified as “restricted
use,” which means that it can be used only by people who
are licensed applicators.
Paraquat is one of the more common agents used in
suicidal attempts. Because paraquat is highly poisonous,
the form marketed in the U.S. has a blue dye to keep it
from being confused with beverages such as coffee, a
sharp odor to serve as a warning, and an added agent to
cause vomiting if ingested. Paraquat has also been used to
maliciously poison pets (Bischoff et al. 1998; Cope et al.
2004).
418
Kinetics and Toxicity
Paraquat is poorly absorbed from the Gl tract (only 5 to
10%), although it can persist in the GI tract for many hours
(Oehme and Pickrell 2004). It is primarily excreted via the
kidneys. Paraquat has a unique affinity for lung tissue and
accumulates in alveolar epithelial  cells.  In animals.
paraquat has oral LD5o ranging from 22 to 262 mg/kg
Clinicalexperience
1n
humans  provides   a  rough
dose-response scale associated with  the severity of
intoxication. Dosages of <20 mg/kg body weight are
associated with mild GI signs and likely recovery. Dosages
of 20 to 40 mg/kg are associated with pulmonary fibrosis
and death within 2 to 3 weeks postexposure. Dosages
>40mg/kg are associated with multiple organ damage with
mortality within 1 to 7 days (before the delayed pulmonary
damage occurs) (Riegart and Roberts 1999).
Mechanism of Action
Paraquat
t forms free radicals that can damage cell
membranes. In the lung, one of the major target tissues.
paraquat undergoes repeated redox cycling that increases
production of reactive oxygen species such as superoxide
jons(O2)whiledecreasing
 important intracelluar
reducing species such as NADPH (Oehme and Pickrell
2004). Superoxide radicals are converted to hydrogen
peroxide by superoxide dismutase. Both superoxide
radicals and hydrogen peroxide damage epithelial cell
membranes and cause pulmonary damage. Paraquat is also
an irritant and vesicant and can cause significant localized
damage upon contact with skin, eyes, or mucous
membranes.
419
CLINICAL EFFECTS
SIGNS
Dermal contact can result in erythema and blistering. Eye
contact results in significant corneal damage. Systemic
signs following exposure typically occur in three phases.
Phase one reflects the corrosive action of paraquat and the
development of gastrointestinal signs including vomiting,
dysphagia, and abdominal pain. The second phase is
manifested by renal and liver damage; this occurs 2 to 3
days after exposure. The third phase is characterized by
development of pulmonary fibrosis, which is ultimately
responsible for most fatalities.
LABORATORY
There are no specific laboratory findings noted with
paraquat poisoning. Radiographic evidence of pulmonary
edema or other pulmonary abnormalities is present if the
animal survives for a sufficient length of time for lesions
to develop.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
Antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and
occurrence of compatible clinical signs. Detection of
paraquat in serum/plasma or urine samples is possible.
POSTMORTEM
420
Postmortem detection of paraquat in tissues or urine is
possible. Because paraquat accumulates in the lungs,
samples of this tissue are often positive for paraquat when
other tissues are negative. Pathologic changes in the lungs
are also rather unique.
Management of Exposures
There are no antidotes for paraquat intoxication. If an
animal is known to have just ingested paraquat, the goal is
removal from the stomach of as much of the toxicant as
possible as quickly as possible to prevent absorption.
Emesis should be induced or gastric lavage should be
performed. The administration of activated charcoal or
Fuller's earth should be started immediately and continued
every   46  hours  for   3-7  days  following ingestion.
Intravenous fluids and furosemide should be administered
to create a forced diuresis, increasing the rate of excretion
of paraquat via the kidneys (Cope et al. 2004). Diuresis is
most useful in the first 72 hours after ingestion.
Hemodialysis is another useful modality in the treatment
of paraquat ingestion, but it also must be performed within
the first 72 hours to improve outcomes. The lack of
availability of hemodialysis to most veterinarians makes
this treatment option more theoretical than practical.
Once an animal presents with clinical signs of respiratory
distress,  treatment  is limited  to supportive care.
Interestingly, oxygen therapy is not recommended as part
of the initial stabilization or treatment of paraquat
ingestion. This is because oxygen increases the amount of
O2  formed and O2 formation is one of the main causes
of pulmonary damage.
421
Prognosis
The prognosis, as mentioned earlier, is dependent on the
degree of exposure. The prognosis is good if only
gastrointestinal signs occur. However, the prognosis is
poor in patients developing multiple organ failure or
pulmonary impairment.
Herbicide Exposure and Cancer
The association between pesticide exposure and the
   n    
debated and studied. Studies linking the occurrence of
malignant lymphoma in dogs with the owner's use of
        
Vietnam to pesticide exposure raised the issue of an
association in veterinary medicine (Hayes et al. 1990.
1991). A review with the use of 2,4-D because of
numerous limitations to the original study design (Carlo et
al. 1992). An epidemiologic study of household dogs
reported an increased risk of bladder cancer with topical
insecticide use (Glickman et al. 1989). Studies have also
Scottish terriers with the use of topical spot-on flea control
products and exposure of lawns to herbicides (Glickman et
al. 2004; Raghavan et al. 2004). Unfortunately, there are
not enough data to draw any firm conclusions concerning
pesticide exposure and cancer or other chronic disease
processes in animals.
Molluscicides
Metaldehyde
422
Sources and Formulations
Metaldehyde is found in a number of snail and slug baits
that are commonly used in and around gardens. Baits are
available in liquid, powder, pellet, and granular
formulations. The concentration of metaldehyde in these
products ranges from 2% to 4%. Some states require that
certain formulations be designed so that they are
unattractive to nontarget species such as dogs (Talcott
2004).
Kinetics and Toxicity
In the stomach, metaldehyde undergoes acid hydrolysis to
acetaldehyde, which is rapidly absorbed (Richardson et al.
2003). Metaldehyde is also absorbed from the stomach
intact. Metaldehyde is rapidly metabolized in the liver by
cytochrome   P450.  Acetaldehyde   is  also  rapidly
metabolized to carbon dioxide. Less than 10% of absorbed
metaldehyde is eliminated in the urine as parent
compound. The half-life of metaldehyde is unknown for
dogs and cats, but is approximately 27 hours in people.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of toxic action is unknown, but likely
involves alterations of neurotransmitters such as GABA.
serotonin, and norepinephrine in the brain (Richardson et
al. 2003).
Clinical Effects
SIGNS
423
A common presentation of intoxicated animals is termed
"shake and bake." Signs can commence as soon as 30
minutes postexposure. The most common clinical signs in
dogs include tachycardia, nystagmus, hyperpnea, ataxia,
seizures, acidosis, cyanosis, diarrhea, dehydration, and
     
hyperthermia can lead to DIC and multiple organ failure
Temporary blindness has been reported in dogs (Talcott
2004). Heightened sensitivity to noise, light, and touch is
also commonly noted.
Signs
Saresimilarinother
intoxicated species.
LABORATORY
There
areno
  characteristic    laboratory   changes.
Hemoconcentration, alterations of renal and liver function
(possibly secondary to uncontrolled hyperthermia), and
mild metabolic acidosis have been reported.
Diagnosis
ANTEMORTEM
A diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and occurrence
of  compatible  clinical  signs.  Laboratory  detection  of
metaldehyde in stomach contents, serum/plasma and urine
in  areas  where  metaldehyde-containing products are
frequently used.
POSTMORTEM
424
There are no characteristic lesions noted. Analysis of GI
contents or urine can confirm exposure.
Management of Exposures
Treatment is directed toward decontamination, controlling
muscle tremors and seizures, correcting hyperthermia, and
providing adequate cardiovascular and respiratory support
(Talcott 2004).
Standard decontamination protocols are recommended. In
asymptomatic  animals, emetics can  be used.  In
symptomatic animals they are not recommended due to the
risk of aspiration. Alternatively, gastric lavage might be
considered, particularly if the animal is anesthetized to
control muscle tremors or seizures. Activated charcoal
with or without a cathartic is indicated
A variety of drugs are used to control muscle tremors or
seizures including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, gas
anesthetics, propofol, and methocarbamol. Methocarbamol
is likely to be effective and should be tried first
(Richardson et al. 2003). Hyperthermia usually resolves
one muscle tremors are controlled. If not, evaporative
cooling, cool water baths, or cool water enemas might be
Regular monitoring of blood gas concentrations, anion
gap, and urine pH is recommended to identify metabolic
acidosis if present. Metabolic acidosis also tends to resolve
once muscle tremors are controlled
Prognosis
425
The overall prognosis isgood with appropriate
decontamination and control of muscle tremors and
seizures
AVICIDES
4-aminopyridine
Sources and Formulations
4-aminopyridine (4-AP) is registered as Avitrol? by the
EPA for use against red- winged blackbirds, grackles, and
blackbirds in agricultural fields, pigeons, and sparrows in
public buildings, and  various birds around livestock
feeding pens. It is usually formulated as a grain (e.g., corn)
bait with 0.5 to 3% active ingredient; it is also available as
a powder. It is a restricted use pesticide that can be used
only by certified applicators. 4-AP repels birds by
poisoning a few individual members of a flock of birds,
causing them to become hyperactive and to utter distress
calls, which signal other birds to leave the site. Only a
small number of birds need to be affected to cause alarm in
the rest of the flock. After one alarming exposure, birds
will usually not return to treated areas.
Kinetics and Toxicity
The chemical is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract. It is
rapidly metabolized by the liver and metabolites are
excreted via the kidneys (Schell 2004). 4-AP is highly
toxic for mammals and birds with LDsos ranging from 3.7
mg/kg for dogs to 20 mg/kg for rodents. Horses have been
intoxicated with as little as 3 mg/kg
426
Mechanism of Action
4-AP blocks potassium ion channels, which causes an
increased release of acetylcholine within synapses and
enhanced nerve transmission.
Clinical Effects
Reported
clinical
signs
include
salivation,
hyperexcitability, tremors, incoordination, tonic-clonic
seizures, and cardiac arrhthymias. Signs can begin within
15 minutes of exposure, reflecting rapid absorption of the
chemical from the gastrointestinal  tract. Laboratory
changes are nonspecific and include alterations consistent
with metabolic acidosis and
 possibly   mild    liver
dysfunction.
Diagnosis
An antemortem or postmortem diagnosis relies on a
history of exposure and the occurrence of compatible
clinical signs and detection  of 4-AP  in suspect bait
samples, GI contents, liver, kidney, or urine.
Management of Exposures Clinical Effects
Treatment involves minimizing absorption and controlling
CNS signs, along with other necessary symptomatic and
supportive care. Standard and timely decontamination
procedures are indicated. Benzodiazepines or barbiturates
are recommended to control seizures. Monitoring of
acid-base
status and
ECGs
 are recommended.
427
Tachyarrhythmias are controlled with β-blockers such as
propanolol.
Prognosis
Animals surviving beyond 4 hours postexposure reportedly
have a good prognosis.
LARGE PREDATOR CONTROL
Sodium Fluoroacetate (Compound 1080)
Sources
Sodium fluoroacetate is a naturally occurring compound
found in several plant species in Africa, Australia, and
South America. In the U.S., it has been used for predator
control (particularly coyotes) under strict guidelines. Its
use is limited to inclusion in livestock protection collars
(LPCs) primarily used on sheep and goats in several states
registered with the EPA (an EPA-approved certification
and training program is required) (Parton 2004). LPCs
used on sheep and goats contain 30 ml of 1% sodium
fluoroacetate (300 mg of active ingredient).
Kinetics and Toxicity
Fluoroacetate is readily absorbed from the GI tract, lungs,
and mucous membranes. The parent compound is
considered to be nontoxic, but it is metabolized to
monofluoroacetic
 acid
by
hydrolysis.
The
monofluoroacetic acid reacts with coenzyme A (CoA) to
428
form fluoroacetyl CoA. Parent compound and metabolites
are eliminated primarily via the kidneys.
Fluoroacetate is highly toxic. Oral lethal dosages have
been determined for a number of animal species and range
from 0.06 to 0.2 mg/kg for dogs to 10 to 30 mg/kg for
birds (Parton 2004)
Mechanism of Action
Fluoroacetyl CoA combines with oxaloacetate in the
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and is converted to
fluorocitrate. Fluorocitrate inhibits the enzyme aconitase
and the oxidation of citric acid, resulting in blockage of the
cycle. This results in cellular energy depletion, increases in
citrate and lactate concentrations and a decrease in blood
pH.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Signs appear rapidly in intoxicated animals (as soon as 30
minutes after exposure). Signs are primarily related to
CNS
 stimulation:
anxiety,
frenziedbehavior,
hyperesthesia,   and   seizures.  Vomiting,   salivation,
urination, defecation, tenesmus, and hyperthermia also can
occur. Seizures are tonic-clonic in nature and seizure
episodes   are  interspersed   with  periods  of relative
normalcy. Anoxia associated with continuous seizing leads
torespiratory failure, coma, and death. Cardiac
arrhthymias are reported in cats. Animals exposed to
429
sublethal doses of fluoroacetate exhibit severe depression,
anorexia, listlessness, teeth grinding, and weakness.
Laboratory
Consistent
clinical
 pathologic   changes 
include
hyperglycemia, hypocalcemia (ionized), acidosis, and
elevations of citrate. Cardiac arrhthymias in cats might be
secondary to hypocalcemia.
Differentials
Diseases associated with seizures and CNS stimulation
should be strongly considered as differentials. These
include numerous intoxications: strychnine, chlorinated
hydrocarbon insecticides, bromethalin, lead, metaldehyde,
methylxanthines, prescription and illicit drugs (e.g.,
amphetamines,
cocaine), cyanide, and tremorgenic
mycotoxins.
Diagnosis
 on nsodxa go Aisty e uodn paseq si sisouep a
compound, compatible clinical signs, and detection of the
toxicant in source material or vomitus. Analysis of tissues
is possible, but the parent compound is typically present at
very low levels and few laboratories offer sufficiently
sensitive  tests. Postmortem findings are nonspecific
although rapid onset of rigor mortis is reported (Parton
2004).
Management of Exposures
430
The rapidity of onset of clinical signs often precludes
institution of decontamination procedures. Administration
of activated charcoal is recommended, but this might
require control of seizures first.
Perhaps  the  most  critical intervention is the IV
administration of sodium bicarbonate (Parton 2004).
Although sodium bicarbonate administration might worsen
hypocalcemia and  cause hyperkalemia,  the benefits
outweigh the risks. Frequent monitoring of electrolytes is
warranted.
Prognosis
The prognosis is typically poor.
REFERENCES
Bischoff , K. , Brizzee-Buxton , B. ,Gatto , N. et al. 1998.
Malicious paraquat poisoning in Oklahoma dogs. Vet Hum
Toxicol 40 (3): 151-153.
Carlo , G.L., Cole ,P.,Miller , A.B.,Munro ,IC.,
Soloman , K.R. , and Squire , R.A. 1992. Review of a
study
reporting
an
association
between
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid   and   canine  malignant
lymphoma: report of an expert panel. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol 16 : 245-252.
Cope , R.B. , Bildfell , R.J. , Valentine , B.A. et al. 2004.
Fatal paraquat poisoning in seven Portland, OR dogs. Vet
Hum Toxicol 46 (5): 258-264.
431
Crandell , D.E. , Weinberg , G.L. 2009. Moxidectin
toxicosis in a puppy successfully treated with intravenous
lipids. J Vet Emerg Crit Car 19 ( 2 ): 181-186.
Dorman , D.C. 1990. Diethyltoluamide (DEET) insect
repellant toxicosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20 : 387-392.
 2004. Diethyltoluamide. In Plumlee , K.H. , ed.
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology , pp. 180-18. St. Louis :
Mosby
Gerken , D.F. 1995. Lawn care products. In Bonagura ,
JD. , ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xll: Small
Animal Practice , Pp. 248-249. Philadelphia : W.B
Saunders.
Glickman , L.T. , Raghavan , M. , Knapp , D.W. ,Bonney ,
P.L. , and Dawson , M.H. 2004. Herbicide exposure and
the risk of transitional cell carcinoma in Scottish Terriers.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 224 : 1290-1297.
Glickman , L.T. , Schofer , F.S. , McKee , L.J. ,Reif , J.S.
and Goldschmidt , M.H. 1989. Epidemiologic study of
insecticide exposures, obesity, and risk of bladder cancer
in household dogs. J Toxicol Environ Health 28 : 407-414.
Gramer , I. , Leidolf , R.,Doring , B., Klintzsch , S.
Kramer , E.M. , Yalcin , E. , Petzinger , E. , and Geyer , J.
2010. Breed distribution of the nt230(del4) MDRl
mutation in dogs. Veterinary Journal , in press.
432
Hayes , H.M. , Tarone , R.E. , Cantor , D.M. , Jessen , C.R
，McCurnin ，D.M. ，and Richardson ，R.C. 1991.
Case-control  study  of  canine  malignant lymphoma:
Positive association with  dog owner's use of
2,4-dichlorophenyoxyacetic acid herbicides. J Natl Cancer
Inst 83 : 1226-1231.
Hayes , H.M. , Tarone , R.E. , Casey , H.W. , and Huxsoll ,
D.L. 1990. Excess of seminomas observed in Vietnam
service U.S. military working dogs. J Natl Cancer Inst 82 :
1042-1046.
Lanusse , Carlos E. , Lifschitz , Adrian L. , Imperiale , and
Fernanda A. 2009. Macrocyclic lactones: Endectocide
compounds.  In    Veterinary    Pharmacology   and
Therapeutics , 9th ed. , edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark
McCurnin
， D.M. and Richardson ，R.C.1991.
Case-control  study of  canine malignant  lymphomai
positive  association   with  dog  owner's  use  of
2,4-dichlorophenyoxyacetic acid herbicides. J Natl Cancer
Inst 83 : 1226-1231.
Mealey , Katrina L. 2006. Ivermectin: Macrolide
antiparasitic agents. In Small Animal Toxicology , 2nd ed. ,
edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott , pp.
785-794. St.Louis : Saunders.
Merola ， Valentina M. ， Khan  Safdar A. ， and
Gwaltney-Brant , Sharon M. 2009. Ivermectin toxicosis in
dogs:A retrospective study.Journal of the American
Animal Hospital Association 45 (3 ): 106-111.
433
Oehme , F. and Pickrell , J.A. 2004. Dipyridyl herbicides
In Plumlee , K.H. , ed. Clinical Veterinary Toxicology , pp.
146-148. St. Louis : Mosby.
Osweiler ， G.D. 1996. Toxicology: The National
Veterinary Medical Series , Philadelphia : Williams and
Wilkins.
Parton , K.H. 2004. Sodium fluoroacetate. In Plumlee ,
K.H. , ed. Clinical Veterinary Toxicology , pp. 451454.
St. Louis : Mosby.
Raghavan , M. , Knapp , D. , Dawson , M.H. , Bonney ,
P.L., and Glickman , L.T. 2004. Topical fl ea and tick
pesticides and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the
urinary bladder in Scottish terriers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
225 : 389-394.
Richardson , JA. , Welch , S.L. , Gwaltney-Brant , S.M. et
al. 2003. Metaldehyde toxicosis in dogs. Compend Contin
Edu Vet 25 (5): 376-380
Riegart , JR. and Roberts , J.R. 1999. Recognition and
Management ofPesticide Poisonings ,EPA 735-R-98-003.
Roder , Joseph D. 2004. Antiparasiticals. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology , edited by Konnie H. Plumlee , pp.
302-305. St. Louis : Mosby.
Schell , M.M. 2004. 4-aminopyridine. In Plumlee , K.H. ,
ed. Clinical Veterinary Toxicology , pp. 443-442. St. Louis
, Mosby.
434
Talcott , P.A. 2004. Metaldehyde. In Plumlee , K.H. ,ed
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology , pp. 182-183. St. Louis ,
Mosby.
Welch ，S. 2004. Boric acid. In Plumlee ，K.H.，ed
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology ,pp. 143-145. St. Louis ,
Mosby.
Yeary , R.A. 2000. Lawn care products. In Bonagura , JD.
,ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll: Small
 :      
Saunders.
Yeary, Roger A. 2006. Miscellanerious herbicides,
fungicides, and nematocides. In Small Animal Toxicology ,
2nd ed. , edited by Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A.
Talcott ,pp. 732-743.St.Louis : Saunders.
435
20
Plants
Joanna Delaporte and Charlotte Means
INTRODUCTION
This chapter covers common household and yard plants
that might cause household pet intoxication. There are a
few details to keep in mind when managing a plant
exposure. First, the plant must be positively identified.
Potential sources of identification include local plant
nurseries, garden stores, university extension offices, or
veterinary diagnostic laboratories. If the whole plant
cannot be transported, a small branch with leaves, fruit,
flowers, or nuts should be obtained. Ideally, the scientific
name of the plant rather than the common name should be
sought, because common names can be shared among
totally unrelated plants. Next, it is important to keep in
mind that even nontoxic plants can cause signs of digestive
upset such as vomiting, diarrhea, and mild nausea or
drooling if they are ingested. Also, the toxicity of plant
material can vary tremendously depending on growing
conditions. Finally, in cases where signs have already
developed, decontamination by induction of emesis may
be contraindicated.
There are several plant-related intoxications that are
discussed in Chapter 24, "Food-Associated Intoxications,"
including Allium spp. (onions, garlic), Persea cmericana
(avocado), grapes and raisins, and macadamia nuts.
436
Additional plant-related intoxications are discussed in
Chapter 21, "Dietary Supplements and Herbs."
DIGESTIVESYSTEM
Aloe spp.
Aloe vera (Figure 20.1) is also known as A. barbadensis.
This plant is different from American aloe. Aloe contains
anthraquinone glycosides, which are potent purgatives
concentrated in the latex of the leaves. Chewing on Aloe
vera leaves can result in severe diarrhea. Fluid and
electrolyte imbalances may need to be managed if
dehydration develops.
Asparagusspp.
Also called asparagus fern, these plants contain steroidal
saponins, with the highest concentration being present in
the berries. These plants are considered a contact allergen
and can cause irritation after dermal contact. After
ingestion, signs such as salivation, vomiting, and diarrhea
can occur. Symptomatic treatment for gastrointestinal
signs may be needed.
Begonia spp.
In contrast to plants that contain only insoluble calcium
oxalate, Begonia (Figure 20.2) contains both insoluble
calcium oxalates and soluble oxalates (soluble salts of
oxalic acid such as sodium, potassium, ammonium, and
acid potassium oxalates).  The oxalate crystals are
especially concentrated in the tubers and stems. Insoluble
437
calcium oxalate crystals may cause dermal and mucous
membrane irritation. Signs  that develop  can include
salivation and vomiting.
Soluble oxalate intoxication is poorly documented in pets
or people due to the large quantity of plant material
required to induce toxicosis; livestock poisonings are more
commonly reported. In animals, nausea, rapid respiration,
and stupor occur early followed by vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, coma, and tetany due to hypocalcemia. Oliguria,
oxaluria, albuminuria, or hematuria can occur due to
formation of calcium oxalate crystals in the kidney.
Treatmentof
f suspected intoxications has included
administration  of  parenteral  calcium  salts  to  correct
hypocalcemia as well as intravenous fluid support. These
plants are rarely associated with poisonings in companion
animals.
Figure 20.1.Aloe (Aloe vera).
438
Figure 20.2.Begonia (Begonia sp.) (photo courtesy TD
Brant).
439
Figure 20.3.Ormamental Pepper (Capsicum sp.) (photo
courtesy TD Brant)
440
Capsicumspp.
Capsicum spp. (Figure 20.3) includes chili peppers and
other pepper plants that are usually grown in gardens for
food or as ornamental plants. The toxin in pepper plants is
capsaicin. The highest concentration is found in the fruits,
especially in the seeds. Hot peppers are irritating, causing a
burmning sensation and possibly oral blisters when ingested.
Large exposures can cause vomiting and diarrhea. In
experiments using rats, very high doses have caused
convulsions. Effects of capsaicin are transient and may be
relieved by dilution with water or milk or flushing the
mouth with water. Demulcents and pain control might also
be indicated
441
Chrysanthemumspp
Chrysanthemum plants (Figure 20.4) contain a toxin called
arteglasin A, a sesquiterpene lactone. Plant ingestion is
associated  with  hypersensitivity  and  allergic  contact
dermatitis.
Clematis spp.
Clematis is also known as virgin's bower and traveler's
joy. These plants cause intense GI irritation, vomiting, and
diarrhea. Protoanemonin, which is related to the blister
beetle vesicant cantharidin, is the toxin. Protoanemonin is
a subepidermal vesicant, so plants can cause profound
dermal irritation on contact. When ingested, plants are
bitter and irritating. Excessive salivation, vomiting, and
diarrhea are expected signs. Dried plant material contains a
polymerized form of protoanemonin, called anemonin,
which is not considered to be toxic. Thus, dried plants are
considered nontoxic. Treatment includes gastrointestinal
protectants, antiemetics, and other symptomatic and
supportive care.
Figure 20.4.Chrysanthemum (Chrysanthemum sp.) (photo
courtesy TD Brant).
442
Cyclamenspp
Cyclamen species are native to the Mediterranean and may
be known as Persian violet or sow's bread. The toxin
contained in Cyclamen is a triterpenoid saponin. The
saponin is found mainly in the roots, with a small amount
in leaves. Ingestion of this plant may lead to nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea. If larger quantities are ingested, the
saponin may be absorbed, causing convulsions, seizures,
cardiac dysrhythmias, and paralysis. Supportive treatment
is typically all that is needed to ensure recovery.
Euphorbiapulcherrima
Euphorbia pulcherrima is commonly known as poinsettia.
The toxicity of poinsettia has been greatly exaggerated. In
one study using rats, ingestions of up to 15 g/kg for 1 week
did not cause behavior changes, clinical signs, or
443
postmortem lesions. However, one group of rats in the
study showed a significant increase in thyroid weight. As
an estimate of toxicity, human poison experts have
calculated that a 50-pound child would need to ingest
about 1.25 1b, or 500-600 leaves, to surpass levels that
have been toxic in animal experiments.
Figure 20.5.Hosta (Hosta sp.) (photo courtesy TD Brant)
Poinsettia plants do contain an irritating milky sap. Pets
that chew on the plants develop hypersalivation, vomiting
anorexia, and depression. Signs are usually self-limiting
and require minimal treatment. Further GI irritation may
be reduced by limiting food and water intake for 1 to 2
hours.
Gypsophilia paniculata
444
Gypsophilia paniculata is commonly known as Baby's
breath, and is often used in floral arrangements.
Gypsophilia exposures can case dermal irritation due to
contact allergen. Ingestion of the plant may lead to
vomiting and diarrhea.
Hostaspp.
Members of the Hosta genu are also known as hosta lily or
August lily (Figure 20.5). Some species contain saponins
which can cause vomiting, diarrhea, depression, and
anorexia. They are likely to cause a problem only if
consumed in quantity.
Ilexspp.
Holly (Figure 20.6) grows as a small shrub outdoors or can
be brought indoors for holiday decoration. A variety of
biologically active compounds have been identified in lex
spp. including tannins, caffeine, theobromine, triterpenes,
and a hemolytic saponin, among others. With small
ingestions vomiting and diarrhea can occur. Anorexia,
head shaking, and lip smacking can also occur. Flushing
the oral cavity with water will reduce mucosal irritation
Figure 20.6.American Holly (llex opaca); i nsert: Closer
view of leaves and berries (photo courtesy TD Brant).
445
Insoluble Calcium Oxalate-containing Plants
A number of plants including Dieffenbachia spp. (Figure
20.7),
Zantedeschia
 spp.,
Epipremnun
aureum,
Philodendron spp., and Spathiphyllum spp. (Figure 20.8)
contain insoluble calcium oxalate crystals (Spoerke and
Smolinske 1990). Chewing on calcium-oxalate containing
plants causes mechanical irritation to mucous membranes
of the GI tract. As the plant cells are crushed or broken
open, needlelike crystals called raphides are released and
surrounding tissues are penetrated by the crystals. The
reaction may be rapid, causing oral pain and swelling of
the lips and tongue. The irritation may extend to the
esophagus and stomach. However, since the plant cells
must be broken open, effects beyond the oral cavity are
unlikely with small ingestions. The animal may be
446
inappetent for several days following exposure due to oral
discomfort. Vomiting and diarrhea occur rarely. Treatment
for insoluble calcium oxalate crystal ingestion is often not
the oral discomfort (Means 2004). In rare severe cases, a
soft diet, pain control, NSAIDs, or sedation may be useful.
Ornamental Bulbs
Ornamental bulb plants include tulips (Tulipa spp., Figure
20.9), daffodils (Narcissus spp.), hyacinth (Hyacinthus
orientalis), spring-blooming crocus (Crocus spp., not to be
confused with autumn-blooming crocus, Colchicum, see
below), and iris (Iris spp.). All parts of the bulb, especially
the roots, flesh, and seed capsules contain pentacyclic
terpenoids, which are irritating and cause gastroenteritis.
Clinical signs include salivation, abdominal pain, profuse
diarrhea with or without blood, and oral lesions. Signs may
last hours to days. Treatment includes correction of fluid
and electrolyte imbalances and possibly gastrointestinal
protectants.
Figure 20.7.Dieffenbachia (Dieffenbachia sp.)
447
Figure20.8.Peace
Lily(Spathiphyllumsp.)(photo
courtesy TD Brant).
448
Figure 20.9.Tulip (Tulipa sp.).
449
Ricinus communis
Ricinus communis (Figure 20.10) is also known as castor
bean or castor oil plant. The principal toxins are ricinine
(or ricin) and toxalbumin. The seeds, when well-chewed
and ingested in amounts as low as 0.01% of body weight,
can cause severe intoxication (Albretson et al. 2o00).
Intact seeds areexpected
1 topass throughthe
gastrointestinal tract with no negative effects. Leaves or
pericarps of fruits require about 2% of body weight (ricin)
ingested to cause intoxication. Ricin is water-soluble and is
aging reduce its toxicity. When ingested, ricin is poorly
absorbed and its main site of action is the digestive
epithelium. Ricinine appears to have some action on
neuroreceptors, since seizures and muscular weakness
450
have been seen in some animals that have chewed and
swallowed castor beans (Albretson et al. 2000). The toxins
cause edema and necrosis of mucosa of stomach and small
intestine. However, castor bean intoxication is associated
with multiple organ effects: heart, stomach, lungs, liver,
kidneys, and pancreas can be affected.
Figure 20.10.Castor Bean plant (Ricinus communis); in
sert: Castor beans (photo courtesy TD Brant)
If the seeds are chewed and swallowed, the most common
sign is severe diarrhea within about 6 hours (Albretson et
al. 2000). The diarrhea may be hemorrhagic. Other signs
include hypotension, depression, weakness, trembling,
sweating,  vomiting, 
 abdominal
pain,
anorexia,
hyperthermia, ataxia, hypersalivation, recumbency, and
451
tachycardia. Signs can be delayed as long as 24 to 48 hours
after exposure. Death is attributed to hypovolemic shock.
Treatment involves early decontamination in animals not
exhibiting clinical signs. Symptomatic animals need to be
stabilized first. Diazepam may be used to control seizures.
Intravenous fluid therapy, such as Ringer's lactate
solution, is recommended to prevent or treat hypovolemia
and to maintain
1 hydration   and electrolyte  balance.
Gastrointestinal protectants such as sucralfate, famotidine.
and kaolin-pectin might be indicated to protect and
promote healing of the gastrointestinal tract. Antiemetics
and pain management might also be needed. Frequent
CBC, serum chemistry, and electrolytes monitoring is
recommended to assess the extent of organ damage.
Schlumbergeraspp.
These plants are commonly  called Christmas  cactus.
Ingestion may result in mild gastrointestinal upset although
they are considered to be nontoxic for cats and dogs. If
mild gastrointestinal signs occur, withholding food and
water for 1 or 2 hours should be sufficient.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Cardiac Glycosides
Several   plants  contain  cardiac glycosides.  Cardiac
glycoside inhibit
 cell membrane  sodium-potassium
ATPase, resulting in decreased electrical conductivity.
This can result in the occurrence of a variety of cardiac
arrhythmias, both tachy- and bradyarrhythmias, along with
452
abdominal pain and diarrhea. Death can be rapid or
delayed for up to 2 days. In general, standard
decontamination protocols  should be followed when
possible and appropriate. Treatment of cardiac arrhythmias
varies depending on the specific arrhythmia noted. The
electrolytes status of affected animals should be monitored
and fluids and electrolytes administered as needed
Treatment with digoxin immune Fab (Digibind?) might be
helpful but should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure for maximum efficacy. Further information
on the effects of cardiac glycosides can be found in
Chapter 12, "Cardiovascular System," and Chapter 27,
"Prescription Drugs."
Adenium obesum
This plant is known as desert rose and mock azalea. About
30 cardiac glycosides have been isolated from this plant.
The plant has been a source for an arrow poison in Africa.
There have been no reported cases of animal intoxications.
     x    
exposure occurs. If sufficient amounts of the plant are
ingested, cardiac arrhythmias, heart block, and death may
develop. Treatment would be similar to other cardiac
glycoside intoxications.
Convallaria majalis
Lily-of-the-valley is the common name for Convallaria
majalis (Figure 20.11), which contains approximately 38
cardenolides and various saponins. All parts of the plant
are toxic, with the greatest toxin concentration in the
rhizomes. Signs are as one would expect from cardiac
453
glycosides: vomiting, diarrhea, cardiac arrhythmias, and
death. Treatment considerations are as outlined above.
Digitalis purpurea
Foxglove is the common name for Digitalis purpurea
(Figure 20.12). The plant contains the cardenolides digoxin
and digitoxin. All plant parts are toxic, especially the
seeds. The dried plant is also toxic. Even water from vases
where the flowers are kept can be a risk if ingested. The
earliest signs of intoxication include marked weakness.
stupor, and diarrhea with or without blood. The heartbeat
at first may be loud and strong, but then later become faint
and barely perceptible, eventually regressing to ventricular
fibrillation. Vomiting, increased salivation, and more
frequent urination can occur. Treatment is as for other
cardiac glycoside-containing plants.
Figure20.11.Lily-of-the-Valleyflowers (Convallaria
majalis).
454
Figure 20.12.Foxglove (Digitalis sp.)
455
Figure 20.13.Oleander (Nerium oleander)
456
Nerium oleander
Nerium oleander (Figure 20.13) is a shrub that is used as a
landscaping plant in warmer parts of the United States,
such as California. Oleander is extremely toxic; ingestion
of as little as 0.005% body weight can be fatal. Oleander is
highly poisonous to birds. Both fresh and dried plant are
toxic.
Oleander contains the cardenolides oleandrin, which is
concentrated in the leaves, flowers, and seeds. The plant
also contains terpenoids.  The terpenoids may
be
responsible
efor  the gastrointestinal irritation seen.
Weakness, depression, anorexia, vomiting, abdominal
pain, hypersalivation, and diarrhea are likely in cats and
457
dogs. Patients might exhibit signs for many hours and then
recover. However, patients can die suddenly from cardiac
arrest with few preliminary signs. Patients should be
monitored closely with particular attention paid to heart
rate and rhythm and
1electrolyte
concentrations.
Hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia may develop. Treatment
considerations are as outlined above. Intravenous fluids
and electrolytes are provided as needed.
Grayanotoxins
Several plants contain cardiotoxins called grayanotoxins.
These include Rhododendron (azalea,
Figure 20.14:
mountain rosebay; red laurel; and great laurel, among
others), Kalmia spp. (mountain laurel), and Pieris japonica
(Japanese  pieris).
These
eplants
contain  diterpenoid
grayanotoxins, which are present in all parts of the plant,
although
their
concentrations
vary
between
plants
Grayanotoxins increase sodium
1  channel permeability,
which opens cells to sodium instead of calcium. The
channels are slow to close and the cell remains
depolarized. Significant effects occur in the heart, skeletal
muscles, and CNS. Increased reflexes, increased vagal
tone, hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias occur. Signs
include profuse salivation, anorexia, repeated swallowing,
abdominal pain, and bloat. Severe cases may exhibit
weakness and inability or reluctance to stand. Less
frequent cardiac effects include bradycardia and AV block.
Acute effects last about 24 hours. Weakness and other
neurologic effects can last 2 to 3 days. Treatment includes
appropriate and timely decontamination and symptomatic
and supportive care.
458
Figure 20.14.Azalea (Rhododendron sp.)
Kalanchoespp.
      r  
scientific name, Bryophyllum. Mother-of-millions is one
common name. The significant toxin in Kalanchoe is
lanceotoxin A, which is a bufadienolide cardiotoxin. These
cardiotoxins are similar to the cardiac glycosides found in
foxglove, oleander, and lily-of-the-valley. Ingestion of as
little as 1% body weight can cause intoxication. The
flowers are especially toxic. Natural poisonings are most
commonly reported during the plants' flowering season.
Known intoxications have occurred in dogs and rabbits.
459
Figure 20.15.Kalanchoe (Kalanchoe sp.) (photo courtesy
SM Gwaltney-Brant).
Signs include vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, trembling, and
sudden death due to cardiac failure. Other signs that have
been reported include tachycardia, hypertension, dilated
pupils, nystagmus, delirium, weakness, tetany, mild
seizures, depression, anorexia, hypersalivation, and
mucoid to bloody diarrhea. The diarrhea may persist
several days without other signs. Cardiac effects typically
require a larger ingestion and signs include increased or
decreased heart rate, labored respiration or grunting,
arrhythmias, heart block, severe weakness. Serum
460
chemistry
1   abnormalities   include   increased
1BUN,
creatinine, and glucose concentrations.
Treatment of Kalanchoe exposures includes appropriate
and   timely   decontamination  and  symptomatic  and
supportive care. Digibind? has not been evaluated for
treatment of Kalanchoe intoxications.  Atropine or
propranolol can be used to increase the heart rate and
reverse heart block.
Melia azedarach
This plant is known by many common names, including
chinaberry, Persian lilac, Texas umbrella tree, among
others. The plant is native to Asia, but has become
widespread as a landscape plant across the southern United
States. Several meliatoxins are present in all parts of the
plant, but especially in the fruit. Only the berries have been
known to cause intoxication; toxicity of the berries varies
by location and species of plant. The toxic dosage is
approximately 0.2-0.3% body weight (Hare et al. 1997).
Five to six fruits were lethal to a young dog within 48
hours (Barr 2006). Clinical signs are variable and include
hyperthermia,  hypothermia,  tachycardia, bradycardia,
dyspnea, stranguria, muscle rigidity, mydriasis, and miosis.
Early signs include hypersalivation, vomiting, anorexia,
and diarrhea. If large enough quantities of berries have
been ingested, muscle weakness, ataxia, seizures, and
paralysis develop. Excitement occurs early, with paralysis
developing later. It is possible for sudden death to occur as
the only clinical sign. For a recent exposure where signs
have not yet developed, emesis helps to remove berries
from the stomach  followed by  activated  charcoal
461
administration. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
because no antidote exists. In severe cases, sedatives and
fluid-electrolyte therapy should be used. Animals that
recover usually do so within 24-48 hours.
Taxus spp.
Members of Taxus spp. (Figure 20.16), also called yews,
 s n a non n s 
leaves, and seeds are toxic, but not the red flesh of the
fruit. The principal toxins are taxines, which cause cardiac
      s 
channels of cardiac muscle. All domestic animals and birds
are at risk for intoxication.
The plant seems to be more toxic in winter. Ingestion of as
little as 1 ounce of leaves can be lethal to a dog (Barr
2006). Both fresh and dried leaves are dangerous. Signs
exhibited by intoxicated dogs include vomiting, muscle
tremors, seizures, panting, dilated pupils, and significant
tachycardia. Stressing the patient can cause sudden
collapse and death. Sudden death can occur even days after
ingestion. Once signs develop it is usually too late for
effective treatment due to the peracute nature of the
intoxication.  However,  early
decontamination    and
administration of atropine to reverse bradycardia and heart
block should be considered. Syrup of ipecac should not be
used to induce emesis due to the potential for vagal nerve
stimulation to exacerbate the cardiac effects of yew
Figure 20.16.Japanese yew (7axus sp.)
462
LIVER
Cycas spp. and Zamia spp.
Members of Cycas and Zamia are referred to as cycad
palms, which include common names such as sago palm
(Figure 20.17), false sago palm, and fern palm. There are
two types of toxins present in cycads: cycasin and
macrozamin. The seeds, leaves, and pulp of the cones are
primarily hepatotoxic, but the digestive and neuromuscular
systems can also be affected. Prolonged consumption of
the seeds can cause neurologic signs and lesions. The fruits
and seeds of some species remain toxic even after being
cooked. The fruits seem to be especially enticing to dogs.
463
In some reported intoxications, parts of the plant have been
inappropriately used as an alternative medicine.
Signs that develop after cycad ingestion include persistent
anorexia,
 diarrhea
or
constipation,
icterus,
thrombocytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, increase of liver
enzymes, elevations of BUN and creatinine, and
coagulopathy. Hepatic necrosis and subsequent fibrosis
can develop. Treatment primarily involves appropriate and
timely decontamination and symptomatic and supportive
care. The latter might include the use of hepatoprotectants
such as N-acetylcysteine, silimaryin or SAMe, although
the efficacy of such therapy is unknown.
Figure 20.17.Sago Palm (Cycas revoluta) (photo courtesy
TD Brant)
464
Lantana spp.
Members of Lantana (Figure 20.18) are also known as
shrub verbena, yellow/red/wild sage, and bunchberry. The
toxins are triterpenes. There are some varieties much less
toxic than others because their triterpene structure is
different. All parts of the plants, especially the unripe
berries, are toxic, but not all species are toxic. Fully ripe
fruits are not toxic, but partially ripe berries can be. All
animal species are at risk with ingestions of as little as 1%
body weight causing intoxication. Signs associated with
intoxication include GI irritation, vomiting, diarrhea,
weakness,
ataxia,
depression,
cholestasis,
hyperbilirubinemia, hepatic damage, lethargy, cyanosis,
465
labored breathing, depressed tendon reflexes, photophobia.
coma, and death
Triterpenoids cause damage to the bile canaliculi with
subsequent development of obstructive cholangitis. They
also irritate the GI mucosa and cause diarrhea or
constipation. Subacute or chronic exposures are associated
with photosensitization. The second or third day after
exposure, icterus and photosensitization may be noticed as
well as diarrhea with or without blood. Deaths from
Lantana toxicoses are mainly due to hepatic and renal
failure. Treatment  includes appropriate and  timely
decontamination, fluids, and
1  glucose  and  electrolyte
administration. Symptomatic and supportive might include
the use of hepatoprotectants such as N-acetylcysteine,
silimaryin, or SAMe although the efficacy of such therapy
is unknown. Once signs of liver damage are present,
treatment of animals is usually not successful.
Figure 20.18.Lantana (Lantana sp.) (photo courtesy TD
Brant).
466
URINARY SYSTEM
Liliumspp
Lilium species including L. pardalinum, L. candidum, L.
speciosum, L.lancifolium (rubrum or Japanese showy
lilies), L. longiflorum (Easter lily, Figure 20.19), L.
tigrinum (Tiger lily, Figure 20.20), and Hemerocallis (day
lilies, Figure 20.21) are nephrotoxic to cats. Peace lily
(Spathiphyllum, Figure 20.8) and calla lily (Zantedeschia)
are not true lilies and are not associated with renal issues,
although they do contain insoluble calcium oxalate crystals
(see earlier discussion). All true lily plant parts are toxic to
cats, and cats are the only species known to be sensitive to
lily ingestion. Ingestion of less than one leaf can cause
467
severe toxicosis. Clinical signs include early vomiting.
anorexia, and depression; these signs can begin within 2
hours of exposure (Langston 2002). Vomiting may resolve,
but anorexia and depression continue as BUN, creatinine,
potassium, and phosphorus concentrations rise 24 to 72
hours after exposure. Epithelial casts and glucose may be
detected in the urine within 18 hours. Renal failure is due
to an unknown mechanism causing renal tubular necrosis.
Fortunately, in cats surviving the acute crisis, affected
renal  tubular epithelial cells  can regenerate since the
basement membrane remains intact. Treatment involves
early decontamination. Fluid diuresis using LRS at twice
maintenance rates (approximately 30 ml/kg/day) should be
started as soon as possible and continued for at least 48
hours. Baseline BUN and creatinine should be obtained
and  rechecked  daily. Creatinine levels  are  often
disproportionately high when compared to BUN. As long
as BUN and creatinine are high, fluid diuresis is continued.
If treatment is delayed, there is an increased risk for renal
failure and death. Anuric cats have a grave prognosis, but
renal  function has been restored  after  peritoneal  or
hemodialysis dialysis in some cases (Langston 2002).
Figure 20.19.Easter Lily (Lilium longiflorum)
468
Figure 20.20.Tiger Lily (Lilium tigrinum)
469
Figure 20.21.Day Lily (Hemerocallis sp.) (photo courtesy
SM Gwaltney-Brant).
Figure 20.22.Rhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum)
470
Soluble Oxalate-Containing Plants
Rhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum, Figure 20.22) contains
anthraquinones and soluble oxalates in small quantities
(about 0.28% dry weight of leaf material) (Peterson 2006).
Oxalis spp. (sorrel, wood sorrel, shamrock, soursob,
Bermuda buttercup, and Irish shamrock) can contain up to
16% of dry matter as soluble oxalates
Most of the signs associated with rhubarb leaf ingestion
can be attributed to the cathartic action of anthraquinones.
In theory, the soluble oxalates can precipitate within the
renal tubules causing kidney damage. However, renal
471
oxalosis is unlikely to occur unless very large amounts of
plant material are ingested. If a quantity large enough is
ingested, the oxalates can cause hypocalcemia in addition
to renal oxalate precipitation. Signs typically are limited to
vomiting although hypocalcemic tetany and signs related
to renal failure are possible.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Brunfelsia spp
There are a number of species in the Brunfelsia genus
(Figure 20.23) and a variety of common names. B.
pauciflorais known
by the common names of
yesterdaytoday-tomorrow,
morming-noon-and-night
or
yesterdayand-today.
.Brunfelsia
americana
is called
lady-of-thenight or Franciscan rain tree. These are
primarily outdoor ornamental plants but are sometimes
used indoors. Dogs seem to find the fruits appealing and as
a result have a higher risk of exposure. The toxin in the
plant has not been identified but neuroexitatory and
neurodepressant agents are present. Typical signs include
anxiety and excitement followed by coughing, gagging,
sneezing, and nystagmus. Initial signs are followed within
a few hours by tremors and tetanic or paddling seizures,
which can be precipitated by external stimuli. Tremors and
seizures can last hours to days with full recovery taking up
to a week or longer. Treatment involves appropriate and
timely decontamination and symptomatic and supportive
care. Control of central nervous system excitation is
achieved with diazepam or pentobarbital.
472
Figure
20.23.Yesterday-Today-Tomorrow
(Brunfelsia
sp.).
Laburnum anagyroids
This plant is also known as golden rain tree, golden chain
tree, scotch laburnum, and alpine golden chain. It contains
quinolizidine alkaloids, some of which are teratogenic
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001). The greatest concentration of the
alkaloids is found in the seeds, but the toxins are present
throughout all parts of the plant. The leaves, seed pods,
and seeds are toxic. Ingestion of plant material equaling
0.1%-1% body weight is toxic. Horses appear to be the
most sensitive species to intoxication, but poisonings have
been reported in dogs as well.
473
The main toxins are rapidly absorbed and excreted and
clinical signs would be expected to develop rapidly after a
toxic dose of the plant has been consumed. The most
common signs seen in dogs are a centrally mediated
vomiting and abdominal pain, and occasionally weakness,
depression, ataxia, and tachycardia. Sweating, delirium,
excitation, tonic-clonic
Cconvulsions,  and  death  are
reported. The signs are usually short-lived due to rapid
excretion of the alkaloid, cystisine. If a large quantity of
seeds has been consumed, myocardial degeneration and
death can occur.
Figure 20.24.Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum) (photo
courtesy SM Gwaltney-Brant)
474
With small ingestions, treatment might not be needed. If
signs do occur symptomatic and supportive care is needed
to control vomiting and abdominal pain. Cleft palate and
arthrogryposis are possible teratogenic effects in pregnant
animals exposed to the plant more chronically
Lycopersicon lycopersicum and Solanum spp.
The toxins found in tomatoes (L. lycopersicum,
，Figure
20.24) and Solanum spp. (many species and common
names, but many are referred to as mightshades) are
steroidal glycoalkaloids. These include c-solanine and
α-chaconine. Although for most species all plant parts are
considered potentially toxic with the exception of ripe
fruits, the immature fruits typically contain the highest
toxin concentrations. However, even the ripe fruits are
poisonous for some Solanum spp. Uncooked sprouted or
green potatoes are also toxic.
The glycoalkaloids are irritating to the gastrointestinal tract
and large ingestions can cause dilated pupils, tachycardia.
and central nervous system depression, and respiratory
difficulty. In severe cases, dilated pupils, muscle tremors,
and  incoordination  may develop.   Treatment  involves
appropriate and timely decontamination and symptomatic
and supportive care. Solanine can cause mild cholinergic
effects due to cholinesterase inhibition, and atropine can be
used to reverse such effects in severe cases.
Nicotianaspp.
Nicotiana spp., include tobacco and tree tobacco. These
plants contain the pyridine alkaloids nicotine and
475
normicotine. The alkaloids are rapidly absorbed across
skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract. All
parts of the plant are toxic. Nicotine directly affects the
brain and muscles initially causing stimulation followed by
paralysis due to a depolarizing blockade. The minimum
lethal dose in dogs and cats is 20-l00 mg. The
cardiovascular, urinary, and reproductive systems can also
be affected.
Initial signs include excitement, bradycardia, and a slow
respiration rate. Subsequent signs can include depression,
hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea, rapid and labored
breathing, ataxia, tremors, severe weakness, muscle
twitching or trembling (beginning at the shoulders and
then extending to the whole body), stiff-legged gait, and
protrusion of the third eyelid. Death is most typically from
respiratory failure. Signs are typically short-lived and last
5-6 hours; the prognosis is good if an animal survives the
first 12 hours after onset of signs. Treatment involves
appropriate and timely decontamination and symptomatic
and supportive care. Antacids should not be given; they
increase the absorption of nicotine. Patients should be
closely monitored. Oxygen, positive pressure respiration,
and sedatives might be needed.
Prunusspp.
There are a number of Prunus species that contain
cyanogenic glycosides. High concentrations are found in
the kermels of the seeds. As a result of damage to the plant
or following ingestion, cyanogenic glycosides are broken
down to hydrocyanic acid (cyanide). Although many
Prunus spp. contain cyanogenic glycosides, most do not
476
present a significant intoxication hazard. The ingestion of
intact seeds does not release cyanide, and many seed
kermels would need to be crushed and ingested for a
sudden onset of apprehension and distress, weakness,
ataxia, labored
breathing,  collapse,  and  lateral
recumbency. Paddling and tetanic seizures may occur. Due
to rapid metabolism of cyanide following absorption, signs
usually last only 515 minutes; animals either die or
recover quickly. The rapidity of onset of clinical signs and
possibly death make timely initiation of treatment
problematic.
Antidote kits for cyanide poisoning are available and
include a nitrite salt such as sodium nitrite and sodium
thiosulfate (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Amyl nitrite, which
is used in intoxicated humans, is not recommended for use
in animals. Nitrite forms methemoglobin, which combines
with cyanide to form cyanmethemoglobin. Thiosulfate acts
as a sulfur donor for the conversion of cyanide to
thiocyanate by the action of the enzyme rhodanese, which
is then rapidly excreted in the urine. Hydroxycobalamin
(vitamin B12a) has also been used as an effective antidote.
MULTISYSTEMIC EFFECTS
Colchicum autumnale
Colchicumautumnaleisknownas autumncrocus,
meadow saffron, and naked lady, and should not be
confused with spring-blooming crocuses (Crocus spp., see
toxin colchicine, which is present in all parts of the plant
477
with the greatest concentrations in the flowers and seeds
Glory lily (Gloriosa superba) is also known to contain
colchicine and other alkaloids similar to those in
Colchicum autumnale. Colchicine is quite toxic. Ingestion
of as little as 08 mg/kg body weight of colchicine, 1.5 to
2.0 grams of plant material, 2 to 3 seeds, or 1/2 flower can
be fatal (Burrows and Tyrl 200l). Colchicine is an
antimitotic and is used in human medicine to treat a
number of diseases including gout. Thus, animals can be
intoxicated following the ingestion of both the plant and
prescription medication. Intoxication results in multiple
organ failure impairing cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal,
metabolic, and neuromuscular function.
Initial signs of toxicosis are related to effects on the
digestive tract and include vomiting, abdominal pain, and
severe hemorrhagic diarrhea. Soon after, the patient
becomes weak and disoriented, and develops seizures and
cardiac abnormalities. Additional signs developing within
2-12 hours and include dysphagia, paralysis, and
hypovolemic shock. If the animal survives for 4 to 5 days,
bone marrow depression may occur. Death is attributed to
respiratory failure. Treatment involves appropriate and
timely decontamination and symptomatic and supportive
care. In people, colchicine poisoning has been treated
successfully using colchicine-specific Fab fragments.
Humulus lupulus
Also known as hops, beer hops, European hops, and
lupulin. The plant is native to Europe and Asia and
contains  a number of biologically active constituents
including essential oils, phenolic compounds, resins, and
478
concern in dogs, because they will readily eat them. A cup
of spent hops has been reported to cause malignant
hyperthermia in greyhounds (the responsible compound is
not known). Hops also can affect the estrus cycle, since
they contain phytoestrogens, although chronic exposure
would
probably
benecessary tointerferewith
reproduction. Acute signs reported within 1 hour of
consumption
 by  greyhounds  include  hyperthermia,
restlessness, panting, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
seizures. Creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels become
markedly elevated and urine becomes dark brown,
suggesting muscle necrosis. Treatment includes standard
decontamination
procedures.
Fluids   should
1 be
administered to maintain renal function. Sedatives such as
benzodiazepines can be used to control excitement or
seizures.
A list of other potentially toxic plants and the general signs
typically attributed to them is provided in Appendix 2.
NONTOXIC PLANTS
Although it is important to know whether a particular plant
is potentially toxic or not, it is equally important to know
which plants, when ingested, are considered to be
nontoxic. Appendix 3 provides a list of nontoxic plants.
Keep in mind that mild GI upset and perhaps vomiting is
not unusual even when nontoxic plants are ingested.
REFERENCES
479
Albretson, JC., Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., and Khan, S.A
2000. Evaluation of castor bean toxicosis in dogs: 98
cases.J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:229-233
ASPCA National Animal Poison Control Center. 1998
Household Plant Reference. New York: ASPCA.
Barr, A.C. 2006. Household and garden plants. In
Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., eds. Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed., pp. 345410. St. Louis: Saunders
Elsevier.
Burrows, George E. and Tyrl, Ronald J. 2001. Toxic Plants
of North America. Ames, Iowa State University Press
Hare, W.R., Schutzman, H., Lee, B.R., and Knight, M.W.
1997. Chinaberry poisoning in two dogs, Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 210:1638-1640.
Langston, C.E. 2002. Acute renal failure caused by lily
ingestion in six cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220(1):49-52.
Means, Charlotte. 2004. Insoluble calcium 0xalates. In
Veterinary  Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H.
Plumlee, pp. 340-341. St. Louis: Mosby.
Mouser, P., Filigenzi, M.S., Puschner, B., Johnson, V.
Miller, M.A., and Hooser, S.B. 2007. Fatal ricin toxicosis
in a puppy confirmed by liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry when using ricinine as a marker. J Vet Diagn
Invest 19:216-220.
480
Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., eds. 2006. Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed., pp. 345-410. St. Louis: Saunders
Elsevier.
Spoerke, D.G. and Smolinske, S.C. 1990. Toxicity of
Houseplants, Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc.
IntermetResources
ASPCA Poison Control Center: http://www.aspca.org/
petcare/poison-control/
Canadian
Poisonous
Plants
Information
System:
http://www.cbif.gc.ca/pls/pp/poison?p_x=px
Cormell Department of Animal Science, Poisonous plants
affecting dogs:1
http://www.ansci.cormell.edu/plants/dogs/
index.html
Humane
Society
of
the
United
States:
http://www.humanesociety.org/animals/resources/tips/
plants_poisonous_to_pets.html
Pet Poison Helpline, Plants that are toxic
to cats:
http://petpoisonhelpline.com/IsThatPoisonous/
plants-toxicto-cats
Poisonous
plants
of
North
Carolina:
http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/hort/consumer/poison/
poison.htm
481
21
Dietary Supplements and Herbs
Charlotte Means
INTRODUCTION
The sales of herbal dietary supplements in 2007 totaled
approximately 4.8 billion dollars.  Because of the
popularity of herbal supplements, dogs and cats (as well as
other household pets) are exposed by accidental overdoses
or by owner administration. Adverse effects can occur
because of dosage, species differences in metabolism, or
drug-herb interactions.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS
Sources and Formulations
Herbs that contain sympathomimetics include ma huang
(Ephedrasinica),
 Indian  common
mallow
(Sida
cordifolia), and
bitter 
orange
(Citrus aurantium)
Historically, these herbs were used to treat asthma, cough,
and colds. Today, these herbs are most commonly sold as
weight loss aids, decongestants, and also for illicit
recreational use (such as herbal ecstasy) or to improve
athletic performance (such as weightlifters). Supplements
containing ma huang were among the first widely
marketed and advertised herbal products. When used as a
weight-loss aid, frequently caffeine-containing plants are
included in the formulation, which can increase toxicity
482
(Means 1999). The active components of Ephedra sinica
and Sida cordifolia are alkaloids, including ephedrine and
pseudoephedrine. Bitter orange contains synephrine (Der
Marderosian 1996; Means 1999).
In 2004, the FDA issued a final rule summary declaring
dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids
adulterated under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act. The FDA stated that these supplements presented an
unreasonable risk of illness or injury under the conditions
of use recommended or stated in labeling. The rule applies
to all dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids,
such as ephedra, ma huang, Sida cordifolia, and pinellia.
At this time, the FDA is monitoring supplements marketed
as substitutes for ephedra, such as Citrus aurantium
(FDA.222.fda.gov/oc/initiatives/ephedra/February2004/
qu_020604.html). Because the rule does not include
traditional Chinese herbal medicines, the potential for
exposure to ephedra still exists.
Citrus aurantium, also known as the Seville orange, or
bitter orange, is used to make orange marmalade. The
unripe peel contains synephrine, neohesperidien, and five
other adrenergic amines. Proponents for bitter orange use
claim that bitter orange stimulates only beta-3 receptors in
the adipose tissue and liver. They claim that bitter orange
will not increase blood pressure or heart rate and thus is
safer and a substitute for ephedra. However, a study using
healthy  volunteers showed that bitter orange elevated
systolic and diastolic blood pressure and heart rate
following a single dose (Bui et al. 2006).
483
The potential for adulterated products must be kept in
mind when evaluating a patient. On January 9, 2009, the
FDA released a press release naming 69 different weight
loss products adulterated with various drugs, including
sibutramine (a controlled IV drug found in the weight loss
pharmaceutical  Meridia@), phenytoin, phenolphthalein.
rimonabant, and bumetadine. Most of the products claimed
to be natural or only herbal ingredients. (FDA Expands
Warning to Consumers About Tainted Weight Loss Pills.
http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/2008/
NEW01933.html. Accessed Feb 28, 2009).
Mechanism of Action
Pharmacologically, ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are
sympathomimetic alkaloids. The alkaloids stimulate alpha
and beta-adrenergic receptors, causing the release of
endogenous catecholamines at synapses in the brain and
heart.   This    stimulation
results  in  peripheral
vasoconstriction and cardiac stimulation. This results in
increased blood pressure, tachycardia, ataxia, restlessness,
tremors, and seizures (Gurley et al. 1998).
Kinetics
 Pseudoephedrine is excreted in urine as an unchanged drug
(Means 1999). In humans, the elimination half-life varies
between 2-21 hours, depending on the urine pH.
Toxicity
Clinical signs have been seen in dogs at 5-6 mg/kg and
deaths have occurred at 10-12 mg/kg. Dogs have a narrow
484
margin of safety compared to other species (Means 1999).
Toxicity can be increased if other sympathomimetic
substances (such as phenylpropanolomine) are taken at the
same time. Underlying disease can also increase an
animal's susceptibility to toxicosis. Some of these
conditions include heart disease, diabetes, and seizure
disorders (Brinker 1998).
Clinical Signs
Effects are generally limited to the cardiovascular and
central nervous systems. Initial signs usually begin with
restlessness, pacing, and agitation.
Vocalization may
occur. Dogs may exhibit hallucinogenic behavior. On
clinical examination, mydriasis, tachycardia, hypertension,
muscle tremors, and seizures may be present. Death is
usually due to cardiovascular collapse. Hypertension can
cause pulmonary edema, although it is rare. Once an
animal becomes symptomatic, clinical signs may last for
36-48 hours (Means 1999).
Management of Exposures
For a recent ingestion (l5 minutes or less) in an
asymptomatic animal, emesis may be induced followed by
administration of activated charcoal with a cathartic.
Agitation, nervousness, and tremors are best controlled by
acepromazine maleate, chlorpromazine, or if seizures
develop, a barbiturate such as phenobarbital
1S
recommended (Plumb 1999). For acepromazine and
chlorpromazine, start at the low end of the dosage range
and   increase  as  needed.  Dissociative  effects 
 of
485
pseudoephedrine toxicosis; dogs may actually become
more agitated after  the administration of diazepam.
Serotonin syndrome may be present, and cyproheptadine is
a serotonin antagonist that may aid in management of
serotonergicsigns
(disorientation,
vocalization,
hyperthermia). Propranolol or another beta-blocker can be
used to control tachycardia. Supportive care includes
administration of intravenous fluids and monitoring the
patient. Baseline blood tests, including serum potassium
and glucose concentrations, should be obtained and any
abnormalities corrected.
METHYLXANTHINES
Sources
Caffeine is obtained from guarana (Paullinia cupana) a
plant containing high levels of caffeine. Guarana may
contain 3%-5% caffeine by dry weight compared to coffee
beans (1%-2% caffeine) and tea (1%4% caffeine).
Common names include Brazilian cocoa and Zoom.
Theobromine and theophylline have also been found in the
plant. Historically, guarana was used to provide energy
during fasting, as an aphrodisiac, and to prevent malaria
and dysentery. Guarana is frequently found in herbal
weight loss aids (with or without ma huang) and in
products promising increased energy (Der Marderosian
1996;PDR1998).Because
guarana
contains
methylxanthines, it produces a clinical syndrome similar to
chocolate, coffee, or over-the-counter stimulant products,
which contain caffeine.
Mechanism of Action
486
Caffeine is a methylated xanthine. It increases cyclic
AMP, releases catecholamines, and increases muscular
contractility. The net effect is a positive inotropic and
chronotropic effect on the heart, cerebral vasoconstriction,
renal vasorelaxation, and smooth muscle relaxation in the
gastrointestinal tract (Beasley 1997)
Kinetics
Caffeine is well absorbed orally. The plasma half-life in
the dog is 4.5 hours. Caffeine is metabolized in the liver
and undergoes enterohepatic recirculation. Caffeine is
excreted through the urine (Beasley 1997; Kisseberth and
Trammel 1990). Caffeine has caused birth defects in
animals (Brinker 1998).
Toxicity
The LD5o of caffeine in dogs is reported to be 140 mg/kg
However, serious toxicity and death have been reported at
doses much lower than the LDso. Signs of acute caffeine
toxicity in humans appear at 15 to 30 mg/kg and the lethal
dose is estimated to be 100 to 200 mg/kg (Kisseberth and
Trammel 1990; Shannon 1998). For combinations of ma
huang and guarana, the minimum dose at which clinical
't pe suny e y ' I si shop u poda aam suis
mg/kg guarana. The minimum dose at which death was
reported was 5.8 mg/kg ma huang and 19.1 mg/kg
guarana. These doses were obtained from cases reported to
the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (Ooms et al.
2001). There are multiple drugs that can interact with
caffeine.  Besides pseudoephedrine  and  ma
huang,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, aspirin, and cimetidine are
487
commonly used medications that should not be combined
with caffeine. The sedative effects of benzodiazepines may
be decreased by caffeine (Brinker 1998). As with ma
huang, there are several medical conditions, which may
enhance toxicity. These conditions include heart and
kidney disease and ulcers.
Clinical Effects
Clinical   signs
include
vomiting,  restlessness and
hyperactivity, polydipsia, and polyuria. Tachycardia and
other cardiac arrhythmias such as premature ventricular
contractions (PVCs) are possible. Clinical signs progress
to muscle tremors and seizures, and finally death (Beasley
1997; 0oms et al.2001)
Management of Exposure
Treatment consists of early decontamination. Induce
emesis in an asymptomatic animal or perform gastric
lavage. Because enterohepatic recirculation occurs in
caffeine toxicosis, repeated doses of activated charcoal are
beneficial.   Cardiac   function    should   be    monitored.
Tachycardia can be treated with a beta-blocker such as
metoprolol or propranolol. The dose is the same as in ma
huang toxicosis. Premature ventricular contractions can be
treated with lidocaine. Lidocaine is dosed as an initial
bolus slowly intravenously, followed by an IV drip.
Muscle tremors and seizures are treated with diazepam or a
barbiturate can be used (dose as per ma huang).
Intravenous fluids may enhance excretion. A urinary
catheter should be placed because methylxanthines can be
488
absorbed through the bladder wall (Beasley 1997; Ooms et
al. 2001).
HYPOGLYCEMICS
Alpha Lipoic Acid
Sources
Alpha lipoic acid (ALA), also known as thioctic acid, is
considered a “vitaminlike" antioxidant. ALA is found in
yeast, liver, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, spinach,
broccoli, and potatoes. It is used in alternative veterinary
practices to treat diabetic polyneuropathy, cataracts, and
glaucoma. In toxicology, it has been used to treat amanita
mushroom poisoning. However, the doses used in human
medicine for mushroom toxicity can cause toxicity in dogs.
Toxicity
ALA is taken orally, usually in 100 or 300 mg capsules.
The reported LD5o in dogs is 400-500mg/kg. However,
100mg/kg, and confirmed deaths at 330 mg/kg (ASPCA
2010). Cats are about 10 times more sensitive than dogs
(Hill et al. 2 004). The minimum toxic dose in cats is 13
mg/kg   and   at   30 
mg/kg
 neurologic
C signs and
hepatotoxicity develop.
The therapeutic dose for cats is 1-5 mg/kg, with a
maximum dose of 25 mg/day. For dogs, the therapeutic
dose is  up  to  200 mg/day.  Decontamination is
489
recommended for all cats if the calculated dose is >5mg/kg
and dogs if the dose is >30mg/kg
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs include hypersalivation, vomiting, ataxia,
tremors and seizures, and death. Serum chemistry
abnormalities  include  profound
1 hypoglycemia
 and
increased liver enzymes. Acute renal failure has occurred
in some patients. The onset of clinical signs is within 30
minutes up to several hours postingestion.
Management of Exposure
Treatment
 is   symptomatic    and 
1 supportive.  Treat
hypoglycemia, if present, with dextrose; support liver
function; correct dehydration and control  vomiting; and
control tremors and seizures. Monitor blood glucose as
well as renal and liver enzymes. See the section "Xylitol"
in Chapter 24 for specific treatment.
Cinnamon
Sources and Formulations
Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum
cassia
andCinnamomum
zeylanicum) is currently touted as an adjunct therapy in the
( n p s s h  p s
Baker et al. 2008). Cinnamon can be purchased in capsular
form at natural food stores or wherever vitamins and
supplements are sold. Most of the clinical trials reported at
this time have had a small number of patients, or used rats,
and some studies had conflicting results
490
Cinnamon is NOT the same as cinnamon oil. Cinnamon oil
is sometimes abused by teenagers, generally boys. They
report a rush or sensation of warmth, facial flushing, and
oral an burning sensation (Klepser and Klepser 1999; Lee
et al. 2000; Libster 1999; McGuffin and Hobbs 1997;
Means 1999).
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action is generally described as an
insulinlike effect. Cinnamon contains an active constituent
classed as a methylhydroxychalcone polymer (MHCP) that
may be linked to the effect. This substance, when
combined with insulin, has synergistic effects. People are
advised to monitor blood glucose carefully when taking
cinnamon,  especially
when
concurrentdiabetic
medications are used.
If a dog ingests large quantities of cinnamon, the potential
for hypoglycemia exists. Cinnamon is also reported to
cause hypotension in dogs. Cinnamon does have an emetic
effectinlargequantities,so
 many
dogs
will
selfdecontaminate after ingestion.
Some concerns with long-term usage do exist. Some
sources of cinnamon may have significant pesticide
       
injury with long-term use. Cinnamon also contains
coumarin and can have drug interactions.
Management of Exposures
491
In asymptomatic animals, emesis should be induced
following large ingestions. Home care will be appropriate
in many cases. Owners can monitor and feed small
frequent meals and transport to a veterinary clinic if
clinical signs develop.
MISCELLANEOUS HERBS
Griffonia simplicifolia
Sources and Formulations
Seeds from this
6plant are used as a source of
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP). This extract is generally
used to treat depression, headaches, obesity, and insomnia
in humans. 5-HTP is reported to increase serotonin in the
CNS.  Label information
 may
list5-HTP,
5-hydroxytryptophan, or griffonia seed extract as an
ingredient. Drug interactions with MAO inhibitors,
antidepressants, and herbs such as St. John's Wort can
occur (GwaltneyBrant et al. 2000).
Kinetics and Toxicity
5-HTP
1S
rapidlyand wellabsorbed fromthe
gastrointestinal tract. 5-H TP readily crossed  the
blood-brain barrier. Once target cells are reached, 5-HTP
is converted to serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine). Serotonin
is important in the regulation of sleep, cognition, behavior,
temperature regulation, and other functions.
In dogs, the minimum toxic dose reported is 23.6 mg/kg
and the minimum lethal dose reported in dogs is 128 mg
492
kg (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000). There is not necessarily a
good correlation between severity of signs and dose
ingested. Signs have been reported from 10 minutes up to
Sou 9 on dn isel uo suis uosansod snou t
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000).
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs resemble serotonin syndrome in humans.
Signs include seizures and tremors, depression, ataxia,
disorientation,   vocalization,
 and
hyperesthesia.
Gastrointestinal effects including vomiting, diarrhea, and
drooling are common. Severe hyperthermia and blindness 
have been reported (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2000).
Management of Exposures
Treatment  includes
early decontamination.Seizures,
tremors, and other neurologic signs usually respond well to
diazepam or barbiturates. Fluid therapy should be initiated.
Hyperthermia can be managed with cool water baths and
fans. Baseline blood and chemistry panels should be
obtained. Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist and can
be used PO or rectally until signs resolve (Gwaltney-Brant
et al. 2000)
Echinacea purpurea
Sources and Formulations
This herb is one of the most popular supplements in use
today. The common names of Echinacea include purple
coneflower, comb flower, scurvy root, and others.
493
Echinacea is indigenous to the United States and cultivated
elsewhere. The plant is a perennial herb with narrow
leaves and can grow up 3 feet. It is not unusual to have
echinacea confused with Parthenium integrifolium,a
member of the same family, but one that contains no
pharmacological activity. Historically, echinacea was used
by Native Americans and adopted by settlers. Uses ranged
Extracts were widely
used
as  anti-infectives until
antibiotics were discovered (Der Marderosian 1996; PDR
1998).
Echinacea contains essential oils, as well as glycoproteins,
alkamides, and flavonoids. All parts of the plant are used
in various herbal preparations. Echinacea is taken as a
tincture and in capsular form, and is applied locally to
wounds. Echinacea is typically used as an immune
stimulant and as supportive therapy for the common cold
or coughs, urinary tract infections, and stomatitis.
Echinacea is recommended for chronic skin ulcers or
poorly healing wounds. Because echinacea is suspected of
being an immunostimulant, it should not be taken for more
than 8 consecutive weeks. Echinacea is contraindicated in
progressive diseases such as AIDS or multiple sclerosis,
and tuberculosis (Der Marderosian 1996; Brinker 1998).
Toxicity
Echinacea has a wide margin of safety. Arabinogalactan, a
purified compound found in E. purpurea, has been dosed
at 4 gm/kg IP and IV with no toxic effects. People have
reported   a   variety   of   adverse  effects  including
hypotension, dizziness, fever, chills, nausea and vomiting,
494
dyspnea, and dermatological effects. At least some of the
effects are probably due to hypersensitivity and allergic
reactions (Der Marderosian 1996; Brinker 1998; PDR
1998)
Signs
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control Center has
received 45 calls involving echinacea since 1992. In many
cases, multiple herbal trades were ingested, or the capsules
contained multiple ingredients. The most common clinical
signs when echinacea was the only trade ingested were
vomiting and drooling. In 2 cases, the animal developed a
mild cough, possibly associated with retching. Both
hyperactivity and lethargy were reported. Erythema was
reported in 1 case. In 25 cases, no clinical signs developed
(ASPCA 2010).
Management of Exposures
A small ingestion of echinacea generally does not require
medical  intervention.  Any   gastrointestinal   upset   is
generally self-limiting and the pet owner will be able to
treat with supportive care (NPO, kaolin/pectin). It is
imperative to determine whether the animal ingested other
herbal products or medications. Large recent ingestions
can be treated with gastric decontamination. If an animal
develops severe vomiting, symptomatic treatment with IV
fluids and other supportive care should be initiated.
Chamomile
Sources
495
Chamomile refers to both German chamomile (Matricaria
recutita) and Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile).
Common names for German chamomile include wild
chamomile and pin heads. Common names for Roman
chamomile include garden chamomile, sweet chamomile,
ground apple, and whig plant. The plant is indigenous to
Europe and northwest Asia and naturalized in America
German chamomile is an annual, and Roman chamomile is
a slow-growing perennial. The plant is erect and grows to
about 20-40 cm. Flowers are white with yellow centers
(Eisenberg 1997; Klepser and Klepser 1999). Chamomile
has been used medicinally since the Roman Empire. It was
used as an antispasmodic and sedative. In folk medicine,
chamomile  is  used  for rheumatism  and   intestinal
parasitism. Chamomile has also been used as a hair tint
and cigarette flavoring (Der Marderosian 1996; Brinker
1998). In veterinary medicine, the most common uses are
as a natural dewormer, sedative and as a treatment for
aggression.
Chamomile
contains
sessentialoils,flavanoids,and
hydroxycoumarins. Both fresh and dried flower heads are
used. Some preparations will use the entire plant.
Chamomile is most frequently taken as a tea. Ointments,
gels, and bath salts are also available. Chamomile is used
as a sedative and gastrointestinal antispasmodic. It may
also be taken to treat colds, bronchitis, and fevers. In one
study using rats, the development of gastrointestinal ulcers
caused by indomethacin (a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory)
was prevented by chamomile (Der Marderosian 1996).
Topically, chamomile is used to treat wounds and burns.
Chamomile is contraindicated in pregnancy (especially
496
early pregnancy) ((McGuffin and Hobbs 1997; Brinker
1998).
Toxicity
Bisaldolol, which accounts for 50% of the essential oils
found in chamomile, has an acute LD5o of 15 ml/kg in rats
and mice. In a 4-week subacute toxicity study, 1-2 ml/kg
given orally to rats produced no significant effects Der
Marderosian 1996).
Clinical Effects
Hypersensitivity  and  anaphylaxis  has been reported.
Contact dermatitis occurs in people sensitive to other
plants in the family, such as ragwort. Ingestion of large
quantities of the flower heads produces vomiting. The
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center has had 6 cases of
ingestion in cats (ASPCA 2010). Three cases involved
gastrointestinal upset (vomiting and/or diarrhea), 4 cases 
reported depression and lethargy, and 2 cases reported
epistaxis. Of the two cats with epistaxis, one also
developed
hematomas.   Epistaxis   and   hematoma
development is probably due to the hydroxycoumarin
content. One cat developed no clinical signs. The majority
of dogs developed no clinical signs. Vomiting and
hypersalivation were the most commonly reported clinical
signs in dogs (ASPCA 2010).
Management of Exposures
Management of  recent ingestions  includes gastric
decontamination. In cases of large ingestions, activated
497
charcoal can be given. Treatment for gastric irritation is
symptomaticand
supportive
(NPO，
gastrointestinal
protectants, fluid therapy if severe vomiting or dehydration
occurs). If anaphylaxis occurs, standard therapy with
epinephrine, steroids, and antihistamines should be
initiated. For cats, or dogs with bleeding disorders such as
von Willebrand's disease, a packed cell volume and
activated clotting time or coagulation profile may be
required. If necessary, a blood transfusion could be
administered.
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Sources and Formulations
St. John's wort is also known as goatweed, rosin rose, and
Klamath weed. It is a perennial native in Europe, Canada.
and the United States. This plant can be found throughout
much of the United States, but northwestern states have
had the greatest livestock economic losses due to
Hypericum. There are several Hypericum species, some
with overlapping ranges, but the most important is
Hypericum perforatum. The plant grows aggressively in
roadside areas and ditches, meadows, and woods. The
height is usually 2 feet. Yellow flowers bloom from June
through September. The plant must be harvested between
July  and August and dried immediately  to retain
pharmacological properties.
St. John's Wort has been used since the Middle Ages.
Traditionally, this herb is used as an antidepressant and to
treat diarrhea and gastritis. It was also used to treat
insomnia and cancer. Topically, the herb is mixed with
498
olive oil to create “red oil" and used for inflammation (Der
Marderosian 1996; PDR 1998). In veterinary medicine,
this plant is well known for causing photosensitization in
livestock and horses. St. John's wort has been responsible
for devastating economic losses to livestock producers.
Mechanism of Action
The
major
active
constituents   are   anthraquinone
derivatives, hypericin, and pseudohypericin, as well as
flavanoids.
. The
concentration
variesconsiderably
depending on harvest time, drying process, and storage. St.
John's wort is used primarily as an antidepressant and
sedative. Studies have shown that St. John's wort inhibits
serotonin uptake, accounting for the antidepressant effects.
It is taken as an infusion or as dried herb. The most
common preparation is a standardized 300 mg capsule. St.
John's wort can interact with several medications. It
decreases the activity of protease inhibitors, antagonizes
reserpine, and increases stupor when consumed with
alcohol. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO) such as
seligiline (Anipryl?) are potentiated when taken
concomitantly. Serotonin syndrome is possible if St.
John's wort is taken with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) due to synergistic activity. Common
SSRIs include fluoxetine (Prozac?) and sertraline
St. John's wort is taken with dextrometorphan and
meperidine. Sympathomimetics combined with St. John's
wort may lead to a hypertensive crisis (Shannon 1999)
Clinical Effects
499
Adverse effects occur commonly. In humans, the most
frequently reported signs include gastrointestinal upset,
allergic reactions, and agitation. Photosensitization has
occurred, generally after large doses or long-term usage.
Prior to 1994, the only cases in the ASPCA National
Animal  Poison Control Center databanks  involved
livestock  and  photosensitization.  Almost  all cases
involving herbal products involve dogs (35 out of 38
  s       
The most commonly reported clinical signs were
depression, vomiting, and diarrhea. Tremors and/or seizure
were reported in three cases. Two cases developed
increased liver enzymes (ASPCA 2010).
Management of Exposures
Recent ingestions are best treated by decontamination.
Gastrointestinal disorders are generally easily managed
with symptomatic and supportive care. In large ingestions,
or unknown quantities, especially if early decontamination
is not possible, baseline liver enzymes should be obtained.
If evidence of serotonin syndrome develops (tremors,
seizures, hyperthermia, vomiting, and diarrhea), standard
therapy as discussed in the section Griffonia simplicifolia
is initiated. If evidence of photosensitization occurs, keep
the animal out of sunlight, and provide supportive care for
hepatic damage.
Valerian Root (Valeriana officianalis)
Sources and Formulations
500
Valerian root is one of the most popular herbs on the
market. Common names include all-heal, heliotrope,
Vandal root, and Capon's tale. It is an herbaceous
perennial found widely over the United States. The dried
rhizome contains a volatile oil with an odor many find
offensive. The fresh drug does not have an odor. The plant
grows to about 50 to 100 cm high and is erect without a
branching stem. Flowers are bright pink to white. The fruit
is yellow with a tuft of white hair. Valerian is sometimes
confused with Veratrum album, which is a toxic plant.
There are over 2o0 species of valerian, with various
degrees of pharmacologic activity. Valeriana officianalis is
considered the standard genus and species used in herbal
medicine (Der Marderosian 1996; PDR 1998)
The primary active ingredients are volatile oils, alkaloids.
and most importantly, valepotriates. The root is the only
part of the plant that is used. Valerian is classed as
generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for food use. The
volatile oils are used as flavoring in some food products.
Valerian is used primarily as a sedative and as a sleeping
aid. It has also been used in epilepsy, headaches, colic, and
numerous other minor ailments. Valerian is frequently
taken as a tea or as an extract. Valerian increases the
length of sedation induced by pentobarbital and length of
anesthesia produced by thiopental. Valerian has helped
ease the effects of withdrawal from benzodiazepines due to
similar receptor sites, but it increases the effects of
sedatives if taken concomitantly (Der Marderosian 1996;
PDR 1998).
Toxicity
501
Most reports of adverse effects of valerian in human
literature occur after chronic use. These effects include
headache, cardiac arrhthymias, and agitation. In one case
report, 200 mg in a human caused fatigue, tremors,
abdominal pain, and mydriasis (Shannon 1999). Animal
studies included injections of 50 mg/kg intravenous in cats,
which caused a drop in heart rate and blood pressure.
Another study found no pharmacological effect in cats at
250 mg/ kg. Mice given up to 4600 mg/kg orally produced
mild clinical effects. Signs of toxicity included ataxia,
hypothermia, and muscle relaxation (Der Marderosian
1996).
Clinical Effects
The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center has had only a
few calls on valerian ingestion. Most produced no clinical
effects, although lethargy and sedation were seen in a cat
(ASPCA 2010)
Management of Exposures
Generally, significant treatment would be unnecessary.
The sedative effects are generally short-lived and can be
managed by an owner at home. Large ingestions in an
asymptomatic animal could be treated by decontamination.
ESSENTIAL OILS
Sources and Formulations
Essential oils are produced by a large number of plants
(Wolfe 1999). The oils are a mixture of terpenes and other
502
chemicals. Essential oils are used from food flavorings to
perfumes to medications. The most commonly used
essential oils in veterinary medicine include Melaleuca or
tea tree oil (M elaleuca alternifolia), pennyroyal oil
(Mentha pulegium), D-limonene and linalool (Citrus spp.),
Citronella(Cymbopgum
nardus), Thuja(Thuja
occidentalis), and wormwood or absinthe (Artemisia
absinthium)
In veterinary medicine, essential oils are most commonly
used to treat flea infestations, hot spots or other
dermatological conditions, or as wormers. Oils may be
found in shampoos, dips, liniments, teas, tinctures, syrups,
or other formulations (Villar et al. 1994; Bischoff and
Gaule 1998; Wolfe 1999).
Kinetics
Essential oils are rapidly absorbed both orally  and
dermally. They are metabolized by the liver to glucuronide
and glycine conjugates. Repeated exposure can cause
inductions of the hepatic enzyme systems cytochrome
P-450 and UPD-glycuronyl transferase systems. Thus,
preexisting liver disease can increase the risk of toxicity.
Toxicity
Cats appear to be more sensitive to essential oils than dogs
(Villar et al. 1994; Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Wolfe 1999).
The acute LDso varies significantly between various
essential oils. Formulations mixed with an organic solvent.
such as alcohol, can allow increased absorption and
toxicity. Generally, a greater volume of fresh product is
503
required to produce the same effects as a concentrated
essence. The basic mechanism of action is unknown
(Villar et al. 1994).
Clinical Effects
The most common clinical signs after dermal exposures
include ataxia,
 muscle weakness, depression, and
behavioral abnormalities. Severe hypothermia and collapse
have occurred in cats. A transient paresis can occur in
small breed dogs when melaleuca oil is applied down the
spine as a topical flea treatment (Villar et al. 1994;
Kaluzienski 20o0). Cats have developed scrotal dermatitis
after exposure to d-limonene or linalool (Power et al.
1988; Hooser 1990). Liver failure has been associated with
essential oils, especially pennyroyal and melaleuca (Villar
et al. 1994; Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Kaluzienski 2000;
Sudekum et al. 1992).
Oral  ingestions cause vomiting and diarrhea.  Central
nervous system depression may occur, and seizures are
possible with large doses. Aspiration pneumonia can occur
when essential oils are inhaled. Death can occur with
sufficient doses. Signs usually develop from almost
immediately up to 8 hours postexposure (Villar et al. 1994;
Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Der Marderosian 1996)
Management of Exposures
Recent dermal exposures should be treated by bathing
using a hand dishwashing liquid. Activated charcoal is
effective in oral exposures. Emesis should not be induced
due to the potential for aspiration pneumonia. Intravenous
504
fluids help  correct hypotension and aid in  renal
elimination. Body temperature should be monitored and
regulated as needed, and electrolytes, cardiac, and
respiratory function should be monitored. Seizures and
tremors usually
respond
to
diazepam. 
Aspiration
pneumoniamayrequire
e  oxygen  and  broad-spectrum
antibiotics. Hepatic damage usually responds to good
supportive care, although N-acetylcysteine has been used
experimentally  in  humans  diagnosed  with  pennyroyal
toxicosis (Poisindex? 2001). Signs usually resolve over a
few hours up to a few days. Most animals do have a good
prognosis with appropriate treatment. Many mild cases
require only mild home treatment and observation_ (Villar
et al. 1994; Bischoff and Gaule 1998; Poisindex 2001;
Plumb 1999).
HERBSANDPETS
One of the most important considerations in treating herbal
ingestions is product quality assurance. Although most
herbal companies are reputable, there are numerous reports
of adulterated products (addition of substances not noted
on the label). This has been particularly true of Chinese
herbal products, which frequently contain pharmaceuticals.
Plant identification errors occur, and entire batches of
product have been mixed using the wrong herb. In some
cases, labels are written in a foreign language or contain
directions only for mixing, making interpretation difficult
In cases where a known ingestion produces unexpected
clinical signs, the potential for adulteration or other errors
should be considered. When a product is not standardized,
a consumer can not be sure what dosage of active
constituents or how bioavailable the product may be.
505
Standardization also provides assurance that the actual
herb is in the product (Winslow and Kroll 1998).
Clients who use herbal products should be advised to treat
them as a medication, and keep them away from pets.
Specifically ask clients if they take or use any natural or
herbal products. Many people do not consider these
  ‘lu f, anss o shp aq o saois-qns
harmless." Clients should be encouraged to learn about the
herbal and nutriceutical products they are taking or giving
their pets. Clients need to be encouraged to discuss proper
use of herbal products in pets with their veterinarian.
Clients can be encouraged to discuss alternative therapies
by discussing a pet's diagnosis and suggested treatments
thoroughly. Discuss the client's expectations and opinions
of both alternative and conventional medicine. Issues of
safety and efficacy must be explained to clients. They
should be encouraged to report potential adverse reactions
or to discuss different routes of therapy if a pet's medical
condition is not improving. Clients who want to use
alternative medical treatments should be encouraged to
o  uo m spo u dn gp poo e u
diagnosis and be referred to a veterinarian trained in
alternative medicine. In choosing an alternative medicine
practitioner, the same criteria would be used as for any
other specialist: education, training, and professionalism
(Libster 1999).
REFERENCES
ASPCA  Animal  Poison  Control  Center Databanks.
unpublished data, 2010.
506
Baker, W.L., Guiterrez-Williams, G., White, C.M., Kluger,
J., and Coleman, C.1. 2008. Effect of cinnamon on glucose
control and lipid parameters. Diabetes Care 31(1): 41-43.
Beasley, V.R. 1997. A Systems Affected Approach to
Veterinary Toxicology, pp. 116-120. Urbana: University of
Illinois.
Bischoff, K. and Gaule, F. 1998. Australian Tea Tree
(Melaleuca alternifolia) oil poisoning in three purebred
cats. J Vet Diagn fnvest 10:208-210.
Brinker, F. 1998. Herb Contraindications and Drug
Interactions, 2nd ed. Sandy, Oregon: Eclectic Medical
Publications.
Bui, L.T., Nguyen, D.T., and Ambrose, P.J. 2006. Blood
pressure and heart rate effects following a single dose of
bitter orange. Ann Pharmacother 40:53-57.
Chase, C.K. and McQueen, C.E. 2007. Cinnamon in
diabetes   mellitus.
Am
Health Syst
Pharm
64(10):1033-1035.
Der Marderosian, A., ed. 1996. The Review of Natural
Products. St. Louis: Facts and Comparisons Publishing
Group.
Eisenberg, E.M. 1997. Advising patients who seek
altermative   medical   therapies.
.AnnInternMed
27(1):61-69.
507
Gulla, J. and Singer, A.J. 200o. Use of alternative therapies
among emergency department patients. Ann Emer Med
35(3):226-228
Gurley, B.J., Gardner, S.F., White, L.M., and Wang, P.L
1998. Ephedrine pharmacokinetics after the ingestion of
nutritional supplements containing Ephedra sinica (ma
huang). Ther Drug Monit 20:439-445.
Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., Albretson, JC., and Khan, S.A
2000. 5-hydroxytryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases
(1989 1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(12):1937-1940.
Hill, A.S., Werner, J.A., Rogers, Q.R. et al. 2004. Lipoic
       s oh  
humans, dogs, or rats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 88:
150-156.
Hooser, S.B. 1990. D-limonene, linalool, and crude citrus
oil extracts. V et Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):
383-385.
Kaluzienski, M. 2000. Partial paralysis and altered
behavior in dogs treated with melaleuca oil. Clin Tox
38(5): 518-519.
Kisseberth, W.C. and Trammel, H.T. 1990. Illicit and
abused drugs.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20(2):405-417.
Klepser, T.B. and Klepser, M.E. 1999. Unsafe and
potentially safe herbal therapies. Am J Health Syst Pharm
56:125-138.
508
Lee, K.W., Yamato, O., Tajima, M. et al. 2000.
Hematologic changes associated with the appearance of
eccentrocytes after intragastric administration  of  garlic
extract to dogs. Am J Vet Res 61(11):1446-1450.
Libster, M. 1999. Guidelines for selecting a medical
herbalist for consultation  and referral:  Consulting a
medical  herbalist. J
AlternComplement
Med
5(5):457-462.
McGuffin, M. and Hobbs, C. 1997. In Botanical Safety
Handbook, edited by R. Upton andA. Goldberg. New
York: CRC Press.
Means, C. 1999. Ma huang:All natural but not always
innocuous. Vet Med 94(6):511-512.
Ooms, T.G., Khan, S.A., and Means, C. 2001. Suspected
caffeine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting from ingestion
of an herbal supplement containing guarana and ma huang
in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
218(2): 225-229.
PDR for Herbal Medicines. 1998. Montvale, New Jersey:
Medical Economics Company.
Plumb, D.C. 1999. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3rd
ed.Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Poisindex@ Editorial Staff. 200l. Essential oils. In
POISINDEX? System, edited by L.L. Toll and K.M.
Hurlbut. Englewood, Colorado: Micromedex, Inc. (Edition
expired 2001.)
509
Power, K.A., Hooser, S.B. et al. 1988. An evaluation of the
acute toxicity of an insecticidal spray containing linalool,
D-limonene, and piperonyl butoxide applied topically to
domestic cats. Vet Human Tox 30(3):206-210.
Shannon, M. 1999. Alternative medicines toxicology: A
review of selected agents. Clin Tox 37(6):709-713.
Shannon, M.W. 1998. Theophylline and caffeine. In
Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose,
3rd ed., edited by L.M. Haddad, M.W. Shannonm, and JF.
Winchester, pp. 1 102-1104. Philadelphia: W.B.Saunders.
Sudekum, M., Poppenga, R.H., Raju, N. et al. 1992.
Pennyroyal oil toxicosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200(6):817-818.
Villar, D., Knight, M.J., Hansen, S.R. et al. 1994. Toxicity
of melaleuca oil and related essential oils applied topically
on dogs and cats. Vet Human Tox 36(2):139-142.
Winslow, L.C. and Kroll, D.J. 1998. Herbs as medicines.
Arch Intern Med 158:2192-2199.
Wolfe, A. 1999. Essential oil poisoning. Clin Tox 37(6):
721-727.
510
22
Zootoxins
TamaraFoss
HYMENOPTERA: BEES, WASPS, AND HORNETS
Sources
The Order  Hymenoptera includes three medically
important families of insects: bees of the family Apidae.
wasps and hornets of the family Vespidae, and fire ants of
the family Formicidae. Bees, wasps, and hornets are
credited with being responsible for more human deaths
than any other venomous animal (Cowell et al. 1991).
The family Apidae  includes  European honeybees.
Africanized honeybees, bumblebees, and carpenter bees.
All Apids feed on nectar and pollen and can sting only
once because they are eviscerated and die after their
barbed stinger is left behind. European honeybees.
although protective of their hives, are considered to be less
aggressive than their Africanized honeybee relatives and
Vespids.  When  honeybees,  especially  Africanized
honeybees, sting, they release an alarm pheromone that
alerts and attracts other bees (Diaz 2007). Africanized
honeybees are more easily agitated, experience more
prolonged agitation and defend a greater distance of area
around their hives than their European counterparts
(Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999). Although bigger than
honeybees, bumblebees and carpenter bees do not receive
511
as much discussion in the literature and are considered less
aggressive than honeybees (Diaz 2007).
The family Vespidae includes yellow jackets, hornets, and
wasps. Vespids are predatory carnivores; they feed on
other insects and are attracted to sweet foods and meats.
       a  is
behind in the victim, so a lone vespid has the ability to
sting multiple times.
Solenopsis invicta, the red imported fire ant, a member of
the Formicidae family, is the primary species of concern in
regard to envenomation of animals (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007). There are unique clinical signs that develop with
fire ant envenomation, as discussed later.
Toxicity
The amount of venom delivered to a victim does not
determine whether an anaphylactic reaction will result. A
single sting can result in anaphylaxis. Cases involving
multiple stings result in higher venom doses delivered to
the victim and a greater toxic reaction (Fitzgerald and Vera
2006). The estimated lethal dose is approximately 20
stings/kg for most mammals (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Only female bees and wasps are able to sting. The stinger
is associated with venom glands within the modified
venoms contain proteins (which are largely responsible for
allergic responses), peptides, and enzymes (which are
512
made up of proteins). The two major enzymes implicated
in allergic responses  in Apid envenomations are
phospholipase and hyaluronidase (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007). Phospholipase A2 is a major allergen and is
regarded as the most lethal peptide in honeybee venom
(GwatneyBrant et al. 2007). Mellitin, which is unique to
honeybee venom, is responsible for the local pain
associated with a sting. Apamin peptide is also unique to
honeybee venom and may have neurotoxic effects on the
peripheral nerves (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Vespid
venoms
contain  serotonin,  kinins,and
acetylcholine, all of which are believed to play a role in
production of the intense pain that follows envenomation
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006). Antigen 5 is the major
allergenic component of vespid venom (Fitzgerald and
Flood 2006; Merck 2008). Mastoparans are peptide toxins
found in wasp venom, which are similar to but less potent
than mast cell degranulation peptide 401 found in Apid
venom (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006).
Clinical Effects
Signs
A localized reaction including pain and swelling will
generally occur in all victims of envenomation. Erythema
can be seen and embedded stingers can result in abscess
formation. Local reactions can go unnoticed since the
reaction often does not progress in severity and resolves
without treatment within 24 hours (Fitzgerald and Flood
2006).
513
Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions can also occur and
vary in their severity. They can be relatively moderate on
the continuum of allergic reactions and present as more
regional swelling of an area in which a sting was received
(Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999), or they can be as severe as
an anaphylactic response and result in death. Anaphylaxis
occurs fairly infrequently in animals, but if it is going to
occur, signs typically develop within 10-15 minutes
(Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999; Fitzgerald and Flood 2006).
Anaphylactic signs include urticaria, pruritis, angioedema,
vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, hematuria, laryngeal edema,
dyspnea, hyperpnea, tachycardia, possibly hypotension in
dogs and cats, ataxia, syncope, seizures, and death
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006; Akre and Reed 2002;
Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1 999).
Anaphylactic reactions in cats can involve salivation and
collapse (Cowell and Cowell 1995)
Nonanaphylactoid systemic or toxic reactions typically are
delayed for 6 to 24 hours, or even up to several weeks or
months (Akre and Reed 2002). Reactions seen include
serum sickness, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, neuropathy.
disseminated  intravascular  coagulation,  and  arthritis
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006). Other possible conditions
include acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress
hemolytic anemia (Noble and Armstrong 1999). Specific
signs include ataxia, prostration, convulsions, CNS
depression, shock, hyperthermia, bloody diarrhea, bloody
vomiting,   hematuria,   leukocystosis,   intravascular
hemolysis, increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
elevated alanine transaminase (ALT) (Gwaltney-Brant et
514
al. 2007). Cats can develop hepatic injury following hornet
envenomation (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Laboratory
When systemic reactions or anaphylaxis occur, it is
important to monitor laboratory values including urinalysis
and various blood chemistries such as alanine amino
transaminase (ALT), total bilirubin, electrolyte levels.
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, arterial blood
gases, and serum creatine kinase. Urine can be red or
brown and might contain granular casts (Cowell and
Cowell 1995). Blood hemograms reflect an inflammatory
leukogram: leukocytosis with a left shift. Anemia may
occur with marked spherocytosis (Cowell and  Cowell
1995). Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure can occur.
Electrocardiograph monitoring may be necessary.
Differential Diagnoses
In cases that develop anaphylaxis, it is prudent to rule out
other potential toxicological causes such as spiders or
other insects. Rule-outs to keep in mind include infection,
abscess, trauma, neoplasia, allergy, abscessed tooth, or
foreign object (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006). Another
possible differential diagnosis is heatstroke (Cowell et al.
1991). Differential diagnoses for animals presenting with
respiratory distress should also include acute lung injury/
acute respiratory distress syndrome, aspiration pneumonia.
interstitial pneumonia, congestive heart failure, and
pulmonary thromboembolism (Walker et al. 2005). A
potential diagnosis for sudden unexplained death is insect
sting, especially when death occurs outdoors (Diaz 2007).
515
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Evidence of stingers is diagnostic of Apid envenomation.
Stingers will not be present with Vespid envenomation.
Areas most commonly stung in animals include the head
and neck, oral cavity, and limbs and paws (Oliveira et al.
2007).
Postmortem
Postmortem findings include facial edema, gastric
hemorrhage, petechiation of the epicardium, and red-black
urine (Noble and Armstrong 1999). Facial cellulitis, lung
and liver congestion, and pulmonary hemorrhage might
also be noted (Noble and Armstrong 1999). Bees and
 ls   n a u ss
(Rodriguez-Lainz et al. 1999).
Management of Exposures
Single sting envenomations can cause pain and swelling
In most cases, treatment will not be necessary (Fitzgerald
and Flood 2006). If the incident is witnessed and a stinger
is located, it can be removed by scraping away from the
injection site. The pet should be monitored for anaphylaxis
for the first 10-15 minutes following an envenomation.
Anaphylaxis must be treated intensively. Epinephrine
should be administered subcutaneously  (Cowell and
Cowell 1995). Cardiac monitoring and respiratory support
are vital. Intubation and administration of oxygen may be
516
needed. Fluid administration with a crystalloid solution is
important to avoid vascular collapse (Fitzgerald and Flood
2006). Antihistamine and corticosteroid administration is
recommended (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Diazepam can
be used for convulsions (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007)
Cases  involving more  severe  regional reactions  and
multiple stings should be hospitalized and closely
monitored. Corticosteroid administration of prednisolone
sodium succinate followed by prednisolone orally and then
        
progression of an envenomation syndrome (Fitzgerald and
Flood 2006). If hypotension develops, an intravenous
bolus of normal saline should be given (Fitzgerald and
Flood 2006). Since hymenopterid
venom can
be
nephrotoxic, it is important to provide continuous fluid
administration to ensure normal urine output (Fitzgerald
and   Flood   2006).  Additionial
treatment including
vascular stasis will be required if signs progress. Toxic
reactions,  most  often
associated
with
massive
envenomations, also require closer monitoring of major
systems including hematologic profiles, cardiac and
respiratory function and renal sufficiency for several days
(Fitzgerald and Flood 2006). The more rapidly a patient
can be stabilized and provided with supportive care, the
better chance for a positive outcome. Even after resolution
of signs, monitoring should continue for 24 hours in
patients suffering anaphylactic or massive envenomation
responses (Fitzgerald and Flood 2006)
Prognosis
517
Most animals that are victims of single-sting Hymenoptera
envenomation will not develop serious signs, so overall,
prognosis is very good. Patients that develop anaphylaxis
have a better chance of full recovery if they survive the
first 60 minutes of the initial envenomation (Fitzgerald and
Flood 2006). The chance of recovery increases for animals
that experience anaphylaxis or develop severe reactions
from multiple sting envenomation if treatment is sought
immediately
HYMENOPTERA: IMPORTED FIRE ANTS
Sources
Fire ants belong to the order Hymenoptera in the family
Formicidae. Two species of imported fire ants, Solenopsis
richteri (black imported fire ants) and Solenopsis invicta
(the red imported fire ant), are the most problematic and
dangerous formicids to humans, agriculture, companion
animals, livestock, and wildlife. Due to its greater
distribution as compared to Solenopsis richteri, Solenopsis
invicta is the primary species of concerm.
Toxicity
Anaphylaxis can occur after fire ant envenomation and is
not predictable based on dose or the number of stings
received (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006). Although uncommon
overall, human fatalities associated with fire ant
envenomation are largely due to anaphylaxis (Fitzgerald
and Vera 2006). However, there are no known reports of
animal deaths from fire ant stings as a result of
anaphylaxis (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Conceicao et al.
518
2006). Since fire ant envenomations generally occur en
masse due to their aggressive and swarming nature,
multiple stings leading to systemic toxicity is possible.
There is no established lethal number of stings for
mammals.
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Formicid venom is unique compared to bee, wasp, and
hornet venom. It is comprised of 95% water insoluble
alkaloids (Akre and Reed 2002). The alkaloid portion
includes
solenopsin
A
which is
a
piperidine alkaloid derivative (Conceicao et al. 2006). The
dermal necrosis that occurs with envenomation is
attributed to the alkaloid portion of the venom (Akre and
Reed 2002; Rakich et al. 1993). The alkaloid component is
also the cause of most of the local sting reactions that
occur (Akre and Reed 2002). The alkaloids have cytotoxic,
hemolytic, fungicidal, insecticidal and bactericidal
properties (GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007; Rakich et al. 1993).
Unlike the high protein content in bee, wasp, and hornet
venom, only approximately 1%-5% of fire ant venom is
proteinaceous (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Akre and Reed
2002; Cowell and Cowell 1995; Elgart 1990). The
proteinaceous component of fire ant venom includes
hyaluronidase and phospholipase, and is the cause of
allergic and anaphylactic responses that occur (Rakich et
al. 1993; Akre and Reed 2002).
Fire ants bite and sting their victims. The stingers are not
barbed, so they are capable of delivering multiple stings.
Fire ants initially bite and then rotate about their fixed
519
heads in a circular fashion as they repeatedly sting
(Fitzgerald and Vera 2006).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical signs range from mild dermatologic reactions to
anaphylaxis and possibly death. It is unclear as to the
annual incidence of bites involving pets or livestock.
Generally, signs in dogs are associated with local sting
reactions and may include erythema, pruritis, pain,
swelling, and dermal necrosis. It is debatable as to whether
pustules develop in dogs, but pustule formation is
characteristic and diagnostic in humans (Akre and Reed
2002; GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007; Rakich et al. 1993;
Conceicao et al. 2006; Fowler 1993).
There are no reported deaths in animals attributed to
anaphylaxis secondary to fire ant stings (Gwaltney-Brant
et al. 2007). An anaphylactic reaction is associated with
urticaria, cutaneous and laryngeal edema, bronchospasm,
and vascular collapse and is mediated by IgE (Fitzgerald
and Vera 2006). Typically, anaphylaxis will develop a
short time after an envenomation, whereas systemic
toxicity from massive envenomations can result in death
  i sd so t  
2006).
Laboratory
There are no laboratory tests that will confirm or determine
fire ant exposure (Fitzgerald and Vera 2006)
520
Differential Diagnoses
Primary diagnoses to keep in mind are similar to those
noted in the earlier discussion of bees, wasps, and hornets.
Other differential diagnoses to consider include subcorneal
pustular dermatosis, pustular psoriasis, and other skin
diseases manifested by pustules (Conceicao et al. 2006).
Diagnostics
Antemortem
In humans, the unique circular pattern of stings and the
resulting wheal and flare that develop are diagnostic
(Elgart 1990). Typically, the wheals progress into papules
that fill with fluid, which then develop into pustules within
24 hours (Elgart 1990; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). It is
suggested that rather than developing pustules, dogs
develop erythematous pruritic papules that commonly
resolve within 24 hours (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007)
Postmortem
No postmortem diagnostics are specifically described for
fire ant evenomation.
Management of Exposures
Generally, fire ant exposures involving a small number of
stings   will  not require
treatment.Multiplesting
envenomations  involving  neonatal  or  geriatric patients
may require veterinary  treatment.  Severe systemic
reactions or anaphylaxis, should they develop, are treated
521
as noted in the previous bees, wasps, and hornets
discussion. If live fire ants are observed when an animal is
presented for treatment, they should be removed as soon as
possible to limit further venom delivery. A soapy water
bath or application of a low-toxicity insecticide (e.g.,
  a s)    (
Fire ants target areas on animals with minimal hair growth
and/or moist areas including the muzzle, eyes, ears, ventral
abdomen, and perineum (Drees et al. 2002). Animals lick
or bite at areas where fire ants congregate and sting; in so
doing they may ingest a number of fire ants and potentially
suffer stings in the oral cavity or gastrointestinal tract
(Drees et al.  2002). Gastrointestinal protectants and
nutritional supplementation might be indicated (Drees et
al. 2002).
If the eyesare
bitten,
excessive lacrimation,
blepharospasm, and
1 mucopurulent exudates can be
observed (Drees et al. 2 002). Focal necrotic ulcers can be
present on the cormea and conjunctiva (Drees et al. 2o02).
Topical ophthalmic antibiotic solutions  should
[be
administered. Corticosteroids should be avoided in cases
involving comeal ulcers (Drees et al. 2002).
Prognosis
 q  d p ms  o 
extent of clinical signs. In many cases, owners will not be
aware that their pet was stung.
BUFO TOADS
522
Sources
Bufo marinus (cane toad, giant toad, or marine toad)
gained access to the United States from Puerto Rico via
Hawai. It now additionally resides in the southern tip of
Florida and Texas (Eubig 2001). Bufo alvarius (Colorado
River toad)  inhabits  southerm  Arizona, south-easterm
California and southwestern New Mexico (Eubig 2001).
Toads have mucous and granular glands that aid in defense
against predators. Bufo toads have a pair of parotid glands,
which begin caudal to the tympanum and continue over the
shoulders (Fowler 1993; Palumbo 1983; Eubig 2001). The
parotid glands serve as the primary release site of a thick,
creamy, poisonous secretion through pinhole orifices on
the surface of the skin (Fowler 1993; Palumbo 1983; Eubig
2001). Bufo alvarius, although considered less toxic than
Bufo marinus, is equipped with an additional pair of
poison glands on the forelimbs and several pairs on the
hindlimbs (Eubig 2001).
Toxicity
Bufo marinus that reside in Florida are equipped with a
more potent toxin than those residing in Hawaii; the
mortality of dogs exposed to Bufo marinus in Florida that
subsequently receive no treatment is almost 100%
compared to about only 5% for those exposed to Bufo
entire content of both  parotid glands, which is
approximately equivalent to 0.1 g of venom, is considered
a potentially lethal oral dose for a dog (Reeves 2004).
However, toxicity varies (Peterson and Roberts 2006). The
523
size of the animal exposed and size of the toad delivering
the venom, coupled with the length of time subjected to the
venom, will largely impact the outcome of exposure
(Peterson and Roberts 2006). Typically, a bite and release
exposure is not as severe as one involving holding and
chewing, or ingestion of a toad (Peterson and Roberts
2006). Clinical signs are expected in exposures involving a
dose of 1 mg/kg (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Bufo toad secretions contain two primary components:
bufogenins and bufotoxins (Peterson and Roberts 2006;
Fowler 1993; Eubig 2001). The secretions also contain
bufotenines
(serotonin
 and
5-hydroxytryptophan),
catecholamines
(dopamine,
 epinephrine,
and
norepinephrine), and indolealkylamines (Peterson and
Roberts 2006; Eubig 2001). Bufogenins are similar in
activity to cardiac glycosides and, along with bufotoxins,
are responsible for arrhythmias such as ventricular
fibrillation that develop (Eubig 200l; Beasley 1999;
Fowler 1993). Bufotenines are associated with vomiting,
diarrhea, depression, tremors, seizures, hyperthermia and
hypersensitivity
tosensory
stimuli (Eubig
2001)
Tachycardia, hypertension, anxiety, and respiratory
distress can develop as a result of the catecholamine
activity
in
the
secretions
(Eubig
2001).
Indole-alkylamines,
along
with
 serotonin
and
5-hydroxytryptophan, have hallucinogenic effects (Beasley
1999; Peterson and Roberts 2006; Reeves 2004).
Clinical Effects
524
Signs
Initial signs after oral exposure include profuse salivation.
deep red mucous membranes, pawing at the mouth, and
vocalizing (Peterson and Roberts 2006). Vomiting and
anxiety can also be noted (Roder 2004a). Commonly, signs
include ataxia, seizures, stupor, coma, nystagmus,
recumbency or collapse, and tachypnea (Eubig 2001;
Roberts et al. 2 000; Roder 2004a). Signs can worsen
quickly and death can occur within 15 minutes (Eubig
200l;  Roder 
 2004a). Various  arrhythmias and
hyperthermia or hypothermia can develop (Eubig 2001)
Although exposures to Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius are
more likely to result in development of serious signs,
exposure to any Bufo species is potentially toxic.
especially for smaller, older pets or those with underlying
health conditions (Eubig 2001)
Laboratory
Serum potassium may be elevated (Peterson 2000; Morgan
1997). Elevated packed cell volume, hemoglobin, blood
glucose, serum urea nitrogen, and serum calcium might be
observed (Palumbo 1983; Reeves 2004). Serum sodium
and chloride concentrations drop minimally while serum
inorganic phosphorus  dramatically  decreases  (Palumbo
1983).
Differential Diagnoses
Signs associated with Bufo toad exposures are similar to
those assicuated with seizure disorders, ataxic conditions,
heat stroke, and trauma (such as hit by car) (Eubig 2001),
525
Exposure   to  insecticides    in   organophosphorous.
carbamates, pyrethroids, metaldehyde or chlorinated
hydrocarbons can cause similar signs (Eubig 2001).
Sympathomimetic, methylxanthine, β-blocker, β-agonist
and various antidepressant medication exposures should be
ruled out (Eubig 200l). Ingestion of outdoor plants such as
rhododendron (Rhododendron sp.), oleander (Nerium
oleander), and foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) can result in
development of signs seen in  Bufo exposures.
Additionally, exposure to caustic agents such as liquid
potpourri and various cleaning agents, orally irritating
agents such as topical flea and tick products, and plants
containing insoluble calcium oxalates such as Diffenbachia
and Philodendron, can cause copious salivation (Eubig
2001; Peterson 2000). Seizure disorders to rule out include
idiopathic epilepsy,  inflammatory meningoencephalitis
(secondary to an infection, immune-mediated reaction, or
neoplasm), and internal masses (Peterson and Roberts
2006). Ataxia is often reported in peripheral and central
vestibular diseases (Peterson and Roberts 2006)
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Since Bufo toad toxicosis is similar in presentation to a
varietyof
other
  potential  exposures  ranging
from
insecticides
to
various medications, the only truly
beneficial  antemortem   diagnostic   information   is  a
witnessed exposure to a Bufo toad (Fowler 1993).
Postmortem
526
No  specific postmortem diagnostics are  suggested.
However, necropsy might reveal pulmonary edema and, if
ingested, toad parts can be identified in stomach contents
(Fowler 1993).
Management of Exposures
If a toad exposure is suspected or was witnessed, and the
pet is showing no or only minor signs (such as excessive
salivation and gagging), the mouth should be irrigated with
large volumes of water (such as with a garden hose) to
       
membranes. If more severe signs are present, initial
decontamination should take place under the care of a
veterinarian,  following   stabilization   and  preferably
intubation of the pet (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Eubig
200l). It is best to flush the mouth rostrally, to avoid
ingestion of the water (Eubig 2001). In areas in which Bufo
marinus resides, especially Florida, it is important to seek
veterinary care immediately.
Ingestion of an entire toad warrants inducing emesis under
the direct supervision of a veterinarian (Eubig 2001). For
those pets with more serious signs, it might be necessary to
remove  the  toad endoscopically or  surgically  after
stabilizing the patient (Eubig 2001). Another option is to
administer multiple doses of charcoal with a cathartic
(Eubig 2001). Activated charcoal has not specifically been
assessed for its effectiveness in adsorbing Bufo toxins but
it is nonetheless indicated in situations involving serious
signs or observed ingestion of a toad (Eubig 200l)
527
Pets presented in areas in which Bufo marinus or Bufo
alvarius reside should be thoroughly examined, including
auscultation of the heart. Continuous monitoring of an
electrocardiogram is indicated if any cardiac abnormalities
are detected or if severe neurologic signs or shock develop
(Eubig 200l; Roder 2004a). Electrolytes should be
monitored and corrected as needed (Eubig 2001).
Patients experiencing severe toxicosis should receive
intensive symptomatic support. Diazepam or a barbiturate
may be administered to control seizures, tremors, and
agitation (Eubig 2001). Electrolytes, especially potassium,
should  be  monitored,  and  corrected  as  needed
fluids should be given to provide additional cardiovascular
contraindicated for treatment of hypersalivation due its
potential to contribute to arrhythmias; however, it is
indicated to treat severe bradycardia (Eubig 2001; Roder
2004a). Arrhythmias (such as tachycardia, ventricular and
supraventricular arrhythmias) that do not respond to fluids
maybe treated
d  using  propranolol  or   esmolol
     
temperature should be continuously monitored in those
patients with severe signs since it is common for secondary
hypothermia to develop (Eubig 2001).
Digoxin-specific    antigen-binding    fragments  (digoxin
immune Fab) have proven to be valuable in the treatment
of humans exposed to Bufo species glandular toxins (Eubig
2001). This treatment is especially beneficial for those
patients experiencing severe arrhythmias, significant
( g ss    
528
Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Fab is expensive and might
not be readily available, so its use might not be a feasible
option  in 
many   veterinary
cases (Eubig  2001;
GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007).
Prognosis
The prognosis is good when early decontamination and
symptomatic treatment is effectively administered in cases
involving Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius exposure (Roder
2004a; Eubig 2001). However, death is more likely in
cases involving advanced signs where treatment is delayed
(Eubig 2001). Generally, exposure to Bufo species other
than Bufo marinus or Bufo alvarius involve only mild
signs that respond to oral decontamination and resolve
without veterinary assistance (Eubig 2001).
ARACHNIDS-LATRODECTUSANDLOXOSCELES
Sources
There are more than 20,000 species of spider that live in
the United States (Graudins 2007). Although most spiders
are venomous, they are not all physically able to deliver
the venom to humans or pets or the venom may not be
potent enough to be of medical concern (Graudins 2007;
Mullen 2002; Fowler 1993). Spiders belonging to the
Latrodectus (widow spiders) and Loxosceles (recluse
spiders) genera are of primary veterinary importance in the
United States (Graudins 2007).
Latrodectus-Widow Spiders
529
Only female black widow spiders have the characteristic.
well-rounded abdomen. Males have an oval-shaped
abdomen that is flatter than the females. The species
generally prefers outdoor living. Latrodectus mactans
(black widow) seems to be the most common species
found indoors (Mullen 2002). With its proclivity for
unheated indoor areas such as barns, sheds, and garages,
there  is  a greater potential for human  and animal
interaction (Mullen 2002).
Toxicity
A single bite can deliver enough venom to cause death in
domestic animals (Peterson and McNalley 2006a)
Latrodectus geometricus, with a median lethal dose (LD50)
of 0.43 mg/kg body weight, has the most potent venom of
the five native Latrodectus species in the U.S. (Peterson
and  McNalley 2006a). Comparatively,  Latrodectus
(Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Cats are very sensitive to
black widow spider venom (Peterson and McNalley 2006a;
GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007). Dogs are considered more
resistant but often develop severe clinical signs (Peterson
and McNalley 2006a). The prevalence of Latrodectus
envenomation of domestic animals is not known (Peterson
and McNalley 2006a).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Both males and females are venomous but only the
females are physically able to envenomate an animal or
human (Poppenga 2002; Peterson and McNalley 2006a).
530
behind the eyes. Venom is delivered via the paired fangs at
the terminal ends of the chelicera (Fowler 1993). Not all
bites are associated with venom transfer to the victim;
black widows are capable of controlling the amount of
      
       h 
nonenvenomating (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). The
venom of black widow spiders is made up of 5 or 6
proteinaceous toxins, most notably alpha-latrotoxin, a
powerful mammalian neurotoxin (Peterson and McNalley
2006a).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Latrodectism is the syndrome associated with black widow
spider envenomation (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). The
signs are generally central nervous system or muscular in
origin due to the neurotoxic nature of the venom (Roder
2004b). The bite itself may not be felt and local reactions
such as swelling and tissue changes are uncommon
(Forrester and Stanley 2003; Peterson and McNalley
2006a). Clinicalsigns develop
within8hours of
envenomation and are generally serious (Peterson and
 sssd ds  so  n
pain and fasciculation (Peterson 1997). A rigid abdomen
without noted  tendermess is
s a unique clinical sign
associated with black widow spider bites (Peterson and
McNalley 2006a). The pain associated with the condition
worsens with the severity of the envenomation (Peterson
      
associated with severe pain such as contortions and
531
writhing may  develop (Peterson
1997).Excessive
production of runny nasal secretions, hypersalivation,
hyperesthesia, regional numbness and facial swelling may
be noted (Peterson 1997). Hypertension and tachycardia
commonly develop and seizures can occur (Peterson and
McNalley 2006a). Muscle cramping might be evident and
can result in major respiratory difficulty (Peterson and
McNalley 2006a). When death occurs, it is due to
respiratoryorcardiovascular
failure(Petersonand
McNalley 2006a).
Cats might develop early and severe signs of paralysis
(Peterson 1997). Howling and other loud vocalizations are
common and hypersalivation, restlessness, diarrhea, and
vomiting may occur (Peterson 1997). Muscle tremors,
cramping, ataxia, and difficulty standing due to muscle
weakness may be noted and often occur prior to paralysis.
Respiratory collapse often precedes death (Peterson 1997)
Laboratory
Complete blood cell count and a serum chemistry panel is
recommended. A leukocytosis is often noted A (Peterson
especially when severe muscle spasms are noted (Peterson
1997). Hyperglycemia, oliguria, albuminuria, and elevated
specific gravity might be noted.
Differential Diagnoses
Acute  abdomen, intervertebral disk disease, and
bromethalin  toxicosis are the primary differential
532
diagnoses to consider (Peterson and McNalley 2006a)
Additionally, in cats, rabies should be considered.
Diagnostics
There are no specific tests to confirm black widow spider
bite.
Antemortem
A rigid abdomen without tendermess and accompanied by
markedly severe pain in cases of severe envenomation is a
unique clinical sign associated with black widow spider
bites (Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Cats might vomit
the spider (Peterson 1997).
Postmortem
No postmortem
diagnostics are   characteristic  for
latrodectism.
Management of Exposures
Treatment is focused on alleviation of clinical signs
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Graudins 2007; Roder
2004b). Diazepam and methocarbamol are recommended
to alleviate muscular effects as well as seizures. Opioids
are best utilized for pain management (Gwaltney-Brant et
al. 2007).
There is a specific antivenin of equine origin (Lyovac?,
available from Merck and Co.) that can be administered. It
is generally reserved for use in high-risk patients (neonata]
533
or geriatric or those with underlying health conditions) or
in those that are not responding to symptomatic treatment
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). If needed, it might be
available from a hospital pharmacy or a regional poison
control center (Roder 2004b). Although the risk is
generally  low,  a
anaphylaxis
can
developupon
administration of antivenin (Peterson and McNalley
2006a). It is best to give it slowly, and administration of
diphenhydramine might provide a calming effect and
potentially prevent an allergic reaction (Peterson and
McNalley 2006a).
Prognosis
The prognosis is difficult to determine because patients
may not fully recover until weeks after envenomation
(Peterson and McNalley 2006a). Due to their increased
sensitivity to black widow spider bites, cats generally will
have a guarded prognosis even with administration of
antivenin (Peterson and Roberts 2006). The average
survival time reported for 20 of 22 felines that died
subsequent to envenomation  was 1l5 hours
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
2006a).
Loxosceles—Brown Recluse Spiders
The Loxosceles genus includes an estimated 70 species, 14
of which reside in the United States (Mullen 2002).
Loxosceles spiders are also known as violin or fiddle-back
spiders. The most distinguishing feature of this genus is
the violin shape located on the dorsal cephalothorax. They
are more likely to be found indoors than black widow
534
spiders. They are reclusive and prefer dark, warm, dry,
undisturbed areas (Mullen 2002). The most notorious and
medically
important
 isLoxosceles
reclusa
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Mullen 2002).
Brown recluse spiders  do not inhabit the Pacific
Northwest. However, Tegenaria agrestis, the hobo spider
or aggressive house spider, resides in that area and its bite
can result in similar skin lesions as those seen following
brown recluse envenomation (Peterson and McNalley
2006b).
Toxicity
Male Loxosceles spiders have a smaller venom capacity
than do females (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Lethal
envenomation can occur as the result of a single bite
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). An estimated 40mcg of
venom-proteins are delivered per bite (Roder 2004b). Less
than 5 mcg of venom may potentially result in clinical
lesions (Poppenga 2002). The bigger and more mature a
spider is, the larger the venom volume (Peterson and
McNalley 2006b).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Brown recluse venom contains a number of necrotizing
enzymes, 1
most
notably,
sphingomyelinase
D
(GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007; Graudins 2007). Other
enzymes include hyaluronidase, which acts as a spreading
factor for the venom, lipase, proteases, esterases, and
alkaline phosphatases (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Roder
2004b). Sphingomyelinase D binds to cell membranes and
535
causes damage to small blood vessels and aggregation of
platelets (Roder 2004b). Serum hemolytic complement is
inactivated, which results in intravascular coagulation,
small capillary  occlusion,  and tissue  necrosis
(GwaltneyBrant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
2006b; Beasley 1999). Activated partial thromboplastin
time (PTT) is prolonged, and clotting factors VIII, IX, XI.
and XII are exhausted (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007;
Peterson and McNalley 2006b). In the presence of serum
C-reactive protein and calcium, sphingomyelinase causes
hemolysis (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and
McNalley 2006b). Free lipids in the blood, caused by the
lipases, serve as inflammatory intermediaries and cause
embolization (Peterson
　and　McNalley2006b;
Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Loxoscelism is the syndrome associated with brown
recluse spider envenomation (Mullen 2002). There are two
general manifestations of loxoscelism: tissue necrosis
(most common) or systemic effects (which are rare but can
be life-threatening) (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Dogs
are especially sensitive to brown recluse bites. The severity
of a bite is dependent on the amount of venom injected, the
size of the bite, and the immune status of the victim
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b)
The bite might not be felt or a mild stinging sensation
might be evident for up to 8 hours (Peterson and McNalley
2006b). Blood vessels constrict, resulting in diminished
536
supply of blood to the bite area, and pruritus and soreness
may develop. Swelling of the bite area and a characteristic
bull's-eye lesion, with a dark necrotic center, develops
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Gravity can displace
venom further and result in irregular expansion of the
lesion (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). A scab forms that
sloughs in 2 to 5 weeks and results in a slow-healing ulcer
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Generally, ulcers will not
extend into muscle but if they extend into fatty tissue, they
can become extensive and take months to heal while
potentially leaving a deep scar (Peterson and McNalley
2006b).
Loxoscelism with systemic signs is generally uncommon.
Systemic signs, when they 0ccur, typically develop 2472
hours   postenvenomation    and    can    be   serious
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
2006b). The most predominant systemic sign is hemolytic
anemia with prominent hemoglobinuria (Peterson and
McNalley 2006b). Other potential but infrequent systemic
signs include tachycardia, fever, muscle pain, vomiting.
difficulty    breathing,   disseminated   intravascular
coagulation, and coma (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007)
Laboratory
Assessment of a complete blood cell count (CBC) and a
serum chemistry panel with electrolytes is recommended
(Peterson and McNalley 2006b). The CBC may indicate
leukocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytopenia (Peterson
1997). Urinalysis may reveal hemoglobinuria (Peterson
1997). A Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia may be
noted (Roder 2004b). A coagulation profile to monitor
537
prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, platelet
count, and fibrinogen is recommended (Peterson and
McNalley 2006b).
Differential Diagnoses
Differential  diagnoses
 include
pyoderma (suchas
Staphylococcus spp.) or mycobacterial infection, decubital
ulcer, and third-degree burn; all are potentially present
with a necrotizing wound (Peterson and McNalley 2006b;
Peterson 1997). Causes of hemolytic anemia, such as
immunemediated conditions, zinc poisoning, and onion
poisoning, should be considered (Peterson and McNalley
2006b). Other rule-outs for the systemic manifestations are
snakebite, insect sting, erlichiosis, jaundice, unexplained
fever, and red blood cell parasitism (Peterson 1997;
Peterson and McNalley 2006b).
Diagnostics
There are no specific tests available in the United States to
confirm brown recluse spider bite (Peterson and McNalley
2006b).
Antemortem
There is a characteristic bull's-eye lesion, with a dark
necrotic center, that develops in association with brown
recluse spider envenomation (Peterson and McNalley
2006b).
Postmortem
538
No postmortem findings are characteristic for loxoscelism
Management of Exposures
Treatment  is  primarily  symptomatic  and  supportive
because there is no specific antidote for loxoscelism
(Poppenga 2002). Necrotic wound care involves measuring
and monitoring the size of the wound, debridement with
aluminum acetate or hydrogen peroxide, and bandaging
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Dapsone, a leukocyte
inhibitor, might reduce the severity of dermal lesions and
also has antibacterial properties, although its efficacy is
questionable (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and
McNalley 2006b; Hahn and Lewin 2006). If pain is
evident,  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  medications or
opioids may be given (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). If
dapsone is not being administered and infection  is
suspected, broadspectrum antibiotics should be given
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson and McNalley
2006b). Pruritis may be treated with diphenydramine
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with advanced systemic signs is
guarded (Peterson and McNalley 2006b). Patients with
dermonecrotic lesions  generally recover but typically
endure an extended healing process of weeks to months.
ARACHNIDS-SCORPIONS
Sources
539
Of the approximately 45 species of scorpions worldwide
that are considered health risks, only Centruroides
sculpturatus, or the Arizona bark scorpion, is of great
concern to people and pets in the United States (Thomas et
al. 2007;  Mullen  2002).  Although  Centruroides
sculpturatus is considered the most dangerous scorpion in
the United States, it is mostly a threat to young children
(Mullen 2002).
Toxicity
Scorpion envenomation typically presents as one of two
conditions (Bryson 1996). With the less toxic scorpions.
signs beyond those associated with a local reaction are
uncommon. The risk of anaphylaxis does exist, but does
not often occur (Goddard 2003). With the more dangerous
scorpions such as Centruroides sculpturatus, local effects
are not typically noted. More severe, systemic signs
associated with the neurotoxins in the venom are more
prevalent. The venom composition varies among species
as well as by the age and health of the scorpion and the
time of year (Thomas et al. 2007). The size of a scorpion
does not correlate with its toxicity; therefore, larger
scorpion species are not automatically more toxic than
smaller ones (Thomas et al. 2007; Mullen 2002).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Scorpions generally sting once but are capable of stinging
multiple times (Mullen 2002). Proteins are common
constituents of all scorpion venoms and include
phospholipase A2 (Fowler 1993). Other enzymes like
hyaluronidase and acetylcholinesterase are present in some
540
species but not in others. Serotonin may also be present
and is typically associated withthe pain felt after
envenomation (Mullen 2o02). The Hemiscorpius genus is
equipped with a cytotoxic venom that can cause serious
tissue injury upon evenomation (Mullen 2002).
All scorpions are equipped with chelicerae and pedipalps
with pincers that are utilized to capture their prey (Thomas
et al. 2007; Fowler 1993). Scorpions with more slender
pedipalps are generally more toxic than those with thicker
pedipalps. The stinger is supplied with venom from the
telson, both of which are located in the terminal end of the
tail.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The occurrence of localized reactions is dependent on the
scorpion species. If they occur, localized reactions include
immediate pain at the injection site and edema that may or
may not be associated with discoloration (Goddard 2003).
associated with localized reactions. However, a tap test,
which involves lightly tapping on the envenomation site,
can cause increased pain in human victims of Centruroides
sculpturatus stings (Mullen 2002).
Additional signs include enlargement of regional lymph
nodes, pruritis, atypical skin sensation such as numbness
and tingling, fever, nausea, and vomiting. A systemic
anaphylactic reaction can occur but is rare (Goddard
1993). Systemic signs associated with neurotoxic venoms
541
include difficulty swallowing, salivation, nystagmus,
sweating, difficulty breathing, hypertension, cranial nerve
dysfunction, tremors, myocardial failure, and pulmonary
edema (Fowler 1993). Ferrets and cats can develop
seizures.
Laboratory
Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia might be noted (Fowler
1993).
Differential Diagnoses
Rule-outs for painful local reactions include other insect
stings (Fowler 1993; Mullen 2002; Heard 2000). When
neurologic signs are present, rule-outs should include acute
dystonic  reaction, central nervous system  (CNS)
stimulants, cholinergic agents, strychnine toxicosis, head
trauma, CNS infections, botulism, and tetanus (Mullen
2002).
Diagnostics
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests
available in the United States to confirm scorpion
envenomation. The only test that is useful for the diagnosis
of Centruroides sculpturatus envenomation in humans is
the tap test (Trestrail 1981).
Management of Exposures
Treatment of the majority of scorpion stings in the United
States    involves  local 
wound
managementand
542
administration of analgesics for pain (Gwaltney-Brant et
al. 2007). Narcotic analgesics are contraindicated due to
their apparent enhancement of scorpion venom effects
(Trestrail 1981).
 Treatment of systemic  signs
1S
symptomatic and supportive. Special attention should be
given to cardiovascular monitoring and management of
hypertension and neurologic signs (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007).
Prognosis
The prognosis is generally good for most pets
envenomated by scorpions. Pet fatalities are not common
and signs typically improve within 24 hours of the
envenomation (Fowler 1993).
SNAKES-ELAPIDS
Sources
Coral snakes belong to the family Elapidae. There are two
genera of coral snake indigenous to the United States:
Micruroides and Micrurus (Peterson 2006a). Coral snakes
of the Micrurus genus are more clinically significant
(Peterson 2006a).
All species of coral snakes in the United States have a
similar color pattern that starts with a black snout and
consists of small yellow (may be vibrant yellow or pale.
almost white) bands, and larger red and black bands
    ,   s  )
 (a)  sn (aoa oo ,  ao
prove to be helpful in the identification of poisonous coral
543
snakes in the United States versus nonpoisonous snakes
that have the same colors but in a different pattern
(Peterson 2006a). The saying “"red touches black, friend of
Jack” can be helpful in identification of the similarly
colored, nonpoisonous snakes in the United States.
Coral snakes have round (generally black) eyes, small.
nontriangular heads, and small mouths (Peterson 2006a)
They have short, fixed fangs that are not as efficient and
streamlined for venom delivery as pit viper fangs. Coral
snakes often employ a chewing action to deliver their
venom (Peterson 2006a). Victims of coral snake bites may
have to shake or pull the snake off, or it may still be
attached upon presentation.
Toxicity
The toxicity of a coral snake bite is dependent on the size
of the coral snake involved, the volume of venom injected,
and the size of the victim (Peterson 2006a). Larger snakes
are capable of delivering larger volumes of venom. Up to
20 mg of venom may be delivered from a large coral
      o o  9  t 
(Peterson 2006a). Coral snakes deliver nonenvenomating
bites about 60% of the time. Human fatality percentages
h    n     
(Peterson 2006a).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Coral snake venom is primarily neurotoxic. The venom
consists   of   polypeptides   and
enzymes including
hyaluronidase,
proteinase,
ribonuclease,
544
desoxyribonuclease, phosphodiesterase, phospholipase A,
and cholinesterase (Peterson 2006a; Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007; Poppenga 2002). The peptides in coral snake venom
have similar effects in humans and dogs as does curare in
thattheycreatea
1 nondepolarizing, postsynaptic
neuromuscular block (Peterson 2006a; Gwaltney-Brant et
al. 2007; Chrisman et al. 1996). Phospholipase A is
believed to play a role in the hemolysis and
hemoglobinurea that are often noted in dogs following
coral snake envenomation (Peterson 2006a). Paralysis,
central nervous system depression, and vasomotor effects
are also common.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical signs are not the same for all species. Signs
associated with coral snake bites in dogs include acute
depression,
,  vomiting,   hypersalivation,  quadriplegia
involving diminished spinal reflexes in all the limbs, and
respiratory paralysis (Peterson 2006a; Chrisman 1996).
Anemia,  intravascular  hemolysis, 
hemoglobinuria,
morphologic red blood cell effects, hypotension, and
ventricular tachycardia with or without pulse deficits may
also be noted (Peterson 2006a; Chrisman 1996). Other
signs noted in dogs include difficulty breathing, difficulty
swallowing, and muscle fasciculations (Gwaltney-Brant et
al. 2007).
Signs associated with coral snake envenomation in cats
include acute, ascending, flaccid quadriplegia, depression,
reduced spinal reflexes, and inhibited recognition of
545
painful stimuli (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007; Peterson
2006a).  Other
signs
include unequal 
  pupil 
size.
hypothermia, hypotension, respiratory depression, and lack
of cutaneous trunci reflex (Peterson 2006a; Chrisman
1996). Unlike with dogs, no clinical evidence of hematuria
or hemoglobinuria has been observed in cats (Peterson
2006a; Chrisman 1996).
Laboratory
It is recommended that baseline data be obtained froma
CBC, serum electrolytes, and serum chemistries (Peterson
and Roberts 2006). Abnormalities that might be noted
include hyperfibrinogenemia, moderate leukocytosis, and
early and high increases in creatine kinase (Peterson
2006a). The only laboratory findings considered highly
suggestive of coral snake envenomation are an early
increase in creatine kinase and burring and spherocytosis
of canine red blood cells (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
Differential Diagnoses
Rule-outs for coral snake bite include tick-associated
paralysis, macadamia nut exposure in dogs, botulism,
bromethalin  toxicosis,  ionophore
toxicosis,  acute
polyneuritis, myasthenia gravis, polyradiculoneuritis,
organophosphate toxicosis, and various drugs that might
be associated with neurologic signs (Peterson 2006a;
Chrisman 1996).
Diagnostics
546
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests to
confirm coral snake envenomation (Peterson 2006a).
Management of Exposures
Although development of signs can be delayed 1o-18
hours after envenomation, it is important to seek medical
treatment as soon as possible once signs develop
Antivenin is suggested in animals showing evidence of
puncturing fang marks or in which an exposure to coral
snakes other than the Sonoran coral snake (for which the
antivenin is ineffective) have been witnessed (Peterson
2006a). Unfortunately, production of antivenin has been
discontinued so it may not be available (Peterson 2006a).
Hospitalization for at least 48 hours, with special attention
ns     
prudent to take radiographs to monitor development of
aspiration pneumonia (Peterson 2006a). Endotracheal
intubation is recommended at the onset of respiratory
difficulty to prevent aspiration. Maintenance intravenous
fluid administration is recommended.
In the absence of antivenin (or in cases involving Sonoran
coral snakes, since no antivenin is available), treatment is
generally symptomatic and supportive and may require
       g  
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended because
pathogenic bacteria are prevalent in the mouths of snakes.
547
Antivenin administration is the only definitive treatment
for coral snake envenomation (Peterson 2006a). Antivenin
is most effective when administered as soon as possible
following envenomation. The amount required to treat a
patient is generally higher in smaller pets since the dose of
venom per kilogram of body weight is higher. It is
recommended that 1 to 2 vials be administered initially and
additional doses be given as required based on progression
of signs. Since coral snake antivenin contains equine
proteins, an allergic reaction is possible, albeit rare
(Peterson 2006a). Anaphylaxis, an anaphylactoid reaction
allergic reaction. Anaphylaxis is generally treated by
cessation of antivenin administration and administration of
epinephrine, corticosteroids, and crystalloid fluid infusion.
More commonly experienced anaphylactoid reactions are
best treated by ceasing antivenin administration and giving
intravenous or subcutaneous diphenhydramine, waiting
five minutes, and restarting antivenin infusion at a slower
rate (Peterson 2006a). Delayed serum sickness usually
develops 7 to 14 days postantivenin treatment and is best
treated with antihistamines and/or corticosteroids. There is
no known predilection of development of an allergic
reaction in patients with a history of having received
Prognosis
Overall, the prognosis is guarded. It is dependent on
variables such as where the bite occurred, the severity of
envenomation, and the time at which treatment is initiated
(Peterson 2006a). Some pets have recovered without
administration of antivenin. Smaller pets are at greater risk
548
due to their smaller body weight and therefore higher
dosage of venom.
SNAKES—PIT VIPERS
Sources
The family Viperidae includes three genera of snakes that
are collectively referred to as pit vipers. These include
rattlesnakes, water
rmoccasins,  cottonmouths,  and
copperheads. All three genera are indigenous to the United
States and include Crotalus, Sistrurus, and Agkistrodon
(Peterson 2006b). The only states in the United States that
are not home to a venomous snake of some kind are
Maine, Alaska, and Hawaii (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
All pit vipers are similar in appearance. They have heat
sensing  pits located between  their  vertical  pupil  and
nostril, triangular-shaped heads, retractable fangs, and a
single row of subcaudal scales distal to the anal plate
(Peterson 2004). Rattlesnakes in the United States all have
hollow, dried skin segments at the end of their tails that
rattle when the snakes vibrate their tails (Peterson 2004).
Rattlesnakes are most responsible for deaths in humans
and animals (Peterson 2006b). Pit vipers are believed to be
involved in 99% of snakebites delivered to animals in
North America (Peterson 2004).
Toxicity
There is significant variation of venom toxicity both
between and within various species of pit vipers (Peterson
2006b). Some rattlesnake venoms can be toxic at less than
549
2 mg/kg body weight, whereas copperhead venom toxicity
requires a dose of greater than 10 mg/kg (Poppenga 2002)
The three main types of pit vipers arranged in order of
greatest toxicity to least are rattlesnakes, water moccasins,
and
1 copperheads (Peterson
2006b).TheEastern
diamondback rattlesnake is the most dangerous snake in
the United States based on its size, strength, and long fang
length, which all contribute to its high venom volume
delivery (Meerdink 1983)
Venom
composition
varies
considerably
among
rattlesnakes. The venom from 9 species and 12 subspecies
contains proteins that are similar to those found in mojave
toxin, which is a powerful neurotoxin (Peterson 2006b).
During the hottest summer months, when the daylight
hours are at their maximum, snakes are more active and
aggressive and contain the highest venom yields compared
to other times during the year (Peterson 2006b). A
nonenvenomating bite occurs about 25% of the time
(Peterson 2004).
The amount of venom delivered can be controlled by pit
vipers (Peterson 2006b). Bites initiated in response to pain
are the most deadly because the maximum amount of
venom available is delivered (Peterson 2006b). Toxicity is
also dependent on the number of strikes and the depth of
fang penetration per bite (Meerdink 1983). It is possible
for multiple fangs to be present per side; so a bite might
have two fang marks or up to six. Older snakes might have
more potent venom and larger snakes typically have a
larger amount of venom to deliver (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007).
550
 r        
are considered more resistant (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
The size and health status of the victim, the site of the bite
and the immediacy with which treatment is sought also
impact the severity of the envenomation (Gwaltney-Brant
et al. 2007). Bites to the thoracic area result in more rapid
venom uptake, bites to the tongue are equivalent to
intravenous envenomation, and bites to the muzzle area are
capable of inducing life-threatening facial swelling and
airway obstruction (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007)
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
Pit viper venom is delivered from venom glands via
muscular contractions that force the venom through the
hollow fangs and into the victim (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007). The venom is 90% water while the remaining
portion consists of enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins,
peptides, cytotoxins, myotoxins, cardiotoxins, neurotoxins,
coagulants and anticoagulants, lipids, nucleosides and
nucleotides, organic acids, and cations (Peterson 2004,
2006b; Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Venom makeup varies
among species but generally consists of at least 10 of the
previously named components (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007). Rattlesnake envenomation typically results in one
of three presentations. Diamondback rattlesnake venom is
representative of the classic syndrome of significant tissue
destruction,
coagulopathy,
and
hypotension
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Mojave A rattlesnake venom
contains neurotoxins and does not impact tissues or result
in coagulopathy (Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007). Other
venoms contain a combination of both classic and
551
neurotoxic venom components (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Dogs most commonly receive bites to their front legs or
head (Peterson 2004). In contrast, cats most commonly are
presented with bites to their torso (Gwaltney-Brant et al.
2007). Cats often present later for treatment due to their
tendency to run and hide following injury (Gwaltney-Brant
et al. 2007). Signs will vary because they are dependent on
dose of venom, bite location, age, health status and species
of victim, and the physical activity of the victim following
envenomation (Poppenga 2002). Commonly, signs will
include severe pain in the area of the bite, fang marks,
swelling, possibly profuse bleeding in the bite area,
salivation,abnormally
deep
or
rapid
breathing,
tachycardia, and mydriasis (Poppenga 2002). Secondary
infection can develop. Additional signs that might be noted
include petechiae, ecchymoses, cyanosis, discolored skin
andpossibly sloughing
tissue, hypotension, shock,
vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, nausea, muscle fasciculations,
reduced alertness, and enlarged lymph nodes (Paul 2007;
Peterson 2004). Serious signs can be delayed over a few
hours postenvenomation (Peterson 2004).  Local tissue
response cannot be the sole predictor of severity of
envenomation; severe systemic signs can develop with
only mild tissue effects, and neurotoxic venom typically
has little tissue effect (Peterson 2004). More severe,
systemic
developments
include
hemolysis,
552
rhabdomyolysis, thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy
(Gwaltney-Brant et al. 2007).
Laboratory
Baseline data including a  CBC with differential  and
platelet
count,
serum
chemistries,  urinalysis,  and
coagulation profiles should be obtained (Peterson 2006b)
Red blood cell morphology should be examined; transient
echinocytosis may be evident within 48 hours in dogs and
is indicative of pit viper envenomation (Peterson 2006b).
Urinalysis should include free protein, hemoglobin, and
myoglobin  evaluation  (Peterson 2006b). Coagulation
profile tests should include activated clotting times (ACT),
prothrombin time (PT),  activated partial  thromboplastin
time (PTT), fibrinogen, and fibrin degradation products.
Animals with severe envenomations might require
electrocardiogram monitoring (Peterson 2006b). These
tests should be repeated on a periodic basis to follow
progression  of envenomation and provide feedback
regarding treatment success (Peterson and Roberts 2006).
Table 22.1. Snakebite severity score
Pulmonary
System
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: slight dyspnea
Moderate: respiratory compromise, tachypnea, use of
accessory muscles
Severe: cyanosis, air hunger, extreme tachypnea,
respiratory insufficiency or respiratory arrest from any
cause
553
Cardiovascular
System
0
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: tachycardia, general weakness, benign
dysrhythmia, hypertension
Moderate: tachycardia, hypotension (but tarsal pulse still
2
palpable)
Severe: extreme tachycardia, hypotension (nonpalpable
tarsal pulse or systolic blood pressure <80 mmHg),
malignant dysrhythmia or cardiac arrest
Local Wound
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema limited to
1
bite site
Moderate: pain, swelling, erythema involves less than half
2
of extremity and may be spreading slowly
Severe: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema involves
3
most or all of one extremity and is spreading rapidly
Very severe: pain, swelling, ecchymosis, erythema
>
extends beyond affected extremity, or significant tissue
slough
Gastrointestinal
System
0
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: abdominal pain, tenesmus
2
Moderate: vomiting, diarrhea
Severe: repetitive vomiting, diarrhea, or hematemesis
Hematologic
System
0
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: coagulation parameters slightly abnormal, PT <
20sec,PTT< 50sec,platelets100,000-150,000/mm
 Moderate: coagulation parameters abnormal, PT
2
20-50sec, PTT 50-75sec, platelets 50,000-100,000/mm
554
Severe: coagulation parameters abnormal, PT $0-100sec,
PTT 75-100sec, platelets 20,000-50,000/mm
Very severe: coagulation parameters markedly abnormal
with bleeding present or the threat of spontaneous
bleeding, including PT unmeasurable, PTT unmeasurable,
platelets<20.000/mm
Central
Nervous System
0
Signs within normal limits
Minimal: apprehension
2
Moderate: chills, weakness, faintness, ataxia
3
Severe: lethargy, seizures, coma
Total Possible
0-20
Score
Complete blood counts often show hemoconcentration
leukocytosis, or thrombocytopenia (Paul 2007). Increased
creatine phosphokinase and myoglobinuria might be noted
as a result of rhabdomyolysis from rattlesnakes equipped
with neurotoxins (Peterson 2006b). Hematuria can be
noted as well (Paul 2007). Transient hypokalemia that
responds to intravenous fluid and antivenin treatment may
be evident following pit viper snake envenomation
(Peterson 2006b). Coagulation profiles often reveal
  a      
fibrinogen degradation products (Paul 2007).
Differential Diagnoses
Rule-outs for pit viper snake bite include trauma, insect
bites or stings, animal bites, draining abscess, and
penetrating wound (Peterson 2006b; Paul 2007).
Diagnostics
555
There are no specific antemortem or postmortem tests to
confirm pit viper snake envenomation (Peterson 2006b).
Management of Exposures
Development of significant signs, other than the immediate
pain felt at the time of bite, can be delayed. It is imperative
that treatment be sought as soon as possible because major
irreversible complications can develop if too much time
has elapsed (Peterson 2006b). It is important to keep the
animal calm after being bitten because physical activity
and anxiousness could promote more rapid uptake of the
venom. Additionally, if possible, the bite site should be
kept below heart level and the animal should be
transported to a veterinary medical facility as soon as
possible so that treatment, including antivenin therapy, can
be initiated (Peterson 2006b). Pit viper bite victims should
be hospitalized for a minimum of 8 hours so that they can
be closely monitored. A severity score sheet should be
initiated   upon   presentation  and   periodically   updated
(Peterson 2006b) (Table 22.1). The severity score is a
more objective method for assessing the patient's
overtime. Inaddition, itis important to take
circumferential measurements at, above, and below the
bite area so development of swelling can be methodically
tracked (Peterson 2006b).
Administration of a crystalloid fluid drip via intravenous
catheter    should    be   initiated.  Corticosteroids    are
contraindicated.  Broad-spectrum  antibiotic  therapy is
recommended in veterinary patients due to the plethora of
556
pathogenic bacteria that may be introduced during the bite
(Peterson 2006b).
Antivenin therapy is the only proven therapy for pit viper
envenomation. Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab Ovine is
the antivenin of choice because it is FDA approved
(Peterson 2006b). This antivenin is less likely to produce
an allergic response, it efficiently and effectively
penetrates tissues, and it has a high affinity for venom
antigens (Peterson 2006b). Repeated administration may
be required.
Prognosis
Although pit viper envenomation varies in severity, most
dogs and cats treated promptly and aggressively, generally
recover (Peterson 2006b; Paul 2007). Administration of
antivenin increases the likelihood of recovery but does not
ensure recovery; some pets have died despite antivenin
treatment (Paul 2007). Smaller pets are at greater risk. The
prognosis  is  poor  in  animals receiving high-volume
envenomation or in those that experience shock, severe
cardiac arrhythmias, hematologic effects, and infection
(Paul 2007).
REFERENCES
Akre, R.D. and Reed, H.C. 2002. Ants, wasps, and bees
(Hymenoptera). In Medical and Veterinary Entomology
edited by G. Mullen and L. Durden, pp. 383-409. New
York: Academic Press.
557
Beasley, V.R. 1999. A Systems Affected Approach to
Veterinary Toxicology. Urbana: University of Mlinois
College of Veterinary Medicine.
Bryson, P.D. 1996. Scorpions. In Comprehensive Review
in Toxicology for Emergency Clinicians, 3rd ed., pp.
736-738. Washington, D.C.: Taylor and Francis.
Chrisman, C.L., Hopkins, A.L., Ford, S.L. et al. 1996.
Acute flaccid quadriplegia in three cats with suspected
coral snake envenomation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:
343-349.
Conceicao, L.G., Haddad Jr., V., and Loures, F.H. 2006.
Pustular dermatosis caused by fire ant (Solenopsis invicta)
stings in a dog. Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 17:453-455.
Cowell, A.K. and Cowell, R.L. 1995. Management of bee
Veterinary Therapy Xll: Small Animal Practice, edited by
J.D. Bonagura, pp. 226-228. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Cowell, A.K., Cowell, R.L., Tyler, R.D. et al. 1991. Severe
systemic reactions to hymenoptera stings in three dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 198(6):10141016.
Diaz, JH. 2007. Hymenopterid bites, stings, allergic
reactions and the　impactofhurricanes　 on
Hymenopterid-inflicted injuries.  J  La State Med Soc
159:149-157.
Drees, B.M., Jensen, JM., Joyce, JR. et al. 2002
Diagnosingand treating animals forred imported fireant
558
injury.Available at:
http://fireant.tamu.edu/materials/
factsheets_pubs/pdf/FAPFS022.2002rev.pdf
Elgart, G.W. 1990. Ant, bee and wasp stings. Dermatol
Clin 229-236.
Eubig, P.A. 2001. Bufo species toxicosis: Big toad, big
problem. Vet Med 96(1):595-599.
Fitzgerald, K.T. and Flood, A.A. 2006. Hymenoptera
stings. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 21:194-204.
Fitzgerald,
K.T.
R.
2006
Insects—Hymenoptera.In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd
ed., edited by M.E. Peterson and P.A. Talcott, pp.
744-767.St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Forrester, M.B. and Stanley, S.K. 2003. Black widow
spider and brown recluse spider bites in Texas from 1998
through 2002. Vet Hum Toxicol 45(5):270-273.
Fowler, M.E. 1993. Veterinary Zootoxicology, pp. 41-46;
69-80; 81-86. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Inc.
Goddard, J. 2003. Scorpions. In Physician's Guide to
Arthropods of Medical Importance, 4th ed., pp. 301-308.
Washington, D.C.: CRC Press, Inc.
Graudins, A.2007.Venomous arthropods. In Haddad and
Winchester'sClinicalManagementofPoisoningandDrug
Overdose, 4th ed., edited by M.W. Shannon et al., pp.
433-439. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
559
Gwaltney-Brant, S., Dunayer, E.K., and Youssef, H.J.
2007. Terrestrial zootoxins. InVeterinary Toxicology
Basic and Clinical Principles, edited by R.C. Gupta. pp.
794-807. New York: Academic Press.
Hahn, I., Lewin, N.A. 2006. Arthropods. In Goldfrank's
Toxicologic Emergencies, edited by N.E. Flomenbaum et
al., pp. 1603-1622. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Heard, K. 2000. Scorpion envenomation. In 5-Minute
Toxicology Consult, edited by R.C. Dart, pp. 624-625.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Meerdink, G.L. 1983. Bites and stings of venomous
animals. In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy VIll Small
Animal Practice, edited by JD. Bonagura, pp. 160-162.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Merck    Online   Medical   Library
 for Healthcare
Professionals  accessed  September  23,  2008,  at
http://www.merck.com/mmpe/print/sec21/ch325/
ch325c.html.
Morgan, R.V. 1997. Toad poisoning. In Handbook of
Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed., p. 1288. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders.
Mullen, G.R. 2002. Spiders. In Medical and Veterinary
Entomology, edited by G.R. Mullen and L. Durden, pp.
427-444. Philadelphia: Academic Press.
Noble, S.J. and Armstrong, P.J. 1999. Bee sting
560
hemolytic anemia in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
214(7):1026-1027.
Oliveira, E.C., Pedroso, P.M.O., Meirelles, A.E.W.B. et al.
2007. Pathological  findings  in dogs after multiple
Africanized bee stings. Toxicon 49:1214-1218.
Palumbo, N.E. 1983. Toad poisoning. In Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy VIll Small Animal Practice, edited by
J.D. Bonagura, pp. 160-162. Tokyo: W.B. Saunders.
Paul, A. 2007. Snakebite. In Clinical Veterinary Advisor
Dogs and Cats, edited by E. Cote and E. Rozanski, pp.
1012-1014. St Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Peterson, M.E. 1997. Spider venom toxicosis—Brown
recluse family. In 5-Minute Veterinary Consult, edited by
L.P. Tilley and F.W.K Smith Jr., p. 1207. Philadelphia:
Williams and Wilkins.
2000. Toad venom toxicosis. In 5-Minute
Veterinary Consult Canine and Feline, 2nd ed., edited by
L.P. Tilley and F.W.K. Smith Jr., pp. 1252-1253.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
2004. Reptiles: Pit vipers. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by K.H. Plumlee, pp. 106-1l1. St
Louis: Mosby.
 2006a. Snake bite: Coral snakes. In Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson and P.A.
Talcott, pp. 1039-1047, St Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
561
. 2006b. Snake bite: North American pit vipers. In
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson
and P.A. Talcott, pp. 1017-1038. St Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
Peterson,  M.E. and McNalley,  J. 2006a.  Spider
evenomation: Black recluse. In Small Animal Toxicology,
2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson and P.A. Talcott, pp.
1063-1069. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
. 2006b. Spider evenomation: Brown recluse. In
Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson
and P.A. Talcott, pp. 1070-1075. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
Peterson, M.E. and Roberts, B.K. 2006. Toads. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by M.E. Peterson and
P.A. Talcott, pp. 1083-1093. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Poppenga, R.H. 2002. Zootoxins, Western Veterinary
Conference, February, Las Vegas, Nevada
Rakich, P.M., Latimer, K.S., Mispagel, M.E. et al. 1993.
Clinical  and  histologic characterization  of cutaneous
reactions to stings of the imported fire ant (Solenopsis
invicta) in dogs. Vet Path 30:555-559.
Reeves, M.P. 2004. A retrospective report of 90 dogs with
suspected cane toad (Bufo marinus) toxicity. Aust Vet J
82(10):608-611.
562
Roberts, B.K. et al. 2000. Bufo marinus intoxication in
dogs: 94 cases (1997-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(12):
1941-1944.
Roder, JD. 2004a. Biotoxins: Toads. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by K.J. Plumlee, pp. 113. St.
Louis: Mosby.
. 2004b. Biotoxins: Spiders. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by K.J. Plumlee, pp. 1ll-l13. St.
Louis: Mosby.
Rodriguez-Lainz, A., Fritz, C.L., and McKenna, W.R.
1999. Animal and human health risks associated with
Africanized honeybees. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2l5(12):
1799-1804.
Thomas, J.D., Thomas, K.E., Kazzi, Z.N. 2007. Scorpions
and stinging insects. In Haddad and Winchester's Clinical
Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th ed.,
edited by M.W. Shannon et al., pp. 440-447. St. Louis:
Elsevier Saunders.
Trestrail IHl, JH.  1981. Scorpion envenomation in
Michigan: Three cases of toxic encounters with poisonous
stowaways. Vet Hum Toxicol 23(1):8-11.
Walker, T., Tidwell, A.S., Rozanski, E.A., DeLaforcade.
A., and Hoffman, A.M. 2005. Imaging diagnosis: Acute
lung injury following massive bee envenomation in a dog
Vet RadiolUltrasound 46(4):300-303.
563
23
Mycotoxins and Mushrooms
JoyceEisoldand MichelleMostrom
INTRODUCTION
Mushroom poisonings are common in dogs and infrequent
in cats. Poisonings probably occur more frequently
because ingestions may not be observed by owners and
few analytical laboratories can confirm mushroom
toxicosis. Therefore, many mushroom-induced toxicoses
are likely attributed to other causes. According to the
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, most of the
documented cases of mushroom poisonings occur in
Califormia. Of 7o0 cases reported to the ASPCA between
2002 and 2007, 11% were from California (Puschner
2007).
When dealing with a possible mushroom toxicosis, it is
important to verify whether the mushroom was purchased
from a store for medicinal or ingestion purposes or if it
was obtained from mushroom hunting. If the owner
suspects mushrooms, request a description of the
mushroom (size, color) and whether the dog or cat ate the
cap or stem. Whenever possible, the mushroom should be
positively identified as to genus and species. If the owner
has access to the mushroom it should be placed in a paper
bag and refrigerated. The best way to bag it is to place the
mushroom with the cap down on a white sheet of paper
that has the site and the conditions written on it. It is
564
sometimes important to include known trees in the
environment because certain mushrooms are associated
with specific trees (Spoerke 2006).
There are many different types of mushrooms containing a
variety of toxins that cause differing clinical signs. The
mushrooms that will be covered in this chapter include the
mushroomsaffecting
  the  gastrointestinal
system;
muscarine-containing mushrooms, which cause
classic
cholinergic
signs
(SLUDD);
isoxazole-
and
psilocybin-containing
mushrooms,
which
cause
hallucinogenic
signs;
 and
amanitin-
and
 gyromitin-containing mushrooms, which are hepatotoxic
(Table23.l).Eachcategory of mushroom, t
their
mechanisms of action, their associated clinical signs, and
medical management of intoxications will be covered
separately because they have widely varying symptoms
and degrees of toxicity.
MUSHROOMS
CAUSING
GASTROINTESTINAL
SIGNS
Sources
A large number of mushrooms cause gastrointestinal upset
in animals. The species involved are members of the
genera
Agaricus, Albatrellus,  Armillaria,  Boletus,
Chlorophyllum,Entoloma,Gomphus,Hebeloma,Laccaria,
Lactarius, Laetiporus, Lampteromyces, Meripilus, and
Omphalotus. The specific toxins for many of them have
not been identified. Some possible toxins include illuden S
(Omphalotusilludents,Omphalotusolearuis,and
565
Lampteromyces japonica), monoterpenes (Albatrellus
spp.),
norcaperatic acid (Gomphus spp.), hebeleomic acid A
(cytotoxic
triterpene,
Hefeloma
crustuliniforme),
cucurbitane
triterpene
glycosides
(Hebeloma
vinosphyllum),
lectins
accaria
amethystine),
marasmane/lactarane
sesquitrpenes
(Russula
 spp.
.  and
Lactarius
spp.),
and
 phenolethylamines
7}
actiprus
sulphureus, and Meripilus spp.) (Spoerke 2001; Tegzes
and Puschner 2002a). These mushrooms are
widely
distributed throughout the United States and grow in a
variety of substrates and environments.
Table 23.1. Mushrooms of veterinary importance in North
America
Mushroom
Toxin
Clinical Signs
Agaricus,Albatrellus,
No specific tox in
Gastroi ntestinal
Armillaria, Boletus,
identified
irritation
Chlorophyllum，Entoloma,
Gomphus,Hebeloma,
Laccaria, Lactarius,
Lampteromyces,Omphalotus,
Rhodophyllus,Ramaria,
Suillus
Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Lethargy
Weakness
Dizziness
Inocybe spp.
Muscarine
Salivation
566
Clitocybe spp
Lacrimation
Entoloma
Urination
Diarrhea
Miosis
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Bronchoconstriction
Vomiting
Behavioral changes
Isox azole: ibotenic
Amanita muscaria (fly agaric)
(disoriented,
acid, muscimol
agitated, depression)
Aminata pantherina (panther
Somnolence/coma
or warted agaric)
Lethargy
Vomiting
Ataxia/paresis
Dyspnea
Hyperactivity
Salivation
Diarrhea
Miosis
Tremors/seizures
2nd-degree
atrioventricular
block
Psilocybe
Psilocybin
CNS derangement
Conocybe
Psilocin
Altered behavior
Gymnopilus,Panaeolus
Agitation
Stropharia (hallucinogenic or
Aggression
magicmushrooms)
Vocalization
567
Weakness/ataxia
Tachycardia
Hyperreflex ia
Mydriasis
Seizures
Hyperthermia
Hypertension
Drowsiness
Gyromitra spp. (false morels)
Monomethylhydrazine
Vomiting
Helvella spp.
Watery diarrhea
Verpa bohemica
Dehydration
Abdominal pain
Lethargy
Fever
Liver and renal
damage
Hemolysis
Methemoglobinemia
Hypoglycemia
Seizures
Amanita spp. ( A.phalloides or
Irreversible
death cap)
Cyclopeptides:
cytotoxicity of liver
and kidney
Galerina
Severe
amatoxins
hypoglycemia
(α-,β-,Y-,
Lepiota
c-amanitins),
Gastroeneteritis
phallotoxins,
virotoxins
Death
Kinetics
568
Kinetic information on these species has not been
established because the toxic principle of most GI irritant
mushrooms is not known.
Mechanism of Action
A variety of mechanisms are thought to be responsible for
causing clinical signs, including hypersensitivity, local
irritation, and enzyme defiencies (Spoerke 2001).
Toxicity
The toxicity of these mushrooms varies. One-half of a cap
from an Agaricus spp. caused foaming, vomiting, diarrhea,
and disorientation in a 1-year-old cat (Spoerke 2001).
Ingestion of one Scleroderma citrinum in a 7-month-old
potbellied pig resulted in persistent vomiting, depression,
weakness, recumbency, hypothermia, abdominal splinting.
and death within 5 hours despite treatment with
dexamethasone and fluids. An unknown species of Russula
was eaten by a cat that subsequently developed
hematemesis (Spoerke 2001). Precise toxicity information
specific to pet animals or livestock is not available.
Clinical Signs
The most common clinical effect seen is gastrointestinal
upset, including vomiting and diarrhea (possibly bloody),
salivation, abdominal discomfort, and lethargy. The
gastrointestinal effects can result in dehydration and rarely
cause electrolyte imbalances, hypovolemia, collapse, and
death. Onset of signs is within 15 minutes to several hours
and the duration is a few hours to a couple of days. If the
569
onset of gastrointestinal signs is 6-24 hours after ingestior
there is a possibility that the animal ingested an
amanitincontaining mushroom, which is a much more
serious intoxication.
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses for the Gl class of mushrooms
includesbacterial
or  viral gastroenteritis,  dietary
indiscretion, pancreatitis, hepatotoxic mushroom ingestion,
irritant
 plant
ingestion,  or  tremorgenic  mycotoxin
ingestion.
Diagnostics
In a live animal the vomitus should be examined for
evidence of mushrooms, and at a necropsy mushrooms
may be found in the gastric contents. Fragments of
mushrooms found in vomitus or gastric contents might be
suitable for identification purposes. If the client can
provide fresh, fairly intact samples of the suspected
mushrooms, they can be sent to qualified mycologists for
identification.
Management of Exposures
The medical management of a GI toxin mushroom consists
of inducing emesis if vomiting has not already occurred
Emesis can be achieved by having the owners use 3%
hydrogen peroxide at home with the dose based on the
weight of the animal, or a veterinarian can induce emesis
using  conjunctival  or injectable  apomorphine.  After
calming the GI tract, activated charcoal should be
570
administered. A complete blood count, liver/renal panels.
electrolytes, and acid/base evaluation should be obtained if
hepatotoxic mushroom ingestion has not been ruled out.
Parenteral fluid administration to combat dehydration due
to excessive vomiting may be needed along with stomach
protectants and antiemetics. Symptomatic and supportive
care should be provided as needed.
Prognosis
Ingestion of these mushrooms is rarely fatal, but it is
     
hepatotoxic ones.
MUSCARINICMUSHROOMS
Sources
The agent in muscarinic mushrooms is muscarine, which is
heat stable; only the L(+) isomer is active. Inocybe spp.
and Clitocybe spp. species of mushrooms contain this
agent and are nondescript small brown mushrooms. Very
low concentrations of muscarine can be found in many
other genera including Entoloma and Mycena. These
mushrooms are found throughout the United States and
Canada and prefer to grow in hardwood and coniferous
forests, parks, lawns, and gardens. They fruit in late fall
and early winter.
Kinetics
The oral absorption of muscarine is poor, but some species
(e.g., rabbits) have negligible absorption of muscarine
571
(Benjamin 1995). Muscarine is not affected by digestive
enzymes. It does not cross the blood-brain barrier, so any
CNS signs are attributed to secondary effects from hypoxia
due to hypotension.
Mechanism of Action
Muscarine binds to muscarinic (acetylcholine) receptors in
the
 parasympathetic
nervous  system, 
stimulating
postsynaptic
 neurons.
It
 is notdegraded
1 by
acetylcholinesterase so the action is prolonged. The
specific target organs are gland cells, cardiac nodal muscle
fibers and smooth muscle. Effects are peripheral, not
central (Spoerke 2006)
Toxicity
Species differ in their sensitivity to intoxication. Rabbits
are relatively resistant due to poor oral absorption of
muscarine. Cat and mouse cardiovascular systems are
particularly sensitive to muscarine. In cats, as little as 0.01
mg/kg IV can cause hypotension (Benjamin 1995).
Clinical Signs
The clinical signs are typically cholinergic signs (e.g,
salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, and dyspnea
or SLUDD) without nicotinic or significant CNS effects.
The most common signs seen are hypersalivation (with
thick ropy saliva), vomiting, diarrhea, lacrimation, and wet
bronchial sounds. There is frequently abdominal pain,
urinary  incontinence,  and
  anxiety;  occasionally,
tachycardia, miosis, hypotension, and dyspnea; and rarely,
572
animals exhibit respiratory and cardiac arrest. Onset of
signs is usually within 5-30 minutes of ingestion and
almost never beyond 2 hours (Benjamin 1995). Signs can
persist for several hours if not treated, but they quickly
subside when atropine is administered. There are no
laboratory abnormalities expected.
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses include organophosphorus or
carbamate  insecticide,  anatoxin-a,  or  slaframine
intoxications.
Diagnostics
to confirm exposure, but the best diagnostic parameter is
response to treatment (i.e., administration of atropine).
Management of Exposures
Induction of emesis is advised if the animal has not already
vomited and the time from ingestion to presentation is not
prolonged. Emesis can be achieved by having the owners
use 3% hydrogen peroxide at home with a dose based on
body weight of the animal, or a veterinarian can induce
emesis  using  conjunctival  or  injectable apomorphine.
Gastric emptying is followed by activated charcoal without
a cathartic since muscarine causes increased peristalsis and
diarrhea in many patients (Spoerke 2006). Symptomatic
and supportive care is always needed. Oxygen can be
administered if dyspnea is noted. Intravenous fluid therapy
can be administered for possible hypotension. The specific
573
antagonist   for  muscarine   is  atropine.
Atropine
without stimulating postsynaptic neurons. A preanesthetic
atropine dose should be administered and, if no signs of
atropinization occur, additional atropine may be given to
effect. The starting dose is 0.04 mg/kg (1/4 IV with the
remainder IM). The end point is not mydriasis, but
cessation of secretions Toxicity (Spoerke 2006).
Prognosis
The prognosis is usually good since ingestions are rarely
fatal.
HALLUCINOGENIC MUSHROOMS
Sources
Hallucinogenic
mushrooms
or “magic  mushrooms"
contain  psilocybin
and  psilocin.  Psilocin is   the
dephosphorylated form of psilocybin and can be the
primary form present in the bloodstream. It is a
methyltryptamine derivative and is heat stable and resists
drying. Psilocybe spp., Panaeolus spp., Conocybe spp.,
Gymnophilus spp. and some Stropharia spp. also contain
this type of toxin. Stems of some psilocybin-containing
mushrooms will turn blue when handled.
These mushrooms are found in North America, especially
in the Pacific Northwest and Gulf Coast. They thrive in
manure although some prefer mulch and rotting wood
(Benjamin 1995). They will grow in lawns, gardens, parks.
roadsides, and open woods. These mushrooms are used
574
recreationally for hallucinogenic effects. Their sale and use
is illegal in the United States, but the sale of the mycelia of
have been put in capsules in a powdered form and added to
soups, stews, milkshakes, and other edible products in
order to mask the bitter taste (Benjamin 1995).
Kinetics
The bioavailability of pysilocybin is ~50% in rats
(Benjamin 1995). It is widely distributed throughout the
body  and  it  crosses   the blood-brain   barrier   and
concentrates in the liver and adrenals. Within 4 hours of
ingestion it cannot be detected in blood, but it remains in
the liver and adrenals for up to 48 hours (Benjamin 1995).
It does not appear to be metabolized via monoamine
oxidase. Approximately 66% is excreted in urine within
the first 24 hours while the remainder in the liver and
adrenals is gradually eliminated over 7 days (Benjamin
1995).
Mechanism of Action
The chemical acts as a serotonin agonist. It is thought to
stimulate serotonin receptors (e.g., 5-HT2A) within the
CNS and PNS. The mechanism may also involve
norepinepherine-mediated pathways (Beasley 1999).
Toxicity
Doses of about 4-8mg psilocybin/2g of dried mushrooms
or 20 fresh mushrooms can produce signs. In humans the
initial signs consist of relaxation and detachment and can
575
occur at a psilocybin dose of 4 mg. In humans, 612 mg
psilocybin  results  in  perceptual  alteration  and  visual
distortions. Greater than 12 mg psilocybin or 1 to 4 large
fresh mushrooms can cause hallucinations in humans
(Benjamin 1995).
Clinical Signs
The most common clinical effects from ingestion of these
mushrooms are alteration of behavior and mentation,
ataxia, and vocalization. Frequently, there will also be
mydriasis and hyperthermia and possibly  tachycardia.
seizures, and muscle weakness. Rarely, death has occurred.
There are no specific laboratory abnormalities expected.
Differential Diagnoses
Differentials  include  serotonergic/psychotropic   drug,
alcohol, marijuana, or LsD intoxications.
Diagnosis
Tests are available to detect psilocybin, but the signs will
probably have subsided by the time test results are
obtained.No
 specific
laboratory
 or necropsy/
histopathologic alterations are expected.
Management of Exposures
Decontamination via emesis and lavage can be performed
and activated charcoal given for recent ingestions. Emesis
can be induced by having the owners use 3% hydrogen
peroxide at home with a dose based on the weight of the
576
animal, or a veterinarian can induce emesis using
conjunctival or  injectable  apomorphine.  Aspiration  is a
risk that needs to be taken into consideration in animals
showing neurologic signs. Gastric emptying is followed by
administration of one dose of activated charcoal. Seizures
can be controlled with diazepam or, if no response,
barbiturates, propofol, or isoflurane can be used as needed.
The body temperature needs to be regulated and all
sensory stimuli needs to be kept to a minimum.
Cyproheptadine, while not an antagonist, can block the
effects of serotonergic drugs and may also be helpful for
hyperthermia.
Prognosis
The prognosis is generally good and most animals survive
with supportive and symptomatic care.
MUSHROOMS
Sources
Ibotenic acid and muscimol are isoxazoles. Muscimol is
the decarboxylation product of ibotenic acid (Benjamin
1995).
Amanita
gemmata,Amanita
muscaria(fly
 agaric
mukhomor, woodpecker-of-Mars), Amanita pantherina
(panther  mushroom),  Amanita  smithiana,  Amanita
strobilformis,and Tricholoma muscarium.A.muscaria and
A. pantherina are responsible for most animal and human
poisonings (Benjamin 1995).
577
A. muscaria has a cap that ranges from bright orange to
bright crimson ("looks like a candy apple with a bad case
of dandruff') (Benjamin 1995). It grows from summer to
fall and fruiting most commonly occurs in fall and early
winter. In the eastern United States it can fruit in the
summer and again in late fall. It is found primarily in
coniferous and deciduous forests, but can also be found on
roadsides, in parks and open forests, and on edges of
pastures (Benjamin 1995; Spoerke 2001). It is abundant in
the Pacific Northwest in association with Douglas fir trees
and is widespread throughout the United States and
Canada. It is often found in association with beech and
aspen. A. muscaria has been used as a fly attractant/poison
(Benjamin 1995) and as an inebriant for recreational and
religious purposes.
A. pantheris is found more commonly in the westem
United States, especially the western coastal plain
(Benjamin 1995). It fruits in the spring and early summer
and again in the fall and is associated with conifers and
sometimeshardwoods.
Kinetics
Muscimol and ibotenic acid cross the blood-brain barrier
Mechanism of Action
Isoxazoles  cause fluctuating  CNS   excitation  and
depression due to opposing effects of muscimol and
ibotenic  acid. The  mechanism  of action    for   the
cholinergic-like effects is not known. Muscimol is formed
by the decarboxylation of ibotenic acid, which binds
578
GABA receptors in the central nervous system. This
binding is irreversible and leads to prolonged activity,
which results in central nervous system depression.
Ibotenic acid acts on glutamate receptors in the brain,
which results in CNS stimulation. It may also have direct
neurotoxic effects, which can choloma muscarium has a
similar structure and mechanism of action as ibotenic acid.
Toxicity
The toxicity of these mushrooms can be difficult to
quantify because it depends on many factors. Six mg of
muscimol causes CNS effects in adult humans (Benjamin
1995). This amount is found in a single cap of A.
pantherina and some A. muscaria. A lethal dose (human)
is approximately 15 caps. Spring and summer fruiting caps
may have higher levels of toxins. Ibotenic acid is 5 to 10
times less potent than muscimol in humans (Benjamin
1995). Drying mushrooms containing ibotenic acid results
in  spontaneous decarboxylation   to muscimol.  Dried
mushrooms are more toxic than fresh, but prolonged
storage results in degradation of the toxins so they become
less toxic over time (>l year)
Clinical Signs
The most common clinical signs are vomiting, ataxia, and
disorientation. Frequently one can see hallucinations,
vocalizations,
alternating
lethargy
and
agitation,
hyperesthesia,
recumbency,
 somnolence,
and
fasciculations. There is also the possibility of tremors,
seizures, bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia.
Rarely, one can see respiratory depression and death. The
579
onset of signs is almost always within 30 minutes to 2
hours, but can sometimes be delayed for up to 6 hours. The
duration of signs can be for 8-24 hours. There are no
long-term   sequela   expected  a
and nolaboratory
abnormalities expected, but if the vomiting and diarrhea
are prolonged there can be electrolyte abnormalities.
Diagnosis
There are no diagnostic tests available and there are no
diagnostic lesions that develop.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include ethylene glycol, alcohol.
marijuana, serotonergic or dopaminergic drug, opiate,
barbiturate or other CNS depressants intoxications, and
viral or bacterial encephalitis
Management of Exposures
Decontamination is useful in asymptomatic animals and
consists of inducation of emesis if ingestion has been
within 4 hours. Emesis can be achieved as previously
discussed followed by activated charcoal. Symptomatic
and supportive care is required. Intravenous fluids are
needed for cardiovascular support. If seizures develop,
diazepam and  barbiturates can be used.  Injectable
methocarbamol is best for tremors. Providing an
environment that minimizes external stimuli can reduce the
tendency to seizure or tremor. Thermoregulation is needed
and antiemetics and GI protectants are part of the
supportive care needed. Atropine is contraindicated
580
because it may worsen the clinical effects of isoxazoles
(Benjamin 1995).
Prognosis
The prognosis is  generally  excellent provided  good
supportive care is provided.
GYROMITRIN-CONTAINING MUSHROOMS
Sources
Gyromitrin is heat-labile, volatile, and water soluble
(Tegzes and Puschner 2002s). Cooking the mushroom
causes a decrease in toxicity, although the cooking liquid
is toxic. Species containing gyromitrin include Gyromitra
spp. (false morels), Helvella crispa, and H. lacuose. These
mushrooms grow throughout North America, usually near
conifers, aspens, and melting snow banks. They are
commonly found in the spring
Kinetics
Gyromitrin is metabolized to methyl-formylhydrazine and
then to monomethylhydrazine (Poisindex? 2003). The
mushrooms contain a monomethylhydrazine precursor that
is toxic (Spoerke 2006). Monomethylhydrazine inhibits
y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis with decreased
GABA inhibition. The monomethylhydrazine also reacts
with  pyridoxal  5-phosphate  to  form  a  hydrazone.
Depletion of tissue pyridoxal 5-phosphate results in
decreased  glutamic  acid  decarboxylase  inhibition  and
GABA synthesis. Decreased GABA synthesis predisposes
581
to seizures. The inhibition of a diamine oxidase in the
intestinal mucosa may be responsible for the GI signs. The
mechanism of hepatic damage is hypothesized to involve
inhibition of certain mixed function oxidases in the liver.
resulting in the formation of free radicals and causing lipid
peroxidation. The mechanism of hemolysis is not clearly
defined but might be secondary  to other metabolic
disruptions (Benjamin 1995).
Toxicity
There is a wide variation of gyromitrin in individual
mushrooms and species of mushrooms and thus mushroom
toxicity  varies.  Monomethylhydrazine precursor varies
from 50-300mg/kg and gyromitrin varies from 0.06-1.6g/
kg in fresh mushrooms. Cooking removes over 99% of the
gyromitrin and drying also removes it. Five mg of
monomethylhydrazine caused vomiting in monkeys and 7
mg caused death (Benjamin 1995).
Clinical Signs
The mushrooms cause a gastrointestinal effect followed by
neurologic, hepatoarenal, and/or hemolytic syndromes
Onset of signs can be delayed from 6-24 hours after
ingestion, but in some cases the signs occur as late as 53
hours postingestion. In one dog vomiting began 3 hours
following ingestion (Beasley 1999). There is a 2-8-hour
latent period following spore inhalation. Onset of GI signs
is often sudden and may last for 2 days (Spoerke 2006)
The GI phase involves nausea, vomiting, watery and
possibly  bloody  diarrhea,  along  with  abdominal
discomfort, lethargy, and possibly fever. No additional
582
signs might occur and there may be spontaneous recovery
in a few days to a week.
For the hepatorenal syndrome, signs may develop by
3648 hours and consist of icterus, hepatomegaly, and
possibly splenomegaly.  Rarely renal failure develops
secondary to hypotension, dehydration, and hemolysis.
The hemolytic syndrome occurs rarely and appears to be
more prevalent in dogs, who appear to be more susceptible
to hemolysis and methemoglobinemia (Benjamin 1995).
Sometimes
there   is  methemoglobinemia   without
hemolysis
There can be a neurologic syndrome that is a terminal
phase. This phase consists of delirium, fasciculations,
mydriasis, stupor that progresses to coma, circulatory
collapse, and respiratory arrest. Rabbits intoxicated with
gyromitrin developed loss of activity, seizures, anorexia,
hemoglobinuria, and weight loss (Spoerke 2001). In one
case a dog developed vomiting 2-3 hours after chewing on
Gyromitra esculenta and in the course of 6 hours
developed lethargy, followed by coma and death.
The most common signs are vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain with fever. More severe signs can occur,
but are very rare and occur mainly in dogs. The duration of
signs varies. The GI effects can last for up to a week;
hepatic and renal signs can last for weeks before recovery
or, conversely, deterioration and death. Hemolytic and
liver and kidney effects can be chronic.
Differential Diagnoses
583
Differential diagnoses include amanitin, zinc, iron, and
acetaminophen toxicosis.
Diagnosis
Diagnostically one has to rely on the history of ingestion
of mushrooms and any clinical signs consistent with
exposure (i.e., latent period followed by Gl, and/or hepatic
and renal signs and hemolysis). Clinical pathology tests
can show elevations in PT, AST, ALT, BUN, serum
bilirubin, and creatinine (Spoerke 2006). On postmortem,
histopathology can show renal tubular necrosis, periacinar
hepatic degeneration and necrosis, and cerebral edema
(Benjamin 1995; Tegzes and Puschner 2002a)
Management of Exposures
Management starts with early decontamination using
emesis and activated charcoal. Emesis can be achieved as
specified previously. It is necessary to correct fluid and
electrolyte imbalances, so it is important to monitor
electrolytes, acid/base balance, hydration, PCV, and renal
and liver function. Hemolysis and methemoglobinemia can
also be factors and need to be monitored (Spoerke 2006).
Antiemetics can
be used to control vomiting and
antiseizure medications, such as diazepam, for control of
seizures (Tegzes and Puschner 2002a). Intravenous fluid
therapy at twice a maintenance rate might be required; a
blood  transfusion might be required  for  patients
experiencing hemolysis. For liver and renal damage,
antibiotics, lactulose, and SAMe (S-adenosylmethionine)
s   (     
antagonist (Tegzes and Puschner 2002a). It is used to
584
counter  the neurologic signs caused by gyromitrin
(Spoerke 2001).
Prognosis
The prognosis is guarded in patients progressing beyond
GI effects.
HEPATOTOXIC MUSHROOMS
Sources
Hepatotoxic mushrooms, Amanita, Galerina and Lepiota
genera, contain amanitins. There are nine amatoxins of
which α-, β- and - amanitins are of major importance
(Puschner 2007). The highest concentration of toxin is in
the gills (46%) followed by the stems (23%) and cap
(23%).
The most frequently reported poisoning results from
ingestion of A. phalloides (Tegzes and Puschner 2002a). A.
phalloides (death cap, deadly amanita) is found in
Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Virginia,
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Califormia, Oregon, and
Washington. The Midwest, Southeast, and mountain states
appear to be free of A. phalloides. It fruits from August to
eastern states. A. phalloides requires tree roots to grow, so
it is not often found in grassy areas unless they contain
mature trees with an extensive root system (Tegzes and
Puschner 2002a). A. phalloides mushrooms are most often
associated with birch and oak trees and can be in
woodlands, parks, and golf courses. This mushroom
species is the most toxic of the amatoxin-containing
585
mushrooms and responsible for about 90%-95% of human
deaths from mushroom poisonings worldwide (Donnelly
and Wax2005).
Amanita bisporigera (destroying angel) can be found
across the northern tier states and in eastern Canada
mixed woodlands and is associated with oaks, birches, and
aspens.
Amanita verna (spring destroying angel, spring amanita,
white death cap, fool's mushroom) is associated with oak
trees and fruits in spring, summer, and early fall.
Amanita virosa is found throughout southeast Canada and
easterm coastal United States and is especially abundant
along Lake Ontario shores. It is found in hardwood and
mixed forests.
Amanita ocreata is found primarily along the coast of
California, fruits in the spring, and is associated with oak
trees. The remaining Amanita spp. are found primarily in
southern and southeastern United States.
Kinetics
The bioavailability of amanitins in dogs and cats ranges
from 10 to 20% (Benjamin 1995). Amanitins are taken up
by epithelial cells of the GI tract and by hepatocytes,
respectively. Uptake into the hepatocytes can be blocked
by bile salts, prednisolones, antanamide, and silibinin.
There is no evidence of the amanitins crossing the
586
placental barrier. They undergo extensive enterohepatic
recirculation, and excretion occurs in dogs via the urine.
Within 6 hours 90% of the amanitins are eliminated via the
kidneys. The concentration of amanitins may be 10o-150
times higher in the urine than in the blood (Benjamin
1995). Urinary excretion can continue for up to 72 hours
due to the persistence of the mushrooms in the GI tract and
extensive enterohepatic recirculation.
Mechanism of Action
Amanitins inhibit nuclear RNA polymerase II and interfere
with DNA and RNA transcription (Benjamin 1995), which
results in inhibition of ribosomal protein synthesis. Cells
that have a high rate of metabolism are affected the most.
such as hepatocytes and intestinal crypt cells, but all cells
in the body are susceptible. Blocking uptake by the
hepatocytes might predispose other cells to damage
through increased circulating amanitin concentration. The
kidneys can be damaged in a similar way.
Table 23.2.Typical clinical phases of cyclopeptides 0or
Amanita phalloides toxicosisa
587
Description
Clinieal Effects
Initial
Latcnt period
6 to 12 (to 24) hours aftcr
exposure
Phase I
Gastroenteritis(can detect
±12 to 24 hcurs duration
Nausea
amanitins in serum and
Vomiting
(eun
Bloody diarrhea
Abdominal pain
Ialeryy
Twitching
Dehydration
Phasc I
Severe gastrocnteritis
±18 to 24 hcurs duration
Bloody diarrhca
Hemolysis
Electrolyte imbalance
Hyperthermia
Tachyeardia
Bracycardia
Iaten.y
Latent period
2 tn 48 hours dration
Apparent recovery
(contiue onitoring liver
and kicney function)
Phose III
Final/terminal
Begins 36 to 84 hours
Liver, kicney, and multiorgan failure
aftcr cxposurc
Scvcrc hypoglycemia
ltens
Ccagulopathy
Seizarcs
Azotemia
ATuriz
Metabolic acidosis
Cerebral acema
Ccma
Seqsis
Death
aNote that with large amanintin ingestions or ingestions by
puppies, death may occur within 2 hours postexposure.
Toxicity
Toxicity varies with species. Rodents and rabbits seem to
be unaffected by ingestion of the amanitins. The oral LD50
for a dog
g is approximately 1 mg amanitin (Benjamin
1995). This is about
t equivalent to one “decent-sized’
mushroom cap. The IV LD5o for α-amanitin is 0.1mg/kg
Clinical Effects
Signs
588
Signs  typically  occur in  phases  (Puschner 2o07)
Following a latent period of 6-12 hours, there is a triphasic
syndrome (Table 23.2). Phase 1 consists of GI signs:
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, dehydration, and
lethargy. Anorexia may also be seen. Phase 2 is
characterized by severe GI upset manifested as nausea,
vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and severe abdominal pain. In
this phase there is hepatotoxic damage with signs and lab
values that point to liver failure leading to coagulopathy.
These signs can include icterus, tachycardia, acidosis,
hypotension, and hypoglycemia. This can be followed by
another latent phase in which the animal appears to have
recovered. This latent period requires diligent monitoring
of liver and renal values to determine whether damage is
being done and to assess liver and kidney function. Phase 3
involves hemorrhages, seizures, fulminant hepatic failure.
and renal failure leading to death in 4 to 7 days (Enjalbert
et al. 2002). Fifty percent of dogs given amanitins in lethal
doses died from hypoglycemia within 1 to 2 days of
exposure. The onset of signs is generally 6 to 12 hours for
    s  n t  sis 
duration of signs can be a few days for mild cases and in
severe cases death in 4-10 days. In beagles experimentally
given sublethal doses of amanitins, vomiting, and diarrhea
began in 16 hours and subsided 60 hours later. In beagles
given lethal doses, an initial hyperglycemia was followed
by hypoglycemia. Glucose was administered, which
culminated in hepatic dystrophy and was fatal in 1-2 days
(Spoerke 2006).
Table 23.3. Treatment of mushroom ingestion
589
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
0.02 to 0.04mg/kg IV, IM, or
Emesis
Apomorphine
subconjunctival sac in the dog
3% hydrogen
1 to S ml/kg PO (generally do not
exceed S0 ml for dogs or 10 ml total
peroxide
for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Gastric lavage
Water at body
10mg/kg body weight
temperature
2 to Sg/kg body weight PO (1g
activated charcoal in S ml water):
Adsorbent
Activated charcoal
repeat dose every 4 to 6 hours; may be
used to up 48 hours
Cathartic
Sorbital
3ml/kg (70%) PO
GI protectants:
Gastroeneteritis
1 to 2ml/kg every 6 to 12 hours
kaolin/pectin
Dogs: 0.5 to 1g PO every 8 to 12h cats:
Sucralfate
0.25 g PO every 8 to 12 h
Dehydration
Crystalloid fluids
As needed
Glucose
Hepatic
140mg/kg PO followed by 70mg/kg
Acetylcysteine
damage
PO every 6hr
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 2mg/kg IV
 Phenobarbi tal
6mg/kg IV to effect
Propofol
0.1mg/kg/min IV constant rate infusion
Dyspnea
Oxygen
Mechanical
ventilation
Broad-spectrum
Sepsis
antibiotics
 Parenteral as needed
Severe
Vitamin K1
2.5 to 5mg/kg daily
hemorrhage
Packed red blood
As needed
cells
590
Wholeblood
Amatox in
300.000 to 40 million U/day (human
Penicillin G
hepatic damage
dose)
Silymarin (herbal
milk
thistle—check
1.4 to 4.2 g/day PO for 4 to 5 days
label for
concentration)
0.2 to 2mg/kg; give 50% of dose IV
Cholinergic
Atropine
and S0% IM or SC to effect of drying
stimulation
secretions
Tremors
Methocarbamol
S0mg/kg IV q 8hr
Pyridox ine
25mg/kg by slow IV infusion over
Hydrazine
(vitamin B6)
15-30min
Laboratory
Significant elevations in serum AST, ALT, alkaline
phosphatase, and bilirubin are commonly observed. Severe
hypoglycemia is also characteristic (Tegzes and Puschner
2002b). Coagulopathy as evidenced by prolonged clotting
times occurs in a high percent of affected dogs
Differentials
Differentials include blue-green algae, acetaminophen,
cycad,
iron, a
 aflatoxin,  and
　phenolic
compounds
intoxications, leptospirosis, infectious hepatitis, and
hepatic neoplasia.
Diagnosis
Antemortem
591
Liver biopsies can be done to detect evidence of hepatic
injury; hepatic necrosis would be the expected finding
Urine samples can be tested for the presence of amanitin
Postmortem
On necropsy one would expect to find evidence of hepatic
necrosis, gastrointestinal mucosal injury, and renal tubular
necrosis. Acute tubular necrosis is believed to the result of
reabsorption of the toxins by renal tubules after glomerular
filtration (Puschner 2007). Liver and kidney samples can
be tested for amanitin to confirm exposure (Puschner
2007).
Management of Exposures
Early detection appears to be critical because survival rates
were
greatly
improved
d  with   prompt   therapeutic
intervention (Tegzes and Puschner, 2002b: Puschner
2007). Standard decontamination is recommended if
initiated soon after exposure. Emesis can be achieved as
previously  specified.  After  gastric emptying,  activated
charcoal should be administered. Giving repeated doses
every 2 to 6 hours for 2 to 3 days is recommended to
decrease enterohepatic recirculation (Puschner 2007). With
this frequency of activated charcoal administration, serum
sodium levels should be monitored because there is a high
probability for hypernatremia.
Baselineserum
1 chemistries, CBC, acid/base, and
electrolytes, especially Na, should be obtained, and
glucose, liver enzymes, renal values, and coagulation
parameters should
be  monitored. Coagulation
592
abnormalities have occurred in animals that develop GI
signs within 24 48 hours of ingesting mushrooms. Levels
are expected to be normal for the first 24 hours. ALT and
AST begin to elevate and peak within 72-96 hours, with
symptomatic care is needed consisting of fluid therapy
(diuresis   without   use   of   diuretics),   temperature
management,  GI
Iprotectants,  vitamin  K1， blood
replacement therapy, special dietary food, and diazepam
for seizures.
Liver protectants are recommended. N-acetylcysteine and
silibinin (or silymarin, an herbal milk thistle protectant)
appear to be equally efficacious. N-acetylcysteine and
silibinin are free radical scavengers (Benjamin 1995).
SAMe has also been recommended because it acts as a
membrane stabilizer, hinders amatoxins penetration of cell,
scavenges free radicals, and favors regeneration of
damaged livers (Enjalbert et al. 2002).
Both silibinin and penicillin G interfere with enterohepatic
recirculation of amatoxins. Cephalosporins may also be as,
or even more, effective. (Enjalbert et al. 2002). Table 23.3
lists some of the therapeutic agents and dosages used for
mushroom toxicosis in pets.
Prognosis
The prognosis is poor, especially if there is a short latent
period with an early rise in liver enzyme concentrations.
presence of a coagulopathy, and persistent hypoglycemia.
MYCOTOXINS
593
Mycotoxins are secondary chemical metabolites produced
by various species of fungi in numerous commodities,
foods, and feed. These compounds have diverse chemical
structures and may  cause biological and pathological
changes in animals. Numerous fungi do not produce
mycotoxins, and the presence of mold in feed or food does
not guarantee that mycotoxins were or will be produced
are not readily destroyed by processing, and can be found
in cereal by-products (e.g., corn and wheat gluten,
distiller's grains, etc.) and pet foods. Three genera of
fungi—Fusarium,Penicillium, and
1Aspergillus—are
primarily responsible for invasion of crops, particularly
cereal
 grains,
in thefield
and
during   harvest,
transportation, processing, and storage of foods and feeds.
Each fungus
shas specific
requirements for matrix,
oxygenation, temperature, and moisture for mold growth
and subsequent mycotoxin development.
Mycotoxins
　frequently
associated  with
pet
t  food
contamination
include
aflatoxins,
Fusarium
mycotoxins—particularly  vomitoxin  or deoxynivalenol
(DON)—and ochratoxin A (Table 23.4). The tremorgenic
mycotoxins associated with moldy food (bread, walnuts,
cream cheese, and garbage), such as penitrem A and
roque-fortine,   are  discussed
1n
Chapter
24,
"Food-Associated Intoxications."
Table 23.4. Mycotoxins in pet food (adapted from CAST,
2003)
594
Enviromen. for Moll
Mycotoxin
Fungi
Growth
Commodity
Effcets in Animals
Aflatoxins
Aspergiliu flavus and
Warm days and nights
Corn
Liver damage
(B.B.Gi，G2
A.paraxiicus
789），high
Rice
Liver tamors
M,M)
grain moisture (16
Peanuts/nuts
Hemorhage
to 28/）, drought
Cottonsced
Dcath
stress, insect
Voioxi
damage
Fusuriwtspp
Altereting warn days
Cereals wt,
Digestive disorders
(trichctheccne
nd cool nights (40
corn,barley,
(vomiting, fecd rcfusal.
nycxixin)
80F),d mid
EIN)
dianhesa)
Zearalenone
Fusariwgramnearun
Moderating temps（45
Cereals (wheat,
Estrogenic effects
(prinarily)
 70F） anhigh
, harley) (eere f vulva, vagina,
grain moisture (22
uterus)
to 25%)
Fumonisin
Fusarin veritclioces
Drought curing growing Corn
Liver insult
(synMonilifore)
scason followed by
Corn scrcenings Note:Ilorses are vcry
oul,wel weather
sensiive to fuaumisins
during pollination
and can develop brain
necrusis
(leukcencephalcmalacia)
amltlie
Ochratoxin A
Aspergiliu ochraceus
Cooler weather (5 to
Corn
Kiciney tubular necrosis
Penicilliun
77F) and grain
Whcat
vemucosum!
moisure>16%
Dried beans
Dricd fruits
Peniciliumrqueforii
Waluuis
Ienitrem A
and othcrs
Cream checsc
Incoordination
(lreuurgeus)
Penicillcussn
Breal
Deah
Rice
Chirse
Garbage
Cereal
grains,
cereal by-products, a
and nuts are often
incorporated into commercial food for dogs, cats, birds,
rabbits, and other companion animals. These commodities
can be contaminated with mycotoxins and may be diverted
from use in human food to use in animal feeds. A majority
of
larger
pet
food
companies
test
commodities
for
deviations in testing protocol:
mav
1 not detect mycotoxins
and smaller, local mills may
not
 test pet food ingredients
prior to use. The end result can be pet food contamination
with mycotoxins.
In a worldwide review of the prevalence of mycotoxins in
pet foods, a majority of reported mycotoxin outbreaks in
pets were related to aflatoxins, a few cases were related to
595
tremorgenic mycotoxins, and several in Europe and the
United Kingdom were associated with ochratoxin A
(Leung et al. 2006). No natural outbreaks of aflatoxicosis
       
2005).
This
chapter
focuses
on
two
mycotoxinsaflatoxins and vomitoxin.
AFLATOXINS
Aflatoxins are polycyclic furan compounds produced by
Aspergillus molds both in the field prior to harvest and in
storage. Aflatoxins are hepatotoxic and potent liver
carcinogens. Cases of fatal hepatitis in dogs during the
1950s and turkeys in 1960, termed hepatitis X" and "X
disease,”" respectively, were likely caused by aflatoxins.
Sources
Aspergillus flavus, A. parasiticus, and A. nomius can
produce a number of aflatoxins. Aflatoxins identified
include B1 and B2 (fluoresce blue in ultraviolet light), G1
and G2 (fluoresce green in ultraviolet light, and M1 and
M2 (animal metabolites from hydroxylation of aflatoxins
B1 and B2, respectively).Aflatoxin B1 is the most toxic
mycotoxin in this group, generally found at the highest
concentration, and the most important member of the
aflatoxins for analytical purposes in feeds. Aflatoxins M1
and M2 can be found in tissues, meat, milk, and eggs.
Fungal growth and aflatoxin production are favored when
grain moisture is >1 5%, relative humidity is >75%, and
    )   
occur in corn, nuts, cottonseed, rice, and other crops during
years of drought, warm-to-hot temperatures, and insect
596
damage to crops. Large portions of crops in a region can
be affected with widespread aflatoxin contamination in
animal feeds.
Kinetics
Aflatoxin absorption is by passive diffusion from the small
intestine (Meerdink 2004).  Absorption is rapid and
complete in numerous animal species, with a higher rate of
absorption in young animals. Aflatoxins are eliminated
from the body through the bile, urine, and feces, and into
milk and eggs. Aflatoxins can undergo enterohepatic
circulation. Generally, most of the toxin is excreted within
24 hours after exposure. Dogs given a single oral 100 μg
aflatoxin B1/kg body weight dose in corn oil showed some
vomiting postdosing, but no additional adverse effects, and
over 90% of total aflatoxin M1 was found in the urine 12
hours postdosing: by 48 hours postdosing aflatoxin Mi
was almost undetectable in urine (Bingham et al. 2004)
Aflatoxins do not accumulate in body tissues, but repeated
exposure may result in lasting adverse effects in tissues.
A majority of aflatoxin is biotransformed in the liver, with
smaller amounts biotransformed in the kidney and small
intestine. A critical metabolic step is the transformation of
aflatoxin B1 to a reactive epoxide intermediate by the
cytochrome P450 system. Rapid formation of the reactive
8,9-epoxide of aflatoxin B1 can overwhelm detoxification
mechanisms   by   depleting   intracellular   glutathione
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). Dogs as a species have low liver
glutathione concentrations, compared with other species
The unstable aflatoxin expoxides can bind covalently to
intracellular molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins
597
forming adducts, which can result in cellular damage and
hepatic necrosis. As mentioned earlier, aflatoxin M is
formed from hydroxylation of aflatoxin B1 and is the
major excretion product in several species via urine and
milk (Meerdink 2004).
Mechanism of Action
The
epoxide
ofaflatoxin B1binds cellular
macromolecules, nucleic acids, subcellular organelles, and
regulatory proteins that disrupt normal cellular processes
and organ function. The outcome may result in cellular
necrosis, cancer, immunosuppression (both humoral and
cell-mediated immunity), mutagenesis, and teratogenesis.
Toxicity
In naturally occurring cases, the concentration of aflatoxin
in the feed (dose) and the duration of exposure may not be
 o       s 1 o
suspect pet food that the animals have been consuming and
test for aflatoxins in an analytical laboratory. Dogs are
considered sensitive to aflatoxins, with a LDso from 0.5 to
1.0 mg/kg body weight, and death may occur within 3 days
after exposure. The LDso of aflatoxins in cats ranges from
0.3to 0.6mg/kgbodyweight andinrabbitsis
approximately 0.4 mg/kg body weight. Mice, rats, and
hamsters are more resistant to aflatoxins, with a
single-dose oral LDs0 greater than 5 mg/kg body weight.
Following consumption of aflatoxin contaminated food,
dogs can show peracute to acute, subacute, and chronic
clinical signs. In a subacute study, young beagle dogs were
orally dosed with an aflatoxin mixture (37.5% B1, 5.4%
598
B2, 17.1% G1, and 1.0% G2) at dosages of 1, 5, and 20 μ
g/kg body weight, with the duration of dosing lasting for
10 weeks at 5 days a week (Armbrecht et al. 1971).
Clinical signs of icterus, inappetence, yellow-orange
colored urine, and increased prothrobin time were noted in
dogs at the high dosage of 20u g/kg body weight
Histological changes were observed in only the high-dosed
group and consisted of moderate bile duct proliferation,
bile pigment accumulation in the liver portal areas, and
multiple vascular channels around central and portal liver
veins. Therefore, the toxic dose for aflatoxins in dogs is
estimated to be less than 20 μg/kg body weight
Clinical Signs
Clinical features of aflatoxicosis in dogs are not unique to
this condition and may not be recognized antemortem.
       
aflatoxicosis,  and
analytical detection of elevated
aflatoxins Bi in the feed and Mi in hepatic tissue can
confirm aflatoxicosis. Sudden deaths in kennel dogs fed a
similar pet food may serve as sentinels of aflatoxicosis
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). Dogs may be reluctant to eat the
contaminated food (aflatoxins are considered odorless and
clinical signs of aflatoxicosis are related to liver damage
and failure, which may be acute or chronic in nature. In a
retrospectivecases
study
of
dogs exposed
to
aflatoxincontaminated pet food in 2005 to 2006, the order
of onset of clinical signs was anorexia, lethargy, vomiting.
jaundice, diarrhea frequently associated with melena
progressing to hematochezia, abdominal effusion (usually
transudate),  peripheral edema,  and
 terminal
599
encephalopathy  associated  with hemorrhagic  diathesis
(Table 23.5) (Dereszynski et al. 2008). Dogs may develop
polyuria and polydipsia and show depression. The severity
of clinical signs can vary among dogs, probably related to
differences in dose and duration of aflatoxin exposure,
biotransformation of aflatoxins, nutritional status, and
preexisting  health  conditions.  Poor  survival  of  dogs
affected by aflatoxins in pet food was linked with severe
enteric hemorrhage. Aflatoxicosis in dogs may induce
disseminated intravascular coagulation that can deplete
coagulation factors.
Table 23.5. Clinical signs and clinicopathologic changes
in dogs associated with aflatoxin exposure (adapted from
Dereszynski et al., 2008)
Clinical Signs
Clinicopathologic Changes
Sudden death
Coagulopathic disturbances: low plasma
anticoagulant proteins (protein C, antithrombin)
Anorexia
Hypocholesterolemia
Lethargy
Hypoproteinemia (↓total protein and albumin)
Vomiting
a serum liver enzyme activities
Jaundice
Hyperbilirubinemia
Diarrhea (melena,
↓ serum electrolytes (Nat, Cat)
hematochezia)
Dehydration
Granular casts in urine (cylindruria or renal casts)
Abdominal effusion,
Liver needle aspirates cyto prep: diffuse hepatocyte
peripheral edema
lipid vacuolation
Polyuria, polydipsia
Terminal
encephalopathy
Hemorrhagic diathesis
600
Goodearly markers of aflatoxicosis indogs are
hypocholesterolemia and lower plasma protein C and
antithrombin  activities (Dereszynski
etal. 2008)
Commonly, dogs have coagulopathies, such as prolonged
activated    partial
thromboplastin
time
(aPTT)and
prothrombin
time
(PT),
and
lower
fibrinogen
concentrations and
plasma
acoagulation
factorVII
(FVII:C). Because of vomiting, diarrhea, or abnormal body
fluid distribution (ie., abdominal effusion), electrolyte
disturbances occur, such as lower serum concentrations of
sodium and calcium and elevated serum phosphate. Dogs
also had lowered serum albumin and total protein, and
increased liver enzyme activities and hyperbilirubinemia.
The magnitude of liver enzyme activities did not correlate
with the severity
1 of hepatocellular damage noted at
necropsy (Dereszynski
iet al. 2008). No significant
differences were observed in urine specific gravity,
(between survivor and nonsurvivor dogs), but dogs with
granular casts, specifically with cylindruria (renal casts or
tiny, tube-shaped particles) died from aflatoxicosis, while
few of these dogs were azotemic (Dereszynski et al. 2008).
The presence of granular casts in the urine of dogs dying
from aflatoxicosis could be related to aflatoxin adduct
injury to tissue, altered redox status, or impaired renal
perfusion  from systemic effects of aflatoxins; the
cause-effect relationship is only speculated.
Needle aspirates of liver from dogs that died from
aflatoxicosis were processed for cytology examination and
revealed diffuse hepatocyte lipid vacuolation, hepatocyte
degeneration, and minor inflammatory cell infiltrates.
These findings are not pathognomonic for aflatoxins and a
full necropsy is recommended.
601
Diagnosis
Diagnosis  is based  on  compatible clinical  signs and
clinical pathology changes, particularly related to liver
failure or sudden death. A complete necropsy is
recommended in suspect aflatoxicoses. Histopathologic
findings consistent with aflatoxicoses include hepatic
lipidosis; portal fibroplasias; magelocytosis of hepatocytes;
biliary hyperplasia; and, in chronic hepatopathy cases,
marked lobular atrophy, bridging portal fibrosis, and
regenerative hepatocellular nodules (Newman et al. 2007).
Suspect food consumed bv the animal should be tested in
analytical laboratories for aflatoxins, in particular aflatoxin
B1, for confirmation of exposure to aflatoxins. Aflatoxins
are notorious for occurring in localized hot spots in feeds;
multiple samples of the suspect food should be taken and
can be held and frozen for future analysis. If the animal
has been consuming the suspect food recently, liver
samples can be frozen for subsequent analysis for aflatoxin
M1; however, the half-life of aflatoxins in dogs has not
been determined and is thought to be very short. Aflatoxin
M1 may be cleared from the liver within 7 days after a
suspect food has been discontinued in the diet, so analysis
of liver tissue may be of value only with recent exposure to
a suspect food (Newman et al. 2007). Dog foods associated
with outbreaks of aflatoxicosis had greater than 60μg
aflatoxin/kg and from to 100 to 300+ μg aflatoxin/kg of
food (Leung et al. 2006). Analysis of some dog feed
associated with aflatoxicosis in the eastern United States
during 2005 and 2006 revealed high concentrations of
aflatoxin B1 in a range of 223 to 579 μg/kg (ppb or parts
per billion) of feed, and hepatic tissue of affected dogs
602
contained high concentrations of aflatoxin M1, from 0.6 to
4.4 μg/kg liver (Newman et al. 2007). The US Food and
Drug Administration's action level for maximum aflatoxin
in feed for pets (dogs, cats, horses) is 20 μg/kg or ppb
(FDA 1994).
Differential Diagnoses
Differential  diagnoses  would  include  acetaminophen.
cyanobacterial
toxin-microcystins,
iron,
 phenolic
compounds,
Penicillium
islandicum
mycotoxin—leutoskyrin,   and
1pyrrolizidine
  alkaloid
intoxications, leptospirosis, infectious hepatitis, and
hepatic neoplasia from other causes.
Treatment
If aflatoxin is suspected from food exposure, identify the
potential aflatoxin-contaminated food source(s) and stop
further exposure. Ensure that possible contaminated food
sources are retained and frozen for analytical testing for
aflatoxins. There is no antidote for aflatoxin.
There is no definitive treatment protocol for aflatoxicosis
in animals. General supportive treatment and care are the
main focus. Dogs may require intravenous fluids and blood
component treatment; vitamins K and E may be
administered to replenish the coagulation cofactor and to
inhibit
tmembrane
lipid
1 peroxidation,  respectively
(Dereszynski et al. 2008). The dose of vitamin E was
limited to ≤10U/kg/d (<4.5 U/lb/d) because of concerms
that higher dosages may inhibit gamma-carboxylation of
vitamin K dependent coagulants. In the 2005/2006
603
outbreak of aflatoxicosis in dogs, one therapeutic approach
for2 months after theinitial aflatoxin diagnosis;
glutathione was considered important  for aflatoxin
detoxification mechanisms (aflatoxin metabolites undergo
enterohepatic circulation) and glutathione can be depleted
in dogs with spontaneous liver disease (Dereszynski et al.
2008). Initial thiol replacement was by intravenous
n-acetylcysteine    but
was
changed
to
 oral
s-adenosylmethionine when the dogs could tolerate oral
      
antiemetics, but gastric atony, detected in several affected
dogs, did not respond to antiemetic or prokinetic treatment
and some dogs were euthanized
Dogs
 suspected of developing gastric ulcers and
esophagitis secondary to protracted vomiting were treated
with a histamine-2 receptor blocking agent famotidine and
1
gastriccytoprotective drug
sucralfate.Silybin.
considered a hepatic protective flavanoid from herbal milk
thistle, was given to enhance glutathione-S-transferase
activity and promote glutathione synthesis (Dereszynski et
al. 2008). Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended to
protect    against 
tsystemicinfections
frompossible
immunosuppression. L-carnitine was provided to dogs to
    s  i  
beneficial in experimental aflatoxicosis in several species.
(Dereszynski et al. 2008).
Prognosis
604
The prognosis depends on the severity of liver damage.
Severe liver damage suggests a guarded to poor prognosis.
Monitoring coagulation (particularly aPTT and PT, plasma
protein C, and antithrombin activity), serum liver enzyme
activities, serum biochemistry panel, and electrolytes can
be indicative of the hepatic damage. The presence of
granular casts, specifically for cylindruria, has been
associated with fatality. The finding of enteric blood has
been associated with the onset of hepatic encephalopathy
and terminal stages of aflatoxicosis and death.
VOMITOXIN OR DEOXYNIVALENOL (DON)
Fusarium molds invade a variety of cereal plants resulting
in widespread plant diseases, such as “Fusarium head
blight" or "scab" in wheat and barley and “Giberella ear
rot" of corm. Moderate temperatures during flowering and
higher humidity favor Fusarium growth in cereals and
mycotoxin production in the field (see Table 23.4). A
group of mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. are the
trichothecenes, sesquiterpenoid compounds with an epoxy
ring at C12-13 that is considered essential for toxicity. The
trichothecenes  include  a  number   of  mycotoxins,
vomitoxin, 15-and
13-acetyldeoxynivalnol,  nivalenol,
scirpenol, T-2 toxin, HT-2 toxin, diacetoxyscirpenol, etc.,
with a broad range of toxicity. Reports of adverse effects
in
dogsand
cats
are
not 
common
from
trichothecene-contaminated pet food. This chapter is
focused on vomitoxin, the most common trichothecene
contaminant identified in grain.
Sources
605
Trichothecenes are produced by several genera of fungi
including  Fusarium,
Stachybotrys,
Myrothecium,
Trichothecium, and others. Trichothecene production by
Fusarium fungi is heavily dependent on oxygen,
environmental pH, osmotic tension, and temperature. For
example,vomitoxin is produced under conditions of low
oxygen tension, whereas zearalenone production by the
same fungi requires oxygen saturation, usually occurring
after field crops senesce. F. graminearum, the primary
producer of vomitoxin in North America, has an optimum
a water activity (a w) greater than 0.88. Vomitoxin is a
stable chemical and is not destroyed by high temperatures
and pressure treatments.
Kinetics and Toxicity
The kinetics of vomitoxin have not been described in dogs
and cats. In other monogastric animals, vomitoxin is
rapidly and nearly completely absorbed in the stomach and
proximal small intestine after oral exposure. Distribution
to all body tissues is fairly rapid, and most of the
vomitoxin is eliminated in the urine and feces in less than
24 to 48 hours. Vomitoxin is not accumulated in tissues. In
a feeding trial with mature Brittany and beagle dogs and
American shorthair cats, naturally contaminated wheat was
incorporated into pet foods at increasing concentrations of
vomitoxin from 0 to 10 mg/kg or ppm (parts per million)
(Hughes et al. 1999). Dogs previously exposed to
vomitoxin-contaminated pet food preferentially selected
uncontaminated food. When the vomitoxin concentration
in feed was >4.5 ±1.7mg/kg in dog food and >7.7 ± 1.1
mg/kg in cat food, feed intake was reduced in dogs and
606
cats, respectively. Vomitoxin concentrations greater than 8
to 10 mg/kg in the diet caused vomiting in dogs and cats.
Mechanism of Action
Trichothecene  mycotoxins  have multiple effects on
eukaryotic cells, including inhibition of protein, RNA, and
DNA synthesis, alteration of membrane structure and
mitochondrial function, stimulation of lipid peroxidation,
induction of programmed cell death or apoptosis, and
activation of cytokines and chemokines. Typical effects
from trichothecene exposure are anorexia, vomiting,
 gastrointestinal irritation, and immunosuppression.
Table  23.6.  Clinical signs in dogs associated with
vomitoxin exposure
Feed refusal
Vomiting
Weight loss
Diarrhea
Poor feed conversion
Gastrointestinal irritation
Clinical Signs
The predominant clinical signs from vomitoxin exposure
in pet food are feed refusal, vomiting, and weight loss in
dogs (Table 23.6). In a study of mature beagle dogs fed
Fusarium mycotoxin-contaminated diets (2.7 and 3.9 ppm
vomitoxin   with
 low  concentrations [<0.5ppm]
of
15-acetyldeoxynivalenol and zearalenone, and 8 to 10 ppm
fusaric acid), rapid onset of reduced feed intake was
607
reported (Leung et al. 2007). Only one dog vomited on
these diets; however, weight loss was reported in dogs fed
the vomitoxin-contaminated diets. Vomitoxin has been
reported to delay gastric emptying through peripheral
action at serotonin receptors in rodents (Fioramonti et al.
1993). Additional clinical signs from vomitoxin exposure
could include gastrointestinal irritation and diarrhea, and
poor  feed  conversion.  Dogs  can  show  individual
susceptibility to mycotoxins, and younger animals may be
more susceptible to adverse effects at lower concentrations
of vomitoxin in food.
Diagnosis
The clinical signs associated with vomitoxin exposure are
common to many conditions and generally no significant
changes are observed  in  clinicopathologic parameters.
Vomitoxin, and other trichothecene mycotoxins, can be
a       
diagnostic labs. The FDA advisory levels for vomitoxin on
 n r po  sid r s-q  p s
mg/kg (ppm) and not to exceed 40% of the diet or not to
exceed 2 mg/kg (ppm) of their final diet (FDA 2010).
Differential Diagnoses
Clinical signs of feed refusal, vomiting, weight loss, and
diarrhea could be attributed to bacterial or viral intestinal
infections and garbage or irritant plant ingestion.
Treatment
608
As with any mycotoxin exposure in feed, the first
recommendation is to stop the exposure and switch to a
dietwithlow
 or nondetectable
 concentrationsof
vomitoxin. Feed samples can be taken of the suspect pet
food, frozen, and submitted to veterinary diagnostic
laboratories for analysis. Generally, treatment is not
required; if the animals are dehydrated from fluid loss
through vomiting or diarrhea, fluid therapy should be
instituted.
Prognosis
After exposure
 to the vomitoxin-suspectdiet is
discontinued, rapid recovery to normal status should occur.
The prognosis is good for recovery.
OTHERS
Numerous mycotoxins can be produced in natural
infections of mold in grains, feed, and food. Zearalenone, a
resorcyclic acid lactone, is a mycotoxin produced by
Fusarium species in corn and other crops, and it is often
found
withvomitoxin.Z
Zearalenone, and related
metabolites zearalenols and zearalanols, are estrogenic
compounds that can affect the reproductive system causing
edema of the vulva and uterus, enlargement of mammary
glands, and possibly ovarian dysfunction. The concern for
adverse reproductive effects in dogs would be the breeding
bitches; however, no case reports of zearalenone toxicosis
have been adequately documented in dogs. Additional
mycotoxins produced by Fusarium species are the
fumonisins, particularly fumonisin B1. Dogs and cats are
not considered sensitive to fumonisins and toxicoses have
609
  a  si p so e pda g o
horses are very sensitive to fumonisins and can develop
brain malacia and necrosis. All species have the potential
to have some liver damage from fumonisins. The FDA
guidance levels for total fumonisins in corn and corn
kg (ppm) and not to exceed 50% of the diet or not to
exceed 5 mg/kg (ppm) of their final diet (FDA 2001). The
FDA guidance level for equids and rabbits is not to exceed
1 ppm of the final diet.
Particularly in Europe and the United Kingdom.
ochratoxin A is an important nephrotoxin mycotoxin. The
molds Aspergillus ochraceus and Penicillium verrucosum
produce ochratoxins in cereal grains under cooler weather,
54 to 77 ° F, and moist conditions. Dogs are sensitive to
ochratoxin A and can develop anorexia, vomiting,
polyuria, polydipsia, bloody feces, paralysis, and die
(Bohn and Razzazi-Fazeli 2005). Daily oral doses of 0.2 to
0.3 mg ochratoxin A/kg body weight can be lethal to dogs
within 10 to 14 days. Necropsy lesions related to
ochratoxin A exposure include necrosis of proximal renal
tubules, mucohemorrhagic enteritis, and necrosis of
lymphoid tissue. No cases of ochratoxin A toxicosis in pets
have been reported in North America.
REFERENCES
Armbrecht, B.H., Geleta, J.N., and Shalkop, W.T. 1971. A
subacute exposure of beagle dogs to aflatoxin. Toxicol
ApplPharmacol18:579-585
610
Beasley, V.R. 1999. A Systems Affected Approach to
Veterinary Toxicology. Urbana: University of Mlinois
College of Veterinary Medicine.
Benjamin, D.R. 1995. Mushrooms: Poisons and panaceas
New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Bingham, A.K., Huebner, H.J., Phillips, T.D. et al. 2004.
Identification   and   reduction   of   urinary   aflatoxin
metabolites in dogs. Food Chem Toxicol 42:1851-1858.
Bohm,  J. and Razzazi-Fazeli, E.  2oo5. Effects of
mycotoxins on domestic pet species. In The Mycotoxin
Blue Book, edited by Diaz, D., pp. 77-91. Nottingham,
UK: Nottingham University Press.
CAST (Council for Agricultural Science and Technology).
2003.Mycotoxins:Risks in Plant,Animal and Human
System s. Task Force Report No. 139. Ames, Iowa
Dereszynski, D.M., Center, S.A., Randolph, JE. et al.
2008. Clinical and clinicopathologic features of dogs that
consumed foodborne hepatotoxic aflatoxins: 72 cases
(2005-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 232:1329-1337.
Donnelly, M. and Wax, P. 2005. Cyclopeptide-containing
mushrooms: the deadly amanita mushrooms. In Critical
Care Toxicology: Diagnosis and Management of the
Critically Poisoned Patient, edited by Brent, J., Wallace,
K.L., Burkhart, K.K., Phillips, S.D., Donovan, JW., pp.
1277-1285. New York: Elsevier Mosby.
611
Enjalbert, F., Rapior, S., Nouguier-Soule, J. et al. 2002.
Treatment of amatoxin poisoning 20 year retrospective
analysis. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 40(6):715-757.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1994. CPG Sec.
683.100 Action Levels for Aflatoxins in Animal Feeds.
Revised
8/28/94.
http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/
ComplianceManuals/CompliancePolicyGuidanceManual/
ucm074703.htm.
. 20o1. Guidance for Industry: Fumonisin Levels in
Human Foods and Animal Feeds; Final Guidance. Revised
11/9/2001.
http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatory Information/
GuidanceDocuments/
ChemicalContaminantsandPesticides/ucm109231.htm
. 2010. Guidance for Industry and FDA: Advisory
Levels for Deoxynivalenol (DON) in Finished Wheat
Products for Human Consumption and Grains and Grain
By-products Used for Animal Feed. Revised 7/7/2010.
http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
GuidanceDocuments/NaturalToxins/ucm1 20184.htm.
Fioramonti, J., Dupuy, C., Dupuy, J. et al. 1993. The
mycotoxin, deoxynivalenol, delays gastric emptying
through serotonin-3 receptors in rodents. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 266:1255-1260.
Hughes, D.M., Gahl, M.J., Graham, C.H. et al. 1999. Overt
signs of toxicity to dogs and cats of dietary
deoxynivalenol. J Anim Sci 77:693-700.
612
Leung, M.C., Diaz-Llano, G., and Smith, T.K. 2006.
Mycotoxins in pet food: A review on worldwide
prevalence and preventative strategies. J Agric Food Chem
54:9623-9635.
Leung, M.C., Smith, TK., Karrow, N.A. et al. 2007.
Effects of foodborne Fusarium mycotoxins with and
without a polymeric glucomannan mycotoxin adsorbent on
food intake and nutrient digestibility, body weight, and
physical and clinicopathologic variables of mature dogs.
Am J Vet Res 68:1122-1129.
Meerdink, G.L.2004. Aflatoxins. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Plumlee, K.H., pp. 231-235. St.
Louis: Mosby.
Newman, S.N., Smith, JR., Stenske, K.A.et al. 2007.
commercial dog food. J Vet Diagn Invest 19:168-175.
Poisindex CD-ROM Editorial Staff. 2003. Mushrooms
(Toxicologic Managements) Poisindex System Vol 114
Micromedex, Englewood, Colorado. Expires 12-20-2003
Puschner, B. 2007. Mushrooms toxins. In Veterinary
Toxicology, Basic and Clinical Principles, edited by
Gupta, R.C., pp. 915-923. New York: Elsevier Academic
Press.
Spoerke, D. 2001. Mushroom exposure. In Small Animal
Toxicology, edited by Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., pp.
571-592.St.Louis: Saunders
613
2006. Mushrooms.In Small Animal Toxicology,
edited by Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A., pp. 860-888. St.
Louis:Saunders.
Tegzes, JH. and Puschner, B. 2002a. Toxic mushrooms.
Vet ClinNorthAmSmallAnimPract32:397-407.
. 2002b. Amanita Poisoning: efficacy of aggressive
treatment of two dogs. Vet Hum Toxicol 11:96-99.
614
24
Food-Associated Intoxications
MindyBough
ALLIUMSPECIES
Sources
There are a number of plants in the Allium genera. Some
common examples include Allium cepa, cultivated onion;
Allium validum and Allium canadense,wild onion;Allium
sativum, garlic; Allium schoenoprassum, chives; and
Allium porrum, leek. These plants are frequently used by
humans as food, flavoring agents, and as medicinal herbs.
Cull onions have been used as livestock feed.
Companion animals may have access to Allium spp. in the
yard or garden, from the feeding of table food, from foods
left unattended, or when pet owners give the food or
supplements to their pets directly. Regardless of the source
of exposure, dogs, and especially cats, may demonstrate
signs of toxicosis.
Kinetics
The crushing or chewing of Allium spp. produces changes
leading to the production of allicin; this compound has
pharmacologic and toxicologic properties and produces the
characteristic garlic odor. The oil, which contains the
pharmacological and toxic components, is readily absorbed
through the gastrointestinal tract. Garlic oil is eliminated
615
both through the urine and through the lungs (Okuyama et
al. 1989). The half-life of allin in rats who were given 30
mg/kg was approximately 0.7 hours (Guo et al. 1990).
Mechanism of Action
When crushed or chewed, the sulfur compounds in Allium
spp. are hydrolyzed to thiosulfinates that then decompose
to disulfides. These disulfide compounds are oxidating
agents, which can cause hemolysis of erythrocytes. The
most toxic disulfide is reported to be dipropenyl disulfide
also known as n-propyl disulfide (Cheeke 1998). These
disulfides oxidize erythrocyte membranes. The result is the
formation of Heinz bodies, methemoglobinemia, and
anemia (Ogawa et al. 1986). Cats are more sensitive to the
effects of Allium spp. because their hemoglobin is more
sensitive to oxidative damage than other species. They
have 8 free sulfhydryl groups on their hemoglobin, which
is twice the amount that dogs have and four times the
amount that humans have. In addition, feline hemoglobin
dissociates into dimers 10 times more readily than other
species (Robertson et al. 1998).
A different mechanism of action may be involved with
sheep and other ruminants. Selim et al. (1999) reported
that rumen bacteria may be involved in the production of
toxic metabolites.
Toxicity
Pantoja et al. (l991) reported natriuresis, diuresis, and
hypotension in anesthetized dogs that were given 2.5 to 15
mg/kgofencapsulated
1  garlic
  powder.   Transient
616
bradycardia was present in dogs at doses of 15 and 20 mg/
kg of encapsulated garlic. Erythrocyte effects and
decreased hemoglobin concentrations were seen in dogs
that were given an extract equal to 5 g of whole garlic per
kg of body weight once a day for 7 days. Cats and some
dog breeds, particularly Japanese breeds such as Akitas,
Shibas, and Tosas, are at an increased risk for toxicosis to
Allium spp. because their erythrocytes are more
susceptible to oxidative damage (Christopher et al. 1990)
Large animals can be affected by Allium spp. Beasley
(1999) reports sensitivity ratings among these animals,
with cattle being the most sensitive followed by horses,
and then sheep, and then goats. Feeding more than 25% of
the diet in the form of onions will be hazardous to cattle.
Onion toxicosis has been reported in calves and yearling
cattle. An average of 11.8 kg/head per day was fed, and
signs developed in 26% of the animals within 5 days
(Verhoeff et al. 1985). Sheep have been fed cull onions
without toxicity (Cheeke 1998). However, Selim et al.
(1999) reported Heinz body hemolytic anemia when sheep
were fed 50 g/kg/day for 15 days.
Clinical Effects
Signs
 s  so hh    s go
postexposure. The primary concern, in Allium spp.
exposure cases, is for Heinz body hemolytic anemia and
methemoglobinemia. Secondarily, in serious cases renal
damage occurs from hemoglobinuria. In dogs, the most
common signs reported to the American Society for the
617
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison
Control    Center 
(APCC)
are
depression, decreased
hematocrit, vomiting, elevated WBC count, anorexia,
hemolysis, and weakness. Less commonly reported signs
include salivation, diarrhea, ataxia, hemoglobinuria, Heinz
bodies, methemoglobinemia, abnormal breath, and
abnormal feces. Cats most frequently exhibited vomiting.
salivation, and anorexia. Ogawa et al. (1986) reported that
hematocrits returned to normal in 10-14 days after oral
exposure.
Differential Diagnoses
If Allium spp. ingestion is suspected but specific evidence
is unavailable, other potential causes of hemolysis or
Heinz body anemia should be ruled out. Other toxicoses
that may produce similar signs include zinc, copper,
propylene glycol in cats, red maple in horse, Brassica spp.
in ruminants, phenothiazines, and mothballs. Additional
differentials may include auto immune hemolytic anemia,
blood parasites (e.g., H aemobartonella felis, Babesia
canis, and Eperythrozoon suis), and hereditary diseases
that affect red blood cells.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Hematological   testing  should  be   performed   with
evaluations
for
rHeinz
Zbodyhemolytic anemia,
methemoglobinemia, reticulocytes, icterus, and bilirubin,
and chemistry evaluation of renal values. Urine output and
presence of hemoglobinuria should be evaluated.
618
Postmortem
If death occurs, postmortem findings can include onion
   s s   
urine, pale or icteric tissues, and renal tubular degeneration
and necrosis.
Management of Exposures
Small animals presenting with significant exposure to
Allium spp.  should be decontaminated. Induction  of
  sa ansodxa a    a 
the animal is asymptomatic. However, caution should be
exercised  in determining  whether  contraindications  to
vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have the pet owner
induce vomiting at home. Activated charcoal should be
given once vomiting is controlled. A cathartic such as
sorbitol can be given with the first dose of activated
charcoal, but not with subsequent doses. When repeat
doses of activated charcoal are used as  part of
decontamination, electrolyte values should be monitored,
since electrolyte shifts can occur.
    s  
include administration of oxygen, blood transfusion(s) or
Oxyglobin?, intravenous
fluids,  and
controlof
gastrointestinal signs. Selim et al. (1999) reported that
Heinz body hemolytic anemia in sheep was less severe
when animals were fed ampicillin along with onions.
Therefore, it may be beneficial to treat sheep with oral
antibiotics to reduce oxidative damage. Treatment should
continue until clinical signs are resolved.
619
Prognosis
The prognosis is generally good for animals that are
decontaminated and treated early. However, the prognosis
may be compromised in animals that develop renal
damage secondary to hemolytic anemia.
AVOCADO
Sources
Avocados are in the family Lauraceae. They originate from
southern Mexico to Central America but are now also
grown in the warm climate of the southern United States.
The genus Persea includes approximately 150 species and
is the only edible genus. Persea americana is the only
species known to have toxicological significance (Burrows
and Tyrl 2001). Persea americana includes 3 ecological
races or varieties, Guatemalan, Mexican, and West Indian
or Columbian. Of the avocado races, there are a number of
hybrids.
Kinetics
The toxic compound in avocados, persin, is absorbed
quickly from the gastrointestinal system. The peak plasma
level of persin with oral ingestion is 1-2 hours.
Elimination of persin can occur through the milk in
lactating animals. Other forms of elimination are unknown,
but mice that were dosed orally with persin eliminated the
persin within 24 hours (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
Mechanism of Action
620
The mechanism of action for avocado toxicosis is
unknown (Pickrell et al. 2 004).
Toxicity
The Guatemalan avocado and its hybrids have been shown
to be toxic. Other races/varieties have not been implicated
in toxicoses to date (Burrows and Tyrl 200l). Mammalian
species that are known to be affected include cattle, goats,
horses, mice, rabbits, rats, and sheep. Lower doses are
associated with mammary gland effects, and higher doses
are associated with cardiac effects, including acute cardiac
failure and chronic cardiac insufficiency (Pickrell et al.
2004). There are no reliable literature reports of mammary
gland or cardiac effects in dogs and cats. Persea
americana has also caused signs of toxicosis in caged
birds, ostriches, and fish (Burger et al. 1994; Hargis et al.
1989). Persin doses of 60 to 100 mg/kg may cause mastitis
and agalactia. Doses of persin over 100 mg/kg may lead to
cardiac effects (Oelrichs et al. 1995).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Lactating sheep, horses, cattle, rabbits, goats, rats, and
mice may show signs of mastitis and agalactia. Reported
signs include hard, swollen udders; a decrease in milk
production; and watery, cheesy, curdled milk. Cardiac
effects may include edema of the head, neck, brisket, and
chest; cough; weakness; depression; hesitancy to move;
respiratory distress; cardiac arrhythmias; acute cardiac
failure; and chronic cardiac insufficiency. Sudden death
621
has also been reported in rabbits, caged birds, and goats
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001; Pickrell et al. 2004)
Mammary and cardiac signs have been reported to occur
within 15 hours to 3 days of exposure (Hargis et al. 1989;
Craigmill et al. 1984; McKenzie and Brown 1991).
Gastrointestinal signs in dogs and cats are expected to
occur within 1-3 hours of exposure.
Laboratory
Blood chemistries and electrolytes should be monitored in
these cases. Elevated creatine phosphokinase and alanine
aminotransferase are consistent with damage to the cardiac
muscle (Pickrell et al. 2004). Hepatic enzymes may also be
elevated (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Electrolyte imbalances
could occur due to the administration of activated charcoal
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses and disease processes may produce similar
signs and should therefore be considered, especially if
there is no known history of Persea americana exposure.
Differentials include exposure to ionophones, gossypol.,
cardiac glycosides, and Taxus spp. as well as primary
congestive heart failure and acute hepatic disease.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
A history of exposure along with expected clinical signs
provide adequate diagnostic evidence (Pickrell et al. 2004).
622
Postmortem
Clots may be present in the mammary ducts. Edema may
be present in tissues such as the subcutis and the lungs.
Congestion is apparent in the lungs, liver, and spleen. Free
fluid may be visible in the heart sac, thorax, and abdomen.
The gallbladder and perirenal tissues may be edematous.
The heart tissue appears pale (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
Management of Exposures
Emesis may be induced in dogs and potentially cats with
significant exposure if the exposure is recent, no signs are
present, and no other contraindications to emesis exist.
Caution should be exercised in determining whether
contraindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Activated
charcoal may be given to dogs and cats once vomiting is
controlled. Other animal species at risk for toxicoses may
also be administered activated charcoal. A cathartic, such
as sorbitol or mineral oil may be given with or after the
first dose of activated charcoal but not with subsequent
doses. When repeat doses of activated charcoal are used as
part of decontamination, electrolyte values should be
monitored, since electrolyte shifts may occur. In cattle,
sheep, and goats, rumenotomy may be considered to
remove plant material prior to the administration of
activated charcoal.
Treatment is primarily symptomatic, because no specific
antagonist exists. Crystalloid or colloid fluid support may
be required. Administration of oxygen may be necessary.
Anti-inflammatories and diuretics may be useful, and
623
antibiotics may help to control secondary infections of the
mammary glands (Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
Prognosis
The risks will vary depending on the level of intoxication
and the signs that develop. Animals with mastitis may
fully recover; however, milk production may be reduced.
Animals with cardiac effects have a more guarded
prognosis (Pickrell et al. 2004).
GRAPESAND RAISINS
Sources
The grape family contains 11-13 genera and 700-735
species. Most species grow on woody vines, but a few
species grow on shrubs or small trees. Grapes are an
important crop because they are eaten for food in whole
fresh form and are used for raisins, currants, juice, and
wine. In addition, some taxa are used as ornamentals
(Burrows and Tyrl 2001).
Kinetics
Grapes and raisins are ingested orally. It is not known how
the toxic component is absorbed, distributed, metabolized.
or eliminated from the body.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action for grapes and raisins is not
known.
624
Toxicity
A retrospective evaluation of cases, involving dogs that
ingested grapes or raisins, reported to the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center indicated that a range of doses may
produce toxicosis. Raisin dosages that produced renal
effects ranged from 2.8 to 36.4 g/kg. Grape dosages ranged
from 19.6 to 148.4 g/kg. In this study, there was not a
statistically significant difference in survival rates in dogs
with varying dosages (Eubig et al. 2005)
Per unpublished information from the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center, the lowest documented grape
dosage leading to renal failure in dogs is 0.7 oz/kg, and the
lowest documented raisin dosage leading to renal failure is
0.11oz/kg.
Grapes and raisins from multiple sources have been
involved in the cases reported to the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center. Grapes from grocery stores as well
as homegrown and still-on-the-vine grapes have been
implicated alike. Commercial brands of raisins as well as
homegrown and organic varieties have been involved
Fruits have been evaluated for pesticides, heavy metals and
mycotoxins to determine whether these substances could
be a factor in the toxicities, and the results to date have
been negative. It is possible that individual animals may be
more susceptible to toxicosis than other animals, because
reports from pet owners indicate that some dogs never
became ill with ingestions of grapes or raisins. More
research is needed to determine whether grape and raisin
characteristics  or  animal  characteristics or  both  are
involved in this syndrome
625
It is possible that other species of animals may also
experience toxicoses with ingestion of grapes and raisins.
The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center has had
minimal reports on other species, so more evidence is
needed.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The typical presentation involves vomiting within 12 to 15
hours of ingestion. The grapes and raisins are often seen in
the vomitus and may be seen in fecal material as well. The
dogs may exhibit lethargy, abdominal pain, anorexia, and
diarrhea. These signs may be present for a few days or, in
some cases, weeks. The kidney damage may progress
leading to oliguria and finally to anuria.
Laboratory
Blood chemistry panels may begin to show changes as
early as 12 hours after exposure, but changes may not be
noted for several days. Elevations of calcium, blood urea
nitrogen,  creatinine,  and 
phosphorus
have
been
documented. Elevations of pancreatic and liver enzymes
have been documented in some cases as well.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses and disease processes produce similar
signs and should therefore be considered, especially if
there is no kmown history of Vitis sp. exposure.
Differentials include exposure to ethylene glycol, lilies in
626
cats, and aminoglycosides as well as leptospirosis.
bacterial pyelonephritis, and chronic renal failure. Diseases
that increase the risk for acute renal failure may include
pancreatitis, heat stroke, hepatic failure, Rickettsia,
bacterial endocarditis, and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (Lane 2001).
Diagnostics
Antemortem
A history of exposure along with consistent clinical signs
provide adequate diagnostic evidence for a diagnosis
Biopsy of the kidney might provide additional information
relevant for determining the prognosis.
Postmortem
Histopathological evaluation of tissues in the retrospective
study demonstrated that the most consistent renal changes
involved diffuse renal tubular degeneration, particularly
affecting the proximal renal tubules. Other renal lesions
were present in some cases. In addition, histopathology in
some cases revealed congestion or edema of the liver,
lungs, spleen, pancreas, and abdominal lymph nodes and
occasional fibrinoid vasculitis or vascular necrosis (Eubig
et al. 2005).
Management of Exposures
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested grapes
or raisins if the exposure is recent, no signs are present,
and no other contraindications to emesis exist. Caution
627
shouldbe exercised  in  determining   whether
contraindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Activated
charcoal may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled
gastrointestinal tract. A cathartic, such as sorbitol may be
given with or after the first dose of activated charcoal but
not with subsequent doses. When repeat doses of activated
charcoal are used as part of decontamination, electrolyte
values should be monitored, since electrolyte shifts may
occur.
Baseline chemistries, complete blood count, electrolytes,
and urinalysis should be performed and monitored
throughout the course of treatment. Treatment is primarily
symptomatic, because no specific antagonist exists.
Vomiting may be treated with metoclopramide, H2
antagonists, and/or sucralfate.
Fluid support is required. Dehydration should be corrected
and then fluid diuresis should be initiated. Hydration
status, lung sounds, body weight, and urine output should
be monitored. Diuretics such as mannitol and furosemide
may be useful to treat oliguria. Dopamine has also been
used in the treatment of oliguria. If hyperphosphatemia
occurs, aluminum hydroxide may be beneficial. If uremia
occurs, hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis may be
beneficial. Treatment should continue until signs are
resolved.
Prognosis
628
In the retrospective study mentioned above, ataxia,
decreased urine output, and weakness were associated with
a negative prognosis. In the same study, 53% of the dogs
fully recovered or had mild residual azotema, 12% died,
and 35% were euthanized (Eubig et al. 2005).
MACADAMIA NUTS
Sources
Macadamiaintegrifolia and Macadamiatetraphylla trees
produce macadamia nuts. These trees have been cultivated
in Hawaii since the late 1800s. These nuts are commonly
eaten by humans. They may be eaten whole as snack
foods, but they are also used in baking and in a variety of
recipes.
Kinetics
Macadamia nuts are ingested orally. It is not known how
the toxic component is absorbed, distributed, metabolized,
or eliminated from the body.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action for macadamia nut toxicosis is
unknown.
Toxicity
Dogs are the only reported species to develop toxicosis
from ingestions of macadamia nuts. Signs have been
reported with macadamia nut ingestions of 2.4 g/kg of
629
body weight to 62.4g/kg of body weight. Signs may
develop within 2 to 12 hours of ingestion and generally
resolve within 48 hours (Hansen et al. 2000).
Clinical Effects
Signs
The most common signs from cases reported to the
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center include weakness,
depression, vomiting, ataxia, tremors, and hyperthermia. A
laboratory study  involving   4  dogs confirmed  the
syndrome, which had been reported to the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center. Weakness, stiffness, and ataxia
q  sho 'sq a a un sudde iso q in adde
reluctant to stand and have difficulty walking (Hansen et
al. 2000).
Laboratory
White blood cell counts were high for all 4 dogs listed in
the study above. One dog maintained an elevated white
blood cell count 48 hours after ingestion. Numbers of
segmented neutrophils including immature forms were
increased. A few toxic neutrophils containing vacuoles
were noted. The only other laboratory abnormality was
alkaline phosphatase. Three of the dogs had high values 24
hours after ingestion, and the values were still elevated 48
hours after exposure (Hansen et al. 2000).
Differential Diagnoses
630
Other toxicoses may produce similar signs and should
therefore be considered, especially if there is no known
history of Macadamia sp. exposure. Differentials include
exposure to ivermectin, milbemycin, moxidectin, or other
avermectins;   ethylene   glycol;   5-hydroxytryptophan;
benzodiazepines; barbiturate overdose; ethanol or other
alcohols; and bromethalin
Diagnostics
Antemortem
History   of 
f exposure along  with expected  clinical
presentation
provide
 adequate   diagnostic  evidence.
Consistent
t  laboratory findings may help  to confirm
diagnosis.
Postmortem
No deaths have been reported from Macadamia spp.
exposures.
Management of Exposures
macadamia nuts if the exposure is recent, no signs are
present, and no other contraindications to emesis exist.
Caution should be exercised in determining whether
contraindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Activated
charcoal may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled
in an effort to bind any toxic principle remaining in the
gastrointestinal tract. A cathartic, such as sorbitol, may be
631
given with or after the first dose of activated charcoal but
not with subsequent doses. When repeat doses of activated
charcoal are used as part of decontamination, electrolyte
values should be monitored, since electrolyte shifts may
occur.
Most cases of macadamia nut toxicosis do not require
treatment. When treatment is needed, it is primarily
symptomatic   and
dsupportive,  because  no  specific
antagonist exists. If continued vomiting occurs, it may be
treated with anti-emetics. Subcutaneous or intravenous
usad si uonpaup e pannbau aq Ae oddns pin
from vomiting and oral fluids are not tolerated.
Close monitoring is required. Confinement may be
necessary to prevent injury in ataxic animals and to reduce
sensory stimuli. Body temperature should be monitored,
and   thermoregulation provided  if  needed.  Monitoring
should continue until signs have resolved.
Prognosis
Dogs with macadamia nut toxicosis have a good prognosis.
No deaths have been reported, and no sequelae have been
noted.
METHYLXANTHINES
Sources
Methylxanthines are naturally occurring alkaloids. They
occur naturally in some foods. They are also used as
medications. Theobromine  and  caffeine  are  the
632
methylxanthines of toxicological significance in chocolate
(Table 24.1). Caffeine is also naturally present in coffee
and some teas and is added to a number of commercial
beverages. Pets are frequently attracted to these foods and
beverages and may ingest amounts significant to produce
toxicosis. Most methylxanthine toxicoses in dogs occur as
a result of chocolate ingestion, so this chapter will focus on
chocolate (Beasley 1999).
Kinetics
Methylxanthines
are
well
  absorbed
from
the
gastrointestinal tract (Serafin 1995). Signs can develop
within 2 hours of exposure but onset may be longer
especially if the animal ingests the wrappers.
Table 24.1.
Approximate
methylxanthinelevels  in
different forms of chocolate a
Source: Gwaltney-Brant 2001.
Chocolate
Total Methylxanthineb (mg/oz)
White chocolate
1.1
Milk chocolate
64
Semisweet chocolate chips
160
Baker's chocolate(unsweetened)
440
Dry cocoa powder
800
*Levels of methylxanthines in chocolates vary due to
natural  variations in methylxanthine content of the
chocolate base, as well as differences in manufacturing
processes.
633
bIncludes levels of theobromine and caffeine.
Methylxanthines are distributed throughout the body, cross
the placenta, and are passed into the milk of lactating
females. The liver metabolizes methylxanthines (Beasley
1999). Enterohepatic recirculation and reabsorption from
the urinary tract has been reported (Serafin 1995). The
half-life of caffeine and theobromine in dogs is 4.5 and
17.5 hours respectively (Beasley 1999). ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center data indicate that recovery generally
occurs within 24-48 hours after exposure provided that the
signs are controlled. Drugs that can affect methylxanthine
elimination   include   propranolol,   erythromycin,
corticosteroids, and cimetidine (Serafin 1995).
Mechanism of Action
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified.
but clinical signs in animals are believed to be related to
competitive  inhibition  of  cellular  adenosine  receptors
Other mechanism of actions may include cellular calcium
reuptake  inhibition and competition  for benzodiazepine
receptors (Serafin 1995; Beasley 1999)
Toxicity
Both caffeine and theobromine are present in chocolate.
The darker chocolates contain higher levels of
chocolate. Toxicosis is possible with either type of product
and is dependent upon the dose of methylxanthines
ingested.
634
       
methylxanthines ingested. The worst case scenario should
be utilized for dose calculations. At combined caffeine and
theobromine doses of 10-15 mg/kg or less, signs of
toxicosis generally do not occur. However, chocolate often
contains a significant amount of fat, so gastrointestinal
upset and/or pancreatitis may occur with any chocolate
exposure. Combined doses of caffeine and theobromine
that are greater than 15 mg/kg should be considered
significant and may require decontamination and/or
treatment. Doses of 50 mg/kg or more may induce signs of
cardiotoxicity.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The most commonly observed signs associated with
significant chocolate ingestion in dogs and cats include
vomiting, restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia and other
cardiac arrhythmias, tachypnea, polyuria, hyperthermia,
tremors, and seizures. Weakness, coma, cyanosis,
hypertension, bradycardia, and ataxia may also occur.
Death occurs from heart rhythm disturbances or respiratory
failure (Beasley 1999)
Laboratory
Hypokalemia may coincide with diuresis and vomiting
(Beasley 1999). Chemistries associated with the pancreas
may be elevated 1-3 days after the exposure indicating
pancreatitis.
635
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses produce similar signs and should therefore
be considered, especially if there is no known history of
chocolate exposure. Differentials include exposure to
caffeine  tablets,  other  medications  that  contain
methylxanthines,
pseudoephedrine, 
amphetamines,
antihistamines, cocaine, and other products that may cause
seizures.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
History of exposure along with expected clinical
presentation provide adequate diagnostic evidence. Some
laboratories can test for methylxanthines in the serum,
plasma, and urine.
Postmortem
Stomach contents can be evaluated grossly for wrappers
and may be collected and submitted for methylxanthine
testing. Special request for methylxanthine or other
toxicology testing is usually required (Hooser and Beasley
1986).
Management of Exposures
Emesis may be induced in dogs and cats that have ingested
chocolate if the exposure is recent, no signs are present,
and no other contraindications to emesis exist. Caution
shouldbe　exercised indetermining  whether
636
contraindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Gastric
lavage may be indicated in some cases because chocolate
may form a firm mass in the stomach, and lavage may
break the mass down and allow for more complete removal
vomiting is controlled or may be given by stomach tube
after gastric lavage is performed. Activated charcoal may
bind any methylxanthines remaining in the gastrointestinal
tract. Multiple doses of activated charcoal over 3 days may
be required (Hooser and Beasley 1986; Shannon 1998). A
cathartic such as sorbitol may be given daily if diarrhea is
not present. When repeat doses of activated charcoal are
used as part of decontamination, electrolyte values should
be monitored, since electrolyte shifts may occur.
Close monitoring and nursing care should be provided.
Intravenous fluid therapy should be initiated when
significant exposure has occurred. Other treatments should
be provided as needed based on signs that occur. Tremors
may  be  controlled  with diazepam  or methocarbamol.
Seizures may require diazepam, phenobarbital, or gas
anesthesia. Beta blockers or lidocaine may be beneficial
for treating tachyarrhythmias, and bradycardias can be
treated with atropine (Beasley 1999)
Prognosis
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
decontamination and treatment.
TREMORGENIC MYCOTOXINS
637
Sources
Mycotoxins are secondary fungal metabolites, which are
toxic to species such as animals, plants, or other microbes
The effects of mycotoxins differ based upon the toxin and
its chemical structure (Boysen et al. 2002). Approximately
20 mycotoxins have been identified as tremorgens. The
most frequently reported tremorgenic mycotoxins affecting
pets are petitrem-A and roquefortine C, both of which are
produced by Penicillium species (Schell 2000)
Reports  of  tremorgenic mycotoxin exposures 
have
involved moldy foods including dairy foods, moldy
walnuts or peanuts, stored grains, and moldy pasta, as well
        5
Dogs may ingest moldy food from the garbage or from
composting areas. Young et al. (2003) reported on two
cases, one involving the ingestion of moldy cream cheese
and the other involving the ingestion of moldy macaroni
and cheese. Another report described an exposure that
involved four dogs from one household that ingested
material from a compost pile (Boysen et al. 2002).
Kinetics
Tremorgenic mycotoxins are rapidly absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, with onset of action occurring from
15 minutes to several hours after the exposure (Young et
al. 2 003). Reports on distribution and elimination are not
available.
Mechanism of Action
638
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified.
but several have been proposed. One potential mechanism
of action is the interference of inhibitory neurotransmitters
such as glycine and GABA (Cole 1977; Pitt 1994; Beasley
1999). Additional studies will be required to determine a
confirmed mechanism of action.
Toxicity
Severe tremors have been reported in dogs with penitrem
A exposure to dosages of 0.175 mg/kg of body weight
(Abramson 1997). In a clinical environment, dosage
calculation may not be possible, so determining the risk
based on dose may not occur.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Common signs reported to the ASPCA Animal Poison
Control Center include hyperthermia, salivation, vomiting.
ataxia, tachycardia, fasciculation, tremors, seizures, and
death. Signs from exposure often begin within 15 minutes
to 2 hours after the exposure, but signs may occur after this
time frame. Young et al. (2003) reported on an 11-year old
Labrador retriever exposed to moldy cream cheese from
the garbage. Signs were noted to occur the morning after
the dog ingested the food. In this case penitrem A and
roquefortine C were identified by the laboratory when
cream cheese from the wrapper was analyzed. Signs in this
case included: generalized muscle fasciculation and
hyperextension of the extremities, blepharospasms,
639
vocalization, weakness, tachypnea, hyperexcitation, and
tachycardia.
A second case documented in this report involved a dog
that  developed 
1 status epilepticusassociated
with
tremorgenic mycotoxin ingestion. Further complications
occurred for this dog with the development of aspiration
pneumonia potentially associated with emesis or the
gastric lavage procedure performed on the dog (Young, et
al. 2003). Signs from tremorgenic mycotoxins frequently
resolve within 48 hours, but residual fasciculations or
intention tremors may persist for longer periods (Young et
al. 2003).
Laboratory
Diagnostic laboratories utilize chromatography or mass
spectrometry   to    identify   tremorgenic   mycotoxins.
Electrolytes and other blood values should be monitored
based on presenting signs.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses can produce similar signs and should
therefore be considered especially if there is no known
history of mold exposure. Differentials include exposure to
strychnine, metaldehyde, ethylene glycol, cholinesterase
inhibitors,
methylxanthines,
pseudoephedrine,
amphetamines, and cocaine.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
640
 n       
exposure history and the resulting signs. Confirmation of
the diagnosis is dependent on the results of laboratory
tests. Suspect food or vomitus may be collected and
submitted for tremorgenic mycotoxin evaluation.  Food
samples should be sent chilled; vomitus should be frozen.
Postmortem
No characteristic postmortem lesions are expected. Suspect
food, vomitus, or stomach contents may be submitted for
tremorgenic mycotoxin evaluation. Food samples should
be sent chilled; vomitus and stomach contents should be
frozen.
Management of Exposures
A is a  so  o q  isg
food or compost if the exposure is recent, no signs are
present, and no other contraindications to emesis exist.
Caution should be exercised in determining whether
contraindications to vomiting exist and whether it is safe to
have the pet owner induce vomiting at home. Gastric
lavage may be indicated in some cases. Activated charcoal
may be given to dogs once vomiting is controlled or may
be given by stomach tube after gastric lavage is performed.
Activated  charcoal binds organic  compounds  and  is
expected to help prevent the absorption of toxins. Multiple
doses of activated charcoal may be required. A cathartic.
such as sorbitol may be given with the first dose of
activated charcoal if diarrhea is not present. When repeat
doses of activated charcoal are used as part of
641
decontamination, electrolyte values should be monitored,
since electrolyte shifts may occur.
Close monitoring and nursing care should be provided
The patient should be stabilized and signs should be
managed. Intravenous fluid therapy should be initiated to
prevent or treat dehydration associated with vomiting and
to help regulate electrolytes. Other treatments should be
provided as needed based on signs that occur. Tremors
may be controlled with diazepam or methocarbamol.
Seizures mayrequire
diazepam, phenobarbital,
phenobarbital, or gas anesthesia (Boysen etet al. 2002;
Young et al. 2 003). Body temperature should be
monitored and thermoregulation provided.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
decontamination and treatment. Death may occur in
untreated animals.
ALCOHOL
Sources
Alcohol toxicosis most frequently occurs when animals are
exposed to alcoholic beverages or raw yeast dough but
may also occur with ingestion of certain drug formulation
or rubbing alcohol.
Kinetics
642
Ethanol is fully and quickly absorbed from all parts of the
gastrointestinal tract generally within 30 to 60 minutes
(Ellenhorn and Barceloux 1988: Osborn 1994; Rall 1990)
Absorption may be enhanced if the stomach is empty, the
concentration of the substance ingested is dilute, or the
substance ingested is carbonated (Rangno et al. 198l;
Osborn 1994). Absorption may be delayed if there is food
in the stomach, gastrointestinal disease is present, certain
drugs are in the system, the concentration of alcohol is
high, or if there is decreased gastrointestinal motility (Lin
et al. 1 976; Osborn 1994). Peak plasma levels in humans
1 )   s 7  s  
Ethanol is primarily metabolized in the liver. The
remainder is excreted unchanged in the breath, urine,
feces, and sweat (Ellenhorn and Barceloux 1988; Osborn
1994).
Mechanism of Action
A definitive mechanism of action has not been identified
but the mechanism of action is believed to be related to
dissolution of lipid membranes affecting ion channels and
their proteins, which causes depressant effects on the CNS.
Another  potential  mechanism of action  suggests  that
ethanol can also augment GABA-mediated synaptic
inhibition as well as changes in chloride ions.
Toxicity
Any dose of alcohol has the potential to cause serious
effects in pet animals. Effects will vary based upon the
amount ingested and the absorption rate. The minimum
lethal dosage in children is 3 g/kg of body weight.
643
Clinical Effects
Signs
Alcohol intoxication leads to central nervous system
(CNS) depression (Rall 1990). The signs most commonly
reported to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
include  ataxia,
 lethargy,  vomiting,  recumbency,
hypothermia, disorientation, and vocalization. Signs that
have been reported but are less common include tremors,
tachycardia, acidosis, diarrhea, dyspnea, coma, and
seizures. Signs usually resolve within 12 hours of
exposure.
Laboratory
Abnormal laboratory values may occur. Complete blood
count, chemistry panel, and blood gases should be
performed.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicoses produce similar signs and should therefore
be considered, especially if there is no known history of
alcohol exposure. Differentials include exposure to iron,
isoniazid, lactic acidosis, diabetes, ethylene glycol.
salicylic acid, toluene, and marijuana.  Additional
differentials may include uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, or
cardiovascular accident.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
644
Diagnosis may be determined based upon the exposure
history and the resulting signs. Blood alcohol levels can be
obtained to confirm exposure.
Postmortem
Toxicology tests may be performed on blood or tissues to
confirm exposure and cause of death.
Management of Exposures
Emesis may be induced in dogs and cats that have ingested
ethanol if the exposure occurred within the previous 25
minutes,  no  signs  are  present,  and  no other
contraindications to emesis exist. Caution should be
vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have the pet owner
induce vomiting at home. Activated charcoal may be given
to dogs once vomiting is controlled. Care should be taken
to avoid aspiration of activated charcoal in inebriated
animals. When repeat doses of activated charcoal are used
as part of decontamination, electrolyte values should be
monitored, since electrolyte shifts may occur.
Close
monitoring
and
nursing
 care including
thermoregulation should be provided. Confinement may be
required to prevent injury. Heart rate, blood pressure, and
electrocardiogram should be obtained. Intravenous fluid
and electrolyte therapy should be initiated. Sodium
bicarbonate should be included if metabolic acidosis
occurs, and dextrose should be added if hypoglycemia
occurs. Other treatments should be provided as needed
based on signs that occur. Cardiac drugs that may be of
645
benefit include epinephrine, atropine, lidocaine, and
yohimbine.  Ventilation  and seizure  control  may be
required.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
decontamination, supportive care, and treatment.
YEAST DOUGH
Sources
Dogs may ingest raw yeast dough if it is available (Thrall
et al. 1 984; Suter 1992). A commonly reported scenario
involves a dog ingesting yeast bread or roll dough left out
to rise on a countertop. Two potential syndromes may
occur independently or concurrently, the first being
ethanol intoxication and the second being foreign body
obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract (Means 2003).
Kinetics
See Kinetics section for ethanol toxicosis.
Mechanism of Action
Foreign body obstruction may occur in the gastrointestinal
tract due to dough that expands while in the stomach. See
Mechanism of Action section for ethanol toxicosis.
Toxicity
646
See Toxicity section for ethanol toxicosis
Clinical Effects
Signs
addition to signs of alcohol intoxication, the ingestion of
bread dough has been theorized to cause foreign body
obstruction, gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV), or even
gastric rupture. The dough expands in the warm, moist
environment of the stomach. Vomiting, abdominal pain,
retching, and recumbency may occur.
Laboratory
See Laboratory section for ethanol toxicosis
Differential Diagnoses
See Differential Diagnoses section for ethanol toxicosis.
Other potential causes of gastrointestinal signs and foreign
body obstruction should be evaluated.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
History of exposure along with expected clinical
presentation provide adequate diagnostic evidence. See
Antemortem section for ethanol toxicosis.
Postmortem
647
See Postmortem section for ethanol toxicosis. Necropsy
may reveal dough mass in the stomach, GDV, or gastric
rupture.
Management of Exposures
See Management of Exposures section for ethanol
toxicosis. Emesis may be recommended with caution.
because the stomach may rupture if the dough mass blocks
the esophageal sphincter. A stomach tube may be passed to
help expel gas within the stomach. A lavage with cold
water may help to decrease fermentation and remove some
of the dough. Surgical removal of the dough may be
required in severe cases. If bloat or GDV occurs,
stabilization and standard treatment should be provided
(Means 2003).
Prognosis
The prognosis is good for animals that receive timely
decontamination, supportive care, and treatment.
XYLITOL
Sources
Xylitol, a sugar alcohol, is a natural sweetener found in
plants. It is commonly obtained from birch bark. Xylitol
has comparable sweetness to table sugar (Dunayer 2004).
It is a nutritive sweetener that provides calories and is
found in many human and pet products, e.g., sugar-free
gum, dental spray, dental lozenges, and toothpaste. It is
also used as a sweetener in products for diabetics, is found
648
in some dietary supplements and chewable vitamins, and
in other products designed to be low in carbohydrates.
Kinetics
When ingested, xylitol is absorbed readily from the
gastrointestinal tract with peak plasma levels occurring 30
minutes after ingestion (Kuzuya et al. 1969). It may be
converted to glucose and then glycogen in the liver (WHO
1978). The liver is where 80% of xylitol metabolism
occurs (Froesch and Jakob 1974).
Mechanism of Action
Xylitol is metabolized intracellularly to D-xylulose, which
is then metabolized via the Pentose-Phosphate Pathway
(PPP). The PPP is believed to control insulin release
(Kuzuya et al. 1969). The mechanism of action for liver
effects is not known, but has been theorized by Dunayer
and Gwaltney-Brant (2006) to be related to either
depletion of ATP during the metabolism of xylitol or to the
production of reactive oxygen species.
Toxicity
One report involved a dog that ingested 2.96 g of xylotol/
kg of body weight. This dog showed signs of lateral
recumbency, nonresponsiveness, and gas in the
gastrointestinal tract (Dunayer 2004). Unpublished data
from the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center indicates
that signs of hypoglycemia may occur at doses of 0.1 g/kg
and greater. Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant (2006) report
649
that 1.4 to 2.0 g of xylitol/kg of body weight has been
associated with hepatic failure.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Reported signs include hypoglycemia, vomiting, lethargy,
and ataxia. The animal' s condition may advance to
include recumbency, seizures, and coagulopathy (Dunayer
2004; Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant 2006).
Laboratory
Abnormal lab values may include low potassium, low
phosphate, elevated bilirubin, and elevated liver enzymes
(Dunayer 2004; Dunayer and Gwaltney-Brant 2006)
Differential Diagnoses
Additional differentials may include insulinoma, insulin
overdose, oral hypoglycemic agents (e.g., sulfonylureas),
hunting dog hypoglycemia, juvenile hypoglycemia, and
prolonged starvation.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
History of  exposure along with expected 
1clinical
 presentation provide adequate diagnostic evidence.
Postmortem
650
Xylitol is not expected to remain in the tissues, since it is
metabolized quickly.
Management of Exposures
Emesis may be induced in dogs that have ingested xylitol
containing products if the exposure was within 15-30
minutes,  no  signs  are 
epresent,andnoother
contraindications to emesis exist. Caution should be
exercised in determining whether  contraindications to
vomiting exist and whether it is safe to have the pet owner
induce vomiting at home.
Close monitoring is required. Glucose should be monitored
 s       
chemistries and electrolytes should be monitored. If liver
enzymes begin to elevate, coagulation parameters should
be monitored. Confinement may be necessary to prevent
injury in ataxic animals. Symptomatic and supportive care
should be provided and may include administration of
intravenous fluids with dextrose, nutritional support, and
potassium supplementation. Hepatoprotective agents such
as SAM-e, silymarin (milk thistle), or n-acetylcysteine
may be given. Monitoring and treatment should continue
until signs have resolved.
Prognosis
When treatment is provided and doses that affect the liver
are not achieved, the prognosis is good. When hepatic
necrosis and coagulopathy occur, the prognosis is guarded.
REFERENCES
651
Abramson, D. 1997. Toxicants of the genus Penicillium. In
Handbook of Plant and Fungal Toxicants, edited by Felix,
JP., pp. 303-317. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, Inc.
Beasley, V.R. 1999. A Systems Affected Approach to
Veterinary Toxicology, pp. 116-120. Urbana: University of
Illinois College of Veterinary Medicine.
Boysen, S., Rozanski, E., Chan, D., Grobe, T., Fallon, M.,
Rush, J. 2002. Tremorgenic mycotoxicosis in four dogs
from a single household. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 221(10):1441-1444.
Burger, W.P., Naude, T.W., Van Rensburg, IB., Botha.
C.J., Pienaar A.C. 1994. Cardiomyopathy in ostriches
(Struthio camelus) due to avocado (Persea americana var
Guatemalensis) intoxication. Journal of the South African
Veterinary Association 65(3):113-118.
Burrows, G.E. and Tyrl, R.J. 2001. Toxic Plants of North
America, pp. 744-747. Ames: Iowa State Press.
Cheeke, P. 1998. Natural Toxicants in Feeds, Forages, and
Poisonous Plants, 2nd ed. Danville, Illinois: Interstate
Publishers.
Christopher, M.M., White, JG., Eaton, JW. 1990.
Erythrocyte  pathology  and  mechanisms  of Heinz
body-mediated hemolysis in cats. Veterinary Pathology
27:299-310.
Cole, R.J. 1977. Tremorgenic mycotoxins. Mycotoxins in
HumanandAnimalHealth,ConferenceProceedings,
652
edited by Rodricks, Hesseltine, and Mehlman, pp.
583-595. Park Forest South, Illinois: Pathotox Publishers.
Craigmill A.L., Eide, R.N., Shultz, T.A., Hedrick, K. 1984.
Toxicity of avocado (Persea americana [Guatemalan var])
leaves: Review and preliminary report. Veterinary and
Human Toxicology 26(5):381-384.
Dunayer, E.K. 2004. Hypoglycemia following canine
ingestion  of  xylitol-containing  gum.  Veterinary  and
Human Toxicology 46:87-88.
Dunayer, E.K. and Gwaltney-Brant, S.M. 2006.Acute
ingestion in eight dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 229:1113-1117.
Ellenhorn, M.J. and Barceloux, D.G. 1988. Ethanol. In
Medical Toxicology:Diagnosis and Treatment of Human
Poisoning, edited by Ellenhorn, M.J. and Barceloux, D.G.
New York: Elsevier.
Eubig, P.A., Brady, M.S., Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., Khan,
S.A., Mazzaferro, E.M., Morrow, C.K. 2005. Acute renal
failure in dogs subsequent to the ingestion of grapes or
raisins:  A retrospective evaluation  of 43  dogs
(1992-2002). Journal ofVeterinary InternMedicine
19:663-674.
Froesch, E.R. and Jakob, A. 1974. The metabolism of
xylitol. In Sugars in nutrition, edited by Sipple, H.L.,
McNutt, K.W., pp. 241-258. New York: Academic Press.
653
Guo, Z., Muller, D., and Pentz, R. 1990. Bioavailability of
sulphur — containing ingredients of garlic in the rat.
PlantaMedica 56:692.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2001. Chocolate intoxication.
Veterinary Medicine 96(2):108-111.
Hansen, S.R., Buck, W.B., Meerdink, G., Khan, S.A. 2000.
Weakness, tremors, and depression associated with
macadamia nuts in dogs.  Veterinary and Human
Toxicology 42(1):18-21.
Hargis, A.M., Stauber, E., Casteel, S. 1989. Avocado
(Persea americana) intoxication in caged birds. Journal of
the
American
Veterinary
Medical
Association
194(1):64-66.
Hooser, S.B. and Beasley, V.R. 1986. Methylxanthines. In
Current Veterinary Therapy IX, edited by Kirk, R.W., pp.
191-192. Philadelphia: Saunders Co.
Kuzuya, T., Kanazawa, Y., Kosaka, K. 1969. Stimulation
of insulin secretion by xylitol in dogs. Endocrinology 84:
200-207.
Lane, IF. 2o01. Treatment of urinary disorders. In Small
Animal Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, edited
by Boothe, D.M., pp. 528-540. Philadelphia: Saunders Co.
Lin, Y.J., Weidler, D.J., and Garg, D.C. 1976. Effects of
solid food on blood levels of alcohol in man. Research
Communications  in  Chemistry, Pathology, and
Pharmacology 13:713-722.
654
McKenzie, R.A. and Brown, O.P. 1991. Avocado (Persea
americana) poisoning of horses. Australian  Veterinary
Journal68(2):77-78
Means, C. 2003. Bread dough toxicosis in dogs. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 13(1): 39-41.
Oelrichs, P.B., Pearce, C.M., Zhu, J., Filippich, L.J. 1995.
Isolation and identification of a compound from avocado
(Persea Americana) leaves which causes necrosis of the
acinar epithelium of the lactating mammary glad and the
myocardium. Natural Toxins 3(5):344-349.
Ogawa, E., Shinoki, T., Akahori, F., Masaoka, T. 1986.
Effect of onion ingestion on anti-oxidizing agents in dog
erythrocytes. Japanese Journal of Veterinary Science 48:
685-691.
Okuyama, T., Fujita, K., and Shibata, S. 1989. Effects of
Chinese drugs “Xiebai" and “Dasuan" on human platelet
aggregation (Allium bakeri, A. sativum). Planta Medica
55:242-244.
Osborn, H. 1994. Ethanol. In Goldfrank's Toxicologic
Emergencies, 5th ed., edited by Goldfrank, L.R.,
Flomenbaum N.E., Lewin, N.A., pp. 813-824. Norwalk,
Connecticut: Appleton and Lange.
Pantoja, C.V., Chiang, L.C., Norris, B.C., Concha, JB
1991. Diuretic, natriuretic and hypotensive effects
produced by Allium sativum (garlic) in anaesthetized dogs.
J Ethno-pharmacol 32(3):325-331.
655
Pickrell, J.A., Oehme, F., Mannala, S.A. 2004. Avocado
In Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Plumlee,
K.H., pp. 424425, St. Louis: Mosby.
Pitt,  JI. 1994.  Penicillium.  In  Foodborne  Disease
Handbook, Vol. 2, edited by Hui, Y.H., Gorham, JR.,
Murrell, K.D., Cliver, D.O., pp. 517-630. New York:
Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Rall, T.W. 1990. Hypnotics and sedatives; Ethanol. In The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, edited
Iby
Goodman and Gilman. New York: Pergamon Press.
Rangno, R.E., Kreeft, JH., Sitar, D.S. 1981. Ethanol dose
dependent elimination: Michaelis-Menten   classical
kinetic analysis. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
12:667-673.
Robertson, JE., Christopher, M.M., Rogers, Q.R. 1998
Heinz body formation in cats fed baby food containing
onionpowder.Journal ofthe AmericanVeterinary
MedicalAssociation 212:1260-1266
Schell, M.M. 2000. Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication.
Veterinary Medicine 95(4):283-286.
Selim, H.M., Yamato, O., Tajima, M., Maede,Y. 1999.
Rumen bacteria are involved in the onset of onion-induced
hemolytic anemia in sheep. Journal of Veterinary Medical
Science 61:269-374.
Serafin, W.E. 1995. Methylxanthines. In Goodman and
Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 9th
656
ed., edited by Hardman, J.G., Limbird, L.E., pp. 672-679.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shannon, M.W. 1998. Methylxanthines. In Clinical
Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 3rd ed.,
edited by Haddad, L.M., pp. 1093-1106. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders Company.
Suter, R.J. 1992. Presumed ethanol intoxication in sheep
dogs fed uncooked pizza dough. Aust Vet J 69(1):20
Thrall, M.A., Freemyer, F.G., Hamar, D.W., Jones, R.L.
1984. Ethanol toxicosis secondary to sourdough ingestion
in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 184(12):1513-1514.
Verhoeff, J., Hajer, R., van den Ingh, T.S. 1985. Onion
poisoning
in
young
cattle.
Veterinary
Record
117:497-498.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1978. WHO Food
Additives Series 12. Xylitol. Retrieved December 30, 2008.
from
http://www.inchem.org/documents/jecfa/jecmono/
v18je16.htm
Young, K., Villar, D., Carson, T., Ierman, P., Moore, R.,
Bottoff, M. 2003. Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication
with penitrem a and roquefortine in two dogs. Journal of
theAmerican
Veterinary
MedicalAssociation
221(1):52-53.
657
25
Drugs of Abuse
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ALCOHOL
Ethanol is the most commonly abused drug, and accidental
ingestion of ethanol by pets is not an uncommon event. A
complete discussion of ethanol toxicosis can be found in
Chapter 28.
AMPHETAMINES
Sources/Formulations
Amphetamines encompass a wide variety of drugs, both
legal and illicit. The high level of dependency and abuse
that these drugs can elicit has resulted in them being
designated controlled substances by  the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Agency.  Amphetamines  are prescribed
legally for the treatment of obesity, narcolepsy, and
attention deficit disorder in humans (Volmer 2006).
Methamphetamine does have therapeutic uses, but is most
infamous as the street drug also known as “crystal,"
"crank,"meth," and
“glass.” Pseudoephedrine, an
over-the-counter decongestant, is a precursor to illicitly
manufactured methamphetamine, and the features of
pseudoephedrine overdose will be similar to those seen
with amphetamines. Companion animals are generally
658
exposed to amphetamines through the accidental ingestion
of prescription or illicit medication.
Kinetics
Most amphetamines are quickly absorbed into the blood
stream, and clinical signs can occur very quickly after
ingestion (Volmer 2006). Amphetamines are lipophilic and
      -o  s
system. They are metabolized in the liver and both parent
compound and its metabolites are excreted in the urine.
Elimination by the urine is enhanced in acidic urine.
Mechanism of Action
Amphetamines produce their stimulatory activity through
several
neurotransmitters,  including  norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin in the central nervous system and
through direct stimulation of α-and β-adrenergic receptors
in the peripheral nervous system (Bischoff 2007)
Amphetamines also inhibit monoamine oxidase and inhibit
neuronal reuptake of catecholamines, both of which can
result in accumulation of excess neurotransmitters such as
serotonin and norepinephrine at the postsynaptic neuron.
Toxicity
Although the oral LDso for amphetamine sulfate in dogs is
listed as 20-27mg/kg, serious and life-threatening clinical
signs can occur at much lower levels.
Clinical Effects
659
Signs
Signs associated with amphetamine intoxication include
agitation,  restlessness, 
hyperactivity,  aggression,
vocalization, hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, ataxia,
tremors, and seizures.
Laboratory
No specific clinical pathology abnormalities are expected,
although
acidosis，
 electrolyte
imbalances, 
 and
hypoglycemia may be seen in severe cases.
Differential Diagnoses
Other CNS stimulants such as cocaine, methylxanthines,
otherS
sympathomimetics
(e.g.，1
 pseudoephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine),  metaldehyde,  antidepressants,
tremorgenic mycotoxins, organochlorine insecticides,
organophosphorous
  and   carbamate    insecticides,
5-fluorouracil, hypermatremia, ephedra (e.g., ma huang/
guarana preparations), 5-hydroxytryptophan, or lead
should all be considered when presented with a patient
with severe CNS and cardiovascular stimulation
Diagnostics
Blood, saliva, and urine can be analyzed by most
veterinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence of
amphetamine, although the turnaround time may make the
diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing
an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have the
advantages of being inexpensive and readily available at
660
most pharmacies, and providing rapid results (Teitler
2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably
reliable for amphetamine exposures in dogs. These kits are
not validated in nonhumans, so further testing by a
[       
cases.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing amphetamine exposures are to
stabilize the patient, manage clinical signs, decontaminate
(if feasible), and provide supportive care. Agitation.
hyperactivity, and other stimulatory signs tend to respond
well to phenothiazine tranquilizers such as acepromazine
or chlorpromazine. Benzodiazepines should be avoided,
because paradoxical worsening of the neurologic effects
has been reported (Volmer 2006). Seizures are best
controlled  with  injectable  anesthetics  (pentobarbital  or
propofol). Hyperthermia should be managed by external
cooling measures (ice packs, fans, etc.). For tachycardia
that persists after sedation, a beta blocker such as
propranolol should be used. Intravenous fluid therapy will
aid in stabilizing the cardiovascular system as well as
enhancing elimination of amphetamine via the urine.
Although acidification of the urine can increase urinary
excretion of amphetamine, severely symptomatic animals
may already be acidotic, so urinary acidification is not
recommended until it has been established that acidosis
doesn't already exist.
In animals that have presented following recent exposure
and are asymptomatic, induction of emesis and
administration of activated charcoal is recommended. The
661
patient  should  then be monitored in-hospital for a
minimum of 3-4 hours (prompt release products) or up to
12hours following the ingestion of delayed-release
products (i.e., extended release, sustained release,
controlled release products). It is important to realize that
amphetamines can cause a very rapid onset of signs, so
close monitoring during and after decontamination is
recommended.
Prognosis
The prognosis for animals ingesting amphetamine depends
on the dose ingested, the severity and duration of clinical
signs at presentation and the response to appropriate
therapy. Complications from severe cases can include
injury due to hyperthermia, hypoxia, trauma, uncontrolled
seizure activity, or cerebral edema.
BARBITURATES
Sources/Formulations
Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid that are used
therapeutically
as
  anticonvulsants    and
sedatives.
Barbiturates are also the primary component of most
euthanasia solutions. Most barbiturate poisonings in
companion animals are the result of accidental ingestion of
human  or  veterinary prescription  products, although
ingestion of illicit medications, iatrogetic overdoses.
accidental injection of euthanasia solutions, and ingestion
of meat from carcasses euthanized with barbiturate-based
solutions are other means of exposure (Bischoff 2007;
Volmer 2006).
662
Kinetics
Barbiturates are well absorbed orally. Barbiturates are
classified according to their duration of action as
ultra-short-acting (less than 3 hours), short-acting (3-6
hours) and long-acting (6-12 hours), which is related to
their lipid solubility (Volmer 2006). Highly lipid-soluble
barbiturates rapidly distribute throughout the body,
including the CNS, and then are very rapidly redistributed
into fat and total body water, which terminates their
anesthetic effect. Barbiturates undergo hepatic metabolism,
and metabolites as well as parent compound are eliminated
in the urine. Chronic barbiturate use results in induction of
their metabolic enzymes, which can result in accelerated
metabolism of barbiturates and other compounds that are
normally biotransformed by those enzymes.
Mechanism of Action
In the CNS, barbiturates stimulate -aminobutyric acid
(GABA), an  inhibitory neurotransmitter, receptors and
inhibit  glutamate,  a  stimulatory  neurotransmitter,
receptors, causing CNS depression. Some of the CNS
depressive effects of barbiturates relate to their inhibition
of the release of
f other neurotransmitters such as
norepinephrine and acetylcholine. Very high doses of
barbiturates depress respiration and cardiac contractility,
leading to respiratory depression and hypotension.
Toxicity
Barbiturates have a narrow margin of safety and even
small overdoses can result in significant CNS depression
663
The lowest reported oral lethal dosage of phenobarbital in
cats is 125 mg/kg (Volmer 2006). The oral LD50 (dosage
at which 50% will die) for phenobarbital in dogs is 150mg/
kg.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The clinical effects of barbiturates relate to CNS
depression, so the signs that can be seen include lethargy,
ataxia, weakness, disorientation, recumbency, coma,
respiratory   depression,   tachycardia  or  bradycardia,
hypothermia, and death.
Laboratory
Although a minimum database should be established for
patients in order to determine any preexisting conditions
(e.g., renal or hepatic insufficiency) that may interfere with
elimination of the drug, no specific clinical pathologic
abnormalities are expected in patients with barbiturate
overdose. Severely comatose animals with compromised
respiration may develop respiratory acidosis.
Differential Diagnoses
Otheragents that can
1causeCNS andrespiratory
depression
  resembling
 barbiturate  toxicosis  include
benzodiazepines,
 macrolide
 antiparasiticides  (e.g..
ivermectin, moxidectin), amitraz, ethanol and other
alcohols, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, other sedatives
(opioids, phenothiazines, sleep aids such as zolpidem,
664
etc.), and marijuana. Nontoxicologic rule-outs include
hypoglycemia, encephalopathy (infectious vs. metabolic),
encephalitis, CNS trauma, and cerebral vascular accident
Diagnostics
Blood, urine, stomach content, and feces can be analyzed
by most veterinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence
of barbiturates, although the turnaround time may make
the diagnostic laboratory of limited  usefulness in
diagnosing an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test
kits have the advantages of being inexpensive and readily
available at most pharmacies, and providing rapid results
(Teitler 2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be
reasonably reliable for rapid identification of barbiturates
exposures in dogs in a clinical setting. These kits are not
validated in nonhumans, so further testing by a veterinary
diagnostic laboratory may be needed in legal cases.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing a patient exposure to barbiturates
are to minimize absorption of the drug and provide
symptomatic and supportive care to animals experiencing
CNS depression. For exposures with no-to-minimal signs,
emesis may be induced followed by administration of
activated  charcoal  and  monitoring in-hospital  for  46
hours. Animals that present with severe CNS depression
should not have vomiting induced due to the risk of
aspiration; in these patients, gastric lavage should be
considered. Activated charcoal administration should be
repeated every 12 hours until the animals are ambulatory,
because  redistribution  of  barbiturate   after   activated
665
charcoal has been eliminated from the GI tract may result
in recurrence of severe depression. Activated charcoal has
been shown to act as a “sink” in enhancing movement of
barbiturates from the circulation into the gastrointestinal
tract, and therefore it is of benefit even in cases where the
barbiturate was administered parenterally (Volmer 2006).
Animals experiencing severe coma will need intensive
supportive care.  Endotracheal tube placement may be
indicated in those animals with severe coma and
subsequent  respiratory  depression;
in some  cases
mechanical ventilation may be necessary. Oxygen and
intravenous fluids should be administered, and standard
nursing care for comatose animals (prevention of
hypothermia and decubital ulcers) is important in those
animals experiencing severe toxicosis. Depending on the
lipid solubility of the barbiturate involved, intravenous
lipid solutions may assist in removal of barbiturates from
the circulation (see Chapter 8)
Prognosis
The prognosis of barbiturate intoxication depends on the
amount ingested and the severity and duration of signs at
presentation. Comatose animals provided with prompt and
appropriate supportive care have a reasonable expectation
of recovery, although it may take up to several days.
BENZODIAZEPINES
Sources/Formulations
666
Benzodiazepines are used in human and veterinary
medicine as sedatives, anxiolytics, and anticonvulsants.
There are a large number of different benzodiazepines that
are distinguished by their onset and duration of action.
Benzodiazepines can trigger dependency in human patients
and are widely abused in certain populations, especially
psychiatric  and substance-abuse patients  (Longo and
Johnson 2000). Additionally, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol?)
np ad ep, e e a asn aa s
Kinetics
Benzodiazepines are well absorbed from the GI tract and
are widely distributed throughout the body. They are
highly protein bound and highly lipophilic. Most are
metabolized in the liver via glucuronide conjugation. Some
benzodiazepines
have 
pharmacologically
　  active
metabolites with half-lives exceeding those of the parent
compound (Volmer 2006).
Mechanism of Action
Benzodiazepines act on GABA receptors, triggering
inhibitory impulses in the CNS and resulting in CNS
depression.
Toxicity
Although benzodiazepines can produce intoxications that
require veterinary care, they tend to have a wide margin of
safety, and death is not common unless very large amounts
have been ingested or there is coingestion of other CNS
depressants. However, even low doses can cause sedation
667
and ataxia. Dosages greater than or equal to a dosage
equivalent to 20 mg/kg of diazepam can cause more severe
clinical effects and will need  veterinary intervention
(ASPCA Animal  Poison  Control  Center, unpublished
data).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical effects of benzodiazepines can occur as rapidly as
10 to 15 minutes following exposure. The clinical signs
associated with benzodiazepine toxicosis include sedation,
ataxia, and disorientation. Severely affected animals may
become comatose, hypothermic, and hypotensive. Seizures
are possible, although uncommon, in comatose patients.
Some animals exposed to benzodiazepines present with
paradoxical agitation and hyperactivity; in the author’ s
experience, this is most commonly seen with large
ingested doses or with juvenile animals (dogs and cats < 6
months of age). Rarely, liver necrosis has been reported
following therapeutic use of diazepam in cats (Volmer
2006); whether this is an issue with acute intoxications is
not known.
Laboratory
No   significant  clinical  pathological  abnormalities  are
expected  with  benzodiazepine  overdose.  With  large
exposures, a baseline minimum database is recommended.
Differential Diagnoses
668
Other CNS depressants that can cause signs similar to
those of benzodiazepines include barbiturates, opioids.
alcohols, ethylene glycol, marijuana, amitraz, xylitol,
antidepressants, centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants
(e.g.,  baclofen),  macrolide
 antiparasiticides (e.g,
ivermectin), sleep aids such as zolpidem, and marijuana.
Nontoxicologic rule outs would include encephalopathy.
encephalitis, head trauma, hypoglycemia, and cerebral
vascular accident.
Diagnostics
Blood and urine can be analyzed by most veterinary
diagnostic
laboratories
for the　presence
benzodiazepines, although the turnaround time may make
the
e diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness
 in
diagnosing an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test
kits have the advantages of being inexpensive and readily
available at most pharmacies, and providing rapid results
(Teitler 2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be
reasonablyreliable  for
 rapid
1identificationof
benzodiazepines exposures in dogs. These kits are not
validated in nonhumans, so further testing by a veterinary
diagnostic laboratory may be needed in legal cases.
Management of Exposures
Because benzodiazepines have wide margins of safety.
animals ingesting small doses (e.g., one tablet) generally
can be managed at home provided they can be kept in a
secure area away from obstacles (e.g., furmiture or stairs)
to avoid accidental trauma. Owners should be instructed to
keep the animal in a quiet area to reduce the likelihood of
699
paradoxical excitation. Mild ataxia can be dealt with at
home, but if the animal becomes recumbent or develops
paradoxical excitation, it should be taken to the veterinary
hospital for monitoring and further care.
The goals of therapy in benzodiazepine exposures are to
minimize absorption
1 and provide  symptomatic  and
supportive care. Because of the potential for rapid onset of
signs, decontamination should be performed in the
veterinary hospital under veterinary supervision.Ataxic
and disoriented animals may be at risk of aspiration if
vomiting is induced. For animals showing no or very mild
signs, induction of emesis may be considered; otherwise,
careful
 administration
of
 activated  charcoal
1S
recommended.  Most
animalsdo
verywell
with
decontamination and careful monitoring. In the rare event
that severe CNS depression develops, respiratory function
should
1beclosely
monitored, 
and   f
flumazenil,
benzodiazepine antagonist, may be used for those patients
experiencing respiratory depression. Because flumazenil
has a short duration of action, animals must be closely
monitored for return of respiratory depression when the
effects of flumazenil subside. Recumbent animals require
careful nursing and supportive care including IV fluid
therapy, thermoregulation (hypothermia is common in
comatose animals), and prevention of decubital ulcers
Animals experiencing paradoxical excitation should be
kg) with the caveat that once the excitation has resolved.
the CNS depression may
bequitepronounced.
Anecdotally, cyproheptadine has also been effective in
managing the paradoxical excitation of benzodiazepines.
The duration of signs will vary with the type of
670
benzodiazepine, the dose ingested, and the effectiveness of
decontamination measure instituted.
Prognosis
Most benzodiazepine overdoses have excellent outcomes,
 provided patients receive prompt and appropriate care.
COCAINE
Sources/Formulations
Cocaine is an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the
shrub Erythroxylon coca, which grows in Central and
South America as well as Indonesia and the West Indies.
Therapeutically, cocaine is used as a topical local
anesthetic for oral and nasal mucous membranes.
However, the most common exposures to cocaine in
companion animals occur when they are exposed to
illicitly obtained cocaine.
Kinetics
Cocaine is very rapidly absorbed across all mucosal
surfaces, and clinical effects can be seen within minutes of
exposure. Cocaine is metabolized in the serum and liver
and is excreted as parent compound and metabolites in the
urine.
Mechanism of Action
Cocaine is a potent sympathomimetic that blocks the
reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin in the CNS,
671
causing accumulation of these neurotransmitters in the
synapse and resulting in prolonged  stimulation of
postsynaptic neurons. It also sensitizes the myocardial
cells  to  endogenous catecholamines,  resulting
in
tachycardia
Toxicity
The LDso for cocaine in dogs is 3 mg/kg IV, and it is
reported that dogs can tolerate oral doses 2-4 times that
level (Bischoff 2007).
Clinical Effects
Signs
Signs of cocaine intoxication occur quickly following
ingestion   and   include   hyperactivity,  hyperthermia,
agitation, ataxia, mydriasis, vomiting,  vocalization,
tachycardia, tremors, and seizures. Severe seizures may
result  in myoglobinemia  or disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy secondary to hyperthermia.
Laboratory
Metabolic acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities may be
seen with cocaine toxicosis. As with most intoxications, a
minimum database should be established, including
complete blood count, serum chemistries, and electrolyte
status.
Differential Diagnoses
672
Other intoxications
from CNS stimulants suchas
amphetamines, methylxanthines, other sympathomimetics
(e.g.,
pseudoephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine),
metaldehyde, antidepressants, tremorgenic mycotoxins,
organochlorine
insecticides, (
organophosphorous
 and
carbamate  insecticides,  5-fluorouracil,  hypernatremia,
ephedra (e.g.,， mal
huang/guarana   preparations),
5-hydroxytryptophan, or lead should all be considered
when presented with a patient with severe CNS and
cardiovascular stimulation.
Diagnostics
Blood, stomach contents, and urine can be analyzed by
most veterinary diagnostic laboratories for the presence of
cocaine, although 
the
turnaround
time makes the
diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing
an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits have the
advantages of being inexpensive and readily available at
most pharmacies, and providing rapid results (Teitler
2009). These tests utilize urine and appear to be reasonably
reliable for rapid identification of cocaine exposures in
dogs. These kits are not validated in nonhumans, so further
testing  by  a  veterinary
diagnostic laboratory maybe
needed in legal cases.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing cocaine intoxications include
stabilization of the symptomatic patient, decontamination
dns pn s d p (s )
care to minimize complications
673
Because of the potential for very rapid onset of severe
signs with cocaine ingestion, emesis should only be
induced in a veterinary setting and only in asymptomatic
animals may trigger a seizure. Sedation and gastric lavage
should be considered, especially if animals have begun to
show clinical signs of intoxication. Activated charcoal
should follow emesis or lavage. Police dogs that have
ingested bags of cocaine or dogs with surgically implanted
 p pasa  nor (san, o s
bags carefully extracted surgically or via endoscopy to
avoid rupture and spillage of cocaine onto tissues
(Bischoff 2007).
Diazepam should be used to manage existing seizures.
Barbiturates should be used for seizures refractory to
diazepam. Acepromazine or chlorpromazine may work
better than diazepam at managing agitation in nonseizing
animals. Cyproheptadine has been recommended by some
to block the effects of excess serotonin caused by cocaine;
this often helps with disorientation, hyperthermia, and
vocalization (ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center.
unpublished data). Severe tachycardia may be treated with
propranolol once the agitation and hyperactivity is under
control. Intravenous fluids will help with hyperthermia as
well as provide cardiovascular support
Prognosis
The prognosis will depend on the amount of cocaine
ingested and the duration and severity of signs at
presentation. Animals experiencing seizures have a more
guarded prognosis.
674
MARIJUANA
Sources/Formulations
Marijuana is the dried leaves, seeds, and stems of the
Cannibis sativa plant. The major active ingredient of
marijuana is the cannabinoid delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC). Marijuana is most commonly used as an illicit
recreational drug, but it is also used medicinally in humans
to limit nausea in chemotherapy patients and to lower
intraocular pressure in glaucoma patients (Janczyk et al.
2004). Marinol?, a tablet form of synthetic THC has
recently been approved for the relief of nausea and
vomiting in chemotherapy cancer patients and assist with
loss of appetite in AIDS patients. Most companion animals
are exposed when they ingest a “stash" of illicit marijuana,
although exposures to medicinal agents or, rarely, through
inhalationof smoke from marijuana cigarettes
intentionally blown into their faces are possible (Janczyk
et al. 2004).
Kinetics
THC is rapidly absorbed after ingestion or inhalation, with
onset of effects occurring within 6 to 12 minutes of
inhalation and 30 to 60 minutes of ingestion (Donaldson
2002).THCishighly
 lipid-soluble and  highly
protein-bound and undergoes a significant first pass effect
when ingested. Because of high levels of storage of THC
in body fat, the half-life is relatively long (25-30 hours),
with 80% to 90% being eliminated by 5 days after
exposure.
675
Mechanism of Action
The cannabinoids in marijuana act on cannabinoid-specific
receptors within the CNS, which trigger most of the
psychoactive effects of marijuana. Cannabinoids also
interact  with a  variety of CNS  neurotransmitters,
stimulating the release of dopamine, enhancing GABA
turnover, and enhancing the synthesis of norepinephrine,
dopamine and serotonin (Donaldson 2002).
Toxicity
The minimum toxic dosage of marijuana in dogs is
reported to be 84.7 mg/kg of dry leaves, which is the
equivalent of approximately 1/2 teaspoon of dry leaves in a
30kg dog (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). Although marijuana can
produce significant clinical effects at low exposure levels.
it does have a wide margin of safety with the lethal dose
being over 10o0 times the behaviorally effective dose
(Volmer 2006). Doses of 3 to 28 g/kg of marijuana did not
result in deaths in dogs. Deaths from marijuana ingestion
may be more likely the result of accidental misadventure
(e.g., trauma) or leading to complications of preexisting
serious health issues (e.g., prior cardiac dysfunction) than
from a direct effect of the cannabinoids in marijuana.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The most common clinical effects seen in marijuana
toxicosis in dogs and cats are depression, ataxia, and
bradycardia. Other common signs include agitation,
676
disorientation,   vocalization,   vomiting,  hyperesthesia,
hypothermia,   mydriasis,   hypersalivation,   diarrhea,
recumbency, coma, and seizures, although the latter three
signs are relatively uncommon (Bischoff 2007; Donaldson
2002; GwaltneyBrant 2004). A single case of atopic
dermatitis in a dog thought to be associated with marijuana
has been reported (Evans 1989).
Laboratory
As with most intoxications, a baseline minimum database
consisting of serum chemistry and complete blood count is
recommended to identify any concurrent disease issues.
Marijuana is not expected to cause any specific laboratory
abnormalities.
Differential Diagnoses
Intoxication from other CNS depressants such as
macrolide anitparasiticides  (e.g., ivermectin), amitraz,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, opioids, alcohols, ethylene
glycol, centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants,
sedatives, and isoxazole and hallucinogenic mushrooms
should all be considered in the differential list if marijuana
exposure is suspected but cannot be confirmed historically.
Nontoxic
differentialsinclude
head
trauma,
encephalopathy, encephalitis, and hypoglycemia.
Diagnostics
Stomach contents and urine can be analyzed by most
veterinary  diagnostic  laboratories  for  the  presence  of
cannabinoids, although the turnaround time makes the
677
diagnostic laboratory of limited usefulness in diagnosing
an acute toxicosis. Over-the-counter drug test kits, which
work so well on other drugs of abuse, appear to be less
reliable in the detection of marijuana exposures (Teitler
2009). It is possible that the metabolite that many of these
tests detect is not one that is excreted by dogs in sufficient
quantities for the test to identify. However, some
veterinary emergency clinics have reported to the author
that they have found some brands of test kits that do
appear to work. So, when using the kits it is important to
remember that a negative test does not completely rule out
marijuana exposure and confirmation from an analytical
laboratory should be considered. The OTC kits are not
validated in nonhumans, so further testing by a veterinary
diagnostic laboratory may be needed in legal cases.
Management of Exposures
Fortunately,
mar1juana
exposures
arerarely
life-threatening, and providing good supportive care and
decontamination  is generally all  that  is  needed  for
successful recovery. Emesis should be induced in animals
with mild or no clinical signs. Repeated doses of activated
charcoal are recommended (monitor electrolytes for
hypernatremia) to attempt to reduce the duration of signs.
Central nervous stimulation can be managed with
diazepam. Body temperature should be monitored and
hypothermia corrected as needed. Intravenous fluids will
 o   s   iss
elimination of marijuana.
Prognosis
678
The prognosis in most uncomplicated cases of marijuana
intoxication is excellent and most patients will make full
recoveries within2to5 days.Oncethe patient’s
disorientation has largely resolved and the patient is able to
maintain normal body temperature and heart rate, it may
be discharged from the hospital. Close supervision is
recommended for 5 days after ingestion to avoid accidental
injury from any residual ataxia.
OPIATESANDOPIOIDS
Sources/Formulations
There are many opiates and opioids used in human and
veterinary medicine. Opiates are natural extracts derived
from the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum. Opioids are
semisynthetic or fully synthetic compounds that act on
opiate receptors. Opiates include morphine and codeine,
while
semisynthetic
opioids  include oxymorphone,
hydromorphone,
hydrocodone,  oxycodone,
heroin.
etorphine, and buprenorphine. Fully synthetic opioids
include fentanyl, methadone, propoxyphene, and tramadol.
For ease of this discussion, the term opioid will be used to
include both opiates and opioids
Opioids are used in veterinary and human medicine for
their analgesic effects. Apomorphine is used in veterinary
medicine as an emetic. Fentanyl suckers, lozenges, and
transdermal patches are becoming more frequently used in
both human and veterinary medicine. The lozenges or
suckers contain fentanyl citrate in a sucrose and liquid
glucose base and are attractive to animals. Companion
679
their own or their owner’ s medication, lozenges, or
discarded fentanyl patches
Kinetics
Most opioids are well absorbed from the Gl tract.
Although fentanylin transdermal
1patches has poor
absorption from the Gl tract due to first pass effect
significant
tamounts  of
f  fentanyl  can  be   absorbed
transmucosally  when
animals 
　chewthe
 patches.
Metabolism varies, but opioids generally undergo hepatic
metabolism with some form of conjugation, hydrolysis,
oxidation,  glucuronidation,  or
dealkylation.
The
requirement  for  metabolism  via  glucuronidation
may
account for the relative sensitivity of cats to opioids
Mechanism of Action
Opioids are generally classified by their ability to exert
effects at the different opioid receptors (mu, kappa, delta,
sigma), and by their agonist or antagonist effects on those
    i   sis S 'sn
opioid receptors and as antagonists at others. Opioids act
centrally to elevate the pain threshold and to alter the
psychological response to pain. Most of the clinically used
opioids exert effect at the mu receptor (mul subtype
mediates analgesic effects, mu2 mediates respiratory
depression). Opioids also can induce emesis through
stimulation  of the
dopamine
  receptors 
1m
　the
chemoreceptor trigger zone (Volmer 2006). Opioids can,
paradoxically, sometimes cause CNS excitation
1n
overdose situations. The exact mechanism is not known
but is postulated to involve stimulation of dopaminergic,
680
adrenergic, cholinergic, and/ or serotonergic receptors,
possibly associated with inhibition of GABA receptors
(Kukanich and Papich 2009; Tashakori and Afshari 2010)
Toxicity
The toxicity of individual opioid compounds varies
considerably. The minimum lethal dosage of morphine in
laboratory dogs is between 110 and 210 mg/kg (Bischoff
2007). Heroin given at 0.20 mg/kg to dogs (route not
specified) caused sedation and respiratory depression. The
minimum lethaldosage of heroin is  25 mg/kg
Oxymorphone, fentanyl, and etorphine have approximately
10, 80, and
1 10,000 times the potency of morphine,
respectively.
Clinical Effects
Signs
In dogs, CNS signs include depression, ataxia, and
seizures. Respiratory depression, vomiting, bradycardia,
and hypotension may also be seen. Cats may show
excitatory behavior and urinary retention. Some opioids.
such as tramadol can result in serotonin syndrome in
    
on serotonin syndrome)
Laboratory
681
As with most mtoxications, a baseline minimum database
consisting of serum chemistry and complete blood count is
recommended to identify any concurrent disease issues.
Differential Diagnoses
Intoxication   from  other  CNS   depressants  such  as
macrolide anitparasiticides (e.g., ivermectin), amitraz,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, alcohols, ethylene glycol,
centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants, sedatives, and
isoxazole and hallucinogenic mushrooms should all be
considered in the differential list if opioid exposure is
suspected but cannot be confirmed historically. Nontoxic
differentials would include head trauma, encephalopathy,
encephalitis, and hypoglycemia.
Management
The goals in management of opioid overdoses include
stabilizing and decontaminating the patient, providing
ventilatory support, and providing supportive care until
recovery.  Treatment in an asymptomatic animal may
include emesis if the ingestion is recent. Activated
charcoal with cathartic should be administered and the
patient monitored for up to 12 hours. If the animal
becomes symptomatic, respiratory support may need to be
given. If severe respiratory depression is seen, naloxone (a
pure competitive antagonist with activity at the mu
receptors) can be administered to reverse respiratory
effects. As the duration of action of naloxone is much
shorter than that of the opioids, repeat dosages may be
necessary. Naloxone may not result in the animal regaining
full consciousness.  Partial  agonists/antagonists  (i.e.,
682
butorphanol) may be used to partially reverse the effects of
pure agonists if no naloxone is available. Animals
exhibiting  signs of  serotonin  syndrome  (agitation,
vocalization, disorientation) may benefit from the use of
cyproheptadine.   Monitoring of  temperature, cardiac
function, and blood gases is important. Treatment times
will vary with the half-life of the opioid.
Prognosis
If   respiratory   and  cardiovascular  function   can  be
maintained, the prognosis is good. For those cases that
experience seizures, prognosis is more guarded.
REFERENCES
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of drugs of abuse. In
Veterinary Toxicology: Basic and Clinical Principles,
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 391-410. New York:
Elsevier.
Donaldson, Caroline. 2002. Marijuana exposures in
animals. Veterinary Medicine 97(6):437-439.
Evans, A.G. 1989. Allergic inhalant dermatitis attributed to
marijuana exposure in a dog. Journal of the American
Veterinary MedicalAssociation 195:1588-1590
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2004. Ataxia and depression in a
Newfoundland dog, NAVC Clinician's Brief2(10): 29-30.
Janczyk, Pawel, Donaldson, Caroline W., and Gwaltney,
       
683
marijuana toxicoses in dogs. Veterinary and Human
Toxicology 46(1):19-21.
Kukanich, Butch, and Papich, Mark G. 2009. Opioid
analgesic  drugs. In   Veterinary   Pharmacology  and
Therapeutics, 9th ed., edited by Jim E. Riviere and Mark
G. Papich, pp. 302-335. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Longo, Lance P., and Johnson, Brian. 2000. Addiction:
Part 1. Benzodiazepines — Side effects, abuse risk and
alternatives.American Academy of Family Physicians
61:2121-2128.
Tashakori, A., and Afshari, R. 2010. Tramadol overdose as
a cause of serotonin syndrome: A case series. Clinical
Toxicology 45(4):337-341.
Teitler, Joan B. 2009. Evaluation of a human on-site urine
multidrug test for emergency use with dogs. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association 45(2): 59-66.
Volmer, Petra A. 2006. Recreational drugs. In Small
Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E.
Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 273-311. St. Louis:
Saunders.
684
26
OTC Drugs
MaryM.SchellandSharonGwaltney-Brant
ACETAMINOPHEN
Sources/Formulations
Acetaminophen
(Tylenol?, nonaspirin pain reliever,
APAP)
¥1S
a
synthetic
nonopiate
derivative
of
p-aminophenol.
Acetaminophen
is available as
an
over-the-counter drug found in a variety of medications.
When dealing with a potential exposure to acetaminophen,
it is important to verify the exact ingredients in a product,
because
many
medications
have
nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory
drugs
(e.g., ibuprofen) rather than
acetaminophen
as
their
"nonaspirin”
 component.
Additionally, many of the other ingredients found in
combination products (e.g., antihistamines, decongestants)
may also contribute to the toxicosis and their potential
adverse effects need to be addressed. Acetaminophen is
used as an analgesic and antipyretic drug but has little
anti-inflammatory action. Most companion animals are
exposed   through accidental  ingestion  of  medication,
although many cats are poisoned when owners are
unaware of the hazards of administering acetaminophen to
cats.
Kinetics
685
Acetaminophen is rapidly and almost completely absorbed
         
seen at 10-60 minutes for regular release products and at
dosages, acetaminophen is metabolized in the liver by
sulfation and glucuronidation to nontoxic metabolites that
are eliminated in the urine. Because cats cannot effectively
glucuronidate acetaminophen,  they are particularly
sensitive to its toxic effects. The serum half-life in dogs
and cats is dose-dependent, increasing as the ingested
dosage increases.
Mechanism of Action
Pharmacologic Action
The exact mechanism of  pharmacologic action of
acetaminophen is unknown but it is believed to act
primarily in the CNS to increase the pain threshold through
cannabinoid receptors, and it may also inhibit chemical
mediators that sensitize the pain receptors to mechanical or
chemical stimulation (Ottani et al. 2006). The antipyretic
activity of acetaminophen is achieved by blocking the
effectsofendogenous
 pyrogens
by inhibiting
prostaglandin
synthesis
through
inhibition
of
cyclooxygenase 2 or 3 (Burke et al. 2005)
Mechanism of Toxicity
Acetaminophen itself is of low toxicity. When normal
hepatic  sulfation and  glucuronidation pathways are
saturated (e.g., in overdose situations), cytochrome P450
enzymes convert acetaminophen tothe oxidative
686
metabolite, N-acetyl-para-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI)
Intracellular glutathione acts as a scavenger to conjugate
and neutralize NAPQI, but when glutathione stores are
depleted, NAPQI binds to sulfhydryl groups on tissue
macromolecules leading to hepatocellular necrosis. At very
high doses, the same mechanism occurs in renal tubules,
resulting in nephrotoxicity
Acetaminophen  is  also  deacetylated to  p-aminophenol
(PAP), which causes oxidative damage to red blood cells
resulting in methemoglobinemia (McConkey et al. 2009).
Cats are more  susceptible  to  acetaminophen-induced
methemoglobinemia because they are deficient in the
enzyme that converts PAP back to acetaminophen,
allowing buildup of high levels of PAP. Additionally, PAP
causes methemoglobinemia by binding to sulfhydryl
groups on hemoglobin. As cats have more sulfhydryl
groups on their hemoglobin (8 -SH compared to 4 in dogs
and 2 in humans) and are deficient in methemoglobin
reductase, they are inherently more susceptible to
oxidative injury to hemoglobin (Bischoff 2007).
Toxicity
Hepatotoxicity has been reported in dogs at 100 mg/kg and
200
mg/kg
can
cause
clinically
evident
methemoglobinemia (Talcott 2006). In dogs, dosages of >
40mg/kg have resulted in keratoconjunctivitis sicca 72
hours after ingestion (ASPCA Animal Poison Control
Center, unpublished data). In cats, methemoglobinemia has
been reported at dosages as low as 10 mg/kg
and
hepatotoxicity is possible if dosages exceed 40mg/kg.
687
Clinical Effects
In cats, methemoglobin values increase within 1-4 hours
of ingestion, followed by Heinz body formation within 72
hours. Methemoglobinemia in dogs may occur within 412
hours or may be delayed up to 48 hours following
exposure (Bischoff 2007). Liver injury may not become
clinically apparent for 24-72 hours following exposure. In
general, dogs typically develop liver injury while cats
develop methemoglobinemia, although at acetaminophen
doses over 200 mg/kg, dogs can develop both. Rare cases
ofcats developing
liver injury without initial
methemoglobinemia have been reported, but cats most
often succumb to methemoglobinemia before liver injury
develops.
Signs
Clinical signs seen in patients with methemoglobinemia
can
include
depression,
vomiting，
weakness,
hypersalivation, chocolate brown mucous membranes,
hyperventilation, cyanosis, dyspnea, facial or paw edema,
tachycardia, hypothermia, hemolysis, shock, and death.
Clinical signs of methemoglobinemia may last 3-4 days.
Clinical  signs   associated   with liver  injury  include
vomiting, anorexia, depression, abdominal pain, icterus,
tachycardia, tachypnea, and death. Other less common
clinical effects
 include  renal   insufficiency/damage,
myocardial damage, hemolytic anemia and coma. Hepatic
injury may not resolve for several weeks.
Laboratory
688
Methemoglobinemia, Heinz bodies, hemolytic anemia,
metabolic acidosis, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, and
hyperbilirubinemia
have
been
 reported
with
acetaminophen toxicosis in both dogs and cats. Changes
consistent with liver damage include elevated alanine
transaminase (ALT; the most reliable indicator of liver
injury),  elevated 
  aspartate   transaminase
(AST),
hyperbilirubinemia,   bilirubinuria,   decreased
1serum
cholesterol and albumin, elevated prothrombin (PT), and
elevated partial thromboplastin times (PTT).
Differential Diagnoses
Other causes of methemoglobinemia and Heinz body
anemia include onions/garlic, naphthalene, hydroxyurea.
chlorates, benzocaine, zinc, skunk spray, and propylene
glycol (cats) toxicoses (Plumlee 2004; Stockham and Scott
2008)
  n   s 
mushrooms, blue-green algae, iron salts, xylitol, alpha
lipoic acid, aflatoxin, cycad palms, castor beans, and
idiopathic NSAID hepatopathy (Moeller 2004).
Diagnostics
There are no in-house tests for acetaminophen for animals
and diagnosis is often made based on history and clinical
signs. Most human hospitals have the ability to measure
acetaminophen levels in serum or plasma, and may be
helpful in determining whether an exposure has occurred if
the turnaround time for obtaining the results is reasonably
short. Veterinary diagnostic laboratories can also measure
689
acetaminophen levels, but turnaround times can be long.
making them less useful for diagnosis of acute exposure.
Management of Exposures
The goals of managing acetaminophen exposures include
stabilization,  prevention
of
liver
damage
and
methemoglobinemia, decontamination (when feasible) and
providing supportive care. Symptomatic patients need
initial stabilization, including oxygen if dyspneic. To aid in
replenishing glutathione
 stores,
n-acetylcysteine
(Mucomyst?, NAC) is used. Adverse effects of the oral
route of NAC administration include nausea and vomiting;
NAC at concentrations over 5% can be corrosive to oral
and esophageal tissue. Recently, an IV formulation of
NAC (Acetadote?) has become available. For hepatic
injury,  a new  therapy
that shows potential
is
s-adenosylmethionine
：(SAMe, Denosyl-SD4?). Early
studies and anecdotal reports show a positive effect for
treatment of acetamino-phen toxicosis. Over-the-counter
formulations  of SAMe have  variable potency  and
prescription  quality,  enteric  coated
[  products 
are
recommended (round the dose to nearest whole tablet and
do not break tablet).
Intravenous fluid therapy is used to correct dehydration
and for maintenance needs, but not for diuresis. Whole
blood transfusions or Oxyglobin? may be necessary to
increase  oxygen-carrying
 capacity
in patients  with
methemoglobinemia. Ascorbic acid provides a reserve
system for the reduction of methemoglobin back to
hemoglobin; however, ascorbic acid has questionable
efficacy and when given orally may irritate the stomach.
690
Cimetidine is an inhibitor of the cytochrome P-450
         
metabolism of acetaminophen, although its use is coming
into  question
(Bischoff2007).Cimetidine isnot
recommended for cats, because it may increase the
accumulation of    p-aminophenol 
 responsible
for
methemoglobinemia.
Decontamination  of asymptomatic  patients  includes
induction  of emesis and administration of activated
charcoal (repeat doses with large exposures) and cathartic.
In most cases where overdose is expected to cause severe
signs and only oral NAS is available, the administration of
a loading dose of NAC is recommended 30 to 40 minutes
prior to the first dose of activated charcoal in order to
achieve efficacious NAC concentrations as quickly as
possible. A 2- to 2-hour interval between subsequent
activated charcoal and per os NAC is recommended,
because activated charcoal could adsorb NAC as well as
acetaminophen.
Liver function and methemoglobin concentrations should
be monitored. Liver enzymes and bilirubin may rise within
24 hours after ingestion and peak within 48 to 72 hours.
Serum albumin concentrations may decrease significantly
after 36 hours and continue to decrease if liver failure
occurs (providing a true index of liver function)
Prognosis
The prognosis is good if the animal is treated promptly
Animals with severe signs of methemoglobinemia or with
hepatic damage have a more guarded prognosis.
691
ANTIHISTAMINES
Sources/Formulations
Antihistamines are found in many over-the-counter allergy
relief products, both as single drugs and in combination
with decongestants and/or analgesics. They are also
marketed to prevent motion sickness and as sleep aids. A
wide variety of antihistamines are available. These include
first-generation
agents
(FGAs) diphenhydramine,
brompheniramine, dimenhydrinate, and chlorpheniramine,
and second-generation agents (SGAs) loratadine and
cetirizine. Other ingredients in antihistamine medications
(e.g., pseudoephedrine) may pose higher risk for severe
toxicosis, so it is important to verify all of the active
ingredients in a product when an exposure occurs.
Kinetics
Antihistamines  are  absorbed rapidly  when  ingested,
reaching  peak  blood
1levelswithin
¥1-3
hours
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004). FGAs are small and lipophilic
         
cause central nervous system signs such as extensive
drowsiness. Other central effects are the result of increased
cholinergic activity and include dry mouth and decreased
tear release. SGAs are less lipophilic, less able to cross the
blood-brain barrier, and thus less likely to cause CNS and
cholinergic sideeffects (Gonzalez and Estes 1998)
Mechanism of Action
692
Antihistamines are reversible, competitive inhibitors of the
pharmacologic
Cactions of histamine.Cetirizine and
loratadine also decrease histamine release from basophils
(Boothe 2006). The mechanism of the adverse effects of
antihistamine is an exacerbation of normal pharmacologic
action.
Toxicity
Antihistamines vary considerably in their toxicity, and
many can cause mild adverse effects (e.g., lethargy) at
therapeutic doses. Specific toxic doses have not been
established for companion animals, although most will
tolerate twice therapeutic doses with little more than
sedation.
Clinical Effects
First-generation agents are more likely to cause sedation
within 30 minutes of ingestion (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). If
no clinical signs are apparent at 2 hours following
ingestion, development of significant signs is unlikely. At
higher doses, especially in animals under 6 months, initial
sedation may progress to agitation, tremors, tachycardia,
hypotension, and seizures.
Differential Diagnoses
Many conditions can cause signs similar to antihistamine
toxicosis.   Differentials   include    systemic   infectious/
inflammatory disorders, ingestion of CNS depressants or
stimulants, ethylene glycol, alcohol, and marijuana
693
Diagnostics
No specific biochemical alterations are expected with
antihistamine intoxication. Diagnosis is based on a history
of exposure and development of consistent clinical signs.
Antihistamine serum concentrations are not routinely
measured, although most veterinary diagnostic laboratories
would be able to perform the analysis.
Management of Exposures
If the ingested dose is above suggested therapeutic ranges
and exposure was within half an hour, induction of emesis
should be considered for decontamination. Activated
charcoal is indicated in large ingestions. The patient should
be monitored for at least 2 to3 hours following
decontamination. Additional care, if needed, is supportive
and includes parenteral fluids for marked hypotension and
diazepam for seizures or hyperactivity.
Prognosis
The prognosis  for most exposures is good provided
veterinary care is provided. Clinical signs can persist for
up to 72 hours in severe cases. Animals exhibiting seizures
or coma have more guarded prognoses.
ASPIRIN AND OTHER SALICYLATES
Sources/Formulations
Salicylates are found in many products. Aspirin
(acetylsalicylic acid, ASA) is available alone or in
694
combination with other drugs as tablets, capsules
powders, effervescent tablets, and oral liquid preparations.
Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol?, Kaopectate?) is
used to treat and prevent diarrhea. Pepto Bismol?
(bismuth subsalicylate) contains  9 mg/ml of salicylate
Thus 2 tablespoons of bismuth subsalicylate is equivalent
to 1 regular-strength aspirin. Salicylate ointments are used
for the anti-inflammatory effects in arthritis and for their
keratolytic properties in dermal conditions such as
psoriasis. Topically applied salicylic acid can be absorbed
through the skin and cause systemic problems. Oil of
wintergreen is used as a flavoring for candy and contains
approximately 98% methyl salicylate. Salicylates are used
in some teething ointments, sunscreens, and topical wart
removal products.
Kinetics
Aspirin is rapidly absorbed from the stomach and proximal
small intestines in monogastric animals (Gwaltney-Brant
2001). Aspirin is metabolized in the liver and excreted
through the urine. The elimination half-life increases with
the dosage. In dogs, the half-life at therapeutic doses is 8.6
hours. Cats are deficient in glucuronyl transferase and have
prolonged half-lives due to decreased aspirin metabolism.
Feline dosages of 5-12 mg/kg have a half-life of 22-27
hours; dosages of 25 mg/kg have a half-life of
approximately 44 hours. Elimination is also slower in
neonates and geriatric animals.
Mechanism of Action
695
Aspirin reduces pain and inflammation by reducing
prostaglandin
  and
thromboxane
esynthesis
through
inhibition of cyclooxygenase.  Decreased  prostaglandin
production results in a decrease secretion of the protective
mucous layer in the stomach and small intestine and causes
vasoconstriction in gastric mucosa. At very high dosages,
aspirin
and  other   salicylates  umcouple
oxidative
phosphorylation, leading to fever and seizures. Salicylates
also impair platelet aggregation. Unlike other NSAIDs,
salicylate toxicosis does not commonly produce renal
injury;
instead
1the
liver is
thetarget
organ
(Gwaltney-Brant 2001).
Toxicity
In dogs, toxicosis has occurred at dosages of 100-300 mg/
kg/day PO for 1-4 weeks. Doses of 325 mg twice a day
were lethal to cats.
Clinical Effects
Clinical effects of salicylate overdoses include metabolic
acidosis
with
 respiratory  alkalosis, gastrointestinal
ulceration, liver necrosis, and coagulopathy.
Signs
Signs
S may include vomiting (± blood), hyperpnea,
abdominal pain, lethargy, weakness, pallor, diarrhea,
pyrexia, increased bleeding times, dehydration, icterus,
coma, and seizures. Renal insufficiency is uncommon with
salicylate toxicoses but could develop  secondary to
rhabdomyolysis (from seizuring) or hypotension.
696
Laboratory
Laboratory
  abnormalities  expected    with  salicylate
toxicosis include high anion gap metabolic acidosis,
respiratory alkalosis, anemia, hypoproteinemia, elevated
liver enzymes, and elevated white blood cell count.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include ethylene glycol, alcohol, or
metaldehyde toxicoses, inflammatory and infectious
disorders, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, viral enteritis,
hypoadrenocorticism,   gastrointestinal   foreign   body,
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis, and other causes of
liver failure (acetaminophen, iron, or blue-green algae
toxicosis, among others).
Diagnostics
Serum salicylate levels can be measured by veterinary
diagnostic laboratories or human hospitals but turnaround
times need to be considered when trying to confirm acute
toxicosis.
Management of Exposures
The primary goals of treatment are to prevent or treat
gastric
ulceration，
acidosis, 
 hepatopathy,
and
coagulopathy. Decontamination of asymptomatic patients
includes induction of emesis and administration of
activated charcoal (repeat dosages with large exposures)
and cathartic.  Peritoneal dialysis  can be effective in
removing salicylates. Liver values, glucose, acid base
697
status
S and electrolytes  should   be  monitored.
Gastrointestinal protectant therapy should be initiated to
help manage and/or prevent gastric ulcers and should
include sucralfate and an acid reducer (H2 blocker or
proton pump inhibitor). Misoprostol could be considered
in patients at higher risk for GI bleeding (e.g., higher
exposure levels, prior NSAID or corticosteroid use). In the
asymptomatic patient, gastric protectants should be
continued for a minimum of 5-7 days. Bismuth
subsalicylate antacid formulations and corticosteroids are
contraindicated. Assisted ventilation and supplemental
oxygen may be required if the animal is comatose.
Seizures should be treated with diazepam. Intravenous
fluids, whole blood, and electrolytes should be given as
needed to control hypotension and hemorrhage, manage
acute bleeding ulcers, maintain hydration, and correct
electrolyte abnormalities. Acid base imbalances should be
corrected. Hyperpyrexia should be treated conservatively
because ice baths or cold water enemas could result in
hypothermia.
Prognosis
In most cases of salicylate toxicosis, the prognosis is good
if the animal is treated promptly and appropriately.
DECONGESTANTS
Sources/Formulations
Decongestants are found in cold and flu medications,
allergy products, and eyedrops intended to decrease
redness.The
most
common
decongestantsin
698
over-the-counter
oral
medications
arethe
sympathomimetics pseudoephedrine and  phenylephrine.
These compounds are often found in combination with
antihistamines or analgesics for cold and allergy relief.
Because of the similarities with amphetamine, the reader is
directed to the amphetamine discussion in Chapter 25,
"Drugs of Abuse," for further information on these
compounds.
The most common active ingredients in ocular and nasal
decongestants are
imidazoline
ecompoundssuch
as
oxymetazoline or tetrahydrozoline. These compounds
work as topical vasoconstrictives and are used to decrease
ocular redness associated with  conjunctivitis and  to
decrease nasal congestion due to colds, allergies, and
sinusitis. Companion animals are most commonly exposed
by chewing on bottles of medication and ingesting the
contents.
Kinetics
Imidazoline decongestants are well absorbed from the GI
tract as well as across mucosal surfaces. It is thought that
the imidazolines are metabolized in the liver, although
some fraction is excreted unchanged in the urine. In
humans, the half-life is 2-4 hours.
Mechanism of Action
In the central nervous system, imidazolines bind to
alpha2-adrenergic receptors, which inhibits norepinephrine
release and decreases sympathetic effects. This results in
hypotension, bradycardia, and sedation (Means 2004).
699
Peripherally, stimulation of alpha-2 receptors results in
vasoconstriction and hypertension. With oral intoxications
the central effects usually predominate.
Toxicity
Imidazoline decongestants  have  very  low margins  of
safety, with even small exposures resulting in significant
clinical signs.
Clinical Effects
Clinical effects can be seen as quickly as 10 minutes after
exposure and include vomiting, lethargy or sedation,
weakness, collapse, bradycardia, and coma. Hypotension is
commonly  seen,  although  occasionally  hypertension
occurs, often accompanied by hyperactivity and muscle
tremors.
Differential Diagnoses
Other causes of hypotension and sedation include alpha-2
agonist (e.g., amitraz, xylzine, medetomidine), calcium
channel blocker, cardiac glycoside, and beta adrenergic
Diagnostics
No laboratory tests to detect these drugs are readily
available and no specific clinical pathology changes are
expected with imidazoline toxicosis.
Management of Exposures
700
Decontamination  following
gexposureisgenerally
small  volume of liquid medication that is involved.
Exposed asymptomatic animals should be monitored for
the development of signs for a minimum of 4 hours
following exposure.
Symptomatic animals should be
administered intravenous fluids. If needed, atropine,
yohimbine, or atipamezole may be used to increase heart
rate and blood pressure. The latter two drugs are preferred
 a   i    
of the clinical effects.
Prognosis
Animals receiving appropriate treatment have a good
prognosis for recovery.
NONSTEROIDAL
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
MEDICATIONS
This section covers the nonsalicylate NSAIDs. Aspirin and
other salicylates are discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
Sources/Formulations
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) are
commonly used to treat pain and inflammation and to
reduce fevers. Many are also available in combination with
antihistamines and/or decongestants in cold, flu, and
allergy products. It is important to verify the active
ingredients in over-the-counter products because clients
are sometimes confused as to which NSAID (e.g.,
ibuprofen vs. naproxen) the product contains, and there
701
may  be  additional   ingredients  such  as   caffeine,
antihistamines, or decongestants that might contribute to
adverse effects. There are several NSAIDs approved for
use in veterinary medicine. Most exposures to NSAIDs in
companion animals are due to accidental ingestion of
human or veterinary formulations, although iatrogenic
owners are common.
Kinetics
In general, over-the-counter NSAIDs are well absorbed
from the stomach and upper small intestine, and are highly
(>90%) protein-bound (Burke et al. 2005). They exhibit a
higher degree of toxicity when other highly protein-bound
drugs are coingested. Most NSAIDs undergo liver
metabolism, with metabolites excreted primarily via the
urine. One exception is naproxen, which is excreted via the
bile  in  dogs,  undergoes 
extensiveenterohepatic
recirculation, and has a long half-life (74 hours)
Mechanism of Action
NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by blocking the
conversion of arachidonic acid to various prostaglandins
through the inhibition of the enzyme cyclooxygenase
(COX). Although many moderm NSAIDs are marketed as
being specific for certain forms of COX (e.g., COX-2), the
fact that COX specificity is lost in overdose situations
minimizes the importance of this distinction (Talcott
2006). The NSAIDs decrease secretion of the protective
mucous layer in the stomach and small intestine and cause
vasoconstriction in gastric mucosa. Renal effects include
702
inhibition of renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate,
tubular ion transport, renin release, and water homeostasis.
Some NSAIDs also affect platelet aggregation  and
possibly hepatic function, although unlike salicylates,
serious hepatotoxicosis does not appear to be a common
problem with acute NSAID overdoses.
Toxicity
There is tremendous variation in the degree of toxicity
among the many NSAIDs, as well as significant species
       
NSAIDs (Table 26.1). Many over-the-counter NSAIDs
(e.g.,  naproxen and ibuprofen)
）poseriskfor
especially when given repeatedly. Larger overdoses can
result in renal tubular injury. Ibuprofen can cause severe
neurologic dysfunction when dosages exceed 4o0 mg/kg
(Dunayer 2004).
A rough rule of thumb for dogs is that GI toxicity may be
seen at 4-5 times the therapeutic dose of a given NSAID
and renal injury may occur at doses 8-l0 times the
therapeutic doses. Cats are considered to be 2-4 times
more sensitive than dogs (Dunayer 2004).
Clinical Effects
The onset of GI upset is generally within the first 2-6
hours after ingestion, with GI hemorrhage and ulceration
occurring 12 hours to 4 days postingestion. In severe cases.
gastrointestinal  perforation  may  occur,  causing  septic
peritonitis and shock. The onset of renal failure usually
703
occurs within the first 12 hours after massive exposure to
an NSAM. but mav he delaved for 3_5 dava
NSAID
Therapeutic Dosoge
Toxic Dosage (Gl)
Toxic Dosoge (Renal)
Ibuprofen
Dogs:5mg/kgq 24h
Dogs:>25mg/kg
Dogs >175mg/kg(>400mg/kg
Cas:Nne
Cas:>1mg/kg
Cais:Not known lu fhoughi o
be twice as sensitive as ys
Naroen
Dgs:2mg/kgq48h
>5ngikg
Cats:None
Carprofen
Dogs: 4.4mg/kg PO q 24h or 2.2mg/kg
Dogs:>20mg/kg
Dogs >40 mg/kg
POq12h
Cats:12mg/kgSQ once or 2mg/kg
Cats: >4mg/kg
Cats:>8mg/kg
POq12hfor48h
Dermcxib
Dogs:12mg/kg q12h
Dogs:15mg/kg
Dogs 30mg/kg
Cats:None
Cuts:4m/kg
Cats:8mg/kg
pediatric animals, geriatric animals, or animals with prior
health issues may be more susceptible to the effects of
NSAID overdose.
Signs
Clinical signs include vomiting, hematemesis, depression,
anorexia, hyperthermia, melena, abdominal pain, and
hematochezia. Polydipsia, polyuria, dehydration, lethargy,
hematuria, and oliguria have been reported in animals
experiencing renal injury from NSAIDs. Central nervous
signs include depression, ataxia, tremors, seizures, coma,
and hypothermia.
Laboratory
Complete blood counts may reflect GI hemorrhage and
inflammation, with elevations in white blood cell and
segmented neutrophil counts and decreases in hematocrit
noted. Patients with renal failure will have increases in
BUN and creatinine as well as isosthenuria. With larger
704
overdoses of NSAIDs, transient elevations in  liver
enzymes (especially ALT) may be noted.
Differential Diagnoses
Other potential  causes  of  gastrointestinal upset and
hemorrhage
 include
hemorrhagic
gastroenteritis
hypoadrenocorticism, gastrointestinal foreign bodies, viral
enteritis, and gastrointestinal neoplasia. Other causes of
renal failure include leptospirosis and ingestion of grapes/
raisins, lilies(cats), ethylene glycol, and heavy metals.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
Serum measurements for many NSAIDs can be performed
at veterinary diagnostic laboratories and many human
hospitals, but turnaround time may be too long to assist in
diagnosis of an acute case. Diagnosis is generally based on
history of exposure and development of consistent clinical
signs.
Postmortem
Lesions associated  with  ibuprofen overdose include
perforations, erosions, ulcers, and hemorrhages in the
upper (stomach and duodenum) and, on occasion, lower
(colon) gastrointestinal tract. Renal damage includes renal
tubular necrosis and/or papillary necrosis.
Management of Exposures
705
Decontamination includes emesis if it can be performed
within an hour of ingestion and activated charcoal if within
4 hours postingestion. Activated charcoal should not be
administered if there is  evidence of gastrointestinal
bleeding, because the charcoal may impede healing of
ulcerated areas. Gastrointestinal protectants (H2 blocker or
proton pump inhibitor, sucralfate, and misoprostol) should
be maintained for 5-10 days or longer if evidence of GI
bleeding occurs. For animals ingesting potentially
nephrotoxic doses, intravenous (IV) fluid therapy at 2x
maintenance rate for a minimum of 48 hours (72 hours for
naproxen) is recommended to protect renal tubules.
Animals with evidence of renal insufficiency should be
managed as for any type of acute renal failure. Central
(i.e., diazepam for seizures, oxygen and thermoregulation
for coma).
Prognosis
The prognosis is dependent upon the dose ingested, species
of animal involved, and promptness of treatment. Those
with mild GI and renal effects can be expected to make full
recoveries; patients with gastrointestinal perforation or
severe renal insufficiency have more guarded prognoses.
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE
Sources/Formulations
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA) is a sympathomimetic agent
that has been withdrawn from the human market due to an
association with increased stroke risk, but it is still used in
706
veterinary medicine for controlling urinary incontinence in
dogs. Chewable veterinary formulations are extremely
palatable, especially to dogs, which may increase the risk
of accidental overdose.
Kinetics
Phenylpropanolamine is quickly absorbed orally, although
extended release products may have a delayed onset of
action (Means 2004).
Mechanism of Action
Sympathomimetics like PPA stimulate α- and β-adrenergic
receptors, resulting in  the release of endogenous
catecholamines in the brain and heart. This results in
peripheral  vasoconstriction, cardiac  stimulation and
bronchodilation (Means 2004).
Toxicity
Signs can be seen at therapeutic doses in some dogs, and
serious signs appear at dosages above 20 mg/kg (Means
2004).
Clinical Effects
Signs normally start within 30-90 minutes and may
continue up to 72 hours, depending on the dose ingested.
Signs of PPA toxicosis include tachycardia, hypertension,
panting,  agitation,
hyperesthesia, 
 piloerection,
hyperthermia, tremors, seizures, and secondary depression
707
Bradycardia may result  in response  to hypertension;
therefore, dogs may present either depressed, bradycardic,
and    hypertensive
ORagitated, tachycardic, and
hypertensive.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include intoxication from other
CNS stimulants such as other sympathomimetics (e.g.,
pseudoephedrine, amphetamine), metaldehyde, cocaine,
ethylene
glycol,
albuterol,
 strychnine,
and
5-hydroxytryptophan.
Diagnostics
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and history. Serum
levels canbe measured at a veterinary diagnostic
laboratory, but turnaround times may be too long to assist
in prompt diagnosis of an acute case.
Management of Exposures
Because of the potential for rapid onset of signs, emesis
should be induced at the veterinary hospital and within 30
minutes of exposure. Activated charcoal should be given if
no contraindications exist. Heart rate and blood pressure
should
be
closely
monitored.Phenothiazines
(acepromazine or chlorpromazine) may be used to contro]
agitation, and may also help to lower the blood pressure.
Cyproheptadine has been found to be useful for alleviating
some of the central nervous system signs. Nitroprusside or
other pressor agents may be used to manage severe
hypertension. Managing the blood pressure often results in
708
correction  of  the reflex bradycardia. Atropine  is
contraindicated in the management of bradycardia because
it will worsen the hypertension. Beta-blockers should not
be used on bradycardic animals because they will worsen
the bradycardia. In tachycardic animals very low doses of
metoprolol (preferred due to beta-l selectivity and short
half-life) or propranolol may be considered but should be
used with caution and only after CNS signs (agitation,
recommended to promote excretion, protect renal function,
and aid in thermoregulation. Fluid rates should be adjusted
accordingly in hypertensive animals.
Prognosis
The prognosis will depend on the dose ingested, severity
of clinical signs, elapsed time between onset of signs and
institution of therapy, and response to therapy. Animals
experiencing seizures have a more guarded prognosis.
VITAMINS
Sources/Formulations
Vitamin supplements are widely available and include
multivitamins as  well  as products containing  single
vitamins as ingredients. Many vitamin supplements also
contain a variety of minerals (e.g., iron, selenium, etc.).
Most products are designed to provide the minimum daily
requirement (MRA) of vitamins, but some products have
higher potencies and contain several times the MRA in
each tablet or capsule. For instance, most vitamin
supplements contain vitamin D3 at 400 IU per serving, but
709
highpotency products containing 1000 to 50,000 IU have
become available and these pose a higher risk of acute
toxicosis.
Toxicity
Ingredients of concern in vitamin supplements include iron
and vitamin D. Water-soluble vitamins (B vitamins,
vitamin C) are not likely to cause significant clinical
effects because excess vitamins are eliminated through the
urine. However, formulations with B vitamins can result in
benign orange discoloration of the urine. High doses of
niacin (vitamin B3) can cause a self-limiting flushing of
the skin of the face and ear pinnas in some dogs (though
transiently uncomfortable, no serious harm will occur).
Vitamin C can be irritating to the gastrointestinal tract and
result in mild, transient vomiting, or diarrhea.
Vitamin D is of concern if the ingested dosage exceeds 0.1
mg/kg (40o0 IU/kg). (See to the cholecalciferol section of
       h 
vitamin D exposures.) Iron dosages above 20 mg/kg can
cause vomiting and diarrhea; dosages over 60 mg/kg can
cause corrosive injury to the intestinal mucosa and liver
injury. (see the iron section in Chapter 29 for further
information on iron toxicosis.)
REFERENCES
Bischoff, Karen. 2007. Toxicity of over-the-counter drugs.
InVeterinary Toxicology:Basic and Clinical Principles.
edited by Ramesh C. Gupta, pp. 363-390. San Dieg0:
Elsevier.
710
Boothe, Dawn M. 2006. Small Animal Pharmacology and
Therapeutics. St. Louis: Saunders.
Burke, Anne, Smyth, Emer, and FitzGerald, Garret A.
2005, Analgesic-antipyretic and antinflammatory agents:
Pharmacotherapy of gout. In Goodman & Gilman's The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, llth edition,
edited by Laurence Brunton, John Lazo, and Keith Parker,
pp. 671-716. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Dunayer, Eric K. 2004. Ibuprofen toxicosis in dogs, cats,
ferrets. Veterinary Medicine 99(7):580-586.
Gonzalez, M.A., and Estes, K.S. 1998. Pharmacokinetic
overview  of  oral  second-generation  Hl  antihistamines.
International JournalofClinicalPharmacologyand
Therapeutics 36(5):292-300.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2010. Toxicology of Pain
Medication. Proceedings from the CVC Baltimore,
Baltimore, MD, April 11, 2010.
 2004. Antihistamines.  In Veterinary Clinical
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 309-311. St.
Louis: Mosby.
 2001. Salicylate toxicosis in dogs and cats.
Standards of Care: Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4(7):1-5.
McConkey, S.E., Grant, D.M., and Cribb A.E. 2009. The
role   of  para-aminophenol   in  acetaminophen-induced
711
Veterinary
Pharmacology
and
Therapeutics
32(6):585-595
Means, Charlotte. 2004. Decongestants. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
309-311. St. Louis: Mosby.
Moeller, Robert B. 2004. Hepatobiliary system: Toxic
response of the hepatobiliary system. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
61-68. St. Louis: Mosby.
Ottani, A., Leone, S., Sandrini, M., Ferrari, A., and
Bertolini, A. 2006. The analgesic activity of paracetamol is
prevented by the blockade of cannabinoid CBl receptors,
European Journal of Pharmacology, 531(1-3): 280-281.
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th
edition. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Plumlee, Konnie H. 2004. Hematic system. In Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, p.
59. St. Louis: Mosby.
Roder, Joseph D. 2004. Analgesics. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 282-284. St.
Louis: Mosby.
Sellon, Rance K. 2006. Acetaminophen. In Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 550-558. St. Louis: Saunders
712
FundamentalsofVeterinaryClinicalPathology,2nd
edition, p. 1 86. Oxford: Blackwell.
Talcott, Patricia A. 2006. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatories
In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd edition, edited by
Michael E. Peterson and Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 902-933.
St. Louis: Saunders.
713
27
Prescription Drugs
Sharon Gwaltney-Brant
ALBUTEROL
Sources/Formulations
Albuterol   (salbutamol)
 and 
1 albuterol sulfate  are
bronchodilators
available
as tablets (immediate-and
extended-release
forms), oral syrups, l
liquids for
nebulization, and aerosols for inhalation (Rosendale 2004).
Bronchodilators are used for the management of airway
diseases such as asthma. Companion animals are most
commonly exposed when they accidentally ingest tablets
or liquids or when they bite into pressurized inhalers.
Kinetics
Albuterol is rapidly absorbed via inhalation or ingestion.
Albuterol crosses the blood brain barrier and placenta; it is
not known whether albuterol distributes into milk
Albuterol is metabolized to inactive metabolites in the
liver and is excreted as metabolites and parent compound
in the urine.
Mechanism of Action
The pharmacologic action of albuterol is due to stimulation
of β2 adrenergic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle,
causing bronchodilation (Mensching and Volmer 2007). In
714
overdose situations, the β2 selectivity is lost and β1
receptors are also stimulated resulting in increased rate and
force of contraction of the heart. Peripheral vasodilation
results in hypotension, potentiating the tachycardia and
increasing  the likelihood of more severe cardiac
arrhythmias  such as premature  ventricular contraction,
atrioventricular block, etc. Stimulation of β2 receptors on
skeletal muscle results in muscle tremors.
Toxicity
Toxic doses for albuterol have not been established, but
adverse clinicaleffects can be seen in some dogs at
therapeutic dosages (o.o5 mg/kg for dogs) (Rosendale
2004). Animals biting into inhalers could have the entire
contents expelled into the oral cavity and pharynx,
resulting in exposures many times the therapeutic levels
(Mensching and Volmer 2007).
Clinical Effects
Aerosolized products can have an almost immediate effect;
tablets and liquids may have some delay in onset of
clinical signs.
Signs
Clinical signs of albuterol toxicosis include tachycardia or
other  arrhythmia,  weakness,  lethargy,  tachypnea.
aggression, agitation, hyperactivity, vomiting, and tremors
(Mensching and Volmer 2007). Seizures, although
uncommon, can occur.
715
Laboratory
Hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia have been reported
in dogs with albuterol toxicosis (Mensching and Volmer
2007). Although the hypophosphatemia generally resolves
on its own, hypokalemia
may
 require
epotassium
supplementation.
Differential Diagnosis
Other  central  nervous
S  system    and  cardiovascular
stimulants such as methylxanthines, amphetamines,
cocaine, antidepressants, ethylene glycol, metaldehyde,
pseudoephedrine,  and  phenylpropanolamine  can cause
signs resembling albuterol toxicosis.
Diagnostics
Plasma albuterol levels can be measured but require
submission to a specialty laboratory, so they would not be
helpful in making a prompt diagnosis.
Management of Exposures
The goals of management of albuterol toxicosis are control
of clinical signs, correction of electrolyte abnormalities,
and supportive care until full recovery. Decontamination is
inadvisable, and likely to be unrewarding, in cases
involving aerosol or liquid formulations due to the rapidity
of onset of clinical signs (Rosendale 2004). Intravenous
fluid therapy is key to providing cardiovascular support in
patients with albuterol toxicosis. In mild toxicosis, fluid
therapy may be sufficient to manage
ehypotension;
716
however, with more severe intoxications, more aggressive
treatment will be necessary. Diazepam should be utilized
first to manage central nervous system stimulation,
because some tachycardia may be due to the agitated state
of the patient. Propranolol is the beta blocker of choice in
treating  tachycardia that persists after central nervous
system stimulation has been managed; propranolol also
often assists in normalizing serum potassium. Once the
heart rate is within reasonable levels, the serum should be
analyzed for hypokalemia and potassium supplementation
administered as needed
Prognosis
Most animals receiving prompt and appropriate care will
recover within 12 hours of exposure, but large overdoses
may result in signs that last for 2448 hours.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Introduction
The use of psychotropic drugs to alter behavior of humans
and animals has dramatically increased in the last decade.
The behaviors that these types of drugs are intended to
alter include depression, anxiety, obsessive/compulsive
behavior, and undesirable impulses such as smoking in
humans. With the increased usage of these drugs, the
potential for accidental overdosage in companion animals
has increased. This is especially true for dogs, who due to
their inquisitive nature and often indiscriminate eating
habits, may ingest entire prescriptions of psychotropic
drugs in one sitting. Table 27.1 gives examples of the
717
veterinary medicine.
Table 27.1. Classes of antidepressants
Tricyclic Antidepressants
Amitriptyline (Elavil?)
Clomipramine (Clomicalm@)
Doxepin (Sinequin?)
Imipramine (Tofranil@)
Nortriptyline (Pamelor?)
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Citalopram (Celexa?)
Escitalopram (Lexapro?)
Fluoxetine (Prozac?)
Paroxetine (Paxil@)
Sertraline (Zoloft?)
Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Desvenlafax ine (Pristiq?)
Venlafaxine (Effexor?)
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Phenylzine (Nardil?)
Selegiline (Eldepryl?, Anypril?)
Atypical Antidepressants
Bupropion (Wellbutrin@)
Mirtazapine (Remeron?)
Nefazodone (Serzone?)
Trazodone (Desyrell@)
718
Serotonin and Serotonin Syndrome
Early psychotropic drugs were nonselective and frequently
targeted a variety of areas of the central nervous system
       n)
neurotransmitters in the CNS were more influential in
altering undesirable behaviors, and drugs that more
selectively  targeted
those
neurotransmitters
were
developed. Serotonin is one neurotransmitter that appears
to be extremely important in managing
g many CNS
disorders and older drugs  that targeted a variety  of
neurotransmitters (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants) have, in
  s  m    
selectively alter CNS serotonin levels, including selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and nonselective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (NSSRIs).
Table 27.2. Mechanism of action of serotonergic drugs
Source: Mills 2005.
Increase Serotonin Synthesis
Inhibit Serotonin Reuptake
L-tryptophan
Tricyclic Antidepressants
S-hydroxytryptophan
Amitriptyline (Elavil@)
Increase Serotonin Release
Clomipramine (Clomicalm@)
Amphetamine
Doxepin (Sinequin@)
Cocaine
Imipramine (Tofranil@)
Fenfluramine(Pondimin)
Nortriptyline (Pamelor?)
Reserpine
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Dextromethorphan
Citalopram (Celexa?)
Escitalopram (Lexapro?)
719
Decrease Serotonin Metabolism
Fluoxetine (Prozac?)
Amphetamine (metabolites)
Paroxetine (Paxil@)
Monoamine OxidaseInhibitors
Sertraline (Zoloft@)
Phenylzine (Nardil?)
Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake
Selegiline (Eldepryl?, Anypril)
Inhibitors
Venlafaxine (Effexor?)
Serotonin Receptor Agonist
Other Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Buspirone (Buspar?)
Amphetamine
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
Cocaine
Sumatriptan (Imitrex ?)
Dex tromethorphan
Meperidine (Demerol?)
Nefazodone (Serzone?)
Tramadol (Ultram?)
Trazodone (Desyrell?)
Enhancing serotonin levels in the CNS can result in
dramatic and favorable alterations in behaviors of humans
and animals. However, excessive levels of serotonin can
result in a severe and potentially life -threatening condition
termed serotonin syndrome. Many CNS stimulants that
primarily    affect
other
neurotransmitters
such
as
norepinephrine and/or dopamine (e.g., amphetamines and
cocaine), also have some degree of serotonergic action, so
at least part of the clinical effects seen may be due to
serotonin excess (Table 27.2).
. In humans, serotonin
syndrome is most commonly seen when two different
serotonergic drugs are administered simultaneously, or
when
insufficient
time
has
elapsed
between
discontinuation of one class of serotonergic drug and
institution of therapy with a different class of serotonergic
drug. In dogs, serotonin syndrome has been associated
720
with excessive ingestion of 5-hydroxytryptophan as well as
a variety of serotonergic drugs (Gwaltney-Brant 2004;
Wismer 2000)
Clinical Effects
Serotonin syndrome is characterized by a variety of effects
including altered mental status (agitation or depression,
aggression,  vocalization,  seizures,  etc.),
altered
neuromuscular activity (rigidity, myoclonus, tremors,
hyperreflexia, ataxia, etc.), hyperthermia, autonomic
derangements, and diarrhea. Death can be due to
hyperthermia,  respiratory  compromise  or  disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy.
General Management of Serotonin Syndrome
Management of serotonin syndrome includes managing
any severe CNS effects with diazepam or a phenothiazine;
refractory seizures may require general anesthesia (Merola
and Dunayer 2006: Gwaltney-Brant 2004: Wismer 2000).
Due to its serotonin-blocking effects, cyproheptadine may
be beneficial in managing the agitation, hyperthermia, and
vocalization. Once animals have been stabilized and severe
signs
s managed
(or  inasymptomatic animals),
decontamination should be attempted. If the animal has not
already vomited, induction of emesis or gastric lavage
might be performed. Administration of activated charcoal
is recommended in most cases and is especially important
if extended-or sustained-release products have been
ingested. Severe tachycardia may be managed with
betablockers  such as  propranolol.  Fluid  therapy  is
important to provide cardiovascular support and protect the
721
kidney from hypotension-related injury. Acid/base status
should be monitored and managed as needed.
Differential Diagnosis
Other agents that may cause signs resembling serotonin
syndrome (or have a serotonergic component themselves)
include
amphetamines，
cocaine,  methylxanthines,
pseudoephedrine, albuterol, metaldehyde, ethylene glycol,
strychnine, organophosphorous or carbamate insecticides,
and zinc phosphide.
Diagnosis
Most human hospitals can run quick screens for
antidepressants and may be able to provide results on a
STAT basis. Antidepressants can also be detected in blood
and urine by a veterinary diagnostic laboratory.
Prognosis
The prognosis of serotonin syndrome is generally good if
prompt veterinary medical care is obtained. In cases
involving immediate-release products, signs of serotonin
syndrome usually resolve within 12 to 36 hours, while
extended-release
(including
controlled-and
to 72 hours (Gwaltney-Brant 2004).
Tricyclic Antidepressants
Kinetics
722
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) are rapidly absorbed from
the GI tract and widely distributed throughout the body.
The half-lives of these drugs vary considerably between
individuals, and half-lives can be extended during a
toxicosis. Delayed gastric emptying and enterohepatic
recirculation are features of TCA intoxication that can also
prolong the clinical effects (Wismer 2000)
Mechanism of Action
Tricyclicantidepressants block  the reuptakeof
norepinephrine and serotonin by the presynaptic neuron,
resulting in increased levels of these drugs within the CNS.
These drugs also have  significant antihistiminic and
cholinergic effects, as well as cardiac sodium channel
blocking action, resulting in significant cardiovascular
effects.
Toxicity
Many TCAs have narrow margins of safety, with signs of
toxicosis possible  at   2-5 times therapeutic doses.
Amitrip-tyline at 15 mg/kg may be lethal to dogs. The oral
lethal dosage of clomipramine is 100mg/kg (Wismer
2000).
Clinical Effects
Signs of TCA intoxication may occur as soon as 30
minutes following exposure and include initial lethargy
and ataxia that progresses to agitation, vocalization,
hyperesthesia,   hyperthermia,   vomiting,  tachycardia,
hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia, dyspnea, pulmonary
723
edema, seizures, coma, and death. Death due to cardiac
arrhythmia may occur as early as 2 hours of ingestion in
untreated animals (Wismer 2000)
Management
Management
ofTCA
overdosage
includes
decontamination of clinically stable animals (emesis or
gastric lavage followed by activated charcoal with
cathartic). Management of clinical signs would be as above
for serotonin syndrome, but cardiac arrhythmias in TCA
overdoses may be pronounced and require further
treatment. The use of hypertonic saline has been
recommended to manage severe cardiac arrhythmias,
because the arrhythmias are thought to be due to blockade
of sodium channels within the myocardium.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Mechanism of Action
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SsRI) are classed
by function rather than structure; this class of drugs blocks
the reuptake of serotonin by the presynaptic neuron.
resulting in increased serotonin levels at the postsynaptic
receptors.
Kinetics
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are well absorbed
orally and are highly protein-bound. They tend to have
rapid onsets of action, although delayed onset may occur
724
when extended-or controlled-release products are ingested.
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004).
Toxicity
At therapeutic levels, SSRI have fewer histaminic,
cardiovascular, and sedative side effects compared to
TCAs or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs); in
overdose situations these effects, while present, tend to be
less severe than the other two classes of antidepressants.
At therapeutic and low overdose levels (< 5 times
therapeutic), these drugs tend to cause sedation; at higher
doses, more severe signs, including CNS stimulation, may
be seen.
Management
Because these agents tend to exert primarily a direct
serotonin effect, the treatment outlined above for serotonin
syndrome is  the recommended  management  when
over-dosages  occur. S
 Sustained-or extended-release
products tend to have signs that may persist for up to 72
hours.
Nonselective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
Nonselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (NSSRI) act
similarly to SSRI to block serotonin reuptake but also
block the reuptake of other amines, such as dopamine or
norepinephrine.   Venlafaxine   capsules  appear 
 to be
appealing to cats, who will readily ingest them (Merola
and Dunayer 2006). Dosages of venlafaxine of 1 mg/kg
can cause sedation, and tremors may be seen at 10 mg/kg
725
of immediate-release products (Wismer 2000). The clinical
effects of NSSRI overdose include serotonin syndrome as
well as a potential cardiovascular stimulation, resulting in
tachycardia or other cardiac arrhythmias. Management is
the same as for SSRI, but symptomatic treatment of
cardiac arrhythmias may be needed.
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that breaks down
various amines including epinephrine, dopamine, and
serotonin.   Monoamine   oxidase    inhibitors  (MAOI)
therefore inhibit the breakdown of these amines, resulting
in an increase in their concentrations both within the
presynaptic neuron and at the synapse (Wismer 2000).
Signs of MAOI overdose in companion animals include
hypo/ hypertension, tachycardia or other arrhythmias,
depression,  ataxia,
 agitation,  hyperthermia,  tremors,
seizures, coma, and respiratory depression. The onset of
signs may vary from 2 to 24 hours depending on dosage
ingested and the form of the drug (immediate- vs.
sustained-release).   Management is  as  for  serotonin
syndrome. It is recommended that animals ingesting large
doses of MAOIs have liver enzyme values monitored as
elevations in these values can sometimes occur with
MAOI overdose.
Atypical (Novel) Antidepressants
The atypical, or novel, antidepressants comprise a class of
drugs of varying structure and mechanism of action;
essentially, they do not fit well into the previous categories
726
Signs expected from this class of antidepressant vary, but
still tend to fall in line with signs seen with other
antidepressants. Similarly, treatment of toxicoses will be
the same as that of the other antidepressants outlined
above.
BACLOFEN
Sources/Formulations
Baclofen is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant that
is used to control spasticity and pain in humans with
musculoskeletal disorders and to treat urethral resistance in
dogs with urinary retention.
Kinetics
Baclofen is well absorbed orally and can have a very rapid
onset of action. Baclofen is lipid-soluble and crosses the
therapeutic levels) (Gwaltney-Brant 2004a). Baclofen is
excreted largely unchanged in the urine. The half-life is
dose-dependent and increases significantly in overdose
situations.
Mechanism of Action
At therapeutic levels, baclofen mimics GABA within the
spinal cord, blocking excitatory responses to sensory input
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004a). In overdose situations, baclofen
enters the central nervous system where it inhibits
substance P, a stimulatory compound within the brain
stem. The mechanism of baclofen -induced seizures is
727
thought to be due to decreased GABA release from
presynaptic neurons, causing excessive postsynaptic firing.
Toxicity
In dogs, dosages of 1.3 mg/kg have resulted in clinical
signs, and deaths have occurred at dosages over 8 mg/kg
(Wismer 2004).
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs of baclofen toxicosis include vomiting,
ataxia,
vocalization,
disorientation,
depression,
hypersalivation,
weakness,
recumbency,
coma.
hypothermia, hypotension or hypertension, bradycardia,
hyperactivity, agitation, tremors, mydriasis, dyspnea,
respiratory arrest, pulmonary edema, and death (Wismer
2004). Seizures and respiratory compromise secondary to
paralysis of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles are the
most lifethreatening signs.
Differential Diagnosis
Other compounds that can cause signs similar to baclofen
include   other 
 central
1
 nervous
 system  depressants
(barbiturates, benzodiazepines, sleep aids such
as
zolpidem, etc.), ethylene glycol, isoxazole mushrooms,
antidepressants,
 macrolide
 antiparasiticides
ivermectin, moxidectin, etc.) and marijuana.
Diagnosis
728
Baclofen blood levels can be measured at a human hospital
or veterinary diagnostic laboratory, although unless STAT
results can be obtained, they may be of little value when
dealing with the emergent patient.
Management
Treatment goals for baclofen exposures are managing
clinical signs, maintaining respiration, decontamination,
and supportive care. Patients developing respiratory
compromise may need mechanical ventilation. Comatose
animals  should be monitored closely  for respiratory
insufficiency and hypothermia. Seizures generally respond
to diazepam, but the lowest dose necessary to control
seizures should be used in order to prevent exacerbating
the central nervous system depression that will follow
seizure control. Intravenous fluid therapy is helpful in
correcting hypotension and
1  providing  cardiovascular
support.   Vocalization    and
disorientationsometimes
respond to cyproheptadine. Anecdotally, some clinicians
have found the use of intravenous lipid solutions to be
helpful in managing baclofen toxicoses. Decontamination
(emesis and single dose of activated charcoal) can be
considered in asymptomatic animals, but patients
displaying even mild central nervous system effects may
be at risk of aspiration, so decontamination should be done
with care.
Prognosis
Resolution of clinical signs can take up to several days in
severe cases. Patients provided with prompt supportive
care have a reasonable prognosis of recovery as long as
729
adequate ventilatory support can be maintained. Patients
experiencing seizures have a more guarded prognosis
(Wismer 2004).
CARDIAC DRUGS
ACE Inhibitors
Sources/Formulations
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors include
drugs such as enalapril, lisinopril, benazepril, and
captopril. These drugs are used in human and veterinary
medicine to manage heart failure or hypertension. These
drugs are available as tablets and capsules alone or
combined with other medication (e.g., diuretics).
Kinetics
ACE inhibitors are well absorbed orally. Food in the
gastrointestinal tract can reduce bioavailability of captopril
by 30% to 40% (Plumb 2005). Some ACE inhibitors (e.g.,
enalapril and benazepril) are prodrugs that are converted to
an active metabolite following absorption. In dogs, the half
-lives of benazepril and captopril are 3.5 hours and 2.8
hours. Enalapril has a slower onset of action (4-6 hours)
but longer duration of action (12-14 hours) compared to
benazepril and captopril (Plumb 2005). The half-life of
benazepril in cats is 16-23 hours. Half-lives of all are
increased in patients with renal failure.
Mechanism of Action
730
ACE inhibitors prevent the conversion of angiotensin I to
angiotensin HI by competing with angiotensin I for the
ACE enzyme. The ACE enzyme has a higher affinity for
ACE inhibitors  than  for angiotensin I.  Decreased
angiotensin II  levels result  in decreased aldosterone
secretion and increased renin secretion, causing peripheral
vasodilation.
Toxicity
Compared to other cardiac drugs, ACE inhibitors have a
relatively wide margin of safety, with hypotension
expected only at high doses. Generally dosages equivalent
to < 20 mg/kg of lisinopril are not likely to cause any
serious clinical problems in healthy adult dogs (ASPCA
Animal Poison Control Center, unpublished data).
Clinical Effects
The primary clinical effect of ACE inhibitor overdose is
hypotension, which can result in nausea, vomiting, and
weakness.
Differential Diagnosis
Other
causes   of   hypotension   include 
primary
cardiovascular disease, cardiac glycosides (drugs, plants.
Bufo toads), calcium channel blockers, nitroglycerine,
alpha2 agonists (e.g., amitraz, xylazine), imidazoline
decongestants, beta blockers, and muscarinic mushrooms.
Diagnosis
731
Serum or plasma levels of ACE inhibitors are not readily
available. Diagnosis of toxicosis is based on history and
clinical signs.
Management
Large ingestions of ACE inhibitors should be managed
with decontamination (emesis followed by activated
charcoal) and monitoring for hypotension. Patients
developing hypotension should be treated with intravenous
fluids to assist in maintaining blood pressure.
Prognosis
The prognosis for patients ingesting overdoses of ACE
inhibitors is excellent because serious consequences are
rare.
Calcium Channel Blockers
Sources/Formulations
Calcium channel blockers include verapamil, diltiazem,
nifedipine, and nimodipine. These drugs have been used to
manage a variety of cardiovascular disorders in human and
veterinary medicine.
Kinetics
Calcium channel blockers are rapidly absorbed from the
gastrointestinal  tract and undergo significant  first  pass
effect (Roder 2004a). These drugs are metabolized in the
liver and metabolites are excreted through the urine. The
732
half-life of diltiazem in cats is 2 hours and the half-life of
verapamil in the dog is 0.8 to 2.5 hours (Plumb 2005).
Mechanism of Action
Calcium channel blockers prevent the opening of voltage
gated calcium channels within the heart, slowing the influx
of calcium into the myocardiocyte and inhibiting calcium
dependent processes  in  the myocardium  (Miller and
Adams 2009; Roder 2004a). This results in coronary and
peripheral  vasodilation, decreased cardiac  contractility,
and decreased activity of cardiac pacemaker nodes. The
net effect is slowing of heart rate and lowering of blood
pressure. These effects are exaggerated in overdose
situations.
Toxicity
Calcium channel blockers have a narrow margin of safety
and doses 2-3 times therapeutic doses can cause adverse
reactions (Roder 2004a).
Clinical Effects
The clinical effects of calcium channel blockers include
bradycardia   and  hypotension   resulting
inweakness.
recumbency,  coma,
vomiting,
depression,  and
disorientation (Roder 2004a). Severe cardiac conduction
disturbances (e.g., second-and third-degree AV blockade)
and pulmonary edema are possible. Hyperglycemia may
also 0ccur (Plumb 2005).
Differential Diagnosis
733
Other causes of hypotension and/or bradycardia include
primary cardiovascular disease, cardiac glycosides (drugs,
plants, Bufo
toads), calcium 
channel  blockers,
nitroglycerine, alpha2 agonists (e.g., amitraz, xylazine),
imidazoline decongestants, beta blockers, and muscarinic
mushrooms.
Management
Prompt
decontaminationofrecent  ingestions is
recommended, including induction  of emesis and
administration of activated charcoal. Patients should be
monitored a minimum of 6 hours following ingestion of
immediaterelease   products  and 12  hours following
ingestion of sustained -, controlled-or extended-release
products.  Mild hypotension and bradycardia may be
manageable with intravenous fluids alone, but more severe
cardiovascular effects need more intensive treatment,
including  administration  of  intravenous  calcium salts.
Treatment for refractory cases includes pressor agents
(dopamine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol, etc.), atropine,
and cardiac pacing. Intravenous lipid solutions have been
calcium channel blockers (Cave and Harvey 2009).
Prognosis
Prognosis will depend on dose ingested, time to
presentation for veterinary care, severity of clinical signs.
and response to therapy. Patients with poor response to
appropriate therapy have a guarded to poor prognosis.
Cardiac Glycosides
734
Sources/Formulations
Cardiac glycoside drugs include digoxin and digitoxin.
Cardiac glycoside compounds are also found in a variety
of plants including foxglove (Digitalis purpura), oleander
(Nerium oleander), and lily of the valley (Convallaria
spp.), as well as the secretions of several species of Bufo
toads.
Kinetics
Cardiac glycosides are well absorbed orally.  Protein
binding varies, with digitoxin being highly protein-bound
and digoxin having low protein binding (Roder 2004a).
These drugs are metabolized in the liver.
Mechanism of Action
Cardiac glycosides interfere with normal functioning of Na
+/K+-ATPases, increasing intracellular sodium and
extracellular potassium. The final result is an increase in
force of contraction, increase in cardiac output, and
decrease in heart rate.
Toxicity
Cardiac glycosides have a very narrow margin of safety,
and adverse effects with chronic therapeutic use are not
uncommon. Doses 2 to 3 times therapeutic doses can cause
significant adverse cardiovascular effects (Roder 2004a).
Clinical Effects
735
Clinical Signs
Clinical  signs of cardiac  glycoside toxicosis  include
vomiting and diarrhea as well as cardiac effects (Roder
2004a). Cardiac effects can be seen without any initial
gastrointestinal signs and can include just about any
known  arrhythmia.  Clinical  signs associated  with  the
cardiovascular effects in acute intoxications include
weakness, collapse, pale or gray mucous membrane color,
hypotension, hypothermia, coma, and death. Pulmonary
edema and renal failure may occur secondarily.
Laboratory
Serum
 potassium
 shouldbemonitored
because
hyperkalemia is commonly seen with cardiac glycoside
toxicosis.
Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of cardiac dysfunction include primary
cardiovascular
disease,  calcium  channel   blockers,
nitroglycerine, alpha2 agonists (e.g., amitraz, xylazine),
imidazoline decongestants, beta blockers, and muscarinic
mushrooms.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and clinical
signs. Most human hospitals can run serum digoxin levels
on a STAT basis.
Management
736
Prompt
 decontamination  of  recent  ingestions  is
recommended, including induction of emesis and
administration of activated charcoal. Patients should be
monitored a minimum of 6 hours following ingestion.
There is a wide range of arrhythmias that can be seen with
cardiac glycoside toxicosis, so the cardinal rule of
treatment is to “"treat the patient, not the poison," and
manage the arrhythmias symptomatically (e.g., atropine for
bradyarrhythmias). For patients that are not responding to
appropriate antiarrhythmic therapy, the use of digoxin
immune Fab may be considered (for further information,
see Chapter 8, "Antidotes"). Management of hyperkalemia
may include the use of potassium-free fluids and/or insulin
therapy.
Prognosis
The prognosis will depend on the dose ingested, time to
presentation for veterinary care, severity of clinical signs
and response to therapy. Patients with poor response to
appropriate therapy have a guarded to poor prognosis.
5-FLUOROURACIL
Sources/Formulations
5-Fluorouracil is a pyrimidine analog in the class of
antineoplastic dugs termed antimetabolites. 5-Fluorouracil
is used to treat a variety of cancers in human and
veterinary medicine. Topical creams and solutions are used
to treat dermal disorders such as solar keratosis in humans
(Roder 2004).
737
Kinetics
5-Flurouracil is well-absorbed both orally and following
topical application.
Mechanism of Action
5-Fluorouracil inhibits DNA synthesis, resulting in
interference with cell division, so it is more toxic to rapidly
dividing cells of the gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow
(Albretsen 2001). Metabolites of 5-fluorouracil are thoughi
to contribute to the seizures that are frequently seen with
5-fluorouracil toxicosis in dogs (Yamashita et al. 2004)
Toxicity
The minimum lethal dosage of 5-fluorouracil in dogs is 20
mg/kg, although serious clinical effects can be seen at
dosages well below this (Albretsen 200l). Any exposure
should  be  considered potentially serious and   merit
evaluation of the patient by a veterinarian.
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs in dogs exposed to 5-fluorouracil include
vomiting, lethargy, tremors, seizures, cardiac arrhythmias,
and respiratory depression (Albretsen 2001). Severe
vomiting can begin within minutes of exposure; seizures
may occur quickly or can be delayed up to several hours.
Patients surviving the acute crisis may develop evidence of
bone marrow suppression and/or alimentary tract mucosal
necrosis within days of exposure.
738
Differential Diagnosis
Other toxicants that can cause acute onset of signs similar
to
 5-fluorouracil
include
 CNS  stimulant
 drugs
(amphetamines,
cocaine,
antidepressants, 
etc.),
organophosphorous or carbamate insecticides, strychnine,
methylxanthines, ethylene glycol, nicotine, and zinc
phosphide.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history of exposure and clinical
signs. Serum levels of 5-fluorouracil are not readily
available.
Management
Management of 5-fluorouracil toxicosis entails managing
life-threatening
clinical
signs, 
 seizure
control,
 gastrointestinal protection, supportive care, and monitoring
for
r bone marrow suppression.I
Decontamination
1S
indicated only in recent, asymptomatic exposures. Once
clinical signs develop, decontamination is less rewarding
and may add the risk of aspiration. Seizures are often
refractory to diazepam alone, but a dose of pentobarbital
followed by a constant-rate-infusion of diazepam has been
found to be helpful in managing seizures (ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center, unpublished data).  Antiemetics
should be used to manage vomiting, and gastrointestinal
protectants  should be  provided.  Cardiac arrhythmias
should be managed as they occur. General supportive care
includesintravenous
fluid
 administration,
pain
management
(patients
S experiencing alimentary
tract
739
necrosis  are  quite  painful),  thermoregulation,  and
antibiotics to prevent infection from the eroded GI mucosa.
Serum chemistry, complete blood count, acid/base, and
electrolytes should all be monitored. Animals that survive
beyond a few days should have serial complete blood
counts twice weekly for 4 weeks to detect evidence of
bone marrow suppression. Patients with bone marrow
suppression may need to be treated with bone marrow
stimulants (e.g., filgrastim for leukopenia)
Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with 5-fluorouracil exposures is
guarded, and mortality rates of > 50% have been reported,
despite  intensive
care (Albretsen2001).Positive
prognostic indicators include no seizures or seizures that
respond well to therapy. Negative prognostic indicators
include being a cat and poor response to anticonvulsant
therapy.
ORALDIABETICMEDICATIONS
Sulfonylureas
Sources/Formulations
Sulfonylureas are oral hypoglycemic drugs used in the
treatment of diabetes in human and veterinary medicine
Included in this class are glimepiride, glipizide, glyburide,
chlorpropamide, and tolazamide (Rosendale 2004a).
Kinetics
740
gastrointestinal tract and are highly protein-bound. They
are metabolized in the liver and excreted via the urine.
Half-life information in nonhumans is not available but
glimepiride and glyburide appear to have duration of
action of approximately 24 hours in cats, while glipizide
has a hypoglycemic effect in cats lasting less than 60
minutes at therapeutic levels (Plumb 2005).
Mechanism of Action
     n a sg
endogenous release of insulin and may enhance the
binding of insulin to receptors (Rosendale 2004a).
Toxicity
In normoglycemic animals, hypoglycemia can be seen at
therapeutic doses (Rosendale 2004a)
Clinical Effects
Clinical signs of sulfonylurea toxicosis are primarily those
of hypoglycemia. Liver dysfunction has been reported with
therapeutic use of sulfonylureas in cats, but whether liver
injury would occur following acute overdose is not known.
Clinical Signs
Vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, ataxia, weakness, behavioral
changes, seizures and coma can occur in patients
experiencing
ghypoglycemia. Icterus, vomiting, and
741
diarrhea were reported in cats experiencing adverse hepatic
effects from glipizide (Rosendale 2004a)
Laboratory
Hypoglycemia   is  the   primary   laboratory   abnormality
expected with sulfonylurea overdose.
Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of hypoglycemia that should be considered
include juvenile hypoglycemia, xylitol (dogs), alphalipoic
acid (dogs), primary liver disease, sepsis, iatrogenic insulin
overdose, and insulinoma.
Diagnosis
Sulfonylurea serum levels can be determined by a
veterinary diagnostic laboratory but turnaround times can
be long, making determination of serum levels of little use
for diagnosing the acute patient.
Management
Management of sulfonylurea overdose should focus on
managing serious
 clinical effects 
(coma, seizures),
normalization of serum glucose, decontamination, and
monitoring for return of hypoglycemia. Because of the
potential for rapid onset of signs of hypoglycemia, emesis
should only be induced in a hospital setting once serum
glucose levels have been determined and, if necessary,
corrected. Monitoring of serum glucose should be done for
a minimum of 24 hours following exposure. Small,
742
frequent meals may help in management of mild
intoxications. As needed, intravenous dextrose solutions
should be administered to maintain blood glucose in
patients experiencing more severe hypoglycemia. Seizing
animals may also require diazepam. Baseline liver values
should be obtained and repeated at 24 and 48 hours;
patients showing increasing liver values should continue to
have levels repeated every 24 hours until it is apparent that
the enzyme values have leveled off or started to decline.
Prognosis
Most cases of sulfonylurea overdose will have a good
prognosis provided prompt  veterinary care has been
obtained. Patients with protracted hypoglycemia prior to
presentation have a more guarded prognosis.
Metformin
Sources/Formulations
Metformin is a biguanide antidiabetic agent with the trade
name Glucophage ?. Metformin is used to treat non
insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus in humans and cats
(Rosendale 2004a; Plumb 2005).
Kinetics
Metformin is slowly absorbed in humans and variably
absorbed in cats (Plumb 2005). Metformin is eliminated
unchanged in the urine (Rosendale 2004a). The half-life of
metformin in cats is 11.5 hours.
743
Mechanism of Action
Metformin is thought to lower blood glucose by improving
peripheral  sensitivity  to  insulin  and  increasing insulin
uptake by peripheral cells (Rosendale 2004a). Unlike
sulfonylureas, metformin does not increase serum insulin
levels.
Toxicity
No toxic doses exist for dogs or cats ingesting metformin;
doses ranging from 58 to 170 mg/kg in dogs and cats did
not  result  in  hypoglycemia
(Heller 2007). Unlike
sulfonylureas, ingestion of metformin is not expected to
cause hypoglycemia in euglycemic animals (Rosendale
2004a). Animals with inadequate caloric intake or with
recent excessive exercise couldbe at riskfor
hypoglycemia. Although gastrointestinal signs have been
seen with metformin overdoses in animals, serious life
-threatening signs have not been reported.
Clinical Effects
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of  metformin are  primarily related  to
gastrointestinal upset: nausea, vomiting, abdominal
bloating, diarrhea, flatulence, and anorexia (Heller 2007).
Laboratory
Hypoglycemia is not anticipated with metformin exposures
744
those with recent excessive exercise without adequate food
intake could develop hypoglycemia following metformin
exposure (Rosendale 2004a). Lactic acidosis has been
reported in humans taking metformin and in severe
overdose situations, but this condition has not been
reported in animals.
Differential Diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for signs of metformin exposure
include other causes of gastrointestinal upset such as
dietary
indiscretion,
infectious
gastroenteritis,
 gastrointestinal foreign body, etc.
Diagnosis
Metformin serum levels can be measured, but because
metformin is not expected to cause serious issues,
measuring is not generally recommended.
Management
Management of metformin overdoses primarily involves
managing gastrointestinal upset. Antiemetics can be
utilized  in vomiting
patients.Decontaminationis
recommended in large exposures, including induction of
emesis if within 1 hour of exposure followed by
administration of activated charcoal. Animals appearing to
be in a negative energy balance (e.g., emaciated, cachexic)
should have blood glucose monitored; small frequent
meals may help keep blood glucose within normal limits.
 sisin    ss  
be prudent.
745
Prognosis
Most cases develop no more than gastrointestinal upset
that is responsive to symptomatic care, so the prognosis in
most cases is excellent.
REFERENCES
Albretsen, Jay C. 2001. 5-Fluorouracil toxicosis in dogs
VeterinaryMedicine96(4):270-274
Cave, G. and Harvey, M. 2009. Intravenous lipid emulsion
as an antidote beyond local anesthetic toxicity: A
systematicreview.
AcademicEmergency Medicine
16(9):815-824.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon M. 2004. Antidepressants. In
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Konnie H.
Plumlee, pp. 286-291. St. Louis: Mosby.
.2004a. Muscle relaxants.In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp. 326-330. St.
Louis: Mosby.
Heller, Jacqueline B. 2007. Metformin overdose in dogs
Mensching, Donna and Volmer, Petra A. 2007. Breathe
easier when managing beta2 agonist inhaler toxicoses in
dogs. Veterinary Medicine 102(6):369-373.
746
Merola, Valentina M. and Dunayer, Eric D. 2006. The 10
most common toxicoses in cats. Veterinary Medicine
101(6): 339-342.
Miller, Matthew W. and Adams, H. Richard. 2009.
Digitalis, positive inotropes and vasodilators. In Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edition, edited by
Jim E. Riviere and Mark G. Papich, pp. 541-574. Ames,
Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.
Mills, Kirk C. 2005. Serotonin syndrome. In Critical Care
Toxicology, edited by Jeffrey Brent, Kevin L. Wallace,
Keith K. Burkhart, Scott D. Phillips, and J. Ward
Donovan, pp. 281-290. Philadelphia: Mosby.
Plumb, Donald C. 2005. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th
ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell.
Roder, Joseph D. 2004. Antineoplastics. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
299-302. St. Louis: Mosby.
2004a. Cardiovascular drugs. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
307-309. St. Louis: Mosby.
Rosendale, Marcy. 2004. Bronchodilators. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
305-306. St. Louis: Mosby.
2004a. Diabetes medications. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, edited by Konnie H. Plumlee, pp.
311-319. St. Louis: Mosby.
747
Wismer, Tina A. 2000. Antidepressant overdoses in dogs.
Veterinary Medicine 95(7):520-525
Wismer, Tina A. 2004. Baclofen overdose in dogs.
Veterinary Medicine99(5):406-410
Yamashita, K., Yada, H., and Yariyoshi, T. 2004.
Neurotoxic effects of alpha-fluoro-beta-alanine (FBAL)
and fluoroacetic acide (FA)in dogs. Journal of
Toxicologic Science 29:155-166.
748
28
Household and Industrial Toxicants
Rhian Cope
ASPIRATION
Sources
Aspiration is the accidental introduction of liquid into the
lungs. It may occur either directly or as a consequence of
vomiting. It is a common complication of ingestion of
manylow viscosityhousehold
1products.Petroleum
distillates with a kinematic viscosity of less than 19 mm′/s
@ 40 °C (e.g., kerosene, diesel/gas oil fuels, gasoline,
Stoddard cleaning solvent, light lubricating oils, light
hydraulic fluids), glycols, and many other low viscosity
household products are significant aspiration hazards.
In general, the potential for aspiration depends on the
viscosity, surface tension and volatility of the ingested
material. Viscosity, however, provides the best estimate of
the aspiration potential of a material and determines the
rate and extent of penetration into deeper lung structures.
Any substance with low viscosity has low resistance to
flow and can readily spread in the respiratory tract.
Consequently, even a small volume may cause widespread
tissue damage. The viscosity of baby oil is an approximate
high cut-off viscosity for a high risk of aspiration.
Mechanism
749
commonly) or occur secondarily to vomiting. Aspirated
hydrocarbons (and other potential aspirants) impair lung
fluid surfactant function, leading to alveolar instability,
early  distal airway
1  closure, and ventilation/perfusion
mismatches with subsequent hypoxemia. If the aspirated
hydrocarbon is highly volatile, it may also displace
alveolar oxygen leading to temporary transient hypoxia or
in some cases to asphyxia due to rapid displacement of air.
In addition, many aspirated materials can damage
pulmonary capillaries directly, producing pathological
findings ranging from chemical pneumonitis, hemorrhages,
and bronchopneumonia to gross pulmonary edema.
CLINICALEFFECTS
Signs
It is wise to always assume that pulmonary aspiration has
occurred following ingestion of low viscosity materials,
even when there is no clinical history or signs of vomiting.
coughing, or choking. Many patients who aspirate low
viscosity materials are often initially asymptomatic and
may not be presented for treatment until significant
respiratory compromise is present. In the majority of cases,
aspiration is a quiet and insidious process that goes
unrecognized   until   respiratory   distress  develops.   In
relatively rare instances, patients may present with initial
symptoms such as gagging, choking, coughing, and
dyspnea.
Examination of the patient may show tachypnea,
intercostal   retractions,  diminished  breath   sounds,
750
tachycardia, and fever. Some patients will show few or no
signs until respiratory compromise becomes evident.
Patients with a history of ingestion of a potentially
aspiratable material should always be monitored for
aspiration pneumonia/pneumonitis and other respiratory
system  complications  by  continuous  monitoring  of
peripheral  hemoglobin   oxygen   saturation  by   pulse
oximetry/cooximetry. It is important to use periodic
diagnostic imaging of the thorax starting at 6 hours
-      s
hours postingestion.
A high proportion of patients with aspiration (particularly
of hydrocarbon distillates) will develop acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Pulmonary involvement is usually
progressive during the first 2448 hours. Reversible
bronchial hyperresponsiveness and restrictive ventilatory
limitation may be demonstrated.
If the patient survives, the pulmonary involvement often
gradually subsides
over days
01
weeks.Other
complications may
include 
pulmonary   edema,
pneumomediastinum, emphysema, pneumatoriles, cysts,
and secondary infectious pneumonia. Nonpulmonary organ
toxicity is rare with simple petroleum distillate aspiration,
but may occur with other materials.
Laboratory Findings
Typically, a progressive decline in peripheral blood
oximetry/co-oximetry) occurs. The lowered peripheral
751
blood hemoglobin oxygen saturation is most commonly
due to the development of a ventilation-perfusion
mismatch.
Bronchoalveolar
lavage
 commonly
demonstrates
 inflammatory responses characterized by neutrophilia and
foamy macrophages (foamy cytoplasmic vacuolization of
macrophages)
Differential Diagnosis
Common and important  differential  diagnoses  include
paraquat poisoning, inhalation of superheated air, and
acute viral and/or bacterial pneumonia.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
A history of exposure/ingestion is usually the most
important antemortem diagnostic clue. Occasionally, it
may be possible to smell petroleum distillates on the
animal’ s breath or the facial coat or paws. Aspiration of
stomach contents via small-bore nasogastric tube may
yield valuable diagnostic samples if performed within
about an hour following ingestion. Diagnostic imaging
evidence of pneumonitis is usually present within -12
hours. The most common radiographic pattern 
1S
pulmonary edema, although various radiographic opacities
may occur.
Postmortem
752
Gross findings of a necropsy range from frank chemical
pneumonitis, hemorrhages, and bronchopneumonia to
gross pulmonary edema. In some cases, it may be possible
to smell petroleum distillates in the fluid present in the
airways and lungs.
Histopathological changes in the lung in these cases
include interstitial inflammation, bronchial and bronchiolar
necrosis, intra-alveolar hemorrhage, and inflammatory cell
exudate.
Management of Exposures
In cases where the patient has ingested material and is at
risk of aspiration, induction of vomiting and gastric lavage,
even with a secure airway, are ineffective, increase the
morbidity and mortality, and are directly contraindicated.
Insufficient data either to support or exclude the
effectiveness of simple small-bore nasogastric aspiration is
available. In cases where significant volumes of material
have been ingested and the animal presents for treatment
within 30 to 60 minutes of ingestion, simple small-bore
nasogastric aspiration may be of some benefit
Medical
1  treatment of 
aspiration
1S
symptomatic.
Conservative
fluid
management,
avoidance
of
overaggressive fluid therapy, and overhydration are critical
in minimizing the affects of the acute respiratory distress
syndrome that may develop following aspiration. In
humans, conservative
fluid  management has  been
definitively shown to contribute to improved outcomes in
patients with acute respiratory distress.
753
Pharmaceutical interventions for acute respiratory distress
syndrome have so far been proven ineffective and thus
cannot
be  recommended. The use  of high-dose
corticosteroids is controversial and large-scale trials in
humans have demonstrated a lack of effectiveness.
Prophylactic corticosteroids may increase the death rate
among human patients at risk for acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Because of the controversy and lack of data
demonstrating clear benefit in animals, the use of
corticosteroids in the treatment of aspiration in domestic
animals remains one of individual judgment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for confirmed cases of aspiration is always
 guarded, particularly if acute respiratory distress is present.
ALCOHOLS
Ethanol
Synonyms include alcohol, ethyl;, denatured alcohol;
distilled spirits; ethyl alcohol, undenatured; ethanol; ethyl
alcohol; ethylcarbinol.
Sources
Ethanol is a ubiquitous household and industrial chemical.
A partial list of common sources of ethanol in households
includes alcoholic beverages, fermenting organic waste
materials (particularly fruit, food waste in garbage), bread
dough and related fermenting yeast doughs, automotive
deicers, window cleaners, antifogging solutions, dental
754
mouthwashes,
toothpastes,  perfumes,
fragrances,
aftershaves, cosmetics, paints, varnishes, polishes,
shellacs, sealers, degreasers, design and sketch art markers,
paints, tinctures (e.g., tincture of iodine), cough syrups,
cosmetics, adhesive removers, liquid detergents, stain
removers, disinfectants, deodorizers, shampoos, hair
conditioners, antiperspirants, thermometers, and insect
repellents. An extensive list of U.S. household products
that contain ethanol can be found on the U.s. Department
of Health and Human Services’ Household Products
Database (Health and Safety Information on Household
Products). Alcohol content in household products can be
surprisingly high. It should be noted that the percentage of
ethanol in distilled alcoholic beverages is half of its "proof
value."” Pungent fermenting fruits, grains, and vegetable
matter are often attractive to several domestic and wildlife
species and are commonly voluntarily consumed to excess.
In industrial situations, ethanol is an extensively used
solvent and transported  intermediate.  Industrial-grade
ethanol is typically high purity (> 98% by mass). In the
context of veterinary medicine, acute poisoning is the most
common of the various ethanol toxidromes.
Kinetics
The most common route of exposure in domestic animals
is via ingestion, although inhalation exposures can occur
under some rare circumstances (prolonged inhalation of
ethanol vapors). Ethanol is rapidly absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract and the onset of clinical signs is
generally correlated with blood ethanol concentration. The
presence of food in the stomach or small intestine delays
755
systemic absorption, as can the type of formulation
containing the ethanol. However, the onset of clinical signs
will typically occur within an hour following ingestion.
Ethanol is metabolized by three basic mechanisms: (1)
first-pass metabolism of ethanol to acetaldehyde by gastric
alcohol dehydrogenase; (2) first-pass metabolism of
ethanol to acetaldehyde by liver alcohol dehydrogenase IB
followed by conversion of the acetaldehyde to acetic acid
by liver aldehyde dehydrogenase, and acetic acid is then
converted to acetyl CoA that is consumed as an energy
source via the citric acid cycle or for the synthesis of
lipids; and (3) conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde by
hepatic CYP 2El. In domestic animals that are not
normally regularly exposed to ethanol, mechanisms (1)
and (2) are usually the most important.
Clearance of ethanol from the bloodstream is mostly via
hepatic metabolism, but small amounts of ethanol (<l0%
Whole body elimination follows zero order kinetics.
Mechanism of Action
Ethanol, particularly concentrated ethanol, is a skin,
respiratory, eye, and gastrointestinal irritant. Its irritancy
on the gastric mucosa is associated with its well-known
capacity to induce vomiting. Consumption of concentrated
industrial  ethanol  produces significant  damage  to  the
gastric mucosa and bleeding into the stomach.
Within the CNS, ethanol and many of the anesthetics and
       oo
756
site of action on CNS neurotransmitter receptors. Ethanol
has agonistlike effects on CNS GABA-A and glycine
receptors and inhibitory effects on glutamate NMDA
receptors (particularly
inthe
hippocampus).
.These
mechanisms help to explain the CNS depressive,
aestheticlike effects and its amnesic actions. Importantly.
the CNS depressive effects also include the loss of central
cardiovascular/respiratory drive and the loss of normal
airway-protective  reflexes.
Thelossof
 normal
airwayprotective  effects,  plus  the  ethanol-induced
decreased pulmonary secretion clearance, plus ethanol′ s
propensity for inducing vomiting creates a substantial risk
of aspiration pneumonia
Ethanol suppresses the release of antidiuretic hormone
(arginine vasopressin) by the posterior pituitary. This
reduces water reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubules
and collecting tubules in the nephrons of kidneys and
increased urine production.
Doses of ethanol  that produce  inebriation  typically
sensitize the myocardium to the effects of catecholamines
and    fatal    cardiac 
  arrhythmias  may   develop.  The
hypothermia that is common in ethanol intoxication
exacerbates these effects and increases the difficulty of
treating
anycardiac
C  arrhythmias  that    develop.
Hypothermia develops in ethanol poisoning due to a
combination of peripheral vasodilatation (increased heat
Acute  ethanol
 poisoning
may
alsotrigger
r  acute
pancreatitis. Ethanol is a proven teratogen in animals.
757
With chronic exposure, ethanol has a myriad of other
effects. However, most of these are rarely of relevance to
veterinary medicine
Toxicity
The lowest dosage expected to produce death in dogs
following ingestion is around 5.5 g/kg. However, clinical
signs of toxicity may occur at much lower dosages.
ClinicalEffects
Signs
Clinical signs of acute ethanol poisoning in companion
animals resemble the classical signs in humans: vomiting.
an   initial  period  of  paradoxical  behavioral  excitation
followed by CNS depression, ataxia, lethargy, and
sedation. Significant ingestions are associated with coma
and hypothermia. Signs of abdominal pain may be present
due to ethanol’ s irritant effects on the gastric mucosa and
its ability to trigger acute pancreatitis. Dehydration may
occur because of an inability to concentrate urine due to
decreased antidiuretic hormone. Pupillary reflexes may be
variable in their response. Tachycardia or myocardial
depression and hypotension may be present. Death is
typically from cardiovascular respiratory arrest combined
with hypothermia. Cardiac arrhythmias are common.
Hypoglycemic seizures may occur, particularly in young
animals.
Importantly, many patients lose their airway protective
reflexes.Thus aspiration of vomitus is an important
758
delayed effect of ethanol poisoning. Sequential diagnostic
imaging should be performed if aspiration is suspected.
Laboratory Findings
Determination of whole blood or serum alcohol
concentration is the most effective method of confirming
the diagnosis. However, ethanol levels can be determined
in most body fluids and vomitus. Osmolar gap metabolic
acidosis is a common finding in acute ethanol poisoning.
An elevated anion gap may also be occasionally present in
acute ethanol poisoning. Hypoglycemia, serum electrolyte
disturbances, and evidence of hemoconcentration are
common. Blood pCO2 measurement may be useful if
respiratory depression is present. Evidence of acute
pancreatitis such as elevated serum amylase and lipase
may be present.
Because the early stages of ethanol poisoning and ethylene
glycol poisoning are clinically similar, blood ethylene
glycol levels should also be measured.
Differential Diagnoses
The most critical differential diagnosis is ethylene glycol
poisoning. Other alcohols (methanol, isopropyl alcohol),
hydrocarbon solvents, chemsols, marijuana, macrolide
antiparasitics, and amitraz produce similar effects to
ethanol in domestic animals, as do most benzodiazepine.
barbiturate, antipsychotic, antiseizure, and antidepressant
human prescription drugs.
Diagnostics
759
Antemortem
The patient's history plus the presence of the typical
clinical signs/laboratory findings of the ethanol toxidrome
are usually the best diagnostic clues. Definitive diagnosis
typically requires the determination of whole blood or
serum ethanol. Altermatively, ethanol levels can be
determined in most body fluids and in vomitus. Aspirating
stomach contents using a small-bore nasogastric tube can
often yield useful samples for ethanol testing if performed
within about 1 hour following ingestion. Samples of the
material suspected of being ingested, preferably in the
original container, are always particularly valuable.
Postmortem
Ethanol levels can be measured in most body fluids and in
the gastric contents. Detection of significant amounts of
ethanol provides the most definitive diagnosis. Hyperemia
and inflammation of the gastric mucosa may be present.
Inflammation of the esophagus and bleeding from the
gastric mucosa may be present if concentrated ethanol
solutions have been ingested. The presence of pneumonia
is strongly suggestive of aspiration.
Management of Exposures
Given that absorption of ethanol from the gastrointestinal
tract is rapid, attempts at decontamination of the upper
intestinal tract are usually ineffective. Because of the
potential loss of airway reflexes, induction of vomiting
should only be used with extreme caution in asymptomatic
patients with a history of very recent ingestion (within 15
760
minutes). Gastric lavage is no longer used in cases of
human ethanol poisoning since it has been shown to be
ineffective and to increase the risk of severe complications.
Activated charcoal does not bind ethanol and is ineffective.
Evacuation of stomach contents using a small bore
nasogastric tube may be of some value if the patient
presents within 1 hour of ingestion.
Intravenous fluid therapy should be used to correct/prevent
dehydration, support kidney function, maintain circulation
and    blood
1  pressure,  correct/prevent hypoglycemia
(dextrose intravenous fluids), and correct any electrolyte.
acid base disturbances present. Treatment of acidosis may
include sodium bicarbonate administration. Regular
monitoring of the patient' s blood
pressure,  serum
electrolytes, and acid base status is recommended
Vasopressors, such as dopamine, and plasma expanders
may be useful if significant hypotension is present.
Regular monitoring
gof cardiacelectricalactivity,
particularly if the patient is hypothermic, is recommended.
Hypothermia is a common and serious problem in ethanol
toxicoses and supplementary heat may be required. Given
that    animals
with
ethano]
 toxicoses   have
poor
thermoregulation, it is also important to avoid iatrogenic
hyperthermia.
Yohimbine has been  recommended to treat CNS
depression in dogs with ethanol poisoning. Careful dose
selection is required to avoid producing overdose effects
under these circumstances.
Prognosis
761
Most cases in domestic animals are relatively mild and
involve   consumption   of   relatively c
dilute alcoholic
materials. In this situation, most uncomplicated cases will
recover within 24-48 hours provided close monitoring and
supportive care is available. The prognosis for patients
withsevere CNS
Ssigns,  significant hypothermia,
significant cardiovascular
respiratory  depression,  or
metabolic acidosis is much more guarded. The presence of
aspiration
pneumonia always
 warrants a guarded
prognosis.
Methanol
Synonyms include alcohol, methyl carbinol, methyl
alcohol, and wood alcohol
Sources/Formulations
Methanol is typically used in the same range of household
products as ethanol. It is no longer used in cosmetics or
personal care products in most jurisdictions. Any product
containing  methanol  is  usually
required to have a
childproof cap or closure. However, the lack of a
childproof cap or closure on a product is not an absolute
guarantee that methanol is not present in it. An extensive
list of US household products that contain methanol can be
found on the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services’ Household Products Database (Health and Safety
Information on Household Products). Most automotive
windshield deicers contain from 20-86% methanol; dogs
are commonly exposed when they chew on the plastic
bottles. A potential cause of methanol poisoning is home
brewing and home distillation of alcohol.
762
Kinetics
The kinetics of methanol resemble that of ethanol.
Importantly, significant toxicoses have been reported
following exposure of the skin, as well as following
ingestion and inhalation. Methanol is rapidly metabolized
by alcohol dehydrogenase to formaldehyde that is then
oxidized to formic acid by formaldehyde dehydrogenase.
In all domestic nonprimate animals, formic acid rapidly
converts to CO2 and water. Formic acid is metabolized
much more slowly in humans, leading to blindness and
other effects. These effects do not occur in domestic
companion or production animals.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanisms of action of methanol in the CNS in
nonprimates are presumed to be similar to those of ethanol.
However, the methanol is generally a less potent inebriant
than ethanol. Methanol is generally more irritating to the
gastrointestinal tract than ethanol. Acute pancreatitis is
common in acute methanol poisoning. Methanol is a
proven teratogen.
Toxicity
The minimum lethal dosage in dogs is between 5.0 and
11.25 mg/kg. Methanol is far more toxic to primates,
where blindness and neuronal necrosis can occur after
exposure to relatively small amounts.
Clinical Effects
763
The effects of methanol in nonprimate companion animals
essentially resemble those of ethanol. Importantly,
methanol does not produce blindness in nonprimates.
Unlike ethanol, an increased anion gap is typically present
in methanol toxicoses.
Differential Diagnoses
Important differential diagnoses are similar to those of
ethanol, but also include other potential causes of anion
gap metabolic acidosis.  Common  causes of  anion
metabolic acidosis can be memorized using the following
mnemonic AT MUD PILES:  Alcohols, Toluene;
Methanol,  Uremia,  Diabetic ketoacidosis (alcoholic
ketoacidosis,  starvation  ketoacidosis;  P araldehyde
(phenformin), Iron (isoniazid), L actic acidosis, Ethylene
glycol  and  Salicylates  (nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory
drugs).
Diagnostics
Ante-and
 postmortem   diagnostic
 techniques
are
essentially the same as for ethanol.
Management of Exposures Diagnostics
In nonprimate companion animals, the management of
methanol poisoning resembles that of ethanol poisoning.
Prognosis
In nonprimate domestic animals, the prognosis is similar to
ethanol toxicoses.
764
Isopropanol
Synonyms include 1-methylethanol; 2-hydroxypropane;
2-propanol; 2-propyl alcohol; dimethylcarbinol; isopropyl
alcohol; isopropyl alcohol, rubbing alcohol.
Sources/Formulations
Isopropanol is typically used in the same range of
household and industrial products as ethanol. Seventy
medicine as an antiseptic and cleansing agent, and
isopropanol is used as the base in alcohol-based flea and
tick sprays.
Kinetics
Isopropanol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract: approximately 80% of an oral dose is absorbed
within 30 minutes. Except in the case of massive overdose,
absorption is usually complete within 2 hours. Isopropanol
israpidlymetabolizedto acetone viaalcohol
dehydrogenase. Acetone is metabolized relatively slowly
compared with the metabolites of ethanol and methanol.
Mechanism of Action
Isopropanol is a potent CNS depressant and its metabolite,
acetone, potentiates this effect. Acetone, by itself, is also a
CNS depressant. The mechanisms of action of isopropanol
in the CNS are assumed to be similar to that of ethanol.
Toxicity
765
ethanol. This is due to a combination of the innate
properties of isopropanol, plus the potentiating effect and
long half-life of its main metabolite, acetone.
Clinical Effects
Acute
isopropanol
1  toxicosis
following
voluntary
consumption is relatively uncommon in domestic animals
because of its bitter taste. The clinical effects resemble
those of ethanol. Given an identical dose, CNS signs will
generally be more  severe  in  isopropanol  poisoning
compared with ethanol poisoning.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
Diagnostics
Ante-  and
postmortem  diagnostic
techniques
are
essentially the same as for ethanol.
Management of Exposures
The management of isopropanol poisoning resembles that
of ethanol poisoning
Prognosis
In nonprimate domestic animals, the prognosis is similar to
ethanol toxicoses.
766
Benzyl Alcohol (Benzoid Acid, Sodium Benzoate,
Potassium Benzoate)
Synonyms include benzyl alcohol, benzenemethanol.
alphahydroxytoluene, phenol carbinol, phenyl carbinol,
phenylmethanol, and phenylmethyl alcohol.
Sources/Formulations
Benzyl alcohol is most commonly encountered in
veterinary medicine as an excipient and antibacterial
preservative in pharmaceutical preparations, particularly
those designed for intravenous delivery.  Significant
exposures may occur during repeated drug infusions or
when bacteriostatic water or sodium chloride solutions are
used to flush IV lines.
Benzoic acid and its benzoate salts are common food
additives/preservatives.   Benzyl   alcohol  is   a   natural
constituent of a number of plants. It occurs, for example, in
some edible fruits (up to 5 mg/kg) and in green and black
tea (1-30 and 1-15mg/kg, respectively). Benzyl alcohol is
added as a flavoring substance to some foods and
beverages at a level up to about 400 mg/kg (chewing gum
1254 mg/kg). Benzyl alcohol is extensively uses as a
preservative in cosmetics and personal care products.
Among domestic animals, toxicity has most commonly
been reported in cats administered lactated Ringer’ s
solution containing benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
Kinetics
767
Benzyl alcohol is rapidly metabolized to benzyl aldehyde
by alcohol dehydrogenase. Alcohol dehydrogenase then
converts benzyl aldehyde to benzoic acid. In all domestic
species except cats, benzoic acid is either glucuronidated
to form benzyl glucuronide or conjugated to glycine to
form hippuric acid. These metabolites are then largely
excreted in urine.
Mechanism of Action
Domestic cats lack the ability to rapidly glucuronidate
benzoic acid and primarily slowly metabolize benzoic acid
to hippuric acid. Under these circumstances, benzoic acid
accumulates, resulting in anion-gap metabolic acidosis.
Benzoic acid has been shown to be extremely toxic to cats.
Toxicity
Benzyl alcohol is relatively toxic in cats. Lactated Ringer
s solution containing 1.5% benzyl alcohol can cause severe
signs of toxicosis in this species
Clinical Effects
Antemortem
Clinical signs in cats include hyperesthesia, followed by
depression, coma, and finally death. In humans, respiratory
distress (gasping syndrome), CNS depression, seizures and
hemolysis are regarded as highly suggestive of benzyl
alcohol poisoning. Surprisingly, hemolysis has not been
reported in cats. The clinical chemistry  picture is
768
dominated by  the  presence of anion gap metabolic
acidosis.
Postmortem
There are no specific findings.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
Diagnostics
Apart from a history of exposure, the most effective
method of confirming the diagnosis is detection of
elevated levels of benzyl alcohol, benzoic acid, and/or
hippuric acid in blood, serum, urine, or aqueous humor.
Management of Exposures
Treatment resembles  that of ethanolpoisoning
Hemodialysis has been used in humans, but its
effectiveness remains unknown.
Higher Alcohols
These include butanols, pentanols, hexanols, heptanols,
octanols, paraffinic alcohols, aliphatic alcohols, and amy]
alcohol (n-pentanyl alcohol), among others.
Sources/Formulations
769
Higher alcohols are largely used in industrial settings as
solvent for paints, lacquers and varnishes, natural and
synthetic resins, gums, vegetable oils, and dyes and
alkaloids. They are used as intermediates in the
manufacture  of  pharmaceuticals  and  chemicals  and
employed in industries producing artificial leather, textiles,
safety glass, rubber cement, shellac, raincoats, and
photographic films. They are also used as fragrances and
solvents in perfumes, cosmetics, and personal care
products.
Kinetics
Generally speaking, the shorter-chain higher alcohols are
well absorbed through skin, the respiratory tract, and the
gastrointestinal  tract. Glucuronidation  is  a  common
pathway of metabolism for many of these chemicals.
Excretion in urine is usually the major route of excretion.
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of action of the higher alcohols in the
CNS is assumed to be similar to that of ethanol and the
hydrocarbon  solvents. Given  that  glucuronidation  is
important in the metabolism and excretion of these
alcohols, it is likely that cats are significantly more
sensitive to toxicity (cats have relatively inefficient
glucuronidation of metabolites).
exposure results in hearing impairment in humans. All of
  sn  d m so ir a
skin with repeated exposures. Most of these chemicals will
770
produce dyschromatopsias (alterations in color vision) in
humans.
Toxicity
As a general rule, as the alcohol’ s carbon chain lengthens,
its toxicity  decreases.  Branched chain alcohols are
generally more toxic than the straight chained alcohols of
similar carbon  number.  Longer chain alcohols are
absorbed more slowly, are less able to penetrate the skin,
and are less likely to be inhaled.
Importantly, many of the higher alcohols have kinematic
viscosities less than 19 mm^ x s' and are thus significant
aspiration hazards.
Clinical Effects
Antemortem
Acute exposure to higher alcohols may result in CNS
depression, hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Butanols and amyl alcohols are irritants. Most of these
materials are significant aspiration hazards. If aspirated.
hemorrhagic  pneumonitis  is common.  Other  effects
resemble those of ethanol.
Postmortem
Postmortem effects resemble those in ethanol poisoning
Chemical hemorrhagic aspiration pneumonitis is likely.
Differential Diagnoses
771
Differential diagnoses are as per ethanol.
Diagnostics
A history of potential exposure is the most important
diagnostic tool. Tests for the presence of these materials in
biological  samples are not  routinely available.  The
presence of chemical pneumonitis is strongly suggestive of
postingestion aspiration.
Management of Exposures
General
symptomatic
management
tas per ethanol
poisoning is recommended.
Prognosis
Given their generally lower toxicity, for a given identical
dose, the prognosis can usually be expected to be better
than ethanol toxicity.
GLYCOLS
Ethylene Glycol
Synonyms include 1,2-dihydroxyethane; 1,2-ethandiol;
1,2-ethane-diol;   2-hydroxyethanol;  ethylene  alcohol;
ethylene dihydrate; glycol; monoethylene glycol; MEG;
Lutrol-9; Dowtherm Sr 1; Fridex: Norkool; Ramp: Tescol:
Ucar 17.
Sources
772
Ethylene glycol is a ubiquitous household chemical found
in adhesives, sealers, deicers, radiator coolants, hydraulic
fluids, some brake fluids, cleaners, wood preservatives,
grouting mixtures, inks, caulks, and paints. One of the
most common sources of ethylene glycol poisoning in
domestic animals is automotive radiator coolant
Kinetics
Ethylene glycol is rapidly and nearly completely absorbed
from the digestive tract. Peak blood concentrations occur
within about 1-4 hours following ingestion. Ethylene
glycol is   oxidized
 by  alcohol  deydrogenase
to
 glycoaldehyde and then subsequently converted to glycolic
acid, glyoxylic acid, and oxalic acid (Figure 28.1).
Glyoxylic acid is metabolized in intermediary metabolism
to malate, formate, and glycine. Ethylene glycol, glycolic
acid, calcium oxalate, and glycine (and its conjugate,
hippurate) are excreted in urine.
Figure 28.1.Metabolism of ethylene glycol.
773
HOCHCHOH
EthyleneGlycol
→
HOCHCHO
Glycoaldehyde
CHO-CHO
HOCHCOOH
Glycolic Acid
Glyoxal
(urine)
CHO-COOH
Glyoxylic Acid
COOH-COOH
HCOOH
NHCHCOOH
Oxalic Acid
Glycine
Formic Acid
(euun)
CO2
CarbonDioxide
(exhaled air)
Mechanism of Action
Ethylene glycol poisoning has three basic mechanisms of
action: (l) CNS depression and inebriating effects that
resemble those of the alcohols; (2) the metabolism to
glycoaldehyde, glycolic acid, glyoxylic acid, oxalic acid,
malate, formate, and glycine results in an anion gap
metabolic acidosis; and (3) free calcium in the blood and
tissues reacts with oxalic acid to form calcium oxalate.
       
tubules of the kidney and in and around small blood
vessels (particularly in the brain). This results in kidney
failure.
774
Toxicity
The minimum lethal dosage of pure ethylene glycol in
dogs is around 6.6 ml/kg. Cats are significantly more
sensitive, with a minimum lethal dosage of around 1.5 ml/
kg.
Clinical Effects
Signs
The ethylene glycol toxidrome occurs in three sequential
stages. Stage 1 is the CNS depression phase. CNS
depression begins soon after exposure, and lasts up to 12
hours after ingestion. This depression appears similar to
ethanol intoxication but is typically more severe on a
consumption. The effects are due to unmetabolized
ethylene glycol. Frequent urination and excessive thirst are
common signs in dogs during this early stage. Cats
typically do not develop this polydipsia.
Stage 2 is the cardiopulmonary phase. It is characterized
by   cardiorespiratory  signs  that  typically   consist  of
tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypotension or hypertension.
After the glycoaldehyde metabolite forms at 4-12 hours
postconsumption, anion gap metabolic acidosis develops
and the following effects may occur: seizures, myoclonic
jerks, cerebral edema (in some cases), and coma,
gastrointestinal  irritation  (vomiting).  Cerebral   edema,
deposition of calcium oxalate crystals in the walls of small
blood vessels in the brain, and exposure of the
metabolically active deep grey matter nuclei of the brain
775
basal ganglia to ethylene glycol metabolites contribute to
the CNS toxicity.
Significant cardiac arrhythmias may occur during this
phase.
Significant pulmonary edema, pneumonitis, congestive
heart failure, and circulatory shock may develop during
this phase.
Metabolism of the glycoaldehyde to oxalic acid often
results in the appearance of calcium oxalate crystal
precipitates in the meninges, blood vessel walls, lung,
myocardium, and associated tissue injury. The formation
of calcium oxalate crystal precipitates in tissues may be
associated with hypocalcemia. Death may occur during
this stage in some cases.
Stage 3 is the renal failure phase. Kidney damage due to
formation of calcium oxalate crystals in the renal tubules
usually develops  24-72  hours  after exposure.  The
subsequent decline in kidney fiunction  and oliguria
exacerbate the anion gap metabolic acidosis and other
serum chemistry disturbances.
Classically, the formation of calcium oxalate crystals in the
kidneys has been claimed associated with the development
 'so u ns o,   n g,  o
renal medullary rim sign is detected by ultrasound and is a
distinct hyperechoic line in the renal medulla parallel to
the corticomedullary junction. However, more recent
studies have demonstrated that the renal medullary rim
sign is a nonspecific ultrasonographic sign that is present
776
in a high proportion of dogs with apparently normal kidney
function.
The following conditions characterize the third phase:
flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, and oliguric
renal failure. Prolonged, rarely permanent, kidney failure
is distinguished by proteinuria, hematuria, crystalluria, and
increased serum BUN and creatinine. Calcium oxalate
crystals may appear in the urine as early as stage 1, but
absence of these crvstals does not rule out the diagnosis of
ethylene glycol poisoning. Myopathy and bone marrow
suppression may occur in some individuals
LaboratoryFindings
Ethylene glycol test kits are available that will accurately
detect blood ethylene glycol down to a level of 50 mg/dl.
Unfortunately, cats may become significantly poisoned at
blood levels below 50 mg/dl. Thus the test is not
sufficiently sensitive enough to conclusively rule out
ethylene glycol toxicosis in cats. Furthermore, in patients
that present in the late stages of the toxicosis, blood
ethylene glycol levels may fall below the limit of detection
due to its catabolism. Two newer ethylene glycol test kits
have been introduced, but both of these kits can give false
positives in the presence of alcohols, so careful
interpretation of the results is needed.
An osmolal gap, without metabolic acidosis, or an anion
gap can be detected before significant metabolism of
ethylene glycol occurs. As ethylene glycol is metabolized,
the osmolal gap, if present, will decrease and an anion gap
metabolic acidosis evolves. Patients who present late may
777
have renal failure with normal osmolal and anion gaps and
no acidosis or measurable ethylene glycol levels
Isosthenuria, due to an osmotic diuresis produced by
urinary excretion of unmetabolized ethylene  glycol  is
common in the early stage of the toxicosis in dogs.
Decrease in urine specific gravity may also occur in cats
during this stage, but isosthenuria rarely develops. Calcium
oxalate monohydrate crystals (clear, six-sided, prismlike
crystals) can be detected within 3-6 hours postingestion in
dogs. Urinary crystals can take many forms such as
dumbbells, envelopes, and needles (most commonly).
Importantly, the absence of urinary crystals, however, does
not rule out poisoning. Urinary pH is usually decreased in
ethyleneglycol poisoning
Many radiator fluid formulations that contain ethylene
glycol also contain fluorescine (a fluorescent green or red
dye, depending on pH). In occasional cases, the dye
(which fluoresces with UV light exposure) may be
detectable in the urine. It may also be useful to examine
any vomitus, the mouth, the face, and the animal’ s paws
with a Wood’ s lamp to determine whether they appear
fluorescent.
Once oliguric or anuric renal failure has developed
(typically  2448  hours  following ingestion), large
increases in serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
creatinine will occur. Elevated serum potassium usually
develops during this phase. About 50% of patients will
also have decreased serum calcium due to the formation of
calcium oxalate. Likewise, about 50% of patients will have
elevated bloodglucose.
778
During the period of recovery from renal failure, patients
will typically be isosthenuric. Urinalysis during this phase
will typically reveal calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals.
hematuria, proteinuria, and glucosuria.
Differential Diagnoses
The most critical differential diagnosis in the early stages
of the toxidrome is poisoning by the various alcohols.
Hydrocarbon solvents, chemsols, marijuana, macrolide
antiparasitics, and amitraz produce similar effects to the
alcohols,  as  do
most benzodiazepine, barbiturate,
antipsychotic, antiseizure, and antidepressant
thuman
prescription drugs. During the later stages of the
toxidrome, other causes of renal failure are the major
differential diagnoses.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
The patient' s history plus the presence of the typical
clinical signs/laboratory findings of the ethylene glycol
toxidrome plus detection of ethylene glycol in vomitus,
urine, or blood are usually the best diagnostic clues. The
level of ethylene glycol or its metabolites can be measured
in most body fluids and in the gastric contents. Definitive
diagnosis typically requires the determination of blood
ethylene glycol. Aspirating stomach contents using a
small-bore nasogastric tube can often yield useful samples
if performed within about 30 to 60 minutes following
ingestion. Samples of the material suspected of being
ingested, preferably in the original container, are always
779
particularly valuable. It is important to communicate other
possible exposures to the testing lab since 2,3-butanediol,
often found in the plasma of following ethanol ingestion,
can be mistakenly identified as ethylene glycol when the
analysis is performed by gas chromatography. Propylene
glycol can also interfere with some ethylene glycol assays.
Recent studies have demonstrated usefulness of glycolic
acid analysis
in ethylene
glycolpoisoningcases.
Measuring glycolic acid in ethylene glycol poisonings has
certain advantages: findings correlate better with ethylene
glycol toxicity than ethylene glycol levels, findings
determine how much ethylene glycol has metabolized to
glycolic acid, the presence of glycolic acid objectively
indicates toxicity, and the test confirms that the metabolic
acidosis was due to ethylene glycol poisoning rather than
another cause.
Postmortem
Signs of gastritis or enteritis (gastric and intestinal mucosa
is hemorrhagic and hyperemic) are typically present, as are
pulmonary edema and hyperemia. The kidneys are usually
swollen, tancolored and have intermittent gray or yellow
streaks at the corticomedullary junction.
Histologically, calcium oxalate crystals are found in and
around the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidneys. In
animals that survive, regenerating renal tubules may be
seen. Similar crystals may be seen in the adventitia and
perivascular spaces of the brain blood vessels.
Management of Exposures
780
Decontamination of the upper digestive tract either by
inducing vomiting or dosing with activated charcoal has
been proven to be ineffective. Aspiration of stomach
contents with a small-bore nasogastric tube may be of
some benefit and may yield valuable diagnostic samples if
performed within about 30-60 minutes postingestion.
There are three critical objectives in the treatment of
ethylene glycol poisoning: (1) prevention of conversion of
ethylene glycol to its toxic metabolites, (2) correction of
the anion-gap metabolic acidosis and maintenance of renal
glomerular filtration rate, (3) adjunctive and supportive
care. Except for hemodialysis, which is rarely available in
veterinary practice, the older practices of increasing the
excretion of ethylene glycol and its toxic metabolites by
forced dieresis and/or urinary alkalinization have been
proved to be ineffective. Furthermore, these techniques
have been  demonstrated to increase the serious
complication rate and the death rate.
The single most important factor associated with survival
and reduction of morbidity in ethylene glycol poisoning is
preventing conversion of ethylene glycol to its toxic
metabolites by the prompt administration of the specific
antidote   fomepizole  (4-methylpyrazole). Fomepizole
(loading dose of 15 mg/kg IV followed in 12 hours by 10
mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses) is the first choice
antidote and is highly effective even in cases of massive
poisonings and substantially reduces the risk of significant
CNS and renal complications. Fomepizole is also highly
effective following oral dosing. Fomepizole acts as a
competitive inhibitor of the metabolism of ethylene glycol
to glycolaldehyde metabolite and thus limits the formation
781
of oxalate and associated tissue crystallization of calcium
oxalate. Fomepizole greatly reduces the severity of the
cardiopulmonary and renal failure stages of the poisoning
Fomepizole has a high therapeutic index and a very low
risk of serious side effects. Fomepizole will not prevent the
inebriation and CNS effects induced by unmetabolized
ethylene glycol (and any other alcohols present) and may
prolong this state in poisoned individuals.
The second choice antidote is ethanol. Ethanol can be
administered as a 5% aqueous solution intravenously. The
intravenous solution is hyperosmotic and can cause
osmotic dehydration, hyponatremia, and venous irritation.
Regardless of route of administration the objective is to
rapidly achieve and maintain a blood ethanol concentration
of at least1o0 mg/dlin order to provide adequate
competitive inhibition of ethylene glycol metabolism. To
attain this goal, it is usual to administer a loading dose of
0.6 g/kg. A maintenance dose is chosen based upon the
ethanol elimination rate (66-130 mg/kg/hour). Frequent
blood ethanol determinations should be made. Any
increase in the anion gap or decrease in blood bicarbonate
concentration implies that the ethanol dose is insufficient
to achieve competitive inhibition of ethylene glycol
disturbance of blood electrolyte and glucose levels,
increased CNS depression, ethanol-related toxicity such as
hepatitis, pancreatitis, hypoglycemia and disulfiam-like
reactions, increased cardiovascular/respiratory depression,
and hypothermia. Overly aggressive treatment with ethanol
should be avoided. Never administer ethanol to a
significantly dehydrated patient or an animal in oliguric/
782
anuric renal failure. Patients undergoing ethanol treatment
require intensive monitoring, particularly for exacerbated
cardiovascular/respiratory
depression,
hypothermia,
dehydration and electrolyte disturbances.
Table 28.1.Distilled alcoholic beverages and doses that
can be administered by small-bore nasogastric tube to treat
ethylene glycolexposure
Namcof
Typical Grams of
Typical ml/kg of
Typical ml/kg of
Alecholic
Typical
Typical Perccnt
Ethanol pcr 100ml
Bcvcrage Required
Bevcragc Requircd
Beverage
Proof
Ethanol byVolume
of Beverage
for Loading Dose
for Maintenance Dosc
Bramly
4060
%0-0
15.823.7
3.2-4.7ulg
0.64-0.94mlkg
Cognac
80
40%
31.6
24
0.5mlkg
90-110
45-55%
35.613.5
1.72.1ml/kg
0.3-0.4m/kg
Grain alcohol
190
95%
75.0
Iml/kg
0.2mlkg
Rum
151
75.5%
59.6
13m/kg
0.25ml/kg
Schaopps
30-100
15-50%
11.8-39.5
1.9-6.4ml/kg
0.4-1.3m/kg
Tequila
30-100
%0-0
31.6-39.5
1.9-2.4ml/kg
0.40.5ml/kg
Vodka
80100
%05-0
31.639.5
1.9-2.4ml/kg
0.40.5ml/kg
Whisky
R0-100
40-50%
31.6-39.5
1.9-24ml/y
0.40.5/kg
In extreme circumstances where ethanol infusion is not
possible,
pharmaceutical-grade
material
can
be
administered orally or by small-bore nasogastric tube. The
oral loading dose is 750 mg/kg body weight administered
slowly over the first hour, with a maintenance dose of 150
mg/kg body weight per hour thereafter. Always administer
the ethanol slowly to reduce the risk of vomiting. If there
is a high risk of vomiting, secure the airway using a cuffed
endotracheal tube.
If pharmaceutical-grade ethanol is not available, distilled
alcoholic beverages can be administered by small bore
nasogastric tube as summarized in Table 28.1.
Administration of thiamine hydrochloride (promotes the
metabolism of ethylene glycol to ketoadipate), and the
783
administration of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine; promotes the
metabolism of ethylene glycol to glycine and ultimately to
hippuric acid) may be beneficial.
Detailed discussion of the treatment of acute oliguric renal
failure and anion-gap metabolic acidosis is beyond the
scope of this chapter. However, reestablishment of a
near-normal renal glomerular filtration rate by the use of
intravenous crystalloids and/or diuretics, such as manitol.
and/or vasopressors, such as dopamine, is often the most
effective method of correcting the anion-gap metabolic
acidosis and other electrolyte disturbances associated with
ethylene glycol poisoning. Care must be taken to avoid
exacerbating electrolyte disturbances such as hyperkalemia
and/or hypernatremia. The administration of bicarbonate
may be useful in the initial control of metabolic acidosis.
Regular monitoring of the patient' s electrocardiogram and
early correction of any arrhythmias that develop is
recommended.
Prognosis
The prognosis for ethylene glycol poisoning in domestic
animals is always guarded. Early aggressive treatment,
particularly with fomepizole, is associated with an
improved prognosis.
Propylene Glycol
Synonyms include 1,2-dihydroxypropane; 1,2-propylene
glycol;    2,3-propanediol; 
isopropylene
glycol;
1,2-propanediol; and trimethyl glycol.
784
Sources/Formulations
Propylene glycol is a ubiquitous ingredient in cosmetic and
personal care products. It is also a "Generally Recognized
as Safe" food additive, except in cat foods. In food, it is
primarily used as a humectant. It can also be found in
paints, cleaning agents, sealants, inks, and caulking agents.
Propylene glycol is progressively replacing the use of
ethylene glycol in radiator coolants, deicing solutions, and
hydraulic fluids. It is also a ubiquitous excipient and
solvent in pharmaceutical preparations.
Kinetics
Propylene glycol  is rapidly and relatively  completely
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Propylene glycol
undergoes metabolic oxidation to pyruvic acid, acetic acid,
lactic acid, and propionaldehyde. These metabolites are
then consumed, primarily by the citric acid cycle
Propylene glycol is rapidly converted to proprionic acid, a
volatile fatty acid, in the rumen. The volatile fatty acid is
then rapidly absorbed and converted to glucose  via
gluconeogenesis. For this reason, administration of
propylene glycol via an ororumen tube has been used as an
emergency energy supplement in debilitated sheep and
cattle.
Mechanism of Action
The CNS is the main target organ in acute propylene
glycol toxicoses. The effects are similar to ethanol and the
other alcohols. The rapid metabolism of propylene glycol
to lactic acid may also result in metabolic acidosis
785
A high level of dietary propylene glycol produces
oxidative damage to erythrocytes and decreased red cell
lifespan in cats. For this reason, propylene glycol is no
longer used in cat feeds.
Toxicity
The median lethal dosage in dogs is about 9 ml/kg. Horses
appear to be more sensitive to the toxicoses than dogs with
Clinical Effects
CNS depression is the primary manifestation of acute
propylene glycol poisoning. Other effects include anion
gap metabolic acidosis and blood hyperosmolality and
frequent urination due to osmotic dieresis. Propylene
glycol does not cause direct damage to the kidneys.
Propylene glycol is a common diluent for injectable
medications, most notably phenytoin. Toxicity following
intravenous injection of pharmaceuticals containing high
levels of propylene glycol may cause hypotension and
cardiac arrhythmias.
Differential Diagnoses
ethanol and ethylene glycol but also include other potential
causes of anion gap metabolic acidosis.
Diagnostics
786
A history of consumption and the presence of anion gap
metabolic acidosis are key diagnostic pointers. Detection
of propylene glycol in vomitus or samples obtained by
small-bore nasogastric aspiration, and/or in blood or other
body fluids is usually conclusive. As always, samples of
the ingested material are always particularly useful.
Management of Exposures
Antidotal therapy with fomepizole or ethanol is not
bicarbonate and fluid therapy may be necessary to correct
the acidosis and prevent dehydration
Prognosis
Propylene glycol  is  normally unpalatable to domestic
animals. Thus voluntary ingestions usually result in mild
intoxication. Sere anion gap  metabolic acidosis  is
indicative of a more guarded prognosis.
Butylene Glycol
Synonyms include 1,3-butanediol and 1,3-butylene glycol.
Sources/Formulations
Butylene glycol is commonly used in cosmetics and
personal care products. Butylene glycol is a relatively
common drug of abuse and has been sold in health food
stores as a "supplement."
Kinetics
787
Butylene glycol is rapidly and nearly completely absorbed
from the gastrointestinal tract. It is rapidly metabolized to
acetoacetate and gamma-hydroxybutyrate.
Mechanism of Action
Gamma hydroxybutyrate is a CNS GABA agonist and this
produces pronounced  CNS  depression  and anesthetic/
narcoticlike effects.
Clinical Effects
The primary effects resemble those of alcohol intoxication.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses are similar to ethanol.
Diagnostics
Detection of the material in the ingested substance,
stomach contents or body fluids, plus a history of exposure
are the key diagnostic steps.
Management of Exposures
Management is largely supportive and is similar to ethanol
poisoning
Prognosis
The prognosis is dependent on the severity of the CNS
depression. The presence of unconsciousness or significant
788
cardiovascular/respiratory depression is always associated
with a more guarded prognosis.
BRAKE FLUID AND CLUTCH FLUIDS
Sources
Brake fluid is a common household item. The main
chemical constituents are high boiling point and high
molecular weight polyalkylene glycol ethers. Some brands
may also contain  small amounts of ethylene and/or
diethylene glycol. These products also contain small
amounts
Sof additives  (e.g.,  corrosion  inhibitors,
antioxidants). These materials are usually mobile, water
miscible liquids. Color ranges from colorless to amber; in
some cases it may also contain dyes.
Kinetics
The main routes of exposure are ingestion and skin
contact. In general, these materials are relatively poorly
absorbed from the intestinal tract. Ingestion of large
amounts can result in systemic effects.
Mechanism of Action
In general, brake fluids are considered to be of low
toxicity, following oral and dermal exposure. Since these
products are based on synthetic, polyalkylene glycol
ethers, their acute toxicological properties are usually
similar to those of the polyglycol ethers except that they do
not produce damage to erythrocytes.
789
 n      s 
The effects are likely to be only transient, however, and
serious/permanent
damage
 isconsideredunlikely
Accidental skin contact is unlikely to cause significant
irritation, although prolonged or repeated contact may
cause dermatitis.
Exposure to high concentrations of mist or vapor is very
unlikely because of the low vapor pressure of these
products, but heating of the products may result in vapors
capable of causing irritation of the respiratory tract.
Ingestion of small amounts is unlikely to cause systemic
toxicity; transient gastrointestinal effects may, however, be
experienced. Swallowing of larger amounts may result in
nausea, vomiting and possibly signs of central nervous
system depression. Kidney damage may also occur with
some products, due to the presence of diethylene glycol.
The viscosity of the products is such that aspiration of
product into the lung is unlikely.
Brake fluids contain small amounts of additives. Although
some of these may be hazardous in their own right, the
amount of each present, typically less than 1%, is unlikely
to contribute significantly to the acute toxicity of the
product.
Clinical Effects
Signs
790
Following ingestion, the main clinical signs will most
commonly relate to gastrointestinal upset, i.e., salivation,
vomiting, and diarrhea. If ingestion of large amounts has
occurred, there is a possibility of central nervous system
depression and/or kidney damage. In rare cases, kidney
failure and death may result.
Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings (if any) will most commonly reflect
hemoconcentration. In very rare cases, evidence of kidney
failure may be present (i.e., elevated blood urea nitrogen
and creatinine, oliguria). Occasionally, the brake fluid may
be visually detectable in the feces
Differential Diagnoses
The most common differential diagnoses will be virtually
any cause of acute diarrhea. If CNS depression is present,
section on ethanol.
Diagnostics
A history of exposure and consumption is the most
common method of diagnosis. Aspiration of stomach
contents via small-bore nasogastric tube may yield
valuable diagnostic samples if performed within about an
hour following ingestion.
Management of Exposures
791
Management of ingestions is most commonly symptomatic
and supportive. If the diarrhea is severe, fluid therapy may
be required.
Contamination of the skin and coat is best managed by
gentle washing in a body-temperature solution of dilute,
mild, neutral hand-dishwashing detergent followed by
rinsing with clean water. Several rinse/wash cycles over a
     d  i
dishwashing detergents include pharmaceutical-grade PEG
400, PEG 300, and polyvinyl pyrrolidone solutions.
         
solvents, petroleum distillates (such as baby oil, Stoddard
solvent, engine degreasers, naphthas, kerosene, petrol,
diesel etc), mechanic'’ s hand degreasers, strong cationic
detergents, strong anionic detergents and abrasive
materials is contraindicated  in dermal decontamination.
These materials are known to be ineffective and to increase
systemic absorption.
Prognosis
Prognosis is usually good.
DETERGENTS
Sources
Detergents are ubiquitous materials in most households
There are four basic types.
Anionic Detergents
792
The detergent property of these materials is due to its
anionic properties. The anion is neutralized with an
alkaline or basic material to produce full detergency. There
are three main groups: the alkyl aryl sulphonates, the
longchain (fatty) alcohol sulphates, and other sulphonates
(olefine sulphates and sulphonates, alpha olefine sulphates
and sulphonates, sulphated monoglycerides, sulphated
ethers, sulphosuccinates, alkane sulphonates, phosphate
esters, alkyl isethionates, sucrose esters).
These materials commonly contain water-softening agents
such as sodium phosphate, sodium carbonate, and sodium
silicate. Laundry detergents (liquid and powdered) and
inthehome.
Nonionic Detergents
The materials are ionically inert and are the largest and
most chemically diverse member of the detergent chemical
family. Typical nonionic detergents include alkyl and aryl
polyether suphates, alcohols or sulfonates, polyglycol
ethers, polyethylene glycol, and sorbitan monostearate.
Common household sources of these materials include
soaps, laundry detergents, and dishwashing detergents
Cationic Detergents
The detergency of these materials is dependent on its
cationic properties. However, these have poor detergency
and are more commonly used as germicides, fabric
softeners, and specialist emulsifiers; liquid potpourri
products are also sources of cationic detergents. Typically,
793
these materials are large halogenated (i.e., contain
bromine, jodide, or  chlorine) molecules. Common
examples include benzethonium chloride, benzalkonium
chloride, methyl benzethonium, cetylpyridinium chloride,
and holgenated quartermary ammonium compounds.
Amphoteric Detergents
These contain both acidic and basic groups in their
molecule and can act as cationic or anionic detergents.
depending on the pH of the solution. These materials are
commonly found in shampoos, skin cleaners, and carpet
shampoo. They are very stable in strong acidic conditions
and often used in conjunction with hydrofluoric acid in
industrial settings.
Kinetics and Mechanism of Action
The main site of action of most of these materials is local
i.e., at the site of contact. In most cases, this means the
skin, the oral mucous membranes or the gastrointestinal
tract. The systemic toxicity of most domestic detergents is
usually relatively low. The notable exceptions to this
generalization are the cationic detergents and those
detergents that contain citronella extract (fragrance), pine
oil extracts (fragrance), or phenol-based disinfectants (see
relevant sections of this text).
Toxicity
In most circumstances, detergents formulated for general
household use are specifically designed to have a low toxic
potential. The exception to this is often machine
794
dishwashing detergents, which are notoriously alkaline and
capable of producing serious caustic burns to mucous
membranes and the gastrointestinal tract.
As a general rule, ionic detergents are more irritating than
nonionic detergents and anionic detergents are less
irritating than cationic detergents. Household anionic
detergents are rarely irritant or toxic, even following
ingestion. Cationic detergents (particularly quarternary
ammonium   compounds)
are
irritating tothe
gastrointestinal tract, skin, and mucous membranes and
may be potent systemic toxicants.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Repeated exposure of the skin to detergents results in a
cumulative irritant dermatitis, typically due to defatting
injury to the skin. Relevant clinical signs include
thickening of the skin with weeping, cracking, scaling, and
possibly blistering.
Splash injuries to the eyes with nonionic or anionic
detergents usually produce transient signs of irritation.
Splash injuries of the eyes by cationic detergents are
potentially serious and may result in significant damage to
the cornea and surrounding eye structures.
Ingestion of many ionic detergents often results in signs of
gastrointestinal  disturbance ie.,  salivation,  vomiting,
nausea, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal distension.
795
Quarternary    ammonium   compounds   are   frequently
corrosive to the mouth, and gastrointestinal tract and
ingestion may result in serious vomiting (including
partial digestion in the stomach), diarrhea, vascular shock,
collapse, and possibly death.
Ingestion of cationic detergents, particularly those
containing
quartemary ammonium  compounds, is
associated with a systemic toxidrome consisting of CNS
and respiratory depression, fever, seizures, collapse, and
coma.
Ingestion of anionic detergents may result in intravascular
red cell hemolysis in patients with impaired liver function.
This is thought to be due to the reduced metabolism and
excretion of the detergent.
Laboratory Findings
Since most of the effects of detergent are local, few
laboratory signs can be expected in most cases. Clinical
pathology signs that reflect dehydration may occur in cases
where significant diarrhea is present. Alkaline dishwashing
detergents will cause coagulative to liquefactive necrosis at
the sites of contact
Differential Diagnoses
The most common differential diagnoses will be virtually
any cause of acute diarrhea or cumulative skin irritation.
Systemic cationic
796
quarternary ammonium compounds) may resemble several
types of pesticide poisoning.
Diagnostics
A history of exposure and consumption is the most
common method of diagnosis.
Management of Exposures
Splash injuries to the eyes should be initially treated by
    (a p e o  
specialist eye flush solution for 10 to 15 minutes.
injuries due to cationic detergents or machine dishwashing
detergents.
Washing with hand soaps (technically a mild anionic
detergent) are generally effective at neutralizing and
removing cationic detergents on the skin.
Administration of milk, egg whites, or water as diluents
       
anionic and cationic detergents provided there is no
corrosive injury to the gastrointestinal tract. Induction of
emesis is generally contraindicated because of the potential
corrosive action of these materials. Activated charcoal use
is also commonly recommended, although its efficacy is
unknown. Simple aspiration of stomach contents using a
fine-bore nasogastric tube may also be beneficial if
performed within about 60 minutes postingestion
797
Management of ingestions is most commonly symptomatic
and supportive. If the diarrhea is severe or if vascular
shock is present/likely, intravenous fluid therapy may be
required. If significant damage to  the mouth and/or
esophagus has occurred, placement of a percutaneous
esophageal gastric tube may be required for adequate
nutritional support.
Prognosis
With ingestion of nonionic and anionic detergents,
prognosis is usually good. With ingestion of cationic
detergents, prognosis is often guarded.
ESSENTIAL OILS
Essential oils (see also herbal toxicities in Chapters 21) are
fragrant   hydrophobic   plant  extracts  produced  by
distillation or solvent extraction of plant material.
oils," “ethereal oils,” or simply as the “oil of" the plant
material from which they were extracted, such as oil of
clove. These oily plant extracts are considered "essential"
if they carry a distinctive scent or essence, of plant source.
These materials do not have any specific chemical
properties other than their characteristic fragrances.
Sources and Toxicity
Common essential oils found in many household products
and herbal medicine products are listed in Table 28.2
798
Table
28.2.Common
essential
oils
found
1n
many
household and herbal medicine products
CNS effcts may cccur at high doses.
Pue mateial is a aspiraio hazad
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Pure material is an aspiration hzzard.
animalstudic
lung and liver damage.
euedie
Cedrol is a sedative.
SN
individuals.
ops-eo%
1.8Cineole(eucalyptol andalpha
Eugencl, phenethyl alcohol, inalool.
50%carotol. a sesquiterpeue alcolol
Clemical Properies
Caphor, a terpinoid
scsquiterpenes
Cedar leaf cil: Thujg occidentalis
（665%），Linderacitriodora
lemon(25%).andoranges
Plant of Origin
Cinwnorum cunphoru
Eleitaria cardamonum
Dianha caryopiryilus
Daucs curou (GaTO
Cupressus spp.
Caumphor oil
Cardamom cil
Carrut sed oil
Carnation cil
799
within 10
SI
   n
bare
Pure material is ar aspiration hazard.
DI
gastrointestina iritant.
coma.and death.
coma,and deah.
of reflexes,
号
SDC
nit:
1,8-cincole and alpapinene bicyclic
>90% d-limonene (a cycli terpene).
Aromatic alcohol
(d)
Purifiedl chemical astae fom
Purifed chemical substance fom
peppermint or spearmint
Citnas linon (Lemon tree)
orange or lemon oils
Lucalyptus oil
Mentl
800
Pure material is an aspiration hazad.
May be a gastrointcstinalirritant.
toclovc.its
cf this book.
throat
Menthyl salicylate aml galtherilene
6090% enenol. engery acetate,
Chemical Properties
R-Carvcne,a terpinoid
caryophyllene
(1113%）.
Citrus sinersis (sweet orange tree)
Plant of Origin
Name of Essential Oil
(syin-swect orange)
Oll of citronella
Oil of speamint
Oilofcloves
801
membranes,eyes,and gastrointestinal tract.
CNS effects such as depression,hallucinations,
Can be toxic incatsanddogsfollowing topical
exposure and ingestion. Toxidrome consists
coma.Evidence of liver damage has been
Toxidrome following oral exposure resembles
Pure materialis rritant to the skinmucou
Purematerial is an aspiration hazard.
Considered nontoxic and not irritating.
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Purematerial is an aspiration hazard..
Pure material is an aspiration hazard.
Skin irritant at high concentration.
Produces acuteliver damage.
Causes abortion in humans.
and coma may occur.
that of eucalyptus oil.
low concentrations.
reported in cats.
Pulegone, menthone, iso-menthone, and
asarone,coniferaldehyde,camphone,
sesquiterpenoids,with terpinene-4-ol
Mainly bicyclic trpenealcholsbut
hydrocarbons,ethers,andestrs
>80% safrole,5-menthoxy-eugenol,
Alpha andbeta santalol,aromatic
lpha-terpinene (8 %),and 1,8-
Menthol, an aromatic alcohol
cineole(4 %）as themajor
Mixture of terpenoids and
Carvone, a terpinoid
neomenthone
and eugenol
components
alcohols
Brazilian sassafras oil,obtained from
the trunkwoodof Ocoteapretiosa,
sse
Cinnamomumcamphora
Melaleuca alternifolia
Mentha pulegium
s
Santalun sp.
Pennyroyal oil
Peppermint oil
Sandalwood oil
Sassafras oil
Pineoil
802
DIPHENYLMETHANE DIISOCYANATE ADHESIVES
Sources
Gorilla glue is the most common brand name. Similar
products are marketed as polyurethane glues.
Toxicity and Treatment
As the glue dries, it will expand to 3-4 times its original
volume. Thus, when the glue is swallowed, it will
potentially cause an acute gastric obstruction. Surgical
removal of the gastric foreign body is usually required.
DEICING SALTS
Sources
Common deicing salts may contain one or other of the
following: calcium carbonate, calcium magnesium acetate,
urea, potassium chloride, magnesium chloride, and sodium
chloride.
Toxicity and Treatment
Calcium carbonate, calcium magnesium acetate, and urea
are primarily gastric irritants and will produce vomiting
and diarrhea. Sodium chloride can produce serious
hyper-natremia (muscle tremors, acidosis, seizures), and
osmotic diuresis. Muscle weakness and cardiac rhythm/
electrical  abnormalities can result  from  ingestion  of
potassium chloride or magnesium chloride.
803
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive
REFERENCES
Dart, R.C., Editor. 2003. Medical Toxicology, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Gfeller, R.W. and Messonnier, S.P. 2003. Handbook of
Small Animal Toxicology and Poisonings. St Louis:
Mosby.
Gupta, R.C., Editor. 2007. Veterinary Toxicology. Basic
and Clinical Principles. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Osweiler, G.D. 1996. Toxicology. The National Veterinary
Medical Series. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
Peterson, M.E. and Talcott, P.A. 2006. Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Rossoff, IS. 2001. Encyclopedia of Clinical Toxicology.
The Parthenon Publishing Group. Boca Raton, Florida:
Boca Raton Group.
804
29
Metals and Minerals
Robert H. Poppenga
INTRODUCTION
Metals are intrinsic to nature and are ubiquitous in the
environment of animals. While the form or valence of any
given metal can be changed, metals themselves cannot be
destroyed. The activities of man have resulted in the
large-scale redistribution of metals in the environment.
Perhaps the best example of this relates to lead, which
originates as lead ore that is processed for numerous uses.
The prior use of lead as an antiknock compound in
gasoline and pigment in paints contributed to widespread
environmental contamination before such uses were
banned. Despite curtailment of lead use, it still poses
significant risks for intoxication.  Lead in old paints
continues to cause adverse health effects in people and
pets.
Metals can be categorized as those that play an essential
role  in  biological
processes (e.g., those that are
nutritionally necessary such as iron, copper, zinc and
selenium, among others) and those that do not (e.g., lead
syndromes caused
by deficiencies
of nutritionally
important metals are different in pathogenesis and clinical
manifestations than those caused by exposure to excessive
amounts of the same metal
805
The toxicity of metals is sometimes harder to define than
for other toxicants. One reason for this is that the form of a
metal plays a critical role in how readily it is systemically
absorbed resulting in intoxication. For example, elemental
mercury, when ingested, is essentially unavailable for
systemic absorption. In contrast, organic forms of mercury
such as methyl mercury are highly bioavailable. The
interaction of metals also plays an important role in the
determination of toxicity. For example, high dietary
calcium can decrease absorption of lead because lead uses
calcium transport mechanisms for its uptake into the body.
Other factors that can influence toxicity include animal
age, gender, and the capacity of an individual for
biotransformation of a metal.
The distribution and accumulation of metals in certain
        
accumulate in bone where it is not available to affect target
tissues such as the CNS. Also, metals can be sequestered
in the body by cystine-rich
proteinscalled
metallothioneins. Metallothioneins are highly inducible by
metals and are essential for metal homeostasis and
detoxification of metals (Liu et al. 2008). The interaction
of metals with sulfhydryl-containing groups like cystine is
the basis for the efficacy of metal chelators, such as
succimer or dimercaprol, which contain 
numerous
sulfhydryl groups.
Although the periodic table is full of potentially toxic
metals that most commonly intoxicate, or pose an
intoxication risk for, companion animals. We do not
discuss metals that are more frequently involved in
806
livestock or wildlife intoxications such as selenium and
mercury nor discuss copper accumulation in susceptible
dog breeds. However, keep in mind that most metals,
under appropriate circumstances, can poison animals and
people.
Arsenic
Sources/Formulations
Historically, various forms of arsenic have been used as
herbicides, insecticides, wood
1 preservatives, growth
promotants, and therapeutic agents. Arsenic is found in
various valences and forms. There are trivalent and
pentavalent inorganic and organic arsenic forms. The
trivalent inorganic arsenic trioxide was formerly used as an
insecticide and herbicide and as a source for other
arsenicals (Ensley 2004). Pentavalent (arsenate, H3AsO4)
and trivalent (arsenite, HsAsO3) forms of arsenic include
sodium, potassium, and calcium salts. Paris green (copper
acetoarsenite) and lead arsenate have been used as
insecticides, and trivalent inorganic arsenic forms such as
monosodium methanarsentate (MSMA) and disodium
methanearsonate (DMSA)
are
 used  as  herbicides.
Pentavalent organic arsenicals such as sodium arsenilate
and 3-nitro, 4-hydroxyphenylarsonic acid are used as feed
additives for somelivestock species
Although arsenic is still utilized in some products, it is not
as ubiquitous as it once was due to restrictions on its use
and the availability of newer, more targeted pesticides. For
example, its use as a wood preservative in the form of
chromated copper arsenic (CCA) has been banned for
807
residential use  by  the  USEPA(
(http://www.epa.gov/
oppad001/reregistration/cca/).
Thiacetarsamide,
a
phenylarsenoxide
previously
used
asaheartworm
adulticide, is no longer commercially available in the U.S.
although another organic 
 arsenical, melarsomine, is
available (Plumb 2005). According to the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center, the 1
highest
number
of
arsenic-related calls involves the exposure of dogs and cats
to ant or roach baits, which are typically inorganic forms
of arsenic (Neiger 2004)
Kinetics
As for most metals, the bioavailability of arsenic is
variable and depends on its form (organic vs. inorganic,
solution vs. powder). The arsenic in solutions of organic
arsenicals is almost completely absorbed from the Gl tract
(Neiger 2004). Alternatively, arsenic compounds of low
solubility such as arsenic trioxide are absorbed less
efficiently. Once absorbed, arsenic is widely distributed in
the body and reaches its highest concentrations in the liver,
spleen, kidney, lungs, and GI tract. Persistent residues are
found in keratinized tissues such as skin, hair, and nails.
Clearance of arsenic from the blood is multiphasic with the
first phase having a 1- to-2 hour half-life. Forty to 70% of
an absorbed dose is eliminated via the urine within the first
48 hours. To a large extent, inorganic arsenic is
metabolized in the liver by the addition of methyl groups
prior to its elimination.
Toxicity
808
The toxicity of arsenic is quite variable and depends on its
form, purity, solubility, particle size, valence, and species
exposed, and the condition of the exposed individual
(Neiger 2004). For example, trivalent arsenicals are 4 to 10
times more toxic than pentavalent arsenicals. The cat is
considered to be one of the more sensitive species. A lethal
oral dose of sodium arsenite is reported to be less than 5
mg/kg body weight. More generally, the range of lethal
oral doses for sodium arsenite is 1 to 25 mg/kg body
weight. Weak and debilitated animals are more susceptible
to intoxication (Neiger 2007).
Mechanism of Action
The mechanism of toxic action is dependent on the form of
arsenic. Trivalent
t inorganic arsenicals (i.e., arsenites)
inhibit cellular respiration.
They  bind  to  sulfhydryl
compounds, especially lipoic acid and α-keto oxidases.
Lipoic acid, a tissue respiratory enzyme cofactor, plays an
essential role in the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA).
Tissues with high oxidative energy requirements (e.g.,
actively dividing cells such as those of the intestinal
epithelium, kidney, liver, skin, and lungs) are more
severely affected. Trivalent arsenic affects capillary
integrity by an unknown mechanism. The gastrointestinal
tract is most affected; capillary dilatation is followed by
resulting in submucosal congestion and edema.
[n
 contrast,  pentavalent  inorganic 
arsenicals (i.e.,
phosphorylation. Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation
produces  a  cellular   energy 
 deficit.  Elevated body
809
temperature is not characteristic of pentavalent arsenical
poisoning as it is in poisonings by other oxidative
uncouplers (e.g., nitrophenols)
The organic arsenicals also vary in terms of their
mechanism of toxic action. Trivalent organic arsenicals
appear to have a mechanism of toxic action similar to the
inorganic arsenicals. However, pentavalent organic
arsenicals (e.g., used as livestock feed additives) act on
nerves by an unknown mechanism. They produce
demyelination and eventual axonal degeneration, leading
some researchers to believe that pentavalent organic
arsenicals interfere with the B vitamins essential for
maintenance of nervous tissue.
Although chronic arsenic exposure has been associated
with various cancers in people, its ability to cause cancer is
animals is uncertain (Neiger 2004). In humans, chronic
       s
skin
including
hyper-  or   hypopigmentation    and
hyperkeratosis.
Clinical Effects
Typically, arsenic intoxication in small animals is an acute
illness. Signs can occur within minutes of exposure, with
death occurring within several hours. Intoxication from
chronic  arsenic  exposure  is  not  well described  in
companion animals. However, there is one case report
describing dermatitis in a German shorthaired pointer
chronically exposed to arsenic (Evinger and Blakemore
1984). The source of exposure was from a container of
810
44% sodium arsenate that had been leaking into the dog's
house.
Signs
Signs associated with acute arsenic intoxication generally
develop in the following progression: intense abdominal
pain, salivation, vomiting, staggering gait, diarrhea (often
bloody), rapid and weak pulse, hypothermia, collapse, and
death. Experimentally, long-term exposure of dogs to
inorganic arsenic  caused nonspecific signs such as
anorexia and weight loss secondary to reduced food
consumption (Neiger and Osweiler 1989)
Laboratory
There are no specific abnormalities noted from CBC or
serum chemistry tests. Because arsenic can damage
multiple organs, changes associated with liver or kidney
dysfunction can be present if the animal survives for
several days. Protein, red blood cells, and casts can be
noted in the urine.
Differential Diagnoses
Other disease etiologies to consider include intoxication
from other metals or metal salts (e.g., lead, copper, or zinc
salts), ingestion of acid or alkaline caustics, ingestion of
irritating plants (e.g., those containing insoluble calcium
oxalates, castor bean), and infectious agents such as
parvovirus.
Diagnostics
811
Antemortem
An antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of ingestion of
arsenic, the occurrence of consistent clinical signs, and the
detection of toxic concentrations of arsenic in vomitus or
stomach contents, whole blood, or urine. Suspect sources
of exposure can also be tested to confirm the presence of
arsenic. The rapid elimination of the metal from the body
makes the collection of appropriate samples as early as
possible an important  consideration.  Most veterinary
diagnostic laboratories can test for arsenic. It is important
to point out that low-level concentrations of arsenic in
blood or urine are not unusual and do not indicate arsenic
intoxication. The interpretation of a given concentration of
          
timing of sample collection in relation to exposure.
Postmortem
Postmortem analysis of stomach contents, liver, kidney, or
urine can confirm exposure. Again, the significance of
detected  concentrations,  especially
relatively
1low
concentrations, needs to be interpreted in conjunction with
other case variables. Postmortem lesions might be absent
in cases of rapid death. Otherwise, severe gastrointestinal
lesions consisting of reddening of the gastric mucosa and
proximal small intestine, watery GI contents, and blood
and sloughed mucosa in the feces are commonly noted.
Other organ lesions are not specific for arsenic.
Management of Exposures
812
The rapidity of onset of clinical signs such as vomiting
often precludes initiating decontamination procedures.
Activated  charcoal  is unlikely  to   adsorb  significant
amounts of arsenic, although with significant exposures its
administration is recommended (Ford 2006). Symptomatic
animals need to be stabilized first. This might entail
 s     
       
and electrolyte abnormalities might need to be addressed.
Glucose and glycogen stores should be maintained
parenterally   with dextrose  or  parenteral  alimentation
solutions (Ford 2006).
Chelation   therapy  is  typically  indicated.  Historically,
dimercaprol (BAL or British anti-Lewisite) was the
recommended chelator. It is a sulfhydryl-containing
chelator that binds to arsenic and allows the
arsenic-chelator complex to be eliminated. An alternative
chelator, succimer, has several theoretical advantages over
dimercaprol,
including less toxicity and oral (vs.
injectable) dosing form. It has been theorized that because
has escaped the extracelluar space as efficiently as
dimercaprol (Neiger 2004). However, available studies
dimercaprol in increasing arsenic elimination (Ford 2006).
If dimercaprol is used, monitoring for adverse reactions
included pain at the injection site, vomiting, tremors, and
seizures is required.
Table 29.l. Percentages of elemental iron found in
common iron formulations
813
Iron Formulation
% Elemental Iron
Ionic Forms
Ferrous chloride
28%
Ferrous fumarate
33%
Ferrous gluconate
12%
Ferrous lactate
19%
Ferrous sulfate
20%
NonionicForms
Carbonyl iron
%86
Iron polysaccharide46%
Although the administration of B-complex vitamins and
amino acids has been recommended, the evidence for their
might be considered  to prevent secondary bacterial
infections of the GI tract. The use of GI protectants might
also be indicated. Hemodialysis is not recommended in the
absence of renal impairment (Ford 2006). Recovering
animals should be fed a high-quality diet in small portions,
which can be increased as time and circumstances permit.
Prognosis
The prognosis in symptomatic animals is always guarded.
particularly in the absence of early intervention and
intensive monitoring and treatment.
Iron
Sources/Forms
814
Iron is an element essential for life. Sources for readily
ionizable iron include multivitamins and dietary mineral
supplements (for geriatric use or use during pregnancy)
(Hall 2007a). In humans, the most commonly reported iron
intoxication occurs in children ingesting iron supplements.
There are a number of iron salts and formulations. The
more common formulations and their respective percent
elemental iron concentrations are provided in Table 29.1.
Some insoluble forms of iron such as elemental iron and
ferric oxide (i.e., rust) are not hazardous when ingested
due to low bioavailability. One newer source of iron, a
chelated iron called iron phosphate EDTA, is found in
some slug and snail baits, which are advertised as being
nontoxic to pets. However, there are many anecdotal
reports of illness in dogs following ingestion of these
products, possibly as a result of enhanced absorption of the
chelated iron.
Kinetics
The kinetics of iron absorption are complex. Iron body
stores are regulated at the site of absorption from the Gl
tract because the body is not able to actively excrete iron.
From the GI tract, iron must first enter duodenal mucosal
cells, possibly by a carrier-mediated process. Next the iron
is either lost as the mucosal cells slough into the GI lumen
or is bound to ferritin for later transfer to transferrin, a
serum iron-binding transport protein. Serum transferrin
concentrations greatly exceed amounts necessary to bind
iron under normal physiological processes (normal binding
capacity is 3 to 4 times the serum iron concentration).
815
However, during intoxications the binding capacity is
exceeded, allowing free iron to cause cell damage.
Toxicity
The toxicity of iron for dogs is believed to be similar to
that for humans. Ingestion of less than 20 mg/kg body
weight of elemental iron is not considered to cause more
than mild gastric upset. Dosages of 20 to 60 mg/kg body
weight cause mild to moderate intoxication, and dosages in
excess of 60 mg/kg are associated with severe intoxication.
Without early intervention, dosages of 1o0 mg/kg are
potentially fatal. It is important to determine the dose or
   s   o m
much of a product was ingested, knowing the form and
amount of iron per unit of product weight, and then
multiplying the total by the percentage of elemental iron
based upon the form (see Table 29.1)
Mechanism of Action
Free iron can cause direct or indirect tissue and cell
damage. Iron acts as a free radical and can also generate
free radicals. Free radicals have one or more unpaired
electrons, which can initiate lipid peroxidation resulting in
cell membrane damage. Tissues that have first contact with
free iron are primarily affected although all tissues are
susceptible to damage if exposed. The primary targets are
the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and hepatic tissues.
Iron also damages mitochondria, leading to loss of
     
direct  negative inotropic effect  on  the  myocardium
(Perrone 2007)
816
Clinical Effects
Classically, the signs associated with iron intoxication
follow more or less well-defined stages.
Signs
Initial clinical signs are due to GI upset (within 6 hours
after ingestion). Bloody vomitus or stool can occur during
this stage. The next stage (approximately 6 to 24 hours
subside. The apparent recovery stage is followed by a
worsening of signs that include vomiting, diarrhea,
depression, GI hemorrhage, abdominal pain, circulatory
shock, tremors, metabolic acidosis, coagulopathy, and in
some cases, death. The last stage, 2 to 6 weeks after
exposure, is characterized by GI obstruction secondary to
fibrosing repair of prior GI damage.
Laboratory
Leukocytosis, hyperglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and
normal-to-high AST, ALT, ALP, and serum bilirubin
concentrations can occur. Iron-containing tablets or pills
might be visualized by abdominal imaging.
Differential Diagnoses
A variety of diseases with a significant Gl involvement
needs to be considered.Such diseases include garbage
intoxication, toxic plant ingestion (e.g., castor bean) gastric
torsion, caustic ingestions, snake bite, heat prostration, and
infectious (bacterial or viral) enteritis.
817
Diagnostics
Antemortem
A diagnosis relies on a history of exposure and occurrence
of compatible clinical signs. Serum iron in excess of the
total serum iron-binding capacity (TIBC) is consistent with
exposure to excessive iron (Hall 2007b). If possible, TIBC
should be determined at 2 to 3 hours and again at 5 to 6
hours postexposure. Analysis of vomitus or  stomach
contents might suggest a high iron exposure.
Postmortem
Postmortem tissue iron concentrations might help support
a diagnosis of iron intoxication. Lesions in the liver tend to
have  a  rather  distinct  periportal  distribution  because
periportal regions of the liver are the first to be exposed to
excessive free iron absorbed from the GI tract.
Management of Exposures
Early after exposure (within the first 2 hours), emesis can
be induced or gastric lavage considered. Keep in mind that
pill bezoars can form that makes gastric evacuation more
challenging. Also many patients present with significant
prior vomiting; in such cases induction of emesis is not
warranted. In cases where pill bezoars might form,
particularly with large ingestions, emergency gastrotomy
has been suggested (Hall 2007a). Although not used much
in veterinary medicine currently, in human exposures.
whole  bowel
 irrigation using  polyethylene glycol
electrolyte lavage solution has shown some promise for
818
removing iron tablets or pills. Activated charcoal does not
bind iron and is not indicated.
Patient stabilization is a priority in symptomatic animals.
Treating circulatory  shock and metabolic acidosis  is
critical. Sucrafate might be useful in order to provide some
GI protection.
Deferoxamine mesylate is an effective iron chelator. It
combines with iron to form ferrioxamine, which is
subsequently eliminated via the kidneys (Perrone 2007).
      
cardiac arrhthymias; it is a teratogen and should be used in
pregnant animals only if the potential benefits outweigh
the risks.
Prognosis
The prognosis is variable depending on the dosage
ingested and availability of appropriate monitoring. In
animals that recover from acute intoxication, owners
should be instructed to watch for evidence of GI
obstruction several weeks after discharge.
LEAD
The true incidence of lead intoxication of household pets is
unknown but is likely to be of decreasing prevalence due
to curtailment of lead paint use and resulting decreases in
exposure. At least historically, a higher prevalence of
intoxication is reported during warmer months. There is
also a higher prevalence in young animals, most likely due
819
to their increased susceptibility as a result of greater
bio-availability of lead and a more permeable blood-brain
barrier (Poppenga 2007). Additionally, the prevalence is
higher in pets housed in older homes or buildings. Low
socioeconomic status of a pet-owning family is more likely
to be associated with a high blood-lead concentration in
pets, although housing undergoing renovations in urban
review of lead intoxication in cats, 84% of the cases
involved exposure of the cats to old paint, most often as a
result ofhome renovations (Knight and Kumar 2003).
Sources/Forms
Lead is used in an impressive array of products including
tank linings, piping, radiation shielding, paint pigments,
inks, lead ammunition (shot and bullets), ballast and
weights, solder, linoleum, wine bottle foil, lubricants,
bearings, alloys, storage batteries, ceramics, plastics,
electronic devices, leaded glass, stained-glass framing,
fishing gear, jewelry and small toys (Casteel 2004;
Poppenga 2007). Wrappers used for imported candies have
been found to contain high concentrations of lead as a
result of the use of lead-contaminated inks (Medlin 2004).
Animals can be intoxicated from lead-contaminated soils.
For example, cats and birds can ingest lead-contaminated
soil via grooming or foraging behavior, respectively. Pet
and aviary birds are unlikely to be exposed to many
sources of lead due to their being kept in home or cage
environments. The more common sources of exposure for
such birds are likely to be from paint (either from direct
ingestion of lead-based paint flakes or secondary to paint
820
dust contaminating the environment) or from ingestion of
small leadcontaining objects.
Because of the toxicity of lead for children and wild bird
species, several former uses of lead have been eliminated
or curtailed (e.g., in paints, gasoline, and ammunition).
Lead has not intentionally been added to most paint since
1978, although it has been estimated by the Centers for
Disease Control that 74% of privately owned housing in
the United States built before 1980 still contains hazardous
quantities of lead paint (Casteel 2004). Thus, animals kept
in older homes have an increased risk of lead exposure
from paint.
Kinetics
As for other metals, the bioavailability of lead following
ingestion depends on its form. Elemental lead is less
bio-available than inorganic lead salts such as lead acetate
or organic lead such as tetraethyl lead. Elemental lead is
relatively insoluble in hard, basic water, but more soluble
in acidic water. Therefore, elemental lead is more soluble.
and therefore more bioavailable, in the acidic fluids of the
proventriculus or ventriculus of birds and the stomach of
mammals. Lead is actively transported across the GI tract
using the same transport mechanisms used for calcium
absorption.  This  absorption  mechanism explains  the
greater bioavailability of lead in immature, rapidly
growing animals with an increased need for calcium.
Irrespective of the form of lead, a significant amount of
ingested lead is excreted in the feces without being
absorbed.
821
Approximately 90% of absorbed lead is found in red blood
cells, with small amounts bound to albumin or found in
plasma as free lead. Within red blood cells, lead is
associated with the cell membrane, hemoglobin and
possibly other cell components (Liu et al. 2008). Lead is
widely distributed in soft tissues and bone serves as a
long-term storage site. The half-life of lead is multiphasic
due to redistribution within various compartments of the
body (Gwaltney-Brant 2004). For example, the half-life of
lead in whole blood is approximately 35 days, whereas in
brain it is approximately 2 years. Lead can persist in bone
for years. Enhanced bone remodeling can release lead into
the blood and cause adverse effects. Elimination of
absorbed lead can occur via sloughing of renal tubular
epithelial cells, via the bile or via pancreatic secretions
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004).
Toxicity
Few studies have determined the acute or chronic toxicity
of lead for many species, especially for pet birds. The risk
for lead intoxication is influenced not only by the amount
exposed, dietary factors, size of ingested lead particles and.
in birds, the amount of grit in the ventriculus. The length
of retention of lead particles in the GI tract varies among
individuals within a given species and between species.
Given the large number of variables that can affect the
toxicity of lead, the availability of precise toxic or lethal
doses is limited.
Mechanism of Action
822
Most cellular damage due to lead is caused by the ability
of lead to substitute for a variety of polyvalent cations,
especially calcium and zinc, in their binding sites (Garza et
al. 2 006). The role that metal ions play in biological
systems are numerous and diverse. They serve as charge
carriers,  intermediates  in  catalyzed
 reactions, and
structural elements in the maintenance of
protein
conformation. Metal transport,  energy metabolism,
apoptosis, ionic conduction, cell adhesion, inter- and
intracellular signaling, diverse enzymatic processes,
protein maturation, and genetic regulation can all be
affected. Lead produces oxidative damage to lipids and
proteins as a result of release of iron, disruption of
antioxidant mechanisms, and direct oxidative damage.
The neurotoxicity of lead is most likely due to such diverse
mechanisms as lipid peroxidation, excitotoxicity (i.e., cell
damage secondary to receptor overstimulation due to
excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate), alterations
in
neurotransmitter
 synthesis, storage and release,
alterations in expression and functioning of receptors,
interference with mitochondrial metabolism, interference
with second messenger systems, and damage to astroglia
and oligodendroglia
The mechanism of lead-induced altered GI motility is not
effect of lead on peripheral nerves or calcium flux.
Lead-induced relaxation may be due to stimulation of
adenylate cyclase activity resulting in an increase in
intracellular cyclic AMP (Boyer et al. 1985).
823
Lead causes anemia by increasing erythrocyte fragility,
delaying erythrocyte maturation, and inhibiting heme
synthesis. Heme synthesis is impaired as a result of
aminolevulinic acid synthetase, S-aminolevulinic acid
dehydratase (ALAD), coproporphyrinogen decarboxylase,
and ferrochelatase inhibition (Henritig 2002)
Clinical Effects
Signs
As discussed, the primary organ systems affected are the
gastrointestinal, nervous, and hematopoietic. The most
obvious and common signs reflect GI and CNS effects.
Gastrointestinal signs often precede CNS signs and are
predominant with chronic, low-level exposure. CNS signs
are more frequently observed following acute exposures
and are more common in younger animals. Common signs
include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, abdominal pain.
regurgitation due to megaesophagus, lethargy, hysteria,
seizures, and blindness. In intoxicated cats central
vestibular abnormalities such as vertical nystagmus and
ataxia are reported (Poppenga 2007). In a review of lead
intoxication of cats, the most common clinical signs
reported were anorexia, vomiting, and seizures (Knight
and Kumar 2003)
In pet birds, signs of intoxication can be nonspecific and
limited to anorexia, weakness, and weight loss. Signs
related to nervous system impairment include lethargy,
weakness manifested as wing droop, leg paresis or
paralysis, changes in phonation, head tilt, ataxia, blindness,
circling, head tremors, and seizures (Locke and Thomas
824
1996). Gastrointestinal signs include regurgitation and
decreased motility of the upper GI tract (esophagus,
proventriculus, and ventriculus) resulting in impaction and
greenish diarrhea, which stains feathers around the vent
(Locke and Thomas 1996; Dumonceaux and Harrison
1994).
It is important to note that blood lead concentrations do not
correlate with the occurrence or severity of clinical signs.
Laboratory
Diagnostic  laboratory  abnormalities are noted most
frequently when the hematopoietic system is affected. The
presence of 5 to 40 nucleated RBCs/100 WBCs without
anemia strongly suggests lead exposure. However, the
absence of nucleated RBC changes does not rule out the
diagnosis. Red blood cell changes include anisocytosis,
polychromasia, poikilocytosis, target cells, hypochromasia,
and basophilic stippling. The latter is often difficult to
detect. A neutrophilic leukocytosis might be noted. In cats,
elevated AST and ALP values are reported. Urinalysis can
reflect mild nonspecific renal damage, glucosuria, and
hemoglobinuria.
Diagnostics
Antemortem
As mentioned, clinical signs associated with lead
intoxication can be nonspecific, making a diagnosis more
difficult. Radiographs might identify metallic objects in
the GI tract. Obviously, detecting a metal density does not
825
identify it as to type of metal. The absence of metal
densities does not rule out metal exposure, because metal
objects may have been passed or exposure to lead was
from a nonradiodense form.
Diagnosis of lead exposure or intoxication is most directly
made by measurement of lead in whole blood samples. In
contrast to the diagnosis of zinc intoxication, serum or
plasma are not appropriate samples for lead analysis.
because lead associates with the red blood cell. Lead
analyses are widely available through veterinary diagnostic
laboratories. Fortunately, small sample sizes can be used;
blood samples as small as 20 μl are often suitable. This is
important when obtaining blood from small animals such
as many caged birds.In
 general, any anticoagulant,
including EDTA can be used to prevent samples from
clotting, although there may be exceptions to this general
rule; it is best to consult with the laboratory conducting the
testing prior to sample collection. Whole blood lead
concentrations consistent
t withleadexposure and/or
intoxication are generally 0.20 ppm or greater (20pg/dl or
greater). There are no “normal background blood lead
concentrations in animals. Measurement of ALAD
activity, blood zinc protoporphyrin, or free erythrocyte
protoporphyrin concentrations are also good biomarkers of
lead exposure, but these tests are not widely available.
Postmortem
 s     s 
compatible clinical signs, detection of metallic particles or
other forms of lead in the Gl tract, and measurement of
liver or kidney lead concentrations. Reported diagnostic
826
liver or kidney concentrations are variable, but values of 4
significant. There can be significant differences in liver
and kidney tissue concentrations in the same animal; as a
consequence it is often advisable to test both tissues.
Necropsy findings can include the observation of paint
chips or lead objects in the  gastrointestinal tract
[  s  s  
tubular epithelial cells {intracellular storage form of lead)
are considered highly suggestive. Cerebrocortical lesions
can include spongiosis, vascular hypertrophy, gliosis,
neuronal necrosis, and demyelination.
Differential Diagnoses
With the exception of CBC changes, clinical signs
associated with lead intoxication are nonspecific and a
number of differential diagnoses need to be considered. In
dogs, the following diseases can mimic lead intoxication:
canine distemper, infectious encephalitides, epilepsy,
bromethalin, methylxanthine or tremorgenic mycotoxin
toxicoses,  NSAID  toxicosis,  heatstroke,  intestinal
parasitism, intussusception, foreign body, pancreatitis, and
infectious canine hepatitis. In cats, degenerative or storage
diseases,
hepatic
encephalopathy,
infectious
encephalitides,
and
organophosphorous/carbamate,
bromethalin, or methylxanthine toxicoses need to be
considered.
Management of Cases
827
Case management focuses on evacuation of the GI tract,
stabilization of the patient, and reduction of lead body
burden. Typically, animals intoxicated by lead have not
been exposed to a single dose of lead or developed signs
immediately after  a single
e exposure. Thus, gastric
evacuation is not always indicated. The exception would
be in those cases in which a metallic object is detected in
the stomach. In those cases, gastric lavage or endoscopy
can be considered. Because a significant amount of lead
might remain in the Gl tract beyond the stomach.
decontamination of the Gl tract can be useful. This is
accomplished using saccharide or saline cathartics such as
sorbitol or sodium or magnesium sulfate. The advantage of
using sodium or magnesium sulfate lies in the potential to
form lead sulfate, which has relatively low bioavailability.
However, use of sodium sulfate in combination with
chelators such as CaNazEDTA or succimer has not been
shown to be more effective than using a chelator alone. In
pet birds, decontamination approaches include the use of
emollient laxatives such as mineral oil, bulk laxatives such
as psyllium, or cathartics such as sodium sulfate.
Administration of 3 to 5 appropriately sized pieces of grit
has been reported to aid in the passage of metal objects
from the ventriculus (Dumonceaux and Harrison 1994).
Saline lavage has been successful in removing lead
particles from  the proventriculus
Sorventriculusof
lead-intoxicated birds (Loudis 2004)
If animals present with neurologic symptoms such as
seizures, control with a benzodiazepine can be tried.
Seizure activity might suggest the presence of cerebral
edema. This should be treated using mannitol and
dexamethasone.
828
Chelation therapy is universally recommended. The two
chelators most commonly used are calcium disodium
EDTA (CaNa2 EDTA) and succimer. In human medicine.
succimer has largely replaced the use of CaNa2EDTA due
to its efficacy, lack of adverse side effects and ability to be
givenorally.
If using EDTA, only the calcium salt should be used to
avoid calcium  chelation  and  resulting  hypocalcemia
      
significant disadvantages to the use of CaNa2EDTA. It is
potentially nephrotoxic, which can either induce renal
dysfunction or exacerbate concurrent lead-induced renal
impairment. It has to be administered parenterally because
oral  administration    of  CaNazEDTA  enhances   the
absorption of lead from the Gl tract. Repeated IM
injections in birds can cause significant muscle damage.
Additionally, CaNa2EDTA chelates important endogenous
minerals such as zinc. Prolonged use of CaNa2 EDTA is
generally interrupted by intervals of no therapy to avoid
adverse effects. Treatment periods of 5-10 days followed
by a 3-5-day “rest” period are recommended. Assessment
of renal function every 2-3 days during chelation therapy
is also recommended.
Succimer (DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid) is a newer
chelating  agent that has several advantages  over
CaNa2EDTA. It can be given orally, which avoids the
need for repeated IM injections and potentially allows for
essential minerals such as zinc and it is not nephrotoxic
Succimer is more effective at removing lead from soft
tissues compared to CaNa2EDTA. Succimer decreases
829
CNS lead concentrations more rapidly than CaNa2EDTA
(Gwaltney-Brant 2004). In pet birds, succimer can be
given orally by gavage or other direct means, although it
has been effective when sprinkled on food (Hoogesteijn et
al. 2003). As with CaNa2EDTA use, the length of
treatment should be based on clinical improvement and
determination of blood lead concentrations. Whole blood
lead should be determined following chelation to assess
the need for additional chelation therapy. However, 3 to 5
days should be allowed for remaining lead to reequilibrate
to obtain an accurate assessment of lead status. Succimer
has been used successfully in dogs and cats (Ramsey et al.
1996; Knight et al. 2001).
Table 29.2.Comparison of CaNa2 EDTA and succimer for
the treatment of lead and zinc intoxications
CaNaEDTA
Succimer
Chemet
Tradenames
Calcium DisodiumVersenate
(Sanofi-Synthelabo)
(3M) 200mg/ml
100mg capsules
Slow IV infusion, IM or SQ
Routes of
injection; dilution with saline or
Oral
administration
5% dex trose needed if given IV
Oral administration
Not nephrotoxic
Does not chelate essential 
minerals such as zinc,
Rapid absorption Can chelate
manganese, and copper
Advantages
More rapid clinical
lead and zinc
improvement in lead
intox ication
More effective at
removing lead from soft
tissues
830
Need for repeated IM injections
Pain at injection site
Potential nephrotoxicity and
Less effective chelation
therefore need to monitor renal
of zinc; efficacy uncertain
function regularly
in zinc intox ication
Regurgi tation noted in
such as zinc, manganese, and
cockatiels
copper with long-term use
Potential to worsen CNS signs as
a result of lead redistribution
Clinical improvement is likely to be more rapid (within 24
hours) following succimer use compared to CaNa2EDTA.
 s un sn  a sis ron
with CaNa2EDTA.This is most likely
due
to
CaNa2EDTAinduced mobilization of lead from bone in
animals with chronic lead exposure, since acutely
intoxicated animals would be expected to have lower bone
lead
concentrations.  Combining  CaNa2EDTA  and
 s       
CaNa2EDTA or succimer alone. A comparison between
CaNa2EDTA and succimer is provided in Table 29.2
Irrespective of what chelator is used, assessment of blood
lead concentrations at the end of each rest period should
dictate the length of time needed for chelation therapy. The
goal is to chelate for the minimum amount of time
necessary to resolve the intoxication (based upon
resolution of clinical signs and a decline in blood lead
concentrations).
D-penicillamine has also been used to chelate lead in
animals, but its use is associated with a number of possible
adverse effects and is currently not recommended for use
in people (Van Alstine et al. 1993; Henritig 2002).
831
There is evidence in mammals that the efficacy of
chelation is improved when thiamine or antioxidants such
as ascorbic acid are used in conjunction with chelators.
Such combinations have not been investigated in birds.
Prognosis
The prognosis is favorable with treatment, although it is
guarded   in  animals  presenting  with  uncontrollable
seizures. Signs should improve significantly within 24 to
48 hours of initiating chelation therapy.
Zinc
Zinc intoxication is most commonly reported in small dogs
and caged birds.  Although cats are occasionally
intoxicated based upon anecdotal reports, intoxication
appears to be relatively uncommon in this species.
Sources/Forms
Metallic zinc is commonly used to galvanize metals, such
as iron and steel, to provide protective coating. Until 1982.
pennies consisted mainly of copper (95%) and zinc (4%),
but the copper-clad pennies minted after 1982 contain 97%
zinc and 2.5% copper (Barceloux 1999). Additionally, zinc
n q  isd   p os u p s
concentrations to result in avian poisonings. Zinc is also
used in a variety of medical formulations, pigments, wood
preservatives, insecticides, and rubber. Zinc oxide
ointments and creams can be licked from the skin
following topical application or cause intoxication if the
832
products are chewed and the contents swallowed (Talcott
2004).
Kinetics
The rate of absorption depends on the amount and form of
ingested zinc. The acidity of the stomach provides an
excellent environment for the quick release and dissolution
of zinc from metallic objects (Talcott 2004). Once
absorbed, zinc is distributed widely to tissues, including
pancreas, liver, kidney, bone, muscle, brain, retina, and
skin. In tissues, especially the pancreas, liver, kidney,
intestinal mucosa, and brain, zinc is bound to
metallothionein. Metallothionein  is a low molecular
weight, cysteine rich protein that has potent metal-binding
capabilities. Zinc has a high binding affinity for
metallothionein, which may play an integral role in zinc
metabolism. The major route of excretion of zinc is via the
feces.
Toxicity
Zinc is an essential metal, and animals and humans have
the ability to regulate zinc effectively. Zinc is relatively
nontoxic in mammals as judged by their tolerance to
dietary concentrations greater than 1oo times the minimum
recommended daily zinc requirement (Leonard and Gerber
1989). If dietary exposure is excessive and homeostatic
mechanisms fail, zinc toxicity can occur. Definite data on
the toxicity of zinc in caged birds is lacking, although there
is limited information available for certain avian and
mammalian species. In dogs, the ingestion of one or two
pennies is likely sufficient to cause intoxication. One
833
report estimated that the toxic dose of zinc in the form of
zinc oxide for dogs was 108 grams of zinc (Breitschwerdt
et al. 1986).
Mechanism of Action
Zinc is required for a large number of physiological
processes
including
bone
formation,
immunity.
keratogenesis,
reproduction, growth, vision, wound
healing, brain development, normal functioning of the
central nervous system, and many other physiological
processes
(Talcott
t  2004).   Major pathophysiological
mechanisms of zinc intoxication are attributed to direct
and indirect toxic effects on the gastrointestinal tract, liver,
kidney, pancreas, red blood cells, and brain, although
specific mechanisms for many of these effects have not
elucidated. In acute cases of zinc poisoning, particularly
when zinc salts are ingested, local corrosive effects occur
in the gastrointestinal tract followed by damage to the
liver, kidney, and pancreas. The hemolytic anemia
associated with zinc intoxication might be due to a direct
damaging effect of zinc on red blood cell membranes. In
birds, a major concern is chronic zinc toxicosis with
resulting anemia. Anemia might be secondary to functional
iron or copper deficiencies. Zinc has been shown to cause
acute pancreatic, hepatic, and renal failure, although
underlying specific pathophysiological mechanisms have
not been described. Zinc toxicosis has been associated with
brain damage that is most likely a combination of hypoxic
and direct toxic effects.
Clinical Effects
834
Signs
In intoxicated dogs, the most common signs include
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, depression, pale
mucous membranes, icterus, and orange-tinged feces.
Often metallic objects are noted on abdominal radiographs.
although the absence of such findings does not rule out
zinc
intoxication.  Arrhythmias    and    ST-segment
abnormalities have been reported (Talcott 2004).
In birds clinical signs of intoxication are variable and
nonspecific. They include lethargy, anorexia, regurgitation.
polyuria, polydipsia, hematuria, hematochezia, pallor, dark
or bright green diarrhea, foul-smelling feces, paresis,
(hoo euaddod pue sauqosnd qeap uppns pue 'sanzias
However, zinc toxicosis was associated with sudden death
in 7 of 21 psittacine birds evaluated in one study (Puschner
et al. 1 999). Therefore, any acute death in a caged bird
needs to be evaluated for possible zinc poisoning.
Excessive zinc exposure as a cause of feather picking is
questionable.
Laboratory
In dogs, findings indicative of an oxidant-induced
hemolytic anemia predominate. These include Heinz body
formation, target cells, spherocytosis, hemoglobinemia,
hemoglobinuria, and bilirubinemia. Regenerative changes
such as nucleated RBCs, basophilic stippling, and
polychromasia might be noted.
Diagnostics
835
Antemortem
Antemortem diagnosis relies on a history of ingestion of
zinc, the occurrence of compatible clinical signs (e.g.,
hemolytic anemia in conjunction with a metallic object in
the GI tract), and measurement of zinc in serum samples.
Serum zinc concentrations typically exceed 5 ppm and are
often much higher (for dogs and cats a serum zinc
reference range is 0.7 to 2.0 ppm). Because many rubbers
can leach zinc, it is important to use appropriate serum
tubes (i.e., royal blue top) for sample collection and
submission or scrupulously avoid contact of the blood/
serum samples with rubber (e.g., a plastic-capped vial can
be used to store and ship serum). Once exposure to zinc is
stopped, follow up
0determinations
ofserum
1zinc
concentrations might be useful.
Postmortem
A postmortem diagnosis relies on antemortem findings and
measurement of zinc concentrations in appropriate tissue
samples. Liver is the most commonly tested sample.
although kidney and pancreatic tissue samples can also be
used.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential
diagnoses
include
immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia, Babesia, onion/garlic, naphthalene
mothball,
some  mushroom
 acetaminophen
intoxications, snake and brown recluse spider bites, caval
syndrome, overhydration, skunk spray, and numerous
causes of gastrointestinal signs.
836
Management of Exposures
The most important intervention is rapid removal of any
identified zinc object by endoscopy or laparotomy. Severe
hemolytic anemias might require blood transfusions. In
one case series of 19 dogs with zinc intoxication, all
animals received either packed red blood cells or an
oxygen-carrying solution (Oxyglobin?)(Gunee and
Drobatz 2007). Fluid therapy and diuresis are important to
both maintain hydration and minimize renal damage from
hemoglobinuria.
Although
CaNa2EDTA
and
D-penicillamine can chelate zinc, their routine use is
questionable, given the relatively rapid elimination of zinc.
Once exposure to zinc is stopped, tissue and serum zinc
concentrations drop rapidly. H2-receptor blockers might
help reduce stomach acidity and the rate of release of zinc
from zinc objects, although rapid removal of the zinc
object might make their use unnecessary.
Frequent evaluation of PCV and ECGs is warranted.
Periodic assessment of renal function might also be
prudent.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good to guarded. In one retrospective
study in dogs (N = 19), 17 dogs receiving treatment
survived (one was euthanized without treatment and one
was discharged but returned the next day in severe
respiratory distress) (Gurmee and Drobatz 2007). Rapid
removal of the source of zinc should result in progressive
 As [so  a 's  n 7 a sa
the retrospective study was 2 days. Multiple organ failure,
837
DIC,  pancreatic 　 disease,  renal failure, and
car-diopulmonary   arrest   are   potential   complications
(Talcott 2004).
REFERENCES
Barceloux, D.G. 1999. Zinc. J Toxicol—Clin Toxicol
37:279-292.
Boyer, IJ., Cory-Slechta, D.A., DiStefano, V. 1985. Lead
induction of crop dysfunction in pigeons through a direct
action on neural or smooth muscle components of crop
tissue.J Pharmacol Exp Ther 234:607-615
Breitschwerdt, E.B., Armstrong, P.J., Robinette, C.L
1986. Three cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs. Vet Hum
Toxicol 28:109-117.
Casteel, S.W. 2004. Lead. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A.,
eds. Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders
Elsevier, pp. 795-805.
Dumonceaux, G. and Harrison, G.H. 1994. Toxins. In
Ritchie, B.W., Harrison, G.J., Harrison, L.R., eds. Avian
Medicine: Principles and Application. Delray Beach,
Florida: Wingers Publishing, pp. 1030-1052.
Ensley, S. 2004. Arsenic. In Plumlee, K.H., ed. Clinical
Veterinary Toxicology. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 193-195.
Evinger, JV. and Blakemore, JC. 1984. Dermatitis in a
dog associated with exposure to an arsenic compound. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 84(10):1281-1282.
838
Ford, M. 2006. Arsenic. In Flomenbaum, N.E., Howland.
M.A., Goldfrank, L.R. et al., eds. Goldfrank's Toxicologic
Emergencies. New York, McGraw-Hill, pp. 1251-1264.
Garza, A., Vega, R., Soto, E. 2006. Cellular mechanisms
of lead neurotoxicity. Med Sci Monit 12:RA57-65
Gurmee, C.M., Drobatz, K.J. 2007. Zinc intoxication in
dogs: 19 cases (1991-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 230(8):
1174-1179.
Gwaltney-Brant, S. 2004. Lead. In Plumlee, K.H., ed.
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology. Mosby, St. Louis, pp.
204-210.
Hall, J.O. 2007a. Iron. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A.,
eds. Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders
Elsevier, pp. 777-784.
.2007b. Iron toxicity. In Tilley, L.P., Smith.
F.W.K., eds. Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consult,
4th ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing, p. 771.
Henritig,  F.M. 2002.  Lead. In Goldfrank,  L.R.,
Flomenbaum, N.E., Lewin, N.A., eds., Goldfrank's
Toxicologic Emergencies. Mew York: McGraw-Hill pp.
1200-1238.
Hoogesteijn, A.L., Raphael, B.L., Callem P. et al. 2003.
Oral  treatment    of   avian  lead  intoxication  with
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid. J Zoo Wildl Med
34:82-87.
839
Knight, T.E., Kent, M., Junk, JE. 200l. Succimer
treatment of lead toxicosis in two cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 218(12):1946-1948.
Knight, T.E., Kumar, M.S.A. 2003. Lead toxicosis in
cats—A review. J Feline Med and Surg 5:249-255.
Leonard, A., Gerber, G.B. 1989. Zinc toxicity—Does it
exist? J Am Coll Toxicol 8:1285-1290.
Liu, J., Goyer, R.A., Waalkes, M.P. 2008. Toxic effects of
metals. In Klaassen, C.D., ed. Casarett and Doull's
Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons. New York:
McGraw Hill, pp. 931-979.
Locke, L.N., Thomas, N.J. 1996. Lead poisoning of
waterfowl and raptors. In Fairbrother, A., Locke, L.N.,
Hoff, G.L., eds. Noninfectious Diseases of Wildlife. Ames:
Iowa State University Press, Ames, pp. 108-117.
Loudis, B. 2004. Endoscope assisted gastric lavage for
foreign body retrieval. Association of Avian Veterinarians
83-88.
Medlin, J. 2004. Sweet candy, bitter poison. Environ
Health Perspect 112:A803.
Neiger, R.D. 2004. Arsenic. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott,
P.A.(eds). Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis,
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 592-602.
840
. 2007. Arsenic. In Tilley, L.P., Smith, F.W.K., eds
Blackwell'sFiveMinuteVeterinary Consult,4thed.Ames,
Blackwell Publishing, p. 101.
Neiger, R.D. and Osweiler, G.D. 1989. Effect of subacute
low level dietary sodium arsenite on dogs. Fund Appl
Toxicol 13:439-451.
Perrone, J. 2007. Iron. In Flomenbaum, N.E., Howland
M.A., Goldfrank, L.S. et al., eds. Goldfrank's Toxicologic
Emergencies. New York, McGraw-Hill, pp. 629-637.
Plumb, D.C. 2005. Thiacetarsamide sodium. In Plumb's
Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed. Ames, Blackwell
Publishing, pp. 747-749.
Poppenga, R.H. 2007. Lead poisoning. In Tilley, L.P.,
Smith, F.W.K., eds. Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary
Consult, 4th ed. Ames, Blackwell Publishing, pp. 796-797.
Puschner, B. and Poppenga, R.H. 2009. Lead and zinc
intoxication in companion birds. Compend Contin Educ
Vet 31(1):E1-12.
Puschner, B., St. Leger, J., Galey, F.D. 1999. Normal and
toxic zinc concentrations in serum/plasma and liver of
psittacines with respect to genus differences. J Vet Diagn
Invest 11:522-527.
Ramsey, D.R., Casteel, S.W., Fagella, A.M. et al. 1996.
Use
of
orally
administered
succimer
(meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment of lead
poisoning in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208(3):371-375.
841
Talcott, P.A. 2004. Zinc. In Peterson, M.E., Talcott, P.A.,
eds). Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders
Elsevier, pp. 1094-1100.
Van Alstine, W.G., Wickliffe, L.W., Everson, R.J. et al.
1993. Acute lead toxicosis in a household of cats. J Vet
Diagn Invest 5:496-498.
842
30
Miscellaneous Toxicants
MichelleMostrom
INTRODUCTION
This chapter
r discusses clinicalsigns and suggested
treatments for a diverse group of compounds. In many
cases, animals may not be observed consuming the toxic
agent and owners report clinical signs with no known
toxicant exposure. In other cases, an exposure may be
recognized but a dose and the potential for intoxication is
unknown. In a number of these instances, the veterinary
clinical staff must treat the animal and developing clinical
signs and not a textbook description of toxicity and
therapy. Sorting through a complete history and evaluating
the animal, particularly as clinical signs develop, may be
the only approach available for a treatment regime and
establishing aplausible diagnosis.
A presumptive
diagnosis can often be based on findings from the history
and clinical observations (ie., observing a toxicant in the
vomitus or gastric lavage; smelling a hydrocarbon on
animal breath, urine, or skin; history of training on plastic
explosives   and
1  animals   displaying   seizures).  The
confirmatory diagnosis may be difficult to achieve due to
lack of analytical testing procedures for a particular toxic
agent. Contact your local state diagnostic laboratory or
check on the
American
1AssociationofVeterinary
Laboratory
Diagnosticians
(AAVLD)
website
(http://www.aavld.org)
and“Accreditation"link for
843
diagnostic lab contact information to assist in veterinary
toxicology analytical testing
PETROLEUM-BASED PRODUCTS
Sources
Animals can be exposed to petroleum- based hydrocarbon
products through inhalation, oral, ocular, or dermal routes
in the house, hobby or work areas, garage, or outdoor
environment. Generally pets will be exposed to refined
petroleum products, such as fuels (gasoline, diesel,
kerosene), paint thinners or pesticide carriers (petroleum
distillates), degreasing and dry- cleaning compounds, and
solvents. Petroleum products are complex chemical
mixtures produced from the distillation of crude oil.
Petroleum distillates are comprised of aliphatic and
aromatic hydrocarbons and are usually liquids with a
strong characteristic odor (e.g., diesel, gasoline, paint
solvent, barbecue lighter fluids). Some petroleum products
are in the form of flammable gases, such as methane.
ethane, propane, and butane, which act more as simple
asphyxiants. The aromatic hydrocarbons, benzene, toluene.
ethyl benzene, and xylene (BTEX), are found in glues,
quick- drying paints, lacquers, etc., and they are associated
with more neurological signs and potential bone marrow
toxicity. Although most hydrocarbons are of petroleum
origin, some are wood- based such as turpentine and pine
oil. Petroleum hydrocarbon-based products may contain
additional compounds, such as surfactants, metals, and
insecticides.
844
Table 30.1. Petroleum hydrocarbon products listed by
relative viscosity (lower to higher)
Saybolt Universal Seconds (SUS) at
100F
Lighter fluid (maptha)
<32
Degreasers
<32
Carburetor cleaner
<32
Kerosene
32
Gasoline treatment
35
Diesel fuel 2D
32-45
Fuel oil 2
33-40
Mineral seal oil
3642
Furniture polish
40
Turpentine
<60
Baby oil
70
No. 4 Fuel oil
80
Paint thinners
<100
Stoddardsolvent (white
spirits)
Transmission fluids
<138
Heavy mineral oil
180
Machine Lubricant #10
160-235
Motor oil (10W30)
325
Tar, pine
200-300
Tar, road RT-6
250-400
Adapted
1n
part
from
16
CFR
Part
1700:
http://www.cpsc.gov/businfo/frmotices/fr97/frpetdis.html
845
Mechanism
The dose or amount of exposure is generally difficult if not
impossible to estimate unless observed.Petroleum
products with lower viscosity (resistance to flow) and
higher volatility (ability to vaporize) are more likely to
result in inhalation or aspiration into lungs. Aspiration of a
small amount of refined petroleum distillation products (<5
  od os g    (s I  
In general hydrocarbons with a viscosity of <35 SUS
(Saybolt Universal Seconds, a measure of viscosity) pose a
severe aspiration hazard because volatile products with a
low surface tension diffuse into distal airways even when
small quantities of fluid are ingested (see Table 30.1).
Products with a viscosity of 35 to 100 SUS pose a
moderate aspiration hazard. These products can cause
vomiting and subsequent aspiration pneumonia. Products
with a viscosity >loo SUS present a minimal aspiration
hazard. Exposure to petroleum products results in clinical
signs
involving
the
respiratory,  
gastrointestinal.
integumentary, and
I central nervous systems. Diverse
clinical  effects may occur.  Some  hydrocarbons  may
sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines and result in
cardiac arrhythmias. Benzene, an aromatic hydrocarbon
and carcinogen, can cause bone marrow depression and
pancytopenia.
Table  30.2.
Clinical   signs
 related
1 to petroleum
hydrocarbon product ingestion
Inhalation
Aspiration pneumonia
Dyspnea
846
Coughing
Bronchospasms
Fever
Cyanosis
Depression
Dermal/ocular (grooming can lead to oral
Blisters
exposure)
Burns
Inflammation
Corneal ulcers
Oral
Salivation
Pawing at mouth/shaking
head
 Oral irritation/ulceration
Severe vomiting
Abdominal tenderness
Diarrhea
Anorexia
Systemic
Tachycardia/dysrhythmias
Ataxia
Tremors
Weakness
 Depression
Agitation
Seizures
Aspiration pneumonia
Dyspnea/tachypnea
Hepatic insult
847
 Renal degeneration
Clinical Effects
SIGNS
Clinical effects in animals generally occur 1 to 8 hours
postexposure (see
Table 30.2). When animals inhale
petroleum products in enclosed spaces or while walking
through spills, respiratory signs of coughing, aspiration
pneumonia, fever, cyanosis, and d
depression may occur.
Hydrocarbons can penetrate deep into the lung, causing
bronchospasms, inflammation, and oxygen displacement in
the alveolus leading
 to hypoxia.
Direct contact with
alveolar surfaces may cause hemorrhage, 6
edema, and
thrombosis
leading
to
hypoxia,
 atelectasis,
  and
pneumonitis. Cats and dogs breathing large amounts of
petroleum solvents for several hours can suffer seizures
and bronchitis.
Table 30.3.
 Therapy  recommendations  for  petroleum
hydrocarbon product exposure
Clinical Sign
Recommendation
Dose
Respiratory
Oxygen
Based on blood gas data
Positive end-expiratory
pressure ventilation
Antibiotics
As needed
Chest radiographs
Beta-2 selective agonist
Dogs: 0.003 to 0.005 mg/kg SC
Bronchospasm
(avoid epinephrine)
every 4 h Cats: 0.005 to 0.01 mg/
e.g, terbutaline
kg SC every 4 h
848
Cardiac
Electrocardiogram
dysrhythmia
Dehydration
Crystalloid Fluids
As needed
Gastrointestinal
Famotidine
0.25 mg/kg PO every 12 h
irritation
Dogs: 0.5 to 1 g PO every 8 to
Sucralfate
12 h
Cats: 0.25 g PO every 8 to 12 h
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV
Mild detergents/cool
Dermal contact
water
Topical antibiotics
Dermal contact can cause skin blisters and burms, severe
buccal
 irritation, reduced
respiratory
function,
and
abdominal tendermess. Cats and dogs can be exposed to
petroleum products through dermal contact and subsequent
oral  ingestion
vla
grooming.
After a heavy dermal
exposure to hydrocarbons of lower viscosity (e.g., paint
thinners, kerosene, Stoddard solvent, gasoline), systemic
and dermal clinical signs may occur. Petroleum products
can  irritate  the eyes  producing
g inflammation, corneal
damage, and ulcers.
Oral
exposure
e in animals from direct contact with
petroleum products may cause salivation, severe vomiting,
oral ulcerations, abdominal tenderness, diarrhea, and
anorexia.  Systemic toxicity  associated  with petroleum
exposures
include
 tachycardia
1  and    dysrhythmias
(originating from hypoxia or myocardial sensitization to
catecholamines), ataxia, tremors, weakness,
 central
849
depression, tachypnea, fever, aspiration pneumonia,
cyanosis, and hepatic and renal damage.
Management of Exposures
Treatment of petroleum hydrocarbon exposures is
challenging because of a general lack of dose and toxicity
information and  proven treatment regimens.  If  the
exposure involves small amounts of petroleum products
with a high viscosity, sometimes just cage rest and
observation for 12 to 24 hours is required.
Following ingestion of petroleum hydrocarbon products.
avoid inducing emesis and performing gastric lavage to
reduce the risk of aspiration. The use of an endotracheal
tube cuff is not thought to be protective against aspiration.
Administration of adsorbents (activated charcoal) is
generally not effective in adsorbing hydrocarbons and can
increase the risk of aspiration of petroleum product
However, if an animal ingested a large amount of
petroleum  product
containing
g  additiona]   toxicants
(insecticides, metals, chloride-containing compounds), the
risk of gastric lavage and possible aspiration should be
 o g  o o   s 
dilute the petroleum product. Treatment for aspiration
pneumonia may be necessary, including monitoring chest
radiographs, blood gases, and performing a CBC and
serum biochemistries for hepatic and renal damage.
Animals with aspiration pneumonia should be hospitalized
with intravenous fluids, oxygen therapy if needed, and
cage rest (Table 30.3). In severe inhalation cases consider
the use of positive end- expiratory pressure ventilation
850
with
caution
because   pneumothorax   and
pneumomediastinum could occur. Use of antibiotics may
be indicated for secondary infections and bronchospasms
treatment may be required using a beta-2 selective agonist
(avoid epinephrine). Perform chest radiographs initially
(preferably within 2 hours postexposure) and 2 to 4 days
postexposure to check for pulmonary damage. Monitor a
complete blood count (CBC) for hemoconcentration
(increased    packed    cell   volume    and    hemoglobin
concentrations) and inflammatory responses and perform
serum biochemistry to check for elevated blood urea
nitrogen and hepatic enzyme levels associated with
systemic toxicity. Check for hypoglycemia and monitor
blood gases and oxygen saturation for pulmonary
a guarded prognosis. Respiratory signs may take days to
almost two weeks or longer to resolve
With evidence of buccal irritation, animals can be provided
oral egg whites or milk. Oral protectants, such as sucralfate
or famotidine, may be needed. Follow up with intravenous
fluids and bland diets providing adequate nutrition. It is
recommended that animals with abnormal cardiac rhythms
should be monitored with electrocardiograms and treated
appropriately. Seizures in animals can be treated with
diazepam or barbiturates.
Dermal exposure to petroleum hydrocarbons should be
treated by washing the animal with mild, nonsolvent -
very miscible with water. Topical ointments or antibiotics
may be required depending on skin irritation. Exposure to
     
851
require clipping the hair coat. Animals may need an
Elizabethan collar to prevent grooming and oral exposure.
Flush eyes with warm water or saline for 15 minutes and
stain for corneal ulcers if ocular exposure has occurred.
Observe animals for at least 12 hours postexposure,
particularly for respiratory effects, which may require
oxygen supplementation and cage rest.
Diagnostics
Postmortem lesions may involve pulmonary congestion
and edema, hepatic fatty change, renal degeneration, and
 sd e  s    i
an oily substance may be noted on oral and tracheal
mucous membranes. The most severe clinical signs are
associated with aspiration pneumonia, and the more
volatile or highly refined products the greater the risk of
aspiration and development of pulmonary edema
Table  30.4.  Postmortem lesions reported  following
ingestion or aspiration of petroleum hydrocarbons
Ulcerations in oral, gastrointestinal, or tracheal mucosa
Oily contents in gastrointestinal tract or lung
Pulmonary edema and congestion (lesions generally bilateral and
caudoventral inlung)
Hepatic fatty change and centrilobular necrosis
Renal degeneration and necrosis
Diagnosis  will be based
1 on history of exposure  to
petroleum products and  compatible  clinical signs. The
characteristic odor of petroleum hydrocarbons can
sometimes be detected in vomitus, gastrointestinal
852
contents, urine, skin secretions, and on the breath
Although few diagnostic labs perform   testing for
petroleum hydrocarbons in gastrointestinal contents, it is
recommended to save gastrointestinal contents in airtight,
clean, glass containers and tissue samples (lung, liver,
kidney) in aluminum foil and airtight containers; freeze
samples. Contact a veterinary diagnostic laboratory for
location of a lab to perform analysis, or commercial
environmental  labs  may  perform  petroleum  testing
depending on the matrix.
A quick test for hydrocarbons in  stomach contents
involves mixing the contents vigorously with warm water
and observing for petroleum products to rise to the surface
as oily bubbles or oil film. This is not a definitive test
because fatty acids can produce an oil film
Differential Diagnoses
Differential  diagnoses  for  clinical  signs
include
organophosphates, caustic compounds, and trauma
Avoid toxicosis by preventing animal access to petroleum
product containers in the home, garage, and hobby areas.
Where hydrocarbon spills occur, clean up immediately and
prevent animal access to spill area.
FERTILIZERS
Sources
Fertilizers are typically based on N- P-Kor
nitrogen-phosphorus-potassium compounds and reported
853
as numbers "5-10-5." These numbers represent percent by
weight of ingredients in the fertilizer—for example. 5%
nitrogen and potassium and 1o% phosphorus. Fertilizers
are used for agricultural, lawn and garden, and household
plants. Formulations can be as granules, powders, liquids
(concentrated or diluted), and solid sticks. The source of
nitrogen is varied, including ammonium or potassium
nitrate, urea, or organic in the form of blood meal (about
12% to 13% nitrogen), canola meal, and fish powder.
Phosphorus sources can be inorganic, ammonium or
potassium phosphate, or organic in the form of bone meal
(containing about 12% phosphorus) or fish emulsions.
Often potassium is added as potassium chloride or potash
(salts of potassium carbonate, potassium oxide, or
potassium chloride). Minor trace nutrients such as
magnesium, boron, copper, molybdenum, cobalt, zinc, and
iron, can be incorporated. Fertilizers with high iron
concentrations (>l%) can cause iron intoxication and
severe gastrointestinal irritation (see Chapter 29)
Fertilizers can include epsom salts (magnesium sulfate)
and cocoa bean hulls and be incorporated with pesticides,
herbicides, and fungicides. A history on ingestion of the
particular product and listed ingredients is needed to
evaluate exposure.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical signs are dependent on the ingredients in the
product. Typically, fertilizers are of low toxicity, and only
gastrointestinal irritation is reported with ingestion (Table
854
30.5). Dogs are generally involved in exposures. Clinical
signs of salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, and lethargy
generally develop within 2 to 10 hours postexposure.
signs reported are rash, pruritis, stiffness, tremors, and
large amounts of blood or bone meal and could develop
severe gastroenteritis and possible pancreatitis. Fertilizers
containing nitrates as the main nitrogen source may cause
methemoglobinemia. The elimination half-life for nitrate
in dogs is relatively long, 44.7 hours, with most absorbed
nitrate eliminated in urine. In monogastrics, use of
ammonium salts and urea as the nitrogen source produces
gastrointestinal irritation. Death is not commonly reported
with fertilizer ingestions in monogastrics.
Management of Exposures
Animals with recent fertilizer ingestion and no clinical
signs should be induced to vomit (Table 30.6). Emesis
should not be induced in animals with a history of
vomiting. Often no additional therapy is required. If the
animal is dehydrated or in shock, fluid therapy is
recommended. Depending on clinical signs, additional
therapy may be necessary for managing the animal. The
appearance  of  congested mucous  membranes and
chocolate brown blood can indicate methemoglobinemia
requiring oxygen therapy and methylene blue or ascorbic
acid treatment. Check appropriate chapters in this book for
treatment of iron, herbicide, or insecticide toxicosis.
Table 30.5. Fertilizer clinical signs
855
Reported
Vomiting
Salivation
Diarrhea
Abdominal tenderness
Polydipsia
Lethargy
Less frequently reported
Urticarial rash
Pruritis
Seizures
Stiffness
Tremors
Swollen muzzle
Methemoglobinemia
Pancreatitis
Calcium cyanamide ingestion
Skin irri tation/ulceration
Gastritis
Rhinitis
Tracheobronchitis
Tachypnea
Pulmonary edema
Ataxia
Hypotension and shock
Table 30.6. Treatment of fertilizer ingestion
Treatment
RecommendationDose
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or
Emesis
Apomorphine
subconjunctival sac
856
1 to 5 ml/kg PO (generally do not
3% hydrogen
exceed 50 ml for dogs or 10 ml
peroxide
total for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Cathartic
Sorbital
3 ml/kg (70%) PO
Dehydration/shock
Crystalloid fluids
Methemoglobinemia
Oxygen therapy
1.5 mg/kg IV as a 10% solution
Methylene blue
in saline (monitor for Heinz
bodies)
Ascorbic acid in
30 mg/kg PO 4 times daily (slow
cats
in action)
One compound used as a fertilizer is calcium cyanamide
(CCaN2). It can also be applied as a pesticide, defoliant
and fungicide. The compound is irritating to skin, eyes,
and respiratory tract. Clinical signs can be skin irritation
and ulcers, rhinitis, tracheobronchitis, and gastritis. Acute
oral exposure may result in erythematous reaction in the
face, dizziness, lethargy, vomiting, rapid breathing,
pulmonary edema,
l, hypotension, ataxia, shock, and
possible hepatic insult.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery is generally good with fertilizer
ingestion and treatment. However, additional ingredients
of iron, herbicides, and insecticides may cause more severe
clinical signs. Several of the Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratories are capable of testing stomach contents or
product samples for fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides.
Nitrate analysis can be performed on serum, feed, and
ocular fluids by many veterinary labs.
857
Following application of fertilizer to plants, lawn, garden.
or agricultural area, animals should be kept from
contacting the area until dry or product has been
   o  os   
containers and animals prevented access to the containers
or storage areas.
MULCHES
Sources
A variety of mulches are used in gardens or landscapes.
Inorganic mulches include lava rock, river stones,
geotextile fabrics, and pulverized rubber. Organic mulches
include shredded wood, bark or wood chips, conifer
needles, leaves, grass clippings, newspapers, and straw,
which are generally nontoxic unless consumed in large
amounts  and  could cause  gastrointestinal  iritation  or
obstruction. With ingestion of organic mulches, consider
exposure to possible pesticides or molds and mycotoxins
A popular mulch or organic fertilizer is cocoa bean mulch.
which can be toxic to animals, particularly dogs attracted
to the sweet, chocolate aroma. Cocoa bean mulch is made
of cocoa bean shells and reportedly contains between 0.19
to 2.98% theobromine (approximately 860 to 13,500 mg
theobromine/lb or 54 to 850 mg theobromine/oz). The
concentrations of theobromine in cocoa bean mulch can be
higher than concentrations found in some chocolates.
      i, 
ingested, many animals have no clinical signs. When large
amounts of cocoa bean mulch are ingested by an animal,
vomiting and muscle tremors can occur similar to signs
from a methylxanthine toxicosis (Table 30.7).
858
Table 30.7. Clinical signs in dogs consuming cocoa bean
mulch
Commonly reported
Vomiting
Muscletremors
Less frequently reported
Tachycardia
Hyperactivity
Diarrhea
Management of Cases
Treatment depends on the amount of mulch (particularly
cocoa bean mulch) ingested, time elapsed since ingestion,
and clinical signs observed. If a small amount was
ingested, the animal should be observed for up to 24 hours
for clinical signs. When larger amounts of cocoa bean
mulch are ingested within a few hours of discovery (<3 to
4 hours), vomiting has not occurred, and the animal has
normal mentation, emesis can be induced with 3%
hydrogen peroxide or apomorphine (Table 30.8). If the dog
is hyperexcitable or has seizures, gastric lavage should be
performed with an endotrachealtube cuff in place.
Hyperactivity or seizures can usually be controlled with
given every 3 to 6 hr for up to 72 hr. Use a cathartic with
the first dose of activated charcoal. Intravenous fluid
therapy can increase urinary excretion of methylxanthines.
Consider urinary bladder catheterization, which may
reduce reabsorption of theobromine. Heart function should
be
monitored in dogs, particularly for premature
ventricular contractions and persistent tachyarrhythmias;
treatment with lidocaine (without epinephrine and not in
859
cats) and beta- blockers may be required. Bradycardia is
not reported as commonly as tachyarrhythmias. Death is
not common with ingestion of cocoa bean mulches (see
Chapter 24). Contact your state veterinary laboratory or the
AAVLD   website
for
information
on
diagnostic
confirmation of theobromine in cocoa bean mulch or
gastric contents.
Prevention includes recommending
guseofalternative
mulches, such as pine or cedar mulches, where dogs have
access to roam or exercise
Table 30.8.
Treatment
of mulch/cocoa bean mulch
(theobromine) ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or
Emesis
Apomorphine
subconjunctival sac
3% hydrogen
1 to 5 ml/kg PO (generally do not
exceed 50 ml for dogs or 10 ml total
peroxide
for cat)
Can repeat once after 15 min
Activated
2 to 5 g/kg body weight PO(1 g
Adsorbent
charcoal
activated charcoal in 5 ml water)
Cathartic
Sorbital
3 ml/kg (70%) PO
Tremors
Diazepam
0.S to 2 mg/kg IV
Methocarbamol
50 to 220 mg/kg IV slowly
Seizures
Diazepam
0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV
Phenobarbital
2 to 6 mg/kg IV slowly
Tachyarrhythmia
Propanolol
0.02 to 0.06 mg/kg IV slowly
Metoprolol
0.04 to 0.06 mg/kg IV slowly
860
1 to 2 mg/kg IV slowly, and then
Lidocaine
infuse at 30 to 50 mcg/kg/min
Bradycardia
Atropine
0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg IV
COMPOST PILES
Sources
Compost piles may contain decomposing lawn, garden,
and food products, especially fruit and vegetable wastes,
leaves, and paper products. Generally meat, bones, dairy,
q louueo 1nq isodoo 0n pappe 1ou aie sionpoid peg pue
eliminated from consideration with ingestion of compost
by pets. Dogs, as compared with cats, are more prone to
scavenging and
1 ingesting decaying products such as
compost. A succession of bacterial populations occurs
during composting, including growth of Bacillus spp. and
perhaps Staphylococcus and Streptococcus, which could
cause clinical signs of gastroenteritis. Yeast and mold
populations aid in decomposition of compost materials.
Mold growth of Penicillium, Aspergillus, and Claviceps on
dairy, grain, bread, pasta, and walnut products could
release tremorgenic mycotoxins that cause muscle tremors
and seizures (see also Chapter 23). Chemicals may be
added to compost to improve decomposition, such as
nitrogen (inorganic as ammonium nitrate or organic as
manure or blood meal) and lime (alkalinize the compost
pile).
Toxicity
Expect typically low toxicity with ingestion of compost.
861
Clinical Effects
Clinical  signs  of  
 gastroenteritis,
, vomiting, diarrhea,
dehydration, and fever may occur within a few hours after
consumption of compost (Table 30.9). Animals ingesting a
small amount of compost material may require only
monitoring and treatment of clinical signs over 12 to 24
hours. Depending on the contents of the compost pile.
Salmonella spp., Escherichia Coli, and Clostridium spp.
(including Clostridium botulinum) could contribute to
more severe clinical signs of bloody diarrhea, endotoxic
shock, and depression. Botulinum toxin ingestion may
result in drooling; limb and tail weakness; poor reflexes in
the eyes, throat, and legs; respiratory paralysis; and death
Dogs and cats are reported less sensitive to botulism than
cattle, horses, and birds.
Table 30.9. Clinical signs of compost ingestion
Bacterial
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Dehydration
Fever
Depression
Shock
Botulism
Drooling
Limb and tail weakness
Poor reflexes of eyes and
throat
Respiratory paralysis
Death
862
Tremorgenic mycotoxins (roquefortine and
Irritability
penitrem A)
Salivation
Vomiting
Ataxia
Tachycardia
Muscle tremors
Panting
Hyperthermia
Nystagmus
Seizures
Death
Table 30.10.
Treatment of compost i
ingestion(with
potential of
tremorgenic
 mycotoxins
and
botulism
exposure)
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or
Emesis
Apomorphine
subconjunctival sac in the dog
10 mg/kg body weight by gravity
Gastric
Water at body
installation; continue until lavage fl uid
lavage
temperature
runs clear
Activated
2 to 5 g/kg body weight PO (1 g activated
Adsorbent
charcoal
charcoal in S ml water)
Cathartic
Sorbital
3 ml/kg (70%) PO
Dehydration
Crystalloid fluids
As needed
Acid base
Sodium
bicarbonate
As needed
imbalance
0.S to S mg/kg IV (can be repeated at 10
Seizures
Diazepam
min intervals up to 3 times)
863
Phenobarbital
6 mg/kg IV to effect
Pentobarbital
3 to 15 mg/kg IV slowly to effect
Muscle
SS to 220 mg/kg IV to effect at a rate of
Methocarbamol
tremors
no more than 2 ml/min
Botulism
Antitoxin
Artificial
As required
respiration
The tremorgenic mycotoxins, roquefortine and penitrem A,
are readily absorbed following ingestion and within 30
minutes to several hours can cause irritability, muscle
tremors (initially in the head and neck regions), weakness,
panting, and eventually seizures, nystagmus, opisthotonus,
recumbency, and death.
Management of Exposures
Clinical signs of tremors or central nervous system
stimulation should be treated first. Tremors may be
controlled by methocarbamol, a centrally acting muscle
relaxant (Table 30.10). Diazepam may not be effective
alone for treatment of seizures and phenobarbital may be
needed. Pentobarbital is also effective controlling tremor
and seizures
 in  dogs with
  tremorgenic
 mycotoxin
ingestion.
Treatment may include emesis if the animal has not
already vomited and has normal CNS function. If animals
exhibit tremors, induction of emesis is not recommended
because vomiting may trigger seizures. Gastric lavage is
recommended in large ingestions of compost, where
vomiting has not occurred, and when animal is exhibiting
clinical signs (tremors and central nervous system signs).
864
A recommendation is use of a short- acting anesthesia for
gastric lavage with a cuffed endotracheal tube in place to
prevent aspiration pneumonia. Follow gastric lavage with
activated charcoal and cathartic administration. Multiple
doses of activated charcoal every 4 to 6 hours for up to 3
days may be necessary with  tremorgenic mycotoxin
ingestion due to excretion of toxins in bile with
enterohepatic circulation. Monitor the animal with a
complete blood count, serum biochemistry panel,
determination of serum anion gap (increased lactate
production from muscle tremors), urinalysis, and arterial
blood gas measurements.
Animals with dehydration should be given fluids in
conjunction with monitoring of electrolyte balance. With
an acid- base imbalance sodium bicarbonate should be
in shock.
Body temperature should be monitored for hyperthermia
and body temperature regulated with the onset of tremors
and seizures.  In tremorgenic mycotoxin  exposure,
methocarbamol oral dosage may be required for several
days to control tremors. The prognosis is good for
recovery if gastric decontamination occurred and clinical
signs are aggressively treated over the first 24 to 48 hours.
If the animal had no gastrointestinal decontamination and
ingested a large ingestion of tremorgenic material, the
prognosis is poor.
If botulism is suspected, appropriate gastric lavage and
activated charcoal therapy should be given soon after
ingestion. Antitoxin treatment should be considered early
865
in the course of therapy if a diagnosis of botulism is made
based on clinical signs. Animals will require supportive
care and possible artificial respiration. Prognosis is poor to
guarded in animals showing clinical signs of botulism.
Diagnostics
A tentative diagnosis of compost pile ingestion is based on
the history and compatible clinical signs. Stomach contents
and suspect moldy material can be submitted for analysis
of tremorgenic mycotoxins and botulism at a veterinary
diagnostic laboratory.  Contact the lab  for submission
information.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential
diagnoses
include
 methylxanthines,
strychnine, bromethalin rodenticides, metaldehyde, illicit
drug ingestion, tetanus toxoid, and a variety of human or
veterinary drug ingestion. Prevention is through adequate
enclosure of compost piles and decaying food material and
restraint of animals from these areas.
CHARCOAL BRIQUETTES
Charcoal briquettes are of low toxicity and pose primarily
a foreign body obstruction risk if swallowed. The solid
cubes contain char dust that after ingestion could act as a
gastrointestinal irritant causing vomiting. Clinical signs
generally are self -limiting. Inhalation of charcoal dust can
irritate ocular mucous membranes, nose, and throat (Table
30.11). Gently flush the eyes with saline or warm water
and remove animals from the source of irritation. Quick
866
lightingcharcoal
1briquettescontain10to20%
hydrocarbon solvent, char dust, and limestone (<l5%).
Ingestion of the hydrocarbon-containing briquettes may
cause vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, lethargy, and possibly
seizures if large amounts are ingested (see the section on
petroleumbased products for therapy recommendations).
Store product in a location where animals have no access.
FIRELOGS
Firelogs contain combustible products such as reclaimed
sawdust, wood flour, paper pulp, and ground nut shells
pressed into a log shape. The cellulosic material may be
combined with petroleum- based wax (up to 65%) for
quick ignition. The “green firelogs" can contain a
vegetable or plant - based wax that dogs may be attracted
to ingest in large amounts. Colorful firelogs can contain
particulates mixed with a variety of chemicals (calcium or
sodium chloride, potassium nitrate, copper sulfate, boric
acid, or metals such as lead, arsenic, antimony, selenium)
Chemicals such as coffee waste can be in java logs.
Additional chemicals in firelogs are oxidizing agents such
as perborates and persulfates to improve viscosity and
burning, nonporous extenders (silica, clay, coal dust), and
fire retardants to extend burning time.
Firelog ingestion can cause gastroenteritis (see
eTable
attracted to the odor of wax-impregnated logs. Clinical
signs of gastrointestinal irritation, such as vomiting,
diarrhea, and constipation can occur. Animals may show
depression, hypotension, and, rarely, renal failure.
Treatment may consist of oral decontamination including
867
emesis if ingestion is within 2 to 3 hours, vomiting has not
occurred, and the animal has normal mentation. The use of
activated charcoal and a cathartic are recommended.
Depending on clinical signs, fluids and monitoring renal
function should  be
considered.   Prevention
        
animals have no access.
MATCHES
Match heads are made from potassium chlorate and
 s       e
30.1l). Potassium chlorate is an oxidizing agent that can
cause methemoglobinemia. If animals ingest a box or
books of matches, clinical signs may develop including
vomiting, abdominal pain, CNS depression, hypotension,
cyanosis, hemolysis, and possibly methemoglobinemia. If
treatment is required and ingestion has occurred within
several hours, recommend oral decontamination with
emesis. Supportive therapy may include gastrointestinal
protectants (e.g., egg whites, milk) and fluids. If
methemoglobinemia develops, treatment with oxygen and
methylene blue (1% at 4 mg/kg in dogs or once at 1.5 mg/
kg in cats IV) should be considered. The effective use of
ascorbic acid treatment in cats (30 mg/kg PO 4 times
daily) may be too slow for practical therapy.
FIREWORKS AND FLARES
Fireworks can contain oxidizing agents (potassium nitrate
or chlorates), potassium perchlorates, heavy metal salts.
and black powder (potassium nitrate or salt peter, charcoal,
and sulfur) (see Table 30.11). Sparklers can contain
868
potassium nitrate on a thin metal wand. Flares are made
from
 metal
 nitrates
orsodium
1nitrate,  sulfur and
hydrocarbons.
The
toxicity
from
1 ingestion of
these
products
s is generally
low. Primarily
gastrointestinal
irritation is reported as vomiting (sometimes severe),
abdominal pain, and salivation. Occasionally ulcerations
may occur in the gastrointestinal tract and bloody feces are
reported. Reports of hemolysis and seizures in affected
animals are rare. Provide symptomatic care for clinical
signs. If signs of methemoglobinemia occur (cyanosis,
dyspnea, ataxia), treatment with oxygen and methylene
should be considered.
Table 30.11. Products involving ignition
Product
Chemical
Clinical Signs
Charcoal
Char dust (wood, coal, starch, lime)
Vomiting
briquettes
10-20% hydrocarbon solvent
Diarrhea
Mucous membrane
irritation
Lethargy
Cellulose/lignin: sawdust, wood flour,
Vomiting (severe)
Firelogs
coal dust, ground mut shells, silica
Diarrhea
Petroleum - based wax
Constipation
Vegetable/plant wax
Depression
Potassium nitrate
Renal failure (rare)
Sodium chloride
Heavy metals
Match head
Potassium chlorate
Methemoglobinemia
869
Striking
surface
Red phosphorus
Cyanosis
Powdered glass
Vomiting
Hypotension
Depression
Hemolysis
Sparklers
Potassium nitrate
Gastroenteritis
Oxidizing agents (potassium nitrate,
Vomiting (severe)
Fireworks
chlorates)
Abdominal pain
Bloody feces
Potassium perchlorates (produces white
Shallow breathing
flash and noise)
Methemoglobinemia
Colors produced by heavy metal salts
Additional signs
(mercury, antimony, copper, strontium,
could be associated
lithium, barium, phosphorus)
with heavy metals
Black powder:
75% potassium nitrate
Vomiting
15% charcoal
Diarrhea
10% sulfur
Methemoglobinemia
Watusi or
Acute liver toxicity
dancing
Yellow phosphorus
firecracker
and organ failure
Signaling or
Illuminating
Metal nitrates or sodium nitrate
Gastroenteritis
Flares
Hydrocarbons
Methemoglobinemia
Yellow
phosphorus
fireworks
found
in
"dancing
firecracker"
or "Watusi"”
fireworks made in
Asia are
extremely toxic. Yellow phosphorus is readily absorbed
from 
the
 gastrointestinal  tract
 and
1S
a
general
protoplasmic  poison affecting multiple  organ  systems.
While the United States restricts the use of yellow
870
phosphorus in matches and fireworks, some of these
products could find their way into the country. Reported
clinical signs in humans following ingestion of these
fireworks are acute hepatic injury and hepatic failure,
upper-
gastrointestinal
hemorrhage,
disseminated
intravascular
r   coagulation,   bonemarrow  depression,
cerebral edema, and death. Treatment includes aggressive
early decontamination of  the gastrointestinal  tract,
monitoring hepatic function and acidbase balance, and
providing fluids, glucose, and fresh frozen plasma. The
administration  of intravenous  N-acetylcysteine did not
appear to affect survival rates in human exposures.
EXPLOSIVES
Plastic Explosives
Sources
Plastic explosives (e.g., RDX, C- 4, PE- 4) are generally
malleable solids that burn without exploding and are
relatively insensitive to friction or impact; therefore, they
are easily transported without undue precautions. Ingestion
is usually by dogs undergoing training for military or
police and accidental. In one report, a working dog
ingested a small fragment of C-4 (the size of a grain of
rice) and was treated with emesis of gastric contents but
still  developed  systemic  effects  including  generalized
seizures.
The chemical cyclonite or cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine is
a component in many plastic explosives (Table 30.12).
Cyclonite crystals are colorless and insoluble in water. It
871
has been reported that during manufacturing of cyclonite.
human workers breathing the dust for severaldays
developed “tonic- clonic spasms" that lasted for 5 to 10
minutes, occurred intermittently, and did not readily stop
when the workerwas removed from the work
environment.
Kinetics
From experimental studies, plastic explosives appear to be
slowly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. In a rat
experiment, RDX was rapidly cleared from the plasma
following absorption and distributed to tissues. C - 4 is
distributed widely to tissues, with kidneys having the
highest concentration, followed by brain, heart, and lung.
Toxicity
An experimental estimate of a fatal dosage of PE-4 in a
dog is 14 to 34 mg/kg body weight. Postmortem lesions
are listed in Table 30.12. The lethal dosage of RDX for
cats was reported to be 100 mg/kg. It appears from
reported exposure cases that dogs display individual
sensitivity to plastic explosive ingestion.
Clinical Effects
Signs
Clinical signs appear within minutes to several hours after
ingestion. Animals that are clinically normal after a
potential exposure to plastic explosives should be observed
for a minimum of 4 to 6 hours. Clinicaleffects can be
872
serious and severe, with early recognition of the ingestion
and rapid treatment improving the outcome. Following
ingestion of plastic explosives with cyclonite, clinical
signs can appear rapidly and include lethargy, ataxia,
confusion, hyperesthesia, salivation, vomiting, tremors,
and seizures that can become prolonged.
Management of Exposures
Because of the rapid onset of seizures, use of emetics (such
as apomorphine) is controversial. Emesis is not indicated if
the animal is showing neurological signs because of the
potential for aspiration pneumonia, and vomiting may have
already occurred following ingestion. Cyclonite appears to
have a long retention time in the stomach; it is strongly
recommended that gastric lavage be performed, preferably
within several
hours 
postexposure
and with 
an
endotracheal tube cuff in place (see Table 30.13).
Activated charcoal should be given following lavage,
either orally or by an orogastric tube. To protect against
potential C-4  caustic action, gastrointestinal  protectants
were recommended during and after hospitalization. If the
animal is salivating profusely consider using atropine.
Seizures may have durations of several minutes separated
by periods of 10 to 30 minutes of initialcalm that
progresses to hyperesthesia and tremors. Convulsions can
be controlled with sedatives such as diazepam and
phenobarbital (which may be necessary for up to 6 hours)
   s     
needed for up to 6 to 8 hours. An oral maintenance
phenobarbital therapy may be required for a period of days
after the acute clinical signs abate to help control seizures
873
and possibly stimulate cytochrome P450 enzyme activity
and cyclonite metabolism. If animals go into respiratory
arrest, mechanical ventilation may be required for a period
of time. Dogs should be allowed to recover consciousness
gradually, but resume anesthesia if convulsions reoccur. In
        
response was reported for 12 hours after hospitalization;
thiamine (8 mg/kg IM) was administered every 24 hours to
help protect the CNS from insult.
Fluids (such as lactated ringers and dextrose saline drips)
should be used to maintain hydration and for acidotic
patients. In one case the dog developed facial and
appendicular edema within 8 hours after hospitalization
and was treated for hypoproteinemia with intravenous
fresh frozen plasma followed by hydroxyethyl starch (1
ml/kg/hr).  To help prevent pulmonary edema it is
recommended to turn the dog every few hours while under
sedation or anesthesia. Monitor a complete blood count for
anemia and serum biochemistries for hepatic and renal
functions and elevations in liver enzymes, bilirubin, and
blood urea nitrogen. In one report, the blood biochemistry
panel indicated liver damage three days after exposure to
RDX and indicated a prolonged recovery. With hepatic
damage, the dog was supplemented with vitamin Kl and
multivitamins. Urine protein and output should be
monitored. Following rehydration the use of a diuretic is
recommended to help accelerate elimination of metabolites
in urine.
Table 30.12. Explosives and clinical signs
874
Name
Chemical
Clinical Signs
RDX
(syn.
Cyclonite
royal
Confusion Hyperesthesia
(cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine)
defense
explosive)
91% cyclonite 5.4% plasticizer
Hyperventilation Lethargy
C-4
2.1% polyisobutylene 1.6%
Ataxia Tremors/facial twitches
motor oil
Seizures
Transient blindness
Hyperthermia Hematuria
Oliguria Proteinuria Salivation
88% RDX (cyclonite) 12%
Vomiting Pale or congested
PE-4
plasticizer paraffi n
mucous membranes Petechial
rash Hepatic injury Anemia
Urinary incontinence Renal
damage Death
PETN
Vomiting Ataxia Collapse
Pentaerythrityl tetrani trate
Bradycardia Dysrhythmia
(penthrite)
Depression Disorientation
Methemoglobinemia Anemia
Hepatic injury Splenomegaly
TNT
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene
Anorexia Skin irritation (skin
yellow - orange color) Mucous
membrane irri tation Death
Methemoglobinemia Dyspnea
Nitroglycerin (glyceryl
Dynamite
 trinitrate) Nitrate salts
Hypotension Depression
Muscle weakness Anorexia
Diatomaceous earth or sawdust
Convulsions Death
Table 30.13. Treatment for explosive ingestion
Treatment
Recommendation
Dose
0.02 to 0.04mg/kg IV, IM, or
Emesis
Apomorphine
subconjunctival sac in the dog
Gastric lavage
Water at body
10mg/kg body weight
temperature
875
Adsorbent
Activated
2 to Sg/kg body weight PO (1g
charcoal
activated charcoal in Sml water)
4mg/kg, IV every 4hr, 4 times for
a total of 16mg/kg total dose 3
Seizures
Phenobarbital
mg/kg PO, every 12 hr as
maintenance dose, and then
tapering dose
Diazepam
0.28mg/kg rectally
0.34mg/kg/hr, IV
Propofol 0.4mg/kg IV
Gastrointestinal
Famotidine
0.57mg/kg PO every 12hr
Protectant
Sucralfate
28.5mg/kg PO every 8hr
Omeprazole
1.15mg/kg PO every 12hr
Respiratory arrest
Oxygenl
As needed
Positive pressure
ventilation
Isotonic
68.5ml/kg/day IV reduced to
Fluids
crystalloid
48ml/kg/day IV
Fresh frozen
10ml/kg IV as a rate of Sml/kg
Hypoproteinemia
plasma
/hr
Diuretic
Furosemide
1mg/kg
Liver insult
Vitamin K
2mg/kg PO every 24hr
Multivitamins
IM
Salivation
Atropine
30 to S0μg/kg subcutaneously
Methemoglobinemia
Oxygen therapy
1.5 mg/kg IV as a 10% solution
Methylene blue
in saline (monitor for Heinz
bodies)
Diagnostics
876
Fragments of plastic explosives may be identified visually
in gastric contents to help confirm exposure (Table 30.14)
Prognosis
Although clinical signs can be severe, with prompt
treatment death  is not common following accidental
exposure. Recovery 0ccurs in about 48 hours. Prognosis is
generally good with early detection of exposure and
treatment, although renal toxicity was associated with one
canine exposure. In this case of a 2 - year - old Labrador
dog ingesting cyclonite (C- 4), the dog responded to
treatment  for  seizures but subsequently developed
polyuria/polydipsia and renal insufficiency characterized
by a 70% reduction in glomerular filtration rate.
Table 30.14.
：Postmortem lesions reported  following
ingestion of plastic explosives
Generalized congestion
Pulmonary edema
Petechial hemorrhages in the pancreas
Hepatic congestion and enlargement
Renal congestion and hydropic degeneration
Pentaerythrityl Tetranitrate (PETN or Penthrite)
Sources
PETN is a nitroglycerin compound and high explosive
Dogs can be exposed to PETN during training in military
or police work.
877
Clinical Effects
Signs
Initial clinical signs in a dog that chewed on a wrapped
PETN container were gastrointestinal irritation, repeated
vomiting,  depression, 
 mild  disorientation,  miosis,
weakness, and ataxia (see Table 30.12). Depending on the
time postingestion and clinical signs, gastric lavage may be
effective; the animal may have vomiting frequently prior
to hospitalization. In one report, a clinical exam of a dog
following PETN ingestion revealed a slight bradycardia
and blood pressure within normal range. The dog showed
conscious proprioceptive deficits in the hindlimbs.
Laboratory
It is recommended to monitor serum biochemical changes
for mild hepatic damage, including elevated bilirubin and
increased levels in AST, ALT, ALP, and gamma glutamyl
transferase (GGT). Monitor the heart rate with an
electrocardiogram; an affected dog displayed a  slight
bradycardia   and   dysrhythmia  (described   as   sinus
arrhythmia with periods of sinus arrest).
Management of Exposures
Ireatment
mayincludefluids, theantiemetic
metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg IV,IM, PO q 6 to 8 h), and
suppression of gastric acid production (e.g., omeprazole or
rantidine (2 mg/kg q 12 hr). Multiple vitamins, particularly
thiamine, B1, B6, and B12 were recommended. In a
reported case of PETN ingestion, the dog was hospitalized
878
for 7 days and showed gradual improvement of ataxia,
normal heart rate, and incidence in nausea/vomiting. The
bradycardia observed in this case was thought to be related
to nitroglycerin induced increased vagal tone.
Diagnostics
Veterinary diagnostic laboratories do not routinely analyze
for plastic explosives; the presumptive diagnosis is based
on a history of exposure to plastic explosives and
compatible clinical signs. In one case report, analysis of
the dog? s serum using a method based on ion mobility
spectrometry detected fragments characteristic of PETN.
Dynamite
The primary ingredients of dynamite are nitroglycerin and
nitrate salts. Potential effects of nitroglycerin ingestion
include vomiting, bradycardia, dysrhythmia, and ataxia.
The treatment is similar to exposure to PETN.
Methemoglobinemia may result from the nitrate salts in
dynamite.  Treatment for methemoglobinemia includes
oxygen and methylene blue (see Table 30.13).
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene or TNT
TNT or 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene is classified as a secondary
explosive because it requires an initiating explosive for
ignition. TNT is a crystalline substance with good
chemical and thermal stability; it is practically insoluble in
water and not affected by acids. It is affected by alkalis
becoming a pink, red, or brown color and more sensitive.
TNT may be mixed with other explosives such as RDX or
879
HMX (high melting explosive). Workers handling TNT
developed a canary yellow discoloration to their skin.
Ingestion of TNT can cause methemoglobinemia, hepatic
damage, irritated mucous membranes, sneezing, coughing.
cyanosis, muscular pain, dysrhythmia, erythema, and
pruritis (see
e Table 30.12). More chronic exposures in
workers have resulted in anemia, peripheral neuritis, and
splenic, hepatic, and renal damage. Treatment following
ingestion    includes  oral   decontamination,  activated
charcoal, and cathartic use (see Table 30.13). Monitor the
CBC and serum biochemical panel for hepatic damage. If
methemoglobinemia develops use oxygen and methylene
blue with supportive therapy.
REFERENCES
Albretsen, Jay C. 2004. Fertilizers. In Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology, edited by Konnie Plumlee, pp. 154-155. St.
Louis: Mosby.
Bruchim, Y., Saragusty, J., Weisman, A., and Sterneim, D.
2005. Cyclonite (RDX) intoxication in a police working
dog. Vet Rec 157:354-356.
Cope, Rhian B. 2007. Mushroom poisoning in dogs. Vet
Med February:95-100.
De Cramer, K.G.M. and Short, R.P. 1992. Plastic
explosive poisoning in dogs.J S Afr Vet Assoc
63(1):30-31.
880
Fishkin, Randi A., Stanley, Skye W., and Langston, Cathy
E. 2008. Toxic effects of cyclonite (C- 4) plastic explosive
ingestion in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18(5):537-540.
Naude, T.W. and Berry, W.L. 1997. Suspected poisoning
of puppies by the mushroom Amanita pantherina. J S Afr
Vet Assoc 68(4):154158
Oehme, Frederick W. and Kore, Anita M. 2006.
Miscellaneous indoor  toxicants. In  Small  Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michal Peterson and
Patricia Talcott, pp. 986-995. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Osweiler, Gary D. 1996. The National Veterinary Medical
Series. Toxicology, Pp. 324-325. Media,Pennsylvania:
Williams &Wilkins.
Potocnjak, D., Baric-Rafaj, R., Lemo, N., Matijatko, V.,
Kis I., Mrljak, V., and Harapin I. 2008. Poisoning of a dog
with  the explosive pentaerythrityl tetranitrate.  J Small
Anim Pract 49(6):314-318.
Raisbeck, Merl F. and Dailey, Rebecca N. 2006. Petroleum
hydrocarbons. In Small Animal Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited
by Michal Peterson and Patricia Talcott, pp. 986-995. St.
Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
881
Appendices
882
Appendix 1
Drugs Used in Toxicology
Drug
Indication
Spccics
Dosage
Acepromazine
Sedatiun for agittin cased by
Dugs
0.0250.2mg/kg IM ox IV (Start wih
psychotropic drugs (e.g
low cose anc titrate up to effect)
amphetamines.
phenyipropanolamine,
Cats:
0.050.1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC
psudocphcdrinc)
N-acetylcysteine
Management of aceteminophen
Dogs and Cats:
Mucomyst@: Dilute to 5% solation;
(Mucomyst@,
toxicosis
140mg/kg PO loading dose, and
Acctadotc)
thcn 70mg/kg q 45h for 7
treatments; if hepatic enzymes
elevated continue for additional 10
trcatments
Acetadnte@:150mg/kg in ml/kg
diluent IV over 1h; and then 50 mg/
kg IV in 7 ml/kg dilucnt over 4h.
and then 100mgkg in14mlkg
diluent over 16h
Activated charcoaP
Adsorption of toxicants (pocr
Dogs and Cats:1 3g/kg PO
adspticm of many melals
and minerals, small
molcculcs |c.g.,alcchols.
Generally ainisteed with
a cathartic—when
administering multiple doss
catharic is given every thid
asop
Aluminum hydrcxide
Antacid
Dogs:
515ml P0 q 1224h
Cats:
2-10ml POq24h
Antivenin Crotalidae
Management of crctalid snake
Dogs and Cats:
Administer 15rehydraed vials IV
Polyvalent.Equine
envenomation (ratlesnake.
depending on severity of bite
Origin
coperheal, waler mxxzsin)
883
Drug
Iudication
Spevies
Dusage
Antivenin Crotalidae
Managemert of erotalid snake
Dogs and Cats:Dilute I vial in 250ml sterile saline
Polyvalet lmue
envenomation (ratlestake,
ad nuse ver 1h, onitur for
FAB,Ovine onigin
coppcrhcad.water moccesin）
araphylaxis:repcat as ncccssary
(CroFab@)
Management of envenomation
Dogs cnd Cats:
Contents of I vial diluted in 2.5 ml of
Lactrodecus
by Laciroaectus (black
horse serum IM or further dilute in
(lyovac)
wicow spider)
1050ml of sterle saline and
aciminister IV cver 15 minutes
Apomophine
Indxtion of emesis; may rot he
Dogs:
0.03mg/kg IV or 0.04mg/kg TM
effective in cats: because
they have few opioid
Alternatively a portion of tablet may be
receptors wiin their enetie
crushed in a syringe and dissolved
centr in the CNS
writh few drops of water and
aciministered into the conjunctival
sac.After suicient vomiting
oceus, rinse cunjunetival se ee
of unabsorbod apomorphinc.
0.04mg/kg IV or 0.08 mg/kg SC cr IM
Atipamizole
Reversal of bradycardin.
s00
50mcg/kg IM
hypoensionn seatio
from alpha agonists e.g
amitraz, xylazinc), imidazolc
decongestans
Atropine
ods g ssop 
Dogs and Cats: TD: Cerermine heart rate, and then
organcphosphorus(OP）or
aciminister 0.02m2/kg IV; recheck
carhamate toxicnsis (TD)
heart rateif rare increases hpm,
not an OP or curbamate toxicosis
Treatmcnt of bradycardia or
Dogs and Cats:XID: 0.2-0.5mg/kg, give 4 dosc IV
cxocssivc bronchial
rest IM or SC
secretions from
argansphosnhons or
carbamatc toxiccsis (XD)
Treatent f bradyeadia frut
Dogs and Cats:0.022-0.044mg/kg IM, IV, SC gm
cardiac dcprcssant drugs
(e.g..digxin）（CD)
Bicarbonatc,Socium
Managcmcnt of acidosis
Dogs and Cats:mEq rcquircd= 0.5x body wt
(kg) × (cesired total COminus
measured total CO): give 
calculated dose over 4h, and thcn
recheck blood gases
884
Drug
Indication
Spccics
Dosagc
Blocd,whole
Replacement therapy for anemiaDogs and Cats:1020ml/kg IV
(transfusion)
Buprenorphine
Management of pain
Dogs and Cats:
0.005-0.01mg/kgIM,1V.SCq6-12h
Calcitonin. Salmon
Trcatmcnt of hypercalccmia
Dogs:
46IU/kg SC q 8-12h
caaed by cllecaleiferol
toxicosis
Calcium ELIA
llcavy mctal chckator
Dogs and Cats:25mg/kg SC qid for 5 days
Chlorpromazioc
Antiemetic
Dogs and Cats:0.5mg/kg IV. IM cr SC q C8h
Secation for agitation caused by
sc
3mg/kg PO q 12h
psychotropic drugs (e.g-
0.5mg/kg IM or IV q 12 h
amphetamines,
phenylpropanclamine,
Cats:
m/kgPq24h
pxendoephedrine)
0.5mg/kg IM or IV q 24h
ppedaods
Assistamce in mangemeat of
Dugs:
my/kg PO ox per rectu q 6l
serotonin syndrome and
scrotonrgic cffects of
Cats:
2-4mg per cat PO q 1224h
psychoropie drugs
Dantrolene
Management of Lactrodec
:ssca
15mg/kgPO q8h or I mg/kg IV
(widow) spider bitcs:
management of malignarf
Cals:
0.52g/kg PO q 8l ur 1 mig/kg IV
hyperthermia from hops
Dapsonc
Maragcmcnt of dermal nccrosis
Dogs and Cats:1 mg/kg PO q 824h
from Ioxoseles hits (recluse
(sepds
Dcferroxaminc
Chelaor of iron
Dogs and Cats:15mg/kg/hour IV or 40mg/kg IM q
48h
Diazepam
Sedation for CNS stimulation;
Dogs:
0.1mg/kg slow IV
CAUTION: avoid usc or usc
with cion wit
sympathomimetic (e.g
amphctaminc)intoxication
bezuse paraloxical
excitation may occur
Management of seizures
Dogs and Cais:
0.2-5mg/kg IV to effect
885
Drug
Indication
Species
Dcsage
Digibind
Managcment of cardiac
Dogs and Cats:Dosage based on serum cigoxin levels
glyooside toxioosis (drugs,
or amount of digoxin ingested
plaats, toads） whcrc lifc-
(fcrmulas on inscrt), if unknown
turealening arrhytmias have
expsure level, stat wih 2 vials
not rcsclved with
sympai terapy or
serum potassium levels
mmol/ in the setting of
severe digitalis intoxication
Dimercaprol (BAL)
Heavy metal chelator
Dogs and Cas:2.5m/kg IMrepest qhfcr2 dayq
8h on 3rd day, and thcn q 12h for
10d;
Diphenhydramine
Management of acute allergic
Dogs:
2 4mg/kg PU q 12h
reactious, atieneti
1mg/kg IM,SC,IVq8 12h
0.5 mg/kg POq 12h
2ug/kg IMq Bh
Epinephrine
Systemic treatment of acnte
0.01-0.02mg/kg IV.IMor SC
anaphylaxis
Esmolol
Managcment of ventricular
Dogs and Cats:Loading cose of 200500 mcg/kg IV
arrhythmias;
overIminute followed by constant
ultre-shorl-ecting
rate IV infusion of 25200mcg/kg/
minue
Ethanol
Managcment of cthylcne glycol
Dogs:
As 20% sclution.administer 5.5ml/kg
toxicosis, prevents formation
IV q6h for 5 treatments,and then
of toxic metabolites
q 8h for 4 treatments
As 20% solution, administer 5ml/kg IV
q6hfor trcatmcnts,nd thcn q
8h for 4 treatments
Flumazenil
Henzndiazepine antagonist sed
Dogs and Cats:0.01mg/kg IV
to aid in severe
benzodiazepine overcose
Fomepizole
Management of ethylene glycol
20mg/kg IV, and then 15 mg/kg IV at
toxicosis,prevents formation
12 and 24h.and ticn 5mg/kg at
of toxic netabolites
36h al  12huntil no detectable
EG in blocd
125 mg/kg slow IV: then 31.25mg/kg ct
12.24 and 36h
886
Diug
Incication
Species
Dosage
Fuosemide
Diuretie for use ia amageme
Doys:
Lp to 7.7mg/kg IV or IM q 12h as
of puimonary cdema
popcu
seconlary to inlalation
toxicity
Cats:
Lp to 4.4mg/kg IV or IM q 1 2h as
naeded
Diuretic to cnhance calcium
Dogs and Cats:2-4mg/kg q PO, IV or IM 8-12h
excreion in hyperealcemia
(c.g.,cholccakifcrol
loxicosis)
Glucagoa
Managcs sevcrc cardiac
Dogs and Cats:5-10mg IV
arrhythmias (bradycardia, AV
blcck) dux to beta adrcnergic
bhxker, calciwn cl
blccker,nd trieyclie
aridepresm venloses
Hhlockers
Reces pastric acic secrerion
Dogs and Cats:Cimetidine:510mg/kg PO,SQ,IM,
IVq68h
Dogs:
Famocidine: 0.51mg/kg PO, IM, SQ,
IV q 12-24h
Cats:
0.5mg/kg PO, SC, IM, 1V q 24h
Anecdotal repoirts of intravescular
hemolysis when used IV in cais
Dogs:
Raniticine: 0.52mg/kg IO,1V, 1M q
8-12h
Cals:
2.5g/kg IVq 12hur 3m/y POq
12h
3% Hydrogen
Ikluctiou uf emesis
Doys and Cats:
1m/lbo mxi of 4550m; c
peroxide
repcat oncc
Hydroxocobalamin
Management of cyanide
Dogs:
75-150mg/kg IVt
toxicosis
Intravenous Lipld
Management of intoxication by
Dogs and Cats:1.5ml/kg 1V administered over 1020
Sclution(20%:
highly lipid solublc
minutes followod by 0.25 ml/kg/min
Lipusyu③,
cumpouls (e.g, ivermectin,
IV fur 1 hour; repeat dosing can be
Inralipics@)
moxidectin, baclcfen,
given at 3 4 hour intervals (or
calium chanel blockers):
we serunmu lnger lipic
emerging modality that some
consider experimental,
should be reserved for sevare
cascs that are pocrly
887
Drug
Inlizalim:
Speriex
Desay=
Kaolin pectin
Demulcent and putative
Dogs:
1 5ml/kg PO q4 12h
alsorhent; CAITION: many
formulations now contain
Cats:
1-2ml/kg POq4-12h
bismuth subsalicylatc
Lactuluse
Laxative and reluces blood
Dugs:
1530mlPOq6l
ammonia levels; helptul in
cases of liver insfficiency
Cats:
0.251l PO q 8
Lidocaine
Management of ventricular
Dogs:
Bolus 2mg/kg slow IV up to 8mg/kg;
arrhythmias
or rapid IV 0.8 mg/kg/minute, and
then CRI cf 25=80mcg/kg/min
Cats
Holus 0.250.5mg/kg slowly,repeat at
0.15-0,25mg/kg in 520 minutes;
CRI at 0.01-0.02mg/kg min
Magnesium hydroxideReduces gastric acid
Dogs:
530ml q 1224 h
Cas:
515ly 1224h
Mannitol
Osmotic diuretic for mangement Dcgs and Cats:
0.250.5gm/kg IVover 1520minutes
of oliguric renal failure
Treatment of cerebral adema
Dcgs and Cats:
0.51.5g/kg 1Vover 1020 minutes
Maropitant
Antiemetic
Dogs:
1mg/kg SC q 24h
2ng/kgPO241
Methocarbamol
Management of muscle tremors,
Dcgs and Cats:55 220mg/kg 1V; administer half
rigidity.convulsivc activity
rapidly. wait for the animal to relax,
(e.g.Penmelnin.
and ten adinisler remaimler t
mctaldchyde toxicoscs)
ctfcct:donot cxcced330mg/kg/day
Meihylene Blue
Treatmen of
Dugs:
4g/k.g slow IV once
methemoglobinemia use
Cats:
1-1.5 mg/kg IV cnce
with extreme cartion,
especially in cats:
Mctoprolol
Managcmcnt of tachycardia
Dog
550mg IO q 812h or
0.2-0.4kg POq 12
Cats:
2-15mg per cat PO q 12h
Naloxone
Reversal cf opioid toxiccsis
Dogs:
0.04mg/kg IV, IM or SC
Cats:
0.05-0.1mg/kg IV
888
Drug
Indication
Species
Dosage
Nitroprusside
Trcatment of hypertcnsion
Dogs
lnitial dose 12mcg/kg/minuitc:
increase incrementally q 35 min
u ntil cesired BP attained
Cas
Iiial dse 0.5/g/ne; ieree
incrementally q35min until
desired BP attained
Panidrunate
Maagemeut ofhyperealcemia
Dugs.
0.652 ug/kg in 0.9% NaC1 slow IV
(Aredia@)
due to intoxication by
over 23 hours may repeat in 4 7
viamin D cr analogues
Cays if needed
D-Penicillamine
Copper or leal clhelator
Dugs.
110mg/kg/day PO dividelqid for 12
wccks
Cats.
125 mg q 12h PO for 5 days
Pentobarbital
Maragement of seizures
Dogs
315mg/kg slow 1V to effeet
Phenobarbital
Marazement of seizures
Dogs and Cats:3 6mg/kg IV to effect
Pralidoxime Chloride
Trectment of crganophosphcrous
Dogs and Cats:
20mg/kg IM. IV, SC q 8 12h if no
insecticide intoxication
response aferdses,iscot
Prednisone
Adjunct therapy in
Dogs ard Cats:
12mg/kg PO q8-12h
hypercalcemia due to vitamin
Dor aalogue toxkcosis
Propanolol
Maragement of tachycartia or
Dogs ard Cats:
n.f2mg/kg slowIV
other cardiac arrhythmias
Propofol
Marazement of seizures
Dogs and Cats:
0.10.6 m2/kg/minute
36mg/kg IV followed by CRI
8-12ug/ky/:
Prctanie Sulfae
Maragemen af heparin
Dugs ad Cas
Ainister 11.5mg o tgnize
overdoses
each mg (100 urits) hepcrin: slow
IV
Pyridostiynine
Mauagement of toxieesis frum
Dugs.
0.53mg/kg PO q 8-12h
ncn-dcpolarizing
neuromuscular blocking
Cas
0.25mg/kg/day
agents, bohlism, atrpine,
avermectin,coral snake
eavetonation, and
anticholinergies
889
Drug
Indication
Species
Dosage
Pyridoxine
Used in management of seizuresDogs:
Administer rmiligram for milligram the
from penicillamine,
dose cf isoniazid/hydrazine;if not
Gyromira mushrcom,
kaown, initial desage 70mg/kg IVi
isoriozid, and hydrozines;
acjunct therapy for ethylee
glycol ki
SAMe
Hepatoprotectant
Dogs:
17-20mg/kg/day PO
Cats:
2C0mg/day PO
Silymarin
Hepatoprotectant
Dogs and Cats:2050mg/kg/day PO
Succimer
Heavy metal chelator
Dogs and Cats:10mg/kg PPO q 8h for 10 days; can be
given rectally if patient is vomiting
T'rientine
Chelator for coppe
Dogs:
1015mg/kg POq 12h befcre meals
hcpatotoxicity
VilaninK
Trene of angt
Dug an Cals:35mg/ky PO divilel BID;eal fin 7,
(Phytonadione)
rodenticice coagulopathy
21, or 28 days according to type of
rodenticide; check prothrombin
timc 48h afer lost vitamin K
Xylazine
Emetic
Cats:
Yohinbine
Reversal ef bradyearlia,
Dugs:
0.11mg/kg IV
hypotensicn and sedation
from alphe cgonists (e.g..
amitraz, xylazinc), imidazck
cecongestanrs
Sources:
Donald C. 2005. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th
ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing Professional.
poisoning. In Veterinary Toxicology, edited by Ramesh C.
Gupta,
pp.
1139-1158.
San
Diego:
Academic
Press-Elsevier.
Merck
&
Co, Inc.
 2005.Antivenin
(Lactrodectus
mactans), Equine origin, product insert.
890
Plumlee, pp. 286-291. St. Louis: Mosby.
 Smithkline Beecham  Corporation.  2009.  Digibind
product information.
f Dalefi eld, Rosalind R. and Oehme, Frederick W.
Antidotes for specifi c poisons. In Small Animal
Toxicology, 2nd ed., edited by Michael E. Peterson and
Patricia A. Talcott, pp. 459-474. St. Louis: Saunders.
Gwaltney-Brant, Sharon. 2010. Newer Antidotal
Therapies. Proceedings of the CVC Baltimore, Baltimore,
Maryland.
insert.
i Savage Labs. 2008. CroFab package insert.
j Villar D, Knight MW, Holding J, Barret GH, Buck WB.
1995. Treatment of acute isoniazid overdose in dogs.
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 37(5):473-477.
k Borron, Stephen W, Stonerook, Michael, Reid, Frances.
2006. Efficacy of hyroxocobalamin in the treatment of
acute cyanide poisoning in adult beagle dogs. Clinical
Toxicology 44(Supp1 1):5-15
891
Appendix 2
Additional Toxic Plants and Associated System-Based
Effects
GASTROINTESTINAL
African milk bush (Synadenium grantii)
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp)
Alder buckthorn (Rhamnus spp)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Anemone, Pasque flower, windflower, meadow anemone,
crowfoot (Anemone spp)
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry
(Prunus spp)
Amica(Arnica montana)
Aucuba, Japanese aucuba, Japanese laurel, spotted laurel
(Aucuba japonica)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Baby's breath (Gypsophilia paniculata)
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Bird-of-paradise (Caesalpinia spp)
892
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
dulcamara)
Black bryony (Tamus communis)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn,
staggerweed (Dicentra spp)
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus multiflorus)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Bluebell (Hyacinthoides non-scripta)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Buttercup, meadow buttercup, crowfoot, lesser spearwort
(Ranunculus spp)
Caladium (Caladium spp)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Candelabra aloe, octopus plant, torch plant, Barbados aloe,
medicinal aloe (Aloe spp)
893
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Chenille plant, red-hot cattail (Acalypha hispida)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp)
Chinese lantern, winter cherry, Cape gooseberry (Physalis
alkekengi)
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine (Dioscorea batatas)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Corn plant (Dracaena spp)
Crinum lily, spider lily, swamp lily (Crinum spp)
Croton (Codiaeum variegatum) (Croton tiglium)
894
Crown of thorns (Euphorbia milii)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
(Epipremnum aureum)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp)
Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocynum cannabium)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Lilium spp, hyb)
Elder, dwarfelder, Danewort (Sambucus ebulus)
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Eucalyptus, blue gum, cider gum, silver dollar, Australian
fever tree (Eucalyptus spp)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonymus spp)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
European mistletoe (Viscum album)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Firethon (Pyracantha spp)
895
Fishtail palm (Caryota mitis)
Flamingo flower (Anthurium spp)
Four o'clock (Mirabilis jalapa)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine
(Syngonium spp)
Greater celandine (Chelidonium majus)
Green earth star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
Guelder-rose, high-bush cranberry (Viburnum spp)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Holly, yaupon, possum-haw (Ilex spp)
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
896
Hyacinth, garden hyacinth, Dutch hyacinth (Hyacinthus
orientalis)
Hydrangea, hills of snow, French hydrangea, hortensia
(Hydrangea macrophylla)
Iris, crested iris, dwarf iris, fleur-de-lis, blue flag, butterfly
iris, poison flag, yellow iris (Iris spp)
Jack-in-the-pulpit (Arisaema triphyllum)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
cherry (Solanum pseudocapsicum)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Kalanchoe, Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant
ear, devil's backbone, lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Kingcup, marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana
camara)
Larkspur (Delphinuim spp)
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay (Laurus nobilis)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
spp)
Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis)
897
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
maculatum)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
Male-fern (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog
marigold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
Marsh marigold, kingcup (Caltha palustris)
May apple, mandrake (Podophyllum spp)
May lily (Maianthemum bifolium)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
(Sophora spp)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne spp)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Mock azalea, rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
898
Netted vriesea (Vriesea fenestralis)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
spp, Tragia spp)
Night-blooming jessamine, Chinese inkberry (C estrum
nocturmum)
Nightshade (Solanum spp)
Oak (Quercus spp)
Old man's beard, traveler's joy, virgin's bower (Clematis
spp)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
Ornamental pepper (Capsicum annuum)
Oyster plant, boat lily, Moses in a boat (Rhoeo spathacea)
Peace lily, white sails, white anthurium, spathe flower,
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Periwinkle (Vinca spp)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclamen spp)
899
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williamsii)
Pheasant's eye (Adonis spp)
Philodendron, sweetheart plant, panda plant, parlor ivy
(Philodendron spp)
Physic nut (Jatropha curcas)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Pineapple, pineapple tree (Ananas comosus)
Pink quill (Tillandsia cyanea)
Plumbago, Cape plumbago,
， Cape leadwort, Ceylon
leadwort (Plumbago spp)
Poinsettia, Christmas star (Euphorbia pulcherrima) very
low toxicity
Pokeweed, pokeberry, pokesalad (Phytolacca americana)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose (Primula
spp)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp)
Pulsatilla (Pulsatilla spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
900
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant
(Rheum rhubarbarum)
Rosary pea, prayer bean, jequerity, precatory bean (Abrus
precatorius)
Rowan, mountain ash, service tree, whitebeam (Sorbus
spp)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
revoluta, Cycas spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Savin (Juniperus sabina)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefflera
spp)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Sensitive plant, shame plant, touch-me-not, action plant,
humble plant (Mimosa pudica)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Solomon's seal (Polygonatum spp)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
901
Spider lily, crown-beauty, sea daffodil, basket flower,
alligator lily (Hymenocallis spp)
Spurge,
creeping
 spurge,
 donkeytail
(Euphorbia
myrsinites)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla,
Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth, hyacinth of Peru, bluebell
(Scilla spp)
Star-of-Bethlehem, summer snowflake, dove's dung,
napat-noon (Ornithogalum spp)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calamus)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Tuberous begonia (Begonia tuberhybrida)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Urn plant (Aechmea fasciata)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjamin tree, small-leaved
rubber plant (Ficus benjamina)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
902
White mustard, charlock (Sinapis spp)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Wisteria, Chinese kidney bean (Wisteria sinensis)
Wormwood, sagewort, sagebrush (Artemisia spp)
Yellow allamanda, Nani Ali'i, flor de barbero (Allamanda
cathartica)
Yellow oleander, Mexican oleander (Thevetia spp)
Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow (Brunfelsia calycina)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fairy lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Pinpoint pupils
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
903
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Dilated pupils
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia,
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
spp)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
dulcamara)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
904
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Com plant (Dracaena spp) (Croton tiglium)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
cherry (Solanum pseudocapsicum)
Jimsonweed,
thorm-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
stramonium)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Peyote, mescal, mescal button (Lophophora williamsii)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
905
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheflera
spp)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Hyperexcitability, muscle twitches
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Coffee (Coffee arabica)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp)
Jimsonweed,
thorm-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
stramonium)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
906
Mock azalea, rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow (Brunfelsia calycina)
Hallucination, behavioral changes
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Jimsonweed,
thorm-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
stramonium)
Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus rocus)
Male-fern (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
907
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
(Sophora spp)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Nutmeg (Myristica fragrans)
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williamsii)
Trembling, ataxia, weakness, depression
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia.
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
spp)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
dulcamara)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel com,
staggerweed (Dicentra spp)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Bluebell (Hyacinthoides non-scripta)
908
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Corm plant (Dracaena spp)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Lilium spp)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Horse-chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp)
Horsetail (Equisetum spp)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal
cherry (Solanum pseudocapsicum)
Kalanchoe, Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant
ear, devil's backbone, lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
909
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana
(nunun)
Larkspur (Delphinuim spp)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
(Sophora spp)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Mimosa, silk tree (Albizia julibrissin)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
spp, Tragia spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
910
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Sage palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
revoluta, Cycas spp)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheflera
spp)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yesterday-today-and tomorrow (Brunfelsia calycina)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fairy lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp)
Paralysis
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus multiflorus)
911
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Coyotilla, tullidora (Karwinskia humboldtiana)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
False hellebore, black hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Larkspur (Delphinuim spp)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
spp)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclamen spp)
Pieris (Pieris spp)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Convulsions
912
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia.
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn,
staggerweed (Dicentra spp)
Box, common box, boxwood ( Buxus sempervirens)
Broom ( Cytisus spp)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp) (Croton tiglium)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
913
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Mediterranean thistle (Atractylis gummifera)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp) Mimosa, silk
tree (Albizia julibrissin)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclamen spp)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
revoluta, Cycas spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefflera
spp)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Spurge, creeping
spurge,donkeytail(Euphorbia
myrisinites)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla.
Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth, hyacinth of Peru, bluebell
(Scilla spp)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
914
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Yellow jessamine,
  Carolina jessamine
(Gelsemium
sempervirens)
Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow(Brunfelsia calycina)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
Unconsciousness/coma
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
915
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Hemlock(Conium maculatum)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Jimsonweed,
thorm-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
stramonium)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace
(Sophora spp)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Poppy (Papaver spp)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
revoluta,Cycas spp)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
916
Spurge (Euphorbia spp)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calamus)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
CARDIOVASCULAR
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia.
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
spp)
Amica(Arnica montana)
Avocado (Persea americana)
Azalea(Rhododendron spp)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
917
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp) (Croton
tiglium)
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
Common tansy (Tenacetum spp)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp)
Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocymum cannabium)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonymus spp)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's
fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
918
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Jimsonweed,
thorn-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
Kalancho, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone.
lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum
spp)
Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
Macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Morming glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
spp, Tragia spp)
Night-blooming jessamine (Cestrum nocturnum)
919
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Periwinkle (Vinca spp)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Saffron crocus, meadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheflera
spp)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Silk vine (Periploca graeca)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla.
Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth, hyacinth of Peru, bluebell
(Scilla spp)
Star-of-Bethlehem, summer snowflake, dove's dung,
napat-noon (Ornithogalum spp)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
920
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fair lily, fire lily (Z ephyranthes spp)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
Respiratory
Dyspnea, cyanosis
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry
(Prunus spp)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn,
staggerweed (Dicentra spp)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Caladium (Caladium spp)
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
921
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
(Epipremnum aureum)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp)
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Flamingo flower (Anthurium spp)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs,
fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine
(Syngonium spp)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
maculatum)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn (Urtica spp, Cnidoscolus
spp, Tragia spp)
Philodendron, sweetheart plant (Philodendron spp)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
922
Respiratory depression or paralysis
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp)
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum
dulcamara)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Broom (Cytisus spp)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (G loriosa superba)
Golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
Hemlock, poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Jimsonweed,
thorm-apple,
moonflower
(Datura
Larkspur (Delphinium spp)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp)
923
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp)
Monk's-hood (Aconitum spp)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
RENAL
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Easter lily, star-g azer lily, tiger lily (Lilium spp)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
924
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Saffron crocus, meadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Calcium oxalate crystalluria
Caladium (Caladium spp)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine
(Syngonium spp)
Lord-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
maculatum)
Schefflera, umbrella plant, rubber plant, starleaf
(Scheflera spp)
925
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calamus)
Hematuria, azotemia
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp)
Black locust (Robinia pseudo-acacia)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Garlic (Allium spp)
Onion (Allium spp)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp)
Rosary pea (Abrus precatorius)
LIVER DAMAGE
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp)
Borage (Borago officinalis)
Comfrey (Symphytum officinale)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
926
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy,
Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantand
camara)
Oak (Quercus spp)
Purple viper's-bugloss, calamity Jane, Patterson's curse
(Echium lycopsis)
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant
(Rheumrhubarbarum)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas
revoluta, Cycas spp)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis) (Solanum malacoxylon)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp)
927
EMACIATION, ASCITES, EDEMA OF DEPENDENT
EXTREMITIES;
JAUNDICE;
HEPATOENCEPHALOPATHY
Borage (Borago officinalis)
Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp)
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy,
Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Purple viper's-bugloss, calamity Jane, Patterson's curse
(Echium lycopsis)
CONTACT
DERMATITIS,
EYE
IRRITANTS,
ALLERGENS
African blue lily, blue African lily (Agapanthus orientalis)
African milk bush (Synadenium grantii)
Anemone, Pasque flower, windflower, meadow anemone,
crowfoot (Anemone spp)
928
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia,
geranium-leaf aralia, wild coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias
spp)
Amica (Arnica spp)
Baby's breath (Gypsophilia paniculata)
Black bryony (Tamus communis)
Buttercup, meadow buttercup, crowfoot, lesser spearwort
(Ranunculus spp)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon
bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf
philodendron, Mexican breadfruit (Monstera spp)
Chenille plant, red-hot cattail (Acalypha hispida)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp) spathacea)
Chinese lantern, winter cherry, Cape gooseberry (Physalis
akekengi)
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine (Dioscorea batatas)
Chrysanthemum,
marguerite,
ox-eye
daisy
(Chrysanthemum spp, hyb)
929
Croton,
ormamental
1(Codiaeumvariegatum)(Croton
tiglium)
Crown of thorns (Euphorbia milii)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine
(Epipremnumaureum)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp)
Dog-tooth violet, trout lily, avalanche lily (Erythronium
spp)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Eucalyptus, blue gum, cider gum, silver dollar, Australian
fever tree (Eucalyptus spp)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
European mistletoe (Viscum album)
Garlic, onion (Allium spp)
Geranium, zonal geranium, ivy geranium (Pelargonium
spp)
Great lettuce, garden lettuce (Lactuca spp)
Green earth star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
930
Horseradish, red cole (Armorica rusticana)
Iris, yellow iris, crested iris, dwarf iris, fleur-de-lis, blue
flag, poison flag (/ris spp)
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay (Laurus nobilis)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam-and-Eve (Arum
maculatum)
Male-ferm (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Marigold, African marigold, French
1marigold, bog
marigold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
Netted vriesea ( Vriesea fenestralis)
Old man's beard, traveler's joy, virgin's bower (Clematis
spp)
Ornamental pepper (Capsicum annuum)
Oyster plant, boat lily, Moses in a boat ( Rhoeo spathacea
Peace lily, white sails, white anthurium, spathe flower,
Mauna Loa (Spathiphyllum spp)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger
tree, naked lady (Euphorbia tirucalli)
Peruvian lily, lily of the Incas (Alstroemeria spp)
931
Philodendron, sweetheart plant, panda plant, parlor ivy
(Philodendron spp)
Piggyback plant, pickaback plant, thousand mothers,
youth-on-age (Tolmiea menziesii)
Pink quill (Tillandsia cyanea)
Plumbago, Cape plumbago, Cape leadwort, Ceylon
leadwort (Plumbago spp)
Poinsettia, Christmas star (Euphorbia pulcherrima)
Poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac (Rhus spp)
Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose (Primula
spp)
Pulsatilla (Pulsatilla spp)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp)
Sneezeweed (Helenium spp)
Spurge,
creeping
 spurge,
donkeytail
(Euphorbia
myrsinites)
Tulip (Tulipa spp, hyb)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp)
Urn plant (Aechmea fasciata)
932
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjamin tree, small-leaved
rubber plant (Ficus benjamina)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Yellow allamanda, Nani Ali'i, flor de barbero (Allamanda
cathartica)
Primary photosensitization
Bishop's weed, Queen Anne's lace (Ammi majus)
Dahlia (Dahlia spp)
Dutchman's breeches (Thamnosma texana)
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog
marigold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes spp)
St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
SUDDEN DEATH
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp)
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea)
Hemlock, poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Kalanchoe, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone.
lavender-scallops (Kalanchoe spp)
Laburnum, golden chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides)
933
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Yellow oleander, Mexican oleander (Thevetia spp)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp)
934
Appendix 3
Plants Not Reported to Be Toxic
Achira (Canna edulis)
Achyranthes Verschaffelti (Iresine herbstii)
Acorn Squash (Curcurbita pepo cv acorn)
African Violet (Saintpaulia ionantha)
Algaroba (Ceratonia sUiqua)
Aluminum Plant (Pilea cadierei)
Alumroot (Heuchera sanguinea)
American Rubber Plant (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Anthericum Comosum (Chlorophytum comosum)
Antirrhinum Multiflorum (Antirrhinum glandulosum)
Apple Leaf Croton (Polyscias balfouriana marginai)
Arabian Gentian (Exacum affine)
Aregelia (Neoregelia carolinae)
Artillery Plant (Pilea callitrichoides)
Aspidium Falcatum (Cyrtomium falcatum)
935
Aubepine (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Autumn Olive (Elaeagnus spp.)
Baby Rubber Plant (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Baby Tears (Helxine soleirolii)
Bachelors Buttons (Centaurea cyanus)
Ball Fern (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Ball Fern (Davallia fojeensis plumosa)
Bamboo (Phylostachys aurea)
Bamboo Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Bamboo Vine (Smilax laurifolia)
Banana (Musa acuminata)
Banana Squash (Curcurbita maxima cv banana)
Begonia Species
Belmore Sentry Palm (Howeia spp.)
Big Shellbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
Bignonia (Jacaranda procera)
Bitter Pecan (Carya spp.)
936
Bitternut (Carya spp.)
Black Haw (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Black Hawthom (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Blaspheme Vine (Smilax laurifolia)
Bloodleaf Plant (lresine herbsti)
Blooming-Sally(Epilobium angustijloium)
Blue Bead (Clintonia borealis)
Blue Daisy (Felicia amelloides)
Blue Echeveria (Echeveria derenbergii)
Blue-Dicks (Brodiaea capitata)
Blue-Eyed Daisy (Arctotis grandis)
Bluebottle (Centaurea cyanus)
Blunt-Leaved Peperomia (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Blushing Bromeliad (Neoregelia carolinae)
Bold Sword Fern
(Nephrolepis
Sexaltabostoniensi
compacta)
Boston Fern (Nephrolespis exalta bostoniensi compacta)
937
Boston Sword Fern (Nephrolespis exaltata bostoniensi
compacta)
Bottle Palm (Beaucarnea recurvata)
Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.)
Brazilian Orchid (Sophronitis spp.)
Bride's-Bonnet (Clintonia uniflora)
Bristly Greenbrier (Smilax hispida)
Brodiaea Pulchella (Brodiaea capitata)
Broom Hickory (Carya spp.)
Bullbrier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Bur Gourd (Cucumis anguria)
Burro's Tail (Sedum morganianum)
Buttercup Squash (Curcurbita maxima cv buttercup)
Butterfly Ginger (Hedychium coronarium)
Butterfly Iris (S puria spp.)
Butterfly Lily (Hedychium coronarium)
Butterfly Orchid (Oncidium spp.)
Butterfly Tulip (Calochortus gunnisonii)
938
Button Fern (Pellaea rotundifolia)
Caeroba (Jacaranda procera)
Calathea Insignis (Maranta insignis)
Calathea Lancifolia (Maranta insignis)
Califormia Cobra Plant (Darlingtonia californica)
Califormia Pitcher Plant (Darlingtonia californica)
Callistemon Bradyandrus (Callistemon spp.)
Callistemon Citrinus (Callistemon spp.)
Callistemon Viminalis (Callistemon spp.)
Calochortus Nuttalli (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Camellia (Camellia japonica)
Canada Hemlock (Fsuga canadensis)
Canary Date Palm (Pheonix canariensis)
Candle Plant (Plectranthus coleoides (Marginatus)
Candycorn Plant (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Canna Lily (Canna generalis)
Cantebury-Bell (Gloxinia perennis)
939
Cape Jasmine (Fabernaemontana)
Cape Primrose (Streptocarpus spp.)
Carob (Ceratonia silig)
Carob Tree (Ceratonia sUiqua)
Carob Tree (Jacaranda procera)
Caroba (Jacaranda procera)
Carobinha (Jacaranda procera)
Carolina Hemlock (Tsuga spp.)
Carrion Flower (Smilax herbacea)
Carrot Fern (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Carrot Fern (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Casaba Melon (Cucumis melo)
Cast Iron Plant (Aspidistra elatior)
Cat Brier (Smilax glabra)
Cat Ear (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Cattleya Labiata (Cattleya trianaei)
Cattleya Labiata Var Mossiae (Cattleya mossiae)
940
Cattleya Labiata Var Mossiae (Cattleya trianaei)
Celosia Globosa (Celosia cristata)
Celosia Plumosa (Celosia cristata)
Chamaedorean Humilis (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Chaparral Snapdragon (Antirrhinum coulteranum)
Chenille Plant (Echeveria derenbergii)
Chestnut (Castanea spp.)
Chicken-Gizzard Plant (lresine herbstii)
Chickens and Hens (Echeveria agavoides)
Chickens and Hens (Echeveria elegans)
Chicks and Hens (Echeveria imbricata)
Chicks and Hens (Echeveria secunda)
Chin-Lao-Shu (Smilax glabra)
China Aster (Callistephus spp.)
China Root (Smilax glabra)
Chinese Plumbago (Ceratostigma willmottianum)
ChlorophytumBichetii(Anthericum bichetii)
941
Chlorophytwn
Sternbergianum (Chlorophytum comosum)
Chocolate Solider Plant (Episcia dianthiflora)
Christmas Dagger Fern (Polystichym spp.)
Christmas Orchid (Cattleya trianaei)
Christmas Palm ( Veitchia merrillii)
Cinnamon Jasmine (Hedychium coronarium)
Cinquefoil (Potentilla spp.)
Cirrhopetalum
Appendeculatum (Bulbophyllum appendeculatum)
Clearweed (Pilea pumila)
Cliff Brake Fen (Pellaea rotundifolia)
Club Moss (Selaginelia kraussiana)
Cocks Comb (Celosia cristata)
Cocktail Orchid (Cattleya forbesii)
Coffee Plant (Coffea arabica)
Collinia Elegans (Chamaedorea erumpens)
942
Color-Band Cryptanthus (Cryptanthus “It")
Columnar Cactus (Cephalocereus)
Common Camellia (Camellia japonica)
Common Catbrier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Common Garden Canna (Canna generalis)
Common Greenbrier (Smilax rotundifolia)
Common Snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus)
Common Staghorn Fern (Platycerium bifurcatum)
Confederate Jasmine (Trachelospermum jasminoides)
Coolwort (Pilea pumila)
Copper Rose (Echeveria derenbergii)
Copperlead (Acalypha wilkesiana macafeana)
Coral Ardisia (Ardisia crenulata)
Coral Bells (Heuchera sanguinea)
Coral Berry (Ardisia crispa)
Cornflower (Centaurea cyanus)
Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia spp.)
943
Crataegus Phaenopyrum (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Crataegus spp. (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Creeping Charlie (Lysimachia nummularia)
Creeping Charlie (Pilea nummulariifolia)
Creeping Charlie (Plectranthus australis)
Creeping Gloxinia (Asarina erubscens)
Creping Gloxinia (Maurandia spp.)
Creeping Mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Creeping Pilea (Pilea depressa)
Creeping Rubus (Rubus pedatus)
Creeping Zinnia (Sanvitalia spp.)
Crepe Myrtle (Lagerstroemia spp.)
Crimson Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.)
Crimson Cup (Neoregelia carolinae)
Crisped Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Crossandra (Crossandra undulifolia infundibuliformis)
Cucumber (Cucumis sativus)
944
Cushion Aloe (Hawthoria spp.)
Cushion Moss (Selagenella kraussiana brownii)
Cushon Aloe (Haworthia subfasciata)
Cyrtudeira Reptans (Episcia reptans)
Dainty (Davallia bullata maries;i)
Dainty (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Dainty Rabbits-Foot Fern (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Dainty Rabbits-Foot Fern (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Dallas Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium jlexuosum)
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium lanceanum)
Dancing Doll Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Davallia Bullata Mariessi (Davallia fejeensis plumosa)
Davallia Trichomanoides (Davallia bullata mariesii)
Desert Trumpet (Eriogonum umbellatum)
Dichelostemma Pulchellum (Brodiaea capitata)
Dichorisandra Reginae (l'radescantia reginae)
945
Dinteranthus Vanzylii (Lithops vanzylii)
Duffi Fern (Nephrolepis exalta)
Duffy Fern (Nephrolepis exalta)
Dwarf Boston Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Dwarf Date Palm (Pheonix roebelenii)
Dwarf Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Dwarf Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Dwarf Rose-Stripe Star (Cryptanthus rose us pictus)
Dwarf Royal Palm (Veitchia merrillii)
Dwarf Whitman Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Earth Star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
Easter Cattleya (Cattleya mossiae)
Easter Daisy (l'ownsendia sericea)
Easter Lily Cactus (Echinopsis multiplex)
Easter Orchid (Cattleya mossiae)
Edible Banana (Musa acuminata)
946
Edible Canna (Canna edulis)
Elephant-Ear Begonia (Begonia scharfii)
Emerald-Ripple Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
English Hawthorn (Crataegus oryacantha)
Epidendrum Atropurpeum (Epidendrum cocholeastum)
Epidendrum Ibaguense (Epidendrum cochloeastum)
Epidendrum Prismatocarpum (Epidendrum cochleastum)
Episcia spp. (Episcia dianthiflora)
False Aralia (Dizygotheca elegantissima)
Fairy Fountain (Celosia cristata)
Fan Tufted Palm (Rhapis spp.)
Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis cormpacta)
Feathered Amaranth (Celosia cristata)
Fiery Reed Orchid (Epidendrum cochleasrum)
Fig-Leaf Gourd (Cucurbita ficifolia)
Figleaf Palm (Fatsia japonica)
Fingermail Plant (Neoregelia carolinae)
947
Fire Weed (Epilobium angustifloium)
Fish Tail Fern (Cyrtomium falcarum)
Flame African Violet (Episcia reptans)
Flame of the Woods (Ixora coccinea)
Flame Violet (Episcia reptans)
Florida Butter-Fly Orchid (Epidendrum tampense)
FluffyRuffles (Nephrolepis exalta 6bostoniensis
compacta)
Forster Sentry Palm (Belmoreana howea Jorsteriana)
Fortunes Palm (TrachycarpusJortuneij)
Freckle Face (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Friendship Plant (Pilea involucrata)
Frosty (Episcia reptans)
Garden Marigold (Calendula officinalis)
Garden Snapdragon(Antirrhinum majus)
German Violet (Exacum affine)
Gherkins (Cucumis sativus)
Ghost Leafless Orchid (Polyrrhiza lindenii)
948
Ghost Plant (Graptopetalum paraguayense)
Giant Aster (Townsendia sericea)
Giant Holly Fern (Polystichum munitum)
Giant
White
Inch
 Plant
t(Tradescantia
albiflora
"Albo-vittata")
Gibasis Geniculata(Tradescantia multiflora)
Globe Thistle (Echinops spp.)
Gloxinia (Sinningia spp.)
Gold Bloom (Calendula officina/is)
Gold-Fish Plant (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Golden Aster (Callistephus spp.)
Golden Bells (Forsythia spp.)
Golden Lace Orchid (Haemaria discolor)
Golden Shower Orchid (Oncidium flexuosum)
Golden Shower Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Good Luck Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Grape Hyacinth (Muscari armeniacum)
Grape Hyacinth (Muscari spp.)
949
Grape Ivy (Cissus rhombifolia)
GreatWillow-Herb(Epilobium angustiforium)
Green-Ripple Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
Greenbrier (Smilax glabra)
Hagbrier (Smilax hispida)
Hardy Baby Tears (Nertera grandensis)
Hardy Gloxinia (Incarvillea spp.)
Haw Apple (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Haworthia (Haworthia subJasciata)
Haws (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Hedgehog Gourd (Cucumis dipsaceus)
Hellfetter (Smilax hospida)
Hemlock Tree (Tsuga spp.)
Hen-and-Chickens Fern (Asplenium bulbiferum)
Hens and Chicks (Echeveria imbricata)
Hens and Chicks (Echeveria secunda)
950
Hens and Chickens (Echeveria agavoides)
Hens and Chickens (Echeveria elegans)
Hickory (Carya spp.)
(. onduoo, psouno non) sue[d adoy npuH
Holligold (Calendula officinalis)
Holly Fen (Cyrtomium jalcatum)
Hollyhock (Althaea rosea)
Honey Locust (Glenditsia triacanthos)
Honey Plant (Hoya carnosa“compacta')
Honeydew Melons (Cucumis melo)
Honeysuckle Fuchsia (Fuchsia triphylla)
Hookera Pul chella (Brodiaea capitata)
Horse Brier (Smilax rotundifolia)
(, onduoo, psouno pot) .eonoxg, esoe eAo
HoyaCanosa"KrinkleKur!"(Hoyacarnosa"compacta")
Hoya Carnosa, Variegata, (Hoya carnosa “compacta")
Hoya “Mauna Loa" (Hoya spp.)
951
Hubbard Squash (Curcurbita maxima cv hubbard)
Hypocyrta spp. (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Ice Plant (Aptenia cordifolia)
Ice Plant (Lampranthus spp.)
Imbricata sword fern (Polystichum munitum)
Irish Moss (Helxine soleirolii)
Iron Cross Begonia (Begonia masoniana)
Iron Tree (Ixora coccinea)
Ivy Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Ivy-Leaf Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Jackson Brier (Smilax lanceolata)
Jacob's Ladder (Smilax herbacea)
Japanese Aralia (Fatsia japonica)
Japanese Holly Fern (Cyrtomium jalcatum)
Japanese Moss (Helxine soleirolii)
Japanese Pittosporurn (Pittosporum tobira)
Jasmine (Jasminium rex)
952
Jewel Orchid (Haemaria discolor)
Joseph's Coat (Alternanthera amoena)
Joseph's Coat (Iresine herbstii)
Jungle Geranium (Ixora javanica)
Kaempferis (Kaempferia pulchra)
Kahali Ginger (Hedychium gardneranum)
Kenilworth Ivy (Cybalaria muralis)
KentiaPalm (Howeia spp.)
Kenya Violet (Saintpaulis spp.)
Kharoub (Ceratonia siliqua)
King Nut (Carya spp.)
King of the Forest (Anoectochilus setaceus)
King-and-Queen Fern (Asplenium bulbiferum)
Kuang-Yen pa-Hsieh (Smilax glabra)
Lace Flower Vine (Episcia dianthiflora)
Lace Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
Lace Orchid (Odontoglossum grande)
953
Ladies Ear Drops (Fuchsia spp.)
Lady Lou (Episcia reptans)
Lady Palm (Rhapis flabelliformis)
Ladys Ear Drops (Fuchsia spp.)
Lagerstroemia Indica (Lagerstroemia spp.)
Lance Dracaena (Pleomele thaliodes)
Lance Pleumele (Pleomele thalioides)
Large Lady Palm (Rhapsis excelsa)
Laurel-Leaved Greenbrier (Smilax laurifolia)
Leather Peperomia (Peperomia crassifolia)
Leng-Fen Tu'an (Smilax glabra)
Leopard Lily (Lachenalia spp.)
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium flexuosum)
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium lanceanum)
Leopard Orchid (Oncidium sphacelatum)
Lesser Snapdragon (Antirrhinum orontium)
Lily of the Valley Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
954
Lily of the Valley Orchid (Oncidium lanceanum) Linden
(filia americana)
Lipstick Plant (Aeschynathus pulcher)
Little Zebra Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Little Zebra Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Little-Fantasy Peperomia (Peperomia caperata)
Living Rock Cactus (Pleiospilos bulusii)
Living Stones (Lithops vanzylii)
Locust Pods (Ceratonia siliqua)
Lou-Lang-T'ou (Smilax glabra)
Luther (Harald)
Madagascar Jasmine(Stephanotis floribunda)
Magnolia Bush (Magnolia stellata)
Mahonia Aquifolium(Mahonia acquifolium)
Malabar Gourd (Cucurbita ficilolia)
Malaysian Dracaena (Pleomele reflexa)
Manila Palm (Veitchia merrillii)
Mapleleaf Begonia(Begonia cleopatra)
955
Maranta (Prayer plants)
Marbled Fingernail (Neoregelia carolinae)
Mariposa Lily (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Maroon(Echeveria derenbergii)
Mary-Bud (Calendula officinalis)
May Bush (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Measles Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Melons (Cucumis melo)
Metallic Leaf Begonia (Begonia metallica)
Mexican Firecracker (Echeveria spp.)
Metallic Peperomia (Peperomia metallica)
Mexican Rosettes (Echeveria spp.)
Mexican Snowball (Echeveria spp.)
Miniature Date Palm (Phoenix roe belen;)
Minature Fish Tail (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Minature Maranta (Calathea micans)
Miniature Marble Plant (Neoregelia carolinae)
956
Mistletoe Cactus (Thipsalis cassutha)
Mockernut Hickory (Carya spp.)
Mosaic Plant (Fittonia verschaffeltii)
MosaicVase(Guzmania lingulata)
Moss Agate (Episcia reptans)
Moss Campion (Silene acaulis)
Moss Fern (Selaginella spp.)
Moss Phlox (Phlox subulata)
Moss Rose (Portulaca spp.)
Mossy Campion (Silene acaulis)
MotherFern(Aspleniumbulbiferum)
Mother Spleenwort (Asplenium bulbiferum)
Mother-of-Pearl Plant (Graptopetalum paraguayense)
Mountain Camellia (Stewartia)
Mountian Grape (Mahonia spp.)
Mulberry Bush (Morus spp.)
Mulberry Tree (Morus spp.)
957
Musa Paradisiaca (Musa acuminata)
Muscari Armeniacum (Muscari spp.)
Muscari spp. (Muscari armeniacum)
Muskmelon (Cucumis melo)
Narrow-Leaved Pleomele (Pleomele angustifolia)
Natal Plum (Carissa grandiflora)
Neanthe Bella Palm (Chamaedorea elegans "Bella")
Neanthebella (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Nematanthus spp. (Hypocyrta nummularia)
Neoregelia (Neoregelia carlinae)
Nepbrolepsis (Nephrolepis exalta)
Nerve Plant (Fittonia verschaffelti)
New Silver & Bronze (Pilea sp. “Silver Tree")
Night-Blooming Cereus (Hylocereus undatus)
Odontoglossum spp. (Odontoglossum grande)
Old Man Cactus (Cephalocereus senilis)
958
OrangeStar(Guzmania lingulata)
Oregon Grape (Mahonia acquifolium)
Ossifragi Vase (Neoregelia carolinae)
Paddy's Wig (Helxine soleiroli)
Painted Lady (Echeveria derenbergii)
Palm Lily (Yucca elephantipes)
Pampus Grass (Cortaderia selloana)
Panamiga (Pilea involucrata)
Pansy Orchid (Miltonia roezlii alba)
Paradise Palm (Howea spp.)
Parlor Palm (Chamaedorea erumpens)
Parlor Plant (Hoya carnosa)
Parsley Fern (Asplenium bulbiforum)
Peace Begonia (Begonia rex “Peace")
Peacock Plant (Kaempferia pulchra)
Pearl Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Pearl Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
959
Pearly Dots (Haworthia subfasciata)
Pearly Dots (Hawthoria spp.)
Peperomia Fosteri (Peperomia dahlstedti)
Peperomia Hederifolia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Peperomia Peltifolia (Peperomia argyreia)
Peperomia Rotundifolia (Peperomia nummulariifolia)
Peperomia Sandersii (Peperomia argyreia)
Pepper-Face (Peperomia obtusifolia)
Persian Violet (Exacum affine)
Pheasant Plant (Cryptanthus zonatus)
Piggy-Back Plant (Tolmiea menziesii)
Pigmy Date Palm (Pheonix roebelenii)
Pignut (Carya spp.)
Pignut Hickory (Carya spp.)
Pilea Microphylla(Pilea callitrichoides)
Pilea Mucosa (Pilea callitrichoides)
Pink Brocade(Episcia“Pink Brocade")
960
Pink Pearl (Begonia semperflorens “Pink Pearl")
Pink Polka Dot Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Pink Starlite (C rypthanthus rose us pictus
“Pink
Starllite")
Pirliteiro (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Pitaya (Hylocereus undatus)
Plantanus Orientalis (Plantanus acerifolia)
Plantanus Occidentalis (Plantanus acerifolia)
Platinum Peperomia (Peperomia griseoargentea)
Platycerium Alicicome (Platycerium bifurcatum)
Plumbago Larpentiae (Ceratostigma plumbaginoides)
Plush Plant (Echeveria derenbergii)
Polka Dot Plant (Hypoestes sanguinolenta)
Polystichum Falcatum (Crytomium falcatum)
Pony Tail (Beaucarnea recurvata)
Sego Lily (Calochortus gunnisonii)
Shagbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
961
Shan Ku'ei-Lai (Smilax glabra)
Shellbark Hickory (Carya spp.)
Shiny Leaf Smilax (Smilax glabra)
Shrimp Cactus (Schlumbergera russelliana)
Silver Bell (Ralesia carolina)
Silver Berry (Elaeagnus spp.)
Silver Heart (Peperomia maremorata)
Silver-Leaf Peperomia (peperomia griseoargentea)
Silver Nerve Plant (Fittonia verschaffelti argyroneura)
Silver Pink Vine (Hoya purpureafusca)
Silver Star (Cryptanthus lacerdae)
Silver Table Fern (Pteris ensiformis “virtoriae")
Silver Tree Panamiga (Pilea sp. “Silver Tree')
Slender Deutzia (Deutzia gracilis)
Small-Fruited Hickory (Carya spp.)
Smilax Tamnoides Vas
Hispida (Smilax hispida)
962
Speckled Wood Lily (Clintonia umbeliulata)
Spice Orchid (Epidendrum cochleastum)
Spider Ivy (Chlorophytum comosum)
Spider Plant (Chlorophytum comosum)
Spotted Laurel (Aucuba japonica variegata)
Squarenut (Carya spp.)
Squirrels Foot Fern (Davallia spp.)
Star Jasmine (Frachelospermum jasminoides)
Star Lily (Leucocrinum montanum)
Star Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Star Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Star Tulip (Calochortus gunnisoni)
Star Window Plant (Haworthia subfasciata)
Star Window Plant (Hawthoria spp.)
Strawberry (Fragaria spp.)
Striped Blushing Bromeliad (Neoregelia carolinae)
Sugar-Pods (Ceratonia siliqua)
963
Sulfur Flower (Eriogonum umbeliatum)
Summer Hyacinth (Galtonia spp.)
Sunflower (Helianthus annuus)
Swamp Hickory (Carya spp.)
Swedish Ivy (Plectranthus australis)
Sweet William (Phlox diuaricata)
Sweetheart Hoya (Hoya kerui)
Sweetheart Peperomia (Peperomia verschaffeltii)
Sword Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Swordfern (Polystichum munitum)
Tahitian Bridal Veil (Tradescantia multiflora)
Tailed Orchid (Masdevallia veichiana)
Tall Feather Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Tall Mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Teasel Gourd (Cucumis dipsaceus)
Texas Sage (Salvia coccinea)
Thea Japonica (Camellia japonica)
964
Thimble Cactus(Mammillaria fragilis)
Thorn Apple (Carateagus oxyacantha)
Ti Hu-Ling (Smilax glabra)
Tiger Orchid (Odontoglossum crispum)
Tiger Orchid (Odtongolossum grande)
Toad Spotted Cactus (Stapelia variegata)
Torch Lily (Kniphofia spp.)
Tous-Les-Mois (Canna edulis)
Trailing Peperomia (Peperomia “nummularifoliaj")
Tree Cactus (Cephalocereus)
Tree Gloxinia (Kohleria lindeniana)
Tropical Moss (Selaginella spp.)
True Cantelope (Cucumis melo)
TuFu-Ling (Smilax glabra)
Tulip Poplar (Liriodendron tulip/era)
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron tulip/era)
Turban Squash (Cucurbita maxima cv turbaniformis)
965
TurfLily (Liriope muscari)
Umbrella Plant (Eriogonum umbellatum)
Urbinia Agavoides (Echeveria agavoides)
Usambara Violet (Saintpaulia confiusa)
Variegated Laurel (Aucuba japonica variegata)
Variegated Oval Leaf Peperomia (Peperomia obtusifolia
Variegated Philodendron Leaf Peperomia  (P eperomia
scandens)
Variegated Wandering Jew (T ranescantia jluminsis
Variegated Wax Plant (Hoya carnosa variegata)
Velvet Plant (Gynura)
Venus Fly Trap (Dionaea muscipula)
Verona Fern (Nephrolepis exalt a bostoniensis compacta)
Verona Lace Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis
compacta)
Vining Peperomia (Peperomia dahlstedti)
Violet Slipper Gloxinia (Sinningia spp.)
966
Waftle Plant (Hemigraphis exotica)
Walking Anthericum (Chlorophytum comosum)
Washington Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha)
Water Hickory (Carya spp.)
Watermelon Begonia (Pellionia daveauana)
Waternelon Begonia (Peperomia argyreia)
WaternelonPeperomia(Peperomia argyreia)
Waternelon Pilea (Pilea cadierei)
Wax Plant (Hoya carnosaz “compactsz")
Wax Rosette (Echeveria derenbergii)
Weeping Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.)
Weeping Sargent Hemlock (Fsuga canadensis pendula)
Weisdornbluten Osaycantha (Crataegus oxyacantha)
West Indian Gherkin (Cucumis anguria)
Western Sword(Polystichum munitum)
White Ginger (Hedychium coronarium)
White-Edged Swedish Ivy (Plectranthus coleoides
(.snnuBanW,
967
White-Heart Hickory (Carya spp.)
Whitman Fern (Nephrolepis exalta bostoniensis compacta)
Wild Buckwheat (Eriogonum umbellatum)
Wild Hyacinth (Brodiaea capitata)
Wild Lantana(Abronia fragrans)
Wild Sarsaparilla (Smilax glauca)
Wild Strawberry (Fragaria spp.)
Willow-Herb (Epilobium angustifloium)
WindmillPalm(FrachycarpusJortuneij)
Winter Cattleya (Cattleya trianaei)
968
Index
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
2,4-D
2-PAM, see pralidoxime chloride
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol
4-Aminopyridine
5-Fluorouracil
5-Hydroxytryptophan
Abamectin; see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
ABCBl gene, see Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides,
MDR1 P-glycoprotein and
Absinthe,seeArtemisiaabsinthium
ACE inhibitors
Acetaminophen
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
Acute renal failure: see Kidney, failure acute
969
Adenium obesum
Aflatoxin
clinical signs in dogs
Agkistrodon spp
Albuterol
Alcohol
antidotal usage
higher alcohols
proof, conversion
Aldicarb
Aldrin
Alimentary system
gastrointestinal tract
toxicants affecting
oral cavity
Allium spp.
Aloe barbadensis
970
Aloe vera
Alphahydroxytoluene, see Benzyl alcohol
Alpha lipoic acid
Alpine golden chain, see Laburnum anagyroids
Amanita spp., see also Mushrooms
Amanitabisporigera
Amanita muscaria
Amanitaocreata
Amanitapantherina
Amanita phalloides
Amanita smithiana
Amanitastrobilformis
Amanita verna
Amanitavirosa
Amanitin
Amitraz
Amitriptyline;
see
also
Antidepressants;T
Tricyclic
antidepressants
971
Amphetamines
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Anemia
Heinz body
hemolytic
Anticoagulant rodenticides
toxicosis
Antidepressants
atypical antidepressants
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
nonselective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
selective serotonin reuptake iInhibitors
serotonin syndrome and
tricyclic antidepressants
Antidotes
Acepromazine
Antibodies
972
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab
Cross reactivity
Digoxin specific antibodies
Cross reactivity
Antivenin
Black widow spider
Coral snake
Crotalidae
Atipamezole
Atropine
Bicarbonate, sodium
Calcitonin, salmon
Calcium salts
Chelators
Calcium disodium EDTA
Deferoxamine
Dimercaprol
973
D-penicillamine
Succimer
Trientine
Chlorpromazine
Cyproheptadine
Dantrolene
Dapsone
Dextrose
Ethanol
Flumazenil
Functional
Folinic acid
Fomepizole
Glucagon
Hydroxycobalamin
Hyperbaric oxygen
Methocarbamol
974
Methylene blue
 N-acetylcysteine
Naloxone
Norepinephrine
Pamidronate
Pharmacologic
Pralidoxime
Protamine sulfate
Pyridostigmine
Pyridoxine
S-adenosyl-methionine
SAMe
Silymarin
Vitamin K
Yohimbine
Antifreeze see also Ethylene glycol; Propylene glycol
Antihistamines
975
toxicosis
Antivenin/antivenom
black widow spider
coral snake
pit viper
Apotosis, hepatic
Atipamezole
in amatraz toxicosis
Arsenic
Arteglasin
Artemisiaabsinthium
Asclepias app.,
Aspiration of toxicants
Aspirin
Asparagus spp.,
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Atropabelladonna
976
Atropine
antidotal use
in Bufo toxicosis
in Kalanchoe toxicosis
in muscarinic mushroom toxicosis
in organophosphorus and carbamate insecticide toxicosis
in toxicosis from cardiotoxic plants
contraindications
in amitraz-induced bradycardia
in isoxazole mushroom toxicosis
in phenylpropanolamine toxicosis
in pyrethroid toxicosis
test dose
toxicosis
Atypical antidepressants, see also Antidepressants
August lily, see Hosta spp.
Australian shepherd dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism
977
Avitrol, see 4-aminopyridine
Avocado, see Persea spp.
Azalea, see Rhododendron spp.
Baby's breath plant, see Gypsophilia paniculata
Baclofen
Barbiturates
for managing toxicoses
Bee sting, see Hymenepteran insects; Venom, apid (bee)
Begonia spp.
Benazepril
Benzenemethanol, see Benzyl alcohol
Benzodiazepines
Benzoid acid
Benzyl alcohol
Bermuda buttercup
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents
Bisaldolol
978
Bismuth subsalicylate
Bitter orange, see Citrus aurantium
Black widow spider
Borates
Border
collie
dogs, MDR1
1 Pglycoprotein
genetic
polymorphism
Boric acid, see Borates
Brake fl uid
Bread dough, raw
Brodifacoum
Bromadiolone
Bromethalin
decontamination recommendations
desmethylbromethalin
LD50
toxicosis
Brompheniramine
Brown recluse spider
979
Brunfelsia americana
Brunfelsia americana
Brunfelsia paucifl ora
Bryophyllum, see Kalanchoe spp.
Bunchberry, see Lantana spp
Bufo spp.,.
Bupropion
Butylene glycol
C-4 explosive
Caffeine
Calcifediol
Calcipotriene
Calcitonin, salmon
Calcitriol
Calcium channel blockers
Calcium cyanamide
Calcium homeostasis
980
Calcium oxalate crystalluria
Calcium, x phosphorus produc
Calculations
Calla lily, see Zantedeschia spp.
Camphor oil
Cancer
herbicide exposure and
lung cancer
Cane toad
Capsaicin
Capsicum spp.,
Captopril
Carbamate insecticides
Carbaryl
Carbofuran
Carbon monoxide
Cardamom oil
981
Cardiac glycoside
drugs
plants
Cardiovascular system
Anatomy
Injury
Mechanisms
Patterms
Physiology
Toxicants affecting
Angiotensin II antagonists
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents
Calcium channel blockers
Carbon monoxide
Cardicac glycosides
Cholecalciferol
Methylxanthines
982
Pimobendan
Sympathomimetic agents
Carnation oil
Carprofen, see also Nonsteroidal anti-infliammatory drugs
toxic dosages
Carrot seed oil
Castor bean plant, see Ricinus communis
Castor oil plant, see Ricinus communis Cats
amitraz toxicosis
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis
bromethalin toxicosis
decontamination recommendations
LD50
dermal reaction to pyrethrin-based sprays
lily toxicosis
organophosphorus toxicosis
poisoning statistics
983
permethrin toxicosis
sodium fl uoroacetate toxicosis
species differences
strychnine toxicosis
zinc phosphide toxicosis, LD50
Cedar oil
Centruroides spp.
Cetirizine
Chamaemelum nobile, see Chamomile
Chamomile
Charocal briquette
Chemical, interaction
additive
antagonistic
potentiation
synergistic
Chinaberry, see Melia azedarach
984
Chinese herbal medicine
Chlordane
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, see Organochlorine insecticides
Chlorophacinone
Chlorpheniramine
Chlorphenoxy herbicides, see Herbicides chlorphenoxy
Chlorpyrifos
intermediate syndrome in cats
toxicity of
Chocolate, see Methylxanthines
Cholecalciferol
in rodenticides
in vitamin supplements
toxicosis
Cholestasis
Christmas cactus plant, see Schlumbergera spp
Chrysanthemumspp
985
Cinnamon
Cinnamonmumspp.
Citalopramt;
seealsoSelective
serotonin
 reuptake
inhibitors
Citral
Citronella
Citrus spp.
C. aurantium
d-limonene
Clematis spp.,
Clomipraminet; see also Tricyclic antidepressants
Clotting factors
Clove, oil of
Clutch fl uid
Coagulation tests
Coagulopathy
Cocaine
Cocoa bean shell mulch
986
Colchicine
Colchicum autumnale
Collie dogs
macrolide sensitivity
 MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic polymorphism
Colorado River toad
Compos
Compound, see Sodium fluoroacetate
Convallaria majalis
Conversion factors
Copperheads
Coral snakes
Corticosteroids
In anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis
in bromethalin toxicosis
in cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis
in Hymenopteran stings
987
Coumarin
Crocus spp.
Crocus, autumn-blooming, see Colchicum autumnale
Crocus, spring-blooming, see Crocus spp.
Crotalus spp.; see also Snakes, pit viper; Venom, pit viper
Cyanide
plants
Cyanogenic glycosides
Cycas revoluta
Cycas spp
Cycasin
Cyclamen spp.,
Cymbopgum nardus, see Citronella
Cytoskeletal disruption
Daffodil plant, see Narcissus spp.
Database, emergency
blood gases
988
blood urea nitrogen
glucose, blood
hematocri
hematology
radiography
serum chemistry
total solids
urinalysis
Day lily, see Hemerocallis spp.
DD
Decongestan; see also Pseudoephedrine
imidazoline
Decontamination
activated charcoal
contraindications
emesis
apomorphine
989
contraindicated emetics
hydrogen peroxide
xylaxzine
enemas
dermal
dilution
cathartics
bulk
osmotic
sorbitol
saline
magnesium sulfate
sodium sulfate
gastric lavage
inhalation
ocular
intravenous lipids
990
DEET, see Diethyltoluamide
Definitions
acute toxicity
chronic toxicity
dosage
dose
hazard
LD50
lethal dose 50%
lethal dose
median lethal dose
no observable effect level
NOEL
parts per million
subacute toxicity
subchronic toxicity
threshold dose
991
toxican
toxicity
toxin
Deicing salts
Delayed reaction
Deoxynivalenol (DON)
Deracoxib, toxic dosages see also Nonsteroidal antiinfl
ammatorydrugs
Desert rose, see Adenium obesum
Desmethylbromethalin
Desvenlafaxine, see also Nonselective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
Detergents
Developmental toxicity
Diazinon
Dichlorvos
Dicofol
Dicoumarol
992
Dieffenbachia spp..
Dieldrin
Diethyltoluamide (DEET)
Difenacoum
Difethialone
Disocyanate adhesives
Digitalis purpurea
Digitoxin
Digoxin
Digoxin immune Fab
Diltiazem
Dimenhydrinate
Dinotefuran
Diphacinone
Diphenhydramine
Disseminated
intravascular
coagulopathy
see
Coagulopathy
Disulfoton (disyston)
993
D-limonene, see Citrus spp.
Dogs
2,4-D
amitraz toxicosis
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis
bromethalin toxicosis
decontamination recommendations
LD60
Brunfelsia toxicosis
cancer, herbicides and
cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis
dermal hypersensitivity to pyrethroids
grape & raisin toxicosis
macrocyclic lactone parasiticide susceptibility
MDR1-defective
metaldehyde toxicosis
poisoning statistics
994
strychnine toxicosis
xylitol toxicosis
Doramectin; see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Dose-response
individual
population
Doxepin; see also Tricyclic antidepressants
Dynamite, see Explosives
Easter lily,seeLilium longiflorum
Echinaceapurpurea
ED50
Edema
brain
facial and paw
lung
myelin
Efudex, see 5-Fluorouracil
995
Elapids
Enalapril
Endectocide
Endrin
Enterohepatic recirculation
Environmental
Protection
Agency (EPA, US EPA,
USEPA)
Information on pesticide poisonings
registration number
EPA,see Environmental Protection Agency
Ephedra
Ephedra sinica
Ephedrine
wnann unumaadidg
Eprinomectin, see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Escitalopram,
，see alsoSelective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
Essential oils
996
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)
for treatment of ethylene glycol toxicosis
Eucalyptus oil
Eucalyptus sp
Euphorbiapulcherrima
Explosives
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT)
dynamite
pentaerythrityl tetranitrate (PE TN)
plastic explosives
Exposure
amount
duration
frequency
route
site
997
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Ac
Fentanyl
Fertilizers
Fire ants
Firelogs
Fireworks
sparklers
Watusi (dancing) fi recracker
Flare, signaling or illuminating
Fluoxetine; see also Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Food and Drug Administration (US FDA)
Free radicals
Fungicides
Furosemide
in bromethalin toxicosis
in cholecalciferol toxicosis
False sago palm, see Cycas spp.
998
Fern palm, see Cycas spp.
Foxglove plant, see Digitalis purpurea
Franciscan rain tree plant, see Brunfelsia americana
Fumonisin
GABA
Garlic, see Allium spp.
German chamomile, see Chamomile
German shepherd dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism
Genetic polymorphism
Genetic testing
Geriatric patients
Glimepiride
Glipizide
Gloriosa superba
Glory lily, see Gloriosa superba
Glue, expanding, see disocyanate adhesives
Glyburide
999
Glycine
antagonism in strychnine toxicosis
Glycols; see also Ethylene glycol; Propylene glycol
Glycosides
anthraquinone
cardiac
cyanogenic
Golden chain tree, see Laburnum anagyroids
Golden rain tree, see Laburnum anagyroids
Gorilla glue
Grapes
GRAS (generally regarded as safe)
Grayanotoxins
Griffonia simplicifolia
Guarana, see Paullinia cupana
Guinea pigs
desmethylbromethalin and toxicity
1000
LD50
Gypsophilia paniculata
Gyromitra spp
Hemerocallis spp.
Half-life
Hematopoietic system
toxicants affecting
Heptachlor
Hepatobiliary System
anatomy
healing and repair
cirrhosis
mechanisms of toxicologic injury
calcium homeostasis disruption
cholestasis
cytoskeletal disruption
free radical injury
1001
idiosyncratic reactions
mitochondrial injury
physiology
patterns of injury
apotosis
hepatic lipidosis
hepatocellular degeneration
necrosis
zones
toxicants affecting
Herbi cides
2,4-D
chlophenoxy herbicides
paraqua
History taking
agent information
client information
1002
clinical status
environmental information
exposure information
medical records
patient information
patient presentation
sudden death
Holly, see Ilex spp.
Hops plant, see Humulus lupulus
Hosta spp.
Humulus lupulus
Hyacinthus spp
Hydroxycoumarins
Hymenopeteran insects
Hypercalcemia
in cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis
Hyperglycemia
1003
in amitraz toxicosis
in black widow spider envenomation
in sodium fl uoroacetate toxicosis
Hypericum perforatum, see St. John's Wor
Hyperkalemia
In cardiac glycoside toxicosis
Hyperphosphatemia
Hyperthermia
in castor bean toxicosis
in fl uoroacetate toxicosis
in hops toxicosis
in metaldehyde toxicosis
in mushroom toxicosis
in serotonin syndrome
Hypocalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemic drugs
1004
metformin
sulfonylureas
Ibuprofen, toxic dosages
see also Nonsteroidal antinfl
ammatory drugs
Idiosyncratic reaction
Illicit drug
testing
Ilex spp.
Immediate reation
Imidacloprid
Imipramine, see also Tricyclic antidepressants
Information resources
computer databases
diagnostic laboratories
intermet sites
peer-reviewed jourmals
1005
poison control centers
textbooks
Indian common mallow, see Sida cordifolia
Inhalation
Insoluble calcium oxalates, see oxalates insoluble
Integumentary system
toxicants affecting
Intoxication
Incidence
Iris spp.,
Intermediate syndrome in organophosphorus toxicosis
Intravenous lipids
Iron
percentage determination
Isopropanol (isopropyl alcohol); see also Alcohol
Ivermectin; see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Japanese pieris plant, see Pieris japonica
1006
Japanese showy lily, see Lilium lancifolium
Japanese Yew, see Taxus
Kalanchoe spp.
Kalmia spp.
Kepone
Kidney
failure, acute
in cholecalciferol toxicosis
in ethylene glycol toxicosis
in grape/raisin toxicosis
in lily toxicosis
in NSAID toxicosis
in ochratoxin toxicosis
in paraquat toxicosis
failure, chronic
mineralization
in cholecalciferol toxicosis
1007
tubules, injury to
from oxalate crystals
tubules, regeneration of
Laboratory
diagnostic
testing
toxican
sample types
antemortem
postmortem
Laburnumanagyroids
Lady-of-the-night plant, see Brunfelsia americana
Lantana spp.
Latrodectusspp.
Lead
Lemon oil
Lepiota spp.
1008
Lilium spp.
L. candidum
L. lancifolium
L. longifl orum
L. pardalinum
L.speciosum
L. tigrinum
Linalool, see Citrus spp.
Lindane
Lipidosis, hepatic
Lisinopril
Liver, see Hepatobiliary System
damage, acute
in acetaminophen toxicosis
in cycad toxicosis
in lantana toxicosis
in mushroom toxicosis
1009
in paraquat toxicosis
in xylitol toxicosis
dysfunction
in 4-aminopyridine toxicosis
in metaldehyde toxicosis
lipidosis
mechanisms of injury
necrosis
patterns of injury
Livestock protection collar (LPC)
Longhaired whippet dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism
Loratadine
Loxosceles spp.
Lung fibrosis in paraquat toxicosis
Lycopersiconlycopersicum
Macadamia spp.
Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides (macrolides)
1010
dog breed sensitivity to
MDR1 P-glycoprotein and
mechanism of action
toxicosis
Macrolides, see macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Macrozamin
Ma huang
Malignant hyperthermia
Managemen
initial assessmen
central nervous system
renal system
respiratory system
testing, toxicologic
triage, telephone
Mannitol
in bromethalin toxicosis
1011
Marijuana
Matches
Matricaria recutita, see Chamomile
Melaleuca alternifolia, see Melaleuca
Melaleuca
Melia azedarach
Mentha puleguim, see Pennyroyal oil
Menthol
Metabolism, see Toxicokinetics
Metaldehyde
Metallothionein
Metformin
Methanol
Methemoglobinemia
Methocarbamol
in 2,3-D toxicosis
in feline permethrin toxicosis
1012
in metaldehyde toxicosis
Methomyl
Methoxychlor
Methyl alcohol, see Methanol
Methylxanthines
toxicosis
Micruroides envenomation
Micrurus envenomation
Mineralization, soft tissue
Miniature Australian shepherd dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein
genetic polymorphism
Milbemycin
oxime;
see
also
  Macrocyclic
lactone
parasiticides
Mirex
Mirtazapine
Mitochondrial injury
Mock azalea, see Adenium obesum
Monoamine
oxidase
inhibitors
(MAOI)
see
also
Antidepressants
1013
Monomethylhydrazine
Morning-noon-and-night plant, see Brunfelsia pauciflora
Morphine
Mother-of-millions plant, see Kalanchoe spp.
Mountain laurel plant, see Kalmia spp.
Moxidectin; see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Mulch
Muscarinic signs
Musculoskeletal system
toxicants affecting
Mushrooms
gastrointestinal irritan
gyromitrin
hallucinogenic
hepatotoxic
isoxazole
muscarinic
1014
muscimol
treatment of ingestion
Mycotoxins
pet food associated
nephrotoxic
tremorgenic
N-acetylcysteine
Naphthalene
Naproxen; see also Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Narcissus spp.
National Pesticide Information Center (NPIC)
Nefazodone
Neonicotinoid insecticides
Neriumoleander
Nervous system
 anatomy
healing and repair
1015
injury
mechanisms
patterms
Physiology
toxicants affecting
Nicotiana spp
Nicotine
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)
Nicotinic signs
Nightshade plant, see Solanum spp.
Nilfedipine
Nimodipine
Nitenpyram
Nonselective serotoin reuptake inhibitors (NSSRI), see
also Antidepressants
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Nortryptyline; see also Tricyclic antidepressants
NSAID, see Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
1016
Ochratoxin
Old English sheepdogs, MDR
Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism
Onions, see Allium spp.
Opioids (Opiates)
Orange, oil of
Organochlorine insecticides (OCs)
Organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides
Organophosphorus induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN)
Ormamental peppers, see Capsicum spp
Oxalates; see also Ethylene glycol
insoluble
soluble
Oxalis spp.
Pamidronate (pamidronic acid)
Paradichlorobenzene
1017
Paralysis
Paroxetine; see also Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
Paulliniacupana
PE-4 explosive, see Explosives
Pediatric patients
Pennyroyal oil
Penthrite, see Explosives
Permethrin
Peppermint oil
Peppers, chili, see Capsicum spp.
Peppers, ornamental, see Capsicum spp.
Persea spp.
Persian lilac, see Melia azedarach
Persian violet, see Cyclamen spp.
Perthane
Pesticide, definition of
1018
PETN explosive, see Explosives
Pet Poison Helpline
Petroleum-based products
P-glycoprotein,  see  Macrocyclic  lactone parasiticides,
MDR1 P-glycoprotein and
Phenol carbinol, see Benzyl alcohol
Phenyl carbinol, see Benzyl alcohol
Phenylmethanol, see Benzyl alcohol
Phenylmethylalcohol, see Benzyl alcohol
Phenylpropanolamine (PPA)
Phenylzine; see also Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Phenytoin
Philodendronspp
Phosme
Phosphine gas
Phosphorus
serum
yellow
1019
Pieris japonica
Pimobendan
Pindone
Pine oil
PIVKA see Proteins induced by vitamin K1 Antagonism
Poinsettia plant, see Euphorbia pulcherrima
Poisoning
incidence
Potassium benzoate, see Benzyl alcohol
Potassium chlorate
Potatoes, green
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM, protopam chloride)
Propoxur
Propylene glycol
Proteins induced by vitamin K1 antagonism (PIVKA)
Prothrombin time (PT)
Protoanemonin
1020
Protopam chloride, see pralidoxime chloride
Prunus spp.
Pseudoephedrine
Psilocybe spp.
Psilocybin
Pulmonary fibrosis, see Lung, fibrosis
Pulmonary system
anatomy
cancer
healing and repair
emphysema
fibrosis
hyperplasia, epithelial
injury
mechanisms
patterms
particle deposition
1021
toxicants affecting
Pyrethrins, see Pyrethroid insecticides
Pyrethroid insecticides
Pyrethrum
Raisins
Rattlesnakes
Rats
RDX explosive, see Explosives
Recluse spiders
Red sage, see Lantana spp.
Reproductive toxicity
Rheum rhabarbarum
Rhododendronspp
Rhubarb,seeRheum rhabarbarum
Ricin
Ricinuscommunis
Roman chamomile, see Chamomile
1022
Rubrum lily, see Lilium lancifolium
Sago palm, see Cycas revoluta
Salicylates
Samples
toxicologic testing
environmental
antemortem
postmortem
Sandalwood oil
Saponins
Sassafras oil
Schlumbergera spp
Scorpions
Scotch labunum, see Laburnum anagyroids
Scottish terrier dogs, bladder cancer
Seizures
in drug/herbal toxicoses
1023
in food toxicoses
in herbal toxicoses
in insecticide toxicoses
in metal or mineral toxicosis
in pesticide toxicoses
in plant toxicoses
Selamectin; see also Macrocyclic lactone parasiticides
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) see also
Antidepressants
Selegiline; see also Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Serotonin syndrome
Serotonin
Sertraline; see also Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Seville orange, see Citrus aurantium
Shamrock
Shetland sheepdogs, MDR1  Pglycoprotein 
 genetic
polymorphism
Shrubverbena,see Lantana spp
1024
Sibutramine
Sida cordifolia
Sistrurus spp.
SLUDDE signs
Snakes; see also Venom
elapids
envenomation
pit vipers
snakebite severity scoreshee
Sodium benzoate, see Benzyl alcohol
Sodium fluoroacetate
Solanum spp.
Solenopsis spp
Sorrel plan
Sow's bread, see Cyclamen spp.
Sparklers
Spathiphyllumspp.
1025
Spearmint, oil of
Spiders
SSRI, see Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
St. John's Wor
Strychnine
Sudden death
investigation
sample collection
samplesubmission
toxicants causing
Sulfonylurea diabetic medications
Sweet clover, moldy
Sympathomimetics
Taxines
Taxus spp.
TD50
Tea tree oil, see Melaleuca
1026
Terbufos
Testing, see Laboratory
Texas umbrella tree, see Melia azedarach
Theobromine; see also Methylxanthines
Therapeutic index
Thuja occidentalis
Tiger lily, see Lilium tigrinum
TNT explosive, see Explosives
Toads
Tobacco,seeNicotiana spp.
Tolazamide
Tolerance
Tomato plant, see Lycopersicon lycopersicum
Toxaphene
Toxican
classification
Toxicokinetics
1027
absorption
distribution, metabolism
bioactivation
elimination
Phase I
Phase II
Traveler's joy, see Clematis spp.
Trazodone
Tree tobacco, see Nicotiana spp.
Triage
telephone
Trichlorfon
Tricholomamuscarium
Tricyclic antidepressants; see also Antidepressants
Triterpenoids
Tulipa spp.
Urinary system
1028
anatomy
healing and repair
injury
mechanisms
patterns
physiology
US EPA, see Environmental Protection Agency
Valerian root (Valerian)
Venom
Apid (bee)
elapid snakes
Fire ant
Mojave A rattlesnake
pit viper
recluse spider
scorpion
Vespid (wasp)
1029
widow spider
Venlafaxine
Verapamil
Virgin's bower, see Clematis spp.
Vitamin
ingestion
unit conversion
Vitamin D see Cholecalciferol
Vitamin K1
Vomitoxin
Waller dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic polymorphism
Warfarin
Wasp sting, see Hymenopteran insects; Venom; Vespid
Water moccasin; see also Snakes; Venom
Watusi (dancing) firecracker
White Swiss shepherd dogs, MDR1 Pglycoprotein genetic
polymorphism
Widow spiders; see also Venom
1030
Wild sage, see Lantana spp.
Wintergreen, oil of
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation
Working dogs, and explosives
Xylitol
Yellow sage,seeLantana spp
Yesterday-and-today plant, see Brunfelsia pauciflora
Yesterday-today-tomorrow plant, see Brunfelsia pauciflora
Yew, see Taxus
Yohimbine
Zamia spp.
Zantedeschiaspp
Zearalenone
Zinc
Zinc phosphide
1031
Keep up with
critical fields
Wouldyouliketoreceiveup-to-dateinformation
onourbooks,journals and databasesin the areas
that interestyou,directtoyourmailbox?
JointheWileye-mailservice-aconvenientway
toreceiveupdatesand exclusivediscountoffers
onproducts from us.
Simplyvisitwww.wiley.com/email
and register online
Wewon't bombardyouwithemails
and well only email you with
informationthat'srelevanttoyou.
We will ALWAYSrespectyour e-mail
privacy and NEVER sell,rent,or
exchangeyoure-maileddresstoany
cutsidecompany.Fulldetailsonour
privacy policy can be found online.
BLACKWELL
www.wiley.com/email
1032