10
TH
EDITION
VETERINARY
Anaesthesia
LW HALL
KWCLARKE
CMTRIM
W.B.SAUNDERS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
W. B. Saunders
An imprint of Harcourt Publishers Limited
OHarcourt Publishers Limited 2001
The right of L.W. Hall, K.W. Clarke and C.M. Trim to be identified as the authors of this work
have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without either the prior permission of the publishers (Harcourt Publishers Limited, Harcourt Place, 32
Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY), or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P OLP.
First edition published in 1941 by J.G. Wright
Second edition 1947 (J.G. Wright)
Third edition 1948 (J.G. Wright)
Fourth edition 1957 (J.G. Wright)
Fifth edition 1961 (J.G. Wright and L.W. Hall)
Sixth edition 1966 (L.W. Hall)
Seventh edition 1971 (L.W. Hall), reprinted 1974 and 1976
Eighth edition 1983 (L.W. Hall and K.W. Clarke), reprinted 1985 and 1989
Ninth edition 1991 (L.W. Hall and K.W. Clarke)
ISBN 0 7020 2035 4
Cataloguing in Publication Data:
Catalogue records for this book are available from the British Library and the US Library of Congress.
Note:
 Medical knowledge is constantly changing. As new information becomes available, changes in treatment,
 procedures, equipment and the use of drugs become necessary. The authors and the publishers have
taken care to ensure that the information given in this textis accurate and up to date. However,
readers are strongly advised to confirm that the information, especially with regard to drug usage,
complies with the latest legislation and standards of practice.
The
publishe's
policy Is fo use
paper manufactured
from sustainable forests
Printed in England
Preface
This, the 1Oth edition of Veterinary Anaesthesia, is a direct descendant of Anaesthesia & Narcosis of Arimals &
Birds by Sir Frederick Hobday published in 1915 by Bailliere, Tindall and Cox. The 1st edition of Veterinary
Araesthesia, which had marked similarities to Hobday's book, was written by Professor J.G. Wright and
published in 1942. Wright's intention was to 'incorporate in a small volume the present status of know-
ledge on anaesthesia in the domestic animals'. This he accomplished in 198 small pages with fewer than
100 references to publications - including many to his own work. Since then tremendous advances have
been made and now almost every week that passes sees new publications relating to veterinary anaesthe-
sia and its related subjects. Thus, we have had to acknowledge the impossibility of including a comprehen-
sive bibliography in this edition, but we have selected references which should provide a useful
mtroduction to the literature. In addition, we have indicated where attention should be given to material
published before computerized databases became available because, despite the increasing complexity of
anaesthesia, simple methods also work.
Although extensively revised, the general concepts remain as in previous editions. The aim is still to
provide a text for undergraduate veterinary students, a reference work for veterinarians in general prac-
tice and laboratory scientists, and a stimulating introduction to the subject for those wishing to specialize
in veterinary anaesthesia through the examinations of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, the
American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists and the European College of Veterinary Anaesthesia.
 Because we believe that clinical anaesthesia encompasses much more than an exercise in applied pharma-
cology, emphasis is still on the effects of clinically useful doses of drugs and of practical techniques in an-
imal patients, rather than on pharmacological effects demonstrated in healthy experimental animals in
laboratories.
We wish to express our appreciation of the invaluable help given by Mrs Lorraine Leonard, librarian of
the University of Cambridge Veterinary School, and the librarians at the Royal College of Veterinary
Surgeons in tracing older references. Mr Stephen Freane of the Royal Veterinary College gave much assis-
tance with computer-generated figures. Finally, our warmest thanks are due to the publishers for their
patience, and especially to Deborah Russell whose encouragement ensured completion of the manuscript.
L.W. Hall
K.W. Clarke
C.M. Trim
2000
General considerations
'pain is the conscious perception of a noxious stimu-
INTRODUCTION
lus' two conditions may be envisaged: general
The clinical discipline concerned with the
anaesthesia where the animal is unconscious and
reversible production of insensibility to pain is
kmown as 'anaesthesia', a term coined by Oliver
gesia or local anaesthesia where the animal, although
Wendell Holmes in 1846 to describe a new phe-
seemingly aware of its surroundings, shows
-jeid e Aeuassa si h prom allus e u uouaou
diminished or no perception of pain.
tical subject and although becoming increasingly
General anaesthesia is a reversible, controlled
based on science it still retains some of the attrib-
drug-induced intoxication of the central nervous
utes of an art. In veterinary practice anaesthesia
system in which the patient neither perceives nor
has to satisfy two requirements: (i) the humane
 recalls noxious or painful stimuli. Analgesia may
handling of animals and (ii) technical efficiency.
be produced by centrally acting drugs such as
Humanitarian considerations dictate that gentle
handling and restraint should always be em-
unconsciousness or by substances having a local,
transient, selective paralytic action on sensory
the struggling animal from possible injury.
nerves and nerve endings (local anaesthetics). The
Technical efficiency is not restricted to facilitation
analgesia produced by these latter substances may
of the procedure to be carried out on the animal, it
be classified as local or regional, applied as they
must also take into account the protection of per-
are by topical application, subdermal or submu-
sonnel from bites, scratches or kicks as well as the
cous infiltration and by peripheral, paravertebral
risks of accidental or deliberate self-injection with
or spinal perineural injection.
dangerous or addictive drugs. Moreover, today it
The anaesthetist aims to prevent awareness of
is considered that personnel need protection from
pain, provide immobility and, whenever this is
the possible harmful effects of breathing low con-
needed, relaxation of the skeletal muscles. These
centrations of inhalation anaesthetic agents.
objectives must be achieved in such a way that the
While anaesthesia has precisely the same mean-
safety of the patient is not jeopardized during the
ing as when it was first coined, i.e. the state in
perianaesthetic period. Many animals fear and
which an animal is insensible to pain resulting
resist the restraint necessary for the administration
from the trauma of surgery, it is now used much
of anaesthetics thereby increasing not only the
more widely and can be compared to terms such as
technical difficulties of administration but also
'illness' and‘shock’which are too non-specific to
the dangers inseparable from their use. A fully
be of real value. Starting with the premise that
conscious animal forced to breathe a strange and
2 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
possibly pungent vapour struggles to escape and
nociceptors' but he realized that impulses in them
s   n
would not necessarily lead to pain sensation
the risks associated with the induction of anaes-
unless the central nervous system accepted them
thesia. For this reason, veterinary anaesthetists
 amd conveyed them to a pain-perceiving region of
often employ sedative drugs to facilitate the com
the brain. The nociceptor fibres were found to end
pletion of general anaesthesia as well as to over-
 preferentially on cells in laminae 1, 2 and 5 of the
come the natural fear of restraint inherent in
dorsal horn and from there impulses were be-
animals and to control any tendency to move sud--
lieved to reach the thalamus by way of spinothala-
denly during operations under local analgesia.
mic fibres which ran in the ventrolateral white
In addition, the veterinary anaesthetist must
matter of the spinal cord. From the thalamus
recognize that not only does the response of each 
impulses were said to reach a site of pure pain sen-
species of animal to the various anaesthetics differ
 sation (pain centre) in the association areas of the
due to anatomical and physiological differences,
cerebral cortex.
but that there is often a marked variation in
response between breeds within each particular
Afferent mechanisms
 species. Another factor which must be considered
is that in many parts of the world veterinarians
 In recent years pain studies have resulted in an
must perform tasks without highly skilled assist-
almost explosive expansion of knowledge relating
ance and when employing general anaesthesia,
to pain mechanisms in the body and have shown
after inducing it themselves, have to depute its
that these earlier ideas must be abandoned in
maintenance to a nurse or even to a lay assistant.
favour of an interlocking, dynamic series of bio-
o    o  a i i
logical processes which need still further invest-
including the UK, the delegation of tasks related to
 igation. It is apparent that in the periphery the old
anaesthesia to an urtrained person may in law be
 picture of fixed property nociceptor cells in dam-
considered negligent if a mishap occurs). Thus, the
aged tissue passively detecting the products of cell
continued development in recent years of safe,
breakdown does not accurately represent what is
simple, easily applied techniques of general anaes-
 actually happening. The tissue breakdown prod-
thesia and regional analgesia, together with the
ucts have been shown to have both direct and in-
institution of nurse and anaesthetic technician
direct effects on sensory afferent nerves. The role
training programmes, are particularly welcome
of unmyelinated sensory fibres themselves in
 inflammation as proposed by Lewis (1942) is, how-
ever, now well established. Leucocytes attracted
PAIN
into damaged tissues secrete cytokines which have
both powerful systemic and local effects. Sub-
stances such as nerve growth factor synthetized
CLASSIC TEACHING RELATING TO PAIN
locally in damaged tissue are also involved in pain
 As anaesthesia is invoked to prevent appreciation
production (McMahon et al., 1995). The sym-
 of pain, any study of the discipline of anaesthesia
pathetic nerves play a role in the inflammatory
must be related to an understanding of what con-
process, new α adrenergic, bradykinin and opiate
stitutes pain. The old classic teaching on pain
sa- go dno e are ara pue reade sroidanar
involved a hard-wired, modality specific, line spe-
which seem to be completely silent in normal
cific, single pathway which coupled stimulus with
tissue but which are activated by ongoing
pain sensation. Anatomists labelled the axons and
inflammation.
nerve cells according to this single relay transmis-
It is now also clear that certain types of pain are
produced by afferents with large diameters out-
fine myelinated (A8) and unmyelinated (C-fibre)
 side the range of nociceptors. There is evidence
afferents which possessed such high thresholds for
 sa  rs 
stimulation that they only responded to noxious
 develops in healthy tissue surrounding injury or in
stimuli. Sherrington (1900) termed these structures
distant tissue to which pain is referred, can be
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 3
mediated by the thick tactile sensory fibres.These
tors, also has a major role in the spinal modulation
 -rou ui sasmdui Aq paxo aoid Aiqeqoid are suied
 of nocioception. Opioid receptors and α2 adreno-
mal low-threshold afferents entering the central
 ceptors are present in laminae 1 and 2 of the dorsal
nervous system, where they encounter highly
horn, the area involved in the reception and modu-
abnormal central nervous circuits that amplify or
lation of incoming nocioceptive signals, and their
reroute the signals of normally innocuous events.
density and, in the case of opioid, the proportion of
The afferent fibres convey information to the
each type of receptor differ at different levels of the
central nervous system in two quite different
spinal cord (Bouchenafa & Livingston, 1987, 1989;
ways. Sensory fibres which have been changed by
Khan et al., 1999). The density of opioid receptors is
their contact with damaged or inflamed tissue dis-
labile, increasing in response to chronic pain
charge impulses in a characteristic spatial and tem-
(Brandt & Livingston, 1990; Dickenson, 1995), and
poral pattern. The second way is by transport of
changing with age (Marsh et al., 1997).
chemicals from the tissues along axons towards
 In both brain and spinal cord, a new receptor
the dorsal root ganglion. In response to changes in
has been identified which although sharing a high
these relatively slowly transported chemicals the
degree of sequence similarity with opioid recep-
chemistry and metabolism of the cytoplasm and
tors is not activated by opioids. This receptor was
cell membrane, including its central terminal
named the ORL-1 (opioid receptor-like) receptor
arborizations, is altered. This consequently affects
Subsequently the endogenous peptide ligand for
the post-synaptic cells of the central nervous
ORL-1 was identified and named orphanin FQ or
system.
nociceptin. This peptide has a widespread distri-
bution throughout the nervous system. Despite its
Pain and the central nervous system
structural similarity to opioid peptides, nociceptin
Cl shadde (pazisauss uaaq mou s uum)
The first cells of the central nervous system on
which the afferents terminate are not exclusively
 ways, and it is thought that these pathways might 
simply relay cells. They form integrated groups
 be involved in the modulation of a broad range of
with both summation and differentiation func-
 physiological and behavioural functions (Meunier,
tions as well as inhibitory and facilitatory mech-
1997; Darland & Grandy, 1998). In the midbrain the
anisms. The facilitatory functions appear to
[aaal aierapou ci asuap e seq adi roidasai I-To
become active following noxious inputs and this
of expression in the periaqueductal gray matter, an
results in the development of a hyperalgesic state
area known to be involved with nocioceptive pro-
(Treede et al., 1992; Woolf & Doubell, 1994). In
cessing, and where electrical stimulation or opioid
addition, there are also powerful inhibitory sys-
agonist agents will produce intense analgesia
tems in this region and their failure may contribute
(Meunier, 1997; Darland & Grandy, 1998). In the
to hyperalgesia.
spinal cord of the rat, ORL-1 receptors are found in
The modulator role of the spinal cord in trans-
the superficial layers (laminae 1 and 2) of the dor-
sal horn, in areas similar to those where opioid
to the brain has been known for many years, and
receptors are located. The density of neurones
new evidence as to the complexity of the system
expressing the ORL-1 receptor varies in different
 and both the excitatory and inhibitory influence of
areas of the spinal cord. The most recent work
many different neurotransmitter substances
(unpublished results quoted by Darland &
 emerges continually (Dickenson, 1995, Marsh
Grandy, 1998) suggests that these neurones are
et al., 1997). Knowledge of these pathways forms
internuncial neurones, and do not themselves
the basis for the provision of pain relief by the
project forward to the thalamus.
epidural or intrathecal administration of analgesic
The position of nociceptin in relation to anal-
drugs. To date the opioid pathways remain the
 gesia is still unclear. From the anatomical locations
most important system involved in the production 
of the ORL-1 receptors it was anticipated that noci-
of analgesia at the spinal level, although noradren-
ceptin would cause analgesia by both spinal and
aline, the natural ligand acting at Q2 adrenocep-
 supraspinal mechanisms. In the whole animal,
4PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
nociceptin does provide analgesia through spinal
and until very recently methods to analyse brain
mechanisms, as intrathecal injection in rats pro-
 systems in a relatively non-invasive manner did
duced a dose-dependent reduction of a spinal
not exist.
nocioceptive flexor reflex, and produced beha-
vioural antinocioception in the tail flick test. These
Investigation of brain systems involved in pain
effects were not accompanied by sedation or
motor impairment, and could not be reversed
Even the techniques now available to study activ-
by antagonists of the opioid, α2 adrenoceptor ag-
ity in the brain have severe limitations. Single
onist or GABA-A receptors, thus suggesting that
they acted through a mechanism as yet unknown
positron emission tomography (PET) and func-
(Xu et al., 1996). However in rats and mice noci-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) provide
ceptin given by intracerebroventricular injection
 indirect measures of local brain activity. Direct
unexpectedly antagonized the analgesic effects of
measures of neural activity can be obtained from
stress, opioids and electroacupuncture, thus sug-
 magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroen-
gesting that the supraspinal actions of the peptide
cephalography (EEG). A critical review of all these
were ant-analgesic. The apparent allodynia and
 techniques as applied to human subjects is that of
hyperalgesia induced by the supraspinal effects of
Berman (1995).
nociceptin can be blocked by another naturally
SPECT, PET and fMRI measure changes in
occurring peptide, which has been termed nocist-
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) and the evi-
atin (Okuda-Ashitaka εt al., 1998; Darland &
 dence that links rCBF to increased neural activity
Grandy, 1998). Despite the complexity of the path-
 as originally proposed by Roy and Sherrington
ways involving the modulation of pain by noci-
(1890) is now well established. However, aspointed
ceptin, interest continues in this field. Recent work
out by Berman (1995) there are important limita-
has concentrated on the production of antagonists
tions to the usefulness of these techniques.
to nociceptin, as theoretically these may provide
 Temporal and spacial resolution are poor, being
analgesia by supraspinal mechanisms, and there-
measured in tens of seconds and several millime-
fore be more suitable as analgesic drugs in the
 tres, while the final images are produced after mul-
practical situation (Meunier, 1997). When com-
tiple processing steps on large data sets sometimes
pared with opioid analgesics, a major potential
obtained by pooling data from several subjects.
advantage of nociceptin-based compounds is that,
MEG is limited to the cortical grey matter, the tech-
to date, they have not been seen to cause behavi-
nique is very costly and requires a specially shielded
our suggestive of euphoria or dysphoria, and
environment because the magnetic fields pro-
therefore have the potential to become analgesics
duced by the brain are of the order of 10-13 Tesla,
with limited tendency for abuse.
 compared with 5x10-5 Tesla for the earth's mag-
Ihncreased understanding of the activities of the
netic field. The EEG has well known limitations of
peripheral and first central cells has not been
 complexity due to the difficulties inherent in accur-
 accompanied by similar advances in knowledge of
ately knowing the shape and conductivity of the
the functioning of the deeper parts of the nervous
different tissues.
system. There is considerable new knowledge of
It must be said that the application of functional
the way in which the brainstem exerts a descend-
 neuroimaging to pain is still of little value to the
ing control of the receptivity of the dorsal horn
 anaesthetist. There is much disagreement between
cells (Stamford, 1995), but so far there is no under-
investigators and the only reliable conclusions
standing of the circumstances in which these con-
 seem to be that changes in activity in regions of the
trols come into operation. The old idea of a
di- and telencephalon are associated with pain
dedicated, localized pain centre is quite untenable
 perception. These facts have been known from
because apart from massive excision of the input
 other research methods for many years, some of
structures, no discrete lesion in the brain has ever
them for more than a century, so that to date ima-
been shown to produce long-lasting analgesia.
 ging methods have done little more than repro-
Thus it is necessary to analyse a distributed system
duce older findings. However, as these new,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 5
inflammation and hyperalgesia at the site of the
become established they promise to increase our
wound; the analgesic methods have not been con-
kmowledge of cerebral pain mechanisms.
tinued into this period. Moreover, conventional
postoperative analgesia with local anaesthetics or
opioids may not provide total C-afferent block
CONTROL OF PAIN
during surgery.
In experimental studies, acute pain behaviour or
 In human subjects it is useful to define pain as
hyperexcitability of dorsal horn neurones may be
that state that disappears when treated for pain. It
eliminated or red uced if the afferent input is pre-
would, therefore, seem useful to call a drug an
vented from reaching the central nervous system
analgesic for an animal if it appears to ameliorate
by pre-injury local anaesthetic block of afferent
the reaction of an animal to what in man would be
fibres or by dampening of the excitability of the
perceived as pain. However, it is most important
central nervous system with opioids before it
to be certain that the treatment has not merely pre-
receives an input from nociceptors (Woolf &
vented the animal from displaying the sign used
Wall, 1986; Dickenson & Sullivan, 1987). Similar
by the observer to connote pain in that arimal. An
antinociceptive procedures are less effective when
extreme example would be to paralyse the animal
applied post-injury (Woolf & Wall, 1986a; Coderre
with a neuromuscular blocking drug. Abolition of
et al., 1990). As a result, the importance of 'timing'
a clinical sigm may be even more subtle. For ex-
of the application of analgesic methods has been
ample, neurectomy is commonly used to prevent a
suggested as a potential major factor in the treat-
horse from limping. In man this technique is
ment of postoperative pain and the experimental
kmown to lead to Charcot joints and a deafferenta-
studies would indicate a valuable role for pre-
tion syndrome, two signs that the unfortunate
horse may not be able to exhibit. Even in man,
ative pain.
a1e aiaut asnesaq isal paajueieng e jou st Adeiau
 In contrast to the experimental findings, several
 intractable pains that fail to respond to any known
dinical studies in man (the only species where the
therapy. There is no obvious reason to suppose
duration and severity of pain can be relatively eas-
that similar conditions do not exist in animals.
ily established) have so far failed to demonstrate
Furthermore, because of the differing neurotrans-
any marked superiority of pre-emptive analgesia.
 mitters and structures and behavioural repertoires
Only three studies have been somewhat positive in
it could be that effective analgesics for human sub-
finding either a delay in request from the patient for
jects are not necessarily effective in all animals
additional analgesics or a reduction in the need for
(Wall, 1992).
postoperative analgesics (Katz et al., 1992; Ejlersen 
 Ht must be concluded that before clinical recom-
et al., 1992; Richmond et al., 1993). Although it must
 mendations of pre-emptive analgesia can be sug-
be recognized that many of the clinical studies
 gested, well controlled investigations in both
have been non-randomized and otherwise poorly
animals and man are imperative. In the future,
designed, there are likely to be good reasons for
effective pre-emptive analgesia may well be
failure to achieve similar results to those obtained
achieved by a multimodal technique, such as a
in experimental animals. Although central sensiti-
combination of opioids and neural block, or with
zation may contribute to postoperative pain in
specific drugs acting at the spinal cord, such as
humans, surgical trauma differs from the type of
NMDA antagonists, etc. rather than a single
stimulus used in most experimental animals.
modality 'pre-emptive' treatment. There is a need
Contrary to a well localized thermal or chemical
to establish the exact role of post-injury neuroplas-
injury, or brief C-afferent fibre stimulation, the
ticity relative to the magnitude and duration of
afferent input to the central nervous system during
 postoperative pain and to develop simple and reli-
and after surgery is prolonged and extensive with
able methods for clinical measurement of neuro-
mixed cutaneous, muscular and visceral com-
plasticity. It is naive to believe that one analgesic or
ponents. Central stimulation may persist in the 
 one single technique will solve the complex prob-
postoperative period because of continuing
 lem of postoperative pain. However, research and
6 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
development of new analgesics acting at the
tion between voltage modulated charnels and lig-
peripheral site of injury, such as the NSAIDs, may
 and gated channels. The demonstration of inter-
lead to a reduction of side effects currently associ-
 mediate forms of ion channels suggests that overall
ated with postoperative pain relief. It is now well
cellular effects are far more complicated than was
established that prostaglandins contribute not
thought to be the case as little as 25 years ago.
omnly to peripheral but also to central sensitization,
and that NSAIDs act at peripheral and central
FAST AND SLOW SIGNALLING
sites. Intrathecal administration of NSAIDs results
in antinociception in experimental models of cen-
The receptors linked directly to ion channels are
tral sensitization (Malmberg & Yaksh, 1992; 1992a)
for fast signalling but synaptic stimulation may
and their central action is equally effective
result in a more subtle long term modulation of
whether given before or after the application of the
excitability via second messengers. For example,
noxious stimulus. This is because they act on intra-
 noradrenaline interacts with two different classes
cellular messengers responsible for the mainten-
 of receptors (Pfaffinger & Siegelbaum, 1990). One
ance of the persistent nociceptive state in the
spinal cord (Coderre & Yashpal, 1994). If the con-
and the other inhibits adenylate cyclase (α adreno-
centration of NSAID in the brain continues to
 ceptors). Similarly, the response of muscarinic
increase for some hours after its administration
 acetylcholine receptors depends on the receptor
this could provide analgesia covering much of the
 subtype. M1, M3 and M5 receptors activate phos-
immediate postoperative period (Hudspith &
 pholipase C and generate diacylglycerol and inosi-
Munglani, 1996).
tol triphosphate (IP3), while M2 and M4 receptors
are associated with inhibition of adenylate cyclase
(Fukuda et al., 1989). Many other neurotrans-
 MECHANISMS OF ANAESTHESIA
 mitters, such as dopamine and 5-hydroxytrypta-
 mine, are now thought to activate second messenger
 In 1906 Sherrington stressed the importance of the
systems inside the cell.
 synapse in central nervous system (CNS) process-
Both fast and slow synaptic events eventually
ing. Since then details of synaptic transmission
modulate specific ion channels and alter the level
within the CNS have received much attention.
Studies have shown that a nerve cell receives infor-
minals themselves are subject to modulation by
mation by way of synaptic contacts all over the
presynaptic axonal contacts by way of presynaptic
dendrites and cell body (Fig. 1.1). Impulses travel-
 inhibition (Schmidt, 1971). Also, axons branch and
ling in presynaptic fibres progress to the terminal
 changes in threshold at each branch point may
branches to depolarize the nerve endings. This de-
result in different patterns of impulse activity in
polarization opens voltage-gated calcium (Ca2+)
different nerve branches. Thus, there are both tem-
channels and the influx of calcium into the
poral and spatial patterns of neuronal activity in
terminal. The resulting increase in intracellular
the CNS.
calcium triggers the exocytotic secretion of trans-
mitter substance from the nerve terminal. The
ACTION OF GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
released transmitter diffuses across the synaptic
AGENTS
cleft and binds to specific receptor sites on the post-
synaptic membrane. Receptor activation results in
At concentrations likely to be found in the brain
a change in permeability of the cell membrane to
 during surgical anaesthesia general anaesthetics
 particular ions, which in turn leads to changes in
 depress excitatory synaptic transmission. The
membrane potential and to excitation or inhibition
 effects of anaesthetics on inhibitory synaptic trans-
of the postsynaptic neurone depending on the 
 mission are more varied and both depression
nature of the synapse,i.e. excitatory or inhibitory.  and enhancement of inhibition have been re-
This voltage gated activity is generally accepted  ported. From the above brief account of synaptic
butit is nowkmown that there isno cleardistinc-
processing, it is clear that anaesthetics may act
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 7
at a number of different sites either enhancing
bioactive chemicals is conspicuously absent in
inhibition or depressing excitation at them.
 anaesthetics. There is a very wide range in molecu-
 Depression of excitation or enhancement of inhibi-
 lar structure ranging from relatively simple chem-
tion will reduce transmission through a synaptic
icals (e.g. cyclopropane) to complex steroids (e.g.
relay.
dde are suuos yi eu ym auexude
Excitation may be depressed by:
priate, lead to a state of anaesthesia. Although con-
vulsants may antagonize some anaesthetics the
1. Slowing of action potential propagation
only effective antagonist for all is very great ambi-
2.1
 Enhancement of presynaptic inhibition
ent pressure. Pressure provides a physicochemical
3. Depression of release of transmitter 
barrier to an anaesthetic by action at a putative
substances
hydrophobic receptor site: it seems that pressure
4. Depression of the response of postsynaptic
 prevents the normal increase in volume caused by
receptors
 5. Enhancement of postsynaptic inhibition by
an anaesthetic at the receptor site.
There is still argument over whether anaes-
 increased release of inhibitory
thetics have a common mode of action or whether
neurotransmitters
6. Augmentation of the response of
each agent has a unique action, the end result of
which is to produce a state of anaesthesia. The
 postsynaptic receptors to inhibitory
simplicity of the idea of a common mode of action
neurotransmitters
 7. Direct action on postsynaptic neurones to
is more appealing but is yet to be established. One
of the more attractive unifying hypotheses is that
modulate excitability
voltage sensitive Ca2+ charmels are the targets for
 8. Modulation of the resting cell membrane
all anaesthetic agents since this cation contributes
potential.
to the regulation of neuronal excitability and
It is clear that the action of general anaesthetics is
neurotransmitter release through at least three
likely to be complex. Moreover, the usual chemical
different types of voltage sensitive Ca2+ channel
structure/activity relationship seen with most
(Hirota & Lambert, 1996). However, general anaes-
thetics differ in their effects on distinct neuronal
Presynaptic
 processes and even their isomers do so, thus a non-
inhibitory axon
specific unitary mechanism is unlikely.
Afferent axon
Natural sleep and general anaesthesia
Terminal
It is interesting to compare general anaesthesia
arborization
Excitatory
with natural sleep. Some 40 years have passed
synapses
since the first recognition of rapid eye movement
Dendritic tree
Inhibitory
(REM) sleep (Aserensky & Kleitman, 1953) and the
synapse
linking of this to Moruzzi and Magoun's earlier
Inhibitory
finding in 1949 of the arousal-promoting brain
interneurone
stem network - the ascending reticular activating
Cell body
system. Later, in 1962 Jouvet discovered that the
pontine reticular formation played a key role in
REM sleep generation. It has since been shown
that REM sleep is regulated, at least in part, by
muscarinic cholinergic receptors of the non-M1
variety localized within the medial pontine reticu-
Axon colateral
lar formation (Steriade & McCarley, 1990). Animal
studies have shown that the injection of minute
FIG. I.I Schematic diagram of the organization of a
doses of morphine into the medial pontine reticu-
synaptic relay within the CNS.
lar formation known to be involved significantly
8 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 inhibited REM sleep and increased the occurrence
officers with any experience of anaesthesia and to
of apnoea (Keifer et al., 1992). Even more recently
help the inexperienced doctors avoid some of the
in vivo microdialysis studies have shown that sys-
 dangers Guedel in 1918 devised a scheme involv-
temically administered morphine significantly
ing observation of changes in respiratory rate,
decreases release of acetylcholine in the medial
limb movement and eye signs which formed the
pontine reticular formation (Lydic et al., 1993). Simi-
basis of his celebrated 'Signs and Stages of Ether
lar results have been reported for anaesthetic con-
 Anaesthesia' which has been included until very
centrations of the inhalation anaesthetic, halothane
 recently in all text books of anaesthesia.
(Keifer et al., 1994). Thus, cholinergic neurotrans-
The introduction of neuromuscular blocking
mission in the pontine reticular formation is al-
 drugs after World War II completely changed the
tered by morphine, halothane and REM sleep. This
picture and the emphasis swung from the danger
gives rise to the view that cholinergic transmission
 of too deep anaesthesia to that of too light anaes-
 in pontine reticular formation may generate some
thesia with the risk of conscious awareness and
of the phenomena associated with morphine
perception of pain. Cullen et al. (1972), in an
effects and halothane anaesthesia.
attempt to produce new guidelines indicating
Although there are serious reservations about
depth of anaesthesia, were forced to conclude that
the use of the EEG as an index of anaesthesia
it was difficult to categorize the clinical signs of
(Prys-Roberts, 1987; Hug, 1990; Kulli & Koch,
 anaesthesia for any one inhalation anaesthetic let
1991; Kissin, 1993) both halothane and natural
 alone for inhalation agents in general. Today a
sleep produce similar spindles in the cortical EEG
very much broader range of different drugs are
suggesting that halothane spindles and natural
employed during anaesthesia than were used in
sleep spindles may be generated by the same thal-
the 1970s. These drugs produce a very wide spec-
amocortical mechanisms (Keifer et al., 1994).
trum of quite separate pharmacological actions
 Further reseach in this area may prove product-
which include analgesia, amnesia, unconscious-
ive but to date the fact remains that anaesthetics
ness and relaxation of skeletal muscles as well as
are one of the few groups of drugs which are used
suppression of somatic, cardiovascular, respir-
clinically without any real understanding of their
atory and hormonal responses to surgical stimula-
underlying activity and the reason for their amaz-
tion. It is believed from observations in man that
ing efficacy remains a mystery.
 loss of conscious awareness is achieved at lighter
depths of anaesthesia than are needed to prevent
movement.
DEPTH OF ANAESTHESIA
Only two years after the first demonstration of
Electroencephalography (EEG)
 general anaesthesia John Snow (1847) stated, quite 
emphatically, that the point requiring most skill in
The majority of comprehensive studies attempting
the administration of anaesthetics is to determine
to monitor the depth of anaesthesia have focussed
when it has been carried far enough. Snow
on the use of the EEG.However, the raw EEG is of
described five stages of anaesthesia produced by
very limited value to the clinical anaesthetist
diethyl ether, the last stage in his experiments with
because of wide differences in response with dif-
animals being characterized by feeble and irregu-
ferent anaesthetics, the long paper runs utilized for
lar respiratory movements heralding death - clear-
 recording generating unmanageable amounts of
[e Aq paoey wanqoid 1ofew v rey coi aseis e A1
 paper, and subjective interpretation of the traces
anaesthetists since that time is to avoid both 'too
obtained. The fast-moving EEG signals cannot be
light' anaesthesia with the risk of sudden violent
effectively monitored on visual display unit
movement, and the dangerous 'too deep' stage.
(VDU) as can the electrocardiogram and in order
Snow suggested guidelines whereby anaesthetists
to simplify the extraction of useful information
could reduce the risk of either too light or too deep
from complex waveforms a number of methods of
ether anaesthesia. In the First World War the US
 compressing, processing and displaying EEG
Army in France was seriously deficient in medical
signals have been developed, some of which have
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 9
been compared by Levy et al. (1980) and Stoeckel
the sum of which represents the original sig-
et al. (1981). In attempts to simplify the procedure
nal. Breaking up the original waveform in this
these techniques have, in many cases, been
way makes it possible to compare one non-
applied to single channels of EEG rather than the
standard wave form with another and, in particu-
16 channels normally studied.
lar, to extract the distribution of components of
It is only possible to describe the EEG changes
different frequency within the EEG signal. The
related to anaesthesia in the most general terms.
 power in each frequency band is then derived by
The earliest changes seen with the induction of 
 squaring the amplitude of each sine wave into
amaesthesia are that a previously responsive α
which the Fourier Transform has separated the
rhythm becomes unresponsive and then desyn-
    
chronized and flattened, becoming replaced with
 means of monitoring depth of halothane anaesthe-
aa yy ro m jo Ae Auaba u
sia in horses has been reported by Otto and Short
depending on the agent. Further deepening of
(1991).
anaesthesia is associated with replacement of
Considerable ingenuity has been devoted to
thiese waves with slow waves and the slower the
displaying the three variable data derived from
frequency the deeper the level of anaesthesia
the EEG by power spectrum analysis (Figs 1.2 &
(Mori et al., 1985). Further deepening of anaesthesia
1.3). Methods such as power spectrum analysis
produces periods of electrical silence interrupted
demonstrate the relative partitioning of changes
by bursts of activity. The bursts may be of a few
associated with depth of anaesthesia as shown in
slow waves or with other agents repetitive high
the unprocessed EEG in the general shift to lower
n p pue ads au uaa ro sads aa
frequency but even so they are cumbersome and of
plexes that characterize epileptic fits. This ‘epi-
limited clinical application. The averaging over
leptoid' activity has commonly been associated
time needed for all the various methods is rel-
with enflurane but it is charcteristic of ethers (Joas
atively long with a great loss of resolution.
et al., 1971).
Important changes of a transient nature in the
EEG such as those associated with arousal and
burst suppression may be completely obscured
Power spectrum onalysis
(Bimar & Bellville, 1977). Thus it seems that in
In this technique the EEG sigmal, after being digit-
the typical clinical environment, in which multiple
ized, is subjected to fast Fourier analysis in
 drugs are administered and clinical end-points
which it is separated into a series of sine waves,
 are not defined clearly, the success achieved in
%/Hz
Time (min)
80
30
0
0.5
20 Hz
FIG. I.2 Plot of compressed spectral array of EEG power spectrum.(After Stoeckel & Schwilden, I987).In this plot it is
necessary to suppress the lines behind the hillocks (high power bands) of the plot so that information hidden behind the
hillocks is lost.To avoid loss the time axis is at an angle to the other two axes but this only slightly improves the visibility of
this lost information.
10 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
20-
or otherwise. Anaesthetic depth is a balance
between cerebral depression and surgical (or
(ZH)
口
L
other) stimulation. Thus, cerebral function during
口
 anaesthesia is most easily assessed by putting in a
uency
口
stimulus - auditory or somatic or visual - and
Frequ
observing the EEG response. That response can
口
 then be compared for amplitude and latency with
口
-0
the response to the same stimulus in the presence
0
of differing brain concentrations of any anaesthetic.
Time (min)
Changes in the EEG produced by external stimuli
(evoked responses) are not easy to detect because
FIG. I.3 Spectral edge frequency plot.This plot
they may be as much as 100 times below normal
demonstrates the frequency below which lies 95% of the
EEG noise and the technique of signal averaging
power in the EEG signal.(After Rampil et al, I980.)
must be employed. A repetitive stimulus such as
clicks in the external ear canal is applied to the
determining the depth of anaesthesia and predict-
subject and an epoch of EEG signal is summated
ing intraoperative arousal with movement, by
in such a way that the normal EEG signal is can-
study of EEG variables, is limited.
celled out (because it is random). The evoked
 response is time-locked to the stimulus and rein-
forces itself by repetition. The auditory evoked
Cerebral function monitoring
response (AER) is usually summated over 2000 or
Anumber of methods of analysing the EEG sigmal
more epochs, taking 5 to 7 minutes, and this is a
have been used in attempts to extract from it a sin-
limitation of the technique since transient changes
 gle number which might be related to the depth of
 may not be detected. The AER can be tracked from
anaesthesia. The median frequency and the num-
its entry into the brain stem via the auditory nerve
ber of times the signal crosses the isoelectric line in
to the auditory cortex and cortical association
a fixed time have been suggested but have not
 areas and the pathway continues to function dur-
proved to be useful. The cerebral function
 ing quite deep surgical anaesthesia.
analysing monitor (CFAM) of Maynard and
There are two ways of producing the AER: the
Jenkinson (1984) is a development of the cerebral
transient method and the steady state method. The
fumction monitor (CFM) described by Maynard in
middle latency part of the transient response refers
1969. The CFM filtered the EEG sigmal and
displayed the average peak voltage on a slowly
in the first 100 ms after an abrupt auditory event.
moving chart to facilitate trend analysis. and was
This middle latency response (MLR) or 'early cor-
of particular value as a monitor of cerebral perfu-
tical response' represents processing at the prim-
sion. In the CFAM similar signal processing is
ary auditory cortex and is elicited using clicks at
employed; after filtering to increase amplitude
rates near to 10/s. Although rates of as few as 1/s
with frequency and logarithmetic amplitude com-
produce larger MLR responses, they take a very
pression, the frequency distribution is displayed
 long period of signal averaging in order to pro-
divided into the four conventional EEG frequency
duce a satisfactory waveform. The transient MLR
bands. This instrument may be used to display
 is promising but the time to produce the response
 transient EEG events and to study evoked poten-
(about 5 min) and difficulties in interpreting the
tials. References to the the use of the CFAM are
waveforms mean that it is very limited as a clinical
given by Frank and Prior (1987).
tool. In contrast, the steady state method refers to
activity in the EEG driven by a train of stimuli
delivered at a sufficiently fast rate to cause re-
Evoked responses
sponses provoked by successive stimuli to over-
Evoked responses are changes in the EEG pro-
lap. At rates of stimulation near to 40Hz the
duced in the EEG by external stimuli, surgical
 amplitude reaches a maximum and with all gen-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS II
beta/delta ratio (BD), the theta /delta (T /D) and
alpha/delta (A/D) ratio. They concluded that the
measured EEG variables A/D ratio, median power
frequency and the 80% spectral edge frequency
Air
recorded in horses with an end-tidal concentration
of 1.7% isoflurane were sigrificantly increased by
surgical stimulation, suggesting EEG arousal by
this stimulation.
10
20
30
40
50
New techniques are now being developed
using bandpass digital filtering and automatic
Frequency (Hz)
peak detection to decrease greatly the time needed
for the averaging process (Bertrand et al., 1987).
The Bispectral Index (BIS) has been developed
0.4% Isoflurane
by Aspect Medical Systems as a monitor of
the state of cortical arousal and gives a number of
0 to 100 depending on the degree of wakefulness
of the subject. A low BIS may occur with sleep.
anaesthesia and head injury (Driver et al., 1996).
The BIS uses both the EEG frequency and phase in
0
10
20
30
40
50
its computation but the exact process remains, at
the moment, a jealously guarded commercial
Frequency (Hz)
secret.
FIG.1.4 Coherent frequency of the auditory evoked
More technologies for study of depth of anaes-
potential.(After Mungliani et al., 1993.) The coherent
thesia are currently available than at any time in
the past but whether any of them will become clin-
demonstrates the power of the fundamental (which is
ically useful may well be governed by the degree of
large compared with the power in the harmonics).
commercial investment they obtain. To be of use in
eral anaesthetics the 40 Hz value of the dominant
clinical practice the technology must be presented
frequency decreases with anaesthetic depth
in monitors that are easy to apply and simple to
(Mungliani et al., 1993), as illustrated in Fig. 1.4.
operate. Many potentially useful technologies will
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SER or SEP)
disappear without the balance of academic study
are usually produced by percutaneous stimulation
and commercial interest being available to assess
of a peripheral nerve and the waveform of the
them (Pomfrett, 1999).
evoked potential depends on the site of stimula-
tion and the positions of the cranial electrodes.
THE 'CLASSIC' SIGNS OF ANAESTHESIA
Again the technique suffers from the time required
to obtain a signal; averaging over 4 to 8 minutes
The so-called 'classic signs' of anaesthesia, such as
may be necessary and this obscures transient EEG
tabulated in Chapter 2 for convenience of new-
[esims Aq paonpoid aq Aeu youm saueu 
comers to the subject and in older textbooks of
stimulation.
anaesthesia, were provided by the presence or
The effect of surgical stimulation in horses
absence of response of the anaesthetized subject to
under isoflurane anaesthesia has been examined
stimuli provided by the anaesthetist or surgeon.
by Otto & Short (1991). These workers looked at
Particular signs of anaesthesia were, therefore,
the power spectrum between 1 and 30 Hz and
equated with particular anatomical levels or
calculated the 80% spectral edge frequency (80%
'planes' of depression of the central nervous sys-
quantile; SEF 80), median power frequency (50%
tem. These signs were often likened to a series of
quantile; MED),relative fractional power located
landmarks used to assess the progess made on a
in the delta (1 to 4 Hz), theta (4 to 8Hz), alpha (8 to
journey. Such empirical, traditional methods of
13 Hz), beta (13 to 30 Hz) frequency band and the
assessing the progress of anaesthesia and the
12 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
anatomical implications that went with these
Anaesthetic agents affect respiration in a dose-
methods incorporated a fallacy, because they
dependent manner and this was responsible for
took no account of the fact that the changing func-
the original classification of the'depth of anaesthe-
tion of any biological system can only be made in
sia'. In deeply anaesthetized animals tidal and
terms of magnitude and time. A depth of uncon-
 minute volumes are decreased but, depending on
sciousness is really a particular moment in a con-
thie species of animal and on the anaesthetic agents
tinuous
temporal stream of biological
or
used, respiratory rate may increase before breath-
neurological phenomena to be interpreted by the
ing eventually ceases once the animal is close
magnitude and quality of these phenomena
to death. As inadequate anaesthesia also is often
 obtaining to that moment.
indicated by an increase in the rate and /or depth
Use of the term 'depth of anaesthesia' is now
of breathing the unwary may be tempted to
so ingrained in common usage that it must be
 administer more anaesthetic agent to the deeply
accepted since it probably cannot be eradicated. It
anaesthetized animal in the mistaken impression
is important, however, to realize that it commonly
that awareness is imminent. Laryngospasm,
refers to depression of brain function beyond that
 coughing or breath-holding can indicate excessive
necessary for the production of 'anaesthesia', i.e.
umawareness of surroundings and absence of
sciousness.
recall of events.
 All anaesthetic agents, other than the dissociat-
 In general, the volatile anaesthetic agents
ive drugs such as ketamine, cause a dose-related
halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane and
reduction in muscle tone and overdosage pro-
desflurane produce a dose-dependent decrease in
duces complete respiratory muscle paralysis. In
arterial blood pressure and many veterinary
the absence of complete neuromuscular block pro-
anaesthetists use this depression to assess the
duced by neuromuscular blocking drugs the
depth of anaesthesia. The effect is not so marked
degree of muscle relaxation may, therefore, usually
during anaesthetic techniques involving the
be used as a measure of the depth of anaesthetic-
administration of opioid analgesics and nitrous
induced unconsciousness. However, even in the
 oxide. If the depth of unconsciousness is adequate,
presence of muscular paralysis due to clinically
 au Aue asnn jou saop ues lms
effective doses of neuromuscular blockers it is not
arterial blood pressure. There are, however, many
uncommon to observe movements of facial mus-
other factors which influence the arterial blood
cles, swallowing or chewing movements in
pressure during surgery such as the circulating
response to surgical stimulation if the depth of
blood volume, cardiac output and the influence of
unconsciousness becomes inadequate.
 drug therapy given before anaesthesia. If ketamine 
When animals are breathing spontaneously
or high doses of opioids are given arterial blood
pressure may change very little if the depth of
nized as indicating that the depth of unconscious-
unconsciousness is increased by the administra-
 ness is adequate for the performance of painful
 procedures, i.e. the animal is unaware of the envir-
thetics.
onment and of the infliction of pain - it is anaes-
Changes in heart rate alone are a poor guide to
thetized. Sweating (in those animals which do)
changes in the depth of unconsciousness. The
and lacrimation may both occur if surgical stimu-
heart rate may increase under isoflurane and
lation is intense while the depth of unconscious-
enflurane anaesthesia due to their direct effect on
ness is too light. However, drugs that modify
the myocardium. Arrhythmias are common dur-
autonomic effects, such as the phenothiazine
ing light levels of unconsciousness induced by
derivatives (e.g. chlorpromazine or acepromazine)
halothane, when they are usually due to increased
may also modify sweating responses.
Unfortunately, there are many differences
cardia in the absence of any other cause may be
 between the various species of animal in the signs
taken to represent inadequate anaesthesia for the
which are usually used to estimate the depth of
 procedure being undertaken.
umconsciousness. One fairly reliable sign is that of
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 13
eyeball movement, especially in horses and cattle,
imal's physiological state are monitored by the
although even this may be modified in the pres-
anaesthetist who adjusts the rate of administration
ece of certain other drugs, such as the C adreno-
of intravenous drugs, or the concentration of the
ceptor agents (see ch. 11 on equine anaesthesia).
administered inhalation anaesthetic, or the lung
Fortunately for the animal this test involves
ventilation, as appropriate for the perceived state
inspection only and no touching of the delicate
of anaesthesia. The extent and direction of the
cornea and conjunctiva although it may be neces-
adjustment is determined by this 'rule of thumb'
sary to separate the eyelids because these are usu-
but this does not preclude the provision of safe and
ally closed. Unless neuromuscular blocking drugs
effective anaesthesia. Every anaesthetist probably
uses some type of rules, but sometimes simple
cattle and downward inclination of the eyeballs in
rules are hidden by an aura of profunditity
pigs and dogs usually indicates a satisfactory level
designed to enhance the mystique of anaesthesia.
of unconsciousness and, at this level, breathing
 A computer may assist in dispelling this mystique.
should be smooth although its rate and depth may
Given the availability of the necessary hard-
alter depending on the prevailing severity of the
ware and computer software a computer can be
surgical stimulation. Nystagmus is also seen in
used to control the administration of an anaesthet-
horses just before death from hypoxaemia.
ic. It may be programed to respond to a set devia-
Absence of the lash or palpebral reflex (closure of
tion from some predetermined value measured by
 the eyelids in response to light stroking of the eye-
a sensor, which is considered by the anaesthetist to
lashes) is another reasonably reliable guide to sat-
Aaaap aui u auuo e Sunu Aq 'leou, aq
isfactory anaesthesia. In dogs and cats it is safe to
of an agent. For example, the instructions may be
assume that if the mouth can be opened without
If the arterial blood pressure decreases by
provoking yawning or curling of the tongue, cen-
10 mmHg then decrease the rate of administration
tral depression is adequate. In all animals saliva-
of halothane by 10%'. It is relatively easy to pro-
tion and excessive lacrimation usually indicate a
 gram the computer to do this but a human anaes-
returning awareness.
thetist controlling an anaesthetic administration
Disappearance of head shaking or whisker
will not respond in such a precise way. More likely
twitching in response to gentle scratching of the
a rule of thumb such as 'If the arterial blood pres-
inside of the ear pinna is a good sigm of unaware-
sure decreases slowly, then the rate of administra-
ness in pigs, cats, rabbits and guinea pigs. Pupil
tion of the anaesthetic needs to be decreased a
size is a most unreliable guide to unawareness
little' will be applied by the anaesthetist. This is
because a dose of an opiate tends to cause constric-
because humans have no difficulty in responding
tion of the pupils while atropine causes dilation.
to such imprecise information as 'decreases slow-
The pupils do, however, dilate when an overdose
of an anaesthetic has been given or when aware-
able computer language to describe such
ness is imminent.
imprecise data in such a way that a computer is
The experienced anaesthetist relies most of the
capable of acting on it.
time on an animal's response to stimuli produced
Accurate control of arterial pressure (or indeed
 by the surgeon or procedure to indicate adequate
 any variable) in any anaesthetized animal imposes
depth of unconsciousness. The most effective
the task of frequent monitoring of arterial pressure
depth is taken to be that which obliterates the an-
 and adjustments of the rate of anaesthetic adminis-
 imal's response to pain and /or discomfort without
tration. Manual methods can lead to poor control
depressing respiratory and circulatory function
with see-sawing values. Automatic closed-loop
control of anaesthetic delivery systems, developed
to improve the quality of control using standard
Computer controlled anaesthesia
engineering systems of self-tuning algorithms
In general, anaesthetists use'rules of thumb' when
relying on mathematical models of the cardiovas-
managing the course of anaesthesia. As the anaes-
 cular system, are not much better because the car-
thetic administration proceeds, changes in the an-
diovascular system is complex. Much of the
14   PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
100-
75
Very
Low
High
Veryhigh
low
Normal
25
20
80
120
160
200
220
Systolic arterial pressure (mmHg)
FlG. I.5 Subdivision of systolic arterial blood pressure into sets using fuzzy logic.The boundaries of each set form a
triangle and overlap the boundaries of neighbouring sets. The shaded area shows the extent of the 'normal' set. (After
Asbury & Tzabar, 1995.)
complexity arises from the fact that the response is
 Expressing imprecise information in a form which
non-linear and involves a time delay before it
 can be incorporated into a computer program.
occurs, while the degree of responsiveness may
Using fuzzy logic control (Ying et al., 1992)
change with time.
which employs a series of rules described in
A key to solve this problem was provided by
imprecise terms (e.g. 'If the arterial pressure is
Lofti Zadeh (1965) who coined the term ‘fuzzy
slightly above the desired range, increase the
sets'. This concept says that an item (e.g. a meas-
administration rate of the anaesthetic a little' or 'If
urement of blood pressure or a blood gas value)
the arterial pressure falls catastrophically stop the
can belong simultaneously to several sets to differ-
administration temporarily') leads to much
ent degrees, from not belonging (or 0% member-
smoother control. These rules would be formulated
ship) through to totally
belonging
(or 100%
by questioning an expert anaesthetist so that an
membership) to a set. This principle has been well
engineer:
can convert the rules and imprecise data
explained in relation to anaesthesia by Asbury &
al sazy qm ond randon e o
Tzabar (1995). They point out that a set of mean
 incoming blood pressure data from the measuring
arterial blood pressure measurements from 20 to
device, applies the rules and then calculates a
 220 mmHg can be assigned into sets such as 'nor-
definitive administration rate (defuzzification)
mal', 'very low','high', etc. Using classic logic each
and automatically sets it on the anaesthetic deliv-
value then takes on 100% membership of one and
ery system.
only one set. This logic becomes less reasonable
The difficulty with fuzzy logic is that its rules
when 99 mmHg is interpreted as ‘low' but
have to be extracted from experts who, though
100 mmHg as 'normal. When the values are divid-
perhaps highly efficient in clinical work, do not
ed into fuzzy sets where the ordinate indicates the
realize the extent of their own knowledge and par-
Extent of membership, each value can belong to
ticularly how their knowledge is structured. An
one or more sets (but usually two sets). Thus a
engineer then needs to optimize the rules and
value of 85 mmHg can be seen as belonging 75% to
boundaries of fuzzy sets for best performance. In
a set termed ‘low' and at the same time 25% to a set
termed 'normal (Fig. 1.5). This gives a way of
result in much smoother and better controlled
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 15
anaesthesia. The use of fuzzy logic control is likely
of other drugs and circumstances encountered
to grow but its development is both time-consum-
during clinical anaesthesia which may alter
ing and costly.
the requirement for anaesthesia. MAC is not
affected by the duration of anaesthesia, hyper-
kalaemia, hypokalaemia, hypercarbia or metabolic
MINImAL ALVEOLAR CONCENTRATION
acid-base changes. However, MAC is reduced by
(MAC) AND MINIMUM INFUSION RATE
8% for every °C reduction in body temperature, by
(MIR)
hyponatraemia and with increasing age. In dogs a
Recognition of the problems in establishing that
progressive reduction of halothane MAC has been
the patient is unconscious at any given moment,
shown to occur as mean partial pressure is
coupled with the difficulty of reproducing the
reduced to 50 mmHg. Young animals have high
same degree of central nervous depression on
MAC values, and hyperthermia also increases
another occasion, forces the anaesthetist to rely on
MAC. MAC is measured as vol%, and so is
the concept of minimal alveolar concentration
dependent on atmospheric pressure, thus explain-
(MAC), sometimes also kmown as minimal anaes-
ing the increased doses of volatile agents required
thetic concentration, as proposed by Merkel and
to maintain anaesthesia at high altitudes (Eger,
Eger (1963). MAC is defined as the alveolar con-
1974; Quasha et al., 1980).
centration of an anaesthetic that prevents muscu-
The accurate control of depth of umconscious-
lar movement in response to a painful stimulus in
ness is more difficult to achieve with intravenous
50% of the test subjects. If adequate time is allowed
anaesthetic agents. To obtain unconsciousness
for the anaesthetic in the brain to equilibrate with
they must be administered at a rate which pro-
the anaesthetic agent in theblood, the alveolar par-
duces a concentration of drug in the bloodstream
tial pressure of the anaesthetic (which can be
sufficient to result in the required depth of depres-
measured) is a reasonably accurate expression of
sion of the central nervous system. The concept of
the anaesthetic state. The stimulus, standardized
minimum infusion rate (MIR) was introduced by
as far as possible, usually consists of tail clamping
Sear and Prys-Roberts in 1970 to define the median
or an electrical stimulus in animals or surgical inci-
effective dose (EDso) of an intravenous anaesthetic
sion or an electrical stimulus in man.
agent which would prevent movement in response
The measurement of MAC enables the relative
to surgical incision. Unlike MAC, however, MIR
potencies of anaesthetics to be compared, and with
does not necessarily equate with the concentration
the MAC defined as 1.0, the level of central nervous
of the anaesthetic in the blood (Spelina et al., 1986).
depression can be stated as the ratio of alveolar
In veterinary anaesthesia there is a paucity of infor-
concentration to the MAC. This reproducible
mation relating to the MIR and since there is no
method may be contrasted with the difficulty in
way of estimating the concentration of the agent in
using physiological parameters as an indication, or
the blood sufficiently rapidly to enable the anaes-
the EEG, which varies according to the agent used.
thetist to adjust the rate of administration during
Although the MAC value represents the anaes-
any operation in the light of the analytical result, its
thetizing dose for only 50% of subjects the anaes-
usefulness is questionable. It may be of value in set-
thetist can be reasonably certain that increasing the
ting infusion rates in computer controlled intra-
alveolar concentration to between 1.1 or 1.2 times
venous anaesthesia but such techniques currently
MAC will ensure satisfactory anaesthesia
111
the vast majority of individuals because the
tice although it is possible that their use in experi-
dose-response curve is relatively steep. In veter-
mental laboratories is more widespread.
inary practice it is also important to note that
according to Eger, the variability of MAC is
remarkably low between species and is quite con-
ANAESTHETIC RISK
stant in any one animal. Finally, it is important to
remember that MAC is determined in healthy an-
General anaesthesia and local analgesia do not
imals under laboratory conditions in the absence
occur naturally and their induction with drugs
16 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE I.I American Society of
 greater metabolic disturbance (and increased post-
 Anesthesiologists' categories of anaesthetic
 operative pain). Increased danger can also arise
risk
when the surgeon is working in the mouth or
Category I Normal healthy patient with no
 pharynx in such a way as to make the maintenance
 detectable disease
 of a clear airway difficult, or is working on struc-
tures such as the eye or larynx and provoking
Category 2 Slight or moderate systemic disease
causing no obvious incapacity
autonomic reflexes.
Category 3 Mild to moderate systemic disease
3. The influence of available facilities. Crises
causing mild symptoms (e.g.moderate
arising during anaesthesia are usually more easily
pyrexia, anaemia or hypovolaemia)
overcome in a well equipped veterinary hospital
Category 4 Extreme systemic disease constituting a
than under the primitive conditions which may be
threat to life (e.g.toxaemia, uraemia,
severe hypovolaemia, cardiac failure)
 encountered on farms.
Category 5 Moribund or dying patients
 4. The influence of the anaesthetist. The compe-
tence, experience and judgement of the anaes-
thetist have a profound bearing on the degree of
that even today are never completely devoid of
risk to which the patient is exposed. Familarity
toxicity must constitute a threat to the life of the
with anaesthetic techniques leads to greater effi-
patient. This can be a major or trivial threat
ciency and the art of anaesthetic administration is
depending on the circumstances, but no owner
only developed by experience.
must ever be assured that anaesthesia does not
constitute a risk. When an animal owmer raises the
question of risk involved in any anaesthetic proced-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE
 ure the veterinarian needs, before replying, to con-
SELECTION OF THE ANAESTHETIC
sider:
METHOD
1. The state of health of the animal. Animals
The first consideration will be the nature of the
presented for anaesthesia may be fit and healthy or 
 operation to be performed, its magnitude, site and
suffering from disease; they may be presented for
duration. In general, the use of local infiltration
elective ('cold') surgery or as emergency cases
analgesia may suffice for simple operations such
needing immediate attention for obstetrical crises,
 as the incision of superficial abscesses, the excision
intractable haemorrhage or thoracic injuries. In the
of small neoplasms, biopsies and the castration of
USA the American Society of Anesthesiologists
immature animals. Nevertheless, what seems to be
(ASA)has adopted a classification of physical
 a simple interference may have special anaesthetic
status into categories, an 'E' being added after the
requirements. Subdermal fibrosis may make local
number when the case is presented as an emer-
infiltration impossible to effect. Again, the site of
gency (Table 1.1).
the operation in relation to the complexity of the
 This is a useful classification but most impor-
structures in its vicinity may render operation
tantly it refers only to the physical status of
under local analgesia dangerous because of poss-
the patient and is not necessarily a classification of
ible movement by the conscious animal, e.g. oper-
risk because additional factors such as its
ations in the vicinity of the eyes.
 species, breed and temperament contribute to
When adopting general anaesthesia the likely
the risk involved for any particular animal.
duration of the procedure to be performed will
Moreover, the assessment of a patient's 'correct'
influence the selection of the anaesthetic. Minor
ASA classification variesbetween different anaes
short operations may be performed quite satisfact-
thetists (Haynes & Lawler, 1995; Wolters et al.)
orily after the intravenous injection of a small dose
1996).
of an agent such as propofol or thiopental sodium
 2. The influence of the surgeon. Inexperienced
surgeons may take much longer to perform an 
with an ultra-short acting agent and maintained
 operation and by rough technique produce intense
and extensive trauma to tissues, thereby causing a
cheal intubation. F'or most major operations under
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 17
general anaesthesia, preanaesthetic medication
must be taken in giving computed doses of agents
(premedication') will need to be considered, par-
to toxaemic subjects. Quite often it is found that a
ticularly when they are of long duration and the
toxaemic animal requires very much less than the
animal must remain quiet and pain-free for several
'normal’ dose. Toxaemia may also be associated
hours after the operation. Undesirable effects of
with a slowing of the circulation and unless this is
certain agents (e.g. ketamine) may need to be
recognized it may lead to gross overdosing of
countered by the administration of 'correcting'
intravenous anaesthetics. In those diseases associ-
agents (e.g. C2 adrenoceptor agonists, atropine).
ated with wasting there is often tachycardia and a
Although sedative premedication may significantly
soft, friable myocardium; animals suffering from
reduce the amount of general anaesthetic which
such diseases are, in consequence, liable to devel-
has to be given it may also increase the duration of
 op cardiac failure when subjected to the stress of
recovery from anaesthesia. Premedication may be
anaesthesia. It is most important that the presence
omitted for day-case patients when a rapid return
of a diseased condition is detected before anaes-
to full awareness is desirable.
thesia is induced.
The species of animal involved is a pre-eminent
consideration in the selection of the anaesthetic
method (see later chapters). The anaesthetist will
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT
be influenced not only by size and temperament
BEFORE ANAESTHESIA
but also by any anatomical or physiological fea-
tures peculiar to a particular species or breed.
It is probable that most veterinary operations are
Experience indicates that the larger the animal, the
performed on normal, healthy animals. The sub-
greater are the difficulties and dangers associated
jects are generally young and represent good
with the induction and maintenance of general
anaesthetic risks'. Nevertheless, enquiry should
anaesthesia. Methods which are safe and satis-
be made to ensure that they are normal and
factory for the dog and cat may be quite unsuitable
healthy -bright, vigorous and of hearty appetite.
for horses and cattle. In vigorous and heavy
Should there be any doubt, operations are best
creatures the mere upset of locomotor coordina-
delayed until there is assurance on this point.
tion may entail risks, as also may prolonged
Many a reputation has been damaged by perform-
recumbency.
ing simple operations on young animals which are
in the early stages of some acute infectious disease
or which possess some congenital abnormality.
Individual animals
When an operation is to be performed for the
relief of disease, considerable care must be exer-
The variable reaction of the different species of an-
cised in assessing the factors which may influence
imals, and of individuals, to the various agents
the choice or course of the anaesthetic. Once these
administered by anaesthetists will also influence
are recognized the appropriate type of anaesthesia
the choice of anaesthetic technique. In addition,
can be chosen and preoperative measures adopted
factors causing increased susceptibility to the toxic
actions of anaesthetic agents must be borne in
to diminish or, where possible, prevent complica-
tions. The commonest conditions affecting the
mind. These include:
1. Prolonged fasting. This, by depleting the
diovascular and respiratory systems, but the state
glycogen reserves of the liver, greatly reduces
of the liver and kidneys cannot be ignored.
its detoxicating power and when using parenteral-
 The owmer or attendant should always be asked
ly administered agents in computed doses,
whether the animal has a cough. A soft, moist
 allowance must be made for increased susceptibil-
cough is associated with airway secretions that
ity to them.
may give rise to respiratory obstruction and lung
2. Diseased conditions.Toxaemia causes
collapse when the cough reflex is suppressed by
degenerative changes in parenchymatous organs,
 general anaesthesia. Severe cardiovascular disease
particularly the liver and the heart, and great care
may be almost unoticed by the owner and enquiry
18 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
should be made to determine whether the animal
The presence of a thrill over the heart is always
appears to suffer from respiratory distress after
a sigm of cardiovascular disease and suggests an
exertion, or indeed appears unwilling to take exer-
increased risk of complications arising during
cise, since these signs may precede other sigms of
anaesthesia. More detailed cardiological examina-
cardiac and respiratory failure by many months or
tion is warranted when a cardiac thrill is detected
even years. Dyspnoea is generally the first sign of
during the preoperative examination.
left ventricular failure and a history of excessive
Auscultation of the heart should never be omit-
thirst may indicate the existence of advanced renal
ted, particularly when the animal's owner is pres-
disease, diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus.
ent because owners expect this to be carried out,
 The actual examination may be restricted to one
 but the findings are perhaps only of limited inter-
which is informative yet will not consume too
est to the anaesthetist. The timing of any murmurs
much time nor unduly disturb the animal. While a
should be ascertained by simultaneous palpation
more complete examination may sometimes be
of the arterial pulse. Diastolic murmurs are always
necessary, attention should always be paid to the
 indicative of heart disease and, while they may be
pulse, the position of the apex beat of the heart, the
of little importance in relation to cardiac function
presence of cardiac thrills, the heart sounds and
during anaesthesia, it is unwise to come to this
the jugular venous pressure. Examination of the
conclusion unless other signs, such as displace-
 urine for the presence of albumin and reducing
ment of the apex beat, are absent. Systolic mur-
substances may also be useful.
murs may or may not indicate the presence of heart
Tachycardia is to be expected in all febrile and
 disease, but if other signs are absent they are most
in many wasting diseases and under these circum-
 probably of no significance to the anaesthetist.
 stances is indicative of some myocardial weak-
Accurate location of the apex beat is possibly
ness. It can, however, also be due to nervousness
the most important single observation in assessing
and where this is so it is often associaed with
the state of the cardovascular and respiratory sys-
rather cold ears and /or feet. Bradycardia may be
tems. It is displaced in most abnormal conditions
physiological or it may indicate complete atrio-
of the lungs (e.g. pleural effusion, pneumothorax,
ventricular block. In horses atrioventricular block
 lung collapse) and in the presence of enlargement
that disappears with exercise is probably of no
 of the left ventricle. In the absence of any pul-
clinical significance. In all animals the electrocar-
 monary disorder a displaced apex beat indicates
diogram may be the only way of determining
cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation.
whether bradycardia is physiological or is due to
Oedema in cardiac failure has multiple causes
conduction block in the heart.
which are not fully understood but include a fail-
 The jugular venous pressure is also important.
ing right ventricle and an abnormal renal blood
When the animal is standing and the head is
flow that gives rise to secondary aldosteronism
held so that the neck is at an angle of about 45°
and excessive reabsorption of salt and water by the
to the horizontal, distension of the jugular
renal tubules. The tissue fluid appears to accumu-
veins should, in normal animals, be just visible at
 late in different regions in different species - in
the base of the neck. When the distension
horses in the limbs and along the ventral body
rises above this level, even in the absence of other
 wall, in cattle it is seen in the brisket region and in
signs, it indicates an obstruction to the cranial
dogs and cats the fluid tends to accumulate in the
vena cava or a rise in right atrial or ventricular
abdominal cavity. The differential diagnosis of
pressures. The commonest cause of a rise in pres-
peripheral oedema includes renal disease, liver
sure in these chambers is probably right ventricular
 disease and impaired lymphatic drainage.
hypertrophy associated with chronic lung disease
Pulmonary disorders provide particular haz-
although congerital conditions such as atrial septal
 ards for an animal undergoing operation and any
defects may also be indicated by this sign and it 
examination, no matter how brief, must be
should be remembered that cattle suffering from
desigmed to disclose their presence or absence. On
constrictive pericarditis, or bacterial endocarditis,
 auscultation attention should be directed towards
may have a marked increase in venous pressure.
the lengthi of the expiratory sounds and the discov-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 19
ery of any rhonchi or crepitations. If rhonchi or
hepto-portal shunt in a young dog) such tests may
crepitations are heard excessive sputum is present,
detect an unsuspected disease state, in the vast
and the animal is either suffering from, or has
majority of apparently fit healthy animals they
recently suffered, a pulmonary infection.
constitute an unnecessary expense, and indeed the
Prolongation of the the expiratory sounds, espe-
on raumo ue juaaaid Aew paaloau ison eiixa
cially when accompanied by high pitched rhonchi,
 agreeing to continuation of treatment necessary
indicate narrowing of the airways or broncho-
for the wellbeing of the patient.
spasm. Respiratory sounds may be absent in
Provided a brief examination such as that
animals with pneumothorax, extensive lung con-
described is carried out thoroughly, and that the
solidation, or severe emphysema; they are usually
examiner has sufficient skill and experience to re-
faint in moribund animals.
cognize the significance or lack of significance of
Uneven movements between the two sides of
the findings, most of the conditions that have a
the chest is a reliable sign of pulmonary disease
bearing on the wellbeing of an animal in the peri-
and one which is easily and quickly observed. The
 operative period will be brought to light so that
animal should be positioned squarely while the
appropriate measures can be taken to protect it
examiner stands directly in front of it and then
from harm.
directly behind it. In small animals uneven move-
ment of the two sides of the chest is often better
appreciated by palpation rather than by inspection.
SIGNIFICANCE OF CONDITIONS
The mouth should be examined for the pres-
FOUND BY PREANAESTHETIC
ence of loose teeth which might become dislod ged
EXAMINATION
during general anaesthesia and enter the tracheo-
bronchial tree. Other mucous membranes should
CARDIOVASCULAR AND RESPIRATORY
be inspected for evidence of anaemia, denoted by
DISEASE
paleness.
The cardiovascular and respiratory systems are
those which govern the rate at which oxygen can
Biochemical tests prior to anaesthesia
be made available to the tissues of the body. Many
years ago Nunn and Freeman drew attention to
The question as to whether preanaesthetic urine
the crucial fact that this rate is equal to the product
and blood analysis should be performed routinely
of the cardiac output and the oxygen content of the
before every elective anaesthetic is controversial.
arterial blood. Since the arterial oxygen content
Such tests are essential to confirm or exclude
approximates to the product of the oxygen satura-
disease conditions suspected as a result of clinical
tion and the quantity of oxygen which can be car-
history and examination, but the cost/benefit of
 ried by the haemoglobin (about 1.34 ml per g of
their use in animals which appear perfectly
haemoglobin when fully saturated), the oxygen
 healthy can be argued on the basis that the results
made available to the body can be expressed by a
rarely would alter the anaesthetic protocol to be
employed. Urine testing is simple, inexpensive
:onenba ads
and is particularly important in dogs for in these
Available oxygen = cardiac output (ml / min)
animals renal disease and previously undiagnosed
(ml/min)
X arterial saturation (%)
 diabetes mellitus are common. Urine samples may
x haemoglobin (g/ml)
be less readily obtainable from other species of an-
x 1.34
imal. The Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists
debated (Spring Meeting, 1998) the question as to
This equation, of course, makes no allowance for
the need for routine preanaesthetic checks on
the small quantity of oxygen which is carried in
haematological and biochemical profiles, and
 physical solution in the plasma, but it serves to
voted that they were unnecessary if the clinical
 illustrate the way in which three variables com-
examination was adequate. Although in a very
 bine to produce an effect which is often greater
occasional case (e.g. the detection of a partial
 than is commonly supposed. If any one of the three
20 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
determining variables on the right-hand side of
the equation is changed, the rate at which oxygen
Lack of co-factors
is made available to the tissues of the body is
(e.g. oxygen)
altered proportionately. Thus, if the cardiac output
is halved, the available oxygen is also halved. If
two determinants are lowered simultaneously
Environmental
while the third remains constant, the effect on the
changes
Inducers
available oxygen is the product of the individual
(e.g.hypoxia,
(e.g.phenobarbitone)
changes. For example, if the cardiac output and the
inflammation)
haemoglobin concentration are both halved while
the arterial oxygen saturation remains at about the
normal 95%, only one-quarter of the normal
Enzyme
amount of oxygen is made available to the body
tissues. If all three variables are reduced the effect
is, of course, even more dramatic.
Inhibitors
DRUG METABOLISM AND DISEASE STATES
Drugs are usually metabolized through several
Direct effect on
Substrate
pathways so that they are changed from fat sol-
the enzyme
competition
uble, active, unexcretable drugs into water soluble,
(e.g.propofol)
(e.g.midazolam)
inactive drugs that are able to be excreted by the
kidneys and in the bile. Since the mammalian body
FIG.1.6 Factors which may change enzyme function.
metabolizes many thousands of compounds every
day and has far fewer enzymes, each enzyme
sion and activity of many enzymes. Non-traumatic
metabolizes many substrates. Only very rarely,
stress has been shown to reduce enzyme function,
if ever, will one enzyme metabolize only one
 possibly by decreased hepatic blood flow resulting
substrate. Many things change enzyme function.
 in hypoxaemic induced reduction in metabolizing
Mechanisms for enzyme induction are poorly
enzymes. Endogenous corticosteroid secretion as
understood, unlike inhibition, which has been
part of the stress response or exogenous steroid
much more extensively studied. Enzyme induction
 given to treat disease will change the expression of
is a slow process involving an increased amount of
drug metabolizing enymes, and metabolic activity
enzyme in the cell over about 24 to 48hours,
 also varies with age. The anaesthetist must be
whereas inhibition is quick and sometimes occurs
aware of these factors so that any increase or
after only one dose of an inhibitor. Since enzymes
decrease in the duration of drug action may be
 are proteins their concentrations inside cells may
anticipated.
be changed by a variety of factors (Fig. 1.6).
 There is now an increasing amount of informa-
tion about how enzymes change in response to one
FACTORS AFFECTING TRANSPORT OF
DRUGS IN THE BODY
stressful stimulus but it is important to recognize
that usually several stimuli exist at the same time
Most drugs are carried in the bloodstream partly
in each critically ill animal. Most chemical reac-
bound, usually by electrostatic bonds, to the pro-
tions are sensitive to temperature, speeding up as
teins of the plasma, albumin being far the most
the temperature increases and slowing with a
important for the majority of agents. Light or mod-
decrease in temperature, but in spite of this
erate protein binding has relatively little effect on
all fevers do not increase the rate of metabolism 
 drug pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics.
of drugs: the cause of the fever is important.
Infections and pyrogens cause the release of
 thiopental results in a low free plasma concentra-
mflammatory mediators which reduce the expres-
tion of the drug, which may become progressively
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 21
augmented as the available binding sites become
drugs by lowering the free plasma concentration,
saturated. The bound drug is, of course, in dynam-
thereby increasing the concentration gradient for
ic equilibrium with free (active) drug in the plasma
diffusion from the gut lumen. An apparent excep-
water. The bonds are generally reversible and con-
tion to the increased activity of drugs in hypopro-
form to the law of mass action:
teinaemic animals is the resistance to tubocurarine
seen in cases of liver disease. This is explained by
[D] 
[P]
krb
[DP]
the fact that tubocurarine binds to Y globulin rather
drug
protein
kbi
complex
than albumin and reversed albumin/globulin
ratios are common in hepatic diseases.
The association and dissociation processes take
Not surprisingly, for a protein with a molecular
place very quickly, and can generally be taken to
weight of about 65 000, there are several genetic-
be instantaneous. The equilibrium association con-
ally acquired variants of albumin. Furthermore,
stant KA is defined as the ratio of rate constants,
the configuration of the albumin molecule also
and of bound to the product of unbound concen-
changes during illness and, for example, in renal
trations:
failure. These changes can be demonstrated by
electrophoresis but their significance for the bind-
Keb
[DP]
KA
ing of drugs in vivo is not known.
Kiot
[D] ×[1]
This simple relationship is often obscured by the
RENAL DISEASE
fact that one protein molecule may possess several
Chronic renal disease is common in dogs, and
binding sites for any particular drug, which may
affected animals cannot produce concentrated
 or may not have the same association constant. It
urine. Dehydration from any cause deprives the
can generally be assumed, however, that so long as
kidneys of sufficient water for excretory purposes
the plasma proteins remain unchanged, the ratio
(Fig. 1.7). To ensure that these animals receive an
of ‘free' to 'bound' drug will remain constant. This
 adequate fluid intake over the anaesthetic period it
ratio depends on the nature of the drug molecule.
is usually necessary to administer fluid by intra-
Small, neutral, water soluble drugs will not bind to
venous infusion. A uraemic circle can also be set
protein at all but larger lipophilic molecules may
up in animals suffering from chronic renal disease
exhibit very high binding ratios.
if the arterial blood pressure is allowed to decrease
Anaemia is often associated with hypopro-
because of anaesthetic overdose or haemorrhage
teinaemia and this can have marked effects in
and renal ischaemia ensues (Fig. 1.8). The maintenn-
anaesthesia. In conditions where there is anaemia
ance of the circulating fluid volume is most
 and hypoalbuminaemia, a greater fraction of a
important in all animals with chronic renal disease
given dose of a drug will be unbound and this will
and it is important that adequate venous access is
be even greater if other bound drugs have already
assured before anaesthesia and operation.
occupied many of the binding sites.This can result
Acute renal failure can be defined as an abrupt
in an increased peak activity of the drug. Liver dis-
decline in renal function with a decrease in
ease giving rise to hypoalbuminaemia can result in
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) resulting in the
eu os auydiou se ypns sonip jo Supuq paonpar
retention of nitrogenous waste products. Acute
smaller than normal doses of this analgesic will be
renal failure is classified into:
effective when pain relief is needed. A rapid intra-
venous injection of an albumin-bound drug may
(i) Prerenal failure, denoting a disorder in the
also lead to increased pharmacological activity
systemic circulation that causes renal hypoperfu-
because the binding capacity of the albumin in the
sion. Implicit here is that correction of the underly-
limited volume of blood with which the drug ini-
ing circulatory disturbance (e.g. by improvement
tially mixes is exceeded and more free (active)
in cardiac function or repletion of volume) restores
drug is presented to the receptor sites. Plasma pro-
the GFR. However, prerenal failure is often fol-
tein binding enhances alimentary absorption of
lowed by transition to:
22 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Abnormal high water loss
Inadequate water intake
Chronic renal disease
7
Vomiting, diarrhoea
Oliguria
Dilute urine
Death
Uraemia
 Oliguria and dilute urine
FIG. I.7 Effect of water deprivation in dogs suffering from chronic renal disease.
(ii) Intrinsic renal failure, where correction of
 inotropic agents have similar effects on renal blood
the underlying circulatory impairment does not
flow.
restore the GFR to normal levels. Intrinsic renal
failure generally includes tubular necrosis or the
blocking of tubules by cell debris or precipitated
PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT
proteins and there is no question of unaffected
nephrons compensating for failing nephrons as
 Certain operations are performed as emergencies
there is in chronic renal failure. Instead all are
when it is imperative that there shall be no delay
involved in a massive disturbance of renal func-
and but little preparation of the patient is possible.
tion with diversion of blood flow away from the
renal cortex towards the medulla and an overall
 injuries, the control of severe, persistent haem-
reduction in renal perfusion. There is, however, a
orrhage, and certain obstetrical interferences
potential for complete recovery, whereas chronic
where the delivery of a live, healthy neonate is
renal failure invariably progresses over a variable
of paramount importance. For all other operations,
period of time with no hope of recovery of renal
time and care spent in preoperative preparation
function.
are well worthwhile since proper preparation
(ii) Postrenal failure (obstructive) is a third pos-
not only improves the patient's chances of
sibility.
survival, but also prevents the complications
which might otherwise occur
during and
 Excessive reliance on blood pressure maintenance
after operation. When operations are to be
to between the 'autoregulatory range' by infusion
performed on normal, healthy animals, only
or the use of vasoactive drugs overlooks the fact
the minimum of preparation is required before
that renal blood flow is labile since the kidneys
the administration of a general anaesthetic, but
contribute to the regulation of blood pressure. The
operations
on dehydrated, anaemic, hypo-
mcidence of acute renal failure is high after the use
volaemic or toxic patients should only be under-
 of intravenous contrast radiological media, nephro-
taken after careful preoperative assessement and
toxic drugs (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
preparation.
drugs, gentamycin, amphotericin). The use of
dopamine as a renoprotective agent is controver-
sial; it is said to act as a renal vasodilator but it is
FoOD AND WATer
probable that the increased renal blood flow when
Food should be withheld from the animal on the
it is given in doses of 2-5μg/kg/min is due to
 day it is to umdergo an elective operation umder
inotropic effects because other non-dopaminergic
 general anaesthesia. A distended stomach may
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 23
withholding water for about six hours before
Dehydration
abdominal operations because this appears to
Drug overdose
Haemorrhage
result in slowing of fermentation in the rumen.
FlUID AND ElECTrOLYTeS
Arterial hypotension
The water and electrolyte balance of an animal is a
most important factor in determining uncomplic-
←
ated recovery or otherwise after operation. The
repair of existing deficits of body fluid, or of one of
Renal ischaemia
Impaired
its components, is complex because of the inter-
renal function
relations between the different electrolytes and
the difficulties imposed by the effects of severe
Oliguria
sodium depletion on the circulation and renal
function.
←
Fortunately, the majority of animal patients suf-
fer only minor and recent upsets of fluid balance so
Uraemia
that infusion with isotonic saline, Hartmarn's solu-
tion or 5% dextrose, depending on whether sodium
 depletion or water depletion is the more predom-
inant, is all that is required. An anaesthetic should
Death
not be administered to an animal which has a
depleted circulating blood volume for the vasodi-
FIG. I.8 Effect of drug overdose or haemorrhage on
latation caused by anaesthetic agents may lead to
arterial blood pressure leading to renal failure and death in
acute circulatory failure, and every effort should be
the presence of chronic renal disease.
made to repair this deficit by the infusion of blood,
plasma or plasma substitute before anaesthesia is
interfere with the free movement of the diaphragm
 induced. In many instances, anaesthesia and oper-
and hinder breathing. In dogs, cats and pigs, a full
ation may be safely postponed until the total fluid
stomach predisposes to vomiting under anaesthe-
deficit is made good and an adequate renal output
sia. In horses a full stomach may rupture when the
is achieved, but in cases of intestinal obstruction
horse falls to the ground as unconsciousness is
operation should be carried out as soon as the
induced. In ruminants, a few hours of starvation
blood volume has been restored. Attempts to
will not result in an appreciable reduction in the
restore the complete extracellular deficit before the
volume of the fluid content of the rumen but it
intestinal obstruction is relieved result in further
seems to reduce the rate of fermentation within
loss of fluid into the lumen of the obstructed bowel
this organ, thus delaying the development of tym-
and, especially in horses, make subsequent opera-
 pany when eructation is supressed by general
tion more difficult. When in doubt about the
anaesthesia.
nature and volume of fluid to be administered, it is
Excessive fasting exposes the patient to risks
as well to remember that, with the exception of
almost as great as those associated with lack of
toxic conditions and where severe hypotension
preparation and should not be adopted. Any fast-
due to hypovolaemia is present, an animal's condi-
ing of birds and small mammals is actually life-
tion should not deteriorate further if sufficient
threatening. Many clinicians are of the opinion
fluid is given to cover current losses. These current
that prolonged fasting in horses predisposes to
losses include the inevitable loss of water through
postanaesthetic colic by encouraging gut stasis. In
the skin and respiratory tract (approximately
non-ruminants, free access to water should be
20-60ml/kg/day depending on the age and
allowed right up to the time premedication is
species of the animal), the urinary and faecal loss,
given, but in ruminants there is some advantage in 
 and any abnormal loss such as vomit.
24 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
HAEMOGLObIN LEVEL
ination of an anaerobically drawn arterial blood
sample. In the absence of this data the animal may
As already mentioned on page 21 anaemia may be
treated to raise the haemoglobin concentration to
be treated by infusing 2.5% sodium bicarbonate
solution until the overbreathing ceases. Because of
 more reasonable value before any major premedi-
the presence of an osmotic diuresis, many uncon-
tated surgery is performed. When operation can be
delayed for two or more weeks, the oral or par-
trolled diabetics also require treatment for dehy-
enteral administration of iron may increase the
dration. The object of management is not to try to
haemoglobin to an acceptable value, (eg. 10 to
correct all disturbances as quickly as possible, so
12 g/100 ml blood depending on the species of an-
   o    s
should take 2 to 3 days. Doing this may produce
imal) but when such a delay is inadvisable either
the transfusion of red blood cells is indicated or
swings in plasma osmolarity that can be respons-
low levels of haemoglobin must be tolerated for
ible for the development of cerebral oedema. All
that is necessary prior to emergency surgery is to
their effect of decreasing blood viscosity.
correct any hypovolaemia and ensure that the
blood glucose level is declining.
DIABETES MELLITUS
It is sometimes necessary to anaesthetize a dog or
cat suffering from diabetes mellitis and if the con-
INFLUENCE OF PRE-EXISTING DRUG
dition is already under control no serious prob-
THERAPY
lems are likely to be encountered. However, if the
normal dose of insulin is given, starvation before
Modern therapeutic agents are often of consider-
 operation and inappetance afterwards may give
able pharmacological potency and animals pre-
rise to hypolgycaemia. There are over 30 commer-
sented for anaesthesia may have been exposed to
cially available preparations of insulin and they
have different durations of action. Short acting
 one or more of these. Some may have been given
- a po ja aaadoai a po pd s
insulins (e.g. soluble insulin) have a peak effect at
imal but whatever the reason for their administra-
2 to 4 hours and their effects last for 8 to 12hours.
tion they may modify the animal's response to
Medium acting insulins (e.g. semilente) have a
 anaesthetic agents, to surgery and to drugs given
peak effect at 6 to 10hours and activity for up to
before, during and after operation. In some cases
 24 hours. Long acting insulins have a peak effect at
drug interactions are predictable and these may
12 to 15hours and one dose lasts for at least
36 hours. For this reason it is advisable to switch to
form the basis of many of the combinations used in
modern anaesthesia, but effects which are unex-
purely short acting insulin a few days prior to elec-
pected may be dangerous.
tive surgery. By doing this, there is effectively no
In an ideal situation a drug action would occur
active long acting insulin preparation left on the
only at a desired site to produce the sought-after
day of operation and it becomes much easier to
effect. In practice, drugs are much less selective and
control the blood sugar around the perioperative
are prone to produce 'side effects' which have to be
period.
anticipated and taken into account whenever the
 If an emergency operation has to be performed
drug is administered. (A ‘side effect' may be
on an uncontrolled diabetic then the condition of
defined as a response not required clinically, but
the animal requires careful assessment and treat-
ment. Ketonuria is an indication for treatment
therapeutic range.) Apart from these unavoidable
with gluose and soluble insulin, whilst over-
side effects which are inherent, adverse reactions to
breathing is a sign of severe metabolic acidosis.
ae yom sem paa u u moso Ae sin
This must be treated with the infusion of sodium
 of importance to the anaesthetist. These include:
bicarbonate solution but the amount of bicarbon-
aq Auo ueo ase remoed Aue u papaau ae
 1. Overdosage. For some drugs exact dosing may
calculated with any degree of certainty when the
be difficult. Overdosage may be absolute as when
acid-base status is known from laboratory exam-
a si asop papua a  raa po 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 25
5.Drug interactions. Despite the importance
route, e.g. a normal intramuscular dose may con-
of drug interactions there is little information in
stitute a serious overdose if given intravenously.
the veterinary literature on this subject. Drug inter-
Relative overdose may be due to an abnormality of
action can occur outside the body, as when two
the animal; an abnormal sensitivity to digitalis is
drugs are mixed in a a syringe before they are
found in hypokalaemic animals and newborn ani-
administered, or inside the body after administra-
 mals are sensitive to non-depolarizing neuromus-
tion by the same or different routes. It is generally
cular blocking drugs. The use in dogs and cats of
unwise to mix products or vehicles in the same
flea collars containing organophosphorus com-
syringe or to administer a drug into an intravenous
pounds may reduce the plasma cholinesterase and
infusion of another drug for this may result in
prolong the action of a normal dose of suxametho-
precipitation of one or both drugs or even the for-
nium. Overdose manifestations vary from acute to
mation of new potentially toxic or inactive com-
chronic and may produce toxicity by a quantita-
 pounds. The result of the interaction between two
tively enhanced action which can be an extension
drugs inside the body may be an increased or
of the therapeutic action, e.g. neostigmine in
decreased action of one or bothi or even an effect com-
 EXcess for the antagonism of non-depolarizing
pletely different from the normal action of either
neuromuscular block. They may also be due to
drug. The result of interaction may be simply the
side effects (e.g. morphine producing respiratory
the sum of the actions of the two drugs (1 + 1 = 2),
depression).
 or greater (1 + 1 > 2), when it is known as syner-
2. Idiosyncrasy. Some animals may have a
 gism. When one agent has no appreciable effect but
 genetically determined response to a drug which
enhances the response to the other (0 + 1 > 1) the
is qualitatively different to that of normal individ-
term 'potentiation' is used to describe the effect of 
uals, as in the porcine hyperpyrexia syndrome
the first on the action of the second. An agent may
(porcine malignant hyperthermia).
also antagonize the effects of another and the
3. Intolerance. This is exhibiting a qualitatively
 antagonism may be 'chemical' if they form an inac-
normal response but to an abnormally low or high
tive complex, 'physiological' if they have directly
dose. It is usually simply explained by the
 opposing actions although at different sites, or
Gaussian distribution of variation in the animal
‘competitive' if they compete for the same recep-
population.
 tors. Non-competitive antgonism may result from
4. Allergy. Allergic responses are, in general, not
modification by one drug of the transport, bio-
dose related and the allergy may be due to the
transformation or excretion of the other. In the liver
drug itself or to the vehicle in which it is present-
the non-specific metabolic degradation of many
ed.The reaction may take a number of forms:
drugs occurs and many different agents have the
shock, asthma or bronchospasm, hepatic conges-
 ability to cause an 'enzyme induction' whilst a few
tion from hepatic vein constriction, blood disor-
decrease the activity
y-‘enzyme inhibition'An-
ders, rashes or pyrexia. Terms such as 'allergie',
algesics such as phenylbutazone cause enzyme
 induction and can produce a great increase in the
have specific meanings to immunologists but,
rate of metabolism of substrates. Barbiturate treat-
unfortunately, they are often used interchange-
ably. Strictly speaking it is inaccurate to use any of
dexamethasone with a conseqent marked deterio-
these terms until evidence of the immunological
ration in the therapeutic effect of this steroidal sub-
basis of a reaction has been established. Many
stance. Competition for binding sites and the
of these reactions are histamine-related but
displacement of one drug from the bound (inac-
other mediators such as prostaglandins, leuco-
tive) form may lead to increased toxicity. For exam-
trienes or kinins may be involved. Some im-
ple, warfarin (which is sometimes used in the
munologists consider that where either the
 management of navicular disease in horses) is dis-
mediator or the mechanism involved is uncertain,
placed by several agents, including the analgesic
reactions are best described as ‘histaminoid' or
phenylbutazone, with a resulting risk of haemor-
anaphylactoid'.
rhage.
26 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 REFERENCES
postincisional lidocaine infiltration on postoperative
pain. Aresthesia and Anaigesia 74:495-498.
Frank, M. and Prior, PF. (1987) The cerebral function
of thinking for anaesthesia. British Jourrat of
analysing monitor: principle and potential use. In:
Anaesthesia 75: 1-2.
Rosen, M. & Lunm, J.N.(eds) Consciousness, Auwreness
Aserensky, E. and Kleitman, N. (1953) Regularly
and Pain in Gernerat Anaesthesia. London: Butterworths,
occurring periods of eye motility and concomitant
Pp 61-71.
phenomena during sleep. Scierce 118: 273-274.
Fukuda, K., Kubo, T., Maeda, A., Akiba, I., Bujo, H. et at.
Berman, J. (1995) Imaging pain in humans. British
(1989) Selective effector coupling of muscarinic
Jourrat ofAraesthesia 75:209-216.
acetylcholine receptor subtypes. Trends int
Bertrand, O., Garcia-Larrea, L., Artru, F., Maguire, F. and
Pharmacological Sciences 10S:4-10.
Permier, J. (1987) Brain stem monitoring. I. A system
Haynes, S.R. and Lawler, PG.P (1995) An assessment of
for high-rate sequential BAEP recording and feature
the consistency of ASA physical status classification
extraction. Electrcencephatogrphy and Clinicat
allocation. Anaesthesia 50: 195-199.
Neurophysiology 68:433-445.
Hirota, K. and Lambert, D.G. (1996) Voltage sensitive
Bimar, J. and Bellville, J.W. (1977) Arousal reactions
Ca+ channels and anaesthesia. British Journat of
during anesthesia in man. Anesthesiology, 47:
Anaesthesia 76: 344-346.
449-454.
Hug, C.G. (1990) Does opioid 'anaesthesia' exist?
Bouchenafa, O. and Livingston, A. (1987)
Anesthesia and Analgesia 73: 1-4.
Autoradiographic localisation of alpha 2
Joas, T.A., Stevens, W.C. and Egger E.1. 1I (1971)
adrenoceptor binding sites in the spinalcord of
Electroencephalographic seizure activity in dogs
sheep. Research in Veterinary Science, 42:382-386.
during anaesthesia. British Journal of Anaesthesia 43:
Bouchenafa, O. and Livingston, A. (1989) Distribution of
739-745.
immunoreactive Met-enkephalin and
Katz, J., Kavanagh, H., Sandler, A.N., Nierenberg, H.,
autoradiographic [3H] DAGO and [ 3H] DPDPE in
Boylan, J.F., Friedlander, M. and Shaw, B.F. (1992)
the spinal cord of sheep. Aduances in Biotogicat Science
Preemptive analgesia. Clinical evidence of
75:289-292.
 neuroplasticity contributing to postoperative pain.
Brandt, S.A.and Livingston, A. (1990) Receptor changes
Anesthesiotogy 77: 739-746.
 in the spinal cord of sheep associated with exposure to
Keifer, J.C., Baghdoyan, H.A. and Lydic, R. (1992)
chronic pain. Pain 42: 323-329.
Sleep disruption and increased apneas after
Coderre, T.J., Vaccarino, A.L. and Melzak, R. (1990)
Central nervous system plasticity in the tonic pain
77:973-983
response to subcutaneous formalin injection. Brain
Keifer, J.C., Baghdoyan, H.A., Becker, L. and Lydic, R.
Research 535: 155-158.
(1994) Halothane anaesthesia causes decreased
Coderre, T.J. and Yashpal, K. (1994) Intracellular
acetylcholine release in the pontine reticular
messengers contributing to persistent nociception and
formation and increased EEG spindles. NeuroReport 5:
hyperalgesia induce by L-glutamate and substance P
577-580.
in therat formal pain model. European Journat of
Khan, Z.P., Ferguson, C.N. and Jones, R.M. (1999) Alpha
Neuroscience,6:1328-1334.
2 adrenoceptor and imidazole agonists - their
Cullen, D.J., Egger, E.1.1I, Stevens, W. C. et al. (1972)
pharmacology and therapeutic role. Araesthesia 54:
Clinical signs of anesthesia. Anesthesiotogy 36: 21-36.
146-165.
Darland, T. and Grandy, D.K. (1998) The orphanin FQ
Kissin, I. (1993) General anaesthetic action: An obsolete
system: an emerging target for the management of
notion? Aresthesia and Anaigesia 76: 215-218.
pain? British Jourrat of Anaesthesia 81: 29-38.
Kulli, J. and Koch, C. (1991) Does anaesthesia cause
Dickenson, A.H. (1995) Spinal cord pharmacology of
loss of consciousness? Trends in Neuroscience 14:
pain.British Journat of Anaesthesia 75:193-200.
6-10.
Dickenson, A.H. and Sullivan, A.F. (1987) Subcutaneous
Levy,W.J., Shapiro, H.M., Maruchak, G. and Meathe, E
formalin-induced activity of dorsal horm neurones
(1980) Automated EEG processing for intraoperative
in the rat: differential response to an intrathecal
monitoring. Anesthesiotogy 53:223-236.
opiate administered pre or post formalin. Pair 30:
Lewis, T. (1942) Pain. New York: Macmillan, ch 1, PP
349-360.
1-200.
Driver, I.K, Watson, B.J., Menon, D.K., Aggarwal, S.K.
Lydic, R., Keifer, J.C., Baghdoyan, H.A. and Becker, L.
and Jones, J.G. (1996) Bispectral index is a state
(1993) Microdialysis of the pontine reticular formation
specific measure of arousal. British Jourral of
 reveals inhibition of acetylcholine release by
Anaesthesia, 77,694.
morphine. Anesthesiology 79: 1003-1012.
Eger, E.1. (1974) Araesthetic Llptake and Action. Baltimore:
Malmeberg, A.B. and Yaksh, T.L. (1992) Isobolographic
Williams and Wilkins,
and dose-response analyses of the interaction
Ejlersen, E., Andersen, H.B., Eliasen, K. and Mogensen,
between intrathecal mu and delta agonists: effects of
T.A. (1992) A comparison between pre- and
naltrindole and its benzofuran analog (NTB). jJourrat
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 27
of Pharmacology and Experimentat Therapeutics.263:
Richmond, C.E., Bromley, L.M. and Woolf, C.O. (1993)
264-275.
Preoperative morphine pre-empts post operative
Malmbeg, A.B. and Yaksh, T.L. (1992a) Antinoceptive
pain.Lancet 342:73-76.
actions of spinal nonsteriodal anti-infalmmatory
Roy, C.S. and Sherrington, C.S. (1890) On the regulation
agents on the formal in test in the rat. Journal of
of the blood supply of the brain. Journat of Physiology
Pharcacology and Experimental Therapeutics.263:
11: 85-108.
136-146.
Schmidt, R.F. (1971) Presynaptic inhibition in the
Marsh, D.F., Hatch, D.J. and Fitzgerald, M. (1997) Opioid
vertebrate central nervous system. Ergebrisse der
systems and the newborn. British Jourrat of Araesthesia
Physiotogie 63:21-108.
79: 787-795.
Sear, J.W. and Prys-Roberts, C. (1970) Plasma
Maynard, D.E. and Jenkinson, J.L. (1984) The cerebral
concentrations of alphaxalone during continuous
function analysing monitor. Anaesthesia 39:
infusions of althesin. British Jourrat of Anaesthesia 51:
678-690.
861-867.
McMahon, S.B., Dmitrieva, N. and Koltzenburg, M.
Sherrington, C.S. (1900) Cutaneous sensation. In:
(1995) Visceral pain. British Journat of Anaesthesia 75:
Textbook of Physiology. Schafer, ch 1,pp 920-1001.
132-144.
Sherrington, C.S. (1906) The Integrative Action of the
Merkel, G. and Eger, E.1. (1963) A comparative study of
Nervous System. Hew Haven: Yale University Press, ch
halothane and halopropane anesthesia. Anesthesiology
1,pp.1-200.
24: 346-357.
Snow J. (1847) On the inhalation of the vapour of ether in
Meunier, J.C. (1997) Nociceptin, orphanin FQ and the
surgical operations. London: John Churchill.
opioid receptor-like ORL1 receptor. European Jourral of
Spelina, K.R, Coates, D.P., Monk, C.R., Prys-Roberts, C.,
Pharmacology 340: 1-15.
Norley, I. and Turtle, M.J. (1986) Dose requirements
Mori, K., Shingu, K.,Moti, H. et al. (1985) Factors
of propofol by infusion during nitrous oxide
modifying anaesthetic induced EEG activities. In:
anaesthesia in man. British Journat of Araesthesia
Stoeckel, H. (ed) Quantitation, Modelling.
58: 1080.
Moruzzi, G. and Magoun, H.W. (1949) Brainstem
Stamford, J.A. (1995) Descending control of pain. British
reticular formation and activation of the EEG
Journat of Araesthesia 75:217-227.
Electroencephatography and Neurophysiotogy 1:
Steriade, M. and McCarley, R.W. (1990) Brainstem Corntrol
455-473.
of Wakefutness and Steep. London: Plenum Press, ch 1,
Mungliani, R., Andrade, J., Sapsford, D.J. , Baddeley, A.
pp 1-100.
and Jones, J.G. (1993) A measure of consciousness and
Stoeckel, H., Schwilden, H., Lauren, P. and Schuttler, J.
memory during isoflurane administration; the
(1981) EEG parameters for evaluation of depth of
coherent frequency. British Journal of Anaesthesia 71:
anaesthesia. Proceedings of the European Academy of
633-641.
Anaesthesiotogy 1:73-84.
Okuda-Ashitaka, E., Minami, T., Tachibana, S.
Stoeckel, H. and Schwilden, H. (1987) Median EEG
Yoshihara, Y, Nischiuchi, Y., Kimura, T. and
frequency. In: Rosen, N. and Lunn J.N. (eds)
Ito, S. (1998) Nocistatin, a peptide that blocks
Consciousness, Awareness and Pain in Generat
nociceptin action on pain transmission. Nature
Anaesthesia. London: Butterworths, pp 53-60.
392:286-289.
Treede, R.-D., Meyer, R.A., Raja, S.N. and Campbell, J.N.
Otto, K. and Short, C.E. (1991) Electroencephalographic
(1992) Peripheral and central mechanisms of
power spectrum analysis as a monitor of anesthetic
cutaneous hyperalgesia. Progress in Neurobiology 38:
depth in horses. Veterinary Surgery 20,362-371.
397421.
Pfaffinger, PJ. and Siegelbaum, S.A. (1990) K+ channel
Wall, PD. (1992) In: Short, C.E. and Poznak, A. van (eds)
 Pain in Animals. New York: Churchill Livingstone, PP
Cook,N.S.(ed). see British Journal of Araesthesia (1993)
63-79.
71. p 146(1): 1-100.
Wolters, U., Wolf, T., Stitzer, H. and Schroder, T. (1996)
 Pomfrett, C.J.D. (1999) Heart rate variability, BIS and
ASA classification and perioperative variables as
‘depthof anaesthesia'. British Jourrnatof Anaesthesia 82:
predictors of postoperative out-come. British Journal of
659-662.
Anaesthesia 77:217-222.
Prys-Roberts, C. (1987) Anaesthesia : A practical or
Woolf, C.J. and Doubell, T.P. (1994) The pathophysiology
impractical construct?British Journal of Anaesthesia 59:
of chronic pain - increased sensitivity to low
1341-1345.
threshold Ab-fibre input. Current Opinion in
Quasha, A.L., Eger, E.1. and Tinker, J.H. (1980)
Neurobiology 4:525-534.
Determination and application of MAC.
Woolf, C.J. and Wall, PD. (1986) Morphine-sensitive
Anesthesiology 53:315-334.
and morphine-insensitive actions of C-fibre input
Rampil, I.J., Susse, F.J.,Smith, N.T., Hoff, R.H. and
on therat spinal cord. Neuroscience Letters, 64:
Flemming, D.C. (1980) Spectral edge frequency -a
221-225.
new correlate of anesthetic depth. Aresthesiology ;
Woolf, C.J. and Wall, PD. (1986a) Relative effectiveness
53:S12.
of C primary afferent fibres of different origins in
28 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
evoking a prolonged facilitation of the flexor
Ying, H., McEarcherm, E.D.W., Eddleman, D.W. and
reflex in the rat. Jourrat of Neuroscience 6:
Sheppard, L.C. (1992) Fuzzy control of mean aterial
1433-1442.
 pressure in postsurgical patients with sodium
Xu, X.J., Hao, J.X. and Weisenfeld-Hallin,Z. (1996)
nitroprusside infusion. IEEE Transactions of Biomedicat
 Nociceptin or antinociceptin: potent spinal
Engineering 39, 1060-1070.
antinociceptive effect or orphanin FQ/nociceptin in
Zadeh, L.H. (1965) Fuzzy sets. lnformation and Controt 8:
the rat. NeurReport 7: 2092-2094.
338-353.
Patient monitoring and clinical
2
measurement
INTRODUCTION
human error. Judgmental error frequently occurs
when the anaesthetist is in a hurry and circum-
From the earliest days of anaesthesia the anaesthetist
vents basic practices and procedures, or when a
has monitored the patient's pulse rate, pattern of
decision must be made in an emergency. The
breathing and general condition. Ad vances in elec-
prevalence of complications may also be asso-
tronic technology have made reasonably reliable,
ciated with inadequate training or experience of
easily attached, non-invasive monitoring devices
the anaesthetist. Knowledge and experience are a
available for clinical practice. Observations and
function of the nature of the training received and
measurements of certain parameters before, dur-
the years of practice, but proper vigilance at all
ing, and after anaesthesia provide important data
times can only be generated by self-motivation.
to support the clinical assessment of the animal's
Routines should be developed to ensure that
condition and improve the chances of survival of
each aspect of apparatus function is checked
the very ill by indicating what treatment is needed,
before use. Failure to follow a simple check list in
as well as the response to treatment already given.
every case features high on the list of causes of
It is necessary to know what to measure as well as
 anaesthetic disasters. All anaesthetic equipment,
how to measure it and not all anaesthetists may agree
 including monitoring devices, should be main-
on the priority ranking of the monitoring devices
tained in good functioning order. It should be a
available. There can be little doubt that to introduce
matter of course to maintain monitors with a bat-
the full panoply of monitoring equipment for short
tery back-up fully charged in case of need in an
bloodless proced ures on healthy animals may turn
area without a convenient electricity outlet nearby,
a simple anaesthetic administration into a complex
failure of electricity supply, or the need to discon-
one with unnecessary distractions. However, for
nect from the main supply to minimize electrical
major surgery, for anaesthesia and surgery of
interference with other monitoring equipment.
poor-risk patients, and for equine anaesthesia, it
Proficiency with methods of electronic surveil-
would be difficult to defend the failure to use mon-
lance must be acquired during minor procedures
itoring equipment, especially if it were available.
-I ul Ajadoid padde aq ues Aaun ieu os
cumstances where their use is mandatory (e.g.
during major surgery or a cardiovascular crisis).
GENERAL (
CONSIDERATIONS
Routine use ensures that probes, sensors, elec-
RELATING TO MONITORING
trodes, etc. can be applied quickly to the animal
Anaesthetic mishaps may be caused by mechan-
and increases the likelihood that the information
ical malfunction, disconnection of equipment, or
obtained is reliable.
29
30 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Although current practice is to establish moni-
content of the vomit may warn thiat the animal was
toring only after the animal has been anaesthetized,
fed recently and so may be at risk for regurgitation
it must be recognised that many complications
and pulmonary aspiration of gastric material.
occur during induction of anaesthesia. Ideally,
 Brachycephalic breeds and animals with respir-
especially for poor-risk patients, monitoring
atory problems should always be observed after
should begin when the drugs for premedication
administration of preanaesthetic drugs because
are administered. Dogs and cats may vomit after
sedation may cause partial or complete airway
administration of an opioid and the quantity and
obstruction or serious respiratory depression. In
Abbreviations
AG
2
3
4
AE
TIME
0率
15
30
45
0
15
30
45
0
15
30
Oflow L/min
2
End tidal CO2
37
32
38
38
38
Vaporizer %
2
1.75
1.5
HR
180
180
Arterial pressure:
V Systolic
160
160
ADiastolic
140
140
X Mean
120
120
Ventilation:
Spontaneous
100
100
S
80
80
Controlled
60
60
C
40
40
 A| Anes. induction
AG Begin inhalant 
20
s
20
Ae End anes.
Ss Surgery start
10
10
SE Surgery end
E Extubation
D
Temperature
103.1
101.6
101.6
99.9
98.8
98.6
98.1
97.5
97.2
96.6
96.1
96.5
Fluids
(ml) LRS
175
350
550
850
1050
1430
2050
2200
2530
2650
2725
Other
DETAILED COMMENTS:
1. Oxymorphone 1.5mg IV
2. Move to O.R 1 200mg Cefotetan IV
3. Change from indirect to direct arteriai BP monitoring
4.Morphine 30mgIM
Fig. 2.I Anaesthetic record of a 6l kg, 6-year-old female Great Dane anaesthetized for exploratory laparotomy because
of torsion of the spleen. Anaesthesia was induced by intravenous administration of ketamine, 200 mg, and diazepam, I0
mg, and maintained with isofurane.Heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory rate were recorded at regular intervals to
facilitate early recognition of adverse trends.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 3I
any animal, evaluation of the degree of sedation
should be checked for at least 20minutes after the
produced by premedicant drugs may indicate that
 animal has been disconnected from oxygen as it
the anaesthetic plan should be reassessed and either
may take that long for hypoxaemia to develop in
drug doses reduced or additional agents included.
animals that are moderately hypoventilating and
Careful observation of the patient during
breathing air.
A variety of methods using inexpensive or
tion of drugs to achieve the desired depth of anaes-
expensive equipment can be used to monitor para-
thesia and ensure early recognition of
meters determined by the species of animal to be
complication that requires immediate specific
anaesthetized and by the abnormalities already
treatment, such as cyanosis, anaphylaxis, or car-
 present in the patient. Not all monitoring techniques
diac arrest. Where possible, patients at risk for
need to be applied to every patient. A recommen-
complications may be attached to specific monitor-
dation for three levels of monitoring is presented
ing equipment before ind uction of anaesthesia.
in Table 2.1; level 1 monitoring information should
Appropriate equipment for this would be the elec-
be obtained from all anaesthetized animals, level 2
trocardiograph (ECG) and a device for measure-
monitors are affordable and recommended for
ment of blood pressure.
routine use in some groups of patients, and level 3
 Recording drugs, dosages and responses for
 monitors individually offer improved monitoring
each patient is essential and provides valuable
for patients with specific problems.
information for any subsequent time that anaesthe-
This chapter will describe the techniques of
sia may be needed. Noting all measurements on an
o pe yde susas e usn urn
anaesthetic record provides a pictorial description
guidelines for interpretation of the information
 of changes that can be used to predict complica-
obtained.Further recommendations are given in
tions and plan treatment (Fig. 2.1). Retrospective
the chapters devoted to species anaesthesia and
evaluation of difficult cases and of series of records,
s
perhaps of patients with similar surgical proced-
ures, or to compare different anaesthetic protocols,
can be used to monitor the anaesthetist's perform-
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE
ance and identify difficult situations that require
PATIENT
further thought and improved management. For
research purposes, data can be acquired into a
MONITOrING ThE CENTRAL NERVOUS
computer for accurate data summaries.
SYSTEM
Monitoring animals during anaesthesia must
include observation of behaviour and reflexes and
An early attempt at defining depth of anaesthesia
through observation of changes in reflexes, muscle
 at regular intervals to accomplish two objectives.
tone, and respiration with administration of
The first objective is to ensure that the animal sur-
increased concentration of ether resulted in classi-
vives anaesthesia and surgery. The second object-
(2 i) saeis rnoy oiui eisayisaeue jo uoe
ive is to obtain information that can be used to
The animal was said to make the transition from
adjust anaesthetic administration and manage-
consciousness to deep anaesthesia by passing
ment to minimize physiological abnormalities,
sequentially through Stage I (in which voluntary
which is especially important for animals that
excitement might be observed), Stage II (when the
have already compromized organ systems. The
animal appeared to be unconscious but exhibited
goal is to prevent development of preventable
involuntary muscle movement, such as limb
adverse consequences 1hour, 12hours, or even
[silins)  aseis 'uoeziesoa pue gupped
3 days after anaesthesia.
anaesthesia), and Stage IV (anaesthetic overdose
Monitoring should continue into the recovery
immediately prior to death). Stage IlI was further
period to determine the need for additional anal-
divided into Plane 1 (light anaesthesia sufficient
gesic drugs and to record serious deviations in
 only for non-painful procedures), Plane
2
body temperature. Mucous membrane colour
(medium depth anaesthesia employed for most
32 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE 2.I Prioritization of monitoring
Monitor
 Information obtained
Specific use
Level I (Basic monitoring)
● Palpebral and pedal reflexes, eye position 
Depth of anaesthesia
All anaesthetized animals
● Respiratory rate and depth of chest or
 Adequacy of ventilation
All anaesthetized animals
bag excursion
● Oral mucous membrane colour
Oxygenation
All anaesthetized animals
● Heart rate, pulse strength, capillary refll
Assessment of circulation
 All anaesthetized animals
time
● Temperature
Temperature
Dogs and cats anaesthesia
 greater than 30 min; allinhalation 
anaesthesia
Level 2 (Routine use recommended for some patients)
● Arterial blood pressure measurement
Blood pressure
All inhalation anaesthesia;
(indirect or direct methods)
cardiovascular disease or
depression
● Blood glucose
Blood glucose
Paediatric patients; diabetics;
septicaemia; insulinoma
Electrocardiography
Cardiac rate and rhythm; diagnosis
All inhalation anaesthesia;
of arrhythmia or cardiac arrest
thoracic trauma or cardiac
disease
●Pulse oximetry
Haemoglobin oxygen saturation;
 Small animals breathing air
pulse rate
during anaesthesia; thoracic
 trauma or pulmonary
 disease;septicaemiaf
endotoxaemia
● Urine output, either by expression
Urine volume produced during
 Renal disease;some urinary tract
of urinary bladder or by urethral
anaesthesia;indirect assessment
surgery; multiorgan failure
catheterization
of adequacy of tissue perfusion
Level 3 (Use for specific patients or problems)
●Anaesthetic gas analyser
Inspired and end-tidal anaesthetic
Any patient on inhalation 
agent concentration; evaluation of
 anaesthetic agent
depth of inhalation anaesthesia
● Blood gases and pH
PaCO2,PaO2, pH,HCO3; base
Suspected hypoventilation or
excess/deficit
hypoxaemia; measurement of
metabolic status
●Capnography
End-tidal carbon dioxide
Suspected hypoventilation 
concentration; estimate of
 during inhalation anaesthesia; 
adequacy of ventilation; warning
 patients at risk for complications
of circuit disconnect or cardiac
arrest
● Cardiac output measurement
Cardiac output
 Multiorgan failure; research
investigations
● Central venous pressure
 Adequacy of blood volume
 Dehydrated small animal 
patients; portosystemic shunt
● Electrophysiological diagnostics
Cerebral ischaemia; assessment of
Reliability is being investigated
(electroencephalogram, cortical evoked
depth of anaesthesia
responses, spectral edge frequency)
● Packed cell volume and total protein
Haemodilution and protein
Haemorrhage; large volume
concentration
infusion of crystalloid
solution
● Peripheral nerve stimulator
Neuromuscular transmission
 Use of neuromuscular blocking
agents
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 33
surgical procedures), Plane 3 (deep anaesthesia),
nystagmus may be present in horses anaesthetised
-Iv (eisayisaeue daap Aiaaissanxa)  aueid pue
with ketamine (See Chapter 11). The palpebral
though the progression of changes described in
reflex, which is partial or complete closure of
Fig. 2.2 are generally accurate representations of
the eyelids (a blink) elicited by a gentle tap at
the transition from light to deep ether anaesthesia,
the lateral canthus of the eye or gentle stroking of
the rate of changes vary for the newer inhalation
the eyelashes, is frequently a useful guide to depth
agents and are altered by concurrent administra-
of anaesthesia. At a plane of anaesthesia satisfact-
tion of injectable drugs.
ory for surgery, the palpebral reflex is weak and
nystagmus is absent. A brisk palpebral reflex
develops when anaesthesia lightens. Ketamine
Eye position and reflexes
anaesthesia is associated with a brisk palpebral
Eye movements are similar with thiopental,
reflex.
propofol, halothane, and isoflurane in that the
Acorneal reflex is a similar lid response elicited
eyeball rotates rostroventrally during light and
by gentle pressure on the cornea. The presence of a
moderate depths of surgical anaesthesia, retuming
corneal reflex is no indicator of depth of anaesthe-
 to a central position during deep anaesthesia (Fig.
sia and may still be present for a short time after
2.3). Muscle tone is retained during ketamine
cardiac arrest has occurred.
anaesthesia and the eye remains centrally placed
 The pedal reflex is frequently tested in dogs,
in the orbit in dogs and cats (Fig. 2.4), and only
cats and small laboratory animals to determine if
slightly rotated in horses and ruminants. Fine
depth of anaesthesia is adequate for the start of
VENTILATION
Inter-
Dia-
Pattern
Pupil
Eyeball
Eye
Lacri-
Response to
costal
phragm
position
reflexes
mation
surgical stim.
Awake
Irregular
panting
Irregular
Stage Il
breath-
Palpebral
holding
Stage IlI
LIGHT
Regular
Plane 1
MEDIUM
Regular
Plane 2
shallow
DEEP
Jerky
Plane 3
Corneal
Stage IV
FIG.2.2 Changes in ventilation and eye signs follow recognized patterns with different stages of inhalation anaesthesia.
The progression of these changes willbe influenced by inclusion of injectable anaesthetic agents (adapted from Soma,
1971).
34 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
of pentobarbital to facilitate rapid transition
through any excitement stage, smal increments
 are administered over several minutes just until
the whisker reflex is abolished.
MoNItoriNG Of rESpIraToRY rATe AND
CaRDIOVASCULAr FUNCTION
Measurements of respiratory rates, heart rates,
and blood pressure are not reliable guides to depth
of anaesthesia, although increasing the depth of
anaesthesia by increasing administration of an
anaesthetic agent produces increased respiratory
and cardiovascular depression. It is not un-
common for an unstimulated dog anaesthetised
with an inhalation agent to have a low arterial
blood pressure and yet in the next minute start
FIG.2.3 The rostroventral rotation of the eye in this dog
moving its legs and chewing on the endotracheal
is consistent with light and medium planes of halothane or
tube in response to a skin incision, all accompan-
isoflurane anaesthesia.
ied by a dramatic increase in blood pressure.
 Inhalation agents may elicit different responses,
surgery. Pinching the web between the toes or firm
for example, increasing depth of isoflurane anaes-
pressure applied to a nail bed will be followed
thesia may decrease respiratory rates whereas
by withdrawal of the limb if anaesthesia is
increasing depth of halothane anaesthesia may
inadequate.
 result in increased respiratory rates. Furthermore,
The whisker reflex in cats, where pinching of
today in a clinical patient, more than one anaes-
the pirna elicits a twitch of the whiskers, has been
 thetic or preanaesthetic agent is generally used
used to assist in titration of pentobarbital to an
 and the cardiopulmonary effects are determined
adequate depth of anaesthesia. After administra-
 by the combination of agents used and the dose
tion of one-third to one-half of the calculated dose 
rates.
FlG. 2.4 The central position of the eye, with a brisk palpebral reflex,is observed typically during ketamine anaesthesia in
cats.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 35
CAPNOMAC
ULTIMA
SETUP
AUTO
HONITOR
C02
SELECT
SETUP
AGENT
SCREEN
96
TRENDS
CAL
ERASE
40
EVENT
RESET
ELP?
C02
（mHg）02
N20
IS0
RR55
C02
ALARM
h6
1.1
NORMAL
1.5
SCBEEN
SILENCE
56
门
SUSPEND
2h:80
POWER
FIG.2.5 This gas analyser (Capnomac UltimaTM, Datex-Engstrom Inc.,Tewksbury, Maryland, USA) is monitoring a 27 kg
female English Bulldog that was premedicated with glycopyrrolate and butorphanol and anaesthesia induced with propofol.
She has been breathing oxygen and isoflurane at a vaporizer setting of 2.5% for 5 minutes.The monitor indicates that the
inspired (Fi) isoflurane concentration is less than the vaporizer setting and that the end-tidal (ET) isoflurane concentration
is less than MAC value.
Anaesthetic gas analysers
opioid, or by medetomidine or detomidine.
For these animals, the anaesthetic administration
The anaesthetic gas analyser measures the concen-
must be adjusted according to observation of
reflexes and cardiovascular response to surgical
and expired gases (Fig. 2.5). The gases are sampled
stimulus.
at the junction of the endotracheal tube and
It should be noted that the gas analyser also
breathing circuit either directly in-line or by con-
accurately measures inspired anaesthetic concen-
tinuous aspiration of gases at a rate of 150 ml/min
tration, which may be substantially lower than the
to a monitor placed at some distance from the
patient. To assess the depth of anaesthesia, the
end-tidal concentration of inhalation agent is
TABLE 2.2 MAC* values for halothane,
measured (alveolar concentration is measured at
 isoflurane and sevoflurane in several species
the end of exhalation) and compared with the
Anaesthetic
Dogs
Cats
Horses
MAC value for that inhalant anaesthetic and
agent
species (Table 2.2). Higher than MAC values will
Halothane
0.9
1.1
0.9
be required to prevent movement in response to
Isoflurane
1.4 
1.6
1.3
surgery, usually 1.2 to 1.5 times MAC, when anaes-
Sevoflurane
2.8
2.6
2.3
thesia is maintained almost entirely by inhalation
 MAC = minimum alveolar concentration of anaesthetic
agent. Less than MAC value may be sufficient
agent required to prevent purposeful movement in 50% of
when analgesia is provided by neuroleptanalgesia,
anirmals in response to a standard painful stirmulus.
by continuous or intermittent administration of an
36 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
vaporizer setting in rebreathing systems during
TABLE 2.3 Methods of assessing cardiovascular
anaesthesia in large dogs, horses and ruminants.
 function in anaesthetized clinical patients
In the absence of an accurate measure of anaes-
Heart rate
thetic concentration delivered, administration of
● Palpation of arterial pulse
an anaesthetic agent may be inadequate despite an
 Oesophageal stethoscope
 apparently adequate vaporizer setting. In a retro-
 Electrocardiogram
spective study of equine anaesthesia, it was found
● Blood pressure monitor
● Pulse oximeter
that horses were four times more likely to move
 during anaesthesia when an anaesthetic agent
Tissue perfusion
analyser was not used (C. M. Trim, unpublished
● Mucous membrane colour
observations).
● Capillary refill time
 Some monitors using the principles of infrared
● Blood pressure
● Bleeding at operative site
absorption spectrometry cannot be used for
 Observation of intestine colour
horses or ruminants as they will measure exhaled
● Urine output
methane and record the concentration as
halothane, for example the Datex Capnomac/
Arterial blood pressure
Normac (Taylor 1990). Analysers that use higher
● Palpation of peripheral pulse
● Doppler ultrasound method
wavelengths of infrared light should be un-
● Oscillometric method
affected by methane (Moens et al., 1991)
● Arterial catheterization
Computerized onoesthetic odministration
Heart rate monitors
The subject of computerized control of anaesthetic
Heart rates measured before anaesthesia are
administration has already been discussed in
greatly influenced by the environment. Means
Chapter 1. This control is usually exerted by refer
(standard deviations, range) of heart rates obtained
ence to the changes in the electroencephalogram
by palpation from healthy cats at home were 118
(EEG) with changes in depth of anaesthesia as
determined by clinical signs or end-tidal concen-
trations of halothane (Otto & Short, 1991; Ekstrom
et al., 1993; Johnson et al., 1994). The EEG may be
influenced by a variety of factors occurring during
anaesthesia, including cerebrocortical depression,
hypotension, hypoxaemia, and hypercapnia
Computerized EEG techniques, such as power
spectrum analysis (described by 80% or 95% spec-
tral edge frequency), have potential application for
monitoring depth of anaesthesia (Otto & Short
1991; Johnson et al., 1994; Otto et al., 1996), but it is
most important to recognize the limitations of the
raw EEG and its derivatives as discussed in
Chapter 1.
MOnItOrInG the CirCULAtION
The heart rate, tissue perfusion, and blood
FIG.2.6 The lingual artery is easily palpated in dogs
pressure of all anaesthetized animals should
midline on the ventral surface of the tongue,adjacent to
the nerve and between the lingual veins.The arrow in the
be assessed at frequent regular intervals (Table
photograph points to a line drawn adjacent to the lingual
2.3).
artery.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 37
The lowest acceptable heart rates during anaes-
thesia are controversial, but reasonable guidelines
are 55 beats/min for large dogs, 65 beats/min
for adult cats, 26 beats/min for horses, and
Transverse
50 beats/min for cattle. Heart rates should be
facial artery
    so paa s  
immature animals. It should be remembered that
heart rate is a major determinant of cardiac output,
consequently, bradycardia should be treated if
blood pressure and peripheral perfusion are also
decreased.
Heart rate may be counted by palpation of a
 peripheral arterial pulse, such as the femoral
artery in dogs and cats, lingual artery in dogs (Fig.
2.6), facial, median or metatarsal arteries in horses
(Fig. 2.7), and femoral, median, or auricular arter-
ies in ruminants and pigs.
Facial artery
Lateral
Oesophageai stethoscope
nasal artery
The oesophageal stethoscope (Fig. 2.8) is a simple
FIG.2.7 Sites for palpation of arterial pulse or catheter
method of monitoring heart rate in dogs and cats.
placement for blood pressure measurement in horses.
This monitor consists of a tube with a balloon on
mean (SD 11, range 80 to 160) beats per minute
the end which is passed dorsal to the endotracheal
compared with mean 182 (SD 20, range 142 to 222)
tube and into the oesophagus until the tip is level
when obtained by electrocardiography in the vet-
with the heart. The open end of the tube is con-
erinary hospital (Sawyer et al., 1991).
nected to an ordinary stethoscope headpiece, to a
FlG.2.8 The oesophageal stethoscope.lt may be used with a single earpiece or with a conventional stethoscope
headpiece.This is a simple and inexpensive monitoring device for heart beat and respiratory activity.
38PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
single earpiece that can be worn by the anaes-
 small animals, clip electrodes and ECG paste , and
thetist or surgeon, or connected to an amplifier 
 selecting ECG Lead II on the oscilloscope (Fig.
that makes the heart sounds audible throughout
2.9A). Poor contact of the electrodes to the skin
the room. This monitor provides only information 
 from hair bunched in the clips, or close proximity
about heart rate and rhythm; the intensity of
 to another electrical apparatus, such as the hot
sound is not reliably associated with changes in
water circulating pad, can result in electrical inter-
blood pressure or cardiac output. Other electronic
ference that obscures the ECG. The leads should
oesophageal probes are available to provide heart
not be placed over the thorax as breathing will
rate, and some also may produce an ECG and
 move the electrodes and result in a wandering
oesophageal temperature.
ECG baseline (Fig. 2.9B).
Sinus arrhythmia is abolished when atropine
has been administered. Other arrhythmias, for
Electrocardiogrophy
example second degree atrioventricular heart
Heart rate and rhythm can be obtained from an
block and premature ventricular contractions,
electrocardiograph using standard limb leads in
aas) juaan oads anmban jou Aeu no Aew
0:24A
3
82
B
C
FIG. 2.9 A Normal Lead Il ECG from a Labrador anaesthetised with halothane. B ECG with a wandering baseline
blood pressure recorded from a horse anaesthetised with isoflurane.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 39
Chapter 20). Dogs with premature ventricular con-
Tissue perfusion is usually decreased when the
tractions (PVCs) from myocardial ischaemia as a
 gums are pale, rather than pink, and the capillary
result of a road accident or gastric dilatation and
refill time (CRT) exceeds 1.5 seconds, or the mean
volvulus may be treated with antiarrhythmic
 arterial pressure (MAP) is less than 60 mmHg.
drugs before anaesthesia. Rather than completely
When MAP is above 60 mmHg, palpation of the
abolish all arrhythmias, the aim is to monitor
strength of the peripheral pulse and observation of
blood pressure and tissue perfusion and adjust
oral membrane colour and CRT should be used to
anaesthetic management to ensure that myocar-
dial and respiratory depression are minimal.
diac output.
A frequently used monitor lead in equine
anaesthesia is the 'base-apex' lead. The right arm
electrode is clipped on the neck in the rightjugular
Arterial blood pressure
furrow and the left arm electrode is passed
Systolic (SAP), mean (MAP), and diastolic (DAP)
between the forelimbs and clipped at the apex of
arterial pressures in awake healthy animals are
the heart over the left 5th intercostal space several
approximately 140-160 mmHg, 100-110 mHg, and
inches from the midline. The left leg electrode is
 85-95 mmHg, respectively. Excepting when pre-
dipped on the neck or on the shoulder. Good elec-
medication has included detomidine or medeto-
trical contact is achieved with alcohol or electrode
midine or when anaesthesia was induced with
paste. Lead I is selected on the electrocardiograph
ketamine or tiletamine, arterial blood pressure is
 amd the normal configuration includes a negative
decreased from the awake value during anaesthe-
R wave (Fig. 2.9C). A bifid P wave is frequently
sia. Arterial blood pressure is lower in paediatric
observed in the normal equine ECG.
patients than in mature animals. For example,
There is a high incidence of sinus arrhythmia
healthy 5 or 6-day-old foals anaesthetized with
isoflurane had an average MAP of 58 mmHg.
heart block in conscious unsedated horses
When the same foals were reanaesthetized 4-5
(Robertson, 1990). In contrast, AV block during
weeks later, the average MAP had increased to 80
anaesthesia is uncommon except when the horse
mmHg, with a corresponding decrease in cardiac
has been premedicated with detomidine, or sup-
index (Hodgson et al., 1990).
plemental intravenous injections of xylazine are
Hypotension may be defined as a mean arterial
given during anaesthesia. The appearance of this
pressure of less than 65 mmHg in mature animals.
arrhythmia during anaesthesia on any other occa-
An MAP as low as 60 mmHg may be allowed in
sion is cause for concern as this rhythm may
dogs and cats provided that the mucous mem-
progress within a few minutes to advanced heart
brane colour is pink and CRT is 1 sec. This com-
block (P waves only, no ventricular complexes)
bination of values may occur during inhalation
and cardiac arrest. Atrial fibrillation and VPCs
anaesthesia at the time of minimal stimulation
during preparation of the operative site and before
associated with hypotension.
the onset of surgery. MAP is not usually allowed to
fall below 65-70 mmHg for any length of time in
anaesthetized horses because of the increased risk
Tissue perfusion
for postanaesthetic myopathy. When hypotension
Evaluation of tissue perfusion can be done by con-
is documented, appropriate treatment can be
sidering gum or lip mucous membrane colour, the 
instituted, such as decreasing anaesthetic depth or
capillary refill time, and the blood pressure. High
mean arterial pressure does not guarantee ad-
istration of fluids or administration of a vasoactive
equate tissue perfusion. For example, when blood
drug such as dopamine, dobutamine, or ephed-
 pressure increases during anaesthesia in response 
rine. The outcome of untreated severe or pro-
to a surgical stimulus, cardiac output may be 
longed hypotension may be unexpected cardiac
decreased due to increased afterload from peri-
arrest during anaesthesia or blindness or renal fail-
pheral vasoconstriction.
ure after recovery from anaesthesia. In equine
40 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
practice, consequences also include the potentially
fatal syndrome of postanaesthetic myopathy.
 An approximate estimate of blood pressure can
be made from palpation of a peripheral artery.
However, in states associated with vasodilatation,
a peripheral pulse can be palpated at pressures as
low as 50 mmHg and, in some cases, palpation
alone does not suggest the urgency for treatment
that is frequently warranted. Furthermore, it is not
 uncommon for heart rates to be within an accepted
normal range while blood pressure is low or
decreasing.
 Measurement of blood pressure can be made
easily; equipment cost varies. The investment in
time and money is worthwhile in animals at risk
for hypotension, such as small animals and horses
anaesthetised with inhalation agents, and in
FIG.2.10 Sites for application of the Doppler probe for
 animals with abnormalities likely to give rise to
indirect measurement of arterial blood pressure in dogs.
complications during anaesthesia. The least
I & 2: Ulnar artery on the caudal surface of the forelimb,
expensive techniques are the Doppler ultrasound
above and below the carpal pad;3: cranial tibial artery on
technique in dogs and cats, and direct blood pres-
the craniolateral surface of the hindlimb; 4 & 5:saphenous
artery on the medial surface of the flexor tendons and on
the plantar surface of the paw proximal to the foot pad;6:
n horses.
dorsal pedal artery;7:coccygeal artery on the ventral
surface of the tail.
Doppler uitrasound for indirect measurement of blood
cuff air bladder centred over the ventral surface of
pressure
the tail. The probe is taped distal to the cuff over
Hair is first clipped from the skin on the palmar
the coccygeal artery in the ventral midline groove.
surface of the paw of dogs and cats (Fig. 2.10).
 The coccygeal artery can be used for this technique
A probe covered with contact gel is placed over
in adult cattle but the results are not reliable. In
the artery and taped in place (Fig. 2.11). Ultra-
foals and small ruminants, the probe can be taped
sound waves emitted from one of the two piezo-
 over the metatarsal artery on the lateral surface of
electric crystals embedded in the probe passes
the hind limb or the common digital artery on the
through the skin and deeper tissues. A structure
medial side of the forelimb distal to the carpus.
which is stationary will reflect sound back to the
The cuff is secured around the limb above the
 a  m  
hock or carpus. In pigs, the probe is most reliable
(Stegall et al., 1968). Moving objects, such as ery-
when taped over the common digital artery on
throcytes and the artery wall, will reflect some of
the caudomedial aspect of the forelimb. The cuff
the sound at a different frequency (Doppler-shift).
 should be placed between the carpus and the
The change in frequency can be heard through a
elbow but, because of the triangular shape of the
loudspeaker as an audible swooshing sound with
forearm, it may be unable to occlude blood flow
each pulse.
when inflation of the cuff causes it to slip down
A cuff is wrapped snugly around an extremity
 over the carpus. The width of the air bladder with-
proximal to the probe, in dogs and cats with the
in the cuff is important for accuracy; a bladder that
centre of the inflatable part of the cuff on the me-
is too narrow will overestimate blood pressure and
dial aspect of the limb. The cuff is cormected to an
 one which is too wide will underestimate it. A cuff
anaeroid manometer and a bulb for manual infla-
that is attached too loosely or slips down the
tion of the cuff with air (Fig. 2.12). In horses, the
extremity and becomes loose, will result in an erro-
cuff is wrapped around the base of the tail with the
neously high value.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 41
.35.
FIG. 2.II Doppler-shift pulse detector. One
piezoelectric crystal emits incident ultrasound signal while
the other receives the reflected signal from cells in flowing
blood.The frequency shift between the incident and
reflected sound is converted to audible sound.
To measure blood pressure, the cuff is inflated to
above systolic pressure to occlude the artery and
no sound is heard. The pressure in the cuff is
gradually released until the first sounds of blood
flow are detected at systolic pressure. As addition-
al pressure is released from the cuff, diastolic pres-
FIG.2.12 Measurement of arterial pressure in a dog by
sure is heard as a change in character of sound
taping a Doppler probe over an artery distal to the carpal
from a one or two beat sound to a multiple beat
pad so that audible sounds of arterial pulses are emitted
sound, to a muffling of sound, or to a growl. This
from the box. A blood pressure cuff is applied higher up
will occur 15 to 40 mmHg below systolic pressure.
the limb and the anaeroid manometer attached to the cuff
The sounds associated with diastolic pressure are
is used to identify systolic and diastolic pressures.
well defined in some animals but not at all clear in
others. In some animals a first muffling of beat
ments obtained from a femoral artery catheter
signals may occur 10 to 15mmHg above the
revealed that the indirect method consistently
true diastolic pressure. In this event, the second
umderestimated the pressure by an average of
change in beat signal will be more abrupt or dis-
14 mmHg (Grandy et al., 1992). Using this tech-
tinct. Mean pressure can be calculated as one third
nique of measuring blood pressure in mature hors-
of the pulse pressure (systolic-diastolic) plus dias-
es using a cuff width 48% of the circumference of
tolic pressure.
the tail (bladder width 10.4 cm) systolic pressure
A decrease in intensity of the pulsing sound,
was underestimated and diastolic pressure overes-
when the attachment and setting have been un-
timated by approximately 9% (Parry et al., 1982). In
changed, is a reliable indication of decreased blood
another investigation, measurements of systolic
flow. Furthermore, changes in cardiac rhythm are
arterial pressure in horses anaesthetized in dorsal
easily detected by listening to this monitor.
recumbency with halothane using a cuff 41% of the
 An investigation in cats comparing the Doppler
tail circumference was reasonably accurate but in
ultrasonic method, using a cuff placed halfway
 5% of the horses this technique had an error range
between the carpus and the elbow, with measure-
of ± 20 mmHg (Bailey et al., 1994).
42 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Oscillometry for indirect measurement of blood pressure
An evaluation of the DINAMAP model 1846SX
comparing direct measurement of blood pressure
Devices that non-invasively measure peripheral
from the dorsal pedal artery with measurements
blood pressures using the oscillometric method
obtained from a cuff applied at various sites on the
o e Sue Anone Aq aeado Aera
forelimb, hindlimb, and tail determined that the
placed around an extremity (Fig. 2.13). As pressure
is released from the cuff, pressure changes occur-
closest correlations were from a cuff on the tail or
at a proximal site on the hindlimb (Bodey et al.,
ring within the cuff as a result of adjacent arterial
1994). The tail cuff delivered the best reproducibil-
pulsations are detected by a transducer within the
ity in conscious dogs and although the systolic
monitor. Values for systolic, diastolic, and mean
 pressure obtained from the tail cuff was substan-
arterial pressures, and heart rate are digitally
tially higher than direct values, the tail systolic
displayed and the monitor can be programmed to
 pressure correlated best with changes in direct
automatically measure at a specific time interval.
blood pressure. In anaesthetized dogs, mean pres-
Artefactual pressure changes induced in the
sures obtained from a cuff applied to a proximal
cuff by movement of the extremity, for example,
site on the hindlimb were significantly correlated
during preparation of the surgical site, will either
to mean direct pressures, whereas systolic and dia-
induce abnormal readings or prevent the monitor
 stolic pressures were on average 8 and 5 mmHg.
from obtaining a measurement.
 respectively, higher than directly measured pres-
Published results of comparisons between
sures (Bodey et al., 1994).
measurements of blood pressure obtained by indi-
Measurements obtained from a DINAMAP
rect and direct methods have identified variability
 model 8100 using a cuff around the metacarpus or
according to the monitor used, cuff size, and site of
metatarsus and cuff width 40-60% of limb circum-
application of the cuff. The closest correlations
between direct and indirect measurements have
ference were compared with direct measurement
occurred in anaesthetized dogs, using cuff widths
of blood pressure from a catheter in the abdominal
between 40 and 60% of the circumference of the ex-
aorta of medium to large-sized anaesthetized dogs
 tremity, at systolic pressures greater than 80 mmHg.
(Sawyer et al., 1991). No differences were found in
FIG. 2.13 The DINAMAP 8300 (Sharn,Tampa,Florida, USA) utilizes the oscillometric method of measuring arterial blood
pressure non-invasively.
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 43
measurements recorded from cuffs applied to
placed close to the base of the tail,but in this
either forelimb or hindlimb. Differences between
author's opinion more accurate readings are
indirect and direct measurements were statistic-
obtained with the cuff applied approximately
ally significant but not considered to be clinically
10 cm from the base of the tail, where the tail dia-
significant. In general, indirect pressure measure-
meter is constant for the length of the cuff. Early
ments were lower than direct measurements
investigations of the DINAMAP confirmed accu-
and indirect systolic pressure was found to have
rate and clinically useful values for arterial pres-
the most accurate correlation. At systolic pres-
sure using a cuff width 24% of the tail
sures of lower than 80 mmHg, indirect pressure
circumference in ponies (Geddes et al., 1977) and
measurements were 6 to 15% higher than direct
25-35% in horses (Latshaw et al., 1979; Muir et al.,
measurements.
1983). However, measurements were inaccurate at
In a clinical study of dogs anaesthetized for a
heart rates of less than 25 beats/ minute. Our experi-
variety of soft tissue surgical procedures, indirect
ence using a Model 8300 DINAMAP and a cuff
measurements of blood pressure using the
width 3540% of the tail circumference ratio (child
DINAMAP model 8300 and a cuff around the
 or small adult cuff for a mature horse depending
metatarsus with the arrow directly over the pedal
on tail thickness and the amount of hair) has been
artery were compared with pressures recorded
that the mean arterial blood pressure value
from the dorsal pedal artery in the opposite limb
obtained from this monitor is usually the same as
(Meurs et al., 1996). It was concluded that measure-
that obtained by direct blood pressure measure-
ments taken at a single point in time varied widely
ment. Occasionally, the DINAMAP recorded pres-
between indirect and direct methods, and that sin-
sures 10 to 20 mmHg higher than the true mean
gle values do not provide reliable information
arterial pressure.
about changing blood pressure. When five sequen-
In summary, indirect method of measurement
tial readings over 30 minutes were averaged, this
of blood pressure provides useful information in
model had a sensitivity of 100% (i.e. the method
most horses, but may produce erroneous values
correctly identified a direct MAP of less than
in a small number. Consequently, blood pressure
60 mmHg 100% of the time) in this population of
should be measured by direct means whenever
animals, of which 73% were normovolaemic
(Meurs et al., 1996). A positive predictive value of
 80% was calculated, which indicates that the abili-
ty of this method to detect correctly a true MAP of
less than 60 mmHg was 80% and that the method
mcorrectly predicted hypotension 20% of the time.
Cranial
Six sites for placement of the cuff have been
tibial artery
evaluated in anaesthetized cats using the
DINAMAP model 8300 (Sawyer, 1992). The great-
est accuracy was obtained with the cuff placed
between the elbow and carpus with the cuff arrow
on the medial side of the limb. An evaluation of the
Dorsal
Datascope Passport revealed that this model did
pedal artery
not accurately estimate direct blood pressure in
cats (Branson et al., 1997).
In horses, the DINAMAP is a commonly used
monitor utilizing the oscillometric method of
blood pressure measurement. The cuff is wrapped
around the tail of mature horses or around the
hind limb near the metatarsal artery in foals. The
cuff should not be wrapped tightly. Some invest-
FIG.2.14 Sites for insertion of arterial catheters on the
igators have recommended that the tail cuff be
cranial aspect of the right hindlimb of a dog.
44 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
possible in horses at risk of developing low
blood pressure, for example, during inhalation
anaesthesia.
Anaeroid
manometer
Fine nylon cathetcr
Direct meosurement of blood pressure
ur needle in artery
Measurement of arterial blood pressure directly is
Three-way tap
accomplished by insertion of a 20 gauge, 22 gauge
 or, in cats and small dogs, a 24 gauge catheter asep-
tically into a peripheral artery, usually the dorsal
Plastic lube
pedal artery, anterior tibial or femoral artery in
6-8cmlong:
dogs and cats (Fig. 2.14), the lateral nasal, facial,
transverse facial, or metatarsal artery in horses
(Fig. 2.7), or an auricular artery in ruminants and
Drip extension tube
Male Luer
pigs (Fig. 2.15). The catheter is connected by saline-
connection
filled tubing to either an anaeroid manometer (Fig.
2.16) or an electrical pressure transducer (Fig. 2.17)
Three-way
taps
for measurement of arterial pressure. Either an air
gap or a commercially available latex diaphragm
(Fig. 2.18) should be maintained next to the
anaeroid manometer to prevent saline entering the
manometer and to maintain sterility. An optional
20 l syringe
addition is a continuous flushing device (Fig. 2.19)
Drip extension tube
that can be inserted between the manometer or
FIG.2. 16 Inexpensive apparatus for the direct
transducer and the artery. This device is connected
measurement of mean arterial blood pressure.
to a bag of saline that has been pressurized to
200mmHg and will deliver 24 ml saline/hour to
help prevent clotting of blood in the catheter.
deflection of the needle is slightly less than the
 The needle of the anaeroid manometer deflects
values obtained by direct measurement (Riebold
slightlywitheach beat and thevalue at the upper
& Evans 1985). For accurate measurement, the
air-saline junction in the tubing connected to
the manometer, or the electrical transducer, are
zero reference points and should be placed level
Auricular
with the right atrium or the point of the shoulder
arteries
when the horse is in dorsal recumbency or level
with the sternal manubrium when in lateral
recumbency.
The anaeroid manometer costs very little but
provides only MAP. The initial cost of an electro-
cardiograph and blood pressure monitor can be
high, however, the electrical transducer does pro-
vide much more information, such as digital
values for SAP, MAP and DAP, heart rate, and a
waveform that can be observed on the oscilloscope
or paper printout (Fig. 2.20).
 Important advantages of direct measurement of
blood pressure are the reliability of measurement
FIG.2.15 Ink lines have been drawn over the auricular
and the ability continuously to observe the pressure
arteries in this goat.
and immediately detect an abnormality (Fig. 2.21).
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT45
FIG.2.17 Direct measurement of blood pressure in a horse using a catheter in the facial artery connected by saline-filled
tubing to an electrical transducer.
Central venous pressure
connect the manometer tube to the catheter. The
The apparatus for measurement of central venous
fall of fluid in the manometer is observed and
pressure (CVP) can include a commercially-avail-
Arnsan cn asuodsan u a-dans, aq pmous
able plastic venous manometer set or be con-
pressure changes. The central venous pressure is
structed from venous extension tubes and a
read off when fluid fall ceases.
centimetre ruler (Fig. 2.22). A catheter of sufficient
Venous pressures being low, the margin of error
length is introduced into the jugular vein and
introduced by inaccuracies in obtaining a suitable
advanced until its tip lies in the cranial vena cava.
aq Aew amssaid ciaz juasaidai ci juiod aouaiaja
The distance the catheter tip has to be introduced
clinically significant. Whatever apparatus is used,
is, initially, estimated by measurement of length,
the zero of the scale should be carefully located,
but once the catheter is cornected to the manome-
either by placing the patient and manometer in
ter its position may be adjusted until the level of
close proximity or by using a spirit level to ensure
fluid in the manometer tube moves in time with
the animal's respiratory movements. In dogs and
pressure in the right atrium but for practical pur-
cats the introduction of a catheter into the jugular
poses the most appropriate is the sternal manubri-
vein is often greatly facilitated by laying the
um which is easily located and is related to the
animal on its side and extending its head and neck
position of the right atrium in all animals, irrespect-
over a pillow or sandbag. If the catheter is to be left
ive of body position. Measurements of CVP are not
in position for a long time it is kept patent with a
significantly affected by positioning the animal in
drip infusion or the catheter is kept filled with
right or left recumbency or by catheter size,
heparin-saline solution (10 units/ml) between
although oscillations are more easily observed
measurements. Readings may be taken at any
with a 16 gauge catheter (Oakley et al., 1997).
time. If an intravenous drip is used it is turned full
CVP is used in the evaluation of adequacy
on and the stopcock manipulated first to fill the
 of blood volume, with the normal range being 0 to
manometer tube from the bag or botle and then to
5 cm H2O in small animals. Hypovolaemia is
46PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
mmHg
120
08
mmHg
dP/dt
120
80-
C
D
FlG. 2.20 Waveforms from direct measurement of the
arterial pressure.A Good trace.B Recording of the same
pressure but with excessive damping, systolic pressure
low, diastolic pressure high, mean arterial pressure
unchanged.C Recording of same pressures but with
resonance, systolic pressure apparently increased while
diastolic pressure reduced,mean pressure unchanged.
D llustration of how left ventricular contractility may be
estimated from the rate of rise of pressure during early
systole (dP/dt) while the shaded area gives an index of
stroke volume.
indicated when the CVP is less thian O cmH, O. An
increase in pressure above 12cmH2O may be
caused by fluid overload or cardiac failure.
Left atrial pressure (pulmonary artery wedge
FlG.2.18 Pressure transfer unit in which a latex
diaphragm isolates the anaeroid manometer from the
pressure)
fluid-filled catheter line.These units are presterilized and
disposable.
Left heart failure may precede that of the right side
and precipitate pulmonary oedema without a rise
in central venous pressure. The pulmonary artery
FIG.2.19 Continuous infusion valve for attachment to a pressure transducer. A pressurized bag of intravenous fluid is
connected to the plastic tube to give a continuous infusion of 3 ml per hour.With this particular version, rapid flushing of
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT47
1second
1minute
Tsecond
Arterial B.P.
150mmHg
150mmHg
ECG
FlG.2.2l Top:pressure trace from a dog's femoral artery.Bottom: Lead ll electrocardiogram. Circulatory failure from an
Overdose of pentobarbital. Note that while the pressure trace shows the circulation to be ineffective, the ECG trace is
little diferent from normal - heart rate monitors relying on the QRS complex for detection of the heart beat would,
under these circumstances, show an unchanged heart rate and in the absence of a blood pressure record encourage the
erroneous belief that all was well with the circulatory system.
wedge pressure (PAWP) is used as a measure of
the left atrial filling pressure. A balloon-tip
Balanced electrolyte
solution with
catheter is introduced into the jugular vein and its
administration set
tip advanced into the heart. Inflation of the balloon
with 0.5 ml air facilitates floating the catheter in the
bloodstream into the pulmonary artery and then
the catheter can be advanced until the tip is
wedged in a small pulmonary vessel. The meas-
 urement is made using the same apparatus as is
manometer
 used for the measurement of central venous pres-
calibrated
 in cm
sure or using an electrical pressure transducer.
Care must be taken to ensure that vessel occlusion
is not maintained between measurements or pul-
monary infarction may occur. If a balloon catheter
is used the balloon should only be inflated while
 measurements are made and if a simple catheter is
used it should be slightly withdrawn from the
wedged position between measurements.
ystopcock
Manometer connected
Zero on scale
Cardiac output
to jugular catheter
corresponds with
(covered by bandage
thoracic inlet
The measurement of cardiac output is not one
around neck)
which is routinely carried out in clinical anaesthe-
FIG.2.22 Schematic diagram of the apparatus for
sia. For research purposes it may be determined by
measurement of central venous pressure.
invasive methods such as the direct or indirect
48 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Fick estimations, dye (indocyanine green) or ther-
Haemorrhage % of blood volume
mal dilution. Modern non-invasive methods
10%
20%
30%
include Doppler shift measurements, including
colour Doppler displays, but the cost of the neces-
sary apparatus renders them impracticable for
0
most veterinary purposes.
20
30
Blood loss
Heart rate
Monitoring blood loss should include measuring
40
Mean arterial pressure
the volume of blood aspirated from a body cavity,
-50
Cardiac output
estimating free blood on drapes around the sur-
gical site, and counting blood-soaked gauze swabs.
FIG.2.23 Cardiovascular responses to graded
The volume of blood lost on the swabs may be
hemorrhage in five isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs. Results
estimated or the swabs weighed and, after the
are presented as percent change from values measured
before blood loss (adapted from Weiskopf et ai., I 98 I).
has been subtracted, applying the formula that 1g
weight equals 1 ml blood. Measurement of packed
draught horses and ponies, 100 ml/kg in Thorough-
cell volume is not useful in acute blood loss as this
breds and Arabians, 60 ml/kg in sheep.
value will not change initially. Once large volumes
Blood volume of paediatric patients may be
of balanced electrolyte solution have been infused
 50% greater than the blood volume of the mature
the packed cell volume and total protein concen-
 animal. The percentage of this volume that the ani-
trations will decrease. When evaluating packed
mal can lose before circulatory shock ensues
cell volume changes it is important to consider that
 depends to a large extent on the physical status of
anaesthesia per se will result in sequestration of red
the patient, the depth of anaesthesia, and the sup-
blood cells in the spleen and decrease the packed
 port treatment provided. The maximum blood loss
cell volume by up to 20%.
allowed before giving a blood transfusion is
In the conscious animal, loss of blood volume is
usually 20% of the estimated blood volume, how-
initially compensated for by increased heart rate
ever, in some animals up to 40% of the total blood
and cardiac contractility, together with peripheral
volume may be lost without onset of hypotension
vasoconstriction. These physiological responses
 or hypoxia if the patient has no major preanaes
are blunted or abolished during anaesthesia.
thetic illness, is ventilated with oxygen, the depth
Consequently, the significance of the blood loss
of anaesthesia is lightened, balanced electrolyte
may not be appreciated owing to maintenance of a
solution is infused intravenously, and vasoactive
normal heart rate. Furthermore, it should be
drugs are administered as needed.
remembered that when mean arterial pressure is
decreasing in response to haemorrhage, cardiac
output decreases to a greater extent (Fig. 2.23)
MONITORING THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
(Weiskopf et al., 1981).
Visual observation of respiratory rate and depth of
Measurement of arterial pressure is an import-
breathing is a basic estimate of adequacy of breath-
 ant step in the management of blood loss as oxy-
 ing. The respiratory rate may be counted by obser-
gen delivery to tissues is impaired when mean
vation of chest movement or movement of the
arterial pressure decreases below 60 mmHg. The
reservoir bag on the anaesthesia machine. The
potential impact of blood loss on the patient
Excursion of the chest, abdomen, or bag should be
may be evaluated better by assessing the volume
observed to gain an impression of the depth of
of blood loss against the total blood volume.
 breathing. In general, except possibly in horses, a
The blood volume varies between species and is
 spontaneous rate of 6breaths/min or less consti-
usually assessed in mature animals as 86 ml/kg
body weight in dogs, 56 ml/kg in cats, 72 ml/kg in
10 breaths/min or greater may provide adequate
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 49
ventilation but the breaths may be shallow and
animals. A micro technigue using 0.2ml blood
result in hypoventilation. Chest wall movement
drawn into a 1ml syringe can be used for very
with no corresponding movement of the bag is
small animals.
common with complete respiratory obstruction
The blood sample should be collected anaerobi-
cally slowly over several respiratory cycles and
without aspirating any air bubbles. After express-
Rate monitors and apnoea alarms
ing a drop of blood and any bubbles from the nee-
Rate monitors and apnoea alarms may use a ther-
dle, the syringe should be sealed either with a
mistor either connected to the endotracheal tube
special cap or by inserting the tip of the needle into
or placed in front of a dog's nose. The thermistor
a rubber stopper. The syringe should be inverted
detects temperature differences between inspired
several times to mix the blood with the heparin. If
and exhaled gases to produce a sigmal that drives a
the sample is not analysed immediately, the
digital rate meter to make a noise which varies in
syringe should be immersed in a container con-
intensity or pitch in time with the animal's breath-
taining ice and water. The temperature of the an-
 ing. An alarm soundsif a constant gas temperature
imal should be measured at the time of sampling.
is detected. Like the oesophageal stethoscope that
The blood sample is then introduced into
counts only heart rate, the respiratory rate monitor
equipment incorporating electrodes measuring
registers rate only and not adequacy of ventilation.
pH, PCO2 and PO2. The machine may use the
measured values to compute bicarbonate (HCO3),
total CO2 (TCO2), base excess (BE) and oxygen sat-
Tidal and minute volume monitors
uration (SaO2). The patient's temperature is
The volume of each breath (tidal volume) and the
entered into the blood gas analyser for appropriate
volume of gas inhaled or exhaled per minute
adjustment of pH and PO2. The patient's haemo-
(minute volume) can be measured in small an-
 globin concentration must be known for an accur-
imals by attaching a gas meter such as a Wright's
ate measure of base excess. Fully automated pH
respirometer within the circle circuit or to the
q aiemsoe Auaiy aie siasieue seg pooia pue
endotracheal tube. The respirometer has a low
Expensive. Portable and less expensive equipment
resistance to breathing and is reasonably accurate
is
available, for example,
StatPal?(PPG
over volumes ranging from 4l/min to 15l/min
but under-reads below 4l/min. Gas meters suffi-
TABLE 2.4 Normal values for pH, PaCOz, and
ciently large for adult horses are not routinely
PaO, in mature conscious unsedated animals.
utilised but domestic dry-gasmeters can be incor-
Values for PaCOz, and PaO, given as pKa
porated in large animal breathing systems.
(mmHg)
Species pHa PaCO, PaO, References
Measurement of arterial pH and blood gas
tensions
Dogs
7.40
4.67
13.6
Horwitz et al.,
(35)
(102)
6961
Measurement of the partial pressure of carbon
Cats
7.34
4.5
13.7
Middleton et al.,
dioxide (PaCO2) in a sample of arterial blood by
(34)
(100)
1981
blood gas analysis is the best monitor of ventila-
Horses
7.38
5.0-6.1
13.5
Steffey et ail, 1987;
tion. Arterial blood may be collected from any
(3846) (100)
Clarke et al., 199 1;
Wagner et al.,
peripheral artery used for blood pressure meas-
199 I;Wan et al.,
urement. A small amount of 1:1000 heparin should
1992
be drawm into a 3 ml syringe using a 25 gauge nee-
Cattle
7.40
5.28
12.0
Gallivan et ai., 1 989
dle and the plunger withdrawn to wash the inside
(39)
(89)
Sheep
7.48
4.4
12.3
of the syringe with heparin. Excess heparin is then
Wanner &
(33)
(92)
Reinhart, 1978
squirted from the syringe leaving only syringe
Goats
7.45
5.48
12.6
Foster et a., 1981
dead space filled with heparin and no bubbles. A
(41)
(95)
1-2ml sample of blood is collected from most
50 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Industries, Inc., La Jolla, California, USA) and
The maximum possible PaO2 is governed by
i-STAT (Sensor Devices, Inc., Waukesha, Wisconsin,
the PiO2 and animals breathing oxygen may have
USA), although the cost of individual analyses is
PaO2 values up to five times greater than when
higher.
breathing air. The partial pressure of oxygen at the
Normal values for PaCO, in conscious unsed
alveolar level (PaO2) can be calculated from the
ated animals are given in Table 2.4. Increased
following formula:
PaCO2 (hypercapnia) is a direct consequence of
 PaO = [(barometric pressure - Pwater vapour)
hypoventilation and commonly occurs during
xFIO2]-PaCO2
anaesthesia. PaCO2 values exceeding 8kPa
(60 mmHg) are indicative of significant respiratory
where the value for water vapour is 6.25kPa (47
depression. A decrease in PaCO2 (hypocapnia)
mmHg) and FIO2 is the fractional concentration of
is due to increased ventilation. A PaO, less than
 Oxygen in inspired gas. Values for PaO2 greater
2.6kPa (20 mmHg) causes cerebral vasoconstric-
than 53.2kPa (400 mmHg) are expected in healthy
tion and cerebral hypoxia.
 dogs breathing oxygen. Horses and ruminants are
Hypercapnia in dogs and cats, particularly dur-
subject to lung collapse during recumbency and
ing halothane anaesthesia, may be associated with
anaesthesia and, consequently, ventilation and
 arrhythmias such as premature ventricular depo-
perfusion are mismatched within the lung, result-
larizations. In these animals intermittent positive
ing in a lower PaO2.
pressure ventilation (IPPV) will result in normal
Hypoxaemia may develop in dogs and cats
cardiac rhythm within a few minutes. Hyper-
during anaesthesia or recovery as a result of
capnia in horses during anaesthesia may cause
hypoventilation when breathing air. This situation
stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system,
is most likely to occur in old animals, animals with
increased blood pressure and cardiac output
hypotension, pneumothorax, pulmonary disease,
(Wagner et al., 1990; Khanna et al., 1995). Adverse
CNS depression from metabolic disease, or after
effects of hypercapnia are observed in some horses
administration of opioids. Hypoxaemia may also
as tachycardia of 60-70 beats/min, or hypotension
 develop during general anaesthesia as a result of
caused by
 decreased myocardial contractility.
 severe lung collapse. Patients at greatest risk are
These abnormalities are corrected within 5-
small animals during thoracotomy or repair of a
10 minutes by initiating controlled ventilation.
ruptured diaphragm, foals with pneumonia and
More frequently, the effects of hypoventilation
horses with abdominal distension from pregnancy
 during inhalation anaesthesia are manifested as an
or colic. Cyanosis may be suspected but is not
inadequate depth of anaesthesia despite a vaporis-
 always obvious, especially in horses. Monitoring
er setting that should provide a sufficient depth of
by blood gas analysis or pulse oximetry will con-
anaesthesia. In these animals, controlled ventila-
firm low PaO2 or SaO2
tion expands the lungs, thereby improving uptake
of anaesthetic agent and resulting in increased
Pulseoximetry
depth of anaesthesia.
Arterial oxygenation can be monitored by
Pulse oximetry is a non-invasive method of
direct measurement of the partial pressure of oxy-
continuously measuring haemoglobin oxygen
 gen in a sample of arterial blood (PaO2) or indirect-
saturation (SpO2). The sensor consists of light-
ly by attaching a sensor to the tongue, for example,
emitting diodes (LEDs) that emit light in the
and measuring oxygen saturation of arterial
red (660 nm) and infrared (940 nm) wavelengths
blood (pulse oximetry). PaO2 values are influ-
and a photodetector that measures the amount
enced by the inspired oxygen tension (PrO2), ad-
of light that has been transmitted through tis-
equacy of ventilation, cardiac output, and blood 
 sues (Tremper & Barker, 1990). The principles of
pressure. A PaO2 of 12-14.6 kPa (90-110mmHg) is
 measurement are based on the different light
 normal in unsedated animals at sea level and PaO2
absorption spectra of oxyhaemoglobin and re-
values less than 8kPa (60 mmHg) constitute
duced haemoglobin, and the detection of a pul-
hypoxaemia.
satile signal
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 51
FIG.2.24 Pulse oximeter (Heska Corporation, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA) showing the dog's heart rate and
haemoglobin oxygen saturation in waveform and as a digital number.
defined by the oxygen content (oxygen combined
Pulse oximeters display a digital record of pulse
with haemoglobin and dissolved in plasma) and
rate, with an audible beep, and some monitors dis-
the cardiac output, although oxygen delivery to an
play the oxygen saturation waveform (Fig. 2.24). A
 individual organ is influenced by the blood flow to
limit for acceptable saturation can be entered into
that specific organ. Hypoxia is inadequate tissue
the monitor, allowing an alarm to sound when
oxygenation caused by low arterial oxygen con-
lower values are sensed. The pulse rate displayed
tent or inadequate blood flow. An animal with a
on the oximeter must correspond to the rate
low haemoglobin will have low blood oxygen
obtained by palpation or ECG, and the sensor be in
content despite PaO2 and SaO2 being within
 position for at least 30 seconds, before the meas-
 urement can be assumed to be accurate. The shape
of the sensor, thickness of tissue placed within the
100
20
sensor, the presence of pigment and hair, and
80
Arterial
16
content (ml/100ml)
movement of the patient, can be responsible for
ation
sat.97%
the oximeter failing to measure oxygen saturation.
satura
PO100
It may be impossible to obtain a reading from a
60
Venous
 pulse oximeter when peripheral vasoconstriction
sat. 75%
oglobin
40
PO2 40
is severe, for example, after administration of
8
medetomidine in dogs or patients in circulatory
shock.
20
4
Arterial oxy gen saturation (SaO2) is the percent
of haemoglobin saturated with oxygen. The rela-
0
0
20
40
60
80
001
tionship between PaO2 and SaO2 is not linear
because haemoglobin changes its affinity for oxy-
PO2 (mmHg)
gen at increasing levels of saturation, and the asso-
FIG. 2.25 Graph depicting the relationship between
ciation is further altered by pH and temperature of
PaO2, haemoglobin oxygen saturation SaO2, and oxygen
the blood (Fig. 2.25). Oxygen delivery to tissues is
content.
52 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
their normal ranges. Anaesthetic management
was accurate only when placed on the dog's lip
of anaemic patients should, therefore, include
and when haemoglobin saturation was complete.
administration of 100% inspired oxygen and car-
The lip was found to be the best site in conscious
diovascular support.
animals. Another study of conscious dogs in an
A pulse oximeter detects inadequate blood oxy-
intensive care unit found that a circumferential
 genation, which should be taken as an indication
pulse oximeter probe around a digit or the
to supplement the animal's inspired oxygen con-
metatarsus  produced excellent  correlations
centration and to search for the cause. A pulse
between pulse oximeter and SaO2 values (Fairman,
oximeter is a valuable monitor for animals anaes-
1993). An evaluation of the Ohmeda Biox 3700
thetized with injectable anaesthetic agents and
with a human ear probe applied to the tongue
breathing air, or during inhalation anaesthesia in
 provided an accurate evaluation of SaO2 Jacobson
patients with pulmonary disease or traumatic pul-
et al., 1992). The pulse oximeter umderestimated
monary contusions or pneumothorax, and during
 SaO2 at higher saturations and overestimated
thoracotomy or major surgery in the cranial
SaO2 at saturations < 70%. However, as the
abdomen. It is also important to keep track of oxy-
authors pointed out, detection of hypoxaemia is
 genation in animals during recovery from anaes-
more important than measurement of the exact
thesia, in patients with partial airway obstruction,
degree of hypoxaemia. In our experience, a rectal
 or when ventilation is depressed or impaired
 sensor is useful for monitoring oxygenation in
by systemic opioid administration or residual
dogs and cats recovering from anaesthesia.
pneumothorax after thoracotomy or ruptured dia-
Different monitors, types of sensors, and altern-
phragm repair.
atives sites for measurement have been evaluated
The pulse oximeter is particularly valuable
in horses (Whitehair et al., 1990; Chaffin ef al.,
because it provides an immediate monitor of
1996). The Ohmeda Biox 3700 pulse oximeter and
decreased oxygen saturation, so that corrective
the Physio-Control Lifestat 1600 pulse oximeter
 treatment can be initiated before respiratory or
were evaluated in mature horses using the human
cardiovascular failure develops. Evaluation of the
ear lobe probe (Whitehair et al., 1990). Measure-
patient should take into account the fact that the
 ments were obtained from the tongue and the ear,
pulse oximeter does not measure carbon dioxide
with the most accurate measurements obtained
concentration or blood pressure and may continue
from the tongue; the oximeters failed to detect a
to read satisfactorily in the presence of hypoten-
pulse at the nostril, lip, or vulva. The results
sion. However, it can provide a warning of a
revealed that both oximeters tended to underestim-
severe decrease in tissue blood flow caused by
 ate saturation by 3.7%, with 95% of the oxygen
hypotension or decreased cardiac output
by
saturation values within 1 percent above or 8 per-
abruptly failing to obtain a signal. Loss of signal
cent below SaO2 (Whitehair ef al, 1990). The
 aueuo ou ym isnoauds so oste Ae
Nellcor N-200 pulse oximeter was evaluated in
the patient's condition and measurement
is
amaesthetized foals using a fingertip probe
restored by changing the position of the probe.
(Durasensor DS-100A) (Chaffin et al., 1996).
Compression of the base of the tongue between the
Attachment of the probe to the tongue or ear of the
foals slightly underestimated SaO2 within the
flow and signal acquisition from a probe clipped to
range of 80-100% saturation. In our experience, a
the tongue.
 sensor applied to the Schneiderian membrane in
Differernt body sites in dogs have been evaluated
the nostrils yields the most accurate results in
for accuracy of measurement of SaO2. In one in-
horses.
vestigation, a multisite clip probe placed on the lip,
Reflectance pulse oximeters detect changes in
tongue, toe web, and the tip of the tail gave accur-
absorption of light reflected from tissues, rather
ate and reliable estimations of SaO2 values during
thian transmitted through tissues as just described
conditions of full haemoglobin saturation and
(Watney et al., 1993; Chaffin et al., 1996). Attach-
moderate haemoglobin desaturation (92%) (Huss
 ment of a reflectance probe desigmed for the
et al., 1995). In this study, the human finger probe
human forehead to the ventral surface of the base
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 53
60
cO2
mm
D
comm
02%
N,0%
IS0%
RESP
0
94
0
IN
1.2
10
EX
49
87
0
1.1
foal is breathing spontaneously at I0 breaths per minute and the end-tidal concentration of carbon dioxide is 6.5 kPa (49
mmHg), confirming a degree of hypoventilation.
of the tail in foals had 100% sensitivity for
the animal by the surgeon. Changes in ErCO2 or
detecting SaO2 < 90% but consistently underesti-
waveform are useful indicators of significant altera-
mated the actual value (Chaffin et al., 1996).
tion in physiological status or equipment mal-
Therefore, this probesite combination will incor-
function (Table 2.5). A sudden decrease in ErCO2is
rectly identify some foals as being hypoxaemic.
cause for concermn and the patient and equipment
should be checked for hypotension, cardiac arrest,
or equipment leaks and disconnection. Exhaled
Capnography
water vapour condenses in the sampling tubing
Capnography indirectly estimates PaCO2 by
and water trap but when water enters the monitor
measuring the concentration of CO2 in expired
unpredictable and bizarre values are obtained.
 gas. Capnography is also useful for diagnosis of
Significant correlation between ErCO, and
mechanical problems in anaesthetic circuits, air-
 PaCO2 has been recorded in dogs and horses, with
way obstruction, and cardiogenic shock. Gas is
the PaCO exceeding the ErCO, by 1.00-4.65kPa
aspirated from the endotracheal tube or Y-piece
(Matthews et al., 1990) and the capnometer meas-
ures CO2 concentration by infrared absorption
TABLE 2.5 Troubleshooting the capnogram
(Fig. 2.5). Gases leaving the analyser should be
Unexpectedly low ECO2
directed back into the anaesthetic circuit or into the
Cardiac arrest
scavenging system. The capnometer provides
 Sampling line disconnected or broken
Endotracheal tube cuff deflated
breath-by-breath numerical values for carbon di-
Tidal volume too small
oxide concentration and some monitors display the
CO2 waveform (capnograph). The upward slope of
Failure to read zero on inspiration
the waveform represents expiration and the high-
(rebreathing)
est value is the end-tidal CO2 (ErCO2). The down-
Large apparatus deadspace
Exhausted soda lime
ward slope occurs during inspiration and the
 Expiratory valve on circle stuck in open position
inspiratory baseline should be zero (Fig. 2.26).
 Breathing rapid and shallow
Falsely low measurements of ErCO2 may occur
with the use of non-rebreathing circuits, because
Prolonged inspiratory or expiratory slope
the high gas flow results in dilution of expired
Slow inspiratory time
Obstruction or crack in the sampling line
 gases, and in animals with very small tidal vol-
Gas sampling rate too slow
umes or that are panting. Bumps and dips in the
Leak around connection to circle or tracheal tube
Expiratory plateau may be caused by spontaneous
Lung disease
respiratory efforts, heart beats, and movements of
54 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
(1-35mmHg) depending on the degree of
pulmonary shunting and lung collapse. ErCO2
thetized foals (Geiser & Rohrbach, 1992).
values exceeding 6.7kPa (50 mmHg) represent
increased PaCO2 and significant hypoventilation.
Monitoring acid-base status
However, when ECO is normal, PaCO2 may be
normal or increased and when ErCO2 is low,
The values for HCOg and TCO2 calculated from
PaCO2 may be low, normal or increased.
the measured values for pH and PaCO2 are influ-
Therefore, if blood gas analysis is available one
enced by both metabolic and respiratory physio-
direct measurement of PaCO2 is advisable when
logical functions and both values are increased by
the ErCO2 value is normal or low, particularly in
hypercapnia. The base excess value is obtained
dogs with pulmonary disease or during thoracoto-
by a calculation that defines the metabolic status
my, and anaesthetized horses at risk for severe
by eliminating deviations of the respiratory
lung collapse, such as colic patients or foals.
 component from normal. Zero base excess is nei-
The difference between PaCO2 and ErCO2 is
ther acidotic nor alkalotic. Positive base excess
usually less in dogs than in horses. In a group of
describes a metabolic alkalosis and a negative base
mechanically ventilated dogs in intensive care, the
excess (base deficit) defines a metabolic acidosis.
ETCO2 was on average 0.67kPa (5mmHg) less
The metabolic status of a healthy animal is influ-
than PaCO2 (Hendricks & King, 1994). None-
enced by its diet and, in general, carnivores usu-
theless, there was sufficient variation to conclude
ally have a mild metabolic acidosis and herbivores
that although high ETCO2 confirms the presence
 a metabolic alkalosis. An approximate estimate of
 of hypoventilation, some patients may be erro-
severity of acid-base changes can be obtained
neously identified as having adequate ventilation.
from the guideline that a 5 mmol/l change from
 In anaesthetized healthy mature horses an aver-
 normal is a mild deviation, a 10 mmol/l change is a
age difference of 1.6kPa (12 mmHg), range 0-4.3
moderate deviation, and a 15 mmol/l deviation is
kPa (0-32 mmHg) was recorded during halothane
severe.
(Cribb, 1988; Moens, 1989) and 1.9kPa (14 mmHg)
Chemical determination of TCO2 in serum
during isoflurane anaesthesia (Cribb, 1988). A
or plasma is often used as an estimate of blood
stronger correlation between ETCO2 and PaCO2
bicarbonate concentration and acid-base status
was identified during halothane compared with
isoflurane anaesthesia (Meyer & Short, 1985;
 able. However, the values obtained using auto-
Cribb, 1988). No sigmificant increase in PaCO2
analysers may be significantly different from that
ETCO2 difference was recorded with increased
obtained by calculation from pH and PCO,. Errors
duration of anaesthesia (Cribb, 1988; Moens,1989).
 arise from differences in handling the samples,
In one study of 110 horses, the PaCO-ErCO, dif-
such as exposure to air, underfilling of blood
ference was greater in heavier horses and was
collection tubes, delay in analysis, and chang-
 mcreased when horses were in dorsal recumbency
ing reagents. A combination of these factors
compared with lateral recumbency (Moens, 1989).
may result in lowering the TCO2 by as much as
A mean PaCO,-ErCO, difference of 1.8 ± 0.9 kPa
5.3 mmol/l in canine blood and 4.6mmol/l in
(13.4 ± 6.9mmHg: range 0-37.5 mmHg) was meas-
feline blood. This degree of inaccuracy might
 ured in 125 horses anaesthetized with isoflurane
result in erroneous assumptions and affect clinical
in dorsal recumbency for colic surgery (Trim, 1998).
decisions.
Spontaneously breathing foals anaesthetized with
Acid-base evaluation has always used the Van
isoflurane had a mean PaCO-ECO2 difference in
Slyke technique as the ‘gold standard' measure-
the first hour of anaesthesia of 0.9 kPa (7 mmHg)
eondde rens Aiaa e Auaan ao nq hua
which increased over 90 minutes of anaesthesia to
has been available in the form of a simple kit,
1.7kPa (13 mmHg), coincident with an increase in
 intended for use with serum (the ‘Harleco' sys-
PaCO2 (Geiser & Rohrbach, 1992). These authors
tem), which, when correctly used, is capable of
were unable accurately to predict PaCO2 from
high precision by clinical standards, allowing
ETCO2 and emphasized the limitations of cap-
TCO2 status to be determined with reasonable
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 55
confidence from samples of venous whole blood
sia. Small animals can be insulated from a cool
(Groutides & Michell, 1988).
environment by a variety of methods, including
plastic covered foam pads and hot water circulat-
ing pads to lie on, and wrapping of extremities
Monitoring body temperature
with towels or plastic insulation. Heat loss from
In the normal animal, body heat is unevenly
the respiratory tract may be minimized by ensur
distributed with the core temperature being 24 °C
ing that the inspired air remains warm and humid-
higher than the peripheral. General anaesthesia
ified. This can be accomplished by employing
inhibits vasoconstriction, allowing generalized
rebreathing circuits and low flow administration,
redistribution of body heat. An additional de-
or by attachment of a humidifier to the endotra-
crease in body temperature occurs as heat is lost to
cheal connexion of the anaesthetic circuit. Heat
the environment by exposure to cold operating
loss in small cats and dogs is effectively limited by
room conditions, skin preparation with cold solu-
 insertion of a low-volume passive humidifier (e.g.
tions, and abdominal surgical exposure. Further-
Humid-Vent?, Gibeck) between the endotracheal
more, anaesthetics inhibit thermoregulation,
tube and the anaesthetic circuit. The water vapour
vasoconstriction, and shivering, thereby decreas-
in exhaled gases condenses on the humidifier so
ing the thresholds for cold responses. Admini-
 that the inhaled air is moistened and warmed.
stration of unwarmed iv. fluid contributes
Fluids to be administered iv. should be warm,
substantially to the decrease in body temperature.
either in the bag or bottle by storage in an incub-
ator or at the time of administration by attaching a
warming block to the administration line. Active
Hypothermia
skin warming of the limbs may be the most effect-
Hypothermia, (35 °C; 96°F), may develop in an-
ive method of preventing heat loss (Cabell et al.,
imals anaesthetized in a cool environment. A
1997). This can be accomplished by application of
decrease in temperature of 1-3 °C below normal
hot water or hot air circulating devices, or warmed
has been demonstrated to provide substantial pro-
 towels and gel-filled packs.
 -xo p ist lqa is 
Special care should be taken to avoid skin
aemia in anaesthetised dogs (Wass et al., 1995).:
 sloughing from burns caused by application of
However, life-threatening cardiovascular depres-
devices that are too hot. Electrical heating pads
sion may develop when the temperature decreases
and packs heated in a microwave oven are fre-
below 32.8°C (91°F). Perioperative hypothermia
quently to blame for tissue damage. It should also
 is associated with several other significant adverse
be remembered that warming devices placed over
effects (Table 2.6) (Carli et al., 1991; Sheffield et al.,
the site of an intramuscular injection, or an opioid.
1994; Kurz et al., 1996).
filled patch applied to the skin, may alter local
Rectal or oesophageal temperature should be
blood flow and speed absorption of the drug.
monitored at regular intervals during inhalation
anaesthesia, during protracted total intravenous
anaesthesia, and during recovery from anaesthe-
Hyperthermia
 Increased body temperature is occasionally meas-
TABLE 2.6 Adverse effectsofperianaesthetic
ured in anaesthetized animals. Hyperthermia
hypothermia
developing in dogs and cats is most often caused
Impaired cardiovascular function
  p   assa ra q
Hypoventilation
Decreased metabolism and detoxification of
reaction to a bacterial infection, a contaminant in
anaesthetic drugs
Weakness during recovery from anaesthesia
iv. fluids, or drugs. Other causes of intraoperative
hyperthermia are loss of central nervous sys-
Decreased resistance to infection
Increased incidence of surgical wound infection 
tem temperature regulation, thyrotoxicosis, or
Increased postoperative protein catabolism
 phaeochromocytoma. Rarely, hyperthermia is a
manifestation of the malignant hyperthermia
56 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
syndrome (MH) which is a life-threatening hyper-
 only one of these signs present in a dog that was
metabolic condition triggered by stress and certain 
merely overheated.
anaesthetic agents.
The clinical picture of MH in horses is not clear
Hyperthermia (40.5°C; 105 *F) quite frequently
cut. Abnormal measurements may not be observed
develops in cats during recovery from anaesthesia
for some time after induction of anaesthesia.
that included administration of tiletamine-zolaze-
Observed signs may be suggestive that the horse is
pam. In these animals, the increase in temperature
 in a light plane of anaesthesia, however, the earliest
is associated with increased muscle activity such
changes are usually increased PaCO2 and ErCO2
as paddling, uncoordinated movements, or pur-
Heart rates may be mildly elevated and arterial
 poseful movements directed at restraints or band-
blood pressure is often within the normal range for
 ages. Treatment that is usually effective includes
inhalation anaesthesia (Manley et al., 1983; Klein ef
directing a flow of air over the cat from a fan
αl., 1989). Changes in anaesthetic management may
placed outside the cage and providing sedation,
 permit the horse to survive anaesthesia but severe
for example, butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg i.m., with or
 rhabdomyolysis developing during recovery from
without acepromazine, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.m
anaesthesia may necessitate euthanasia.
Malignant hyperthermid
Monitoring urine volume
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) occurs most fre-
The urinary output depends on the renal blood
quently during anaesthesia of human beings and
flow which, in turn, depends on cardiac output
pigs (McGrath, 1986; Roewer et al., 1995), but has
 and circulating blood volume, and thus it is a relat-
been reported to occur in dogs (O'Brien et al., 1990;
ively sensitive indicator of the circulatory state
Nelson, 1991), cats (Bellah et al., 1989), and horses
 during anaesthesia. Measurement of urine pro-
(Manley et al., 1983; Klein et al., 1989). Clinical
 duction is advisable in animals with severe chronic
signs of MH in pigs (p.366) usually include an
renal disease, renal failure, or circulatory failure
mcrease in temperature, increased respiratory rate
 from non-renal causes. The urinary bladder may
and depth, increased ETCO, and PaCO2, metabolic
 be catheterized using aseptic technique before
acidosis, tachycardia, hypertension, and arrhyth- anaesthesia or after induction of anaesthesia, and
       s
skin of the abdomen and snout. The soda lime  ous collection of urine.
canister on the anaesthesia machine may be-
Urine output of less than 1 ml/kg/hour is inad-
come excessively hot to touch and the absorbent equate and an indication for treatment. In event of
changes colour rapidly, reflecting massive carbon  inadequate urine flow, the anaesthetist should first
dioxide production. Rigidity of the jaw and limb check that the catheter is not blocked by mucus or
muscles may be observed as the condition pro-
 a blood clot and that urine is not pooling in the
 gresses. The animal dies unless the condition is
 bladder and cannot drain because of the relation-
treated early.
ship between the catheter tip and positioning of
 The clinical appearance of dogs developing MH
the animal.
 during anaesthesia may differ from pigs. Tachy-
cardia may not be a feature, skeletal muscle rigidi-
Monitoring blood glucose
 n   o   
not increase until the syndrome is well estab-
 Clinical signs of hypoglycaemia may not be obvi
lished (Nelson, 1991). The earliest signs may be
 ous during anaesthesia and the condition may go
related to increased CO2 production. These signs 
unrecognized. Consequences of hypoglycaemia
include an increased respiratory rate and depth,
are coma, hypotension, or prolonged recovery
rapid changing of soda lime colour, a hot soda
from anaesthesia with depression, weakness, or
lime canister, and increased EqCO2 in the absence
 even seizures.
of hypoventilation or malfunctioning one-way
 Animals at risk for developing hypoglycaemia
valves. Increased respiratory rate would be the
during anaesthesia include paediatric patients,
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 57
diabetics, and animals with hepatic disease, por-
The colour indicator incorporated in many brands
tosystemic shunt, insulinoma, and septicaemia or
of soda lime cannot be relied upon to indicate
endotoxaemia. Occasionally, healthy adult sheep,
freshness.
goats, and even horses develop hypoglycaemia
Interruption in the supply of O2 to the patient is
 one of the most serious events which can occur dur-
from anaesthesia. Routine monitoring of patients
ing anaesthesia and many anaesthesic machines
at risk for hypoglycaemia should include measure-
incorporate warning devices which sound alarms
ment of blood glucose at the start and the end of
if the O2 supply fails. However, when a rebreath-
 anaesthesia. Blood glucose can be determined rap-
ing circuit is being used, the delivery of O2 in the
idly using reagent strips and a glucometer.
a ieqh amsua shemie jou saop Aiddns seg usan
Animals with low blood glucose concentrations
inspired gases will contain sufficient O2 to support
pasuoloid 1o 1ofeu Suograpum asoun no Ae
life. Dilution of the O2 in a rebreathing system is
surgery, should have their blood glucose mon-
itored at approximately 1 hour intervals during
anaesthesia when denitrogenation of the patient is
anaesthesia.
taking place, or when NzO is used with low total
Patients at risk for hypoglycemia should be
flow rates of fresh gas. Measurement devices are
given 5% dextrose in water (D5W) as part of
available which can be used to demonstrate to the
the intraoperative i.v. fluid therapy. D5W should
anaesthetist that the patient is receiving an ad-
be infused at a rate of 2-5ml/kg/hour to maintain
equate concentration of O2 (Fig. 2.5).
blood glucose between 5.5-11.0mmol/l (100
Inspired and end-tidal concentrations of volatile
and 200mg/dl). Balanced electrolyte solution
 anaesthetics can be measured by sampling gases
should also be infused at the usual rate of
from the endotracheal tube cormector, as described
5-10ml/kg/hour.
 earlier in this chapter In addition to providing infor-
mation on the concentration of the volatile anaes-
thetic agent in the patient, the analyser acts as a
Monitoring neuromuscular blockade
The mechanical response to nerve stimulation (i.e.
 muscular contraction) may be observed following
the application of supramaximal single, tetanic or
REFERENCES
‘train-of-four’ electrical stimuli to a suitable
peripheral motor nerve, usually a foot twitch in
Bailey, J.E., Dunlop, C.1., Chapman, P.L., et al. (1994)
Indirect Doppler ultrasonic measurement of arterial
response to stimulation of the peroneal, tibial, or
blood pressure results in a large measurement error in
ulnar nerves. During general anaesthesia the
dorsally recumbent anaesthetised horses. Equine
response obtained may be influenced by the anaes-
Veterinary Journat 26(1): 70-73.
thetic agents and any neuromuscular blocking
Bellah, J.R., Robertson, S.A, Buergelt, C.D. and McGavin
drugs which have been used. Details about neuro-
halothane anesthesia ina cat. Veterinary Surgery 18(6):
muscular blocking drugs and the monitoring tech-
483488.
rique are given in Chapter 7.
Bodey, A.R., Young, L.E., Bartram, D.H., Diamond, M.J.
and Michell, A.R. (1994) A comparison of direct
 and indirect (oscillometric) measurements of arterial
MONITORING OF EQUIPMENT
 blood pressure in anaesthetised dogs, using tail and
limb cuffs.Research in Veterinary Science 57: 265-269.
Before any anaesthetic is administered all equip-
 Branson, K.R., Wagner-Mann, C.C. and Mann, F.A.
ment likely to be used should be carefully checked.
(1997) Evaluation of an oscillometric blood pressure
It is essential to ensure that the O2 supply will be
monitor on anesthetized cats and the effect of cuff
adequate, the circuit is free from leaks and that the
placement and fur on accuracy. Veterinary Surgery 26
correct volatile anaesthetic is in the vaporizer. If
347-353.
Cabell, L.W., Perkowski, S.Z.,Gregor, T. and Smith, G.K.
soda lime is to be used its freshness should be
(1997) The effects of active peripheral skin warming
checked by blowing CO2 through a small portion
'oy iah o1 hi sasneo siul rauaum aas oi Sunsat pue
Surgery 26: 79-85.
58 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Carli, F., Webster J., Pearson M., et at. (1991)
 atmospheres in conscious and anaesthetized dogs.
Postoperative protein metabolism: effect of mursing
Journat of Apptied Physiotogy,27(3): 370-373.
Huss, B.T., Anderson, M.A., Branson, KR, Wagner-Mann,
thermoneutral environment. British Journat of
C.C. and Mann, F.A. (1995) Evaluation of pulse oximeter
Arnaesthesia 66: 292-299.
probes and probe placerment in healthy dogs. Jourra? of
Chaffin, M.K., Mathews, N.S., Cohen, N.D. and Carter,
the American Animat Hospitat Association 31(1): 914.
G.K. (1996) Evaluation of pulse oximetry in
Jacobson, J.D., Miller, M.W, Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield,
anaesthetised foals using multiple combinations of
S.M. and Knauer, K.W. (1992) Evaluation of accuracy
 transducer type and transducer attachment site.
of pulse oximetry in dogs. Americar Journat of
Equine Veterinary Journal 28(6):437-445.
Veterinary Research 53(4):537-540.
Clarke, K.W., England, G.C.W and Goosens, L. (1991)
Johnson, C.B., Young, S.S. and Taylor, PM. (1994)
Sedative and cardiovascular effects of romifidine,
Analysis of the frequency spectrum of the equine
alone and in combination with butorphanol, in the
electroencephalogram during halothane anaesthesia.
horse. Journat of Veterinary Anaesthesia, 18:25-29.
Research in Veterirnary Science 56(3): 373-378.
Cribb, PH. (1988) Capnographic monitoring during
Khanma, A.K.,McDonell, W.N., Dyson, D.H. and Taylor,
anesthesia with controlled ventilation in the horse.
P.M.(1995) Cardiopulmonary effects of hypercapnia
Veterirary Surgery 17(1): 48-52.
during controlled intermittent positive pressure
Ekstrom, PM., Short, C.E. and Geimer, T.R. (1993)
ventilation in the horse. Canadian Journat of Veterinary
Electroencephalography of detomidine-ketamine-
Research 59:213-221.
halothane and detomidine-ketamine-isoflurane
Klein, L., Ailes, N., Fackelman, G., Kellon, E. and
 anesthetized horses during orthopedic surgery: a
 Rosenberg, H. (1989) Postanesthetic equine myopathy
comparison. Veterinary Surgery 22(5): 414-418.
suggestive of malignant hyperthermia. A case report.
Fairman, N. (1993) Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a
Veterinary Surgery 18(6): 479-482.
continuous monitoring technique in critically ill dogs
Kurz, A., Sessler, D.1. and Lenhardt, R. (1996)
in the small animal intensive care unit. Veterinary
Perioperative normothermia to reduce the incidence
Emergency and Criticat Care 2(2): 50-56.
 of surgical-wound infection and shorten
Forster, H.V., Bisgard,G.E. and Klein, J.P(1981) Effect of
hospitalization. New England Journat of Medicine
 peripheral chemoreceptor denervation on
334(19): 1209-1215.
acclimatization of goats during hypoxia. Journat of
Latshaw, H., Fessler,J.F., Whistler, S.J. and Geddes, L.A.
Applied Physiotogy 50(2): 392-398.
(1979) Indirect measurement of mean blood pressure
Gallivan, J.G., McDonell, W.N. and Forrest, J.B. (1989)
in the normotensive and hypotensive horse. Equine
Comparative ventilation and gas exchange in the
Veterinary Journat 11: 191-194.
horse and cow. Research in Veterinary Science 46(3):
Manley, S.V., Kelly, A.B. and Hodgson, D. (1983)
331-336.
 Malignant hyperthermia-like reactions in three
Geddes, L.A., Chaffee, V., Whistler, S.J., Bourland, J.D.
anesthetized horses. Journal of the American Veterinary
and Tacker, W.A. (1977) Indirect mean blood pressure
Medicat Association 183: 85-89.
in the anesthetized pony. American Journat of Veterinary
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield, S.M., Cormick, J.L. and
Sciernce 38(12): 2055-2057.
Jacobson, J.D. (1990) A comparison of end-tidal
Geiser, D.R. and Rohrbach, B.W. (1992) Use of end-tidal
halothane concentration measurement at different 
CO2 tension to predict arterial CO2 values in
locations in the horse. Veterinary Surgery 19:317
isoflurane-anesthetized equine neonates. American
(Abstract).
Journat of Veterinary Research 53(9): 1617-1621.
MeGrath, C. (1986) Malignant hyperthermia. Seminars in
Grandy, J.L., Dunlop, C.1., Hodgson, D.S., Curtis, C.R.
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small animat) 1:
and Chapman, PL. (1992) Evaluation of the doppler
238-244.
ultrasonic method of measuring systolic arterial blood
Meurs, K.M., Miller, M.W. and Slater, M.R. (1996)
pressure in cats. American Journat of Veterinary Research
Comparison of the indirect oscillometric and direct
53(7): 1166-1169.
arterial methods for blood pressure measurements in
Groutides, C. and Michell, A.R. (1988). A method for
anesthetized dogs. Journal of the American Animat
assessment of of acid-base disturbances. Clirica!
Hospital Asociation 32:471-475.
Insight, 3: 209-210.
Meyer, R.E. and Short, C.E. (1985) Arterial to end-tidal
Hendricks, J.C. and King, L.G. (1994) Practicality,
CO tension and alveolar dead space in halothane- or
usefulness, and limits of end-tidal carbon dioxide
isoflurane-anesthetized ponies. American Jourrat of
monitoring in critical small animal patients. purrat of
Veterinary Research 46:597-599.
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 4:29-39.
Middleton, D.J., Ilkiw, J.E. and Watson,A.D.J. (1981)
Hodgson, D.S., Dunlop, C.1., Chapman, PL. and Steffey,
Arterial and venous blood gas tensions in clinically
E.P. (1990) Cardiopulmonary effects ofisoflurane in
healthy cats. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
foals (abstract). Veterinary Surgery 19:316.
42(9): 1609-1611.
Horwitz, L.D., Bishop, V.S.,Stone, H.L. and Stegall, H.F.
Moens, Y. (1989) Arterial-alveolar carbon dioxide
(1969) Cardiovascular effects of low-oxygen
tension difference and aveolar dead space in
PATIENT MONITORING AND CLINICAL MEASUREMENT 59
halothane anaesthetised horses. Equire Veterinary
Soma, L.R. (1971) Depth of General Anaesthesia. In:
Journat 21(4):282-284.
Soma, L.R.(ed.) Textbook of Veterinary Anaesthesia.
Moens, Y.,Gootjes, P. and Lagerweij, E. (1991) The
Baltimore: Williams & Wikins Company,
influence of methane on the infrared measurement of
pp 178-187.
halothane in the horse. Jourrat of Veterinary Anaesthesia
Steffey, E.P., Dunlop, C.1., Farver, T.B., Woliner, M.J. and
18:4-7.
Schultz, L.J. (1987) Cardiovascular and respiratory
Muir, W.W., Wade, A. and Grospitch, B. (1983)
measurements in awake and isoflurane-anesthetized
horses.American Journal of Veterinary Rearch 48(1):
horses. Journat of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
7-12.
Association 182(11): 1230-1233.
Stegall, H.E., Kardon, M.B. and Kemmerer, W.T. (1968)
Indirect measurement of arterial blood pressure by
Journal of the Americar Veterinary Medicat Association
Doppler ultrasonic sphygmomanometry. Jourral of
198(6): 989-994.
Applied Physiology 25(1): 793-798.
O'Brien, P.J., Pook, H.A., Klip, A. et at. (1990) Canine
Taylor, PM. (1990) Interference with the Datex Normac
stress syndrome/malignant hyperthermia
anaesthetic agent monitor for halothane in horses and
susceptibility: calcium-hemostasis defect in muscle
sheep.Journalof the Association ofVeterinary
and lymphocytes.Research in Veterinary Science 48:
Anaesthetists 17:32-34.
124-128.
Tremper, K.K. and Barker, S.J. (1990) Monitoring of
Oakley, R.E., Olivier, B., Eyster, G.E. and Hauptman, J.G.
oxygen. In: Lake, C.L. (ed) Clinicat Monitoring.
(1997) Experimental evaluation of central venous
Philadelphia: W.B.Saunders Company,
pressure monitoring in the dog. Jourmal of the American
pp 283-313.
Animal Hospitat Asociation 33: 77-82.
Trim, C.M. (1998) Monitoring during anaesthesia:
Otto, K.A. and Short, C.E. (1991)
techniques and interpretation. Equine Veterinary
 Electroencephalographic power spectrum analysis as
Education (4): 207-218.
a monitor of anesthetic depth in horses. Veterinary
Wagner, A.E., Bednarski, R.M. and Muir, W.W. (1990)
Surgery 20(5): 362-371.
Hemodynamic effects of carbon dioxide during
Otto, K.A., Voigt, S., Piepenbrock, S., Deegan, E. and
intermittent positive-pressure ventilation in horses.
 Short, C.E. (1996) Differences in quantitated
American Jourrat of Veterinary Research 51(12):
electroencephalographic variables during surgical
1922-1929.
stimulation of horses anesthetized with isoflurane.
Wagner, A.E., Muir, W.W. and Hinchcliff K.W. (1991)
Veterinary Surgery 25:249-255.
Cardiovascular effects of xylazine and detomidine in
Parry, B.W., McCarthy, M.A.,Anderson, G.A. and Gay,
horses.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research 52(5):
C.C. (1982) Correct occlusive bladder width for
651-657.
indirect blood pressure measurement in horses.
Wan, PY., Trim, C.M. and Mueller, PO.E. (1992)
American Journat ofVeterirary Research 43:50-54.
Xylazine-ketamine and detomidine-tiletamine-
Riebold, T.W. and Evans, A.T. (1985) Blood pressure
zolazepam anesthesia in horses. Veterinary Surgery
measurements in the anesthetized horse: comparison
21(4):312-318
of four methods. Veterinary Surgery 14(4): 332-337.
Wanmer A. and Reinhart, M.E. (1978) Respiratory
Robertson, S.A. (1990) Practical use of ECG in the horse.
mechanics in conscious sheep: response to
In Practice 12(2): 59-67.
methacholine. Journat of Apptied Physiotogy 44(3):
Roewer, N., Dziadzka, A., Greim, C.A., Kraas, E. and
479482.
Schulteamesch, J. (1995) Cardiovascular and
Wass, C.T., Lanier, W.L., Hofer, R.E., Scheithauer, B.W.
metabolic responses to anesthetic-induced malignant
and Andrews, A.G. (1995) Temperature changes
hyperthermia in swine. Anesthesiology 83: 141-159.
of > 1 or =1 °C alter functional neurologic outcome
Sa wyer, D.C. (1992) Indirect blood pressure
measurements in dogs, cats and horses: correlation
with direct arterial pressures and site of measurement.
Watmey, G.C.G., Norman, W.M., Schumacher, J.P. and
In: Proceedings ofthe XXVHl Worid Smatl Animat
Beck, E. (1993) Accuracy of a reflectance pulse
Veterirary Association Corgress. Rome, Italy, 1992,
oximeter in anesthetized horses. Americar Jourral of
Pp 93-98.
Veterinary Research 54(4):497-501.
Sawyer, D.C, Brown M., Striler E.L., Durham, R.A.,
Weiskopf, R.B., Townsley, M.1., Riordan, K.K.,
Langham, M.A. and Rech, R. H. (1991) Comparison of
Chadwick, K., Baysinger, M. and Mahoney, E. (1981)
 direct and indirect blood pressure measurement in
Comparison of cardiopulmonary responses to graded
anesthetized dogs. Laboratory Animut Science 41(2):
hemorrhage during enflurane, halothane, isoflurane,
134-138.
and ketamine anesthesia. Anesthesia and Analgesia
Sheffield, C.W., Sessler D.1. and Hunt, T.K. (1994) Mild
60: 481491.
hypothermia during isoflurane anesthesia decreases
Whitehair, K.J., Watmey, G.C.G., Leith, D.E. and
resistance to E. coli dermal infection in guinea pigs.
DeBowes, R.M. (1990) Pulse oximetry in horses.
Acta Araesthesiologica Scandinavica 38(3): 201-205.
Veterinary Surgery 19(3): 243-248.
Introduction to general
3
anaesthesia: pharmacodynamics
and pharmacokinetics
'the tension of nitrous oxide in the blood is 50.5kPa
INTRODUCTION
(380 mmHg)' means that if a sample of blood were
placed in an ambient atmosphere containing
The term pharmacodyramics refers to the relation
nitrous oxide at a concentration of 50% v/ v (and,
ship between drug concentration and its clinical or
therefore according to Dalton's law, exerting a par-
pharmacological effect, while pharmacokinetics
tial pressure of 50.5kPa (380 mmHg) there would
refers to the mathematical description of the vari-
be no movement of nitrous oxide into or out of the
ous processes relating to drug movement from the
blood. 'Tension' is a term used by physiologists
site of its administration, followed by distribution
and anaesthetists, while physicists speak of 'par-
to the tissues and, finally, elimination from the
tial pressure'.
body. To paraphrase, pharmacokinetics is 'what
the body does to the drug' whereas pharmacody-
namics is 'what the drug does to the body'. They
SOLUBILITY COEFFICIENTS OF GASES
cannot be regarded as separate processes for drugs
At any given temperature the mass of a gas
produce effects in vivo which alter their own kin-
dissolved in a solution, i.e. its concentration
etic and dynamic profiles, for example by means of
in the solution, varies directly with its tension
acute haemodynamic effects and increased or
(Henry's law) and is governed by the solubi-
lity of the gas in the particular solvent. The
receptor regulation (Fig. 3.1).
solubility of anaesthetics varies widely and, there-
In the account of the pharmacokinetics of
fore, at any one tension, the quantities of the differ-
mhaled drugs which follows frequent reference is
ent anaesthetics in the solvent are not equal. The
made to tensions, solubilities and concentrations
solubility of anaesthetics in the blood and tissues
 of gases in solution. These terms may perhaps be
are best expressed in terms of their partition, or
best explained by considering specific examples.
distribution, coefficients. For example, the blood-
gas partition coefficient of nitrous oxide is 0.47.
THE TENSIONS OF AGENT DISSOLVED IN
This means that when blood and alveolar air con-
A LIQUId
taining nitrous oxide at a given tension are in
This is the pressure of the agent in the gas with
equilibrium, there will be 47 parts of nitrous
which the liquid should be in equilibrium. A liquid
oxide per unit volume (say per litre) of blood for
and a gas, or two liquids, are in equilibrium if,
every 100 parts of nitrous oxide per unit
when separated by a permeable membrane, there
volume (litre) of alveolar air. In general, the parti-
is no exchange between them. The statement that
tion coefficient of a gas at a stated temperature is
61
62 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Drug
Activity
Absorption
Free drug in plasma
Site for
therapeutic
effect
Redistribution to
inactive tissues
Site(s) for
Bound to plasma protein
side effects
Activity
Biotransformation
Activity
Excretion of metabolites
Excretion
 Reabsorption
Excretion of
unchanged drug
FIG.3.I Pathways for the uptake, distribution and elimination from the body of an active drug.
the ratio, at equilibrium, of the gas's concentration
in blood because their tissue-blood partition co-
on the two sides of a diffusing membrane or inter-
efficients are sufficiently close in unity.
face.
CONCENTRATION OF A GAS IN
Tissue solubility does not necessarily correlate
SOLUTION
with blood-gas solubility. The newer volatile
agents (e.g. isoflurane, desflurane, sevoflurane)
The concentration of a gas in solution may be
 may have a low blood-gas partition coefficient but
 expressed in a variety of ways including :
their brain-blood partition coefficient is not
1. The volume of gas which can be extracted
necesssarily lowered to the same extent. The
from a unit of volume of solution under
brain-blood partition coefficient can be estimated
standard conditions (v /v)
by dividing the brain-gas with the blood-gas par-
 2. The weight of dissolved gas per unit volume
tition coefficient. The brain-blood partition co-
of solvent (w /v)
efficients for halothane, enflurane, isoflurane and
3. The molar concentration, i.e. the number of
desflurane calculate to be 1.86, 1.73, 1.67 and 1.27,
 gram-molecules of gas per litre of solvent. The
respectively. Hence desflurane has a more rapid
molar concentration is the most useful - equi-
uptake in the brain tissue. For simplicity, in many
 molar solutions of gases of different molecular
theoretical calculations it is often assumed that in
weights contain equal concentrations of mole-
the brain and all other tissues (except fat) gases
cules. This would not be so if their con-
have very nearly the same solubility as they have
centrations in terms of w / v were equal.
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL ANAESTHESIA 63
the eventual saturation of the tissues. The tension
PHARMACOKINETICS OF INHALED
ANAESTHETICS
of the gas in the brain follows, with a slight delay,
its tension in the alveolar air. Since both the rate of
Inhaled anaesthetics have a pharmacokinetic pro-
induction and recovery from inhalation anaesthe-
sia are governed by the rate of change of the
file which results in ease in controlling the depth of
tension of the anaesthetic in the brain, and this in
anaesthesia as a result of rapid uptake and elimi-
turn is governed by the rate of change of tension in
nation: a knowledge of this profile can facilitate
the alveoli, the factors which determine the anaes-
their use in clinical practice. They carnot be intro-
thetic tension in the alveoli are obviously of very
duced into the brain without at the same time
 great importance.
being distributed through the entire body, and this
distribution exerts a controlling influence over the
The rate at which the tension of an anaesthetic
in the alveolar air approaches its tension in the
rate of the uptake or elimination of the anaesthetic
by brain tissue. Although with some agents there
inspired air depends on the pulmonary ventila-
may be some metabolism, all the gaseous and
tion, the uptake of the anaesthetic by the blood and
volatile substances used as anaesthetics may be
tissues and the inspired concentration. First, by
regarded as essentially inert gases as far as uptake
means of pulmonary ventilation the gas is inhaled,
 and elimination are concerned.
diluted with functional residual air, and enters the
alveoli. This is where diffusion occurs and nor-
mally the alveolar gas equilibrates almost immedi-
ately with the pulmonary blood which is then
UPTAKE OF INHALED ANAESTHETICS
distributed throughout the body. A second diffu-
If some factors are reduced to their simplest poss-
sion process occurs across the capillary mem-
ible terms, and certain assumptions are made, it is
branes of the tissues into the interstitial fluid and
possible to give approximate predictions relating
from there through the cell membranes into the
to inert gas exchange in the body (Bourne, 1964).
cells themselves. Venous blood leaving the tissues
These predictions are sufficiently realistic for prac-
is in equilibrium with the tissue tension. The blood
tical purposes and serve to illustrate the main prin-
from the tissues returns to the lungs, still carrying
ciples involved. Once these are understood more
some of its original content of anaesthetic, and is
elaborate expositions found elsewhere (Eger, 1974,
1990; Mapleson, 1989) should become reasonably
easy to follow.
100
Tail
For simplicity, the physiological variables such
as cardiac output and tidal volume must be
(Tissue saturation phase)
assumed to be unaffected by the presence of the
 gas, and to remain uniform throughout the admin-
'knee'
istration. Allowance cannot be made for alter-
ations in the tidal volume as administration
%
proceeds. The blood supply to the grey matter of
A
the brain must be assumed to be uniform and the
gas to be evenly distributed throughout the grey
matter. Finally, although in practice anaesthetics
Initial rise
are seldom administered in this way, the anaes-
(lung wash-in phase)
thetic must be assumed to be given at a fixed
inspired concentration, and, what is more, it must
5
10
be assumed that no rebreathing of gases occurs.
Time (min)
The tensions of the gas in the alveolar blood and
tissues all tend to move towards inspired tension
FIG.3.2 Typical alveolar tension curve for an inert gas
(Kety, 1951) but a number of processes, each of
inhaled at a fixed concentration from a non-rebreathing
which proceeds at its own rate, intervene to delay
system.
64 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
contains a slightly higher tension of the anaes-
A
thetic. It is in this manner that the alveolar (or
100-
arterial) and venous (or tissue) tensions of the
B
anaesthetic in question gradually, and in that
order, rise towards eventual equilibrium with the
inspired tension.
 As this complex process proceeds, the tension
F
6
of the anaesthetic in the alveolar air increases con-
%
50
tinuously, but not at a uniform rate. Plotted against
c
time, alveolar tension rises in a curve that is, in
A
 general, the same for every inert gas (Fig. 3.2). This
curve tails off and slopes gradually upwards until,
 after several hours or even days, depending on the
anaesthetic in question, complete equilibrium is
reached. The steep initial rise represents move-
10
0
10
ment of anaesthetic into the lungs, i.e. the pul-
monary wash-in phase. The slowly rising tail
Time (min)
represents more gradual tissue saturation. The
FlG.3.3 Alveolar tension curves for a totally insoluble
change from steep part of the curve to the tail
gas, A of low solubility, B (nitrous oxide) and a gas of
marks the point at which lung wash-in gives place
extremely high solubility, C all breathed at a constant
to tissue saturation as the most important in-
inspired concentration from a non-rebreathing system.
fluence. The tail can be very long if the anaesthetic
in question has a very high fat/blood partition
very short time, alveolar tension equalled inspired
coefficient.
tension (Fig. 3.3). The curve obtained would be all
initial rise and there would be no tail. Such a gas
BLOOD SOLUBILITY AND ALVEOLAR
could not ever be an anaesthetic, since none would
ever reach the brain.
TENSION
Agas of extremely low blood solubility (Fig. 3.3,
The shape of curve obtained with any given anaes-
curve B) would give an almost identical curve. The
thetic depends on a number of factors. These
loss into the pulmonary blood stream of only a
include such things as minute volume of respira-
 minute amount of the gas contained in the lungs at
tion; the functional residual capacity of the lumgs;
 any moment would bring the tension of the gas in
the cardiac output and the blood flow to the main
the blood into equilibrium with that in the alveolar
anaesthetic absorbing bulk of the body - muscles
air. The capacity of the blood for such a gas would
and fat. However, one physical property of the
be extremely small. Likewise, the capacity of the
 anaesthetic itself is considerably more important
entire body tissue (with the possible exception of
than all of these factors - the solubility of the
 fat) would be small, since as already pointed out,
anaesthetic in the blood. This is the factor which
the tissue-blood partition coefficients of most
determines the height of the ‘knee' in the alveolar
 anaesthetics are close to unity. If such an agent,
uptake curve. With anaesthetics of low blood solu-
even when given at the highest permissible con-
bility the knee is high; with high solubility the
centration of 80% with 20% of oxygen only pro-
kee is low. This may be illustrated by considera-
duced a faint depression of the central nervous
tion of the hypothetical extremes of solubility.
system, it could nevertheless be looked upon as a
A totally insoluble gas would not diffuse into
very active agent because it would be deriving its
the pulmonary blood and would not be carried in
effect through the presence in the brain of only a
it away from the lungs. If such a gas were inhaled
munute trace.
At the other hypothetical extreme would be a
 gas of very nearly infinite solubility in blood. All
nentially as lung washout proceeded until, after a
 s   s h g  s  e ig
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL ANAESTHESIA 65
TABLE 3.1 Partition coefficients of some inhalation anaesthesics at 37 *C
Partition coefficient
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Enflurane
Halothane
Blood-gas
0.42
1.40
0.60
2.00
1.94
Tissue-blood:
Brain
1.29
1.57
1.70
2.70
1.94
Heart
1.29
1.61
1.78
1.15
1.84
Liver
1.31
1.75
1.85
3.70
2.07
Muscle
1.02
1.92
3.13
2.20
3.38
Fat
27.20
44.90
47.59
83.00
51.10
any one moment would dissolve in the pulmonary
various sources but mainly from data sheets) are
blood as soon as the blood arrived at the alveoli.
shown in Table 3.1. The effect of the different solu-
The capacity of the blood and body tissues for such
bilities on the alveolar tension when the agents are
a gas would be vast. The alveoli tension curve (Fig.
administered at a constant inspired tension are
3.3, C) would be very flat, with virtually no rapid
shown in Fig. 3.4.
initial rise and a very slowly rising tail. Given
enough time for full equilibrium, it might be poss-
ible to achieve very deep anaesthesia by using a
THE TENSION OF ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
IN BrAIN TISSUE
minute inspired tension but of course, in one sense
In addition to the alveolar tensions, the anaes-
concentration in the brain would be enormous.
thetist is also concerned with the tension of anaes-
Ranging between these hypothetical extremes
thetic agents in the grey matter of the brain. In the
of solubility are the gaseous and volatile anaes-
(uasaid ae saueu ieonoued ssaun) sum
thetics. Their solubilities in blood and tissues
diffusion from the alveolar air to the blood is
for man and some animals (figures taken from
almost instantaneous, so that for theoretical pur-
poses the tension in the arterial blood leaving the
lungs can be regarded as equal to the tension in the 
1.0-
N2O
alveolar air. Only when the body has become
Desflurane
absolutely saturated does the arterial tension
equal the tissue tension. During the saturation
Isoflurane
process, and after the administration is stopped,
the tissue tension is accurately represented by the
 tension of the agent in the venous blood leaving
Halothane
作
0.5
that tissue. This lags behind the arterial tension by
an amount which depends mainly upon the blood
 supply to the tissue. Fatty tissues are exceptions to
this rule, for in them the relative solubilities play
 -dns pooq y e um sueio u led qeodu ue
ply such as the brain and heart, the venous tension
0-
rises quite quickly to the arterial tension. After
10
20
30
about 20 minutes (in man) with anaesthetics
Minutes of administration
whose solubility in grey matter is about equal to
that in blood, or perhaps 40 minutes in the case of 
FIG.3.4 Increase in alveolar tension (FA) towards
agents like halothane which are a little more sol-
inspired tension (Fl) during administration at a fixed
uble in grey matter, arterial and grey matter
concentration in a non-rebreathing system. Effect of blood
solubility.The curves are not drawn accurately and only
represent approximate,relative curves.
are almost equal (Fig. 3.3).
66 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
It follows from these considerations that if a gas
blood supply or high tissue-blood partition
has a low blood solubility, any change in its ten-
sion in the alveolar air is quickly reflected in the
saturated), elimination of the more soluble anaes-
 grey matter in the brain, whereas if the blood solu-
thetics will take time and recovery will be slow.
bility is high there will be a considerable delay
 Low blood solubility leads to rapid elimination of
because the whole body will act as a very large
 anaesthetics like desflurane and rapid recovery
buffer. Thus, with an inhalation anaesthetic, the
from anaesthesia.
speed with which induction of anaesthesia can be
At the end of anaesthesia the volume of nitrous
carried out (when the inspired tension is kept con--
oxide eliminated causes the minute volume of
stant) is governed by the solubility of the anaes-
expiration to exceed the inspired volume and this
thetic in the blood. Low solubility (e.g. desflurane)
 outpouring of nitrous oxide dilutes the alveolar
favours rapid induction, whereas high blood solu-
 content of oxygen. If the animal is breathing room
bility (methoxyflurane) leads to slow induction.
 air, the alveolar oxygen tension can fall to low lev-
The important point to note here is, of course, that
els, resulting in a severe reduction in PaO. This
so far all arguments have been based on the
phenomenon, called ‘diffusion hypoxia' can also
assumption that the inspired concentration is
 happen if nitrous oxide is cut off during anaesthe-
maintained constant. In fact, alteration of the
sia. Theoretically, it can happen with any agent,
inspired tension can do much to overcome the
but it is unlikely to have any ill effects with very
slow induction with agents of high blood solubil-
 soluble agents such as methoxyflurane, because of
ity. For example, if in animals methoxyflurane
the small volumes involved and the slow excretion
were givenat concentrations which would
 of the agent. The danger is greatest if two insoluble
give satisfactory anaesthesia afer full equilibra-
agents (e.g. nitrous oxide and desflurane) are
tion, induction might take many hours. It
administered together.
would be a very long time before the animal even
lost consciousness. The difficulty is, of course
SPEED OF UPTAKE AND ELIMINATION
in practice, overcome by starting the administra-
RELATED TO SAFETY OF INHALATION
tion not with this concentration, but with one
AGENTS
istered indefinitely, kill the animal. As the desired
Blood solubility is not only important as a factor
level of anaesthesia is reached the inspired concen-
influencing the speed of induction and recovery. It
tration is gradually reduced. Even so, induction
has wider implications; it determines (in an in-
with a very soluble agent such as methoxyflurane
verse manner) the extent to which tissue tensions
is slow.
keep pace with alterations in inspired tension and
It is in fact standard practice to hasten induction
thus it controls the rate at which anaesthesia can be
of anaesthesia in this way. However, the maximum 
 as aa e m ar aa
concentration which can be administered is
 such as diethyl ether or methoxyflurane no sud-
limited by the volatility of the anaesthetic, and its
 den change in tissue tension is possible; if gross
pungency. Many anaesthetics are so pungent or
 overdosage is given the anaesthetist has plenty of
time in which to observe the signs of deepening
trations.
unconsciousness and to reduce the strength of the
inhaled mixture. With an anaesthetic of low blood
solubility such as desflurane, however, increase in
RecoVErY FroM ANaESTheSIA
tissue tension follows very quickly after an
When the administration of the anaesthetic is ter-
 increase in the inspired tension; anaesthesia may
minated, its concentration in the inspired air can-
HI tmsa1 Aew asopraao ssoia e pue Aipide1 uadaap 
not be reduced (wash-out phase) to below zero.j
 is, therefore, very important with the less soluble
Although the full buffering effect of the body tis- anaesthetics to consider carefully the factors that
sues will not be seen after accelerated inductions   favour the giving of an overdose, the chief of
amd brief administration(those tissues with apoor
which must be volatility and potency.
Volatility
blood flow (which may be different, especially in
pathological conditions of the lungs); regional vari-
Volatility governs the potential strength of the
ations in ventilation/perfusion relationships in the
inspired mixture for obviously the more volatile
lungs; the blood flow through the tissues of the
the anaesthetic the greater the risk of its being
body; the partition coefficients of the anaesthetic
administered at a high concentration. Gaseous
between the gaseous or vapour state and lung
anaesthetics and liquid anaesthetics which have
tissue or blood, and between blood and the body
low boiling points are, therefore, potentially dan-
tissues; and the blood flow diffusion coefficient and
gerous. Because gases are passed through flow-
diffusion distance for each of the tissues of thebody.
meters the danger is, in their case, rather less, since
 In addition the anaesthetics themselves may
the anaesthetist has an accuracy of control only
modify many of the variables as administration
 possible with volatile liquids by the use of special,
proceeds. For example, most anaesthetics depress
often expensive vaporizers.
breathing and reduce the cardiac output. Con-
siderations such as these indicate only too clearly
Potency
why it is not yet possible to give a complete ac-
count of the uptake and elimination of inhalation
Potency determines the magnitude of a possible
anaesthetics as encountered in clinical practice.
overdose. With a weak anaesthetic such as nitrous
oxide overdose is imposssible; if it were not for
lack of oxygen, nitrous oxide could be given at
OTHER FACTORS AFFECTING INHALATION
100% concentration without danger. However, a
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION
concentration of 80% of an agent which was fully
effective when given at a concentration of say 5%
would constitute gross overdosage. This is, of
()
The vaporizer
course, self-evident, but as has been pointed out by
The output or concentration delivered from a
Bourme (1964), anaesthetists have in the past paid
vaporizer can be calculated but they are usually
insufficient attention to the precise meaning and
calibrated manually by the manufacturer. Modern
 s n  os  po sm
vaporizers are capable of delivering very accurate
confusion. An acceptable definition of potency
concentrations but there are several factors that
would do much to clarify thought relating to
can influence the concentration of a volatile agent
safety of inhalation anaesthetics.
in the gas mixture leaving the vaporizer (Fig. 3.5).
Older vaporizers were inaccurate at low gas
flow rates but most are, today, stable for flows of
UPTAKE AND ELIMINATION OF
100 ml to 5000 ml/min. The vapour pressure of
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS IN CLINICAL
the volatile anaesthetic in the vaporizing chamber
PRACTICE
is temperature dependent and most modern
The various assumptions made for the purpose of
theoretical or mathematical predictions of inhala-
anisms to correct for this so that output is constant
tional anaesthetic uptake and elimination cannot be
for a wide temperature range.
made in everyday practice. Many of the factors
Vaporizers are usually calibrated for a specific
which have to be regarded as constant if any mathe-
 carrier gas (mostly air or oxygen). When switching
matical prediction is to be made, do, in fact, vary
from pure oxygen as the carrier gas to a mixture of
considerably during the course of anaesthesia.
nitrous oxide and oxygen, some nitrous oxide dis-
These factors include the tidal volume; the physio-
solves in the volatile liquid anaesthetic in the
logical dead-space; the functional residual capacity
vaporizing chamber and thus the total amount of
(FRC - that volume of gas in the lungs which
gas leaving the chamber decreases, causing an
dilutes each single breath of anaesthetic); the thick-
 overall decrease in the concentration of the volatile
ness and permeability of the alveolar-capillary
 agent. When nitrous oxide is switched off, the dis-
membrane; the cardiac output and pulmonary
solved nitrous oxide evaporates from the liquid
68 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Temperature
Vaporizer
Delivery
Method of
Fresh gas flow
carbon dioxide
system
removal
Second gas effect
Concentration effect
Second gas effect
Alveolar ventilation
Lungs
VQ ratio
Solubility
Circulation
Cardiac output
Brain
Perfusion
Sedatives
Effect
Age
Surgery
FlG.3.5 The concentration cascade between the vaporizer and the brain tissue and some factors which influence it.
volatile anaesthetic agent, resulting in an increased
behaves like a ‘molecular sieve’ with saturable
flow through the vaporizing chamber and, there-
characteristics. Later a quasi-steady state occurs
fore, an increase in the delivered concentration.
and anaesthetic agents dissove in accordance with
This effect can lead to an error of 20-30% depend-
their partial pressure. Wet soda lime absorbs much
ing on the fresh gas flow (Lin, 1980).
less of volatile anaesthetics than when it is dry
because the'molecular sieve' is occupied by water.
A variable amount of the anaesthetic may be ab-
(2)
The breathing system
sorbed in the tubing of the breathing system. There
The fresh gas that flows into the breathing system
is a large difference between materials and poly-
(circuit) is diluted by the expired alveolar gas,
carbon is more inert in this respect than teflon.
causing a difference between the concentration of
In a circle system the fresh gas utilization will
the inflowing gas and the concentration which is
vary widely depending on the arrangement of
actually inspired. The lower the fresh gas flow
the system components. An arrangement with the
rates the
 greater this difference becomes.
spill-off valve between the fresh gas inlet and the
Absorption by tubing and any absorbent used to
lungs will result in a lower fresh gas utilization.
remove carbon dioxide, as well as high anaesthetic
Better characteristics with greater utilization are
uptake by the animal, may also increase this differ-
found where the spill-off valve closes during
ence. At the beginning of anaesthesia soda lime
inspiration and is as close to the lungs as possible.
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL ANAESTHESIA 69
（3）
Thelungs
Early distribution phase
al sauoeai seo ysany qnu mou uo Supuada
Or
ati
Late elimination phase
 lungs and how much anaesthetic is carried away
concentr
in the arterialized blood there will be a variable
concentration difference between the inspired and
arterial concentrations of the anaesthetic. The
Plasma
inspired concentration of the agent is the easiest
parameter to be changed by the anaesthetist in
order to influence the uptake and elimination of
the anaesthetic.
Time
With higher alveolar ventilation there is a more
FlG.3.6 Plasma concentration versus time relationship
rapid increase in the alveolar uptake curve. Dur-
following rapid intravenous administration of a drug such
ing spontaneous ventilation, the animal is to some
as propofol,illustrating the rapid decline in plasma drug
concentration during the early distributional (o) phase
volatile anaesthetics depress ventilation and con-
and the much slower decline in the terminal (β)
sequently, due to negative feed back, the speed of
elimination phase
uptake is reduced. The relative ventilatory depres-
the depressed circulation less of the agent is
sant effects of some inhaled agents are: nitrous
removed from the alveoli so that alveolar concen-
oxide < halothane (Bahlman et al., 1972) < isoflu-
tration rises more rapidly.
rane (Fourcade et al., 1971) <enflurane (Calverley
et al., 1978).
During spontaneous ventilation the alveolar
PHARMACOKINETICS OF
tension of halothane or isoflurane cannot increase
INTRAVENOUS ANAESTHETICS
to more than 23 mmHg regardless of the inspired
concentration because of the resultant ventilatory
The pharmacokinetics of the intravenous agents,
depression (Munson et al., 1973).
i.e. the processes by which drug concentrations at
Nitrous oxide, because it can be given in high
effector sites are achieved, maintained and dimin-
concentration, increases alveolar ventilation and
ished after intravenous injection, is of increasing
thus its own uptake via the concentration effect, in
importance today because of the use of computer
particular when the animal is hypoventilated and
models to study drug uptake and elimination, and
highly soluble agents are used (Eger, 1963). For
the use of microprocessors to control anaesthetic
example, if halothane is used in low concentra-
administration. For a more detailed account of
tions, its uptake is increased as well (second gas
their pharmacokinetics than follows here reference
effect) due to the additional inspiratory inflow by
should be made to standard textbooks of pharma-
the concentration effect of the nitrous oxide
cology (e.g. Dean, 1987; Pratt & Taylor, 1990).
(Epstein et al., 1964).
Pharmacokinetic variables commonly reported
for intravenous or otherwise parenterally adminis-
tered drugs are total apparent volume of distribu-
(4)  Cardiac output
tion, total elimination clearance, and elimination
Cardiac output is another major determinant of
half-life .
nhaled anaesthetic uptake. The higher the cardiac
output the more anaesthetic agent is removed
TOTAL APPARENT VOLUME OF
from the alveolar gas and the slower is the rise in
DISTRIBUTION
alveolar concentration. The volatile anaesthetic
The total apparent volume of distribution (Va)
agents all depress cardiac output and while with
relates the amount of drug in the body to the plas-
spontaneous ventilation a protective negative feed
ma or blood concentration:
back exists with respect to high concentrations, the
reverse is true for the circulation because due to
uonenuasuos Snip /Snip jo pumoue = PA
70 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Afrequently reported total volume of distribution
 centrations due to elimination clearance becomes a
is the volume of distribution at steady state, Vdssy
 sigrificant factor in the relationship of plasma (or
the total apparent volume a drug would have if it 
 blood) concentration with time only after the inital
were in equilibrium with all body tissues. Another
 rapid decline due to the distribution and redistrib-
commonly reported, and usually larger, total vol-
ution phase is over (Fig. 3.6).
ume of distribution is Vap which, together with
 It is now appreciated that the offset of clinical
elimination clearance (C?e), determines the elimi-
effect is not simply a function of half-life. It may be
nation half-life.
affected by the rate of equilibration between plas-
 In theory, a volume of distribution is measured
ma and effector site and duration of infusion.
by injecting a known quantity of the drug and,
Hughes et al. (1992) proposed the use of context-
after allowing an adequate period of time for it to
distribute, determining its concentration (both free
the time for the plasma conentration to decrease by
 amd combined) in the plasma . In practice the equi-
 50% after termination of an i.v. infusion designed
librium necessary is seldom attained because
 to maintain a constant plasma concentration.
before it is complete the opposing processes of
Context refers to the duration of infusion. They
metabolism or excretion come into operation.
demonstrated that context-sensitive half-lines of
A knowledge of the apparent volume of distri-
commonly used i.v. anaesthetic agents and opioids
bution makes it possible to calculate the doses to be
could differ markedly from elimination half-lives
administered initially and subsequenly to achieve
 and were dependent on duration of infusion.
desired concentrations in the blood and tissues.
COMPARTMENTAL MODELS
TOTAL ELIMINATION CLEARANCE (C'E)
AND ELIMINATION HALF-LIFE (t1/23)
Drugs injected into a vein are distributed directly
in the blood stream to the brain and the other tis-
Clg is an independent variable relating the rate of
 sues of the body. Those given by the alimentary
irreversible drug removal from the body to the
route (by mouth or high into the rectum) must first
plasma or blood concentration:
be absorbed into the blood and they then pass
through the liver before reaching the central nerv-
Clg = rate of elimination/drug concentration
ous system. Passage through the liver (the ‘first
Thus, Clg is the sum of the elimination clearances
 pass') is avoided if the drugs are given via the
of all the organs and tissues of the body, princi-
mucous membranes of the nose, the terminal rec-
pally the liver and the kidneys. The elimination
tum, or sublingually, so that administration of suit-
half-life, t1/23, is a dependent variable and is the 
 able drugs by these routes renders the effective
time required for the amount of drug in the body
dose similar to that needed by the intravenous
to decrease by one-half:
route. Elimination of these drugs from the body is
t1/23 =In2 x Vaβ/Cle
not a reversal of the process of absorption; they are
broken down, mostly in the liver, and are then
or, t1/23 = 0.693 x VaB/Cle.
 excreted mainly by the kidneys.
These pharmacokinetic variables can be useful for
When a drug is administered by intravenous
drugs with a rapid onset of action, such as intra-
 injection the onset and duration of its effect depend
venously administered propofol, but they do not 
 on the distribution to the tissues, tissue binding and
provide a complete description of their pharmaco-
 access to those tissues where the pharmacological
kinetics.The total volume of distribution is not
effect takes place, interaction with receptor sites,
realized until after extensive drug distribution and
 and elimination by various routes (Fig. 3.1). Since
redistribution has occurred. Thus, predicted early
the body is composed of innumerable tissue zones,
 drug concentrations based on the dose and Vdss
 each with a unique blend of perfusion, binding
will be very low. Although elimination clearance
 affinity, etc. for the drug, quantification of the whole
begins from the time the drug arrives at the clear- 
s ssoo aos ssn aissod ea si ssano
 plifications can be made. For any particular drug
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL ANAESTHESIA7I
the body can be thought of as comprising one or
which has the dimension of rate and will be stated
more compartments, each of which can be consid-
in reciprocal units (t-l). From this it follows that a
ered as a space throughout which the substance is
 graph of In(C/C) against time will yield a straight
uniformly distributed and has uniform kinetics of
line, of gradient -k. In practice, very few drugs
(861 pieddaus) hodsuen ro uonqns
behave according to one compartment kinetics,
Secondary dispersion of highly lipid-soluble
since some initial redistribution from the circula-
drugs such as the intravenous anasthetic agents
tion to other tissues is almost inevitable. The
 occurs as they cross cell membranes and the limit-
majority of drugs can be regarded as obeying what
ing factor to this process is the rate at which they
are known as zero order or first order kinetics.
are delivered to the cells - the blood flow to the tis-
A zero order process is one which occurs at a con-
 sues. Thus, organs with a rapid blood flow (e.g.
stant rate and is, therefore, independent of the
brain, heart, liver, kidney) initially receive a high
quantity of drug present at the particular sites of
concentration of the drug but, with time, this is
absorption or removal. A zero order process
depleted as the agent redistributes into moder-
requires a large excess of drug available on the
ately and slowly perfused tissues (the muscles and
entry side (e.g. intravenous infusion) or, on the
fat, respectively). The greater the lipid solubility of
removal side, a system of limited capacity.
the drug the more rapid its redistribution but even
A first order process is considered to be the most
charged drugs can be redistributed. Redistribution
common for both drug absorption and elimina-
also means that repeated doses of the drug can
tion. In a first order process the rate of the reaction
Exert prolonged effects due to the gradual passage
is exponentially related to the amount of drug
over an extended period from saturated sites
available. In other words, a constant fractior of the
where it is inactive, back into the plasma. Plasma
drug is absorbed or eliminated in constant time.
and the organs where blood flow is rapid can be
The rate constants ( kab and kel) are measurements
taken to represent one 'compartment', while mod-
 of these fractions since they represent the fraction
erately and poorly perfused tissues represent sec-
of the drug present which is absorbed or eliminat-
 omd and third compartments.
ed in unit time (usually in 1 minute or 1 hour).
The one compartment model
When drugs behave as if they were distributed
into a single uniform compartment excretion takes
2.00
place according to 'first order' kinetics, i.e. in any
time period a constant proportion of the remaining
drug will be eliminated; the elimination rate is pro-
1.00
portional to the concentration. When a drug con-
centration decreases in this constant proportion
conc.
manner, the concentration curve can be defined by
a simple exponential equation:
0.50
plas
t1/2
C/C =e-kt
Log
where C = drug concentration at time t; Co = drug
0.25
concentration at time 0 (i.e. immediately after i.v.
administration); k = a constant; t = time elapsed;
and e = the base of the natural logarithm (2.718).
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the
R
equation, a linear equation results :
Time (hours)
In (C/C) = -kt or In (C/C0) / t = -k.
FIG.3.7 Simplified diagram of first order elimination
Thus, the natural logarithm of the proportion by
from the plasma of an intravenous drug.The plot of log
which C has decreased to time is a constant (k)
plasma concentration versus time is linear.
72 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
A very simplified example of a first order elim-
What is known as 'the plateau principle’ applies
ination is shown in Fig. 3.7 where the natural log-
when a drug undergoes zero order absorption and
arithm (ln) of the plasma concentration of a drug
first order elimination. Under these conditions it
 given by a single intravenous injection is plotted
can be shown that when the concentration of the
 against time. Under these conditions a plot of In 
drug being administered is changed, the time
plasma concentration versus time is linear. The
taken to reach a steady state (plateau) level is
time taken for the plasma concentration to halve
 determined solely by the reciprocal of kel. The
(t1/2) is known as the plasma half-life. Va can be
height of the plateau reached depends on the con-
calculated for the initial concentration (i.e. that at
centration of the drug administered and when this
zero time) and from this, by assuming Va to be
height is attained the amount of drug given is
constant over the whole time period (which, in
 reduced to maintain it. Similar principles apply
practice, it seldom is), the clearance from the pla-
when a loading dose is followed by subsequent
sma can be calculated. A more accurate method
doses to maintain this level (Fig. 3.8). About 97% of
assumes (usually incorrectly) that the clearance
a drug will be eliminated from the plasma in about
from the plasma is a constant fraction of the instan-
5 x t1/2 (i.e. 50% + 25% + 12.5% + 6.25% + 3.125%).
taneous level, thus:
Plasma clearance (C1) =
The two compartment model
Original dose
Frequently, the serial plasma concentrations after
Area under curve to complete elimination.
the intravenous administration of a drug show an
initial rapid decay (the α phase), followed by a lin-
The area under the curve (AUC) is obtained from a
ear decline (the β phase) when plotted on the same
 graph of the actual (not log concentration) against
semi-logarithmic axes. The curve of best fit is a bi-
time. A drug with a high Ci will have a lower AUC
exponential decay, which is characteristic of drug
than one with a lower C1 given at the same dose. A
drug given to an animal with a reduced Ci result-
concentration in the central compartment (V1) of a
two compartment system where the drug is
ing from disease will have a higher AUC than the
assumed to enter V1, from which it is also elim-
same drug administered to an animal with a nor-
 mal C. It follows from this that the diseased animal
Drug
Drug
will be exposed to a higher drug concentration for
a longer period of time and greater and more per-
sistent drug effects can be produced unless the
Eliminatior
dose of the drug is reduced
A
B
Maximum 
Drug
Effective concentration
Minimum
Elimination
Plasp
c
FIG.3.9 A Two compartment model.B Mamillary
three compartment model. C Catenary three
Time
compartment model.lIn the mamillary three compartment
model both V2 and V3 exchange with V, whereas in the
FIG.3.8 Intermittent intravenous dosage to maintain an
catenary model V is'deep'to V2 and is not connected in
effective anaesthetic concentration.Single compartment
model.
some drug metabolites and has characteristics of its own.
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL ANAESTHESIA 73
inated. A second peripheral compartment (V2)
because of the wide range of solubilities in the var-
receives drug by redistribution from V, but elim-
ious tissues. Thus, the perfusion model is limited
ination of the drug does rot take place except by
by the number of identifiable tissues or organs for
transfer back to V, (Fig. 3.9).
which reliable data are available.
In the two compartment model the half-life is
 expressed as t1/23 which makes it clear that it is
limited to the β (elimination) phase of the decay,
PrACTICAL METHODS OF DRUG DELIVErY
DURING INTRAVENOUS ANAESTHESIA
but it depends on both elimination and distribu-
tion rates so that it cannot be regarded as a direct
It is now generally agreed that it is possible to
mdicator of elimination rate.
improve the titration of intravenous drugs by
administering continuous variable rate infusions
The multi-compartment model
rather than by injecting intermittent bolus doses.
Continuous infusion is the logical extension of the
A three compartment model has been used to
more traditional incremental bolus dose method
explain a curve of declining drug concentration
which inevitably leads to fluctuations in blood (and
which does not fit in a conveniently bi-exponential
hence brain) concentrations that follow each bolus
fashion and better fits a three-exponential equa-
dose (Fig. 3.8). To achieve an effective blood concen-
tion. However, great care must be exercised when
tration rapidly, it is necessary to administer a ‘load-
Expanding the number of terms, since the 'degrees
ing dose',just as with inhalation anaesthesia it is
 of freedom' in the regression equations are pro-
usually necessary to start with a high inspired
 gressively reduced, thus widening the confidence
concentration. Similarly, as with the inhalation
interval for the line. In other words, although a
anaesthetics, it is necessary to reduce the dose
more complex curve may fit measured concentra-
administered to maintain this effective con-
tion points better, the probability of it being correct
centration.
diminishes. There are two types of three compart-
 In practice, intravenous infusions are generally
ment models. In one, the 'mamillary' model, both
titrated on an empirical basis depending on the
peripheral compartments (V2 and Vg) connect to
response of the animal to the infusion rate.
the central compartment (Vi). For some drug
However, the aim for the future is to predict the
metabolites a different, 'catenary', model has been
dosage requirements from pharmacokinetic data.
proposed where V3 is 'deep' to V2, but is not con-
The smaller the loading dose, the greater the initial
nected to V1 and has quite different characteristics.
maintenance infusion rate needed because the
Rarely can a plasma decay curve be defined so
amount of drug infused must be equal to that
precisely as to permit justification of more than
which is removed from the brain by both distribu-
three exponential terms. Moreover, the compart-
tion and elimination processes. With time, distri-
ments carmot be equated with true anatomical vol-
bution assumes less importance, and the infusion
umes. The use of 'perfusion models’ overcomes
rate required to maintain any given blood concen-
many difficulties to some extent, but these require
tration becomes solely dependent on the elimina-
much more information. The perfusion model
tion rate. Thus, the infusion rate needed to
takes a number of anatomically defined compart-
maintain a given concentration in the body
ments and, by consideration of their volumes,
decreases as a function of the infusion period.
blood flow rates through them and tissue/blood
Considerations of this nature have led to the estab-
partition coefficients computes the movement of
drug between them. Although the distribution of
trolled infusion regimens following a loading dose
cardiac output in the anaesthetized horse (Staddon
 or inital high infusion rate.
et al., 1979) and the solubility of halothane in
Ideally, the anaesthetist would like to know the
equine tissues have been studied (Webb & Weaver,
 concentration of the anaesthetic agent attained and
1981) there is little other relevant information
maintained at its site of effect (i.e. the brain) but, as
in the veterinary literature. Moreover, the 
may be guessed from the above considerations,
tissue/blood partition coefficients vary widely
this is rarely possible. All that can be said is that
74 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
14
 REFERENCES
Bahlman, S.H., Eger, E.1. I1, Halsy, M.J., et al. (1972) The
12
cardiovascular effects of halothane in man during
w
spontaneous ventilation. Arnesthesiotogy 36(5): 494-502.
10
Bourme, J.G. (1964) Uptake , elimination and potency of
the inhalational anaesthetics. Araesthesin 19: 12-32.
Calverley, R.K.,Smith, N.T., Jones, C.W.,Prys-Roberts,
C. and Eger, E.1. 1II (1978) Ventilatory and
 cardiovascular effects of enflurane anesthesia during
spontaneous ventilation in man. Anesthesia and
Analgesia,54(6),610-618.
Dean, PM. (1987) Motecutar Foundations of Drug Receptor
Interactior.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eger, E.1. II (1963) Effect of inspired anesthetic
1
20
406080100120140
concentration on the rate of rise of alveolar
+
concentration. Anesthesiotogy 24: 153-157.
Time (min)
Eger, E.1. II (1974) Anesthetic Uptake and Action.
 Baltimore : Williams and Wilkins.
FIG.3.10 Blood propofol concentrations (μg/ml) in 6
Eger, E.1. 1I (1990) Uptake and distribution. In: Miller,
dogs (beagles) after an induction dose of 7 mg/kg followed
RD. (ed) Anesthesia,3rd Ed New York: Churchill
by an infusion of 0.4 mg/kg/min,illustrating the tendency of
Livingstone, Ppp 85-104.
blood concentrations to rise when the infusion rate is
Epstein, R.M., Rackow, H., Salanitre, E. and Wolf, G.L.
kept constant throughout I20 minutes of anaesthesia.
(1964) Influence of the concentration effect on the
uptake of anesthetic mixtures: the second gas effect.
the plasma or blood drug concentration is often
Anesthesiotogy 25: 364-371.
related to, and is a valid measure of, the required
Fourcade, H.E., Stevens, W.C., Larson, C.P. et al. (1971)
quantity so that f1/2 is, usually, the paramount
The ventilatory effects of forane, a new inhaled
anesthetic. Anesthesiology 35(1): 26-31.
determinant of dose frequency when intermittent
Hughes, M.A., Glass, PS.A. and Jacobs, J.R. (1992)
administration is practised. The main difficulties
Context-sensitive half-time in multicompartment
in devising suitable computer controlled infusion
 pharrmacokinetic models for intravenous anaesthetic
regimens for the induction and maintenance of
dhrugs. Aresthesiology 76(3): 334-341.
intravenous anaesthesia arise from the variable
Kety, S.S. (1951) The theory and applications of the
exchange of inert gas at the lungs and tissues.
response of individual subjects (Fig. 3.10). The
Pharmacotogicat Reviews (Battimore) 3: 141.
future of computer-controlled
1 infusions for
Lin, C.Y. (1980) Assessment of vaporizer performance in
administering
intravenous anaesthetics will
low-flow and closed-circuit anesthesia. Anesthesin and
depend on their safety, reliability, cost-effective-
Analgesia 59: 359-366.
ness and 'user friendliness'.
Mapleson, W.W. (1989) Pharmacokinetics of inhalational
anaesthetics. In: Nunn, Utting and Brown (eds)
The clinical anaesthetist may be forgiven for feel-
Generat Araesthesia,5th edn.London: Nunn, Utting &
ing that the sources of variation are so legion that in
Brown, pp. 44-59.
the case of many drugs used in anaesthetic practice
Munson, E.S., Eger, E.1. II and Bowers, D.L. (1973) Effects
it is better to titrate dose against response rather than
of anaesthetic-depressed ventilation and cardiac
attempt to predict the correct dose on theoretical
output on anesthetic uptake: a computer nonlinear
simulation. Arnesthesiology 38(3): 251-259.
grounds. This is a somewhat regressive pharmaco-
Pratt, W.B. and Taylor, P. (1990) Principtes of Drug Action:
logic approach to the administration of intravenous
he Basis of Pharmacology, 3rd edn. Edinburgh:
agents but, at the moment, it certainly offers a sim-
Churchilli-Livingstone.
pler model for everyday use. Even using this ap-
transfers within a multi-compartment system. journat
proach, a clear understanding of the ways in which
of Applied Physics 19: 70-76.
Aq paypow aq Aeu ,apou Snip, s,ewue au
Staddon, G.E., Weaver, B.M.Q. and Webb,A.1. (1979)
Distribution of cardiac output in anaesthetized horses.
Research in Veterinary Science 27(1): 38-45.
ments and, therefore, titrate with greater skill and
Webb, A.1. and Weaver, B.M.Q. (1981) Solubility of
delicacy.
halothane in equine tissues at 37°C. British Jourral of
Anaesthesia 53(5): 479-486.
Principles
of sedation, analgesia
and
premedication
in pharmacological texts (Booth, 1988), classifi-
INTRODUCTION
cation is based on medical clinical uses of the
There is considerable confusion concerning the
drugs. Thus, three categories are recognized:
terminology applied to sedative, tranquillizing
antianxiety drugs (or anxiolytics), antipsychotic
and hypnotic drugs, and no single classification is
drugs and the classic sedative/hyprotics. Benzodia-
completely satisfactory. However, the following
zepines are considered to be both anxiolytics and
definitions are commonly used and almost univer-
sedative /hypnotics. Drugs now classified as anti-
sally recogmized:
psychotic are those previously termed neuroleptics.
They reduce psychomotor agitation, curiosity and
● A hyprotic is a depressant of the central
apparent aggressiveness in animals, exerting
nervous system which enables the animal to go to
sleep more easily, or a drug used to intensify the
their effects by blocking dopamine-mediated
responses in the central nervous sy stem. Overdose
causes marked extrapyramidal symptoms and
medicine because the state of sleep, from which
parkinsonian-type tremor (Lees, 1979, 1979a;
the animal is easily aroused by minor stimulation
Vickers et al., 1984). Drugs of the butyrophenone
such as noise, is seldom recogmizable.
and phenothiazine groups are now categorized as
● A sedative is a drug which relieves anxiety
antipsychotics. The term ‘tranquillizer' is still
and as a result tends to make it easier for the
patient to rest or sleep - in fact they are usually
loosely used in clinical anaesthesia to cover both
the anxiolytics and antipsychotics (Dundee &
associated with drowsiness. Many drugs fall into
both the sedative and the hypnotic categories, the
Wyant, 1989), and will continue to be used in
places in this and later chapters.
differentiation usually being related to dose. They
are best considered as one group, exemplified by
The multiplicity of definitions is confusing and
chloral hydrate or xylazine where low doses cause
understanding of the major actions of the drugs is
drowsiness and higher doses cause sleep.
more important than being able to categorize
●A tranquillizer (or ataractic) is a drug with a
them, for with this understanding it is possible to
predominant action in relieving anxiety without
appreciate the limitations of the drugs in use. For
o poou pae Aauy uoepas anpum Suonpoid
example, if drugs such as the benzodiazepines are
behaviour but in recent years the terms have
used for premedication they will not quieten the
become unpopular (Tobin & Ballard, 1979) and
animal, but may make it more difficult to handle
indeed the classification of tranquillizers as
by removing its inhibitions, so that vicious animals
P[1oM au Kq paisagans ,rouru, pue ,roleu,
become more likely to bite or kick, and even
Health Organization is now rarely used. Instead,
friendly animals may become uncontrollable. By
75
76 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
reducing nervousness, phenothiazine derivatives
pharmacological actions varies from one com-
may make an animal more liable to sleep, but will
pound to another. These actions and side effects
not make the vicious animal easier to handle, no
have been well reviewed (Tobin & Ballard, 1979;
matter what dose is given.
Lees, 1979, 1979a).
Effective sedation depends on the careful selec
 Being dopamine antagonists, they have calm-
tion of the drug appropriate for the procedure, the
ing and mood-altering (antipsychotic?) effects,
species of animal, its temperament and condition, 
 and also a powerful antiemetic action, particularly
and must allow for possible side effects. Where
sedation is to control an animal so that it may
undergo surgery under local analgesia, comparat-
ively high doses of drugs may be used, but where
is an unwanted side effect, but in veterinary medi-
sedation fails to be adequate, resort may have to be
cine the phenothiazine derivatives are used prim-
made to drug combinations or to general anaesthe-
 arily for this purpose. In general, they do not have
sia. Where 'sedative' and 'tranquillizing' drugs are
 analgesic activity, although methotrimeprazine is
used for premedication, low doses are usually uti-
claimed to be a powerful analgesic in man. Their
lized and their effect on the subsequent depth and
major cardiovascular side effects are related to
duration of anaesthesia must be taken into
their ability to block α1 adrenoceptors, and thus
account. In all cases it is important that the arimal is
 having an anti-adrenaline effect. This results in
left undisturbed for an adequate period of time
marked arterial hypotension primarily due to
after administration of the sedative because stimu-
peripheral vasodilatation, and a decrease in
lation during the onset of the drug's action may pre-
packed cell volume caused by splenic dilatation.
vent the full effect from developing. To sedate an
They exert an antiarrhythmic effect on the heart
animal that is in pain a suitable analgesic must be
(Muir et al., 1975; Muir, 1981) which was originally
used, possibly in combination with a sedative drug.
thought to be due to a quinidine action on the
because most sedative drugs themselves have little
cardiac membrane (Lees, 1979, 1979a), but has
 paieassexa asneo Ae pue Aanoe pisaaeue ou 10
 more recently been suggested as being caused by a
reactions to painful stimulation.
blocking action on the cardiac α-arrhythmic re-
During the past two decades major pharma-
ceptors (Maze et al., 1985; Dresel, 1985). They have
 cological advances have been made in the recogmni-
a spasmolytic action on the gut although, at least
tion of specific drug receptor sites and of the 
in horses, gut motility is not reduced (J. Davis,
actions resulting from their stimulation or block-
 personal communication 1990). However, as they
ade. These advances have been followed by syn-
cause relaxation of the cardiac sphincter, in rumin-
thesis of potent drugs which act as agonists or as
ants they increase the chance of regurgitation
antagonists at such sites. Where receptors are
 should an animal become recumbent. They have
involved in sedation and anaesthesia, these
varying degrees of antihistamine activity and
advances have included a better understanding of
 also produce a partial cholinergic block. All phe-
the actions of existing drugs, availability of newer 
 nothiazine derivatives cause a fall in body temper-
and more potent agonist drugs, and of antagonists 
ature partly due to increased heat loss through
enabling the reversal of some sedative agent
dilated cutaneous vessels and partly through
effects.
resetting of thermoregulatory mechanisms. In
spite of all their side effects the phenothiazines are
well tolerated by the majority of normovolaemic
SEDATION
animals.
 Although promethazine is used as an antihista-
PHENOTHIAZINE DERIVATIVES
mine, the most commonly used phenothiazine
 poasdue se passep are dnoio stut jo san
today in the UK, North America and Australasia is
 acepromazine, but other derivatives such as chlor-
All have a wide range of central and peripheral
effects, but the degree of activity in different
used in some European and other countries.
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 77
Acepromazine
oncile these two statements but in veterinary med-
icine it seems to be generally agreed that acepro-
Acepromazine is the 2-acetyl derivative of pro-
mazine should be avoided in animals with a
mazine and has the chemical name 2-acetyl-10-
history of fits or which are in danger of convul-
(3-dimethylaminopropyl) phenothiazine; it is pre-
(ydeiooaAu ranje 8'a) uosea1 Aue roy sos
 pared as the maleate, a yellow crystalline solid.
In all species of animal acepromazine causes a
The drug has marked sedative properties, which
 dose related fall in arterial blood pressure and this
are responsible for its popularity in veterinary
property has been particularly well documented
medicine. Like all phenothiazine drugs, with low
in the horse (Kerr et al., 1972a; Glen, 1973; Muir &
doses there are effects on behaviour, and as the
Hamlin, 1975; Parry et al., 1982). This property is
dose is increased sedation occurs but the dose-
thought to be mediated through vasodilatation
response curve rapidly reaches a plateau after
brought about by peripheral α1 adrenoceptor
which higher doses do not increase, but only
 block. In most fit and healthy animals the lowering
lengthen sedation, and increase side effects (Tobin
 of blood pressure is well tolerated but in shocked
& Ballard, 1979). Further increase in doses may
or hypovolaemic animals a precipitous and even
cause excitement and extrapyramidal signs. In
fatal fall in arterial pressure can occur. The effects
 many animals sedation may be achieved with i.m.
of clinical dose rates of acepromazine on heart rate
doses as low as 0.03 mg/kg although the drug has
are generally minimal, most investigators having
been used safely at ten times this dose when pro-
found a slight rise (MacKenzie & Snow, 1977; Kerr
longed effects were required. A calming effect on
et al., 1972a; Parry et al., 1982) or no change (Muir
the behaviour of excitable animals can be seen at
et al., 1979). However, Popovic et al. (1972) reported
doses even below 0.03 mg/kg, making acepro-
that in dogs doses of 0.1 mg/kg i.m. acepromazine
mazine, particularly, a drug liable to abuse espe-
caused bradycardia and even sinoatrial arrest, and
cially in the equine sporting field. The length of
atrioventricular block has been noted in horses
action is prolonged. Clinically obvious sedation
(L.W. Hall, unpublished observations). These dif-
lasts 4-6 hours after doses of 0.2mg/kg, but in
 ferences in reports could be due to the route of
horses Parry and coworkers (1982) considered that
 administration, dose (0.1 mg/kg is high compared
there were detectable residual effects for 12 hours
with doses usually used in clinical practice), or
after doses of 0.1 mg/kg, and for 16-24 hours after
individual animal sensitivity. Changes in cardiac
0.15 mg/kg i.m. Owners of giant breeds of dog
output appear to be minimal (Maze et al., 1985).
often complain that their animals are sedated for
Acepromazine has antiarrhythmic effects and pro-
several days following acepromazine administra-
 tects against adrenaline induced fibrillation (Muir
tion, but scientific substantiation of these reports is
et al., 1981) and this property must be an advan-
not available.
tage when this drug is used for preanaesthetic
In practice, the dose is chosen in relation to the
medication.
length of sedation required and the purpose for
Fainting and cardiovascular collapse has been
which it is needed. However, the drug cannot be
reported to occur occasionally in all species of an-
relied upon to give sedation in all animals; some
imal following the use of even low doses of
individuals fail to become sedated and, in these,
 acepromazine. In some cases it may have been due
other drugs or drug combinations must be
to administration to a hypovolaemic animal but in
employed. Excitement reactions are rare but have
others it has not been explained. Some strains of
been reported following i.v. (Tobin & Ballard, 1979)
Boxer dogs are renowned for collapsing after a
or i.m. injection of the drug (MacKenzie & Snow,
A Aq uaan aunzae jo asop s Ara
1977). Other central effects of acepromazine
route, and it has been suggested that this may be
include hypothermia and a moderate antiemetic
due to orthostatic hypotension or to vasovagal
effect. Acepromazine is said to reduce the thresh-
synicope.
old at which epileptiform seizures occur but it is
Clinical doses have little effect on respiration
claimed that in man the phenothiazine derivatives
and although sedated animals may breathe more
have an anticonvulsant effect. It is difficult to rec-
slowly the minute volume of respiration is usually
78PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
unchanged (Muir et al., 1975; Tobin & Ballard,
detail and their conclusion was that, despite
1979; Parry et al., 1982).
the possible side effects involving the equine penis,
Acepromazine has little antihistamine activity
the drug remained a useful sedative in male
but has a powerful spasmolytic effect on smooth
horses. It was, however, recommended that only
muscle including that of the gut. It is metabolized in 
minimal doses of acepromazine should be admin-
the liver and both conjugated and non-conjugated
istered, preferably by i.m. rather than i.v. injection,
 metabolites are excreted in the urine. The drug
causes paralysis of the retractor penis muscle and
of the flaccid penis, the condition ought to be
protrusion of the flaccid penis from the prepuce in
treated quickly and efficiently (Jones, 1979). The
bulls and stallions; it was often given to facilitate
penis must be supported to prevent or reduce
examination of the penis. In horses, however,
swelling and the application of ice packs together
physical damage to the dangling penis may result
oe Ae tnssaon gnn pue ass ym
in swelling and failure of the organ to return with-
be ofhelp.
in the prepuce when the drug action ceases. This
In the UK acepromazine is available as 2% and
10% solutions for injection, and for oral use in dogs
tion of the penis, has been reported as occurring in
 and cats as tablets of 5 and 20 mg. The injectable
horses following the use of several phenothiazine
forms are non-irritant and are effective by i.v., i.m.
derivatives.
 and s.c. routes. Following i.v. injection sedation is
 Priapism has been reported in stallions follow.
usually obvious within 5 minutes but in some cases
ing the use of acepromazine as part of the neuro-
the full effects may not be apparent for 20 minutes
leptanalgesic mixture 'Large Animal Immobilon'
and when the drug is used for premedication by
(Pearson & Weaver, 1978). In most reports the stal-
this route at least this period should be allowed to
lion was being castrated but priapism has been
elapse before anaesthetic agents are given. Maxi-
encountered in other circumstances, for example
mal effects are seen 30-45 minutes after i.m. and
immediately after induction of anaesthesia withi an
s.c. injection. It has been claimed that absorption
 intravenous barbiturate in acepromazine premed-
from s.c. sites is poor and the fact that, at least in
icated horses (Lucke & Sanson, 1972). Current
 small animals, it works very well when given s.c.,
speculation is that priapism and flaccid protrusion
may indicate that even the minimum recommend-
of the penis is due to acepromazine blockade of
ed doses are larger than necessary. Given by the
oral route, absorption, and therefore its effects, are
 gic receptors but the therapeutic administration of
very variable and much higher doses need to be
catecholamines and anticholinergics has found
 administered (e.g. 1-3mg/kg in dogs and cats).
limited success. However, Wilson et al.(1991) have
Very small doses have been used to treat behav-
reported two cases of priapism in adult horses
 ioural problems in dogs and horses but the dose
where detumescence followed the administration
required in any individual case can only be foumd
of 8 mg of benztropine mesylate (a drug used in
by trial and error. Its antiemetic properties make it
the treatment of Parkinson disease) which is
a useful drug for the prevention of motion sickness
believed to be a central anticholinergic. It is of
in dogs and cats and its spasmolytic properties
interest that Edwards and Clarke (unpublished
have led to its use in spasmodic colic in horses.
observations) have encountered three cases of pri-
It has been very widely used in all species of an-
apism in horses undergoing surgery for relief of
imal as a sedative and premedicant, as well as in
colic which had rot been given acepromazine.
combination with etorphine as ‘Large Animal
As both priapism and flaccid paralysis with
Immobilon'.
subsequent physical injury are equally calamitous
Parenteral doses of acepromazine for sed-
in valuable breeding stallions the manufacturers
ative and premedicant purposes in most domestic
 specifically contraindicate the drug in these an-
 animals are in the range of 0.025 to 0.100 mg/kg.
imals. Members attending a meeting of the
the lower doses being used by the i.v. route.
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists held in
Higher doses of up to 0.2mg/kg may be used
the UK discussed the use of acepromazine in some
safely by i.m. injection. Recommended doses
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 79
for specific purposes will be discussed in the -
that of morphine. In veterinary practice in the UK
chapters relating to the individual species of 
it has been combined with etorphine as the
animal.
neuroleptanalgesic mixture ‘Small Animal
Immobilon'.
Propionylpromazine
Propionylpromazine,  10-(3-dimethyl  amino-
Promethazine
propyl)-2-propionylphenothiazine, has been 
This drug, 10-(2-dimethylaminopropyl) phen-
widely used on the Continent of Europe and in
othiazine hydrochloride, was probably the first
Scandinavia  for  sedation and  premedication
phenothiazine derivative to be used in veterinary
of both small and large animal patients. Its
anaesthesia. Solutions of this drug are irritant to the
actions, the sedation it produces and its side effects
tissues and when used for premedication should be
are very similar to those of acepromazine. In
horses it is used in doses of 0.15-0.25 mg/kg
injected deeply in a large muscle mass 40-60 min-
 and in dogs the dose ranges from 0.2-0.3 mg/kg.
utes before anaesthesia. In emergencies the drug
can be given, after dilution with isotonic saline, by
It has also been widely used in combination
very slow i.v. injection. Rapid i.v. injection causes a
with methadone.
 profound fall in arterial blood pressure which may
be fatal in shocked or hypovolaemic animals.
Chlorpromazine
 Promethazine is used in veterinary medicine
primarily for its potent antihistamine activity; it is
This compound, 2-chloro-10-(3-dimethylamino-
 employed for premedication prior to the adminis-
propyl) phenothiazine hydrochloride, was used
Extensively in veterinary practice but has largely
tration of anaesthetic drugs which cause histamine
release.
been replaced by acepromazine and propionylpro-
mazine. Its actions and side effects are similar to
those of acepromazine, but it is less potent (doses
BUTYROPHENONES
of up to 1 mg/kg were used in all species of ani-
mal), has a longer duration of action and produces
In man the butyrophenone group of compounds
less sedation. It is particularly unreliable in horses,
were classed as major tranquillizers (neuroleptics)
giving rise to what appears to be a state of panic
but they can cause very unpleasant side effects,
due the muscle weakness it supposedly causes. It
including hallucinations, mental agitation, and
is still widely used in human medicine for its
even feelings of aggression. These side effects are
antipsychotic actions as in psychotic patients its
often not obvious to an observer and only become
weak sedative properties constitute a desirable
known when a human patient recovers from the
feature.
drug and complains, often bitterly, about the exper-
ience. The incidence of these side effects is dose
related and increases with increase of dose.
Promazine
Overdose results in dystonic reactions. We do not
This is 10-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) phenoth-
know whether the subjective effects produced in
iazine hydrochloride and has actions similar to
animals are similar to those known to occur in
those of chlorpromazine but is claimed to give
 man, but the unpredictable aggressive behaviour
better sedation with fewer side effects. For pre-
shown by some animals when under the influence
medication it was administered at doses of up to
suggests they may be.
1mg/kg but it is seldom used today.
Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of the
butyrophenones are minimal, although slight
aap n u nsan e usuao enre
Methotrimeprazine
blockade. They are potent antiemetics, acting
This is a typical phenothiazine but it is also a
-anip juaaard ci auoz rasainn onaaouau a uo
potent analgesic, having a potency about 0.7 times
 induced vomiting, such as may be caused by
80 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 opioid analgesics. It is this latter property which
 In horses i.m. doses of 0.4-0.8 mg/kg can some-
makes the butyrophenones the drug of choice
times give good sedation (Aitken & Sanford, 1972)
for the neuroleptic component of neuroleptan-
but some horses develop muscle tremors and
algesia.
sweat profusely (Lees & Serrano, 1976) and, in
Saas h u u asn rauh jo auaadxa o
practice, azaperone often proves unsatisfactory.
 doubtful whether the butyrophenones should ever
Should an excitement reaction be encountered an
be used on their own as tranquillizing agents, but
extremely dangerous situation arises in which
injury to the horse and /or its handlers could occur
way as well as in neuroleptanalgesic combina-
(Dodman & Waterman, 1979). Although Dod-
tions. It may be that blocking of central dopamin-
 man and Waterman suggest that the cause of ex-
ergic and noradrenergic activity is responsible for
 citement may be a reaction to the ataxia produced,
their ability to suppress evidence of opioid-
 the fact that pigs show a similar reaction, coupled
induced excitement.
with the known central nervous effect in man,
suggests that the excitement is due to a direct effect
of the drug. Thus, its use in horses cannot be
Azaperone
recommended.
Azaperone, 4'-fluoro-4 [4-(2 pyridyl)-1-piper-
azinyl] butyrophenone, is a drug licenced in the
UK for use in pigs where its i.m. administration 
Droperidol
produces a good, dose-related sedative effect up to
 Droperidol is a potent neuroleptic agent with an
the maximum recommended dose for clinical use
 action of 6-8 hours duration. It is an extremely
(4 mg /kg). Pigs may show excitement during the
 potent antiemetic and is said to antagonize the
frst 20 minutes following injection, particularly if
respiratory depressant effects of morphine-like
disturbed during this period. Intravenous admin-
compounds by increasing the sensitivity of the res-
istration of this drug frequently results in a vigor-
piratory centre to carbon dioxide. Although it was
ous excitement phase.
claimed that extrapyramidal side effects were rare,
Azaperone in clinical doses has minimal effects
they are produced by overdosing - but are some-
on respiration, such effect as there is being that of
times delayed for up to 24 hours after administra-
slight stimulation (Clarke, 1969). Clarke also
tion of the drug. Doses of 0.1-0.4 mg/kg give useful
reported a consistent small fall in arterial blood
 sedation in pigs for 2-5 hours. However, in pigs
pressure following the i.m. injection of 0.3-
droperidol has largely been superseded by the less
3.5 mg/kg of the drug. The effect is presumably
 expensive azaperone. Its main use was in neurolep-
due to the α adrenergic block common to all buty-
tanalgesia techniques when combined with fen-
rophenones. Reductions in cardiac output and
 tanyl (p.369), but more recently 0.5mg/kg has been
heart rate in pigs were reported by MacKenzie and
used with 0.3 mg/kg midazolam, both given i.m., to
Snow (1977) to be clinically insignificant.
produce dependable sedation.
Azaperone is widely used both as a sedative
and as a premedicant in pigs. In anaesthesia, given
Fluanisone
prior to the use of metomidate, it is a useful pre-
medicant (p.368). It is also sold directly to farmers
This is 4'-fluoro-4-[4-(o-methoxy)phenyl]-1-piper-
to be used to sedate pigs before transportation,
and to prevent fighting following the mixing of
analgesic techniques in many laboratory animals.
sl auoiadeze uauM "uad auo ul soid 1o saale
used as a sedative or premedication for vaginal
BENZODIAZEPINES
delivery of piglets or for caesarian section, the
piglets may appear sleepy for some hours after
 Chlordiazepoxide was first introduced in 1955 and
delivery. However, provided they are kept warm
 since this time drugs of the benzodiazepine group
they breathe well and there is usually no problem
have been widely used in human and veterinary
due to this sleepiness.
medicine, although their veterinary applications
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 81
appear to have been more limited. In man, drugs
is a reciprocal interaction by which GABA and the
of this group are utilized to provide:
 benzodiazepines each increase the binding of the
other agent. There is a very good correlation
1. an anti-anxiety action
 2. sedation and hypnosis
between the binding affinities of benzodiazepines
to this site and their clinical potencies and it is,
3. anticonvulsant effects
therefore, assumed that this is the site at which
4. muscle relaxation
they produce their main effects. In vitro, sevoflu-
5. retrograde amnesia.
rane at concentrations found in clinical anaesthe-
A very wide range of different compounds now
sia activates both GABAAand GABAp mediated
exist which are employed for one or more of these
inhibitions in the hippocampus (Hirota & Roth,
effects, these compounds differing primarily in
1997)
bioavailability, permissible route of administration
It is very difficult if not impossible to induce
and length of action.
anaesthesia with benzodiazepine drugs in fit
Benzodiazepine compounds exert their main
healthy animals (Lees, 1979, 1979a), although they
sedative effects through depression of the limbic
do combine with almost any other central nervous
 system, and their muscle relaxing properties
depressant drug to give anaesthesia. It is in com-
through inhibition of the internuncial neurones at
binations with such drugs as the opioids that they
spinal levels. Their action is thought to be through
are generally employed. Certainly, when used for
stimulation of specific benzodiazepine (BZ) recep-
premedication at subanaesthetic doses, they do
tors, and there are as many as six variants of BZ
markedly reduce the dose required of subsequent
sites (Doble & Martin, 1992). The ligand interac-
anaesthetic agents, but when they are used in
tions with BZ sites are unusual in that three cat-
many combinations their advantage of causing
egories of action can be identified. Agents which
minimal cardiovascular and respiratory effects
increase Y amino butyric acid (GABA) binding
may be lost (Dundee & Wyant, 1989).
and also GABA-induced chloride currents, are
    o 
regarded as agonists. Others reduce both GABA
bioavailability and many can also be given by the
binding and GABA- induced chloride flux; they
i.m. and i.v. routes. Their action when given i.v. is
are known as inverse agonists and are believed to
not within one circulation time; there are marked
be responsible for anxiety and convulsions as well
differences between individuals in sensitivity and
as having analeptic properties. A third group, the
it may take several minutes for maximal effects to
genuine antagonists of both agonists and inverse
become apparent. Metabolism is in the liver and in
agonists, bind but have no efficacy at the site;
many instances metabolites are as active or more
flumazanil is the drug of this type.
active than the parent compound; actions there-
GABA is now well validated as one of the two
fore tend to be prolonged. In fit animals they do
major inhibitory amino acid transmitters in the
not, on their own, cause sedation and indeed their
central nervous system, the other being glycine
anxiolytic properties may result in animals becom-
(Bloom, 1996). Glycine performs this inhibitory
 ing uncontrollable - a phenomenon also noted in
function in the spinal cord, brain stem and retina,
people (Dundee & Wyant, 1989).
whereas GABA is found in the cerebrum and cere-
 They are used in combination with other drugs
bellum. Two types of GABA receptors are re-
to produce sedation and analgesia for intensive
cogmized and both these GABAAand GABAB
care and to counteract the convulsant and hallucin-
receptors are found at pre- and postsynaptic sites.
atory properties of ketamine. In a variety of
 GABAA receptors have at least eight interacting
animals benzodiazepines have the property of sti-
binding sites (Sieghart, 1992). Benzodiazepines
 mulating appetite (Van Miet et al., 1989). Diazepam
potentiate the actions of GABA at the GABAA
has been particularly widely used for this in cats
receptor and they do so by increasing the fre-
 showing anorexia following illness and doses of
quency of Cl- channel opening. Ligand binding
 up to 1 mg/kg have been claimed to be successful
studies have shown high affinity binding sites for
 in restoring normal feeding habits. However, in
benzodiazepines associated with GABA and there
debilitated cats i.v. doses of 0.05-0.1 mg/kg are
82 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
usually adequate and doses of 0.4 mg/kg should
epilepticus should be given 5 mg by slow i.v. injec-
not be exceeded if deep sedation is not to result.
tion, followed if necessary by a further 5mg, and
 Of the available benzodiazepine drugs, dia-
more recently doses of 10-35 mg have been recom-
zepam, midazolam, climazolam and zolazepam
 mended for this purpose. In dogs and cats the
have been most utilized in veterinary anaesthesia.
drug has been used both for premedication as a
 preventative measure and postoperatively to con-
trol convulsions caused by radiographic tech-
Diazepam
niques involving the introduction of contrast
Diazepam is probably the most widely used of the
 media into the spinal canal. Convulsions of toxic
benzodiazepines. It is, like all other compounds of
 origin in cats have also been treated successfully
this group, insoluble in water and solutions for 
with the drug.
injections contain solvents such as propylene gly-
 The use of diazepam as a premedicant, sedative
 col, ethanol, and sodium benzoate in benzoic acid.
 and tranquillizer is less well documented. Oral
 Intravenous injection may give rise to throm-
 doses of up to 5 mg per day have been used in dogs
bophlebitis and this is thought to be due to the sol-
to control behavioural problems without produc-
vents rather than to diazepam itself. An emulsion
 ing unwanted sedation. It has been used for pre-
specially prepared for i.v. injection is claimed to be
 medication prior to the use of ketamine in dogs
non-irritant to veins, but the bioavailability of this
 and horses (Short, 1981, 1981a), and during anaes-
preparation is reduced compared with that of
thesia to abolish ketamine-induced convulsions in
other formulations. Because of the problems of sol-
cats (Reid & Frank, 1972). In the postoperative
ubility diazepam should not be diluted with water
period, provided pain has been relieved by the
 or mixed with solutions of other drugs.
appropriate use of analgesic agents, diazepam
The effects of diazepam in domestic animals are
may be given i.v. in doses of up to 1 mg/kg/hour
not well documented. A rise in plasma concentra-
 to control restlessness and facilitate the carrying
tion, coupled with a return of clinical effects, occurs
 out of necessary nursing.
6-8 hours after administration and is thought to
 Diazepam alone has not been widely used in
be due to enterohepatic recycling of the drug
large animals and in horses its muscle relaxing
and/or its metabolites (Dundee & Wyant, 1989).
properties may be associated with induced panic
Premedication with diazepam increases the length
(Muir et al., 1982; Rehm & Schatzmann, 1984). It
 of action of other anaesthetic agents and the
may, however, be used as part of a protocol of gen-
drug is particularly useful prior to ketamine
eral anaesthesia
anaesthesia to reduce the hallucinations which
seem to be associated with this dissociative anaes-
thetic agent.
Midazolam
The sedative and hypnotic effects of diazepam
Midazolam, (8-chloro-6 (2-flurophenol)-1-methyl-
appear to be minimal or absent in fit, healthy dogs
4H imidazo (1,5-a) (1,4)) benzodiazepine is a
A'  se ro sisouy roy h as on sida pe
water soluble compound yielding a solution with
induction agent have been unsuccessful because,
a pH of 3.5. Above pH values of 4.0 the chemical
used alone in healthy animals, it often induces
configuration of the molecule changes so that it
becomes lipid soluble. The aqueous solution is not
no significant effect on the circulation or respir-
painful on i.v. injection and does not cause throm-
atory activity but does produce some muscular
bophlebitis. It is metabolized in the liver and in
relaxation due to its action at internuncial neu-
man its half-life is considerably shorter than that of
rones. It has very low toxicity and large doses
diazepam thus it is less cumulative and recovery is
given to dogs for prolonged periods do not pro-
 more rapid. These properties have led to its being
duce any changes in liver or kidney function.
used for i.v. sedation and 'induction of anaesthe-
 Diazepam has a major role in veterinary prac-
sia'. Like most benzodiazepines it has minimal
tice in the control of convulsions of any origin.
 respiratory and cardiovascular effects and in
Averill (1970) recommends that dogs in status
 combination with opioids has been widely used
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 83
   s    
is now being widely employed to reverse midazo-
1989).
lam sedation in 'day case' patients.
Although literature relating to its use is sparse,
Flumazenil has been reported to reverse
midazolam has been used fairly extensively in
diazepam or climazolam sedation in sheep and
small animal patients, especially with ketamine in
cattle (Rhem & Schatzmann, 1984) and has also
cats (Chambers & Dobson, 1989). The combination
 been used in combination with naloxone to reverse
apedopeiau pue (sx/sw gz'o) welozepnu jo
climazolam/fentanyl combination anaesthesia
(3.3mg/kg) will produce good sedation in pigs
(Erhardt et al., 1986). Although to date the veter-
even though neither drug on its own will produce
 inary use of flumazenil has been limited (Gross
sedation in these animals. Again in pigs, midazo-
et al., 1992; Tranquilli et al., 1992) there is no reason
lam (0.3 mg/kg) has been used by i.m. injection
 why it should not be employed in any situation
with droperidol (0.5 mg /kg) to produce excellent
where it may become necessary to reverse the
sedation.
effects of a benzodiazepine drug.
Climazolam
02 ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS
Climazolam is a potent benzodiazepine which, fol-
Xylazine has been used as a sedative in animals
lowing i.v. administration, has a very rapid onset
since 1968 (Sagner et al., 1968, 1968a) but at that
of effect. It has been used in a wide variety of ani-
time the mechanisms of its complex actions and
mals including cattle, sheep, horses and dogs
side effects were not understood. When it was
(Rehm & Schatzmann, 1984; Erhardt et al., 1986;
described as ‘both excitatory and inhibitory of
Komar & Mouallem, 1988). In cattle, 5 mg/kg orally
adrenergic and cholinergic neurones' (Kronberg et
cause sedation and ataxia but much lower doses
al., 1966) this statement appeared more than a little
by the i.v. or i.m. routes give useful sedation.
confusing. A similar drug, clonidine, was original-
Horses, however, panic (presumably from the feel-
 ly used in man for its powers of peripheral vaso-
ing of muscle weakness) and the drug is con-
constriction but later became (and still is) used as
 traindicated on its owm for these animals, although
 an antihypertensive (Schmidtt, 1977).
 it is useful in anaesthetic combinations, being par-
These actions and the correctness of the above
ticularly effective for use with ketamine (Rehm &
 description only became explicable when Langer
Schatzmann, 1984). Climazolam (1.0-1.5mg/kg)
(1974) suggested the existence of receptor sites sit-
has also been used in combination with fentanyl
 uated presynaptically on the noradrenergic neu-
(5-15 μg/kg) for anaesthesia in the dog (Erhardt
rones which, when stimulated by noradrenaline,
et al., 1986).
inhibited the further release of this transmitter,
thus forming a negative feedback mechanism.
pdeusand asaun teun iauhy pansasns rauet
Zolazepam
inhibitory receptors differed from the previously
This drug is claimed to have marked hypnotic
recognized α adrenoceptors and should therefore
effects in man. It is now being used in animals
be termed α2 adrenoceptors. There is now convinc-
combined, in a fixed ratio, with the dissociative
ing evidence for the presence of postsynaptic and
agent, tiletamine (Rehm & Schatzmann, 1984).
presynaptic C2 adrenoceptors in both central and
This combination (Telazol', Parke Davis), pro-
peripheral sites. The distinction between C1, and
 sponad pue uoissaidap Aoiendsar saonp
o1
C2 adrenoceptors is made on sensitivity to specific
excitement occur during recovery.
agonist and antagonists. Adrenaline and nor-
adrenaline stimulate both types. For C1 adreno-
Flumazenil (benzodiazepine antagonist)
ceptors, phenylephrine and methoxamine are
considered to be fairly specific agonists and pra-
Originally developed for the treatment of over-
 zosin to be a specific antagonist. Classically, for
dose in man, flumazenil is a potent and specific
 pharmacological tests clonidine is considered a
aqo p isue rndaoae  sads
84PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
and idazoxan antagonists. However, very few
 TABLE 4.I Results of α2 adrenoceptor
drugs are absolutely specific in their actions and
stimulation
the vast majority can only be described as showing
CNS
Sedation, analgesia, hypotension,
selectivity, thus at higher doses the alternative Q
bradycardia
receptors may also be stimulated or blocked, a fac-
cvs
 Peripheral vasoconstriction → initial
tor possibly explaining some of the side effects and
hypertension. Central bradycardia and
aberrant reactions occasionally seen with their
vasomotor depression → hypotension
Gut
Relaxation, decreased motility
dinical use.
Salivation
Decreased
 Characteristic adrenergic responses are predi-
Gastric
Reduced
cated by the structure of the C2 adrenoceptors
secretion
which is similar to many other neurotransmitter
Uterus
Stimulation
Hormones
receptors including the other adrenergic (o1, B),
 Reduced release of insulin, renin and
antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
muscarinic, opioid and dopamine receptors. Each
Eyes
Mydriasis, decreased intraocular
of these receptors consists of a single polypeptide
pressure
chain which meanders back and forth through the
Platelets
 Aggregation
cell membrane. The intramembranous portion of
each adrenergic receptor is hydrophobic and all
After Livingstone, Nolan & Waterman (1986)
are similar in structure; from this it can be inferred
that they are the site which recogmizes noradrena
line, the common neurotransmitter for each of the
the C2 adrenoceptors are summarized in Table 4.1
adrenergic receptors. By way of contrast, the cyto-
and the clinical effects seen with drugs which are
agonist at this site are the result of the balance of
difference in structure and especially in their 'con-
these actions.
tact regions' for the many guanine nucleotide
binding proteins (G proteins). At least four differ-
Clinical actions of o., adrenoceptor agonist
ent G proteins couple to the C2 adrenoceptors.
Moreover, biological molecular probes
have
shown that at least three different α2 isoreceptors
-iaas Auu pue suaod mau Auu siea juanan 
exist (Bylund, 1988). These are defined by the loca-
ive α2 adrenoceptor agonists have been developed
tion of the gene for the receptor on the chromo-
for both medical and veterinary use. In veterinary
some, being either C2C2, C2C4, or C2C10. It is also
practice the major drugs used are xylazine,
possible to divide the α2 adrenoceptors at the level
detomidine, medetomidine and romifidine;
of intracellular second messenger systems. For
clonidine, although primarily used in medical
example, the postsynaptic C2 adrenoceptors in
practice, has also been studied in animals in some
vascular smooth muscle and the presynaptic C2
detail.
The major actions and side effects of all these
endings utilize different transduction mechanisms
drugs are similar, although there may be differ-
(Nichols et al., 1988). Finally it is now recognized
Eces in length of action and in the extent and sig-
that there are species differences in the location,
nificance of some of the side effects seen. There are
distribution and type of C2 receptors.
variations between the drugs in their specificity
As the presynaptic C2 adrenoceptors inhibit
for α2 and α1 receptors and this explains some of
noradrenaline release, it might be expected that
the differences in observed clinical effects. There is
the action of agonists would be the opposite of
also marked variation in species sensitivity to their
the classic effects of sympathetic stimulation.
actions. For example, cattle are approximately
However, where postsynaptic α2 adrenoceptors
10 times more sensitive to xylazine than horses or
exist they often exert a stimulating action similar
 dogs, but are equally sensitive to medetomidine as
to that exerted by C1 adrenoceptors at the same
 dogs, and equally or less sensitive to detomidine
site. The major central and peripheral actions most
than horses. Pigs appear very resistant to all the
relevant to anaesthetic practice of stimulation of
 drugs so far tested. Generalized comparisons of
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 85
their potency are meaningless except in the context
be effective the anticholinergic must be given an
of a stated species of animal.
adequate time prior to the α2 adrenoceptor ago-
The C2 adrenoceptor agonist drugs are used pri-
nist; arrhythmias or tachycardia often result and
marily for their central effect of profound sedation
the hypertensive phase of the agonist's action may
(even of hypnosis in some species of animal) but
be enhanced in the absence of bradycardia. In cats
they also give analgesia through both spinal and
it has been shown that anticholinergics further
central actions even in subsedative doses (Vainio ef
decrease cardiac output, presumably due to the
a.,1986; Nolan et al., 1986; Scheinin & Macdonald,
resulting tachycardia preventing adequate filling
1989). This is not surprising because C2 adrenocep-
of the heart during diastole (Dunkle et al., 1986),
tors and opioid receptors share similar regions of
but this does not necessarily apply in larger an-
the brain and even some of the same neurones.
imals. Work involving continuous recording of the
Binding of either C2 adrenergic or μ opioid recep-
 ECG has shown the pulse rates of normal sleeping
 tor agonists results in activation of the same trans-
dogs (Hall et al., 1991) and horses (Hall, unpub-
duction systems (the membrane associated G
lished data) to drop to values similar to those seen
proteins).
in animals sedated by α2 adrenoceptor agonists.
The major side effects of α2 adrenoceptor ago-
The bradycardia in the sedated animal can be over-
nists are on the cardiovascular system. Although
ridden by toxaemia or by the administration of
the majority of investigations have been into the
some anaesthetics. Thus, the use of anticholiner-
actions of xylazine, the evidence to date with the
gics remains controversial and more study of the
newer compounds suggests that their actions are,
 possible combinations is necessary before an
in the main, similar. In all species there is marked
informed judgement of their use can be made.
bradycardia due to central stimulation and medi-
The question of the possible direct effects of α2
ated through the vagus nerves. The effects on arte-
adrenoceptor agonists on the myocardium is also
rial blood pressure depend on the relative effects
an open one. There have been reports of animals
of the central and peripheral stimulation. There is
which were in a very excited state at the time of
often an initial hypertensive phase, the extent and
xylazine administration suffering sudden cardiac
duration of which depend on the particular drug.
arrest and the suggestion has been made that this
its dose, route of administration, and the species of
drug might sensitize the heart to adrenaline
animal concerned, followed by a more prolonged
induced arrhythmias. Indeed Muir and Piper
(1977) showed this to be the case in halothane
on the drug and the species of animal. Cardiac out-
anaesthetized dogs but failed to show the same
put falls (but the drugs seem to have little direct 
effect in horses. It must be noted here that pharma-
action on the myocardium) and the circulation
 cological studies have failed to demonstrate Q2
appears to be slowed. The exact state of the peri-
 adrenoceptors in the heart but their presence in the
pheral circulation is more complicated and dose 
coronary vessels has beern established.
dependent. During the early phase of arterial
Respiratory effects appear to differ between
hypertension with bradycardia, peripheral resist-
 species of animal. Although with doses which
 ance is increased, presumably through shut down
cause deep sedation in dogs, cats and horses,
of blood vessels. How long this poor peripheral
respiratory rates may be reduced, there is no
perfusion lasts is difficult to ascertain and prob-
serious fall in PaO2 (Hsu, 1985; Dunkle et al., 1986).
ably depends on the species of animal, the drug
In ruminants tachypnoea may occur, breathing
and the dose used, because in the hypotensive
appears to require a considerable effort and the
 phase peripheral resistance is said to be reduced.
PaO2 shows desaturation of the haemoglobin
The bradycardia, which can be severe, has
(DeMoor & Desmet, 1971; Raptopoulos et al.,
given rise to much discussion. Many authorities
1985; Nolan et al., 1986). This hypoxaemia does not
have recommended medication with anticholiner-
seem to be due to changes in blood pressure or in
gics prior to sedation with these drugs to prevent
ventilation and, indeed, has been shown to occur
the fall in heart rate but recent evidence has
following clonidine injection in anaesthetized
thrown doubt on the soundness of this advice. To
 artificially ventilated sheep (Eisenach, 1988). Thus,
86 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
intrapulmonary mechanisms have been postulat-
ous species of domestic animals. Horses, dogs and
ed as the cause, hypoxaemia being accompanied
cats require 10 times the dose needed in cattle and
s      
even then the degree of sedation achieved in
Xylazine causes a marked increase in airway
horses is considerably less. Pigs are even more
resistance in sheep (Nolan & Waterman, 1985) but
resistant than horses (Sagner et al., 1968, 1968a). It
not in catfle (Watmey, 1986).
is possible that lesser variations in sensitivity may
 All α2 adrenoceptor agonist drugs cause an
 occur in breeds within a single species and that
increase in urination, thought to be through inhibi-
this might contribute to the occasional failure of
tion of ADH release, but when high doses are
the drug to produce sedation.
used, diuresis is possibly assisted by hyper-
Xylazine can be given by i.v., i.m. or s.c. injec-
glycaemia. Gut motility ceases almost completely.
tion although the s.c. route is not very reliable.
These side effects must be taken into account when
 Injections are non-irritant although minor tempo-
these drugs are used to facilitate investigations
 rary swellings have been reported at the site of i.m.
such as barium meals and glucose tolerance tests.
injection of concentrated solutions in horses.
Another important side effect of c2 adrenoceptor
 Although never proved by laboratory testing.
agonists is that many (but not all) cause sigmificant
 most users of the drug are satisfied that the pot-
uterine stimulation and their administration is,
ency of available commercial solutions decreases
therefore, contraindicated in very early or late
 with age, and that this deterioration is enhanced
by increased environmental temperature (Van
In doses which produce clinical sedation most
Dieten, 1988, personal communication).
of these drugs cause hypothermia but the mecha-
In horses the drug is usually used in doses that
nism by which this is produced appears to differ
enable the animal to remain standing (although
between drugs and species of animal. Xylazine
 with marked ataxia), but in ruminants and small
induced hypothermia has been shown to be ant-
animals sedation is dose dependent and higher
agonized by idazoxan whilst clonidine induced
Kouaqumsar asnes Aeu uprum pasn are sasop
hypothermia is intensified by this antagonist
unconsciousness and a state close to general anaes-
(Livingstone et al., 1984). In rats, low doses of deto-
thesia. After these high doses sedation is very
midine cause hypothermia which can be reversed
 prolonged and is accompanied by marked cardio-
by yohimbine (Virtanen, 1986) but higher doses
vascular and respiratory depression, i.e. they con-
cause hyperthermia probably due to an C1 adreno-
stitute overdoses. The sedative effects of xylazine
ceptor-stimulating action.
appear to be synergistic with a variety of analgesic,
When C2 adrenoceptor agonists are used for
 sedative and anaesthetic drugs and such combina-
premedication they greatly reduce the dose
tions are much preferable to overdoses of xylazine
requirements of inhalation anaesthetics (Virtanen,
for the production of sedation.
1986) or intravenous agents. They also combine
 Although the drug can be a potent analgesic,
with opioids to produce deep sedation or even
claims as to the degree of analgesia achieved at
anaesthesia.
clinical dose rates are conflicting. Sedative doses
 appear to produce a short period of intense analge-
sia in horses - there is considerable experimental
Xylazine
 and clinical evidence that it produces excellent
Xylazine, 2-(2,6-dimethylphenylamino)-4H-5,5
 analgesia in equine colic (Lowe, 1978). However,
dihydro-1,3-thiazine, was enthusiastically re-
others (Clarke & Hall, 1969; Tronicke & Vocke,
ceived as a sedative and over the past 20 years it
 1970) have found that horses deeply sedated with
has maintained its popularity as a generally reli-
 xylazine may respond violently to manipulations
able sedative and premedicant in a wide range of
 or even attempts to inject local analgesics. It may
 animal species (Clarke & Hall, 1969). The drug is a
be that such reactions are a response to touch
typical α2 adrenoceptor agonist and exerts its
s ns sapanard mud-uu se ured u a
effects accordingly. However, there are marked
variations in susceptibility to it between the vari-
cause a horse to respond with a well directed kick.
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 87
Cattle and small animals do not show this marked
tions have been reported. There have been reports
response to touch. Analgesia is not adequate for
of violent excitement or collapse in horses asso-
minor surgery and in cats Arbeiter et al. (1972)
ciated with its intravenous injection. Some of these
found that even massive doses of xylazine suffi-
mishaps may have been due to inadvertent intra-
cient to cause prolonged umnconsciousness were
arterial injection, but it is probable that a few have
inadequate to abolish all reaction to painful stimuli
been genuine drug reactions. Fainting through
in the majority of animals. Thus, despite the
 extreme bradycardia has been suggested as a poss-
undoubted analgesic properties of the drug, in the
ible cause of collapse, but this is unlikely because
opinion of the authors where surgery is to be per-
the greatest bradycardia is coupled with arterial
formed local analgesia must be used to supple-
hypertension. Deaths have also been reported in
ment its effects.
cattle and the problems of recumbency in rumi-
The cardiovascular effects of xylazine are typical
nants must be increased by the hypoxaemia
 u ens aqcn reade pue snip go dnon s go
caused by Q2 adrenoceptor agonists. The advent of
species of animal (Clarke & Hall, 1969; Garner et
the opportunity to limit the duration of recum-
al., 1971; Haskins et al., 1986). An initial rise in
bency by the reversal of sedation with drugs such
 arterial blood pressure following its i.v. injection as
as atipamezole should increase the safety of
a bolus is short lived and the pressure then falls to
xylazine in these animals. In small animals deaths
10 to 20% below initial resting levels. The hyper-
have mainly resulted from the use of xylazine for
tensive phase is not always evident after i.m. injec-
premedication.
tion, possibly because of reduced peak blood
 In most species of animal, xylazine is a useful
concentrations of the drug.
drug for premedication prior to induction of
Cardiac output falls due to bradycardia and
anaesthesia with one of a wide variety of agents.
heart block is usually observed. The advisability of
Its use greatly reduces the dose of anaesthetic
using anticholinergic drugs to counteract brady-
required, and although the reduction can often be
cardia is disputed (Kerr et al., 1972; Hsu, 1985).
predicted from the degree of sedation achieved it 
Pronounced hypertension associated with the
may still be present in animals which have res-
bradycardia can usually be avoided by using mini-
ponded poorly to the drug. In heavily sedated
mal doses and i.m. or slow i.v. injection. Xylazine
animals circulation is slowed, the effects of sub-
appears to have little direct effect on the myocar-
sequent anaesthetic agents is delayed and over-
dium but causes a dose related depression of res-
dose of the anaesthetic may result. Thus, particular
piration. Falls in PaO2 are species specific, being
care is needed when this sedative is followed by
particularly severe in ruminants, while the mus-
i.v. agents such as the barbiturates, Saffan or
 Cle relaxing properties make the drug contraindi-
propofol. Xylazine is particularly useful in com-
cated in animals suffering from upper airway
bination with ketamine for its muscle relaxing
obstruction.
properties help to reduce the rigidity caused
Other side effects of xylazine include: muscle
by the dissociative agent and for many years
twitching when sedation is deep; sweating in
 xylazine/ketamine combinations have proved
horses at the time sedation is diminishing; vomit-
useful in a wide range of animal species (Muir
ing at the onset of sedation in dogs and cats; hyper-
et al., 1977; 1978; Butera et al., 1978; Brouwer et al.,
 gylcaemia; decreased intraocular pressure and gut
1980; Hall & Taylor, 1981; Waterman, 1981).
motility and increased urine production. Xylazine
also causes uterine contractions and should not be
Detomidine
eaid aonpu Aew j 1oy Aoueuaid aiel ul pasn
ture labour. Increase in uterine tone may con-
Detomidine, 4-(2,3-dimethylphenyl)methyl-1H-
traindicate it in cattle or horses receiving ovum
imidazole hydrochloride, is an imidazole
transplants since this may reduce the chance of
derivative which has been developed as a seda-
implantation.
tive/analgesic for animals. It is supplied in multi-
Xylazine has proved to be a very safe sedative
dose bottles at a concentration of 10 mg/ml and
in a wide variety of animals but some serious reac-
may be given by the i.v. and i.m. routes. It is
88 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
not effective if given orally, but is when adminis-
tion and side effects (bradycardia, arterial hyper-
tered sublingually because it is readily absorbed
 tension, ataxia, sweating. piloerection, muscle tre-
through mucous membranes. In a variety of labo-
mor and diuresis) were unacceptably prolonged.
ratory animals its sedative potency has been
This early work serves to demonstrate the very
shown to be of a similar order to that of clonidine
high therapeutic index of the drug as subsequent
and approximately 10 times (Virtanen, 1986) that
clinical experience has shown that i.v. doses of 10
of xylazine. (These relative potencies are not neces-
to 20 μg/kg give adequate sedation for about an
sarily the same in domestic animals for in cattle,
hour with much more limited side effects (Clarke
unlike xylazine, it is no more potent than it is in
& Taylor, 1987). Its action is prolonged in the pres-
horses).
 The properties of detomidine are well docu-
not clinically apparent (Chambers et al., 1996). The
mented in Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica, Sup-
 drug has also been widely used in horses for pre-
plement 82/1986 (20 papers). Its analgesic powers
medication prior to induction of anaesthesia with
have been shown in a number of pain models and
 agents such as ketamine, thiopental and propofol
it is particularly effective as an analgesic in equine
(Taylor & Clarke, 1985; Clarke et al., 1986). A more
colic (Virtanen, 1985; Clarke, 1988; Jochle et al.,
detailed description of the effects and uses of deto-
1989). Cardiovascular changes are typical of an (2
 midine in horses is given in Chapter 11.
adrenoceptor agonist in that there is a marked
The doses of detomidine required in cattle
bradycardia and following doses of 20 μg/kg arte-
 appear to be similar to those in horses. Again, early
rial blood pressure is elevated for about 15 min-
 experimental work suggested that high doses
utes but falls significantly below control values
were needed for adequate sedation but subse-
within 45 minutes of injection of the drug (Clarke 
quent trials have shown that doses of up to
& Taylor, 1987; Sarazan et al., 1989). Higher doses
 30 μg/kg are satisfactory. In the authors' experi-
of the drug are followed by more prolonged arteri-
ence, doses of 10μg/kg i.v. produce sedation in
al hypertension but as yet there have been no 
cattle very similar to that seen in horses, i.e. cattle
investigations into whether this is followed by
 remain standing but show marked ataxia. The
prolonged hypotension. Work to date in horses
 relative lack of hypnotic effect with detomidine
shows that arterial pressure during anaesthesia
means that cattle are more likely to remain stand-
after detomidine premedication appears to be
 ing than after xylazine and this probably led to
dependent on the anaesthetic agents used (Clarke,
the initial misapprehension that cattle required
1988). Like xylazine, detomidine causes a minimal
higher doses. Low doses of detomidine may be
fall in equine PaO2 (Clarke, 1988), but marked
used safely in early and late pregnancy in cattle
hypoxaemia in sheep (Waterman et al., 1986). In
(Chapter 18).
horses, other side effects include muscular twitch-
ing, sweating, piloerection, hyperglycaemia, a
marked diuresis and reduced gut motility. Side
Medetomidine
effects increase in frequency and duration with
This compound, 4-(1-(2,3-dimethylphenyl) ethyl)-
increased dose.
1H-imadazole, is a very potent, efficacious and
One difference between xylazine and detomi
selective agonist for C2 adrenoreceptors in the cen-
dine appears to be in their effects on the uterus.
Whereas xylazine appears to have marked ecbolic
1988). The preparation that has been used in vet-
effects, detomidine, at i.v. doses of 20 μg/kg, slows
erinary anaesthesia is a mixture of two sterio-
electrical activity in the pregmant bovine uterus,
isomers and contains 1mg/ml of the racaemic
although 40-60 μg/kg causes an increase in electri-
mixture. The dextrorotatory isomer, which is used
cal activity (Jedruch & Gajewski, 1986).
 in man as a premedicant and anxiolytic (Scheinin 
Detomidine is primarily used as a sedative
et al., 1987; MacDonald et al., 1988), is the active
for horses. In early work doses between 10 and
component.
300 μg/kg were employed, horses remaining
Apart from the required actions of sedation,
standing after the highest doses, although seda-
hypnosis and analgesia (Stenberg et al., 1987)
SEDATION,ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION89
medetomidine has the usual marked cardiovascu-
pared with that induced by xylazine. Next, the
lar effects of this group of drugs (bradycardia, arter-
dogs becomes recumbent but even if apparently
ial hypertension followed by hypotension and
very deeply sedated it can be made to arise and
reduced cardiac output). Its actions in dogs and
 walk around in an ataxic manner before resuming
cats have beenn well reviewed by Cullen (1996)
recumbency. Muscle twitching may occur, being
 In most animals medetomidine slows respira-
most marked in most deeply sedated animals. In
tion (Clarke & England, 1989). Nevertheless, at
the medium sized dog, maximal sedation is
normal sedative doses in non-ruminant animals
achieved with i.m. doses of 40 μg/kg (or half these
the PaCO2 does not rise to an excessive level
doses by i.v. injection), higher doses lengthening
(Vainio, 1989; Cullen & Reynoldson, 1993) and there
the duration of sedation but up to 80 μg/kg also
is less depression of the ventilatory response to
contributing to further analgesia. Smaller animals
CO, than is commonly seen in anaesthetized ani-
appear more resistant to the effects so that it has
 mals. However, cyanosis has been reported in up
been suggested that doses should be calculated on
to one third of dogs sedated with medetomidine
the basis of μg/unit body surface area rather than
(Clarke & England, 1989; Vaha-Vahe, 1989; Sap &
on body weight. Sedation is less effective in noisy
Hellebrekers, 1993). This cyanosis is not associated
or disturbing surroundings but, once sedated,
with a lowered arterial PaO2 or an oxygen satura-
dogs are not usually responsive to sound. All the
tion below 95% and has been attributed to a slow
other typical side effects such as vomiting, muscu-
tissue blood flow with increased oxygen extraction
lar twitching, hypothermia, decreased gut move-
leading to cyanosis from venous desaturation.
ment and hyperglycaemia, have been noted
It has not yet been established whether medeto-
(Vainio et al., 1986; Clarke & England, 1989).
midine is safe for use in pregnant animals but in
 In cats higher doses (80 to 150 μg/kg i.m.) are
bitches the electrical activity of the uterine muscle
needed to produce sedation. Sedation is usually
is depressed at doses of 20 μg/kg, while at higher
excellent but the animals are capable of being
doses (40-60 μg /kg) there is an initial increase in
aroused. The i.v. use of medetomidine in cats has
this activity for some 5-7 minutes followed by
depression; pregnant bitches do not abort (Jedruch
The drug has been widely used in combination
& Gajewski, 1989). Medetomidine markedly
with other drugs to prolong recumbency. In the
reduces the MAC of volatile agents given sub-
dog opioids have proved to be successful (Clarke
sequently for anaesthesia and a similar synergism
& England, 1988) but the most popular combina-
must be expected with i.v. agents whenever
tions have been with ketamine, even 1 to 2mg/kg
medetomidine premedication is used.
of ketamine being adequate to ensure prolonga-
The solution is non-irritant and can be adminis-
tion of recumbency.
tered by s.c., i.m. or i.v. injection. Intravenous injec-
Medetomidine has been used in sheep and
tion gives the fastest and most reliable results and
cattle; i.v. doses of 10 to 20μg/kg causing
vomiting is less common than with other routes of
sedation similar to that seen after 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg
administration. Vomiting occurs in 10 to 20% of
of xylazine (Clarke & England, unpublished
dogs and 50 to 65% of cats given i.m. medetomi-
observations). In wild animals higher doses
dine and although some sedation may be evident
are required and the drug has usually been
within 5 minutes maximal sedation isnot achieved
used in combination with ketamine when admin-
until 20 minutes have elapsed. Although medeto-
istered by dart gun for immobilization. Indeed,
midine is ineffective when given by mouth, as it is
medetomidine/ketamine combinations have been
inactivated by passage through the liver, it is read-
found to provide excellent immobilization and
ily absorbed through mucous membranes and can
relaxation in a wide range of species of animals,
be administered effectively sublingually.
while the ability to reverse the sedation with Q2
 Following its administration in the dog, the an-
adrenoceptor antagonists has proved to be partic-
imal rapidly becomes ataxic then stands quietly
ularly useful (Jalenka, 1989, 1989a).
with its head down. Vomiting may occur at this
 The drug has also been used in many rodents
time, but tends to be of short-lived duration com-
and other laboratory animals and there is marked
90 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
variation in susceptibility to its effects, the guinea
When using antagonists in the clinical situation
pig being most resistant. Once again, combina-
it is necessary to consider the pharmacokinetics of
tions with ketamine are more effective than the
the drugs involved, because if the antagonist is
sedative alone.
eliminated faster than the agonist, resedation will
occur; this is most serious in wild animals which
are not under observation and vulnerable to pred-
Romifidine
ators. The dose rates of antagonist drugs for
This drug, developed from clonidine, has typical
reversing sedation will obviously vary with the
C2 adrenoceptor agonist effects. It has undergone
dose of sedative used and the elapsed time after its
dinical trials in Germany, Switzerland and the UK
 administration. With all antagorists investigated,
as a sedative (Clarke et al., 1991) and premedicant
higher doses are required to reverse cardiopul-
(Young, 1992) for horses. Maximal sedation is
monary effects than to reverse sedation (Hsu et al.,
achieved with i.v. doses of 80 μg/kg. When com-
1989; Vainio & Vaha-Vahe, 1989). The situation is
pared in horses given i. v. xylazine (1 mg/kg) or
 complicated by the fact that there may be species
detomidine (20μg/kg) it produces less ataxia and
differences in antagonistic effects and it is, there-
the head is not lowered to the same extent, but 
fore, very difficult to be certain of the exact dose of
response to imposed stimuli is reduced to the same
 antagonist necessary in any particular case. For
degree by all three drugs. At these doses, the dura-
 this reason it is important that no side effects occur
tion of effect is longest with romifidine, the horses
should the antagonist be overdosed. Convulsions
remaining quieter than normal for some consider-
 have occasionally been reported after yohimbine,
able time after obvious sedation has waned.
idazoxan and atipamezole but in most reports ket-
Romifidine produces a marked increase in urine
amine, which is not influenced by the C2 adreno-
production over 90 minutes accompanied by an 
ceptor antagonists, was part of the sedative
increase in sodium and glucose excretion while
combination used and may have been the cause of
creatinine clearance remains constant (Gasthuys
this side effect.
et al.,1996).
Of the C2 adrenoceptor antagonists, yohimbine
 In dogs, recovery from romifidine is rapid
 and atipamazole are the most commonly used in
(Michelsen, 1996) but the liver contributes very
veterinary practice. Numerous studies have
little to its overall clearance from the body (Chism
demonstrated the effectiveness of yohimbine in
& Rickert, 1996).
antagonizing C2 agonist induced sedation and
analgesia in laboratory animals, dogs and cats
(Holmberg & Gershon, 1961; Hsu, 1983). Doses of
O ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
0.1mg/kg have generally been employed to
The central and peripheral effects of the C2 adreno-
ceptor agonists can be reversed by the use of
doses have caused excitement in dogs (Paddle-
equally specific antagonists. The antagonists used
ford, 1988). Yohimbine has sometimes been used in
include yohimbine (Hsu et al., 1989), idazoxan
 combination with 4-aminopyridine, a drug which
(Docherty et al., 1987; Hsu et al., 1989), tolazoline
 releases acetylcholine and other neurotransmitters
(Hsu et al., 1987) and atipamezole (Clarke &
 from presynaptic nerve endings, but the combina-
England, 1988; Kock et al., 1989), the most potent
 tion appears to have no advantages over the use of
and specific being atipamezole.
the antagonist alone.
The ability to awaken xylazine or detomidine-
Atipamezole has mainly been used to reverse
sedated subjects has proved to be particularly use-
medetomidine sedation in dogs (Clarke &
ful in wild animals where prolonged sedation may
England, 1988; Vainio & Vaha-Vahe, 1989), cats
be fatal (Kock et al., 1989), and in domestic rumin-
(Virtanen, 1989) and wild animals. Serious relapse
ants (Thompson et al., 1989) where prolonged
 into sedation has not been noted, although follow-
recumbency is again unwelcome. Also, in some
ing low doses of the drug animals have been
clinical situations the Q adrenoceptor antagonists
described as appearing 'tired' for some hours.
are useful in small animal practice.
Overdose of atipamezole does not appear to cause
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 91
problems in most species of animal, injection into
 general anaesthesia assists in obtaining a smooth,
the unsedated dog (Clarke & England 1988) caus-
pain-free recovery. All general anesthetics undoubt-
ing mild muscular tremors but little else and
    n   
convulsions have never been noted in the absence
 analgesia can be provided by four main methods:
of ketamine. However, although atipamezole
 appears to have little effect in unsedated cats, when
1. Use oflocal analgesics
 2. Use of C adrenoceptor agonists
used to reverse medetomidine sedation a few cats
 3. Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
have been described as being'over-reversed'but
drugs (NSAIDs)
overt excitement has not been seen. Atipamezole
4. Use of opioid drugs.
has also been shown to be effective in reversing
detomidine sedation in horses, and xylazine seda-
 Local analgesics, particularly the long acting group
tion in wild animals, sheep and cattle.
of drugs, e.g. bupivacaine, used during surgery
Tolazoline (Tolazine, Lloyd Laboratories, Iowa)
may also provide outstanding postoperative anal-
is used in doses of 4mg/kg to antagonize the
 gesia. These drugs are discussed in more detail in
effects of xylazine in horses. The rate of i.v. admin-
Chapter 10. C2 Adrenoceptor agonists, discussed
istration needs to be controlled to approximately
above, when used parenterally at analgesic doses
100 mg/min. It is a mixed C1 and α2 adrenergic
will also cause deep sedation (which is not always
receptor antagonist and also has a direct peripher-
a disadvantage in the postoperative period) and
al vasodilator action. Temporary side effects,
bradycardia. In man, and increasingly in animals,
which usually last not more than 1 to 2 hours,
these Q2 adrenoceptor agonists are now being
include increases in blood pressure, tachycardia,
administered epidurally to limit their side effects.
peripheral vasodilatation and sweating.
With all of these drugs, there is now convincing
evidence that they are more effective if adminis-
tered before pain becomes manifest (Mitchell &
TAMERIDONE
Smith, 1989).
Tameridone, a purine alkyl piperidine derivative,
has undergone extensive clinical and pharmaco-
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
logical investigations in cattle where i. v. doses of
DRUGS (NSAIDs)
0.05 mg/kg or i.m. doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg produce
good sedation for 90-120 minutes. Sedation
landin release at the site of trauma and by reducing
appears to be dose dependent in depth and takes
longer to appear than sedation after xylazine
inflammation and swelling - themselves a major
administration. The drug appears to be equally
source of postoperative pain. Details of the very
effective in all breeds of cattle but cows at full term
large number of NSAIDs, their uses, limitations
undergoing caesarian section appear to be unduly
and toxicity are beyond the scope of this book but
sensitive, i.v. doses of 0.03 mg/kg readily causing
are well reviewed in current standard pharmaco-
recumbency. In the USA tameridone has been tried
logical texts. With due care, they can make a most
useful contribution to postoperative analgesia.
ruminant animals but the results have been vari-
able - doses and depth of sedation achieved differ
Salicylate
between species of animal.
Acetylsalicylate ('Aspirin') was one of the first
NSAIDs used in veterinary medicine and still has a
ANALGESIA
place, particularly for postoperative pain and dis-
comfort in small animals. It acts as an analgesic
Although an animal may be deemed to be uncon-
both centrally and peripherally. It is said to cause
scious during general anaesthesia and, therefore,
 gastric irritation due, in part, to ion trapping (ion
incapable of appreciating pain, there is now evidence
 trapping occurs when an ion passes through a
thiat the use of analgesic drugs before and during
membrane and encounters a different pH from
92 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
which it has difficulty in escaping). By this mecha-
sasop paprap u aep uaa aq ae ue ued
nism the concentration of aspirin within a cell may
every 8 hours for not more than one week.
contribute to the gastric irritation because aspirin
 The drug is highly protein bound and should
which is absorbed in the stomach at the intracellu-
  r    n
lar pH of approximately 7.4 reverts to the ionized
 bound drugs for this can lead to toxic effects. It
form which can only slowly cross from the cells
 should not be administered to cats (Christianson,
into the blood plasma (aspirin pK。 = 3.4 so that the
 1980) and since in all animals it produces many
ionized concentration is 104 times that of the
side effects which are likely to be severe if the
unionized amount). The so-called ‘soluble'
usual therapeutic dose is exceeded many authori-
aspirins are certainly solutions at about neutral
ties consider this drug to be obsolescent.
pH, i.e. when dissolved in water, but precipitate a
considerable proportion of the drug in the acid
Flunixin
medium of the gastric juice. ‘Buffered’ aspirin
preparations reduce ion trapping by decreasing
Flunixin in i.v. doses of 1.1 mg/kg is used in horses
 gastric absorption. In the alkaline medium of the
 suffering from colic for its antiendotoxic and vis-
small intestine the aqueous solubility of aspirin 
 ceral pain relieving properties. Doses should not
increases and although the unionized form of the
be repeated more than twice. Consequently, many
 drug is present in much lower proportion, most of 
 animals presented for surgical treatment of colic
the absorption into the bloodstream occurs due to
 will have received the drug prior to surgery. Its
the larger absorptive surface and the greater time
-ap uaaq pou sy saru pueand ui Aiaes
spent in this part of the gastrointestinal tract.
strated. The drug in tablet form is also used in
Plasma content is chiefly (due to rapid hydrolysis
dogs for the control of postoperative pain and
in blood and liver) in the form of sodium salicylate
inflammation at a dose of 1 mg/kg for up to three
which is heavily protein bound.
days. Side effects in dogs include vomiting and
There is little evidence of clinical harm caused
diarrhoea and it should not be administered to
by aspirin irritation of the canine or feline stomach
 pregmant bitches. Its pharmacokinetics and phar-
apart from one isolated report of buffered aspirin
 macodynamics in cats have been reported by Lees
 - e u ae ss aaiss s
and Taylor (1991).
hound (Shaw et al., 1997). By diminishing platelet
 aggregation it has a small, clinically insignificant,
Ketoprofen
effect in prolonging blood coagulation.
 lad A1e1o Sui Oi uaai aq Aajes aumb ues sao
 Ketoprofen is used in horses, dogs and cats. It is
day and cats 5mg per day by the same route
 said to be approximately 15 times more potent
(Davis & Donnelly, 1968). It may be given pre-
jajod anou sau ne pue auozeinqluaud ueul
S  n   n  r ao
than aspirin. The i.v. dose for horses is 2.2 mg/kg.
postoperatively when the most severe postoper-
once daily, in dogs it is 2 mg/kg by the i.v., i.m. or
ative pain has waned.
s.c. routes, and in cats (s.c.) 2mg/kg is given, in
each case for not more than three days.
 In common with other NSAIDs it is not per-
Phenylbutazone
mitted by the racing authorities of Great Britain
Phenylbutazone is a favourite drug of horse own-
and Ireland to be used at the time of racing and
ers wishing to alleviate minor degrees of lameness
ketoprofen or its conjugates can be detected in
as an alternative to euthanasia. Veterinary
urine for up to 10 days after its administration
anaesthetists may use this drug as an analgesic
ceases.
anti-inflammatory in the treatment of equine post-
anaesthetic rhabdomyolysis in i.v. doses of
Carprofen
4mg /kg. In dogs i.v. injections or oral administra-
tion of up to 20 mg/kg (100 and 200 mg tablets are
Carprofen is the latest NSAID to be introduced
available in the UK) are used for the treatment of
loe oi readde jou saop h 'aonoeid Areualaa o
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 93
by inhibition of cyclo-oxgenase or lipoxygenase
particularly unlikely to produce excitement when
(McKellar et al., 1990) as the earlier NSAIDs do.
pain is present.
The side effects of these drugs generally result
The use of nalorphine as an antidote to mor-
from inhibition of prostaglandin formation by this
phine poisoning in man was first reported in 1951
mechanism, so carprofen promises to have fewer
and since then other agents which antagonize the
side effects than the other drugs.
effects of morphine have been produced. Many of
 In horses carprofen is used as a single i.v. dose
these have partial agonist activity, sufficient for
of 0.7 mg/kg (1 ml/70kg) which may be repeated
them to be used as analgesics, and often they are
 after 24 hours or followed with oral therapy for up
less liable to abuse and, therefore, have fewer con-
to five days. In dogs, the drug is given before or
trols over their use. Pure antagonists, such as
immediately after induction of general anaesthesia
naloxone, will reverse the effects of morphine at
in i.v. or s.c. doses of 4mg/kg for 'pre-emptive
doses which have no intrinsic activity when given
alone.
only a single dose of carprofen is required in the
In recent years the discovery of specific receptor
first 24 hours perioperatively; if analgesia is need-
 sites of action for the opioids (first suggested by
ed after this, half the initial dose may be given for
Martin et al., 1976) and the identification in the cen-
not more than seven days. Its analgesic activity in
 tral nervous system of endogenous ligands such as
cats has been described by Lascelles et al., (1995)
encephalins, endorphins and dynorphin which act
who found that i.m. pethidine (meperidine) in
 at these receptors, has led to better understanding
doses of 10 mg/kg produced significantly better
of the multiple actions of agonist and partial ago-
postoperative analgesia for up to two hours post-
nist opioid drugs, as well as providing the possi-
bility of the development of more specific drugs
the reverse was true and 4 mg/kg carprofen pro-
with fewer side effects. On the basis of response to
vided significantly better pain relief.
specific drugs Martin et al. initially postulated the
existence of three opioid receptors receptors,
termed μ, K and o.
OPIOID ANALGESICS
Other multiple receptors have since been postu-
Opioids have been used as painkillers in man for
lated and it is now accepted that the one known as
at least 2000 years and the refined and processed
the & receptor is of importance. Table 4.2 shows
extracts, morphine and heroin, still have a major
receptor selectivity of some opioid analgesics.
role as analgesics. There is now a wide range of
Many authorities now do not consider the o re-
ceptor to be a true opioid receptor. The actions
that the clinician has an enormous range of choice.
which are suggested to occur on activation of these
The principal reason for employing opioids is to
provide analgesia but some are used as cough
 TABLE 4.2 Receptor selectivity (agonist and
suppressants. Unfortunately, these drugs have a
 antagonist) of some opioid drugs
wide range of side effects, the most important of
Drug
L receptor K receptor& receptor
which is probably respiratory depression. Even
more unfortunately, in man these drugs cause
Buprenorphine
?
?
euphoria and addiction, rendering them liable to
Butorphanol
+
+
、
 Diprenorphine
++
abuse and resulting in controls on their use. Abuse
Fentanyl
+
一
一
is not a feature of their use in veterinary patients
Methadone
+1
+1
—
but they have other undesirable side effects,
Morphine
++
including the production of nausea and vomiting
Naloxone
+
+
Nalbuphine
(in dogs), constipation, pruritis and in some
++
+
Pentazocine
+
+
+
cases dysphoria. Whilst in dogs they invariably
Pethidine
+
cause sedation, in cats and horses higher doses
Remifentanil
+1
cause excitement, although clinical doses can be
Sufentanil
+
+
used quite safely in these species of animal, being
94 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
various receptors have been the subject of very
horses, which is said to be a μ effect (Tobin et al.,
many reviews and Table 4.3 summarizes, in a very
1979). Nevertheless, despite discrepancies, a
simplified form, the suggested actions following
knowledge of the range of activity at different
stimulation of the receptors as gleaned from these
-pueisiapn ue je Suaire un Indlau st sioidanan
reviews.
ing of the actions, side effects and reversibility of
The cloning of receptor sites, with the identifi-
the wide range of opioids available for clinical use.
cation of a large number of variations, has led to a
Increasing the dose of pure agonist drugs in-
re-classification in which the classical receptors are
creases analgesia but, urfortunately, also increases
now termed OP1 (previously the & receptor), OP2,
respiratory depression. Moreover, all the drugs
(K) and OP3. (μ). However, as this classification is
 as yet unfamiliar in anaesthetic use, the original
have effects which give rise to abuse by humans. It
terminology will continue to be used in this book.
 has been suggested that there are li and μ2 recep-
It is thought that analgesia results primarily
tors, stimulation of μ1 resulting in analgesia whilst
from stimulation of the μ and k receptors while
 2 stimulation leads to respiratory depression and
stimulation of the & receptors modulates the effects
 abuse. Meptazinol was claimed to be a pure l1 ago
at the μ receptors.
 nist (Sanford, 1948) but this drug does not appear
Drugs classified as pure agonists, e.g. mor-
to have lived up to early expectations and is now
phine, cause analgesia by stimulation of the μ and
thought to act also by other mechanisms.
K receptors, although they may have actions else-
 Partial agonists have a limit to the analgesia
where. Naloxone is antagonistic at all receptors 
they can produce, increasing doses sometimes
where it is active. The partial agonist/antagonist
 antagonizing the analgesia of lower doses (i.e. the
drugs show a range of activity. Some may act as
dose-response curve is bell-shaped). However, the
agonists at one type of receptor whilst antagoniz-
respiratory depression produced by the partial
ing at another; some have partial agonist actions at
 agonists is also limited, maximal depression reach-
a single type of receptor, low doses stimulating the
ing a plateau at high doses. Unfortunately, the
receptor but higher doses antagonizing this effect.
Unfortunately, in intact animals, urlike in pharma-
still be of some clinical significance. Partial agonist
os aq lou Aeu sasuodsan 'suoneredaid lesisonon
drugs are less liable to human abuse, primarily
clear cut. For example, butorphanol is said to have
u asuodsai uiem, e saonput h inq Ahanoe n ou
hallucinatory effects. Psychomimetic and halluci-
natory effects have generally been considered
TABLE 4.3 Actions suggested to occur on
signs of o receptor stimulation. Recently, pure K
stimulation of opioid receptors
agonists have become available and it was hoped
Receptor
Suggested action
that these drugs would have the analgesic advant-
-ndsai Suisne pnoum istuole pioido ue jo sase
Spinal and supraspinal analgesia
Respiratory depression
Euphoria
abuse. Regrettably, all the drugs available to date
 Nausea and Vomiting 
 se p   eds ad a
 Changes in gut motility
result it is now postulated that some of the actions
Miosis
Addiction
attributed to o receptor stimulation may in fact be
Sedation
 a property of k receptor stimulation. As animals
Supraspinal analgesia
cannot complain of dysphoric or hallucinatory
K
Sedation
experiences it behoves veterinarians to exercise
Addiction (mild)
care when using drugs likely to cause such effects.
Miosis
Dysphoria and psychomimetic effects
analgesia
General actions of opioid agonists in animals
 Dysphoria and psychomimetic effects
Mydriasis
At least in man, it seems that the euphoric effects
of morphine-like drugs contribute to the analgesia
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 95
they produce, patients being unconcerned by any
the response to opioids, and horses and cats in
residual pain. Whether this is also true in animals
adverse reactions to doses which would cause
produce dose-dependent respiratory depression
excitement in normal animals.
but it must be emphasized that in chest pain low
the analgesic effect. In ambulatory humans, dogs
Use and choice of opioid analgesics
and cats, morphine and some other opioid agonists
Opioid drugs may be used to provide analgesia
cause vomiting and as they also produce marked
before, during and after surgery as well as in com-
depression of the cough reflex care must be taken
-oo lenuau, roy sinip aaepis ym toa
to ensure that inhalation of vomit does not occur.
trol. The choice of opioid will depend on the
Opioid agonists increase the tone of the gut, particu-
degree of analgesia needed, the speed of onset of
larly of the sphincters, and decrease transit time,
the drug's action and the length of action required,
-os Aeraua si asn naui "uoedsuos Susnes
as well as on the side effects thiat can be tolerated in
traindicated for biliary or ureteric pain as they
the circumstances. When analgesia is needed dur-
cause spasm of the bile and ureteric ducts.
ing surgery, an opioid with a fairly long action
Cerebrospinal fluid pressure is elevated, so their
may be used for premedication (e.g. morphine or
use is also contraindicated in head injuries. The
buprenorphine), or a short acting drug such as
pure agonist drugs' effects of causing tolerance
fentanyl
and addiction in man results in their being subject
Where potent agonists such as fentanyl or
to tight statutory controls.
alfentanil are used to provide a major component
 In humans, dogs and rabbits, opioid agonists
 of anaesthesia for surgery, respiratory depression
tend to cause central nervous depression whilst in
may be severe and respiratory support with
cats and horses excitement may predominate. This
intermittent positive pressure ventilation of the
species difference reflects in many of the proper-
lungs and oxygen supplementation will be neces-
ties of the drugs. High doses of morphine will
sary. A similar degree of respiratory depression
sedate dogs, but not horses or cats. Opioid ago-
during the recovery period is unacceptable if
nists generally cause miosis, and do so in the dog.
less support is available. As all opioids cross
but generalized excitement in horses and cats may
the placenta, care must be taken if they are used
sometimes be accompanied by mydriasis. The
at parturition, although naloxone may be used
effects on the cardiovascular system are very vari-
to antagonize
 respiratory depression in the
able and depend on the drug, its dose and the
neonate.
species of animal concerned. In general, however,
Dysphoric or hallucinatory effects will not be a
at high doses they cause bradycardia, thought to
problem during general anaesthesia and are often
 be mediated via vagal mechanisms, and this is reg-
prevented in conscious animals by the use of sedat-
ularly seen in dogs. They have minimal direct
ives, but may cause distress if drugs causing these
effect on the heart and their effects on arterial
effects are given to unsedated, ambulatory an-
blood pressure may be very variable. Release of
imals. Because opioids often have a synergistic
histamine by morphine and pethidine may cause
depressant action in combination with sedatives or
arterial hypotension in dogs. Opioid agonists usu-
anaesthetics, doses (particularly of the more
 ally cause arterial hypertension and tachycardia in
potent agents) may need to be reduced when com-
horses - presumably manifestations of the excite-
binations of these drugs are used. The use of par-
ment reaction although under some circumstances
tial agonist drugs was encouraged by their
bradycardia can occur (Muir et al., 1978; Clarke &
freedom from statutory controls in many coun-
Paton, 1988). High doses of opioids produce mus-
tries, but now in the USA pentazocine, butor-
cle rigidity in all species of animals, including
 phanol and buprenorphine are all FDA controlled
dogs.
and in the UK buprenorphine and pentazocine are
It must be emphiasized again that the presence
controlled drugs while butorphanol is a prescrip-
 
tion-only medicine.
96 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Epidural opioids
the dose to 0.1 mg/kg. Excitement reactions,
Opioids, including morphine, oxymorphone, fen-
bradycardia and histamine release are more com-
mon when the drug is given by the intravenous
tanyl, sufentanil and butorphanol have been used
route and even after intravenous injection analge-
by the epidural route in order to try to achieve
amalgesia without central and respiratory depres-
sia may not become apparent for some 15 minutes.
sion during and after surgery. There are differ-
ueodenxa pue Aononeueud oidanar ul sa
Papaveretum
from human experience may be unwise. In man,
The mixture of drugs now marketed as papa-
respiratory depression may occur and is some-
veretum contains morphine, papaverine and
times seriously delayed, but this does not seem to
codeine and is currently available in two strengthis.
be a clinical problem in dogs. Another common
This combination differs from that sold previous
side effect is pruritis in 67-100% of patients,
to 1993 under the Trade name, 'Omnopon' which
although only serious in 1-10% (Morgan, 1989).
also contained a number of other morphine alka-
Epidural opioids administered through indwell-
loids. In veterinary anaesthesia, the ad vantage of
ing catheters may have a role to play in the provi-
'Omnopon' over morphine alone was that it
sion of prolonged analgesia but in veterinary
caused less  vomiting in ambulatory dogs.
Omnopon' was commonly used with hyoscine in
indwelling epidural catheters can present prob-
the preparation 'Omnopon-Scopolamine', which
lems. When they are used by epidural injection
contained 20 mg of the alkaloids with 0.4 mg of
care must be taken to ensure that the solution does
hyoscine ('Scopolamine′) per ml. The combination
not contain a preservative, for this may damage
was a time-honoured premedication in medical
nerves.
anaesthesia, and a 1ml vial of the 'Omnopon-
Scopolamine' mixture with 3 mg of acepromazine
was useful to sedate and control vicious dogs. The
OPIOID AGONISTS
authors have no experience with the current
Morphine
 preparation of papaveretum, but it is probable that
it will be equally effective as a canine sedative
Morphine, the principal alkaloid found in opium
when combined with hyoscine (still available in
(the partially dried latex from the unripe capsule
the UK as Scopolamine) and acepromazine
against which other analgesics are assessed. As the
alkaloid itself is insoluble in water, it is supplied as
Pethidine
a water soluble salt, usually the sulphate or
Pethidine ('meperidine′ in North America) is only
hydrochloride. Because of its euphoric properties
1/10 thi as potent as morphine and although its pri-
in man it is strongly addictive and its use is, there-
 mary actions are typical of agonist opioids it also
fore, subject to controls.
appears to have atropine-like properties. Unlike
Its major properties are those of producing anal-
 morphine,it appears to relax intestinal spasm and
gesia, respiratory depression and constipation.
so is particularly useful in equine spasmodic colic.
Small doses have minimal effects on the cardiovas-
 It rarely, if ever, causes vomiting in dogs or cats
cular system but higher doses may cause bradycar-
and has little effect on the cough reflex. Doses
dia and hypotension in dogs. In these animals
given by i.m. injection have little effect on arterial
histamine release may contribute to its hypotensive
 blood pressure but pethidine is a potent histamine
liberator and because of this its i.v. injection can
minimal changes in heart rate (Muir et al., 1978).
 result in severe hypotension in dogs.
Doses of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg by intramuscular
 In large animals doses of 1 mg/kg by i.m. injec-
injection will usually provide good analgesia in
 tion and in dogs 1-2 mg/kg produce generally sat-
most species of animal if they are in pain when the
 isfactory analgesia. In cats i.m. doses of 10-20 mg
drug is given, but in cats it may be safer to restrict 
 per cat may be given. Pethidine appears to have a
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 97
short half life in animals (Alexander & Collett,
Polyester film backing
1974; Kalthum & Waterman, 1988) and these doses
only give effective pain relief for 1.5 to 2 hours.
Fentanyl reservoir
Methadone
Methadone is a synthetic agonist, approximately
Release membrane
equipotent to morphine in terms of analgesia,
Adhesive
pue soop ui uoepas ssa sanpord  unoue
more ataxia in horses. It is less likely to cause
FIG. 4.1 Diagrammatic section through a fentanyl patch
anaphylactoid reactions than is pethidine. It has
(fentanyl transdermal system; Duragesic,Janssen).
been widely used in horses at i.v. or i.m. doses of
 general anaesthesia IPPV is usually necessary if
0.1 mg/kg, higher doses carrying an increased risk
the dose used exceeds 0.2 mg/kg. Fentanyl has lit-
of ataxia and excitement. The dose for the dog is
fle effect on the cardiovascular system but usually
generally accepted to be 0.25 mg/kg.
causes some slowing of the pulse. Occasionally
 Methadone has frequently been used in dogs
severe bradycardia occurs, necessitating the
and horses as part of sedative/opioid combina-
administration of anticholinergics.
tions. A preparation used on the Continent of
 In veterinary practice, fentanyl was initially
Europe, ‘Polamivet', contains 2.5mg of the
used as part of neuroleptanalgesic mixtures for
laevorotatory isomer together with 0.125 mg of an
dogs (Marsboom & Mortelmans, 1964) but it is
 atropine-like compound, diphenylpiperidonoethyl-
now popular in balanced anaesthesia techniques
acetamide hydrochloride, per ml of solution and
and for postoperative analgesia in intensive care.
this mixture is widely used in combination with
In man, the use of adequate doses of opioids such
the phenothiazine derivative, propionyl pro-
as fentanyl has been shown to reduce the stress and
mazine, ‘Combelen', for sedation of horses and
catabolic responses to anaesthesia and surgery, and
dogs.
to reduce morbidity. There is some evidence to
indicate that a similar reduction in stress response
occurs in animal patients given these analgesics
Fentanyl
during surgery.
This drug is about 50 times as potent as morphine.
A recent development has been the availability
qoy e Suonpoid jo aiqedes isruoge amd e si H
of cutaneous patches for the continuous, controlled
level of analgesia, sufficient to allow surgery
administration of fentanyl (Fig. 4.1) and although
(Tobin et al., 1979). Effective following i.v. injection,
there is still some debate about the best way to
it is also rapidly absorbed across mucous mem-
uo pasn Suaq Auaedde are Aaun wau Aondua
branes. Following i.v. injection it is effective in
dogs and cats in the USA. In the UK they are
47minutes and, although claimed to be short act-
available for use in man (Janssen-Cilag Ltd.,
ing (15 to 20 minutes) this is largely due to redistri-
Saunderton, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP14 4HJ)
bution in the body so that cumulative effects occur
and designed to release 25μg/hour, 50 μg/hour, 75
with prolonged or high dosages.
μg/hour and 100 μg/hour.
The pharmacology of fentanyl in animals has
They all produce a skin depot of the drug so that
been well described (Tobin et al., 1979; Sanford,
fentanyl continues to be absorbed into the circula-
1984). In dogs, rats and primates it produces seda-
tion for some time after removal of the patch. There
tion and myosis, whilst in mice, cats and horses it
paaemosua aq iuoju asnqe Snip jeu uasuon sem
causes excitement with mydriasis. Horses show a
by the use of these patches in canine outpatients,
very marked locomotor response, pacing increas-
however, recommended disposal of the patch after
ing with dosage, yet they show very little ataxia
its removal from the skin entails no more than fold-
(Tobin et al., 1979). As with all opioid agonists,
ing it over and discarding into the household trash
analgesia is accompanied by respiratory depres-
 bin. Their use in animals is not licenced but, in
sion and when the drug is used in dogs during
the future, they may make the provision of
98 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
nsea Aralms ases Aep rog eisalreue aaeradoisod
 produce short periods of anaesthesia followed by a
to ensure. Egger et al.(1998) recommended that
rapid recovery in a wide range of species.
because of inter-individual and intra-individual
variation in plasma fentanyl concentrations
Remifentanil
obtained from the use of 50, 75 and 100 μg/hour
patches, they should be applied 24 hours before the
Remifentanil is a fentanyl derivative with an ester
anticipated time that analgesia will be required.
linkage which is rapidly broken down by non-spe-
cific tissue and plasma esterases and is responsible
for its unique characteristics. It is a pure μ agonist
Alfentanil
(James et al., 1991) and the EEG effects of remifen-
This fentanyl derivative is only one-quarter as
tanil are similar to those of other opioids in dogs
potent an analgesic as fentanyl itself but has the
(Hoffman ef al., 1993). Clearance is unlikely to be
advantage of being rapidly effective (1 to 2 min-
dependent on renal or hepatic function and
utes following i.v. injection). It has been claimed to
because in vitro it is a poor substrate for butyryl-
be shorter acting although studies of its pharmaco-
cholinesterases (pseudocholinesterases), its clea-
kinetics in dogs throw some doubt on this since it
rance should be unaffected by cholinesterase
has been shown to be more cumulative following
deficiency induced by anticholinesterase flea col-
repeated doses. Alfentanil plasma levels decay
lars. Currently, remifentanil is formulated in
triphasically in dogs (1/2β = 104 minutes), and less 
glycine, an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and con-
than 1% of the drug is excreted unchanged as
10 [euds Aq uaai aq jou pmous H Auanbas
alfentanil, metabolism into a large number of inac-
extradural injection.
tive metabolites being rapid (Heykants et al., 1982).
Rapid biotransformation to minimally active
Analgesia is accompanied by respiratory depres-
 metabolites should be associated with a short, pre-
sion and very severe bradycardia may occur
dictable duration of action with no accumulation of
(Arndt et al., 1986).
effect on repeated dosing or with continuous infu-
In dogs alfentanil may be used to reduce the
sion. Its effects are antagonized by naloxone and its
induction dose of an i.v. anaesthetic although this
potency is similar to that of fentanyl, and 15 to 30
may entail production of several minutes of
times that of alfentanil. Bolus i.v. injection is said to
apnoea. For example, mixing 10 μg/kg of alfen-
 a  % oqe j opa  a
tanil with 0.3 or 0.6 mg of atropine and injecting
blood pressure and heart rate, but more detailed
this mixture some 30 seconds before injecting
haemodynamic investigations are awaited. Recov-
 propofol can reduce the dose of propofol needed
ery from remifentanil anaesthesia is said to be
to induce anaesthesia to less than 2mg/kg, but
much more rapid than for any other opioid studied
 apnoea of up to three minutes duration may occur
to date, especially after continuous infusions main-
(Chambers, 1989). Similar results follow when
tained for six or more hours ( Michelsen et al., 1996).
alfentanil at this dose is used prior to the injection
To date there are no reports of the clinical use
of thiopental. However, with these i.v. anaesthetics
 of remifentanil in veterinary practice. It may
 apnoea is not nearly so prolonged when the alfen-
be that it will be used widely (perhaps in place of
tanil dose is reduced to 5 μg/kg, while there is still
 nitrous oxide during general anaesthesia) because
a desirable reduction in the dose of anaesthetic
 of its predictability, short duration of action and
needed to allow endotracheal intubation. Alfen-
easily reversible effects, but its exact niche in vet-
tanil is now often used in intermittent doses to pro-
erinary anaesthesia remains to be seen.
vide an'analgesic element' in anaesthetized dogs
 about to be subjected to intense surgical stimulation
Other fentanyl derivatives
but in spontaneously breathing animals the indi-
vidual doses should not exceed 5 μg/kg if there are
 no facilities for prolonged IPPV of the lungs.
Sufentonil, lofentonil ond corfentonil
 In Munich, Erhardt has used etomidate/alfen-
Sufentanil is approximately 10 times as potent as
tanil (Erhardt, 1984;Erhardt et al.;1985, 1985a) to
fentanyl, while lofentanil has a very potent and
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 99
exceptionally long lasting effect. Neither of these
by the i.v., i.m. and s.c. routes. Although in man it is
drugs has been used extensively in veterinary
 given in the form of a sublingual tablet, sublingual
medicine. Carfentanil is one of the most potent
absorption is difficult to achieve in animals and
opioids known. It is said to be 3-8 times as potent
 oral administration is ineffective as the drug is bro-
as etorphine and has proved to be useful in
ken dowm during first pass through the liver.
elephants (Bengis et al., 1985), although at the con-
This drug is unusual in that its association
centrations used it is a dangerous drug to handle
 and dissociation with receptors is very slow.
since it is rapidly absorbed across mucous mem-
Thus, even after i. v. injection it has a prolonged
branes. An antagonist drug suitable for use in
onset of action (30 minutes or longer), a fact
humans should be readily available whenever car-
often forgotten in its use. Its long duration
fentanil is used.
of action (known to be about eight hours in man) is
due to its slow dissociation from receptors
and analgesia remains long after it can no
Etorphine
longer be detected in the blood by most
Etorphine is a very potent derivative of morphine
assay methods. This tight binding to receptors
which is claimed to be effective in a dose of
means that its actions are very difficult to reverse
about 0.5 mg per 500kg. It appears to have all
with naloxone, although pretreatment with nalox-
the properties of morphine but equipotent
one will prevent its effects. Should respiratory
doses cause more respiratory depression. lts
depression result from the use of buprenorphine it
very great potency constitutes its sole advantage
 should be treated with IPPV of the lungs, or with
in that an effective dose for a very large animal
non-specific respiratory  stimulants such  as
can be dissolved in a small volume of solvent,
doxapram.
enabling it to be used in dart gun projectiles for
The analgesic dose-response curve is bell-
immoblizing wild game animals. In anaesthetic
 shaped, higher doses antagonizing analgesia
practice this very same potency makes it a difficult 
 already produced by lower doses but higher doses
drug to handle and constitutes a hazard to the
do not antagonize the respiratory depression once
anaesthetist.
this has reached a plateau. In the authors' experi-
Etorphine is an extremely long acting com-
ence serious respiratory depression is rare with the
pound and recovery from its effects is also delayed
usual clinical doses but as its onset may be delayed,
by enterohepatic recycling. Its action is usually ter-
minated by the use of diprenorphine, a specific
given the drug remains under close observation
antagonist, but relapse into deep sedation may
for at least two hours after its administration. On
 occur. The drug has the highly undesirable proper-
its own, in clinical doses, it does not appear to
ty of producing stimulation of the central nervous
cause sedation, or to cause excitement in sus-
system before depressing it and this results in a
 ceptible species of animal, but its use towards the
period of excitement. In an attempt to overcome
 end of surgery slows recovery from anaesthesia. Its
this, etorphine is marketed in fixed ratio combina-
effects on the cardiovascular system are minimal.
tions with phenothizine tranquillizers ('Large
Doses used in dogs and cats vary from 6 to
Animal Immobilon’ with acepromazine and
 10 μg/kg and in horses the authors have found it
'Small Animal Immobilon'with methotrime-
 an effective analgesic at doses of 6ug/kg for
prazine). Should accidental self-administration
orthopaedic cases. However, the bell-shaped
 Occur, death can result if the antidote is not readily
nature of the dose-response curve must be consid-
available.
ered and if these doses are inadequate for pain
relief, they may be followed by doses of a pure
 agonist drug. Buprenorphine has also been exten-
Buprenorphine
sively used with C2 adrenoceptor agonists in sedat-
Buprenorphine is a partial agonist that is popular
ive combinations.
 as a premedicant and postoperative analgesic
The popularity of the drug in the UK has
in cats, dogs and laboratory animal where it is used 
undoubtedly been due to its prolonged length of
100 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
action, that it provides better analgesia than can be
extensive experience of pentazocine have seen
obtained with other partial agonists and, until
 signs they associate with such an effect, parti-
recently, its freedom from control under the
cularly following high doses.
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
Despite these problems pentazocine has been
quite widely used in veterinary practice, doses
 of 1 to 3 mg/kg being said give to three hours of
Butorphanol
pain relief (Taylor & Houlton, 1984; Sawyer &
In the UK this drug is currently not subject to con-
Rech, 1987; Paddleford, 1988). Pentazocine can
trols under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. It is used
 be given orally but first pass liver metabolism
in cats, dogs and horses for analgesia and in seda-
 means that high doses are necessary. In the experi-
tive combinations with C2 adrenoceptor agonists.
 mental horse colic model doses of 0.5 to 4.0 mg/kg
Butorphanol is also used in dogs for its antitussive 
 have been tested, the higher doses giving rise
effect. In dogs and horses it is said to have minimal
to ataxia and muscle tremors. The recommended
effects on the cardiovascular system (Trim, 1983;
dose for the relief of colic pains in horses is
Robertson et al., 1981) but caution may be in order
0.33 mg/kg i.v., followed 15 minutes later by a sim-
here for in man it causes increased pulmonary vas-
ilar i.m. dose.
cular resistance and, at high doses, hypertension,
so it is not recommended for patients with cardio-
Nalbuphine
vascular disease.
 In experimental horses it has been used in doses
Although this drug has minimal cardiovascular
of 0.1 to 0.4 mg/kg but the higher doses caused rest-
effects and appears to cause few dysphoric reac-
'p ja uiaeidle enodsp juaredde pue ssaussa
tions, it has a low ceiling of analgesia and is not
1984) and the dose currently used clinically is 0.02 to
 recommended for relief of severe pain. In experi-
0.1 mg /kg by i.v. injection, which seems to be particu-
mental dogs it has been found that doses of
larly effective for the relief of mild colic. However,
 0.75 mg/kg give reasonable visceral analgesia;
in the authors' experience even this dose may
 somatic analgesia is poor and analgesia is always
induce walking behaviour in urrestrained animals.
 inferior to that provided by butorphanol. As part of
 Doses of 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg by i.m. or s.c. injection
 a sedative combination for use in horses, in the
have been found to give effective analgesia for up
 doses employed for this, nalbuphine alone pro-
to four hours in both dogs and cats (Paddleford,
duces no discemible unwanted effects in pain-free
1988). In experimental studies visceral analgesia
horses.
was found to be superior to somatic analgesia,
 and lower doses superior to higher doses, poss-
SEQUENTIAL ANALGESIA
ibly indicating that, like buprenorphine, the
dose-response curve is bell shaped. Butorphanol
 Sequential analgesia is a term introduced to des-
may be given orally for analgesia although doses
cribe the use of partial agonists subsequent to pure
5-10 times those by injection are required to pro-
 agonists (usually fentanyl) in an attempt to reverse
duce an equivalent effect.
residual respiratory depression whilst maintain-
 ing analgesia. First attempted with pentazocine,
buprenorphine, butorphanol and nalbuphine have
Pentazocine
also been used for this purpose (Mitchell & Smith,
 In man this partial agonist has lost its earlier popu-
1989). On theoretical grounds buprenorphine
larity due to producing a high incidence of dys-
 should be the least efficient and nalbuphine the
phoria and hallucinatory responses, coupled with 
 most because of their μ agonist and antagonist
causing a marked increase in pulmonary vascular 
 properties (Table 4.2), and nalbuphine has been
resistance. Moreover, because of its abuse poten- 
 widely recommended for use in man for this pur-
tial, in the UK it is controlled under the Misuse of  
 pose. In laboratory practice, buprenorphine has
Drugs Act 1971. Although it is impossible to assess 
been used to reverse the effects of high dose fen-
dysphoria in animals most veterinarians with
tanyl (Flecknell, et al., 1989).
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 101
The idea of agonist/antagonist analgesia is not
their use as analgesics, are used for their antagonis-
tic properties. Nalorphine was the first to be used
dine together with its antagonist levallorphan was
as an opioid antagonist but has now been super-
marketed, but was found to produce no less res-
seded by naloxone. Diprenorphine is marketed as
piratory depression than pethidine alone at
 a specific antagonist of etorphine and in animals it
equianalgesic doses. It is clear that the final out-
 appears to be very efficient in this role. However as
come of sequential analgesia must be the result of a
it causes hallucinations in man it is only licensed
delicate balance of activities at the various recep-
for use in animals and in medical practice nalox-
tors and the 'reversing’ drugs must be given with
one remains the drug of choice for countering the
 great care according to the need of the individual
effects of etorphine.
patient.
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS
SEDATIVE-OPIOID COMBINATIONS
Pure antagonists
When opioids are combined with sedative drugs.
synergism seems to occur, sedation and analgesia
Noloxone
being greater than that capable of being achieved
Naloxone is a pure antagonist at all opioid receptors
by either drug alone. The use of the sedative will
 amd so will reverse the effect of all opioid agonists
often also prevent any excitement effects that
but it is less effective against partial agonists. In
might occur with the opioid alone. There is noth-
man, reversal of opioid actions with naloxone is
ing new about the use of such combinations, vet-
sometimes accompanied by tachycardia but there
erinarians having used them for many years to
are no reports of this in the veterinary literature.
make animals more manageable (Amadon &
The drug is fairly short acting and its effects may
Craige, 1936). The range of sedative/ opioid mix-
wear off before those of the previously admin-
tures in use for sedation and control of animals is
istered agonist so that repeated doses may be
now enormous, Q2 adrenoceptor agonists, neuro-
needed. This is particularly important in veter-
leptic agents and benzodiazepines all having been
inary medicine where large and frequent doses of
combined with a wide variety of agonist and par-
naloxone are necessary to counter the accidental
tial agonist opioids. Depth of sedation achieved
self-administration of the potent long acting agent,
depends primarily on the opioid employed, par-
etorphine.
tial agonists or less potent agonist combinations
Naloxone given to an animal that has not
producing sedation whereas large doses of potent
received an opioid may temporarily alter its
 opioids such as fentanyl or alfentanil can achieve
behaviour and it has been claimed that it is effect-
anaesthesia. Unfortunately, severe respiratory
"(hh 'yoog) u-qo sasoy Sddois ui aa
depression may accompany the use of these high
Naloxone is thought by some to have a role in the
dose opioid techniques. Suitable combinations for
treatment of shock (Booth, 1988).
sedation, control and anaesthesia in each species
of animal are given in later chapters of this book.
The term neuroleptanalgesia has been used to
Naltrexone
describe the combination of opioids with pheno-
Naltrexone is a long acting derivative of naloxone
thiazines or butyrophenones (neuroleptics). The
aaa u pasn uao Auaredde jou ynoue pu
principles of their use are the same as outlined
nary practice it could prove useful should a long
above for any sedative/opioid combination but
acting pure antagonist be required.
the neuroleptic agents have the specific property
of reducing opioid-induced vomiting in dogs.
Neuroleptic techniques can be used in two ways.
Partial agonists used as antagonists
At comparatively low opioid dose rates they can
Some partial agonists, which either give poor anal-
 be used for control, or as premedication before
gesia or prod uce dysphoria sufficient to preclude
102 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE 4.4 Composition of some commercially
slow, the time varying from 2 to 10hours before
available neuroleptanalgesic mixtures
recovery to full consciousness. Respiratory effects
 are variable, with both hyperpnoea and respirato-
Commercial Analgesic
Neuroleptic
ry depression occurring. The advantages of the
name
 mixture include ease of administration, wide safe-
Thalamonal
 Fentanyl 0.05 mg/ml
 Droperidol 20 mg/ml
ty margin, quiet postoperative state, reversibility
Hypnorm 
Fentanyl 0.315 mg/kg  Fluanisone 10 mg/ml
with narcotic antagonists (such as naloxone),
Immobilon SA Etorphine 0.074 mg/ml Methotrimeprazine 
18mg/ml
and tolerance by animals in poor physical con-
Immobilon LA Etorphine 2.45mg/ml  Acepromazine
dition. Disadvantages include variable response
10 mg/ml
in certain breeds, the spontaneous movements
which occur, the need to employ nitrous oxide or
local analgesia when major surgery is to be
be used to produce sufficient depression of the
performed, and the possibility of respiratory
central nervous system to enable surgery to be per-
depression
formed. This latter use is sometimes termed 'neuro-
Fentanyl has also been used in the UK in com-
leptanaesthesia' and was the way in which the
bination with fluanisone, as the preparation
'Hypnorm'. Diarrhoea has been reported to follow
(Marsboom & Mortelmans, 1964), but it is associ-
the administration of this mixture in over 24% of
ated with profound respiratory depression and
canine patients.
should not be used unless facilities for respiratory
The effects of fentanyl with fluanisone and fen-
support are available.
tanyl with droperidol in pigs have been studied
To obtain the best results the neuroleptic should
but neither mixture produced better sedation than
be administered first and, when it is fully effective,
droperidol alone.
the analgesic should be given to produce the
The results obtained by neuroleptanalgesic
desired result. In veterinary medicine, however,
techniques are more impressive in monkeys. In
for convenience it is usual to employ commercially
these animals the technique may offer distinct
available fixed ratios of the two drugs and it must
 advantages over the more conventional methods
be accepted that this ratio may not be optimal for
 of anaesthesia especially when skilled assistance is
 any particular animal.
not available.
The composition of c
commercially available
mixtures of fentanyl/butyrophenone tranquillizer
are given in Table 4.4. All have similar properties
"IMmobIloN'
and may be considered together. They are used in
‘Immobilon' is marketed for both small and large
dogs, primates and rodents, but they are con-
animal use, the concentrations of etorphine and
traindicated in cats because fentanyl may cause
the tranquillizer in each preparation being as
violent excitement in these animals. They are usu-
shown in Table 4.4. At the doses recommended by
ally used to produce deep sedation with profound
the manufacturers the preparations cause intense
analgesia sufficient for
procedures such
as
central nervous depression with considerable
endoscopy, or the lancing of a superficial abscess,
analgesia, allowing major surgery to be carried
but are inadequate for major surgery. The rationale
out. When surgery is completed it was recom-
for using the short acting fentanyl with long acting
mended that the effects of the etorphine (but not of
butyrophenones is not obvious, but the combina-
the phenothiazine tranquillizer) be reversed by the
 tion appears effective.
use of the specific antagonist ('Revivon'). LA
Ferntanyl has been used with fluanisone for neu-
Revivon contains 3.0mg/ml and SM Revivon
roleptanalgesia in a 1:50 mixture (Fluanisone
0.272 mg/ml of diprenorphine.
Comp.). Given at a dosage level of 0.1 mg/kg of
The effects of ‘Immobilon' in horses are what
fentanyl with 5 mg/kg of fluanisone by slow i.v.
might be expected to follow such high doses of an
injection it produced a short period of anaesthesia
opiate drug in this species of animal. Intramus-
after short and mild excitement. Recovery was
cular injection regularly leads to excitement dur-
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 103
ing induction; after i.v. injection the horse becomes
ether are used, but it is not essential with modern
recumbent within one minute and although excite-
halogenated anaesthetics like halothane and
ment may occur it is much less marked. Once
isoflurane. However, in small dogs and in cats,
recumbent, intense muscular activity makes the
even a little secretion may be enough to give rise to
animal very stiff and violent continuous tremors
significant respiratory obstruction and in such
occur. The muscles relax somewhat after about
small patients it is arguably advisable to adminis-
20 minutes. Blood pressure and heart rate increase
ter  anticholinergics  before  any  anaesthetic.
 s      
Ruminants produce large quantities of saliva but
depressed. Following the i.v. injection of 'Revivon'
most horses regain the standing position within a
more viscid and thick and more likely to create res-
few minutes. Occasionally, horses become excited
piratory obstruction, so these drugs should not be
shortly after standing and a further excitement
used.
phase may occur several hours later due to entero-
 Some drugs, in particular the α2 adrenoceptor
hepatic recycling of the etorphine. The disadvant-
agonists and, in high doses, the opioids, can cause
ages associated with the use of ‘Immobilon' in
marked vagus-mediated bradycardia. Also, under
domestic animals far outweigh the advantages.
light anaesthesia, surgery of the head and neck is
Immobilon' and other etorphine-containing
prone to trigger vagal reflexes, and the horse, dog
 mixtures have been extensively used for the cap-
and cat seem to be most at risk from these disturb-
ture of wild game. Although generally used as
ances. In cats the oculocardiac reflex is well known
Knockdown' doses, as in horses, they are also
commonly used at lower dose rates whereby the
stimulation of the nose or other similarly sensitive
animals (elephants and giraffes) became sedated
structures can have the same effect or causelaryn-
but remain standing. ‘Immobilon' is not recom-
 gospasm. In horses, stimulation about the head
mended for wild felidae (nor domestic cats!).
and neck can produce sudden cardiac arrest with-
 In man etorphine is extremely potent and the
 out a prior warning of bradycardia.
use of ‘Immobilon' constitutes a danger to the
 Anticholinesterase drugs such as neostigmine
anaesthetist and assistants. Should an accident
 are used to antagonize the block produced by com-
occur, naloxone is recommended as the drug of
 petitive neuromuscular blocking drugs and their
choice for treatment of human beings, but several
use must be preceded or combined with one of the
 doses may be needed to maintain respiration until
anticholinergic drugs to block the muscarinic
medical help can be obtained.
effects of the released acetylcholine. Also, the
depolarizing agent suxamethonium has effects
similar to those of acetylcholine and, at least in
ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS
dogs and cats, an anticholinergic 'cover' should be
employed when this relaxant is used.
Anticholinergic agents are widely used in anaes-
 In recent years the advisability of routine pre-
thesia to antagonize the muscarinic effects of
medication with anticholinergic drugs has been
acetylcholine and thus to block transmission at
questioned. These drugs certainly have side effects
parasympathetic postganglionic nerve endings.
and the tachycardia they induce may be undesir-
The main purposes are:
able when it reduces stroke volume or cardiac out-
1. To reduce salivation and bronchial secretions
put. Disturbance of vision may cause a cat or horse
 2. To block the effects of impulses in the vagus
to panic. Reduced gut motility may cause colic in
horses. In man, considerable discomfort results
nerves
3. To block certain of the effects produced by
from dry mouth in the postoperative period and,
drugs which stimulate the parasympathetic
presumably, this may also be the case in animals.
system.
These disadvantages must be weighed against the
advantages already mentioned.
The reduction of salivation and bronchial secretion
Current practice, where ether is not to be used
is necessary if irritant volatile anaesthetics such as
seems to be not to use anticholinergic drugs for
104 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
routine premedication, but to reserve them for cor-
The drug has unpredictable effects on the
rective measures should bradycardia occur during
central nervous system. Certain cerebral and
the course of the anaesthetic. This, of course,
med ullary functions are initially stimulated then
assumes that monitoring is adequate to detect the
later depressed, so that the final outcome depends
bradycardia. However, it must be remembered
on the dose used and the route of administration.
that following i.v. injection atropine may cause
Clinical doses may produce an initial slowing of
further bradycardia through a central effect before
the heart due to stimulation of vagal centres in the
blocking at the vagal endings and increasing the
brain before its peripheral anticholinergic effects
heart rate. Thus, it can be argued that in dogs, cats
occur. Atropine overdose causes a'central cholin-
and pigs the i.m. use of atropine before induction
ergic effect' with fluctuations between hyperex-
of anaesthesia is preferable to waiting for brady.
citability and depression. Although atropine is, in
cardia and heart block to appear during the course
general, a very safe drug with a wide therapeutic
of anaesthesia and correction by i.v. administra-
 margin, occasional cases have been reported
tion. The use of i.v. atropine or glycopyrrolate to
where an individual person or animal has
correct some drug-induced bradycardias has been
appeared unduly sensitive to the central effects.
shown to be associated with further bradycardia
The main action of the drug is on the heart rate,
and heart block (Richards et al., 1989). Thus, the
 which usually increases due to peripheral inhibi-
 decision to include an anticholinergic agent in pre-
tion of the cardiac vagus: the initial slowing due to
medication may be based on the species of animal
central action is only seen before the onset of
concerned, its size, the drugs to be used for and
 peripheral inhibition. Arterial blood pressure is
during anaesthesia, the likelihood of complica-
usually unchanged, but if already depressed by
tions from bradycardia or vagal reflexes, the level
vagal activity due to reflex or drug action (e.g.
of monitoring in use and any specific contraindica-
halothane) it will be raised by the administration
fions. The main contraindications are in conditions
of atropine. In man, an increase in the incidence of
associated with tachycardia and in certain forms of
cardiac arrythmias has been observed during
 Jo uoneieip Aq paieaeiase ane yum ewoneno
anaesthesia following atropine premedication, but
thepupil.
K. W. Clarke (unpublished observations) found
that atropine reduced the incidence of ventricular
Atropine
extrasystoles in cats anaesthetized with a variety
of halogenated volatile anaesthetics. Cardiac
Atropine, the most important of the alkaloids
obtained from Atropa belladonna (deadly night-
 attributed to atropine were probably due to barbit-
shade), is used in anaesthesia as its water-soluble
urates and are often seen in the absence of
sulphate. Its metabolism is not the same in all spec-
atropine.
ies of animal. When administered to dogs, atropine
The minute volume of respiration is slightly
increased due to central stimulation. Bronchial
Part of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine,
musculature is relaxed and bronchial secretions
part appears in the urine as tropine and the
 are reduced. Both anatomical and physiological
remainder is apparently broken down in the body
dead space are increased by atropine (Nunn
to as yet uridentified substances. In cats, atropine 
& Bergman, 1964). Studies in dogs at the Cam-
is hydrolyzed by either of two esterases which are
 bridge Veterinary School and elsewhere have not
found in large quantities in the liver and kidneys.
 shown any hypoxaemia attributable to atropine
These esterases are also found in rabbits and rats.
administration.
Atropine inhibits transmission of postgang-
Atropine has marked ocular effects. Mydriasis
lionic cholinergic nerve impulses to effector cells
 results from the local or systemic administration of
but inhibition is not equally effective all over the
 atropine. Except in dogs, where the parenteral
body and atropine has less effect upon the urinary
administration of clinical doses of atropine does
bladder and intestines than upon the heart and
 not alter pupillary size, the mydriasis may inter-
salivary glands.
fere with the so-called 'ocular signs' of anaesthe-
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 105
sia. The ocular effects also result in visual dis-
arrhythmias compared with their incidence after
turbances and animals so effected must be
atropine. This cardiovascular stability was
approached with great caution as they may have
thought to make it particularly useful for combina-
problems in judging distances. This is particularly
tion with anticholinesterases for antagonizing the
important in horses and cats as both these animals
effects of non-depolarizing neuromuscular block-
tend to panic in response to sudden movements
ing agents and, indeed, as glycopyrrolate is
which they do not see clearly.
claimed to have a more rapid onset of action than
Although atropine reduces muscle tone in the
 atropine, a preparation of neostigmine with gly-
gastrointestinal tract, at the doses used for pre-
copyrrolate is available for this purpose. However,
medication this effect is minimal. The passage of
 work on anaesthetized human patients showed no
 barium meals along the gut of the dog is not appre-
difference in the cardiovascular effects of atropine
ciably slowed by atropine premedication but it is
 and glycopyrolate other than in the time of onset
possible that the incidence of postanaesthetic colic
 of action - glycopyrrolate taking 2 to 3 minutes to
in horses is increased by the use of this drug.
become effective following i.v. injection (Short &
Because of the different ways in which they
Miller, 1978).
metabolize the drug, the effectiveness of a given
Glycopyrrolate has now been used widely in
dose varies according to the species of animal but
veterinary practice in doses of 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg
its therapeutic index is such that a wide range of
(Short et al., 1974). However, although it has been
doses can be recommended. In dogs, doses from
satisfactory in preventing excessive salivation and
0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg are employed, while in cats
bradycardia, it has proved disappointingly similar
doses of up to 0.3 mg (approximately 0.1 mg/kg
to atropine in its effects on the heart rate (Richards
for an adult cat for example) are perfectly safe.
et al., 1989). A comparison of atropine given i.v. at
Pigs may be given 0.3 to 1.8 mg according to size.
doses of 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg with i.v. glycopyrrolate
The exact dose is largely determined by the fact
(0.02 and 0.01 mg/kg) in dogs with drug-induced
that, at least in the UK, atropine sulphate for injec-
bradycardia showed that both agents caused a
tion is still supplied in a solution of 0.6 mg/ml - a
high incidence of cardiac arrhythmia, including
legacy of earlier days when doses were measured
 atrioventricular block, during the first three min-
in grains. A large animal preparation containing
 utes after injection. This is surprising since glyco-
10 mg/ml is now available, and this enables horses
pyrrolate does not readily cross the blood-brain
to be given doses between 10 and 60mg much
barrier and suggests that arrhythmias may be due
more converiently than was previously possible.
to mechanisms other than central stimulation.
To neutralize the muscarinic effects of anti-
The fact that the drug does not readily cross the
cholinesterases such as neostigmine, in cats, dogs
blood-brain barrier means that it has little central
 amd pigs 0.6 to 1.2 mg of atropine are given slowly
action, producing less effect on vision than other
i. v. 2 to 5 minutes before these agents are injected,
anticholinergic agents and thus it could be the
 or else mixed in the syringe and injected with the
anticholinergic of choice in horses and cats.
 anticholinesterase In horses doses of 10 mg appear
to be adequate for this purpose.
Hyoscine
Hyoscine is an alkaloid resembling atropine,
Glycopyrrolate
found in the same group of plants but usually
-e we Arnh e si aondon
obtained from the shrub henbane (Hyoscyamus
riger). The peripheral actions of hyoscine resemble
anti-sialagogue activity. As an anti-sialagogue it is
about five times as potent as atropine. In man, clin-
different sites differs from atropine. It is a more
ical doses have an almost selective effect on sali-
potent anti-sialagogue but less effective as a
vary and sweat gland secretion. Cardiovascular
vagolytic so that its effect on heart rate is less than
stability is excellent, there being little change in
heart rate, and there is a reduction in cardiac
 doses for their drying effects. The central effects of
106 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
   n   a 
stages of the anaesthetic process. Very potent but
horses it may produce considerable excitement. In
short acting opioids such as fentanyl and alfentanil
as u u u pasn si asu unoe a
 will reduce the dose of anaesthetic required, but
of its propensity to cause hallucination) as a
their short action means that further analgesia
depressant of nervous activity, it is not suitable for
 must be provided during recovery.
this purpose in animals. It has been used as the hy-
The sedative and anxiolytic drugs play the
Jo sasop u soop u uoeoipawaid roy apruonqop
major role in premedication, improving the
0.2 to 0.4 mg and it is often used with paraveretum.
quality of anaesthesia and recovery, contributing
to anaesthesia and,in some cases counteracting
uwanted side effects such as the muscle rigidity
 PREMEDICATION
produced by ketamine. By calming the animal in
the preoperative period, the necessary clipping
Preanaesthetic medication or ‘premedication'
helps both the anaesthetist and the animal, for it
and cleaning is made more pleasant for both the
 animal and nursing staff. Moreover, by controlling
makes induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
emotional disturbance the release of catecho-
easier for the anaesthetist while at the same time
lamines is reduced, thus decreasing the chance of
rendering the experience safer and more comfort-
adrenaline-induced cardiac arrhythmias, smooth-
able for the patient. It implies the administration,
ing the course of anaesthesia and (usually) ensur-
usually before, but sometimes at or immediately
ing a quiet recovery.
after, the induction of anaesthesia, of sedatives,
The degree of activity of the central nervous
anxiolytics and analgesics, with or without anti-
system at the time when anaesthesia is induced
cholinergics.
 The classic aims of premedication are :
determines the amount of anaesthetic which has to
be administered to produce surgical anaesthesia.
 1. To relieve anxiety thus apprehension, fear
This activity is lowered by wasting disease, senil-
ity and surgical shock and increased by pain, fear,
and resistance to anaesthesia.
fever and conditions such as thyrotoxicosis.
2. To counteract unwanted side effects of
agents used in anaesthesia. Effects which may
Sedatives and analgesics decrease the irritability of
require modification depend on the species of
the central nervous system and thereby enhance
animal and on the drugs used; they include
the effects of the anaesthetic agents. In general, the
vomiting (mainly in dogs and cats), poor quality of
depressant effects of the drugs used in premedica-
recovery, bradycardia, salivation and excessive
tion summate with those of the anaesthetic and
uless this is clearly understood overdosage may
muscle tone.
 3. To reduce the dose of anaesthetic. In many,
occur. Most sedative drugs depress respiration,
but not all cases, drug combinations may have a
and if given in large doses before anaesthetics
lower incidence of side effects than a high dose of
 the anaesthetic would have on its own.
thiopental sodium or halothane), respiratory
failure may occur before surgical anaesthesia is
4. To provide extra analgesia
attained. Premedication must, therefore, be
The use of anticholinergic agents for premedica-
regarded as an integral part of the whole anaes-
tion has been discussed in the previous section.
thetic technique and never as an isolated event.
 Analgesic agents are essential if the patient is in
The type of sedative drug chosen for premed-
ication will depend on a variety of factors.
pain is absent, analgesics may increase preoperat-
 Phenothiazine derivatives such as acepromazine
ive sedation, reduce the dose of anaesthetic need-
 are good anxiolytics and reduce the incidence of
ed, contribute to analgesia during surgery and
 vomiting. Their use usually results in a calm, but
even, if sufficiently long acting, contribute to anal-
 delayed, recovery and delayed recovery is usually
 gesia postoperatively. The use of long acting anal-
 to be avoided in horses and ruminants for in these
gesics such as buprenorphine is particularly
 animals prolonged recumbency gives rise to prob-
popular for the contribution they make to all
 lems. To prevent recovery being unacceptably
SEDATION,ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION107
delayed, doses of the phenothiazine derivatives
In the past it was fairly simple to define the lim-
used for premedication should be below those
its of premedication and when anaesthesia began.
 Today, with the wide range of different types of
when anaesthesia is not contemplated. Phenothi-
drugs available, such distinctions are no longer
azine drugs undoubtedly increase the chance of
clear. Neuroleptanalgesic techniques may enable
regurgitation at induction of general anaesthesia
surgery to be carried out without further resort to
m ruminants.
 general anaesthetic agents. Dissociative agents
The C2 adrenoceptor agonists have a major
such as ketamine may be regarded as being drugs
effect in reducing the dose of subsequent anaes-
for premedication or for the induction of general
thetic required; doses at the lower end of the
anaesthesia. Hypnotics (e.g. chloral hydrate or
dosage range provide profound sedation and are
pentobarbital sodium) may be used at low doses
useful in the animal which is particularly difficult
for sedation, or at higher doses to produce hypno-
to handle. They also provide some degree of mus-
sis or even anaesthesia. In clinical practice, exact
cle relaxation and are especially effective in coun-
definitions of terminology are unimportant as
teracting the muscle tension associated with the
long as the anaesthetist clearly understands
use of drugs such as ketamine.
the role played by each drug used, be it ‘pre-
 Benzodiazepines provide little obvious preop-
medicant','dissociative agent' or 'anaesthetic', in
 erative sedation but their muscle relaxing proper-
the total process in bringing the animal to a state
 ties are useful when drugs such as ketamine are to
suitable for the performance of surgery, examina-
be used and they reduce the dose of subsequent
tion, or whatever else is required. Anxiolytics,
 anaesthetic needed.
sedatives, hypnotics and analgesics all have
Often, more than one sedative drug is used in
their place in this process. In any particular
premedication. For example, C2 adrenoceptor
case, the choice of drugs, their dose and route of
agonists and benzodiazepines may be combined
administration, gives the anaesthetist the opportu-
prior to the use of ketamine. However, such
nity to demonstrate artistry as well as scientific
polypharmacy must be used with care, as many
kmowledge.
such combinations have synergistic activity and it
is easy to administer an overdose of anaesthetic
agents given subsequently.
 REFERENCES
For premedication, drugs can be given by any
 one or more of the usual routes of drug adminis-
Aitken, M.M. and Sanford, J. (1972) Comparative
tration. The choice is governed both by the nature
assessment of tranquillizers in the horse. Proceedings 0f
theAssociationofVeterinary AnaesthetistsofGreat Britain
 of the drug to be used and the time which is avail-
andIreland3:20-28.
able before anaesthesia is to be induced. If there is
Alexander, F. and Collet, R.A. (1974) Pethidine in the
-uqns uaai aq Ae shnp ai awn go Ajuand
horse. Research in Veterinary Science 17: 136-137.
gually, by mouth or into the rectum. The rectal
Amadon, R.S. and Craige, A.H. (1936) Observations on
the use of bulbocapnine as a soporific in horses.
route is not very satisfactory and is only used when
Journat ofthe American Veterinary Medicat Association
for some reason the others are impracticable, but
41: 737-754.
the sublingual route is surprisingly effective for the
Arbieter, K., Szekely, H. and Lorin, D. (1972)Veterirary.
C2 adrenoceptor agonists, making it possible to
Medicat Reviews.(Leverkusen)3:248.
subdue vicious animals by using a syringe to squirt
Armdt, J.O., Bednarski, B. and Parasher, C. (1986)
the drug into the animal's open mouth. If only 5 to
Alfentanil's analgesic, respiratory and cardiovascular
actions inrelation to dose and plasma concentration
10 minutes will elapse before anaesthesia is to be
in unanesthetized dogs. Aresthesiotogy 64 (3):345.
induced, then the i.v. route must be employed. It is
Averill, D.R. (1970) Treatment of status epilepticus in
always as well to ensure that the preliminary med-
dogs with diazepam sodium.Journal of the Americar
ication exerts its full effects before the administra
Veterinary Medical Association 56:432-434.
tion of a general anaesthetic is begun, otherwise
Bengis, R.G., de Vos, V.and van Niekerk, J. (1985)
Immobilisation of the African Elephant. Proceedings 0f
respiratory depression and even respiratory fail-
the 2nd Internatiorat Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia:
142-143.
108 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Bloom, F.E. (1996) Neurotransmission and the central
Clarke, K.W. and Hall, L.W. (1969) Xylazine - a new
nervous system. Chapter 12 in the Pharmacological
sedative for horses and cattle. Veterinary Record 85
basis of Therapeutics. (Eds) Hardman, J.G. and
(19): 512-517.
Limind, L.E. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Clarke, K.W. and Paton, B.S. (1988) Combined use of
Booth, N.H. (1988) Veterinary Pharmacology and
detomidine with opiates in the horse. Equine
Therapeutics, 6th edn. Ames: Iowa University Press,
Veterinary Journal 20(5):331-334.
ch. 15.
Clarke, K.W. and Taylor, PM. (1985) Detomidine as a
Brouwer, G.J., Hall, L.W. and Kutchel, T.R. (1980)
premedicant in the horse. Journalof the Association of
Intravenous anaesthesia in horses after xylazine
Veterinary Araesthetists 14:29-32.
premedication. Veterinary Record 107 (11): 241-245.
Clarke, K.W. and Taylor, PM. (1987) Detomidine: a new
Butera, T.S., Moore, J.N., Garmer, H.E., Amend, J.F.,
sedative for horses. Equine Veterinary Journal 18:
Clarke, L.L. and Hatfield, D.G. (1978)
366-370.
 Diazepam/xylazine combination for short-term
Clarke, K.W., Taylor, PM. and Watkins, S.B. (1986)
anesthesia in the horse. Veterinary Medicine/Small.
Detomidine/ketamine anaesthesia in the horse. Acta
Animat Clinician 73 (4):490-499.
Veterinaria Scandinavica 82:167-179.
 Bylund, D.B.(1988) Subtypes of alpha-2 adrenoceptors:
Cullen, L.K. (1996) Medetomidine sedation in dogs
pharmacological and molecular biological evidence
and cats: a review of its pharmacology, antagonism
converge. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 9 (10):
and dose. British Veterinary Journal 152:
356-361.
519-535.
 Chambers, J.P.(1989) Induction of anaesthesia in dogs
Cullen, L.K., Reynoldson, J.A. (1993) Xylazine or
with alfentanil and propofol. Jourral of the Associatior
medetomidine premedication before propofol
ofVeterinary Anaesthetistsof Great Britain and&lreland
anaesthesia.Veterirary Record 132:378-383.
16: 14.
Davis, L.E., Donnelly, E.J. (1968) Analgesic drugs in the
Chambers, J.P. and Dobson, J.M. ( 1989) A midazolam
cat.Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat
and ketamine combination as a sedative in cats.
Association 153: 116l-1167.
JournaloftheAssociationofVeterinaryAnaesthetistsof
DeMoor, A. and Desmet, P (1971) Veterinary Medicine
Great Britain and Iretand 16:53-54.
Reviews (Leverkusen): 163.
Chambers, J.P., Waterman, A.E., Livingston, A. and
Doble, A. and Martin, A. (1992) Multiple
Goodship, A.E. (1996) Prolonged action of detomidine
atxue rog uosear ou - sroidasar audazepozuq
in Thoroughbred horses with abnormal liver function.
Trends in Pharmacologicat Science 13 (2): 76-81.
Journat of the Association of Veterinary Araesthetists of
Docherty, T.J., Ballinger, J.A., McDonell, W.N.,Pascoe,
Great Britain and Ireland 23:27-28.
P.J. and Valliant,A.E.(1987) Antagonism of xylazine
Chism, J.P and Rickert, D.E. (1996) The
induced sedation by idazoxan in calves. Caradian
 pharmacokinetics and exra-hepatic clearance of
Journat of Veterinary Research 51: 244.
remifentanil, a short acting opioid agonist, in male
Dodman, N.H. and Waterman, A.E. (1979) Paradoxical
beagle dogs during constant rate infusions. Drug
excitement following the intravenous administration
Metabotism and Disposition, 24(1): 3440.
of azaperone in the horse. Equine Veterinary Jourrat 11:
Christiansen, G. (1980) The toxicity of selected
33-35.
therapeutic agents used incats. Veterinary Medicine
Dresel, PE. (1985) Cardiac alpha receptors and
and Small Animat Clinician 75:1133-1137.
arrhythmias. Anesthesiology 63:582-583.
Clarke, K.W. (1969) Effects of azaperone on the blood
Dundee, J.W. and Wyant, G.M. (1989) Intravenous
pressure and pulmonary ventilation in pigs. Veterinary
Araesthesia. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Record 85: 649-651.
Dunkle, N., Moise, N.J., Scarlettg-Kranz, J. and Short,
Clarke, K.W. (1988) Clinical pharmacology of
C.E. (1986) Cardiac performance in cats after
detomidine in the horse. Academic dissertation.
administration of xylazine or xylazine +
London: University of London.
glycopyrrolate: echocardiographic evaluations.
Clarke, K.W. and England, G.C.W.(1988) Behavioural
American Journat of Veterinary Research.
effects of medetomidine/opioid combinations in the
47:2212-2216.
dog. Adoarces in Veterinary Anaesthesia (Brisbane):
Egger, C.M., Duke, T, Archer, J. and Cribb, PH. (1998)
104-114.
 Comparison of plasma fentanyl concentrations by
Clarke, K.W. and England, G.C.W. (1989)
using three transdermal fentanyl patch sizes in dogs.
Medetomidine, a new sedative-analgesic for use in the
Veterinary Surgery,27(2): 159-166.
dog and its reversal with atipamezole. Jourrat of Smal
Eisenach, J.C. (1988) Intravenous clonidine produces
Animal Practice 30:343-348.
hypoxia by a peripheral alpha-2 adrenergic
Clarke, K.W., England, G.C.W. and Goosens, L. (1991.)
mechanism. Journal of Pharmacotogy and Experimentat
Sedative and cardiovascular effects of romifidine
Therapeutics 244:247-252.
alone and in combination with butorphanol
England, G.C.W., Clarke, K.W. and Goossens, L. (1992).
in the horse. Jourrat of Veterinary Anaesthesia
Acomparison of the sedative effect of three alpha 2
18: 25-29.
adrenoceptor agonists, romifidine, detomidine and
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION 109
xylazine, in the horse. Jourrat of Veterinary
Hoffman, W.E., Cunningham, F., Jameds, M.K,
Pharmacotogy and Therapeutics 15: 194-201.
Baughman, V.L. and Albrecht, R.F. (1993) Effects of
Erhardt, W. (1984) Anesthesia procedures in the rabbit.
remifentanil, a new short-acting opioid, on cerebral
Tierarztl Prax 12: 391-402.
flow, brain electrical activity and intracranial pressure
Erhardt, W. (1984) Proceedings of the 15th Congress of
in dogs anaesthetized with isoflurane and nitrous
European Society of Veterinary Surgery. p. 11.
oxide. Anesthesiology 79: 107-113.
Erhardt, W., Kostlin, R., Seiler, R., Tonzer, G., Tielebier-
Holmberg, G. and Gershon, J.(1961)Autonomic and
Langenscheidt, B., Limmer, R., Pfeiffer, U., Blumel, G.
psychic effects of yohimbine hydrochloride.
(1985) Respiratory functional hypoxia in ruminants
Psychopharmacology 2:93-106.
under general anesthesia Tierarztt Prax Suppl 1: 45-49.
Hsu, W.H. (1983) Antagonism of xylazine-induced CNS
Erhardt, W., Seiler, R., Riedl, V., Aschenbrerner, G.,
depression by yohimbine in cats. Catiforrian
Blumel, G (1985a) Ultrashort hypnoanalgesia with
Veterinarian 37(7): 19-21.
alfentanyl and etomidate in the dog-circulatory and
Hsu, W.H. (1985) Effects of atropine on xylazine-
respiratory studies Berl Murch Tierarztl Wochenschr 98:
pentobarbital anesthesia in dogs: prelminary study.
413417.
American Jourrat ofVeterinary Research 46:856-858.
Erhardt, W., Stephen, M., Schatzmann, U. et al. (1986)
Hsu, W.H., Schaffer, D.D. and Hanson, C.E. (1987)
Reversal of anaesthesia by simultaneously
Effects of tolazoline and yohimbine on xylazine-
administered benzodiazepine and opioid antagonists
induced central nervous system depression,
in the dog. Journal of the Association of Veterinary
bradycardia and tachypnea in sheep. Jourrat of the
Anaesthetists 14: 90-99.
American Veterinary Medical Association 190: 423-426.
Flecknell, PA., Liles, J.H., Wootton, R. (1989) Reversal of
Hsu, W.H., Hanson, C.E., Hembrough, F.B. and Schaffer,
fentanyl/fluanisone neuroleptanalgesia in the rabbit
D.D. (1989) Effects of idazoxan, tolazoline and
using mixed agonist/antagonist opioids. Laboratory
yohimbine on xylazine- induced respiratory
Animal Science 23: 147-155.
changes and central nervous depression in ewes.
Garner, H.E., Amend, J.F. and Rosborough, J.P. (1971.)
American Journat of Veterinary Research 50 (9):
 Effects of Bay Va 1470 on cardiovascular parameters in
1570-1573.
ponies.Veterinary Medicine and Smalt Animal Ctinician
 Jalenka, H.H. (1989) The use of medetomidine,
66: 1016-1021.
medetomidine- ketamine combinations and
Gasthuys, F., Martens, A., Goosens, L. and De Moor, A.
atipamezole at Helsinki Zoo - a review of 240 cases.
A. (1996) Quantitative and qualitative study of the
Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica Suppl 85: 193-198.
diuretic effects of romifidine in the horse. Jourral of
 Jalenka, H.H. (1989a) Evaluation and comparison of two
Veterinary Araesthesia. 23(1): 6-10.
ketamine-based immobilization techniques in snow
Glen, J.B. (1973) Dissociative anaesthesia. Proceedings 0f
leopards. Journat of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 20(2):
the Associatior of Veterinary. Araesthetists 4: 71-76.
163-169.
Gross M.E., Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C., Benson, G.J.
James, M.K., Feldman, PL. and Schuster, S.V.(1991)
and Olson, W.A. (1992) Yohimbine/flumazenil
Opioid receptor activity of GI87084B, a novel ultra-
antagonism of hemodynamic alterations induced by a
short acting analgesic, in isolated tissues. Jourral of
combination of midazolam, xylazine and butorphanol
in dogs. Journat of the American Veterinary Medicat
712-718.
Association, 201: 1887-1890.
Jedruch, J. and Gajewski, Z. (1986) The effect of
Hall, L.W., Dunn, J.K., Delaney, M., Shapiro, L.M. (1991)
detomidine hydrochloride, Domosedan, on the
Ambulatory electrocardiography in dogs. Veterinary
electrical activity of the uterus in cows. Acta
Record 129:213-216.
Veterinaria Scandinavica. 82 (Suppl.): 189.
Hall, L.W. and Taylor, PM. (1981) Clinical trial of
Jedruch, J., Gajewski, Z. and Ratajska-Michalzak, K.
xylazine with ketamine in equine anaesthesia.
(1989) Uterine motor responses to an alpha 2
Veterinary Record 108:489-493.
adrenergic agonist, medetomidinehydrochloride in
Haskins, S.C., Patz, J.D. and Farver, T.B. (1986) Xylazine
bitches during the end of gestation and the post-
and xylazine-ketamine in dogs. Americar Jourrat of
Veterinary Research 47: 636-641.
129-134.
Heykants,J., Meuldermans, W. and Michiels, M. (1982)
Jochle, W., Moore, J.M., Brown, J., Baker, G.J., Lowe, J.E.,
Proceedings of the Vith European Congress of
Fubini, S., Reeves, M.T., Watkins, J.P. and White, N.A.
Anaesthesiology, London.
(1989) Comparison of detomidine, butorphanol,
Hill, D.R.,Bowery, N.G. (1981) 3H-baclofen and 3H-
flunixin meglumine and xylazine in clinical cases of
GABA bind to bicuculline-insensitive GABA B sites in
equine colic. Equine Veterinary Journat (Suppl.) 7:
rat brain.Nature 290 (5802): 149-152.
111-116.
Hirota, K. and Roth, S.H. (1977) Sevoflurane
Jones, R.S. (1979) Acepromazine in male horses.
modulates both GABAa and GABAb
Veterinary Record 105: 405.
receptors in area CA1 of rat hippocampus. British
Kalpravidh, M., Lumb, W.V., Wright, M. and Heath, R.B.
Journal ofAnaesthesia.78:60-65.
(1984) Effects of butorphanol, flunixin, levorphanol,
I10 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
morphine and xylazine in ponies. American Journat of
MacDonald, E., Ruskoaho, H. Scheinin, M. and
Veterinary Research 45: 217.
Virtanen, R. (1988) Therapeutic applications of drugs
Kalthum, W. and Waterman, A.E. (1988) The
acting on alpha-adrenoceptors. Arnals of Clinical
pharmacokinetics of pethidine in the dog. Jourral of
Research 20: 298-310.
Associatior of Veterinary Araesthetists 15: 3941.
Marsboom, R. and Mortelmans, J. (1964) Small Arimat
Kerr, D.D., Jones, E.W, Holbert, M.S. and Huggins, K.
Anaesthesia. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
(1972a) Comparison of the effects of xylazine and
Martin, W.R, Eades, C.C., Thompson, J.A., Huppler, R.E.
acetylpromazine maleate in the horse. Americar
and Gilbert, PE. (1976) The effects of morphine and
Journal of Veterirnary Research 33:777-784.
nalorphine-like drugs in the independent and
Kerr, D.D., Jones, E.W., Huggins, K. and Edwards, W.C.
morphine-dependent chronic spinal dog. Jourrat of
(1972) Sedative and other effects of xylazine given
Pharmacology ard Experimentat Therapeutics 197(3):
intravenously to horses. Americar Journal of Veterinary.
517-532.
Research 33:525-532.
Maze, M., Hayward, E. and Gaba, D.M. (1985) Alpha 1-
Kock, R.A.,Jago, M., Gulland, FM.D. and Lewis,J.
adrenergic blockade raises epinephrine-arrhythmia
(1989) The use of two novel alpha 2 adrenoceptor
threshoid in halothane- anesthetized dogs in a dose-
antagonists idazoxan and its analogue RX821002A in
dependent fashion. Anesthesiology 63: 611-615
zoo and wildlife animals. Jourrat of the Association of
McKellar, Q.A., Pearson, T.,Bogan, J.A., Galbraith, E.A.,
Veterinary Araesthetists 16:4-10.
Lees, P. and Tiberghien, M.P. (1990) Pharmacokinetics,
Komar, E. and Mouallem, H. (1988) Climaxolam as a
tolerance and serum thromboxane inhibition of
sedative in sheep. Journat of the Association of Veterinary
carprofen in the dog. Jourral of Small Animat Practice
Anaesthetists.15:127-133.
31: 443-448.
Kronberg, G., Oberdorf, A., Hoffmeister, F. and Wirth,
Mackenzie, G. and Snow, D.H. (1977) An evaluation of
W.(1966) Adrenergich-cholinergische
chemical restraining agents. Veterinary Record 101:
neuronenhemmstoffe. Naturwisserschaften 53: 502.
30-33.
Langer, S.Z. (1974) Presynaptic regulation of
Michelsen, L.G., Salmenpera, M., Hug, C.C. Szlam and
catecholamine release.Biochemical Pharmacology.
Vandermeer, D.(1996) Anaesthetic potency of
23(13): 1793-8000.
remifentanil in dogs. Anesthesiology 84: 865-872.
Lascelles, B.D.X., Cripps, P., Mirchandani, S. and
Mitchell, R.W.D. and Smith, G. (1989) The control of
Waterman, A.E. (1995) Carprofen as an analgesic for
acute postoperative pain. British Jourrat of Araesthesia
postoperative pain in cats: dose titration and
63:147-153.
assessment of efficacy in comparison to pethidine
Morgan, M. (1989) The rational use of intrathecal and
hydrochloride. Jourrat of Small Animut Practice 36(12):
extradural opioids. British Jourrat of Anaesthesia 63:
535-541.
165-188.
Lees, P (1979) Chemical Restraint of Large Animals
 Muir, W.W. (1981) Drugs used to produce standing
Chapter 21 in Pharmacotogicat Basis of Small Animal
chemical restraint in horses. Veterirary Clinics of North
Medicine. Edited Bogan, J.A., Lees, P. and Yoxall, A.T.
America 3:1744.
London. Blackwell Scientific Publications: Oxford,
Muir, W.W. and Hamlin, R.L. (1975) Effects of
UK.
acetylpromazine on ventilatory variables in the horse.
Lees, P (1979a) Pharmacologicat Basis of Smalt Arnimat
American Journal of Veterinary Research 36: 1439-1442.
Medicine. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Muir, W.W. and Piper, F.S. (1977) Effect of xylazine on
Lees, P. and Serrano, L. (1976) Effects of azaperone on
indices of myocardial contractility in the dog.
cardiovascular and respiratory functions in the horse.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 38:931-934.
British Jourral ofPharmacology. 56(3): 263-269.
Muir, W.W., Sasms, R.A., Hoffman, R.H. and Noonan,
Lees, P. and Taylor, PM. (1991) Pharmacodynamics and
J.S.(1982) Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
pharmacokinetics of flunixin in the cat. British
properties of diazepam in horses.American Journal of
Veterinary Journat 147(4): 298-305.
Veterirnary Research. 43(10): 1756-1762.
Livingstone, A., Low, J. and Morris, B. (1984) Effects of
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T., Milne, D.W. (1977) Evaluation
clonidine and xylazine on body temperature in the rat.
of xylazine and ketamine hydrochloride for
British Journal of Pharmacology 81(1): 189-193.
anesthesia in horses. American Journal of Veterinary
Livingston, A., Nolan, A. and Waterman, A., (1986/87).
Research 38: 195-201.
The pharmacology of the alpha 2 adrenergic agonist
Muir, W.W.,Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W.C. (1978)
drugs.Jourmal of the Associationof Veterinary
Evaluation of xylazine, guaifenesin and ketamine
Anaesthetists 14:3-10.
hydrochloride for restraint in horses. Americar Journat
Lowe, J.E. (1978) Xylazine, pentazocine, meperidine and
ofVeterinary Research.39:1274-1278.
dipyrone for the relief of balloon induced equine colic;
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W.C. (1979)
a double blind comparative evaluation. Journat of
Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of a
Equine Medicine and Surgery 2 (6): 286-291.
xylazine-acetylpromazine drug combination in
Lucke, J.N. and Sansom, J. (1979) Penile erection in the
horses.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research 36:
horse after acepromazine. Veterinary Record 104: 21-22.
1299-1303.
SEDATION, ANALGESIA & PREMEDICATION III
Muir, W.W., Wermer, L.L. and Hamlin, R.L. (1975) Effects
Sagmer, Von G.,Hoffmeister, F. and Kronberg, G. (1968a)
of xylazine and acetylpromazine upon induced
Deutsche. Teirarztliche Wocherschrift 22:565.
ventricular fibrillation in dogs anesthetized with
Sanford, J. (1984) Meptazinol - a new analgesic agent.
thiamylal and halothane. American Jourrat of
Jourrat of the Association of Veterinary Araesthetists 12:
Veterirnary Research 36: 1299-1303.
48-60.
Nichols, A.J., Motley, E.D. and Ruffolo, R.R. (1988)
Sap, R. and Hellebrekers, L.J. (1993)
Differential effects of pertussis toxin on the pre- and
Medetomidine/propofol anaesthesia for
postjunctional alpha-2-adrenoceptors in the
gastroduodenal endoscopy in dogs. Jourrat of
cardiovascular system of the pithed rat. Europear
Veterirnary Araesthesia 20:100-102.
Journal of Pharmacology 145:345-349.
Sarazan, R.D.,Starke, W.A., Krause, G.F. and Garmer,
Nolan, A.M. and Waterman, A.E. (1985) Preliminary
H.E. (1989) The cardiovascular effects of detomidine, a
results of a study on the effects of xylazine on airway
new alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist, in the conscious
pressure in the sheep's lung. Jourrat of the Associatior
pony. journal ofVeterinary Pharmacoiogy and
ofVeterinary Anaesthetists 13: 122-123.
Therapeutics. 12(4): 378-388.
Nolan, A.M., Waterman, A.E. and Livingston, A. (1986)
Sawyer, D.C. and Rech, R.H.(1987) Analagesia and
The analgesic activity of alpha-2 adrenoceptor
behavioral effects of butorphanol, nalbuphine and
agonists in sheep: A comparison with opioids.
pentazocine incats. Journal of the American Animat
JournatoftheAssociationofVeterinary Anaesthetists
Hospitals Association 23:438-446.
14: 14-15.
Scheinin, N. and Macdonald, E. (1989) An introduction
 Nunn, J.F. and Bergman, N.A. (1964) The effect of
to the pharmacology of alpha-2 adrenoceptors in the
yg axa s Aeud uo ado
central nervous system. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica
Journal ofAraesthesia.36:68-73.
85 (Suppl.): 11-19.
Paddleford, R.R. (1988) Maruat of Small Animat
Scheinin, M., Kallid, A., Koulu, M., Vikkari, J. and
Anaesthesia. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Scheinin, H. (1987) Sedative and cardiovascular
Parry, B.W., Anderson, G.A. and Gay,C.C. (1982)
effects of medetomidine, a novel selective
Hypotension in the horse induced by acepromazine
maleate. Austratian Veterinary Journat 59: 148-152.
volunteers.British Journatl ofClinicat Pharmacology
Pearson, H. and Weaver, B.M.Q. (1978) Priapism after
24 (4): 443-451.
sedation, neuroleptanalgesia and anaesthesia in the
Schmidtt, H. (1977) The pharmacology of clonidine and
horse. Equine Veterinary Journal 10: 85-90.
related products Chapter 7 in: Antihypertensive
Popovic, N.A., Mullane, J.E. and Yhap, M.D. (1972)
agents, Ed Gross, Berlin, Springer-Verlag.
Effects of acetylpromazine maleate on certain
Shaw, N., Burrows, C.F. and King, R.R. (1997) Massive
cardiorespiratory responses in dogs. American Journat
gastric hemorrhage induced by buffered aspirin in a
of Veterinary Research 33: 1819-1824.
greyhound.Jourrat of the American Animat Hospitats
Raptopoulos, D., Koutinas, A., Moustardis, N. and
Association, 33:215-219.
Papasteriadis, A. (1985) The effect of xylazine or
 Short, C.E.(1981) Intravenous anesthesia. Veterinary
xylazine plus atropine on blood gases in sheep.
Clinics of North America: In Equine Anaesthesia (ed.
Proceedings of the 2nd Interrationat Congress of
E.P Steffey. Philadelphia J.B. Saunders,
Veterinary Anaesthesia pp 201-202.
Pp.195-208.
Rehm, W. F. and Schatzmann, U. (1984) Benzodiazepines
Short, C.E. (198la) In: Steffey, E.P (ed) Veterirary Clinics
as sedatives for large animals. Jourral of the Association
of North America: Equine Anaesthesia Philadelphia: WB
of Veterinary Anaesthetists 12:93-106.
Saunders, p. 205.
Reid, J.S. and Frank, R.J. (1972) Prevention of
Short, C.E., Paddleford, R.R. and Cloy, D. (1974)
undesirable side reactions of ketamine anesthesia in
Glycopyrrolate for prevention of pulmonary
cats.Journal of the American Animut Hospitals
complications during anesthesia. Modern Veterinary
Association 8 (2): 115-119.
Practice 55(3): 194-196.
Richards, D.L.S., Clutton, R.E. and Boyd,C. (1989)
Sieghart, W. (1992) GABA receptors: ligand gated
Electrocardiographic findings following intravenous
chloride channels modulated by multiple drug
glycopyrrolate to sedate dogs: a comparison with
binding sites. Trends in Pharmacotogicat Science 13:
atropine.Journalof the Associationof Veterinary
446-450.
Anaesthetists 16: 46-50.
Stenberg, D., Salven, P. and Mettinen, M.V.J. (1987)
Robertson, J.T., Muir, W.W. and Sams, R. (1981)
Sedative action of the alpha-2 agonist medetomidine
Cardiopulmonary effects of butorphanol tartrate in
in cats. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacotogy and
horses.American Journal of Veterinary Research.42:
Therapeutics 10:319- 323.
41-44
Taylor, PM. and Clarke, K.W. (1985) Detomidine as a
Sagner, Von G., Hoffmeister, F. and Kronberg, G. (1968)
premedicant in the horse. Journal of the Association of
Pharmakologische grundlagen eines neuartigen
Veterirary Anaesthetists 14:29-32.
praparates fur die analgesieDeutsche Teirarztliche
Taylor, PM. and Houlton, J.E.F. (1984) Post-operative
Wochenschrift 22:565-572.
analgesia in the dog:a comparison of morphine,
I12 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
buprenorphine and pentazocine. jJourrat of Smal!
Van Miet, A., Koot, M. and Van Duin, C. (1989) Appetite
Animal Practice 25: 437-451.
modulating drugs in dwarf goats, with special
Thompson, J.R., Hsu, W.H., Kersting, K.W. (1989)
emphasis on benzodiazapine induced hyperphagia
Antagonistic effect of idazoxan on xylazine-induced
and its antogonism by flumazenil & R15-3505.
central nervous system depression and bradycardia in
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacotogy andTherapeutics
calves. American Journat of Veterinary Research 50:
12: 147-156.
734-736.
Vickers, M.D., Schneider, H. and Wood-Smith, F.G.
Tobin, T. and Ballard, S.(1979) Pharmacological Review
(1984) Drugs in Anaesthetic Practice, 6th edn.
- the phenothiazine tranquilizers. Journat of Equine
Virtanen, G. (1985) Evaluation of the alphal and alpha2
Medicine and Surgery. 3:460-466.
adrenoceptor effects of detomidine. European Jourrat of
Tobin, T., Combie, J.,Schults, T. and Dougherty, J. (1979)
Pharmacology 108: 163-169.
The pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in the horse.
Virtanen, R.(1986) Pharmacology of detomidine
III Characteristics of the locomotor effects of fentanyl
and other alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists in the
brain. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica 82
Surgery 3:284-288.
(Suppl.): 35-46.
Tranquilli, W.J., Lemke, K.A., Wiliams, L.L. et at.(1992)
Virtanen, R. (1989) Pharmacological profiles of
Flumazenil efficacy in reversing diazepam or
 medetomidine and its antagonist atipamezole. Acta
midazolam overdose in the dog. Journat of Veterinary
Veterinaria Scandinavica. 85 (Suppl.): 29-37.
Anaesthesia 19: 65-68.
Virtanen, R., Savola, J.M., Saano, V., Nyman, L. (1988)
Trim, C.M. (1983) Cardiopulmonary effects of 
Characterizationof the selectivity, specificity and
butorphanol tartrate in dogs. Americar Journal of
potency of medetomidine as an alpha 2-adrenoceptor
Veterinary Research 44:329-331.
agonist. European Journal of Pharmacology 150: 9-14
Tronicke, R. and Vocke, G. (1970) Contributions to the
Waterman, A.E. (1981) Preliminary observations on the
use of the preparation Rompun as a sedative and for
use of a combination of xylazine and ketamine
anaesthetic premedication in the horse, Veterinary
hydrochloride in calves. Veterinary Record 109:
Medicat Reviews (Leverkusen):247-254.
464467.
Vaha-Vahe, T. (1989) The clinical efficacy of
Waterman, A.E., Nolan, A.M. and Livingstone, A. (1986)
medetomidine. Acta Veteriraria Scandinavica Suppl 85:
The effect of alpha-two adrenergic agonist drugs and
151-154.
their antagonists on the respiratory blood gases in
Vainio, O. (1989) Introduction to the clinical
conscious sheep.Journalof the Associationof Veterinary
pharmacology of medetomidine. Acta Veterinaria
Araesthetists 14: 11-13.
Scandinavica Suppl 85: 85-88.
Watmey, G.C.G. (1986/87) Effects of xylazine/halothane
Vainio, O. and Vahe-Vahe, T. (1989) Reversal of
anaesthesia on the pulmonary mechanics of cattle.
medetomidine sedation by atipamezole in dogs.
Journat of the Association of Veterinary Araesthetists 14:
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 13:
16-27.
15-22.
Wilson, D.V. (1991) Pharmacologic treatment of
Vainio, O., Palmu, L., Virtanen, R. and Wecksell, J. (1986)
priapism in two horses. Journat of the American
Medetomidine: A new sedative and anlagesic drug for
Veterinary Medicat Association 199: 1183-1184.
dogs andcats.Journal of the Association of Veterinary
Young, L.E. (1992) Clinical evaluation of
Anaesthetists 14:53-55.
romifidine/ketamine/halothane anaesthesia in
horses. Jourrat of Veterinary Anaesthesia 19: 89.
5
Generalp
pharmacology of the
injectable agents used in
anaesthesia
 cles, giving a picture of deep unconsciousness.
INTRODUCTION
However, on surgical stimulation the breathing
may accelerate or deepen, muscle relaxation may
 In the past, injectable or intravenous agents were
be lost, reflex movement of a limb occur, and blood
regarded as being particularly useful for either the
pressure and heart rate suddenly increase. Herein
induction of anaesthesia to be continued by an
lies one of the major hazards of intravenous anaes-
inhalation technique or for anaesthesia of short
thesia becauseif this animal is now given sufficient
duration. They are now increasingly used as altern-
of the intravenous agent to abolish these reactions
atives to inhalation anaesthetic agents when pro-
to stimulation, a dangerous degree of respiratory
longed periods of anaesthesia are desired. For
depression may
occur when the stimulation
these longer periods they may be given by inter-
ceases. Moreover, because of the larger quantity
mittent injection or by continuous infusion.
of agent being administered more prolonged
While it is perfectly possible to obtain satis-
ess can be expected. Although
factory anaesthesia using manual control of infu-
similar considerations apply to anaesthesia with
sion rates, the procedure is facilitated greatly by
some inhalation agents it must always be borne in
the use of a computer controlled continuous infu-
mind that a major difference between the intra-
sion where the anaesthetist specifies the 'target'
venous anaesthetics and those given by inhalation
blood concentration rather than an infusion rate
is that the action of intravenous agents is not as
and the computer is programed to determine the
quickly reversible because, unlike the inhalation
appropriate rate of injection to achieve this target
 agents, they cannot be recovered from the patient.
concentration. Computer controlled infusions are
Another significant difference from the inhala-
tion agents is that specific receptor sites for many
they are in medical practice, largely because the
of the intravenous agents have been identified in
 necessary pharmacokinetic data are not available,
the central nervous system, whereas no such spe
but their use is likely to increase as the necessary
cific receptors have been shown to exist for the
 information is revealed by research.
With intravenous agents (in particular the
Cl aud arou yonu are pue Aieauag saueiquau
barbiturates), the clinical level of anaesthesia is
demonstrate undesirable side effects from their
more related to the intensity of stimulation than it
actions on cell function in the body outside the
is with most of the inhalation agents. An undis-
central nervous system.
turbed animal may be breathing quietly and have
Intravenous  anaesthetic
agents
should
marked relaxation of the jaw and abdominal mus-
when given in adequate doses, produce loss of
113
114PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
consciousness in one injection site-brain circula-
tion time so that the dose can be titrated against
the animal's requirements. Drugs with a slower
onset of action, such as ketamine, are more diffi-
Ketoform
cult to use as induction agents. Rapidity of effect
requires the drug to be lipophilic at physiological
H
pH and they must also be non-toxic to any body
 organ or tissue as well as being non-allergenic.
 Other important characteristics include biotrans-
formation to inactive metabolites and, even at high
H
=OHEnolform
dose rates, non-saturability of the enzyme systems
responsible for their elimination from the body
一
The terms'ultra-short acting' and 'short acting'
H
were originally used in the classification of the
effects of barbiturates but they have come to be
FIG.5.1 Keto and enol forms of barbituric acid.
employed for a wider range of anaesthetic agents.
They are both confusing and misleading and
1. Barbiturates (or oxybarbiturates): 1 = H, 2 = O.
 should be reserved for drugs which are indeed
2. Methylated oxybarbiturates: 1 = CH, 2 = O.
og 'togodod) Apoq aui u Aipiden umop uaonq
3. Thiobarbiturates: 1 = H, 2 = S
Example). In contrast to these, retum of conscious-
ness following an intravenous barbiturate such as
4. Methylated thiobarbiturates: 1 = CHy, 2 = S.
thiopental (which was originally classified as an
Unconsciousness cannot be produced in one injec-
'ultra-short acting' compound) occurs with a large
tion site-brain circulation time by the intravenous
 amount of active drug still in the body so that if left
injection of any of the group 1 compounds; they
 udisturbed animals tend to lapse back into a deep
have a very limited use in veterinary practice as
sleep from which they can only be aroused with
hypnotics or sedatives. Group 2 compounds fre-
difficulty.
quently, but not invariably, will produce uncon-
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) avoids the
sciousness in one injection site-brain circulation
use of both volatile agents and nitrous oxide dur-
time. The methyl group confers convulsive activ-
ing anaesthesia. An intravenous analgesic (e.g.
ity, of which tremor, involuntary muscle movement
fentanyl) ensures adequate pain relief during the
and hypertonicity are manifestations. Intravenous
U ponad aaeradoisod Anrea pue aaeradonad
injection of an adequate dose of one of the Group 3
practice many prefer to use a combination of
thiobarbiturates produces unconsciousness in one
 nitrous oxide with intravenous supplementation
injection site-brain time and return to conscious-
(intravenous anaesthesia; IVA). In a number of
ness is more rapid than after the same dose of the
clinical situations IVA and TIVA can offer ad vant-
comparable oxybarbiturate. Methylated barbit-
ages over the more traditional volatile agent
urates of Group 4 produce such severe convulsive
anaesthesia.
manifestations as to preclude their use in clinical
anaesthesia.
 All barbiturates commonly used as anaesthetics
THE BARBITURATES
 are prepared for clinical use as sodium salts and
 are usually available as powders to be dissolved in
It is more correct to regard barbituric acid as a
water or saline before use. Commercial prepara-
pyrimidine derivative but it is usually depicted in
tions of most barbiturate anaesthetics contain a
either the keto or enol form (Fig.5.1).From Dundee
mixture of six parts of anhydrous sodium carbon-
 and Wyant (1988) it seems that the many occuring
ate and 100 parts (w /w) of the barbiturate to pre-
variations are all derived by substitutions in the
vent precipitation of the insoluble free acid by
1,2 and 5,5' positions and that four distinct groups
 atmospheric CO. Aqueous solutions are strongly
of compounds can be recogmized:
alkaline and are incompatible with acids such as
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 115
most solutions of analgesics, phenothiazine deriv-
1. The amount of the drug injected
 atives, adrenaline and some preparations of neuro-
2. The speed of injection
muscular blocking drugs. Methohexital is a
3. The rate of distribution of the drug in the
colourless compound and its solution is readily
non-fatty tissues of the body
distinguishable from the yellow solution of sul-
4. The rate of uptake of thiopental by the body
phur-containing compounds.
fat.
The terminology applied to the barbiturates
formerly varied between North America and
The speed of injection and the quantity injected are
the UK, the former using the suffix '-al’ and the 
related. For example, a small amount injected rap-
latter'-one', hence'thiopental' and 'thiopentone'
 idly may produce a high plasma concentration of
referred to the same compound. The use of the'-al'
undissociated drug and consequently a parallel
suffix is now universal.
high brain level so that deep narcosis is induced
rapidly. However, the drug soon becomes distrib-
uted throughout the non-fatty tissues of the body
THIOPENTAL SODIUM
so that the plasma concentration and the brain
In the UK thiopental (thiopentone) was introduced
concentration are reduced and there is a rapid
into veterinary practice in 1937 (Sheppard &
decrease in the depth of narcosis. In contrast, a
Sheppard, 1937; Wright, 1937) and over the next
slow rate of injection of a larger quantity of the
60 years came to be the most widely used induc-
drug has the effect of maintaining the plasma level
tion agent, especially for dogs and cats. Studies of
as the drug is distributed to the body tissues. This
its pharmacology did not keep pace with progress
means that a larger amount of thiopental will be
in the clinical field and it was not until the 1950s 
necessary to obtain any given depth of narcosis
that any notable contribution to an understanding
and recovery will depend more on the uptake of
 of its clinical pharmacology was made when Brodie
the drug by the body fat and detoxication, since
and his co-workers (Brodie, 1952; Brodie et al.,
the concentration of thiopental in the non-fatty tis-
1951; 1953) followed the concentration of the drug
sues will already be high at the end of injection.
im the urine and various body tissues both in dogs
Thiopental appears to cross the blood-brain
and in man. It was found that the liver and plasma
concentrations of thiopental, which were high
limits the time of response following an injection is
almost immediately after a single injection, soon
the circulation time from the site of injection to the
fell rapidly. The muscle concentration, although
 brain. The absence of any appreciable blood-brain
high almost immediately after injection, continued
barrier makes the rapid injection of the drug very
to rise for some 20 minutes, then fell - the fall being
useful for the production of short periods of narco-
fairly rapid during the first hour but then becom-
sis with rapid recovery as redistribution occurs.
ing progressively slower in the next two to three
Induction doses of the drug are usually between
hours. In contrast to this, the concentration in the
5 and 10 mg/kg for most species of animal, but the
body fat, which was negligible at first, increased
anaesthetist always aims to combine the effects of
rapidly during the first hour and then more slowly
injection speed and total dose in such a manner as
 util a maximum was reached in three to six hours.
to minimize the quantity needed by any individ-
It was obvious that the concentration in the fat rose
ual for any given procedure, and takes full advant-
at the expense of that in the plasma and all other
age of the reduction in dose offered by suitable
tissues. Although the brain concentration of
premedication.
thiopental was below that of the blood plasma,
Carbon dioxide (CO2) retention or the adminis-
both showed similar changes and therefore the
tration of CO2 has the effect of reducing plasma
depth of narcosis could be related to the plasma
pH. Alteration of the plasma pH has a complex
concentration of the drug.
effect on the distribution of thiopental in the body.
From these findings it is clear that the factors
The drug is partially ionized and acts as a weak
which govern the duration and depth of narcosis
organic acid; the dissociation constant is such that
due to an injection of thiopental are:
        
116PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
degree of ionization. If the plasma pHis lowered
After intravenous injection thiopental rapidly
by CO2, the undissociated fraction is increased and
reaches the central nervous system and its effects
since only this fraction is fat soluble, the decrease
become apparent within 15-30s of injection.
in pH results in an increase in the uptake of the
Concentrations of the drug in the plasma and cere-
drug by fatty tissues. This lowers the plasma
brospinal fluid run parallel so the depth of narco-
concentration and narcosis might be expected to
 sis can be assumed to be dependent on, and vary
lighten. However, this does not occur and Brodie
with, the blood level. However, this relationship is
has suggested that although the total plasma
not a simple linear one, as acute tolerance to the
thiopental is reduced, the concentration of the
drug develops. The plasma concentration of
undissociated (active) fraction remains roughly
the drug at which the animal wakens increases as
the same.
the duration of narcosis proceeds. Moreover, the
A further mechanism may be implicated since
depth and duration of narcosis bear some relation
thiopental becomes bound to the plasma protein
to the initial dose. When a large dose has been
and the degree of binding depends on the pro-
injected for the induction of narcosis, the animal
tein concentration and the pH of the plasma. Pro-
will awaken at a higher plasma level than after a
tein binding is reduced by a reduction in pH and
small dose. This acute tolerance is probably the
because the pharmacological activity resides in the
explanation for the clinical observation that recov-
unbound fraction, narcosis might be expected to
ery from the rapid injection of a given dose is
deepen when the plasma pH is reduced by CO2. To
quicker than if the same amount is given slowly.
complicate matters further, hyperventilation,
The initial concentration of the drug reaching the
-rady on ioaa asoddo aul aae pmous ym
brain is greater when the drug is injected quickly
capnia, has been shown to to reduce the amount of
so that consciousness returns at a higher plasma
thiopental necessary for the maintenance of anaes-
concentration than after a slower administration.
thesia. This, of course, is not necessarily contradict-
 In clinical practice the intravenous injection of
 ory since all three factors, the uptake by body fat,
the drug is usually carried out at such a rate that
the degree of dissociaton and the degree of bind-
surgical anaesthesia is reached within, at the most,
ing by the plasma proteins, affect the concentra-
1-2 minutes. Apnoea sometimes occurs at a depth
tion of active drug. It is unlikely that all three
of anaesthesia sufficient to permit surgical inter-
factors will be affected to the same degree and in
vention but excitement is very rarely seen during
the same way by changes in the pH of the plasma.
the induction of anaesthesia. The drug, like all bar-
 Comparatively little attention has been given to
biturates, has little, if any, analgesic action and
the reduction of plasma thiopental concentration
reflex response to stimuli is not abolished until an
by detoxication. Animal experiments show pro-
 appreciably greater depth of unconsciousness is
reached than is required with many other anaes-
 liver damage caused by other agents, revealing the
thetic agents. Because of the lack of analgesic
importance of the liver for recovery from thiopen-
properties anaesthesia is more affected by premed-
tal. Mark and co-workers (1963) showed that up to
ication with analgesic drugs than is the case with
50% of thiopental is removed in its passage
other anaesthetic agents. This applies also to sup-
through the human liver and although there are
plementation during anaesthesia with analgesics
kmown to be marked species variations, metabol-
whether these be of the opioid type (e.g. alfentanil)
'sop un paane Aeauae mou si sheue u wst
Saidman and Eger (1966) concluded that although
They reduce or abolish reflex response to stimuli
the uptake in muscle still plays the dominant role
and enable operative procedures to be performed
 in the early fall of arterial thiopental levels, this is
 at plasma levels of thiopental which would be
rivalled by the additive effect of metabolism and
 uptake in fat. Decreased liver metabolism was also
All barbiturate drugs cause respiratory depres-
shown to be involved in the prolonged recovery
 sion and a short period of apnoea usually follows
from thiopental found in greyhounds (Ilkiw et al.,
the intravenous injection of thiopental. This is
1985).
probably due to the central nervous depression
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 117
caused by the initial high plasma concentration.
The drug appears to have a direct depressant
The sensitivity of the respiratory centre to CO, is
effect on the myocardium and in certain circum-
reduced progressively as narcosis deepens. As a
stances may produce cardiac arrhythmias such as
result of the central depression the alveolar ventil-
ventricular extrasystoles. It is doubtful whether
ation is diminished, raising the CO, tension of the
these have any clinical significance since they do
arterial blood.
 not seem to progress to fibrillation and usually
As with many other agents, anaesthesia in
pass off spontaneously. In most instances only the
horses is often associated with a peculiar respir-
ECG provides any indication of their presence.
atory effect - a complete arrest of respiration for
Where myocardial damage is present, it is unwise
20-30 s followed by four to eight respiratory move-
 to use a very rapid rate of injection because this
ments. These bursts of activity followed by inactiv-
will submit the heart to a very high initial concen-
auoT eisauisaeue pnouoncrun sisiad Aeu A!
tration of the drug.
1950; Waddington, 1950; Ford, 1951; Jones et al.,
In many types of anaemia the amount of
1960; Tyagi et al. 1964).
thiopental necessary for any given level of narcosis
There is an apparent increase in the sensitivity
is reduced, for the plasma protein concentration as
of the laryngeal and bronchial reflexes under light
well as the haemoglobin level are low and
thiopental anaesthesia. This is generally attributed
decreased protein binding is then responsible for
increased sensitivity to the drug.
thiopental anaesthesia. It would be wrong, how-
Thiopental modifies the vasomotor response to
ever, to assume that thiopental itself produces
increase in intrathoracic pressure (Valsalva
laryngeal and bronchial spasm for these are reflex
manoeuvre). In the absence of thiopental, too vig-
phenomena, usually evoked by stimulation of sens-
orous controlled respiration will produce a fall in
ory afferent nerves by small amounts of mucus,
arterial pressure by increasing the mean intratho-
regurgitated gastric contents or by foreign bodies
racic pressure, although a degree of recovery
such as endotracheal tubes. They may also be initi-
ensues as the result of compensatory venoconstric-
ated by stimuli from other parts of the body.
tion. This compensatory mechanism is impaired
During anaesthesia these reflexes are depressed
by thiopental and persistent hypotension may
centrally and it is probable that thiopental does not
result from injudicious positive pressure ventila-
affect the afferent side of the reflex pathway as
tion of the lungs.
much as other agents do, so that deeper levels of
Thiopental does not effectively block motor
umconsciousness are necessary for the suppression
nerve impulses and muscular relaxation can be
 of these effects. Certainly, spasm is no more com-
provided only
y by excessive central nervous
mon in deep thiopental anaesthesia than with
depression. Shivering is common in all species of
other anaesthetic agents.
 animal in the recovery period and may be due to
There is considerable disagreement among
 persistent cutaneous vasodilatation in a cold envir-
research workers concerning the effects of
onment. It is probably a reflection of the lack of
thiopental on the cardiovascular system. This may
analgesic action because it is usually readily con-
well be due to varying methods used for determin-
 trolled by small doses of analgesic drugs.
ations of such things as cardiac output, differences
 The incidence of hepatic damage is related to
 of premedication, depth of narcosis and the degree
the dose administered and hepatic dysfunction
of CO2 retention, as well as on the speed of injec-
always follows the use of large doses. However,
tion. It appears to be generally agreed, however,
the presence of liver damage does not contraindic-
that the rapid intravenous injection of the drug
ate the drug so long as only minimal doses are
causes a fall in blood pressure even in normo-
employed. Uraemia increases the duration of
volaemic animals and that this can be serious in
thiopental narcosis and the drug should be used
hypovolaemic states. After the initial fall in nor-
with care, and in only minimal doses, in uraemic
movolaemic animals the blood pressure returns to
animals. Renal blood flow varies with the arterial
about the normal level but often with a persistent
tachycardia.
by thiopental can be followed by temporary
118 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
oliguria. The drug is associated with a small but
but it seems likely that acute tolerance may be
sometimes persistent fall in plasma potassium
involved.
concentration.
Thiopental is usually supplied together with
Foetal respiration seems particularly sensitive
 the appropriate quantities of water for injection to
to the depressant effects of thiopental. It has never
 make a 2.5 or 5% solution. When prepared as a
been clearly established whether, in animals, a
 2.5% solution dose and stored in multidose vials at
long or short induction-delivery interval is benefi-
room temperature the solution will generally
cial to the offspring. At Cambridge it has been
remain fit for use for up to four or five days but
used as an induction agent for obstetrical cases for 
 freshly prepared 10% solutions may precipitate
over 40 years without evidence of serious harm to
out at lower environmental temperatures.
the offspring. Only minimal doses are adminis-
tered for the induction of anaesthesia and a relati-
Contraindications
vely long induction-delivery interval is allowed.
Other induction agents, with the possible excep-
 Porphyria, a disease characterized by progressive
tion of propofol, and in horses ketamine, appear to
 acute demyelination of nerves, with clinical signs
have no remarkable advantages.
depending on those most affected, is well docu-
mented in man. In a latent stage any barbiturate
may provoke an acute exacerbation. Progressive
Presentation
paralysis may end in the death of the patient.
In dogs a 2.5% solution (0.5 g in 20 ml) should be
 During these acute excerbations porphobilinogen
 used and 1.25% solution is preferable in very small
 is usually present in the urine and can be detected
dogs and in cats. The intravenous injection of a 5%
by a simple test in the absence of laboratory facil-
   g  sa o s 
ities. When first voided, urine containing porpho-
perivascular injection causes sloughing of overly-
bilinogen is usually normal in colour but it
ing tissues. The use of a 2.5% solution does not
darkens when left standing in daylight for a few
cause venous thrombosis and ensures that acci-
hours. The classic case presents with colicky
 dental perivascular injection is much less likely to
 abdominal pain and many are subjected to unne-
be followed by tissue necrosis. In small animals
 cessary laparatomy. Porphyria has been diagnosed
where the total dose is likely to be between 50 and
 in cattle and pigs (Blood & Henderson, 1961) and
100 mg, further dilution of the 1.25% solution is 
 while it is probably of little importance in these
ad visable to give the injection bulk and ensure that
species, the anaesthetist must note that it has also
the dose is not given too quickly. When it seems
been diagnosed in cats (Tobias, 1964) although the
 possible that more than 20ml of the 2.5 % solution
 exact type of porphyria was uncertain. In the light
will be required for a dog or similar sized animal,
-on aq isnu eiqdiod aopalmou juasaid 1mo jo
thought should be given to the use of suitable pre-
sidered an absolute contraindication to the use of
medication to reduce the thiopental dose.
thiopental in veterinary practice. There are no
It may be essential to use concentrated solutions
other absolute contraindications.
(e.g. up to 10%) in horses and the larger farm an-
imals but necrosis, sloughing and even aneurysms
may follow their accidental perivascular injection.
Thiamyial sodium
The likelihood of accidental perivascular injection
Thiamylal closely resembles thiopental in chem-
may be reduced by always injecting the solution
ical structure except that while the latter is the
through a correctly placed intravenous catheter
ethyl derivative of the series, the former is the allyl
that is well secured in position in the vein.
compound. It is no longer available.
It is a remarkable and as yet unexplained fact
that the use of a 2.5% rather than a 5% solution
halves the total dose of the drug which has to
METHOHEXItAL SODIUM
be administered to small animal patients. There is
Methohexital sodium is a racemic mixture of the
no completely acceptable explanation for this
C-d and a-l isomers of sodium 5-allyl-1-methyl-5-
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 119
(1-methyl-2-ynyl) barbiturate, and differs from
tremors indicates that it is not the perfect agent. It
thiopental in having no sulphur in the molecule. It 
 seems to have an advantage over the thiobarbit-
is stable for at least six weeks in aqueous solutions
urates in that recovery may be completed earlier as
kept at room temperature.
the animal is more alert and coordinated on
There are important differences between this
regaining consciousness. It seems probable, how-
and other barbiturates. The significant features
ever, that in the near future it will be superseded
characteristic of methohexital sodium compared
by propofol and in some countries it is no longer
to thiopental are:
available.
1. Potency is two or three times greater
2. Shorter duration of effect
RAPIDLY ACTING
3. More rapid recovery to full alertness, even
NON-BARBITURATES
after prolonged anaesthesia (it is the only
barbiturate drug for which there is convin-
SAFFAN
cing evidence of a more rapid recovery than
from the'standard' barbiturate, thiopental).
Research into the anaesthetic activity of steroids
prod uced a number of hypnotic compounds. Of
Its action is characterized by a rapid induction, sat-
these alphaxalone was the most promising and,
isfactory surgical anaesthesia and a recovery
although virtually insoluble in water, when dis-
which seldom exceeds 30 minutes. Unfortunately,
solved in cremophor EL the addition of another
 the recovery period is often complicated by muscle
tremors or even frank convulsions. Muscle
its solubility more than threefold. 'Saffan' is a mix-
ture of the two steroids in cremophor EL and this
of anaesthesia. These undesirable features are usu-
mixture has never been given an 'official' name. In
ally suppressed by the use of an opioid or acepro-
medical practice an identical formulation was
mazine for premedication. The short duration of
kmown as 'Althesin'. Solution in cremophor EL
action depends both on marked fat solubility and
being no longer acceptable for drugs to be used in
also on rapid hepatic breakdown to inactive com-
man, Althesin was withdrawn from medical clin-
pounds.
ical use in 1984, although many anaesthetists con-
Ht is best administered to small animals as a 1%
sidered its withdrawal unwarranted.
solution (10 mg/ml) but when large volumes of
Each millitre of Saffan contains 9 mg of alphax-
this solution would be required to administer a
alone and 3 mg of alphadolone. The ready-to-use
dose of 3-5mg/kg, a 2.5% (25mg/ ml) solution
solution is viscid, has a pH of about 7 and is iso-
may be used. In large animals more concentrated
tonic with blood. Like all solutions made up in cre-
solutions of up to 6% are more convenient. Owing
mophor EL it froths when drawn up into the
to differences in pH, solutions of methohexital
syringe but is miscible with water. The dose of
sodium should not be mixed with acid solutions
Saffan may be expressed in several ways but in
such as atropine sulphate.
veterinary anaesthesia it has been usual to record
Rapid injection, especially of the more concen-
it as mg (total steroid) per kg body weight.
 trated solutions, usually produces apnoea of 30 to
Pharmacological studies in Glaxo laboratories
 60 s duration. Rapid injection may also produce
(Child et al., 1971) led to the introduction of Saffan
transient hypotension but the blood pressure soon
as an anaesthetic for cats, but it can be used in all
returns to normal levels. Laryngospasm is reputed
domesticated animals, except dogs (in these an-
to occur less frequently than with the other intra-
imals it causes histamine release), without major
venous anaesthetics.
problems (Hall, 1972; Eales et al., 1974; Eales 1976;
Undoubtedly, there is a place in veterinary
Komar, 1984) and in monkeys (Dhiri, 1984).
anaesthesia for an agent which can safely produce
The electroencephalographic pattem of cerebral
rapid anaesthesia with recovery that is fast and
depression is similar to that produced by other
complete. Methohexital sodium fulfills most 
 anaesthetics. Some evidence has been produced
requirements, although the occurrence of muscle
which suggests that Saffan selectively decreases
120 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
cerebral oxygen consumption to an extent greater
to the mother. It has been claimed that kittens
than can be attributed to a reduction in cerebral
breathe almost immediately after delivery when
blood flow. Thus, it may be a useful agent for
the dose of Saffan given to the mother is restricted
 anaesthetizing animals other than dogs suffering
to less than 4 mg/kg.
from head injuries. When given to cats by intra-
Cats recovering from Saffan anaesthesia often
venous injection induction is not as smoothi as with
show tremor of muscles, paddle and, if stimulated,
thiopental and, in the authors' experience, retch-
may become extremely excited or convulse.This
ing and even vomiting may occur unless the
 excitement and convulsions disappear as soon as
induction dose is given rapidly. Twitching of limb
the stimulation ceases. Oedema and/or hyper-
and facial muscles is also seen but appears to have
aemia of the ear pinnae and paws is common
 no clinical significance. Saffan produces similar
under Saffan anaesthesia. Measurement of paw
falls in arterial blood pressure, central venous
pressure and stroke volume to thiopental, but the
frequently than can be recognized by simple visual
hypotension is not dose related and is accompan-
inspection. Currently, it has to be accepted that
ied by tachycardia. It causes no significant changes
 these side effects result from some idiosyncrasy in
in cardiac index or systemic vascular resistance
 some cats to some unidentified ingredient in the
(Dyson et al., 1987). With moderate doses the arte-
 product. Informed opinion seems to be that this
rial hypotension is transient but large doses have a
type of reaction, probably related to histamine
more prolonged effect. Foex and Prys-Roberts
release, is usually without clinical significance
(1972) observed a dose-related increase in pul-
 although there have been occasional reports of ear
 monary vascular resistance in goats and conclud-
pinna and paw necrosis.
ed that Saffan appeared to cause a greater fall in
Other reports of possible histamine release in
cardiac output than equipotent doses of other
cats cannot be dismissed so easily. These are clin-
 -uas Ampum aq oi readde daaus 'sjuage uononpu
Asdone Aq paodns opias Auo 'soan l
sitive to Saffan (Clarke & Hall, 1975) for in these
 findings, associating the administration of Saffan
animals it produces a marked fall in cardiac out-
with pulmonary oedema. However, in about 30
 put, pulse rate and arterial blood pressure. In dogs
 instances, lung oedema has been confirmed histo-
cremophor EL produces histamine release, thus 
q () sag s  o
causing a further fall in arterial blood pressure and
pulmonary oedema to an administration or
making Saffan unsuitable for use without prior
administrator-related problem because most
 antihistamine medication; even then it cannot be
reports stem from very few practitioners and he
recommended.
estimated that about 30 000 cats are anaesthetized
It is claimed that Saffan produces good muscle
with Saffan each month. There seems to be no way
relaxation in cats without at the same time causing
of preventing it occurring and because it is a
severe respiratory depression. Maligmant hyper-
potentially lethal problem others take the view
thermia-susceptible pigs have been safely anaes-
that Saffan is not an acceptable alternative to
thetized with Saffan (Hall et al., 1972).
thiopental. However, in at least one region of the
The only endocrine effect of Saffan is a weak
UK from which pulmonary oedema has been
anti-oestrogenic action. The major route for excre-
tion of steroids is via the bile and in rats 60-70% of
jo uorado aun aenipu Ae stun pue peadon
alphaxalone and alphadolone are excreted by this
 some factor peculiar to a geographical region. In
route within three hours of administration. There
 such a region an endemic chronic infection may
is some evidence that, like progesterone, the
 prime the complement systems, making them sus-
anaesthetic steroids are involved in enterohepatic
ceptible to activation by an intravenously adminis-
circulation.
tered compound. This would lead to histamine
Information relating to the transfer of Saffan
release in affected arimals by the so-called 'altern-
across the placental barrier is scanty but clinical
ative pathway’ without involvement of immune
results show very minor adverse effects on kittens
recognition so no previous exposure to Saffan or to
when induction doses of up to 6 mg/kg are given
 any other intravenous agent would be necessary
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 121
for such a reaction as histamine-induced pul-
 pressure occurring immediately after injection but
monary oedema to occur. There are also reliable
pressure rapidly returned to normal or slightly
reports of laryngeal oedema following induction
elevated levels.
 of anaesthesia with Saffan with no history of pre-
Unfortunately the drug did not live up to ex-
vious exposure to the steroids.
pectations with regard to smoothness of recovery
Although all the genus Canis show a dose-
or speed of recovery and was withdrawn from the
related anaphylactoid type of reaction to surface-
market.
active agents such as cremophor EL, a constituent
of Saffan, the preparation has been used in dogs
5/β Pregnanolone and other steroids
after premedication with acepromazine and
chlorpheniramine. Attempts to follow this regi-
 The pregnanes were first reported to possess
men in dogs in the UK have revealed a high inci-
anaesthetic activity in 1957 but it was a decade
dence of skin erythema and vomiting. It is
later that the anaesthetic effects of some were
difficult to accept that the prior administration of
described. 5 βPregmanolone is insoluble in water
an antihistamine merely to enable Saffan to be
but it has been used as an emulsion in man. To date
used is good practice, especially now that other
there are no published data on its efficacy in veter
 and better agents such as propofol are available
inary anaesthesia. It may have an impact on intra-
for use in dogs.
venous anaesthetic techniques.
Unlike many induction agents Saffan may be
given by intramuscular injection but, despite this
METOMIDATE
 possible use, there is no doubt that the prime role
for the formulation is as an intravenous induction
Metomidate (Hypnodil) is a non-barbiturate intra-
agent, or as a total anaesthetic (using incremental
venous hypnotic synthesized in the laboratories of
dosage or a continuous infusion technique).
Janssen Pharmaceutica in Belgium. It was the first
Metabolism is so fast that subcutaneous injection
representative of a completely new group of
fails to produce any evidence of effect on the
hypnotics, the imidazole derivatives. It is a
central nervous system, making it possible to
white crystalline powder, freely soluble in
disregard inadvertent perivascular injection as far
water, but aqueous solutions are unstable and
pauaouos are sasop luanbasqns se
should be used within 24 hours of preparation.
A 1% solution has a pH of 2.9 and a 5% solution a
pH of 2.4. It was introduced as a hypnotic for
OTHER STEROIDS
 pigs and its use has mainly been confined to these
animals.
Minaxolone
 Metomidate has strong central muscle relaxant
Following enthusiastic reports of its use in early
 properties but litle ability to suppress response to
dlinical trials in man, minaxolone, a rapidly acting,
 painful stimulation. However, since it has usually
water soluble steroid was subjected to clinical
been used with other agents, such as fentanyl or
trials involving 70 dogs and six anaesthetists
azaperone, it is difficult to establish the effects of
(Clarke & Hall, 1984). It proved to be an adequate
the agent alone. Given by intravenous injection it
anaesthetic, with usually smooth induction but
prolonged recovery times. The commonest side
site-brain circulation time. In pigs, after azaperone
effect noted was twitching, while the most serious
premedication, induction of unconsciousness is
was respiratory depression often needing oxygen
smooth and side effects are rarely seen. Occa-
supplementation  coupled  with  intermittent
positive pressure ventilation of the lungs, to main-
Jo aq ot readde Aaui smou man e oj sisiad Aeu
tain an adequate PaO2. Occasionally, there was a
little clinical significance. Metomidate has also
marked delay between intravenous injection and
 been given by intraperitoneal injection at the same
thie attainment of maximal anaesthesia. Cardiovas-
time as an intramuscular injection of azaperone
cular effects were minimal, a slight fall in arterial
but the results were urpredictable.
122 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
In pigs, injection of metomidate is followed by
24 hours (2% as unchanged etomidate) and 13% is
slight hypotension, with a decreased pulse rate
excreted in the bile. It is quickly hydrolysed by
and a mild decrease in cardiac output. During
esterases in the liver and plasma to pharmacolo-
sedation there is remarkable stability of the cardio-
 gically inert metabolites. The pharmacokinetics of
vascular system. Under azaperone-metomidate
etomidate in cats have been investigated (Wertz
sedation the minute volume of respiration is equal
et al., 1990) and are best described by a three-
to that of the rested, conscious pig, with a de-
 compartment open model similar to those deter-
creased frequency but an increased tidal volume.
 mined in people and rats.
Piglets delivered by caesarean section from sows
In effective doses etomidate causes loss of con-
under metomidate hypnosis are sleepy but usually
sciousness in one injection site-brain circulation
recover from this depressed state if they are kept
time and in dogs doses of 1.5 to 3 mg/kg prod uce
hypnosis, in a dose dependent manner, lasting
to the sow the piglets may show tremors for sever-
from 10 to 20minutes. Thus on a weight-for-
al hours after birth.
weight basis it appears to be about 10 times more
Although introduced as a hypnotic for pigs it
potent than thiopental. Side effects are no more
has also been used experimentally in horses (Cox,
likely to occur with the higher dose rates thian with
1973; Hillidge et al., 1973) and for restraint for a
lower ones.
variety of species of birds (Cooper, 1974). In horses
Intravenous injection is associated with a high
metomidate produces sweating, muscular tremors
incidence of involuntary muscle movement,
and involuntary head and limb movements ; it
 tremor and hypertonus. The EEG changes pro-
cannot be recommended for clinical use.
duced by etomidate at induction are similar to
those seen with barbiturates and no specific
epileptogeric or convulsive activity is observed, so
Role
the muscle movements cannot be attributed to
Although possibly indicated for pigs, there is cur-
central nervous activity. Premedication with
rently little call for its use in the field because of
diazepam, fentanyl or pethidine reduces the incid-
farm economics and although pigs are becoming
ence of these side effects so they may be related to
widely used as experimental animals other agents
pain on intravenous injection when the drug is
are usually more satisfactory for laboratory
 administered through a small calibre vein.
purposes.
Lack of cardiovascular depression is claimed to
be one of the outstanding features of etomidate
(Nagel et al., 1979). The drug does release signific-
ETOMIDATE
ant amounts of histamine and there is a very low
The commercial preparation, Hypnomidate, con-
incidence of thrombosis after injection. Injection of
tains 20mg of the dextrorotatory isomer of the
etomidate is frequently followed by a short bout of
compoumd dissolved in 10 ml of a mixture of 35%
 coughing in unpremedicated dogs but in general
propylene glycol and 65% water v/v, because
 respiration is less depressed than after other intra-
injection of plain aqueous solutions causes pain.
venous hypnotics.
Etomidate is currently much more expensive than
 A slight rise in serum potassium occurs when
metomidate.
marked, persistent myoclonic movements occur,
The pharmacokinetics of etomidate favour its
but the main effect of importance is that etomidate
use as an infusion and, combined with its low car-
inhibits increases in plasma cortisol and aldo-
diovascular toxicity it is not surprising that this
sterone concentrations during surgical stress, even
became a popular technique (usually combined
when adrenocorticotropic hormone levels are
with an opioid such as fentanyl) in man. In dogs it 
normal or increased. In canine surgical patients
is 76% bound to albumin and like thiopental it
 adrenocortical function is suppressed for two to
quickly enters the brain and leaves rapidly as it 
 three hours after the administration of etomidate
becomes redistributed in the body. Of the total
(Kruse-Elliott et al., 1987). Suppression of the
dose given, in rats 83% is excreted in the urine in
endocrine response to surgical stress has been
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 123
deemed by some to be beneficial, although this
w/v purified egg phosphatide and 2.25% w/v
suppression has resulted in etomidate no longer
glycerol.
being used for sedation of human patients in
Like thiopental, propofol is a rapidly-acting
intensive care units.
agent producing anaesthesia of short duration
without side effects. Both agents produce equival-
ent cardiovascular and respiratory effects but,
Role
unlike thiopental, propofol does not damage
H is impossible to assess whether etomidate has a
place in veterinary anaesthesia. Erhardt (1984) has
ally. Pain on injection into small veins has been
reported acceptable results with a mixture of eto-
reported in man and occasionally dogs seem to
midate and alfentanil mixed in a ratio of 1.000 mg
resent injection into the cephalic vein. The reason
to 0.015 mg in dogs, cats, rats, rabbits, sheep, goats
for pain on injection is not known but the various
 and calves but etomidate has so far failed to make
possible explanations have been reviewed by Tan
any impact in veterinary practice in North
& Onsiong (1998). Greater reflex depression and
America or the UK.
 more pronounced EEG changes are associated
with propofol than with thiopental.
Details of pharmacological studies performed
EUGENOLS
in rabbits, cats, pigs and monkeys were published
The eugenols are related to oil of cloves and three
(Glen, 1980; James & Glen, 1980; Glen & Hunter,
derivatives have been subjected to clinical trials in
1984), and preliminary clinical trials in 10 dogs and
man. The first, known as G29505 or Estil, was
one cat soon followed (Hall, 1984). Propofol has
abandoned because of its deleterious effects on
been shown to be compatible with a wide range of
veins. Another derivative, Propinal, was aban-
drugs used for premedication, inhalation anaes-
doned very quickly because of its effects on res-
thesia and neuromuscular block (James & Glen,
piration and the circulation. The third eugenol,
1980). It lacks any central anticholinergic effect, is
propanidid (Epontol), became available in the UK
 not potentiated by other non-anaesthetic drugs,
in 1967. Doses of 5mg/kg given to very small
 does not affect bronchomotor tone or gastroin-
onalui snoua aeru pider Apaaxa Aq sanuod
testinal motility, and decreases the risk for cate-
produced anaesthesia sufficient for castration fol-
cholamine induced cardiac arrhythmias.
lowed by complete recovery in less than 10 min-
The propofol blood concentration profile fol-
utes. Because of the extremely short duration of
lowing a single bolus dose can be described by the
 action it was found to be physically impossible to
sum of three exponential functions representing;
give the drug fast enough to produce anaesthesia
(i)distribution from blood into tissues
 in larger horses, and violent excitement followed
(ii) metabolic clearance from blood
the administration of subanaesthetic doses. In
(ii) metabolic clearance constrained by the
dogs, Epontol was found to produce profound
slow return of propofol into the blood from a
sem pipiuedord asnesaq Aiqeqoid 'uoisuanod
uaueduro anssin pasngrad rlrood
dissolved in cremophor EL.
It is highly lipophilic and rapidly metabolized
primarily to inactive glucuronide conjugates, the
PROPOFOL
metabolites being excreted in the urine. In man,
Propofol is an intravenous anaesthetic agent
liver disease and renal failure have little effect on
unrelated to barbiturates, eugenols, or steroid
pharmacokinetic parameters and it seems likely
anaesthetic agents. The active ingredient, 2,6 di-
that extrahepatic mechanisms contribute to the
isopropylphenol, exists as an oil at room temper-
metabolism of propofol, but this has not been
 investigated in any detail in other animals. In dogs
 premedication with 10 μg/kg of medetomidine,
it is now presented as a free flowing oil-in-water
which might be expected to reduce hepatic blood
emulsion containing 1% w /v soya bean oil, 1.2%
flow, does not significantly alter the kinetic
124 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE 5.1 Mean utilization rate of propofol (data
TABLE 5.2 Disposition of propofol in mongrel and
supplied by J.B. Glen)
Species
distribution at steady state.T1/β = elimination
Mean utilization rate
half-life.* indicates a significant difference at
(mg/kg/min)
p > 0.05 (data from Hall et al., 1994; 1997);
Mouse
2.22
Disposition
Mongrel dogs
Laboratory
Rabbit
1.55
beagles
Rat 
0.61
Pig
0.28
(n=6)
(n=6)
Cat
0.19
Vss (L/kg)
6.04 (0.71)
3.27 (0.26)*
Systemic
dearance
34.40 (1.92)
47.46 (6.21)
variables (Hall et al., 1994). In cats considerable
(ml/kg/min)
T1/2p (min)
486.2 (56.4)
131.30 (12.82)*
first pass extraction of propofol occurs in the lung
(Matot et al., 1993) and it is uncertain whether all of
the drug is released back into the circulation or if
some is metabolized in the pulmonary tissue.
hounds and mixed breed dogs (Zoran & Riedesel,
The mean 'utilization rate' of propofol varies
1993) so that breed differences must be expected.
from species to species (Table 5.1) and is probably
In dogs, anaesthesia maintained by continuous
related to differences in the rate of biotransforma-
infusion (Chambers, 1988; Vainio 1991; Nolan &
tion and conjugation as the cat, with the smallest
Reid, 1993; Hammond & England, 1994) appeared
utilization rate of the animals studied, has a defi-
to be less controllable than that maintained by
ciency in its ability to conjugate phenols.
halothane /nitrous oxide (Hall & Chambers, 1987;
Propofol is now accepted as a most useful agent
Chambers, 1988) although it is perhaps better
 in all domestic animals, although its current price
when maintained by intermittent injections of the
 precludes its widespread use in adult farm animals
agent (Watkins et al., 1987). Following a single
and horses. The principal advantage of propofol
intravenous dose of 6 mg/kg recovery in dogs is
over thiopental is the more rapid recovery of con-
complete (awake, no ataxia) after about 20 minutes
sciousness. As itis very lipophilic it has a very large
 and neither acepromazine nor medetomidine pre-
volume of distribution. There are noticeable differ-
 medication appear to increase the recovery time.
Ences between the disposition data from mongrels
 Recovery in greyhounds and other sighthounds is
and beagle dogs (Table 5.2). It is metabolized very
no longer than in other breeds. There is a sugges-
quickly although, at least in man, concurrent
 tion that some families of boxer dogs may be more
administration of fentanyl reduces clearance and
susceptible to the drug since recovery was pro-
increases plasma concentrations (Cockshott, 1985).
longed in some related animals of this breed (Hall
The dose for induction of anaesthesia
ain
& Chambers, 1987). In cats recovery after a single
 dose is less rapid - about 30 minutes - presumably
unpremedicated dogs and cats is between 6 and
7 mg/kg. Premedication with between 0.02 and
because of relative inability to conjugate phenols.
0.04 mg/kg of acepromazine reduces this induc-
In cats the incidence of postanaesthetic side effects
tion dose by about 30% in dogs but this effect is not
such as vomiting/retching and sneezing or paw-
so marked in cats premedicated with 0.04 mg/kg
ing at the mouth is about 15% but this can be
of acepromazine (Brearley et al., 1988). Premedi-
slightly reduced by acepromazine premedication
cation with 10 or 20μg/kg of medetomidine
(Brearley et al., 1988). Vomiting and retching
decreases the anaesthetic induction dose in dogs to
 may also be seen during recovery in dogs, the inci-
about 5mg/kg and 3mg/kg respectively (Hall
dence being about 16% following infusion at
et al., 1994; 1997). Blood systemic clearance is
0.4 mg/kg/min after atropine and acepromazine
almost halved by premedication with medetomi-
premedication (Chambers, 1988).
dine 20 μg/kg whereas 10μg/kg produces very lit-
Propofol has also been used for anaesthesia in
tle effect. It has been demonstrated that the
horses (Nolan, 1982; Nolan & Hall, 1985; Aguiar
pharmacokinetics of propofol differ in grey-
et al., 1993), goats (Nolan et al., 1991), macacaque
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 125
monkeys (Sainsbury et al., 1991) and many other
often followed by sloughing of the overlying
species of animal. It does not appear to trigger
tissues. A small amount appears unchanged in the
urine but most is excreted after conjugation
&Harrison, 1989)
with glycuronic acid through the kidneys as
 The great attraction for using propofol is the
trichloroethylglycuronic acid.
rapid and complete, excitement-free awakening,
 Chloral hydrate is a hypnotic and not an anaes-
irrespective of the duration of anaesthesia. How-
thetic. The dose needed to produce anaesthesia is
ever, animals require careful observation during
very close to the minimal lethal dose. It has only
the recovery period to ensure that they come to no
very weak analgesic action. Hypnotic doses cause
harm from vomiting. In dogs, excitatory phenome-
respiratory depression and large doses result in
na associated with the use of propofol have been
arterial hypotension. Death from chloral hydrate
reported (Davies, 1991; Davies & Hall, 1991).
 results as a result of respiratory depression.
These have been mainly muscle twitching, exten-
 The drug was never used as an anaesthetic in
sor rigidity and opisthotonus, and have not given
dogs and cats but formerly it was used extensively
rise to life-threatening situations.
in large animals, sometimes with a barbiturate
(Wright, 1957). Recovery from chloral hydrate
anaesthesia in horses occupies one to four or more
LESS RAPiDLY ACTING INTrAVENoUS
hours and unless tranquillizers are given is often
AGENTS
accompanied by struggling to rise. Its action in
cattle is similar to that in horses except that recov-
The less rapidly acting intravenous agents include
with water, by stomach tube into the rumen. More
barbital sodium. In the past all have been used as
recently introduced agents are safer and more con-
anaesthetics but appropriate doses do not produce
venient to administer to both horses and cattle and
 unconsciousness in one injection site-brain circu-
there is litle to recommend its continuing use.
lation time.
CHLORALOSE
CHLORAL HYDRATE
Chloralose is prepared by heating equal quantities
Chloral hydrate is a white, translucent, crystalline
of glucose and chloral hydrate under controlled
substance which volatilizes on exposure to air,
conditions so that two isomers are produced. Only
producing a penetrating smell. It is not deliques-
 Q-chloralose has narcotic properties; β chloralose
cent, but it is readily soluble in water and aqueous
can produce muscular pain. α-Chloralose is avail-
solutions are generally stable although the drug
able commercially as a white, crystalline powder
decomposes in the presence of alkali. Solutions
and it is used as a 1% solution in water or saline.
may be sterilized by boiling for a few minutes. In
The solution is prepared fresh immediately before
the blood chloral hydrate is reduced to 2,2,2-
use by heating to 60°C. Heating above this temper-
trichloroethanol and its narcotic effect is generally
ature results in decomposition and precipitation
 attributed to this substance. When given by intra-
occurs on standing. Chloralose is still extensively
venous injection its effects are slow in appearing
used in physiological and pharmacological non-
and this means that it is difficult to assess the
survival experiments. Because large volumes of
degree of depression produced by a given dose as
solution have to be given before consciousness is
injection proceeds. Even following slow intra-
 lost, anaesthesia is often induced with some other
venous infusion of a dilute solution, narcosis con-
 agent such as methohexital or, today, propofol. An
tinues to deepen for several minutes and
intravenous dose of 80-100 mg/kg of chloralose
additional doses should not be administered until
causes loss of consciousness but spontaneous
it is clear that the maximum depth of depression 
 muscular activity is common. The peak narcotic
from the initial dose has been reached. Peri- 
 action of chloralose is seen some 15 to 20 minutes
vascular injection causes severe tissue reaction,
 after injection. The arterial blood pressure is elev-
126 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
ated and the activity of the autonomic nervous
must be slow if the full effects are to be assessed as
system is believed to be umaffected. The heart rate
 injection proceeds.The drug markedly depresses
is often greatly increased and respiratory depres-
 the respiratory centre and in pregnant animals it
sion does not occur umtil very large doses are
diffuses readily across the placenta into the fetal
given. In the body chloralose is broken down to
circulation, inhibiting fetal respiratory move-
chloral and glucose and the safety margin is rel-
 ments. One of its isomers causes a transient period
atively wide.
of excitement before depressing the central nerv-
 Disadvantages are its relative insolubility, the 
ous system while the other produces smoother,
long comparatively shallow depth of anaesthesia
progressive hypnosis.
 and the slow recovery accompanied by struggling.
 In sheep, pentobarbital causes a marked de-
It has no place in veterinary practice but it is
 crease in stroke volume and in the acceleration of
regarded by many experimentalists as a valuable
blood in the pulmonary artery. Pulse rate increases
drug for maintenance of unconsciousness for long.
but this does not compensate for the fall in stroke
non-survival experiments.
volume so cardiac output falls to an average of
64% of the resting volume in the conscious animal
(Clarke & Hall, 1975). The blood pressure may
URETHANE
subsequently rise due to hypercapnia consequent
 Urethane is no longer commonly used as an an-
upon respiratory depression produced by the
aesthetic for any laboratory experiments. It was
drug. The drug alters both myocardial function
often given with chloralose to suppress the muscu-
 and the distribution of blood flow in most labor-
lar activity which may occur when chloralose is
 atory animals so that although often used in the
used alone. Urethane has little effect on respiration
past as an anaesthetic for physiological and phar-
and arterial blood pressure. It is believed to be car-
 macological studies their results require critical
cinogenic and laboratory workers still having con-
evaluation.
tact with this compound should handle it with
 The drug has no appreciable effect on the gas-
care.
 trointestinal system or on liver function but large
doses may cause further damage to an already
damaged liver. It is destroyed primarily in the liver
PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM
although other tissues may have the power of
Pentobarbital sodium in the form of a racemic
breaking it down. Some of the administered dose is
mixture of sodium 5-ethyl-5-(1-methylbutyl) bar-
 Excreted in the urine so that if a diuresis can be pro-
biturate is marketed as a sterile 6.5% solution con-
 duced by intravenous infusion of fluid, awakening
taining propylene glycol, as a powder in gelatine
may be accelerated. Pentobarbital has no direct
capsules and, for euthanasia, in non-sterile solu-
action on the kidney but may inhibit water diure-
tions of about 20%.
sis, probably by causing a release of antidiuretic
The main action of pentobarbital sodium is to
hormone from the pituitary gland (Blake, 1957).
depress the central nervous system, and effects
 Recovery from pentobarbital is always slow but
upon other systems of the body only become
the duration varies according to the species of an-
important as the toxic limitations to the use of the
 imal. The drug is metabolized more rapidly in
drug are approached. It depresses the cerebral cor-
horses, sheep and goats than in pigs, dogs and
tex and, probably, the hypothalamus. Because it
 cats. Convulsive movements, paddling and vocal-
depresses the motor areas of the brain it is used to
ization may occur in the recovery period but such
control convulsive seizures. It has only a weak
excitatory phenomena can usually be suppressed
 amalgesic action and relatively large doses must be
with analgesics or tranquillizers although these
administered before pain perception is affected;
like all barbiturates, it is primarily a hypnotic
effect' - a reanaesthetizing effect due to a glucose
 drug. Pentobarbital sodium takes an appreciable
induced decreased microsomal activity - exhibits a
time to cross the blood-brain barrier and when
 marked species variability and is of no significance
a p ai a a s g 
 in dogs, cats, mice or rats, although it has been
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 127
demonstrated to prolong recovery in rabbits and
agents. Spontaneous involuntary muscle move-
guinea pigs (Hamlin et al., 1965).
ment and hypertonus are not uncommon during
induction and purposeless tonic-clonic move-
ments of the extremities may be mistaken to indic-
Role
ate an inadequate level of anaesthesia and the need
In horses pentobarbital may be used to prolong the
for additional doses and unless this possibility is
duration of chloral hydrate hypnosis. Horses
recognized, overdoses may be given.
metabolize pentobarbital relatively quickly but
 Electroencephalographic studies show a func-
unless combined with chloral hydrate recovery is
tional dissociation between the thalamoneo-
usually associated with excitement. Sheep and
 cortical and limbic systems, the former being
goats also metabolize the drug rapidly. In the field
depressed before there is a significant effect on the
it may used in catle for anaesthesia of short dura-
reticular activating and limbic systems. This differs
tion, although the prolonged recovery period con-
from the effects of other non-inhalation anaes-
stitutes a disad vantage. In dogs and cats it can be
thetics and is manifested by the state of the animal.
used on its own as a hypnotic or anaesthetic but
Hypertonus and muscle movement have already
analgesics are needed to reduce distress in recov-
 been mentioned; in addition animals may remain
 e s si h  a  s r A
 with their eyes open and have a good tone in the
widely used injectable anaesthetic in dogs and cats
 jaw muscles with active laryngeal and pharyngeal
despite its disadvantages. It is becoming increas-
 reflexes, whilst analgesia appears to be extremely
ingly used to maintain hypnosis in pigs for long.
good.
non-survival experiments.
Phencyclidine
Phencyclidine was the first dissociative agent used
DISSOCIATIVE AGENTS
 in veterinary anaesthesia but is no longer generally
Three cyclohexylamine derivatives have been
available.
used in several species of animal to produce a state
that enables a surgical operation to be carried out.
These substances, phencyclidine, tiletamine and
Tiletamine
ketamine, differ markedly both in chemical and
Tiletamine hydrochloride is a cataleptic agent sim-
physical properties as well as in their clinical
ilar to phencyclidine hydrochloride but at least
effects when compared to the non-inhalation
twice as potent. The lack of muscle relaxation and
agents already described. They have been des-
long recovery period together with pain on injec-
cribed as having cataleptic, analgesic and anaes-
tion of the available preparation (Garmer, 1969)
thetic action, but no hypnotic
properties.
resulted in it not being used in the UK.
Catalepsy is defined as a characteristic akinetic
state with loss of orthostatic reflexes but without
TILETAMINE-ZOLAZEPAM MIXTURE
impairment of consciousness in which the extrem-
ities appear to be paralysed by motor and sensory
Tiletamine is currently marketed in combination
failure.
with a diazepam analogue, zolazepam ('Telazol',
Another definition of the state produced by
'Zoletil) in the USA, Australia, Europe and else-
these agents is 'dissociative anaesthesia' which is
where, but not in the UK. This preparation is a 1:1
characterized by complete analgesia combined
dry powder with a long shelf-life. It can be made
 into highly concentrated solutions convenient for
 and emergence delirium phenomena are known to
 administration to wild animals by dart gun.
occur. It cannot be established whether similar
In domestic cats the drug combination causes
phenomena are experienced by animals but the
 tachycardia with slight rises in blood pressure and
state produced by these substances is clinically
cardiac output coupled with initial respiratory
very different from anaesthesia produced by other
stimulation followed by mild depression of
128 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
breathing. Its use in non-domesticated cats has
 even the thiobarbiturates or an inhalation agent
been well described by Lewis (1994). In dogs, the
are commonly given concurrently with ketamine.
tranquillizing effects of zolazepam seem to wane
Mild respiratory depression has been reported
before those of tiletamine so that recovery is often
and in clinical practice this is usually manifested
violent. Muscle rigidity is common and some
by an increased rate which does not compensate
seizure-like manifestations may be seen. In the UK
for a decreased tidal volume. Although laryngeal
the mixture has yet to be subjected to clinical trials
 reflexes may be present it is still necessary for the
but initial reports indicate that the combination is
airway to be kept under close observation because
unlikely to find favour.
the degree of protection of the upper airway is less
than was once thought.
In contrast with the action of other i.v. induction
KETAMINE
 agents ketamine causes a rise in arterial blood
The ketamine molecule exists as two optical iso-
 pressure. The rate of injection is not an important
mers and the racemic mixture is currently used
factor in the production of hypertension and i.m.
clinically. It is available in 10, 50 and 100 mg/ ml
injection results in no less a rise in blood pressure
strengths suitable for i.m. or i.v. injection. The
than the i.v. route. The picture is one of stimulation
10 mg/ml solution is made isotonic with sodium
uoe puessaidap poaip e sey yoium juase ue Aq
 chloride. In all species of animal ketamine appears 
 on the isolated heart preparation. This is probably
to have a much shorter duration of action than
due to an increase in circulating catecholamines
phencyclidine or tiletamine.
caused by ketamine blocking the reuptake of nor-
 The effects of the two enantiomers of ketamine
adrenaline by adrenergic nerve terminals. Cardiac
differ. The potency ratio between the two isomers
arrhythmias are uncommon in animals under ket-
 appears to be greater for ketamine's analgesic
 amine anaesthesia and the minimal arterial blood
action than for its anaesthetic effect. White et al.
pressure is always similar to and rarely less than
(1980) have suggested that d-ketamine (about four 
the preoperative level.
times as potent than the l form) would be more
Ketamine produces little, if any, muscle relax-
useful than either the racemic mixture or the liso-
ation. There is generally an increase in skeletal
mer, retaining the desirable but lacking the unde-
muscle tonus and tendon reflexes are brisk.
sirable properties of the drug. It is unlikely that
Athetoid limb movements occur without external
this will be followed up because it would involve
stimuli and are not dose-related.
considerable pharmaceutical outlay, which might
 There is no evidence of tolerance developing
have been very much more worthwhile if it had
after repeated injections of ketamine and no signi-
preceded the introduction of propofol
ficant cumulative effects have been reported in the
The effects of ketamine on the central nervous
veterinary literature, although a case of tolerance
/uerq aun roy Aipiden juaredde auosaq waisss
has been noted in a young child (Stevens & Hain,
plasma ratio becomes constant in less than one
1981). Daily injections of ketamine in rats, dogs
minute. It also rapidly crosses the placental barrier.
and monkeys caused no alterations in haematolo-
Liver metabolism produces at least four meta-
gical, urine or bone marrow values or in blood
bolites which are excreted in the urine; they may
chemistry. According to the manufacturers there
have some slight additive effect to the action of the
were no adverse effects on the dam or the pups
parent drug. Ketamine produces profound analge-
 when pregnant bitches were given 25 mg/kg keta-
sia without muscle relaxtion, and tonic-clonic
 mine twice a week over a three-week period dur-
spasms of limb muscles may occur even in the
 ing each third of pregmancy and pregnant rabbits
absence of surgical or other stimulation. Salivation
given ketamine daily during the period of organo-
is increased and saliva can obstruct the airway
 genesis produced normal litters.
even though laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes are
 There is little published information regarding
retained. To eliminate side effects a variety of other
 the use of ketamine for caesarian section in any
compounds such as atropine, diazepam, midazo-
 species of animal. In the authors' experience lambs
lam, xylazine, detomidine, medetomidine and
delivered from ewes that have had anaesthesia
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 129
induced with ketamine behave as though they are
Propofol anaesthesia in cats. Journal of Smalt Arimat
unaware of their surroundings for up to 12hours
Practice 29:315-322.
after delivery. Extreme difficulty was experienced
Bree, M.M. and Gross, N.B. (1969). Anesthesia of pigeons
with C1581 (ketamine) and pentobarbital. Laboratory
in getting them to suckle in the first six hours of
Animal Care 19:500-502.
life. The behaviour of young of other animal
Brodie, B.B. (1952). Physiological disposition and
species born to mothers after ketamine has appar-
chemical fate of thiobarbiturates in the body. Federa!
ently not been studied but for caesarian section in
Proceedings 11: 632-639.
Brodie, B.B., Mark, L. C., Papper, E.M., Lief, PA.,
mares, induction of anaesthesia with ketamine
Bermstein, E. and Papper, E.M. (1951). Acute tolerance
after xylazine premedication seems to have little
to thiopentone.journal of Pharmacology and
effect on the survival of the foal.
Experimental Therapeutics 102: 215-218.
The difficulty in assessing the depth of uncon-
Brodie, B.B, Burms, J.J., Mark, L.C., Lief, P.A.,
sciousness coupled with the poor muscle relax-
Bernstein,E. and Papper, E.M. (1953). Fate of
ation produced by the drug make it doubtful
 pentobarbital inman and dog, and method for its
estimation in biological material. Jourral of
whether ketamine should ever be used alone for
Pharmacoiogy and Experimental Therapeutics
surgical operations, although its ease of adminis-
109:26-34.
tration makes its use superficially attractive in ani-
Chambers, J.P. (1988). Propofol infusion anaesthesia in
mals such as sheep and cats. Ketamine alone in
dogs. Journal of the Association of Veterinary
sheep, or in any other animals, in the authors'
Anaesthetists 15:135.
Child, K.J.,Currie, J.P, Davis, B., Dodds, M.G., Pearce,
experience and that of others (Taylor et al., 1972;
D.R. and Twissell, D.J. (1971). The pharmacological
Thurmon et al., 1973) fails to produce satisfactory
 properties in animals of CT1341 -a new steroid
 anaesthesia. In cats it is doubtful if ketamine alone
anaesthetic agent. British Journal of Araesthesia 43:
should be used, except possibly to subdue a partic-
2-13.
Clarke, K.W. and Hall, L.W. (1975). The effect of some
ularly wild individual. However, there is general
 intravenous anaesthetics on cardiac output.
 agreement that if injectables have to be used, keta-
Proceedings of the 20th.World Veterinary
mine is the agent of choice for the sedation of
Corgress,Thessaloniki. 2: 1688-1692 (published in 1976).
reptiles (Bree & Gross, 1969; Borzio,1973; Harding
Clarke, K.W. and Hall, L.W. (1984). Minaxolone : a
1977). Similarly, ketamine has proved to be of
clinical trial in the dog. Journat of the Association of
value in many species of birds (Gerlach, 1969;
Veterirnary Anaesthetists 12: 83-92.
Cockshott, 1.D. (1985). Propofol ('Diprivan')
Kittle, 1971; Mattingly, 1972; Klide, 1973;
pharmacokinetics and metabolism - an overview.
Mandelker, 1973; Boever & Wright, 1975) when
Postgraduate Medicat Jourral., 61 (Suppl 13): 45-50.
nhalation agents are unavailable.
Cooper,J.E. (1974). Metomidate anaesthesia of some
birds of prey for laparotomy and sexing. Veterinary
Record 94: 437-440.
 REFERENCES
Cox, J.E. (1973). Immobilization and anaesthesia of the
pig.Veterinary Record 92:143-147.
Davies,C. (1991). Excitatory phenomena following the
Aguiar, A.J.A., Hussni, C.A., Luna, S.P.L., Castro, G.B.,
Massone, F. and Alves, A.L.G. (1993) Propofol
use of propofol indogs. fournal of Veterinary
compared with propofol/guaiphenesin after
Anaesthesia 18:48-51.
detomidine premedication for equine surgery. Journat
Davies, C. and Hall, L.W.(1991). Propofol and excitatory
of Veterinary Anaesthesia 20:26-28.
sequelae in dogs. Anaesthesia 46:797-798.
Blake, W.D. (1957) Some effects of pentobarbital and
Dhiri, A.K. (1984). Continuous intravenous infusion
anesthesia on renal hemodynamics. Americar Jourrat
using Saffan (CT1341) in the Patas monkey. Jourrat of
of Physiotogy 191: 393-398.
the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain
Blood, D.C. and Henderson, J.A.(1961). In: Veterinary
and Ireland 12:68-77.
Medicine. London: Bailliere, Tindall and Cox.
Dundee, J.W. and Wyant, G.M. (1988) In: Intravenous
Boever, W.J. and Wright, W. (1975). Use of ketamine for
Anaesthesia 2nd Edition, Edinburgh. Churchill
restraint and anaesthesia of birds. Veterinary Medicine
Livingstone.
Small Animal Clinician 70:86-88.
Dyson, D.H.,Allen, D.A., Ingwersen, W, Pascoe, PJ. and
Borzio, F. (1973) Ketamine hydrochloride as an
O'Grady, M. (1987). Efects of Saffan on
anesthetic for wild fowl. Veterinary Medicine - Small
cardiopulmonary functions in healthy cats. Caradian
Animal Clinician 68: 1364-1367.
JourratofVeterinary Research 51:236-239.
Brearley, J.C., Kellagher, R.E.B. and Hall, L.W. (1988)
Eales, F.A., Hall, L.W. and Massey G.M. (1974)
'Saffan' a new steroid anaesthetic in veterinary
130 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
anaesthesia. Proceedings of the Association of Veterinary
Harding, K.A. (1977). The use of ketamine anaesthesia to
Araesthetists of Great Britain ard Iretard. No. 5: 1-5.
milk tropicalrattlesnakes (Crotalus durissus terrijficus).
Eales, F.A. (1976). Effects of Saffan administered
Veterinary Record 100: 289-290.
intravenously in the horse. Veterinary Record
Hillidge, C.J., Lees, P. and Serrano, L. (1973)
99:270-272
Investigations of azaperone-metomidate anaesthesia
Erhardt, W. (1984). Anaesthesia with alfentanil and
in the horse. Veterinary Record 93:307-311.
etomidate in several animal species. Jourral of the
Ilkiw, J.E., Sampson, D. and Cutler, D. (1985)
Association of Veterinary Araesthetists ofGreat Britain
Thiopentone sodium in the Greyhound. Proceedings of
and Ireland 12: 196-196.
the 2nd.Interrationat CongressofVeterinary Anesthesia
Evans, J.M.(1979). Steroid anaesthesia five years on.
Oct. pp 118-119.
Proceedings of the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists
James, R. and Glen, J.B. (1980) Synthesis, biological
of Great Britain and lreland 8: 73-84.
evaluation and preliminary structure-activity
Foex, P. and Prys-Roberts, C. (1972). Pulmonary
considerations of a series of alkylphenols as
haemodynamics and myocardial effects of Althesin
intravenous anaesthetic agents. Jourrat of Medicinat
(CT1341) in goat. Postgraduate Medical Journal.
Chemistry, 23: 1350.
(Suppl 2).48-24.
Jones, E.W., Johnson, L. and Heinze, C.D. (1960).
Ford, E.J.H. (1951) Some observations on the use of
Anesthesia in the horse. Jourral of the Americar
thiopentone in large animals. Veterinary Record
Veterinary Medical Association 137: 19-122.
63: 636-638.
Klide, A.M. (1973). Avian anesthesia (cage
Garmer, L.N. (1969). Effects of 2-ethylamino- 2'-
birds). Veterinary Clinics of North America 3: p. 175-186.
(2'phenyl) cyclohexanone HCl (Ci-634) incats.
Komar, E. (1984). Steroid anaesthesia in horses.
Research in Veterinary Science 10:382-388.
Journatofthe AssociationofVeterinary Araesthetists
Gerlach, H. (1969). Surgical conditions in wild and pet
of Great Britain and Iretand 12:127-131.
birds. Veterinary Record 84:342.
Kruse-Elliott, K.T., Swanson, C.R. and Aucoin, D.P
Glen, J.B. (1980). Pharmacokinetics in laboratory
(1987). Effects of metomidate function on canine
animals of ICI 35868: a new i.v. anaesthetic
surgical patients. Americar Journal of Veterinary
agent.British Jourral of Araesthesia 52:743-746.
Research 48: 1098-1100.
Glen, J.B. and Hunter, S.C. (1984) Pharmacology of an
Lewis, J.C.M. (1994). Anaesthesia of non-domestic cats.
emulsion formulation of ICI 35868. British Jourral of
In: Hall, L.W. and Taylor, PM. (eds) Araesthesia of the
Arnaesthesia 56: 617-626.
Cat. London: Bailliere Tindall,pp. 329-330.
Hall, L.W. (1972). Althesin in the larger animal.
Longley, E.O. (1950). Thiopentone (pentothal sodium) as
Postgraduate Medicat Journat.48 (Suppt2):55-58.
a general anaesthetic in the horse. Veterinary Record
Hall, L.W. (1984). A clinical study of a new intravenous
62:17-20.
agent indogs and cats. Journal of the Association of
Mandelker, L. (1973). A toxicity study of ketamine HC1
Veterinary Anaesthetists ofGreat Britain and Ireland
in parakeets.Veterinary Medicine - Smalt Animal
12: 115-121.
Clinician 68: 487-488.
Hall, L.W. and Chambers, J.P. (1987). A clinical trial of
Mark, L.C. (1963). Thiobarbiturates. In: Papper, E.M.,
propofol infusion anaesthesia in dogs. Journal of Small
Kitz, R.J. (eds) Llptake and Distribution of Anesthetic
Animat Practice 28: 623-637.
Agents. New York, McGraw-Hill, ch 23.
Hall, L. W., Trim, C.M. and Woolf, N. (1972). Further
Matot, I., Neely, C.F., Ray, M.D., Katz, R.Y. and Neufield,
studies of porcine malignant hyperthermia. British
G.R. (1993). Pulmonary uptake of propofol in cats,
Medicat Journat ii: 1145-1148.
effect of fentanyl and halothane. Anesthesiology
Hall, L. W, Lagerweij, E., Nolan, A.M. and Sear, J.W.
78: 1157-1165.
(1994). Effect of medetomidine on the
Mattingly, B.E. (1972) Injectable anesthetic for raptors.
pharmacokinetics of propofol in dogs. American
Raptor Research 6: 51-52.
Journat of Veterinary Research 55: 116-120.
Nagel, M.L., Muir, W.W. and Nguyen, K (1979).
Hall. L. W., Lagerweij, E., Nolan, A.M. and Sear, J.W.
Comparison of the cardiopulmonary effects of
(1997). Disposition of propofol after medetomidine
etomidate and thiamylal in dogs. Americar Jourrat of
premedication in beagle dogs. Journal of Veterinary
Veterinary Research 40: 193-196.
Anaesthesia 24: 23-29.
Nolan, A.M. (1982). Disoprofol anaesthesia in horses - a
Hamlin, R.L., Redding, R.W., Rieger, J.E., Smith, R.C.
preliminary report. Proceedings of the Associatior of
and Prynn, B. (1965). Insignificance of the'glucose
Veterinary AnaesthetistsofGreat Britain and Ireland
effect' in dogs anesthetized with pentobarbital.
10:204-207.
JournatoftheAmericanVeterinary Medicat
Nolan, A.M. and Hall, L.W. (1985). Total intravenous
Association 146: 238-241.
anaesthesia in the horse with propofol. Equine
Hammond, R.A. and England, G.C.W. (1994). The effect
Veterinary Journal 17:394-398.
loodord uodn uoeoipauand aupruoapau go
Nolan, A.M. and Reid, J. (1993). Pharmacokinetics of
induction and infusion anaesthesia in the dog.
propofol administered by infusion indogsundergoing
Jourrat of Veterinary Anaesthesia 21:24-28.
surgery. British fournal of Anaesthesia 70:546-551.
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS 131
Nolan,A.M., Reid, J. and Welsh, E. (1991). Use of
Tyagi, R.PS., Armold, J.P, Usenik, E.A. and Fletcher, T.F.
propofol as an induction agent in goats. Jourrat of
(1964) Effects of thiopental sodium (pentothal
Veterinary Anaesthesia 18:53-54.
sodium) anesthesia in the horse. Cornell Veterinariar
Raff, M. and Harrison, G.G. (1989). The screening of
54: 584-692.
propofol in MH swine. Canadian Journat of Anaesthesia
Vanio, O. (1991) Propofol infusion anaesthesia in dogs
36:186-197.
pre-medicated with medetomidine. Jourral of
Saidman, L.J. and Egger, E.1. (1966) The effect of
Veterinary Anaesthesia 18: 35-37.
thiopental metabolism on duration of anaesthesia.
Waddington, FG.(1950). Thiopentone as an anaesthetic
Anesthesiotogy,27: 118-126.
in the horse. Veterinary Record 62: 100-101.
 Sheppard, M. and Sheppard, D.H.(1937). The use
Watkins, S.M., Hall, L.W. and Clarke, K.W. (1987).
of pentothal sodium as a short-duration anaesthetic
Propofol as an intravenous anaesthetic agent in dogs.
in small animals. Veterinary Record 49: 424-425.
Veterinary Record 120:326-329.
 Stevens, R.W. and Hain, W.R. (1981) Tolerance to rectal
Wertz, E.M., Benson, G.J., Thurmon, J.C. and Tranquilli,
ketamine in paediatric anaesthesia. Araesthesin
W.J. ( 1990). Pharmacokinetics of etomidate in cats.
36:1089-1093.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 51(2): 281-285.
Tan, C.H. and Onsiong, M.K. (1998) Pain on injection of
White, P.F., Ham, I., Way, W.L. and Trevor, A.J. (1980).
propofol. Anaesthesia 53:468-476.
 Pharmacology of ketamine isomers in surgical
Taylor, PM., Hopkins, L., Young, M. and McFadyen, I.R.
patients. Anesthesiology 52:231-239
(1972). Ketamine anaesthesia in the pregnant sheep.
Wright,J.G. (1937). The use of a new short-acting
Veterirary Record 90:35-36.
 barbiturate - pentothal sodium -as a general
Thurman, J.C., Kumar, A. and Link, R.P (1973)
anaesthetic in canine surgery. Veterirary Record
Evaluation of ketamine hydrochloride as an
49:27-29.
anesthetic in sheep. Journat of the Americar
Wright, J.G. (1957). Veterinary Araesthesia, 4th edn.
Veterinary Medicat Association 162: 293-297.
London: Bailliere, Tindall & Cox.
Tobias, G.(1964). Congenital porphyria in a cat. Journal
Zoran, D.L. and Riedesel, D.H. (1993). Pharmacokinetics
of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
of propofol in mixed breed dogs and greyhounds.
145: 462-463.
American Jourrat ofVeterinary Research 54:755-760.
General pharmacology of
inhalation anaesthetics
volatile anaesthetic agents (and therefore on the
INTRODUCTION
speed on induction of and recovery from anaesthe-
An inhalation anaesthetic cannot be introduced into
sia) have been described in detail in Chapter 3. The
the brain without at the same time being distributed
anaesthetist needs to know these and other physi-
through the entire body, and this distribution exerts
cal and pharmacodynamic properties of the cur-
a controlling influence over the rate of uptake or
rently used inhalation agents in order to use these
elimination of the anaesthetic by brain tissue. So
agents in the safest possible manner.
far, no specific receptors mediating the actions of
used inhalation anaesthetics have been identified.
NON-INFLAMMABILITY
It seems that they act via a non-specific (? physical)
mechanism on the lipid bilayer of cell membranes
Modern anaesthetics must be non-inflammable in
and thus it is not unexpected that profound effects
the range of concentrations and in the range of gas
on other organ systems besides the central nerv-
mixtures (usually of O2 and NzO) used in clinical
ous system have been readily identified.
practice. In the past, quenching gases such as
The influence of the physical characteristics
helium were used to make otherwise explosive
shown in Table 6.1 on the pharmacokinetics of the
mixtures of agents such as cyclopropane safe for
TABLE 6.I Physical characteristics for some anaesthetic agents. Values taken from various sources in
the literature but mainly from Halsey (1981), Steward et al. (1900), Eger (1987), Rhone Merieux data
sheets and Ohio Medical Products
Compound
Water/gas
Blood/gas
Oiligas
Bailing Point (°C)
Vapour Pressure
part.coeff.
part.coeff.
part.coeff.
at 20°C. (mmHG)
Cyclopropane
0.21
0.55
11.50
-34.0
Gas at 20C
Desflurane
0.23
0.42
18.70
23.5
664
Enflurane
0.78
1.90
98.00
56.5
172
Ether
13.00
12.00
65.00
34.6
442
Halothane
0.80
1.94
220.00
50.2
240
Isoflurane
0.62
1.40
97.00
48.5
236
Methoxyflurane
12.00
970.00
104.8
23
Nitrous oxide
0.47
0.47
1.40
89.0
Gas at 20°C
Sevoflurane
0.36
0.60
53.00
58.5
157
133
134 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
ultraviolet method of anaesthetic gas analysis is no
usually achieved by halogenation - in particular
longer used.
fluorination - of the agent. In most cases this does
 Sevoflurane when used in closed systems, pro-
not greatly change inflammability limits but it
duces a number of breakdown products of which
does greatly increase the energy necessary to
'Compound A' (CFg=C(CF3)-O-CH,F) is nephro-
ignite the agents and it is this which renders these
toxic in rats. Although toxic values (in rats) usually
 agents non-inflammable in clinical use. They
need to exceed 1000 ppm, under certain circum-
require a spark having an energy of 10-30joules to
stances levels as low as 50ppm may cause
ignite them and a static spark released within an
medullary tubular necrosis (Callan et al., 1994)
anaesthetic system has an energy of only a few
The concentrations of Compound A which occur
hundred millijoules. Thus, the halothane/oxygen
mixture within the vaporizing chamber of a
 absorbents, with low flow or closed systems and,
os A1 (g'd aas) razioda ad wmuad
 not surprisingly, with high concentrations of sevo-
about 33% of halothane at 20 °C, well within the
flurane (Baum & Aitenhead, 1995). Levels in man
flammable range for halothane, but it could only
and the dog using closed systems are usually
be ignited by a powerful energy source which can-
 about 20 ppm, but in certain circumstamces reach
not be present during normal use.
over 50ppm in individuals (Smith et al., 1996).
Promising anaesthetic agents have often been
Nevertheless, in man there is no evidence that
rejected on grounds of inflammability and it is
renal failure has resulted from sevoflurane anaes-
worth noting that NzO increases the flammability
thesia (Malan, 1995).
of organic vapours because it is an endothermic 
The passage of some volatile anaesthetic agents
compound whose decomposition results in the
 Over very dry CO2 absorbents results in accumula-
evolution of heat together with the production of
tion of carbon monoxide (CO) within a closed
 yoye 's (o %) ax y-uaxo ue
 anaesthetic system. Of the volatile agents in com-
the lowest concentration of halothane in oxygen
 mon use, desflurane produces the greatest amount
which can be ignited is around 14% it can be
 of CO, and halothane probably the least (Fang
shown that in pure N2O, 2% of halothane vapour
et al., 1995). The problem can be avoided by turn-
is ignitable by an ignition energy as low as 0.3
ing off the O2 flow of 'fail-safe' machines when
joules.
they are not in use to avoid the drying effect of
continuous gas flow through the system.
CHEMICAL STABILITY
The use of completely closed breathing systems
BIOTRANSFORMATION OF ANAESTHETIC
GASES AND VAPOURS AND ORGAN
(see p.68) imposes a severe test on the chemical sta-
bility of an agent because of its continuing passage
TOXICITY
over hot, moist CO2 absorbents (soda lime or
Damage to organs as a result of inhalation anaes-
Barolyme). A compound which is toxic to mice in
thetic agents may be due to direct toxic effects of
the concentration range of 100-5000 ppm has been
the agent, to effects mediated by metabolites, or to
detected after one hour of closed circuit halothane
hypoxic changes, usually from poor organ blood
anaesthesia (Sharp et al., 1979) but halothane has
flow. Except in sensitivity reactions the toxicity of
now been used very extensively with soda lime
the unchanged compound is normally directly
 carbon dioxide absorption during prolonged
 related to the concentration present and decreasing
anaesthesia in all species of domestic animal with-
the concentration present and/or the duration of
out any reports of harmful effects. Halothane is,
exposure to it will decrease toxicity. Metabolite for-
however, broken down by ultraviolet light and
mation is more complicated and may be faster
samples removed from an anaesthetic system for
when the concentration of the parent compound is
analysis by an ultraviolet absorption meter should
low. The mechanism of this concentration/time
not be returned to the breathing circuit, and
dependence is unknown but it seems that biotrans-
indeed it is for this reason that the economical
formation reaches a maximum at relatively low
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 135
concentrations of anaesthetic and later as its con-
these depressant effects may be modified or even
centration in the liver increases the efficiency of the 
controlled by various mechanisms. With the
enzyme system decreases. The plateau in biotrans-
formation rate could be because the amount of
produce a concentration dependent depression of
@Mzyme available becomes the rate limiting factor
respiration although there is some difference of
or its activity is depressed either by inhibition due
degree between the agents currently used in their
to the anaesthetic substrate or the metabolites pro-
tendency to produce this effect. In clinical practice
duced. The important implication for toxicity
this is offset by surgical stimulation so that all the
caused by metabolism of anaesthetics is that
standard agents can be used in spontaneously
 greater quantities of metabolites may be produced
breathing animals without undue accumulation of
by subanaesthetic concentrations than by exposure
carbon dioxide provided excessively deep levels of
 central nervous depression are avoided.
administered for the same number of MAC hours.
 On the cardiovascular system all the inhalation-
Furthermore, increasing the duration of anaesthesia
al agents have a directly depressant action and the
does not proportionally increase the quantity of
differences in their overall effects can be attributed
metabolites produced in the body. Finally, while a
large reduction in the concentration of an admin-
activity of the sympathoadrenal system as ref-
istered anaesthetic might reduce direct toxicity to
lected in plasma adrenaline and noradrenaline.
below threshold for harm this might not be the case
The direct effects on the cardiovascular system are
for indirect toxicity due to metabolites.
opposed by sympathetic activity resulting from
Toxic effects of anaesthetic drugs are most com-
surgical stimulation and the changes in cardiovas-
monly seen in the liver and kidneys. The most
cular function seen will depend on the balance
commonly cited example is that of halothane,
between inhibitory and excitatory influences.
which is extensively metabolized, catalysed by
enzymes such as cytochrome P450. Breakdown
INTERACTION WITh OTHEr DRUGS
products include trifluoroacetyl halides, which
can link to liver proteins. In some cases antibodies
 All neuromuscular blocking drugs are potentiated
 are formed against the halothane-induced antigen,
by inhalational anaesthetics in a dose-dependent
resulting in immune mediated liver damage (the
manner and since muscle relaxation quite ad-
so-called 'halothane hepatitis'). However, isoflu-
equate for most operations can be produced by
rane and enflurane produce similar breakdown
inhalation agents alone it is reasonable to assume
products to halothane, but to a lesser extent, so
that at least part of this potentiation is due to the
similar autoimmune mediated hepatitis may occur
central nervous depression produced by the
(Frink, 1995; Kenna & Jones, 1995), but more
anaesthetic agent. In addition, it has been shown
uncommonly. The renal damage which was
that inhalational agents decrease the sensitivity of
reported following the prolonged use of
the postjunctional membrane of the neuromuscu-
methoxyflurane was thought to be due to the
lar junction and possibly act at a more distal site
action of free fluoride ions formed from hepatic
such as the muscle membrane itself. The different
metabolism. The threshold for plasma fluoride to
anaesthetic agents differ in the extent they potenti-
ate relaxants. For example, enflurane and isoflu-
However, levels close to this occur after prolonged
rane are considerably more potent in potentiating
enflurane or seveflurane anaesthesia, but appear
d-tubocurarine in man than are halothane or N2O
to have only transient effects and serious renal
(Ali & Savarese, 1976). The reason for this is quite
damage is rare (Kerma & Jones, 1955).
unknown but, clearly, it may be considered advant-
ageous for an inhalational agent to contribute to
neuromuscular block since this component can
DEPrESSION OF VItAL BODY FUNCTIONS
be removed by ventilation of the lungs, so increas-
In experiments on isolated organs all anaesthetics
 ing the flexibility of control because there are then
have a depressant effect but in an intact animal
at least two methods of reducing or abolishing
136 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
the block-use of an anticholinesterase and aug-
 as gas leaves the cylinder. Some type of 'regulator'
mented ventilation.
 Or pressure-reducing valve must be attached to the
The sensitization of the myocardium to both
cylinder before the rate of flow of the gas can be
endogenous and exogenous adrenaline by the
 accurately adjusted or measured.
inhalational agents has been the subject of much
 Ht is not irritant to the respiratory mucosa and
investigation and it can be concluded that while
 because short periods of inhalation do not cause
straight-chain hydrocarbons tend to sensitize the
 toxicity it was given for prolonged periods in
heart to catecholamines, the ethers, especially if
 intensive care units. However, exposure to it for
fluorinated, do not have this effect. Indeed, fluorin-
several days caused bone marrow depression in
ated ethers such as enflurane and isoflurane, have
humans due to interference with methionine syn-
the desirable attribute of conferring good stability
thase giving rise to disturbances of folate metabol-
to adrenaline.
ism and megablastosis (Armstrong & Spence,
1993). NzO has little or no effect on the liver and
kidneys and although it has a direct depressant
ANALGESIA
effect on the myocardium this is offset by its sym-
For as yet unknown reasons subanaesthetic con-
pathetic stimulating properties.
centrations of agents such as nitrous oxide pro-
The results of several studies suggest that NO
duce marked analgesia, whereas others such as
may increase pulmonary ventilation (Eckenhoff &
halothane do not. It may be speculated that this
Helrich, 1958; Hornbein et al., 1982; Hall, 1988).
effect depends on the release of endorphins
The tachypnoea produced by NzO may result from
 direct central stimulation similar to that postul-
(encephalins) but, except for NzO evidence for this
is lacking. If an agent having good analgesic prop-
 ated for potent inhalation agents but the impact of
erties has a high solubility (e.g methoxyflurane)
N2O appears to be greater than that of other
then elimination of it will be slow and analgesia
inhalation anaesthetics. The greater increase in res-
will be present during recovery. Unfortunately,
piratory rate and minute ventilation associated
less desirable effects such as respiratory depres-
with its use is also found when it is combined with
sion and arterial hypotension are also prolonged
some of the inhaled anaesthetics but not with opi-
so that it is usually better to rely on specific anal-
oid analgesics. Respiratory rate and minute venti-
gesic drugs in the postoperative period rather than
lation are greater at a given MAC level when N2O
the retention of the anaesthetic agent.
 and isoflurane are combined than when isoflurane
is given alone (Dolan et al., 1974). This is also true
for halothane but not enflurane. Adding N2O to a
stable level of alfentanil narcosis appears to have
INDIVIDUAL INHALATION
ANAESTHETICS
no effect (Andrews et al., 1982).
As already discussed NzO tends to enter gas-
filled spaces in the body at a greater rate than
NITROUS OXIDE (N2O)
nitrogen can diffuse out. This is of considerable
 NOis a colourless gas with a faint, rather pleasant 
importance in herbivores and in the presence of a
smell; it is not flammable or explosive but it will
closed pneumothorax.
 support combustion, even in the absence of free
 During the induction of anaesthesia a large gra-
O2. Compressed into cylinders ('tanks' in North
dient exists between the tension of NO in the
America) at 40 atmospheres pressure it liquifies so
 inspired gas and the arterial blood so that in the
that the amount in a cylinder can only be deter-
early moments of induction the blood takes up
mined by weighing since the pressure of the
 large volumes of gas. Its rapid removal from the
gaseous N2O above the liquid level remains con-
alveoli by the blood elevates the tension of
 stant as long as any liquid remains. Thus a pres-
 any remaining (second) gas or vapour such as oxy-
sure gauge screwed into the cylinder outlet will
 gen, or a volatile anaesthetic agent, and augments
register a constant pressure until all the NzO has 
 alveolar ventilation. Thus, during the first few
vaporized and after this the reading drops rapidly
minutes of N2O administration anaesthetic uptake
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 137
is facilitated because the enhanced tension of the
the liguid is, therefore, stored in amber-coloured
second gas ensures a steeper tension gradient for
bottles kept in a cool dark place. Its heavy vapour
its passage into the blood. This is known as 'the
tends to pool on the floor and unless ventilation is
second gas effect'.
good the possibility of fires is very great. Sparks of
,erxodAy uoisn!p, se umouY uouauouaud au
static electricity from faulty connections in electri-
occurs immediately following anaesthesia when
 a  s  s s
the gas is being rapidly eliminated from the lungs;
ether/air mixtures and ether/oxygen mixtures are
N2O may form 10% or more of the volume of
explosive. Fires have resulted from the vapour
expired gas, and the outward diffusion of NzO into
the alveoli lowers the the partial pressure of O2 in
there. Ether should not be administered in loca-
the lungs (PaO2). This effect appears to have little
-redde sydeioopei se uons puaudmba araum suo
clinical significance in healthy animals but any
atus or diathermy is to be used.
hypoxia may be dangerous in elderly animals or in
Ether is safe in the presence of adrenaline.
those suffering from cardiovascular or pulmonary
Indeed, its administration is associated with sym-
disease and such animals should have an O2
 pathoadrenal stimulation which opposes its neg-
enriched mixture to inhale for some 10minutes
ative inotropic effect and the concurrent use of
 after the termination of NO administration. Many
β-adrenergic blocking drugs allows this effect to
anaesthetists consider that even healthy animals
become dangerous. Normally, cardiac output is
benefit from 5-10 minutes of O2 inhalation when
well maintained even at deep levels of uncon-
NO is discontinued at the end of a lengthy
sciousness. During light levels of unconscious-
 procedure. When the insoluble agent desflurane is
ness, ether does not depress respiration. The
used with N2O, it is imperative that O2 is given for
spleen contracts while the intestines become
some minutes after termination of the anaesthetic
dilated and atonic. The blood sugar level rises
administration.
due to the mobilization of liver glycogen under
Being only a very weak anaesthetic, with a
the influence of the increased secretion of adrena-
MAC of over 100%, N2O cannot, on its own, be
line. Liver and kidney function is depressed but
used to produce anaesthesia because it must be
these organs usually recover their normal function
given with sufficient O2 (>25%) to prevent hypox-
within 24 hours. The inhalation of ether causes
ia. Its strong analgesic properties make it most use-
 metabolic acidosis and ketone bodies may appear
ful to provide additional analgesia for both
in the urine. Although ether does undergo some
 intravenous and inhalation anaesthetic agents, i.e.
metabolism it contains no halogens so that its
it is best regarded as an anaesthetic adjuvant
intermediate metabolites are such relatively non-
toxic substances as ethyl alcohol, acetic acid and
acetaldehyde.
DIETHYL ETHER
Ether possesses many disadvantages in addi-
Diethyl ether, commonly known simply as'ether',
tion to its inflammability. Its inhalation provokes
was one of the earliest inhalation anaesthetics
the secretion of saliva and of mucus within the
introduced into clinical practice but its use is
respiratory tract (although this problem can be
currently declining rapidly. The chief reason
 counteracted by premedication with an anticholin-
for this is its inflammability and also its great
ergic agent). In man, postanaesthetic nausea
water and blood solubility which, together with
 appears to be pronounced and it is a fact that ani-
its irritant smell, make for a slow induction
mals are reluctant to eat for several hours follow-
and recovery. Nevertheless, ether has always had
ing ether anaesthesia, possibly indicating they too
the justification of being a very safe anaesthetic
experience nausea.
agent.
Ether has now been in continuous use for well
It is a transparent, colourless liquid with a
over 100 years and millions of operations must
vapour twice as heavy as air, which is highly
have been performed on animals under ether
inflammable in air and explosive in O2 rich atmos-
anaesthesia. The number of deaths directly
pheres. Ether is decomposed by air, light and heat;
 attributable to ether, apart from accidents (e.g.
138 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
explosions and fires) and errors of technique, must
Vapour concentrations from 2 to 4% in the
be very small indeed or its use would have been 
 inspired air produce smooth and rapid induction
discontinued long ago. It must still be considered a
 of anaesthesia in all species of domestic animal.
safe agent for the inexperienced anaesthetist to use
 Anaesthesia can then be maintained with inspired
because, in addition to being slow in action, it pro-
concentrations of 0.8 to 2%, the MAC being
 duces a graded series of signs useful in indicating
about 0.85% in all mammals. Recovery from short-
the depth of central nervous depression.
duration halothane anaesthesia is also reasonably
rapid and free from excitement although un-
relieved pain can give rise to restlessness during
ChLOrOfORm
recovery. When no other agents are administered
Chloroform is a most powerful anaesthetic which
 most animals are able to walk without ataxia in
is no longer used. It has a toxic effect on the liver
 15 to 30 minutes, depending on the duration of an-
and kidneys, causing cloudy swelling and even 
 aesthesia and the degree of obesity of the animal.
acute fatty change in the cells. When severe these
 Blood concentrations are around 14 mg/dl during
changes give rise to delayed poisoning, the symp-
maintenance of anaesthesia and fall rapidly dur-
toms of which develop some 24-48hours after
 ing recovery so that levels of 4-6 mg/dl have been
administration. Delayed poisoning is char-
 recorded 15 minutes after the discontinuation of
acterized by acute acidosis, severe vomiting (in
administration.
dogs and cats), acetonuria, albuminuria, mild
The mucosa of the respiratory tract is not irritat-
pyrexia and icterus, and frequently terminates  
 ed and and it is for this reason that halothane has
fatally with severe hyperpyrexia. In addition, (
(until the advent of sevoflurane), remained the
chloroform sensitizes the myocardium to the 
 agent of choice in man for mask induction of
effects of catecholamines and sudden death has
 anaesthesia. Halothane has been shown to pro-
occurred from ventricular fibrillation during
duce bronchodilatation with an increase in expira-
 amaesthesia or recovery from chloroform.
tory reserve volume in ponies (Watmey et al., 1987).
The PaCO2 is directly related to the alveolar con-
centration of halothane when this is above 0.7%
CYClOProPaNe
(Merkel & Eger, 1963).
Cyclopropane is as inflammable as ether and mix-
Halothane causes a dose-dependent depression
tures with both air and oxygen are explosive. It has
 of cardiac output and arterial blood pressure due
solubility characteristics which commend it as an
anaesthetic agent for induction and recovery but it
 does cause some block of transmission at sympa-
produces marked respiratory depression. In the
thetic ganglia. Evidence for the mode of action of
1950s it was extensively employed in veterinary
halothane on the peripheral vasculature is still
hospitals in the UK and was noted for causing
both controversial and more than a little confus-
soop pue shid un ponad Anaaonau aun u luuoa
ing. In dogs Perry et al. (1974) showed that halo-
The explosion risk associated with its use is a very
thane decreases plasma catecholamine levels and
real one and it is no longer available.
this may explain the reduction of arterial pressure
and decreased myocardial contractility and car-
diac output.
HALOTHANE
 Dose-dependent respiratory depression occurs,
Halothane was introduced into veterinary anaes-
both the depth and rate being decreased so that the
thesia in 1956 (Hall, 1957) and was so greatly sup-
 minute volume of respiration is greatly reduced
erior to existing agents that it soon became used
 leading to a progressive rise in PaCO2 until equil-
throughout the world. It is probable thathalothane
 ibrium between production and elimination of
has been subjected to more investigational studies   this gas is reached. In small dogs and in cats
than any other anaesthetic agent and in the veter-
 tachypnoea has been related to a central action of
 iaxa  mu si a a  
the anaesthetic (Mazzarelli et al., 1979; Berken-
number of references to this agent.
bosch et al., 1982). Except in horses, respiratory
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 139
failure from overdose precedes cardiac failure by a
mixtures of N2O and O2. Postoperative analgesia
considerable margin. Adaptation of both cardio-
during recovery is not a feature of unsupple-
vascular and respiratory function occurs with time
mented halothane anaesthesia.
(Steffey et al., 1987) After about four hours cardiac
 Minimal pathological changes have been found
output in horses increases by about 40% from that
daaus pue sasioy 'soop jo shaupn pue laall au u
at 30 minutes and the values for PaCO2 and the
anaesthetized for long periods with halothane
ratio of inspired to expired gas flow become signi-
(Stephen et al., 1958; Wolff et al., 1967). Sus-
thesia.
to species. For example, rat liver microsomes,
Bradycardia is common during halothane
which contain the cytochrome P450, will bind
anaesthesia due apparently to activity in the vagus
to reductive metabolites of halothane and if
nerves. Usually a perfectly normal electrocardio-
these microsomal enzymes are pre-induced
gram persists throughout anaesthesia although
hepatoxicity results. Mice have the same isoen-
ventricular extrasystoles and bigeminal rhythm
zyme P450 as rats but even when this is induced,
have been reported as occurring in dogs; these can
hepatotoxicity cannot be provoked by halothane
ae ym toipaad Aq pauaaard aq aie
(Gorsky & Cascorbi, 1979). The guinea pig does
promazine (Wiersig et al., 1974). In cats A-V disso-
not metabolize halothane well under reductive
ciation with interference and extrasystoles may
conditions, yet develops hepatoxicity (Lunam
occur (Muir et al., 1959). Arrhythmias are usually
et al., 1985).
associated with CO2 accumulation from respir-
The question of hepatotoxicity in man has been
atory depression, hypoxia, catecholamine release
much discussed but its actual incidence seems
and overdosage. Changes in heart rate and rhythm
small because the estimated incidence of fatal ful-
should not be treated with atropine as a routine
minant hepatic failure is less than 1:35000
(National Halothane Study, Washington DC, 1969)
their severity and even induce ventricular fibrilla-
and is associated with repeated exposure to the
tion. Catecholamine-induced tachyarrhythmias
drug, often at short intervals (Elliott & Strunin,
may be treated with propranolol or by switching
1993). A second, more common syndrome, charac-
to another inhalation agent.
terized by moderately increased concentrations of
Halothane has minimal neuromuscular block-
liver transaminases and sometimes transient jaun-
 ing effect and the muscle relaxation seen during
dice, carries a low morbidity. These conditions,
halothane anaesthesia (which is only moderate at
however, only relate to people given halothane
deep levels of central nervous depression) does,
anaesthetics and the veterinary anaesthetist is
however, potentiate the effects of non-depolariz-
more concerned by the risk of adverse effects
ing muscle relaxants and antagonize those of
from exposure of anaesthetic persornel to the low
depolarizing agents (Graham, 1958). Shivering is
concentrations of halothane in operating rooms.
often seen in all species of domestic animals dur-
After a detailed and extensive review, Armstrong
img recovery but the reason for it is not completely
and Spence (1993) concluded that evidence for a
understood. It does not seem to be related to whole
severe problem with pollution from anaesthetic
body or environmental temperature and its only
waste gases, including halothane, is small but
importance is that it may be harmful by increasing
nevertheless they may cause adverse effects in
 Oxygen demands in animals suffering from respir-
pregnant women and have an effect on the
atory and/or cardiovascular diseases which limit
immune system (although this is probably of no
 Oxygen uptake when they are breathing air.
clinical relevance).
Because of its lack of analgesic properties
Halothane and ether form an azeotropic mix-
halothane anaesthesia is more affected by premed-
ture (31.7% diethyl ether and 68.3% halothane,
ication with analgesic drugs than is the case for
v /v) with a boiling point of 51.5°C. This mixture
many other agents. This also applies to supple-
has been employed in veterinary anaesthesia
mentation during anaesthesia with analgesics,
(Hime, 1963) but it is an illogical one and is no
whether these be of the opioid type or analgesic
longer used.
140 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
METHOXYFLURANE
coughing. Clinical signs of anaesthesia resemble
Methoxyflurane is a clear, colourless liquid which
those seen with halothane.
boils at 104.65°C. at 760 mmHg (101 kPa) pressure
Like most inhalation agents it undergoes some
and freezes at -35 °℃. Although the boiling point is
biotransformation (approximately 1%), the main
 metabolites being trifluroacetic acid and inorganic
slightly higher than that of water it volatilizes
fluoride, but the possibility of fluoride nephrotox-
more readily as a result of low latent heat of vapor-
icity is very remote. Respiratory and cardiovascu-
ization (49 cal/g). It is non-explosive and non-
lar depression are dose-dependent. Respiratory
inflammable in air or oxygen and conditions
depression in the unstimulated subject is greater
encountered in anaesthesia.
than with halothane but surgical stimulation
It is chemically stable and is not decomposed by
counteracts this and tends to equalize respiratory
air, light, moisture or alkali such as soda lime. It
rates under anaesthesia with the two agents.
may, however, slowly form a brownish discol-
Arterial blood pressure is as depressed as it is
oration due to the antioxidant used in its formula-
under halothane anaesthesia. However, heart
tion. Chenworth et al. (1962) have shown that the
rate is increased and cardiac output and stroke
urine contains only minute traces of methoxyflu-
volume are reduced less than they are with
rane, but polyuric renal dysfunction (high output
 halothane; a greater fall in peripheral resistance
renal failure) has been reported in people and
laboratory animals. It follows the prolonged
must be responsible for the similarity of the
blood pressure response, for at clinical con-
administration of high concentrations and is said
centrations halothane has little effect on total
to be due to the release of free fluoride by metabol-
peripheral resistance. There is evidence that at
ism in the body: this resulted in the withdrawal of
1.5 and 2.0 x MAC isoflurane lowers peripheral
methoxyflurane from medical practice. High out-
resistance and maintains or increases blood flow to
put renal failure, except when flunixin was given
 organs and muscle. Arrhythmias have not been
concurrently, has not been reported in veterinary
reported and because it is an ether irregularities
anaesthesia where methoxyflurane was used
Extensively for small animals. The agent has now
following the injection of catecholamines are less
 a s  m  
likely to occur than under halothane anaesthesia.
the manufacturers, although it can still be obtained
In horses a limited number of tests have shown
minimal or no toxicity (Davidcova et al., 1988)
from them for research purposes and is apparently
and recovery is usually quiet although problems
still available in Australia.
 particulary after the use of ketamine as an induc-
tion agent. The quick elimination of isoflurane
ISOFLURANE
 allows mares to nurse shortly after completion of
Isoflurane is similar to enflurane in general, phys-
surgery.
 The high volatility, coupled with low blood sol-
mental work has been carried out in evaluating
 ubility, provide for relatively rapid induction and
isoflurane and comprehensive reviews of its phar-
recovery and easy control of the depth of anaesthe-
macological properties are those of Eger (1981),
sia. Its low solubility in fatty tissues avoids accu-
Wade & Stevens (1981) and Forrest (1983). Isoflur-
mulation in obese subjects. Isoflurane increases
ane does not decompose in the presence of moist
splanchnic blood flow and thus enhances hepatic
soda lime but has been reported to interact with
oxygenation. Renal blood flow is well maintained
dry carbon dioxide absorbents to form carbon
during isoflurane anaesthesia and because there is
monoxide (Rhone Mérieux Ltd, Data Sheet).
very little production of fluoride ions, coupled with
It may be administered with oxygen or nitrous
 less than 1% elimination via the kidneys, it can gen-
oxide /oxygen mixtures and because it is a potent
erally be administered quite safely to animals with
anaesthetic an accurately calibrated vaporizer
 renal dysfunction. Isoflurane should not be used in
should be used. Isoflurane has a pungent odour  animals with a known susceptibility to malignant
but animals breathe it without breath holding or
 hyperthermia. Fully comprehensive data concern-
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 14I
TABLE 6.2 Inspired concentrations for the
TABLE 6.3 Median recovery times to
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia with
swallowing, response to voice, spontaneous
isoflurane for different species of animal.The
head lift and walking without ataxia in 12 dogs
precise concentration depends on the other
after anaesthesia induced with propofol and
drugs administered and the type of anaesthetic
maintained for a median time of 18 minutes
delivery system.The concentrations shown
with halothane, enflurane and isoflurane in
here refer to situations where the induction of
N,O / O,. None of the dogs received
anaesthesia has been with isoflurane alone and
premedication or underwent surgical
could represent gross overdoses when
procedures (data from Peshin & Hall, 1996)
anaesthesia is induced with other drugs (data
Agent
Time to
Time
from MallinckrodtVeterinary, 1996)
Time to
 swallowing response to head walking
SPECIES
MAC (%) Induction (%) Maintenance
(min)
to voice
lift
(uw)
(min)
(min)
Horse
1.31
3.0-5.0 (foals)
1.5-2.5
Dog
1.28
Upto 5.0
1.5-2.5
Halothane
3
5
8
12.5
Cat
1.63
Upto 4.0
1.5-3.0
Enflurane
2.2
4.5
8
12
Ornamental
Isoflurane
4.5
8
01
12.5
birds
About 1.453.0-5.0
0.6-5.0
Reptiles
!
2.0-4.0
1.0-3.0
Mouse
1.34
2.0-3.0
0.25-2.0
dose-dependent manner, and the effects of the two
Rat
1.38-2.40
2.0-3.0
0.25-2.0
Rabbits
2.05
2.0-3.0
0.25-2.0
effect on the canine heart, which
by a decrease
ing its use in pregnant, breeding or lactating do-
equipotent concentrations enflurane causes slight-
mestic animals are not yet available, although
ly greater impairment of left ventricular function
Funkquist et al. (1993) have reported its use for
than does halothane (Horan et al., 1977). Heart rate
caesarian section in bitches. The use of isoflurane
and rhythm are stable with enflurane and it only
in reptiles has been reported by Hochleithner
mildly sensitizes
the
heart
muscle
tocate-
(1995).
cholamines.
Thus,
subcutaneous
sinjection of
 Despite the popularity isoflurane has gained,
adrenaline by
/ the surgeon is unlikely to cause seri-
especially in North America, it is doubtful whether
ous cardiacirreg
gularities. Arterial hypotension is
it will replace halothane in veterinary anaesthesia
often a cons
oicuous feature (Wolff et al., 1967;
Except possibly in certain indications such as in
Steffey et al.,
1975). Comparative studies of equi-
 obese animals or those suffering from cardiac dis-
potent concentrations of enflurane,
,isoflurane,
u su aaonan pidei pazind yn a 'asa
sevoflurane and halothane in dogs showed that
been substantiated in dogs (Zbinden et al., 1988).
enflurane produced the
e greatest falls in cardiac
Moreover, after propofol induced anaesthesia
output and arterial blood pressure (Mutoh et al.,
maintained with isoflurane/NzO/O2 (Peshin &
1997). Under light anaesthesia surgical stimulation
Hall, 1996) significant differences in recovery
 produces an immediate increase in arterial blood
times from halothane, enflurane and isoflurane
pressure, possibly due to increased sympathetic
were not observed (Table 6.3).
activity. All the commonly used neuromuscular
 blocking drugs are compatible with this agent but
 the actions of the non-depolarizing relaxants may
ENFLURANE
be markedly enhanced so that smaller doses
Enflurane was first synthesized in 1963 and was
become adequate.
released for general clinical use in people in North
The degree of metabolic biotransformation is
America in 1972. Fears about possible epilepto-
approximately 2-8% (Elliot & Strunin, 1993). The
genic properties have not been realized although
production of inorganic fluoride is probably not
some anaesthetists have reported muscle twitch-
 great enough to pose a threat to the health of nor-
ing in enflurane anaesthetized dogs. Like halo-
mal kidneys so any potential hazard from renal
thane it depresses cardiovascular function in a
fluoride toxicity is unlikely to occur but 'enflurane
I42 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
hepatitis' has been reported. The ability to produce
rapid changes in the depth of anaesthesia coupled
with apparent absence of adverse side effects sug-
Isoflurane
 gested that this agent might be useful in veterinary
C
practice, particularly for horses and small animals
udergoing surgery on a day case basis. In horses
recovery not covered by xylazine administration is
unpleasant (Taylor & Hall, 1985) but in dogs enflu-
rane has been used very satisfactorily for radio-
therapy treatment (Peshin & Hall, 1996).
Desflurane
F
F
F
DESFLURANE
FIG.6.I Formulae of isoflurane and desflurane.
Desflurane is a fluorinated methyl ethyl ether, dif-
fering from isoflurane only in the substitution of
fluorine for chlorine at the C-ethyl carbon atom
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
(Fig.6.1). It is a clear, colourless and virtually
desflurane varies between species and between
 odourless fluid, with a boiling point of 23.5 ℃
individuals within that species. For example, the
and a saturated vapour pressure of 88.53kPa
 measured MAC of desflurane in human surgical
(664 mmHg) at 20 *C. Substitution of fluorine for
 patients has been reported as 7.25% in the age group
chlorine on the C-ethyl carbon atom confers a high
18-30 years and 6% in those aged 31-65 years
degree of chemical stability so that desflurane can
(Rampil et al., 1991), while in neonates it is about
be stored at room temperature for up to one year
9.16% (Taylor & Lerman, 1991). In non-human pri-
without the need for added preservatives. It is not
mates MAC varies between 5.7 and 10.3% (Eger,
degraded by artificial light and is inflammable at a
1992). After induction of anaesthesia with xylazine
concentration of 17%.
and ketamine, Clarke et al. (1996, 1996a) reported
Although decomposing when in contact with
the MAC in ponies aged 1 or 2 years to be 7.0% (SD
dry soda lime it is not significantly decomposed by
0.85) with a range of 5.8 to 8.3%.
warm, moist soda lime, thus it can be used in the
In an individual the MAC of an inhalation
minimal flow systems so important in the current 
agent does not usually vary by more than 10%
awareness of the need for cost containment in
(Quasha ef al., 1980) and sudden large increases of
veterinary anaesthesia. Desflurane has a very low
MAC during the period of measurement as report-
solubility in blood (0.42; N2O is 0.46 - Eger (1987)
ed by Eger et al. (1988) or Clarke et al. (1996), have
and might, therefore, be expected to induce anaes-
 not been reported for other inhalation agents.
thesia very rapidly, as well as permitting rapid
 Desflurane boils at close to room temperature,
changes in depth of anaesthesia when the inspired
 and a special vaporizer, such as the Tec 6 vaporizer
concentration is altered (Eger, 1992; Smiley 1992;
 produced by Ohmeda, is essential. Any volume of
White, 1992; Jones & Nay, 1994). Similarly, recov-
gas flowing through the vaporizing chamber of a
 ery should be rapid. Problems have arisen in man
traditional vaporizer will contain several volumes
where the quality of induction of anaesthesia is
of desflurane because of the high volatility of the
complicated by breath holding, coughing, laryn-
 agent. The resulting volume expansion will pro-
geal spasm and increased airway secretions from
 duce uncontrollable efflux of gas from the cham-
irritation of the airways (White, 1992; Smiley, 1992;
ber. Moreover, the low potency of desflurane
Whitton et al., 1993). No similar problems have
 necessitates the vaporization of large quantities of
been reported when desflurane has been used to
 liquid during the course of an anaesthestic and in
induce anaesthesia in the dog and cat and dogs
the absence of any heat source this will cause
 recovered within 3-9 minutes following 5-9 hours 
 Excessive cooling of the vaporizer. In the special
of desflurane anaesthesia (Hammond et al., 1994;
 vaporizer desflurane is contained in a sump which
McMurphy & Hodgson, 1994).
is electrically heated and thermostatically con-
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 143
trolled to maintain a constant temperature of 37°C,
SEVOFLURANE
while an electronically controlled pressure regul-
Sevoflurane is a fluorinated ether (Fig. 6.2) which
ating valve ensures a precise, controllable output
has been licenced for medical use in Japan since
from the vaporizer which is not affected by the rate
1990 and is now approved for clinical use in med-
 of gas flow through the sump but is reduced by up
ical practice in the USA, the UK and Continental
to 2% by the concurrent use of NzO in the carrier
Europe. Although the blood /gas partition coeffi-
gas flow (Johnston et al., 1994).
cient of sevoflurane is quite low (0.62), dictating
 Desflurane undergoes minimal metabolism
rapidity of uptake and elimination, the
(0.2%) and therefore the potential for toxicity is
low (Koblin, 1992). It does not prevent the devel-
those of isoflurane (Table 6.4)
The data in Table 6.4 do not prevent sevoflu-
pigs (Wedal et al., 1993) and in experimental
rane being a rapidly acting general anaesthetic
circumstances the effects of desflurane on vital
with faster induction and emergence than iso-
 organ function are similar to those of isoflurane
flurane, but not as fast as desflurane. Both in-
(Merin et al., 1991; Hartman et al., 1992; Warltier
duction and emergence phases are smooth
and Pagel, 1992) in that it causes dose-related
although there have been reports of emergence
vasodilatation, moderate impairment of myocar-
excitement in man and unsedated recoveries in
dial function and a similar degree of respiratory
horses may be violent (Clarke, 1999). The vapour
depression. The heart is not sensitized to adrena-
pressure of sevoflurane is such that a convention-
line-induced arrhythmias. However, experimen-
 al vaporizer can be employed rather than the spe-
tally Weiskoptf et al. reported 'sympathetic storms'
cial, and
expensive, vaporizer required
for
in man whereby an increase in inhaled concentra-
desflurane.
tion was followed by tachycardia and an increase
The respiratory and cardiovascular (Ebert et al.,
in arterial blood pressure (Ebert & Muzi, 1993;
1995) actions of sevoflurane are similar to those of
Weiskopft et al., 1994). Such sympathetic storms
the other halogenated agents. No seizure-like
have not been reported in animals but the varia-
activity has been noted for sevoflurane. Sevo-
tions in reported MAC may be due to a similar
flurane depresses myocardial contractility and
occurrence.
decreases peripheral blood flow but it is non-irrit-
The major potential advantages of desflurane
ant to the respiratory passages so that induction of
in comparison with isoflurane result from its
anaesthesia is not complicated by coughing or
low solubilities in blood and fat. However, in
breath-holding.
most veterinary species it is probable that the
Sevoflurane undergoes biotransformation to
advantages are minimal. The exception is in the
free fluoride ions and hexafluoroisopropanol
horse (p.298), where desflurane renders it ex-
which is rapidly glucuronidated. Its potential for
ceptionally easy to maintain stable anaesthesia
hepatotoxicity is low as its metabolic pathway is
and is possible to run in a totally closed system,
not via trifluroacetic acid, but the release of free
making it very economical in use. Clarke et al.
fluoride ions has given rise to some concern.
-sap rane A1aaonai sanuod un jeui patroda1 (966 1)
Investigations into this issue demonstrate no evid-
flurane, when coupled with low dose xylazine (0.2
ence of renal toxicity and extensive clinical experi-
mg/kg i.v. given after extubation), proved to be
 ence in man has brought to light no cases of renal
Extremely rapid, quiet and uneventful; without
failure following its use.
xylazine, animals tended to fall at their first
attempt to stand.
The availability of desflurane for use in animals
H
will probably depend on its fate in the medical
anaesthetic market where it does not seem to be
proving popular because of its irritant nature (pre-
F
H
venting mask inductions of anaesthesia) and the
occurrence of sympathetic storms.
FlG. 6.2 Chemical structure of sevoflurane.
144  PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE 6.4 Physiochemical and partition data
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO
for isoflurane and sevoflurane in human
INHALATION ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
subjects (part. coeff. = partition coefficient)
Sevoflurane Isoflurane
Personnel are often exposed to trace concentra-
Boiling point (°C)
58.5
48.5
tions of inhalation anaesthetics in the atmosphere.
Vapour pressure (20 °℃)
157
236
Contamination of ambient air occurs during the
Blood/gas partit. coeff.
0.62
1.36
Oil/Gas part. coeff.
47
98
filling of vaporizers, via known or unsuspected
MAC in 02 (%)
2.05
1.20
leaks in breathing systems, and accidental spillage
Tissue/fat part. coeff.
47.5
44.9
of liquid agent. Personnel inhale and apparently
Tissue/brain part. coeff.
1.70
1.57
retain these agents in their bodies for some hours
Tissue/muscle part. coeff.
3.13
2.92
or even days and slow elimination of anaesthetics
Tissue/liver part. coeff.
1.85
1.75
such as halothane allows accumulation of retained
quantities from one day to the next and the persist-
ent low concentration of the agent may encourage
Another question which has been raised con-
the formation of toxic metabolites.
cerns the stability of sevoflurane in the presence of
The Control of Substance Hazardous to Human
strongly alkaline carbon dioxide absorbers since
Health (COSHH) regulations in the UK require
the molecule is more susceptible to spontaneous
employers to evaluate and control the risks to
base degradation than are other anaesthetic
health for all their employees from exposure to ha-
molecules, such as those of isoflurane and desflu-
zardous substances at work. Occupational Ex-
rane. Two of the decomposition compounds
posure Standards (OES) on an eight hour time
 generated in carbon dioxide absorbers during
weighted average (TWA) have been set by the
medical clinical use are known as compounds A
Health and Safety Commision and are shown in
 and B. In clinical practice the maximum concen-
Table 6.5.
tration of the degradation product, compound A,
The critical health effect was considered to be
was far below the toxic concentration found
toxicity to reproduction but reproductive effects
experimentally.
 have not been proven following occupational
 The MAC of sevoflurane in horses has been
exposures. In the USA levels of exposure which
determined by Aida et al. ( 1994) as 2.31 and Aida
should not be exceeded are, for example, by gov-
et al. (1966) have described its cardiovascular and
ernment recommendation 2.0 ppm for volatile
pulmonary effects in these animals. Its use follow-
agents and 25 ppm for NO.
ing atropine/xylazine/guaifenesin/thiopental
There seems to be no good evidence on which
induction of anaesthesia in horses was recorded by
to base any recommendations such as those above
Hikasa et al. (1994a).
but there is now a legal obligation in the UK for
 In adult spontaneously breathing cattle its
employers to meet these conditions. Anaesthetists
use following atropine/guaifenesin/thiopental
throughout the UK were united in opposing
induction of anaesthesia was reported by Hikasa
(unsuccessfully) the imposition of COSHH regula-
et al. (1994b), while Yasuda et al. (1990) compared
tions to anaesthetic practice. Monitoring of levels
its pharmacokinetics with those of desflurane,
of these supposedly hazardous substances in the
isoflurane and halothane in pigs. Hikasa et al. stud-
ied the effects of these same agents in sponta-
neously breathing cats and compared their
TABLE 6.5 Occupational exposure standards
ventricular arrhythmogenic activities (Hikasa
(Health and Safety Commission of the UK).
et al., 1996). Sevoflurane has also been used in
The standard for isoflurane is five times that for
dogs (Mutoh et al., 1995, 1995a) and cats (Hikasa
halothane
et al., 1994c). Its cardipulmonary effects were com-
Halothane
10 pPm
pared with those of halothane, enflurane and
lsoflurane
50 Ppm
isoflurane in healthy Beagles by Mutoh et al.
Nitrous Oxide
100 ppm
(1997).
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 145
environment will, of course, entail expense for the
Davidkova, T., Kikucchi, H., Fujii, K., Mukaida, K.,
purchase of suitable equipment. It must also be
Sato, N.,Kawachi, S. and Motio, M. (1988)
noted that work using better controlled groups
Biotransformation of isoflurane: urinary and serum
flhuoride ion and organic fluorine. Anesthesiology
and improved methods of data collection indicate
69: 218-222.
that pollution of theatre atmosphere with anaes-
Dolan, W.M., Stevens, W.C., Eger, E.1. et al. (1974)
thetic gases is not as great a hazard as was thought
The cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
some 20 years ago (Armstrong & Spence, 1993).
isoflurane-nitrous oxide anaesthesia. Canadian
However, even now there is still sufficient doubt
Anaesthetists Society Journat 21:557-568.
about the safety of trace concentrations of anaes-
Ebert, T.J., Harkin, C.P and Muzi, M. (1995)
Cardiovascular responses to sevoflurane: a review.
thetic gases for further research to be needed.
Anesthesia and Araigesia 81 (Suppl): 11-22.
Ebert, T.J. and Muzi, M. (1993) Sympathetic
REFERENCES
healthy volunteers: a comparison with isoflurane.
Anesthesiotogy 79(3): 444-453.
Aida, H., Mizuno, Y., Hobo,S., Yoshida, K. and Fujinaga,
Eckenhoff, J.E. and Helrich, M. (1958) The effect of
T. (1994) Determination of the minimum alveolar
narcotics, thiopental and nitrous oxide upon
 concentration (MAC) and physical response to
respiration and respiratory responses to hypercapina.
sevoflurane inhalation in horses. Jourrat of Veterinary
Anesthesiotogy 19(2): 240-243.
Medical Science 56: 1161-1165.
Eger, E.1. II(1981) Isoflurane; a review. Anesthesiology
Aida, H, Mizuno, Y, Hobo,S, Yoshida, K.and Fujnaga,
55:559-576.
T. (1996) Cardiovascular and pulmonary effects of
Eger, E.1. 1I (1987) Anesthesia and Analgesia 66: 971.
sevoflurane in horses. Veterirnary Surgery 25: 164-170.
 Eger, E.1. II(1992) Desflurane - animal and human
Andrews, C.J.H., Sinclair, M., Dye, A., Dye, J., Harvey, J.
pharmacology: aspects kinetics, safety and MAC.
and Prys-Roberts, C. (1982) The additive effect of
Anesthesia arnd Anaigesia 75(4): 3-9.
 nitrous oxide on respiratory depression in patients
Elliott, R.H. and Strunin, L. (1993) Hepatotoxicity of
having fentanyl or alfentanil infusions. British Jourrat
volatile anaesthetics. British Jourrat of Araesthesia
ofAnaesthesia54.
70:339-348.
Armstrong, PJ. and Spence, A.A. (1993) Toxicity of 
Fang, Z.X., Eger E.1. II, Laster M.J.,Chortkoff, B.S.,
 inhalational anaesthesia: long-term exposure of
Kandel, L. and Lonescu, P (1995) Carbon monoxide
anaesthetic personnel - environmental pollution.
production from degradation of desflurane,
Bailtiere's Clinicat Anaesthesiotogy 7(4): 915-935.
enflurane,isoflurane, halothane and sevoflurane by
Baum, J.A., Aikenhead, A.R. (1995) Low flow
soda-lime and Baralyme. Aresthesia and Araigesia
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 50: S37.
80(6): 1187-1193.
Berkenbosch, A., de Goede, J., Olievier, C.N. and
Fink, B.R. (1955) Diffusion anoxia. Aresthesiology
Quanjer, M.D. (1982) Sites of action of halothane on
16:511-519.
respiratory pattern and ventilatory response to CO2 in
Forrest, J.B. (1983) Clinics in Anesthesiology 1(2): 251.
cats. Anesthesiology 57:389-398.
Frink, E.J. Jr (1995) The hepatic effects of sevoflurane.
Callan, C., Prokocimer, P., Delado-Herrer, L. et a
Anesthesia and Analgesia 81 (Suppl): S46.
(1994) Effect of compound A on the kidney of
Funkquist, P., Lofgren, A.M. and Nyman, G. (1993)
Spragu-Dawley rats. Anaesthesiotogy
Propofol-isoflurane anaesthesia for caesarian section
81(3A): A1284.
in bitches. Soensk Veterinartidning 45: 675-680.
Chenworth, M.B.,Robertson, D.N., Erley, D.S. and
Gorsky, B.H. and Cascorbi, H.F. (1979) Halothane
Golhke, M.S. (1962) Blood and tissue levels of ether,
toxicity and fluoride production in mice and rats.
chloroform, halothane and methyflurane in dogs.
Anesthesiology 50: 123-125.
Anesthesiotogy 23: 101-106.
Graham, J.D.P (1958) The myoneural blocking
Clarke, K.W. (1999) Desflurane and sevoflurane. Clinicat
action of anaesthetic drugs. British Medical
Anaesthesia.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
Bulletin
Animal Practice 29(3):793-810.
14: 15-17.
Clarke, K.W.,Song, D.Y., Alibhai, H.1.K. and Lee, Y.H.
Hall, L. W. (1957) Bromochlorotrifluroethane
(1996) Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in
(fluothane); a new volatile anaesthetic agent.
 ponies after induction of anaesthesia with xylazine
Veterinary Record 69: 615-618.
and ketamine. Veterinary Record 139: 180-185.
Hall, L.W. (1988) Effects of nitrous oxide on respiration
Clarke, K.W., Song, D.Y., Lee, Y.H. and Alibhai, H.1.K.
during halothane anaesthesia in the dog. British
(1996a) Desflurane anaesthesia in the horse; minimum
Jourrat of Araesthesia 60: 207-215.
alveolar concentration following induction of
Halsey, M.L. (1981) British Jourrat of Anesthesia 53: 4S.
anaesthesia with xylazine and ketamine. Jourral of
Hammond, R.A., Alibhai, H.1.K., Walsh, K.P., Clarke,
Veterinary Anaesthesia 23:56-59.
K. W., Holden, D.J. and White, R.N. (1994) Desflurane
146 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
in the dog: minimum alveolar concentration alone
Journat of Pharmacology and Experimentat Therapeutics
and in combination with nitrous oxide. jourrat of
232(3): 802-809.
Veterinary Anaesthesia 21:21-23.
Malan, T.P Jr (1995) Sevoflurane and renal function.
Hartman, J.C., Pagel, PS., Proctor, L.T., Kampine, J.P.,
Anesthesia and Analgesia 81:S39-S45.
Schmeling, W.T. and Warltier, D.C. (1992) Influence of
Mazzarelli, M., Haberer, J.P., Jaspar, N. and Miserocchi,
desflurane, isoflurane and halothane on regional
M.D. (1979) Mechanism of halothane induced
tissue perfusion in dogs. Canadian Journal of
tachypnea in cats. Anesthesiology 51(6): 522-527.
Anaesthesia 39: 877-887.
McMurphy, R.M. and Hodgson, D.S. (1994)
Hikasa, Y., Takase, K.,Kondou, K. and Ogasawara, S.
Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in cats.
(1994) Sevoflurane and oxygen anaesthesia
Proceedings of the 5th Internationat Congress of
following administration of atropine-xylazine
Veterinary Anaesthesia,Guelph,Canada p.191.
McMurphy, R.M. and Hodgson, D.S. (1995) The
breathing horses. Zentraibtat Veterinarmedizin - A
minimum alveolar concentration of desflurane
41: 700-708.
incats. Veterirary Surgery 24:435.
Hikasa, Y., Takase, K.,Kondou, K. and Ogasawara, S.
Merin, R.G., Benard, J.M., Doursout, M.F., Cohen, M.
(1994a) Sevoflurane and oxygen anaesthesia
and Chelly, J.E. (1991) Comparison of the effects
following administration of atropine-xylazine-
 of isoflurane and desflurane on cardiovascular
guaifenesin-thiopental in spontaneously breathing
dynamics and regional blood flow in the
adult cattle. Jourral of Veterinary Medicat Science
chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology
56(3): 613-616.
74(3): 568-574.
Hikasa, Y., Kawanabe, H., Takase, K. and Ogasawara, S.
 Merkel, G and Eger, E.1. II (1963) A comparative
(1994b) Comparison of sevoflurane, isoflurane and
study of halothane and halopropane anaesthesia.
halothane anaesthesia in spontaneously breathing
Anesthesiotogy 24:346-357.
cats. Veterinary Surgery 25:234-243.
Muir, B.J., Hall, L.W. and Littlewort, M.C.G. (1959)
Hikasa, Y., Okabe, C., Takase, K. and Ogasawara, S.
Cardiac irregularities in cats under halothane
anaesthesia. British Journal of Araesthesia
during sevoflurane, isoflurane and halothane
31:488-489.
anaesthesia either with or without ketamine or
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Kim, H. Y. et at. (1995)
thiopentoneincats.Research in Veterinary Science
Clinical application of rapid induction of anesthesia
60(2): 134-137.
using isoflurane and sevoflurane with nitrous
Hime, J.M. (1963) Observations on the use of halothane
oxide in dogs. Journat of Veterinary Medicatl Science
and ether in constant boiling (azeotropic) mixture in
57(6): 1007-1013.
general anaesthesia in a small series of dogs.
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Kim, H.Y. et al. (1995a) Rapid
Veterinary Record 75:426-427.
inhalation induction of anesthesia by halothane)
Hochleithner, K. (1995) Isoflurane anaesthesia in birds
enflurane, isoflurane and sevoflurane and their
and reptiles. Europear Journat of Companion Animat
cardiopulmonary effects in dogs. Journat of Veterinary
Medicine 1: 37-41.
Medicat Science 57: 1007-1013.
Horan, B.F., Prys-Roberts, C., Bennett, M.J. and Foex, P.
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Kim, H.Y., matsunaga, S.
(1977) Haemodynamic responses to isoflurane
and Sasaki, N. (1997) Cardiopulmonary effects of
anaesthesia and hypovolaemia in the dog and their
sevoflurane, compared with halothane, enflurane and
modification by propranolol. British Journat of
isoflurane, in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
Anaesthesia 49(12): 1189-1197.
Research 58: 885-890.
Hormbein, T.F., Eger. E.I., Winter, P.M., Smith, G.,
National Halothane Study (1969) Bunker, J.P., Forrest,
Wetstone, D. and Smith, K.H. (1982) The minimum
W.H., Mosteller, F. and Vandam, L.D. (eds) A study
alveolar concentration of nitrous oxide in man.
of the possible association between halothane
Anesthesia and Analgesia 61:553-556.
anesthesia and post operative hepatic necrosis.
Johnston, R.V. Jr, Andrews, J.J., Deyo, D.J. et al. (1994).
Washington DC: US Govermment Printing Office.
Anesthesia and Anaigesia 79:548.
Peshin, PK. and Hall, L.W. (1996) Short duration
Jones, R.M. and Nay, PG. (1994) Desflurane. Anesthetic
anaesthesia for minor procedures in dogs. Journal of
Pharmacology Review 2:51-60.
Veterinary Anaesthesiatar 23:70-74.
Kenna, J.G. and Jones, R.M. (1995) The organ toxicity of
Quasha, A.L., Eger E.1.1II, and Tinker, J.H. (1980)
inhaled anesthetics. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 81(6)
 Determination and applications of MAC.
(Suppl): S51-S56.
Anesthesiology 53:315-334.
Koblin, D.D. (1992) Characteristics and implications of
Rampil, 1.J., Lockhart, S.H., Zwass, M.S. et at.,(1991)
desflurane metabolism and toxicity. Anesthesin and
Clinical characteristics of desflurane in surgical
Analgesia 75 (Suppl): S10-S16.
patients: minimum alveolar concentration.
Lunam, C.A., Cousins, M.J. and Hall, P (1985) Guinea
Anesthesiology 74(3): 429-433.
pig model of halothane associated heptotoxicity in
 Smiley, R.M. (1992) An overview of induction and
the absence of enzyme induction and hypoxia.
emergence characteristics of desflurane in pediatric,
INHALATION ANAESTHETICS 147
adult and geriatric patients. Aresthesia and Analgesia
Watmey, G.C.G., Jordan, C. and Hall, L.W. (1987) Effect of
74 (Suppl 4): 38-46; discussion S44-S46.
halothane, enflurane and isoflurane on bronchomotor
Smith. 1., Nathanson, M. and White, PF. (1996)
tone in anaesthetized ponies. British Jourral of
Sevoflurane- a long awaited volatile anaesthetic.
Anaesthesia 59(8): 1022-1026.
British Jourrat of Anaesthesia 76:435-445.
Wedal, D.J.,Gammel, S.A., Milde, J.H.and Iaizzo, P.A.
Steffey, E.P., Gillespie, J.R., Berry, J.D., Eger, E.1.1I and
(1993) Delayed onset of malignant hyperthermia
Rhode, E.A. (1975) Circulatory effects of halothane
induced by isoflurane and desflurane compared with
and halothane-nitrous oxide anaesthesia in the dog:
halothane in susceptible swine. Anesthesiology
spontaneous ventilation. American Journal of Veterinary
78: 1138-1144.
Research 36(2): 197-200.
Weiskopf, R.B., Moore, M.A., Eger, E.1.II, Noorani, M.,
Steffey, E.P. Kelly, A.B. and Woliner, M.J. (1987) Time
McKay, L.,Chortkoff, B., Hart, PS. and Damask, M.
related responses of spontaneously breathing,
(1994) Rapid increase in desflurane concentration is
laterally recumbent horses to prolonged anesthesia
associated with greater transient cardiovascular
with halothane. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
stimulation than with rapid increase in isoflurane
48(6): 952-957.
concentration in humans. Arnesthesiology
Stephen, C.R., Margolisd, G., Fabian, L.W. and
80(5): 1035-1045.
Bourgeois- Garvardin, M. (1958) Laboratory
White, P.F. (1992) Studies of desflurane for outpatient
observations with fluothane. Anesthesiology
anesthesia. Aresthesia and Analgesia 74 (Supp1 4):
19: 770-781.
S47S53; discussion S53-S54.
Steward, A.et al. (1900) British Jourrat of Araesthesia
Whitton, C.W., Elmore, J.C. and Latson, T.W. (1993)
45: 282.
Desflurane; a review.Progress in Anesthesiology
Taylor, PM. and Hall, L.W. (1985) Clinical anaesthesia in
78:46-58.
the horse: comparison of enflurane and halothane.
Wiersig, D.O., Davis, R.H. and Szabiniewicvz, M. (1974)
Equine Veterinary Journat 17: 51-57.
 Prevention of induced ventricular fibrillation in dogs
Taylor, R.H. and Lerman, J. (1991) Minimum alveolar
anesthetized with ultra-short acting barbiturates and
concentration of desflurane and hemodynamic
halothane. Jourrat of the American Veterirary Medicat
Association 165(4): 341-345.
Anesthesiotogy 75: 975-979.
Wolff, W.A., Lumb, W.V. and Ramsaya, K.(1967) Effects
Wade, J.G. and Stevens, W.C. (1981) Isoflurane: an
of halothane and chloroform anesthesia on the equine
anesthetic for the eighties? Aresthesin and Anaigesin
liver.American JournalofVeterinary Research 28(126):
60:666-682.
1363-1372.
Warltier, D.C. and Pagel, PS. (1992) Cardiovascular and
Yasuda, N., Targ, A.G., Eger, E.1.II, Johnson, B.H. and
respiratory actions of desflurane: is desflurane
Weiskopf, R.B. (1990) Pharmacokinetics of desflurane,
diferent from isoflurane? Aresthesin and Aralgesia
sevoflurane, isoflurane and halothane in pigs.
75 (Suppl 4): S17-29; discussion S29-S31.
Anesthesia ard Analgesia 71(4): 340-348.
Relaxationof the skeletal
7
muscles
spindles and the mere reduction of such a flow to
INTRODUCTION
the brainstem may have subtle effects. For exam-
To relax skeletal muscles it is necessary to abolish
ple, there is a possibility that a drug which par-
voluntary muscle contractions and modify the
alyses the  fibres and so reduces muscle spindle
slight tension which is the normal state (the ‘tone'
proprioceptive inflow to the higher centres actu-
 or ‘tonus' of the muscle). Tone is maintained by
ally contributes to a sleep-like state.
many complex mechanisms but, briefly, it can be
said that all result in the slow asynchronous dis-
charge of impulses from cells in the ventral horn
METHODS OF ABOLISHING MUSCLE TONE
region of the spinal cord. This discharge gives rise
AND AbIlItY TO CoNTraCT
to impulses in the α motor neurones which cause
During anaesthesia abolition of muscle tone and
the muscle fibres to contract. Activity of these ven-
ability to contract can be brought about in three
tral horn cells is controlled by impulses from the
higher centres (cerebrum, cerebellum, or medulla
ways:
oblongata) exciting the α motor neurone direct, or
1.By the use of anaesthetic agents which act
by impulses through the small motor nerve fibre
centrally.
system (the efferents) which activate them indir-
 The anaesthetic agents cause decreased activity
ectly via the stretch reflex arc. Movements con-
 of ventral horn cells in the spinal cord and, thus,
trolled by the  fibre system are essentially directed
 muscle relaxation. A profound degree of muscle
towards governing the length of the muscle.
 relaxation can be obtained when a potent drug is
Voluntary movement, on the other hand, involv-
 administered in doses which produce a deep
ing direct activity in the  fibres, results in muscle
generalized depression of the whole central
tension of a given magnitude.
nervous system. However, the consequences are
The relevance to anaesthesia lies in the fact that
widespread for these agents produce dose
the small motor nerve fibre system is, like the
dependent depression of the cardiovascular and
motor fibres to the skeletal muscles themselves, a
respiratory systems. Also, deep depression and
cholinergic one. Any drug which can affect the
immobility in the recovery period can predispose
neuromuscular junction may, therefore, also inter-
fere with the effect of the -fibres on the muscle
aspiration of regurgitated ingesta in ruminants or
spindles. A paralysis of the fibre /muscle spindle
of stomach acid in other animals.
junction will have, as a major consequence, a
Other centrally acting drugs, such as
reduction in the afferent inflow from the muscle
 guaiphenesin, which produce muscle relaxation
149
150 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
by selectively depressing the transmission of
central nervous and cardiovascular systems. They
impulses at the intemuncial neurones of the spinal
 are commonly called 'muscle relaxants' or simply
cord, brain stem and subcortical regions of
relaxants'
the brain, may be more acceptable but the
In order that their mode of action be understood
relaxation produced by them is seldom profound.
it is essential that the phenomena which occur at
Muscle relaxation can also be produced by the
the neuromuscular junction upon the arrival of an
benzodiazepines and C adrenoceptor agonists but
impulse in the motor nerve should be appreciated.
this is weak and no substitute for the complete
The following brief review of neuromuscular
relaxation produced by neuromuscular blocking
transmission is concermed with those aspects that
agents.
are of importance in anaesthesia. For a detailed
2. LItilizing drugs which have a peripheral action.
study of these phenomena reference should be
Local analgesics injected directly into a muscle
 made to the standard texts of physiology.
mass, or around nerve fibres or nerve endings.
block the transmission of impulses and muscle
fibres are effectively isolated from nervous
ThEOrY OF NEUROmUSCULAR
influences. This is strikingly demonstrated by
TRANSMISSION
paravertebral nerve block in cattle. At the same
time this method also has its disadvantages. The
The neuromuscular junction is the most accessible
temperament of some animals renders them
 of the synapses in the body to study and over the
unsuitable subjects for the use of local analgesics
last 100 years very much has been revealed about
alone, especially when limb muscles are involved,
it. Even so, there are many processes involved in
and even in docile animals immobility of the
synaptic transmission which still await explana-
whole body can only be assured when local
tion. It is now well established that acetylcholine is
analgesia is combined with general anaesthesia or
synthesized and stored in the motor nerve in vesi-
very deep sedation. The injection of local
cles, each of which contains one packet or 'quan-
pue ampanoid Suumsuos-an e st soisaopeu
tum’ of acetylcholine. This is the transmitter
even after simple techniques there is a delay before
substance released as a result of a propagated
the full degree of relaxation is obtained. In
 impulse in the nerve fibre. After release, the acetyl-
addition, techniques such as neuraxial blocks can
choline diffuses across the synaptic gap (cleff) and
cause loss of control of much of the circulatory
 interacts with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
system as a result of paralysis of sympathetic
embedded in the postjunctional membrane dir-
nerves.
ectly opposite the sites of its release. This interac-
In spite of the disadvantages it is probable that
tion causes the receptor-ion channel complex to
combinations of local analgesia and general
undergo a conformational change from a closed to
anaesthesia are used much less than they should
 an open state. The channnel is relatively non-
be in veterinary anaesthesia. Peripheral nerve
specific and in the open state it can conduct so-
blocks such as brachial plexus block, or epidural
dium and potassium ions, together with other less
blocks with low dose bupivacaine and opioids, are
important cations, down their respective chemical
the only reliable methods of preventing wind-up
 and electrical gradients resulting in a localized fall
in the dorsal horn cells of the spinal cord and can
 in membrane potential measured by physiologists
thus make a marked contribution to postoperative
 as the 'end-plate potential'. The end-plate poten-
pain control.
tial causes local circuit currents which lower the
 3. LIsing specific neuromuscular blocking agents.
 membrane potential in the electrically excitable
Modern neuromuscular blocking agents have
 adjacent muscle membrane and, if this lowering is
little or no significant action in the body other than
at the neuromuscular junction, and by their use it
to initiate the muscle action potential which results
is possible to produce quickly, and with certainty,
 in muscle contraction.
any degree of muscle relaxation without
Release of acetylcholine from the nerve termi-
influencing the excitability and functioning of the
nal occurs in discrete quanta and it is now believed
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES I51
that transmitter release is an exocytotic process
whereby each quantum of acetylcholine released
represents the exocytotic liberation of the contents
of a single synaptic vesicle found in the terminal
region of the nerve. Acetylcholine is synthesized in
the nerve cytoplasm by choline acetyl-O-trans-
ferase and must be pumped into these vesicles
Extracellularfluid
against its concentration gradient, but the mecha-
nism by which this occurs is poorly understood.
There must also be mechanisms which link the ini-
tiation of exocytosis and promote the fusion of the
Lipid bilayer
 synaptic vesicle membrane with the nerve term-
cell membrane
inal membrane together with the formation of a
'pore' linking the inside of the vesicle to the extra-
cellular space of the synaptic cleft. There is still
Intracellular fluid
vesicular exocytotic processes.
The release of acetylcholine can only occur at
active or 'critical’ zones, meaning that there is a
lon channel
limited compartment of acetylcholine which can
be regarded as available for release. In simple
FIG. 7.I Diagram of the nicotinic receptor at the
terms,'mobilization' must occur, bringing reserve
neuromuscular junction.There are thought to be five
supplies of either acetylcholine itself or acetyl-
subunits, two of which, the α receptors, are similar. The
other subunits are called β, & and &. Another type of
choline-containing vesicles into the available com-
nicotinic receptor has a subunit instead ofe,the so-called
partment as depletion occurs from vesicular
extrajunctional or foetal receptor, because it occurs in
exocytosis. One proposal which has 
gained
relatively low numbers outside the neuromuscular
ground is that prejunctional nicotinic acetyl-
junction in skeletal muscle.The five units are arranged as a
choline receptors exist on nerve terminals allow-
cylinder around a central funnel-shaped pore.
ing a positive feedback control mechanism such
that acetylcholine can enhance its own release. The
importance of effective mobilization becomes criti-
 tor). The common element in this receptor family is
cal at high rates of nerve stimulation when the
that the receptors consist of five glycosylated pro-
acetylcholine output of the nerve terminal is great-
tein subunits of varying molecular type. In mature
est. The phenomenon known as 'tetanic fade', i.e.
skeletal muscle these have been desigmated α, B, , &
the inability of the muscle to maintain a constant
and ε (Fig. 7.1) having changed from embryonic
tension in reponse to high frequency stimulation
 types during the neonatal period when the size and
of its motor nerve, is used by some anaesthetists to
number of end plates and the number of receptors
monitor the degree of neuromuscular block (Klide,
increases. Each of the subunits traverses the muscle
1973). A rate of stimulation of 50Hz is considered
membrane at the end plate region and they are
to be the maximum physiological rate as the
 arranged to form the walls of an aqueous pore rep-
evoked muscle tension is similar to that developed
resenting the ion channel through which mainly
during maximum voluntary effort.
sodium and potassium ions flow to produce the
All nicotinic receptors so far isolated and charac-
single charnel current measurable by the physiolo-
terized, function as cation channels, the activation
 gists' patch-clamping technique.
 of which causes a change in postjunctional mem-
Neurotransmitter acetylcholine must bind to
brane potential. Thus they behave ina similar man-
sites on two α subunits for the ion channel to open
ner to receptors for other known chemical
and produce the single channel current. Com-
transmitters and belong to a family of closely re-
petitive neuromuscular blocking agents bind on
lated receptors (5-HTg receptor, GABAA receptor,
these sites so that acetylcholine has a reduced
152 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
chance of binding and opening the channel. It is
Drugs may interfere with this complex Cat+
known that tubocurarine has different binding
 mechanism in many ways. For example, Ca++
affinities for α subunits and it is possible that dif-
 antagonists such as verapamil may act by inhibit-
ferential binding of other chemical classes of neu-
ing calmodulin combination. One molecule of this
romuscular blocking agents may explain some of
drug may be sufficient to block the uptake of sev-
the interactions that can be observed clinically
eral thousand Ca++. There is evidence that the
with such agents (Pedersen & Cohen, 1990).
 change in quantal release of acetylcholine is pro-
General anaesthetics, local analgesics and anti-
portional to the fourth power of the change in
biotics are all potential causes of end plate ion
Ca++ concentration. In dogs, a dose of 1 mg/kg of
channel block. The most widely documented form
verapamil has been shown to produce a significant
of channel block is the ‘open channel block'
 interaction with the non-depolarizing agent, pan-
(Lambertet al.,1983).After the channelis opened
curonium, which persists long beyond the period
by acetylcholine this type of block is produced by
 of the calcium antagonist's cardiac effects (Jones)
drugs which themselves have no affinity for the
1984). Volatile anaesthetics may be considered to
binding sites on the α subunits but which, once the
be non-specific calcium antagonists and so poten-
channel is open, enter it and bind to amino acids in
tiate neuromuscular blockade (Pollard & Millar,
the transmembrane domains. The result is that the
1973).
active or open form of the receptor becomes
 In recent years there has been an increasing
blocked in a non-competitive way and increasing
 awareness that in addition to nicotinic cholinergic
the agonist concentration (acetylcholine) leads to
o ao aua pue siau uao ar
 receptors which have an influence on normal neu-
for the blocking compound to act. This type of
romuscular transmission. It is thought that there
block is, consequently, not reversible by anti-
 are at least two populations of presynaptic cholin-
 cholinesterase agents such as neostigmine.
ergic receptors, each subserving different physio-
Calcium is recognized as an essential interme-
logical functions. One group is the presynaptic
nicotinic receptor which acts as a positive feedback
terminals to transmitter release. Release of acetyl-
and responds to low concentrations of acetyl-
choline is triggered by an increase in the concen-
choline by facilitating its release at the end plate.
tration of intracellular calcium ions (Ca++).
This is believed to be mediated atleast partly by its
Depolarization opens channels in the membrane
action on synapsin I causing an increase in the
that allow calcium to pass into the cell, possibly
immediately available store of the transmitter. The
through the cyclic adenosine monophosphate
-danan sruensnu sndeusard are dnono puosas
(cAMP) mechanism. Thus, it is generally believed
tors which respond to a high concentration of
that depolarization activates membrane-bound
 acetylcholine and act in a negative feedback mech-
adenyl cyclase which converts ATP to cAMP and
anism. Stimulation of these receptors causes
that the latter acts on a protein kinase which causes
 reduced release of transmitter in response to motor
opening of the Ca++ channel. Calcium itself does
 nerve activity. There are also adrenoreceptors on
not cause transmitter mobilization and release- an
motor nerve endings which 
1 maymodulate
essential intermediary is calmodulin, a Ca++ bind-
synaptic function, and noradrenaline is known to
ing protein which regulates its action. Binding of
increase transmitter output in skeletal muscle.
four Ca++ to calmodulin changes its shape and
The catecholamine effect on the motor nerve end-
activates it. Activated calmodulin combines with
 ings is thought to be an α effect in the presynaptic
 an inactive receptor protein, activating it by chang-
 region contributing to an anticurare action;it con-
ing its shape, and this activated form is kmown to
trasts with the β effect on the postsynaptic mem-
be associated with the aggregation of acetylcholine
brane which leads to hyperpolarization and a
vesicles and their subsequent interaction with the
presynaptic membrane. It seems probable that
block.
release of transmitter (exocytosis) is dependent on
Aremarkable property known as'desensitiza-
calcium ions and calmodulin.
tion' is displayed by the acetylcholine receptor of
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 153
striated muscle and its associated systems. This
The existence of a safety factor has obvious
appears as the waning of a stimulant effect or
practical significance. It means, for example, that
development of repolarization (usually partial but
the action of the drug is far from terminated at the
under some circumstances complete) despite the
continued presence of acetylcholine or some other
There is likely to be considerable ‘subthreshold
depolarizing substance at the end plate. The rate of
action' which is only detectable when a tetanic
this repolarization increases with the concentra-
stimulus is applied to the motor nerve or when
fion of the drug and is faster when the extracellular
some other drug is potentiated. It also explains the
concentration of Ca++ is high. The extent of desen-
properties of muscles partially blocked by compet-
sitization appears to vary between individuals of
itive drugs, such as the fall of tension during a
any one species. Acetylcholine has been shown to
tetanus, the sensitivity of the depth of block
change the affinity of the receptor for certain
 to anticholinesterases, catecholamines, previous
blocking agents in a way which may be connected
 tetanization, anaesthesia and a wide range of
with the desensitization process.
drugs.
Depolarizing drugs will increase the variation
of the safety factor. Slightly depolarized fibres
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
become more excitable, i.e. their safety factor
becomes greater than normal conversely, deeply
Consideration of the mechanisms of neuromuscu-
depolarized fibres become less excitable. If the
 lar transmission outlined above suggests many
depolarization is sufficient, the propagation
ways in which the process may be modified to pro-
threshold may rise above the maximum depolar-
duce failure or block of transmission.
ization which can be achieved by acetylcholine
Non-depolarizing, antagonist, curare-like or
and the safety factor becomes zero. It is likely that
competitive block results when the drug reduces
this underlies the general insensitivity of partial
the degree of depolarization of the postsynaptic
depolarization block.
membrane caused by acetylcholine following
Drugs which produce depolarization and then
motor nerve stimulation. When the reduction in
prevent the passage of excitation from motor
the degree of depolarization is such that a thresh-
 da, n aa  sr
old depolarization of the membrane adjacent to
and the analysis of their actions brought to light a
the end plate is not achieved, a neuromuscular
variety of stimulant effects analogous to those of
block is present. As the effect is 'all or none' for
acetylcholine itself, and attributable to end plate
each motor end plate, what is seen in any particu-
depolarization. In themselves, however, these
lar muscle during this type of block represents a
effects do not explain how synaptic block is pro-
spectrum of these thresholds. For complete sup-
duced, nor why the overt signs of stimulation
pression of the motor response to occur even the
(such as fasciculations and limb movements) are
 most resistant synapses must be blocked.
quite transient although the depolarization per-
In normal neuromuscular transmission an
sists. During the block produced by a depolarizing
excess of acetylcholine is produced by motor nerve
agent there is a decrease of electrical excitability of
stimulation. There also exist many more receptors
the postsynaptic membrane as a result of the per-
than necessary for the production of a total
sisting depolarization (Burns & Paton, 1951).
imcrease in cation conductance required to trigger
Depolarizing block may be followed by an
an action potential. This results in a substantial
alteration of the threshold of the end plate region
safety factor' (Jones, 1984). It has been shown that
to depolarization by acetylcholine. This ‘raised
umder certain conditions in cat tibialis muscle four
threshold block' was originally described as'dual
to five times as much acetylcholine is released as is
block'but now the commonly used term is'phase
needed for threshold action. Expressed in terms of
Ⅱ block', indicating that it follows 'phase I' which
receptors this means that 75-80% of the receptors
is the depolarizing activity of the drug. Phase II
must be occluded before the threshold is reached
block following prolonged suxamethonium depol-
(Cookson & Paton, 1969).
arization may be due to ‘channel block', the
154 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
aie ci unoua s uaq np a go asao
respiratory rate. Because of the oxygen-rich mix-
penetrate the open ion channels.
tures commonly used in breathing circuits hypoxia
In the past, neuromuscular block was classified
may not occur but, nevertheless, the decreased
minute volume of respiration will lead to an ineffi-
itive') solely on characteristics such as the response
cient elimination of carbon dioxide. The results are
 to an anticholinesterase, behaviour during and
likely to be a rising blood pressure, an increased
after the application of a tetanic stimulus, and
 oozing from cut cutaneous vessels and distressed
interaction with other drugs. This now seems a
 respiratory efforts. Thus, it is now generally recog-
dangerous outlook. Erosion of the safety factor 
 nized that if a neuromuscular blocking drug is
makes it possible for a block to develop from quite
 administered for any purpose some form of artifi-
a small rise in propagation threshold produced by
cal respiration (IPPV) will be required.
a depolarizing drug without greatly increasing the
variation in safety factor; such a block would show
many of the characteristics of a competitive block.
Sensitivity of muscles to neuromuscular
When it is realized that some neuromuscular
block
blocking agents may be 'partial agonists' (i.e. pos-
The concept of sensitivity refers to the concentra-
sessing limited ability themselves to depolarize as
 tion of drug at the neuromuscular junction needed
-Asaid joe Aeu snip jeut pue (aiaduos oi se lam
to produce a specific degree of blockade. From the
naptically as well as postsynaptically, it becomes
clear that under clinical conditions many situ-
earliest attempts to use these drugs it has been
recognised that the neuromuscular junctions of
ations will arise where the underlying mecha-
various muscles differ in response with regard to
risms can only be guessed. To interpret the effect
intensity and duration of blockade. The recent
of neuromuscular blocking drugs clinically it is
progress in monitoring and assessing the relation-
necessary to assess contributions due to depolari-
 ship between the response of different muscles has
zation, competitive antagonism and presynaptic
not, unfortunately, been equalled by an under-
action produced by the various drugs used.
standing of the mechanisms underlying the differ-
ent responses of muscles to neuromuscular
PATTERN OF NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
 blocking agents. If it were available it might allow
objective predictions of the sensitivities of muscles
Attempts have been made to take advantage of the
that are inaccessible to easy monitoring under a
different susceptibilities of the body muscle to
wide range of pathological states.
paralysis by neuromuscular blocking drugs by
 Among the mechanisms suggested as being
asapered oi yanoua isnf anam ynum sasop Surai
responsible for differing responses are:
the abdominal muscles without paralysis of the
 intercostal muscles and diaphragm. However, use-
1. Perfusion.
ful relaxation of the abdominal muscles is invari-
This is important since neuromuscular block
ably associated with a marked diminution in the
 can only be produced when the drug binds with
tidal volume of respiration. When it is of a minor
acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular
degree the animal may compensate for this respi-
junction. Therefore, after i.v. injection the onset
ratory impairment by an increase in respiratory
time for the block in any particular muscle
rate. The breathing which results is characterized
depends on circulatory factors such as cardiac
'endxa pue uonendsui uaamiaq asned e Aq
 output and circulation time from injection site to
producing a rectangular pattern when recorded
the muscle, muscle blood flow and proximity to
spirometrically. The increased respiratory rate is
the central arterial circulation (Donati, 1988). This
accompanied by over-activity of the diaphragm
resulting in very turbulent conditions for intra-
 diaphragm, laryngeal, masseter, abdominal and
 abdominal surgery. Larger doses of the neuromus-
facial muscles which are nearer to the aorta and
cular blocking agent result in depression which
 probably better perfused than muscles of the distal
limbs. For the onset phase concentration gradients
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES I55
between the plasma and the receptors are large
The diaphragm requires more neuromuscular
and thus perfusion plays a major part in the
blocker than a peripheral limb muscle for an iden-
development of neuromuscular block. Perfusion,
tical degree of blockade. Monitoring of neuromus-
however, does not appear to contribute to unequal
cular blockade during recovery is, because of their
durations of paralysis of different muscles, at least
relative sensitivity, clearly best carried out by
for longer acting paralysing drugs (Goat et al.,
 observing the responses of peripheral muscles to
1976). During recovery from block plasma
stimulation of their motor nerves.
concentration changes slowly with time, so that
 the concentration gradient between plasma and
receptors on the different muscles is likely to be
MONITORING OF NEUROMUSCULAR
small as a result perfusion plays only a minor role,
BLOCK
duration of blockade being determined mainly by
plasma concentration and sensitivity of each
The large variability in onset times, duration and
muscle.
depth of neuromuscular blockade following a
2.Acetylcholine receptor numbers, distribution and
given dose of a neuromuscular blocking agent
type.
makes it impossible to predict its effect in any indi-
The motor innervation pattern of muscles,
vid ual animal. It is desirable to monitor blockade
acetylcholinesterase activity and number and
to allow drug dosage to be titrated against
density of receptors at end plate regions may all
response of the individual. Monitoring assesses
 play a part but it is not known exactly how these
response of a muscle following electrical stimula-
may contribute to muscle
sensitivity
to
tion of its motor nerve somewhere in the nerve's
 neuromuscular blocking drugs.
peripheral course. This does not mean that neuro-
3. Fibre size in the muscle.
muscular blocking drugs should not be used in the
 In goats there is a direct association between
absence of monitoring apparatus - they were used
time to spontaneous recovery from vecuronium or
quite safely for very many years before these
suxamethonium blockade and size of fibres in the
devices became available in clinical practice, but
diaphragm, posterior cricoarytenoideus, thyroary-
their use does, undeniably, add to the ease with
tenoideus and ulnaris lateralis muscles (Ibebunjo
which the degree of muscle relaxation can be
& Hall, 1993). This evidence for influence of fibre
controlled.
size is supported by the fact that laryngeal and
facial muscles contain very small fibres while
PERIPHERAL NERVE STIMULATION
larger fibres are found in the diaphragm and still
larger ones in peripheral muscles, a rank order
A peripheral motor nerve is stimulated to produce
identical to the relative sensitivities of these
 a propagated action potential when the electrical
muscles to neuromuscular block (Donati et al.,
potential inside the fibre is decreased from the nor-
1990).
mal resting value of -90 mV to a threshold of
around -50 mV. A peripheral nerve stimulator
The respiratory muscles
achieves this when a sufficient current density is
produced to decrease the potential in the tissue
The anaesthetist is interested in the sensitivity of
surrounding the nerve whereby the effective
the respiratory muscles to neuromuscular block-
 membrane potential is decreased to the threshold
ing drugs but there is a paucity of information
value. This is most easily achieved when the nega-
relating to the response of intercostal, abdominal
tive electrode of the stimulator is placed closest to
and accessory respiratory muscles to these agents.
the nerve, for a smaller current is then required
The upper airway is kept patent and protected by
than if the positive electrode is nearest. After a
the laryngeal adductors, laryngeal abductors, the
nerve has been depolarized to produce an action
masseter muscle and the muscles of the tongue
potential, it is resistant to further stimulation for
and pharynx, but again little is known about thein
its refractory period of some 0.5 to 1.0 ms. The
sensitivity to neuromuscular blockade.
observed muscle response following stimulation
156 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
to presynaptic effects of non-depolarizing agents
 impairing release of acetylcholine. Its usefulness in
veterinary anaesthesia is limited as the size of the
response must be quantified against a control
response obtained before the administration of
any drug and simple visual inspection of the
twitch is insufficiently accurate for this.
Train-of-four (TOF)
TRAN
Since its description by Ali et al., (1970) the train-
of- four (four pulses at 2.0Hz) has become the most
popular of the methods available to the clinical
anaesthetist to monitor competitive neuromuscu-
lar blockade. The method as developed by these
workers involves recording four twitch responses
evoked in a muscle by supramaximal stimulation
M
of its motor nerve at a rate of 2 Hz. The frequency
AKELANGMEDIC
MiniStim-II
 of 2Hz was adopted to allow maximum separation
of individual twitch responses; to avoid fade
between successive train-of-four (TOF) stimuli, the
stimulation should not be repeated at intervals of
less than 12s. The great advantage of the TOF is
that it is not necessary to establish a control
response before the administration of the neuro-
muscular blocking agent (Cullen & Jones, 1984).
FIG. 7.2 MiniStim nerve stimulator.This is typical of the
The technique is simple and evaluation of the
small, hand-held inexpensive nerve stimulators used for
evoked response requires no special equipment.
monitoring neuromuscular block.
Response of the muscle can be assessed either as
the number of palpable twitches (TOF count) or
of a peripheral nerve is only reliable when the
ratio of the fourth and the first response (TOF
nerve is depolarized once in response to the elec-
ratio). Fig. 7.3 illustrates the relationship during
trical stimulus, the same number of nerve fibres
recovery from non-depolarizing blockade.
are stimulated each time and the direct stimulation
The relationship shown in Fig. 7.4 is relatively
of muscle fibres is avoided. The duration and
 constant for all the different non-depolarizing
shape of the stimulus pulse is important for if the
duration of the impulse exceeds the refractory
period of the nerve, or a non-square wave impulse
is delivered, repetitive nerve stimulation may
occur. A long stimulus duration is also likely to
result in direct muscle stimulation (Fig. 7.2).
The single twitch
Control
Curarized
Single twitch stimulation at slow frequencies has
Height of 4 
been used extensively to investigate effects of neu
Twitch height ratio =
romuscular blocking agents in human subjects. At
Height of I
a stimulus frequency greater than about 0.15 Hz
FIG.7.3 Train-of-four'(TOF) stimulation of a motor
the response becomes progressively smaller owing
nerve.
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 157
Depolarizing block
2 Hz, and thus stimulation at the higher rate is a
much more sensitive method to indicate a slight
blockade. However, tetanic stimulation induces
recovery in the muscles stimulated so that all sub-
sequent events are shifted towards normality (Ali
& Salvarese, 1976). Moreover, stimulation of the
nerve at 50 Hz results in sustained tension when
only 20-25% of receptors are free, less than the
2
25-30% as indicated by TOF restoration of the
fourth twitch. Conflicting views may result from
observations in different species of animal and
Non-depolarizing block
stimulation of different muscles.
Tetanus
Repetitive high frequency stimulation of the motor
nerve where the responses to individual stimuli
fuse and summate to produce a sustained muscle
contraction causes what is kmown as 'tetany'. The
2
3
absence or presence of fade due to presynaptic
FIG.7.4 Pattern of responses toTOF stimulation during
effect of non-depolarizing blockade has been
recovery from non-depolarizing neuromuscular block.
used to assess adequacy of recovery in order
Twitch height calculated as percentage inhibition of first
to judge whether any clinically significant block-
response to TOF stimulation.
ade persists to endanger the life of the animal. A
tetanic stimulation of 50 Hz for 5s stresses
agents (O'Hara et al., 1986). A TOF ratio of > 0.5 is
neuromuscular function to much the same extent
generally accepted as being compatible with clini-
as does maximal voluntary effort and it may be
cally safe recovery but a TOF ratio of 0.6 to 0.7 can
possible to decide, by visual or tactile means,
still be associated with fade (Drenck et al., 1989). As
whether there is any fade in response to tetanic
the consequences of missing residual curarization
stimulation.
are more serious than failing to recogzise full
A sustained tetanus correlates with a TOF ratio
recovery, the prudent anaesthetist is only satisfied
of 0.7 or greater. It seems certain that fade repre-
with a TOF ratio of 0.8 to 0.9. The fourth twitch is
 sents interaction of neuromuscular blocking
said to be as strong as the first when 25-30% of the
agents with different sites within the neuromuscu-
 receptors are free of the blocking drug. During
lar junction. A site of action at presynaptic nico-
depolarizing
neuromuscular
:blockade,
the
tinic receptors or ion channels could impede the
responses to TOF stimulation are all of approx-
mobilization and / or release of the transmitter in
imately equal height. The detection of fade is asso-
response to repeated stimulation of the motor
ciated with the appearance of a phase II block.
nerve; ion channel block might also be involved.
The TOF has been used to study suxamethon-
Increased mobilization and release of transmit-
ium (Cullen & Jones, 1980), atracurium (Jones &
ter substance occuring following tetanic stimula-
Brearley, 1985), gallamine and pancuronium
tion in the presence of a neuromuscular blocking
(Gleed & Jones, 1982), vecuronium (Jones &
agent can cause the magmitude of response to a
Seymour, 1985), pipecuronium (Jones, 1987) and
subsequent stimulus to be enhanced. This is
rocuronium (Martinez et al., 1996) in dogs, but its
termed post-tetanic facilitation or potentiation.
value in other animals has been questioned.
The effect increases with the duration and fre-
According to Kein et al.(1988) in halothane anaes-
 quency of tetanic stimulus and can persist for up to
thetized horses there may be very obvious 'fade'
30 minutes. It can lead to underestimation of neu-
during 50 Hz stimulation when no fade exists at
romuscular block and to avoid it it is necessary to
158 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
delay further tetanic stimlation for at least two
TOF stimulation and the second response occurs
minutes (Brul et al., 1991; Silverman & Brul, 1993).
slightly before the fourth response to TOF (Gill et
 During profound neuromuscular blockade 
al., 1990) DBS was designed to improve clinical
when all responses to single twitch, TOF and
detection of residual curarization because it is
tetanic stimulation have been abolished, post-
easier to compare the strength of the two contrac-
tetanic facilitation following a tetanic burst may
tions to DBS than to compare the strength of the
allow responses to occur with single twitch stimu-
first and fourth contractions with TOF ratio.
lation. Post tetanic count (PTC) is the number of
When any nerve stimulator is used, supra-
responses to 1Hz stimulation 3s after a 5s 50 Hz
 maximal stimulation must be employed (e.g. 200
tetanus (Viby-Mogensen et al., 1981). The number
to 300 V for 0.3 ms) and results of stimulation
of post-tetanic responses is inversely related to
should be observed before neuromuscular
depth of blockade: the smaller the PTC the deeper
block is induced to ascertain that the placing of
the neuromuscular block.
the electrodes is correct and that twitches can
be obtained. Supramaximal stimulation can be
Double burst stimulation (DBS)
achieved using surface or needle electrodes.
 Paediatric ECG silver/silver chloride gel elec-
The DBS consists of two short lasting bursts of
 trodes are excellent provided the underlying skin
tetanus (2 to 4 pulses at 50Hz) separated by 0.75s.
The interval of 0.75 s allows the muscle to relax
is properly prepared by shaving but needle elec-
completely between tetanic bursts, so that
trodes may be necessary in obese animals or those
having very thick skins.
response to this pattern of stimulation is two single
separated muscle contractions perceived as two
twitches. The tetanic bursts fatigue the neuromus-
Recognition of twitches in clinical practice
cular synapse more than two single twitches so
In clinical practice the most convenient way of
that fade is exaggerated. Several diferent combina-
assessing the response to stimulation of the motor
tions of tetanic stimulation have been used but the
pattern known as DBS3,3 seems the most satisfact-
nerve is to observe or feel for contraction of mus-
cles. This obviously means that the accurate evalu-
ory. This consists of three bursts at 50Hz followed
by a further three at 50Hz after a 0.75s delay (Fig.
ation of the strength of muscle activity obtained by
 mechanical recording with a force transducer as
7.5). The stimulus pattern is of limited use during
employed in the laboratory, cannot be expected.
operations; the larger response to DBS means that
the first response reappears just before that from
However, even under laboratory conditions stabil-
ity of recording with time tends to be poor so per-
haps the limitations imposed in the clinical
situation are not a major drawback. Visual
appraisal of the relevant muscle twitch is probably
the simplest way of recognizing the response to
nerve stimulation but other means exist.
When the ulnar nerve is stimulated accelerogra-
phy may be used to measure the acceleration of the
distal limb. The mass of the limb is taken to be con-
stant and by Newton's law (force = mass X acceler-
20ms
ation) changes in force are directly proportional to
changes in acceleration. Fixation of the limb is not
critical and small hand-held accelerograph moni-
tors are available but these devices are not very
750 ms
reliable. Slight alteration in the position of the limb
FIG.7.5 Preferred pattern of double-burst stimulation.
 may alter the measured response.
In each burst three impulses are given at a frequency of 50
Another method of monitoring involves record-
Hz and the two bursts are separated by 750 ms (= 0.75 s).
ing of the electromyogram (EMG) from the stimu-
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES I59
lated muscle. This involves insertion of three
Medial condyle of humerus
needle electrodes - the active electrode from the
belly of the muscle, a reference electrode on
the point of origin of the muscle and a ground elec-
trode positioned between the recording and stimu-
lating electrodes. The recording signal is gated and
usually delayed for 3 to 4 ms following nerve stim-
ulation to avoid stimulus artefact. The equipment
Silc for stimulation ot ulnar nerve
is expensive and the technique is usually reserved
FIG.7.6 Site for stimulation of the ulnar nerve in the dog
for experimental studies.
and cat.
Sites for electrical stimulation of motor
Recognition of paralysis when a nerve
nerves
stimulator is not used
In theory, neuromuscular block can be monitored
There can be little doubt that the reliance on simple
clinical evaluations of the degree of neuromuscu-
eral motor nerve and evaluation of the response of
lar blockade (using such criteria as the respiratory
any muscle supplied by that nerve. Monitoring is
efforts in the anaesthetized animal) is inadequate.
usually performed at some site where there is an
There is a remarkably wide variation in the sensit-
accessible peripheral nerve and a readily available
 ivity of individuals to neuromuscular blocking
muscle for assessment of the results of the nerve
drugs but after spontaneous or evoked recovery
stimulation.
from neuromuscular blockade routine clinical
monitoring may allow the prediction of which
The dog ond cot
individuals are likely to be able to maintain and
clear their airways.
 In dogs muscle responses to electrical stimulation
Abolition of diaphragmatic activity can be
of the ulnar (Heckman et al., 1977; Cullen et al.,
taken to indicate complete muscle paralysis. If an
1980), tibial (Curtis & Eiker, 1991), peroneal
animal can move its limbs in such a way as to be
(Bowen, 1969) and facial (Cullen et al., 1980a)
able to maintain itself in sternal recumbency it
nerves have been reported. Probably the best of
usually means that at the most only partial neuro-
these, which should be used when accessible dur-
muscular block is present. Short, jerky respiratory
ing an operation, is the ulnar nerve. Itis stimulated
efforts are often seen in animals where diaphrag-
at its most superficial location on the medial aspect
matic activity is not in evidence and marked block-
of the elbow and contraction involving the
ade exists. To assess the ability of a partially
forepaw is assessed visually or by palpation. The
paralysed animal to breathe, the endotracheal tube
peroneal nerve is stimulated on the lateral aspect
 may be occluded and the negative pressure generat-
of the stifle and muscle twitch of the hindfoot
ed in the tracheal tube during an attempt at inspira-
assessed; this site is particularly useful when the
tion measured with a simple anaeroid manometer.
head end of the animal is covered, for example
 Depending on depth of anaesthesia and the pre-
during ocular surgery. Accurate recording of mus-
vailing PaCO2, a pressure of -10 to -20 cm H2O can
cle twitches is not possible with facial nerve stimu-
usually be taken to indicate that the block is insuffi-
lation (Cullen and Jones, 1980a).
cient to produce respiratory inadequacy. However,
The horse
be adequate in an animal whose airway is safe-
guarded by an endotracheal tube, the degree of
The most commonly stimulated nerve is the facial
neuromuscular block may not leave enough mar-
nerve (Fig. 7.7) where it can be palpated on the
gin of safety after extubation because of residual
masseter muscle ventral to the lateral canthus of
paralysis of the muscles of the pharynx and larynx
the eye. This produces easily visible contractions
causing upper airway obstruction.
of the muscles of the lip and nostrils (Bowen, 1969;
160 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
muscular blocking agents than the facial muscle
twitch (Manley et al.,1983 ; Hildebrand & Arpin,
1988; Hildebrand et al., 1989).
Other onimols
Peroneal nerve stimulation has been used in the
assessment of neuromuscular block in cows
(Bowen, 1969), calves (Hildebrand & Howitt, 1984)
and llamas (Hildebrand & Hill, 1991).
Factors affecting monitoring
 Some patient conditions and errors in monitoring
FIG. 7.7 Site for stimulation of the facial nerve in the
horse.
techniques can affect the muscle response obser-
ved following stimulation of a motor nerve and
Jones & Prentice, 1976). The peroneal nerve (Fig
can lead to erroneous conclusions being drawn.
7.8) can be stimulated as it crosses the head of the
fibula (Klein et al., 1988) to produce contractions of
Hypothermia
the digital extensor muscles. It is advisable to
restrain the hind leg when this nerve is stimulated
Hypothermia is a common finding during general
anaesthesia and may cause the degree of neuro-
even if no mechanical recording of the response is
 muscular block to be overestimated. It is generally
proposed. In horses and ponies stimulation of the
accepted that there is a 10% decrease in twitch
peroneal nerve shows greater sensitivity to neuro-
height per *C, although the TOF ratio shows only a
minimal effect. Hypothermia seems to have a
smaller and more consistent effect on the EMG
compared to mechanical recording (Engbaek et al.,
1992).
Reduction in body temperature decreases renal,
hepatic and biliary elimination of non-depolariz-
ing drugs and during hypothermia reduced doses
may be needed to produce any given degree of
blockade. Below a body core temperature of
34.5°C monitoring may become increasingly
inaccurate as thermoregulatory vasoconstriction
occurs. Reduction of muscle blood flow in
hypothermic animals may lead to delay in the
onset of the block and unless allowance is made
for this unduly deep block can result when assess-
ment is carried out too soon after the injection of
the drug because the anaesthetist is persuaded to
administer further, unnecessary, doses.
Overstimulation
FIG.7.8 Site for stimulation of the peroneal nerve in the
Overstimulation caused by an excessive current
horse.The nerve crosses the shaft of the tibia just distal to
directly stimulating muscle or by inducing repet-
the head of the fibula and is often palpable at this site in
itive firing leads to the degree of blockade being
thin-skinned horses.
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 161
underestimated. Overstimulation is most likely to
paralysing action of the drug but doses of up to
follow when the nerve stimulator is applied after
0.06 mg/kg have been given without harmful
the administration of the first dose of neuromuscu-
effects being noted. Intocostrin, the crude curare
lar blocking agent.
preparation, was used in horses during chloral
hydrate narcosis and Booth and Rankin (1953)
came to the conclusion that this combination
AGents WhIch pRoduce Non.
of drugs had no value in equine anaesthesia.
DEPOLARIZING (COMPETITIVE)
However, the dose of curare used (about
BLOCK
0.12 mg /kg when expressed in terms of the pure
d-tubocurarine was much less than what is today
d-TUBOCURARINE CHLORIDE
regarded as the minimal effective dose. Doses of
0.22 to 0.25 mg/kg produce good relaxation with
of curare (Intocostrin) was used in dogs in 1951.
 respiratory arrest in anaesthetized horses breath-
Intocostrin was, however, a relatively crude
ing 0.8 to 1.0% halothane and no sigmificant
substance, and the pure quaternary alkaloid,
hypotension is encountered.
d-tubocurarine, which had become available in
1944, was used in the UK and elsewhere. After
DIMETHYL ETHER OF d-TUBOCURARINE
ent within 2-3 minutes and lasts for 35-40 minutes
The dimethyl ether of d-tubocurarine has been
in most species of animal. Some 3040% of the
used as a relaxant during anaesthesia in dogs, cats,
dose is excreted unchanged in the urine within 3-
pigs and horses. It appeared to be two to three
4 hours. Plasma proteins have the power of bind-
times as potent as d-tubocurarine chloride but the
ing d-tubocurarine chloride and full discussion of
duration of neuromuscular blockade was slightly
the fate of tubocurarine in the body has been given
shorter. It never gained a wide popularity and has
by Kalow (1959).
not been available a in the UK since about 1965 but
Use of an effective dose, i.e. dose that corres-
it is available in the USA under the name of
ponds to 90% depression of twitch response under
'Metocurine'.
light general anaesthesia, showed that in dogs
d-tubocurarine chloride has actions other than at
GALLAMINE TRIETHIODIDE
the neuromuscular junction for although even
large doses of the drug do not affect the canine
Gallamine block of cardiac muscarinic activity can
myocardium it causes a severe fall in blood pressure
be useful during halothane anaesthesia since
and an increase in heart rate. The fall in arterial
halothane tends to produce bradycardia via the
blood pressure appears to be due to block of
vagus nerve. Tachycardia occurs within 1.0 to
impulse transmission across autonomic ganglia -
1.5 min after i.v. injection and in dogs and pigs the
hence tachycardia from vagal block - and/or
heart rate increases by 10-20%. The rise in heart
release of histamine. A similar fall in arterial blood
 rate is sometimes accompanied by a rise in arterial
pressure occurs when the drug is administered
blood pressure. It is not detoxicated and is ex-
intravenously to cats. In pigs, doses of the order of
 creted unchanged in the urine. Gallamine does not
0.3 mg/kg cause complete relaxation with respirat-
give rise to histamine release so that it is a useful
ory paralysis without at the same time causing any
 non-depolarizing relaxant in dogs.
marked fall in arterial blood pressure. Although
In dogs doses of 1.0 mg/kg by i.v. injection usu-
unlikely to be of any use in clinical porcine anaes-
 ally cause complete relaxation for 15 to 20 minutes.
thesia, d-tubocurarine chloride has proved to be a
Apart from a slight tachycardia, the drug appears
useful agent for the production of relaxation
to produce few side effects, but occasionally
required for experimental surgery.
hypertension follows its administration. In cats
Relatively little is known about the action of d-
emp uju 0z ot 01 jo eaoude saonpoid 8x/8u 0'1
tubocurarine chloride in ruminant animals. Young
 tion. Pigs are very resistant to gallamine and doses
lambs and calves appear very sensitive to the
 of 4 mg/ kg are needed to produce complete relax
162 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
ation with apnoea. In horses, doses of 0.5 to
complete relaxation with apnoea in dogs and
1.0 mg/kg result in complete paralysis with
horses of about 40 min duration together with a
 apnoea of 10 to 20 min duration. Young lambs and
short-lived rise in arterial blood pressure. A similar
calves have been given doses of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
period of apnoea follows a second dose of
without harmful effect but in these animals apnoea
0.03 mg/kg. The delay in achieving maximum
may be prolonged.
effect after i.v. administration is much less than is
found with d-tubocurarine or alcuronium. Comp-
 lete antagonism with neostigmine (always given
AlcuronIum chlOride
with an anticholinergic) is readily obtained and no
Alcuronium is not available in the USA. It is dial-
cases of relapse into neuromuscular block have
lylnortoxiferine, a derivative of the alkaloid tox-
been encountered. Care should be taken in dogs
iferine obtained from calabash curare. It has been
suffering from chronic nephritis and other condi-
used quite extensively in dogs and horses and
tions which impair kidney function, because it is, in
seems to have no significant histamine liberating
 part, excreted unchanged in the urine and its action
or ganglionic blocking effects. During light
 is also prolonged in cases of biliary obstruction.
halothane anaesthesia the dose required to pro-
duce complete relaxation with respiratory arrest is
VECURONIUM
0.1 mg/kg. Intravenous injection produces no
 change in heart rate, arterial blood pressure or cen-
Vecuronium is a monoquarternary analogue of
tral venous pressure. The return of spontaneous
pancuronium, the only difference in structure
breathing is apparently followed by a prolonged
being that in this compound the nitrogen in the
period of partial paresis; because of this, reversal
piperidine group attached to the steroid nucleus
of the myoneural block is obligatory. If only one
is not quarternary and positively charged whereas
 dose of alcuronium chloride has been given dur-
in pancuronium it is. Due to the instability of the
ing the course of an operation, the block is very
readily reversed with neostigmine or other anti-
the drug is marketed as a freeze-dried buffered
cholinesterases, but when more than one dose of
powder with water in a separate ampoule. The
alcuronium has been administered some difficulty
 powder can be kept on the shelf at room tempera-
may be experienced in antagonizing its effects. It
ture without deterioration. Vecuronium is cur-
is, therefore, probably advisable to limit the use of
 rently the most specific neuromuscular blocking
alcuronium for operations which can be comple-
 drug in clinical use and is more potent and shorter
ted in the 70 ± 18 minute period of relaxation which
acting than pancuronium. It shows a low pro-
follows one injection of the drug Jones et al., 1978).
pensity to liberate histamine and possesses a
negligible ganglionic blocking action, hence
cardiovascular side effects are unlikely to be seen
PANCURONIUM BROMIDE
during clinical use.
Pancuronium bromide, an amino steroid free from
 Although the mechanism and exact pathway of
 any hormonal action, is a rapidly acting, non-
inactivation in the body is not fully understood, by
depolarizing neuromuscular blocker with a med-
ium duration of activity. It has no major
three main metabolites that could arise by deacety-
undesirable side effects but its administration may
 lation to the corresponding alcohol. The principal
be followed by a slight, short lived, rise in arterial
 metabolite appears to be the 3-hydroxyl derivative
blood pressure. A study in 1970 of the effects of
 for up to 10% of an injected dose may appear in
pancuronium in dogs, cats and horses (G.M.
this form in the urine.
Thompson, personal communication) showed that
 In dogs doses of 0.06 mg/kg produce an initial
the i.v. injection of the drug causes minimal change
block of about 20 min and in horses this dose
in heart rate or central venous pressure and no
emp uru ne oh oz jo eaoude aonpoid oi steadde
alteration of the ECG. During light anaesthesia
tion. Although the EDso of vecuronium is about
doses of 0.06 mg/kg have been found to produce
 0.04 mg/kg compared with 0.05 mg/kg for
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 163
 pancuronium, at this dose the recovery from neu-
ered to have some mild vagolytic activity. In cats
romuscular block to 50% twitch depression is less
more than 50% of the injected dose is eliminated
than 10 min and this period is less than adequate
unchanged in the bile and only 9% in the urine
for most surgical procedures, whereas that
(Khuenl-Brady et al., 1990). No signs of histamine
 produced by pancuronium is much longer lasting.
release or anaphylactoid responses have been
As a result, if longer lasting relaxation is to be
reported after its administration but it has been
 obtained it is necessary to use a larger bolus dose
 reported that in man the injection of rocuronium is
 of vecuronium to produce a rather greater initial
painful and, therefore, the drug should only be
block than with pancuronium.
injected after the deeper stages of anaesthesia have
Vecuronium has both hepatic and renal path-
been achieved (Borgeat & Kwiatkowski, 1997).
Ways for excretion but renal failure has little effect
 on its clearance. Biliary excretion accounts for
about 50% of the injected dose so that clearance is
ATRACURIUM
much reduced in severe hepatic disease. In the
Atracurium besylate is a bisquaternary isoquino-
absence of renal and hepatic disease it is not
line compound and is available as a mixture of
 markedly cumulative and, indeed, in healthy dogs
10 sterioisomers (Amaki et al., 1985). It is eliminated
up to six incremental doses of 0.4 mg/kg have
by pH and temperature-dependent Hofmann
been shown to be non-cumulative (Jones &
degradation, giving rise to laudanosine and a
Seymour, 1985). It has also been used as an infu-
 monoquaternary ester which is further degraded to
sion in dogs (Clutton, 1992).
a second laudanosine molecule and an acrylate
ester (Sterlake et al., 1981). None of these degradua-
tion products is active at the neuromuscular
PIPECURONIUM
junction. The half-life of this process in cats is about
Pipecuronium bromide, a long acting non-depo-
19 minutes (Payne & Hughes, 1981). Coupled with
larizing neuromuscular blocking agent, is an ana-
uptake by the the liver, kidney and other tissues,
logue of pancuronium. It was originally used in
this produces a rapid plasma clearance and an
1980 in Hungary but it is now approved for clinical
 apparent large distribution volume. The Hofmann
use in man in both the UK and the USA. In dogs
-sAs auAzua ue paau jou saop ssanoid uogepeisap
about 77% of the injected drug is said to be elimi-
tem and attains a linear relationship between the
nated in the urine with less than 5% being excreted
dose of drug and the rate of metabolism irrespec-
 in the bile. One potential advantage of pipecuro-
tive of the substrate load. Obviously, the reason
nium is that it is apparently free from cardiovascular
why the duration of block is unaffected by hepatic
side effects. Its neuromuscular blocking effects in the
disease or anuria is because neither process in-
dog have been investigated (Jones 1987;1987a)
volves liver metabolism or renal excretion.
Because of its propensity to release histamine,
atracurium cannot be administered in multiples of
ROCURONIUM
its EDso to give the same sort of flexibility of dura-
Rocuronium, formerly known as Org 9426, a
 tion of action associated with vecuronium where a
steroidal non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker,
 large single bolus dose can be used to provide
is a derivative of vecuronium. Initial animal stud-
 relaxation for a moderately prolonged operation.
ies (Muir et al., 1989 ; Cason et al., 1990) demon-
It is in short procedures that its relatively rapid
strated that compared with vecuronium the onset
 onset, medium duration of action and rapid recov-
 of block was more rapid, its duration of action very
ery are most useful.
similar and its potency about one-fifth. It has no or
 The paralysing dose for the dog is from 0.3 to
minimal cardiovascular effects but in anaes-
0.5 mg/kg (Jones & Clutton, 1984) and recovery
thetized cats it has been shown to possess a
 from these doses occurs in about 40 min (Jones
vagal/neuromuscular blocking ratio of 7 com-
 et al., 1983) although there is a very wide range in
pared to 3 for pancuronium (Marshallet al.,1994),
the duration of effect. The reason for this wide
so that compared to vecuronium it may be consid-
variability in duration is unknown. The drug has
164 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
also been administered to dogs by continuous
PHARMACOKINETICS OF THE
infusion of 0.5mg/kg/hour after a loading dose of
NON-DEPOLARIZING AGENTS
0.5mg/kg Jones & Brearley, 1985).
 All neuromuscular blocking agents contain qua-
A single injection of 0.11 mg/kg of atracur-
onium produces paralysis of about 20 to 30 min
ly charged at body temperature. Because of this
duration in halothane anaesthetized horses
ionization they are highly water soluble and rela-
(Hildebrand et al., 1986). It has also been adminis-
tively insoluble in fat. Their pharmacokinetics can
tered by infusion to horses under halothane anaes-
be described by a two or three compartment
thesia (Klein et al., 1988). After a loading dose of
model, with a rapid distribution phase in which
0.05 mg /kg in another investigation a 95 to 99 %
they distribute from a central into a peripheral
reduction in TOF hoof-twitch response was pro-
compartment. This is followed by one or two
duced by an infusion of 0.17 ± 0.01 mg/kg/hour
slower elimination phases, consisting of bio-
(Hildebrand & Hill, 1989).
 transformation and excretion. For most drugs a
Some anxiety has been expressed about a poss-
 two compartment model is suitable and thus two
ible central nervous system effect of the tertiary
half-lives can be determined: the half-life of distri-
metabolite of atracurium. This compound, laud-
bution (t1/2α) and the half-life of elimination
anosine, does penetrate the blood-brain barrier
(1/28). The mean residence time (MRT) has been
and, in higher concentrations than are likely to be
introduced for statistical purposes - the time for
produced with clinical doses in normal animals, it 
63.2 % of the administered dose to be excreted. The
can cause analeptic or convulsant effects. To date,
value known as Csss is the plasma concentration
no reports of these effects have been described in
at which a 95% decrease in muscle contraction
the veterinary literature.
occurs. This is particularly important to the anaes-
thetist because it represents the surgically optimal
MIVACURIUM
 level of neuromuscular block.
All pharmacokinetic data are relevant to the full
Savarese and colleagues in Massachusetts
umderstanding of the pharmacological profile of a
investigated a series of compounds which are non-
drug under particular circumstances, but only a
depolarizing and metabolized by plasma cho-
few are of immediate clinical importance to the
linesterase. One of these, mivacurium, is a
anaesthetist who principally wishes to utilize
benzylisoquinoline diester compound with a
them for calculation of the appropriate infusion
rate for any particular drug. These clinically
atracurium. It consists of three sterioisomers of
important data are summarized in Table 7.1 which
which one is active. Unlike atracurium, its break-
shows mean figures culled from the literature. The
down products are pharmacologically inactive.
published data show a marked variability result-
Breakdown is by plasma cholinesterase and both
 ing from differences in the doses administered, the
acetylcholinesterase and spontaneous hydrolysis
anaesthetic technique employed, the time of
appear to have only minimal effects. Low plasma
sampling, the extraction and assay methods for
cholinesterase levels are associated with a longer
measuring the concentrations, the species of an-
imal and in the pharmacokinetic model used for
 cholinesterase due to hepatic failure results in pro-
the calculations.
longed activity, although alternative pathways for
Vdc governs the peak plasma concentration fol-
dlearance are available (Saverese et al., 1988)
lowing injection of a bolus dose. Because drug dis-
 Re-establishment of paralysis using very small
tribution depends on tissue perfusion, cardiac
doses of mivacurium following apparent full
output is an important factor in pharmacokinetics.
lar block has been reported in man (Kopman et al.
Reduction in cardiac outputleads to slow and lesser
distribution with lengthening of t1/2o a slower
1996). Even at a TOF of 0.95 the neuromuscular
 onset of action and eventually, a stronger effect.
With increased cardiac output tissue perfusion is
reduced.
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 165
TABLE 7.1 Pharmacokinetic data (rounded figures).Vde = initial volume of distribution; Vdss = volume of
distribution, central and peripheral compartment; Clp = plasma clearance;t/2 β =hal-life of elimination;
 MRT = mean residence time; Cs9s = plasma concentration for 95 % decrease in first twitch of TOF
Drug
Css9s (mg/kg)
Vdc (l/kg)
Cdss (l/kg)
Cl, (ml/kg/min) t/z β (min)
MRT (min)
 Alcuronium
0.08
0.15
1.34
143
Atracurium
1.30
0.05
0.20
6.60
21
Doxacurium
0.22
2.76
99
616
Gallamine
10.00
0.10
0.20
1.20
134
Metocurine
0.60
0.05
0.57
1.20
360
Mivacurium
0.11
70.00
18
1.5
Pancuronium
0.35
0.10
0.26
1.80
132
134.0
 Pipecuronium
0.11
0.31
2.30
137
140.0
Rocuronium
0.04
0.21
3.70
97
58.3
Vecuronium
0.23
0.07
0.27
5.20
71
52.0
greater than normal which means a more extensive
 2. Substances which antagonize the non-depo-
and faster distribution and thus a higher dose is
 larizing agents tend to potentiate the depolarizing
needed to cause the same effect. When the plasma
 ones and thus in clinical practice it is important to
concentration of a drug to produce a given level of
note that anticholinestrases such as neostigmine
neuromuscular block (e.g. Css95) is kmown, the sin-
may prolong the action of depolarizing relaxants.
gle bolus dose or the rate of a continuous infusion
3. In a nerve-muscle preparation it can be
needed for it to be achieved can be calculated:
demonstrated that after partial paralysis with a
Bolus dose = Ccs95 x Vdss
non-depolarizing drug there is a rapid decay of an
and infusion rate = Css9s x Clp
degree of paralysis caused by a depolarizing agent
It must be remembered, however, that a wide bio-
an induced tetanus is sustained.
logical variability in response to neuromuscular
4. It is unlikely that depolarizing agents ever
blocking drugs exists between individual animals.
produce a pure type of neuromuscular block. For
Another important factor in pharmacokinetic
example, in dogs they cause both depolarization
behaviour is protein binding which influences the
and desensitization.
volume of distribution, metabolism and excretion
 5. In the cat, rat and mouse, the depolarizing
of neuromuscular blocking agents. Changes in
agents affect the red muscles more than the white,
whereas non-depolarizers have the opposite
and binding of concurrently administered drugs
effect.
will both influence the protein binding of these
In certain animal species esters of choline, notably
agents.
the succinyl derivatives, cause neuromuscular
block of short duration by depolarization. Two of
AGENTS WHICh PRODUCe
these compounds are dimethylsuccinylcholine
DEPOLARIZING BLOCK
and diethylsuccinylcholine. The former substance
is known as suxamethonium and the latter as sux-
Muscle paralysis due to depolarization differs
ethonium. They resemble each other pharmaco-
from that caused by non-depolarizing drugs in the
lbgically, with the sole difference that the paralysis
following respects:
caused by suxethonium is rather more rapid in
1. The paralysis is preceded by the transient
onset and of slightly shorter duration. The first
stimulation of muscle fibres, probably caused by
two of the compounds to be used clinically in vet-
the initial depolarization. The muscle twitching
erinary anaesthesia was suxethonium bromide
which results from this is visible in animal
(Hall, 1952) but the suxamethonium compound is
 the one generally employed today.
subjects.
166 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
SUXAMETHONIUM
motor nerve is quickly followed by a tonic contrac-
tion and depression of neuromuscular transmis-
Suxamethonium consists of two acetylcholine
sion. Spasm does not require neural impulses,
molecules coupled back to back. Like acetyl-
choline, it is hydrolysed by cholinesterases and
usually prevents muscle fasciculation and persists
as long as the block lasts. In mammals, this
this hydrolysis is believed to be responsible for
recovery from its effects. It has been shown in dogs
 myotonic response persists in the extraocular mus-
 cles, in partially denervated and degenerating
that the injection of a purified cholinesterase
limb muscles and to a minor degree in the jaw
 preparation produces a marked increase in resist-
muscles. Animals susceptible to malignant hyper-
ance to the effect of the drug (Hall et al., 1953).
 Because of this, attempts have been made to corre-
thermia also respond to suxamethonium with a
spastic paralysis.
late the sensitivity of an animal to suxamethonium
In domestic animals there is some slight varia-
with the levels of cholinesterase present in its
tion in response of the various muscle groups but
blood (Stowe et al., 1958).
the diaphragmatic muscle is usually the last to be
The ability of plasma cholinesterase to hydrolyse
butyrylthiocholine can be used to predict sensitivity
affected. Suxamethonium causes marked muscle
fasciculation and in man these contractions fre-
to suxamethonium in man but has not been of value
quently lead to muscle pains obvious the next day
in animals. Faye (1988) has made an extensive study
of the role of cholinesterase in the explanation of
to the patient. Conscious volunteers given suxam-
differing species sensitivity to suxamethonium. In
ethonium for experimental purposes have report-
her opinion the affinities of cholinesterase for differ-
ed that the muscle fasciculations are extremely
painful. Suxamethonium produces actual muscle
ent substrates are different between species (Tables
7.2 and 7.3) and, furthermore, although the hydro-
injury; serum creatine kinase levels are raised and
lysis of some assay substrates parallel that of sux-
 myoglobinuria has been seen after intermittent
administration of the drug during halothane
amethonium in man they do not in other species of
animal. Therefore, the substrates used to study
anaesthesia in horses.
 Because cholinesterase is formed in the liver,
cholinesterase activity in man cannot be used to
draw conclusions regarding suxamethonium sensit-
the existence of severe liver damage, cachexia, or
 malnutrition may prolong the duration of action of
ivity in other animals; for this to be done, Faye con-
siders it is most important that the substrate used
suxamethonium. In man, atypical forms of cho-
linesterase are recognized. They have been found
for assay is suxamethonium itself.
In birds, suxamethonium produces spastic
in animals but their sigmificance and mode of
inheritance have not been determined (Trucchi
paralysis of the whole body. An initial enhance-
ct al, 1988). Low cholinesterase levels are also
ment of the twitch produced by stimulation of the
TABLE 7.2 Mean values for plasma cholinesterases as determined by the use of different assay substrates
(courtesy of Dr Sherry Faye, Senior Biochemist,Bristol Royal Infirmary)
Species
Propionyl thiocholine Benzoyl cholineI
 Butyryl thiocholine Succinylcholine
 Sacred baboon
4.20
0.85
7.01
89.70
Chimpanzee
5.65
0.93
6.15
76.50
Bottle-nosed dolphin
0.04
None
0.02
47.90
Pig
0.34
0.03
0.32
43.13
Horse
4.18
0.27
4.46
33.10
Dog
2.13
0.36
3.33
8.01
Cat
1.36
7.24
 Indian elephant
0.01
None
0.05
7.00
Goat
0.14
0.04
0.02
6.70
Sheep
0.05
None
None
1.47
Cow
0.06
0.95
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 167
TABLE 7.3 Plasma cholinesterase activities determined using different substrates expressed as a
homozygotes taken as: propionylthiocholine activity 4.58 units/ml, benzoylcholine activity 0.88 units/ml,
butyryl thiocholine activity 5.04 units/ml and succinylcholine activity 58.6 units/ml (courtesy of
Dr Sherry Faye, Senior Biochemist, Bristol Royal Infirmary)
Species
Propionyl thiocholine  Benzoyl choline  Butyryl thiocholine  Succinylcholine
activity
activity
actvity
activity
Red deer
1.3
4.5
0.5
6.8
Goat
2.9
4.5
0.5
6.7
Fallow deer
1.0
1.3
12.4
Bottle-nosed dolphin
0.9
0.4
81.7
Indian elephant
0.2
0.9
11.9
Sacred baboon
91.7
96.6
139.1
153.1
Patas monkey
9.2
5.7
13.5
45.9
White rhino
29.7
12.5
34.3
26.4
Donkey
99.3
62.5
124.4
61.6
Muscovy duck
8.5
7.9
6.9
18.9
compoumds.
likely to be due to release of potassium ions from
Suxamethonium, containing two acetylcholine
muscle. This rise in serum potassium may also be
molecules, might be expected to have actions in
associated with cardiac irregularities. Prolonged
the body in addition to its effects at the neuromus-
administration of suxamethonium, on the other
cular junction and this is indeed the case. Injection
hand, causes a large decrease in serum potassium
 of suxamethonium causes a rise in blood pressure
in dogs, but the reason for this is unknown
in all animals, although in some species the rise
(Stevenson, 1960).
may be preceded by a fall. In cats there is an imme-
Anisas ui sanuaa saiads apim are arau
diate marked fall in arterial blood pressure, fol-
to the neuromuscular blocking action of suxam-
lowed by a slower rise to above the resting level.
ethonium. Horses, pigs and cats are relatively
The fall in blood pressure can be prevented by the
resistant, but dogs, sheep and cattle are paralysed
prior administration of atropine, and the rise by
by small doses. In horses 0.12-0.15mg/kg usually
hexamethonium so that the prior administration
cause paralysis of the limb, head and neck muscles
 without producing diaphragmatic paralysis. In
change. Blood pressure changes are seen after each
most horses double this dose will cause total para-
successive dose of suxamethonium but with pro-
lysis but the exact effect prod uced in any individ-
 gressively diminishing severity. Pulse rate changes
ual will depend on the depth of anaesthesia at the 
are variable, both bradycardia and tachycardia
time when the relaxant is administered. After a
being observed, sometimes in the same animal,
single dose paralysis generally lasts for about
 and often the heart rate does not change. In horses
4-5 min although limb weakness may persist for
and dogs the nicotinic response predominates
some time longer. In cattle, one-sixth of this quan-
(Adams & Hall, 1962, 1962a) - very occasionally a
tity (0.02 mg/kg) produces paralysis of the body
fall in blood pressure with bradycardia is seen, but
muscles without diaphragmatic paralysis and this
st ajei jeau pue aimssaid pooiq yoq ul aseaioun ue
 relaxation lasts 6-8 min. Once again, double this
the usual response.
dose will cause complete paralysis in most an-
Cardiac arrhythmias are frequently seen after i.v.
imals. In sheep, doses similar to those used in cattle
injection and usually take the form of atrioventric
are employed. Pigs require much larger doses; to
ular nodal rhythm. One injection of suxamethon-
facilitate
endotracheal intubation the dose
ium causes a rise in serum potassium which is not
 required is about 2 mg/kg, which produces com-
abolished by adrenalectomy, ganglionic blockade,
plete paralysis for only 2-3 min. In cats, 3-5 mg of
168 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
suxamethonium chloride (total dose) produces
during moderate hypothermia. Reduction of mus-
 5-6 min of paralysis. The dog is comparatively
 cle blood flow in hypothermic animals may lead to
sensitive and doses of 0.3 mg/kg produce total
delay in onset time of block and unless allowance
paralysis of 15-20 minutes' duration. A single dose
is made for this, gives rise to the risk of serious
II aseud pue shop u ynonq lI aseud aonpoid Aeu
 overdosing if the drug is being given in incremen-
block may also be produced when more than one
tal doses to assess its effects as administration
dose is given to other animals. It is believed that
proceeds.
the response of the motor end plate gradually
alters with each successive dose but the precise
Administration of other drugs
time and dose relationship is not yet known
Apart from its use to facilitate endotracheal
 Any drug which has anticholinesterase properties
intubation in pigs and cats, it seems that there are
 will prolong the action of suxamethonium and
today no good indications for suxamethonium in 
 tend to antagonize non-depolarizing neuromuscu-
veterinary anaesthesia.
lar blockade. Several antibiotics, especially the
aminoglycosides, may produce or enhance non-
depolarizing block, possibly by binding calcium to
FACTORS AFFECTING THE ACTION OF
NEUROMUSCULAr bLOCKING DrUGS
of calcium at presynaptic sites. However, antibio-
Factors such as age, concurrent administration of
tic induced or enhanced competitive block is not
other drugs, body temperature, extracellular pH,
 invariably  antagonized  by  anticholinesterase
neuromuscular disease and genetic abnormalities
 drugs or by administration of calcium. Care
may influence response to muscle relaxant drugs.
should, therefore, be taken over the administration
of antibiotics such as gentamycin during the
immediate recovery period following antagonism
Age
of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers
The response of young animals to neuromuscular
because refractory paralysis may occur.
blocking drugs is different from that of adults. The
General anaesthetics may have a marked effect
muscles of a 7-day-old kitten are less sensitive to
 on neuromuscular block. Halothane, methoxyflu-
depolarizing drugs than those of a normal adult
rane and isoflurane potentiate non-depolarizing
cat but very sensitive to tubocurarine. The anaes-
relaxants such as pancuronium. Rocuronium block
thetic drugs themselves have an age-dependent
is potentiated by isoflurane and enflurane but only
effect upon neuromuscular transmission so that
to a lesser degree by halothane.
complementary relaxation provided by some
anaesthetics is variable and important.
Extracellular p H
Hypercapnia augments tubocurarine block and
Body temperature
 opposes its reversal by neostigmine. Alcuronium
The effect of muscle and body temperature on the
 and pancuronium block are apparently unaffected
potency and duration of action of muscle relaxants
by PCO2, but block due to suxamethonium may be
is difficult to assess because any effect of change in
potentiated by acidosis. A number of explanations
 have been advanced to account for these findings
complicated by changes in regional blood flow.
 se s s r a ss  p
Reduction in body temperature decreases renal,
binding, ionization of the relaxant and ionization
hepatic and biliary elimination of non-depolariz-
of the receptor sites may be important.
ing neuromuscular blocking agents and during
hypothermia reduced doses may be needed to pro-
Neuromuscular disease
duce a given degree of neuromuscular block. In
clinical practice it certainly seems that the require-
Animals suffering from myasthenia gravis are
ments of non-depolarizing agents are decreased
resistant to depolarizing neuromuscular blockers
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 169
and are more than normally sensitive to compet-
logical need to stand immediately on recovery
itive blocking agents. A myopathy has been
 from anaesthesia. The presence of even a small
described in a horse (Jones & Richie, 1965) where a
 degree of neuromuscular block can result in vio-
generalized muscle spasm was produced by the
 lent excitement and floumdering about as the horse
administration of an extremely small dose of sux-
tries, unsuccessfully because of muscle weakmess,
amethonium.
to get to its feet.
The principle underlying use of antagonists to
neuromuscular blocking drugs is tilting of the bal-
Genetic factors
ance between the concentration of acetylcholine
Genetic factors in relation to response to suxam-
and the concentration of the drug at the neuromus-
ethonium have been described in humans. Trucchi
 cular junction in favour of the former. To do this, it 
et al. (1988) have demonstrated some effects on
is necessary to reduce breakdown of acetylcholine
cholinesterase activity which seem to have a gen-
by cholinesterase or to facilitate greater release of
etic basis in dogs.
it. The drugs that are in common use as antago-
rists of neuromuscular block are those that reduce
breakdown of the transmitter, i.e. they are anti-
Blood pressure and flow
cholinesterases. The anticholinesterases allow the
Recovery from the effects of relaxant drugs is like-
accumulation of acetylcholine at the end plate
ly to be more rapid if blood flow through the
 region but acetylcholine does not actively displace
muscle is high and thus maintains a steep concen-
the neuromuscular blocking drugs molecules from
tration gradient between tissues and blood by
 the receptor sites. There is constant attachment
removing molecules of the agent as soon as they
and reattachment of the molecules of the muscle
are freed from receptors.
relaxant and acetylcholine to the receptor, and
Electrolyte imbalance
cules from inhibition of acetylcholinesterase there
is a greater chance of one of the acetylcholine mol-
 A deficiency of calcium, potassium or sodium
 ecules occupying a temporarily 'unblocked' recep-
retards the depolarization of motor end plates and   tor (Bowman, 1990).
by thus inhibiting neuromuscular transmission
There are no effective antidotes to those agents
will increase the blocking effects of the non-depo-
which act by depolarization, but certain anti-
larizing muscle relaxants. On the other hand,
cholinesterases are effective antidotes to the phase
hyperkalaemia and hypernatraemia render mus-
I block following the use of suxamethonium. It is
cles more resistant to them
essential to observe clear fade of TOF because,
when phase I block is not present, prolonged
paralysis requiring several hours of ventilatory
EVOKED RECOVErY fROM
support may result from anticholinesterase admin-
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
istration. The commonly used anticholinesterase
agents are neostigmine, edrophonium and pyri-
While it is possible for non-depolarizing agents to
 dostigmine and of these neostigmine is by far the
be eliminated from the body with or without sig-
most popular The use of these agents in the rever-
nificant metabolism, thus resulting in termination
 sal of neuromuscular blockade in veterinary anaes-
of action, this can never be reliably predicted.
thesia was well reviewed by Jones (1988).
There is great individual variation in response of
Acetylcholinesterase has two sites of action, one
animals to neuromuscular blocking drugs and, in
ionic and and the other esteratic, and its inhibitors
 are usually classified as acid-transferring or pros-
takes a very long time. Thus, antagonism of non-
thetic. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine are acid
depolarizing neuromuscular block is usually indi-
 transferring drugs, containing a carbamate group
 and combining with cholinesterase in almost
horses, for these animals appear to have a psycho-
the same way as acetylcholine.The bond of the
170 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
carbamate-enzyme is much longer lasting than
mine, being about 7 to 10 minutes. Unless neuro-
that of the bond of the enzyme with acetylcholine
muscular block is being monitored by a motor
and they are, therefore, more slowly hydrolysed
nerve stimulation technique, neostigmine should
than acetylcholine, thus preventing the access of
never be given until there is some sign of sponta-
the enzyme to acetylcholine. Their breakdown
neous respiratory activity, otherwise there is no
products also have weak anticholinesterase acti-
way of assessing its effects and the possibility of
vity. Prosthetic inhibitors such as edrophonium
 passing from a non-depolarization to a depolariza-
have a dissociation half-life which is much shorter
 tion block exists. An anticholinergic should always
than that of the neostigmine-enzyme bond but,
be given to counteract the more serious muscarinic
unlike neostigmine, edrophonium is not meta-
effects of neostigmine (bradycardia, salivation,
bolized when combined with cholinesterase and
is therefore free to recombine repeatedly with
 be mixed in the syringe with neostigmine and the
the enzyme (Wilson, 1955). The inhibition of
 mixture given in small repeated doses until full
 acetylcholinesterase, although it is the main one, is
respiratory activity is established or monitoring
not the only action of these drugs. Their other
reveals a satisfactory TOF ratio. It is customary to
 actions include a direct stimulation of the receptor
mix atropine and neostigmine in the ratio of
as well as a presynaptic effect involving enhance-
approximately 1 : 2 (e.g. 1.2 mg of atropine with
ment of acetylcholine release (Riker & Wescoe,
 2.5 mg of neostigmine). This practice is quite safe
1946; Deana & Scuka, 1990).
because anticholinergics exert their effects before
 Neostigmine and pyridostigmine differ from
the onset of neostigmine activity.
 edrophonium in their effects on presynaptic recep-
Neostigmine, even if given with full doses of
tors. Presynaptic effects of edrophonium are much
atropine, may cause serious cardiac arrhythmias if
 greater in terms of acetylcholine liberation. This is
there has been gross underventilation during
 shown by greater anti-fade effect (higher TOF
 anaesthesia or if CO, has been allowed to accumu-
late at the end of operation with a view to ensuring
muscular block, fade being a presynaptic phenom-
return of spontaneous respiration. Hypercapnia
enon related to liberation of more acetylcholine
also increases the neuromuscular block of non-
(Donati et al., 1983). Edrophonium may also differ
 depolarizing agents and so antagonism is likely to
from neostigmine and pyridostigmine because its
be less effective under these conditions. It has been
inconsistent effect in deep neuromuscular block
shown that after anaesthesia in which IPPV has
may result, at least in part, from a direct depres-
been used to lower the PaCO2, spontaneous
sion of the end plate channel leading to muscle
breathing returns at low PaCO2s, provided that no
weakness from accumulation of acetylcholine pro-
 depressant drugs have been used. This is probably
duced in excess due to a presynaptic effect of edro-
due to the effect of stimuli arising in the trachea
phonium (Wachtel, 1990).
and bronchi, skin and, perhaps, to the effect of a
 If the anticholinerestases are administered in
sudden increase of afferent nerve impulses result-
the absence of non-depolarizing neuromuscular
ing from the return of proprioceptive activity as
blocking drug they produce muscle fibrillation or
muscle tone is restored following the administra-
fasciculations and, given in large enough doses,
tion of neostigmine.
they will produce a depolarization type of neuro-
In the absence of facilities for monitoring of
muscular block.
neuromuscular block reliance must be placed on
clinical signs to assess when reversal is adequate.
Signs of residual neuromuscular block include tra-
NEOSTIGMINE
cheal tug, paradoxical indrawing of intercostal
Neostigmine is probably the most widely used
muscles during inspiration similar to that seen in
 anticholinesterase antagonist of non-depolarizing
 cases of respiratory obstruction, and a 'rectangu-
neuromuscular block. The time course of the
antagonising effect of neostigmine is roughly half-
 position is held for some time before expiration
way between that of edrophonium and pyridostig-
begins. The atropine-neostigmine mixture should
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 17I
be given in small doses, with a pause between
1. To relax skeletal muscles for easier surgical
each, until these sigms disappear.
access.
 2. To facilitate control of respiration during
intrathoracic surgery.
EDROPHONIUm
 3. To assist in reduction of dislocated joints.
Edrophonium is an effective and reliable anatagon-
Clinical experience shows that not only are
ist to the non-depolarizing agents. Earlier impres-
dislocations more easily reduced if the muscles are
sions that its effects were too short lasting were
paralysed but also that reluxation of the joint is
probably due to use of inadequate doses and, with
facilitated by the absence of muscle tone. The
the use of higher doses,the drug isnow becoming
reduction of fractures, on the other hand, is seldom
popular. Doses of edrophonium in excess of
eased by administration of relaxants since the
0.5 mg/kg appear similar in effect to that of neo-
difficulties of reduction are due to spasm of
stigmine but the onset of action is considerably
muscles around the fracture site provoked by
shorter (about 1 to 3 minutes) making it easier to
haematomata and broken bone fragments.
titrate more accurately its administration to full
 4. To limit the amount of general anaesthetic
reversal of blockade. It is usual to administer it in
used when muscle relaxation itself is not the prime
conjunction with atropine or glycopyrrolate
requisite. For example, in dogs no muscle
although it may have fewer and more transient
relaxation is needed for operations on the ear canal
muscarinic effects than neostigmine.
but surgical stimulation can be intense, resulting
in head shaking unless the animal is very deeply
PYRIDOSTIGMINE
anaesthetized. The judicious use of neuromuscular
block prevents head shaking by weakening neck
In the USA pyridostigmine has found favour in
some centres. It has a longer duration of action
muscles so very much smaller quantities of
than neostigmine but its long onset time of around
anaesthetic or analgesic can be employed. In these
10 - 15 minutes means that assessment of reversal
circumstances all that is required is a light degree
is difficult if it is administered by a titration
of unconsciousness coupled with analgesia, and
thus the detrimental effects of deep depression of
method. In veterinary practice, it appears to have
no significant advantages over neostigmine.
 the central nervous system are avoided.
5. To ease the induction of full anaesthesia in
animals already unconscious from intravenous
4-AMINOPYRIDINE
narcotic drugs. For example, when thiopentone is
This has not been used to increase the output of
used to induce loss of consciousness in horses
acetylcholine at nerve endings since the early
before administration of an inhalant such as
1980s. The main problems with 4-aminopyridine
halothane or isoflurane, there is a period when the
are its occasional inability to antagonize non-
 effect of the thiopentone is waning and the uptake
depolarizing neuromuscular block, and its effects
of the inhalation agent is not yet sufficient to
on the central and peripheral nervous systems. Its
prevent movement of the limbs. The careful use of
central effects may be useful as an analeptic and
small doses of relaxant can do much to 'smooth
respiratory stimulant but other and more satisfact-
 out' this transitional period by paralysing the limb
ory drugs exist for these purposes.
muscles.
6. To facilitate the performance of endotracheal
intubation and endoscopy. Although animals can
USE OF NEUROMUSCULAR
be intubated without the use of these drugs, they
BLOCKING DRUGS IN VETERINARY
 may make endotracheal intubation very much
ANAESTHESIA
easier, especially in cats and pigs.
7. To reduce the need for postoperative
INDICATIONS
analgesics. By making surgical access easier
The general indications for the use of these drugs
without forcible retraction of muscles by the
in veterinary clinical practice are:
surgeon they minimize bruising of muscle caused
172 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
by retractors. Much postoperative pain is due to
duction agent is deemed contraindicated and
muscle damage and minimizing this by use of
 anaesthesia is induced with an inhalation agent,
neuromuscular blocking drugs contributes greatly
somewhat heavier sedation is required. The neuro-
to postoperative comfort of the animal and to
muscular blocker may be given at induction or
wound healing.
later, at the start of, or during surgery, depending
8. To facilitate eye
 surgery by ensuring
 on the reason for its use. Atropine or glycopyrro-
immobility of the eyeball.
late should always be given to avoid troublesome
salivation and increased bronchial secretion which
may otherwise follow administration of suxam-
CONTRAINDICATIONS
ethonium.
It must be very clearly understood that a relaxant
Induction of anaesthesia with an i.v. drug has
should never be administered unless facilities are
available for immediate and sustained artificial
minimal doses are employed. The dose used
respiration to be applied. The administration of
 should only be just sufficient to induce loss of con-
even small doses of these drugs may, on occasion,
sciousness and relaxation of the jaw muscles.
be followed by respiratory paralysis. An animal
 Dogs, horses and ruminants may then be intuba-
cannot be ventilated efficiently for very long by
 ted. In cats and pigs injection of the induction agent
application of intermittent pressure to the chest
may be followed immediately unconsciousness
wall and artificial respiration must be carried out
supervenes by i.v. injection of a neuromuscular
by application of intermittent positive pressure to
 blocking agent and the animal allowed to breathe
the airway through an endotracheal tube - the use
O2 through a close-fitting face mask until respira-
tion ceases and atraumatic endotracheal intuba-
bation attempts fail, is not really satisfactory
tion can be performed. These animals are perhaps
because it is all too easy to inflate the stomach as
best intubated under suxamethonium-induced
well as the lungs.
relaxation but pigs may be intubated under
 In addition it must be clearly recognized that
vecuronium paralysis (Richards et al., 1988).
 neuromuscular blocking drugs have no narcotic or
Endotracheal intubation is most desirable when
 analgesic properties. During any surgical opera-
relaxant drugs are used because a perfectly clear
tion an animal must be incapable of appreciating
airway is required at all times (but it must never be
 pain or fear throughout the whole period of action
assumed that the presence of an endotracheal tube
of any neuromuscular blocking drug which may
necessarily guarantees an unobstructed airway).
be employed. Fortunately, provided due care is
Owing to relaxation of pharyngeal and oeso-
taken, itis a relatively simple matter to ensure this,
 phageal muscles stomach contents may be regur-
but any doubt about the maintenance of uncon-
 gitated and aspirated into the lungs. This need not
sciousness must constitute an absolute contraindi-
imply that a cuffed endotracheal tube is essential.
cation to the use of neuromuscular blockers. When
In cats and other small animals, reasonably close-
an inhalation anaesthetic such as halothane, isoflu-
fitting plain tubes confer a considerable protection
rane or sevoflurane is being used, with or without
for with IPPV escape of gas around the tube dur-
nitrous oxide, administration of 1.2 x MAC should
 ing the inspiratory phase discourages the passage
always ensure unconsciousness without produc-
of regurgitated stomach contents down the tra-
ing an undesirable depth of unconsciousness.
chea and the presence of stomach content in the
 pharynx, from where it can be removed by suction,
will become obvious to the observant anaesthetist.
TECHNIQUE OF USE
If an endotracheal tube is not used the stomach
Induction of anaesthesia by intravenous medi-
and even the intestines may be inflated by gas
cation is simple and pleasant for the animal so
forced down the oesophagus when positive pres-
that heavy sedation with large doses of sedative/
sure is applied to the airway at the mouth and nos-
analgesic drugs is neither necessary nor desirable.
trils. This may be dangerous and is always a
When, however, the use of an intravenous in-
 nuisance in abdominal surgery. Laryngeal masks
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 173
(Colgate Medical, Windsor, Berkshire), now widely
The maintenance of a light plane of anaesthesia
used in man instead of endotracheal intubation,
throughout the operation is of very great import-
may not provide total airway protection in an-
ance. Allowing the animal to awaken to con-
imals. Although tried in pigs they have not been
sciousness during the course of an operation
extensively tested in animals and, currently, the
clearly cannot be tolerated but deep central nerv-
 ous depression must be avoided or the full benefit
thesia is precluded by their cost.
derived from the use of neuromuscular blocking
Maintenance of anaesthesia involves f
the
drugs will not be obtained. Once anaesthesia has
administration of further doses of the neuromus-
been induced light anaesthesia may be ensured in
cular blocker whenever these are indicated, and
one or more of several ways but it is important to
ensuring beyond all reasonable doubt that the
note that if it becomes dangerously light, contrac-
animal remains lightly anaesthetized throughout
tions of limb or facial muscles will occur either
the operation. Indications for supplementary
spontaneously or in response to surgical stimula-
doses of relaxant are relatively easy to state. The
tion. These movements can always be seen, even
drugs are always best given by i.v. injection of
when clinically paralysing doses of neuromuscular
repeated small doses, or by continuous infusion,
blockers have been given. The reason for this is
until the desired degree of relaxation is obtained.
unknown, but it is tempting to speculate that the Y
One exception to this rule is that a dose given prior
fibre system nerve endings are more sensitive to
to endotracheal intubation must be large enough
the action of relaxant drugs than are the α fibre
to abolish respiratory movements so that the tube
endings, for if this is so the neuromuscular blockers
may be introduced through a completely relaxed
might abolish muscle tonus and produce relaxation
larynx.
without entirely preventing contraction of the mus-
Neuromuscular blockade is probably best
cles due to impulses in the c motor neurones.
Theoretically, it is unwise to use drugs of differ-
 n     r   
ing actions at the myoneural junction in the same
dose. Infusion is commenced when the desired
 animal at any one time. There is some clinical evid-
level of block returns after this dose and its rate is
adjusted to to maintain this level, with initial
appreciation of the risks involved and the avoid-
adjustments of ± 20%, but adjustments are not
-xs se yns snip 'saanbas uan go au
made more frequently than every 5 minutes.
ethonium and pancuronium can be given with
Atracurium, vecuronium or mivacurium may be
safety to the animal during one operation. Jones
given in this way and infusion is stopped when
and Gleed (1984) demonstrated that in dogs prior
relaxation is no longer needed. The desired level of
administration of suxamethonium reduced the
block is easily established when TOF monitoring is
duration of action of alcuronium, gallamine and
employed because maintenance of one twitch will
pancuronium. In pigs it is often desirable to pro-
provide good operating conditions; desired block
duce total paralysis rapidly with suxamethonium
level is more difficult to recognize when TOF
so as to obtain the best possible conditions for intu-
monitoring is unavailable. Most anaesthetists con-
bation of the trachea and yet to obtain relaxation
sider that the dose of relaxant drug used should be
throughout the subsequent operation with a non-
such that if IPPV is temporarily suspended, the
 depolarizing drug. Provided the effects of suxam-
 animal is just capable of making feeble respiratory
ethonium have worn off (as judged by the
 efforts. Resistance to lung inflation, in the absence
respiratory activity) few, if any, harmful effects are
 of other obvious causes (e.g. airway obstruction)
seen when the non-depolarizing neuromuscular
 ndicates that forcible respiratory efforts are immin-
blocker is given. In dogs, the use of suxamethon-
ent and a further dose of neuromuscular blockel
ium at the end of a long operation when a non-
is required. When an intermittent injection tech-
 depolarizing drug has provided the relaxation up
nique is used supplementary doses of neuromus-
 to the last few minutes, seems to involve reduction
cular blockers should not, in general, exceed half
in the duration of action of the depolarizing agent
the initial dose.
(Jones & Gleed, 1984a).
174 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Cumulative effects should not be forgotten - if,
citrated blood), calcium gluconate or calcium chlo-
when bolus administration is being employed, it is 
ride solutions may be given.
necessary to administer subsequent doses, the
The commonest cause of prolonged apnoea fol-
quantity of each dose given should not, in
 general, exceed half the total dose used initially to
 to be hypothermia. Unless precautions are taken to
secure the desired degree of relaxation. As noted
maintain the body temperature it falls, especially
previously the aminoglycoside variety of anti-
during laparotomy and thoracotomy. This fall is
biotics may cause difficulty in antagonism of neu-
 particularly great in small animal patients and
 romuscular block produced by non-depolarizing
there is often difficulty in antagonizing the effects
agents.
of non-depolarizing drugs in these animals until
they are rewarmed. Animals should not be left in
the postoperative period with any residual neuro-
PoSTOPerATIVE COMPlICATIONS
 muscular block. If dogs are returned to their cages
OF NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING
with any residual curarization, pulmonary atelect-
AGENTS
asis may develop. Estimation of the tone of the
masseter muscle, by gentle traction on the
The most important complication is prolonged
mandible, has proved to be a useful test for detect-
 apnoea. The best prevention of this complication is 
ing slight degrees of muscular weakness. If the
the avoidance of excessive doses. Potentially trou-
masseter tone is good there is unlikely to be trou-
blesome desensitization of the postjunctional
ble with respiration.
membrane can be avoided if the anaesthetist does
not persist with administration of increasingly
larger doses of depolarizing agents in the face of
CENTRALLY ACTING MUSCLE
obvious tachyphylaxis to their blocking effect. In
RELAXANTS
-aa aq pmous ieue au ude aaeadoisod
tilated until the cause of the apnoea can be ascer-
MEPHENESIN
tained and treated. If non-depolarizing agents
were used during the operation and the cause of
Mephenesin is a colourless, odourless, crystalline
apnoea seems to be due to paralysis of the respirat-
solid soluble in ethyl alchohol and propylene gly-
ory muscles, it may be treated by i.v. atropine and
col. Intravenous injection of a 10% solution leads
an anticholinesterase. There is no antidote to the
to a high incidence of venous thrombosis and also
phase I block of depolarizing drugs and the only
treatment is IPPV until the return of adequate
 oliguria, uraemia and death. The drug is partly
spontaneous breathing.
detoxicated in the liver and partly excreted
When an anticholinesterase agent is ineffective
unchanged in the urine. Mephenesin mixed with
but the apnoea appears to be due to neuromuscu-
pentobarbitone was introduced for canine and
lar block caused by non-depolarizing agents, or is
feline anaesthesia but the mixture did not prove to
 due to a phase 2 block of the depolarizing agents,
-nqreqouad iaao aaeueape juesyuais Aue aaeu
the effects of the i.v. administration of potassium
one alone. Mephenesin has many side effects and
and/or calcium may be tried. In the absence of a
it is no longer used in anaesthesia.
urinary output potassium should be given cau-
tiously and if possible myocardial activity should
GUAIPHENESIN
be continuously monitored for incipient electro-
cardiographic evidence of hyperkalaemia (e.g.
Guaiphenesin (Guaifenesin in North America),
high spiking T-waves, shortening of the S-T seg-
formerly knowm as guaicol glycerine ether, GGE or
ment). If the administration of potassium is not
GG, is a mephenesin-like compound which has
effective and there is reason to believe that the
sanusam) srea  roy Aua u pasn taaq
plasma level of ionized calcium has been dimin-
& Fritsch, 1961) and is now used widely throughh-
ished (e.g. after transfusion of large quantities of
out the world. Concentrated solutions (over 10%)
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 175
in water or 5% glucose have been associated with
ial hypotension but the pressure recovers slowly
haemolysis, haemoglobinuria and venous throm-
over the next 20 to 30 min. Abdominal relaxation
bosis and although the recently introduced 15%
obtained with doses of guaiphenesin which do not
stabilized solutions are said to be be free from
interfere with respiratory activity is never as good
these effects there is evidence that they cause
as can be produced by the proper use of neuro-
thrombosis. Solutions of 10% in water have mini-
muscular blocking drugs, but may be useful in sit-
mal haemolytic effect - they have an osmolality of
uations where inhalation anaesthesia cannot be
242mOsm/kg which is closer to the osmolality of
used or where the services of a specialist anaes-
equine plasma than the formerly recommended
thetist are not available. For short operations,
5% aqueous or dextrose solutions (Grandy &
doses in excess of 50 mg/kg may be associated
McDonell, 1980) but 10% aqueous solutions give
with marked ataxia in the recovery period and this
rise to thrombus formation in the equine jugular
can give rise to excitement unless a small dose of a
vein (Herschl et al., 1992). Injection into tissues
sedative such as xylazine is given at the end of
causes pain, abscesses and necrosis so that accu-
operation.
rate intravenous injection is essential. Venous
 Guaiphenesin is now used as an ingredient of
thrombosis is potentially very serious; it is a
the ‘Triple drip' for total intravenous anaesthesia
delayed complication and may be related to speed
in horses with xylazine and ketamine (Greene et
of injection since it has been reported to occur with
al., 1986; Young et al., 1993) or detomidine and ket-
all formulations of guiaphenesin, particularly
amine (Taylor & Watkins, 1992).
when they were infused under pressure
 The drug may be used to cast cattle. If these an-
(Schatzmann, 1980). However, the incidence of
imals are premedicated with tranquillizers and
venous thrombosis was greatly reduced when
analgesics the necessary dose for casting purposes
15 % stabilized solutions were administered to
is 4-5 g/kg, i.e. about 1l of the 5% solution in any
2000 horses (Schatzmann, 1988).
animal weighing 500 kg. Towards the end, or after
Cardiovascular depression is dose dependent.
the completion of this i.v. injection, the animal starts
 In healthy horses heart rate is increased and arter-
 to sway and then falls relaxed. Barbiturates may be
 ial blood pressure decreased when guaiphenesin is 
 mixed with the solution (e.g. 0.25 g thiobarbital per
administered with minimal doses of thiobarbitu-
50kg body weight) but as the two drugs potentiate
rates (Heath & Gabel, 1970; Wright et al., 1979).
 each other most animals fall during the infusion,
Respiration is also depressed by guaiphenesin,
which is completed in the cast position.
and the PaCO2 rises (Muir et al., 1977; Muir et al.,
Guaiphenesin has been used in other species of
1978), an increase in frequency being insufficient
animal but its administration is rendered difficult
to compensate for decreased tidal volume. Its
     s   
effects on the cardiopulmonary system have been
infused. Even in horses and cattle this is a consid-
studied in detail by Hubbell et al. (1980). The dura-
erable disadvantage associated with its use, for
tion of action in male horses is 1.5 times that in
ataxia develops as the solution is run into the vein
 mares but there is apparently no sex difference in
and care has to be exercised to avoid the type of
the doses required to produce relaxation (Davis &
injury to the animal resulting from stumbling
Wolff, 1970). In contrast to neuromuscular block-
when the hind legs are crossed.
ing agents significant amounts of guaiphenesin
cross the placental barrier.
 Following premedication with acepromazine
 REFERENCES
(0.04 mg/kg i.v.) or xylazine (0.6 mg/kg i.v.) a mix-
Adams, A.K. and Hall, L.W. (1962) An experimental
ture of guaiphenesin and thiobarbiturate given to
study of the action of suxamethonium on the
effect will produce about 20 min of immobilization
circulatory system. British Jourmat of Anaesthesia 34:
in horses. The usual dose requirement is about
445-450.
4 mg/kg of thiobarbiturate and 100 mg/kg of
Adams, A.K. and Hall, L.W. (1962a) The action of
guaiphenesin. Completing the induction of anaes-
suxamethonium on the circulatory system.
Proceedings of the lst European Congress of Anaesthesia,
thesia with halothane often produces marked arter
Vienna.
176 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Ali, H.H. and Savarese, J.J. (1976) Monitoring of
Davis, L.E. and Wolff, W. A. (1970) Pharmacokinetics
neuromuscular function Anesthesiotogy 45: 216-249.
and metabolism of glyceryl guaiacolate in ponies.
Ali, H.H., Utting, J.E. and Gray, T.C. (1970) Stimulus
American Journat of Veterinary Research 31:469-473.
frequency in the detection of neuromuscular block in 
Deana, A. and Scuka, N. (1990) Time course of
humans. British Journat of Araesthesin 42: 967-978.
neostigmine; action on the end plate response.
Amaki, Y. , Waud, B.E. and Waud, D.R. (1985)
Neurosciences 118: 82-84.
Atracurium-receptor kinetics: sample behaviour from
Donati, F. (1988) Onset of action of relaxants. Canadian
a mixture. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 64: 777-780.
JournatofAnaesthesia 35:S52-S58.
Booth, N.H. and Rankin, A.D. (1953) Studies on the
 Donati, F., Ferguson, A. and Bevan, D.R. (1983) Twitch
pharmacodynamics of curare in the horse. I. Dosage
depression and train-of-four ratio after antagonism of
and physiological activity of d-tubocurarine chloride.
pancuronium with edrophonium, neostigmine or
American Journat of Veterinary Research 14:51-59.
pyridostigmine. Anesthesia ard Arnalgesia 62:314-316.
Borgeat, A. and Kwiatkowski, D. (19997) Spontaneous
Donati, F., Meistelman, C. and Plaud, B. (1990)
 movements associate with rocuronium;is pain on
Vecuronium neuromuscular blockade at the
injection the cause? British Journat of Anaesthesin
diaphragm, the orbicularis oculi and the adductor
79:382-383.
pollicis muscles. Anesthesiology 74: 833-837.
 Bowen, J.M. (1969) Monitoring neuromuscular function
Drenck, N. W., Ueda, N., Olsen, N.V. et at. (1989) Manual
in intact animals. American fournal of Veterinary
evaluation of residual curarization using double burst
Research 30: 857-859.
stimulation: a comparison with train-of-four.
Bowman, W.C. (1990) Reversal agents. In: Pharmacology
Anesthesiology 70:578-581.
of Neuromuscuiar Function, 2nd edn. London: Wright,
Engbaek, J., Skovgaard, L.T., Fris, B.et at.(1992)
pp 196-202.
 Monitoring of the neuromuscular transmission by
Brul, S.J., Connelly, N.R., O'Connor, T.Z., and Silverman,
electromyography (I). Stability and temperature
D.G. (199l) Efect of tetanus on subsequent
dependence of evoked EMG response compared to
neurommuscular monitoring in patients receiving
mechanical twitch recordings in the cat. Acta
vecuronium. Anesthesiology 74: 64-70.
Anaesthesiotogica Scandinavica 36: 495-504.
Burms, B.D. and Paton, W.D.M. (1951) depolarization of
Faye,S. (1988) PhD thesis. Leeds: University of Leeds.
the motor end plate by decamethonium and
Gill, S.S., Donati, F. and Bevan, D.R. (1990) Clinical
acetylcholine. journal of Applied Physiology. 115: 41-73.
evaluation of double-burst stimulation. Araesthesia 45:
Cason, B., Baker, D.G.,Hickey, R.F. et at. (1990)
543-548.
Cardiovascular and neuromuscular effects of three
Gleed, R.D. and Jones, R.S. (1982) Observations on the
 steroidal neuromuscular blocking drugs in dogs
 neuromuscular blocking action of gallamine and
(ORG 9616,ORG 9426,ORG 9991). Anesthesia and
pancuronium and their reversal by neostigmine.
Anaigesia 70:382-388.
Research in Veterinary Science 32:324-326.
Clutton, R.E. (1992) Combined bolus and infusion of
Goat, V.A., Yeung, M.L., Blakeney, C. and Feldman, S.A.
vecuronium in dogs. Journat of Veterinary Anaesthesia
Jo Aae au uon mo pooago iaa a (96)
19:74-77.
gallamine triethiodide.British Journal of Anaesthesia
Cookson, J.C. and Paton, W.D.M. (1969) Mechanisms of
48:69-72.
neuromuscular block. Anaesthesia 24: 395416.
Grandy, J.L. and McDonell, W.N. (1980) Evaluation of
Cullen, L.K. and Jones, R.S. (1980) The nature of
concentrated solutions of guiafenesin for equine
suxamethonium neuromuscular block in the dog
anesthesia. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
assessed by train-of-four stimulation. Research in
Association 176: 619-622.
Veterinary Science.29:266-268.
Greene, S.A., Thurmaon, J.C., Tranquilli, W.J. and
Cullen, L.K. and Jones, R.S. (1980a) Recording of
Benson, G.J. (1986) Cardiopulmonary effects of
 train-of-four evoked muscle responses from the nose
contimuous intravenous infusion of guaifenesin,
and foreleg in the intact dog. Research in Veterirary
ketamine and xylazine in ponies. Americar Jourrat of
Sciernce 29: 277-280.
Veterinary Research 47: 2364-2367.
Cullen, L.K. and Jones, R.S. (1984) Residual
Hall, L.W. (1952) Areport on the clinical use of bis-(β-
non-depolarizing neuromuscular block assessed by
dimethylaminoethyl)-succinate bisethiodide (Brevidil
train-of-four stimulation in the dog. Research int
E,M & B2210) in the dog. Veterinary Record
Veterinary Science 32: 121-123.
64: 491492.
Cullen, L.K., Jones, R.S. and Snowdon, S.L. (1980)
Hall, L.W., Lehmanm, H. and Silk, E. (1953) Responses in
Neuromuscular activity in the intact dog: techniques
 dogs to relaxants derived from succinic acid and
for recording evoked mechanical responses. British
choline. British Medicat Journat i, 134-136.
Veterirnary Journal 136: 154-159.
Heath, R.B. and Gabel, A.A. (1970) Evaluation of
Curtis, M.B. and Eicker, S.E. (1991) Pharmacodynamic
thiamylal sodium, succinylcholine, and glyceryl
 properties of succinylcholine in greyhounds.
American Jourrat of Veterirary Research
Journatof the American Veterinary Medicat Association
52: 898-902.
157: 1486-1494.
RELAXATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLES 177
Heckmann, R., Jones, R.S. and Wuersch, W.A. (1977)
Jones, R.S. and Gleed, R.D. (1984a) Effects of prior
A method for recording electrical and mechanical
administration of a non-depolarizing muscle relaxant 
activity of muscle in the intact dog. Research int
on the action of suxamethonium in the dog. Research
Veterinary Science 23: 1-6.
in Veterinary Science 36:348-353.
Herschl, M.A., Trim, C.M. and Mahaffey, E.A. (1992)
Jones, R.S., Heckmann, R. and Wuersch, W. (1978)
Effects of 5% and 10% guaifenesin infusion on equine
Observations on the neuromuscular blocking
vascular endothelium. Veterinary Surgery 21: 494-497.
action of alcuronium in the dog and its reversal by
Hildebrand, S.V. and Arpin, D. (1988) Neuromuscular
neostigmine. Research in Veterinary Science
and cardiovascular effects of atracurium administered
25: 101-102.
to healthy horses anesthetized with halothane.
Jones, R.S., Hunter, J.M. and Utting, J.E. (1983)
American Journat of Veterirary Research 49: 1066-1071.
Neuromuscular blocking action of atracurium and its
Hildebrand, S.V. and Hill, T. (1989) Effects of atracurium
reversal by neostigmine. Research in Veterinary Science
administered by continuous intravenous infusion in
34: 173-176.
halothane-anesthetized horses. American Jourrat of
Jones, R.S. and Prentice, D.E. (1976) A techmique for
VeteriraryResearch 50:2124-2126.
investigation of the action of drugs on the
Hildebrand, S.V. and Hill, T. (1991) Neuromuscular
neuromuscular junction in the intact horse. British
blockadeby atracurium in llamas. Veterinary Surgery
Veterirary Journal 132: 226-230.
20: 153-154.
Jones, R. S and Richie, H.E. (1965) The effects of
Hildebrand, S.V, Hill, T. and Holland, M. (1989) The
suxamethonium in a case of myotonia in the horse.
effect of the neuromuscular blocking activity of
British Jourrat of Araesthesia 37: 142.
atracurium in halothane anesthetized horses. jJourrot
Jones, R.S. and Seymour, C.J. (1985) Clinical
ofVeterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 12:277-282.
observations on the use of vecuronium as a muscle
Hildebrand, S.V. and Howitt, G.A. (1984)
relaxant in the dog. Journat of Small Animat Practice
 Neuromuscular and cardiovascular effects of
26:213-218.
pancuronium bromide incalves anesthetized with
Kalow, W. (1959) The distribution, destruction and
halothane.American JournalofVeterinary Research
elimination of muscle relaxants. Aresthesiology
45:1549-1552
20:505-518
Hildebrand, S.V., Howitt, G.A. and Arpin, D. (1986)
Khuenl-Brady, K., Castagnoli, K.P., Canfell, P.C.et at.
 Neuromuscular and cardiovascular effects of
(1990) The neuromuscular blocking effects and
atracuronium in ponies anesthetized with halothane.
pharmacokinetics ofORG 9426 and ORG 9616 in the
American Journal of Veterirary Research 47: 1096-1100.
cat. Anesthesiology 72: 669-674.
Hubbell, J.A.E., Muir, W.W. and Sams, R.A. (1980)
Klide,A.M.(1973) Veterirary Clinics ofNorth America.
Guaifenesin: cardiopulmonary effects and plasma
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders., 3: 152.
concentrations in horses. American Journal of Veterinary
Klein, L.V, Nann, L. and Brophy, M.A.(1988) Potency
Research 41: 1751-1755.
and duration of atracurium in anesthetized horses.
Ibebunjo, C. and Hall, L.W. (1993) Muscle fibre diameter
Adoances in Anaesthesia 1988.Proceedingsofthe 3rd
and and sensitivity to muscle relaxant drugs. British
Internationat Corgress of Veterinary Anaesthesia,
Journal of Anaesthesia 71:732-733.
Brisbane,pp 35-36.
Jones, R.M. (1984) Calcium antagonists. Araesthesia
Kopman, A.F., Mallhi, M.N., Newman, G.G. and Justo,
39:747-749
M.D. (1996) Reestablishment of paralysis using
Jones, R.S. (1987) Observations on the neuromuscular
miracurium following apparent full recovery from 
blocking action of pipecuronium in the dog. Research
miracurium-induced neuromuscular block.
in Veterinary Science 43: 101-103.
Anaesthesia 51: 4144.
 Jones, R.S. (1987a) Interactions between pipecuronium
Lambert, J.J., Durant, N.N. and Henderson, E.G. (1983)
and suxamethonium in the dog. Research in Veterinary
Characterization of end plate conductance at the
Sciernce 43: 308-312.
neuromuscular junction. Arruat Review of
Jones, R.S. (1988) Reversal of neuromuscular blockade - a
Pharmacology and Toxicology 23:505-539.
review. Jourral of the Association of Veterinary
Manley, S.V., Steffey, E.P., Howitt, G.A. and Woliner, M.
Anaesthetists 15: 80-88.
(1983) Cardiovascular and neuromuscular effects of
 Jones, R.S. and Brearley, J.C. (1985) Atracurium infusion
pancuronium in the pony. Americar Journal of
in the dog. Proceedings of the 2nd Internationat Congress
Veterinary Research 44: 1349-1353.
of Veterinary Anesthesia, Sacramento,pp 172-173.
Marshall, R.J., Muir, A.W., Sleigh, T. and Savage, D.S.
Jones, R.S. and Clutton, R.E. (1984) Clinical observations
(1994) An overview of the pharmacology of
on the use of the muscle relaxant atracurium in the
rocuronium bromide in experimental animals.
dog. Journal of Small Animat Practice 25:473-477.
European Journatof Anaesthesia 11:9-15.
 Jones, R.S. and Gleed, R.D. (1984) Effects of prior
Martinez, E.A., Wooldridge, A.A., Mercer, D.R., Slater,
administration of suxamethonium on non-
M.R. and Hartsfield, S.M. (1996) Cardiovascular and
depolarizing muscle relaxants in dogs. Research int
neuromuscular effects of rocuronium in anesthetized
Veterinary Science 36:43-47.
dogs.Proceedings of the Anruat Meetingof the Americar
178 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Cotlege of Veterinary Anesthesiotogists, New Orleans,
Silverman, D.G.and Brul, S.J. (1993) The effect of a
p32.
tetanic stimulus on the response to subsequent
Muir, A.W., Houston, J., Green, K.L. et at. (1989) Effects of
tetanic stimulation. Anesthesia and Analgesin
a new neuromuscular blocking agent, ORG 9426 in
76: 1284-1287.
anaesthetized cats and pigs and in isolated nerve-
Stenlake, J.B., Waigh, R.D. and Dewar, G.H. (1981)
muscle preparations. British Journal of Araesthesia
 Biodegradable neuromuscular blocking agents
63:400410.
part 4: atracurium besylate and related polyalkylene
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Milne, D.W. (1977)
di-esters.Europear Journal of Medicat Chemistry
Evaluation of xylazine and ketamine hydrochloride
16: 515-524.
for anesthesia American Jourrat of Veterinary Research
Stevenson, D.E. (1960) Changes in the blood
38:195-201
electrolytes of anaesthetized dogs caused
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Sheenan, W. (1978)
by suxamethonium. British Jourral of Araesthesin
Evaluation of xylazine, guaifenesin and ketamine
32:364-371.
hydrochloride for restraint in horses. Americar Journa?
Stowe, C.M., Bieter, R.N. and Roepke, M.H. (1958)
ofVeterinary Research 39:1274-1278.
The relationship between cholinesterase activity
O'Hara, D.A., Fragen, R.J. and Shanks, C.A. (1986)
and the effects of succinylcholine in the horse
 Reappearance of train-of-four after neuromuscular
and cow.Cornell Veterinarian 48:241-259.
blockade induced with tubocurarine, vecuronium or
Taylor, PM. and Watkins, S.B. (1992)Stress responses
atracurium. British Journat of Arnaesthesia
 during total intravenous anaesthesia in ponies with
58:1296-1299.
detomidine guaiphenesin-ketamine. Journatl of
Payne, J.P. and Hughes, R. (1981) Evaluation of
Veterinary Araesthesia 19: 13-17.
atracuronium in anaesthetized man. British Jourrat of
Trucchi, G., Buracco, P., Mangione, M., Quaranta,
Anaesthesia, 53:45-54.
G. and Berra, G.P (1988) Correlation between the
Pedersen, S.E. and Cohen, J.B. (1990) D-tubocuraine
duration of action of suxamethonium, serum
binding sites are located at alpha-gamma and alpha-
levels of pseudocholinesterases and dibucaine
delta subunit interfaces of the nicotinic acetylcholine
mumber in the dog. Jourrat of the Association of
receptor. Proceedings of the National Acadermy of Sciences
Veterinary Araesthetists ofGreat Britain and lreland
of the LISA 87:2785-2789.
15: 96-113
Pollard, B.J. and Millar, R.A. (1973) Potentiating and
Viby-Mogensen, J, Howard-Hansen, P, Chraemmer
 depressant effects of inhalation anaesthetics on the rat
Jorgensen, B. et al.(1981) Posttetanic count (PTC):
phrenic nerve - diaphragm preparation. British Journa!
A method of evaluating an intense nondepolarizing
of Anaesthesia 45:404-415.
neuromuscular blockade. Aresthesiology
Riker, W.F. and Wescoe, W.C. (1946) The direct action of
55:458-461.
 prostigmin on skeletal muscle; its relationship to the
Wachtel, R.E. (1990) Comparison of anticholinesterases
choline esters. Journat of Pharmacology and Experimentat
and their effects on acetylcholine-activated ion
Therapeutics 88: 58-66.
channels. Aresthesiology 72: 496-503.
Richards, D.L.S., Clutton, R.E., Boyd, C., Shipley,C. and
Westhues, M. and Fritsch, R. (1961) In: Weaver, A.D.
McGrath, C.J. (1988) Conditions for tracheal
(trans) Arimat Araesthesia, volume 2. Berlin: Paul
intubation in pigs using vecuronium-a comparison
Parey Translated in 1965.
with succinylcholine. Jourrat of the Association of
Wilson, I.B. (1955) The interaction of tensilon and
Veterinary Anaesthetists ofGB Great Britain ard Iretand
neostigmine with acetylcholinesterase. Archives
15: 89-90.
Internationales de Pharmacodyramieet de Therapie
Savarese, J.J., Ali, H.H., Basta, S.J. et at. (1988) The clinical
54:204-213.
Wright, M., McGrath, C.J. and Raffe, M. (1979)
Anesthesiotogy 68: 723-732.
 Indirect blood pressure readings in horses before
Schatzmann, U. (1980/81) Advantages and
and after induction of general anesthesia with
disadvantages of glycerol guaiacolate (Guaifenesin) in
acepromazine, glyceryl guaiacolate and
the equine species. Proceedings of the Associatior of
sodium thiamylal. Veterinary Anesthesia
Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland.
VI: 41-44.
9: 153-159.
Young, L.E., Bartram, D.H., Diamond, M.J. Gregg, A.S.
Schatzmann, U. (1988) Discussion on the use of glyceryl
and Jones, R.S. (1993) Clinical evaluation of xylazine,
guiacolate ether (G.G.E.). Journat of the Association of
guaifenesin and ketamine for maintenance of
Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain and lreland
anaesthesia in horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
15: 14-16.
25: 115-119.
Pulmonary gas exchange:
8
artifical ventilation of
the
sounia
INTRODUCTION
Lung volume
Special techniques to ventilate the lungs when the
 respiratory muscles are paralysed by neuromuscu-
lar blocking drugs or rendered inactive by central
nervous depression have evolved gradually over a
Alveolar
number of years. Today, they usually involve endo-
pressure
tracheal intubation together with periodic infla-
Transpulmonary pressure
tion of the lungs and the commonest method used
cm
is knowm as 'intermittent positive pressure ventila-
Pleural pressure
tion' of the lungs or IPPV. It was first employed
Inspiration
Expiration
more widely used in anaesthesia. It is also a rou-
tine technique in intensive care whenever respira-
FIG.8.I Changes in lung volume, pleural and
transpulmonary pressures during normal spontaneous
tory failure occurs. There are differences between
breathing (diagramatic only).
spontaneous breathing and IPPV, and IPPV when
the thoracic cage is opened widely at thoracotomy
from when it is intact. The anaesthetist must
exterior and the alveoli. This overcomes the air
appreciate what these differences are if IPPV is to
way resistance and air flows into the alveoli until
 at the end of inspiration the alveolar pressure
be correctly managed under all circumstances
becomes equal to the atmospheric pressure.
During expiration the pressure gradient is
reversed and air flows out of the alveoli.
SPONTANEOUS F
 RESPIRATION
The transpulmonary pressure is a measure of
the elastic forces which tend to collapse the lungs
In a spontaneously breathing animal active con-
and there is no one intrapleural pressure. In the
traction of the inspiratory muscles lowers the nor-
ventral parts of the chest it isjust sufficient to keep
mally subatmospheric intrapleural pressure still
the lungs expanded. Because of the influence of
further by enlarging the relatively rigid thoracic
 gravity acting on the lungs, the intrapleural pres-
cavity. The decrease in intrapleural pressure low-
sure in the dorsal parts of the chest should be
ers the alveolar pressure (Fig. 8.1) so that a pres-
much more below atmospheric, but it is not at all
sure gradient or driving force is set up between the
certain how uniform the pressure on the pleural
179
180 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Spontaneous breathing
electricity, where:
Exp.
E
Insp.
Insp.
R=
R
A
01+
So that:
alveolar pressure change
Resistance =
air flow
Airway resistance is largely influenced by the lung
volume because the elastic recoil of lung paren-
-10
chyma exerts traction on the pleural surfaces and
walls of airways (holding them patent) when
B
+10-
the lungs are inflated above residual volume. As the
lungs are further inflated, elastic recoil pressure
increases, thus further dilating the airways and
decreasing resistance to air flow. This relationship
between airway resistance and lung volume is
hyperbolic in nature, as shown in Fig. 8. 3. Airway
-10
resistance also depends on the nature of airflow
through the
airway. With a clear airway and a low
rate.
 intrapulmonary flow is largely
IPPV
laminar (streamlined) and airway resistance is also
low, but obstruction or a high flow velocity will
A
20
give rise to turbulence and a greatly increased
resistance. Measurement of airway resistance must
be made when gas is flowing. During IPPV when
the chest wall is intact, resistance to expansion
of the lungs is also offered by the chest wall
which then contributes to the total respiratory
B
10
resistance.
Total respiratory
y resistance (Rr,) may be esti-
mated by the application of an oscillating airflow
10
to the airways with measurement of the resultant
FIG.8.2 Pressure changes (A) at the mouth end of
endotracheal tube, (B) in the thoracic oesophagus during
(2)
spontaneous breathing and IPPV with closed chest
(diagramatic only).
surface ot the lung really is. The hilar forces, the
buoyancy of the lung in the pleural cavity and the
istance
different shapes of the lung and chest wall are all
(1)
possible sources of local pressure differences.
53
Thus, it is customary to measure the intra-
oesophageal pressure as being representative of
Lung volume
the mean intrapleural pressure (Fig. 8.2)
FIG.8.3 Resistance and volume curves together with
lower airways conductance curves (Glaw).(l): Resistance
into and out of the lungs against a resistance in a
curves;(2):(Glaw); A:normal airway B:obstructed airway
way analagous to that stated by Ohm's Law for
(Lehane et al., I980).
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 181
pressure and airflow changes. A technique was
Resistance
developed by Lehane et al. (1980) to measure air-
way resistance as a function of lung volume dur-
ing a vital capacity manoeuvre and so to derive
ductance being the reciprocal of resistance) and
the expiratory reserve volume (ERV). The method
was modified by Watney for use in anaesthetized
Terminal bronchioles
and paralysed horses and dogs (Watmey et al., 1987;
Segmental
1988) and it was demonstrated that in ponies
bronchi
xylazine, acepromazine, halothane and enflurane
produce bronchodilatation and a decrease in ERV
while isoflurane appears to increase ERV. In dogs,
5
10
it was concluded that both bronchoconstriction
15
20
aisuodsan aq Ae aumoa Sun u saueuo pue
Airway divisions
for changes in airway resistance seen during
FIG.8.4 Contribution of the major and minor airways to
hypoxia. During spontaneous breathing changes
total respiratory resistance.The resistance offered by the
in resistance may necessitate a great increase in
small airways, each of which has a high resistance, is small
the work of breathing. The effect of inhalation
aa  ee  ad ae  aa
anaesthetics on total respiratory resistance in con-
resistance: I/Rcocal= I/R, + I/R + I/R33 ... I/R).
 scious horses was studied by Hall and Young
(1992) who showed that halothane appeared to
expiration (Gillespie et al., 1966). This increase
have no effect while enflurane and isoflurane
does not usually present problems during anaes-
seemed to increase it.
thesia with spontaneous breathing but may neces-
Resistance is not the only factor opposing
sitate a prolonged expiratory period during IPPV.
movement of air in and out of the chest; a full
Unfortunately, small airways contribute little to
analysis includes the effects of compliance and
the total lung resistance; although each one has a
inertance. Adding the compliance and inertance
large individual resistance, there are large num-
forms the reactance and this can be combined with
bers in parallel so that the overall effect is small
the resistance in one complex term called the
(Fig. 8.4). This is important because small airway
'impedance'. If the impedance of the respiratory
disease (which increases local resistance) is not
system is known then the resistance and reactance
detected by measurement of total airway resist-
can be determined. A completely non-invasive
 ance until the condition is well advanced.
method suggested by Michaelson et al. (1975) has,
Anaesthetic apparatus may afford resistance
since the introduction of computers, been used
that is considerably higher than that offered by the
quite extensively to determine the frequency
amimal's respiratory tract. It is difficult to say at
dependence of resistance in man. Because it does
what value this apparatus resistance becomes
not require patient cooperation it is relatively sim-
intolerable because a healthy anaesthetized animal
ple to use in conscious animals as described by
seems able to compensate for increases in resist-
Young and Hall (1989) for horses but it is dificult to
ance to airflow. Anaesthetized human subjects
use in anaesthetized, intubated animals because
breathe at 80 % of control tidal volume against an
the impedance of the tube alone is much greater
inspiratory load of 10 cm H2O (Nunn & Ezi-Ashi,
than that of a non-intubated animal. Commercially
1961). It is unlikely that moderate expiratory
available apparatus is expensive but, nevertheless,
resistance will cause serious problems in spontan-
it can provide a useful diagnostic tool for the iden-
eously breathing animals provided the PaCO2
tification of horses suffering from chronic obstruct-
remains within acceptable limits. In halothane
ive pulmonary disease (COPD) which can pose
anaesthetized horses, Hall and Trim (1975) found
problems during anaesthesia with IPPV because of
that 10 and 20 cm H2O of expiratory resistance did
a sudden increase airway resistance at the end of
not affect the PaO2 but was associated with
182 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
increases in PaCO, of about 1.2 mmHg (0.16kPa)
the PaCO, falls below the threshold for stimulat-
 per min. However, common sense would seem to
ing the respiratory centre so that spontaneous
suggest that apparatus resistance should be kept
breathing movements cease and the anaesthetist
to a minimum. Purchase (1965; 1965a) studied the
can impose whatever respiratory rhythm is
resistance afforded by four closed breathing sys-
required -'controlled respiration'.
tems used in horses and cattle and in three, all of
A properly used machine undoubtedly pro-
which had internal bores of 5 cm, found it to be of
vides the most efficient means of ventilating the
the order of 1 cm H2O (0.1kPa) per 1001/min at
lungs for prolonged periods, but to use a machine
flow rates of 6001/min, which he judged to be
properly or even to squeeze a bag correctly, it is
quite acceptable. He also found that the resistance
essential to umderstand the principles underlying
of endotracheal tube connectors was relatively
IPPV and to know under what circumstances any
high in comparison with that of the remainder of
 possible harmful effects may arise.
the apparatus.
 Compliance has been defined in many ways but
During a breathing cycle mean intrathoracic
the simplest definition is that it is the volume
pressure may be above or below atmospheric pres-
change produced by unit pressure change (8V/&P).
sure as a result of apparatus resistance. For exam-
Compliance shows hysteresis (Fig.8.5) and it is
ple, if the expiratory flow through a piece of
changes in surfactant which seem to be responsi-
 apparatus with a high resistance is great enough to
ble; airway resistance and tissue viscosity play
induce turbulence, whilst the inspiratory rate is
only a small part. Ideally, measurements needed
lower (as it often is in horses) so that during inspi-
for the calculation necessary to obtain this value
ration the flow is laminar, the mean intrathoracic
should be made when no air is flowing into or out
pressure will be above atmospheric. Conversely, if
of the lungs (i.e. at the end of inspiration).
the inspiratory flow rate is greater there may be
Compliance measures carnot be compared unless
a subatmospheric mean intrathoracic pressure.
related to a lung volume such as the functional
Mean intrathoracic pressures above atmospheric
may cause cardiovascular failure in hypovolaemic
Volume
Total
states by reducing the effect of the thoraco-abdomi-
lung
nal pump for venous return. Large subatmospheric
Deflate
capacity
mean intrathoracic pressures may be equally dan-
ma, but probably more importantly by reducing
lung volume. Trapping of gas in the lungs occurs
more readily at low lung volumes and gas trap-
ping produces widespread airway obstruction
with serious impairment of respiratory function.
Inflate
IPPV When The chesT wall IS
Residual
INTACT
volume
IPPV is easily applied during anaesthesia by
rhythmical compression of the reservoir bag of a
Pressure
breathing circuit. This is most simply achieved by
FIG.8.5 Total thoracic compliance curves showing
manual squeezing, but machines have been
hysteresis.The compliance can be altered by a number of
desigmned and built to relieve the anaesthetist of the
factors: (a) the lung compliance is reduced by lack of
bag-squeezing duty. If the bag is squeezed as the
surfactant (respiratory distress syndrome),reduction of
 animal breathes in, the tidal volume may be aug-
elastic tissue in the lungs (as in emphysema),and fibrosis or
scar tissue; (b) the chest wall compliance is altered by
mented ('assisted vertilatior′). The increased ventil-
ation produced results in ‘washout' of CO2 and
disorders.
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 183
residual capacity (FRC). Unfortunately, measure-
ment of FRC is not a simple procedure and such
tered to some extent by bronchodilation due to
measurements of compliance as have been made 
the agents given, e.g. xylazine, acepromazine,
im animals have often omitted this refinement
halothane and enflurane.
As commonly measured, compliance has two
Perhaps the most obvious effect of IPPV
components and compliance values can be found
when the chest is closed is on the circulatory
for both the lungs themselves and the thoracic
system. During spontaneous breathing, by lower-
cage but, of course, when the chest wall is not
ing intrathoracic pressure inspiration augments
intact the total compliance measured approaches
the venous return to the heart; in many animals,
that of the lungs alone. It might seem that methods
as can often be seen on a tracing of continuously
using high airway pressures to inflate the lungs
recorded blood pressure, there are indications
might be safe if, when compliance is reduced, it is
that a increased stroke volume is produced.
the thoracic cage itself which is uncompliant
During IPPV, however, intrathoracic pressure rises
because alveoli only rupture when overdistended.
during inspiration, blood is dammed back from
On the other hand, decreased compliance of the
the thorax, venous return and stroke volume
lungs themselves is apt to be non-uniform, an air-
decrease; blood flows freely into the thoracic
way pressure which produces little ventilation of
some regions may overdistend and even rupture
by causing distension of veins this damming back
alveoli in other regions. During anaesthesia com-
of blood during inspiration produces a reflex
pliance may be altered by assistants resting their
increase in venous tone which in normal animals
weight on the chest, by the use of retractors and by
appears to compensate for the changed intratho-
the degree of muscle relaxation.
racic conditions during the inspiratory period
Airway resistance has to be overcome to deliver
and restores the venous return towards normality.
 gas to the alveoli at inspiration and to expel it dur-
Obviously the extent to which an increase in
ing expiration. Resistance during anaesthesia is
venous tone can compensate will depend on
increased by the resistance of apparatus used, such
the degree of venomotor integrity (which can
as endotracheal tubes. Animals with pulmonary
be affected by drugs), the blood volume, the
disease may also have increased airway resistance
magnitude of the intrathoracic pressure rise and
its duration.
Expiratory period if the lungs are to deflate to FRC.
The magnitude and duration of the increased
If this is not done lung volume will be greater at
pressure within the thorax during the inspiratory
the start of the next inspiration and there will be a
phase of IPPV are, therefore, critical and are
steady increase in FRC until the retractive forces of
reflected in the 'mean intrathoracic pressure'. This
the lung, which increase with increase in lung vol-
mean pressure, like the mean arterial blood pres-
ume, become sufficient to empty the lungs to a
sure, is not the simple arithmetical mean between
new FRC in the time available and the inspiratory
the highest and lowest pressures reached in the
and expiratory tidal volumes become normally
system and its calculation is not always easy for
related. While conscious, the animal with expir-
the non-mathematician. It is clearly important to
atory obstruction empties its lungs by active expir-
 keep this mean pressure as low as possible during
atory movements but, when anaesthetized and
the respiratory cycle and this can be accomplished
paralysed or made otherwise apnoeic, expiration
in a variety of ways:
auon jo uanbasuon 'pue aaissed auosaq Ae
duration. The pattern of IPPV used must make
1. Short application of positive pressure.
allowance for this, and large tidal volumes should
 The shorter the inspiratory period during IPPV
be delivered with long expiratory pauses between
the lower the mean intrathoracic pressure will be
each inspiration to allow the chest to return to its
for any given applied pressure. Theoretically, it
original resting position.
might seem that the peak pressure should never be
The induction of general anaesthesia is usually
maintained - expiration should commence as soon
associated with an increase in resistance due to
as the peak pressure is achieved - or the circulation
184 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
will suffer. However, the short application of a
4.Subatmospheric pressure during the expiratory
poo8 Xiaa u Hmsan jou Aew amssand aausod
phase.
distribution of fresh gas within the lungs. In man
If a subatmospheric pressure is applied to the
very short inspiratory periods have the effect of
 airway during the expiratory phase of IPPV the
increasing the physiological dead space, while
 inspiratory pressure will be applied from a lower
Hall et al. (1968) found a decrease in the
 baseline. Hence the pressure gradient necessary to
 produce the required volume change in the lungs
horses ventilated with a ventilator which had a
 can be achieved with a lower peak pressure. This
might be expected to help maintain cardiac
seems to be necessary here, but exactly what it is
 output, but changes in arterial blood pressure and
likely to be for any one animal of any one species
 cardiac output are proportional to the duration
 uonen Aensn si H "uoemsads amd sueuan
 of the increased airway pressure and not neces-
that in small animals (dogs, cats, foals, calves,
 sarily to the peak pressures reached. Consequen-
sheep) the inspiratory time should be 10-1.5s and
tly, merely decreasing the peak airway pressure
in adult horses and cattle 2-3s provided the lungs
 may have but little effect if the inspiratory phase is
 are healthy.
long. Clinical experience in dogs suggests that any
2.Rapid gas flow rate.
beneficial effects resulting from a subatmospheric
 If the necessary tidal volume of gas is to be
expiratory phase are difficult to appreciate. In
delivered to the lungs in a short inspiratory period
 animals suffering from emphysema where air
it is clear that the flow rate will need to be high.
trapping occurs, its use will result in further
The rate at which gas can flow into the lungs,
impairment of the expiratory gas flow. During
however, is largely dictated by the resistance
thoracotomy its application will cause such
offered by the apparatus used and the airway
ag A uoisdxa-ai l asdo n a
resistance. The airway resistance to the various
difficult
lung regions may not be uniform. For example, a
bleb of mucus may partially obstruct a small
bronchus and greatly increase the resistance to gas
IPPV AFTER OPENING OF THE
flow through it. A high gas flow rate through a
PLEURAL CAVITY
neighbouring, unobstructed bronchus may result
in overdistension of the alveoli supplied by it in an
COLLAPSE OF THE LUNG
interval of time so short that the alveoli supplied
by the partially obstructed bronchus will not have
Normally, distension of the lungs to fill the
time for more than minimal expansion. Theoretic-
thoracic cavity is due to the existence of a pressure
ally, it would seem that under these circumstances
 gradient between the airway and the pleural
alveolar rupture might occur, but in practice this
 cavity. The airway pressure is usually atmospheric
complication seems rare.
and the intrapleural pressure subatmospheric
3.Low expiratory resistance.
due to the outward recoil forces of the chest wall,
 Because any resistance to the airflow created
the lymphatic removal of fluid from the pleural
by the passive phase of IPPV will delay the fall
 cavity and the limited expansibility of the lungs.
in intrathoracic pressure, it will result in an
waaq seu seum Aq pasoddo st anioy bupuaisip si
increase in mean intrathoracic pressure and
termed the‘elasticity'of the lung tissue, although
 possibly in circulatory embarrassment. However,
the term ‘elasticity’ is not strictly applicable
expiratory resistance can result in more orderly
because surface tension in the alveoli contributes
emptying of alveoli and an increase in FRC with
 in a most important manner to the lung retractive
consequent widening of the airways (Comroe ef
force. When the chest is opened and atmospheric
al., 1962). Thus, at least in some cases (e.g. in
 pressure allowed to act directly in the pleural cav-
animals with obstructive emphysema) a higher
ity, the normal pressure gradient is abolished and
expiratory resistance may be advantageous to the
the retractive forces cause the lung to collapse
animal.
(Fig.8.6).
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 185
Atmospheric pressure
Atmospheric pressure
Intact side
Open side
Pendulum air
Relative
cross-section
areas of trachea
Retractive
Atmospheric pressure plus
forces
retractive force
Mediastinum
 FIG. 8.7 Effect of unilateral pneumothorax on
intrabronchial pressure.
FIG.8.6 Forces responsible for collapse of the lung
following unilateral opening of the chest wall during
as from the atmosphere. The exposed lung, there-
spontaneous breathing. The volume of air entering the
 fore, becomes smaller. On expiration the lung on
pleural cavity at each breath will depend on the relative
cross-sectional area of the trachea and the defect in the
the intact side is discharged partly into the col-
chest wall.
lapsed lung, which becomes larger In this way an
animal with a unilateral open pneumothorax
Paradoxical respiration
breathing spontaneously shuttles air from one
The paradox is that during spontaneous breathing
lung to the other This 'pendulum air' produces, in
following unilateral large openings into the pleu-
effect, an increase in respiratory dead space, and
ral cavity the lung on the damaged side of the
the animal's respiratory efforts are less effective in
chest becomes smaller on inspiration and larger on
producing overall ventilation. It is not seen after
expiration. Normally, when the thorax enlarges
bilateral opening of the pleural cavity through a
due to activity of the inspiratory muscles
its
sternotomy. Applying positive pressure to the air-
increased volume comes to be occupied by air
way during inspiration abolishes paradoxical res-
which enters via the trachea and blood which
piration.
 enters the right atrium and thin-walled great
veins. In the presence of a unilateral open pneu-
MEDIASTINAL MOVEMENT
mothorax air enters not only into the lungs via the
trachea but also through the chest wall defect into
In any normal animal the mediastinum is not a
the pleural cavity. The proportion of air entering
rigid partition between the two halves of the chest.
by each route is largely governed by the relative
Veterinary anatomists have made much of the
size of the the chest wall defect to the tracheal
presence or absence of fenestration in the medi-
lumen. When the opening to the hemithorax is
astinum but in practice this seems unimportant 
large, or when there is any degree of airway
 and the behaviour of each half of the chest during
obstruction, the greater volume of air will enter
respiration is always dependent on the conditions
through the hole in the chest wall and the medi-
prevailing in the other half. Unilateral pneumo-
astinum will be pushed towards the intact side of
thorax can occur in all domestic animals and its
the chest. During inspiration pressure in the
 presence causes the mediastinum to move towards
 the intact side during inspiration and the opposite
bronchi on the open side of the chest will be
greater than in the trachea because of the addition
way during expiration. This movement of the
of the normal retractive forces of the lung to the
mediastinum results in obstruction of the thin-
atmospheric pressure acting on the pleural surface
walled great veins and thus impedes the venous
of the exposed lung (Fig. 8.7). Thus, on inspiration
return to the heart. However, this impediment
the increased volume on the intact side of the chest
poses little problem and death is usually due to
is occupied by air from the collapsed lung as well
hypoxia rather than circulatory failure. Rigidity of
186 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
the mediastinum may be encountered in chronic
Any uneven distribution of gas must have the
imflammatory pleuritis.
effect of disturbing the normal ventilation/perfu-
sion relationships within the lungs. It appears that
these are often upset by anaesthesia itself and if
EFFECTS ON THE CIRCULATION
IPPV produces more uneven gas distribution it
It might be expected that most of the potentially
 will probably fail to affect any improvement in the
harmful effects of IPPV on the circulatory system
 alveolar-arterial oxygen tension gradient found
would be absent when the pleura is opened widely
during anaesthesia in spite of any improvement in
because an opening in the chest wall should pre-
-xa rog anord Ae  unum auxa iep
vent compression of intrathoracic vessels when
ple, in laterally recumbent horses it is possible that
positive pressure is applied to the airway.
the gravitational force gradient from the top to the
Nevertheless, in dogs it has been found that thora-
 bottom of the lungs acting on the low pressure pul-
cotomy reduces the cardiac output to below levels
 monary circulation may, by reducing the circula-
that might be expected to result from the appli-
tion to the upper lung, cause this lung to be
cation of IPPV alone, apparently by causing a fur-
overventilated in relation to its perfusion. Due to
ther reduction in venous return to the heart. It may
 the weight of the horse's abdominal viscera acting
be that the airway pressure results in compression
on the lower cone of the diaphragm, IPPV is more
 of pulmonary capillaries leading to a diminished
successful in inflating the upper than the lower
return to the left atrium.
uaaa ue saajanai Suml iaddn aul aouau pue Sumi
more disproportionally large part of the ventila-
tion to the further detriment of its ventilation/per-
POSSIBLE HARMFUL EFFECTS OF
fusion relationships. Certainly, in the laterally
IPPV
recumbent horse IPPV appears to produce very lit-
tle improvement in the alveolar-arterial oxygen
The effects of IPPV on pulmonary ventilation are,
tension gradient found during general anaesthe-
of course, in the main clearly beneficial, or the pro-
sia. Other situations in which the normal relation-
cedure would not have found such extensive use
ships between ventilation may be upset occur in
in the treatment of respiratory failure. Rupture of
all animals where the expansion of one lung or
lung tissue is no more likely to occur during prop-
part of a lung is limited by surgical procedures
erly conducted IPPV than during the ordinary
such as‘packing off' and retraction of lung lobes
during intrathoracic surgery.
sures develop during activities such as coughing.
IPPV should remove CO2 from the animal's
 or straining at defaecation or parturition. In dogs,
lungs and it is possible, over a period of time, to
pressures above 100 mmHg (13.3kPa) will produce
 remove either too much or too little causing the
fatal air embolism, while during thoracotomy
animal to suffer from either respiratory alkalosis
pressures above 70 mmHg (9.3kPa) can produce
 or acidosis. Respiratory acidosis (hypercapnia) is
mediastinal emphysema but pressures of this
characterized by sympathetic overactivity, cutan-
 order are most unlikely to be encountered during
eous vasodilatation, a rise in arterial blood pres-
normal IPPV where it is seldom possible to create
 sure and a bounding pulse. Respiratory alkalosis
pressure above 60 cm H2O (6kPa) by compression
(hypocapnia) may, it has been claimed, lead to
of the reservoir bag. Care is needed when ventila-
cerebral damage from cerebral vasoconstriction
tors are used for, in some, sticking of valves may
because the calibre of the cerebral blood vessels
expose the patient's airway directly to the high
depends on the PaCO2. However, convincing
pressures at which gases are delivered from the
 evidence of cerebral damage due to hypocapnia
anaesthetic machine to the ventilator. As already
 has yet to be produced. Moreover, although it has
mentioned, uneven inflation of alveoli is a distinct
sanpan eudenodu reun panesuoup uaaq
possibility during IPPV but the surrounding tis-
 cardiac output in horses (Hall et al., 1968), at least
sues seem to provide sufficient support to prevent
in normovolaemic states no disaster appears to
rupture of the relatively overinflated alveoli.
result.
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 187
IPPV carried out with a face mask instead of
desired degree oflung inflation has been produced
through an endotracheal tube can be harmful
the bag should be released and the lungs allowed
unless care is taken to avoid forcing gases down
to empty freely. The rate of lung ventilation should
the oesophagus into the stomach. This entails care-
be faster than the normal respiratory rate of the
ful limiting of the pressure applied at the mouth
animal and the chest wall movement produced
and nostrils and observations of the epigastric
 should be more obvious than in normal breathing.
region to detect any inflation of the stomach. An
 During thoracotomy, expansion of the lung
inflated stomach not only hinders intra-abdominal
beyond the limits of the wound indicates that
surgery -if it becomes sufficiently distended with
 excessive inflation on the lungs is being produced.
gas, regurgitation of gastric fluid is a distinct poss-
Simple observations such as these ensure that ven-
ibility. Gas accidentally forced into the stomach
tilation is being carried out in a marner which will
should be removed as soon as possible by passing
 result in no harm to the animal.
a stomach tube.
Because the rhythmical squeezing of a reservoir
bag for long periods is both tedious and monoto-
nous, mechanical devices ('ventilators') are com-
MANAGEMENT OF IPPV
monly used to perform this duty. The use of a
ventilator frees the anaesthetist to set up intra-
Before IPPV can be applied all spontaneous
venous infusions, keep records, suck out the tra-
breathing movements have to be abolished if the
cheobronchial tree, and otherwise attend to the
animal is not to ‘fight' the imposed ventilation.
welfare of the patient. Nevertheless, it should be
This is usually accomplished by:
noted that the manual squeezing of a reservoir bag
1. Depressing the respiratory centres by
is not to be despised. Observation of the bag
relative overdose of anaesthetics or agents such as
between compressions shows volume changes
morphine or fentanyl.
due to the heart beat; the anaesthetist can alter the
2. Paralysis of the respiratory muscles by
rate, rhythm and character of lung inflation to suit
neuromuscular block.
3. Lowering the PCO2 by hyperventilation.
critical stage of an operation, and the presence of
This may be done by forcing a little more gas into
respiratory obstruction is immediately obvious.
the lungs at the end of a normal inspiration, or by
Theoretically, the effort necessary to produce the
ventilating between spontaneous breaths.
desired degree of lung inflation should give the
4. Reflexly inhibiting the respiratory centres by
 anaesthetist information about the level of anaes-
thesia or degree of relaxation of the respiratory
regular rhythmical lung inflation. This inhibition
muscles, more difficult inflation meaning waning
does not depend on changes in blood pH and
PaCO2. For example, in the cat subjected to IPPV it
relaxation or lighter anaesthesia. As relaxation
is known that respiratory neuronal activity usually
wears off it is undoubtedly necessary to exert a
synchronizes with the ventilator cycle within two
 greater pressure to maintain the tidal exchange as
to three respiratory cycles; this is too rapid for
may be observed by anyone using suitably calib-
significant changes in the arterial blood gases to
rated apparatus, but the authors have seldom
been able to appreciate this while actually squeez-
occur. It is believed that if the lungs are slightly
ing a reservoir bag. There may be such a thing as
overdistended at each inspiration afferent im-
 an'educated hand' which recognizes every flicker
pulses from pulmonary receptors inhibit the
medullary centres.
of the diaphragm, or attempted cough, or waning
relaxation, but it does not seem to be all that easily
acquired.
MANUAL VENTILATION
When IPPV is carried out by manual squeezing of
LUNG VENTILATORS
the reservoir bag (a procedure often known in
North America as ‘bagging the animal') this
A description of every commercially available ven-
should be done gently and rhythmically. Once the
tilator is quite outside the scope of this book and
188 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
the principles that underlie their operation can
before attempting to employ it. As a guide, provid-
 only be outlined. In general, the respiratory cycle
 ed a machine meets the following requirements it
of a ventilator can be divided into four parts :
should be adequate in most circumstances no mat-
ter what its mode of operation or mechianism of
1. The inspiratory phase provided by either
cycling may be.
Mo yhm 'sioierauag amssaid 1o srojeiauah mon
generators the tidal volume delivered to the
patient is independent of factors outside the
Essential characteristics
ventilator-if, for example,the patient's airway
For use in cats, dogs, sheep, goats, small calves and
resistance rises then the inflation pressure
small pigs, a ventilator needs to provide tidal vol-
mcreases. The flow is not necessarily constant and
can be generated by a bellows compressed by a
umes up to 1000 ml at a cycling rate of from 8 to
about 40 cycles/minute. The duration of the inspir-
cam mechanism or by pneumatic compression of
atory phase should be variable, independent of
the anaesthetic reservoir bag situated in a gas-tight
the other settings and range from about 0.5 to 3.0s
chamber. Pressure generators maintain a constant
duration. Whenever possible the expired volume
pressure during the inspiratory phase of the
should be monitored since due to leaks the 'stroke
respiratory cycle, often by a weight acting on a
volume' of the ventilator may not represent the
concertina bag. The volume delivered by a
tidal volume delivered to the animal
pressure ventilator will depend on such factors as
 Difficulty is experienced in using many com-
the airway resistance (Mushin et al., 1969).
mercially available ventilators in cats and small
 2. The changeover from inspiratory to expir-
dogs. The problems involve the provision of high
atory phase, i.e. the manner in which the ventilator
respiratory rates, and low tidal volumes. Adapt-
cycles, may be (a) time cycled, in which inspiration
ation of ventilators designed for adult humans can
is terminated after a set time, (b) volume cycled,
be accomplished by employing a controlled leak or
where inspiration is terminated after a preset
 a parallel resistance and compliance used in con-
volume has been delivered, or (c) pressure cycled,
junction with an Ayre's T-piece. However, such
 in which case inspiration ceases as soon as a preset
systems are complicated and the ventilators
pressure is reached. Not all machines conform to
designed specifically for veterinary purposes offer
this classification in that some show mixed cycling
a better solution to the problem (Fig 8.8)
   s   
Since there is nothing more tiresome than hav-
apparatus has its own advantages and dis-
ing to adjust all the controls of a ventilator when
 advantages and discussion of their relative merits
 only one setting needs correction, control of the
is, again, outside the scope of this book.
length of expiratory period should, like that of
 3. In the expiratory phase a machine may act as
the inspiratory period, be independent of the other
amssaid e 1o (1o1oalul ue 8'a) 1oje1aua8 mo e
settings. It should be possible to obtain inspir-
generator and the commonest arrangement is to
atory: expiratory ratios of at least 1:3, the expirato-
     
ry period beginning immediately the desired tidal
pressure.
volume has been delivered to the lungs. Resistance
4. The changeover from the expiratory to the
to expiration should be low although it may some-
inspiratory phase may be time cycled or patient
times be to an animal's advantage if the expiratory
triggered. In the patient triggered ventilator a
resistance can be increased (e.g. in emphysemat-
slight inspiratory effort by the patient triggers the
ous animals).
changeover to the inspiratory phase.
-ndsu au up aen mo s yead yoi 
Ventilator performance in the presence of changed
 atory phase is always desirable if the lungs are to be
parameters in the patient is extremely complex
-rdun st i poad Aodsu pus e u p
and anyone contemplating the use of an unfamil-
 atively easy to adapt a ventilator which gives a
iar ventilator is well advised to read any instruc-
high peak flow rate to give a lower flow rate but it
tions provided by the manufacturer and become
 is impossible to obtain a high peak flow rate from a
thoroughly conversant with its mode of operation
machine which is not designed to achieve this.
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 189
Provided a ventilator satisfies these general cri-
teria, its method of cycling is unimportant. There
are, however, several points which should be
taken into account before buying a machine. First,
for safety, it is essential that provision is made for a
 change to manual squeezing of a reservoir bag
should any mechanical fault develop during the
course of an operation. Secondly, if electrically
driven, the machine must be electrically safe and
explosion proof. Possibly less important, the
 machinery should not be noisy and if free standing
it should occupy the minimum of floor space. In
practice, the choice of ventilator is largely one of
personal preference, convenience of operation for
the particular circumstances in which it is to be
used and the financial resources available.
/eterinar
Anesthesia
The basic clinical criteria for ventilators for adult
horses, cattle and large pigs are similar to those for
the other animals described above (Fig. 8.9). A
MODEL
useful ventilator has a tidal volume of between
2 and 20l with a cycling rate of between 4 and
15/min and an inspiratory phase of 2 to 3 s dura-
tion. It should be capable of sustaining pressures
B
FlG.8.8 A, B One example of a ventilator specially designed for veterinary use is the Hallowell ventilator, which is widely
bellows and housings enable it to deliver accurate tidal volumes of from 20 ml to 3000 ml at safe working pressures of
I0-60 cm H2O with respiratory rates of 6-40 breaths per minute.It can be fitted to all anaesthesia systems with
out-of-circuit vaporizers (photographs courtesy of Hallowell EMC,63 Eagle Street, Pittsfield, Massachusetts 01 201, USA)
190 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
FIG.8.9 On the Mallard Medical ventilatorthe controls are easily identified and the setting clearly displayed, making this
ventilator very easy to set up. Rachel Model 2800 Large animal anaesthesia ventilator with model 2850 large animal
absorber circuit. I: Microprocessor based ventilator; 2:expanded flow rate control for paediatric through to large adult
wraps on frame and backboard for hoses; 7:21 litre ascending bellows with resolution of less than I litre; 8:surge and
noise suppresser to protect all electronic instruments and provide multiple electrical outlets; 9: model 2850 large animal
absorber circuit; I0: visible directional valves to observe inhalation and exhalation; I I:new advanced design gas balance
model 2800) backboard has holes located for either two Ohmeda or two Drager vaporizers, or a combination; 15:oxygen
flush, delivers I00% oxygen to absorber circuit; I6:anaesthesia flowmeter (I-10 litres per minute) to vaporizer;
Note: not shown is an optional paediatric bellows assembly, providing tidal volumes of 200 ml to 2.20 litres (photograph
courtesy of Mallard Medical,Inc., 20268 Skypark Drive, Redding, California 96002, USA).
of up to 60 cmH2O (6 kPa) in the upper airway
with large animals and often constructed to local
during inspiration, although it must be noted that
specifications. Commercially made ventilators
for adult horses and cattle are now available but
pressures above 20 cmH2Olead to overdistension
 proper data on their performance is scarce.
of lung tissue in the apical regions of the horse's
 lungs and to discharge of unidentified fluid out of 
Ventilatorsettings
 the lungs during recovery from anaesthesia. The
inspiratory: expiratory ratio should be at least 1:2.
A survey of the literature reveals wide variations
To achieve sufficiently high gas flows and tidal
in the recommendations for tidal and minute vol-
volumes special machines were developed for use
umes of respiration when IPPV is used. There are
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 191
no generally agreed values for the production of
WEANING FROM IPPV
adequate levels of ventilation in horses and even
It is important to note that while in most animals
in dogs, where more studies have been done, pub-
apnoea may be established with the aid of neuro-
lished figures range from 20 to 30 ml/kg (tidal vol-
muscular blocking or centrally depressant drugs,
ume) and from 400 to 600 ml/kg (minute volume),
pmous eaoude uoeiado jo pua aul ie sases le ui
so it is clear that numbers such as these can only be
be mainly due to reflex inhibition of respiration
regarded as a very rough guide. In horses and cat-
by the rhythmical slight overinflation of the
tle it is suggested that a tidal volume of 10 ml/kg at
lungs and, possibly, hypocapnia. Thus, prompt
a rate of 8 to 12 breaths per minute, with an inspir-
resumption of spontaneous breathing usually fol-
atory: expiratory time ratio of 1:2 and a peak air-
lows if:
way pressure not exceeding 30 cm H2O should
provide suitable initial settings for IPPV, although
1. The rhythm of lung inflation is broken.
these may need to be modified as anaesthesia pro-
 2. Some accumulation of CO2 is allowed by
ceeds. Ideally, the end tidal concentration of car-
either by slowing the ventilation rate,
bon dioxide may be monitored continuously and,
removing the soda lime canister or, in
once the end tidal to arterial tension difference has
non-rebreathing systems, by adding more
been derived from blood gas analysis, the ventila-
CO2 to the inspired gases.
tion may be adjusted to yield a normal PaCO2; it is
Residual neuromuscular block should be counter-
important to note, however, that the end tidal to
acted where appropriate by the i.v. administration
arterial carbon dioxide gradient may change dur-
of anticholinergic and anticholinesterase drugs.
ing the course of anaesthesia. In practice, facilities
This should be done before any CO2 accumulation
for rapid gas and blood analysis are limited by
is encouraged because anticholinesterases appear
financial and other constraints and it is often nec-
less likely to produce cardiac irregularities when
essary to perform IPPV without such assistance.
the PaCO2 is low. When inhalation anaesthetics
For small animal patients, where non-rebreath-
have been used the inspired anaesthetic concentra-
ing systems can be employed, it is relatively easy
tion should be decreased. Provided only minimal
to ensure the maintenance of satisfactory PaCO2
central depression by anaesthetic agents is present
animals will resume spontaneous breathing at
volumes with a gas mixture containing 4% CO2
very low PaCO2. Dogs have been observed to start
and at least 30% O2. Using such a gas mixture in
breathing with PaCO2 as low as 18-20 mmHg
this way it is only necessary to ensure that large
(approx. 2.2kPa).
tidal and minute volumes are being imposed and
In cases where apnoea is established by the use
this can be done from observation of the frequency
of centrally acting drugs, antagonists such as
of lung inflation and the amplitude of the chest
naloxone may be given at the end of operation to
wall excursions.
 overcome the respiratory depressant effects, but
In large animals, where for reasons of economy
the relatively short action of the drugs commonly
in the use of gases it is essential to employ
used today (e.g. fentanyl) usually makes this
rebreathing systems, it is much less easy to ensure
umnecessary.
satisfactory blood gas levels and, in the absence of
 monitoring facilities, the anaesthetist has to rely on
PEEP and CPAP
experience and aim to err, if at all, on the side of
providing a mild degree of hyperventilation. In
In many conditions of advanced lung disease the
general, it is better to ventilate at slower rates with
imposition of an expiratory threshold has been
large tidal volumes than to achieve the same
shown to have beneficial effects on the PaO2.
minute volumes by faster rates and smaller tidal
According to Nunn (1977), use of an expiratory
volumes because low tidal volumes predispose to
resistor during IPPV is known as PEEP (positive
the lung collapse which necessitated the 'obliga-
end-expiratory pressure) and during spontaneous
tory sigh' incorporated into the mechanism of
breathing as CPAP (continuous positive airway
earlier ventilators.
pressure).
192 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
The respiratory benefits of an expiratory resis.
HIGH FREQUENCY LuNG VENTILATION
tor include an overall reduction in airway resist-
Ventilation with tidal volumes of less than the
ance due to an increase in FRC, movement of the
anatomical dead space volume can provide ade-
tidal volume above the airway closing volume, a
quate gas exchange in the lungs. The means of
tendency towards re-expansion of any collapsed
achieving this are not immediately obvious.
lung and, possibly, a reduction in total lung water.
ysay saimbai sum auu alueuoxa see aaa
The net result is that ventilation/perfusion rela-
 gas to be presented to the animal's alveoli and the
tionships are improved. However, these advant-
removal of used gas from the alveoli. The amount
ages are, in some circumstances, counterbalanced
 of gas required per minute to accomplish this is
by circulatory disadvantages due to the inevitable
determined by the size and metabolic rate of the
rise in mean intrathoracic pressure. Although the
animal. Conventional artificial ventilation des-
venous return can be restored by an α adrenergic
cribed in this chapter uses rates and tidal volumes
stimulator such as dobutamine, or by over-trans-
within the physiological range but using small
fusion, in clinical practice the situation is more
tidal volumes and higher respiratory frequencies
complicated.
 is associated with lower peak inspiratory airway
Both disease and drugs have profound effects
pressures and less fluctuation in intrathoracic
 on the circulatory response to a rise in mean
pressure.
intrathoracic pressure due to PEEP (or CPAP)
The transition from the conducting airways,
 Certain conditions may aggravate the reduction in
with no gas exchanging function, to the alveolar
cardiac output but others actually oppose it and it
 sacs where gas exchange takes place, is not sharply
is in these latter conditions that PEEP or CPAP is
demarcated anatomically. The respiratory bron-
likely to be of benefit. In animals with poor lung
 chioles are predominently conducting passages
compliance much of the applied end-expiratory
but do have alveolar sacs opening off them.
-ind aaissanxa a Aq pasoddo aq m assand
The alveolar ducts have gas exchanging epitheli-
monary transmural pressure, thus minimizing the
um throughout and in addition conduct gas to
increase in intrathoracic pressure. Thus, the stiffer
 the alveoli. Thus any gas which penetrates to
the lungs, the safer is the application of PEEP or
the respiratory bronchioles by bulk convection
CPAP likely to be.
from the mouth and nose will take part in gas
To summarize, PEEP and CPAP may confer res-
exchange.
piratory advantages and circulatory disadvant-
Within the lung differing regions have different
ages which interact in a complicated manner
time constants (product of compliance and airway
rendering it necessary to make direct measure-
resistance). Some areas of the lung are fast fillers
ments of the relevant physiological functions to
with short time constants, whereas other areas
ensure that overall benefit results.
are slow fillers with long time constants. During
The results of PEEP and CPAP during routine
early inspiration the fast filling regions become
anaesthesia are disappointing. Colgan et al. (1971)
full and during late inspiration are actually emp-
showed that PEEP produced no change in the
tying into the slow fillers. This is known as
alveolar-arterial gradient in anaesthetized dogs.
Hall and Trim (1975) failed to demonstrate any
Pendelluft', and the sum of gas movement within
the lung is greater than the gas flow down the tra-
benefit from CPAP in anaesthetized horses, and
chea; there is gas movement between regions of
broadly similar results were obtained by Beadle et
the lung without gas movement in the trachea. It
al. (1975). These results all probably indicate that
 is, therefore, apparent that when small tidal
 anaesthesia produces no reduction in lung compli-
mos e uanban uu ie paaaap are sauma
ance in veterinary patients free from pulmonary
filler could still be filling from a fast filler which at
disease. There would, therefore, seem to be no
the same time is providing gas for expiration up
indication for the use of PEEP or CPAP in routine
the trachea
anaesthesia in healthy animals. Use of PEEP or
Even with high ventilation frequencies fresh
CPAP in animals suffering from respiratory dis-
gas presented to the alveoli has ample time to dif-
aamop aag aa ci adde po saop asa
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 193
fuse across the alveolar zone (for this is complete
tracheal tube and high gas flow rates (large tidal
within 10 ms.) and thus there is an enhanced
volumes at high frequency).
 potential for molecular diffusion to take a consid-
erably greater role in the movement of gas across
within the lung is determined by regional compli-
the alveoli.
ance. However, with higher respiratory rates
airway resistance and gas inertia have an in-
creasing effect on the distribution of ventilation.
High ventilation frequency
 Potentially, this will result in a change of ventila-
In the conventional model of ventilation a mass
tion from areas of high compliance to areas of
of gas under pressure (potential energy) is pre-
low impedance. Since there is no evidence to
 s  n   
'aiane si toisngad Sunn leonoan jeh isassns
energy is converted to kinetic energy to allow
high frequency ventilation must, therefore, result
the gas to flow down the airway. By the end of
in changes in lung ventilation-perfusion ratios.
 inspiration this kinetic energy has become zero for
 Another aspect of high frequency ventilation is
the gas is then static and the energy is stored as
that it involves less time for the bulk convection of
potential energy in the distended lungs. The time
course for this change is determined by the time
gas path length becomes increasingly important.
constant for the lumg and it is known that 95% of
Thus, in animals such as horses with long tracheas,
change occurs within three time constants. It is
 pressures at the airway distend the major conduct-
obvious that with higher frequencies of ventila-
ing passages, then the nearby fast filling lumg units
tion there will be insufficient time for inspiration
and finally the peripheral slow filling units. With a
to go to completion, i.e. with static gas distending
progressive shortening of the inspiratory time a
the lung alveoli. It therefore follows that with
situation will arise when there is insufficient time
higher ventilatory frequencies either a reduced
for the tidal volume to get beyond the major con-
tidal volume is delivered to the lung periphery
Am e u pre ue m ym sassd  
or a higher peak pressure is required to force
analagous to that of an electrical capacitor. The
the gas into the lung periphery within the time
implication of this is that pressure at the airway
available.
opening is not transmitted to the lung periphery
With high frequencies of ventilation the kinetic
and hence the pleural space. However, the reverse
energy of the molecules of gas undergoing bulk
will also occure in that there will not be enough
convection as ventilation cycles from inspiration to
time for the intra-alveolar pressure to empty
expiration becomes increasingly important. As
the alveoli so that there will be a continuous
ventilation changes from inspiration to expiration
positive pressure in the peripheral lung units.
the gas retains its forward kinetic energy and will 
This should, in theory, be beneficial in elderly ani-
 continue to progress peripherally until this kinetic
mals or in those with a reduced FRC since small
Energy is dissipated. This inertia of gas molecules
airway closure is most likely to occur in these
is not present with conventional IPPV since end-
patients.
inspiration is a static state.
The pressure-flow relationships at convention-
Methods for achieving high frequency
 al breathing rates are adequately expressed by air-
ventilation of the lungs
ways resistance but with higher frequencies
airways resistance can no longer be assumed to be
Conventional ventilators deliver a volume of gas
constant and inertia makes an increasing contribu-
during inspiration by occlusion of a relatively
wide bore orifice through which expiration takes
ance, which takes inertia into account, must be
place and the device to occlude the expiratory
used to express pressure-flow relationships. By far
the largest component of impedance to high fre-
this device is made to operate the more likely valve
quency ventilation lies in the endotracheal tube.
 bounce is to occur so that conventional ventilators
This impedance is greatest with a wide bore endo-
cannot, in general, operate at frequencies above
194 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
2 Hz. Because of this limitation high frequency
seems to be the case and there is a critical fre-
ventilation is normally provided by either high
quency at which CO2 elimination reaches a peak.
Kouanbany uoiy ro (Aft uoeiuaa jaf Auanba
 Above this frequency CO, elimination becomes a
oscillation (HFO).
function of tidal volume and independent of venti-
latory frequency. The critical frequency is depend-
ent on the anatomy of the lung and is certainly
High frequency jet ventilators
higher in dogs than in horses.
These ventilators allow a high pressure gas source
 One of the original hopes for high frequency
to flow into the airway during part of the respira-
ventilation was that the change from compli-
tory cycle, usually 20-35% of the cycle time,
 ance/airway resistance distribution of ventilation
through a narrow diameter tube usually at tra-
 to one determined by airway resistance/gas iner-
cheal level. They require no expiratory seal and
tia would result in improved distribution of gas
hence the airway is open to atmospheric pressure
within the lung and an improvement in ventila-
throughout the cycle. This potentially results in
tion. However, it is now generally accepted that, at
entrainment of an unknown quantity of ambient
equivalent tidal volumes, neither HFJV nor HFO
gas and thus the volume and composition of
produce improvement in PaO2, over that which
the tidal volume is unknown. The system has the
 can be attained by conventional ventilation tech-
inherent safety advantage that the arimal can take
 niques. Reports to date of high frequency lung
a spontaneous breath at any time during the respir-
ventilation in veterinary patients (Wilson et al.,
atory cycle.
1985; Dunlop et al., 1985; Dodman et al, 1985) are
not encouraging.
High frequency oscillators
 Oscillator type ventilators tend to be used for
LUNG VENTILATION IN INTENSIVE CARE
higher frequencies (6 to 40Hz). A piston driven by
Long term IPPV over several days may be neces-
 a motor or an electronically driven diaphragm at
sary after cardiopulmonary resuscitation, pro-
 the airway opening generates a to-and-fro motion
 longed recovery from anaesthesia, or in animals
 of gas within the airway. The tidal volume results
presently unable to maintain an adequate PaO2
from displacement of the piston or diaphragm and
when breathing 60% O2 but which are expected to
recover after appropriate treatment. IPPV is usual-
during the expiratory half of the respiratory cycle.
ly carried out with an air/oxygen mixture, the
Fresh gasis fed in at the airway opening and a low-
 inspired O2 concentration being adjusted to yield
pass filter exhaust port allows gas to exit the sys-
 an arterial O2 saturation of over 90% as shown by
tem. The low-pass filter offers a high impedance to
 pulse oximetry.
high frequencies which are thus able to direct the
 Animals which are restless may require seda-
tidal volume down the airway, which has a lower
impedance, rather than be lost through the exhaust
of the endotracheal tube (which is obligatory for
port.
the performance of IPPV). In dogs, cats and small
ruminants an oral endotracheal tube is usual but in
Carbon dioxide elimination and oxygen
foals it is customary to employ a nasotracheal tube.
Humidification of the inspired gases is necessary if
delivery
high gas flows are employed but at low flows suffi-
On theoretical grounds it might be expected that
cient water vapour appears to condense on the
with a constant tidal volume there should be a
 inside of a rebreathing circuit to provide the water
linear relationship between CO2 removal and ven-
 necessary for humidification. With high gas flows
tilatory frequency until such a time as the duration 
 a disposable condenser-humidifier between the
of inspiration is insufficent to permit the gas to  
 endotracheal tube and and delivery circuit is a
penetrate the conducting airways to the gas  convenient method of ensuring proper humidifi-
exchanging regions of the lung. In practice this 
 cation of the inspired gas.
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS 195
 REFERENCES
Lehane, J.R. Jordan, C. and Jones, J.G. (1980) Influence
 of halothane and enflurane on respiratory airflow
Beadle, R.E., Robinson, N.E. and Sorensen, PR.
resistance and specific conductance in anaesthetized
(1975) Cardiopulmonary effects of positive
man. British Jourrat of Araesthesia 52: 773-781.
end-expiratory pressure in anesthetized horses.
Michaelson, E.D., Grassman, E.D. and Peters, W.R.
American Jourrat of Veterinary Research.
(1975) Pulmonary mechanics by spectral analysis of
36:1435-1438.
forced random noise. Journat of Clinicat lnvestigation
Colgan, FJ., Barrow, R.E and Fanming, G. (1971)
56: 1210-1230.
Constant positive pressure breathing and
Mushin, W.W., Rendell-Baker, L., Thompson, P. and
cardiorespiratory function. Anesthesiology
Mapleson, W.W. (1969) Automatic Ventilation of the
34:145-151
Lungs. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific.
Comroe, J.H., Forster, R.E., Dubois, A.B., Briscoe, W.A.
Nunn, J.F. (1977) Applied Respiratory Physiology. London:
and Carlsen, E. (1962) The Lurg,2nd edn. Chicago:
Butterworths, p 128.
Year Book Medical.
Nunn, J.F and Azi-Ashi, T.1. (1961) Respiratory effects of
Dodman, N.H., Lehr, J.L. and Spaulding, G.L.
resistance to breathing in anaesthetized man.
(1985) High frequency ventilation in large
Anesthesiotogy 22: 174-175.
animals. Proceedings of the 2nd Internationat
 Purchase I.F.H. (1965) Function tests on four large
Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Sacramento,
animal anaesthetic circuits. Veterinary Record
pp 186-187.
77:913-919.
Dunlop,C.,Steffey, E.P, Daunt, D., Kock, N. and
Purchase I.F.H. (1965a) Some respiratory parameters
Hodgson, D. (1985) Experiences with high frequency
in horses and cattle.Veterinary Record 77:859-860.
jet ventilation in conscious horses. Proceedings of the
Schatzmann, U. (1988) Artificial ventilation in the
Znd Internationat Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia,
horse. Advances in Veterinary Anaesthesia: Proceedings of
Sacramento,pp 190-191.
the 3nd International Congressof Veterinary Anaesthesia,
Gillespie, J.R., Tyler, W.S. and Eberly, V.E.
Brisbane,pp 29-34.
( 1966) Pulmonary ventilation and resistance
Watmey, G.C.G., Jordan, C. and Hall, L.W. (1987)
in emphysematous and control horses. Jourrat
Effect of halothane, enflurane and isoflurane on
of Applied Physiotogy. 21: 416-422.
bronchomotor tone in anaesthetized ponies. British
Hall, L.W., Gillespie, J.R. and Tyler, W.S. (1968)
Journat of Anaesthesia 59: 1022-1026.
Alveolar-arterial oxygen tension differences in
Watmey, G.C.G., Jordan, C., Hall, L.W. and Nolan, A.M.
anaesthetized horses. British Journal of Araesthesin
(1988) Effects of xylazine and acepromazine on
40:560-568.
bronchomotor tone of anaesthetized ponies. Equine
Hall, L. W. and Trim, C.M. (1975) Positive
Veterinary Journal. 20: 185-188.
Wilson, D.V., Soma, L.R. and Klein, L.V. (1985) High
spontaneously breathing horses. British Journat of
frequency positive pressure ventilation in the equine.
Anaesthesia 47:819-824.
Proceedings of the 2nd Interrationat Congress of
Hall, L.W. and Young, S.S. (1992) Effect of inhalation
Veterinary Araesthesia, Sacramento,pp i8s-189.
anaesthetics on total respiratory resistance in
Young, S.S. and Hall, L.W. (1989) Arapid, non-invasive
conscious ponies.fournalof Veterinary Pharmacology
method for measuring total respiratory impedance in
and Therapeutics 15: 174-179.
the horse. Equine Veterinary Journal 21:99-105.
Apparatus for the
9
administration of
fanaesthetics
ADMINISTRATION OF INTRAVENOUS
AGENTS
have been replaced by the disposable plastic vari-
ety when no delay between collection of the sam-
ple and its analysis is anticipated.
For agents which are intended to reach the central
Needles must be sharp and their points should,
nervous system and produce narcosis or anaesthe-
preferably, have a short bevel to reduce the risk of
sia the intravenous route is obviously more direct
than one through the respiratory tract. But it must
transfixing the vein: good quality disposable need-
les are always sharp. In small animals insertion of
always be borne in mind that unlike the respir-
atory pathway the intravenous one does not pro-
a needle or catheter through the skin may be rend-
ered painless by the prior application of a local
vide an exit as well as an entrance and, for this
analgesic cream to the skin after suitable hair clip-
reason, apparatus used for the administration of
intravenous agents must be designed to allow accu-
ping. EMLA cream, a eutectic mixture of ligno-
caine base 2.5% with prilocaine base 2.5% applied
rate control of the amount given, for once injected it
cannot be recovered from the animal's body.
under an occlusive dressing for 60 min prior to
venepuncture, has been reported to be effective,
choice of vein does not influence the apparatus
but amethocaine 4% gel also applied under an
which may be employed and detailed descriptions
 occlusive dressing needs only 30 min to produce
of the techniques of venepuncture will be found in
similar analgesia. In horses and cattle it is custom-
 ary to desensitize the skin by the intradermal or
the chapters concerned with anaesthesia of the
s.c. injection of a small bleb of 2% lignocaine
various species of animal.
hydrochloride through a 25 gauge needle or via an
air powered intradermal injector, prior to the
insertion of a large bore catheter.
SYRINGES, NEEDLES AND CATHETERS
The administration of intermittent small doses
The largest syringe which can be handled conven-
of a drug, or its constant infusion, normally
iently is one of 50 to 60 ml capacity and for easy
requires that a catheter be kept in the vein and free
percutaneous venepuncture all those of greater
from blood clot. Methods in which a needle is left
capacity than 2mi should have eccentrically
in the vein and an attached, loaded, syringe
placed nozzles. All-glass syringes are easy to steril-
strapped to the patient are rarely satisfactory
ize but have plungers which tend to stick during
because movement between the skin and the vein,
injection and, although theoretically the best in
 Or of the patient, results in displacement of the nee
which to collect samples of blood for blood gas
dle. Unless this mishap is noticed it may lead to
6 1
198 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 purpose can be made with the cutting edge of a
needle. Should venepuncture be found to be
usuccessful, even if the needle has only been par-
tially withdrawn from the catheter, it must not be
reinserted unless the catheter is completely
removed from the tissues because it may penetrate
the side wall of the catheter and sheer off the distal
portion.
More than than 25 different patterns of'catheter
over needle' are commercially available in the
United Kingdom alone. There is some variation on
FIG.9.1 Disposable plastic'catheter over-needle'.Many
their general shape and some have small handles
patterns are available.
to aid insertion. Most have plastic needle hubs
through which which blood can be seen when the
haematoma formation and/or the extravascular
needle enters the vein. Three important factors
-uaudieng a'a) yorum jo awos 'shnip go uooalu
 govern the choice of catheter. First, it should be no
esin, thiopentone) may be highly irritant to the
 longer than strictly necessary. The length of most
surrounding tissues.
catheters (up to 7 cm) is always adequate and there
Where anaesthesia is to be supervised by
is no need for the larger diameters to be longer.
nursing staff or a technician it is particularly
However, exceptions to this rule may be made in
important to ensure there is a secure open venous
circumstances when the need to ensure that the
line before commencing surgery. Venous access is
catheter remains in the vein at all costs (e.g. when
usually ensured with a plastic catheter (Fig. 9.1).
administering guaiphenesin to a horse) outweigh
Proprietary catheters for this purpose are supplied
the effect of the increased length on resistance to
sterile: they consist of a nylon, polythene or teflon
flow. The second important feature is the wall
catheter around a hollow metal needle or trocar,
thickmess. It is the external diameter which largely
the point of which projects just beyond the tapered
determines the size chosen in any given situation
end of the catheter The catheter is inserted into the
and catheters with thinner walls obviously permit
vein with the trocar needle in position and the nee-
more rapid infusions. The third factor is that the
dle is withdrawn when blood flows from its prox-
external shape should be as smooth as possible, for
imal end or is seen to enter the catheter hub. The
catheters with smooth contours are the easiest to
needle hub is then held firmly while the catheter is
introduce.
advanced well up the vein and secured in position
 Longer catheters are available for special pur-
with adhesive tape or a stitch. Because the catheter
 poses such as measurement of the central venous
is blunt ended it does not transfix the vein and a
 pressure (see Chapter 2). Although it is possible to
long length can be threaded into the vein. Once the
 obtain some of the catheters described above up to
catheter is in position the needle is completely
5.25 inches (13.3 cm) in length (which may be ade-
withdrawn. To prevent unwelcome spilling
of
quate for central venous pressure measurement in
blood from a peripheral vein it is customary, as
cats and small dogs), the longer catheters are gen-
soon as the catheter has been sited, to occlude the
erally not provided with introducing needles.
vein by exerting digital pressure over the catheter
Whenever possible, they are introduced into the
tip (usually easily located by palpation) until an
vein through a previously placed large bore
obturator or tap is affixed or an infusion cornected.
catheter. Some long catheters (e.g. Abbotts Drum
An attempt to insert one of these catheters
 Reel) are supplied with an additional short, wider
directly through the skin may result in the tip of
bore catheter of the ‘over needle pattern' that is
adeus yno-laq e on no ado ranann a
introduced into the vein so that the longer one can
which is almost impossible to introduce into the
be threaded through it.
vein, so they should be inserted through a small
Veins (and arteries) can be catheterized over a
skin incision. Often, a small skin incision for this
guidewire. Originally described as the 'Seldinger
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 199
tips followed by a stiffer section. The tip may be
Guide wire
preformed into a J-shape to facilitate its passage
e
through angles in the vessels. Some catheters (e.g.
radiographic catheters) are stiff enough to be
Vein
threaded over the guidewire and passed into
the vessel but softer catheters need to be passed
through the vein dilator. For asepsis it is safer
Guidewire
ab1el e dn [amoi pue Alaialduos ,dn-umos, c1
Sheath
disinfected area of skin to avoid contamination of
- q l A m ra asxa ra 
Dilator
sterilizable.
 The number of proprietary catheters of various
Vein
lengths now available is bewilderingly large and
choice is difficult. Because the wrong choice is
Long soft
made intravenous infusions which appear to run
catheter
Dilator
smoothly when originally set up with electrolyte
solutions may prove infuriatingly slow when
blood or a colloid solution has to be given. Such
a disadvantage may cost an animal's life. Consid-
Vein
eration of some of the factors influencing the flow
 makes the choice of catheter more rational and less
FIG. 9.2 Technique for the insertion of a long. soft
dependent on the information given on the packet
catheter (e.g. Swan-Ganz) into a vein by the modified
by the manufacturers of any particular product.
Seldinger technique.The vein is first penetrated with a
The flow through a tube is proportional to the
needle through which the guide wire is threaded as soon
driving pressure, which is equal to the pressure
as the needle is placed in the vein.After withdrawing the
difference between the two ends of the tube, multi-
needle,a sheathed vein dilator is introduced over the
guide wire and the dilator and guide wire are removed to
plied by a constant,π/8. Flow is also inversely pro-
leave the dilator sheath patent for the introduction of the
portional to the viscosity of the fluid, since the
catheter.
more viscous it is the harder it will be to force it
through the tube. The final factor governing the
technique for arterial cannulation, this method is
flow is the internal diameter of the tube, flow
now used to introduce catheters which are too flex-
being directly proportional to the fourth power of
ible, blunt ended or too large to be inserted directly
the radius, and inversely proportional to the 
percutaneously. It is commonly used for arterial
length of the bore. Thus, for maximum flow of any
catheters, right atrial feeding catheters, catheters
given fluid at any given pressure, the tube should
for injecting radiological contrast media, cardiac
be short, and the diameter large. It must be noted
pacing catheters and pulmonary artery flow
aa jea e se ana u aeu es e je
directed catheters, but it may be used for any intra-
on flow velocity.
venous catheter placement. A relatively small nee-
At very high flow rates it may be found that the
dle or catheter is introduced into the vessel, a
resistance to flow is disproportionately high. There
guidewire is inserted through it and the catheter is
is a critical flow velocity at which flow changes
withdrawn. A large bore vein dilator is threaded
from streamline to turbulent. During turbulence
over the guidewire. Most vein dilators are fragile
the driving pressure is largely used up in creating
and a scalpel incision must be made to clear a track
the kinetic energy of the turbulent eddies. The
to the vessel. Dilators usually consist of an inner
flow no longer depends on the viscosity of the
section and a sheath; the inner section is removed
fluid but on its density. However, the critical veloc-
with the guidewire. The catheter proper is inserted
ity at which turbulence occurs depends mainly on
through the vein dilator sheath (Fig. 9.2). There are
the viscosity and density of the fluid as well as the
several designs of guidewire; most have flexible
radius of the bore of the tube through which it is
200 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
apparatus may be used. However, if a fairly accu-
rate control of flow rate is needed, or the infusion
is to be given slowly as may be necessary in small
animal patients or when potent drugs are to be
administered, a system giving a greater degree of
control is essential. Proprietary disposable plastic
'giving sets' or'administration sets' are convenient
for these purposes and can be obtained in a variety
of patterns.
 Essentially, a 'giving set' consists of an outlet
 e arodru ou A ro A ym aqn
depending on whether the set is for blood and
seid jo suual aau le ang alae ae sadi uei ias
blood products or crystalloids alone, a drip cham-
tubing attached and most have winged needles to aid
ber and a long length of plastic delivery tubing
insertion and subsequent fixation to the patient.
which can be occluded by some form of adjustable
clamp. If it is intended for use with bottles of fluid
flowing. In an intravenous infusion system the
 an air inlet with a filter is incorporated. All plastic
a e a aq i  s  l
 sets include a short piece of rubber tubing towards
high flow rates and also at local points in the
the needle mount end of the delivery tube, or a rub-
 apparatus at which, because of sudden change in 
 ber capped short side arm so that injections can be
internal configuration, the velocity of flow mom-
made through a fine bore needle whilst the tubing
entarily rises. Thus, at points at which the internal
is pinched between the finger and thumb on the
 diameter changes suddenly, turbulence will occur.
drip chamber side of the injection site to prevent
The viscosity of blood is considerably greater
the pressure damming back fluid in the drip cham-
thian that of water, mainly because of the presence
ber. The flow rate is controlled by means of the
of erythrocytes. It increases with the haematocrit
clamp and can be estimated from number of drops
and above about 60% packed cell volume blood
which pass through the drip chamber in one
hardly behaves as a fluid. Viscosity is also in-
minute. For example, with most sets 40 drops/
creased by a drop in temperature, and the viscosity
minute means the administration of approximately
of blood at 0°C is about 2.5 times as great as at
500 ml in 4 hours. Much more accurate control of
37°℃. Blood warming coils are, therefore, justified
infusion rate can be obtained by the use of a drip
 on grounds of increasing the speed of transfusion
rate controller between the fluid container and the
as well as of preventing the development of
patient. These are electronic devices which monitor
hypothermia in the recipient.
the drip chamber and, by changing the effective
An alternative to a catheter for very small veins
cross-section area of a section of the standard
is a needle attached to a hub by a length of plastic
administration set tubing, maintain a constant
tubing. There are at least nine types of 'small vein'
infusion rate. The automatic control eliminates the
needles currently available (Fig. 9.3). Some have
need for frequent adjustment of the drip rate. How-
winged handles to aid insertion and subsquent fix-
ever, drip rate controllers are expensive and cannot
ation to the patient. Flow performance of most of
 compensate for variations in drip size so that the
the 'small vein sets' (often called 'scalp vein sets
 actual delivery rate depends on the drop size.
or 'butterflies') is surprisingly poor, and it is usu-
Drip rate pumps are similar in cost and appear-
ally best to choose one with the shortest length of
ance to drop rate controllers and most operate sat-
tubing attached.
isfactorily with standard administration sets. They
 generate a pressure by peristaltic fingers or rollers
acting on deformable tubing to give a constant
INFUSION APPARATUS
infusion rate.
Where, as in larger farm animals and horses, large
Volumetric pumps are designed to avoid prob-
volume infusions are to be given rapidly, simple
lems associated with variations in drop size. Very
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION  201
FIG. 9.5 Syringe driver Many types of electrically driven
syringe drivers are available.Some must be used with one
specified size of syringe,others can be used with a variety
of syringes.
the administration of relatively small volumes of
fluid (e.g. to cats or for the continuous administra-
tion of small volumes of drug solutions during
anaesthesia). They are usually calibrated for a par-
ticular type and size of syringe. The delivery rate
control alters the rate of plunger travel and hence
the cross-sectional area of the barrel is critical in
ensuring that the delivery rate is correct. The
syringe can be filled from a large container of fluid
FIG.9.4 Volumetric or constant infusion pump.Types
and connected to the intravenous catheter with a
such as this drive a disposable piston pump and the need
simple administration extension set so that prim-
to refill the barrel of the pump means that the infusion rate
 ing volume is minimal. Syringe drivers are gener-
is not actually constant.They will, however, maintain a
 ally less expensive than volumetric pumps or drip
reliable infusion rate.Most have devices which warn of the
 rate pumps or controllers as well as being more
presence of air in the infusion line or occlusion of the line.
 portable. Further developments include the use of
good volumetric accuracy is obtained with either a
programmed microprocessor control with an abil-
reciprocating piston type pump or by peristaltic
ity (if the pharmacokinetics of the infused sub-
 pumping on an accurately made tube which forms
 stance are known) to deliver a changing infusion
 part of the administration set. With the piston type
rate such that a steady state of blood concentra-
pump (Fig. 9.4) no fluid is delivered to the patient
tions can be achieved and maintained.
during the refilling stage of the cycle so that at low
 Most infusion pumps monitor line pressure by
flow rates significant fluctuations in delivery rate
detecting changes in the motor current needed for
occur. The need for a dedicated infusion set adds
driving and to avoid frequent false alarms the pres-
to the cost of each infusion and the volume of fluid
sure at which an occlusion is indicated is usually
needed to prime these sets can also be in the region
set well above the anticipated line pressure. This
am is c as a   o 
 means that occlusion alarms on infusion pumps
of expensive solutions. These pumps are, however,
have little value in indicating that the fluid is being
particularly valuable for longer procedures where
injected into the tissues rather than into a vein.
the solution can be withdrawn from a large con-
With low flow rates, the time required for a sigrific-
 tainer such as a 3l plastic bag.
ant increase in interstitial, and subsequently line
Electrically driven syringe drivers (Fig. 9.5)
pressure, will be long and substantial amoumts of
overcome many of the problems associated with
fluid may be injected before any warning is given.
202 FRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Pharmaceutical companies now provide intra-
1. A source of oxygen (which may be air)
venous fluids in plastic disposable bag containers
2. A vaporizer or a source of anaesthetic gas
3. A'patient' or 'breathing' system.
 Because such bags are collapsible, no air inlet is
 In its simplest form modern anaesthetic apparatus
necessary, air embolism cannot occur and infu-
sions can be left running unattended, which may
consists of an oxygen cylinder, with pressure
 gauge, pressure regulator and flowmeter, deliver-
be an advantage for veterinary use. When bottles
of fluid are used, there is a possibility of air
 ing oxygen to a suitable patient breathing system.
A vaporizer for an inhalation anaesthetic agent
embolism should the bottle empty unobserved, as
may be included inside or outside the patient
air has to enter the bottlebefore fluid can leave.
breathing system.
When fluids are administered under the influ
ence of gravity the speed of infusion depends
DELIVERY AND REGULATION OF
more on the bore of the needle or catheter than on
ANAESTHETIC GASES
the pressure applied (i.e. the height above the nee-
dle or catheter at which the container is held).
Oxygen cylinders ('tanks' in North America)
Doubling the diameter of the needle or catheter
 gives a 16-fold increase in the rate of flow, whereas
For medical use oxygen is obtained compressed at
high pressure (138 atmospheres or 2000 lb/in2)
a four-fold increase in the pressure is required to
double the rate. However, in the case of the'flutter
 into metal cylinders or as liquid oxygen in special
valve' apparatus traditional and formerly so pop-
 ular in veterinary practice, the vertical distance
usually used. In the United Kingdom they are
 between the needle and the air inlet opening deter-
colour coded black with a white top but in other
mines the rate at which air enters the system;
countries there is no adherence to what was
intended to be a universal code. In the USA they
increasing this distance increases the rate of air
are coloured all green and in Canada all white.
entry and hence the speed of infusion. The 'flutter
When delivered, all cylinders have a plastic seal
valve' is unreliable and there is little justification
for its continued use in veterinary anaesthetic
over their outlet to exclude dust and this seal
practice except, perhaps, when short duration fast
should be removed only immediately before use
infusion needs to be given.
There are two types of cylinder outlet. Some cylin-
ders fit into a yoke over pins which are indexed for
In circumstances where the maximum size of
the needle or catheter is limited, the maximum rate
different gases so as to make it impossible to attach
of flow of fluid can be increased by pressurizing
an incorrect cylinder. A small washer termed a
the system. Where bottles are in use, they can be
Bodcock seal' is needed around the inlet on the
pressurized by pumping air under pressure
ders utilize ‘bull-nose' fittings which screw into
through the air inlet. This procedure carries a high
risk of producing air embolism if the supply of
place and require no sealing washer.
fluid runs out, so it should be used with caution
Pressure gauge
and the infusion should never be left unattended.
Pressure can be applied to plastic bags of fluid by
It is essential for the anaesthetist to know that
placing them in a second bag or container pressur-
there is an adequate supply of oxygen in the
ized by pumping in air; there is then no danger of
cylinder so when in use they are coupled to a
air embolism.
pressure gauge to register the pressure inside
and, therefore, the quantity of oxy gen available.
Pressure gauges are most commonly of the
ADMINISTRATION OF INHALATION
Bourdon type (see Fig. 9.6), consisting of a
AGENTS
metal tube, the end of which is attached to a
pointer. The application of pressure to the inside of
The administration of an inhalation anaesthetic
the tube causes it to straighten and moves the
requires:
pointer over a scale.
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 203
shut off by the flowmeter control is very much
reduced.
The regulators in common use in anaesthesia usu-
ally reduce the pressure at which oxygen is deliv-
ered to below 200 lb/in2 (13.8 atm) and many
modern anaesthetic machines incorporate the
valve into the block featuring the cylinder pin
index so that on superficial inspection of the
machine they may be difficult to identify. Further
details of these regulators can be obtained from
such texts as Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment by
Moyle and Davey (4th edn. (1997) W. B. Saunders)
and will not be considered here.
Flowmeters
Today most of the flowmeters used in anaesthesia
in the UK are known as 'rotameters' (Fig. 9.7).
They make use of the interdependence of flow
rate, size of an orifice and the pressure difference
on either side of the orifice. The rotameter consists
FIG.9.6 Bourdon gauge.These are used for measuring
 gas pressure and, placed before an orifice,for gas flow
measurement.
5
Reducing valves or regulators
Apressure reducing valve at the cylinder outlet or
4
m a pipeline supply is necessary for three reasons:
3
1. For cylinder supplies, once the flow has been
set for any particular level, frequent readjustment
2
 of the flowmeter control, which would be necessary
as the pressure in the cylinder fell off, is obviated.
 Because the reducing valve exerts this automatic
 control it is often referred to as a 'regulator'.
500
 2. By supplying a low gas pressure to the
control valve spindle small variations in the gas
flow can be made easily. Where a high pressure
cylinder is controlled directly by a simple needle
type valve large changes in flow result from very
small movements of the control valve spindle.
3. The regulator limits the pressure within the
connecting tubing to a low level and the likelihood
of bursting the connecting tube when the flow is
FIG.9.7 Rotameter.
204FRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 of a glass tube inside which a rotating bobbin is
free to move. The bore of the tube gradually
increases from below upwards. The bobbin floats
up and down the tube, allowing gas to flow
around it. The higher the bobbin in the tube the
wider the annular space between the tube and
bobbin (orifice) and the greater the flow rate
through it. The bobbin, usually made of alu-
minium, has an upper rim which is of a diameter
slightly greater than that of the body, and in which
specially shaped channels are cut. As the gas
enters the rotameter tube it impinges on the bob-
bin and causes it to rise and to spin because the rim
with its set of channels acts like a set of vanes. The
result is that the bobbin rides on a cushion of gas
thereby eliminating errors due to friction between
the tube and bobbin. The gas flow rate is read from
FIG.9.8 Boyle-type vaporizer.This relatively crude type
the top of the bobbin against a scale etched on the
of vaporizer is not temperature or flow compensated and
outside of the glass tube. If the tube is mounted in
is mostly used in developing countries for the volatilization
a truly upright position these meters are capable of
Of ether in a stream of O2 or air.
readings of an accuracy of ± 2% but only for the gas
for which they have been calibrated.
and is made to pass through a small orifice. A pres-
The Heidbrink flowmeter, commonly used
sure builds up proximal to the constriction and
in the USA, has a metal tube, the inside of which
this pressure is transmitted to the flexible, metal,
is tapered in the same way as a rotameter tube.
oval cross-section, Bourdon tube. The tube tends
The bobbin is replaced by a rod, the tip of which
to straighten, the degree of straightening depend-
is visible through a glass tube fitted at the top
ing on the pressure within it which, in turn,
of the metal tube. A scale is fitted to the side of
depends on the gas flow through the orifice. The
the glass tube and the gas flow rate can be read
tip of the Bourdon tube is linked by a simple mech-
off from the position of the tip of the metal
anism to an indicator needle which moves over a
rod against this scale. In the UK this type of
scale calibrated in terms of rate of gas flow. In fact,
meter is most commonly found on oxygen therapy
 in this meter the gauge indicates the pressure dif-
ference between the proximal side of the orifice
Ball float meters, like the rotameter and
 and the atmosphere. This is virtually equivalent to
Heidbrink, have a tapering bore and are, therefore,
 measuring the pressure gradient across the orifice
variable orifice meters. The bobbin or rod is
since in anaesthetic practice the pressure on the
replaced by a special ball and if the tube is mourted
distal side of the orifice approximates very closely
on an inclined plane one ball is sufficient, but if the
to atmospheric.
tube is vertical the ball tends to oscillate; this is
 The Bourdon type of flowmeter is not satisfact-
overcome by using two ball floats. The reading is
ory for measuring small rates of gas flow. Owing to
taken from the centre of the ball or, in two ball
the pressure necessary to cause the Bourdon tube
types, the point of contact between the balls. The
to straighten out, a very small orifice must be used
Connell flowmeter has two balls in contact in an
to provide the resistance to gas flow. If this orifice
inclined tube. With all inclined tube meters it is
becomes partially blocked by dirt the meter read-
important that they are set at the correct angle or
ing increases whereas the actual flow of gas is
naccuracies will occur.
decreased; if the orifice becomes completely
A much more crude flowmeter utilizes a
blocked the meter reading suggests that the flow is
Bourdon pressure gauge (Fig. 9.8). The gas flowing
 being maintained. On the other hand, if the orifice
from the cylinder issues from the reducing valve
is enlarged due to wear, the gas flow will be
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 205
increased while the decreased resistance to gas
 gen pressure falls a diaphragm moves to allow the
flow will lead to a low meter reading.
second gas to pass through a whistle and an easily
audible warning note is emitted. In other types a
a pue sdoip amssaid uasAxo aul se suado aalea
Pipeline systems
remaining oxygen passes through the whistle; the
Where large quantities of oxygen (or other gases)
whistling noise ceases as the oxygen pressure falls
are used, it is more convenient and more economi-
to atmospheric pressure.
cal to utilize larger cylinders. As these are awk-
ward to handle they are kept outside the operating
Gases other than oxygen
area and the gas is supplied to the anaesthetic
machine through a pipeline. The central depot has
a number of large cylinders connected to a mani-
found on anaesthetic machines include nitrous
fold so that gas is taken from all the cylinders in
oxide (in the UK cylinders are colour coded blue)
the bank. Warning devices are included so that the
 and carbon dioxide (grey cylinders). These gases
manifold can be changed to a second bank of cylin-
are compressed in cylinders under a pressure
ders when the supply pressure drops, or, with
which liquifies them at ordinary room tempera-
more complex apparatus where there are two or
tures. The amount of gas present in the cylinder
more manifolds, the change to the bank of fresh
can only be found by weighing (all have full and
cylinders takes place automatically. If extremely
empty weights stamped on them) since the pres-
large quantities of oxygen are used daily, as they
sure of the gas above the liquid remains almost
may be in a large hospital, the cylinder bank
constant as long as any liquid remains. Thus, a
may be replaced by liquid oxy gen containers but
 pressure gauge at the cylinder outlet willregister
this is most unlikely to be necessary for veterinary
 only a small fall as the gas is being drawn off due
practice.
to cooling causing a fall in the saturated vapour
In the UK the outlets from the pipelines in the
pressure, but this will rise again as the cylinder
theatre are colour coded and indexed so that at
warms and the pressure registered will not drop
least in theory, pipes from the anaesthetic machine
rapidly until all the liquid has been vaporized and
cannot be connected to the wrong outlet. In prac-
the residual gas is being drawn off.
tice, it is not unknown for force to be used to cir-
The saturation pressure of 20 °C of NzO and CO2
is sufficiently high that the cylinders need to be
other gases are delivered at a low pressure to the
fitted with reducing valves ('pressure regulators').
anaesthetic machine and are fed directly from the
It is now possible to mix two gases using a
piped supply to the flowmeter. However, most
monitored dial mixer unit before delivery into a
pipeline machines also carry a small oxygen cylin-
fnal common pathway. This type of system
der and an associated pressure regulator for emer-
(Quantiflex) has been used for nitrous oxide/oxy-
 gency use in the event of a failure in the pipeline
 gen mixtures in any proportions from 21 to 100%
Addns
oxygen at flow rates of 1-201/min. The system is
costly, but it has the advantage that it can be more
convenient and mistakes are less likely. It is inher-
Oxygen failure warning devices
aq po saix s sxodu asneaq aes 
Devices which warn the anaesthetist that the pres-
delivered.
sure of the oxygen supply is low have been largely
When an oxygen flow is being mixed with a
neglected in veterinary anaesthesia, yet it is in this
nitrous oxide without the aid of a Quantiflex
field, when often in general practice there is mini-
mixer, failure of the oxygen supply is disastrous
mal assistance available to monitor the oxygen
because the machine will then deliver 100% N2O.
delivery, where they should be considered an
 Oxygen warning devices such as those described
essential feature of anaesthetic machines. Some
above reduce the chance of this happening
types depend on a second source of gas, usually
without the knowledge of the anaesthetist, but
nitrous oxide, for their operation. When the oxy-
  
206 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
device so that should O, flow cease the N,Oflow is
The open end of the J-tube is covered by a metal
also cut off. This cut-off device may prevent the
 hood which can be positioned as required by mov-
machine from being fitted with some types of oxy-
ing the rod attached to it up or down. As the hood
 gen failure alarm.
is pushed downwards the gas is deflected nearer
and nearer to the surface of the liquid and finally.
when the open end of the hood is pushed below
VAPORIZERS
the surface of the liquid gases are made to bubble
The ideal vaporizer would be one that delivered a
through the liquid anaesthetic. When the tap is in
suitable and accurately known quantity of a
the ON position and the hood, or cowl, fully
volatile anaesthetic agent at all times and under all
depressed, the whole of the gas flow is made to
conditions of use. However, many factors which
bubble through the liquid and a maximum con-
vary during the course of administration influence
centration of the anaesthetic vapour is picked up.
vaporization and only the most modern of expens-
se yns shuae juanod iog siaziodea uaed anog
ive, sophisticated pieces of apparatus approach
halothane have a single, straight inlet tube with a
anywhere near this ideal.
side port and no cowl arrangement.
Factors which have most influence include
When air or other gas flows over the surface of a
temperature, gas flow rate through the vaporizer,
liquid, the vapour of the liquid is carried away.
and back pressure transmitted during IPPV. A
 and is replaced by fresh vapour. This continuous
low resistance to gas flow may also be important if 
 process of vaporization is accompanied by a corres-
the vaporizer is to be used in the breathing circuit
 ponding loss of heat, the magnitude of which is
(p. 000).
determined by the rate at which the vapour is
removed and by the latent heat of vaporization of
the liquid. The loss of heat results in a fall in the
Uncalibrated vaporizers
temperature of the liquid unless heat is conducted
If a liquid volatile anaesthetic is contained in a bot-
to the liquid from some outside source. With a fall
tle it is possible to bubble gas through it or to allow
in the temperature of the liquid there is a corres-
the gas to flow over its surface. This arrangement
 ponding decrease in the speed of vaporization
is sometimes known as a ‘plenum vaporizer'
 and, if the gas flow remains constant, the concen-
because gas is being forced into a chamber, and
tration of anaesthetic vapour in the gas stream
plenum' is a chamber or container in which the
from a Boyle pattern vaporizer decreases with
pressure inside is greater than that outside it.
fime until the heat loss due to vaporization is bal-
 In the UK Boyle pattern vaporizers are still
anced by the conduction of heat through the glass
occasionally encountered and they are common in
bottle from the surrounding atmosphere. When
some developing countries. In these vaporizers the
ether was used in this type of vaporizer it was not
method of varying the concentration of anaes-
uncommon to see ice crystals forming on the out-
thetic vapour delivered utilizes a permanent parti-
side of the bottle as its temperature fell due to
tion to prevent the direct passage of gases from the
volatilization of the ether.
flowmeters to the patient. When the control lever
is in the OFF position all gases are diverted around
Calibrated vaporizers
the partition but away from the bottle. With the tap
in the ON position all gases pass through the bottle
There are today many precision vaporizers on the
 cntaining the liquid. The control can be placed in
market, all designed to deliver an accurately
any intermediate position and this determines
kmown concentration of specific volatile anaesthe-
how muchof the total gas flowpasses through the
tics over a wide range of gas flow rates. They con-
bottle.
sist of a vaporizing chamber and a bypass. The
A further means of controlling the vapour con
fresh gas stream flowing into the vaporizer is
 centration is also provided. The gases are made to
divided into two portions, the larger of which
pass through a J-shaped tube before emerging into
 passes straight through the bypass. The smaller
the space above the liquid anaesthetic in the bottle.
 portion is ducted through the vaporizing chamber
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 207
where it becomes saturated with the vapour, and
at intervals as recommended by the manufacturers
this ensures that:
if they are to retain their accuracy.
All the vaporizers described so far have a high
1. There is no sudden burst of high vapour
resistance to gas flow, which is unimportant when
concentration when the vaporizer is first
the carrier gas is pushed through them by the
switched on.
 power of the compressed gases in the cylinders or
2. The output of the vaporizer is unaffected by
 pipelines. However, if the vaporizer is to be used
shaking.
where the gas flow is powered by the respiratory
As already pointed out, vaporization of the liquid
efforts of the animal, then a low resistance vapor-
anaesthetic results in the removal of heat from the
izer is essential and vaporizers of this type are nec-
liquid with a resultant fall in its temperature.
essary for use in 'in-circle' systems.
Modern calibrated vaporizers are constructed
from metal (mainly copper) which ensure the
Low resistance vaporizers
ready conduction of heat from the room to the con-
tained liquid, the high thermal conductivity of the
ane mo seo oi anueisisar mol e Sunao siaziode
metal container together with the high thermal
usually of a simple type with wide-bore entry and
capacity of its mass, ensure a sufficient supply of
exit ports and no wicks to impede the flow of
heat for vaporization, holding the liquid tempera-
 gases. A simple low resistance, low efficiency
ture constant. In these modern vaporizers the only
vaporizer of this type often used in dental surgery
control to set is the output concentration.
is the Goldman (Fig. 9.9).
Amajor problem in vaporizer design lies in the
The EMO vaporizer (Epstein-Macintosh-
design of the splitting valves. In the earlier types it
Oxford) (Fig. 9.10) was specifically desigmed for
proved impossible to ensure that the flow division
the volatilization of ether and is generally recog-
of this valve remained constant over a wide
nized as the best of this type of vaporizer. It is
range of flow rates, and the vaporizers were
supplied with graphs which needed to be con-
sulted to determine the concentration of volatile
agent being delivered when they were used
with gas flow rates below 4l/min. In current
models this problem has been overcome and it
is generally accepted that most deliver accurately
indicated concentrations at flow rates above
500 ml/ min.
Pressure fluctuations produced by IPPV have a
pumping effect and this may have a considerable
effect on the output, even doubling the output con-
centration at low gas flow rates. Modern vapor-
izers incorporate a non-return valve to overcome
this.
The volatile anaesthetic agent, desflurane,
 requires a special vaporizer as its boiling point is
too close to room temperature for it to be used in
the conventional systems.
The 'Selectatec' and similar systems enable the
easy removal or placement of the vaporizer on the
'back bar' of the anaesthetic machine for filling in
another environment, or for exchange for a vapor-
izer containing a different anaesthetic agent or for
FIG. 9.9 Goldman vaporizer for inclusion in the
service. Calibrated vaporizers need regular service
breathing system. Commonly used for halothane.
208FRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Temperature
agreed system. A system of classification formerly
Conrecting
 in common use in the UK was:
tubing
indicator
1. The open method
Dutiet
 2. The semi-open method
Inlet
3. (a) The closed method with carbon dioxide
absorption (b) The semi-closed method with
carbon dioxide absorption
4. The semi-closed method without carbon
dioxide absorption.
filler
This classification has been criticised on the
Ether
[evel
 grounds that it is impractical and does not fit all
indicator
systems. A more clinically useful definition of sys-
tems is based on the two methods by which carbon
dioxideis removed from the inspired gases:
1. Non-rebreathing
 The system is designed so that the expired gases 
are vented to the atmosphere and cannot be
rebreathed.
2.Rebreathing
Wate
absorber which contains soda lime or another
absorbent (e.g. Baralyme) to remove the carbon
dioxide.
FIG.9.10 The EMO vaporizer for ether.This draw-over,
The open and semi-open methods were used to
temperature compensated unit may be used in situations
volatilize agents such as chloroform and ether. The
where supplies of O2 are not readily available and,
methods are often referred to as 'rag and bottle
anaesthesia' and they survived through over a
countries.
hundred years of anaesthetic history. In the semi-
portable, has a temperature compensating device
open or 'perhalation' method all the inspired air
and is employed in a non-rebreathing system.
was made to pass through a mask on which the
Ether/air anaesthesia administered from it meets
vaporization of the agent occurred. In horse and
criteria for acceptability in general practice where
cattle special masks were often used for the semi-
the veterinarian may be assisted in the operating
 open administration of chloroform. These masks
theatre by a nurse or may be entirely alone. It may
were cylinders of leather and canvas applied over
 be used in situations where supplies of oxygen are
either the upper or both jaws. Chloroform was
not readily available and, consequently it is popu-
applied to a sponge inserted in the open end of the
lar in many developing countries.
cylinder. In the cruder types of mask the sponge
was actually in contact with the nostrils, but in
 more refined patterns a wire mesh partition pre-
BREATHING SYSTEMS
vented this direct contact.
Today, the open and semi-open methods of
The purpose of the breathing system is to convey
administration are seldom used. In them, the
 oxygen and anaesthetic to the patient, and to
anaesthetic agents are diluted to an unknown
ensure the removal of carbon dioxide produced by
 extent by air and this dilution is greatest when
the patient. It does not seem possible to classify all
the minute volume of breathing is large so the
the ways in which this can be done in a completely
inspiratory gas flow rate is high. The greater the
logical manner and as yet there is no universally
ventilation (and hence, the dilution of the anaes-
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 209
thetic inhaled), the closer the alveolar concentra-
tion of the anaesthetic will approach zero, and
anaesthesia lightens as ventilation increases. On
the other hand, depression of breathing decreases
the air dilution and thereby increases the con-
MAPELSON
centration of anaesthetic inspired. Under these
 SYSTEMS
circumstances unless there is an increase in the
B
uptake of the anaesthetic by the body, the alveolar
concentration of the anaesthetic must rise. A rise
in the alveolar concentration produces deeper
unconsciousness and further respiratory depres-
FG
sion. In addition, deepening anaesthesia reduces
the cardiac output and hence the uptake of anaes-
thetic by the body, thus adding still further to the
rise in the alveolar concentration. If this process is
allowed to proceed unchecked, unconsciousness
FG
deepens until the ventilation becomes inadequate.
 In other words, with the open and semi-open
methods of administration, animals which become
more lightly anaesthetized tend to continue awak-
ening and animals which become more deeply
FG
anaesthetized tend to continue becoming more
depressed and nearer to death.
NON-REBREATHING SYSTEMS
FG
-ss an-u puaq adid ra 
tems is that the fresh gases flow from the anaesthet-
ic machine into a reservoir from which the patient
inhales and the exhaled gases are spilled, usually
through an expiratory valve, to the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide removal depends on the fresh gas
FG
flow rate, and on the tidal and minute volumes of
FIG.9.1l The Mapleson classification of patient
respiration of the patient. Many systems have been
breathing systems. A: Magill and Lack circuits; E:T-piece
 devised but, in general, they are all variations of
system; FG:fresh gas flow; P: patient.
those classified by Mapleson (1954). The perform-
ance of many of these systems has been reviewed
 by Sykes (1968). Strictly speaking, they often can-
 not be regarded as non-rebreathing systems
The Magill system
because some rebreathing of exhaled gases takes
The Magill attachment, which incorporates a
place, but they are operated to ensure that this
rebreathed gas constitutes no more than the gas
spring loaded expiratory valve is probably the
coming from the deadspace of the animals' respira-
most generally useful of all the non-rebreathing
tory tract, i.e. fresh gas in so far as the inhaled con-
systems. With this system rebreathing is prevented
centration of anaesthetic gases is concerned. In
by maintaining the total gas flow rate slightly in
veterinary anaesthesia the most commonly used
excess of the patient's respiratory minute volume.
non-rebreathing systems are the Magill (Mapleson
The animal inhales from the bag and wide bore
A), the T-piece (Mapleson E) and coaxial circuits
tubing: the exhaled mixture passes back up the
(variations of Mapleson A and D) (Fig. 9.11).
 tubing displacing the gas in it back into the bag
2I0PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Fresh gas
(1968) have shown that in spontaneously breath-
flow
early inspiration
ing patients sigmificant rebreathing does not occur
until the fresh gas flow rate falls below 70% of the
patient's minute volume. If, however, IPPV is
applied by compression of the reservoir bag, then
very much higher fresh gas flows are needed to
 prevent rebreathing because under these circum-
-ndxa auh yanorun patds si seh ysay ah sauis
late inspiration
atory valve at the end of inspiration.
Various non-return valves have been incorpor-
ated in the Magill system in place of the simple
spring loaded expiratory valve. All these valves
prevent any rebreathing of the exhaled gases other
than those contained in the valve itself and its con-
early expiration
 nections. Where they are used the gas flow rates
from the apparatus require frequent adjustment,
for any alteration in the rate or depth of the
 patient's breathing affects the degree of distension
of the reservoir bag. If the gas flow rate is kept con-
stant, deep or rapid breathing empties the bag
:late expiration
quickly, while slow or shallow breathing allows
the bag to become over distended. These non-
return valves can be used to measure the minute
volume of respiration for if the flow rates are
alveolar gas
deadspace gas
adjusted to maintain the bag at a constant average
FIG.9.12 The Magill system (spontaneous breathing)
size at the end of expiration the total flow rate as
showing the mode of operation to prevent rebreathing of
read from the flowmeters will equal the respir-
exhaled gas.
atory minute volume. In practice because of the
necessity for repeated adjustments of the total gas
flow rate, an excessive flow is employed and a spill
until it is full. The exhaled gases never reach the
valve is incorporated between the reservoir bag
bag because the capacity of the tube is too great
and the non-return valve.
and once the bag is distended the build up of pres-
sure inside the system causes the expiratory valve
The T-piece system
to open so that the terminal part of expiration (rich
 in carbon dioxide - the alveolar gas) passes out of
The low resistance and small deadspace make the
the valve into the atmosphere. During the pause
T-piece system, first described by Ayre in 1937,
which follows expiration and before the next inspir-
very suitable for small dogs and cats. As shown in
ation fresh gas from the anaesthetic apparatus
Fig. 9.13 an open tube acts as a reservoir and there
sweeps the first part of the exhaled gases from the
are no valves. The exhaled gases are swept out of
corrugated tube out through the expiratory valve
the open end of the reservoir tube by fresh gases
(Fig. 9.12).
flowing in from the anaesthetic apparatus during
To ensure minimal rebreathing of the expired
the expiratory phase. Unless the capacity of the
 gases the fresh gas flow rate should be equal to, or
reservoir tube is at least equal to the tidal volume
 greater than, the minute volume of respiration of
of the animal the terminal part of inspiration will
the patient. However, as the system leads to the
be air, but unless its capacity is very small this is
 preferential removal of alveolar gas, a lower fresh
uimportant for the air will only enter the respira-
gas flow rate (equal to the alveolar ventilation)
 tory dead-space and no dilution of the anaesthetic
may be adequate and, in man, Kain and Nunn
gases will take place.
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION2II
fresh gas flow
suit the circumstances. Scavenging of waste gases
▼
from the T-piece system presents some difficulties
if the overall resistance of the apparatus is not to be
early inspiration
increased.
fresh gas flow
4
Coaxial systems
 late inspiration
The desirability of controlling atmospheric pollu-
tion in operating theatres has led to an interest in
fresh gas flow
the use of coaxial circuits because it is relatively
easy to duct the waste gases from them to the
atmosphere by valves placed at the anaesthetic
—early expiration
machine and well away from the patient. The Bain
fresh gas flow
(Fig 9.14) and the Lack (Fig. 9.15) systems are two
types of coaxial circuits.
 In the Bain system fresh gas passes up the cen-
—late expiration
tral tube and expired gas through the outer sleeve.
It can be seen that this arrangement is basically
that of the T-piece system and, therefore, in gen-
0000-0
However, higher gas flow rates are needed to pre-
alveolar gasdeadspace gas
vent rebreathing of expired gases during spontan-
FIG.9.13 Mode of operation of the T-piece system in
eous respiration and the pattern of respiration is
preventing rebreathing provided the fresh gas flow
important. These high flows directed via a narrow
exceeds about twice the patient's minute volume.
pipe to the animal's airway themselves cause quite
marked expiratory respiratory resistance through
The resistance and fresh gas requirements are
a venturi effect. An animal which breathes slowly
obviously related to the expiratory flow rate and
with a long expiratory pause will make more effi-
flow patterns which occur in animals of any partic-
cient use of the fresh gas inflow than an animal
ular size. The minimum fresh gas flow rate
with a rapid, shallow respiratory pattern.
required to prevent rebreathing and air dilution
The Lack circuit uses the alternative arrange-
during both spontaneous and controlled ventila-
ment in which the fresh gas flows in the outer
tion is generally recommended to be 2.5 - 3.0 times
sleeve and expiration through the inner tube. This
the minute volume of respiration, provided the
 arrangement was designed to aid scavenging of
expiratory limb has a capacity greater than the
expired gas and is more satisfactory than the con-
tidal volume.
ventional Mapleson A system in this respect. The
Using the basic T-piece system IPPV may be
Lack system cannot be used with controlled ventil-
 applied by intermittently blocking the open end of
ation in the same way as the Bain system without
the reservoir tube thus directing the fresh gas into
excessive rebreathing so its use is restricted to
the animal's lungs. However, the inflation pres-
spontaneously breathing animals.
sure, being that supplied by the anaesthetic
 The modified Bain system collects the expired
machine, may be so high as to cause massive pul-
gas in a reservoir bag connected to a blow-off
monary damage if over inflation is allowed to
valve at the end of the expiratory tube and has
occur. Ventilation may be controlled more safely
sgop ul asn roy Aroioeishes Aiqeuoseai paaond
by squeezing an open-tailed bag attached to the
over 10kg body weight. Compression of this reser-
end of the expiratory limb - the Jackson-Rees
voir bag or the introduction of air during the inspir-
modification. The orifice of the open tail can be
atory cycle of a ventilator connected to the bag
controlled between the finger and thumb of the
s8op ul AddlI 1oy shmsa1 poo8 A1aA saa18 jumou
anaesthetist and the inflation pressure adjusted to
over 20kg body weight.
212 FRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
FGF
FGF
Patient
Patient
>
FGF -
Patient
：
FGF
PatientB
131
FGF-
Patient
><
FGF -
Patient
atient
C
D
FGF
FIG.9.15 The Lack coaxial system (B) compared to the
standard Magill system (A) and the parallel Lack system
FIG.9.14 The T-piece system (A) compared to the
(C). In allthese systems the bag is on the inspiratory limb of
original Bain coaxial system (B),the modified Bain system
the system (FGF:fresh gas flow)
(C) and the modified, parallel Bain system (D). It is
important to note that in the modified systems the bag is
on the expiratory limb (FGF:fresh gas flow).
Use of these coaxial systems in veterinary anaes-
 occluded (with the finger or the plunger of a 5 ml
thesia has revealed a number of problems. In some
syringe) and the oxygen flowmeter bobbin should
cases the internal or external tubing has been of
be seen to dip and the machine pressure relief
such a small bore that excessive demands were
valve heard blowing off, indicating that all is well.
made on the animal's inspiratory or expiratory
Parallel systems which operate in the same
efforts. More serious, perhaps, the inmer tube may
manner as the Bain and Lack systems have two
become detached from the anaesthetic machine or
tubes running alongside one another rather than
the patient resulting in a very large deadspace.
one inside the other (Figs 9.14 & 9.15). Although
The potential for a large increase in deadspace
 perhaps slightly more cumbersome, faults in the
if the inner tube of a coaxial system becomes
systems are more easily recognized.
detached at the end nearest the anaesthetic
aul jo joadsan ui paieioaidde uaaq seu auuoe
Modifications of non-rebreathing systems
Bain system for some considerable time and it is
most important that the system is tested immedi-
The Humphrey ADE system is designed to facilit-
ately before use. Testing may be done by connect-
ate changing from a Mapleson A configuration
ing it to the common gas outlet of the anaesthetic
during spontaneous ventilation to a Mapleson D
machine and passing a flow of at least 61/min of
 or E mode during controlled ventilation. Recently
Oxygen through the inner tube of the system. The
 the system has been adapted to include the op-
distal (patient) end of this inner tube is then
tional use of a carbon dioxide absorber. Resistance
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 213
in the system is reduced by the use of a flat (non-
ef al. (1999) has demonstrated that with a
corrugated) lining to the tubing, which reduces
Mapleson A circuit, a flow rate of 4l/min. was
turbulence. In man, the system has proved suitable
sufficient to prevent rebreathing in all but one of 49
for use in adults and children. To have one system
dogs, weights ranging from 5.4 - 89.0kg, but one
adaptable for rebreathing, non-rebreathing, spon-
dog (not the heaviest but with a weight of 59 kg)
taneous and controlled ventilation for all sizes of
required a flow of 5l/min. The disadvantage of
cats and dogs would be of great convenience in
using any of the set 'formulae' discussed above is
s ss Aar a ard r
that in order to ensure that flow rates are adequate
proved suitable for dogs weighing from 5.4 -89.0Kg
(Lilja et al., 1999), but its use in smaller dogs or cats
many, leading to waste and expense. Ideally.
has yet to be investigated.
where there is the ability to monitor end tidal car-
The Maxima breathing system (Miller 1995)
bon dioxide, gas flows can be reduced to those just
also can be used for both controlled and spontan-
sufficient to prevent rebreathing, and where this is
eous ventilation. It is a lightweight valveless non-
 practicable, it will be found that for small animals
absorber system that allows selective elimination
non-rebreathing circuits can be used with minimal
of alveolar gas in both spontaneous and controlled
expense.
ventilation modes. In spontaneous ventilation
mode it behaves as a Mapleson A system.
REBREATHING SYSTEMS
Flow rates required in non-rebreathing
Anaesthetic gases and vapours are said to be more
or less physiologically ‘indifferent', in that they are
systems
largely exhaled from the body unchanged, but
Non-rebreathing systems have major advantages
when exhaled they are mixed with carbon dioxide.
in that they may have low deadspace and resist-
 The exhaled gas can be directed into a closed bag
ance, and the anaesthetist knows the concentration
and if the carbon dioxide is removed, and suffi-
of gases which the animal is breathing. Their dis-
cient oxygen added to satisfy the metabolic
advantage is the wastefulness of using high flow
 requirements of the animal, the same gas or
rates of gases. Although most textbooks advocate
vapour can be rebreathed continuously from the
the need for administering the minute volume (for
bag. This is the principle of closed system anaes-
Mapleson A systems) or more (Mapleson E), a sur-
thetic administration. The same apparatus may
vey of existing literature demonstrates that there
also be employed as a 'low flow’ system if slightly
are few recommendations as to what is the minute
higher gas flow rates are fed in and the excess
volume of a particular type of animal. Most stud-
gases allowed to escape through an overflow
 ies have suggested that tidal volume ranges from
valve.
10-20 ml/kg in dogs (Clutton 1995), and respir-
 In anaesthesia, the carbon dioxide is usually
atory rate may be counted in order to obtain minute
removed by directing the exhaled mixture over the
volume (this is not accurate if the dog is panting).
surface of soda lime. This is a mixture of 90% cal-
A second approach is to set flow rates based on
cium hydroxide and 5% sodium hydroxide to-
ml/kg/minute. With a Mapleson A circuit the flow
 gether with 5% of silicate and water to prevent
rates recommended to prevent rebreathing are
powdering. It is used in a granular form, the gran-
ules being 4-8 mesh in size, and ideally packed in a
ing less than 10 Kg, and 95 ml/kg/min for those
container so that the space between the granules is
weighing more (Holden, personal communica-
at least equal to the tidal volume of the animal.
tion; Waterman 1986; Lilja et al., 1999). The higher
Some brands of soda lime contain an indicator dye
metabolic rate of the smaller animal provides an
that changes colour (e.g. from white to violet)
explanation for the differences in requirement in
when the carbon dioxide absorbing capacity is
relation to weight, and it has been suggested that it
 exhausted. Absence of visible colour change is no
should be possible to find a single suitable flow
 guarantee that the soda line is capable of absorb-
rate for a moderately wide range of weights. Lilja
 ing more carbon dioxide - a small quantity should
214 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
be wrapped in gauze and a brisk flow of carbon
humans. Another disadvantage is that the conser-
dioxide directed through it. When this is done
vation of heat and water vapour afforded by the
active soda lime becomes very hot but exhausted
pue shop u axons jeay oi astu aaio Aew pouu
absorbent remains cool. Unfortunately, the mod-
 sheep if the ambient temperature is high.
ern practice of removing carbon dioxide supplies
There are two systems in use for carbon dioxide
 from anaesthetic machines means that this simple
absorption in anaesthesia:
test may be impossible to carry out although sim-
1. The‘to-and-fro' system
ply breathing out over a small quantity is effective,
2. The'circle' system.
albeit taking a longer time, for the heat change to
become palpable. When a capnograph is available
The 'to-and-fro' system
the inspired gases should not contain more than
0.1 to 1% of carbon dioxide and thus any rise in the
A canister full of CO2 absorbent is interposed
inspired concentration of this gas in a circle system
between animal and the rebreathing bag, fresh
may be the only indication that the soda lime is
 gases being fed into the system as close to the an-
exhausted. Due to the exothermic nature of the
imal as possible to effect changes in the mixture
reaction between soda lime and carbon dioxide,
rapidly (Fig 9.16A). This system is simple but has
the soda lime container should become warm as
several drawbacks. It is difficult to maintain the
anaesthesia proceeds and this should be detectable
 heavy, awkward apparatus in a gas-tight condition
if absorption is efficient.
and the inspired gases become undesirably hot
Theoretically, during closed circuit administra-
due to the chemical action between the soda lime
tion, once anaesthesia has been induced and a state
and the carbon dioxide. Furthermore, irritating
of equilibrium established, all that the animal
dust may be inhaled from the soda lime and give
requires from the apparatus isa continuous stream
rise to a bronchitis. Nevertheless, the system has
of oxygen just sufficient to satisfy its metabolic
been most commonly used in veterinary anaesthe-
needs, and efficient absorption of carbon dioxide.
sia for the necessary apparatus is relatively inex-
In practice, however, most periods of anaesthesia
 pensive and may be improvized.
are too short to allow a state of equilibrium to be
For small animal anaesthesia (dogs, sheep and
reached and the body continues to take up the
goats, young calves, young foals and small pigs)
anaesthetic agent throughout the administration,
the standard soda lime canisters used in man,
so that the agent has to be given all the time in
which are known as Water's canisters after their
order to maintain the alveolar concentration.
designer, are quite satisfactory. They are available
The closed method of administration is simple,
 in various sizes: one containing 1lb (approx 0.5kg)
and much less anaesthetic is used than in non-
 and a second one containing 10 oz (approx 0.3 kg)
rebreathing methods because there is no wastage to
of soda lime are adequate for most veterinary pur-
the atmosphere. The chief disad vantage of closed
 poses. These canisters are used horizontally and
system anaesthesia was assumed to be the resist-
unless the soda lime is tightly packed when the
ance due to the packed soda lime and this resist-
canister is filled it tends the settle, leaving a chan-
ance was considered suficiently great to render the
 nel along the top through which gases may pass
 method unsuitable for cats, puppies and very small
following the path of least resistance without
adult dogs. These reservations were applied to the
being subjected to the action of the soda lime. In
use of systems designed for use in human adults
the larger canisters a domestic nylon pot-scrub
for these small veterinary patients. Although the
may be used so as to leave about half of it to be
mechanical deadspace imposed by some of the
compressed by the wire gauze in the lid of the can-
Y-piece cormectors was excessive, physiological
ister when the cap is screwed on.
factors such as muscle fatigue, inefficient ventila-
Adult horses, cattle and large pigs need much
tion and a tendency to lung collapse were probably
 larger soda lime canisters. They are designed on
responsible for some of the respiratory problems 
the principle that the animal's tidal volume should
observed in small animals breathing spontane-
be accommodated in the spaces between the soda
ously from systems designed for use with adult
 lime granules. Because of the difficulty of packing
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION  215
sodalime
canister are placed between these tubes. The valves
and tubing offer an appreciable resistance to
breathing and unless the apparatus is carefully
Patient
designed with regard to the diameter of airways in
relation to flow rates, breathing through the appar-
atus can impose a considerable strain on the
FGF
animal, and the inevitable degree of rebreathing
A
which occurs at the T-piece connexion to the patient
limits the removal of CO2 from the exhaled gas.
This rebreathing can be prevented by placing the
unidirectional valves at the face-piece or endotra-
cheal tube connection, but it is difficult to design
Patient
robust, competent valves for use at these situations.
 In the majority of modern circle type units the uni-
B
directional valves are of the turret type; they are
FGF
valve
robust and competent but must be kept upright and
of necessity, therefore, have to be mounted on the
soda lime
apparatus at some distance away from the animal.
FIG. 9.16 To-and-fro (A) and circle absorber
Circle absorber units (Fig. 9.16B) are more effi-
(B) systems (FGF:fresh gas flow).
cient absorbers of carbon dioxide than are to-and-
fro units because their dead space is constant since
these canister sufficiently tightly with soda lime,
all the charge of soda lime is available to the
special to-and-fro canisters have been desigmed
respired gases. Exhaustion of soda lime is noticed
and developed for large animals. The vertical posi-
more suddenly than in to-and-fro absorbers and
tion of these soda lime canisters means that tight
once it occurs the inspired carbon dioxide concen-
packing is not necessary and their cross-sectional
tration may soon become excessive.
area is large to ensure than the respired gases pass
To avoid this sudden exhaustion of soda lime
through the absorbent slowly. For adult horses and
and for economy in its use, canisters are now often
cattle a rebreathing bag having a capacity of about
made with two compartments. The compartment
151 is used.
of the canister which first receives the expired
The to-and-fro systems can never be really
 gases and, therefore, whose soda lime is first used,
efficient absorbers of carbon dioxide. The exhaled
can be refilled and the position of the canister
 gases all come into contact with the soda lime
reversed so that expired gases pass through the
at the end of the canister nearest to the patient
remaining partially used soda lime, using this to
and the absorbent in this region is quickly ex-
complete exhaustion before reaching the newly
hausted. Thus, as this occurs, the gases have
 filled compartment.
to travel further and further into the canister
Standard circle absorbers designed for man are
before carbon dioxide is absorbed or, in other
satisfactory for spontaneously breathing young
words, the apparatus deadspace steadily increases
foals, young calves, sheep, goats, most pigs, and
during anaesthesia. Thus, ideally the absorbent in
dogs over 15kg body weight. Circle absorbers for
these circuits should be changed between every
large animal patients are now readily available from
case.
commercial sources but there are few reports oftheir
efficiency in terms of carbon dioxide absorbing
The'circle'system
capacity or resistance to breathing. In North
America human paediatric circle absorbers are often
The circle system for carbon dioxide absorption
used for small dogs (and even cats) but they have
aqnt Aiojeiidxa ue pue Aioje1idsu ue sajerodiosu
never found favour in the UK for patients of this
with unidirectional valves to ensure a one-way
 size. In adapting circle systems for use in small ani-
flow of gases; the rebreathing bag and soda lime
 mals, it was originally assumed that all components
216 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
of the standard adult human systems should be
 anaesthesia presents problems similar to those
reduced in proportion to the size of animal in order
encountered in induction of anaesthesia but the
 to minimize deadspace and resistance to breathing.
gases exhaled by the patient will contain anaes-
Several minaturized circle systems were manufac-
thetic in higher concentrations than the inspired
tured, of which the Bloomquist and Ohio Infant
gas, so that the concentration in the breathing
Circle Systems are probably the best known (Dorsch
circuit will tend to increase, and the depth of anaes-
& Dorsch, 1975). However, it was an error to assume
thesia will only lighten very slowly. Again, this can
that smaller valves would result in less resistance to
 be overcome by increasing the gas inflow rates and
breathing because resistance is inversely propor-
emptying the rebreathing bag at frequent intervals.
tional to the diameter of the valve (Hunt, 1955).
 Moreover, being non-standard apparatus, all these 
employed maintenance of a stable depth of anaes-
small animal circle systems involve a considerable
 thesia also poses problems. Theoretically, all thatis
nuisance factor for the anaesthetist, requiring a com-
 required is a fresh gas inflow containing exactly the
plete changeover from standard adult human sys-
 oxygen requirements of the animal together with
tems. The general practice in medical anaesthesia
low concentrations of the anaesthetic just sufficient
today is to anaesthetize paediatric patients using
 to replenish that being absorbed by the patient or
 -aao Al um snq sniedde azis ipe prepuens 
 lost from the wound surfaces etc. In large animals
come the physiological factors such as muscle
 where the oxygen need exceeds 1l/min., the com-
fatigue and inefficient ventilation involved.
pletely closed system works well and can be used
throughout the anaesthetic maintenance period. In
small animals, however, it is often difficult to main-
Practical problems involved in the use of
tain smooth stable anaesthesia without extreme
dosed rebreathing systems
care being paid by the anaesthetist to every aspect
All anaesthetists using closed rebreathing systems
of administration. This is because these small
must fully understand how the concentrations of
animals have very low basal metabolic re-
 gases which the animal breathes from the reservoir 
quirements of oxygen and the vaporizers used to
bag are altered by the uptake, utilization, and elim-
deliver volatile anaesthetics are often very in-
ination of gases and vapours by the patient.
efficient at low gas flow rates. Even modern
When anaesthesia is first induced with an
vaporizers only deliver accurately known con-
inhalation anaesthetic the animal takes up the
 centrations of the volatile agents with carrier gas
anaesthetic and the expired gases contain a lower
flow rates of more than 0.5l/min. and stable
concentration of the anaesthetic than in the
 anaesthesia can only be achieved by increasing
inspired gases. Thus, the concentration of anaes-
the fresh gas flow rate to a level at which the vapor-
thetic in a completely closed circuit will be diluted.
izer will deliver an accurately known con-
The speed of uptake of the anaesthetic depends on
centrations of anaesthetic, and allowing the excess
many factors (Chapter 6) but the larger the animal,
to escape from an overflow valve. Some veterinari-
the greater the dilution, and the longer the time
 ans attempt to overcome these problems by filling
before equilibrium is attained. Also, during induc-
the circuit intermittently with high fresh gas
tion, nitrogen from the patient accumulates in the
flow rates but this results in fluctuating levels of
anaesthetic circuit and decreases the concentration
anaesthesia.
of O,therein.
A second method of overcoming the problem of
The problems of denitrogenation and of main-
vaporization of the anaesthetic at low fresh gas
taining an adequate concentration of anaesthetic
flow rates is to place the vaporizer inside the
for the induction of anaesthesia are best overcome
breathing system. If the vaporizer is placed in the
by increasing the fresh gas flow rate, opening over-
fresh gas supply line outside the breathing system
spill valves, frequently emptying the rebreathing
the system receives a steady supply of anaesthetic.
bag ('dumping'′) and thus converting the system 
 When the vaporizer is placed in the breathing cir-
into a semi-closed system for the duration of the
cuit (vic), however, the flow through it depends on
induction period. Rapidly decreasing the depth of
 the respiratory efforts of the patient so that vapori-
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 217
zation of the anaesthetic depends on this rather
There is wide concern among anaesthetists that
thian the fresh gas flow rate.
inadvertent high flows through the vaporizer may
All anaesthetists using vaporizers inside the
lead to undesirably high concentrations of the vol-
breathing circuit must understand clearly the way
atile agent accumulating in the circuit during assist-
in which the alveolar concentration and hence the
ed lung ventilation with consequent danger from
depth of anaesthesia, is dependent on the factors
overdose. However, used cautiously with, if poss-
of ventilation, fresh gas inflow and vaporizer char-
ible, monitoring of the circuit concentrations of the
 acteristics. In general, when the vaporizer is in the
volatile agent the method can be very satisfactory.
breathing circuit:
When the vaporizer is outside the breathing
system:
1. If anaesthesia is too light surgical stimu-
lation will lead to increased ventilation and a
1. Ventilation has no effect on vaporization.
deepening of unconsciousness. A sudden increase
Assisted or controlled respiration by IPPV has
in ventilation and, therefore, of inspired concen-
little effect on the depth of anaesthesia and is
tration may be dangerous.
therefore much safer than is the case when the
2. If the vaporizer setting is too high, deepen-
vaporizer is in the breathing system.
 ing anaesthesia depresses ventilation and reduces
 2. In most instances for any particular setting of
vaporization. This acts to some extent as a built-in
 the vaporizer control the smaller the fresh gas
safety factor.
flow, the lower is the inspired concentration.
3. If the animal stops breathing no fresh vapour
3. Too deep anaesthesia with respiratory de-
enters the circuit.
pression does not have the built in safety factor
4. The smaller the fresh gas inflow the
found when the vaporizer is in the breathing
 greater the economy in the use of the volatile
system and the animal is in the breathing spon-
agent.
taneously.
 5. A simple, low efficiency vaporizer is all that
is required (e.g. The Goldman vaporizer for halo-
Because of the difficulties with both in-circuit
thane which limits the concentration delivered to
and out-of-circuit vaporizer positions many
less than 3% by volume whatever the gas flow
workers are adopting a simple system of inject-
through it).
ing the liquid volatile agents directly into the
6. The safety of the circuit will depend on the
closed breathing system. Vaporization takes
anaesthetic agent. The concentration achieved will
place inside the tubing of the system and a
depend on the volatility of the agent, and the
metal sleeve with or without some gauze may be
safety of that concentration on the MAC of the
used to aid vaporization. Drip feeds of liquid
agent. For example, the boiling points and thus
anaesthetics into anaesthetic systems were
the concentration achieved at any setting of the
common in the past but current interest is in
vaporizer for halothane and isoflurane are similar,
the injection of liquid anaesthetic into the system
but as the MAC of isoflurane is higher, theo-
using
g an electrically driven syringe pump
retically its use should be safer in this system than
which greatly facilitates automatic, computer
halothane (Laredo et al., 1998). The boiling point of
 control. Using a monitoring device in the inspir-
sevoflurane is higher, its MAC is 2.5%, and it has
landuos e dn jas ol aiqissod si h quil Aioie
proved necessary to increase the efficacy of the
assisted system to maintain a constant inspired
0l rapio ui xim e Suppe Aq raziodea prepueis
concentration of the anaesthetic agent. The closed
use sevoflurane efficiently in a VIC (Muir &
circuit system also lends itself to various methods
Gadawski, 1998). The low boiling point of
of automatically controlling gas flow into the sys-
desflurane means that it would be impossible to
tem. One sophisticated approach uses a concer-
use in such a vaporizer.
tina bellows in the circuit as a volume transducer
 7. The fact that respired gases pass through the
which is attached to a linear transducer to control
vaporizer introduces problems of resistance to
the inflow of oxygen and nitrous oxide. In this
breathing.
system the gas flows can be electrically controlled
218 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
to produce any desired flow rate from 50 to
used needs to be described (T-piece, etc.), and sec-
1000 ml/min with an accuracy of ±1%, an oxygen 
 ond, the fresh gas flow rate should be stated. These
sensor controlling oxygen flow to maintain a
two basic items of information need only be
predetermined concentration and the nitrous
 supplemented under certain, special circum-
oxide to maintain the volume. Work with such
 stances. For example in certain commurications it
systems for veterinary use has been reported by
might be necessary to give details such as the exact
Moens (1985).
apparatus deadspace volume, types of valves,
 The influence of the location of the vaporizer on
type and location of vaporizer (in or out of the
the inspired tension of the anaesthetic agent must
breathing circuit), etc. For the majority of commun-
always be taken into account. Each placement has
ications simply stating the apparatus used and the
its own advantages and disadvantages, but in the
 flow rates of gases would be quite adequate. It is to
hands of an experienced anaesthetist either
 be hoped that authors will adopt this simple expe-
 arrangement is equally safe (or unsafe). The inex-
dient so easy exchange of accurate information so
perienced anaesthetist is advised, especially with
vital to patient's welfare, teaching and research,
potent anaesthetics such as halothane or isoflu-
will become a possibility in veterinary anaesthesia.
rane, to use a calibrated and preferably thermo-
statically controlled vaporizer placed outside the
breathing system.
FACE MASKS AND ENDOTRACHEAL
TUBES
DEFINITION OF ANAESTHETIC SYSTEMS
There have been many multiple and inconsistent
Anaesthetics given by any method must be deliv-
definitions in British and North American litera-
ered to the animal through a well fitting face mask
ture and, as yet, there is no universal nomencla-
or endotracheal tube or the anaesthetic agent will
ture. The systems of terminology consist of
 be diluted and inhaled with an unknown quantity
‘closed’ and 'open' themes with variations, but
 of air.
this terminology is now of very little value.
Moreover, these systems attempt to use re-
breathing as the distinguishing factor. Although
ANAESTHETIC FACE MASKS
rebreathing is an extremely important variable, it 
In domestic animals there are wide variations in
is impossible to describe accurately variations
the configuration and size of the face in any one
which occur in the degree of rebreathing by the use
 species, so that it is difficult to obtain an accurate
of such terms as semi-closed, semi-closed with
 airtight fit between the face and a mask. However,
absorption, partial rebreathing, etc. It appears to
this difficulty can be overcome by the use of mal-
be agreed by most workers that semi-closed refers
leable constructions of latex rubber (Figs. 9.17 &
to partial rebreathing techniques. Thus, for exam-
9.18) which can be moulded around the face.
ple, a system which has nearly complete rebreath-
 Another type of mask for small animals makes use
ing of the expired gases might have the same label
 of rigid transparent cones fitted with a perforated
n ou sse s um ss e s
 thin rubber diaphragm to provide an air-tight seal
Clearly this system of nomenclature may allow
around the face. This latter type are difficult to
erroneous interpretations concerning the actual
 apply for IPPV of the lungs and should be avoided
inspired concentration or tension of any inhalation
if the mask is to be left in place for any length of
anaesthetic. In order to clarify matters so that read-
time for the tightly fitting rubber diaphragm cuts
Aue u panodar ampanoid e jo jumosse ue jo sia
off the venous return from the muzzle and can
 paper or book can obtain an exact picture of what
cause cutaneous oedema. In small animals the
was actually done, regardless of variations of
 lower jaw must be pushed forward into the mask
teaching, practice and geographical location, it is 
 for if it is displaced backwards the airway may
only necessary for an author to give two simple become obstructed by the base of the tongue
pieces of information. First, the actual eqwipment
coming into contact with the posterior wall of the
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 219
ensure that the nostrils are not obstructed by com-
ing into contact with the mask. Some patterns of
face mask are made of transparent material to
allow the anaesthetist to observe the position of
the mouth and nostrils.
ENDOTRACHEAL INTUBATION
The history of endotracheal intubation in animals
is older than that of anaesthesia. In 1542 Vesalius
passed a tube into the trachea of an animal and
inflated the lungs by means of a bellows to keep
the animal alive while the anatomy of its thoracic
cavity was demonstrated. Similar demonstrations
FIG. 9.17 Commercially available malleable face mask.
were given before the Fellows of the Royal Society
in London by Robert Hook in 1667.
There are two methods by which inhalation
pharynx. Variations in face shape are not so trou-
anaesthetics can be administered through an endo-
blesome in large animals and face masks for horses
tracheal tube. The first to be used was that of
and cattle can be made from rigid material with a
insufflation' in which the anaesthetics are blown
soft cushion to provide an air-tight seal with the
into the lungs near to the carina through a narrow
muzzle, but again a variety of sizes is needed.
bore tube. Respiration and the return flow of gases
Whenever a face mask is used care must be
and vapours takes place around the tube. The
taken not to cause damage to the eyes and, in
insufflation technique is said to render respiratory
species of animal that breathe through the nose
movements unnecessary but has the great disad-
rather than the mouth, it is most important to
vantage of causing a considerable loss of heat and
water vapour from the body. It has fallen into
 disuse but has given rise to the technique of inter-
mittent entrainment of air to produce ventilation
of the lungs of apnoeic small animal patients dur-
ng rigid-tube bronchoscopy (Fig. 9.19).
A fine-bore tube (usually an 18 s.w.g. needle)
mounted at the eyepiece end of a rigid broncho-
scope has oxygen or a mixture of oxygen, nitrous
1 yonorui umonq juase aeqoa e 1o/pue apixo
intermittently. The jet of gas entrains air and gen-
erates enough pressure to inflate the animal's
lungs which deflate as soon as the gas flow
through the fine-bore tube is stopped. To-and-fro
respiration takes place through one large-bore
tube.
The standard endotracheal tubes used in man
in the UK were designed by Magill and hence are
kmown as 'Magill tubes'. Both'oral' and 'nasal' are
FIG.9.18 Modification of commercially available face
available. The oral tubes have comparatively thick
masks for cats and small brachycephalic dogs to reduce
walls and are intended for intubation through the
excessive deadspace.The masks are cut in two and the
mouth, while the 'nasal' tubes, designed for pass-
smaller diameter cemented inside the other.This
telescoping produces a more rigid mask with a much
age through the nostril into the trachea, have
smaller deadspace.
220 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
FlG.9.19 Entrainer on rigid bronchoscope to allow ventilation of the lungs of the apnoeic patient during bronchoscopy
im red rubber (seldom encoumtered today), plastic,
material of the cuff stretches under stress, increas.
or silicone rubber. The oral tubes may be either
ing cuff volume. The ‘leak-past' pressure decreases
plain, or fitted with a cuff which can be inflated
with red rubber and silicone rubber tubes but
with air after the tube has been passed into the tra-
increases with PVC tubes as time passes. Pressure
chea. The inflated cuff provides an airtight seal
changes within the cuff may be caused by the dif-
between the wall of the trachea and the tube so
that all respired gases must pass through the
lumen of the tube. A good seal between the trachea
and cuff reduces the danger of inhalation of for-
eign material, but over inflation must be avoided
because this may result in either pressure damage
to the mucous membrane of the trachea or to
respiratory obstruction by pressing the wall of the
tube into its lumen (Fig. 9.20).
Some of these problems may be overcome by
the use of tubes which have a high volume, low
pressure cuff but these tubes may be difficult to
pass through the larynx. On all cuffed tubes a pilot
balloon gives some guidance to the degree of infla-
tion but does not show when an air-tight seal has
been obtained. The cuff should be inflated with air
until gentle compression of the reservoir gag of the
anaesthetic circuit to which the patient is con-
nected no longer causes an audible leak of gas
around the tube.
Intracuff and ‘leak-past' pressures of various
types of tube have been measured and it has been
FIG.9.20 Radiograph showing occlusion of an
shown that air diffuses out of the cuff irrespective
endotracheal tube due to over-distension of the inflatable
of the material being red rubber, later or PVC. The
cuff.
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 221
fusion of gases - the most important gas is oxygen
ive than the standard tubes, and because there are
and when the respired gases contain 30% oxy gen
 not many occasions when their use is essential,
the pressure in the cuff can increase by up to
d an apiston sisansae reaaa A
90 mmHg (0.9KPa). Ideally, the pressure inside the
chase to be unjustified. They have thicker walls
cuff should be monitored to prevent damage to the
than non-reinforced tubes and are difficult to cut to
tracheal mucosa but in practice this is seldom
shorter lengths (they come with a non-reinforced
done.
end to ease their connection to the endotracheal
connector). They are usually very flexible and to
facilitate their introduction it is often necessary to
Length of endotracheal tubes
stiffen them with a malleable stilette introd uced
An endotracheal tube which is too long may be
into their lumen in such a way as not to protrude
inadvertently introduced into one or the other of
from thebevelled tip.
the main bronchi; this results in one lung provid-
ing a large 'shunt'. Most commonly the tube will
LARYNGOSCOPES
Enter the right main bronchus. Endobronchial
intubation may give rise to persistent cyanosis and
Although not strictly essential, a laryngoscope
ee ue j paadsns aq pnous h eudead
greatly facilitates the process of intubation in
many animals and is a piece of equipment which is
 mixture through an endotracheal tube. Often very
most desirable. A suitable laryngoscope usually
high inspired concentrations of volatile anaes-
holds a dry electric battery in the handle and has
thetic agent are required to keep the animal asleep.
detachable blades of different sizes. The blades
All new Magill tubes must be cut to the correct
should be desigred so as to enable the passage of a
length both to ensure that endobronchial intuba-
large bore endotracheal tube to be made as easily
 tion is impossible and to minimize the respiratory
as possible. For veterinary purposes one standard
deadspace. They should be cut so that when their
bevelled tip lies between the larynx and carina
blades and one special blade are the minimum
their cut end is immediately beyond the nostrils.
 requirements. The special blade should be of the
Also, the connecting piece between the tube and
Macintosh pattern, 3/4 inch (1.9 cm) wide, and
anaesthetic delivery apparatus should be as short
23 to 30 cm long. The blades should be separate
as possible. Unfortunately with many modern
from the lamp and its electrical connections so they
tubes, the tube through which the cuff is inflated is
 can be sterilized by boiling without risk of damage
Enclosed within the wall of the endotracheal tube,
to the electrical system. Various types are available
making it impossible to shorten.
and one suitable instrument is shown in Fig.9.21.
 For small animal use, a modified penlight torch
can provide an inexpensive light source which,
Reinforced endotracheal tubes
although less satisfactory than a laryngoscope,
Frequent use with associated cleaning and sterili-
 rog uaaa ue un anbape aand 
zation processes makes red rubber endotracheal
animals, special laryngoscope blades are required
tubes soft and plastic tubes may soften when
 and the Rowson blade (Rowson, 1965) has greatly
warmed to body temperature. Soft tubes flatten
simplified the intubation of small catle, sheep and
out and are easily compressed by pressure.
large pigs. The most attractive feature of the
Obliteration of the lumen from either of these
Rowson blade is that it makes lifting of the lower
causes may give rise to serious obstruction of the
jaw to expose the laryngeal opening unnecessary
airway. Patency of the airway, when the animal has
The 14 inch Wisconsin blade is excellent for Ilamas)
to be placed in any position which may cause flat-
large rams and goats and in these animals it may
tening or kinking of the tube, can be assured by the
be necessary to use an introd ucer in the form of a
use of an armoured, or reinforced, endotracheal
stilette passed through the tube to stiffen it.
tube. These special tubes incorporate a wire or
Difficult intubation may be overcome by use of a
nylon spiral in their walls. They are more expens-
fibrescope to identify the glottis. Before passing the
222 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
CLEANING AND STERILIZATION OF
ANAESTHETIC EQUIPMENT
Anaesthetic equipment is obviously a potential
source of cross infection from one patient to the
next; ideally, all parts of the breathing systems
should be capable of being sterilized between each
use. Unfortunately, this is not very practical as
 parts of the apparatus do not tolerate many of the
possible methods of sterilization and, where they
do, most of the methods shorten their life. The
nearer the part of the system to the patient, the
 greater the risk of cross infection from organisms
associated with previous usage. The compromise
usually adopted with anaesthetic equipment is,
therefore, to sterilize the components such as
endotracheal tubes or face masks after use, whilst
the rest of the equipment is only regularly cleaned
by washing. All equipment should, however, be
 sterilized periodically, or immediately following
FIG.9.21 Laryngoscope with detachable Macintosh
its use on a patient thought or known to be suffer-
blade - a wide variety of patterns of blade are
ing from an infectious disease.
available.
Whatever method of sterilization is to be
employed, the apparatus must first be thoroughly
cleaned by washing in hot water with a detergent
sized endotracheal tube so that this tube may be
or soap. Many parts of the breathing circuit may be
'railroaded' into the trachea once the tip of the
damaged if subjected to autoclaving. Heat sterili-
fibrescope is seen to be correctly placed. Because
zation by boiling may be used for endotracheal
the fibrescope occupies most of the lumen of the
tubes although regular treatment of this nature
tube it must be quickly withdrawn leaving the tube
does shorten their life. The various means of chem-
 in place. Intubating flexible endoscopes (KeyMed,
ical sterilization rarely damage equipment but
KeyMed House, Stock Road, Southend-on-Sea,
when they are used the apparatus must be thor-
Essex SS2 5QH) are manufactured with tougher
oughly washed afterwards because traces of
rubber than is used in other flexible endoscopes to
chemical, particularly if remaining on face masks
ensure that'railroading' an endotracheal tube will
-l Aiaa aq oi aaoid Ae 'saqni leaunenopua 10
not cause deterioration of the endoscope.
tant indeed to the next patient The use of ethylene
Wide-bore tubes may be introduced into the tra-
 oxide gas is now a practical method of sterilization
chea in various ways and the method to be adopt-
 in veterinary practice and although it causes no
ed in any particular case is decided by the skill and
damage to anaesthetic equipment a sufficient time
experience of the anaesthetist and the kind of an-
(up to 7 days) must be allowed to elapse before the
imal. In the chapters dealing with anaesthesia for
the various species of animal will be found des-
 of this most irritant gas to disappear. Also, it must
criptions of techniques which undergraduate stu-
be remembered that some plastics which have
dents and anaesthetists in training have found
been previously sterilized by  irradiation (e.g.
relatively easy to master. Experienced, skilled
most plastic endotracheal tubes supplied in sterile
amaesthetists should of course be able to pass an
 packets) produce an extreme toxic substance, ethy-
endotracheal tube in all species of animal under
lene chlorohydrin, when subjected to ethylene
any circumstances and most develop their own
oxide gas so they should never be resterilized by
techniques.
exposure to the agent (Dorsch & Dorsch, 1975).
ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION 223
 REFERENCES
Mapleson, W.W. (1954) The elimination of rebreathing in
various semi-closed anaesthetic systems. British
Clutton, R.E. (1995) The right anaesthetic breathing
JournatofAnaesthesia 26:323-332.
systerm for you? In Practice 5:229-237.
Miller (1995) An enclosed efferent afferent reservoir
Dorsch, J.A.and Dorsch, S.E. (1975) Llnderstanding
system: the Maxima. Araesthesia and Intensive Care.
Anaesthetic Equipment. Baltimore: Williams and
23:292-295.
Wilkins.
Moens, Y. (1985) Introduction to the quantitative
Humphrey, D. (1983) A new anaesthetic breathing
 practice and the use of closed circuit in veterinary
system combining Mapleson A.D and E principles.
anaesthesia.Proceedings of the 2nd Internationat
A simple apparatus for low flow universal use
Congress of Veterirary Anesthesia, Sacramento,p.57.
without carbon dioxide absorption. Anaesthesia
Muir, W.W. and Gadawski, J. (1998) Cardiorespiratory
38:361-372.
effects of low-flow and closed circuit inhalation
Hunt, K.H. (1955) Resistance inrespiratory valves and
anesthesia using sevoflurane delivered with an
canisters. Aresthesiology 16: 190-205.
in-circle vaporizer, and concentrations of compound
 Kain, M.K. and Nunn, J.F. (1968) Fresh gas
A.American Journal ofVeterinary Research 59:603.
economics of the Magill circuit. Anesthesiology
Rowson, L.E.A. (1965) Endotracheal intubation in the
29:964-974.
pig. Veterinary Record 77: 1465.
Laredo, FG., Sanchez-Valverde, M.A., Cantalapiedra,
Sykes, M.K. (1968) Rebreathing circuits. British Jourmat of
A.G., Pereira, J.L. and Agut, A. (1998) Efficacy of
Anaesthesia 40: 666-670.
the Komesarof anaesthetic machine for
Waterman, A.E. (1985) Clinical experiences with the
delivering isoflurane to dogs. Veterirary Record
Komesaroff machine. Journal ofthe Association of
143: 437-440.
Veterirnary Araesthetists 13: 42-49.
Lilja, A.S.,Alibhai, H.1.K. and Clarke, K.W. (1999)
Waterman, A.E. (1986) Clinical evaluation of the
Evaluation of the Humphrey ADE circuit during
 Lack coaxial breathing circuit in small animal
spontaneous ventilation in dogs. Journal of Veterinary
anaesthesia. Journat of small Animat Practice 27:
Araesthesia (inpress).
591598.
10
General principles oflocal
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMY AND FUNCTION OF THE
NERVE FIBRE
Many surgical procedures can be satisfactorily
performed under local analgesia. Whether or not
The unit of nervous tissue consists of the nerve cell
sedation is employed as an adjunct will depend on
the species, temperament and health of the animal
and its processes, the dendrites and the axon. The
processes are dependent upon the intact connec-
as well as the magnitude of the procedure. In adult
cattle and horses, many operations can be per
tion with the nerve cell for survival and nutrition.
 Conventional theories of nerve function have long
formed on standing animals and since sedation
been based on the assumption that the surface
may induce the animal to lie down, it is often
membrane of nerve fibres and cells exists as a dif-
better avoided. In other animals sedation should
ferentially permeable interface between tissue
be adopted since efficient surgery is greatly facilit-
fluid and the liquid phase of the neuronal cyto-
ated by the reduction of fear and liability to sud-
plasm. However, modern cytological studies ren-
den movement. Local analgesics may exert a
der it very unlikely that external surfaces of nerve
sedative action when they are absorbed from sites
cells and fibres are bathed directly by tissue fluid,
of injection and for surgery on the standing animal
for it now appears that most neurones are entirely,
the dose of any calming sedative drug must be
or almost entirely, covered by supporting cells
reduced to allow for this.
There are several features of local analgesia
applied directly to their external surfaces. Thus,
the diffusion barrier surrounding neurones must
which render it particularly useful in veterinary
be considered to involve these supporting cells
practice. It enables protracted operations to be per-
and their membranes. The larger nerve cells are
formed on standing animals and in large animals
this avoids the dangers associated with prolonged
surrounded by a coat of fatty material - the myelin
sheath. The thickness of this sheath increases with
recumbency. Local analgesia can also be a useful
the diameter of the axon it encloses, and it is com-
technique to reduce the depth of anaesthesia need-
posed of a number of lipoprotein lamellae which,
ed for major surgery during general anaesthesia. A
feature which appeals to those in general veter-
in the case of peripheral nerve fibres, are laid down
from the Schwann cells that enclose the axons. The
inary practice is that the surgeon can induce local
myelin lamellae are not continuous along the
analgesia and operate without the assistance of an
entire length of the fibre, being interrupted at more
anaesthetist. The techniques of local analgesia are
or less regular intervals (the nodes of Ranvier) to
not difficult to learn and do not involve the use of
leave short segments of the axon covered by the
expensive or complicated equipment.
225
226 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
myelin are relatively impervious to local analgesic
TABLE I0.I Relationship between nerve fibre
size and function.The divisions are not absolute
solutions compared to those which contain little or
and there is a varying degree of overlap from
no myelin. Therefore, once a drug has penetrated
 one diameter group to the other
through the connective tissues of the nerve into the
 endoneural fluid, it can act upon the entire length
Group
Fibre diameter
Functions
range (μm)
of any unmyelinated fibres but only on the short
segments of myelinated fibres at the nodes of
15-25
Somatic motor efferents
 Ranvier. As the number of nodes per unit length of
(myelinated)
 Proprioceptive afferents
an axon is greater in fine fibres than in thick ones,
11
5-15
Cutancous afferents
there will be more of such segments within the
(myelinated)
(except pain)
2-5
Pain efferents
 pool of solution in the finer fibres than in the thick-
[(myelinated)
ymotor efferents
er ones. For this reason also, local blockade of
5
2
Pain afferents
nerve fibres becomes more rapid and effective the
L(unmyelinated)
Postganglionic
greater the length of the fibres exposed to the
 sympathetic efferent
action of the drug. An alternative to employing an
increased concentration of drug to accelerate local
Schwann cells. Thus throughout the length of the
 analgesia is, therefore, to infiltrate along a greater
unmyelinated fibres and at the nodes of Ranvier in
length of the nerve with a more dilute solution.
myelinated fibres, the axon is always separated
from the surrounding tissue fluid by the thickness
MECHANISM Of NERVE BLoCK
of the Schwann cell in which it is embedded; in the
internodal segments of myelinated fibres the axon
Most of the clinically useful local analgesics are
is separated by the myelin lamellae also.
weakly basic tertiary amines which exist in a
Peripheral nerves are composed of fibres of
charged (ionic) or uncharged (free base) form. The
many different diameters, the finest of which usu-
greater the alkalinity of the solution the more
 ally have no myelin within their Schwann cells,
uncharged or free base form is present. The pKa
while the larger fibres are surrounded by increas-
(the pH at which the solution contains equal pro-
ing numbers of myelin lamellae. There is some cor-
 portions of charged and uncharged molecules) of
relation between fibre size and function, and the
currently used compounds lies between 7.7 and
fibres in the spinal peripheral nerves may be class-
8.5 and commercially available solutions are
ified into three broad groups in terms of diameter
always acid so they contain more charged mole-
ranges, each of these groups mediating particular
cules. It seems that both the urionized base (B) and
functions. Such an arbitrary division does, of
the ionized cationic form (BH+) are important for
course, give rise to some overlap (Table 10.1).
The action of local analgesics is one of stabiliza-
ble the analgesic compound, the more potent it is
tion of the active membrane which surrounds the
and protein binding is believed to determine the
nerve fibre, and in the case of myelinated fibres
duration of the block produced.
occurs only at the node of Ranvier. All, including
 It can be shown by voltage clamp experiments
motor nerves, may be blocked and transmission at
that local analgesics block conduction in excitable
the neuromuscular junction and at the autonomic
tissues by diminished entry of sodium ions during
 ganglia may be affected by a similar mechanism.
the generation of the action potential. As the local
 When a peripheral nerve is exposed to a local
concentration of the drug is increased there is a
analgesic, conduction in its constituent fibres is
 progressive fall in the rate of rise of the spike
blocked at a rate that is inversely proportional to
 potential causing a corresponding slowing of
their diameters. If a pool of local analgesic sur-
conduction velocity. This is because the less
rounds a peripheral nerve, function fails first in the
 intense the depolarization at any point, the shorter
unmyelinated fibres then in the smaller, followed
 the range of the local circuits produced. Finally
by the larger, myelinated fibres. This sequence is
there is inability to reach the threshold potential.
due to the fact that the Schwann cells containing
resulting in conduction block. Although higher
LOCAL ANALGESIA 227
concentrations of the drug can decrease the exit of
for it has been almost entirely replaced by com-
potassium ions this is irrelevant to the local block-
 pounds which do not suffer from these disadvant-
 ages to the same extent. Its one remaining use is for
resting potential.
surgery in the nasal chambers, where its property
of producing intense vasoconstriction shrinks the
mucous membrane, allowing more room for the
CLinICALlY USEFUL LOCAL
surgeon and aiding haemostasis.
ANALGESIC DRUGS
Procaine
BASIC StrUCTure
Clinically useful local analgesics have a common
Procaine was introduced in 1905 under the
trade name of Novocain, and largely replaced
chain-amine group (Table 10.2). The aromatic
cocaine as a local analgesic. Compared to cocaine
its power of penetration of mucous membranes is
group confers lipophilic properties while the
amine group is hydrophilic. The intermediate
 poor and following injection nerve block is slow in
chain is usually either an ester or an amide. The
onset.
ester linkage can be hydrolyzed by esterases, while
 the amide group can only be broken down by liver
Amethocaine
enzymes. Some compounds lack the hydrophilic
Amethocaine is a member of the procaine series of
tail (e.g. benzocaine) and are nearly insoluble in
compounds which is particularly useful for desen-
water so that they are unsuitable for injection but
sitizing mucous membranes. A 1% solution is used
they can be applied to mucosal surfaces
Modification of the chemical structure alters
for instillation into the conjunctival sac instead of
activity and the physical properties of the mole-
proxymetacaine and a 2% solution is used for
 cule. Lengthening of the intermediate chain or
the pharyngeal, laryngeal and nasal mucous
addition of carbon atoms to the aromatic or amine
membranes.
groups results in an increase in potency up to a cer-
tain maximum, beyond which any further increase
Cinchocaine
in molecular weight is followed by a decrease in
 activity. The addition of a butyl group to the aro-
This was first introduced as Percaine in 1929. It is
matic end of the procaine molecule increases lipid
known as 'Nupercaine', a name which prevents
confusion with procaine, and in the United States
binding with an increased duration of action and
as ‘Dibucaine'. The drug is quite different from
systemic toxicity. Similarly, the substitution of a
either cocaine or procaine, being a quinoline deriv-
butyl group for the methyl group of the amine of
ative - butyloxycinchoninic acid diethyl ethylene
ao e pue Auaiod raieao saao aueaida
diamide. It is readily soluble in water and solu-
prolonged duration of activity. Once again there is
tions may be boiled repeatedly for sterilization. It
p aea e pu ns pidi ul asau e
is decomposed by alkali, and for this reason traces
of protein binding.
of acid are added to solutions which are to be
stored. For the same reason Nupercaine must
always be kept in alkali-free glass containers. The
Cocaine
drug is much more toxic than procaine, but this is
Cocaine is an alkaloid obtained from the leaves of
counterbalanced by the smaller quantities used,
Erythroxylum coca, a South American plant. It was
for the minimal effective concentration is about
first introduced into surgery by Koller in 1884,
 one-fortieth that of procaine. In addition, the anal-
some 38 years after the introduction of general
rasuol yonw Aiaa 1oy sisel saonpoid 1l eisas
anaesthesia. Its toxicity and addictive properties in
 Nupercaine has been used for every type of local
man led to a search for synthetic substitutes and
 analgesia but has been found most useful for sur
reference to it now has become largely historical
face and spinal analgesia.
228 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
TABLE 10.2 Chemical structures and properties of some commonly used local analgesics
Chemicalstructure
Aromatic
Intermediate
Amino
Lipid
 Anaesthetic
Onset
pua
 chain
end 
solubility
duration
time
Amino esters
C2H5
Procaine
HN
COOCHCH2
-Z
1
Short
Slow
C2H5
CL
C2H5
Short
Fast
2-Chloroprocaine
HN
COOCH,CH2
-N
C2H5
HgC4
CH3
Tetracainé
COOCH,CH2
-N
80
Long
Slow
H
CH3
CH3
Amino amides
C2Hs
Lignocaine 
NHCOCH2
IN
4
Moderate
Fast
C2H5
CH3
CH3
CH7
Prilocaine
NHCOCH
IN
1.5
Moderate
Fast
H
CH3
CH3
C2Hs
Etidocaine
NHCOCH
N
140
Long
Fast
CH7
CH3
C2Hs
CH3
Mepivacaine
NHCO
Moderate
Fast
CH3
CH
CH3
Bupivacaine
NHCO
30
Long
Moderate
CH3
C4Hg
LOCAL ANALGESIA 229
Lignocaine (lidocaine)
Prilocaine
Since its introduction into veterinary clinical
 This substance is closely related to ligmocaine
practice in 1944 ligmocaine (lidocaine in North
and possesses the same pKa and onset time
America) has replaced procaine and most other
of the block in isolated nerves. However, in
compoumds in every field where local analgesia
vivo, prilocaine nerve blocks do not develop as
is used (except for postoperative analgesia).
rapidly as lignocaine blocks. It is popular in
Chemically, lignocaine is N-diethylaminoacetyl-
 equine surgery because it is claimed to produce
2,6-xylidine hydrochloride and as it is not an ester
less tissue reaction than lignocaine. It is the most
it is unaffected by pseudocholinesterase (procaine
rapidly metabolized amide and its metabolism
esterase). It is extremely stable in solution and
releases o-toluidine, which causes methaemoglo-
solutions can be stored and resterilized almost
binaemia.
indefinitely, without fear of toxic changes or loss of
potency. Compared with procaine, lignocaine has
Mepivacaine
a far shorter period of onset, a more intense and a
longer duration of action. Spread through the tis-
This compound (Carbocaine) closely resembles
sues is much greater with lignocaine than with
lignocaine hydrochloride but is slightly less toxic.
procaine, and injections made in the neighbour-
It has been found to be especially useful for the
hood of a nerve trunk penetrate more effectively.
nerve blocks used in the diagnosis of equine lame-
This facility for tissue penetration has some import-
 ness because there is less post-injection oedema
ant practical applications. It is unnecessary to add
thian with lignocaine.
hyaluronidase to solutions of lignocaine for infil-
tration or nerve blocking purposes (as is often
Bupivacaine
recommended with other agents) since the spread-
ing power of this agent is already adequate.
Bupivacaine (Marcain) is dl-l-butyl-2'.6'-pipe-
Probably as another result of its tissue penetrating
coloxylidide hydrochloride, a remarkably stable
properties, lignocaine also has marked local anal-
compound which is resistant to boiling with
gesic activity when applied to the surface of
strong acid or alkali and shows no change on
mucous membranes or the cornea. Its activity on
repeated autoclaving. It possesses, to greater or
mucous membranes is similar to that of cocaine,
lesser degrees, the most desirable general propert-
while on the cornea a 4% solution of lignocaine is
ies of a local analgesic drug.
approximately equivalent to a 2% solution of
The local analgesic effect of bupivacaine is
ocaine.
slower in rate of onset and similar in depth to that
The drug is rapidly absorbed from tissues and
 of lignocaine and mepivacaine, but is of much
mucous surfaces. In dogs, after subcutaneous or
longer duration. The addition of adrenaline in low
intramuscular injection, the blood concentration of
 concentrations has been shown to increase both
lignocaine reaches a maximum in about 30 min-
the speed of onset and the duration of analgesia so
utes. The addition of adrenaline (epinephrine) to
that all solutions of bupivacaine for clinical use
the injected solution approximately doubles the
should contain adrenaline.
time required for complete absorption. Ten percent
Bupivacaine is approximately four times as
 or less of an injected dose of lignocaine is excreted
potent as lignocaine; hence a 0.5% solution is
uchanged in the urine and the metabolism of lig-
equivalent in nerve-blocking activity to a 2% solu-
nocaine has, therefore, been the subject of much
-idnq ie paaae Aeiaua si l aeou jo uog
investigation. Liver is the only tissue which has
vacaine provides a period of analgesia at least
been shown to metabolize lignocaine in significant
twice as long as that of ligmocaine, and that it is
quantities. The approximate maximum dose by
Exceptionally well tolerated by all tissues. Due to
infiltration before toxic signs become apparent is
these properties it is increasingly used today as a
not known with any certainty but is thought to be
6-10mg/kg
analgesla
230 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Ropivacaine
and administration into the urethra and urinary
Ropivacaine, a relatively new long acting amide-
bladder. Peak blood levels occur 10 minutes after
intrapleural instillation. The use of ointments or
type local analgesic, is the (S) enantiomer of a
chain-shortened homologue of bupivacaine. It
gels to apply local analgesic drugs to mucous
membranes tends to delay absorption
 appears to provide a greater margin of safety than
bupivacaine when used in equal dosage (Reiz et
The absorption and subsequent blood levels of
local analgesics is related to the total dose of drug
al., 1989). It is an effective long acting drug when
administered regardless of the site or route of
given epidurally and it appears to be a vasocon-
administration. For most agents there is a linear
strictor over a wide range of concentrations.
Subcutaneous infiltration of plain ropivacaine pro-
relationship between the amount of drug given
and the resultant peak blood level. Local analgesic
duces cutaneous vasoconstriction equivalent to
 adrenaline, in contrast to bupivacaine, which pro-
solutions frequently contain a vasoconstrictor,
usually adrenaline (epinephrine), in concentra-
ducesvasodilatation.
tions varying from 5 μg/ml to 20 μg/ml, to delay
the absorption and prolong the action of the agent.
Although other vasoconstrictors such asnoradren-
PHARMACOKINETICS OF LOCAL
ANALGESIC DRUGS
been employed with local analgesic drugs neither
seems as effective as adrenaline in a concentration
The concentration of local analgesics in the blood
is determined by the rate of absorption from the
of1:200 000
The pharmacological characteristics of the spe-
site of injection or application, the rate of tissue
cific local analgesic also influence the rate and
distribution and the rate of metabolism and excre-
degree of vascular absorption. For example, ligmo-
tion of the particular compound. The physiologi-
 caine and mepivacaine are absorbed more rapidly
cal disposition and resultant blood concentration
than prilocaine from the epidural space, while
will also depend on the age of the animal, its car-
bupivacaine is absorbed more rapidly than etido-
diovascular status and hepatic function.
caine. These differences are probably a reflection of
differences in both vasodilator activity and lipid
ABSORPTION
solubility.
Factors which influence systemic absorption and
Local analgesic drugs distribute themselves
throughout the total body water. Their rate of dis-
 potential toxicity of local analgesics are:
appearance from the blood (tissue redistribution),
1. The site of injection
the volume of distribution and relative uptake by
2. The dosage
the various tissues are related to their physiochem-
 3. The addition of a vasoconstrictor
ical properties. The distribution can be described
by a two or three compartment model. The rapid
itself.
disappearance (c) phase is believed to be related to
uptake by rapidly equilibrating tissues (i.e. those
Multiple injections (e.g. intercostal nerve blocks)
with high vascular perfusion). The slower β phase
eaie reinssea jeaig e 0l juase aul asodxa Aeu
of disappearance from blood is mainly a function
resulting in a faster rate of absorption. The same
of distribution to slowly equilibrating tissues and
dose of agent injected in one site results in a much
the metabolism and excretion of the compound.
lower maximum blood level. Topical application
This secondary phase may also be subdivided into
 of local analgesics at various sites also results in
distribution into slowly perfused tissues (true β
differences in absorption and toxicity. In general,
 phase) and a phase of metabolism and excretion (Y
 absorption occurs most rapidly after intratracheal
phase). A comparison of the three amide drugs
spray for the agent is dispersed over a wide sur-
 (lignocaine, mepivacaine and prilocaine) reveals
face area, promoting vascular absorption. The rate
that prilocaine is redistributed at a significantly
of absorption is less after intranasal instillation :
 faster rate from blood to tissues than is lignocaine
LOCAL ANALGESIA 231
 or mepivacaine (which have similar rates of tissue
In animals with a pathologically low hepatic
redistribution). In addition, the β disappearance
blood flow, or advanced hepatic disease, signific-
phase from blood also occurs more rapidly
antly higher blood concentrations of the amide
with prilocaine, suggesting a more rapid rate of
agents may be expected. This is important for the
metabolism.
disappearance of lignocaine from the blood may
Local analgesics become distributed through-
be markedly prolonged in animals with congestive
out all body tissues, but the relative concentration
heart failure.
in different tissues varies. In general the more
-n r e ms so psna 
tion of local analgesic drugs than less well per-
SYSTEMIC AND TOXIC EFFECTS OF
fused organs. The highest fraction of an injected
LoCaL ANaLGESIC [
DRUGS
dose is found in the skeletal muscles since their
mass makes them the largest reservoir but they
Local analgesics affect not only the nerve fibres but
have no specific affinity for these drugs.
all types of excitable tissue including skeletal,
The pattern of metabolism of the local anal-
smooth and cardiac muscle. Side effects occur
 gesics varies according to their chemical composi-
when they enter the systemic circulation and the
tion. Plasma pseudocholinesterase hydrolyses the
 most severe follow inadvertent intravascular injec-
ester class agents. Chloroprocaine is hydrolysed
tion, but absorption from tissue depots can also be
more rapidly than procaine or tetracaine and the
responsible if the rate of absorption exceeds the
toxicity of these agents is directly related to their
rate of metabolism or elimination from the body as
rate of degradation. Less than 2% of unchanged
it may be if the dose rate is too high. Cardio-
procaine is found in the urine but 90% of para-
aminobenzoic acid, its primary metabolite, is
ances are common side effects but allergic
Excreted in urine. The amide class of local anal-
reactions occasionally occur with ester-type
gesics undergoes enzymatic degradation pri-
agents.
marily in the liver. The rate of hepatic degradation
may vary between compounds which, in turn,
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
may influence the toxicity of the specific agent.
Prilocaine undergoes the fastest rate of enzymatic
Local analgesics have a complex effect on the cen-
 metabolism and is the least toxic of the amide-type
tral nervous system. Usually, sedation is the first
agents. Lignocaine is metabolized more rapidly
nq aun ui aseanu namg e 1mq uis snonaqo
than is mepivacaine. Some degradation of these
concentration produces grand mal tonic-clonic
amide compounds may take place in tissues other
seizures. One explanation given for this is that
thian liver cells and their metabolism is more com-
local analgesics stabilize cell membranes even at
plex than that of the ester compounds. The
low concentrations but as the concentration
metabolites of local analgesics are of clinical
increases more and more of the cells having
importance since they may exert both pharmaco-
inhibitory functions are affected and as the
logical and toxicological effects similar to those of
inhibitory pathways become blocked facilitatory
their parent compounds.
neurones are released to act unopposed, thus giv-
The excretion of amide-type compounds occurs
 ing rise to excitation and convulsions. As the con-
through the kidneys. Less than about 5% of the
centration of the drug in the brain rises still higher,
drug is excreted unchanged. The major fraction
however, depression of both inhibitory and facilit-
appears in the form of various metabolites, some
atory systems occurs with overall loss of central
as yet unidentified. The renal clearance of the
nervous activity. For this explanation to be valid it
 amide-type drugs appears to be inversely related
would seem that there must be certain predilection
to their protein binding abilities. Renal clearance is
sites of activity in the brain but evidence for their
-ans 'Hd Areun on leuoodond Aiasiaau ose
 precise location is conflicting.
gesting that urinary excretion occurs by non-ionic
Lignocaine and other agents have anticonvul-
diffusion.
sant activity as well as the ability to produce
232 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
seizures. In general, the dose giving rise to anti-
are associated with a decrease in the maximum
convulsant activity is less than that associated with
rate of depolarization on Purkinje fibres and ven-
convulsions and a marked antiepileptic effect is
tricular muscle, a reduction in amplitude of the
observed. It seems probable that this antiepileptic
action potential, and a marked decrease in conduc-
activity is due to depression of specific hyper-
tion velocity. On the ECG there is an increase in the
Excitable cortical neurones.
P-R interval and in duration of the QRS complex.
Seizures induced by local analgesics may be
Sinus bradycardia may proceed to cardiac arrest at
high lignocaine concentrations. At concentrations
remembered that many are self-limiting due to the
of lignocaine sufficient to control arrythmias there
rapid redistrubution of the drug from the brain to
 is no reduction in cardiac output or myocardial
other tissues. Grand mal seizures increase the cere-
contractility. Ligmocaine is particularly useful for
bral oxy gen consumption yet interfere with nor-
mal pulmonary function, while hypercapnia
because it enhances the efflux of K+ from ventricu-
potentiates the effect of local analgesics on the
 lar muscle and Purkinje fibres but not from atrial
brain.Thus,whatever else is done,measures to
tissue.
protect the airway and ensure adequate alveolar
The usual clinical doses of lignocaine and other
ventilation must be taken immediately. If the
 analgesics used for local and regional analgesia do
seizures continue for more than 1-2minutes
 not give rise to blood levels which are associated
diazepam (up to 0.2mg/kg) or 5mg/kg of
with cardiodepressant effects. Accidental intravas
thiopental should be given by i.v. injection. It has
cular injection of excessive doses may, however,
been suggested that diazepam has a specific antag-
 give rise to concentrations which result in signific-
onist effect against the excitatory effects of local
ant decreases in myocardial contractility or even
 analgesics on the limbic brain and that it gives rise
cardiac arrest.
to fewer side effects than thiopental, but the barbi-
Cocaine is the only agent which produces vaso-
turate has a shorter duration of action and in many
constriction and it is believed that this results from
situations this short duration of action may be
uptake of catecholamines into tissue binding sites.
desirable.
Most other agents have a dose-related effect; low
The stimulant action of local analgesics on the
concentrations stimulate smooth muscle produc-
brain has led to their abuse by human subjects
ing vasoconstriction, while high concentrations
seeking to achieve the preseizive aura without
cause vasodilatation.
-ierauag e aonpoid oi snip aut go juaioms buisn
Secondary effects independent of the direct
ized seizure, and also in the horse racing industry
actions of whatever agent is used can occur due to
where they have been given to enhance perform-
the regional nature of the block produced.
ance.
injection due to sympathetic blockade. For the
heart rate to be able to compensate for falls in arter-
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
ial pressure the cardioaccelerator fibres in the first
Local analgesics have both direct and indirect
two thoracic nerves must be unaffected and if the
effects on the cardiovascular system. In experi-
block reaches this level vasodilatation will occur in
ments on isolated cardiac muscle preparations
the forelimbs and peripheral resistance will
with concentrations of lignocaine known to con-
 decrease so that hypotension will be very severe. If
 trol arrythmias but which are not toxic, it has been
the block affects the caudal nerves only the hypo-
shown that automaticity is strongly suppressed.
tension is less profound because of compensatory
The duration of the action potential and effective
 vasoconstriction in the rostral regions of the body.
refractory period is shortened in both Purkinje
Renal and hepatic blood flow may also decrease
gested that these effects are responsible for the sta- 1
 nervous system and this will result in a decrease in
bilizing action which lignocaine has on cardiac both renal excretion and liver metabolism of the
irregularities. Toxic concentrations of lignocaine
amide-type drugs.
LOCAL ANALGESIA 233
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Ice is the simplest but, generally, volatile sub-
stances which cause freezing by rapid volatiliza-
At subtoxic doses bronchial smooth muscle is
tion from the surface of the skin are used (e.g. ethyl
relaxed and some respiratory depression may
chloride spray and carbonic acid snow). Their
occur from central nervous activity.
action is very superficial and transient and
their use is limited to the simplest forms of surgical
Local toxic effects
interference, such as the incision of small super-
Large doses of local analgesics cause damage to
ficial abscesses.Used too freely,they may cause
tissues such as nerves and skeletal muscles and the
skin necrosis. In man, the thawing out after their
use of excessive amounts together with vasocon-
use is known to be painful. Decicaine and ligno-
strictors in wound areas may delay healing.
caine are sometimes incorporated in ointments
Cytotoxicity is correlated with potency - the more
and applied with friction to the skin. Some slight
 potent the drug the greater its cytotoxic activity.
absorption occurs producing a local numbing
 Methaemoglobinaemia has been reported in
which has been found to be useful for the control
of pruritis but they have little use in anaesthesia.
amounts of benzocaine for relief of pruritis.
Similarly, aqueous solutions of 2% lignocaine or
Local analgesics must always be treated with
4% procaine may be applied topically for the relief
Auo anoeid ui eui sueodui s! h pue iadsat
of pain from superficial abraded or eczematous
minimal, accurately placed quantities are used if
areas.
 toxic effects are to be avoided.
EMLA cream (2.5% lignocaine base with 2.5%
prilocaine base) and 4% amethocaine gel can be
applied to the skin over the site of venepuncture to
INTeRACtION WITh OThEr DrUGS
render subsequent penetration by needles and
The duration of nerve block can be increased and
catheters painless. They are applied under an
the potential risk of systemic toxicity can be
 occlusive dressing and anaesthetizing the sup-
reduced by combining vasoconstrictor drugs with
 erficial skin layers takes about 60 minutes with
local analgesics so as to delay absorption from the
EMLA cream but less than 30 minutes with
injection site. As already mentioned, it is probable
amethocaine gel.
that adrenaline in concentrations between
 For analgesia of the mucous membranes of the
1:100000 and 1:200 000 is the most generally useful
glans penis and the vulva the application of ligno-
drug for this purpose. Dilute solutions of adrena-
caine in carboxymethylcellulose gel is the prepara-
line tend to be unstable and for this reason most
tion of choice. (This gel possesses very good
commercially available solutions of local anal-
lubricating properties and is an excellent lubricant 
 gesics contain rather more - usually about 1:80 000
for urethral catheters.)
- to allow for deterioration in strength during
For procedures in the nasal chambers of the
shelf-life.
horse, or for the transnasal passage of a stomach
Local analgesics can enhance the duration of
-0nd aul % ym Sueids so ui aqn1
action of both depolarizing and non-depolarizing
vides satisfactory analgesia. In ophthalmic surgery
neuromuscular blocking agents. Drugs such as the
aioo jo juase aut inq ajes atmb si auresouai %y
phenothiazine derivatives and pethidine may
for topical analgesia of the cornea is proxymeta-
lower the threshold at which the convulsant
caine hydrochloride
(2-diethylaminoethyl-3-
actions of local analgesics are encountered.
amino-4 propoxybenzoate hydrochloride), known
by the trade name of 'Ophthaine'. Using a single
drop, the onset of corneal analgesia occurs in
FORMS OF LOCAL ANALGESIA
about 15 seconds and persists for about 15 min-
utes. This compound does not produce pupillary
SURFACE ANALGESIA
dilatation and is non-irritant, but its solution
Agents which cause freezing of the superficial lay-
is rather unstable, having a shelf-life of only
ers of the skin are sometimes used for analgesia.
12 monthis
234 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
INTRASYNOVIAL ANALGESIA
solutions than 0.5% should never be necessary. In
large animals 2% solutions of lignocaine are com-
Surface analgesia is also employed for the relief of
 pain arising from pathological processes or opera-
monly used. Bupivacaine is used in concentrations
of 0.125 to 0.250%. Care must be taken to minimize
tions involving joints and tendon sheaths. A solu-
the total doses of analgesic in dogs and cats to
tion of local analgesic is injected into the synovial
avoid toxic reactions; maximum effective dilution
cavity and then dispersed throughout the cavity
 of the agent is necessary. It is usual to add adrena-
by manipulation of the limb. If the synovial cavity
line (1:400 000 to 1:200 000) to the solution, but this
is distended with fluid, it is first drained to ensure
vasoconstrictor should be omitted when there
relatively simple to introduce a needle into syn-
are circumstances present which may interfere
with healing, e.g. damaged tissue, possible con-
ovial sheaths when they are distended with fluid,
but entry to a normal sheath is not easy. When
tamination.
searching for a synovial sheath the exploring nee.
A hypodermic syringe and needle is all the
dle should be connected to a syringe containing
apparatus necessary for the administration of local
the analgesic solution and a slight pressure main
infiltration analgesia. The limits of the area to be
infiltrated are conveniently defined and marked
tained on the syringe plunger. As soon as the nee-
dle enters the sheath resistance to injection
for subsequent recognition by the use of intrader-
 disappears and some of the solution enters the
mal weals. To produce an intradermal weal a short
sheath, lifting its wall away from the underlying
needle is held almost parallel to the skin surface
with the bevel of its point uppermost. The needle
tendon. Analgesia develops within 5 to 10 minutes
 is thrust into the skin until the bevel is no longer
 after successful injection and persists for about one
visible and by exerting considerable pressure on
hour depending on the drug employed. The injec-
the plunger of the syringe 0.5 to 1.0 ml of local
tion renders the synovial membrane insensitive
 analgesic solution is injected. The resulting weal is
but it is not known whether the nerve endings in
 insensitive as soon as it is formed and if punctures
the underlying structures are affected.
are repeatedly made at the periphery of such
Intra-articular injection of local analgesics in
weals, a continuous weal can be produced along
conmection with the diagnosis of lameness was first
introduced by Forssell at the Royal Veterinary
the proposed line of incision without an animal
College, Stockholm in 1921, and his techniques,
feeling more than the initial needle prick. Such
with only slight modifications, are still in use today.
 intradermal infiltration is only easily performed in
Clearly, almost every joint and tendon sheath in the
thick-skinned animals; in horses and cattle it is
body can be treated in this way and the technique is
usual to simply mark the proposed line of infiltra-
 tion by raising a weal at either end of the line.
o gai a r pada sa aq mo
Subcutaneous tissues are infiltrated by intro-
ducing a needle through the skin at the site of an
 intradermal weal. For infiltration of a straight line
incision a needle about 10 cm long is introduced
INFILTRATION ANALGESIA
almost parallel to the skin surface and pushed
By this method the nerve endings are affected at
through the subcutaneous tissue along the pro-
the actual site of operation. Most minor surgical
posed line. Before injecting any local analgesic
procedures not involving the digits, penis or teats
 solution, aspiration is attempted to ascertain that
 the needle point has not entered a blood vessel. If
the technique is also useful, in conjunction with
 blood is aspirated back into the syringe, the needle
light narcosis, for major operations in animals
 is partially withdrawn and reinserted in a slightly
which are bad operative risks. Infiltration should,
different direction. About 1 ml of solution is in-
however, never be carried out through, or into,
 jected for every centimetre length of incision as the
infected or inflamed tissues.
needle is withdrawn. If the proposed incision is
Suitable concentrations of lignocaine for canine
 longer than the needle it may be infiltrated from its
 and feline anaesthesia are 0.2 to 0.5%, and stronger
middle, the needle being introduced first in one
LOCAL ANALGESIA 235
direction and then in the opposite direction. Very
long incisions will necessitate more than one punc-
ture, but the needle may be reinserted through
the extremity of the area that has already been
infiltrated so that the animal suffers only the
sensation of one needle insertion. Care should
Incision
be taken to infiltrate an adequate area at the outset,
so there is no necessity for further infiltration
as operation proceeds. It is always better to overdo
local infiltration than to apply it inadequately
and to use more of a dilute rather than less of a
concentrated, solution of local analgesic. Local
infiltration may also be used at the concluding
stages of an operation carried out under general
FIG.I0.1 The L-block often used for flank coeliotomy in
 amaesthesia to ensure a measure of postoperative
cattle and sheep. This technique is effective but
 pain relief.
cumbersome and,if properly carried out, time consuming.
To infiltrate several layers of tissue, the pro-
cedure is to inject, from one puncture site, first
the subcutaneous tissue and then, in succession
operative field itself is not touched while its
by further advancing the needle, the deeper
sensitivity is abolished and good analgesia results
tissues.
from the use of small quantities of solution. The
solution must, however, be brought into the closest
possible contact with the nerve which is to be
REGIONAL NErVE BLOCKS
blocked, and special care must be taken to ensure
One form of regional nerve block consists of mak-
that there is no sheet of fascia between the nerve
ing walls of analgesia enclosing the operation
and the site of deposition of the analgesic solution
field. It is accomplished by making fanwise injec-
since solutions do not diffuse through fascial
tions in certain planes of the tissues so as to soak all
sheets. Success in regional nerve blocks comes
the nerves which cross these on their way to the
only from constant practice, as does success in
operation site. Usually the entire thickmess of the
 other techniques, but clearly it requires a thorough
soft tissue in which the nerves run is involved. In
knowledge of the topographical anatomy of the
cattle and sheep, for flank coeliotomy, two linear
nerves and sites of injection. Moreover, no descrip-
nfiltrations are made of the whole thickness of the
 tion, however long and detailed, or however well
abdominal wall, one cranial to and one dorsal to,
illustrated, can ever be more than a poor substitute
the line of incision (Fig. 10.1).
for demonstration and tuition by an experienced
Ring block of an extremity is another special
practitioner.
type of regional analgesia in which a transverse
It is quite beyond the scope of this book to give
plane through the whole extremity is infiltrated
 a complete account of all the nerve blocks that can
and particular attention is paid to the sites of large
be carried out, but in the following chapters vari-
nerve trunks. In limbs the technique is more effect-
 ous techniques will be described, arranged more
ive when the injection is made distal to a tourni-
 or less on a regional basis. Selection presents diffi-
quet. When used for operations on cow's teats it is
culty in a book of limited scope and must be rather
important that vasoconstrictors should not be
 arbitrary, but two considerations have been borne
added to the analgesic solutions, for prolonged
in mind. First, the methods described are, with one
vasoconstriction may result in ischaemic necrosis
of the end of the teat.
 and may be attempted without apprehension.
More commonly, regional analgesia is brought
Secondly, they are all useful techniques which are
about by blocking conduction in the sensory nerve
 suitable for inclusion in a general textbook of
or nerves innervating the operation site. The 
anaesthesia.
236 FRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
INTRAVENOUS REGIONAL ANALGESIA
possible. Its position should be verified by aspira-
(IVRA)
tion, when blood or blood clot should be drawn
 into the syringe. Lignocaine hydrochloride (1%
In 1908 Bier reported a technique of 'venous anaes-
 solution without adrenaline) is the best agent to
thesia' and recorded 134 cases, but this technique
use. In small animal patients 2 to 5 ml, and in large
seems to have been largely forgotten until recent
animals 10 to 15ml, of solution are required.
years. After suitable modification it has been
Analgesia follows 5-10 minutes after injection.
employed in canine and bovine surgery with grati-
Scrupulous asepsis must be observed when inject-
fying results.
 ing into a fracture site as the consequences of infec-
A small needle or catheter is inserted into a vein
at the distal extremity of a limb and temporarily
tion are serious. This technique is particularly
blocked with an obturator or tap. The limb is
suitable as a first aid measure and in the relief of
 Exsanguinated, usually with an Esmarch bandage,
 pain arising from fractured ribs.
a tourniquet is inflated or tied to occlude the arte-
rial supply at the top of the limb and the local anal-
SPINAL NERVE BLOCKS
 gesic solution is injected via the needle or catheter.
Analgesia of the limb up to the lower limit of the
Spinal analgesia is a special type of regional block
 tourniquet comes on rapidly, and when the tourni-
comprising the injection into some part of the
 spinal canal of a local analgesic solution. By com
quet is released it wears off with almost equal
 ing into contact with the spinal nerves the drug
rapidity.
The mode of action of this technique is unclear
temporarily paralyses them and gives rise to loss
but it seems to be both safe and simple for opera-
of sensation in those parts of the body from which
tions on the digits, especially in ruminant animals
the sensory portion of the nerves carries impulses
and in dogs unfit for general anaesthesia because
and, when more concentrated solutions are used,
 of a full stomach or intercurrent disease. The good
paralysis of those parts supplied by the motor
fibres. It is divided into two distinct types:
analgesia and bloodless field are appreciated by
the surgeon. Analgesia develops distally and pro-
1. Subarachnoid injection in which the needle
gresses proximally so it is important that the injec-
 penetrates the dura mater and the arachnoid mater
tion is made as distally as possible. If the
 so that the analgesic solution is introduced directly
tourniquet is left in place for more than about
 into the cerebrospinal fluid.
1.5 hours ischaemic damage may follow and pain
2. Epi- (extra-) dural injection, in which the
is severe. Bupivacaine should not be used for this
needle enters the spinal canal but does not
technique because, due to the toxicity of this local
 penetrate the meninges, and the injected solution
analgesic drug, cardiovascular collapse and death
 permeates along the spinal canal outside the dura
 may occur when the tourniquet is released. Major
mater.
advantages of this technique is that it requires no
precise knowledge of anatomy and only one injec-
In 1885 Corning found that the injection of cocaine
solutions into the spinal canal of the dog was
tion needs to be made.
followed by paralysis of the hind limbs and loss
of sensation in them. This observation received
very little attention until 1899 when Bier published
LoCAL ANaLGESIA FOr FrACTUrES
his observations in the injection of cocaine
A technique which does not fit readily into any
solutions into the subarachnoid space in man.
classification but must be mentioned, is that of
 In veterinary practice subarachnoid injections
local analgesia for the relief of pain arising from
were first performed in France by Cuille and
fractured bones. The injection is made directly into
 Sendrail in 1901. They demonstrated the method
the haematoma at the site of fracture and deposi- j
 in the horse, ox and dog, but consequent upon its
tion of the solution in the correct place is essential
 perceived difficulties and dangers it was not
for success. The needle should be inserted as far  widely adopted. Epidural injection was intro-
imto thehaematoma and asnearthebone endsas
duced into the UK by Brook in 1930 and this same
LOCAL ANALGESIA 237
worker contributed an extensive review of the sub-
layers in the spinal canal is the‘extra-' or 'epidural′
ject (Brooke, 1935).
(perhaps more strictly the 'interdural′) potential
 space. The dorsal and ventral nerve roots issuing
from the spinal canal penetrate the investing layer
Anatomy of the epidural space
of dura and carry tubular prolongations (dural
Examination of the epidural space has been per-
cuffs) which blend with the perineurium of the
formed using a great number of methods. Post-
 mixed spinal nerve.
mortem measurements, pressure measurements
 The spinal arachnoid mater is a continuation of
involving needle and catheter introduction into
the cerebral arachnoid. An incomplete and incon-
the space, radiographic examination with or with-
sistent septum divides the spinal subarachnoid
out contrast injection, isotopic studies of local
space along the midline of the dorsal surface of the
blood circulation, computerized tomography,
cord. In the spinal canal the pia mater is closely
endoscopic examination, magmetic resonance and
applied to the cord and extends into the ventral
cryomicrotome section have all contributed to
median fissure. The blood vessels going to the cord
present day knowledge of this space but some
 lie in the subarachnoid space before piercing the
studies were, regrettably, unsound. Studies claim-
pia mater. They carry with them into the spinal
ing to show the existence of a space by the intro-
cord a double sleeve of meninges.
duction of air, contrast media or endoscopes, all
 Although the venous plexuses of the spinal
displaced the dura and created the space which
canal lie in the epidural space to form a network
was then studied. Acceptable studies show that
they can be subdivided into:
the epidural space is not a cavity in the undis-
1. A pair of ventral venous plexuses lying on
turbed state in vivo; it contains vessels, nerves and
either side of the dorsal longitudinal ligament of
fat in dorsal and lateral compartments, i.e. it is
the vertebra, into which the basivertebral veins
only a potential space.
drain.
The spinal cord lies within the spinal canal and
2. A single dorsal venous plexus which
is covered by three membranes, the dense dura
connects with the dorsal external veins. All
mater, the arachnoid mater and the delicate pia
interconnect with one another and form a series of
mater. The wall of the spinal canal is formed by the
venous rings at the level of each vertebra. The
vertebral arches and bodies, the intervertebral
accidental injection of local analgesic solution into
discs and the intervertebral ligaments. The tube-
these veins may occur during the performance of
like canal is somewhat flat in the lumbar region.
an epidural block and be responsible for toxic
The spinal cord and dura mater end at the lumbar
manifestations.
enlargement and the canal itself tapers off caudal
to this enlargement to end in the 4th or 5th coc-
In addition to the venous plexuses, branches from
 cygeal vertebra. In each vertebral segment the
vertebral, ascending cervical, deep cervical, inter-
canal has lateral openings between the vertebral
costal, lumbar and iliolumbar arteries enter the
arches, the ‘intervertebral foraminae', through
intervertebral foramina and anastomose with one
which pass blood vessels and the spinal nerves.
another, chiefly in the lateral parts of the epidural
In the cranial cavity the dura mater is arranged
space. The spaces between the nerves, arteries and
in two layers, the 'periosteal' and 'investing' lay-
veins in the epidural space are filled with fatty tis-
ers, which are firmly adherent except where they
sue, the amount of which corresponds with the
split to enclose venous sinuses. The outer layer
adiposity of the subject.
forms the periosteum of the inner surface of the
 Each spinal nerve results from the union of two
cranial bones and in the spine acts as the perios-
roots - a dorsal, ganglionic or sensory root and a
teum lining the vertebral canal. The investing
ventral motor root. In the horse, these roots pene-
layer is continued from the cranium into the spinal
trate the dura mater separately and converge
canal but at the foramen magrum is firmly adher-
towards the intervertebral foramina where they
ent to the margins of the foramen where it blends
join, immediately external to the point where the
with the outer or periosteallayer. Between the two
dorsal root has the ganglion placed on it. In the
238 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
cervical, dorsal and cranial lumbar regions the
 solution injected was indicated from a well recog-
 nized and commonly used technique for examin-
 ings in the dura mater in linear series before unit-
 ing the bull's penis. In this technique, if the initial
ing into a root proper, but further caudally the 
 injection was ineffective succeeding injections of
bundles of each root unite within the dura mater.
 smaller volumes of solution seemed to pass cra-
 In the dog, union is effected within the interverte-
nially, tracking along in the wake of the initial inef-
bral foramina, except in the lumbar and coccygeal
fective injection, to extend the neural block and
regions, where it takes place within the vertebral
result in the desired extrusion of the penis from the
canal. The point of fusion of the two roots is of
prepuce. If volume alone was the major determin-
practical sigrificance - at any rate, in the small an-
ant of spread, why should this be? The inter-rela-
imals in which epidural anaesthesia is induced. It
tionships of concentration, volume and effect were
is the dorsal root which it is desired to influence
indeed difficult to explain on the basis of the pre-
and thus when injecting volumes likely to perme-
 vailing assumptions and it is only in recent years
ate in front of the cranial lumbar region it is an
that explanations have been recognized.
advantage to place the animal on its back after
Other assumptions were also accepted for too
injection to reduce the extent of the complicating
 many years. It was held that the dura mater was
factors resulting from paralysis of vasomotor
impermeable to the passage of local analgesic (or
fibres emerging with the ventral root.
any other) drugs so that there seemed to be no logi-
cal limit to the volume of solution that could be
injected into the epidural space, and excessive
Spread of epidural analgesia
amounts would leak harmlessly out through the
For a long time the clinical management of epi-
intervertebral foramina. Moreover, since the dura
dural blockade was based on three assumptions
fused with the periosteum at the base of the skull,
that seemed self-evident. First, the number of seg-
it was assumed that the impermeable dura would
ments blocked would depend on the volume of
form a safety barrier preventing the entry of local
solution injected. The space was considered to be a
analgesics from the epidural space into the in-
simple cylindrical reservoir, whose volume was
tracranial parts of the central nervous system.
determined by the length and diameter of the 
 Unfortunately, neither of these is true. It is now
cylinder less the volume of the structures it con-
 recognized that the dura itself appears to be per-
tained. Thus a larger volume would be needed for
meable to drugs and it is the pia-arachnoid with its
animals with long backs than for those with short
complex mixture of water (extracellular fluid and
ones. Secondly, certain escape channels, most
 cerebrospinal fluid) and lipid (in cell membranes)
importantly the intervertebral foramina, drained
which
1 constitutes the permeability
ybarrier
this reservoir and the extent of spread from the
(Bernards & Hill, 1990).
 imjection site would depend on the leakage of solu-
 When a drug is administered into the epidural
tion through these escape channels. Thirdly, the
 space it must diffuse into neuronal tissue to pro-
quality or intensity of sensory and motor blockade
 duce an effect. The drug may leak out through
would be governed by the concentration of the
 intervertebral foramina, it may get taken up into
local analgesic solution used.
epidural fat, it may diffuse into nerve roots beyond
 There were a number of reasons for doubting
the meningeal sleeves, and it may be removed by
the first two of these assumptions, although the
epidural blood flow. It may diffuse into the dorsal
third gained more credibility from clinical obser-
roots through the dural cuffs or directly through
vations. Brook (1935) quoted the assertion of sev-
the meninges to the cerebrospinal fluid and the
eral practitioners that, in cattle, the concentration
spinal cord itself. The site of action of local anal-
of the solution employed affected the extent of
 gesics given epidurally is still controversial but the
the block. For example, 2-3 ml of 5% lignocaine
 main sites are thought to be the nerve roots within
injected into the caudal region of a cow blocks as
the dura and nerve tracts in the superficial layers
many segments as 10-12 ml of 2% lignocaine. That 
 of the spinal cord. The quantity of drug actually
spread could not be simply governed by volume of
 reaching the neuronal tissues is largely, but not
LOCAL ANALGESIA 239
entirely, dependent on the lipid solubility of
fibres varies according to the site at which they
the drug. Hydrophilic drugs easily cross the
leave the spinal cord.
hydrophilic component of the meningeal tissue
The cranial and sacral outflow (parasymp-
but enter the hydrophobic lipid phase with diffi-
athetic) is, in general, concerned with vegetative
culty, in contrast to hydrophobic drugs.
functions such digestion and excretion, whereas
The precise effect of epidurally administered
the lumbar and thoracic (sympathetic) outflow is
local analgesic drugs is not only related to lipid
more closely concerned with protective reflex
solubility, however. Other physiochemical propert-
activity. Distinct from the sympathetic nervous
ies such as the pH of the solution, the pKa of the
system but rurning with it are afferent fibres from
drug and tissue and protein binding capacity are
the viscera. These visceral afferent fibres travel
also involved. The effectiveness of block is a func-
with the postganglionic fibres, but run in the oppo-
tion of drug concentration and its duration
site direction, passing through the ganglia, up the
appears to be related to its protein binding.
white rami and into the dorsal root of the spinal
Although it is the base form of the drug which is
nerve. Their cell bodies are located in the dorsal
responsible for penetration of the lipid membrane,
root ganglia and an axon passes to a synapse in the
it is the ionic form which is responsible for block-
lateral horn of the spinal cord. These fibres must
 ing sodium channels and so interfering with nerve
not be confused with the postganglionic auto-
conduction.
nomic fibres (vasoconstrictor and vasodilator
e se oa leida jeuh paziosai am si H
fibres) which also follow the dorsal root but whose
e 'sueuand Sump Aiapim peaids ot Aouapual
cell bodies have not yet been precisely located.
least at term and when labour has begun. Several
The postganglionic fibres to a limb mainly pass
factors are probably involved. One of the most
with the spinal nerves to reach the cutaneous
important is the space occupying and massaging
blood vessels, and the sweat and sebaceous glands
effects of the distended venous plexuses in the
in its distal four-fifths. The proximal one-fifth of
epidural space causing rhythmic pressure waves
the limb in the groin and axilla is supplied by
which tend to disperse solutions lying around
fibres passing directly from ganglia without
them. Increased vascularity of the meninges and
joining the spinal nerves. Since the spinal nerve
changes in the cerebrospinal fluid have also been
always carries sympathetic fibres, a peripheral
suggested as contributing to the spread.
nerve block always produces vasodilatation in the
In the final analysis it appears that the spread of
distal part of the limb. Physiologically, neurogenic
solutions in the epidural space is a function of the
sympathetic influences are important for the con-
total mass (concentration X volume) of the particu-
trol of blood pressure by the rapid adjustment of
lar drug used, and the site of injection. The dura-
flow resistance and cardiac output on one hand,
tion of block depends on the protein binding of the
and by stabilizing the filling of the heart via their
drug and whether or not a vasoconstrictor such as
effects on blood distribution on the other.
adrenaline is mixed with the injected drug.
 The largest vasomotor nerves in the body are
Lignocaine and mepivacaine are less tightly
the splanchnic, which pass to the abdominal vis-
protein bound than bupivacaine and ropivacaine
cera. The area supplied by them is so great that
and, consequently have a shorter duration of
their paralysis should produce a marked fall in
effect. The addition of adrenaline prolongs block
blood pressure. This fall should be most marked in
due to lignocaine and mepivcaine but not that of
herbivores, in which the abdominal viscera are
bupivacaine or ropivacaine (Feldman & Covino,
large and their blood supply correspondingly
1988).
 great. It would thus seem that when the lumbar
and thoracic nerves which give rise to the
 splanchnic nerves are blocked a marked fall in
Effects of spinal nerve blocks
blood pressure should occur. However, since the
Many of the spinal nerves which may be involved
development of indirect means of measuring arte-
in spinal nerve blocks contain fibres of the auto-
rial pressure it has become apparent that in
nomic nervous system. The function of these nerve
healthy subjects this does not happen.
240 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Cordiovasculor effects of spinal nerve blocks
culation contains a large proportion of the total
Most studies to date have shown that changes in
blood volume it cannot be used actively to increase
filling of the left ventricle because of lack of muscle
arterial pressure, heart rate and cardiac output
fibres in the blood vessels of greater than about
vary within ± 20% of pre-block levels, regardless of
0.2mm in diameter. Consequently left ventricular
whether the upper analgesic level is above or
filling must passively follow changes in the
below the T4 spinal segment. This is also true with
 extrathoracic capacitance vessels.
segmental epidural blockade, which definitely
Maintenance of cardiac filling during spinal
eliminates sympathetic drive to the heart, so that
nerve blockade of sympathetic fibres is dependent
bradycardia during major spinal blocks must be of
 on hormonal support systems, particularly vaso-
vagal origin. Blood flow is always increased in the
pressin. (Share 1988). Although angiotensin, the
denervated extremities (upper and lower limbs)
most effective constrictor of resistance vessels
provided the cranial analgesic level exceeds T4. In
plays a dominant role in normal blood pressure
contrast, blood flow is decreased in all other
regulation there is evidence that the renin-
 organs, despite the fact that they are deprived of
angiotensin mechanism does not respond as a
neurogenic sympathetic tone. Why the blood flow
blood pressure support during spinal nerve blocks
of the internal organs decreases rather than
(Peters et al., 1990). Renin, which controls the for-
increases is as yet unknown. Alternatives are that
 mation of angiotensin II, originates from the juxta-
compared with the limbs, the internal organs have
glomerular apparatus of the kidneys and is
a low resting sympathetic tone, are also under the
released in response to a fall in arterial blood pres-
control of vagal vasoconstrictor tone, respond
sure, particularly renal perfusion pressure, but
preferentially to vasoactive hormones, or their
blood flow decreases when arterial pressure falls.
also and apparently more importantly, in response
 Physiologically, neurogenic sympathetic tone is
tors (Ehmke et al., 1987). This drive is eliminated
important for the control of arterial blood pressure
by spinal nerve blocks which affect the relevant
by the rapid adjustment of flow resistance, the car-
diac output and stabilization of the filling of the
nerve roots. It is, therefore, vasopressin that
stabilizes the arterial pressure during spinal
heart via their effects on blood distribution. It is
nerve blocks. Vasopressin plasma concentrations
now apparent, however, that animals can well
 increase considerably during epidural blocks,
maintain their circulation even when the sym-
pathetic tone is removed by autonomic blockade.
Spinal nerve blockade jeopardizes primarily the
aemia. In dogs, when vasopressin is prevented
from acting by pretreatment with a vasopressin
filling of the heart because of blood pooling in de-
1 receptor antagonist, epidural block causes a
nervated body regions, which is normally counter-
profound fall in blood pressure (Peters et al.,
acted by vasoconstriction in the remaining
1990a).
innervated body regions and particularly by vaso-
constriction in the splanchnic region. Blood loss,
low blood volumes from other causes and positive
Site of injection
 airway pressure also reduce the filling of the heart
It is now customary to classify extradural spinal
blocks as epidural and caudal, according to the site
collapse. The empty heart cannot maintain an effi-
ofinjection.
cient circulation and renders cardiopulmonary
resuscitation ineffective (Keats, 1988).
The capacitance vessels - postarteriolar ex-
Caudai block
trathoracic vessels, the venules and veins of the
Caudal injection is made between the coccygeal
systemic circulation and the sinusoids of the liver
 intervertebral spaces with the object of providing
and spleen - contain a large proportion of the
 analgesia over the tail and croup as far as the mid-
blood which can be mobilized in favour of cardiac
sacral region, the anus, vulva, perineum and the
filling (Arndt, 1986). Although the pulmonary cir-
caudal aspect of the thigh. If paralysis of motor
LOCAL ANALGESIA 24I
fibres is produced the anal sphincter relaxes and
Drugs used in epidural injections
the posterior part of the rectum balloons. De-
The efficacy of local analgesic drugs in producing
faecation will be suspended and stretching of the
epidural block may be enhanced by mixing
vulva provokes no response. The vagina dilates
them with other drugs such as opioids, C2
ad in animals at parturition'straining' or 'bearing
 adrenoceptor agonists, NMDA antagonists and
 dowm' ceases while uterine contractions are unin-
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Since
fluenced.
these drugs have actions which are mostly dis-
tinct from each other it seems logical that combina-
Epidural block
tions of different classes of drugs will enhance
analgesia.
Epidural block implies that the injection is made
further cranially, usually at the lumbosacral junc-
tion or in the lumbar region, although injection is
Opioids
sometimes made in the thoracic region. There is
usually some degree of interference with the con-
In the epidural space there is a synergism
trol of the hind limbs, depending on the drugs
between local analgesics and opioids (Wang et al.,
used and their concentration. It is important to
1993) and combinations are being used clinically at
note that the motor nerve fibres need not be
doses which minimize the side effects of each
blocked for this to occur, for block of afferent fibres
individual drug. The opioids are believed to act
alone will suffice to destroy temporarily the
at presynaptic sites in the dorsal horn to prevent
integrity of the reflex arcs involved in the mainten-
the release of substance P and on postsynaptic
ance of muscle tone. Recently there has been con-
receptors to hyperpolarize nerve cells. Thus,
siderable interest, especially in human obstetrics,
they diminish nociception without having any
in using spinal analgesia to provide sensory blocks
noticeable effect on motor function. In rats the
without interfering with motor control. The mech-
potency of different opioids given intrathecally
anisms behind this differential blockade are not
has been shown to be a linear function of lipid
well understood but it can be achieved by injecting
solubility (Dickenson et al., 1990), with decreasing
dilute solutions of the local analgesic into the
potency as lipophilicity increases. Morphine
epidural space. It has been suggested that diff-
has been the most useful opioid given by epid ural
erential uptake by nerve fibres firing at different
injection because it has a high potency and a
frequencies may be responsible since the drugs
long duration of action. It has been used in
are taken up more readily by fast firing fibres.
dogs (Bonath & Saleh, 1985), cats (Tung & Yaksh,
An alternative explanation is that it is related
1982), horses (Valverde et al., 1990), and goats
to the action at the nerve roots - small unmy-
(Pablo, 1993). The common side effects noted in
elinated C-fibres need to be bathed in solution
animals with epidural morphine are pruritis and
for only a short distance to prevent impulse con-
urinary retention (Drenger & Magora, 1989). It is
duction, whereas in myelinated fibres a longer dis-
believed that only about 0.3% of epidural mor-
 tance incorporating several nodes of Ranvier have
phine crosses the meninges in dogs (Durant &
to be involved. Bupivacaine at concentrations of
Yaksh, 1986).
less than 0.125% and ropivacaine at 0.1% appear to
have the least effect on motor fibres while produc-
Pethidine (meperidine)
ing good sensory block.
The concept of differential nerve block is 
 In cats pethidine given epidurally has a rapid
attractive in veterinary medicine where it is
 onset of action with a duration of up to 4 hours,
desired to avoid recumbency following epidural
depending on the dose (Tung & Yaksh, 1982). It
analgesia but it seems that the proprioceptive and
must be noted in this connexion that pethidine has
-dde si  Ae panod sp os
local analgesic properties in addition to its opioid
tion. It will be further discussed in subsequent
activity (Jaffe & Rowe, 1996) and this may have a
chapters.
bearing on the rapidity of onset.
242 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
Methodone
Clonidine
Intrathecal methadone increases urinary bladder
Clonidine has been used quite extensively
 soop ui asueduos rappeiq saseaiap pue auon
 in humans and is known to produce a dose
(Drenger et al., 1986). It has also been given to cats
dependent duration of analgesia accompanied
(Tung & Yaksh, (1982) by epidural injection in
by some sedation and systemic hypotension. In
doses of 0.7 to 1.0 mg/kg.
sheep the drug gave profound analgesia and some
sedation with no hypotension (Eisenach et al.,
1987).
Oxymorphone
Epidural oxymorphone has been given to
Xylazine
 dogs and 0.1 mg/kg was shown to more effective
and to last longer (10 hours compared with
Epidural xylazine can provide profound analgesia
 2hours) than 0.2 mg/kg given i.m. (Popilskis et al.,
 in some animals without interfering with motor
1991). A more recent clinical study indicated
activity (Caulkett et al., 1993). In cattle and llamas
that 0.05 mg/kg epidurally gave about 7 hours of
the onset of analgesia occurs within 15 to 20 min-
good analgesia without significant side effects
utes and persists for 2 to 3 hours; in horses the
(Vesal et al., 1996).
onset is slower but the analgesia lasts longer. Both
horses and cattle show signs of sedation and
decreased intestinal activity as well as slight
Fentanyl, sufentanil
ataxia. In cattle the systemic signs can be antagon-
There is considerable doubt about the effectiveness
ized without loss of analgesia by systemic tolazo-
of these two opioids when given epidurally
line (Skarda & Muir, 1990).
Butorphonol
Detomidine
A number of studies have failed to produce good
Mainly used in horses, epidural detomidine
produces profound analgesia with ataxia and
tering butorphanol epidurally rather than i.v. but  loss of proprioception. Skarda and Muir (1994)
 sop u sae ape aau  ano leida au
 reported that 60μg/kg administered at the
(Troncy et al., 1996).
first intercoccygeal space induced analgesia as
far cranially as the 4th thoracic segment. Onset
of analgesia was within 20 minutes and was
Buprenorphine
accompanied by marked sedation, a reduction in
The analgesia effects of epidural buprenorphine
appear similar to those of epidural morphine. The
PaCO2. Ko et al. (1992) failed to produce analgesia
occurrence of urinary retention is less likely with
 in pigs after epidural injection of massive doses of
buprenorphine since its intrathecal injection has
detomidine.
minimal effects on urodynamics in dogs (Drenger
& Magora, 1989).
Medetomidine
Epidural medetomidine in cats produces sedation
O., odrenoceptor ogonists
and, often, vomiting, which suggests that its
When epidural doses of α2 adrenoceptor agonists
effects are mainly systemic following absorption
produce analgesia it is usual to see signs of seda-
 from the epidural space. Further evidence in
tion as a result of systemic uptake. Of the available 
 favour of this is that it produces an initial increase
compounds clonidine, xylazine, detomidine and
 in arterial blood pressure followed some 20 min-
medetomidine have been administered by the
utes later by a decrease, while heart rate and respir-
epidural route.
atory rates are both decreased.
LOCAL ANALGESIA 243
NMDA antagonists
thesia because of technical difficulties in catheter
placement, the potential for producing damage of
Ketamine is known to have activity as a local
analgesic, an NMDA antagonist, an opioid ago-
the spinal cord, meninges and nerves, the risk of
introducing infection and catheter related prob-
nist/antagonist and, possibly, as an antimus-
lems. However, practice should render the tech-
carinic. These complex actions have made the
nique safer and its accomplishment
evaluation of epidural ketamine difficult. In iso-
less
formidable in all species of animal.
flurane anaesthetized dogs epidural ketamine
(2 mg/kg) is associated with minimal haemodyn-
amic effects (Martin et al., 1997). Further investiga-
Problems and hazards ofepidural block
tion is needed before epidural ketamine can be
Very few drugs are specifically marketed for
recommended.
epidural or spinal use and those available
for intramuscular or intravenous injection
Miscellaneous drugs
contain preservatives. Common preservatives are
sodium bisulphite, benzethonium chloride,
NSAIDs, corticosteroids anticholinesterases, in-
chlorbutanol and disodium EDTA. Their neuro-
hibitors of nitric oxide synthase, vasopressin and
toxicity is currently largely unknowm. One preser-
somatostatin have all been shown to have some
vative, methylparaben, does not appear to be
degree of analgesic effect when administered
toxic but has been associated with allergic
epidurally. Currently, none is used clinically by
responses in man (Adams et al., 1977). Morphine
epidural injection.
is now marketed specifically for epidural use
(Duramorph') and this preparation is free from
preservatives.
Continuous epidural block
Testing for entry to the epidural space by loss of
Continuous spinal blocks can be used to provide
resistance to injection of a small quantity of air as is
long term analgesia and, with the correct choice of
often used in children (Michel & Anaes, 1991) and
drugs and drug concentrations, animals can be 
sheep (Hall & Clarke, 1991) may be associated
-do ra ag u pue Arqe yq ida
with incomplete or patchy absorption of epidural
tions on the caudal limbs, perineum and tail. The
drugs, postoperative neurological deficits and
technique can also be used to prevent straining in
even air embolism. (Dalens et al., 1987; Stevens et
cases of rectal and vaginal prolapse. In most
al., 1989; Sethna & Berde, 1993)
instances the catheter is introduced into the
Arterial hypotension is more frequently the
 epidural rather than subarachnoid space and the
consequence of toxic blood levels affer absorption
or from undetected intravenous injection than the
small, fractional doses, or by slow continuous
result of sympathetic block. It seems probable
 infusion using a syringe pump. The introduction
 from experience in a variety of animals that the
of commercially available sterile packs of catheters
and suitable needles has made the use of continu-
lignocaine and no more than 4 mg/kg of bupiva-
 ous blocks attractive in many species of animal.
caine, but the maximal doses produced depend on
The indications, advantages, contraindications
the speed of injection and the time to reach max-
and complications associated with continuous
imum plasma concentration.
epidural block are similar to those of single injec-
Catheters can be sheared off when pulled back-
tion techniques. The additional advantages of con-
ward through the insertion needle. When
tinuous block are the ability to maintain analgesia
 advancement is impossible the needle and catheter
for long periods and to maintain a route for the
should be withdrawn together and the procedure
injection of opioids and other drugs during sur-
repeated. The management of cases where a
catheter has sheared or broken is rather controver
To date, continuous epidural block has not
sial, but a retained fragment is rarely a problem
become a routine technique in veterinary anaes-
(Hurley & Lambert, 1990).
244 PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES
 Puncture of the dura is not dangerous if recog-
Drenger, B.,Magora, F., Evron, S.et at. (1986) The action
nized and does not contraindicate a second
of intrathecal morphine and methadone on the lower
urinary tract of the dog. Journal of Urology
attempt (preferably at another interspace) with a
135: 852-855.
slow speed of injection. Total spinal block occurs
 Drenger, B. and Magora, F. (1989) Urodynamic studies
when dural puncture is not recognized and full
after intrathecal fentanyl and buprenorphine in the 
 doses intended for epidural injection are given.
dog. Aresthesin and Anaigesia 69: 348-353.
The first signs are changes in respiratory rate but
Durant, PA.C. and Yaksh, T.L. (1986) Distribution in
haemodynamic changes are minimal. The pupils
cerebrospinal fluid, blood and lymph of epidurally
first become unequal, then dilated and apnoea fol-
injected morphine and imulin in dogs. Aresthesia and
Anaigesia 65: 583-592.
lows. If the animal is intubated and ventilated with
Eisenach, J.C., Dewan, D.M., Rose, J.C. and Angelo, J.M.
pure oxygen it is usually found that total spinal
 (1987) Epidural clonidine produces antinociception,
but not hypotension in sheep. Anesthesiology
block takes about one hour to wear off. If the situa-
tion is under control it is probably not necessary to
66: 496-501.
Emhke, H., Persson, PB. and Kirchheim, H.R. (1987)
postpone surgery
A physiological role for pressure-dependent renin
The major complication of a 'bloody tap', when
release in long term pressure control. Pfuegers
blood issues from the hub of a spinal needle, is the
Archive European Journal of Physiology
danger of intravascular injection that can result in
410:450-456.
cardiac toxicity.
Feldman, H. and Covino, B. (1988) Comparative motor
blocking effects of bupivacaine and ropivacaine, a
new amino amide local anesthetic in the rat and dog.
Anesthesia ard Analgesia 67: 1047-1052.
 REFERENCES
Hall, L. W. and Clarke, K.W.(1991) Veterinary
Anaesthesia, 9th ed. London: Bailliere Tindal, p. 263.
Adams, H.,Mastri, A. and Charron, D. (1977)
Hurley, R.J. and Lambert, D.H. (1990) Continuous spinal 
Morphological effects of subarachnoid
anesthesia with a microcatheter technique;
methylparaben on rabbit spinal cord. Pharmacologicat
preliminary experience. Anesthesia and Analgesia
Research Communications 9:547-551.
70:97-102.
Arndt, J.O.(1986) The low pressure system: the
Jaffe, R.A. and Rowe, M.A. (1996) A comparison of the
integrated function of veins. Europear Journat of
local anesthetic effects of meperidine, fentanyl and
Anaesthesiology 3: 343-370.
sufentanil on dorsalroot axons. Anesthesia and
Bermards, C.M., and Hill, H.F. (1990) Morphine and
Anaigesia 83: 776-781.
alfentanil permeability through the spinal dura,
Keates, A.S. (1988) Anesthesia mortality - a new
 arachnoid and pia mater of dogs and monkeys.
mechanism. Anesthesiotogy 68: 2-4.
Anesthesiotogy 73: 1214-1219.
Ko, J.C.H., Thurmon, J.C., Benson, J.G. et al. (1992)
Bouarth, K.H. and Saleh, A.S.(1985) Long-term pain
Comparison of epidural analgesia induced by
'audou einpiad Aq op aui ut puaean
detomidine or xylazine in swine. Veterinary Surgery
Proceedingsof the2nd Internationat Congress of
21: 82.
Anesthesia,Sacramento, p. 161.
Martin, D.D., Tranquilli, W.J., Olson, W.A., Thurmon,
Brook, G.B. (1930) Spinal (epidural) anaesthesia
J.C. and Besson, G.J. (1997) Hemodynamic effects of
in cattle. Veterinary Record 10: 30-36.
epidural ketamine in isoflurane anesthetized dogs.
Brook, G.B. (1935) Spinal (epidural) anaesthesia
Veterinary Surgery 26: 505-509.
in the domestic animal. A review of our
Pablo, L.S. (1993) Epidural morphine in goats after
knowledge at the present time. Veterinary
hindlimb orthopedic surgery. Veterinary Surgery
Record 15: 549-553; 576-581; 597-606; 631-635;
22:307-310.
659-667.
Peters, J., Kutkuhn, B., Medert, H.A., Schlaghecke, R.,
Caulkett, N., Cribb, P.H., Duke, T. (1993) Xylazine
Schuttler,J. and Arndt, J.O. (1990) Sympathetic
epidural analgesia for cesarian section in cattle.
blockade by epidural anesthesia attenuates the
Caradian Veterinary Journat 34:674-676.
cardiovascular response to severe hypoxemia.
Dalens, B., Bazin, J.E. and Haberer, J. P. (1987) Epidural
Anesthesiotogy 72: 134-144.
air bubbles a cause of incomplete analgesia during
Peters, J., Schlaghecke, R., Thouet, H. and Armdt, J.O.
epidural anesthesia. Aresthesia and Aralgesia
(1990a) Endogenous vasopressin supports blood
66:697-683.
pressure and prevents severe hypotension during
Dickenson, A., Sullivan, A. and McQuay, H. (1990)
epidural anesthesia in conscious dogs. Anesthesiology
 Intrathecal etorphine, fentanyl and buprenorphine on
73:694-702.
spinal nociceptive neurones in the rat. Pair
Popilskis S. Kohn, D., Sanchez J.A. and Gorman, P.
42:227-234.
(1991) Epidural vs. intramuscular oxymorphone
LOCAL ANALGESIA 245
analgesia after thoracotomy in dogs. Veterinary
epidurally administered butorphanol in isoflurane-
Surgery 20: 462-467.
anesthetized dogs.American Journal of Veterinary
Reiz, S., Haggmark, S. Johansson, G. and Nath, S. (1989)
Research 57: 1478-1482.
Cardiotoxicity ofropivacaine - a new amide local
Tung, A.S. and Yaksh, T.L. (1982) The antinociceptive
anaesthetic agent. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica
effects of epidural opiates in the cat: Studies on the
33:93-98.
Sethma, N.F. and Berde, C.B. (1993) Venous air
analgesia.Pain 12:343-356.
embolism during identification of the epidural
Valverde, A., Little, C.B. Dyson, D.H. and Motter, C.H.
space in children. Aresthesia and Analgesia
 (1990) Use of epidural morphine to relieve pain in a
76:925-927
horse. Canadian Veterinary fournat 31:21l-212.
Share, L. (1988) Role of vasopressin in cardiovascular
Vesal, N., Cribb, P and Frketic, M. (1996) Postoperative
regulation. Physiological Reviews 68: 1248-1284.
analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects of
Skarda, R.T. and Muir, W.W. I1I (1990) Influence of
 oxymorphone administered epidurally and
tolazoline on caudal epidural administration of
intramuscularly, and medetomidine administered
xylazine in cattle. American Journal of Veterinary
epidurally: a commparative clinical study. Veterinary
Research 51: 556-560.
Surgery 25: 361-369.
Stevens, R., Mikat-Stevens, M., Van Clief, M. et al. (1989)
Wang, C., Chakrabarti, M.K. and Whitwam, J.G. (1993)
 Deliberate epidural air injection in dogs: a
Specific enhancement by fentanyl of the effects of
radiographic study. Regionat Anesthesia 14: 180-182.
intrathecal bupivacaine on nociceptive afferent but
Troncy, E., Cuvelliez,S. and Blaise, D.(1996) Evaluation
 not sympathetic efferent pathways in dogs.
of analgesia and cardiorespiratory effects of
Anesthesiology 79:766-733.
Anaesthesia of the horse
INTRODUCTION
SEDATION OF THE STANDING HORSE
Probably no other species of animal presents as
It frequently is necessary to sedate horses to enable
many special problems to the veterinary anaes-
procedures to be carried out easily and safely.
thetist as the horse. Perioperative mortality rate in
Horses are not good subjects for sedation for if they
relation to general anaesthesia in apparently
experience a feeling of muscle weakness or ataxia
healthy horses is around 1% (Johnston et al., 1995)
 they may panic in a violent manner. Historically,
and has remained constant over at least 30 years
the most effective sedative was, for many years,
(Hall, 1983; Tevik, 1983; Clarke & Gerring, 1990;
chloral hydrate, but its use required administra-
Young & Taylor, 1993) despite increasing sophisti-
tion of large volumes of solution and panic
cation of anaesthetic techniques and monitoring.
 responses to ataxia produced by it were occasion-
However, lack of improvement in survival rates
ally encountered. Other drugs used included
results mainly from the longer duration of many
carnabis indica, bulbocapnine, bromides, and pen-
surgical procedures which, without the advances
tobarbitone (Amadon & Craige, 1936; Wright,
which have occurred, would have been impossible
1942). The introduction of the mood-altering 'neu-
to perform. Increased duration of anaesthesia sig-
roleptic' agents, in particular the phenothiazines,
nificantly increases the risk (Johnston et al., 1995).
followed in 1969 by xylazine (Clarke & Hall, 1969),
The veterinary anaesthetist is faced with numer-
and more recently other C2 adrenoceptor agonists,
ous disturbances of cardiopulmonary and skeletal
has revolutionized equine sedation and, with the
muscle function associated with general anaesthe-
additional use oflocal analgesic techriques, enable
sia, many of which are only very incompletely
many procedures to be performed in the standing
understood. Their certain prevention is currently
animal. However, even with modern agents, sed-
impossible, and measures desigmed to overcome
ated horses must be handled with caution for they
one problem often only result in exacerbation of
another. Developments in the provision of reliable
turbed can respond with a very well aimed kick.
sedation has enabled a wider range of procedures
to be carried out under local analgesia than was
PHENOTHIAZINES
once considered practicable, but even this tech-
nique is not without risk (to horse and operator)
Acepromazine
and general anaesthesia still remains the only
Acepromazine is the phenothiazine derivative most
option in many cases.
widely used in horses for both its mood-altering
247
248 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
and sedative actions. Intravenous (i.v.) doses of
 sedation. When acepromazine is combined with
0.03 mg/kg or intramuscular (i.m.) of 0.05 mg/kg
opioid agents deep sedation is achieved, and such
exert a calming effect within 20-30 minutes of
combinations may be used in cases where Q2
 injection and, although at these dose rates obvious
 adrenoceptor agonists alone would be inappropri-
sedation may only be apparent in 60% of horses,
ate. Acepromazine is an excellent premedicant
they become much easier to handle. Doses may be
before general anaesthesia; it calms the horse prior
doubled, but the dose-response curve of acepro-
to the insertion of catheters, lengthens the action of
mazine is such that the level of sedation does not
the anaesthetic agents, statistically reduces the
always increase, although the duration will.
anaesthetic risk in the horse (Johnston et al., 1995)
Acepromazine (in paste or tablet forms) also may
 and its prolonged duration of action means that it
be given orally at maximally recommended doses
contributes to a quiet recovery.
of 0.1 mg/kg. Oral availability in horses is high
and can be equal to that of the i.m. route (Hashem
& Keller, 1993). Acepromazine is very long acting.
0ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS
and elimination may be further delayed in old or
Xylazine
sick animals, particularly in those with even mild
liver disease.
Following the introduction of xylazine for sedat-
Acepromazine at the doses recommended has
ing horses, it rapidly gained in popularity because
little effect on ventilation, but causes hypotension
of the reliable sedation produced. Doses of
through vasodilation, and hypovolaemic horses
0.5-1.1 mg/kg i.v. are followed within 2 minutes
may faint. Tachycardia results from the fall in arte-
by obvious signs of effect. The horse's head is low-
rial blood pressure (ABP), but sometimes first
ered and the eyelids and lower lip droop (Clarke &
degree atrioventicular block is seen. A very small
Hall 1969; Kerr et al., 1972). Although the horse
proportion of horses (the authors have seen two
may sway on its feet, cross its hindlegs or knuckle
such cases) show aberrant reactions, and may
 on a foreleg, it will remain on its feet and show no
 become recumbent without there being any appar-
panic. Sedation is maximal after about 5 minutes
ent cardiovascular cause; these reactions were
 and lasts 30 to 60 minutes depending on the dose.
more common with other phenothiazine agents. In
Doses of 2 to 3mg/kg i.m. give similar effects,
male animals effective sedation with phenoth-
 maximal sedation being achieved 20 minutes after
iazine derivatives is associated with protrusion of
 injection. Xylazine has analgesic properties, particu-
the flaccid penis or, on very rare occasions, pri-
larly in colic (Pippi & Lumb, 1979; Lowe &
apism. In either case, physical damage to the penis
Hilfiger, 1986; Jochle et al., 1989; England & Clarke,
must be avoided. In the vast majority of animals
1996) and in colic cases analgesia is associated with
the penis retracts as sedation wears off; in a very
the marked reduction in gut movement caused by
small proportion prolonged prolapse occurs.
drugs of this class. Horses sedated with xylazine
Treatment of this complication is by manual mas-
sage, compression bandage and replacement in the
 well sedated horse may, if disturbed, respond with
prepuce followed by suture of the preputial orifice.
a very sudden and accurate kick.
It is the opinion of the authors that the low incid-
The cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine in
ence of this complication coupled with the poss-
horses have been well investigated (Muir et al.,
ibility of immediate treatment means that where a
1979a; Short, 1992; England & Clarke, 1996). A
phenothiazine agent is the drug of choice its use is
transient rise in ABP peaks 1-2 minutes after i.v.
not contraindicated in stallions or geldings.
injection; the pressure then slowly falls to below
Acepromazine has proved a very safe agent in
 resting values and remains depressed for at least
the horse. The calming and low level sedative
 one hour. Concurrent with the hypertensive phase
effects it produces make it the agent of choice for
there is profound bradycardia coupled with both
 interventions such as shoeing, and when used in
 atrioventricular and sinoatrial heart block. Heart
young animals it appears to assist in training the
block is at its most intense in the first few minutes
horse to tolerate many future procedures without
and in many cases disappears as the heart rate
THE HORSE249
increases. Changes in ABP are dose dependent in
Detomidine has some effect when injected sub-
intensity and duration, and following i.m. injection
 cutaneously (SC) and is also absorbed through
changes are similar but less marked. Cardiac out-
mucous membranes. The latter property has been
put (CO) is significantly reduced, i.v. doses of
utilized by administering the drug on sugar
1.1 mg/kg causing falls of 20-40% of normal rest-
lumps, peppermint sweets or, more effectively,
ing values. At doses of up to 1.1 mg /kg xylazine
squirting it under the tongue (Malone & Clarke,
does not cause severe respiratory depression
1993). When given in food, the effect is less reliable
although there may be a small rise in PaCO2 and a
as the drug is extensively metabolized by first pass
slight decrease in PaO2. However, some upper air-
through the liver. The property of easy absorption
across mucous membranes must, for reasons of
may sweat as sedation is waning - this is most
personal safety, be taken into account when hand-
commonly seen if atmospheric temperatures are
ling the drug.
high. Other side effects are those typical of α2
The type of sedation produced by detomidine is
-<iady apnpout pue sisruoge rondasouaape
identical to that produced by xylazine; blind trials
caemia (Thurmon et al., 1982) and diuresis.
failed to identify which horses had been given
-radhu pue uonpond umsu u saue
 1 mg/kg xylazine i.v. and which 20 μg/kg detomi-
caemia do not appear to be a feature of xylazine
dine i.v. (England et al., 1992), except by duration
action in neonatal foals (Robertson et al., 1990)
of action. As with xylazine, horses under detomi-
When used as a premedicant, xylazine greatly
dine sedation are sensitive to touch and may kick
reduces the amount of both injectable and volatile
Lower doses of detomidine do not always result in
anaesthetic agents subsequently required. In the 30
maximal sedation, but may prove useful where a
years since its launch xylazine has become the
short period of action is required. Detomidine pre-
gold standard' for equine sedation and premedica-
medication reduces the dose of anaesthetic agents
tion, particularly in North America. In Europe
subsequently required.
until the advent of generic forms and alternative
The pharmacological properties of detomidine
agents forced prices to reduce to a realistic level, its
 are typical of those of an Cα2 adrenoceptor agonist.
 use was limited by much higher pricing.
Following doses of 10-20 μg/kg i.v. cardiovascular
changes are very similar to those following
xylazine (Short, 1992), there being a marked
Detomidine
bradycardia with heart block, coupled with arterial
 Detomidine, a very potent α2 adrenoceptor ago-
hypertension followed by hypotension. However,
nist was first used as a sedative and analgesic
with higher doses the hypertensive phase is
agent by Alitalo and Vainio in 1982, and since its
 considerably more prolonged (Vainio, 1985; Short
 introduction has gained great popularity for seda-
et al., 1986). Whether this hypertension is then fol-
tion and premedication of all types of horse
lowed by prolonged hypotension has not been
(Vainio, 1985; Alitalo, 1986; Clarke & Taylor, 1986;
 investigated - most studies terminating when
Short, 1992). Initially very high doses (up to
sedation ceases. At clinically used doses respira-
160 μg/kg) of detomidine were recommended but
tion is slowed and PaO2 is slightly decreased.
it soon became obvious that maximal sedative
Some horses snore - presumably from congestion
 effects were obtained with i.v. doses of 20 μg/kg
 of the nasal mucous membranes. The authors have
and that higher doses increased the duration
 noted occasional horses (usually those suffering
rather than depth of sedation. Slightly higher
from toxaemic conditions) becoming tachy-
eisableue poo8 aplaoid cl Aiessarau 1eadde sasop
 pnoepic for some 10-15 minutes after the adminis-
(Hamm & Jochle, 1984). The concentrated but non-
tration of detomidine. Similar reactions have been
irritant form of 10 mg/ml in which detomidine (as
observed after other C2 adrenoceptor agonists
Domosedan or Dormasedan) is provided makes it
xylazine, romifidine and medetomidine (Clarke &
very suitable for i.m. injection, doses approxi-
Gerring 1990; Bettschart et al., 1999a). Other effects
mately twice those given i.v. being required to pro-
duce the same effect.
sweating and an increase in urination. Doses
250 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
above 60 μg/kg may cause swelling of the head;
reduces gut motility, the duration of this effect
this problem appears to be associated with the
being dose dependant (Freeman, 1998). Self-limit-
prolonged head droop and can be prevented by
ing urticarial reactions may occur occasionally.
 propping the head in a more normal position.
The degree of analgesia produced by romifidine
Occasionally urticarial reactions have been noted;
has been questioned; Voegtli (1988) found that
these are self-limiting and regress without treat-
analgesia did occur but was not dose related or
ment. Moderate doses of detomidine are claimed
 consistent, whilst other work has suggested that it
to be safe in pregnancy and many mares have
is devoid of analgesic activity (Hamm et al., 1995).
received multiple doses throughout gestation
 Nevertheless, romifidine is widely used for pre-
without any maternal or foetal harm resulting.
medication and as part of anaesthetic combina-
 Abortion has been reported in a pony mare which
tions it reduces the dose of anaesthetic agents
had received detomidine (Katila & Oijala, 1988),
subsequently used.
but the authors considered the abortion was due to
othier causes.
Medetomidine
The actions of detomidine (and of other Q2
adrenoceptor agonists) can be reversed by the spe-
Medetomidine's use has been investigated in
cific antagonist, atipamezole. Dose rates from
horses (Bryant et al., 1991; Bettschart et al., 1999).
60-200μg/kg have been used, that required
 Doses of 5-7μg/kg i.v. are sufficient to cause very
depending on the degree of residual sedation
 deep sedation with severe ataxia, and higher doses
Nilsfors & Kvart 1986; Ramseyer et al., 1998;
 may result in recumbency. The marked hypnotic
Bettschart et al., 1999a). At the doses of detomidine
 properties make the agent unsuitable for routine
recommended it is rare that antagonism is
use as a sedative in horses. However, it appears to
required, but the authors have been grateful of its 
be very short acting in the horse, and its excellent
availability in cases of overdosage of α2/opioid
 analgesic and muscle relaxant properties mean
combinations where a horse has become severely
 that it can be a useful agent as part of an anaes-
ataxic or even recumbent.
thetic process.
Romifidine
PrAcTICAL USE Of v, ADRENOcEPTOR
Romifidine is a recent α2 adrenoceptor agonist
AGONISTS IN THE HORSE.
marketed for use in horses. The type of sedation
The different manifestation of sedation and lack of
produced by romifidine differs from that pro-
ataxia with romifidine excepted, the remaining
duced by the other Q2 adrenoceptor agonists;
 properties, including all side effects, appear sim-
the horse's head does not hang so low, and
ilar with all three Q2 adrenoceptor agonists com-
there is considerably less ataxia (Voetgli, 1988;
monly used in horses (Fig. 11.1). Thus choice will
England et al., 1992). Nevertheless, doses of from 
depend on the duration of action required, the
40-120μg/kg i.v. result in sedation which enables 
 route of administration, and on personal prefer-
a range of clinical procedures to be performed. In
-ixa apiaoid shuae aan le 'andxa rog 'san
 dlinical practice romifidine has proved very popu-
lent analgesia in cases of colic, although the
lar where ataxia is particularly unwelcome, e.g. for
 bradycardia and lack of gut motility induced must
shoeing. When used to sedate animals for surgical
be considered in the subsequent assessment.
procedures, romifidine is generally combined with
 Before a definitive diagnosis has been made in a
opioid agents as indeed are most C2 adrenoceptor
colic case it is preferable to use xylazine or a low
agonists. The pharmacological actions of romifi-
dose (up to 20μg/kg) of detomidine for sedation
dine other than sedation are similar to all α2
 and analgesia, as high doses may mask signs indic-
adrenoceptor agonists. Following i.v. administra-
 ating the requirement for surgery. Following a
 tion there is bradycardia, a fall in CO, and hyper-
 decision that surgery is required, the longer acting
tension followed by lowered blood pressure 
romifidine with its lack of ataxia, may be the most
(Clarke et al., 1991; Freeman, 1998). Romifidine
 suitable analgesic for transportation. Although
THE HORSE 251
50-
Heart rate
200-
Mean arterial blood pressure
40
1
E
08
eart
/52E
%
100
20
10
ean
1
251015304560
251015304560
0
Time from injection (min)
Time from injection (min)
120-
Muzzle to floor distance
20
Ataxia (sum of scores)
100
15
80
pon
distan
5
from
10
E
o
40
3
20
101530
60
5
1015
60
Time from injection (min)
Time from injection (min)
Xylazine Img/kg
Detomidine 0.02 mg/kg (20 μg/kg)
Romifidine 0.08mg/kg (80 μg/kg)
FIG. I I.I Comparison of some of the sedative and cardiovascular effects of i.v. doses of xylazine (I mg/kg), detomidine
Clarke et al.,1991; England et ai., 1992).
there are no scientific studies of combining differ-
event, then such a reaction is probably drug
ent α2 adrenoceptor agonists, in practical clinical
induced. In dogs, xylazine sensitizes the heart to
use there are many reports of changing from one to
adrenaline induced arrhythmias but in horse such
another at subsequent dosing; the effects appear to
sensitization has not been proved (W.W. Muir, per-
be additive as expected.
sonal communication). However, there are anec-
C2 Adrenoceptor agonists have marked car-
 dotal reports of collapse in horses which are given
 diopulmonary side effects, and it is not surprising
that occasional cases of collapse, or even of death
excitement. Unfortunately immediate sedation is
have been reported following their use. Some
necessary in many such situations, and in these
reported cases may have resulted from intra-
cases sufficient time must be left after drug admin-
carotid injection, but where there is a delay
istration before further stimulation is applied. In
between injection of the drug and the umexpected
such situations, the authors prefer combinations
252 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
with acepromazine, which may reduce the risk.
injection. The caudal epidural administration of
 Clinical reports have suggested that combinations
0.17 mg/kg of xylazine in 10 ml of normal saline
of C adrenoceptor agonists and potentiated sul-
produces safe, effective perineal analgesia of 2.5
fonamides should be avoided, although the scien-
hours duration in horses without apparent side
tific basis of these observations is unproven.
effects (LeBlanc et al., 1988). More recently exten-
 Some authorities premedicate horses with an
sive investigations have been carried out into the
analgesic and systemic effects of xylazine and
prior to the administration of an C2 adrenoceptor
detomidine given by this route (Skarda & Muir
agonist, but use of such combinations is controver-
1994; 1996a, b; 1998). To date there are no reports of
sial. Anticholinergic drugs will prevent or reverse
the epidural adminstration of romifidine. Caudal
the bradycardia caused by C2 adrenoceptor ago-
 epidural xylazine (0.25 mg/kg) gives perineal
nists and will improve CO. However, the brady-
 analgesia and variable bilateral analgesia as far
cardia protects against the hypertension caused by
forward as S3 with minimal systemic effects. In
C2 adrenoceptor agonist induced vasoconstriction
 order to obtain adequate perineal analgesia with
and once pulse rate rises, so does ABP (Alibhai &
epidural detomidine, doses of 60 μg/kg were
Clarke, 1996). Anticholinergic drugs, if used, must
 required, which resulted in variable spread of
be given an adequate time prior to sedation; giving
analgesia sometimes extending to the thoracic
the two drugs together is pointless
region. Systemic effects (e.g. bradycardia and
sedation) suggested that a significant quantity of
detomidine had been absorbed, and horses were
Infusions of o2 adrenoceptor agonists
Where Q2 adrenoceptor agonists are being used to
the midsacral subarachnoid route, 30 μg/kg deto-
provide sedation for surgery, sometimes it is neces-
 midine gave good analgesia from the coccyx to the
sary to increase their duration of action.
lumbar region with minimal systemic effects.
Intermittent dosing, each increment being 25-50%
 Systemic effects could be antagonized with agents
of the original dose administered, is effective, but
such as atipamezole given systemically or by the
infusion results in a more level and controllable 
 epidural route. With either Q2 adrenoceptor ago-
plane of sedation. There are few scientific studies
 nist, onset of perineal analgesia occurred within
as to the doses required; usually, the agent used is
15 minutes. Skarda and Muir (1996a, b) suggested
diluted in a saline drip, then, following the initial
that xylazine was exerting a local anaesthetic
loading dose, is infused to effect. The authors
effect, hence the low doses required in comparison
loisnu ue sasioy snoston u iuh pmog aau
 to those used when the drug is given systemically.
of 0.55 mg/kg/hour of xylazine provides good
 Q2 Adrenoceptor agonists have also been given
sedation with minimal ataxia. Detomidine infu-
by the epidural route in combination with opioids
sions at 0.18 μg/kg/min have been demonstrated
and /or local anaesthetic agents.
to provide steady sedation and to be appropriate
for intraoperative infusion (Wagner et al., 1992;
Daunt et al., 1993). Infusions of 3.5 μg /kg/hour of
BENZODIAZEPINES
medetomidine following a loading dose of 5μg/kg
Diazepam, midazolam, climazolam and
give deep sedation and have also proved effective
zolazepam
in providing intraoperative analgesia without
resulting in any delay of recovery (Bettschart et al.,
The anxiolytic properties of diazepam are not
1999).
obvious in horses and the drug should not be used
on its own as it gives rise to ataxia, sometimes
associated with panic, possibly through its muscle
Administration of α2 adrenoceptor
relaxing properties (Muir et al., 1982). Another
agonists by other routes
benzodiazepine, climazolam, has been found to
C2 Adrenoceptor agonists are strong analgesics
have similar properties and the antagonist sar-
when administered by epidural or subarachnoid
mazenil has been used to reverse its effects.
THE HORSE 253
Although not useful as a sedatives in adult horses
100 μg/kg) have often been used together for
the benzodiazepine agents can be used in foals
 sedating horses. The prolonged calming action of
which will usually become recumbent following
 acepromazine is useful in a variety of circum-
i. v. 0.1-0.25 mg/kg of diazepam or midazolam (a
water soluble benzodiazepine). The muscle
prior to sedation, both for premedication and in
relaxation induced by benzodiazepine agents is
combination with opioids. Some North American
useful during anaesthesia, and benzodiazepines
sources have considered that acepromazine and
such as diazepam, climazolam, midazolam and
the Q2 adrenoceptor agonists should not be used
zolazepam have all been incorporated into anaes-
together. The pharmacological reasoning behind
thetic regimes used in adult horses.
the suggestion that the two drugs should not be
given together rests on the fact that acepromazine
causes hypotension and the C2 adrenoceptor ago-
OThEr cATEGoRIEs
nist causes bradycardia. However, the maximal
bradycardia occurs within 1-2 minutes of injec-
Chloral hydrate
tion, and at this time is accompanied by hyperten-
Chloral hydrate was a popular sedative for horses
sion. If detomidine is given to horses already
but it has largely fallen into disuse because its
sedated with acepromazine, there is still a hyper-
administration poses problems and sedation is
tensive response, albeit starting from a lower base
accompanied by ataxia. Details of suitable doses
(Muir et al., 1979a). The authors have administered
can be found in earlier editions of this book and it
xylazine, detomidine or romifidine to over 4000
is still a useful component in some mixtures used
horses already sedated with acepromazine with no
in equine anaesthesia.
ill effects (other than an increase in ataxia) and pro-
viding both drugs are given at suitable doses there
is no reason why the combination cannot be used.
Reserpine
Reserpine has been employed for its prolonged
Sedative/opioid combinations
calming action, but has many side effects and does
not give the type of sedation allowing veterinary
The pharmacological basis for combination of
procedures to be carried out easily (Tobin, 1978).
sedatives with opioids has already been discussed
(Chapter 4). Their use in the horse is not new
(Martin & Beck, 1956; Klein, 1975) and a very large
DRUG COMBINATIONS
 number of such combinations have been investig-
In the search for a completely reliable, safe method
ated and advocated for use in this species of an-
of producing sedation in standing horses a num-
imal (Martin & Beck, 1956; Muir et al., 1979b;
ber of mixtures of drugs have been used.
Robertson & Muir 1983; Nolan & Hall, 1984;
Appropriate doses of many of these have proved
Clarke & Paton, 1988). The addition of opioids,
to have a more certain and profound effect than
aueuua oi sieadde 'sasop pisaoieueqns pe uaaa
can be regularly obtained from the use of any sin-
 sedation dramatically and, in particular, diminish-
gle drug. However, the possibility of untoward
 es the response to touch, thus reducing the likeli-
reactions and appearance of as yet unrecognized
hood of provoking well directed kicks from the
drug interactions must always be considered
sedated horse. The disadvantage is that ataxia is
when these mixtures are employed.
also increased (particularly with combinations
involving methadone or butorphanol), and occa
Acepromazine/α.2 adrenoceptor agonist
sionally a horse may become recumbent. Opioid
Excitement reactions such as aimless walking may
combinations
occur when sedation becomes inadequate and it is
Acepromazine (0.02-0.05 mg/kg) and α2 adreno-
 irrational to combine a short acting sedative such
'(8x /u 0'I-9'o) auize[x se yons sistuoge 1oidan
 as xylazine with opioids with long actions such
detomidine (10-20μg/kg) or romifidine (50-
as buprenorphine or high doses of morphine.
254 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE Il.I Some of the sedative/opioid
cessful, particularly for clipping fractious horses.
combinations that have been satisfactorily
Prolonged sedation can be achieved by initial
used; there are many other combinations
 dosage of both agents followed by an infusion of
which are likely to be as satisfactory
the C adrenoceptor; often further dosing of the
Sedative I
Sedative 2
Opioid
opioid is not needed, although this depends on the
duration of action of the agent chosen. Caution is
Acepromazine,
Methadone,
needed to prevent cross contamination of the
0.05-0.10mg/kg
0.05-0.10 mg/kg
drugs in their multi-dose bottles; the authors have
Or
Butorphanol,
seen several cases of gross overdosage (the horse
0.02-0.04 mg/kg
becoming very ataxic, or recumbent) where this
 Acepromazine,
Xylazine, 0.5 mg/kg
has occurred.
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
Or
Detomidine,
0.01 mg/kg
ANALGESIA
or
Romifidine,
0.04-0.08 mg/kg
As with all species, the perioperative analgesic
Acepromazine,
Detomidine,
 Butorphanol,
Aq lau Aeraua ane asroq aul ui saanmba
0.04-0.06 mg/kg  0.0l mg/kg
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
non-steroidal analgesics, opioid analgesics and
or
Methadone,
local analgesics. In certain circumstances Q2
0.05 mg/kg
adrenoceptor agonists and agents used as anaes-
Xylazine,
Butorphanol,
 thetic agents, such as ketamine, also play a part in
0.5-0.6 mg/kg or
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
the provision of analgesia.
Detomidine,
 or Methadone,
0.010-0.015 mg/kg
0.05-0.10mg/kg
 or Romifidine,
0.04-0.08 mg/kg
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
ANALGESICS (NSAIDs)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are
Acepromazine has a very long action so problems
widely used in horses for the provision of analge-
are less when this is part of the combination. The
sia for acute pain, for their anti-inflammatory
mcidence of opioid-induced excitement occurring
action in injury and disease, for anti-endotoxaemic
can be reduced by administering sedatives first
actions and for the provision of analgesia in chronic
followed by opioids once sedation is apparent,
pain. Although they have not been shown to pro-
 although if the opioid concerned is one which has
vide any intraoperative analgesia (Alibhai &
a delayed onset of action (e.g. buprenorphine), this
Clarke, 1996), they are often administered at
 is neither necessary nor desirable.
premedication or intraoperatively so that their
Table 11.1 lists some of the sedative/opioid
 analgesic and anti-inflammatory actions will be
combinations that have been satisfactorily used,
effective at the time of recovery.
 but there are many other potential combinations
For many years, phenylbutazone was the NSAID
which are likely to be as satisfactory. The dose of
of choice for equine use, and it still remains an
 opioid required is considerably less than that pro-
 inexpensive and very effective agent that may be
ducing analgesia (and with these combinations,
given by injection in the immediate perioperative
local analgesia should still be employed for sur-
period, then orally for continuing postoperative
 gery). In recent years the most popular opioid for
care. Although it can cause toxic reactions, these
use in such combinations has been butorphanol,
are well known, and can be avoided with correct
 as q  g a n s m
dosing schedules. However, currently in Europe it
such strict control regulations as the pure agonists.
may not be used in food animals, and in many
In the UK the combination of i.v. (
detomidine
 countries this includes horses. Other older agents
(10-15μg/kg) or romifidine (40-120μg /kg) and
 used in the horse include dipyrone and meclofenic
butorphanol (0.02mg/kg) has proved very suc-
 acid. In the last 10 years the most popular NSAID
THE HORSE 255
for use in the horse has been flunixin meglumate,
sary to assess dosing schedules but efficacy may
which gives excellent analgesia in a wide variety
outlast effective blood levels as in some cases the
of circumstances. Several of the new, very effective
NSAID is concentrated in the inflammatory fluid
and potentially less toxic NSAIDs including car-
at the site of injury. Toxic effects, most commonly
profen, cedaprofen and ketoprofen are marketed
manifest by diarrhoea, are usually due to cumula-
 in oral and /or injectable formulations for horses,
tion, and are most likely to occur some days into
and others may soon become available.
the postoperative period. It is therefore very
The major problem with NSAIDs is their high
important not to exceed the data sheet recommen-
toxicity and fairly low therapeutic index and,
dations for doses and frequency of dosing, and to
although in theory the newer COX 2 sparing
realise that if more than one NSAID is employed,
agents such as carprofen and vedaprofen should
their toxic effects will be cumulative. Even if the
cause fewer problems, it will be only after some
 manufacturers guidelines are kept, toxicity may be
years of use that lack of toxic effects will be con-
 greater than expected in a sick horse, for example
firmed. The major sites of toxicity of the NSAIDs
in shocked animals, or in hypoproteinaemia
are the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, liver and the
(NSAIDs are highly protein bound).
blood cells. In horses, the gastrointestinal tract
NSAIDs are widely used as analgesics for colic
appears the organ most affected, overdose of the
but the response may be variable - sometimes
agent causing stomach ulceration, and also dam-
there is complete relief from pain, even in cases
age to other areas, including the large bowel, lead-
where there is non-viable intestine, whilst another
 ing to diarrhoea. In the horse renal damage, even 
case with an identical lesion may show no remis-
in the presence of hypotension, is not common,
sion of symptoms. NSAIDs prevent the onset of
and NSAIDs are administered before or during
symptoms of endotoxaemia, such as the increase
anaesthesia without apparent problems. Liver
in pulse rate and in PCV. Prevention of these
damage due to NSAIDs has been reported in old
changes coupled with analgesia may prevent
horses maintained on NSAIDs, and blood
recognition of the onset of 'shock' and diagnosis of
yoy uaail sasioy ul paimsno aaey seiseinssp
 surgical conditions. Thus, it is better if NSAIDs are
doses of phenylbutazone. Many of the injectable
not given to horses with colic until there is a definit-
 preparations are contraindicated for i.m. use in the
ive diagnosis, and a decision for surgery (or not) is
horse as they cause local irritation. At least one i.v.
 made. When using NSAIDs in the postoperative
preparation of phenylbutazone can cause severe
period in colic cases consideration must be given
cardiac arrhythmias if injected too fast (probably
to the effect of altered blood protein levels, and of
because of the solvent, rather than the drug), so in
the absence of evidence to the contrary, it is best to
pharmacokinetics. It is difficult to distinguish
administer all i.v. NSAIDs slowly, especially in
whether diarrhoea following surgery for colic is
anaesthetized horses.
due to endotoxaemia or is, itself, d ue to the toxicity
The pharmacokinetics of NSAIDs vary greatly
of the NSAIDs used.
between species. In normal horses, the half-lives of
some of the commonly used agents are as follows:
OPIOID ANALGESICS
●Phenylbutazone: 4.5-9.0 hours
●Flunixin: 1.6-2.1hours
-ins rae pue Sump eisalieue apiaoid oi asiou
 Meloxycam: 3hours
gery, as well as in combination with sedative
●
 Carprofen: 18hours
 agents for restraint. As in all other species of an-
Vedaprofen: 6-8hours
imal, they cause a dose-related respiratory depres-
●
 Ketoprofen: 0.7-1.0 hour.
sion. The cardiovascular effects of high doses
(Curmingham & Lees 1995; product informa-
include tachycardia and arterial hypertension,
tion sheets).
although at clinical dose rates such responses are
Breakdown products of some agents are them-
minimal (Muir et al., 1978a). Excitement can occur
selves active. Knowledge of the half-life is neces-
following their use, depending on dosage and
256 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE Il.2 Doses of opioids for producing
Methadone
analgesi; i.m. injection minimizes the risk of
Methadone (0.1 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.) is popular for
excitement reactions
use in the horse, both as an analgesic and in sedat-
Opioid
Dose and route
ive/opioid combinations.
Morphine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.v.or i.m.Up to
0.25 mg/kg i.m.
Pethidine (meperidine)
 Methadone
0.1 mg/kg i.v.or i.m.
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.3 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.
Pethidine (meperidine) has been one of the most
Pethidine
I2 mg/kg i.m. only
widely used opioids in horses (Archer, 1947;
Buprenorphine 
0.006 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.
Combie et al., 1979) especially for spasmodic colic
Butorphanol
0.05-0.10 mg/kg i.v.
as it has an antispasmodic action. Doses of up to
2 mg/kg have been recommended and these
whether or not the horse is in pain at the time of
appear to produce good analgesia with moderate
their administration. Excitement is manifest in var-
sedation. Pethidine does have several drawbacks.
ious ways from muzzle twitching, muscular
It is comparatively short acting (Alexander &
spasms, ataxia, snatching at food, umcontrollable
Collett, 1974) and analgesia rarely lasts more than
walking through to violent excitement. Tobin
 two hours. Following i.v. use excitement reactions
and co-workers (Tobin & Combie, 1982) developed 
are common. A small but significant number of
a ‘step-counting' method of measuring the -
horses suffer anaphylactoid reactions (Clutton,
walking or locomotor response and obtained
1987) manifest by severe sweating, shaking and
dose-response curves very similar to those
even collapse. Anaphylactoid reactions are less
 obtained for analgesia. It is probable that many of
these responses are due to stimulation of μ(OP3)
i.m. injection; excitement is also less common and
receptors.
so this route should be considered the one of choice.
The assessment of analgesic activity is very dif-
ficult. Drugs may affect different types of pain in
Partial agonists
al methods of assessment it is not easy to be certain
The advantage of the partial agonist opioid drugs
of the most effective dose in any clinical circum-
is that they are often less addictive in man and
stance. Table 11.2 lists suggested doses for some
therefore subject to less control regulations than
 opioids but it must be remembered that the
 are pure agonist agents. Controversy concerning
response obtained (both of analgesia and side 
their most suitable doses for horses may be
effects) will depend on many factors such as the
because dose-response effects occur in which
presence or absence of pre-existing pain and the
higher doses antagonize analgesia already pro-
 presence of sedative or anaesthetic drugs.
duced, so if, in clinical use, analgesia is not
obtained it is inadvisable to increase the dose, and
Pure agonists
another analgesic should be used.
Morphine
Pentazocine
Of the agonist drugs, morphine is still to be re-
Pentazocine has been used in horses in North
garded as an excellent postoperative analgesic, but
America. Dose recommendations are very vari-
there is controversy as to the most effective dose.
 able, ranging from 0.9 to 2.2 mg/kg.
Classically, a suitable dose is said to be 0.1 mg/kg.
but even this dose may cause dysphoria (Muir et al.)
Butorphanol
1978a). However, Combie et al., (1979; 1981) found
that doses of up to 0.3 mg/kg produced minimal
Butorphanol is used to provide analgesia in pre.
behavioural effects, although they did comment
medication, during surgery, for postoperative
that any locomotor response was delayed.
analgesia and in sedative/opioid combinations.
THE HORSE 257
Again, dose recommendations vary widely. The
dermatomes and in some animals analgesia
minimal analgesic dose is 0.1 mg/kg i.v. but anal-
spread considerably further cranially. Analgesia
gesia is transient, higher doses being required for
lasted for 17hours, but onset of analgesia was
longer effective pain relief (Robertson et al., 1981;
 delayed for up to eight hours. When a higher dose
Kalpravidh et al., 1984). Doses of 0.2 mg/kg i.v.
 of morphine (100 mg) was used, onset of analgesia
have been claimed to produce effective analgesia
 was faster (six hours), lasted longer (19hours) and
in equine colic for up to two hours. Cardiovascular
 spread further (sometimes as far as T9) but the
effects appear to be minimal but all studies of its
signs of sedation, presumably through systemic
use in pain-free animals found it to produce
absorption of the drug, were greater. There are
behavioural effects - nose-twitches, ataxia, shiver-
 many anecdotal reports from clinical practice as to
ing box walking and restlessness at doses as low as
the efficacy of epidural morphine in providing
0.1 mg/kg i.v. Differences may be due to whether
postoperative analgesia of the hind limbs and even
or not the horse is in pain but, in the authors?
of the abdomen of individual animals, but few
experience of the use of this drug alone as an anal-
mention the very prolonged onset of analgesic
 gesic, doses of 0.1 mg/kg i.v. given to horses with
effects. In practice, frequently morphine is used in
mild colic pain cause the horse to walk constantly
combination with other agents. Sysel et al., (1996;
around the box for one hour (a locomotor
 1997) demonstrated that morphine (0.2mg/kg)
response), and such a response could be disastrous
and detomidine (30μg/kg) given through an
in postoperative orthopaedic cases.
epidural catheter situated at approximately the
lumbosacral junction reduced experimentally in-
duced lameness within an a hour; that there was
Buprenorphine
minimal ataxia (the horses could trot); that this
Buprenorphine, another partial agonist, gives
 analgesia lasted for at least six hours after drug
analgesia for about eight hours although it must be
administration and that incremental dosing could
remembered that even after i. v. injection onset of
 be used to maintain analgesia for up to 14 days.
analgesia requires at least 15 minutes. The authors
have found in clinical practice that doses of
0.006mg/kg i.m. or i.v. to the horse in pain appar-
LOCAL ANaLGESIA
ently give good analgesia for several hours.
The many techniques of nerve block used in horses
for purely diagnostic purposes and the methods
Additional routes of administration of
for producing intrasynovial desensitization will
opioid agents
not be considered here. Details of these techniques
Morphine has been administered into joints fol-
can be obtained from surgical textbooks or from
lowing arthroscopy. This is effective in man pre-
Die Narkose der Tiere, volume 1, Lokalanasthesie, by
sumably through its action on specific opioid
Westhues and Fritsch (Westhues and Fristch,
receptors in the synovium (Lawrence et al., 1992)
1960). Those to be described here are only the ones
but claims of its efficacy in the horse have yet to be
which the authors have found useful in operative
substantiated. When morphine (15 mg in 5 ml of
surgery or for giving pain relief (Fig. 11.2).
saline) is injected into the joints of ponies, the mor-
phine plasma levels do not reach those likely to
result in systemic effects, whilst morphine is still
SPECIFIC NERVE BLOCKS
detectable in joint fluid for at least 24hours
Infraorbital nerve block
(Raekallio et al., 1997). Morphine (in a preparation
which does not contain preservatives) may be
The infraorbital nerve is the continuation of the
given by caudal epidural injection at doses of
maxillary division of the Vth cranial nerve and is
0.1 mg/kg. Robinson et al., (1994) found that cau-
entirely sensory. During its course along the infra-
dal epidural injection of 50 mg of morphine in
 orbital canal it supplies branches to the upper
10 mls of saline resulted in analgesia of at least five
molar, canine and incisor teeth on that side, and
258 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
their alveoli and contiguous gum. The nerves sup-
plying the first and second molars (PM1 and 2), the
canine and incisors, arise within the canal about
2.5 cm from the infraorbital foramen and pass for-
wards in the maxilla and premaxilla to the teeth
The nerves to cheek teeth three to six (PM3, Ml,
2 and 3) pass directly from the parent nerve trunk
 in the upper parts of the canal. After emerging
from the foramen the nerve supplies sensory fibres
to the upper lip and cheek, the nostrils and lower
parts of the face.
The infraorbital nerve may be approached at
two sites:
FlG. I l.2 Sites for insertion of the needle to block the
1. At its point of emergence from the
supraorbital, infraorbital, mental and mandibular nerves.
infraorbital foramen: the area desensitized will
comprise the skin of the lip, nostril and face on that
the facial sinuses, local infiltration analgesia offers
side up to the level of the foramen
 2 Within the canal, via the infraorbital foramen,
a good alternative.
when in addition the first and second premolars,
the canine and incisor teeth with their alveoli and
Mandibular nerve block
 gum, and the skin as high as the level of the inner
The alveolar branch of the mandibular division of
canthus of the eye, will be influenced (Fig. 11.3).
the Vth cranial nerve enters the mandibular fora-
The lip of the infraorbital foramen can be detected
men on the medial aspect of the vertical ramus of
readily as a bony ridge lying beneath the edge of
the mandible under cover of the medial pterygoid
the flat levator nasolabialis muscle. When it is
 muscle. It traverses the mandibular canal, giving
desired to block the nerve within the canal it is nec-
off dental and alveolar branches on that side, and
essary to pass the needle up the canal about 2.5 cm.
emerges through the mental foramen. From this
To do this the needle must be inserted through the
 point it is styled the mental nerve. The nerves sup-
skin about 2cm in front of the foramen after
plying the canine and incisor teeth arise from the
reflecting the edge of the levator muscle upwards.
parent trunk within the canal 3-5 cm behind the
An insensitive skin weal is an advantage. For the
 mental foramen, and pass to the teeth within the
perineural injection a needle 19 gauge (1.1 mm),.
bone.
5 cm long, is suitable. The quantity of local anal-
If the mandibular alveolar nerve is injected at
 gesic solution required will vary from 4 to 5 ml. For
its point of entry into the mandibular canal at the
blocking the nerve at its point of emergence from
mandibular foramen, practically the whole of the
the canal, the needle is introduced until its point
lower jaw and all the teeth and alveoli on that side
can be felt beneath the bony lip of the foramen.
will become desensitized. The technique is diffi-
From 4 to 5 ml of 1% mepivacaine is injected, with-
cult and uncertain, for the nerve enters the canal
drawing the needle slightly as injection proceeds.
high up on the medial aspect of the vertical ramus.
Loss of sensation should follow in 15-20 minutes
The foramen lies practically opposite the point of
and last a further 30-40 minutes if the solution
intersection of a line passing vertically down-
injected contains a vasoconstrictor.
wards from the lateral canthus of the eye, and one
Injections at site 1 may be employed for inter-
extending backwards from the tables of the
ferences about the lips and nostrils, such as sutur-
mandibular molar teeth.
ing of wounds, removal of polypi, etc. Extraction
A point is selected on the caudal border of the
 of canine or incisor teeth is seldom required in
mandible about 3 cm below the temporomandibu-
 lar articulation. After penetrating the skin the nee-
 amaesthesia is usually preferred. For trephining
dle is allowed to lie in the depression between the
THE HORSE 259
incisor teeth will also be desensitized) but this is
not easily performed.
The mental foramen is situated on the lateral
aspect of the ramus in the middle of the interdental
 space. It can be palpated after deflecting the
 pencil-like tendon of the depressor labi inferioris
muscle upwards. The nerve may be detected as an
emerging thick straw-like structure. From this
point the technique is the same as that outlined for
the infraorbital nerve.
FIG. Il.3 Area of skin desensitized after blocking: the
Supraorbital nerve block
infraorbital nerve within the canal (transverse lines), the
supaorbital nerve (vertical lines) and the mental nerve
 Suturing of wounds involving only the upper
(spotted).
eyelid is easily possible after block of the supra-
orbital nerve (Fig. 11.3). The supraorbital (or
wing of the atlas and the base of the ear. The needle
frontal) nerve is one of the terminal branches of the
is advanced as its point is depressed until it passes
ophthalmic division of the Vth cranial nerve. It
deep to the medial border of the ramus. It is then
emerges from the orbit accompanied by the artery
advanced further in the direction of the point of
 through the supraorbital foramen in the supraor-
intersection of the previously mentioned lines,
 bital process. It supplies sensory fibres to the upper
keeping as close as possible to the medial surface of
eyelid and, in part, to the skin of the forehead. The
the mandible but, as the nerve lies medial to the
nerve is injected within the supraorbital foramen.
accompanying artery and vein, the needle does not
 The upper and lower borders of the supraor-
need to follow the bone closely. Following this
bital process, close to its junction with the main
method the needle should lie parallel with the nerve
mass of the frontal bone, is palpable. The foramen
for a distance of 3-4 cm. About 5ml of analgesic
is recognized as a pit-like depression midway
solution is injected along this length. German
 between the two borders. The skin is prepared and
writers describe a modification: the foramen is
 an insensitive weal produced. A needle, 19 gauge
 approached from the ventral border of the ramus,
(1.1 mm), 2.2 cm long, is passed into the foramen to
just in front of the angle. The point of the needle
a depth of 0.5-1.0 cm and 5 ml of analgesic solution
must penetrate a distance of 1.0-1.5 cm to reach the
injected.
foramen.
The chief indications are molar dental interfer-
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
ences in the lower jaw, but most surgeons today
prefer to carry out all dental surgery under general
The auriculopalpebral nerve is a terminal branch
anaesthesia and this nerve block will only be used
of the facial division of the trigeminal (Vth) cranial
when, for some reason, general anaesthesia is
nerve innervating the orbicularis oculi muscles.
impracticable.
Blocking it prevents voluntary closure of the
eyelids but does not in any way desensitize them.
In conjunction with topical analgesia of the
Mental nerve block
conjunctiva it is most useful for examination of
Suturing of wounds of the lower lip may be con-
the eye, as well as for the removal of foreign
veiently carried out under mental nerve block.
 bodies from the cornea and other minor eye sur-
The nerve can be injected as it emerges from
 gery. It may be blocked by placing 5ml of 2%
the mental foramen and analgesia of the lower
mepivacaine solution subfascially at the most
lip on that side will ensue (Fig. 11.3). Attempts
dorsal point of the zygomatic arch. A 2.5 cm,
may be made to pass the needle along a canal a
 22 gauge (0.7 mm) needle is a convenient size for
distance of 3-5 cm (in which case the canine and
this injection.
260ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Palmari'plantar nerve block
winds obliquelydownwards and outwards
behind the flexor tendons to join the lateral plantar
The nerves confer sensibility to the digit. The
nerve about the level of the button of the fourth
medial palmar nerve of the forelimb is one of the
metatarsal bone. At the metatarsophalangeal joint,
terminal branches of the median nerve. At the
each nerve, coming into relation with the digital
level of the proximal sesamoid bones the trunk of
vessels, resolves itself into three branches for the
the nerve divides into three digital branches, and
supply of the digit.
all three branches are in close relationship with the
 In the hindlimb the main artery - the dorsal
digital vessels. The dorsal branch in front of the
metatarsal artery - passes to the back of the 
vein distributes cutaneous branches to the front of
 metatarsus by dipping under the free end of the
the digit, and terminates in the coronary cushion.
4th metatarsal bone, and finally bifurcates above
The middle branch, which is small and irregular,
the fetlock, between the two divisions of the sus-
descends between the artery and vein. It is gener-
pensory ligament, to form the digital arteries. In
ally formed by the union of several smaller
the pastern region the disposition of the nerves
branches which cross forwards over the artery
and vessels is the same as in the forelimb. Plantar
before uniting, and it terminates in the sensitive
nerve block does not give the same results as pal-
laminae and the coronary cushion. The palmar
mar block in the forelimb. The skin and deeper tis-
a ie idaxa iae an paq aso sa yun
sues on the dorsal aspect of the hind fetlock and
metacarpophalangeal joint, where the nerve is
 pastern are innervated by terminal branches of the
almost superposed to the artery. It accompanies
fibular nerve. This may be important from a sur-
the digital artery in the hoof, and passes with the
gical standpoint although less important from a
palmar branch of that vessel to be distributed to
diagmostic point of view (S. Dyson, personal com-
the distal phalanx and sensitive laminae.
munication, 1991).
The lateral palmar nerve is formed by fusion of
the termination of the ulnar nerve with one of the
Technique for paimar/plantar (obaxial sesamoid)
terminal branches of the median. In the metacarpal
region it occupies, on the outside of the limb, a
injection
position on the flexor tendons analogous to that of
Injection in both fore- and hindlimbs is where the
the medial palmar nerve on the inside. Unlike the
nerves course just proximal to the metacarpopha-
latter nerve,however,it is accompanied by only a
langeal/metatarsophalangeal joint. Although the
single vessel - the lateral palmar vein - which lies
nerves divide up into three branches at about this
in front of it. (A small artery - the lateral palmar
 point the injection of 2-3 ml of local analgesic solu-
metacarpal artery - accompanies the nerve and
tion medially and laterally still produces complete
vein from the carpus to the metacarpophalangeal
desensitization of the entire foot (Fig. 11.4) An
joint on the lateral aspect of the limb). At the level
 advantage of this site is that when the limb is held
of the sesamoid bones it divides into three digital
up and the joint flexed, the nerves and their associ-
branches exactly as does the medial palmar nerve
ated vessels can be palpated so their accurate loca-
already described.
tion is easy.
 In the hindlimb, plantar nerves result from
A strict aseptic technique must be practised and
bifurcation of the tibial nerve when it gains the
the lateral and medial sites should be clipped and
back of the tarsus. They accompany the deep digit-
prepared as for an operation. In thin-skinned
 al flexor tendon in the tarsal sheath and, diverging
horses a 25 gauge (0.5 mm), 2.5 cm long needle is
from one another, they descend in the metatarsal
used; disposable needles can usually be intro-
region, one at each side of the deep digital flexor
 duced through the skin without the horse showing
tendon. Each is accompanied in the metatarsus by
resentment.
the metatarsal vein of that side, and by a slender
After the injections have been completed the
artery from the vascular arch at the back of the tar-
 animal is allowed to stand quietly for 10-15 min-
sus. A little below the middle of the metatarsus the
utes. At the end of this time the limb is tested for
medial nerve detaches a considerable branch that
sensation by tapping on the skin with a blunt-
THE HORSE 261
during insertion of the needle, the flaccidity of the
skin may cause the point to enter the subcutaneous
connective tissue and the method will fail. If blood
escapes from the needle, it should be partially
withdrawn, redirected and reinserted. It may be
decided, first, to provoke an insensitive skin weal,
and then pass the needle through this at the appro-
priate angle until its point lies beneath the fascia.
When it is intended to block both sides of the
limb supplied by these nerves, the opposite side of
the leg is similarly dealt with. When dealing with
the medial nerve it is necessary to work around the
opposite leg. With the horse standing squarely.
the operator passes one hand around the front of
FIG. Il.4 Area of skin desensitized after bilateral plantar
 the adjacent leg for inserting the needle, while the
 or palmar nerve block.
 other is passed behind the limb for holding the
ended spike on the end of a short pole. This is a
syringe to the needle.
better way of detecting loss of deep sensation than
The most likely cause of failure is that the solu-
pricking with a needle. Any response to tapping
tion was injected into the subcutaneous connective
around the coronet and heel indicates failure to
tissue, and not beneath the fascia. Fortunately the
block the nerve on that side. One indication of sen-
skin at the site is now desensitized and a second
sation is sufficient to prove this, and successive tri-
and deeper injection can be made without
als only serve to agitate the animal. It may be
restraint.
necessary to cover the animal's eye to prevent it
About 2.5-5.0 ml of 1% mepivacaine or 0.5%
seeing the approach of the test instrument.
bupivacaine solution is commonly injected around
each nerve. The average hunter is given 3 ml over
each nerve. In the hindlimb the technique is sim-
Technique of paimar/plantar metacorpal/metatarsal
ilar, except that the procedure exposes the operator
injection
to a greater risk of injury, especially when dealing
An altermative site for blocking the palmar/plan-
with a nervous animal. Thus, not only must the
tar digital nerves is from 5 to 7 cm proximal to the
animal be twitched, but the forelimb raised in
addition if the operation is to be carried out with
at the level of the distal enlargements of the 2nd
the animal standing on the affected limb. Should
and 4th metacarpal or metatarsal bones. This
the operator feel indisposed to make the injection
ensures that the analgesic solution is in contact
with the hindleg free, it may be raised by an assist-
with the nerve proximal to its point of division.
ant, but the needle must be inserted sufficiently
The local analgesic is injected into the groove
deeply to penetrate the fascia.
between the deep digital flexor tendon and the
 suspensory ligament. The nerve lies deep to
Technique of blocking paimor terminal digital nerves
the subcutaneous fascia immediately in front of
the deep flexor tendon. A 25 gauge (0.5 mm) needle
The terminal divisions of the palmar and plantar
1.2 cm long is used. The skin over the site is clipped
nerves may be subjected to medial and lateral peri-
and cleansed. In the great majority of cases the
neural injection in the pastern region. The site for
needle can be inserted without movement on the
injection is midway between the fetlock joint and
part of the animal. With the animal standing on the
coronet. The palmar or volar border of the first
limb, the skin and subcutaneous fascia are tense,
phalanx is located, and the dorsal edge of the (at
and it is easy to penetrate the latter and thus 
this point flattened) deep digital flexor tendon is
ensure that the subsequent injection is in direct
 palpated. The nerve lies immediately dorsal to the
contact with the nerve. If the limb is held raised
tendon. About 2ml of 1% mepivacaine or 0.5%
262 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
 bupivacaine solution is injected SC just proximal
to the collateral cartilages. The area desensitized is
limited to the palmar or volar part of the foot and
heel on that side.
Indications for paimar/plantar block
Palmar/plantar block is commonly used to aid
diagmosis of the site of lameness, but it is also very
useful to relieve the pain of acutely painful lesions
about the foot, and to allow the animal to rest. The
practice may be repeated daily for a few days in
severe cases. Longest pain relief is obtained by
using bupivacaine with a vasoconstrictor such as
adrenaline at a concentration of 1:200 000.
The nerve blocks allow the painless perform-
FIG. I1.5 Areas of skin desensitization after block of the
ance of palmar and plantar neurectomy and of
ulnar (shaded) and median nerves (spotted) (S.Dyson,
operations about the foot, coronet and heel, such
personal communication, 1991).
as exposure of a corn or gathered nail track, partial
 operations for quittor and sandcrack. Even when
where it meets the distal edge of the caudal super-
 operations about the foot are performed under
ficial pectoral muscle is located with a finger. The
general anaesthesia, palmar and plantar blocks
 point of insertion of the needle is immediately
can provide analgesia intraoperatively and in the
 proximal to the finger. A needle, 19 gauge
recovery period. The desensitization of the foot
 (1.1 mm), 2.5-3.0 cm long, is suitable. It is directed
which they produce does not seem to be an ob-
-laa au ot oz jo albue ue je ieixe pue iexoid
stacle to the animal regaining its feet after general
tical, to ensure penetration of the pectoral muscle
anaesthesia or to contribute to ataxia immediately
 and the deep fascia; 7.5-10.0 ml of local analgesic
afterwards.
solution is injected. To facilitate insertion of the
 needle to the proper depth it is best first to induce
 an insensitive skin weal.
The complete desensitization of the
forelimb below the carpus
The indications for blocking the median nerve
alone are limited, for the surface area desensitized
Simultaneous block of the median, ulnar and mus-
is little more than that obtained with medial pal-
culocutaneous (cutaneous branch) nerves desens-
mar block (see Figs 11.4 and 11.5).
itize the entire manus.
Uinor nerve
Mediannerve
This nerve may be blocked by injection of 10 ml of
The best site at which to inject the median nerve is
local analgesic solution in the centre of the caudal
the one used for the operation of median neur-
 aspect of the limb, about 10 cm proximal to the
ectomy, i.e. the point on the medial aspect of the 
accessory carpal bone, in the groove between the
limb about5 cm distal to the elbowjoint, where the
tendons of the ulnaris lateralis and flexor carpi
nerve lies immediately caudal to the radius and
ulnaris, and beneath the deep fascia.
cranial to the muscular belly of the internal flexor
of the metacarpus, deep to the caudal superficial
 pectoral muscle and the deep fascia.
Musculocutaneous nerve
With the animal standing squarely, the adminis-
This nerve is blocked on the medial aspect of the
trator stoops adjacent to and slightly behind the
 limb where it lies on the surface of the radius
opposite forelimb. The caudal border of the radius
halfwaybetween the elbow and carpus,immedi
THE HORSE 263
ately adjacent to the cephalic vein. At this site, it
can easily be palpated just cranial to the cephalic
Medial
vein and blocked by the injection of 10 ml of local
analgesic solution.
Acnillcs tendor
The complete desensitization of the distal
hindlimb
Long digita! fl.
The technique of nerve block of the hindlimb
sometimes works extremely well but is urreliable,
especially for removal of cutaneous sensation
(Westhues & Fristch, 1960). Westhues and Fristch
described techniques for blocking the tibial and
peroneal (fibular) nerves.
FIG. I1.6 Sites for injection about the peroneal nerve on
Tbiol nerve
the lateral aspect and the tibial nerve on the medial aspect
Injection is made about 1.5 cm above the point of
of the horse's hindlimb.
the tarsus, in the groove between the gastro-
memius and the deep digital flexor tendons.
proximal to the tibiotarsal joint will effectively
Palpation of the nerve at this site is facilitated by
block the saphenous nerve.
holding up the foot and slightly flexing the leg.
Block of the tibial nerve above the hock, and of
although the injection is best made with the limb
the deep peroneal (fibular) nerve, desensitizes the
bearing weight. Care must be taken to inject deep
plantar metatarsus, the medial and lateral aspects of
to the subcutaneous fascia or only the superficial
the fetlock and whole digit. To produce a complete
branch of the nerve will be affected. Some 20 ml of
block distal to the hock, these two nerves must be
local analgesic solution should be injected at this
injected together with the saphenous nerve, the
site through a 2.5 cm, 20 gauge (0.9 mm) needle
superficial peroneal (fibular) nerve and the caudal
that has been placed beneath the fascia.
cutaneous nerve (a branch of the tibial nerve).
Peroneol (fibulor) nerve
Accidents and complications
The superficial and deep branches of this nerve
Sudden movement by the animal, while inserting
are best blocked simultaneously in the groove
the needle or during injection, may cause the shaft
between the tendons of the long and lateral digital
of the needle to break from the hub. The accident is
extensors about 10cm proximal to the lateral
especially liable to occur if an attempt is made to
malleolus of the tibia. First a 3.75 cm, 22 gauge
carry out the operation without sedating or twitch-
(0.7 mm) needle is introduced subcutaneously and
ing a nervous or fractious animal. A sufficient
10ml of the local analgesic solution injected
length of needle may remain exposed for it to be
through it to block the superficial nerve. The
gripped with forceps and withdrawn. Removal
needle must then be inserted another 2-3 cm to
will be facilitated by raising the limb, and thus eas-
penetrate the deep fascia and about 1.0-1.5 ml of
ing the tension of the skin. Should the needle be
local analgesic solution injected (Fig. 11.6) around
the deep branch.
needle into the subcutaneous connective tissue,
provoke an insensitive weal, and make an incision
1 cm or so long, directly over the broken needle to
Sophenous nerve
expose it.
The deposition of 5 ml of local analgesic solution
 Although horses can perform fast work after
on the dorsal aspect of the median saphenous vein
surgical neurectomy, care should be taken that a
264 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
horse under the influence of palmar/plantar block
 is not exercised vigorously, for incoordinate move-
ment after acute loss of sensation may result in
bone fracture. (Cases involving the proximal and
 distal phalanges were reported by J. G. Wright in
the 1st edition of this book.)
Local analgesia for castration
There are three methods in common use for desen-
sitizing the scrotum, testicle and spermatic cord by
injection of local analgesics but for all of them it is
essential that the animal is properly restrained ol
sedated if the operator is not to be injured when
carrying them out on the standing animal. The an
imal is placed with its right side against a wall or
partition and if not sedated a twitch is applied to
its upper lip. After preparation of the skin of the
scrotum, prepuce and medial aspect of the thighs,
the operator stands with his left shoulder pressed
lightly against the caudal part of the animal's left
chest wall. The neck of the scrotum on the right
side is gripped with the left hand and the testicle
drawn well down until the skin of the scrotum is
tense (Fig. 11.7).
FlG. Il.7 Injection into the substance of the testicles
after linear infiltration of the scrotal tissues.
Method 1
 A 19 gauge (1.1 mm) needle is quickly thrust into
Method 3
the substance of the testicle to a depth of 3-4 cm
A long (12-15cm) 19 gauge (1.1mm) needle is
and 30-35 ml of 2% lignocaine injected. When an
thrust through the testicle and directed into the
adequate amount of lignocaine has been injected
spermatic cord while 20-25 ml 2% ligmocaine are
the testicle feels firm. The procedure is repeated
 being injected. After treatment of both spermatic
for the left testicle, and local analgesic solution is
cords the scrotal skin is infiltrated.
injected along the median raphe of the scrotum.
After about 10 minutes has elapsed castration can
To infiltrate the scrotal skin it is important that the
be carried out painlessly.
direction of the needle shall be almost parallel to the
skin to ensure that its point lies in the subcutaneous
connective tissue, for if it enters the dartos or the
Method 2
substance of the testicle itself, difficulty may be
The spermatic cord is grasped with the fingers just
sh iem 'pue unos a uau u pauaaxa
above the testicle and a 5cm 19 gauge (1.1mm)
 more important, the skin does not become anal-
needle thrust into the subcutaneous tissues of that
 gesic. The animal usually moves as the needle is
region. The needle is kept stationary to avoid pen-
 inserted and the operator must be prepared for this.
 etration of blood vessels and about 20 ml of 2% lig-
Some right-handed operators prefer to stand on
nocaine injected around each spermatic cord. The
the right side of the horse, with the left hand hold-
scrotal skin is injected along the line of the pro-
 ing the scrotum or spermatic cord, so that the left
posed incisions. This method does not seem as
 arm is against the stifle and affords some measure
effective as the one described above.
 of protection against a kick. The person holding
THE HORSE265
the twitch should stand on the same side as the
operator. It is interesting to note that many equine
practitioners assert that a twitch applied around
 Jo amseau auos aonpoid oi sieadde dil 1addn au
analgesia and is not simply a distraction or counter-
irritant. It may be relevant that the midpoint in the
midline between the upper lip and the nose is, in
fact, a well-recogmized acupuncture point.
ParAVErtebral ANaLGeSIA
A thoracolumbar paravertebral block of T18, L1
and L2 segmental nerves provides useful anaes-
thesia of skin, muscles and peritoneum of the
FlG. Il.8 Location of the site for paravertebral block of
paralumbar fossa, and it is an excellent method of
L2. A line extended vertically upward from the most
amalgesia for procedures such as flank laparotomy
caudal point of the last rib passes over the transverse
or for laparoscopy in the standing horse (Fig. 11.8)
process of L3. A needle inserted 3-6 cm (depending on
(Moon & Suter, 1993). L3 should not be blocked, as
size of the horse) from the midline over L3 should strike
 in horses it provides some innervation to the hind
the transverse process; L2 nerve can be located by
limbs, and its block may cause ataxia.
redirecting the needletopass anteriorto the process.
The basic anatomy of the spinal nerves resemb
tion to ensure that the needle is not in a blood ves-
les that of cattle, each nerve bifurcating shortly
sel, 20 mls of 2% lignocaine is slowly infiltrated,
after leaving the spinal canal, the dorsal branch
half 2.5 cm below the inter-transverse ligament,
supplying the skin and superficial tissues, whilst
and the remainder 2.5 cm above to block the dorsal
the ventral branch passes beneath the inter-trans-
branch of the nerve. Skarda (1996) points out that it
verse ligament, and innervates the muscle layers
is easy to enter the peritoneum and that this is
and peritoneum. Thus, as with cattle, it is neces
detected by a loss of resistance (as it penetrates the
sary to block both dorsal and ventral branches of
transverse ligament) and sometimes by hearing air
each spinal nerve if adequate analgesia is to be
being aspirated through the needle. Should this
obtained. In cattle the landmarks for injection are
happen, the needle should be withdrawn to a
found by palpation of the transverse process of the
retroperitoneal position, before the local anaes-
lumbar vertebrae, but these are almost impossible
thetic is deposited. The procedure is repeated to
to locate in horses. However, Moon and Suter
block nerves L1 and T13. The sites for injection are
(1993) point out that a line from the most caudal
located by measuring 5-6 cm anterior from the
portion of the last rib (easily located in almost all
previous site (less in ponies), and confirmed by
horses) and perpendicular to the long axis of the
 the needle impinging on a transverse process of 
spine passes across the transverse process of L3.
the vertebrae.
Thus, to block the spinal nerve L2, the site chosen
With practice, the technique is simple and reli-
 is over the transverse process of L3, and approxim-
able, although on occasions analgesia of the ven-
ately 5-6 cm lateral to the midline. A small bleb of
tral area of the paralumbar fossa is inadequate for
local anaesthetic is placed in the skin, then 5 ml of
surgery, and local infiltration become necessary.
2% lignocaine (or other suitable local analgesic
agent) infiltrated in the muscle. A long spinal nee-
dle (eg. 18 G x 7-15 cm) is then introduced vertic-
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
hh ssaod asraase a uo saud n n a
withdrawn a little, then redirected slightly cra-
Caudal and more anterior blocks
rially, until the inter-transverse ligament between
 In horses the caudal epidural block is performed
L2 and L3 is penetrated (felt as an increase, then
 by entering between the first and second coccygeal
sudden decrease, in resistance). Following aspira-
vertebrae (Fig. 11.9), the spinal cord and its
266ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
meninges ending in the midsacral region. The
depression between the first and second coccygeal
dorsal spinous processes can usually be felt with
the finger when the tail is raised, even in the heavy
breeds, about 2.5 cm cranial to the commencement
of the tail hairs, although in fat animals it may be
 impossible to detect any of the sacral or coccygeal
dorsal spinous processes. Upward flexion at the
sacrococcygeal articulation is seldom discernible;
in fact, in many animals this joint is fused A line
drawn over the back joining the two coxofemoral
joints crosses the midline at the level of the sacro-
coccygeal joint. Immediately behind this may be
palpated the dorsal spinous process of the first
coccygeal bone, and the site for insertion of the
FlG. I1.9 Caudal epidural block in the horse.The needle
may be inserted at right angles to the skin surface between
needle is the space immediately caudal to this. The
the first and second caudal vertebrae (B), or it may be
 interarcual space is smaller than in the ox and may
introduced further caudally over the cranial boder of the
be more difficult to locate with the needle, particu-
second coccygeal vertebra and inclined at an angle of about
larly in welldeveloped or fat animals in which the
30° to the horizontal to advance up the neural canal (A).
root of the tail is well covered by muscle or fat.
Sometimes it is possible to detect a 'popping' sensa-
largest of horses. Analgesia takes much longer to
tion as the interarcual ligament is penetrated. The
develop than in cattle and unless allowance is
surest evidence, however, that the canal has been
made for this it may be erroneously concluded that
entered is the almost complete absence of resist-
injection was not made correctly. Analgesia will
ance to injection of the local analgesic solution
usually be present after about 20 minutes and per-
Most anaesthetists introduce the needle at right
sists for 35-50 minutes depending on whether or
angles to the general contour of the croup until the
not the solution used contained a vasoconstrictor.
floor of the neural canal is struck, but in the method
Caudal block is indicated to overcome straining
of Browne the point of the needle is inserted at the
during manipulative correction of the simpler
caudal part of the intercoccygeal depression and
forms of malpresentation of the fetus, for amputa-
directed cranioventrally at an angle of 30° from the
 tion of the tail (an operation which in the UK may
horizontal so that its point will glide along the
only be performed for surgical reasons), and for
floor of the neural canal and the needle can be
 operations about the anus, perineum and vulva,
inserted to its full length (the steep cranioventral
 suture of wounds, operation for prolapsed rectum
direction of the canal at this point allows this). It is
 and Caslick's operation for vaginal wind sucking.
probable, however, that the first method, whereby
the needle is inserted at a 60 ° angle from the hori-
zontal, is easier to perform. Where it is likely that a
Anteriorblock
caudal block will need extending in duration, a
Local anaesthetic agents injected epidurally at the
catheter can be placed through the needle and into
caudal region in doses sufficient to cause anterior
the epidural space. An 18G Tuohy needle may be
epidural block have no place in equine anaesthesia
placed as described above, and a 20G epidural
because of the hindlimb paralysis produced.
catheter advanced through this. Whichever type of
However, with modern epidural catheters, anteri-
needle is used, the skin and subcutaneous tissues
or block is technically possible to perform; small
should be made insensitive by the injection of a
quantities of local anaesthetic agents being
small weal of local analgesic solution.
deposited in the region of the dermatomes to be
Ten millilitres of 2% lignocaine or 5 ml of 2%
 anaesthetized. Catheters inserted in the coccygeal
mepivacine, with or without a vasoconstrictor, is
 region may be advanced at least as far forward as
usually sufficient to produce caudal block in the
the lumbosacral junction (Sysel et al., 1996). The
THE HORSE 267
technique has been used to provide long term
 domestic animal. In particular, cardiopulmonary
analgesia with agents other than local anaesthetic
 dysfunction, nerve and ischaemic muscle damage
drugs, which reduces the danger of unwanted
appear more pronounced and can be difficult to
hindlimb weakness.
avoid. The problems are often inter-related and
seem to follow directly from the actions of the
anaesthetic agents themselves, or from interfer-
Subarochnoid andesthesid
ence with mechanisms existing in conscious
Subarachnoid catheterization in the horse is pra-
horses to compensate for respiratory or cardiovas-
cticable (Skarda, 1996), and enables segmental
 cular changes induced by recumbency. Other
analgesia to be provided if the catheter, inserted at
problems relate to the horse's size, its tempera-
the lumbosacral junction, is advanced until it 
 ment and its tendency to panic. It is necessary to
reaches the required dermatome. However, the
anticipate the problems from the beginning of the
 technique is complicated, and paravertebral thora-
anaesthetic protocol in order to take action neces
columbar analgesia is usually preferable for surgi-
sary to avoid or reduce them; hence they will be
cal analgesia of the sublumbar region.
considered in general at this stage.
Use of other agents
PROBLEMS RELATING TO SIZE AND
The use of morphine (p.257) and α, adrenoceptor
TEMPERAMENT
agonists (p.252) by epidural injection has been dis-
When handling horses the safety not only of the
cussed above. Where such agents are required to
horse, but also of the handlers must be considered,
give surgical analgesia it is usual to combine them
and methods of control used must reflect the tem-
with small doses of local analgesics. The aim of
 r    a  
such combinations is to combine the rapid onset of
trained personnel. Sedative premedication aids
local analgesics with the prolonged pain relieving
placement of catheters and the smoothness of
 properties of opioids and α2 adrenoceptor agonists,
 induction of anaesthesia. The sheer weight and
to reduce the dose of any single agent to below that
 bulk of a large horse makes it difficult to handle,
which may cause systemic effects and, hopefully, to
 transport or position for surgery without adequate
reduce the dose of local analgesics to that which
manpower or mechanical aids. Many unconscious
will not cause ataxia or hindlimb paralysis.
horses are transported for short distances (e.g.
The combination most commonly used is that
from the operating table to recovery box) sus-
of xylazine and lignocaine (Grubb et al., 1992) but
 pended in a net or by their hobbled legs from an
many similar combinations ha ve been employed.
 Overhead hoist. Other methods of moving uncon-
Opioids have also been combined with local anal-
 scious horses include trolleys which may consti-
gesics. Butorphanol (0.04 mg /kg) and lignocaine
tute the floor of the anaesthetic induction box and
sey aneds [empida aul oui uaaio (8x/Sw gz'0)
may then become the operating table top.
been reported to give prolonged analgesia without
In clinical practice anaesthesia in the adult
the horses showing ataxia (Farney et al., 1991).
horse is amost always induced by i.v. agents,
However, it must be remembered that only preserv-
 although in young foals it may be induced with
ative-free solutions should be administered into
 inhalation agents. Breed is often allied to tempera-
a ax p a - ads gmida a
ment and must not be ignored in the selection of an
easily obtainable in this form, hence their popular-
anaesthetic technique. A method suitable for a
ity for use by this route
phlegmatic warmblood, trotter or quarter horse
may be totally unsuitable for a very excitable
young Thoroughbred or Arab.
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
 Ideally the horse should regain its feet as rapidly
as possible at the first attempt, with minimal ataxia.
General anaesthesia in horses appears beset with
 Unfortunately this is not easily achieved following
prolonged anaesthesia. Although prolonged
268 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
recumbency is not desirable, it is now appreciated
morbidity and mortality are cardiovascular
that in some cases ultra-fast recoveries may be of
depression, the development of a large alveolar-
poor quality because the horse tries to arise whilst
'pue ((od (e-v)) suaipeia uoisuai uasAxo eirane
still disorientated. The best quality recoveries are
probably resulting from the first two factors,
seen where the drugs given during anaesthesia are
postanaesthetic myopathy.
eliminated in such a manner that the horse does
not try to rise until it is ready, and it may be neces-
Cardiovascular effects
sary to use sedation to increase the duration of
recumbency. Animals which are unused to people
 Horses in which anaesthesia is maintained using
may try to rise too soon, but the young, well han-
volatile anaesthetic agents often suffer from
dled but excitable Thoroughbred colt (which
hypotension, which may be the result of vasodila-
requires very careful handling for induction of
tion and/or a fall in CO. A number of studies have
anaesthesia) often remains recumbent for a consid-
investigated the effects of volatile anaesthetics
erable time, and then recovers remarkably well.
 alone, i.e. including volatile anaesthetic induction
Ponies exhibit poor quality recovery as often as do
(Steffey & Howland, 1978a; Dunlop et al., 1987;
large horses, but it is the heavier animal which is
Steffey et al., 1987a, b, c; 1990; 1993). These invest-
most likely to suffer from serious injury as a result.
igations have demonstrated that halothane
Other causes of poor quality of recovery from
depresses the equine heart in a dose-dependent
anaesthesia include nerve and muscle damage
fashion. Accommodation occurs and, at a given
induced during anaesthesia, and untreated post-
end-tidal concentration, CO and heart rate rise as
operative pain.
anaesthesia progresses, possibly due to the release
of catecholamines, although the cause of this
release remains uncertain. The time course of this
DISTURBANCES IN CARDIOPULMONarY
accommodation is more prolonged (over five or
FUNCTION
 more hours) than would be encountered during
Disturbances of cardiopulmonary function have
normal clinical practice. Accommodation is more
long been recognized in anaesthetized horses but,
 pronounced in spontaneously breathing animals,
in spite of much research, their cause remains
 probably as a result of hypercapnia. Anaesthesia
ucertain. Because general anaesthesia necessarily
with isoflurane or sevoflurane (Steffey &
involves recumbency there has been some debate
Howland, 1980; Aida et al., 1996) also results in
as to the relative importance of the roles of recum-
hypotension, mainly arising from vasodilation as,
bency and of anaesthetic agents in their genesis,
at eqi-MAC values, CO is better maintained than
but in conscious experimental animals the car-
with halothane. However, even with these newer
diopulmonary disturbances produced by lateral
 agents increasing the concentration still results in a
recumbency have been found to be minimal (Hall
dose related fall in CO.
1984; Ruch et al., 1984). The effects of posture can-
Such experiments as detailed above provide
not be ignored for disturbances are more severe
useful pharmacological information about the
following supine rather than lateral recumbency in
 volatile anaesthetic agents in horses, but are not
 anaesthetized horses; however it is probable that
typical of normal clinical anaesthetic practice, in
while various postures may magnify effects they
which anaesthesia is induced by i.v. agents. With
do not initiate them.
the i.v. techniques most commonly employed, the
From the evidence available today it seems
introduction of the volatile anaesthetic agent
likely that any disturbances resulting from recum-
results in marked hypotension, in experimental
bency are minimized in conscious animals by the
situations mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) fre-
operation of compensatory mechanisms that fail
quently falling to below 40mmHg (Gleed &
or become depressed when an anaesthetic is
 Dobson, 1990; Lee et al., 1998a). With halothane,
administered. Their failure or depression is mani-
these minimal levels are reached 30-40 minutes
fested in several ways but probably the most
 after anaesthetic induction, and are considerably
important results which affect equine anaesthetic
 lower than the minimal MAP of 70-80mm Hg
THE HORSE 269
which occurred with 1 MAC in most of the experi-
with other agents. The increased (A-a)PO2 may be
mental studies in which halothane was used as a
the result of a combination of several factors and
sole agent. ABP slowly rises through vasoconstric-
these have been the subject of many investigations
tion over the next hour, but CO remains
in recent years
uchanged or may even fall. Similar changes in
The PaO2 depends on the size of the animal and
MAP also occur with other volatile anaesthetics,
its position during anaesthesia (Hall, 1983), but it
although with these newer agents CO is better 
 is relatively unaffected by the degree of respiratory
maintained. The relative effects of the different i.v.
depression produced by the anaesthetic agent.
anaesthetic techniques on the subsequent cardio-
Many studies have reported relative or absolute
vascular actions of the volatile anaesthetic agents
decreases in PaO2 with or without increased
have not been fully investigated, but the fact that
PaCO2 levels. Moreover, there has been shown to
an induction technique itself does not cause car-
be no statistically significant difference in
diovascular depression does not mean that its
(A-a)PO2 in a series of animals anaesthetized once
combination with a volatile agent will not do so.
with spontaneous breathing and on another occa-
With many total i.v. techniques, blood pressure is
sion with IPPV to normocapnia (Hall et al., 1968a,
well maintained, but this does not mean that there
b). One notable feature is that the (A-a)PO2 gradi-
is no cardiovascular depression.
ent does not increase significantly with time
 In clinical practice, although hypotension may
(Gillespie et al., 1969).
occur it is rarely as severe as that seen experiment-
When a horse is disconnected from a breathing
ally, as surgical stimulation causes APB to rise.
circuit containing an O2-rich mixture of gases and
However, this rise is due to vasoconstriction, and
allowed to breathe air, PaO2 of around 50 mmHg
CO may fall, probably because of the increased
(6.5kPa) is common. This may represent a blood
afterload (Wagner et al., 1992). To maintain blood
O2 saturation of around 90% (Clerbaux et al., 1986)
flow an adequate perfusion pressure must be cou-
but the steep part of the dissociation curve starts
pled with good CO, and unfortunately CO cur-
about here and any accident such as temporary
rently is not easy to measure. Pink mucous
obstruction of the airway can have very serious
membranes and a rapid capillary refill time indic-
consequences. It is not uncommon for frank
 ate good peripheral blood flow. Venous blood oxy-
J! pojrad Aiaaonai aul ul paaiasqo aq ol sisoueAs
gen values also give a guide as to the adequacy of
 Oxygen is not administered but it must be remem-
perfusion. Although, ideally, mixed venous sam-
bered that the PaO2 may fall to 40 mmHg (5.3 kPa)
ples are necessary, in the horse the oxygen tension
without cyanosis becoming apparent if the blood
of jugular venous blood approximates (Wetmore et
flow to the mucous membranes is adequate. To
al., 1987) and values above 5kPa (37.5mmHg)
 improve the situation O2 must be insufflated at a
indicate the adequacy of oygenation and therefore
minimum rate of 151/min. The PaO2 apparently
of perfusion of the peripheral tissue.
recovers to normal levels as soon as the animal
regains its feet.
 Factors other than hypoventilation which may
Pulmonary changes
contribute to the large (A-a)PO, include diffusion
Amajor problem encountered in equine anaesthe-
 defects in the lungs, right-to-left intrapulmonary
 sia is that the arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) is
vascular shunts, mismatching of ventilation and
always much lower than might be expected from
perfusion in the lungs, atelectasis and a fall in CO
the inspired oxygen tensions (PiO2), i.e. there is a
without a corresponding fall in tissue oxygen con-
large (A-a)PaO2. A normal (A-a) of about 18
sumption.
mmHg (2.4kPa) in standing horses breathing air is
doubled in anaesthetized, laterally recumbent ani-
Diffusion impairment
mals. Most investigations concerned
with
(A-a)PO2 gradients have been carried out under
There is no evidence that diffusion impairment
-a reus inq eisauisae uaxau
occurs so this must be regarded as an unlikely
ences have been found during general anaesthesia
cause of hypoxaemia.
270 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG.I1.1I Opacity ofthe lower lung seen in a
radiograph taken at full expiration after 20 minutes of
FIG. I1.l0 Slices of the lungs of a large horse that died
halothane anaesthesia in right decubitus (from
following anaesthesia.The horse had undergone 3 hours of
McDonell,W.N., Hall, L.W & Jeffcott, L.B. ( 1979), with
surgery in dorsal decubitus,then been placed in lateral
permission).
decubitus for recovery. The lung dependent during lateral
decubitus (lower picture) shows a large region of total
recumbent horses under halothane anaesthesia,
collapse, while the lung which was uppermost in recovery
compared with about 5% in the standing animal
still shows considerable areas of collapse around the hilar
(Gillespie et al., 1969). Decrease in lung volume
region from the period of time in which the horse was in
short of collapse may not have all that an adverse
dorsal decubitus.
effect on alveolar ventilation for the alveolar com-
Atelectasis
pliance curve predicts that a small alveolus will
Progressive atelectasis is unlikely because in
in intra-alveolar pressure.
horses the (A-a)PO2 develops very soon after the
Radiographic studies (McDonell et al., 1979)
induction of anaesthesia and thereafter remains
 and blood samples drawn from pulmonary veins
relatively constant. There is no doubt, however,
through implanted catheters in conscious and
that atelectasis does occur for total collapse of
anaesthetized animals in lateral decubitus (Hall
regions of the dependent lung is commonly seen at
et al., 1968b; Hall, 1979) have afforded further con-
pazausaue am Sup sasrou go Asdone
firmation of the impairment of function in the
(Fig. 11.10). This collapse is presumably due to
(1l't hi) sasuereadde siydenoipey umi ramo
compression of the lung by overlying abdominal
 are suggestive of a greatly reduced volume of the
 and thoracic viscera. A totally collapsed lung acts
lower lung in laterally recumbent animals
as a venous-arterial shunt and can cause marked
(McDonell et al., 1979; Nyman et al., 1990). When a
arterial hypoxaemia. A shunt of 15% of the total horse lies on its side a diffuse radiographic opacity
pulmonary blood flow has been found in laterally
 of the lower lung develops within 20 minutes and
THE HORSE 271
may be due to alveolar collapse, regional pul-
effect on the (A-V)PO2. It is important to note here
monary congestion and/or interstitial oedema.
that the magnitude of the reduction in CO cannot
Spontaneous deep breaths or forced expansion of
be inferred from the ABP and that IPPV may
the lung by compression of an anaesthetic reser-
reduce CO. Indeed, the oxygen tension in mixed
voir bag, both of which might be expected to
venous blood from the pulmonary artery (PvO2) is
reexpand collapsed alveoli, fail to alter the radio-
lower when IPPV is used despite a slight increase
logical appearance. Stolk (1979) demonstrated no
in PaO2, presumably because of an increased
significant increase in the water content of the
 extraction of oxygen from the blood by the tissue --
lower lung and considered that the radiographic
necessitated by the reduced CO - and hence rate of
 opacity must be due to an increased blood content.
tissue perfusion. Because right-to-left intrapul-
The opacity persists for some time after the horse
monary shunt increases from the normal 5% in the
is turned over and this raises the possibility that
standing, awake horse to about 15% under
venous congestion may kink pulmonary veins and
halothane anaesthesia (Gillespie et al., 1969),
hinder the prompt drainage of blood from the
the effect of the shunted blood of lower than
affected lung.
normal PO2 will be to produce noticeable reduc-
tion in the mixed PaO2 of the blood in the left
atrium (PaO2).
Venous odmixture
It would seem unlikely that total collapse of lung
regions resulting in right-to-left vascular shunting
Ling volume
accounts for all the venous admixture which
The larger the lung the greater the stretch across
occurs in anaesthetized horses. A substantial
the airways and the less tendency for closure to
amount must be due to the occurrence of gross
mismatching of ventilation and perfusion in the
way closure starts to occur ('the closing volume′) is
lungs. Some indication of this may be obtained
important, for, if airways close, gas trapped distal
from the physiological deadspace:tidal volume
to the point of closure soon becomes depleted of
ratio. In most mammals this ratio is about 0.3 but
oxygen and the blood perfusing the region gets
in anaesthetized horses it is over 0.5 (Hall et al.,
through unoxygenated to join the blood from
1968a).
other regions and reduces the mixed PaO2. Studies
The large physiological deadspace: tidal vol-
strongly suggest that during general anaesthesia
ume ratio probably explains why IPPV is relatively
the horse's lung volume is reduced to a level at 
ineffective in decreasing the (A-a)PO2 in horses.
which airway closure may occur and that the
The augmented tidal volume resulting from IPPV
-msai Ae rae ai ui aumoa Sumi u uon pa
merely increases ventilation to those regions of the
bent horse was not equally distributed between
lung which are already overventilated in relation
the lower and upper lungs (McDonell, 1974). In
to their perfusion, i.e. those contributing to the
both right and left lateral decubitus there was a
physiological deadspace. While even in horses the
 greater reduction in the volume of the lower lung
increased ventilation will remove carbon dioxide
and pulling the legs together in hobbles reduced
from the lungs and keep the PaCO2 within normal
lung volume still further.
limits, it will not greatly increase the PaO2.
The effect of airway closure on PaO, might be
mitigated by collateral ventilation from neigh-
bouring alveoli but although anatomical studies
Effect of cardiac output
(Tyler et al., 1971) indicate that this is possible, it is
CO is usually reduced under anaesthesia but tis-
unlikely to occur in horses. McDonell (1974) con-
sue O2 consumption may remain substantially
 cluded that recumbency rather than anaesthesia
unchanged. The resulting arterio-mixed venous
 was responsible for the reduction of lung volume
PaO2 tension difference, (A-V)PO2, thus increases
found in anaesthetized ponies but more recent
and venous blood passing through the anatomical
 work has suggested that the anaesthetic agent may
 e su asde n go sun no pu
also play a part (Watmey et al., 1987).
272 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
 Confirmation of serious impairment of expan-
saturation is reduced by pulmonary disease, but it
sion of the lowermost lung has been obtained from
 seems likely that, because of its dome-like shape,
histological examination of very rapidly frozen
only the upper part of the horse's diaphragm is
lung regions. Also, from the histological appear-
susceptible to displacement by end-expiratory
ances it would seem that a reduction of the tether-
 pressure, and thus lung volume will only increase
 ing effect of lung parenchyma on extra-alveolar
 in regions which are already well ventilated. The
vessels might well be responsible for the increased
 indiscriminate use of end-expiratory pressure cer-
resistance to blood flow in thislung (Hall, 1979)
tainly has no place in routine equine anaesthesia
It might be thought that increasing the airway
and, by reducing CO, it may even be harmful in
 pressure to above atmospheric pressure (positive
some circumstances.
End-expiratory pressure or PEEP) will, by increas-
ing the lung volume to an amount equal to the
Phormocologicaltreatments
product of the total compliance and the pressure,
decrease the tendency for airways to close and
Hypoventilation is not the major cause of anaes-
thus raise the PaO. However, the imposition of a
thetic-induced hypoxia in the horse, and indeed in
10 and 20 cmH2O (1 and 2kPa) expiratory resist-
 tn ra 'x sas s
ance by the insertion of a water trap in the expirat-
 appears to be the respiratory drive under anaes-
ory limb of a circle absorber fails to improve the
thesia (Schatzmann, 1982; Steffey et al., 1992). Thus
PaO2 in horses breathing spontaneously under
 it is not surprising that respiratory stimulants
halothane/ oxygen anaesthesia (Hall & Trim, 1975),
Suandu ie aanaa are wndexp se yns
 and indeed usually produced immediate respirat-
oxygenation in anaesthetized horses (Taylor,
 ory arrest. Broadly similar results were obtained in
1990). Gleed and Dobson (1990) reported that the
 -asane usaandiena / aieqreq apin saso
B2 agonist clenbuterol (0.8 mg/kg) was very effec
sia (Beadle ef al., 1975), but in this second study
tive in increasing PaO2 in dorsally recumbent
arterial oxygen saturation was always over 95%. It
halothane anaesthetized horses and their work
is possible that some beneficial effect of expiratory
was confirmed in clinical cases (Keegan et al.,
resistance might be found where arterial oxygen
1991). Other studies failed to reproduce these
FIG. I 1.12 Postanaesthetic myopathy shown in the forelimb. Characteristic posture of pain with head thrown back and
up when made to walk.In this case there was hard swelling of the shoulder muscles and triceps.The posture due to pain
varies with the muscles involved.
THE HORSE 273
results (Doddam et al., 1993; Lee et al., 1998b) and it
 explains why horses may appear unaffected when
is probable that both positioning and the anaes-
they first rise, the condition becoming apparent
thetic technique employed influence the efficacy of
over the ensuing hours.
clenbuterol in raising PaO2. In some cases the
In order to limit the occurrence of myopathy,
injection of clenbuterol is followed by a transient
three factors are necessary:
fall in PaO2, presumably because of the increased
(a) The time of anaesthesia should be kept as
O2 demand associated with the side effects of
short as possible and anaesthetic time should
sweating and tachycardia. Thus the routine use of
clenbuterol to increase PaO2 in anaesthetized
never be wasted.
(b) Intracompartmental pressure should be
horses cannot be recommended for use in clinical
reduced to the minimum. The intracompartmental
practice.
pressure in the triceps muscles of the dependent
limb in a horse positioned on a hard surface may
Muscle and nerve damage
reach as high as 50 mm Hg; positioning on a soft
surface reduces this (Lindsay et al., 1980; 1985).
There is an incidence of up to 6.4% of lameness fol-
However, the weight of a horse or of one of its
lowing anaesthesia in the horse (Klein,1978;
limbs can compress veins while patent arteries
Richey et al, 1990), much of which is due to damage
allow blood to flow into muscle capillaries, thus
to nerves and muscles during recumbency. In the
resulting in a rapid increase in intracompart-
dlinical situation it is not always easy to distingish
between the two syndromes (hence the term
mental pressure to that of arterial pressure (Taylor
& Young, 1990) and the total failure of all muscle
'radial paralysis' was once used to describe the
condition now known to be caused by a triceps
perfusion; this is probably the reason for myo-
o sq (n o a-u a  
myopathy (Fig 11.12) and it is probable that it some
laterally recumbent horses.
cases both occur together.
(c) Blood supply to the muscles should be
increased. It has been routine to assume that
Postanaesthetic myopathy (rhobdomyolysis)
this means increasing ABP, and certainly it is
necessary to raise this above the'closing pressure?
It is now generally accepted that the common form
within the muscle compartment. However,
of postanaesthetic myopathy is due to muscle
once ABP is above this ‘closing pressure', then
ischaemia caused by inadequate muscle perfusion
further improvement in muscle blood flow de-
(Trim & Mason, 1973; Lindsay et al., 1980; 1985;
pends on increasing CO (Lee et al., 1998a,b,c).
1989). Clinical surveys (Klein, 1978; Richey et al.,
Positive inotropes such as dobutamine improve
1990) have demonstrated that the incidence of the
CO, ABP and muscle blood flow whilst vaso-
condition is increased by duration of anaesthesia
constrictor agents increase ABP but have no action
and by periods of hypotension. In experimental
circumstances it can be can be induced by pro-
on peripheral perfusion (Fig 11.13).
longed (three plus hours) of hypotensive anaesthe-
The condition described above fails to explain
sia (Grandy et al., 1987; Lindsay et al., 1989). The
all cases of myopathy, and it is probable that
failure of perfusion to the muscles is a typical
the condition is multifactorial. Klein (1978) con-
'compartmental syndrome'. i.e. increased pressure
sidered that there were two distinct types of anaes-
within the space limited by thefascial sheath of the
thetic induced myopathy, the compartmental
muscle compromises the circulation. When intra-
syndrome and a more generalized form which
compartmental muscular pressure increases to the
she considered was more likely to occur in very
point at which the local circulation fails, the mus-
fit animals; the authors have seen two cases of
cle will become ischaemic. Damage will occur at
acute generalized rhabdomyolysis occurring in
reperfusion and this results in swelling and a fur-
horses one-two days after anaesthesia, in which
ther increase in compartmental pressure, thus
 post-mortem findings resembled capture myopa-
worsering the situation. The potential for continu-
thy. The condition has much in common with
ing damage at reperfusion (Serteyn et al., 1990)
equine azoturia. It has been postulated that the
274 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
120 
Mean arterial
nutritional status and resulting intracellular pH
blood pressure
at the time of anaesthesia is another factor in-
100
volved, but no survey has found a sigrificant link
80-
between the animals' nutritional status and anaes-
 thetic-related myopathy. It would appear the gen-
60-
eralized condition is sporadic and unpredictable
in occurrence.
40-
The treatment for myopathy is mainly symptom-
20-
atic: analgesia (the condition is very painful),seda-
tion if necessary, prevention of further damage,
0-
fluids (to prevent renal damage) and a great deal
-20
20
40
60
80
of tender loving care. As much of the damage
Cardiacindex
 occurs at reperfusion there could be a role for the
administration of free radical scavengers, but as
6
yet there is no evidence as to their efficacy. It is
probable that by the time the condition is diag-
nosed, the damage is already present.
Neuropothy
Nerves may be damaged during the anaesthetic
process by the effects of pressure, of stretching,
and by ischaemia. Peripheral neuropathies (such
-20
20
40
60
80
as facial nerve damage through pressure from the
400-
Intramuscular
headcollar (Fig 11.14) are easy to diagnose, but
blood flow
aq Ae (aeep aarau leray a) sas ao
6
time
300-
from
品
200
100
1
-20
20
40
60
80
Time (min)
Control
 Dobutamine
Phenylephrine
FIG. I1.13 Cardiac index,mean arterial blood pressure
(MAP) and intramuscular blood flow in the dependent
triceps muscle in 6 halothane-anaesthetized ponies. On
different occasions the ponies were given increasing doses
of infusions of one of the following: saline (control),
phenylephrine or dobutamine. Dobutamine increased MAP,
cardiac index and intramuscular blood flow, but whilst
phenylephrine was equally effective in increasing MAP, it
FIG. I1.14 Facial nerve paresis resulting from pressure.
failed to improve either cardiac index or intramuscular
In this case the damage resulted from inadequate padding
blood flow (adapted from Y.H. Lee, et al.,(1998).
on the operating table, but more typically it results from
pressure exerted by a head collar.
THE HORSE 275
difficult to differentiate from myopathy, and
Extremely fit horses on high levels of nutrition,
indeed it is probable that the two conditions fre-
fed on grain-rich diets, and horses entirely grass
quently occur concurrently. Neuropathy is not
fed seem particularly difficult to manage. They
 painful, but if it involves the motor supply to more
 often develop abdominal distension during anaes-
than one limb, the horse will be unable to rise.
thesia even after careful fasting and there is a clin-
Contused nerves may regain their function once
ical impression, unsupported by investigational
the surrounding swelling has subsided, so symp-
data, that they are more prone to develop circulat-
tomatic treatment should be combined with good
ory and other problems. Although there appears to
nursing.
be little scientific justification for it, many experi-
A very occasional but disastrous occurrence fol-
enced anaesthetists and equine surgeons are firm
lbwing anaesthesia is spinal malacia. The problem
believers in the old practice of 'letting down' an
has only been reported to occur in young horses
animal before subjecting it to anaesthesia and
positioned on their back for a short procedure.
operation, i.e. reducing the protein and energy
Most, but not all cases have occurred in heavy
content of its diet for some 7-10 days before anaes-
horses (Brearley et al., 1986; Lam et al., 1995; Trim,
thesia. In the authors' opinion, to postpone all but
1997). Sometimes the horse fails to regain its feet
the most urgent of operations until a horse which
following anaesthesia, other times it will stand, but
is in full training has lost the peak of its fitness
an ascending paralysis commences. The condition
from being fed a less rich diet certainly does no
appears totally painless; many cases have been
' puawon o qn aae A pue 
maintained by good nursing for several days but
Unfortunately, economic considerations often
the condition always progresses and euthanasia
demand that horses be returned to full work with
is inevitable. The cause of this condition is
the minimum of delay and this period of therapeu-
unknown.
tic inactivity is not well received by many owners.
Shoes should be removed before anaesthesia, or
at least covered with adhesive plaster, to prevent
PreParaTIoN for GEneraL
damage to flooring or the animal itself in the
ANAESTHESIA
recovery period. Surgeons may request that the
The preanaesthetic examination and the general
horse receives prophylactic treatment for tetanus
principles of preparation prior to anaesthesia
and is given antibiotics prior to the induction
described in Chapter 1 are, of course, applicable to
anaesthesia. Many of the antibiotic agents may
horses, but there are some aspects of preanaes-
influence the effects of anaesthetic drugs.
thetic preparation of these animals which warrant
 Gentamycin and other antibiotics of this group
further consideration.
will increase the length of action of neuromuscular
blocking agents. The i.v. injection of penicillin
causes marked hypotension (through vasodila-
General considerations
tion) for approximately 40 minutes (Hubbell et al.,
To preserve the largest oxygen store in the body
1987) and is best avoided just prior to anaesthesia.
and to minimize gas trapping in the lungs, the FRC
As the cardiovascular effects of most antibiotics
needs to be maintained at the highest possible
 are unknown, their i.v. use immediately prior to
level. Except in emergencies, it is always possible
 anaesthesia should be avoided unless absolutely
to ensure that the animal is fasted before anaes-
 essential to the overall success of the case.
thesia. Fasting for more than 18 hours may result
In emergencies the aim of preparation for
in acidosis, and is probably inadvisable, but it
anaesthesia is to improve the physical status of the
increases the FRC by up to 30%, presumably due
 horse as much as possible, and to make any prepa-
to a reduction in the bulk of the abdominal con-
rations which may reduce the risk of the perioper-
 -uos seo paonpat pue eisagul jo ssol yononut shual
ative process. To detail all such preparations is
tent (McDonell, 1974). Water should always be
beyond the scope of this chapter. Briefly,
available except for the last two hours prior to
 orthopaedic cases may need support to the limb to
anaesthesia.
prevent damage at anaesthetic induction, and
276 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
analgesia and sedation should be chosen to avoid
should be kept low both to limit their duration of
excessive ataxia. Most acute thoracic crises are the
action, and their cardiopulmonary effects in an
result of trauma and horses suffering from chest
 already stressed horse. The effect of these agents
injuries may be agitated, restless and dyspnoeic,
 on gut motility is probably unimportant as it is
and may require an analgesic both for its sake and
 comparatively short acting. Acepromazine, being
to reduce the risk of injury to attendants. Provided
an C-adrenergic blocker, will contribute to
Excessive doses are not used, the potential ability
hypotension in dehydrated or shocked animals
of analgesics to produce respiratory depression
 and is generally not advised if surgery will be nec-
 aq pinous pinu 1o/pue iIv 'paouo1 aq ues
 essary, although doses of up to 0.05 mg/kg are
removed from the pleural cavity by the insertion of
unlikely to do any harm.
a chest drain before general anaesthesia is
The main problem in the preanaesthetic prepa-
induced. In most emergency cases, hypovolaemia
ration of most colic cases is the replacement of
needs to be corrected before induction of anaesthe-
fluids in the dehydrated and possibly shocked
sia. However, where blood loss is acute and the
 animal. Fluid replacement is extremely urgent in
potential for further loss is still present (e.g. haem-
surgical cases if any consistent measure of success
orrhage from the guttural pouch) such replace-
 is to be obtained. Unfortunately, diagnosis is very
ment should be limited prior to anaesthetic
imprecise, and there is an understandable reluct-
Xe anssand pooq ui aseanu ue se uonpu
 ance on the part of both owners and veterinarians
result in the commencement of severe and uncon-
 to spend a considerable sum of money and time on
trollable haemorrhage. In such cases the agents
-adoul aq ci aaord Aedeie A um sass
used for sedation and analgesia should have min-
 able. To overcome this reluctance some acceptable
imal effects (in either direction) on blood pressure.
routine which does not involve replacement of the
Once the horse has been anaesthetized blood pres-
 major part of the fluid deficit prior to anaesthesia is
sure will almost certainly be reduced, and it may
clearly desirable. Our experience of cases in which
then be necessary to administer rapidly high vol-
tympany or violent intractable pain allowed only
umes of fluids.
 minimal preparation indicates that if really vigor-
 ous replacement is carried out once the surgeon has
confirmed that surgical treatment is possible, a suc-
Colic
cessful outcome is quite as likely as in cases treated
The most common equine emergency case pre-
before the induction of anaesthesia. Moreover, in
sented to the anaesthetist is that of colic. Most
cases of intestinal obstruction many are of the opi-
cases of colic presented for surgical treatment have
 nion that massive preoperative infusions are better
already been treated medically and it is important
avoided since much of the fluid infused accumul-
to consider the drugs used, their route of adminis-
 ates in the obstructed intestine, making operation
tration, doses and time of dosing, for they can
more difficult and time consuming because of the
influence the response to subsequent anaesthesia.
greater need for decompression of the bowel.
Pain is usually indicative of gastric and/or intes-
Thus, it is possible that ‘minimal' preparation
tinal distension and of acute ischaemia. Its severity
may make the horse unmanageable
until
Iit
 grounds but it must be emphasized that for suc-
becomes utterly exhausted and pain must be con-
cess it must be carried out in a rational manner.
trolled, although this is not always easy. NSAIDs,
Whenever possible anaesthesia should not be
 in particular flunixin, are widely used and can be
 induced in a colic case until hypovolaemia has
so effective in reducing both the pain of colic and
 been improved and the packed cell volume (PCV)
the signs of toxaemia as to mask the need for sur
 decreased. Tachycardia may persist, due to pain or
 gery (Moore, 1994). Opioids which are often used
toxaemia, even after the blood volume has been
include butorphanol, pethidine (often in very
restored to normal. Hypertonic saline (4 ml/kg i.v.
large doses), methadone and morphine. Xylazine
 of 7.5%) followed by large quantities of Ringer's
and detomidine are usually the most effective
 lactate provides an inexpensive method of treating
agents to provide analgesia in colic, but doses
the hypovolaemia rapidly. Other methods include
THE HORSE 277
the transfusion of plasma or plasma substitutes,
constitute a useful guide. The weight of a horse
such as starch. Acid-base disturbances are seldom
may also be estimated with acceptable accuracy
a problem in the preoperative period and there is
from the formula:
no need to administer bicarbonate at this stage.
The administration of bicarbonate intraoper-
Girth (inches)2 × Length (inches)
Weight (kg) =
atively results in a very high PaCO2, and the rapid
660
exhaustion of the carbon dioxide absorbent of the
The girth is measured just behind the elbow and
anaesthetic circuit. Even in cases complicated by
the length is from the point of the shoulder to the
septic shock, the routine administration of gluco-
line of the ischial tuberosity. M. Down and L. Gray
corticoids before operation is of doubtful value.
(personal communication) weighed 400 horses of
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
all ages, including geldings, stallions and mares
if not already given, are usually administered
admitted to the Cambridge Veterinary School over
both for their analgesic and antitoxaemic effects.
a 3-year period and found that the formula given
Methods of treatment of endotoxic shock, such as
above always estimated the weight to within 25kg
the use of antibodies are very expensive and as yet
of the true weight. Commercially available'weigh-
there is no published data as to their efficacy in
bands' base their calculation on the girth measure-
improving overall success.
ment only, but still provide a useful estimate of
Regardless of whether preoperative fluids are
weight.
to be given to a colic case, at least one reliable i.v.
line must be introduced into the jugular vein. A
stomach tube should be passed through one nos-
Intravenous techniques
tril before the horse is anaesthetized and the stom-
In horses i.v. injections are usually made into the
ach decompressed. It should be withdrawn into
jugular vein about half way down the neck. The
the oesophagus before the induction of anaesthesia
horse should be handled quietly, as once forcible
because if left in the stomach it seems to encourage
restraint (such as the twitch) is used many will
regurgitation, but it should not be completely re-
tense their neck muscles and obscure the jugular
moved for once the horse is recumbent under
furrow, making i. v. injection difficult and the dan-
anaesthesia it is almost impossible to pass a tube
down the oesophagus to the stomach. Gastric
The usual aseptic precautions should be taken
decompression will minimize the likelihood of the
prior to insertion of a needle or catheter, the size of
stomach rupturing during induction. Whenever
which depends on personal preference and on
possible the surgical site should be clipped and pre-
what is to be injected. A small fine needle (e.g.
pared while the animal is conscious and standing.
23 G) does not necessarily cause the horse less pain
for the duration of the anaesthetic period needs to
be kept to a minimum in these very ill animals.
TABLE Il.3 Ranges in weight for various types of
animal
Mares nursing foals should not be separated from
Type of animal
Weight (kg)
their offspring in the preanaesthetic period. If it is
necessary to operate on the mare, the need for
 Children's ponies
150-300
Donkeys
sedation is greatly reduced if anaesthesia is
150-200
Thoroughbred yearlings
300-350
induced in the presence of the foal. Similarly, the
Thoroughbred 2 y.0.
300-400
presence of a foal's sedated mother contributes to
Thoroughbred 3 y.0.
400-450
the smooth induction of anaesthesia in the foal.
Thoroughbred adults
450-550
It is always safer if the weight of the animal is
Hunter
450-675
known and it should be determined by actual
Warmbloods
500-750
Cart yearlings
350-450
weighing, for visual appraisal, even with experi-
Cart 2 y.0.
450-525
Ence, is too inaccurate. Under field conditions it is
Draught cross
550-625
improbable that weighing facilities will be avail-
Heavy draught
650-850
able, and the average figures given in Table 11.3
278 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
the point of injection and maintained there for at
least 5 minutes in order to prevent the formation of
a haematoma. Unfortunately intracarotid injection
may not be recognized if a small bore needle is
employed. Once the needle is in situ, its hub and
the syringe should be held and pressed gently and
continuously against the animal's neck during any
injection so that should the animal move its neck
the hand (and needle) will move with the horse
and thus overcome any tendency for the needle to
be pulled out of the vein.
Catheterization of the jugular vein
If larger needles or catheters are to be used in foals
(which are hypersensitive to injections), or if the
FIG. I1.15 Injection into the jugular vein of the horse.
animal is very sensitive, it is necessary to desens-
The vein is easily raised with digital pressure.Neck ropes'
itize the skin either by injecting a bleb of lignocaine
should not be employed for this purpose as they invariably
subcutaneously via a very fine needle, or by using
displace the skin resulting in withdrawal of the needle or
catheter from the vein when their compression is
an intradermal pressure injector. EMLA cream
released.
also may be used for this purpose but it is difficult
to keep the cream-covered swab in place for long
than one of 19 G, but will reduce the damage to the
enough to be effective.
Catheters are now almost routine for the
tions are anticipated. The vein is distended by
administration of i.v. anaesthetic agents in the
pressing the thumb into the jugular furrow just
horse. Simple, short (less than 6 inches) over
below the site of venipuncture (Fig. 11.15). This
the needle catheters are perfectly adequate and are
 tenses the skin and the distended veinis easily palp-
placed as described in Chapter 9. Once it is certain
 able. Two methods of placement of a needle may
that a catheter is in the vein to its maximum length
be used. In the first, the point of the needle is
it should be secured in position with a partial skin
directed at an angle of 45 ° to the vein, slid through
thickness stitch and a stopcock or injection cap
the skin, into the vein then advanced up the vein
attached (Fig. 11.16). The catheter may be kept
towards the head. In the second method the needle
 patent for many hours if its lumen is periodically
is held at an angle of 90° to the vein, thrust into it,
flushed with heparin saline solution (10 IU /ml).
then turned 90° so that it can be advanced up
 Ideally the skin suture should be laid before
the vessel. It is important that a good length of nee-
venipuncture is attempted so that it may be tied
dle (or catheter) is introduced into the vein other-
securely around the catheter without risk of dis-
wise there is a risk that as the vein subsides, on the
placing this from the vein, but otherwise, the
release of pressure, it will retract away from the
 catheter may be fixed in place with a drop of acryl-
needle or that the slightest movement will cause
 ate glue which will hold it whilst the suture is com-
the needle to leave the vessel. Afree flow of blood
pleted.
indicates that the needle is well placed in the
There is no ad vantage to be gained from intro-
lumen of the vein. If only a few drops of blood
ducing a needle or catheter into the vein in a
fall either (1) the needle is in a perivascular
downwards direction away from the head except,
haematoma or (2) the needle is in the vein but its
 possibly, for the infusion of large volumes of solu-
lumen is partially blocked. If red blood spurts, or
 tions such as guaiphenesin. Technical errors are
blood is very free flowing then the needle may be
much more likely to arise if attempts are made to
in the carotid artery and should be withdrawn, the 
 perform venipuncture in this manner. The opera-
fist being placed hard into the jugular furrow over
tion is more awkward: it is more difficult to assess
THE HORSE279
B
FIG. Il.l6 Introduction of a catheter into the jugular vein.ln (A) a catheter of the'over-the-needle' variety is being
necessary to make a small skin incision in the centre of the weal to prevent 'belling-out' of the catheter tip,or the catheter
being pushed back along its introducing needle as the skin is penetrated. After penetration of the skin the vein is distended
by digital pressure and the catheter advanced well into the vein.In (B) the catheter and its occluding tap are being fixed in
position with partial skin thickness sutures. (lt is helpful if these sutures are in position before the catheter is introduced
but this was avoided here for sake of clarity.)
the depth to which the needle is being inserted, it
ment will be against the point of the needle thus
is more difficult to detect intracarotid injection and
tending to transfix the vein. Care must be taken to
if the animal moves its neck the direction of move-
avoid air embolism when a needle or catheter is
280 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
directed dowmwards since its tip will be at a lower
 mg/kg i.v. atropine appear to be safe to use where
pressure than its hub, predisposing to the aspira-
 required but nevertheless in horses, glycopyrro-
tion of air if the hub is not closed off whenever an
late (0.005-0.010 mg/kg) is probably preferable
injection is not being made. Very little air needs to
(Singh et al., 1997), for it is shorter acting and does
be aspirated to cause the horse to collapse - the
not readily cross the blood-brain barrier, thus
authors have seen one case where aspiration was
being less likely to cause central excitatory effects.
heard to occur for less than one second through a
23 G catheter.
Sedatives
Where a catheter is to remain in place for some
time postoperatively, usually to enable the infu-
Premedication with sedative agents whilst the
sion of fluids, then long catheters are used. These
horse is still in its accustomed accommodation
catheters are usually placed over guide wires by
 greatly improves the process of anaesthetic induc-
the Seldinger technique and are always directed
tion as it keeps the horse calm, reduces apprehen-
towards the heart. Long catheters are not ideal for
 sion and fear, and makes procedures such as the
i.v. induction of anaesthesia (other than by infu-
placement of catheters more pleasant for both
sion techniques) nor for the very rapid administra-
horse and anaesthetist.
tion of fluids as their length increases resistance
and therefore slows the speed of injection. When
Acepromazine
Jo rasuep e st araun 'aoeid un hal ane siaiaue
infection and subsequent thrombophlebitis so full
 In many cases acepromazine (0.03-0.05 mg/kg
sterile precautions are required for their place-
i.m. or 0.03 mg/kg i.v.) given 30-60 minutes prior
ment, and in subsequent handling of the injection
 to anaesthesia is ideal for premedication; it calms
ports.
the horse without making it ataxic and its long-
lasting effects usually last throughout the whole
perioperative period, so contributing to a calm
PREMEDICATION
recovery. Acepromazine reduces the dose of the
The choice and dose of any premedicant drug will
 parental anaesthetics used and reduces MAC of
depend on the physical condition and tempera-
volatile anaesthetic agents (Heard et al., 1986). The
ment of the horse, the likely duration of the pro-
influence of acepromazine premedication on the
 posed examination or operation and the nature of
amount of volatile anaesthetic agent required
the anaesthetic technique to be employed. In many
becomes obvious when the effects of concurrently
respects, the relative importance given to the pre-
 administered short acting Cadrenoceptor ago-
 medicant drugs or the anaesthetic agents is a mat-
nists wane (usually 60-90 minutes); without ace-
ter of personal preference. Some anaesthetists
 promazine the depth of anaesthesia lightens very
 suddenly, necessitating a rapid increase in the
decreases the quantities of sedatives and anaes-
 inspired levels of volatile anaesthetic agents.
thetics administered later, while others habitually
The use of acepromazine for premedication
use light premedication and more of the anaes-
significantly reduces the overall anaesthetic risk
thetic. In the hands of their exponents both regi-
(Johnston et al., 1995).
Ozadrenoceptor ogonists
Anticholinergics
Xylazine, detomidine and romifidine are widely
In current practice anticholinergic drugs are not 
 used as part of the anaesthetic induction process
used in the routine premedication of horses,
 and they reduce markedly the dose of both i.v. and
although they may be administered if required
 inhalation anaesthetic agents. However, they may
once the horse is anaesthetized, for example if the
 also be used as classic ‘premedicants' in which
surgery is likely to provoke vagal reflexes or(
 case their residual action must be taken into
should bradycardia develop. Doses of 0.01-0.02
account when deciding on doses to be used at
THE HORSE 281
anaesthetic induction. Doses used i.v. for premed-
Facilities for induction
-epas rog pasn asot je Aiaexondde are uonet
With the exception of occasional emergency situa-
tion (i.e. xylazine at 0.5 mg/kg, detomidine at 10
μg/kg and romifidine at 50 μg/kg) so that the
fions, anaesthesia should never be induced in horse
without there being available the necessary appa-
horse is able to walk to the anaesthetic induction
ratus to resuscitate the horse should it become nec-
area. The i.m. use of C adrenoceptor agonists has
essary. Such apparatus includes endotracheal
been much neglected, but i.m. doses of 1 mg/kg
tubes, methods to administer O2 and apply IPPV,
xylazine or 20μg/kg detomidine give excellent
and the drugs likely to be needed should cardiac
sedation after approximately 20 minutes. If the
arrest occur. In the hospital setting the apparatus
horse is exceptionally difficult to handle, 40-50
needed to administer volatile anaesthetic agents
μg/kg detomidine (chosen because of the low vol-
(anaesthetic machine and absorber circuit) will ful-
ume invoved) may be given i.m., the horse left qui-
fil this role. For field anaesthesia, a portable source
etly for at least 20 minutes, after which time, in the
of O2 will be required. IPPV of the lungs can be sat-
authors’ experience, i.v. injection has always
isfactorily provided by the use of a stream of oxy-
become possible, although occasionally only with
gen directed into the trachea for the Venturi effect
the aid of a twitch. In such horses i.m. injection
by a Hudson valve, or using an easily portable to-
may be given at any convenient site (the horse
often does not anticipate an injection in the pec-
and-fro circuit.
The cardiopulmonary system of the anaes-
toral muscles) as swelling rarely occurs after the
thetized horse must be monitored continuously
use of i.m. detomidine.
throughout anaesthesia but the degree of sophist-
ication with which this will be done will depend
Analgesics
on the facilities available, and in the field may be
limited to those of continuous observation, palpa-
Opioid analgesics may be used both to provide
tion of the pulse, and possibly the use of a battery
 m essanau n rn ud aaa
operated pulse oximeter. The pulse oximeter is of
analgesic doses are required, and to improve the
variable use in the horse as many such instruments
level of sedation, when doses are usually reduced
to half. Full doses may be required for difficult
beats/minute. The favoured site for the probe is
horses, and in these circumstances can usually
across the nasal septum, as it is without hair, usu-
mixed in the same syringe as the C2 adrenoceptor
ally without pigment, and sufficiently thin. In
agonist. In general mixing such combinations is
equine hospitals monitoring is more sophisticated
not recommended by the manufacturers as the
and may include the electrocardiogram, ABP
necessary tests to ensure chemical stability have
 peripheral pulse monitor, end-tidal gases and arte-
not been performed, but with difficult horses there
rial and venous blood gases.
may only be one opportunity to carry out the
injection. If not already given, NSAIDs may be
Methods of control at anaesthetic
administered so that they will be effective by the
induction
postoperative period.
Free foll
In this simplest method of control, one person
INDUCTION OF ANAESTHESIA
holds the horse's head as it becomes recumbent. If
The past 40 years have seen great improvements in
the horse leans back as anaesthesia takes hold, the
equine anaesthesia but a routine method suitable
handler holds the head down, which steadies the
for every situation has yet to be discovered. The
 fall and prevents the horse going over backwards
anaesthetist must choose a suitable method with
(Fig 11.17). With the type of induction which
regard to the size, health and temperament of the 
 occurs following use of the dissociative agents this
ndividual horse, the cost of the procedure and the
is less necessary, and the handler simply has to
facilities and staff available.
steady the head. If induction is in a padded box,
282ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Ring in
padded wall
Swinging
gate
Applied
pressure
Breast
restraining
Halterrope
rope
FIG. Il.17 Control of a horse during induction of
anaesthesia using the free-fall' method.
the horse may be placed with its rump to a wall so
that the wall takes the weight; this makes induc-
tion very smooth, but occasionally results in a hind
leg becoming trapped beneath the horse.
FIG. I l.18 Control of a horse during induction of
The free fall method requires the minimum of
anaesthesia using the'gate' or'swinging-door' method.
staff and is the only practicable method in the field.
Induction to recumbency is aided by two or three people
applying pressure to the gate as the horse sinks towards
the floor. An assistant restrains the horse's head and
Gote method
prevents the horse from falling forwards or backwards.
The breast control rope which prevents the horse from
In this method the horse is positioned against a
walking forwards is slackened off as the horse becomes
wallof the induction box, and restrained there by a
recumbent.
gate. A rope, which can easily be released, holds
the gate in place and prevents the horse moving
forward (Fig. 11.18). Usually when available sever-
by straps (Fig 11.19). As the horse loses conscious-
'l hoddns cn aie auh isee ssaid osie aldoad je
ness during the induction process it is brought
As anaesthesia is induced, the rope is released and
smoothly into lateral recumbency by restoring the
the gate opened so that the horse may sink to the
table top to its normal horizontal position. The
ground.
Auo si h 1nq Ham Araa som Aensn poua
 possible where an adequate number of trained
A variation of this method manages without the
 gate, the horse being held against the wall by a
personnel are available, and trouble occurs if
the horse panics or a fault develops in the
number of people. The horse is restrained and its
weight supported as it becomes recumbent by
table mechanism at a critical stage of induction.
head and tail ropes attached to rings in the wall of
Once the horse is unconscious, padding must be
the induction box.
placed underneath it, so the method does not
remove the necessity to lift the horse. The horse
may be allowed to recover on the horizontal table
Tilting toble
top and placed on its feet as soon as it is judged
 In this method the operating table top is tilted to
able to stand by rotating the top to vertical; or the
the vertical position; the adequately premedicated
horse may be transferred to a padded recovery
or quiet animal is restrained against the table top
box.
THE HORSE 283
agents such as ketamine. Either method may be
assisted by the use of centrally acting muscle relax-
ants such as guiaphenesin or the benzodiazepine
agents. The following section and Table 11.4 dis-
cuss some combinations which the authors have
found satisfactory. If the horse is not healthy modi-
fications may have to be made to these protocols.
For example, there may be times when the side
effects of the C2 adrenoceptor agonists are con-
traindicated, and conditions such as toxaemia or
hypoproteinaemia reduce the quantity of anaes-
thetic agent required.
Hypnotic/andesthetic ogents
The marner in which a horse becomes recumbent
is similar following the injection of any of the hyp
notic/anaesthetic agents, and is typified by that
with thiopental. Following injection of thiopental
the horse tries to lean backwards and to lift its
head, which must be restrained to prevent the
 horse losing its balance and possibly 'going over
backwards' (Fig. 11.17). With restraint, the horse
sinks gently to the ground. Premedication with the
 Q2 adrenoceptor agonists slows the circulation in a
dose-dependent manner and the onset of uncon-
FIG.1l.19 Induction of anaesthesia using a tilting table
sciousness is delayed for 40-120 seconds after
top.The sedated horse is restrained against the table
completion of the thiopental injection. The horse
which is rotated to the horizontal position as the animal
may make paddling or galloping movements
becomes unconscious and relaxed. Usually induction of
anaesthesia is with guaiphenesin/thiopental or
when it first becomes recumbent; these move-
guaiphenesin/ketamine and 4 to 6 trained personnel are
ments disappear within 10-20 seconds as uncon-
involved in manipulation of the table and animal.
sciousness deepens.
Intravenous regimes for anaesthetic
induction
Thiopental
In normal clinical practice anaesthesia in adult
Thiopental is a hypnotic/anaesthetic agent com-
horses is induced with i.v. agents. The dose of
monly employed. The dose required to induce
anaesthetic required in the healthy horse will
anaesthesia in the horse depends on the amount of
depend on the amount of sedative and opioid
sedation present (Table 11.4). As recovery from an
analgesic it has received both as premedication
induction dose of thiopental depends on redistribu
and just prior to anaesthetic administration. The
tion rather than elimination, reduction in the dose
number of possible combinations of sedative and
leads to a faster and better quality recovery.
anaesthetic agents which are suitable for anaes-
Thiopental at 15 mg/kg i.v. can be given rapidly to
thetic induction are enormous, and the choice will
unsedated colts for castration; induction is ade-
depend on facilities, the state of the horse, and on
quate but recovery, although rapid, may be very
personal preference. However, the majority of
violent and this method cannot be recommended.
induction techniques are based on a combination
 Following premedication  with acepromazine
of sedative drugs either with hypnotic/anaesth-
(0.03-0.05 mg/kg) given at least 30 minutes prior
etic agents such as thiopental, or with dissociative
 to anaesthesia, thiopental, at a dose of 10 mg/kg
284 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE I I.4 Some regimes suitable for the induction of anaesthesia prior to maintenance with volatile
agents, or by TIVA. Anaesthesia results from a combination of the effects of the sedative premedicant
drugs and of the induction agents. Many combinations other than those listed here can be used safely
Premedication
Anaesthetic
Maintenance by further i.v. agents (TIVA)
for short duration (20-30 mins) only
Acepromazine,
Thiopental, II mg/kg i.v. or
0.03-0.05 mg/kg i.m. or i.v.
Methohexital, 5 mg/kg i.v.
Xylazine,0.5 mg/kg i.v. or
Thiopental,7-8 mg/kg i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (recovery may be
Detomidine, 0.0l mg/kg i.v.
prolonged and of poor quality if total
thiopentone dose exceeds I2 mg/kg)
Xylazine, I mg/kg i.v. or
Thiopental, 5.5 mg/kg i.v. or
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as above)
Detomidine, 0.ol mg/kg i.v.
Methohexital, 3 mg/kg i.v.
Xylazine, I mg/kg i.v.
Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as above)
(Diazepam, 0.01-0.03 mg/kg i.v. given or increments of 0.5 mg/kg xylazine and I mg/kg
immediately following the ketamine  ketamine i.v. as required
will improve relaxation,but may
cause apnoea)
Detomidine, 0.015-0.02
Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as above)
mg/kg i.v.
(optional: diazepam, 0.01-0.03
or increments of I mg/kg ketamine i.v. as required
kg/i.v. as above)
Romifidine 0.08-0. 12 mg/kg i.v. Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg i.v. (optional: Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as above)
diazepam, 0.0 I-0.03 mg/kg i.v.
or increments of 0.02-0.04mg/kg romifidine and
as above)
I mg/kg ketamine i.v. as required
Xylazine, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg i.v.
Tiletamine, 0.05-1.0 mg/kg i.v. and
Detomidine, 0.01-0.02
Zolazepam, 0.5-I mg/kg i.v.
mg/kg i.v.
(Tiletamine and zolazepam are
supplied as a fixed 50:50 ratio
combination)
Acepromazine, 0.03-0.05
Guaiphenesin infused i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as
mg/kg i.m. or i.v.
(approximately 25-50 mg/kg)
above). Extra guiaphenesin may be infused, but
until ataxia, then thiopental,
maximal doses should not exceed 50 mg/kg, or
5 mg/kg i.v.
recovery may be delayed
Xylazine, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg i.v. or (
Guaiphenesin infused i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v. (maximal dose as above).
Detomidine, 0.0l mg/kg i.v.
 ( o- ke)
Extra guiaphenesin may be infused, but maximal
or Romifidine,0.08 mg/kg i.v.
 ataxia, then thiopental
doses should not exceed 50 mg/kg, or recovery
5 mg/kg i.v. (Alternatively
may be delayed
thiopentone can be mixed with
the guaiphenesin, and the mixture
infused until the horse becomes
recumbent)
Xylazine, I mg/kg i.v. or
Guaiphenesin infused i.v.
Thiopental, I mg/kg i.v.or ketamine, I mg/kg i.v.
Detomidine, 0.01-0.02
(approximately 15-30 mg/kg)
mg/kg i.v.Romifidine, 0.08
until ataxia, then ketamine,
mg/kg i.v.
1.5-2.0 mg/kg mg/kg i.v.
Additional premedication with acepromazine (<0.05mg/kg) will not reduce the dose of induction agent required, but will lengthen the
duration of action. Additional premedication with an opioid (e.g., butorphanol 0.02 mg/kg) will not reduce the dose of induction agent
required, but may cause additional respiratory depression. Its use may also increase the duration of effect of the anaesthetic agents.
i. v., is a satisfactory induction technique. The horse
procedure such as castration, or to provide a
becomes unconscious and recumbent 25-30 sec-
 onds after the thiopental injection and anaesthesia
 anaesthesia is to be maintained for long periods. If
lasts for an adequate time either to enable a short
 no maintenance agents are given the horse regains
THE HORSE285
its feet in approximately 30-40 minutes, and
jugular vein to produce recumbency but there is
although there may be some ataxia, recovery is
much less control over anaesthesia when this is
usually calm. The dose of thiopental is critical,
done and profound respiratory depression can be
umder dosage through underestimation of weight
produced. Recovery from these agents alone
may lead to excitement during induction, and for
occurs in 30-40 minutes, but there may be some
this reason it used to be common practice to follow
residual muscle weakness if high doses
of
the injection of thiopental with a small dose (0.1
 guiaphenesin are used. Where anaesthesia sub-
mg /kg) of succinyl choline, but this agent is now
sequently is maintained with other agents the
used rarely.
effects of guiaphenesin have time to wane.
The use of i.v. C2 adrenoceptor agonists (xyla-
zine, detomidine or romifidine) just prior to anaes-
Methohexital
thetic induction reduces the dose of thiopental
required in a dose dependent manner, and also
The dose of methohexital required to induce
 increases the therapeutic index of the drug, mean-
 anaesthesia appears to be half that for thiopental.
ing that it is rare for underdosage to cause excite-
For example 5 minutes after i.v. xylazine (1 mg/kg)
ment. Xylazine 1 mg /kg or detomidine 20 μg/kg
or detomidine (15 μg/kg) anaesthesia can be
given i.v. 5 minutes prior to induction reduces the
induced with 2.8 mg/kg of methohexital given i.v.
necessary dose of thiopental to about 5.5 mg/kg.
as a bolus dose. Lateral recumbency occurs in a
Following doses of xylazine of 0.5 mg/kg or deto-
 similar fashion and time scale to that following
midine at 10μ g/kg i.v. the dose of thiopental
thiopental. However, following the use of metho-
required is about 8 mg/kg. Anaesthesia lasts for
hexital, the breathing rhythm is often abnormal,
15-20 minutes (sufficient to enable castration) and
three deep breaths being succeeded by 30-40 sec-
if no further drugs are administered, the horse will
onds without any sigm of respiratory activity.
regain its feet after 30-40 minutes. As yet there is
Similar breathing patterns occur in horses with
little published information available as to the
 other anaesthetic agents but the clinical impres-
combination doses of romifidine and thiopental.
sion is that they are more common during anaes-
Premedication with acepromazine prior to giving
thesia involving methohexital. Anaesthesia lasts
xylazine or detomidine does not appear to reduce
for about 5 minutes and the horse usually stands
the dose of thiopental subsequently required
up about 25minutes later. Recovery is usually
for anaesthetic induction. Recovery to standing (in
quiet and uneventful.
the absence of maintenance agents) occurs in
3040 minutes, and with less ataxia than when
Propofoi
A rapid injection of propofol (2mg/kg i.v.)
appears adequate for induction of anaesthesia
Thiopentai/guoiphenesin
when given 5 minutes after i.v. 02 adrenoceptor
After premedication with acepromazine, and /or
agonists such as xylazine 0.5 mg/kg, detomidine
C2 adrenoceptor agonists, guaiphenesin (at con-
15-20 μg/kg, or medetomidine 7μg/kg (Nolan &
centrations of 5-15% depending on the personal
Hall, 1985; Aguiar et al., 1993; Bettschart-Wolfens-
 preferences of the anaesthetist and the prepara-
berger et al., 1999a). At these doses of propofol
tions available) is infused into the jugular vein
01 Araiexoidde roy isel oi sieadde eisauisae
umtil the horse shows marked ataxia (after approx-
minutes, with recovery to standing within 30 min-
imately 35-50 mg /kg). A bolus i.v. dose of about
 utes. In all studies the animals became hypox-
5mg/kg of thiopental then produces recumbency
aemic and appeared very lightly anaesthetized,
and apparent unconsciousness. Panic due to mus-
but where surgery was being performed (Aguiar
cle weakness may be seen if guaiphenesin is
et al., 1993), there was no response to surgical stim-
nfused without prior administration of sufficient
 ulation. Without premedication a dose of 4 mg/kg
sedative. It is also possible to combine guaiphen-
 propofol is necessary to induce anaesthesia and
esin and thiopental solutions for infusion into the
even then horses show some excitement and
286 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
paddling (Mama et al., 1995). With the current
more quickly and the onset of unconsciousness is
preparations of propofol available, it is difficult to
more rapid when no attempt is made forcibly to
inject even 2 mg/ kg propofol sufficiently rapidly.
restrain the head - if this is done the horse may
and in large horses slow injection results in a poor
quality of anaesthetic induction (Bettschart-
Wolfensberger, 1999a). However, it is possible that
new more concentrated preparations of propofol
Ketomine
will become available and these may make ind uc-
Ketamine, following premdication with an C2
tion of anaesthesia with this agent more practica-
 adrenoceptor agonist produces excellent induction
ble and perhaps, less expensive.
of anaesthesia followed by a spectacularly rapid,
but usually very quiet, recovery. Xylazine
1.0-1.1 mg/kg, detomidine 20μg/kg or romifidine
Etomidote ond metomidate
 80-100μg/kg is giveni.v. and then, once maximum
Etomidate has apparently not been used in horses,
-uu g Araeuxdde padonaaap seu uoepas
and it is probable that current preparations would
utes), a bolus of ketamine (2.2 mg/kg) is injected
result in the volume required being too large to be
1.v. Lateral recumbency is assumed in 1-3 minutes
practicable. However, the similar but no longer
 after the ketamine injection, the longer time occur-
available compound, metomidate (2.25 mg/kg i.v.)
ring with the larger animals. Anaesthesia contin-
following  premedication   with  detomidine 
ues to deepen for 1-2minutes after the horse
(10 μg /kg) produced excellent induction prior to
 becomes recumbent, and even when eye move-
maintenance of anaesthesia with halothane since
 ments cease, relaxation of the jaw muscles is not
significant apnoea did not occur.
always good and it may be necessary to prise the
 mouth open for the passage of an endotracheal
tube. Relaxation can be improved by the admin-
Dissociative ogents
stration of a benzodiazepine agent i.v. (usually
When the dissociative agents, ketamine or tileta-
diazepam 0.01-0.05 mg/kg) immediately after the
mine are given on their own to horses, they cause
ketamine injection, although this tends to cause
stimulation rather than depression of the central
 further repiratory depression and should be used
nervous system, with a form of excitement in
with caution in situations where facilities for IPPV
which there is poor muscle relaxation, tremors and
are not readily available. If for any clinical reason it
even convulsions. Many drugs have been used in
is desirable to give a lower dose of c2 adrenoceptor
attempts to suppress these most undesirable
agonist,then the dose rate of the benzodiazepine
effects but only the Q2 adrenoceptor agonists and
can be increased to compensate. The classic signs
the benzodiazepines have proved to be of any real
and stages of anaesthesia are not recognizable;
value.
nystagmus and tear formation may be observed
The dissociative anaesthetic agents are not
 and the surest guide to the depth of anaesthesia is
effective in a single brain circulation time, and
the presence or absence of response to surgical
therefore where sedation with an Q2 adrenoceptor
stimulation. When no other anaesthetic is given,
 agonist has preceded the i.v. injection of ketamine
depending on the degree of surgical stimulation,
a large horse may take as long as 3minutes to
horses first raise their heads 10-30 minutes after
become recumbent. The method of achieving
the ketamine injection, roll into sternal recumb-
recumbency differs from that seen following
 ency some minutes later and stand 5 or 6 minutes
thiopental; it is a much more gradual process, the
after this. Termination of surgical anaesthesia is
animal often taking a step or two sideways or
very abrupt but recovery is remarkably free from
backwards before sitting back on its haunches and
excitement and horses usually stand at the first
sinking to sternal recumbency. It then rolls gently
attempt. Once standing there is very little evidence
 over on to its side and may make one or two quite
of ataxia.
vigorous limb movements before becoming still.
 The method is not without disadvantages. The
Once laterally recumbent, the animal settles much
very abrupt end of surgical anaesthesia when no
THE HORSE 287
other agents are given can lead to difficulties, and
Tiletomine/zolozepom
indeed this rapid 'awakening' may become evid-
The idea behind the combination of tiletamine
ent even when anaesthesia is continued with
volatile anaesthetic agents. Horses require very
with zolazepam is that there is already a benzodi-
azepine present to ensure muscle relaxation dur-
different handling from that used when anaesthe-
ing subsequent anaesthesia. In the horse, however,
sia is induced with the barbiturates, and this is a
this combination has always been used following
matter of familiarity with the regime. How-
the administration of an C2 adrenoceptor agonist.
ever, the method appears to be a very safe way of
This combination is used after xylazine (Hubbell ef
producing short periods of anaesthesia. Cardio-
al., 1989) or detomidine premedication (Muir et al.,
vascular parameters are well maintained (Muir
1999). Although it produces reasonably safe'short-
et al., 1977; Hall & Taylor, 1981; Clarke et al., 1986),
term anaesthesia' of a little longer duration than
respiration is adequate and continuation of anaes-
thesia with an inhalation agent or by total i.v.
that seen after xylazine/ketamine/diazepam, it
offers very litle other advantage.
methods presents no problems.
Ketamine may also be used with other premedic-
ant agents or in other combinations. Acepromazine
Other i.v. techniques
premedication is inadequate prior to ketamine
 induction. Many dose schedules utilizing guai-
Etorphine
phenesin together with α2 adrenceptor agonists
Etorphine is used in horses as ‘Large Animal
and ketamine have been recommended. For ex-
Immobilon', a yellow solution containing 2.45 mg
ample, xylazine (2.2 mg /kg) is given by i.m. injec-
etorphine hydrochloride with 10mg acepro-
tion 20 minutes before 55 mg/kg of guaiphenesin is
mazine maleate per millilitre. The minimum dose
infused as a 5% solution in 5% dextrose into the
for horses is 0.5 ml of the solution i.v. per 50kg
jugular vein. This is followed by the i.v. injection of
 body weight. The i.m. route should only be used in
1.7mg/kg of ketamine (Muir et al., 1978b)
dire emergencies since it results in a period of
Ketamine can be given with benzodiazepine
marked excitement before sedation and anaes-
agents alone (i.e. with no Q2 adrenoceptor agonists).
thesia ensue. Animals made recumbent with
In foals diazepam or midazolam (0.10-0.25 mg/kg
Immobilon are very stiff, with muscle tremors,
i.v.) followed by ketamine (2.2 mg/kg i.v.) gives a
severe respiratory depression, cyanosis, tachycar-
very satisfactory anaesthetic; usually foals lie
dia and hypertension. In male animals priapism is
down following the benzodiazepine drug.
not uncommon. Transfer to inhalation anaesthesia
However, in adult horses the combination is more
is usually not required because the effects of
Immobilon last about 45 minutes. Because of the
alone. As both have a variable onset of action,
marked effects in the body, Immobilon is not re-
when administered together the quality of induc-
commended for use in horses with cardiac prob-
lems or liver damage. Animals should not be
takes effect first (Clarke et al., 1997). One study
slaughtered for consumption by humans or other
utilizing midazolam/ketamine found that even
 arimals until 28 days have elapsed.
after three hours of subsequent halothane anaes-
 The actions of Immobilon may be antagonized
thesia, recovery was complicated by muscle
by the injection of Revivon, a blue solution con-
weakness, and in some cases it was necessary to
 antagonize the residual midazolam. The poor
A quantity of Revivon equal to the total volume of
Immobilon injected should be given i.v. as soon as
zodizepine/ketamine combinations is unfortunate
possible after the required period of restraint is
as during subsequent maintenance with volatile
complete. Most (but not all) horses regain their feet
agents, heart rate, MAP and CO are maintained at 
within a few minutes of this injection. Injection
 a considerably higher value than when α2 adreno-
 of Revivon antagonizes only the actions of etor-
ceptor agonists are used in the induction protocol
phine, hence analgesia is lost but sedation due to
(Luna et al.,1997).
the acepromazine is umaffected. Undesirable
288 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
hyperexcitability may be associated with the injec-
anaesthesia can be induced with any suitable
tion of the antagonist and enterohepatic cycling
volatile anaesthetic agent.
may occur, causing excitement and compulsive
walking 6-8hours after remobilization. An extra
half dose of Revivon given subcutaneously at the
Chloroform
time of initial reversal may reduce the incidence of
Chloroform has little place in routine equine
this delayed excitement, but should it still occur, a
anaesthesia. It causes dose related liver toxicity
further half dose of Revivon must be given. The
while sensitizing the heart to adrenaline induced
product information states that horses must
arrhythmias, and its safe use requires a great deal
be kept stabled for at least 24hours after the
 of skill. Anaesthetic chloroform is no longer avail-
administration of Immobilon. Donkeys appear
able in the UK, but analytical quality chloroform is
particularly susceptible to delayed excitement
 at least, if not more, pure. Despite potential prob-
with Immobilon, and the current product informa-
lems, its use may be justified on the grounds of
tion no longer gives any recommendations for this
 economy for procedures such as castration in
species. Combinations of etorphine with other
small unbroken colts whose monetary or senti-
agents such as xylazine and azaperone have
 mental value is minimal. Administration of chloro-
proved no more satisfactory in practice than
form by Cox's mask to induce anaesthesia has
Immobilon, and the attempts of some clinicians to
been described in a great deal of detail in earlier
 obtain greater muscle relaxation by combining C2
editions of this book
asmun are uqou ym sisue rodanoaie
in view of the respiratory and circulatory disturb-
Volatile agents in foals
ances which result.
The use of Immobilon is associated both with a
An inhalation induction technique in young foals
degree of risk to the life of the anaesthetist and to
avoids the necessity of giving drugs that their
that of even healthy horses. Large Animal
 Immobilon is an extremely potent neuroleptanal-
not be able to cope with. The size and lack of fat in
 gesic which is highly toxic to man. In man it causes
the foal mean that induction with volatile agents is
dizziness, nausea, pinpoint pupils, respiratory
easily achieved, with minimal excitement. The
depression, cyanosis, hypotension, loss of con-
mare should be sedated, but if possible allowed to
sciousness and death. In the event of accidental
remain until the foal is unconscious as to separate
injection, spillage on the skin or splashing into the
the two at this time will lead to great distress and
eyes or mouth immediate treatment is essential.
high levels of circulating adrenaline in the foal,
Any veterinarian contemplating the
use
of
with an increased anaesthetic risk. To achieve
Immobilon should be thoroughly familiar with the
induction of anaesthesia the standing foal is
latest treatment measures set out in the product
gently restrained and the inhalation anaesthetic
information sheet and ensure that adequate sup-
(halothane or isoflurane) volatilized in a stream of
plies of (in date) naloxone are to hand. If it is con-
O2 or N2O/O2 administered through a face-mask
sidered for any reason that the use of Immobilon is
applied lightly over both nostrils. The volatile
absolutely essertial, it is clearly most unwise to use
 agent should be introduced gradually, its concen-
it unless another qualified person is present.
tration being increased every three or four breaths
up to a maximum of 4 × MAC until consciousness
is lost. As the foal loses consciousness the attend-
Anaesthetic induction with inhalation
ants must lower it gently to the ground, the mask
agents
removed, and an endotracheal tube passed
Although induction of anaesthesia in adult horses
through the mouth in the usual manner. Currently
with volatile agents of anaesthesia is possible in
there is no evidence as to the safety of using the
experimental circumstances, it is not practicable 
 new volatile agents, sevoflurane or desflurane, to
for clinical use with the very limited exception of:
 induce anaesthesia in foal. It is anticipated that
chloroform by Cox's mask. However, in foals they will result in very fast effective anaesthetic
THE HORSE 289
induction, but their rapid speed of uptake will
mean that great care is needed to prevent over-
 dosage. The maximum concentrations required in
relation to MAC will be very much lower than
those recommended above for halothane and
isoflurane.
 An alternative to using a face-mask is to pass an
endotracheal tube into the trachea via one nostril
and administer the anaesthetic through this. The
best endotracheal tubes for this purpose are of sili-
cone rubber and about 55 cm long. Neonatal
Thoroughbred foals can accommodate tubes of
7-9 mm internal diameter and in 6 week old foals
11 mm tubes can be passed with ease. Passage of
FIG. I l.20 Passage of an oral endotracheal tube in a
the tube is greatly facilitated by prior preparation
horse.
of the ventral nasal mucosa with lignocaine oint-
ment or gel and lubrication of the tube with the
of its curve is towards the tongue (Fig. 11.20) and
same preparation. The possible complications of
at the next inspiration it is pushed rapidly on into
this technique have been reviewed (Webb, 1984)
the trachea. The rotation of the tube when its tip is
but with care they are rare. Anaesthetic systems
in the pharynx ensures that it does not become
designed for use in adult human subjects are ade-
impacted on the epiglottis.
quate for foals up to 2-3 months of age.
The commonest causes for failure of the tube to
The recent survey of anaesthetic deaths in
enter the trachea are that the aligrment of the head
horses (Johnston et al., 1995) found that in foals
and neck is incorrect, that the tube is not in the
induction of anaesthesia with a volatile agent
midline of the orotracheal axis, or that the tip of the
resulted in a higher mortality rate than when i.v.
tube is sited ventral to the epiglottis: should any of
induction methods were employed. Whether this
these occur the tube should be withdrawn to clear
finding represents a genuine increased risk, or
the epiglotis, and redirected for a further attempt.
whether it results from the fact that in the sickest
The technique for introduction of straight tubes
foals anaesthesia was induced with volatile agents
or those with only a shallow curvature differs
hasyet tobe elucidated.
slightly: the head needs to be more extended on
the neck and often it is easier to introduce the tube
with its concavity towards the tongue, then to
MAINTENANCE OF ANAESTHESIA
rotate the tube 360 ° once in the pharynx in order to
disconnect the soft palate from the epiglottis.
Endotracheal intubation
Once in the correct position the tube should
In horses the passage of a Magill-type endotra-
advance down the trachea with minimal resistance;
cheal tube (for which in the UK there is a British
force should not be used. Resistance to passing the
Standards specification) presents no great prob-
tube suggests either the endotracheal tube is too
lem. With the anaesthetized horse in lateral recum-
large, or that oesophageal intubation has occurred.
bency the head is moderately extended on the
Intubation through the mouth permits the use
neck, the mouth opened, a suitable gag or bite
of the largest tube which will comfortably fit the
block put in place and the tongue pulled forward.
trachea. A 16.0 mm diameter tube is suitable for
The tube, lubricated on its outside with a suitable
ponies up to about 150 kg body weight, while a
lubricant (e.g. K-Y Jelly, Johnson and Johnson), is
25-30mm tube is adequate for most thorough-
introduced into the mouth with the concave side of
breds. Heavy hunters and warmbloods often take
its curve directed towards the hard palate and
surprisingly large tubes.
advanced, keeping to the midline, until its tip is in
Endotracheal tubes can be passed through the
the pharynx. It is then rotated so that the concavity
inferior nasal meatus but this limits the size of the
290 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
tube to that which can be accommodated by the
nostril, and therefore increases resistance to
breathing. The introd uction and removal of nasal
tubes entails the risk of damaging the turbinate
bones, although with the modern soft silicone
tubes this risk is reduced. Despite the limitations,
nasal intubation can be very useful in cases where
the surgeons require unobstructed access to the
mouth. In young foals the nasal passages are relat-
-ape jo saqnt pue simpe ui ueun raaiel yonu Aiaal
quate size can be introduced through the nostril.
The cuffs of endotracheal tubes are often dam-
aged by contact with the horse's teeth even when a
 reliable mouth-gag is used to keep the mouth open
FlG. I l.2l Cole-pattern endotracheal tube for the
during intubation and extubation. Cuffed tubes
horse.
made of red rubber for use in horses are very
expensive, but punctured cuffs should not be
be used with care in young animals having soft
repaired with patches not vulcanized on, as other-
laryngeal cartilages for in them forcible dilatation
wise these patches may become detached during
 with these tubes can seriously damage the larynx.
anaesthesia and lodge in one of the smaller air pas-
They have been reported in association with acute
sages with disastrous results. Plastic tubes have
noue sasru nmpe oi u eapao lure
met with only partial success; either the plastic is
whether they were in fact the cause was not estab-
so hard that atraumatic intubation is difficult or,
lished (Trim, 1984).
when they reach body temperature they soften so
much that they become obstructed when the head
Positioning
is flexed on the neck. Siliconized latex rubber
cuffed tubes are more successful, can be recuffed,
Practically the aim in positioning is:
 and, although the smaller versions for foals, sheep
1. to reduce to the minimum possible the
etc. may require an 'introducer' before they can be
pressure at all points in order to enable adequate
inserted, those designed for adult horses are suffi-
blood perfusion to muscles and to decrease the
ciently stiff to enable endotracheal intubation to be
chance of a compartmental syndrome occurring
performed easily. Static charges on the silicone
attracts dust, and it is important that after use and
2. to ensure that major veins are not obstructed.
If this happens then pressure in the area drained
cleaning it is not placed where it will attract such
by these veins will increase until it reaches arterial
dirt during the induction process.
values, after which time there will be no further
As the horse has poor laryngeal tone, the cuff of
perfusion to the area
the endotracheal tube must be adequately inflated
3. to avoid putting anything under tension.
if the IPPV is to be carried out, and a good seal is
 Exceptionally important in cases of colic to prevent
stretching as well as by direct pressure
inhalation of regurgitated material. Cuffs should
4. to allow surgical access.
therefore be checked for leaks by leaving them
 inflated for a period of time prior to use
The first three aims are often at odds with the
The Cole-pattern tube (Fig. 11.21), which has no
fourth, necessitating compromise and sacrifice of
inflatable cuff, has been used in horses but these
 surgical convenience for the benefit of the horse.
tubes have to be of the exact size needed for any
It is now generally accepted that the best
given animal and accurately placed in the larynx if
 method to reduce pressure on the horse's body is
they are to provide an atraumatic seal which is suf-
 to position it on a soft foam mattress sufficiently
ficiently gas-tight for IPPV to be carried out with-
deep to allow the horse to sink right in (thus reduc-
out gross leakage of anaesthetic gases. They must
ing the unit weight at any one point) without 'bot-
THE HORSE291
FIG. Il.22 The Snell infla-table.This is a portable,
pnuematically raised table comprising of five stacked
chambers.The top chamber provides the working surface
and should not be fully inflated so that the horse lies on a
soft, compressible surface.The lower four provide support
and height adjustment.lt is placed in its deflated condition
alongside the anaesthetized horse which is then rolled on
to it.The table is then inflated to the desired working
height using an electrically powered air pump.
(Manufactured by Snell-Wessex Ltd, Fosters Farm
Boyshill, Holnest, Sherborne, Dorset DT9 5PJ, UK)
toming' on the hard undersurface. The type of
matting used in gymnastics is ideal. However, the
horse has to be lifted on to such a mat. Alternatives
inflated under the horse (Fig. 11.22). It is very
important that air mattresses are not fully inflated
- the horse must still be able to sink in or no reduc-
tion in pressure is achieved. This is one of the times
when compromise from the surgeon is necessary
as operating on a horse which is lying on a soggy
FIG. I 1.23 An operating table with many sections which
water or air bed is not conducive to the perform-
may slide out (A) thus assisting the surgeons to make a
 amce of any delicate surgery.
good approach to the operating site.However,the edges
The edges of tables or overinflated air or water
of hard padding around these separate sections are
potential'pressure points' and extra padding (B) should
beds can cause pressure points and result in nerve
be provided between them and the horse.
or muscle damage. Operating tables may have
care must be taken to use some soft padding or
slide out, and if so, suitable pads and matting
the pressure on the triceps muscle may be suffi-
to cover these pressure points are essential (Fig.
 cient to induce myopathy. The legs may be sup-
11.23).
 When horses are positioned in lateral recum-
both hind legs, and in particular locking the stifle
bency, the under front leg should be pulled for-
joints of dorsally recumbent horses, should be
ward, and both upper legs should be supported
 avoided unless absolutely essential to the surgery,
parallel to the body (Fig. 11.24). This support
 as it may result in severe hindlimb lameness. This
reduces pressure on the triceps muscles, brachial
lameness is thought to be due to femoral nerve
vessels and nerves, and also prevents obstruction
Jo puauoduon e aq osje Aew anaqn 1nq 'asewep
of the venous drainage of the upper limbs. Supine
gluteal myopathy. If bilateral, the horse will be
horses may be supported by a V-shaped back sup-
umable to rise. The problem is unrelated to weight
port (Fig. 11.25) but where such supports are used,
- the authors have seen it in miniature Shetland
292 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
The head is very liable to damage at pressure
 points and to avoid damage to the masseter mus-
cle, facial nerve and eyes, care must be taken to
ensure that the face is not allowed to fall over the
edge of the table top or to remain in contact with
sharp edges of halters or head collars. Whether in
lateral decubitus or supine the head must not be
over-extended (this leads to laryngeal paralysis)
nor rotated on the neck. If possible the head should
be slightly raised during anaesthesia to ensure
good venous drainage and to avoid intense vascu-
lar congestion of the nasal passages leading to
 gross upper respiratory obstruction after extuba-
tion. When the anaesthetized horse has to be
 moved the head should be supported in a normal
 position in relation to the neck.
Under field conditions, the facilities may not
be available to position the horse as suggested
above. However, a horse in lateral decubitus may
have adduction of the upper limbs prevented by
supporting them on straw bales, and the under-
most foreleg may be drawn as far forward as pos-
sible to minimize pressure on the brachial vessels
and nerves.
AGENTS FOr The MaINTeNaNCE OF
ANAESTHESIA
Intravenous agents: total i.v. anaesthesia
(TIVA)
Total i.v. anaesthesia for short procedures in the
field (such as castration) has been used for many
years, but in the past available agents had such a
long duration of action that their use was very
lized and eliminated are being introduced and
TIVA can be used for more prolonged procedures
as the duration of recovery after some of the more
FIG.11.24 A well positioned horse in lateral recumbency.
It is placed on a deep soft foam bed,into which it sinks
recently introduced agents and combinations is no
longer than after anaesthesia with volatile agents.
are supported so that venous drainage is not impaired,
Also, reassessment of some of the older agents has
and the other forelimb drawn forward.When a table is
shown that many of their disadvantages can be
not used the limbs can be positioned with cushions A.In
overcome by using them in combination with
B the limbs are supported in slings. An extra foam
other or newer drugs.
cushion was used to keep the head slightly elevated.
The use of TIVA does not reduce the need for
apparatus or for experienced staff Most i.v. anaes-
ponies, and it can occur after a comparatively
thetic techniques cause as much, if not more respir-
short time.
atory depression, than do volatile anaesthetics, and
THE HORSE293
FIG. I1.25 Back support for supine horse.ln use the support is covered with 3 inches (7.5 cm) thick foam padding. The 
weight of the horse is taken by the dorsal spine and the spines of the scapulae,thus avoiding pressure on the back muscles.
indeed overdose commonly causes respiratory
necessary anaesthetists must be prepared to change
arrest, so it is still essential to have a means of deliv-
technique (e.g. to introduce volatile agents, or
ering oxygen to the horse and of providing IPPV if
change to different drug combinations) if required.
required. ABP is better maintained than with
volatile agents, but it is now realized that this does
TIVA for short procedures (up to 30
not necessarily mean that there is no cardiovascular
minutes)
depression; CO still may be reduced and peripheral
perfusion poor. Adequate cardiopulmonary moni-
The techniques fori.v.induction anaesthesia
toring is as necessary withi. v. as with volatile agents.
described above (p. 284, Table 11.4 ) provide ade-
The current limitations to techriques of TIVA are
quate anaesthesia for procedures lasting 10-
those of duration and of expense. Many drugs or
15 minutes and (except for Immobilon) anaesthesia
combinations are long acting and cumulative, so
 can be 'topped up' with increments of i.v. drugs for
extending length of action with more drug may
 a period of time before cumulation occurs. The
result ina prolonged and poor quality recovery. The
most commonly used combinations for short term
ideal agents for use by infusion (propofol and some
anaesthesia are combinations of the α2 adrenocep-
 -oneureud aaeu (sisuoe rondanouaipe r an o
tors with ketamine or with thiopental. Anaesthesia
netics such that neither they nor their active metab-
is then extended with incremental doses of
olites are cumulative whatever the duration of
thiopental or ketamine.
administration. In a compromise between expense
 If no additional agents are given, recovery from
and the ideal agents, the techniques suitable for
ketamine-based methods occurs within 20-25 min-
TIVA can be considered in three categories: those
utes and is usually very smooth and well con-
suitable for short procedures such as castration (up
trolled. However, recovery can be abrupt, and
to 30 minutes) and which result in a very rapid reco-
Aams Sump uaeme Aeu asrou au sauauos
very; those suitable for more prolonged use (up to
with litle warning so it is essential that a rapid
1.5-2.0 hours), and those which could be extended
 means to deepen anaesthesia is to hand. The dura-
indefinitely should the surgery demand. Pro-
tion of surgical anaesthesia can be increased by the
cedures may last far longer than anticipated, and if
use of local anaesthesia; this technique is particu-
294 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
larly suitable for castration. Choice of the C2 adren-
20 minute intervals (Short, 1981). The combination,
Oceptor agonist (xylazine, detomidine or romifi-
using infusions of the two drugs, has been used to
dine) utilized prior to ketamine does not influence 
 provide approximately 90 minutes of anaesthesia
the quality and duration of anaesthesia, or the
(Mama et al., 1998). With detomidine/ketamine
speed and quality of recovery (Kerr et al., 1996).
combinations only a further dose of ketamine
With thiopental-based methods, recovery is
 (1 mg/kg) is required initially to extend the dura-
slower (30-40 minutes), there is some hindlimb
tion, although if ketamine increments are to be
weakness, and often more that one attempt to rise
 given more than 30 minutes after anaesthetic in-
is required. Nevertheless, with appropriate pre-
duction, it is probably advisable also to administer
medication rising is usually calm. Although the
S Aianeixondde) apnuoiap go asop lews e 
horse may still move in response to surgery (local
μg/kg). With romifidine/ketamine combinations
anaesthesia is a good option to prevent this) it is
 the product information sheet suggests that incre-
easy to anticipate, and the abrupt awakenings seen
 mental doses of both ketamine and romifidine are
with ketamine do not occur.
given to extend anaesthesia.
To date there are no scientific reports as to the
use of ketamine (1 mg/kg i.v.) to lengthen the
Agents used to extend the duration of
duration of anaesthesia induced with α2 adreno-
anaesthesia
ceptor agonist/thiopental, although anecdotal
Thiopental sodium
reports suggest that the method is practicable.
Small doses (0.5-1.0 mg /kg i.v.) may be given to
Methohexital sodium
extend anaesthesia which has been induced with
either thiopental or with ketamine. The major
Methohexital (0.5mg/kg i.v.) can be given to
advantage of thiopental is that it acts in a circula-
extend anaesthesia in the situations where incre-
tion time and is ideal to bring an awakening
 ments of thiopental would otherwise be used.
animal quickly back under control. However,
However, it is very respiratory-depressant and
overdose may cause apnoea and, as the drug is
recovery is violent if the horse is not well sedated.
cumulative, speed and quality of recovery depend
on the total dose. Thus, if initial anaesthetic induc-
tion was with ketamine, more increments may be
TIVA for medium duration procedures
given than is possible following induction using
(30-90 minutes)
thiopental. A total dose of 10 mg/kg still results in
Anaesthesia which needs to be prolonged for more
 a calm recovery in an acceptable time; higher total
than 30 minutes is usually achieved by combina-
 doses may be safe but will lengthen recovery.
tions of α2 adrenoceptor agonists, ketamine, and a
centrally acting muscle relaxant - guiaphenesin or
a benzodiazepine. (Table 11.5). Ideally any drug
Ketamine hydrochloride
used for infusion to provide long term anaesthesia
Anaesthesia induced with α2 adrenoceptor ago-
should have a short half life of elimination so that
nists/ketamine mixtures may be prolonged with
 there is no cumulation. Not all these agents have
additional ketamine, but there is a danger of undes-
 the ideal kinetics, hence their limitations for use
irable excitatory effects unless the C2 adrenoceptor
Ae uoisuaxa auos qnouhe) sainuu ne puoaaq
induced sedation is still adequate. In clinical
pasuojoid arou e jo asuadxa aut te anqissod aq
practice, incremental doses of half the original
recovery).
dose of both xylazine and ketamine are given as
Xylazine and detomidine have adequately
required. There will be a delay before these agents 
 rapid kinetics (the information for romifidine is
will be effective. The xylazine/ketamine combina-
ua os Xaaonai ul ssaeam ansn asneo im -saeue an wmpa aail cn papuaixa aq uen to
thesia by administration of half the initial dose  ods which reduce the dose of this component are
    
 preferred. It benzodiazepines are used, then they
THE HORSE 295
TABLE I1.5 Some regimens of total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) suitable for providing anaesthesia
of from 30-90 minutes duration. All agents are given i.v. unless otherwise stated. Many variations of
these combinations can be used safely
Premedication
Anaesthetic
Maintenance
Acepromazine,
Chloral hydrate (l0%) infused
Thiopental, I mg/kg (maximal total dose
0.03-0.05 mg/kg i.m. or i.v.
until ataxia (50-60 mg/kg),then 12 mg/kg) or methohexital, 0.5 mg/kg.
thiopental, 5-6 mg/kg or
If anaesthesia needs to be extended beyond 45
methohexital,2.5-3.0 mg/kg
 minutes, more chloral hydrate may be required
 Xylazine, I mg/kg or
Ketamine,2.0-2.2 mg/kg
The* Triple Drip', a combination of guiaphenesin, C2
 Detomidine, 0.02 mg/kg
adrenoceptor agonist and ketamine infused to effect.
or
 For details of how to prepare suitable mixtures, see
 Romifidine, 0.08 mg/kg
below
 Xylazine, I mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg.
Climazolam (0.4 mg/kg/h) and ketamine (6 mg/kg/h)
followed after induction by
essa jage sanuiu o Xuasuns suunp pasnui ae
Climazolam 0.2 mg/kg
 of infusion,the climazolam is reversed with sarmazenil
(0.04 mg/kg)
Additional premedication with acepromazine (<0.05 mg/kg) may also be used. Additional premedication with an opioid (e.g.
butorphanol 0.02 mg/kg) will not reduce the doses of agents required initialy, but may lengthen their effects and may also cause
additional respiratory depression. Regimens including propofol have not been included here as,at this time of writing, the costs
involved mean that they are not practicable for clinical use.
must be antagonized at the end of surgery - this is
 of duration (Taylor & Luna, 1995). To make up a
expensive. Theoretically ketamine is not cumulat-
suitable solution for infusion 1 gram of ketamine
ive, but if used by infusion for periods of more 
 and either 500 mg of xylazine or 10 mg detomidine
than 90minutes, prolonged and poor quality
are added to 500 mls of 10% guiaphenesin or
apparently hallucinatory recoveries have been
330 ml of 15% guaiphenesin. Anaesthetic induction
seen (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1996). It is
should preferably avoid guiaphenesin in order to
postulated that the cause of these poor quality
reduce the total dose of this long acting agent,
recoveries is the cumulation of the active metabol-
and is then maintained by infusion to effect. The
ite, norketamine. The cumulation of norketamine
average rate of this mixture which is needed
will depend on total dose of ketamine rather than
to maintain anaesthesia is 1ml/kg/hour but,
 on time, so combinations which can reduce the
 depending on the induction regime used, higher
rate of infusion of ketamine may be used for a
rates may be needed earlier in procedure and
longer period.
rates should be reduced towards the end of sur-
al jo uoisnjui paouonoid wony Araaonay Arao
Triple Drip is not fast (often more than one hour)
C,Adrenoceptor agonist/guiaphenesin
but is usually calm. Romifidine has been used as
ketamine - the *Triple Drip'
the C2 adrenoceptor agonist component of the
The 'Triple Drip' was first used by Green et al.
combination.
(1986) who used i.v. xylazine (1.1 mg/kg) followed
by ketamine 2.2 mg/kg for anaesthetic induction,
then maintained anaesthesia with an i. v. infusion
O.2Adrenoceptor agonist/benzodiazepine/
ketamine
of 2.75 ml/kg/h of a guaiphenesin/ketamine/
xylazine mixture containing 50 mg guaiphenesin,
The replacement of guaiphenesin by a benzodi-
1 mg ketamine and 0.5 mg of xylazine per ml of 5%
azepine agent can improve the quality of recovery.
dextrose in water. This technique, and adaptations
The system has been most widely used in
of it using different C2 adrenoceptor agonists are
Switzerland, where both the benzodiazepine
now widely used in operations of up to 90 minutes
climazolam and its antagonist sarmazenil are
296 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
available. Anaesthesia is induced with xylazine
prolonged anaesthesia is propofol (Nolan et al.,
and ketamine, then climazolam is given at
1996). Propofol however has several drawbacks: it
0.2 mg/kg i.v. Anaesthesia is maintained with an
 is a poor analgesic, it produces severe respiratory
infusion of climazolam 0.4 mg/kg/hour and keta-
 and moderate cardiovascular depression, and its
mine 6 mg/kg/hour. Infusion ceases at the end of
carrier results in accumulation of triglycerides in
surgery, but the benzodiazepine is not antago-
blood. In the horse there are additional disadvant-
nized with sarmazenil (0.04 mg/kg i.v.) for 20 min-
 ages that with existing preparations, large vol-
utes in order to give time for the ketamine effects
umes are required and at such volumes it becomes
to have waned. The system gives good cardiovas-
very expensive. There must also be some concern
cular stability and respiration is adequate but O2 is
as to the dangers of triggering hyperlipaemia in
usually given. Recovery occurs rapidly following
susceptible individuals, although to date this com-
reversal of the benzodiazepine agent (Bettschart-
plication has never occurred. Nevertheless, if
Wolfensberger et al, 1996).
TIVA is ever to become practical for anaesthesia of
umlimited time in the horse, propofol is the agent
most likely to be involved.
Chloral hydrate/barbiturate
A number of studies have looked at methods to
Chloral hydrate lost favour due to its irritant
 reduce the dose of propofol by providing analge-
nature if injected outside the vein and to the fact
sia and further sedation (Nolan & Hall, 1985;
that if used alone recovery is very slow. However,
Taylor, 1989; Nolan et al., 1996; Flaherty et al., 1997;
in combination with the barbiturates it gives good
Carroll et al., 1998; Mama et al., 1998; Bettschart-
moderate term anaesthesia and administration
Wolfensberger, 1999a; Matthews et al., 1999). Most
through long i.v. catheters reduces the risk of
combinations utilize C2 adrenoceptor agonists,
perivascular injection. A 10% solution is infused
with or without ketamine. In all studies the
until the horse becomes ataxic (after 40-60 mg/kg
 authors commented on the fact the horse appeared
have been administered) when thiopental
 very lightly anaesthetized, yet did not respond to
(5 mg/kg) or methohexital (2.5 mg /kg) is injected
surgery.
i.v. as a bolus. Surgical anaesthesia is maintained
Betschart-Wolfensberger (1999a) investigated
by injection of increments of barbiturates (thiopen-
the use of continuous propofol and medetomidine
tal 1 mg /kg or methohexital 0.5 mg/kg). If anaes-
infusions to provide 4hours of anaesthesia in
thesia is to extend for more than 45 minutes, it may
 ponies. Medetomidine was chosen for its kinetics
prove necessary to give more chloral hydrate
 and its marked analgesic properties. Anaesthesia
(approximately 10 mg/kg but to effect). The need
was induced either with medetomidine/propofol
for this becomes obvious if small increments of
or medetomidine/ketamine and an infusion of
barbiturate fail to suppress paddling movements.
medetomidine at 3.5μg/kg/hour commenced.
If no further chloral hydrate is given, the horse will
The minimum propofol infusion required to
stand some 50-60 minutes after anaesthetic induc-
prevent response to a noxious stimulus ranged
tion and recovery is usually calm. Whilst anaes-
from 0.06-0.11 mg/kg/minute and cardiovascular
thetized, respiration is well maintained, the pulse
parameters were well maintained although oxy-
is strong and mucous membranes are a healthy
uaaand on pannban sem uoeuaanddns ua
pink with a fast capillary refill time, all suggesting
hypoxia. Following 4 hours anaesthesia recovery
that there is minimal cardiovascular depression.
Jo sem pue 'sanu ng Aaeuxoidde ul pamo
Excellent quality. Mama et al., (1998) investigated
the use of xylazine infusions of 35 μg/kg together
TIVA for long procedures (2hours and
with propofol at either 0.15 or 0.25 mg/kg/min for
more)
one hour; anaesthetic quality was excellent but at
the higher doses there was marked hypoxia and
Propofol combinations
recoveries were delayed. Flaherty et al., (1997)
The only anaesthetic agent which is sufficiently
maintained anaesthesia in ponies with an infusion
non-cumulative in the horse to be used for very
ofketamine (40μg/kg/min) and propofol
THE HORSE 297
(0.124mg/kg/min); anaesthesia was adequate for
mine, once the effect of the C2 adrenoceptor
castration and recovery was smooth.
agonist has waned end-tidal concentrations of
1.1-1.3 % are frequently required. Halothane is a
ANAESTHETIC MAINTENANCE WITH
  a r sr s r
INHALATION AGENTS
anaesthetized may respond suddenly to surgical
stimulation. Many of such responses are spinal
Volatile agents
reflexes, and are best prevented by provision
of analgesia. ABP and HR during halothane
Holothone
amaesthesia also will depend on other agents
Halothane's special advantages were (and still are)
administered. The decrease in ABP can give an
reasonably rapid induction and recovery, minimal
indication of the depth of anaesthesia, but modern
excitement during induction or recovery, adequate
practice of treating hypotension with positive
 reflex suppression and sufficient muscle relaxation 
inotrope agents will counteract this fall and
to allow most surgery to be performed, lack of tox-
remove this sign.
icity and ease with which anaesthesia can be con-
 Horses normally regain their feet within about
trolled. Halothane causes a dose-dependent fall in
30 minutes following the termination of halothane
ABP and CO and a rise in CVP. The fall in CO is
administration after induction with xylazine/ket-
due to a direct depressant effect of the agent on the
amine; after acepromazine premedication and
myocardium and falls of up to 55% of the non-
thiopental induction, recovery takes about twice
anaesthetized values have been recorded (Hall et
as long. Shivering is often seen during recovery;
al., 1968). There is a marked respiratory acidosis in
the reason is unknown - it does not seem to be
spontaneously breathing halothane-anaesthetized
related to body or environmental temperature and
horses and while this can be overcome by IPPV
usually is of no importance. However, by increas-
this causes a further fall in CO (Steffey &
ing O2 demands it may be harmful to horses suf-
Howland, 1978). Schatzmann (1982) showed that
hypoxaemia causes a respiratory drive in horses
diseases which limit O2 uptake when they are
anaesthetized with halothane in air, thus demon-
breathing air. Quality of recovery depends on the
strating that hypoxia can overcome halothane-
 injectable drugs which have been administered, on
induced respiratory depression.
the surgery performed and the presence or
 In horses it is remarkably difficult to jud ge the
absence of pain. Recovery tends to be better fol-
depth of unconsciousness during anaesthesia with
lowing thiopental induction compared to keta-
halothane (or the other volatile agents) as hypoxia
 mine inductions (Young & Taylor, 1993), possibly
from any cause results in sympathetic stimulation
because a prolonged recovery enables more of the
and signs such as nystagmus, sweating, hypervent-
halothane to be eliminated before the horse tries to
ilation and even movement. These may be taken as
stand. Horses may take several attempts to rise,
signs of inadequate depth of unconsciousness by
and show a measure of incoordination after recov-
the inexperienced anaesthetist, with disastrous
ery from halothane, but usually remain calm.
consequences. As the MAC value for halothane is
However, horses should not be made to walk (e.g.
about 0.9% it is possible to monitor the depth of
from recovery to loose box or stall) within 10-
halothane by continuous measurement of the end-
15 minutes of standing up.
tidal concentration. The end-tidal values needed to
maintain anaesthesia depend on the sedative pre-
Isoflurane
medication and anaesthetic induction technique
employed.
Isoflurane has been used for anaesthesia in horses
Following induction of anaesthesia with
for approximately 15 years (Steffey et al., 1977; Ste-
thiopental, when O2 alone is used as the carrier
ffey, 1978; Steffey & Howland, 1980). In many ways
 gas, stable maintenance of anaesthesia is usually
 it is very similar to halothane, and the signs of depth
achieved with end-tidal concentrations of
of anaesthesia in horses and the potential for a sud-
0.7-1.1% halothane; when induction is with keta-
den response to surgery are identical with both
298 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
agents. However the kinetics and the cardiopul-
enflurane is marked, and if IPPV is used to over-
monary effects of isoflurane and halothane differ.
come this, then hypotension can be severe or even
At equipotent doses isoflurane causes a smaller
fatal. Deep enflurane anaesthesia is associated
fall in CO than does halothane, and thus its effect
 with abnormal twitches in the muscles of the head,
on arterial hypotension mainly results from de-
 neck and forelimbs which become progressively
Treased peripheral resistance (Steffey & Howland,
 more pronounced as the end-tidal concentration of
1980). These differences between the cardiovascu-
enflurane increases. Recovery from enflurane
lar effects of halothane and isoflurane are still
 anaesthesia is very rapid, but it is associated with
 apparent following anaesthetic induction with i. v.
 Occasional bouts of excitement and more shivering
agents (Taylor, 1991; Lee et al., 1998c). However,
and incoordination than  is recovery from
isoflurane is more respiratory depressant than is
halothane (Taylor & Hall, 1985).
halothane (Steffey et al., 1980) and it is advisable to
perform IPPV on isoflurane-anaesthetized horses
Sevoflurane
not surgically stimulated in order to avoid hypoxia
and hypercapnia. The kinetics of isoflurane mean
MAC of sevoflurane in the horse is 2.3% (Aida
that induction and changes in depth of anaesthesia
et al., 1994) and despite the fact that most commer-
are rapid and recovery is impressively quick.
However, the quality of recovery can be poor
of 5%, low solubility and rapid uptake means that
(Rose et al., 1989), especially where ketamine was
there are no problems in achieving suitable end-
used for anaesthetic induction, and it is usual to
tidal values. Like other volatile anaesthetic agents,
administer a further dose of an Q2 adrenoceptor
sevoflurane causes dose related depression of res-
agonist at the end of anaesthesia to delay recovery
piration, CO and ABP (Aida et al., 1996) but clini-
and improve its quality.
cally, following anaesthetic induction with
Opinions diverge as to the relative merits of
 injectable agents, the cardiopulmonary depression
halothane and isoflurane for prolonged anaesthe-
is similar in extent to that caused by isoflurane
sia in the horse. As yet there is no evidence that
(Grosenbaugh & Muir, 1998). The speed with
isoflurane is safer than halothane; indeed in the 
which anaesthesia can be deepened means there is
multi-centre survey of equine deaths associated
with anaesthesia (Johnston et al., 1995) horses
 thetic agents during anaesthesia. However, the
which received isoflurane were more likely to die
 rapidity of uptake is such that care must be taken
than those receiving halothane but this may have
not to overdose in the early stages of anaesthesia.
been due to the selection of isoflurane for the more
Recovery from anaesthesia is very fast, but its
critical cases.
quality is variable. Without further sedation the
authors have found it to be poor, but if xylazine is
administered to horses as soon as sevoflurane is
Enfurone
terminated acceptable quality recovery occurs in
Enflurane may be used for equine anaesthesia
 about 30 minutes, and is often better than follow-
(Steffey et al, 1977; 1978; Taylor & Hall, 1985), but
ing isoflurane anaesthesia (Aida ef al., 1997;
has not gained popularity for a number of reasons.
Matthews et al., 1997).
The MAC value of enflurane is about 2% and, clinic-
 If sevoflurane is priced at an affordable level
ally, end-tidal concentrations of about 2.3% pro-
aedai lm Ae h (aasuadxa Aaa si hl Aa)
duce satisfactory surgical anaesthesia after
currently employed agents.
 acepromazine premedication and thiobarbiturate
induction. However, with large animals it is diffi-
cult to achieve this end-tidal concentration using
Desflurone
the commercially available vaporizers (maximum
Trials of desflurane in the horse have been very
 of 5% enflurane) unless economically unaccept-
limited. However, the few studies which have
able high flows of fresh gas are added to the
 been performed suggest that desflurane has major
rebreathing systems. Respiratory depression with
advantages for use in this species (Jones et al., 1995;
THE HORSE299
Clarke et al., 1996; 1996a; Tendillo et al., 1997). The
 Desflurane is unpopular for use in man and it is
kinetics of desflurane are such that the end-tidal
questionable as to how long it will be available.
cncentration reaches inspired concentrations in a
This is unfortumate, as the rapid and complete
matter ofminutes, even in a large horse, and recov-
nature of recovery from desflurane means that it is
ery is equally as fast. Consequently, control of
an excellent anaesthetic agent in horses.
anaesthesia is very easy. The MAC of desflurane in
the horse is approximately 7.5%; following i.v.
induction the horse is connected to the circle cir-
Nitrous oxide
cuit which has been primed with 8% desflurane in
The use of NzO is controversial. Its analgesic prop-
O2. In the first 10 minutes the circle system is emp-
erties ensures that less of the volatile agents which
tied twice to reduce the contained N2 concentra-
lack analgesic properties are required (Steffey &
tion, but after this time the circuit can be run closed
Howland, 1978a). The disadvantage lies in the
-the fresh gas flow rate still containing 8% desflu-
potential for causing hypoxia. NzO will reduce
rane, together with enough O2 to replace that lost
the PiO2 and particular care needs to be taken
by utilization and by leaks from the circuit (usually
when it is used in a rebreathing system. N2O
about 3 litres/ minute in a large horse). The low
also passes into the gut spaces, increasing their
flow rates used throughout mean that desflurane
volume and reducing FRC, thus resulting in a
becomes comparatively inexpensive to use - in the
 greater fall in PaO2 than can be explained by the
UK it costs less than halothane. If anaesthesia is
reduction in PiO2 alone (Lee et al., 1998). The use of
too light, the bag is emptied and refilled with a
N2O at the phase of transfer from i.v. induction to
concentration 1% above the previous level, and
maintenance speeds uptake of the volatile agent
depth of anaesthesia changes within a very
 by the 'second gas effect'. However, increasing the
short space of time. Horses anaesthetized with
alveolar concentration of volatile agent by this
desflurane rarely react suddenly or violently to
-mdoipres jo aaiap aieana e u imsan m suea
surgical stimulation, but occasionally if anaesthe-
monary depression. NzO can provide useful anal-
sia is too light, they exhibit muscle tremor and it is
 gesia but in the horse it should be used only in
sometimes necessary to increase inspired des-
situations where it is possible to monitor arterial
flurane concentration to as much as 10% to stop
bloodgases.
this. Recovery from anaesthesia is also very fast -
usedated animals attempt to rise within 6-10
minutes of withdrawal of desflurane, and
General points in relation to maintenance
although they remain calm, are still weak and may
of anaesthesia using volatile agents
fall forward. It isnow routine to administer a small
dose of i.v. xylazine (0.1- 0.2mg/kg) at the end of
Methods ofodministration
anaesthesia, after which horses get to their feet in
In equine anaesthesia volatile anaesthetic agents
about 15-20minutes in a calm and coordinated
 are administered via a circle or to-and-fro absorp-
manner.
tion system using an out-of circuit vaporizer, and
The use of desflurane is not without its prob-
for reasons of economy, they should be used with
lems. Cardiopulmonary depression is dose-
as low a flow of fresh gas as is practicable.
dependent and is similar to that of equipotent
However, the limitations to the use of minimum
doses of isoflurane (Clarke et al., 1996a). At alveo-
flows in the early phase of anaesthesia are (a) the
lar concentrations sufficient for surgery CO is well
necessity to remove N2 from the animal and the
maintained, although there is marked hypoten-
breathing system, and (b) the need to maintain
sion. The rapid kinetics and very fast change in
adequate inspired concentrations of volatile agent
depth of anaesthesia mean that is easy to overdose,
at a time when it is being taken up by the animal
and in early work, before it was realized that the
(Chapter 9). The simplest way to use a low-flow
initial inspired concentration of desflurane needed
 system is to restrict the method to the carrier
to be very little higher than MAC, some horses 
gas O2 and only one volatile anaesthetic such
became very hypotensive (Jones et al., 1995).
as halothane or isoflurane. At the outset the
300 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
anaesthetic system should be primed with O2 and
but careful monitoring is needed to ensure that
up to 4% of halothane or isoflurane (less in animals
overdose does not occur. Attempts to hasten the
with circulatory dysfumction). Following anaes-
uptake by the administration of high inspired con-
thetic induction, the horse is connected to the sys-
centrations can provoke cardiovascular collapse.
tem with fresh gas flow of 6-81/min (still carrying.
up to 4% of the anaesthetic agent). The excess of
Additionalanaigesid
gas is vented via the (scavenged) exhaust valve,
thus reducing N, and keeping the inspired anaes-
Ideally, additional analgesia should be provided to
thetic agent concentration at an adequate level.
horses anaesthetized with halothane or isoflurane
The vaporizer setting is reduced in accordance
prior to the start of painful surgery. Local nerve
with the clinical needs of the animal. At the end of
blocks, where practicable, totally reduce response to
 10-15 minutes, provided the reservoir bag is filling
-[eue aaeadoisod apraoid osle Aeu pue Araoms
well the fresh gas flow can be reduced to about
10 Alaaneiadoaid uaail uao are sIvSN 'eisao
41/min. At these flows rates, with a large horse
 intraoperatively but there no evidence that their use
given halothane the inspired concentration will be
reduces MAC. The place of opioids is controversial;
approximately half that of the vaporizer setting.
 many anaesthetists consider that butorphanol
The reason for this is simply that the mass of
(0.02-0.04 mg/kg) or morphine (0.1-0.2 mg/kg)
halothane delivered to the circuit at this low flow
improve the quality of anaesthesia and prevent
rate is insufficient in the first few hours of the
-ipn awos un nq Xrasms ci asuodsan un juauaao
anaesthetic period to make up the net losses from
vidual animals even under anaesthesia their effect
the breathing system to the animal's tissues.
 is to produce excitement and the dose of volatile
Reducing the flow rate still further (the minimum
 anaesthetic needs to be increased to counteract this.
needed is that required to keep the reservoir bag
Experimental studies have failed to demonstrate an
filled) will increase the difference between
 action of opioids on MAC in the horse (Matthews &
 nspired concentrations and the vaporizer setting.
Lindsay, 1990; Pascoe et al., 1993). Once the horse
If the depth of anaesthesia needs to be altered, the
has responded to surgery, a small dose of thiopental
reservoir bag should be emptied and the new con-
(0.05-0.10mg/kg) will rapidly regain control,
centration of agent given with a high flow of O2
although it may cause a fall in ABP and transient
until the required depth is achieved.
apnoea. Incremental doses of ketamine (0.1-0.2
The more insoluble the anaesthetic, the shorter
the time required for the tissues to become satura-
but the total dose should not exceed 2 mg/kg, and
ted and therefore the closer is the inspired concen
should not be given in the last half hour of anaesthe-
 tration to the vaporizer setting. Isoflurane is given
sia. Other options are Q2 adrenoceptor agonists
in a similar manner to halothane, but since it is less
given as bolus injections (0.1 mg/kg xylazine or
soluble, the vaporizer setting and the flow rates
2ug/kg detomidine) or by infusion.
can be reduced more rapidly; with sevoflurane
these changes occur even faster, and with desflu-
TreATMENT of circULATorY
rane inspired settings are close to those of the
vaporizer within minutes, even when very low
DEPRESSION
flow rates are used throughout.
 In the horse, hypotension is common during
With all volatile anaesthetic agents difficulty can
anaesthesia with volatile agents, and as this
be experienced in the transition to anaesthesia after
parameter is easy to measure, it has usually beer
induction by an i.v. technique. When the horse is
m uoisuaodu yns aienba oi aeid aunon
first connected to the breathing system respiratory
cardiovascular depression. However, it is now
arrest frequently occurs as a result of drug induced
realised that, although it is essential that ABP is
respiratory depression, removal of the hypoxic
 adequate to perfuse vital organs, once this 'open-
drive through high PiO2 (Steffey et al., 1992) and,
 ing' pressure is reached then, as discussed above
possibly, the sudden imposition of expiratory
 perfusion and peripheral blood flow depend on
resistance. The problem can be overcome by IPPV,
CO. Improving ABP by vasoconstriction may
THE HORSE 301
result in a fall in CO, presumably as the result of
Positive inotropes
increased afterload (Wagner et al., 1992; Lee et al.,
1998a). The aim of cardiovascular support is,
Many of the sympathomimetic agents are easily
oxidized to inactive compounds on exposure to air,
therefore, to increase ABP to an acceptable level
and thus should be prepared to the required dilu-
(usually taken as a MAP of 65-70 mmHg) by the
tion just prior to use. This property may explain
improvement of CO and blood flow. A number of
differing results and differing recommendations
methods of providing such support have been
as to dosage and efficacy. Fortunately, in clinical
advocated and investigated in horses anaes-
thetized with volatile agents. Often the findings
practice some changes in potency are acceptable as
the drugs are administered to effect by infusion.
do not agree, probably because of differing
The pharmacological action of dopamine, dobu-
tamine and similar agents is to increase heart rate,
responses in individual animals. In clinical prac-
tice more than one of these methods of support
yet if given too fast to anaesthetized horses brady-
 cardia or even heart block may occur. This appears 
may be needed. Few studies have examined such
to be a vagally mediated reflex to the improving
treatments in horses anaesthetized with i.v. agents
ABP, and if these drugs are given after treatment
although it is now recognized that cardiovascular
with an anticholinergic agent, tachycardia and a
support still may be required if good peripheral
rise in ABP occurs with very low doses of the sym-
 perfusion is to be maintained.
pathomimetic. Bradycardia can be avoid by com-
mencing the infusion of sympathomimetic slowly,
Increase in circulating fluid volume
then gradually increasing the dose as required.
An increase in the circulating fluid volume to
match the increased volume of the dilated vascular
Dopamine
bed will restore the venous return. The simplest
Dopamine is a naturally occurring precursor of
method entails the i.v. infusion of 5-20 litres of iso-
noradrenaline which exerts its action at α1, B1 and
 tonic fluid (usually lactated Ringer), depending on
B2, and dopaminergic adrenoceptors. In horses
the size of the animal, as rapidly as possible imme-
infusions of 2.5-5.0mg/kg/min improve CO
diately after the induction of anaesthesia, although
whilst causing vasodilation. Renal perfusion is
over-enthusiastic adminstration may
cause
imcreased (Trim et al., 1985; 1989) and both CO and
peripheral oedema. The use of hypertonic saline (4
ABP improved in horses with endotoxic shock
ml/kg) in anaesthetized horses has been reviewed
(Trim et al., 1991). Higher doses may cause vaso-
 by Gasthuys (1994). When given prior to anaesthe-
constriction via α activity. Signs of overdose are
sia and followed by a slower infusion of lactated
tachycardia and associated arrhythmias, and trem-
Ringer it improves blood pressure during anaes-
bling (Lee et al., 1998a) but these effects cease as
thesia (Dyson & Pascoe, 1990). However, Gasthuys
soon as the infusion rate is reduced.
et al. (1994) found that when hypertonic saline was
given to halothane anaesthetized ponies, the
Dobutamine
improvement in CO and ABP was significant only
at a time point 5 minutes after the cessation of infu-
Dobutamine exerts its actions at both α and β
sion. During the actual infusion of hypertonic
adrenoceptors (β actions predominating at low
saline ABP fell, and these workers suggest that
doses), but is devoid of action at dopaminergic
the method is not ideal where hypotension already
 receptors. In anaesthetized horses infusions of from
is severe. Gelatin-based compounds are not suit-
0.5-5.0mg/kg have been found to improve both CO
able as volume expanders in the normovolaemic
and ABP (Swanson et al., 1985; Donaldson, 1988;
horse (Taylor, 1998) as the volumes required are
Gasthuys et al., 1991a; Lee et al., 1998a). Overdose of
too great, but starch solutions have proved
dobutamine causes tachycardia with associated
very effective in clinical practice for improving the
arrhythmias (which may be dangerous in the pres
circulation in endotoxic horses (Bettschart-
 ence of hypercapnia) but lack of dopinergic activity
Wolfensberger, personal communication, 1999).
means that muscle tremors do not occur.
302 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Dopexomine
Coicium
Dopexamine is a new synthetic catecholamine
The use of calcium to counteract anaesthetic
which has marked activity at β2 receptors with a
 induced cardiovascular depression has been advo-
lesser action at β1 and dopaminergic sites. It
cated for many years but much of the evidence as
improves CO through a positive inotropic effect,
 to dose and efficacy is anecdotal, and the differing
whist causing vasodilation, reducing afterload and
 availability of elemental calcium in preparations of
improving renal perfusion. Muir (1992; 1992a)
different calcium salts sometimes makes compar-
demonstrated in conscious and anaesthetized
isons between studies difficult (Gasthuys et al.,
OO 'a1ow 1o uju/8x/8n 1 Jo sasop 1e jeu1 sasiou
1991b; Grubb et al., 1994). Calcium borogluconate,
 and HR increased, whilst systemic vascular resist-
 being readily available in veterinary practice, is a
 ance decreased. In conscious horses ABP changes
common choice and up to 300 ml of a 40% w/v
were minimal but in anaesthetized animals dopex-
 solution may be given prior to or during anaesthe-
 amine infusion caused a dose-dependent increase.
sia by slow i.v. infusion. Another recommendation
These advantageous cardiovascular effects in an-
is an infusion of 0.25-2.00 ml/kg/min of 10% calci-
aesthetized horses have been confirmed by other
um gluconate (Daunt, 1990). In clinical practice
workers (Young et al., 1997; Lee et al., 1998), but in
calcium infusions tend either to be very effective
these later studies under halothane anaesthesia
 or almost totally ineffective in improving ABP and
dopexamine was found to cause unacceptable side
 peripheral blood flow. The rationale of the use of
effects. The initial response to infusion of the drug
 calcium is that plasma calcium levels fall during
was a fall in end-tidal anaesthetic agent (presum-
 anaesthesia with volatile agents. Whether calcium
ably because the vasodilation had opened under-
has any effect in improving CO depressed by i.v.
perfused areas which then took up the halothane)
agents is not known.
and great difficulty was encountered in keeping
the animals unconscious. Higher doses caused
Anticholinergic ogents: glycopyrrolate ond atropine
sWeating, tachycardia and tremor. When infusion
was stopped, ABP and heart rate continued to rise,
The advantages and disadvantages of the use of
and side effects did not abate for a considerable
anticholinergic agents in equine anaesthesia
l0od sem Araaonau jo Arenb aul 'aw jo ponad
has been discussed above. However, during anaes
and in one study two horses developed postanaes-
thesia with volatile anaesthetic agents bradycardia
thetic colic. The cardiovascular effects of dopexam-
may contribute to the fall in CO and this is particu-
ine are ideal for circulatory support, and the side 
 larly likely to be the case if α2 adrenoceptor
effects almost certainly result from overdosage, but 
 agonists have been used in the anaesthetic pro-
considerably more experimental work is required
tocol. Atropine (0.01 mg/kg) or glycopyrrolate
to elucidate the correct dose before this agent can
(0.005 mg/kg ) given i.v. often do not increase
be recommended for use in clinical practice.
heart rate, but following their use, small doses of
dopamine or dobutamine do, with a spectacular
effectonCO.
Phenylephrineondmethoxamine
Phenylephrine and methoxamine both act as Q2
USE OF MUSCLE RELAXANTS
poona lealne aseainu pue 'sisjuole roidanouaipe
pressure by vasoconstriction. An infusion dose of
Centrally acting muscle relaxants
phenylephrine of 0.25-2.00 μg/kg/ min in anaes-
thetized horses raises blood pressure but CO and
Gudiphenesin
muscle blood flow fall or are unchanged (Lee et al.,
Where guiaphenesin has been used as part of the
1998). These vasoconstrictor agents should not
 anaesthetic induction technique, it will improve
muscle relaxation for an hour or more. Doses of
thetized horses but may have a role where all other
 guaiphenesin of 3 g and 5 g/ 50 kg may be given to
methodshavefailed.
the anaesthetized horse and will produce some
THE HORSE 303
relaxation without interfering with respiratory
anaesthesia (e.g. in eye surgery) but large doses
activity but when given in this way it causes a
will be required to produce the nearly complete
 blockade demanded by some surgical procedures.
inotropic effect (Pascoe et al., 1985).
In every case the aim should be to use only a mini-
mum dose and to ensure a complete recovery of
neuromuscular function before the termination of
Benzodiazepines
 anaesthesia. If unwanted muscle tone is returning
 Benzodiazepines may also be administered intra-
towards the end of a surgical procedure it is
operatively for their muscle relaxant properties.
usually wiser to restore relaxation by a slight deep-
ening of anaesthesia rather than the administra-
thetized with volatile anaesthetic agents, benzodi-
tion of more neuromuscular blocker.
azepines cause marked respiratory depression.
Clinical monitoring of neuromuscular block is
facilitated by the use of a peripheral nerve stimula-
tor (Chapter 7) which may be used on the facial or
Neuromuscular blocking agents
superficial peroneal nerves and the strength of
For many years neuromuscular blocking agents
contraction of the relevant muscles estimated by
manual sensing at the muzzle or toe. If this facility
(other than suxamethonium at induction of anaes-
is not available, myoneural block may be moni-
thesia), the major fear being that residual muscle
tored by careful observation of the breathing and
weakness when the horse tried to rise would
general muscular activity of the anaesthetized
adversely affect the quality of recovery. The advent
horse. Signs of partial blockade includebrief, weak
of the short acting easily reversed competitive
inspiratory movements, without holding of inspir-
relaxant atracurium changed this, and neuromus-
ation, and feeble, unsustained withdrawal
cular blocking agents are now widely used not
 responses to painful stimulation. One extremely
only to aid abdominal, ophthalmic and thoracic
simple objective test is measurement of airway
01 A1asms sipaedouro pue [erauag ul 1nq X1ag.ms
 pressure with a water manometer when the endo-
 prevent the sudden reflex responses which some-
tracheal tube is occluded before an inspiratory
times occur.
effort. No significant degree of myoneural block is
 The rules for the use of neuromuscular blocking
a ul amssaid e aerauah uen asroy aul jt luasaid
agents are, as for any species: (a) that the facilities
occluded airway of more than 25 cm H2O (2.5kPa)
which enable immediate and sustained IPPV are
below atmospheric pressure. If a degree of block is
available, and (b) that it is possible to be certain
present during anaesthetic recovery the horse is
that the horse will be unconscious throughout the
unable to stiffen the neck or hold up the head
duration of their effect.
when attempting to sit in sternal recumbency, or it
There is a wide variation among individuals in
may make brief, weak attempts to stand followed
the response to a given dose of neuromuscular
by shaking of the limb muscles and collapse.
blocking agent and in rate of recovery from block-
ade. Also, some antibiotic agents such as gen-
tamycin greatly reduce the dose of relaxant
Dosage and duration of action of
required. For this reason no attempt should be
neuromuscular blocking drugs
 made to administer them in fixed doses; they
should always be given so as to produce just the
Atrocurium
desired effect. An incremental dosage regimen
The relatively short duration of action of activity
enables this to be done; about one-half the antici-
and the lack of cumulative neuromuscular block-
pated full dose is given initially and further incre-
ing effect make atracurium particularly suitable
ments of half this initial dose are given at 3-5 min
for use in horses in doses of 0.12-0.20 mg/kg
intervals until the desired degree of relaxation is
(Hildebrand et al., 1986; 1989). The authors recom-
 obtained. Only small doses are needed to suppress
 mend an initial dose of 0.1 mg/kg followed, if this
unwanted muscle movements during general
does not produce the desired degree of relaxation
304 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
as indicated by train-of-four stimulation, by doses
administration of d-tubocurarine might be dan-
of 0.01 mg/kg at 2 minute intervals until the block
gerous.
is judged to be adequate (reduction of initial
twitch height). Edrophonium 0.5-1.0 mg /kg will
Vecuronium
antagonize any residual neuromuscular blocking
effects at the end of the procedure for which it is
 Doses of 0.1 mg/kg produce neuromuscular block
given and prior administration of atropine or gly-
of some 20-30 minutes duration in horses lightly
copyrrolate is unnecessary provided the antago-
 anaesthetized with halothane. Although experi-
nist is injected slowly over more than 1 minute.
 ence with this drug is limited it appears to be well
Atracurium has also been given by continuous
 suited for use in horses in that there is no evidence
infusion at 0.17 mg/kg/h after an initial bolus 
 of histamine release and complete antagonism of
dose of 0.05 mg/kg (Hildebrand et al., 1989).
block is readily obtained about 20 minutes after
Cardiovascular stability is good but there may be
 attainment of full relaxation with depression of the
some slowing of heart rate after an initial increase
first twitch height in train-of-four stimulation of
in ABP in response to edrophonium.
the superficial peroneal nerve. There then is no
evidence of muscle weakness in the anaesthetic
recovery period.
dTubocurorine chloride
In halothane-anaesthetized animals with end-tidal
Suxamethonium chloride
concentrations of halothane of about 1.0%, doses
of the order of 0.22-0.25 mg/kg d-tubocurarine
The use of suxamethonium for casting and
chloride produce good relaxation with respiratory
 restraint of horses is considered by the vast maj-
arrest. The use of d-tubocurarine in horses suffer-
ority of veterinary anaesthetists to be an extremely
ing from asthma or alveolar emphysema may be
inhumane practice, it is unnecessary and it is
associated with the production of bronchospasm,
unsafe on pharmacological grounds. In the past,
presumably due to histamine release. It is seldom
 suxamethonium had a place in the provision of
possible to restore adequate spontaneous breath-
very short term muscle relaxation in anaesthetized
ing by the use of anticholinesterases in less than
horses but it has now been almost totally replaced
3540 minutes after d-tubocurarine has been given
by the short acting competitive blocking agent
 in doses which produce respiratory arrest. Limb
afracurium
 movements are not seen during this period unless
the depth of anaesthesia is allowed to become
Termination of neuromuscular block
inadequate.
There is no effective antidote to suxamethonium,
but neostigmine is an efficient antidote to the non-
Poncuronium bromide
depolarizing relaxants. In horses its use should be
During light anaesthesia doses of 0.06 mg/kg
 preceded by the i.v. injection of 10 mg atropine sul-
produce complete relaxation with apnoea of about 
 phate or, better, 5 mg glycopyrrolate, and it is then
20min duration, but it is more usual to give
o asop rin e o dn sasop au un uaa
doses of 0.1 mg/kg to be certain of producing
10mg. A period of 2-3 minutes should be allowed
apnoea with complete relaxation of respiratory
between increments and the effect of each care-
muscles so that IPPV can be performed with the
fully assessed before the next is given. Edro-
lowest possible airway pressures (Hildebrand &
phonium or neostigmine should be given while
Howitt, 1984). The delay in achieving maximum
IPPV is continued so that there is no danger of
effect after i.v. injection is much less thian that of d-
hypoxia or hypercapnia because if given to hy-
tubocurarine chloride and no cases of relapse into
 poxic or hypercapnic animals neostigmine may
neuromuscular block have been encountered
 cause serious arrhythmias. As a general rule, the
following neostigmine. The lack of histamine
 dose of neostigmine needed to restore full sponta-
release makes this drug of value in cases where the
 neous breathing should be noted and a further
THE HORSE305
dose of half this amount given to be completely sure
cient time for full replenishment of the blood vol-
of full antagonism of all the effects of the relaxant
ume by transfusion before anaesthesia has to be
drug. Care must be taken not to confuse the weak-
induced. For these reasons many anaesthetists
ness of respiratory activity due to deep inhalation
claim that equine colic cases which may be hypo-
anaesthesia, hypothermia or metabolic alkalosis
volaemic fare better if allowed to breathe sponta-
from excessive bicarbonate administration, with
neously during anaesthesia even if their PaCO2
that due to residual neuromuscular block.
rises to 60-70mmHg (8.0-9.5kPa). (In this connec-
fion it must be noted that there is no evidence that
PaCO2 increase to these levels is harmful—indeed
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
it may be beneficial by increasing tissue perfu-
(IPPV)
sion.) The picture is, however, not quite as simple
Careful thought is needed before IPPV is used in
as this for spontaneous ventilation must prod uce
horses. Since blood gas measurements have
an adequate tidal volume and many horses with
become readily available during anaesthesia,
bowel obstruction only ventilate satisfactorily
many anaesthetists have thought it advisable to
once the abdomen has been surgically decom-
institute IPPV whenever the PaCO2 increases by
pressed. If there is any delay in this decompression
about 15mmHg (2kPa). Often in these circum-
it may be essential to institute IPPV as soon as
stances IPPV is commenced under inhalation
anaesthesia is induced. IPPV is, of course, essential
anaesthesia without the use of muscle relaxants,
for thoracotomy or the repair of penetrating
the chest wall is stiff due to tone in the intercostal
wounds of the chest.
muscles and diaphragm so that compliance is low
Ideally, monitoring of end-tidal CO2 and /or
puedxa ci papaau aie saimssaid Aemiie yoiu pue
analysis of arterial blood samples drawn after
the lungs. These high inspiratory pressures raise
about 20 minutes after the commencement of IPPV
the mean intrathoracic pressure and can have a
will enable adjustments to be made to the imposed
most deleterious effect on the circulation. Lower
tidal volume and / or rate of ventilation so that an
ABPs during IPPV than during spontaneous venti-
adequate PaO is maintained with as near as possi-
lation have often been erroneously attributed to
ble normal PaCO2. Unfortumately, in many cases
lowering of the PaCO2. A decline in PaO2 is fre-
facilities for blood gas estimation are not readily
 quently observed in anaesthetized horses when
available and the setting of the ventilator has to be
muscle tone is returning after the use of neuromus-
made from simple clinical observation of the
cular blockers and airway pressures are increased
horse. Excursion of the chest wall should be some-
to maintain the respiratory tidal volume. In these
what greater than might be expected in the sponta-
 cases restoration of the PaO2 requires nothing
neously breathing horse, the respiratory frequency
more than the administration of a further dose of
should be between 8 and 10 breaths/min, the tidal
the relaxant.
volume about 10ml/kg; the airway pressure
 Normally, any increase in mean intrathoracic
should be kept as low as is consistent with ade-
pressure is countered by peripheral venoconstric-
quate expansion of the chest wall and the inspira-
tion which raises the peripheral venous pressure
tory time should be between 2 and 3 seconds.
and restores the pressure gradient to the right atri-
Experience is often the only reliable guide to
um. This has the effect of increasing the venous
return and hence the CO. In hypovolaemic horses
horse. Whenever possible, the ABP should be
(e.g. many colic cases), and where the inhalation
monitored so that any embarrassment of the cir-
 anaesthetic agents block the effect of sympathetic
culation can be recognized before too much harm
discharge, the peripheral venoconstriction may be
results from an unsuitable pattern of lung inflation.
inadequate to counter the rise in mean intratho-
Assisted ventilation, in which the horse triggers
racic pressure due to IPPV so that venous return
the ventilator which then delivers a prescribed
falls and the CO declines. Diagnosis of hypo-
tidal volume, is a very useful compromise in
volaemia in horses is not always easy and even
when correctly diagnosed there may be insuffi-
'fail safe’ mechanism, whereby if the horse does
306 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
not trigger a breath within a certain time, the venti-
 only be carried out by experienced staff. Handlers
lator switches to automatic mode.
prevent the horse from rising by controlling its
head, and by administering small doses of
xylazine as required, until the effects of the volatile
ANaESTHETIC RECOVerY PerIOD
 agent have waned. The time required before the
Ideally horses should recover from anaesthesia
horse should be allowed to attempt to rise
calmly and quietly, and in as fast a time as possi-
depends on the kinetics of the volatile agent
ble, but these aims cannot always be achieved. The
employed - the authors sometimes restrain horses
quality of recovery will depend on a number of
given halothane for up to two hours, whilst fol-
factors including the sedative and anaesthetic
lowing desflurane 30 minutes is sufficient. In many
drugs used throughout the perioperative process,
hospitals ropes are used to assist the horse to rise
the degree of postoperative pain, the comfort of
but in most cases slings should not be used unless
the horse, its temperament, and limitation to
the horse is already accustomed to their use.
Dausaeue jo jasuo 1o Aiagms Aq pasnes Suipues
 In most cases adequate analgesia for the imme-
induced myopathy or neuropathy.
It is important that the horse does not try to rise
istered at the end of anaesthesia. However, if not
 until it is able to do so. Following prolonged anaes-
 already given, NSAIDs may be administered i. v.,
thesia with volatile agents it has now common
 and i.m. doses of pethidine (1 mg/ kg), do not add
 practice to administer additional sedation (e.g)
to recovery time (Taylor, 1986). Local nerve blocks
xylazine at increments of 0.1 mg/kg i.v.) in the
 given at the end of surgery on the digits for post-
-sanau ssat s uonepas yone poad Aiaaona rea
 operative analgesia do not seem to cause problems
sary with halothane than with the newer agents or
for the horse attempting to stand up. Unless
if, after suitable premedication, thiopental (which
catheterized, the bladder of male animals given
provides residual sedation) was used as the induc-
fluid i.v. during operation may become distended
tion agent.
and cause considerable abdominal pain; catheteri-
Horses anaesthetized under 'field conditions'
zation of the bladder produces immediate relief.
may be left to recover in a grassy field or on a thick
This problem does not occur in female animals
straw bed; no attempt should be made to induce
because urine will seep from the bladder during
an animal to stand before it tries to do so of its own
anaesthesia, but catheterization will prevent urine
accord. However, in equine hospitals animals are
 from spilling on to the floor.
usually moved to a quiet, dimly-lit, well-padded
The timing of removal of the endotracheal tube
room to minimize the chance of serious injury as
is controversial. Some anaesthetists leave the tube
they regain their feet. It is important that the floor
in place until the horse has arisen, but this is only
 of this box is not slippery, even if wet. In some hos-
possible with an adequate mouth gag, and even
pitals horse are placed on thick soft mats - this
then authors have seen recovering animal occlude
makes it difficult for the horse to regain sternal
the tube by biting on it. Respiratory obstruction
recumbency, and this, together with the extra com-
caused in this way can be difficult to relieve and
fort, encourage it to remain recumbent until fully
 Expensive tubes may be ruined. In addition, stimu-
ready to stand. Assuming there are no surgical
lation of the trachea by the tube has been asso-
contraindications, an animal which has been
ciated with cardiac arrest, presumably through a
supine should be placed on its left side in the
vagal
1 mechanism, as anaesthesia lightens.
recovery area. However the positioning of an an-
 Following prolonged anaesthesia, respiratory
imal which has been lying on its side is contro-
 obstruction is frequently observed after removal of
versial; turning to the other side enables 
 the endotracheal tube, probably due to hypostatic
under-perfused muscles to be reoxygenated, but
 congestion of the nasal and pharyngeal mucous
results in atelectasis of the lung lobes which are
membranes, and the horse makes a characteristic
still expanded.
 snoring noise. Ideally, it is prevented by keeping
In major orthopaedic cases a decision may be
the horse's head slightly elevated during anaesthe-
made to assist recovery but such recoveries should
sia, but if this has not been done, the obstruction
THE HORSE 307
can be relieved by passing a small-bore endotra-
Beadle, R.E., Robinson, N.E. and Sorensen, PR. (1975)
cheal tube through one nostril. Unless properly
Cardiopulmonary effects of postitive end-expiratory
secured such a tube may be aspirated into the
pressure in anesthetized horses. American Journatl of
Veterinary Research 36: 1435-1438.
tracheobronchial tree.
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Taylor, PM., Sear, J.W. et at.
A rare complication in recovery is obstruction
(1996) Physiologic effects of anesthesia induced and
due to laryngeal paralysis; this probably results
maintained by intravenous administration of a
from neuronal damage from stretching the head
climazolam-ketamine combina tion in ponies
on the neck. Should this occur the horse will
premedicated with acepromazine and xylazine.
American Jourrat of Veterinary Research 57:1472-1477.
obstruct as soon as the nasal tube is removed,
Bettschart, W.R., Clarke, K.W., Vainio, O. et al. (1999)
'panmbar aq Aew Aoauonn Aouaaa ue pue
Pharmacokinetics of medetomidine in ponies and
O2 can be given through the nasal endotracheal
elaboration of a medetomidine infusion regime which
tube,although
1 to produce any significant
provides a constant level of sedation. Research in
improvement of PaO2, it must be administered
Veterinary Science 67:41- 46.
into the trachea at a flow rate of at least 15 1/min.
anaesthesia in horses using medetomidine and
It has been suggested that an O2 demand valve
propofol. PhD thesis. London: Royal Veterinary
 may be used to administer oxygen during the
College, University of London.
recovery period (Reibold et al., 1980) but others
Brearley,J.C., Jones, R.S., Kelly, D.F. et al. (1986) Spinal
have found this rather unsuitable (Watney et al.,
cord degeneration following general anaesthesia in a
Shire horse. Equine Veterinary Journatl 18:222-224.
1985).
Bryant, C.E., England, G.C.and Clarke, K.W.(1991)
Comparison of the sedative effects of medetomidine
and xylazine in horses. Veterinary Record 129: 421- 423.
 REFERENCES
Carroll, G.L., Hooper, R.N., Slater, M.R. et al. (1998)
 Detomidine-butorphanol-propofol for carotid artery
Aguiar, A., Hussni, C.A., Luna, S.P. et al. (1993) Propofol
 translocation and castration or ovariectomy in goats.
compared with propofol/ guaifenesin after
Veterirnary Surgery 27: 75-82.
detomidine premedication. Journal of Veterinary
Clarke, K.W. and Hall, L.W. (1969) Xylazine-a new
Anaesthesia 20:26-28.
sedative for horses and cattle. Veterinary Record
Aida, H., Mizuno, Y, Hobo, S. et at. (1994) Determination
85:512-517.
of the minimal alveolar concentration (MAC)
Clarke, K.W. and Taylor, PM. (1986) Detomidine: a new
and physical response to sevoflurane inhalation
sedative for horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
in horses. Jourrat of Veterinary Medicat Science
18: 366- 370.
56: 1161-1165.
Clarke, K.W., Taylor, PM. and Watkins, S.B. (1986)
Aida, H., Mizuno, Y, Hobo,S. et al. (1996)
Detomidine/ ketamine anaesthesia in the horse.
Cardiovascular and pulmonary effects of
Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica (Suppl): 82: 167-179.
sevoflurane anesthesia in horses. Veterinary
Clarke, K.W. (1988) D. Vet. Med. Thesis. London:
Surgery 25:164-170.
University of London.
Aida, H., Kawashima, K., Yokota, M. et at. (1997)
Clarke, K.W. and Paton, B.S. (1988) Combined use of
Recovery characteristics of sevoflurane anesthesia in
detomidine with opiates in the horse. Equine
racehorses.Proceedingsofthe 6th International Congress
Veterinary Journal 20:331-334.
of Veterinary Anaesthesiology,p. 125.
Clarke, K.W. and Gerring, E.E.L. (1990) Detomidine as a
Alexander, F. and Collett, R.A. (1974) Pethidine in the
sedative and premedicant in the horse. Americar
horse. Research in Veterirary Science 17: 136-137.
Association of Equine Practitioners 35: 629-635.
Alibhai, H.1. and Clarke, K.W. (1996) Influence of
Clarke, K.W., England, G.C.W. and Goossens, L. (1991)
carprofen on minimum alveolar concentration of
Sedative and cardiovascular effects of romifidine
halothane in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
alone and in combination with butorphanol in the
and Therapeutics 19: 320-321.
horse. Journat of Veterinary Araesthesia 18:25-29.
Alitalo, I. (1986) Clinical experiences with Domosedan
Clarke, K. W., Alibhai, H.1.K. and Hammond, R.A.
in horses and cattle. A Review. Acta Veterinaria
(1996) Desflurane anaesthesia in the horse: Minimal
Scandinavica Supplement 82:193-196.
alveolar concentration following induction with
Amadon, R.S. and Craige, A.H. (1936) Observations on
xylazine and ketamine. Journal of Veterinary
the use of bulbocapnine as a soporific in horses.
Anaesthesia 23:56- 59.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
Clarke, K.W., Song, D.Y., Alibhai, H.1. et at. (1996a)
41: 737-754.
Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in ponies, after
Archer, R.K. (1947) Pethidine in Veterinary Practice.
induction of anaesthesia with xylazine and ketamine.
Veterinary Record 59: 401- 402.
Veterinary Record 139: 180-185.
308 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Clarke, K. W., Freeman, S.,Alibhai, H.1.K. et at. (1997)
England, G.C. and Clarke, K.W. (1996) Alpha 2
Cardiopulmonary actions of alpha 2 adrenoceptor
adrenoceptor agonists in the horse - a review. British
agonists administered to ponies during anaesthesia.
Veterinary Journal 152: 641-657.
Proceedings of the 6th Interrationat Congressof Veterinary
Farmey, J., Blaise, D., Vaillancourt, D. et al. (1991). Caudal
Anaesthesiology, p. 123.
epidural analgesia with butorphanol in the mare.
Clerbaux, T.,Sertyn, D., Willems, E. et al. (1986)
Proceedings of the4th International Congressof Veterinary
Determination de la courbe de dissociation standard
Anaesthesia.
de l'oxyhemoglobine du cheval et influence, sur cette
Flaherty, D., Reid, J., Welsh, E. et at. (1997)
courbe, de la temperature, du pH et du
A pharmacodynamic study of propofol or propofol
diphosphoglycerate. Canadian Jourrnat of Veterinary
and ketamine in ponies undergoing surgery. Research
Research 50: 188-192.
in Veterinary Science 62: 179-184.
Clutton, R.E. (1987) Unexpected responses following
Freeman, S.L. (1998) Studies on romifidine in the
intravenous pethidine injection in two horses. Equine
 standing and anaesthetised horse. PhD thesis. London:
Veterinary Journal 19:72-73.
Royal Veterinary College, University of London.
Combie,J., Dougherty,J., Nugent, E. et al. (1979)
Gasthuys, F., DeMoor, A. and Parmentier, D. (1991a)
The pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in the
 Influence of dopamine and dobutamine on the
horse.Journal of Equine Medicine and Surgery 3:
cardiovascular depression during halothane
377-385.
anaesthesia in dorsally recumbent ventilated ponies.
Combie, J., Shults, T., Nugent, E. et at. (1981) The
Journat of the Veterinary Medicat Association 38:494-500.
pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in the horse;
Gasthuys, F., Demoor, A.and Parmentier, D. (1991b)
selective blockade of narcotic induced locomotor
Cardiovascular effects oflow dose calcium chloride
activity. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
infusions during halothane anaesthesia in dorsally
42: 716-721.
recumbent ventilated ponies. Journalof the Veterinary
Cunningham, F.M. and Lees, P (1995). Non-steroidal
Medical Association 38:728-736.
anti-inflammatory drugs. In: Higgins, A.J. and Wright,
Gasthuys, F. (1994) The value of 7.2% hypertonic saline
I.M. (eds) Equine Maruat. London: W.B. Saunders,
in anaesthesia and intensive care: myth or fact? Jourrat
pp.229-237.
ofVeterinary Araesthesia 21:12-14.
 Daunt, D.A. (1990) Supportive therapy in the
Gasthuys, F., Messerman, C. and Moor, A.D. (1994)
anaesthetized horse. Veterinary Clirnics of North America
Cardiovascular effects of 7.2% hypertonic saline
6:557-574
solution in halothane anaesthetised ponies. Jourrat of
Daunt, D.A., Dunlop, C.1., Chapman, P.L.et at. (1993)
Veterinary Anaesthesia 21: 60-65.
Cardiopulmonary and behavioral responses to
Gillespie, J.R., Tyler, W.S. and Hall, L.W. (1969)
computer-driven infusion of detomidine in standing
Cardiopulmonary dysfunction in anesthetized
horses. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
laterally recumbent horses. American Jourrat of
54: 2075-2082.
Veterirnary Research 30: 61-72.
Doddam, J.R., Moon, R.E., Olsen, N.C.et at. (1993)
Gleed, R.D. and Dobson, A. (1990) Effect of clenbuterol
Effects of clenbuterol hydrochloride on pulmonary
gas exchange and hemodynamics in anesthetized
Research in Veterinary Science 48:331-337.
horses.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
Grandy, J.L., Steffey, E.P., Hodgson, D.S. et al. (1987)
54:776-782.
Arterial hypotension and the development of
Donaldson, L.L. (1988) Retrospective assessment of
postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized
dobutamine therapy for hypotension in anesthetized
horses. American Journat of Veterinary Research
horses. Veterinary Surgery 17: 53-57.
48: 192-197.
Dunlop, C.1., Steffey, E.P, Miller, M.F. et al. (1987)
Greene, S.A., Thurmon, J.C., Tranquilli, W.J. et al. (1986)
Temporal effects of halothane and isoflurane in
Cardiopulmonary effects of continuous intravenous
laterally recumbent ventilated male horses.
infusion of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine in
American Journat of Veterirary Research
ponies. American Journal of Veterinary Research
48: 1250-1255.
47:2364-2367.
Dyson, D.H. and Pascoe, PJ. (1990) Influence of
Grosenbaugh, D.A. and Muir, W.W. (1998)
pre-induction methoxamine, lactated Ringer
Cardiorespiratory effects of sevoflurane, isoflurane,
and halothane anesthesia in horses. Americar Journat
or post-induction dobutamine infusion on
of Veterinary Research 59: 101-106.
anesthetic-induced hypotension in horses.
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W. and Huber, M.J. (1992)
American Jourral of Veterinary Research 51:17-21.
Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine, and
England, G.C., Clarke, K.W. and Goossens, L. (1992)
xylazine/lidocaine for caudal epidural analgesia in
 A comparison of the sedative effects of three alpha
horses. Jourmat of the American Veteterinary Medical
2-adrenoceptor agonists (romifidine, detomidine and
Association 201: 1187-1190.
xylazine) in the horse. Journat of Veterinary
Grubb, T.L., Benson, G.B., Thurmon, J. et al. (1994)
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 15: 194-201.
Effects ofionised calcium on cardiovascular function
THE HORSE 309
in horses anesthetized with halothane or isoflurane.
Hubbell, J.A., Bednarski, R.M. and Muir, W.W. (1989)
Proceedings of the 5th International Congress of
Xylazine and tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia in
Anaesthesiotogy, Guelph.
horses. American Journat of Veterinary Research
Hall, L. W., Gillespie, J.R. and Tyler, W.S. (1968)
50: 737-742.
Alveolar-arterial oxygen tension differences in
Jochle, W., Moore, J.N., Brown, J. et at. (1989)
anaesthetized horses. British Journat of Araesthesin
Comparison of detomidine, butorphanol,
40:560-568.
flunixin meglumine and xylazine in clinical cases
Hall, L.W., Senior, J.E.B. and Walker, R.G. (1968a)
of equine colic. Equine Veterinary Journat
Sampling of equine pulmonary vein blood. Research in
Suppl: 111-116.
Veterinary Science 9:487-488.
Johnston, G.M., Taylor, PM., Holmes, M.A. et at. (1995)
Hall, L.W. and Trim, C.M. (1975) Positive end-expiratory
Confidential enquiry of perioperative equine fatalities
 pressure in anaesthetized spontaneously breathing
(CEPEF-1): preliminary results. Equire Veterinary
horses.British Jourral of Anaesthesia 47:819-824.
Journat27:193-200.
Hall, L.W. (1979) Oxygenation of pulmonary vein blood
Jones, N.Y, Clarke, K.W. and Clegg, PD. (1995)
in conscious and anaesthetised ponies. Equine
Desflurane in equine anaesthesia: a preliminary trial.
Veterinary Journal 11: 71-75.
Veterirnary Record 137: 618-620.
Hall, L.W. and Taylor, PM. (1981) Clinical trial of
Kalpravidh, M., Lumb, W.V., Wright, M. et al. (1984)
xylazine with ketamine in equine anaesthesia.
Analgesic effects of butorphanol in horses: dose-
Veterinary Record 108:489-493.
response studies. American Journal of Veterinary
Hall, L.W. (1983) Equine anaesthesia: discovery and
Research 45:211-216.
rediscovery. Equine Veterinary Journal 15: 190-195
Katila, T. and Oijala, M. (1988) The effect of detomidine
Hall, L.W. (1984) Cardiovascular and pulmonary effects
(Domosedan) on the maintenance of equine
of recumbency in two conscious ponies. Equine
pregnancy and foetal development: ten cases.
Veterinary Journat 16: 89-92.
Equine Veterinary Journal 20:323-326.
Hamm, D. and Jochle, W. (1984) Sedation and analgesia
Keegan, R.D., Gleed, R.D., Sanders, E.A. et at. (1991)
in horses treated with various doses of Domosedan:
Treatment of low arterial oxygen tension in
 Blind studies on the efficacy and the duration of
anesthetized horses with clenbuterol. Veterinary
effects.American AssociationofEquinePractitioners
Surgery 20:148-152.
30:235-242
Kerr, C.L., McDonell, W.N. and Young, S.S. (1996) A
Hamm, D., Turchi, P. and Jochle, W. (1995) Sedative and
comparison of romifidine and xylazine when used
analgesic effects of detomidine and romifidine in
with diazepam /ketamine for short duration
horses. Veterinary Record 136:324-327.
anesthesia in the horse. Caradian Veterinary Journal
Hashem, A. and Keller, H. (1993) Disposition,
37:601-609.
bioavailability and clinical efficacy of orally
Kerr, D.D., Jones, E.W., Huggins, K. et al. (1972) Sedative
administered acepromazine in the horse. purnat of
and other effects of xylazine given intravenously to
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therepeutics 16:359-368.
horses.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
Heard, D.J., Webb, A.1. and Daniels, R.T. (1986) Effect of
33:525-532.
 Klein, L.V. (1975) Standing sedation in the horse using
halothane in the dog.American Journal of Veterinary
xylazine and morphine. Proceedings of the 20th World
Research 47:2113-2115.
Veterinary Congress 2: 739.
Hildebrand, S.V. and Howitt, G.A. (1984) Dosage
Klein, L. (1978) A review of fifty cases of post-operative
anesthetized ponies: a comparison of cumulative and
Practioners 24: 89-94.
single-dose administration. Americar Journat of
Lam, K.H.K., Smyth, J.B.A., Clarke, K. et at. (1995) Acute
Veterirary Research 45:2441-2444
spinal cord degeneration following general
Hildebrand, S.V, Howitt,G.A. and Arpin, D. (1986)
anaesthesia ina young pony. Veterirnary Record
 Neuromuscular and cardiovascular effects of
136: 329-330.
atracurium in ponies anesthetized with halothane.
Lawrence, A.J., Joshi, G.P, Michalkiewicz, A. et at. (1992)
American Journat of Veterirary Research 47: 1096-1100.
Evidence for analgesia mediated by peripheral opioid
Hildebrand, S.V., Holland, M., Copland, VS. et al. (1989)
receptors in inflamed synovial tissue. Europear Jourrat
Clinical use of the neuromuscular blocking agents
of Clinicat Pharmacology 43:351-355.
atracurium and pancuronium for equine anesthesia.
LeBlanc, PH., Caron, J.P., Patterson, J.S. et al. (1988)
Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
Epidural injection of xylazine for perineal analgesia in
195: 212-219.
horses. Journat of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
Hubbell, J.A., Muir, W. W., Robertson, J.T. et al. (1987)
Association 193: 1405-1408.
Cardiovascular effects of intravenous sodium
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K. W., Alibhai, H.1. et al. (1998) Effects
 penicillin, sodium cefazolin, and sodium citrate in
of dopamine, dobutamine, dopexamine,
awake and anesthetized horses. Veterirary Surgery
phenylephrine, and saline solution on intramuscular
16: 245-250.
blood flow and other cardiopulmonary variables in
310 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
halothane-anesthetized ponies. Americar Jourral of
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield, S.M., Hague, B. et al.
Veterirnary Research 59: 1463-1472.
(1999) Detomidine-propofol anesthesia for
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K.W. and Alibhai, H.1. (1998a) The
abdominal surgery in horses. Veterinary Surgery
cardiopulmonary effects of clenbuterol when
28: 196-201.
administered to dorsally recumbent halothane
McDonell, W.N. (1974) PhD thesis. Cambridge:
anaesthetised ponies—failure to increase arterial
University of Cambridge.
oxygenation.Research in Veterinary Science
McDonell, W.N., Hall, L.W. and Jeffcott, L.B. (1979)
65:227-232.
Radiographic evidence of impaired pulmonary
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K.W. and Alibhai, H.1. (1998b) Effects
function in laterally recumbent anaesthetised horses.
on the intramuscular blood flow and
Equine Veterinary Journat 11:24-32.
cardiopulmonary function of anaesthetised ponies of
Moon, P.F. and Suter, C.M. (1993) Paravertebral
changing from halothane to isoflurane maintenance
thoracolumbar anaesthesia in 10 horses. Equine
and vice versa. Veterinary Record 143:629-633.
Veterinary Journat, 25:304-308.
Lindsay, W.A., McDonell, W. and Bignell, W. (1980)
Moore, J.M. (1994) Endotoxaemia; recent advances in
Equine postanesthetic forelimb lameness:
pathophysiology and treatment. Jourrat of Veterinary
intracompartmental muscle pressure changes and
Anaesthesia 21: 77-81.
biochemical patterns. Americar fournal of Veterinary
Muir, W.W.,Skarda, R.T. and Milne, D.W. (1977)
Research 41: 1919-1924.
Evaluation of xylazine and ketamine hydrochloride
Lindsay, W.A., Pascoe, PJ., McDonell, W.N. et al. (1985)
for anesthesia in horses. American Jourrat of Veterinary
Effect of protective padding on forelimb
Research 38: 195-201.
intracompartmental muscle pressures in anesthetized
Muir, W.W.,Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W.C. (1978)
horses.Americar Jourrat of Veterinary Research
Cardiopulmonary effects of narcotic agonists and a
46:688-691.
partial agonist in horses. American Journal of Veterinary
Lindsay, W.A., Robinson, G.M., Brunson, D.B. et at.
Research 39: 1632-1635.
(1989) Induction of equine postanesthetic myositis
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W. (1978a)
after halothane-induced hypotension. Americar
Evaluation of xylazine, guaifenesin, and ketamine
Journal ofVeterinary Research 50:404-410.
hydrochloride for restraint in horses. Americar Journa?
Lowe, J.E. and Hilfiger, J. (1986) Analgesic and sedative
ofVeterinary Research 39:1274-1278.
effects of detomidine compared to xylazine in a colic
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W.C. (1979)
model using i.v. and i.m. routes of administration.
Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of a
Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica 82 (Suppl): 85-95.
xylazine-acetylpromazine drug combination in
Luna, S.P, Taylor, PM. and Massone, F. (1997)
horses. American Journat of Veterinary Research
Midazolam and ketamine induction before halothane
40: 1518-1522.
anaesthesia in ponies: cardiorespiratory, endocrine
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T. and Sheehan, W.C. (1979a)
and metabolic changes. Jourrat of Veterinary
Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of xylazine-
Pharmacology And Therapeutics 20: 153-159.
morphine sulfate in horses. Americar Journat of
Malone, J. and Clarke, K.W. (1993) A comparison of the
Veterinary Research 40: 1417-1420.
efficacy of detomidine by sublingual and
Muir, W.W., Sams, R.A., Huffman, R.H. et al. (1982)
intramuscular administration in ponies. Journal of
 Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties of
Veterinary Anaesthesia 20: 73-77.
diazepam in horses.American Journal of Veterinary
Mama, K.R., Pascoe, P.J., Steffey, E.P. et at. (1998)
Research 43: 1756-1762.
Comparison of two techniques for total intravenous
Muir, W.W. (1992) Cardiovascular effects of dopexamine
anesthesia in horses. Americar Journat of Veterinary
HCl in conscious and halothane-anaesthetised horses.
Research 59:1292-1298.
Equine Veterinary Journat Suppl: 24-29.
Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P. and Pascoe, PJ. (1995)
Muir, W.W. (1992a) Inotropic mechanisms of
Evaluation of propofol as a general anesthetic for
dopexamine hydrochloride in horses. Americar
horses. Veterinary Surgery 24: 188-194.
Journat of Veterinary Research 53: 1343-1346.
Martin, J.E. and Beck, J.D. (1956) Some effects of
Muir, W.W. Gadawski, J.E. and Grosenbaugh, D.A.
chlorpromazine hydrochloride in horses. Americar
(1999) Cardiorespiratory effects of a
Jourral of Veterinary Research 17:678-686.
tiletamine/zolazepam-ketamine-detomidine
Matthews, N.S. and Lindsay, S.L. (1990) Effect of low-
combination in horses.American Journal of Veterinary
 dose butorphanol on halothane minimum alveolar
Research 60: 770-774.
concentration in ponies. Equine Veterinary Journat
Nilsfors, L. and Kvart, C. (1986) Preliminary report on
22:325-327.
the cardiorespiratory effects of the antagonist to
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield, S.M., Carroll, G.L. et at.
detomidine, MPV-1248. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica
(1997) Maintenance and recovery from anesthesia
82 (Supp;): 121-131.
with sevoflurane in 40 equine clinical cases.
Nolan, A.M. and Hall, L.W. (1984) Combined use of
Proceedingsof the 6th InternationalCongressof Veterinary
sedatives and opiates in horses. Veterinary Record
Anaesthesiotogy, Thessaloniki,p.125.
114: 63-67.
THE HORSE 311
Nolan, A.M. and Hall, L.W. (1985) Total intravenous
 Schatzmann, U.(1982) The respiration of the horse
anaesthesia in the horse with propofol. Equine
under different anaesthetic medications. Proceedings of
Veterinary Journal 17:394-398.
the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists 10 (Suppl):
Nolan, A.M., Reid, J., Welsh, E. et at. (1996) Simultaneous
112-118.
infusions of propofol and ketamine in ponies
Serteyn, D., Mottart, E., Deby, C. et at. (1990) Equine
premedicated with detomidine: a pharmacokinetic
 postanaesthetic myositis: a possible role for free
study. Research in Veterinary Science 60: 262-266.
radical generation and membrane lipoperoxidation.
Nyman, G., Funkquist, B., Kvart, C. et al. (1990)
Research in Veterinary Science 48:42-46.
Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment in the
Short, C.E. (1981) Intravenous anaesthesia; drugs and
anaesthetised horse. Equine Veterinary Journat
techniques. Veterirary Clinics of North America: Equine
22:317-324.
Anaesthesia 3: 195-208.
Pascoe, PJ., Steffey, E.P., Black, W.D. et al. (1993)
Short, C.E., Matthews, N.S., Harvey, R. et al. (1986)
Evaluation of the effect of alfentanil on the
Cardiovascular and pulmonary function studies of a
minimum alveolar concentration of halothane in
new sedative/analgesic (detomidine/ Domosedan)
horses.American Journal of Veterinary Research
for use alone in horses - or as a pre-anesthetic. Acta
54:1327-1332
Veterinaria Scandinavica 82 (Suppl): 139-155.
Pascoe, PJ., McDonell, W.N. and Fox, A.E. (1985).
Short, C.E. (1992). Alpha 2- agents in animals. Sedation,
Proceedingsof the 2nd Internationat Corgress of
analgesia and anaesthesia. Santa Barbara: Veterinary
Veterinary Aresthesiology, Sacramento, p.61.
Practice Publishing Company,pp. 21-39.
Pippi, N.L. and Lumb, W.V. (1979) Objective tests of
Singh, S., McDonell, W., Young, S.et al.(1997) The effect
analgesic drugs inponies. American Jourrat of
of glycopyrrolate on heart rate and intestinal motility
Veterinary Research 40: 1082-1086.
in conscious horses. Jourral of Veterirary Araesthesia
Raekallio, M., Taylor, PM. and Bennett, R.C. (1997)
24: 14-19.
Preliminary investigations of pain and analgesia
Skarda, R.T. and Muir, W.W. (1994) Caudal analgesia
assessment in horses administered phenylbutazone or
induced by epidural or subarachnoid administration
placebo after arthroscopic surgery. Veterinary Surgery
of detomidine hydrochloride solution in mares.
26:150-155.
American Jourral of Veterinary Research 55:670-680.
Ramseyer, B., Schucker, N., Schatzman, U. et al. (1998)
Skarda, R.T. (1996). Local and regional anesthetic and
Antagonism of detomidine sedation with atipamezole
analgesic techmiques: horses. In: Thurmon, J.C,
in horses. Journat of Veterinary Anaesthesia 25:47-51.
Tranquilli, W.J. and Benson, G.J. (eds) Lumb and Jones'
Reibold, T.W., Evans,A.T. and Robinson, N.E. (1980)
Veterinary Araesthesia. Baltimore: Williams and
Evaluation of the demand valve for resuscitation of
Wilkins, Pp. 461-462.
horses. Journat of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
Skarda, R.T. and Muir, W.W. (1996a) Analgesic,
Association 176: 623-626.
hemodynamic, and respiratory effects of caudal
Richey, M.T., Holland, M.S, McGrath, C.J. et al. (1990)
epidurally administered xylazine hydrochloride
Equine post-anesthetic lameness. A retrospective
solution in mares. American Jourrat of Veterinary
study. Veterinary Surgery 19:392-397.
Research 57: 193-200.
Robertson, J.T., Muir, W.W. and Sams, R. (1981)
Skarda, R.T. and Muir, W.W.(1996b) Comparison of
Cardiopulmonary effects of butorphanol tartrate in
antinociceptive, cardiovascular, and respiratory
horses. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
effects, head ptosis, and position of pelvic limbs in
42:4144.
mares after caudal epidural administration of
Robertson, J.T. and Muir, W.W. (1983) A new analgesic
xylazine and detomidine hydrochloride
drug combination in the horse. Americar Jourrat of
solution. Americar Jourrat of Veterirary Research
Veterinary Research 44: 1667-1669.
57:1338-1345.
Robertson, S.A., Carter, S.W., Donovan, M. et al. (1990)
Skarda, R.T. and Muir, W.W. (1998) Influence of
Effects of intravenous xylazine hydrochloride on
atipamezole on effects of midsacral subarachmoidally
blood glucose, plasma insulin and rectal temperature
administered detomidine in mares. American Jourrat of
in neonatal foals. Equine Veterinary Journal 22: 43-47.
Veterinary Research 59:468-477.
Robinson, E.P, Moncada-Suarex, J.R. and Felice, L.
Steffey, E.P., Howland, D. Jr. Giri, S. et at. (1977)
(1994) Epidural morphine analgesia in horses.
 Enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane potency in
Veterinary Surgery 23: 78.
horses.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
Rose, R.J., Rose, E.M. and Peterson, P.R. (1989) Clinical
38: 1037-1039.
experiences with isoflurane anaesthesia in foals and
Steffey, E.P (1978) Enflurane and isoflurane anesthesia: a
adult horses.American Association of Equine
Practitioners.34: 555-569.
horses. Journat of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
Ruch, K.S., Gamer, H.E., Hatfiels, D.G. et at. (1984)
Association 172:367-373.
Arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions in
Steffey, E.P and Howland, D. Jr. (1978) Cardiovascular
conscious laterally recumbent ponies. Equine
effects of halothane in the horse. Americar Jourrat of
Veterinary Journal 16: 185-188.
Veterinary Research 39: 611-615.
312 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Steffey, E.P. and Howland, D. Jr. (1978a) Potency of
Taylor, PM. (1989) Adrenocortical response to propofol
halothane- N0 in the horse. American Jourral of
infusion in ponies: a preliminary report. Jourrat of the
Veterinary Research 39: 1141-1146.
Association ofVeterinary Araesthetists 17:32-34.
Steffey, E.P. and Howland, D. Jr. (1980) Comparison of
Taylor, PM. (1990) Doxapram infusion during halothane
circulatory and respiratory effects of isoflurane and
anaesthesia inponies. Equine Veterinary Journal
halothane anesthesia in horses. Americar Jourrat of
22:329-332.
Veterinary Research 41: 821-825.
Taylor, PM. and Young, S.S. (1990) The effect of limb
Steffey, E.P, Dunlop, C.1., Farver, T.B. et al. (1987)
Cardiovascular and respiratory measurements in
in the forelimb of ponies. Jourrat of the Association of
awake and isoflurane- anesthetized horses. Americar
Veterirnary Anaesthetists 17:35-37.
Journal of Veterinary Research 48: 7-12.
Taylor, PM. (1991) Stress response in ponies during
Steffey, E.P., Farver, T.B. and Woliner, M.J. (1987a)
halonthone onisoflurane anaesthesia after induction
Cardiopulmonary function during 7 h of constant-
dose halothane and methoxyflurane. Jourrat of Applied
association of Veterinary anaesthesia
Physiology 63: 1351-1359.
18, 8-14.
Steffey, E.P., Kelly, A.B. and Woliner, M.J. (1987b)
Taylor, PM. and Luna, S.PL. (1995) Total intravenous
Time-related responses of spontaneously breathing,
 anaesthesia in ponies using detomidine. ketamine and
laterally recumbent horses to prolonged anesthesia
guaifenesin: pharmacokinetics, cardiopulmonary and
with halothane. American Jourral of Veterirary Research
endocrine effects. Research in Veterinary Science
48:952-957.
59: 1723.
Steffey, E.P., Woliner, M.J. and Dunlop,C. (1990) Effects
Taylor, PM. (1998) Endocrine and metabolic
of five hours of constant 1.2 MAC halothane in
responses to plasma volume expansion during
stermally recumbent, spontaneously breathing horses.
halothane anesthesia in ponies. Journat Of
Equine Veterinary Journat 22:433-436.
Veterinary Pharmacology And Therapeutics
Steffey, E.P., Willits, N. and Woliner, M. (1992)
21: 485-490.
Hemodynamic and respiratory responses to variable
Tendillo, F.J., Mascia, A. and Santos, M. et al. (1997)
Anesthetic potency of desflurane in the horse:
anesthetized horses during spontaneous and
 determination of minimal alveolar concentration.
controlled ventilation. American Journal of Veterirary
Veterinary Surgery 26: 354.
Research 53: 1850-1858.
Tevik, A. (1983) The role of anesthesia in surgical
Steffey, E.P., Dunlop, C.1., Cullen, L.K. et at. (1993)
mortality in horses. Nordisk Veterinarmedicin
Circulatory and respiratory responses of
35: 175-179
spontaneously breathing, laterally recumbent
Thurmon, J.C., Neff-Davis, C.,Davis, L.E.et al.
horses to 12hours of halothane anesthesia.
(1982) Xylazine hydrochloride-induced
American Journat of Veterinary Research
hyperglycemia and hypoinsulinemia in thoroughbred
54:929-936.
horses. Jourrat of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Stolk, P.W. (1979). PhD thesis. Cambridge: University of
Therapeutics 5: 241245.
Cambridge.
Tobin, T. (1978) Areview of the pharmacology of
Swanson, C.R., Muir, W.W., Bednarski, R.M.et al.
reserpine in the horse. Journal of Equine Medicine and
(1985) Hemodynamic responses in halothane-
Surgery 2: 433-438.
anesthetized horses given infusions of dopamine or
Tobin, T. and Combie, J.D. (1982) Performance testing in
dobutamine. Americar Jourrat of Veterinary Research
horses: a review of the role of simple behavioral
46:365-370.
models in the design of performance experiments.
Sysel, A.M., Pleasant, R.S., Jacobson, J.D. et at. (1996)
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacotogy and Therapeutics
Efficacy of an epidural combination of morphine and
5: 105-118
detomidine in alleviating experimentally induced
Trim, C.M. and Mason, J. (1973) Post-anaesthetic fore-
hindlimb lameness in horses. Veterinary Surgery
limb lameness in horses. Equine Veterinary Journat
25:511-518.
5: 71- 76.
Sysel, A.M., Pleasant, R.S., Jacobson, J.D. et at. (1997)
Trim, C.M. (1984) Complications associated with the use
Systermic and local effects associated with long-term
of the cuffless endotracheal tube in the horse. Jourra?
epidural catheterization and morphine-detomidine
of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
administration in horses. Veterinary Surgery
185:541-542.
26: 141-149.
Trim, C.M., Moore, J.N. and White, N.A. (1985)
Taylor, PM. and Hall, L.W. (1985) Clinical anaesthesia in
Cardiopulmonary effects of dopamine hydrochloride
the horse: comparison of enflurane and halothane.
in anaesthetised horses. Equirne Veterinary Journat
Equine Veterinary Journal 17: 51-57.
17: 4144.
Taylor, PM. (1986) Effect of postoperative pethidine on
Trim, C.M., Moore, J.N. and Clark, E.S. (1989) Renal
the anaesthetic recovery period in the horse. Equine
effects of dopamine infusion in conscious horses.
Veterinary Journat 18: 70-72.
Equine Veterinary Journat Supp: 124-128.
THE HORSE 313
Trim, C.M., Moore, J.N., Hardee, M.M. et at. (1991)
Watmey, G.C., Watkins, S.B. and Hall, L.W. (1985) Effects
Effects of an infusion of dopamine on the
 of a demand valve on pulmonary ventilation in
cardiopulmonary effects of Escherichia coli endotoxin
spontaneously breathing, anaesthetised horses.
in anaesthetised horses. Research in Veterinary
Veterinary Record 117:358-362.
Science 50: 54-63.
Watney, G.C.J., Jordan, C. and Hall, L.W. (1987) The
Trim, C.M. (1997) Postanesthetic hemorrhagic
effect of halothane, enflurane and isoflurane on 
myelopathy ormyelomalacia. Veterirnary Clinics of
bronchomotor tone in anaesthetized ponies. British
North America.Equine Practice 13:73-77.
Jourrat ofAraesthesia 59: 1022-1026.
Tyler, W.S., Gillespie, J.R. and Nowell, J. (1971) Moderm
Webb, A.1. (1984) Nasal intubation in the foal. Jourral of
functional morphology of the equine lung. Equine
the American Veterinary Medical Association 185:48-51.
Veterinary Journa1 3: 84-94.
Westhues, M. and Fristch, R. (1960). Die narkose der Tierre,
Vainio, O. (1985) Detomidine, a new sedative and
Berlin: Paul Darey.
Wetmore, L.A., Derksen, F.J., Blaze, C.A. et al. (1987).
 and clinical studies inlaboratory animals, horses
 Mixed venous oxygen tension as an estimate of
and cattle. PhD thesis. Helsinki: University of
cordiac output in anesthetized horses. American
Helsinki.
Journat of Veterinary Research 48: 971.
Voetgli, K. (1988). Studies on the sedative and analgesic
Wright, J.G. (1942) Veterinary Anaesthesia. London:
 effects of an alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonist (STH2130)
Balliere Tindall and Cox.
in horses. D.V et. Med. Thesis. Bermne: University of
Young, L.E., Blissitt, K.J., Clutton, R.E. et at. (1997)
Berme.
 Temporal effects of an infusion of dopexamine
Wagner, A.E., Dunlop, C.1., Heath, R.B. et at. (1992)
hydrochloride in horses anesthetized with halothane.
Hemodynamic function during neurectomy in
American Jourral ofVeterinary Research 58:516-523.
halothane-anesthetized horses with or without
Young,S.S. and Taylor, PM. (1993) Factors influencing
constant dose detomidine infusion. Veterinary Surgery
the outcome of equine anaesthesia: a review of 1,314
21:248-255.
cases.Equine Veterinary Journal 25:147-151.
12
Anaesthesia of cattle
2. Withholding water for 8 to 12hours before
INTRODUCTION
anaesthesia.
 3. When the animal is in lateral recumbency
Aaeau roy sinalqns poog sueau ou Aq aie ae
during anaesthesia arranging that the occiput is
sedation or general anaesthesia. Regurgitation
above general body level and that the head slopes
followed by aspiration of ruminal contents into
so that saliva and any regurgitated material runs
the lungs can easily occur. Once a ruminant ani-
freely from the mouth (Fig. 12.1).
mal is in lateral or dorsal recumbency, the
4. At the end of anaesthesia, cleaning solid
oesophageal opening is submerged in ruminal
material from the pharynx and leaving the
material, normal eructation cannot occur, and gas
accumulates. The degree of bloat depends on the
endotracheal tube in the trachea with the cuff
 inflated until the animal is in sternal recumbency,
amount of fermentation of the ingesta and on the
length of time that gas is allowed to accumulate.
is swallowing and, most importantly, can with-
draw its tongue back into its mouth.
Gross distension of the rumen becomes a hazard if
anaesthesia or recumbency is prolonged and re-
An additional procedure to prevent regurgit-
gurgitation can follow from this. In addition, the
ation that has been tried but not often used is to
weight of the abdominal viscera and their contents
pass a modified stomach tube as far down the
prevents the diaphragm from moving freely on
oesophagus as possible. The tube has a balloon
inspiration and ventilation becomes shallow, rapid
firmly attached to its end that can be inflated to
and inefficient for gas exchange within the lungs.
 The danger of regurgitation and inhalation of
ingesta is always present but the likelihood of it
 occurring can be minimized by:
1. Withholding all food for 24 to 48hours
before anaesthesia. Optimum duration  for
starvation is up for discussion, with some
recommending that 24 hours is not only sufficient
but also produces the best consistency of rumen
contents to minimize regurgitation. A longer
e jo uoeuo u nmsan u ueaiis jo ponad
FIG. I2.I Animal's head inclined over a support to allow
more liquid ruminal content which may be
saliva and any regurgitated rumenal content to drain out
regurgitated more easily.
of the mouth.
315
316 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
obstruct flow of ingesta from the rumen into the
remove the tube from the oesophagus and to
pharynx.
rapidly intubate the trachea. However, if the
Regurgitation occurs during both light and
conditions initiating the regurgitation such as
deep anaesthesia so that it is probable that two
ropes tight around the thorax and abdomen
 mechanisms are involved in the process. During
have not been removed, or the depth of anaesthe-
light anaesthesia ingesta may pass up the oesopha-
 sia is light, regurgitation may recommence during
 gus into the pharynx as a result of an active, but
the removal of the endotracheal tube from the
uncontrolled, reflex mechanism. It is then a matter
oesophagus.
of chance whether or not the protective reflexes,
Salivation continues as a copious flow through-
e.g. laryngeal closure, coughing, etc., are active
out general anaesthesia but the loss of saliva is
and can or cannot prevent aspiration. Fortunately,
unlikely to produce a significant effect on
laryngeal closure often occurs but, as hypoxia
 acid-base status. Antisialagogues are not of much
develops, at some point the animal will take a
use for they make the secretion more viscid in
large breath and any ingesta accumulated in the
nature and do not significantly reduce its produc-
 pharynx will be aspirated. The order in which the
tion. It is important to arrange the head of the
reflexes of laryngeal closure, coughing, swallow-
 anaesthetized animal so that saliva drains from the
ing, and regurgitation disappear as anaesthesia is
mouth and does not accumulate in the pharynx.
deepened differs from one anaesthetic drug com-
Intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube will
bination to another but the relative safety of the
 prevent inhalation of saliva.
various agents is not documented. During deep
 In two reports involving restraint of unsedated
anaesthesia, on the other hand, regurgitation is a
cows or bulls in dorsal or lateral recumbency, a
passive process. The striated muscle of the oesoph-
 decrease in PaO, from an average standing value
 agus loses its tone and any increase in the intraru-
of 11.4kPa (86 mmHg) to less than 9.3kPa (70
minal pressure - whether from pressure on the
mmHg) was measured, with a decrease to below
abdominal wall from a rope or belly band or from
6.6 kPa (50 mmHg) in some individuals (Semrad et
 gas accumulation in the rumen itself - may force
al., 1986; Klein & Fisher 1988). Arterial PCO2
ingesta up into the pharyrx. The protective reflexes
remained at or slightly below 5kPa (38mmHg). In
     a  ag
another investigation of cows from which food
Tracheal intubation is not always performed in
 was withheld for 18h, mean PaO2 in standing ani-
all sedated or anaesthetized recumbent bovine ani-
mals was 14.5kPa (109 mmHg) (Wagmer et al.,
mals and regurgitation does not always occur.
1990). Significant decreases in PaO2 occurred in
However, some animals will regurgitate, and this
both lateral and dorsal positions but only in dorsal
has an unreasonably high risk for fatal outcome.
recumbency did values decrease to below 9.3kPa
Should regurgitation occur during the induction of
(70 mmHg). These changes indicate that even in
anaesthesia before endotracheal intubation has
unsedated cattle, recumbency creates abnorm-
been accomplished, the endotracheal tube may be
alities of ventilation and perfusion that are not
immediately passed into the oesophagus and its
counter-balanced by normal compensatory mech-
cuff inflated so that the regurgitated material pass-
anisms. It is not surprising that cattle sedated with
es along the tube and out of the mouth. The tra-
 xylazine and breathing air will develop decreased
chea can then be intubated with a second tube,
 Oxygenation or hypoxaemia (DeMoor & Desmet,
taking care to cover the end of the tube to avoid
1971; Raptopoulos & Weaver 1984).
scooping material into its lumen. In actuality, the
Withholding feed before sedation and anaes-
thesia may reduce pressure on the diaphragm,
often makes passage of a second tube nearly
limit lung collapse and modify the decrease in
impossible due to the small size of the bovine
 PaO2. In a study of fed and non-fed cows anaes-
pharynx. One option is to intubate the trachea
 thetized with halothane and breathing oxygen,
with a stomach tube and attempt to feed the sec-
 cows fed before anaesthesia had a progressive
ond endotracheal tube over the stomach tube. An
decrease in PaO2, reaching hypoxaemic levels after
alternative is to wait until the flow of ingesta stops,
an hour of anaesthesia, whereas cows that were
CATTLE 317
starved before anaesthesia were well oxygenated
was associated with significant aversive behaviour
(Blaze et al., 1988). Severe hypercapnia was measured
and evidence of distress and the results led the
Ul pamseau aseaioui rajeana e yim sdnoig yoq u
authors to believe that electroimmobilization was
the fed cows. Thus, hypoxaemia may develop in
a strong noxious stimulus that was remembered
 recumbent non-starved cattle even when inhaling
for several months.
high O2 concentrations but supplementation of
inspired air with O2 may prevent hypoxaemia if
the cow has been starved first. Respiratory acid-
SEDATION
osis usually develops in anaesthetized cattle.
Normal values for cardiovascular parameters
AGENTS USED IN BOVINE ANAESTHESIA
in unsedated healthy cattle are approximately
73 ± 14 beats/min (mean ± SD) for heart rate,
Xylazine
150 ± 27 mmHg for mean arterial pressure, and
Xylazine has for a long time been the most effect-
64 ± 14 ml/kg/min for cardiac output (Wagner
ive sedative available for cattle. The dose rate of
et al., 1990). Withholding feed for 48h has been
xylazine in cattle, 0.02-0.20 mg/kg, with the high-
determined to cause significant decreases in heart
est dose intended for i.m. use, is one-tenth of that
rates in cattle (Rumsey & Bond, 1976; McGuirk
used in horses. Intravenous injection results in
et al., 1990).
deeper sedation than i.m. administration. Cattle
may assume recumbency even at the lowest dose
RESTRAINT
rates, although breed differences in sensitivity to
xylazine have been reported. In an investigation
The majority of bovine clinical surgery is carried
comparing Hereford and Holstein cattle, 84% of
out under local analgesia, frequently in the stand-
Herefords spontaneously lay down after xylazine
ing animal. Surgical procedure is made easier by
administration, whereas only 22% of Holsteins did
 use of appropriate sedation and /or restraining
so (Raptopoulos & Weaver, 1984). Furthermore,
'crushes' or'chutes'. Ropes are useful additions for
the average duration of recumbency in the Here-
restraining sedated or unsedated cattle and any-
fords was 90 min compared with 50 min in the
one in cattle veterinary practice soon becomes
Holsteins. The environmental conditions under
expert at tying quick-release knots, tying bowline
which xylazine is administered may influence the
knots for rope loops, applying Reuff's method of
response. In a study comparing the effects of
casting a mature bovine by squeezing with a neck
xylazine in Holstein heifers under a thermoneutral
loop and two half-hitches around the body, and
condition compared with a hot envirorment (tem-
assembling figure of eight ties to secure flexed
front and hind limbs.
ity 63%), the time to standing was increased from
41 min to an average of 107 min during heat stress
Electroimmobilization
(Fayed et al., 1989). Xylazine causes contraction of
the bovine uterus similar to oxytocin (LeBlanc
Electrical devices are available to immobilize cattle
et al., 1984), and premature birth has been reported
by causing muscle tetanus from application of an
after administration to heavily pregnant cows.
electrical current between electrodes at the lip and
Jo asn jeul paopalmouyoe Alerauag st 1 Aepo
rectum. There are concerns that this technique is
 xylazine in pregnant cows in the last trimester of
neither humane nor analgesic. Holstein cows
pregnancy is contraindicated.
trained to be lead with a halter and enter a set of
Xylazine may cause mild to severe decreases in
stocks were observed for behavioural and physio-
PaO2 and moderate increases in PaCO2 in mature
logical responses to either immobilization by
cattle (DeMoor & Desmet, 1971; Raptopoulos &
application of an electric current for 30s from a
Weaver, 1984). Xylazine administration induces
commercially available electroimmobilizer or to
bradycardia, decreased MAP and CO, and
an intramuscular injection with an 18 gauge nee-
 increased peripheral resistance (Campbell et al.,
dle (Pascoe, 1986). The electrical immobilization
1979). Campbell et al. (1979) also noted second
318 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
degree atrioventricular heart block in one out of
A lower dose rate of detomidine, 0.02 mg/kg,
five calves receiving xylazine.
decreased electrical activity of the uterus and seda-
Xylazine has a number of side effects that may
tion at this dose rate may be safe in the pregnant
have an adverse effect on the animal. It abolishes
animal (Vainio 1988).
the swallowing reflex so that regurgitation can 
 The pharmacologic effects of detomidine in cat-
result in pulmonary aspiration. The inability of the
tle are very similar to those of xylazine in that it
cow or bull to withdraw its tongue into its mouth
 causes bradycardia, hyperglycaemia, and in-
and swallow may persist until after the animal
 creased urine production. An exception is that
regains the standing position. Thus, it is advisable 
detomidine causes arterial hypertension which is
to withhold food and water from catle before giv-
dose-dependent in duration.
img xylazine. Gastrointestinal motility is decreased
Medetomidine
observed 12-24hours after sedation (Hopkins,
1972). Hyperglycaemia persisting for about
Deep sedation without recumbency can be ob-
10 hours develops after xylazine administration
tained with intravenous doses of medetomidine,
and this is associated with a decrease in serum
-umsa1 saonpoid 8x /8w 10'0 aum '8x/8u g00'0
insulin concentration (Symonds & Mallinson,
bency and sedation equivalent to that obtained
1978; Eichner et al., 1979). The decrease in serum
with intravenous doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg xylazine
insulin is believed to be due to a decrease in
(G. C. W. England and K. W. Clarke, unpublished
production (Fayed et al., 1989). Increased urine
 observations). Medetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg, has
production occurs within 30 minutes of adminis-
 been given intra venously alone or with ketamine
tration and continues for two hours (Thurmon
for anaesthesia in calves (Raekallio et al., 1991;
et al., 1978) due to suppression of antidiuretic hor-
Ranheim et al.,1998). Medetomidine, 0.015 mg/kg
mone (ADH) release. Use of xylazine in animals
 has been administered by epidural injection for
with urethral obstruction may be responsible for
 analgesia in cows (Lin et al., 1998).
rupture of the urinary bladder or urethra.
Minor surgical procedures have been per-
Antagonists to the O, adrenoceptor agonists
formed on cattle sedated with xylazine but,
whenever possible, local infiltration techniques or
-qoid Auew os sasnes Aouaqumoai pasuo joid sy
nerve blocks should be utilized to ensure sufficient
lems in cattle, the availability of α2 adrenoceptor
analgesia.
antagonists is of particular value. These antagon-
ists not only cause the animal to awaken, they also
Detomidine
antagonize the majority of the side effects of the
 agonists, including restoring ruminal motility to
In contrast to xylazine, the dose rates for detomi-
normal.
dine in cattle are similar to those used in horses.
Almost all the C2 adrenoceptor antagonists
Dose rates of 0.03-0.06 mg/kg i.m. have been used
have been used in cattle sedated with xylazine.
in clinical trials, however lower doses may provide 
Yohimbine, 0.125 mg/kg, with aminopyridine,
sufficient sedation for combination with local anal-
0.3 mg/kg, will awaken cattle sedated with
 gesic techniques for surgery. Elimination is mainly
0.2-0.3 mg/kg of xylazine, but will not restore a
by metabolism as there is negligible excretion of
normal state of consciousness. Idazoxan at dose of
the drug in urine. No detomidine was detectable in
0.01-0.10 mg/kg is reported to be effective against
milk 23h after dosing and tissue concentrations
xylazine in calves, with no relapse to sedation.
measured 48h after dosing were less than 3% of
Tolazoline at 0.2 mg /kg reverses the suppression
the original dose (Salonen et al., 1989). Detomidine,
of ruminal motility induced by xylazine but higher
0.04 and 0.06 mg/kg, increases electrical activity of
 doses, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg, are required for full reversal
the bovine uterus, although administration of
 of sedation. Care must be taken to administer tola-
detomidine, 0.05 mg/kg, to a group of pregnant z
 zoline slowly as intravenous injection has been
cows was not followed by abortions (Vainio, 1988).
associated with abrupt adverse haemodynamic
CATTLE 319
changes. One experimental study of xylazine
perfectably acceptable, inexpensive sedative for
administered by intramuscular and lumbosacral
adult cattle. It may be given by mouth or i.v. injec-
epidural routes concluded that the technique did
tion. To obtain a recumbent, very lightly uncon-
not provide adequate analgesia for umbilical sur-
scious adult cow, the drug is usually administered
gery in calves (Lewis et al., 1999). In this study,
by drench, or preferably by stomach tube, in doses
reversal of sedation with tolazoline caused tran-
of 30-60 g as a 1 in 20 solution in water. Sedation
sient sinus bradycardia and sinus arrest, accompa-
attains its maximum depth in a period of 10-20
min and local analgesics may be injected for nerve
Atipamezole in doses of 25 and 50μg/kg, intra-
blocks while sedation is developing. As cows can
venously or intramuscularly, causes awakening in
 generally be cast and restrained without difficulty,
cows sedated with 0.2 mg/kg of xylazine, with
i.v. administration will generally be in this position
restoration of ruminal motility to normal. Two
with the head and neck extended. The external
hours later some relapse occurs although reseda-
jugular vein can be readily distended by finger
tion should not be so deep as to cause recumbency.
pressure and the use of choke cords is unneces-
Relapse does not occur after i.m. injection of the
sarily distressful for the animal. The dose
antagonist. Atipamezole, 60μg/kg, given either as
required is between 80 and 90 mg/kg of a 10%
the entire dose i.v. or as half the dose i.v. and half
solution and it should be remembered that narco-
i.m. to antagonize medetomidine in calves results
sis will continue to deepen after the i.v. injection is
in a rapid smooth recovery to ambulation
completed. The induction and recovery periods
(Raekallio et al., 1991). Calves sedated with medeto-
are excitement free.
midine, 0.04 mg /kg, and injected with atipame-
Young bulls present no particular difficulties
zole, 200μg/kg i.v. 60minutes later, became 
provided their temperament is such that they can
resedated on average 80 min after the injection of
be safely and effectively restrained for drenching
atipamezole and this lasted an average of 240 min
or precise i. v. injection. In older bulls the precise
(Ranheim et al., 1998). These authors suggested
i. v. injection of drugs in the standing position may
that the relapse into sedation could not be ex-
not only be uncertain on account of difficulties in
plained by differences in pharmacokinetic param-
satisfactorily introducing the needle into the vein
eters of medetomidine and atipamezole. It may be
but sometimes impossible because of movement
that the elimination of medetomidine from the
by the animal.
sites of action is slower than elimination of the
In many instances the temperament of the bull
drug from plasma. Atipamezole given to unsed-
is such that large doses have to be given by mouth
ated cattle, or as medetomidine sedation is wan-
in order to obtain sufficient sedation to allow
So aady go aeis e anu Ae u
 application of casting tackle. The further adminis-
and bucking.
tration of the drug by the i.v. route after casting
gives rise to danger of overdose consequent on
continued absorption from the stomach. When,
Acepromazine
without any previous medication, chloral hydrate
Jo sasop  uaai aq Ae azndan
is given to a bull by i.v. injection at the usual rate,
0.05 mg /kg i.v. or 0.1 mg/kg i.m. to induce mild
the dose required to induce deep narcosis is the
tranquillization. Acepromazine will decrease the
same as for the big cow - about 90-100 mg/kg.
When the drug is given by the mouth a dose of
ics and may increase the risk of regurgitation.
140-200g (or even more) may be required to
induce a degree of sedation whereby the animal
can be handled safely and even after such a quan-
Chloral hydrate
tity the animal may still be able to stand.
Although some of the more recently introduced
 The bull which is running free in the yard or a
agents, such as the α2 adrenoceptor agonist
loose-box may be quite dangerous even to
xylazine, may have some advantages, including
 approach. In such cases it is generally advised that
easier administration, chloral hydrate is still a
drinking water be withheld for 36 hours and that
320 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
the animal then be offered water containing 90 to
120 g of chloral hydrate in 12 litres. It is often taken
 and, if it is, the degree of sedation is such that, with
care, the bull can be approached and a leading pole
applied.
Pentobarbital
Nervous or excitable cattle may be restrained by
the slow i.v. injection of a 20% solution of pentobar-
bital. To make the animal sway slightly on its hind
legs while being able to walk unaided, a dose of
1-2 g is needed for the adult cow. A dose of about
3g/500 kg usually makes an adult cow recumbent
and almost unconscious.
Small doses (15-20 ml of a 6.5% solution, i.e.
siu Su1d 0n ua1 aq  (897'I-001
Fig. 12.2 Auriculopalpebral nerve block
induced with chloral hydrate. It is injected i.v. as
eye, giving off its branches on the way. This block
soon as the chloral hydrate effect becomes inade-
is used to prevent eyelid closure during examina-
quate and provided the injection is made slowly.
 tion or surgery of the eye. It does not provide anal-
and to effect, no harmful effects occur. The period of
 gesia to the eye or eyelids and should be used in
recumbency is much less than if additional doses of
conjunction with topical analgesia or other nerve
chloral hydrate are administered and recovery is
blocks for painful procedures.
not associated with struggling and excitement.
The needle is inserted in front of the base of the
More than one injection of pentobarbital may be
ear at the end of the zygomatic arch until its point
given during the course of long operations.
lies at the dorsal border of the arch (Fig. 12.2).
About 10-15ml of 2% lignocaine is injected
Butorphanol
beneath the fascia at this point.
Administration of butorphanol tohealthy un-
sedated cows will not predictably induce sedation
Cornual nerve block
-lsan supnioui sasueuo moiaeuaq aonpu Aeu pue
The horn corium and the skin around its base
lessness and bellowing. Butorphanol, 0.02-
derive their sensory nerve supply from a branch of
0.03 mg/kg, may provide sedation in cattle that
the ophthalmic division of the 5th cranial nerve.
are sick and may increase the quality of sedation
The nerve emerges from the orbit and ascends just
when administered in conjunction with xylazine.
behind the lateral ridge of the frontal bone. This
Butorphanol can be detected in the milk for up to
latter structure can be readily palpated with the
36hours following administration (Court et al.,
fingers. In the upper third of the ridge the nerve is
1992)
relatively superficial, being covered only by skin
and a thin layer of the frontalis muscle.
 The site for injection is the upper third of the
LoCAl ANaLGESIA
temporal ridge, about 2.5 cm below the base of the
horn (Fig. 12.3). The needle (18 gauge, 2.5 cm long)
SPECIAL NERVE BLOCKS
 is inserted so that its point lies 0.7-1.0 cm deep,
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
immediately behind the ridge, and 5 ml of 2% lig-
nocaine solution injected. The needle must not be
This nerve supplies motor fibres to the orbicularis
 inserted too deeply, otherwise injection will be
oculi muscle. The nerve runs from the base of the
 made beneath the aponeurosis of the temporal
ear along the facial crest, past and ventral to the
 muscle and the method will fail. In large animals
CATTLE 321
Coronoid process
of mandible
Supraorbital
Pterygoid
process
crest
FIG. I2.3 Injection of the nerve to the horn core.In
some animals the branch to the caudal part leaves the
parent trunk proximal to the normal site for injection.
Foramen
Site for
orbitorotundum
auriculopalpebral
with well developed horns, a second injection
nerve block
(zygomatic arch)
should be made about 1 cm behind the first to
Needle direction
block the posterior division of the nerve (Fig. 12.3).
for Petersen block
Loss of sensation develops in 10-15 minutes and
lasts about 1 hour. This nerve block has been
FlG. I2.4 Schematic drawing of the Petersen nerve block
widely used for the dishorning of adult cattle but
to block the nerves emerging from the foramen
the block is not always complete. Variability in the
orbitorotundum,together with the auriculopalpebral
nerve block on the zygomatic ridge.This is an alternative to
curvature of the lateral ridge of the frontal bone
the retrobulbar block but requires more skill to perform.
makes exact determination of the site of the nerve
difficult. In a struggling animal, it may be difficult
tion injected. This blocks the oculomotor, trochlear,
to ensure that the point of the needle is at the cor-
abducens nerves and the three branches of the
rect depth. A third injection may be required in
trigeminal nerve as they emerge from the foramen
adult cattle with well developed horns; it is made
orbitorotundum. The needle is withdrawn to the
caudal to the horn base to block the cutaneous
subcutaneous tissue and redirected caudally and
branches of cervical nerves.
laterally to block the auriculopalpebral nerve on
the zygomatic ridge by the injection of 5-10 ml of
the local analgesic solution. The Petersen tech-
Petersen eye block
nique requires more skill to perform than a retrob-
A 22 gauge, 2.5 cm needle is used to infiltrate local
ulbar block but it may be safer.
analgesic solution subcutaneously, about 5 ml of
2% lignocaine, within the notch formed by the
supraorbital process cranially, the zygomatic arch
Peribulbar and retrobulbar block
ventrally and the coronoid process of the mandible
Retrobulbar injection is achieved by introduction
caudally (Fig. 12.4). A 12 or 14 gauge, 2.5 cm needle
of a curved needle through the skin about 1 cm
placed as far rostral and ventral as possible in the
lateral to the lateral canthus, or through the con-
desensitized skin of the notch serves as a cannula
jurnctiva. The needle is first directed straight back
and a 18 gauge, 10 or 12 cm needle is introduced
and away from the eyeball until the point is beyond
through it. The long needle is directed in a hori-
the globe and then turned inward to penetrate the
zontal and caudal direction until it strikes the coro-
 muscle cone. When no blood is obtained after aspi-
noid process of the mandible. It is then redirected
ration, lignocaine is deposited behind the eye.
 towards the pterygopalatine fossa rostral to the
 Peribulbar anaesthesia is produced by inserting
orbitorotundum foramen at a depth of about 8-10 cm
the needle and injecting lignocaine in 2 to 4 quad-
from the skin and 10-15 ml of 2% ligmocaine solu-
rants within the orbit but outside the ocular
322 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
muscles. Injection of 20-30 ml of 2% ligmocaine (or
Paravertebral nerve block
its equivalent) will produce comeal analgesia, my-
Paravertebral block involves the perineural injec-
Anaesthesia is produced after spread of the anaes-
tion of local analgesic solution about the spinal
thetic agent; thus a larger volume of lignocaine is
nerves as they emerge from the vertebral canal
required for peribulbar anaesthesia, the onset of
through the intervertebral foramina. This tech-
block is longer, and the larger volume of solution
nique is commonly used to provide analgesia for
causes a greater increase in ocular pressure.
laparotomy. It offers a major advantage over use of
Recommendations vary over the use of sharp
field infiltration in that the abdominal wall includ-
hypodermic or blunt (e.g spinal needle) needles
ing the peritoneum is more likely to be uniformly
for ocular blocks, but penetration of the globe has
desensitized. Additionally, the abdominal wall is
 been reported in human patients with both sharp
relaxed.
and blunt needles (Hay, 1991; Wong, 1993). Blunt
The area of the flank bounded cranially by the
needles are not considered to be safer than
last rib, caudally by the angle of the ilium and dor
sharp needles. Visual outcome is not a factor when
sally by the lumbar transverse processes, is inner-
 penetration of the globe occurs during nerve block
vated by the thirteenth and first and second lumbar
for enucleation. However, bacterial contamination
nerves. In addition, the third lumbar nerve,
of the orbit is possible.
although it does not supply the flank, gives off a
Potentially adverse effects of both the Petersen
 cutaneous branch which passes obliquely back-
block and the retrobulbar block include bradycar-
wards in front of the ilium. Operations involving
dia, hypotension, asystole, respiratory depression,
the ventral aspect of the abdominal wall will
apnoea, perforation of the globe and intraorbital or
require additional desensitization of the dorsal
retrobulbar venous haemorrhage. Symptoms of
nerves cranial to the thirteenth. The last dorsal and
local anaesthetic spread to the central nervous sys-
first lumbar intervertebral foramina in cattle are
tem vary but respiratory arrest is a usual sign of
occasionally double. The last dorsal foramen lies
brainstem anaesthesia. When the block is used for
immediately caudal to the head of the last rib and
other purposes, care must be taken to ensure that
 on a level with the base of the trarnsverse process of
the corneal surface does not become dry because
the firstlumbar vertebra. The lumbar foramina are
of loss of tear formation for several hours.
large and are situated between the base of the trans-
verse processes and approximately on the same
level. The spinal nerves, after emerging from the
Inverted L block
foramina, immediately divide into a smaller dor-
Infiltration of the skin, subcutaneous and deeper
sal and a larger ventral branch. The dorsal branch
 tissues in an inverted L shape with 60 ml of 2% lig-
 supplies chiefly the skin and muscles of the loins,
nocaine solution is a commonly used technique to
but some of its cutaneous branches pass a consid-
provide analgesia for a flank laparotomy in a
erable distance dowm the flank. The ventral branch
standing cow (Chapter 10). It is also used in
passes obliquely ventrally and caudally between
recumbent animals to block the site for a parame-
the muscles and comprises the main nerve supply
 dian incision, or repeated in a mirror image to
to the skin, muscles, and peritoneum of the flank.
form a U shape and analgesia for a midline inci-
The ventral branch is also connected with the sym-
sion. Injections must be made both subcutan-
pathetic system by a ramus communicans. Par-
eously and down to the peritoneum to produce a
alysis of the nerves at their points of emergence
total block. The block can be achieved by making
from the intervertebral foramina will provoke
isolated injections at intervals of about 1 cm, which
desensitization of the whole depth of the flank
relies on lateral diffusion of the analgesic solution.
wall and complete muscular relaxation. Block of
Alternatively, a wall of local analgesic solution can
the rami communicantes will result in splanchnic
be created by inserting a long needle to its depth,
vasodilatation and potential for hypotension.
and injecting anaesthetic solution in a steady
The number of nerves to be blocked will
stream as the needle is withdrawn.
depend on the site and extent of the proposed inci-
CATTLE323
teenth thoracic nerve is found by simple measure-
ment. The distance between the skin weals over
the second and third lumbar transverse processes
is measured and another skin weal is produced at
a distance equal to this, cranial to the anterior
weal, to mark the site where the needle is to be
introduced to strike the cranial border of the first
lumbar transverse process. A stout needle (7 cm
long, 3mm bore) is inserted through each skin
weal and the underlying longissimus dorsi muscle
infiltrated with 2-3 ml of 1% lignocaine (lidocaine)
or other local analgesic solution as they are
advanced to a depth of about 4 cm from the skin
surface. This infiltration is omitted by some work-
ers but it does serve to counteract spasm of the
longissimus dorsi during the subsequent insertion
of the longer needle used to deposit analgesic
FIG. I2.5 Regions of the flank involved after
solution around the main nerve trunks. The nee.
paravertebral block of the respective nerves.
dles used for injection around the nerves (10 cm
long, 2 mm bore) are introduced, after an appropri-
sion. The areas involved by blocking of respective
ate pause, through the holes made in the skin by
nerves are illustrated in Fig. 12.5. Therefore, for
the stout needles used for infiltration of the longis-
rumenotomy, using an incision parallel with and
simus dorsi muscle, and advanced to strike the
about 7 cm caudal to the last rib, analgesia of the
anterior border of the transverse process. Each
thirteenth thoracic and first and second lumbar
needle is then redirected cranially over the edge of
nerves is required. The third lumbar nerve must be
the transverse process and advanced until it is felt
blocked for a more caudal incision and for relax-
to penetrate the intertransverse ligament. Pene-
ation of the internal oblique muscle.
tration of the intertransverse ligament is made
A number of different techniques for blocking
more obvious if the needles used have 'short-
the respective nerves have been described but the
bevel' points. Injection of 15 ml of local analgesic
most reliable relies on directing the needle towards
solution is made immediately below the ligament
the cranial border of the transverse process of the
and a further 5ml is injected as the needle is with-
vertebra behind the nerve to be blocked. For exam-
drawn to just above the ligament. During final
ple, to block the 1st lumbar nerve the needle
withdrawal of the needle the skin is pressed down-
should be directed to strike the cranial broder of
wards to prevent separation of the connective tis-
the 2nd lumbar vertebra about 5-6 cm from the
sue and aspiration of air through the needle.
animal's midline. At such sites the cranial borders
It is important to ensure that the needles shall
of the transverse processes are usually in the same
be vertical when contact is first made with the cra-
cross sectional plane of the body as the most
nial border of the transverse processes for, if they
 prominent parts of their lateral borders.
are not, redirection over the edge of the processes
To block the thirteenth thoracic and first, second
may cause their points to lie well away from the
and third lumbar nerves skin weals should be
course of the nerves. Successful infiltration around
raised in line with the most obvious parts of the
the nerves is indicated first by the development of
transverse processes of the second, third and
a belt of hyperaemia which causes a distinct and
fourth lumbar vertebrae, 5-6 cm from, the midline
 appreciable rise in skin temperature. Full analge-
 of the body. Location of the transverse process of
sia develops in about ten minutes and when ligno-
the first lumbar vertebra is usually difficult (partic-
caine with adrenaline 1:400 000 is used it persists
ularly in well-muscled or obese animals) so in
for about 90 minutes. When a unilateral block is
most cases the site for infiltration around the thir-
fully developed it produces a curvature of the
324 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
spine, the convexity of which is towards the anal-
gesic side (Fig. 12.6).
An alternative method of lumbar paravertebral
block utilizing a lateral approach to the nerves is
favoured by some. About 10 ml of local analgesic
solution is injected beneath each transverse
 process towards the midline. The needle is then
withdrawn a short distance and then redirected
first cranially, then caudally, with more analgesic
solution being injected along each line of insertion.
A total of about 20 ml of solution is used for each
site and the last portion of each 20 ml is injected
slightly dorsal and caudal to the transverse
process to block dorsolateral branches of the
nerves. With this technique analgesic solution may
be injected below fascial sheets and thus be pre-
vented from bathing the nerves.
It is inevitable that failure or at least partial fail-
ure will sometimes attend attempts to inject local
analgesic solution in the immediate vicinity of a
FIG. I2.6 Unilateral analgesia with either a paravertebral
block or lumbar epidural producing spinal curvature
series of nerves situated at a depth of 5-7 cm from
towards the affected side.
the body surface, however careful the technique
Sh yeondde ynum rae ou pue uooalu jo
adopted. Among the factors which reduce the
precision of the method are: the nerves traverse
FIG. I2.7 Pudendal nerve block.Lateral view of the pelvis with the sacrosciatic ligament removed to show distribution of
the sacral spinal nerves. I: Pudic nerve; 2:middle haemorrhoidal nerve; 3:caudal haemorrhoidal nerve; 4, 5: proximal and
distal cutaneous branches of pudic nerve; 6:deep perineal nerve; 7: nerve that becomes the dorsal nerve of the penis;
8: sciatic nerve; 9: branch connecting sciatic nerve with branch of pudic nerve 7; I0:pelvic nerve; II:internal pudic
artery; I2:coccygeus muscle; 13: external anal sphincter; 14: sacrosciatic ligament; 15:tuber ischi; 16:sacrum; 17:first
coccygeal vertebra; I8:needle in position.
CATTLE325
mals the nerve roots are double, emerging from
the fascia of the coccygeal muscle. In addition to
double foramina; it is difficult to ensure that the
the pudic and middle haemorrhoidal nerves some
site of injection is the same as that assessed from
fibres which enter into the dorsal nerve of the penis
the body surface; penetration of the muscular
are obtained from a branch of the sciatic nerve
mass of the back tends to cause spasmodic contrac-
which, leaving the parent nerve on the outer aspect
tion of the muscles with consequent modification
of the sacrosciatic ligament, passes into the lesser
of the needle track. Precise location of the injection
sacrosciatic foramen and anastomoses with the
sites is also more difficult in the newer large breeds
ventral branch of the pudic nerve where that lies
ofcattle.
immediately above the internal pudic vessels close
to the ventral border of the foramen (Fig. 12.7).
The pudic nerve is located per rectum, the hand
Pudic (internal pudendal) block
being introduced as far as the wrist and the fingers
While epidural block is a reliable means of provok-
directed laterally and ventrally to detect the lesser
ing exposure of the penis in the bull, it must be
 sacrosciatic foramen. Its outline is not clearly iden-
acknowledged that the method also has disadvan-
tifiable, but its position is recognized by the soft-
tages, particularly in heavier individuals. The
ness and depressability of the pelvic wall at this
chief of these is that the volume of analgesic solu-
 point. Moreover, the internal pudic artery which
tion required to cause complete exposure may
can readily be detected running along the lat-
result in severe interference with the motor power
Jo ino sassed Aaen sialad at jo inadse leruaao
of the hindlimbs, and in order to prevent injury to
the pelvis at the cranial part of the foramen. Care
the limbs and pelvis it becomes necessary to keep
should be taken not to advance the hand too far,
the animal cast and restrained for several hours.
for on entering the rectum the foramen lies imme-
But prolonged recumbency in a heavy bull, often
diately ventrolateral to the fingers. The nerve can
Amu ui nsai Aeu uns ym paeosse
readily be felt, the size of a straw, lying on the
elsewhere. A most useful alternative to produce
 sacrosciatic ligament immediately rostral and dor-
analgesia of the penis for examination and surgical
sal to the foramen.
 procedures is a bilateral pudic (internal pudendal)
The site of insertion of the needle is at the point
block.
of deepest depression of the ischiorectal fossa and
The pudic (internal pudendal) nerve consists of
it is directed rostral and slightly ventral in direc-
fibres arising from the ventral branches of the third
tion. During the whole procedure a hand is kept in
and fourth sacral nerves. It passes ventrally and
the rectum. When the needle has penetrated to a
caudally on the medial surface of the sacrosciatic
depth of 5-7cm, it will be palpable through the
ligament, where it is associated with the middle
 rectal wall and its point should be directed to the
haemorrhoidal nerve, to cross the lesser sacro-
 position of the nerve a little rostral to the foramen.
sciatic foramen where it is accompanied by the
Here some 20-25 ml of 2% lignocaine hydrochlo-
internal pudic vessels; they then pass along the
ride (or its equivalent) is injected. A further 10-15 ml
floor of the pelvis to the ischial arch supplying
is injected a little caudal and dorsal to this point to
motor fibres to the urethra and the erector and
block also the middle haemorrhoidal nerve which
retractor muscles of the penis, the middle haemor-
may carry some sympathetic fibres to the penis. A
rhoidal nerve and sensory fibres to the skin on
third injection should be made after redirecting the
either side of the midline from the anus to the scro-
needle a little ventrally just inside the lesser sciatic
tum. Between the sacrosciatic ligament and the rec-
foramen where the ventral branch of the pudic
tum in the region of surgical approach to the nerve
nerve can be palpated distal to its anastomosis
lies the sheet-like coccygeal muscle. The pudic
with sciatic nerve branches. The onset of adequate
nerve lies between the ligament and the muscle,
exposure of the penis is delayed for a period of
while the accompanying middle haemorrhoidal
30 45 min after injection of the nerves.
nerve lies deep to the muscle, that is between it and
 Another approach to pudendal nerve block is a
the rectal wall. The lesser sacrosciatic foramen is
lateral one. One injection is made over the puden-
closed by a sheet of fascia which is an extension of
dal nerve just as it passes medial to the dorsorostral
326 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
quadrant of the lesser sciatic foramen and a second
ed by s.c. injection and the spermatic cord itself is
injection is performed between the posterior haem-
also infiltrated at the same site. About 10-20 ml of
 orrhoidal and pudendal nerves. This latter injec-
2% lignocaine is a suitable dose on each side.
tion necessitates penetration of the sacrosciatic
ligament. The site of insertion of the needle is deter-
Caudal epidural analgesia
mined by using the cranial tuberosity of the tuber
ischii as a fixed point and the length of the sacro-
The spinal cord ends in the region of the last lum-
tuberous ligament as a radius. The distance is used
bar vertebra but the meningeal sac is continued as
to establish the site on a line drawn parallel to the
far as the junction of the 3rd and 4th sacral seg-
midline anterior to the fixed point. After clipping.
ments. The diameter of the neural canal as it passes
deaning and disinfecting the skin the site
is
marked by the s.c. injection of 2 ml of 2% lignocaine
caudal part and 2 cm in the cranial. In the lumbar
or equivalent drug solution. This injection makes
regions the dimensions of the canal are much
subsequent manipulations less painful and renders
 greater, its width at the last segment being 4 cm.
the subject more amenable to handling. Either
This helps to explain why paralysis of the spinal
hand is then introduced into the rectum and
nerves as far forward as the first sacral is effected
the lesser sciatic foramen located. A 12 cm long.
with comparatively small quantities of local anal-
1.8 mm bore needle is introduced through the skin
 gesic solution (20 ml), whereas paralysis of the cra-
site and directed towards the middle finger held in 
the foramen until it can be felt to lie alongside the
much larger quantities (100 ml).
nerve. About 10 ml of the local analgesic solution
Caudal epidural block is performed by inser-
is injected at this point. The needle is withdrawn
tion of the needle between the 1st and 2nd coc-
45 cm and redirected caudally and dorsally so that
cygeal vertebrae, i.e. beyond the termination of the
it penetrates the sacrosciatic ligament at a point
 spinal cord and its meninges (Fig. 12.8). This site is
about 2.5 cm above and behind the first site of injec-
larger and more easily penetrated and, in some
tion. About 5ml of solution is injected at this point,
animals, more easily located than the sacrococ-
the needle is withdrawn and the sites massaged to
cygeal space. One or more of the following meth-
 spread the solution in the tissues. Similar injections
ods may be used:
are carried out on the other side of the animal.
1. The tail is gripped about 15 cm from its base
and raised ‘pump-handle’ fashion. The first
Local analgesia for castration
obvious articulation behind the sacrum is the first
intercoccygeal space.
For castration the site of the proposed incision in
the scrotum may be desensitized by the s.c. infiltra-
tion of local analgesic solution but this does not, of
course, block the nerve fibres running in the sper-
matic cord. These fibres can be blocked by the
direct injection of 5-10 ml of local analgesic solu-
tion into each cord at the neck of the scrotum or by
injecting 5-25 ml (depending on the size of the ani-
mal) into the substance of each testicle. In the latter
method the drug is assumed to pass out from
the testicle along the lymph vessels and to block,
after diffusion, the nerve fibres present in the cord.
The bulk of the drug is carried on in the lymph to
enter the blood stream and for this reason excessive
dosage must be avoided or intoxication will occur.
For the closed or bloodless (Burdizzo) castration
FlG. I2.8 Caudal epidural injection made into the first
the skin of the neck of the scrotum must be infiltrat-
intercoccygeal space.
CATTLE327
2. Standing on one side of the animal and
dle should be slightly withdrawn, the syringe re-
observing the line of the croup, the prominence of
applied and injection attempted. When the point
the sacrum is seen. Moving the eye back towards
of the needle is correctly placed in the neural canal
the tail, the next prominence to be observed is the
there is, for all practicable purposes, no resistance
spine of the first coccygeal bone. The site is the
and injection can be made quite easily. Sometimes
depression immediately behind it.
blood issues from the needle due to penetration of
3. The caudal prominence of the tuberosity of
a vein but experience indicates that injection can
the ischium is palpated and the point selected
still be injected without harm. If thought prefer-
10-11 cm in front of it. A line drawn directly over
able the needle can be withdrawn, cleansed of
the back from this point passes, in a medium-sized
blood clot and reintroduced.
animal, through the depression between the first
The rate of injection should be rather slow, a
and second coccygeal spines.
volume of 15 ml being given over 10-15 seconds;
2% lignocaine hydrochloride is now almost uni-
The dimensions of the opening in the dorsal wall
versally used but the duration of block can, if
of the neural canal are approximately 2 cm trans-
needed be increased by using 0.5% bupivacaine.
versely, 2.5 cm craniocaudally and about 0.5 cm in
Production of caudal block means that motor
depth.
control of the hindlimbs is uninfluenced. When 2%
The canal is occupied by six caudal nerves,
solutions of lignocaine are used the total dose lies
together with a vein on each side. The aperture
between 5 and 10 ml depending on the size of the
between the two vertebral arches is closed by the
animal. Provided that the concentration of the
 amaq ads a p p a
solution used is sufficient to paralyse the sensory
spines occupied by connective tissue. Surmoun-
fibres, skin analgesia will develop in the tail and
ting the spines is a variable amount of fat covered
croup as far as the mid-sacral region, the anus,
by skin. The floor comprises, about the centre of
vulva and perineum and the posterior aspect of
the space, the intervertebral cartilaginous disc
the thighs. Paralysis of motor fibres will cause the
and, in front and behind this, the surface of the
anal sphincter to relax and the posterior part of the
vertebral centrum.
rectum to balloon. Defaecation will be suspended,
An insensitive skin weal is made with the object
stretching of the vulva will produce no response
of preventing movement during insertion of the
and the vagina will dilate. During parturition
 injection needle and thus ensuring that the latter is
straining ceases but uterine contractions are unin-
introduced in the correct position and direction.
fluenced.
For insertion of the epidural needle the tail is
The onset of muscular paralysis of the tail
allowed to hang naturally. The point of the needle
occurs from 60-90s after injection and affords reli-
is applied to the centre of the depression between
able evidence that the injection has been made cor-
 the 1st and 2nd coccygeal spines, taking care that it
rectly. When lignocaine is used analgesia attains its
is precisely in the midline. The needle is advanced
maximum extent over 5-10 min, and persists for
ventrally and cranially at an angle of 15 ° with the
about an hour after which there is progressive
vertical, until its point impinges on the floor of the
recovery. The block completely disappears by the
canal. Often, contact with a caudal nerve causes
end of the second hour from the time of injection
the animal to move suddenly, and the anaesthetist
The introduction of caudal epidural analgesia
should be prepared for this.
was immediately followed by its use as a means of
Provided the needle has been correctly intro-
causing relaxation and exposure of the penis in
duced there is usually no doubt but that it has
bulls. For this, a minimum dose should be given,
entered the epidural space. Sometimes, however,
the epidural needle left in place and if extrusion of
the point of the needle will tranverse the space and
the penis does not occur after the elapse of an
 penetrate the intervertebral disc. This is detected,
appropriate length of time additional small doses
can be given until it does. The dose necessary for
solution, by a great resistance offered to the
penile extrusion is very close to that causing some
syringe plunger. Should this error occur, the nee-
degree of motor incoordination of the hind limbs.
328 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
As yet, there is no way of determining the effective
 gesia, but when lumbar epidural block is required
dose in relation to weight or other measurements
it is not always possible to produce satisfactory
and it is necessary to wait for at least 25 min before
cranial spread from the caudal injection site.
concluding that the dose administered was inade-
 Consequently, some make the injection at the lum-
quate. For this particular purpose caudal block
bosacral foramen although needles introduced
has, nowadays, been replaced to a large extent by
here may enter the subarachnoid space and once
pudic nerve block, sympathetic blockade or by the
this has been done it is no longer really safe to pro-
use of tranquillizers such as acepromazine, or the
ceed with the induction of an epidural block until
C2 adrenoceptor agonists.
the puncture in the dural has become sealed. The
 Many other drugs are now commonly adminis-
patency of the hole in the dura persists for several
tered into the epidural space at the caudal site.
hours and if an immediate spinal block is essential,
Xylazine, 0.05 mg/kg diluted to 5 ml in 0.9% saline,
 a deliberate, controlled subarachnoid block must
is used to provide analgesia of the perineum and to
be performed. However, a subarachnoid block can
reduce straining during parturition. Xylazine will
 only be managed in relatively small animals,
induce bilateral analgesia of dermatomes supplied
where full use can be made of gravity to control
by the caudal, caudal rectal, perineal, pudendal,
the extent of neural blockade, so injection at the
and caudal cutaneous femoral nerves (StJean et al.,
lumbosacral foramen is normally only employed
1990). Analgesia develops by 20 min after adminis-
 in sheep, goats, small pigs and dogs.
tration and persists for 2h. The tail will be flaccid
Injection into the epidural space in the lumbar
and mild ataxia may be present. Sufficient xylazine 
 region can be employed to produce analgesia of a
is absorbed to induce mild sedation, decreased
 number of body segments in cattle. By careful con-
ruminal motility (bloat), bradycardia and
 trol of the dose of local analgesic injected it is poss-
decreased MAP. These side effects may have a sig-
ible to produce a belt of analgesia around the
rificantly adverse effect in sick animals. A slightly
animal's trunk without interfering with control of
higher dose of xylazine, 0.07 mg/kg in 7.5 ml of
the hind limbs. Although not easy to perform, in
0.9% saline, has been used by caudal epidural injec-
expert hands it can be most effective.
tion to provide analgesia for castration in mature
With the animal standing, the site for insertion
bulls (Caulkett et al., 1993). Sedation was evident in
of the needle is just to the right of the lumbar spin-
these animals and moderate ataxia, with recum-
 ous process on a line 1.5cm behind the cranial
bency, was observed in 14%. Surgery was per-
edge of the 2nd lumbar transverse process. An ini-
formed 30 minutes after injection and surgical
tial skin weal is produced using a fine needle and a
analgesia was judged to be good in 81% of animals
longitudinal skin incision some 2-3 cm is made to
but pain or discomfort during emasculation was
facilitate penetration by the spinal needle. The
apparent in the remaining bulls.
spinal needle (14 gauge, 12cm long) is directed
Medetomidine, 0.015 mg/kg diluted with 0.9%
ventrally and medially at an angle of 10-13 ° with
saline to a volume of 5 ml, has been evaluated for
the vertical for a distance of 7.5 cm - at which point
epidural analgesia in cows (Lin et al., 1998). Results
the needle enters the neural canal. Even when
of this investigation showed that medetomidine
small quantities of local analgesic are injected
induced analgesia within 10 minutes and lasted
 along the track of the needle, penetration of the
412 ± 156 min (mean ± SD) - significantly longer 
pue mued Auaedde si juaai lenoiea
than lignocaine, 0.2mg/kg, which lasted 10 to
thus the animal needs adequate restraint. The
115 min (mean 43 ± 37min). Systemic effects of
 intervertebral space through which the needle
absorbed medetomidine included mild to moder-
must pass to enter the epidural space is actually an
ate sedation and mild ataxia.
interosseous canal formed by the bases of the
spinous processes cranially and caudally and by
the intervertebral articular processes laterally.
Lumbosacral epidural analgesia
Immediately the needle is felt to penetrate the
Injection of local analgesic solutions in the caudal
 interarcual ligament the stilette is withdrawn and
region affords a method of inducing epidural anal-
if air is heard to enter the needle it is certain that
CATTLE 329
the epidural space has been entered. Alternatively,
it seems generally agreed that the sympathetic
in the absence of air aspiration and if no fluid flows
blockade caused by segmental epidural injection is
from the needle, a trial injection is made. If the
well tolerated by non-sedated healthy cows.
needle is correctly placed in the epidural space
si rasumid aus aun uo amssand Aue Arasiess
needed. If on removing the stilette, cerebrospinal
Digital nerve blocks
fluid flows from the needle, the latter must be
The nerve supply of the digits of cattle is more
quickly but gently withdrawn until the flow ceases
complex than in the horse and regional analgesia is
 and then injection made (Fig. 12.9).
more difficult to produce. The skin below the car-
 The cardiovascular response to segmental block
pus and tarsus is tense and the subcutaneous tis-
(T13-L1) is associated with a reduction in MAP,
sue fibrous, so that precise location of the nerves is
and an increase in CO due to an increase in HR in
not easy.
response to decreased vascular resistance.These
Analgesia may be produced in the forelimb by
changes appear to be of no clinical sigmificance and
injection at the sites indicated in Fig. 12.10. The
1: Point of insertion of spinal
needle through skin; 2:articular proce
verse section through the
joints between the articular processes of the Ist
yoftheIst lumbarsegment
is viewed from its caudal aspect. I: Needle in positio
 surrounded by meninges; 3:left Ist lumbar
nerve; 4: body of I st lumbar vertebra; 5:spinc
ess; 7:sectioned interlocking articular
processes.
Radial
FIG. I2.I0 Nerve block of the forelimb.To block the whole digit,injections must be made atA,B, C, D and E. To block
the medial digit, inject atA, D and E. To block the lateral digit,inject at points B, C, D and E.
330 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
dorsal metacarpal nerve is located by palpation at
aspect of the limb, just in front of the gastro-
about the middle of the metacarpus, medial to the
cnemius tendon. The gastrocnemius tendon is
extensor tendon. The dorsal branch of the ulnar
 grasped between the thumb and index finger of
nerve is blocked about 5 cm above the fetlock on
 one hand while a needle, about 2.5 cm long, is
the lateral aspect of the limb, in the groove
inserted immediately below the thumb until its
between the suspensory 1l
ligament and
1the
 point can be felt just under the skin by the index
metacarpal bone. At this point, the palmar branch
finger. About 15 ml of local analgesia solution is
of the ulnar nerve may also be blocked, the two 
injected at this site. A further 5ml of solution
nerves being respectively situated in front of, and
should be injected on the medial side of the leg
behind the suspensory ligament. The axial palmar
to block a small cutaneous nerve. The block takes
aspect of the digits may be rendered analgesic by
15 minutes to develop.
an injection in the midline just above the fetlock.
An alternative method for desensitization of
The injection will reach the lateral branch of the
the hindlimb below the fetlock involves blocking
median nerve before it divides, or if it has already
the superficial and deep peroneal nerves separ-
divided its two branches will still be close to each
ately. The superficial peroneal nerve is blocked in
other. The two branches may also be simultan-
the upper third of the metatarsus where it lies
eously blocked on the midline just below the level
subcutaneously over the midline of the dorsal
of the dew claws, i.e. after they have passed from
 aspect of the metatarsal bone (Fig. 12.11). The deep
below the fibrous plate of the dew claws. The
 peroneal nerve accompanies the dorsal metatarsal
medial branch of the median nerve is blocked on
vessels in a groove on the cranial aspect of the
the medial side of the limb in the groove between
metatarsal bone under cover of the extensor ten-
the suspensory ligament and the flexor tendons
dons. Injection is made halfway between the hock
about 5 cm above the fetlock. Blocking the median
and the fetlock. The needle is inserted from the lat-
nerve higher up the limb before it divides is not
eral aspect of the bone and the point directed
practical as at this point the nerve lies beneath the
beneath the edge of the tendon.
artery and vein.
The plantar metatarsal nerves are blocked on
An alternative technique that is less precise is to
the medial and lateral sides of the limb in the
perform a ring block of the limb with local anaes-
depression between the suspensory ligament and
thetic solution in an attempt to block all nerve
branches at the same level.
The hindlimb can be blocked to provide loss of
sensation below the hock. The peroneal nerve is
blocked immediately behind the caudal edge of
the lateral condyle of the tibia, over the fibula. The
A
nerve is blocked before it dips down between the
=0 B
extensor pedis and flexor metatarsi muscles to
divide into the deep and superficial peroneal ner-
ves. The bony prominence can easily be palpated
in most animals, and in some, the nerve itself can
be rolled against the bone as it passes superficially,
obliquely downwards and cranially, at this point.
An 18 or 20 gauge, 2.5cm, needle is inserted
through the skin, the subcutaneous tissue and the
aponeurotic sheet of the biceps femoris until its
point just touches the bony landmark. Lignocaine,
approximately 20 ml of 2% for an adult, is injected
FIG. I2.1I Nerve block of the distal part of the
at this point. Onset of analgesia is in 20 minutes
hindlimb. A: injection of the superficial peroneal nerve.
The tibial nerve is blocked about 10-12 cm
B:injection of the deep peroneal nerve. C:injection of the
above the summit of the calcaneous on the medial
plantar metatarsal nerves.
CATTLE  331
the flexor tendons, about 5 cm proximal to the fet-
tourniquet is preferable as it appears to cause the
lock joint and deep to the superficial fascia (Fig.
 animals less discomfort than rubber tubing; con-
12.11). Five ml of local analgesia solution is inject-
sequently, they are less likely to be restless. When
ed over each nerve.
the tourniquet is to be placed on the hind limb
above the hock in an adult animal, rolls of bandage
should be placed either side of the limb beneath
INtraVeNOUS REGIONAL
the tourniquet in the depression between the tibia
ANALGESIA
and the gastrocnemius tendon to ensure occlusion
of all blood vessels (Fig. 12.12 ). A 19 gauge needle
Intravenous regional analgesia (IVRA) is a simple
or butterfly needle is inserted into a vein with its
and commonly used technique to provide an-
point towards the foot. If the limb is to be exsan-
algesia of the limb or digits. It is achieved by inject-
'aeuq yresg ue jo uoesidde Aq paieums
ing local analgesic solution into a superficial
the vein may be difficult to locate after application
vein in a limb isolated from the general circulation
 of the bandage; the needle should be placed
by a tourniquet. The limb distal to the site of appli-
first and kept patent with heparin-saline solution.
cation of the tourniquet becomes analgesic and
In adult cattle, 30 ml of 2% lignocaine (without
remains so until the tourniquet is released.
adrenaline) is injected into the vein after first
 The animal is restrained in lateral recumbency,
aspirating blood to confirm location of the needle
with or without sedation. The hair over a promin-
within the lumen of the vessel. Some veterinarians
ent vein on the relevant limb is clipped and the
skin prepared for injection (Fig. 12.12 ). A tourni-
 spread of the local anaesthetic through the limb.
quet of stout rubber tubing or a wide flat rubber 
Analgesia distal to the tourniquet will develop in
band is applied above the carpus or hock, or above 
15-20 minutes and persist until the tourniquet is
the fetlock, to occlude arterial blood flow. The flat
removed. Provided that 10 minutes or more have
elapsed since the injection, no adverse effect from
the local analgesic solution should be observed
when the tourniquet is removed. Analgesia dissip-
ates very rapidly in almost all animals.
Occasionally, the foot is analgesic everywhere
except for the skin between the digits. This can be
blocked by injection of 5 ml of 2% lignocaine mid-
 line on the dorsal aspect of the fetlock and a fur-
ther 5 ml of solution on the caudal aspect of the
fetlock between the dew claws.
The duration of analgesia is limited only by the
time it is considered safe to leave a tourniquet in
 place. Intravenous regional analgesia is safe for up
to at least 1.5hours and this is long enough for
most procedures done on the bovine foot.
(2)
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
(1)
FIG. 12.12 Easily recognized veins of the distal parts of
Clearly, choice of technique depends in large part
limbs that can be used in placing needles or cannulae for
on the circumstances surrounding the need for
intravenous regional analgesia. ( I) Medial view of the right
foreleg.A:radial vein;B:medial palmar digital vein.(2)
sedation or anaesthesia. For example, management
Lateral view of the right hindleg. C: lateral branch of lateral
of a dairy cow for caesarian section is different from
saphenous vein;D:lateral plantar vein;E:lateral plantar
management of a beef or feedlot heifer that has not
digitalvein.
been handled. Sedating a bull for a foot trim or
332 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
radiographs may be more difficult when done on
TABLE 12.I Drug combinations used in cattle
the farm than when performed in the clinic.
anaesthesia
Regurgitation during anaesthesia is a real haz-
Drugs
Dose
Comments
ard with potential consequence of pulmonary
Thiopental  II mg/kg i.v.
 aspiration of ruminal fluid and material, asphyxia,
Premedication
 pulmonary abscesses, or pneumonia. Food is cus-
decreases dose
rate
tomarily withheld from cattle older than 3 months
Guaiphenesin50- I 00 mg/kg i.v.
Dose rate
of age before elective anaesthesia for 36 (24-48)
5%
：
decreases > 600 kg
hours, water for 8-12hours, to decrease the vol-
+
bodyweight;
ume of the rumen contents. This reduction in gas-
Thiopental
3-4mg/kg
premedication
trointestinal volume has an added benefit of
decreases dose
rate
Xylazine
0.1-0.2 mg/kg/ i.m. 15-20 min
Animals less than 2 months of age are likely to
+
or i.v. +
duration;
develop hypoglycaemia if food and milk are with-
Ketamine
2 mg/kg i.v.
prolong with I g
held for several hours. One recommendation is to
ketamine in I litre
prevent the calves from eating solid food for sever-
 5% guaiphenesin at
al hours and to withhold milk or milk replacer for
1.5-2.0 ml/kg/h
30 to 60 minutes before anaesthesia.
Xylazine
Infuse I-2 ml/kg
Choice of drugs may be influenced by current
100 mg/litre  of the mixture i.v.
legislature concerning use of anaesthetic agents in
food-producing animals. In this chapter informa-
Guaiphenesin
50 g/litre
tion on the pharmacological effects of various
agents and their combinations is given in order
Ketamine
that informed decisions can be made about their
I g/litre
 use in all situations. Some of the anaesthetic agents
mentioned may be unsuitable in some countries
medetomidine is usual prior to anaesthesia with
for use in animals for subsequent slaughter be-
ketamine, except in young calves in which anaes-
cause of presumed persistence of drug residues
thesia can be induced with diazepam-ketamine.
ANAESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
Intravenous injection
Anaesthesia can be induced in the standing animal
Use of an indwelling catheter is preferable to avoid
with only one assistant holding the head during
perivascular injection of irritant drugs, such as
injection, or the cow or bull can be first cast with
thiopental or guaiphenesin, and to facilitate supple-
ropes or strapped to a tilting table and anaes-
mental injections. A 14 gauge, 13 cm long catheter is
thetized in standing or lateral position. There is a
suitable for insertion in the jugular vein, although a
clinically obvious difference in response to anaes-
10 gauge catheter is better for administration of
thetic drugs between Bos taurus breeds and breeds
 guaiphenesin solutions in bulls. The skin of bulls
crossed with Bos indicus. Dairy breeds in particular
may be 0.5-1.0 cm thick over the jugular vein and
are relatively tolerant of the effects of anaesthesia.
insertion of the catheter is easier through a small
Breeds such as the Beefmaster, Santa Gertrudis,
incision made with a scalpel blade through an intra-
and Brahman often require a much lower dose of
dermal bleb of local analgesic (usually lignocaine).
anaesthetic agents.
Premedication is not essential prior to injection
Endotracheal intubation
of thiopental or thiopental-guaiphenesin. Admini-
stration of acepromazine or xylazine will decrease
There are a variety of techniques that can be used
the dose rate of induction drug, alter the cardio-
to facilitate endotracheal intubation in adult cattle.
vascular parameters, and slow recovery from
In cattle up to about 300kg, intubation can be
anaesthesia. Premedication with xylazine or
accomplished under direct vision of the larynx
CATTLE333
Anaesthetist's
free hand is used to advance the endotracheal
tube onto the epiglottis. The arm inside the
mouth is then advanced a further 5 cm and the
Tube
forefinger and middle finger are used to spread
the arytenoids and open the larynx. The free 
hand is used to advance the endotracheal tube
into the larynx and trachea. If the endotracheal
 tube catches at the entrance of the larynx, the fore-
finger should be swept around the tube to free
it for insertion. The anaesthetist's arm is removed
Epiglottis
and the endotracheal tube inserted its full length.
The endotracheal tube cuff should be inflated
Arytenoid
immediately and the tube secured with gauze
FIG. 12.13 Intubation by palpation.
to the speculum, the halter, or by lengths of gauze
around the head or horns. When there is insuffi-
using a laryngoscope with a blade suitable for
cient room for both the anaesthetist's arm and
 intubating a large dog. The animal is supported in
the endotracheal tube, a stomach tube or metal
sternal position, the head and neck extended, and
 rod can be inserted in a manner just described
the laryngoscope positioned at the corner of the
and then the endotracheal tube fed over the tube
animal's mouth with the tip of the blade on the
or rod and into the trachea after removal of the
dorsum of the tongue. The trachea is intubated
anaesthetist's arm.
with an endotracheal tube of 11-18 or 20 mm inter-
Endotracheal tubes may be passed ‘blind' by
nal diameter (ID), with a technique similar to that
the anaesthetist gripping the larynx with one hand
 used in dogs. Care must be taken in smaller calves
and feeding the endotracheal tube into the larynx
 not to use the blade of the laryngoscope as a lever
with the other hand. This is not an easy technique
with the incisor teeth acting as a fulcrum.
but the success rate of this technique increases
 In large bovine animals, a longer laryngoscope
with practice.
blade will be needed to view the laryngeal open-
The lubricant applied to any endotracheal tube
ing. A stiff stomach tube or a 2 m metal rod with a
used in ruminant animals should never contain a
blunted end is passed through the mouth and into
lbcal analgesic drug for if it does the mucous mem-
the trachea. The laryngoscope is withdrawn and
brane of the trachea and larynx may remain desensi-
the endotracheal tube is fed over the tube or rod
tized for some time after the tube is withdrawn. The
 and into the trachea, whereupon the tube or rod is
protective cough reflex will then be absent and for-
removed. One problem is that the tube may catch
eign material may be inhaled into the bronchial tree.
 on the epiglotis unless it is rotated at the appropri-
ate moment.
Intubation by palpation is a technique com-
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
monly employed for cows and bulls. The mouth of
the anaesthetized animal must be held open
Thiopental
securely using a wedge-shaped gag inserted
Thiopental may be used in adult cattle either alone
between the molar teeth or any other gag suitable
to provide full anaesthesia for operations of short
for ruminants. A 25 mm or 30 mm ID endotracheal
duration or to induce anaesthesia that is then
tube is used for adult cattle. The anaesthetist
maintained by inhalation agents. In the unpremed-
 grasps the end of the endotracheal tube and inserts
icated animal thiopental, 5% or 10% solution, is
the arm and tube into the cow's mouth, taking care
injected rapidly into the jugular vein in a dose of
to remain midline so that the endotracheal tube
11 mg/kg estimated body weight; if xylazine pre-
Jo saopa dreus aun isuiese usnnq jou saop jmo
medication has been used a dose of 5-6 mg/kg is
the molar teeth and tear (Fig. 12.13). The fore-
usually adequate. The animal sinks quietly to the
finger is used to depress the epiglottis and the
 ground within 20-30 seconds of injection and there
334 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
is a brief period of apnoea. Apnoea seldom lasts for
ABP, and an increase in respiratory and heart rates.
more than 15-20 seconds and artificial respiration
The dose rate in unpremedicated cattle up to
is not required. Surgical anaesthesia of about
500kg is approximately 2ml/kg and this rate
10minutes is followed by recovery which is com-
 decreases substantially on a mg/kg basis, with even
plete within 45 minutes. Recovery is usually quiet
large bulls seldom requiring more than 1500 ml
and free from excitement. The animal can be
of the mixture for anaesthesia adequate for endo-
[s jo uoisod e uruu lm pue 'dn paddond
tracheal intubation. Administration of xylazine
recumbency, about 12-15 min after injection of the
premedication greatly reduces the dose rate
drug. The period of surgical anaesthesia is brief but 
required for anaesthesia.
adequate for operations of very short duration or
The drugs may also be administered separately.
for endotracheal intubation prior to maintenance
 in which case, guaiphenesin is first infused i.v.
 of anaesthesia with an inhalation agent.
at 50mg/kg followed by a bolus injection of 3-
Apart from the usual risks of anaesthesia in
4mg/kg of thiopental.
ruminant animals the method is safe in healthy
cattle. Overdosage may occur when there is a gross
Methohexital
error in estimation of body weight. Underdosage
is more frequent and the animal may remain
standing, but excitement does not occur. Failure to
 tone) is so much more rapid than it is after thiopen-
induce anaesthesia may be the result of the injec-
tal, it might appear to be the better of the two
tion being made too slowly or because of perivas-
compounds for use in cattle. However, the action of
cular injection. Additional thiopental may be
methohexitone is, for unknown reasons, rather un-
injected i.v. immediately to achieve anaesthesia
predictable and the rapid i.v. injection of a comput-
provided that i.v. access can be guaranteed.
ed dose cannot be recommended. Given to adult
Perivascular injection should be treated by infiltra-
cows by slow i.v. injection, assessing the effects pro-
tion of the area with 1-2 mg/kg of 2% lignocaine
 duced as injection proceeds, the agent has proved
and several hundredml of 0.9% saline in an
to be quite satisfactory although muscle tremors
attempt to avoid tissue necrosis and abscesses.
occur as unconsciousness supervenes. These mus-
Thiopental should not be administered by this
cle tremors appear to have no clinical sigrificance.
rapid injection technique to sick animals or ani-
Methohexital appears to produce better con-
mals with compromized cardiovascular function.
ditions for endotracheal intubation than are pro-
Young calves up to 2.5 months of age are not good
duced by thiopental. The jaw is more relaxed for a
subjects for thiopental anaesthesia and the use of
 given degree of unconsciousness and thelaryngeal
even small doses for induction of anaesthesia can-
and cough mechanisms appear to be less active.
not be recommended.
Recovery
 from  methohexital  anaesthesia  is
smooth and extremely rapid but occasionally it is
accompanied by a return of the muscle tremors
Thiopental-guaiphenesin
seen during induction of anaesthesia.
Approximately 80-100 mg/kg of 5% guaiphenesin
Doses of 1 mg/kg by rapid i.v. injection are suffi-
on it own is needed to produce recumbency in cat-
cient to enable endotracheal intubation to be car-
tle. If pain-producing procedures are to follow,
 ried out in young calves and can be used for
a combination of guaiphenesin and thiopental
 castration of calves whose ages range from 6 weeks
should always be used (50 g of guaiphenesin to 2g
to 1U months.
thiopental sodium). The mixture is run rapidly into
a catheterized vein (perivascular injection will
Pentobarbital
cause tissue necrosis and sloughing) to produce the
desired effect; the prior use of xylazine greatly
Toosey (1959) found that 1.9-3.8 mg/kg of i.v. pen-
 diminishes the necessary quantity of the combina-
 tobarbital produced sedation in adult animals
fion necessary. Administration of the mixture
 which remained standing, but swaying, on their
results in a decrease in respiratory tidal volume and
feet. Thirty years later, Valverde et al. (1989) con-
CATTLE 335
firmed that 2 mg/kg i.v. produces reliable sedation
intravenous injection. In calves, xylazine, 0.1
in standing adult cattle. These doses produce mod-
mg/kg, and ketamine, 10 mg/kg. can be given
erate sedation for 30 min and mild sedation for a
intramuscularly at the same time, or ketamine may
further 30 min. Respiratory rate is significantly
be administered after a few minutes intravenously
decreased but no changes have been measured in
at 4-6 mg/kg. Intramuscular administration of
 arterial blood gases.
xylazine and ketamine will provide 25-30 min of
 Full general anaesthesia may be induced in
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia can be maintained after
small bovine animals by the slow i.v. injection of
pentobarbital, taking some 4 min over the injec-
tion. Induction is quiet and the dose for the pro-
of ketamine in 1litre of 5% guaiphenesin, or by
duction of light anaesthesia varies from 1.00 to
mhalation agents.
1.45 g/50kg. Surgical anaesthesia persists for
 The combination of diazepam and ketamine
about 30 min and is followed by slow recovery tak-
will produce less cardiovascular depression
ing up to 3 h before the animal can regain its feet.
 in calves than xylazine and ketamine. Diazepam,
For the very young calf - animals up to 1 month
0.2 mg/kg, and ketamine, 5mg/kg, can be com-
old - pentobarbital is quite unsuitable. In these
bined and injected intravenously as a bolus or in
young animals unconsciousness lightens slowly
increments to achieve the desired effect. This com-
over more than 2 days and there is a grave danger
bination will provide about 15 min of anaesthesia.
that during this period the animal will succumb
Butorphanol, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, can be included with
 -asqns Ae h jeu ro 'ewapao Areuod wo
 this combination to increase analgesia and muscle
quently develop pneumonia.
relaxation. Anaesthesia may be prolonged by
 intermittent injections of diazepam and ketamine,
or by inhalation agents.
Ketamine
Medetomidine, 0.02mg/kg, and ketamine,
Ketamine alone will not cause seizures in cattle but
 0.5mg/kg, given together intravenously is a com-
the quality of anaesthesia obtained by it is poor.
 bination that has been described to produce deep
Premedication with xylazine produces quiet,
sedation lasting 30min in calves that could
smooth induction of anaesthesia with good muscle
be combined with local analgesia for surgery
relaxation and a smooth recovery from anaesthe-
(Raekallio et al., 1991). As might be expected,
sia. In young calves, premedication with xylazine
hypoxaemia developed in the calves in dorsal
may be substituted with diazepam or acepro-
recumbency.  Administration of atipamezole,
mazine, with or without butorphanol. The dose
 20-60μg/kg, produced a rapid smooth recovery It
rate of ketamine is usually higher in calves than in
should be noted that in another study of medeto-
mature animals.
midine sedation in calves, injection of antipame-
Xylazine is given to adult cattle either i.m. at
zole, 200 μg/kg, to reverse sedation induced
01-0.2mg/kg or i.v. at 0.05-0.10 mg/kg to produce 
transient severe hypotension and even sinus arrest
deep sedation, often with recumbency. Ketamine is
(Ranheim et al., 1998). Therefore, reversal agents
then given i. v. in doses of 2 mg/kg to induce anaes-
should be given cautiously while monitoring the
thesia. Often, endotracheal intubation can be per-
patient closely. Relapse of sedation may occur
formed soon after the xylazine injection and before
90 minutes later.
ketamine is given and whenever possible this
should be done, for ketamine appears to produce
Ketamine-guaiphenesin
copious salivation or an inability to swallow the
normal saliva volume. The duration of anaesthesia
A similar technique to that for thiopental/guai-
is about 15 min.
phenesin employs a mixture of 1 g of ketamine
 In smaller animals of about 200-350 kg body
mixed with 50 g of guaiphenesin, infused i.v. to
weight, xylazine, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, is given intra-
effect.
muscularly 5-8 min before ketamine at either 6
Anaesthesia can also be induced and main-
mg /kg by intramuscular injection or 4 mg/kg by
tained by i.v. infusion of xylazine, guaiphenesin
336 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
and ketamine. Xylazine, 100 mg and ketamine
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
1000 mg are added to 1 litre of 5% guaiphenesin
Mask induction with halothane or isoflurane
and the mixture infused i.v. at 1-2 ml/kg. Alter-
is possible with little difficulty in calves up to
natively, after induction of anaesthesia with
 2months of age. A small animal circle system can
xylazine and ketamine anaesthesia can be -
be used to deliver O2 and anaesthetic initially
maintained by intermittent or continuous infusion
through a well-fitting mask. The calf can be
of a mixture of guaiphenesin-ketamine (1000 mg
unpremedicated or sedated with a combination
ketamine added to 1 litre of 5% guaiphenesin)
of diazepam, 0.1mg/kg, butorphanol, 0.05-
at approximately 2ml/kg /h - there is no need
0.10 mg/kg, and xylazine, 0.02 mg/kg. With the
to add xylazine to the maintenance anaesthetic
calf standing the mask is applied with the O2 flow-
combination because in cattle the half life of
ing at 341/min, the vaporizer setting starts at zero
xylazine is longer than ketamine. When anaes-
and is increased by 0.5% increments every few
thesia is prolonged supplementation with O2 is
breaths. As its legs begin to relax the calf is allowed
advisable
 to subside to the ground and it is supported in ster-
nal recumbency. The trachea is intubated under
Propofol
direct vision of the larynx using a laryngoscope.
It would seem because of rapid and complete
The mouth can be held open using lengths of
recovery, irrespective of the duration of anaes-
 gauze looped around the upper and lower jaws
thesia, that propofol should be the ideal agent 
 and the tongue pulled to the opposite side of the
for general anaesthesia in cattle. However, there
 mouth to the laryngoscope. After intubation the
cuff is inflated and the tube secured by tying gauze
are very few reports of its use in these animals,
probably due to cost making its use impractical in
around the tube and then around the back of the
adults. In calves inhalation anaesthesia is easily
calf's head. Subsequently the calf can be posi-
anaul seul os aaisuadxa ssal yonu pue paseueu
fioned or lifted onto the operating table.
has been little incentive to use an expensive i.v.
agent.
Halothane
 Personal experience (LWH) has been that one
Halothane is a useful inhalation anaesthetic for
i.v. injection of propofol (5-6 mg/kg) provides, in
cattle and is usually administered by low-flow
non-premedicated calves up to 3 months of age,
 methods with a precision vaporizer and CO2
perfectably acceptable general anaesthesia of
49 min duration, with a smooth, excitement-free
absorption. Endotracheal intubation is first accom-
awakening. Further work to establish the dose-
  s  
thiopental or ketamine, with or without guaiphen-
response to propofol alone, and after α2 adreno-
esin. Tracheal intubation is associated with
ceptors agonists is needed.
increased circulating catecholamine concentra-
Tiletamine-zolazepam
fions (Semrad et al., 1986) and premature ventricu-
lar contractions may develop in some animals
The combination oftiletamine-zolazepam,
 after intubation, particularly when anaesthesia is
4 mg/kg, and xylazine, 0.1 mg/ kg, injected i.m. in
 not deep. The prevalence of arrhythmias decreases
sequence produced anaesthesia within minutes
 over 15 minutes. Halothane induces a significant
in calves (Thurmon et al., 1989). Analgesia lasted
 decrease in ABP with increasing depth of anaes-
 on average 70 min and the calves were able to walk
thesia but ABP is usually high during halothane
in 130 ± 18 min from the time of the last injection.
anaesthesia in mature male cattle.
When higher doses of xylazine were used in
another group of calves some became apnoeic.
Isoflurane
-axa tenun nis st u pasa ou yno
rience has been that calves anaesthetized with tile-
Isoflurane is often chosen for anaesthesia of young
tamine-zolazepam become hypoxic when placed
calves. MAP may fall due to peripheral vasodilata-
 in dorsal recumbency.
tion, mucous membrane colour and capillary refill
CATTLE 337
time remaining good. Induction of anaesthesia is
the general descriptions that should be noted. The
normally as smooth as it is with halothane while
bovine eye rotates with increasing depth of anaes-
recovery is said to be more rapid than after
thesia into a ventral rather than rostroventral posi-
halothane, although this is scientifically unsub-
tion and only the sclera can be seen; it then rotates
stantiated. Isoflurane anaesthesia is satisfactory in
back into a central position during deep anaesthe-
adult cattle.
sia. The pupil usually constricts to a horizontal slit
but some pupillary dilatation may occur after ket-
amine administration. The presence of a palpebral
Sevoflurane and desflurane
reflex indicates that anaesthesia is light. During
The safe use of sevoflurane and desflurane in cattle
ketamine anaesthesia increased muscle tone may
has still to be established. Administration of anaes-
 result in a centrally placed eye and strong palpe-
thesia with sevoflurane is similar to halothane and
bral reflex.
Respiratory rate may be rapid (20-40 breaths/
 tions are required to overcome its lower potency.
min) and the depth shallow. Mature bulls and
Desflurane anaesthesia is easily controlled and,
cows develop high PaCO2 during inhalation
although expensive, its use in a closed system may
anaesthesia and IPPV is often necessary to prevent
prove to be commercially acceptable.
severe hypercapnia, which manifests as tachycar-
dia. A rate of 10 breaths/min and a tidal volume of
10 ml/kg (5-6l for an adult cow or bull) will usual-
Nitrous oxide
ly maintain a PaCO2 of around 5.3kPa (40 mmHg).
N2O/O2 mixtures are not often used in cattle
because of the progressive movement of NzO into
hypoventilate when supine and IPPV with tidal
the rumen and intestines which results in bloat.
volumes of 12-15ml/kg, at rates of 12 breaths
NzO is not sufficiently potent to induce or main-
SHuw oe jo amssaid Aioje nidsu ue pue uu iad
tain anaesthesia when given on its own and it is,
 may be necessary to keep the PaCO2 at about
 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg). Oxygenation when anaes-
halothane or isoflurane.
thesia is being maintained with i.v. agents can
be provided by endotracheal intubation and con-
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS
nection to an anaesthetic system or a demand
valve for assisted or controlled ventilation.
The fact that in cattle peripheral nerve blocks are
Insufflation of O2 at 15l/min through a small bore
easily used to produce skeletal muscle relaxation
tube down an endotracheal tube may prevent
means that neuromuscular blocking drugs are sel-
hypoxaemia.
dom necessary in clinical anaesthesia. Such further
Mature bulls and cows usually maintain HRs of
muscle relaxation as may be needed is usually pro-
60-80 beats/min during anaesthesia. Bulls and
vided by the i.v. injection of guaiphenesin.
adult cows develop hypertension during anaes-
In
1experimentalstudies
pancuronium
thesia and systolic pressures of >200 mmHg are
(0.1 mg/kg) has been found to produce relaxation
 not uncommon. Values obtained by indirect meth-
 of some 30-40 min duration. As in horses, but in
ods of measurement are often incorrect, but ABP is
contrast to other species of animal, the facial mus-
easily and accurately measured by direct means
cles are more resistant to neuromuscular block
using a 20 or 22 gauge catheter placed in the mid-
than are the limb muscles. Monitoring of block
dle or caudal auricular artery (Fig 2.15) and con-
should, therefore, be carried out by stimulation of
nected to a manometer or electrical transducer
nerves to limb muscles.
Hypotension should be treated in the usual man-
ner, namely, by decreasing the rate of anaesthetic
administration, infusing balanced electrolyte solu-
MONITORING
tion and infusion of either dopamine or dobuta
Monitoring the anaesthetized animal is discussed
 mine. For prolonged anaesthesia or major surgery
in Chapter 2 but there are some differences fromj
it is common practice to give 10ml/kg/h of
338 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
balanced electrolyte solution while calves less than
Cattle may be allowed to eat and drink within a
3 months of age should be given 2-5 ml/kg/h of
few hours of recovery to consciousness, the precise
5% dextrose in water to prevent the development
time depending, to some extent, on the anaesthetic
of hypoglycaemia.
agents administered. Calves are usually prevented
In calves ABP is similar to that in other small
from suckling for an hour and hypoglycaemia
ruminant animals. The MAP should be >60 mmHg
should be ruled out if recovery is slow.
and values less than this warrant treatment.
Premedication with acepromazine or xylazine
may contribute to low ABPs.
 REFERENCES
Blaze, C.A., LeBlanc, PH. and Robinson, N.E.
POSITIONING
(1988) Effect of withholding feed on ventilation
and the incidence of regurgitation during
Correct positioning and padding is important as
halothane anesthesia of adult cattle. Americar
radial nerve damage may develop in the under-
Journal of Veterinary Research 49:2126-2129.
most forelimb in cattle that have been lying in
Campbell, K.B., Klavano, P.A., Richardson, P. and
lateral recumbency for more than about 20 min.
Alexander, J.E. (1979) Hemodynamic effects of
xylazine in the calf.American Journal of Veterinary
Padding (e.g. inflated tractor tyre inner tubes)
Research 40: 1777-1780.
should be inserted under the shoulder and fore-
Caulkett, N.A., MacDonald, D.G., Janzen, E.D., Cribb,
arm. Position of the limbs in catfle is the same as in
PN. and Fretz, PB. (1993) Xylazine hydrochloride
anaesthetized horses, but the difference in the
epidural analgesia: a method of providing sedation
shoulders makes it difficult to pull the lower fore-
and analgesia to facilitate castration of mature
limb forward to the same extent. The upper limbs
bulls. Compendiumfor Continuing Education
15: 1155-1159.
should be elevated into a horizontal position and
Court, M.H., Dodman, N.H., Levine, H.D., Richey, M.T.,
the head should be positioned with a pad under
Lee, J.W. and Hustead, D.R. (1992) Pharmacokinetics
the poll so that the nose is lower than the crown,
and milk residues of butorphanol in dairy cows
allowing saliva and any regurgitated material to
after single intravenous administration. Journa! of
Veterinary Pharmacologyand Therapeutics
drain from the pharynx. The homs should be pro-
15: 28-35.
tected from breakage.
DeMoor, A. and Desmet, P (1971) Effect of Rompun on
acid-base-equilibrium and arterial O2 pressure in
cattle. Veterinary Medical Reviews 2: 163-169.
RECOVERY FrOM ANaESTHESIA
Eichner, R.D., Prior, R.L. and Kvasnicka, W.G. (1979)
Xylazine-induced hyperglycemia in beef cattle.
Cattle should be moved into sternal recumbency
American Journal of Veterinary Research 40: 127-129.
and propped up in this position as soon as anaes-
Fayed, A.H.,Abdalla, E.B.,Anderson, R.R., Spencer, K.
thesia is terminated to allow eructation for the
and Johnson, H.D. (1989) Effect of xylazine in
heifers under thermoneutral or heat stress
conditions. American Journal of Veterinary
tory function. The endotracheal tube should not be
Research 50: 151-153.
removed until the animal is swallowing and vol-
Hay, A. (1991) Needle penetration of the globe during
utarily withdraws its tongue into its mouth. This
retrobulbarand peribulbar injections. Ophthalmology
may not occur for some time after coughing and
98: 1017-1024.
chewing movements return. O2 administration by
Hopkins, T.J. (1972) The clinical pharmacology of
insufflation down the endotracheal tube, or
xylazine in cattle. Australian Veterinary Journat
48: 109-112.
through a facemask, should be carried out when-
 Klein, L. and Fisher, N. (1988) Cardiopulmonary effects
 ever possible. In animals that have been intubated,
of restraint in dorsal recumbency on awake cattle.
the tube should be removed with the cuff still par-
American Journal of Veterinary Research 49:1605-1608.
tially inflated. Cattle often remain sitting for some
LeBlanc, M.M., Hubbell, J.A.E. and Smith, H.C. (1984)
time after consciousness has returned and the
The effects of xylazine hydrochloride on intrauterine
pressure in the cow. Theriogenology 21: 681-690.
 process of standing is much more deliberate than it
Lewis, C.A., Constable, PD., Huhn, J.C. and Morin, D.E.
is in horses. After sevoflurane anaesthesia recov-
(1999) Sedation with xylazine and lumbosacral
ery to standing is rapid.
epidural administration of lidocaine and xylazine
CATTLE339
for umbilical surgery in calves. Jourral of the
Semrad, S.D., Trim, C.M. and Hardee, G.E. (1986)
American Veterinary Medicat Association
Hypertension in bulls and steers anesthetized
214: 89-95.
with guaifenesin-thiobarbiturate-halothane
Lin, H.C., Trachte, E.A., DeGraves, F.J., Rodgerson, D.H.,
combination.American Journal of Veterinary
Steiss, J.E. and Carson, R.L. (1998) Evaluation of
Research 47: 1577-1582.
analgesia induced by epidural administration of
StJean, G.,Skarda,R.T., Muir, W.W.and Hoffsis,G.F
medetomidine to cows.American Journal of Veterinary
(1990) Caudal epidural analgesia induced by xylazine
Research 59:162-167
administration in cows. American Journal of Veterinary
McGuirk, S.M., Bednarski, R.M. and Clayton, M.K
Research 51: 1232-1236.
(1990) Bradycardia incattle deprived of food. Journat
Symonds, H.W. and Mallinson, C.B. (1978) The effect of
of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
xylazine and xylazine followed by insulin on blood
196: 894-896.
glucose and insulin in the dairy cow. Veterinary Record
Pascoe, PJ.(1986) Humaneness of an
102: 27-29.
electroimmobilization unit for cattle. Americarn Journa?
Thurmon, J.C., Nelson, D.R., Hartsfield, S.M. and
ofVeterinary Research 47:2252-2256.
Rumore, C.A.(1978) Effects of xylazine hydrochloride
Raekallio, M., Kivalo, M, Jalanka, H. and Vainio, O.
on urine incattle. Austratiar Veterinary Journat
(1991) Medetomidine/ketamine sedation in calves
54: 178-180.
and its reversal with atipamezole. Jourrat of Veterinary
Thurmon, J.C., Lin, H.C., Benson, G.J., Tranquieli, W.J.
Anaesthesia 18:45-47.
and Olson, W.A. (1989) Combining telazal and
Ranheim, B., Soli, N.E., Ryeng, K.A., Arnemo, J.M.
xylazine for anesthesia in calves. Veterinary medicine
and Horsberg, T.E. (1998) Pharmacokinetics of
84:824-830.
medetomidine and atipamezole in dairy calves:
Toosey, M.B. (1959) The uses of concentrated
an agonist-antagonist interaction. Journat of
pentobarbitone sodium solution in bovine practice.
Veterinary Pharmacotogy and Therapeutics
Veterinary Record 71:24-27.
21:428-432.
Vainio, O. (1988) Detomidine (letter to the editor).
Raptopoulos, D. and Weaver, B.M. (1984) Observations
Veterinary Record 123: 655.
following intravenous xylazine administration in
Valuesde, A., Doheny, T.J., Dyson, D. and Valliant, A.E.
steers. Veterinary Record 114:567-569.
(1989) Evaluation of pentobarbital as a drug for
 Rumsey, T.S. and Bond, J. (1976) Cardiorespiratory
standing sedation in castle. Veterinary Surgery
patterns, rectal temperature, serum electrolytes and
18:235-238.
packed cell volume in beef cattle deprived of feed and
Wagner, A.E., Muir, W.W. and Grospitch, B.J. (1990)
water.JournalofAnimalScience 42:1227-1238.
Cardiopulmonary effects of position in conscious
Salonen, J.S., Vaha-Vahe, T., Vainio, O. and Vakkuri, O
cattle. American Jourrat of Veterirary Research 51: 7-10.
(1989) Single-dose pharmacokinetics of detomidine in
Wong, D.H.W. (1993) Regional anaesthesia for
the horse and cow.Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
intraocularsurgery.Canadian Journal of Araesthesia
and Therapeutics 12: 65-72.
40:635-657.
13
Anaesthesia of sheep, goats
and other herbivores
involved is inexpensive, cardiovascular and respir-
INTRODUCTION
[ara Aq paonpoid reu ssa are uoissaidap Aroe
Anaesthetic management of sheep and goats is
anaesthesia, and the risk of regurgitation and
 aspiration is decreased. The immediate post surg-
usually uncomplicated with the notable exception
that regurgitation with potentially fatal pul-
ical recovery time may or may not be shorter than
after general anaesthesia, depending on the agents
monary aspiration is always a risk of sedation or
and techniques used. Local anaesthetic agents may
 general anaesthesia. Furthermore, intubation can
 induce toxic symptoms when used inappropriate-
be technically difficult, particularly in large rams,
because the animals' narrow jaws leave little room
ly, especially when an excessive volume of local
to view the larynx during insertion of the endotra-
anaesthetic is injected. Limiting the initial admin-
cheal tube. Two factors should be considered in
istration of lignocaine to 6 mg/kg has been found
to be safe; administration of ligmocaine in excess of
selection of anaesthetic protocols for these rumi-
10 mg/kg can result in sufficiently high blood lev-
nants. First, dose rates of some anaesthetic agents
differ from those in other species. Secondly
els to cause cardiovascular depression and central
nervous system stimulation. This section will also
animals that are not used to being handled or iso-
discuss techniques of local nerve blocks involving
paeiosse Auoon suais tanuxa jou Ae paiel
with sickness or pain. These animals will have a
use of opioids or C2 adrenoceptor agonists.
reduced requirement for anaesthesia and failure to
recognize this may result in overdosage.
APPLICATIONS OF LOCAL ANAESTHESIA
This chapter describes techniques and drug com-
 binations that can be used to anaesthetize sheep,
Cornual nerve blocks for dehorning
goats, and lamas in a variety of clinical settings.
The cornual branches of the lachrymal and infra-
Local analgesia is useful in these species and details
trochlear nerves provide sensory innervation to
on the techniques are included. Some information
the horns. The cornual branch of the lachrymal
om methods of anaesthesia of deer, camels and ele-
nerve emerges from the orbit behind the root of the
phants has been provided at the end of the chapter.
supraorbital process. The nerve, covered by a thin
frontalis muscle, divides into several branches,
LOCAL ANaLGESIA
two of which supply mainly the lateral and caudal
parts of the horn. The main trunk of the
Local analgesia techniques are highly useful in
infratrochlear nerve emerges from the orbit dorso-
juaudmba asnesaq anoeid jeog pue daaus
medially and divides into two branches, the dorsal
341
342ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
maximum of 6 mg/kg or about 2-3 ml per site for
adult animals.
 Care must be taken with young goats not to
exceed the toxic dose of Lignocaine or to inad ver-
tently inject local anaesthetic intravenously.
 Alternative analgesic techniques for dehorming
include administration of xylazine for sedation, or
production of light general anaesthesia with
diazepam and ketamine, Saffan@, propofol, or an
inhalant. It must be remembered that when inhala-
tion anaesthesia is employed, the oxygen must be
switched off and the facemask removed before
application of a hot iron.
Castration
In the UK the Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics)
FIG. I3.I Nerve blocks for dehorning of goats.The
Act specifies that castration of male sheep over
cornual branches of both the lachrymal and infratrochlear
 3 months of age and of male goats over 2 months of
nerves must be blocked. Care must be taken in young kids
to ensure that attempts to block both nerves do not lead
age must be carried out under local or general
to injection of toxic quantities of local analgesic solution.
anaesthesia. All of the methods described for cattle
are applicable.
or cornual branch and the medial or frontal
branch. The cornual branch soon divides, one divi-
Caudal block
sion coursing to the dorsal aspect of the base of the
horn and ramifying dorsally and dorsomedially.
 Injection of 2 (1-4) ml of 2% ligmocaine solution
The other division passes to the medial aspect of
into the epidural canal through the sacrococcygeal
the base of the horn and gives off branches to the
space will provide caudal epidural analgesia for
medial and caudomedial parts of it. Both divisions
obstetrical procedures involving the vagina,
are covered in part by the orbicularis and in part
vulva, and perineum. A smaller volume of local
by the frontalis muscle
anaesthetic, 0.75 to 1.0 ml of 1% ligmocaine, will
The site for producing block of the cormual
provide analgesia for the docking of lambs' tails.
branch of the lachrymal nerve is caudal to the root
Strict attention must be paid to aseptic technique
of the supraorbital process (Fig. 13.1). The needle
 to avoid complications and several minutes must
should be inserted as close as possible to the cau-
 be allowed for analgesia to develop.
dal ridge of the root of the supraorbital process to a
The wool must be clipped from over the sacrum
depth of 1.0-1.5 cm in adult goats. The syringe
and the base of the tail. The site for needle place-
plunger should be withdrawn before injection to
ment is located by moving the tail up and down
check that the tip of the needle has not penetrated
and palpating the most cranial point of articula-
the large blood vessel located at this site.
tion. A 20 gauge hypodermic needle is inserted
The site for blocking the cornual branch of the
 midline approximately at a 45 ° angle to the curva-
infratrochlear nerve is at the dorsomedial margin
ture of the rump so that the tip of the needle enters
of the orbit (Fig. 13.1). In some animals the nerve is
the vertebral column and may even thread for a
palpable by applying thumbnail pressure and
few mm cranially. Addition of xylazine, 0.05 mg/kg,
moving the skin over this area. The needle should
'smou 9g 0h dn 1oy eisagjeue Suolod m
be inserted as close as possible to the margin
Continuous caudal block can be employed to
of the orbit and under the muscle to a depth of
 provide relief of conditions of the vagina and rec.
about 0.5 cm. Local analgesic solution such as 2%
tum which provoke severe and continuous strain
Lignocaine should be injected at each site, up to a
 ing. Continuous block is facilitated by placement
SHEEP GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 343
TABLE 13.l Epidural analgesia for flank
laparotomy in goats. A lower dose rate,such as
I ml/7 kg, is sufficient for analgesia of the
hindlimbs or perineal surgery
Treatment
Onset
Duration   S
Standing
(min)
(h)
(h)
FIG. 13.2 Catheter emerging from tip of Tuohy needle.
Lignocaine
25
2
3.5-5.0
2%with
adrenaline,
of an epidural catheter. Threading of the catheter
I ml /5 kg
into the epidural space is performed using a Tuohy
Bupivacaine
45
4-6
8-12
needle, which has a curved end that directs the
0.5% or 0.75%,
catheter (Fig. 13.2). The needle is withdrawn after
I ml / 4 kg
the catheter has been advanced 6-8cm in the
epidural space. Local analgesic solution is injected
through the catheter whenever the animal shows
in muscled or fat animals. Epidural block can be
signs of returning sensation. Extreme care must be
performed with the goat or sheep standing or in
taken to secure the catheter in position and to
lateral recumbency. An imaginary line between the
ensure sterile injections by protecting the free
cranial borders of the ilium crosses between
catheter end - capped and wrapped in sterile
the spinous processes of the last lumbar vertebrae
gauze, for example.
(Fig. 13.3). The caudal borders of the ilium, where
the angle bends to parallel midline, are level with
the cranial edge of the sacrum. The point of needle
Digital nerve block
insertion is midline halfway between the spinous
Digital nerves are easily blocked with lignocaine at
process of the seventh lumbar vertebra and the
the sites described for cattle. (Chapter 12)
quh ise al jo ssaoid snouds ah f 'uies
vertebra can be palpated, the next depression cau-
dal to it is the lumbosacral space. This area must be
Epidural block
clipped and the skin prepared with a surgical
Epidural block can be produced by injection of
scrub.
local anaesthetic solution into the epidural space at
A spinal needle should be used because it has a
the lumbosacral jumction. Complete analgesia and
 stilette to prevent injection of a core of subcuta-
paralysis can be induced in the hindlimbs and
neous tissue into the epidural space. The notch on
abdomen to allow surgery, depending on the vol-
the hub of the needle indicates the direction of the
ume of local anaesthetic injected (Trim, 1989). The
bevel. Thus the anaesthetist can ensure that injec-
dose rates for different drugs and their times for
tion of local anaesthetic solution is towards the
onset of action are listed in Table 13.1. The dose
head of the animal.
rates listed are to produce analgesia for flank
When epidural nerve block is to be performed
laparotomy. The dose should be decreased if the
on the conscious animal, 1-3 ml 2% lignocaine
animal is old, obese, or pregnant. A lower dose of
should be injected subcutaneously with a fine nee-
lignocaine, such as 1 ml/7kg, is sufficient for per-
dle at the site intended for insertion of the spinal
ineal or hindlimb surgical procedures, and for cae-
needle. For lambs, kids, and pygmy goats, a
sarian section. The long duration of hindlimb
22 gauge 3.7cm spinal needle can be used. For
paralysis from bupivacaine block for caesarian
 adult animals a sturdier needle, such as an 18 gauge
section interferes with nursing of the newborn,
6.25 cm spinal needle, is recommended. The needle
and for that reason lignocaine with adrenaline is
should be inserted midline perpendicular to the
usually preferred.
curvature of the hindquarters and perpendicular
The lumbosacral junction is easy to palpate in
to the midline sagittal plane of the animal, i.e. not
thin animals but recognition of landmarks will be
necessarily parallel or perpendicular to the floor or
necessary to identify the point of needle insertion
table top (Fig. 13.4).
344 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. I3.3 Black pen has been used to identify the landmarks used to locate the lumbosacral space in a goat. An imaginary
line between the cranial edge of the ilium crosses midline between the spinous processes of the last two lumbar
Considerable pressure may be needed to intro-
to appreciate the resistance then penetration of the
duce the needle through the skin and supraspin-
interarcuate ligament which lies over the epidural
ous ligament and it may be preferable to puncture
space, described as a 'pop', and secondly, to con-
the skin first with a larger, sharp hypodermic nee-
trol introduction of the tip of the needle into the
dle. Once introduced, the spinal needle should be
epidural space so that movement of the needle can
advanced gently for two reasons. First, to be able
be stopped immediately. Further introduction of
the needle will penetrate the spinal cord and
the animal, if conscious, will jump and may dis-
lodge the position of the needle. If the tip of the
 needle strikes bone and the needle does not appear
to be deep enough to be in the epidural space, the
needle should be withdrawn until the tip is just
 under the skin and redirected in a cranial direction.
If unsuccessful, the procedure should be repeated
with the needle advanced in a caudal direction.
After correct placement of the needle, the
stilette should be removed and placed on a sterile
surface. A 3 ml syringe containing 0.5 ml air should
be attached to the spinal needle and the plunger
withdrawn to test for aspiration of cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) or blood. Attempts at aspiration should
sua ne jo uoendse pue wnina e Auo leaaa
that the syringe is not tightly attached to the nee-
dle. When no cerebrospinal fluid or blood is aspir-
1e jo jumoue lews e jo uooajui isal e 'paie
should be made. Injection should be easy when
FlG. 13.4 Direction of insertion of needle for lumbar
epidural injection in sheep in lateral recumbency.
the needle is in the epidural space. After correct
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 345
placement of the needle, the 3 ml syringe should be
animals, treatment should include expansion of
detached and the syringe containing the local
blood volume with intravenous administration of
 anaesthetic solution attached. Injection of the drug
fluid and injection of ephedrine, 0.06 mg/kg, or
should be made over at least 30 seconds. Faste1
methoxamine, 5-10 mg. Animals with urethral
injections result in increased intracranial pressure
obstruction being given epidural analgesia for per-
which, if the animal is conscious, manifest as
opisthotonus, nystagmus, and collapse. After
have a distended urinary bladder at risk of
injection, the spinal needle should be withdrawn.
rupture. Nonetheless, administration of fluid
If analgesia of one side or leg is required the ani-
intravenously is important to restore blood vol-
mal should be placed in lateral recumbency with
ume and cardiovascular function. One option is to
the side to be desensitized underneath. When
decrease the size of the bladder by cystocentesis.
bilateral analgesia is required, the animal should
Alternatively, fluid infusion can begin at the time
aul jeul os audns io auond rauna pauosod aq
of epidural administration so that surgical relief of
vertebral canal is horizontal. The goat or sheep
distension can be accomplished before a substan-
should not be allowed to 'dog-sit', otherwise anal-
fial increase in urine production occurs.
 gesia will not develop cranially.
Approximately 50% of human patients
 The spinal cord may project into the sacrum in
sheep and goats and penetration of the dura will
under epidural block with bupivacaine and
result in aspiration of CSF. Injection into the sub-
describe the pain as poorly localized, dull pain, or
 arachnoid space of the same volume of local anaes-
as a feeling of heaviness or squeezing (Alahuhta ef
thetic intended for epidural analgesia will result in
al., 1990). Sheep or goats may respond by move-
the block extending further cranially and respira-
ment or vocalization to manipulation of viscera
tory arrest. Usually, the volume for subarachnoid
during laparotomy under epidural analgesia with
injection is half the epidural dose. There is some
lignocaine or bupivacaine. The animals may be
risk of local anaesthetic solution entering CSF
made more comfortable by i.v. butorphanol,
through the puncture hole if the spinal needle is
0.1 mg/kg, diazepam, 0.05-0.10 mg/kg, or xylazine,
partly withdrawn and redirected into the epidural
0.02mg/kg. Disadvantages of adjunct drug
 space a few mm distant from the original insertion.
administration include respiratory depression,
If the entry of the needle into a venous sinus is not
pharyngeal relaxation that may promote reg-
detected by aspirating blood, intravenous injec-
urgitation and pulmonary aspiration, and depres-
tion may result in cardiovascular depression. The
sion of the lambs or kids delivered by caesarian
local anaesthetic solution should be warmed when
section.
the epidural injection is to be made in the con-
 Sensory block may extend several dermatomes
scious animal. Injection of a cold solution will
cranial to the level of motor block. Limb move-
stimulate receptors in the spinal cord and the ani-
ment is possible even when the animal is suffi-
mal will jump, possibly dislodging the needle.
Indwelling catheters can be inserted into the
from epidural block, the ability to move the
epidural space at the lumbosacral junction using a
hindlimbs may develop before analgesia is lost,
16 gauge Tuohy needle as described for caudal
although the ability to stand may not return until
analgesia.
long after analgesia is gone.
Placement of a venous catheter is a sensible pre-
Respiratory paralysis can occur if local anaes-
caution when epidural analgesia is to be used for
thetic solution travels cranially to the neck. This
surgery. Epidural injection of local anaesthetic
will occur if a too large volume is injected, i.e. inac-
solution causes paralysis of the splanchnic nerves
curate calculation of dose. In this event, general
and results in a decrease in blood pressure.
anesthesia must be quickly induced, the trachea
-ody ui Annadsa 'donaaap Ae uoisuad
intubated and IPPV applied until the animal is
volaemic animals, such as for caesarian section, or 
 able to breathe again.
animals positioned in such a way as to promote
 During recovery from epidural block produced
pooling of blood in the hindlimbs. In these  by local anaesthetic solutions, the animal should
346 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
be allowed to recover quietly. It will be able to
 out through the flank the thirteenth thoracic and
 maintain sternal recumbency but there is potential
first three lumbar nerves are blocked. For each of
for injury to the hindlimbs if it makes uncoordinat-
these nerves up to 5ml of 1 or 2% lignocaine is
ed attempts to rise.
used, divided and injected above and below the
intertransverse ligament, up to a maximum total
dose of 6 mg/kg lignocaine. Onset of analgesia
Epidural morphine
 may be as fast as 5 minutes. Duration of analgesia
Epidural injection of morphine, 0.1 mg/kg used as
is an hour, or longer when lignocaine with adrena-
a 1 mg/ml preservative-free solution, or 15 mg/ml
line is used.
diluted in saline to 0.15-0.20 ml/kg, at the lum-
bosacraljunction will produce analgesia without
Inverted L block
paralysis. This technique can be used to decrease
the requirement for general anaesthetic agents and
Flank laparotomy can be performed using
to provide postoperative analgesia. Its beneficial
 local infiltration of lignocaine in an inverted L
effects were documented by a study during which
pattern 2 to 3cm cranial and dorsal to the
 it was noted that goats given epidural morphine
 intended skin incision site. Blebs of lignocaine
after stifle surgery vocalized less and were less
must be injected subcutaneously and deep in
likely to grind their teeth than goats that had not 
the abdominal muscle at approximately 1.5 cm
(Pablo, 1993). Epidural morphine also provides
 intervals along the injection site. The maximum
 pain relief for 6 hours after abdominal surgery
dose of lignocaine to be injected at one time is
(Hendrickson et al., 1996).
6 mg/kg and dilution of 2% solution to 1% solu-
tion may be necessary to provide sufficient volume
for injection. The duration of analgesia is about
Epidurai xyiazine
1.5hours.
Xylazine, 0.05mg/kg, diluted with saline to
0.1 ml/kg may be used as an adjunct to general
Intravenous regional analgesia
anaesthesia for surgery. Systemic effects of seda-
tion and decreased gastrointestinal motility may
Surgery on the limbs can be performed using intra-
accompany epidural administration of xylazine in
venous regional analgesia (Chapter 10). In
ruminants. A higher dose of xylazine, 0.4 mg/kg,
sheep and goats the tourniquet or sphygmo-
has been injected at the lumbosacral junction of
manometer cuff is usually placed on the forelimb
rams to produce analgesia for surgery involving
above the elbow (taking care not to pinch skin in
lateral deviation of the penis (Aminkov &
the axilla) and on the hindlimb above the hock
Hubenov 1995). Analgesia extended to T5-T6
 (leaving sufficient length of the saphenous vein for
within 10 minutes and lasted for 120-140 minutes.
 injection) (Fig. 13.5). A tourniquet must be suffi-
Although sedation was judged to be poor,- heart (
 ciently tight to block arterial flow without being
rates decreased moderately, the ability to swallow  
was decreased, and the rams urinated frequently.
 used as a tourniquet must be inflated to above the
and these are all signs indicative of systemic
 systolic blood pressure. Injection of 4 mg/kg lign1o-
absorption. The rams were supine during the sur-
 caine without adrenaline should be made slowly
 gical procedure but changes in PaO2 and PaCO2
 through a 25 gauge needle directed towards the
were clinically insignificant. Hindlimb motor
foot. Care must be taken to keep the needle immo-
block lasted an average of 224 minutes.
bile within the vein during injection. Blood should
be aspirated before injection to confirm needle
placement within the vein. Onset of action is in
Paravertebral nerve block
15-20 minutes. Analgesia will persist as long as the
In sheep and goats lumbar paravertebral nerve
 tourniquet is in place but sensation will rapidly
block is carried out using techniques similar to 1
return after the tourniquet is removed. The tourni-
those employed in cattle. For operations carried
quet should not be released within 10 minutes of
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 347
intravenous injection of lignocaine.
the initial injection to allow time for the lignocaine
to diffuse into tissues. Thereafter, releasing
the tourniquet has no clinical effect on the animal.
 No long lasting effect has been noted in sheep
 or goats when the toumiquet has been in place for
2hours.
Peroneal and tibial nerve block
Analgesia of the hindlimb below the hock can be
achieved by peroneal and tibial nerve blocks. The
peroneal nerve is blocked by injection of 5 ml 2%
lignocaine where the nerve runs obliquely cau-
2.5 cm below the lateral condyle of the tibia. The
nerve can often be palpated by using thumbnail
pressure to move the skin and underlying tissues.
Analgesia of the dorsum of the foot is obvious
from the animal's stance (Fig. 13.6).
The tibial nerve is blocked by infiltration of 4 ml
of 2% solution of lignocaine on the medial side of
the leg at the hock between the flexor tendons and
the gastrocnemius tendon. A further 1 ml is inject-
ed at a similar site on the lateral side of the limb to
block a small cutaneous nerve, a branch of the
of the thigh. Onset of analgesia should be within
FIG. 13.6 Peroneal and tibial nerve block produces
15 minutes and is accompanied by straightening of
analgesia distal to the hock.The hock will straighten and
the hock (Fig. 13.6).
the goat willstand on the dorsum of the fetlock.
348 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
SEDATION
damage, including capillary endothelial damage.
 intra-alveolar haemorrhage, and interstitial oedema
(Celly et al., 1999). Xylazine administration has oc-
SEDATIVE AGENTS EMPLOYED IN SHEEP
casionally been associated with the development
AND GOATS
 of clinical signs of pulmonary oedema in sheep.
Acepromazine
Xylazine induces a short-lived decrease in heart
Acepromazine, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg, can be used to
rate and a mild decrease in mean arterial pressure
 provide mild tranquilisation in sheep and goats.
(MAP). Detomidine, medetomidine and romifi-
dine induce sigrificant bradycardia whereas deto-
midine and romifidine increase MAP (Celly et al.,
O2 Adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists
1997). The impact of these cardiovascular changes
Xylazine, detomidine, medetomidine, or romifi
will depend on the dose rate of the agent, concur-
dine provide light to heavy sedation according to
 rent administration of other anaesthetics, and the
the dose rate administered. Use of these agents
 physical status of the patient.
alone provides satisfactory sedation for restraint 
The effects of xylazine can be reversed by intra-
 0l ronrd uoeipauaid rog pasn aq ueo Kaun 1o
 venous administration of yohimbine, 0.1 mg/kg.
induction of anaesthesia with other anaesthetic 
 tolazoline, 2mg/kg, or doxapram, 0.5mg/kg.
agents. Dose rates for xylazine range from 0.02 to
 Atipamezole 25 to 50 μg/kg i.v. can also be used to
0.2 mg/kg, the largest dose producing profound
 antagonize the effects of this group of sedatives.
sedation for many hours. Animals that are young
or sick will only require a low dose to induce seda-
Diazepam and midazolam
tion. Variation in the analgesic effects of xylazine
has been noted in different breeds of sheep, for
Intravenous administration of these agents alone
example, analgesia after xylazine was less in
daaus ul erxeie pue uonepas awos aonpoid Aeu
Welsh mountain sheep than in Clun sheep (Ley
and goats for 15-30minutes, but the degree of
et al., 1990). The average weight of the Welsh
sedation is unpredictable in healthy animals.
Mountain was 46 kg compared with 69kg for the
Midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg i.v. significantly decreased
Clun and the authors hypothesized that the differ-
the response of sheep to a mechanical painful stim-
Eice may have been the result of dosing according
ulus for 20 minutes (Kyles et al., 1995). Increasing
to body weight rather than body surface area.
the dose rate to 0.3 mg/kg extended the duration
This group of sedatives induces marked physio-
of antinociception but not the intensity. Admin-
logical changes. A comparison of i.v. xylazine,
 istration of flumazenil, 0.02mg/kg, markedly
0.15 mg/kg, detomidine, 0.03 mg/kg, medetomi-
 attenuated the sedation and analgesia induced by
dine, 0.01 mg /kg, and romifidine, 0.05 mg/kg, in-
midazolam but did not abolish it completely.
dicated that all caused a significant decrease in
 Diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg, i.v. can be used to produce
PaO2 (hypoxaemia) for 45 minutes with no alter-
mild sedation for transdermal tracheal wash.
ation in PaCO2, and that respiratory rate increased
(Celly et al., 1997). These observations are in gen
Opioids
gations. The authors suggested that, since the
A variety of opioids have been used in sheep and
hypoxaemia was not due to hypoventilation or
 goats to provide intraoperative and postoperative
aq uon asnes aqissod e 'uonisod Apoq u auep
analgesia. Pethidine (meperidine) has been used
for many years as an adjunct to anaesthesia in
mental airway obstruction, areas of pulmonary
sheep and goats. Butorphanol, 0.05-0.20 mg/kg,
atelectasis, or opening of previously closed vascu-
i.m. or i.v. is useful to increase sedation from
lar connections. Of further clinical interest, the
xylazine, acepromazine, or diazepam. Butorph-
hypoxaemia outlasted the duration of sedation.
 anol has a rapid onset of action and given 5-10
Further investigation has confirmed that in sheep
 minutes before diazepam and ketamine facilitates
xylazine causes severe pulmonary parenchymal
 a smooth and relaxed induction of anaesthesia.
SHEER GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 349
The duration of effect appears to be 1 to 2hours.
the rumen on the diaphragm and aid ventilation,
Buprenorphine, 0.006-0.010 mg/kg, given intra-
to decrease the severity of bloat, and to decrease
muscularly 30 minutes before induction of anaes-
 the prevalence and volume of regurgitation.
thesia, appears to decrease the concentration of
 Lambs and kids should be prevented from suck-
inhalation agent required for anaesthesia. Bupre-
ling for 30 to 60 minutes before anaesthesia.
 norphine can be repeated in 4 hours for treating
When heavy sedation or general anaesthesia is
postoperative pain.
 to be administered to an unfasted ruminant, rapid-
Buprenorphine, 0.006 and 0.012 mg/kg i. v. in
sequence induction of anaesthesia and intubation
n ersalieue pannpnnd daaus luaadxa
of the trachea should be performed.
40 minutes to 3.5 hours against a thermal stimulus
It is doubtful if atropine has any value as a gen-
but no detectable relief from pressure-induced
eral premedicant in sheep and goats. The doses
pain (Waterman et al., 1991). This difference in
effect against different types of pain, which has not
 mg/kg) produce undesirable tachycardia and ocu-
been observed with pethidine or fentanyl, may be
lar effects, while smaller doses merely make the
related to the fact that buprenorphine is a partial
saliva more viscid and hence more difficult to drain
agonist at the μ opioid receptor. Buprenorphine,
from the oropharynx. Bradycardia develops seldom
aaueup puesynais Aue asnes jou pip gx/Su 900'0
during anaesthesia but may be treated by i.v. atro-
in pHa, PaCO2 or PaO2
pine, 0.02 mg/kg, or glycopyrrolate, 0.005 mg/kg.
 Premedication is not essential before general
anaesthesia in small ruminants, as excitement at
Etorphine ond corfentanil
induction is uncommon. Administration of an opi-
These opioids are used for immobilization of non-
oid, such as butorphanol, 0.05-0.20mg/kg, 0r
domestic animals. A study comparing intramuscu-
buprenorphine, 0.01 mg /kg, i.m. or i.v., will improve
larly administered etorphine or carfentanil, 10, 20,
muscle relaxation and will provide essential anal-
and 40 μg/kg of body weight, in instrumented
gesia for orthopaedic procedures. Xylazine is an
goats described similar effects for both drugs
 important part of induction of anaesthesia with a
(Heard et al., 1996). The goats were rapidly immo-
 xylazine and ketamine combination. Diazepam is
bilized, more quickly with carfentanil (≤ 5min-
 often administered concurrently with ketamine at
utes) than with etorphine (5-10 minutes) and
the time of induction.
 etorphine always induced transient struggling.
Immobilization was characterized by limb and
neck hyperextension with occasional vocalization
ANAESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
and bruxation. The goats were partially recovered
Intravenous injection
by an hour after etorphine administration but
were unable to stand at 2hours after carfentanil.
The site of venepuncture in sheep and goats
Both drugs significantly increased blood pressure
depends mainly on the assistance available and
and decreased heart rates without changing car-
the personal preference of the anaesthetist. The
diac outputs. Arterial O2 content was not de-
cephalic vein in the forelimb (Fig.13.7) and the
creased and the goats did not regurgitate.
saphenous vein in the hindlimb are easily viewed
 after the wool or hair over them has been clipped.
It should be noted that the cephalic vein is more
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
oblique on the limb than in the dog (Fig.13.8). A
catheter (18 gauge, 5 cm long) can be inserted into
PREPARATION
either vein, capped, flushed with heparinized
Withholding food from small ruminants before
saline, and secured to the leg with adhesive tape. A
anaesthesia is not a universal practice. However,
 butterfly needle (21 gauge or 19 gauge) can be
most anaesthetists prefer to withhold food for
used in the cephalic vein.
24hours and water for 6 to 12hours before anaes-
 Goats have relatively long, thin necks with
thesia whenever possible to decrease pressure of
 obviousjugular veins so that jugular venepuncture
350 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. 13.7 Restraint of sheep for injection into the
cephalic vein.For jugular venepuncture the sheep is
similarly restrained in the sitting position but it is not easy
FIG. 13.8 The cephalic vein in a goat is short and oblique
across the forearm (black pen has been used to identify
to place the needle correctly in the vein with the sheep in
the location of the left cephalic vein in this animal)
this position and hence the injection of irritant substances
into the jugular vein of the sitting sheep is to be avoided.
lateral recumbency and the head lowered to allow
or catheterization may be carried out with the goat
drainage. Regurgitated rumen material should be
standing, as described for horses. A 14 gauge 8 cm
quickly scooped out of the mouth before tracheal
long catheter is suitable for mature animals. Sheep
intubation is attempted. When difficulty is
have relatively short, thick necks and jugular
Encountered in intubating the trachea, turning the
catheterization is less easy.
animal into dorsal recumbency with its head off
The ear veins are easily observed after the hair
the end of the table may facilitate the process by
is clipped, especially in goats, and can be used for
 overextending the head and neck. Note that this
intravenous injection
 position will impair ventilation and may promote
regurgitation.
Endotracheal intubation is best performed
Endotracheal intubation
uder direct vision with the aid of a laryngoscope.
After induction of anaesthesia, the sheep or goat
Full extension of the head and neck is essential to
should be held in a sternal, head up position to
 place the pharynx and trachea in a straight line
minimize the likelihood of regurgitation until the 
(Fig. 13.9). Strips of gauze around the upper and
trachea is intubated and the endotracheal tube cuff
 lower jaws may be used to hold them open and
inflated. If regurgitation occurs during the process
keep the assistant's fingers out of the anaesthetist's
of intubation, the animal should be turned into
view. The assistant holds the tongue in a gauze
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 351
FlG. I3.9 Intubation of the trachea is facilitated by extending the head and neck to form a straight line and use of a
laryngoscope to view the laryngeal opening.
sponge for better grip and draws it out of the
over the rod into the larynx and trachea, where-
mouth. Endotracheal tubes with 11-12 mm inter-
upon the rod is withdrawn. The tube may have to
nal diameter are used for adult sheep and goats,
be rotated 360 ° as it enters the pharynx in order for
and up to 16 mm for large breeds of sheep. A metal
the tip to pass over the epiglottis and enter the lar-
 or plastic covered stilette inside the endotracheal
 ynx. Uilizing another method, some anaesthetists 
tube may be used to stiffen it and provide more
are able to pass the endotracheal tube into the tra-
control over the tip of the tube. The tip (last 2 cm)
chea blindly. The endotracheal tube (which must
of the stilette should be bent down at a 30 degree
have a good curvature to it) is introduced into the
angle. The laryngoscope blade should be used to
mouth with one hand and the tip fed into the
depress the dorsum of the tongue and the tip of the
 larynx, which is gripped externally by the anaes-
blade must be positioned at the base of the tongue
thetist's other hand.
in front of the epiglottis. Downward pressure on
 Tubes lubricated with an analgesic jelly may
the length of the blade will expose the laryngeal
also be passed through the nostril. The ventral
entrance. Care must be taken to avoid damaging
nasal meatus is relatively large in sheep and goats
the incisor teeth. The tip of the endotracheal tube is
and although tubes passed via the nostril must be
placed on the epiglottis and used to flatten it
 smaller than those introduced through the mouth
against the tongue before the tube is advanced into
reasonably adequately sized ones can be used. If
the larynx and trachea. Slight resistance may be
the tube passed up the nostril cannot be intro-
felt as the tube passes by the vocal cords. A length
adonsouie e xue au unoru ipuq panp
of gauze is tied tightly around the tube behind the
is used to view the tip of the tube in the pharynx.
incisors and then secured around the back of the
The tip of the tube is grasped with forceps and
head behind the ears, or around the bottom jaw.
 assisted into the laryngeal opening as the tube is
The cuff is inflated to produce an airtight seal with-
advanced through the nostril.
in the trachea.
Alternative methods of intubation include
INJECTABLE ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
nserting a half-metre blunt-ended, thin metal rod
into the trachea under direct vision, removing the
 Major surgery and prolonged diagnostic proce-
laryngoscope, then feeding the endotracheal tube
dures in sheep and goats are best performed undel
352 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
 inhalation anaesthesia, using injectable anaesthetic
will decrease the induction dose of methohexital to
agents only for induction and to facilitate endo-
2mg/kg.
tracheal intubation. The greatest disad vantage to
use of injectable anaesthetics for maintenance as
Pentobarbital
well as induction of anaesthesia is the high likeli-
hood of hypoxaemia developing. Further, with the
Many years ago Phillipson and Barnett (1939)
exception of propofol, extending anaesthesia time
 reported the experimental use of pentobarbital in
beyond 30 minutes with injectable agents is often
 sheep. The approximate dose rate in adult sheep is
 Jo asn Araaonai jo uoeuonoid Aq panueduooe
 30 mg/kg when given by slow intravenous injec-
preanaesthetic drugs whose actions can be antagon-
tion but there is great variation in response to the
ized, such as the α2 agonist sedatives or opioids,
drug and anaesthesia time is short - about 15 min-
may shorten recovery but they also contribute to
utes. In contrast to its effects in other species,
greater respiratory depression and hypoxaemia
detoxification of pentobarbital in sheep is rapid.
The dose rate for pentobarbital in goats is similar
to that in sheep with a variable but longer duration
Thiopental
of anaesthesia.
Thiopental has been extensively used to induce
It is important to note that commercially avail-
anaesthiesia in sheep and goats. Onset of anaesthe-
able solutions of pentobarbital may contain
sia is fast and the drug can be titrated to achieve
propylene glycol and this causes haemolysis
the desired effect. The dose range to induce anaes-
and haematuria in goats and sheep. Clinically.
thesia in the unpremedicated animal is wide, 7 to
injectable anaesthetic agents other than pentobar-
20 mg/kg, and the low or high dose does not seem
bital are now usually used for anaesthesia.
to correlate with any particular patient characteris-
IIl jo aaiap 1ou uoeoguoo 1ou ae jou '5n
health. To avoid overdosage, an initial bolus dose
Ketamine
of 5-7mg/kg of 2.5% thiopental should be in-
Ketamine can be used for anaesthesia in sheep and
jected. Within 30 seconds the degree of central
 goats without fear of causing convulsions. Muscle
nervous system depression can be assessed and
 relaxation is poor, but may be improved by sedat-
further small boluses of drug administered every
ives such as diazepam or xylazine (Table 13.2).
20 seconds until the jaws are relaxed for endo-
Ketamine alone or when given in low dose rates
tracheal intubation. The duration of anaesthesia is
-epas jo aieis e aonpoid oi sieadde wedazeip ui
short, at 5 to 10 minutes, depending on the dose of
 tion in which there is profound analgesia with only
thiopental administered. Recovery is usually
partial depression of the swallowing and cough
smooth. Preanaesthetic sedation decreases the
reflexes. Large dose rates have been used but a
dose rate proportionately to the degree of
lower dose is all that is needed to accomplish endo-
sedation.
tracheal intubation. A useful drug combination for
induction of anaesthesia is diazepam, 0.25 mg/kg
iv., and ketamine, 5mg/kg (4-6 mg/kg) i.v., admin-
Methohexital
istered at the same time. In many animals, half of
 In both sheep and goats the intravenous injection 
this calculated dose is sufficient for endotracheal
 of 4 mg/kg of a 2.5% solution of methohexital pro-
intubation. Better muscle relaxation is achieved
duces anaesthesia of 5-7minutes' duration.
when i.v. butorphanol, 0.05-0.10 mg/kg, is adminis-
Recovery to standing position is complete within
 tered before the diazepam and ketamine. A differ-
10-14 minutes of the injection but the recovery is
ent opioid or a small dose of xylazine, 0.02-
usually associated with violent jerking or con-
0.05 mg/kg, can be given as an alternative to butor-
vulsive movements and excitement if the animal
 phanol. Acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg, i.v. or i.m. can
is disturbed by noise during this period. Recovery
 be substituted for the diazepam but sufficient time
 should be allowed for onset of action before injec-
with diazepam or xylazine. Premedication
tion of ketamine, 6mg/kg.
SHEEP GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 353
TABLE 13.2 Injectable drug combinations for
thetize sheep and the effects reversed by injection
general anaesthesia in goats and sheep
of atipamezole, 0.125mg/kg (Laitinen, 1990;
Tulamo et al., 1995). In one study, anaesthesia was
Drugs
Dosage (mg/kg) Duration
Comments
continued by a further injection of medetomidine,
 Diazepam 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg i.v. 10-15 min
Can include
0.01 mg/kg, and ketamine, 1 mg/kg, 25 minutes
butorphanol
after the first injection (Tulamo et al., 1995).
Ketamine  5.0 to 7.5 mg/kg i.v.
0.1 mg/kg
Administration of atipamezole 45 minutes after
Xylazine
0.1 mg/kg i.m.
30 min
Additional 
induction of anaesthesia resulted in the sheep
xylazine can
standing on average 15 minutes later. With this
Ketamine 6 mg/kg i.v.or
beadded if
 aeapo pue eaexodu loooid sausae
II mg/kg i.m.
depth of 
hypoventilation develop, and cardiac arrest at
 anaesthesia not
induction has been reported (Tulamo et al., 1995).
Endotracheal intubation and supplementation
Thiopental 7 to 20 mg/kg i.v.  I10 min
Not < 3 months
with oxygen is advisable during anaesthesia.
age.Dosage
varies: inject 5
mg/kg i.v. initially
and titrate
Tiletamine-zolazepam
Snup jeuopipe 
Intravenous administration of tiletamine-zolaze-
'to effect'
pam produces longer lasting anaesthesia than
Xylazine 
0.lI mg/kg i.m.
45-60
Higher 
diazepam-ketamine. Tiletamine-zolazepam may
min
xylazine
tiletamine- 4 mg/kg i.v.
dosemay
not provide sufficient analgesia for laparotomy
zolazepam
cause apnoea
and an additional drug should be included for an-
algesia. In one report, i.v. butorphanol, 0.5 mg/kg,
Propofol
About4 mg/kg i.v. Short;
Quality of 
and tiletamine-zolazepam, 12 mg/kg i.v. resulted
can be
anaesthesia
maintained
improved by
in 35minutes of anaesthesia (25-50minutes)
by incremental premedication
(Howard et al., 1990). Mean arterial pressures and
injections
heart rates were sustained at acceptable values,
or infusion
and cardiac output decreased by an average of
30%. Apnoea was present immediately after in-
The combination of xylazine and ketamine is easy
duction for up to 72 seconds followed by apneustic
to use and produces a longer duration of anaesthe-
breathing patterns and hypoxaemia was present
sia. In goats, onset of anaesthesia is approximately
for the first 10minutes of anaesthesia. Mild
5minutes after i.m. xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg, and keta-
mine, 11 mg/kg. If attempts at intubation induce
anaesthesia time.
chewing movements, an additional injection of
The combination of i.v. tiletamine-zolazepam,
xylazine, 0.1mg/kg, should induce complete
6.6 mg/kg, with i.v. ketamine, 6.6 mg/kg, and
relaxation. The duration of surgical anaesthesia is
xylazine, 0.11 mg/kg, resulted in a longer duration
30-40 minutes. Alternatively, xylazine can be
of anaesthesia, 83 ± 27 min (mean and standard
administered i.m. 5 minutes before induction of
deviation), and a protracted recovery, mean
anaesthesia by i.v. ketamine, 24 mg/kg. The dura-
4hours (Lin et al., 1994). Hypotension was present
tion of anaesthesia is shorter after i.v. compared
30 minutes after induction and persisted for the
with i.m. administration. A disadvantage to the use
remainder of anaesthesia. Blood gas analyses were
of xylazine and ketamine is that MAP and cardiac
not performed, however, it is probable that hypox-
output are decreased. This is particularly apparent
aemia developed in these animals.
whenxylazine and ketamine are administered prior
to halothane or isoflurane, when the combined
Saffan
effects often result in low arterial blood pressure.
A combination of medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg
Anaesthesia may be induced in healthy sheep and
and ketamine, 2mg/kg, has been used to anaes-
goats by the intravenous injection of 3mg/kg
354 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Saffan and this is sufficient for intubation and a
hypoventilation occurs in sheep and goats during
smooth transition to inhalation anaesthesia. When
 continuous propofol anaesthesia, resulting in
Saffan is to be used as sole agent in lambs and kids
hypercapnia (Lin et al., 1997; Carroll et al., 1998).
for disbudding, recommended intravenous dose
 Consequently, endotracheal intubation and sup-
rates are 4-6 mg/kg.
plementation with O, is recommended, either by
The effects of Saffan on the heart rate, arterial
insufflation of O2 at 50-100 ml/kg/min into the
blood pressure (ABP) and respiratory rate are
endotracheal tube or by giving 100% O2 from an
dose-dependent. Saffan at 2.2 mg/kg i.v. produces 
anaesthesia machine. MAP may be low after
a short-lived decrease in heart rate and ABP with
 induction of anaesthesia with propofol but should
some slowing of respiration. This dose may pro-
 progressively rise with time. Recovery from anaes-
duce about 10 minutes of surgical anaesthesia with
thesia is rapid with the animals standing 10 to 20
recovery to the standing position about 20 minutes
minutes after propofol infusion is discontinued.
after injection. A dose of 4.4 mg/kg Saffan may
Combination of propofol with ketamine is an
produce a longer duration of decreased heart rate
alternative technique for total intravenous anaes-
and ABP, and about 15 minutes of anaesthesia with
thesia that has been tried in sheep (Correia et al.,
complete recovery after a further 30 minutes
1996). Induction was achieved with propofol,
3mg/kg, and ketamine, 1 mg/kg. Anaesthesia was
maintained for the first 20 minutes with a com
Propofol
bined infusion of propofol, 0.3 mg/kg/ min, with
Propofol has a licence for clinical use in dogs and
ketamine, 0.2 mg/kg/min. This infusion rate was
cats. Its chief advantage lies in its rapid detoxifica-
subsequently decreased to 0.2mg/kg/min of
tion and elimination resulting in rapid recovery
 propofol and 0.1 mg/kg/min of ketamine. Re-
from anaesthesia, even after multiple supple-
 covery from anaesthesia was rapid and free from
ments. Propofol, 5-7mg/kg i.v. in unpremedicated
excitement.
sheep and goats will induce anaesthesia sufficient
for endotracheal intubation (Pablo et al., 1997)
Guaiphenesin (guaifenesin, glyceryl
Apnoea is common but regurgitation should not
guaiacolate,GGE)
be a problem if food and water have been withheld
before anaesthesia. Premedication with acepro-
Maintenance of anaesthesia with an infusion of
mazine, 0.05 mg/kg, and papaveretum, 0.4 mg/kg.
 guaiphenesin and ketamine after induction with
(Correia et al., 1996), or detomidine, 0.01 mg/kg,
xylazine and ketamine is a common protocol for
and butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg (Carroll et al., 1998),
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) in cattle over
all given i.m. decreased the dose of propofol for
200 kg body weight (see Chapter 12). Guaiphen-
intubation to approximately 4 mg/kg.
esin is not often used in sheep and goats because of
Anaesthesia can be maintained with an in-
its cost, but it can be used. One report described
halant anaesthetic or maintained by continuous
       ss
mfusion of propofol. The cardiopulmonary effects
esin, 50 mg/ml, ketamine, 1 mg/ml, and xylazine,
during anaesthesia maintained with halothane or
0.1 mg/ml, combined in 5% dextrose in water.
isoflurane will reflect the influence of the inhalant.
Anaesthesia was induced by rapid administration
Recovery from anaesthesia is usually smooth and
of 1.2ml/kg of the mixture and maintained by
rapid.
infusion at 2.6 ml/kg/h (Lin et al., 1993). The sheep
The infusion rate of propofol to maintain anaes-
were intubated and breathing air. Respiratory
thesia for surgery is within the range 0.3 to
rates were fast and the animals were severely
0.6 mg/kg/min and depends on the presence or
hypoxaemic with an average PaO2 of 4.8kPa
absence of premedication and the intensity of the
(36.4 mmHg) at 30 minutes of anaesthesia. Heart
surgical stimulus. The animals should be less
rates and MAPs remained within acceptable
responsive to the surgical stimulus when they
 ranges of values. Recovery was smooth with time
have been premedicated with a sedative or a sedat-
from termination of infusion to standing of 96 ± 50
ive and opioid combination. Moderate to severe
minutes. The advantage of the technique is the
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 355
constant level of anaesthesia that can be produced
thesia with xylazine and ketamine, or with tileta-
by a continuous infusion. Nonetheless, the sever-
mine-zolazepam, the central nervous system
ity of the decrease in PaO, introduces potential for
depression is greater and the vaporizer setting
a fatal outcome unless O2 administration is included
should be lower, for example, 0.50 to 0.75%
in the technique.
halothane or 1% isoflurane. In either case, as the
 depth of anaesthesia changes with time and onset
of surgery, the vaporizer setting can be adjusted up
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
or down as needed. After about 20 minutes, when
Inhalation anaesthesia is a popular and reasonably
the blood anaesthetic concentrations are more sta-
safe technique for providing anaesthesia for
ble, O2 flow can be reduced to 1.0 or 0.51/min, if
surgery and medical diagnostic procedures.
desired, to limit wastage of inhalant agent.
Halothane/O2 and isoflurane/O2 are the most
Lambs and kids may be connected to a T-piece
commonly used inhalation anaesthetics in rumin-
or Bain circuit. The inspired anaesthetic concentra-
ants. They offer advantages over injectable agents
tion is the same as the vaporizer setting and thus
of easy control of the depth of anaesthesia, O2 that
during maintenance of anaesthesia should be
usually prevents hypoxaemia, and rapid recovery
about 1.0 to 1.5 % for halothane or 1.4 to 1.8% for
from anaesthesia. The greatest disadvantages are
isoflurane, depending on the degree of preanaes-
the production of respiratory and cardiovascular
thetic sedation provided.
depression that may require treatment with IPPV
and vasoactive drugs.
Tracheal intubation prior to halothane or isoflu-
Halothane,isoflurane,and sevoflurane
rane anaesthesia is usually accomplished after
All these agents cause dose-dependent decreases
 amaesthesia is first induced with injectable agents.
in ABP and cardiac output. MAC value for
Induction of anaesthesia with the inhalant deliv-
 sevoflurane has been reported as 3.3% in sheep
ered through a facemask is less desirable in an
 and 2.7% in goats (Clarke, 1999).
adult sheep or goat. The longer time for induction
allows accumulation of saliva in the pharynx and
increases the time before endotracheal intubation,
Nitrous oxide (N,O)
A major disadvantage of NzO is that it rapidly dif-
occur Induction with an inhalant also requires that
fuses into the rumen and causes bloat and respir-
 deep anaesthesia is ind uced to facilitate endotra-
atory compromise. However, NzO can be used as an
cheal intubation, and this is often accompanied by
 adjunct to injectable anaesthesia or used to supple-
a significant decrease in ABP. Furthermore, ind uc-
ment and decrease the requirement for halothane
tion using a mask is often physically resented by
or isoflurane. Low flows must not be used with
the adult animal. In contrast, young lambs and
N2O and a circle rebreathing system. Gas flows for
kids are easily induced with halothane or isoflu-
a small sheep or goat should be 1l/min each of O2
rane via facemask.
and N2O, with an increase to 2l/min of each for
Anaesthetic breathing systems that are used for
very large animals.
dogs can be used for sheep and goats. The initial
sae aun uo puadap lim Suas razodea
agents used for induction of anaesthesia and the
ANAESTHETIC MANAGEMENT
type of breathing system. For example, after
Positioning
nduction and intubation in animals anaesthetized
with acepromazine and thiopental, or butor-
During anaesthesia, the head and neck should be
phanol, diazepam and ketamine, and connection
positioned so that the nose is lower than the phar-
to a circle circuit, a halothane vaporizer (vaporizer
paengmgai Aue pue eales jo aseueip roy xu
out of circle) may be set at 1.5% or the isoflurane
 ruminal fluid. Salivation will continue throughout
vaporizer at 2.0 or 2.5% with an oxygen flow rate of 3
anaesthesia and saliva ceases to flow from
1 to 2l/min. In contrast, after induction of anaes-
the mouth only when it is accumulating in the
356 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
pharynx or because a deep plane of anaesthesia
sequence of the hypercapnia and these will return to
has decreased production.
normal values after the onset of controlled ventila-
tion. Other potential consequences of hypoventila-
 tion are the lack of adequate anaesthesia during
Fluid therapy
 inhalation anaesthesia despite a high vaporizer
Balanced electrolyte solution, such as lactated
 setting, and hepatic ischaemia as a result of hyper-
Ringer's solution at 10ml/kg/h, should be
 capnia-induced splanchnic vasoconstriction. A
infused i.v. when surgery is being performed or 
 near normal PaCO2 results when IPPV is applied
when anaesthesia time becomes extended.
 at 12 breaths/min and an inspiratory pressure of
Animals less than age 3 months should also
 20-25 cmH2O or tidal volume of 15 ml /kg.
receive 5% dextrose in water at 2 to 5ml/kg/h.
 Peripheral arteries that are easily palpated or
Occasionally an adult ruminant develops hypo-
 can be used for indirect methods of blood pressure
glycaemia, and this should be suspected any time
measurement are on the caudomedial side of the
that recovery is more prolonged, or after recovery
forelimb above or below the carpus and on the
from the immediate effects of the anaesthetic if the
hindlimb on the dorsal surface of the metatarsus
animal is more lethargic than anticipated.
(Fig. 13.10). The median and caudal auricular
arteries on the outside surface of the ear can be
Monitoring
used for needle or catheter placement for direct
The position of the eyeball during inhalation
Right hindlimb
anaesthesia in goats and sheep is similar to the pat-
(cranial view)
tern observed in anaesthetized dogs; the eye rolls
rostroventral between light and medium depth
Right forelimb
Cranial tibial
 anaesthesia, and returns to a central position dur-
(palmar view)
artery
 ing deep plane of anaesthesia. Occasionally during
light anaesthesia the eye will rotate dorsally ('star
gazing'). The palpebral reflex is lost in medium to
Radial artery
deep anaesthesia. The pupil should be merely a slit
during an adequate plane of inhalation anaesthe-
sia and dilates in light or deep anaesthesia.
The pupil dilates after ketamine administration
although, if the dose rate is low, the pupil may
Palmar
close down during inhalation anaesthesia.
metacarpal
Respiratory rates are usually 15-30 breaths/
artery
minute; higher rates are associated with hypoven-
tilation or hypoxaemia. Oxygen saturation and
pulse rate can be monitored using a pulse oximeter
with a probe on the tongue. The depth of each
breath is impaired when these animals are supine
and moderate to severe hypercapnia usually
 develops during inhalation anaesthesia. Oxygen-
 ation is usually adequate when the inspired gas is
O2 rich. Rumen bloat may develop during anaes-
thesia despite preoperative fasting, pressing on the
diaphragm and further impairing ventilation.
Bloating can often be relieved by passage of a wide
bore tube through the mouth into the rumen, but
FIG. 13.10 Schematic drawing of the arteries on
the tube may become blocked. Tachycardia, and
sometimes hypertension, may develop as a con-
blood pressure measurement.
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 357
measurement of arterial pressure and for collec-
back into its mouth; this may be a considerable
tion of blood for pH and blood gas analysis (see
time after the animal is able to lift up its head.
Chapter 2, Fig. 2.15). Heart rates are most frequent-
 Recovery is usually quiet and, unlike horses, rumi-
ly between 60 and 120 beats/minute. Heart rates
 nants may be in no hurry to stand after anaesthe-
less than 55 beats/min should be considered to
sia. Full control of swallowing and gastrointestinal
constitute bradycardia and heart rates greater than
140 beats/min should be investigated for possible
xylazine administration and feeding must be
abnormal cause. MAP should be above 70 mmHg
 delayed. Hay or grass and water may be allowed
during anaesthesia.
3 hours after anaesthesia with most other agents
It is not uncommon for the animal's tempera-
used in these species.
ture to decrease to 37.2°C (99°F) before anaesthe-
sia after 24 hours without food. Hypothermia may
develop during anaesthesia and efforts should be
Pain relief
made to prevent heat loss. Sheep and goats require
The relief of postoperative pain demands the same
extermal application of heat when rectal tempera-
care in goats and sheep as in all other animals.
ture decreases to 35.5°C (96°F) to avoid pro-
Signs of pain are not as obvious as in some other
longed recovery. Conversely, anaesthesia in a hot
species. Shivering may be a sign of anxiety Immo-
bility, vocalization, or grinding the teeth may be
indicators that the animal is experiencing pain.
Treatment of hypotension
Systemic administration of opioids may include
i.m. 2 to 4 mg/kg of pethidine, 0.2 mg/kg of butor-
Mean pressures below 65 mmHg should be treated
phanol, or 0.006 to 0.010 mg/kg of buprenorphine.
appropriately according to the suspected cause
of hypotension. Treatment might include a 10 to
 provide analgesia for procedures on the hindlimbs
20ml/kg bolus of electrolyte solution intravenously
or abdomen.
and lightening the depth of anaesthesia. Cardio-
vascular stimulation may be achieved by adminis-
tration of a catecholamine, such as an intravenous
OTHER HERBIVORES
bolus of ephedrine, 0.03-0.06 mg/kg, or an infusion
of dopamine or dobutamine at 5-7μg/kg/min of a
100 μg/ ml solution in 0.9% saline. Blood loss can be
AMAS (lama glama) AND ALPACAS
 treated initially by infusion of lactated Ringer's
(lama pacos)
solution at 2 to 3 times the volume of blood lost and
Llamas may weigh up to 200kg and live up to
by decreasing anaesthetic administration.
20 years. Alpaca males weigh on average 60kg.
These animals should be handled with care as
llamas can kick, swinging the limb forward and
Recovery
out, and males may bite. Use of side rails is not
The animal should be placed prone at the end of
 advised, as a leg can be broken. Some commercial
 anaesthesia. When bloat is present ruminal gas
llama chutes incorporate straps which are passed
should be heard and smelled at the mouth.
under the animal's thorax and caudal abdomen to
Regurgitation during anaesthesia is not a problem
prevent the animal assuming sternal recumbency.
when the endotracheal tube is present and the cuff
Most llamas and alpacas tolerate a halter with a
inflated to produce an airtight seal. Solid rumen
rope lead. Suggestions for manual restraint
material should be removed from the pharynx
include holding the haltered head and exerting the
before the end of anaesthesia. It must be remem-
full force of your weight on the hindlimbs to force
the animal into a sternal recumbent submissive
mal is waking up. Consequently, the endotracheal
 position (cush) (Jessup & Lance, 1982). This works
tube must not be removed until the animal is 
because the forelimbs are the main weight bearers
chewing, swallowing, and can withdraw its tongue 
 and the hindlimbs cannot be locked up. Tapping
358 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
tion, was injected into each testicle until it became
TABLE 13.3 Comparison of mean times for
onset and duration of epidural analgesia with
turgid and a further 1-2ml was deposited subcutan-
2% lignocaine, 0.22 mg/kg, and diluted 10%
eously at the site of the proposed incision as the
xylazine, 0. 17 mg/kg,in six llamas (Grubb et al.,
needle was withdrawn. The lower dose of ligno-
1993)
caine is recommended for llamas weighing less
Treatment
Onset (min)
Duration
than 30 kg. These authors noted that llamas given
(min)
butorphanol are not sedated but also that they do
not exhibit the signs of discomfort and restlessness
Lignocaine
3
71
Xylazine
21
187
during the procedure that have been observed in
Lignocaine/xylazine
4
326
 animals castrated with only local analgesia.
behind the knee of the forelimb may help.
Preparation for anaesthesia
Weanling or yearlings should not be tied as they
A number of publications are available document-
may struggle and injure cervical vertebrae.
ing the reference ranges for haematological and
Aggressive handling or striking an animal will
biochemical values in llamas and alpacas (Fowler
result in fear, distrust and spitting.
& Zinkl, 1989; Hajduk, 1992). In comparison with
common domestic ruminants, llamas and alpacas
Caudal epidural analgesia
X i  a   
1012 /litre) and small mean corpuscular volume,
Caudal epidural injection of lignocaine, xylazine,
with packed cell volumes of 0.25-0.45 litres/litre.
 or a combination of these has been evaluated in lla-
Blood glucose levels of 108 to 156mg/dl were
mas (Grubb et al., 1993). Injections were made into
 measured in nursing 2 to 6 month old llamas com-
the sacrococcygeal space where the epidural space
pared with 74 to 154 mg/ dl in adult llamas.
is shallow and easily entered. The procedure was
Preparation for anaesthesia is the same as for
performed with a 20 gauge, 2.5 cm long needle
sheep and goats. Bloat, regurgitation, and aspira-
inserted at a 60° angle to the base of the tail. Onset
tion can occur in llamas and, therefore, the animals
 of action was rapid after injection of lignocaine
should be fasted for 24 hours and water withheld
and analgesia lasted longest when a combination
for 8 to 12hours before elective anaesthesia. Young
of lignocaine and xylazine was used (Table 13.3).
calves (cria) may take solid food as early as
Ataxia did not develop, although the llamas tend-
2 weeks but weaning may not occur until age 4 to
ed to lie down. The dose rate of xylazine used in
 7 months. Fasting is not usually done in paediatric
this study was toward the high end of the dose
patients because of the risk of hypoglycaemia
range used in ruminants and from which some
except that suckling is prevented for 30 to 60 min-
systemic effects are to be expected. Mild sedation
utes before anaesthesia. A rapid induction and
developed in half the llamas given xylazine, begin-
 ning about 20 minutes after injection and lasting
 procedures in animals that are not fasted.
for 20-30 minutes. The synergistic effect on dura-
Severe bradycardia may develop during halo-
tion of analgesia caused by combining xylazine
thane anaesthesia (Riebold et al., 1989) and there is
with lignocaine is similar to that in horses.
some justification for premedication with atropine,
0.02 mg/kg, in contrast to recommendations for
sheep and goats.
Local analgesia for castration
A technique for castration in the standing llama
has been performed in more than 100 animals
Anaesthetic techniques
without complications (Barrington et al., 1993).
Venepuncture
Butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg, i.m. was administered
15 minutes before applying a surgical scrub to the
 Jugular venepuncture for collection of blood or
perineal region. Ligmocaine, 2-5 ml of a 2% solu-
placement of a catheter is not as easy as in sheep
SHEER GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 359
3-4 cm dorsal
to angle of ventral
border of mandible.
Skin is thick.
Cranial to the ventral
FIG.13.12 The long 35 cm Wisconsin laryngoscope
process of 5th cervical
blade is useful for intubation of adult llamas; seen here in
vertebra. Carotid
comparison with a blade used for intubation in large dogs.
artery nearby.
Endotrocheal intubotion
The technique for endotracheal intubation is simi-
FIG. 13.II Schematic drawing showing the landmarks
lar to that in sheep and goats. Viewing the laryn-
for jugular vein puncture in llamas.
geal opening is difficult in adult llamas and a
laryngoscope with a long blade is essential (e.g.
35 cm Wisconsin blade, Anesthesia Medical Spe-
and goats. Two sites are recommended (Fig. 13.11)
cialties, Santa Fe Springs, California 90670) (Fig.
(Amsel et al., 1987). One site is high in the neck
13.12). A 10 mm internal diameter tube can be used
at the level of the mandible. An imaginary line is
in a 60 kg llama and a 12 mm in a llama of 100 kg.
drawn continuous with the ventral border of
Intubation in large animals is made easier by
the mandible and the point of needle insertion is
inserting a metal rod inside the endotracheal tube
3 to 4 cm dorsal from its angle in an adult animal.
to stiffen it.
 Disadvantages to this site are that the overlying
Llamas are obligate nasal breathers and airway
skin is very thick, and movement of the head
obstruction may occur during anaesthesia in lla-
may dislodge a needle or kink a catheter. The
mas that are not intubated due to dorsal displace-
second site is lower on the neck where the ventral
ment of the soft palate, and during recovery from
processes of the fifth cervical vertebra can be
 amaesthesia due to nasal oedema and congestion.
palpated. Placing a thumb in the depression
Nasotracheal intubation has been recommended
just medial to the ventral process can raise the
in llamas to provide a clear airway during any
 phase of anaesthesia (Riebold et al., 1994). A long
jugular vein. The overlying skin is less thick,
facilitating catheter insertion. A disadvantage to
tube willbe needed, such as the 40 to 55 cm long
this site is that the carotid artery is nearby and can
tubes manufactured for nasotracheal intubation in
be penetrated. Observation of pulsatile blood flow
foals (Bivona, Gary, Indiana 46406). The internal
through the needle or catheter confirms that the
diameter will be about 2 mm less than the size of
catheter is in the carotid artery and should be
tube chosen for orotracheal intubation. The tube
withdrawn. A 14 gauge or 16 gauge, 13cm
should be well lubricated, and lubricant con-
 long catheter is inserted in adult llamas, although
taining phenylephrine can be used to cause
prominent valves in the vein may hinder
vasoconstriction in the nasal mucosa and limit
threading of the catheter. Other veins, such as an
haemorrhage. The tip of the tube is inserted medi-
ear vein, cephalic vein, or saphenous vein can be
 ally and ventrally into the ventral nasal meatus as
used in depressed, sedated, or anaesthetized
in horses, with the bevel directed laterally to mini-
animals.
mize trauma to the conchae. It is important to keep
360 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
a finger on the tube inside the nares to ensure that
shortly before the ketamine. An alternative com-
the tube remains in the ventral meatus while the
bination is xylazine premedication followed
tube is advanced slowly and without twisting. If
by induction of anaesthesia with i.v. diazepam,
the tube is in the middle meatus it will impact on
0.1-0.2mg/kg, and ketamine 2.5 mg/kg.
the ethmoid and cause significant haemorrhage. A
further obstruction to intubation in llamas is the
Guaiphenesin
large diverticulum, 1 cm wide and 2 cm deep, at
the caudodorsal angle of the nasopharynx. If the
Guaiphenesin, up to 0.5 ml/kg of a 5% solution, is
tip of the tube is level with the pharynx and it can-
 a useful adjunct to anaesthetic induction with ket-
not be advanced then the tube should be with-
 amine in large llamas. Premedication facilitates the
drawn severalcm, redirected and advanced again.
procedure and can consist of a low dose of xyla-
The arytenoid cartilages and epiglottis protrude
 zine, or a combination of diazepam, 0.1 mg/kg,
above the soft palate into the nasopharynx.
and butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg. Guaiphenesin is
Hyperextension of the head and neck may allow
 most easily injected into the catheter using a 60 ml
the nasotracheal tube to enter the larynx.
 syringe and a 14 gauge needle. The llama will usu-
Alternatively, a laryngoscope can be inserted into
 ally assume sternal recumbency before ketamine,
the mouth to view the tip of the tube. While the
2.5 mg/kg, is injected to complete induction of
tube is slowly and gently advanced its tip is
 anaesthesia. Dose rates of anaesthetic agents must
 gripped with forceps or hooked rostrally with a
be decreased for animals that are ill, for example,
bent stilette and directed into the larynx.
from urethral obstruction, peritonitis, or intestinal
Extubation after anaesthesia should be delayed, as
 obstruction. Xylazine should be avoided in ani-
in other ruminants, until the animal can withdraw
 mals with urethral obstruction.
its tongue into its mouth, and this may occur long
 after the first swallowing and chewing movements
Propofol
are observed.
Propofol can be used to anaesthetize llamas but
the technique is expensive for large animals. In-
Anaesthetic agents
duction of anaesthesia can be accomplished by
2.0-3.5mg/kg i.v. Anaesthesia may be maintained
Xylazine
with an inhalation agent or by continuous infusion
Xylazine is often used as a sedative in doses of
of propofol, 0.4 mg/kg/min. In an investigation of
0.4-0.6 mg/kg intravenously. This dose will pro-
continuous propofol anaesthesia in llamas, MAP
vide 30 to 45 minutes of recumbency. Bradycardia
-ap jou sem indino seipies pue yoiu paueuan
will be induced with little change in blood pres-
pressed (Duke et al., 1997). Hypoxaemia did
sure. Sedation can be reversed with yohimbine but
not develop even though the animals were breath-
not doxapram. Medetomidine produces dose-
ing air. Additional analgesia, systemic or local, will
'sl u uopas Aaeau oi l juapuadap
be necessary if the procedure is painful.
with 0.03 mg/kg i.m. inducing heavy sedation
for 1 to 2 hours. The sedative effects of mede-
Inhdiotion ogents
tomidine can be reversed by i.v. atipamezole,
0.125mg/kg.
Halothane or isoflurane can maintain anaesthesia
Lower doses of xylazine are adequate for pre-
and is recommended for major surgery. Injectable
medication to general anaesthesia. A common
 agents are used to induce anaesthesia in adults,
anaesthetic combination to provide 30 minutes
 but ind uction with the inhalant using a facemask
of anaesthesia in healthy llamas is xylazine,
is easy in paediatric animals, particularly after
0.25 mg/kg, i.v. followed in 10 to 15 minutes by in-
 premedication with diazepam and butorphanol.
jection of ketamine, 2.5 mg/kg i.v. or 5 mg/kg i.m.
 Anaesthetic management is as for sheep and
Butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg i.m., can be administered 
 goats described previously in this chapter. The
at the same time as the xylazine or, 0.05 mg/kgi.v.,  palpebral  reflex  is  usually  retained  during
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 361
anaesthesia adequate for surgery. Crinkling of
Anaesthetic agents
the lower eyelid is an indication of light anaes-
Anaesthetic agents for sedation are frequently
thesia. Llamas breathe spontaneously at 10 to
30 breaths/minute and appear to ventilate better
administered by darts propelled by a gun or blow-
pipe, or from a syringe attached to a pole. The dose
during anaesthesia than horses or adult cattle,
rate for xylazine varies between the breeds and
although IPPV should be used if monitoring iden-
response to xylazine varies between individuals
tifies severe hypoventilation.
within a breed. Xylazine alone can be adminis-
tered i.m. for sedation in penned red or fallow deer
at 0.5 to 1.5 mg /kg (Fletcher, 1995), 1 mg/kg for
DEER
wapiti (Cervus canadiensis), and 2 to 3mg/kg for
There are detailed recommendations for handling
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) and mule
farmed deer, including recommendations for
deer (Odocoileus hemiorus) (Caulkett, 1997). A
design of deer yards and raceways, deer crushes
lower dosage of xylazine, 0.7 mg/kg, was satisfac-
and chutes, and physical and chemical restraint
tory for capturing 104 free-ranging mule deer
(Chapman et al., 1987; Fletcher, 1995). The purpose
(Jessup et al., 1985). Reversal of sedation is
for this section in this textbook is to describe some
achieved by administration of yohimbine, 0.1 to
basic principles of anaesthesia in deer and to refer
0.2 mg/kg, given half i.v. and half i.m., or tolazo-
 to articles for further reading on the subject.
line, 2 to 4 mg/kg.
Some general guidelines for working with deer
Xylazine and ketamine have been used to immo-
include talking to the deer to alert them as to your
bilize deer. Dosages of xylazine, 4 mg/kg, and keta-
lbcation and to avoid walking through the middle
mine 4 mg/kg, administered intramuscularly in
of a group of deer (Fletcher, 1995). There are re-
adult fallow deer induced recumbency in less than
commendations that, except for adult stags, deer
5 minutes (Stewart & English, 1990). Administration
are best examined in groups, as they may become
 of yohimbine 30 minutes later prod uced satisfac-
frantic when isolated. Deer may become aggress-
tory reversal for release after several minutes.
ive and kick with their forelimbs, and occasionally
Another recommendation is to mix 400 mg of keta-
bite or kick backward with their hindlimbs
mine with 500 mg of dry xylazine powder and to
(Fletcher, 1995).
dose red deer at 1 to 2 ml and fallow deer up to 3 ml
There are considerations of special significance
(Fletcher, 1995). Xylazine and ketamine may be
to the anaesthetist. Not only are there differences
administered separately. The deer are sedated first
 in responses between farmed deer and wildlife, in
with xylazine administered by dart and then keta-
that wild deer will require higher doses, but also
mine, 1 to 2 mg/kg, injected i.v. when the deer is
 there are differences between the species in their
first approachable (Caulkett, 1997). This decreases
responses to both physical management and
the dose of ketamine and there is less chance of
anaesthetic agents. An example given in a concise
central nervous system excitement occurring
article on deer handling explains that fallow deer
when the xylazine sedation is reversed. Additional
(Dama dama), unlike red deer (Cervus elaphus),
ketamine may be administered as needed.
respond favourably to darkened holding pens
Detomidine and medetomidine, 60 to 80μg/kg
(Fletcher, 1995). Another author notes that while
i.m., administered with ketamine, 1-2 mg/kg i.m.,
roe deer (Capreoius capreolus) or fallow deer may lie
have been used to sedate deer. The effects of deto-
impassive when blindfolded and with their legs
midine or medetomidine can be reversed by injec-
tied, the technique is not suitable for muntjac
tion of atipamezole at a dose rate of up to five
(Muntiacus reevesi). Muntjac are small excitable
times the medetomidine dose.
deer that will writhe, struggle and jerk violently
 Etorphine and acepromazine (Immobilon LA),
against restraint. Extraordinary care in the method
etorphine and xylazine, and etorphine, acepro-
of capture of these deer has been described
mazine and xylazine combinations have been used
(Chapman et al., 1987). Specifically, general anaes-
to immobilize a variety of species of deer (Jones,
thesia was induced with the ultra-short acting bar-
1984). Excitement has been observed with the
biturate, methohexital.
etorphine and acepromazine combination (Jones,
362 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
1984). A high number of cardiac arrests occurred in
for the zygomaticotemporal nerve. Local anaes-
fallow deer immobilized with these combinations
thetic solution can also be injected over the zygo-
(Pearce & Kock, 1989).
matic arch, halfway between the base of the ear
Other opioid combinations that have been used
and the lateral canthus. A ring block can be includ-
 in deer include carfentanil and xylazine and, avail-
ed should additional analgesia be needed for
able in New Zealand, a premixed solution of fen-
antler removal.
tanyl, azaperone, and xylazine.
Anaesthesia can be deepened for major surgery
CAMELS
by the administration of halothane or isoflurane.
The vaporizer settings are low for maintenance of
 Handling camels can be dangerous and particular
anaesthesia, 1% for halothane and 1.5% for isoflu-
caution must be observed during the breeding sea-
rane, particularly when detomidine or medetomi-
son when males may be intractable and vicious.
dine have been administered.
Males may press a person to the ground with their
Rectal temperature should be measured imme-
 neck and body, a crushing effect, or they may bite,
diately and throughout the procedure. Hyper-
 causing severe even fatal injuries (Ogunbodede &
thermia will develop in animals immobilized
 Arotiba, 1997). Most experienced anaesthetists
 outside in the heat of the day. Monitoring pulse
 prefer whenever possible to work on domesticated
rate and oxygen saturation is easily done with a
   n     s
 pulse oximeter and a probe applied to the tongue.
 reduces the risk to personnel and to the animal.
ABP can be measured non-invasively using the
Tying the forelimb is a common mode of restraint
oscillometric technique and the cuff placed around
(Fig. 13.13) in animals not trained to lie down on
the forelimb above the carpus or by using the
command. Also of interest to the anaesthetist,
Doppler technique and the probe over the coc-
camels may be susceptible to toxicity from some
cygeal artery. Direct measurement of ABP can be
drugs at doses used commonly in other ruminants.
done with a catheter in an auricular artery.
Although the pharmacokinetics of a variety of
non-steroidal drugs and antibiotics have been
 published in recent years, very little information is
Local analgesia
available about anaesthetic agents.
Local analgesia is required for harvesting antlers.
Heart rates in unsedated resting camels are
Investigation of the innervation of the antler pedi-
40-50 beats/min, mean arterial pressures 130-
cle in wapiti and fallow deer identified the
 140 mmHg, and respiratory rates 6-16 breaths/
infratrochlear and zygomaticotemporal nerves as
 min. Hematologic and biochemical blood values
the largest nerves travelling to the pedicle
for camels (Camelus dromedarius) have been pub-
(Woodbury & Haigh, 1996). In some animals, the
lished (Snow et al., 1988; Nazefi & Maleki, 1998).
auriculopalpebral nerve supplied prominent dor-
sal branches to the lateral or caudal aspects of the
pedicle. There should be no sensory fibres in this
nerve. However, there have been reports that block
 of the auriculopalpebral nerve has achieved local
anaesthesia in a small number of deer in which
inadequate analgesia was produced by conven-
tional nerve block. No other nerves were found to
innervate the antler. Branches of the second cerv-
ical nerve were observed to terminate near the base
of the ear (Woodbury & Haigh, 1996). Thus, recom-
mendations for nerve block are the conventional
block as described earlier for sheep and goats,
increasing the volume of lignocaine at each site to
FlG. 13.13 Camels not trained to lie down on command
5ml and depositing the solution deeper, 2 to 3 cm,
can often be restrained by hobbling the front leg.
SHEER. GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 363
Measurements made after racing show that, in
with a mean thiopental dose of 7.25 mg/kg (Singh
contrast to dogs and horses, no significant increase
 et al., 1994). Subsequent maintenance of anaesthe-
in haematocrit occurs after exercise due to release
sia with halothane resulted in hypoventilation
 of red cells from the spleen. Although packed cell
and a significant decrease in ABP. The camels
volume is on average 0.33litres/litre, camel
recovered from anaesthesia on average 40 minutes
after the halothane was discontinued. The authors
haemoglobin concentration.
 noted that O2 supplementation was necessary
during recovery from anaesthesia to prevent
occur in agitated camels and withholding of rough- ]
hypoxaemia. Anaesthesia can also be induced
age for 48hours and concentrate for 24hours
 with a mixture of thiopental and guaiphenesin
before anaesthesia has been recommended.
prior to halothane anaesthesia. In camels injected
Domestic camels may sit on command (couched)
i.m. with xylazine, 0.25mg/kg, 30minutes
which avoids the need for casting or the risk of
previously, 1.0-2.3 ml/kg of thiopental-guaip-
injury with ataxia or falling after administration of
henesin (2 g thiopental in 1 litre 5% guaiphenesin)
anaesthetic agents.
given rapidly i.v. produces sufficient relaxation
for intubation (White et al., 1986). IPPV was em-
Local and regional analgesia
satisfactory.
Nerve blocks of the hindlimb in camels have been
Intubation of the trachea can be done manually
described, including the topographical anatomy
using the same techniques that are used in cattle.
and technique to block the peroneal, tibial, and
 Male dromedary camels have a dulaa (palatal flap
plantar nerves (Dudi et al., 1984). Desensitization of
or goola pouch) which extends from the soft palate
the digit can also be achieved using intravenous
(White et al., 1986).
regional analgesia by injecting 60 ml of 2% ligno-
lanbruoi e on isip (aape inoum) aun
ELEPHANTS
(Purohit et al., 1985). Xylazine sedation has been
combined with a line block with 2% lignocaine to
Trained elephants are usually relatively quiet and
provide satisfactory restraint and analgesia for cae-
intravenous injection can be made into an ear vein.
sarian section to remove dead foetuses (Elias, 1991).
 Drug administration to free-ranging animals is by
Xylazine, 0.4mg/kg i.m., given to healthy adult
dart gun. Accurate estimates of body weight are
camels (Camelus dromedarius) (Peshin et al., 1980)
useful when calculating drug dosages in an
and Camelus bactrianus (Custer et al., 1977)) results
attempt to produce consistent anaesthetic effects.
in sternal recumbency in 11-15minutes and a
Body measurements from 75 Asian elephants
recumbency time of 1-2 hours. The cardiovascular
(Elephas maximus) from 1 to 57 years of age were
effects of xylazine administration are qualitatively
used to calculate correlations with body weight
similar to those in sheep and goats in that xylazine
(Hile et al., 1997). The authors concluded that in
induces bradycardia, an increase in CVP, and a
Asian elephants the heart girth is the best predictor
small but statistically significant decrease in MAP
of weight. Heart girth (cm) was measured just
bottoming out at 45 minutes
behind the front legs using cotton twine. Weight
Smaller doses of xylazine, 0.25 mg/kg, have
was predicted using the equation:
 been used in combination with ketamine, 2.5 mg/kg
i.m., for sedation and analgesia in the dromedary
Weight (kg) = 18.0 (heart girth) - 3336.
camel (White et al., 1987). Loss of facial expression,
Measurement of pad circumference was not a use-
drooping of the lower lip, weaving of the head, and
ful predictor of weight.
drooling of saliva occur at the onset of sedation.
 Most camels lay their head and neck on the ground
Immobilization
and would assume lateral recumbency if allowed.
In six camels (Camelus dromedarius) satisfactory
 Etorphine has frequently been used to immobilize
anaesthesia for tracheal intubation was achieved
elephants. Free ranging African elephants
364 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
(Loxodonta africana) were immobilized by i.m.
Inhalation anaesthesia
injection by darts with 9.5 ± 0.5mg etorphine
(Osofsky, 1997) or 3, 6, or 9 mg of etorphine and 30,
General anaesthesia can be maintained in ele-
60, or 100 mg of azaperone according to size in
phants with halothane or isoflurane when the
juvenile elephants (mean weight 672 kg) (Still et al.,
equipment is available. In a series of anaesthetic
1996). The mean time to recumbency was 9 min-
episodes in juvenile (3-5-year-old) African ele-
utes. Additional etorphine had to be administered
phants weighing 308 ± 93kg, premedication
intravenously to maintain immobilization for
consisted of xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg, and ketamine,
transportation. All elephants recovered 
un-
0.6 mg/kg, administered intramuscularly (Heard
eventfully after reversal by i.v. diprenorphine at
et al.,1988). Induction of anaesthesia was accom-
approximately three times the dose of etorphine
plished 45 minutes later by i.m. etorphine, 0.0019 ±
administered. In another report, 
etorphine,
0.00056 mg/kg, which produced recumbency in a
0.002 mg/kg, was given i.m. or i.v. to provide satis-
 mean time of 20 minutes. Endotracheal tubes of 18,
factory immobilization for laparotomy for castra-
 22, and 26 mm were used in elephants weighing
tion (Foerner et al., 1994). Supplements of 1 mg of
 250-304kg, 204-350kg, and 280-636kg, respect-
etorphine were injected as needed to maintain
ively. Wads of food were seen in the oropharynx in
immobilization.
these animals despite food having been withheld
Up to one-third of the elephants immobilized
for 24hours. After removal of food from the
with etorphine are reported to be hypoxaemic
oropharynx, the trachea was intubated blindly or
as determined by pulse oximetry or blood gas
by manual palpation of the larynx and guiding the
analysis. At an average respiratory rate of 9 breaths
endotracheal tube into the trachea. Halothane was
per minute, PaCO2 was only mildly to moderate-
administered via a large animal rebreathing circle
ly increased. The average PaO2 of the immobil-
system using low vaporizer settings (0.5-1.0%).
ized elephants in one study, 10.0 ± 1.7kPa (75 ±
Respiratory arrest occurred in one animal after
13 mmHg) (Still et al., 1996), was lower than pre-
induction of anaesthesia and was treated with a
viously reported for recumbent elephants, 11.2 ±
half dose of diprenorphine i.v. (Heard et al., 1988).
0.4kPa (84 ± 3mmHg), or standing unpremedi-
ABP was lower than recorded for etorphine alone
cated elephants, 12.8 ± 0.3kPa (96 ± 2mmHg)
with recorded mean systolic blood pressure of
(Honeyman et al., 1992). Hypoxaemia occurred
106 ± 19 mmHg and heart rate of 50 ± 12 beats per
only in elephants with a body mass <600 kg (Still
minute. Administration of dobutamine was neces-
et al., 1996). The authors suggested that this effect
sary in one animal to treat hypotension. Increases
in the smaller elephants may have been due in
in blood pressure and increases in trunk muscle
part to administration of a relatively larger dose
tone or ear flapping were indicators that the depth
of anaesthetic agents. A possible explanation
of anaesthesia was becoming light. Diprenorphine
proposed for the adequacy of ventilation in
i.v. was given at twice the original etorphine
the larger animals is that the anatomical features
dose about 10minutes after halothane was discon-
of elephants oppose collapse of lung. These fea-
tinued.
tures include the lack of a pleural space and
An anesthetic delivery system for isoflurane
presence of a well-developed supportive system
was devised for an adult 3500 kg African elephant
of elastic fibres in the lungs and pulmonary
by joining two standard large animal anaesthesia
vessels.
machines in parallel (Dunlop et al., 1994). The ele-
ABP was measured from a 20 gauge catheter in
 phant was anaesthetized on three occasions, twice
Hnpe 'xis jo dnoia rauioue u Aianre remoime ue
with etorphine and once with etorphine and azap-
 erone. The trachea was intubated with a 40 mm ID
5000kg, immobilized with etorphine, 8 mg. MAP
tube by digital palpation in a manner similar
during immobilization without stimulation was
to that used to intubate adult cattle and the aid
186 ± 15 mmHg. This value was higher than the
 of a stomach tube as a guide. Tachycardia and
value of 145 ± 3 mmHg reported for standing ele-
hypertension were recorded initially, but these
phants (Honeyman et al., 1992).
values decreased to within normal ranges after
SHEER GOATS & OTHER HERBIVORES 365
administration of isoflurane.Anaesthesia times
restraint of bactrian camels. Jourrat of the American
were from 2.4 to 3.3 hours and the elephant recovered
Veterinary Medical Association 171: 899-901.
satisfactorily after each episode. O2 was insufflated
Dudi, PR., Chouhan, D.S., Choudhary, R.J., Deora, K.S.
and Gahlot, T.K. (1984) A study of topographic
at 60l/min into the endotracheal tube during
anatomy and nerve blocks of hindlimb in camels
recovery from anaesthesia. Residual etorphine
(Cametus dromedarius).Indian Veterinary Journat
was reversed by administration of diprenorphine
61:848-853.
25 to 40 minutes after isoflurane was discontinued.
Duke, T., Egger, C.M., Ferguson, J.G. and Frketic, M.M.
(1997) Cardiopulmonary effects of propofol infusion
in llamas. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
58: 153-156.
 REFERENCES
Dunlop, C.1., Hodgson, D.S., Cambre, R.C., Kenny, D.E.
and Martin, H.D. (1994) Cardiopulmonary effects of
Alahuhta, S., Kangas-Saarela, T., Hollmen, A.I. and
Edstrom, H.H. (1990) Visceral pain during caesarian
three prolonged periods of isoflurane anesthesia in an
adultelephant.Journal of the American Veterinary
section under spinal and epidural anaesthesia with
Medicat Association 205: 1439-1444.
bupivacaine. Acta Araesthesiologica Scandinavica
Elias, E. (1991) Left ventrolateral cesarean section in
34:95-98
three dromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius).
Aminkov, B.Y. and Hubenov, H.D. (1995) The effect of
Veterirary Surgery 20: 323-325.
xylazine epidural anaesthesia on blood gas and acid.
base parameters inrams. British Veterirary Journat
Fletcher, J. (1995) Handling farmed deer. In Practice
151: 579-585.
17:30-37.
Foerner,J.J., Houck, R.1.,Copeland, J.F, Byron, H.T. and
Amsel, S.1., Kainer, R.A. and Johmson, L.W. (1987)
 Choosing the best site to perform venipuncture in a
Olsen, J.H. (1994) Surgical castration of the elephant
(Elephas maximus and Loxodonta africana). Jourrat of Zoo
llama. Veterinary Medicine 82:535-536.
andWildlijfeMedicine25:355-359.
Barrington, G.M., Meyer, T.F. and Parish, S.M. (1993)
Fowler, M.E. and Zinkl, J.G. (1989) Reference ranges
 Standing castration of the llama using butorphanol
for hematologic and serum biochemical values in
tartrate and local anesthesia. Equine Practice 15: 35-39.
llamas. American Journal of Veterinary Research
Carroll, G.L., Hooper, R.N.,Slater, M.R., Hartsfield, S.M.
50:2049-2053.
and Matthews, N.S. (1998) Detomidine-butorphanol-
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W. and Huber, M.J. (1993)
 propofol for carotid artery translocation and
Evaluation of lidocaine, xylazine, and a combination
castration or ovariectomy in goats. Veterinary Surgery
of lidocaine and xylazine for epidural analgesia in
27:75-82.
llamas. Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat
Caulkett, N.A. (1997) Anesthesia for North American
Association 203: 1441-1444.
cervids. Canadian Veterinary Journat 38:389-390.
Hajduk, P (1992) Haematological reference values for
Celly, C.S.,McDonell, W.N., Young, S.S. and Black, W.D.
alpacas.Australian Veterinary Journat 69:89-90.
(1997) The comparative hypoxaemic effect of four α. 2
Heard, D.J., Kollias, G.V., Webb, A.1., Jacobson, E.R. and
adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine,
Brock, K.A.(1988) Use of halothane to maintain
detomidine and medetomidine) in sheep. Jourrat of
anesthesia induced with etorphine in juvenile African
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 20:464-471.
elephants. Jourral of the Americar Veterinary Medicat
Celly, C.S., Atwal, O.S., McDonell, W.N. and Black, W.D.
Association 193: 254-256.
Heard, D.J., Nichols, W. W., Buss, D. and Kollias, G.V.
ridaoar otaaape-zeudie go asn Aq daaus go s
(1996) Comparative cardiopulmonary effects of
agonists.AmericanJournatofVeterinary Research
intramuscularly administered etorphine and
60: 154-161.
carfentanil in goats.American Jourmal of Veterinary
Chapman, N.G., Claydon, K., Cl;aydon, M. and Harris,
Research 57: 87-96.
S. (1987) Techmiques for the safe and humane capture
Hendrickson, D.A., Kruse-Elliot, K.T. and Broadstone,
of free-living muntjac deer (Murtiacus reevesi). British
R.V. (1996) A comparison of epidural saline,
Veterinary Journat 143:35-43.
 Clarke, K.W. (1999) Desflurane and sevoflurane. New
morphine, and bupivacaine for pain relief after
abdominal suwrgery in goats. Veterinary Surgery
volatile anesthetic agents. Veterinary Clinics of North
25: 83-87.
America Small Animal Practice 29:793-810.
Hile, M.E., Hintz, H.F and Erb, H.N. (1997) Predicting
Correia, D., Nolan, A.M. and Reid, J. (1996)
body weight from body measurements in Asian
Pharmacokinetics of propofol infusions, either alone
elephants (Elephas maximus). Journatof Zoo and Witatife
or with ketamine, in sheep premedicated with
Medicine 28:424-427.
acepromazine and papaveretum. Research int
Honeyman, V.L., Pettifer, G.R. and Dyson, D.H. (1992)
Veterinary Science 60: 213-217.
Arterial blood pressure and blood gas values in
Custer, R., Kramer, L., Kennedy, S. and Bush, M. (1977)
normal standing and laterally recumbent African
Hematologic effects of xylazine when used for
(Loxodonta africana)and Asian (Elephas maximus)
366 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
elephants.JournatofZoo and Witatife Medicine
Pearce, PC. and Kock, R.A. (1989) Physiological effects
23:205-210.
 of etorphine, acepromazine and xylazine on the black
Howard, B.W., Lagutchik, M.S., Januszkiewicz, A.J. and
fallow deer(Dama dama).Research in Veterinary Science
 Martin, D.G. (1990) The cardiovascular response of
46:380-386.
sheep to tiletamine-zolazepam and butorphanol
Peshin, P.K., Nigam, J.M., Singh, S.C. and Robinson, B.A
tartrate anesthesia. Veterinary Surgery 19: 461467.
(1980) Evaluation of xylazine in camels. Jourrat of the
Jessup, D.A. and Lance, W.R. (1982) What veterinarians
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation177:875-878.
should know about South American camelids.
Purohit, N.R., Chouhan, D.S., Chaudhary, R.J. and
Catijforria Veterinarian 11: 12-18.
Deora, K.S. (1985) Intravenous regional anaesthesia
Jessup, D.A., Jones, K., Mohr, R. and Kucera, T. (1985)
in camel.lndian Journat ofAnimat Sciences
Yohimbine antagonism to xylazine in free-ranging
55:435-436.
mule deer and desert bighorm sheep. Journal of the
Riebold, T. W., Kaneps, A.J. and Schmotzer, W.B. (1989)
American Veterinary Medical Association 187: 1251-1253.
Anesthesia in the llama. Veterinary Surgery
Jones, D.M. (1984) Physical and chemical methods of
18: 400404.
capturing deer. Veterinary Record 114:109-112.
Riebold, T.W., Engel, H.N., Grubb, T.L.,Adams, J.G.,
Kyles, A.E., Waterman, A.E. and Livingston, A. (1995)
Huber, M.J. and Schmotzer, W.B. (1994) Orotracheal
and nasotracheal intubation in llamas. Jourrat of
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
the American Veterinary Medicat Association
18: 54-60.
204: 779-783.
 Laitinen, O.M. (1990) Clinical observations on 
Singh, R, Peshin, PK., Patil, D.B., Sharda, R., Singh, J.,
medetomidine/ketamine anaesthesia in sheep and its
Singh, A.P. and Sharifi, D. (1994) Evaluation of
reversal by atipamezole. Jourral of the Association of
halothane as an anaesthetic in camels (Cametus
Veterirnary Araesthetists 17: 17-19.
dromedarius).Zentratbtat Veterinarmed 41:359-368.
 Ley, S., Waterman, A. and Livingston, A. (1990) Variation
Snow, D.H., Billah, A. and Ridha, A. (1988) Effects of
in the analgesic effects of xylazine in different breeds
maximal exercise on the blood composition of the
of sheep. Veterinary Record 126: 508.
racing camel. Veterinary Record 123:311-312.
Lin, H.-C., Purohit, R.C. and Rowe, T.A. (1997)
Stewart, M.C. and English, A.W. (1990) The reversal of
 Anesthesia in sheep with propofol or with xylazine-
xylazine/ketamine immobilisation of fallow deer
ketamine followed by halothane. Veterinary Surgery
with yohimbine. Australian Veterinary Journat
26:247-252.
67:315-317
Lin, H.-C., Tyler, J. W, Welles, E.G., Spano, J.S., Thurmon,
Still, J., Raath, J.P. and Matzner, L. (1996) Respiratory
J.C. and Wolfe, D.F. (1993) Effects of anesthesia
and circulatory parameters of African elephants
induced and maintained by continuous intravenous
(Loxodonta africara) anaesthetised with etorphine and
administration of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine
azaperone. Journat of the South African Veterinary
in spontaneously breathing sheep. American Jourrat of
Association 67: 123-127.
Veterinary Research 54: 1913-1916.
Trim, C.M. (1989) Epidural analgesia with 0.75%
Lin, H.C., Wallace, S.S., Tyler, I. W., Robbins, R.L.,
bupivacaine for laparotomy in goats. Jourral of
Thurmon, J.C. and Wolfe, D.F. (1994) Comparison of
the American Veterinary Medicat Association
tiletamine-zolazepam-ketamine and tiletamine-
194: 1292-1296.
zolazepam-ketamine-xylazine anaesthesia in sheep.
Tulamo, R.-M., Raekallio, M. and Ekblad, A. (1995)
Austratian Veterinary Journat 71:239-242.
Cardiovascular effects of medetomidine-ketamine
Nazefi, S. and Maleki, K. (1998) Biochemical analysis of
anaesthesia in sheep, with and without 100% oxygen,
serum and cerebrospinal fluid in clinically normal
and its reversal with atipamezole. Jourral of Veterinary
adult camels (Camelus dromedarins). Research in
Anaesthesia 22: 9-14.
Veterinary Science 65: 83-84.
Waterman, A.E., Livingston, A. and Amin, A. (1991)
Ogunbodede, E.O. and Arotiba,J.T. (1997) Camel bite
Further studies on the antinociceptive activity
injuries of the orofacial region: report of a case. Journat
of Oral and Maxillofaciat Surgery 55: 1174-1176.
Journat of Veterinary Pharmacotogy and Therapeutics
Osofsky, S.A.(1997) A practical anesthesia monitoring
14: 230-234.
protocol for free-ranging adult African elephants
White, R.J., Bark, H. and Bali, S. (1986) Halothane
(Loxodonta africana). fournal of Wilatife Diseases
anaesthesia in the dromedary camel. Veterirnary Record
33:72-77.
119: 615-617.
Pablo, L.S. (1993) Epidural morphine in goats after
White, R.J., Bali, S. and Bark, H. (1987) Xylazine and
hindlimb orthopedic surgery. Veterinary Surgery
ketamine anaesthesia in the dromedary camel
22: 307-310.
under field conditions. Veterinary Record
Pablo, L.S., Bailey, J.E. and Ko, J.C.H. (1997) Median
120: 110-113.
effective dose of propofol required for induction of
Woodbury, M.R. and Haigh, J.C. (1996) Innervation and
anesthesia ingoats. journal of the American Veterinary
anesthesia of the antler pedicle in wapiti and fallow
Medicat Association 211: 86-88.
deer. Caradiar Veterinary Journal 37:486-489.
Anaesthesia of the pig
14
INTRODUCTION
 Surgery may be carried out on the farm using either
local analgesia or general anaesthesia but, where eco-
 nomically possible, for all other than minor surgery
it is better to have the pig transported to a place
with complete surgical facilities. Where local anal-
gesia is used, the pig is usually first heavily sedat-
 ed or even lightly anaesthetized to prevent the
 loud squealing noises which these animals make
when restrained. When general anaesthesia is em-
ployed under farm conditions, simple methods giv.
ing short-term anaesthesia suffice, as surgery is
usually limited in complexity. However, the pig is
now also often used as an experimental animal in re-
search projects involving long and complicated sur-
including cardiopulmonary bypass, may be required.
 Pigs presented for anaesthesia range in size
FIG.14.I Restraint of the pig by a snare applied around
from small newborn piglets to adult boars weigh-
the upper jaw.
ing 350kg, and the methods of restraint and
administration of anaesthetics must be varied
attempting to defend her litter may do). Smaller
accordingly. Whilst small pigs are easily
dseia Aq sapis rau uo paurensa Alensn ane said
re
strained, large sows and boars may prove both dif-
ing the undermost legs and leaning on the body.
ficult and dangerous. Large pigs are usually
usqeisa yoieasai e je pue pauiei Aisea are said
restrained by a rope or wire snare around the
ment, the problems of restraint are greatly reduced
upper jaw, behind the canine teeth (Fig. 14.1).
by very frequent, regular handling. In a large
In most cases the pig will try to escape
：by
intensive farming unit, however, there is a lack
pulling back against this rope or snare and thus
of individual handling and some animals may
immobilizes itself, but this method does not work
be extremely difficult to control by physical
if the animal moves forward to attack (as a sow
means.
367
368 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Most anaesthetists consider that when general
 amaesthetics are administered with due care pigs
 are good subjects. Although they resent restraint,
as is shown by the struggling and loud squeals
which they produce, this does not seem to result in
 adrenaline release with the attendant dangers dur
ing subsequent anaesthesia. Recovery from anaes-
thesia is usually calm. As they have little body hair,
pigs are liable to develop hypothermia when
sedated or anaesthetized, but this lack of hair does
enable the anaesthetist to assess the state of
peripheral circulation by monitoring the skin
colour. Pigs tend to be fatter than most other farm
animals and adipose tissue forms a depot for
anaesthetics. The fatty nature of the tissue also
makes accurate i.m. injections more difficult in
these animals and necessitates the use of long nee-
dles to reach the muscle through the fatty tissue.
The shape of the pig's head, together with the fat
in the pharyngeal region (especially in Vietnamese
Pot-bellied pigs) coupled with the small larynx
FIG.14.2 Maintaining a clear airway by pushing forward
and trachea, makes respiratory obstruction likely
on the vertical ramus of the mandible with the tongue
drawn forward on the mouth.For ease of photography,in
in both sedated and anaesthetized animals.
this illustration the mask is held firmly on the face by the
Patency of the airway in the absence of endotra-
thumb, but the position of the hand is usually reversed, the
cheal intubation is best maintained by applying
thumb being used to push on the mandible and the fingers
pressure behind the vertical ramus of the mandible
to hold the mask on the face.
and thus pushing the jaw forward, while the tongue
is drawn out between the incisor teeth (Fig. 14.2).
Breeding experiments with Landrace cross pigs
Salivation, even if not excessive, can contribute
showed the abnormality to be inherited as an auto-
to airway obstruction so anticholinergic premed-
somal dominant with variable penetrance, occa-
ication is usually given before general anaesthesia
sional litters being found without susceptible
uless there are contraindications such as pre
animals. In some litters, however, piglets died
existing tachycardia or pyrexia.
before testing with a non-lethal test procedure
which had been developed (Hall et al., 1972) so this
finding must be treated with some reserve. It is
PORCINe MALIGNaNT
also possible that two genes might have been
HYPERTHERMIA
involved but, unfortunately, due to withdrawal
 of funding, further investigation of this was
 Although in the vast majority of pigs general
impossible.
anaesthesia presents few problems other than
The abnormal response of these pigs to anaes-
those associated with the maintenance of a clear
thetic and other drugs is characterized by the
airway, some strains and breeds suffer from a bio-
 development of generalized muscle rigidity, a
chemical myopathy which manifests itself during
 severe and sustained rise in body temperature,
general anaesthesia with some anaesthetic and
 hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis. Since the
ancillary agents. Hall et al. (1966) reported its
first report of the porcine syndrome there have
 occurrence in Landrace cross pigs following the
 been numerous other reports of similar abnormal
use of suxamethonium during halothane anaes-
 responses to anaesthetic agents, both in humans
thesia, but it was later found that it could occur 
 and animals and it is generally agreed that the
without the administration of suxamethonium.
syndrome has certain resemblances to the 'stress
THE PIG369
FIG. 14.3 Rigidity of limbs in a pig with developed porcine malignant hyperthermia.
reaction' seen in Pietrain and Poland-China pigs.
myopathies both in humans and in experimental
There are, however, some striking differences
animals and serum levels of this enzyme were
between the syndrome as manifested in various
studied in Landrace cross pigs by Woolf et al.
pig breeds and strains. For example, in the Poland-
(1970) who found that raised CPK levels in
China and Pietrain breeds dyspnoea, hyperther-
unanaesthetized animals had a fair predictive
mia and immediate rigor mortis can be induced by
value for the development of abnormal muscle
environmental stress associated with exercise,
contracture following induction of anaesthesia
with halothane and challenge with suxametho-
atures, whereas Landrace and Landrace cross pigs
nium (Hall et al., 1972). Of 34 closely related pigs
develop the syndrome only when anaesthetized.
studied, 25 had serum CPK levels > 250 units /ml
It has been suggested that malignant hyperther-
and 20 of these were subsequently found to react
mia in man could be a syndrome resulting from
positively to challenge. Clearly finding of a CPK
more than one defect, and the same may be true for
level of < 250 units/ml does not rule out the poss-
the porcine syndrome. It seems likely that it is re-
ibility of an abnormal reaction, but the chances of
sistance or susceptibility to triggering factors which
this happening are much lower.
differs, and that the final metabolic derangement
 It must be emphasized that the clinical veter-
which leads to death is common to all. While the
pig has proved to be a valuable experimental ani-
cases of porcine malignant hyperthermia except in
mal for the study of this condition, great caution is
the Poland-China and Pietrain breeds, but it may
needed in attempting to transpose results obtained
occur in Large White and Landrace pigs (particu-
in one breed or strain of pigs to another breed or
larly in view of the modern practice of breeding
strain, to another species of animal, or to man.
from boars known to carry the trait because of the
Early clinical findings suggested that the prim-
belief that their offspring may have faster growth
ary abnormality lies in the voluntary muscle of
rates). However, anaesthetists should be aware of
affected animals and attempts have been made to
the existennce of this condition, be able to recognize
find a biochemical'marker' which could support
 its development during anaesthesia and, where
this suggestion and which might serve to identify
possible, treat it. In a typical case, where a suscept-
experimental animals (and more particularly
ible pig is given a triggering agent, its muscles
human beings) at risk. Raised serum creatine
develop contracture making the animal very stiff
phosphokinase (CPK) occurs in a number of
or even rigid (Fig. 14.3). Often the first sign the
370 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. 14.4 Spreading apart of the digits in a pig developing porcine malignant hyperthermia.
anaesthetist notices is a spreading apart of the dig-
SEDATION
its (Fig. 14.4). Next, the body temperature starts to
rise and the skin often shows blotchy reddening. If
The pig's reaction to restraint (struggling accom-
no attempt is made to treat the condition, the body
panied by ear-splitting squeals) is unpleasant for
 temperature continues to rise (rectal temperatures
all concerned and, therefore, sedation is widely
of over 108° F have been recorded); eventually res-
used to facilitate all handling and minor proced-
piration ceases and death ensues. Presumably
ures, as well as for restraint prior to local or gen-
death is due to cellular hypoxia, for at temperat-
 eral anaesthesia. In pigs, C2 adrenoceptor agonists
ures above 42°C oxygen utilization exceeds oxy-
seem to be useful in smoothing reactions to ket-
gen supply.
amine but, for reasons as yet unknown, they are
Dantrolene sodium, a skeletal muscle relaxant,
otherwise generally ineffective as sedatives.
given orally in doses of 2 to 5 mg/kg 6 to 8hours
before the induction of anaesthesia, may prevent
the onset of the syndrome in susceptible pigs
SEDATIVE AGENTS EMPLOYEDIN PIGS
and i.v. in doses of 2 to 10 mg/kg, has proved
of some use in treating the established condition
Azaperone
Unfortumately dantrolene sodium is expensive.
This extremely safe butyrophenone drug is inex-
It has a very limited shelf-life and, in general,
 pensive and so effective in pigs that other seda-
keeping it in readiness for the treatment of this
tives are now seldom used in these animals. It is
uncommon porcine condition cannot be justified
marketed both to the veterinary profession for
on economic grounds although it certainly is
clinical use and directly to farmers who use it to
for man.
Induction of anaesthesia with Saffan affords
fattening units.
some protection against the development of the
Azaperone must be given by deep i.m. injection,
syndrome in some strains of susceptible animals
the neck muscles behind the ear usually proving to
(Hall et al., 1972). Symptomatic treatment includes
be the most convenient and best site; s.c. injection
rapid termination of the inhalation anaesthetic and
is ineffective and i.v. injection results in a phase of
the administration of pure oxygen, preferably
violent excitement. Injection into regions likely to
through a 'clean' anaesthetic system, the adminis-
be used for human food (e.g. the hams) should
tration of i.v. sodium bicarbonate (2 to 4 mEq/kg i. v.)
 always be avoided. The doses used depend on the
and whole body cooling with cold water applied
 effects sought and range from 1 to 8 mg/kg, but it
 to the skin. Intravenous dantrolene may be given if
 is recommended that a dose of 1mg/kg is not
available.
exceeded for adult boars as higher doses cause
THE PIG37I
protrusion of the penis with the risk of subsequent 
less when handled and are much less likely to dis-
damage to that organ. Following an i.m. injection
lodge the i. v. needle by head-shaking when injec-
of 1 to 8mg/kg of azaperone, the pig should be left
tion is made. Acepromazine may be given by i.v.
udisturbed for 20 minutes, as interference before
injection but this may be followed by venous
this time may provoke an excitement reaction.
thrombosis unless very dilute solutions are used.
Excitement may occur during this induction phase
When given i.v. the drug should be allowed 10 to
even in the absence of stimulation, but it is usually
20 minutes to produce its full effects. Hyperpnoea
lasting for about 15 minutes may follow i.v. injec-
induction period of some 20 minutes, pigs are
tion, but the reason for this is unknown.
deeply sedated and handling for the administra-
tion of other drugs or minor procedures is greatly
Dissociative agents
facilitated.
Azaperone causes vasodilatation resulting in a
Phencyclidine was used very successfully as a
small fall in arterial blood pressure, and some
sedative for pigs for some years until the hallucin-
slight respiratory stimulation. Vasodilatation of
atory effects produced in man ingesting the drug
cutaneous vessels makes sedated pigs particularly
led to a ban of the use of the drug in food animals.
likely to develop hypothermia in a cold environ-
Phencyclidine has been withdrawn from the mar-
ket and the dissociative agent in current use, ket-
ment so warm surroundings are essential, but the
dilated ear veins are easy to enter for i.v. injection
amine, is generally used as an anaesthetic rather
of drugs.
than as a sedative; low doses are analgesic.
Droperidol
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
The butyrophenone compound, droperidol, has
been used in pigs and doses of 0.1 to 0.4mg/kg
PreParaTIoN For GeneraL
 give similar sedation to that produced by azaper-
ANAESTHESIA
one. Butyrophenone/analgesic drug mixtures
In pigs, 6 to 8hours fasting and 2hours depriva-
have been used and fentanyl/droperidol produce
tion of water is usually adequate to ensure that the
better sedation than droperidol alone. At the
stomach is empty. Vomiting at induction or during
Cambridge School a combination of i.m. droperidol
recovery is rare in pigs (although it used to be seen
(0.5 mg/kg) with midazolam (0.3 mg/kg) given
regularly in pigs recovering from cylcopropane
separately, or where appropriate, from the same
 amaesthesia) but a full stomach exerts pressure on
 syringe, produces ideal sedation for radiography.
the diaphragm and reduces respiratory eficiency.
lancing of abscesses, etc. (P.G.C. Jackson, personal
The majority of surgery carried out in pigs.
communication). Dependable sedation of approxim-
whether clinical or experimental, is elective, and
ately 15min duration follows some 10minutes
fluid deficits are seldom present before anaesthe-
from the time of injection, but it is important to
sia. Ani.v. infusion may be needed, however, before
leave the pig undisturbed whilst the effects are
anaesthesia for the correction of a strangulated
developing. As with ketamine, sudden awakening
hernia, for example. Details of existing drug
without prior warning may occur.
therapy such as antibiotic food additives, or
anthelminitics, should be noted - especially if
Acepromazine
neuromuscular blocking drugs whose action they
may lengthen are to be used in the anaesthetic
Phenothiazine derivatives are not as effective in
technique.
pigs as they are in some other species of animal.
However, pigs are more easily restrained for i. v.
Premedication
injection if first given an i.m. dose of 0.03 to
0.10 mg/kg before venepuncture is attempted.
During general anaesthesia salivation, even if not
Under the influence of acepromazine they squeal
excessive, may cause respiratory obstruction.
372 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Atropine, i.v. or i.m. in doses 0.3 to 2.4 mg (total
whilst the second holds the uppermost ear at the
dose), or glycopyrrolate (0.2 to 2.0 mg total dose),
 base of the conchal cartilage and applies pressure
depending on the size of the pig, will usually con-
over the vein as near to the base of the ear as poss-
trol this salivation.
ible. If a second assistant is not available a rubber
 The degree of sedation required depends on the
band is applied around the base of the ear flap. In
anaesthetic technique which is to follow. Some
large pigs, a noose is applied around the upper jaw
anaesthetists prefer to dispense with sedation at
 behind the tusks as previously described (see Fig.
this stage while others use it to facilitate the
14.1). As in small pigs, the ear veins are distended
administration of the anaesthetic and to reduce the
 by the application of pressure as near to the base of
squealing and struggling which would otherwise
the ear flap as possible.
 occur during inhalation anaesthetic induction.
Once the skin of the ear flap over the vein has
Only rarely is there any need for analgesics to be
 been cleansed, the veins are usually easily visible
ncluded in the premedication but if required they
(Fig.14.5) but if necessary they can be made more
 may be employed in slightly larger doses than are
 obvious by gentle slapping and brisk rubbing of
used in dogs. It is probable that azaperone is the 
 the ear flap with an alcohol-soaked gauze swab.
most widely used premedicant drug for porcine
Venepuncture is then carried out using a needle
anaesthesia. As already mentioned, it is given i.m.
 about 2.5 cm long and depending on the calibre
in doses of 1 to 8 mg/kg according to the degree of
 of the vessel to be entered, 21 to 23 gauge (0.6 to
sedation required.
0.65mm). In large pigs blood can be aspirated into
an attached syringe once the needle has been
inserted into the lumen of the vein but in small
Intravenous technique
pigs the amount of blood in the vein between the
Injections are best made into auricular veins on the
points of pressure and the needle point may be so
external aspect of the ear flap. Small pigs are
 small that it is impossible to withdraw any into the
restrained on their side on the table and usually
 syringe. In such cases injection must be attempted
two assistants are needed, one gripping the legs,
 and if the needle point is not in the vein a subcuta-
neous bleb will develop. When it is certain that the
needle is in the vein the pressure is released (if a
rubber band has been applied to the base of the
ear flap the band must be cut with scissors) and the
injection made. It will be noticed that the injected
fluid washes the blood from the vein and this
affords further evidence that the needle is correctly
 placed in the lumen of vessel.
Introduction of a catheter into an ear vein is not
difficult (Fig. 14.6) but these veins are not very con-
venient for the administration of large volumes
fluid. Fortunately, infusions of large volumes are
seldom needed but if they are anticipated to be
necessary it is usually best to implant surgically a
catheter into the jugular vein of the anaesthetized
pig as the subcutaneous fat makes percutaneous
placement difficult. Some workers prefer to
catheterize the anterior vena cava by a blind tech-
nique. Small pigs are restrained on their backs in a
V-shaped trough with the neck fully extended and
the head hanging down. The forelegs are drawn
FIG. 14.5 Distension of the ear flap veins by the
back and a 5 to 7.5 cm long 16 s.w.g. (1.65 mm)
application of a rubber band around the base of the ear.
needle pushed through the skin in the depression
THE PIG 373
Direction
of needlc
L. jugular
vcin
Site of chin
Sternal
puncture
manubrium
1strib
L. brachial
vein
L. internal
thoracic vein
Cranial
vena cava
FlG.14.7 Site for the introduction of a needle to
 penetrate the anterior vena cava.The needle tip is
scapulae.
which can be palpated just lateral to the anterior
angle of the sternum and formed by the angle
between the first rib and trachea. The needle is
directed towards an imaginary point midway
between the scapulae and advanced until blood
is attached. A fine plastic catheter is then threaded
through the needle into the anterior vena cava and
after its position has been verified by aspiration
of blood through it, or by radiography, the
needle is completely withdrawn and the catheter
secured in position with a skin suture. In large ani-
mals the procedure is carried out with the animal
standing and hanging back on a nose snare. It is
always important to ensure that the head does not 
deviate from the midline and that the neck is well
extended (Fig. 14.7).
Intraperitoneal injection
This method of administration of anaesthetic
drugs is very far from ideal, but it is sometimes
employed by the laboratory worker and the less
skilled veterinarian. Response is variable, and
 accidental injection into the liver, kidney or gut
lumen may follow. The injection of irritant solu-
tions may lead to the subsequent formation of
FIG.14.6 Stages in the introduction of a catheter into an
intraperitoneal adhesions. Preferably, pigs should
be starved for 24 hours to reduce the gut volume
ear vein of a pig.The stitch securing the catheter does not
penetrate the ear cartilage. Super-glue' may be used as an
before injection is made. The animal is then
alternativetostitching.
restrained on its back or by its hind legs, and an
374 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
area of skin in the region of the umbilicus is
clipped and cleaned. A needle is inserted 2 to 5 cm
from the midline at the level of the umbilicus and
injection made. A complete absence of resistance to
pressure on the plunger of the syringe indicates
that the solution is being injected into the peri-
 toneal cavity or, possibly, into the lumen of the gut.
Endotracheal intubation
Endotracheal intubation in the pig is not as easy as
in most other domestic animals. It is particularly
lied pig. The shape and size of the head and mouth
make the use of a laryngoscope difficult. The rima
P
glottis is extremely small and the larynx is set at an
angle to the trachea, causing difficulty in passing
the tube beyond the cricoid ring (Fig. 14.8).
Laryngeal spasm is easily provoked so atraumatic
 intubation must be carried out under deep general
anaesthesia with local analgesic spray of the
 cords, or with the aid of a neuromuscular blocking
agent.
 The sizes of endotracheal tubes suitable for pigs
are unexpectedly small when compared with
those used in dogs of a similar body weight. A
6mm tube may be the largest which can be passed
in a pig weighing about 25 kg; a 9 mm tube is suit-
able for a 50 kg animal; large boars and sows may
accommodate tubes of 14 to 16 mm diameter. Pot-
Arytenoid cartilage
Lateral ventricle
Endotracheal
of larynx
tube (cuffed)
Lumen of trachea
jo uuado
Epiglottis
lateral ventricle
Thyroid cartilage
FIG.14.9 Apparatus needed for endotracheal intubation
in the pig.A Note the malleable wire stilette inside the
FIG.14.8 Saggital section of pig's head to show principal
tube but not protruding from its bevelled end; B the use of
structures in relation to the passage of an endotracheal
the laryngoscope to elevate the lower jaw and displace the
tube.The lumen of the trachea runs at an angle to the line
tongue to one side; C tube tied in position with tape
of theglotticopening.
around the lower jaw and cuff inflated.
THE PIG375
bellied pigs can only be intubated with smaller
-wosoe Aquo ues leuue So6 e - saqnn aap
modate a 9 mm diameter tube. Introduction of the
tube may be made easier by the use of a malleable
stilette such as a copper rod with one end carefully
rounded or covered to prevent damage to the
mucosa of the larynx or trachea. The stilette is
placed inside the endotracheal tube and a move-
able side arm adjusted to ensure that the tip does
not protrude beyond the end of the tube (Fig. 14.9).
Whenever a tube is reinforced in this way care
must be taken not to use force in its introduction,
as damage to the laryngeal mucosa with sub-
sequent oedema and, after extubation, respiratory
obstruction, can easily occur. Laryngoscopes
designed for use in man, as used in dogs, are suit-
able for small pigs, but in large ones the weight of
the lower jaw may make its elevation almost
impossible and the Rowson laryngoscope may be
needed to expose the larynx to view.
The easiest position in which to intubate the
anaesthetized pig using a standard laryngoscope
 blade is with the pig supine and the neck and head
fully extended. An assistant pulls on the tongue
and fixes the upper jaw while the laryngoscope is
introduced and the larynx brought into view by
FIG.14.10 View of the pig's larynx when a standard type
vertical lifting of the tongue and lower jaw, no
laryngoscope is used correctly in the supine animal.As can
leverage being exerted (Fig 14.10). Under direct
be seen,the laryngoscope blade is used to elevate the base
vision the tube is passed between the vocal cords
of the tongue and does not come into contact with the
and kept dorsal to the middle ventricle of the lar-
epiglottis.The epiglottis is often so soft and flexible that
 ymx. If its progress is arrested at the cricoid ring.
unless due care is taken it folds back into the glottic
the stilette must be partially withdrawn and the
opening as the tube is passed.
head flexed slightly on the neck. The tube may
then be advanced gently into the trachea. An altern-
Should an attempt at intubation fail, small pigs
ative is to introduce a stilette about three times the
may easily be ventilated with pure oxygen by
length of the endotracheal tube it is intended to
squeezing of the reservoir bag of the anaesthetic
use through the larynx under direct vision and
apparatus while a face mask is correctly applied
then to 'railroad' the tube over it into the trachea.
(Fig. 14.2). Applying IPPV in this way is more diffi-
Endotracheal intubation in the pig is greatly
cult in adult sows and boars, so it is recommended
facilitated by the use of neuromuscular blocking
that neuromuscular blocking drugs are only used
drugs, such as suxamethonium, which relax the
in these larger animals by anaesthetists experi-
 jaw muscles and prevent the larynx from going
enced at endotracheal intubation and capable of
into spasm. The anaesthetized pig is given oxygen
ventilating large individuals through a face-mask.
to breathe through a face mask and the chosen
neuromuscular blocker given i.v. The pig is intub-
TECHNIQUES OF GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
ated as soon as the jaw muscles relax and IPPV is
IN PIGS
carried out until spontaneous respiration is
resumed. When suxamethonium is injected, spon-
Although the pig is a good subject for general
taneous respiration returns within 1 to 2min.
anaesthesia the anaesthetist may find problems in
376 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
maintaining a clear airway and spontaneous
azaperone, for the production of deep narcosis
breathing in non-intubated animals. When dealing
(short of general anaesthesia) in pigs both under
with fat pigs, cessation of breathing is a common
field conditions and prior to the use of more
complication of deep anaesthesia. A striking fea-
sophisticated methods in the operating theatre.
ture of this apparent respiratory failure is that it is
Ideally, metomidate is given i.v. at dose rates of
-dxa rog 'sanads rao u uaas je wnn juana
3.3 mg/kg about 20 minutes after i.m. injection of
sion of air from the lungs by pressure on the 
 2 mg/kg azaperone. Often the pig moves as the
abdomen is immediately followed by a spontan-
 metomidate is injected and this may be a response
eous deep inspiration of the type seen when there
to pain for the i.v. injection of the related drug, eto-
is some mechanical obstruction to respiration dur-
 midate, is known to cause pain in man. Following
ing anaesthesia. It is possible that the position of
i.v. injection of metomidate after azaperone pigs
the head is enough to cause pressure on the larynx
become recumbent and will remain so for some
sufficient to arrest breathing. The animal's head
10 to 20 min. Respiration is well maintained and
should be placed at a natural angle to the neck and
further doses of metomidate can be given as need-
IPPV applied. In unintubated animals this is per-
ed to prolong recumbency. Analgesia is very limit-
formed by applying pressure to the abdomen
 ed with this combination of drugs and painful
about every 4 seconds. Unless spontaneous brea-
stimuli sometimes result in dramatic, even if short-
thing returns within 1 to 2 minutes, endotracheal
lived, awakening, so it is advisable to utilize some
intubation to facilitate IPPV should be considered.
form of analgesia, or even physical restraint, to
padde Aiaso e ynoe ino paes si AlI H
 Enable surgery to be carried out. The combination
face mask care must be taken to limit the pressures
 of azaperone and metomidate is compatible with
applied to avoid inflation of the stomach.
 all inhalation and neuromuscular blocking agents
The prudent anaesthetist avoids trouble by
used in anaesthesia so they may be used sub-
avoiding the need to produce deep anaesthesia in
sequently as needed.
spontaneously breathing animals - if necessary by
 In some centres anaesthesia associated with
the simultaneous use of techniques of local analge-
only minimal analgesia has been maintained by
sia when light general anaesthesia does not suffice
the continuous i.v. infusion of azaperone
on its own.
(2mg/kg/hour) and metomidate (8mg/kg/hour).
It is claimed that this technigue offers a safe altern
ative when facilities for administration of inhala-
Intravenous anaesthesia
tion agents are not available, although recovery
The i.v. injection of suitable agents into an already
 can be prolonged.
 sedated animal is an excellent way of inducing
It is possible to give azaperone i.p. or i.m. and
 general anaesthesia in pigs. Under farm conditions
 metomidate i.p. at the same time. Narcosis follows
it may be desirable to maintain anaesthesia by use
about 20 minutes after injection but this can result
 of intravenous drugs but if suitable apparatus is
    s 
available anaesthesia can be maintained even on
adhesions.
farms, with inhalation agents. Numerous agents
are available for induction of anaesthesia by the i.v.
Thiopental sodium
route and many of them can be used to maintain
anaesthesia in situations where this is necessary. In
Anaesthesia can be induced in pigs by thei.v. injec-
pigs, some of these agents may also be adminis-
tion of minimal (5 to 10mg/kg) quantities of a
tered by IP injection, but this route is not to be re-
 2.5% solution of thiopental. As in all other species
commended.
cumulative and can result in delay in recovery.
Metomidate
The quantity of thiopental taken to induce
medium depth surgical anaesthesia and the dura-
This hypnotic drug has been used on the
 tion of the anaesthetic period are chiefly governed
Continent of Europe, usually in combination with
by the speed at which the i.v. injection is made.
THE PIG377
When rapid injection techniques are practised in
 most satisfactory method of administration of pen-
healthy pigs, the quantity used will be surprising-
tobarbital is slow i.v. injection into an ear vein until
ly small, and the recovery period short. Surgical
the desired degree of the central nervous system
 amaesthesia can be induced in non-premedicated
depression is obtained. However, for non-survival
sows weighing about 100 kg by injection of no
experiments intraperitoneal injection using a com-
more than 500 mg of the drug. Moreover, it has
puted dose, or for castration intratesticular injec-
been observed that use of a 2.5% solution decreases
tion of large doses, may be useful alternatives for
the total dose required for any operation.
the inexperienced anaesthetist.
Induction of anaesthesia with thiopental sodium is
 For healthy, unsedated male and female pigs up
greatly facilitated by azaperone premedication.
 to 50 kg (approx 1 cwt) live weight, the average i.v.
Provided that the pig is left undisturbed for
dose necessary to induce medium depth anaesthe-
paaun 'aoiadeze a jo unoau rae sa o
sia is about 30 mg /kg. In small pigs there is a con-
injection into an ear vein is easy and complete
eaa sao rr ui nq Kiajes jo ure aqeias
 anaesthesia can be obtained with very low quantit-
variations in susceptibility may occur. Castrated
ies of a 2.5% solution of thiopental. It seems that
arimals appear to be slightly more susceptible than
butyrophenone antagonizes the respiratory
entires. Provided that injection is made slowly and
depressant effect of thiopental but this clinical
the onset of muscle relaxation is observed, the
impression still awaits controlled investigation.
method is safe. Inductionis not associated withi nar-
As with all barbiturate anaesthetics, respiration
cotic excitement; in fact, in the case of a squealing
may fail with the onset of anaesthesia. When rapid
animal, the progressive reduction, and finally cessa-
injection techniques are used this period of apnoea
tion of squealing, is a good guide to the progress of
is short and should not necessitate use of IPPV.
narcosis. Depths of anaesthesia may be difficult to
Apnoea of more than a few seconds duration
assess in pigs. The presence of complete relaxation
must, of course, be treated by IPPV and, provided
 of abdominal muscles and absence of response to
this is applied efficiently, spontaneous breathing
pricking of the skin is usually taken as evidence
soon returns. Recovery after a very great overdose
that anaesthesia has been attained. Its duration
of thiopental may be expected if efficient IPPV is
will be sufficient for the performance of rapid oper-
performed until the concentration of thiopental in
ations such as castration. For very large subjects
the brain has diminished.
 doses per kg need to be reduced and marked varia-
tions in susceptibility will be encountered.
 The duration of surgical plane anaesthesia will
Methohexital sodium
depend upon the initial depth induced. As a rule it
Provided the anaesthetist is aware of the special
is shorter than in dogs. With light levels of uncon-
characteristics of methohexital (such as its tend-
sciousness - a brisk corneal reflex and a reflex
Ency to produce muscle tremors during induction
response to skin pricking - it is of 10 to 15 minutes
of anaesthesia) this agent can be used quite safely
only; when there is a sluggish corneal reflex and
in pigs. Anaesthesia can be produced in unsedated
loss of reflex response to pricking - 20 to 25 min-
animals by i.v. injection of 5 to 6 mg/kg as a 2.5%
utes. Anaesthesia is followed by a period of pro-
solution and recovery is complete 10 to 15min
after injection of a single dose.
3 to 8hours. Recovery is not accompanied by narcotic
Premedication with azaperone reduces the dose
excitement and the animal usually passes into a
of methohexital required and enables small incre-
state of sleep. For non-survival experiments, after
mental doses to be used to prolong anaesthesia
 induction with 30 mg/kg pentobarbital, anaesthe-
without delay in recovery.
sia may be maintained by continuous i.v. infusion
of pentobarbital at about 2 mg/kg/hour although
this rate may need adjustment from time to time.
Pentobarbital sodium
In very small, unsedated subjects in which
This drug still has a place for surgery carried out
 intravenous injection may be found to be difficult,
on farms and in experimental laboratories. The 
the intraperitoneal route may be adopted,
378 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
 although in general, it is not to be recommended. It
In larger pigs intravenous doses of 6mg/kg
becomes necessary to compute an anaesthetic
constitute too large a volume for convenience and
dose. For animals up to 20kg this is put at
 it is usual to employ premedication to reduce the
30 mg/kg: for those between 20 and 30kg, at
dose needed. Following sedation with 4 mg/kg
 24 mg/kg. Variations in response are inevitable
 azaperone i.m., i.v. injection of 2 mg/kg of Saffan
with such a method. In some cases narcosis only
 produces good surgical anaesthesia with adequate
will be obtained and it will be necessary to aug-
 muscle relaxation and minimal respiratory depres-
ment it by inhalation or local analgesic injection,
sion. Further increments of Saffan can be given to
while in others it may become alarmingly deep
prolong anaesthesia without appreciable increase
 and even fatal. Provided a careful watch is kept on
in recovery time.
the breathing pattern and IPPV applied should
respiration cease, fatalities should, however, be of
Ketomine
rare occurrence. Provided efficient IPPV is used
pigs will survive after some three times the anaes-
Pigs are rapidly immobilized by i.m. injection of
thetic dose has been given. In fat subjects there is
 20 mg/kg ketamine, which produces adequate
the possibility that, despite the length of the needle
analgesia for the performance of minor operations.
employed, the injection will be made into
 Wakening is often abrupt and many pigs seem to
retroperitoneal fat. In this case absorption will be
remain sensitive to noise throughout the period of
 so slow it is improbable that even light narcosis
'anaesthesia'. Much better results are obtained by
will develop. When employing this route of
 2 to 5mg i.v. after pretreatment with 1 mg/kg
administration, the action of the drug will attain its 
 xylazine, although this latter drug seems to pro-
maximum depth in a period of 20 to 30 minutes
duce no obvious sedation in these animals.
after injection. The duration of the period of anaes-
 Reasonably satisfactory results are also obtained
thesia and of narcosis tends to be rather longer
 when 10 to 18 mg/kg of ketamine are given after i.v.
thian with the i.v. method.
 injection of 1 to 2 mg/kg of diazepam. Pot-bellied
pigs generally need about half these doses.
Ketamine (8 mg/kg) and xylazine (2mg/kg
Intratesticular injection ofpentobarbital
drawn into the same syringe may be injected
 A concentrated solution of pentobarbital sodium,
intratesticularly to provide anaesthesia for castra-
such as one commercially available for euthanasia
tion of large boars. Rapid castration removes the
of small animals (300 mg/ml) may be administered
remaining drugs contained in the testicles and
by intratesticular injection prior to castration. A
 recovery is more rapid than after intratesticular
dose rate of about 45 mg/kg is employed, a very
pentobarbital.
large boar being given 20 ml of solution into each
 It must be remembered that ketamine, xylazine
testicle and adequate anaesthesia for castration
 and diazepam are all rather expensive for use in
develops within 10 minutes of injection. Removal
farm animals.
of the testicles removes any excess drug so that to
prevent overdosage the testicles must be removed
Triple drip
as soon as the boar becomes anaesthetized. Care
must be taken in disposal of the testicles after their
The combination of ketamine, xylazine and
removal since they still contain enough barbiturate
 guaiphenesin in 5% dextrose ('triple drip') given
to produce fatal poisoning of any animal (e.g. the
by i.v. infusion, although rather expensive, can be
farm dog) which might eat them.
used in pigs as in other species of animal to pro-
duce and maintain anaesthesia. The solution is
usually prepared immediately before use to con-
Saffan
tain 2 mg of ketamine, and 1 mg of xylazine per ml
When no premedication is used, i.v. doses of
 of 5% guaiphenesin. Induction of anaesthesia
 01 01 jo eisauisaue lesiams anpoid 8y/bu g
usually needs 0.6 to 1ml/kg. Following this
15minutes duration followed by smooth recovery.
 maintenance of anaesthesia is accomplished by
THE PIG 379
sophisticated apparatus is available any inhalation
rate of infusion must, of course, be adjusted to
agent may be used.
effect as judged by monitoring the usual signs of
anaesthesia. Recovery usually takes some 30 to 45
Trichloroethylene
minutes following cessation of administration but
can be hastened by the cautious i.v. injection of
Trichloroethylene - once quite widely used in
atipamezole.
porcine practice - is no longer commercially avail-
able as a preparation for inhalation anaesthesia.
Inhalation anaesthesia
Ether
Breathing systems designed for use in man, and
which are used for dogs, may be employed for all
Inhalation of ether by conscious pigs produces
but the largest of boars and sows. In the latter, sys-
copious salivation and bronchial secretion, even
tems designed for equine anaesthesia are more
after atropine premedication, so it cannot be
regarded as a satisfactory induction agent for this
appropriate.
Endotracheal intubation is essential if IPPV is to
species of animal. Given by semi-closed or low-
be used but otherwise volatile agents may be
flow methods following suitable premedication
administered via a face mask. Large Hall-pattern
and induction with i.v. agents, it can produce good
face masks are adequate for small pigs but masks
 anaesthesia with marked muscle relaxation.
suitable for large pigs are not commercially avail-
Non-inflommoble inhaiation ogents
able. Fortunately, conical or snout-shaped masks
are fairly easy to design and construct and
All modern inhalation anaesthetics are safe anaes-
thetics for pigs other than those susceptible to
snout a gas-tight seal can be obtained by wrapping
malignant hyperthermia. Halothane and isoflu-
wet towels around the edge of the mask. The pig
rane are known to be associated with triggering
breathes through the nose, so whatever mask is
this condition in susceptible animals but in this
used it is essential to ensure that it does not block
respect the position of enflurane, sevoflurane and
the flow of gas into the nostrils. Luckily, the anter-
desflurane is currently uncertain, although it
ior position of the nostrils makes their obstruction
 s p  o n i  s
by the mask much less likely than in animals such
Because of the need for suitable equipment for
as cattle where the nares are situated more lateral-
their safe administration use of all these agents is
ly. If a suitable snout mask is not available the
 more or less confined to hospital conditions. Des-
anaesthetic may be administered through a Hall's
flurane requires a very expensive special vaporizer
mask placed over the nostrils, although it is obvi-
for its administration and it is likely that at least for
ously impossible to make this a gas-tight fit and a
the foreseeable future its use will be confined to
considerable quantity of anaesthetic escapes to the
 experimental animals in well equipped laborato-
atmosphere. Whenever the pig is not intubated the
ries. The physical characteristics of halothane and
tendency towards respiratory obstruction must be
isoflurane are so similar that they may be adminis-
 tered from the same precision vaporizer designed
previously described (Fig. 14.2).
for either drug provided that it is carefully cleaned
 Induction of anaesthesia with inhalation agents
before the subsequent use of the other agent.
is usually free from excitement but, except in small
Because of its potency and relative low cost
pigs, it is usually more convenient to induce anaes-
with an absence of toxicity (except in malignant
thesia with a parenterally administered drug and
hyperthermia susceptible pigs), halothane is an
use inhalation agents just for maintenance of
Excellent anaesthetic for pigs of all ages. Induction
anaesthesia. Under farm conditions, when meth-
 of anaesthesia is rapid and provided the animal
ods of administration may lead to considerable
can be effectively restrained there is seldom any
wastage of anaesthetic, the older, less expensive 
 need to use i.m. or i.v. administration of other drugs
agents are usually employed but when more
for this purpose before halothane is given.
380 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Squealing ceases after as few as 4 or 5 breaths and
drug produces muscle relaxation as needed.
inhalation of the vapour does not provoke saliva-
 Recovery from anaesthesia is rapid and after sur-
tion or breath holding. Recovery from anaesthesia
 gical procedures the administration of analgesics
is equally smooth and rapid.
is usually obligatory.
Isoflurane is similarly effective but tends
to cause more respiratory depression in pigs
not being subjected to surgical stimulation. Un-
NEUROMUSCULAR bLOCKING
fortunately, the cost of halothane and isoflurane
AGENTS
and the need for accurately calibrated vaporizers
limits their use on farms but, where low-flow or
Neuromuscular blocking agents are used in pigs to
semi-closed methods can be used halothane and
facilitate endotracheal intubation and for thoracic,
isoflurane are worthy of consideration for porcine
abdominal, or some experimental procedures. As
 anaesthesia. Their main disadvantages in pigs, as
 in all species of animal, two things are essential if
in all species, are those of cardiovascular depres-
these drugs are to be administered:
sion leading to hypotension, respiratory depres-
1. The pig must be unconscious and unaware
sion and the comparative lack of ability to
 of its surroundings, i.e. anaesthetized with recogmized
suppress motor response to surgical stimulation.
anaesthetic agents.
Sevoflurane has not been widely used in pigs
2. Means to apply efficient IPPV must be
but there seems no reason to suppose it will not
available.
prove to be an effective anaesthetic agent. It solu-
Techmiques involving neuromuscular blockers are
bility characteristics indicate it should prod uce a
not designed for use in the field, and can only be
pas e Aq aeueape oi panondua Aliadoid
from anaesthesia.
 amaesthetist. All those intending to use these drugs
Desflurane's solubility in blood is much less
 in porcine anaesthesia should be thoroughly famil-
than that of the other halogenated volatile agents
 iar with the pharmacology (Chapter 7) and with
and thus, induction of anaesthesia and recovery
the methods of IPPV (Chapter 8). By providing
are rapid, while the depth of anaesthesia is readily
complete muscular relaxation their use means that
controllable.
the surgeon does not need to apply forcible retrac-
tion to tissues to gain access to the surgical site and
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
so avoids tissue bruising which can give rise to
post-operative pain.
It is impossible to induce anaesthesia in pigs with
N2O but as long as sufficient O2 is provided it may
be supplemented with a volatile anaesthetic agent.
Suxamethonium
In particular, it can be used to speed induction of
The main use of suxamethonium in pigs is to
anaesthesia with the halogenated agents ('second
facilitate endotracheal intubation. Atropine pre-
gas' effect).
medication is essential to counter the autonomic
The sequence of premedication, induction of
stimulating effect of the initial depolarizing pro-
anaesthesia with thiopental sodium, endotracheal
cess. Following induction of anaesthesia, doses of
 intubation under the influence of a neuromuscular
 2 mg/kg produce complete paralysis of skeletal
blocker and the maintenance of anaesthesia by
muscles for about 2 minutes, i.e. long enough to
endotracheal non-rebreathing administration of
allow unhurried, atraumatic intubation. It is, of
N2O plus an intravenous or inhalational supple-
course, necessary to perform IPPV until full spon-
ment together with a neuromuscular blocker with
taneous breathing is resumed. When non-depolar-
IPPV has proved to be a very satisfactory method
izing blockers are to be employed for the
for lengthy experimental surgical procedures in
 remainder of the anaesthetic period many anaes-
pigs of all ages. By this system NzO provides valu-
       
 paralysis should be complete before they are ad-
maintained while the neuromuscular blocking
 ministered but this does not seem to be essential.
THE PIG381
Table I4.I Neuromuscular blocking drugs which
meringes continue, around the phylum terminale,
 have been used in pigs
as far as the middle of the sacrum. At the lum-
Drug
Dose
Approximate
bosacral space the sac is comparatively small, and
(mg/kg)
duration of
it is improbable that a needle introduced at this
action (min)
point will penetrate into the subarachnoid space.
The lumbosacral aperture is large. Its dimensions
Suxamethonium
2.0
2-3
 in the adult are approximately 1.5 cm craniocaud-
D-tubocurarine
0.3
25-35
Gallamine
4.0
15-20
ally and 3 cm transversely. The depth of the canal is
Alcuronium
0.1
30-40
about 1 cm.
Pancuronium
0.12
25-30
The site for insertion of the needle is located as
Vecuronium
0.1
15-20
follows: the cranial border of the ileum on each
Atracurium
0.5
20-60
side is found with the fingers. A line joining them
crosses the spinous process of the last lumbar ver-
tebra (Fig. 14.11). The needle is inserted in the mid-
Non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking
line immediately behind this spinous process and
agents
directed downwards and backwards at an angle of
20° with the vertical. The depth to which the nee-
All the non-depolarizing relaxants used in man
dle must penetrate in pigs of from 30 to 70 kg will
may be employed in anaesthetized pigs to facil-
vary from 5 to 9 cm. The landmarks described are
itate surgical or experimental procedures. The
readily detected in animals of smaller size but they
choice of drug depends on the duration of action
may be entirely masked by the overlying tissues in
needed, on the route of its elimination, and on the
cardiovascular effects it produces. The drugs
which have been used are listed in Table 14.1.
Lumbosacral
The technique most commonly applied is that
space
Crest of
Last lumbar
as described under NzO above. Ventilators de-
the ileum
vertebra
signed for use in adult humans are adequate for
the majority of pigs, but large boars and sows may
have to be ventilated with one of the ventilators
designed for use in adult horses and cattle. At the
end of the procedure it is usual to give atropine (in
doses of up to 0.3 mg/kg) or glycopyrolate (up to
>Sacrum
0.2 mg/kg) followed by neostigmine (up to 2.5 mg
total dose) or edrophonium (up to 0.5 mg/kg) to
restore adequate spontaneous breathing. In pigs
the depth of neuromuscular blockade is best estim-
ated by stimulation of the ulnar nerve as in the dog
and cat using 'double-burst' stimulation.
LoCaL ANaLGESIA
Caudal nerve block is not employed in pigs and
epidural block is usually used simply for economic
FIG.14.1l Dorsal view of the pig's pelvis. A line
reasons.
connecting the iliac crests crosses the last lumbar
vertebra.The lumbosacral space in adult pigs is 2.5 - 3 cm
caudal to this point.The patella can be used as a reliable
Epidural block
landmark for location of the iliac crest in larger animals;
with the hindlegs in a normal standing position, a vertical
In the pig the spinal cord ends at thejunction of the
line through the patella will cross midline on level with the
5th and 6th lumbar vertebrae and the spinal
crest of the ileum.
382 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
larger ones. In these a point 15 cm cranial to the
(2 mg /kg in 5 ml 0.9% saline) induces bilateral anal-
base of the tail serves as a fairly accurate guide.
 gesia extending from the anus to the umbilicus
Provided the needle is introduced in approximately
within 5 minutes after completion of the injection
the correct position and direction, the size of the lum-
 and persists for at least 10 minutes. Detomidine
bosacral space makes its detection comparatively
(500 μg/kg in 5 ml 0.9% saline) induces recumb-
easy. Eighteen gauge needles are used; for pigs
 ency but analgesia caudal to the umbilicus is min-
between 30 and 50kg one 8 cm long, and for animals
imal. In large sows 1 mg/kg of 10% xylazine in
of 70kg and above, one 12 cmlong are required.
 [esoqum aui ie paisaui auiesouai %z o gi1
Before inserting the epidural needle an insens-
 space produces analgesia extending from the anus
itive skin weal should be produced. The animal is
 to the umbilicus 5 to 8 minutes after completion of
restrained either on its breast or side. For small
the injection.
pigs the latter is preferable, as sudden movement
Tendillo et al. (1995) found that epidural
can be better controlled. In large sows and boars
 xylazine 0.2 mg/kg diluted in saline to 0.5 ml/kg
the injection is made in the standing animal
produced analgesia in isoflurane anaesthetized
Owing to difficulties with restraint, it is generally
healthy Landrace-Large White pigs for up to
necessary to make the injection comparatively rap-
90minutes.
idly. Penetration of the canal is often associated
with sudden movement, for which attendants
Analgesia for castration
must be prepared. Rapid injection seems to cause
discomfort, presumably due to transient elevation
Local analgesia is quite suitable for the castration
 of CSF pressure. In pigs weighing from 10 to 20 kg
 of male pigs up to about 5 months of age but gen-
the interarcuate ligament is at a depth of about 2 t0
eral anaesthesia is probably more satisfactory for
3.5 cm from the skin surface while in adult sows
older animals.
and boars it may be at a depth of up to 15 cm
In the field, intratesticular injection is probably
Epidural analgesia has been used for the castra-
 the most practical method of local analgesia. A
tion of pigs of 40 to 50 kg, injecting 10 ml of 2% lig-
 needle of suitable size is thrust perpendicularly
nocaine solution with adrenaline. Complete 
through the tensed scrotal skin and advanced until
desensitization of the scrotum, testes and sperm-
 its point lies in the middle of the testicle. Between 3
atic cord was present in 10minutes, and there was
 and 15 ml, depending on the size the animal, of 2%
a partial motor paralysis of the hind-limbs.
 lignocaine hydrochloride are injected into the mid-
s e    s a
dle of the testicle and a further 2 to 5 ml are injected
hour.
subcutaneously beneath the scrotal skin as the nee-
It is difficult to know up to what weight of an-
dle is withdrawn. Both sides are treated in the
imal this recommendation can be employed, for in
same manner. Operation may commence about
larger animals fat often represents a considerable
 5minutes after completion of the injections.
proportion of body weight. It is suggested that for
2% ligmnocaine the dose should be 1.0 ml per 7.5kg
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
for pigs weighing up to 50kg and an additional
1.0 ml for every 10kg above this in weight. Another
It is absolutely essential that pigs should be kept in
suggestion which has proved to be satisfactory is
a warm environment until they are completely
based on occiput-tail base measurement allowing
mobile affer sedation or general anaesthesia
1.0 ml for the first 40 cm and an additional 1.5 ml
because, due to their lack of body hair, they are
for each 10 cm longer length. Certainly, when
prone to develop hypothermia if left in cold sur-
administered at the lumbosacral space 20 ml of 2%
roundings. Close observation during recovery is
lignocaine is adequate for caesarian section in
necessary so that immediate measures may be
sows weighing about 300 kg.
taken to relieve any respiratory obstruction which
Recently the effects of xylazine and detomidine
injected at the lumbosacral space have been evalu-
 particularly following all surgical procedures.
ated (Lumb and Jones, 1996). Epidural xylazine
  s   ss 
THE PIG383
doses similar to those used in dogs. Amongst those
Hall, L.W., Trim, C.M. and Woolf, N. (1972) Further
most commonly employed are morphine (0.1 mg /kg
studies of porcine malignant hyperthermia. British
up to a maximum of 20 mg for large pigs) and pethi-
Medicat Jourrat ii: 145-148.
Bradley, W.G., Ward, M., Murchison, D., Hall, L.W.
dine (2 mg/kg up to a maximum of 1.0 g in large
 and Woolf, N. (1973) Clinical, electrophysiological
boars and sows). It is probable that postoperative
and pathological studies on malignant
analgesia is frequently considered as being too
hyperpyrexia. Proceedings of the Royat Society of
uneconomic for use after operations such as castra-
Medicine 66: 67-68.
tion but, ethically, veterinarians are obliged to give
Lumb, W. V.and Jones, E.W. (1996) Veterinary
Anesthesia, 3rd edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins,
pain relief whenever desirable without undue
p.501.
regard for agricultural economic considerations.
Tendillo, F.J., Pera, A.M.,Mascias, A. et al. (1995)
Cardiopulmonary and analgesic effects of epidural
 lidocaine, alfentanil and xylazine in pigs anesthetized
 REFERENCES
with isoflurane. Veterinary Surgery 24:73-77.
Woolf, N., Hall, L.W., Thorme, C., Down, M. and Walker,
Hall, L.W., Woolf, V., Bradley, J.W.P. and Jolly, D.W.
R.G. (1970) Serum creatine-phosphokinase levels in
(1966) Unusual reaction to suxamethonium chloride.
pigs reacting abnormally to halogenated anaesthetics.
British Medicat Journat i: 1305.
British Medical Journal ii 386-387.
15
Anaesthesia of the dog
INTRODUCTION
the drugs are used for premedication to anaesthe-
sia, dose rates are often considerably lower so
as to minimize cardiovascular and respiratory
Within the last 15 years there has been a consider-
able number of changes in the way anaesthesia is
depression.
conducted in dogs. Introduction of new drugs has
broadened choices for anaesthetic protocols and
PHENOTHIAZINE DERIVATIVES
enabled use of appropriate combinations to meet
Acepromazine is the phenothiazine most com-
demands of increasingly sophisticated and more
protracted medical and surgical procedures.
monly used for sedation in dogs. It is best used as a
Monitoring equipment has become available
2 mg /ml solution in dogs as dose administration
can be more accurate than when a stronger solu-
specifically for veterinary medicine and its cost is
such as to make its purchase feasible in general
tion is used. The response to acepromazine is not
veterinary practice. Now, more than ever, it is poss-
uniform and depends on the animal's tempera-
ment, physical condition, and breed. In general,
ible to focus on the individual patient's problems
the giant breeds (e.g. St Bernard and New-
 foundland) are exceptionally sensitive to the drug
safe anaesthesia with optimum surgical conditions
and minimal adverse impact on postoperative
and will become recumbent and reluctant to move
following doses of about 0.03mg/kg. Small
course.
breeds, in particular the terrier breeds, are much
more resistant and may not show signs of sedation
SEDATION AND ANALGESIA
following even large doses.
 Dogs of the Boxer breed are renowned for their
Selection of a drug or drugs for sedation depends
liability to 'faint' following even small doses of
on the purpose for which it is intended. Mild tran-
phenothiazine derivatives (e.g. 0.02 mg/ kg of i.m.
quilization can be achieved with a phenothiazine
acepromazine). This response may occur quite
such as acepromazine whereas moderate to heavy
suddenly, with no prior sedation; the animal
sedation is better obtained using an α2 agonist,
becomes flaccid or unconscious and there is severe
such as medetomidine, or a neuroleptanalgesic
hypotension with bradycardia. Because this
mixture, such as morphine with acepromazine.
response is similar to a vasovagal reaction
Dose rates chosen may depend on whether the
which might be blocked by atropine or glycopyr-
animal is to be only sedated or whether sedation is
 rolate, the authors suggest that not only should
to be followed by general anaesthesia. When
minimal doses (0.02 mg/kg) be employed in this
385
386 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
breed, but also that they should always be
are usually adequate for sedation of most animals
 combined with anticholinergics even if being
and for premedication. They are lower doses than
given for purposes other than premedication
those recommended on the product data sheets but
before anaesthesia.
increasing the dosage rarely increases the sedative
 The actions of acepromazine are potentiated by
effect. The action of acepromazine is primarily
hypovolaemia, l
uraemia，
pue
P[O
I age.
The
issa u aau aq A pe ri
hypotensive effects of the drug can become particu-
dogs. In general, there will be better sedation and
larly serious in the presence of hypovolaemia.
less cardiovascular depression if an opioid is given
Hypotension is best treated by the rapid intra-
concurrently when more pronounced sedation is
venous infusion of balanced electrolyte solution
required.
and, if necessary, by infusion of dobutamine.
Acepromazine and atropine solutions may
When an opioid has been administered concur
A'l paialu pue asus aes aul u pax aq
rently, partial reversal of the opioid with naloxone
(0.03 mg/kg acepromazine) but the drug may still
may assist in restoration of blood pressure.
take up to 20 minutes to produce its full effects.
The dose rates for acepromazine decrease
Acepromazine is said by some to be poorly absorb-
with increasing size of the animal; for i.m. admin-
ed from s.c. sites but has, in fact, been used satis-
istration in small dogs, 0.05-0.10 mg/kg; for dogs
factorily by this route in dogs for many years. Oral
10 to 20kg, 0.05 mg/kg; for dogs 20 to 40kg
administration is much less reliable and the seda-
0.03-0.05 mg/kg: with a maximum dose of 3 mg
tive effect is greatly influenced by whether the drug
for most large dogs, with occasional dogs being
is administered with food or on an empty stomach.
anpui oh pioido ue qim auzeuoidane Su g uaan
An advantage to including acepromazine
profound sedation (Table 15.1). These dose rates
for premedication is that it provides some protec-
TABLE 15.1 Injectable drugs for sedation or premedication in dogs
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Comments
Acepromazine
0.05 to 0.20 i.m.,i.v. smalldogs
Lowest dose for large dogs, max. usually 3 mg, absolute
0.05 to 0.10 i.m.,i.v. 10-30kg
max.5 mg
0.03 to 0.10 i.m.,i.v. >30kg
Atropine
0.04 i.m., s.c.;0.02 i.v.
Anticholinergic
Buprenorphine
0.006 to 0.010 i.m.,i.v.
Onset time 30-40 min.
Butorphanol
0.2 to 0.4 i.m., i.v.
Premedication
0.05 to 0.20 i.m., i.v.
 Postoperative analgesia
Diazepam
0.2 to 0.5 i.v.
Do not give alone to healthy dogs
Glycopyrrolate
0.010 i.m.; 0.005 i.v.
 Anticholinergic
Medetomidine
0.02-0.04 i.m.
 Profound sedation;severely decreases dose of
0.01-0.02 i.v.
 anaesthetic agents
Midazolam
0.I to 0.2 i.m.,i.v.
 Do not give alone to healthy dogs
Morphine
0.2 to I.0 i.m.lf using i.v. route,
 Initiates vomiting
give slowly *
Naloxone
0.0l to 0.02 i.m.,i.v, s.c.
Opioid antagonist
Oxymorphone
0.05 to 0.20 i.m., i.v.
 Max.initial dose 5 mg: highest dose only for induction
 protocol; initiates vomiting, panting
 Pethidine
3.0 to 4.0 i.m.
Premedication
1.0 to 2.0 i.m.lf using i.v.route,
 Postoperative analgesia
give slowly *
Xylazine
0.5 to 2.0 i.m.,0.5 to I.0 i.v.
Initiates vomiting
* Give slowly over 5min to avoid hypotension.
THE DOG 387
tion against catcholamine-induced ventricular
Medetomidine
irregular rhythms. Acepromazine should be omit-
Medetomidine is a potent O adrenoceptor agonist
ted from premedication when severe blood loss or
hypotension is anticipated during surgery as the
which produces a dose-dependent decrease in the
release and turnover of noradrenaline in the cen-
peripheral α blockade complicates treatment of
tral nervous system which results in sedation,
hypotension. Acepromazine decreases the thres-
analgesia and bradycardia. In the periphery,
 hoid for seizures and it is usual to avoid it in dogs
with a history of seizures and when myelography
medetomidine causes vasoconstriction by activa-
tion of postsynaptic receptors in the vascular
is scheduled.
smooth muscle. Thus, as with xylazine, there is an
Other phenothiazine derivatives which are
initial increase in ABP due to an increase in sys-
used include propionyl promazine, promazine,
temic vascular resistance. When administered i.m.
promethazine, trimeprazine, and chlorpromazine.
at doses which produce deep sedation (40μg/kg)
The side effects produced by them and the provi-
the rise is minimal and ABP rapidly falls to slightly
sions of use are similar to those of acepromazine
 below the normal resting level. Following medeto-
but methotrimeprazine, which is used as part of
midine administration dogs often breathe in an
the neuroleptanalgesic mixture ‘Small Animal
irregular manner, periods of up to 45 seconds of
Immobilon', is said to have the added advantage
apnoea being followed by several rapid breaths.
of possessing analgesic properties.
Although the mucous membranes appear to be
 cyanotic, PaO2 is only slightly depressed.
0 ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS
With equisedative doses of xylazine and med-
etomidine both the type of sedation achieved
Xylazine
and the side effects of bradycardia, respiratory
Xylazine was the first Q2 adrenoceptor agonist to
depression and mucous membrane colour are sim-
 ilar. Medetomidine provides better sedation and
be widely used in veterinary medicine. Given i.m.
 amalgesia than xylazine and has a longer duration
to dogs in doses of 1-3 mg/kg it will produce good
 of action (Tyner et al., 1997). Vomiting occurs in
sedation and even hypnosis. The drug is classified
about 20% of dogs receiving medetomidine, but is
as a sedative/hypnotic and, as might be expected,
more frequent and prolonged after xylazine. Both
increasing the dose leads to greater sedation as
well as increased duration of action. Although
xylazine and medetomidine decrease gut motility.
high doses will apparently produce unconscious-
Medetomidine, at 10 and 20 μg/kg i.v., signific-
ness (absence of visible response to external
antly decreases serum insulin concentration but
plasma glucose concentration remains within the
stimuli) this is associated with severe cardiovascu-
normal physiologic range (Burton et al., 1997).
lar effects and prolonged recovery, so that high
 Medetomidine has a steep dose-response curve
doses cannot be recommended. An obvious side
and doses should, ideally, be calculated on a body
effect in dogs is retching and vomiting as sedation
develops.
surface area basis rather than on bodyweight. In
 practice this means that smaller dogs require relat-
In dogs, xylazine often causes a rise in arterial
ively higher doses than large dogs. Over the rising
blood pressure (ABP) and dose-related respiratory
phase of the dose-response curve sedation and
depression. Although atropine may be given to
analgesia are dose-dependent. Although appear-
 prevent bradycardia its effect is variable, and it is
ing deeply sedated vicious dogs may still be
sometimes ineffective.
 aggressive and must be handled with care. Old age
Even when sedation is not marked, the doses of
increases the sedative effect of medetomidine and
induction agents are greatly reduced after xylazine
frequently a dose of 20 μg/kg will have the same
premedication. Xylazine slows the circulation, so
effect as 40 μg/kg in a younger dog. The effect and
there is a long delay between i.v. injection of an
 anaesthetic drug and its effects becoming appar-
duration of medetomidine also depends on the
route of administration, i.v. producing a more
ent: unless due allowance is made for this, i.v.
anaesthetic agents will be overdosed.
intense sedation of shorter duration than i.m.
388 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
(England & Clarke, 1989). Injection s.c. of medeto-
Romifidine
midine resulted in poor absorption and unpre-
 Romifidine is the most recent Q2 adrenoceptor ago-
dictable effect. Following i.v. administration dogs
nist investigated for use as a sedative in dogs.
will become recumbent in 2 minutes but maximal
Similarly to the other agents, romifidine, 40 μg/kg
effects may take longer to appear. The duration of
 analgesia may be 45 minutes without further drug
and 80 μg/kg, reduced the subsequent induction
dose of thiopental to 6.5 and 4.0 mg /kg, respect-
administration, and the time to standing will be
ively (England & Hammond, 1997).
approximately 90 minutes. After i.m. injection,
recumbency may occur within 6 minutes or take
30 minutes and likewise, the time to standing is
OPIOId ANALGESICS
variable from 1.5 to 2.0 hours.
The drug is also effective when squirted from a
Opioids are widely used to provide analgesia, in
syringe into the oral cavity of difficult dogs in
and outside the operating room (Table 15.1). The
doses of 30-80 μg/kg, but in quiet dogs may be
administered carefully under the tongue and doses
 on the origin of the noxious stimulus, the required
[enauqns sn Aq aaoaa Araa are x/onoi- go
duration of analgesia, the need for sedation or not,
route which avoids a first-pass through the liver. In
assessment of the potential impact of adverse
the UK the data sheet for medetomidine recom-
effects on the patient, and the relative cost. The
mends that impervious gloves be worn when
opiates such as morphine, pethidine (meperidine),
handling the drug. Care is necessary to avoid
splashing the drug on to mucous membranes
analgesics for orthopaedic pain whereas the partial
when expelling air from syringes.
agonist, butorphanol appears to be less effective.
Investigations relating to the use of anticholin-
Buprenorphine has been unpredictable in provid-
ergics with medetomidine have confirmed that in-
 ing postoperative analgesia. Nonetheless, in a clini-
cidence of ventricular arrhythmias is higher when
 cal study comparing preoperative administration of
 atropine and medetomidine are administered at
 morphine and buprenorphine for post-arthrotomy
the same time; an effect which is not observed
 analgesia effects, both opioids provided adequate
when the atropine is given 10 or more minutes
 analgesia (Brodbelt et al. 1997). The approximate
before the medetomidine. Since hypertension is
onset of action after i.m. administration for butor-
the usual mechanism inducing the bradycardia,
phanol and oxymorphone is 10-15 minutes, for
 administration of an anticholinergic agent will
pethidine is 20 minutes, and for morphine and
exacerbate the hypertension (Alibhai et al., 1996).
buprenorphine is 40 minutes. The degree of seda-
Thus, use of an anticholinergic is unnecessary or
tion induced by opioids depends on the drug, the
even contraindicated when medetomidine is to be
 dose rate, and the individual response. Some seda-
used only for sedation. However, when medeto-
tion is usually obtained with morphine and oxy-
midine is to be followed by inhalation anaesthesia
there is a valid argument for anticholinergic ad-
and to a lesser extent oxymorphone to healthy
ministration for premedication to avoid a further
dogs can result in excitement (Robinson et al.
decrease in cardiac output and blood pressure
1988). Pethidine, butorphanol and buprenorphine
 induced by vasodilation from the inhalation agent.
 may produce little obvious sedation, although
The use of medetomidine for premedication
dose rates of subsequently administered drugs are
greatly reduces the doses of subsequent anaes-
decreased. Pethidine and butorphanol have short
thetic required in a dose-dependent manner, e.g.
durations of action of 1-2h, morphine and oxy-
moderate doses of medetomidine may decrease
pue 'u1g roy eisaue apiaoid Aew auoydiou
the subsequent dose of thiopental to 2 mg/kg. Its
 buprenorphine appears to last 4-6h. Fentanyl is
sedative and hypnotic effects have been shown to
very short lived at 20-40 minutes.
be synergistic with those of opioids such as butor-
The opioids are renowned for their respiratory
phanol and fentanyl (England & Clarke, 1989a)
depressant effects, particularly when used with
 and with other anaesthetic agents.
inhalation anaesthesia. Hypoventilation (hyper-
THE DOG389
 addition of an opioid will increase the degree of
an undesirable feature for dogs with head trauma,
sedation and analgesia beyond that achieved by
intracranial masses, or spinal cord compression.
use of the sedative or opioid alone. Conversely, the
Hypoventilation may result in inadequate uptake
combination allows a decrease in dose rate of one
o Aiqeidasoeum ue pue juase uoenequ go
or both the drugs while still achieving satisfactory
plane of anaesthesia. Panting may be a feature of
sedation. Decreased dose rates may result in less
opioid administration, and this occurs more often
respiratory or cardiovascular depression, less air-
with pethidine and oxymorphone. Potent short
way obstruction in brachycephalic breeds, and less
acting opioids, such as fentanyl, that are injected as
drug to be metabolized for recovery. Furthermore,
supplements during surgery or given as an infu-
at the end of the procedure the opioid component
sion cause sufficient respiratory depression that
can be antagonized by injection of naloxone.
controlled ventilation is usually necessary.
Sedative-opioid combinations (neuroleptanalge-
Dogs frequently vomit during the onset of
sia) are used for procedures such as radiography,
 action of morphine, hydromorphone and oxymor-
examinations, bandage changes and minor
phone, and this is not a desirable feature for dogs
orthopaedic manipulations, and for preanaesthetic
with cervical instability or gastrointestinal foreign
medication. For some of these combinations dogs
bodies or obstruction. Vomiting is less likely to
remain sensitive to sound and may rouse abruptly
occur if the animal is in pain when the drug is ad-
 in response to a loud noise or sudden movement.
ministered. Pethidine and morphine cause severe
 Combinations such as acepromazine, 0.05 mg/
kg, with morphine, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, or oxymor-
The hypotension may be the result of histamine
phone, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg (5mg maximum initial
release or due to a direct peripheral vasodilation. If
total dose), or the combination of medetomidine,
given i.v., these drugs must be given slowly over
0.03-0.04 mg/kg, with butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg.
several minutes to avoid severe haemodynamic
given i.m. will induce profound sedation. The
changes or they may be best given by other routes.
combinations of acepromazine, 0.05mg/kg.
The other drugs may be given by i.v. or i.m. routes
with pethidine, 3-4mg/kg, or butorphanol,
depending on the need for rapidity of action, but
0.2-0.4 mg/kg, or buprenorphine, 0.01 mg/kg.
im. administration tends to produced a more level,
cause mild to moderate sedation. The route of
prolonged effect. The cardiovascular effects of i.v.
administration will influence the intensity of seda-
administered opioids are greater when the animal
tion. The combination of a benzodiazepine with
is anaesthetized and decreases in cardiac output
butorphanol is useful in brachycephalic dogs with
and blood pressure should be expected (Martinez
low risk for causing airway obstruction. For exam-
et al. 1997). Decreases in cardiovascular function
ple, administration of butorphanol, 0.2-0.3 mg/kg,
may be unexpectedly dramatic when the opioid is
with midazolam, 0.2mg/kg, i.m. to a Bulldog
given for postoperative analgesia to a patient that
might induce mild sedation but butorphanol,
0.2 mg /kg, with diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg, given i.v.
The cardiovascular effects of the opioids are
n e p ss raa a e
generally minor but there are some differences
animal in lateral recumbency for a short time.
between the agents. Morphine, 1 mg/kg, given
Many combinations with different dose rates
slowly over 5 minutes has only minimal effects on
are used. Other opioids used include methadone,
systemic haemodynamics (Priano & Vatner 1981).
0.1 mg/kg, and hydromorphone, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg.
Similarly, oxymorphone induces minimal cardio-
 Omnopon-Scopolamine is a commercially avail-
able mixture and 20 mg Omnopon (papaveretum)
heart rate may decrease (Copland et al. 1987).
and 0.4 mg Scopolamine (hyoscine, an anticholin-
ergic) combined with 3 mg of acepromazine pro-
vides good sedation in aggressive German
SEDATIVE/OPIOID COMbINATIONS
Shepherd dogs.
The combination of an opioid with a sedative may
Various premixed combinations of drugs are
accomplish one of two goals. On the one hand,
marketed for sedation in dogs. Hyprorm consists
390 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
of fentanyl with fluanisone. Intramuscular injec-
propofol and will produce a small decrease in the
tion produces deep sedation and analgesia of
dose rate needed for induction of anaesthesia.
about 20 minutes duration, which is suitable for
These benzodiazepines are often included with
minor surgical procedures. Dogs sedated with this
ketamine to prevent the central nervous system
 combination will move in response to noise.
excitation that may be caused by ketamine.
Small Animal Immobilon contains the powerful
Diazepam is poorly absorbed from i.m. injec-
and long-acting opioid etorphine in combination 
tion. Midazolam is a water-soluble benzodi-
with methotrimeprazine. Given at the manufac-
 azepine that is twice as potent as diazepam and is
turer's recommended doses to the dog by the i.v.,
better suited fori.m. administration. Midazolam,
i.m. or s.c. routes, it produces a profound and pro-
unlike diazepam, is not painful on i.v. injection
longed state of unconsciousness and analgesia.
and does not cause thrombophlebitis. Both agents
Intramuscular and s.c. injections are painful.
are commonly used because of their cardiovascu-
Respiratory depression can be severe and the dog
lar-sparing action. They cause minor changes in
may appear cyanotic. Convulsions following the
cardiac output and mean arterial pressure at
use of Immobilon have been reported to the
the dose rates used clinically (Jones et al. 1979).
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists Com-
Heart rates may be increased and this may
mittee concerned with deaths and adverse reac-
have an adverse influence in dogs with ventri-
tions of drugs used in anaesthesia.
cular dysrhythmias. Diazepam is commonly
At the end of surgery, the etorphine component
given i.v. at a dose rate of 0.2-0.25 mg/kg but this
of the mixture may be antagonized by the injection
may be increased to 0.5 mg/kg in some circum-
of diprenorphine but the patient remains sedated
stances. Midazolam is administered i.m. or i. v. at
from the effects of methotrimeprazine. It must be
0.1-0.2mg/kg
remembered that once the antagonist has been
Temazepam does not form active metabolites
given, attempts to provide analgesia with pure
 and has a relatively short duration of action. It may
agonist opioids will be unsuccessful. Following
 be given to dogs in a soft gelatine capsule in doses
reversal dogs tend to return to a state of deep seda--
 of approximately 0.25 mg/kg. Zolazepam is avail-
tion, or even unconsciousness, several hours after
 able in a fixed combination with the dissociative
the antagonist has been given. Instances of post
 anaesthetic, tiletamine.
sedation renal failure have occurred after the
Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine antagonist that
use of Immobilon which could be a result of
binds competitively, reversibly, and specifically to
hypoxia and/or hypotension during the period of
the same central nervous system sites as benzodi-
sedation.
azepines. Agonist-antagonist ratios of flumazenil
aq 01 teadde、 sgop ieut paluodai aaeu stauMO
to rapidly and completely reverse the effects of
different' after Immobilon. Behavioral changes,
 diazepam and midazolam overdose in dogs is 26:1
including aggression to people within or outside
 for diazepam and 13:1 for midazolam (Tranquilli
the family have been reported after sedation with
et al. 1992).
acepromazine-oxymorphone (4% of dogs) or fen-
tanyl-droperidol (15% of dogs) (Dohoo et al. 1986).
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
DRUGS
BENZODIAZEPINES
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
-spe uao jou ane nozepiu no wedazi
are frequently used for pain relief in animals
apun  au se sop ay o auoe paral
before anaesthesia and surgery and can be used to
excitability. They are frequently used in combina-
supplement analgesia in the postoperative period.
tion with an opioid for sedation or preanaesthetic
 NSAIDs used in dogs include aspirin, phenylbuta-
medication and within the combination contribute
 zone, naproxen, meloxicam, ketoprofen, carpro-
to greater sedation than would be obtained by the 
fen, and etodolac.Adverse side effects include
opioid alone. Diazepam or midazolam are often
 gastritis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, hepatocell-
injected i.v. just before thiopental, methohexital, or 
 ular toxicosis, and acute renal failure (Johnston &
THE DOG391
Fox, 1997; MacPhail et al., 1998). Gastroduodenal
of the conditions which may be discovered dur-
lesions were observed by endoscopy in 71% of
ing preanaesthetic evaluation are discussed in
healthy dogs receiving carprofen, meloxicam, or
Chapter 1 and later on in this chapter.
ketoprofen for 28 days, although none of the dogs
There are, however, some aspects of the pre-
had clinical signs related to the lesions (Forsyth ef
anaesthetic preparation of dogs that deal with
al., 1998). There is some evidence that the preval-
-pisuon ramy sueiem pue juawaeueu aunnon
ence and severity of adverse side effects are less
eration here.
with carprofen. Dogs undergoing anaesthesia and
 surgery might be imagined to be at greater risk of
CONCURRENT DRUG THERAPY
adverse effects from NSAIDs because these proced-
ures may produce disturbances of fluid balance
Previous drug therapy can alter the response of
and decreased organ blood flow which will slow
elimination and result in prolonged blood concen-
that details of drug use should be sought from the
trations of NSAIDs. However, fluid balance disturb-
case history. A full discussion of all possible drug
ances are usually corrected at the time of surgery
interactions is beyond the scope of this book and
and for analgesia it is seldom necessary to admin-
reference should be made to textbooks on pharma-
o  s an    sr a 
cology and drug interactions. Interactions that are
operative hours.
@mcountered fairly commonly in canine anaesthe-
Aprospective evaluation of carprofen adminis-
sia are described below.
Jo aa e roy aaeaoand / e para
orthopaedic procedures indicated that dogs given
1. Antibiotics
carprofen had similar or slightly better pain scores
than dogs given pethidine pre- and postoper-
Chloramphenicol increases the length of action of
atively (Lascelles et al., 1994). A later study of the
barbiturate and inhalant agents but this rarely
efficiacy of carprofen for analgesia in dogs under-
presents a clinical problem. More importantly.
going ovariohysterectomy confirmed that carpro-
antibiotics given rapidly i.v. during anaesthesia
fen provided pain relief and suggested that
can, in some dogs, induce profound hypotension
administration of carprofen preoperatively had
that is unresponsive to treatment (Table 15.2).
advantages over postoperative administration
Antibiotics to be administered i.v. should be given
(Lascelles et al., 1998). Immediately after anaesthe-
slowly over several minutes with a close watch for
sia for elective orthopaedic surgery, trials showed
effect on the ABP, particularly in dogs with cardio-
that evidence of pain relief was present 4hours
vascular instability. Many antibiotics, including
 later in dogs given ketoprofen but not in dogs
the streptomycin group, the polymixins, and tetra-
given oxymorphone alone (Pibarot et al., 1997).
cyclines, exert an influence at the neuromuscular
junction which enhances the effects of non-depolar-
izing muscle relaxants. This may induce re-paraly-
 PREPARATION FOR ANAESTHESIA
sis when these antibiotics are administered at the
end of anaesthesia.
Preparation for anaesthesia includes preanaes-
thetic evaluation of the ability of the patient to
withstand the changes induced by general anaes-
2. Corticosteroids
thesia and of the potential impact of surgery and
 Dogs which have been treated with corticosteroid
anaesthesia on the intra- and postoperative course.
drugs at any time in the two months preced-
Choice of anaesthetic agents and management is
ing anaesthesia may have reduced ability to
based on information derived from the dog's his-
respond to stress. Additional steroid cover may
tory, physical examination, abnormal values
be advisable in the form of methylprednisolone
detected by laboratory tests, nature of any current
 sodium succinate, 10 to 20 mg/kg i. v., or dexam-
illness, and requirements of the proposed medical
 ethasone, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg, or another steroid more
or surgical procedure. The significance of many
 appropriate for the individual dog's condition
392 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 15.2 Impact of concurrent administration
ed depending on the severity of the surgical
 of drugs on anaesthetic management
procedure and how the dog recovered from
Drug
Significance
anaesthesia.
Antibiotics
Intravenous administration
during anaesthesia causes
3. Barbiturates
moderate, occasionally severe,
Long term barbiturate therapy for epilepsy will
decrease in blood pressure in
lead to enzyme induction and a decrease in dura-
some dogs. Aminoglycoside
antibiotics can cause muscle
tion of action of similar drugs given for anaesthe-
weakness and potentiate
sia. Administration for years leads to hepatic
neuromuscular block from
cirrhosis and decreased hepatic function. The
non-depolarizing relaxants.
effects of acutely administered phenobarbital or
 Chloramphenicol prolongs
pentobarbital for the seizuring animal will be
sleep time with ketamine and
inhalant agents.
additive to subsequently administered drugs for
Carbonic
Induce metabolic acidosis
anaesthesia for collection of cerebrospinal fluid or
anhydrase
further diagnostic tests.
inhibitors
Cardiovascular
Calcium channel blockers and
4. Other drugs
drugs
 ACE inhibitors may contribute
 to hypotension during
The number of dogs on cardiac medications has
 anaesthesia unresponsive to
increased in recent years. Calcium channel block-
treatment with vasoactive
drugs
ing agents, such as verapamil and diltiazem, may
Corticosteroids
 Long term preoperative use
be used to treat dogs with supraventricular tachy-
 may predispose to circulatory
arrhythmias. Atrial fibrillation or flutter in dogs
collapse
with dilated cardiomyopathy or advanced mitral
Diuretics
Frusemide (furosemide)
regurgitation may be treated with these drugs,
 decreases serum potassium
which slow conduction through and prolong the
and may cause muscle
refractory period of the atrioventricular node
weakness and cardiac
(Pion & Browm, 1995). The cardiovascular effects of
arrhythmias
 Risk of hypoglycaemia during
anaesthetic agents may be greater in dogs receiv-
Insulin
 and after anaesthesia 
ing these drugs. Anaesthesia with halothane or
 Anaesthesia increases risk for
isoflurane may be associated with hypotension
Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory toxic effects; May be
and episodes of sinus arrest (Priebe & Skarvan,
drugs
 prevented by
1987; Atlee et al., 1990). Treatment with atropine
 adequate fluid therapy
may be necessary to increase sinus rate and atrio-
Organophosphate
Increases toxicity of 
ventricular conduction. Benzodiazepines may
anthelmintic
 acepromazine; may decrease
compete for serum binding sites thus increasing
 anaesthetic requirement;
 free serum levels of verapamil. Lignocaine admin-
 prolongs duration of action of
istration to dogs receiving verapamil results in a
suxameth onium
Phenobarbital
Chronic use for seizure
change in distribution of verapamil unrelated
control associated with
to protein binding but fortunately has minimal
decreased hepatic function.
impact on cardiac function (Chelly et al., 1987).
 Hepatic enzyme induction may
In contrast, the combined administration of
increase production of
verapamil and bupivacaine leads to decreased
metabolites from halothane to
toxic level
ventricular blocks in conscious dogs. Diltiazem
has been found to potentiate the neuromuscular
based on knowledge of the history and pre-
blockade by vecuronium in humans (Takasaki
vious dosing regime. Further steroid may be need-
et al.,1995).
6 9O0 3H1
TABLE 15.3 A protocol for anaesthetic
BREED CHARACTERISTICS
management of a regulated diabetic dog
The breed, age, and conformation have significant
Sequence of events Management
impact on choice of drugs and anticipated compli-
cations. Breed predispositions for different dis-
Night before surgery Feed as usual
eases and traits are extensive and appear to be
 Morning of the day
Give one-half of the usual
constantly changing (Buchanan, 1993). Variable
of surgery
dose of insulin; do not feed
responses to anaesthetic drugs within breeds have
Before anaesthesia
Measure blood glucose;
also been reported. Some families of the Boxer
administer dextrose if value
is low
breed, for example, are very sensitive to the effects
During anaesthesia
 Administer 5% dextrose in
of acepromazine. Several other breeds have been
water, 3 to 5 ml/kg/h, in
suggested as having increased sensitivity to anaes-
addition to balanced
thetic agents, for example, the Belgian Terveurans
electrolyte solution;measure
and the Siberian Husky, and there is no doubt that
blood glucose at the end of
 often an adult St Bermard requires less drug for
anaesthesia, or every I-2
amaesthesia than an adult Great Dane. It is very
hours, and adjust dextrose
infusion rate according to
likely, and this hypothesis is supported by experi-
result
ence and anecdotal reports, that there are strains of
After anaesthesia
Measure blood glucose 2
dogs within many breeds that have a very low tol-
hours after anaesthesia;
erance for anaesthetic agents. Consequently, safety
 adjust treatment according
is increased when balanced anaesthetic techniques
to result; feed and return to
 insulin therapy as soon as
are employed and drugs are administered sequen-
tially and 'to effect'.
appropriate
Brachycephalic breeds
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-
itors, such as captopril and enalapril, are currently
 Conformation will have an impact on anaesthetic
used in the treatment of dogs showing clinical
management. Brachycephalic breeds such as
signs of congestive heart failure. These drugs
the English bulldog, Pug, Boston Terrier, and
cause vasodilation by blocking the formation of
 Pekingese are at risk of airway obstruction because
 angiotensin II and subsequent administration of
 of elongated soft palates, abnormal narrowing of
anaesthetics that cause vasodilation is often
the larynx, and everted laryngeal ventricles.
 accompanied by profound hypotension. Omitting
Prolonged inspiratory stridor contributes to for-
the dose of drug on the morning of anaesthesia
mation of oedema of the soft palate and laryngeal
results in fewer treated dogs developing hypoten-
mucosa and tenacious stringy saliva in the
sion during anaesthesia.
oropharynx. These dogs are also more likely to
 Diabetic dogs receiving insulin are at risk of
develop cyanosis during induction of anaesthesia
developing hypoglycaemia, hypotension and cere-
and to vomit in the recovery period. Obstruction
bral damage during anaesthesia. An accepted
can occur even during sedation and these dogs
management for the diabetic dog that must be
should be kept under observation after adminis-
anaesthetized is given in Table 15.3. The blood
tration of premedicant drugs. Tracheal intubation
glucose level should be maintained between
is more difficult in these breeds and may involve
5.5-11.0mmol/1 (100-200mg/dl) through frequent
smaller endotracheal tubes than expected based
measurement of blood glucose concentrations and
on the body size. The anatomy of the English
appropriate i.v. administration of 5% dextrose in
Bulldog larynx may be distorted such that only an
water. Even dogs with well controlled diabetes can
 extremely small lumen tube can be inserted.
experience wide swings in blood glucose for sever-
‘Preoxygenation' is advisable to prevent hypox-
al hours after anaesthesia, and monitoring should
aemia during induction of anaesthesia and is ac-
be continued until the following day.
complished by administration of O2 by facemask
394 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
for several minutes before and during induction.
than three months of age are more likely to require
Acepromazine should be used cautiously, if at all,
 small doses of anaesthetic agents and to develop
and propofol or ketamine are less likely to be asso-
ciated with prolonged difficulty in breathing than
than young adults: O2 consumption is higher
thiopental during recovery from anaesthesia.
 in puppies than in mature animals and respir-
 Opioids are useful agents to provide sedation and
 atory rates are high. Heart rates of around 200
analgesia and to decrease the dose of subsequent
beats /min occur in new-born puppies. Decreased
anaesthetics. One problem with this group is that
heart rate and decreased preload (blood volume)
Bulldogs, Boston Terriers, and Pugs frequently
result in large decreases in cardiac output (Baum &
pant during inhalation anaesthesia.
Palmisano, 1997). A small blood loss will cause a
-ue ue ui ueun indino seipien ui aseaiap raeana
imal 3 months of age. The MAP is considerably
Sighthounds
lower in the first month of life than in mature dogs
The lean athletic breeds collectively known as
 and the problem for the anaesthetist is how low is
'sighthounds’ include Greyhounds, Afghans,
too low for blood pressure during anaesthesia?
Salukis, Borzois, Whippets, Wolfhounds and
MAP of 50-60 mmHg may be satisfactory during
Deerhounds. Their significance to the anaesthetist
 anaesthesia in the first two weeks of life provided
is the prolonged recovery from anaesthesia induc-
that peripheral perfusion appears to be adequate
ed by thiopental because of lack of body fat (and 
 as indicated by pink membranes and rapid capil-
 muscle in some breeds), which precludes redistrib-
 lary refill time. Treatment of low pressure can be a
ution and lowering of blood thiopental concentra-
puodsan jou Aeu jeaq amie aui se wanqoid
tions. For these dogs, propofol yields vastly
satisfactorily to administration of anticholinergics
improved quality of recovery from anaesthesia.
 and inotropic agents. The young animal is capable
Ketamine is a less satisfactory agent for anaesthe-
of a significant increase in cardiac output in
sia in these breeds than propofol, unless adequate
 response to a volume load, but this increase is
sedation is provided for recovery, because they
depressed in the first few weeks of life.
may exhibit signs suggestive of dysphoria.
Puppies have a decreased requirement for
anaesthetic agents and also immature mechanisms
for detoxification. Renal function does not, for
AGE CHARACTERISTICS
example, reach adult function until puppies are
Paediatric anaesthesia
3months of age (Poffenbarger et al., 1990). Hypo-
glycaemia may develop during and after anaesthe-
Extremes of age have a significant impact on
sia. Food should not be withheld for more than a
anaesthetic management (Fig. 15.1). Puppies less
few hours before anaesthesia and the puppy
should be fed a few hours after anaesthesia. As
Effect of age on anaesthesia
water, 3 to 5ml/kg/h, should be infused intra-
Paediatric
Geriatric
venously during anaesthesia in addition to bal-
 anced electrolyte solution. Hypothermia develops
Anaesthetic
requirement
easily in these small patients and will have a sig-
←
4
Ventilation
nificant effect in decreasing ABP and metabolic
rate, thus prolonging recovery from anaesthesia.
Blood pressure
4
Recovery
Geriatric (senior) dogs
Hypothermia
K
二
Older dogs have a decreased requirement for
Hypoglycaemia
anaesthetic agents due to a reduction in the num-
FIG. 15.1 Anaesthetic considerations for paediatric and
ber of neurons and neurotransmitter and, because
geriatric animals.
hepatic and renal function are decreased, the dura-
THE DOG395
DogA = healthy
Dog B = overweight
diomyopathy (Browmlie, 1991). All dogs that have
been injured in a road traffic accident should be
FAT
FAT
MUSCLE
 auscultated for decreased lung sounds indicating
MUSCLE
lung collapse, pneumothorax, or diaphragmatic
BLOOD
BLOOD
hernia. Abnormal ventricular rhythm in these
dogs is an indication of traumatic myocarditis,
ent until 24 or 36hours after the trauma. A thoracic
Administration of the same mg/kg dose
radiograph provides valuable information on the
in overweight dog = overdosage
sh pue 'usenqdeip pue shumi aul jo Aisanu
FIG.15.2 Schematic representation of the risk for
evaluation is especially important as up to 50% of
Overdosage of overweight dogs with intravenous
dogs involved in automobile trauma will have
anaesthetic agents.
pulmonary contusions.
tion of action of drugs may be increased resulting
Preanaesthetic blood tests
soop rouas u auoi si uouaaoday jo aa
Considerable controversy arises concerning blood
because chemoreceptor response to high PCO2
testing of healthy dogs scheduled for elective sur-
and low PO2 is decreased. Hypotension is more
gery. Retrospective studies of the outcomes of
likely to develop due to decreased autonomic
anaesthesia of human patients have revealed that
function with increasing age. Thermoregulation is
in only a very small number of patients are there
increasingly impaired and hypothermia develops
abnormalities shown by laboratory tests which
as a consequence. Pharyngeal and laryngeal reflex-
have an impact on anaesthetic protocol (Pasternak,
es are diminished and aspiration of reflux is more
1996). In a study of 2000 patients, only 0.22% of
likely to occur than in a younger animal.
tests demonstrated abnormalities that might influ-
ence perioperative management (Kaplan et al.,
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
1985) and in another study of 1010 patients involv-
ing over 5000 tests, important abnormalities were
Overweight(obese) dogs
found relating to only 4 patients (Turnbull & Buck,
Anaesthetic drug dosages for an obese dog should
1987). Nonetheless, identification of only a few
 dogs requiring special consideration for anaesthe-
be calculated on its ideal weight since the animal's
circulating blood volume is that of a smaller an-
sia may be justification enough for an evaluation
imal and fat contributes little to initial redistribu-
including blood tests. There is a rationale for sub-
tion (Fig. 15.2). Hypoventilation may be severe
mitting older dogs to blood testing before anaes-
and controlled ventilation will probably be neces-
thesia even when they are thought to be healthy.
-ap siaqu aoeda 'ae uisanu 
sary. An obese animal must not be allowed to
breathe only air when anaesthetized as this will
crease, pancreatic enzyme secretion diminishes,
result in hypoxaemia.
nephrons decrease, and glomerular filtration rate
decreases (Hoskins, 1995). The age at which a dog
should be considered geriatric (senior) varies with
Auscultation of the thorax
the breed, but may be said to be 9 years old for
Auscultation of the heart, cardiac rhythm and lung
small and medium dogs, and 6 years for giant
sounds before anaesthesia is essential to identify
breeds. Many veterinary anaesthetists require that
 abnormalities in animals that exhibit no signs of
 all dogs over 4 or 5 years of age have blood drawn
disease to the owner, for example patent ductus
 for a complete blood count (CBC), plasma protein,
arteriosus in the young animal scheduled for cas-
blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, liver enzyme
tration or ovariohysterectomy. Auscultation of
 tests such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine
murmurs or abnormal rhythms should be fol-a
 aminotransferease (ALT) and aspartate amino-
lowed up as potential early indicators of car-
transferase (AST), the in vitro levamisole inhibition
396 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
test as a screening test for increased serum ALP
volume should be ensured by infusion of crystal-
activity, and glucose. Measurement of electrolytes
loid, plasma or plasma substitute, or blood. The im-
may also be advisable.
pact of the procedure on anaesthesia should be
 In the UK many veterinary anaesthetists con-
considered, for example, surgical procedures in the
sider that dogs should be blood tested only when,
cranial abdomen or performed with the animal in a
based on the history or physical examination there
prone, head-dowm position will impair ventilation.
is an expectation of finding an abnormality, or
 Orthopaedic procedures require profound analge-
when the dog is in a high risk population. This
 sia and may be responsible for considerable blood
may include expanding the list of tests to cover a
loss. Excision of tumours over the thorax may
particular concern, for example, tests for coagu- 1
 result in penetration of the pleural cavity. Animals
lopathy in a Doberman pinscher that may suffer 
 with mast cell tumours should be pretreated with
from von Willebrand's disease. Further, patients 
 an antihistamine such as diphenhydramine, 2
scheduled for major surgical procedures that are
 mg/kg. Anaesthesia for thoracotomy or caesarian
moderately to severely invasive and carry the risk
section is discussed in detail elsewhere.
 of major blood loss should have blood tests per-
formed to provide baseline values in anticipation
Food and water restrictions
sa s we sa sis j
of the results of laboratory tests should be noted
Aiaaosai io uoonpu Sunp huoa uao soo
for the possible modification of the anaesthetic
from anaesthesia when their stomachs are not
protocol, e.g. the impact of low plasma protein in
 empty. Subsequent inhalation of vomit leads to
altering the amount of free and active anaesthetic 
 aspiration pneumonia which is frequently fatal. It
drug, or in the ability of the dog to maintain an 
 is usual practice to withhold food from mature
 adequate blood pressure. Abnormalities of hepatic
 dogs for about 12hours, and water for at least
or renal function may dictate an adjustment in the
 2hours, to ensure that a dog will have an empty
selection of anaesthetic agents based on the dog's  
 stomach. Fasting must last at least 16 to 18hours
decreased ability to eliminate the drugs. Dogs with 
 for dogs eating dry food to ensure a completely
30% or less of the normal level of von Willebrand
empty stomach (Arnbjerg, 1992). A dog that has
factor tend to bleed and should be treated with
been involved in a fight or an accident and parturi-
 8-D-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP) or an infusion
ent bitches may have food in the stomach and the
of fresh plasma or cryoprecipitate before anaesthe-
 anaesthetic technique should be chosen to include
sia and surgery.
a rapid sequence of induction to tracheal intuba-
 It must always be remembered that almost all
tion. Protective phayngeal and laryngeal reflexes
laboratory tests are costly to perform and the
 may not be present for several hours after anaes-
owner is entitled to have these costs justified
thesia and may not be present when a dog first
before they can be expected to agree to procedures
regains its feet.
Jo aono an an jou  ro  um
their dog's treatment.
PREMEDICATION
Evaluation of the significance of disease
Premedication in the dog usually involves admin-
Identification of neurological or cardiac disease, or
istration of anticholinergic, sedative, and opioid
hepatic or renal malfunction, may have a direct
drugs, the combination chosen depending on the
bearing on choice of anaesthetic agents or anaes-
circumstances and anaesthetic technique which is
thetic management as discussed later in this chap-
to follow.
ter. Some diseases cause derangements of fluid,
electrolyte, and metabolic balance and these should
ANTICHOLINERGICS
be corrected if possible before induction of anaes-
thesia. Correction of dehydration may not be feasi-
Anticholinergics are administered to limit brady-
ble, but restoration of an adequate circulatory blood
      
THE DOG 397
obstruct the airway or initiate laryngospasm.
half that dose i. v. Onset of action occurs in about
Anticholinergics decrease intestinal motility and
20 minutes after i.m.injection and lasts about
the benefit observed is less vomiting in the re-
1.5hours. Onset of action is within 2 minutes after
covery period. Glycopyrrolate decreases gastric
i.v. injection and the effects on the heart last about
acidity and may protect against oesophageal irrita-
30 minutes. Higher doses may be used where needed
tion in the case of reflux. Glycopyrrolate results in
and in the antagonism of neuromuscular block and
a smaller increase in heart rate after intramuscular
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Glycopyrrolate
administration than atropine and may be prefer-
is given at 0.01 mg/kg i.m. and 0.005 mg/kg i.v.
 s   s  
Onset of action after i.m. administration is 40 min-
adverse effects, e.g. geriatric dogs and dogs with
utes and duration is 2 to 4hours.
myocardial contusions. Atropine may be contra-
Other anticholinergics are sometimes used as
indicated in some animals with cardiac disease as
part of neuroleptanalgesic mixtures. Hyoscine is
the tachycardia induced may decrease cardiac out-
combined with papaveretum in Omnopon/ Scop-
put, increase the prevalence of ventricular arhyth-
olamine and when this combination is used
mias, and increase myocardial ischaemia by
atropine is not required.
ncreasing O2 demand. A further contraindication
to atropine administration is in dogs with a rectal
SEDATIVE AND ANALGESIC
temperature exceeding 39.7°C (103.5 °F).
PREMEDICATION
Atropine sulphate may be given i.m., s.c. or i.v.
Dose rates commonly used for premedication are
Any of the analgesic and sedative drugs already
0.04 mg/kg of a 0.5 mg/ml solution s.c. or i.m., or
discussed may be used for premedication but in
TABLE 15.4 Drug combinations for anaesthesia with injectable agents*
Premedication
Dose rate (mg/kg i.m.)
Induction
Dose rate (mg/kg i.v.)
Acepromazine
0.03 (large dog)
Thiopental
12
0.10 (small dog)
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.10
Thiopental
10
Pethidine
3to 4
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.10
Thiopental
10
Butorphanol
0.3 to 0.4
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.05
Thiopental
4to 6
Morphine
0.5
Medetomidine
0.02
Thiopental
I to 3
None
Propofol
6 to 8
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.05
Propofol
4 to 5
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.05
Propofol
3 to 4
Butorphanol
0.2 to 0.3
Acepromazine
0.03 to 0.05
Propofol
I to 2
Morphine
0.5
Medetomidine
0.04
Propofol
1.0 to 1.5
None or acepromazine
Diazepam (5 mg/ml)
0.25
or butorphanol or
Ketamine (100 mg/ml)
 5.0 (=I ml/ 10 kg using a
buprenorphine
50:50 mixture)
Butorphanol
0.3
Etomidate
0.75 to 1.50
None
Diazepam
0.2
Oxymorphone
0.1 to 0.2
ab  shop enus am ssal eapisus anba e see yisshop ey ay o u aes u sadexa au*
more or less of the induction agent following premedication.
398 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
dogs those most commonly employed for this pur-
     a  
pose in are the opioids, the phenothiazines, and
bined with acepromazine, 0.02-0.03 mg/kg they
the 02 adrenoceptor agonists (Table 15.4). Opioids
laleaig s uonepas uonepas iaraeay aonpoid ues
will provide analgesia during and after the proced-
from morphine, 0.3-0.5mg/kg, oxymorphone,
ure and when administered with sedatives, will
0.07-0.1 mg/kg, or hydromorphone 0.2mg/kg.
increase the sedation achieved. The choice of agent
but these agents induce profound sedation when
will depend partly on the dog and the reason for
 combined with acepromazine and may decrease
use and partly on availability and cost. When vom-
the induction dose of thiopental to 3-4 mg/kg.
iting after premedication is not advisable, such as
Acepromazine alone in i.v. or i.m. doses of
 in dogs with neck pain, gastric or intestinal foreign
0.02-0.03 mg/kg calms most animals effectively
bodies, decreased ability to protect the airway
for venepuncture and reduces the induction dose
 against aspiration, or with a ruptured cornea, pre-
of thiopental or propofol. Active dogs may not be
medication with morphine, oxymorphone, and
sufficiently sedated and here the addition of an
pethidine should be avoided. Similarly, these
 opioid is advisable. Larger doses of acepromazine
agents induce pupillary constriction in dogs and
do not increase sedation but can result in hypo-
should not be included in protocols for intraocular
 tension during anaesthesia. Acepromazine con-
surgery.
tributes to maintenance of a steady plane of
When analgesia is to be supplemented by use of
 anaesthesia and to a smooth recovery from anaes-
a fentanyl patch or epidural morphine, then use of
thesia, while also reducing myocardial irritability.
 Xylazine and medetomidine produce profound
ication is not advisable as it will decrease the effect-
 sedation and greatly reduce the dose of anaesthe-
iveness of fentanyl or morphine. Opiates that are
tics used subsequently. Moderate doses of medeto-
μ receptor agonists can effectively be used concur-
midine, 10-20μg/kg, administered with an opioid
produce deep sedation that needs only a little of
medication followed by supplementation with i.v.
the induction drug for intubation to be possible.
fentanyl during surgery. In the event that butor-
Care must be taken during induction of anaesthe-
phanol has been used for premedication and later,
sia since these drugs slow circulation time, and
during anaesthesia, greater analgesia is required, a
sufficient time must be allowed to elapse for full
higher dose rate of a μ agonist opioid may be ne-
effect to be shown before administering more of
cessary if the time elapsed since the initial admin-
the drug. Medetomidine, 30-40μg/kg, given i.m.
istration of butorphanol is less than 1.5 hours. One
with butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg, produces such deep
 potential use for mixing  agonists and partial ago-
sedation that endotracheal intubation may be
nists is when an agonist such as morphine or oxy-
accomplished without further drug administra-
tion. The cardiovascular effects of this group of
-loinq aul Xlaaeradoisod pasn st loueudroing
 drugs are significant and their use in dogs suffer-
phanol will reverse the effects of the previous drug
ing from cardiovascular disease or those with
but provide some analgesia with minimal sedation
hypovolaemia is inadvisable.
through k receptors (Dyson et al., 1990).
Neuroleptanalgesia created by concurrent
administration of a sedative and an opioid is a
 INTRAVENOUS ANAESTHESIA
popular choice for premedication. Sedation is
-p e pue uqun an q paardn un
 In dogs, as in other animals, intravenous agents
atically decrease the dose rate of drugs used for
may be used either to induce anaesthesia which is
induction and to enable endotracheal intubation to
then maintained by inhalation methods, or as sole
be carried out. The degree of sedation depends on
 anaesthetic agents. The use of intravenous drugs
the drugs used and dose rates, and there is some
 as sole anaesthetics does not mean thiat anaesthetic
individual variation. Intramuscular administra- 
 machines are unnecessary. The i.v. agents com-
tion of butorphanol, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg, buprenor- 1
phine, 0.01 mg/kg, or pethidine, 3-4 mg/kg, alone
 tracheal intubation, administration of oxygen and
THE DOG399
even controlled ventilation may be necessary if
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia are to be avoided.
Some i. v. agents may also be given by s.c. or i.m.
injection but these routes of administration are not
recommended for routine induction of anaesthesia
because of variable absorption and difficulty in
gauging the dose.
INTRAVENOUS TECHNIQUE
Intravenous injections in dogs are commonly
made into the cephalic vein, but other convenient
sites include the lateral saphenous vein, the
femoral vein, the jugular vein and, in anaes-
thetized animals, the sublingual veins. Whichever
site is used, conscious dogs should be handled qui-
etly and forcible restraint reserved for those occa-
sions when it is essential. Muzzles may be
FIG. I5.3 Restraint for injection into the cephalic vein.
necessary in dogs showing an inclination to bite.
The muzzles should be of the type with a quick
release catch as delay in removal of a muzzle tan-
ried out with the usual aseptic precautions, so hair
gled in facial hair in a dog that has vomited during
over the vein is clipped and the skin is disinfected.
induction of anaesthesia may lead to inhalation of
 It is an advantage to use syringes of more than
the vomited material.
2ml capacity that have an eccentrically placed noz-
Haematoma formation after venepuncture
zle, for this allows the syringe to rest securely on the
should be prevented by application of pressure
forearm with the needle more or less flush to the
to the site for an adequate period - usually about
vein. In this way, the angle of entrance, i.e., the angle
a minute. A haematoma is not only painful for
between the needle and the vein, is small and con-
the patient; it may prevent subsequent use of
 sequently there is less risk of the needle being
the particular vein for venepuncture for several
pushed right through the vein. Suitable needle
days. Where a vein has been entered during
sizes depend on the size of the dog and the quanti-
an unsuccessful attempt at venepuncture, the
ty and viscosity of the fluid to be injected. For most
pressure which was keeping the vein distended
 purposes a needle2.5 cm long and 22 or 23 gauge is
 should be released and firm pressure applied to
satisfactory; a 25 gauge needle can be used for
the site to stop bleeding before another attempt is
small dogs. The point of the needle should not be
made.
 cut too acutely, the'short bevel' being preferred.
If the vein on the right forelimb is to be punc-
Two methods of stabilizing the vein prior to
tured an assistant stands on the left side of the an-
needle puncture are employed. In one, the skin
imal, passes his or her left arm around the arimal's
 over the vein is tautened without flattening the
neck and raises its head (Fig. 15.3). The assistant's
vein by the anaesthetist's free hand grasping the
night hand grips the animals right forelimb so that
limb distal to the site of venepuncture and gently
the middle, third and fourth fingers are immedi-
pulling the skin down. In this position it is easy for
ately behind the olecranon and the thumb is
the anaesthetist to adjust the handhold to grip the
around the front side of the limb. The limb is
syringe between thumb and forefinger once the
extended by pushing on the olecranon and the vein
vein has been entered. Usually the skin is pen-
is raised by applying pressure with the thumb. The
etrated in one move and then the vein entered in a
hand should be rotated so as to pull the cephalic
second move. Once blood is observed in the needle
vein slightly lateral, which straightens it and
hub, the needle should always be threaded deeper
makes it more visible. Venepuncture must be car-
into the vein before making any injections.
400 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. 15.4 Stabilization of the cephalic vein against the
FIG. 15.5 In short-legged dogs such as Dachshunds with
thumb.
very mobile skins the easiest point for venepuncture is at
the junction of the veins from the medial and lateral
aspects of the carpus where they unite to form the
In the second method, the thumb of the anaes-
cephalic vein.
thetist's free hand is placed just alongside the vein,
and the skin is not tensed (Fig. 15.4). The vein is
 injection must be made if blood does not appear in
stabilized between the needle and the thumb as
the syringe or needle hub. Failure to draw blood
the needle is advanced through the skin into the
usually means that either the vein has not been
vein. With this method it may be harder to thread
entered, the needle tip has passed through the
the needle up the vein and there is a greater tend-
opposite wall of the vein, or that the needle has
ency to make contact between the needle point and
become occluded. Failure to aspirate blood into
the branch of the radial nerve running alongside
the syringe is also encountered if the assistant has
the vein.
released occlusion pressure on the vein, if the vein
The first attempt at needle puncture should
 is already thrombosed, or when peripheral perfu-
be done distally in the limb so that, if a hae-
sion is poor as it may be after administration of an
matoma forms, further attempts can be made more
O2 adrenoceptor sedative.
proximally. In Dachshunds and dogs with similar
The lateral saphenous vein may be used for i.v.
short, bent forelimbs venepuncture is best
-a rosae a am aea u pae
the lateral aspect of the hindlimb just proximal to
ic and cephalic veins join just cranial to the carpus
the tarsus. The dog is usually restrained on its side
(Fig. 15.5).
but two assistants may be required for an alert
All air should be expressed from the syringe
dog. One restrains the head and forelimbs while
jsnu anaun pue paduae si amiundauaa arnaq
the other holds the underneath leg immobilized
be sufficient space left in the syringe to allow slight
with one hand and holds the upper limb in full
withdrawal of the plunger in order to test whether
extension by pressure on the stifle while raising
the needle is within the lumen of the vessel. Blood
the vein as shown in Fig. 15.6. Two hands may be
should enter the syringe when this is done, and no 
needed to immobilize the limb and raise the vein
THE DOG 401
FIG. 15.7 Jugular venepuncture in the conscious sitting
Bop
FIG. 15.6 Lateral saphenous vein.
the sternal inlet. A small foam pad, towel, or sand-
in very large or active dogs. The lateral saphenous
bag placed under the neck of the dog makes the
vein is usually more prominent than the cephalic
 position of the vein more obvious.
vein but it is more mobile and therefore more diffi-
 Short catheters (18 gauge and 20 gauge, 5cm
cult to puncture. When the needle has been intro-
long. or 20 gauge or 22 gauge, 2.5 cm long) are
duced well into the vein the needle is fixed to the
commonly inserted into the cephalic or lateral
leg by pressing on the needle hub with thumb, or
saphenous veins prior to induction of anaesthesia
thumb and forefinger, while the fingers encircle
for administration of anaesthetic drugs, electrolyte
the limb.
solutions and supportive drugs. All of the veins
The femoral vein in the middle part of the med-
described, cephalic, saphenous, femoral, and
ial aspect of the thigh may also be used. It is
jugular, can be used for placement of longer
 rendered obvious by pressure applied to the
catheters (18 gauge and 22 gauge, 20-30 cm long)
 inguinal region and is usually more prominent
 when the animal is likely to need several days
in the cranial part of the thigh. Care should be
of treatment with i.v. solutions and drugs after
taken to ensure that injections are not made into
anaesthesia.
the femoral artery which lies directly beneath the
 Securing a catheter in the jugular vein is more
vein.
difficult than in a limb. The external end of the
Venepuncture of the jugular vein in the dog can
catheter is positioned so that it is pointing toward
be done with the dog standing or sitting with the
the back of the neck; several folded gauze sponges
head raised (Fig. 15.7). Particularly in smaller or ill
are placed under the free end of the catheter which
patients, it is easier when the animal is restrained
is then stabilized by wrapping 2 or 3-inch gauze
on its side and the vein is raised by occlusion near
around the neck and this then secured by white
402 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
  aq sa r dma  a
Vascular port
catheter-through-the-needle product is used, the
 The vascular port is a subcutaneously implanted
needle usually cannot the removed after the
 system for i.v. delivery of drugs. It is used when
catheter has been inserted in the vein. The needle
dogs require multiple anaesthesias over a short
guard provided should be clipped over the needle
time, for example for radiotherapy, and the
 and the needle and catheter hubs glued together
peripheral veins are badly thrombosed. The vascu-
with a drop of 'superglue'.
lar port consists of two basic parts: an indwelling
 The sublingual veins may be used for i.v. injec-
catheter that is threaded into the jugular vein after
tions in anaesthetized dogs. The tongue is pulled
surgical dissection in the anaesthetized dog and a
over the anaesthetist's finger so that its ventral sur-
rigid puncturable bulb that looks like a volcano
face is exposed and injection is made into one of
and is located subcutaneously in the neck. The
the easily visible veins. It is important to use a
bulb has a silicone rubber window that is easily
small (25 gauge) needle because the vein will bleed
palpated through the skin and allows percutan-
very freely after the needle is withdrawn. Pressure
adoidde ue usn suoaun snouaaenu snoa
should be applied to the site for several minutes to
avoid large sublingual haematoma. However, in
needle.
case of emergency and absence of any other
peripheral venous access, an 18 gauge catheter can
INTRAVENOUS AGENTS
be inserted in the lingual vein of medium sized
dogs for administration of a large volume of elec-
Intravenous agents may be administered alone but
trolyte solution or blood. These veins are also use-
'uepas oauisaeueaid iane uaai Aiensn ae
ful for collecting blood to measure the packed cell
Induction of anaesthesia will then be calmer, fewer
volume and total protein during anaesthesia and
 adverse side effects of the induction drugs will be
surgery.
observed, their margin of safety will be increased,
and recovery may be faster. Some commonly used
 drug combinations, with dose rates, are given in
Intraosseous injection
Table 15.4.
Placement of a catheter in a vein is occasionally
difficult in dehydrated animals, especially toy
Thiopental
breeds and puppies. The intraosseous route is an
 acceptable alternative for administration of fluids,
Solutions of thiopental have a high pH and the
blood, and drugs. Absorption of drugs is rapid and
 drug can only be given i.v. It should always be
within one minute for some drugs, such as
used in dogs as a 2.5% or weaker solution for more
atropine. Intraosseous injection implies injection 
concentrated solutions are unnecessary and dan
into the intramedullary canal of the femur, tibia, or 
 gerous. A 5% solution increases the total quantity
humerus using either a Cooke intraosseous nee-
 of the drug required, causes thrombosis of the vein
dle, a Jamshidi needle or a spinal needle. A
 and, if any is injected perivascularly, produces a
20 gauge, 2.5 cm spinal needle is satisfactory for 
serious slough of the overlying tissues and skin.
the smallest dogs and is inserted aseptically
 Injection of any quantity of even a 2.5% solution
through the trochanteric fossa of the femur and
into the tissues outside the vein is an indication for
parallel to the long axis of the bone into the
the immediate injection into the area of 2 mg/kg of
medullary cavity. The stilette is removed, the nee-
 lignocaine (lidocaine) without adrenaline to pre-
dle flushed with heparinized saline, a T-port is
 cipitate the thiopental into a harmless salt, and up
attached and flushed again. Bandaging must be 
 to 20 ml of saline for dilution of the irritant.
secure to prevent the needle from being dislodged
The dose of thiopental depends on the condi-
as the animal moves about. Potential complica-
tion of the dog its state of hydration and, particu-
tions include infection and exceptional care should
 larly, on previous medication. For these reasons
be taken in maintaining sterility of injections. The
the dose rate is often stated to be 'sufficient and no
needle should be removed after 72 hours.
more' but as a rough guide the anaesthetist should
THE DOG403
expect to have to use up to 12mg/kg in a dog
related to the other agents used. When the other
for induction of anaesthesia. In the healthy but
agents are rapidly eliminated or their action can be
lightly premedicated dog, one half of this, i.e.
pharmacologically antagonized, recovery from
about 6 mg/kg is given rapidly as a bolus of a 2.5%
anaesthesia is more rapid than when a higher dose
solution should produce a rapid induction of
of thiopental alone has been administered.
anaesthesia and a smooth transition to inhalation
 In dogs, thiopental is very slowly metabolized
 anaesthesia. If anaesthesia is insufficient to permit
and attempts to prolong anaesthesia with multiple
endotracheal intubation, additional small incre-
or higher doses which saturate the body fat result
ments of the remainder should be given at 20-30
in very prolonged anaesthesia followed by 'hang-
second intervals. The whole dose may be needed
over' for 24 or more hours. In thin dogs such as
in a proportion of dogs and when the drug is given
Borzois, Afghans, and Greyhounds (Greyhounds
more slowly. Large dogs require relatively less
may also be deficient in the liver enzymes neces-
than small, while geriatric dogs have a reduced
sary for detoxification of thiopental), this level is
anaesthetic requirement. A lower dose of 5-6 mg/
reached very rapidly, and little more than the min-
kg of thiopental may be sufficient in dogs provid-
ed with a moderate degree of preanaesthetic seda-
fact, recovery will be more satisfactory in these
tion from a combination of sedative and opioid,
animals if thiopental is omitted and induction
such as acepromazine and butorphanol. The dose
achieved by administration of a more rapidly
 of thiopental required for induction will be greatly
metabolized agent such as propofol.
decreased to 1-3 mg/kg in dogs that are heavily
Thiopental differs from some other intravenous
sedated, for example with acepromazine and
agents in that high doses cause severe respiratory
morphine, xylazine and butorphanol, or medeto-
depression so that prolonged anaesthesia cannot
midine.
 be produced by an initial high dose, but must be 
 Other drugs may be administered i.v. immedi-
 maintained by incremental doses. Where thiopen-
ately before thiopental to decrease the dose needed
tal is used as the sole anaesthetic, recovery may be
 and to enhance the quality of induction. Diazepam
violent and noisy. Sedative premedication can pre-
or midazolam, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, may decrease the
vent this, so should always be employed, but if it is
dose of thiopental required by 15% or more,
omitted, a sedative or analgesic should be given at
depending on the physical status of the dog.
the end of anaesthesia.
 Potent opioids such as alfentanil may greatly
The maximum total dose of thiopental for a
reduce the thiopental dose required to induce
healthy dog is about 25 mg/kg - and this would
anaesthesia. Alfentanil, 5μg/kg, given over 30 sec-
represent a gross overdose in a sick animal.
 onds before thiopental may reduce the thiopental
Recovery is prolonged after a dose of this magni-
dose to about 3 mg/kg. A dilute solution of alfen-
tude. Because of its lack of analgesic properties,
tanil should be used to facilitate slow injection
 attempts to use thiopental for painful procedures,
which will minimize the occurrence of apnoea
even short ones, tend to result in overdosage. It is
far preferable to provide a base of sedation and
late should be given prior to or concurrently with
analgesia with other drugs so that only small
alfentanil administration to prevent bradycardia.
doses of thiopental must be injected to produce
The consequences of reduced thiopental dose
the minimum of respiratory depression while
rate by prior administration of premedicant or
 only just abolishing or modifying the response to
 other anaesthetic agents are two-fold. First, over-
stimulation.
dosage and cardiac arrest are a possibility and
In the absence of surgical stimulation the first
always the anaesthetist should assess the dog's
indication that thiopental anaesthesia is passing
need for thiopental based on the degree of central
off is that stiffening of the jaws and curling of the
nervous depression and cardiovascular stability.
tongue occur when the mouth is opened. There
Secondly, low dose administration of thiopental
may be licking of the nose and from this point
means that the drug will be rapidly redistributed
 recovery is rapid. The time taken to assuming ster-
so that the duration and quality of recovery are
 nal position will then depend on the lingering
404 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
effects of premedication or provision for postoper-
time of its introduction in the early 1930s it caused
ative analgesia. After light preanaesthetic sedation,
 a revolution in small animal practice. By the end of
 0l uaaia uaaq seu ae sauisae ao ou nam
1938 the slow intravenous injection of pentobarb-
prolong anaesthesia, the dog is obviously quite
 ital had been used to produce anaesthesia in more
conscious and aware of its environment about half
than 2000 operation cases at the Beaumont Hos-
 an hour after induction . Limb coordination, espe-
pital of the Royal Veterinary College, London, by
dially the hind, is delayed, and the dog may stagger
J. G. Wright and his colleagues. Pentobarbital soon 
in a drunken manmer for about an hour.
thesia of about an hour's duration. Although
pentobarbital is not often used now, it is occa-
Methohexital
sionally used in the intensive care unit to produce
 Although recovery from a single bolus dose of
deep sedation in dogs with neurological disease
methohexital is due mainly to redistribution to the
 and it is still widely employed in experimental
muscles and body fat, the drug is rapidly elimin-
laboratories.
ated from the body by metabolism and excretion
After weighing the dog the approximate dose is
so that dogs recover from even large doses quickly.
estimated on a basis of about 30mg/kg body
In general it is advisable to use sedative premed-
weight. In healthy unpremedicated animals, about
ication to smooth induction and recovery, because
a half to two-thirds of the computed probable dose
without such sedation both periods may be vi-
is injected rapidly intravenously in order to ensure
olent. Doses of4 to 6 mg/kg i. v. in a 1 or 2% solution
that the dog passes quickly through the excitement
are suitable for the induction of anaesthesia in
phase of induction of anaesthesia. Because the
dogs premedicated with acepromazine, and fur-
 onset of action of pentobarbital is much slower
ther small increments given as required may be
than that of thiopental, the remainder of the dose is
used to prolong anaesthesia. The method of injec-
administered in increments over 3-5 minutes,
tion is similar to that for thiopental, although a
 pausing after the injection of each increment and
slightly slower rate of initial injection is less likely
 assessing its effect. When complete relaxation of
to result in apnoea. Because of its rapid elimina-
the head and neck is obtained, relaxation of the
tion from the body, recovery after prolonged
jaws is assessed. Opening the mouth provokes
methohexital anaesthesia usually occurs within
 movement of the tongue and jaws varying from a
half an hour of the last dose being given. Overdose
complete yawn to a slight curling of the tip of the
produces severe respiratory depression, and even
tongue. A little more of the anaesthetic is injected
anaesthetic doses produce more respiratory
and after an appropriate wait the jaws are again
depression than equipotent doses of thiopental.
 opened. The aim is to reach the point at which the
 Depression of cardiac output with low anaesthetic
jaws are completely relaxed and the tongue, when
doses is also greater than after equipotent doses of
drawn out, hangs limply.
thiopental (Clarke & Hall, 1975). Cumulation and,
When this is attained, a light level of uncon-
therefore, delayed recovery occurs in doses in
sciousness can be assumed. The corneal reflex is
excess of 10-12 mg/kg.
present, the pupil reacts to light and the pedal
 Because recovery is so rapid and complete,
reflex is brisk. Respirations are regular and deep.
 methohexital is most useful for outpatient anaes-
This is the degree of anaesthesia to be induced for
thesia and induction of anaesthesia in brachyceph-
superficial operations. If it is decided to induce
alic dogs, thin dogs, young dogs, and for caesarian
 deeper unconsciousness with pentobarbital, the
section. Even in these animals, however, metho-
so-called 'pedal reflex' is then used as the index of
hexital has largely been replaced by propofol.
depth. If the web between the digits, or the nail
bed, is pinched firmly with the finger and thumb
 nails, it will be found that the pedal reflex compris-
Pentobarbital
es a definite upward and backward jerking of the
Pentobarbital was formerly widely used in canine
limb. Often the response continues for several sec-
anaesthesia and there can be no doubt that at the
onds after the stimulus has ceased. Administration
THE DOG 405
is slowly continued until the reflex is just lost and
then the depth of unconsciousness is adequate for
the performance of intra-abdominal procedures.
When used to control seizures in a patient with
neurological disease, pentobarbital must be given
 over several minutes in small increments to avoid
overdosage, as the dose in these patients may be as
low as 4 mg/kg.
口口
Propofol
Propofol, as the free-flowing oil-in-water emulsion
which does not give rise to histamine release, is
ommonly used in dogs (Hall, 1984; Watkins et al.,
FIG. 15.8 Syringe driver (Medex Inc., Duluth, Georgia,
1987). The dose for induction of anaesthesia in
USA) for continuous administration of propofol or other
unpremedicated dogs is 6 mg/kg and premedica-
anaesthetic agents or fluids.
tion with 0.02-0.05mg/kg of acepromazine
period appear to sleep - arousal during this stage
reduces this to about 4 mg/kg. Females are more
can result in immediate awakening with an ability
susceptible than males, the induction dose
to walk without ataxia. Dogs given one dose of
in unpremedicated females being 5.23 mg/kg
propofol recover completely in about 18 minutes
(SD 1.58, n = 68) and in males 5.74 mg/kg (SD 1.53,
from the time of injection and those given inter-
r = 39) (Watkins ef al., 1987). Administration of
mittent injections recover in about 22 minutes from
propofol for induction of anaesthesia is similar to
the time of injection of the final increment.
thiopental in that one-half of the anticipated dose
Preanaesthetic sedation will prolong recovery
is administered initially as a bolus but the initial
according to the drugs used.
 administration should be slower to avoid or mini-
Propofol has been used for induction of anaes-
mize apnoea. Recommendations for the rate of the
thesia in dogs after a variety of medications.
initial bolus vary from rapid to up to 3 minutes.
Medetomidine, 20-40μg/kg, decreases the induc-
However, administration of half the anticipated
tion of dose of propofol to 2-4 mg/kg (2mg/kg
dose over 30 seconds seems to be satisfactory.
after the high dose of medetomidine) and the dose
Administration of O2 by facemask during induc-
rate for maintenance of anaesthesia to 0.15-
tion to prevent cyanosis is advisable, particularly
0.2 mg/kg/min (Vanio, 1991; Hall et al., 1997;
 in geriatric and sick dogs. The cyanosis occurring
Hellebrekers et al., 1998). Alfentanil, 10 μg/kg i.v.
at induction of anaesthesia with propofol in some
mixed with 0.3mg atropine, given one minute
dogs has been attributed to apnoea, a transient
before induction of anaesthesia also decreased the
decrease in arterial blood pressure, or opening of
dose of propofol for intubation to 2mg/kg
pulmonary shunts.
(Chambers, 1989) but apnoea of more than 3 min-
-ui u uaa aq Ae logodoid 'uonp ra
utes duration occurred in 11% of dogs and 6%
cremental doses as needed to maintain anaesthe-
showed twitching or paddling, usually of the fore-
sia. In dogs premedicated with an anticholinergic
limbs. Later trials (Hall, unpublished observations)
[oueqdioinq 1o (8x /Su go'0) auizeoidase pue
demonstrated that a dose of 5 μg /kg of alfentanil,
(0.2-0.3 mg/kg) anaesthesia can be maintained
mixed with atropine, given over 30 seconds result-
by continuous infusion of propofol at a rate of
 ed in less apnoea without significantly increasing
0.3-0.4 mg /kg/min (Fig. 15.8). Anaesthesia may
the subsequent dose of propofol needed. Recovery
be light for surgical procedures and muscle rigidi-
from injection to full awakening (no ataxia) is of
ty may be present in some animals. Retching and
the order of 7 minutes - a very fast recovery.
vomiting have been encountered in the recovery
The effect on respiratory rate is variable but
period in 16% of dogs after continuous infusion of
 dogs which are panting before the induction of an-
the agent. Dogs left unstimulated in the recovery
aesthesia are likely to continue to do so throughout
406 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
anaesthesia. Induction of anaesthesia in healthy
A common combination used for induction
dogs with propofol produces dose-dependent res-
of anaesthesia is 0.25 mg/kg of diazepam and
piratory depression. Respiratory rate and minute
ventilation decrease with a transient mild increase
same time (equivalent to combining 5 mg/ml of
in PaCO, (Quandt et al., 1998). No significant
diazepam and 100 mg/ml of ketamine in the same
changes in HR, MAP or CO were measured.
syringe as a 50:50 mixture and dosing at a rate of
Others have concluded that although propofol
1 ml of the mixture per 10kg of body weight).
may preserve MAP and CO if the preload is main-
Premedication may also include acepromazine, or
tained, propofol may decrease MAP and CO sec-
an opioid, or a tranquillizer-opioid combination.
ondary to a reduction in preload by a direct
Frequently one half to two-thirds of the calculated
venodilator effect. Administration of propofol in
dose is administered rapidly initially and the
remainder administered in increments as needed.
their estimated blood volume resulted in a serious
The onset of action is much slower than thiopental
decrease in MAP (Ilkiw et al., 1992). Premedication
and the signs of anaesthesia differ. Up to one
with different agents alter the cardiovascular
 minute may elapse after injection of ketamine
response to propofol. Medetomidine, for example,
before endotracheal intubation can be accom-
results in increased MAP such that arterial pres-
plished and even then there is little relaxation of
sure is maintained after administration of propo-
the jaws; the eyelids will be wide open and a brisk
fol. Like thiopental and halothane, myocardial 
 palpebral reflex should be present.
sensitivity to the effects of catecholamines is
Ketamine, 10mg/kg i.v., to dogs results in
aq pmous logodoid pue logodoid Aq paseaiu
increased HR, MAP, CO and systemic vascular
used cautiously in patients at risk for ventricular
resistance that is attributed to a centrally mediated,
arrhythmias, such as occur in cardiomyopathy and
 generalized increase in sympathetic tone (Haskins
myocardial ischaemia or contusions.
et al., 1985). The combination of diazepam and ket-
Propofol may be a good choice for induction of
amine produces similar effects (Haskins et al.
anaesthesia in dogs with seizures, meningitis, brain
tumours, or spinal cord disease as it decreases
function is useful in ill dogs, the significant in-
intracranial pressure. Likewise, propofol de-
crease in heart rate may induce rhythm problems
creases intraocular pressure and may be used sat-
in dogs with an ischaemic or damaged myocar-
isfactorily for induction of anaesthesia in dogs
 dium. Administration of ketamine to experimental
with severe corneal ulcers or those scheduled for
mtraocular procedures.
that ketamine supported cardiovascular function
well (Haskins & Patz, 1990). However, induction
Ketamine
of anaesthesia in critically ill dogs with ketamine
The dose of ketamine which produces anaesthesia
in dogs produces excessive muscle tone and spon-
dose rates.
taneous muscle activity and is near to that which
 In the past, the combination of xylazine,
causes convulsions. Thus, ketamine cannot be
1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 10 mg/kg, given either i.v.
recommended as a sole agent for canine anaesthe-
or i.m. has been used for short term anaesthesia.
sia.It can be used in combination with various
However, severe cardiopulmonary changes have
sedative agents to induce anaesthesia for short
been measured during anaesthesia with this drug
   g r s 
combination such that there is concern about the
thane, isoflurane, or sevoflurane. Unless specifi-
 safety of its use in old and sick dogs. CO is signific-
cally contraindicated anticholinergics may be 
antly decreased, and HR and ABP are increased,
administered for premedication to reduce the sali-
for 30 minutes following i. v. xylazine and keta-
vation induced by ketamine, or to prevent the
 mine (Kolata & Rawlings, 1982). The combination
decrease in heart rate induced by xylazine or
also prod uces moderate hypercapnia, acidaemia,
medetomidine.
and hypoxaemia for 20 minutes. Respiratory arrest
THE DOG407
is occasionally noted in clinical dogs anaesthetized
HR, MAP, and CO are increased by tiletamine-
with xylazine-ketamine. The more recent intro-
zolazepam but larger i.v. doses result in a transient
duction of medetomidine has revived interest in
and severe decrease in MAP (Hellyer et al., 1989).
the use of an C2 agonist sedative-ketamine combi-
nation for injectable anaesthesia. The clinical
features of anaesthesia in healthy dogs with me-
Etomidate
detomidine, 1000ug/m2 body
surface area
Etomidate is a short acting non-barbiturate i.v.
(approximately 40μg/kg in a 25 kg dog), adminis-
anaesthetic. Its main feature is that induction of
tered intramuscularly 10-15minutes before i.v.
 anaesthesia with etomidate is accompanied by lit-
ketamine, 34 mg/kg, have recently been reported
tle or no change in cardiovascular function and
(Hellebrekers & Sap, 1997; Hellebrekers et al.,
with less myocardial depression than thiopental,
1998). The duration of anaesthesia from single
and etomidate does not predispose the heart to
dosing was 54 ± 31minutes (mean ± SD).
arrhythmias. Even in experimental dogs made
Administration of ketamine reversed the medeto-
hypotensive and hypovolaemic by haemorrhage,
-adau pasnes pue eipresaperq pannpu-aup
little cardiovascular change was measured during
tension with MAPs at 150 mmHg (Hellebrekers &
anaesthesia with etomidate (Pascoe et al., 1992).
Sap, 1997). Recovery from anaesthesia with keta-
Etomidate decreases intracranial pressure. Thus,
mine is often associated with restlessness or
the main indication for use is for dogs with cardio-
hyperactivity and indeed, only 63% of recoveries
vascular compromise, such as cardiomyopathy.
from medetomidine-ketamine were judged to
pericardial tamponade, sick sinus syndrome, or for
be smooth; this is in contrast to 89% of anaesthet-
dogs that are in haemorrhagic shock. Etomidate i.v.
ics utilizing medetomidine-propofol (Hellebrekers
can be associated with undesirable side effects such
etaf.,1998).
as excitement, myoclonus, pain on injection, vomit-
ing, and apnoea (Muir II & Mason, 1989). These
Tiletamine-zolazepam
effects should not be observed if etomidate,
 0.75-1.5 mg/kg, is given after premedication with
In those countries where tiletamine is available it
 an opioid or diazepam. The technique of adminis-
is obtained in a premixed combination with the
tration of etomidate is similar to that of thiopental,
benzodiazepine, zolazepam, umder the trade 
with half of the calculated dose (the dose used is
names of Telazol and Zoletil. The drug preparation
 modified by the evaluation of the individual dog's
consists of 500 mg of lyophilized tiletamine-
 clinical condition) being given as a bolus injection
zolazepam (250 mg of tiletamine and 250 mg
 and additional drug given in increments.
of zolazepam) which is reconstituted with sterile
 An important additional side effect of etomid-
water. The doses reported are the sum of
ate is that it interferes directly with adreno-
tiletamine and zolazepam doses so that 4 mg/kg
cortical
production of corticosteroids and
of Telazol is equivalent to 2 mg/kg of tiletamine
aldosterone. Reduced cortisol response to the
and 2mg/kg of zolazepam. Initial studies of
stress of surgery in comparison to thiopental was
this drug combination were with higher dose
measured for up to 6hours after induction with
rates than are now used commonly. Tiletamine-
etomidate, 2 mg/kg (Dodam et al., 1990). For this
reason, anaesthesia should not be maintained by
provides effective sedation for aggressive or dan-
additional injections of etomidate beyond the cal-
gerous dogs. Sedation is profound but ranges from
culated dose. Exogenous steroid can be adminis-
the dog being just capable of walking to the dog
tered if necessary.
that is almost unconscious and ready for tracheal
intubation. Onset of adequate sedation may be
Neuroleptanalgesia
within minutes or up to 10 minutes. An alternative
technique is to use lower doses of tiletamine-
Some combinations of neuroleptanalgesia are suf-
zolazepam i.v. to achieve anaesthesia for tracheal
ficiently potent to induce anaesthesia that is ad-
intubation prior to inhalation anaesthesia.
equate for endotracheal intubation in old or sick
408 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
dogs. The dogs initially may be responsive to noise
in dogs, as it is solubilized in Cremophor EL - a
and endotracheal intubation must be performed
compound which may cause massive release of
quietly and gently followed by administration of
histamine in all Canidae. Although it has been
sufficient inhalation agent to deepen anaesthesia.
claimed that following heavy premedication with
The administration of this type of induction is
 potent antihistamines Saffan can be used safely in
slightly more prolonged (over 2-3 minutes) than
dogs, reports to the Association of Veterinary
bolus injections of thiopental or propofol, however,
Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland indicate
the main advantage is preservation of haemody-
that even after this premedication Saffan adminis-
namic stability (Haskins et al., 1988). The drugs
tration can be followed by anaphylaxis. It is the
 used for induction of anaesthesia may also be con-
authors' view that, given that safer alternatives
tinued during surgery either as sole agents or to
 exist, Saffan should not be administered to dogs.
provide a substantial base of sedation and analge-
sia such that a very low concentration of inhalation
agent is required. Large doses of opioids frequently
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
induce bradycardia and administration of an anti-
 cholinergic may be advisable. In old and sick dogs
A wide variety of inhalation agents has been used
given opioids IPPV may be necessary to correct
 in the past for canine anaesthesia. The choice of
hypov entilation. Preoxygenation is recommended.
agent or agents in any particular case is largely
Diazepam or midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg, with oxy-
 governed by the limitations of each agent and relat-
morphone, 0.1-0.2 mg /kg, can be injected i.v. in
ive contraindications imposed by the abnormal-
alternate increments, flushing the
catheter
ities of the dog. The properties of the gaseous and
between injections, until all the benzodiazepine
volatile agents currently employed in dogs which
and as much of the oxymorphone as necessary for
 pazims are oanas pae an no jed
induction has been administered. A similar tech-
Table 15.5.
nique involves administration of diazepam,
The inhalation agents may be used in dogs both
0.2 mg/kg, and fentanyl, 2-5 μg/kg. Another com-
to induce or maintain anaesthesia or, more
bination recommended for cardiovascularly com-
commonly, to maintain anaesthesia which has
promized dogs, including those with gastric
been induced with an i.v. agent. Induction of
dilatation/volvulus issufentanil-midazolam
anaesthesia with i. v. agents is rapid and pleasant
(Hellebrekers & Sap, 1992). Mean doses for
for the animal. Induction of anaesthesia with
 induction are 3μg/kg sufentanil and 0.9 mg/kg
the inhalant agent using a facemask is usually
midazolam. This combination has been continued
 only done in lightly sedated puppies or old dogs,
for maintenance of anaesthesia without additional
inhalation agent and the mean dose per hour was
TABLE 15.5 Properties ofinhalation agents
the same as the induction dose, namely 3μg/kg/h
currently used in dogs
sufentanil and 0.9mg/kg/h midazolam (Helle-
Agent
Rapidity Analgesic Other
brekers & Sap, 1992); IPPVwas applied throughout
of action activity
properties
anaesthesia. A combination of metdetomidine,
1500μg/m2 body surface area, with fentanyl,
Halothane
Poor
Hypotension,
2 μg/kg, resulted in satisfactory induction of
respiratory
depression
anaesthesia in healthy dogs but attempts to main-
tain anaesthesia with fentanyl were unsatisfactory,
Isoflurane
++
Poor
Hypotension,
respiratory
producing severe respiratory depression and the
depression
need for O2 (Hellebrekers & Sap, 1997).
Nitrous oxide ++++
Good
Inadequate
on its own
Sevoflurane
Poor
Aphaxalone-alphadalone
Hypotension,
respiratory
Saffan is marketed for use in cats but it is specific-
depression
ally contraindicated by the manufacturers for use
THE DOG 409
A r    s   p
may be advisable to express the low anaesthetic
sedated.
concentrations from the rebreathing bag periodic-
ally during the induction phase and then to
express the highest anaesthetic concentration from
INDUCTION USING A FACEMASK
the rebreathing bag before connecting the dog to
Facemask induction is slower than induction with
the anaesthetic system after endotracheal intuba-
injectable agents and pollution of the room with
tion. In all cases the anaesthetist must remember to
anaesthetic gases usually occurs. The dog should
decrease the vaporizer setting to a safe level before
be placed on a table at a convenient height and
 cormecting the endotracheal tube to the breathing
 gently restrained by an assistant. The facemask is
system.
lightly placed over the dog's nostrils with only O2
In circuits such as the Stephens machine, where
flowing to accustom the animal to the feel of the
the vaporizer is incorporated within the breathing
procedure. When the dog is quiet, the inhalation
circuit, each breath of the dog serves to vaporize
agent can be introduced and vaporizer setting
more anaesthetic and the effect is maximal when
should be increased by 0.5% increments after
the O2 inflow rate is low. The rebreathing bag
every three or four breaths. The face mask should
should also be emptied several times during
be applied closely to the dog's face only when con-
nduction to minimize accumulation of exhaled N2
sciousness is lost. Attempts to introduce a high
within the circuit.
concentration of anaesthetic immediately through
a closely fitted mask to a conscious dog will result
SYSTEMS OF ADMINISTRATION
in struggling, breath holding and excitement.
When a non-rebreathing system is used for anaes-
The different types of breathing systems which are
thetic delivery, the inspired anaesthetic concentra-
available are described in Chapter 9 and the choice
fion will change within seconds of a change in the
 of system will depend on the size of the dog.
vaporizer setting. The increase in inspired concen-
Resistance to breathing in the circuit and appara-
tration will be more gradual and, therefore, induc-
tus deadspace should be low for small dogs.
tion slower when a rebreathing system such as a
Suitable circuits include the T-piece, Norman
circle is used. The O2 flowmeter setting will be
elbow, Magill circuit, and the coaxial circuits such
governed by the type of system in use, with mod-
as the Bain or Lack systems. An advantage to use
 erate to high O2 flows used during mask induction
of these systems is that the inspired anaesthetic
with a rebreathing circuit and an out-of-circle
concentration is the same as that leaving the
vaporizer. The maximum vaporizer setting used
vaporizer, so that it is easier to maintain a stable
during induction should depend on the degree of
level of anesthesia or to quickly change the depth
preanaesthetic sedation, the type of delivery sys-
of anaesthesia. The inspired concentration of
tem, and the health of the dog. When a halothane
anaesthetic agent changes within seconds of
vaporizer is set to above 2.5%, or the isoflurane
changing the vaporizer setting. Disadvantages
vaporizer to above 4%, the anaesthetist must
compared with rebreathing systems are the greater
closely observe the progression of anaesthesia to
decrease in body temperature that may occur
avoid overdosage. Inclusion of 50-66% nitrous
because the inspired gases are dry, and the
oxide from the start of administration will increase
increased cost of anaesthesia because high gas
the speed of induction of anaesthesia by utilizing
flows are required and more anaesthetic agent is
 a ) a s s, a
vaporized and wasted. Inclusion of a disposable
will also be rapid with sevoflurane. When a re-
humidifier between the endotracheal tube and the
breathing system is to be used for maintenance
circuit will help to retain exhaled water vapor and,
of anaesthesia in a small dog, induction may be
by moistening inspired gas, slow the rate of fall in
facilitated by use of a non-rebreathing system dur-
body temperature.
ing induction and connecting the dog to the
 Rebreathing systems used to administer inhala-
tion anaesthesia include the circle and to-and-fro
When a rebreathing system is used for induction, it 
 systems which contain carbon dioxide absorbers.
410 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
circuit. During low-flow administration, the O2
tems is that they are economical in use because low
inflow exceeds metabolic needs and a small
O2 flows are used and less anaesthetic agent is
 amount of waste gases will enter the scavenging
vaporized. Furthermore, heat is generated by the
 system after each exhalation. An O2 flow of less
action of the exhaled CO2 on the soda lime in the
than 15ml/kg/min is usually considered to be
absorber, water vapour is conserved in the circuit
low-flow anaesthesia.
and the dog consequently breathes warm, moist
When low-flow administration is employed
gases. Dogs with a heavy hair coat, anaesthetized
with an out-of-the-circuit vaporizer, the number of
in a warm room using a rebreathing circuit can
molecules of inhalation agent delivered to the cir-
develop hyperthermia.
cle per unit time is low in proportion to the uptake
The resistance to breathing offered by the CO2
of agent into the patient's body. Consequently,
-i jesguais e siraxa pase u mot sea paneixa
small dogs. The smallest size of animal that should
 ing effect on the percent concentration of fresh
be connected to a circle circuit usually used for
 agent entering the circle. The circle anaesthetic
human adults (internal diameter 22 mm) is contro-
concentration may be lower than (down to one-
versial. Paediatric hoses (internal diameter 15 mm)
half) the vaporizer setting. Thus, the vaporizer set-
where available may be substituted for animals
ting may have to be higher than 1.5-2.0 MAC in
between 3 and 8kg bodyweight. Resistance to
 order to achieve a sufficiently high inspired anaes-
breathing in these small sized dogs may result in
thetic concentration to maintain anaesthesia
failure to move gases through the absorber and
 Changes in circuit anaesthetic concentration will
result in rebreathing of CO,. This inability to over-
 develop only slowly after the vaporizer setting is
come the resistance of the soda lime may be coun-
 changed. When the concentration must be
tered by maintaining an oxygen flow of 1l/min
 increased quickly, such as when the dog is to0
which will facilitate movement of gases around
lightly anaesthetized for surgery, the vaporizer
the circle and using IPPV.
setting must be increased for a few minutes and
The to-and-fro rebreathing system with a soda
then decreased to a value just above the original.
lime canister capacity of 0.5kg is usually used in
Alternatively, the circle anaesthetic concentration
dogs weighing more than 10kg and has the disad-
 can be increased rapidly by increasing the O, flow
vantage of increasing dead space with use. The
 to 1l/min. It must be realised that excessive anaes-
presence of the soda lime canister close to the
thetic administration can occur if the O2 flow is
dog's head is physically awkward.
increased from an established low-flow system.
The circle concentration will have been low and if
the vaporizer setting is at a percentage greater than
Low-flow administration ofinhalation
2 MAC, increasing the oxygen flow will bring the
anaesthetics
circle concentration up to deliver an excessive con-
centration.
 Alow-flow system can be defined as one in which
To ensure that there is enough anaesthetic agent
there is substantial rebreathing of previously
in the circle in the early part of anaesthesia, it is
o e ynoru passd sey uom se pannxa
common to use a high oxygen flow (1l/min) in the
absorber (usually in a circle system). The min-
first 15 minutes of anaesthesia to wash-out expired
imum O2 flow that can be delivered safely to a
circle circuit is a flow equal to the animal's
The oxygen flow rate is then decreased when the
metabolic oxygen consumption (approximately
transition from injectable anaesthesia to inhalation
6 ml/kg/min). This is called a closed system of
anaesthesia has occurred. The vaporizer setting
administration because there is no excess oxygen
will be determined not only by whether high or
to be discharged through the ‘pop-off' valve. A
low-flow administration is employed but also by
closed system does not require that the 'pop-off'
which anaesthetic agents have been used for
valve be shut closed because the valve is designed
 premedication and induction of anaesthesia. For
to remain closed until a pressure builds within the
 y ag is za an o y
THE DOG 411
diazepam-ketamine induction but low after tileta-
that NzO will accumulate in a low-flow system,
mine-zolazepam induction or high dose medeto-
reducing the O2 concentration to a value resulting
midine premedication.
Low-flow administration must never be used
B
with NzO unless the inspired concentration of O2
is measured with an O, monitor. The concern is
A
D
FIG. I5.9 Endotracheal intubation as seen by a right handed anaesthetist.AThe assistant is holding the upper lips and the
teeth. B The epiglottis is almost completely obscured by the soft palate.C The soft palate has been lifted by the tip of the
tube to allow the tip of the epiglottis to come forward. D The tip has been passed over the epiglottis,through the vocal
cords and on towards the sternum.
412 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
in hypoxia. For practical purposes, the ratio of
umcuffed tubes and should be prevented by pack-
O2 to NzO will not be distorted if the O2 and N2O
 ing the pharynx with moistened gauze.
ls3 e 1 /x/l oe ie ias y1a a1e sai1 mo
A good light source is needed in the form of
750 ml/min of each (total flow 1.5l/min) for a
bright overhead lighting or a laryngoscope since
 25kg dog. Higher flows should be used if the ratio
intubation in dogs is accomplished under direct
of NzO to O2 is increased to 2:1.
viewing of the epiglottis and the position of the
 Circle circuits which incorporate the vaporizer
tube in relation to it. A laryngoscope is advisable
within the breathing circuit are designed for the
for intubation of brachycephalic dogs. It is usual to
low-flow system of administration. It is the dog's
induce anaesthesia in the dog to a level which is
own ventilation that draws oxygen through the
just adequate to allow the dog's mouth to be held
vaporizer and vaporizes the inhalation agent. The
open without initiating chewing movements,
lower the oxygen flow rate the more quickly the
yawning, or tongue curling. When thiopental
circle anaesthetic concentration increases. If the
or propofol have been used for induction of an-
vaporizer was not initially intended for use with
 aesthesia and the dog is swallowing when intu-
the highly volatile anaesthetic agents, only the low
bation is attempted, the depth of anaesthesia is too
and middle settings on the vaporizer are needed
light and more drug should be administered.
for adequate anaesthetic delivery.
Swallowing during intubation is normal during
ketamine anaesthesia
The dog may be positioned in either sternal or
Endotracheal intubation
lateral recumbency. In either case, the assistant
Cuffed endotracheal tubes for dogs vary from
must hold the dog's head and neck in a straight
2.5 mm to 16.0 mm internal diameter (ID). The dia-
line with one hand holding the top jaw, thumb and
meter of the largest tube which can be introduced
forefinger either side of the jaw behind the canine
into the trachea is related to both the size and the
 teeth and holding the upper lips up and away
breed of the dog with the requirement that the tube
from the teeth to facilitate the anaesthetist's view.
selected should be a good approximation of the 
The dog's tongue is pulled rostrally to spread open
  snd, e jou iq rap ua an
 the larynx and is held either by the assistant or by
example, a 14 mm tube can usually be inserted in
the anaesthetist in such a way as to protect it from
the trachea of an adult German Shepherd and an
laceration by the teeth (Fig. 15.9A). The blade of
 11 or 12 mm tube used for most 25kg dogs. In con-
the laryngoscope is placed flat on the tongue with
trast, the Bulldog often has an exceptionally small-
the tip of the blade depressing the tongue at the
diameter laryngeal lumen and trachea for its body
base of the epiglottis. In some dogs the epiglottis
weight and a selection of smaller tubes should be
 may be trapped behind the soft palate and must be
available at anaesthetic induction of this breed.
released by using the tip of the endotracheal tube
 The tubes should be checked for length along-
to push the soft palate dorsally (Fig. 15.9 B,C). The
side the dog because the tip of the tube should not
 lubricated tube should be used to depress the
extend beyond the thoracic inlet into the chest.
epiglottis on to the tongue and to keep it here
Excess tube extending outside the incisors con-
while the tube itself is advanced in front of the ary-
tributes to deadspace and CO, breathing and,
tenoid cartilages into the trachea (Fig. 15.9D).
therefore, some tubes may have to be shortened by
 Frequently, rotating the tube 90° about its longitud-
cutting off 2 to 6 cm length with scissors. Thin-
inal axis as the tip passes through the larynx
walled endotracheal tubes (e.g. ID to OD differ-
 allows the tube to be advanced more easily into the
ence of mm) with small volume cuffs should be
 trachea. A strip of gauze should be tied tightly to
purchased for use in puppies and very small dogs
the tube within the mouth just behind the canine
to allow the largest lumen size possible in their
 teeth and then either around the jaw or behind the
small tracheas. Altermatively, uncuffed or Cole pat-
dog's head (Fig. 15.10). The knot around the tube
term tubes can be used to eliminate the space occu-
must be tight to avoid slipping and accidental
 pied by the cuff. IPPV and aspiration of foreign
extubation. The endotracheal tube cuff should be
material are potential problems with use of
inflated with just enough air to prevent a leak that
THE DOG413
FlG. I5.l0 Endotracheal tube secured in place by a tie placed tightly around the connector and then tied around the
upper jaw behind the canine teeth.Note that the tube has been shortened so that the expiratory valve is at the nostrils,
ensuring minimum dead-space.The inflating tube for the cuff has been doubled over and sealed by a disposable needle case
(alternatively a 3-way tap can be used).
can be detected when listening for air escaping
(Hoffman et al., 1991; Hysing et al., 1992). Res-
around the tube during inflation of the lungs
 ponses in MAP, mean pulmonary arterial pressure,
by squeezing the reservoir bag to a pressure of
 and CVP vary considerably between individual
20-25 cm H2O with any 'pop-off' valve screwed
dogs. In some studies the decrease in CO is less
down. The anaesthetist must remember to release
during deep isoflurane anaesthesia than at equipo-
the valve after this procedure.
tent concentrations of halothane (Hysing et al.,
The process of intubation should be performed
1992). Changes in cardiovascular parameters
 gently to avoid trauma to the pharynx and larynx
induced by sevoflurane anaesthesia are most simi-
which can cause tissue swelling and may result
lar to those produced by isoflurane (Mutoh et al.,
in airway obstruction during recovery from an-
1997). Nonetheless, since all three agents decrease
aesthesia (even necessitating tracheotomy).
cardiovascular function, excessively low MAP will
Furthermore, any time that the dog's position or
 occur during inhalation anaesthesia in hypo-
location is changed, the endotracheal tube should
volaemic dogs (Pascoe et al., 1994).
be briefly disconnected from the breathing circuit
Halothane increases the sensitivity of the
to avoid twisting the tube within the trachea and
myocardium to catecholamines and premature
tearing tracheal mucosa.
ventricular depolarizations may develop in the
presence of hypercapnia. The prevalence of abnor
mal ventricular rhythms may increase in animals
Halothane, Isoflurane, Sevoflurane
with myocardial ischaemia caused by thoracic
contusions and gastric dilatation/volvulus. In
Cardiovascular effects
contrast, sensitivity of the myocardium is not
Increasing doses of all three agents cause signific-
increased by isoflurane or sevoflurane. Occasion
ant decreases in cardiac index, MAP, and mean
ally, conscious dogs with ventricular premature
pulmonary arterial pressure, a significant increase
 depolarizations maintain a more stable cardiac
in CVP, and a slight decrease or increase in HR 1
rhythm when anaesthetized with isoflurane.
414 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Isoflurane, but not halothane, has antifibrillatory
cephalic breeds, breathing may be fast and shallow
effects in atrial tissue (Freeman et al., 1990).
 (panting). This rapid rate must not be mistaken for
In healthy dogs without significant cardiovas-
a light plane of anaesthesia, although sometimes
cular disease, the effects of the inhalation agents
the tidal volume is so inadequate that uptake of
 on cardiovascular function are relatively unimport-
halothane is insufficient to maintain anaesthesia
ant until deep anaesthesia is produced. The
Hypoventilation will occur during deep inhalation
impact of inhalation anaesthesia must be consid-
 anaesthesia and is very likely to occur in old dogs,
ered in animals with ischaemic heart disease and
obese dogs, and dogs receiving opioids.
cardiomyopathy. Myocardial blood flow is in-
creased during isoflurane anaesthesia (despite
 decreased CO and MAP) and decreased during
Sevoflurane and compound A
halothane anaesthesia (Gelman et al., 1984). The
Sevoflurane reacts with soda lime and generates
myocardial depressant effects in dogs are compar
several degradation products, of which compound
able between isoflurane and sevoflurane, however,
Ais reported to be nephrotoxic. Since the concen-
isoflurane causes coronary vasodilation whereas
tration of compound A is greater in circle circuits
sevoflurane decreases coronary blood flow with
using low oxygen flows there has been concern for
no change in coronary vascular resistance (Tomi-
 patient safety when using sevoflurane in closed
yasu et al., 1999). Thus isoflurane is a coronary
circuit or low flow systems. In a clinical trial of
vasodilator with potential beneficial (increased
sevoflurane in dogs involving three University
myocardial blood flow) and hazardous ('coronary
Teaching Hospitals no evidence of impaired renal
steal'′) effects. 'Coronary steal' occurs when blood
function was detected when the O2 inflow was
flow is redirected away from ischaemic myocardi-
maintained at 500 ml/min (Branson et al., 1997).
um. This may occur during isoflurane anaesthesia
Concentrations of compound A measured in circle
since this agent causes dilation of normal myocar-
circuits administering low-flow (< 15ml/kg/min)
dial arteries, preferentially the smaller coronary
sevoflurane to dogs were substantially lower than
resistance vessels than the larger conductive ves-
the concentrations reported to cause renal toxic-
sels, and this may divert blood from stenotic or
 oses in rats (Muir & Gadawski, 1998).
damaged arteries that are unable to dilate (Merin
& Johns, 1994). The significance of the differences
Administration
between the agents on myocardial blood flow is
not as yet resolved. Many dogs with cardiovascu-
Halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane are potent
lar disease are anaesthetized satisfactorily with
inhalation agents that can be used to change the
isoflurane with no untoward postoperative conse-
depth of anaesthesia rapidly. Anaesthesia can be
quences. It may be a wise precaution to use an
 induced with these agents through a facemask
anaesthetic protocol that relies heavily on opioids
 following preanaesthetic sedation with a sedative
for analgesia and only low doses of isoflurane in
or sedative/opioid combination or they can be
dogs with serious cardiac disease.
used for maintenance of anaesthesia after in-
 Both halothane and isoflurane increase cerebral
duction with an injectable anaesthetic agent.
blood flow, decrease portal blood flow, and pre-
Induction of anaesthesia by facemask is faster and
serve renal blood flow (Gelman et al., 1984;
 smoother with sevoflurane than isoflurane and,
Bernard et al., 1991). Isoflurane increases hepatic
unlike isoflurane, sevoflurane does not cause air-
blood flow whereas halothane decreases it during
 way irritation. The concentration of agent required
deep anaesthesia.
to maintain anaesthesia is usually between 1.0 and
1.5 MAC values. Values reported for MAC vary
slightly but are approximately 0.9% for halothane,
Ventilation
1.4% for isoflurane, and 2.1% for sevoflurane.
The decrease in ventilation during inhalation
Occasionally, the anaesthetic agent for mainten-
anaesthesia in healthy dogs is unpredictable. In
 ance may be changed from halothane to isoflu-
some dogs, particularly small dogs and brachy-
 rane, for example, in the face of increasing
THE DOG415
should not be utilized in a low-flow system unless
surgical procedure is unexpectedly prolonged and
 an O2 analyser is incorporated in the breathing
the anaesthetist wishes to take advantage of the
system.
shorter recovery time of isoflurane. Elimination of
NzO is a useful adjunct to anaesthesia with
halothane takes longer than uptake of isoflurane
halothane, isoflurane, or sevoflurane, providing
auoieu jo asop patequi ue jo %oz ot dn asnenaq
sufficient analgesia is given to maintain an unin-
is retained for metabolism in the liver. However,
terrupted course of anaesthesia. N2O will block
isoflurane is less potent than halothane and a high-
patient response to intermittent intense surgical
er vaporizer setting is required for the same depth
stimulation such as traction on the ovaries, clamp-
of anaesthesia. A compromise is achieved by turn-
ing of the spermatic cord, or the manipulation
ing off the halothane vaporizer and turning on the
involved in reducing a long bone fracture. In-
isoflurane vaporizer to the identical setting for
clusion of N2Oallows a reduction in the concentra-
tion of volatile anaesthetic agent and, therefore,
have to be increased slightly to maintain the same
MAP remains at an acceptable value.
depth of anaesthesia
ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION OF THE LUNGS
Recovery
Controlled ventilation (IPPV) may be needed to
In contrast to halothane, almost none of the
correct hypoventilation especially in overweight
inhaled isoflurane or sevoflurane is retained for
or geriatric dogs, dogs with depressed ventilation
metabolism. Consequently, recovery from anaes-
from administration of opioids or high concentra-
thesia can be very fast and complete unless
tions of inhalant anaesthetics, or for dogs with
underlying sedation is present or an opioid is
impaired ventilation from positioning for perineal,
administered for postanaesthetic analgesia.
back, or upper abdominal surgery. Sometimes
IPPV is indicated in treatment of a moderate
degree of anaesthetic-induced hypoventilation
NITROUS OXIDE
that is resulting in an inadequate uptake of inhala-
tional anaesthetic and a depth of anaesthesia that
It is generally agreed that dogs cannot be anaes-
thetized with unsupplemented mixtures of N2O
is too light for the medical or surgical procedure to
be performed. IPPV will be required in dogs for
and O2. N2O is used in non-rebreathing or circle
intrathoracic surgery, during neuromuscular
circuits either:
paralysis, in neurological procedures that either
1. As a vehicle for the vaporization and delivery
include muscle weakness or dictate the need for
of volatile anaesthetic agents and as a mild analgesic
decreased intracranial pressure, and for respir-
supplement to inhalation anaesthesia. The propor-
 atory or cardiac resuscitation.
fion of O2 in the mixture must be at least 30%;
 O2 or O2/N2O gas flow rates do not need to be
changed at the onset of IPPV. When IPPV is need-
[or:]
an u aueuo ou inq eudeaiady aseaiap ci pa
2. In conjunction with injectable agents and
depth of anaesthesia is desired, the vaporizer set-
analgesic supplements, such as fentanyl, and with
ting should be decreased by 20-25% at the onset of
muscle relaxants, for maintaining a light plane
IPPV to adjust for the increase in alveolar ventila-
of anaesthesia. The percent of NzO should be
tion and anaesthetic uptake. When a circle circuit
d yu ue sd h as  ude
with a vaporizer inside the circle is being used, the
in maintaining unconsciousness. Gas flow into
vaporizer setting should be decreased to almost
a circle must be sufficiently high to wash out N2
off, as the positive pressure generated in the circuit
and allow N2O concentration to increase. The cuff
 and the increase in gas flow through the vaporizer
on the endotracheal tube must be inflated to
 can result in a dramatic increase in inspired anaes
  a  s   a
thetic concentration, with potentially fatal con-
the inspired gases with air. As stated earlier, N2O
sequences.
416 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Regardless of the spontaneous respiratory rate
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING
of the dog, satisfactory arterial carbon dioxide ten-
AGENTS
sion (PaCO2) can be achieved in dogs with IPPV
mcorporating a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/min
Muscle relaxation can be achieved during anaes-
with a tidal volume of 15 ml/kg body weight, or
thesia by inducing deep general anaesthesia, by
 20 breaths/min with a tidal volume of 10 ml/kg. A
incorporation of agents that induce central re-
tidal volume of 15ml/kg can be achieved in
laxation, such as medetomidine, diazepam, or
healthy dogs with a peak inspiratory pressure of
midazolam, or by use of agents that induce neuro-
18 to 20cmH2O, as observed on the pressure
muscular blockade. Use of neuromuscular block-
 gauge of the Bain or circle circuits. Inspiratory time
ing agents provides profound relaxation while
should be kept short and less than 2 s. These val-
permitting a reduction in dose rate of general
ues may have to be adjusted for the individual
amaesthetic agents and consequently the anaes-
patient so that for an overweight dog, for example,
thetic protocol results in less cardiovascular
the tidal volume should be calculated on the dog's
depression. Neuromuscular blockers are com-
ideal weight since the contribution of fat to CO2
 monly used for ocular surgery, ensuring a central
production is minimal. In contrast, the tidal
eye position to facilitate the surgical procedure.
volume for an athletic or lean dog with a large
Further, relaxation of the extraocular muscles
frame and minimal fat should be increased from
decreases intraocular pressure - a prerequisite for
15 to 20 ml/kg. The inspiratory pressure may be as
 intraocular surgery to avoid prolapse of the vitre-
low as 15 cm HzO in tiny, thin dogs or may have to
 ous. These drugs are also used during anaesthesia
be increased up to 35 or 40 cm HzO to achieve an
for thoracotomy to control the respiratory move-
adequate tidal volume in dogs with pressure on
 ments and for abdominal surgery to fully relax the
the diaphragm, such as from increased intra-
abdominal muscles and increase surgical exposure
 abdominal fat or positioned in a prone head-down
to the organs. The relaxation induced by neuro-
position. Inspiratory pressure should be limited to
 muscular blocking agents means that the surgeon
-oo 1o aseasip Areuomd wim sop ul O uo gz
needs to use much less forcible retraction of mus-
tusions to decrease the risk of barotrauma and
dles to gain access to the body cavities and so causes
pneumothorax. The chest of the dog should
far less bruising of muscles, greatly contributing to
always be observed to confirm inflation of the
lungs in the inspiratory phase of the IPPV cycle.
Assessment of the adequacy of IPPV can be pre-
reduction of a fractured long bone or a dislocated
cise with arterial blood gas measurement and
hip. The use of neuromuscular blocking agents
reasonably so with end-tidal CO2 measurement.
Without these, an approximate guide can be ob-
ered in Chapter 7.
tained from observation of the inspiratory pressure
When neuromuscular blocking agents are used,
on a pressure gauge in the breathing circuit and
facilities for IPPV must be available because effect-
from the amplitude of chest excursion. Obser-
ive spontaneous respiratory movements are abol-
vation of mucous membrane colour provides no
ished. Monitoring depth of anaesthesia may be
information about PaCO2. The occurrence of spon-
difficult when breathing and palpebral reflex are
taneous respiratory movements during the appli-
abolished. When excessive anaesthetic admin-
cation of IPPV in a dog with pink mucous
istration occurs, there is increased risk of hypoten-
membranes usually, although not invariably, indic-
sion and prolonged recovery from anaesthesia.
ates that hypoventilation is still present. Other
Insufficient anaesthesia results in awareness,
causes that should be considered are failure to
increased sympathetic nervous system stimulation
expand the lungs owing to a leak at the level of the
 endotracheal tube or to pneumothorax, hypox-
and increased intraocular pressure. One approach
is to anaesthetize the patient and to achieve a sta-
aemia, hyperthermia, or inadequate analgesia.
ble plane of anaesthesia before administration of
General considerations applying to IPPV in all
the relaxant. Subsequently, vaporizer settings and
animals are given in Chapter 8.
THE DOG417
 oxygen flow rates are used that in the anaes-
When the duration of neuromuscular block
thetist's experience result in an adequate depth of
must be extended beyond one dose, subsequent
anaesthesia. In dogs, signs of autonomic stimula-
injections for top-up should be one-half of the ini-
 tion listed below may be observed in response to
- sanu nz Araaa Aiaixondde asop l
inadequate anaesthesia or analgesia:
tinuous infusion of agent will produce a more
consistent blockade. Maintenance of block with
1. Pupillary dilation
2. Salivation
bolus dose of 0.5 mg/kg with halothane anaesthe-
3. Tongue twitch
 4 Increased heart rate and blood pressure.
sia (Jones & Brearley, 1987). Two infusion rates for
     
bolus of vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg followed by an
Agents used
infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/h (Jones & Young, 1991)
The agents most commonly used at present to pro-
and an initial bolus of 0.05 mg/kg with an infusion
duce neuromuscular block in dogs are listed in
of 0.054 mg/kg/h (Clutton, 1992). The higher dose
Table 15.6. Other agents used less frequently are
rate was antagonized with intravenous injections
suxamethonium (succinylcholine), cisatracurium,
of atropine and neostigmine, 0.05 mg /kg, and the
doxacurium, and rocuronium. The dose rates
lower infusion rate was reversed with atropine
given have been found to be clinically effective but
and edrophonium, 0.5 mg/kg.
individuals may vary in the dose required to in-
As described in Chapter 7, other factors influ-
duce a complete block. Further, a dose one-fifth of
ence the duration of neuromuscular block.
the dose used to produce total paralysis may be
Pancuronium and vecuronium will have a pro-
used for intraocular surgery because the extraocu-
longed duration of action in dogs with hepatic or
lar muscles are paralysed earlier (at lower dosage)
renal disease. Atracurium is spontaneously
than muscles of the abdomen or thorax. At these
destroyed in plasma (Hofmann elimination) and is
low dose rates some respiratory movements may
detoxified independently of hepatic or renal func-
continue but alveolar ventilation is inadequate and
tion. Atracurium, but not pancuronium or vecuro-
IPPV should still be employed (Lee et al., 1998)
nium, may occasionally result in histamine release
 and a decrease in arterial blood pressure.
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine) is a depolar-
TABLE 15.6 Neuromuscular blocking agents in
izing neuromuscular blocking agent that causes
 dogs. Approximate doses and indications for use
initial muscle fasciculation after injection and
Agent
Dose
Effective
Indication
before the onset of paralysis. Suxamethonium,
(mg/kg) duration
for use
(min.);
0.3-0.4 mg/kg, will produce about 20 minutes of
halothane
paralysis in dogs. Salivation and bradycardia may
be induced such that prior administration of an
Pancuronium  0.06
40
Abdominal
anticholinergic is advisable. There is no reversal
and thoracic
agent for suxamethonium available but its action
surgery
 Central eye
usually terminates rapidly and completely.
Pancuronium
0.01
60
position for
 ocular surgery
Termination of neuromuscular block
Atracurium
0.5
40
Abdominal
and thoracic
As the effects of neuromuscular block wear off,
surgery
assuming the anaesthetic depth to be that of light
Atracurium
0.1
25
Central eye
surgical anaesthesia, the dog's eyes, which have
position for
been central, start to rotate downwards and
ocular surgery
spontaneous respiration returns. It can usually be
Vecuronium
0.1
25
Abdominal
safely assumed that once spontaneous breathing
and thoracic
becomes adequate that neuromuscular block will
surgery
not become re-established unless a further dose of
418 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
relaxant is given. Administration of an aminogly-
action of neostigmine is slower than edrophonium
coside antibiotic during recovery from anaesthesia
and may take several minutes.
 may potentiate residual neuromuscular blockade
Residual neuromuscular block may remain
and result in re-paralysis.
 even after restoration of apparently normal breath-
 Neostigmine and edrophonium are commonly
 ing. In the dog, this is shown by the eyes remaining
used anticholinesterase antagonists of non-
 central with an absence of palpebral reflexes what-
depolarizing neuromuscular block in dogs. The
 ever the depth of anaesthesia. Pharyngeal and
laryngeal reflexes may remain weak and airway
with the degree of block present and should only
 obstruction may develop after tracheal extubation.
be attempted when the block begins to wane.
 The dog must be closely observed for evidence
When full paralysing doses are given, the time
of residual block and inability to raise its head
lapse from last administration of vecuronium
 and protect the airway during recovery from
should be 10-15 minutes or 25-40 minutes for pan-
 anaesthesia.
curonium and atracurium. When the train-of-four
When the low doses of relaxant are employed
twitches are being monitored with a peripheral
for ocular surgery, administration of an anti-
nerve stimulator, at least two twitches should be
cholinesterase may be unnecessary when only one
present before attempting to reverse the block. In
 or two doses are given and the duration of surgery
the absence of this monitoring, decreasing chest
exceeds an hour after last administration.
 cmpliance, attempts at spontaneous breathing or
response to stimuli afforded by movement of the
endotracheal tube in the trachea should be
ANAESTHETIC MANAGEMENT
observed before attempts are made to restore nor-
mal neuromuscular transmission. It should be
MAIN CONSIDERATIONS
remembered that respiratory acidosis prolongs
Positioning
the action of most non-depolarizing relaxants
and will impair reversal by neostigmine. IPPV
Care should be taken when positioning the animal
should, therefore, be continued during the reversal
to pad parts of the body that might be subject to
process. Monitoring of neuromuscular block
 pressure ischaemia. Limbs should not be allowed
should be continued until all four twitches of the
to hang off the side of the table. Some positions
train-of-four are of equal strength. Inhalation
will compromise abdominal movement and con-
anaesthesia is usually continued through the
tribute to hypoventilation. Access to the head for
reversal process so that the patient is still lightly
 monitoring may be facilitated by placing a drape
anaesthetized when neuromuscular function is
stand in front of the animal. A drape stand can be
restored.
easily created by bending a metal rod into a semi-
An anticholinergic drug such as atropine,
circle, with the diameter of the circle as wide as the
0.02 mg/kg, or glycopyrrolate , 0.005mg/kg.
 operating table, and 15 cm at each end bent at right
should be given i.v. 1-2 minutes before administer-
 angles and parallel to the table edges for taping the
ing the anticholinesterase to block the adverse
stand to the operating table.
effects of bradycardia, salivation and increased
intestinal motility. HR should be monitored and a
Fluid therapy
repeat dose of anticholinergic given if necessary.
Alternatively, the anticholinergic can be mixed
All paediatric, geriatric, and sick dogs, and all that
with neostigmine in the same syringe (1.2mg
will be anaesthetized for more than an hour,
atropine or 0.5 mg glycopyrrolate to 2.5 mg neosti-
should receive balanced electrolyte solution intra-
 gmine) and the mixture injected i.v. in small incre-
venously during anaesthesia. Indeed, it may be
ments until satisfactory reversal is achieved. The
 preferable for all anaesthetized animals to be given
dose of neostigmine varies from 0.01 to 0.10 mg/kg,
fluid to maintain blood volume and transport of
with a maximum total dose of 0.1 mg/kg. The dose
 anaesthetic agents to detoxification sites, thereby
of edrophonium is 0.05 to 0.10 mg/kg. Onset of
facilitating recovery from anaesthesia. An appro-
THE DOG419
priate rate of infusion for most patients is 10 ml/kg
TABLE 15.7 Causes of hypotension during
bodyweight/hour. The infusion rate should be
anaesthesia
halved after 3 hours for patients that do not have a
Decreased venous
Decreased myocardial
body cavity open or when blood loss is minimal
return
contractility
because from this point haemodilution will devel-
 op. Accurate infusion of the volume of fluid in
● Airway obstruction
●Anaesthetic drugs
●Blood loss
● Adjunct drugs, e.g.
very small patients is essential and may be ac-
complished by using a paediatric administration
antibiotics
● Mechanical compression ● Arrhythmias,e.g.
set delivering 60 drops/ml, or by using a drop
of caudal vena cava by
ventricular premature
counting pump or a syringe driver (Fig. 15.8), or
surgeon or enlarged 
depolarization and
pm jo sasnoq lews jo Araaap puey Aq Aidus
organ
 atrial fibrillation
from a syringe. Patients with low blood glucose
●Pancreatic enzymes
● Hypercapnia
released during surgery
or who are at risk for hypoglycaemia should
for pancreatitis
in addition be given 5% dextrose in water at 3 to
● Tension pneumothorax 
● Mediators of sepsis and
5ml/kg/h.
endotoxaemia
Monitoring
with or without an opioid, will often supply suffi-
Routine monitoring techniques have been
cient analgesia to abolish the dog's response to the
described in Chapter 2. It should be remembered
procedure.
that both respiratory rate and depth of breathing
must be observed during evaluation of ventilation
Complications
and that mucous membrane colour is not an indic-
ator of adequacy of ventilation. A serious potential
Hypoventilation commonly occurs in dogs that
consequence of an anaesthetized animal breathing
are overweight, old, sick, deeply anaesthetized,
air is hypoxaemia. Monitoring blood O2 saturation
and those which have increased intra-abdominal
with a pulse oximeter increases the safety of anaes-
 pressure. Treatment is IPPV.
thesia induced and maintained with injectable
Hypotension is a common complication that
agents. Halothane and isoflurane significantly
develops during anaesthesia caused by decreased
depress cardiovascular function and measurement
venous return and decreased cardiac contractility
of arterial blood pressure increases the safety of
(Table 15.7). Initial treatment of hypotension dur-
 inhalation anaesthesia.
ing anaesthesia involves decreasing anaesthetic
administration and expansion of blood volume
Analgesia supplements
with balanced electrolyte solution as a 10 to
20 ml/kg i.v. bolus. Mechanical causes of decreased
Supplementation with additional opioid may
venous return, such as a closed 'pop-off' valve on a
become necessary during anaesthesia as the effects
circle circuit or compression of the caudal vena
of premedication wane. A rough rule of thumb is
cava by an enlarged organ such as the spleen,
to administer the supplemental dose at one-third
should be eliminated. Expansion of plasma vol-
to one-half of the initial premedication dose.
ume by infusion of hydroxyethylstarch (heta-
An alternative is to add a short acting opioid to
starch) or plasma at 20 ml/kg over 30 min may be
the protocol, such as fentanyl or alfentanil.
effective in restoring ABP, especially in the patient
 Fentanyl can be administered as a bolus of 2 μg/kg
with low plasma protein concentration (Table
every 20minutes or as a continuous infusion of
15.8). Blood loss of up to 20% of blood volume may
0.2-0.7 μg/kg/min. Fentanyl may cause bradycar-
be replaced by infusion of balanced electrolyte at
dia, for which an anticholinergic may be given,
three times the volume of blood lost. In the event
and hypoventilation necessitating IPPV. An alter-
of rapid blood loss, treatment with hypertonic
native is to use supplements of alfentanil, 2-5
(7.5%) saline at 4 ml/kg over 10 minutes should
μg/kg. The addition of N2O to the inspired gases,
sustain cardiac output and blood pressure at
420 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 15.8 Drug to increase cardiovascular
Catecholamines used to improve cardiovascu-
performance
lar function include dopamine, 2 to 7μg/kg /min
Drug
(100μg/kg solution made by adding 50mg of
Indication
Dose rate
drug to 500 ml of 0.9% saline solution), or dobuta-
Dopamine
Hypotension,
2-7 μg/kg/min of a
mine, 2 to 7μg/kg/min (100 μg/100 ml solution)
advanced
100 μg/ml
 delivered using a paediatric administration set
atrioventricular
solution in 0.9%
(60 drops/ml) for most dogs (Table 15.8). Dopa-
heart block,
saline;
10-15 μg/kg/min
mine is most effective in conditions of cardiac
cardiac arrest,
to increase renal
for cardiac arrest
arrest or advanced atrioventricular heart block,
blood flow
and can be used to improve urine production.
 Dobutamine Hypotension
2-7 μg/kg/min of a
Dobutamine is best used for patients with car-
100 μg/ml solution in
diomyopathy, congestive heart failure, or who are
0.9% saline;increase
at risk for ventricular arrhythmias. Both dopamine
to 10μg/kg/min in
 and dobutamine can be responsible for the appear-
emergency
10-20 ml/kg over
ance of premature ventricular depolarizations,
Hetastarch 
Low plasma
however, dopamine is metabolized to noradrena-
protein
at least 30 minutes
4-5 ml/kg over
line and this may increase the risk of abnormal car
Hypertonic  Hypotension
diac rhythm. Ephedrine, 0.02 mg/kg, can be used
(7.5%) saline from haemorrhage 10minutes
or endotoxaemia,
to increase ABP in dogs with excessive venodila-
for precautions
tion. An anticholinergic is only effective in increas-
see text
ing blood pressure when the heart rate is low.
Lignocaine
 Premature
I-2 mg/kg up to
Ventricular
arrhythmias not
infrequently
ventricular
10mg/kg over
develop during anaesthesia as a consequence of
contractions,
10 minutes; infusion
0.02-0.02 mg/kg/min
myocardial ischaemia following automobile trau-
ventricular
tachycardia
of a I mg/ml solution 
ma, or abdominal distension from gastric dilata-
Sodium
Metabolic
1-1.5 mEq/kg,
tion/ volvulus, or from myocarditis or vasoactive
bicarbonate acidosis
repeated once;use
mediators of sepsis. Management should include
formula mEq to be
'eudesiadau pue eixoday Suean ro no Sum
 infused = Base deficit
Treatment should be intravenous lignocaine when
×0.3×kg
bodyweight given
the ventricular premature depolarizations are
over 60 minutes
multifocal or sufficiently frequent to decrease car-
diac output and blood pressure (Fig. 15. 11).
Lignocaine 2% or 4% can be injected as an i.v. bolus
acceptable values for about 1.5 hours. Meanwhile,
at 1 mg/kg and repeated if ineffective. Additional
additional therapy in the form of crystalloid solu-
lignocaine up to 8 mg/kg over 10 minutes can be
tion, whole blood, packed red blood cells, or
given to dogs if a lower dose is ineffective.
 Oxyglobin can be initiated. Hypertonic saline prob-
Ligmocaine can be given as a continuous infusion
ably should not be given when the source of the
at 0.02 to 0.08 mg/kg/min. A 1 mg/ml solution of
bleeding cannot be controlled. An antihistamine,
lignocaine can be prepared by adding 500 mg of
 diphenhydramine, 2 mg/kg, is given before plas-
ligmocaine (25 ml of 2% or 12.5 ml of 4%) to 500 ml
of 0.9% saline.
ma or blood transfusion to minimize the risk of an
anaphylactic reaction, and transfusion should
be started slowly to allow an early detection of
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
a transfusion reaction. Although hemodilution
occurs during fluid administration in the face of
Care of the dog in the immediate postanaesthetic
haemorrhage, measurement of haematocrit and
period should include allowing it to breathe 100%
O2 for about 10 minutes, or as long as seems appro-
total protein should be performed periodically
during anaesthesia in patients with considerable
 priate, after discontinuing anaesthetic administra-
blood loss.
tion. Inhalation agents can severely depress
THE DOG421
3Q0
150
Source: ART
25mm/s
MANOALT
FIG. I5.II This ECG was recorded from a Hound anaesthetized for surgical repair of intestinal rupture and abdominal
herniation as a result of trauma.The trace shows two consecutive premature ventricular depolarizations that resulted in a
pulse deficit.The dog's blood pressure progressively deteriorated and was sustained by treatment with hetastarch, plasma,
dobutamine and lignocaine.The dog survived to go home.
ventilation and this is masked when the animal is
Before the dog regains consciousness, the urin-
attached to high concentrations of O2 in the anaes-
ary bladder should be expressed by abdominal
thesia system. Hypoxaemia may develop if the
palpation or catheterized to avoid soiling of band-
animal is disconnected and made to breathe room
ages from urination in the cage during recovery.
air when still deeply anaesthetized. O2 should be
The volume of urine collected should be measured
supplied for at least 5minutes after N2O is discon-
or estimated to assess the adequacy of urine flow
tinued to avoid diffusion hypoxia.
during anaesthesia. Approximately 1 ml/kg/h
Gastric reflux into the pharynx may occur any
of urine should have been produced. When
time during anaesthesia but when it has occurred
the volume is less, consideration should be
the mouth must be cleaned before extubation and
given to continuation of fluid therapy after an-
suction of the nasal passages may be advisable.
 aesthesia. Blood should be collected from dogs
Gastric reflux into the oesopl
hagus occurs more
that have suffered blood loss for measurement
commonly than is usually
y recognized (Rapto-
of haematocrit and total protein concentration.
poulos & Galatos, 1995). In a series of 510 dogs the
 Blood glucose should be measured in diabetic
incidence of oesophageal reflux was 17% but the
 dogs, and those that are less than 3 months of age
gastric contents reached the mouth only in 0.6%
or are thin.
(3 dogs). Many factors may contribute to gastro-
Rectal temperature should be measured and
 oesophageal reflux. Intra-abdominal surgery is
heat applied when the temperature is low. The
associated with an increased frequency of re-
temperature of animals frequently decreases
flux and oesophageal sphincter pressure is sigmifi-
further after the end of surgery when the covering
cantly decreased at the end of surgery during
drapes are removed. Warming is highly effective
isoflurane anaesthesia at the time of suturing of the
when using a device blowing hot air into
skin (Hashim et al., 1995). The incidence of gastro-
pads placed over the animal (Bair Hugger,
oesophageal reflux is sigmificantly higher when
Augustine Medical Inc., Eden Prairie, Minnesota,
anaesthesia has been induced with propofol than
USA).
with thiopental (Raptopoulos & Galatos, 1997).
The information concerning the influence of pre-
Oxygen supplementation
operative fasting on the volume and acidity of
gastric fluid and the impact of anaesthetic combi-
O2 therapy should be considered for dogs that
nations on lower oesophageal sphincter tone is not
have trouble adequately oxygenating. An O2
sufficiently definitive to make specific recommen-
chamber or baby incubator, if available, can be
dations to minimize gastric reflux.
used to supply an inspired concentration of
422 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 15.9 Placement of a nasal O, tube
Supplies
Placement
● Polyvinyl or rubber
● Measure tube
feeding 5F or 8F
from medial canthus to
nostril
●Permanent pen
● Mark distance with pen 
marker
· Lignocaine 2%
● Lubricate tube
● Lubricant gel
● Push nose dorsally,
Haemostat forceps
introduce tube dorsally
for a few mm, then
medially and ventrally
 Suturet'Superglue'
● Suture at the nares,
 between the eyes, and
on the forehead ± glue
tube to hair
a 40% inspired O2 concentration and can be a
more economical method of administration
(Fig 15.12). A bleb of ligmocaine can be injected
subcutaneously at the site for suture placement
but is not needed when the nasal tube is inserted
and secured before the animal regains conscious-
 ness (Table 15.9). O2 is humidified by bubbling
FlG. 15.12 Nasal tube for O2 insufflation.
through sterile water and insufflated into the
patient at 100 ml/kg/min (Fig. 15.13). The oxygen
delivery tubing should be secured to a collar or
tape around the neck.
Analgesia
Display of pain during recovery from surgery may
be obvious or subtle and veterinarians differ wide-
ly in their assessment of the degree of pain and in
their interpretation for the need for analgesia. The
HUMIDIFIER
signs of pain in dogs may vary from excitement,
vocalization, and mutilation of the painful area to
shivering, reluctance to move, excessive salivation
and pupillary dilation. Dogs may become aggress
ive, guard the painful site and avoid human
touch. There are individual and breed differences
 in tolerance for pain and it is possible that sporting
 na c   e si  
FIG. 15.13 Oxygen flowmeter and humidifier for nasal
viour changes to a noxious stimulus. Various types
insuffation.
of pain scoring scales have been described in an
attempt to accurately detect severity of pain.
40-60% O2 and warm the animal at the same
To complete a visual analogue scale, the patient
time. Nasal administration of O2 may achieve
is observed for a specific behaviour and the
THE DOG 423
TABLE 15.10 Examples of intramuscular dose
Tronsdermol fentonyl potch
rates of opioids for analgesia in the early
A method of postoperative pain control that is
recovery period
 gaining popularity in North America is the trans-
Opioid
Dose rate
Dosing interval
dermal fentanyl patch (Chapter 4, p.97). Delivery
(mg/kg)
(h)
Morphine
0.3-0.5
4
area and delivered fentanyl doses are 25, 50, 75,
Pethidine
2-3
2
and 100 μg/hour. Appropriate dose rates in veteri-
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.10
4
Butorphanol
0.2-0.3
nary patients are under investigation but current
Buprenorphine
0.006-0.010
46
usage is 25 μg/h for small dogs > 2kg, 50μg/h
for 10-20kg dog, 75μg/h for 20-30kg dog, and
s a o :< so 1 s  01
should be placed and covered so that the animals
observer places a mark on a line on which the
cannot remove them and ingest the contents.
left end represents no pain and the right end re-
Measurement of plasma fentanyl concentrations
presents the most pain possible. Use of a numeri-
has determined that steady state plasma concen-
cal rating scale is similar except that a number
trations are not achieved for 24 hours after patch
is assigmed to the behaviour where 0 represents
application (Kyles et al., 1996; Egger et al., 1998).
normal or preprocedural behaviour and 2 or 3
Consequently, the patch must be applied the day
represents abnormal behaviour (Conzemius et al.,
before surgery to provide some intraoperative
1997; Holton et al., 1998; Firth & Haldane, 1999).
analgesia. If the patch is applied at the end of sur-
Evaluations of pain scoring techniques have dis-
 gery, another form of analgesia must be provided
covered that measurements of some clinical signs,
for the first 12-24 postoperative hours. There is
such as heart rates and respiratory rates, do not
considerable individual variation in the analgesia
accurately reflect the severity of postoperative
provided by a fentanyl patch, and even when the
pain. Although combining scores from a variety of
patch is applied sufficiently early, the analgesia is
observations including activity, mental status, pos
not enough to prevent the dog experiencing the
ture, vocalization, etc., can provide a reliable
acute pain in the immediate postoperative period.
assessment of pain (Firth & Haldane, 1999), scores
Plasma fentanyl concentrations are sustained for
from different observers may vary considerably
72hours but decline rapidly after the patch is
(Holton et al., 1998).
removed. Respiratory depression has not been a
 Plans for provision of analgesia should have
notable problem. The patch should be removed if
been made before anaesthesia and whenever poss-
signs of overdosage such as a restlessness, drowsi-
ible a multimodal approach should be employed
ness, or inappetance are observed.
that includes local nerve blocks with opioid or local
anaesthetic solution. Parenterally administered
opioids should be given before consciousness
returns. Examples of opioids for postoperative
SPECIFIC PATIENT PROBLEMS
analgesia and dose rates are given in Table 15.10
but adjustments should be made for the individual
CARDIAC DISEASE
dog. A small dose of sedative or tranquillizer
General recommendations for anaesthesia of dogs
may be needed to potentiate the effect of the
with cardiac disease include premedication to
opioid, for example, acepromazine 0.025 mg/kg
present a calm, unstressed animal for induction of
i.v., or medetomidine 1-2μg/kg. Disadvantages
pue Sump eisaaieue juas pue eisansee
of the i.m. or i.v. routes of administration for opi-
 after surgery. Management of cardiovascular func-
oids include a variable degree of respiratory de-
tion must include maintenance of an adequate
pression, even hypoxaemia, potential decrease in
blood volume without overload, preoxygenation
ABP, and decreased effectiveness of the pharyn-
and provision of O2 during anaesthesia to avoid
 geal and laryngeal reflexes, with increased risk for
hypoxaemia, and adequate monitoring of the car-
aspiration.
diovascular system during anaesthesia to detect
424 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 15.1I Significance of cardiac disease to
Consequently, premedication with glycopyrrolate
anaesthesia
is indicated and agents that should be avoided
 Patient problem
include xylazine, medetomidine, large doses of
Anaesthetic considerations
acepromazine, and thiopental.
Mitral valve
Increased risk for
insufficiency
hypotension.
Consider increasing cardiac
Patent ductus arteriosus
preload (i.v.fluids to maintain
A dog with a patent ductus arteriosus has low
blood volume), avoid
decreasing cardiac
diastolic and MAP pressure and care should be
contractility, avoid bradycardia,
taken with anaesthetic agents that cause vasodila-
and consider slightly
tion. Infusion of balanced electrolyte solution to
decreasing cardiac afterload
these patients should be restricted to 6 ml/kg/h,
(some vasodilation preferable
unless individual evaluation indicates need for a
to vasoconstriction)
Cardiomyopathy
 Increased risk for hypotension
modified rate, to avoid pulmonary oedema after
ligation of the ductus. ABP may be increased by
and death.
Careful choice of anaesthetic
infusion of dobutamine, although a dramatic
agents to avoid decreased
increase in diastolic and mean pressures usually
cardiac contractility
 occurs when the ductus is ligated. Other require-
Ventricular
 Increased risk for hypotension
ments for management relate to the thoracotomy
arrhythmias e.g.
 or ventricular fibrillation and
which is discussed later and in Chapter 19
automobile trauma, death.
gastric dilatation
 Consider use of agents 
volvulus
that do not sensitize the
 myocardium to
ENDOSCOPY
catecholamines,e.g.
benzodiazepines, opioids,
Gastrointestinal endoscopy
ketamine, isoflurane
Gastroduodenoscopy and proctoscopy may be
Patent ductus
 Increased risk for hypotension
shop u ro sop Aueay Aiaaan u paoad
arteriosus
 before ligation and for
with a history of chronic weight loss. In the latter
 pulmonary oedema after
ligation.
case, decreased serum total protein concentration
 Minimize dose of agents that
may result in decreased anaesthetic requirement
cause vasodilation and limit
for thiopental or propofol and serious loss of fat
baseline intraoperative fluid
and muscle will result in prolonged recovery from
rate to 6 ml/kg/h
thiopental. Although the ease of introduction of
the endoscope into the duodenum is directly rel-
ated to the experience of the veterinarian in this
unacceptable abnormalities. Different forms of
procedure, premedication with atropine and
cardiac disease require specific management
morphine has been documented to significantly
(Table 15.11). Knowledge of the physiology of the
increase the number of attempts to successfully
disease can be used to define the pharmacological
pass the endoscope (Donaldson et al., 1993). Com-
requirements of the anaesthetic drugs.
plications of endoscopy include excessive distension
 of the stomach and intestines resulting in hypo-
Mitral insufficiency
ventilation and gastric reflux into the pharynx. The
cardiovascular changes caused by gastrointestinal
Anaesthesia for the old dog with mitral insuffi-
distension depend on the severity of distension.
ciency must take into consideration the impact of
s p ts are o pe v u sa
old age on anaesthetic requirements and that
testinal endosopy in the majority of healthy
mitral insufficiency decreases cardiac output in the
 dogs (Jergens et al., 1995) but the anaesthetist must
 presence of bradycardia, decreased venous return,
 be alert for bradycardia and hypotension that
and increased systemic vascular resistance.
 develop in individuals. Biopsy of the intestines
THE DOG 425
carries the risk of perforation and tension pneu-
dial ischaemia increases the risk of hypotension
and poor organ perfusion during anaesthesia.
the need for an emergency exploratory laparoto-
Overt clinical signs of myocardial ischaemia such
my. Endoscopy for removal of an oesophageal for-
eign body or for dilation of an oesophageal
 anaesthesia has been induced or even after surgery
stricture also introduces the potential for pneu-
mothorax.
GDV or gastric dilatation develop cardiac arrhyth-
mias, mainly ventricular premature depolariza-
tions or ventricular tachycardia, between 12 and 36
Bronchoscopy
hours after the onset of the problem (Muir, 1982;
Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
Brockman et al., 1995).
are most difficult to manage in smaller dogs. The 
 Gastric decompression should be accomplished
ability to cough should be retained during BAL
 before induction of anaesthesia by passage of a
and this requires a light plane of anaesthesia with
stomach tube. Blood volume should be expanded
either thiopental or propofol. Anticholinergics
with crystalloid solution administered intra-
should be omitted to preserve the volume of secre-
venously up to 90ml/kg in the first hour.
tions and should not be used in dogs with
Hypertonic (7.5% saline solution) saline, 4 ml/kg
 pneumonia to avoid consolidating secretions.
i.v. over 10 minutes, will induce a more rapid
Butorphanol is marketed as an antitussive, how-
improvement in cardiovascular function. Hyper-
ever, it has proven tobe a useful agent for premedica-
tonic saline in 6% Dextran 70, 5ml/kg, has also
tion in these dogs provided that the dose of
proven to be effective (Allen et al., 1991; Schertel
nduction drug is kept to a minimum. The drug for
et al., 1997). Further volume expansion can
induction should be administered in small incre-
be achieved by administration of hetastarch,
ments to retain the coughing response to introduc-
 20 ml/kg. Reperfusion injury may occur after
tion of the sterile endotracheal tube and to
decompression of the stomach. Deferoxamine
 instillation of sterile saline for bronchial wash. Hypo-
30 mg /kg i.m. (Desferal, Novartis, East Hanover,
xaemia is a common complication, especially during
New Jersey, USA), which inhibits production of
bronchoscopy in a small dog where the diameter
hydroxyl radicals, given before anaesthesia may
of the endoscope may be large in comparison with
increase survival rate (Lantz et al., 1992).
the lumen of the trachea. Preoxygenation is essen-
Routine administration of sodium bicarbonate
 tial and use of a pulse oximeter is advisable during
is not recommended because of uncertainty of the
the procedure. O may be supplied intermittently
 dog's metabolic status. Gastric sequestration may
by facemask when the endoscope is removed or
result in metabolic alkalosis, however, hypoten-
insufflated around or down the endocope. When
 sion and decreased peripheral perfusion may
the procedure is expected to last for more than a
 result in metabolic acidosis. Treatment of suspect-
few minutes, anaesthesia may have to be contin-
 ed metabolic derangements are best reserved until
ued with an injectable drug such as propofol.
pH and blood gas analysis can be performed.
Dogs with gastric necrosis are likely to have abnor-
mal hemostatic function, most frequently throm-
GASTRIC DILATATION/VOLVULUS
bocytopenia  and  decreased  antithrombin 
111
SYNDROME
activity, and a proportion will develop disseminat-
Abdominal distension resulting from gastric
ed intravascular coagulation (DIC) (Millis et al.,
dilatation and volvulus (GDV) decreases CO and
1993).
ABP. Experimental investigations of GDV have
documented a 64% decrease in CO (Orton &
Anaesthetic management of GDV
Muir II, 1983) or as much as an 89% decrease asso-
ciated with 50% decrease in coronary blood flow
The clinical status of these dogs before anaesthesia
(Horme et al., 1985). Even when the stomach has
varies from relatively healthy to moribund.
been decompressed before anaesthesia, myocar-
Anaesthetic agents, dose rates and additional
426 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 15.12 Significance of hepatic disease to anaesthesia
Patient problem
Anaesthetic considerations
Decreased hepatic function
Increased risk for excessive bleeding. hypoglycaemia, prolonged recovery from
anaesthesia.
Consider checking coagulation profile before anaesthesia (may need fresh
plasma),monitoring blood glucose and giving 5% dextrose in water 3 ml/kg/h as
 part of fluid therapy, using anaesthetic agents that are easily eliminated or
antagonized.
During anaesthesia, avoid further hepatit damage by preventing hypotension and
hypercarbia
Portosystemic shunt
Increased risk for hypotension, hypoglycaemia, and hypothermia.
Benzodiazepines contraindicated with encephalopathy; use agents with minimal
cardiovascular depressant effects and that can be antagonized or do not depend
on hepatic function for elimination.
During anaesthesia,give 5% dextrose in water 3 ml/kg/h as part of fluid therapy
and treat hypotension with dopamine or dobutamine
Bile duct calculi
Increased risk for surgical procedure to cause hypoventilation and hypotension
(mechanical obstruction of venous return).
Contraction of bile ducts may be initiated by opiates. Impact of partial agonists
under debate
management will have to be adjusted to the
combination of diazepam and fentanyl, or
individual dog and administered bearing in mind
diazepam and oxymorphone will provide
that the dog may have severely decreased anaes-
 anaesthesia with minimal cardiovascular depres-
thetic requirements.
sion. Disadvantages of these techniques are vomit-
Cardiovascular monitoring should begin be-
ing and probable hypoventilation necessitating
fore induction of anaesthesia by attaching ECG
IPPV. Anaesthesia can be maintained with an
leads or a form of indirect or direct blood pressure
ue jo uoisnju snonuuos Aq no juae uoeeuu
measurement. Preoxygenation is advisable by
opioid.
administration of O2 by facemask for several
minutes before induction. Two induction tech-
HEPATIC DISEASE
niques that are preferable for dogs with GDV
are diazepam/ketamine and neuroleptanalgesia.
Administration of anaesthesia to dogs with
A suitable alternative technique (except for
decreased hepatic function presents two difficul-
the high expense) is to use etomidate which pre-
ties. First, recovery from anaesthesia will be slow if
serves cardiovascular function. Thiopental and
the anaesthetic agents used must be detoxified by
propofol are less appropriate as these agents
the liver. Secondly, further hepatic damage can
decrease CO to a greater extent. Because of the risk
occur during anaesthesia from hepatic hypoxia as
of regurgitation and aspiration mask induction is
a consequence of hypotension, splanchnic vaso-
inadvisable
constriction from hypercapnia, or arterial hypox-
 Induction of anaesthesia with i.v. diazepam,
aemia. Dogs with moderate to severe hepatic
0.25 mg/kg, and ketamine, 5mg/kg, preserves
 disease may have disorders of clotting and tests of
cardiovascular function. Tachycardia caused by
 coagulation should be performed before surgery.
these drugs may potentiate ventricular arrhyth-
 Hypoglycaemia is also a potential complication
mias and i.v. lignocaine, 2mg/kg, can be given
 and 5% dextrose in water should be infused dur-
before or after ketamine to control abnormal
 ing anaesthesia. Surgical problems relating to the
rhythms. After the airway is secured analgesia can
 liver, such as portosystemic shunt and bile duct
be supplemented with an opioid. An alternative
 calculi, have specific anaesthetic considerations
induction technique is neuroleptanalgesia. The (Table 15.12).
THE DOG 427
TABLE 15.13 Significance of neurological disease
avoided as it also increases ICP. Acepromazine is
to anaesthesia (icP = intracranial pressure)
usually avoided in dogs at risk for seizures as it
decreases the seizure threshold.
Patient problem
Anaesthetic considerations
Seizures
Avoid acepromazine.
Use agents that decrease ICP
Myelography
e.g. thiopental, propofol,
etomidate, diazepam
Dogs must be observed closely for mild to serious
Depression, decreased Adjust dose rates for
adverse side effects during injection of iohexol for
mentation, meningitis decreased anaesthetic
myelography. Respiratory arrest should be treated
requirement
by IPPV and hypotension by decreasing anaesthe-
Increased ICP,e.g.
Use agents that decrease
tic administration. Severe decreases in ABP may be
brain tumour,
ICP
treated with dopamine or dobutamine. Occasion-
hydrocephalus
Use controlled
ally cardiac arrest ensues. Balanced electrolyte solu-
head trauma
ventilation
tion should be infused during anaesthesia at a rate
 to prevent hypercarbia
of 10 ml/kg/hour to promote excretion of the con-
trast agent. The dog's head must be supported in an
NEUROLOGIC DISEASE
elevated position after the myelogram to encourage
flow of contrast agent from the brain. Recovery
Dogs with neurologic disease range from being
essentially healthy to comatose. Anaesthesia may
cated by seizures requiring specific treatment.
be straightforward, or the dog may be at risk of
anaesthetic overdose or serious neurologic con-
sequences from increased intracranial pressure
ORTHOPAEDIC SURGERY
(Table 15.13). Diagmostic procedures, such as
General considerations  for  anaesthesia for
collection of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), myelogra-
orthopaedic surgery include awareness of the spe-
phy, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) have
cific problems created by a traumatic accident.
specific considerations relating to anaesthesia.
Prolonged anaesthesia, significant blood loss, pro-
vision of analgesia, and hypothermia are common
Increased intracranial pressure
problems for anaesthetic management. Analgesia
for surgery on the forelimb can include, in addi-
Dogs with increased intracranial pressure (ICP)
tion to parenteral administration of opioid and
before anaesthesia can be treated with methyl-
NSAID, epidural block with morphine and, for
prednisolone sodium succinate and mannitol.
surgery distal to the elbow, brachial plexus nerve
Anaesthesia may be induced with a combination
block with bupivacaine. Analgesia for surgery of
of agents knowm to decrease ICP and cerebral
the hindlimbs and pelvis can include parenteral
metabolic O2 demand, such as diazepam, midazo-
opioid and NSAID, and epidural nerve block with
lam, thiopental and propofol. Halothane and
morphine alone or with bupivacaine. An altern-
isoflurane are usually used to maintain anaesthe-
ative to epidural block for elective surgery of the
Suseau Aq di aseau Aaun ynou uaaa eis
stifle is intra-articular morphine or bupivacaine.
cerebral blood flow and causing hypercapnia.
Repair of a fractured jaw introduces the risk of
Hypercapnia has a direct effect on cerebral vascul-
aspiration of blood and debris and care must be
ature causing increased cerebral blood flow that
taken to ensure that the endotracheal tube cuff is
ncreases ICP. Consequently, IPPV should be used
sufficiently inflated and that the mouth is cleaned
throughout anaesthesia in dogs with increased
before recovery from anaesthesia. Surgical repair
ICP (e.g those suffering from hydrocephalus, brain
may require that the endotracheal tube be
aq ose pmous Adl (enen peay ro 'smon
removed from the oropharynx to increase expos-
instituted during collection of cerebrospinal fluid,
ure to the fracture and to enable the surgeon to
as increased ICP during this procedure may result
judge correct aligrment and avoid malocclusion of
in cerebellar herniation. Hypertension must be
the teeth. Anaesthesia is induced and orotracheal
428 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. 15.14 The endotracheal tube has been inserted through a pharyngostomy incision to provide better surgical access
for repair of the fractured mandible. A reinforced metal spiral endotracheal tube has been used to avoid kinking of the
tube as it turns I80° within the pharynx.
intubation is performed as usual. The site for a
decreased CO and ABP, and by causing sympa-
paedand us aut 'paddip si aqni Aoisoureud
thetic nervous system stimulation. Thus, dogs
for surgery, and the pharyngostomy made with
with chronic renal disease are at risk for acute
appropriate surgical technique. The endotracheal
renal failure after anaesthesia. Adverse effects
tube cuff is deflated and the tube is disconnected
 of anaesthesia can usually be prevented by ade-
s      o
quate fluid therapy during anaesthesia and choice
First, the pilot balloon is grasped with the tip of
of an anaesthetic technique providing a rapid
forceps introduced through the pharyngostomy
recovery from anaesthesia. For some dogs, ade-
and pulled through to the outside, and then the
quate fluid therapy should include starting infu-
oral end of the endotracheal tube is exteriorized.
 sion before anaesthesia and continuing fluid
The endotracheal tube is reconnected to the
 administration at a reduced rate for some hours
adapter and anaesthetic system, the cuff inflated,
after anaesthesia.
and anaesthesia proceeds (Fig. 15.14). Use of an
Acute renal failure from urethral obstruction or
endotracheal tube with a metal spiral embedded in
urinary bladder or ureter rupture includes prob-
its wall will ensure that the tube does not become
lems of hypovolaemia, azotemia, and metabolic
kinked during placement or the surgical proced-
acidosis, all of which result in decreased anaesthe-
ure. An alternative technique for pharyngostomy
tic requirement and increased risk of hypotension
intubation is to introduce the endotracheal tube
 and arrhythmias. Intensive care before anaesthesia
from the outside and to use forceps to grasp the
will decrease complications occurring during
end of the endotracheal tube inside the mouth to
anaesthesia. Anaesthetic agents should be admin-
direct the tube into the larynx.
istered at markedly decreased dose rates.
RENAL DISEASE
THORACOTOMY
Anaesthesia and surgery decrease urine for-
 Consideration of the appropriate choice of anaes-
mation by decreasing renal blood flow through
thetic agents for the dog's problems is essential to
THE DOG429
TABLE 15.14 Significance of renal disease to
minimize complications of thoracotomy. Victims
anaesthesia
of car accidents often have myocardial contusions.
Agents that do not sensitize the myocardium to
Patient problem Anaesthetic considerations
catecholamines, such as diazepam, ketamine and
Chronic renal
 Increased risk for prolonged
isoflurane, may be selected over agents that
disease
recovery from anaesthesia and
increase the risk of arrhythmias, such as xylazine,
further deterioration of renal
thiopental, propofol, and halothane. Patients with
function after anaesthesia.
low PaO2 before anaesthesia (e.g. those with chy-
Use a combination of anaesthetic
agents to facilitate low dose rates
 lothorax and some cases of diaphragmatic hernia),
 and rapid elimination.
will benefit from a rapid i. v. induction sequence
Consider initiating diuresis with
rather than a slower mask induction. If possible,
i.v. balanced electrolyte infusion
monitoring should include use of a pulse oximeter
10 ml/kg/h for 60 min before
induction of anaesthesia, prevent
as hypoxaemia may develop soon after induction
hypotension during anaesthesia,
of anaesthesia. Adequate oxygenation may be
 monitor urine production,
restored by institution of IPPV or by changing the
 continue i.v.fluids into recovery
dog's body position to remove the weight of
period
abdominal organs or collapsed lung on normal
Urethral
Increased risk for anaesthetic
lung.
obstruction,
 overdose, hypoventilation,
 IPPV will be necessary during anaesthesia and
 ruptured ureter, hypotension, and prolonged
urinary bladder  recovery from anaesthesia.
appropriate procedures have been described in a
or urethra
Provide medical treatment before
previous chapter Inspiratory pressure needs to be
anaesthesia to expand blood
less when the chest is open. When a lung is packed
volume and decrease serum
off during surgery, the respiratory rate should be
potassium to <6.5 mmol/l.
increased to 20/min and the tidal volume
Administer anaesthetic agents in
decreased to 11 ml/kg. Lobes of lung that have
small increments to avoid
overdosage and monitor cardiac
aq jou pinous smoy Aueu ioy pasdelon uaaq
rhythm and blood pressure during
forcefully reinflated or reperfusion injury may
anaesthesia
result. This may result in pulmonary oedema that
 TABLE 15.15 Planning for thoracotomy
Problem
Management
Pain control during and after
Use multimodal analgesia involving more than one method of analgesia:
surgery
morphine epidural, intercostal nerve block, interpleural analgesia, systemic
opioid, non-steroidal agent
Inadequate ventilation
IPPV via endotracheal tube will be required
Pneumothorax
Do not use NzO when the chest is closed.
Limit peak inspired pressure to 25 cm H2O in trauma patients to minimize
risk of further alveolar rupture
Cardiac rhythm disturbances
Lignocaine i.v. bolus and infusion to treat ventricular arrhythmias;
originating from myocardial
lignocaine, 2 mg/kg, without adrenaline, can be applied topically to the
damage or surgical manipulation
heart; avoid hypercapnia
Collapsed lung
Do not attempt to reinflate lung that has been collapsed for more than a
few hours as this may cause pulmonary oedema
Hypoxaemia after anaesthesia
Supplement PiO2 by nasal tube insufflation or O2 chamber
Anticipated complications
with specific surgical procedures
develop hypotension when abdominal organs are removed from thorax
Lung lobe torsion: decreased anaesthetic requirement; may develop
hypoxaemia and hypotension after induction
430 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
spreads throughout the lungs resulting in hypox-
aemia. The changes may be severe and progress to
a fatal outcome.
Monitoring ABP, HR and cardiac rhythm are
of prime importance during thoracotomy.
The dog's problems, the anaesthetic agents, and
surgical manipulation can all cause hypotension
and arrhythmias. Cardiovascular performance
may have to be improved as previously described in
the section on anaesthetic management. Premature
ventricular contractions or ventricular tachycardia
may need to be treated by i.v. ligmocaine.
Analgesia can be provided by systemic admin-
istration of opioids, by regional analgesia from
FIG. 15.15 Auriculopalpebral nerve block.The nerve is
intercostal nerve blocks with bupivacaine,
blocked just where the zygomatic ridge dips medially.
interpleural instillation of bupivacaine (up to a
total dose of 2.5 mg/kg), and epidural analgesia
SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
with morphine (0.1 mg/kg). Postanaesthetic vent-
ilation and oxygenation should be monitored close-
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
ly and administration of O2 by O2 chamber or
The nerve runs caudal to the mandibular joint
nasal insufflation (100 ml O2/kg/min) may be
 at the base of the ear and, after giving of the cranial
required for several hours.
auricular branch, proceeds as the temporal branch
The extent of postoperative care needed after
 along the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch
thoracotomy varies from case to case. Minimal
towards the orbit. Before reaching the orbit the
care may be necessary after repair of a patent duc-
nerve divides into two branches, which pass medi-
tus arteriosus, unless a complication occurred
 ally and laterally to supply the orbicularis muscle.
or the dog has heart failure, and similarly, for
The needle is introd uced through the skin and
fascia over the midpoint of the caudal third of the
intensive care will be needed for dogs with com-
Zygomatic arch just where the arch can be felt to
plications, such as sepsis, persistent pneumotho-
 dip sharply medially) and up to 1 ml of 2% ligno-
rax, continual fluid
daccumulation,
or after
caine is injected (Fig. 15.15). The blocking of
complicated surgery. Chest tubes not cornected to
this branch of the facial nerve does not produce
an underwater drain or Heimlich valve should be
any analgesia. By paralysing the orbicularis
sucked avoiding excessive pressures, every 1-2
muscle it facilitates examination of, and operations
hours initially, (
 decreasing to every
y4hours,
on, the eyeball. It is of particular value in pre-
depending on the progress of recovery. Lavage
venting squeezing of the eyeball after intraocular
will be necessary when bacterial contamination is
operations.
present.
Brachial plexus block
LoCAL ANaLGESIA
Block of the brachial plexus will provide analgesia
below the elbow. Injection can be made with the
Local analgesia is frequently used as an adjunct
 anaesthetized dog in lateral recumbency using a
to general anaesthesia or in the treatment of pre-
22 gauge 3.75 cm, 6.25 cm, or 8.75 cm long spinal
or postoperative pain and less frequently
needle, according to the size of the dog. Bupi-
employed as the sole method of analgesia for surgi-
vacaine, 2.0-2.5 mg/kg, should provide at least
cal procedures in dogs. The techniques for these
 6hours of analgesia with an onset time of 10 to
blocks, listed alphabetically, are described in this
40 minutes. Alternatively, lignocaine, 6 mg/kg, can
section.
be used for a shorter duration of action - approxi-
THE DOG 431
6
plexus may be damaged, causing neuritis or per-
manent paralysis, or infection may be introduced
into the axilla. However, if due care is exercised,
the technique may be regarded as a relatively safe
procedure, of particular value for intraoperative
and postoperative analgesia or even one that can
Point of shoulder!
be used as the sole anaesthetic agent for surgery.
greater tubercle
of humerus
EpIDURAL BlOCK
Ist rib
Epidural block with lignocaine or bupivacaine can
provide analgesia for major surgery of the hind-
limbs and pelvis. Opioids, morphine, oxymor-
phone, fentanyl, sufentanil, and butorphanol have
been used in the epidural space to provide analge.
sia during and after surgery, although other
FIG. I5.16 Landmarks for brachial plexus nerve block.
methods of analgesia may be needed to manage
acute pain in the immediate recovery period.
mately 2hours. The brachial plexus originates
Combinations of an opioid with bupivacaine or
from the ventral branches the 6th, 7th and Sth cer-
xylazine or medetomidine have been used to
vical and the 1st and 2nd thoracic spinal nerves
extend the duration of analgesia. Epidural block is
which form three cords which run for a short dis-
contraindicated if the dog has a coagulopathy or
tance before segregating into the nerves of the tho-
skin infection over thelumbosacral area.
racic limb. Local anaesthetic solution must be
spread over a wide area to block all the nerves.
Technique
Commercially available solutions can be diluted
with saline by 25% to produce a larger volume for
The technique of epidural block has already been
injection and increase the spread of anaesthetic.
discussed in Chapters 10 and 13. The spinal cord
An area rostral to the cranial border of the
ends in the dog at the junction of the sixth and sev-
scapula, between the point of the shoulder and the
 enth lumbar vertebrae, and the meninges continue
cervical vertebrae should be clipped and the skin
to the middle of the sacrum. Not infrequently, a
prepared as for surgery. The point of the needle
needle inserted at the lumbosacral space penetrates
should be inserted halfway between the point of
the dura and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is aspirated.
the shoulder and the transverse process of the 6th
The epidural injection may be performed with a
cervical vertebra. It is thern advanced medial to the
conscious dog in the sternal or lateral positions but
scapula and parallel to the vertebral column to the
is usually performed with the anaesthetized dog in
1st or 2nd rib (Fig. 15.16). Aspiration before injec-
lateral recumbency. Sudden forceful movement in
tion of local anaesthetic is essential to ensure that
the conscious dog in sternal position cannot effect-
the needle is not in a blood vessel. Part of the total
ively be prevented when the animal's limbs are
volume is injected and the remainder injected as
beneath it. Better control is achieved by the assist-
the needle is withdrawn, aspirating before each
ant restraining the dog holding the hocks forward
subsequent injection.
so that the hind limbs are in extension. The hair
Some complications may occur as a conse-
should be clipped over a sufficient area to observe
quence of this procedure. Large blood vessels pass
the landmarks for injection and to maintain steril-
through the area for injection and needle puncture
ity. The site for needle insertion is located by iden-
may create a large haematoma. Further, the local
tifying the cranial dorsal iliac spines of the pelvis
aalgesic solution may be injected intravascularly,
(Fig. 15.17). An imaginary line joining these crosses
the needle may enter the thorax and permit the
midline over the dorsal spinous process of the last
entry of air into the pleural cavity, the brachial
lumbar vertebra. The lumbosacral junction is pal-
432 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
FIG. 15.18 Epidural analgesia.The site and direction for
FIG. 15.17 Site for epidural injection.This dog is
insertion of the needle.
anaesthetized and clipped for orthopaedic surgery. An
imaginary line between the caudal dorsal iliac spines
crosses the midline at the lumbosacral space. An
fluid (CSF) or blood into the syringe, injection of
imaginary line between the cranial edges of the cranial
air should offer no resistance. Confirmation of cor-
dorsal iliac spines crosses the midline at the dorsal spinous
process of the last lumbar vertebra.
rect placement is made by ensuring that the needle
is midline, that it is sufficiently deep (needle
pated as a depression immediately caudal to this
should be supported securely by surrounding tis-
midline prominence, adjacent to the caudal dorsal
sues when the tip is in the epidural space), that a
iliac spines, which in thin dogs can be seen as the
slight resistance then penetration 'pop' is appreci-
most dorsal bumps of the pelvis. In heavily mus-
 ated during traverse of the interarcuate ligament,
cled or fat dogs and dogs with rounded hindquar-
 and there is no resistance to injection of the air. If
ters, the caudal dorsal iliac spines are difficult to
CSF or blood are aspirated into the syringe, the
 palpate and heavy reliance is placed on identifying
syringe should be disconnected, the stilette rein-
the spinous process of the last lumbar vertebra.
serted and the tip of the spinal needle reposi-
Palpation of the spinous process of the previous
tioned. Injection of the anaesthetic solution should
lumbar vertebra can be used as a guide. The needle
be made over 30 seconds to avoid an increase in
should be inserted caudal to the last spinous
intracranial pressure. The injectate should be
process at a distance that is half of the distance
 warmed before performing epidural analgesia in
between the two spinous processes.
the conscious dog to avoid movement in response
In conscious dogs an insensitive skin weal is
to the cold solution.
made with a fine needle and a bleb of local anaes-
A catheter can be introduced easily some 2-3 cm
thetic. A 21 or 22 gauge spinal needle, 3.75 cm for
 into the epidural space through a correctly placed
small dogs and 6.25 cm for large dogs, is inserted
Tuohy needle (Fig. 15.19). This technique is useful
midline perpendicular to the skin and to the curvat-
for continuous postoperative analgesia.
ure of the rump (Fig. 15.18). Penetration of the
interarcuate ligament imparts a distinct 'popping'
Drugs used in the epidural spoce
sensation to the fingers. Should bone rather than
ligament be encountered, it indicates that the
Lignocaine 2% with 1:200 000 adrenaline will pro-
direction of the needle has been wrong and that
duce analgesia in 15minutes and last 1.5-2.0
  s    s  s
hours. Bupivacaine 0.50% or 0.75% has a slower
roof of the first sacral segment. If this occurs the
 onset of action at 20-40 minutes and a longer dura-
needle is slightly withdrawn and a search made
tion of at least 6 hours. To produce analgesia up to
for the space by redirecting it a little caudally, cra-
Apoq Sxs' 1ad qu 1 Alaieixoidde go asop e 11
nially or laterally. The hub of the needle should be
weight is required and for cranial laparotomies
held securely as the stilette is removed. A 3ml
1 where analgesia is needed to the 4th or 5th thoracic
syringe containing 0.5 ml air should be attached
 segment this dose is usually increased to about 1
THE DOG433
(Branson et al., 1993), or even as long as 23hours
(Bonath & Saleh, 1985). Analgesia may extend as
far forward as the forelimb and provides a signifi-
cant decrease in anaesthetic requirement for sur-
 gery (MAC value for halothane decreased by
3040%) (Valverde et al., 1989; Valverde et al., 1991).
The duration of analgesia after epidural injection of
oxymorphone, 0.05mg/kg, was measured at
 7.6 hours after hindlimb orthopaedic surgery (Vesal
et al., 1996) and 10hours after thoracotomy
(Popilskis et al., 1991). The anaesthetic requirement
for halothane is reported to be significantly
decreased after epidural administration of oxymor-
phone, 0.1 mg/kg, and further by oxymorphone
with bupivacaine, 1 mg/kg (Torske et al., 1998)
Epidural fentanyl and butorphanol have also been
used, but the duration of analgesia is short.
Potential complications
In dogs, temporary interference with hindlimb
motor power is of no clinical consequence.
Analgesia caused by local anaesthetic solution that
diffuses into the thoracic segments may be accom-
panied by hypotension that can be minimized
by infusion of balanced electrolyte solution, 10-
20ml/kg, as the block develops. ABP and periph-
inounou paonou aq pmous uoisnjad ea
and a catheter for infusion of fluid and vasoactive
drugs should they be needed must be placed in a
FIG. 15.19 Epidural Minipack' set (Portex Ltd) which is
vein before epidural block is induced .
ideal for the introduction of a catheter into a dog's
epidural space.The set contains a 10 ml syringe, 19 G
 In man, respiratory depression has been report-
Tuohy needle graduated 10-45 mm × 5 mm, open-ended
ed to occur several hours after epidural morphine
catheter marked at 20- 100 mm × 10 mm from tip, loss-of-
injection, but this does not appear to be a problem
resistance device,flat filter and Luer Lock connector.
in dogs. Oxymorphone is absorbed into the sys-
temic circulation rapidly with peak values
ml per 3.5 kg. The dose should be decreased about
attained within 15 minutes after administration,
 25% in pregnant animals. In contrast, epidural
similar to absorption after intramuscular injection
 block may not extend as far cranially as expected
(Torske et al., 1999). Serum values of morphine
in dogs that have experienced serious weight loss.
peak 30 minutes after epidural administration. Epi-
Morphine, 0.1mg/kg in a total volume of 
dural oxymorphone results in sigrificant decreases
0.10-0.25 ml/kg (a preservative-free solution con-
in HR and CO (Vesal et al., 1996; Torske et al., 1999)
tains 1 mg/ml), is the opioid used most frequently
These effects can be satisfactorily improved by
for epidural injection in veterinary medicine.
administration of glycopyrrolate. ABP, HR and CO
Morphine preparations containing phenol or
 are not depressed after administration of morphine
formaldehyde should not be used whereas the pre-
in anesthetized dogs (Valverde et al., 1991). A case
servative chlorbutanol has not been shown to be
 of postoperative urinary retention was reported in
neurotoxic (Du Pen et al. 1987).The onset of analge-
 a dog following epidural analgesia with morphine
sia is about 45 minutes and lasts from 6-12hours
and bupivacaine (Herperger, 1998).
434 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
A clinically insignificant complication that may
be regarded most adversely by the owners of show
 dogs is inability of hair over the lumbosacral
region to grow back at the same rate as expected
for other parts of the body and to be darker than
the original hair.
Infiltration of the dental nerves
Nerve block of the infraorbital nerve will provide
 analgesia of the upper teeth and block of the in-
ferior alveolar nerve will desensitize the lower
teeth. The infraorbital nerve is blocked within
the infraorbital canallocated by palpation between
the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch and the
canine tooth. The inferior alveolar nerve is blocked
by insertion of a needle through the mental fora-
 men adjacent to the second premolar tooth. A
recent report of chloroprocaine, 1ml of 2% at
FIG. 15.20 Injection of the digital nerves.
each site, for dental blocks in anesthetized dogs
described the onset of analgesia occurring within
10 minutes (Gross et al., 1997). The duration of
Injection of 0.25 to 1.00 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine
(1 mg/kg) should be made as close to the head of
analgesia lasted less than 90 minutes in the majori-
ty of dogs but persisted in isolated teeth for up to
the rib as possible before the nerve begins to send
96hours. Use of bupivacaine results in a slow
off branches. The block should include two nerves
 onset of action but should provide analgesia post-
immediately cranial to the thoracotomy incision
and two nerves caudal. Analgesia may be pro-
operatively.
 duced in this way in at least 3 out of 4 dogs and
will persist for the critical first 12hours after sur-
Infiltration of the digital nerves
 gery (Pascoe & Dyson, 1993).
ue Araie pauoedde ae saaau lenip a
medially to the first phalanx of the digit to be ren-
Interpleural analgesia
dered analgesic. A fine needle is introduced subcu-
taneously on each side of the digit (Fig. 15.20) and
Injection of bupivacaine, 1.5-2.5mg/kg, into
0.5-1.0 ml of local analgesic solution is injected on
the interpleural space will provide analgesia
after thoracotomy. The bupivacaine can be
each aspect to block the dorsal and palmar or plan-
instilled into the pleural cavity at the end of sur-
tar branches of the digital nerves. Alternatively.
the common dorsal and palmar (or plantar) digital
 gery before starting wound closure or instilled
 nerves can be blocked by injections dorsally and
down a chest tube, flushed in by several ml of ster-
ventrally at the distal end(s) of the main
ile saline. Analgesia develops most effectively
when the dog is in dorsal recumbency so that the
metacarpal (metatarsal) space(s).
bupivacaine collects near the vertebral column
and blocks the nerves at that point. Injection with
Intercostal nerve block
the dog in sternal position may only result in ven-
This block is commonly used to provide analgesia
tral analgesia.
after thoracotomy and is usually performed by the
 Injection of 1.5 mg/kg after lateral thoracotomy
surgeon before starting closure of the thoracic 
 was found to produce a significant improvement
wall. The intercostal nerve should be blocked 
in PaO2 and some measures of pulmonary func-
where it lies on the caudal surface of the rib.
tion for several hours after anaesthesia when com-
THE DOG 435
pared to systemic administration of morphine,
Intravenous regional analgesia
1 mg/kg (Stobie et al., 1995) or buprenorphine
This method provides a very safe and simple
(Conzemius et al., 1994). Furthermore, analgesia
way of obtaining analgesia in tractable or sedated
was at least as good from interpleural bupivacaine
dogs of the distal part of the limb for suturing lac-
-nq rane namol aram sarons uied) aunydiow se
erations, excision of tissue masses, and surgery of
pivacaine for 10hours) and better than bup-
the toes.
renorphine. A larger dose of bupivacaine will
The dog should be restrained on its side and the
 be needed for analgesia after median sternotomy.
appropriate limb held above heart level for 2-3
however it should be noted that a dose rate of
minutes to partially exanguinate it prior to appli-
3 mg/kg 0.5% bupivacaine caused hypotension
cation of a tourniquet. Thin rubber tourniquets can
 in some anaesthetized dogs (Kushner et al., 1995).
be painful and the least likely to cause the dog dis-
This occurred 15minutes after injection and
tress is a blood pressure cuff inflated to a pressure
was coincident with peak bupivacaine blood con-
 above systolic arterial pressure. On the forelimb
centrations
the tourniquet is placed either high on the forearm
Supplemental injections of bupivacaine can be
or above the elbow and on the hind limb above the
made down the chest drain tube as analgesia
hock. Lignocaine, 4mg/kg, is injected with a
fades. Transient 30 second discomfort may be
observed after injection in the conscious dog.
 25 gauge needle into any vein distal to the occlud-
ing cuff, with the direction of injection being made
towards the toes. The lignocaine should not
Intra-articular analgesia
include adrenaline which will cause vasoconstric-
Postoperative analgesia after arthrotomy may be
result in tissue ischaemia. Onset of analgesia will
provided by injection of 0.5% bupivacaine
 be in about 15 minutes and this will persist as long
(0.5 ml/kg) or preservative-free morphine (0.1
mg/kg diluted with saline to 0.5ml/kg). A
as the tourniquet is in place. Failure of analgesia
will occur if the tourniquet does not effectively
 prospective blinded study comparing the anal-
occlude arterial or venous blood flow. Sensation
gesic effects of these drugs after stifle surgery in
will return to the limb within a few minutes of
dogs confirmed that less supplemental analgesia
removal of the tourniquet.
was needed in dogs receiving intra-articular mor-
phine or bupivacaine compared with dogs receiv-
Intravenous injection may be difficult in thick
skinned dogs and this problem can be circumvent-
ing a placebo (Sammarco et al., 1996). Injections
ed by preplacement of a small indwelling catheter
were made after the joint capsule was closed,
prior to exanguination and application of the
extra-articular stabilization was performed, and
subcutaneous tissues were closed. Intra-articular
tourniquet.
The dog can be sedated with any drug combina-
bupivacaine provided the greatest analgesia with
tion appropriate for the dog. If the sedatives are to
consistently lower values postoperatively for HR,
be reversed at the end of the procedure, it must be
MAP, respiratory rates, and cumulative pain
remembered that intravenous regional analgesia
scores (Sammarco et al., 1996). The duration of ben-
eficial effects of bupivacaine seemed to be up to 24
confers no lasting analgesia affer the tourniquet is
hours.
removed.
The advantage of local analgesia after joint sur-
 gery lies in the provision of analgesia and comfort
 REFERENCES
for the dog without systemic side effects. The
peripheral antinociceptive effects of opioids are
Alibhai, H.1., Clarke, K. W., Lee, Y.H. and Thompson, J.
dependent on the presence of inflammation at the
(1996) Cardiopulmonary effects of combinations of
site. The effect of morphine is most likely at a μl
medetomidine hydrochloride and atropine sulphate
in dogs. Veterinary Record 138, 11-13.
opioid receptor at the site of injection and mediat-
Allen, D.A., Schertel, E.R., Muir, W.W. and Valentine,
ed in part by a direct reduction in terminal
A.K. (1991) Hypertonic saline/ dextran resuscitation
Excitability (Nagasaka et al., 1996).
436 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
dilatation-volvulus shock. Americar Journat of
Clarke, K.and Hall, L.(1975) In: World Veterinary
Veterinary Research 52: 92-96.
Congress,p. 1688 (Thessaloniki, 1975).
Armbjerg, J. (1992) Gastric emptying time in the dog and
Clutton, R.E. (1992) Combined bolus and infusion of
cat.Journat of the American Animat Hospitat Association
vecuronium in dogs. Journat of Veterirary Araesthesin
28:77-81.
19, 7477.
Atlee, J.L., Bosnjak, Z.J. and Yeager, T.S. (1990) Effects
Copland, V.S.,Haskins, S.C. and Patz, J.D. (1987)
of diltiazem, verapamil, and inhalation anesthetics
Oxymorphone: Cardiovascular, pulmonary, and
on electrophysiologic properties affecting
behavioral effects indogs. American Journal of
re-entrant supraventricular tachycardia in
Veterinary Research 48,1626-1630.
chronically instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology
Conzemius, M.G., Brockman, D.J., King, L.G. and
72: 889901.
 Perkowski, S.Z. (1994) Analgesia in dogs after
Baum, V.C. and Palmisano, B.W. (1997) The immature
intercostal thoracotomy: A clinical trial comparing
heart and anesthesia. Aresthesiology 87: 1529-1548.
intravenous buprenorphine and interpleural
Bernard, J.-M., Doursout, M.-F., Wouters, P., Hartley, C.,
bupivacaine. Veterinary Surgery 23:291-298.
Cohen, M., Merin, R.G. and Chelly, J.E. (1991)
Conzemius, M.G., Hill, C.M., Sammarco, J.L. and
 Effects of enflurane and isoflurane on hepatic and
Perkowski, S.Z. (1997) Correlation between subjective
renal circulations in chronically instrumented dogs.
and objective measures used to determine severity of
Anesthesiotogy 74,298-302.
postoperative pain in dogs. Jourral of the Americar
Bonath, K. and Saleh, A. (1985) Long term treatment
Veterinary Medicat Association 210: 1619-1622
in the dog by peridural morphines. Proceedings of the
Dodam, J.R., Kruse-Elliot, K.T.,Aucoin, D.P. and
2nd International Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia,
Swanson, C.R. (1990) Duration of etomidate-induced
Sacramento, Califormia p. 161.
adrenocortical suppression during surgery in dogs.
Branson, K., Ko, J., Tranquilli, W., Benson, J. and
American Journal of Veterinary Research 51:786-788.
Thurmon, J. (1993) Duration of analgesia induced by
Dohoo, S.E., O'Connor, M.K., McDonell, W.N. and
epidurally administered morphine and
Dohoo, 1.R. (1986) A clinical comparison of
medetomidine in dogs. Journat of Veterinary
pue auzeuo.dase/auoudouxo
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 16: 369-372.
fentanyl/droperidol sedation in dogs. Jourrat of the
Branson, K.R, Quandt, J.E., Martinez, E.A., et a.
American Animal Hospitat Association 22,313-317.
(1997) Multi-site clinical trial of sevoflurane.
Donaldson, L.L., Leib, M.S., Boyd, C., Burkholder, W.
Veterinary Surgery 26, 156 abstract.
and Sheridan, M. (1993) Effect of preanesthetic
Brockman, D.J., Washabau, R.J. and Drobatz, K.J. (1995)
medication on ease of endoscopic intubation of the
Canine gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome in a
duodenum in anesthetized dogs. American Jourral of
veterinary critical care unit: 295 cases (1986-1992).
Veterirnary Research 54: 1489-1495.
Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medicat Association
Du Pen, S.L., Ramsey, D. and Chin, S. (1987) Chronic
207:460-464.
Brodbelt, D.C., Taylor, PM. and Stanway, G.W. (1997) A
Anesthesiotogy 67,987-988.
comparison of preoperative morphine and
Dyson, D.H., Doherty, T.,Anderson, G.1. and McDonell,
W.N. (1990) Reversal of oxymorphone sedation by
naloxone,nalmefene, and butorphanol. Veterinary
and Therapeutics 20,284-289.
Surgery 19:398-403.
Brownlie, S.E. (1991) An electrocardiographic survey of
Egger, C., Duke, T. and Cribb, P. (1998) Comparison of
cardiac rhythm in Irish wolfhounds. Veterinary Record
plasma fentanyl concentrations by using three
129: 470471.
transdermal fentanyl patch sizes in dogs. Veterinary
Buchanan, J.W. (1993) Changing breed predispositions
Surgery 27:159-166.
in canine heart disease. Carine Practice 18: 12-14.
England, G.C.W. and Clarke, K.W. (1989) The effect of
Burton, S.A., Lemke, K.A., Ihle, S.L. and Mackenzie, A.L.
route of administration upon the efficacy of
(1997) Effects of medetomidine on serum insulin and
medetomidine. Journal of the Association of Veterinary
plasma glucose concentrations in clinically normal
Araesthetists 16:32-34.
dogs. Americar Journat of Veterinary Research
England, G.C. and Clarke, K.W.(1989a) The use of
58: 1440-1442.
medetomidine/fentanyl combinations in dogs. Acta
Chambers, J.P (1989) Induction of anaesthesia in dogs
Veterinaria Scandirnavia Supplement 85,179-186.
with alfentanil and propofol. Journat of Veterirary
England, G.C. and Hammond, R. (1997) Dose-sparing
Anaesthesia 16: 14-17.
effects of romifidine premedication for thiopentone
Chelly, J.E., Hill, D.C., Abermethy, D.R., Dlewati, A.,
and halothane anaesthesia in the dog. Jourrat of Small
Doursout, M.-F. and Merin, R.G. (1987)
Animat Practice 38, 141-146.
Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions
Firth, A. and Haldane, S.L. (1999) Development of a
between lidocaine and verapamil. Journal of
scale to evaluate postoperative pain in dogs. Jourral of
Pharmacology andExperimentat Therapeutics
the American Veterinary Medicat Association
243:211-216.
214: 651-660.
THE DOG437
Freeman, L.C., Ack, J.A., Fligner, M.A. and Muir III,
epidural analgesia. Canadian Veterinary Journal
W.W. (1990) Atrial fibrillation in halothane-and
39:650-652.
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. American Journal of
Hoffman, W.D., Banks, S.M., Alling, D.W, Eichenholz,
Veterirnary Research 51,174-177.
P.W., Eichacker, PQ., Parillo, J.E. and Natanson, C.
Forsyth, S.F., Guilford, W.G., Haslett, S.J. and Godfrey, J.
(1991) Factors that determine the hemodynamic
(1998) Endoscopy of the gastroduodenal mucosa after
response to inhalation anesthetics. Jourral of Applied
carprofen, meloxicam and ketoprofen administration
Phrysiotogy 70,2155-2163.
in dogs. Jourrat of Small Arnimat Practice 39: 421424.
Holton, L.L., Scott, E.M., Nolan, A.M., Reid, J. and
Gelman, S.,Fowler, K.C. and Smith, L.R. (1984) Regional
Welsh, E. (1998) Relationship between physiological
blood flow during isoflurane and halothane
factors and clinical pain in dogs scored using a
anesthesia. Anesthesia & Anaigesin 63,557-565.
mumericalrating scale. Jourrat of Smatl Animat Practice
Gross, M.E., Pope, E.R., O'Brien, D., Dodam, J.R. and
39: 469-474.
Polkow-Haight, J. (1997) Regional anesthesia of the
Holton, L.L., Scot, E.M., Nolan,A.M., Reid, J., Welsh, E.
infraorbital and inferior alveolar nerves during
and Flaherty, D. (1998) Comparison of three methods
noninvasive tooth pulp stimulation in halothane-
used for assessment of pain in dogs. Journal of the
anesthetized dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
American Veterinary Medicat Association 212:61-66.
Medicat Association 211: 1403-1405.
Horme, W.A., Gilmore, D.R., Dietze, A.E., Freden, G.O.
Hall, L.W. (1984) A clinical study of a new intravenous
and Short, C.E. (1985) Effects of gastric distention-
agent in dogs and cats. Jourrat of the Association of
volvulus on coronary blood flow and myocardial O2
Veterinary Araesthetists 12: 115-121.
consumption in the dog. American Journat of Veterinary
Hall, L. W., Nolan, A.M. and Sear, J.W. (1997) Disposition
Research 46: 98-104.
of propofol after medetormidine premedication in
Hoskins, J.D. (1995) The geriatric dog. Perspectives
beagle dogs. Journal of Veterinary Araesthesia 24:23-30.
May/June, 39-46.
Hashim, M.A., Waterman, A.E. and Pearson, H. (1995) A
Hysing, E.S., Chelly, J.E., Doursout, M.-F. and Merin,
comparison of the effects of halothane and isoflurane
R.G.(1992) Comparative effects of halothane,
in combination with nitrous oxide on lower
enflurane, and isoflurane at equihypotensive doses on
oesophageal sphincter pressure and barrier pressure
cardiac performance and coronary and renal blood
in anaesthetised dogs. Veterirary Record 137: 658-661.
flows in chronically instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology
Haskins, S.C.,Farver, T.B. and Patz, J.D. (1985) Ketamine
76,979-984.
in dogs. American Journat of Veterinary Research
Ilkiw, J.E., Pascoe, PJ., Haskins, S.C. and Patz, J.D. (1992)
46: 1855-1985.
Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of propofol
Haskins, S.C.,Farver, T.B. and Patz, J.D. (1986)
administration in hypovolemic dogs. American Journat
Cardiovascular changes in dogs given diazepam and
ofVeterinary Research 53:2323-2327.
diazepam-ketamine. Americar Journal of Veterinary
 Jergens,A.E., Riedesel, D.H., Ries, PA., Miles, K.G. and
Research 47:795-798.
Bailey, T.B.(1995) Cardiopulmonary responses in
Haskins, S.C., Patz, J.D., Copland, S.V., Yamamoto, Y.
healthy dogs during endoscopic examination of the
and Orima, H. (1988) A comparison of the
gastrointestinal tract. American Journalof Veterinary
cardiopulmonary effects of oxymorphone and
Research 56:215-220.
ketamine in hypovolemic dogs. Veterinary Surgery
Johnston, S.A. and Fox, S.M. (1997) Mechanisms of
17: 170-172.
action of anti-inflammatory medications used for the
Haskins,S.C. and Patz, J.D. (1990) Ketamine in
treatment of osteoarthritis. Jourrat of the Americar
hypovolemic dogs. Critical Care Medicine 18: 625-629.
Veterinary Medicat Association 210: 1486-1492.
Hellebrekers, L.J. and Sap, R. (1992) Sufentanil-
Jones, D.J., Stehling, L.C. and Zauder, H.L. (1979)
midazolam anaesthesia in the dog. Jourrat of
Cardiovascular responses to diazepam and
Veterinary Araesthesia 19: 69-71.
midazolam maleate in the dog. Anesthesiology
Hellebrekers, L.J. and Sap, R. (1997) Medetomidine as a
51,430434.
premedicant for ketamine, propofol or fentanyl
Jones, R.S. and Brearley, J.C. (1987) Atracurium infusion
anaesthesia in dogs. Veterinary Record 140: 545-548.
in the dog. Journat of Smalt Arimat Practice 28: 197-201.
Hellebrekers, L.J., vanHerpen, H., Hird, J.F.R.,
Jones, R.S. and Young, L.E. (1991) Vecuronium infusion
Rosenhagen, C.U., Sap, R. and Vainio, O. (1998)
in the dog. Journat of Small Animal Practice 32: 509-512.
Clinical efficacy and safety of propofol or ketamine
Kaplan, E.B.,Sheiner, L.B., Boeckmann, A.J.,Roizen,
anaesthesia in dogs premedicated with
M.F., Beal, S.L., Cohen, S.N. and Nicoll, C.D. (1985)
medetomidine. Veterinary Record 142: 631-634.
The usefulness of preoperative laboratory screening.
Hellyer, P., Muir Il, W.W., Hubbell, J.A.E. and Sally, J.
Journatofthe American Medicat Association
(1989) Cardiorespiratory effects of the intravenous
253:3576-3581.
administration of tiletamine-zolazepam to dogs.
Kolata, R.J. and Rawlings, C.A. (1982) Cardiopulmonary
Veterirary Surgery 18: 160-165.
effects of intravenous xylazine, ketamine, and
Herperger, L. (1998) Postoperative urinary retention
atropine in the dog. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 43: 2196-2198.
438 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Kushner, L.1., Trim, C.M., Madhusudhan, S. and Boyle,
Nagasaka, H., Awad, H. and Yaksh, T.L. (1996)
C.R. (1995) Evaluation of hemodynamic effects of
Peripheral and spinal actions of opioids in the
interpleural bupivacaine in dogs. Veterinary Surgery
blockade of the autonomic response evoked by
24:180-187.
 compression of the inflamed knee joint. Anesthesiology
Kyles, A., Papich, M. and Hardie, E. (1996) Disposition
85: 808-816.
of transdermally administered fentanyl in dogs.
Orton, E.C. and Muir II, W.W. (1983) Hemodynamics
American Jourrat of Veterinary Research 57:715-719.
during experimental gastric dilatation-volvulus in
Lantz, G.C., Badylak, S.F., Hiles, M.C. and Arkin, T.E.
dogs.American Jourrat of Veterinary Research
ym sop ul Amfun uoisnyadar go juaueai (66 )
44: 1512-1515.
Pascoe, PJ., 1lkiw, J.E., Haskins, S.C. and Patz, J.D. (1992)
American Jourrat of Veterirary Research 53: 1594-1598.
Cardiopulmonary effects of etomidate in
Lascelles, B.D., Butterworth, S.J. and Waterman, A.E.
hypovolermic dogs. Americarn Journat of Veterirary
(1994) Postoperative analgesic and sedative effects of
Research 53: 2178-2182.
carprofen and pethidine in dogs. Veterinary Record
Pascoe, PJ., Haskins, S.C., Ilkiw, J.E. and Patz, J.D. (1994)
134(8): 187-191.
Cardiopulmonary effects of halothane in
Lascelles, B.D., Cripps, PJ., Jones, A. and Waterman-
hypovolemic dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
Pearson, A. (1998) Eficacy and kinetics of carprofen,
Research 55,121-126.
Pascoe, PJ. and Dyson, D.H. (1993) Analgesia after
the prevention of pain in dogs undergoing
 lateral thoracotomy in dogs. Epidural morphine vs.
ovariohysterectomy. Veterinary Surgery 27: 568-582.
intercostal bupivacaine. Veterirary Surgery
Lee, D.D., Mayer, R.E.,Sullivan, T.C., Davidson, M.G.
22: 141-147.
Swanson, C.R. and Hellyer, PW.(1998) Respiratory
Pastermak, L.R. (1996) Preanesthesia evaluation of the
depressant and skeletal muscle relaxant effects of low-
surgical dog. Refresher Courses in Anesthesiology
dose pancuronium bromide in spontaneously
24:205-220.
breathing, isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Veterinary
Pibarot, P, Dupuis, J., Grisneaux, E. et at. (1997)
Surgery 27:473-479.
Comparison of ketoprofen, oxymorphone
MacPhail, C.M., Lappin, M.R., Meyer, D.J., Smith, S.G.
hydrochloride, and butorphanol in the treatment of
Webster, C.R. and Armstrong, PJ. (1998)
postoperative pain indogs. Journat of the American
Hepatocellular toxicosis associated with
Veterinary Medicat Association 211: 438-444.
administration of carprofen in 21 dogs. Jourrat of the
Pion, PD. and Brown, W.A.(1995) Calcium channel
American Veterinary Medicat Association 212: 1895-1901.
blocking agents. Compendium of Continuing Education
Martinez, E.A., Hartsfield, S.M., Melendez, L.D.,
17:691-706.
Matthews, N.S. and Slater, M.R. (1997) Cardiovascular
Poffenbarger, E.M., Ralston, S.L., Chandler, M.J. and
effects of buprenorphine in anesthetized dogs.
Olsen, PN. (1990) Canine neonatology. Part I.
American Jourral of Veterinary Research 58,1280-1284.
Physiologic differences between puppies and
Merin, R.G. and Johns, R.A. (1994) Does isoflurane
adults. Compendium of Continuing Education
produce coronary vasoconstriction? Anesthesiology
12: 1601-1609.
81: 1093-1096.
Popilskis, S., Kohn, D., Sanchez, J. and Gorman, P. (1991)
Millis, D.L., Hauptman, J.G. and Fulton, R.B. (1993)
Epidural vs intramuscular oxymorphone analgesia
Abnormal hemostatic profiles and gastric necrosis in
after thoracotomy in dogs. Veterinary Surgery
canine gastric dilatation-volvulus. Veterinary Surgery
20:462467
22: 93-97.
Priano, L.L. and Vatmer, S.F. (1981) Morphine effects on
Muir, W.W. (1982) Gastric dilatation-volvulus in the
cardiac output and regional blood flow distribution in
dog, with emphasis on cardiac arrhythmias.
conscious dogs. Anesthesiotogy 55,236-243.
Journatof the American Veterinary Medicat Association
Priebe, H.-J. and Skarvan, K. (1987) Cardiovascular
180:739-742.
and electrophysiologic interactions between
Muir II1, W.W. and Mason, D.E. (1989) Side effects of
diltiazerm and isoflurane in the dog. Anesthesiology
etomidate in dogs. Jourrat of the American Veterinary
66: 114-121
Medical Association 194: 1430-1434.
Quandt, J.E., Robinson, E.P., Rivers, W.J. and Raffe, M.R.
Muir, W.W. and Gadawski, J. (1998) Cardiorespiratory
(1998) Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
effects of low-flow and closed circuit inhalation
propofol and thiopentai in dogs. American Journal of
anesthesia, using sevoflurane delivered with an
Veterinary Research 59: 1137-1143.
Raptopoulos, D. and Galatos, A.D. (1995) Post
A.Americar Journat of Veterinary Research 59: 603-608.
anaesthetic reflux oesophagitis in dogs and cats.
Mutoh, T., Nishumura, R., Kim, H.-Y., Matsunaga, S. and
Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia 22: 6-8.
Sasaki, N. (1997) Cardiopulmonary effects of
Raptopoulos, D. and Galatos, A.D. (1997) Gastro-
sevoflurane, compared with halothane, enflurane,
and isoflurane, indogs. American Jourratof Veterinary
either thiopentone or propofol in the dog. Jourral of
Research 58: 885-890.
Veterinary Araesthesia 24:20-22.
THE DOG439
Robinson, E.P., Faggella, A.M., Henry, D.P. and Russell,
oxymorphone. Canadian Veterinary Journat
W.L. (1988) Comparison of histamine release induced
39: 361-368.
ul uomensuupe auoydrouxo pue auydrou Aq
Torske, K.E., Dyson, D.H. and Conlon, PD. (1999)
dogs.American Journat of Veterinary Research 49,
Cardiovascular effects of epidurally administered
1699-1701.
 oxymorphone and an oxymorphone-bupivacaine
Sammarco, J.L., Conzemius, M.G., Perkowski, S.Z.,
combination in halothane-anesthetized dogs.
Weinstein, M.J., Gregor, T.P and Smith, G.K. (1996)
American Jourrat of Veterinary Research 60: 194-200.
Postoperative analgesia for stifie surgery: a
Turnbull, JM. and Buck, C. (1987) The value of
comparison of intra-articular bupivacaine, morphine,
 preoperative screening investigations in otherwise
or saline. Veterinary Surgery 25:59-69.
healthy individuals. Archives of Interrat Medicine
Schertel, E.R., Allen, D.A., Muir, W. W., Brourman, J.D.
147,1101-1105.
and DeHoff, W.D. (1997) Evaluation of a hypertonic
Tyner, C.L., Woody, B.J., Reid, J.S. et at. (1997)
saline-dextran solution for treatment of dogs with
 Multicenter clinical comparison of sedative and
shock induced by gastric dilatation-volvulus. Jourrnat
analgesic effects of medetomidine and xylazine in
of the American Veterinary Medicat Association
dogs.Journal ofthe AmericanVeterinary Medicat
210:226-230.
Association 211: 1413-1417.
Stobie, D., Caywood, D.D., Rozanski, E.A. et al. (1995)
Valverde, A., Dyson, D. and McDonell, W. (1989)
Evaluation of pulmonary function and analgesia in
Epidural morphine reduces halothane MAC in the
dogs after intercostal thoracotomy and use of
dog. Caradian Journat of Anaesthesia 36: 629-632.
morphine administered intramuscularly or
Valverde, A., Dyson, D., Cockshutt, J., McDonell, W.
intrapleurally and bupivacaine administered
and Valliant, A. (1991) Comparison of the
intrapleurally. American Journat of Veterinary Research
hemodynamic effects of halothane alone and
56: 1098-1109.
halothane combined with epidurally administered
Takasaki, Y., Naruoka, Y., Shimizu, C., Ochi, G., Nagaro,
morphine for anesthesia in ventilated dogs. American
T. and Arai, T. (1995) Diltiazem potentiates the
Journat of Veterinary Research52:505-509.
neuromuscular blockade by vecuronium in humans.
Vanio, O. (1991) Propofol infusion anaesthesia in dogs
Masui 44: 503-507.
pre-medicated with medetomidine.Journal of
Tomiyasu, S., Hara, T., Ureshino, H. and Sumikawa, K.
Veterirnary Araesthesia 18:35-37.
(1999) Comparative analysis of systemic and coronary
Vesal, N., Cribb, P. and Frketic, M. (1996) Postoperative
hemodynamics during sevoflurane- and
analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects in dogs of
isoflurane-induced hypotension in dogs. Journat of
oxymorphone administered epidurally and
Cardiooascular Pharmacology 33: 741-747.
intramuscularly, and medetomidine administered
Torske, K.E., Dyson, D.H. and Pettifer, G. (1998) End
epidurally: Acomparative clinical study. Veterirary
tidal halothane concentration and postoperative
Surgery 25:361-369.
analgesia requirements in dogs: a comparison
Watkins, S., Hall, L. and Clarke, K. (1987) Propofol as an
between intravenous oxymorphone and epidural
intravenous anaesthetic agent for dogs. Veterinary
bupivacaine alone and in combination with
Record 120:326-329.
16
Anaesthesia of the cat
INTRODUCTION
may be necessary to give parenteral drugs by other
routes, or to induce anaesthesia using inhalation
agents. Cats are small in size and this means that
So often in the past domestic cats have been
the margin of error is small; using large syringes
 regarded as being simply small dogs, but this atti-
tude has gradually changed and it is now recog-
that anaesthetic overdoses are easy.For inhalation
nized that cats are unique among domestic
anaesthesia special apparatus is necessary if
animals (Hall & Taylor, 1994). Despite the cat's rep-
asphyxia is to be avoided. Respiratory obstruction
utation for having nine lives, anaesthetic fatalities
can occur from even a small blob of mucus in the
are not unknown in apparently fit, healthy an-
airway due to the small diameter of the cat's tra-
 imals. Indeed, in veterinary general practice in the
chea and the tendency for laryngeal spasm to
UK the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists
develop. Endotracheal intubation may not reduce
survey in 1990 indicated a death rate of 1 in 550 for
this danger, as trauma to the larynx from inexpert
fit, healthy cats (Clarke & Hall, 1990). A study of
intubation may result in obstruction from mucosal
deaths associated with the perianaesthetic period
oedema
postoperatively.
.Adrenalinerelease
in a University Teaching Hospital (Gaynor et al,
during a stormy induction or recovery can cause
1994) estimated the occurrence to be less than 1%,
ventricular fibrillation and this is especially likely
while anaesthetic related complications occurred
to happen if the heart is suffering from the insults
in approximately 10.5% of cases. It may be that
of hypoxia or hypercapnia due to partial respir-
ignorance of the wealth of information relating to
atory obstruction, or to the use of inappropriate
feline physiology and pharmacology appearing in
anaesthetic apparatus. In the cat, vagal reflexes are
journals and other texts not readily available to
very active during light anaesthesia, they are
veterinary clinicians has contributed to these quite
triggered by surgery of the head and neck, parti-
uacceptably high mortality and morbidity rates.
cularly of the eyes, nose and larynx, and give rise
Now that the peculiarities of the species have been
to laryngeal spasm or, occasionally, to cardiac
recognized so that due allowance can be made for
arrest.
them it is to be hoped that great improvements
Suitable premedication, a quiet induction
will follow.
of anaesthesia, careful monitoring, the mainten-
Cats object to being restrained and even
ance of a clear airway, adequate oxygenation,
the efficient removal of carbon dioxide, and appro
venously; unhandled cats may be impossible to
 priate attention to fluid and electrolyte balance,
anaesthetize using this route. For this reason it
should ensure an extremely low mortality rate.
441
442 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
ANALGESIA
Pethidine and buprenorphine
It is probable that pethidine (meperidine), i.m. at
OPIOIDS
total doses of 10 to 20 mg to average sized animals
has been the opioid most widely used, but cats in
The cat usually only vocalizes when pain is acute
and the tone of vocalization is higher than when
doses of 0.10-0.15 mg/kg. Of the partial agonist
the animal is merely resenting being handled or
drugs, butorphanol 0.2-0.5 mg/kg i.m. has been
restrained. 'Swearing′ or hissing indicates that the
animal resents interference but purring does not
recommended by Short (1987) and i.m. buprenor-
phine (0.006 mg/kg) given at the end of surgery
necessarily mean that all is well. Cats in pain will
often purr when stroked or petted. Chronic pain is
provides excellent analgesia although at the
expense of considerably delayed recovery from
often manifested by the animal hiding in dark cor-
ners of the cage, together with loss of appetite and
anaesthesia.
self-grooming activity. In severe acute pain cats
may pant or mouth breathe.
Neuroleptanalgesia
 Cats have often been denied adequate analgesia
Neuroleptanalgesic techniques which employ
 on the mistaken grounds that the use of opioids
large doses of opioid analgesics may cause cats to
causes maniacal excitement in Felidae. Certainly, the
respond with violent excitement. They are, there-
use of high doses as employed by pharmacologists
studying pharmacological effects can do so, and
fore, contra-indicated in domestic cats and,
indeed, in all other Felidae. Low doses of opioids
violent excitement may be seen after intravenous
such as pethidine (1-2mg/kg) may be used
injection of these drugs, as this method of adminis-
together with acepromazine but the improvement
tration may expose the brain to a (temporary) over-
 in sedation over that provided by acepromazine is
dose. Thus, i.v. administration of potent opioids
minimal. However, acepromazine (0.05mg/
such as fentanyl or alfentanil to conscious cats can
kg i.m.) is often used with 0.1 mg/kg morphine
only be recommended if injection is made extreme-
i.m. to produce sedation, and oxymorphone,
ly slowly. In the correct doses, and by appropriate
routes of administration, opioids will not induce
buprenorphine, butorphanol, papaveretum and
 methadone can also be used, although doses of
excitement even in fit, healthy animals (Davis &
these opioid drugs need to be kept to a minimum
Donelly, 1968) and if the cat is in pain when the
(e.g. butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg, oxymorphone
 analgesic is given higher doses are tolerated with.
0.05 mg/kg i.m.). Geriatric or sick cats may be pre-
out problems. Any of the opioids of moderate
medicated with butorphanol 0.3 mg/kg i.m. and
 potency, which have been recommended for use in
midazolam 0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.m. prior to facemask
other species of animal may be used to provide pre-
induction of anaesthesia.
 or postoperative analgesia in cats (Table 16.1).
TABLE 16.1 Opioid analgesics suitable for use in
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
cats; s.c. = subcutaneous injection;
DRUGS (NSAIDs)
i.m. = intramuscular injection; i.v. = intravenous
injection
Table 16.2 gives recommended dosages for various
NSAIDs used in cats. Phenylbutazone is quite
Drug
Dose
Route of
toxic to cats, even in moderate doses, but aspirin
administration
Buprenorphine 0.006-0.0 10 mg/kg s.c.,i.m.,i.v.
TABLE 16.2 NSAID dosages in cats
Butorphanol
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
i.m.
0.10-0.2 mg/kg
Drug
Dose
Methadone
5.c., i.v.
Morphine
 0.10-0.15 mg/kg
s.c., i.m., i.v.
Aspirin
 > y eo sou  s
Pethidine
 2-5 mg/kg
i.m.
Carprofen
I-4 mg/kg i.v. or s.c.
(meperidine)
Ketoprofen
I mg/kg/24 hours s.c.for <3 days
Oxymorphone(
0.05-0.10 mg/kg
 Phenylbutazone 10 mg/kg/24 hours orally
THE CAT443
may be given in small doses by mouth. When indi-
 and eyes with moist cotton wool can do much to
cated 10-20 mg of aspirin should be given in divi-
increase the animals' comfort and they seem to feel
ded doses over a period of 48hours. Given over one
much better for this attention.
or two days this dose is generally both safe and
effective and allows for the fact that the rate of
hepatic drug metabolism is slow due to a defici-
SEDATION
ency of bilirubin-glucuronoside glucuronosyl-
transferase. Long term aspirin administration can
PHENOTHIAZINE DERIVATIVES
lead to aplastic anaemia or thrombocytopaenia.
Carprofen, which does not appear to act by
Acepromazine
Acepromazine may be given at dose rates of 0.03 to
the older NSAIDs do, may have fewer side effects.
0.10 mg/kg and by the routes described for dogs
However, experience has shown that all NSAIDs
(p. 394) but in cats the sedation produced is very
must be used with caution in cats and only in the
variable and is seldom adequate to assist in control
recommended doses for periods not in excess of
of an animal. The pharmacokinetics of orally
2 to 3 days at a time. Other drugs such as acetamino-
administered acepromazine in cats was poorly
phen (paracetamol), ibuprofen, indomethacin and
documented until the studies of Verstegen et al.
naproxen are contraindicated in cats because of
(1994). These workers found the apparent elimina-
their hepatoxicity.
tion half life to be about 3hours but the determina-
tion of the elimination constant was hampered by
imprecise estimation of the detectable concentra-
LOCAL ANALGESIA
tions using specific HPLC.
Infiltration of fracture sites or wounds with local
Premedication with phenothiazine derivatives
 amalgesics can be very effective means of relieving
 such as acepromazine results in a smoother recov-
pain in cats, but the total dose of drug adminis-
ery from anaesthesia and reduces excitement side
tered must be carefully regulated. If ligmocaine is
effects of certain anaesthetic agents. Promethazine,
used the total dose should not exceed 10 mg/kg -
 a potent antihistamine, is sometimes used before
this means a maximum of about 8ml of a 0.5 %
Saffan anaesthesia to reduce the risk of allergic-
solution or 16 ml of a 0.25 % solution in an average
type reactions.
sized, conscious cat. Doses of 0.125 % or 0.070%
bupivacaine are correspondingly smaller but the
use of this drug for longer duration analgesia in
02ADRENOCEPTORAGONISTS
cats has not been widely explored. Gross disten-
Xylazine
sion of the tissues with local analgesic solution
must be avoided for this interferes with blood flow
Xylazine has been widely used, but it may produce
variable results. Its action is that of a sed-
Epidural blocks are sometimes difficult to
ative/hypnotic so that increasing the dose increas-
produce and in cats nearly always need to be com-
es the depth and duration of sedation produced,
aq ew anon y a q / g on 1 o sasop pu
thesia so their use is limited. If the block is induced
used to give mild to fairly profound sedation; s.c.
during preparation of the surgical site it is an effect-
injection may be used but gives less reliable
ive analgesic long before the end of surgery.
results. Vomiting and retching occur as the drug
starts to exert its effect and are most commonly
seen after the lower dose rates are employed.
Ancillary aids to analgesia
Cardiovascular effects are dose-dependent and
The importance of good nursing care in alleviating
although there may be an initial period of
pain must never be overlooked. Provision of
 hypertension, doses of more than 3 mg/kg result
warmth and appetizing food should always be a
 in cardiac depression and hypotension. Dunkle
priority. Grooming and wiping around the mouth
1et al.(1986), using echocardiography, found
444 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
xylazine to have a marked depressive effect on car-
preparation. All that will need to be remembered
diac performance and showed that glycopyrrolate
is that the effective dose of dexmedetomidine is
may not completely alleviate the bradycardia due
half that of the current commercial preparation
to this α2 adrenoceptor agonist. Very high doses of
 of medetomidine employed in veterinary
xylazine have been used to anaesthetize cats but
medicine.
they are associated with respiratory depression,
 cardiovascular depression and a very protracted
Considerations when using Q2
ns pue aesopiaao puasaidai Aau Araaosa
adrenoceptor agonists
misuse carmot be condoned.
When xylazine is used for premedication,
Should there be any worries about the condition of
its effects summate with those of all other
 an animal sedated with these drugs bradycardia
central nervous depressant drugs, so that doses of
may be treated with atropine or glycopyrrolate,
all parenterally administered anaesthetics have to
laaq raaoe aq iou Aeu sun qonou
be greatly reduced. This additive effect seems
(Dunkle et al., 1986). Their sedative effects may be
to depend on the dose of xylazine rather than
 antagonized with atipamezole. However, the ideal
the effect which it has produced, so that great
dose of atipamezole is uncertain. Doses of one
care is necessary in even apparently lightly
to four times the original dose of medetomidine
sedated cats. Following xylazine premedication
have been recommended and there is no con-
 doses of barbiturate drugs are at least halved,
sensus of the dose to be used to antagonize
and doses of Saffan have to be reduced even more
the effects of xylazine. High doses, or doses given
than this. Xylazine has often been used with keta-
 at a time when sedation is already waning, have
mine and use of these two drugs will be discussed
led to some cats being over-alert. The over-alert
later.
state did not progress to obvious excitement and,
when left quiet in a cage, the animals resumed
normal behaviour over the course of the next hour.
Medetomidine
As there are times when it may be desirable for a
cat to remain very slightly sedated (e.g for the
xylazine and a dose of 80 μg /kg appears to give
 journey home) the decision as to the most suitable
sedation similar in type and depth to that pro-
dose for any individual case should be adjusted
duced by 3 mg/kg of i.m. xylazine. Duration of
according to the time lapsed since the admini-
effect is dose related, but after an i.m. dose of
stration of the agonist drug and degree of reversal
 80 μg/kg clinically useful effects last for approx-
 required. It should be noted that in the authors'
imately 1hour and recovery appears to be com-
experience umnder-reversal using lower doses
plete in about 2.5-3.0hours. Side effects are as
of atipamezole still leaves the cat liable to
expected for an 02 adrenoceptor agonist, there
hypothermia.
being marked bradycardia and transient arterial
hypertension followed by hypotension, depression
of respiratory rate, pallor of mucous membranes
BENZODIAZEPINES
and vomiting early on as sedation develops.
Diazepam
Prolonged sedation with high doses of medetomi-
dine may cause hypothermia.
 Diazepam and other benzodiazepine drugs pro-
 duce no obvious sedation when given to domestic
cats. They are sometimes used in premedication
Dexmedetomidene
for their muscle-relaxing properties and their use
Dexmedetomidine is the active sterioisomer of
is associated with an increased duration of action
the racemic medetomidine preparations currently
 of other drugs used in anaesthesia. Diazepam is
available for veterinary use. If this pure isomer 
 given in doses of up to 0.5 mg/kg i.m.,; its injection
becomes available there should be no problems
edaid jeum lae ou ued ci astu aaio oi sieadde
for its actions are those of the mixed veterinary
ration is used.
THE CAT 45
Other benzodiazepines
ANAESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
Midazolam (0.1-0.2mg/kg) is sometimes used
Intravenous injection
i.m. mixed in the syringe with ketamine 6 mg /kg
to produce a state of good sedation for the per-
The minimum of forcible restraint should be used
formance of minor procedures such as skin biopsy
to enable injection to be carried out. Cats object
or radiography.
strongly to restraint and respond to its imposition
There are currently no reports of the use of cli-
by trying to escape from it, thus inviting more
forcible measures which only too often result in
mazolam or zolazepam given on their own to cats,
but zolazepam is available in Australia, North
scratched and bitten assistants and a very fright-
ened, excited cat. Such stormy conditions during
America and on the Continent of Europe in a fixed
induction of anaesthesia can lead to cats dying
ratio combination with the dissociative agent tilet-
amine ('Telazol', containing 50 mg tiletamine plus
from ventricular fibrillation.
50 mg zolazepam per ml) for the induction of a
In conscious cats, i.v. injections are best made
 state resembling general anaesthesia. Telazol is not
into the cephalic vein. The animal is placed in a sit-
available in the UK. Muscle relaxation is poor,
ting position on a table of convenient height and
there is usually profuse salivation and many cats
for injection into the right cephalic vein the assis-
tant stands to the cat's left side, raising and sup-
-n se lam se uorssaap Aroiendsan mo
arrhythmias. The author's experience agrees with
porting its head between the thumb and fingers
that of Short (1987) that recovery from this combina-
of the left hand (Fig. 16.1). In this position the
assistant can usually help to keep the cat calm
tion can be prolonged and excited.
by tickling it below the ears (Fig. 16.2). The
assistant's right hand is placed so that the middle,
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
third and fourth fingers are behind the olecranon,
and the thumb is around the front of the cat's
PREANAESTHETIC PREPARATION
right forelimb. The limb is extended by pushing
Preanaesthetic examination should be carried out
 on the olecranon and the vein is raised by apply-
in a manner similar to that described in Chapter 1,
ing gentle pressure with the thumb. The limb
and any pathological conditions found, together
must not be held in a vice-like grip because
o uakn Kdeiau hnip Susixa-and Aue ym
this cuts off the arterial blood supply and dis-
account during subsequent anaesthesia. In clinical
tresses the cat.
practice it is common to find that cats have been
exposed to organophosphorus insecticides from
flea collars or sprays and this may increase the
duration of action of suxamethonium given for
intubation. Corticosteroids are frequently used in
cats to control allergies to external parasites and
corticosteroid cover should be given over the
anaesthetic and operating periods if the cat has
received such therapy in the 2 months preceding
anaesthesia.
About 12hours of fasting will usually ensure
that cats have an empty stomach and water need
only be withheld for 2 hours prior to anaesthesia,
 or the water bowl removed at the time premedica-
tion is given. If surgery is to be carried out on the
day of admission, enquiry should be made as to
Fig. I6.1 Injection into the cephalic vein.Note that only
whether the cat was closely confined throughout
the minimum of restraint is being used and as can be seen
the previous night for a roaming, hunting cat may
from this cat's expression it is not frightened or otherwise
have filled its stomach by eating its prey.
upset by the procedure.
446 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
25 gauge needle (0.5mm external diameter),
15 mm long is ideal as long as venepuncture is free
from difficulties and the limb is unlikely to be
moved excessively during positioning for opera-
tion, but it is probably always preferable to use
either a ‘Butterfly' set or an over-the-needle
catheter which can be taped securely in position.
Introduction of an i.v. needle or catheter may be
helped in nervous or 'needle-shy' cats by the prior
use of a local analgesic cream (e.g. EMLA, Astra, or
amethocaine ointment). The site for venepuncture
is shaved and a 2-3mm thick layer of cream
applied to the skin before covering it with an
occlusive dressing for 40 to 45 min. This procedure
produces full thickness skin analgesia and after
removing the dressing, the skin is wiped clean,
disinfected and venepuncture carried out.
Although in theory any of the methods of
aq Aeu soop ui asn roy paqunsap amioundauaa
applied in cats, the problems of restraint make
them difficult to use in conscious animals. In mori-
bund or anaesthetized animals, the jugular vein
FIG. 16.2 The'ear-tickling' position for restraint during
can be used. The cat is placed in lateral recum-
venepuncture.This is the position to be used for animals
bency with its neck over a small pad or sandbag.
not as calm as the one illustrated in Fig. I6.1.
its forelimbs are stretched backwards towards its
tail, and the uppermost jugular vein occluded in
Most friendly household cats will allow vene-
the jugular groove near to the stermal inlet by the
puncture to be carried out easily as long as the nee-
 assistant's thumb. Jugular venepuncture is partic-
dle is sharp (and moderm disposable ones are) and
ularly useful for the administration of intravenous
no thrust is made with the needle. The needle must
be introduced steadily and gently through the skin
 are required for diagnostic or other purposes the
 and into the lumen of the vein without stabbing.
jugular vein is commonly the only practicable site
Should it become obvious that more restraint is
for cannulation, although alternatively, the easily
 needed the assistant can provide this rapidly by
visible saphenous medial vein on the medial
holding the cat between his or her body and right
aspect of the thigh can be used.
arm while preventing movement from the hind
limbs by pressing the cat firmly on to the table sur-
Endotracheal intubation
face. The cat's head can easily be controlled when
held firmly in the left hand as described
 -uag apum Aemie poog e uui Aerauag sie
Sometimes, for the protection of the handler, it is
eral anaesthesia so endotracheal intubation is
necessary to wrap the cat in a towel held around
often unnecessary for short periods of anaesthesia
the neck, leaving only the head and the limb to be
when a mask can be used to administer oxygen
used for injection exposed. If it is clear that greater
 and any volatile anaesthetic. The mask may be
restraint than this is needed, it is probably prefer-
kept in position by the application of a simple elas-
able to abandon attempts at i. v. injection until an
tic harness passing from hooks on the mask (or a
appropriate premedication has had time to take
 wire frame applied over the mask) to around the
effect, or to induce anaesthesia by other means.
back of the head (Fig.16.3). However, there are
A short needle with a fine bore is suitable for
 many instances where intubation is essential and
injections into the cephalic vein and, in general, a
the cat's larynx is a small and delicate structure
THE CAT447
lignocaine solutions (2-4 %) should be used since
some of the additives in medical preparations
cause chemical irritation of the mucous membrane
(Watson, 1992; Taylor, 1992, 1993) giving rise to
 oedema-related airway problems after extubation.
Relaxation of the jaw muscles is not produced by
 spraying of the larynx and must be ensured by an
adequate depth of anaesthesia. Following
intubation after local analgesic spray it must be
remembered that the larynx will be insensitive and
the normal protective reflexes absent until the
effects of the local analgesic have worn off. The
amount of lignocaine used is critical since the drug
is readily absorbed from mucous membranes.
Care must be taken not to exceed the safe dose
(approximately 1-2 mg/kg per laryngeal spray) to
avoid systemic effects.
FIG. I6.3 Hall mask' secured in position with a simple
harness.
In cases where quick intubation is essential this
technique is not suitable since spraying the larynx
with local analgesic solution does not produce
easily damaged by rough attempts at intubation.
immediate desensitization and paralysis of the
Atraumatic intubation is essential and may be
vocal cords. Attempts should not be made to force
 made difficult by laryngospasm. Endotracheal
a tube through the non-relaxed, active larynx, for
intubation carried out when there is no strict indi-
this can cause serious injury. On more than one
cation for it ensures that the technique can be car-
occasion attempts to force a tube through a larynx
ried out quickly when it is essential to do so.
showing spasm have resulted in penetration of the
Moreover, endotracheal intubation with an appro-
pharyngeal wall and passage of the tube down the
priate breathing system can be used to limit atmos-
neck between the oesophagus and trachea, with
pheric pollution which might otherwise be serious
during long operations.
fatalresults.
2. When rapid intubation is essential the
Laryngospasm
anaesthetized cat may be paralysed by the
administration of a neuromuscular blocker after
Laryngospasm means the intrinsic muscles of the
inhaling pure oxygen from a face-mask for 30 to
larynx contracting to occlude the glottis, prevent-
60 seconds to prevent hypoxaemia during the
ing ventilation and resulting in hypoxaemia. It is
subsequent intubation procedure. Paralysis is pro-
very easily provoked in cats, and when it occurs,
duced most rapidly by i.v. 3-5 mg of suxamethon-
atraumatic intubation can only be carried out after
ium (for an adult cat), and oxygen administration
the laryngeal reflexes responsible for the spasm
is continued during the fasciculations caused by
 have been suppressed by adopting one of the fol-
the initial depolarizing action of this agent. When
bowing methods:
relaxation is complete the cat is intubated through
1. The laryngeal mucous membrane of the
completely flaccid vocal cords (Fig 16.4).
anaesthetized cat can be desensitized by spraying
it with a solution of a local analgesic drug such as
Rapid intubation made possible in this
4% lignocaine hydrochloride. The larynx usually
way minimizes the risk of inhalation of re-
pue pandde si Aeids aun uaum wseds e oui saos
gurgitated stomach contents. Artificial ventilation
attempts of intubation should be delayed for about
t of the lumgs is continued through the endotracheal
30 seconds or until it is seen to relax. Pure
tube until spontaneous respiration returns
448 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Ventilation of the lungs using a face-mask is only
impossible in cats with upper airway obstruction
(usually an abscess or tumour) and in these a
tracheostomy may be the only way in which
patency of the airway can be assured so that the
wisdom of using suxamethonium in such cases is
debatable. Particular care should be taken to exert
only minimal pressure on the bag in cats with
ruptured diaphragms, for in them it is very easy to
inflate the stomach.
Obviously, techniques of introducing an endo-
tracheal tube should be practised when intubation
of the cat is not strictly needed so that it can be
performed competently and quickly
/when
essential.
3. Laryngeal spasm does not occur during deep
anaesthesia but deep anaesthesia cannot be
recommended as the depth necessary to prevent
laryngospasm is only achieved after considerable
FIG. 16.4 Exposure of the larynx by simple lifting of the
 overdose. However, where emergency intubation
laryngoscope blade when the cat is supine.
is required following an accidental overdose of
anaesthetic, it is never necessary to employ either
some 3-5minutes later. Should intubation
of methods 1 or 2 above to secure relaxation of the
prove difficult the cat is prevented from becoming
 jaw muscles and vocal cords.
hypoxic while further efforts are made by manual
ventilation of the lungs using a face-mask.
Attempts to carry out forcible intubation through
The mask is applied and the lungs inflated several
tightly opposed vocal cords, even if initially suc-
times with pure oxygen whenever (but preferably
cessful, will result in damage to the mucous mem-
before) the mucous membranes take on a dusky,
brane with oedema and danger of obstruction after
sh iduae raumg e pue 'auadde oous
extubation. The cat's larynx may also go into a
made to intubate as soon as the colour is a normal
spasm after extubation, especially if there is any
pink. Manual ventilation of the lungs through a
 mucus on the cords, so endotracheal tubes should,
face-mask is not difficult. Cats' faces are
if there are no surgical contraindications, be
reasonably uniform in shape and it is easy to get a
 removed without any previous deliberate lighten-
 pauisap aod e uamiaq as -s
 ing of anaesthesia and after careful aspiration of
(e.g. modified “Hall' mask) and face, although
mucus from the airway.
difficult to achieve with the transparent plastic-
rubber diaphragm type of mask. The lower jaw
Performonce of endotracheal intubation
must be pushed forward to ensure the airway is
dear and only gentle pressure applied to ventilate
Intubation is performed under direct vision as
the lungs or gas will be forced down the
soon as the jaw muscles are relaxed by general
oesophagus into the stomach. It is possible to
anaesthesia or the effects of the neuromuscular
ventilate the lungs of almost all cats with
blocker, and intubation is, of course, possible at
open airways with pure oxygen at any time
 much lighter levels of anaesthesia when neuro-
and well oxygenated cats can be intubated 
 muscular blockers are used. Although the expert
under the influence of a neuromuscular blocker
 should be able to intubate regardless of the posi-
such as suxamethonium without the need for
tion of the cat, the procedure is best learned if one
undue haste.
standard position is employed until the technique
THE CAT449
is mastered. Two positions are used for teaching
intubation; the cat is either prone or supine.
In the supine position the head and neck of the
cat are extended by placing a small sandbag under
the neck, or by an assistant supporting the head
with a hand placed beneath the neck, and the
tongue is pulled out of the mouth, care being taken
not to injure it on the teeth. A standard laryngo-
scope with an infant-sized blade is introduced and
the tip of the blade placed so that it is over the dor-
sum of the tongue and resting just in front of the
epiglottis. The blade is then lifted to expose the
glottic opening and give a good view of the vocal
cords (Fig.16.4). The blade is not used as a lever but
simply as a means of lifting the tongue and lower
FlG. I6.5 New endotracheal tubes must be cut to the
jaw while the mouth is kept open by use of the lit-
correct length before use.This is measured from the
tle finger of the hand which holds the laryngo-
nostrils to the point of the shoulder.
scope against the upper canine tooth.
The endotracheal tube may then be passed
may be needed to prevent inhalation of foreign
between the cords without any difficulty. If a
 materials, can be ensured by a pharyngeal pack
laryngoscope is not available, a lighted tongue
of moistened ribbon gauze although relatively
depressor can be used in much the same way but
small, thin walled, cuffed portex tubes are com-
tongue depressors are not so easy to control and it
monly used for this purpose in North America.
may be found easier to expose the larynx if the cat
 Endotracheal tubes should be long enough to pass
 is lying on its side as described for the dog.
well beyond the larynx but not so long that they
In the prone position endotracheal intubation is
will enter a main bronchus. The correct length may
facilitated by an assistant raising the head and
be assessed as being from the nostrils to the point
extending the neck. Careful positioning by the 
of the shoulder, and all new tubes should be cut to
assistant ensures that the path for the introduction
this measurement before use (Fig. 16.5).
of the tube is a relatively straight line. Ease of intu-
An excess of tube between the mouth and
bation of the cat in the prone position depends on
anaesthetic breathing system should not be toler-
the assistant being properly trained, whereas in
ated because this, in small animals such as cats,
the supine position the anaesthetist can be in com-
adds significantly to the respiratory deadspace. A
plete control of the whole operation.
tape tied tightly around the tube over the endotra-
udu st hl paidpe si uosod iaaae
cheal tube connector can be secured behind the
that the laryngoscope blade does not come into
cat's ears to anchor the tube in position once it has
contact with the dorsal surface of the epiglottis for
been introduced (Fig.16.6).
this is likely to be followed by oedema. It is poss-
ible to intubate cats under direct vision but the use
of a laryngoscope greatly facilitates the procedure
PREMEDICATION
and by displaying the glottic opening enables esti-
Anticholinergic drugs should generally be inclu-
mation of the appropriate size of tube to be made.
ded in the premedication given to cats to prevent
There is often a temptation to use a tube that is too
saliva and bronchial secretions from obstructing
small because it is easier introduce, but this should
the small-diameter airway; they should be given
be resisted for a small tube constitutes a partial air-
whenever it is proposed to use suxamethonium
way obstruction. For most adult cats non-cuffed
for endotracheal intubation, and to block vagal
tubes of 4.0 to 5.5 mm internal diameter are suit-
reflexes. The only contraindications to their use are
able; cuffed tubes have to be smaller and the cuff
the general ones of pre-existing tachycardia or
may cause laryngeal trauma. A tight seal, such as
glaucoma. Analgesics should be given whenever it
450 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
patient in the UK was 1/10oth of a grain!).
Elsewhere in the world ampoules generally con-
tain 0.5 mg of atropine simplifying the calculation
of a dose of 0.02 to 0.10 mg/kg. Atropine interferes
with vision and cats which have received this drug
should be handled particularly carefully to avoid
inducing panic reactions.
Glycopyrronium bromide 0.010 mg/kg i.m. or
0.005 mg/kg i.v. may be preferred. It does not
cause as marked an increase in heart rate as does
atropine, nor does it cross the blood-brain barrier
and so results in less visual disturbance. It may be
the anticholinergic of choice for caesarian section
or in accident cases which may have a contused
FIG.16.6 A correctly intubated cat with no excess
myocardium.
length of tube protruding from the mouth and the tube
securely anchored in place with a tape. Apparatus
Sedatives and analgesics
dead space is minimal.
Phenothiazines such as acepromazine and propi-
is necessary to relieve pain, for cats in pain may
onylpromazine produce a variable degree of seda-
not be easy to handle. Sedative use is governed by
tion. Some cats become deeply sedated on doses of
the temperament of the cat and by the anaesthetic
0.05 mg/kg i.m. of acepromazine, whereas others
technique to follow. Phenothiazines do little to
show no appreciable effect. There is a ceiling effect
calm a wild cat, but are useful in quieter animals to
and usually there is no more sedation produced by
counteract excitement caused by some drugs, and
increasing doses but they will increase undesirable
to improve the quality of recovery. Xylazine and
effects such as extrapyramidal signs and duration
medetomidine markedly reduce the dose of all
of action. All the phenothiazines directly depress
other agents used for anaesthesia and need to be
the temperature regulating mechanisms and cats
used with very great care. In the survey of anaes-
 are prone to develop hypothermia when sedated
thetic problems promoted by the Association of
with them. Premedication with acepromazine does
Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain and
 not significantly reduce the induction dose of pro-
Ireland, xylazine was associated with particularly
pofol (Brearley et al., 1988) but the dose of thiopen-
high number of fatalities (1 per 117 cats given the
tal needed to induce anaesthesia is reduced after
drug), that were primarily due to overdosage with
 acepromazine premedication by about 30%.
agents given later to produce anaesthesia.
Acepromazine is often used in combination
However, xylazine and medetomidine appear to
with opioids to increase sedation without increas-
be useful in reducing the side effects of ketamine,
ing the side effects of either drug. Most commonly.
as indeed are the benzodiazepines.
morphine is the drug used (0.1 mg /kg morphine
with 0.03 mg/kg acepromazine i.m.) but in equiva-
naaaeded se yons sproido rauo sasop hua
Anticholinergic agents
butorphanol, methadone and buprenorphine can
In the UK atropine, at a total dose of 0.3 mg i.m., i.v.
be used with acepromazine.
or s.c. for an adult cat and 0.125 or 0.060 mg for
Xylazine (0.2-0.4 mg/kg i.m.) and medetomi-
smaller or younger animals, is commonly used 
dine (80μg/kg i.m.) may be used prophylactically
without any attempt being made to calculate the
 when there is any likelihood of the presence of a
dose on a mg/kg basis. This is because atropine is
 full stomach, for both these drugs induce vomiting
available in ampoules which still contain 0.6 mg of
 in some 60 % of cats. This very property indicates
atropine sulphate per ml (a relic of the days when .
that these drugs should be avoided in cats with
the standard dose of atropine for an adult human
 open eye or head injuries and those suffering from
THE CAT451
eosophageal or intestinal obstruction. Xylazine
i.m.) tend to have a greater part to play in feline
(0.55-1.00 mg/kg i.m. or s.c.) may be used prior to
than in canine anaesthesia. The disadvantages of
ketamine administration to counteract the side
such administration - slow induction, variable
effects of this dissociative agent. It should be noted
 absorption, variable effects, prolonged recovery.
that increasing doses of both xylazine and medeto-
and inability to dose to effect, - must be weighed
midine cause increased duration of sedation rather
 against the temperament of the cat, skill and exper-
than increased depth. They also, by slowing the
ience of the anaesthetist and the likelihood of
circulation, delay the onset of action of injected
being able to carry out a controlled injection. Table
anaesthetic agents. Medetomidine 15-30 μ/kg
16.3 compares the properties of parenteral anaes-
sprayed under the tongue is a useful way of sedat-
thetic agents commonly used in cats.
 ing unmanageable cats prior to anaesthesia.
 The prime role of benzodiazepines in feline pre-
Thiopentalsodium
medication is before ketamine administration to
counteract the rigidity and convulsions produced
Thiopental may only be given i.v. and in cats it
by this agent, and in animals that may be liable to
should be used as a 1.25 % or even more dilute
 convulsions (e.g. epileptics or animals undergoing
solution. Induction doses are up to 10 mg/kg and
myeolography with some of the older contrast
if the cat has not been given sedative premedica-
agents). They may be considered suitable premed-
tion it is probable that the full dose will be
icants for cats with cardiorespiratory disease for at
required. Very small doses (e.g. 2 mg/kg) will be
normal doses they have little influence on the respir-
needed after heavy premedication with C2 adreno-
atory or cardiovascular systems. Diazepam may be
ceptor agonists. If thiopental is to be used as the
given i.m. or i.v. at doses of 0.1-0.5 mg/kg i.v. or
sole agent, incremental doses up to a maximum of
0.3-1.0 mg/kg i.m., and midazolam (0.2mg/kg i.m.)
20 mg/kg may be used, but at these high doses,
has been used before ketamine (6 mg/kg i.m.).
saturation of the fat depots may mean that recov-
Before propofol anaesthesia the dose of midazo-
ery will take several hours and the effects will still
lam should not exceed 0.3 mg/kg i.v.
be observable the next day. If recovery is pro-
longed, the cat must be kept warm, for the devel-
 opment of hypothermia (more marked when
PARENTERALLY ADMINISTERED
acepromazine premedication is used) will delay
ANAESTHETICS
recovery still more.
Intravenous injection is relatively easy in dogs but
in cats problems of restraint may make i. v. injec-
Methohexital sodium
tions more difficult or even impossible, so that
Methohexital may be given only i.v., and is used at
agents which can be given by other routes (e.g.
a concentration of 0.5% for feline anaesthesia.
TABLE 16.3 Injectable anaesthetics in the cat. Dose rates, duration of action and recovery times must
be regarded as only approximate and the use of other agents concurrently can prolong or reduce these
doses and times. Moderate or heavy preanaesthetic sedation will decrease these doses and prolong the
times for anaestheia and recovery
Agent
Dose rate (mg/kg)
Route
 Approx. duration of
Approx.time to
anaesthesia (min)
standing /walking (h)
Ketamine
10-35
i.m.
30-45
3-4
Ketamine
2-10
i.v.
20-40
--4
Methohexital
5-12
i.v.
5-10
1.0-1.5
Pentobarbital
20-30
i.v.
60-90
48
Propofol
5-8
i.v.
3-6
0.5
Saffan
4-12
i.v.
5-15
0.75-2.00
Saffan
Up to 18
i.m.
5-20
Average I.0
Thiopental
15-25
i.v.
 5-15
1-2
452 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Although it can be used for induction of an-
Aphaxalone-alphadolone ('Saffan')
aesthesia at a dose of about 5 mg/kg, and given
Since its introduction into clinical feline anaesthe-
in incremental doses to maintain anaesthesia,
in cats its tendency for causing excitement
sia this steroid mixture has become an extremely
 popular anaesthetic agent, especially in general
means that recovery is often far from uneventful.
practice in the UK. Doses are commonly expressed
The use of sedative premedication helps to reduce
as mg/kg of the total 12 mg/ml steroid content of
the incidence of excitatory phenomena but in
the solution. This solution is non-irritant and is
general, is only employed in cats when very
given to cats i.v. or i.m. Doses of 3 mg/kg i.v. pro-
rapid recovery is needed (e.g. after caesarian
duce unconsciousness for a few minutes, whilst
section).
doses of 9 mg/kg give 10-15minutes of anaesthe-
sia with very little increase in the initial depth of
Pentobarbital sodium
unconsciousness or respiratory depression. The
 increased duration of action with initial higher
Aaim sem eqrequad oe sieaa oe aes un
doses reaches a plateau at about 18 mg/kg i.v. and
used in general practice and experimental labor-
giving higher i.v. doses is pointless and may be
atories as an anaesthetic for cats. Doses of 25 mg/kg
dangerous. If it is necessary to prolong anaesthesia
i. v., half given fast to avoid induction excitement
further increments may be given later on, or an
and the rest given slowly over 2-3minutes to
 inhalation agent employed.
effect, give about 2hours of surgical anaesthesia.
 Recovery from such doses is very prolonged, the
Both steroids are rapidly broken down in the
liver so that an incremental dose regimen does not
cat not becoming fully conscious until the next
result in undue delay in recovery and cats are usu-
day. Despite the long-acting nature of the drug and
ally completely conscious within 2hours of admini-
the respiratory depression it causes, pentobarbital
stration of the last increment. The rapid breakdowm
anaesthesia has, over the years, been successfully
of the steroids is undoubtedly responsible for the
and safely administered clinically to many thou-
wide safety margin as far as dose is concerned.
sands of cats. Most deaths following pentobarbital
 anaesthesia probably result from hypothermia and
Induction of anaesthesia is usually smooth and
rapid, but occasionally it is complicated by retch-
it is essential that cats are kept warm in the recov-
ing, vomiting and laryngeal spasm. Although in
ery period.
 Pentobarbital can also be given by intraperi-
the majority of healthy, unpremedicated cats the
i.v. dose needed to produce some 15minutes of
toneal injection but the results are variable,
anaesthesia (9mg/kg) may be given as a single
 depending on its absorption from the peritoneal
injection, in a few it may be an overdose. It cer-
cavity. Induction of anaesthesia is slow and
tainly causes a significant depression of cardiac
cats frequently show a stage of marked excitement
 output, stroke volume and peripheral vascular
so that if released from a cage at this stage
resistance (Dyson et al., 1987).
they may literally run around the walls of the
room. Today, this route of pentobarbital ad-
The authors much prefer to give an initial i.v.
injection of 2 to 3 mg/kg and administer the rest of
ministration should, if used at all, be restricted to
the dose after gauging the response to the initial
those laboratory workers untrained in more
injection. Where sedative premedication is given
acceptable anaesthetic methods. Some veteri-
the dose of Saffan has to be reduced and if xylazine
narians have in the past administered pento-
 is employed a reduction of more than 50% may be
barbital to cats by intrapleural injection and
necessary. The use of other i.v. agents with Saffan
although absorption from this cavity is better
than from the peritoneum, injection is very painful
may result in severe respiratory and cardiovascu-
lar depression and the manufacturers state that
and the potential complications are such that the
Saffan should not at any time be combined with
intrapleural route must be regarded as quite unac-
ceptable. Today there is little to recommend the
any other i.v. anaesthetic.
There is normally little respiratory depression
use of pentobarbital even i.v. in veterinary clinical
during Saffan anaesthesia although high doses i.v.
practice.
THE CAT453
(more than 12mg/kg) may give rise to some
are not depressed by other agents, Saffan is
depression and a period of apnoea. Hypothermia
undoubtedly a reasonably safe induction and
may occur but is rarely clinically significant unless
'aoeid jeraua u asn noy juale aoueuaue
the operation involves wide opening of the body
Evans estimated from the quantities sold by the
cavities for more than 15 minutes, or the cat is fluid
manufacturers coupled with the deaths reported
depleted. Recovery from Saffan anaesthesia is
to them, that the mortality rate was less than 1 in
often rather restless and if the animal is stimulated
10 000, but it seems more likely that the true mor-
in some way recovery may be violent, the cat
tality rate for Saffan in cats is nearly 10 times
becoming rigid, twitching, convulsing and even 
greater than this at about 1 in 900 (Clarke & Hall,
 showing opisthotonus. The smoothness of recov-
1990).
ery can be improved by ensuring that the animal is
 pain-free and left undisturbed in a quiet, warm,
Propofol
cmfortable cage. Acepromazine premedication is
also claimed by many to improve the quality of
Propofol has been used quite extensively in cats as
recovery from Saffan anaesthesia.
an i.v. anaesthetic. The dose needed to induce
When Saffan is used as an induction agent
amaesthesia is 6 to 7mg/kg in both unpremedi-
before inhalation anaesthesia it is often necessary
cated animals and in animals premedicated with
to increase the concentration of any volatile agent
0.03 mg/kg acepromazine. The dose following
to above what might be expected in order to
medetomidine premedication has yet to be estab-
 suppress the twitching associated with recovery
lished but is likely to be very low. Induction is
from Saffan. Laryngeal spasm may be provoked
smooth and blood pressure and heart rate are well
by head and neck surgery under light Saffan
maintained, but there is some significant respirato-
anaesthesia (reports to the Association of
ry depression. Maintenance of anaesthesia with
Veterinary Anaesthetists) and for this type of sur-
propofol requires about 0.4 mg/kg per min by con-
gery cats must be premedicated with atropine and
tinuous infusion but may be less when intermit-
intubated.
tent doses are administered as needed to simply
Saffan may also be given i.m. and doses of
obtund responses to particularly painful stimuli.
18 mg/kg are followed in about 10 minutes by
Recovery is generally smooth but retching, sneez-
anaesthesia which lasts some 10 to 20minutes.
ing or pawing of the face may occur in about 15%
These doses represent a rather large volume (4.5
of cases.
 ml for a 3 kg cat) but the injection appears painless
The cat's liver does not metabolize phenols as
and cats do not resent administration. Lower
rapidly as does the dog's liver and although con-
doses can be used for minor procedures such as
siderable first pass extraction of propofol is said to
dematting the coat. As the anaesthetic is eliminat-
occur in the cat's lungs (Matot et al., 1993), rapid
ed so rapidly from the body, it is ineffective if
recovery is not a marked feature of propofol anaes-
given either s.c. or into the fascial planes between
thesia. Also, some cats have disturbed recoveries,
muscles so to ensure its proper effect it should be 
pawing at their noses in a manner reminiscent of
uv 'sanosnu jo dnono snisea aui oiui daap uaa
that seen after the use of Saffan. Acepromazine
i.m. administration is never as reliable as i.v. and it
premedication appears to improve the quality of
is, therefore, generally employed either where
recovery. Propofol seems less likely than Saffan to
deep sedation rather than anaesthesia is needed or
produce anaphylactoid reactions but, in the vast
where it is possible to supplement by an i. v. injec-
majority of cats these reactions with Saffan are rel-
fion once the cat is unconscious.
atively mild, so this is not a reason to prefer the
Hyperaemia and swollen paws, ears and noses
use of propofol. It is doubtful whether propofol
 are common following Saffan and there are reports
offers any major advantage over other i. v. agents
of laryngeal and pulmonary oedema. Other side
and, indeed, many cats have very prolonged
effects include sneezing, retching, vomiting and
 recoveries, while the mortality rate, although not
laryngeal spasm, but provided a clear airway is 
 yet reliably established, may prove to be quite
maintained and respiration and cardiac function
umacceptable.
454 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Ketamine
these doses are greatly excessive when many of the
current drug combinations are employed.
Ketamine is available as the water soluble racemic
Ketamine induces a state of catalepsy with
mixture of two isomers and the standard for
some degree of analgesia. It appears to abolish
veterinary use is a solution containing 100 mg/ml
 responses to superficial, painful stimuli, but not to
ketamine hydrochloride with benzethonium chlor-
abdominal pain (Sawyer et al., 1991). Ketamine
ide 0.01% as preservative. Lower strength solutions
dosed cats exhibit marked muscle tone, their eyes
(10 mg/ml and 50 mg/ml) are available for use
remain open and spontaneous movement quite
in man. As well as by i.v. injection ketamine can
unrelated to any stimulation may occur. Such
be administered i.m. or s.c. and this has encour-
movements may lead an anaesthetist unaccus-
aged its use in cats that are difficult or impossible
tomed to the effects of the drug to assume that
to handle. The volume of solution which has to be
anaesthesia is lightening, but this is not the case
 injected is small and the i.m. or s.c. injection can,
and further doses given in attempts to suppress
when deemed to be essential, be made by a dart
projectile fired from a blowpipe. It should be
 geal reflexes are often said to be retained, but no
noted, however that i.m. or s.c. injection of keta-
reliance can be placed on this protection and all
 mine appears to be painful, in that it is often vio-
normal precautions to protect the airway must be
lently resented by the animal. Application to the
taken. Salivation is often profuse, so atropine or
mucous membranes of the mouth (squirting from
glycopyrrolate premedication  is advisable
a syringe) can also be an effective route of adminis-
Although ketamine is claimed to produce minimal
tration in cats which are difficult to handle. When
respiratory depression, relative or absolute over-
given i.v. there is usually a delay of 1-2 minutes
doses cause apnoea (Clarke & Hall, 1990). It is
before its effects become apparent, but this is the
essential that cats should be kept under continu-
best route of administration. Ketamine has become
ous observation from the time ketamine is given
a drug of abuse in man and care must be taken in
until it is obvious that recovery is complete.
its safe storage and disposal. In the USA it is now a
scheduled drug.
Ketamine produces sympathomimetic effects
 Cats become recumbent 3-5 minutes following
but has a negative inotropic on the myocardium so
that the overall effect on the circulatory system
-an eans i / nz no / nn ra
may vary according to the clinical state of the an-
bency is usually regained 30 minutes after the
lower dose and 50 minutes following the higher
imal. In healthy, normovolaemic cats the stimu-
latory action appears to predominate and the ABP
one, but standing and behaving normally takes
 and heart rate increase. The drug normally causes
considerably longer. Higher doses are seldom
more reliable and result in very long recovery
some depression of respiratory function but in
cats these effects are complex and dose-dependent.
periods associated with ataxia, increased motor
When ketamine is used in healthy individuals the
degree of respiratory depression is usually
muli. In man, ketamine emergence reactions are cou-
insignificant.
pled with a range of hallucinations and mood
alterations but, of course, it is impossible to estab-
lish whether similar phenomena occur in cats.
Ketamine combinations
The manufacturers recommend i.m. doses 11-
A wide range of sedative agents have been used in
33 mg/kg, the lower doses to be used for minor
 order to reduce side effects, in particular those of
restraint, and the larger doses for minor surgery
 emergence excitement and increased muscle tone.
 and restraint of fractious cats. Very small kittens of
Where premedication enables a reduction in the
less than 4 weeks of age appear to need still higher
dose of ketamine, speed of recovery may be
doses of up to 35 mg/kg. Doses of up to the lower
 enhanced. Atropine is generally recommended at
 end of the range are recommended when the drug
doses of 0.03 to 0.05 mg /kg to reduce salivation.
is given i.v. Today, however, for the reasons given
below, ketamine is seldom used on its own and
Inhalation anaesthesia may be used after ketamine
 a     
THE CAT455
combinations of O2 with N2O or halothane, or
thian does xylazine and hence the dose of ketamine
isoflurane.
needed to produce surgical anaesthesia can be
reduced to 5-7mg/kg i.m. when preceded by
Acepromozine
80 μg/kg i.m. medetomidine. These doses produce
a mild bradycardia and no apnoeic periods but
Acepromazine (0.01-0.03 mg/kg i.m.), although
increasing the ketamine dose to 10 mg/kg results
widely used, has little influence on the dose of ket-
in tachycardia (? from hypotension) and brief
amine subsequently required. It reduces the mus-
periods of apnoea. The data sheet for ketamine
dle rigidity associated with ketamine alone and
suggests a dose of 80 μg/kg i.m. medetomidine fol-
appears to produce a state resembling more con-
lowed by a 2.5-7.5 mg i.m. ketamine and that these
ventional general anaesthesia, although the eyes
may be combined in the same syringe, although
remain open with a dilated pupil. Better condi-
the vials should have separate needles inserted for
tions result when butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg i.m.) is
withdrawal to minimize the likelihood of cross
added to increase analgesia (Tranquilli et al., 1988).
contamination. Accurate measurement of the dose
is best assured by the use of a tuberculin syringe.
Diozepom ond midazolam
Surgical anaesthesia of 30 to 60 minutes duration
follows after an interval of some 3-4 minutes.
Diazepam (1 mg/kg) is also disappointing but
midazolam with ketamine (0.2 mg /kg midazolam
Except for heart and respiratory rate records,
published data concerning the cardiovascular and
with 10mg/kg ketamine) mixed in the same
respiratory effects of these drug combinations is
syringe and administered i.m. produces heavy
lacking. In view of the similar actions of xylazine
sedation with good muscle relaxation (Chambers
& Dobson, 1989) suitable for radiotherapy or radio-
and medetomidine it seems reasonable to assume
graphy. Useful sedation lasts about 30 minutes
that medetomidine/ketamine combinations will
cause some degree of arterial hypotension. The
(some cats become cyanosed when breathing air)
cardiovascular depressant effects of medetomi-
and recovery is usually complete within 2-3hours.
dine / ketamine combinations can be countered by
the administration of 200 μg/kg i.m. atipamezole
Xylazine
(Verstegen et al., 1991a). In clinical practice it is
Xylazine has been used for some years to prevent
unwise to administer atipamezole until the effects
ketamine-induced emergence excitement but its
of ketamine have waned - probably about one
use is also associated with the side effects of brady-
hour after a dose of 5 mg/kg - because of the likeli-
cardia (unless anticholinergics have been used for
hood of ketamine emergence excitement.
premedication) and vomiting. Earlier high doses
have been replaced by much safer ones and the
Tiletamine
recommendation now is that 1mg/kg of i.m.
xylazine is followed by 5 mg/kg of i.m. ketamine.
Tiletamine, a dissociative agent related to keta-
mine is seldom if ever used as the sole sedative or
This yields a reasonably rapid recovery. The dose
 of i.m. xylazine has been reduced to 0.5 mg/kg and
immobilizing agent in cats. Investigations by
the i.m. dose of ketamine increased to 20-25 mg/kg
by Arnbjerg (1979) with a recorded death rate of
TABLE 16.4 Composition of Zoletil (marketed by
3 in over 7000 cats. Thus even these dosage rates
Virbac) according to the direction sheet
are comparatively safe but the prolonged recovery
One vial contains:
Zoletil  Zoletil  Zoletil
period of 3-5 hours may present problems in busy
20
50
100
practice conditions.
Tiletamine
50mg
125mg 250mg
Zolazepam
50mg
125mg.
250mg
Medetomidine
Dissolved in 5 ml
 20mg/ml 50mg/ml 100mg/ml
water, each ml
agonist, medetomidine, provides more analgesia
contains
456 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Garmer (1969) showed that i.m. it was painful, high
anaesthesia by placing the cat in a rectangular
 doses were required to abolish response to stimu-
glass or clear plastic chamber and piping the gases
lation and recovery was prolonged and excited.
 and vapours into the chamber (Fig. 16.7). Scaveng-
Recently it has been combined with zolazepam, a
 ing is recommended to avoid pollution of the room
member of the benzodiazepine group of drugs, as
air. The cat usually accepts this quite calmly pro
"Telazol' or, in Australia, 'Zoletil' (Table 16.4).
vided it can see out of the container and the trans-
Injection produces profuse salivation that can
 parent walls of the chamber enable the behaviour
be controlled by atropine, the degree of muscle
of the cat to be observed. It must be removed from
relaxation is poor in comparison to medetomi-
the chamber as soon as it loses consciousness and
dine/ketamine and ketamine/xylazine and respir-
 collapses in a state of light anaesthesia.
atory depression is equal to that produced by
Restraining a fully conscious, unsedated cat
tiletamine alone (Verstegen et al., 1991b). Recovery
 and applying a face-mask to force it to inhale any
takes 2-6 hours and if the cat is stimulated in any
 anaesthetic mixture, although often done in the
way there may be periods of excitement. If more
se papiesai aq isnu Kiajes juaedde yhm ised
than the one initial dose has been administered
being inhumane. It results in adrenaline release,
recovery can be very prolonged.
which in the frightened animal may occasionally
result in ventricular fibrillation and death, but the
method has been applied without fatalities for
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
very many years. The animal is usually restrained
Inhalation agents may be used in cats to induce
 a  sa   m n  
and maintain anaesthesia but because of the small
assistant while the anaesthetist controls the head
size of the animals it is relatively easy to adminis-
with one hand and uses the other to apply the face-
ter an overdose of volatile agents. The fit, unsedat-
mask. Cats seldom object to breathing a nitrous
ed cat strongly resents attempts to force it to
oxide/ oxygen mixture and the volatile agents may
breathe volatile agents from a face-mask and it is
be added in grad ually increasing concentrations.
seldom possible to avoid struggling or fighting
The normal rule is to increase the concentration of
with the animal at some time during attempts to
the volatile agent every three breaths until the safe
induce anaesthesia in this way. For this reason
 maximum is obtained. This technique avoids the
many anaesthetists prefer to induce inhalation
 prolonged breath-holding which occurs if the an-
imal is suddenly introduced to high induction con-
centrations of the anaesthetic. If the cat struggles it
usually breathes rapidly and deeply so the induc-
 tion of anaesthesia is more rapid; if breath-holding
is encountered care must be taken not to release
the restraint as the cat may be in the stage of nar-
cotic excitement. In heavily premedicated or very
sick cats, induction of anaesthesia by volatile
agents (e.g. 2.5 % for halothane or 3.5 % for isoflu-
rane) given by face-mask can usually be carried
out without provoking excitement or struggling
and is often the method of choice.
Breathing circuits
Any breathing system used to administer inhala-
tion anaesthetics to cats must have a very low
resistance and small deadspace. In practice, this
FIG. I6.7 A cat box with transparent sides for the
limits the possible systems to non-rebreathing
induction of inhalation anaesthesia.Scavenging of gases
issuing from the box is to be recommended.
ones because the soda lime canister and connect-
THE CAT457
TABLE 16.5 Average cardiovascular data for
administer inhalation anaesthetics. If the mask is
anaesthetized normal adult cats of all domestic
applied tightly to the cat's face most anaesthetists
breeds (measurements made at the Cambridge
lift the valve plate by introd ucing a needle or pin
School between 1952 and 1990)
beneath the plate. Other anaesthetists use a large
Respiratory rate
 24-28 breaths/min
face-mask which is not applied tightly to the cat's
Tidal volume
12-24 ml
face so that expiration can take place freely between
Minute volume
280-760 ml/min
the face and mask. These modifications of the sys-
Heart rate
160 beats/min
tem can result in considerable pollution of the
Arterial blood
atmosphere of the room by the anaesthetic agents.
pressure:
120-140 mmHg
 In the USA circle systems with their paediatric
systolic
diastolic
70-80mmHg
hoses desigmed for use in small human infants are
Arterial blood pH
7.34
commonly used with a fresh gas inflow of 1l/min
PaO2
9/(95) 5 mmHg (12-13.9kPa)
for cats weighing more than 3kg. Circuits
PaO2
35 mmHg (4.7kPa)
designed for adult human patients can be satisfact-
orily used in cats, but gentle IPPV is essential.
ing tubes of rebreathing systems create too much
resistance to respiration.
Inhalation agents used
All the inhalation anaesthetics may be used in cats
The Ayre's Tpiece system
in a similar way to that in which they are used in
dogs (Chapter 15). Chloroform has no place today
This is the circuit of choice when the cat is intub-
in feline anaesthesia.
ated but it may also be used with a face-mask. It has
minimal resistance and deadspace and IPPV can
be carried out very efficiently by squeezing the
Nitrous oxide
partially filled bag of the Jackson-Rees modifica-
Nitrous oxide /oxygen mixtures (3/2 in the Ayre's
tion of the T-piece system. Fresh gas flows of twice
T-piece and 50/50 in circle rebreathing systems)
the minute volume of respiration (Table 16.5) are
sufficient to prevent rebreathing.
are useful after anaesthesia has been induced with
Saffan, especially when it has been given i.m., as
they seem to suppress the muscle twitching often
Co-axial systems
seen when the effects of Saffan are waning.
In practice the Bain system does not behave like a
However, nitrous oxide /oxygen mixtures are usu-
T-piece system and appears to offer too much
ally used in feline anaesthesia simply as a vehicle
resistance for spontaneously breathing cats, but it
for the delivery of volatile agents.
seems that the performance of the modified Bain
system is improved if the 'tail' of the bag is ampu-
Ether
tated! The Lack system behaves rather like a
Magill system but the weight of the tubing tends to
For well over 100 years ether was used as a partic-
drag the face-mask away from the face or endotra-
ularly safe anaesthetic for cats. Today, however,
cheal tube out of the trachea. The expiratory valve
because of its inflammable nature it is largely dis-
needs to be removed from the Lack circuit. The
carded in most developed countries in favour
 parallel circuits in these configurations offer no
of more recently introduced non-inflammable
advantage in feline anaesthesia.
agents. Nevertheless, although induction is slow-
er, the margin for error is much greater than it is for
 more potent agents such as halothane and isoflu-
The Mogill system
rane. Many thousands of cats have been anaes-
 -ss  a g aaa rxa ae y
thetized with ether and the number of deaths
tem creates too much resistance for cats, the sys-
 which can be attributed to its proper use is small. It
tem is frequently used with a face-mask to appears that anaesthetization is often followed by
458 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
nausea for many cats are reluctant to eat for the
the methods usually employed in feline anaesthe-
first 2448 hours after ether anaesthesia. This is,
sia. Evidence of seizures from central nervous irri-
aun pue Aiajes ioy Aed oi aoiid lews e 'sdeuad
tation has not been observed, but myotonia is
only real objection to the use of ether in feline
common during recovery from anaesthesia
 anaesthesia is the risk of fires or explosions when it
essential to reduce the copious secretions induced
sofiurdne
by the irritant nature of its vapour.
Isoflurane is a quite satisfactory agent for feline
anaesthesia although in cats not subjected to
surgical or other stimuli it produces marked dose-
Holothone
dependent respiratory depression. Dose-depend-
Cardiac arrhythmias occur quite frequently in cats
ent arterial hypotension is of the same order as that
under halothane anaesthesia. When they occur
 produced by halothane but results from reduction
they can usually be abolished and normal rhythm
 in peripheral resistance rather than the cardiac
restored by the performance of IPPV to increase
 depression associated with halothane. Unlike its
 pei sieadde 1H 'shumi ah ui asueuoxa snoasea a
isomer, enflurane, it has not been linked to cerebral
the respiratory depressant activity of halothane
irritation in cats.
allows CO2 to accumulate in the body and once the
PaCO2 exceeds a certain threshold value arrhyth-
Sevoflurane
mias appear. Lowering the PaCO2by IPPV is fol-
lowed by a prompt return to normal cardiac
There seems to be nothing exceptional in relation
rhythm. Very satisfactory anaesthesia results when
 to the use of sevoflurane in cats. With the possible
an accurately calibrated vaporizer is used and
exception of a higher heart rate with sevoflurane,
halothane is administered in oxygen or a nitrous
its respiratory and circulatory effects are similar to
 Sueagar-uou e ynor axiu uaxo /apio
those of isoflurane and halothane (Hikasa et al.,
system. For cats, the total fresh gas flow to a T-
1996).
piece system need not exceed 1.5 to 2.01/min, little
halothane is used and consequently, the method is
not expensive. Provided ducting of waste gases
Desflurone
from the open end of the T-piece is practised, there
The cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in cats
is no justification for attempting to use closed
during spontaneous and controlled ventilation
methods of administration
were recorded by McMurphy and Hodgson (1994)
who in 1995 reported the MAC to be 9.79 ± 0.70
vol%. They noted that 1.7 MAC of desflurane
Methoxyfiurane
caused a profound depression of respiration which
In cats methoxyflurane has been used to reinforce
they suggested resulted in high pulmonary artery
the effects of nitrous oxide/oxygen mixtures but
 pressures. Desflurane apparently had a sparing
this agent is no longer generally available for vet-
effect on cardiac output similar to isoflurane.
erinary use.
Because a newly designed, special temperature-
controlled, pressurized vaporizer is needed to deli-
ver the agent in a predictable fashion, this with the
Enflurone
associated costs makes it likely that the develop-
Although as yet there is little published informa-
 ment of desflurane anaesthesia in cats will be slow.
tion relating to the use of enflurane in cats it has
been used quite successfully to produce anaesthe-
sia with short induction and recovery periods.
Intermittent positive-pressure ventilation
(IPPV)
brated vaporizer in a stream of oxygen or nitrous
 In the intubated cat, IPPV can be carried out by
oxide/oxygen and delivered to the cat by any of
 manual compression of the reservoir bag of the
THE CAT459
Jackson-Rees modification of the T-piece system. It
Special problems in feline anaesthesia
is possible to apply IPPV when an uncuffed endo-
The small size of neonatal kittens renders them
tracheal tube is in place and indeed the absence of
particularly prone to develop hypothermia and
a cuff acts as a safety device by preventing the
respiratory obstruction. Kittens should always
application of too high a pressure and over-infla-
 be premedicated with an anticholinergic (0.005 mg
tion of the small feline lungs. When the cat is not
of atropine is appropriate) and anaesthesia is
intubated, IPPV can be applied through a tightly
best induced and maintained with volatile an-
fitting face-mask attached to either an Ayre's T-
aesthetics.
piece or Magill system, but care must be taken to
Endotracheal intubation should be avoided
     sn  a  a
unless absolutely essential - as it is if IPPV is needed.
pressure is not applied or the stomach will be
inflated. A clear airway is produced by avoiding
Very careful attention should be given to the main-
 over-flexion or extension of the head and applying
tenance of body temperature and to the replace-
ment of blood or fluid losses.
forward pressure behind the vertical ramus of the
mandible as the face is pushed into the mask. The
Magill system is only used for emergencies
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
because when IPPV is performed it gives rise to
almost total rebreathing so that the mask must be
Endotracheal tubes should be removed from cats
removed from the patient's face every few breaths
when anaesthesia is still reasonably deep as their
to allow exhalation to the atmosphere and the
removal during light anaesthesia can give rise to
mask to refill with fresh gas.
troublesome laryngeal spasm. The quality of
Most mechanical ventilators used in canine sur-
recovery in cats depends to a great extent on the
 gery produce tidal volumes which are too large for
anaesthetic agents that have been employed. It is
cats and if they are used in these animals a con-
usually smooth and umeventful after inhalation
trolled leak has to be introduced into the circuit.
 anaesthesia but cats may be hypersensitive to
Ventilators such as the Drager, the Halliwell and
noise and other stimulation after Saffan or keta-
the Columbus are quite suitable for use in feline
mine. Whatever anaesthetic agents have been
 anaesthesia but they are needed too infrequently
used, recovery will be improved by keeping the cat
to justify their purchase unless their routine use is
necessary
for the cage to be of adequate size, as many of the
'seizures' seen during recovery are provoked by
the cat being unable to stretch out fully without
Neuromuscular blocking agents
touching the sides of the cage. Cats are prone to
In cats there is seldom any indication for the use of 
 develop hypothermia and the recovery area
competitive neuromuscular blocking agents as
should be kept warm or the cage should be heated.
muscle tone is insufficient to interfere with most
It is difficult to keep cats warm with heated water
feline surgery. However, when they are indicated
 pads or hot water bottles because their claws cause
(e.g. for intraocular surgery) they may be used at
punctures if the animal moves vigorously as it
the same dose rates, and their action antagonized
regains consciousness.
in the same way, as described for the dog. The
 Adequate pain relief is as essential in cats as in
depolarizing agent, suxamethonium, is used to aid
 all other animals. Narcotic analgesics may be
 endotracheal intubation or endoscopy and in cats 
given i.m. as long as excessive doses are not
total doses of 3-5 mg i.v. will, after the initial mus-
employed. Morphine in doses of 0.1 mg/kg does
cle fasciculation, give complete relaxation for
not cause excitement even in fit, healthy cats, and
some 4 - 6 minutes. During the period of apnoea
 post trauma it gives postoperative pain relief for 3
IPPV is, of course, necessary, and no difficulty is
to 4 hours. Pethidine, given at a dose of 4 mg /kg
experienced in continuing this IPPV for much
 gives analgesia for 2hours but no effect is apparent
longer than the paralysis due to the neuromuscu-
after 4hours and the use of this agent should prob-
lar blocker lasts.
ably be restricted to preoperative use. In the
460 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
authors′ experience doses of 10 to 25 mg (depend-
Epidural analgesia
ing on the size of the cat) given i.m. at 3 - 4 hourly
The technique is identical to that used in dogs
 intervals produce excellent pain relief in the post-
and using 2% lignocaine doses of 1ml/ 4.5 kg
operative period for the majority of animals.
administered at the lumbosacral space will block
Buprenorphine (0.006 mg/kg i.m.) can also be very
cranially to the level of L1, while doses of 1 ml/3.4
effective.
kg extend the block to the fifth thoracic vertebral
As cats start to regain consciousness they may
level.
sueip isauo se saurul yons jo anuasaid aul ol poeat
 Most practical anaesthetists consider that in
and occasionally it is necessary to give drugs to
view of the heavy sedation needed to control the
control the animal at this time, even if they delay
cat during operation, properly administered gen-
return to full consciousness. In such circum-
eral anaesthesia is safer and preferable in all cir-
stances, provided that barbiturates have not been
cumstances where lumbar epidural block might be
employed during anaesthesia, small incremental
 used in other species of animal.
doses of i.v. Saffan given into an intravenous
infusion by the nursing staff as required to
produce the necessary control, may be prescribed
WILD FELIDAE
quite safely and the cat still awakens rapidly after
the last dose.
Large zoological Felidae can usually be trapped in
It is often claimed that if local analgesics have
Aadoid uaum pue sabes jodsuen 1o ,azaanbs,
been sprayed on the laryngeal mucous mem-
placed in a'squeeze' cage, a limb can usually be
branes to permit endotracheal intubation, the 
 roped and pulled through the bars so that an intra-
cat should not be allowed access to food or
venous injection can be made. They may then be
water for 4 hours afterwards in case laryngeal pro-.
treated as large domestic cats and procedures are
tective reflexes are still blocked. In practice,
not as difficult or hazardous as might be antici-
the local analgesic is absorbed so rapidly from
pated. If thiopental is used the dose should be kept
the laryngeal mucous membrane that it becomes 
to a minimum since recovery from its effects can
 ineffective about 15 minutes after application.
take up to 2 days in the larger animals such as lions
Cats may always be encouraged to eat and
and tigers. Many lions and tigers in zoological
drink, provided that there are no surgical con-
collections and circuses can be enticed up to the
traindications, as soon as they have fully regained
bars to have their backs scratched and, although
consciousness.
some caution is needed, s.c. injections can often be
made while they are apparently enjoying the
scratching.
LOCAL ANALGESIA
 If the animal cannot be approached closely,
Local analgesia is seldom used in cats because of
xylazine/ketamine or medetomidine/ketamine
the problems involved in adequate restraint and in
 can be administered i.m. by pole or projectile
restricting the dose of drug to non-toxic levels in 
syringe, taking care to use the shortest needle
these small, active animals. However, it can be
 commensurate with penetration of the skin.
valuable in very sick or moribund cats or when the
Needles should be large bore and have holes on
uoi ro uonepas daap Aq panonuoo si lewue
the side of the shaft, for ordinary open-ended
 amaesthesia. Whatever method of local analgesia is
needles may block with a core of skin. It is ad-
employed care must be taken that the total dose of
visable to have atipamezole readily available
the agent does not constitute a toxic dose of about
because it is easy to over-estimate the weight of
0.12 g, i.e. 12 ml of 1% ligmocaine, or its equivalent,
animals that cannot be weighed and it may be
in an 4 kg adult cat. In cats local analgesia usually
found that doses of xylazine or medetomidine
involves local infiltration of the operation site, but
used were excessive. Antagonism of ketamine is
techniques such as IVRA or specific nerve blocks
 seldom needed because the safe dose range is
can be employed if restraint is adequate.
wide.
THE CAT461
 REFERENCES
Matot, 1., Neely, C.F., Ray, M.D., Latz, R.Y. and Neufield,
G.R. (1993) Pulmonary uptake of propofol in cats,
 Armberg, J. (1979) Clinical manifestations of overdose of
effect of fentanyl and halothane. Anesthesiology
ketamine-xylazine in the cat. Nordiske Veterinary
78: 1157-1165.
Medicine 31: 155-161.
MeMurphy, R.M. and Hodgson, D.S. (1994)
Brearley, J.C., Kellagher, R.E.B. and Hall, L.W. (1988)
Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in cats.
Propofol anaesthesia in cats. Journal of Small Animat
Proceedings oftheSth InternationatCongressofVeterinary
Practice 29: 315-322.
Anesthesia, Guelph,p. 191.
Chambers, J.P. and Dobson, J.M. (1989) A midazolam
McMurphy, R.M. and Hodgson, D.S. (1995) The
and ketamine combination as a sedative in cats.
minimum alveolar concentration of desflurane in cats.
Journal of the Associatior of Veterinary Araesthetists
Veterinary Surgery 24:453-455.
16:53-54.
Sawyer, D.C., Rech, R.H. and Durham, R.A. (1991). Does
Clarke, K.W. and Hall, L.W. (1990) A survey of
ketamine provide adequate visceral analgesia when
anaesthesia in small animal practice: AVA/BSAVA
report. Journat ofthe AssociationofVeterinary
diazepam, or butorphanol incats Proceedings of the 4th
Anaesthetists 17:4-10.
Internationat Congress of Veterirary Anaesthesia, Utrecht
 Davis, L.E. and Donelly, E.J. (1968) Analgesic drugs in
p.381. Special Supplement to Journal of Veterinary
the cat. Journat of the American Veterinary Medical
Anaesthesia 1993.
Association 53:1611-1667.
Short, C.E. (1987) Principles and Practice of Veterinary
Dunkle, N., Moise, N.S., Scarlett, K.J. and Short, C.E.
Anesthesia. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, p. 550.
(1986) Cardiac performance in cats after
administration of xylazine or xylazine and
intubation incats. Veterinary Record 130: 583.
glycopyrrolate: echocardiographic evaluations.
Taylor, P. M. (1993) Veterinary use of Xylocaine spray.
American Journat of Veterirary Research 47:2212-2216.
British Journal of Araesthesia 70: 113.
Dyson, D.H.,Allen, D.G., Ingwersen, W.,Pascoe, P.J. and
Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C.,Speiser, J.R. Benson, G.J.
O'Grady, M. (1987) Effects of Saffan on
and Olson, W.A. (1988) Butorphanol as a
cardiopulmonary function in healthy cats. Caradian
preanesthetic incats:its effects on two common
Journal ofVeterinary Research 51:236-239.
intramuscular regimens. Veterirnary Medicine
 Evans, J. (1979) Steroid anaesthesia five years on.
83:848-854.
Proceedings of the Association of Veterinary Araesthetists
Verstegen, J., Fargetton, X., Zanker, S., Donmay, I. and
ofGreat Britain and Iretand 8:73-83.
Ectors, F. (199la) Antagonistic activities of
Garmer, L. N. (1969) Efects of2-ethylamino- 2'-
atipamezole, 4-aminopyridine and yohimbine against
(2'phenyl) cyclohexanone HC1 (CI-634) in cats.
medetomidine/ ketamine induced anaesthesia in cats.
Research in Veterirary Science 10:382-388.
Veterinary Record 128:57-60.
Gaynor, J.S., Dunlop, C.1., Wagner, A.E., Wertz, E.M.
Verstegen, J., Fargetton, X., Donnay, I. and Ectors, F.
Golden, A.and Demme, W.(1994) Morbidity and
(1991b) An evaluation of medetomidine/ketamine
mortality associated with small animal anesthesia.
and other drug combinations for anaesthesia in cats.
Proceedings of the 5th Interrationat Congress of Veterinary
Veterinary Record 128:32-35.
Anesthesia, Guelph,p. 173.
Verstegen, J., Deleforge, J. and Rossillon, D. (1994)
Hall, L.W. and Taylor, PM. (eds) (1994) Araesthesia of the
Pharmacokinetics of ACP after single oral
Cat. London: Bailliere Tindall
administration in dogs and cats. Proceedings of the 5th
Hikasa, Y., Kawanabe, H., Takase,K.and Ogoasawara,
Internationat Congress of Veterirary Anesthesia, Guelph,
S. ( 1996) Comparisons of sevoflurane, isoflurane and
p. 171.
halothane anaesthesia in spontaneously breathing
cats.Veterinary Surgery 25:234-243.
intubation incats. Veterinary Record 130: 455.
17
Anaesthesia of birds,
laboratory animals and
wild animals
Many small mammals become very distressed
INTRODUCTION
by handling, increasing the risk of physical damage
 and of adrenaline release leading to problems
The problems involved in anaesthetizing birds
under subsequent anaesthesia. The risk of physical
laboratory animals and wild animals for clinical
damage is considerably reduced by proper hand-
procedures are usually much less complicated
ling and animals may be weighed with minimal
than those encountered when these animals are
 distress by placing them in a bag or small box hung
anaesthetized for experimental purposes where it
from a suitable spring balance. Adequate preanaes-
is important that the method of anaesthesia should
thetic examination is often difficult but many have
have little or no influence on the result of the experi-
respiratory disease so oxygen should be available
ment. The techniques to be described in this chapter
are those which the authors have found to be satis-
even if only injectable agents are to be used. The
factory in general practice for most linical purpos-
high metabolic rate of these small mammals means
that they require an almost constant supply of
es in the various species of animal presented to them
and, except in fish, do not require drugs not gener-
food, so preanaesthetic fasting should not exceed
 3hours. There is no need to curtail the water supply
ally found in most veterinary general practices
up to the time of induction of anaesthesia. During
anaesthesia small mammals are particularly prone
to hypothermia and precautions to avoid this
RODENTS AND OTHER SMALL
should be taken. Removal of hair and wetting (par-
MAMMALS
ticularly with alcohol based preparations) should
be kept to a minimum; the animal should be placed
Although rodents and other small mammals are
on a heating pad during anaesthesia and recovery.
 anaesthetized in large numbers for laboratory pro-
deim Aq paonpai Aiqerapisuos aq ues ssol ieaH
 cedures with apparently few serious problems,
 ping the animal in foil or bubble paper, although
when similar species are anaesthetized for clinical
this reduces the access of both surgeon and anaes-
purposes the mortality is high. (In a survey by the
 thetist to the patient. When inhalation agents are
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain
used, carrier gases also contribute to cooling
and Ireland, 1 in 32 small mammals or birds anaes-
effects, thus gas flows should be adequate but not
thetized in small animal practices died.) The cause
excessive. Adequate monitoring of the animal's
of the high clinical mortality probably results from
condition, including cardiac and respiratory func-
unfamiliarity with the species and the generally
tion and ensuring it is not hypothermic, is essential
less healthy state of the animals.
until recovery is complete (Table 17.1).
463
464 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE I7.I Some physiological measurements in guinea pigs, hamsters, hens, mice, rabbits and rats.
Values from various sources including Green, C.j. (1979) AnimalAnaesthesia. London:Laboratory
Animals Ltd, and measurements made at Cambridge Veterinary School
Weight
Heart rate
Arterial BP
Functional
IeP!l
Minute
Breaths/
(kg)
(beats/min)
(mmHg
residual
volume
volume
min
syst/diast)
capacity (ml)
(ml)
(l/min)
Guinea pig
0.69
150
90/55
4.75
3.5
0.13
100
range
0.43-1.05
061-051
4.1-5.1
1.0-4.0
0.08-0.40
90-150
Hamster
0.1
350
150/110
0.8
0.06
90
range
0.90-0.12
250-450
0.65-0.85
30-140
Domestic hen
1.6
300
140/85
35
0.7
33
Mouse
0.02
570
110/80
0.15
0.025
190
range
500-600
100-250
Rabbit
2.4
220
110/80
11.3
15.8
0.62
40
range
2.05-3.00
205-235
7.2-15.8
11.5-24.4
0.37-0.89
32-53
Rat
0.25
350
115/90
1.6
0.22
90
range
0.2-0.3
260-450
1.40-1.75
0.21-0.30
70-150
The commonest cause of death is respiratory fail-
ANAESTHESIA WITH VOLATILE AGENTS
ure. Ideally, O2 and the ability to administer artifi-
The most popular agents are halothane and isoflu-
cial ventilation of the lungs should always be
rane. Ether, often used in the past, is not recom-
available. However, intubation of rodents requires
mended as the excessive bronchial secretions it
considerable practice as the narrow mouth makes
provokes may cause respiratory obstruction even if
visualization of the larynx difficult. Suitable antag-
an anticholinergic premedication has been given.
onists should be at hand and there may be a place
 Mask induction can lead to handling stress and
for analeptic agents such as doxapram in circum-
the use of an induction chamber is to be preferred.
stances where intubation is difficult. The other
Several such chambers are commercially available
common cause of mortality is surgical blood loss
but they are relatively easy to improvize and there
so that care must be taken to minimize this and,
is no reason why they should not be available in
whenever possible, to replace that which does
occur, with plasma volume expanders (colloids) or
Once induced, anaesthesia should be main-
Ringer's lactate solution.
tained by volatilizing the volatile agent in a stream
The use of anticholinergic premedication is
of oxygen and administering the mixture through a
- s s iq sis ro i  is
T-piece or similar low-resistance breathing system,
ways are easily blocked by saliva or mucus, its use
assxa q ey an o ar 
is often desirable. Doses of 0.04-0.05 mg/kg of
flow rates. Suitable face masks for small rodents
atropine are suitable for most rodents but rabbits
can be made from plastic syringe barrels and
need much higher doses (e.g. 1-2mg/kg).
should not be a tight fit around the muzzle, for
 Small mammals are generally poor subjects
for local analgesia since even if this is effect-
ing. Such a leak of gas does, however, constitute
ive they still require restraint. If used, local
problems of atmospheric pollution and some form
 analgesic drugs should be diluted and care taken
 of active scavenging of gases should be used.
to avoid overdose. General anaesthesia is pre-
ferred for most purposes and may be induced
and maintained with volatile agents, induced
with injectabable drugs and maintained with
ANAESTHESIA WITH INJECTABLE DRUGS
volatile agents, or maintained with injectable
Theoretically, any injectable anaesthetic can be
drugs alone.
used in small mammals and usually the necessary
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 465
doses for healthy animals are well known from the
of action and, occasionally, in respiratory arrest.
original developmental work in laboratory an-
Combinations of Hypnorm with diazepam or
imals carried out by the company concerned with
midazolam give better muscle relaxation and
marketing the drug. However, practical limita-
allow a reduction of some 50% in the dose of
tions are set by the possible methods of adminis-
Hypnorm. If anaesthesia becomes too deep the
tration. In some animals with easily accessible
 fentanyl component may be antagonized with
veins (e.g. in rabbits) drugs such as propofol or
naloxone (0.1 mg/kg). Flecknell (1988) has re-
thiopental can be used as in cats and dogs
ported on the use of buprenorphine to antagonize
(although the duration of effect may be shorter).
the fentanyl in the drug combination - the tech-
Where i.v. injection is more difficult, drugs which
nique of sequential analgesia.
can be given by i.p., i.m. or s.c. injection are generally
used. The most popular combinations of drugs are
Other agents
the neuroleptanalgesics or mixtures incorporating
ketamine. There are marked differences between
Amixture that is often used, although unlicensed, is
species responses and even within one species of
kmown as the 'Hellabrurn Mixture'. It was devel-
animal many drug actions may be unreliable, a
oped primarily for administration to zoo animals
given drug producing deep anaesthesia in one an-
auuea jo [u Suippe Aq paiedand si pue
imal whilst only providing some sedation in
(100mg/ml) to a vial of dry xylazine (500 mg). This
another of the same species.
yields a stable injectable solution containing xylazine
125 mg/ml together with ketamine 100 mg/ml. Its
stability means that it is immediately available and it
Ketamine
is relatively safe for the administrator.
Ketamine has the advantage that it is effective no
Alphaxalone/alphadolone (Saffan) has proved
matter what the route of administration. Doses
 to be useful in some species of animal when given
required and efficacy vary greatly between the
i v., and it may also be given i.m.
various species of animal. Lower doses may be
Pentobarbital and thiopental may be used by
 used for sedation and immobilization for non-sur-
gical procedures. As in other species of animal,
sedation and respiratory depression; they cannot
ketamine is used in combination with drugs such
be recommended for clinical use.
and/or C2 adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine or
Analgesia
medetomidine) in order to reduce the dose of keta-
mine, improve muscle relaxation and to increase
Postoperative analgesia must not be neglected.
the effectiveness of the dissociative agent as an
Some opioid drugs are suitable and other methods
anaesthetic. It is worth noting that the formula-
utilizing local analgesics should be considered. It
tions of ketamine at lower concentrations, which
is regrettable that the rat, which has probably con-
are available for use in children, can prove more
tributed more than most animals to advances in
convenient for use in very small animals than the
medical and veterinary sciences, still seems in
standard veterinary preparation which needs to be
many laboratories to be ignored in circumstances
further diluted before use.
where postoperative analgesia would be regarded
as essential for other animals.
Neuroleptanalgesia
Although most commercially available neurolep-
LAGOMORPHS
tanalgesic combinations can be used, the mixture
Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) and hares
of fentanyl and fluanisone (Hypnorm’) has
proved to be the most popular in the UK; it can be
(Lepus europaeus)
administered by any route. The dose of fentanyl in
 Rabbits and hares need to be handled carefully;
Hypnorm is high, resulting in a prolonged length 
they tend to panic if placed on slippery surfaces
466 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 17.2 Recommended doses of a variety of agents for use in rabbits.These are in accordance with
the majority of recommendations in the literature
Drug
Dosage
Route of injection
Reference
Xylazine
3 mg/kg
i.v.
Flecknell (1988)
+
3 mg/kg
十
ketamine (3 min. later)
i.v.
Thiopental
10-12 mg/kg to effect
i.v.
Sedgwick ( 1986)
Medetomidine
300 μkg
s.c.
Mero et al. (1989)
Ketamine
 20 mg/kg
+
diazepan
0.75-1.00 mg/kg
Methohexital
 5-10 mg/kg to effect
i.v.
Green (1975)
Saffan
2-8 mg/kg
i.v.for induction of
to effect
anaesthesia only
12 mg/kg
i.m. (sedation only)
Ketamine
20-60 mg/kg
i.m.
Clifford (1984)
and are best held for injection wrapped in a towel
plished by direct visualization of the larynx using a
in the arms of an assistant or placed in a restrain-
straight, premature human infant blade, or blindly.
 ing box. A rabbit or hare struggling against forcible
For blind intubation the the head should be held in
restraint may fracture a vertebra, so any restraint
extension on the neck to provide a straight line of
technique used should only entail the minimum of
 passage for the tube. A semi-rigid stilette can be
force. They should be caught by grasping the
used as a guide to aid in the passage of the endo-
scruff of the neck firmly and pressing down on a
tracheal tube. Tubes of 2.5 to 4.0 mm internal dia-
flat surface until they relax; they may then be lifted
meter are suitable for use in rabbits.
by supplementing the neck grip with support for
Rabbits produce atropinase, which rapidly inac-
the hindquarters. Rabbits, especially when kept as
aae s jo sasop aaoaa aq ci os auidone saieag
pets, can be calmed by scratching behind the ears
must be high (1-2 mg/kg) and repeated every 15
and stroking the back. Respiratory problems, usu-
to 20 min. Alternatively, glycopyrrolate (0.01-
ally due to pasteurella infections, are common in
0.02 mg/kg) may be used as an anticholinergic.
rabbits which may appear to be healthy, and aus-
Although i.v. anaesthetic agents can be used to
cultation of the lungs for diagnosis is not easy;
 induce anaesthesia in rabbits (Table 17.2), they are
many authorities advise thoracic radiography
 not good for maintaining anaesthesia for even very
prior to anaesthesia so that owners may be warned
qnor yeap asnen Aeu sasop ieuawanu tes
of the anaesthetic risks associated with the pres
respiratory arrest. Similarly, unexpected deaths may
ence of lung disease.
occur following ketamine or fentanyl combinations,
Intramuscular injections are made into the
but Scandinavian workers (Mero et al., 1989) have
quadriceps or triceps or lumbar muscles. Intra-
reported no deaths in a series of 340 rabbits undergo-
venous injections are given into the marginal vein
ing experimental surgery and anaesthetized by a s.c.
of the ear and i.v. injection is greatly facilitated by
mixture of medetomidine (300 μg/kg), ketamine
the use of a restraining box which leaves the ears
(20mg/kg) and diazepam (0.75 to 1.50 mg/kg)
accessible.
Induction of anaesthesia with thiopental (10 to
Endotracheal intubation is relatively difficult
12mg/kg), methohexital (5 to 10 mg/kg) or Saffan
because of the long, narrow oropharynx and long
(2 to 8 mg/kg) given i.v. to effect, is satisfactory but
incisor teeth limiting access through the mouth.
it is doubtful whether methohexital or Saffan have
The tongue is thick, fleshy, friable and easily
 any real advantages over thiopental. These agents
torn.The soft palate is long and the epiglottis is
-1nq 8ms 2z 1o 8ms 17 e yono1u A't uaa18 1saq a1e
large. Endotracheal intubation is either accom-
terfly needle strapped into an ear vein.
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 467
For an inhalation induction a 1:1 mixture of
 TABLE 17.3 Injectable drugs for use in rats
NzO/O, should be administered through a face-
Drug
Dose
mask from a T-piece system at a flow rate of about
Route Reference
2 litres/min for 1 to 2minutes before halothane or
Ketamine
50-100 mg/kg i.m.
Green et al.
isoflurane is cautiously added in small step incre-
(1981)
ments up to 2 to 3 %. Induction of anaesthesia is
Ketamine
70-80mg/kg
i.m1.
Flecknell
usually quiet when the volatile agents are vapor-
(1988)
ized in the N2O/O2 mixture in this way. Once
 acepromazine 2.5 mg/kg
i.m.
anaesthetized the rabbit may be intubated. An
Ketamine
60-75mg/kg
i.p.
Nevalainen
alternative method which is probably better if N2O
et al.
medetomidine 0.25-0.5μg/kg s.c.
is not available is to place the rabbit in a box and
(1989)
introduce a stream of halothane or isoflurane
Ketamine
40-87mg/kg
i.p., i.m.
Green et ol.
volatilized in O2 into the box until the animal is
(1981)
uconscious. Anaesthesia is usually maintained
Xylazine
5-13mg/kg
i.p., i.m.
with 1.5 to 2.0% halothane or 2 to 3 % isoflurane
Hypnorm
0.4-0.5 ml/kg i.m.or
Green
given by face mask or through an endotracheal
i.p.
(1975)
tube and, as always in rabbits, O2 administration is
essential since anaesthetized rabbits rapidly devel-
Anaesthesia may be induced in a box used as an
op hypoxaemia.
 The depth of anaesthesia is assessed by tickling
induction chamber, or by face-mask, with the
the inside of the ear pinnae, since with many
agent volatilized in a stream of O2. Injectable
agents may be given i.v. into the dorsal metatarsal
anaesthetic methods the pedal withdrawal reflex
vein or a tail vein, or i.p.
may remain strong until the animal is very close to
 death. Loss of the corneal reflex is a sigm of danger-
Ketamine is generally unsatisfactory in rats in
that i.m. doses of 60 mg/kg usually only produce
ously deep anaesthesia.
Postoperative analgesia
sedation. There are age and sex differences in the
1may
be
provided
response of rats to ketamine. Duration of effect
by buprenorphine (0.02-0.05 mg/kg s.c.) every
decreases as young rats mature from 1 to 3 weeks
8-12 hours, or pethidine (10 mg/kg s.c. or i.m.)
of age. After 3 weeks females sleep longer than
every 2-3hours. Postoperatively, rabbits should be
males. To produce anaesthesia in rats ketamine
kept warm, e.g. in a baby incubator at 95 °F (35 *C).
should always be combined with other drugs such
as xylazine (Table 17.3).
RODENTIA
In inexperienced hands inhalation anaesthesia
is safer and anaesthesia is best induced in a cham-
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
ber although if contamination of the room air is
Rats that are not tame can be very difficult to han-
ignored it can be done by blowing the anaesthetic
dle; they cannot be restrained by the tail for any
gas mixture over the face through a face mask.
Rats should be kept warm until full recovery is
long time for they will turn and climb up their own
apparent and postoperative analgesia can be
tails to bite the restraining hand. They can be
obtained from buprenorphine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg s.c.
restrained in a towel which is folded over the rat
and rolled, making sure that the legs are secure.
at 8 to 12 hourly intervals or pethidine 20 mg/kg
Experienced handlers often grasp the rat with the
s.c. at intervals of 2-3hours.
palm of the hand over the animal's back and
restrain the forelegs by folding them across each
Mice (Mus musculus)
other under the chin so that the chin cannot be
Mice should be lifted by holding the base of the tail
depressed enough to bite.
between the thumb and forefinger and immedia-
There are very many ways of anaesthetizing
tely transferred to a horizontal cloth surface (e.g. the
rats but simple halothane or isoflurane anaesthesia
coat of the handler). As it attempts to escape, it is
is very satisfactory for all clinical purposes.
grasped by the loose scruf of the neck and the tail
468 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
TABLE 17.4 Drugs for use in mice
from i.p. or i.m. injections of computed doses of
Route Duration
injectable drugs. Moreover, respiratory disease is
Drug
Dose
common.
Ketamine
100mg/kg
s.c.
Sedation
Fortunately, halothane or isoflurane anaesthe-
only
sia meets most of the needs of clinical practice. A
Ketamine
100-200 mg/kg
i.m.
60-100 min.
 mixture of the volatile agent with O2 is supplied to
+
+
an induction chamber (box) or face-mask at 1 to
xylazine
 5-15 mg/kg
i.p.
Sedation to
 21/min, starting with a minimal concentration and
100-200 mg/kg
compete
gradually increasing it until the animal loses con-
anaesthesia
Hypnorm
0.01 ml/30g
i.p.
Approx.
sciousness. Anaesthesia is usually produced in
60min.
about 2 to 3 min and can be maintained with con-
Hypnorm
0.01-0.02mg/30g
i.p.
centrations of halothane (0.5 to 1.5%) or isoflurane
+
+
(1 to 2%), given through a face-mask from a T-
diazepam
5mg/kg
i.p.
60-90 min.
piece system. Full recovery follows in less than
20to 30 min after termination of administration of
the anaesthetic.
is gripped, turning the animal so that its abdomi
Maintenance of a clear airway is not always
nal wall is presented for i.p. injections given 2-3 mm
from the mid-abdominal line. With skill, i.v. injec-
secretions tend to become viscid during anaesthe-
tions can be made into a lateral vein of the tail
sia and are liable to give rise to obstruction. The
using a 10 mm long 27 to 28 gauge needle. The
nse juanbang Kq panamon aq Ae Ys
margin of safety is generally considered to be too
of the mouth and oropharynx using a fine rubber
small for the routine use of inhalation anaesthetics
catheter attached to a 60 ml syringe. Endotracheal
such as halothane and isoflurane to induce and
intubation is virtually impossible unless a semi-
maintain anaesthesia but methoxyflurane, where
rigid stilette is used as an introducer and a small
it is still available, can be used with greater safety
endotracheal tube (1.5 mm i.d) is threaded over it
(Green, 1979). Assessment of anaesthetic depth is
once it is in the trachea. As with all small mam-
based on the respiratory rate and depth, corneal,
mals, conservation of body heat is important and a
tail-pinch and pedal reflexes.
warm environment should be provided.
As in rats, ketamine on its own is generally
Ketamine, whether used alone or in com-
unsatisfactory but it may be used with other drugs
bination with α2 adrenoceptor agonists, immobil-
(Table 17.4). It is most important to keep mice
izes and produces anaesthesia in these animals
warm whilst they are anaesthetized and in the
(Table 17.5).
recovery period.
TABLE 17.5 Drugs used in guinea pigs
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus)
Drug
Dose
Route Duration
Guinea pigs are best restrained by grasping
Saffan
16-20 mg/kg i.v.
10-20 min.
around their pectoral and pelvic structures.
They are not good subjects for anaesthesia
Saffan
 40-45 mg/kg
i.p. or
40-90 min.
with injectable agents whether given by i.v. injec-
i.m.
sedation only
tion or other parenteral routes. Visible veins
Pentobarbital 30 mg/kg
i.p.
60 min.
are fragile and venepuncture is often difficult,
Ketamine
30-44mg/kg
i.m.
75 min.sedation
while the use of other routes necessitates an accu-
+
+
rate estimation of body weight for computation of
xylazine
0.15.0 mg/kg i.m.
the dose. Since the gastrointestinal tract can con-
Ketamine
 40-I 00 mg/kg i.m.
60 min.
tribute anything from 20 to 40% of the total weight
+
十
anaesthesia
of the animal, depending on its content of ingesta,
xylazine
45mg/kg
i.m.
it is not surprising that variable results follow
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 469
TABLE 17.6 Drugs recommended for use in hamsters and gerbils
Drug
Dose
Route
Duration of effect
Reference
Hamsters
Pentobarbital
70-80 mg/kg
i.p.
60-75 min.
Orland & Orland (1946)
Ketamine
40-80mg/kg
i.m.
Sedation only
Green et al. (1981)
Hypnorm
0.1 ml/kg
i.p.
60 min.
Green (1975)
Gerbils
 Pentobarbital
30-100 mg/kg
i.p.
Approx.60 min.
Saffan 
80-120 mg/kg
i.p.
Approx.75 min.
Hamsters and gerbils (Mesocricetus auratus
until it is unconscious the animal is not removed
and Gerbillidae)
from the box.
It should be remembered that hamsters are noctur-
nal and often greatly resent being disturbed
Ferrets and skunks (Mustela putorius furo;
during daytime, making them liable to bite. The
Mephitis mephitis)
hamster's scruff is quite loose so restraint by
 grasping the scruff needs to be quite vigorous.
Ferrets are tractable and are usually easily tamed.
 They readily vomit when anaesthetized so they
Hamsters and gerbils are best anaesthetized by
 inhalation methods. They should be placed in an
should be fasted for about6hoursbefore induction
induction chamber such as a small cardboard box
of anaesthesia. Skunks can spray the anaesthetist
with a perforated lid and anaesthetized with
with musk unless precautions are taken to avoid
this. The scent glands can be emptied by holding
isoflurane or halothane introduced into the box in
the skunk up with its hindquarters away from the
a stream of O2, using scavenging of emergent
 gases whenever possible. The animal is removed
handler and pulling the tail up and forwards
from the box as soon as it becomes unconscious.
towards the head.
Unconsciousness is usually equated with loss of
Ferrets and skunks can be anaesthetized with
the righting reflex when the box is tilted; anaesthe-
isoflurane or halothane passed into an induction
sia is then maintained using a face-mask. If the use
box until they are unconscious, following on with
of injectable agents is obligatory, neuroleptanal-
the administration of the agent through a face-mask
gesic combinations appear to give the most reli-
from a T-piece system. Skunks are probably best
able results. Ketamine is very variable in effect
amaesthetized in a disposable clear plastic bag.
surgery being performed through a hole cut in the
(Table 17.6).
bag At the end of the procedure the bag is discarded,
eliminating the problem of persistent odour other-
Mink (Mustela vison)
wise probable when a box is used. Inhalation anaes-
Mink are not domestic animals - they are nervous,
thesia presents no special features in these animals.
fast and vicious. All mink are best handled by
persuading them to enter a clear sided induction
Stoats and weasels (Mustela erminae;
box. Mink dislike a human blowing into their
Mustela nivalis)
face and will retreat from such an onslaught.
Moreover, mink are very inquisitive and will
Stoats and weasels can be dealt with in a similar
investigate the source of gentle scratching noises
manner, using an induction box, but it should be
such as can be made on the side of a box. Once in
remembered that they are much more vicious than
the box they can be anaesthetized with a volatile
ferrets or skunks. Preferred injectable agents are
anaesthetic such as isoflurane or halothane. If nec-
i.m. ketamine 20-30 mg/kg or ketamine (25 mg/kg
essary the box may be covered with transparent
i.m.) with diazepam (2mg/kg i.m.) or Saffan
plastic sheeting to make it more gas-tight, and
(10-15 mg/kg i.m.).
470 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
OTHER SMALL MAMMALS
into gluteal muscles and if the sedation produced
Aq pauadaap aq Ae h Aiasms rog juaions jou st
Badgers (Meles meles)
administration of isoflurane or halothane because
 Badgers resist handling by biting and scratching.
the head will protrude from the shell and breath-
The safest procedure for handling them is to
ing will be reasonably rapid. Saffan may be used
immobilize them with ketamine (10-20 mg/kg
 instead ini.m. doses of 12 to 18 mg/kg. Loss of mus-
i.m.) prior to maintenance of anaesthesia with con-
cle tone in the neck is the best guide to the depth of
ventional inhalation techniques.
central nervous depression. Chelonia are easily
intubated.
Hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus)
Recovery from a dose of 60 mg/kg of ketamine
takes up to 24 hours. Tortoises should be allowed
-saeue o d'i sonip uaaie Aensn are ssouaspa
 to recover at normal room temperature, preferably
thesia is induced in a chamber with a volatile
 in a straw filled box. Terrapins and turtles should
 agent. Hypnorm, the fentanyl-fluanisone mixture
 be kept at a slightly lower environmental tempera-
(0.2 ml/kg) together with diazepam 2.5mg/kg.
 ture and have their bodies kept damp by the appli-
both given i.p. are said to be the most useful agents 
cation of cold water at frequent intervals.
in this species of animal. However, to give an i.p.
injection the animal must first be made to unroll by
prodding it on the rump or back of the neck. As it
REPTILIA
urolls the strong spines on the crown of the head
are grasped with stout artery forceps and used to
Snakes are difficult subjects for the anaesthetist.
  umop pu dn l an on 
They have a low basal metabolic rate which is
uncurls. Keeping the hind limbs pinioned then
directly related to the environmental temperature
 prev ents it rolling itself up.
so that if parenteral agents are used the induction
 and recovery times are very variable. Moreover,
 they are relatively resistant to hypoxia and can
CHELONIA
hold their breath for several minutes so that the
induction of inhalation anaesthesia may be very
In tortoises, terrapins and turtles anaesthetic prob-
prolonged.
lems are posed by the very low metabolic rate
Snakes have peculiar anatomical features. The
which varies with environmental temperature and
absence of an epiglottis and the position of the
the ability to retract the head into the protective
glottis makes it possible to intubate non-ven-
shell. Some species present further problems due
omous snakes under simple physical restraint and
to their adaptation to a semi-aquatic or aquatic
inhalation anaesthesia may then be induced by the
mode of life. It should be remembered that some
use of IPPV (Fig. 17.1). (Even so, non-venemous
species of soft shelled turtles can move quickly
snakes can still inflict bite wounds which often
 and handlers can be bitten or scratched.
become septic!) Most snakes have only one func-
The lungs are well developed and the respir-
 tional lung which consists of a thin walled tube term-
atory movements are produced chiefly by muscles
 inating in an air sac extending to the level of the
at each leg pocket beneath the viscera. Although
 cloaca, the trachea being open along one side with-
 these muscles have been described as diaphragms,
 in the lung. There is no diaphragm and the three
they are too weak to drive gases around any anaes-
chambered heart yields a slushing noise instead of
thetic system. Most chelonians have the ability to
the clear ‘lub-dub' of the mammalian heart on
survive on a single respiratory movement per
auscultation.
hour, making attempts to induce anaesthesia with
Snakes appear to be extremely sensitive to
 mhalation agents rather umsuccessful.
 painful stimuli and strike or contract violently
Ketamine is probably the anaesthetic agent of
choice although it does not produce muscle relax-
 skin. It is, therefore, essential to have snakes prop-
ation. It may be given in doses of 60 to 80 mg/kg
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 471
be at the rate observed in the previously conscious
individual and fluid balance should be maintained
by giving 5 ml of isotonic saline every 1-2hours.
Most snakes may be kept at normal ambient tem-
Eye
peratures of around 20 °C unless it is desired to
cool them for restraint purposes.
Induction of anaesthesia in a tank has the
advantage that venomous snakes can be anaes-
Body
thetized with the minimum of handling, but
Larynx
because anaesthetic vapours are heavier than air
they sink towards the bottom of the tank and
snakes can raise their heads above the anaesthetic
-Tongue
layer so delaying the onset of anaesthesia. It is
always wise to ascertain the righting reflexes really
have been abolished before removing the snake
FlG. I7.I Intubation of snakes. Once the mouth is
from the tank.
 opened widely the larynx is visible and endotracheal
Most snakes exhibit a short period of excite-
intubation presents no problems.
ment or agitation when first exposed to an anaes-
thetic vapour but they quieten down and it is not
simple aid to handling is to reduce the environ-
always easy to ascertain the depth of anaesthesia.
mental temperature to below 10 *C for this makes
The first indication that the snake can be safely
the poikilothermic snake very  sluggish.
If
removed from the tank is certainly loss of righting
injectable agents are to be used only the lightest
reflexes but the tail withdrawal reflex is also valu-
level of narcosis compatible with safe handling
able. Absence of response to pricking of the tail
should be used, for deeper levels which require
indicates that surgical anaesthesia is present. If the
larger doses of drug may be followed by a recov-
tip of the tongue is gently grasped with forceps
ery period extending over several days.
there is a marked resistance to its withdrawal until
Of the injectable central nervous depressants
the stage of surgical anaesthesia is reached.
only ketamine is really useful and initial i.m. doses
of the order of 50 mg/kg produce moderate seda-
tion which facilitates handling but muscle relax-
FISH
ation is poor and serpentine movements may
occur. Ketamine anaesthesia can be supplemented
Fish are usually anaesthetized by allowing them to
by infiltration of the surgical site with 0.5 to 1.0%
swim in a solution of the anaesthetic agent. The
lignocaine, or by the administration of isoflurane
solution should be made up in some of the water
or halothane after endotracheal intubation.
in which they are normally maintained (NOT in
Snakes may also be anaesthetized with inhala-
tap water which is often heavily chlorinated) and
tion anaesthetics when a rapid recovery is import-
various drugs are used:
ant. Induction is best achieved by placing the
snake in a clear plastic box, strong plastic bag or an
1. Carbon(
dioxide may
/be used at a
aquarium tank into which 7 to 10% halothane or
concentration of 200 ppm.
isoflurane vapour in oxygen or nitrous oxide/oxy-
 2. Diethylether 10-15ml per litre of water is
gen is piped. Induction may take as long as 15 min-
usual but 50 ml per litre of water has been used for
utes and the snake should not be removed until
large fish. In goldfish anaesthesia is induced in
agitation or turning of the container demonstrates
about 3-5minutes; recovery once placed in
that righting reflexes have been lost. It is then
anaesthetic-free water takes 5-15 minutes.
removed, intubated and anaesthesia maintained
 3. Tricaine methanesulphonate is probably
with about 3% of halothane or 4% of isoflurane
the best agent to use. It is a white powder
vapour given with IPPV. Lung ventilation should
which dissolves in both fresh and sea water.
472 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
Concentrations of 1:30000 up to 1:1000 are
crop or the removal of superficial neoplasms,
employed, the more concentrated solutions being
cause little response and the heart rate, which might
used for larger fish. Anaesthesia is induced in
be expected to increase if pain was experienced,
1-2 minutes and fish recover once placed in non-
remains normal. In spite of these differences humane
medicated water in about 15 minutes.
considerations seem to dictate that anaesthesia
4. Propoxate hydrochloride (R7464) is very
should be used for birds as it is for mammals.
soluble in both fresh and sea water. It is used in
The special problems presented by birds, espe-
concentrations of 0.5 to 10.0 ppm to obtain varying
cially wild ones, are related to their physiological,
degrees of depth of central nervous depression.
anatomical and metabolic differences from mam-
Unfortunately, propoxate is difficult to obtain.
mals. The problems of handling wild birds are
 5. Benzocaine in an immersion solution at
-u are Aaul papraort paieraexa Aaia uao
concentrations of 20-30 ppm is an excellent
dled quietly and that the normal precautions are
 anaesthetic for tagging, marking and measuring
taken (such as the wearing of gauntlets when deal-
fish (Laird & Oswald, 1975). For surgical anaes-
 ing with birds of prey), few difficulties or dangers 
thesia 50 ppm solutions are used. It is dissolved in
 are encountered.
acetone at 40mg/ml giving a stable solution
The high metabolic rate has several implica-
which, if protected from light, will keep for up to 3
 tions for the anaesthetist. It implies a higher rate of
months. For use, this concentrated solution is
utilization of foods so that starvation of 6 to 8
 diluted in fresh or sea water as required.
hours is often sufficient to produce fatal hypogly-
caemia and ketosis. Metabolism of parenterally
When a fish is immersed in the anaesthetic solu-
tion there is initial excited swimming, becoming
administered agents is also rapid. The high avian
body temperature means that excessive cooling
increasingly erratic. The fish then becomes inac-
occurs when the bird is exposed to a cool environ-
tive, sinking to the bottom of the container to rest
ment during or after anaesthesia, especially if
on its back. For surgery, the fish is removed from
many feathers are plucked around the operation
the tank and placed on a moist cloth. Complete
site. Small birds such as budgerigars have very
recovery from the effects of the anaesthetic ensues
high, labile heart rates and heart failure is fre-
when the fish is place in clean, aerated water (fresh
quently encountered when these birds are fright-
or sea water but NOT tap water).
ened by handling. The blood volume of birds is
   s  s  
ficient to cause death from shock.
BIRDS
The avian respiratory tract is very different
from that of mammals, one obvious difference
In recent years interest in conservation of wild life
 being that inspiration in birds is normally passive
has led to an increased demand for anaesthesia for
whilst expiration is active. The respiratory system
surgical purposes in wild or semi-wild birds as
is constructed around a central'core' of relatively
well as the more domesticated chicken, duck or
fixed lung volume and its anatomy has been well
goose. Cage birds have also become popular as
described by Dunker (1972), Piiper (1972) and
companions, especially for elderly people living in
Piiper and Schneid (1973). The trachea divides into
urban districts, and as a result of these trends it is
two mesobronchi which in turn divide to give sec-
now commonplace for the veterinary anaesthetist
 ondary bronchi, one group of which, the ventro-
to be confronted with avian patients requiring
bronchi, communicates with the cranial air sacs
anaesthesia for a wide variety of conditions. It is
(cervical and interclavicular). The dorsal and
well known that birds do not react in the same way
lateral secondary bronchi arise from each meso-
 as mammals to stimuli which in man cause pain.
 bronchus before these terminate in caudal air sacs
For example, after a slight reaction to the skin inci-
(abdominal and posterior thoracic air sacs). The
sion, conscious birds do not show any response to
dorsal and ventral bronchi are joined by narrow
the manipulations involved in caponization. Many
 tubes, the parabronchi, which form the analogue
operations on hens, such as the suturing of a torn
to mammalian lungs and are where gaseous
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 473
exchange takes place between the air and the
Injectable agents
blood. Air passing through the parabronchi moves
Whenever possible birds should be weighed
in one direction only during both inspiration and
before any drug is given by injection. This is usu-
expiration: blood flows across the direction of gas
ally possible if the bird can be confined to a plastic
flow. Thus, the gas composition must change from
box. Physical restraint should be kept to a mini-
the inspiratory
to
expiratory
ends
of
the
mum because small birds such as budgerigars and
parabronchi so that capillary blood must equili-
canaries are prone to become very distressed and
brate with parabronchial gas at widely different
large birds may fracture bones whilst trying to
PO2 and PaCO2. The arrangement is such that gas
escape. Poultry should be grasped so that the
exchange takes place during both inspiration and
wings are held back along the abdomen to quieten
expiration and its efficiency is dependent on an
them. Budgerigars and the like should be cradled
uninterupted flow of air through the lungs. Tidal
in the palm of the hand with the neck between the
exchange is generated through the air sacs and
 index and middle fingers, taking care not to apply
fluid such as blood or injected solutions will inter-
pressure to the neck. Hawks usually present no
fere with ventilation. Even short periods of apnoea
problem after being hooded and parrots may be
are serious and will produce marked hypoxia.
gripped around the neck and wings with a hand
Anaesthetic gases and vapours are rapidly
wrapped in thick towelling.
absorbed into the blood stream so thatinduction of
Intramuscular injection is made into the pec-
 anaesthesia is rapid when inhalation anaesthesia is
toral muscles on either side of the cariniform ster-
used and, equally recovery is also rapid. Most
num or into the thigh muscles. Intravenous
 inhalation anaesthetics are less soluble in in avian
injections are made into the brachial vein where is
than in mammalian blood so that brain tensions
passes over the ventral aspect of the elbow joint.
equilibrate more rapidly with lung tensions and
Although very many injectable agents have been
the clinical anaesthetist will often find induction
used in birds of all kinds it is probable that keta-
and recovery disconcertingly abrupt.
mine is the one of choice in every case (Table 17.7).
After anaesthesia birds must be kept warm in a
When an injectable agent has to be used ketamine
darkened, padded box and they should be sup-
may be given i.m. in doses of 15 mg/kg. The bird
should be confined in a warm, darkened box
vigorous flapping of the wings may occur and this
should be prevented by wrapping the bird in a
TABLE 17.7 Doses of ketamine and *Hellabrunn
towel because a wing bone may be fractured if the
Mixture' for various birds.(Data from several
wing beats against the cage or box wall.
sources but mainly from published data sheets,
Bayer UK Ltd and Parke-DavisVeterinary)
ANAESTHETIC TECHNIQUES
Bird
Adult
Ketamine “Hellabrunn
Local analgesia
BW (g)
dose (mg) Mixture'
(ml/kg)
Because birds such as budgerigars are so small it is
very easy to give a gross overdose of a local anal-
African Grey 350-450
10-14
0.02
gesic agent, but in larger birds local analgesia can
parrots
be used quite safely. Even so, in large birds it is
Budgerigars
30-50
2
wise to watch the total dose which is administered
Geese
5000-7000
60-85
0.03-0.08
and to use very dilute solutions (e.g. 0.25-0.50%
Gulls
500-800
12-15
0.030-0.035
Kestrels
150-250
6-8
0.03-0.06
lignocaine) for injection because there is some evid-
Macaws
750-850
15-18
0.020-0.025
ence that birds are more sensitive to local anal-
Muscovy
3500-5000
35-50
0.02
gesics than are mammals of the same body weight.
ducks
Many workers consider that local analgesia has no
Parakeets
80-100
3
0.03
Penguins
3200-6000
70-175
0.06
place in avian anaesthesia because even when cor-
Mute
6000-7000
70-85
0.03-0.06
rectly used the bird still requires restraint and this
swans
may produce undue distress.
474 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
as soon as the injection has been made and the
depth of anaesthesia produced is assessed by not-
ing response to pinching the wattle or skin of the
neck and although the eyelids often close the
cormeal reflex should persist throughout.
Increments can be given to produce the desired
degree of unconsciousness. There is a wide safety
Aew auueiax jo Sx/Su gz jo sasop pue ugie
safely be given to all species of birds, although
recovery may sometimes be prolonged.
Inhalation anaesthesia
Whenever possible it is probably desirable to
induce and maintain anaesthesia with an inhala-
tion agent. Birds may be restrained so that anaes-
thesia can be induced using a face-mask or they
 can be confined in a box made of transparent plas-
tic material while anaesthetic gases or vapours are
introduced into the box. Probably the best method
is to induce anaesthesia by passing halothane or
isoflurane into the box in which the bird is con-
fined and then to maintain anaesthesia by admin-
 istering the same agent through a face-mask or
endotracheal tube.
Endotracheal intubation is not difficult in birds
(Fig. 17.2) and suitable tubes may be constructed
 from silicone rubber or PVC tubing. Tubes should
FIG. 17.2 Larynx of a raptor -to demonstrate the
be long enough to reach the syrinx but deadspace
 accessibility for endotracheal intubation.
must be kept to a minimum and their ends should
be be cut at a bevel to facilitate passage into the tra-
250 ml in a pigeon and 25ml in a budgerigar.
chea. Airway secretions may block the flow of gas
 Inhalation anaesthetics may also be administered
in both intubated and non-intubated birds so it is
through a needle introduced directly into an air
always wise to have suction available for their
 sac, but this has litle to commend it.
removal by aspiration. Adequate suction can be
Recovery from anaesthesia is accelerated by
provided from a 60 ml syringe fitted with a short
administering oxygen and flushing the air sacs
length of fine catheter.
from time to time until the bird has regained its
Most birds can be anaesthetized with 0.5-1.0 %
righting reflexes. Unless this is done the anaes-
halothane or 1.0-1.5% isoflurane vapour in oxygen
thetic which passes into the air sacs may not be
delivered to the endotracheal tube or facemask
cleared by the depressed respiratory activity so
from a T-piece system. The air sacs should be
that it will be taken up again by the parabronchial
flushed at about 5 minute intervals by occlusion of
capillary blood and recovery will be prolonged.
the open arm of the T-piece system, their overdis-
tension being prevented by escape of gas around
the loose-fitting endotracheal tube or by partial
Combinations of inhalation and injectable
lifting of the facemask away from the face.Total
agents
gas flow rates should be about two to three times
the estimated minute volume of respiration of the
Very satisfactory results are obtained by the com-
bird, e.g. about 750 ml in an adult domestic hen,
bination of injectable and inhalation agents.
BRDS, LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 475
Although many combinations have been used, the
BEARS
induction of unconsciousness with ketamine
(10-15 mg/kg i.m.) followed by the inhalation of
Bears can inflict severe injuries; their faces are curi-
isoflurane/O2 or halothane/O2 is probably the
ously expressionless and it is difficult to detect
 simplest and safest.
their mood. Even a playful blow from a paw can
Measurement of ketamine doses for small birds
 inflict a severe injury. Grizzly and polar bears may
 m snq p s s s
deliberately attack human beings.
weigh from 30 to 60 g is not easy and these birds
 In zoos and circuses, they can be confined in
may be dosed with 1 to 2mg per bird. The stan-
squeeze cages or airtight boxes where injected or
dard solution of ketamine for veterinary use con-
inhalation agents can be administered, but if these
tains 100 mg/ml and if 0.1 ml is diluted to 1 ml
facilities are not available, ketamine can be admin-
birds may be given 0.1-0.2 ml of the diluted solu-
istered from a projectile syringe (see below). Doses
tion i.m. into the pectoral muscles. The larger dose
are not well established but various doses from 15-
(0.2ml of the diluted solution) will usually pro-
25mg/kg have been administered safely, with
duce light anaesthesia in 2-3minutes from the
atropine to control salivation. Suggested optimal
time of injection.
doses are i.m. xylazine (2.9 mg/ kg) plus i.m. keta-
It has been claimed, often anecdotally, that
mine (2-9mg/kg) but it should be noted that
certain species of birds including moorhens,
young bears seem notably sensitive to sedation
coots, doves and vultures are unsuitable for anaes-
and should have reduced doses.
thesia with ketamine on its own or in combination
Venepuncture is not easy, even in sedated bears,
with other drugs. Saffan can be used in place
because the limb veins are small and embedded
 of ketamine for most birds but when given i.m. it
in fat so that if sedation produced by ketamine
produces more variable results, probably due
yons juase uoneieuut ue Aiagms moie jou saop
 to the difficulty of ensuring that the dose is corr-
as halothane or isoflurane should be given.
ectly administered into a muscle mass. The
Endotracheal intubation is not difficult in the
aim should always be to give just enough of
unconscious animal.
the injectable agent to make the bird unconsci-
ous and to use only as much isoflurane or
halothane as is necessary for the maintenance of
NON-HUMAN PRIMATES
anaesthesia.
Not only can monkeys inflict bites and scratches,
they are also carriers of viruses which are extrem-
RATITES
ely pathogenic to man as well as diseases such as
Ostriches and emus pose challenging problems for
tuberculosis, salmonellosis and shigellosis. For
restraint. Adult birds can move very quickly, peck
these reasons it is always undesirable to handle
with great accuracy and have large-toed feet 
conscious monkeys, and even domestic pets
which they use to strike forwards. Handling can be
should be viewed with suspicion. Handling of
facilitated by hooding and it is always wise, when-
any pet monkey should, preferably, be left to its
ever possible to work with attendant(s) familiar
owners.
with these flightless birds. Ketamine (15mg/
If the owner of a small pet monkey can be
kg i.m. )appears to produce the most reliable and
induced to hold its arms behind its back the anaes-
smoothest induction of anaesthesia, especially
thetist can usually make an intra venous injection
when combined with diazepam (0.5 mg/kg i.m.)
of an anaesthetic such as thiopental or Saffan into
or xylazine (3.5 mg/kg i.m.). Inhalation anaesthesia
the recurrent tarsal vein on the dorsal surface of
can be maintained in emus and ostriches weighing
the gastrocnemius muscle. Caution is necessary
less than 130kg using small animal breathing
for these monkeys often weigh much less than is
systems, but a large animal breathing system is
estimated and it is seldom necessary to exceed
needed for larger birds.
5mg/kg of thiopental or 2 mg/ kg of Saffan. Once
476 ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
unconscious the monkey may be given a small
obtained 5 to 10 minutes after injection and the
dose of suxamethonium (e.g. 1 mg /kg) and intu-
period of sedation is from 30 to 60minutes.
bated with an umcuffed tube.Anaesthesia may
Recovery is complete in 1.5 to 4.5hours depending
then be maintained by the administration of
on the dose and species of the monkey. When the
halothane or isoflurane in N2O/O2, or O2 alone,
desired degree of sedation is not produced by ket-
from a T-piece system. When suxamethonium is to
amine further depression of the central nervous
be given it is wise to inject atropine (0.15-0.30 mg
system is probably best produced by administra-
iv.) as soon as the induction agent has been given.
tion of N2O/O2 supplemented with 0.5 to 1.0%
Alternatively, if the owner or an assistant can
halothane delivered through a face-mask from a T-
hold the monkey, again with its arms held behind
piece system.
its back, an inhalation agent can be used for both 
For squirrel monkeys and marmosets Saffan is
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia. The
 the sedative of choice and this preparation is also
use of NzO is a distinct advantage in these circum-
useful in other species of non-human primates. In
stances and halothane is probably the volatile
squirrel monkeys and marmosets doses of 15-18
agent of choice for, in the authors' experience,
 mg/kg produce light general anaesthesia some
isoflurane often provokes breath holding. A suit-
5 minutes after injection into the thigh muscles.
able face-mask is held over, but not touching, the
Anaesthesia lasts about 45 minutes and is followed
face and N2O/O2 (3:1) is administered at a flow
by recovery to full consciousness 1-3 hours later.
rate of 4l/min for 1-2 minutes. Halothane is then
 In baboons, i.m. doses of 12-18 mg/kg make the
introduced into the gas mixture, increasing the
 animal safe to handle about 10 minutes after injec-
concentration of the vapour every 3 to 4 breaths to
 a maximum of about 3%. The mask is applied to
 monkeys. In all monkeys anaesthesia may be
the face as soon as it is judged that the monkey is
 deepened by giving i.v. increments of Saffan until
unconscious and induction is usually free from
the desired depth is obtained. Animals can then be
Excitement and struggling. Scavenging of waste 
intubated and maintained unconscious with
 gases is usually not possible during the induction
inhalation agents such as halothane, or sequential
of anaesthesia. Anaesthesia is maintained with
incremental i.v. doses of Saffan can be given over
1.2- 1.5% of halothane vapour in the N2O/O2
 several hours if need be. The main disadvantage of
mixture.
Saffan is the large volume which has to be given
Larger or less co-operative monkeys may need
i.m., although these volumes do not appear to
sedating by i.m. injection before an attempt is made
 result in pain at the injection site.
to induce anaesthesia (Green, 1979). The use of
When itis impossible to give an i.m. injection to a
projectile syringes is not to be recommended for
 large monkey or ape the simplest thing is to entice
monkeys are adept at dodging or even deflecting
 it into a cage which can be made airtight by cover-
the projectile with their hands, and they usually
ing with a sheet of plastic material so that anaes-
pull the needle out before the injection is complete 
thetic gases and vapours can be piped in. The
even when a hit is obtained! In the case of the
animal must be observed carefully and removed
smaller varieties it is usually possible to catch the
from the cage as soon as it is unconscious and
monkey's arm through the bars of the cage so that
relaxed.
injection can be made into the deltoid muscle, but
It is important to conserve body heat and the
a squeeze cage may be needed for the larger,
anaesthetized monkey should be placed on a
strong animals such as adult chimpanzees.
warm water blanket maintained at 38 °C; this is
Ketamine is probably the agent of choice in all
especially important for small monkeys. If seda-
 Except squirrel monkeys and marmosets for chem-
tion or anaesthesia is to last for more than about an
ical restraint or preanaesthetic sedation. At dose
hour, an intravenous drip infusion of N/5 saline or
rates of 10-25 mg/kg the volume of the veterinary
Hartmann's solution (Ringer's lactate) should be
preparation 'Vetalar' injected is small so that the 
started as soon as the animal is anaesthetized or
drug can be given rapidly into the thigh muscles of 
e uaai aq pmous pm aui paiepas Auams
even struggling animals. The peak effect is
 the rate of 10 ml/kg per hour and, for the smaller
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 477
monkeys it should be warmed to 38 *C by passing
ing (particularly of some European breeds of cattle)
it through a blood warmer before it reaches the
 are producing virtually unhandled beasts which
animal. The use of atropine is somewhat contro-
are often aggressive, especially if frightened.
versial but it is probable that it should be given as
 The use of projectile syringes for the capture
soon as the monkey becomes anaesthetized, in a
and restraint of wild game animals was well
dose of 0.15 to 1.20 mg depending on the size of the
reviewed by Harthoorn (1971). The problems rel-
 animal.
ated to the use of projectile syringes in general vet-
 Recovery from anaesthesia should take place in
erinary practice are somewhat different.The
a warm environment and endotracheal tubes and
projectile syringe is designed to inject its contents
i.v. cannulae must be removed while it is still safe 
 after the needle has penetrated the skin of the an-
to handle the animal. Postsurgical analgesia
imal and its impact with the tissues can result in
should be provided by the i.m. injection of a suit-
serious bruising. They should empty within sec-
able analgesic (e.g. pethidine at 2 mg /kg or mor-
 onds of penetration and the force of the injection
phine at 0.1 mg /kg).
should be adequate to push the plunger fully
home even if the needle is partially obstructed by a
skin plug. To minimise tissue damage the syringe
WIld ANImalS
should strike the beast towards the end of the fir-
ing trajectory, although obviously this is less
Only species of wild animal which are likely to be
important when the projectile is propelled from a
encountered by those in general veterinary prac-
blowpipe. When fired from a gun or cross-bow at
tice in the UK will be considered here, but as a gen-
 too close range the syringe needle may enter body
eral rule the principles of anaesthesia as applied to
cavities, and often when striking too hard,
domesticated or captive pet animals apply equally
syringes bounce off without penetrating effect-
well in all wild animals and the main differences
ively in spite of barbs and collars on the needles.
arise from the need to protect the anaesthetist and
Extensive and fatal trauma may be caused by
any assistants from injury by unanaesthetized
injection into the thoracic or abdominal cavities.
subjects.
In all cases the shortest needle commensurate
Difficulty in getting close to the subject, either
with penetration of the skin should be used and
because of its timidity or aversion to mankind, and
large bore needles should terminate in a cone, with
the obvious need to avoid being attacked, have led
holes on the side of the shaft, for the ordinary
to two approaches to the problems. The first is the
 open-ended needle may block with a core of skin.
use of squeeze cages, the animal being enticed into
Collared needles are seldom satisfactory and tend
 the cage then squeezed between a fixed and mov-
to allow fluids to flow back out of the hole caused
 able wall so that canmot turn around or move very
by penetration of the collar. To remove a barbed
far whilst being given an injection of a sedative or
needle a small incision is made over the site of the
anaesthetic agent. These cages should be standard
barb.
equipment at zoos, some research centres and simi-
Irritant solutions may not be used since their
lar establishments and they have a definite role in
administration under the non-sterile conditions
the capture of farmed deer, but they are unlikely to
associated with the use of dart-guns may produce
be available to the veterinarian in general practice.
an abscess, but when simple precautions are rou-
The second which is, perhaps, more generally
tinely taken, untoward reactions at the site of injec-
applicable, is the administration of agents from
tion are surprisingly rare. Valuable animals may
projectile syringes. These syringes may be project-
be given a precautionary dose of antimicrobial
 ed from rifles, crossbows, or blow-pipes so that the
substances and in summer the wounds should be
administrator can remain a safe distance from
dressed with fly repellents.
the subject (Fig. 17.3). They were originally devel-
There are now many patterns of projectile
oped for the capture of wild game animals but they
 syringes desigmned for use with rifles, pistols and
cross-bows but, in general, they usually inject thein
fice where, for example, current methods of farm-
contents through the agency of an explosive cap
A78ANAESTHESIA OF THE SPECIES
and striker mechanisms, or by gas evolved from a
It is always advisable to use doses of injectable
agent which allow the animal to be approached
striker mechanism, incorporated behind the
with safety and so allow general anaesthesia to be
syringe plunger. The projectiles used with blow-
 produced with i.v. or inhalation agents. Although
pipes have needles with side holes which are
 a quick recovery is essential in the wild, as partially
covered by a short plastic sleeve and displacement
 sedated animals are at risk from predators, it is not
of this sleeve as the needle penetrates the skin
 so important in captive animals. To date, the tech-
and its displacement allows the pressure of air
 niques most frequently used for immobilizing a
or gas previously injected behind the plunger to
wide variety of species have been based on use
 inject the syringe contents. In projectiles fired
 of opioids such as etorphine or carfentanil coupled
from crossbows, rifles or pistols detonation of
with sedatives, anaesthesia being terminated
an explosive cap produces such a force that the
with antagonists such as diprenorphine or ati-
ejected fluid penetrates far into the tissues and
 pamezole. Ketamine and ketamine combinations
haematoma formation is common so that the slow-
 are now being employed much more commonly in
er injection due to gas propulsion is usually to be
ruminants.
preferred.
The doses of drugs required by various species
Projectile syringes usually have a capacity of up
 of animal and breeds within a species varies enor-
mously so that an extensive literature on the sub-
be administered. If they are to be used on common
ject is now available. Anyone wishing to make use
land or in dense undergrowth any temptation to
of agents to be administered by projectile syringe
use Immobilon or etorphine should be resisted for
is strongly recommended before doing so to con-
should the projectile bounce off the animal or the
sult suitable literature available from commercial
animal be missed completely, these projectiles are
sources.
surprisingly difficult to locate in spite of their
bright silver barrels and coloured flights, and their
Hnpe ue uaaa ro puo e Aq Araaonsip juanbasqns
 REFERENCES
could have fatal consequences for that individual.
Cooper, J.E. (1989) Anaesthesia of exotic species.
It must be appreciated that projection is very far
In: Hilbery, A.D.R. (ed.) Maruat of Anaesthesia for
from accurate. The weight of the projectile accord-
Small Animat Practice. Cheltenham: British
ing to its capacity and degree of filling has a great
Small Animal Veterinary Association, ch. 17,
influence at all but the shortest of ranges which
Pp. 139-151.
can, in any case, only be estimated. Experience has
Dunker, H.R. (1972) Structure of avian lungs. Respiratory
Phrysiotogy, 14:44-63.
shown that the best results are obtained by getting
Flecknell, PA. (1988) Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia.
as close to the animal as is possible or safe, and
London: Academic Press.
aiming for the neck or shoulder region.
Green, C.J. (1975) Neuroleptic drug combinations in the
anaesthetic management of small laboratory animals.
Laboratory Arnimats 9: 161-178.
Green, C.J. (1979) Animat Anaesthesia. London:
Laboratory Animals
Green, C.J., Knight, J., Precious, S. and Simpkin, S. (1981)
Ketamine alone and combined with diazepam or
xylazine in laboratory animals. London: Laboratory
ArimalsLtd
Harthoom, A.M. (1971) Chemical Capture of Animats.
 London: Bailliere Tindall.
Mero, M., Vainionpaa, S., Vasensius, J., Vihkonen, K. and
Rockkanen, P (1989) Medetomidine-ketamine-
diazepam anaesthesia in the rabbit. Acta Veterinaria
Scandinavica, 85 (Suppl): 135-137.
FIG. 17.3 ‘Dist-lInject' dart pistol with projectile syringe.
Nevalainen, T.,Pyhala, L., Hanna-Maija, V. et a.
The lower illustration is of the Miniject projectile syringe
(1989) Evaluation of anaesthetic potency of
for use with a blowpipe.
 medetomidine-ketamine combination in rats,
BRDS. LABORATORY & WILD ANIMALS 479
guinea pigs and rabbits. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica
Piper, J. and Scheid, P (1973) Gas exchange in
85: 139-143.
 avian lungs: models and experimental evidence.
Orland F.J. and Orland, PM. (1946) Pentobarbital
In: Bolis, L., Schmidt-Nielsen, K. and Maddrell, S.H.P.
sodium anesthesia in the Syrian hamster. Jourrat of the
(eds) Cormparative Physiology. Amsterdam: North
American Pharmaceutical Association 35:263-265.
Holland Veterinary Medicine Reviews,
Piper, J. (1972) In: Bolis, L., Schmidt-Nielsen, K. and
Pp.616-618.
Maddrell, S.H.P (eds) Comparative Physiology.
Sedgewick, C.J. (1986) Anesthesia forrabbits. Veterinary
Amsterdam: North Holland Veterinary Medicine
Clinics of North America. Food Animat Practice
Reviews, ch. 3, p. 204.
2: 731-736.
18
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
ery of the foetuses. Early in pregrancy changes are
INTRODUCTION
due, at least in part, to metabolic demands of the
There is no one anaesthetic agent or techmique that is
foetus(es), placenta and uterus, due largely to
ideal for all parturient animals. In veterinary practice
 increasing levels of progesterone and oestrogen.
the choice of anaesthetic methods and drugs is often
Later changes starting around mid-pregnancy are
nfluenced by whether the offspring are alive and
anatomical in nature and are caused by mechan-
wanted, unwanted,or dead due to obstetrical prob-
ical pressure from the enlarging uterus.
lems. In any case the choice must be such as to
ensure the safety of the mother and any living foe-
 tus(es), comfort of the mother during parturition or
Circulatory changes
hysterotomy and convenience of the obstetrician/
Circulatory changes develop primarily to meet
surgeon. To make a rational choice the anaesthetist
increased metabolic demands of the mother and
must be familiar with physiological alterations
foetus(es). Blood volume increases progressively,
Kaooeueud au moqel pue Arueuand q panpu
most of the added volume being accommodated in
of the agents used, and significance of obstetric com-
the increased capacity of vessels in the uterus,
plications necessitating assisted delivery of the off-
 mammary glands, renal, striated muscle and cuta-
spring. Most studies have been carried out in ewes,
neous tissues so that there is no evidence of circu-
latory overload in healthy pregnant animals.
in other species of animal even if their magnitude
Increase in plasma volume is relatively greater
differs. The following brief account of changes in phy-
than that of red cells, resulting in haemodilution
siology and in actions of drugs administered during
with decreased haemoglobin content and haemat-
-nd Aueu joAreuums e st uonjed pue Aueuaid
ocrit. The purpose of this increase in blood volume
blished papers and accounts in standard textbooks
is usually assumed to be twofold. First, it increases
and should apply to all species of domestic animals.
 placental exchanges of respiratory gases, nutrients
and waste metabolites. Secondly, it acts as a
reserve if there is any abnormal maternal blood
The STATe OF PrEGNACY
loss at parturition so that increased autotransfu-
sion of blood can occur from the involuting uterus.
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND ANATOMICAL
Cardiac output increases in pregnancy to a similar
ALTERATIONS
 degree as blood volume and there is an additional
Physiological and anatomical alterations occur in
increase in cardiac output during all stages of
-a pe a  sass uo u
labour. In 3rd stage labour it probably results from
481
482 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
blood being expelled from the involuting uterus
Renal plasma flow (RPF) and glomerular filtra-
into the general circulation. Peripheral vascular
tion rate (GFR) increase progressively, paralleling
 resistance usually decreases during pregnancy so
the increases in blood volume and cardiac output.
that ABP does not change. A serious decrease
Due to increases in renal clearances blood urea and
in venous return due to compression of the vena
 creatinine levels are lower than in non-pregnant
cava and aorta by the enlarged uterus and its
animals.
contents can occur if the animal is restrained or
 Uterine blood flow is directly proportional to
positioned in the supine position This decrease
 perfusion pressure and inversely proportional to
in venous return will, of course, cause a fall in
uterine vascular resistance, so that it can be com-
cardiac output for the heart cannot pump more
promized from vasoconstriction due to cate-
blood than is being returned to it. Cardiac work
cholamine release from fright or anxiety.
-ed je jeun os Asueuaaid Surmp paseanu s!
tion cardiac reserve is reduced and pulmonary
 congestion and heart failure may occur in animals
PHARMACOLOGY OF DRUGS
sren paiesuaduon lam Aisnoiaaid peu e
ADMINISTERED DURING PREGNANCY
disease.
The effects of pregmancy on drug disposition, bio-
transformation and excretion are largely unknown
Respiratory system changes
in domestic animals. The MAC of inhalation
During pregmancy the sensitivity of the respiratory
agents is decreased due to unknown mechanisms.
centre to carbon dioxide is increased, presumably
The increase in RBF and GFR favours renal excre-
due to changes in hormone levels, so that PaCO2
tion of drugs. Any drug administered to the mother
and serum bicarbonate decrease although arterial
is liable to cross the placenta to the foetus(es) and
 pH is maintained due to long term renal compen-
induce effects similar to those observed in the
sation. Oxygen consumption is increased by the
mother.
demands of the developing foetus(es), placenta,
Placental transfer of drugs is governed by the
uterine muscle and mammary glands. During
physiochemical properties of the drug and
labour, ventilation may be further increased by
anatomical features of the placenta. Transfer of
drugs can occur by simple diffusion, facilitated
increased and total pulmonary resistance is
diffusion via transport systems, active transport
 decreased, apparently from hormone-induced
and pinocytosis. Of these simple diffusion is by far
relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle. Cranial
the most important and this will be affected by the
displacement of the diaphragm results from
surface area and thickness of the placenta. The
increasing volume of the gravid uterus leading to a
larger farm animals have thick epitheliochorial
decrease in FRC, so that it is possible for airway
 placentae with relatively small areas for diffusion
closure to occur at end-expiration. Reduction in
due to their cotyledonary or patchy diffuse distri-
oxygen storage capacity from reduced FRC leads
bution, whereas dogs and cats have thinner
to an unusually rapid decline in PaO2 during
endotheliochorial placenta with larger zonular
apnoea. Some compensation for the tendency of
 areas of implantation. Thus, the placental diffu-
the FRC to decrease is achieved by increases in the
sion barrier is greatest in ruminants, pigs and
transverse and antero-posterior diameters of the
horses and least in dogs and cats. However, the
chest cavity and flaring of the ribs.
diffusion barrier does not appear to be of great
clinical significance in the transfer of drugs from
mother to foetus(es) in any species of animal.
Other systems
 More important is the diffusion constant which
 Liver function is generally well maintained during
 is unique to each drug and determined by molecu-
 lar weight, degree of protein binding in maternal
creased but total plasma protein is increased due
blood, lipid solubility and degree of ionization in
to increase in blood volume.
the plasma. Most drugs used in anaesthesia have
OBSTETRICS 483
large diffusion constants - low molecular weights,
volume of solutions needed to produce block to
 -ip pue - uonezjuoi nood pue Alqnlos pidi uo
any given level.
fuse rapidly across the placenta. The exceptions
 Reduction in FRC means that any respiratory
are the neuromuscular blocking drugs, which are
depression caused by drugs is more significant in
highly ionized and of low lipid solubility
pregnant than in non-pregnant animals and
 Maternal blood concentrations of drug depend
hypoventilation will lead to hypercapnia and
on total dose administered, site or route of admin-
hypoxaemia; the hypoxaemia is particularly unde-
istration, rate of distribution and uptake of it by
 sirable during labour when oxy gen consumption
maternal tissues and maternal detoxification and
is increased. In small animals induction of anaes-
Excretion. Thus drugs with rapidly declining plas-
thesia with inhalational agents will be more rapid
ma concentration after administration of a fixed
than in non-pregnant animals due to decrease in
dose (e.g. thiopental) result in a short exposure of
FRC and increased alveolar ventilation as well as
the placenta and hence foetus(es) to high maternal
the decrease in MAC, but in recumbent large an-
concentrations, whereas drugs administered con-
imals shunting of pulmonary blood may make the
tinuously (e.g. inhalation anaesthetics, infused
induction and maintenance of inhalation anaes-
agents during TIVA) are associated with a continu-
thesia more difficult.
ous placental transfer to the foetus(es).
In monogastric animals there is an increased
The concentration of drug in the umbilical
risk of both vomiting and silent aspiration of gas-
vein of a foetus is not that to which the foetal
tric contents in parturient animals for frequently
target organs such as the heart and brain are
the time of last feeding is unknown, and intragas-
exposed, for most of the umbilical blood passes 
 tric pressure is increased in the stomach displaced
initially through the liver, where the drug may be
by the gravid uterus. Risk of regurgitation of ru-
metabolized or sequestrated. The remainder of
 minal contents when general anaesthesia is
the umbilical blood passes through the ductus 
 induced seems to be great in cattle, but perhaps
venous to the vena cava where it is diluted by
 not in sheep and goats which normally have less
drug-free blood from the hind end of the foetus.
fluid rumen contents.
Thus, the foetal circulation protects vital tissues
 and organs from exposure to sudden high drug
concentrations.
DRUG ACTIONS
Opioids
ClInICAL SIGNIfICANCE Of CHaNGES
Opioids rapidly cross the placenta from mother to
DUrING PrEGNANCY AND PArTUrItION
foetus(es) and can cause marked respiratory and
Circulatory changes of pregnancy and parturition
central nervous depression in neonate(s) with
 aaa  s   d 
sleepiness and reluctance to feed. Opioid antag-
well compensated heart disease at risk unless care
onists also readily cross the placenta and it has
is taken to ensure a minimum cardiac depression
been suggested that they should be given to the
from anaesthetic drugs. Ecbolics used early on in
mother immediately before delivery to counter
labour can have an adverse effect on cardiovascu-
neonatal respiratory and central nervous depres-
lar function. Oxytocin will induce vasodilatation
sion, but this deprives the mother of analgesia at
and hypotension that will have an adverse effect
the time when it is most needed and may result in
 on both mother and foetus(es) due to decreased
her regaining consciousness on the operating
tissue and placental perfusion. Ergometrine causes
table. If used, the opioid antagonists such as nalox-
vasoconstriction and may give rise to an increase
one should be given to the neonate(s). Because the
in systemic vascular resistance sufficient to pro-
action of naloxone is shorter than that of some opi-
duce heart failure in the immediate postpartum
oids, depression may return when naloxone is
period when cardiac output is high from the
metabolized and careful observation is indicated
increasedcirculating blood volume.Venous
to allow this to be detected and treated by the
engorgement of the epidural space decreases the
njection of more naloxone.
484 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
O.2 adrenoceptor agonists; ketamine
Foetal haemoglobin can carry more O2 for a
given PO2 due to the low concentration of 2,3-
All α2 adrenoceptor agonists rapidly cross the pla-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) in foetal red cells.
centa and can cause respiratory and cardiovas-
This ensures a higher level of haemoglobin satura-
cular depression in both mother and babies,
although this can be counteracted by antagonists.
tion at the normally low PO, of umbilical venous
blood. Administration of O2 to the mother results
The use of acepromazine/ketamine combinations
 in a most significant increase in foetal oxygenation
is theoretically unwise but, in practice, provided
 omly minimal doses are used little harm appears to
and maternal inspired O2 concentrations of over
50% during general anaesthesia are associated
result.
with delivery of more vigorous newborn. How-
ever, it must be remembered that administration of
Intravenous anaesthetics; neuromuscular
blockers
time to spontaneously breathing animals may lead
Low doses of thiopental, methohexital, propofol
to unrecognized, but fatal, hypercapnia.
and Saffan produce minimal respiratory or central
nervous depression in neonates. Neuromuscular
Local analgesics
blocking drugs do not cross the placenta but are
Local analgesics are not as harmless as sometimes
seldom needed in obstetrical anaesthesia. No mus-
cle relaxation is required for vaginal delivery and
supposed. Amide derivatives (e.g. lignocaine,
 in caesarian section the only time it might be need-
 mepivacaine, bupivacaine) are broken down by
ed is for suture of the abdominal wall, but this is
hepatic microsomal enzymes. After absorption
usually very relaxed following removal of the
from the site of injection maternal blood levels
bulky uterine contents. Use of neuromuscular
decrease slowly and blood levels can reach a sig-
blockers to decrease the quantity of more depress-
rificant level in the foetus(es) causing depression
ant anaesthetic agents needed is, however, a legit-
in the neonate. Sufficiently high concentrations
imate indication for their use in balanced
seldom occur after epidural or paravertebral
anaesthesia techniques
administration, but can be found after the indis-
criminate local infiltration of large volumes of
 local analgesic solutions. Epidural block may pro-
Inhalation anaesthetics
duce hypotension and this may be treated by
Inhalation anaesthetics readily cross the placen-
infusing fluid to fill the dilated vascular bed, or
tal barrier with rapid equilibration between the
better, by injection of ephedrine. Ephedrine acts
mother and foetus(es). The degree of depression
centrally to increase venous tone and thus cardiac
they cause in the neonate is directly proportional
preload; it has minimal vasoconstrictor effect on
to the depth of unconsciousness induced in the
the arterial system.
mother. Deep levels of maternal depression will
cause maternal hypotension, decreased uterine
 blood flow and foetal acidosis. There is a reduction
Anticholinergics
in anaesthetic requirements with a fall in MAC.
Because glycopyrrolate does not readily cross the
When measured in ewes, MAC is 25 to 40% lower
 placental barrier it is probably the anticholinergic
 n gravid as compared with non-pregnant animals.
of choice if anticholinergics are to be used to min-
Use of the less soluble agents enflurane, isoflurane,
imize the effects of traction on the uterus and
sevoflurane and desflurane will lead to more rapid
broad ligaments by the surgeon.
recovery of the newly delivered animals than
when more soluble agents such as halothane are
employed. Nitrous oxide will often enable concen-
HORSES
 tration of more potent soluble anaesthetic agent to
be reduced and its use does not add to depression
In horses, obstructed labour quickly leads to
of the newborn.
exhaustion of the mare and death of the foal.
OBSTETRICS485
Prompt relief is necessary and anaesthesia may
cern because many mares have great difficulty in
have to be provided for vaginal delivery or caesar-
breathing once they are recumbent under general
ian section. The viability of the foal will depend on
 anaesthesia. Due to intrapulmonary shunting of
its state at the time of anaesthesia but the mare will
blood they may also be difficult to keep uncon-
invariably have a distended abdomen and may
scious with inhalation anaesthetics. In the supine
show signs of weakness or be in shock. The anaes-
position which some surgeons prefer for caesarian
thetic problems presented by the mare are very
section, the weight of the gravid uterus will com-
similar to those encountered in horses with bowel
press the vena cava and aorta, reducing venous
obstruction, although the degree of dehydration is
return and causing a marked decrease in ABP.
 generally much less severe. When the foal is alive,
Once the foal is delivered, the condition of the
the effects of any drugs to be given to the mare on
mare shows immediate improvement - pul-
uterine blood flow and foetal oxygenation, as well
monary ventilation increases and ABP rises
as on the respiratory centre of the foal after deliv-
towards normal levels. Attempts by the surgeon to
ery, must also be taken into account.
remove the placenta should be discouraged since
It can be assumed that any drug given to the
this provokes hypotension and, occasionally, con-
mare will cross the placenta to the foal, but its ac-
siderable blood loss requiring the infusion of 20 to
tual concentration in the foal will depend on such
30 ml/kg of lactated or acetated Ringer's solution.
factors as fat solubility, degree of protein binding
To minimize difficulties before delivery of the foal,
and ionization, dose given to the mare and time
the mare should be positioned so that she is lying
 interval between its administration and delivery
 inclined towards her left side and respiration may
of the foal, and the neonatal foal's ability to elimi-
need to be controlled. As always in equine anaes-
nate the drug from its body. Thus, opioids such as
thesia, the magnitude of the problems encoun-
pethidine given to the mare will prod uce respir-
tered is related to size; small pony mares present
atory depression in the foal, but low doses of thio-
only relatively minor problems. It is important to
barbiturates will be tolerated because recovery
remember this for techniques successful for elec-
from central nervous depression is more depend-
tive caesarian section in small experimental pony
ent on redistribution than on metabolism. The
mares operated on in lateral decubitus are often
more insoluble inhalation anaesthetics given to the
inadequate for the large mares of the heavy breeds
mare are readily excreted by the foal if it breathes
requiring emergency obstetric procedures while in
properly after delivery. Although neuromuscular
the supine position.
blocking drugs such as vecuronium, atracurium
In practice, vaginal repositioning and delivery
 and pancuronium do not cross the placenta in sig-
of the foal can often be carried out in the sedated
nificant amounts guaiphenesin does, so for obstet-
mare, using one of the drug combinations dis-
rical anaesthesia itis best avoided or used in much
 cussed earlier in this book. If general anaesthesia is
reduced dose if the foal is alive when anaesthesia
essential the C2 adrenoceptor agonist/ketamine
is induced. Respiratory and central nervous
combination, in spite of some theoretical objec-
depression in the foal resulting from administra-
tions, can be recommended, for it has been used
tion of opioids to the mare can be antagonized by
without giving rise to problems in either the
giving naloxone to the foal but, in general, stimul-
parturient mare or the foal. Should longer periods
ant drugs have only a minor role in the manage-
of light general anaesthesia be required small i.v.
ment of problems in newborns. Doxapram
doses of thiopental (or after delivery of the foal,
(0.5mg/kg i. v.) may be effective in provoking the 
aa a i c a ag A 'say
first breath and aiding lung expansion. However,
of this drug combination.
instead of relying on stimulant drugs to resuscitate
 Caudal epidural block is not as useful as it is in
foals, resuscitation should normally involve clear-
cattle because in mares there is a rather long delay
ing of the airway, endotracheal intubation, O2
between injection and onset of full analgesia. A
administration, and IPPV.
450 kg mare requires 6 to 8 ml of 2% ligmocaine or
Abdominal distension of the mare will prob-
2% mepivacaine (or 0.17mg/kg xylazine or 60
ably be the problem which gives rise to most con-
μg /kg detomidine diluted in 10 ml of 0.9% NaCl)
486 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
for effective analgesia whilst remaining standing
Caesarian section via a ventral abdominal inci-
with no apparent side effects. The development of
sion is usually carried out under general anaesthe-
maximum analgesia can be delayed for 10 to
sia with endotracheal intubation. Anaesthesia may
30 minutes.
be induced by the i.v. injection of minimal doses of
For caesarean section, if the foal is alive, ind uc-
 xylazine (0.1 mg/kg)/ketamine (2.2 mg/kg), thio-
tion with an C2 adrenoceptor agonist before i.v.
/8uu z'0) [ojodoid uaaa 1o (8x/Sur 0l-s) auouad
thiopental or methohexital followed by endotra-
kg) and, after endotracheal intubation maintained
cheal halothane/oxygen or isoflurane/oxygen
with an inhalation agent (usually halothane or
seems to be quite satisfactory, but ketamine is
isoflurane). Alternatively, after xylazine (0.1 to 0.15
undoubtedly better than either of the barbiturates
mg /kg i.v.) or detomidine (10 to 20 μg/kg i.v.) has
 as the induction agent. Only the minimal amounts
 been given to produce deep sedation, the animal
of halothane or isoflurane should be used and
 may be intubated and anaesthesia completed by
IPPV may be necessary until the foal is delivered.
 the administration of the inhalation agent.
Involution of the uterus is hastened when xylazine
Involution of the uterus after delivery may be
has been used and may be assisted by 2.5 to
 assisted by the use of ecbolic drugs provided the
10 units i.v. of oxytocin. Bleeding from the uterus is
 cow is not hypercapnic or hypertensive. All cows
best controlled by i.v. injections of 3 to 5 mg of
subjected to caesarian section under general
 ergometrine tartrate, but this may give rise to car-
 anaesthesia should be given calcium boroglu-
 diac arrhythmias in hypercapnic or hypertensive
 conate s.c. to prevent the occurrence of hypocal-
animals. Vigorous supportive therapy with i.v.
 caemia which is otherwise frequently seen in the
fluids may be necessary. If the foal is dead any
 postoperative period. Postoperative analgesia is
technique of general anaesthesia suitable for
 also important and 0.5 to 1.0 g pethidine (meperi-
laparotomy in horses may be used.
dine) depending on the size of the cow, repeated at
4 to 6 hourly intervals for the first 24hours, has
proved to provide analgesia as shown by the cow
CATTLE
looking comfortable and cudding or eating.
Removal of a dead, putrefying normal-sized
In cattle, caudal block is nearly always used for
 q  pos o  
vaginal delivery of the calf. The substitution of
after resuscitation of the toxaemic or shocked cow
xylazine for lignocaine (0.05 mg/kg xylazine in
with intravenous fluids; antimicrobial cover is
10 ml 0.9% saline for 5 to 10 ml 2% lignocaine)
essential and the cow should be closely observed
confers no obvious advantages. Whenever possi-
for adverse reactions to the antimicrobial drug
ble sedation should be avoided but, if needed for
used.
control, xylazine (0.05 mg /kg i.v.) will, in most
cases,
provide adequate maternal tran-
quillization to enable the block and obstetrical
SHEEP AND GOATS
manoeuvres to be undertaken with minimal
trouble. Lumbar segmental epidural block may
Sheep are seldom given any analgesia or anaesthe-
be used for caesarian section carried out through
sia for the vaginal delivery of lambs but, in diffi-
the left flank of the standing animal but it is not
cult cases requiring extensive repositioning of the
easily performed and most veterinarians prefer
lamb in the birth canal, caudal block is very
to use paravertebral block of the 13th thoracic,
satisfactory, using 1 ml/4.5kg of 2 % lignocaine
1st, 2nd and 3rd lumbar nerves on that side.
hydrochloride. For caesarian section, which is
Local infiltration techniques can be employed
usually carried out through the left flank, epidural
but they do not relax the abdominal muscles and,
or paravertebral blocks, local infiltration and
if the foetus is alive, the injection of large vol-
 general anaesthesia are all suitable. Sedation,
umes of the amide-type local analgesics may
when indicated by the behaviour of the ewe, may
result in cardiopulmonary depression in the
be obtained with i.v. diazepam (0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg).
neonatal calf.
The ewe is usually easily restrained for operation
OBSTETRICS 487
and hence techniques of local analgesia are
piglets should recover from the effects of the
popular. Probably the technique of choice is
anaesthetic in the minimum of time.
paravertebral block of the 13th thoracic, 1st, 2nd
Caesarian section may be carried out under
and 3rd lumbar nerves, for the ewe is then able to
conditions which vary from those encountered on
stand and suckle her lambs immediately the opera-
the farm to those provided in an operating theatre.
tion is completed and the wound area remains
Elective caesarian section is carried out more com-
 analgesic for one or more hours depending on the
monly for the production of minimal disease herds
local analgesic drug used. If local infiltration is
of pigs, or gnotobiotic animals for research pur-
used care must be taken to restrict the total dose of
poses, than in ordinary farm sows, but is usually
any amide-type local analgesic to below 5 mg/kg
performed in well equipped operating theatres.
to minimize toxicity in the ewe and the likelihood
On the farm, caesarean section is probably best
of depression of the lambs.
carried out under local or regional analgesia.
Ewes carrying dead lambs or suffering from
 Although paravertebral blocks are theoretically
pregnancy toxaemia are often very toxic, dehy-
possible, they are difficult to perform because the
drated and dull or collapsed. Hysterotomy should
thick layer of subcutaneous fat makes palpation of
be preceded by resuscitation with intravenous
landmarks almost impossible, and infiltration of
fluids.
the line of incision is the method usually
 Postoperative analgesia is all too often neg-
employed. Epidural block may also be used (see
lected. The ewe, like any other animal, is entitled
later).
to adequate pain relief in the postoperative period
The major problem is the restraint of the sow
and 4 hourly morphine (up to 10 mg i.m.), pethidine
and today sedation with azaperone is usually used
(meperidine) up to 250 mg i.m., or epidural opioid
for this although the drug does cross the placental
drugs should be used as freely as may be required
barrier and the piglets are sleepy when delivered.
to keep the animal comfortable. Obviously,
However, respiratory depression in the offspring
 epidural block will have minimal effects on the
seems minimal and if kept warm they usually sur-
suckling lambs.
vive. The sedative effects of azaperone on the sow
Goats do not seem to be as robust as sheep.
are rather prolonged and she may not be able to
require more careful handling and have a greater
 suckle the piglets for some hours; if left unattend-
need for effective postoperative analgesia to
ed with the neonatal piglets she may suffocate
-lsod uoeiado woy Araaonan piden amsua
some by lying on them. If the sedation produced
operative analgesia can be obtained with doses of
by azaperone is inadequate, i.v. thiopental or meto-
morphine and pethidine (meperidine), butor-
midate may be given to effect. This does not
phanol or buprenorphine as used in sheep.
 appear to add to the depression of the piglets and
Many individual goats are much more used to
 is preferable to increasing the dose of azaperone. If
human company than are sheep and seem to
thiopental or metomidate is used the sow loses
derive comfort from the presence of sympathetic
control of her airway, so that care must be taken to
people.
-aaap pou saop uogonnsqo Aroendsan pe amsua
 op. In most animals it is as well to limit the total
dose of the i.v. agent to that which just produces
PIGS
immobility and to supplement with some form of
local analgesia.
Anaesthesia for obstetrical procedures in sows is
Under conditions encountered in hospitals,
almost completely limited to provision of anaes-
techniques are not usually limited by availability
thesia for caesarean section. The general principles
and a wide variety of techniques can be employed
are similar to those in all other species of animal -
The piglets are not always returned to the dam and
uos lesims aienbape apraord oi Aressanau si !
in these circumstances speed of recovery of the
sow is less important than under farm conditions.
and to use a method which produces minimal
 Surgical sterility is usually vital and the main task
depression of the piglets. Ideally, both the sow and
of the anaesthetist is to ensure unconsciousness
488 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
and immobility so that asepsis is not broken by
therefore, best avoided except by the experienced
movement of the sow during the operation. The
veterinary anaesthetist.
staff and equipment needed for resuscitation of the 
Involution of the uterus after delivery of the
piglets are usually available but in elective caesa-
 piglets may, if the animal is not hypoxic or hyper-
rian sections there is always the risk of the delivery
capnic, be helped by i.v. 2-10 i.u. oxytocin or, if
of premature young and the resuscitation of these
bleeding is a problem i. v. 1.0-1.5 mg ergometrine
is not always easy.
 tartrate, but this latter drug may produce cardiac
 Probably the most viable piglets are obtained
arrhythmias if the PaCO2 is elevated when it is
when anaesthesia is induced and maintained with
givern.
an inhalation anaesthetic and maintained with a
high concentration of inspired oxygen. In the
majority of sows anaesthesia is rapidly attained
DOGS
with agents such as halothane, isoflurane or enflu-
rane, but if the sow is very large or difficult to han-
For elective caesarian section to deliver live pups it
dle, a minimal dose of thiopental or propofol can
 is essential that the minimum of depressant drugs
be employed.
should be in the pups by the time of their delivery.
Satisfactory results are also achieved by the
and that the bitch shall be conscious as soon as
use of ketamine, usually in combination with
 possible after operation so that she will accept and
diazepam (2 mg/kg i.v.) and atropine (0.03 mg/kg
be able to look after her offspring. It is also neces-
i.v.) followed by i.v. injection of ketamine
 sary, however, that the bitch shall not appreciate
given to effect. Usually about 5 to 10mg/kg of
pain during the operation, that the surgeon shall
ketamine is needed to produce a peculiar state in
be provided with adequate operating conditions
which the sow appears to be aware of the en-
 and the bitch with adequate postoperative analge-
sia. Although there were several studies published
other surgical stimulation. If necessary nitrous
prior to 1975 (Wright, 1939; Freak, 1962; Mitchell,
 oxide with or without a more potent inhalation
1966; Goodger & Levy, 1973) there have been many
amaesthetic can be used to control any slight rest-
new agents introduced since then and there is a
lessness which may occur towards the end of the
 tremendous variation in perioperative manage-
operation.
ment. The problems presented and the general
 Sedative premedication with azaperone fol-
principles of management, however, have not
lowed by induction of anaesthesia with inhalation
changed since the earlier days.
The bitch may be fit and healthy at the time of
been widely used for elective caesarean section
 operation (as she should be for an elective opera-
with generally satisfactory results. However, in the
tion) or she may be exhausted from a prolonged
authors' experience, there can be no doubt that
 obstructed labour. Even after several hours of star-
piglets delivered after the use of this sedative drug
   a q     
are, for some hours, sleepier than if no sedation is
 has already delivered one or more puppies spont-
employed.
Methods of anaesthesia involving the use of
 ingested placental material. Thus the likelihood of
neuromuscular blocking agents result in the deliv-
ery of lively piglets and rapid recovery of the sow;
be recogmized as a potential hazard. Premedication
they can be used whenever endotracheal intuba-
with a low dose of morphine (0.1mg/kg) or
tion and IPPV can be carried out. However, it is
Ansn m (x/u zg ,uodouo,) umaaaeded
essential to ensure that the sow is completely
provoke vomiting and ensure an empty stomach
unconscious and it is sometimes difficult to be sure
but may cause some depression in the pups.
 of this without having to administer large doses of
However, as long as low doses are used this will
anaesthetic or other drugs which will give rise to
seldom be a problem and in any case, if it occurs it
marked respiratory and central nervous depres-
 may be overcome by giving the pups naloxone.
sion in the piglets. Techniques of this nature are,
There is little quantitative information regarding
OBSTETRICS489
the dose of naloxone which may be needed but a
postdelivery period. As long as the respiratory
s.c. dose of 0.04 mg/kg is suggested as being an
depression is not too severe the pups will rapidly
appropriate initial dose. Similarly, the use of
 eliminate any of the less soluble inhalation agents
xylazine or medetomidine for their emetic proper-
which may have come to them from the mother
ties may cause prolonged and serious respiratory
but elimination of parenterally administered
depression in the offspring but this can be over-
anaesthetic agents may be much more difficult due
 come by the use of atipamezole (up to 10μg/kg
 to the immaturity of the newborn pups' detoxicat-
s.c.). Sleepiness of the pups caused by premedica-
ing mechanisms. For example, it has been estim-
tion of the bitch with acepromazine cannot, how-
ated that renal function may take as long as 1 to 2
ever, be counteracted for there is no specific
weeks before reaching adult levels (Baggot, 1992).
antagonist to the phenothiazine derivatives.
Anaesthetic-induced depression of the off-
In the supine animal pressure on the caudal
spring can be avoided by the use of local analgesia.
vena cava from the gravid uterus causes circul-
Epid ural block is particularly suited to caesarean
 atory disturbances; pressure on the posterior vena
section but it should only be used in quiet, easily
cava can interfere with venous return to the heart
restrained bitches. If heavy sedation is required
 and result in arterial hypotension. This pressure
for the restraint of the animal the pups will
can be avoided by a wedge of plastic foam material
be affected and the method will offer no
placed under the right side of the supine bitch.
[ua paeuu llam e laao saeape
Major circulatory changes also occur once intra-
anaesthetic.
abdominal pressure has been reduced by removal
 In bitches of reasonable temperament, premed-
of the gravid uterus or the pups and the ability of
ication before general anaesthesia may be limited
the bitch to compensate for these disturbances
to an anticholinergic agent, but minimal doses of
 may have been reduced by the drugs used for gen-
opiates may be used and if they cause vomiting the
eral anaesthesia or the sympathetic blockade
stomach should be empty when anaesthesia is
induced by some techniques of local analgesia. It
induced.
is, therefore, advisable to set up an intravenous
Induction of general anaesthesia with an
infusion prior to the induction of anaesthesia and
inhalation agent has the advantage of rapid elim-
this may be essential if the bitch is already toxic or
ination by the puppies and, when carried out by an
very exhausted. Respiratory function usually
experienced anaesthetist, can be both rapid and
improves greatly after delivery of the puppies and
excitement-free. The main disadvantage of inhala-
the concentration of any inhalation anaesthetic
tion induction is that vomiting may occur before
being administered at this time may need to be
endotracheal intubation is possible, so suction
reduced if overdose is to be avoided.
apparatus should be available to enable the airway
Some of the agents used during anaesthesia
to be cleared rapidly if the bitch is unable to do so
may interfere with the involution of the uterus. In
by coughing. Halothane, enflurane, isoflurane,
women, halothane is particularly likely to lead to
sevoflurane and desflurane can all be used for cae-
sarian section with satisfactory results but (the
rean section but the difference in placental attach-
now obsolete) methoxyflurane usually produced
ment makes this complication much less likely in
marked depression of the pups for some time after
bitches. Provided the bitch is not hypercapnic an
their delivery.
i.v. ecbolic such as oxytocin (2-10 IU), or
 In large or bad tempered bitches an intravenous
ergometrine (up to 0.5 mg) depending on the size
agent may be used for induction of anaesthesia.
      
Propofol in doses of 4 to 6 mg/kg is probably the
pups to promote involution of the uterus and con-
 agent of choice but methohexital (up to 2.5 mg/kg)
 trol any uterine haemorrhage.
and thiopental (up to 5 mg/kg) can be used with-
Although there are considerable differences in
out risk of serious depression of the pups. If endo-
the rate at which drugs cross the placenta, it is
tracheal intubation is not possible at these low
always safest to assume that any drug given to the
 dosages anaesthesia may be deepened with an
bitch will exert an influence on the pups in the
inhalation anaesthetic administered by facemask.
490 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
When i.v. agents have been used it is advisable to
thesia is induced and, when a non-cuffed tube is
wait a few minutes (about 15minutes when
used, a pharyngeal pack introduced around the
propofol is used) before delivering the pups in
tube.
 order to allow blood levels of induction agent to
Many cats presented for caesarian section or
decline. Dodman (1979) when reviewing the literat-
hysterectomy are carrying dead kittens and the
ure on the subject, pointed out that after a barbit-
 uterus may be infected. Ideally, in such cases a bal-
urate induction of anaesthesia there is often
 anced electrolye solution should be infused before
sufficient barbiturate remaining to cause consider-
 anaesthesia is induced but, unless the queen is
 able depression in the bitch at the time of delivery
exhausted or otherwise very ill, this is often
aai Auisdns are sdnd aue ia 'sdnd ae go
 delayed until after careful anaesthetic induction.
Accumulation of the barbiturate in the foetal liver,
Premedication before caesarian section is usu-
as shown by Finster ef al. (1972) or further dilution
 ally limited to the administration of anticholiner-
 of the drug before it reaches the foetal brain may
 gics, and an inhalation induction of anaesthesia
explain this. A recent review, together with sur-
with low-solubility agents leads to the quickest
vival rates for the bitches was published by Moon
recovery of both mother and kittens. With care,
et al. (1998).
such an induction can be smooth, but many anaes-
 Techniques involving the use of neuromuscular
thetists prefer to induce unconsciousness with
blocking agents can be used very satisfactorily for
small doses of thiopental, methohexital, propofol
caesarian section, as these drugs do not cross the
or Saffan before going on to the inhalation anaes-
placenta in sufficient quantities to paralyse the
thetic. Only minimal quantities of any intravenous
muscles of the offspring. However, there is appar-
agent should be used and inhalation agents should
 ently no real advantage to be gained from the use
be employed to maintain the lightest possible lev-
of neuromuscular blockers.
els of anaesthesia.
Where apparatus for the administration of
If total i.v. anaesthesia has to be used for caesar-
inhalation anaesthesia is not available, serious
ian section, Saffan is probably the best available.
consideration should be given to the use of light
Although the Saffan steroids cross the placental
sedation together with some method of local anal-
barrier and will affect the kittens, no noticeable
 gesia such as epidural block or local infiltration of
respiratory depression results. If it is necessary to
 the line of incision and topical application of local
use Saffan alone for this operation it is probable
amalgesic to the broad ligaments.
that it should be used in conjunction with local
 Postoperative pain relief for the bitch is essen-
analgesia so that the lightest levels of general
tial but care must be taken to ensure that drugs
 anaesthesia can be employed.
used for this purpose are not excreted in the milk
Diazepam or midazolam with ketamine
in concentrations which may affect suckling pups.
(<5mg/kg) can be used for induction of anaesthe-
The provision of adequate pain relief may pose
 sia but in general neuroleptanalgesic methods are
problems when opioid antagonists have been used
contraindicated in cats and after ketamine recov-
to produce more rapid awakening of the bitch.
ery is too prolonged if the offspring are alive and
need maternal care soon after delivery. The advent
 of medetomidine, however, has changed this situ-
CATS
ation in that after its use for premedication (in
doses of up to 80μg/kg) the dose of ketamine can
The requirements of anaesthesia for caesarian sec-
be reduced to low levels (< 2mg/kg ), while the
tion in the cat, and the problems likely to be
 effects of medetomidine itself can be antagonized
encountered, are similar to those already dis-
with atipamezole.
cussed above for dogs. Although cats may vomit
 Epidural analgesia can provide excellent anal-
on induction of anaesthesia, inhalation of vomit is
 gesia and muscle relaxation, but in cats the need
less likely than in bitches for cats have more active
for deep sedation to control the head end of the
laryngeal reflexes. Nevertheless, endotracheal
 animal severely limits its usefulness. All sedatives
mtubation should be carried out as soon as anaes-
in current use will depress the kittens and their
OBSTETRICS 491
condition will be no better than after well-admin-
Finster, M., Morishima, H.O., Mark, L.C., Perel, J.M,
istered general anaesthesia.
Dayton, PG. and James, L.S. (1972) Thiopental
Maternal postoperative analgesia may be pro-
concentrations in the fetus and newborm.
Anesthesiology 36:155-158.
vided by the use of small doses of morphine
Freak, M.J. (1962) Abnormal conditions associated with
(0.05 mg/kg i.m.), i.m. pethidine (meperidine)
10mg/kg, or butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg). Any suck-
Record 74:1323-1325.
ling kittens must be carefully watched for signs of
Goodger, W.J. and Levy, W. (1973) Anaesthetic
undue sleepiness that indicate high drug levels in
management of caesarean section. Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Small Animat Practice
the mother's milk.
3: 85-99.
Mitchell, B. (1966) Anaesthesia for caesarean section
 and factors influencing mortality rates of bitches
REFERENCES
and puppies. Veterinary Record 79:252-257.
Moon, PF., Erb, H.N., Ludders, J.W., Gleed, R.D. and
Baggot, J.D. (1992) Drug therapy in the neonatal animal.
 Pascoe, P.J.(1998) Perioperative management and
In: Principles of Drug Disposition in Domestic Animais:
mortality rates of dogs undergoing cesarian
the BasisofVeterinary Clinicat Pharmacology.
section in the United States and Canada. Jourrat
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Dodman, N.H. (1979) Anaesthesia for caesarian section
213: 365-369.
in the dog and cat: a revision. Journat of Small Animat
Wright, J.G. (1939) Caesarian hysterotomy-
Practice 20: 449-460.
hysterectomy. Veterinary Record 51: 133i-1346.
19
Intrathoracic surgery
INTRODUCTION
CLOSURE OF THE CHEST
The anaesthetic management of the pneumo-
The anaesthetic technique used while the chest is
thorax created by the wide opening of the chest
being closed varies with the nature of the opera-
wall and/or diaphragm for surgical access to the
tion but should always include drainage of the
contents of the thoracic cavity involves'controlled
pleural cavity. In the past, after a limited operation
respiration' or ‘IPPV' (Chapter 8). Although in
not involving injury to thelung the chest was often
Aq s a n a ad A
closed without drainage. An attempt was made to
 manual squeezing of the reservoir bag of the
achieve full re-expansion of any collapsed area of
anaesthetic breathing circuit is still carried out
the lung tissue and to maintain full control of the
in centres where little intrathoracic surgery is
 breathing with the lungs held in full expansion as
undertaken, or where neuromuscular blocking
the last suture was tied to make the chest airtight.
drugs are seldom used, the use of mechanical
Sometimes a cannula was left in the pleural cavity
ventilators is now widespread. Surgeons find it
until the thoracotomy wound was completely
easier to work with the regular movement
closed and this cannula was withdrawn quickly
 produced by these devices and their use makes
pansaid sem jem u piau aram shumi aui aum
it possible to stabilize the tidal and minute volumes
to be full expansion. However, the methods
 of respiration, the airway pressures and the duration
aut ie Suaowan u papaasons aaau pakopdua
residual air from the pleural cavity, portions of the
which cannot be achieved by manual 'bag squeez-
lung remained collapsed and often became a focus
ing'. Apart from the fact that IPPV is obligatory
of infection. The air trapped in the pleural cavity
while the pleural cavity is open to the atmosphere,
caused movements of the chest wall to be trans-
the actual anaesthetic methods employed for
mitted to the lung by negative intrapleural
 intrathoracic surgery are largely governed by the
pressure and pleural exudation occurred as a
personal preferences and experience of the anaes-
result of this.
thetist. The main anaesthetic problems centre
 Proper drainage of the pleural cavity with
around the elimination of any pneumothorax
removal of all the residual air overcomes all of
remaining after closure of the thoracotomy inci-
these problems but if, on occasion, the chest has to
sion and here the close cooperation between the
be closed without drainage the amount of air
surgeon and anaesthetist is essential for their satis-
 trapped in the pleural cavity can be minimized by
factory resolution.
493
494 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
and applying suction after the chest wall is closed.
Glass or stiff plastic
The catheter is then pulled out with a sharp tug.
tubes of 0.5 cm ID
Alternatively, when the thoracotomy wound has
For connection
been closed a large-bore catheter connected to a
to chest drain
For connection
suction apparatus is introduced into the pleural
to suction
cavity and suction applied until there is a negative
Removable
pressure present in the system. The catheter may
bung
become blocked by the lung and the method is
Glass or rigid
therefore not very satisfactory. It is, however,
plastic bottle
thorax, a 13 swg intravenous catheter may be
introduced into the pleural cavity, the needle part
2.5cm
Dilute
being withdrawn after penetration of the skin and
chlorhexidine
the blunt ended catheter forced through the inter-
(linch) 
costal muscles and parietal pleura.
When there is any risk of injury to the lung
which could cause a leak, or there is any likelihood
of continuing haemorrhage into the pleural cavity
the chest must be drained. Underwater drainage is
>15cm diameter
undoubtedly the most reliable and informative
 procedure and for this the drain tube is connected
FIG. I9.I Underwater-seal drain bottle.The bottle,
to a container of water or a weak aqueous solution
tubing and bung can be autoclaved before use or the
whole apparatus may be purchased, sterile and ready for
of chlorhexidine. The drain tube dips about 2.5 cm
use from a commercial source.
below the surface of the fluid and should have an
internal diameter of about 0.5 cm. The container
during the respiratory cycle. If, however, the lung
must have an internal diameter of not less than
is not fully expanded large variations of pressure
15 cm. The system acts as a non-return valve and
 occur. Observation of the water level in the glass or
allows air or fluid to be expelled from the pleural
 transparent plastic tube thus provides useful in-
cavity but prevents the indrawing of air during
formation as to the state of expansion of the
inspiration. When the closure of the chest is com-
lungs - the greater the amplitude of the swing of
 plete, inflation of the lung, or spontaneous respir-
the water level in the tube the poorer is the expan-
atory movements of the animal, forces air out of the
sion of the lung. The drain should be allowed to
remain in the pleural cavity until the lung is fully
ral sac is greater than about 2.5 cmH2O (0.25 kPa),
expanded as shown by minimal amplitude of the
i.e. the depth which the tube dips below the sur-
swing with a completely unobstructed drain. It is
face of the water. Provided that the container is
then pulled out with a sharp tug during ex-
kept at least 80 cm below the level of the animal's
piration, and a skin suture,which has been laid
body, water cannot be aspirated into the chest, for
for the purpose, tied tightly to occlude the hole in
no effort of the animal can lift the water up this dis-
the skin.
tance. The large diameter of the container should
ensure that no matter how high the level rises in
 ping of the visceral layer of the pleura there will be
the tube the end of the tube will always be below
an air leak from the raw surface of the lung. In such
the fluid surface (Fig. 19.1).
Ch patdde aq oi aaey Ae nons sasueiso
When the animal breathes spontaneously the
the far side of the underwater seal apparatus to
water level in the drainage tube rises on inspira-
 control the pneumothorax. This suction must be
tion (as the cavity between the lung and chest
 maintained until there is no bubbling of air, indi-
wall increases) and falls on expiration. When the
cating that the leak has been sealed off by inflam-
lung occupies the whole of the pleural space the
matory reaction. It may not be possible to remove
pressure does not show marked fluctuations
 oado  smou on dn og p a
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY495
during this time the animal must be kept well
sedated. Experience has shown that in cats this
sedation is best achieved by the use of Saffan given
either as a continuous infusion or by intermittent
injection, while in dogs combinations of morphine
and diazepam give excellent results particularly
when combined with the instillation of 3 to
5ml/10kg of 0.25 % bupivacaine into the pleural
cavity. Whatever sedation and analgesia is used it
is important that restlessness is overcome without
at the same time producing respiratory depres-
sion. After any thoracotomy the animal must be
examined both physically and radiologically for
evidence of lung collapse. Collapse of a lung, or of
a lobe of a lung, may necessitate immediate intra-
bronchial suction to remove any material occlud-
ing the bronchus to the lung or lobe. Whenever
possible, an immediate postoperative chest
radiograph should be taken to confirm full expan-
sion of the lungs, the absence of pneumothorax
and the position of any drainage tubes. It also
serves as a reference against which later films can
be assessed.
The drain can be used in any animal and sterile
units ready for connection to the pleural catheter
are commercially available. The outlet tube from
the air above the surface of the liquid in the con-
tainer can be connected to a source of suction.
Suction is usually only necessary when there is a
FIG. I9.2 Heimlich chest drain valve.
continuous air leak in the thoracic cavity but, if the
leak is gross, the application of suction can be life-
easily if they become slightly kinked around a rib
saving. Suction must be provided from a high-vol-
and are readily blocked by the expanded lung or a
ume, low-pressure apparatus.
small blood clot. For cats a 2.5 mm internal bore
For horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and ambu-
tube is the narrowest which should be used, but
lant large dogs it is sometimes more convenient to
even in the smallest of dogs and puppies 7.5 mm
use a Heimlich valve (Fig. 19.2). These are also
bore diameter tubing should be used. Commer-
available from commercial sources. This valve
cially available, sterile chest drainage tubes are
should be attached to the animal's chest wall by a
 designed for use in man and may have more side
skin suture and drain tubes tied tightly to the valve
holes than the one or two convenient for use in
inlet - a Y-piece can be used if more than one drain
small animals.
is in use. The Heimlich valve gives no indication as
 Dogs and cats can be turned from side to side to
to the state of expansion of the lungs and regular,
 promote drainage of either air or blood but in large
frequent inspection is needed to check that it is
animals such as horses it is often necessary to
working properly.
insert two chest drains - one ventrally for the
All drainage tubes introduced into the pleural
drainage of blood and one dorsally for the
cavity should be of adequate bore and made from
drainage of air. These can be connected through a
siliconized material which does not soften too
Y-tube to a Heimlich drain (Fig. 19.3).
much at body temperature. Small-bore chest
The time for removal of the drain should be a
drains are almost worse than useless - they occlude
 matter for consultation between the surgeon and
496 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
Drain for air Y-connector
OESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
The problems in oesophageal surgery arise from
the danger of regurgitation of food and/or saliva
which have been retained in the oesophagus.
Prompt endotracheal intubation in the prone
animal with the head raised will usually prevent
this mishap from occurring. Thoracotomy for
oesophageal surgery presents no special anaes-
thetic problems that have not already been
discussed.
Heimlich drain
secured to
RePAIr OF rUPTurES Of The DIAPHRAGM
chest wall
Although the majority of diaphragmatic ruptures
are best repaired through an abdominal incision
the pleural cavity is, of course, opened to the
FlG. I9.3 Two chest drains for blood or fluid drains
connected to a Heimlich valve by aY-piece connector for
atmosphere during the course of the operation.
The anaesthetic management of these cases is not
always easy.
Diaphragmatic rupture produces respiratory
anaesthetist. It is essential that it should be
inefficiency which results both from reduced
removed as soon as it is of no further use but
breathing capacity and from an unbalanced distri-
should a pleural effusion or pneumothorax devel-
bution of blood and air within the lungs. The pres-
 op after it has been taken out, another intercostal
Ence of abdominal viscera and effusion within the
drain should be introduced immediately under
chest reduces the vital capacity; the absence of dis-
lbcal infiltration analgesia.
placement of effective diaphragmatic movement
limits the enlargement of the thoracic cavity.
Twisting or displacement of the lung lobes causes
ANaESTHETIC MANAGeMENT FOR
partial obstruction of the bronchi, leading to
SPECIFIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES
the uneven distribution of the inspired air. The
blood passing through overventilated areas of
Simple thoracotomy for Non-
the lung will lose more CO2 than it would under
PULMONARY LESIONS
normal conditions, but cannot become more than
Thoracotomies for most non-pulmonary lesions
fully oxygenated. In the under ventilated areas of
present few special problems. Large neoplasms
lung both O2 uptake and CO2 elimination are
within the thorax can cause an animal consider-
 impaired. Because of these effects the mixed blood
able respiratory difficulty but removal of the
 returning from the lungs to the systemic circula-
space-occupying lesions eases the respiration at
tion usually has a PaCO2 near to normal, but its
once. In removing some of the more extensive
PaO2 is low, i.e. the main threat to the animal's life
mediastinal tumours the surgeon may open both
 is hypoxia. Anything which distresses the animal
pleural cavities but with the maintenance of con--
 and thus increases its O2 requirements may
trolled ventilation no trouble is encountered dur-
prove fatal. When most of the thoracic cavity is
ing operation. Carcinomata of the bronchi may
 occupied by abdominal viscera and /or effusion,
release catecholamines when manipulated by the
the animal can only survive by making maximal
surgeon. It may be necessary to drain both pleural
 breathing efforts and the use of respiratory depress
cavities and the two intercostal drains can be con-
 ant sedative or analgesic drugs is most unwise.
nected to the same underwater seal or Heimlich
Heavy sedation for diagnostic radiography is
drain by a Y-connector.
 particularly contraindicated. In dogs, phenoth-
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY497
iazine ataractics like acepromazine together with
ThOrACOtOMY FOr PULmONarY
small doses of an opioid such as pethidine
SURGERY
(meperidine) generally produce sufficient, safe
sedation, and in cats small (10 mg) doses of pethi-
One of the major problems in pulmonary surgery
dine are useful. All animals must be kept under
is the prevention of spillage of secretions or pus
close observation after any sedative or analgesic
from the affected part to the remainder of the lung.
premedication to detect the development of respir-
 In man this problem is overcome by drainage or
atory distress.
isolation of the affected part of the lung with some
Anaesthesia for animals with diaphragmatic
form of blocker (usually incorporating a tube for
rupture may be managed in a variety of ways. No
drainage) or, alternatively, endobronchial tubes,
hard and fast rules can be given and each indi-
either single or double lumen, provide means of
vidual case must be treated on its own merits. All
protecting the sound lung which can then be ventil-
cases must be handled very quietly and gently
ated selectively. In animals, due to the shape of the
before anaesthesia is induced, and a smooth
chest and bronchial tree, most of these techniques
induction of anaesthesia with an intravenous
are impossible and reliance has to be placed on
agent is advisable. Some animals do not resent the
preoperative preparation with antimicrobials and
application of a face-mask on or near the face and
expectorants to make the lung relatively 'dry'
og aeuui on uaxo uaai aq Aimgasn eu a
Non-irritating anaesthetic agents also play a part
2to 3 minutes before the induction of anaesthesia
in reducing the volume of secretions, while any
('preoxygenation'). In dogs, whenever it can be
remaining can be removed by bronchoscopic aspi-
done without undue disturbance of the animal, an
ration carried out at frequent intervals through the
intravenous fluid infusion should be set up before
endotracheal tube.
 amaesthesia, otherwise it is set up as soon as poss-
 During lobectomy or pneumonectomy, ventila-
ible during the course of the operation. This drip is
tion after severance of the bronchus and prior to its
often needed to remedy the fall in arterial blood
cosure presents surprisingly little difficulty and
pressure seen when re-expansion of the lungs
although IPPV results in some frothing of blood
alters the haemodynamic state of the body (pre-
this doesnot usually obscure the surgeon's view of
sumably due to the re-opening of areas of the pul-
the bronchial stump. Should it prove to be imposs-
 monary vascular bed). Endotracheal intubation is,
ible to obtain adequate lung expansion while the
of course, essential in all cases.
paxse aq Aew uoaams aul uado apim si snqouonq
pous iuae ou urado aun go pua au r
to occlude the bronchial opening with a finger or
be made to forcibly expand regions of lung tissue
thumb while the lung is inflated between the lay-
which have been in a collapsed state for more thian
ing of bronchial sutures. Provided the minute vol-
a day, for this leads to pulmonary oedema. The use
ume is kept constant the removal of a lobe or even
of a chest drain allows some over expansion of
of one lung does not result in a significant rise
healthy, non-collapsed lung to fill the pleural
in PaCO2 and indeed the PaCO2 may actually
cavity and encourages collapsed regions to re-
fall, indicating an improvement in the dead
expand over a period of time. Chest drainage also
space/tidal volume ratio. There is usually a fall in
allows removal from the pleural cavity of fluid
PaCO2 as soon as the chest is opened and measures
which often appears in the first 24 to 48 hours of
which have been recommended to minimize patchy
the postoperative period.
alveolar collapse during constant minute volume
Postoperative pain, which limits breathing to
IPPV, such as intermittent manual hyperinflation
rapid, very shallow movements of the chest wall,
and continuous manual inflation, are quite ineffec-
is best controlled by the injection of pethidine or
tive and may be harmful. The PaO2 usually
 morphine, given as required, in doses appropriate
remains above 80mmHg (10.6kPa) when the
for the size and species of animal concerned.
inspired gases contain at least 50% of oxygen even
Infiltration of the abdominal incision with 0.25 %
when only one lung is available for ventilation.
bupivacaine is also very effective in alleviating
Frequent suction is needed to clear the
pain.
bronchial tree in bronchiectasis cases and the use
498 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
 of halothane/oxygen or isoflurane/oxygen with-
CARDIAC SURGERY
out nitrous oxide has been found to be advant-
ageous in avoiding hypoxaemia when ventilation
Cardiac surgery involves more than simple thora-
 of the lungs is interrupted for the passage of the
cotomy. The drugs used may affect the heart and
alter the vascular tone generally. Equally, disor-
ues when ventilation is stopped at the end of in-
ders of the circulatory system may modify the
spiration but the PaCO2 rises until ventilation
 absorption, excretion and action of anaesthetic
recommences.
 drugs. The problems that arise are often peculiar to
In certain cases, such as operations for the
 each lesion but certain general principles of anaes-
removal of congenital cysts of the lung, it is advis-
thetic management can be enunciated.
able to allow spontaneous respiration to continue
All animals should be handled quietly to avoid
until the pleural cavity is opened. This avoids the
 excitement and reduce the effect on the heart of
risk of overdistension of the cysts with collapse of
 Endogenous catecholamine secretion. A small dose
normal lung tissue.
of acepromazine is often valuable to calm and
 Replacement of blood loss during the operation
 facilitate handling of all species of animal.
and the maintenance of fluid balance should fol-
If an i.v. agent is to be used for the induction of
low the usual practice for major surgery but after
anaesthesia two points must be noted. First, slow-
the removal of lung tissue animals seem to
ing of the circulation due to the disease process
make better progress if they are slightly short of
causes a considerable lag between the administra-
fluid. Over-transfusion with blood or the adminis-
tion of the drug and the development of its effect.
tration of excessive amounts of other fluids is
This makes it very easy to give too much, for it
associated with pulmonary oedema and this is
may give the impression of drug resistance.
particularly disastrous after resection of any
Secondly, these drugs may depress the myocar-
significant amounts of lung tissue. It should be
dium and produce peripheral vasodilatation. In
noted that in dogs, traction on the hilum of the
animals where cardiac output is fixed (e.g. by
lung can cause arterial hypotension; this is not an
valvular stenoses), the vasodilatation may pro-
indication for the administration of fluids -blood
duce a very marked fall in arterial blood pressure.
 pressure returns quickly to normal when traction
The i.v. drug should always be administered very
ceases.
slowly and in very dilute solutions. However, clin-
 Postoperatively, animals which have had a lung
ical experience indicated that the dangers of i.v.
lobe removed should be nursed lying on the sound
drugs have been overemphasized. The quiet,
side until they are able to sit up; this encourages re-
smooth induction of anaesthesia more than makes
expansion of lung remaining on the side of opera-
up for its supposed disadvantages which are, in
tion and facilitates drainage of any pneumothorax.
 any case, much less obvious with the small doses
After pneumonectomy the animal should be
nursed on the side of operation. The first dose of
Provided it does not excite the animal, O2 should
postoperative sedative analgesic should be given
be administered through a face-mask before anaes-
intravenously in order that the patient's needs
thesia is induced, but in every case it should be
 given as soon as consciousness is lost. A perfect air-
radiograph is advisable before removal of the
way is always essential and a large-bore endotra-
intercostal drainage tube but it must be recognized
 cheal tube must be introduced as soon as possible.
that positioning for this may distress the animal
Pericarditis and cardiac tamponade are very
 and under these circumstances it may be necessary
 crippling conditions because they limit the cardiac
to rely upon auscultation of lung sounds to check
output and depress tissue respiration by the
that the lungs are fully expanded. Instillation of 3
widespread action of raised venous pressure.
to 5 ml/10 kg of 0.25 % bupivacaine into the pleu-
 Associated ascites and pleural effusions reduce the
ral cavity on the operated side will usually provide
 vital capacity and venous back pressure may dam-
 dn og isa aaaonsod asn pso
 age the liver. Careful preanaesthetic preparation of
6hours.
these cases is necessary. Pleural and peritoneal
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY 499
effusions must be tapped and fluid retention
Radiopaque catheters, visible by fluoroscopy, can
reduced by the use of diuretics. Cardiac tampon-
be advanced from a peripheral vein into the right
 ade must be relieved by paracentesis under local
heart and pulmonary artery. By wedging the tip in
mfiltration analgesia.
a pulmonary artery, an indication of left atrial
 Much has been written concerning anaesthesia
pressure can be obtained. In addition, a needle
of healthy animals of various species for experi-
connected to a fine tube can be passed through
mental cardiac surgery but little of this is relevant to
the catheter when it is in the right atrium to pierce
dlinical veterinary practice. Clinical cases presented
the atrial septum and measure the pressure in the
for cardiac surgery for the correction of acquired or
left atrium directly. The left ventricle can be
congenital lesions almost invariably have circul-
entered directly if a catheter is introduced from a
 atory disturbances which complicate their manage-
 peripheral artery.
ment, and in many, failure of medical treatment is
 Information is obtained by pressure measure-
the reason why operationis contemplated. Few vet-
ment, by measurement of cardiac output and by
erinary centres will ever receive enough cases to
blood gas analysis on samples of blood taken from
enable the expertise necessary for their successful
kmown positions of the catheter tip. Angiography
treatment to be developed and the assistance of an
is usually carried out on the same occasion using
experienced medical cardiac surgery team should
be sought to give the animal the best chance of sur-
Anaesthesia must not interfere with any of these
vival. However, some of the simpler lesions may be
diagnostic procedures.
amenable to correction umder moderate hypother-
After full premedication anaesthesia may be
mia by veterinary surgical teams. Even when car-
induced by the careful i.v. injection of small doses
diopulmonary bypass techniques involving an
of thiopentone, diazepam/ketamine, or midazo-
 expert medical perfusionist are needed it is usual
lam/propofol, followed by i.v. pancuronium,
for a veterinary anaesthetist to be involved in the
atracurium or vecuronium, and endotracheal intu-
patient's general management. The veterinary clin-
bation as soon as relaxation of the jaw muscles is
ical anaesthetist should, therefore, be familiar with
obtained. To maintain blood gases as near normal
the principles of bypass techniques, and of moder-
as possible, IPPV is carried out with gas mixtures
ate hypothermia, for circulatory arrest.
containing 20% O2 in such a way as to maintain the
It is probable that most cardiac surgery will be
PaCO2 between 35 and 40 mmHg (4.7 and 5.3kPa).
carried out in dogs and the techniques of anaesthe-
The use of IPPV overcomes alterations of PaO2
sia used in these animals will be described below.
which may result in an uncontrolled way when the
Jo saiads rao roy idepe ci imop jou ane Aau
animal is breathing spontaneously. The procedure
animal should the need arise. It must be empha-
is usually undertaken in a darkened room and the
sized, however, that in veterinary practice cardiac 
wise anaesthetist withdraws briefly during the
surgery is seldom likely to be an economic propo-
 radiation period.
sition and it is often undertaken out of an academic
S     
 interest in the advancement of knowledge relating
 Severe arrhythmias and circulatory instability are
to circulatory disorders generally.
relatively common. The anaesthetist must be pre-
pared to deal with these as they arise, for example
UItrasonography
by giving 1-2 mg /kg of lignocaine (lidocaine) i.v.
as a bolus to treat tachyarrhythmias.
This technique of investigation can be carried out
without risk to an animal that can be handled qui-
etly and the administration of drugs is usually
Hypothermia
quite unnecessary.
Provided that it has no work to do, heart muscle
itself is not harmed by short periods of circulatory
Cardiac catheterization
arrest but brain cells are extremely sensitive to
Most animals presented for cardiac surgery are
 oxygen lack and at normal body temperatures of
first investigated by cardiac catheterization.
 37-38°C carmot survive if the circulation stops for
500 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
more than 3 to 5 minutes. Reducing the temper-
onset of ventricular fibrillation. The onset of ven-
ature of brain cells depresses their metabolism and
tricular fibrillation during hypothermia is influ-
enables them to withstand the effects of longer
enced by a number of factors :
periods of circulatory arrest. For example, at 30°C
1. The type of anaesthesia.
the brain will survive and function after a circu-
2. Mechanical stimulation. Stimulation of the
latory arrest of 10 minutes.
heart by catheters in the ventricles or by surgical
manipulations may induce fibrillation.
Body temperoture measurement
3. Under-ventilation of the lungs, with a
consequent rise in PaCO2 and a fall in pH,
During the rapidly changing conditions of body
predisposes to fibrillation.
cooling and rewarming associated with hypother-
4. Changes in ionic equilibrium of the blood.
 mia techniques, a temperature measurement made
The relative concentrations of potassium and
in the mouth or rectum fails to provide an ad-
calcium are particularly important here.
equate index of temperature in other regions of
 5. Sympathetic discharge. There is some
the body. There is ample evidence, however, that
evidence suggesting that blocking sympathetic
the oesophageal temperature at heart level is a
nerves to the heart protects this organ from
 most reliable measure of heart and blood temper-
fibrillation under hypothermia.
ature. For this reason a suitable calibrated ther-
6. Blood pressure. Abrupt falls in ABP giving
mometer probe introduced correctly into the
rise to decreased coronary blood flow can, during
oesophagus, should always be used for temper-
hypothermia, precipitate ventricular fibrillation.
ature measurement.
The blood flow in the brain, kidney and splanchnic
region is reduced as body temperature falls. The
Reactions to cold
femoral vascular bed dilates down to oesophageal
The reactions of the body in response to chilling
temperatures of about 34 °C, then vasoconstriction
 sdda Aq oe sea Ku paqosap lam aram
occurs and later at 20-25°C a second vasodilata-
(1956). In a conscious animal cutaneous vasocon-
tion takes place. One of the common uses of
striction is the first reaction of the body to a cold
 hypothermia is in circumstances requiring clamp-
environment. Adrenaline (epinephrine) is released
ing of the aorta for a considerable time. After
from the adrenal glands and this, besides causing
occlusion lasting more than about 30 minutes, the
vasoconstriction, stimulates cellular metabolism
vasodilatation which follows the release of the
 mobilizing glycogen and increasing heat produc-
 clamp is large and lasts as long when the body is
tion. Other responses include release of thy-
cold as when it is warm. Vasoconstrictor sub-
rotrophic hormone and adrenal corticoids, both of
 stances or blood transfusion may be necessary to
which result in greater heat production. If these
counteract this effect.
reactions prove insufficient to maintain normal
Afall in body and brain temperature results in a
body temperature shivering occurs and a tremend-
decrease in cerebral oxygen consumption. At 25°℃
 ous increase in heat production results. Shivering
brain O2 uptake is about one-third of that at 37°C
is by far the most effective means of maintaining
and over this range O2 consumption is a linear
body temperature.
function of temperature. A matter of major import-
As the body cools, the heart rate slows and it is
 ance is the degree of protection afforded to nerv-
about halved when body temperature reaches
 ous tissue from the effects of circulatory arrest by
25 °C. This slowing is apparently due to cooling of
hypothermia. At 25°C the circulation can be
-uonord e Aq panuedoe st pue raeuaed a
 stopped for 15 minutes without apparent damage
tion of systole and isometric contraction. Changes 
to brain cells and for various reasons this time of 15
in the ECG include prolongation of the P-R inter- 1
 minutes seems to be maximum which can be
val and a lengthening of the QRS complex.a
 achieved by surface cooling (between 28 and 25°C
Elevation of the S-T segment or the appearance of the incidence of ventricular fibrillation rises
a wave rising steeply from the S wave heralds the
 steeply). The EEG begins to change as body
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY 50I
temperature falls to 36-34 °C. The potential re-
The'after-drop' reduces oesophageal temperature
corded shows a decreased amplitude and large &-
by up to 2°C and it is important to allow for this
waves appear, particularly in the frontal area, at
because ventricular fibrillation is common at tem-
about 30 °C. The electrical activity then declines
peratures below 28°C. The ‘after-drop' occurs
until between 18 and 20°Cno activity is recorded.
because when the animal is removed from the bath
Moderate hypothermia has several potentially
the skin and neighbouring tissues are extremely
harmful effects (Deakin et al., 1988). The O2 disso-
cold. In fact they are much colder than the circulat-
ciation curve is shifted to the left resulting in an
ing blood and as the blood reaches these parts it
increased affinity of haemoglobin for O2 at a given
continues to cool long after active cooling meas-
partial pressure of O2. This reduced O2 delivery to
ures have been stopped.
tissues is partly offset by an increase in free
 In many cases the animal has rewarmed suffi-
dissolved O2 by as much as 20% at 30 *C. Hypo-
ciently by the end of the operation but if it has not
thermia increases muscle tone and, at moderate
done so it may be partially immersed in a bath of
 degrees of hypothermia, will trigger shivering
warm water. If surgery is not complete, anaesthe-
which can increase O2 consumption several fold
 sia may be continued when the body temperature
but is prevented by the use of neuromuscular
is above 35°C.
blocking drugs.
Surface body cooling is a messy, inconvenient
procedure, but it does not involve use of any com-
plicated apparatus and it can be applied by even
Techniques for the production of hypothermia
inexperienced personnel with a fair degree of
Techniques for producing hypothermia include
safety to animals of below about 70 kg.
body surface cooling, body cavity cooling, intra-
 Intragastric cooling is a slower but much more
gastric cooling and blood stream cooling.
sophisticated process. A very good, relatively inex-
Before hypothermia can be produced by surface
 pensive apparatus utilizes an intragastric balloon
 coling the animal's natural defences to cold must
which is introduced into the stomach via the
be obtunded. Otherwise, attempts to reduce body
 oesophagus after the induction of general anaes-
      
thesia. Cold water is circulated through this bal-
reduce cellular metabolism. The efficacy of body
loon and reduction of body temperature to below
surface cooling therefore depends on maintaining
28-29 °C usually takes some 1 to 2hours. This may
a coincident vasodilatation of the superficial blood
 seem a relatively long time but during the cooling
vessels and preventing shivering. Fortunately, the
process ECG leads and blood pressure transducers
anaesthetic agents which affect one reaction gener-
can easily be attached and vascular cannulations
ally modify the other. Chlorpromazine hydrochlo-
made while the surgical procedure is started.
ride appears to be the best drug to produce
 Rewarming can be commenced at any time during
vasodilatation and prevent shivering; acepro-
surgery (without interrupting its progress) by cir-
mazine does not seem to result in the production
culating warm water through the balloon, and
of as marked cutaneous vasodilatation. Once
rewarming is more rapid than can be achieved by
 amaesthesia is induced neuromuscular blocking
any other method.
drugs can be given to make shivering impossible.
Bloodstream cooling is normally regarded as
Hypothermia by body surface cooling is
being part of the cardiopulmonary bypass tech-
 induced by immersing the animal in a water bath
s u paonpoid aq ues enuauodky inq anbiu
at 15 to 20°C and circulating the water around the
body while the trunk and limbs are massaged to
nal circuit containing a transfusion warming coil
maintain the cutaneous circulation. The animal is
removed from the bath when the oesophageal
ma substitute such as Haemaccel and the coil is
temperature is about 30 *C and dried with towels.
immersed in a bath of water maintained at 4-5°C.
One of the principal dangers of body surface cool-
Carnulae are inserted into the animal's femoral or
ing by this immersion method is the 'after-drop'
 carotid artery and femoral or jugular vein and the
when the animal has been removed from the bath.
da s) day y/g aa si 
502 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
without a preservative). The cannulae are then
 ated from it by a plastic film. This allows oxygena-
connected to the external circuit so that arterial
tion to take place and carbon dioxide to be
blood is run through the coil and pumped back 
 removed with minimal blood damage. Whatever
into the vein. The animal cools quite rapidly and
the actual design, the gas input is usually a mix-
the external circulation is stopped when the
ture of O2 and CO2 at a flow adjusted to maintain
desired oesophageal temperature has been
 satisfactory levels of gaseous exchange. The
reached. Heparin has a half-life of about 1hour
 machines must, of necessity, have a large surface
 area for gaseous exchange and this leads to consid-
necessary to give half the initial dose for each hour
erable cooling of the blood so some form of heat
 of operation.
 Exchanger is always incorporated in the design.
 In order that blood may be pumped through the
mencing the external circulation with the water in
 heart-lung machine without clotting the patient
the water bath maintained at 40 °C. Once the an-
 must be anticoagulated with heparin before
imal has rewarmed the external circulation is
 bypass. The management of the anticoagulation is
 aul Aq pasiaaar uoeznueday aul pue paddons
greatly assisted by the use of the activated clotting
administration of protamine sulphate at the rate of
time (ACT) where 2-3ml of blood are added to
1.5 to 2.0 times the initial dose of heparin
12 mg celite which reduces the normal whole blood
clotting time to 90-130 s. Adequate heparinization
is achieved by prolonging the ACT to at least three
Technique of cardiopulmonary bypass
times baseline levels. At the end of the procedure
Cardiopulmonary bypass enables the heart and
heparinization is reversed with protamine sul-
lungs to be excluded from the circulation while an
adequate blood supply to the rest of the body is
 effects such as hypotension.
maintained. In order to exclude the heart and
 Before the patient can be connected to the heart-
lungs from the circulation, the vena cavae or 
 lung machine air must be excluded from the sys-
the right atrium are cannulated and the blood is
tem by filling with fluid (priming of the system').
allowed to flow through these cannulae to the
A typical prime allows the administration of 30 to
 pump-oxygenator or heart-lung' machine. Having
 50 ml/kg of 5% dextrose or Ringer's lactate solu-
S! h 1lo a1asa1 e 01 1ojeuasAxo aul yonoiul passed
 tion from the circuit to the patient when bypass
pumped back into the circulation via a cannula in
commences. The resulting haemodilution reduces
either the aorta, or carotid or femoral artery. The
the viscosity of the blood and enables better body
heart-lung machine is provided with a means of
 perfusion to be achieved. The high flow rates used
altering the temperature of the blood being
 today in cardiopulmonary bypass and meticulous
returned to the patient as required by the circum-
 attention to blood replacement prevent any acido-
stances (e.g. cooling during the bypass procedure,
 sis from suboptimal perfusion of some tissues
 or rewarming at the end of bypass). It is also pro-
 developing, so that it is not necessary to adminis-
vided with a number of pumps which are used to
 ter sodium bicarbonate to correct acidosis at the
aspirate blood from the heart cavities and peri-
end of the procedure.
cardium for return to the patient's circulation via
Anaesthesia for open heart surgery may
the oxygenator during the bypass proced ure.
 be administered in many ways and it is probable
 The pumps used for heart-lung machines are
that each centre carrying out this type of surgery
usually roller pumps which occlude and milk
has its own favoured technique. All methods
siliconized tubing against a track and thus cause
 are chosen to cause minimal changes in heart rate
the blood contained in the tubing to flow along it.
 or blood pressure, and to have no direct depres-
The mechanical part of the pump does not come
sant effect on the myocardium. Recently, the tech-
into contact with the blood and this minimizes
nique of low flow cardiopulmonary bypass in
haemolysis.
small dogs has been recorded (Lew et al., 1997)
with 6 out of 6 dogs being successfully weaned
a thin film of blood to a flowing gas mixture separ-
from bypass.
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY 503
Premedication consists of administering effect-
may occur. The preperfusion period is often the
ive doses of sedative drugs. Agents such as
most hazardous. The heart lesion is uncorrected
diazepam, midazolam, morphine, hyoscine and
 and induction of anaesthesia may produce a fur-
papaveretum may be used in full doses and often a
ther deterioration in the animal's condition. When
small dose of atropine is included with them.
the mediastinum is opened and the heart and great
Heavy sedation helps to allay fear, induction of
vessels are manipulated by the surgeon the effect-
anaesthesia is smoother and total drug dosage
 iveness of the heart's action may be temporarily
during anaesthesia is reduced. It is probable that
impaired. Arrhythmias are easily provoked by
propofol is the best induction agent, administered
contact between the heart and suction catheters
until the eyelash reflex is just abolished. Some
and swabs or retractors may obstruct the venous
small reduction of arterial pressure occurs but is
return or the flow in the pulmonary artery.
seldom of significance if the rate of administration
Constant observation of the arterial pressure
of the intravenous agent is slow. IPPV is com-
wave-forms as displayed on an oscilloscope, and
menced after injection of a neuromuscular block-
 of the ECG are, therefore, essential. Before going
ing_ drug (e.g. atracurium, vecuronium), has
on bypass the surgeon may have to be asked to
abolished spontaneous breathing.
stop activities until the heart has recovered normal
An intraoesophageal thermometer probe is
rhythm
placed middle of the thoracic oesophagus and
Arrhythmias of all kinds may be seen, but are
often only transient, resolving spontaneously
nasopharynx and on the tympanic membrane. An
when the cause is removed. Bradycardia may be
i.v. infusion is established and closed bladder
due to hypoxia, which must be eliminated as a
drainage is set up with a self-retaining urinary
cause before atropine is given. In the absence of
catheter or, in male animals, with a catheter
sinus rhythm isoprenaline may be needed; an
retained in position with a stitch. A catheter for
incomplete heart block is also treated with this
arterial pressure monitoring is introduced and
drug. Myocardial irritability may be due to
another for CVP measurement is passed via the
hypokalaemia and is often corrected by the very
jugular vein. ECG leads using needle electrodes
slow intravenous injection of potassium chloride,
are attached and the ECG is monitored continu-
but if this does not produce the desired result lig-
ously thereafter. The arterial and venous catheters
nocaine may have to be given. It is most important
are attached to their respective manometer lines,
to have facilities for rapid estimation of blood elec-
including 3-way taps for easy withdrawal of
 trolytes readily available. Vary rarely, cardiac irrit-
blood samples.
ability may be the result of metabolic acidosis
For the maintenance of anaesthesia IPPV is
needing treatment with i.v. sodium bicarbonate.
usual with minimal infusions of propofol (2.5 to
 During perfusion the haematocrit falls because
3.0 mg/kg) which can be added to the pump-oxy-
of the diluting effect of the pump prime and the
 genator during total bypass. During total bypass
 aim is to keep it between 20 and 25% by addition of
lung ventilation is stopped and the lungs held at
blood to the pump circuit as needed. Some redis-
an airway pressure of about 10 cmH2O (1kPa) to
tribution of body fluids occurs and urinary output
sase roieuaAxo aue Xesidi asdelos pa aand
usually increases so that additional priming fluid
consist of 97% O2 with 3% CO2 and an inhalation
has to be added. Diuretics (e.g. frusemide) are
agent such as isoflurane or halothane may be
  s o  a  a
included to assist in vasodilatation. Nitrous oxide
 potassium is given to replace that lost in the urine.
is usually reintroduced for IPPV after coming off
Lung ventilation is recommenced immediately
bypass as soon as the arterial blood saturation is
before perfusion is stopped. Caval snares are
satisfactory.
released and blood fills the heart and enters the
In addition to the management of anaesthesia,
lungs. The surgeon uses this blood to ensure that
the anaesthetist plays an important role in mon-
 air is displaced from the left heart before allowing
itoring respiratory and circulatory function and
the systemic circulation to depend on the left ven-
the correction of any departures from optimum as
tricular contraction. Proper cardiac filling is, of
504 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
course, essential and blood is transfused from the
normal rhythm and the caval snares are released.
pump circuit or by i.v. infusion until atrial pres-
 Supportive bypass is maintained while the right
sures are adequate. Initially atrial filling pressures
atrial pressure is adjusted to about 5 mmHg (0.7
may have to be increased slowly to 15mmHg
kPa) by fluid replenishment as needed. Bypass is
(2kPa) or until no further improvement in arterial
then discontinued and protamine sulphate is
presure occurs, and inotropic support (adrena-
 given over a 10 minute period while blood is trans-
line) may be needed but usually over a period of
fused from the heart-lung machine into the animal
 about 30 minutes a much lower atrial filling pres-
 to maintain the right atrial pressure. Any tendency
sure of 5-6 mmHg (0.7-0.8 kPa) becomes effective.
to arterial hypotension in spite of an adequate
 Perfusion is controlled by the perfusionist to
right atrial pressure is treated by the infusion of a
produce an adequate tissue blood supply without
weak solution of adrenaline (1: 50 000 in Hart-
excessive flow rates which result in destruction of
 mann's solution) given at the rate of 2-3 drops per
red blood cells and cause a greater incidence of
dumd uoisnu ue Aq paraisuupe io anuu
postoperative bleeding. It is possible to reduce the
perfusion rate needed by inducing hypothermia
Postoperative core
and, consequently, cardiopulmonary bypass with
moderate hypothermia (reduction of central body
All animals subjected to open heart surgery with
temperature to 30-32 °C) is commonplace. Many
cardiopulmonary bypass should be treated in an
 surgical units use additional profound hypother-
intensive care situation with continuous nursing
mia of the myocardium, cooling it to 15-18°℃
 attention for at least the first 24 hours postopera-
There are many variations for the technique of
tion. During this time arterial and venous pres-
perfusion but typically after heparinization (about
sures, heart and respiratory rates, PaO2 and PaCO2
3mg/kg) and introduction of the necessary
should be recorded at 30 minute intervals while a
catheters and snares, cardiopulmonary bypass is
 continuous watch is kept on the ECG and urinary
begun without arrest of the patient's own circula-
output.
tion. Systemic cooling is instituted and once the
Surgical bleeding is not uncommon and
desired body temperature is reached IPPV is dis-
treatment may require reopening of the chest.
continued and a left ventricular vent is placed
 Although the pericardium is seldom sutured, car-
through the apex of the ventricle. The caval snares
diac tamponade should be suspected when ABP is
are then drawn tight and the aorta is cross-
low, the CVP is high and the urinary output poor.
clamped to produce total bypass. The heart is elec-
If clotting studies produce normal results, any an-
trically fibrillated with low voltage alternating
imals continuing to bleed from the skin wound or
current shock and the aortic root perfused with
 into the chest require surgical re-exploration.
cold cardioplegic solution to cause rapid arrest of
Poor tissue perfusion, low output states and
the heart in diastole. At the same time external car-
 massive blood replacement together with lung col-
diac cooling through the pericardial sac is com-
 lapse may all lead to acid-base changes necessitat-
menced via a recirculation cooling system using
ing the administration of sodium bicarbonate.
cold saline. The cardioplegic solution contains
Emboli may be introduced into the circulation
buffered potassium, calcium and magnesium salts
Aew Aaul Aiasms pue ssedAq Sump au Aue pe
with heparin and procaine. The cardiac muscle
 be particles of silicone antifoam from the oxygen-
normally becomes quite flaccid at 15-18 °C giving
ator, air or oxygen, or tissue debris. The most
about 30 minutes operating time.
important results of such embolism are neurolo-
Rewarming is accomplished by removing the
gical and it can produce anything from transient
aortic clamp and allowing blood, warmed in the
 monoplegia to total brain death.
pump-oxygenator, to perfuse the animal, includ-
Sedation and pain relief are particularly import-
ing the coronary circulation. The myocardium
 ant for the facilitation of nursing care for the first
recovers in 10-20 minutes and goes into coarse fib-
 24 hours after surgery and i.v. frusemide (1 mg/kg)
rillation. The application of a direct current shock
 may have to be given to prompt a satisfactory uri-
of about 45 J applied directly to the heart restores 
nary output of 0.5 to 1 ml/kg/hour.
INTRATHORACIC SURGERY 505
Chest drains are usually removed some 24 to 36
hours after operation and if oedema develops it
may be necessary to administer concentrated plas-
ma to counteract the effects of haemodilution at
the time of bypass.
Insertion of pacemakers
Pacemakers are devices which ensure that the
heart beats sufficient times per minute regardless
of the intrinsic rhythmic activity. They are inserted
for different types of conduction deficits and usu-
FIG. I9.4 A:ECG with demand pacemaker. These have
ally only when an animal is showing symptoms.
an internal ability to suppress their activity if the heart rate
is adequate but 'cut in' if the spontaneous heart rate falls
Most pacemakers used in veterinary practice are
below a preset minimum. B:ECG with a fixed rate
cbtained from human cadavers prior to cremation
pacemaker.These are seldom used today; ECG complexes
of the body.
are usually abnormal during pacemaker function because
of depolarization commencing at an ectopic site.
through the veins to rest in the right ventricle.
There are some needle electrodes which can be
for use should bradycardia develop in the anes-
inserted through the chest wall but these are for
thetized animal before the pacemaker can be made
operational.
emergency use only. Oesophageal pacing is also
 Many anaesthetists do not usually put tempor-
possible. Permanent pacemakers are frequently
 ary pacemakers in animals with stable 3rd degree
inserted under general anaesthesia. The pacing
A-V block because these animals seem to maintain
wire passes via the jugular vein and tricuspid
stable
valve to the right ventricle where it is anchored to
 Should pharmacologic support be needed, dop-
the trabeculae by some kind of hook. A subcuta-
neous pocketis then constructed for the‘pacemak-
amine at about 10 μg/kg/min usually produces a
er box' or it is placed in the abdominal cavity. They
satisfactory increase in the heart rate. When facili-
ties are available, however, most anaesthetists put
are powered by various types of battery. Less com-
a pacemaker in animals with sick sinus syndrome
monly permanent pacemakers are implanted into
the epicardium via a min-thoracotomy.
or in cases where there is concern about the stabi-
Pacemakers have one of three modes of opera-
lity of the slow rhythm before anaesthesia is
tion. They may be fixed rate and have the advant-
induced.
age of simplicity, but are now seldom used
(Fig.19.4). Demand pacemakers have the ability to
 REFERENCES
suppress cardiac pacemaker activity if the heart
rate is adequate but cut in if the rate falls below a
Deakin, C.D., Knight, H., Edwards, J.C., Monro, J.L.,
pre-set minimum; they are the most common kind.
Lamb, R.K., Keeton, B. and Salmon, A.P (1988)
Sequential pacemakers are complex, with atrial
Induced hypothermia in the postoperative
management of refractory cardiac failure following
and ventricular electrodes, usually fired by the P
paediatric surgery. Araesthesia 53:848-853.
wave of the ECG; as yet, they have not been extens-
Dripps, R.D. (1956) The Physiology of Induced
ively used in veterinary medicine.
Hypothermia.Nationat Research Council Publications
Anaesthesia for fitting of pacemakers usually
No. 451. Washington DC: National Research Council.
presents no difficulty but the surgeon should
Lew, L.J., Fowler, J.D., Egger, C.M., Thompson, D.J.,
Rosin, M.W. and Pharr, J.W. (1997) Deep hypothermic
avoid diathermy and the pulse should be mon-
low flow cardiopulmonary bypass in small dogs.
itored by a precordial or oesophageal stethoscope,
Veterirnary Surgery 26: 281-289.
ated by electrical interference. It is advisable to
have an isoprenaline or dopamine infusion ready
Prevention and
20
management of anaesthetic
accidents and crises
The final result of most serious or fatal anaes-
INTRODUCTION
thetic accidents is that of tissue hypoxia. Brain cells
When the profound physiological changes initi-
are particularly easily damaged, and even mild hy-
ated by drugs used in anaesthesia are considered it
 poxia may result ina loss of intelligence and change
is surprising that serious accidents and emergen-
in temperament following anaesthesia, whilst a
cies are not more common. Familiarity with tech-
more prolonged insult results in coma, and poss-
niques and drugs can lead to a nonchalant attitude
ibly death. Hypoxia of the myocardium will reduce
but the anaesthetic may be a greater hazard to the
life of the animal than is the operation. During
coupled with hypercapnia, sensitize the heart to
anaesthesia some accidents occur suddenly and
other stimuli and finally produce cardiac arrest or
the reason for the mishap must be recognized
fibrillation. Lack of oxygen will also damage the
liver, kidneys and even somatic muscle, both
be applied at once. Other incidents are less dra-
directly and by increasing the toxic effects of any
matic and their results may only become apparent
 anaesthetic used, but the results of such damage
during the postoperative period. Moreover, one
 may not become obvious until wellinto the postop-
-s mag rae on pea Ae Auaa go pu
erative period. Haemoglobin desaturation of arte-
au asuo un uappns mn are sauraa sno
rial blood reduces the O2 supplies to all tissues and
are usually the result of summation of various
is, therefore, very important to the anaesthetist.
problems which may have been overlooked. Most
disasters can be avoided by critical assessment of
potential hazards of the particular situation and by
HAEMOGLOBIN DESATURATION
suitable monitoring that enables potential prob-
lems to be recognized before they progress to seri-
The diagnosis and treatment of falls in O, trans-
ously life-threatening situations. Prevention is not
port by haemoglobin in arterial blood (desatura-
always possible and serious problems can ensue if
tion) requires rapid, effective correction during
the anaesthetist is not always ready to apply the
anaesthesia. New technologies such as pulse
appropriate remedy in any difficult situation
oximetry have revolutionized its early recognition.
which may arise. Anaesthesia is still an art, and
When it occurs the immediate response consists of
there is no substitute for experience, but even inex-
rapid performance of the well-known 'Airway,
perienced anaesthetists can deal successfully with
Breathing and Circulation’ check routine (see
most mishaps if aware of the nature of the more
p. 517) and, where possible, provision of an
common accidents and emergencies.
increase in inspired O2. Next, attention should be
507
508 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
focused on differential diagmosis of more defined
and inspect for any attempt to connect incorrectly
causes of hypoxia
by nursing or other staff.
Arterial desaturation can be detected directly
(ii) If connected to a pipeline, switch on spare
by observation of the colour of the patient's
O2 cylinder ('tank' in North America) and check
mucous membranes as well as by monitors such as
that the contents are adequate. For non-pipeline
the pulse oximeter. The clinical sign of cyanosis is
machines switch on the 'in use' cylinder and check
dependent on a number of factors other than arte-
its contents, turn off the cylinder, repeat the check
rial desaturation. These include anaemia, ambient
on the reserve cylinder and after turning it off re-
lighting and superficial pigmentation. Cyanosis 
 open the 'in use' cylinder.
may not be seen at all in anaemic or shocked an-
(iii) If NzO use is intended check that the
imals. The coexistence of cyanosis with a pulse
machine is connected to a NzO supply. For non
oximeter reading that indicates adequate satura-
pipeline machines check the contents of the N2O
tion may be due to local stasis of blood in the
cylinder.
-ysmlusip aensn si urrm) sanss teaudiad
(iv) If intended to use an air supply (pipeline or
able from central cyanosis by examination of the
cylinder) check the machine is connected to it.
colour of the tongue). The colour of lighting
(v) If a CO2 supply is attached to the machine
sources in the room can also give a false impres-
confirm that it is turned off.
sion of cyanosis or normality. This is well known:
(vi) Make sure that blanking plugs are fitted to
shops use longer wavelength light to make count-
all empty or unused cylinder yokes.
er displays of meat look pinker and fresher.
Reasons for arterial desaturation which the
3.Flowmeters:
anaesthetist needs to consider are given below.
(i) Check that all flowmeters move freely
throughout their range.
APPARATUS
(i) Confirm that with O2 flowing at 51/min
Routine following of a checklist such as that given
any O2 analyser fitted reads 100%.
below before administration of any general anaes-
(ii) Make sure that all flowmeters are turned
thetic will prevent mishaps occurring from mal-
off.
functioning or misuse of equipment.
4. Emergency Oz bypass control:
Anaesthetic machines
(i) When the bypass control is operated see that
Before administering any anaesthetic, but especi-
flow occurs without significant drop in the
ally those involving general anaesthetic methods:
pipeline or cylinder pressure.
(i) Check that the flow ceases when the control
is released.
 1
(ii) If fitted, note that the O analyser reads
(i) Note any labelling or service information
100% when the oxygen is flowing.
if appropriate, switch on electrical supply.
(ii) Switch on and note whether any O2
5.Voporizers:
analyser (if fitted) is calibrated and if so, whether it
(i) Check that the vaporizers for the required
is functioning correctly.
volatile agents are present, locked to the back- bar,
correctly seated and adequately filled.
(ii) Make sure that the filling ports of the
2. Gos supplies:
vaporizers are tightly closed and that the controls
(i) Check the connections to an O2 supply. If
of each vaporizer move throughout their range.
connected to a pipeline confirm correct connection
(ii) If the back bar is protected by pressure
with a 'tug test', ie a sharp pull at the connection,
relief valve, with an O2 flow of 51/min occlude the
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 509
common gas outlet, note that the flowmeter
(i) Check that appropriate monitoring
bobbin dips and that there is no leak from the
equipment is present, switched on and calibrated
filling ports of the vaporizers.
with appropriate alarm limits set.
Checks such as these occupy very little time and
6. Breathing systems:
should be repeated before each anaesthetic admin-
(i) Ensure that the breathing system is correctly
istration.
assembled with all the connections tight.
(i) Listen for any leaks when gas is flowing
and the system is pressurized by occlusion of the
AIRWAY
common gas outlet.
(ii) Check that the pressure relief valve(s) open
Obstruction or excessive resistance within the
and close fully.
patient breathing circuit of the apparatus will have
(iv)  By breathing through the system confirm
the same result as obstruction of the patient's own
that in any circle system the unidirectional valves
airway. A spontaneously breathing, lightly anaes-
operate correctly.
thetized animal commonly responds to respiratory
(v) When endotracheal intubation is contemp-
 obstruction by making frequent violent attempts
lated check that tubes of appropriate sizes are
to breath, but the short vigorous inspiratory efforts
available and that their cuffs do not leak when
make the situation worse as they increase the
inflated with air.
resistance created by the obstruction. Unfortun
ately, these vigorous movements can be taken by
the inexperienced anaesthetist to mean that anaes-
7 Ventilators:
thesia is too light and the result may be an attempt
(i) Make sure that the ventilator is correctly
to increase anaesthetic depth. The response to
assembled and that all the connections are tight.
 obstruction in a deeply anaesthetized animal is
Set the controls and switch on to check that
usually much quieter, ventilation simply becomes
adequate pressure is generated in the inspiratory
inadequate to maintain respiratory homeostasis.
phase.
 If a breathing system including a reservoir bag
(ii) Ensure that an alternative means of
is in use for a spontaneously breathing animal, the
ventilation (e.g. manual squeezing of a reservoir
best guide to the patency of the airway is the
bag) is readily available.
excursion of this bag, but if one is not present in
(i) Check that the pressure relief valve op-
erates correctly when the patient port is occluded.
be difficult. Although complete obstruction is usu-
(iv) Ensure that any disconnection alarm
ally fairly easy to detect, a partial obstruction is
which is present is operating correctly (if neces-
often not so obvious and may result in the insidi-
sary consult the manufacturer's instructions).
ous onset of hypoxia and hypercapnia.
In animals connected to a ventilator, observa-
8. Scavenging:
tion of its pressure or volume measuring dials
often enables obstruction of the airway to be
Make sure that any scavenging system is correctly
aay saue aos pue paziuonan Ainb
attached and functioning.
devices which warn of obstructions or changes in
 gas flow into or out of the lungs.
 In the non-intubated animal respiratory ob-
Ancillary equipment
struction is usually due to the base of the tongue or
(i) Confirm that all laryngoscopes likely to be
the epiglottis coming into contact with the poster-
needed are in working order.
ior wall of the pharynx. This type of obstruction is
(i) Check that suction apparatus is available
overcome by extending the head on the neck and
and able to generate adequate negative pressure
pulling the tongue forwards out of the mouth. In
rapidly.
pigs over-extension of the head on the neck will
510 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
also cause respiratory obstruction and in these an-
imals care should be taken to keep the head in a
normal position (' sniffing for food') in relation to
the neck. Horses have a naturally good airway and
seldom, if ever, suffer from respiratory obstruction
of this nature.
Brachycephalic dogs may develop respiratory
obstruction due to the ventral border of the soft
palate coming into contact with the base of the
tongue. Many brachycephalic breeds are almost
unable to breathe through their nostrils and
obstruction can only be overcome by endotracheal
intubation. The main problem in these breeds
occurs during recovery, when the semiconscious
dog will not tolerate an endotracheal tube. Ideally,
anaesthetic agents which ensure a very rapid
return to consciousness should be used to reduce
this danger, but spraying of the larynx with a local
analgesic (4% lignocaine) at the end of the anaes-
thetic may enable the endotracheal tube to be tol-
erated for a longer period.
Large blood clots may accumulate in the phar-
ynx after tonsillectomy, tooth extraction or endo-
FIG.20.1 Acute flexion of a dog's neck for radiography
 tracheal intubation when the tube has been passed
leading to kinking of the cuffed endotracheal tube with
through the nostril. These blood clots must be
complete obstruction of the airway.
found and removed at the end of operation. An-
imals unconscious after nose and throat operations
thesia with NzO cuffs can become overdistended
should be placed in a position of lateral decubitus
by diffusion of N2O into a cuff that has originally
during the recovery period and kept under obser-
been inflated with air.
vation until fully conscious and able to safeguard
An overlong endotracheal tube may pass down
their own airway by coughing and swallowing.
one bronchus (usually the right) effectively ob-
Camelids (e.g. llamas) are often compulsory
structing the airway to the other lung. Obstruction
nasal breathers and the posterior nares can become
 may also be due to an animal biting on the tube.
blocked by the soft palate if this comes to lie dorsal
An uncommon but serious cause of respiratory
 -     o  s 'soa a o
 obstruction in horses is impaction of the epiglottis
intubated llamas, but more often it is encountered
 in the glottic opening. This may occur during blind'
after extubation. Inducing the animal to swallow
intubation in young horses and also in sheep.
causes the palate to resume its normal position. An
when a soft, flexible epiglottis is forced backwards
animal can usually be induced to swallow by light-
 into the glottic opening by the forcible passage of
ening anaesthesia and introducing a small-bore
 an endotracheal tube. Unless the epiglottis is dis
stomach tube into the oropharynx.
lodged to its normal position by the withdrawal of
The fact that an endotracheal tube is in the tra-
the tube at the end of anaesthesia, itcan give rise to
chea does not necessarily mean that the airway is
 serious respiratory obstruction in the recovery
clear. Endotracheal tubes may kink, particularly if
 period until either coughing occurs, or the cause of
the head is flexed on the neck (Fig. 20. 1); they may
the obstruction is recognized and overcome by
become blocked with mucus and in the case of
 hooking the epiglottis out of the airway with a
cuffed tubes a faulty cuff may actually occlude the
tube passed through the nostrils.
End of the tube, or the pressure inside the cuff may
 In horses, oedema of the upper respiratory pass
obliterate the tube lumen (Fig. 20.2). During anaes-
 ages develops during general anaesthesia if the
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS SII
FlG.20.2 Occlusion of a soft-walled endotracheal tube by overinflation of the cuff forcing the wall inwards until the
syringe.
head is in a dependent position or if the jugular
ing induction of anaesthesia before the protective
veins are partially occluded for any length of time.
laryngeal reflexes have been subdued.
This can result in serious respiratory obstruction in
Another common complication of anaesthesia
the recovery period that can only be relieved by
in cats is laryngeal'crowing' - the crowing noise
endotracheal intubation, preferably with a nasal
being caused by partial spasm of the vocal cords
tube.
due to their irritation by a blob of mucus, saliva,
Animals suffering from laryngeal paralysis or
blood or vomit. The incidence of this post-extuba-
tracheal collapse may obstruct during the recovery
tion complication has fallen since the introduction
period when the increased effort of breathing
 of endotracheal tubes manufactured from sub-
tends to draw the sides of the larynx and /or tra-
stances more inert than red rubber. When it per-
chea together. As with the brachycephalic breeds
sists after aspiration of foreign material from the
of dogs, it may be necessary to leave an endotra-
vocal cords, i.v. or oral steroid (e.g. dexamethasone
cheal tube in place longer than would otherwise
0.3 mg/kg) may relieve it.
have been necessary.
 In horses laryngeal spasm is rare, but obstruc-
tion occurs when the soft palate becomes dis-
placed from its normal position under the
LARYNGEAL AND BRONCHIAL SPASM
epiglottis. This situation often arises following
extubation and it is important that the horse swal-
Laryngeal spasm
lows when the endotracheal tube is removed for,
aow yn uaas aq oi sieadde wseds jeasua re
as in camelids, this act restores the soft palate to its
commonly than bronchial spasm, but both condi-
 normal position. Endotracheal tubes are best not
tions can occur together during general anaesthe-
removed until gentle manipulation of the tube or
sia. Laryngeal spasm can, in theory, occur in all
 laryngeal region of the neck is seen to induce the
animals but it is most common in cats and pigs 
horse to swallow.
when attempts are made to force them to breathe
 When laryngeal spasm is very troublesome the
high concentrations of inhalation anaesthetics dur-
best treatment is to administer a neuromuscular
512 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
blocking agent in order to relax the spasm, and
membranes. If not in robust condition the animal
then to intubate with an endotracheal tube.
may die, but usually the severe hypoxia releases
Attempts at intubation by forcible passage of the
-Ioy si dse au1 'sdses jeue auh pue wseds au
tube without the aid of neuromuscular blockers
lowed by normal spontaneous respiration and the
will usually be unsuccessful and will prolong the
 animal recovers. Unfortunately, bronchial spasm
 spasm. Although deepening of anaesthesia itself
may recur if the stimulus responsible for the first
may relax the spasm this can be hazardous.
 attack is still present. In all cases the anaesthetist
Repeated attempts at forcible intubation through a
 must ensure that the upper airway is clear and that
closed glottis can result in oedema of the mucous
whenever possible the first gasp of the animal will
membrane necessitating tracheostomy. Spraying
be of an O2 erriched atmosphere.
 a  m x a g
 If it is necessary to treat bronchospasm with
does not produce instant relaxation of the cords
drugs because other procedures have been unsuc-
and may result in postanaesthetic problems
cessful, adrenaline is the drug of first choice as
from their desensitization causing difficulties in
 being the one most likely to relieve the spasm. In
swallowing.
small animal patients an i.v. loading dose of 2.5 to
5 ml of 1:10 000 followed by an infusion may be
used; these doses need to be scaled up appropri-
Bronchial spasm
ately for larger animals.
'Bronchial spasm' or constriction of the bronchi-
oles is uncommon but occasionally seen in all
kinds of animal. Ruminants appear to be particu-
ASPIRATION OF MATERIAL FROM THE
OESOPHAGUS AND STOMACH
larly liable to develop this complication due to
unsuspected regurgitation and inhalation of ru-
This accident occurs more frequently than is com-
minal fluids. Bronchial spasm may also be initiated
monly realized for material from the oesophagus
reflexly during light anaesthesia by stimuli from
 and stomach may reach the pharynx as a result of
the site of operation and there is some evidence
vomiting or passive reflux. In either case the prim-
suggesting that passage of blood with a low P2O2
 ary problem is respiratory obstruction, possibly
and high PaCO2 through the brain causes bron-
[eaeu uaianog jn wsedsououoq Aq paeduone
choconstriction.
has penetrated deeply enough into the lungs.
The first warning sign that bronchial spasm
Inhalation pneumonia may manifest itself over the
is imminent is usually a bout of coughing and if
next few days.
an endotracheal tube is not in use the larynx
In those animals that can vomit, it is an active
closes. Complete respiratory arrest follows. The
 process either during induction or recovery. It is
 chest is rigid and the lungs can only be inflated by
-aaou ,Suggeg, 1o Sumolems Aq papanaid uao
great pressure on a rebreathing bag. While this
 ments (sharp rhythmic contractions of the abdom-
 may produce an adequate inspiratory volume, the
inal and thoracic muscles); these contractions
passive recoil of the lungs and chest wall may be
inadequate to provide adequate expiratory
tric or oesophageal contents into the pharynx.
volume. If a second breath is delivered before
When active vomiting occurs during the induction
of anaesthesia, the protective mechanisms of
occurs, with increased thoracic gas volume, al-
laryngeal closure, coughing and breath holding
veolar distension and increased risk of barotrauma
are usually present and the accident should not
 and reduced cardiac output. Thus the animal with
have dire consequences, All that is necessary is
severe bronchospasm should be ventilated with a
to clear the pharynx of vomited material, by
 slow rate allowing a prolonged expiratory time.
swabbing or suction, and to allow the animal to
In the extreme situation virtually no expiration
 cough vigorously before proceeding with further
occurs and pressure on the chest wall may be life-
 administration of the anaesthetic. The dog, how-
saving. When untreated, cyanosis sets in and is
ever, has very weak protective reflexes and in a
 snoonu aul jo 1oed Ka1o e Aq panelda1 uoos
few cases, particularly when vomiting occurs dur-
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 513
ing the recovery period and the dog is still sleepy.
Often, the first sign that aspiration has occurred
these reflexes fail to protect the airway so that
is the unexpected appearance of cyanosis, dysp-
inhalation of vomited material occurs. In such
noea and tachycardia. The severity of the
cases it may even prove necessary to re-anaes-
consequences depends on the quantity of fluid
thetize the dog in order to use vigorous suction to
aspirated and extent of the lung regions involved.
clear the tracheobronchial tree.
 Immediate treatment consists of thorough aspira-
It is obvious that if anaesthetics are not given to
tion of the tracheobronchial tree - although this is
animals whose stomachs might contain food then
more easily advised than performed. Oxygen
aspiration is unlikely to occur, but this is a counsel
should be administered and attention directed
of perfection which cannot always be realized.
towards the relief of bronchiolar spasm. If, after
Clearly, it can never be achieved in ruminants and
 operation, the animal develops bronchopneumo-
in simple stomached animals the stomach may
nia the appropriate treatment must be instituted
contain material many hours after the eating of a
(antimicrobials, corticosteroids etc.).
meal, particularly if an accident has occurred in
the meanwhile or if the animal has gone into
Tracheostomy
labour.
Passive regurgitation is most commonly seen in
The obvious treatment of respiratory obstruction
ruminant animals but it also occurs in horses, pigs,
is to locate it and remove the cause, but this is not
dogs and cats. It usually happens when the animal
 always possible and occasionally in cases of upper
is in a head-down position, or lying horizontally
respiratory obstruction an emergency tracheo-
on its side, and relaxation is induced by deep
stomy is required to save the animal's life.
anaesthesia or the use of neuromuscular blocking
In a cat, a 14 gauge needle or catheter, placed
drugs. In these circumstances the protective re-
percutaneously directly into the trachea, if poss-
flexes are not active and aspiration occurs all too
ible through the cricothyroid membrane when the
readily. In deeply anaesthetized ruminants any
obstruction is cranial to this, provides an adequate
short-term airway. In small dogs (up to 5kg)
fluid ingesta up the oesophagus into the pharynx,
10 gauge catheters or needles may be used in a sim-
and this type of regurgitation is frequently seen in
ilar manner. In all but these small animals the size
adult cattle becoming recumbent after induction of
of such airways is totally inadequate for more than
anaesthesia. To prevent regurgitation in cases of
 one or two minutes but may be sufficient to sustain
equine surgical colic the stomach should be
life whilst a surgical tracheostomy is carried out.
decompressed by the passage of a stomach tube
Curved plastic tracheostomy tubes or cannulae
prior to the induction of anaesthesia. It is almost
(Fig. 20.3) are available in sizes suitable for sur-
impossible to pass a tube into the stomach of an
anaesthetized horse.
through the cricothyroid membrane, between two
In cases of oesophageal dilation or obstruction
tracheal rings or by slitting a tracheal ring longitud-
there may be an accumulation of fluid in the
inally. Once such a tube is in place in a dog or other
desophagus, while the stomach may contain fluid
small animal, the patient should be under constant
material if there is an obstruction of the pylorus or
observation as the tube may become dislodged or
small intestine. The most certain way of prevent-
blocked by folds of skin, secretions, or flexure of
 ing the aspiration of material from the oesophagus
the neck.
and stomach is to perform endotracheal intubation
 In the horse, tracheostomy is much easier to
with a cuffed tube immediately anaesthesia has
carry out, and if necessary can provide a safe air-
been induced. In the case of small animals, keep-
way for a long period of time. In emergency, or for
ing the head raised after induction of anaesthesia,
short term use, narrow curved tubes (Fig. 20.4) are
together with rapid intubation of the trachea and
suitable. On superficial examination these tubes
cuff inflation will completely prevent the danger
nq emie ue us co reyapaoid ot readde eu
of inhalation from passive regurgitation, but this is
they are fully effective in such situations. For more
obviously not practicable in ruminants.
prolonged use a tracheostomy tube which can be
514 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
spasm but in most other species of animal it is
made necessary by pathological obstructions of
the airway which prevent endotracheal intuba-
tion. In many cases, therefore, the requirement can
be foreseen and equipment for tracheostomy kept
readily available.
 BREATHING
APNOEA
Apnoea during anaesthesia is very common and
its successful treatment depends on the original
cause. Although respiratory arrest is obvious, it is
is much more difficult to assess. In either case, the
immediate requirement is that oxygenation of the
tissues should be maintained, so as soon as the
problem is diagnosed the anaesthetist should
FIG.20.3 Disposable tracheostomy tube.This type of
carry out the following routine:
tube is suitable for dogs, cats, sheep,goats and small calves.
1. Check the airway and, if necessary take steps
to clear it.
removed and cleaned is employed. These are often
 2. Apply artificial respiration (ensuring there is
formed of interlocking pieces for ease of removal
no anaesthetic in the inspired gas).
and replacement.
3. Check the pulse.
It must be pointed out that the need for an
Assuming that the circulation is adequate, in
 h ien a ui 'aii si Asoa aa
the majority of cases steps 1 and 2 should prevent
be required because of severe, persistent laryngeal
further hypoxia and hypercarbia, and give the
FIG. 20.4 A laryngotomy tube for a horse.These tubes are intended for insertion through the incision should
obstruction develop after a laryngoventriculectomy,but they may be used as emergency tracheostomy tubes because they
can be easily slipped through an incision between the tracheal rings.
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 515
anaesthetist time to assess the problem and apply
forced expired volume carmot be expected to pro-
further measures accordingly. The commonest rea-
duce effective ventilation in large animal species.
son for the failure to resuscitate an apnoeic animal
 In the absence of any apparatus, small animals
is delay in instituting artificial ventilation. It must
can be ventilated by blowing down the nostrils
be emphasized that there are no circumstances in
while the mouth is held closed, but the person per-
which such ventilation is contraindicated in the
forming this must produce a seal with his or her
treatment of apnoea.
lips around the animal's nostrils. Another method
 The efficiency of artificial ventilation in an
 of artificial ventilation, i.e. intermittent pressure
emergency depends on the apparatus available
aaid a am A 'em isa s, a o
and size of the patient. Where anaesthetic systems
This is totally inadequate in providing ventilation
utilizing reservoir bags are being employed it is
for any length of time but may keep the animal
possible to ventilate by squeezing the bag, but oth-
alive for a few minutes. Often, compressing the
erwise resuscitation is more difficult. Self-filling
chest triggers a reflex spontaneous respiration,
bag/valve units such as the Ambu bag (Fig.20.5)
which is more effective than the attempt to vent-
are useful to ventilate small animals via a non-
ilate in this manner.
rebreathing valve attached to a facemask or endo-
Stimulation of the animal in various ways may
tracheal tube. Ventilation is with room air but, if it
result in a reflex spontaneous breath. Such a reflex
is available, extra oxygen may be added to the
is the ‘chest deflation reflex’ described above.
 inspired gas. These units are excellent in emergen-
Movement of the tube in the trachea may also
cies away from operating room areas, and should
make the animal breathe. Most reflexes, however,
be part of any portable resuscitation kit for small
are associated with painful input, the most obvi-
animals. Where only an endotracheal tube may be
ous one being the respiratory response to the
available a dog or cat can, in an emergency, be ven-
commencement of surgery. Janssens et al. (1979)
aqni aui umop Auag Sumonq uosiad e Aq paiin
suggest the use of acupuncture to stimulate
(expired air ventilation). Expired air ventilation
respiration and recommends the placing of a nee-
produces only just adequate inspired PO2 and is
dle in the nasal septum. Certainly in cats and dogs
very tiring to perform. Clearly, the small human
that area is extremely sensitive, and its stimulation
FIG.20.5 Ambu self-inflating bag for IPPV.If available, O2 can be given to enrich the inspired air by delivering it through
the small-bore plastic tubing.
516 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
may trigger reflex respiration, but in lightly anaes-
 inexperienced anaesthetist. Hypoxia and hyper-
thetized animals it may also trigger cardiac arrest.
capnia, from whatever cause, can lead to a jerky
 In horses, stimulation of respiration by twisting
respiratory movements with jaw and limb move-
the ear appears more effective. It must be empha-
ments, leading the unwary into thinking that
sized that adequate artificial respiration must be
anaesthesia is light. Gasping respirations of
continued whilst these attempts to stimulate res-
the Cheyne-Stokes last-gasp type may precede
piration are being made.
apnoea, and again the overall movement of the
The common causes of apnoea are listed in
animal which accompanies these may be mislead-
Table 20.1. As treatment further to initial immedi-
ing. Despite movement, there is, at this stage, no
ate artificial ventilation is dependent on the cause
tone in the muscles and all reflexes show that
of failure, it is essential that the anaesthetist is
 anaesthesia is, in fact, deep.
capable of making the diagnosis. The most com-
Drug overdoses are best treated by maintaining
mon cause of apnoea is respiratory obstruction or
 IPPV until the drug can be eliminated or its action
m auisisan jeana oon (sasroq ui uowo)
 antagonized. However, reliance should never be
the patient breathing system. Once the resistance is
placed on the use of analeptic or antagonistic
removed, spontaneous ventilation resumes. On
 drugs alone. Where volatile agents are implicated
induction and recovery from anaesthesia the
they are removed from the circulation by ventila-
animal may hold its breath for a few seconds,
tion, and rapid recovery occurs. Parenteral agents,
particularly if an endotracheal tube is in place.
however, are more difficult to remove from the cir-
Examination of the level of unconsciousness
culation. Where only a small dose of the anaes-
shows very light anaesthesia and spontaneous res-
thetic has been given i.v. anaesthesia usually
piration resumes rapidly once the endotracheal
lightens as redistribution of the agent occurs, but
tube is removed.
where a relative or gross overdose has been
 Central nervous depression is the most serious
administered and no antagonists are available the
common cause of apnoea under anaesthesia. It is
only method of increasing excretion may be to
particularly serious as it may be accompanied by
increase the renal output by means of an i.v. infu-
circulatory inadequacies, so that the pulse should
sion of dextrose, a balanced electrolyte solution or
be carefully monitored until recovery
occurs.
a diuretic such as frusemide (furosemide).
Depression may be caused by overdoses of anaes-
Respiratory depression due to opioid drugs
thetic or analgesic agents or by cerebral hypoxia.
may be counteracted by specific antagonists.
The animal will be deeply unconscious but
es
Diprenorphine (Revivon) is the specific antagonist
timation of the depth can be very difficult for the
to etorphine but should not be used to treat etor-
phine intoxication in man, because it has agonist
 properties. Naloxone (Narcan) is the drug in cur-
 TABLE 20. I Causes of hypoxia in absence of
 rent use to antagonize the effect of all opioid ago-
respiratory obstruction
nist drugs. Its long-acting derivative, naltrexone,
Causes of hypoxaemia Remedy
has not been studied in veterinary anaesthesia but
could prove useful should a long-acting pure
Failure of O2 supply
Ensure no disconnection
from the anaesthetic
antagonist be required.
system, no empty cylinder
 Naloxone is most effective against the pure opi-
when supply is not from 
oid agonists, and is less effective against partial
pipeline
agonists such as buprenorphine. It may be given to
Accumulation of N2
Flush breathing system
pups delivered from a bitch given a morphine-like
in breathing system
with pure O2 or fresh
 anaesthetic gas mixture
drugs during labour. In dogs and cats the initial i.v.
bolus of naloxone is 200 μg and this can be repeated
Sticking of valves in
Check operation of 
circle systems
directional valves and if
every 2 to 3 mins, up to a total dose of 2 mg, until
necessary replace
the desired response is obtained. Large doses, or
breathing system
doses given too rapidly after each other, will result
in hypertension and arrhythmias.
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS5I7
In horses naloxone has been used in i.v. bolus
sion, which will itself eventually result in apnoea.
doses of 0.005-0.02 mg/kg but its use in equine
Hypercapnia also sensitizes the heart to arrhyth-
anaesthesia is still controversial because its effic-
mias and may precipitate cardiac arrest. In the
acy as an adjunct has not been established and by
majority of case apnoea is preceded by respiratory
antagonizing the horse's endogenous opioids a
insufficiency and by the time that respiration ceas-
horse which is in pain may become restless.
es, hypercapnia already exists. The only circum-
Overdoses of the Q2 adrenoceptor agonists can
stances where CO2
2is required to stimulate
be treated with antagonists such as yohimbine or
respiration is to treat hypocapnia following vigor-
atipamezole.
 ous hyperventilation. If CO2 is required to correct
 The place of analeptic drugs in the treatment of
hypocapnia it is best added to the inspired gas
respiratory failure during anaesthesia is debatable
either from cylinders on the anaesthetic machine,
and it is undoubtedly true that the experienced
or by increasing the deadspace of the patient cir-
amaesthetist only rarely finds it necessary to re-
cuit, as in this way it is possible to continue venti-
course to them. Their duration of action is relatively
lation and prevent hypoxia from occurring. IPPV
short and that of a single dose may be too transient
should never be stopped to allow accumulation of
to restore complete respiratory activity. Thus it is
CO2 in the breathing system
necessary to maintain a careful watch until signs of
Failure to antagonize the effects of neuromus-
recovering consciousness are evident and should
 cular blocking drugs used during anaesthesia will
breathing again become alarmingly shallow or
result in respiratory failure. Treatment consists of
cease, repeated doses should be given (or naltrex-
the continuation of IPPV until the effects of the
one used with caution because its effects in veteri-
blocker have worn off or been adequately antag-
nary patients are currently uninvestigated).
 onized. Pain in the postoperative period, particu-
Doxapram hydrochloride (Dopram V) in-
larly that involved in movement of the thoracic
creases the respiratory minute volume by acting
and abdominal muscles, may cause hypoventila-
on the respiratory centre and, in general, doses
tion. If opioid analgesics in limited doses are used
considerably larger than those used clinically must
in such circumstances, the increased ventilation
be used before general stimulation results in con-
 through pain relief is usually greater than any res-
vulsions. Its use is safe at i.v. doses of 2 mg/kg in a
piratory depression as a direct result of the drug.
wide range of species. For clinical purposes an ini-
Other causes of inadequate ventilation include
tial intravenous dose of 1mg/kg is usually
employed and further doses given if required.
lesions of the lung or pleural cavity, and bleeding
Doxapram may also be used by the sublingual
 into the substance of the lung.
route to stimulate respiration in the new-born.
Normal PaCO is essential for the maintenance
Despite the claims as to the specificity of the action
 omn the respiratory centre, in practice clinical doses
a decrease in cerebral blood flow. However, severe
are usually found to decrease the level of uncon-
hypocapnia does not occur in spontaneously
sciousness of the anaesthetized animal. Whilst this
breathing animals and the cerebral circulation is
is useful if apnoea is due to central depression, this
only likely to be affected when IPPV is carried out in
drug must be used with care in large animals such
such a way as to remove excessive amounts of CO2-
as horses, where the awakening may be violent.
Assuming ventilation to be adequate, the
Normal levels of carbon dioxide in the blood
commonest causes of hypoxaemia during general
are necessary to maintain spontaneous respiration.
anaesthesia include an inadequate supply of O2
However, the role of carbon dioxide in resus-
 to the breathing system from failure of supply
citation in veterinary anaesthesia has been grossly
(empty cylinder, disconnection), accumulation
abused. Although a slight increase in carbon
of nitrogen or nitrous oxide in a low-flow system
dioxide stimulates respiration in the conscious an-
 or faulty valves preventing the proper circulation
imal, this reflex is considerably reduced in anaes-
of gases around the system (Table 20.1). Such
thetized individuals. Under anaesthesia increases
accidents occur quite commonly, and should be
in PaCO2 cause increasing central nervous depres-
suspected if an animal which has previously been
518 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
well becomes cyanotic despite an adequate respi-
failure of organ perfusion and ABP is often used as
ratory minute volume and an apparently adequate
 an assessment of this because modern technology
circulation. Treatment consists of the administra-
has made pressure measurement easy in most ani-
tion of O2, preferably utilizing a simple non-
mals. However, ABP does not necessarily correlate
rebreathing patient system. However, as long as an
with O2 transport which is more related to blood
-usp Aidurs risnoaueuds sueaq st ree
flow. Fortunately, the brain, heart and kidneys are
necting it from the machine and allowing it to
protected by autoregulation and blood flow
breathe room air will usually provide the neces-
 remains constant in spite of large changes in ABP.
sary O2 whilst the fault is being located.
Cerebral and coronary flow remain constant down
Diminished excretion of CO2 from the lungs
to a MAP of 60 mmHg and renal blood flow does
results in respiratory acidosis. This state is com-
not fall until MAP falls below about 70 mmHg.
monly seen when the total gas flow rate in a non-
Unexpected arterial hypotension during anaesthe-
rebreathing system is too low, or when the soda
sia must always be investigated and remedial
lime in an absorber is exhausted. It also occurs
measures taken to avoid serious consequences for
when the airway is obstructed, or when respir-
the animal.
atory movements are hampered by the position of
As is well known, ABP is determined by the car-
the animal's body on the bed or operating table.
diac output (CO) and the systemic vascular resist-
Usually, when the duration of anaesthesia is short
ance (SVR). The CO is dependent on the stroke
there is insufficient time for severe acidosis to
volume (SV) and heart rate (HR). Arterialhypoten-
develop, but long duration anaesthesia can lead to
sion results from a change of one or more of these
a serious fall in blood pH. Death occurs when the
factors and diagnosis and treatment of hypoten-
arterial blood pH falls below about 6.7.
sion must be based on these fundamental consid-
The signs of respiratory acidosis are not always
erations.
obvious. Hypoxaemia may have been avoided by
an increase in the inspired O2 so that the animal's
INADEQUACY OF THE CIRCULATING
mucous membranes remain pink and its pulse
FLUID VOLUME
slow and of good volume (sometimes noted as a
 bounding pulse'). Although in normal animals an
Inadequacy of the circulating fluid volume to fill
increase in the PaCO2 causes a frank increase in the
the existing vascular bed may be due to an
tidal volume, in the anaesthetized animal this may
 absolute reduction in blood or body fluid volumes,
 not occur. The ABP first rises, then returns to nor-
 or to an increase in vascular space as a result of
mal and finally falls. Circulatory failure, when it
peripheral vasodilatation. In either case if
occurs, is rapid and is due to heart failure. When
 compensatory mechanisms are impaired the effect
severe respiratory acidosis has developed an an-
 is to decrease venous return and reduce preload.
imal may collapse at the end of operation, for
Reduction in preload decreases ventricular end-
excess CO2 is rapidly excreted as respiratory
 diastolic filling with consequent decrease in SV
depression decreases with lightening of anaesthe-
and hence in CO. Hypovolaemia is one of the
sia and the circulatory reflexes are not active
 most common causes of hypotension during
enough to compensate for the rapid change in
anaesthesia, operating either alone or in conjunc-
blood pH. The condition may be erroneously dia-
tion with other aggravating factors. Venodilatation
 gnosed as shock, but umlike shock is characterized
causes reduced preload when compensatory
by a slow pulse and, usually, in otherwise fit an-
 mechanisms are impaired - for example when
imals, spontaneous recovery.
sympathetic venomotor tone is diminished by
neuroaxis blockade.
A very common cause of circulatory failure
CIRCULATORY FAILURE
under anaesthesia is surgical haemorrhage. There
may be a sudden effusion of blood or, more com-
Circulatory failure may be due to volume or pri-
monly, an almost imperceptible loss over the
mary cardiac insufficiency. The main concern is
course of a long operation. Unless blood loss is
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 519
actually measured by swabweighing or some
When the fluid loss is primarily an electrolyte loss,
other technique, it is very difficult to estimate the
 such as seen in vomiting dogs and cats or equine
colic cases, circulatory changes can be so severe
geons do not appreciate the extent of the blood loss
that the animal appears shocked. However, in
they cause. Many of the drugs used in anaesthesia
cases where the deficit is primarily of water, it
abolish the normal physiological response to
is more difficult to recognize and assess but un-
haemorrhage and the tachycardia response seen
less this is done these animals will become
in young, healthy animals may not occur in the
hypotensive following the administration of
elderly or sick.
vasodilator drugs, or following an apparently
 For practical clinical purposes all animals can
small blood loss. Also, elderly animals do not tol-
be considered to have a circulating blood volume
 of about 88 ml/kg and when a loss of 10% of this
give rise to concern in young, fit subjects. In all
(i.e. 8-9ml/kg) has occurred it needs to be
these instances deficits should, whenever possible,
replaced. Replacement of lost blood volume with
be corrected before anaesthesia is induced, the
non-blood substances is often desirable if a moder-
only exceptions being cases of intestinal obstruc-
ate degree of haemodilution can be tolerated. An
tion where it is prudent to restore only the circula-
acceptable minimal level of haemoglobin seems to
tory fluid volume if the surgeon is not to be
be around 7g/dl which offsets the reduced O2
mconvenienced.
content of the blood with reduced viscosity
Peripheral vasodilatation due to drugs admin-
(Concensus Conference, 1988). However, the heart
istered before and during anaesthesia, or, more
must be capable of increasing CO to cope with tis-
seriously, due to endotoxins may lead to circul-
sue demands and so animals suffering from
atory failure but in their absence major changes in
restricted CO (e.g. aortic stenosis, valvular incom-
the peripheral circulation can occur in response to
 petence) must be maintained at a higher haemo-
autonomic reflex activity. For example, sudden
globin concentration.
hypotension during operation sometimes occurs
The crystalloid v. colloid debate has often been
without warning in an animal whose cardiovascu-
argued (e.g. Davies, 1989), but the best course is
lar and autonomic systems are healthy and where
probably to combine the two and replace extracel-
there has been but little loss of blood. The pulse
lular deficits with crystalloid solutions and large
becomes imperceptible, respiration ceases and the
blood losses with a colloid (albumin, polygeline or
veins (notably in the tongue) are dilated. The
hydroxyethyl starch) and /or blood. Crystalloid
pupils remain normal in size and this may be
solutions, in a ratio of 3 ml to replace 1 ml of blood
the only indication that the heart has not stopped
loss result in euvolaemia after approximately
beating. This alarming reaction appears to be initi-
1 hour because the crystalloids usually distribute
ated reflexly by certain surgical manipulations.
themselves to the extracellular fluid after about
For example, it may be seen during caesarian hys-
20 minutes. Some tissue oedema occurs and the
terotomies in cattle and sheep when traction is
final equilibration results in less than one-quarter
Exerted on the mesovarium or on the broad liga-
of the infused fluid remaining in the circulation;
ment of the uterus. It may also be seen in dogs
 any diuresis evoked by the lower colloid pressure
and cats when swabs or retractors are allowed to
will reduce this contribution still further Thus, an
press upon the coeliac plexus, or when the stom-
animal which has had its circulating fluid deficit
 ach and liver are handled by the surgeon. Traction
replaced adequately by crystalloids soon after
on the eyeball also invokes parasympathetic
mediated hypotension. When it arises the surgeon
and be suffering from arterial hypotension some
should stop and not recommence operating
hours later, despite having suffered no further
until recovery has occurred. These reactions
haemorrhage.
may be avoided by gentle surgery and the anaes-
Fluid deficits which may have arisen in the pre-
thetist should note that gentle surgery is only
operative period may lead to hypotension when
possible when the patient's muscles are adequ-
blood vessels are dilated by anaesthetic drugs.
ately relaxed.
520 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
SHOCK
It seems likely that irreversibility begins when
Shock is best regarded as a caricature of physiolo-
certain tissues, and prolonged vasoconstriction is
thought to be a key factor. For instance, after
 prolonged decrease in circulating fluid volume. In
shock the outline of the body's defensive features
 to these insults remains recogmizable but it is exag-
echolamine secretion produce vasoconstriction
 gerated and distorted to a degree that becomes
and ischaemic hypoxia in the splanchnic bed, liver
and kidneys. This regional vasoconstriction
both absurd and damaging. The major factors in
enables the circulation to be maintained through
its initiation and maintenance are, therefore, as in
the unconstricted cerebral and coronary vessels in
arterial hypotension, decreased cardiac output,
spite of any reduction in CO. Transfusion at this
increased vascular resistance and decreased circul-
stage improves CO, relieves hypotension and
ating blood volume. Unless corrected, each of
much of the vasoconstriction, allowing tissue per-
these feeds back directly, or through the auto-
nomic nervous system, to worsen the state of the cir-
fusion to be restored. If transfusion is delayed the
constricted arterioles become less and less respons-
culation until there is insufficient perfusion of
ive to adrenaline (epinephrine), apparently due to
tissues, i.e. the animal becomes 'shocked'.
the accumulation of metabolites in the tissues. The
Realization that the development of shock can
venules retain their responsiveness to adrenaline
be prevented by the correction of the conditions
leading to it resulted in its being classified on aetio-
and when the arterioles relax the capillaries
become engorged as flow stagnates. Capillary
logical grounds:
engorgement then raises the hydrostatic pressure
1. Hypovolaemic - due to haemorrhage (surgical
so that fluid exudes from the capillary beds and
or traumatic), fluid loss (vomiting, diarrhoea).
oligaemia becomes more severe. Anoxic changes
2. Vasculogenic - changes in systemic resistance
become serious, local haemorrhages appear and
'sieaudeue 'sisdas ci anp anueedes snouaa o
transfusion is of no avail because it merely
loss of vasomotor tone from central nervous
engorges further the stagnant capillary bed. The
lesions or anaesthetic agents.
venous return and CO continue to fall and the
3. Cardiogenic - when the heart ceases to be
heart ceases to beat as the coronary flow is
an effective pump. This can result from such
reduced.
things as severe cardiac depression from drugs.
Changes in the abdominal viscera and sympa-
arrhythmias, ruptured chorda tendineae, cardiac
thetic activity are of importance in irreversibility
tamponade, or failure of venous return due to
as is the endotoxin of Gram-negative bacilli. This
aortocaval compression in tension pneumothorax.
toxin is absorbed from the damaged (anoxic)
Ventricular strain may be caused by prolonged
bowel, acts on the nervous system, produces a
increase in systemic vascular resistance and the
relentless abdominal sympathetic-induced vaso-
heart muscle itself can be contused by thoracic
constriction, and then it cannot be detoxicated
trauma.
because of failure of the reticuloendothelial
enzyme in the hypoxic spleen and liver. Endotoxin
This classification, while useful in recognition of
action certainly has an important adrenergic com
the factors which has been responsible for shock
 ponent because its lethal effect is countered by
developing, have little bearing on the shock syn-
adrenolytic compounds and it potentiates the
drome itself. The conditions giving rise to the
 pressor responses to catecholamines.
shock state may be amenable to suitable prompt
Vasopressors are much more likely to be harm-
 treatment but delay in initiating treatment, or fail-
ful than beneficial in shocked animals. The only
ure to respond to treatment for some other reason,
measures which consistently reduce mortality are
leads from a final common pathway to inevitable
those which increase blood volume or reduce
death. The actual processes which lead to this
vasoconstriction and this has led to the suggestion
irreversibility are complex and still the subject for
thiat vasodilators may have a place in the treatment
debate.
of shock. Although not to be used when the blood
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 52I
volume is already reduced and no substitute for
 aemia can induce marked neurological dysfunc-
correct fluid therapy it is claimed by some that
tion (Kleeman, 1979), i.v. hypertonic solutions can
anti-adrenergic drugs and other methods of
cause phlebitis and saturated (25%) or semi-satu-
inhibiting sympathetic activity improve survival
rated (15%) NaCl solutions produce haemolysis
after haemorrhage or trauma provided that fur-
(Rocha et al., 1990). Care must be taken in the
ther transfusion is given to cover the increased
interpretation of these reports since some relate to
capacity of the vascular system. It is extremely
 infusions in normovolaemic as opposed to hypo-
doubtful if the adrenal cortex plays any part
volaemic or shocked animals.
although hydrocortisone (itself a vasodilator)
Much work has been done to establish the
sy sasop y/ng go sasop aaiss un uaao
best methods of estimating the state of the cir-
been used. Such massive doses are impracticable
culation. Undoubtedly the most useful determina-
for large animals, but phenylbutazone, in doses of
tions are measurement of ABP, CVP, capillary
15 mg/kg may be as effective as corticosteroids in
refill time, the state of distension of peripheral
the treatment of endotoxic shock. Unfortunately.
veins and the urinary output. Treatment of estab-
the best results are only obtained when these
lished shock is seldom effective and it is, therefore,
drugs are given before shock actually develops.
most important to intervene during the progres-
Flunixin (1 mg/kg i.v.) may counter endotoxaemia
sion of the conditions which lead to it. Early trans-
in equine colic cases. During shock the endogenous
fusion to restore the vascular volumes and
opioid β endorphin is released from the pituitary
expeditious operation to arrest bleeding, removal
 amd it has been suggested that it may contribute to
of damaged tissue and, if necessary, fixation of bro-
hypotension since this is alleviated by the adminis-
ken bones, will prevent irreversible shock from
tration of naloxone. Although the use of naloxone
developing.
may be efficacious it may also restore pain sensitiv-
ity which is usually reduced in shock.
DISTURBANCES Of CARDIAC rHYTHM
The infusion of small volumes of hypertonic
saline may be beneficial in shocked animals. This
Tachycardia is usual in young animals, but in
approach has been reviewed by Gasthuys (1994)
adults the pulse rate increases in shock or after the
and is quite distinct from volume replacement
administration of anticholinergics. It must be em-
therapy. Hypertonic solutions are easily prepared
phasized, too, that in animals under the influence
 and are non-viscous, so that rapid infusion is poss-
of neuromuscular blocking agents tachycardia
ible in spite of their high osmolality (for 7.2 % solu-
 may indicate an insufficient depth of anaesthesia.
tion 2400 mosm/litre). They cause movement of
Many factors determine whether an animal will
fluid from the intracellular compartment to the
develop arrhythmias during anaesthesia but some
interstitium and the circulation and, consequently,
may well have existed prior to anaesthesia. Holter
this form of therapy must be followed by large
monitoring for 24 hours has demonstrated that a
quantities of isotonic solutions or other fluids such
large proportion of conscious asymptomatic an-
as whole blood given i.v. The effects of i.v. hyper-
imals show arrhythmias. Pre-existing arrhythmias
tonic saline solutions, sometimes mixed with colloids
are usually benign and include sinus arrhythmia
such as dextran, have been reported in cats (Muir
 in healthy young animals and sinus bradycardia in
& Sally, 1989), dogs (Mermel & Boyle, 1986; Rocha
trained athletic animals.
et al., 1990; Kein et al., 1991; Dupe et al., 1993), pigs
If the anaesthetic agent is known to depress the
(Maningas et al., 1986; Hellyer et al., 1993; ), sheep
functional capacity of the heart muscle it is natural
(Smith et al., 1985) and horses (Bertone et al., 1990;
to assume that the direct action of the drug on the
Dyson & Pascoe, 1990; Allen et al., 1991; Arden ef
myocardium is the cause, but it is more probable
al., 1991; Moon et al., 1991). Infusion of these
that serious arrhythmias are caused by the action
hypertonic solutions is not without its drawbacks.
of autonomic nerves to the heart. The nervous
Apotentially dangerous initial decrease in arterial
system is often hyperactive immediately before
blood pressure has been noted (Kein et al., 1991).
 anaesthesia, especially if the animal is frightened,
Extreme neuronal dehydration and hypernatri-
 a   s  s 
522 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
may cause ventricular extrasystoles (VES) or even
beats. The optimum therapeutic approach is to
ventricular fibrillation if the heart muscle is sen-
 increase HR using atropine or glycopyrrolate. If
sitized by anaesthetic agents. CO, may accumulate
 bradycardia occurs in animals having epidural or
in the body; this accumulation and /or mild degrees
 spinal analgesia it is probable that i.v. ephedrine as
 of hypoxia can cause stimulation of the sympa-
a bolus, possibly followed by an infusion, is the
thetic nervous system, so arrhythmias are com-
regimen of choice.
Cardiac arrhythmias during anaesthesia are
 common and most are benign but in an emergency
Supraventricular arrhythmias
situation the anaesthetist must know how to treat
Supraventricular extrasystoles originate at or
those which have haemodynamic consequences or
above the bundle of His so that the QRS complex
those that are potentially dangerous. Although
of the ECG is narrow. They may represent the
attempts have been made to grade arrhythmias
 physiological response to light anaesthesia, sym-
such as VES this has not so far proved to be pro-
 pathomimetic stimulation, direct myocardial trau-
ductive in terms of prognosis. During anaesthesia
 ma or loss of circulating blood volume. Exclusion
a classification system based on an ECG may be
 of an anaesthetic and/or surgical aetiology sug-
useful because ECG monitoring is now very com-
 gests that treatment with a Ca++ channel blocker
 mon in veterinary anaesthesia. Before contemplat-
such as verapamil may be indicated. However,
ing administration of anti-arrhythmic drugs it is
 verapamil may cause sinus bradycardia, sinus
essential to consider the possibility that the
 arrest, AV block, ventricular arrhythmias and even
 ventricular asystole. It also has a marked negative
nia, hypoxic) or surgical (haemorrhage, traction on 
 inotropic effect and interacts with other drugs,
tissues) cause. Cardiac arrhythmias only require
 principally digoxin and β blockers. While interac-
pharmacological treatment when:
tion of Ca++ channel blockers with digoxin is
synergistic, the combination with β blockers
(a) they cannot be corrected by removing the
aggravates the negatively inotropic properties of
suspected cause,
both drugs and can lead to asystole.
(b) they are haemodynamically relevant, and
Atrial fibrillation is easily detected by the
(c) when the type of arrhythmia is likely to
absolute arrhythmia and if chronic before anaes-
 progress to a life-threatening condition.
thesia does not require any therapeutic interven-
First, hypercapnia, hypoxia, arterial hypotension,
tion unless it causes very high heart rates. Digoxin
inadequate anaesthesia and electrolyte disorders
or β blockers may be useful if atrial fibrillation
should be corrected. Next, the use of potentially
 appears unexpectedly during anaesthesia.
arrhythmogenic drugs should be terminated. Only
if these treatments are ineffective should the use of
Ventricular arrhythmias
antiarrhythmic drugs be started. Currently, in med-
ical anaesthesia there is a growing concern about
Premature VES are very common and result in
the safety of many antiarrhythmic agents because
wide QRS complexes in the ECG because depolari-
these drugs have the potential to fail, increase the
 zation spreads across the ventricle from cell to cell
severity of the arrhythmias or produce other
rather than through the His-Purkinje system.
circulatory disturbances (Podrid, 1991).
Common causes during anaesthesia include
hypercapnia, electrolyte imbalance, direct my-
ocardial trauma and high levels of circulating
Bradyarrhythmias
catecholamines. Predisposing factors are medica-
Bradyarrhythmias are the result of an abnormal
tion with digitalis and ventricular dilatation.
prolongation of the transmission of the electrical
Isolated VES do not need specific antiarrhythmic
sigmal to the ventricles or to an decreased auto-
treatment but if there is a significant rise in HR or
maticity of the sinoatrial node. They may result in
ventricular tachycardia occurs, therapy is essen-
reduced CO and very slow HR may lead to escape 
tial. Lignocaine (lidocaine) is the drug of choice.
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 523
Heartblock
become anoxic. By the time respiration has ceased
and the pupil has dilated, cerebral hypoxia makes
Heart block is due to the faulty transmission of the
successful resuscitation much more difficult. The
electrical signal from the sinoatrial node to the
horse and the cat are the species of animal most
ventricles. Usually this occurs at the atrioventricu-
sensitive to vagal arrest of the heart and they
lar node (AV block) or in the His bundle (left or
should be protected by the administration of anti-
right bundle branch blocks). First degree AV block
cholinergics prior to surgery in the head and neck
shows as an increased time interval between the P
wave of the ECG and the beginning of the QRS
regions.
 Cessation of the cardiac pumping action may
complex. Second degree AV block is characterized
follow complete cardiac arrest (asystole), ventricu-
by the failure of some of the atrial depolarizations
lar fibrillation, or electromechanical dissociation
to reach the ventricles, whilst in third degree AV
block none of the atrial depolarizations reach the
(EMD). Electromechanical dissociation is similar
to asystole except that there is a regular electrical
ventricles. Second degree AV blocks are classified
rhythm demonstrated on the ECG coupled with
as Mobitz I and Mobitz II blocks. In Mobitz I
the progressive failure of ejection of blood from the
blocks there is an increasing time between the P
ventricles. EMD occurs with overdose of anaes-
waves and the QRS complex until for a single atrial
depolarization a complete block occurs. This type
thetic drugs, hypovolaemia, acute cardiac decom-
pensation, hypoxaemia or severe acidosis. These
of heart block is known as the Wenckebach phe-
three types of cardiac failure can be differentiated
nomenon. Mobitz II blocks have a constant PR
by observation of the ECG and palpation of a
interval; however, there is a failure of some of the
peripheral pulse. Diagnosis of cardiac arrest must
atrial depolarizations to reach the ventricles.
be rapid because during anaesthesia it may have
Animals with Mobitz I or first degree block do
been preceded by respiratory or circulatory insuf-
not need special treatment but Mobitz II is much
more serious and any animal showing this condi-
tion before anaesthesia should be thoroughly
when the circulation ceases. Diagnosis is based on
investigated and equipment for cardiac pacing
the absence of a palpable peripheral pulse, absence
of heart sounds and ashen-coloured mucous mem-
should be available if anaesthesia is needed.
branes coupled with an absence of bleeding from
any surgical wound. These signs are closely fol-
lowed by wide dilatation of the pupils and either
CARDIAC ARREST
agonal gasping or apnoea. Respiration will contin-
The causes of cardiac arrest, when the heart ceases
ue until the respiratory centres become anoxic
to function as a pump, are numerous and in any
When any or all of these sigms are observed the
one case it is likely that several factors may be
traditional ABC protocol should be instituted
implicated but in the majority of cases hypoxia
without delay. A refers to airway and it is most
and hypercapnia contribute significantly to its
important to ensure that the airway is clear. The
occurrence. Cardiac arrest of neurogenic origin,
presence of an endotracheal tube does not nec-
usually stimulation of the vagus nerves, is the
essarily mean that the airway is clear and its
exception to the general rule of multiple causation.
patency and positioning should be checked.
Where the surgeon stimulates the vagus nerves,
Endotracheal intubation is the best way of en-
either directly or by initiating a reflex such as the
suring a patent airway in an animal which has not
oculocardiac, the heart may stop with no prior
got a tube in position. B refers to breathing and
warning. Such an arrest can only be detected by
IPPV is usually needed to ensure an adequate
continuous palpation of the pulse or with an ECG,
alveolar gas exchange. A high inspired concentra-
as the suddenness of the cessation of circulation as
tion of O2 is most desirable. C indicates attention
the heart ceases to beat means that the tissues are
to the circulation which in this situation means
well oxygenated, the mucous membranes remain
repetitive compression of the heart or intact chest.
pink, and spontaneous respiration may continue
Conservative treatment is not only useless
for 2 to 3minutes until the respiratory centres
but also wastes valuable time. The only way of
524 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
restoring an effective circulation is the immediate
As soon as circulatory arrest is detected the
institution of resuscitative measures. Once an
administration of any anaesthetic must be
effective circulation with O, delivery to the tissues
 stopped; a clear airway must be ensured and IPPV
has been established, the immediate danger to the
preferably with pure O2 instituted. At the same
life of the animal is over.
time external chest compression (see below)
It is always worth trying the effect of a manual
should be started to improve the venous return to
thump over the precordial region of the chest
the heart; whenever possible the animal should
because this sometimes results in resumption of
be placed in a head down position. The effect-
cardiac contractions and does not delay the institu-
iveness of chest compression may be judged
tion of other measures. There are two ways of
by the presence of a palpable carotid pulse caused
attempting to provide an effective circulation to
by each compression and a reduction in the diame-
the brain and myocardium. One, and first that
jou saop uoissaiduon isau  'tdnd aul jo ral
should be tried, is compression of the intact chest;
 prove to be effective, then direct cardiac com-
the second is direct compression of the surgically
pression of the surgically exposed heart must be
exposed heart. The use of cardiac stimulant drugs
considered.
should not be considered until the myocardium is
Effective external chest compression is possible
once more well oxygenated and, therefore, they
 in most animals although it is probable that except
have no place in the initial treatment.
in cats and similar small animals this will not com-
There should be a simple, set routine for the
 press the heart itself. In cats and small dogs the
treatment of circulatory arrest, which is known to
chest walls over the region of the heart are com-
all those working in the theatre,recovery unit or
pressed between the fingers and thumb of one
elsewhere.Table 20.2 sets out such a routine.
hand. Larger animals are quickly placed on their
 side on a hard, unyielding surface. The upper
TABLE 20.2 Cardiac resuscitation routine
chest wall over the region of the heart is then
forced inward and allowed to recoil outwards,
Stage I: Establishment of an artificial circulation
movement of the lower chest being restricted by
 1. Notify the surgeon and note the time 
 2. Clear and maintain the airway
the hard surface on which the animal is lying. It is
3. Carry out IPPV (if possible with O2)
an advantage if the lower chest wall can be sup-
4. External compression of the chest;if
 ported. In dogs and other small animals pressure
 ineffective perform internal cardiac
 on the uppermost chest wall with the hand is ade-
massage
 5. Where possible, place and maintain in 
quate, but in adult horses and cattle or similarly
 head-down position
sized animal the knee or foot is applied to the chest
Stage 2: Infuse fluid to restore or maintain 
wall over the region of the heart. The rate of com-
circulating volu me
 pression should be about 60 compressions/min in
This may be left until after Stage 3
dogs, or 30/min in adult horses and cattle. A
 Stage 3: Improve condition of the heart
remarkably effective circulation can be maintained
Administer adrenaline (epinephrine) in
(Fig. 20.6); respiratory movements may return,
 appropriate doses for the type of animal
although they are usually inadequate to provide
concerned, preferably i.v. but if impossible
Addll pue soumI aul ul asueuoxa snoases 1adoid
into the tracheobronchial tree or directly
should not be stopped. The size of the pupils
into the left ventricle
Stage 4: Post-resuscitation
should decrease and the level of unconsciousness
1. Continue IPPV
should lighten. The authors have seen a horse start
 2. Counteract acidosis by pulmonary
to recover consciousness and to move its limbs
hyperventilation
while thoracic compression was being performed.
 3. Prevent cerebral oedema -
The way in which external chest compression
corticosteroids, diuretics
 4. Continue circulatory support with
produces blood flow in the body is debated. It was
adrenaline infusion into a central vein
- s  n m pn h 
(dopamine, dobutamine can be used)
pressed the heart was squeezed, so ejecting blood
into the aorta. This may be so in small animals,
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 525
improving the pulmonary pump mechanism. The
100
first is to bind the abdomen with an Esmarch
B.P
bandage to limit the caudal displacement of the
HWW
diaphragm and hence increase the intrathoracic
pressure during chest compression. The second is
to alternate compression of the chest and abdomen
but this gives rise to risk of damage of the liver. A
third suggestion is to limit the collapse of the lungs
 during compression by ventilating with IPPV as
Lead 2
the chest compression is applied. None of these
E.C.G
has been shown to improve survival in veterinary
dinical practice.
 Cardiac fibrillation may be present as the cause
FIG. 20.6 Tracing showing carotid arterial pressure
produced by chest compressions in a dog suffering from
asystolic heart by the effects of drugs or even chest
coarse ventricular fibrillation. Provided the myocardium is
welloxygenated electrical defibrillation should restore
compression. The best and most specific treatment
spontaneous heart beat.
is to pass an electric shock through the myocar-
dium so that when the contraction it causes passes
particularly in cats or animals of a similar size and
off the whole muscle remains in a relaxed state of
in narrow chested dogs, where it is usually poss-
asystole: following this it is hoped that normal
ible to feel the resistance to compression of the
contractions will start spontaneously. Electrical
ventricles through the compliant chest wall, but
defibrillation attempts will do no harm to a heart
this is unlikely to occur in larger animals. It seems
that is in asystole and may even induce it to start
more likely that another mechanism is also
beating, so applying a shock, or shocks, is now
involved in the latter, and this may be the only
regarded as one of the first measures to be under-
mechanism in larger animals. External chest com-
taken in cases of cardiac failure during anaesthe-
pression induces intrathoracic pressure changes,
sia. Compact and relatively inexpensive apparatus
pushing blood in a retrograde and forward fash-
is available for external defibrillation (electrodes
ion, but due to the presence of valves and collapse
placed on the chest wall (Fig. 20.7) and internal use
of veins, retrograde flow is stopped early on and
electrodes placed on the myocardium itself). All
blood is allowed to flow into the aorta. The flow of
these pieces of apparatus are designed for man
blood through the lungs is thought to be due to a
and they are suitable for use in small animals but
cascade effect between the right and left sides of
their output may be inadequate for larger animal
the heart but emptying of the blood from the lungs
use unless repeated shocks are given. This may not
is also caused by pulmonary ventilation. Whatever
be so much of a problem in horses for ventricular
the reason for forward blood flow through the
fibrillation, when it does occur, tends to be very
aorta it appears that external chest compression
short lived
may not be very protective of the brain as if this is
For defibrillation through the intact chest wall,
performed for more than 34min it is often
 with good electrical contact assured by conducting
followed by significant neurological deficits,
gel, shocks of about 1 J are necessary in cats, from
possibly because the induced cerebral blood flow
1 to 8J in dogs and 400J (repeated shocks at 15 sec-
supplies glucose but insufficient O2 for its metabol-
ond intervals) in horses and cattle. When the elec-
ism, so that anaerobic metabolism produces large
trodes are applied over saline-soaked pads
amounts of lactate and other products. As against
directly on the myocardium shocks of about 0.2
this, if resuscitation is delayed for more than 3 to
J/kg appear to be effective in most cases. Attempts
4 min the glucose substrate will become exhausted.
at electrical defibrillation are much more likely to
Because the technique of external chest com-
 be effective if the myocardium is showing coarse
pression is often not followed by a satisfactory out-
fibrillation and is well oxygenated before the
come several procedures have been advocated for
shock is applied.
526SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
sion is also ineffective until a rapid i.v. infusion has
corrected the deficit in the blood volume.
Once an apparently satisfactory artificial circu-
lation has been established there is no longer any
necessity for haste and there is time for a consid-
ered approach. Ideally, as soon as the primary
resuscitative measures have been commenced
intravenous fluids should be given to expand the
circulatory volume. Where cardiac failure is of
unknown origin, 5% dextrose is used, but if haem-
orrhage caused the problem, then a plasma vol-
ume expander such as a gelatine or starch solution
is to be preferred. However, in veterinary anaes-
FIG.20.7 Defibrillator for external use.For reasons of
thesia there may be no venous line in place and so
safety in use both the electrodes have switches in their
this may be a counsel of perfection as vene-
insulated handles.These switches need to be pressed
puncture is usually very difficult at this time.
simultaneously to deliver the shock.This particular model
of defibrillator has its own monitor ECG.
Attempts to set up an intravenous infusion should
not interfere with resuscitation and, if vene-
 puncture is impossible, placement of an intra-
If an effective circulation cannot be produced
venous line should be deferred until the situation
by external chest compression coupled with elec
is more stable.
trical defibrillation, the heart must be exposed by a
In the past bicarbonate was often administered
thoracotomy incision. Obviously, facilities for
at this stage to counteract the acidosis which
IPPV must be available before this can be done. No
 occurs as a result of hypoxia. However, today the
time should be lost in 'scrubbing up' or in prepar-
consensus of opinion appears to be that acidosis
ing the operation site before making an intercostal
should be counteracted by deliberate hyperventi-
 mcision and when the heart is exposed the ventri-
lation of the lungs. This avoids the risk of alkalosis
cles must be squeezed rhythmically. The squeez-
due to too much bicarbonate provoking arrhyth-
ing should be carried out with a motion from the
mias and resulting in intractable ventricular fibril-
apex towards the base of the heart (rather like the
lation. Although various substances such as
reverse of hand-milking of a cow's teat). The rate
calcium chloride were formerly used, adrenaline
of compression should not be too rapid for the
(epinephrine) is now generally considered to be
chambers of the heart need to have time to fill
the cardiac stimulant of choice. Treatment with
between compressions and a slight head-down
 adrenaline will do no further harm to a fibrillating
inclination of the body assists this. In every case
heart and indeed it may even be successful in
care must be taken to avoid rupture of the heart by
restoring a normal rhythm. It acts on α and β sym-
the fingertips. In small animals the ventricles can
pathetic receptors thus not only stimulating the
 be compressed by the grasp of one hand but in
 myocardium but also increasing the peripheral
larger animals both hands must be used. The effect-
iveness of the circulation produced by this may be
sion. An initial dose of 10 μg/kg should be given
 gauged by the maintenance of a small pupil size
 and as the action of this drug is short-lived further
and the presence of a palpable carotid pulse when
doses are often needed every 34 min or an i.v. infu-
the ventricles are squeezed.
sion may be used (1:50 000 in Hartmann's solu-
Often, when the chest is opened because exter-
tion). If i.v. injection cannot be achieved, the initial
nal chest compression is judged to be ineffective it 
is found that venous return is not sufficient to fill
through the endotracheal tube and wedged in a
the heart between compressions, indicating that
bronchus. Attempts to inject directly into the ven-
the reason for cardiac failure was hypovolaemia,
tricles are inadvisable since coronary vessels may
and in these circumstances direct cardiac compres-
be damaged.
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 527
When an electrical defibrillator is not available
has been started it cannot be withdrawn abruptly
lignocaine hydrochloride in doses of 1 mg/kg may
 and careful weaning is necessary, usually over a
be injected i.v. and massage continued to force it
 period of several hours.
into the coronary vessels. At this dose lignocaine
Cerebral oedema is not uncommon due to
(idocaine) depresses cardiac excitability and pro-
hypoxia during the circulatory arrest and animals
longs the refractory period of heart muscle, but it
which have apparently been successfully resusci-
also decreases myocardial contractility. Although
tated may lapse into unconsciousness from this
worth trying, experience has shown that its use is
several hours later. To limit this oedema, the resus-
citated animal should be given large i.v. doses of
fibrillation.
corticosteroids (e.g. 1 mg/kg methylprednisolone,
Ventilation of the lungs with O2 should be con-
every 6hours for four doses) and diuretics such as
tinued until all evidence of circulatory failure has
frusemide (which also decreases CSF production
vanished. At this stage, there will be a metabolic
 and enhances its clearance).
acidosis due to the products of anaerobic metabol-
 The greater the time elapsing before restoration
ism in the peripheral tissues being returned to the
of adequate spontaneous circulation, the poorer
circulation.
the progmosis. The heart is more resistant to the
 Bradycardia with heart block is common fol-
effects of hypoxia than is the brain so that if the
lowing restoration of the circulation after pro-
heart does not readily respond to resuscitative
longed myocardial hypoxia. This bradycardia is
measures it is likely that cerebral function will be
usually refractory to treatment with atropine and
s0 compromised as to make normal life impossible.
many cases do not respond to sympathomimetic
Usually, it is unrewarding to attempt resuscitation
drugs so electrical pacing of the heart may offer the
of an animal that has had no effective circulation
only hope of successful treatment. However, it is
for more than 5minutes unless it was very
always worth trying the effects of 1 in 50000
hypothermic when circulatory arrest occurred.
adrenaline before considering electrical pacing.
 Following successful restoration of the heart
External pacing of the heart uses voltages of
beat by open chest cardiac massage the beat
100-150 V and frequently leads to skin burns at the
should be observed for several minutes before the
site of the electrodes, so internal pacing using 3-5 V
chest is closed. This time is used to secure any
from a wire electrode passed from thejugular vein
bleeding points. In spite of the lack of sterile pre-
into the right ventricular chamber is to be much
cautions in opening the chest and massaging the
preferred.
heart, sepsis is rare in animals which recover.
If, in spite of transfusion to a satisfactory right
atrial filling pressure as shown by a CVP of 6 to
7mmHg, and distension of peripheral veins, the
EMERGENCY RESUSCITATION EQUIPMENT
spontaneous heart beat is incapable of maintaining
In the operating room, most animals are routinely
am adequate CO and ABP, inotropic support
intubated and facilities for airway and ventilation
should be given. Dopamine is claimed to have the
control are readily available on the anaesthetic
 -s Aq mou poonq leuai Suaoidut go aleueape
-ado a u asn rg aon uaaa uv au
ulation of renal receptors and is a relatively safe
saipaau pue saus Aies pmous woon Sue
notropic drug. Dobutamine, on the other hand, is
of all commonly used sizes, a fluid administration
a pure B1 agonist which is said to work primarily
set and i.v. cannulae, several bags of infusion
by improving stroke volume rather than by
fluids, and drugs - appropriate for the treatment
increasing the heart rate. Isoprenaline, another β
of cardiac arrest in the various species of animal
agonist, also improves cardiac output but causes
already - drawn up into labelled, capped syringes,
 marked tachycardia. Adrenaline (1:50000
with the doses, in terms of volumes of solution,
in Hartmann's solution) given at a rate of
required for the size of animal written on the
0.02 ml/kg/min or as necessary to maintain a sys-
 syringe labels (in an emergency there is little time
tolic pressure of about 120 mmHg is, however, the
 to calculate the doses from those given on data
inotropic drug of choice. Once inotropic support
sheets in mg/kg or the dilutions needed).
528 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
Whenever possible the kit should include a cardiac
defibrillator and electrocardioscope. In general,
e 01 idax aq pmous Aalon Aouagrawa au uo san.p
minimum, e.g. lignocaine, atropine, and naloxone.
Other drugs such as vasopressors, cardiac stimu-
lants, β blockers and diuretics are best kept on a
second shelf or in a drawer of the trolley so that
identification problems do not arise at the time of
greatest emergency.
Because the success of resuscitation depends
 greatly on the speed and efficiency with which itis
 applied it is advisable to have a basic resuscitation
kit wherever animals are recovering from anaes-
thesia. The actual requirements depend on the
species of animal concerned and on the particular
circumstances. Airway problems are likely to
FIG.20.8 Circulating pump and water blanket for small
be important and the kit should contain endo-
animalpatients
 tracheal tubes, laryngoscope, and a self-inflating
bag, (e.g. an Ambu bag, Fig.20.5). Some drugs
es are reduced by the use of the use of rebreathing
such as adrenaline and naloxone should be in-
circuits, the use of these systems may entail exces-
cluded with a suitable range of needles and sy-
sive resistance to respiration for small animals
ringes, and a bag of intravenous infusion fluid
where heat loss is particularly significant. In these
together with an administration set may be
small animals a suitable humidifier can be used to
thought worthwhile.
reduce heat losses (Dodman & Brito-Babapulle,
1979). Particularly in small animals, all infused flu-
ids should be heated to 38 °C using an electric fluid
HYPOTHERMIA AND HYPERTHERMIA
warmer or by letting them flow through a coil of
 tubing immersed in a bath of warm water.
With the smallest of animals hypothermia is a
aesthesia, hypothermia is much more commonly
very serious problem, but it may be the cause of
encountered. Whenever return to consciousness is
 slow recovery from anaesthesia in any cat, dog
uexpectedly delayed hypothermia should be sus-
foal, calf or lamb. Should it occur it is easily treated
pected. Waterman (1981) reviewed the causes,
by warming the patient, but many hypothermic
effects and prevention of hypothermia. Basically,
 animals will shiver violently in the recovery peri-
the causes consist of a reduction in heat production
 od and, as well as increasing heat production this
by the animal, usually coupled with an increased
causes a considerable increase in oxygen con-
heatloss. It is very difficult to influence production,
sumption, so that the administration of O2 should
but Waterman recommends several methods of
be considered in addition to the provision of
reducing heat loss. She suggests that care should be
warmth.
taken not to wet the animal excessively to reduce
Hyperthermia, or heat stroke, is an unusual
evaporative heat losses, placing the animal on a
 complication of anaesthesia. It may, however,
warm surface, preferably a water blanket heated to
occur in a warm environment if small animals are
38 °C (Fig 20.8) and keeping the drapes over the
 anaesthetized using a low-flow system in a high
 animal as dry as possible. Ambient room tempera-
environmental temperature. Systems with CO2
ture should be kept high but not so high as to make
absorption prevent the loss of heat by panting and
for impossible working conditions (20 to 22 *C is
 evaporation from the respiratory tract. Treatment
usually satisfactory). Respiratory heat losses are
is to change the anaesthetic system to one which
 increased when the animal breathes cold dry gas 
 delivers cold, dry gases, to cool the animal with
from non-rebreathing systems. Although such loss-
ice-packs and cold water applications and, if nec-
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 529
essary, to administer drugs producing vasodilata-
but may be delayed for 30 to 60 min. The diagmosis
tion. Active treatment should be discontinued
is based solely on clinical grounds because there is
when the body temperature is still 1 °C above nor-
no quick diagnostic test. Vasodilatation together
 mal or it may overshoot in a most disconcerting
with an increase in vascular permeability produces
way. Hyperthermia will, of course, also occur in
oedema,
上
hypotension and decreased tissue
pathological sensitivity reactions such as porcine
perfusion. Cardiac arrest can occur with but little
malignant hyperthermia.
warning. Laryngeal oedema and bronchospasm
may interfere with pulmonary ventilation. Facial
Dedema may occur and periorbital oedema has
ANAPHYLAXIS AND
 been seen in horses and dogs, while cattle have
ANAPHYLACTOID REACTIONS
shown, in addition, multiple cutaneous uticarial
plaques.
An adverse drug reaction is the occurrence of any
Treatment involves the'ABC' of resuscitation
drug effect not of therapeutic, diagnostic or pro-
(p. 517). High concentrations of O2 should be
phylactic benefit to the animal. Anaphylaxis (an
administered and any IPPV support needed
should be given with prolonged expiratory times
to a substance to which the individual has become
to allow the lungs to empty in spite of the presence
sensitized, in which histamine, serotonin and other
of bronchospasm. The drug of choice is adrenaline
vasoactive substances are released from basophils
I jo sasp u a't uaai Aiqenajaid "(auudauida)
and mast cells in response to an IgE mediated reac-
μg/kg/min but an i.m. injection of 10μg/kg is ini-
tion. An anaphylactoid reaction is clinically indis-
tially probably as good. Further treatment to sup-
tinguishable from anaphylaxis but is not mediated
port the blood pressure entails the i.v. infusion of
by sensitizing IgE antibody. Previous exposure is
adrenaline 0.5 μg/kg/min, or as needed. All ani-
mals with anaphylaxis should receive steroids and
toid reaction. Whether a reaction is designated
antihistamines (e.g. 1 mg/kg of methylpred-
   o  
nisolone, promethazine 0.2 to 1.0mg /kg) because
how it has been investigated and how the results
 although these drugs are not helpful in the imme-
of tests are interpreted. Recurrence of symptoms
diate management of the condition they may
can occur up to 8 hours after the initial manifesta-
reduce the severity of the late-phase response.
tion, apparently due to recruitment of inflamma-
There is a synergistic effect between adrenaline
tory cells such as eosinophils.
and the infusion of i.v. fluids given rapidly to
Clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis
can
 Expand the intravascular volume.
appear within seconds of exposure to the antigen
When an anaphylactic episode has been en-
countered during anaesthesia the animal's owner
TABLE 20.3 Based on bookletof theAssociation
should be notified and given a written statement
 ofAnaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
to present to any veterinarian contemplating
and British Society ofAllergy and Clinical
anaesthetizing the animal at a future date. This
Immunology (1995) Suspected Anaphylactic
statement should, where possible, indicate the sus-
 Reactions Associated with Anaesthesia (revised
pected allergen, or at least specify all the agents
edition)
used in the procedure when the reaction occurred.
TypeA anaphylaxis Type B anaphylaxis
Dose related
Not dose related -may be
 precipitated by a very small 
dose.More severe on
OTHER CAUSES OF ANAESTHETIC
ACCIDENT
re-exposure
Extension of
Signs unlike normal
 pharmacological
pharmacological response.
POSTURE
response
Typical of drug allergy
Uncommon
All anaesthetized animals should be moved
JOWwOU
with great care to ensure that they are adequately
530 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
supported at all times. In small animals, mishan-
thiopentone into perivascular tissues. When this
dling of the patient can, for example, result in the 
happens the injected irritant solution should be
protrusion of a calcified intervertebral disc. The
 diluted by immediate injection of a large volume
arthritic animal, if mishandled, may be in consid--
of saline into the site. Hyaluronidase may be dis-
erable pain for several days following anaesthesia
solved in the saline and this enzyme will hasten
for purposes unconnected with joint problems.
absorption of the irritant drug. No other treatment
The problems in large animals may be even more
is required. It is often suggested that a local anal-
serious. If the hindlegs of horses and cattle are
 gesic such as lignocaine (lidocaine) should be
abd ucted during anaesthesia obturator paralysis
injected into the site of extravasation because these
may result in the animal being unable to regain the
solutions have a low pH that counteracts the high
standing position on recovery. The facial nerve of
 pH of solutions such as thiopentone but it is likely
the horse is easily damaged by pressure on the face
that any beneficial effect noted is due to the
from the buckle of a head-collar or the edge of an
vasodilatation they produce. Solutions of them
operating table. Ischaemic muscle damage in
 containing vasoconstrictors such as adrenaline do
horses has already been considered and these
not have any beneficial effect.
animals appear to suffer intense pain from this
Venous thrombosis is common in small animals
condition.
after the i.v. injection of 5% thiopental but, as it does
The position during operation must always be
 not appear for 5 to 10 days, it may be missed unless
given careful consideration; pressure points may
the anaesthetist has occasion to give another injec-
need to be protected by suitable padding, and
tion after that time. Whenever possible, thiopental
limbs should never be held abducted but always
 should be used as a 2.5% or even more dilute solu-
restrained forward or backwards to avoid nerve
tion, and care should be taken that venous flow is
damage. The cornea can be protected by closing
not obstructed when the injection is made. Venous
the eyelids, if necessary with adhesive bandage,
obstruction caused by acute flexion of the elbow or
but because this precludes observation of the eye-
 unatural position of the limbs will result in i.v. irri-
ball position, and elicitation of the lid or corneal 
 tant solutions being retained in the vein and this
reflexes, it is always better to keep the level of
 may give rise to thrombosis. In horses similar con-
anaesthesia light enough for the eyelids to remain
siderations apply to guaiphenesin and care should
open during general anaesthesia and tear forma-
be taken to ensure that it is not retained in thejugu-
tion to be preserved.
lar vein due to the obstruction of this vein.
Permanent obliteration of vessels results
 from repeated, clumsy attempts at venepuncture,
ANAESTHETIC EXPLOSIONS AND FIRES
the use of ummecessarily large needles or cannulae
Probably the main cause of explosions in operat-
 and allowing large haematomata to form at the site
ing rooms used to be static electricity coupled with
 of venepuncture. In animals superficial veins
the use of explosive inhalational agents. Today,
are not too plentiful and their preservation is
with the almost universal use of non-inflammable,
important.
non-explosive agents, fires in the operating areas
are generally associated with the use of diathermy
LOCAL ANALGESIA
and alcoholic skin disinfectants by surgeons. It
must be remembered that many substances will
Generally manifest toxic reactions to analgesic
burn in oxygen and, therefore, that no oil or grease
drugs arise when the drugs are absorbed into the
must be used on O2 cylinder connections; more-
circulation at a greater rate than that at which they
over, NzO will support combustion.
can be broken down by the body. Rapid absorption
occurs from any hyperaemic or inflamed tissue
and the rate of absorption is increased by the use of
INTRAVENOUS INJECTIONS
solutions which contain spreading agents such as
The commonest mishap is accidental injection of
hyaluronidase. Accidental intravascular injection
an irritant solution such as guaiphenesin or
paindse aq ueo poonq ou yanoun uaaa mooo Ae
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 531
into the syringe before injection. The rate of
cardiac failure must be treated by chest compres-
absorption is decreased by the addition of vaso-
sion or direct cardiac massage (p. 518).
constrictor drugs to the system.
Local analgesics both stimulate and depress the
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
activity of the central nervous system. They have
the same membrane stabilizing effect on the heart
Drugs used to produce spinal analgesia can cause
and nervous tissue of the brain as on the peri-
 a reaction affecting both the meninges and spinal
pheral nervous system. Overt symptoms of central
nerves. Clinical signs resulting from damage
nervous system toxicity appear before the cardio-
to nerves appear rather rapidly after the effects of
vascular effects become apparent. In large doses
the nerve block should have passed off. The region
local analgesics affect cardiac conduction and con-
 of the spinal cord subjected to the greatest
  asa e an sa i en
concentration of the drug shows the most
 mterval, atrioventricular dissociation and prolon-
marked pathological changes. Where the main
gation of the QRS complex. As plasma concentra-
lesion is in the meninges clinical signs appear later
tions increase, pacemaker activity decreases,
 and reaction to the drug takes the form of an asep-
causing sinus bradycardia and, eventually, asys-
tic meningitis which may be mild or severe. These
tole.
complications do not appear to be due to faulty
Often, toxic effects manifested by stimulation
technique. Injection of the drug into the substance
will vary according to the region of the brain
of the spinal cord produces a severe myelitis
affected. Cortical stimulation produces gener-
and neuritis. Damage to the CNS is rarely
alized clonic convulsions, while stimulatory
reversible and management requires prevention,
effects in the medulla cause an increase in the rate
not treatment.
and depth of respiration, tachycardia and vomit-
 In man, post lumbar puncture headache is a
ing in those animals where this is possible. Typical
well recognized complication and it has been
 general anaesthesia with respiratory and vasomo-
observed that sheep subjected to spinal analgesia
tor depression usually follows. It is uncertain
behave in a manner suggesting they too suffer
whether death is due to cardiac or to respiratory
from headache. The headache is believed to be due
failure, but it seems probable that i. v. injection of
to low cerebrospinal fluid pressure caused by leak-
the agent causes sudden primary cardiac failure,
age of the fluid through the needle puncture in the
while rapid absorption from tissues results in
dura mater. It does not occur after epidural blocks.
depression of the central nervous system and res-
Infection of the epidural space is fortunately
piratory failure.
rare but has been reported after caudal epidural
The minimum lethal doses of the various local
block in cattle. The prognosis appears to be better
analgesic agents for the different species of animal
in those cases in which the infection is within
Aar are ad Araaa u paaoa
the dura for it usually remains localized. Strict
unknown. It is probable that insufficient attention
is given to the quantities of local analgesics
 a spinal or epidural block is attempted.
 The rapid injection of a large volume of fluid
e jo asn an rane panmoo se asdeon aaum ase
into the epidural space may cause arching of the
local analgesics IPPV should be commenced
back and opisthotonus. This reaction is presum-
at once. Analeptic drugs should be withheld since
ably due to a rapid increase in pressure in the
they increase the O2 requirements of the brain.
epidural space and is usually of short duration. No
Convulsions should be controlled by the i.v.
treatment is required.
injection of hypnotic doses of short or ultra- short
acting barbiturates and it is probable that thiopen-
tal will be the drug most readily available for this
DANGERS TO THE ANAESTHETIST
purpose. Hypotension due to peripheral or central
vasomotor failure should be treated by the intra-
lsou sl H pue juajod XiaA aie sonip uiapon
important that the anaesthetist does not come
532 SPECIAL ANAESTHESIA
umder their influence. Drugs such as ketamine, the
7. All breathing circuits, especially those
Q adrenoceptor agonists or their antagonists,
desigmed for low-flow use, should be checked,
regularly, for leaks.
absorbed through the human skin or mucous
 There are many scavenging devices suitable for
 membranes and when handling them appropriate
veterinary purposes but care must be taken to
care should be taken. Splashing onto the skin,
ensure that their use does not have an adverse
the lips or eyes should be avoided, but if it does
effect on the patient. It must also be remembered
occur, immediate, copious irrigation of the
that activated charcoal containers used to remove
site with water is essential to avoid their effects.
vapours such as halothane from the exhaled gases
Gloves should be worn when handling some of
do not absorb N2O.
the C2 adrenoceptor agonists or their antagonists
and etorphine. Syringes and needle cases should
never be held in the mouth (this appears to be a
 REFERENCES
common practice under field conditions but can-
not be excused) because their exterior surfaces may
Allen, A., Schertel, E., Muir, W.W. and Valentine, A.
have been contaminated with the drug while it was
(1991) Hypertonic saline/dextran resuscitation of
 being drawm up and air expelled from the syringe.
dogs with experimentally induced gastric dilatation
volvulus shock. American Journat of Veterinary Research
Dangers of exposure of the anaesthetist and
52:92-96
shuae uoenequ on lauosad woon Sueiado
Arden, W.A., Reisdorff, E., Loeffler, B.S., Stick, J.A., and
have already beern discussed. In the UK the Depar-
Walters, D. (1991) Effect of hypertonic-hyperoncotic
tment of Health (1976) has advised that reasonable
fluid resuscitation on cardiopulmonary function
during colon torsion shock in ponies. Veterinary
measures should be taken to reduce the risk of
Surgery 20:329-333.
serious contamination of the atmosphere with
Bertone, J.J., Gossett, K.A., Shoemaker, K.E.; Bertone,
volatile substances. Similar, but much more elabo-
A.1. and Schneiter, H.L. (1990) Effect of
rate recommendations, have been made in the
hypertonic vs.isotonic saline solution on
USA by the National Institute of Occupational
responses to sublethal E. coli endotoxemia in
horses.American Jourrat of Veterinary Research
Safety and Health (1977).
51: 999-1007.
 Sensible, simple measures which can be taken
Concensus Conference (1988) Perioperativered blood
 in veterinary practice to reduce atmospheric pollu-
cell transfusion. Journat of the Americar Medicat
tion in operating rooms include:
Association 260: 2700-2703.
Davies, M.J. (1989) Crystalloid or colloid: does it matter?
1. Vaporizers should always be filled outside
Journal ofCtinicat Anesthesia 1:464-471.
snieredde Su iadord pue wooi Sueado a
Department of Health (1976) HC(76)38 or SHHD /DS
(76). 65. London: DHSS.
should be used, but if this is not possible funnels
Dodman, N.H. and Brito-Babapulle, L.A. (1979) The role
can reduce the risk of spillage of the liquid
of humidification in anaesthesia. Proceedings of the
anaesthetic.
Association of Veterinary Araesthetists ofGreat Britain
 2. Vaporizers should be turned off when not in
and Ireland 8: 141-147.
Dupe, R. Bywater, R.J. and Goddard, M. (1993) A
use.
hypertonic infusion in the trea tment of experimental
 3. Anaesthetic agents should not be used for
shock in calves and clinical shock in dogs and cats.
 cleaning purposes (especially of clothes!) or skin
Veterinary Record 133:585-590.
disinfection.
Dyson, D.H. and Pascoe, PJ. (1990) Influence of
4. Whenever it is safe and convenient to do so,
preinduction methoxamine, lactated Ringer
solution, of hypertonic saline solution infusion
low flow systems of administration should be used.
or postinduction dobutamine infusion on
 5. Scavenging of waste gases and vapours
anesthetic-induced hypotension in horses.
should be encouraged.
American Journal of Veterinary Research
6. Whenever practicable, endotracheal intub-
51: 17-21.
ation should be practised to prevent undue
Gasthuys, F. (1994) The value of 7.2% hypertonic saline
solution in anaesthesia and intensive care: myth
 atmospheric pollution as may occur from the use
orfact?JournatofVeterinary Anaesthesia
of ill-fitting face-masks.
21: 12-14.
ANAESTHETIC ACCIDENTS 533
Hellyer, P W., Meyer, R.E. and Olson, N.C. (1993)
Moon, P.F.,Snyder, J.R., Haskins, S.C., Perron, PR. and
Resuscitation of anesthetized endotoxaemic pigs by
Kramer, G.C. (1991) Effects of a highly concentrated
the use of hypertonic saline solution containing
hypertonic saline-deltran volume expander on
dextran.Americar Journal of Veterinary Research
caroiopulmonary function in anesthetized
54:280-286.
normovolemic horses.American Journalof Veterirary
Janssens, L.,Altman, S. and Rogers, PA.M. (1979)
Research 52: 1611-1618.
Respiratory and cardiac arrest under general
Muir, W.W. and Sally, J. (1989) Small-volume
anaesthesia: treatment by acupuncture of nasal
resuscitation with hypertonic saline solution in
philtrum. Veterinary Record 105:273-276.
hypovolemic cats.American Journal of Veterinary
Kein, N.D., Kramer, G.C. and White, D.A. (1991) Acute
Research 50: 1883-1889.
hypotension caused by rapid hypertonic saline
NIOSH (1977) DHEW Publication No 77-140.
infusion in anesthetized dogs. Anesthesia and Anaigesia
Washington DC: US Govermment Printing Ofice.
73: 597-602.
Podrid, Pj. (1991) Safety and toxicity of antiarrhythmic
 Kleeman, N.S. (1979) CNS manifestations of disordered
drug therapy: benefit versus risk. Journal of
salts and water balance. Hospital Practice 60-73.
Cardiorascuiar Pharmacology 17: (Suppl 6): S65-S73.
Maningas, P.A., DeGuzman, L.R., Tilman, M.S. et a.
Rocha, E., Silva, M., Irineu, I., and Porfirio, M. (1990)
(1986) Small volume infusion of 7.5% NaC1 in 6%
Hypertonic saline resuscitation: saturated
Dextran 70 for the treatment of severe hemorrhagic
salt-dextran solutions are equally effective, but induce
shockin swine. Annais of Emergency Medicine
hemolysis in dogs. Critical Care Medicine 18: 203-211.
1: 1131-1137.
Waterman, A.E. (1981) Maintenance of body
Mermel, G.W. and Boyle, W.A. (1986) Hypertonic saline
temperature during anaesthesia. Proceedings of the
resuscitation following prolonged hemorrhage in the
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists ofGreat Britain
awake dog. Aresthesiology 65(3A): 91.
and Ireland9:73-85.
endix
ABBREVATIONS
PACO2
Alveolar CO2 tension
PaCO2
Arterial carbon dioxide tension
PACO2
Alveolar O2 tension
PaCO2
Arterial oxygen tension
(A-a) PCO2
 Alveolar to arterial CO2 tension difference
(A-a) PO2
Alveolar to arterial O2 tension difference
ABP
Arterial blood pressure
AC
Alternating current
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
AF
Atrial fibrillation
BMR
 Basal metabolic rate
BP
 Blood pressure
Ca++ or Ca2+
Calcium; calcium ion
CNS
Central nervous system
CO
Cardiac output
CO2
Carbon dioxide
COPD
 Chronic obstructive airways disease
CPAP
 Continuous airway pressure
CPK
Creatine phosphokinase
CSF
 Cerebrospinal fluid
CVP
 Central venous pressure
CVS
 Cardiovascular system
DC
Direct current
ECG
 Electrogram; electrocardiograph
FRC
Functional residual capacity
g
Gramme
g/kg
 Grammes per kilogramme body weight
Hb
Haemoglobin
HCO3
Bicarbonate; bicarbonate ion
HR
Heart rate
i.m.
Intramuscular; intramuscularly
i.p.
Intraperitoneal; intraperitoneally
IPPV
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
536APPENDIX
i.t.
Intratracheal
i.v.
Intravenous; intravenously
K+
Potassium; potassium ion
kPa
Kilopascal (1 kPa = approximately 7.5 mmHg)
1
Litres
1/kg
 Litres per kilogramme body weight
LVF
Left ventricular failure
MABP
 Mean arterial blood pressure
Su
Milligrammes
Mg++ or Mg2+
 Magnesium; magnesium ion
mg/kg
 Milligrammes per kilogramme body weight
ml
Millilitres
ml/kg
Millilitres per kilogramme body weight
mmHO
Millimetres of water
mmHg
Millimetres of mercury
mol
Mole = amount of substance
N2
Nitrogen
NO
Nitrous oxide
Na+
 Sodium; Sodium ion
NO
Nitric oxide
O2
Oxygen
°C
 Degrees Celsius
PAWP
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure
PCO2
Carbon dioxide tension
PEEP
Positive end-expiratory pressure
PEFR
Peak expiratory flow rate
PiO2
 Inspired O2 tension or concentration
PO2
Oxy gen tension
psi
 Pounds per square inch
PVC
Posterior vena cava
PvCO2
Venous CO, v= mixed venous tension)
PVO2
Venous O, v = mixed venous tension)
PVR
Peripheral vascular resistance
SBP
Systolic blood pressure
S.c.
Subcutaneous; subcutaneously
S.W.g.
Standard wire gauge
TLC
(i) Totallung capacity or (i) Tender loving care
UK
United Kingdom
VIC
Vaporizer in the (breathing) circuit
VOC
Vaporizer outside the (breathing) circuit
V/Q
Ventilation: perfusion ratio
VD(Anat)
 Respiratory anatomical deadspace volume
VD(physiol)
 Respiratory physiological deadspace volume
VEs
Ventricular extrasystoles
VF
Ventricular fibrillation
V
 Tidal volume of respiration
Microgrammes
μg / kg
正
Microlitres
μ/kg
Microlitres per kilogramme bodyweight
Appendix II
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE STANDARDS
In many countries there are maximum concentrations of inhalation anaesthetics in the atmosphere to
which workers may be exposed,either recommended or governed by regulations, and applying to all
places of work. These concentrations vary from country to country and as yet there appear to be no speci-
fied limits for sevoflurane or desflurane.
1. The UK
In the UK, Occupational Exposure Standards (OES) were introduced in January 1996 for the four main
form part of the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1994 (COSHH)2 with limits based
on an 8 hour time-weighted average (TWA). These limits were set as a consequence of alleged adverse
effects associated with human exposures.
1 Health Services Advisory Committee (1995) Anaesthetic Agents. Controlling Exposure Under COSHH.
London: HMSO.
2 Control of Substances Hazardous to Health(COSHH) (1994) Regulations. Approved Code of Practice.
London: HMSO
2. The USA
Maximal levels of exposure have been suggested by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH).3These are 2 ppm for halogenated anaesthetic agents and 25 ppm for N,O.4,5
3 Whitcher, C. (1975) Development and evaluationof methods for the elimiantion of waste anaesthetic
Journal 34:574-579.
5 Yagiela, J.A. (1991) Health hazards and nitrous oxide: a time for reappraisal. Anesthetic Progress 38: 1-11.
ppendixIII
 UK AND US NAMES OF SOME DRUGS USED IN ANAESTHESIA
US Name
UKName
Acetominophen
 Paracetamol
Alfadolone
Alfadolone
Alfaxalone
Alphaxalone
Bupivacaine
Bupivacaine
 Buprenorphine
 Buprenorphine
Butorphanol
Butorphanol
 Cromylin sodium
Sodiumcromoglycate
Dibucaine
Cinchocaine
Epinephrine
Adrenaline
Ergonovine
Ergometrine
Flunixine
Flunixine
Furosemide
Frusemide
Guaifenesin
Guaiphenesin
 Isoprenterenol
Isoprenaline
Lidocaine
Lignocaine
Methohexital
Methohexital(methohexitone)
Meperidine
Pethidine
 Pentobarbital
Pentobarbital (pentobarbitone)
Phenobarbital
Phenobarbital(phenobarbitone)
Quinalbarbitone
 Secobarbital
 Salbutamol
Salbutamol
Scopolamine
Hyoscine
Succinylcholine
Suxamethonium
Tetracaine
Amethocaine
Thiopental
Thiopental (thiopentone)
Entries in bold indicate main discussion, entries in italic denote illustrations and tables.
Abbreviations, 535-6
Acetylsalicylate see Aspirin
C adrenoceptor agonists, 83-90
Abdominal muscles, neuromuscular
Acid-base status monitoring, 54-5
benzodiazepine
block, 154,155
Activated charcoal, 531
combination, 295-6
Accidents,507-32
Acupuncture, respiration stimulation,
cat, 437-8
Acepromazine, 12, 76,77-9
515-16
cattle, 317-18
α2 adrenoceptor agonist
A8 fibres, 2
cinical actions, 84-6, 91
combinations, horse, 253
Adrenaline,83
dog, 385,387-8,397
cardiovascular side effects, 77
anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid
epidural analgesia,242, 252
contraindications, 78
reactions management, 529
local anaesthetic
equine colic,276
cardiacarrest management,527
combinations,267
etor phine combination, 99
local anaesthetic mixtures,
horse
expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
230, 233
acepromazine
effect, 181
Age characteristics, general
combination,253
ketamine combination
anaesthesia in dogs,390,394
caesarean section, 486
cat, 4.55
Air embolism, 202
epiduralblock,267
 obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Air mattresses, 291,291
 intraoperative analgesia, 300
sheep and goat, 349
Airway management, 509-14
maintenance of anaesthesia,
opioid combinations
 aspiration of oesophageal/
293,294, 295-6
cat,442, 450
stomach contents see
premedication,280-1,285, 286
dog. 398
Aspiration of ingesta/
 sedation of standing animal,
horse, 254
stomach contents
248-52,251,253
papaveretum combination,96
bronchial spasm, 514
ketamine combination,295-6
postoperative analgesia,
laryngeal spasm, 511-12
horse, 485
dog, 422
respiratory obstruction, 509
small mammals, 465
premedication, 103,124,287
tracheostomy,513-14
obstetric anaesthesia, 484, 485
caesarean section in bitch, 488
Airway resistance, 180, 180
occupational exposure hazard, 531
cat, 4.50
measurement,180-1
opioid combinations, 101
cattle, 331
pregnancy-associated
premedication,104
dog, 384-5, 398
changes,481
reversal of sedation, 90
horse, 280
Albumin, drug transport
sheep and goat,347
sedation
processes, 20,21
sheep and goat,347
cardiac surgery, 498
Alcuronium, 162,173
side effects,85-6
cat, 443
pharmacokinetics, 165
cardiovascular, 85,248, 251
cattle,319
Alfentanil, 95,98
Q2 adrenoceptor antagonists, 90-1
dog, 385-6
cat, 442
α adrenoceptors,3,83
horse,247-8, 252,253
dog,419
isoreceptors, 84
pig,370
etomidate combination,98,123
results of stimulation, 84, 84
sheep and goat, 348
premedication,103
structural aspects, 84
see aiso Immobilon, Large Animal
sedative combinations, 101
Alphadolone, 119
Acetaminophen (paracetamol),
Allergic drug reactions, 25
see aiso Saffan
 contraindication in cat, 443
see also Anaphylactoid reactions;
Alphaxalone, 119
Acetylcholine
Anaphylaxis
see aiso Saffan
muscarinic receptors, 6, 7
Allodynia,4
Althesin, 119
neuiromuscular transmission, 149,
 Alpaca se Llama and alpaca
Alveolar uptake, inhaled anaesthetics,
150-1, 153
α adrenoceptors,83
63,63-4
desensitisation, 152-3
Ci adrenoceptor agonist antagonists,
anaesthetic solubility, 64, 65, 65
neuromuscular block, 155
517
cardiac outputeffect, 69
nicotinic receptors, 151,
cattle,318-19
safety aspects, 66-7
152,152
occupational exposure hazard, 531
ventilatory depression, 69
541
542 INDEX
Ambu self-inflating bag, 515, 515
Apnoea, 508-12
Aspirin (acetylsalicylate), 91-2
Amethocaine,227
anaesthetic drug overdose, 516
cat, 443
topical application, 233, 440
artificial ventilation, 515
dog,390
4-Aminopyridine, 171
carbon dioxide levels, 518
Assisted ventilation, 182
xylazine antagonism in
causes,516,516
Asystole, 523
cattle, 318
immediate management, 514-15
Ataractics (tranquillizers), 75
Amphotericin,22
oxygen supply faults,517-18
Atelectasis,general anaesthesia in
Anaemia,51-2
postoperativeneuromuscular
horse,270, 270-1
 drug transport processes,21
block complications, 174
Atipamezole,90,91,517
Anaesthesia, mechanisms, 6-8
respiratory acidosis, 518
detomidine reversal in horse, 250
Anaesthetic accidents, 29
Apnoea alarms,49
large Felidae anaesthesia
Anaesthetic gas analysers, 35, 35-6,
Apparatus
reversal,460
57, 134
breathing systems, 208-18
medetomidine reversal
errors with exhaled
cleaning/sterilisation,222
cattle,319
methane,36
endotracheal intubation, 219-21
llama and alpaca, 360
Anaesthetic risk, 15-16
facemasks,218-19
obstetric anaesthesia reversal in
ASA classification, 16
inhalation agents administration,
puppies,489
Analgesia, 91-101
202-8
sedation reversal
cat,436,442-3
intravenous agents
cat, 444
ancillary aids,443
administration,197-202
sheep and goat,348, 353
premedication, 450-1
laryngoscopes, 221-2, 222
wild animal anaesthesia
dog, 385-91,384
Apparatus checks, 29, 508-9
termination,478
thoracotomy,430
monitoring equipment,57
xylazine antagonism in cattle,319
horse, 254-7
Apparatus resistance,181-2
Atracurium, 163-4, 173
colic, 276
Arterial blood pressure, 518
dog,416,417,417
intraoperative, 300
blood loss response,48,518
horse,303-4
premedication,281
computer controlled
obstetric anaesthesia, 485
inhalation anaesthetics, 136
anaesthesia, 13, 14,14
pharmacokinetics, 165
rodents,465
depth of anaesthesia
Atrial fibrillation, 522
small mammals,465
assessment,12, 34
Atrioventricular heart block, 38,
see aiso Postoperative analgesia
general anaesthesia responses
39,523
Anaphylactoid reactions, 529,529
in horse,268-9
Atropine, 104-5,172, 174,252
Anaphylaxis, 31,529,529
measurement,40
bradyarrhythmias
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
direct methods, 43, 44, 44,
management, 522
(ACE) inhibitors, 393
45,46
horse,302
Anterior tibial artery, direct blood
Doppler ultrasound, 40-1,
ketamine combination, 128
pressure measurement,44
40,41
neuromuscular block reversal in
Antiarrhythmic drugs, 522
oscillometry,424, 42
dog,417-18
Antibiotics
monitoring,36,39-44
premedication
drug interactions, 275
cattle,336
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
dog,391,391-2
dog,414
cat, 454
neuromuscular blocking
horse,281
dog,396
agents,417
sheep and goat, 356, 356
horse,280
preoperative prophylaxis in
Arterial pH monitoring,49,49-50
 llama and alpaca, 358
horse, 275
Artificial ventilation, 179-95
monkey, 477
 Anticholinergic agents, 103-6
apnoea management,515
pig,372
C2 adrenoceptor agonist combina-
CPAP(continuous positive airway
rabbit,466
tions,252
pressure),191-2
sheep and goat,349
bradyarrhythmias management,
high frequency lung
Auditory evoked responses
522
ventilation,1924
(AER),10,11
horse, 302
intensive care,194-5
Auricular artery
dinical applications, 103
intrathoracic su rgery, 493
direct blood pressure
obstetric anaesthesia, 482
IPPV see Intermittent positive
measurement, 44,44
premedication,103
pressure ventilation (IPPV)
pulse,37
cat,449,450
neuromuscular block, 154
Auricular vein injection
dog, 392-3
PEEP (positive end-expiratory
pig,372,372-3,373
horse, 280
pressure),191-2
sheep and goat,350
Anticholinesterases, 169-70, 174
Ascending reticular activating
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
epidural injection,243
system,7
cattle,320,320
Antihistamines, 529
Aspiration of ingesta/stomach
deer,362
Antipsychotic drugs see Neuroleptics
contents,30,149,172, 511-12
dog,430-7,431
Antlers harvesting,361
cattle,315, 315-16,332
horse,259
Anxiolytic drugs, 75
dog.396,398
Autoclaving,222
premedication,103
 llama/ alpaca, 358
Autonomic reflex-mediated
Apex beat,18
sheep/goat, 341
hypotension, 519
INDEX 543
Awareness,8
cattle,336
Buprenorphine, 95, 99
Azaperone,80
horse,269, 281
acepromazine combination
etor phine combination,
Blood glucose monitoring, 56-7
cat, 450
immobilisation of
Blood loss
dog,398
elephant,364
estimation,48,48,518-19
cat, 442,460
pig
replacement,48,519
epidural nerve block, 242
caesarean section,487, 488
Blood transfusion, 200
horse,257
premedication,372
Blood volume assessment, 48
postoperative analgesia
sedation, 370-1
Blood warming coils, 200
caesarian section,487
Bodcock seal, 202
cat, 460
Back support for horse,291, 292
Body temperature
rabbit,467
Badger (Meles meles), 470
monitoring,55-6
rat, 467
Bagging' (manual IPpV), 187
neuromuscular block
sheep and goat,357,487
Bain coaxial system, 211-12,
effects, 168
premedication,103,349
212,409
 Bourdon pressure gauge, 202,
sequential analgesia, 100
feline anaesthesia,457
203, 204
sheep and g0at,349,361,487
Ball float flowmeter, 204
Bovine anaesthesia see Cattle
Butorphanol, 94, 95,100
Barbiturates, 113, 114, 114-19
Boyle vaporiser, 204, 206
acepromazine combination in
caesarean section in bitch, 490
Brachial plexus block, 150
cat, 460
hloral hydrate combination in
dog,428, 431,431
cattle,320
horse,296
Brachycephalic dogs, 393,412, 414
epidural analgesia, 96, 242
drug interactions, 25
respiratory obstruction, 514
caesarean section in
dog,391,392
Bradycardia, 522
sheep/goat,345
obstetric anaesthesia, 485
followiing cardiac arrest, 527
dog,432, 433
Base excess,49, 54
preoperative evaluation,18
lignocaine combination in
Bear, 475
Bradykinin, 2
horse, 267
Behavioural monitoring parameters,
Brain-blood partition coefficient, 62
horse,267
31
Breath-holding response, 12
analgesia,256-7
Benzocaine, 233
Breathing depth monitoring, 48
colic,276
general anaesthesia in fish, 466
Breathingsystem(circuit),68,
intraoperative,300
Benzodiazepines, 75-6, 80-3
208-18
sedative combinations, 254
apparatus checks,509
postcaesarian section analgesia
premedication, 451
cat,456-7
cat, 491
sedation, 444-5
classification,208
goat, 487
drug interactions in dog,392
cleaning/sterilisation,222
premedication
fentanyl/fluanisone combination
dog.409
869'469'8op
in small mammals, 465
facemask induction, 408-9
sheep and goat, 349,352
flumazenil reversal, 83
low-flow administration, 410
sequential analgesia, 100
horse
horse,299-300
sheep and goat,345, 348,349, 352,
intraoperative muscle
non-rebreathing, 209-13
357
relaxation,303
occupational safety,532
Butyrophenones,75,79-80
 maintenance of anaesthesia,
open/semi-open methods,
opioid combinations
294
208-109
(neuroleptanalgesia), 101,
sedation, 252-3
pig,379
102, 102
ketamine combination
rebreathing, 213-18
side effects, 79
horse,295-6
terminology,218
small mammals, 465
Bronchial carcinoma, 496
C fibres,2
mode of action, 81
Bronchial spasm, 512,529
Cachexia,suxamethonium duration
opioid combinations, 101
Bronchiectasis, 497
prolongation,166
premedication,104,287,451
Bronchoscopy in dog, 424
Caesarean section
βblockers, 522
Bupivacaine,91,150,228,229
bitch,487-9
5β pregnanolone, 121
absorption,230
cat, 489-90
Bicarbonate,49,54,526
cat, 443
cattle,486
Biochemical tests, preoperative, 19
drug interactions, 392
horse,486
Bird, 472-5
epidural analgesia
pig, 487-8
general anaesthesia,473-4
dog,431, 432,433
postoperative analgesia,486, 487,
ketamine sedation,129
sheepandgoat,43,343,344
490, 491
metabolic rate, 472
infiltration analgesia,234
sheep and goat, 486, 487
respiratory tract,4723
intra-articular injection in
epidural analgesia, 343,345
suxamethonium response, 166
dog,428,434
Calcium channel blockers, 152, 516
Bispectral Index (BIS), 11
intrapleural analgesia in dog,434
drug interactions in dog, 392
Blindness, intraoperative
obstetric analgesia, 484
Calcium infusion,302
hypotension,39
specific nerve blocks
Calcium ion channels
Blood gases monitoring,49,49-50
dog,428, 430,431, 434,435
neuromuscular transmission, 152
acid-base status monitoring,54
horse,262
voltage gated, 6,7
544INDEX
Calmodulin, 152
Cardiovascular function
obstetric anaesthesia, 490-1
Camel,362,362-3
cat, 457
opioid analgesic antagonists, 516
endotracheal intubation, 363
cattle,338
pain behaviour, 442
local/regional analgesia,363
horse,268-9
perianaesthetic mortality,
restraint, 362
pregnancy-associated changes,
441, 445,450
Capillary refilltime monitoring.39
481-2, 483
peripheral nerve stimulation
Capnography,53,53-4
Cardiovascular function monitoring,
sites,159
Captopril,392
36,36-48
postoperative care, 459-60
Carbon dioxide absorption
arterial blood pressure, 39-45
preanaesthetic preparation,445
circle system, 215-16, 410
blood loss, 48
premedication,441,442,443,
soda lime, 213-14
cardiac output,47-8
449-51
to-and-fro system, 214-15,215
central venous pressure, 45-6
regurgitation,513
Carbon dioxide gas cylinders,205
depth of anaesthesia
restraint,441, 442,445, 446,
Carbon dioxide partial pressure
monitoring.34
456, 460
(PCO2),49,49,50
heart rate, 36-9
sedation, 443-5, 450,495
capnography,53-4
left atrial pressure (pulmonary
tracheostomy, 513,514
Carbon monoxide accumulation, 134
artery wedge pressure),46-7
Catenary three compartment model,
Carbonic acid snow, 233
tissue perfusion, 39
72,73
Cardiac arrest,31, 523-27,529
Carfentanil,98-9
Catheter insertion
airway, 523
sedation
cattle, 331
breathing, 523
deer,362
dog,401
circulation,523-4
sheep and goat, 349
epidural analgesia, 433, 433
direct cardiac compression, 526
wild animal immobilisation, 478
horse,277
electrical defibrillation,
Carprofen,92-3
jugular vein,278-80,279
525-26,526
cat,444
pigear-flap(auricular)vein,
external chestcompression,524-5,
dog.390
372,373
525
horse,255
technique, 198-9,199
hypovolaemia, 526
Castration
'Catheter over needle', 198,198
intraoperative hypotension, 39,
cattle,326
Catheters,197-200, 198
526
horse
flow rates, 199-200
parturition,482
general anaesthesia, 283,
length, 280
resuscitation routine,524,524
288, 294
small vein sets, 200, 200
Cardiac arrhythmias, 12,38-9,
local analgesia,264,264-5
Cattle, 315-38
521-3
llama and alpaca,358
aspiration of ingesta, 315,513
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
pig,378,382-3
prevention,315-16, 315
hypercapnia,50,522
sheep and goat, 342
defibrillation, 526
Cardiac auscultation, 18
Cat,441-60
endotrachealintubation,316,
Cardiac catheterisation, 499
analgesia, 442,442-3,4501
333,3323
Cardiac murmur,18
ancillary aids, 443
general anaesthesia,331-8
Cardiac output
breathing systems, 456-7
drug combinations,332
blood loss response, 48
caesarean section,490-1
inhalation agents, 336-7
inhaled anaesthetic uptake, 69
cardiovascular data,457
intravenous agents,333-56
measurement(monitoring),47-8
chestclosure, 495
monitoring,337-8
oxygen availability relationship,
defibrillation, 525
positioning,338
19-20
endotrachealintubation, 446-9
premedication,332
 pregnancy-associated changes,
epidural analgesia, 443,460,490
recovery,338
481,482
facemask anaesthesia, 446,
intravenous injection, 332
Cardiac surgery,498-515
447,456
'isagleue [euolgai snouaae.u!
cardiac catheterisation, 499
general anaesthesia,445-59
331,331
cardiopulmonary bypass, 502-4
inhalation agents,441,457-8
local analgesia,320-31
hypothermia, 499-502
intravenous agents, 441, 450,
castration,326
pacemaker insertion, 505, 505
451-6
caudal epidural,326-8,326
ultrasonography, 499
kittens, 459
lumbosacralepidural,328-9,
Cardiac tamponade,498, 499
problems,441,459
329, 486
Cardiac thrill, 18
hypothermia, 528
neuromuscular blocking agents,
Cardiogenic shock, 520
induction chamber, 456, 456
167, 3378
Cardiopulmonary bypass, 502-4
intermittent positive pressure
obstetric anaesthesia, 486
general anaesthesia,503
ventilation (IPPV), 459
peripheral nerve stimulation
postoperative care, 504-5
intravenous technique, 445-46,
sites, 160
premedication,503
445,446
pleural cavity drainage, 495
rewarming,504
laryngeal spasm, 505
preoperative preparation,
Cardiovascular disease
local analgesia, 443, 460
316-17, 331-2
dog, 420,423-4
neuroleptanalgesia, 442
recumbency-associated problems
preoperative evaluation, 17-18,
neuromuscular blocking agents,
bloat, 315
19-20
167,459
pulmonary ventilation,316
INDEX 545
restraint, 317
Cholinesterase, 166, 166
Cough, preoperative evaluation, 17
salivation,316
species differences, 167
Coughing response, 12
sedation, 317-20
Circle carbon dioxide removal system,
Cox'smask,288
specificnerve blocks,320-31
214-15, 215,410
C95, 164, 165,165
auriculopalpebral, 320, 320
Circulatory failure, 518-27
Cyanosis,31,508
cornual,320-1,321
a utonomic reflex activity, 519
Cyclopropane,138
digital nerves,329-31,329,330
cardiacrhythm disturbances,
physical characteristics, 133
inverted Lblock,322
521-23
Cytokines,2
paravertebral, 322-5,323
fluid volume inadequacy, 518-20
peribulbar,321-2
shock,520-21
Dalton'slaw, 61
Petersen eye block, 321,
Cisatracurium, 416
Dantrolene sodium, 370
321,322
Classical signs of anaesthesia, ll-13
Deer, 361-2
pudic(internal pudendal),
Cleaning apparatus, 222
anaesthetic agents, 361-2
325-6,323,324
Clenbuterol,272, 273
handling recommendations, 361
retrobulbar, 321-2
Climazolam, 83
harvesting antlers, 362
Caudal block, 240-1
cat, 445
local analgesia,362
cattle,326,326-8,486
horse,252
Defibrillation, 525-6, 526,528
horse,252,265-6,266
Clonidine, 83,84
Definitions of anaesthesia, 1
indications, 266,485-86
epidural nerve block,242
Dehorning
opioids,257
Coaxial breathing systems,
cattle,321
 llama and alpaca,358
211-12,212
sheep and goat,341-2
 obstetric anaesthesia
feline anaesthesia, 457
Dehydration,intraoperative,
cattle,486
Cocaine,227,232
21,22,23
horse, 485-86
spinal nerve block, 236
Dental nerves infiltration in dog, 434
sheep and goat, 486
Cole pattern endotracheal tube,
Depth of anaesthesia, 8-11, 12,31,
sheep and goat,342-3,343,486
290, 290
33,33
Central nervous system
Colic, equine,250, 255,513, 521
anaesthetic gas analysers, 35, 35-6
local anaesthetic toxicity, 231-2
analgesia, 276
blood pressure,34
monitoring,31, 33,33-4
general anaesthesia, 276-7
classical signs, 11-13
Central venous pressure monitoring
Compartment syndrome in
heart rate,34
45-6,47
horse,273
respiratory rate,34
Centrally acting muscle relaxants,
Compliance, 182-3, 182
Desflurane,142, 142-3
174-5,191
Compound A,414
general anaesthesia
dog, 416
Computer controlled anaesthesia,
cat, 458
horse,302-3
13-15, 36
cattle,337
Cephalic vein injection
continuous infusion, 113
horse,298-9
cat,445,445,446
fuzzy logic control,14-15, 14
pig,379,380
dog, 398,399,399
intravenous infusion regimens,
inhalation inductionin foal,288
short-legged breeds, 400
73,74
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
sheep and goat, 349,350
Concentration effect, 69
caesarean section in bitch, 489
Cerebralfunctionmonitoring
Connell flowmeter, 204
pharmacokinetics,66
electroencephalography
Constantinfusion(volumetric)
induction speed, 66
(EEG),10
pumps,200,201
partition coefficient,62,65
Context sensitive half-time
physical characteristics,133
monitoringequipment,57
(tcontext),70
Detomidine,35, 84,87
Chelonia,470
Continuousintravenousinfusion,
blood pressure response, 39
Chest deflation reflex,515
73,405,405
cattle,318
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 516
Continuous positive airway pressure
obstetric anaesthesia, 486
Chinchocaine, 227
(CPAP),191-2
caudal injection,252
Chloral hydrate,75, 104, 125,127
Control of Substances Hazard ous to
epidural nerve block, 242
cattle,319-20
Human Health (COSHH)
opioid combination, 257
horse,253
regulations, 144, 145
xylazine/mepivacaine
barbiturates combination, 296
Cooke intraosseous needle, 402
combination,485
Chloralose, 125-6
Corneal analgesia,233
horse,249-50, 251,252, 294
Chloramphenicol, 391
Corneal reflex,33
acepromazine combination,
Chlordiazepoxide,80
Cornual block
253
Chloroform, 138,208
cattle,320-1,321
atipamezole reversal, 250
horse,288
sheep and goat, 341-42,342
butorphanol combination, 254
Chloroprocaine,228
Corticosteroids
colic,276
dental nerves infiltration in
anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid
 obstetric anaesthesia, 485
dog, 433
reactions,529
premedication,280-1,285,286
metabolism,231
cat preanaesthetic preparation, 445
ketamine combination, 128
Chlorpromazine, 12, 76, 79
drug interactions in dog,392, 391
deer,362
dog,385
endotoxic shock,521
sheep and goat, 348
Choline acetyl-O-transferase, 151
epidural injection, 243
'triple drip' anaesthesia, 175
546 INDEX
Dexamethasone, 25
Distribution half-life (tyα),
neurologic disease,425-7,427
Dexmedetomidene, sed ation in
non-depolarising
 intracranial pressure
cat, 444
neuromuscular blocking
elevation,426
Diabetes insipidus, 18
agents, 164,165
myelography, 426-7
Diabetes mellitus
Dobutamine,39,273, 357,364, 388,
neuromuscular blocking agents,
dog, 392,393
419,527
167, 168,416-18, 417
intraoperative hypoglycaemia,57
cardiovascular depression in
termination,417-18
preoperativeevaluation,18,19
horse,301
obstetric anaesthesia, 487-9
preoperative preparation,24
Dog,385-435
opioid analgesic antagonists, 516
Diaphragm, neuromuscular block
aspiration of vomited material,513
orthopaedic surgery,427-8, 428
linical evaluation of paralysis, 159
brachycephalic breeds,393,
peripheral nerve stimulation
sensitivity,154, 155
412, 414
sites,159
Diaphragm rupture repair, 497-8
respiratory obstruction, 510
 postoperative management,
Diastolic arterial pressure (DAP), 39
caesarean section,487-9
420-3
Diazepam, 82
cardiac disease,421, 4234
analgesia, 422-3, 422
cat, 444, 451
defibrillation, 525
oxygen supplementation,421,
dog
diabetes management, 392,393
422
fentanyl combination, 407,425
drug interactions, 392,391-2
premedication,386-7,390,
morphine combination,495
endoscopy, 424
396-8,397
 oxymorphone combination,
endotracheal intubation, 410-12,
preoperative preparation,
407,425
411, 413,428-9, 428
391-6
horse, 252
epidural analgesia, 428,430, 431-4,
a lscultation of thorax, 395-6
ketamine combination,128
432,433
food /water restriction, 396
caesa rean section in cat, 490
obstetric anaesthesia,488,489
renal disease, 429,429
caesa rean section in sow, 487
gastric dilatation/volvulus
restraint,398,399,399
cardiac catheterisation,499
syndrome,424-5
sedation,385-9,386,494
cat,455,490
general anaesthesia
Boxer breed,385
dog, 425
analgesia supplements, 418-19
specific nerve blocks, 430-1
sheep and goat, 342,349,
breed-specific problems,
auriculopalpebral, 430-1,430
352-3
392-3
brachial plexus,430,431
ketamine/medetomidine
cardiovascular complications,
dental nerves, 433
combination in rabbit,466
419-20, 420
digital,433, 434
premedication
facemask induction,404-5
intercostal, 4334
calves,332
fluid therapy, 418,419, 429
tracheostomy,513
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
geriatric animals,394,394
Dopamine,6,39,357,419,527
cat, 451
impact of disease,396
cardiovascular depression in
sheep and goat,348
inhalation agents, 408,408-16
horse,301
caesarean section under
intravenous agents, 402-8
renoprotection,22
epidural block,345, 486
monitoring,416,418
Dopexamine, 302
Diethylether,8,137-8
overweight (obese) animals,
 Doppler ultrasound blood pressure
 breathing systems, 208
394
measurement, 40,40-1, 41
cat,457-8
paediatricanimals,394, 394
Dorsal horn laminae, 2, 3
fish, 471
positioning,418
Dorsal ped al artery, direct blood
phar macokinetics, 66
ventilation, 414,415-16
pressure measurement,
physical characteristics,133
heart rate palpation, 36, 37
43,44
Diffusion hypoxia, 66, 137
hepatic disease,425,426
Double burst stimulation (DBS),
Digital nerve block
hypothermia, 528
158,158
cattle, 329-31,329, 330
intermittent positive pressure
Doxacurium,416
dog,434,433
ventilation (IPPV), 415-16,419,
pharmacokinetics, 165
sheep and goat, 343
426, 428
Doxapram, 272, 464, 517
Digoxin, 522
intra-articular analgesia, 434
newborn foal resuscitation, 485
Diltiazem,392
intrapleural analgesia, 434
sedation reversal in sheep and
Dimethyl ether of d-tubocurarine, 161
intrathoracicsurgery
goat,348
DINAMAP, 42,42-4
pleural cavity drainage,495
Drip rate controller, 200
Diprenorphine, 99, 101,102
thoracotomy,429-30, 429
Droperidol, 80
etorphine antagonism, 99,
intravenous regional analgesia,
fentanyl combination, 102
102,516
434-5
pig.371
elephant,364,365
intravenous technique,398-402,
Drug adverse effects, 24-5
wild animal anaesthesia
395,399
Drug interactions,25
termination, 478
catheter insertion,401
dog,392,391-2
Dipyrone, 254
intraosseous injection, 401-2
Drug metabolism, 20, 20
Dissociative agents, 127-9
vascular port, 402
Drug names, UK/USA, 539
horse,286
local analgesia,430-36
Drug overdosage,24-5
pig,371
neuroleptanalgesia,397,398,
hypoxaemia,516-17
Dissociative anaesthesia, 127
407-8, 425
inhalation agents, 66, 67
INDEX547
Drug transport processes, 20-1
cattle,316,333,332-3
opioid/α adrenoceptor
Dulaa, 361
dog,410-12, 411,413
agonist-local anaesthetic
Dynorphin, 93
brachycephalic breeds, 412
combinations, 267
mandibular fracture repair,
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Edrophonium, 169,170, 171,418
42830,428
cattle,486
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
elephant,364
sheep and goat,486
anaesthesia monitoring in
high frequency lung
opioids see Opioid analgesics
horse,281
ventilation, 193
pig,381,381-3
heart rate monitoring.38, 38-9
horse,289,289-90,290
problems,2434,531
hypothermia response, 500
intermittent positive pressure
bloodytap,244
Electroencephalography (EEG), 4
ventilation (IPPV),194
total spinal block, 244
cerebral function monitoring, 10
llama and alpaca,359, 359-60
sheep and goat,343,344,344-6, 486
computer controlled
monkey,476
 solution preservative
anaesthesia,36
pig,373,373-4
neurotoxicity,243
depth of anaesthesia, 8-11
rabbit,466
spread of analgesia,238-9
evoked responses, 10-11, 11
sheep and goat, 350-1, 351
see also Spinal nerve blocks
power spectrum analysis, 9-10,
snake,470, 471
Epidural space, 236-8
9,10
tube occlusion
Equipment maintenance,29
 sleep-associated thalamocortical
cuff overinflation, 510,511
Ergometrine, 483
activity, 8
kinked tube,510,510
bitch,488
Electroimmobilisation of cattle, 317
Endotracheal tube removal
horse,486
Electromechanical dissociation, 523
cat, 459
sow,488
Electromyogram (EMG),
cattle,338
Ether see Diethyl ether
neuromuscular block
horse,306
Ethyl chloride spray,233
monitoring, 158-9, 160
Endotrachealtubes,219-21,220
Ethylene oxide sterilisation,222
Elephant,363-5
length,221
Etidocaine, 228
body weight estimation,363
reinforced,221
Etodolac,390
endotracheal intu bation, 364
Enflurane,141-2
Etomid ate, 122-3
immobilisation, 363-4
caesarean section
alfentanil combination, 98, 123
inhalation anaesthesia, 364-5
bitch, 488
dog,407
premedication,364
sow,487
horse,286
Eliminationhalf-life(tB)
cardiovascular responses,
Etor phine,99
intravenous anaesthetics,70,73
12,135
acepromazine combination,99
non-depolarising neuromuscular
cat, 452
azaperone combination,364
blocking agents, 164, 165
horse,298
diprenorphine reversal, 99, 102, 516
Emergencies, 507-32
neuromuscular blocking agent
elephant, 364,365
Emergency proced ures
potentiation, 135,168
elephant immobilisation, 364
diabetes mellitus management, 24
obstetric anaesthesia,484
horse,287-8
equine colic, 276-7
partition coefficient, 62, 65
 methotrimeprazine combination,
 preanaesthetic preparation, 22
physical characteristics, 133
99
horse,275-6
pig.377
occupationalexposure hazard,531
EMLA cream, 197, 233,446
recovery time,141
sheep and goat,349
EMO (Epstein-Mackintosh-Oxford)
respiratory responses, 69, 181
wild animal immobilisation, 471
vaporiser,207,208
toxicity/hepatitis, 135,142
see aliso Immobilon
Emu,475
Enzyme function, 20,20
Eugenols, 123
Enalapril, 392
Ephedrine, 39
Evoked responses,
Encephalins, 93, 136
Epidural analgesia, 150,236, 241
electroencephalography (EEG),
End tidal carbon dioxide (ErCO2),
bradyarrhythmias management,
10-11, 11
53-4
522
Expiration, 179, 179
End-plate potential,150
caesarean section
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 181
Endorphins, 93, 136
bitch,488
Expired air ventilation, 515
End oscopy in dog, 424
cat, 490
Explosions, anaesthetic, 530
End otoxaemia, 57
postoperative analgesia,487
External chest compression,524-5,
End otoxic shock, 520, 521
sheep and goat, 486
525
End otracheal intubation, 171, 172,
cat, 443,460, 490
Eye position, depth of anaesthesia,
219,532
cattle,3269,326,329
12-13,33,33-4,34
bird, 474,474
caudal block see Caudal block
Eye reflexes, depth of anaesthesia,
camel,363
continuous,243
33,33
cardiac catheterisation, 499
dog,428, 430,431-4, 432,
cardiac surgery,498
432, 488
Face maskinduction/ventilation
cat,446-9,448
complications, 434
bird,474
laryngospasm prevention,
drugs, 432
cat,450,447,456
446-7
drugs, 241-3
IPPV application, 459
technique,447-8, 450
horse,252, 257,265-7,266
manual ventilation of
tube size/length, 448, 449
obstetric anaesthesia, 485-6
lungs, 448
548 INDEX
Face maskinduction/ventilation
Fluanisone, 80
Gastric dilatation/volvulus
(contd.)
fentanyl combination, 102
syndrome, dog,424-5
dog,408-9
hedgehog,470
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, dog,420-1
monkey,476
 small mammals, 465
Gastrointestinal endoscopy,
pig,375,379
Fluid and electrolytes, preoperative
dog,424
rabbit, 466
preparation,23
Gate control method, horse, 282,282
rat, 466
Fluid therapy
General anaesthesia, 1, 2
small mammals,454
 blood loss replacement, 519
depth, 8-11
Face masks, 218-19,219
cardiac arrest, 526-7
 classical signs, 11-13
Facial artery
general anaesthesia
selection issues, 16-17
direct blood pressure
dog,418, 419,429
General anaesthetic agents
measurement,37,44,45
horse,301
actions, 6-8
pulse,37,37
monkey, 476-7
toxicity, 16
Facial muscle block, 154
sheep and goat, 356
Gentamycin, 22,275
Facial nerve damage,274, 274,529
preoperative preparation, 23
Gerbil,469,469
Fasting,preanaesthetic,17,22-3
shock,520, 521
Glycine neurotransmission,81
bird, 472
Flumazenil, 83
Glycopyrrolate, 105, 172,252
camel,363
sheep and goat, 348
bradyarrhythmias management,
cat,445
Flunixin,92
522
cattle, 316-17,332
endotoxic shock,521
horse, 302
dog,396
horse,255
neuromuscular block reversal in
horse, 275
colic,276
dog,417-18
llama and alpaca, 358
Fluorination, 134
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
pig.371
"Flutter valve' apparatus, 202
premedication
sheep and goat, 349
Foetal drug exposure, 483
dog,396
Felidae,large,460
Foetal haemoglobin, 484
horse,280
Femoral artery
Forelimb desensitisation
pig,372
direct blood pressure
cattle, 329,329
sheep and goat,349
measurement,44
horse,262,262-3
rabbit,466
pulse,37
median nerve block, 262
Goat see Sheep and goat
Femoral nerve damage,
musculocutanoues nerve
Goldman vaporiser, 207, 207,217
horse, 274-5
block, 262-3
Guaiphenesin, 149-50,174-5
Femoral vein injection, dog, 398,
ulnar nerve block, 262
accidental perivascular injection,
401
Forelimb surgery, dog,428
529
Fentanyl, 95, 97
Fractures,local anaesthesia,236
contraindication for obstetric
cat, 442
Free fall control, horse, 281-2, 282
anaesthesia,485
cutaneous patch (transdermal
Functional magnetic resonance
general anaesthesia
system),97,97
imaging (fMRI),4
camel, 363
gop ul eisasleue aaleradoisod
Functional residual capacity,
horse,294,302-3
422-3
pregnancy-associated changes,
llama and alpaca, 360
dog, 419,422,432,433
482, 483
sheep and goat, 354-5
diazepamcombination,
Fuzzy logic, 14-15,14
ketamine combination in
407,425
cattle,335
epidural analgesia,96,242
GABA (y amino butyric acid)
ketamine/xylazine combination
dog, 432,433
neurotransmission, 81
(triple drip), 175,295
fluanisone combination
Gallamine, 161-2, 173
pig,378-9
hedgehog.470
pharmacokinetics, 165
thiopental combination
small mammals,465
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
cattle,332, 333
ketamine combination in
response,157
horse,285
rabbit, 466
 motor fibres, 149
Guinea pig, 464,468
premedication,103
Gas concentrations in solution, 62
physiological measurements,
sedative combinations, 101
Gas delivery apparatus, 202-6
464
neuroleptanalgesia, 102,
apparatuschecks,508
Gum colour monitoring,39
102
flowmeters, 203-5,203
 total intravenous anaesthesia
 gases other than oxygen, 205-6
Haemoglobin
(TIVA), 114
oxygen cylinders,202
desaturation, 507-9
Ferret (Mustela putoriusfuro),469
oxygenfailure warning
detection,507-8
Fibular nerve block see Peroneal
devices,205
preventive checklist,508-9
nerveblock
pipeline systems, 205
foetal, 484
Fires, 529
pressure gauges,02,03
oxygen availability relationship,
First order processes, 71,71,72
reducingvalves/regulators,
19,20
First pass effect, 70
203, 205
oxygen saturation, 51,51
Fish,471-2
Gastric contents aspiration see
pregnancy-associated
Flowmeters,203, 203-5
Aspiration of ingesta/stomach
changes, 481
apparatus checks,508
contents
preoperative evaluation,24
INDEX 549
Haemorrhage,surgical, 518-19
Hamster,469,469
facilities, 281
Hall mask, 447,448
physiological measurements,464
hypoxaemia,269,2723
Halogenation, 134
Handlingaccidents,529
induction, 281-9
Halothane, 138-9
Hare(Lepus europaeus),465-7,466
inhalation agents, 288-9,
aterial blood pressu re reponse, 12
Heart block,38,39, 523
297-300
caesarean section
Heart rate
inotropic agents,301-2
bitch, 488
 depth of anaesthesia assessment,
intercompartmental pressure
cattle, 486
12,34
in limbs,273
horse, 486
hypothermia response, 502
intermittent positive pressure
sow, 482
monitoring,36-9
ventilation (IPPV),305-6
cardiovascular effects, 12,50,
electrocardiography,38-9,38
intravenous agents, 283-8,284,
412-14
oesophageal stethoscope,
292-7,295
horse,268
36,37-8
intravenous fluid infusion, 301
chemical stability, 134
palpation,36,37,37
lung volume reduction,271-2
drug interactions in dog, 392
Heart rate monitors, 36-9
maintenance,289-300,295
expiratory reserve volume(ERV)
Heat stroke see Hyperthermia
monitoring,281
effect, 181
Hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus),470
movement while unconscious,
eye movements, 33
Heidbrink flowmeter, 204
267
general anaesthesia
Heimlich valve,496, 496
muscle blood flow
bear,475
Y-connector,495, 499,496
improvement,273,274
bird, 474,475
Helium, 134
neuropathy, 273,274-5,274,
camel, 363
Hellabrunn mixture,465
529
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
Hen, domestic, 464
 pharmacological oxygenation
cat,458
Henry's law, 61
improvement, 272-3
cattle,336
Hepatotoxicity
positioning, 290-2, 291,292
chelonia, 470
inhalation anaesthetics, 135, 139
postanaesthetic myopathy
deer, 363
NSAIDs in cat, 443
(rhabdomyolysis), 272,
dog, 409,412-13
thiopenta,117
273-4
elephant,364
High frequency jet ventilators, 194
premedication,280-1
ferret, 469
High frequency lung ventilation,
preparation,275-6
gerbil, 469
192-4
pulmonary changes,269-73
guinea pig, 468
carbon dioxide elimination, 194
recovery, 267-8, 269,
hamster,469
methods,193-4
297,306-7
horse,297, 298,300
oxygen delivery,194
right-to-leftintrapulmonary
 llama and alpaca,360
pressure-flow relationships, 193
shunt, 271
mink, 469
High frequency oscillators, 194
size-related problems,267-8
monkey,476
Hind limb desensitisation, distal
temperament of animal, 267-8
pig,381-2
cattle,330, 330
venous admixture, 271
rabbit, 467
horse,263,263
weight support during
rat, 467
peroneal (fibular) nerve
induction,281-2,282,283
rodents, 464
block,263
heart rate palpation,37,37
sheep and goat, 355
saphenous nerve block,263
intravenous techniques, 277-80,
skunk,469
tibial nerve block, 263
278
small mammals, 463
sheep and goat,347,347
local analgesia,257-67
snake,469
Hind limb surgery, dog, 428
castration,264,264-5
hepatic damage, 135,139
Horse,247-307
neuromuscular blocking agents,
inhalation induction in foals, 288
analgesia,254-7
167,302-5
 minimum alveolar concentration
intra-articular injections,257
obstetric anaesthesia, 484-6
(MAC),35
NSAIDs (non-steroidal
opioid analgesic antagonists, 517
monitoring.36
anti-inflammatory drugs),
paravertebral block,265,265
neuromuscular blocking drug
254-5
peripheral nerve stimulation sites,
potentiation,135,168
opioid analgesics, 255-7,256
159-60,160
non-inflammability, 134
caudal block,257, 265-6
 physiological dead space:tidal
occupational safety,139
defibrillation, 525
volume ratio,271
exposure standards,144, 144
endotracheal intubation,289,
 pleural cavity drainage, 495,496
partition coefficient, 62,65
289-90,290
postoperative analgesia,306
physical characteristics, 133
epidural analgesia, 265-7,266
recumbency onset,283, 286
pontine reticular formation
obstetric, 485-6
free fall control, 281-2, 282
actions, 8
general anaesthesia, 267-307
gate control method,282,282
recovery time,141
atelectasis,270-1,270
tilting table control method,
horse,297
breathing systems, 299-300
282, 283
respiratory despression, 69
cardiovascular effects,268-9
recumbency-associated problems,
total respiratory resistance effect,
circulatory depression
268, 270,271, 273
181
treatment,300-2
obstetrics, 485
toxic metabolites, 135
emergencies,275-6
respiratory obstruction, 510
550 INDEX
Horse (contd.)
Hypoglycaemia,56-7
small mammals, 464
sedation of standing animal,
Hypoproteinaemia, 21
snake,471
247-54
Hypotension
stoat, 469
acepromazine,253
a utonomic reflex activity,519
weasel, 469
C2 adrenoceptor agonists,
cattle, 337
Ind uction monitoring,30, 31
24852
consequences, 39-40
Inferior alveolar nerve block,
benzodiazepines, 252-3
definition, 39
dog,433
dhloral hydrate, 253
hypovolaemia,518-19
Infiltration analgesia, 234-5
drug combinations,253-4
inhalational agents in horse,
Inflammatory process, pain
opioid combinations,253-4,
268-9, 300
mechanisms,2-3
254
postanaesthetic myopathy
 Infraorbital nerve block
phenothiazines, 247-8
(rhabdomyolysis),273
dog,433
reserpine,253
treatment,39,518, 522
horse,257-8,258,259
for transportation,250
dog,386,419
Infusion apparatus, 200-2, 201
soft palate blockage of airway, 511
elephant, 364
Inhalation agents
specificnerve blocks,25765
fluid therapy 517
administration, 67-9, 68
auriculopalpebral,259
sheep and goat, 357
analgesia, 136
complications,263-4
Hypothermia, 55, 55, 528
apparatus,202-8
distal hindlimb desensitisation,
blood viscosity changes,200
 anaesthetic gases delivery,
263
cardiac surgery, 499-502
202-6
forelimb desensitisation,
temperature monitoring.500
dog,409
2623, 262
cat, 450, 459
safety checks, 508-9
infraorbital,257-8,258,259
neuromuscular block effects, 168,
vaporisers, 206-8
mandibular, 258-9,258
174
biotransformation, 134-5
mental,258,259
peripheral nerve stimulation
cardiovascular funcion
needle accidents,263
effect, 160
depression, 135
palmar/plantar,260-2
physiological responses, 500-1
horse,268, 300-2
supraorbital,258,259
29e ieos pue daaus
chemical stability, 134
spinal nerve anatomy,265
small mammals, 463,528
depth of anaesthesia
subarachnoid anaesthesia, 267
techniques for production, 501-2
assessment, 12
total intravenous anaesthesia
trauma surgery in dog, 428
drug interactions, 135-6
(TIVA)
Hypovolaemia, 5i8-20
general anaesthesia
induction regimes,283-8,284
cardiac arrest, 526
bird,474
long procedures, 296-7
central venous pressure
cat, 441,457-8
maintenance of anaesthesia,
monitoring,45-6
cattle,336
292-7
preoperative volume
dog,408,408-16
 medium duration procedures,
restoration, 23
elephant, 364-5
294-6, 295
Hypovolaemic shock, 520
horse,288-9,297-300
short procedures, 293-4
Hypoxaemia, 50,52
llama and alpaca, 360-1
tracheostomy,513
anaesthetic drug overdose, 516-17
monkey, 476
weight estimation,277,277
cattle,316-17
pig,379-80
Humanitarian considerations, 1
horse,269, 272-3
rabbit,467
Humidification of inspired gases,
recovery period monitoring, 31
rat,467
194-5
rodents,464
Humphrey ADE system, 212-13
Ibuprofen, contraindication in cat, 443
sheep and goat,355
Hydromorphone/acepromazine
Idazoxan,84,90
small mammals, 464
combination in dog, 398
xylazine antagonism in cattle, 318
induction chamber use see
5-Hydroxytryptamine,6
Idiosyncratic drug reactions, 25
Induction chamber
Hyoscine, 105-6
Immobilon,102-3,478
myocardial sensitization to
papaveretum combination
Large Animal, 78,99
catecholamines, 135
(Omnopon'), 96,106
deer,362
neuromuscular blocking drug
46 80p
horse,287-8
potentiation, 135-6
premedication,503
occupational exposure
non-inflammability, 133-4
Hyperalgesia,2,3,4
management,288
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Hypercapnia,50
Small Animal, 99, 387
occupational exposure, 144,
acid-base status, 54
Induction chamber
144-5,531
cardiac arrhythmias, 50,522
cat, 456, 456
pharmacokinetics,63-9
neuromuscular block
ferret, 469
blood solubility, 64-5,64,66
potentiation,168
gerbil, 469
brain tissue tension, 65-6
Hyperthermia, 55-6,528-9
hamster,469
clinical aspects, 67
Hypertonic saline, 521
hedgehog,470
induction speed, 66
Hypnorm', 102
mink,469
lung wash-in, 64
Hypnotics, 104
rabbit, 467
lung wash-out, 66
definition,75
rat, 467
overdosage, 66, 67
Hypoalbuminaemia,21
skunk,469
potency,67
INDEX551
recovery from anaesthesia,
practical management, 187-95
Intravenous regional analgesia, 236
66, 67
lung ventilators, 187-91,
cattle,331,331
uptake,63-4, 63,67,69
188,189,190
dog,434-5
volatility, 67
manual ventilation, 187
sheep and goat,346-7,347
pharmacology, 133-45
spontaneous breathing
Intravenous technique
physical characteristics, 133
movements abolition, 187
accidents,529
respiratory depressant effects,
pulmonary surgery,497
cat, 445,445-6, 446
69,135
thoracicsurgery, 182-7,493
cattle, 331
toxiceffects, 134
weaning, 191
dog,398-402,399,400
volatility,67
Internal pudendal nerve block see
 catheter insertion, 401
Injectable agents, 113-29
Pudic nerve block
intraosseous injection,401-2
bird, 473-4
Intracranial pressure elevation,
vascular port, 402
rat,467, 467
dog,426
horse,277-80,278
Inotropicsupport
Intraosseous injection, dog, 401-2
llama and alpaca, 358-9,359
followiing cardiac arrest, 527
Intraperitoneal injection, pig,373-4
mouse, 468
horse,301-2
Intrapleural analgesia, dog,434
pig,372,372-3,373
Inspiration,179, 179
Intrasynovial analgesia, 234
rabbit,466
Insulin therapy
dog,428, 434
sheep and goat, 349-50, 350
diabetic dog,392,392
horse,257
Inverted L block, 234,235
preoperative preparation,24
opioids,257,428
cattle,322
Insulinoma,57
Intrathoracic surgery,493-505
sheep and goat, 346
Intensive care, lung ventilation, 194-5
cardiac surgery,498-505
Iron therapy, preoperative, 24
Intercompartmental pressure in
closure of chest, 493-6
Isoflurane,11,140-1, 142
limbs, horse, 273
diaphragm rupture
blood pressure response, 12
Intercostal nerve block in dog, 430,
repair,496-7
paediatric patients,39
433-4
oesophageal surgery, 496
caesarean section
Intermittent bolus doses, 72, 72, 73
thoracotomy,496
bitch,489
Intermittent positive pressure
pulmonary surgery,497-8
cattle,486
ventilation (IPPV), 179
 Intravenous agents, 113-29, 114
horse,486
adverse effects, 186
 administration apparatus,
sow,488
after opening pleural cavity, 184-7
197-202
cardiovascular effects, 12, 135,
cardiovascular responses,186
barbiturates, 114, 114-19
412-14
collapse of lung,184-5,185
 computer-controlled continuous
horse,268
mediastinal movement,185-6
infusion, 113
drug interactions in dog, 392
paradoxical respiration,
dissociative agents, 127-9
expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
185,185
drug delivery methods, 73-4
effect,181
cardiac arrest, 524,526,527
generalanaesthesia
eye movements,33
cardiac catheterisation, 499
cat, 441,450,451-6
general anaesthesia
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
cattle,333-6
bear,475
cat,459
dog,402-8
bird,474, 475
cattle,337
horse,283-8,284, 292-7,295
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
circulatory system effects, 183,184
llama and alpaca,360
cat, 458
continuous positive airway
monkey,475
cattle,336-7
pressure (CPAP), 191-2
pig.376-9
chelonia, 470
dog,415-16,419
rabbit,466
deer,362
 intracranial pressure
sheep and goat, 351-5,353
dog,409, 412-14
elevation, 426
small mammals, 464-5
elephant, 364,365
thoracotomy,429
less rapidly acting drugs, 125-7
ferret,469
expiratory phase subatmospheric
level of anaesthesia, 113
gerbil,469
pressure application, 184
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
guinea pig,468
expiratory resistance,184
pharmacokinetics, 69, 69-74
hamster, 469
face mask/inadvertent stomach
elimination half-life
horse,297-8,300
inflation, 187
(t）,70
 llama and alpaca, 360
gas flow rate,184
multicompartment model, 73
mink,469
horse,271, 305-6
one compartment model, 71-2,
monkey,476
caesarean section,486
71,72
pig,379,380
humidification of inspired gases,
total apparent volume of
rabbit,467
194-5
distrib ution, 69-70
rat, 467
intensive care, 194-5
 total elimination clearance
sheep and goat,355
mean intrathoracic pressure, 183
(Cle),70
skunk, 469
pig,374,375
two compartment model,
small mammals, 454
positive end-expiratory pressure
72-3,72
snake, 471
(PEEP), 191-2
rapidly-acting drugs, 119-25
hepatic damage, 135
 positive pressure application,
speed of reversal,113
induction/maintenance
1834
see asoInjectable agents
concentrations, 141
552 INDEX
Isoflurane (contd.)
 occupational exposure hazard,531
Laryngeal oedema, 529
inhalation ind uction in
premedication agents, 104,451
Laryngeal paralysis, postoperative in
foals,288
cat, 454
horse,307
minimum alveolar concentration
cattle, 331
Laryngoscope, 221-2,222,35
(MAC),35
horse,286,287
apparatus checks,509
neuromuscular blocking drug
sed ation
Laryngospasm, 12, 511-12
potentiation,135,168
monkey,476
prevention in cat, 447-8
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
pig,371
Laryngotomy tube,514
occupational exposure stand ards,
side effects, 17,128
Lash reflex, 13
144,144
management,81
Lateral saphenous vein injection, dog.
partition coefficient, 62, 65
triple drip'anaesthesia,175,295
398, 4001, 401
physicochemical properties,
pig,378-9
Left atrial pressure (pulmonary artery
133,144
wild animal anaesthesia, 477
wedge pressure), 46-7
recovery time,141
Ketamine/acepromazine
Levallorphan, 100
respiratory despression, 69
cat,455
Ligand gated channels, 6
total respiratory resistance (RrLIsu)
obstetric anaesthesia,484
Lignocaine (lidocaine), 228,229
effect, 181
 sheep and goat, 352
cardiac arrest,529
toxic metabolites, 135
Ketamine/benzodiazepine
cardiac arrhythmias, 499, 523
Isoprenaline, 527
cat, 455
dog,420
caesa rean section, 490
caudal block, obstetric anaesthesia
Jackson-Rees system, 211, 457,459
horse,295-6
in sheep and goat, 486
Jamshidi neelde, 402
 small mammals, 465
drug interactions in dog,392
Jaw fracture repair,dog,428,48
Ketamine/ diazepam
epidural analgesia
Joint dislocation reduction, 171
caesarean section in sow,488
butorphanol combination, 267
Jugular venepuncture
cardiac catheterisation, 499
cat, 460
cat, 446
dog,425
cattle,327, 486
cattle, 332
rabbit,466
dog,431, 432
dog, 398,401, 401
sheep and goat, 349,352-3
horse,266, 267,485
horse,277,278
dehorning,342
obstetric anaesthesia, 485,486
catheterisation,278-80, 279
Ketamine/medetomidine, 87-8
sheep and goat,342, 343,345
llama and alpaca,358-9, 359
cat,455
xylazine combination,267
sheep and goat, 349-50
caesarean section, 490
infiltration analgesia, 234
Jugular venous pressure, 18
deer,362
intravenous regional analgesia
dog,406
cattle, 331
Ketamine, 104, 114,128-9
large Felidae,460
dog,434-5
aterial blood pressure reponse,
rabbit,466
 sheep and goat,346
12, 39
sheep and goat, 353
laryngospasm prevention in
concurrently administered
small mammals, 465
cat, 447
agents,128
Ketamine/xylazine,87,128
local analgesia
detomidine combination in
caesarean section in catle, 486
castration in horse, 264
deer, 362
camel,363
cat, 443,460
epidural nerve block,243
cat, 455
sheep and goat,341
eye movements/reflexes,33,34
deer,362
metabolism, 231
fentanyl combination in
dog,406
obstetric anaesthesia, 484,
rabbit,466
elephant, 364
485, 486
general anaesthesia
large Felidae, 460
paravertebral analgesia in
badger,470
pig,378
horse,265
bear, 475
rat, 467
pharmacokinetics,230, 231
bird, 472,473
sheep and goat, 349,352-3
specificnerve blocks
cat,450,453
 small mammals, 465
cattle,320, 329
cattle, 335
Ketoprofen, 92-3
dog,431
dhelonia,470
dog,390
horse see Horse
dog, 393,406
horse,255
sheep and goat,342,346
guinea pig, 468
systemic/toxic effects, 231-2
horse, 286-7, 293,294, 295
Lack coaxial system, 211-12,
topical application, 233
mouse,467,468
212, 409
Lingual arterial pulse,36, 37
pig.378
feline anaesthesia, 457
Lion, 460
rat, 467
Lacrimation, 12, 13
Lip mucous membrane colour
sheep and goat, 352-3
Lagomorphs, 465-7,465
monitoring,39
small mammals, 465
inhalation agents, 467
Liver disease
snake, 471
intravenous agents, 466
dog,425,426
stoat, 469
postoperative analgesia,467
drug transport processes, 21
weasel,469
Laryngeal mask,172-3
intraoperative hypoglycaemia, 57
 obstetric anaesthesia in horse,
Laryngeal muscles, neuromuscular
suxamethonium duration
485,486
block sensitivity, 154, 155
prolongation,166
INDEX 553
Liver function, pregnancy-associated
Lofentanil, 98
 propofol combination,296
changes, 482
Lung collapse, 50
sedation
Llama and alpaca, 357-61
Lung cysts, congenital, 498
cat, 444
caudal epidural analgesia,358
Lung ventilators, 187-91
cattle,318
endotracheal intubation,
characterisitcs, 188-90, 188,
dog,385,387-9,416
359-60,359
189,190
horse,250
general anaesthesia,358-61
respiratory cycle,188
llama and alpaca, 360
inhalation agents,360-1
settings, 191
sheep and goat,348
intravenous agents, 360
Lung volumes
xylazine combination in dog, 398
preparation,358
airway resistance relationship,
Median arterial pulse,37
intravenous techniques,358-9
180,180
Median nerve block
local analgesia for castration, 358
 changes during spontaneous
cattle,330
manual restraint, 357
respiration,179,179,180
horse,262,262
peripheral nerve stimulation
Meloxicam
sites, 160
Magill system, 209-10, 210, 409
06e80p
premedication,358,360
feline anaesthesia, 457,459
horse,255
sedation,360
Magill tubes, 219,220
Mental nerve block in horse, 258, 259
soft palate blockage of posterior
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 4
Meperidine see Pethidine
nares,510
Malignanthyperthermia56
Mephensin,174
Local anaesthetic agents, 227-30
porcine,25,368-70,369,370,379
Mepivacaine,228, 229,258
drug interactions,233
prevention,370
horse
local toxic effects,233
treatment,370
epidural analgesia, 266,485
metabolism,231
Malnutrition, 166
specificnerve blocks,
mode of action, 226-7
Mamillary three compartment
258, 261
pharmacokinetics, 230-1
model, 72, 73
metabolism, 231
structural aspects,227,28
Mandibular nerve block, horse, 258,
obstetric anaesthesia, 484,485
systemic absorption, 230
258-9
pharmacokinetics, 230, 231
systemic/toxic effects,231-3
Mannitol, 426
Meptazinol,94
cardiovascular system, 232
Manual IPPV, 187
Metatarsal artery, direct blood
central nervous system, 231-2
Mapelson classification, 209, 209
pressure measurement, 44
respiratory system,233
Marmoset, 476
Methadone, 97
vasoconstrictor mixtures,230,233
Masseter muscle, neuromuscular
acepromazine combination in 
Local analgesia, 1, 16-17,225-44
block sensitivity, 154, 155
cat, 450
accidents, 530-1
Maxima breathing system,213
epidural nerve block, 242
camel,363
Mean arterial pressure (MAP),39
horse,256
cat,443, 460
Mean intrathoracic pressure, 183
colic,276
cattle,320-31
Mean residence time (MRT),
Methohexital, 118-19
castration,326
non-depolarising
caesarean section
deer, 362
neuromuscular blocking
cat, 490
dog, 430-6
agents,164,165
horse,486
fracture management, 236
Meclofenic acid, 254
general anaesthesia
horse, 91, 257-67,300
Medetomidine,35, 84, 88-90
cat, 451-2
castration,264, 264-5
antagonism,91
cattle,334
infiltration analgesia,234-5
cattle,319
dog,403-4
intraoperative analgesia,
atipamezole reversal
horse,285, 294
91, 300
cat,444
pig,377
intrasynovial analgesia, 234
llama and alpaca,360
rabbit,466
intravenous regional analgesia
blood pressure response, 39
sheep and goat,352
(IVRA),236
caesarean section in sow, 487
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
llama and alpaca, castration, 358
epidural analgesia,242
Methotrimeprazine, 76,79
muscle tone abolition, 150
cattle,328
etorphine combination, 99
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
dog, 432
sedation/analgesia in dog, 387
pig,381-3
ketamine combination, 87-8, 128
Methoxamine,83
postoperative analgesia,306
cat,455, 490
cardiovascular depression in
pre-emptive analgesia,5
deer,362
horse,302
regional nerve blocks,234,235
dog 406
Methoxyflurane, 140
sheep and goat,341-7
largeFelidae,460
caesarean section in bitch, 488
small mammals, 464
rabbit,466
general anaesthesia
spinal nerve blocks see Spinal
sheep and goat, 353
cat, 458
nerve blocks
small mammals, 465
mouse, 468
surface analgesia,233
premedication, 124
neuromuscular block
catheter insertion, 197
caesarean section in bitch, 488
potentiation,168
toxicity, 16
cat,451
pharmacokinetics, 66
see also Epidural analgesia
cattle,332
induction speed, 66
Local analgesic cream, 197, 233, 446
dog,388
physical characteristics, 133
554INDEX
Methoxyflurane (contd.)
urine volume, 56
dog,393
renal damage,135, 140
Monkey
Needles, 197
 toxic metabolites, 135
fluid therapy, 470-1
intravenous techniques in horse,
Methylprednisolone,426,529
general anaesthesia,475-6
277,278
Metocurine, 165
handling.475
occupational hazards, 531
Metomid ate, 121-2
postoperative care, 477
small vein, 200,200
general anaesthesia
sedation,476
Negligent delegation to assistant,2
horse, 286
Morphine,94,95,96
 Neostigmine, 152, 169,170-1, 304
pig.376
acepromazine combination
atropine neutralization of
sedation
cat, 442, 450
muscariniceffects, 105
caesarean section in sow, 487
86e8op
dog,418
Midazolam, 82-3
cat, 442
overdosage,25
ketamine combination, 128
diazepam combination in
Nephrotoxicity,22,414
cat,455,490
dog.495
inhalation anaesthetics, 135
oxymorphone combination in
epidural analgesia, 96,241
Nerve block, 226-7
dog, 407
dog,428,430,431,433,434
Nerve fibres, 225-6
premedication
horse, 257
diameter-function relationship,
cardiopulmonary bypass,
sheep and goat, 346,357
226, 226
809
horse,256, 257,300
Nerve growth factor,2
cat, 451
colic, 276
Neuroleptanalgesia, 101,101-2,
propofol combination for cardiac
intra-articular
102, 104
catheterisation, 499
dog,428, 434
cat, 442
sedation
horse,257
dog,397,398,407-8,425
cat, 445
pontine reticular formation
small mammals, 465
horse, 253
actions,7-8
Neuroleptics, 75, 76
sheep and goat, 348
postoperative analgesia
opioid combinations see
sufentanil combination in dog,
caesarean section,487,491
Neuroleptanalgesia
407-8
cat,459,491
Neurologic disease, dog,425-7,427
Middle latency reponse (MLR), 10
diaphragm rupture
intracranial pressure elevation,
Minaxolone, 121
repair,497
426
 Minimum alveolar concentration
sheep and goat, 487
myelography,426-9
(MAC), 15,35
premedication
Neuromuscular blocking agents,
pregnancy-associated changes,
caesarean section in bitch,487
149-75
482,483, 484
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
antibiotics potentiation, 275,
Minimum infusion rate (MIR), 15
 protein-bound transport, 21
392, 417
Mink (Mustela vison),469
side effects, 25
caesarean section
Mitral insufficiency, dog, 423
Mouse, 467-8,468
bitch,490
Mivacurium, 164, 173
physiological measurements, 464
sow,487
pharmacokinetics, 165
Mouth examination, preoperative, 19
cardiaccatheterisation,499
Monitoring,29-57
Muscle blood flow, horse, 273,274
 cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
anaesthetic gas analysers, 35,
Muscle relaxants see Neuromuscular
cat, 459
35-6
blockingagents
endotracheal intubation,
anaesthetic records, 30,31
Muscle tone, 149
445, 446
behavioural/physiological
depth of anaesthesia assessment,
cattle, 337
parameters,31
12,31
centrally acting agents, 149-50,
blood glucose,56-7
Musculocutanoues nerve block,
174-5,191
body temperature,55-6
horse,262-3
clinical use,171-4
cardiovascular function, 34, 36,
Myasthenia gravis, 168-9
contraindications, 172
36-48
Myelin sheath, 225, 226
indications, 171-2
cattle,337-8
Myelography,425-6
technique,172-4
central nervous system, 31, 33,
Myocardial sensitization to
depolarisingagents, 153,154,
33-4,34
catecholamines, 135,429
165-8
dog, 418,428
 Myopathy see Postanaesthetic
phase 11 block, 153, 157, 169
equipment checks,57,509
myopathy
dog,416-18, 417
equipment maintenance, 29
termination of block, 417-18
horse, 281
Nalbuphine,100
drug interactions, 168
initiation,30
Nalorphine, 93,101
electrolyte interactions, 169
levels,31,32
Naloxone,93, 94, 95,101, 103, 288,
evoked recovery, 169-71
neuromuscular blockade,57,
516-17
factors determining response,
155-61
obstetric anaesthesia reversal,
168-9
preoperative sedation,30-1
483, 485
horse, 302-5
recovery period,31
puppies,487-8
termination of block, 304-5
respiratory rate,34
Naltrexone, 101, 510
hypothermia effects, 168, 174
respiratory system,48-55
Naproxen
inhalation anaesthetic
sheep and goat, 354,356-7
contraindication in cat,443
potentiation, 135
INDEX 555
laryngeal spasm management,512
second gaseffect,136-7,409
Opioid analgesics, 35,93-6, 95
monitoring,57,155-61
vaporizer administration,678
acepromazine combination,
dinical evaluation of residual
NMDA antagonists
cat, 450
paralysis, 159
epidural nerve block,243
agonists,94,96-9
muscle sensitivity, 154-5
pre-emptive analgesia,5
antagonists, 93,101,510-11
acetylcholine receptor
Nociceptin (orphanin FQ), 34
aterial blood pressure reponse, 12
number/density, 154
Nociceptors, 2
cat, 442,441, 450,459-60
muscle fibre size, 154
Nocistatin, 4
clinical actions, 94-5
perfusion factors, 154-5
Nodes of Ranvier, 225, 226
dog,397-8,418-19, 418,422, 423,
respiratory muscles,154
Non-inflammability, 133-4
430, 4312, 433
non-depolarising(competitive)
Non-rebreathing systems, 209-13
epidural analgesia, 96, 150,241-2
agents, 153,154,161-4
coaxial systems,211-12, 212
detomidine combination, 257
pharmacokinetics, 164-5
flow rates, 213
dog,431-2,433
obstetric anaesthesia, 484, 485
Magill system, 209-10, 210
horse,257,267
pig,380-1,381
 Mapelson classification, 209,
postcaesarian section in sheep
postoperative complications, 174
209
and goat, 487
sensitivity with neuromuscular
modifications, 212-13
horse,255-7,256,267,281, 300,485
disease, 168-9
T-piece system, 210-11, 211
colic,276
ventilatory support, 154
Noradrenaline,3,83
intra-articular, 257
reversalfor weaning,191
 adrenoceptor interactions, 6
intraoperative,95
Neuromuscular disease,
local anaesthetic mixtures, 230
dog,418-19, 430
neromuscular block
neuromuscular transmission
horse, 300
sensitivity,168-9
actions, 152
obstetric anaesthesia, 483,485
Neuromuscular junction
Norman system, 409
horse, 485
acetylcholine nicotinic receptors,
NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-
partial agonists, 94, 95, 99-100
151,152, 152
inflammatory drugs), 22,
 use as antagonists, 101
desensitisation,152-3
91-3
postoperative analgesia
end plate ion channel block, 152
cat, 442, 442-3
cat, 459-60
presynatpic acetylcholine
COX 2sparing agents, 255
dog, 422, 423
receptors,152
dog,390-1, 428
monkey,477
receptor-gated ion channels,
epidural injection,243
sheep and goat,357
151-2
horse,254-5,281,300,306
pre-emptive analgesia, 5
Neuromuscular transmission, 149,
colic, 276, 277
premedication
150-3
pharmacokinetics, 255
dog,397-8
receptor-gated ion channels, 151-2
side effects, 255
horse, 281
Neuropathy, postanaestheticin horse,
mode of action, 91
sheep and goat,349
273,274-5,275
postoperative pain relief,6,306
receptor specificity, 934, 93
Nitric oxide synthase inhibitors, 243
Nutrition, preoperative in horse,275
sedation
Nitrous oxide, 136-7
Nystagmus, 13,33
deer,361, 362
analgesia, 136,137
sheep and goat,348-9
Obstetric anaesthesia, 481-91
sedative combinations, 101-3
delivery apparatus, 205-6
cat, 490-1
horse,253-4,254
diffusion hypoxia, 66, 137
cattle,486
sequential analgesia, 100-1
gas cylinders, 205
dog 487-9
sheep and goat,348-9,357,487
general anaesthesia
goat,486-7
side effects, 93, 95
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
horse,484-6
respiratory depression, 93,94,
cat,457
pig,487-8
95,516
cattle,337
sheep,486-7
vomiting,30,76,80
dog, 409,410, 414-15
Obstructive pulmonary disease,
Opioid receptors, 3, 93-4
horse,299
chronic (COPD), 181
endogenous ligands, 93
monkey,476
Occupational exposure, 531
stimulation effects,94
pig,380
inhalation anaesthetics, 139, 144,
 Organophosphate insecticide-drug
rabbit, 467
144-5, 531
 interactions, 445
sse 'eo8 pue daaus
Large Animal Immobilon, 288
ORL-1 (opioid receptor-like)
inhalation agent flammability
standards,537
receptor,3
influence, 134
halothane,144,144
Orphanin FQ (nociceptin),3-4
intravenous anaesthesia (IVA), 114
Oculocardiac reflex, 103
Orthopaedic surgery, dog,428,428-9
neuromuscular blocking drug
Oedema,preoperative, 18
Oscillometricblood pressure
potentiation,135
Oesophageal stethoscope,36,37-8
measurement, 42,42-4
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Oesophageal surgery,496
Ostrich, 475
 occupational exposure stand ards,
'Omnopon',96
Oxygen availability, 51
144
"Omnopon-Scopolamine',96
cardiac output relationship,
physical characteristics, 133
Open breathing systems, 208-9
19-20,51
potency,67
Operating table,horse positioning,
Oxygen cylinders, 202
respiratory despression,69
2912, 291
 pin-indexed fittings,202
556 INDEX
Oxygen delivery
hyoscine combination, 96, 106
cow, 486
equipment checks,57,508
46 8op
sheep and goat,487
hypoxaemia,517-18
premedication
 postoperative analgesia
warning devices, 205
caesarean section in bitch,487
cat, 459
Oxygen partial pressure (PaO2),49,
cardiopulmonary bypass,506
 diaphragm rupture
49,50
Paravertebral block, 150
repair, 497
Oxygen saturation (SaO2),
cattle,322-5,323,324
rabbit,467
49,51
caesa rean section, 486
rat,467
pulse oximetry, 51,52
horse,265,265
sheep and goat,357
Oxymorphone
obstetric anaesthesia,484
sheep and goat,348,357,487
acepromazine combination in
sheep and goat, 346
pH, arterial blood, 49,49
dog,398
caesarian section,486,487
Phaeochromocytoma,55
diazepam/midazolam
Partial pressure (tension), 61
Pharmacodynamics, 61-74, 62
combination in dog,407, 425
Partition coefficient, 61-2
definitions, 61
epidural analgesia, 96,242
inhaled anaesthetics, 65
Pharmacokinetics, 61-74, 62
dog, 431-2, 433,434
Patent ductus arteriosus, dog, 4234
definitions,61
Oxytocin, 483
Pedal reflex, 33-4
inhaled anaesthetics, 63-9
bitch, 489
Penicillin, 275
intravenous anaesthetics, 69,
horse, 486
Pentazocine,95,100
69-74
sow, 488
horse,256
local anaesthetics, 230-1
sequential analgesia, 100
non-depolarising neuromuscular
Pacemaker insertion,505,505
Pentobarbital,104,1267
blocking agents, 164-5, 165
Pacing, external, 527
clinical role, 127
 pregnancy-associated changes,
Paediatric patients
depth of anaesthesia,34
476
arterialblood pressure, 39
general anaesthesia
Phencyclidine,127
blood volume assessment, 48
cat,452
sedation in pig. 371
general anaesthesia
cattle, 334-5
Phenothiazines, 12, 75, 76, 76-9
kittens, 459
dog.404
antiemetic actions, 76
puppies,394,394
pig,377-8
horse,247-8
hypoglycaemia,56
sheep and goat, 352
opioid combinations
hypothermia, 528
small mammals, 465
(neuroleptanalgesia), 101
inhalation ind uction in foals,
intratesticular injection in pig.378
premedication, 103-4
288-9
sedationin cattle,320
cat, 450
neuromuscular block
Peribulbar nerve block, cattle, 321-2
L6e"8op
response,168
Perica rditis, 498
sedation
Pain,2-6
Peripheral arterial palpation
cat, 443
afferent mechanisms,2-3
blood pressure estimation, 40
dog,385-7
central processes, 34
pulse,36,37,37
side effects,76
functional imaging 4-5
Peripheral nerve block, 150
Phenylbutazone, 92
control, 5-6
Peripheral nerve stimulation,
dog,390
definition in animals, 5
155-61, 156
drug interactions,25
evaluation,422
d ouble burst stimulation (DBS),
endotoxic shock,521
Palmar/plantar nerve block, horse,
158,158
horse,254, 255
260-2
hypothermia effect, 160
Phenylephrine,83,302
abaxial sesamoid injection
muscle twitch appraisal, 158-9
local anaesthetic mixtures, 230
technique,260-1,261
overstimulation, 160-1
Physiological dead space:tidal
indications, 262
single twitch, 156
volume ratio,horse,271
 metacarpal/metatarsal injection
stimulation sites,159-60
Pig,367-83
technique, 261
tetanus, 157-8
airway management,368,368
terminal digital nerves, 261-2
train-of-four (TOF), 156-7, 156,157
caesarean section, 487-8
Palpebral reflex, 13, 33
Peroneal nerve block
castration, 382-3
Pancuronium,162, 173
cattle,330,330
intratesticular anaesthesia, 378
cattle, 337
horse,263, 263
endotracheal intubation,
dog,417,417
sheep and goat,347,347
374-5,374
horse, 304
Petersen eye block, cattle,321, 321, 322
epidural analgesia,381,381-83
inhalation agent potentiation,
Pethidine, 96-7, 100
general anaesthesia,367,371-81
168
acepromazine combination
inhalation agents, 379-80
obstetric anaesthesia, 485
cat,442
intravenous agents, 376-9
pharmacokinetics, 165
dog.398
premedication,37172
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
cat, 442
preparation,371
response,157
epidural nerve block, 241
recovery,368
verapamil interaction,152
horse,256
intramuscular injection, 368
Papaveretum,96
colic, 276
intraperitoneal injection,373-4
acepromazine combination, 96
 postcaesarean section analgesia
intravenous technique,372-3,
cat, 4.50
cat,491
372,373
INDEX557
laryngeal spasm, 511
horse,306
Preoperative evaluation, 17-19
local analgesia, 381
monkey,477
biochemical tests, 19
malignant hyperthermia, 25,
pain evaluation,422
cardiovascular function, 17-18,
368-70,369,370,379
pre-emptive analgesia,5
19-20
neuromuscular blocking agents,
pulmonary surgery,498
renal function, 18,19,21-2
167-8,378-9,381
rabbit,467
respiratory function,1819,
obstetric anaesthesia, 487-8
rat,467
19-20
pleural cavity drainage,495
sheep and goat, 357,487
see also Preanaesthetic preparation
regurgitation,513
 small mammals, 465 
Pressure gauges, 202,203
respiratory problems, 376, 510
Postoperative care
Pressure red ucing valves/regulators,
restraint, 367-8,367,370
cat,459-60
203, 205
sedation, 370-1
dog,420-3
Prilocaine,228, 229
Pinna stimulation,13
Potency,inhaled anaesthetics, 67
pharmacokinetics, 230
Pipecuronium,163
Power spectrum analysis,
Primates, non-human, 475-7
pharmacokinetics, 165
electroencephalography
see also Monkey
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
(EEG),9, 9-10, 10
Procaine,227,228
response,157
 Preanaesthetic preparation, 22-4
metabolism, 231
Pipeline systems, 205
cat,439
topical application, 233
Placental drug transfer, 482-3
diabetes mellitus,24
Projectile syringes, 477-8,478
C adrenoceptor agonists,484
dog.391-96
Promazine, 76,79
neuromuscular blocking
a uscultation of thorax,397-8
sedation/analgesia in dog,389
agents,485
fluid and electrolyte balance,23
Promethazine,76,79,529
opioids,483,485
food and water intake, 22-3
Propionylpromazine,76,79
Plantar nerve block
haemoglobin, 24
premedication in cat, 450
horse see Palmar / plantar nerve
horse,275-6
sedation/analgesia in dog, 389
block, horse
colic, 276
Propofol, 114, 123-5
metatarsal block in cattle,
llama and alpaca,358
caesarean section
329,330
pig.371
bitch,488
Plateau principle,72
sheep and goat,349
cat, 489
Plenum vaporiser, 206
 small mammals, 463
cattle, 486
Pleural cavity drainage,493-5, 494
see aiso Preoperative evaluation
sow,488
Pneumothorax
Pre-emptive analgesia,5,91
ca rdiopulmonary bypass, 503
intermittent positive pressu re
Pregnancy, 481-2
cat, 451,453,490
ventilation (IPPV),
circulation changes, 481-2,483
cattle,336,486
184-5, 185
drug actions,483-4
clinical applications, 124-5
cardiovascular responses, 186
drug disposition,482-3
continuous infusion,405,405
mediastinal movement,
liver function, 482
dog,393, 404-5
185-6
local analgesia, 484
disposition, 124,124
paradoxical respiration,
renal function,482
eye movements,33
185,185
respiratory system changes,
horse,285-6,296-7
see also Intrathoracicsuurgery
482, 483
 llama and alpaca, 360
Polymixins,392
uterine blood flow, 482
mean utilization rate, 124, 124
Porphyria, 118
Premature ventricular contractions,
medetomidine combination,296
Portosystemicshunt,57
38-9
midazolam combination for
Position for operation, 529
Premedication, 17, 106-7
cardiaccatheterisation,499
horse,290-2,291,292,293
aims, 106
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Positive end-expiratory pressure
α2 adrenoceptor agonists, 104
pharmacokinetics, 69, 70, 74
(PEEP), 191-2
 analgesic agents, 106
recovery, 124, 125
horse,272
anticholinergic agents, 103
sheep and goat,354
Positron emission tomography
anxiolytic drugs, 103
dehorning, 341
(PET), 4
 arterial blood pressure
small mammals, 465
Postanaesthetic myopathy
response,39
xylazine combination, 296
(rhabdomyolysis),39,40
caesarean section in bitch,487
Propoxate hydrochloride,472
horse,272, 273-4
cardiopulmonary bypass,503
Protein-bound drugs,20-1 
treatment,274
cat,441,443,444,449-50
Pruritus, 233
Postoperative analgesia, 5-6
dog,386-7,390,396-8,397,487
Pseudocholinesterase, 231
caesa rean section
drug selection, 75-6
Pudic(internal pudendal) nerve
bitch, 490
elephant,364
block, cattle,325-6,324
cat, 484
horse,280-1,285
Pulmonary artery wedge
cow, 486
 llama and alpaca,358, 360
pressure see Left atrial
28t'reog pue daaus
monitoring,30-1
pressure
cardiopulmonary bypass, 504
pig,371-2
Pulmonary disorders, preoperative
cat, 459-60, 490
sedatives, 103-4, 124
evaluation,18,i9-20
diaphragm rupture repair,497
sheep and goat, 349
Pulmonary surgery,497-8
dog, 423,422-3,490
small mammals, 464
postoperative analgesia,498
558 INDEX
Pulse oximetry, 50-3, 51, 507, 508
Respiratory depression, 516
handling,463,464
dog,418,428
blood gas tensions, 50
local analgesia,464
horse,281
inhaled anaesthetics, 69
physiological measurements, 464
reflectance probes, 52-3
opioid analgesics, 93,94, 95, 516
preanaesthetic preparation, 463
sites, 52
respiratory rate,48
premedication,464
Pupil size, 13
Respiratory function
respiratory problems, 463,464
Pyridostigmine, 169, 170, 171
depth of anaesthesia assessment,
volume replacement, 464
12,31, 33
Romifidine,84,90
Quantiflex system,205
 pregnancy-associated changes,
dog,390
482, 483
horse,250,251
Rabbit(Oryctolagus cuniculus),
recumbency-associated problems
 acepromazine complications,
465-67,466
in cattle,316
253
physiological measurements, 464
spontaneous respiration, 179,
butorphanol combination, 254
Rat,467, 467
179-82
premedication,280-1,285,86
physiological measurements, 464
pressure changes, 180, 180
sheep and goat,348
 postoperative analgesia, 465
Respiratory minute volume
Ropivacaine, 230
Ratites,475
depth of anaesthesia
Rotameters, 203, 203
Rebreathing systems, 213-18
assessment,12
Rowson laryngoscope, 375
carbon dioxide absorption, 213-14
monitors,49
circle system, 215-16,410
Respiratory muscle responses, 12
Safety aspects, 1, 531
to-and-fro system, 214-15,
Respiratory obstruction,49, 509-10
see also Occupational exposure
215,409
Respiratory rate
Saffan, 119-21
dog. 409
depth of anaesthesia assessment,
caesarean section in cat,490
vaporiserlocation,216-18
12, 13, 34
dehorning in sheep and goat, 342
Records, anaesthetic,30,31
monitoring,48-9
general anaesthesia
Recovery from anaesthesia
Respiratory sounds, preoperative
bird,474
cat,459, 460
evaluation,18-19
cat,452-3,490
cattle, 338
Respiratory stimulants, 517
chelonia, 470
elephant,365
Respiratory system impedence, 181
dog,408
horse, 306-7
Respiratory system monitoring, 48-55
monkey,475,476
inhaled anaesthetics, 66
acid-base status, 54-5
pig,370,378
pig,368
arterial pH/blood gas tensions,
rabbit,466
Lseeo pue daaus
49-50, 49
sheep and goat,342, 353-4
Recumbency
capnography,53-4,53
small mammals, 463
cattle, associated problems,
pulse oximetry,50-3,51
stoat,469
315,316
respiratoryrate,48,49
weasel,469
horse
tidal volume,49
histamine release-mediated side
associated problems, 268, 270,
Respiratory system reactance, 181
effects, 119-20
271,273
Respiratory system resistance, 181
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
intraoperative positioning,
intermittent positive pressure
sedation for closure of chest, 495
290-2,291,292,293
ventilation (IPPV), 183
Salicylate, 91-2
Referred pain,2
Restraint, 1,2
Salivation, 103, 172
Reflexes, depth of anaesthesia
Resuscitation
cattle,316
monitoring,31,33-4
anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid
depth of anaesthesia
Regional nerve blocks, 234,235
reactions,529
assessment,13
Remifentanil, 98
cardiac arrest, 524,524-7
pig.369
Renal disease
emergencyequipment, 527-8
sheep and goat, 355-6
dog, 429,429
Reticular formation,7
Saphenous nerve block, horse, 263
intraoperative dehydration, 21,
Retrobulbar nerve block, cattle, 321-2
Saphenous vein puncture, sheep and
22, 23
Revivon,102, 103,516
goat,349
preoperative evaluation, 18, 19,
 Large Animal Immobilon
Scavenging system,531
21-2
reversal,287-8
apparatus checks,509
thiopentone use, 117-18
Rhabdomyolysis, postanaesthetic see
Second gas effect, 69, 136-7,409
Renal failure,acute,21
Postanaesthetic myopathy
Second messengers, 6
dog. 429
Rocuronium, 163
Sedation,2,75,76-91
intraoperative hypotension, 39
dog,416
02 adrenoceptor agonists, 83-90
intrinsic,22
inhalation agent potentiation, 168
α2 adrenoceptor antagonists,
postrenal (obstructive), 22
pharmacokinetics, 165
90-1
prerenal,21
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
benzodiazepines, 80-3
Renal function, pregnancy-associated
response,157
butyrophenones,79-80
changes, 482
Rodents, 463-5, 467-8
cardiopulmonary bypass, 503
Reptilia, 470-1
analgesia,465
cat, 443-5,450, 495
ketamine sedation,129
general anaesthesia
premedication,450-1
Reserpine, sedation in horse,253
inhalated agents, 464
cattle,317-20
Respiratory acidosis, 518
intravenous agents,464-5
deer,362
INDEX 559
dog, 385-9,386,495
pleural cavity drainage,495
Stoat(Mustela erminae),469
drug selection, 76
postoperative analgesia,357
Streptomycin, 392
horse,247-54
sedation,348-9
 Stress responses, drug
 obstetric management, 485
specific nerve blocks
metabolism, 20
premedication, 280-1
cornual,341-2,342
Subarachnoid anaesthesia, 236
monkey,476
digital nerves, 343
horse,267
phenothiazines, 76-9
inverted L,346
Sublingual vein injection, dog,398,
pig,370-1
paravertebral,346
401
caesarean section,487
peroneal,347,347
Sufentanil, 98
pleural cavity drainage, 495
tibial,347, 347
epidural analgesia, 96, 242
sheep and goat, 348-9
suxamethonium sensitivity, 167
dog.432
caesarian section,486
Shock,520-1
 midazolam combination in
Sedatives
Single photon emission computed
dog,407-8
definition, 75
tomography(SPECT),4
Supraorbital nerve blocks, horse,
opioid combinations, 101-3
Single twitch stimulation, 156
258,259
premedication,1034
Sinus arrhythmias, 38,39
Supraventricular arrhythmias, 520
Seizures,local anaesthetic toxicity,
Skunk (Mephitis mephitis),469
Surface analgesia,239
2312, 233
Sleep,7-8
Suxamethonium, 165,166-8
Seldinger technique, 198-9,280
Small mammals, 463-70
anticholinergic cover, 103
Semi-open breathing systems, 208-9
analgesia,463
cat, 447,448, 459
Septicaemia, 57
general anaesthesia
clinical use, 172, 173
Sequential analgesia, 100-1
inhalated agents, 464
dog,416,417
Sevoflurane, 143, 143-4
injectable agents,4645
drug interactions,25, 168
aterial blood pressure reponse, 12
handling,463, 464
 organophosphate insecticides,
caesarean section in bitch,488
hypothermia, 528
445
cardiovascular effects, 412-14
local analgesia, 464
genetic factors in response,169
horse,268
monitoring,463
horse,304
chemical stability/decomposition
neuroleptanalgesia, 465
monkey, 476
compounds,134, 144
physiological measurements, 464
muscle fasiculation, 166
compound A,414
preanaesthetic preparation,463
phase I1 block, 153
general anaesthesia
respiratory problems, 463,464
pig,380-1
cat,458
volume replacement,464
endotracheal intubation,375
cattle,337
Small vein set, 200, 200
malignant hyperthermia,368
dog, 409,412-4,489
Snake, 470-1,471
species sensitivity differences,
horse,298
respiratory tract, 470
166,167
pig,379,380
Snell infla-table, 291
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
sheep and goat, 355
Soda lime,57,68,134,142,21314
response,157
inhalation induction in foals, 288
compound A generation from
Suxethonium,165
minimum alveolar concentration
sevoflurane,414
Sweating, 12
(MAC),35
see also Carbon dioxide absorption
Synapsin I1, 152
obstetric anaesthesia,484
Solubility
Synaptic transmission, 6, 7
partition coefficient, 65
coefficient, 61-2
fast/slow signalling,6
physicochemical properties,
inhaled anaesthetics, 64, 64-5
general anaesthetic agent actions,
133,144
induction speed, 66
6-8
 Sheep and goat, 341-57
overdosage, 66
second messengers, 6
caesarian section,486
Somatosensory evoked responses
see also Neuuromuscular
castration, 342
(SER;SEP), 11
transmission
caudalblock,342-3,343,486
Somatostatin,epiduralinjection,243
Syringe drivers,201,201, 405, 405
endotrachealintubation,
Spinal malacia,275
Syringes, 197
350-1,351
Spinal nerve blocks, 236-44
occupational hazards, 531
epidural analgesia,343,344,3446
bradyarrhythmias management,
Systolic arterial pressure (SAP), 39
general anaesthesia,349-57
522
fluid therapy,356
drugs, 241-3
T-piece system, 210-11, 211,409
inhalation agents,355
effects,239-40
bird,474
intravenous agents,
cardiovascular, 239,240
cat, 457,4.59
351-5,353
epi-(extra-)duralinjection,236-9
Jackson-Rees modification, 211,
monitoring,356,3567
caudal block,240-1
457, 459
positioning, 355-6
epidural block,241
rabbit,467
preparation,349
subarachnoid injection, 236
 small mammals, 464
recovery,357
Spinothalamic tracts,2
Tachycardia,12
intravenous regional analgesia,
Squeeze cages, 477
preoperative evaluation, 18
346-7, 347
Squirrel monkey, 476
Tameridone,91
intravenous technique,349-50, 350
Status epilepticus, 82
Tension (partial pressure), 61
local analgesia, 341-7
Stephens machine, 409
Terapins, 470
obstetric anaesthesia, 486-7
Sterilisation of apparatus, 222
Tetanic fade, 151
560INDEX
Tetanic peripheral nerve stimulation,
cattle,337
Vagus-mediated bradycardia,
157-8
dog,406-7
103,104
Tetanus prophylaxis, 275
sheep and goat, 353
Vaporisers, 67-8,206-8
Tetracaine,228
Tilting table control method,
apparatus checks,508-9
metabolism,231
282,283
calibrated, 206-7
Tetracyclines, 392
Tissue perfusion monitoring,36,39
inside breathing circuit, 216-17
Thalamic pain centres, 2
Tissue solubility, 62
low resistance, 207-8
Thiamylal sodium, 118
To-and-fro carbon dioxide removal
occupational safety,531
Thiopental (thiopentone), 114, 115-18
system,214-15,15,409
outside breathing circuit,
accidental perivascular
Tolazoline, 90, 91
217-18
injection,529
sed ation reversal
uncalibrated, 206
 caesa rean section
cattle,318-19
Vascular port, dog, 402
bitch, 488
sheep and goat, 348
Vasculogenicshock,520
cat, 489
Tortoise, 470
Vasodilator therapy 521
cattle, 486
Total apparent volume of distribution,
Vasopressin, epidural
horse, 486
69-70
injection,243
sow, 487,488
Total elimination clearance
Vdc. 164,165,165
contraindications,118
(Cl), 70
Vecuronium,162-3,173
eye movements,33
Total intravenous anaesthesia
dog,417,417
general anaesthesia
(TIVA), 114
druginteractions,392
camel,363
horse,283-8, 284,292-7
horse,304
cardiac catheterisation,499
Total respiratory resistance(RrLlsu),
obstetric anaesthesia, 485
cat,451, 490
180, 181,181
pharmacokinetics, 165
cattle, 331,333-4
Total spinal block, 244
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation
dog, 393,402-3,488
Total thoracic compliance, 182
response,157
horse, 283-5, 284,293,
Toxaemia, 17
Vedaprofen,255
294,486
Toxicity
Venous access, 198
large Felidae,460
individual/species variation, 17
Venous admixture, horse,271
monkey,475
inhalation anaesthetic metabolites,
Ventilators,apparatus
pig,376-7,487
134-5
checks,509
rabbit, 466
Tracheostomy, 513-14
Ventricular arrhythmias,522-3
sheep and goat, 352
Tracheostomy tube,513-14, 514
dog,420, 420
small mammals, 465
Train-of-four (TOF) stimulation, 156,
Ventricular extrasystoles, 522
guaiphenesin combination in
156-7, 157
Ventricular fibrillation, 522, 523
cattle,331,334
Tranquillizers (ataractics), 75
hypothermia response, 500
liver damage, 117
Transpulmonary pressure, 179, 179
Verapamil, 392,522
liver metabolism, 116
Tricaine methanesulphonate, 471-2
pancuronium interaction,152
obstetric anaesthesia, 484
Trichloroethylene,379
Volatile anaesthetic agents see
plasma pH effects, 115-16
Trimeprazine, 388
Inhalation agents
presentation,118
Triple drip' anaesthesia, 175, 295
Voltage gated channels,6,7
protein binding, 20
pig,378-9
Volumetric(constantinfusion)
respiratory depression, 116-17
d-Tubocurarine, 161
pumps, 200,201
Thoracotomy,496
dimethyl ether, 161
Vomiting duringinduction,512
cardiac arrest, 526
horse,304
dog,429-30,429
hypercapnia potentiation, 168
Warfarin,25
intercostal nerve block, 433-4
inhalation anaesthetic
Wasting diseases, 17
intrapleural analgesia, 434
potentiation, 135
Water access, preoperative,3
pulmonary surgery,497-8
mode of action, 152
Water blanket,528, 528
Thyrotoxicosis, 55
 protein-bound transport, 21
Water mattress, 291
Tibial nerve block
Tuohy needle,343,343, 345,432
Weaning from IPPV, 191
cattle, 330
Turtle, 470
Weasel(Mustela nivalis),469
horse, 263,263
Weight estimation
sheep andgoat,347,347
Ulnar nerve block
elephant,363
Tidalvolume
cattle,329
horse,277,277
depth of anaesthesia
horse,262,262
Whisker reflex,34
assessment, 12
Utrasonography,cardiac surgery,499
Wild animals,477-8
monitors, 49
Urethane,126
Wright's respirometer,49
Tiger, 460
Urine testing, preoperative, 19
Tiletamine, 127
Urine volume monitoring, 56
Xylazine,39,75,83,84,86-7
aterial blood pressure reponse, 39
Uterine blood flow, 482
camel,363
induction in horse, 287
Uterine involution
cat, 4434
postoperative hyperthermia, 56
bitch,488
cattle,317-18, 332
zolazepam combination,
cow, 480
tiletamine/zolazepam
127-8, 445
horse,486
combination,336
cat,455,455-6
sow,488
caudal injection, 252
INDEX561
deer, 362,363
llama and alpaca, 360
Yohimbine,83,90, 517
dog, 387,432
obstetric anaesthesia, 485, 486
sedation reversal
medetomidine combination,
opioid combinations
cattle,318
398
in deer,362
llama and alpaca, 360
epidural analgesia, 242
premedication
sheep and goat,348
cattle,326-9
caesarean section in
detomidine/mepivacaine
bitch,489
Zero order processes, 71,72
combination in horse,485
cat, 450-1
Zolazepam, 83
dog, 432
cattle,331
horse
lignocaine combination in
horse,280-1,285, 286
induction of anaesthesia,287
horse,267
propofol combination, 296
sedation,252
sheep and goat, 345,346
reversal of sedation, 91
postoperative hyperthermia, 56
expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
cattle,318-19
tiletamine combination,
effect, 181
sheep and goat, 346,348
127-8,445
horse,248-9, 251,252, 267,
dehorning, 342
cat, 445,455, 455-6
294,479
epidural caesarean
cattle,336
acepromazine combination,253
section,345
dog,406-7
colic, 276
side effects, 87
sheep and goat,353
ketamine combination see
‘triple drip’ anaesthesia, 175,295
 Zygomaticotemporal nerve block,
Ketamine/xylazine
pig.378-9
deer,362