Klaus-DieterBudras·W.O.Sack·SabineRock
Anatomy of the Horse
vet
withAaronHorowitzandRolfBerg
Sixthedition
schlutersche
vet
C
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Klaus-Dieter Budras - W.O. Sack · Sabine Rock
Anatomy of the Horse
Anatomy of the Horse
Sixth Edition
 Professor em. Klaus-Dieter Budras
Institute of Veterinary Anatomy
Free University of Berlin 
Professor em. W. O. Sack t
Department of Biomedical Sciences 
 College of Veterinary Medicine 
Conell University Ithaca, New York 
 Dr Sabine Rock
Institute ofVeterinary Anatomy
Free University of Berlin 
Professor Aaron Horowitz
 Professor Rolf Berg
Dept. of Structure and Funtion
 School of Veterinary Medicine 
Ross University St. Kitts West Inds 
Science llustra tor
Gisela Jahrmarker, Diemut Starke, Renate Richter
Contributors 
Anita Wunsche, Christine Aurich, Jorg Aurich, Silke Buda,
Peter S. Glatzel, Hartmut Gerhards, Arthur Grabner,
 Ekkehard Henschel t, Bianca Patan, Astrid Rijkenhuizen,
 Harald Sieme, Bettina Wollanke 
schlutersche
Co-workers on the Atlas of the Anatomy of the Horse
Sixth Edition
Cover drawing
Renate Richter
German Editions Budras/Rock 1991; 1994; 1997; 2000; 2004; 2009
English Editions Budras/Sack/Rock 1994; 2001; 2003; 2009
Dutch Edition 2005
 Japanese Editions Budras/Rock/Hashimoto 1997; 2001; 2004
Spanish Edition 2005
Turkish Edition 2009
Contributions
A. Univ.-Prof Dr. Christine Aurich, Besamungsstation, Veterinarmedizinische Universitat Wien
O. Univ.-Prof. Dr. Jorg Aurich, Klinik fir Geburtshilfe, Gynakologie und Andrologie, Klinisches Department fir Tierzucht
und Reproduktion, Veterinarmedizinische Universitat Wien
PD Dr. Hermann Bragulla,Dept. of Biological Sciences, Lousiana State Universiy,Baton Rouge
Dr. Silke Buda, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie,Freie Universitat Berlin
Prof. Dr Hartmut Gerhards, Klinik fir Pferde, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Minchen
Prof.Dr Peter S.Glatzel, Tierklinik furFortpflanzung,Free Universitat Berlin
Prof. Dr. Arthur Grabner, Klinik fir Pferde, Freie Universitat Berlin
Dr. Ruth Hirschberg, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c.Horst E.Konig,Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Veterinarmedizinische Universitat Wien
Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. Hans-Georg Liebich, Institut fir Tieranatomie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Minchen
University of Calgary, Canada
Dr. Claudia Schluiter, Klinik fir Kleintiere, Unjiversitat Leipzig
Dr Bianca Patan, Klinik fir Orthopadie bei Huf- und Klauentieren, Veterinarmedizinische Universitat Wien
Ass. Prof. Astrid B. M. Rijkenhuizen, Department of Equine Sciences. Surgery Faculteit Diergenesskunde Universiteit Utrecht
Prof. Dr. Harald Sieme, Reproduktionsrmedizinische Einheit der Kliniken, Stiftung Tierarztliche Hochschule Hannover
Prof. Dr. Paul Simoens, Faculteit Diergeneeskunde, Universiteit Gent
 PD Dr. Bettina Wollanke, Klinik fir Pferde, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Minchen
 2011 Schlitersche Verlagsgesellchaft mbH & Co. KG., Hans-Bockler-Alle 7, 30173 Hannover, Germany
ISBN 978-3-89993-666-7 (Print)
ISBN 978-3-8426-8368-6 {PDF)
 A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from Deutsche Nationalbibliothek, Frankfurt, Germany.
ud kq ui aue u pandai aq nou keu exai pe sydeioud yoq ooq su jo saos au paaiasar sua 
photoprint, phototransparency, microfilm, video, video disc, microfiche, or any other means, nor may it be included in any
computer retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher.
 a pue unsd reu i a aq ar und s on uean u n pasnn e sap oa uosiad au
for damages.
Printing: Werbedruck Aug. Lonneker GmbH & Ko. KG, Stadtoldendorf, Gerrmany
 Printed in Germany
Contents
Preface
Chapter 1: Skin
1.
 The external Skin (common integument) .
2
 Chapter 2: Thoracic Limb
1.
The Skeleton of the Thoracic Limb . .
4
2.
Topography of the Thoracic Limb (Nerves and Muscles)
6
3.
 Cutaneous Innervation, Blood Vessels, and Lymphatic Structures of the Thoracic Limb
8
4.
Vessels, Nerves, and Deep Fascia of Carpus, Metacarpus, and Digit .
10
The passive Stay-apparatus of the Thoracic Limb .
12
6.
 Synovial Structures of the Thoracic Limb . .. . . :
14
 Chapter 3: Pelvic Limb
The Skeleton of the Pelvic Limb
.......
16
2.
Topography of the Pelvic Limb (Nerves and Muscles) .
18
3.
 Skin Innervation, Blood, Vessels, and Lymphatics of the Pelvic Limb
20
4.
Vessels, Nerves, and deep Fascia of Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Digit
22
.
 Passive Stay-Apparatus of the Hindlimb, also Hoof and Contents
24
6.
The Hoof (Ungula)
26
7.
Suspensory Apparatus of the Coffin Bone ( Distal Phalanx), Vessels and Nerves of the Hoof
28
8.
 Synovial Structures of the Pelvic Limb . . .
30
Chapter 4: Head
1.
 Skull and Dentition .
32
2.
 Skull with Teeth and Paranasal Sinuses
34
3.
Supf. Veins of the Head, Facial nerve (VIl) and Muscles supplied by the Facial Nerve
36
 Trigeminal Nerve (V-3 and V-2), Muscles of Mastication, Salivary Glands, and Lymphatic Structures
38
5.
Adnexa ofthe Eye ................
40
6.
The Eye . .
42
7.
 Nose and Nasal Cavity, Mouth and Tongue
44
8.
 Pharynx, Guttural Pouch and Larynx . . .
46
9.
 Larynx and Laryngeal Muscles
48
10. Head-Neck Junction and Ear 
50
Chapter 5: The Central Nervous System
1.
 The Brain ..
52
2.
 The Spinal Cord
54
Chapter 6: Axial Skeleton and Neck
1.
Vertebral Column with Thorax and Nuchal Ligament
56
2.
 Neck and Thoracic Wall
58
3.
 Deep Shoulder-Girdle Muscles, the Muscles of the ventral Part of the Neck and the visceral Space they enclose . . . .
58
 Chapter 7: Thoracic Cavity
1.
 Thoracic Wall, Respiratory Muscles, Lungs, and Lymphatic Structures
60
 Heart and Thymus
62
Chapter 8: Abdominal Wall and Cavity
1.
The Abdominal Wall .
64
2.
 Topography of the Abdominal Organs and Their Relation to the Abdominal Wall
66
 Spleen, Liver and Bile Duct, Pancreas, and Stomach with Omenta 
68
4.
Intestines .
70
 Chapter 9: Pelvis, Inguinal Region, and Urogenital Organs
 Bony Pelvis with Sacrosciatic Ligament, Supf. Inguinal Structures
72
2.
 Inguinal Area
74
3.
 Prepubic Tendon, Inguinal Canal of the Mare, Nerves of the Lumbar Plexus, Hypaxial Lumbar Muscles, and Udder 
76
Lymphatics, Adrenal Glands, and Urinary Organs
78
5.
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Pelvic Cavity
80
6.
 Female Reproductive Organs .
82
7.
 Male Reproductive Organs . .
84
8.
 Perineum, Pelvic Diaphragm, and Tail
86
 Chapter 10: Selected Body Systems in Tabular Form
1.
Muscles
88
2.
 Lymphatic Structures
101
 Peripheral Nervous System
104
4.
Cranial Nerves
108
 Contributions to Clinical-Functional Anatomy
112
 List of References
18.5
Index .
19.5
How to use this book
o padsan ym uogeuou aaih Aoeue jtydenodot yim buap sabed-ixat aun jo buuubiq aui ne suoonpoui paeiy au
the dissection of the areas shown in the figures. At the same time, they can be used as abbreviated dissection instructions.
Bold
 Boldface terms of anatomical structures serve foremphasis and, insofar as they are identified by numbers, they are representedonthe neigh-
boring illustration-page where they are identified by the same number.
ltalics
 The comparative anatomical aspects respecting the species-specific features of the horse are accentuated by using italics. However, if horse-
specific details are continuously discussed in the text (for example, the stay apparatus of the horse), then the descriptions are written in nor-
mal lettering. The weighting of each of the anatomical details according to their significance is shown by the use of different character styles,
figure captions and cross references to the section "Contributions to Clinical-Functional Anatomy". Bold face type is used in the text for
 emphasis and the associated numbers refer to the figures. Less important details are not presented in the text, only in the figure legends. If
a minus sign is present in the figure legends of the skeletal system (see Figs. 5, 17, 33, 35 and 74), this means that the structure is not found
in the horse, but may be present in other domestic mammals.
Abbreviations
 The anatomical/medical terms and expressions occurring in the text are explained and interpreted in “Anatomical Terms". Abbreviations
of anatomical terms follow the abbreviations as employed in the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (2005). Other abbreviations are explained
 in the appertaining text, and in the titles and legends for the illustrations. A few abbreviations that are not generally employed are listed
here:
 The cranial nerves (Nervi craniales) are designated
Vertebrae:
with roman numerals I-XI1.
vC
 - Vertebra cervicalis (e. g., vC - third cervical vertrebra)
vL
- Vertebra lumbalis
Spinal nerves (Nervi spinales):
vS
 - Vertebra sacralis
n
- Nervus spinalis
- Ramus dorsalis n. spinalis
vT   - Vertebra thoracica
nd
ndl
 - Ramus dorsolateralis
 ndm - Ramus dorsomedialis 
nv
 - Ramus ventralis
nvl
 - Ramus ventrolateralis
nvm
 - Ramus ventromedialis
nC
- Nervus cervicalis (e. g., nC1 - first cervical nerve)
nCy
 - Nervus coccygeus s. caudalis
nL
- Nervus lumbalis
nS
- Nervus sacralis
nT
- Nervus thoracicus
Numbers on the margin
 to the corresponding page in the topographical anatomy; e. b., "8.2" refers to the part numered , 2" on page 8.
Cross-references
Chapter 10:Selected Body Systems in Tabular Form
The captions of the anatomical figures in the section "Contributions to
1.Muscles
MLSOE
ORIN
INSRTION
ISNERATKGN RUNCT
mum because the identification of anatomical details with the aid of the
figure tables in the front of the book is straightforward. This effectively
fulfils the goal of providing an easily memorable exercise for students.
O
 The cross-reference numbers refer to both the plate number in the topo-
 graphical part of the book and the respective structure (Example: Teres
major, 7.1 = Plate 7, No. 1 in the legends).
The same principle is also used in the special anatomy tables.
VI
Preface
With our three-volume work on the Anatomy of the Dog (1), of the
 and the completion of the chapters on the limbs. Clinically relevant
 Horse (2), and of the Bovine (3), we pursue the goal to show the
subjects of the head and abdominal and pelvic cavities including the 
structure of the body by illustrations that are true to nature accom-
 genital organs were more intensively illuminated with a view to col-
 aem e yons ui s op a ixai ued jq e Aq pd
ic and parturition. That concerns also the examination of the eye
practical matters are emphasized and irrelevant clinical and func-
and rectal exploration of the abdominal and pelvic cavities in
tional details are only mentioned. Generally valid principles, which
 preparation for sonographic examination of the sex organs with
hold for all species with only slight species-specific differences, as
 attention to the sexual cycle, artificial insemination and examina-
 for example the general anatomy of the autonomic nervous system,
tion for pregnancy. The clinical-functional part was enriched by
can be found in the Anatomy of the Dog (Vol. 1).
excellent illustrations from our anatomical archive. By their publi-
With the ever increasing importance of the horse as partner, helper,
cation in a suitable manner, the high scientific and esthetic value of
the figures may be appreciated and be of use for veterinarians, stu-
and sporting companion, we wanted with this submission of the
 dents and especially for equine medical science. In the clinical-func-
second volume to emphasize the esthetics, grace and genial func-
 tional portion, corrections, changes, additions and the addition of
tionality of the structure of the body but also to emphasize in our
color were undertaken on the archive figures. The labeling is but
book the susceptibility to diseases in allits naturalness. At the same
scarce and justified, since an identification of anatomical structures
time, we wanted to create an attractive basic contribution to animal
 by the aid of figure tables in the main part of our book is easily pos-
health and a practice-related curriculum concept. In the newest edi-
sible. In this way, we attain the aim of an easily remembered exer-
tion presented here, the comprehensive and thorough revision of
cise for the student. We thank our generous colleagues for provid-
both the text and the figures was continued. A main objective was
ing valuable viewing material from sources of modern imaging
 a   an  s a  o
 methods. These sources are mentioned in the key to the figures. We
anatomical main part with the clinical-functional contributions and
 are thankful for the cooperation of the following mentioned col-
the special anatomy in the form of tables into a uniform total con-
leagues in our community of authors: Prof. Dr. Rolf Berg, Prof. Dr.
 cept, doing this by copious illustration and descriptive references.
Aaron Horowitz, Dr. Bianca Patan, Proff. Christine and Jorg
The well-tried didactic concept of the nexus between descriptive
 and illustrative elements on respective opposite pages of the book
 Aurich, Prof. Dr. Astrid Rijkenhuizen, Prof. Dr. Harald Sieme, Dr.
Claudia Noller, Prof. Dr. Peter S. Glatzel, Prof. Dr. Hartmut Ger-
was understandably retained and further developed. In the topo-
 hards and Privat Dozentin Dr. Bettina Wollanke. The valuable and
 graphical main part, additions and improvements are concentrated
constructive ideas from our circle of readers, especially the students,
in the important, clinically significant, subjects such as the skin, the
were taken into consideration as far as possible. They are also very
hoof and its suspensory apparatus with links to founder, head with
welcome in the future. We suffered an extremely sad loss from the
pharynx and guttural pouch as well as the larynx, and arteries,
 passing away of our co-editor and friend, Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Sack,
veins and nerves of the pelvic cavity as also the perineal region in 
 regards to obstetrics.
 revision was wonderful and extremely beneficial for the improve-
-rd pe s u ais hs  oi hos
 ment of our book.
tice, the contributions to clinical-functional anatomy were most
intensively revised and most extensively completed. The close asso-
ciation between anatomy and orthopedics and their importance for 
 Berlin, in the summer of 2008
For the authors,
dxa a q aisn o n am a aa
Klaus-D. Budras
Chapter 1: Skin
1. The external Skin (common integument)
 On the horse, the colors and markings of the skin are definite. Pre-
irregularly distributed. The long hairs occur in the horse on the
sent markings, pigment-fre and haired areas are detected. With ds-
head as the forelock (cirrus capitis —5), on the neck as the mane
section of the animal body, notice has to be taken of the variable
(juba —6) and at the root of the tail as the cirrus caudae (7). In
thickness of the skin, hair coat, direction of the hairs and charac-
many equine breeds a distinct tuft of hairs is present at the flexion
teristics of the subcutaneous fat. The later dissection of the head can
surface of the fetlock of the thoracic or pelvic limb (cirrus pedis).
be used for the study of the vibrissae.
 The other parts of the skin are covered with ordinary hairs and
wool hairs (8), which are of variable character depending on the
a) Generally, the SkiN is subdivided into 3 layers. 1. The epidermis,
season. The roots of these hairs lie usually oblique to the surface in
which is the layer of contact as well as the protective surface, 2. The
the dermis. Hair tracts are formed by this alignment. The hairs can
corium or dermis, which assures the nutritive and sensory supply of
 be erected by the contraction of the smooth muscle cells (mm. arrec-
the epidermis, and 3. The subcutis or hypodermis, which serves as
tores pilorum), which are innervated by sympathetic nerves. In dif-
a displaceable layer and fat layer (panniculus adiposus externus).
ferent regions of the body, the hair tracts form diverging (flank) or
1. The epidermis (1) consists of a stratified, keratinized squamous
converging (forehead) hair whorls, hair sheaths (in extension of the
epithelium. Where the common integument bears hairs, the epider-
flank fold) and hair crests. The density of the hair coat varies with
mis is relatively thin in comparison to the different skin modifica-
the region of the body. It is most dense in the region of the head, less
tions as, for example, the hoof, where the epidermis is much thick-
 dense in the abdominal and inguinal regions.
The SEBACEous GLANDs (9) are holocrine secretory cutaneous
which rests directly on the basal membrane, a spinous layer and a
glands, which release their product, the entire non-living, fat-con-
granular layer. The avital, non-living, part consists of the stratum
 taining cells into the hair follicle. The sebum thus secreted forms a
lucidum, which is rarely present, and the stratum corneum, which
 thin fat film on the skin and hairs and ensures a sleek, glistening
make up the so-called cutaneous layer Besides the cells of the epi-
 coat. At the body openings such as the mouth (lips), the perineal
dermis, the keratinocytes, other cells of the basal layer are mela-
nocytes (protection against ultraviolet radiation) and LANGER-
region, the udder, the vulva and prepuce relatively large, "free"
sebaceous glands occur. These open onto the surface of the skin and
HANS cells in the basal and spinous layers (antigen presentation).
not into a hair follicle.
A semipermeable epidermal barrier protects the body against the
entrance of water and loss of fluid and regulates the absorption of
APocRINE swEAT GLANDs (10) are associated with the presence of
medicaments in ointment application.
hairs. Their excretory ducts likewise open into the hair follicle. The
secretion of the sweat glands consists of 97-99 % water, other con-
2. The dermis is subdivided into a papillary layer (2), which is
stitutents are electrolytes and proteins. Since in cases of stress up to
found directly under the epidermis, and a reticular layer (2'). It con-
10 ml secretion per kg body weight per hour is given off (500 kg
sists of connective tissue, which in the papillary layer contains finer
 horse = 5 liters per hour), considerable losses of water can occur due
and in the reticular layer, coarser, net-like connected collagen fiber
to sweating. Owing to the protein content of the secretion, with
bundles. In the dermis, there are blood vessels and nerves. Besides
exercise of the animal, a very visible foamy sweat is formed. The
supplying the tissues with nutrients and oxygen, the blood vessels
 apocrine sweat glands are enlaced by cholinergic sympathetic nerve
 have a thermoregulatory function, which is not inconsiderable. The
equine dermis is thinner than the bovine dermis. The thickness
 vessels running there and to the myoepithelial cells of the glandular 
varies between the different regions of the body and among the dif-
ferent breeds of horses.
end-pieces.
EccRINE swEAT GLANDs occur independent of the hairs and open
3. The subcutis (3) consists of loose connective tissue with fixed
freely, but they are very rare (e.g., heel (ball) segment of the hoof).
and freely movable cells, adipose tissue, which in the horse is of yel-
lowish color and oily consistency, and larger blood vessels. The sub-
 SINus HAIns (pili tactiles —11) are present on the upper and lower
cutis is fixed by taut retinacula to fascia or the periosteum of under-
lip as well as on the eyelids. These tactile hairs are considerably
lying bone and is distinctly more weakly developed in the horse
larger than the normal hairs. The root of the hair reaches deeply, far
than in the dog. In some body regions (lips, cheeks, eyelids) the sub-
into the reticular layer of the dermis, and is in contact with muscle
cutis is absent.
fibers of the striated cutaneous musculature. The connective tissue
 root sheath is subdivided by an irregularly chambered endothelium-
The nerve supply is realized by sensory and sympathetic fibers. The
lined blood sinus (12) into an external and internal lamina. A dis-
 sympathetic innervation of the blood vessels and sweat glands is
tinct basal membrane and the external epithelial root sheath are
related to thermoregulation, but is also a reflection of different
associated with the internal lamina. Many MERKEL cells, which
states of excitement (e.g-, sweating with high sympathetic tonus).
 are in contact with (myelinated) neve fibers, lie in the basal layer of
 Owing to the sensory innervation of the skin, it becomes the largest
 sense organ of the body. Besides free nerve endings, which serve as
the external epithelial root sheath. The MERKEL cell-axon com-
 plexes and free nerve-endings of unmyelinated nerve fibers are
pain receptors  and thermoreceptors, special receptor cells
excited by deviation of the sinus hair. The movement of the hair
(MERKEL cells) and specially structured nerve end-corpuscles
and, by this, the pressure on the receptors is reinforced still more by
(RUFFINI corpuscles, lamellar corpuscles -4) are located in the
skin. These function as pressure and tension receptors and receptors
compression of the blood sinus in the region of the hair follicle, by
which a very sensitive mechanoreceptor-complex is formed. The
for movement.
importance of the sinus hairs for mechanoreception becomes also
The haired skin is characterized by the triad: hair sebaceous gland
clear by the great number of sensory myelinated nerve fibers, which
and apocrine sweat gland.
 approach regularly the root of a sinus hair and are visible in the his-
b) The Hans (pili) are differentiated into long hairs, ordinary hairs
tological slide.
and wool hairs. Leading hairs are only very few in number and
2
External Skin (common integument)
7 Cirrus caudae
Lips
1 Epidermis
Dermis
2 Papillary laye
10 Apocrine sweat gland
 11 Sinus hair
2' Reticular
12 Endothelium-lined
bood sinus
Chapter 2: Thoracic Limb
1. The Skeleton of the Thoracic Limb
  The limbs of the horse are adapted for the well-developed ability to
numbered, first to fourth carpal bones (66), of which the first is 
10
run fast. Compared to the plantigrade stance (newborn dog) and
small and inconstant.
the digitigrade stance (adult dog), the overextended angulation at
e) METACARPAL BoNEs. Only Mc2, 3, and 4 are present. Mc1 and
the canine carpus has been lost in the horse. The horse is an
 5 have disappeared and Mc2 and 4 are greatly reduced in accord-
unguligrade animal and as a result of the straightening and length-
ance with the streamlining and lengthening of the limb for speed.
ening of its limbs is capable of a long stride. The loss of rays 1 and
Mc3, also known as cannon bone, is well developed and carries the
5, the reduction of 2 and 4, and the very well-developed digit 3 as
11
 entire weight assigned to the limb; it is a very robust bone with a lat-
the only one that supports the body are part of the same adaptation.
 eromedially oriented oval cross section. The caput at the distal end
The thoracic limbs in the standing horse carry about 55-60 % of
a ui aoo e saeua iei ap peies e suasad auoq aui jo
the body weight. The rider, by using the reins to flex the atlanto-
 proximal phalanx. Mc2 and 4, known also as splint bones, are slen-
occipital and nearby cervical joints, “shortens" the neck and thus
12
 der and about a third shorter than the cannon bone. The proximal
causes the center of gravity to move toward the hindlimbs. In hors-
bases (67) of the metacarpal bones articulate with the carpal bones
es of good conformation, the forelimbs appear straight and parallel
(Mc2 with C2; Mc3 with C2 and 3; and Mc4 with C4). The splint
to one another when viewed from the front. In lateral view, they
bones are connected to Me3 by fibrous tissue, their rounded distal
should appear straight and vertical. A plumb line from the palpable
 end is an important palpable landmark.
tuber (5') on the scapular spine passes through the center of the fet-
lock joint and touches the caudal aspect of the hoof.
f) The proximal, middle, and distal PHALANGEs (70, 71, 76) form
the supporting skeleton of the single third digit. The proximal pha-
The shoulder girdle (scapula, coracoid, clavicle of other animals) is
13
lanx, also known as Phalanx I (PI), is the longest of the three; it
greatly reduced; the clavicle has disappeared and only a fibrous
 presents a triangular rough area (70') on its palmar surface. The
strip (clavicular intersection) is left in the brachiocephalicus.
middle phalanx (Pll) is half as long as the preceding bone and pres-
14
2
 a) The equine ScApuLA is characterized by the wide, semilunar
ents a fexor tuberosity (75) on its proximopalmar aspect that, in
scapular cartilage (14) that enlarges its dorsal border. The spine
the fresh state, is enlarged proximally by a stout complementary
presents a palpable tuber and subsides distally opposite the neck of
fibrocartilage for the attachment of ligaments and the tendon of the
the bone without forming an acromion. An infraglenoid tubercle
supf. digital flexor. The distal phalanx (PIl) is also known as the
15
(20) is sometimes present.
coffin bone. It consists of spongy bone throughout and presents sole
foramina (76') and parietal grooves (76") as conduits for blood ves-
b) HuMERus. The greater (25) and lesser (29) tubercles on the lat-
sels. The medial and lateral hoof cartilages (76""') surmount respec-
eral and medial sides, respectively, of the proximal extremity are
16
tive palmar processes (76"") of the bone; they are slightly curved to
nearly equally well developed. Both tubercles are separated by a
conform to the curvature of the hoof. Their proximal border pro-
sagittal intertubercular groove (28) which is wide and carries an
 jects above the hoof where they can be palpated. The articular sur-
intermediate tubercle (28'). The latter fits into a depression on the
 deep surface of the wide biceps tendon and seems to impede move-
face (77) of the distal phalanx makes contact principally with the
middle phalanx, but has a small facet for articulation with the dis-
ment of the tendon relative to the humerus in the standing horse.
tal sesamoid bone. The flexor surface (79) of the coffin bone pro-
The body of the bone presents the teres major tuberosity (32') on its
vides insertion for the deep flexor tendon.
medial surface about opposite the much more salient deltoid
tuberosity (32) on the lateral surface. The distal end forms a cylin-
drical condyle (35) that transfers the weight onto the radius. The
condyle presents laterally a slight sagittal ridge flanked by grooves
Phalanges, Navicular Bone, and Hoof Cartilages
that fit into corresponding features on radius and ulna. The epi-
with some of their Ligaments
condyles, lateral (38) and medial (39), as well as the lateral supra-
condylar crest (38') are palpable. The shallow radial fossa (41) is
just proximal to the condyle on the cranial surface of the bone. The
lies opposite the radial fossa on the caudal surface. ( There is no per-
foration in the form of a supratrochlear foramen between the two
fossae.)
(lateropalmar view)
4: 6 c) Of the two bones, RADIus and UlNA,that form the antrebrachial
skeleton, only the radius supports the humerus in the elbow joint.
The radius on its proximomedial aspect presents the large radial
tuberosity (46) that serves as the insertion of the biceps tendon. At
the distal end of the bone, unobtrusive medial (50) and lateral (61)
79
styloid processes form the ends of the articular surface; the lateral
 process contains a distal remnant of the ulna.
The ulna is fused to the radius and with its olecranon limits exten-
 5
 sion of the elbow joint. Its proximal extremity (olecranon tuber, 52)
reaches to the fifth rib. The shaft of the bone is greatly reduced and
tapers to end in midforearm. The fusion of the two bones is inter-
rupted at an interosseous space (62) that is situated in the proximal
g) The proximal and distal SEsAMoiD BoNEs are of considerable
third of the forearm.
17
d) CARPAL BoNEs. The bones of the proximal row from medial to
articulate with Me3, while the single distal bone, known as the na-
18
7:8
lateral are the radial (63), the intermediate (63'), the ulnar (64), and
vicular bone (84), lies within the hoof and contacts both middle and
9
the accessory (65) carpal bones. The bones of the distal row are 
 distal phalanges.
4
Thoracic Limb
eindess
Costal surface (1)
Lateral surface (4)
Scapular spine (5)
Tuber of scapular spine (5)
Dorsal border (13)
ventral [articular] angle (17)
Glenoid cavity (18)
Neck of scapula (19)
Infraglenoid tubercle (20)
Coracoid process (22)
(Medial view)
Humerus 
(Lateral view)
Cranial part (25)
Caudal part (25 ")
Crestofgre
Triceps line (27)
htertubercular groove (28)
mediate tub
lé (28)
Cranial part (29")
Caudal part (29"
Body of humerus (31)
Crest of humerus (33)
33
ateral epicondyle（38)
Lateral supracondylar crest (38)
Medialepicondyle(39)
Olecranon fossa (40)
Radial fossa (41)
Radius
Head of radius (43)
(st) snipeu jo yoan
Radial tuberosity (46)
ea ot rad i4s (4
Medial styloid process (50)
Ulna
Olecranon tuber(52)
Anconeal process (53)
Trochlear [semilunar] notch (54)
Medial coronoid process (55)
Lateral coronoid process (56)
Radial notch (57)
Body of ulna (58)
Lateral styloid process (61)
hterosseus space (62)
Carpal bones 
Unar carpal bone (64)
Accessory carpal bone (65)
Frst, send,irdfo
arpal bones (66)
 Metacarpal bones Il-IV
Base (67)
Digital bones 
Proximal phalanx (70) 
Triangular rough area (70")
Middle phalanx (71)
Flexor tuberosity(75)
MclV
Mcll
dista
phalanx（76
Sole foramen (76)
68
Parietal groove (76")
Hoof cartilage (76)
Articular suraface (77)
Extensorprocess(78）
69
(mediopalmar)
Proximal sesamoid bone (83)
Flexor tuberosity (79)
(dorsolateral)
 Distal (navicular) sesamoid bone (84)
 2. Topography of the Thoracic Limb (Nerves and Muscles) cinical and Functi
tional Anat
my p. 118
The two Figures on the opposite page show the structures men-
addition to its large humeral head (33), has a small radial head (34)
tioned in the account below to best advantage. The following steps
known formerly as Phillip's muscle, whose thin tendon joints that
would reproduce the dissection upon which the two Figures were
of the lateral digital extensor to end on the proximal phalanx. (A
based:
tiny deeply placed ulnar head, formerly Thierness' muscle, is also
 present.) The tendon of the common digital extensor before ending
Skin the limb to the hoof (note the chestnut, the homologue of the
on the extensor process of the distal phalanx, attaches also on the
carpal pad, proximomedial to the carpus; the ergot, homologue of
 middle phalanx and receives the extensor branches of the largely
the metacarpal pad, caudal to the proximal phalanx is often hidden
tendinous interosseus (see p. 13).
in long hair). Remove the pectoral muscles and the subclavius
 The lateral digital extensor (36) presents a bursa at its insertion on
Preserve the blood vessels throughout. Transect the deltoideus at
 the proximolateral surface of the proximal phalanx.
the level of the shoulder joint. The tensor fasciae antebrachii and
the lateral head of the triceps are transected at their middle. In mid-
 The extensor carpi radialis (31) receives the lacertus fibrosus (see p.
forearm, the flexor carpi radialis and flexor carpi ulnaris are tran-
13) and terminates on the proximodorsal tuberosity of the large
sected.
metacarpal bone.
 In addition, transect the tendon of origin of the biceps brachii to
expose the intertubercular bursa; the supf. and deep digital flexor
The ulnaris lateralis (38; m. extensor carpi ulnaris) ends on the
tendons are lifted from the carpal canal after transection of the flex-
accessory carpal bone, and with a second, longer tendon on the lat-
 eral splint bone. Only the long tendon has a tendon sheath.
or retinaculum.
a) SHOULDER AND ARMS
 The extensor carpi obliquus (42; m. abductor pollicis longus) ends
 on the proximal end of the medial splint bone; its tendon is pro-
1
A) The roots of the brachial plexus (4) arise from the ventral
branches of C6 through T2.
tected by a synovial sheath and a subtendinous bursa.
 B) The axillary nerve (14) innervates the teres major (1), the caudal
C) NERVES AND MUSCLES ON THE CAUDOMEDIAL SURFACE OF THE
2
segment of the subscapularis (3), and, on the lateral side, the del-
FOREARM
toideus (6) and the relatively tendinous teres minor (13). The axil-
lary nerve ends by furnishing the cranial cutaneous antebrachial
The median nerve accompanies the brachial artery and vein over the
4
nerve (26) which supplies the skin on the cranial aspect of the fore-
 elbow joint where it releases muscular branches to the flexor carpi
arm. The subscapular nerves (3) innervate most of the subscapu-
radialis (28) and to the radial and humeral heads of the deep digi-
laris. The suprascapular nerve (9) crosses the cranial border of the
tal flexor (35; see p. 13). (The pronator teres of other species has
scapula and ends in the supra- (5) and infraspinatus (10) muscles.
 become the long part of the medial collateral ligament of the elbow
The sharp scapular border and the absence of an acromion are
joint; the pronatur quadratus is absent.)
thought to expose the nerve to mechanical trauma. The thora-
codorsal nerve (2) passes caudally to innervate the latissimus dorsi
The median nerve ends in the distal half of the forearm by dividing
(2). Median (8) and musculocutaneous (7) nerves join to form a
into medial (37) and lateral (39) palmar nerves. The medial palmar
loop (ansa axillaris) which supports the axillary artery as it passes
 nerve passes through the carpal canal along the medial border of the
into the limb. The musculocutaneous nerve, with its proximal and
 deep flexor tendon. The lateral palmar nerve crosses the musculo-
distal muscular branches, supplies the coracobrachialis (19) and
tendinous junction of the supf. digital flexor, receives the palmar
biceps (25), and the brachialis (20), respectively. It ends as the medi-
branch of the ulnar nerve, and follows the lateral border of the deep
al cutaneous antebrachial nerve (30). The proximal musclar branch
flexor tendon through the carpal canal. (The two nerves, after pass-
 passes deep (lateral) to the coracobrachialis to reach the biceps. The
ing the carpal canal, may also be termed the common digital nerves
3
radial nerve (11) releases a branch to the tensor fasciae antebrachii
(11I pue ⅡI
(21) before changing over to the lateral aspect of the arm. Proximal
muscular branches are given offto the anconeus (24) and the long
The ulnar nerve (12) lies caudal to the brachial vessels and, in the 
5
(15), medial (17), and lateral (16) heads of the triceps that lacks an
 distal third of the arm, releases the caudal cutaneous antebrachial
accessory head in the horse. The nerve then crosses the lateral
 nerve (23). After crossing the elbow joint the ulnar nerve releases
supracondylar crest of the humerus and splits into supf. (27) and
muscular branches to the flexor carpi ulnaris (41), the supf. digital
deep (18) branches.
flexor (32), and to the ulnar head (see p. 13) and the humeral head
of the deep digital flexor The nerve then passes distally in the cau-
b) NERVES AN MUSCLES ON THE CRANIOLATERAL SURFACE OF THE
dal border of the forearm. A few cm proximal to the accessory
FOREARM
carpal it divides into dorsal and palmar branches. The dorsal
The supf. branch of the radial nerve gives rise to the lateral cuta-
branch (43), palpable as it becomes subcutaneous at this location,
neous antebrachial nerves (29); none of these reach the carpusthe
 passes around the lateral aspect of the carpus to innervate the skin
 on the dorsolateral surface of the cannon. The palmar branch (40)
 dorsum of metacarpus and digit is supplied by the median and ulnar
nerves. The deep branch of the radial nerve goes to the craniolater-
 as already mentioned joins the lateral palmar nerve of the median
al muscles of the forearm.
 in the carpal canal.
The carpal and digital extensors arise from the craniolateral aspect
The bellies of the supf. and deep flexors form a partially fused mus-
of the distal end of the humerus and from the nearby lateral collat-
cle mass on the caudal surface of the radius. Their tendons distal to
eral ligament of the elbow joint. The common digital extensor, in
the carpus are described on p. 13.
6
Thoracic Limb
(Medial view)
(Lateral view)
1 Teres major
 2 Thoracodorsal n. and 
 latissimus dorsi 
 3 Subscapular nn., subscapularis.
 and brachial plexus 
 4  Roots of brachial plexus
5 Supraspinatus 
6 Deltoideus, resected 
7 Musculocutaneous n.
8 Median n.
9 Suprascapular n.
10 Infraspinatus 
11 Radial n.
12 Ulnar n.
13 Teres minor
14 Axillary rn.
Triceps brachii:
15  Long head 
16 Lateral head, resected
17   Medial head 
18 Deep branch of radial n. 
19 Coracobrachialis
20 Brachialis -
 21 Tensor fasciae antebrachii
 22 Cleidobrachialis 
 23 N. Caud. cutaneous antebrachial n. (ulnar) 
24Anconeus
 25 Biceps brachi
 26 Cran. cutaneous antebrachial n. (axillary)
27 Supf. branch of radial n. 
 28 Flexor carpi radialis, resected 
29 Lat. cutaneous antebrachial nn. (radial) 
 30 Med. cutaneous antebrachial n. (musculocut.)
31 Extensor carpi radialis -
32 Supf. digital flexor
33 Common digital extensor (humeral head) 
34 Common digital extensor (radial head) —
35 Deep digital flexor
28
36 Lat. digital extensor
 37 Medial palmar n.
38 Ulnaris lateralis -
39 Lateral palmar n.
40 Palmar branch of ulnar n.
 41 Flexor carpi ulnaris, resected
42 Extensor carpi obliquus -
43 Dorsal branch of ulnar n.
44 Lateral palmar a., v., and n.
45 Medial palmar a., v., and n.
46 Medial digital n.
47 Communicating branch
48 Lateral digital a., v., and n.
49 Dorsal branches of the digital a., v., and n.
47
47
A Supf. cervical lymph nodes 
 Collateral radial vessels
B
 Proper axilary ymph nodes
C
 Cubital lymph nodes
Dors. carpalbranch of collat.
a
Prox.muscular branch of
Lateral palmar metacarpal n.
ulnara
45
musculocutaneous n.
m
Medial palmar metacarpal n.
musculocutaneous n.
Distal end of medial splint bone
Accessory carpal bone
Mc2)
6
 Subscapular a. and v.
Distal end of lat. splint bone (Mc4)
Caud. circumfex humeral a. and v.
46
Flexorretinaculumand carpalcanal
S
Thoracodorsal a. and v.
Extensor retinaculum
deep to it
49
 Subclavius
Median cubital v.
 Pectoralis profundus
w Median a. and v.,
and median n.
 Cephalic v.
yAccessory cephalic v.
3. Cutaneous Innervation, Blood Vessels, and
Clinical and Functional Anat
my p. 118-119
Lymphatic Structures of the Thoracic Limb
a) CUTANEOUS INNERVATION
the latissimus dorsi, and the caudal circumflex humeral vessels (3)
which anastomose with the cranial circumflex humeral vessels, the
 The skin of the forelimb is innervated in the region of the scapular
last branches of the axillary vessels before the stem artery becomes
      s  a  n
the brachial artery. (The thoracodorsal and caudal circumflex
a aui aq pans s endes aui jo iapoq le ai raao eae
branch of the 6th cervical nerve (n. supraclavicularis). The large
humeral arteries are branches of the large subscapular artery and
therefore indirect branches of the axillary.) The cranial circumflex
region over scapula and triceps receives its innervation from the
humeral artery (22) accompanies the proximal muscular branch of
intercostobrachial nerve (1; from brachial plexus and the ventral
the musculocutaneous nerve deep to the coracobrachialis to the
branches of T2 and T3) which carries also motor fibers for the m.
biceps, while the often double satellite vein can cross the coraco-
 cutaneus omobrachialis.
brachialis on either surface. The supf. thoracic (spur) vein (5) aris-
The cranial region of distal arm and forearm receives skin sensation
es from the initial segment of the thoracodorsal vein, passes cau-
from the cranial cutaneous antebrachial nerve (axillary; 24). The
 dally, and drains the ventral part of the trunk.
lateral skin region of distal arm and forearm is supplied by the lat-
The brachial vessels (7) in midarm give off the deep brachial vessels
1
eral cutaneous antebrachial nerve (radial; 27). The caudal cuta-
neous antebrachial nerve (ulnar; 9) innervates the caudal, and the
(6) to the triceps, and more distally the bicipital vessels (25) to the
biceps. The transverse cubital vessels (26), the next branches, pass
deep to the biceps. From the caudal surface of the brachial vessels
medial surface of the forearm.
arise the collateral ulnar vessels (8) which follow the ulnar nerve.
Carpus and metacarpus receive skin innervation from the medial
 The last branches are the common interosseous vessels (28) which
cutaneous antebrachial nerve (29) for the dorsomedial surface,
 pass to and through the interosseous space. They often are contin-
from the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve (14) for the dorsolateral
ued by the cranial interoseous vessels.
surface, and from the medial (16) and lateral (15) palmar nerves for
At the level of the elbow, the brachial vein gives off the median
the palmar surface.
cubital vein (10) which provides an anastomosis to the cephalic
The medial surface of the digit is innervated by the medial digital
vein. After leaving the groove between brachiocephalicus and pec-
nerve (median n.; 17), while the lateral surface receives a mixed
toralis descendens, the cephalic vein (23) descends on the medial
innervation (median and ulnar nn.) from the lateral digital nerve
surface of the forearm. Already at the elbow joint it releases the
(see pp. 7 and 11).
accessory cephalic vein (30) which parallels the cephalic vein, but
inclines more cranially to end on the dorsal surface of the carpus.
Cutaneous Nerves of the Thoracic Limb
(craniolateral view)
The median artery and vein (11) continue the brachial vessels in the
forearm in close mediocaudal proximity to the radius. The vein is
often double. The median vessels give off one or two deep ante-
brachial vessels (12) which supply the caudomedial antebrachial
musculature. Proximal to the carpus they give rise to the proximal
radial artery and the radial vessels (31). The radial vein receives the
cephalic vein and as the medial palmar vein (16) passes subfascial-
ly over the mediopalmar aspect of the carpus. The palmar branch
(13) of the median vein receives the collateral ulnar vein and as the
lateral palmar vein (15) continues over the lateropalmar surface of
Supraclavicular nn.
the carpus.
The median artery after giving off its palmar branch passes through
 Dorsolateral brr.
the carpal canal. After that it is joined by a branch from the radial
 of thoracic nn.
artery, and as the medial palmar artery (16) (the largest artery in
3
 this area) passes toward the digit.
Radial n.
The small lateral palmar artery (15) originates from the union of the
Unar n.
 palmar branch of the median artery with the collateral ulnar artery
proximal to the carpus.
 The median and lateral palmar metacarpal arteries descend on the
Axillary n.
axial surface of the splint bones. They arise distal to the carpus from
the deep palmar arch that is formed by branches of the median and
radial arteries.
Median n.
C)LYMPHATIC STRUCTURES
Lymph from the hoof is collected in several vessels that become dis-
sectable proximal to the coronet. At first evenly spaced around the
digit, they converge on each side to form one to three vessels. Those
ostobrachial n.
on the lateral side change over to the medial side a few cm proximal
to the proximal sesamoid bones. They do so either deeply between
the interosseus and the deep flexor tendon or subcutaneously. The
b) BLOOD VesSELS
lymphatics then accompany the medial palmar vessels and nerve
 and ascend (predominantly through the carpal canal) to the medial
The subclavian artery (19), before becoming the axillary artery
aspect of the forearm and thence to the cubital lymph nodes (see p.
(20), gives off the supf. cervical artery. The deltoid branch of the lat-
7.C) that lie just proximal to the elbow joint. From here the lymph
2
ter accompanies the cephalic vein (23) through the groove between
 passes to the axillary nodes (see p. 7.B) on the distal end of the teres
brachiocephalicus and pectoralis descendens. (The cephalic vein
major.
arises from the external jugular vein.) The axillary vessels (a. and v.)
give rise, either directly or indirectly, to the external thoracic vessels
 From the axillary nodes the lymph passes via the caudal deep cervi-
(21) to the pectoral muscles, the suprascapular vessels (18) to the
cal nodes to the veins at the thoracic inlet. Lymph, especially from
lateral scapular muscles, the subscapular vessels (2) to the caudal
the proximal and lateral areas of the forelimb, is channeled to the
border of the like-named muscle, the thoracodorsal vessels (4) to
supf. cervical nodes (see p. 7.A), not to the axillary ones.
8
Arteries, Veins and Nerves of the Thoracic Limb
(Medial view)
1 Intercostobrachial r
2 Subscapular a. and v
8Supra
aandv
3 Caud. circumflex
19 Subclavian a.
4 Thoracodorsal a. and v
 20 Axillary a. and v.
5 Supf. thoracic
- 21 External thoracic a. and v.
6 Deep brachial a. and v.
22 Cran. circumfl. humeral a. and v., and
7 Brachial a. and v.
prox. muscular branch of musculocut. n.
 23 Cephalic v.
8 Collateral ulnar
- 24 Cran. cutaneous antebrachial n. (axillary)
 25 Bicipital a and v. and distal muscular 
 branch of musculocut. n.
 26 Transverse cubital a.
 27 Lat. cutaneous antebrachial n. (radial)
10 Median cubital v.
 28 Common interosseous a. and v.
11 Median a. and v., and median n.
 29 Med. cutaneous antebrachial n.
12 Deep antebrachial a. and v.
(musculocutaneous)
 30 Accessory cephalic v.
13 Palmar bra
14 Dorsal branch of ulnar r
31Radiala.and v
15 Lateral palmar a., v., and n
a  Circumflex scapular a. and v.
b Lat. thoracic n.
16 Medial palmar a., v., and n.
C Caud. pectoral n.
d  External jugular v.
e  Cranial pectoral n.
F
 Axillary loop formed by median
and musculocut. nn.
g  Deltoid branch of supf. cervical a.
h Prox. radial a.
i
 Medial palmar metacarpal n.
17 Medial digital n.
(See p. 7, 10, 11)
4. Vessels, Nerves, and Deep Fascia of Carpus, Metacarpus, and Digit 
ny p. 119-122
1
 a) Just distal to the carpus the MEDIAL PALMAR ARTERY, VEN AND
digit just now).The ulnar nerve (a) also splits: its dorsal branch (1)
NeRve (2) lie next to each other in this dorsopalmar sequence
supplies the skin over the dorsolateral aspect of carpus and
(VAN). Artery and nerve have just passed through the carpal canal;
metacarpus, while its palmar branch (d) joins the lateral palmar
ai u a oxa a on ns sdrno au pass ua a
nerve. Soon after receiving the branch of the ulnar, the lateral pal-
metacarpus, the three structures, retaining this sequence, lie medal
 mar nerve gives off a deep branch that innervates the interosseus
to the interosseus and deep flexor tendon. (There are no corres-
and is continued by the medial and lateral palmar metacarpal
ponding dorsal vessels and nerves.)
nerves (5; 6). These are deeply placed and run along the axial sur-
At the fetlock joint the medial palmar vessels and nerve become the
faces of the two splint bones where they are accompanied by equal-
ly thin arteries.
medial digital vessels and nerve (7). These release several dorsal
branches (9) that serve the dorsal surface of the digit. Opposite the
b) The Deep FAsciA on the dorsal surface of the carpus forms the
pastern joint they give off a branch to the digital cushion (10).
 ober the joint. On the palmar surface it furnishes the flexor retina-
The lateral palmar artery, vein, and nerve (3) pass the carpus near
3
is a a uo s pede  sxa iei (a'/ d aas 
the tip of the accessory carpal. They are markedly thinner than their
to the accessory carpal forming the carpal canal with these bones.
medial counterparts, especially the artery. Vein and nerve lie next to
 At the level of the fetlock joint the deep fascia is again thickened to
each other, and deep to them lies the small artery. They are suc-
form the annular ligament of the fetlock joint (A in Figure below)
ceeded at the fetlock by the lateral digital vessels and nerve (8).
4
2
that is most prominent at the palmar aspect where it connects the
There are no real differences in distribution from the same struc-
 abaxial borders of the proximal sesamoid bones and holds the flex-
tures on the medial side. The prominent communicating branch (4)
 or tendons in place. Distal to this the deep fascia forms the proxi-
 connecting the medial and lateral palmar nerves must be taken into
 mal digital annular ligament (B). This resembles the letter X and
 account when nerve blocks are performed.
 holds the flexor tendons against the ligaments on the palmar surface
 For the deeper-lying palmar metacarpal nerves we need to return to
 of the proximal phalanx. Its four corners insert on the medial and
the carpal level. Here the median nerve (g) splits into medial and lat-
lateral borders of the bone, the distal two attachments being weak-
eral palmar nerves (c and b; or 2 and 3 that were followed into the 
 er than the proximal, as the ligament here blends also with the two
branches of the supf. flexor tendon. The distal digital annular liga-
ment (C) arises from the medial and lateral borders of the proximal
Arteries and Veins of the Left Distal Forelimb
phalanx and descends to the distal phalanx between the deep flex-
or tendon and the digital cushion. It is crossed medially and later-
Cephalic v.
ally by the ligament of the ergot (not shown), subcutaneously, con-
 Collateral ulnar vessels -
 Prox. radial vessels
nects the ergot with the hoof cartilage.
Palmar br. of prox.
 Median vessels
radial vessels-
 The digital synovial sheath surrounds the flexor tendons and facili-
 Dorsal br. of prox.
 tates their movements against each other and over the three bearing
radial vessels
surfaces on the palmar surface of the digit.
 Inflammation may cause the sheath to swell and to pouch out in any
 Palmar br.
 of the nine places where it is not bound down by the annular liga-
 of median vessels
 Radial vessels
ligament of the fetlock joint; two (I and II) medial and lateral to the
 Deep palmar arch 
 Median a.
supf. flexor tendon and two (IlI and IV) medial and lateral to the
interosseus. The remaining more dicrete single pouches are as
shown in the next figure below.
 Lateral palmar
 metacarpal vessels
Medial palmar metacarpal
Palmar View of Fetlock and Digit
vessels
(For explanation see text above.)
Medial palmar vessels
Supf.palmar arch
Lateral palmar vessels 
Lateral digital 
vessels
- Medial digital vessels
 Dorsal br to prox. phalanx
Palmar br. to prox. phalanx
(palmar view)
 Palmar br. to 
 Dorsal br. to middle
middle phalanx
 phalanx (coronal vessels)
Brr. to digital 
cushion 
Vessels—
following sole border
Terminal arch
of distal phalanx 
10
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Distal Forelimb
(Medial view)
(Lateral view)
a Collateral ulnar a., and v., and 
ulnar nerve
b
 Lateral palmar nerve
C
 Medial palmar nerve 
d
 Palmar branch of ulnar nerve
e
 Cephalic vein 
f   Medial cutaneous antebrachial
nerve (musculocutaneous) 
g Median a, v., and n.
h  Accessory cephalic vein 
1 Dorsal branch of ulnar nerve
2 Medial palmar a., v., and n.
3 Lateral palmar a., v, and n.
Communicatingbranc
5 Medial palmar metacarpal nerve
 6 Lateral palmar metacarpal nerve 
Medial digital a.,v.,and n
8 Lateral digital a., v, and n.
9Dorsalbranches of the digitala,v.,and n
(See p. 7, 9, 10)
 Cranial interosseous a. and v.
 m Supf. digital flexor tendon 
Deep digital flexor
w Flexor retinaculum and carpal canal
j
 Dorsal carpal branch of coll. 
 n Flexor carpi radialis, resected 
 S Lat. digital extensor
deep to it 
 ulnar artery
 0 Extensor carpi radialis
t
 Ulnaris lateralis 
X Extensor retinaculum
K
Interosseus
P
 Supf. digital flexor
u
 Flexor carpi ulnaris, resected 
 Deep digital flexor tendon
q  Common digital extensor (humeral head)
V  Extensor carpi obliquus
11
5
The passive Stay-Apparatus of the Thoracic Limb
Clinical and Functi
hal An
omy p. 112-113; 122-125
The structures making up the PAssIvE STAY-APPARATUS are shown on
biceps insertion that would tend to keep the joint extended has
the opposite page schematically and on two dissections. The latter
 already been mentioned.
show the actual structures to best advantage and were made by the
following steps. The limb is skinned to the hoof, and the pectoral
a aq (xa o prd) azs si ro do a t
muscles, subclavius, and rests of the trapezius and brachiocephali-.
Are uop ser id rosuixa au jo assrd, (eso)
cus are removed. Blood vessels and nerves can be discarded (and
alluded to. The flexor carpi ulnaris and ulnaris lateralis ending on
removed) throughout. The extensor carpi radialis is resected at the
 the accessory carpal and being tensed by the weight of the trunk via
level of the elbow, preserving the lacertus fibrosus as shown. Then
scapula, fixed shoulder joint, and humerus, “pulls" on the flexor
the brachialis is resected. At the level of the fetlock and digit, the
surface of the carpal joint in an attempt to keep the joint extended.
palmar annular ligament and the prox. digital annular ligament are
The accessory ligaments of the supf. and deep digital flexors attach-
 ing on the palmar surface of radius and large metacarpal bone
transected axially, and the sleeve formed by the supf. digital flexor
 above and below the carpus tend to supply a similar *pull", again
around the deep digital flexor tendon is opened by a similar but
 deeper cut. The deep flexor tendon is transected in midmetacarpus
by the weight of the animal, but in the opposite direction—distally.
and liftet out of the sleeve so it can be reflected distally.
Some workers ascribe a similar potential to the interosseus.
 The PAssivE sTAY-APPARATUs of both fore- and hindlimbs enables the
5. The fetlock joint needs to be stabilized by being prevented from
2
horse to be on its feet for long periods with a minimum of muscu-
further overextending, i. e., sinking toward the ground. This is
lar effort. Older subjects actually doze (perhaps sleep) while stand-
 accomplished by three elements: the suspensory apparatus associat-
ing, although for a refreshing sleephorses lie down, usually at night
ed with the interosseus, and the supf. and deep digital flexor ten-
when they are unobserved. By being on its feet most of the time, the 
 dons. These attach to the palmar surface of the limb skeleton prox-
horse, a rather nervous and excitable animal that uses flight as its
 imal and distal to the joint and are tensed when the weight of the
principal means of defense, appears to be in perpetual readiness to
horse overextends the joint. Their elastic properties “carry" the
run away from danger.
 joint in a yielding, anticoncussive manner that is best observed in
slow-motion films of a horse at speed.
The four limbs that carry the body of a quadruped are angulated
3
 doing so by the activity of the intrinsic limb muscles. Active muscles
 proximal sesamoid bones, and sesamoidean ligaments.
The
soon tire and become painful, which signals the animal to lie down.
interosseus arises from the carpus and proximal end of the large
The effort of the intrinsic limb muscles of horses is greatly reduced
metacarpal bone and ends on the two sesamoid bones. (Before
by the non-tiring tendons and ligaments of the stay-apparatus,
doing so it sends extensor branches around the proximal phalanx
which stabilizes the joints in a position suitable for the support of
to the common extensor tendon.) The proximal sesamoid bones
the body. In most joints stabilization means preventing them from
articulate with the distal end of the large metacarpal bone to reduce
flexing. Pastern and fetlock joints in the standing horse, however,
friction between the suspensory apparatus and the palmar surface
are extended and overextended, respectively; their stabilization
 of the fetlock joint. Collateral ligaments tie the sesamoid bones to
 aui suaaard oi se os rau puaxaao oi ou aui sabai
the cannon bone and proximal phalanx, while a thick palmar liga-
from sinking to the ground.
ment unites the sesamoid bones and forms a smooth bearing surface
 for the digital flexor tendons. The tension in the interosseus is con-
1. The fleshy attachment (synsarcosis) of the forelimb to the trunk
4
tinued distal to the joint by four sesamoidean ligaments (short, cru-
is not part of the stay-apparatus, though the serratus ventralis that
ciate, oblique, and straight) of which the first three end on the prox-
serves as the principal weight-bearing connection is heavily inter-
 imal, and the last on the middle phalanx.
laced with non-tiring tendinous tissue.
Xq sede osuadsns au sssse uopu nox  ns u
5
2. Though no collateral ligaments are present, the movements in
providing a tendinous support extending (via its accessory [check]
1
the shoulder joint are restricted largely to flexion and extension in 
ligament) from the radius above the fetlock joint to the proximal
the sagittal plane by the subscapularis medially and the infraspina-
and middle phalanges below the joint.
tus and (to a lesser degree) the supraspinatus laterally.
 The principal stabilizer of the shoulder joint in the standing horse is
The deep flexor tendon and its accessory (check) ligament provide
6
added and similar support; the accessory ligament arises with the
the biceps tendon pressing against the cranial (extensor) surface of
the joint. The way the tendon caps the intermediate tubercle of the
 interosseus from the caudal aspect of carpus, the tendon itself ends
 on the distal phalanx.
intertubercular groove suggests a partial locking of the joint. The
shoulder joint is further prevented from collapsing (flexing) by the
 aq uisao  Pad si  usd a '9
internal tendon of the biceps that anchors the muscle to the most
o t a  i saoq omi ai ian   uid
proximal part of the radius and, via the lacertus fibrosus and exten-
the palmar surface. The straight sesamoidean ligament of the sus-
sor carpi radialis, to a similar point on the large metacarpal bone.
-ippe aaig suopuai noxa daap pue ydns aut pue snieiedde Aiosuad
Thus the weight of the trunk acting on the proximal end of the
tional support.
mentioned. This causes a cranial "pull" on the elbow joint (i. e., an
The proximopalmar border of the middle phalanx carries a com-
extension of the joint) and “ pressure" on the extensor surface of the
plementary fibrocartilage into which the supf. flexor tendon and the
carpal joint that tends to prevent flexion in that joint.
ligaments reaching the bone from above insert. The cartilage and
 3. The elbow joint is stabilized (i. e., prevented from flexing) prin-
 m ra a saq s a   a jo i
 deep flexor tendon changes direction.
ae i soxa p pe ede jo dn e ui us aq Aed
on the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus and contain
7. The coffin joint actually flexes when the fetlock sinks under
7
much fibrous tissue. Eccentrically placed collateral ligaments inhib-
weight and can be disregarded in the consideration of the stay-
it flexion to a lesser degree. The principal extensor of the joint, the
apparatus. On its palmar surface lies the distal (navicular) sesamoid
triceps, seems inactive by its flabbiness in the quietly standing horse,
 although some workers believe that its tonus alone would prevent
provides the third bearing surface for the deep flexor tendon which
collapse of this key joint. The “pull" on the flexor surface by the
here is protected from wear by the navicular bursa.
12
Musculature of the Thoracic Limb
a Stump of palmar annular lig. of fetlock joint 
b Palmar ligament
(Lateral view)
 C Axial palmar lig. of pastern joint 
d Supf. digital flexor tendon 
é
Hoof cartilage
Navicular bursa 
9
 Distal sesamoid (navicular) bone
h
 Stump of distal digital annular lig.
i
 Deep digital flexor tendon, reflected distally
Supraspinatus 
k Deltoideus, resected 
Infraspinatus
m Brachialis 
h  Tensor fasciae antebrachi 
。
 Deep digital flexor
p Lat. digital extensor
Triceps
(Cranial pressure)
Long head 
Lateral head
Medial head
Lacertus fibrosus
(Cranial traction)
 Flexor carpi ulnaris
Ulnar head
Humeral head 
 Deep digital flexor
 UInar head 
 Humeral head 
 Radial head 
 Extensor carpi radialis
 Common digital extensor
 Ulnaris lateralis
Accessory (check) lig. of supf.
digital flexor
Palmar view)
 Accessory (check) lig. of deep
digital flexor
Supt. digi
Collateral sesamoid igament
Short and cruciate
sesamoidean ligaments
Oblique sesamoidean ligamen
Extensor branch
of interosseus
 Straight sesamoidean -
ligament 
13
6.
 Synovial Structures of the Thoracic Limb
Clinical and Functional Anate
omy p. 112-113: 125-128
1
 a) JoINTS OF THE THORACIC LiMB
Name/Fig.
 Bones involved
Type of joint
Function
Remarks
2
 1. Shoulder Joint / 1-3
Glenoid cavity ot scapula
 Simple spheroidal joint
 Restricted to flexion and
 Site of injection
and head of humerus
extension by tendinous
Cranial border of palpa ble infra.
components of subscapu-
spinatus tendon, 2 cm proximal to
laris and supra- and infra-
 greater tubercle, to a depth of about
spinatus muscles
5 cm
3
I. Elbow Joint / 4-6
Composite joint
a) Humeroulnar
 a) Condyle of humerus and  a) Simple hinge joint 
a-b) Flexion and extension
 Initial flexion of the joint
 articulation
ulna
is impeded by eccentrically placed
b) Humeroulnar
b) Condyle of humerus and b) Simple hinge joint 
 collateral ligaments. The long part
articulation
 head of radius
of the medial collateral ligament 
 c) Proximal radioulnar
 C) Articular circumference
c) Simple pivot joint
c) No movement
corresponds to the pronator teres of
articulation
 of radius and radial
other animals
notch of ulna
 II1. Distal radioulnar joint 
(absent)
 CARPAL AND DIGITAL JOINTS
4
 IV. Carpal joint / 7, 8
Composite joint (in the 
wider sense)
a) Radiocarpal joint
Trochlea of radius and
 Composite condylar joint 
a) Flexion and extension
a) Site of injection: Between lateral
carpal bones 
up to 90°
 digital extensor and ulnaris later-
b) Midcarpal joint 
 Proximal and distal rows
Composite condylar joint
 b) Flexion and extension
alis into the proximal pouch
of carpal bones
up to 45°
when the carpus is flexed
 c) Carpometacarpal joint Carpal bones II-IV and
 Composite plane joint 
c) Little movement
a-d) The fibrous layer of the joint 
 metacarpal bones II-IV
capsule is common to all artic-
d) Intercarpal joints
Carpal bones of the same
Composite plane joint
d) Little movement
ulations in the carpus. The syn-
row
 ovial layer is divided to enclose
 the three individual articula-
tions separately. The midcarpal
 capsule communicates with
that of the carpometacarpal
articulation.
V. Fetlock (metacarpo-
Metacarpal 3, prox.
 Composite hinge
5
Flexion and extension
Site of injection:
phalangeal) joint / 9, 10
phalanx, and prox.
joint
 Into the prox. palmar pouch
sesamoid bones
between large metacarpal bone and
interosseus
6
VI. Pastern (prox. inter
 Proximal and middle
Simple saddle joint
 Flexion and extension,
 Site of injection:
phalangeal) joint / 9, 10
 phalanx
also slight side-to-side and 
 Into the prox. dorsal pouch under
rotational movements
 the lateral border of the common
extensor tendon
VIl. Coffin (dist. inter-
Middle phalanx, distal
Composite saddle joint
 Flexion and extension,
 Site of injection:
7
phalangeal) joint / 10
 phalanx, with hoof
 also slight side-to-side and
 Into the prox. dorsal pouch under
 cartilage, and navicular
rotational movements
the lateral border of the common
bone
extensor tendon
 The three digital joints are the fetlock, pastern, and coffin joints.
 The subtendinous bursa of the common and lateral digital extensors
The proximal sesamoid bones and their ligaments are part of the
(9) lies between the cannon bone and the tendons of these muscles.
fetlock joint, and the navicular bone and its ligaments are part of
 The navicular bursa (10) provides frictionless movement of the deep
11
 flexor tendon over the navicular bone.
tively). The sesamoids receive part of the body weight when the
limb is bearing weight. The capsules of the three digital joints pres-
C) TeNDoN SHEATHS
ent dorsal and palmar pouches which extend proximally, some of
 Synovial tendon sheaths are thin walled, but double-layered, fluid-
them are the sites for puncturing the joints.
filled tubes surrounding stretches of tendons; they protect the ten-
b) ImPOrTant SyNoviaL BursAE
dons where they are exposed to wear. Synovial sheaths surround the
 The infraspinatus bursa (1) lies between the tendon of the infra-
tendons passing over the carpus (7), except for the short tendon of
12
the ulnaris lateralis and that of the flexor carpi ulnaris. One of these
 spinatus and the caudal part of the greater tubercle of the humerus.
 is known as the carpal sheath (8); it serves both supf. and deep flex-
13
 The intertubercular bursa (4) underlies the biceps tendon between
or tendons as they pass the carpus in the carpal canal. A similar
the greater and lesser tubercles of the humerus. It corresponds to the
sheath for both these tendons is the digital sheath which extends
recess (of the shoulder joint capsule) that surrounds the biceps ten-
from above the fetlock joint to the middle of the middle phalanx. In
 don in most other domestic mammals. Its inflammation can pro-
 both sheaths, the deep flexor tendon is wholly, but the supf. flexor
 duce shoulder lameness.
is only partly surrounded. Only at the proximal extremity of the
 The subcutaneous olecranon bursa (4) over the olecranon tuber is
digital sheath is the supf. flexor tendon nearly completely enclosed.
9
 inconstant. Its hygromatous enlargement is known as capped
Except for the nine outpouchings illustrated on page 10, the palmar
14
surface of the digital sheath is covered by the annular ligament of
elbow.
the fetlock joint and by the proximal and distal digital annular lig-
10
A subcutaneous (precarpal) bursa (7) on the dorsal surface of the
aments.
 carpus can develop after repeated injury in small box or trailer
stalls.
14
Joints, Bursae, and Synovial Sheaths
(Lateral view)
(Lateral view)
a Supraspinatus
b Deltoideus, resected
C Infraspinatus
d   Teres minor
Ticeps brachii:
e  Long head 
f Lateral head, resected 
Infraspinatus
g Medial head
bursa 
h
 Brachialis
 Joint capsule
 Biceps brachii
 Transverse humeral 
 Flexor carpi radialis resected
ligament 
 Extensor carpi radialis
Intertubercular bursa
Supf. digital flexor
 m Common digital extensor
(humeral head)
 Common digital extensor 
(radial head)
0 Deep digital flexor
p Lat. digital flexor
q Unaris lateralis
r
 Flexor carpi ulnaris, resected 
s Extensor carpi obliquus
(1) Shoulder joint
(2) Shoulder joint (3)
(Lateral view)
(Lateral view)
(Medial view)
Subtendinous 
olecranon bursa
Subcutaneous
olecranon bursa 
Joint capsule 
Lacertus 
Medial and 
fibrosus
lateral
 collateral ligament
(4) Elbow joint
(5) Elbow joint (6)
(Cranial view)
(Medial view)
(Lateral view)
(Lateral view)
Synovial
 Subtendinous bursa of
sheaths
Joint capsule 
aitr
Prox.sesamoid
bones
IVa-
Fibrous layer
Synovial layer
IVb-
Subcutaneous
IVc-
bursa
IV d-
Distal lig. of
accessory carpal
Navicular
Carpal
bursa
synovial sheath
 Deep digital
fexol
tendon
(7) Carpal joint (8)
(9) Digital joints (10)
 A Lateral collaterallig. of coffin joint C Lateral collaterallig. of fetlock joint
 E Oblique sesamoidean ligament 
 G Navicular bone
 B Collateral lig. of navicular bone 
 D Lateral collateral lig. of prox. sesamoid bones
F Straight sesamoidean ligament 
 H  Lateral collateral lig. of carpal joint 
15
Chapter 3: Pelvic Limb
Cinical and Functional Anatomy p. 130-132
1—
1. The Skeleton of the Pelvic Limb
2
The skeleton of the pelvic limb actually includes the bones of the
face are further divided by less distinct transverse ridges into large
pelvic girdle: ilium, pubis, and ischium, known together as the hip
gliding and small resting surfaces; the resting surface of the trochlea
bone (os coxae). For didactic and applied-clinical reasons the hip
is proximal to the gliding surface, that of the patella is distal to it.
bone, in fact the entire bony pelvis, is considered with the pelvic
organs.
 proximal end of the trochlea as is the case when the standing horse
 is bearing weight equally on both hindlimbs.
3
 a) The FemuR presents on its head (1) a relatively large, triangular
fovea (2). The apex of the fovea lies near the center of the femoral
b) BoNEs OF THE LEG. Of these the fibula is rudimentary, so the 
6
head and its base is close to the medial border of the femoral head.
weight on the limb is carried by the tibia alone.
The fovea, devoid of articular cartilage, gives attachment in the
I. The proximal articular surface (22) of the tibia is roughly trian-
vicinity of its apex to the ligament of the head of the femur and,
gular; from its center arises the prominent intercondylar eminence
7
(24). The apex of the triangle is formed by the tibial tuberosity (29)
pubic tendon with most of its fibers originating from the insertion
8
which receives the three patellar ligaments that constitute the inser-
tendon of the rectus abdominis. The neck of the femur (3) is no real
 tion tendon of the quadriceps. The craniolateral border of the tri-
constriction in the horse; it is continuous laterally with the greater
angle is interrupted by the deep extensor groove (27), while the base
notch that leads to the prominent popliteal line (27') on the caudal
surface of the bone. The popliteal line runs obliquely from proxi-
(Caudolateral view)
molateral to distomedial and gives attachment to the popliteus mus-
cle. Only the craniomedial surface of the tibia is subcutaneous; the
remaining surfaces are covered by muscle. The distal end of the
bone forms the cochlea (30). This consists of two oblique grooves
pue lepau ay Aq apis yoea uo papunoq pue aapu e Aq paereds
lateral malleoli.
II. The fibula articulates with its expanded head (32) with the later-
9
al condyle of the tibia (25). The slender body of the bone ends about
half-way down the tibia. The distal end of the fibula is represented
by the lateral malleolus (35) that has been incorporated in the tibia.
 trochanter (4) which is divided into a cranial (4') and a more salient
caudal (4") part. The caudal part extends considerably above the
head of the femur, but more ventrally contributes also to the lateral
border of the trochanteric fossa (5). The medial border of the fossa
is formed by the lesser trochanter (6). The prominent third
trochanter (7) projects from the lateral border of the femur at the
junction of its proximal and middle thirds. The supracondylar fos-
sa (13) is on the caudal surface of the bone at the junction of mid-
 s a rn  s i arm srn p p 
flexor. From the fossa's raised lateral edge, known as the lateral
supracondylar tuberosity, arises the lateral head of the gastrocne-
(Medioplantar view)
mius. The medial (14) and lateral (17) condyles at the distal end of
the femur are separated by a roomy intercondylar fossa (20). Both
4
condyles extend cranially to the trochlea (21) whose medial ridge
(21') is markedly larger than the lateral ridge and drawn out prox-
imally to provide a tubercle which plays a critical role in the lock-
ing mechanism of the stifle joint (see p. 24). The trochlea presents
an extensive gliding surface for articulation with the patella (69).
c)  The TARsAL BoNEs are arranged in three rows.
10: 11
5
The latter, roughly triangular, presents a base (69') proximally and
an apex (69) distally. The medial border is drawn out by the patel-
Talus (37) and calcaneus (42) furnish the proximal row. The robust
12
lar fibrocartilage(6)The articular sufaceof the patela69)
trochlea (39) of the talus consists of two oblique ridges that articu-
late with the cochlea of the tibia. The calcaneus (42) is slightly
expanded proximally (calcanean tuber; 43), presents in its middle
two ridges of the trochlea. Both patellar and trochlear articular sur-
flexor tendon, and articulates distally with the fourth tarsal bone.
69
(Caudal view)
The middle row of tarsal bones is provided by the central tarsal
13
(45). The distal row comprises tarsal bones 1-4 (46) of which the
first and second are fused, the third rests on the large metatarsal
 bone, and the fourth is lateral and projects proximally into the lev-
el of the middle row.
d) The METATARSAL BONES, PHALANGES AND SESAMOID BoNES are
similar to corresponding bones in the forelimb (see p. 4). Mt3 has a
round cross section, while that of Mc3 is a lateromedially oriented
oval.
16
Pelvic Limb
 Femur
Head (1)
Fovea of femoral head (2)
Neck (3)
Greater trochanter (4)
 Cranial part (4")
Caudal part (4")
Trochanteric fossa (5)
Lesser trochanter (6)
Third trochanter (7)
Body of femur (8)
(Craniomedial view)
Rough surface (9)
(Caudolateral view)
Lat. border of rough surface (10)
Med. border of rough surface (11)
 Popliteal surface (12)
Lat. supracondylar tuberosity (fossa) (13)
L
Medial condyle (14)
Medial epicondyle (16)
Lateral condyle (17)
Lateral epicondyle (19)
Intercondylar fossa (20)
Trochlea (21)
Tubercle of med. trochlear ridge (21')
Tibia
23
 Proximal articular surface (22)
Medial condyle (23)
Intercondylar eminence (24)
Lateral condyle (25)
 Articular surface for fibula (26)
Extensor groove (27)
Popliteal line (27)
33
Body of tibia (28)
 Subcutaneous surface (28")
Tibial tuberosity (29)
Cranial border (29')
Cochlea (30)
 Medial malleolus (31)
Fibula
Head (32)
Articular surface (33)
Body of fibula (34)
Lateral malleolus (35)
28
Interosseous space (36)
Tarsal bones
Talus (37)
Body of talus (38)
Trochlea (39)
Head (41)
Calcaneus (42)
Calcanean tuber (43)
 Sustentaculum tali (44)
Tc
TIV
TII
TI+II
 Central tarsal bone (Tc - 45)
TIII
Tarsal bone 1+2, 3, 4 (46)
 Metatarsal bones Il-IV
mt IV
Base (47)
mtIl
Body (48)
mt Il
Head (49)
mt II
Digital bones
 Proximal phalanx (50)
Middle phalanx (51)
Base (52)
 Flexor tuberosity (53)
Body (54)
Head (55)
Distal phalanx (56)
Articular surface (57)
 Extensor process (58)
Parietal groove (59)
Plantar process (59")
Sesamoid bones
Proximal sesamoid bones (66)
Distal (navicular) sesamoid bone (67)
Patella (69)
Base (69')
Apex (69")
Cartilage process (69!")
Patellar fibrocartilage (69"")
54
Articular surface (6g")
 2. Topography of the Pelvic Limb (Nerves and Muscles) cinical and Functi
ny p.132
The two Figures on the opposite page show the structures men-
Their ischial heads are served by the tibial nerve.
tioned in the account below to best advantage. The following steps
would reproduce the dissection upon which the two Figures were
The sciatic nerve (4) leaves the pelvic cavity by the greater sciatic
3
foramen and passes, medial to the greater trochanter, around the
based.
caudal aspect of the hip joint. Here it releases branches to the group
The limb is skinned to midmetatarsus, preserving the subcutaneous
 of insignificant hip rotators (gemell, int. obturator, quadratus
femoris, and the ext. obturator which, however, is innervated by the
the large gluteus medius (3) is transected at the level of the coxal
 obturator nerve). It is possible, already at the level of the hip joint,
tuber, and again where it inserts on the greater trochanter, so that
d u  ln o an s  s o
the muscle between these cuts can be removed. The gluteus acces-
nerves.
"sde s e Aq pao pe ii on dap o) ss
 The tibial nerve (13) sends proximal muscular branches to the
4
 ischial heads of the hamstring muscles and in mid-thigh gives off the
dus (6) comes into view. The gluteus superficialis (11) and tensor
caudal cutaneous sural nerve (30), which accompanies the lateral
fasciae latae (20) are detached at their origin (coxal tuber) and ter-
saphenous vein along the common calcanean tendon and ends on
mination. Most of the biceps femoris (22) is removed, leaving in
the lateral surface of the tarsus. The hamstring muscles arise with
place its vertebral and pelvic origins, and its termination on the
their ischial heads from the ischial tuber. The biceps (22) ends lat-
crural fascia, and its tarsal tendon. The lateral head of the gastro-
erally on patella, lateral patellar ligament, crural fascia, and with its
cnemius (26) is detached from the femur to expose the supf. digital
tarsal tendon on the calcanean tuber. The other two hamstrings end
flexor (31). The gracilis (21), on the medial surface is fenestrated.
on the medial aspect of the limb: the semitendinosus (1) on the tib-
5
 a) MEDIAL SIDE OF THE THIGH. The obturator and femoral nerves
ia and with its tarsal tendon also on the calcanean tuber, the semi-
innervate the muscles in this region.
membranosus (23) with two insertion tendons on the medial
condyle of femur and tibia.
The obturator nerve (5) courses along the medial surface to the
shaft of the ilium, exits from the pelvic cavity through the obtura-
c) Leg (Crus). Opposite the stifle the tibial nerve gives off distal
tor foramen, and sends branches to the muscles described below.
muscular branches to the extensors of the hock and flexors of the
digit described in the next paragraph. The nerve then descends
The external obturator muscle arises from the ventral surface of the
 between the two heads of the gastrocnemius and along the medial
pelvic floor in the vicinity of the obturator foramen and ends
surface of the common calcanean tendon to give rise, before reach-
together with the gemelli, quadratus femoris, and the internal obtu-
ing the hock, to the lateral (35) and medial (38) plantar nerves.
rator in the trochanteric fossa. The pectineus (and long adductor; 
14) takes origin from the contralateral iliopubic eminence so that its 
 The gastrocnemius (26) arises from the supracondylar tuberosities
tendon of origin crosses the median plane. The tendon of origin,
on the caudal surface of the femur and ends as part of the common
and that of the pectineus of the other side, thus form the bulk of the
calcanean tendon on the calcanean tuber. The insignificant soleus
prepubic tendon. The spindle-shaped belly of the pectineus ends at
(28) extends obliquely from the head of the fibula to the common
the middle of the medial border of the femur. The adductor (mag-
calcanean tendon; it forms, together with the two heads of the gas-
nus et brevis; 19) is a large fleshy muscle; it arises from pelvic sym-
trocnemius, the m. triceps surae. The nearly tendinous supf. digital
physis and symphysial tendon. It ends on the caudal surface and the
flexor (31) takes origin from the (lateral) supracondylar fossa. Its
medial epicondyle of the femur. The gracilis (21) originates from the
 tendon winds around that of the gastrocnemius and widens to form
6
pelvic symphysis and the symphysial tendon. It ends largely on the
 a cap over the calcanean tuber to the sides of which it is attached.
crural fascia.
The cap is easily demonstrated by cutting one of the attachments.
This opens the large subtendinous calcanean bursa. (The distal
The femoral nerve (12) leaves the abdominal cavity together with
course of the tendon is similar to that of the same muscle in the fore-
the sartorius muscle, gives off the saphenous nerve (25) (see further
limb;, see p. 12.) The deep digital flexor comprises three muscles:
 on) and innervates the sartorius, the quadriceps, and (with a senso-
medial and lateral digital flexors and the tibialis caudalis. The ten-
ry branch) also the stifle joint.
don of the medial digital flexor (29) passes the medial surface of the
 The sartorius (10) arises from the iliac fascia covering the iliopsoas,
hock to join the combined tendon of the other two muscles below
exits from the abdominal cavity by passing caudal to the inguinal
the hock. The combined tendon of the lateral digital flexor (34) and
ligament, and ends on the medial aspect of the stifle.
tibialis caudalis (33) pass the hock caudally by passing over the sus-
 The rectus femoris of the quadriceps (15) takes origin from the
cles on the caudal surface of the tibia; it arises from the lateral
body of the ilium, while vastus lateralis, intermedius, and medialis
 femoral condyle and is also supplied by the tibial nerve.
come from the upper end of the femur. The insertion tendon par-
 The common peroneal nerve (17) crosses the lateral head of the gas-
tially encloses the patella and terminates via the intermediate patel-
7
lar ligament (15) on the tibial tuberosity.
trocnemius where it releases the lateral cutaneous sural nerve (24).
The latter emerges distally between middle and caudal divisions of
The femoral triangle (16) is bounded cranially by the sartorius and
 the biceps. Distal to the stifle, the common peroneal nerve splits
caudally by the gracilis and pectineus; its medial wall is the external
into supf. (39) and deep (32) peroneal nerves which innervate the
abdominal oblique aponeurosis. The apex of the triangle points
flexors of the hock and the extensors of the digit described in the
ventrally; the vascular lacuna forms the (dorsal) base. The triangle
 next paragraph. The two nerves then descend between the lateral
 contains the femoral vessels (18), the saphenous nerve, and the deep
 and long digital extensors to the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the
inguinal lymph nodes (B).
metatarsus (see p. 21).
b) LATERAL SIDE OF THE THIGH AND CRoUp. The innervation of the
 The entirely tendinous peroneus tertius (37) divides on the dorsal
8
muscles in this region comes from the cranial and caudal gluteal, the
surface of the hock joint into four terminal branches at the origin of
sciatic, and the tibial nerves.
which it also forms a ring-like tunnel for the passage of the tibialis
cranialis. It terminates with wide medial and dorsal branches on
2
The cranial gluteal nerve (8) supplies the tensor fasciae latae (20)
Mt3, Tc, and T3, and with supf. and deep lateral branches on the
and the glutei: gluteus profundus (6), accessorius (9), medius (3),
calcaneus and T4 (see p. 31). The tendon of the tibialis cranialis
and superficialis (11). These muscles arise variously from the coxal
9
(36), after emerging from the peroneus tunnel, splits to insert with
tuber, the gluteal surface of the ilium, and from the gluteal fascia.
a dorsal branch on Mt3 and a medial branch (cunean tendon) on
The gluteus accessorius is considered to be a deep part of the glu-
T1 and 2. The long digital extensor (40), guided by the three exten-
teus medius. The gluteus superficialis is parly fused with the tensor
sor retinacula, passes the hock dorsally and ends on the distal pha-
fasciae latae; both arise from the coxal tuber but also from the
lanx with secondary attachments also on the other phalanges. The
gluteal fascia.
lateral digital extensor (41) ends by joining the tendon of the long
10
 The caudal gluteal nerve (2) supplies the vertebral heads of biceps,
extensor below the hock. (The insignificant m. extensor brevis
semitendinosus, and semimembranosus (the hamstring muscles).
needs no further mention.)
18
Pelvic Limb
(Medial view)
(Lateral view)
1 Semitendinosu
 2 Caudal gluteal nerve
3 Gluteus medius
4 Sciatic nerve
 5 Obturator nerve
6 Gluteus profundus
7 Int. obturator muscle
& Cranial gluteal nerve
 9 Gluteus accessorius
10 Sartorius
11 Gluteus superficialis
12 Femoral nerve
13 Tibial nerve
14 Pectineus
 15 Quadiceps femoris
16 Femoral triangle
17 Common peroneal nerve 
 18 Femoral vessels
19 Adductor
 20 Tensor fasciae latae
 21 Gracilis
22 Biceps femoris
23 Semimembranosus
24 Lateral cutaneous sural nerve
 25 Saphenous nerve
26 Gastrocnemius 
27 Popliteus
28 Soleus
46
29 Med. digital flexor
30 Caudal cutaneous sural nerve 
 31 Supf. digital flexor
 32 Deep peroneal nerve 
33 Tibialis caudalis
34 Lat. digital flexor
 35 Lateral plantar nerve
36 Tibialis cranialis
37 Peroneus tertius
38 Medial plantar nerve
 39 Supf. peroneal nerve
40 Long digital extensor
41 Lateral digital extensor
47
3
42 External iliac vessels
a Prox. stump of retractor penis (clitoridis)
 43 Lateral circumflex femoral vessels
b Sacrocaudalis ventralis 
 44 Saphenous artery and nerve, and 
C
Caudal rectal nerve 
 medial saphenous vein 
d  Umbilical artery 
 45 Cranial branches
Coccygeus
46 Caudal branches 
 Pudendal nerve
47 Dorsal common digital vein Il
g  Psoas major
48 Caudal gluteal vessels
Illiacus
49 Caudal cutaneous femoral nerve 
 Levator ani
 50 Caudal femoral vessels
Int. pudendal vessels 
 51 Lat. saphenous vein and caudal
 Obturator vessels
 cutaneous sural nerve tibial)
I  Int. abdominal oblique muscle
 52 Caudal tibial vessels
m Accessory ext. pudendal vein 
 53 Medial plantar vessels and medial
Quadriceps femoris
 and lateral plantar nerves
 Vastus medialis
 Rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
 q Anastomosis betw. caud. femoral and 
obturator vessels 
Extensor retinacula
 A Popliteal lymph nodes
s Subtendinous calcanean bursa 
(See p. 65)
 B Deep inguinal lymph nodes 
t
 Subcutaneous calcanean bursa 
 C Medial iliac lymph nodes
U  Dorsal mteatarsal artery
 D Subiliac lymph nodes
V Lateral plantar vessels and nerve
19
3. Skin Innervation, Blood, Vessels, and Lymphatics of the Pelvic Limb
Cinical and Funct
onal Anatomy p. 132-133
a) SKIN INNERVATION
b) Blood Vessels
The skin over the dorsal and lateral regions of the croup is inner-
 Blood supply to, and return from, the pelvic limb flows predomi-
vated by cranial, middle, and caudal clunial nerves that arise from
 nantly through the external iliac vessels, though the internal iliac
the lumbar, sacral, and caudal spinal nerves, respectively; one of
vessels are also involved.
them is recognized as the caudal cutaneous femoral nerve (17). The
The internal iliac vessels (1) release the cranial (18) and caudal (16)
craniolateral surface of the thigh receives cutaneous innervation
1
gluteal vessels to the croup and thigh. The cranial gluteal artery
from the ventral branches of the first (L1; 2) and second (L2; 3)
 gives offthe obturator artery, while the satellte obturator vein is a
lumbar nerves. The craniomedial surface is supplied by the lateral
 branch of the external iliac vein.
cutaneous femoral nerve (6), the medial surface by the genito-
femoral nerve (5), and the caudal surface by the caudal cutaneous 
As the external iliac vessels (4) enter the thigh by passing caudal to
femoral nerve (17).
the inguinal ligament, they become the femoral vessels (8). These at
    (an    a  a  
sndes a aq Aa pns si (sn) hal a jo us a
the pudendoepigastric trunks (19'). As the femoral vessels traverse
nerve (9); craniolaterally by the common peroneal nerve, especially
the femoral triangle they give off the lateral circumflex femoral ves-
the lateral cutaneous sural nerve (21); and caudomedially by the tib-
sels (7) that enter the quadriceps between rectus femoris and vastus
ial nerve, especially its caudal cutaneous sural nerve (23).
medialis, and the saphenous vessels (9) of which the vein is very
 The medial surface of metatarsus and digit receives its skin inner-
much larger than the artery, these accompany the like-named nerve
vation from the saphenous nerve and farther distally by a mixture
 and in the proximal third of the leg divide into cranial (10) and cau-
of tibial and peroneal nerve branches. The dorsal surface is supplied
dal (11) branches. The cranial branch of the vein passes the tarsus
by the dorsal metatarsal nerves (15) which are branches of the deep
 dorsomedially to become the dorsal common digital vein Ⅱ (14) in
peroneal nerve, and the plantar surface is supplied by the medial
the metatarsus. This crosses the large metatarsal bone obliquely and
and lateral plantar nerves (26) and their continuations, the medial
unites with the medial plantar vein (see p. 22). The caudal branch-
and lateral digital nerves (27).
es of the medial saphenous vein and artery pass distally in the
 groove cranial to the common calcanean tendon. The vein anasto-
moses proximal to the hock with the caudal tibial vein (25) and
Cutaneous Nerves of the Pelvic Limb
-od yo a sassid p (e a sds r ae 
medially where it divides into medial and lateral plantar veins (26).
The saphenous artery anastomoses with the caudal tibial artery (25;
see further on) and gives rise to the medial and lateral plantar arter-
ies (26).
In the distal third of the thigh the femoral vessels release the
descending artery and vein of the stifle (20) and other vessels to that
joint. Some of the latter arise from the popliteal vessels (24; see fur-
ther on) that continue the femoral vessels at this level. The last
branches of the femoral artery and vein are the caudal femoral ves-
sels (22). The large caudal femoral vein releases the lateral saphe-
nous vein (23) which follows the caudal border of the gastrocne-
mius distally to anastomose proximal to the hock with the caudal
branch (11) of the medial saphenous vein and with the caudal tib-
ial vein (25; see above). Opposite the head of the fibula, the
popliteal vessels bifurcate to give rise to the cranial (12) and the
smaller caudal (25) tibial vessels. The caudal tibial vessels descend
caudal to the tibia. The cranial tibial vessels, however, pass cranial-
ly between tibia and fibula, follow the tibia craniolaterally, and at
the hock become the short dorsal pedal vessels (14). The continua-
tion of the pedal artery, the dorsal metatarsal artery, is the largest
artery in the metatarsus. It passes over the lateral surface of the can-
non bone, then between this bone and the distal end of the lateral
splint bone to the plantar surface where it receives the thin plantar
metatarsal arteries that descend on the plantar aspect of the
metatarsal bones.
C) LYMPHATIC STRUCTURES
Numerous lymph vessels leave the hoof and, similar to the forelimb
(see p. 8), unite proximal to the fetlock joint to form a small num-
ber of larger lymphatics. Most of these lie on the medial aspect of
the metatarsus between the flexor tendons; they ascend medial to
hock and leg until they reach the popliteal lymph nodes (see p.
19.A). These lie caudal and proximal to the stifle between biceps
and semitendinosus. From here the lymph travels to the deep
inguinal nodes (see p. 19.B) which occupy the femoral triangle, and
finally to the medial iliac nodes (see p. 19.C). The deep inguinal
Cranial clunial nn.
Caudal rectal n
nodes receive lymph also from the medial surface of leg and thigh
that does not pass through the popliteal nodes. Croup and cranial
Middle clunial nn.
Caudalcutaneousfemoraln
thigh drain to the subiliac nodes (see p. 19.D) which lie on the cra-
nial border of the thigh between coxal tuber and patella. From here
Genitofemoral n.
the lymph travels first to the lateral and then to the medial iliac
nodes. A portion of the lymph from the medial aspect of the thigh
Ventral br. of L1 
Peroneal n.
 passes to the supf. inguinal lymph nodes.
Ventral br. of L2
 Saphenous n.
Caudal nn.
Tibial n.
20
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Pelvic Limb
(Medial view)
16 Caudal gluteal vessels
1 Interna iliac vessels 
2 Ventral branch of 
18 Cranial gluteal vessels
lumbar nerve 1 (L1) 
 3 Ventral branch of
lumbar nerve 2 (L2) 
4 External liac vessels 
5 Genitofemoral nerve 
6 Lateral cutaneous femoral nerve
19'Pudendoepigastric trunk
 7 Lateral circumflex femoral vessels -
and vein
8 Femoral vessels
- 21 Lat. cutaneous sural nerve
(peroneal)
 9 Saphenous artery and nerve,
22 Caudal femoral vessels
 and medial saphenous vein -
 23 Lat. saphenous vein and
caudal cutaneous sural
nerve (tibial)
10 Cranial branches of 9
 24 Popliteal vessels
11 Caudal branches of 9
25 Caudal tibial vessels 
12 Cranial tibial vess
 26 Medial and lateral plantar
vessels and nerves
13 Dorsal pedal vessels
14 Dorsal common digital vein Il
15 Medial and lateral dorsal me
etatarsalnerves
(peroneal)
 27 Medial and lateral plantar
vessels and nerves
 Deep circumflex iliac vessels 
k Vessels to the stifle
b  Umbilical artery
I  Medial dorsal metatarsal vein 
C
 Internal pudendal vessels 
m Lat. dorsal metatarsal artery
d  Pudendal nerve
n Deep branch of lat. plantar nerve 
 Obturator vessels and nerve
 0 Deep branches of medial plantar 
Femoral nerve 
vessels
 Medial circumflex femoral vessels
p  Medial plantar metatarsal nerve
h
 Common peroneal nerve 
q  Medial digital nerve
h' Supf. peroneal nerve
r Caudal gluteal nerve
h" Deep peroneal nerve
 S Accessory ext. pudendal vein 
i
Tibial nerve 
 Quadriceps femoris 
j
 Anastomosis betw. obturator and
caudal femoral vessels 
(See p. 19, 22, 23, 81)
21
4. Vessels, Nerves, and deep Fascia of Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Digit 
ical and Funct
my p. 133-134
1
a) The LATERAL AND MeDIAL PLANTAR ARTERIES, VENS AND NERvES
nar dermis and in the dermis of the sole that collects the post-capil-
 continue the caudal branches of the saphenous artery and medial
lary blood. The venous plexus drains into the medial and lateral
saphenous vein, and the tibial nerve, respectively, and as such
 digital veins via a large number of converging, midsize veins. Most
accompany the deep flexor tendon over the sustentaculum into the
of these lie under the skin just proximal to the hoof, others reach the
metatarsus (see p. 21). The medial vessels and nerve follow the
digital veins directly from the axial surface of the hoof cartilages.
medial border, and the lateral vessels and nerve the lateral border,
b) See p. 10 for the DisPosITION OF THE DeEp FAsCIA of metatarsus
of the deep flexor tendon to the fetlock joint, whereby vein and
 and digit.
nerve usually lie supf. to the corresponding artery (10, 11). In the
digit, the medial and lateral digital veins, arteries, and nerves (15,
16) lie next to each other in this (dorsoplantar) sequence (VAN).
As in the forelimb the medial and lateral plantar nerves are con-
nected by the subcutaneous communicating branch (12). The
branch leaves the medial nerve in midmetatarsus, passes laterodis-
tally over the supf. flexor tendon, and joins the lateral nerve a few
cm proximal to the fetlock joint. The communicating branch is pal-
pable in thin-skinned horses, about 5 cm more distally than that of
the forelimb. Opposite the fetlock joint, the medial and lateral plan-
tar nerves are succeeded by the medial and lateral digital nerves and
detach one or two dorsal branches (17) to the dorsal surface of the
digit, and opposite the pastern joint a branch to the digital cushion
(18).
Arteries and Veins on the Distal Part of the Hindlimb
The medial (13) and lateral (14) plantar metatarsal nerves, as in the
forelimb, arise from the deep branch of the lateral plantar nerve and
distribute themselves as their counterparts in the forelimb. That is
 Saphenous artery
to say, they pass along the axial surfaces of the splint bones, inner-
and medial
 lateral saphenous vein
 saphenous vein
vate (part of) the fetlock joint and the skin on the dorsal surface of
 Caudal tibial vessels
the proximal phalanx. The medial (8) and lateral (9) dorsal
metatarsal nerves are terminal branches of the deep peroneal nerve
(1). The lateral nerve accompanies the dorsal metatarsal artery
Lateral caudal malleolar
along the lateral splint bone, while the medial nerve obliquely cross-
vessels
Anastomosis betw.
es the medial surface of the cannon bone and descends along the
saphenous and 
medial surface of the digit. There are no supf. dorsal digital nerves
 Caudal branches of 
 caudal tibial arteries
since the supf. peroneal nerve (2), from which such nerves would
and veins
saphenous artery -
derive, ends already in the metatarsus. Both the saphenous (5) and
 and medial saphenous vein 
the caudal cutaneous sural nerve (6) take part in supplying the skin
 on the medial and lateral surfaces (respectively) of the metatarsus.
As the medial and lateral plantar vessels enter the metatarsus they
Medialplantarvessels
give rise to deep plantar arterial and venous arches from which the
Lateral plantar vessels
insignificant medial and lateral plantar metatarsal vessels take ori-
 Perforating tarsal vessels -
 gin (see text Fig.). Close to the fetlock joint, the thin medial and lat-
 Deep plantar arch
eral plantar metatarsal arteries join the medial and lateral digital
arteries that result from the bifurcation of the dorsal metatarsal
1Lateralplantarvessels
2
10 Medial plantar
 po is d a on p  su  () ar
vessels
metatarsus. The dorsal metatarsal artery continues the short dorsal
(   r a sxa  i  ()  
 Medial plantar
onto the dorsal surface of the hock; cranial tibial, dorsal pedal, and
 Lateral plantar metatarsal 
 metatarsal vessels
 dorsal metatarsal arteries provide the principal blood supply to the
vessels
 7 Dorsal common 
digit and hoof.
digital vein Il
The dorsal common digital vein Ⅱ (7) crosses the medial surface of
9  Dorsal metatarsal artery
the cannon bone obliquely in the same direction as the dorsal
metatarsal artery does on the lateral surface. In the distal third of
the metatarsus the dorsal common digital vein II joins the medial
 plantar vein shortly before the latter becomes the medial digital vein
at the fetlock joint. At this level, the medial plantar vein sends a
d pr an on (re ed da pis siss 
vein (see text Fig.).
 Deep distal plantar arc
The lateral and medial digital arteries descend on the sides of the
(plantar view)
digit where they detach dorsal and plantar branches to each of the
 proximal and middle phalanges. These anastomose on their respec-
  is asodo an  sd  m sas a
so doing form arterial circles around each bone. At the distal pha-
16 Lateral digital
lanx, the lateral and medial digital arteries send a dorsal branch
vessels
 15 Medial digital
through the foramen (or notch) in the plantar process and onto the
 Dorsal branches of lateral
vessels
parietal surface of the bone where the branch occupies the parietal
digital vessels
 Dorsal branches of 
groove. The digital arteries continue to the sole surface of the distal
(to prox. phalanx)
medial digital vessels 
(to prox. phalanx)
mose within the bone forming the terminal arch. Branches from the
18 Branches to the
latter run in osseous canals to the parietal surface to supply the lam-
 Dorsal branches of
digital cushion 
medial digital vessels 
inar dermis. Branches that emerge close to the sharp margin (mar-
vein following the
(to middle phalanx) (A.
go solearis) that forms the junction of parietal and sole surfaces of
et. V. coronalis medialis)
the bone anastomose to form an artery that follows the margin.
solear border of the
 distal phalanx
Dorsal branches of
medial digital vessels 
While the digital veins are satellite to the arteries to and into the dis-
Terminal arch 
(to distal phalanx)
tal phalanx, not all arterial branches are accompanied by veins.
However, there is a dense venous plexus in the coronary and lami-
22
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Distal Hindlimb
(Medial view)
(Lateral view)
2 Supf. pero
3 Cranial tibial a
6 Caudal cutaneous sural nerve 
(tibial)
 7 Dorsal common digital vein Il
 8 Medial dorsal metatarsal vein and nerve
 9 Dorsal metatarsal artery and later
 dorsal metatarsal nerve
10 Medial plantar vessels and nerve
11 Lateral plantar vessels and nerve
2Communicatingbranch
13Medialplar
'salnerve
15 Medial digital vessels and nerve
16 Lateral digital vessels and nerve
 Saphenous artery
and nerve, and medial 
17Dorsalbranchesofdigitalnerves
saphenous vein
Cranial branches
b
 Caudal branches 
Lat.saphenous vein and
nerve (tibial)
d
Caudal tibial vessels
Tibial nerve 
Gastrocnemius
9
Popliteus 
Med. digital flexor
Supf. digital flexor
Tibialis caudalis
Lat. digital flexor
Tibialis cranialis
m
Peroneus tertius
 Long digital extenso
(See p. 19, 21, 22, 25)
 Lateral digital extensor
23
 5. Passive Stay-Apparatus of the Hindlimb, also Hoof and Contents 
nal Anatomy p. 134-135
1  The PAssIve STAy-ApPARATus prevents collapse of the hindlimb with
By being able to lock the stifle, the horse converts the jointed col-
only a minimum of muscular effort. That is to say, it prevents flex-
umn of its hindlimb into a weight-bearing pillar. This is accom-
ion in stifle and hock joints and overextension in the fetlock and
plished by the very asymmetrical femoral trochlea, the patella, and
 -a au aq pasoddo ae so f aa s peaud
two of the three patellar ligaments. The medial ridge of the trochlea
ous components of the stay-apparatus (which include the deep fas-
is larger than the lateral and is prolonged proximally to form a
cia) and by the horse's ability to lock the stifle joint. When horses 
rounded tubercle (see p. 17.21'). The medial patellar ligament con-
u a ns a spad pa r a ss
nects to the medial border of the patella via the patellar fibrocarti-
with only one hindlimb while resting the other (relaxed) on the toe
lage, while the intermediate patellar ligament attaches directly on
of the hoof with the pelvis tilted slightly toward the “shorter", non-
the patellar apex. The two ligaments therefore diverge from a com-
supporting limb. The horse itself appears relaxed and comfortable
 mon origin on the tibial tuberosity and with patella and its fibro-
with the three-legged support. (It cannot rest one of the forelimbs,
cartilage form a loop that embraces the tubercle on the medial
however.)
trochlear ridge. When the horse is standing squarely on both
hindlimbs the patella rests at the proximal end of the trochlea, with-
out the loop fully embracing the tubercle. Perhaps only the tonus in
the muscles attaching on the medial and lateral patellar ligaments
(Craniomedial view)
(gracilis, sartorius; biceps, tensor fascial latae) keeps the patella in
place. When the horse rests one hindlimb on the toe of the hoof, the
patella in the supporting limb rotates medially (about 15 degrees)
and the fibrocartilage and medial patellar ligament slide farther
caudally on the tubercle, fully locking the stifle.
Thus, the locking of this key joint enables the horse to stand with
little muscular activity. Some effort must be required, however,
 because the horse tires after a few minutes and shifts its weight to
 the other hindlimb.
Distal Phalanx (coffin bone) with ossified Hoof
Cartilages
patellar ligaments
-Medial
ossified hoof
(dorsolateral view)
cartilages
- Intermediate
Lateral
An important part of the passive stay-apparatus is the so-called
2
reciprocal mechanism that links the actions of stifle and hock joints.
This is accomplished by the tendinous peroneus tertius muscle and
the nearly tendinous supf. digital flexor muscle, both crossing the
joint spaces of the two joints. The peroneus tertius arises by a com-
of the femur and, passing cranial to the tibia, ends by complex
 attachments on certain tarsal bones and the proximal end of the
large metatarsal bone. The supf. digital flexor lies caudal to the tib-
ia and connects the caudal surface of the femur with the calcanean
tuber. The schematic representation of the stay-apparatus on the
The HooF AND Irs CoNTENTs are popularly known as the foot of the
opposite page shows that stifle and hock must move in unison and,
horse, although this structure in no way corresponds to the human
if the stiffe joint is locked, that the hock joint is als rendered inca-
foot. The supporting structures enclosed by the hoof include the fol-
 pable of movement.
lowing: the distal portion of the middle phalanx, the distal phalanx
The fetlock and phalangeal joints are supported as in the forelimb
with the insertions of the extensor and flexor tendons, the coffin
 m s xa dap pe s a p si  a
 joint with its capsule and collateral ligaments (see p. 15), the navic-
fetlock joint slightly overextended in the standing animal. The
ular bone and the medial and lateral hoof cartilages. These lie
3
tendinous interosseus arises proximal to the fetlock, attaches on the
against the concave deep surface of the hoof but project with their
proximal sesamoid bones, and is functionally continued by the dis-
dorsal borders above the coronary border of the wall. Several liga-
tal sesamoidean ligaments that attach on the plantar surface of the
 ments attach the hoof cartilages to the three phalanges and to the
proximal two phalanges. The supf. and deep flexor tendons also
navicular bone. The latter forms part of the plantar (palmar) wall
attach proximal and distal to the fetlock and lend further support.
 of the coffin joint capsule, articulating with both middle and distal
The tendinous structures are under tension when weight is on the
phalanges. It is suspended from the distal end of the proximal pha-
overextended fetlock joint and support the joint by preventing it
lanx by the collateral navicular ligaments, and distally it is con-
 from overextending further.
nected by a short but wide distal navicular ligament to the plantar
surface of the distal phalanx; the last-named ligament strengthens
There are two differences from the arrangement in the distal part of
 the coffin joint capsule at his location.
4
the forelimbs. (1) The accessory (check) ligament of the deep flexor
is much thinner and may be absent. (2) The supf. digital flexor ten-
The deep flexor tendon changes direction as it passes over the navi-
a u r pesa si si q  ossa ou s u
 s oe  i e  a oq e
hindlimb by its firm attachment on the calcanean tuber: its attach-
vides frictionless movement of the tendon over the bearing surface
ment proximal and distal to the fetlock joint still helps to prevent
 provided by the bone. Navicular bone, bursa, and the tendon are of
 Overextension in this joint when the limb is supporting weight.
great clinical importance (see p. 14).
24
Certain Muscles of the Pelvic Limb
(Lateral view)
Patellar ligaments
medial 
intermediate
Tarsal tendon of semi-
tendinosus
Tarsal tendon of
 biceps femoris 
- Tendon of gastro-
cnemius
 Common calcanean
tendon
 Peroneus tertius
Tendon of supf.
(Cranial view)
digital flexor
 Long digital extensor
 Deep digital flexors
● Medial digital flexor
● Lateral digital flexor
● Tibialis caudalis 
- Attachment of supf. digital
flexor tendon on calcanean tuber
Long plantar ligamen
M. interosseus medius
tendc
Extensor branch of interosseus
Proximal sesamoid bones
a  Tendon of peroneus tertius
 Medial branch 
 Collateral sesamoidean ligament
Short and cruciate sesamoidean
 Dorsal branch 
igaments
a”
 Supf. and deep lateral branches
 Oblique sesamoidean ligament
b  Tendon of tibialis cranialis 
tion of supf. digital flexor tendon
Medial branch (cunean tendon)
h
b""
 Dorsal branch 
c Semitendinosus 
d Biceps femoris
é Soleus 
f   Supf. digital flexor
 g Lat. digital flexor
Distal(navicular)sesamoidbone
h   Tibialis cranialis 
I  Lateral digital extensor
25
6. The Hoof (Ungula)
Clinical and Functional Anato
my p. 135-138
ssr   s e s 
which is unpigmented, soft horn and appears whitish on the intact
lengthened the horse's limbs during phylogeny and has raised the
hoof. It descends as the external layer of the hoof wall but fails to
animal on the tip of only a single digit (and hoof) on each of its
reach the ground because it dries and gets worn away. The subcutis
limbs. Compared to the weight of horse, the ground surface of al
 underlying the perioplic dermis is a slightly thickened ring known
hoof is exceedingly small. In addition to transmitting and cushion-
ing this weight, the hoof must protect the underlying soft tissues:
 I1. The wider coronary segment (Corona) follows the perioplic seg-
two reasons for the complexity of this structure, which in some
 parts of the world is referred to as the digital "organ".
ment distally and is separated from it by a shallow grove. The coro-
nary dermis (2) is studded with papillae which are longest distally
1
a) DEFINITION oF THE Hoor: The hoof, in a narrow sense, is nothing
where they can be made out with the naked eye. The coronary epi-
more than modified skin covering the tip of a digit. In a wider sense,
 dermis (10) forms the diddle layer of the hoof wall. This horn is
the hoof includes also the structures it encloses and protects, such
 hard, pigmented horses, and is pushed toward the ground by the
as the distal phalanx (coffin bone), hoof cartilages, distal interpha-
growth of its living basal and spinous layers covering the coronary
langeal (coffin) joint, distal sesamoid (navicular) bone, tendons, lig-
dermis. The coronary horn consists of many horn tubules (17)
aments, blood vessels, and nerves. (This in the jargon of horse own-
which can be detected on the surface of the wall as proximodistal-
ers, is known as "the foot of the horse", although it bears, no resem-
 ly directed fine lines. The subcutis is present in the form of a ring-
blance to the human foot, for instance.) The remarkable skin mod-
like coronary cushion (34) that causes the overlying coronary der-
ification that has taken place involves the three layers of the skin:
mis to bulge and allows its papillae to be directed toward the
2: 3
epidermis, dermis, and subcutis, but not uniformly in all parts of the
ground.
hoof. Characteristic for the hoof is, that it has no hair, no sebaceous
II. The wall segment (Paries) lies deep of the hoof wall and extends
and sweat glands (except for some associated with the frog), and
that it has a firm outer epidermis that must be trimmed (like a fin-
from the coronary segment to the ground. The parietal dermis (3,
3') lies directly on the distal phalanx (39) and on the external sur-
gernail) it its wear with the ground des not keep pace with its
face of the hoof cartilages. The parietal dermis consists of primary
 growth; or conversely, it needs metal shoes if its growth does not
 and secondary dermal lamellae present only in this segment. The
keep pace with wear on man-made surfaces.
crests of the dermal lamellae give rise, near their proximal and dis-
4
 For its study the hoof is best macerated. This grossly separates the
tal ends, to small cap papillae which are directed distally. Similarly,
hard hoof epidermis from the underlying dermis by destroying the
the distal ends of the dermal lamellae bear a short row of terminal
soft basal and spinous layers, but leaving the stratum corneum (the 
papillae (3') that also continue in the direction of the lamellae
actual hoof capsule) intact. The two upper left Figures on the oppo-
toward the ground. The living epidermal cells on the dermal lamel-
site page illustrate that the interior of the hoof capsule can be
lae produce epidermal lamellae (11) which interdigitate with the
likened to the (negative) imprint of the (positive) dermis-covered
 dermal lamellae; their centers are cornified (horny lamellae —19)
foot from which the capsule was removed.
 and it is these that are visible on the internal surface of the wall of
the hoof capsule. The living epidermal cells of the wall segment by
The hoof capsule* consists of wall, sole, frog and bulb. The wall
their continuous mitotic activity make possible the slow, distal
(10, 11) is the part visible in the standing horse. It comprises a toe 
in front, quarters on the sides, and medial and lateral heels (30) at
 minal papillae presents horn tubules that are better developed and
the back, where the wall reflects on itself to form medial and later-
visible only in the terminal horn near the ground where they can be
al bars (24, 25) that flank the frog from which they are separated
made out in the white line (zona alba —18, —20) as faint dots
by paracuneal groves (29). The sole (22, 23) fills the space between 
7
 between the horny lamellae.
the wall and frog; its parts between quarters and bars are its angles.
The triangular frog (27, 28) projects into the sole from behind and
The horn produced over the parietal dermis is covered by, and is
8
continuous with, the thick plate of horn produced over the coro-
hoof, thicken, spread upwards, an overhang the heels as the bulbs
nary dermis and becomes visible only at the white line of the intact
of the heels (26). The bulbs of the heels together with the frog are
hoof. The width of the white line is taken into consideration in the
the homologue of the digital pad.
 diagnosis of hoof diseases, for example in laminitis. The subcutis is
The dermis of the hoof bears papillae (1, 2, 4, 5) which in the large
 absent in the wall segment.
5
wall segment (see further on) are represented by dermal Lamellae
 Dermis and epidermis of the wall segment transfer part of the
(3). The mitotically active cells in the basal and spinous layer of the
weight upon the limb to the inside of the wall through the follow-
hoof epidermisthe ones that maceration destroyed—-produce the
ing structures: distal phalanx, to the dermal lamellae, by interdigi
horn (stratum corneum) of the hoof by passing through processes
tation to the horny lamellae of the wall, and through the sole bor-
of keratinisation and cornification until they die as mature horn
 der of the wall to the ground.
cells. The epidermis overlying to consist of horn tubules embedded
 IV. The slightly concave sole segment (Solea) occupies the space
in intertubular horn. The same cells overlying the dermal lamellae
between the sole border of the wall and the grog/bulb segment. The
produce epidermal lamellae which interdigitate with their dermal
dermis of the sole (4) lies directly on the sole surface of the distal
neighbors and make possible the movement of the wall toward the
phalanx and presents short dermal papillae. The horn of the sole is
 ground.
hard tubular horn. A subcutis is absent.
 b) For further description the hoof may be divided into FvE SEG-
V. The frog/bulb segment forms part of the ground- and the pal-
 MENTs which are most easily recognized in the upper left drawing on
6
mar/plantar surface of the hoof. The dermis of the frog/bulb seg-
s ai i a  pd ou  d aso a
ment (8, 5) presents papillae which spiral in the bulbar part while
forms the wall of the hoof. The respective skin modifications will be
 described for each segment.
 being straight where they underlie the frog. The horn produced by
the overlying epidermis (13, 16) has spiralling horn tubules and is
1. The arrow perioplic segment (Limbus) circles the hoof adjacent to
soft in the bulbar part of the segment and in the center of the frog:
the haired skin. It widens on the palmar/plantar aspect of the hoof
 close to the sole the horn of the frog ist hard. the subcutis deep to
where it merges with the fifth (frog/Bulb) segment. (The junction
the frog is a thick wedge that occupies the spache between the deep
between skin and periople is known as the Coronet.) The perioplic
flexor tendon and the hoof cartilages; it is al feltwork of fibrous
dermis (1) has short dermal papillae, which increase in length dis-
 connective- and adipose tussue known as the digital cushion (35,
 s d ,     
—9
36).
26
Hoof
 33 Perioplic cushion
34 Coronary cushion 
35, 36 Digital cushion
37 Proximal phalanx
38 Middle phalanx 
39 Distal phalanx
40 Navicular bone
41 Common digital extens(
sor tenden
Hoof dermis
 42 Deep digital flexor tendon
 43 Glands of the frog
(Proximolateral view)
Torus
metacarpeus
Median section
1 Perioplic dermis 
 2 Coronary dermis -
 6 Dermis of the bars
3 Parietal dermis -
(Coronary part)
(dermal lamellae)
 7 Dermis of the bars
(Parietal part)
37
 8 Dermis of the bulb of
 3' Terminal
the heel
elded
3
34
4 Dermis of the sole
 Dermis of the frog
39
Hoof capsule
此
(Distolateral view)
Wall
513
 9 External layer
32 Sole border of wall
Navicular bursa
(Periople)
Distal interphalangeal (cofin) joint
10 Middle layer
(Coronary
horn,
11 Internal
layer
14 Bar (Parietal part)
(Parietal
horn)
15 Bar (Coronary part)
16 Bulb of heel
Ground surface
 27 Crura
 29 Paracuneal
30 Heels
 31 Central
of frog
grooves
 28 apex of frog
12 Sole
13 Frog
White line (zona alba)
ceubicld
20 Terminal horn|
18 Cap horn
19 Horny
tubules
lamellae
tubules
22 Sole (Central part)
23 Sole (Angle) 
17 Horn tubules
21 Horn 
of middle 
 tubules of
the sole
24 Bar (Coronary horn)
layer of wall 
 26 Bulbs of
 25 Bar (Parietal horn) -
the heels
27
7. Suspensory Apparatus of the Coffin Bone
 Clinical and Functional Anat
my p. 138-141
(Distal Phalanx), Vessels and Nerves of the Hoof
The horse is an animal walking onthe border of the tip ofthe toe. That
artery at the level of the proximal border of the ungular cartilage. It
means that its body weight rests predominantly on the solear border
gives off a branch peripherally into the bulb of the heel and an axial
(margo solearis —5)ofthe hoof; whereas, its modified digital pad, the
branch to the crus of the frog. The coronal artery (7) arises from the
sole (solea ungulae) and the frog (cuneus ungulae) of the hoof,
 abaxial wall of the plantar digital artery closely above the proximal
depending on the character of the ground-surface, bear only a small
border of the hoof capsule. It gives off dorsal branches and branch-
part of the body weight. This is in contrast to the claw (see Atlas of
 es for the quarter region. Shortly before the plantar (palmar) digital
Bovine Anatomy). Within the hoof, the body weight of a horse is
 artery enters the axial solear foramen or, respectively, the abaxial
transferred from the coffin bone (os ungulare) to the hoof plate by the
solear foramen there arises from its abaxial side a short common
1
suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone (apparatus suspensorius
trunk for the artery of the hoof wall (ramus dorsalis phalangis dis-
 ossis ungulae) and by this to the solear border of this hoof plate.
talis—9) and the artery of the coffin bone (ramus plantaris phalangis
1. DefinITION Of The SuSpenSoRY AppArAtuS of THe CoffiN BoNE.
 distalis —9'). These two arteries run on the surface of the bone and
The suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone is a constituent of the
each gives off proximal as well as distal branches. The proximal
equine hoof. The concept, suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone,
 branches of the ramus dorsalis phalangis distalis are connected to the
comprises all connective tissue and epithelial structures in the wall
 distal branches of the coronal artery. Arterio-arterial anastomoses
 segment as a functional unit of the hoof, which transfers the body
 are also found at the distal border of the coffin bone and its plantar
weight. The body weight rests as a pressure-force on the coffin bone
(palmar) processes. Here, the distal branches of the ramus dorsalis
(os ungulare -3) and is transferred as a tensile force onto the hoof
phalangis distalis and ramus plantaris (palmaris) phalangis distalis
plate. The wall corium (dermis parietis —2) and the wall epidermis
 are connected with each other arcade-like to form the artery of the
(epidermis parietis —1) are part of this suspensory apparatus.
solear border (a. marginis solearis —10), which again anastomoses
with distal branches of the ramus tori ungulae and those of the ter-
a) The wall corium is a taut, collagen-fibered connective tissue,
 minal arch (arcus terminalis) of the plantar (palmar) digital arteries.
conducting blood vessels and nerves. The collagen fiber-bundles
The terminal arch is the terminal part of the anastomosing lateral
originate at the parietal surface of the coffin bone. Proximodistally
and medial plantar digital arteries and veins in the semicircular bony
running bony crests are characteristic for the parietal surface of the
canal of the coffin bone (see text-figure, 13). The arterial pulse wave
coffin bone, at which —and less between them—- the collagen fiber-
is transferred to the accompanying veins, by which the blood
bundles of the wall dermis arise directly in the bone tissue by way
 drainage from the hoof is enhanced.
 of a chondroapophyseal insertion. The coffin bone has no perios-
teum in this insertional zone of the connective tissue part of the sus-
pensory apparatus of the coffin bone. Moreover, partially calcified
Dorsal view
fibrocartilage is embedded here. The collagen fiber-bundles of the
wall corium exchange fibers with each other, and by this a dense
network of fibers, the reticular layer (2") (stratum reticulare) of the
wall corium is formed. The collagen fiber-bundles then run radial-
ly, obliquely distoproximally in direction into the primary and sec-
10
ondary dermal lamellae (stratum lamellatum dermidis parietis —
13-
2') and insert on the basal membrane that joins the parietal dermis
 and parietal epidermis together.
b) The parietal epidermis with its primary and secondary laminae
is interlocked with those of the dermis. With the putting down
(weight-bearing) of the hoof, the tensile force acting on the second-
ary lamellae is transferred via the basal membrane onto the basal
and spinous cells in the secondary epidermal lamellae. These are
connected via hemidesmosomes on the basal membrane or via
desmosomes to each other and via finger-like processes to horn cells
a d    d  
The subcutaneous arteries form a network from which the dermal
lamellae or horny lamellae pass over continuously into the inter-
tubular horn of the coronary horn and wind around the coronary
vessels (rete dermale parietale —8) proceed. These ramify within the
 dermis just below the surface ofthe papillary body in a subepidermal
horn tubules in a basket-like manner. By these intensive connections
in the form of intercellular junctions and interdigitating cell
and veinsThse veinagainfrmsupficial, ermal, anddeep,s
processes, the tensile force is finally transferred to the coronary
cutaneous, (excluding the wall and sole segment) vascular plexus,
horn in the epidermal part of the suspensory apparatus of the cof-
from which the draining veins originate at the coronary and solear
2
fin bone. This then rests as a pressure force on the solear border of
 borders of the hoof. The venous drainage from the hoof in the subcu-
the hoof plate.
taneous venous plexus that lies axial and abaxial to the ungular car-
I. The vessels that supply the hoof originate from the lateral and
 tilages is facilitated by the hoof mechanism in placing the foot down
medial plantar (palmar) digital arteries (6) and veins. Functional-
(dund unnsassad) dnuue (ueaqam)
anatomically it should be noted that the lateral and medial digital
ML. The nerves of the hoof originate from the lateral and medial plan-
arteries are multiply connected with each other by their branches
tar (palmar) digital nerves (6). The latter nerves run lateral or, respec-
(coronal artery [a. coronalis —7], dorsal branch of the distal pha-
tively, medial to the deep flexor tendon distally to the hoof and
n s] re en [ss suad ssp  x
 accompany the same-named arteries deep to the ligament of the ergot
nalis —13]), by which the blood supply is assured in variable load-
 to the axial aspect of the ungular cartilage. Proximoplantar (-palmar)
ing of the hoof. In the same manner the lateral and medial veins are
to the ungular cartilage a branch of the digital cushion (ramus tori
connected with each other, especially with their venous plexuses
ungulae) branches off from the digital nerve of each side. The con-
(plexus ungularis —11) that lie axial and abaxial to the ungular car-
tinuing digital nerve turns dorsodistally axial to the plantar (palmar)
 process of the coffin bone, gives off branches for the coffin joint axi-
together with the hoof mechanism, have a special importance for the
 ally and enters the solear foramen to reach the solear canal of the cof-
drainage from the hoof. The superficial and deep arteriovenous
fin bone. In its semicircular course through the solear canal, proximal
anastomoses, which are described in the haired skin, lie in the cori-
 and distal nerve branches are given off. These together with arteries
um of the hoof at the base of the dermal papillae or, respectively, at
 and veins penetrate the bone in a radiating manner. On the parietal
the base of a primary dermal lamella. It is by these that the blood can
surface of the coffin bone they enter the parietal dermis proximally
be drained in the papillary body of the modified ungular skin with
and distally. Here again they branch into proximal and distal branch-
by-passing of the terminal network of subepidermal capillaries.
es. These branches form a deep dermal network. From the branches
The medial and lateral plantar (palmar) digital arteries (6) extend
 of the deep dermal network, nerves branch off at the base of a lamel-
distally in the company of the same named veins and nerves on the
la. Nerve end-corpuscles (tactile corpuscles) lie predominantly in the
sides of the deep flexor tendon. The artery of the digital cushion
subcutis of the frog and heel. They appear moreover in the subcuta-
(ramus tori ungulae 12) branches from the plantar (palmar) digital
neous cushion of the periople and coronary dermis.
28
Suspensory Apparatus of the Coffin Bone
Hoof capsule and dermis, distal phalanx
(Dorsolateral view)
 Wall epidermis
 External layer (periople)
Middle layer 
- Perioplic dermis
1- Internal layer
 Coronary dermis
2  Wall corium
Dermal lamellae
2"
 Reticular layer
 3 Distal phalanx
 Transverse section
4  Ungular cartilage 
Horizontal section 
 Perioplic cushion 
Coronary cushion 
Coronaryepidermi:
Digital cushion -
 Plantar process
 of the distal
phalanx —
 Dermis of the sole
Sole (angle) -
Frog-
5 Solear border
Central sulcus of the frog
 Crus of the frog
 Deep digital flexor tendon 
 Paracuneal sulcus
 Bar (pars inflexa)
 6 Medial and lateral digital artery, vein, and nerve
(Dorsolateral view)
Coronary branch of the
digital nerve -
 Median section
 Digital extensor tendon
 7  Coronary artery and vein 
 Suspensory apparatus of 
the coffin bone 
Arrows:
 Pressure ↓ Tension I Pressure 
Axis of rotation O
Curved arrows:
9 Artery of the
Coffin bone rotation
hoof wall
 9' Artery of the
 coffin bone
12 Branch of
the digital
 cushion 
11 Venous plexus
10 Artery and vein of the solear border
29
8. Synovial Structures of the Pelvic Limb
Clinical and Functional Anat
omy p. 112-113: 141-145
a) JoINTS OF THE PELVIC LiMB 
Name/Fig.
Participating Bones
Type of the joint 
Function
Remarks
1. Sacroiliac joint
see p. 165/166 (56.3.)
1. Hip joint
lium, pubis, ischium
 commposite spheroidal
 Mainly flexion and extension;
 Ligaments: transverse acetabular;
within aceta bulum with
joint
little ab- and adduction
 of femoral head; accessory; articu-
the head of the femur
lar labrum deepens acetabulum
II. Art. genus
Composite joint
Ligaments of the femorotibial
(Kniegelenk)
joint: attach menisci to tibia and
a) Femorotibia joint
 a) Femur with med. and
a) Simple condylar
a) Mainly flexion and
femur; cran. and caud. cruciates;
lat. condyles
joint
extension; tightening ligs.
med. and lat. collaterals 
slow movement
b) Femoropatellar joint
b) Femoral trochlea with
 b) Simple gliding joint
Gliding
Ligaments of the femoropatellar
patella
joint: med., intermediate, and lat.
patellars; med. and lat. femoro-
patellars
 c) Proximal tibiofibular joint, communicates with the femorotibial joint 
III. Hock joint
Composite joint 
(tarsal joint)
a) Tarsocrural joint
a) Cochlea of tibia with
 Simple cochlear joint
 Springy "snap" joint allowing 
The two collateral and the long
trochlea of talus
only flexion and extension
 plantar ligs. have functional and
 b) Prox. intertarsal
b) Talus and calcaneus
Composite plane joint 
 Minimum movement
 clinical significance; many small
with central and fourth
ligs. are incorporated in the
tarsals
fibrous joint capsule
c) Distal intertarsal
c) Central tarsal with first
 Composite plane joint
Minimum movement
to third tarsals
Mt II-IV und prox.
Ossa tarsalia I-IV
d) Tarsometatarsal joint
d) First to fourth tarsals
Composite plane joint
 Minimum movement
with second to fourth
metatarsals 
e) Intertarsal joints: vertical joints between tarsal bones
Hip joint: The acetabulum is deepened by the fibrous labrum along
 three permit almost no movement. The medial and lateral (long)
1
its rim. The ligament of the femoral head extends from the depth of
 collateral ligaments arise from their respective malleoli on the tibia
the acetabulum to the central part of the fovea. The accessory liga-
 and terminate on the proximal extremities of the corresponding
ment, a peculiarity of the horse, arises mainly from the terminal ten-
splint bones. Between these points they attach also to some of the
don of the rectus abdominis and to a lesser extent from the external
tarsal bones they cross. The long plantar ligament extends from the
abdominal oblique muscle and the yelow abdominal tunic covering
calcaneus distally to the proximoplantar surface of the metatarsal
it. It is part of the prepubic tendon and inserts in the peripheral part
 bones and, as the preceding ligaments, connects also to the inter-
of the fovea. Both ligaments pass through the acetabular notch
vening tarsal bones. The fibrous joint capsule extends from the tib-
where they cross dorsal to the transverse acetabular ligament.
ia to the metatarsal bones and is firmly attached to various parts of
the tarsal skeleton. The synovial membrane, however, is divided
2
The femorotibial joint of the stifle is incompletely divided by the
into the four joint cavities of which a and b (of the Table), and
two crescent-shaped menisci into upper and lower compartments.
sometimes c and d, communicate. The capacious capsule of the tar-
These communicate freely through the open centers of the menisci
socrural joint has a dorsal and two plantar pouches; these are areas
where the condyles of femur and tibia are in direct contact. The
menisci are tough, fibrocartilaginous structures that compensate for
cavity is distended by synovia.
the incongruency of the articular surfaces; they are said to reduce
concussion in the joint. Their thick outer margins are firmly
b) ImPORTANT SYNOvIAL BuRSAE
attached to the fibrous joint capsule, and their ends are anchored
mainly on the tibia, but with one ligament also to the femur. The
The trochanteric bursa lies between the tendon of the gluteus acces-
4
sorius and the low part of the greater trochanter.
joint cavity is divided into medial and lateral sacs. Whether the (axi-
al) synovial membranes completely separate the two has not been
The proximal infrapatellar bursa, a peculiarity of the horse, lies
firmly established. (Both may communicate with the femoropatel-
deep to the proximal end of the intermediate patellar ligament; the
lar joint cavity.) The two sacs are punctured using the collateral lig-
- s a  a  a ra s q de  
aments as palpable landmarks. The cruciate ligaments in the center
ment.
of the joint cannot be palpated. They are import for the stability of
the stifle. The combined tendons of origin of the long digital exten-
The subtendinous calcanean bursa is situated between the cal-
 5
sor and peroneus tertius are underlain by an extension of the later-
canean tuber and the “cap" of the supf. flexor tendon that attaches
al femorotibial joint cavity to lessen friction with the tibia.
here. An inconstant subcutaneous calcanean bursa lies in the same
 position but under the skin (capped hock).
The femoropatellar joint moves in unison with the femorotibial
joint. The patella is anchored to the femur by medial and lateral
 The subtendinous bursa of the medial tibialis cranialis tendon facil-
6
- rd ar Aq i a oi pe si 
itates movement of the tendon over the medial collateral ligament 
of the hock.
the sartorius and gracilis muscles, the intermediate ligament is the
 The navicular bursa between the deep flexor tendon and the navic-
principal termination tendon of the rectus femoris, and the lateral
ular (distal sesamoid) bone is similar to that of the forelimb (Figs.
patellar ligament contains tendinous tissue from the biceps femoris
on pp. 13 and 15).
and tensor fasciae latae. (For the loop formed by the medial and
intermediate ligaments that locks the stifle see p. 24.)
c) Tendon ShEats
The (proximal) tibiofibular joint allows little movement. Its cavity
 The tendons passing over the hook are furnished with synovial
7
communicates with the lateral femorotibial joint. (There is no dis-
sheaths, with the exception of the supf. flexor tendon whose pas-
tal tibiofibular joint in the horse.)
sage over the calcanean tuber is eased by a bursa.
3
 The hock joint has four levels of articulation of which the distal
The digital sheath is like that of the forelimb (see pp. 10 and 15).
30
Joints (Articulations), Bursae and Synovial Sheaths
Gastrocnemius
(Ventral view)
(Ventral view)
b
 Medial digital flexor
 Superficial digital flexor
P
Tibialis caudalis
Lig. of the head of the femur
Lig. of the head of the femur
会
Lateral digital flexor
Tibialis cranialis
Accessory ligament
 Accessory ligament
 Labrum of acetabulum
9
 Peroneus tertius
 Long digital extensor
Lateral digital extensor
Transverse acetabular lig.
Joint capsule
Hip joint 
(Craniolateral view)
(Craniolateral view)
(Caudal view)
Patella
Lat. femoropatellar lig.
Meniscofe-
moral lig. -
Intermediate
Prox.
 patellar lig.
infrapatellar bursa
Popliteus,
Lat. patellar lig.
tendon
Caudal menis-
 Popliteus tendon 
cotibial lig.
of lat. meniscus
Lat. and med.
Caudal
collat. ligg.-
Med. patellar lig.
Long dig.
 Dist. infrapatellar
extensor tendon
 Peroneus tertius
bursa
tendon 
 Stifle joint 
(Lateral view)
Lateralview
(medial)
Subcutaneous
calcanean 
bursa
 Subtendinous
calcanean 
bursa
Distal end (cochlea)
Lat. and med.
of tibia 
collateral ligg.
Talus
 Long plantar lig.
 Central tarsal
 Subtendinous (cunean)
bursaoftibialiscranialis
vtI川
Synovial tendon sheaths
Hock joint
31
 The Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (NAV) difine hoof capsule as only the stratum corneum of all hoof segment.
Chapter 4: Head
 Clinical and Functional Anato
ny p.145-147
1. Skull and Dentition
a)  The SuRFAce FeATUREs of the skull such as processes, crests, and
two teeth are brachydont which means that they are fully formed
notches are helpful landmarks during palpation, while deeper skele-
when erupted and do not increase in length as do the remaining
tal features serve the same purpose when examining radiographs.
hypsodont teeth. The growth of the horse's hyposodont teeth ceas-
The orbit lies between the facial and cranial parts of the skull and
es about seven years following eruption. At that time short roots
1
has a complete bony rim, since the zygomatic process of the frontal
form on the cheek teeth while the foramen at the proximal end of
bone (1) is long enough to reach the zyomatic arch. The tympanic
    an s s   s a
bulla (17) is unobtrusive and situated medial to the styloid process
 horse until death. Deposition of cement and bone at the bottom of
(10') of the temporal bone. The distinct external occipital protu-
the tooth sockets now pushes the teeth out of the jaws; this proceeds
berance (31) for the attachment of the nuchal ligament lies in the
 at the rate of wear at the occlusal surface which for the cheek teeth
midline half way between the nuchal crest (m) and the foramen
is 2-3 mm per year. Another feature of the cheek teeth is the
magnum (38). The lateral surface of the skull' s facial part is char-
 extreme folding of their enamel casing. There is also invagination of
acterized by the facial crest (57') that extends from the maxilla to
the enamel at the occlusal surface producing infundibula. Both the
the zygomatic arch. Between the nasal process (69) of the incisive
 folding and the invagination results in multiple raised enamel ridges
bone and the nasal bone is the nasoincisive notch (X."), an easily
 on the occlusal surface separated by the softer dentin. Combining
palpated landmark. Midway between the rostral end of the facial
these features with the horizontal chewing movements of the
crest and the nasoincisive notch lies the palpable infraorbital fora-
mandible makes for a very efficient grinding mechanism. The enam-
men (59) which is a landmark for a nerve block.
el of the incisors is also invaginated at the occlusal surface (forming
b)  The more deeply situated FonMINA may be used for orientation
 one infundibulum) resulting in two raised enamel rings when the
 tooth is in wear. Cement surrounds the enamel casing of both types
 on radiographs, and certain others are occasionally used to block
 of teeth while dentin fills the space between the enamel and the den-
nerves emerging from them.
tal cavity within the tooth.
A prominent foramen is the foramen lacerum (45') on the base of
The surfaces of the teeth are known as mesial (facing the median
the skull between sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones. Its ros-
 plane along the dental arch), distal (the opposite surface), vestibu-
tral portion is sculpted to present an oval notch (45) and an carotid
lar, and lingual; and the occlusal or working surface. The usual divi-
 axa r op a u  aes ae  (,d 
 n      ( =h  g 
caudal part of the foramen lacerum narrows to form the jugular
line), and root (in the socket and clothed by cement) is not applica-
foramen (q). The roof of the cranium presents a series of dorsal
ble to the horse's teeth. The reason is the growth at the proximal
apertures (h') for veins which connect with the temporal meatus.
 end of the teeth and their continuous extrusion from the jaw. There-
The supraorbital foramen (1') transmits the frontal nerve that aris-
fore, the part showing in the mouth may be called clinical crown,
es in the orbit.
 and the hidden, much longer portion, the body of the tooth.
The notch for the facial vessels on the ventral border of the
mandible is an important landmark in the horse for taking the pulse
(see p. 35.77').
 Permanent Teeth in Longitudinal Section
2
c)  The DENTITION OF THE HORSE is characterized by almost all teeth
Secondary dentin
being hypsodont (they are tall and continue to grow in length after
Enamel fold
erupting), by a molarization of the premolars to form a continuous
I  Raised enamel nidge 
 grinding surface with the molars, and by the two rows of lower
cheek teeth standing closer together than the two rows of cheek
 Cement
teeth in the upper jaw. Distinct lateral masticatory movements
 Enamel
cause the cheek teeth to obtain a flat, though very rough, occlusal
Dentin
surface. The horse, as the other domestic mammals, has a heteroge-
neous dentition that consists of incisors (I), canines (C), premolars
(P), and molars (M) of which the two last-named are similar and
 Secondary dentin 
because of this are referred to simply as cheek teeth.
The dental formula for the deciduous teeth is
M
 Dental cavity
2 ↓Di
D
24
3-0-3
Foramenattipofroo
or more simply
3-0-3
That for the permanent teeth is
 = 40 or 42
Cup
 Cement filling bottom
3-1-3 (4} -3
 of infundibulum 
 Invaginated enamel 
-3
forming infundibulum 
Dental cavity
A further characteristic of the equine dentition is that the canine
teeth are fully developed only in the male, and that the first premo-
 Foramen at proximal end of tooth
lar (P1) is a vestige (*wolf" tooth) that not always erupts. These
32
Cranium
External lamina (a)
(Dorsal view)
Diploe (b)
Internal lamina (c)
ralme
Canal for transverse sinus (t)
Retroarticular foramen(h)
Dorsal apertures (h')
emporal fossa (j) 
Nuchal crest (m) 
Termporal crest (m) 
Carotid notch (p) 
￥ (b) uaweoy denbnr
￥ ( b anss ednd
I. Frontal bone ★ 
Ethmoidal foramina (2) 
IV. Temporal bone ★ ●
Internal acousticmeatus
men (10) ★
Styloid process (10) ★
Canal for trigeminal nerve (14)
X
Lingual surface
b. Tympanic part (15) ★
Distal surface 
66'
Occlusal surface 
Tympanic bulla (17) 
Tympanic opening of auditory tube (17) ★ ●
P
Vestibular surface
Muscular process (17") ★
Mesialsurface
c. Squamous part (18) ★ 
Zygomatic process(19) 
(Ventrocaudal view)
Retroarticular process (22) ★ 
Vl. Occipital bone ●
Squamouspart (30) 
66
External occipital protubera
ance (31) 
"vWolf”thooth
Tentorial process (31)
Lateral part (32) ●
Occipital condyle (33) 
Canal for hypoglossal nerve (35) ★ ●
Baslar part (37) 
Paracondylar process (36) ★ 
Foramen magnum (38) 
Muscular tubercle (49) 
VIll. Sphenoid bone ●
Basisphenoid
Body (41) 
(45)★
Pterygoid crest (46) 
Alar canal (47) ★ 
2
Smallalarforamen（48')★
Caudal alar foramen (49) ★ 
(Lingual surface)
57
1500
Cement
Orbital fssure (53) 
Dentin
lnfundibulum
Face
X. Nasal bone ★
 Pterygopalatine fossa (A) 
Majc
Nasoincisive notch (x.") 
Rostral process(X.)★
Caudal palatine foram
M1
Major palatine foramen (C) 
X. Maxilla ★
 Minor palatine canals ●
Minor palatine foramina D)
(Lingual surface)
Infraorbital canal
Sphenopalatine forarmen (E) 
Maxillary foramen (58) 
Orbit (G) 
Choanae (F)
Palatine fissure (H) ●
Palatine process (64) 
Dental alveoli (J) 
Alveolar process (65) 
 Alveolar rigdes (K) ★ 
 Xll. Incisive bone ★ 鲁
Body (66) ★
Diastema (N) ★
Alveolar process (67) ★
Facial bones
Nasal process (69) 
VIll. Lacrimal bone ★  
XIll. Palatine bone ★ ●
Fossa for lacrimal sac (54) ★
IX. Zygomatic bone ★ 鲁
Temporal process (55) ★
XIV. Pterygoid bone ★ 鲁
Hamulus (72) 
XV. Vomer ●
Septal groove (73) 
33
2. Skull with Teeth and Paranasal Sinuses
 Clinical and Functi
tional Ana
my p. 147-149
a) The deciduous (milk) TeETH are white compared to the more
the two maxillary sinuses, its dorsal part is so thin that it can be dis-
ivory or yellowish color of the permanent teeth.
solved by pus from an aggressive purulent sinusitis. The rostral
3
The incisors (I) of the deciduous set are shovel-shaped and have an
 sni   s    ss 
maxillary sinus (8). The rostral maxillary sinus communicates over
indistinct neck. The recently erupted permanent incisors are 5-7 cm
the infraorbital canal with the ventral conchal sinus (e) located in
long, have a single root (body), and an oval occlusal surface that is
the caudalmost portion of the ventral nasal concha. The ventral
 oriented transversely. Their transverse section below the gums is
 conchal sinus thus lies medial to the sagittal bony plate that sup-
more rounded and at the proximal end again oval but with the oval
 ports the infraorbital canal. The roots of P4 and M1 covered by a
oriented longitudinally, i.e., from labial to lingual. (This change in 
thin plate of bone extend into and form the floor of the rostral max-
shape is mirrored on the occlusal (working) surface as the teeth are
worn down by the abrasive fodder and when the teeth are extrud-
illary sinus.
ed to compensate for the loss at the crown; see Aging 32.2) The
 The floor of the caudal maxillary sinus is formed in part by the
three incisors of a side are known popularly as central, intermedi-
 proximal ends of the last two cheek teeth (M2 and M3). Ventrome-
ate, and corner incisors (I1-I3). During mastication, cement and
dially, the caudal maxillary sinus communicates with the
dentin are worn away more readily than the harder enamel, leaving
sphenopalatine sinus (k') which excavates palatine and sphenoid
A id a  ie si   rd s oi ra a
bones ventral to the orbit; dorsomedially, the sinus communicates
running a fingernail across the working surface.
through a large oval frontomaxillary opening (C) with the con-
The infundibulum is partly filled with cement, leaving a small cavi-
chofrontal sinus. The latter consists of the large frontal sinus (n)
4
which lies dorsal to the orbit, and the smaller dorsal conchal sinus
ty, the cup, that is blackened by food deposits. Wear at the occlusal
surface at first eradicates the cup (*cup-gone"), leaving the proxi-
(0) which lies rostromedial to the orbit. (Again, only the caudal por-
tion of the dorsal nasal concha furnishes the dorsal conchal sinus;
mal end of the infundibulum known as the enamel spot in the cen-
the rostral portion of both dorsal and ventral nasal conchae are
ter of the tooth. Secondary dentin, known as the dental star, appears
 scrolls surrounding recesses of the nasal cavity; see p. 45.)
on the labial aspect of the receding cup. The slightly darker sec-
ondary dentin is laid down at the distal end of the dental cavity
c) The basihyoid (90), the central bone of the HyoID ApPARATUs,
before wear at the working surface of the tooth would open the cav-
 presents a prominent ingual process (90") that is embedded in the
ity and expose its contents to infection. When also the enamel spot
root of the tongue. The thyrohyoid (92) that projects caudodorsal-
has been worn away,the now round dental star occupies the center
ly from the basihyoid articulates with the thyroid cartilage of the
of the occlusal surface.
larynx. Dorsally, the basihyoid is succeeded by the ceratohyoid
The canine teeth (C) are fully developed only in the permanent den-
(91). The small epihyoid (93) sits at the junction of cerato- and sty-
lohyoids and fuses with the latter. The long and flat stylohyoid (94)
tition of the male. They are brachydont (short) teeth that are not
 articulates via a short cartilaginous tympanohyoid (95) with the sty-
extruded further following eruption. Mares lack them or show only
loid process (10') at the base of the skull.
 peg-like rudiments, mostly in the lower jaw.
The rudimentary "wolf" teeth (P1) are seen mesial to P2, more
 often in the upper jaw. They fall out again or are pulled by horse
 aq p an on ud a  an n  rn s
ing with the bit.
 Hyoid apparatus
1
The premolars (P2-P4) are four-cornered pillars (except P2 whose
transverse section is triangular) which carry three roots in the upper
jaw and two in the lower. Apart from the longitudinally folded
enamel casing, the upper premolars present two infundibula visible
on the working surface. Before such a tooth comes into wear the
enamel of the outer casing is continuous with that forming the
infundibula. Upon wear, this connection is lost. The infundibula,
like those of the incisors, are filled with cement. Inside the outer
enamel casing and surrounding the infundibula is dentin. Since the
left rostrolateral view
dentin and the cement wear more readily than the enamel, the
working surface acquires a rasplike quality.
The last three cheek teeth, the molars (M1-M3), are similar to the
premolars, and have also three roots in the upper and two in the
94
94
lower jaw.
Stylohyoid angle
 b) The PARANAsAL SNusEs expand into the diploe of certain facial
93
bones and, by remaining open to the nasal cavity, are lined with a
thin respiratory epithelium. The expansion begins in the fetus and
proceeds from the middle nasal meatus where throughout the life of
the animal the nasomaxillary aperture (o) maintains communica-
tion into the rostral and caudal maxillary sinuses. These are sepa-
rated by an oblique septum (β) that is inconstant in its position, but
most often proceeds dorsocaudally from a point about 5 cm caudal
to the rostral end of the facial crest. Though the septum separates
90
34
 Cranium
 External lamina (a) o
Diploe (b)
Internal lamina (c) o
calme
Canal for transverse sinus (f o
(Paramedian section o)
Dorsal apertures (h)
emporal fossa (j)
External frontal crest (k)
External sagittal crest ()
Nuchal crest (m) o
Temporal crest (m)
Carotid notch (p) o
Jugular foramen (q) o
Petrooccipital fssure (q o
 Cranial cavity
Rostral fossa (r) o
 Paranasal sinuses
Caudal fossa (x) o
Medullary impression (z) o
Face
 Neurocranial bones 
I. Frontal bone o
Facial bones 0
Xll.Incisive bone 0
rbitalfore
en(1') 0
Body of incisive bone (66) 0
Ethmoida foramina (2)
Alveolar process (67) o
Il. Parietal bone 0
 Tentorial process (4) 0
Nasal process (69) 0
Ill. Interparietal bone 0
XllI. Palatine bone 0
 Tentorial process (5) o
Perpendicular plate (70)
Horizontal plate (71) o
IV. Temporal bone 0
XIV Pterygoid bone 0
a. Petrosal part (6) o
Mastoid process(7)
Hamulus (72) 0
Interena acoustic orice (8) o
Internal acousticmeatus
Xv. Vomer 0
Septal groove (73)
Facial canal (9) 0
 XVI. Ventral (nasal) turbinate 0
Stylomastoid foramen (10)
Styloid process (10)
XVll. Mandible*
Petrotympanic fissure (12)
Cerebellar [floccular] fossa (13) 0
Tar
Canal for trigeminal nerve (14) o
Mental foramen(75)★
b. Tympanic part (15)
Body of mandible (76) ★
Externalacousticmeatus
entral border（77)★
External acousticorifice(16)
Vascular notch (77) ★
Alveolar border (78)
Tympanic opening of auditory tube (17)
Tympanic bulla (17)
Mylohyoid line (79) ★
Ramus of mandible (80)
Muscular process (17") 0
c. Squamous part (18)
Masseteric fossa (83)
Articular surface (21)
Retroarticular process (22)
Neck of mandible (87) ★
V. Ethmoid bone 0
Coronoid process (89) ★
Lamina cribrosa (23) 0
 XVIll. Paranasal sinuses
Crista galli (24) o
Perpendicular plate (24) 0
maxillary sinuses β
Ectoturbinates(26) (not shown)
Rostral maxillary sinus
Enamel crest
Endoturbinates (27)ot
Ventral conchal sinus ε
Frontomaxillary opening 
 Enamel fold
Vl. Occipital bone 0
Frontal sinus 1
Dorsal conchal sinus θ
Sphenopalatine sinus K'
Maxillopalatine aperture k
M,
(Vestibular surface)
Occipital condyle (33)
Canal for hypoglossal nerve (35) 0
 Enamel crest
 Paracondyar process (36)
Basilar part (37)
 Dental star
Foramen magnum (38)
(secondary dentin)
Muscular tubercle (40)
 Infundibulum 
 Vll. Sphenoid bone 0
(tilled with cement)
Basisphenoid
Body (41) 0
Wing(43） 0
Sella turcica (42) 0
(Lingual surface)
Alar canal (47) o
Rostral alar foramen (48)
Small alar forar
men（48)
Caudal alar foramen (49)
Presphenoid
Body (50) 0
Wing (51) 0
Optic canal (52) o
XVIl. Mandiblex
35
3. Supf. Veins of the Head, Facial nerve (Vll) and
Clinical and Functional Ana
my p. 149
Muscles supplied by the Facial Nerve
 In order to show these structures to best advantage (Fig. on oppo-
facial nerve, now on a rostral course, receives a contribution from
site page), the skin, cutaneous muscle, and the portion of the
 the transverse facial branch (26; of the auriculotemporal nerve,
parotid gland dorsal to the maxillary vein are removed. The parotid
from V-3) and splits into dorsal (12) and ventral (13) buccal branch-
lymphnodes under the cranial border of the gland should be pre-
es that cross the masseter in the direction of the mouth, being pal-
served.
 pable (and visible) in thin-skinned horses.
a)  The Supr. Veins of the head are branches of the external jugular
c) The MusCLEs SuPPLIED BY THE FACIAL NERVE (with minor
vein (21) whose prominent bifurcation at the angle of the mandible
 exceptions) are known as the muscles of facial expression, or the
embraces the ventral end of the parotid gland and, more deeply.
 mimetic muscles; they activate muzzle, cheeks, eyelids, and ear.
part of the mandibular gland (see p. 39.10) as well The linguofa-
 The levator nasolabialis (4) splits distally to provide passage to the
cial vein (20) forms the ventral limb of the bifurcation; after releas-
 caninus. Its ventral part crosses the supf. surface of the caninus and
ing the lingual and sublingual veins, it becomes the facial vein (11)
a am i so s ai  q d rn a  sa
which crosses the ventral border of the mandible to ascend across
 dorsal part passes deep to the caninus to reach the nostril and upper
the face. At the level of the lower cheek teeth the facial vein gives off 
lip. The levator labii superioris (6) arises rostroventral to the orbit.
the buccal vein (10) which passes deep to the masseter where it pres-
 Its belly covers the infraorbital foramen—and has to be displaced
ents a dilated segment (see p. 39.3) before it joins the maxillary vein.
 dorsally when the foramen is to be palpated. The muscle ends with
At the level of the upper cheek teeth, the facial vein gives off the
 a long tendon (provided with a tendon sheath) that unites with its
1
deep facial vein (8) that is similarly dilated (see p. 39.2) under the
fellow from the other side and descends into the upper lip between
masseter; it passes into the orbit where it penetrates the periorbita.
the nostrils; it raises the lip in the "flehmen" reaction. The caninus
The maxillary vein (32) is the other terminal branch of the external 
(3) extends from the facial crest to the lateral aspect of the nostril
by passing between the two parts of the levator nasolabialis. The
jugular vein. It gives off the occipital vein (31) which passes deeply
under the wing of the atlas, and the caudal auricular vein (30)
 depressor labii inferioris (2) arises from the coronoid process of the
s     s
 mandible and passes forward deep to the masseter and along the
(ster-
ventral border of the buccinator to the lower lip where its tendon
nocephalicus) insertion arises the ventral masseteric vein (17) which
covers the mental foramen. The buccinator (7) itself forms the mus-
passes almost ventrally into the masseter. Before the maxillary vein
 5
turns rostrally medial to the ramus of the mandible, it releases the
 cular base of the cheek between upper and lower jaws and extends
supf. temporal vein (16). This vessel, after a short course to the lev-
from the coronoid process to the angle of the mouth; its caudal por-
el of the temporomandibular joint, sends the transverse facial vein
tion lies deep to the masseter. The zygomaticus (5) arises ventral to
2
(14) rostrally along the ventral aspect of the zygomatic arch. The
the facial crest at the level of the orbit and passes to the angle of the
transverse facial vein, near its origin, gives off the dorsal masseteric
mouth.
vein (25) and then is dilated (see p. 39.1) for a few cm before join-
 The muscles of the eyelids are thin and delicate; they include the lev-
ing the facial vein ventral to the cranial end of the facial crest. The
 ator anguli oculi medialis (22), the orbicularis oculi (23), and the
transverse facial vein supplies also the inferior and superior palpe-
malaris (9).
bral veins (24) to the eyelids.
Only two of the numerous ear muscles warrant mention. The long
3 b) The intraosseous course of the FAcIAL NeRvE (18) conforms to
parotidoauricularis (28) lies on the lateral surface of the parotid
the general mammalian pattern. As the nerve emerges from the sty-
gland and passes dorsally to the auricular cartilage. The cervicoau-
lomastoid foramen it releases the caudal (30) and internal (27)
ricularis supf. (29), caudomedial to the ear, is innervated by both
auricular nerves, the latter penetrating the auricular cartilage to
 the facial (VIl) and the great auricular (C2) nerves. This is impor-
 gain the inner surface of the auditory meatus. Next, a branch to the
digastricus and occipitomandibularis is given off ventrally,and dor-
 tation, remains elevated by the activity of the muscle from its par-
4
 sally the auriculopalpebral nerve (15) to the ear and eyelids. The
tial supplied by the second cervical nerve.
Blood Vessels of the Head
1 Common carotid a.
26 Malar a.
a Dilation of transverse facial vein 
2 Internal carotid a.
27 Infraorbital a. and v.
b Dilation of deep facial vein 
3 External carotid a.
 28 External jugular vein 
c Dilation of buccal vein 
4 Occipital a. and v.
 29 Buccal vein
 5 Linguofacial a. and v.
30 Deep facial vein 
6 Lingual a. and v.
 7 Submental a. and sublingual v.
8 Sublingual a.
 9 Facial a. and v.
10 Inferior labial a. and v.
11 Superior labial a. and v.
12 Lateral nasal a. and v.
13 Dorsal nasal a. and v.
14 Angularis oculi a. and v.
15 Masseteric a. and v.
16 Caudal auricular a. and v.
17 Supf. temporal vein
18 Rostral auricular a and v.
19 Transverse facial a. and v.
 20 Dorsal masseteric vein 
 21 Inferior and superior lateral
palpebral veins 
 22 Maxilary a. and v.
 23 Inferior alveolar a. and v.
 24 External ophthalmic a.
-8
10:
 25 Supraorbital a. and v.
(See pp. 37, 39, 47, and 51.)
36
Supf. Structures of the Head
A Mandible
B Nasal bone
C Temporal bone 
 D Annular cartilage
E
 Auricular cartilage 
 F Scutiform cartilage
a Cutaneous muscle of the face
1 Orbicularis oris
b
 Dilator naris
C
 Inferior labial vessels 
d Superior labial vessels
 2 Depressor labi inferioris
Dorsal nasal vessels
f
Lateral nasal vessels
3 Caninus
9
 Infraorbital nerve 
Great auricular nerve
i
 Mental nerve and artery
Omohyoideus
K
 Sternomandibularis
5Zygomaticus
 Medial cervicoauricularis
m Frontoscutularis
6Levatorlabiisuperioris
n
 Zygomaticoauricularis
Intersculutaris
P
 Ventral stumps of masseter 
7 Buccinatol
q  Parotid lymph nodes 
 Parotid gland and its duct
S
 Mandibular gland
t
 Lateral retropharyngeal lymph 
nodes
8 Deep facial veir
9 Malaris
10 Buccal vein
11 Facial vein
22 Levator anguli occuli medialis
 12 Dorsal buccal branch 
 of facial nerve
23 Orbicularis oculi
13 Ventral buccal branch
 of facial nerve 
 24 Inferior and superior
palpebral veins 
14 Transverse facial vein -
 25 Dorsal masseteric vein
 15 Auriculopalpebral nerve
 26 Transv. facial br. of
 16 Supf. temporal vessels 
auriculotemporal nerve (V-3)
17 Ventral masseteric vessels 
 27 Internal auricular nerve
18 Facial nerve
 28 Parotidoauricularis
19 Occipitomandibularis 
 20 Linguofacial vein 
 21 External jugular vein
 29 Cervicoauricularis supf.
- 30 Caudal auricular vessels
and nerve
- 31 Occipital vein
 32 Maxillary vein
37
4. Trigeminal Nerve (V-3 and V-2), Muscles of Mastication, 
 Clinical and Functional Anat
my p. 149-150
Salivary Glands, and Lymphatic Structures
To duplicate the dissections on the opposite page that show the
ments and unilateral action, the same can be said for the medial and
structures to be described most advantageously, one has to proceed
lateral pterygoideus muscles (12) on the medial surface of the
as follows. The vessels and nerves and the muscles innervated by the
mandibie.
facial nerve that overly the temporalis and masseter are removed.
The group of supf. muscles occupying the intermandibular space
The masseter is removed in layers to demonstrate its oblique and
comprises the mylohyoideus (15), digastricus (17), and the occipito-
vertical fibers, its prominent internal tendon sheets, and its inner-
mandibularis (24). The last-named, extending from the paracondy-
vation (masseteric nerve, from V-3) entering the muscle from imme-
lar process to the caudal border of the mandible, may be regarded
diately rostral to the temporomandibular joint. This exposes the
 as a part of the caudal belly of the digastricus; both are innervated
dilated segments of the buccal (3), deep facial (2), and transverse
by the facial nerve. As they separate, the caudal digastricus belly is
facial (1) veins. The zygomatic arch is removed following three
succeeded rostrally by an intermediate tendon that passes through
a split in the termination of the stylohyoideus (14). The tendon then
to the orbit, and Il. through the zygomatic process of the frontal
bone. Before disarticulating the temporomandibular joint, the tem-
(V3) and which ends on the ventral border of the mandible oppo-
poralis muscle is detached from the coronoid process of the
site the last three cheek teeth.
mandible when the innervation of the muscle by the deep temporal
nerves will be noted. The mandible is transected at the level of the
c)  The MAJoR SALIvARy GLANDs comprise the parotid, mandibular, 
8
first cheek tooth. All structures attaching on the medial surface of
sublingual (polystomatic), and the buccal glands.
the mandible are cut close to the bone and the mandible is forceful-
The parotid gland (8) is the largest salivary gland of the horse. It
ly lifted laterally and disarticulated by cutting the joint capsule of
 occupies the space between the caudal border of the mandible, the
1
the temporomandibular joint. The articular disc (22) of the joint is
wing of the atlas, and the base of the ear, and ventrally it extends to
thick and compensates for the incongruency of the articular sur-
  a i si a  i a  
faces while permitting considerable movement to the joint. The
gives origin to the band-like parotidoauricularis (see p. 37.28). The
temporomandibular joint lies several cm dorsal to the occlusal sur-
 (serous) secretion of the gland is collected by several radicles which
face of the cheek teeth, enhancing the lever action of the masticato-
combine to form the parotid duct (8). This accompanies the facial
ry muscles.
9
artery and vein, and with them winds around the ventral border of
a)  The TriGEMINAL NeRvE conforms to the general mammalian pat-
the mandible to gain the lateral surface of the face. The duct opens
tern regarding its distribution, fiber types, and additions of
 into the oral vestibule opposite the 2nd or 3rd upper cheek tooth.
parasympathetic fibers (see p. 108/109).
The deep relations of the parotid gland are the maxillary vein; the
 internal and external carotid arteries; the facial, glossopharyngeal,
2
The mandibular nerve (V-3; 23) innervates the skin and the oral
and hypoglossal nerves, as well as the vagosympathetic trunk; and
mucous membrane, and in contrast to the first two principal trigem-
the guttural pouch. Some of the vessels and nerves are actually
inal branches (V-1 and V-2) carries also motor fibers which give rise
 imbedded in the tissue of the gland. One of the surgical approaches
 to the guttural pouch is through Viborg's triangle which is defined
temporal (6) and masseteric nerves (7) for the respective muscles of
on p. 46.
mastication. The medial and lateral pterygoid muscles, the tensor
tympani and tensor veli palatini also receive like-named nerves from
The thin mandibular gland (10) extends in a curve from the basi-
the mandibular nerve. The mylohyoid nerve (15) supplies the mylo-
hyoid to the atlantal fossa and is covered laterally by the parotid
hyoideus and the rostral belly of the digastricus, and with a cuta-
gland, the insertion tendon of the sternomandibularis, the digastri-
neous branch supplies the skin in the vicinity of the chin. The fol.
cus, and the maxillary vein. Its medial relations include the larynx,
lowing branches of the mandibular nerve do not contain motor
common carotid artery and vagosympathetic trunk (with branch-
fibers to skeletal muscles: The buccal nerve (28), with both sensory
es), and the guttural pouch. The mandibular duct (10) leaves the
and parasympathetic fibers (the latter from N.IX via the otic gan-
 concavity of the gland and passes onto the deep surface of the mylo-
glion), passes to the mucous membrane of the mouth and to the
hyoideus where it follows the medial aspect of the sublingual gland
buccal glands. The auriculotemporal nerve (21) passes caudally to
to the sublingual caruncle on the floor of the mouth a few cm cau-
temporal skin and parotid gland to supply sensory and parasympa-
 dal to the incisors.
thetic (from N.IX via the otic ganglion) innervation. The sensory
lingual nerve (13) receives sensory and parasympathetic additions
 The (polystomatic) sublingual gland (18) lies directly under the oral
mucosa between the tongue and the medial surface of the mandible
via the chorda tympani (26); it innervates the rostral two thirds of
from the level of the chin to about the third cheek tooth. Its many
the tongue and, from the parasympathetic inflow, the sublingual
small excretory ducts open on small papillae below the tongue. A
3
e r ass d a sa s rn 
 monostomatic sublingual gland is absent in the horse.
lar nerve (25) enters the mandibular canal on the medial surface of
the mandible. It supplies the lower teeth and, after emerging from
 The buccal glands (4) form two rows along the dorsal and ventral
the mental foramen, innervates the skin of the lower lip and chin
borders of the buccinator muscle. The numerous microscopic lesser 
4:5
(mental nerve; see p. 37.i). The maxillary nerve (V-2; 27) is sensory
salivary glands are located in the lips, tongue, and soft palate.
but receives parasympathetic fibers from the facial nerve via the
d) The LYMPHATIc STRUcTUREs of the head are peculiar in that
 lymph collected by the parotid and lateral retropharyngeal nodes is
41), the greater and lesser palatine nerves, and the caudal nasal
refiltered by the medial retropharyngeal ones, and lymph passing
6
nerve. Its rostral continuation is the very large infraorbital nerve
 through the medial retropharyngeal and mandibular lymph nodes
(27') that, still within the infraorbital canal, detaches branches for 
is refiltered by the cranial deep cervical nodes before it travels along
the upper teeth. After emerging from the infraorbital foramen (site
the trachea (tracheal trunk) to the large veins at the thoracic inlet.
sensory innervation to the lips, nostrils, and the nasal vestibule. (For
eqiuuodua ai ot nua all s spou qduai poed a
the ophthalmic nerve (V-1) of the trigeminal nerve see p. 41.)
 joint under the rostral border of the parotid gland.
7
 b) The MuscLEs OF MAsTIcATION and several SupF. MuscLEs OF
The mandibular lymph nodes (16) of both sides form an easily pal-
10
THE INTERMANDIBULAR SPACE are innervated by the mandibular
nerve (V-3). (The digastricus in addition receives supply from the
space a little caudal to the level where the facial artery crosses the
facial nerve.) Of the external masticatory muscles, the masseter (9),
ventral border of the mandible.
regarded as the strongest muscle of this group, is more robust than
The lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes (19) lie deep to the parotid
the temporalis (11). Its origin lies considerably lateral to its termi-
gland between the dorsal end of the mandibular gland and the
nation on the mandible, while its supf. fibers run obliquely cau-
 doventrally but deeper ones run nearly vertically. These features are
 occipitomandibularis against the lateral surface of the guttural
 pouch.
responsible for the lateral and rotational chewing movements of the
horse, especially when only the masseter of one side is active at the
 The medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes (20) continue the chain of
time. The relative “looseness" of the
e temporomandibular joint
 the preceding nodes ventrally and cranially; they lie dorsolateral on
favors these mandibular excursions. Regarding masticatory move-
the pharynx and deep to the stylohyoid bone.
38
10
The Mandibular Nerve (V-3), the Maxillary Nerve (V-2), and the Salivary Glands
a  Orbicularis oris 
s  Inferior labial vessels
 Depressor labi inferioris 
t
Superior labial vessels
C
Caninus
Lateral nasal vessels
d
Levator nasolabialis
Mental nerve and artery
Zyg omaticus
W
Omohyoideus
5 Parotid lymph nodes
Levator labi superioris 
Sternomandibularis 
Buccinator
Medial cervicoauricularis 
6 Deep temporal nerves
h
Facial vein 
2 Zygomaticoauricularis
7 Masseteric nerve :
 8 Parotid gland and its duct 
Linguofacial vein
Orbicularis oculi
 9 Ventral stumps of masseter -
m
Parotidoauricularis
1 Dilation of transverse facial
Cervicoauricularis supf.
vein
10 Mandibular gland -
Occipital vein
 2 Dilation of deep facial vein 
11 Temporalis 
 3 Dilation of buccal vein,
of the face
 Dilator naris
4 Buccal glands .
19 Lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes 
20Medial retropharyngeal lymphnodes
 21 Stump of auriculotemporal nerve 
22Articular disc of temporomandibular joint
23 Mandibular nerve (V-3) -
12 Medial and lateral pterygoideus
 24 Stump of occipitomandibularis 
13 Lingual nerve
 25 Inferior alveolar nerve -
26 Chorda tympany-
15 Mylohyoideus muscle and nerve
 27 Maxilary artery and nerve (V-2) 
16 Mandibular lymph nodes
27'Infraorbital nerve
17 Digastricus
 28 Buccal artery and nerve
18 Sublingual gland (polystomatic)-
39
5. Adnexa of the Eye
 Clinical and Functi
tional Anat
my p. 150-154
1
 The ApNExA of the eye comprise the ocular muscles and orbital fas-
I1. The lacrimal apparatus (see Fig. below) conforms to the general
6
2
 ciae, the eyelids and conjunctiva, and the lacrimal apparatus.
mammalian plan. The lacrimal gland (2) lies dorsolateral on the
 I. The eyelids (A, B in the text Fig. below) consist of three layers.
eyeball and between it and the zygomatic process of the frontal
3
bone, which reaches the zygomatic arch to complete the bony
The outermost is skin, covered with short hairs. In the middle is a
 orbital margin. The largest accessory lacrimal gland is the gland of
fibromuscular layer that includes the striated orbicularis oculi, the
the third eyelid that surrounds the stem of the T-shaped cartilage
orbital septum and fibrous tarsus, the smooth tarsal muscle, and
medial to the eyeball. Minute ducts direct the lacrimal fluid into the
(only in the upper lid) the aponeurosis of the levator palpebrae. The
dorsal fornix and into the space between the third eyelid and the
deep layer which touches the eyeball is the palpebral conjunctiva
that, with the bulbar conjunctiva and the cornea, lines the conjunc-
globe. Blinking movements spread the fluid over the cornea to keep
it moist, after which the fluid drains to the medial angle where it
tival sac. The upper and lower limits of the conjunctival sac are the
forms the so-called lacrimal lake (E) that surrounds, moat-like, a
fornices situated roughly opposite the base of the respective lid (see
 prominent lacrimal caruncle (D). From here the lacrimal fluid is
also p. 43).
conveyed via upper and lower lacrimal puncta (J, K), lacrimal
4
The third eyelid (C) occupies the medial angle of the eye. It consists
canaliculi (I), lacrimal sac (H); and finally through the long naso-
 p o  o si   j d  e jo
 lacrimal duct (G) to the nasolacrimal orifice (F) in the floor of the
exposed surfaces with conjunctiva. The stem of the T lies between
5
nostril.
the eyeball and the medial wall of the orbit while the crossbar stiff-
 III. The cone of ocular muscles is surrounded by the fibroelastic
ens the free edge of the lid.
 periorbita (18) which on its interior surface presents the trochlea
that redirects the dorsal oblique muscle. The zygomatic nerve (V-2)
courses ventrolateral to the ocular muscles and after leaving the
orbit becomes the zygomaticofacial nerve (16) that supplies the
lower eyelid and a little adjacent skin. According to most authors,
the zygomaticotemporal nerve (10) arises from the ophthalmic
nerve, sends a branch to the lacrimal nerve (V-1), and passes cau-
dally deep to the zygomatic process of the frontal bone; other
authors consider it a branch of the maxillary nerve (V-2).
The ophthalmic nerve (V-1) gives off the mostly double lacrimal
nerve (12), the nasociliary nerve (21), and the frontal nerve (9). The
nasociliary in turn branches into infratrochlear (19), ethmoidal
(20), and long ciliary nerves (22); the frontal, after emerging from
the supraorbital foramen as the supraorbital nerve (8), supplies the
 area of the forehead between the eyes.
 The muscles of the eye arise deep in the orbit from the vicinity of the
optic foramen, except the ventral oblique which takes origin from a
depression in the ventromedial wall of the orbit. They end on the
sclera near or slightly anterior to the equator, but the levator palpe-
brae leaves the orbit and ends in the upper lid.
 The majority of the ocular muscles are innervated by the oculomo-
tor nerve (N m). They are the medial (14), ventral (6), and dorsal
(4) rectus muscles, the ventral oblique (7), the levator palpebrae (3)
and most of the cone-shaped retractor bulbi (13). The dorsal
oblique (1) is supplied by the trochlear nerve (N IV; 11); and the lat-
eral rectus (5) and part of the retractor bulbi are activated by the
abducent nerve (N VI; 23).
Lacrimal Apparatus, exposed by sculpting certain facial bones
Dorsal nasal concha
Ventral nasal concha
(Medial view of right
(Lateral view of left
nasolacrimal duct) 
nasolacrimal duct)
A Upper lid
D Lacrimal caruncle
G Nasolacrimal duct 
J  Upper punctum lacrimale 
B Lower lid
E Lacrimal lake
H Lacrimal sac
K Lower punctum lacrimale
C Third eyelid
 F Nasolacrimal orifice 
I  Lacrimal canaliculi 
2 Lacrimal gland 
40
Muscles of the Eyeball and Cranial Nerves Il, Ill, IV, V-1*, V-2*, and Vl
(Lateral view)
 8 Supraorbital nerve (V-1)
1 Dorsal oblique 
9 Frontal nerve (V-1)
2 Lacrimal gland-
 3 Levator palpebrae superioris 
 10 Zygomaticotemporal
4 Dorsal rectus
nerve (V-1)
5 Lateral rectus 
6 Ventral rectus
11 Trochlear nerve (IV)
7 Ventral oblique
12 Lacrimal nerve (V-1)
a Malar artery 
éMinor palatine artery and nerve
Temporalis 
V-1, V-2, V-3, the three
b Infraorbital artery and nerve
fB
Buccal artery
k  Maxillary artery
divisions of the trigeminal
 C Sphenopalatine artery and 
g External ophthalmic artery
I  Ciliary ganglion 
nerve: ophtalmic, maxillary.
caudal nasal nerve
h  Rostral deep temporal artery 
m Pterygopalatine ganglion
and mandibular.
d Major palatine artery and nerve
i  Caudal deep temporal artery 
n Pterygopalatine nerve
(Lateral view)
18 Periorbita
13 Retractor bulbi
19 Infratrochlear nerve (V-1)
14 Medial rectus 
15 Optic nerve (ll)
20 Ethmoidal nerve (V-1)
16 Zygomaticofacial nerve (V-2)
1 Nasociliary nerve (V-1)
17 Oculomotor nerve (Ill) 
 22 Long ciliary nerves (V-1)
23 Abducent nerve (VI)
2.2
(See p. 36, 39, 51)
41
6. The Eye
Clinical and Functional Anatomy p. 154-158
The eyeball of the horse is rostrocaudally compressed. For spatial
tapetum lucidum of the choroid is free of pigment however, allow-
 orientation, the pupil and the optic nerve (among others) are used
ing light to strike the tapetum. This produces the *" shine" in the eyes
as reference points. The pupil ist transversely elliptical. Prominent,
of horses when they face a light at night such as the headlights of an
dark projections (iridic granules -5) protrude from the upper and
oncoming car.
lower margins of the pupil; those on the lower margin are marked-
ly smaller. The granules are covered on their posterior surface by the
The optic disc (26) lies in the lower temporal quardrant of the fun-
pigmented blind part of the retina and are vascularized by vessels
dus. It is here that the axons of the optical part of the retina pass
from the stroma of the iris. The optic nerve emerges ventral and
through the sclera to form the optic nerve (24). The axons, before
temporal to the posterior pole of the eyeball.
 penetrating the sclera, are still without myelin sheaths and thus
translucent. They receive their sheaths in the optic disc and are
 One eyes sectioned on the equator and meridionally, one can study
tightly packed leaving no room for light receptors. This is why the
the external (fibrous) tunic, the middle (vascular) tunic, and the
optic disc is also referred to as the blind spot. As the now myelinat-
interal tunic (retina).
ed nerve leaves the eyeball, it is covered by two meningeal sheats
that are embedded in fat and surrounded by the retrobulbar eye
1. The external (fibrous) tunic consists of sclera and cornea. The
muscles. Because nerve and eyeball are outgrowths of the dien-
 globe forward, while the opaque bluish-white sclera (1) forms the
cephalons, the nerve as a continuation of the brain is also covered
1
 by the meninges. The tough external sheath (dural component) and
the delicate internal sheath (pia mater component) merge directly
indentation known as the limbus (2).
with the sclera and are separated by an intervaginal space which
The sclera is a tough, collagenous mantle which gives the eyeball its
corresponds with the subarachnoidal space. The ensheathed nerve
constant shape, an important requirement for acute vision. Though
 is slightly undulating to permint movement of the eye. After passing
"hard" to the touch and unyielding, the sclera does not break or
 the optic canal right and left optic nerves meet inside the cranial
shatter, but in accidents it can be punctured or cut allowing the
cavity in the optic chiasm. About 80 % of the axonx cross here to
 gelatinous interior to escape.
 the other side and accompany the non-crossing fibers of the ipsilat-
 eral side in the optic tract to the diencephalon.
The healthy cornea is translucent. Should it dry out, because of the
lack of lacrimal fluid, it becomes opaque. This also happens when
IV. The interior of the eye presents the anterior and posterior cham-
 its posterior epithelial layer is injured and allows aqueous humor to
 bers in front of the lens and the vitreous body behind the lens.
permeate superficial layers. Following death, the cornea turns gray
and loses its translucency.
IV. The lens (7) is suspended enclosed in a capsule (8) which is thick-
4
 est at its equator where the zonular fibers are secured that hold the
2I1. The middle (vascular) tunic is firmly attached to the internal sur-
lens in place. The substance of the lens consists of regularly dis-
face of the sclera; it comprises three zones: choroid, ciliary body,
 posed curved lens fibers whose ends are cemented to neighboring
and iris.
fibers on the anterior and posterior surfaces where these junctions
The choroid (20) lines considerably more than the posterior half
form little stars (radi lentis) that are best observed on fresh speci-
(fundus) of the eye. It consists of an outer layer of large vessels and
mens.
a thin inner layer of capillaries. Over the dorsal part of the fundus 
The anterior chamber of the eye (9) is relatively large and lies
the choroid forms the roughly triangular light-reflecting tapetum
between cornea and iris. It communicates via the pupil with the
lucidum (21). This is a compact and regularly arranged fibrous lay-
much smaller posterior chamber (10) which is the narrow space
er that cause light to be fractioned into a yellowish- or bluishgreen
between the iris and the lens and the structures that suspend it. Both
iridescence. The border of the tapetum is dark brown.
anterior and posterior chambers are filled with aqueous humor
The ciliary body is the anterior continuation of the choroid. It forms
which is produced by the vascular tunic, especially its ciliary body.
si e (t s s snrau su ym   d e
 Production and resorption balance each other in the healthy eye so
markedly narrower nasally, and a central crown (15) of larger
  n da si la   asad  i
processes (16) which give rise to the zonular fibers (12) that suspend
leaves the system through the iridocorneal angle (11) and reaches
 the blood stream via an intrascleral circular venous plexus near the
ciliary body and the sclera is the weak ciliary muscle (k) that acts on
limbus.
the suspensory apparatus of lens and causes accommodation
(increase in thickness and convexity of the lens in order to focus an
The vitreous body (27) fills the space posterior to the lens. It is a gel-
 5
like mass, consisting mainly of water, but with a translucent stroma
object on the retina).
of minute fibers. These are condensed into a membrane at the sur-
3
The third and smallest zone of the vascular tunic is the iris (4) which
face. The water content of the vitreous body determines, together
lies in front of the lens. Its anterior surface is usually brown in hors-
 with the pressure of the aqueous humor, the intraocular pressure.
es, and its stroma contains the sphincter (j) and dilator (i) of the
pupil - muscles derived from ectoderm - that regulate the size of the
V. The blood supply of the eye comes from the external and 7 inter-
pupil (6) and thus the amount of light admitted into the eye. The
 nal ophthalmic arteries which are connected about 3 cm behind the
already mentioned iridic granules as well as the ciliary body,
 posterior pole of the eyeball by a substantial anastomotic branch.
because of their rich blood supply, are well suited to produce the
The external ophthalmic artery (22) arises from the maxillary artery
 aqueous humor. The granules, in addition, help protect the eye from
and, in addition to the anastomosis, gives rise also to the muscular
 bright sunlight and thus asst the sphincter of the pupil
branches for the eye muscles, as well as the lacrimal artery for the
lacrimal gland and eyelids. The small internal ophthalmic artery
 III. The internal tunic of the eyeball is known as the retina which
(23) comes from the arterial circle of the brain and supplies only the
lines the interior of the eyball from the pupil to the optic disc where
optic nerve which it accompanies through the optic canal. The anas-
the fibers that form the optic nerve pass through the sclera. The por-
 tomotic branch (22') releases several anterior and posterior ciliary
tion of the retina on the posterior surface of iris and ciliary body
arteries, (r, r', s s', t, t', u) for the choroids, ciliary body, and iris, as
 and extending to a vague line known as ora serrata (17) is "blind"
well as small choroidoretinal arteries (v), which travel within the
(pars ceca; —18) because it is devoid of photoreceptors and direct
external sheat of the optic nerve (25) to the posterior pole and
6
light does not reach it. The remaining pars optica (19) extends from
detach fine branches to the nearby choroids and minute, short
the ora serrata to the optic disc. It has nine layers and contains the
branches to the retina adjacent to the optic disc.
light-sensitive cells. in the form of rods and cones. The grayish opti-
cal part can be lifted off the external (tenth) layer of the retina con-
The principal venous drainage of the eye uses the anterior ciliary,
sisting of a heavily pigmented epithelium that colors the fundus of
vorticose, and choroidoretinal veins which leave the eye next to the
the opened eye dark brown. The pigmented epithelium over the
limbus, equator, and near the posterior pole, respectively.
42
Right Eye
Retina:
17  Ora serrata
18  Blind part
Fibrous tunic:
19  Optical part
1  Sclera
- 20 Choroid
Limbus
21
 Tapetum lucidum
 22  External ophthalmic
artery
4 Iris
 22' Anastomotic branch 
5  Iridic granules
 23 Internal ophthalmic a.
6 Pupil -
8 Lens capsule 
10 Posterior chamber
11 lIridocor
healangle
24 Optic n.
25 External sheath ot
 optic n.
26 Optic disc
 27 Vitreous body
 Upper eyelid
i
 Dilator of the pupil 
p  Ventral rectus
U Short posterior ciliary aa.
b Lower eyelid
j
Sphincter of the pupil
q  Retractor bulbi
V   horoidoretinal a.
c  Orbicularis oculi
 Scleral venous plexus 
r
 Dorsal anterior ciliary a.
w Retinal vessels
d
 Tarsal glands
k
Ciliary muscle
r'
 Ventral anterior ciliary a.
X  Major arterial circle of iris 
é Cilia
 Venous plexus of the sclera 
s Lateral long posterior ciliary a.
y Vorticose veins
F
 Palpebral conjunctiva 
 m Pectinate lig. of iridocorneal angle 
 s' Medial long posterior ciliary a.
9
 Bulbar conjunctiva
 Radli lentis
t
 Dorsal posterior ciliary a.
h  Fornix
0 Dorsal rectus
 t' Ventral posterior ciliary a.
Ciliary body:
13 Ciliary crown
14  Ciliary folds -
15
 Ciliary crown
16
(Nasal)
(Temporal)
xternalsheathofopticr
Internal sheath of optic n.
43
7. Nose and Nasal Cavity, Mouth and Tongue
 Clinical and Func
/ p. 159-16
a) NosE
 paired vomeronasal organ. (The paranasal sinuses are described on 
8
1 I.  The nostrils (nares) are comma-shaped and widely spaced. They
p. 34.)
dilate to become spherical in outline when breathing is strenuous.
 b) The entrance to the MouTH is formed by the very mobile and
9
Their medial border is supported by a cartilage (n) while the later-
sensitive lips used by the horse in the selection and prehension of
al border is soft and allows for the dilation (p. 45, left lower cor-
food. The lips are rather short, placing the angle of the mouth for-
ner). The nostril is divided by the alar fold (see further on) into a
2
blind-ending nasal diverticulum (20) dorsally, and the actual
 be opened. Below the lower lip is a ventral elevation (chin) consist-
entrance to the nasal cavity, ventrally. The nasal diverticulum is
 ing of muscle and adipose tissue. When the mouth is closed, the oral
about 8 cm long and occupies the nasoincisive notch. Ordinary skin
vestibule (14) communicates with the oral cavity proper (17) via the
covered with short fine hairs surrounds the nostrils.
diastema, the large space on both jaws between the last incisor (I13)
and the first cheek tooth in which the male animal carries the
3
 II. The nasal vestibule (1) leads from the nostril into the paired
canines. The hard palate presents about 18 transverse ridges (15)
10
nasal cavity. On its floor about 5 cm internal to the entrance is the
 deep to which is a thick venous plexus. This is especially salient near
 orifice of the nasolacrimal duct (l) which occasionally is accompa-
the incisors, and during their replacement is congested with blood;
although this swelling is a normal occurrence, it gives some horse
the vestibule is partly skin with fine hairs and parly mucous mem-
 owners cause for concern. The floor of the mouth (Fig. on this page)
brane; the nasolacrimal orifice is found near the junction of the two.
a a pe (a  nu ai aq an pa si
A longitudinal indentation in the middle third of the dorsal nasal
 presents the sublingual caruncle (A) upon which the mandibular
concha hints at an internal division. The rostral end of the concha
(salivary) duct opens.
projects into the nasal vestibule as the straight fold (3). The rostral
c) The ToNGuE (see Figs. on this and on the opposite page) is
part of the ventral nasal concha divides to form alar (4) and basal
11
(5) folds of which the former, as already mentioned, partitions off
remarkably long and has a spatula-shaped apex (16). The body (18)
the nasal divericulum dorsal to it. The nasal cavity proper is lined
is thick dorsoventrally while the root (19) begins at the level of the
palatoglossal arch (I) and slopes toward the base of the epiglottis.
with thick and very vascular respiratory mucosa. Its caudalmost
4:5
 part (fundus) harbors the ethmoidal conchae (13) and is lined to a
apex. Fungiform papillae (C) are present on the dorsal surface of
relatively small extent with olfactory epithelium. The caudal por-
the apex, and in quasi rows also on the lateral surfaces of the body.
6
tions of the dorsal (10) and ventral (11) nasal conchae are free of
 The two distinct vallate papillae (E) mark the junction of body and
interior subdivisions (bullae, cells) and instead are converted caudal
root, and the foliate papillae (F) are situated just rostral to the
to an interior oblique septum to conchal sinuses (35.; 0). The nasal
 palatoglossal arches on each side of the tongue. Below the mucous
meatuses (dorsal (9), middle (7), ventral (6), and common (8) hold
 membrane over the body of the tongue lies the median dorsal lin-
to the common pattern.
 gual cartilage that is about 15 cm long and 0.5 cm in diameter.
The composition of the partly membranous, cartilaginous, and
7
 osseous nasal septum (2) is shown on p.and the hard palate lies the
anbuol
(dorsal view)
(See p. 47 and 51)
A Sublingual caruncle
F Foliate papillae
 K  Median laryngeal recess
16 Apex of tongue
B Lingual frenulum
G Lingual tonsil
L Laryngeal ventricle
18 Body of tongue
 C Fungifomm papillae 
H Palatine tonsil
M Glottic cleft 
19 Root of tongue
 D Filform papilae
I Stump of palatoglossal
N Corniculate process of
E Vallate papillae
J  Epiglottis 
 arytenoid cartilage
44
The Nose, Nasal Cavity, and Oral Cavity
a Subdivisions (bullae, cellulae)
f  Hyoideus transversus
within dorsal nasal concha
g  Hyoepiglotticus 
b Ventral conchal sinus
h  Basihyoid and its lingual process
c  Infraorbital canal 
 Sternohyoideus
d  Genioglossus
 Geniohyoideus
é Hyoglossus 
k  Mylohyoideus 
(Median section, the nasal
septum has been removed)
(See p. 46-51)
Nasolacrimal orifice 
19 Root of tongue
 m-o External nasal cartilages
18 Body of tongue
m
 Dorsal lateral nasal cartilage
17 Proper oral cavity
n
Alar cartilage
16 Apex of tongue
n'
Lamina of n 
15 Palatine ridges
n'
Cornu of n 
14 Oral vestibule
Medial access. nasal cartilage 
P
Cavernous nasal plexus of veins
 Palatine venous plexus
b
r
Guttural pouch 
S
Ventral conchal sinus
 Frontal sinus 
 20 Nasal diverticulum 
口
Dorsal conchal sinus 
V
Sphenopalatine sinus 
(Lateral views)
S.2002
45
8. Pharynx, Guttural Pouch and Larynx
 Clinical and Func
ny p. 160-161
These structures need to be studied from both medial and lateral
 e aq pas are  arm s sen sn 
aspects. The guttural pouch is best opened and explored on a medi-
 membrane. The pouch is reflected around the dorsal border of the
an section of the head. This shows its interior and certain vessels
stylohyoid bone (n) which divides it into a small lateral recess (16)
and nerves on its surface to best advantage. To examine position
 and a larger medial recess (17). The lateral recess is related lateral-
 and extent of the guttural pouch and of the pharyngeal constrictors,
 ly to the ramus of the mandible, while the medial recess is related
the pterygoids, digastricus, stylohyoideus, occipitomandibularis,
laterally to the mandibular and parotid glands. Surgical access to an
 and occipitohyoideus are parly, and the mandibular and parotid
 enlarged pouch is possible through Viborg's triangle. This is formed
 glands are completely removed.
cranially by the caudal border of the mandible (see p. 39.24), dor-
 a) The PHARyNx, following the common plan, comprises an oro-
sally by the insertion tendon of the sternomandibularis (see p. 37.k),
1
 and ventrally by the linguofacial vein (see p. 37.20). Vessels and
pharynx, a laryngopharynx, and a nasopharynx. The oropharynx
nerves touching or even indenting the pouch wall, as well as adja-
(B) continues the oral cavity at the level of the glossopalatine arch
cent lymph nodes are of clinical significance. Thus the dorsal wall
and extends to the base of the epiglottis. The laryngopharynx (C)
 of the medial recessis related to the glossopharyngeal nerve (IX; 28)
continues the oropharynx around the rostral parts of the larynx to
the vagus (X; 26), the accessory nerve (XI; 23) and the hypoglossal
a ei Aesrop uado si i 'sndosa au Aq asi pano aq
6
nerve (Xll; 29)-as well as the pharyngeal branches of the first two
2
intrapharyngeal opening to the nasopharynx (A). During normal
of these nerves—the sympathetic trunk (25) with the cranial cervi-
breathing the intrapharyngeal opening allows the rostral parts of
cal ganglion, and the internal carotid artery (24). The lateral
the larynx to protrude into the nasopharynx.
retropharyngeal lymph nodes (22) contact the lateral wall of the
7
 The nasopharynx is dorsal to the soft palate where it continues the
medial recess; and the medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes (27)
ventral nasal meatus through the choanae. It communicates via the
contact its ventral wall. The dorsocaudal wall of the lateral recess
3
 pharyngeal openings of the auditory tubes (2), the auditory tube
forms relations with the maxillary vessels (20), the external carotid
a ar a m (uo ag aas) ynd  a p 
artery (21) and the facial nerve (VMl).
4
The soft palate (3) is about 12 cm long and during normal breath-
ing extends with its free border to the base of the epiglottis. This cir-
cumstance makes it very difficult for horses to breathe through their
Guttural Pouch
mouth or to vomit. For the same reason vomitus is expelled through
(View of the dorsal wall)
the nose. (The reason why vomiting is so rare in horses is related
principally to the structure of the stomach; p. 68.)
I. The pharyngeal muscles, their innervation and that of the pha-
ryngeal mucosa by the pharyngeal branches of cranial nerves IX
the soft palate are tensor veli palatini (7) and levator veli palatini
(8). The rostral pharyngeal constrictors, which arise on the skull,
are pterygopharyngeus (9) and palatopharyngeus (11). The middle
pharyngeal constrictor (from the thyrohyoid) is the hyopharyngeus
(12). And the caudal pharyngeal constrictors, which arise from the
larynx, are thyropharyngeus (13) and the cricopharyngeus (14).
The only dilator of the pharynx is the stylopharyngeus caudalis
(10).
I1. The tonsils concentrated in the pharynx include palatine, pha-
ryngeal, lingual, tubal, and those residing in the soft palate. The
palatine tonsil (5) is an elongated slightly raised structure, about 10
cm long and 2 cm wide, on the floor of the oropharynx lateral to
the median glossoepiglottic fold. The pharyngeal tonsil (1) is in the
 dorsolateral wall of the nasopharynx near the pharyngeal opening
of the auditory tube. The lingual tonsil (6) is spread over the root of
the tongue, and the tonsil of the soft palate (4) is a slightly raised
area rostrally on the ventral surface of the soft palate. The tubal
tonsil, not a discrete organ, is diffuse lymphoid tissue in and around
the pharyngeal opening of the auditory tube.
II. The auditory tube opens into the lateral wall of the nasopharynx
(A) opposite the lateral angle of the eye. The opening is covered
medially by the most rostral part of the tubal cartilage (15), a flap
that is drawn medially by the tensor and levator veli palatini during
swallowing. The opening leads into the auditory tube supported by
the rest of the tubal cartilage (shaped like an inverted trough) and
into the guttural pouch, which is a great expansion of the unsup-
ported ventral wall of the tube. The caudal end of the auditory tube
is in addition supported by bone and opens into the tympanic cavi-
ty forming the middle ear.
30 Auditory tube
 35 Tympanic ostium of the auditory
 31 Occipitohyoideus m.
tube
5
 b) The GuTTuRAL PoucH is a paired airfilled space with a capacity
 32 Paracondylar process 
 36 Ramus of the mandible 
 of 300 to 500 ml. It extends from the base of the skull and the atlas 
33 Parotid gland
 37 Pterygoideus
to the nasopharynx. The two pouches touch each other ventral to
 34 Caudal auricular a.
 38 Masseter
46
Pharynx, Guttural Pouch, and Larynx
(Brain, see p. 54)
a  Cerebrum
b  Cerebellum
C Medulla oblongata
d Spinal cord
é  Nuchal ligament
 Rectus capitis dorsalis minor
g Atlas
h Axis
(Median section)
i
Rectus capitis ventralis
 Longus capitis
k  Neurovascular fold 
I  Longus colli 
15 Cartilage of auditory tube 
16
Lateral compartment
1 Pharyngeal tonsil-
of guttural pouch
 2 Pharyngeal opening 
7
Medial compartment
of auditory tube
of guttural pouch
3 Soft palate
4 Tonsil of soft palate
5 Palatine tonsil -
6 Lingual tonsil -
18 Laryngeal ventricle
19 Median laryngeal recess 
Pharyngeal cavity
Laryngeal cavity
m Palatine glands
A Nasopharynx
E Laryngeal vestibule with
n Stylohoid bone
B Oropharynx
vestibular fold
0  Thyroid gland 
CLaryngopharynx
F Glottis and vocal fold 
 p Internal parathyroid gland 
 D Entrance to esophagus
 G Infraglottic cavity
(Lateral view)
 20 Maxillary artery
 21 External carotid artery
 22 Lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes
 7 Tensor veli palatini
23 Accessory nerve (Xl)
8 Levator veli palatini -
 24 Internal carotid artery
9Pterygopharyngeus
 25 Sympathetic trunk 
10 Stylopharyngeus caudalis
26 Vagus (X)
 11 Palatopharyngeus
27 Medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes
12 Hyopharyngeus
 28 Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
 29 Hypoglossal nerve (Xll)
14 Cricopharyngeus
(See p. 37, 39, 45, 50, and 51)
47
1 9. Larynx and Laryngeal Muscles
 Clinical and Fun
ny p. 161-162
The LARynx is ventral at the head-neck junction, anchored in posi-
Ventral half of Larynx
tion by the hyoid bone (thyrohyoideum). It fulfills the functions of
closing the airway and of enabling the animal to form its voice. In
swallowing, the entrance to the larynx is safeguarded by retroflex-
(dorsal view)
2
 ion of the epiglottis (epiglottis —3). In coughing, to clear the lower
airway (see the text-figure), the glottic cleft is first closed and, uti-
lizing the abdominal press, suddenly opened to allow the thrust of
air to expel exudate, particulate, and other material. In the opera-
tion of the abdominal press, the glottic cleft is closed, in which case
the inspiratory position of the diaphragm in the thoracic cavity
d u as   -sad s e s srss
in the abdominal cavity. The formation of sound by the larynx is
associated with the vocal folds (plicae vocales —V), which sur-
28
round the glottic cleft and are underlain by the vocal muscle (m.
vocalis —11). Owing to the intensity of the air-stream, the vocal
 Cricoarytenoid ligament 
folds vibrate and in this way the tone (pitch) of the voice arises. The
 Cricotracheal ligament 
(medial view of right half)
more that the vocal folds are stretched, the higher is the pitch.
 Annular ligaments
3
ssassd q z si ( rxai as) xe a a
4: 5
laryngeal ventricles laterally (l, see page 49.10) and a single medi-
an recess (IV); otherwise, it follows the common mammalian plan.
The following features of its interior and its cartilages are shown in
the two figures on this page and the two figures on page 49: laryn-
geal vestibule (ll), vestibular fold containing the vestibular ligament
(ll") and the ventricularis muscle (9), the glottis (see page 47.F) and
the glottic cleft (V), which is the space between right and left com-
ponents of the glottis. See the vocal fold (page 47.F) which contains
the vocal ligament (V') and the vocalis muscle (11), and the infra-
glottic cavity (page 47.G).
 Cricothyroid ligament 
6
The epiglottic cartilage (3) has right and left cuneiform processes
(3'), which project dorsally from its base; the arytenoid cartilage (1)
tends from the muscular process of the arytenoid cartilage to the
presents corniculate (1") and vocal (1"') processes and, on its later-
 dorsal border of the thyroid cartilage, or a tensor of the laryngeal
al surface, a muscular process. The thyroid cartilage (4) is deeply
e sia a po sad  a o saq  
notched ventrally, creating the thyroid notch. The notch is open
 fans out to end on the laryngeal ventricle.
caudally and bridged by the cricothyroid ligament. The lamina of
INNERvATioN. The laryngeal muscles are innervated by the cranial
the cricoid cartilage (2) overhangs the first tracheal cartilage.
 and caudal laryngeal nerves, both branches of the vagus, of which
The JoNTs OF THE LARYNX are the cricothyroid (4""), hinge-like
the former is dispatched at the head-neck junction and the latter in
movements that tilt the thyroid cartilage and, in that way, vary the
 the thorax. The cranial laryngeal nerve enters the larynx by the thy-
tension on the vocal folds), cricoarytenoid (4""', for craniocaudal
 roid foramen but before doing so detaches an external branch (b) to
gliding movements) as well as the hyrohyoid articulation (4", the
the cricothyroideus. The caudal laryngeal nerve (8) is the continua-
connection to the hyoid bone).
tion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve after that nerve's tracheal and
esophageal branches have been given off in its ascent of the neck.
 Of the LARYNGEAL MuscLEs the cricoarytenoideus dorsalis (7), the
The caudal laryngeal nerve is distributed to the remaining laryngeal
muscles. The two nerves also innervate the laryngeal mucosa: the
of the glottis-cricothyroideus (12), cricoarytenoideus lateralis (6),
cranial nerve by its internal branch (afferent limb of the cough
vocalis (11), ventricularis (9), and the arytenoideus transversus (5)
reflex), which supplies the area up to the glottic cleft. The caudal
- as well as the innervation of the larynx by the cranial and recur-
 nerve supplies the area caudal to the glottic cleft.
rent laryngeal nerves follow the common mammalian pattern.
 Occasionally, one finds an accessory thyroarytenoideus that ex-
48
Larynx
(lateral view)
1' Muscular process
11" Corniculate process
!"'Vocal process
2 Cricoid cartilage
2' Lamina
 A  Tympanohyoid cartilage
B
 Stylohyoid bone
 Epihyoid bone
D
 Ceratohyoid bone
E
 Basihyoid bone
E' Lingual process
F
 Thyrohyoid bone 
G Thyroid gland
H Parathyroid gland 
Thyroid cartilage
4
 Thyroid foramen
4″
 Thyrohyoid articulation
3 Epiglotica cartilage
4"
 Cricothyroid articulation
4"" Cricoarytenoid articulation
 3' Cuneiform process
 5 Arytenoideus transversus 
6  Cricoarytenoideus dorsalis
7  Cricoarytenoideus dorsalis 
(lateral view)
8  Caudal laryngeal nerve
 Cranial laryngeal nerve
9 Ventricularis muscle
 Internal branch 
10 Laryngeal ventricle 
 External branch 
 11 Vocalis muscle
Common carotid a.
d
 Caudal thyroid a.
会
Cranial thyroid a.
Laryngeal branch 
q
 Ascending pharyngeal a.
4* Cricothyroid ligament
h
 Cranial laryngeal a.
12 Cricothyroideus muscle
Ceratohyoid m.
Transverse hyoid m.
(ventral view)
13 Thyrohyoid muscle
49
10. Head-Neck Junction and Ear
 Clinical and Func
tional Ana
my p. 162-163
The cranial nerves IX through XII and the deeper arteries of the
logical sound effects (intense noise). On the connection of the mid-
head may be demonstrated both from the side (lateral approach)
dle ear with the pharynx by the auditory tube with the expansion of
and, on a split head, from the medial surface. In the former, and in
the guttural pouch, see page 46.
continuation of the dissection, rests of the parotid gland and the
 The INTeRNAL EAR lies totally in the petrous part of the temporal
guttural pouch (except its median septum) are removed, and so is
 bone. It consists of a system of osseous and membranous canals and
the proximal (dorsal) third of the stylohyoid and the occipitohy-
is subdivided into the auditory organ with the cochlear duct (duc-
oideus muscle attaching to it. In the more advantageous medial
tus cocblearis, j) and the vestibular apparatus (apparatus vestibu-
2
approach the rectus capitis ventralis and longus capitis are taken
laris, k) or organ of equilibration with the vestibule and the three
out so as to demonstrate the neurovascular structures associated
semicircular ducts that stand perpendicular to one another. Both
with the guttural pouch (see p. 46 and 47).
organs are supplied by the sensory vestibulocochlear nerve (Vm).
1
a)  The EAR can be subdivided into the external ear (auris externa),
b) The deep ARTERIEs OF THE HEAD begin with the common carotid
middle ear (auris media) and internal ear (auris interna). See the
(21) which, together with the vagosympathetic trunk, ascends the
text-figures.
neck dorsolateral to the trachea. Opposite the second cervical ver-
The ExTERNAL EAR consists of the auricle with the auricular muscles
 tebra the common carotid gives off the cranial thyroid artery (18)
and scutiform cartilage (scutulum, see page 37) as well as the exter-
which sends the ascending pharyngeal artery (g) to the pharynx
nal acoustic meatus with its cartilaginous part (cartilago auriculae
 and, as cranial laryngeal artery (h), curves around the cranial pole
et cartilago anularis; see page 37, D and E) and an osseous part.
of the thyroid gland. Slightly more cranially, the common carotid
The external acoustic meatus (meatus acusticus extermus —a) ends
splits into internal (13) and external (1) carotid arteries. The latter,
at the tympanic membrane (b), the cutaneomembranous border
facial trunk (7) which, medial to the mandible, bifurcates to form
between the external and middle ear. The tympanic membrane con-
lingual (8) and facial (9) arteries. The last-named vessel and its
3
sists externally of a cutaneous layer, which is aglandular, hairless,
and lacks pigment. It is followed by a middle connective tissue lay-
Aaui rauaoi pue ionp pnored au Aq pauot are uaa aes
er. On its side toward the middle ear, the tympanic membrane is
 obliquely cross the ventral border of the mandible to gain the face.
The pulse may be taken here on the artery by pressing it against the
clothed with a simple squamous epithelium.
medial surface of the mandible. (See p. 36 for the veins of the head.)
The MppLe EAR consists of the pars tympanica of the petrous bone
with the tympanic bulla and the auditory ossicles, nerves and mus-
c) The convex THYRoID GLAND (20) is palpable and lies with its
cles contained within it. In the horse, radially arranged bony lamel-
right and left lobes dorsolaterally on the trachea immediately cau-
lae form characteristic cellulae tympanicae (d) around the anulus
 dal to larynx. The lobes are occasionally united ventral to the tra-
tympanicus (c). The auditory ossicles transmit the sound waves
 chea by a connective tissue isthmus.
striking the tympanic membrane mechanically to the internal ear.
d) The PARATHYROID GLANDs are only a few mm in diameter; the
The handle of the hammer (malleus, e) is directly fused with the
 external ones lie on the trachea but at a considerable distance from
tympanic membrane. Its head articulates with the body of the incus
the thyroid glands, about 10 cm cranial to the thoracic inlet. The
(f). With its long crus, the incus transmits the sound waves further
 internal parathyroid glands (19) are either in contact with their
respective thyroid lobe or lie within a 1 cm range from it.
vestibular window of the internal ear. The footplate is joined to the
e) The EsopHAGus continues the pharynx dorsal to the larynx;
margin of the window by the anular ligament. By way of the tensor
 opposite the fourth cervical vertebra it slips to the left lateral sur-
tympani muscle (h), the tympanic membrane can be tensed and
face of the trachea, and shortly before the thoracic inlet may even
pulled toward the interior of the tympanic cavity. The stapedius
 gain its ventral surface. It may be divided for description into cervi-
muscle (i) alters the position of the incus and by that favors the
cal, thoracic, and (a short) abdominal parts.
transfer of the higher frequencies. On the other hand at normal
tonus the stapedius muscle, precisely as does the tensor tympani
f) The TRAcHEA continues the infraglottic cavity of the larynx at
muscle, prevents damage to the auditory system due to nonphysio-
the cricoid cartilage; its initial portion is covered ventrally by the
omohyoideus. It consists of cervical and thoracic parts.
g) The CRANIAL NeRves IX-XI leave the cranial cavity by the jugu-
Middle ear and internal ear*
 lar foramen and conform to the general pattern.
 The glossopharyngeal nerve (3), among others releases a lingual
branch (5) to the tongue and a pharyngeal branch (4) to the phar-
yhix.
 I1. The vagus (16) also releases a pharyngeal branch and, in addi-
tion, the cranial laryngeal nerve (6) to the thyroid foramen through
which it enters the larynx. Before doing so it sends a branch to the
cricothyroideus. The vagus passes down the neck within the
vagosympathetic trunk and in the thorax it gives off the recurrent
laryngeal nerve (22). This reascends to the area of the larynx ven-
tral to the common carotid artery on the dorsalateral aspect of the
trachea and enters the larynx by passing deep to thyroid lamina. It
 innervates all laryngeal muscles (except the cricothyroideus) and the
mucosa caudal to the glottis.
III.The accessory nerve (15) splits opposite the atlas into dorsal (r)
and ventral (q) branches which innervate trapezius and ster-
nocephalicus, respectively.
h) The HypoGLossAL NERvE (14) enters the region under discussion
through the hypoglossal canal and pursues a rostroventral course.
It crosses the medial aspect of the accessory nerve and the lateral
aspects of vagus and external carotid artery on its way to supply the
intrinsic and the following extrinsic tongue muscles: styloglossus
(10), hyoglossus (11), and genioglossus (see p. 45.d). The geniohy-
oide (see p. 45.j) and thyrohyoideus (12), of the group of hyoid
muscles, receive their innervation from the first cervical nerve (C1)
which forms the ansa cervicalis (f) with the hypoglossal nerve.
i) The dissection also exposes parts of the AuToNomIc Nervous
SrsTEM such as the sympathetic trunk (17) and the cranial cervical
ganglion (17).
50
Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin
Arteries and Cranial Nerves IX, X, Xl, and Xll of the Head
a Internal carotid nerve of sympathetic trunk 
 n  Obliquus capitis caudalis 
b  Rectus capitis ventralis 
0 Longissimus capitis
 Branch of glossopharyngeal nerve to carotid sinus
p  Occipital artery
d Pharyngeal branch of vagus
q  Ventral branch of accessory 
é
Esophagus
nerve
Ansa cervicalis (C1)
r Dorsal branch of accessory
g  Ascending pharyngeal artery
nerve
h
 Cranial laryngeal artery
(Lateral view)
s Longus capitis
 Cranial deep cervical lymph nodes 
Vagosympathetic trunk
Trachea 
u Sternohyoideus
k
 Sternothyroideus
 Obliquus capitis cranialis
 m Semispinalis capitis 
13 Internal carotid artery
14 Hypoglossal nerve (N XIl)
1 External (
arotidarter
 15 Accessory nerve (N Xl)
16 Vagus (NX)
3 Glossopharyngeal nerve (N IX)
Pharyngeal branch
 17 Sympathetic trunk and 
5  Lingual branch
cranial cervical ganglion
- 18 Cranial thyroid artery
6Craniallarvngealnerve
 19 Internal parathyroid gland 
7 Linguofa
- 20 Thyroid gland
 21 Common carotid artery
 22 Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Facial arte
10 Stylo
11 Hyogl
(See p. 37, 39, 47)
Median section of the Head
a Nasal septum
a'
 Membranous part
a'"
 Cartilaginous part
al"' Osseous part
b  Tensor veli palatini
C
Levator veli palatini
d Pterygopharyngeus
 Palatopharyngeus
Guttural pouch
 Median septum
 Medial recess
 g  Neurovascular fold associated 
with the guttural pouch
(See p. 45 and 47)
51
Chapter 5: The Central Nervous System
1. The Brain
 Clinical and Fun
The structure of the brain cannot be studied unless it is removed
dorsally. They are at the ends of the olfactory peduncles. These, fol-
from its membranous and bony (brain case) enclosure. This is more
lowed caudally, divide into lateral and medial olfactory tracts
easily accomplished when the head is first split in the median plane,
between which lies the so-called olfactory triangle.
 although this divides the brain into right and left halves. Compen-
b) The VENTRIcuLAR SysTEM, or the lumen of the brain, reaches 
sation is found, however, in that the division exposes some of the
4
from the interior of the olfactory bulbs via a complicated array of
brain's interior and that two groups of students can study a sym-
ventricles and interconnecting ducts to the spinal cord where it is
metrical half, as shown in the Figure on this page. Since it is impor-
continued by the central canal of that structure. The fourth ventri-
1
tant during the removal of the brain to preserve the cranial nerves
as they leave the brain, it is best to proceed in the following man-
cle (23), situated ventral to the cerebellum, presents a lateral evagi-
nation (choroid plexus; a vascular, fringe-like fold of pia mater that
ner. The spinal cord and medulla oblongata are the first to be ele-
S s    si    sin
vated. The hypoglossal nerve (N Xll) is transected midway between
cerebellum and brain stem. The third ventricle and its choroid
its emergence from the medulla oblongata (lateral to the crossing of
plexus (8) lie rostral to the pineal gland (6) and by a suprapineal
the pyramidal tracts) and the hypoglossal canal through which it
 recess (5) extend beyond the end of the gland as shown in the Fig-
leaves the skull. The accessory nerve (N XI) can be identified by its
 ure on this page. The two lateral ventricles send extensions into the
prominent spinal root that lies on the lateral border of the spinal
olfactory bulbs.
cord; its thin cranial root joins the spinal root just before the nerve
exits via the foramen lacerum where it should be cut. This cut most
 c) The BLood SuppLy to the brain comes from the ventral surface
likely detaches also the vagus (N X) and glossopharyngeal nerves 
i sauuaq riel sh un pue (aed asoddo aun uo umous se)
(N IX) which share the same exit from the skull with the accessory
remarkably constant among the domestic mammals. The venous
nerve. Vestibulocochlear (N Vm) and facial (N VMl) nerves also lie
sinuses that drain the blood away lie within the dura and consist of
close together and are cut between the trapezoid body (just caudal
 dorsal and ventral systems which are not interconnected in the
to the pons) and the internal acoustic meatus through which they
 horse. The sagittal sinus in the dorsal system divides caudally into
 enter the petrous temporal bone. The thin abducent nerve (N VI) is
 right and left transverse sinuses that course within the membranous
cut next; it arises at the same level as the preceding nerves but more
tentorium cerebelli. The two transverse sinuses, more caudally, are
ventromedial from between the pyramid and the trapezoid body,
connected by a communicating sinus that occupies the osseous ten-
also just caudal to the pons. The large trigeminal nerve (N V) is cut
 torium cerebelli. The ventral system is connected rostrally to veins
where it passes rostrally from the lateral aspect of the pons. The
next two nerves arise from the midbrain: the thin trochlear (N IV)
tem is drained caudally into the internal vertebral venous plexus.
is the only nerve to emerge on the dorsal surface of the brain stem,
caudal to the caudal colliculus; it usually tears before it can be tran-
sected. The much larger oculomotor nerve (N m) is cut where it
 arises from the crus cerebri caudolateral to the bisected hypophysis
which also has to be lifted carefully from its bed. The optic nerve (N
Median Section of the Brain
M) is cut distal to the optic chiasm which can be seen rostral to the
hypophysis. Finally, to free the half brain completely, the olfactory
bulb with its olfactory nerve (N I) bundles will have to be lifted
 away from cribriform plate with a flat instrument.
a) According to Dyce, Sack, and Wensing (1987) the BRAIN of the
Apoq on paedoo is o pue oot uaamq syaiam asry
weight, a ratio of 1:800. The ratio for the dog is about 1:100. It is
   e s a  i  s o 
Species-specific features of the equine brain compared to the brains
of the other domestic mammals are of little significance. Hence, the
illustrations on this and the following pages should be given more
weight than the accompanying text.
2: 3
1. The dorsal part of the rhombencephalon, the cerebellum (20),
 has a surface contour, formed by winding lobes, that is more irreg-
21
—一
ular and complex than that of the human cerebellum. The median
11 1012
16 17 19 18
vermis is more salient than the hemispheres flanking it.
 I1. The mesencephalon, or midbrain, is overhung by cerebrum and
 Telencephalon:
Mesencephalon:
cerebellum, and thus is best viewed from below or on a median sec-
 1 Rhinencephalon 
Tectum:
tion. Its upper part (tectum) presents four swellings (colliculi; 14,
2 Cerebrum
 13 Lamina tecti quadrigemina 
15) which are of about equal size in the horse.
 3 Corpus callosum
14 Rostral colliculus
III. The diencephalon, the most rostral part of the brain stem, is con-
15 Caudal colliculus
 Diencephalon:
16 Aqueduct
nected dorsally to the large cerebral hemispheres by fiber tracts, and
4 Thalamus
 m
is thus completely hidden except ventrally. The ventral portion is
 5 Suprapineal recess
the hypothalamus (9) which, between optic chiasm and mammillary
 6 Pineal gland and pineal recess
Rhombencephalon:
body, presents the infundibulum (11) that connects the hypophysis
 7 Interthalamic adhesion 
18 Metencephalon 
(10) with the brain.
8 Third ventricle and its choroid
 19 Rostral medullary velum 
 snxeld 
 20 Cerebellun and recess in the roof
IV. The telencephalon, comprising in the main the cerebral hemi-
 9 Hypothalamus
 of the fourth ventricle
spheres, is the largest part of the brain. Its surface is fissured in a
10 Hypophysis
 21 Medulla oblongata 
) so e ( s  A r xa
11  Infundibulum
 22 Caudal medullary velum 
 Rostral to the hemispheres are the olfactory bulbs which are bent
12 Mamillary body
23 Fourth ventricle and its choroid
plexus
52
Brain and Cranial Nerves
(ventral view)
Bundles of olfactory fibers
 Offactory bulb
 Olfactory peduncle
Rostralcommunicatingar
 Medial olfactory tract
Internal ethmoidal artery
 Lateral olfactory tract
Rostal cerebral artery-
- Offactory riangle
 Middle cerebral artery
 Optic chiasm
Internal carotid artery
 Optic tract
Rostral choroidal artery
 Piriform lobe
 Caudal communicating artery 
Hypophysis
Caudal cerebral artery -
 Rostral cerebellar artery 
Branch to the pons
Pons
 Caroticobasilar artery 
Labyrinthine artery -
Caudal cerebellar artery
Trapezoid body
Basilarartery
Accessory nerve (N Xl): 
 Cranial root 
 Spinal root
C
Dorsal view of Brain with left Hemi-
sphere sectioned in the dorsal plane
Longitudinalcerebralfissure
 Cerebral hemisphere
Cerebral cortex [gray matter]
White m
Sulci
 Choroid plexus of lateral ventricle
 Septum pellucidum
Ammon's horn [pes hippocampi] -
Cerebellar hemisphere
Vermis
Accessory nerve (N Xl):
 Spinal root
1C
53
2. The Spinal Cord
 Clinical and Fun
y p. 164
The spinal cord is best demonstrated from the dorsal aspect, in situ.
Transverse Sections of the Spinal Cord*
removed as shown on the opposite page. (The lower case n preced-
Transverse Section at C6
ing the segmental designations stands for nerve.) For the study of
the cord's gray and white substances, central canal, and commis-
sures the cord needs to be transected. Few species-specific features
other than size that distinguish the equine spinal cord from those of
ead ao   sass us p o
from a young, few-months-old horse in which the shortening of the
 cord (ascencus medullae) in relation to the vertebral canal was still
 going on. This is why the extents given above for the adult animal
do not agree with those in the Figures.
1; 2
 The SpINAL GoRD is surrounded and protected by the meninges and
with them it occupies the vertebral canal. The end of the cord
3
(conus medullaris; 20) in the adult horse extends relatively far cau-
dally, to the first sacral vertebra; the filum terminale (21), which
prolongs the cord, reaches the fourth sacral segment. Both conus
and filum, together with the spinal nerves that flank them for vari-
ous distances, form the cauda equina (C)which in adult horses
begins at the lumbosacral junction.
The central canal on transverse section is a nearly dorsoventrally
flattened oval; in the sacral segment, however, it is slightly flattened
from side to side. At its caudal end the canal is slightly expanded
4
(ventriculus terminalis; 19) and communicates dorsally with the
subarachnoid space. (There is a possibility that both the ventriculus
and its communication are artificial post mortem changes.) The
Transverse Section at T4
number of spinal nerves equals that of the thoracic, lumbar, and
sacral vertebrae. In the cervical segment are 8 nerves as in the oth-
 er domestic mammals, and there are normally only 5 caudal spinal
 nerves for the innervation of the tail.
1 White matter
12 Reticular formation 
 2 Dorsal median septum 
13 Motor nuclei
3 Central canal 
14 Thoracic nucleus
 4 Median fissure (ventral) 
15 Epidural space
 5 Gray matter
16 Dura mater
6 Dorsal horn
17 Arachnoid and subdural spaces 
7 Ventral horn
18 Pia mater
8 Lateral horn 
19 Ventriculus terminalis
 9 Gray commissure
 20 Conus medullaris 
10 white commissure
 21 Filum terminale 
11 Substantia gelatinosa 
22 End of dura mater
Lumbosacral Portion of Spinal Cord
(median section)
22
54
The transverse sections of the spinal cord drawn after Braun (1950)
Spinal Cord of a Young Horse, in situ
A. Medulla oblongat
icalpart
(Dorsal views)
foramen
 Spinal root of
Dorsal funiculus
Fasciculus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
Subarachnoid space
 Dorsal root
Spinal ganglion
Cervical part
Ventralroot
Lateral dorsal sulcus
Intervertebral foramen
B. Cervical thickening
 Cervical
thickening
 Subdural sp
Denticulate ligament
Pia mate
Tz
Ta
Thoracic part
T10
 Epidural spa
T11
T12
T13
Periosteum
T14
Dura mate
T15
T16
T17
Conusmedullari
L
Lumbar part
L4
Lumbar
 thickening
Filum terminal
 Sacral part
 Lumbosacral
Caudaequin
S3
foramen
55
Chapter 6: Axial Skeleton and Neck
 Clinical and Functional Anatomy p. 164-166
1. Vertebral Column with Thorax and Nuchal Ligament
a)  At the junction of neck and thorax the VERTEBRAL CoLuMN by a
II. The transverse processes (13) of the lumbar vertebrae project
deep concavity (as seen from the side) is farthest removed from the
laterally, and the last two form a joint (or fuse) with each other. This
dorsal surface of the body. Caudal to this it gradually ascends to be
causes the intervertebral foramina to be partitioned into dorsal and
close to the dorsal midline again in the lumbar and pelvic areas. The
ventral openings for the respective primary branches of the spinal
slanted spinous processes (12) of the thoracic vertebrae increase in
nerves. The last lumbar transverse process articulates at its base
length up to T4 (or T5) to form, with the scapulae, the basis of the
 with the wing of the sacrum with a similar partition of the interver-
withers.
 tebral foramen.
Then the spinous processes get steadily shorter, until they have
 IV. The sacral vertebrae fuse when the horse is 4-5 years old. Its
3
reach 10 cm, which is the length of the anticlinal vertebra (usually
spinal processes remain separate at their summits, but merge at
T16) in a medium size horse. This is also the length of the lumbar
their bases with the occasional loss, or right/left division, of the
spinous processes which have a slight cranial inclination.
 interarcuate spaces. The promontory (38), ventrally on the cranial
 end, is not a salient feature upon rectal palpation because of the
 In young horses the ends of the long thoracic spinous processes of
lack of angulation at the lumbosacral junction. The lumbosacral
4
the withers are capped with cartilage, which gradually ossifies with
age. The vertebral formula is as follows: C7 (as in all domestic
(interarcual) space (23) at the same level is wide.
mammals), T18 [17,19], L6 [5,7], S5, Cd (Cy) [15-21]. The square 
V. The paired nature of the spinous processes on the caudal verte-
brackets indicate fairly common variations. (The lower case v pre-
brae is a feature of the first two elements. After that, and up to the
ceding the segmental designation stands for vertebra.)
sixth, the arches are open dorsally and farther distally disappear
 .  The spinous process of the cervical vertebrae, except for the sec-
altogether. The last ten or so elements, therefore, are mere cylindin-
cal rods representing the bodies of the vertebrae. The first caudal
 ond and the last, are poorly developed and absent on C1. The atlas
vertebra has the tendency to fuse with the sacrum.
has an alar- (27') and a lateral (28) vertebral foramen (for the first
cervical nerve). The axis of older subjects also has a lateral vertebral
b) The THoRAx is formed by the ribs, the thoracic vertebrae, and
foramen which transmits the second cervical nerve. Its crest-like
the sternum. The relatively large number of ribs (18 mostly) cause
 spinous process shows evidence caudally that it developed from
it to extend to within a short distance of the pelvis. It is compressed
 paired elements. The transverse processes of vertebrae C3-6 present
 from side to side cranially to accommodate shoulder and arm with-
ventral (13') and dorsal (13") tubercles.
 in the skin of the trunk, but caudal to the forelimb it is wider and
2I1. The articular surfaces of the articular processes on the thoracic
 more barrel-shaped.
vertebrae undergo a change in direction from a nearly dorsal (hori-
The first 8 [9] ribs end directly on the sternum (sternal ribs; 41)
zontal) plane orientation to one that is sagittal. In the more caudal
while the remaining 10 [9] are asternal ribs (42). Supernumerary
thoracic vertebrae the cranial costal facet (6) on the body is
 ribs are represented usually as floating ribs that do not reach the
 approached and finally touched by the costal facet (14) on the
 costal arch. The first rib is short and almost incapable of movement;
transverse process to form a combined surface for both the head
 it solidly connects the vertebral column to the sternum and provides 
and the tubercle of the rib. In some of these vertebrae the caudal
 a solid base for the respiratory movements of the more and more
notch is transformed to a lateral vertebral foramen that transmits
mobile, later ribs.
the spinal nerve.
 The cranial portion of the sternum consisting of manubrium (54)
 and the next three sternebrae, is laterally flattened. The caudal por-
tion—the last two sternebrae (56) and the xiphoid process—is
dorsoventrally flattened. The ventral border of the sternum forms a
Costovertebral Articulations
cartilaginous crest (55') that fails to show the segmentation of the
lateral view of vertebrae, caudal view of left
bone. The crest ends cranially by an upturned manubrial cartilage
 ribs. (Cranial, in relation to the vertebrae, is
(54').
to the left.)
c) The elastic NucHAL LiGAMENT consists of two parts, each paired.
5
Dorsally is the cord-like funicular part (funiculus nuchae; A) and
ventral to it the flat laminar part (lamina nuchae; B).
 The funiculus extends from the external occipital protuberance to
the summits of the 3rd, 4th, or 5th thoracic vertebrae where it is
continued by the less elastic supraspinous ligament (C) that ends at
the sacrum. The cranial segment of the funiculus is an oval cord that
passes dorsal to atlas and axis without attaching to these bones. In
VIII
midneck the paired funiculus gradually flattens and takes on a para-
median position which it maintains at the withers by lying dorso-
lateral to the summits of the thoracic spines so that its right and left
parts almost make contact with the scapular cartilages. Caudal to
form a single median structure.
 Passage of the funiculus over the thoracic spines at the withers is
eased by the supraspinous bursa (C'). A similar function falls to the
6
cranial (A') and caudal (A") nuchal bursae which lie dorsal to atlas
7
and axis, respectively, and of which the caudal is inconstant.
The fenestrated lamina nuchae fills the space between the cervical
vertebrae and the funiculus. It extends cranioventrally from the lat-
ter and from the spinous proceses of T2 and T3 and attaches on the
spinous processes of all cervical vertebrae except the first.
XVII
d) Muscles Of The VerTeBRal Column (see Table on p. 96).
56
The Vertebral Column, the Thorax, and the Nuchal Ligament
(Caudodorsal view)
Vertebral column and bones of the thorax
Cervical vertebrae (C1-7)
Thoracic vertebrae (T1-18 [17-19])
(-] g-) ag e
Sacral vertebrae (S1-5)
Caudal vertebrae(Cd1-x) (Cy1-x)
Body (1)
ventral crest (2)
Cranial extremity (3)
Caudal extremity(4)
Caudal costal facet [C7, ](5)
Cranial costal facet [] (6)
Vertebral canal (7)
VC
VC2
Intervertebra foramen (9)
Arch (8)
Cranial notch (10)
Caudal notch (11)
Spinous process (12)
Transverse process (13)
ventral tubercle [C3-6] (13)
(.  [g-s] aan es.oa
Costal facet [1] (14)
 Transverse foramen [C1-6] (15)
 Cranial articular process (16)
( ssod ne en
Costal process [C3-6, L] (18)
Mamllary process[T-sS] (20)
(Lateral view)
 Interarcular space 
Lumbosacral interarcual space (23)
Sacrocaudal interarcual space (24)
vC3
(ateral)
Atlas [C1] (25)
VC
Wing (26)
Alar foramen (17")
Lateral vertebral foramen (28)
 Dorsal arch (29)
Ventral arch (30)
Axis [C2] (31)
Lateral vertebral foramen (31)
Dens (32)
Sacrum [S1-5]
Wing of sacrum [S1] (33)
Notch (foramen) of wing (33)
Auricular surface (34)
Lateral sacral crest (36)
Promontory (38)
Dorsal sacral foramen (39)
Ventral sacral foramen (40)
Ribs
Sternal ribs (41)
Asternal ribs (42)
Floating rib (43)
Bony part of rib (44)
Head of rib (45)
Articular surface (46)
Tubercle of rib (49)
 Articular surface (50)
Costal cartilage (52)
VT18
Knee of rb, costochondral junction (53) (Ventral view)
(Dorsolateral view)
 Sternum 
1.3
Manubrium (54)
Manubrial cartilage (54)
Body of sternum (55)
Crest of sternum (55)
Sternebrae (56)
VS
vCy
Funiculus of nuchal lig.
vCy3
A'
 Cranial nuchal bursa
A"
Caudal nuchal bursa
(Caudal view)
VCV
B
Lamina of nuchal lig.
C
Supraspinousligament
C' Supraspinous bursa
vCy.
57
2. Neck and Thoracic Wall
 Clinical and Functional Ana
ny p. 166-167
Removal of the skin, and underlying fascia, and certain cutaneous
by the omohyoideus (see further on). The sternocephalici arise from
muscles exposes the supf. structures shown in the upper dissection
the manubrium sterni and remain connected in the ventral midline
 on the opposite page. In the lower dissection also the following
to about halfway up the neck. More cranially, each muscle passes
structures were removed (lower Figure on facing page): forelimb,
 deep to the parotid gland and with a discrete tendon ends on the
supf, shoulder-girdle muscles, sternocephalicus, omohyoideus, ext.
caudal border of the mandible.
jugular vein; and partly the rhomboideus, serratus ventralis, sub-
clavius, and pectoral muscles.
The latissimus dorsi (11) has a broad origin from the thoracolum-
bar fascia. Its fibers course cranioventrally at first, but closer to the
a) There are three GuTANEous MuscLEs in the area (see also left
scapula they turn ventrally to end on a relatively thin tendon. This
Fig. on p. 64). The cutaneus omobrachialis covers shoulder and
 makes contact with the tensor fasciae antebrachii but unites fully
arm with nearly dorsoventrally oriented fibers; it is continued cau-
with the teres major tendon with which it ends on the teres tuberos-
dally by the much larger cutaneus trunci whose fibers run cranio-
ity on the medial surface of the humerus.
caudally. The cutaneus colli (5) covers the caudventral portion of
the neck; it arises from the manubrium sterni and from the cervical
The supf. pectoral muscles (pectoralis descendens, 26; and pec-
2
fascia and ascends in the shape of a V obliquely across right and left
toralis transversus, 26') cross the medial surface of the elbow joint
jugular grooves to end, and partly attach, on the cleidomastoideus.
to end on the fascia of arm and forearm, respectively. The pectoralis
b) The SuPF. SHoULDER-GIRDLE MusCLEs: The cervical (10) and
 descendens bulges forward and with the cleidobrachialis forms the
 lateral pectoral groove (9). The median pectoral groove separates
thoracic (10') parts of the trapezius arise from a long stretch of the
dorsal midline and converge on the spine of the scapula.
 right and left descending pectorals in the midline.
The omotransversarius (6) passes cranially from the clavicular
C) VEINS OCCUPYING THE JUGULAR AND LATERAL PECTORAL
  j sad asaa   ry as 
GROOVES
to 4th cervical vertebrae. Its ventral border is fused with the dorsal
border of the cleidomastoideus. The cleidomastoideus (4') is con-
 The jugular groove is bounded dorsally by the cleidomastoideus,
tinuous caudally with the cleidobrachialis. The fibrous clavicular
ventrally by the sternocephalicus (—mandibularis), while most of
intersection that separates these two muscles is present only in the
 its floor is provided by the omohyoideus. The ext. jugular vein (3)
3
deeper strata of these muscles. Superficially, there is no visible
that fills the groove results from the confluence of the maxillary (2)
boundary between cleidobrachialis and cleidomastoideus, and the
 and the more ventral linguofacial (1) veins and carries blood toward
single unit they appear to form constitutes the brachiocephalicus.
the heart. The jugular groove and its vein are covered in the caudal
The cleidomastoideus arises with its deep strata from the clavicular
two-thirds of the neck by the cutaneus colli muscle.
intersection; it forms the dorsal border of the jugular groove and
 In the caudal end of the jugular groove, the ext. jugular vein releas-
ends on the mastoid process of the petrous temporal bone.
es the supf. cervical vein (22) craniodorsally, and the cephalic vein
1
The sternocephalicus (—mandibularis) (4) furnishes the ventral
(24) caudoventrally. The latter descends to the forearm in the later-
border of the jugular groove whose floor to a large extent is formed
 al pectoral groove.
 3. Deep Shoulder-Girdle Muscles, the Muscles of the ventral Part of the Neck and the visceral
Space they enclose
a) DEEP SHOULDER-GIRDLE MUSCLES:
arising from the manubrium (sternohyoideus, —thyroideus, and
cephalicus); laterally by the omohyoideus and the sternocephali-
The rhomboideus consists of two parts. The cervical (28) is cranial
cus again; and dorsally by the longus colli and capitis, muscles of
to the scapula, on which it attaches, while the thoracic part (28') is
the vertebral column. The trachea (21), the largest occupant of the
at the level of the sapula and lies deep to scapular cartilage.
visceral space holds a median position and, depending on the level,
The pectoralis profundus (25') ascends from its origin on the ster-
 is related to all muscles bounding the visceral space. Its carilages
num (and vicinity) to the medial and lateral tubercles of the
overlap dorsally, and their ends are joined by the tracheal muscle
humerus. The subclavius (25), also one of the pectoral muscles, aris-
that lies in the dorsal wall of the tube between the mucous mem-
es from the cranial part of the sternum and ascends craniomedial to
 brane and the cartilages. The common carotid artery (16) lies dor-
the shoulder joint and supraspinatus muscle to end on the cranial
solateral to the trachea at the cranial end of the neck, while near the
border of the scapula.
thorax it has descended into a ventrolateral position. (An internal
The serratus ventralis (27, 27'), like the rhomboideus, consists of
jugular vein is very small or absent.) The esophagus (14) at the cra-
4
nial end of the neck is dorsal to the trachea; in midneck it lies to the
left of the trachea; shortly before the thoracic inlet it can even be
of the medial scapular surface; the cervical part with caudodorsal,
ventral to the trachea, but as it passes into the thorax it regains its
 mostly fleshy bundles, the thoracic with vertical and craniodorsal
 dorsal position in respect of the trachea. The vagosympathetic
bundles and tendinous sheets.
trunk (17) lies dorsomedial, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve (15)
b) VeNTRAL NecK MusCLES:
ventromedial to the common carotid artery.
Sternohyoideus (19) and sternothyroideus (20) ascend ventral to
d) LYMPHATIC STRUCTURES:
the trachea from a common origin on the manubrium of the ster-
The supf. cervical lymph nodes (7),imbedded in fat, lie against the
num. They divide in midneck to seek their separate insertions on the
cranial surface of the subclavius and are covered laterally by the
basihyoid, and the thyroid cartilage of the larynx, respectively.
cleidomastoideus. They drain supf. structures of the neck, thorax,
Right and left muscles in the caudal half of the neck are fused in the
midline, and the sternohyoidei remain so to their attachment on the
and forelimb. Their efferents pass directly to the veins at the tho-
racic inlet, or indirectly via the caudal deep cervical nodes.
basihyoid. The omohyoideus (13) arises from the subscapular fas-
cia just dorsal to the shoulder joint. On its way to the basihyoid it
The cranial (12), middle (18), and caudal (23) deep cervical lymph
very obliquely crosses the deep surface of the ext. jugular vein, after
nodes are grouped along the tracheal (lymph) duct that conveys
which it fuses with the sternohyoideus.
lymph from the head to the veins at the thoracic inlet. The cranial
 group is confluent with the medial retropharyngeal nodes. The
C) The VIsCERAL SpACE OF THE NECK:
especially large nodes of the caudal group are occasionally difficult
The space occupied by trachea, esophagus, and the vessels and
to distinguish from the supf. cervical nodes and from the cranial
nerves accompanying them is formed ventrally by the strap muscles
mediastinal nodes.
58
Structures of the Neck and Thorax
a Great auicular nerve
m Longissimus cervicis
b  Cervical br. of facial nerve 
m' Longissimus thoracis
C
Transverse n. of neck
lliocostalis
(lateral view)
d  Splenius 
C6 root of phrenic n.
 Dorsal br. of accessory n.
o'
C7 root of phrenic n.
f
 Supraclavicular nerves
p Middle scalenus
g Intercostobrachial nerve
p' Ventral scalenus
 Ext. intercostal muscles
q  Brachial plexus 
 Ext. abdominal oblique
r  Long thoracic nerve
 Longus capitis
s Lateral thoracic nerve 
Longus colli
 Cranial supf. epigastric vein
K
 Ventral intertransversari
 Spinalis thoracis et cervicis
V Serratus dorsalis cranialis
v' Serratus dorsalis caudalis
10 Cervical part of trapezius 
w Funiculus nuchae
10' Thoracic part of
 trapezius 
Linguofacial vein,
11 Latissimus dorsi
 2 Maxillary vein -
3 Ext. jugular vein -
Sternocleidomastoideus
4  Sternomandibularis 
4' Cleidomastoideus
6 Omotran
arius
 7 Supf. cervical lymph nodes
8 Cleidobrachialis
Lateral pecto
groove
26
32
33—
 29 Deltoideus, resected 
27 Serratus ventralis cervicis
Triceps brachii:
30  Long head
27'Serratus ventralis thoracis
31 Lateral head, resected 
 32 Cran. cutaneous antebrachial
n. (axillary)
 33 Supf. branch of radial n.
28 Rhomboideus cervicis
 28'Rhomboideus thoracibs
2 Cranial deep cervi-/
val lymph nodes -/
13 Omohyoideus -
14 Esophagus 
15 Recurrent laryngeal nerve
16 Common carotid artery -
17 Vagosympathetic trunk 
18 Middle deep cervical lymph nodes
19 Sternohyoideus 
20 Sternothyroideus
21 Trachea
 22 Supf. cervical art
yandveir
lymphnodes
24 Cephalic vein
25 Subclavius
 25'Pectoralis profundus
26 Pectoralis descendens
26'Pectoralis transversus
(See p. 64, 65)
59
Chapter 7: Thoracic Cavity
 Clinical and Functional Anato
my p. 167
1. Thoracic Wall, Respiratory Muscles, Lungs, and Lymphatic Structures
 For the dissections on this page the intercostal muscles and the ribs
Right lung in situ
(except ribs 9 and 15-18) were removed without disturbing the
page the right lung was also removed. Except for size and the num-
ber of ribs, the thoracic cavity of the horse follows the general mam-
   a s as-ads a a d 
text.
a)  The cranial portion of the ThoRAx is covered laterally by the
skeleton and muscles of shoulder and arm, preventing clinical
examination by auscultation and percussion of the organs within
unless the forelimb is pulled forward. The latissimus dorsi and the
flat abdominal and cutaneous muscles cover the ribs and intercostal
muscles caudal to the forelimb and are part of the thoracic wall.
b) RespiRAToRy MuscLes (see Tables on Mylogy on p. 98).
 I. Expiratory muscles
 I. Inspiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, the principal
 inspiratory muscle.
sounds cease a few cm proximal to the thin basal border so that the
The diaphragm forms the boundary between thoracic and abdomi-
"audible" lung field is slightly smaller than the projection.
nal cavities. Its insertion on the thoracic wall extends in a gentle
curve from the 8th and 9th costal cartilages, across the costochon-
 The right lung is larger than the left because it carries the centrally
dral junctions of the 9th-15th ribs, to the middle of the 18th rib
 located accessory lobe (25). Inter- and intralobar fissures are absent
where it turns craniomedially to end at the vertebral end of the last
so that cranial (18) and caudal (26) lobes are separated only by the
(17th) intercostal space. In the median plane the diaphragm bulges
wide cardiac notch (22). Part of the mediastinal surface of both
forward to the level of the 7th rib, and thus is almost opposite the
 lungs fuses in an elongated area caudal to the hilus. The lobulation
olecranon in the standing animal. The three openings of the
 of the equine lungs is indistinct.
diaphragm, beginning dorsally, are the aortic hiatus between right
and left crura, for the aorta; the esophageal hiatus in the (larger)
right crus, for the esophagus; and the caval foramen (5) in the tendi-
 Left lung in situ
nous center, for the caudal vena cava. Surrounding the tendinous
center is the muscular part divisible into sternal (7), costal (6), and
lumbar (3) segments by which the diaphragm is attached at its
periphery.
c) The two PLeuRAL SAcs line the thoracic cavity including the
diaphragm and contact each other in the median plane to form the
on itself to become the costal pleura that lines the ribs, is the line of
pleural reflection that follows the attachment of the diaphragm.
Craniodorsal to the line of pleural reflection, diaphagmatic (8) and
costal (9) pleurae are in contact and are separated by a potential
space known as the costodiaphragmatic recess (10).
 d) The MeDIAsTINuM contains the heart and all other thoracic
s a ad u  s  l es ea p 
ported by the caval fold (f).
 In regions where the mediastinum contains no organs it is relative-
g) Most of the LyMPH NoDes of the thorax, as in other areas, con-
ly thin and may be fenestrated as a result of an underdeveloped or
sist of aggregates of small nodes. The right (19), left (20), and mid-
dle (23) tracheobronchial nodes surround the tracheal bifurcation.
 Fenestrations are seen mainly caudal to the heart. This part of the
Nearby pulmonary nodes (24) are inconstant and are covered by
mediastinum is pushed far over to the left because of the greater
lung tissue. The cranial mediastinal nodes (15) continue the caudal
mass of the right lung.
deep cervical nodes within the thorax. Middle mediastinal nodes
e) The EsopHAGus (14) traverses the mediastinum from the tho-
(16) lie dorsal to the heart, and the caudal mediastinal nodes (13)
racic inlet to the diaphragm. At the inlet it lies still a little to the left,
 occupy the caudal mediastinum between aorta and esophagus.
but still in the cranial mediastinum it reaches the median plane dor-
 Inconstant cranial sternal lymph nodes (17) lie cranial to the inter-
sal to the trachea. In this region its muscular coat changes from stri-
 nal thoracic vessels and are not easily distinguished from the cranial
ated to smooth muscle which may be seen in fresh specimens by a
 mediastinal nodes. There are also inconstant caudal sternal lymph
 color change.
nodes where the diaphragm attaches to the sternum. The intercostal
lymph nodes (11) occupy the dorsal ends of the intercostal spaces
f) The LunGs reflect the general shape of the thoracic cavity and
 3-16, while the paired thoracic aortic nodes (12) lie dorsal to the
are long and laterally compressed cranially. The root of the lung.
 aorta opposite the 3rd to the 17th thoracic vertebrae; they are more
fully visible when one lung is removed, lies opposite the 6th rib and
numerous on the left since the right ones are often absent at the lev-
pe ae ard au pue (v) sn ed a sap
el of the 9th-14th vertebrae.
2
veins (w, x). The "lung field" is the projection of the lung on the sur-
face of the animal, caudal to the forelimb. It is roughly triangular,
 The efferent lymphatics arising from the nodes in the thoracic cav-
bounded dorsally by the back muscles and caudoventrally by the
ity communicate variously and either join the veins at the thoracic
basal border of the lung. The latter curves from the costochondral
inlet or the cranial segment of the thoracic duct (1). The latter, hav-
junction of the 6th rib through the middle of the 11th rib to the edge
ing arisen from the cisterna chyli, accompanies the aorta forward
of the back muscles at the 16th intercostal space. The lung can be
and crosses the left face of the trachea before ending on one of the
 percussed and auscultated within the lung field, though respiratory
veins at the thoracic inlet, usually the cranial vena cava.
60
The Thoracic Cavity (right side) and the Lungs
1 Thoracic duct
11 Intercostal lymph nodes
2 Caudal mediastinum 
12 Thoracic aortic lymph nodes
 3 Lumbar part of diaphragm
 13 Caudal mediastinal lymph nodes
4 Tendinous center 
14 Esophagus
5 Caval foramen -
15 Cranial mediastinal lymph nodes
16 Middle mediastinal lymph nodes 
6 Costal part of diaphragm
7 Sternal part of diaphragm
17 Cranial sternal lymph nodes 
8 Diaphragmatic pleura -
 9 Costal pleura
 10 Costodiaphragma
(See p. 59, 63, 65)
A Principal bronchus
 Caudal vena cava
I  Bronchoesophageal vessels
 Ext. jugular vein
B Lobar bronchus
 Caval fold
 m Supreme intercostal vessels
 Cephalic vein 
C Segmental bronchus
g Mediastinal recess 
n  Dorsal scapular vessels 
t
 Axillary vessels
a
 Retractor costae
1
 Phrenic nerve
 0 Deep cervical vessels 
Int. thoracic vessels
b
Aorta
 Pericardiac pleura
p Vertebral vessels and nerve
Transversus thoracis
 Right azygous vein
 Semispinalis capitis
q Common carotid a. and
w Pulmonary artery
d  Dorsal and ventral vagal trunks 
 Intercostal vessels
vagosympathetic trunk
x Pulmonary veins
Bronchial Tree, dorsal view
Lungs, ventral view
(Left)
(Right)
(Right lung)
(Left lung)
18 Cranial lobes
19 Right tracheobronchial lymph nodes
 20 Left tracheobronichal lymph nodes 
21 Tracheal bifurcation
22 Cardiac notch -
23 Middle tracheobronchial lymph nodes
 24 Pulmonary lymph nodes
25 Acce
61
2. Heart and Thymus
 Cinical and Fune
onalAna
ny p. 167-168
a) HEART and its Projection on the Thoracic Wall
 Base of the Heart, sectioned in the dorsal
 Depending on the breed and the amount of training, the weight of
(horizontal) plane
1
the heart relative to body weight ranges between 0.6 % for a draft
0
horse and 1 % for a Thoroughbred. Species-specific features of the
 organ serve to distinguish it mainly from the bovine heart which
attains comparable size. The horse's heart is cone shaped, but has a
blunted apex when relaxed (diastole). The amount of fat in the
coronary and interventricular grooves varies with the breed; the
   r     r  so
associated with the heart is intensely yellow and soft. The free bor-
C
 der of the left auricle is usually notched.
The left coronary artery (15) a few cm from its origin splits into cir-
A
cumflex (16) and (descending) interventricular (17) branches; while
the right coronary artery (18; 19) itself pursues a circumflex course
in the coronary groove before sending an interventricular branch
(20) down the subsinuosal interventricular groove. When the heart
is opened (as in a post mortem examination) a large cardiac carti-
lage may be palpated next to the origin of the aorta; a smaller acces-
sory cartilage is sometimes present.
 The heart makes direct contact with the ribs through the cardiac
notches of the lungs from the 3rd to the 5th intercostal space on the
fa
left, and from the 3rd to the 4th space on the right (area of absolute
dullness, caudal to triceps). More dorsally lung tissue intervenes
between heart and chest wall (area of relative dullness). The four
heart valves are best ausculated as follows: left AV,low in the left 5th
intercostal space, aortic, high in the left 4th space, just below a hori-
zontal line through the shoulder joint; pulmonary, low in the left
3rd space; and right AV-valve, low in the right 3rd or 4th spaces.
A* Right atrium
C Left atrium
b) The distribution of the BLoop Vessels cranial to the heart is as
 Sinus venosus
q   Entrance of pulmonary veins
follows: The parent artery is the brachiocephalic trunk (14), the
b
Coronary sinus
Pectinate muscles
only branch of the aortic arch near the base of the heart. It in turn
C
Veins entering atrium
gives rise to the right subclavian artery, a short bicarotid trunk for
the right (see p. 61.q) and left (5) common carotid arteries, and
 Interatrial septum
(also) the left subclavian artery (7). The costocervical trunk (4), the
Fossa ovalis
first branch of the subclavian, gives off the supreme intercostal (1)
Epicardium 
and the dorsal scapular (2) arteries. The subsequent branches of the
Myocardium
subclavian artery are the deep cervical (8) and the vertebral (3)
Endocardium
arteries. The former passes into the dorsal part of the neck where it 
lies against the laminar part of the nuchal ligament, the latter pass-
es toward the head through the transverse foramina of the cervical
vertebrae and at the atlas anastomoses with the occipital artery; it
then enters the vertebral canal where it contributes to the blood
supply of the brain and spinal cord. The supf. cervical artery (6) is
BRight ventricle
D Left ventricle
the last branch arising from the convexity of the sublavian; it pass-
 Right atrioventricular (AV) valve
 Left atrioventricular (AV) valve
es forward to supply the ventral portion of the cervicothoracic junc-
e'
 Parietal cusp
 Parietal cusp
tion. Finally, the internal thoracic artery (9), the last branch of the
e'2
 Septal cusp 
r'2
Septal cusp 
subclavian to arise within the thoracic cavity, passes ventrocaudal-
e3
 Angular cusp
r'1
 Subauricular papillary muscle
ly to course along the sternum. The corresponding veins by and
e' Great papillary muscle 
 Subatrial papillary muscle
large are satellite to the arteries.
e"2 Lesser papillary muscles
S
Aortic valve
3
c)  The Nerves encountered within the thoracic cavity conform to
e"'s Subarterial papilary muscle 
S1
 Right semilunar valvule
the common pattern. Beginning ventrally, the phrenic nerve (see p.
Pulmonary valve
S2
 Left semilunar valvule
 61.h) crosses the base of the heart to gain the diaphragm. The vagus
f1
 Right semilunar valvule
S3
 Septal semilunar valvule
Left semilunar valvule
(e) at the aortic arch releases the left recurrent laryngeal nerve (h)
t2
t3
 Intermediate semilunar valvule
and with its fellow from the other side furnishes the dorsal and ven-
tral vagal trunks that accompany the esophagus through
the
 Atrioventricular orifice
diaphragm. The sympathetic trunk (12) lies on the bodies of the
4
m
 Interventricular septum
thoracic vertebrae. Its major branch, the greater splanchnic nerve
 Trabeculae septomarginales
(12), arises from the 6th to the 15th sympathetic ganglia.
Trabeculae carneae
 Chordae tendineae
d) The Thrmus (10), when at its largest (about 2 months after
birth), fully fills the ventral part of the mediastinum cranial to the
heart. Some of its tissue may extend into the neck to lie next to the
trachea where, when broken up, it may be mistaken for caudal deep
cervical lymph nodes. In rare cases thymus tissue may be encoun-
The letters of the above legend are placed in squares on the drawings of the
tered also near the thyroid gland.
heart.
62
Thoracic Cavity and Heart
left lateral view
 12 Sympathetic trunk and
major splanchnic nerve
1 Supreme intercostal vessels
 2 Dorsal scapular vessels -
3 Vertebral vessels and nerve :
4Costocervical trunk-
5 Common carotid artery
and vagosympathetic trunk
 13 Ansa subclavia
6 Supf. cervical artery -
- 14 Brachiocephalic trunk 
 and cephalic vein
 7 Left subclavian artery 
 8 Deep cervical vessels -
 9 Int. thoracic vessels
10 Thymus
 11 Pericardium
(See p. 61)
S.ROCK
 Cervicothoracic ganglion
f Intercostal vessels
k Truncus arteriosus
p Cranial vena cava
u   Left auricle 
b
 Middle cervical ganglion
g Aorta
I Left pulmonary artery 
q Right azygous vein
V
 Middle cardiac vein
C
 Trachea
h
 Recurrent laryngeal n.
m Right pulmonary artery
r  Great cardiac vein
w Right ventricular (cranial) border 
d  Thoracic duct
i
 Interpulmonary adhesion 
n  Pulmonary veins 
s Lig. arteriosum 
X  Left ventricular (caudal) border 
Vagus
Conus arteriosus 
0 Caudal vena cava
会
t
 Right auricle
y Apex
Right atrium and ventricle
Left atrium and ventricle
(Arterial surface)
(Auricular surface)
15 Left coronary artery
16 Circumflex branch of 15 -
 17 Paraconal interventricular
groove and branch of 15
！回
18 Right coronary artery
19 Coronary groove
20Subsinuosalinterventricular
groove and branch of 18
63
Chapter 8: Abdominal Wall and Cavity
1. The Abdominal Wall
y p.168
To show the supf. muscles and nerves (upper dissection on facing
inguinal ring, partly separates the two tendons at the level of the
 page) the skin and cutaneous muscles were removed. For the lower
 prepubic tendon. The abdominal tendon combines with the apo-
5
dissection the forelimb, latissimus dorsi, and external abdominal
neurosis of the internal abdominal oblique muscle to form the
oblique were fully, and the internal abdominal oblique partly
external rectus sheath (see further on).
removed.
Lateral cutaneous branches of spinal nerves T16-L4 pass through
a)  On the undissected, skin-covered trunk attention should be giv-
 the external oblique muscle and the abdominal tunic that covers it.
en of three palpable and sometimes visible features: the paralumbar
Those from L1 (5) and L2 (6) on their way to the skin of the thigh
fossa, the costal arch, and the so-called spur vein. The paralumbar
 s   su  ns  aao sd
fossa is a triangular depression cranioventral to the coxal tuber,
 nerve (11; from L3 and L4) accompanies the caudal branch of the
bounded principally by the muscles of the back and the last rib. It
 deep circumflex iliac vessels (7), passes caudal to the lymph nodes,
is most obvious in emaciated subjects. The length of the thorax
 and innervates the medial skin of the thigh dorsal to the stifle.
positions the end of the costal arch and the last rib close to the pelvis
 II. The internal abdominal oblique (C on this page) takes origin
leaving a narrow flank between the last rib and the thigh. The supf.
 from the coxal tuber and the inguinal ligament and ends on the
costal arch and with its aponeurosis (which joins that of the exter-
non, passes caudally along the border of the deep pectoral muscle.
 nal oblique) on the linea alba. Its musculoaponeurotic junction
b)  The subcutaneous Trunk FasciA (see also p. 74) consists of supf.
 descends from the costal arch and bends caudally to follow the lat-
and deep layers.
 eral border of the rectus abdominis. The free caudoventral border
I. The supf. trunk fascia (B in the Fig. on this page) encloses the
 of the muscle forms the cranial margin of the deep inguinal ring.
m (  s )     so
 I. The transversus abdominis (9) is the least extensive of the three
extends from the area of the olecranon to the withers and caudally
flank muscles, its caudal border reaching only to the level of the
to the level of the thigh. This large plate of muscle is thin dorsally,
 coxal tuber. The muscle does not usually take part in the formation
but up to 2 cm thick caudoventrally where it lies within the fold of
 of the inguinal canal, but its aponeurosis, which also ends on the
the flank that connects the abdomen with the stifle. The muscle
 linea alba, forms the internal rectus sheath. The musculoaponeu-
blends cranially with the cutaneus omobrachialis (A') that covers
 rotic junction passes caudodorsally, caudal and parallel to the costal
much of the triceps.
 arch, in the direction of the sacrum.
The palpable subiliac lymph nodes (10) lie on the cranial border of
 The ventral branches of spinal nerves T16 to L3 pass ventrally
the tensor fasciae latae (cranial edge of thigh) dorsal to the stifle.
imbedded in the lateral surface of the transversus muscle. They car-
I1. The part of the deep fascia that lies directly on the external
ry motor fibers for the rectus abdominis, sensory fibers for the pari-
abdominal oblique muscle contains much elastic tissue that colors
etal peritoneum, and close to the linea alba give rise to the short
it yellow and gives it the additional name, tunica flava (yellow)
 ventral cutaneous branches.
abdominis, or, less formally, abdominal tunic (4). It increases in
 IV. The rectus abdominis (8) arises from the 4th to the 9th costal
thickness ventrally and blends with the linea alba. It functions in the
cartilages and adjacent parts of the sternum and ends principally-
 support of the heavy abdominal viscera of this herbivorous animal.
via the accessory ligament—on the head of the femur, but also on
1
The fibrous linea alba (see p. 75.18) connects the aponeuroses of
the prepubic tendon (see p. 76). It is marked by about ten tendinous
2
 the right and left abdominal muscles in the midventral line. It begins
intersections (8) which attach the muscle to the external rectus
at the sternum, where it is about 2 cm wide, encloses the umbilicus
sheath. This enclosure (as already alluded to) consists of external
widening slightly (3 cm), and caudal to this is very narrow. It ends
 and internal sheaths, the former a combination of the two oblique
 on the prepubic tendon.
 muscle aponeuroses, the latter furnished by the transversus abdo-
 c) The ABDomINAL WALL is formed by four abdominal muscles but
minis.
3
it also includes portions of the ribs and the costal arch.
 d) The abdominal wall formed by these muscles is lined by TRANs-
   as e s ( o  a  1
VERsE FAsciA, and this in turn by parietal peritoneum. The trans-
4
 verse fascia blends caudally with the iliac fascia, which covers the
lateral surface of the ribs and, more caudally, on the thoracolumbar
 iliopsoas, and that is continuous with the pelvic fascia.
fascia. Its wide aponeuosis is divided into abdominal and pelvic ten-
dons. The former inserts on the linea alba, the latter on the coxal
e) The parietal PeRIToNEum (see also p. 74) in the male animal
tuber and the prepubic tendon between which points it is slightly
 sends an evagination (vaginal process) through the inguinal canal
thickened to form the inguinal ligament. A slit-like gap, the supf.
 into the scrotum.
64
Superficial and Deep Dissections of the Trunk
(Lateral views)
6llioinguinalnerve(L2)
 5 lliohypogastric nerve (L1)
a
 Rectus thoracis
4 Abdominal tunic
b
 Internal intercostal muscles
 Deltoideus, resected
External abdominal oblique muscle
C
d  Long head 
2 Supf. thoracic vein and lateral
 Cleidobrachialis
thoracic nerve
 Cran. cutaneous antebrachial n. (axillary) 
 Supf. branch of radial n.
1 Skin
(See p. 59)
9
h
 Semitendinosus
i
Gluteus medius 
 Gluteus superficialis
7 Cranial branch of deep
k  Tensor fasciae latae
I circumflex iliac a. and v.
1 Biceps femoris
 m Lateral cutaneous sural nerve
Caudal cutaneous sural nerve
 11 Lateral cutaneous femoral nerve
 Caudal cutaneous femoral nerve
 10 Subiliac lymph nodes
。
P
 Subclarius
 9 Transversus abdominis
q  Pectoralis profundus
8 Rectus abdominis with
 Dorsal cutaneous br. of thoracic n.
tendinous intersections
IPL
Ldl 
 Dorsal cutaneous br. of lumbar n.
Sdl
 Dorsal cutaneous br. of sacral n.
 T16vl Lateral cutaneous br. of thoracic n. T16 
 T18v Ventral br. of thoracic n. T18 
65
2. Topography of the Abdominal Organs and
Clinical and Functional Anato
my p. 168
Their Relation to the Abdominal Wall
 For the demonstration of the undisturbed organs of the abdominal
cecum (14) and the capacious right dorsal colon (18) turning cra-
 cavity (dissections on facing page) the following structures were ful-
 nially into the dorsal diaphragmatic flexure. The right lung covers
ly or partially removed: certain ribs and all intercostal tissues,
the liver (except for its caudoventral angle), the kidney, and part of
diaphragm except for a narrow median strip, abdominal muscles
the duodenum.
except the rectus, parietal peritoneum, and the tensor fasciae latae.
The right flank is occupied by the base of the cecum (14) which is
Knowledge of the relationship of the abdominal organs to the
continued ventrally by the body of the cecum (11). This is directed
abdominal wall is essential for the various methods by which these
craniomedially to allow the right ventral colon (19) to make contact
organs can be examined (rectal palpation, percussion, auscultation 
with the costal arch.
and abdominocentesis). It must be kept in mind, however, that the
C)  Ventral Aedominal Wall
intestines in particular, because of their loose attachment, can shift
markedly from the position most often depicted in anatomical illus-
The dissection on this page depicts the abdominal organs that lie on
trations. Least accessible are the organs covered by the ribs and
the floor of the abdomen; the soft ventral abdominal wall was
costal arch, in the so-called intrathoracic part of the abdominal cav-
removed so that the organs are flanked by the right and left costal
ity. Most of them lie against the diaphragm and thus are overlain,
 arches. The ventral loop of the ascending colon—right ventral colon
in addition to the ribs, by portions of the lungs. The abdominal cav-
(19), ventral diaphragmatic flexure (8), and left ventral colon
ity, as a whole, is shaped like an egg whose pointed end occupies the
(10)—dominates the field. Nestling between its parts are the body
cupola of the diaphragm, whose blunt end is at the pelvic inlet
(11) and apex (20) of the cecum. The latter, among mammals, has
where the abdominal cavity opens into the pelvic cavity, and whose
the very unusual position, about 15 cm caudal to the xiphoid carti-
long axis is oriented from cranioventral to caudodorsal. Clinical
lage; the former is attached to the lateral free band of the right ven-
examination is, of course, easiest through the soft abdominal wall
tral colon by the cecocolic fold. This is an important landmark for
caudal to the costal arch.
and descending colon (5; with prominent band) may insinuate
It is important for the diagnosis of positional changes and colic aris-
themselves between the body of the cecum and the left ventral colon
ing from these to understand the ATTAcHMENT of the entire colon to
to make intermittent contact with the ventral abdominal wall
the roof of the abdomen. The ascending mesocolon (see p. 71.33)
which, close to the pelvis, rises steeply to the level of the pubic brim.
splits off from the right side of the root of the mesentery. It does not
form a sheet, but attaches the dorsal and ventral colon layers to
each other, being visible only as narrow tissue bridges where the
two pieces of gut come together. It extends, therefore, from the
Ventral View of Opened Abdominal Cavity
mesenteric root to the pelvic flexure (see p. 71.27) where it is sheet-
like and spans the short distance between the two limbs of the flex-
ure. Accordingly, the entire ascending colon except for its beginning
and end (also adhered to the dorsal abdominal wall and base of the
cecum) lies free on the abdominal floor and is subject to twisting or
Cecocolic fold -
displacement. The descending mesocolon, however, is a regular
sheet like the (jejunal) mesentery and allows also the descending
colon considerable range in the caudal portion of the abdominal
cavity.
a) LEFT SIDE
Left lobe of liver (1), stomach (2), and spleen (3) are intrathoracic
1
and, with the exception of parts of the spleen covered also by lung.
These organs are related ventrally to the left dorsal colon (9) and
the beginning of the dorsal diaphragmatic flexure (7); though still
under cover of the ribs, some parts of the left dorsal colon escape
being blanketed by the lung. (See p. 71 for an understanding of the
double flexures of the ascending colon.)
The upper part of the flank is occupied by a mixture of descending.
colon (5) and jejunum (4). The former has two bands (teniae) of
which the free one as well as the sacculations (fecal balls) are promi-
nent. The jejunum is without bands. Below these coils lie the caudal
parts of the left colon (9; 10); the left dorsal has a smaller diameter
than the left ventral; both become confluent in the pelvic flexure (6)
which, shielded by the thigh, lies in front of the pelvic inlet often
extending across the median to the right.
b)RIGHT SIDE
Quadrate (17) and right lobes of the liver (16), right kidney (15),
and descending (13) and transverse (12) parts of the duodenum are
intrathoracic on the right. Ventral to these organs lie the base of the
66
 Abdominal Cavity and Organs
a  Semitendinosus 
b Gluteus medius
Gluteus superficialis
d  Quadriceps femoris 
d  Tensor fasciae latae
+
 Biceps femoris
g Lateral cutaneous sural nerve
 Caudal cutaneous sural nerve
(Left lateral view)
Illiacus
 Longissimus thoracis
S.ROcr
k  Spinalis thoracis et cervicis
9 Left dorsal colon
Esophagus
8 Ventral diaphragmatic flexure 
m Aorta
7 Dorsal diaphragmatic flexure
 Caudal vena cava
Internal abdominal oblique
(see p. 66, 69 and 71)
(Right lateral view)
1 9 Right ventral colon
18 Right Dorsal colon
67
3. Spleen, Liver and Bile Duct, Pancreas, and
Clinical and Functional Anate
tomy p. 168-170: 178-179
Stomach with Omenta
a) The SpLEEN (11) in the fresh state is bluish; after death and expo-
organ spread away from that point. Its parietal (cranial) surface is
sure to air the red pulp becomes more obvious and colors the organ
related to the diaphragm and the liver, while the visceral (caudal)
reddish-brown. Smooth muscle in capsule and supporting frame-
surface faces the intestines.
work allows much variation in size and is important in the function
The part of the stomach dorsal to the cardia, the fundus, is distinct
of the spleen as a blood reservoir. The average weight of the spleen
 in the horse and is known as the blind sac (saccus cecus; 22). This
is about 1.5 kg. Thoroughbreds and other racers have relatively
 is continued ventral to the cardia by the body which is joined to the
 pyloric part (25) at the deep angular notch (24). When the stomach
The spleen is roughly triangular with a broad dorsal base and a ven-
po sse a d s  pdap a  u pado si
tral apex that is bent cranially. Its position varies slightly with res-
cardiac sphincter (23) is revealed. This feature among others is
piration and with the distension of the stomach to which it is tied
s   s d a    a 
 sphincters (26'; 27') at the pyloric end are also well developed, the
lies against the diaphragm under cover of the caudalmost ribs, dor-
more distal one especially, where the pyloric canal (27) is continued
by the duodenum. The lining of the stomach is divided by the mar-
ing forward to the 9th to 11th interspaces. Its convex caudal border
go plicatus (28) into a proximal nonglandular mucosa (29) in the
is roughly parallel and 10 cm cranial to the costal arch,but its cau-
blind sac and body near the lesser curvature, and a glandular
dodorsal end can protrude slightly into the flank (see p. 67). The
mucosa (26; 30) in the rest of the body and the pyloric part. In the
visceral surface is divided by the long (ca. 50 cm) hilus into a small 
fresh organ the former is light gray and harsh to the touch, while the
cranial gastric surface and a much larger intestinal surface and
latter is more reddish, softer, and smooth.
through these is related to stomach, pancreas, and intestines. The
 It is not possible to delimit grossly the three glandular zones. His-
spleen is held in place by gastrosplenic (9), phrenicosplenic, and
 tological sampling places the cardiac glands near the margo plica-
 renosplenic (12) ligaments that connect it to stomach, diaphragm,
tus where they mix with the proper gastric glands of the distal body
and left kidney, respectively.
 and beginning of the pyloric part; the pyloric glands are found in
b)  The LveR accounts for about 1.5 % of body weight and thus is
the rest of the pyloric part.
relatively small when compared to that of the dog, a carnivore. Its
The stomach is attached to its surroundings by certain portions of
large right lobe atrophies in many horses as a result of pressure
the greater, and by the lesser omentum. The greater omentum (5)
from a chronically distended right ventral colon that lies under it
arises from the greater curvature (6), the lesser from the lesser cur-
(see p. 67).
vature (8) of the organ. The two omenta and the viseral surface of
The liver lies entirely within the intrathoracic part of the abdomen
 the stomach enclose a subdivision of the peritoneal cavity known as
and extends from the 6th intercostal space cranioventrally on the
 the omental bursa. This sac-like potential space communicates with
left to the 15th interspace caudodorsally on the right. Much more
-ida pu no ( s) mu e Aq Aeo ead pa a
of its mass lies to the right of the median plane (see p. 67). The cau-
d  rq a  i e u  (i  
 Stomach and Cranial Part of Duodenum,
process, is lacking. Its caudate process carries a distinct impression
opened on the visceral (caudal) surface
for the right kidney. The major characteristic of the equine liver is
the absence of a gall bladder which in the other domestic mammals
 of the organ. The junction between the quadrate and the left medi-
 al lobe is well marked by the round ligament (obliterated umbilical
vein) that passes caudally to the umbilicus in the free border of the
falciform ligament (13). Before reaching its destination the round
25
ligament courses subperitoneally for a short distance. A fissure sep-
arates left lateral (2) and left medial (19) lobes. The large right lobe
(15) is undivided.
The liver is held in place by right (17) and left (21) triangular liga-
ments. They attach it to the fleshy periphery of the diaphragm. The
3
 coronary ligament (not shown) attaches the parietal surface of the
liver to the diaphragm more centrally.
The hepatic ducts are relatively wide which may be related to the
absence of a gall bladder. They merge within the organ to form the
common hepatic duct (16). The latter is continued by the bile duct
that opens into the duodenum at the major duodenal papilla (31 in
Fig. on this page) situated in the second bend of the S-shaped cra-
nial part.
c)  The PANcREAs also opens with its pancreatic duct on the major
 6 Greater curvature
25 Pyloric part
29 Nonglandular part
duodenal papilla. Its accessory pancreatic duct, however, opens on
26 Pyloric antrum
30 Glandular part
 8 Lesser curvature
the minor duodenal papila (32) opposite the major papilla. The
 22 Fundus, or blind sac
 26'Sphincter of pyloric antrum
 31 Major duodenal 
pancreas is roughly triangular; its body (2) is cranial and lies against
 23 Cardiac sphincter at
27 Pyloric canal
papilla 
the cranial part of the duodenum; it is perforated by the portal vein
 cardia
 27'Pyloric sphincter at pylorus
32 Minor duodenal
 28 Margo plicatus
(d). The left lobe of the pancreas (10) extends across the median
 24 Angular notch
papilla
plane to the left where it makes contact with the stomach and the
ploic foramen (see p. 161, 68.2A). The foramen lies between the
dorsal abdominal wall. The right lobe (4) follows the descending
 right lobe of the liver and the descending duodenum and extends
 duodenum and is related to the right kidney and nearby base of the
 medially between caudal vena cava and portal vein to allow access
cecum.
first into the vestibule, and then into the caudal recess of the omen-
2
 d) The STomAcH of the horse is of the simple, unilocular kind and
tal bursa. The caudal recess is the part of the bursa that is enclosed
with a capacity of only 5-15 liters is small for such a large animal.
 almost entirely by the greater omentum; it is not extensive and is
It lies in the cranial part of the abdominal cavity entirely within the
 hidden from view between the stomach and the intestines; it has
rib cage, mostly to the left of the median plane. It is strongly flexed
with the result that entrance and exit, cardia (23) and pylorus (27'
 trophrenic ligament, a part of the greater omentum, attaches the
in Fig. on this page), lie close together. When moderately flled it lies
 greater curvature near the cardia to the crura of the diaphragm. The
opposite the 9th to the 14th intercostal spaces; but even when fully
 gastrosplenic ligament (9 on facing page) attaches the stomach to
distended the stomach remains within the rib cage and fails to con-
the spleen. The lesser omentum (not shown) spans the short dis-
tact the abdominal floor. The cardia is fixed fairly solidy to the
 tance between lesser curvature and the visceral surface of the liver
diaphragm at the esophageal hiatus, so that enlargements of the
which itself is well fixed to the diaphragm.
89
 Spleen, Liver, Pancreas, and Stomach lying against the Diaphragm
5 Greater omentum, cut
6Greate
r curvature of stomach
8 Lesser curvature
1 Epiploic foramen
9 Gastrosplenic ligament
2 Body of pan
10 Left lobe of pancreas
3 Pancreatic ring
1 Spleen
4 Right lobe of pancreas
12 Renosplenic ligament
 Abdominal muscles
g  Right gastroepiploic artery
m Renal vessels and ureter
 s  Esophagus and vagal trunks 
b Duodenum
h Left gastric vessels 
nRight kidney
t  Hepatorenal lig. and renal impression
Jejunum 
 Splenic vessels
o Left kidney
C
U  Right crus of diaphragm
d  Portal vein 
Left gastroepiploic vessels
p  Right adrenal gl.
V  Left crus of diaphragm 
 Celiac artery
k
 Cranial mesenteric artery and ganglion
q Left adrenal gl. 
w Hepatic lymph nodes
 Hepatic artery
 Caudal vena cava
r Aorta
13 Falciform and round ligament (of liver) 
19 Left medial lobe
14 Quadrate lobe
 20 Left lateral lobe
15 Right lobe
21Left triangular ligament
17 Right triangular igament
18 Caudate lobe and process
(See p. 61, 67, 71 and 75)
69
4. Intestines
 Clinical and Functional Ana
my p. 170-172
a) The INTEsTINAL TRACT is divided into small and large intestines,
right ventral colon (IV* —20). This follows the right costal arch to
although the terminal part of the latter, the descending or small
the diaphragm which deflects the colon to the left side of the body
 colon, has a narrow lumen but it is easily distinguished by a promi-
in the form of the ventral diaphragmatic flexure (25). The latter is
nent free band (tenia) and related sacculations (haustra).
 pei sassd i a on a a 
pelvic inlet on the left ventral abdominal wall. In the vicinity of the
1
The small intestine has three parts: duodenum, jejunum, and ileum;
inlet the lumen decreases and the gut reflects upon itself to form the
d  p an son il a  
 pelvic flexure (I—27); this many cross the median plane or lie with-
 The duodenum is about 1 m long. Its cranial part (1) begins at the
in the pelvic cavity. The pelvic flexure is succeeded by the left dor-
pylorus with a slight enlargement and forms a sigmoid flexure that
sal colon (I—28). The two last-named segments because they carry
lies against the porta of the liver. The second bend of the flexure
 only a single band (and that hidden in the mesocolic attachment; see
presents in its interior the major and minor duodenal papillae which
further on) are without sacculations. The left dorsal colon passes
lie opposite to each other and mediate the influx of bile and pan-
creatic juice (see p. 68). The descending duodenum (2) continues the
right, dorsal diaphragmatic flexure (Il29), where the capacious
sigmoid flexure and passes caudodorsally under cover of the liver to
right dorsal colon (Il—30) begins. This has the largest diameter
be followed at the right kidney by the caudal flexure (transverse
(ampulla coli) of the four parts of the ascending colon; but as it
duodenum; 3) that takes the duodenum from right to left around
reaches the base of the cecum it is deflected to the left, decreases
the caudal aspect of the root of the mesentery. As it enters the cau-
 markedly in diameter, and crosses the median plan as the transverse
dal flexure, high in the abdominal cavity, it is related and attached
 colon (II—31). The latter lies cranial to the cranial mesenteric artery
to the base of the cecum and to the transverse colon. The last seg-
(45), and ventral to about the last thoracic vertebra, and adheres to
ment, the ascending duodenum (4), is short, and medial to the left
the roof of the abdomen and the pancreas.
kidney it becomes the jejunum that has a markedly longer mesen-
The descending colon (II—32), also known as small colon, is about
teric attachment. The duodenojejunal junction is made plain by the
7
cranial free border of the duodenocolic fold (5).
3m (10 feet) long, is suspended by a broad mesocolon and mingles
with the jejunum in the left flank.
3
The jejunum (6), is about 25 m (70 feet) long; it is shorter in life.
 Owing to its long mesentery, jejunal coils can be found in many
The rectum (Il—34), the last segment of the large intestine and 
8
parts of the abdominal cavity; most of them, however, reside near
 about 30 cm in length, continues the small colon at the pelvic inlet.
the left flank, ventral to the pelvic inlet, and to the left of the cecum.
 The caudal mesenteric artery (56) bifurcates into left colic and cra-
 nial rectal arteries that supply both the rectum and the caudal por-
4
The ileum (7), about 50 cm long, continues the jejunum where the
tions of the colon.
ileocecal fold (8) has its most proximal (oral) extent. It is charac-
 b) The BLoop SuppLy to the gastrointestinal tract follows the gen-
although when relaxed in the fresh state after death the ileum may
 eral mammalian plan despite the extraordinary shape of the large
not appear or feel much different than the jejunum. The ileum ends
intestine. The celiac artery (35) splits into splenic (42), left gastric
on the ileal papilla (9) in the medial wall of the cecum at the junc-
(37), and hepatic (36) arteries that pass to their respective organs.
tion of this organ's base and body.
The cranial mesenteric artery (45) of many horses is subject to dis-
tortion by the activity of nematode larvae. Its principal branch, the
The large intestine has three parts: cecum, colon, and rectum and is
ileocolic artery, gives rise to the colic branch (50) and the right col-
e a pe an ixa  aq asou a ua
ic artery (54) that supply the right and left ventral colons (first half)
cious parts of the colon which allow stasis of the ingesta for the pur-
 and the right and left dorsal colons (second half) of the ascending
 pose of their microbial destruction.
colon, respectively. These two vessels are of course very long; they
5
The cecum is about 1 m (4 feet) long and has a capacity of roughly
 anastomose at the pelvic flexure. Several (transverse) anastomoses
35 liters; it consists of base, body, and apex. The base of the cecum
connect the two vessels also in their initial course where they lie
(10) occupies the right flank but extends forward as well to lie
 close together between the right dorsal and ventral colons. The lat-
under cover of the last few ribs. (Since the latter part of the base is
eral (52) and medial (51) cecal arteries also anastomose near the
distal (aboral) to the ileocecal junction, it corresponds actually to
 apex of the cecum.
the first part of the ascending colon as in most domestic mammals.)
The base of the cecum is continued by a cylindrical body (12) that
c) The Nerve SuppLy of the intestines follows the general mam-
curves ventrally and cranially to follow the slope of the abdominal
malian plan. The parasympathetic innervation is by the end-
floor to the vicinity of the xiphoid cartilage where it is succeeded by
branches of the vagal trunks that follow the branches of the cranial
the apex (13) that occupies the concavity of the ventral diaphrag-
 mesenteric artery. The sympathetic innervation takes the same route
matic flexure formed by the ascending colon. The cecal wall is gath-
but is brought to the region by the splanchnic nerves and passes
through the ganglia in the root of the mesentery.
ered into sacculations by four bands of which the medial (16) and
lateral (14) ones accommodate blood vessels and lymph nodes. The
d) The position of the LyMPH NoDes associated with the gastroin-
lateral band releases the cecocolic fold (18) that ties the right ven-
testinal tract can be determined by reference to the main drawing on
tral colon to the cecum. The dorsal band (15) releases the ileocecal
the facing page: celiac lymph nodes (A), at the origin of the celiac
fold that ends on the ileum. The ventral band (17) is unremarkable
artery; splenic lymph nodes (B), along the hilus of the spleen; gas-
except for joining the medial band shortly before reaching the apex
tric lymph nodes (C), in the lesser curvature of the stomach along
 of the organ.
the left gastric artery; hepatic lymph nodes (see p. 69), at the porta
The colon consists of ascending, transverse, and descending parts of
of the liver surrounding the portal vein, pancreaticoduodenal
which the first-named is the most capacious. For this reason it is
 lymph nodes (D), between pancreas and descending duodenum;
also known as the great colon in contrast to small colon that desig-
jejunal lymph nodes (E), in the dorsal, gathered part of the mesen-
nates the equine descending colon.
tery where the jejunal arteries originate; colic lymph nodes (G),
 between the dorsal and ventral layers of the ascending colon; cecal
6
The ascending colon is about 4 m long, holds on average 80 liters,
lymph nodes (F), along the medial and lateral bands of the cecum;
and is folded together to form a double loop consisting of left (26)
 and caudal mesenteric lymph nodes (H), grouped around the break-
and right ventral (20), and left (28) and right dorsal (30) parts. It
up of the caudal mesenteric artery.
begins at the cecocolic orifice (11) in the lesser curvature of the
cecum that lies roughly opposite the costochondral junctions of the
 Lymph from the intestinal nodes is gathered by the intestinal lymph
last two right ribs. Its first, slightly enlarged portion (collum coli;
19) deflects the digesta it contains from a caudal to a cranioventral
ly by the thoracic duct which transports the lymph to the veins at
direction which is the orientation of the first of the four parts, the
the thoracic inlet.
70
 The Roman numbers following certain terms indicate the number of bands--and rows of sacculations—present on the corresponding segments and
inform also on their relative capacity.
The Intestines, right lateral view
A Celiac lymph nodes
B Splenic lymph nodes
C Gastric lymph nodes
 D Pancreaticoduodenal lymph nodes
E Jejunal lymph nodes 
F Cecal lymph nodes 
G Colic lymph nodes
 H Caudal mesenteric lymph nodes
Part of Cecum and Right Ventral Colon, right lateral view
Duodenum
Colon
Right gastric artery (38)
Cranial part (1)
Ascending colon
Gastroduodenal artery (39)
Descending part (2)
Neck of colon (19)
 Cran. pancreaticoduodenal artery (40) 
Transverse part (3)
Right ventral colon (20)
 Right gastroepiploic artery (41)
Ascending part (4)
Lateral mesocolic band (21)
 Splenic artery (42)
 Duodenocolic fold (5)
 Medial mesocolic band (22)
 Short gastric arteries (43)
Jejunum (6)
Medial free band (23)
Left gastroepiploic artery (44)
lleum (7)
Lateral free band (24)
 Cranial mesenteric artery (45)
lleocecal fold (8)
Ventral diaphragmatic flexure (25)
 Caud. pancreaticoduodenal artery (46) 
 lleal papilla and orifice (9)
Left ventral colon (26)
Jejunal arteries (47)
Cecum
Pelvic flexure (27)
lleal artery (48)
Base (10)
Left dorsal colon (28)
lleocolic artery (49)
Cecocolic orifice (11)
Dorsal diaphragmatic flexure (29)
Colic branch (50)
Body (12)
Right dorsal colon (30)
 Medial cecal artery (51)
Apex (13)
Transverse colon (31)
 Lateral cecal artery (52)
Lateral band (14)
 Descending colon (32)
 Mesenteric ileal branch (53) 
Dorsal band (15)
Mesocolon (33)
Right colic artery (54)
Medial band (16)
Rectum (34)
Middle colic artery (55)
Ventral band (17)
Celiac artery (35)
 Caudal mesenteric artery (56) 
Cecocolic fold (18)
Left gastric artery (36)
Left colic artery (57)
Hepatic artery (37)
 Cranial rectal artery (58)
71
Chapter 9:
 Clinical and F
onal Anato
y p.172
Pelvis, Inguinal Region, and Urogenital Organs
1. Bony Pelvis with Sacrosciatic Ligament, Supf. Inguinal Structures
1 a) Bony Pevis (see upper Fig. on facing page): The bony pelvis
Left Sacrosciatic Ligament, lateral view
 comprises right and left hip bones (ossa coxarum) which are joined
in the pelvic symphysis and united dorsally by the sacrum (see p.
164, Fig. 72.4, 72.5). The hip bones consist, from cranial to caudal,
Dorsal sacroiliac lig.
 of ilium, pubis, and ischium. The pelvic symphysis ossifies in a cran-
Short part
iocaudal direction.
 Long part
The coxal tuber (13) of the ilium lies under the skin as a nearly ver-
tical palpable rectangle, whereas the ischial tuber (28), at the cau-
dal end and belonging to the ischium, is covered by muscle. The
2
ventral surface of the pubis presents a groove for the accessory lig-
ament (33') and a wide acetabular notch (5). These features chan-
nel the accessory ligament to the head of the femur. The ligament
 represents the major insertion tendon of the rectus abdominis in the
3
 horse; it is absent in the other domestic mammals. The obturator
groove (A on this page) guides the obturator nerve and accompa-
nying vessels from the prominent psoas minor tubercle (22) to the
obturator foramen (2). The floor of the pelvis is flat.
B Greater sciatic foramen
 C Lesser sciatic foramen 
Right Os Coxae (Hip Bone), medial view
symphysial tendon that attaches to the ventral surface of the pelvic
symphysis and facilitates attachment of other thigh muscles in the
crowded condition high between the thighs. The dissection of the
unsplit hindquarters on the facing page shows that the accessory
external pudendal veins (3) emerge from the symphysial tendon fos-
sa; they carry blood from the penis (or udder) to the deep femoral
veins whose stumps are also depicted. The (proper) external puden-
dal vessels (11) pass through the inguinal canal and emerge as
22
shown with the genitofemoral nerve (11) from the medial angle of
the supf. inguinal ring (12) which lateral to these structures is cov-
ered on its deep surface by the internal oblique muscle (2).
A Groove for obturator
To appreciate how the large blood vessels supplying the hindlimb
n. and vessels
leave the abdominal cavity, the structures known as femoral trian-
 gle, vascular lacuna, and femoral canal need to be understood. The
femoral triangle (7) is a nearly pyramidal space high in the medial
surface of the thigh. The base of the pyramid is dorsal and is formed
 a si xae a  r a o  l an aq
 The pelvic inlet (framed by the terminal line) is round in the mare,
medial wall of the pyramid is formed by fascia and, more ventrally,
4
while in the stallion it is pear-shaped with a lateral contraction
by overlying skin. The cranial border of the femoral triangle is fur-
5
toward the pelvic floor. Both vertical and transverse diameters of
nished by the sartorius (18), the caudal border by the pectineus (6).
the pelvis are larger in the mare. The inlet of the male is marked in
The vascular lacuna (13) is an eliptical space between the inguinal
addition by an inconstant (age-related) dorsal pubic tubercle that
ligament and the shaft of the ilium; its lateral half is occupied by the
lies opposite the ventral pubic tubercle (35) on the dorsal face of the
sartorius (18) that arises from the iliac fascia in the abdominal cav-
bone.
ity and passes through the vascular lacuna to the vicinity of the sti-
 b) The SACROsCIATIc LIGAMENT (upper Fig. on this page), charac-
fle. The medial half of the vascular lacuna permits the external iliac
teristic of the large domestic ungulates, closes the pelvic cavity lat-
vessels to leave the abdominal cavity in order to enter the thigh. As
erally. It extends from the lateral crest of the sacrum and the trans-
soon as they have passed through the vascular lacuna they occupy
verse processes of the first few caudal vertebrae to the ischial spine
the femoral triangle and become the femoral vessels (15). They
(7), and to the ischial tuber (28) leaving two openings, the greater
share the triangle with the deep inguinal lymph nodes (see p. 19.B).
(B) and lesser (C) ischial foramina, for certain structures to leave the
To complicate matters further, the medial extremity of the vascular
 pelvic cavity. The caudal border of the sacrosciatic ligament is cov-
lacuna is known as the femoral ring (5) that, in the intact state, is
7
ered, as is the ischial tuber at its ventral end, by the vertebral heads
 closed on the abdominal side by peritoneum and transverse fascia.
 of the semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscles. It furnishes
The femoral ring lies medial to the external iliac vessels that pass
the lateral border of the triangular pelvic outlet whose dorsal apex
through the vascular lacuna into the femoral triangle. In rare cases
is provided by a caudal (tail) vertebra, and whose ventral border is
 a loop of jejunum pushes through the femoral ring (femoral hernia)
the ischial arch (29) that connects right and left ischial tubers.
and comes to lie in the dorsomedial part (femoral canal) of the
Because of the presence and fullness of the afore-mentioned verte-
 pyramidal femoral triangle.
bral muscular heads, the perineal (surface) region surrounding the
The muscular lacuna (14), in the standing horse, lies dorsolateral to
anus (and vulva in the mare) is narrow with the result that an
the vascular lacuna. It conveys the iliopsoas (16), the femoral nerve
 ischiorectal fossa is absent.
and its branch, the saphenous nerve* (9), into the thigh. The con-
C) SUPF. PUBIC AND INGUINAL STRUCTURES (See lower Fig. On facing
 tents of the muscular lacuna are overlain ventromedially by the sar-
page): The stallion especially presents a median symphysial tendon
torius (18), and ventrolaterally by the abdominal tunic (1) of the
fossa (4) at the cranial extremity of the pelvic symphysis. It results
abdominal wall and by the tendinous femoral lamina (17) which is
from the failure of the right and left gracilis (8) tendons to unite;
split off by the pelvic tendon of the external abdominal oblique (10)
caudal to the fossa the tendons do unite to form the midsagittal
 aponeurosis.
72
 Differing with certain textbooks, the saphenous nerve passes through the muscular lacuna (not the vascular), and the sartorius passes through the vas
cular lacuna (not the muscular).
Hip Bones
(Ventral view)
12
Hip bone (os coxae)
Pelvic symphysis (1)
Obturator foramen (2)
Acetabulum (3)
Acetabular fossa (4)
Acetabular notch (5)
Lunate surface (6)
Ischial spine (7)
Ilium
Body of ilium (8)
Ischium
ventral caudal iliac spine (9)
35
Body of ischium (24)
Wing of ilium (10)
Iliac crest (12)
Flat part (tabula) of ischium (25)
Coxal tuber (13)
Symphysial surface
ventral cranial liac spine
Lesser ischial notch (27)
Internal lip (13)
Externalip (13")
Ischial tuber (28)
 Sacral tuber (14)
Ischial arch (29)
Gluteal surface (17)
 Sacropelvic surface (18)
Pubis
Auricular surface (19)
Body of pubis (30)
lliac surface (20)
Caudal ramus of pubis (31)
 Greater ischial notch (23)
Pecten (33)
Groove for accessoryligament (33)
lliopubic eminence (34)
ventral pubic tubercle (35)
Supf. Pubic and Inguinal Structures
 a Linea alba
d   Transverse fascia
g Deep circumflex iliac vessels
Tensorfasciaelatae
b  Vaginal process
é  Pudendoepigastric vessels 
 and lateral cut. femoral nerve 
 Rectus femoris
 Cremaster and ilioinguinal nerve
f  Deep femoral vessels 
h Iliacofemoral vessels 
k  Vastus medialis
1   Abdominal tunic
(Caudoventral view)
 2 Internal abdominal oblique
muscle
 10 External abdominal 
oblique muscle
- 11 External pudendal vessels 
3 Accessory external
and genitofemoral nerve
pudendal veins 
 12 Supf. inguinal ring
 Symphysial tendon -
fossa
 5 Femoral ring
 13 Vascular lacuna
6 Pectineus
 14 Muscular lacuna 
(and adductor longus)
7 Femoral canal -
15 Femoral vessels
16 lliospoas
8 Gracilis
 17 Tendinous femoral lamina
9 Saphenous nerve
18 Sartorius
73
2. Inguinal Area
 Clinical and Functional Ane
my p. 172-173
 The complex inguinal area comprises the attachment of the soft
(6) which is a fusiform opening with lateral (6') and medial angles
ventral abdominal wall to the bony pelvis and, below this, scrotum
(6"). The vaginal process (13") passes through the lateral angle of
and penis. It needs to be exposed both from the outside, and from
the ring, while the external pudendal artery (14) passes through the
inside the abdominal cavity, as shown in the lower Fig. on the fac-
medial angle which lies close to the lateral border of the rectus
ing page.
abdominis (15). The cremaster passes through the ring together
 a)  The INGuINAL CANAL is a flat, potential space between the inter-
transversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique muscles but
nal and external abdominal muscles through which certain struc-
has acquired an origin of its own from the inguinal ligament.
tures pass from the abdominal cavity into the subcutaneous tissues
 of the groin. The canal extends from the deep inguinal ring (6) at
 The caudal border of the transversus abdominis (11) is at the level
the free caudal border of the internal abdominal oblique (5) to the 
 of the coxal tuber and thus does not reach the area of the inguinal
supf. inguinal ring (16) which is a slit in the aponeurosis of the
 canal or its rings.
external abdominal oblique muscle. The principal structure to use
 p  p an s  (  s  
1
this route of exit in the stallion is the vaginal process and its con-
 abdominal muscles evaginates the internal spermatic fascia (12') at
tents. These are the deferent duct (7), the testicular vessels (17)
the deep inguinal ring that encloses the vaginal process and with it
accompanied by the testicular (nerve) plexus, and lymphatics; and,
passes through the inguinal canal. The fascia on its way to the testis
lying against the outside of the vaginal process, the cremaster mus-
 changes to loose connective tissue that facilitates the sliding move-
cle (4). The aggregate of these structures is known by the clinician
ments between the coverings of spermatic cord and testis. (In a
 as the spermatic cord. The mare lacks, of course, a vaginal process,
 closed castration the testis, still covered by vaginal tunic and sper-
but in some a tiny peritoneal and fascial evagination can be detect-
matic fasciae, can be peeled out of the scrotum and detached after
ed; the round ligament of the uterus and a weak cremaster muscle
 ligation.) In stallions with inguinal hernia, the area where the inter-
 can be followed through the canal to the base of the udder (see p.
 nal spermatic fascia becomes loose connective tissue forms a typi-
77). In both sexes the genitofemoral nerve (3), branches of the sec-
3
2
 cally contracted ring. Cutting the ring is necessary for returning the
ond lumbar nerve (L2; 2), and the external pudendal vessels (14)
 herniated intestine to the abdominal cavity.
 pass through the inguinal canal.
V. At the vaginal ring (13') the parietal peritoneum (13) forms the
I. The skin (9) is reflected over the testes to form the scrotum (s)
tubular but blind vaginal process (13") which also passes through
which has few hairs, is pigmented, and glistens from the secretion
the inguinal canal. Spermatic cord and testis “sink into" the vaginal
of sweat and sebaceous glands. Smooth muscle (tunica dartos) as a
 process and thus gain their immediate coverings known as the vis-
 deep component of the scrotal skin, but also in the scrotal septum 
ceral and parietal vaginal tunics. The potential space between the
(20), wrinkles the skin in cold weather and helps to draw the testes 
two tunics (vaginal cavity) is continuous with the peritoneal cavity
 closer to the body.
 at the vaginal ring.
I1. The elastic abdominal tunic (8; see also p. 73) that covers the
The wall of the inguinal canal consists of different tissues: the fleshy
external abdominal oblique muscle, in the stallion gives rise at the
 part of the internal abdominal oblique cranially and the pelvic ten-
supf. inguinal ring to the external spermatic fascia (8') which
 don of the external oblique caudally-not the criteria of a canal.
encloses the spermatic cord and the testes. (A homologous but
d aas r a i oe piss aqo es adoaap ssa 
muscles that are spread apart by the structures that pass through it
77.) The abdominal tunic also blends with the fascia lata (19) where
 and by loose connective tissue. The medial and lateral boundaries
thigh and abdominal wall lie against each other. In the ventral mid-
 of the space are ill defined. The length of canal in a medium-sized
line the abdominal tunic is anchored to the linea alba (18), from
horse, when measured along the spermatic cord, is about 15 cm,
which, in the mare,the medial lamina of the suspensory apparatus
whereby it is necessary to remember that the cord enters the canal
of the udder arises; the lateral laminae originate from near the
 close to the lateral angle of the deep inguinal ring, and leaves it near 
supf.inguinal ring and cover the sides of the udder (see p. 77). Sim-
 the medial angle of the supf. inguinal ring.
ilar laminae can be demonstrated in the stallion as the suspensory
 Upon approaching the pubic brim the rectus abdominis (15) ten-
ligament of the penis (8"") that reaches also the prepuce. An addi-
tional sheet (lamina femoralis fascialis*; 8"), unrelated to penis and
 dons curve toward a median decussation of their fibers to penetrate
spermatic cord, extends from the fascia covering the lateral crus of
the prepubic tendon. At the caudal angle of the supf. inguinal ring
the supf. inguinal ring to the thigh and opens the ring when the stal-
the abdominal tendon of the external abdominal oblique and the
lion spreads its hind limbs apart as occurs during service.
 overlying abdominal tunic join the rectus fibers to form the acces-
 sory ligament of the femur.
III. The external abdominal oblique (10) presents a slit-like defect 
between its pelvic (10') and abdominal (1o") tendons which was 
b) The INGUINAL LIGAMENT (1) arises from the coxal tuber and ends
already described as the supf. inguinal ring (16). The ring is easily
within the prepubic tendon. After leaving the tuber it blends with
the iliac fascia that covers the iliopsoas muscle. About its middle,
seen on the deep (internal) surface of the muscle (right side on low-
the ligament loses contact with the fascia and unites with the pelvic
er Fig. on facing page). On the supf. (external) surface of the mus-
cle, the ring is covered by the tube-like external spermatic fascia (8')
 tendon of the external abdominal oblique muscle** with which it
which has been fenestrated on the left side of the same Fig.
concludes its course to the prepubic tendon. The lateral part of the
inguinal ligament gives origin to a portion of the internal abdomi-
The internal abdominal oblique (5) has a free border where it devi-
 nal oblique by which it is hidden from view. In the lower Fig. on the
ates from its attachment on the inguinal ligament. The free border
facing page, the muscle origin has been removed to fully expose the
Su peumu daap aqn uoy il on pepneo suaueai eumun aul pue
ligament.
74
 Differing with certain texts, the lateral crus of the supf. ring does not split off an aponeurosis but a fascial sheet.
Inguinal Rings and Vicinity in the Stallion (6 )
lliocostalis
b  Longissimus dorsi
C Multifidus 
d  Psoas major
Psoas minor
Caudal vena cava
6
Abdominal aorta 
h Ureter 
Coxal tuber
 Internal iliac fascia
k Descending mesocolon
Descending colon
m Left colic vessels
n Bladder 
Lat. lig. of bladder
p Penis
q  Epididymis
Testis
s Scrotum
10 External abdominal oblique 
10' Pelvic tendon
10" Abdominal tendon
11 Transversus abdominis
1Inguinalligame
12 Transverse fascia
12' Internal spermatic fascia 
 5  Internal abdominal oblique
6 Deep inguinal ring
13 Peritoneum
6' Lateral angle
13'  Vaginal ring
13" Vaginal process
6"
 Medial angle
7 Deferent duct 
- 14 External pudendal vessels
8 Abdominal tunic
15 Rectus abdominis
8'
 External spermatic fascia
 16 Supf. inguinal ring
8"
 Femoral lamina 
8" Suspensory ig. of penis 
 17 Testicular vessels
18 Linea alba
19 Fascia lata
20 Scrotal septum
9Skin
(vide p. 73, 77)
75
3. Prepubic Tendon, Inguinal Canal of the Mare,
Clinical and Functional Anate
Nerves of the Lumbar Plexus, Hypaxial
Lumbar Muscles, and Udder
a)PREPUBIC TENDON
d) HYPAXIAL LUMBAR MuSCLES
1
The prepubic tendon (2) is a strong, transversely oriented, fibrous
For psoas major (7), psoas minor (8), and quadratus lumborum
mass set against the pecten of the pubis and extending from one
iliopubic eminence to the other. The prepubic tendon is formed
e) UDDER
principally by the right and left pectineus (and adductor longus)
muscles (5) whose tendons of origin, after arising from the pecten
 The udder of the mare lies ventral to the area where the ventral
3
on both sides of the median as far laterally as the iliopubic emi-
 abdominal wall joins the bony pelvis. Its shape and size are related
 nences, decussate ventromedial to the pelvic symphysis. The tendi-
to the functional state of the ovaries. It is a relatively small gland,
nous cranial parts of the gracilis and external obturator muscles
 hardly noticeable in the virgin mare but rounded and semispherical
also take part in its formation.)
 during the latter part of pregnancy and subsequent lactation. One
hair (or more) protruding from the teat orifice, as well as other less
The inguinal ligament (1) together with the pelvic tendon of the
obvious features remind us that the mammary gland is an enor-
external abdominal oblique join the lateral parts of the prepubic
mously enlarged apocrine sweat gland. The hair disappears at the
 beginning of lactation or is worn off by the foal during suckling.
tus abdominis, perforates, but also attaches itself to, the prepubic
Secretions of both sebaceous and sweat glands in the tip of the teat
tendon and eventually passes via the acetabular notch to the fovea
(or perhaps precocious colostrum) fill the two teat orifices and cov-
on the femoral head, accompanied the last few cm by the ligament 
 er the tip of the teat with a waxy material whose presence indicates
of the femoral head (3).
 that foaling is imminent.
2
 The linea alba (14) is formed by the convergence of the aponeuroses
The udder (see Fig. on this page) comprises right and left mamma-
 of the flat abdominal muscles in the ventral midline. It is several cm
ry glands (15) each surmounted by a teat (17). Each gland accom-
wide near the umbilicus, but narrows to a few mm as it joins the
modates two (sometimes three) duct systems which channel the
 prepubic tendon between the bellies of the rectus muscles.
 milk through increasingly larger lactiferous ducts (B) into a lactif-
b) STRUCTURES ASSOCIATED WITH THE INGUINAL CANAL OF THE MARE
erous sinus (A) in the base of the teat and in the teat itself (teat
sinus). Two papillary ducts (C) ending at the teat orifices (D) con-
The evaginations of the peritoneum (19, not shown on this side but 
vey the milk to the outside. Though the two duct systems in each
at 12), the transverse fascia (12), and the abdominal tunic (13) are
half of the udder are separate, the glandular tissue belonging to each
much less prominent than in the male, not always present, and dif-
can only be demonstrated by injections of different color suspen-
ficult to demonstrate. The round ligament of the uterus (11) con-
sions into the two orifices. (For blood and nerve supply of the udder
tains small amounts of smooth and striated muscle and presents a
small, pendulous appendage near its origin from the uterine horn.
see p. 80.)
It and a rudimentary cremaster muscle can be traced through the
 The udder is supported by a suspensory apparatus (21) that com-
inguinal canal to where they end at the base of the udder. (In the
 prises medial and lateral laminae. The paired medial lamina (21') is
 elastic and arises from the abdominal tunic near the linea alba and
the cremaster [see p. 75.4] was relatively well developed.)
separates the two halves of the udder along the prominent inter-
mammary groove (16). The lateral laminae (21") are less elastic
C) THE NERVES OF THE LuMBAR PLExUS (VENTRAL BRANCHES OF L2
To L6)
the supf. inguinal rings from where they pass lateral to the glandu-
Nerve L1 continues solely the ventral branch of the first lumbar
lar tissue and separate it from a layer of adjacent fat.
nerve and thus cannot be regarded as belonging to the lumbar
plexus, though it is often described under that heading. It takes a
subperitoneal course to the vicinity of the deep inguinal ring and
takes part in the innervation of the caudal parts of the internal
abdominal oblique and the transversus abdominis muscles. Its
 Udder, sagittal section through a teat
sometimes double lateral cutaneous branch perforates (and also
 supplies) the abdominal muscles to innervate the skin and the fold
of the flank.
(Cranial end)
(Caudal end)
 Nerve L2 (18; with contribution from L3) also supplies the skin and
the fold of the flank with its lateral cutaneous branch. It crosses the
ventral surface of the deep circumflex iliac vessels (9), shortly before
the latter penetrate the flank, to pass with one or two branches
through the lateral part of the supf. inguinal ring.
 The lateral cutaneous femoral nerve (10; from L3 and 4) obliquely
crosses the dorsal surface of the deep circumflex iliac vessels and
then accompanies their caudal branch through the body wall to the
flank fold.
The genitofemoral nerve (20; from L2 to 4) crosses the deep cir-
cumflex iliac vessels more medially with one or two branches and
Mammary blood
passes through the medial part of the supf. inguinal ring.
vessels
The femoral and, its branch, the saphenous nerves (see p. 19.12;
1 Skin 
19.25; from L4 to 6) were described on p 18.
D
Subcutis
C
Also the obturator nerve (see p. 19.5; from L4 to 6) was already
A Lactiferous sinus
C Papillary duct
described on p. 18.
 B Lactiferous duct
D Teat orifice
76
Prepubic Tendon, Inguinal Ligament, and Accessory Ligament
(ventral view)
1 Inguinal ligament
Pelvic tendon of ext. abdominal 
oblique
1'′ Rectus abdominis, fenestrated
2   Prepubic tendon
3 Ligament of head of femur-
 4  Accessory ligament
5 Pectineus (and adductor longus) -
 Symphysial tendon fossa
Inguinal Rings and Vicinity of the Mare ()
a Suspensory lig. of ovary 
bOvary
CProper lig. of ovary
(cranioventral view)
d Uterine horn and mesometrium 
é Caudal epigastric vessels 
 External pudendal vessels 
Ureter
h  Descending colon 
i
Bladder 
6 Quadratus lumborum
 Cremaster
K
 Internal abdominal oblique
7 Psoas major
 External abdominal oblique
m Transversus abdominis
8 Psoas minor
n  Rectus abdominis 
9 Deep circumflex
 iliac vessels
 10 Lat. cutaneous femoral nerve
 18 Lumbar nerve L2
 11 Round lig. of uterus
 19 Peritoneum
12Transt
14 Linea alba
21 Suspensory apparatus
15 Mammary gland
of udder
16 Intermammary groove -
 21'  Medial lamina
17 Teat 
 21" Lateral lamina
(See p. 73 and 75)
77
 4. Lymphatics, Adrenal Glands, and Urinary Organs 
 Clinical and Functi
my p. 173-174
a) THE LYMPHATICS OF THE PELVIC AND LUMBAR AREAS
 I. The wall of the renal pelvis—and that of the initial segment of
 I. Lymph nodes outside the abdominal and pelvic cavities.
the ureter—contain mucous glands that can be detected with the
naked eye; they give the horse's urine its cloudy and slimy quality.
The supf inguinal lymph nodes (see p. 85.s) in the male lie on each
I1. The ureters (9), after emerging from the hilus, lie retroperi-
side of the penis and extend to the scrotum (scrotal lymph nodes);
 toneally on each side of the two great abdominal blood vessels (aor-
 in the female they extend to the base of the udder (mammary lymph
ta and caudal vena cava). Their pelvic part descends towards the
nodes).
dorsal surface of the bladder whose wall it penetrates obliquely; the
The subiliac lymph nodes, which lie in the flank fold halfway
 pelvic part in the male briefly lies in the mesoductus deferens and
between the coxal tuber and the patella, were described with the
crosses the dorsal surface of the deferent duct.
hindlimb (see p. 19.D) and with the abdominal wall (see p. 65.10).
 II. The bladder (see text Fig. below), when empty, has the size of a
The deep inguinal lymph nodes were mentioned in connection with
small fist and resides entirely within the pelvic cavity in a largely
the femoral triangle (see p. 19.B).
retroperitoneal position. When moderately filled, its apex (21) and
m nq  e a o d u ( a
 II. The retroperitoneal lymph nodes at the junction of abdomen 
filled to capacity, the apex may advance to the level of the umbili-
and pelvis.
cus. The neck of the bladder (23), however, always remains within
The sacral lymph nodes (6) lie caudal to the aortic bifurcation
the pelvic cavity. The lateral ligaments of the bladder (11) carry the
between the origins of right and left internal iliac arteries.
nearly obliterated umbilical artery (round ligament) in their free
border (the artery arises from the cranial or caudal gluteal arteries).
The medial iliac lymph nodes (4) surround the break-up of the
The median ligament of the bladder (12) connects the bladder to the
abdominal aorta a little more cranial than the preceding nodes;
 pelvic floor and to the linea alba, and contains smooth muscle tis-
some lie at the origin of the deep circumflex iliac vessels (10).
sue.
The lateral iliac lymph nodes (5) are located at the break-up of the
 IV. The male urethra (see p. 85.p) within the pelvic cavity (pelvic
deep circumflex iliac vessels into cranial (10') and caudal (10")
3
branches.
 part) is 12 cm long; its lumen is narrow at the level of the prostate
 and at the ischial arch where it is continuous with the spongy penile
 The lumbar aortic lymph nodes (3) continue the medial iliac nodes 
part.
cranially along the abdominal aorta.
V. The female urethra (see p. 83), only 6 cm long, is short but com-
The renal lymph nodes (2) lie near the renal hilus between the
 pensates with a wide lumen throughout. This, plus its ability to
branches of the renal vessels; they are not easily distinguished from
 dilate, occasionally permits a prolapse of the bladder through the
neighboring lumbar aortic nodes.
urethra when bladder mucosa becomes visible in the vestibule of the
 Lymph passing through the afore-mentioned nodes enters the cis-
vagina.
terna chyli which at the level of the kidneys accompanies the aorta
on its right dorsal aspect. The cisterna is continued cranially by the
thoracic duct which conveys the lymph to one of the veins at the
thoracic inlet.
b) The paired ADRENAL GLANDs (7) are about 8 cm long, have an
irregular surface, and are bilaterally compressed. Their yellowish-
brown color distinguishes them from the more grayish-brown
lymph nodes. The left gland lies against the left kidney cranial to its
hilus. The right one lies between the hilus of the right kidney and
the caudal vena cava.
C)THE URINARY ORGANS
Urinary Bladder, with Pelvic Part of Male Urethra
The right kidney (1), shaped like the heart on a playing card, lies
with its cranial pole in the renal impression of the liver, and makes
 contact dorsally the diaphragm. The base of the cecum is attached
to its ventral surface. The bean-shaped left kidney (8) lies medial to
the spleen to which it is bound by the renosplenic ligament (see p.
69.12). It is ventral to the last rib and the first two lumbar trans-
 a o  y su e  s pe sssd asa
kidney which lies ventral to the last two ribs and the first lumbar
transverse process.
1
 The kidneys are smooth on the surface. The renal lobes (15) have
completely fused so that their original limits are revealed only by
the course of the interlobar arteries and veins (19). When sectioned,
(ventral view)
the kidney discloses a granular reddish-brown cortex (16) which is
easily distinguished from the dark-red external (20') and the paler
internal (20") part of the smooth medulla (20). The papillary ducts
of the central parenchyma open on the small renal crest (20"")
which juts into the equally small renal pelvis (13) located in the cen-
 Ureteric columns
ter of the organ. The papillary ducts near the poles of the kidney
open into the two so-called terminal recesses (14). These are about
 Trigonum vesicae
 Ureteric orifices
10 cm long, have a diameter of about 0.5 cm, and are cranial and
 Ureteric folds 
caudal extensions of the renal pelvis, though they can also be
regarded as overgrown collecting ducts without walls.
The renal sinus (18), the indentation on the medial border of the
- Urethral crest
2
 organ that gives passage to the ureter and the lymph- and blood ves-
Urethralis
 Prostatic ductules
sels, contains the renal pelvis at its depth and forms the hilus (17)
where ureter and blood vessels emerge. Some branches of the renal
Ejaculatory orifice
ued u a aed anq s a zn u op sa
from the ventral surface.
Colliculus seminalis
78
 Abdominal Cavity and Urinary Organs
(ventral view)
1  Right kidney 
7 Adrenal glands
2Renal lymph nodes
8 Left kidney
9 Ureter
4  Medial iliac lymph nodes
 10 Deep circumflex iliac vessels 
10' Cranial branch
5LateraliliacIymphnodes
10"' Caudal branch
6Sacral lymph 1
11 Lateral and round ligaments
of bladder
12 Median ligament of bladder
(See p. 63 and 69)
 Caval foramen
 f Lat. cutaneous femoral nerve
Ext. iliac artery
a
K
p Int. pudendal vessels
b
 Renal vessels
 g Testicular vessels
 Int. iliac artery
q  Deferent duct
 Celiac and cran. mesenteric ganglia 
 h  Caud. mesenteric artery and ganglion 
m Rectum
r  Deep inguinal ring 
d
 lliohypogastric nerve (L1)
i
 Hypogastric nerves 
n Obturator vessels
s Interlobular vessels
e llioinguinal nerve (L2)
j  Genitofemoral nerve
0  Umbilical artery 
Right Kidney
Left Kidney
sectioned through hilus and poles 
cast of renal vessels and renal pelvis
13 Renal pelvis
14 Terminal recesses 
 15 Renal lobes
16 Renal cortex
 17 Renal hilus
18 Renal sinus
19 Interlobar vessels
20 Medulla 
20'  External part
 20" Internal part
20"' Renal crest
79
5. Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Pelvic Cavity
Clinical and Func
onal Ana
my p. 174
1 a)  The ABDoMINAL AoRTA (2) begins its break-up already at the lev.
 penis (36) which gives rise to the artery of the bulb (37) for the bulb
el of the 5th lumbar vertebra. It gives rise to the paired external and
and corpus spongiosum, and to the dorsal artery of the penis (38)
internal iliac arteries, and to the unpaired median sacral artery
which anastomoses with the middle (46) and cranial (19) arteries of
which is occasiomnally absent.
the penis on the dorsal surface of the organ. The deep arery of the
 penis (39) for the corpus cavernosum carries blood from the obtu-
The external iliac artery (10), seldom the internal iliac, in the mare
rator artery. The veins form an extensive plexus dorsal and lateral
releases the uterine artery (11), the principal artery of the uterus,
to the penis whose blood enters the accessory external pudendal
and in the stallion it releases the cremasteric artery (11) which
vein (16) but also the obturator (44) and internal (23) pudendal
accompanies the testicular artery (from the aorta) through the vagi-
veins.
nal ring. Before entering the vascular lacuna to gain the thigh, the
external iliac gives rise to the deep femoral artery (12) which in turn
d) The BLooD SupPLY OF THE UoDER comes fom the external
gives off the pudendoepigastric trunk (13). This immediately gives 
 pudendal artery via the caudal supf. epigastric (cranial mammary
 artery; 20) and from the internal pudendal artery via the dorsal labi-
 inguinal canal. The external pudendal, among other branches, sup-
 al branch that anastomoses with the ventral labial branch (caudal
plies vessels for the udder and the cranial artery of the penis (19)
 mammary artery; 18) of the external pudendal.
which anastomoses on the dorsal surface of the penis with the mid-
dlle artery of the penis (46; from the obturator) and the dorsal artery
 The venous drainage is mainly by the accessory external pudendal
vein (middle mammary vein; 16) into the deep femoral, but also by
of the penis (38; from the internal pudendal).
the caudal supf. epigastric vein (cranial mammary vein; 20) and by
The internal iliac artery (22), as does the abdominal aorta and 
 the ventral labial vein of the external pudendal (caudal mammary
sometimes also the caudal gluteal, sends lumbar arteries (3) to the
vein; 18) which anastomoses with the dorsal labial vein of the inter-
vertebral column and associated structures, and immediately
nal pudendal.
(opposite the 6th lumbar vertebra) divides into the caudal gluteal
e) The BLoOD SupPLy OF THE UTERUs comes principally from the
(47) and internal pudendal arteries (23). Of these the former is des-
tined predominantly for the pelvic wall, while the latter goes to the
uterine artery (11), a branch of the external (rarely internal) iliac.
The uterine artery anastomoses cranially with the uterine branch of
pelvic viscera.
the ovarian artery (5) and caudally with the uterine branch of the
The internal pudendal artery (23), close to its origin, gives off the
vaginal artery (29).
umbilical artery (24) which, in the stallion, releases the small artery
of the deferent duct (25), and in both sexes the cranial vesical artery
f) The SAcRAL PLExUs OF NERvEs is the continuation of the lum-
(26) and ends as the round ligament of the bladder (27) in the free
bar plexus; together they form the lumbosacral plexus (see p. 76).
border of the lateral ligament of the bladder. The internal pudendal
The cranial gluteal nerve (L6-S2; f) accompanies the like-named
then courses along the medial surface of the sacrosciatic ligament in
artery through the greater sciatic foramen to supply the gluteus
the vicinity of the pudendal nerve and with its next branch, the vagi-
medius, accessorius, and profundus, and also the tensor fasciae
nal artery (prostatic in the male) (28), supplies most of the pelvic
latae (see p. 19.8).
viscera: branch to deferent duct or uterine branch (29), caudal vesi-
cal artery (30), ureteric branch (31), urethral branch (32), middle
 The sciatic nerve (L5-S2; g) also emerges from the greater sciatic
rectal artery (33), ventral perineal artery (40), and the caudal rectal
 foramen. Lying on the sacrosciatic ligament, it passes the hip joint
artery (41). The internal pudendal itself is continued by the artery
 dorsally and caudally, and as the largest nerve of the plexus enters
of the penis (36); the clitoris receives its supply from the middle cli-
the pelvic limb.
 toral artery, a branch of the obturator artery.
The caudal gluteal nerve (L6-S2; h) passes also through the greater
The caudal gluteal artery (47) and its branches, especially the cra-
sciatic foramen and accompanies like-named blood vessels into the
 gluteus supf. and into the vertebral heads of biceps and semitendi-
ply the dorsolateral wall of the pelvis and the croup. The obturator
nosus.
artery (44), arising either from the caudal or cranial gluteal, is the
The caudal cutaneous femoral nerve (S1-S2; i) at first follows the
exception: it passes caudoventrally on the medial aspect of the shaft
 dorsal border of the sciatic nerve but as the latter turns ventrally
of the ilium and leaves the pelvic cavity together with its satellite
 into the limb, it passes over the ischial tuber to end subcutaneously
vein and nerve by the obturator foramen. Below the floor of the
on the caudal surface of the thigh.
pelvis it detaches the middle artery of the penis (clitoris) (46).
 The pudendal nerve (S2-S4; j) at first lies on the medial surface of
b) The Vens of the pelvic cavity by and large are satellite to the
d aoddo  uo s  u umo ae sup sae
the sacrosciatic ligament, and then within the ligament, in which
 position it reaches the lesser sciatic foramen. Here it communicates
The external pudendal vein (15) that accompanies its satellite artery
with the caudal cutaneous femoral nerve. Before accompanying the
through the inguinal canal is very thin. Its blood-return function is
internal pudendal vessels to the penis (clitoris), it gives rise to the
assumed by the accessory external pudendal vein (16) which col-
 deep perineal nerve (l) for the striated muscles of the perineum and
lects most of the veins from penis or udder and delivers the blood
 the supf. perineal nerve (m) which is sensory to the vulva and per-
to the ipsilateral deep femoral vein (branch of external iliac) at the
 ineal body.
cranial end of the pelvic symphysis. Right and left accessory exter-
The caudal rectal nerve (S4, S5; k) passes caudoventrally and sup-
nal pudendal veins anastomose here (in the symphysial fossa, see p.
plies sensation to rectum, anal canal, and perineum; it also con-
73.3) across the median plane; it is the transected anastomosis that
tributes to the motor innervation of the perineal musculature.
attracts attention after the hind quarters of the cadaver are split (see
p. 83). The large obturator vein (44) assists the accessory external
g) For the AuToNomic NeRvous SysTEM at the entrance to the pelvic
pudendal vein in draining penis and udder.
cavity we need merely mention that the caudal mesenteric ganglion
The blood supply of penis and udder follows in greater detail
(o) lies cranioproximal to the origin of the caudal mesenteric artery
(7), and that the hypogastric nerve (p), which begins here, at first
c) The BLooD SuppLy Or THE PeNIs derives from three sets of ves-
follows the roof of the cavity and then descends to the pelvic plexus
sels: internal pudendal artery and vein, obturator artery and vein,
(q) on the viscera. The parasympathetic pelvic nerves (r) arise from
and external pudendal artery and the accessory external pudendal
 the roots of the pudendal and caudal rectal nerves, pass ventrally,
vein. The internal pudendal artery (23) becomes the artery of the
and join the pelvic plexus.
08
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves of the Pelvic Cavity
1 Caudal vena cava
2 Abdominal aorta
3 Lumbar vessels 
4 Ovarian or testicular vessels
5 Uterine branch 
6 Pampiniform plexus 
7 Caudal mesenteric artery
8 Common iliac vein
 9 Deep circumflex iliac vessels 
10 External iliac vessels
11 Uterine or cremasteric vessels
12 Deep femoral vessels 
13 Pudendoepigastric arerial trunk 
 and pudendoepigastric vein 
14 Caudal epigastric vessels
Lvm 1
 15 External pudendal vessels
16 Accessory ext. pudendal vein
[middle mammary vein] 
17 Venous plexus of penis
 18 Ventral labial (scrotal) arterial branch and 
v [caudal mammary vessels] 
19 Cranial vessels of penis
 20 Caudal supf. epigastric vessels [cranial
mammary vessels]
 21 Medial circumflex femoral vessels 
 22 Internal iliac vessels 
 23 Internal pudendal vessels
 24 Umbilical artery
 25 Vessels of deferent duct 
 26 Cranial vesical artery
 27 Round ligament of bladder
 28 Vaginal or prostatic artery
 29 Uterine branch or branch to deferent duct 
 30 Caudal vesical vessels
31 Ureteric branches
 32 Urethral branches
 33 Middle rectal vessels
 34 Vestibular branch
35 Vessels of the vestibular bulb
 36 Vessels of the penis
 37 Vessels of the bulb of the penis 
 38 Dorsal vessels of the penis (clitoris)
39 Deep vessels of the penis (clitoris)
 40 Ventral perineal vessels
41 Caudal rectal vessels
42 Dorsal labial branches
 43 lliolumbar vessels 
44 Obturator vessels
 45 Iliacofemoral vessels
46 Middle vessels of the penis (clitoris)
 47 Caudal gluteal vessels
 48 Sacral branches
 49 Cranial gluteal vessels
 50 Median caudal vessels
 51 Ventrolateral caudal vessels
 52 Dorsolateral caudal vessels
Lvm 1
a
 llioinguinal nerve (L2)
b
Genitofemoralnerve
C
 Lateral cutaneous femoral nerve
P
Femoral nerve
é
 Obturator nerve
 Cranial gluteal nerve
Sciatic nerve
-21
q
h
Caudal gluteal nerve
 Caudal cutaneous femoral nerve
 Pudendal nerve 
k
 Caudal rectal nerves
 Deep perineal nerve 
 m Supf. perineal nerve 
n  Dorsal nerve of penis (clitoris) 
 Caudal mesenteric ganglion
P
Hypogastric nerve
b
 Pelvic plexus
r
 Pelvic nerves
81
6. Female Reproductive Organs
 Clinical and Func
tional Anat
my p. 174-176: 180-183
 ( g Aq 8 1e) a A Aa Si (ot) 1 a (e
 and urethra. The mesometrium that suspends these pars extends
1
about 10 cm caudal to the kidneys and, when projected onto the
from the tip of the uterine horn to the cervix and attaches to the
skin, the same distance cranioventral to the coxal tuber, i.e., at the
mesometrial border where its two lamellae enclose the triangular (in
level of the Sth lumbar vertebra. The ovary is suspended by the 15
transverse section) parametrium consisting of many blood vessels
cm long mesovarium (2) whose cranial border (suspensory ligament
embedded in connective tissue.
 The lateral surface of the
of the ovary; 1) extends on the sublumbar area towards the
mesometrium splits off the round ligament of the uterus (7) that can
 diaphagm. The mesovarium splits off the mesosalpinx (3) from its
be traced from the tip of the uterine horn to the vicinity of the
lateral surface and is continued caudally by the mesometrium (4).
inguinal canal.
The three sheets taken together constitute the broad ligament.
 The cervix (27) intervenes without external landmarks between the
The oval ovary of the filly gradually takes on the shape of a bean.
body of the uterus and the vagina. It is posible, however, on rectal
This is brought about by regression of the cell masses in the stroma
palpation to determine its extent by its firm consistency. Radially
(cessation of the hormonal influence), more rapid growth at the
 arranged longitudinal folds close the cervical canal (27) except dur-
poles, and progressive indentation at the free border to form the
ing estrus. The lumen of the uterus gradually narrows to the diam-
ovulation fossa. The germinal epithelium is concentrated in the area
eter of the cervical canal where the internal uterine ostium (13) is
of the fossa which thus is the only region on the surface of the organ
located. The external uterine ostium (26) lies in the center of the
where ovulation can occur. The remainder of the ovary is covered
intravaginal part (portio vaginalis) of the cervix that occupies the
by peritoneum (flat mesothelial cells) which has a slightly different
cranial end of the vagina. The longitudinal folds of the cervical
color than the germinal epithelium. The parenchymatous zone con-
 canal extend through the external uterine ostium and give the por-
taining the folicles lies deep to the germinal epithelium and thus
 tio vaginalis its lobed appearance.
surrounds the depth of the ovulation fossa. (In the filly, before the
d) The VAGINA (19) is as long as the uterine body (about 25 cm). It
5
lies in the center of the pelvic cavity ventral to the rectum and dor-
free border of the ovary.) The vascular zone of the adult ovary is rel-
egated to the poles and attached border The concept of the 
sal to bladder and urethra. Only its cranial portion is covered by
parenchymatous zone forming a cortex and the vascular zone form-
pouch (8) and ventrally the roof of the less extensive vesicogenital
ing a medulla, as is the case in other domestic mammals, does not
-t passaduo aenuasop s uaun leuea u (nod
 apply in the mare.
tudinal folds are present and provide a reserve for dilation. The
The surface of the ovary is relativelty flat, and corpora lutea, even
lumen surrounds the intra vaginal part of the cervix, forming a com-
 at their largest, do not become conspicuous. Likewise, mature folli-
plete ring-like space known as vaginal fornix (18). Caudally, the
cles, which can attain a diameter of 6 cm, bulge only slightly fom
vagina is continued by the vestibule (22) at a relatively distinct 
the surface; they are not as easily recognized on rectal exploration
transverse fold (hymen; 20) on the floor and sides of the junction
6
as in the cow where the ovaries are considerably smaller.
that is located immediately cranial to the external urethral orifice
(21) and is supported ventrally by the constrictor vestibuli.
b) The UTeRine TuBE (14) meanders—parallel to the body axis—-
from the ovulation fossa to the horn of the uterus. It is suspended
e)  The Vulva comprises the two labia (24) which surround the vul-
7
in the mesosalpinx (3) that arises from the lateral surface of the
 var cleft forming a pointed dorsal commissure and a rounded ven-
mesovarium and ends with a free border a few mm ventral to the
 tral commissure which encloses and hides the large glans of the cli-
uterine tube. The mesosalpinx forms the lateral, and the proper lig-
toris.
ament of the ovary (6) the medial wall of the shallow ovarian bur-
The mare's dlitoris (see Fig. in this column) is well developed. It con-
sa (5) which has a wide entrance, open ventrally, for easy access to
8
the ovary.
sists of crura, body, and glans of which the last named lies in the cli-
toral fossa (23) in the ventral end of the vulva. The prepuce of the
clitoral glans is formed by a transverse fold of vestibular mucosa
and the ventral ends of the labia. Sinuses in the periphery of the
Ovary
 glans can harbor infectious agents such as the organism responsible
 Tertiary (vesicular) follicles
for contagious equine metritis (CEM). The deeper ones on the dor-
Parenchymatous zone (cortex)
sal aspect are often removed (sinusectomy) to elimite carriers of the
 Periodic corpus luteum 
disease in mares imported into the U.S.A. The others are shallow
 and can be cleansed by washing.
Tubal end 
Uterine end
of ovary -
ofovary
Clitoris, caudal view of glans
Corpus albicans
 Atretic corpus luteum
Glans
Vascular zone
 Clitoral sinuses
Ovulation fossa
Transverse fold forming 
Fimbriae of infundibulum
 dorsal part of prepuce
2
The infundibulum (16), the funnel shaped ovarian end of the uter-
ine tube, parly covers the ovary with its fimbriae (16) and is firm-
ly attached to it in the vicinity of the ovulation fossa. The abdomi-
nal orifice of the tube, situated in the center of the infundibulum,
faces the ovary and leads into the shorter wide part (ampulla) of the
tube. Depending on the phase of the cycle, the ampulla may attain
a diameter of 6 mm. The longer remainder (isthmus) of the tube is
 only half as wide and ends with its uterine orifice (15) on the tip of
the uterine horn where it raises a small papilla that contains a
 sphincter.
3
 c) UTenus. Horns (11) and body (12) are of about equal length (25
4
 cm each). Both are in the abdominal cavity; only the cervix, which
23
24
 is about 6 cm long, lies in the pelvic cavity where it rests on bladder
Ventral commissure (of labia)
82
Female Reproductive Organs
(left lateral view)
 1  Suspensory ligament of ovary 
 Broad ligament:
2
Mesovarium -
 Mesosalpinx
4
Mesometrium -
 5 Ovarian bursa
6  Proper ligament of ovary
二
 7 Round ligament of uterus 
 8 Rectogenital pouch |
 9  Vesicogenital pouch 
(See also pp. 19, 72, 77, 85)
a
 Gluteus medius
g Pararectal fossa
I Sacrocaudalis dorsalis lateralis
  Urethralis 
 b Longissimus lumborum
h Bladder
 m Sacrocaudalis ventralis lateralis
s Constrictor vestibuli
C
 Left kidney
i  Lat. lig. of bladder
n Coccygeus
t  Constrictor vulvae
d  Descending colon 
  Median ligament of bladder 
0 Levator ani
v  Crus of clitoris 
Ureter
j  Pubovesical pouch 
p Ext. anal sphincter
 lliacus
k  Sacrocaudalis dorsalis medialis 
q Rectum
(Dorsal view)
10 Ovary
18 Fornix
19 Vagina
 20 Hymen 
 21 External urethral orifice
22Vestibule
Uterus:
11
Horn of uterus-
12
Body of uterus 
13
Internal uterine orifice -
23Clitoral fossa
|| 25 Portio vaginalis of cervix 
24 Labia
14 Uterine tube 
| 26 External uterine orifice
 15  Uterine onifice of 
 27 Cervix and cervical canal 
uterine tube -
16
Infundibulum with fimbriae
17  Abdominal orifice of uterine tube -
83
 7. Male Reproductive Organs
 Clinical and Func
tional Ana
ny p. 176-177
 a) The TesTes (19; t) lie in the pubic region between the cranial
sleeve forms the preputial orifice (4). The internal lamina gives rise
parts of the thighs. Their long axes almost match that of the trunk,
to an additional, circular preputial fold which is similarly con-
structed (1; 2) and which, with its cranial border, forms the
drawn up by the cremaster muscles. The testes are anchored to the
 preputial ring (3). The preputial fold disappears as it is applied to
 parietal layer of the vaginal process by the mesorchium (v') and by
 the erected penis, only the preputial ring remains identifiable by its
the ligament of the tail of the epididymis (w). The latter forms the
smooth surface forming a ring-like elevation (3) that is a useful
caudal end of the mesorchium and is attached to the dartos that
 landmark for the surgeon.
lines the scrotum by a condensation of connective tissue forming the
 The equine penis is of the musculocavernous type. When quiescent
scrotal ligament. The proper ligment of the testis (x) connects the
7
caudal pole of the testis to the tail of the epididymis.
it is about 50 cm long and reaches only to the level of the umbili-
8
 cus. During maximal erection it becomes three times as long. The
The testis has the shape of a bilaterally compressed, shorened egg.
 corpus cavernosum is nearly uniform as a median septum penis is
The arterial pattern visible on the surface is characteristic for the
formed only caudally where the corpus cavernosum gives rise to the
species. A major branch of the testicular artery (20) appears close to
2
two crura by which the organ is atached to the ischial arch of the
the tail of the epididymis and meanders along the free border of the
 pelvis. The groove on the ventral surface contains urethra and sur-
6
testis toward the cranial pole where it breaks up. Tortuous branch-
rounding corpus spongiosum held in place by the bulbospongiosus
es givenoff during its course supply both sides of the organ. The tes-
d e sd a so  yo a   ()
ticular parenchyma, on section, appears yellowish gray; the medi-
 dorsal process and two lesser ventrolateral pocesses all of which are
astinum testis and the rete testis it contains are indistinct and con-
capped by the glans.
centrated at the cranial pole close to the head of the epididymis.
iqon ssa sin nsouods sndo n aq pao si ( s a
10
b)  The head (14) of the EpDiDyMis does not extend beyond the cra-
tunica albuginea renders it softer in the erected state than the cor-
3
nial pole of the testis, but the tail (16) is larger and projects well
 s ae a d i  si s a s
4
beyond the caudal extremity of the testis so that it can be palpated
coitus. The cranial surface of the glans is recessed ventrally to form
without difficulty. Between the head and the tail is the body of the
 the fossa glandis (E) from which the free end of the urethra (urethral
epididymis (15) which forms the testicular bursa (17) with the dor-
process) with its external urethral orifice protrudes slightly. The
 sal part of the lateral surface of the testis.
 greatest circumference of the glans is the corona glandis (F) which
 c)  There is a full complement of AcCEssoRY REPRODUcTIvE GLANDS
 often carries short papillae. The abrupt narrowing of the glans
5
consisting of seminal vesicle, ampulla of the deferent duct, prostate,
proximal to the corona is known as the neck of the glans (collum
s an ui adp a are asu  p 
p e Aq nxd p si s a s (s
and retain their juvenile status following castration in the gelding.
 process, about 10 cm long, that lies on the corpus cavernosum with-
The seminal vesicle (11) and the ampulla of the deferent duct (10,
 out external demarkation and is visible only upon sectioning.
whose wall is thickened by glands) lie on the dorsal surface of the
bladder with the ureter between them. The seminal vesicle is homol-
The muscles of the horse's penis are well developed. The ischiocav-
ernosus (8) typically lies in a depression of the semimembranosus.
ogous to the vesicular gland of ruminant and pig but because of its
central collecting space carries a different name. Its duct joins the
 It arises from the ischial arch close to the ischial tuber and caudal
border of the sacrosciatic ligament and surrounds the crus of the
deferent duct forming a short ejaculatory duct that opens on the
penis of the same side. During erection the ischiocavernosi contract
colliculus seminalis where it is flanked by several openings of the
ducts of the prostate (see p. 78). The knobby right (12) and left (13)
rhythmically to pump arterial blood that has entered the corpus
cavernosum forward, and at the end of sexual excitement allow the
lobes of the prostate are connected by an isthmus dorsal to the ure-
blood to leave the penis again. The bulbospongiosus (7) begins near
the bulbourethral glands, covers the bulb of the penis (7) and reach-
(18) lie at the level of the pelvic oulet. Their medial surfaces espe-
cially are covered by the bulboglandularis (18, part of m.
 es apically to the free part of the penis. Its transverse fibers connect
the edges of the urethral groove to contain urethra and corpus spon-
ischiourethralis). The ducts open in two rows on the dorsal surface
of the urethra as the latter proceeds to pass ventrally around the
 giosum. The smooth retractor penis (9) takes origin from the cau-
dal vertebrae and with right and left parts descends on each side of
ischial arch.
 the rectum. The two parts unite and decussate below the rectum
 d) PENIs and PREpUcE (sheath) present several features characteris-
where two narrow bands of muscle arise to lie on the caudal, and
tic of the horse (see also the Fig. on this page). The prepuce proper,
later ventral, surface of the bulbospongiosus. As the two retractor
comparable to that of the other domestic mammals is a sleeve with
bands approach the free part of the penis, they work their way
internal and external surfaces (laminae; 5; 6) of which the latter is
through the transverse fibers of the bulbospongiosus so that the lat-
the skin. Where the two surfaces become confluent cranially, the
 ter muscle then lies ventral to the retractor.
Penis
(Transverse section)
Leftlateralview
Transversesection)
A Tunica albuginea
D Glans
G Collum glandis
 Red line: Outline of corpus cavernosum penis
B Septum of penis
E Fossa glandis
H Urethral process and external 
 Blue line: Outline of corpus spongiosum glandis
C Trabeculae
F Corona glandis
urethral orifice
and dorsal process of glans 
84
 Drawn after Nickel/Schummer/Seiferle, Vol. II, 1987.
Male Reproductive Organs
(eft lateral view)
18
7 Bulbospongiosus and
bulb of penis
- 8 Ischiocavernosus and
crus of penis
9  Retractor penis
Prepuce:
 Preputial fold
 External layer
2
 Internal layer
3 Preputial ring -
4  Preputial orifice 
5  Internal lamina 
6 External lamina
(See p. 19, 72, 75, 83)
 a  Right transversus abdominis
g Ureter 
m Root of penis
S Supf. inguinal lymph nodes
b Right internal abd. oblique 
h Ext. pudendal vessels 
n  Body of penis
   Medial surface of right testis 
C
 Right rectus abdominis
i
 Accssory ext. pudendal vein 
 0 Corpus cavernosum
u Spermatic cord (mesorchium)
d  Proximal mesorchium (Vascular fold)
j1
Middle artery of penis
 p Urethra and corpus spongiosum 
V  Mesofuniculus, mesorchium at v'
é
Vaginal ring
k
 Suspensory lig. of penis 
q  Free part of penis 
w Lig. of tail of epididymis
 Deferent duct
I Urethralis
r Depth of preputial cavity
X Proper lig. of testis
Left Testis and Epididymis
Accessory Reproductive Glands
(lateral view)
(dorsal view)
 10 Ampulla of deferent duct
11 Seminal vesicle 
 Prostate:
12   Right lobe
13 Left lobe 
 Epididymis:
14Head
15Body
16  Tail
17 Testicular bursa
18 Bulbourethral gland and bulboglandularis
19 Left testis
 20 Testicular artery
85
8. Perineum, Pelvic Diaphragm, and Tail
a) PERINEUM and PeRINEAL REGIoN are terms that refer to the area
 The perineal body is a musculofibrous node of tissue between anus
surrounding anus and vulva in the female, and anus and the root of
 and vestibule and consequently is a median structure. It comprises
the penis in the male. Specifically, the perineal region is on the sur-
 the muscular connection between external anal sphincter and con-
face of the body, and therefore has no depth.
strictor vestibuli, the internal anal sphincter, the subanal decussa-
tion of the retractor clitoridis, and a fibrous plate (perineal septum)
The perineum lies deep to the perineal region; it is the body wall
that passes craniodorsally from the vestibule to the rectum.
that closes the pelvic cavity caudally. Since this particular part of the
body wall by necessity includes the anal canal and urogenital tract,
 The birth process in the mare is occasionally accompanied by per-
it is considerably more complicated than ordinary body wall, like
 ineal lacerations; in severe cases a foot of the foal can push through
that of the flank, for example. The boundaries of the perineum are
the dorsal wall of the vestibule and the ventral wall of the rectum,
the floor of the bony pelvis ventrally, the sacrosciatic figaments lat-
 tearing apart the tissues of the perineal body.
erally, and the sacrum and first few caudal vertebrae dorsally. In
 In the male the urethra can be palpated as it turns around the ischial
caudal view, therefore, the perineum is triangular.
arch. It is accessible to the surgeon at this point when urinary cal-
The perineal region is only skin deep. It comprises the narrow medi-
 culi have to be removed.
an strip between the rounded semimembranosi, the anus and vulva,
The pudendal and caudal rectal nerves (see p. 81.j; k) supply the
and extends from the root of the tail to the ventral commissure of
 perineum with motor and sensory innervation. They arise from
the vulva, which in older mares falls below the level of the pelvic
spinal nerves S2-S4 where their roots communicate. The nerves fur-
nish supf. perineal nerves to the skin of the perineal region as far as
a line connecting the ischial tubers which can only be discerned by
 the base of udder and scrotum.
deep palpation.) In the male the perineal region extends to the base
of the scrotum. The prominence of the two semimembranosi and
 The pudendal nerve at first lies on the deep surface of the sacrosci-
their proximity to the midline precludes formation of an ischiorec-
atic ligament but soon buries into it. At the lesser sciatic foramen it
tal fossa. For the same reason the caudal border of the sacrosciatic
 communicates with the caudal cutaneous femoral nerve and releas-
ligament cannot be palpated as is the case in dog and cattle.
es the deep perineal nerve (see p. 81.i; 1). The latter reinforces the
supf. perineal nerves and then passes deeply to the muscles of the
b)  The PEvic DiAPHRAGM is the muscular basis of the perineum. It
 is formed by the levator ani and coccygeus (see pp. 19.i; e, and 83.0;
 perineum. The continuation of the pudendal nerve crosses the inter-
 nal pudendal artery and, near the median plane, turns around the
n) of which the latter slightly overlaps the lateral surface of the for-
mer. The levator ani arises from the ischial spine and adjacent medi-
 ischial arch to innervate penis and clitoris.
al surface of the sacrosciatic ligament. Most of its fibers end on the
 The caudal rectal nerve runs parallel to the pudendal nerve and at
anus where they mingle with those of the external anal sphincter.
first supplies the coccygeus and levator ani. Further branches go to
The coccygeus has a similar origin but passes more dorsally to insert
 the anal sphincter and via the supf. perineal nerve to the skin.
on the first few caudal vertebrae. The two muscles are sandwiched
between layers of fascia that are an integral part of the pelvic
c)  The TaL of the horse contains about 20 vertebrae of which the
diaphragm. The space between the two coccygeus muscles dorsal to
last few are thin rods without discernable processes. The vertebrae
are surrounded by several muscles most of which arise from the
the anus is closed by the external anal sphincter (see p. 83.p) and the
sacrum (Mm. sacrocaudales); the muscles are enclosed by fascia on
smooth internal anal sphincter and rectococcygeus muscles. The lat-
the outside of which is the skin. There are four sacrocaudales mus-
cles: dorsalis medialis (see p. 83.k), dorsalis lateralis (see p. 83.1),
rectum that passes caudally beyond the level of the anus to the
ventralis lateralis (see p. 83.m), and ventralis medialis (see also the
undersurface of the tail vertebrae (see Fig. on this page).
Fig. on this page). The much smaller intertransverse muscles con-
The hiatus between the pelvic diaphragm and the caudal margin of 
the pelvic floor is closed by the urogenital diaphragm that is pene-
 as already mentioned, continues the longitudinal muscle layer of the
trated by the urogenital canal accompanied in the male by the bul-
 rectal wall to the first few caudal vertebrae. The retractor penis (cli-
uodsaos au Aq a an u pue (i'es d aas) snsouodsog
 toridis) passes ventrally from the second caudal vertebra. Blood ves-
constrictor vestibuli and constrictor vulvae muscles (see p. 83.s; t).
sels and nerves closely accompany the caudal vertebrae. The largest
Another muscle in the area is the paired retractor penis (clitoridis)
 are the median caudal vessels (from the caudal gluteal) which lie
(see p. 85.9) which arises from the second caudal vertebra and
ventral to the vertebrae associated, at the root of the tail, with the
descends, deep to the levator ani, on each side of the rectum. It
rectococcygeus (see Fig. on this page). Taking the pulse from the
decussates ventral to the rectum and from here descends to the ven-
 artery is not as convenient as in cattle in which the sacrocaudal
tral surface of the penis, but does not reach the clitoris in the mare.
muscles are not as well developed.
Transverse Section of the Root of the Tail
Skin
 Sacrocaudalis dorsalis medialis
Fascia
 Sacrocaudalis dorsalis lateralis
- Filamentous caudal end of dura mater
 Dorsal caudal (nerve) plexus
Intertransversarii -
- Dorsolateral caudal vessels
 Cutaneous branch of internal pudendal vein 
Ventral caudal (nerve) plexus 
 Ventrolateral caudal vessels
 Sacrocaudalis ventralis lateralis -
Median caudal vessels
 Sacrocaudalis ventralis medialis 
ccyge
98
Regio perinealis
(caudal view)
1  Caudal rectal n..
7Rectococcygeus m.
 Caudal gluteal a./v.
Broad sacrotuberous ligame
2
Coccygeus m.
- 8  External anal sphincter
3 Levator ani m.
- 9 Deep perineal nerve
Internal pudendal a./v.
 4  Obturator internus
Ventral perineal a./v.
 5  Retractor clitoridis m.
6Constrictor vulvae m.
 Ischiadic tuber
d  Biceps femoris m.
h Gemellus mm.
I  Adductor magnus m.
a
b
 Greater trochanter
eSemitendinosus m.
Internal obturator m.
m Anorectal In.
 Third trochanter
f Semimembranosus m.
C
j External obturator m.
g Gracilis m.
k Quadratus femoris m.
(ateral view)
10 Pudendal n.
Caudal rectal a./v.
Cranial gluteal a./v.
 11 Caudal cutaneous femoral n.
Ischiadic (sciatic) n.
12 Bulbospongiosus m.
a/v. of the bulb of the penis 
13 Retractor penis m.
Ischiocavernosus m.
 Dorsal a./v. of the penis 
87
Chapter 10: Selected Body Systems in Tabular Form
1. Muscles
Muscle
Origin
 Insertion
Innervation
 Function
Comments
Medial shoulder and arm muscles (p. 7)
Teres major
Caudal border of
Teres tuberosity of
Axillary n.
 Flexes shoulder joint
Wide, flat muscle
(7.1)
 scapula and sub-
humerus
scapularis
Subscapularis
 Subscapular fossa of
 Lesser tuberosity of
 Subscapular and 
 Predomina ntly an ex-
Multipennate; functions 
(7.3)
scapula
humerus
 axillary n.
tensor of shoulder joint  as (contractile) medial
collateral ligament of
shoulder joint 
Coracobrachialis
 Coracoid process of
 Proximomedial surface
Musculocutaneous n.
Extensor of shoulder
Has a synovial bursa or a
(7.19)
scapula
of humerus
joint; adductor of limb
 tendon sheath associated
with tendon of origin
Articularis humeri
 Proximal to medial rim
 Neck of humerus
Axillary n.
 Tenses shoulder joint
Lies on medial surface of
of glenoid cavity
capsule
shoulder joint capsule 
 Biceps brachii
 Supraglenoid tubercle
 Radial tuberosity; me-
Extensor ot shoulder
 Intertubercular bursa un-
I
(7.25)
dial collateral lig.; via
joint; flexor of elbow
der tendon of origin; has
lacertus fibr. on tendon
joint; via lacertus fibr.
int. tendon; consists of
of extensor carpi rad.
stabilizer of carpus (in
 two parts assumed to be
 stay-apparatus)
principally postural and
locomotor
 Brachialis
 Proximoca udal surface
 Proximomedial surface
Musculocutaneous n.;
Flexor of elbow joint
 Long fibers for consider-
(7.20)
of humerus
of radius
lateral parts of muscle
 able shortening during
by radial n. in half the
contraction; in half the
horses
 horses additional inner-
vation by radial n.
Tensor fasciae
Caudal border of
 Deep fascia of forearm;  Radial n.
Tenses forearm fascia;
 antebrachii
scapula; insertion ten-
olecranon
extends elbow joint 
(7.21)
don of latissimus dorsi
Lateral shoulder and arm muscles (p. 7)
Deltoideus
Axillary n.
· Clavicular part
 Clavicular inscription
Crest of humerus
Advances limb
(M. cleidobrachialis)
(7.22)
+ Scapular part
Aponeurotica lly from
 Deltoid tuberosity of
 Flexes shoulder joint
(7.6)
scapular spine; fleshy
humerus
from caudal border of
scapula
Teres minor
 Distal half of caudal
Proximal to deltoid
Axillary n.
 Flexes shoulder joint
Covered by deltoideus 
(7.13)
border of scapula
tuberosity of humerus
 Supraspinatus
Supraspinous fossa,
Greater and lesser
Supra sca pular n.
Extends and stabilizes
 Biceps tendon of origin
(7.5)
scapular cartilage and
tubercles of humerus
shoulder joint
 passes between the two
spine
 insertion tendons of
supras pinatus
Infraspinatus
Infraspinous fossa,
 Fleshy on greater tuber-
Suprascapular n.
Extends (and flexes)
Multipennate; its strong
(7.10)
 scapular cartilage and
cle of humerus; strong
shoulder joint; func-
tendon underlain by (in-
spine
 tendon to lat. surface of
tions as (contractile)
 fraspinatus) bursa
 geater tubercle distal to
lat. collateral ligament
lat. insertion of
supraspinatus
Triceps brachii
 Olecranon tuber
Radial n.
Extends elbow joint, its Medial head is relatively
(underlain by small
long head also flexes
the weakest
bursa)
shoulder joint
· Long head
Caudal border of
(7.15)
scapula
● Lateral head
Deltoid tuberosity and
(7.16)
vicinity
●Medial head
Medial surface of
(7.17)
humerus, middle third
 Border of olecra non
Anconeus
Lat. surface of
 Radial n.
Extends elbow joint; 
Not easily separated
(7.24)
fossa
olecranon
raises joint capsule to
from lat. head of triceps
 prevent its being
pinched during exten-
sion of joint
88
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Caudomedial forearm muscles (p. 7)
Supf. digital flexor
 Medial epicondyle of
 Distal collat. tubercles
 Ulnar n.
Flexes digit and carpus; Receives access. lig. from
(7.32)
humerus
of prox. phalanx; prox.
extends elbow joint 
radius; forms sleeve
collat. tubercles of
 around deep flexor ten-
middle phalanx
don at fetlock joint
 Deep digital flexor
 Flexor surface of distal
 Flexes digit and carpus;
Receives access lig. from
(7.35)
phalanx
extends elbow joint
carpus; passes through
● Humeral head
Medial epicondyle of
Median and ulnar nn.
supf. flexor sleeve; bursa
humerus
betw. tendon and navicu-
● Ulnar head
Medial on olecranon 
Ulnar n.
lar bone
● Radial head
Middle of caudal
Median n.
surface of radius
 Flexor carpi ulnaris
Access. carpal bone
Ulnar n.
 Flexes carpus
Its humeral head under-
(7.41)
lain by a bursa
●Humeral head
Medial epicondyle of
humerus
● Ulnar head
 Medial on olecranon
 Flexor carpi radialis
Medial epicondyle of
Prox. end of Mc2
Median n.
Flexes carpus
At its origin underlain by
(7.28)
humerus
a bursa that communi-
cates with that of flexor
carpi ulnaris
 Metacarpus
Interosseus (medius)
Proximoca udal on
Prox. sesamoid bones
 Deep bra nch of ulnar n. Counteracts overexten-
 Contains little muscular
Mc3, and palmar
sion of fetlock joint
tissue; sends extensor
carpal lig
branches around prox.
 phalanx to common digi-
tal extensor
Craniolateral forearm muscles:
Common digital
 Radial head (Phillip's
 Proximodorsal on prox. Radial n.
Carpal and digital
In the digit the tendon
extensor
muscle) (7.34)
 phalanx (together with
extensor
receives the extensor
(7.33)
tendon of lat. dig. ex-
branches of the in-
tensor)
terosseus
Humeral head (7.33)
Lat. epicondyle of
 Extensor process of dis-
humerus
tal phalanx (and of 
Ulnar head (Thierness*
 middle phalanx)
muscle)
 Lateral digital extensor
 Prox. end of radius and
Proximodorsal on
Radial n.
Extensor of fetlock
Insertion tendon com-
(7.36)
ulna
 prox. phalanx
joint (not of digit)
bines with Phillip's
muscle and is underlain
by a bursa
 Extensor carpi radialis
Lat. supracondylar
 Proximodorsal on Mc3 Radial n.
Extends carpus
 Tendon receives the lac-
(7.31)
crest and radial fossa
ertus fibr. and passes un-
der the insertion tendon
of the extensor obliquus
Ulnaris lateralis
Lat. epicondyle of
Its short tendon on ac-
 Radial n.
 Flexes (!) carpus
Only the long tendon has
(M.extensor carpi
humerus
cess. carpal bone; its
a tendon sheath
ulnaris)
long tendon prox. on
(7.38)
Mc4
 Extensor carpi obliquus Craniolateral, middle 
Prox. on Mc2
 Radial n.
Extends carpus
Covered by the digital
(M.a bductor pollicis
of radius
extensors; its tendon has
longus)
a tendon sheath and is
(7.42)
underlain by a bursa
Muscles of the hip joint (p. 19)
Tensor fasciae latae
Coxal tuber
Together with the fascia Cran. gluteal n.
Flexes hip joint; pro-
 Forms cran. border of
{19.20;
lata on patella, lat.
tracts hindimb; extends thigh; its ca udal portion
73.i)
patellar lig., and cran.
stifle; tenses fascia lata
 blends with supf. gluteal
border of tibia; with
muscle
supf. gluteal muscle on
third trocha nter
89
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Muscles of the group
 Supf. gluteal muscle
Coxal tuber
Third trochanter and
 Cranial and caudal
 Flexes hip joint; pro-
 Blends with tensor fasci-
(19.11)
(gluteal fascia)
fascia lata
 gluteal nn.
tracts and abducts 
ae latae
hindlimb
Middle gluteal muscle
 Longissimus lumbo-
Greater trochanter
Cranial glutal n.
 Extends hip joint; 
(19.3)
rum; gluteal surface of
abducts hindlimb
ilium; sacrum; sacroili-
ac and sacrosciatic ligg.
Accessory gluteal
Gluteal surface of ilum Just distal to greater
Cranial gluteal n.
 Considered deep portion
muscle
trochanter
 of middle gluteal muscle;
(19.9)
tendon underlain by
trochanteric bursa
 Deep gluteal muscle
 Ischial spine
Greater trochanter
Cranial gluteal n.
 Abducts hindlimb
Deep to caudal portion
(19.6)
 of middle gluteal muscle
 Caudal thigh muscles: Double innervation by caudal gluteal and tibial nerves (p. 19)
 Biceps femoris
Vertebral head: Spinous  Patella; lat. and middle  Caudal gluteal and sci-
 Extends hip and stifle
(19.22)
and transv. processes of
patellar ligg.; cran.
 ataic nn.
joints; with its caudal
last three sacral verte-
border of tibia; crural
division flexes stifle;
brae; Sacrosciatic lig.
fascia; and via its tarsal
abducts hindimb; ex-
and tail fascia; Pelvic
 tendon on calcaneus
tends hock joint
head: ischial tuber
Semitendinosus
Vertebral head: last
 Cranial border of tibia; Caudal gluteal and 
Limb supporting
Bursa between ischial
(19.1)
sacral and first two
crural fascia; via tarsal
sciatic nn.
weight: extends hip.
tuber and vertebral head
caudal vertebrae; tail
tendon on calca neus
stifle, and hock joints;
 of muscle
fascia and sacrosciatic
 Limb not supporting
ligament; Pelvic head:
weight: flexes stifle,
ventral aspect of ischial
retracts and adducts
tuber
limb
Semimembranosus
Vertebral head: first
Medial condyles of
Caudal gluteal and
Limb supporting
 Blends with adductor
(19.23)
caudal vertebra; sacro-
femur and tibia
sciatic nn.
weight: extends hip and
 sciatic ligament; Pelvic
stifle joints; Limb not
head: ventromedial
supporting weight: re-
 aspect of ischial tuber
tracts, adducts, and ro-
tates limb inward
Deep muscles of the hip joint (pp. 19 and 87)
Gemelli (87.h)
 Dorsal border of
 Trochanteric fossa of
Muscular brr. of
Rotate thigh outward
ischium
femur
sciatic n.
 Internal obturator
Internal surface of
 Trochanteric tossa of
 Muscular brr. of
 Rotates thigh outward
As tendon crosses lesser
(19.7;
ischium and pubis from  femur
sciatic n.
sciatic notch it is sur-
87.i)
border of obturator
rounded by a tendon
foramen to pelvic sym-
sheath
ph ysis
Quadratus femoris
Ventral surface of
Caudal surface of
Muscular brr. of
Assists in extending hip  Covered medially by
(87.k)
ischium
femur near third
sciatic n.
joint
trocha nter
Extel
nal obturator
Ventral surtace of
Trochanteric tossa of
Obturator n.
Rotates thigh outward;
Obturator n. passes
(87.j)
pelvis from border of
femur
adducts limb
through a gap in this
obturator foramen
muscle
Medial muscles of the thigh: adductors (p. 19)
Gracilis
 Pelvic symphysis via
Crural fascia, medial
Obturator n.
Adducts limb (also
The tendons of origin of
(19.21;
 symphysial tendon
 patellar ligament, and
extends stifle)
right and left muscles
73.8;
cranial border of tibia
form the symphysial ten-
87.g
don; the muscle forms
the caudal border of the
femoral triangle
Adductor
Ventral surface of
Caudal surface and
 Obturator n.
 Adducts and retracts
(19.19)
 pelvis; symphysial
 medial epicondyle of
limb
tendon
femur
 Pectineus
 Pubis and iliopubic
Medial surface of
 Obturator and femoral
Adducts limb; flexes
 The tendons of origin of
{19.14;
eminence of the other
femur
nn.
hip joint
right and left muscles
73.6;
side
form the prepubic ten-
77.5)
don
90
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Extensors of the stifle (p. 19)
Sartorius
Int. iliac fascia and
 Medial aspect of stifle
Femoral n.
 Flexes hip joint; pro-
 Forms cranial border of 
(19.10;
insertion tendon of
 tracts and adducts limb femoral triangle
73.18)
psoas minor
Quadriceps femoris
Via the intermediate
Femoral n.
 Flexes hip joint (rectus
 Tonus stabilizes patella;
{19.15;
 patellar ligament on the
fem.); extends and sta-
 prox. and distal infra-
73.j)
tibial tuberosity
bilizes stifle
 patellar bursae lie deep
●Rectus femoris
Shaft of ilium cranial to
to insertion tendon
{19.0)
aceta bulum 
(intermediate patellar
●Vastus lateralis
Proximolateral on
lig.)
(19.p)
femur
· Vastus medialis
Proximomedial on
{19.n)
femur
●Vastus intermedius
 Proximodorsal on
femur
Special flexor of the stifle: caudal to the stifle (p. 19)
Popliteus
Lat. condyle of temur
Tibial n.
Flexes stifle
Tendon of origin is sur-
(19.27)
of tibia
rounded by a pouch of
the stifle joint
Extensors of the hock, flexors of the digit: on caudal surface of leg (p. 19)
Gastrocnemius
With medial and
As part of common
Tibial n.
Extends hock; flexes
(19.26)
lateral heads from cor-
calcanea n tendon on
stifle
responding supracondy-
 calcanean tuber
lar tuberosities of the
femur
Soleus
 Prox. end of fibula
Joins common
Tibial n.
Rudimentary muscle;
Forms m. triceps surae
(19.28)
 calcanean tendon
could extend the hock
with both heads of gas-
trocnemius
Supf. digital flexor
 Supracondylar fossa
 Plantar on distal end of Tibial n.
 Being mainly tendinous, Large subtendinous bur-
(19.31)
of femur
 proximal phalanx and
the prox. part acts in
 sa over calcanean tuber;
 prox. collateral tuber-
the reciprocal mecha-
forms sleeve for deep dig.
cles of middle phalanx
nism, the distal part
flexor at fetlock joint
pue ypoay shuoddns 
pastern joints
 Deep digital
Plantar on distal
Tibial n.
Extends hock; flexes
flexor
phalanx
● Lat. digital flexor
Caudal surface of tibia
(19.34)
with tibialis caudalis
Their tendons combine
●Tibialis caudalis
Caudal surface of tibia
to pass over the susten-
{19.33)
with lat. dig. Flexor
taculum tali
● Med. digital flexor
Lat. tibial condyle
 Joins common deep flex-
(19.29)
or tendon in metatarsus
Fexors of hock and extensors of digit: Craniolateral on leg (p. 19)
Tibialis cranialis
Lat. condyle and 
 Dors. br.: on T3 and
 Peroneal n.
Flexes hock joint
 The medial branch of its 
(19.36)
tuberosity of tibia
prox. end of Mt3; Med.
insertion tendon is
br.: on T1+2
known also as the
"cunean tendon"
Peroneus tertius
Lat. condyle of femur
By four branches on all
Peroneal n
Entirely tendinous;
Originates together with
(19.37)
 tarsal bones (except
constituent of reci-
long dig. extensor from
T1+2) and on Mt3
procal mecha nism
the lat. condyle of the
femur
Long digital extensor 
Lat. condyle of femur
 Extensor process of dis-
Peroneal n.
Extends digit; flexes 
 Held to dorsal surface of
(19.40)
tal phalanx; secondarily
hock
hock by three retinacula;
on proximal and mid-
in digit receives extensor
 dle phalanges
brr. from interosseus 
Lateral digital extensor
Lat. collat. lig of stifle
 Joins long extensor 
 Peroneal n.
 Extends digit; flexes
{19.41)
and nearby tibia and
tendon
hock
fibula
 Extensor digitalis 
 From the lat. brr. Of
 Joins tendon of long
 Peroneal n.
Rudimentary: could
brevis
 peroneus tertius inser-
extensor
extend digit
tion tendon
Metatarsus
Interosseus muscle
Mt3, calcaneus, and T4 Prox. sesamoid bones 
Tibial n.
 Counteracts overexten-
In the foal, the inter-
(suspensory ligament)
sion of fetlock joint
 osseous is fairly muscu-
lar. In the adult the 
interosseous is entirely
tendinous. Its extensor
branches pass onto the
dorsal aspect of the
proximal phalanx and
join the long digital ex-
tensor tendon.
91
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
Facial Musculature (p. 37)
 Cutaneous muscle of
Thin bundles between 
 Facial n.
Moves the skin; retracts
the face
larynx and mouth
angle of the mouth 
(37.a)
 M. sphincter colli profundus: Muscles of the external ear (p. 37)
 Supf. cervicoauricularis
 Ext. occipital protuber-
Ext. surface of auricle
Caudal auricular n.
 Raises auricle
Has double innervation
(37.29)
ance and nuchal lig.
(from facial), and great
auricular n.
Cervicoscutularis
 Nuchal crest
Caudomedial on scuti-
 Facial and caudal
 Elevates auricle
form cartilage
 a uricular nn.
Cervicoauricularis
Nuchal lig. and caudal 
Lateral border of
Facial and caudal
Moves auricle laterally  Partially covered by supf.
 pue snpunyoud
 surface of occipital
auricle
 auricular nn.
cer vicoauricularis
medius
bone
(37.1)
 Interscutularis
Connects right and
Also attaches on ext.
 From tacial n.:
 Sta bilizes scutiftorm
(37.0)
left scutiform cartilages
 sagittal crest and tem-
a uriculopalpebral n.
ca rtilage
 poral line
 and rostral auricular
brr.
 Frontoscutularis
 Sta bilizes scutiform
(37.m)
cartilage
●Frontal part
 Temporal line
 Rostal and lateral on
From facial n.:
 Both parts well isolated
● Temporal part
 Zygomatic arch
scutiform cartilage
 a uriculopalpebral n.
 and rostral auricular
brr.
Supf. scutuloa uricul aris Scutiform cartilage
 Rostromedial on
From facial n.:
 Straightens and moves
May be divided into
auricle
auriculopalpebral n.
 auricle medially
three parts
and rostal auricular
brr.
 Zygomaticoauricularis
Zygomatic arch
Ventromedial on
From facial n.:
 Moves auricle medially
{37.n)
auricle
a uriculopalpebral n.
 and rostral auricular
brr.
 Parotidoauricularis
Fascia covering
Ventrolateral on the
Cervical br. of
 Depressor of auricle
 Lies on parotid gland
(37.28)
parotid gland
base of the auricle
facial n.
 Styloauricularis
 Ext. acoustic meatus 
Ventromedial on the 
Caudal auricular n.
Not known
Lies on ext. acoustic
base of the auricle
(from facial)
meatus
Muscles of the lips and cheek (p. 37)
 Orbicularis oris
 Forms a closed circle
 Dorsal and ventral buc- Closes the mouth
No attachment on bone
(37.1)
around the mouth
 colabial brr. of facial n.
 opening
Buccinator
 Border ot upper jaw
 Border of lower jaw
Dorsal and ventral
 Forms muscular basis
May be divided into
(37.7)
and coronoid process
buccola bial brr. of
of cheek; returns food
buccal and molar parts
of mandi ble
facial n.
to the central cavity of
the mouth
 Zygomaticus
 Facial crest
Angle of mouth
Auriculopalpebral br.
 Retracts angle of mouth
(37.5)
of facial n.
Caninus
 Rostral end of facial
Lateral border of
Dorsal and ventral
 Elevates upper
 lip and
 Passes between the two
(37.3)
crest
nostril
buccola bial brr. of
widens nostril
 parts of the levator
facial n.
nasola bialis
Levator labii
Lacrimal bone
 By common tendon
 Dorsal and ventral
 Elevates upper lip;
 Covers infraorbital
superioris
with its fellow between
buccola bial brr. of
"flehmen" reaction
 foramen; passes deep to
(37.6)
the nostrils in the upper facial n.
levator nasolabialis 
lip
Depressor labii
Mandibular ramus
 Blends with orbicularis
 Dorsal and ventral
 Depresses and retracts
 Its tendon covers the
inferioris
oris in lower lip
buccola bial brr. of
lower lip
mental foramen
(37.2)
facial n.
92
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Muscles of the eye lids and nose (p. 37)
Orbicularis oculi
 Forms a closed circle around palpebral fissure
Auriculopalpebral n.
 Closes palpebral 
Better developed in
(37.23 and
(from facial n.)
fissure
upper lid
43.c)
 Levator anguli oculi
 Base of zygomatic
 Medial end of upper
 Auriculopalpebral n.
 Elevates medial part of  A small muscle
(37.22)
process of frontal bone
P!I
(from facial n.)
P! addn
Levator nasolabialis
Frontal and nasal
 Supf. part: blends with
 Auriculopalpebral n.
 Elevates upper lip;
Caninus passes between
(37.4)
bones
 orbicularis oris; deep
(from facial n.)
enlarges nostril
the two parts of the
 part: into upper lid
muscle
Malaris
 Dorsal to facial crest
 Lower lid
Auriculopalpebral n.
 Pulls lower lid
A small muscle
(37.9)
(from facial n.)
ventrally
Muscles of mastication (pp. 37, 39 and 45)
Supf. Muscles of the
intermandibular space
 Digastricus
 Paracondylar process 
Ventral border of
Caudal belly: digastric
Opens mouth; elevates
 The two bellies are seper-
(39.17)
mandible; its occipito-
br. of facial n.; Rostral
hyoid apparatus
 ated by an intermediate
mandibular part to
 belly: mylohyoid n. of
 tendon which penetrates
angle of mandible
ma ndi bular n.
the tendon of the stylo-
hyoideus
Mylohyoideus
 Lingual surface of
 Basihyoid and lingual
Mylohyoid n. (from
 Elevates floor of
Consists of rostral and
(39.15;
mandible (mylohyoid
process; and median
ma ndibular n.)
mouth; presses tongue
caudal parts
45.k)
line)
ra phe
 against hard palate
Lateral Muscles of
Mastication
Tempora lis
 Temporal fossa and
Coronoid process of
Masticatory n. (from
Mastication (elevates
(39.11)
 medial surface of
mandible
ma ndi bular n.)
mandible and presses it
zygomatic arch
against maxilla)
Masseter
Large area caudolateral
Masticatory n.
Mastication (elevates
Penneate muscle
(39.9)
 on mandible
(from mandi bular n.)
 mandible and presses it
Supf. part
 Facial crest
 against maxilla
· Deep part
 Zygomatic arch
Medial Muscles of 
Mastication
Ptergoideus
Pterygoid process of
Convave medial
Pterygoid nn. (from
 Synergist to masseter;
 The mandibular n. lies
(39.12)
basisphenoid and
surface of mandible;
ma ndibular n.)
in unilateral contrac-
 between the two muscles;
medialis
vicinity
 condyle of mandible 
tion: moves lower jaw
the lateral muscle is
—lateralis 
and vicinity
laterally
fleshy
Muscles of the eye (p. 41 and Anatomy of the Dog)
Muscles of the pharynx (p. 47)
 Stylopharyngeus
Medial on dorsal third
 Dorsolateral
 Glossopharyngeal n.
Dilates pharynx
The only muscle that
(47.10)
of stylohyoid
 pharyngeal wall
(IX)
dilates the pharynx
Muscles of the Soft 
Palate
 Tensor veli palatini
Muscular process of
Around hamulus of
Mandibular n. (V3)
 Tenses soft palate
(47.7)
petrous temporal bone,
 pterygoid bone into the
 pterygoid bone, lateral
 aponeurosis of the soft
surface of auditory tube palat
 Levator veli palatini
 Muscular process of
 In the soft palate
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
 Elevates soft palate
(47.8)
petrous temporal bone,
and X)
lateral surface of audi-
tory tube
93
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Rostral Pharyngeal
Constrictors
Pterygopharyngeus
 Pterygoid bone
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus 
 Constricts and
 Difficult to separate from
(47.9)
(x pu x1)
protracts pharynx
palatopha ryngeus; 
crosses lat. surface of
levator veli palatini
 Palatopharyngeus
Via aponeurosis of soft
 Pharyngeal raphe and
 Pharyngeal plexus 
 Constricts and
Lies medial to levator
(47.11)
palate from palatine
dorsal border of thy-
(IX and X)
 protracts pharynx
veli palatini
 and pterygoid bones
roid cartilage
 Middle Pharyngeal
Constrictor
Hypopharyngeus
Medial surface of ven-
Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus
Constricts pharynx
May be divided into
(47.12)
tral end of stylohyoid; 
(IX and X)
cerato- and chondro-
piouAy pue ploxyouaui
pharyngei
lamina
Caudal Pharyngeal
Constrictors
 Thyropharyngeus
Thyroid cartilage
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus
 Constricts pharynx
Blends with crico-
(47.13)
(x pu x1)
 pharyngeus
Cricopharyngeus
Arch of cricoid
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus
Constricts pharynx
Blends caudally with the
(47.14)
cartilage
(x pu X1)
longitudinal musculature
of the esophagus
Intrinsic muscles of the larynx (p. 49)
Cricothyroideus
Ventrolateral on cricoid Caudal border of
Cranial laryngeal n.
Narrows glottic cleft;
(49.12)
cartilage
thyroid lamina
(from vagus)
tenses vocal folds
Cricoarytenoideus
Ipsilateral half of
 Muscluar process of
 Recurrent laryngeal n.
 Enlarges glottic clett
dorsalis
cricoid lamina
arytenoid cartilage
(from vagus)
(49.7)
 Cricoarytenoideus
 Rostrolateral on cricoid  Muscular process of
 Recurrent laryngeal n.
Narrows glottic cleft 
lateralis
cartilage
arytenoid cartilage
(from vagus)
(49.6)
 Arytenoideus
 Muscular processes of
Median raphe dorsal toRecurrent laryngeal n.
 Narrows glottic cleft
 Unpaired muscle
transversus
right and left arytenoid
 arytenoid cartilages
(from vagus)
(49.5)
cartilages
Thyroarytenoideus
 Recurrent laryngeal n.
Narrows glottic cleft
(from vagus)
Ventricularis
Ventromedial on
 Muscular process of
(49.9)
thyroid cartilage, and
 arytenoid cartilage;
on cricothyroid liga-
 some fibers blend with
 arytenoideus transv.
● Vocalis
Ventromedial on
 Muscular and vocal
(49.11)
thyroid cartilage
 processes of arytenoid
cartilage
 Thyroar ytenoideus 
 Muscular process of
Dorsal border of
 Recurrent laryngeal n.
 Constricts glottic cleft
 Inconstant and present
access orius
 arytenoid cartilage
thyroid lamina
(from vagus)
 only in the horse; may be
represented by a liga-
ment
Tensor ventriculi
 Cuneiform process of
 Fans to lateral surface
Recurrent laryngeal n.
 Tenses lateral laryngeal
 Thin muscle, present 
laryngis
epiglottic cartilage
 of laryngeal ventricle
(from vagus)
ventricle
only in the horse
 Muscles of the tongue and hyoid apparatus (fan into the tongue or attach on the basihyoid)
(p. 45 and 51)
 M. lingualis proprius
 Intrinsic tongue muscle
Hypoglossal n. (XIl)
 Simultaneous contrac-
Consists of longitudinal,
tion of transv. and per-
transverse, and perpendi-
pendicular bundles
cular bundles
stiffens the tongue
Extrinsic Tongue Muscles
Styloglossus
Lateral surface of
 Ends near the tip of the Hypoglossal n. (XIl)
 Pulls tongue caudodor-
 Right and left muscles
(51.10)
stylohyoid
tongue
 sally; in unilateral con-
fuse near the tip of the
traction, to the side
tongue
94
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Hyoglossus
 Lingual process of 
 Ends in tongue, most
Hypoglossal n. (XIl)
 Pulls tongue caudoven-
Antagonist to genio-
(45.e;
 basihyoid; stylo- and
fibers near dorsum and
trally
gloss us
51.11)
thyrohyoids
near median plane
Genioglossus
Incisive part of
Fans sagittaly into the
Hypoglossal n. (XII)
 Pulls tongue rostrally
The median septum of
(P'st)
mandible
tongue, into tip and
 and ventrally
the tongue separates
toward root
right and left muscles
Muscles of the Hyoid Apparatus
Geniohyoideus
 Incisive part of
 Lingual process of
Hypoglossal n. (XIl)
 Draws hyoid apparatus
 Forms muscular basis of
(45.j)
mandible
ba sihyoid
(and tongue) rostrally
the floor of the mouth
Thyrohyoideus
 Thyroid cartilage
 Thyrohyoid bone
Hypoglossal n. (XIl)
 Draws larynx and thy-
 Rostral continuation of
(51.12)
rohyoid toward each
the sternothyroideus
other
Mylohyoideus
 See Supf. Muscles of
(45.k)
 the Intermandibular
Space (p. 38)
Stylohyoideus
 Jo pua [esuopopne
Thyrohyoid bone
Facial n. (VII)
Draws thyrohyoid
Tendon of insertion is
stylohyoid bone
bone and larynx
split for passage of inter-
dorsocaudally
mediate tendon of digas-
tricus
Occipitohyoideus
 Paracondylar process
Caudodorsal end of
Facial n. (VII)
Depresses root of
 Blends with caudal belly
stylohyoid bone
tongue and larynx
of digastricus
 Hyoideus transversus
Ceratohyoid bone
On median raphe to
Glossopharyngeal n.
 Elevates root of tongue
(49.j)
connect with its fellow
(IX)
from the other side
Ceratohyoideus
Rostral border of
Caudal border of cera-
 Glossopharyngeal n.
 Draws larynx ros-
 Thin plate of muscle, fills 
thyrohyoid bone
 tohyoid and prox. end
{IX)
trodorsally
 triangle between cerato
of stylohyoid bones 
and thyrohyoids
Hyoepiglotticus
 Basihyoid bone
 Base of rostral surface
Hypoglossal n. (XII)
Draws epiglottis
Associated with hyo
of epiglottic cartilage
rostroventrally
 epiglottic ligament
Infrahyoid muscles (p. 45/51, and 59)
Sternothyroideus
Thyroid cartilage of
Spinal nerve C1 
 Retracts larynx;
 In midneck divided by a
(51.k;
larynx
synergist to sterno-
trans verse tendinous in-
59.20)
. Manubrium sterni
hyoideus
 tersection into cranial
and caudal parts
Sternohyoideus
Spinal nerve C1
 Retracts basihyoid and
(59.19)
tongue
 Lingual process of
 basihyoid bone
Omohyoideus
Subscapular fascia
Spinal nerve C1
Synergist to sterno-
Connected to overlying
(37.j;
near shoulder joint
hyoideus
cleidomastoideus in cau-
59.13)
dal half of the neck;
forms floor of jugular
groove
Cutaneous muscles (p. 37/59, and 64)
Platysma:
+ Cutaneous muscle
From the supf fascia
Fades away in the
 Ramus colli of the
Tightens and moves the
of the face
 in the vicinity of the
vicinity of the angle of
facial n.
skin of the head
(37.a)
xuA1
the mouth
● Cutaneus colli
Manubrium sterni
 On the supf. fascia
Ramus colli of the
Tightens and moves
By its contraction may
(59.5)
covering the region of
facial n.
the skin on the ventral
interfere with the raising
the jugular groove
surface of the neck
 of the jugular vein
Cutaneus trunci
From the supt. trunk
Opposite the dorsal
Lateral thoracic and
Tightens and moves
Its fibers run from cra-
(64.A)
fascia roughly along a
two thirds of the scapu-
 intercostobrachial nn.
the skin of the trunk
nial to caudal
line from the withers
la: blends with the supf.
to the fold of the flank
 shoulder fascia;
 Opposite the ventral
third of the scapula:
ends with deep pectoral
muscle on medial sur-
face of humerus
95
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
● Cutaneus
 From the supf. shoulder Over the elbow joint
 Intercostobrachial n.
Tightens and moves the  Is a cranial continuation
omobrachialis
fascia opposite the
skin over the shoulder
 of the cutaneus trunci
(64.A')
sca pula
Epaxial muscles of the vertebral column (p. 59)
 Splenius
Dorsal brr. of local
Extends, elevates, or
Well developed; contours
(59.d)
 spinal nn., and dorsal
bends neck and head
visible through skin;
—capitis
 Spinous processes of
Nuchal crest and
br. of accessory n. (XI)
laterally
both parts distinguished
cervicis
T3-5 by means of
 mastoid process of
easily
thoracolumbar fascia;
temporal bone; transv.
nuchal ligament
processes of C2-5
Iliocostalis
Dorsal brr. of local
 Sta bilizes lumbar verte-
Its lumbar portion is
cervicis
 Between transv. processes of C4 and T1 and
 spinal n.
brae and ribs; extends 
fused with the logissimus 
first rib
vertebral column and
muscle
bends it laterally; may
function in expiration
—thoracis
Lumbar transverse
Angles of ribs 1-15 and 
(59.n,
 processes and fleshy
transv. process of C7
75.a)
from cran. border of
ribs
Longissimus
 Spinous processes of
 Transv. processes of
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Sta bilizes and extends
 Longissimus capitis
—lumborum
sacrum, lumbar, and
 vertebrae; tubercles of
 spinal nn.
vertebral column;
 and atlantis are well
—thoracis
thoracic vertebrae;
ribs; wing of atlas; and
elevates or bends head
separated
(59.m')
wing of ilium; transv.
mastoid process of tem-
and neck laterally
cervicis
 processes of thoracic
poral bone
(59.m)
 and cervical vertebrae
—capitis et atlantis
(51.0)
 Spinalis
 Spinous processes of
 Spinous processes of
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Stabilizes back and
(59.u)
lumbar and last 6 tho-
the first 6-7 thoracic
 spinal nn.
neck; elevates neck or
thoracis
racic vertebrae
and the last S cervical
bends it laterally
cervicis
vertebrae
 Semispinalis capitis
Transv. processes of the
Occipital bone
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Elevates head and neck
 Uniform powerful
(51.m;
first 6-7 thoracic verte-
 spinal nn.
 or bends it laterally
muscle
61.j)
brae; articular processes
of the last 5-6 cervical
vertebrae
Multifidus
Articular and mamil-
 Spinous processes of
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Stabilizes and twists
 In the neck the muscles
(75.c)
lary processes of all 
 preceding vertebrae
 spinal nn.
the vertebral column;
 connect neighboring
vertebrae from C2 to
elevates neck
vertebrae; caudally the
-thoracis
sacrum
muscles are longer and
l umborum
bridge up to six verte-
brae
Intertransversarii
 Between transverse and articular processes of
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Sta bilizes vertebral
 Present only in neck and
(59.1)
cervical and tail vertebrae
 spinal nn.
 column and bends it
tail; dorsal, middle, and
laterally 
ventral muscles can be
distinguished
 Sacrocaudalis dorsalis
 Between spinous and mamillary processes of 
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Elevates tail and bends
 Caudal continuation of
medialis
the last 2-3 sacral and the first several caudal
 spinal nn.
it laterally
multifidus muscles
(83.k)
vertebrae
 Sacrocaudalis dorsalis
 Laterally on sacrum;
By tendon on the
 Dorsal brr. of local
 Elevates tail and bends
 Caudal continuation of
lateralis
 transv. processes of the
 preceding vertebra
 spinal nn.
it laterally
longissimus muscle; in
(83.1)
 cranial and mamillary
distal part of tail only
 processes of the more
thin tendons
caudal tail vertebrae 
Hypaxial of the vertebral column (p. 53)
Hypaxial Muscles
 Scalenus
First rib
Ventral brr. of local
 Flexes neck, or bends
The roots of the brachial
+ medius
Iransv. process of C7;
 spinal nn.
it laterally; may assist
 plexus pass between the 
(59.p)
transv. process of C4-6
inspiration by elevating  two muscles 
● ventralis
first rib
(59.p')
96
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Longus ca pitis 
 Transv. processes of
 Muscular tubercle on
Ventral brr. of local
 Flexes head or bends it  Continues longus colli
(S1.s;
C3-5
base of skull 
spinal nn.
laterally
muscle to the head
59.j)
Longus colli
Thoracic part: bodies of Thoracic part: transv.
Ventral brr. of local
Flexes neck
(59.k)
T1-6; Cervical part:
processes of C6 and 7; 
spinal nn.
transv. processes of
Cervical part: bodies of
C3-7
 cervical vertebrae and
ventral tubercle of atlas
Sacrocaudalis ventralis
 Lateral part: ventral
With combined tendons Ventral brr. of local
 Flexes tail or bends it
 The median caudal ves-
(19.b)
surface of sacrum,
on ventrolateral surface
 spinal nn.
laterally
sels course in the groove
 transv. processes of first
t  of tail vertebrae
between right and left
few tail vertebrae;
muscles
Medial part: ventral
surface of tail vertebrae
 Rectus capitis ventralis
Ventral arch of atlas
On the base of the
Ventral brr of local
 Flexes atla nto-occipital
(51.b)
skull caudal to longus
spinal nn.
joint
colli muscle
Dorsal muscles to the head (p. 51)
 Rectus capitis dorsalis
 Spinous process of axis
 Nuchal crest
Dorsal br. of C1
Elevates head
Relatively weak muscle
major
 Rectus capitis dorsalis
Dorsal arch of atlas
Occipital bone
 Dorsal br. of C1
 Elevates head
Weak muscle; occasion-
minor
 ally atrophied
 Obliquus capitis
Spinous process of axis
Wing of atlas
 Dorsal br. of C2
Rotates atlas fand
Cranial continuation of
caudalis
head) to the side of the
multifidus, much en-
(51.n)
muscle
larged
 Obliquus capitis
Ventral surface of wing
 Nuchal crest and
Dorsal br. of C1
Extends head, or flexes
 Occupies the space
cranialis
of atlas
mastoid process of
it laterally
between atlas and
(51.1)
temporal bone
occipital bone
Dorsal muscles of the shoulder girdle:
Suspend the limb from neck and trunk (p. 58 and 59)
Trapezius
 Nuchal and supra-
Thoracic part: dorsal
 Dorsal br. of accessory
Elevates shoulder:
(59.10;
spinous ligaments from
 third of scapular spine;
n. (XI)
draws scapula
59.10′)
C2 to T10
Cervical part: entire
craniodorsally and
scapular spine
caudodorsally
 Omotrans versarius
Shoulder fascia
 Transv. processes of
Medioventral brr. of
 Protracts limb; bends
Fused ventrally with the
(59.6)
C2-4
local cervical nn.
neck laterally
cleidomastoideus
Rhomboideus
 Scapular cartilage
Medioventral brr. of
 Draws scapula dorsally
cervicis
Nuchal and dorso-
local thoracic and
and cranially; elevates 
(59.28)
 scapular ligaments from
cervical nn.
neck
-thoracis
C2 to T8
(59.28')
Latissimus dorsi
 Supraspinous ligament
Teres major tuberosity
Thoracodorsal n.
 Retracts limb; flexes
Wide muscle; converges
(7.2;
from T3 caudally via
 of humerus together
shoulder joint; when
toward axillary fossa
59.11)
 thoracolumbar fascia
with teres major muscle
limb is fixed, draws
trunk cranially
Ventral muscles of the shoulder girdle:
Suspend the trunk between the forelimbs (p. 58 and 59)
 Supf. pectoral muscles
Cranial and caudal
Connect forelimb
Pectoralis descendens
●Pectoralis transversus
Costal cartilages 1-6
Forearm fascia
pectoral nn.
with trunk; adduct,
forms lateral pectoral
(59.26')
and adjacent sternum
pro- and retract fore-
groove with cleido-
● Pectoralis descendens
 Manubrium sterni
 Deltoid tuberosity and
limb
brachialis; right and left
(59.26)
crest of humerus
pectoralis desc. muscles
form median pectoral
groove
97
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Deep pectoral muscle
 Sternum; distally on
Major and minor
Cranial and caudal
 Suspends trunk be-
(7.h;
ribs 4-9; tunica flava
tubercles of humerus;
 pectoral n.
tween forelimbs; re-
59.25')
abdominis
tendon of origin of
tracts limb; stabilizes
coracobrachialis
shoulder joint
 Subclavius
Sternum and costal
 Blends with supraspina-  Cranial pectoral nn.
 Suspends trunk; stabi-
Lies deep to the supf.
(5.g
cartilages 1-4
tus and shoulder fascia
lizes shoulder joint
pectoral muscles
59.25)
Serratus ventralis
 Scapular cartilage and
 Suspends trunk; raises
 Major part ot synsarcotic
—cervicis
 Transverse processes
 two adjacent triangular
Ventral brr. of local
 neck when forelimb
connection between
(59.27)
of C4-7
 areas on medial surface
cervical nn.
is fixed; may support
trunk and forelimb;
—thoracis
 First 8 or 9 ribs
 of scapula
 Long thoracic n.
inspiration
Cervical part is fleshy,
(57.27')
thoracic part is intershot
with tendinous sheets
 Sternocephalicus
Manubrium sterni
 Caudal border of
Ventral br of accessory
Opens mouth; flexes or
 Forms ventral border of
(mandibularis)
 mandible
n. (XI)
inclines head and neck
lou saop taaoo.a 1enan!
57.4;
to the side of the
belong to shoulder girdle
37.K)
muscle
muscles
· Cleidomastoideus
 From clavicular inter-
Mastoid process of
Ventral br. of accessory
 Protracts forelimb;
 Forms dorsal border of
(57.4')
section at cranial end
temporal bone
n. (XI)
 flexes and turns head
jugular groove
of cleidobrachialis
Expiratory muscles:
 Compress thorax by drawing ribs mediocaudally (pp. 59/61, and 65)
 Serratus dorsalis
Thoracolumbar fascia
Caudal borders of ribs
 Intercostal nn.
 Expiratory muscle
caudalis
11-18
(59.v)
 Internal intercostal
 In intercostal spaces; fibers run cranioventrally
Intercostal nn.
 Expiratory muscle
muscles
(65.b)
Retractor costae
Thoracolumbar fascia
Caudal border of last 
Lumbar nn.
 Expiratory muscle
Belongs to the group of
(61.a)
rib
internal intercostal
muscles
Transversus thoracis
 Deep surface of
 Medial surface of
 Intercostal nn.
Expiratory muscle
 Cranial continuation of
(61.v)
 sternum
ventral ends of ribs 2-8
tra nsversus abdominis
Inspiratory muscles:
(69 pue s9/as 'd) Ajeaejojueno squ bume.p Aq xeioyn puedxg
 Serratus dorsalis
 Supraspinous ligament
Cranial borders of ribs
Intercostal nn.
cra nialis
via thoracolumbar
5-11
(59.v)
fascia
Rectus thoracis
First rib
Costal cartilages 2-4
 Intercostal nn.
 Inspiratory muscle
 Cranial continuation of
(65.a)
rectus abdominis
 External intercostal
 In intercostal spaces; fibers run ca udoventrally
 Intercostal nn.
 Inspiratory muscle
 Fibers are at almost right
muscles
angles to those of int.
(59.h)
intercostal muscles
Levatores costarum
 Transverse processes
Cranially on angles of
Intercostal nn.
 Inspiratory muscle
 Represent vertebral parts
 of thoracic vertebrae
ribs 2-17
(dors. brr.)
 of ext. intercostal
muscles
 Diaphragm
Tendinous center
 From sternum across
 Phrenic n.
Principal inspiratory
Costal part interdigitates
(69.u;
 lower parts of ribs
muscle
with transversus abdo-
69.v)
 9-15 and middle of rib
minis; there are three
+ sternal part
18, to last thoracic
foramina: aortic hiatus,
+ costal part
vertebra and lumbar
esophageal hiatus, and 
●lumbar part
vertebrae 1-4
caval foramen
86
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
 Innervation
 Function
Comments
Abdominal muscles (p. 66)
 External abdominal
Lateral surface of ribs
 Abdominal tendon:
Local intercostal and 
Compresses abdominal  The supf. inguinal ring is
oblique
4-18; thoracolumbar
linea alba and prepubic  ventral brr. of lumbar 
viscera as in defecation, 
, a gap between abdomi-
(59.i;
fascia
tendon;
nn.
micturition, parturition, nal and pelvic tendons; 
65.3;
 Pelvic tendon: coxal
and expiration.; flexes
-laxa suy sisunuode
73.10;
tuber, inguinal lig.,.
the trunk
nal rectus sheath with
75.10)
uopuat qndand
 aponeurosis of int. abd.
oblique; fibers run cau-
doventrally
Internal abdominal
Coxal tuber and
Last rib; cartilages of
Local intercostal and
 Similar to preceding
Forms cranial border of
oblique
adjacent inguinal lig.
last five ribs; linea alba
ventral brr. of lumbar
muscle
deep inguinal ring;
{19.l;
and prepubic tendon 
nn.
aponeurosis forms exter-
64.C;
nal rectus sheath with
73.2;
 aponeurosis of ext. abd.
75.5)
oblique; fibers run
cranioventrally; detaches 
cremaster muscle
 Transversus abdominis
 Medial surface of costal Linea alba 
Local intercostal and
 Similar to preceding
Aponeurosis forms inter-
(65.9;
cartilages 7-18; lumbar
ventral brr. of lumbar
muscle
nal rectus sheath; its
75.11)
transverse processes
nn.
Alensn ii aoejns daap
covered by a layer of
subperitoneal fat
 Rectus abdominis
Lateral surface of costal Prepubic tendon and,
 Local intercostal and
Assists in the actions
Its attachment on the
(65.8;
cartilages 4-9
via accessory lig., on
ventral brr. of lumbar
 of preceding muscle;
femoral head stabilizes
75.15)
head of femur
nn.
well positioned to flex
 the hip joint; the muscle
lumbar spine and
contains about ten trans-
lumbosacral joint
verse tendinous inscrip-
tions
 Sublumbar muscles (p. 73/75 and 77)
Quadratus lumborum
Ventral surtace ot prox.
Ventral surtace ot wing
 Local intercostal and
Weak muscle; possibly
Contains much tendi-
(77.6)
ends of last two ribs;
of sacrum and nearby
ventral brr. of lumbar
 stabilizes last two ribs
nous tissue
lumbar transverse
sacroiliac ligaments 
nn.
 and lumbar vertebrae
processes
 Psoas major
 Similar to preceding
As iliopsoas (by fusing
 Local intercostal and
 Protracts hindlimb and
(19.g
muscle
with iliacus) on lesser
ventral brr. of lumbar
 rotates it outward; flex-
73.16;
trochanter of femur
nn.:; lumbar plexus 
es hip joint; stabilizes
75.d;
vertebral column when
77.7)
hindlimb is fixed
Iliacus
Sacroiliac surface of
As iliopsoas (by fusing
 Same as preceding
 Same as preceding
May be divided into
(19.h;
ilium; adjacent wing
with psoas major on
muscle
muscle
lateral and medial parts
73.16)
of sacrum and psoas
 lesser trochanter of
minor tendon
femur
Psoas minor
Bodies of last three
 Psoas minor tubercle
Same as preceding
 Flexes pelvis on the
{75.e;
thoracic and first few
of ilium
muscle
loins; inclines pelvis to
77.8)
lumbar vertebrae
the side
Pelvic diaphragm (p. 87)
Levator ani
 Medial surface of
 Blends with ext. anal
Caudal rectal n.
Fixes anus during
Its subanal loop forms
19.i;
ischial spine and
 sphinter; also on per-
defecation; synergist to
 part of perineal body
83.0;
 adjacent part of sacro-
ineal septum
coccygeus
87.31
sciatic lig.
66
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
Coccygeus
 Similar to preceding
Transverse processes
Caudal rectal n.
 Flexes tail and moves
 Related dorsolaterally to
19.e;
muscle
 of first three to five tail
it laterally
levator ani
83.n;
vertebrae; also on tail
87.2)
fascia
 Further muscles of the perineum
 External anal sphincter
Muscle fibers related to the tail vertebrae
Caudal rectal and deep  Constricts anus
 Striated muscle; fibers
83.p
surround the anus
 perineal nn.
ventral to anus con-
87.8)
tribute to perineal body
 Internal anal sphincter 
Thickened circular muscle
coat of rectum
Caudal rectal and deep
Constricts anus
 Smooth muscle
 surrounds anus
 perineal nn.
Rectococcygeus
Ca udal continuation
Fourth or fifth tail
 Caudal rectal n.
 Sta bilizes anus during
 Smooth muscle
(87.7)
dorsal to anus of longi-
vertebra
defecation
tudinal smooth muscle 
 coat of rectum
Urogenital diaphragm (p. 87)
 Bulbospongiosus
 Continues the urethralis Individual fibers extend Deep perineal n.
Empties spongy part of
(87.12)
muscle and extends to
between corpus caver-
urethra
the glans
nosum and a median
raphe
Constrictor vestibuli
Ventral border of
Meets muscle from
 Deep perineal n.
 Constricts vestibule
Muscle is deficient
(87.4)
levator ani
 other side ventral to
dorsally
vestibule
Constrictor vulvae
 Striated fiber bundles
Fiber bundles fuse
 Deep perineal and
Constricts vulvar cleft
Thought to be involved
(87.6)
under skin of vulva
 dorsally with external
caudal rectal nn.
in the exposure of the cli
anal sphincter
toral glans (winking)
Retractor penis
Ventral surface of
 Decussates below anal
 Deep perineal n.
 Retracts penis; may
 Smooth muscle; has anal
(clitoridis)
 second tail vertebra
 canal; ends in the male
 elevate clitoris or be
 and penile (clitoral)
(87.13 resp.
 on corpus spongiosum,
invol ved in the expo-
 parts; contributes to
87.5)
near the glans, in the 
sure of the clitoral glans perineal body
 female to the side of the 
(winking) during heat
clitoris
Ischioca vernosus
Ischial tuber and
Crus and adjacent part  Deep perineal n.
 Rhythmically
 In the temale, rudimen-
(87)
adjacent part of
 of body of penis
 compresses crus of
tary but with similar
sacrosciatic lig.
 penis during erection
attachments 
100
 2. Lymphatic Structures
Lymph nodes
Position
 Afferents from
Efferents to
Comments
 Parotid Imyphocenter
Parotid l.nn.
Deep to parotid gl.; ventral to
 Skin and muscles of dorsal
Lateral and medial retro-
6-10 nodes; some embedded
(39.5)
temporomandibular joint
part of head; eye muscles, lids,
 pharyngeal nodes
in parotid gl.
lacrimal gl., ext. ear
 Mandibular lymphocenter
Mandi bular l.nn.
 Intermandibular space where
 Skin of face; masticatory,
Cranial deep cervical nodes
Large elongated mass of up
(39.16)
facial artery crosses ventral
 pharyngeal, hyoid, and tongue
to 150 nodes; forms for-
border of mandible
muscles; salivary gll.
wardlooking V with the
nodes of the other side
 Retropharyngeal lymphocenter
Lateral retropharyngeal  Ventral to wing of atlas on
 Similar to medial retropharyn-
 Medial retropharyngeal nodes
 8-15 up to 15 mm diameter
I.nn.
lateral wall of guttural pouch
geal l.nn.
sapou
(39.19)
 Medial retropharyngeal  Dorsolateral on pharynx 
 Muscles and deep structures
Cranial deep cervical nodes
20-30 nodes up to 40 mm
l. nn.
of head; large salivary gll:
diameter
(39.20)
 pharynx, larynx, and thyroid
gl.
 Supf. cervical lymphocenter
 Supf. cervical l.nn.
Cranial to shoulder joint;
 Parts of neck and thoracic
Caudal deep cervical nodes
Long chain of many small
(7.A,
 deep to cleidomastoideus and
wall; forelimb
nodes along cranial border
59.7)
omotra nsversarius
of subclavius
 Deep cervical lymphocenter
 Cranial deep cervical
 On trachea near thyroid gland
Larynx, esophagus, trachea,
 Tracheal duct; middle deep
 30-40 nodes; not easily dis-
l.nn.
 mandible, and ventral neck 
cervical nodes
tinguished from med.
(59.12)
retropharyngeal nodes
Middle deep cervical
On trachea in mid neck
 Trachea and esophagus;
Tracheal duct; caudal deep
Number and size of nodes 
I.nn.
muscles ventral to trachea
cervical nodes
vary greatly; may form a
(59.18)
long chain or be absent
 Caudal deep cervical
Cranial to first rib ventro-
 Forelimb, neck, esophagus,
Cranial mediastinal nodes, or
 Near scalenus; not easily
I.nn.
lateral to trachea
and thymus
directly into adjacent veins
distinguished from cranial
(59.23)
mediastinal nodes
 Axillary lymphocenter
 Proper axillary l.n.
Caudomedial to shoulder joint; Part of thoracic wall; muscles
Caudal deep cervical nodes
 Caudal to where the axillary
(7.B)
deep to teres major
of shoulder and arm
artery gives off the sub-
scapular
Cubital l.nn.
 Proximomedial to elbow joint
 Elbow joint; and muscles,
Proper axillary nodes
 5-20 nodes between biceps
(7.C)
 tendons, and joints distal to
and medial head of triceps
that
 Dorsal thoracic lymphocenter 
Thoracic aortic l.nn.
Between aorta and the bodies
 Shoulder girdle muscles and
Cranial mediastinal nodes and
1-4 paired nodes at each
(61.12)
of thoracic vertebrae 6-17
thoracic wall deep to them;
thoracic duct
vertebra
 mediastinum, pleura, and 
aorta
Intercostal l.nn.
In intercostal spaces 3-16
Local epaxial muscles, verte-
Thoracic aortic nodes and
The sympathetic trunk lies
(61.11)
near the heads of the ribs 
 brae and muscles of the tho-
thoracic duct
between the intercostal and
 racic wall; pleura; diaphragm
thoracic aortic nodes
 Ventral thoracic lymphocenter
Cranial sternal l.nn.
 On internal thoracic artery and Ribs, sternum, mediastinum,
Cranial mediastinal nodes
(61.17)
manubrium sterni
and pericardium
Caudal sternal I.n.
Inconstant; on sternum near
 Diaphragm, liver, pericardium
Cranial sternal or cranial
 May lie in the caval told
diaphragm
mediastinal nodes
(plica venae cavae)
101
 Lymph nodes
Position
 Afferents from
Efferents to
Comments
 Mediastinal lymphocenter
 Cranial mediastinal
 Precardial mediastinum;
 Muscles of neck; trachea and
Into veins at thoracic inlet via
 Number and size vary
1. nn.
among the great vessels
 esophagus; heart and media-
right lymphatic and thoracic
greatly
(61.15)
stinum
ducts
Nuchal l.n.
In first intercostal space and
 Deep muscles of neck near
Cranial mediastinal nodes
 Inconstant node; on deep
 along deep cervical vessels
thoracic inlet
surface of longissimus
cervicis
Middle mediastinal
Dorsal to heart, on right side
 Heart, aorta, esophagus,
Cranial mediastinal and 
 Not easily distinguished
I.nn.
 of esophagus and trachea
trachea
middle tracheobronchial nodes 
 from cranial and caudal
(61.16)
mediastinal nodes
Caudal mediastinal
Caudal to aortic arch, along
 Mediastinum, esophagus, and
 Middle and cranial mediastinal Up to 7 nodes; not easily
1. nn.
esophagus
lungs
sapou
distinguished from middle
(61.13}
 mediastinal nodes
Bronchial lymphocenter
Tracheobronchial l. nn.
Surrounding tracheal biturca-
Lung, trachea, mediastinum,
Cranial mediastinal nodes 
Three groups ot up to 20
right (61.19)
tion
esophagus, heart
nodes each
middle (61.23)
left (61.20)
Pulmonary l. nn.
Lumbar lymphocenter
Lumbar aortic l. nn.
On aorta and caudal vena cava Lumbar muscles; urogenital
Lumbar trunks
 30 to 160 nodes from kid-
(79.3)
 organs and kidneys
neys to deep circumflex iliac
vessels
Renal l.nn.
 Associated with the renal
 Kidney, ureter, and adrenal
Lumbar aortic nodes
Not easily distinguished
(79.2)
vessels
 gland; also liver and duode-
from lumbar aortic nodes
wnu
Ovarian l. n.
Ovary
Lumbar aortic nodes
Inconstant small node 
 Celiac lymphocenter
Celiac I. nn.
 Surround celiac artery
 Stomach, spleen, pancreas,
Cisterna chyli via celiac trunk 
 Some nodes lie on left gastric
(71.A)
liver; also lung and media-
and splenic arteries
stinum
 Splenic l. nn.
 On splenic vessels and in
 Spleen and stomach
Celiac nodes
 Number and size vary
(71.B)
 gastrosplenic ligament
greatly
Gastric l. nn.
 On left gastric artery; also on
 Esophagus, stomach, liver,
 Celiac nodes
 Number and size vary
(71.C)
cardia and lesser curvature of
 omentum; also lung
greatly
stomach
Hepatic l. nn.
 Near the porta
Liver, pancreas, duodenum
Celiac nodes
Number and size vary
(69.w)
greatly
 Pancreaticoduodenal
Associated with right gastric
 Duodenum, pancreas, stomach
 Hepatic and celiac nodes 
 Number and size vary
I. nn.
 and right gastroepiploic
greatly
(71.D)
arteries
 Omental l. nn.
In gr. omentum and gastro-
 Stomach and omentum; also
Splenic and hepatic nodes
Number and size vary
 splenic lig. near gr. curvature
spleen
greatly
of stomach
Cranial mesenteric lymphocenter
Cranial mesenteric
At the origin of the cranial
 Duodenum, pancreas, colon;
Cisterna chyli via intestinal
 70-80 small nodes sur-
1. nn.
 mesenteric artery
also from jejunal, cecal, and 
trunk
rounding the cranial mesen-
colic nodes
 teric artery
 Jejunal l. n.
 Associated with prox. ends of
 Jejunum and ileum
Cranial mesenteric nodes
Number and size vary
(71.E)
jejunal arteries
greatly
Cecal l. nn
Along dorsal, lateral, and
Cecum, ileum, and duodenum
 Cranial mesenteric nodes
 Long strands of hundreds of
(71.F)
medial bands of cecum
small nodes
Colic I. nn.
 In ascending mesocolon
Ascending and transverse
Cranial mesenteric nodes
 3000 to 6000 small nodes in
(71.G)
 colon; also ileum
thick strands between dorsal
and ventral layers of ascend-
ing colon
Caudal mesenteric
Associated with the caudal
 Descending colon, rectum,
Lumbar trunks 
The nodes are grouped
l. nn.
 mesenteric artery
peritoneum
around bifurcation of caudal
(71. H)
 mesenteric artery
Vesical l. nn
 In lateral ligaments of bladder
 Bladder, prostate
Medial iliac nodes
1 or 2 inconstant nodes
102
 Lymph nodes
Position
 Afferents from
 Efferents to
Comments
 lliosacral lymphocenter
Medial iliac Il. n.
 At origin of deep circumflex
Muscles of pelvis and thigh;
 Efferents form lumbar trunks
Up to 25 nodes; the largest
(79.4)
iliac vessels
urogenital organs, peritoneum 
can be 5.s cm long; at
breakup of aorta
Lateral iliac l. nn.
At bifurcation of deep circum-
 Abdominal muscles, dia
Medial iliac and lumbar aortic L
Up to 20 small nodes
flex iliac vessels
 phragm, peritoneum
nodes
Sacral l. nn.
Near angle formed by internal
Muscles of croup; accessory
Medial iliac nodes
On average 5-10 nodes; 
(79.5)
iliac arteries
spuel aonpoidan
some may lie along internal
pudendal artery
Anorectal l. nn.
Retroperitoneally dorsal to
 Rectum, anus; tail muscles,
Caudal mesenteric, sacral, is-
A total of 15-35 nodes
 rectum; a caudal group lies
vagina and vulva
chial, and medial liac nodes 
 dorsolateral to anus
Uterine l. n.
 In broad ligament of uterus
Uterus
Medial iliac nodes
Inconstant small node
Obturator l. n.
Cranial border of obturator
Hip joint; iliopsoas, quadri-
Sacral and medial iliac nodes
Inconstant
vessels
ceps, and gluteal muscles
Deep inguinal lymphocenter 
 Deep inguinal I. n.
On temoral vessels in femoral
 Entire hindlimb; some
Medial iliac nodes
 Elongated group consisting
(19.B)
triangle
abdominal muscles
of up to 35 nodes
 Supf. inguinal lymphocenter
 Supf. inguinal l. nn.
 Between ventral abdominal
 Nearby abdominal wall; penis,
 Deep inguinal nodes
Embedded in fatty connec-
wall and penis, or base of 
 and scrotum; udder and vulva
tive tissue; usually palpable
rappn
 Subiliac l. nn.
 Cranial border of thigh
 Skin and subcutis of dorsal
Lateral and medial iliac nodes
 Elongated package of small 
(19.D;
 halfway between coxal tuber
pue sioiou jeael pue
nodes; palpa ble
65.10)
 and patella
 abdominal walls and of thigh
Coxal I. n.
 On rectus femoris cranial to
Hip joint, quadriceps, tensor 
Medial iliac nodes
Inconstant; only present in
hip joint
fasciae latae
25% of horses
Ischial lymphocenter
Ischial l. nn.
Lateral surface of sacrosciatic
Tail; muscles of thigh
Medial iliac nodes
Up to 5 nodes
ligament, on caudal gluteal
vessels
 Popliteal lymphocenter
 Popliteal l. nn.
 On caudal border of gastro-
 Bones, joints, and muscles
 Deep inguinal nodes 
Small group of up to 12
(19.A)
cnemius, between biceps and
distal to position of these
sapou
semitendinosus
sapou
Lymph trunks
Position
Start
End
Comments
Thoracic duct
Dextrodorsal to thoracic aorta; Continues cisterna chyli
Veins at thoracic inlet
Enters thoracic cavity via
(61.1)
farther cranially on left surface
aortic hiatus
 of trachea
Celiac trunk
On right side of celiac artery
 Formed by efferents of celiac
 Empties into cisterna chyli
sapou
Intestinal trunk 
On right side of cranial mesen-
 Formed by efferents of cranial
 Empties into cisterna chyli
teric artery
mesenteric nodes
 Right and left tracheal
 On each side of trachea
 Formed by efferents of cranial
Caudal deep cervical nodes 
ducts
deep cervical nodes
 Right lymphatic duct
Cranial to right first rib
 Formed by efferents of cranial
Veins at thoracic inlet
 mediastinal and sternal nodes 
103
3. Peripheral Nervous System
Nerve
Innervation
Comments
 Spinal nerve
 Leaves vertebral canal via interverebral foramen,
(pp. 58/59 and 64/65)
except C1, C2, sometimes mid-T, and S1-5
● Dorsal branch
Generally skin dorsolateral to epaxial muscu-
Generally sensory except in cervical nn. where these
++ Lateral branch
lature
 brr. are motor
++Medial branch
Generally epaxial musculature
Generally motor except in cervical nn. where these
●Ventral branch
brr. are sensory
Lateral branch
 Generally skin of lateral and ventral parts of
Except nn. of brachial and sacral plexuses
trunk, and of limbs
++Medial branch
Generally hypaxial musculature and limb
 Except nn. of brachial and sacral plexuses
muscles
1. Cervical nerves (C1-C8)
C1 and C2 leave vertebral canal through lateral ver-
tebral foramina
Dorsal branches 
● Lateral branches
Dorsolateral neck muscles
(See Muscle Table beginning p. 98)
● Medial branches
 Skin on dorsal part of neck
That of C2 is known as major occipital n. for the
skin of the poll
Ventral branches
●Lateral branches
 Lateral and ventral skin of neck; cutaneous mm.
That of C2, known as transverse n. of neck, goes to
of head and neck; omotransversarius, rhom-
cutaneous mm. of head and neck; and another br. of
boideus, and cervical part of serratus ventralis 
C2, known as great auricular n., goes to the ear; brr.
of C6, known as supraclavicular nn., supply the skin
Over the shoulder joint and descending pectoral m.
● Medial branches
 Sternothyroideus, sternohyoideus, hypa xial mm.
 Brr. of C2-5 form cervical plexus; C5, 6, and 7 form
associated with cervical vertebrae
phrenic n. that passes through thoracic inlet to dia-
phragm; C6, 7, and 8 contribute to brachial plexus
(see further on)
II. Thoracic nerves (T1-T18)
Dorsal branches
+ Lateral branches
Skin over dorsolateral part of back and thorax
 Known as dorsal cutaneous nn.
●Medial branches
Local epa xial mm.
(See Muscle Table beginning p. 99)
Ventral branches
Intercostal mm.
 Known as intercostal nn.
● Lateral branches
 Muscles and skin on lateral thoracic wall 
Those of T3 and 4 combine with lateral thoracic n.
++ Lateral cutaneous branches
to form intercostobrachial n. (7.1) which innervates
 the cutaneus omobrachialis muscle and associated
skin
Medial branches
 Muscles and skin on ventral thoracic wall
 In region of sternal ribs, innervate intercostal mm.
and transversus thoracis; in region of asternal ribs,
innervate ext. and int. abdominal obliques, and rec-
tus and transversus abdominis mm.; that of T18 is
 known as costoabdominal n. for psoas and quadra-
tus lumborum mm.
● Ventral cutaneous branches
Skin on ventral and lateral thoracic and
 abdominal wall to udder and prepuce
II. Lumbar nerves (L1-L6)
Dorsal branches 
Known as cranial clunial nn., over the gluteal region
● Lateral branches
+● Medial and lateral cutaneous branches 
 Skin of lumbar region and cranial part of croup
● Medial branches
 Epaxial lumbar mm.
Ventral branches
Form roots of lumbar plexus (see further on)
● Lateral branches
 Skin and muscles of lateral and ventral
abdominal wall, and of hindlimb
● Medial branches
 Skin and muscles of lateral and ventral abdomi-
 nal wall, and of hindlimb
 IV. Sacral nerves (S1-S5)
Dorsal branches
● Lateral branches
Skin of croup and thigh
 Known as middle clunial nn.
● Medial branches
Caudal segments of multifidus and dorsal tail
muscle
104
Nerve
Innervation
Comments
Ventral branches
 Muscles of hindlimb
Leave vertebral canal through ventral sacral
● Lateral branches
foramina
● Medial branches
Form roots of sacral plexus (see further on)
V. Caudal (coccygeal) nerves (Cd1-Cd5)
 Form cauda equina
 Dorsal branches
 Dorsal sacrocaudal mm. and intertransversarii;
Form dorsal sacral plexus
skin on dorsal surface of tail
Ventral branches
Ventral sacrocaudal mm. and intertransversari;
 Form ventral sacral plexus
 skin on ventral surface of tail
Brachial plexus (pp. 6/7; 8/9; 10/11)
Network of ventral branches of spinal nerves C6, 7, and 8, and T1 and 2, which torm the roots of the plexus that perforate the scalenus muscle to
 approach the forelimb craniomedial to the shoulder joint.
Suprascapular nerve (7.9)
 Supra- and infraspinatus
From C6 and 7; crosses cranial border pf scapula
Subscapular nerve (7.3)
Subsca pularis
Chiefly from C6 and 7
Axillary nerve (7.14)
Chiefly from C7 and 8; most of the nerve passes
between subscapularis and teres major to lateral
surface of limb
● Muscular branches
Caudal part of subscapularis, teres major and
minor, deltoideus, and articularis humeri
● Craniolateral cutaneous branch of arm
 Skin lateral to prox. part of humerus 
● Cranial cutaneous antebrachial nerve 
Skin on cranial surface of forearm
(7.26; 9.24)
Musculocutaneous nerve (7.7)
Chiefly from C7, but also from C6 and C8; forms
ansa axillaris with median n.
●Proximal muscular branch (7.a)
 Coracobrachialis and biceps
Crosses lateral surface of coracobrachialis to reach
biceps
● Distal muscular branch (7.b)
Brachialis
● Medial cutaneous antebrachial nerve
Skin on medial surface of forearm, carpus, and
(7.30; 9.29)
into metacarpus
Radial nerve (7.11)
 From C7, 8, and T1; passes between teres major and
long head of triceps to lateral surface of limb, then
crosses lateral supracondylar crest (see also Radial
Paralysis)
● Muscular branches
● Caudolateral cutaneous branch of arm
Skin lateral to distal part of humerus
● Deep branch (7.18)
●●Muscular branches
Extensor(s) carpi radialis, carpi ulnaris, digitalis
communis, digitalis lateralis, carpi obliquus 
● Superficial branch (7.27)
 Lateral cutaneous antebrachial nerve
 Skin on lateral surface of forearm
 Does not proceed to metacarpus and digit as in other
(7.29; 9.27)
domestic mammals
Median nerve (7.8; 9.11)
Chiefly from C8 and T1, contributions also from C7
and T2; accompanies brachial a.; in forearm accom-
panies median a. between deep digital flexor and
flexor carpi radialis 
●Muscular branches
Flexor carpi radialis, humeral and radial heads of
deep digital flexor
● Medial palmar nerve (7.37)
 Passes carpus in carpal canal accompanying supf.
and deep flexor tendons, continues to fetlock joint 
N. digitalis palmaris communis II (9.16)
 on medial aspect of these tendons
+ Communicating bra nch
 In metacarpus connects to lateral palmar n.
which descends on lateral aspect of flexor
tendons
+ Medial (palmar) digital nerve
Hoof dermis, hoof cartilage, coffin joint,
 Continues medial palmar n. into digit; runs palmar
navicular bone and bursa
to medial digital a.; crosses deep surface of ligament
of ergot
**+ Dorsal branch (11.9)
Skin on dorsomedial surface of fetlock and digit,  May be double
 dorsal part of pastern joint, coronary dermis
+**+ Branch to digital cushion (11.10)
 Digital cushion
● Lateral palmar nerve (7.39; 9.15)
Above carpus receives palmar br. of ulnar n., passes
carpus in substance of flexor retinaculum, then lies
on lateral aspect of flexor tendons where it receives
communicating br. from medial palmar n.
N. digitalis palmaris communis III (9.15)
** Deep branch
Interosseus
+*++ Lateral and medial palmar metacarpal
 Fetlock joint; skin on dorsolateral and dorso-
 Deeply embedded on axial surface of splint bones,
nerves (7.n, m)
medial aspect of digit
then subcutaneous across fetlock joint 
105
Nerve
Innervation
Comments
+ Lateral (palmar) digital nerve
 Same as medial digital n. (see above)
Continues lateral palmar n. into digit 
(9.17)
+ Dorsal branch
May be double
+* Branch to digital cushion
 Ulnar nerve (7.12)
Chiefly from C8 and T1, occasionally T2; lies caudal
 to brachial vessels and crosses the caudal (extensor)
aspect of elbow joint
● Caudal cutaneous antebrachial nerve (7.23) Skin on caudal aspect of forearm
● Muscular branches
Flexor(s) carpi ulnaris, digitalis supt., digitalis
profundus (ulnar head)
●Dorsal branch (7.43; 9.14)
Dorsolateral skin of carpus and metacarpus
 Emerges just prox. to accessory carpal bone and
turns dorsodistally
● Palmar branch (7.40; 11.d)
Joins lateral palmar n. at the carpus (see above)
 Cranial and caudal pectoral nerves
 Pectoral muscles and subclavius
(9.e; 9.c)
 Long thoracic nerve (59.r)
Thoracic part of serratus ventralis
Chiefly from C7 and C8
Lateral thoracic nerve (59.s)
 Cutaneus trunci and ventral skin on thorax and
 Chiefly from C8 and T1 (see also intercostobrachial
abdomen
n., 59.g)
Thoracodorsal nerve (7.2)
 Latissimus dorsi
Chiefly from C8
Lumbosacral plexus 
LUMBAR PLEXUS (pp. 18/19; 20/21;
Ventral branches of L2-6 torm the roots ot the lum-
76/77; 80/81)
bar plexus
Ventral branch of L1 (iliohypogastric n.) (21.2)
 No communication with neighboring ventral brr.,
 therefore not part of lumbar plexus 
● Lateral branch
Abdominal mm. except rectus; skin of flank
 Penetrates oblique abd mm. and continues as lateral
cuta neous br.
● Medial branch
Caudal parts of abd. mm.; skin on ventral abd.
 Passes subperitoneally to vicinity of deep inguinal
wall; udder and prepuce
ring
Ventral branch of L2 (ilioinguinal n.)
From L2 and L3
(21.3; 75.2; 77.18)
● Lateral branch
Abdominal mm. except rectus; skin of flank
 Penetrates oblique abd. mm. and continues as lateral
cutaneous br.
● Medial branch
 Caudal parts of abd. mm.; peritoneum in vicinity
 Crosses bifurcation of deep circumflex iliac vessels,
 of inguinal canal
passes through inguinal canal
Genitofemoral nerve
From L2-L4; crosses deep circumflex iliac vessels;
(21.5; 73.11; 75.3; 77.20)
 passes through inguinal canal
● Genital branch
Internal abdominal oblique m. and cremaster;
vaginal tunic; skin of prepuce, scrotum, and 
● Femoral branch
Medial skin of thigh
 Passes through vascular lacuna
 Lateral cutaneous femoral nerve (21.6; 77.10;
 Psoas major; skin on cranial part of thigh and
From L3 and L4
65.11)
stifle
 Femoral nerve
 From L3 to L6; passes between psoas minor and
(19.12)
iliopsoas to muscular lacuna where it detaches
sa phenous n.
● Muscular branches
Sartorius, quadriceps, pectineus, and part of
adductor
●Saphenous nerve (19.25; 73.9)
 Sensory brr. to stifle joint; skin on medial
Accompanies femoral vessels until it becomes 
surface of thigh, leg, and metatarsus 
subcuta neous
 Obturator nerve
Ext. obturator, pectineus, gracilis, and adductor 
 From L4 to L6, also S1; passes through obturator
(19.5)
foramen
106
Nerve
Innervation
Comments
Sacral plexus (pp 18/19; 20/21; 80/81)
Roots from S1 to S5
 Cranial gluteal nerve
Gluteal mm. and tensor fasciae latae
From L6 to S2; emerges from greater sciatic foramen
(19.8)
 Caudal gluteal nerve
Vertebral heads ot biceps, semitendinosus, and
From L6 to S2; emerges from greater sciatic foramen
(19.2)
semimembranosus; also supf. gluteal m.
Caudal cutaneous femoral nerve
 Skin on caudal part of thigh
From S1 and S2; lies on lateral surface of sacrosciatic
(21.17)
ligament 
 Caudal clunial nerves
Skin on caudal part of thigh
Ischiatic nerve
 From LS to S2; through greater sciatic toramen to lie
(19.4)
 on lateral surface of sacrosciatic lig., then turns ven-
trally caudal to hip joint
● Muscular branches
 Small muscles in vicinity of hip joint; semimem-
(see Table p. 90)
branosus and pelvic heads of biceps and semi-
tendinosus
● Common peroneal nerve (19.17)
 Crosses lateral surface of gastrocnemius and is under
● Lateral cutaneous sural nerve (19.24)
 Skin lateral and distal to stifle joint Perforates
the skin at the stifle joint where it divides into supf.
 distal part of biceps
and deep peroneal nn.
●●Superficial peroneal nerve (19.39)
Arises opposite stifle joint space and passes distally
 between lateral and long digital extensor muscles
++
 Muscular branches
Lateral digital extensor
+++
 Dorsal and lateral cutaneous branches
 Skin dorsolateral to hock joint, metatarsus, and
ap
● Deep peroneal nerve (19.32)
Passes deeply between lateral and long dig. exten-
sors, then distally on tibialis cranialis to dorsal sur-
face of hock joint and under extensor retinacula to
dorsal surface of metatarsus and digit
++ Muscular branches
Tibialis cranialis, lateral and long dig. extensors,
extensor brevis, peroneus tertius
●● Medial dorsal metatarsal nerve (23.8)
 Skin on dorsomedial aspect of digit
 Descends on medial surface of large metatarsal bone
●● Lateral dorsal metatarsal nerve (23.9)
 Skin on dorsolateral aspect of digit
 Descends dorsal to lateral splint bone
●Tibial nerve (19.13)
 Descends between the two heads of gastrocnemius
and divides prox. to hock joint into med. and lat.
plantar nn.
●● Caudal cutaneous sural nerve (19.30; 23.6) Skin on caudal aspect of leg
Accompanies lateral saphenous v.; passes distally on
common calcanean tendon across lateral surface of
hock to fetlock joint
●● Muscular branches
 Popliteus, extensors of hock and flexors of digit
●●Medial plantar nerve (19.38; 21.26)
Crosses plantar aspect of hock and in metatarsus lies
 on medial aspect of flexor tendons 
++电
 N. digitalis plantaris communis II 
(21.27; 23.10)
Communicating branch (23.12)
In metatarsus connects to lateral plantar n. on
lateral aspect of flexor tendons
***+ Medial (plantar) digital nerve (23.15)
 The plantar digital nerves have a similar distribu-
tion as the palmar digital nerves (see above)
● Lateral plantar nerve (19.35; 21.26)
 Deep branch
Interosseus
+++
 Lateral and medial plantar metatarsal
 Deeply embedded on axial surface of splint bones;
nerves (23.13; 23.14)
then subcutaneous, but only the medial nerve 
reaches the hoof dermis 
*+ Lateral (plantar) digital nerve (23.16)
The plantar digital nerves have a similar distribution
as the palmar digital nerves (see above)
Pudendal nerve (19.f)
Rectum, reproductive organs
From S2 to S4; crosses ischial arch with int. puden-
● Superficial perineal nerves
 Skin of perineal region, cranially to scrotum and
dal a.
rappn
● Deep perineal nerve
Ischioca vernosus, bulboca vernosus, urethralis,
retractor penis (clitoridis)
● Dorsal nerve of penis (clitoris)
Penis (clitoris)
Caudal rectal nerve (19.c)
 From S4 and SS
● Muscular branches
 Anal sphincters, coccygeus, levator ani
● Cutaneous branches
 Skin around anus
107
 4. Cranial Nerves
Nerv
Fig-
Name (fiber type)
 Innervation
Comments
 Olfactory n. (special sense: olfaction)
 Olfactory region in nasal cavity
 Orgin: olfactory bulb; leaves skull by cribri-
form plate
(1)
Vomeronasal n. (special sense:
Vomeronasal organ
olfaction)
II
Optic n. (special sense: sight)
Optic part of retina
 Developmentally an evagination ot the dien-
cephalon; leaves skull by optic foramen
III
41.17
Oculomotor n. (s, m, psy)
Origin: mesencephalon; leaves skull by
 orbital fissure
(2)
 Dorsal branch (m)
Dorsal rectus, levator palp. sup., retractor
bulbi muscles
(3)
Ventral branch ( m, psy)
Medial and ventral recti, ventral oblique 
muscles
IV
41.11
Trochlear n. (m)
 Dorsal oblique muscle
Origin: mesencephalon; leaves skull by
trochlear foramen
V
Trigeminal n.
 Origin: rhombencephalon; nerve of 1st 
 pharyngeal arch
VI
Ophthalmic n. (s)
Skin surrounding eyes, ethmoid bone,
Leaves skull by orbital fissure
lacrimal gl., upper eyelid
(4) 41.21
Nasociliary n. (s)
(5) 41.20
Ethmoidal n. (s)
 Olfactory area of nasal cavity
 Detaches a br. to frontal sinus 
[6)  41.19
Infratrochlear n. (s)
Conjunctiva, 3rd eyelid, lacrimal caruncle 
 Leaves orbit by trochlear notch; brr. to
and skin near medial angle of eye
frontal sinus
(7)  41.22
Long cilicary nn. (s, psy)
Iris, cornea, ciliary m.
 Receive psy.* fibers from ciliary gangl.
(8) 41.12
Lacrimal n. (s, psy, sy)
Lacrimal gl., skin and conjunctiva near lat.
Usually double; receives psy fibers from
angle of eye
pterygopalatine gangl. and sy. fibers from
int. carotid plexus
(9)  41.9
Frontal n. (s)
 Skin of forehead and upper eyelid; br. to
 Perforates periorbita and leaves orbit
frontal sinus
through supraorb. for. where it becomes 
supraorbital n. (41.8)
{10) 41.10
 Zygomaticotemporal br.
 Skin of temporal region, lacrimal gl.
 Receives psy. fibers from pterygopalatine
[s, psy)
gangl.
V2
39.27
Maxillary n. (s)
 Leaves skull by round toramen
(11) 41.27
 Zygomatic n.
(12) 41.16
 Zygomaticofacial br. (s)
Lower eyelid, tarsal gll.
Leave orbit near lat. angle of eye
(13)
 Pterygopalatine n. (s, psy)
Receives psy. fibers from pterygopalatine
gangl.
{(14)  41.d
Greater palatine n. (s, psy)
Mucosa and gll. of hard palate
Passes through gr. palatine canal
{15) 41.e
Lesser palatine n. (s, psy)
Mucosa and gll. of soft palate 
{16) 41.c
Caudal nasal n. (s)
 Mucosa of nasal cavity and gums
 Passes through sphenopalatine for.
(17)
39.27
 Infraorbital n. (s)
Skin of nose, nostrils and upper lip; also
Leaves skull by infraorbital for.
41.b
via alveolar brr. upper teeth and maxillary
sinuses
V3
39.23
Mandibular n. (s, m)
 Leaves skull by oval notch of for. lacerum
(18)
 Masticatory n. (m)
(19)
 Deep temporal nn. (m)
 Temporalis muscle
(20)39.7
Masseteric n. (m)
 Masseter muscle
 Passes laterally through mandibular notch
(21)
Medial pterygoid n. (m)
 Med. pterygoid muscle
At its origin lies the small otic gangl.
(22)
Tensor tympani n. (m)
Tensor tympani muscle
(23)
Tensor veli palatini n. (m)
 Tensor veli palatini
(24)
Lateral pterygoid n. (m)
Lat. pterygoid muscle
(25) 39.21
Auriculotemporal n. (s, sy, psy)
Receives psy. fibers from otic gangl
(26)37.26
Transverse facial br. (s)
 Skin of masseteric region and over tem-
 Detaches brr. to temporomandibular joint
 poromandibular joint
(27)
Communicating br. (s)
Carries sensory fibers to dorsal and ventral
 The sensory fibers are thus distributed to
buccal brr. of facial n (VII)
the side of the face
(28)
Parotid brr (s, psy)
Parotid gl.
 Bring psy. fibers to the parotid gl.
(29)
Buccal n. (s, psy)
Buccal gll. and mucosa of buccal part of
 Receives psy. fibers from otic gangl.
oral cavity
{30) 39.13
Lingual n. (s, psy, and gustatory)
Mucosa of apex and body of tongue
 Receives psy. and gustatory fibers via
chorda tympani (VII)
{31)
 Sublingual n. (s)
 Mucosa of prefrenular part of oral cavity
(32)  39.25
 Inferior alveolar n. (s)
Lower teeth and gums 
 Enters mandible by mandibular for.
(33) 37.i
Mental n. (s)
Skin of lower lip and chin
Leaves mandible by mental for.
(34) 39.15
Mylohyoid n. (m)
Mylohyoideus muscle
(35)
 Rostral digastric br. (m)
 Rostral belly of digastricus
(36)
Submental brr (s)
Skin of rostral part of intermandibular
space
108
 Fiber quality: m = motor; s = sensory; sy = sympathetic; psy = parasympathetic
Cranial Nerves
A Cribriform plate
K Hypoglossal canal 
a
 Offactory region
Vallate and foliate papillae
S Sympathetic trunk
B Optic canal
L  Lacrimal gland
b Retina
k  Geniculate ganglion 
s' Cranial cervical ganglion
C Trochlear foramen 
M Nasal glands 
C Fungiform papillae 
I  Proximal ganglia
t  Vagosympathetic trunk
D
 Ethmoidal foramen
N Palatine glands in soft 
P
 Ciliary ganglion
m Distal (petrosal) ganglion 
u Spinal root of accessory nerve
E
 Orbital fissure 
palate 
d' Short ciliary nerves
m' Tympanic nerve 
v  Ansa cervicalis
F
 Round foramen 
 N' Palatine glands in hard 
e  Pterygopalatine ganglion 
n Distal (nodose) ganglion
palate 
e'Orbital branches
Carotid body
G' Jugular foramen
O Buccal glands
 e' Nerve of pterygoid canal 
p Carotid sinus
● Neuron of special senses 
H Stylomastoid foramen
P Sublingual gland
 Sublingual ganglion
q  Vestibular nerve
● Sensory neuron
Internal acoustic meatus
Q Mandibular gland 
9
Mandibular ganglion 
 q  Superior vestibular ganglion
● Parasympathetic neuron
Foramen magnum
R Parotid gland
h
 Trigeminal ganglion 
 ql' Inferior vestibular ganglion
( Sympathetic neuron 
i
 Otic ganglion
r
 Cochlear nerve
● Motor neuron
i  Minor petrosal nerve 
r  Spiral ganglion 
109
 Cranial Nerves
Nerv
Fig-
Name (fiber type)
Innervation
Comments
VI
41.28
Abducent n. (m)
Lateral rectus, lateral portion of retractor 
 Origin: rhombencephalon; leaves skull by
bulbi
 orbital fissure
VII
37.18
 Facial n. (m, s, psy, gustatory)
 Origin: medulla oblongata; has facial and in-
termediate components; enters int. acoustic
meatus, bears geniculate gangl. in facial
canal; leaves skull by stylomastoid for.; n. of
 2nd pharyngeal arch
(37)
Greater petrosal n. (psy)
Gll. of nasal cavity and palate
 Runs in petrosal canal; joins deep petrosal n.
(sy.) to form n. of petrosal canal which goes 
to pterygopalatine gangl.
(38)
Stapedial n. (m)
 Stapedius muscle
(39)
Chorda tympani (gustatory, psy)
 Salivary gll.
 Leaves petrous temporal bone by petrotym-
panic fissure and joins lingual n. (V3)
(40)37.27
 Internal auricular br. (s)
Skin on int. surface of external ear
Is joined by auricular br. of vagus
{41)  37.30
Caudal auricular n. (m)
 Muscles of external ear
 Is joined by dorsal brr. of first two cervical
nn.
(42)
Auriculopalpebral n. (m)
 Orbicularis oculi, interscutularis, zygoma-
 Joins brr.of auriculotemporal n. (V3)
ticus, levator nasola bialis, mm. of external
ear
{43)   37.12
 Dorsal buccal br. (m)
Muscles of upper lip and nose 
 Receives communic. br. from auriculotempo-
ral n. (V3); n. injured in facial paralysis
(44) 37.13
Ventral buccal br. (m)
Muscles of cheek and lower lip
(45)
Cervical br. (m)
Parotidoauricularis, cut. mm. of head and
 Unites with ventral brr. of cervical n.
neck
(46)
Digastric br. (m)
 Caudal belly of digastricus
(47)
Stylohyoideus brr. (m)
Stylohyoideus
VIII
Vestibulocochlear n. (special sense:
Macula of utriculus and sacculus, am-
 Origin: rhombencephalon; into petrous tem-
balance and hearing)
pullary crests, spiral gangl. of cochlea
poral bone through int. acoustic meatus
IX
47.28
 Glossopharyngeal n.
Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
51.3
(m, s, psy, gustatory)
jugular for; n. of 3rd pharyngeal arch;lies in
a fold of guttural pouch
(48) 51.4
Pharyngeal br. (s, m)
 Pharyngeal mucosa, stylopharyngeus
Takes part in forming pharyngeal plexus
(49) 51.c
Carotid sinus br. (s)
Baroreceptors in wall ot carotid sinus, 
(50) 51.5
Lingual brr (s, gustatory)
 Mucosa of root of tongue and pharynx
Communicates with lingual n. (V3)
X
47.26
Vagus (s, m, psy)
Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
Eu ue [eauieyd ut jo u ro enan!
fold of guttural pouch
(51)
Auricular br (s)
Skin of external acoustic meatus
Communicates with int. auricular br. (VIl)
(52)  51.d
 Pharyngeal br. (s, m)
 Pharyngeal mm. except stylopharyngeus;
 Takes part in forming pharyngeal plexus
 mucosa of pharynx and larynx
(53)
Cranial laryngeal n. (s, m)
Arises from distal gangl.
(54) 49.a
●Internal br. (s)
Laryngeal mucosa rostral to glottis 
Passes into larynx through thyroid for.
(55) 49.b
●External br. (m)
Cricothyroideus
Cardiac brr. (psy)
Heart
 Recurrent (caudal) laryngeal n.
Brr. to trachea and esophagus; laryngeal
 Leaves vagus in thorax; passes up the neck;
(m, s, psy)
mm. except cricothyroideus; laryngeal
thought to be involved in "roaring"
mucosa caudal to glottis
XI
47.23
Accessory n. (m)
Origin of cranial root: medulla oblongata,
51.15
●Cranial root
spinal root: cervical spinal cord; leaves skul
+ Spinal root
by jugular for.; lies against guttural pouch
(56)
Internal br. (m)
Connects with vagus
(57)
External br. (m)
51.r
●Dorsal br. (m)
Trapezius
51.q
●Ventral br. (m)
Sternoce phalicus
XII
47.29
Hypoglossal n. (m)
 Intrinsic tongue musculature; genio-
Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
51.14
 stylo-, and hyoglossi
hypoglossal canal; forms ansa cervicalis with
ventral br. of C
110
Cranial Nerves
Brain:
O Telencephalon
Diencephalon
 Mesencephalon
 Metencephalon 
Myelencephalon
VII
+
XIL
V2
V3
A Cribriform plate
K Hypoglossal canal 
a  Ofactory region 
j  Vallate and foliate papillae
S Sympathetic trunk 
B Optic canal
L  Lacrimal gland 
b Retina 
k  Geniculate ganglion
 s' Cranial cervical ganglion 
C Trochlear foramen
M Nasal glands 
C
 Fungiform papillae 
 Proximal ganglia
t   Vagosympathetic trunk
D
 Ethmoidal foramen
 N Palatine glands in soft 
 Ciliary ganglion 
m Distal (petrosal) ganglion 
U Spinal root of accessory nerve
E
Orbital fissure 
palate
.P
 Short ciliary nerves
m' Tympanic nerve
vAnsa cervicalis
F
 Round foramen
 N' Palatine glands in hard
 Pterygopalatine ganglion 
n Distal (nodose) ganglion 
palate
Orbital branches
Carotid body
 G' Jugular foramen
 O Buccal glands
 e' Nerve of pterygoid canal
p Carotid sinus
● Neuron of special senses 
H Stylomastoid foramen
 P Sublingual gland
 Sublingual ganglion
q  Vestibular nerve
● Sensory neuron
Internal acoustic meatus 
Q Mandibular gland
g Mandibular ganglion
 q  Superior vestibular ganglion 
● Parasympathetic neuron
JForamen magnum
R Parotid gland 
h  Trigeminal ganglion 
 ql" Inferior vestibular ganglion
I Sympathetic neuron
i
 Otic ganglion 
r Cochlear nerve
● Motor neuron 
i Minor petrosal nerve
r  Spiral ganglion 
品
55
111
 Contributions to Clinical-Functional Anatomy
Arthroscopy and Endoscopy in Veterinary
Possible Applications of Arthroscopy
a. Diagnosis: When clinical or diagnostic imaging examination
Medicine
ASTRID B. M. R1JKENHUIZEN
does not result in a certain diagnosis, direct arthroscopic visualiza-
tion of the intraarticular structures may deliver additional informa-
 General Remarks. Veterinary medicine today without arthroscopy
tion. Also a possibility exists to obtain biopsy material of altered
(Gr. arthros = joint; scopein = to examine) in the treatment of joint 
 structures directly viewed.
diseases is something that cannot be imagined. This so-called key-
b. Instituting therapy at the same time that the diagnosis is made.
hole surgery, or also minimall invasive surgery, is realized by appli-
· Removal of osseous or cartilaginous free bodies (corpora libera)
cation of the arthroscope, an optical system of lenses. It is one of the
that are occurring freely in synovia;
greatest advances of the last decade in the recognition and treat-
ment of joint diseases and has almost completely replaced the con-
 and culture (partial removal of the altered stratum synoviale);
ventional surgery of joints. In contrast to conventional surgery with
● Tapping of synovia for bacterial examination;
a wide access, this minimally invasive procedure has several advan-
● Arthroscopic procedures of osteosynthesis; for example, frac-
tages. These are less stress for the horse, better demonstration of the
tures of the third carpal bone (os carpale III);
anatomical structures of the joint, the minimizing of soft tissue trau-
· Synoviectomy (partial removal of the ulcerated synovial mem-
ma, shorter operation times for many manipulations, less post-
 brane) in cases of arthritis;
operative pain, extension of therapeutic possibilities, shorter heal-
● Removal of osteochondromas (tumors of osseous and cartilagi-
ing time, a better cosmetic result, and a quicker recovery of effi-
nous tissue);
ciency. A substantial advantage of this technically high quality
● Smoothing and suturing of fissures in tendons or menisci;
method is improved diagnostics should the clinical and radiograph-
· Flushing of the joint cavity to remove articular detritus and infec-
ic as well as the sonographic examination fail to clarify the prob-
tious material, for example, during treatment of articular hemor-
lem. Endoscopy also serves for diagnostic examination and mini-
 rhage and septic arthritis; this can be done with visual monitoring
mally invasive manipulations at the internal surfaces of the body
of the procedure:
cavities and hollow organs, for example the gastrointestinal tract.
· Removal of cysts and necrotic tissue;
The procedure is similar to arthroscopy with application of similar
 Smoothing of marginal excrescences of joints;
methods and instruments.
· Reconstruction of cruciate ligament in case of rupture.
Instruments and Objectives of Arthroscopy. Arthroscopy is utilied
Arthroscopy is most suited for treatment of osteochondrosis disse-
predominantly for endoscopic examination of joints but also for
cans.
other synovial structures such as synovial sheaths (tendovagino-
scopy) and synovial bursae (bursascopy). In doing this, the arthro-
Which joints and synovial structures are treated arthroscopically?
scope is introduced through a small incision of the skin and soft tis-
sues into joint cavities or synovial sheaths or bursae. The visual
applied in the examination and treatment of the hock joint, fetlock
impression is transmitted by a camera to a monitor to facilitate ori-
 joint, femoropatellar joint, femorotibial joint, radiocarpal an inter-
entation to the surgeon. In this way the internal structures of the
 joint, synovial sheath or bursa can be directly observed. The sur-
 der, elbow, and temporomandibular joints have possible appli
 geon sees these internal structures only by way of the monitor.
cation. For tendovaginoscopy in the horse, the flexor aspect of the
Installation of the monitor is at shoulder-level of the surgeon and
fetlock region, carpal region, and the tendon sheaths of the flexor
faces the surgeon. Additional mechanical or surgical instruments
aspect of the hock joint are suitable. For bursoscopy, the navicular
can be introduced to permit minimally invasive treatments; for
bursa, intertubercular bursa and the subtendinous and calcaneal
example, the removal of bone or bone-fragments.
bursae and also acquired (subcutaneous) bursae can be examined.
Virtually any structure that is filled with synovial fluid can be exam-
What Possibilities of Evaluation are Provided by Arthroscopy? Car-
 ined endoscopically.
tilage, bone, the joint capsule with synovial and fibrous layers,
menisci, collateral ligaments, cruciate ligaments, and tendons asso-
What instruments will be used?
ciated with the joints as, for example, the long digital extensor, will
 The main instrument that is used is a rigid arthroscope (4 mm diam-
be assessed.
eter) with a viewing angle of 0° to 30° or 45° or 70°. It contains
● Degenerative changes (among other things, frayed ligaments, for-
 optical device that is connected by a light-conducting cable to a cold
mation of fissures, traces of where the bones have rubbed against 
light source (150-300 watt). Smaller optical instruments with a
and damaged one another, partial losses of bone, rarefaction or
diameter of 2.7 mm can be used for smaller joints, for example, the
thickening or detachment of cartilage, arthrotic alterations such as
coffin joint. Usually longer optical instruments are employed for the
marginal swellings, cysts of articular cartilage).
femoropatellar joint in order to assess the articular surfaces distal to
● Inflammatory changes of the joint capsule (among other things,
the patella. The angle of view can be altered simply by turning the
number, size and shape of synovial villi), hyperemic changes, adhe-
optical device without moving the entire instrument. In this way, the
sions as well as partial or complete rupture).
operator is able to hold the optical device away from other instru-
●Traumatic changes (fragments, etc.).
ments and is thus able to protect it from damage during manipula-
tion. The optical device is connected to a video camera that is con-
 nected to a monitor and digital image processor for recording.
 Fig. 2. Tendon and tendon sheath, opened wedge-ike. The inner lining of the ten-
don sheath (peritendineum) is formed as a double-layered mesotendineum that
 surrounds the tendon as an epitendineum. The connective tissue that conducts 
Fig. 1. Arthroscopy of the tarsal tendon sheath. (Courtesy of Prof. Dr. Rijken-
the vessels can, as a vinculum tendineum, pass from the tendon to the underlying 
huizen)
bone. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
112
A pump is used to expand the joint cavity with fluid or gas. This
increasing fluid-flow or by irrigation. Iatrogenic complications as,
s    i assd n e s
for example, injuries to cartilage, blood vessels, and nerves that are
  f   as ad i ess si dxa s
caused by the treating veterinarian must be considered. Synovial
far reaching inspection and surgical manipulations. Trocars are
fluid may leak out at the injection site. There may be herniation at
-o au ynoru pausnd si m uasu aun anpoui o pasn
the site of incision. Occasionally, there may be observed an increase
car. The passage within the trocar is sealed by valves. In this way,
 in secondary periosteal bone or ossifications within the joint. Infec-
neither gas nor fluid escapes from the joint during the changing of
tions are dreaded complications that, in the extreme, may result in
instruments. The passage of the optical instrument through the dif-
ankylosis.
ferent compartments of the joint space is essential for examination
of the joint. The operator is able to evaluate the individual struc-
 Special preconditions for successful endoscopy
tures one after the other. As mentioned, arthroscopy is used not 
To carry out a procedure like this in which direct observation of the
only for diagnosis but at the same time for minimally invasive
 field of operation is lacking, orientation is exclusively by monitor,
   q r   s
 and there is a loss of the three dimensional sense that requires a sys-
purpose. They are also introduced by special access to the joint.
 tematic training. Solid anatomical knowledge and a rich experience
Among these are hand instruments such as punch, pliers, scissors,
 are essential preconditions for successful minimally invasive manip-
knives, curettes and rasps and, in addition, motor driven instru-
ulations. A well-adjusted team of surgeons, a trained staff and a
 ments for smoothing articular cartilage and menisci. Laser and ther-
 well equipped operating room are additional requirements for suc-
mocautery instruments are also used.
cessful surgery.
How is the arthroscope used?
Endoscopy of the hock joint (talocrural joint, Fig. 3)
The positioning of the patient in lateral or dorsal recumbency
Arthroscopy of the talocrural joint is most common because thera-
 peutic options are favorable here and a good overview can be
in such a way that movement, manipulation, of the joint to be
obtained by expanding the joint space. The dorsal and plantar parts
examined is possible. As in conventional operations the surgery is
 of this compound joint are most valuable. Positioning: dorsal or lat-
realized under aseptic conditions. First, a cannula is introduced into
 eral recumbency. Access: Standard access is dorsomedial, as far dis-
the joint and by this means the joint is filed with physiological
tal as possible. Indications: osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD) and
saline or gas (carbon dioxide or air) and the joint cavity expanded.
traumata of the articular ridges of the trochlea of the talus, of the
After that, a small incision is made in the skin and, using a blunt or
tibial cochlea as well as the lateral and medial malleoli.
sharp trocar, the arthroscope is introduced into the joint space after
which the trocar is replaced by the optical instrument. One or two
Arthroscopy of the stifle joint (Fig. 4)
additional joint openings are made for the introduction of special
Arthroscopy of the stifle joint is often done. The stifle or genual
surgical instruments. Certain manipulations such as the extirpation
joint is subdivided into a femoropatellar joint with its own joint
of an osteochondroma, are carried out after the ligation of blood
capsule and the femorotibial joint with medial and lateral joint cap-
vessels. For minimally invasive procedures, the principle of the so-
sules. Orientation within the femoropatellar joint is excellent. In the
called triangular technique is employed. This means that the surgi-
femorotibial joint only the cranial and caudal parts are visible. Posi-
cal instruments and the optical instrument are introduced at the
tioning: dorsal recumbency or, in rare cases, lateral recumbency.
 Access: Standard access for the femoropatellar joint is craniomedi-
ing with the necessary freedom of movement and, besides that,
 additional protection for the sensitive optical instrument. Later,
 access can also be achieved by splitting the intermediate patellar lig-
sutures close the small openings in the joint needed for the opera-
 ament or entering between the lateral and intermediate patellar lig-
tion. If possible, a sterile dressing is applied.
as q      i
 Follow-up treatment in arthroscopic manipulations
 ined by positioning the arthroscope between the medial and inter-
 Depending on the indication and seriousness of the operation, the
 mediate patellar ligaments, directing the instrument caudoproxi-
limbs and joints are fully weight-bearing following the procedure.
 mally and somewhat axially. The lateral joint cavity can also be
 If fragments of bone and cartilage were removed, a follow-up con-
 reached from this access.
trol radiograph is appropriate.
● Indications ([1], [2]):
· Osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD) of the medial ridge of the
Complications of arthroscopy
trochlea
 During the procedure, technical problems may occur that impair
+ Cysts of the medial condyle
visibility. Damage to blood vessels may lead to hemorrhage and
● Cruciate ligament repair following rupture of the ligament
reduce visibility. This impairment of visibility can be removed by
· Repair of the meniscus following meniscal tears
Fig. 3. Arthroscopy of the tarsocrural joint. Photographs of an OCD of the sagittal
Fig. 4. Arthroscopy of the stifle joint. Left: Meniscus of the lateral femorotibial jint.
ridge of the tibia (Courtesy of Prof. Dr. Rijkenhuizen) 
Right: OCD of the lateral ridge of the femur (femoropatellar joint). (Courtesy of
Prof. Dr. Rijkenhuizen)
113
Thoracic Limb
BIANCA PATAN
Unequal growth in the area of the growth plate can result in
angular limb deformities. In such cases, an axial deviation of the
4.1. Ossification of the individual thoracic limb bones takes place
distal limb in a lateral direction is called a valgus position; an axial
predominantly from several ossification centers, which are separat-
 deviation in the medial direction, a varus position. [7] [8] The distal
 epiphysis of the radius is most often affected, in which, because of
physes). Some of these apophyses and epiphyseal growh plates close
a greater growth potential on the medial aspect, a carpus valgus
 only after birth and for this reason, for a certain time, are still
results. [7] In addition to the asymmetrical growth of the growth
demonstrable by radiograph (Figs. 4.1.1, 4.1.2). [3] Knowledge of
 plate cartilage, an incomplete ossification and deformation of the
their localization and of the time of closure is of paramount clinical
 carpal bones may be the cause of the axial deviation. [8] [9] More-
importance as the growth plates may feign fracture lines in young
animals. Moreover, they represent a certain locus minoris resisten-
foals as a result of slack periarticular ligaments. This usually cor-
tiae (weak point) and fractures of the growth plates (so-called
rects itself during the first postnatal weeks. [8] [9] On the basis of
radiographs in which lines through the longitudinal axis of the
tion of the fracture line or the involvement of the epiphysis and/or
radius and metacarpal bone II are drawn, the origin and degree of
metaphysis, 6 types can be differentiated. [S] On the thoracic limb,
severity of the axial deviation (intersection or angular deviation of
the proximal growth plates of the ulna and radius as well as the dis-
the lines) can be determined (Fig. 4.4). [10] A special form of axial
tal plates of the humerus, scapula, radius and Me II (cannon bone)
deviation in the carpal region (offset knee or bench knee) consists
are most frequently encountered. [4] Treatment and prognosis
 of a valgus deviation at the distal end of the radius and a varus
depend on the kind of fracture. In most cases, a surgical approach
 deviation at the proximal metacarpal bone IIl. [7] For the correc-
(internal fixation of the fracture fragments by osteosynthesis) is
 tion of axial deviations in the area of the growth plate, also surgi
indicated. [6] [5] If the fracture is stable and there is no dislocation 
cal manipulations, which have an impact on bone growth in the
of the bone fragments and no joint involvement, a conservative
growth plate, are in use besides conservative methods of treatment.
treatment is possible. [6]
In this way, the growth of the bone can be inhibited on the convex
 aspect, actually the growth plate can be overbridged temporarily by
suitable osteosynthetic procedures. [8] [9] Alternatively or in com-
bination with this, bone growth on the concave aspect can be sti-
au Iel [sl [] naisoad aun jo sull pe uoisiou ue Aq paien
usefulness of the foregoing is, to be sure, controverted. [11] In both
surgical procedures, the time of growth plate closure must be taken
into account. [7] [8]
12-24 months
4.2. Scapula. Fractures are relatively rare. Most often, the supra-
glenoid tubercle is affected in which case the fracture-line usually
ca. 5 months
reaches the shoulder joint. Owing to the pull of the attaching mus-
approx. 3-4 month
cles (biceps brachi and coracobrachialis muscles), the fragments are
 as a rule displaced cranially and distally. [12] [13]
24-36months
4.3. Fractures of the humerus occur often as oblique or spiral frac-
tures of the metaphysis or of the diaphysis. [14] Avulsions in the
area of the deltoid tuberosity or of the tubercles can also occasion-
11-24months
ally be observed. [13] In addition, incomplete fractures due to
11-24 months
fatigue or stress fractures (fissures) in young thoroughbreds in train-
ing are not rare. In the proximal part of the bone, the caudolateral
24-36 months
11-24 months
cortex is predominantly affected; distally, the fractures are often
11-24 months
located craniomedially or caudally. For diagnosis, scintigraphya is
the method of choice as the fracture lines are sometimes not recog-
nizable radiographically. [15] [16].
(medial view)
a Image-producing method with the use of a radioactive substance (as a
rule, technetium 99m) that, following intravenous injection, is selective-
ly concentrated in a specific tissue. For scintigraphy of bone, the radioac-
tive isotope is coupled to a bone marker (polyphosphonate) that, with
active bone formation, is accumulated in hydroxyapatite crystals. The
20-24 months
radiation given off with radioactive breakdown can be recorded with the
help of a so-called gamma-camera in which case there is a locally elevated
up to 12 months
radiation intensity, which points to an increased metabolic activity in a
particular bone.
approx. 6 months
approx. 12 months
8-12 months
 Fig. 4.1.1. Apophyseal and epiphyseal lines of fusion of the thoracic limb of the 
Fig. 4.1.2. Growth plates in the region of the elbow (a) and on the distal limb (b) of
horse. (Closure of the growth plates after Butler et al., 20oo). (Courtesy of Institut 
a 2.5 months old wanmblood fily-foal. (Courtesy of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf-
f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berin)
u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
114
4.4. In most horses, the distal part of the ulna is reduced. The lat-
bones that are insufficiently ossified can by the foal's bodyweight
eral styloid process of the radius, which in foals has an isolated ossi-
alone be compressed and deformed wedgelike. [27] The result is
fication center, can be considered as a remnant of the distal end of
that misconformations of the limb (angular limb deformities) occur
the ulna. (Fig. 4.4) In some pony breeds (especially, the Shetland
frequently in which case, as a rule, a carpus valgus develops. [23]
pony),a completely developed ulna (ulna completa, ulna persistens)
The main objective of conservative treatment is to prevent bone or,
is sometimes found, which can be understood as a form of atavism.
 respectively, cartilage damage of the carpal bone concerned and to
Such ponies usually have misconformation of the limb in the form
maintain the axis of the limb until ossification is complete. [27]
of a carpus valgus. [17]
4.8. Especially in racehorses osteochondral fragmentation occurs
 4.5. Fractures of the olecranon are usually the result of direct trau-
relatively often (in the form of chip or slab fractures) at the dorsalb
ma to the elbow region. [18] Depending on its configuration, five
or dorsomedial border of certain carpal bones [28] [29]. This has its
different types are distinguished. Articular fractures in the region of
origin in bone restructuring after repeated mechanical overload.
the semilunar notch are seen most often. [18] [19] Conservative
[30] In chip fractures, the osteochondral fragment extends only into
treatment is possible. Especially in the case of displaced fracture
one joint (most often the middle carpal or radiocarpal jont) in
fragments or involvement of the elbow joint a surgical approach in
 d  s r si    
the form of internal fixation of the bone fragments by way of a suit-
carpal bone Ml or distally on the radial carpal. [31] [32] [33] Chip
 able osteosynthetic procedure is recommended. [18] [20] [19]
fractures are also oserved, not rarely, proximally on the radial
carpal bone or intermediate carpal bone as well as distally on the
4.6. Fractures of the radius may take many forms, but most often
radius. [31] [34] The slab fracture is characterized by a complete
oblique or spiral fractures are observed. [21] [22] Particularly in
separation of the (usually) dorsal surface of a carpal bone in which
 2-3 year old thoroughbreds in training stress fractures in the region
 omi o aoq aa a  sa a a a
 of the radial diaphysis may occur. [15]
boring joints. [31] [33] Carpal bone Il is especially affected
[30][29], more rarely the radial carpal bone or intermediate carpal
4.7. In premature or immature foals as well as in twins, incomplete
 bone as well as carpal bone IV. [35] Sometimes there occur fractures 
 ossification of the carpal bones is sometimes observed in which cas-
at the palmar borders of the proximal row of carpal bones as well
es the lateral carpal bones (carpal bones M, IV, as well as the ulnar
as caudodistally on the radius. These are predominantly the result
and intermediate carpal bones} are most often affected. [23] [24]
 of a single trauma. [36] Treatment depends on the configuration of
For diagnosis, radiographic examination is the preferred means, but
the fracture and also on the size of the fragments. Usually a surgi-
sonographic imaging of the joint can give valuable information.
cal approach (arthroscopic removal or internal fixation of frag-
[25] Slight delays in the ossification process can be recognized ra-
ments) is indicated. [35] [30] [29] For combined slab fractures,
which are accompanied by instability of the carpal joint, partial or
bone and, in severe cases, ossification of the cartilaginous precursor
 complete arthrodesis (surgical immobility) of the carpal joint is
of the carpal bone can be lacking completely. [26] Thus, carpal
described. [37]
b With respect to the designation of direction on the thoracic limb: In the
-p, ta (sndis ai sunu pe o dnq sp ago uoa
-aisap au xepne, jo aod u pue sleuo, jo aed auiu pasn s! es
nation " palmar" is employed.
[)
 Fig. 4.4. Carpus of a 17 days old warmblood colt-foal, dorsopalmar radiograph a) 
regular limb position, b) carpus valgus with an axial deviation of about 15 in the
Fig. 4.8. a) Carpal joint in flexion with a dorsodistal chip-fracture of the radial
region of the antebrachiocarpal joint. Arrowhead: distal epiphyseal fusion-line of
carpal bone (arrow head), 3 years thoroughbred stallion, b) 3 months old hori-
the radius; Arrow: Ilsolated ossification center of the lateral styloid process (cor-
zontal-fracture of the accessory carpal bone (arrow), 13 years old Channel Island
responds to the distal end of the ulna). (Radiograph: Kinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf-
horse. (Radiograph: Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf-u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed.
U. KIlauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
Univ. Wien)
115
4.9. The accessory carpal bone is located palmarolaterally and is a
Fractures of the splint bones of the horse are often diagnosed but
they are not in every case linked to lameness. [54] [55] Proximal
racehorses. Vertical fractures are most often observed; whereas,
fractures have usually a traumatic cause (frequently injury as a
horizontal fractures are seen only rarely (Fig. 4.8, b). [31]
result of being kicked by another horse); whereas, distal fractures
are usually the result of fatigue. [55] The latter are mostly associat-
4.10. Occasionally a carpal bone I [38] [39] is developed and, spo-
ed with inflammation of the suspensory ligament (interosseous
muscle) and are mainly caused by forces that act on the freely move-
joint, these should not be confused with osteochondral fracture-
able end of the splint bone. [54] [55] The rudimentary lateral and
fragments.
medial interosseous muscles [the author refers here to the small liga-
ment that extends from the distal end of each splint bone and ends
4.11. Dorsally or dorsomedially on the cannon bone (Mc Il) of
 young racehorses (especially 2 year old thoroughbreds in their first
 ginate each at the distal end of the splint bone, extend in the direc-
year of training) there may occur an increase in bone substance,
 tion of the sesamoid bone and end in the fascia of the fetlock joint,
 play a special role in this connection. [55] These bands are especi-
immature bone (bucked shins). Radiographically, predominantly
 ally under tension in hyperextension of the fetlock joint and exert a
 periosteal, but also endosteal, increases in bone can be observed.
 pull on the end of the splint bone. [54] [55] Because the proximal
ssu a se ssas oi susisan ssal si auoq paep-ard, e yons
part of the splint bone is relatively firmly connected to metacarpal
concerned, at the age of 3 years, relatively often exhibit fatigue frac-
bone II by interosseous metacarpal ligaments, the transition to the
tures of the dorsolateral corticalis in the region of the middle or dis-
freely moveable end of the splint bone is a site that is predisposed
tal diaphysis. Both conditions are classified together as "dorsal
to fracture. [55] Many fatigue-fractures heal spontaneously and
metacarpal disease." [40] The training regime of the horses plays an
only a weakly developed callus (increase of bone in the region of the
important role in the pathogenesis of this disease. The duration of
fracture) is observed. [55] If there is a greater callus formation,
the stress as well as the kind of gait and speed are particular risk fac-
 mechanical irritation may lead to inflammation of the suspensory
tors. [41]
ligament (interosseous muscle). In such a case, surgical removal of
 Also, stress-fractures occasionally occur on the distal end of
the distal splint bone, including the increased bone formation, is
-oeu ai un ltl t] spaqnooun hno jo l auoq pedeoi
-ad a us q s a j p d  
rity of cases they are simple, complete or incomplete oblique frac-
 served for reasons of maintenance of carpal stability. If more than
tures in the region of the lateral condyle. [43] Fractures of the medi-
 two-thirds must be removed, it is sometimes essential to fix the
 al condyle are rare and have a more spiral configuration. [44]
remaining proximal part of the splint bone to metacarpal bone I1.
 Likewise, longitudinal fatigue-fractures of the palmar cortical
[56]
substance occur fairly often at the proximal end of metacarpal bone
"Splints" are locally circumscribed periosteal increases of bone
 II. [45] [46] Articular chip-fractures of proximal metacarpal bone
II are also not rare. These fractures are predominantly located dor-
proximal part of the splint bone (especially the medial splint bone,
somedially. [47]
Mc II) is affected. [57] [38] Basically, splints can appear at any age
 The area of origin of the suspensory ligament (interosseous mus-
but are most often observed in young horses. [57] They usually
 cle) on the proximopalmar aspect of metacarpal bone II is also of
form following traumatic inflammation of the periosteum. [57] [38]
great importance. Owing to overload of the suspensory apparatus
A further reason is excess stress of the interosseous metacarpal liga-
in athletic horses, there may be observed here changes in bone den-
ments with secondary bone formation at their attachment. [57]
sity or, respectively, increases in bone substance or avulsion fractu-
Usually, they are as a rule not important clinically [38], but in case
res. [48] [49] [50] Especially in trotters, the dorsal sagittal ridge of
a jo u un ns oe  o aoq r jo
metacarpal/metatarsal bone Il is a frequent site of disturbance of
suspensory ligament. [56] [58] If lameness is observed, the splint
endochondral ossification in the region of the articular cartilage
 and eventually the end of the splint bone located distal to the splint
(osteochondrosis dissecans; Fig. 4.11.a). [51] [52] In most cases, the
 may be removed. Moreover, neurectomy (section and partial remo-
pelvic limb is affected, but osteochondritic lesions can often also be
 val) of the medial or, respectively, lateral palmar metacarpal nerve
seen at the distal end of metacarpal bone III of the thoracic limb.
is described. [58]
[51]
4.13. Fractures of the proximal phalanx (long pastern bone, P1,
4.12. The splint bones can be easily distinguished on radiographs as
first phalanx) occur relatively often, especially in racehorses. They
the medial bone (metacarpal bone II) has three, the lateral splint 
 develop suddenly during a race or in training and result in lameness.
 Different types are distinguished according to the configuration of
bones. The medial splint bone is also frequently longer than the lat-
the fracture, concerning which a midsagittal fracture, which begins
eral. [53]
at the fetlock joint, is most frequently observed. In the majority, we
dius
Cacc.
Culn
Cinfem.
CI-
CIV
CI-
Cm-
Me!!l
MeIV
Mell
Fig. 4.10. Carpal joint of an adult horse (dorsopalmar radiograph) with schematic
representation of the individual bones.
Mc Il-IV: metacarpal bones I-IV, C I-IV: carpal bones I-IV, C acc: accessory
Fig. 4.11. a) Fetlock joint chip (arrow): Osteochondrosis dissecans in the region
carpal bone, C interm.: intermediate carpal bone, C rad.: radial carpal bone, C
of the dorsal sagittal crest of Mc Ill, 8 years warmblood mare, b) Fracture in the
uln.: ulnar carpal bone. Arrowhead: vestige of the distal epiphyseal fusion of the
region of the lateral palmar eminence of the proximal phalanx Birkeland fracture,
radius. (Radiograph: Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed.
arrowhead), 10 years trotter-mare. (Radiograph: Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u.
Univ. Wien)
Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
116
are dealing with incomplete fractures (fissures), but also, not rarely,
the intense crushing of the bone. [72] In addition to conservative
complete fractures sometimes occur, extending to the pastern joint.
therapy (classical cast bandage), a so-called "trans-fixation cast"
Treatment and prognosis depend on the configuration of the frac-
can be used for weight relief of the distal limb. At the same time,
ture. Often a surgical approach (internal fixation of the fracture-
a r ps are s-s e-nrd p
fragments by osteosynthesis) is indicated. [59] [60]
 cannon bone and their projecting ends fixed in a cast. In this way,
 Beyond that, occasionally small osteochondral fragments (so-
the body weight is transferred from the cannon bone to the cast and
called Birkeland fractures; Fig. 4.11.b) occur proximopalmarly on
from there to the ground without the digital bones having to take
the long pastern bone. To be sure, these are not linked with a lame-
over the load. [72] A similar principle is followed in the so-called
ness in every case. Basically, they can be found also on the thoracic
limb; but, for the most part, they are observed on the pelvic limb
 to the cast but also to the U-shaped metal frame. In this framework,
 s a  [ [] (n  s)
found above all in trotters very frequently but are observed also in
 ground is possible without loading the distal limb. [73]
warmbloods. [63] They are predominantly located medially and
originate as a rule in the first postnatal months from avulsion frac-
4.15. Fractures of the coffin bone (distal phalanx, third phalanx)
tures in the region of attachment of the short sesamoidean liga-
 are especially not rare in racehorses, in which in the majority of cas-
ments. [63] [64] Sometimes the severed tissue fragments also ossify
es the thoracic limb is involved. [74] Depending on the configura-
secondarily. [63] Intra-articular and extra-articular fractures in the
tion of the fracture one differentiates six different types. [75]
 region of the proximal tuberosities of the proximal phalanx are
 Oblique fractures of the body of the coffin bone with involvement
considerably more rare. These occur exclusively laterally. [65] Tre-
 of the coffin joint are most often seen. [74] Also sagittal fractures as
atment depends on the position and size of the bone fragment.
well as fractures in the region of the margo solearis (solear border),
 Usually a surgical approach (arthroscopic removal or internal fix-
the palmar or plantar process of the coffin bone or the extensor
ation is indicated. [66] [61]
 process are relatively often observed; whereas, crushing fractures
 Osteochondral fragments (chip fractures) are also observed rela-
are rather rare. [75] Treatment and prognosis depend on the loca-
tively often proximodorsally on the proximal phalanx. They are
tion and configuration of the fracture. Conservative treatment
q    p i     n
(external fixation by appropriate orthopedic shoeing and applying
 ae s  l qad a  a nu oe ae a
 a foot bandage) have the objective to eliminate the hoof mechanism
always associated with a lameness, but can also be an incidental
and, by this means, to obtain immobilization of the fracture. [76] 
finding on x-ray examination. The arthroscopic removal of the chip
 Compression of the fracture crack, which is especially desirable in
is usually performed under general anesthesia [67] [68], but is also
sagittal fractures with joint involvement is only possible surgically.
 possible in standing horses. [69] Each increase in bone substance on 
ou r a yo sao yooide pens a asaaa []
the lateral and palmar aspect of the proximal phalanx in the region
 wall, surgical treatment of the fracture is associated with a high risk
of ligamentous attachment (so-called osteophytes) are designated
 of infection. [77] [76]
"osteophytic growth" in the figure (Fig. 4.13.b). The cause is a
 Differential diagnosis must be considered in that palmar at the pal-
chronic ossifying periostitis resulting from repeated stress at the
-dasssd xa u ju u  joasd r
attachment of ligaments. Especially in athletic horses and race-
 arate ossification centers may occur, which are not to be confused
horses, the attachments of the oblique sesamoidean ligaments are
with fractures. [78] [79] Moreover, isolated fragments of dense
affected. However, such insertional desmopathies may occur also at
bone proximally at the extensor process may be caused by a meta-
the attachment of other ligaments. Usually they are incidental fin-
 plasia (dystrophic mineralization) of the extensor tendon or of the
dings on the radiograph and without clinical importance. [70]
joint capule or by a developmental defect in the region of the artic-
ular cartilage (osteochondrosis dissecans; Fig. 4.15, a). [78] The
4.14. Fractures of the middle phalanx (short pastern bone, P2) may
 clinical significance of such fragments in the region of the extensor
develop if pressure from the proximal phalanx and from the distal
 process is different. In case of lamenes,the treatment depends on
 phalanx (coffin bone) act on the middle phalanx, which at the same
the location and size of the fragment. If the fragment is intra-artic-
time is subjected to torsion of the proximal interphalangeal
ular, then usually a surgical approach in the form of an arthroscop-
(pastern) joint. In this case, the forces concentrate at the center of 
 ic or arthrotomic removal is indicated. [80] For larger fragments an
the proximal articular surface of the middle phalanx, where multi-
 internal fixation is also described. [81]
ple radiating fractures usually take origin (Fig. 4.13.a). Often, some
 In many horses, at the dorsal part of the solear border of the coffin
fracture lines reach the distal interphalangeal (coffin) joint. Prog-
 bone, a concave indentation (crena marginis solearis) is observed as
nosis depends on the number of fragments that develop and the
 an anatomical variant and an equivalent of a solear spur. [82] [83]
 a i ss u dd  a m on 
Similar changes in contour of the coffin bone may also develop on
also geared mainly to the number and size of the fracture-frag-
the basis of a pressure-related atrophy of bone in the case of the
ments. [71] [72] Internal fixation is often not possible because of
existence of a horn column (Fig. 26.8). [82]
Fig. 4.13. a) Multiple fractures of the middle phalanx (short pastern bone), 10
Fig. 4.15. a) Coffn joint-chip (arrow), 16 years warmblood gelding, b) Fracture of
years warmblood mae, b) arthrosis of the pastern joint (arrow) and chronic ossi-
 the ossified ungular cartilage (arrowhead), 18 years warmblood gelding. (Radio-
fying periostitis (arrowhead), 23 years wammblood mare. (Radiograph: Klinik fur 
graph: Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf-u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
117
4.16. The proximal border of the ungular cartilage can be readily
sis of podotrochleosis, in which possibly a different distribution--
palpated as an elastic structure under the skin. Sometimes the elas-
depending on the form—-of the forces acting on the distal sesamoid
ticity is lost due to a gradual ossification of the cartilaginous tissue,
bone plays a role. [104] Fractures of the navicular bone are usually
which in advanced stages can also be palpated. [84] Ossifications of
traumatically induced and affect mainly the thoracic limb. [105]
the ungular cartilage occur especially in heavy draft horses both on
Sagittal fractures occur most frequently [105], in which case the
the medial as well as the lateral ungular cartilages of the thoracic
fracture-fragments are usually only a little displaced. [106] Conser-
limbs. [85] Also in warmbloods (especially in horses working on 
vative and surgical treatments (external or internal fixation) are in
hard ground) such alterations are not rare, but, to be sure, here the
accordance with the procedures in fractures of the coffin bone [105]
lateral ungular cartilage is more likely to be affected. [85] Ossifica-
tion of the ungular cartilage starts usually at the base and, with
rectomy of the medial and lateral palmar digital nerves is per-
greater ossification, reaches almost to the level of the pastern joint.
formed. [106]
[84] Often separate ossification centers have developed, which may
simulate fracture lines (Fig. 4.15.b). [25] As a rule, we are dealing
6.1. Lesions of the brachial plexus may result in a total loss of sen-
with incidental radiographic findings without clinical relevance.
sory and motor function of the thoracic limb. According to the loca-
[84] [8.5]
tion of the nerve lesion one differentiates a peripheral paralysis, in
Wounds in the region of the ungular cartilage may lead to necro-
which a lesion is external to the vertebral column (for example in
sis of the cartilaginous tissue and formation of an ungular fistula.
fractures of the scapula or other traumata brought about by space-
Typically, directly proximal to the lateral or palmar coronary bor-
 consuming processes) and a central paralysis, in which the lesion is
der, there is a chronic outflow of pus from a wound that is not heal-
within the vertebral canal (for example, following vertebral frac-
ing. Lameness is usually present. Treatment as a rule consists of sur-
[ol] (sassanoid suunsuos-aneds no sain
 gical removal of the altered cartilage-tissue. [86]
6.2. Sometimes only individual nerves are affected, in which a
4.17. The proximal sesamoid bones together with the suspensory
lesion of the subcapular and suprascapular nerves may result in
ligament (interosseous muscle) and the distal sesamoidean liga-
 instability of the shoulder joint and by this in gait irregularities
ess  s
 owing to loss of function of the shoulder muscles (especially of the
suspensory ligament loses its distal fixation owing to fracture of
 sasnu sudseu pue edns u s m se rndesqn
these sesamoid bones, an excessive hyperextension of the fetlock
 The suprascapular nerve is moreover readily injured as it turns
joint occurs (breakdown, see also 12.2). [87] [88] Fractures of the
around the cranial border of the neck of the scapula (collum scapu-
proximal sesamoid bones are primarily observed in young race-
lae). This may lead to a temporary or permanent loss of function
horses (trotter and thoroughbred), but are also possible in all other
 and by this to atrophy of the supra- and infraspinatus muscles (so-
horses. [89] For the most part, the proximal sesamoid bones of the
called "Sweeny-syndrome"). [109] [108] Besides conservative ther-
thoracic limb are affected. In trotters, fractures of the proximal
apy, surgical decompression of the nerve (by partial osteotomy of
sesamoid bones are also often seen on the pelvic limb. [91] Accord-
the scapula beneath the nerve or lifting and padding of the nerve at
ing to the location and configuration of the fracture line, six differ-
 its reflection site) is described in the case of a persisting injury. [109]
ent types are distinguished. [92] Apical fractures are most common,
but fractures of the basis, midbody and crushing fractures are also
6.3. Occasionally lesions of the radial nerve may develop which
not rarely observed. [92] [93] [90] Abaxial fractures usually involve 
 may lead to a loss of function of the extensors of the thoracic limb.
the attachment of the suspensory ligament (m. interosseus) on the
[107] [13] In a distal radial paralysis, only the extensor muscles of
abaxial border of the sesamoid and are usually not articular. [92]
the carpus and digit are affected. The cause is usually trauma in the
[93] Sagittal fractures are considerably more rare and are mostly
 region where the radial nerve turns proximal to the humeral
located on the axial border of the sesamoid and are associated often
condyles. [107] In a case of proximal (total) radial paralysis, addi-
with a fracture of the lateral condyle of Mc II1. [94] [92] Also in 
tionally thetriceps brachi muscle is paralyzed. This results in a typ
foals less than 2 months of age sesamoid fractures may occur. Often
ical attitude of the limb with a dropped elbow and flexed carpal and
they are fractures of the base of the medial sesamoid bone of the
digital joints (so-called “kiss hand attitude" ). Proximal radial paral-
thoracic limb. The fractures mostly develop on pasture when the
 ysis may be caused among other things by trauma or a pressure-
foal tries to follow the mother at high speed. [95] Treatment and
 conditioned lesion of the radial nerve owing to an unfavorable posi-
prognosis depend on the configuration of the fracture and on the
 tion during anesthesia. Besides that, also an ischemia of the muscles
size of the fracture-fragment as well as on the age of the horse.
 by compression of the vessels (especially the axillary artery) during
Often a surgical approach (arthroscopic or arthrotomic removal of
 anesthesia in lateral recumbency is described as a cause of the men-
a fragment [92] [96] [97]] or an internal fixation ofthe fracture [92]
tioned symptoms. [107]
[91] [98] is indicated.
Chronic degenerative disease of the sesamoid bones is designated
6.4. Anesthesia of the median nerve that is possible in the scope of
the lameness examination will be described with conduction-anes-
ation of the arterial blood supply of the sesamoid bones [100] and
 thesia of other nerves of the thoracic limb (section 10.1, k).
results in a chronic recidivistic lameness. [99] This is seen especial-
ly in racehorses (thoroughbred and trotter), but also other athletic
6.5. For anesthesia of the ulnar nerve: See conduction anesthesia of
horses may have such alterations of the sesamoid bones. [101] [102]
the thoracic limb (section 10.1, i).
The most important radiographic findings are that, in the abaxial
region of the sesamoid bones, the vascular canals are increased in
 8.1. Anesthesia of the musculocutaneous nerve, which, with the
number and altered in form, which can sometimes be observed al-
 ulnar and median nerves, is responsible for cutaneous anesthesia of
ready in yearlings. [102] Beyond that, sometimes an increase in
the distal limb, is also described in conduction anesthesia of the tho-
bone spurs may also be observed in the region of attachment of the
racic limb (section 11.1, 1).
suspensory ligament (m. interosseus) or of the distal sesamoid liga-
ments (proximoabaxially or distally on the sesamoid bone) or
 8.2. Especially in foals, the cephalic vein on the medial aspect of the
osteolytic areas (local dissolution within the bone) may be deter-
antebrachium can be used as an alternative to the external jugular
mined. [103] [102]
 vein for venepuncture or for the placement of an indwelling venous
cathether. [110]
4.18. The navicular bone (distal sesamoid bone) belongs to the
complex of the podotrochlea and may exhibit radiographically vis-
 8.3. Palmar common digital artery M is the main metacarpal artery
 ible changes in outline and structure (see also podotrochleosis, sec-
of the thoracic limb. It is palpable proximomedially on the cannon
tion 12.7).
 a pisip aue ro uoi xa piip daap aue aisaq ao
p q u  g   e s
 ment. In the case of inflammatory processes of the distal limb (for
-d si esnd pas  rsasse aos  s adxa
ences are possible in the shape of its proximal border, which in the
 ble. Moreover, it is possible to check the pulsation of the medial and
adult horse is conca ve, undulating, straight, or convex. The form of
lateral palmar digital arteries at the level of the fetlock joint. [53]
the distal sesamoid bone is a predisposing factor in the pathogene-
118
10.1. Nerve Anesthesia of the Thoracic Limb
sa is a possible complication of this method of anesthesia, which is
Diagnostic nerve anesthesia within the scope of lameness examina-
not very often implemented. [112]
tions implies a directed nerve block by which precisely defined areas
 b) An alternative is anesthesia of the medial or lateral palmar digi-
 of the limb are desensitized. For this, a 2 % local anesthesia solution
tal nerve (TPA 2, palmar digital block). This nerve can be palpated
is injected into the neighborhood of a particular nerve. As a rule the
 in the fetlock region, together with the same-named blood vessels
procedure is begun distally and advanced step-by-step proximally
(from dorsal to palmar: vein, artery and nerve) at the border of the
for the purpose of localizing the lameness. For conclusions as to the
 deep digital flexor tendon or at the insertional parts of the superfi-
cause of the lameness, knowledge of the area supplied by the desen-
cial digital flexor tendon, which are abaxial to the deep tendon here
sitized nerves is essential. A further possible application of nerve
(see Fig. 10.1.2., Q6). Basically, the entire palmar digital nerve in its 
 anesthesia is local elimination of pain for preparation or facilitation
 extension between the ungular cartilage and the distal border of the
 of certain surgical procedures (for example, care of wounds on the
 proximal sesamoid bone can be anesthetized when a subcutaneous
distal limb). Nerve anesthesia is contraindicated if there is suspicion
 deposit of 1-2 cc of anesthesia solution is injected directly palmar to
 of fissures or fractures as well as a subtotal rupture of tendon. In this
the neurovascular bundle. [113] [112] An anesthesia as far distal as
case, the elimination of pain could lead to stress of the limb con-
possible in the fetlock region has the advantage that only a slight
cerned and by this to a worsening of the condition.
danger exists in involving the dorsal branches of the nerve and is for
 In the following, the most important sites for blocking nerves
this reason more specific. [114] The same structures are desensitized
 shall be described. For didactic reasons, the description will be done
as in TPA 1, which means 70-80 % of the hoof including the pal-
from distal to proximal (see also Figs. 10.1.1. and 10.1.2.).
mar and abaxial parts of the coffin joint as well as also the entire sole.
a)  For anesthesia of the rami tori of the medial or lateral palmar
 [114] If the anesthesia is realized in the proximal third of the fetlock
digital nerve (anesthesia of the ramus pulvinus, deep distal anesthe-
region, additionally also the palmar part of the pastern joint (= pro-
sia of the palmar digital nerves [TPA 1]), the foot is lifted and the
   a g d     
injection done on each side axial to the ungular cartilage, parallel to
 dons including the distal synovial sheath ofthe flexor tendons as well
the deep digital flexor tendon, and 3—4 cm deep in the direction of
 as the straight sesamoidean ligament (lig. sesamoideum rectum) and
the sole of the hoof [111]. Two cc of local anesthesia solution is
ae (nbio rpiosss i) stuei uaproess anbo a
injected. [112] In addition, the other terminal branches of the medi-
involdes. [112]
al or lateral palmar digital nerve are anesthetized [112] so that
c)  In addition to TPA 2, also the dorsal branches (= rami dorsales) of 
besides the heel also the podotrochlea (navicular bone including li-
the medial or, respectively, lateral palmar digital nerve can be anes-
gaments of the navicular bone, distal part of the deep digital flexor
thetized, in which case the needle is introduced through the skin in the
tendon and podotrochlear bursa [= nacicular bursa]), the palmar
 middle of the fetlock in a direction dorsal to the neurovascular bun-
and abaxial parts of the coffin joint, the palmar part of the coffin
 dle. [114] Injection is 2—4 cc of local anesthesia solution subcuta-
bone and the ungular cartilage as well as the solear and cuneal der-
neously. [115] In this way, also the rest of the dorsal part of the hoof
mis and parts of the laminar corium are desensitized. [112] [111]
(including the dorsal part of the coffin joint) will be desensitized.
 The unintentional puncture of the coffin joint or the navicular bur-
[114] Desensitization of the dorsal pastern joint is uncertain. [115]
(Palmar view)
(Dorsal view)
UInar n.
Median n.
Med. cutaneous antebrachial 
n. (musculocutaneous)
Q1
Palmar branch
Radial n.
Median n. block
of ulnar n.
(prox.)
at. palmar n.
Dorsal branch
of ulnar n.
Med. palmar n.
Q2
Median n. block
[dist.)}
Deep branch
of ulnar n.
of ulnar n.
01
Ulnar n. block 
(High palmar
n. block)
Lat. palmar n.
Lat. palmar
Palmar branch
Med. palma
 of ulnar n.
Med. palmar n.
Communication branch
(High palmar
91
n. block)
(Low palmar
Med. palmar
metacarpaln
Lat. palmar metacarpal n.
Q5
Low 4-point block
Anesth. of the dorsal
Dorsal branch of med./
(Low palma
branch of palmar dig. n.
Lat. palmar digital n.
n. block)
Med. palmar
Palmar
digital n.
digital n. block 2 (TPA2)
Lat. palmar digital n.
Abaxial sesamoid block
Anesth. of the dorsal
Med. palmar digital n.
TPA2
Palmar
Med. palmar digital n.
TPA1
digital n. block 1 (TPA1)
(Lateral view)
(Medial view)
 Fig. 10.1.1. For diagnosis of lameness, relevant nerves of the thoracic limb and their most commonly applied sites for anesthesia. Q1-Q6 give the levels of cross-sec-
 tion shown in Fig. 10.1.2. In the right part of the figure, the ulnar nerve with its branches is yellow and the median nerve including its distal continuation is dark green.
 Nerves colored light green mediate a dual innervation by the ulnar and median nerves (after Muylle et al., 1998).
 HPA: high palmar nerve block, MPA: low 4-point block, TPA 1 and 2: deep (distal and proximal) palmar digital nerve block.
119
 d) To anesthetize the medial and lateral palmar digital nerves at the
 local anesthesia is injected. This desensitizes the sesamoid bones
level of the base of the sesamoid bones (abaxial sesamoidean block),
 and the distal part of the interosseous muscle. [116]
the neurovascular bundle (consisting of the lateral or medial palmar
f)  The medial or the lateral palmar nerves can be anesthetized at the
digital vein, artery and nerve) is palpated on the abaxial surface of
level of the distal ends of the splint bones, directly proximal to the
the corresponding sesamoid bone. A subcutaneous deposit of 2-3 cc
of anesthesia solution is injected directly palmar to this. [113] This 
thesia, [MPA], low palmar block). [113] [112] For this, the needle
block desensitizes the distal digit, including coffin and pastern joints
is introduced between the deep digital flexor tendon and the
as well as the palmar part of the fetlock joint. [112] Misinterpreta-
interosseous muscle and 1.5-5 cc of anesthesia solution is deposit-
tions are possible if, by diffusion of the solution proximally, desen-
ed subcutaneously. [114] Anesthesia of the medial and lateral pal-
sitization of the entire fetlock joint and sesamoid bones occurs.
 mar nerves combined with a desensitization of the medial and lat-
[114][112]
eral metacarpal nerves is designated a deep 4-point anesthesia (low
e) Proximal to the fetlock joint,the medial or lateral sesamoid nerve 
four-point block, Fig. 10.1.2, Q 5). [113] [112] For anesthesia of
proceeds from the medial or lateral palmar nerve. To anesthetize it,
the palmar metacarpal nerves (which course parallel and axial to
the needle is introduced between the attachment of the interosseous
muscle and the dorsal, abaxial border of the sesamoid bone in a
ton" of the splint bone, about 1-2 cm perpendicularly through the
direction toward the apex of the sesamoid. A deposit of 0.5 cc of
skin [114], and 13 cc of solution injected. [113] [112] Here, per-
foration of the proximal palmar pouch of the fetlock joint capsule
is to be avoided. Deep 4-point anesthesia desensitizes the entire fet-
c According to the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (1994) synonymous 
lock joint, including the sesamoid bones and all structures located
 designation for the N. digitalis palmaris communis II or Il
distal to the block. [112] Cutaneous sensation dorsal to the fetlock
Q1-Anesthesia of themedian nerve （prox.)
Q4-High four-point block
Lateral palmar
motacarpal n.
Medial palma
metacarpal n.
mediann
Q 5- Low four-point block
Q 2-Anesthesia of the median nerve (distal)
Lateral palmar
metocarpaln
Medial palmar
Medial palmar n
Q 3-Anesthesia of the ulnar nerve
Q6-Pan
r digital block
LatD
COE
AL-SOF
Med.palma
medan n.
Gigital n.
 Fig. 10.1.2. Cross-section of the right thoracic limb of a horse to demonstrate the most common sites of local anesthetic nerve blocks. (Level of the cross-sections: see
Fig. 10.1.1.).
1: A/V. mediana, 2: V. cephalica, 3: A/V collateralis ulnaris, 4/4': A.V. dig. palm. com. I/ll 5/5': A/V. metacarp. palm. I/ll, 6/6': A/V. dig. palm. med./at., AL-DDF:
accessory ligament of the deep digital flexor muscle, AL-sDF: accessory ligament of the superficial digital flexor muscle, APL: M. abductor policis longus (oblique carpal
extensor), CDE: common digital extensor muscle, Ch: chestnut, DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon, EB: Extensor branch of interosseus, ECR: extensor carpiradialis mus-
cle, FCR: flexor carpi radialis muscle, IOM: suspensoryligament (interosseous muscle), LDE: lateral digital extensor muscle, OsL: oblique sesamoid ligament, RH: radi-
al head of the deep digital flexor muscle, SDFT: superficial digita flexor tendon, SsL: straight sesamoid ligament, UH: ulnar head of the deep digital flexor muscle. (Cour-
tesy of Dr. Patan)
120
joint remains intact, to be sure, retained by cutaneous branches of 
 inserted perpendicularly through the skin directly caudal to the well
the ulnar and musculocutaneous nerves. [113]
visible cephalic vein, between the radius and the flexor carpi radi-
g) In the proximal third of the cannon bone, the lateral or medial
 alis muscle,. The needle is advanced 2.5-4 cm in a lateral direction.
palmar nerves that course subfascially at the dorsal border of the
The median nerve is accompanied by the median artery and vein
deep digital flexor tendon may be anesthetized either individually
 and is located at this site medial to the artery (Fig. 10.1.2, Q 1). The
(high palmar nerve anesthesia [HPA], high palmar block) or togeth-
 distal site of injection is found about 10 cm proximal to the chest-
er with the lateral and medial palmar metacarpal nerves located
 nut at the caudal border of the flexor carpi radialis muscle. [113]
parallel and axial to the splint bones (high 4-point anesthesia, high
 [112] The needle is inserted slightly cranial in the direction of the
four-point block), Fig. 10.1.2, Q 4). [112] For anesthesia of the
caudal contour of the radius. At a depth of about 3-4 cm the anes-
medial and lateral palmar nerves, the injection is placed, proximal
thesia solution is injected. [114] [113] [112] At this site, the medi-
to the communicating branch, between the deep flexor tendon and
 an nerve lies between the flexor carpi radialis and deep digital flex-
the m. interosseus. [114] [112]. At this site, medially and laterally
 or muscles and somewhat caudal to the blood vessels (Fig. 10.1.2,
 on each side, 6 cc. of anesthesia solution is injected subfascially and
Q 2). [113] [112] Usually anesthesia of the median nerve is done in
an additional 2 cc is injected subcutaneously. [117] This desensitizes
 combination with anesthesia of the ulnar nerve. With this anesthe-
the distal part of the suspensory ligament, the middle and distal por-
sia, there is desensitization of the entire carpal joint as well as the
tion of the deep and superficial flexor tendons, as well as the distal
carpal canal, including the flexor tendons and carpal synovial
limb including the fetlock joint. [117] [112] Desensitization of the
sheath of the flexor tendons as well as all distally located structures.
accessory ligament (distal check ligament) of the deep digital flexor
[112]
 sss a n id pxrd a p sn 
1) For cutaneous anesthesia of the medial distal limb (e.g., for care
ament is not involved in this anesthesia. [118] For high 4-point 
 of surgical wounds), the cutaneous branch of the musculocutaneous
anesthesia, the needle is introduced proximal to the communicating
 nerve (N. cutaneus antebrachi medialis) can be anesthetized addi-
branch medially or laterally beside the deep digital flexor tendon,
tionally. To do this, a subcutaneous deposit of local anesthesia solu-
 and advanced between the suspensory ligament and splint bone up
tion is injected medially on the antebrachium, 10 cm proximal to
to the cannon bone. [112] A deposit of ca. 5 cc of local anesthesia
 the chestnut, at the cranial and caudal border of the cephalic vein
solution is injected around the medial or, respectively, lateral pal-
 and accessory cephalic vein. [114] [113]
mar metacarpal nerve. [114] If the HPA (= high palmar anesthesia)
has not been previously carried out, then the lateral and medial pal-
10.2. In the case of chronic degenerative diseases in the palmar half
mar nerves each can be anesthetized with withdrawal of the needle.
d ai se l se s aosss a jo id isr a
fractures of the coffin bone or navicular bone) a neurectomy of the
 part of the metacarpus and the structures anesthetized by the HPA
lateral and medial palmar digital nerves in the palmar pastern
are desensitized. [113] [112] The origin of the suspensory ligament 
region can be carried out as a last measure (ultima ratio). [120]
[121]
interpretations are possible if the carpal synovial sheath of the flex-
10.3. The carpal canal is bordered palmaromedially by the flexor
pouch between the proximal splint bone and the suspensory liga-
 retinaculum, laterally by the accessory carpal bone and dorsally by
[il] ii] aui oa aam (
 the deep palmar carpal ligament or, respectively, by the bony struc-
h) The proximal portion of the m. interosseus is innervated by the
tures (distal radius, carpal and proximal metacarpal bones). [122]
deep branch (= ramus profundus), which originates from the pal-
Within the carpal canal are located the superficial and deep digital
mar branch of the ulnar nerve. [118] By its communication with the 
flexor tendons, including the carpal synovial sheath of the flexor
lateral palmar nerve, the deep branch also receives fibers from the
 tendons as well as the median artery and medial palmar nerve (Fig.
median nerve. [118] This dual innervation from the ulnar nerve and
10.3). An increased pressure within the carpal canal (triggered by a
median nerve is also found in the lateral palmar metacarpal nerve
as well as the distal continuation of the lateral palmar nerve (Fig.
 ovial sheath, a fracture of the accessory carpal bone or by other
10.1.1). [118] For anesthesia of the deep branch (= ramus profun-
dus) (lateral palmar block), the needle is introduced, with the car-
pus slightly flexed, between the accessory carpal bone and the lat-
eral splint bone. It is directed perpendicular to the skin in a dorso-
Carpal flexor tendon sheath
medial direction below the flexor retinaculum [118] [112] and, in
withdrawing the needle, about 5 cc of anesthesia solution are inject-
Deep palmar carpal
ed. [114] [112] In this way, at the same time, the lateral palmar
uowedn
nerve is also desensitized. Perineural injection of the lateral palmar
nerve proximal to the origin of its deep branch is also possible at the
medial aspect of the accessory carpal bone [199a]. By additional
anesthesia of the medial palmar nerve (high 2-point block) besides
the origin of the suspensory ligament, the same structures are desen-
sitized as in high 4-point anesthesia. [114]
i) To anesthetize the ulnar nerve, the ulnar sulcus (a groove beteen
the flexor and extensor carpi ulnarisd muscles, caudal at the ante-
brachium is palpated about 10 cm proximal to the accessory carpal
Medial paimar n.
 q sas a a a oi xd  s s a
Medial palmar a
antebrachial fascia. [114] [113] [112] At this site, the needle is
Flexor retinaculum
 introduced perpendicular to the skin, slightly laterally directed, and
inserted 0.5-1 cm (Fig. 10.1.2, Q 3). [112] With the injection of at
least 10 cc of local anesthesia solution [114] [112], the proximal
FCU
Supf digial fexr endon
 metacarpal region, parts of the carpal canal and of the carpal syn-
Deep digital fexor lendon
 Ovial sheath of the digital flexor tendons as well as the caudal parts
of the carpal joint are desensitized. [113] In the region of origin of
Fig. 10.3. Cross-section through the left forelimb at the level of the carpal canal.
the suspensory ligament there is only a partial elimination of pain
 Surgical separation of the flexor retinaculum; conventional access from medial 
 owing to the dual innervation by branches of the ulnar and median
(arrowhead) or endoscopic access from lateral (proximal to the accessory carpal
bone (dashed arrow).
nerves. [118]
1: lateral palmar nerve, 2/3: ramus palmaris (palmar branch) of the median a./v..
k) Anesthesia of the median nerve can take place at two locations in
4/5: radial a./v., APL: abductor pollicis longus (oblique carpal extensor) muscle, C
the antebrachium. The proximal injection site is found at the distal
border of the superficial pectoral muscles. [114] [113] The needle is 
acc.: accessory carpal bone, CDE: common digital extensor muscle, C interm.:
intermediate carpal bone, C rad.: radial carpal bone, C uln.: ulnar carpal bone,
 ECR: extensor carpi radialis muscle, FcR: flexor carpi radialis muscle, FCU: flex-
 or carpi ulnaris muscle, LCL/MCL: lateral/medial collateral ligament of the carpal
d According to the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (1994) synonymous 
 joint, LDE: lateral digital extensor muscle, UcE: ulnar carpal extensor (ulnaris lat-
designation: M. ulnaris lateralis 
eralis) muscle. (Courtesy of Dr. Patan)
121
 space occupying processes) may-especially with flexion of the car-
Racehorses are especially involved during intensive training or dur-
pus--result in a painful compression of the flexor tendons or the
ing the race [131] as well as foals, which in the field follow their
medial palmar nerve and artery (carpal canal- or carpal tunnel-syn-
mothers over a long distance at high speed. [95] Most often, the rea-
drome). [31] [123] [122] The bone or soft tissue changes brought
son forthe loss of function of the suspensory apparatus is a fracture
about by the increase in pressure within the carpal canal can usual-
 of both sesamoid bones, [133] [95] but also a rupture of the distal
ly be demonstrated either radiographically or sonographically.
sesamoidean ligaments is often observed. [88] A typical radio-
Treatment consists of a cutting of the flexor retinaculum, in which
 graphic sign is the proximal location of the sesamoid bones. [88]
the conventional access is from the medial aspect. [31] [123] Alter-
 Rupture of the suspensory ligament is on the contrary relatively
natively, an endoscopic approach through the wall of the carpal
synovial sheath of the flexor tendons is possible. [122]
distal dislocation of the proximal sesamoid bones can be observed
by radiography. [88] Besides conservative treatment (external sup-
10.4. The palmar anular ligament (Lig. anulare palmare) attaches
 port by rigid bandaging), different surgical treatments are also
to the abaxial surface of the sesamoid bones and forms together
described such as the removal or internal fixation of the fracture
with the intersesamoidean ligament a canal, which transmits the
fragments of the proximal sesamoid bone, arthrodesis (surgical fix-
flexor tendons including their digital synovial sheath (Fig. 10.4).
ation of a joint) of the fetlock joint by suitable osteosynthetic pro-
[124] A stricture of the flexor tendons caused by the palmar anular
cedures or the application of “transfixation casts" (see 4.14.). [133]
ligament may result in a chronic lameness (palmar tunnel- or pal-
mar anular ligament-syndrome) in which thoracic and pelvic limb
12.3. The suspensory ligament (interosseous muscle), which is an
 are affected equally. [124] [125] As a rule, there is a primary or sec-
important constituent of the suspensory apparatus, is supplied in
ondary inflammation and thickening of the flexor tendons or of the
the thoracic limb by branches of the median and ulnar nerves. [118]
palmar anular ligament or an inflammation and increased filling of
It originates proximopalmarly at Mc Ml as well as with a minor part
the digital synovial sheath of the flexor tendons. [124] [126] In lat-
at the Lig. carpi radiatum (part of the deep palmar carpal ligament,
eral view, one observes particularly an indentation in the region of
Figs. 12.3.1. and 12.3.2., a). Distally it divides into rounded
the palmar anular ligament or a bulging of the digital synovial
 branches, each of which inserts on the abaxial surface of the apex
sheath proximal to the palmar anular ligament. [124] [125] Fre-
of the sesamoid bone (Figs. 12.3.1. and 12.3.2., b). On the standing
quently, increases of bone tissue as an insertional desmopathy are
observed in the region of attachment of the anular ligament on the
proximal sesamoid bone. [127] To demonstrate the extent of the
changes, radiographic and especially sonographic studies are very
suitable. [124] [127] Often surgical treatment in the form of section
 of the palmar anular ligament is indicated, [124] [125] which also
can be realized endoscopically via the synovial sheath of the digital
flexor tendons. [128]
superficial flexor tendon
accessory (*distal check")
12.1. The tendon of the biceps brachi muscle runs in the region of
ligament of the
the shoulder joint cranial to the intermediate tubercle of the inter-
deep digital flexor muscle
tubercular groove and is underlain at this site by a synovial bursa
deep flexor tendon
(intertubercular bursa or bicipital bursa). Occasionally the bursa
 interosseous muscle
together with the tendon is inflamed, which may cause a typical
(suspensory ligament)
shoulder lameness. The tendon of the biceps muscle, the synovial
bursa and the surface of the underlying bone can be demonstrated
sesamoid
.3.2b
very well by sonography. [129] [130]
bone
oblique sesamoid ligament
12.2. With thoroughbred horses, occasionally a complete loss of
straight sesamoid ligament
racic limb is almost exclusively involved. [131] [87] Owing to the
a jo usurad ess e si ar ns rd o ss
branch of the interosseous
fetlock joint, which may result in the fetlock's contacting the
m. to the extensor tendon
ground (breakdown). [87] [88] A stress-related severe overexten-
sion of the fetlock joint at high speed is regarded as a main reason,
together with fatigue of the superficial and deep digital flexor mus-
cles (the tendons of which support the suspensory apparatus). [132]
Fig. 12.3.1. Tendons and ligaments in the palmar region of the distal limb (the rec-
tut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
PAL
DDFT
DFTS
58
SB
MCI
OM
AL-DDF
DDFT SDFTS
Fig. 12.3.2. a) Sonogram of the proximopalmar metacarpal region (longitudinal
 Fig. 10.4. Cross-section at the level of the proximal sesamoid bones with sono-
linear array scanner 7.5 MHz with stand-off pad), b) Sonogram of the attachment 
 gram of the palmar region (transverse, linear array scanner 7.5 MHz with stand-off 
 of the suspensory ligament (interosseous muscle) on the sesamoid bone (longitu-
pad).
dinal, linear array scanner 7.5 MHz with stand-off pad), AL-DDF: accessory liga-
 DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon, DFTS: digital flexor tendon sheath, PAL: palmar
 ment of the deep digital flexor muscle, DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon, IOM:
anular ligament, S: skin, SB: sesamoid bone, SDFT: superficial digital flexor ten-
suspensory ligament (interosseous muscle), S: skin, SB: sesamoid bone, SDFT:
 don, asterisk: intersesamoid ligament (palmar ligaments).
superficial digital flexor tendon. (Courtesy of Dr. Patan)
122
limb, they are palpable as relatively firm structures. [134] Inflam-
surgical procedures are described for treatment, concerning which
matory changes of the proximal part of the suspensory ligament
 a controlled program of exercise adapted to the course of healing is
(origin of the suspensory ligament) are a relatively frequent cause of
considered especially important. [141]
lameness in athletic horses (especially racehorses, but also dressage
The accessory ligament of the superficial digital flexor tendon
and jumping horses). The pelvic limbs are somewhat more often
(proximal check ligament), which originates about 7-14 cm proxi-
involved (see 24.3). [13.5]
mal to the antebrachiocarpal joint caudomedially at the radius, may
12.4. Also, the distal sesamoidea ligaments (especially the oblique
[147] [148] The changes can usually be demonstrated well sono-
sesamoidean ligaments, but also the straight sesamoidean ligament)
 graphically [147] and occur often together with a tendinitis of the
have a clinical importance. Especially in athletic horses there occurs
superficial digital flexor tendon [139] or with the carpal canal syn-
 drome. [148] Also, surgically the accessory ligment is of import-
ligaments. For confirmation of the diagnosis, sonographic exami-
ance, because in case of a severe tendinitis of the superficial digital
 nation is the method of choice. [136] [137] [138]
flexor tendon [139] or in certain forms of flexural limb deformities
 a desmotomy (section) of the ligament in the region of its origin is
12.5. Tendinitis of the superficial digital flexor tendon is the most
 done therapeutically. This can be done endoscopically, in which
frequent tendon disease of athletic horses, [139] in which case, the
case access is possible either from lateral via the carpal synovial
damage to the tendon is chiefly localized in the middle to distal
sheath of the digital flexors [149] or from medial via the synovial
third of the metacarpus. [140] [141] In this region, the superficial
sheath of the flexor carpi radialis muscle. [139] Alternatively, direct
digital flexor tendon has a sickle-shaped cross-section in the physio-
access to the accessory ligament from medial at the level of the
logical state, and is on the lifted limb easily differentiated by palpa-
chestnut, cranial to the cephalic vein, is possible.
tion from the more oval cross-section of the deep digital flexor ten-
don (see also Fig. 10.4.). With the inflammatory changes, it is fre-
12.6. In contrast to the superficial digital flexor tendon, tendinitis
quently difficult to delimit these tendons. With an acute inflamma-
 of the deep digital flexor tendon in the region of the cannon bone is
tion, there is moreover a painful, warm swelling of the tendon.
rather rare. Lesions of this tendon are more often localized in the
[141] The main cause of tendinitis of the superficial digital flexor
 distal part (i.e., at the pastern or in the region of the podotrochlea),
tendon is considered to be an overstress of the tendon, which leads
to a rupture of tendon fibers. [139] On the basis of the very restrict-
tendon is present. Secondary tendon lesions in connection with
ed adaptability of the tendons, there is an accumulation of stress-
alterations of the navicular bone are remarkably more rare, for
dependent microtraumata and with that a degeneration of tendon
which reason, there is sometimes no radiographic indication of the
tissue. [142] Besides that, direct traumata can also bring about a
 podotrochleosis syndrome. Since lesions in this area very frequent-
tendonitis secondarily. [139] Healing of the tendon damage results
 ly can also not be demonstrated sonographically, an additional MRI
with the formation of scar tissue, which decreases the elasticity of
 is of great diagnostic value. [151]
the tendon. Consequently, especially in trotter racehorses, in which
 The accessory ligament of the deep digital flexor tendon (distal
the superficial digital flexor tendon is exposed to a high stress, there
 check ligament) originates in the area of the palmar carpus from the
 are relatively often recidivists. [139] The extent of the damage to
ligamentum carpi radiatum (a part of the deep palmar carpal liga-
the tendon is best assessed sonographically. In checking the course
 ment) and passes over into the deep digital flexor tendon at the
of healing, sonographic examination is also the method of choice,
 middle of the metacarpus. [134] Also, this check ligament, which on
[141] [143] but it is problematic to demonstrate the chronic scar tis-
the thoracic limb in the proximal metcarpal region has roughly the
sue. [144] In this case especially the MRI (magnetic resonance imag-
same caliber as the deep digital flexor tendon, is of clinical relevan-
ing) is very suitable. [144] [145] Different physical, medical, and
ce (Fig. 12.5). Owing to overstress, especially in athletic horses,
 lesions of this ligament may develop, which can usually be demon-
strated very well sonographically. [142] Moreover, in certain forms
 Computer supported cross-sectional imaging procedure for the differen-
 of flexural limb deformities (see below) a desmotomy of the check
tiation of various soft tissues. The phenomenon which forms the basis of
 ligament of the deep digital flexor tendon is performed in the pro-
this is the inherent rotation (so-called "spin") of hydrogen nuclei (pro-
 ximal third of the metacarpus. [152] For that, the access is mostly
tons). These are disposed across an appropriate magnetic moment and
from lateral (to take care for the medial palmar artery), but is also
are aligned in the direction of an external magnetic field. This alignment
possible from medial. [150]
is disturbed for a short time by brief impulses of electromagnetic waves
 Due to shortening of the flexor tendons, restrictions of the mobi-
that exhibit the same frequency as theinherent rotation (resonance）of
 lity of different joints may develop, so that the limb cannot be fully
the protons. Following the impulse, protons revert to their original orien-
extended (flexural limb deformities). [152] Newborn foals or youn-
tation, releasing electromagnetic waves that can be recorded with corre-
sponding registering devices. The intensity of the signal is specific and is
 ger horses are especially involved; however, older horses may also
based on the variable proton density of the tissue.
   a a n l  q  e d
flexural limb deformity of foals, a disproportion between the mus-
MCI
(laL)
(mod.)
Fig. 12.4. Cross-section at the level of the proximal phalanx with sonogram of the
 Fig. 12.5. Cross-section at the level of the proximal metacarpus with sonogram of
palmar region (transverse, linear array scanner 7.5 MHz with stand-off pad).
 the palmar region (transverse, linear array scanner 7.5 MHz with stand-off pad).
DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon, OsL: oblique sesamoid ligament, P I: proximal
 AL-DDF: accessory ligament of the deep digital flexor muscle, DDFT: deep digi-
phalanx, S: skin, SDFT: superficial digital flexor tendon, SSL: straight sesamoid 
 tal flexor tendon, IOM: suspensory ligament interosseous muscle), S: skin, SDFT:
ligament. (Courtesy of Dr. Patan)
superficial digital flexor tendon. (Courtesy of Dr Patan)
123
cle-tendon-length and the length of the bone is frequently present.
supply (ischemia) in the distal region of the podotrochlea as well as
Occasionally, however, deformation of the joint-forming bones is
excessive static-mechanical stress are discussed. [121] The most fre-
p  g m u sue ae ss e 
ed, but sometimes also the carpal joints and rarely the hock joints
 border of the navicular bone in the form of sesamoid canals (out-
are involved. [152] [153] [154] In the case of acquired flexural limb 
 pouchings of the coffin joint surrounded by vessels and nerves.
deformities of foals, which develop mostly at an age of 6 weeks to
 [155] [157] Here, knobby, deformed or branched canals are to be
8 months, especially the coffin joint cannot be extended because of
 regarded in each case as pathological; whereas narrow sesamoid
a contracture of the deep digital flexor tendon. [152] [8] With per-
canals of variable depth can be observed even in clinically normal
sistence of the condition, there usually develops a club hoof (angle
 horses. [158] The pathological dilatation of these little canals pre-
of the toe will be up to 90° or even more). [152] [8] [153] With the
sumably arises either from an increased intraarticular pressure in
more rare form in which the carpal joint is also involved, predomi-
 connection with an inflammation of the cofin joint [155] or by an
nantly foals of an age between 1-6 months are encountered. [154]
 elevated intraarterial pressure due to arteriosclerotic changes of the
The acquired flexural deformity of the young horse appears usual-
vessels within the sesamoid canals. [156] Beyond that, also carti-
ly at an age between 9-24 months. [8] [154] A non-physiological
laginous and osseous defects of the gliding surface of the navicular
flexure of the fetlock joint (so-called *knuckling over") is typical, in
bone,inflammationof thenavicularbrsa, as well as lesons of the
which case the dorsal angle of the fetlock joint is 180° and more (an
distal part of the deep flexor tendon are possible causes. [1s9] A
 angle of about 140° is physiological). [152] The disease develops
further change that appears is insertional desmopathy of the differ-
primarily by a shortening of the superficial digital flexor tendon in
ent ligaments of the navicular bone. [155] [157] [38] Excessive
relation to the skeleton. The deep digital flexor tendon and the
stress of the ligamentous apparatus is considered the cause that
leads to the reactive increase of bone. [38] The consequence is a
As a cause, especially different painful conditions in the region of
 deformation of the contour of the navicular bone in the form of
the limbs are considered. [8] [154] [153] Treatment of the inherited
sharp-pointed extensions at the ends or excrescences of bone on the
and acquired flexural limb deformity depends on the location and
 proximal or distal border of the navicular bone. [155] [38] Some-
the degree of severity of the disease. In mild cases, a conservative
times, chip fractures of these bony excrescences also occur. [155]
 The lesions on the navicular bone are usually well demonstrated
procedures are customary. [152] [8] [153] In the case of an acquired
radiographically, in which case the so-called Oxspring technique is
flexural limb deformity of foals, a desmotomy of the check ligament
 of particular importance. [160] [161] Using this technique, the nav-
 of the deep digital flexor tendon and/or a tenotomy of the deep digi-
icular bone is projected onto the second phalanx by flexion of the
tal flexor tendon in the middle metacarpal region may be necessary.
 q nx  jo d o e p  
[152] For the acquired flexural limb deformity of the young horse,
12.7.1., a). [161] An evaluation of the gliding surface for the ten-
often a desmotomy of the check ligament of the superficial and/or
 don as well as the bone structure of the navicular bone can be
deep flexor tendons, sometimes also a tenotomy of the deep and/or
accomplished by latero-medial (Fig. 12.7.1., c) or tangential (pal-
superficial flexor tendon is indicated. [152] [154] Section of the
maroproximal-palmarodistal, Fig. 12.7.1., b) radiographs. [121] 
suspensory ligament is only performed in exceptional cases. [152]
 [161] To obtain additional information on the gliding surface for
In newborn foals with non-physiological flexure of the carpal joint,
the tendon of the navicular bone as well as of the deep flexor ten-
tenotomy of the tendons of the flexor and extensor carpi ulnaris
 don, which passes here, a sonographic examination can be attempt-
muscles about 2 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone is possi-
ed over the area of the frog (after hoof trimming). [162] A further
ble as a final resort (ultima ratio). [152] [8]
aid to diagnosis would be scintigraphy of the navicular bone region,
which, to be sure, even in clinically healthy horses can yield a posi-
12.7. The podotrochlea consists of the gliding surface (facies flexo-
tive reading. [163] It is possible to obtain a good representation of
ria or distal scutum) of the navicular bone, the podotrochlear bur-
 the navicular bone or the surrounding soft tissues with CTf or MRI.
sa (navicular bursa), and the part of the deep digital flexor tendon
that passes upon the gliding surface. [155] In the broader sense, the
entire navicular bone, including its ligaments, as well as the palmar
 Computer supported cross-sectional imaging procedure, which rests
part of the coffin joint belong to the podotrochlea. [156] Disease of
the podotrochlea (podotrochleosis, navicular-bone-syndrome, nav-
upon the principle of tissue-specific absorption of x-radiation. In this
procedure, a multiplicity of projections of a designated layer of the body
icular disease) is one of the most frequent causes of lameness in rid-
is generated. In the computer, these are reworked by way of measure-
aun pue paanoau ae squl oieou yoq aensn Issil 'sasioy su
ments of density to form an image. The different density values are
horses have a stiff, stumbling gait. [157] [121] The pathogenesis is
represented as grey-tones and permit a certain differentiation of the tis-
 presumably multifactorial, in which a main cause of reduced blood
sues.
SDFT
OSL
SSL
 Fig. 12.7.1. Radiographs of the distal limb of a 5 years quarterhorse mare with
 Fig. 12.7.2. a) Nuclear magnetic resonance image: distal limb, paramedian longi-
podotrochleosis: three different exposures: a) Oxspring exposure: knobby.
tudinal section, b) CT scan: cross-section at the level of the distal sesamoid bone.
enlarged sesamoid canals (arrow) and drawn-out extensions at the lateral borders
CDE: tendon of the common digital extensor muscle, DDFT: deep digital flexor
-d - lewixadaeuled leuauel (q (peaymone) auog pioueses leisip aun jo
tendon, OsL: oblique sesamoid ligament, P ll: palmar process of the distal pha-
marodistal) exposure: enlarged sesamoid canals (arrow), c) Lateral (latero-medi-
lanx, SDFT: superficial digital flexor tendon, SSL: straight sesamoid ligament.
al) exposure: slight degree of concavity in the region of the distal scutum (gliding
(Courtesy of Prof. Dr W. Henninger Universitatsklinik fur Radiologie, Veterinar-
surface for the deep flexor tendon) (arrow). (Radiographs: Klinik fur Orthopadie 
med. Univ. Wien)
bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
124
[164]  [165] [166] Possible conservative therapy consists of an
tis. [174] [175] As collateral ligaments are absent in the shoulder
orthopedic horse shoeing including hoof trimming, systemic and
joint, the insertional tendons of the subscapularis, infraspinatus and
local medication as well as an adequate exercise regime. [167] [168]
supraspinatus muscles are responsible for the collateral stability of
[169] Recently also the application of shock-wave-treatment (extra-
the joint. [176] Collateral instability of the shoulder joint can be
corporeal shock wave therapy) is recommended. [170] Beyond that,
caused by a lesion of the nerves of the brachial plexus and the
also different surgical procedures are described. To promote perfu-
 accompanying loss of function of the muscles, which act as a re-
placement for the collateral ligaments.
thetic nerve fibers) in the region of the medial or lateral palmar dig-
Injection of the shoulder joint for intraarticular anesthesia or
ital artery and vein, in combination with a fasciotomy, has been
 local therapy is performed cranial to the tendon of the infraspina-
proposed. [99] As a further possibility, desmotomy of the ligaments 
tus muscle, which is easily palpable. To do this, the needle is intro-
between the long pastern bone and the navicular bone is described.
 duced at the depression between the cranial and caudal parts of the 
 greater tubercle of the humerus and advanced about 6-8 cm in a
ital nerves (TPA 2), neurectomy of the lateral and medial palmar
caudomedial and slightly distal direction (in a direction toward the 
digital nerves at the pastern can be performed as a final measure.
elbow of the opposite side; Fig. 14.2., 1). [114] [177] If a second
[121] [168]
 aq uo sf rs a ' an y oi aessau si ssae
jected additionally about 10 cm caudal and 4 cm distal to the site
14.1. Synovial structures on the Thoracic Limb
just described. The needle is directed 20° dorsally and to a depth of
Besides the diagnostic nerve anesthesias, also often intrasynovial
8 cm. [177] Anesthesia of the shoulder joint is obtained with 25-30
anesthesias of joints or certain synovial sheaths of synovial bursae
cc of a 2% local anesthesia solution [114], in which case the injec-
a  s rn ss r xa  d a
 tion of a larger volume (more than 10 cc) may, owing to diffusion,
most often used sites of injection of these structures are important
lead to a paresis of the adjacent suprascapular nerve. [177]
for diagnosis of lameness. Also, for the implementation of an endo-
nial to the tendon of the infraspinatus and directly proximal to the
knowledge of the anatomy of the concerned structure is a basic pre-
 depression between the cranial and caudal parts of the greater
condition. Besides that, the synovial structures are of a special clin-
tubercle of the humerus. [178] [179] The needle is introduced at an
ical importance, because the lesions in the region of these structures
 angle of about 25° in a caudodistal direction. [179] The second
a on sun aq pue uoi hi jo ys e on paoao sme ar
 access for the instruments will be chosen depending on the location
necessity of an immediate adequate therapy. A solid knowledge of
 of the lesion. Usually a caudolateral portal for the instruments
the exact localization and extension of the synovial spaces is for this
(about 6 cm caudal and 4 cm distal to the arthroscopic portal) is uti-
reason also essential for the evaluation of lesions.
lized. [178] [179] Sometimes also a cranial access of the instruments
directly distal to the arthroscopic portal is possible. An alternate
14.2. The shoulder joint is covered by relatively strong muscles. For
 access is located about 1 cm caudal to the tendon of the infraspina-
this reason, the danger of an infection caused by a wound is more
( r sn i p a ss a m s
rare. But also non-infectious inflammation of the shoulder joint is
muscle. Access for the instruments is, in this case, about 2-4 cm
relatively rarely observed. Occasional causes of lameness are lesions
caudal to the arthroscopic portal. [179]
of the articular cartilage or of the subchondral bone, related to a
disorder of endochondral ossification (osteochondrosis). [173]
14.3. Pathologic changes in the region of the elbow joint are like-
[108] In radiographs a flattening or indentation of the bony contour
wise relatively seldom the cause for lameness. Occasionally, cyst-
 or of isolation of a cartilage-bone-chip is visible. Such alterations
like subchondral defects occur, which are usually located medially
can be observed both in the region of the glenoid cavity of the
 in the proximal epiphysis of the radius. [180] [181] Osteochondral
scapula and the humeral head. Usually the caudal half of the joint
changes or traumata are discussed as the cause. [182] Besides con-
is involved. [173] [108] Moreover, cyst-like defects may occur in the
 servative therapy, a surgical procedure in the form of an extra-artic-
subchondral bone. These are usually localized at the transition
 ular curettage of the subchondral lesion is described. [180]
between the middle and caudal thirds of the glenoid cavity of the
 In contrast to the shoulder joint, the lateral part of the elbow
scapula. [108] Therapy can be conservative [108] or surgical
 joint is covered only by little soft tissue. For this reason, in the event
(arthroscopical curettage of the altered cartilage or removal of the
of lacerations of the elbow joint region, the joint is relatively easily
osteochondral fragment [173]).
 Especialy in Shetland ponies, there occasionally appears also a
dysplasia (defective development) of the shoulder joint, which is
accompanied by subluxation and a secondary degenerative arthri-
Subcutaneous
bursa over the
Shoulder
olecranon 
joint
Subtendinous
Subtendinous
bursa of the
bursa of the
triceps brachi muscle
infraspinatus
Ebow (cubital)
muscie
Intertubercular
joint
bursa
lateralis) muscle
 Subcutaneous bursa
over the lateral prominence
oftheheadoftheradius
Fig. 14.2. Injection of the shoulder joint (1) and the intertubercular bursa (2). (Cour-
Fig. 14.3. Injection of the elbow joint: 1) cranial access, 2) proximolateral access.
tesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
(Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
 opened and can become infected. In such a case, a possible commu-
sor muscle, both joints are palpable as a depression. The needle is
nication of the joint with the 5 cm long subtendinous bursa of the
inserted in this depression perpendicular to the skin and advanced
ulnaris lateralis muscle [183] as well as a shift of the skin over the
into the particular joint (Fig. 14.4., 1/2). Care must be taken for the
articular region during movement of the limb must be taken into
 tendons and their tendon sheaths. [114] [184] An additional access
 consideration, so that even a supposed distant wound may have a
to both joints is possible by way of the corresponding palmarolat-
communication with the elbow joint. To examine for possible artic-
ular infection, the joint is penetrated and the synovia is examined
the antebrachiocarpal joint extends proximal to the accessory car-
cytologically.
pal bone and lies directly cranial to the carpal synovial sheath,
 Injection of the elbow joint is traditionally performed cranial to
which in case of increased filling of these synovial structures can
the lateral collateral ligament, which is found between the lateral
easily lead to mistakes. [114] Injection of the joint is performed be-
 epicondyle of the humerus and the tuberosity of the radius for the
tween the readily palpable tendon of the lateral digital extensor
attachment of the ligament (both bony points are readily palpable).
 muscle and the tendon of the ulnaris lateralis muscle, directly pro-
[177] [184] The needle is introduced about 2.5 cm cranial to the
 ximal to the accessory carpal bone (section 14.4., 3). [114] Alter-
collateral ligament and about 3.5 cm proximal to the ligament's
 natively, the injection can also be performed farther distal, about
insertion on the radius. The skin is penetrated horizontally and the
the level of the middle of the accessory carpal bone. [188] At this
needle directed slightly caudally and advanced to a depth of 5-6 cm
site, a slight depression is palpable between the distal radius and the
(Fig. 14.3. 1). [114] [177] Alternatively, the joint can also be pene-
trated by way of the proximolateral part of the caudal recess in the
lar to the skin (section 14.4., 4.). [114] [188] In doing this, care
region of the olecranon fossa. To do this, the needle is introduced
must also be taken for the surrounding tendons and tendinous
into the palpable depression between the olecranon and the lateral
sheaths. The palmarolateral recess of the intercarpal joint is located
about 2-2.5 cm farther distal between the palmar border of the
 needle is advanced mediodistally and slightly cranially about 4-7
ulnar carpal bone and the fourth carpal bone (section 14.4., 5.).
cm (Fig. 14.3, 2). [114] [183] For intra-articular anesthesia of the
 [114] [188] For anesthesia of each corresponding joint about 5-10
elbow joint, about 20-25 cc of a 2% local anesthesia solution is
cc of a 2% local anesthesia solution is injected, [114] The carpo-
injected. [114] The anesthesia of the elbow joint that was per-
 metacarpal joint does not have to be injected individually, because
formed in former times by way of the subtendinous bursa of the
it will be desensitized by anesthesia of the intercarpal joint owing to
ulnaris lateralis muscle is very uncertain owing to the fact that the
the communication of the synovial spaces. In doing this, considera-
two synovial structures communicate only in about one-third of
tion must be given to the fact that it is possible for a diffusion of
horses. [183]
anesthesia solution from the palmarodistal outpouching of the car-
 For arthroscopy of the elbow joint, access can be caudomedial,
between the flexor carpi radialis muscle and the flexor carpi ulnaris
as to the palmar metacarpal nerves. This can lead to misinterpreta-
muscle, where a large part of the caudal articular surfaces of the
tions. [114] Moreover diffusion processes have been described be-
humerus, radius and ulna can be demonstrated. [185] A second
tween the intercarpal joint and the antebrachiocarpal joint. [189] 
access for the instrumentation is possible caudal and slightly proxi-
 For arthroscopy of the antebrachiocarpal and of the intercarpal
mal to the arthroscopic portal. To avoid injury to the ulnar nerve as
joint, access is also medial to the terminal tendon of the extensor
well as the collateral ulnar artery and vein, access should not be
carpi radialis muscle or between that tendon and the tendon of the
proximal to the articular cavity of the humeroradial joint. [185]
common digital extensor muscle. [179] [190] The palmar part of
Alternatively, access to the caudal region of the elbow joint is also
the joints is accessible via the respective palmarolateral articular
possible laterally by way of the large synovial outpouching in the
 recess, in which case, after filling of the joint, the instruments are
olecranon fossa. [179] To demonstrate the cranial articular surface
introduced in the center. [179] Besides that, also an access to the
 of the humeral condyles, arthroscopic access can be gained directly
 antebrachiocarpal joint from caudomedial is described. [191]
cranial to the lateral collateral ligament. In this case, access for
instrumentation is located in the region of the belly of the extensor
carpi radialis muscle or of the common digital extensor muscle.
[18.5]
14.4. The carpal joint is composed of three horizontally arranged
joints. The proximal joint (antebrachiocarpal joint or radiocarpal
joint) is located between the radius and the proximal row of carpal
bones and permits flexion of about 95°. [186] The middle joint
(mediocarpal joint, in clinical usage also intercarpal joint) is
between the proximal and distal row of carpal bones and can be
flexed about 45°. [186] It communicates always with the distal joint 
others-communicate between the third and fourth carpal bones. A
communication of the intercarpal joint with the antebrachiocarpal
joint is rare. [187] The carpometacarpal joint has palmarodistal
 outpouchings, which are present laterally and medially between the
 corresponding splint bone and the cannon bone. They extend about
2.5 cm in a distal direction. [187]
Besides the chip and slab fractures in the region of the carpus,
degenerative changes of the carpal joints are the most frequent pro-
Antebrachiocarpal joint
blems. They are usually associated with an increased filling of the
 Mediocarpal (clinical: 
joint, which can be most easily palpated on the flexed limb medial-
intercarpal) joint
ly and laterally beside the tendon of the extensor carpi radialis mus-
 Carpometacarpal joint-
cle. [31]
 In the carpal joint region, also a great number of synovial sheaths
and bursae are found (Fig. 14.13.). These can also be excessively
filled due to inflammatory processes and have to be considered in
20
the differential diagnosis. Also, with injuries in the carpal region,
an  o e os jo sa aq p e 
carpal joint, of the synovial sheaths or of the synovial bursa must
 be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Fig. 14.4. Injection of the carpal joint: dorsal access into the antebrachiocarpal
 For injection of the antebrachiocarpal joint and the intercarpal
 joint (1) or into the mediocarpal- (middle carpal-) joint (2), proximal (3) or distal (4)
joint, the named joints are flexed, in which case they open dorsally.
access into the palmarolateral recess of the antebrachiocarpal joint, (5) access
Medial to the insertion tendon of the extensor carpi radialis muscle
 into the palmarolateral recess of the mediocarpal- (middle carpal-) joint. (Courtesy 
 or between this tendon and the tendon of the common digital exten-
of Institut f. Veterinär-Anatomie, Berlin)
126
14.5. The fetlock joint is a compound hinge joint, which permits a
the dorsal joint sac can be lateral or medial to the extensor tendon
slight side-to-side movement only in extreme flexion. [176] In the
 at the level of the articular cleft. The needle is advanced horizontal-
weight-bearing limb, the joint is in hyperextension, in which the
ly under the extensor tendon (Fig. 14.5., 2). [188] For anesthesia of
dorsal extension angle is about 140°. [152] To prevent excessive
the fetlock joint, 10 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution is injected.
hyperextension of the joint, the fetlock joint is supported palmarly
[114]
by different ligamentous and tendinous structures (so-called sus-
 For arthroscopy of the fetlock joint in the region of the dorsal
pensory apparatus). [176]
articular outpouching, access is also medial and lateral to the ten-
The collateral ligaments of the fetlock joint consist each of two
 don of the common digital extensor muscle, in which case, lateral
parts, which are well demonstrated sonographically. The somewhat
 more dorsally located superficial part is relatively thin and runs in
 demonstration of the palmar parts of the joint, there is besides
a vertical direction. The deeper part is on the other hand obliquely
 medial or lateral access possible in the center of the palmaroproxi-
distopalmarly oriented and attaches not only to the proximal pha-
 mal articular recess. The instrument portal is installed either distal
lanx, but also to the corresponding sesamoid bone. [192] Lesions of
 or proximal to the arthroscopic portal according to where the lesion
the collateral ligaments, which can arise from avulsion fractures of
is found. [190]
the proximal phalanx, are usually due to trauma and lead to an
 In athletic horses, inflammatory changes of the fetlock joint are
instability or luxation of the fetlock joint. [193] The joint capsule
 relatively often associated with lameness. A possible cause is oste-
forms a dorsal and a palmar articular recess, in which case the dor-
 ochondrotic lesions in the region of the articular cartilage or of the
sal recess extends proximally about 2 cm and the palmar recess
subchondral bone. These can be demonstrated radiographically as
 about 4-5 cm proximally. With increased filling, the latter is palpa-
irregularities of contour or fragmentation and are usually located
ble or even visible (so-called "windpuffs") between the insertional
 dorsally on the sagittal ridge of the cannon bone. [51] [52] Occa-
branches of the suspensory ligament and the cannon bone (McII).
 sionally there also occur intra-articular fragments dorsoproximally
It must not be confused with the proximal part of the digital syn-
 or palmaroproximally on the proximal phalanx (chip-/Birkeland
 ovial sheath of the flexor tendons, which is palmar to the suspen-
fractures, section 4.13.). [67] [61] [51] If lameness is present, usu-
sory ligament. [176]
 ally surgical therapy (arthroscopic curettage of the altered articular
 Diagnostic or therapeutic injection of the fetlock joint can be per-
 cartilage or removal of fragments) is indicated. [61] [51] [52]
 Subchondral cystoid defects are a further possible cause of lame-
access to the palmar recess is the easier. The traditional proximal
 ness. These are mostly found on the weight-bearing surface of the
injection site lies between the cannon bone (MclI) and the suspen-
 medial condyle of the cannon bone. [196] Therapy can be arthro-
sory ligament at the level of the *button" of the splint bone and pro-
 ximal to the collateral ligament of the sesamoid bone, in which case
subchondral bone [196] or by an additional transplantation of bone
the needle is advanced in a slightly distal direction (Fig. 14.5., 1).
substance from the coxal tuber). [197]
[188] [184] [194] Owing to the fact that at this site there are pro-
 A special form of arthritis of the fetlock joint is chronic prolife-
minent villi of the joint capsule, which often cause an obstruction
 rative synovitis (villonodular synovitis) which is characterized by a
of the needle and, besides that, the danger of hemorrhage into the
 great increase in the synovial pads (localized duplicatures of the
 synovial membrane medial and lateral in the region of the dorso-
farther distally. [195] To do this, the fetlock joint is slightly flexed.
 proximal fixation of the joint capsule to the bone). Repeated trau-
 The needle is inserted perpendicularly through the skin dorsal to the
 mata and irritations of the tissue as a result of hyperextension of the
neurovascular bundle in the palpable depression between McllI and
fetlock joint at high speed are considered to be the cause. A striking
the lateral sesamoid bone and advanced through the collateral liga-
feature is chronic filing of the joint as well as typical radiographic
ment of the sesamoid bone (Fig. 14.5., 3). [195] [188] Injection into
changes in the form of an indentation in the region of the dorsodi-
stal cannon bone (directly proximal to the sagittal ridge). Therapy
val of altered tissue). [198] [199]
14.6. The pastern joint is a saddle joint, which--besides movement
-ed is e soe osxa e xa o) ad iees a 
sive side-to-side and torsion-movement (about 4°). [200] [176] The
joint capsule forms a proximal palmar and dorsal recess. [176]
Injection into the dorsal pouch of the pastern joint is performed la-
teral or medial to the extensor tendon about 1 cm distal to the
attachment of the collateral ligament at the well palpable distal
tubercles of the proximal phalanx. The needle is directed horizon-
tally or slightly distally under the extensor tendon (Fig. 14.5., 4).
[188] Alternatively, injection into the palmar recess of the pastern
joint can be realized from lateral (Fig. 14.5., 5). [201] [188] To do
this, dorsal to the neurovascular bundle, the depression between the
 palmar border of the proximal phalanx and the lateral branch of
the superficial flexor tendon (proximal to its insertion at the flexor
tuberosity) is palpated. At this depression proximal to the distal
tubercles of the proximal phalanx, the needle is introduced and
advanced into the joint pouch in a slightly distal direction. [201]
Additional access is possible at the palmaroproximal border of the
middle phalanx); the needle is directed as nearly horizontally as
possible. [188] For anesthesia of the pastern joint, 5-10 cc of 2%
 anesthesia solution is injected. [114]
Arthroscopy of the pastern joint is necessary only in rare cases.
For this, access is in the region of the dorsal pouch of the joint,
medially and laterally beside the tendon of the common digital
 Fig. 14.5.Injection of the digital articulations: (1) proximal access into the palmar
extensor muscle. [179]
recess of the fetlock joint, (2) injection of the dorsal fetlock joint recess, (3) distal
 Arthrotic changes of the pastern joint (high ringbone) are usual-
 ly observed bilaterally. They are relatively frequently the cause of
of the dorsal pastern joint recess, (5) palmar access into the pastern joint, (6/7)
injection of the dorsal coffin joint recess, (8) injection of the palmaroproximal cof-
lameness in athletic horses. [202] [203] Increased deposition of
bone dorsally on the proximal middle phalanx and distally on the
fin joint recess. a: subtendinous bursa of the common digital extensor muscle, b:
subtendinous bursa of the lateral digital extensor muscle, c: bursa under the
proximal phalanx are typical and radiographically visible (Fig.
extensor branch of the suspensory ligament (interosseous muscle). (Courtesy of 
4.13., b). In advanced cases, these may result in bridge-like forma-
Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
 tions and ankylosis (stiffening of the joint) and then they are usual-
ly also palpable and even visible. [204] Treatment depends on the
 proximal to the deltoid tuberosity. A second access is possible 2-3
degree of the disease. For advanced stages an arthrodesis (surgical
cm proximal to the cranial part of the greater tubercle of the hume-
stiffening of the joint by different procedures of osteosynthesis) is
rus near the tendon of origin of the biceps brachi, in which case the
possible, [202] [205] [203] [206] in which case arthrodesis of the
 instrument is introduced and directed distomedially. [217]
pastern joint of the pelvic limb is described as having a better
chance of success than the thoracic limb. [205] [202]
14.9. A subcutaneous olecranon bursa frequently arises over the
olecranon tuber, often as a result of contusions (e.g., by insufficient
14.7. The coffin joint is a compound saddle joint, which besides
bedding or the pressure of a horseshoe while lying down). With
flexion and extension, has also a certain side-to-side movement and
inflammation, it usually becomes visibly enlarged (so-called
torsion movement (thoracic limb up to 15°, pelvic limb to 18°) that 
"capped elbow"). [218]
 o n a o s  usao e 
The joint capsule has a palmar and a dorsal pouch, [176] in which
14.10. Also, the precarpal subcutaneous bursa can be increasingly
case the dorsal pouch, which is located under the tendon of the
filled due to inflammation (hygroma), which as a rule can be traced
common digital extensor muscle, extends 1-2 cm proximal to the
 to trauma in the region of the dorsal carpus. In a differential diag-
hoof capsule. With increased filling of the coffin joint it is palpable
nosis, this has to be distinguished from an increased filling of the
as a fluctuating swelling directly above the coronet. [111]
 extensor tendon sheaths or a rather more rare synovial hernia of the
 Especially in case of injuries in the dorsal region of the coronet,
intercarpal or antebrachiocarpal joint. [31]
there may be an opening of the dorsal joint pouch and by this an
infection of the coffin joint. Beyond that, also foreign bodies (nail)
14.11. The navicular bursa (podotrochlear bursa) is  located
may enter via the solear surface of thehoof and lead to an opening
between the navicular bone and the deep flexor tendon that rides
of the joint in the palmarodistal recess. Here usually the deep flexor
 over it (Fig. 14.11., a). It belongs to the complex of podotrochlea
tendon and the distal sesamoid impar ligament (distal sesamoid-
(see podotrochleosis, section 12.7). For injection of the navicular
distal phalanx ligament) will be penetrated. [208]
bursa, the projection of the navicular bone onto the side wall of the
Injection of the coffin joint for local treatment or intra-articular
hoof serves as a landmark. This is located 1 cm distal to the coro-
anesthesia is usually performed in the region of the dorsal joint-
 net in the middle between the dorsal and palmar borders of the hoof
 pouch. Here the skin is penetrated about 1.5 cm proximal to the
 red a u nn si au  l sde
coronet and 1.5-2 cm from the midline of the limb. The needle is
 about 1 cm proximal to the coronet and advanced in the direction
advanced in a palmarodistal and axial direction into the articular 
 of the navicular bone until bone-contact is made (usually at a depth
pouch. (Fig. 14.5, 6.). [188] [112] Alternatively the joint may also
 of 4-5 cm; Fig. 14.11., b). [219] This is best performed under radio-
be injected in the midline with the needle directed slightly distally
 graphic control to avoid an erroneous injection of the adjacent cof-
(Fig. 14.5.7.). [114] [188] Further access is by way of the palmaro-
fin joint. [114] Alternatively, the needle may be introduced at the
proximal recess, in which the needle is introduced in the depression 
 deepest place between the heels and advanced dorsodistally in the
between the proximal border of the ungular cartilage and the pal-
 direction of the navicular bone. For anesthesia, 3-5 cc of 2% anes-
marodistal border of the middle phalanx in a dorsodistal and axial 
thesia solution is injected into the bursa. Owing to diffusion, cer-
direction (Fig. 1.5., 8). [209] 188] For anesthesia, maximally 6 cc of
 tainly after 20 minutes a desensitization of the coffin joint is also
2% local anesthesia solution is injected. [114] Because of the direct 
possible. [189] [220]
proximity to the navicular bursa and navicular bone, including liga-
 For endoscopy of the navicular bursa, access is proximal to the
ments of the navicular bone, a diffusion of the anesthetic solution
ungular cartilage between the border of the deep flexor tendon and
to these structures is possible. [210] [189] [211] For this reason,
the neurovascular bundle, in which case, entry is dorsal to the deep
 anesthesia of the coffin joint is not entirely specific. [211] Also, dif-
flexor tendon in a distoaxial direction. In this way, the synovial
[ ss si srau r d e  jo 
 membrane of the synovial bursa, the insertion of the navicular liga-
which would explain the observed desensitization of the entire sole
 ments, the palmar or plantar surface of the navicular bone as well
following anesthesia of the coffin joint. [212] [213]
 as the dorsal surface of the deep flexor tendon can be demonstrated.
Arthroscopyof the coffin joint is alsopossible in the region ofthe
[221]
dorsal joint pouch. Access is 2-3 cm proximal to the coronet,
 directly beside the extensor tendon (about 2 cm lateral or medial to
the midline of the limb). [214]
 Because of the enormous biomechanical stress on the coffin joint
(especially upon uneven ground or turning) the joint is relatively
frequently subject to pathological changes. [207] In addition to
inflammation of the coffin joint, also arthrotic changes (low ring-
bone) that result in lameness are not rare. Radiographically demon-
strable articular or periarticular increases in bone substance are
typical. In advanced cases, proximal to the coronet, these form a
eepflexo
 prominence which is palpable or even visible. [204]
 Occasionally there are also cystoid defects in the coffin bone,
which usually communicate with the coffin joint and often are asso-
-u pu nn ane suisa ns Ii] sai e ym pi
trally in the proximal coffin bone and can be well demonstrated
 radiographiclly. [215] [216] Besides conservative therapy, a surgical
procedure in the form of a curettage of the lesion (arthroscopic or
extra-articular via a defect of the hoof wall) is described. [182]
14.8. The intertubercular bursa (bicipital bursa) is located between
the intermediate tubercle of the humerus and the tendon of the
 Distal sesamoid
biceps brachii muscle that rides on it. Inflammation of the synovial
 (navicular) bone
Podotrochlear
bursa may cause a typical shoulder lameness. Injection is performed
(navicular) bursa
from lateral, in which case the needle is introduced about 4 cm
proximal to the distal border of the deltoid tuberosity of the
humerus, between the biceps brachii muscle and the humerus in a
Fig. 14.11. a) Longitudinal section through the distal limb to demonstrate the
proximomedial and slightly cranial direction. It is then advanced
 podotrochlea. Observe the close relationship of the podotrochlear bursa to the
along the cranial margin of the bone (Fig. 14.2., 2). Alternatively,
the cranial part of the greater tubercle of the humerus can serve as
 ovial sheath, b) Radiograph used to monitor the position of the needle in injection
 a landmark. Here, the injection site is about 3-5 cm distal and 6-7
of the podotrochlear bursa.
cm caudal to this readily palpable bony point. For anesthesia of the
 a: coffin joint (a': dorsal recess, a": palmaroproximal recess, a: palmarodistal
bursa, 10-20 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution is injected. [114]
recess), b: pastern joint (b': dorsal recess, b'": palmar recess), c: digital synovial
 For endoscopy of the intertubercular bursa, the access is 2-3 cm
sheath. (Courtesy of Dr. Patan)
128
14.12. An increased filling of the synovial sheath of the common
[134] It begins proximally at the level of the button of the splint
digital or lateral digital extensor muscle in the carpal region occurs
bone and reaches distally to the middle of the pastern bone. [224]
 occasionally in newborn foals or foals a few days old, in which case
At the latter site, it borders directly on the navicular bursa and the
 a e s s    e s i aasa
coffin joint (Fig. 14.11., a). [134] [225] With increased filling, the
ture of the corresponding extensor tendon. With the typical
synovial sheath is visible proximal to the palmar anular ligament
swelling, a knuckling over (non-physiological flexure of the
 fetlock
 between the suspensory ligament and the deep flexor tendon or dis-
joint) is usually observed when the limb is advanced. [154]
tal below and at the sides of the four-cornered plate formed by the
proximal digital anular ligaments. [224] Because an expansion of
14.13. The carpal flexor sheath surrounds the superficial and deep
the synovial sheath is not possible in the region of the palmar anu-
flexor tendons in the carpal canal and, with an increased filling, is
lar ligament, an indentation can be observed here in lateral view
visible proximal and distal to the flexor retinaculum. [114] Injec-
(see anular-ligament-syndrome, section 10.4.). Proximal to the fet-
tion of the synovial sheath is possible caudolaterally, about 5 cm
 lock joint, the superficial flexor tendon forms within the synovial
proximal to the accessory carpal bone between the tendons of the
 sheath a ring-like sleeve around the deep flexor tendon (manica
lateral digital extensor muscle and the ulnaris lateralis muscle (Fig.
flexoria), which is very well demonstrated sonographically. [225]
14.13., 1). [114] [112] Because the palmarolateral recess of the
Especially with filling of the tendon sheath, proximal to the manica
antebrachiocarpal joint is in the immediate neighborhood at this
flexoria, the lateral and medial attachment of the deep flexor ten-
site, there is always the danger of an unintentional articular injec-
 don to the wall of the tendon sheath (so-called mesotendon) is eas-
tion. [114] Alternatively, the synovial sheath can be injected direct-
 ily recognized sonographically. [225] In the fetlock region the deep
ly distal to the flexor retinaculum, in which case the needle is intro-
flexor tendon is dorsally connected with the wall of the tendon
duced between the lateral splint bone and the deep flexor tendon in
 sheath (vinculum tendinis), which likewise with increased filling
a slightly proximal direction (Fig. 14.13., 2). [114] [112] For anes-
can be well demonstrated sonographically. [226]
thesia of the carpal synovial sheath, 10-15 cc of 2% local anesthe-
 Injection of the fetlock flexor tendon sheath (digital synovial
sia solution is necessary. [114] Owing to diffusion, also here a
sheath) is possible in the proximolateral pouch about 2 cm proxi-
 desensitization of the palmar or palmar metacarpal nerves is possi-
a e si osadss a amiaq saoq rss au oi r
ble, which can lead to misinterpretation. [112]
 deep flexor tendon or between the deep and superficial flexor ten-
Endoscopy of the carpal flexor sheath is performed on the slight-
dons (Fig. 14.14., 1). [112] Because at this site a distinct hypertro-
ly flexed carpal joint in the lateral forearm region. The arthroscopic
 phy of the villi of the synovial membrane can be present, obtaining
portal is located about 3 cm proximal to the distal epiphysis of the
synovial fluid is sometimes difficult. [114] An alternate site of injec-
radius and about 2.5 cm caudal to the radius between the tendons
 tion is in the midline of the pastern in the region of the distal blind
 of the lateral digital extensor and ulnaris lateralis muscles. [222]
sac, which is bounded by the four-cornered plate of the proximal
Access for the instrumentation is distal to this point. Among other
 digital anular ligaments and the distal digital anular ligament (Fig.
things, the radial head of the deep digital flexor muscle, the proxi-
14.14., 2). [114] With a slight filling of the tendon sheath, this injec-
    ( e   
tion is also difficult, for which reason a further access was des-
flexor muscle, the distal radial epiphysis, the tendons of the super-
cribed. Here, with the fetlock joint slightly flexed, the needle is
ficial and deep digital flexor muscles, the accessory carpal bone as
inserted at the level of the middle of the sesamoid bone, palmar to
well as the adjacent articular pouches of the antebrachiocarpal and
 the neurovascular bundle between the sesamoid bone and the flexor
intercarpal joints can be demonstrated. [223] [222]
tendons nearly perpendicularly through the skin and advanced
The other tendon sheaths located in the carpal region, which
through the palmar anular ligament in the direction of the interse-
 have to be considered in differential diagnosis in case of injuries in
samoid region to a depth of 1.5-2 cm (Fig. 14.14., 3). [227] For
the carpal region, are shown in Fig. 14.13.
anesthesia of the digital synovial sheath, 10-15 cc of 2% anesthesia
solution is injected. [114] Because of diffusion, here also a desensi-
14.14. The (about 14-20 cm long) fetlock flexor tendon sheath
tization of the medial and lateral palmar digital nerves is possible,
(digital synovial sheath) surrounds mainly the deep digital flexor
which may lead to misinterpretations. [112]
tendon and only partially the superficial digital flexor tendon. [224]
SOFT
(lateral view)
(medial view)
 Fig. 14.13. Tendon sheaths and synovial bursae in the carpal region.
a: tendon sheath of the extensor carpi radialis muscle, b: tendon sheath of the
common digital extensor muscle, c: tendon sheath of the lateral digital extensor
muscle, d: tendon sheath of the extensor carpi ulnaris (ulnaris lat.) muscle, e:
Fig. 14.14. Injection of the digital synovial sheath: 1) proximal access, 2) access
carpal flexor synovial sheath with proximal (1) and distal (2) sites of injection, f:
to the distal, blind, end, 3) injection at the middle of the proximal sesamoid bones.
tendon sheath of the flexor carpi radialis muscle, g: tendon sheath of the abduc-
Mcll Third metacarpal (cannon) bone, DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon, SB:
tor pollicis longus (oblique carpal ext.) muscle. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-
 sesamoid bone, SDFT: superficial digital flexor tendon. (Courtesy of Institut f.
Anatomie, Berlin)
Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
129
 For endoscopy of the digital synovial sheath, access is at the pro-
ever is observed much more rarely than carpus valgus (cause and
ximal border of the palmar anular ligament; [228] a second access 
therapy, see carpus valgus, section 4.1.). Tarsus varus deformities
is possible directly distal to the palmar anular ligament. [229] Here
are on the other hand rather rare. A special form is the so-called
entrance into the synovial sheath is at each border of the superficial
 sn e q d a   m   nam,
digital flexor tendon about 1-2 cm palmarly from the neurovascu-
 and on the other a tarsus varus is present. Another relatively fre.
lar bundle. [229] [225] In this manner, both the region between the
 quent deviation of the axis of the pelvic limb is the varus position at
palmar anular ligament and superficial flexor tendon as well as the
the fetlock joint, where usually the distal epiphyseal growth plate of
region between superficial and deep flexor tendons can be inspec-
Mt IIl, more rarely the proximal one of the proximal phalangeal
ted. [22.5]
bone is involved. Valgus deformities of the fetlock joint are rather
rare. With surgical correction of limb deformities of the fetlock
joint it is to be noted that in this region the epiphyses close much
earlier than the distal epiphysis of the radius or of the tibia. [8]
Pelvic Limb
BIANCA PATAN
16.2. With respect to pelvic fractures, two different forms can be
16.1. For the fusion of the epiphyses and apophyses of the pelvic
differentiated according to the location of the fracture lines. Frac-
limb, basically, the same holds as for the thoracic limb. Closure of
 tures at the pelvic border (blow-up fractures of the tuber coxae,
the epiphyses of the pelvic limb is given in Fig. 16.1. Epiphyseal
ischiadic or sacral tubers) are usually accompanied by a slight to
fractures are most often located in the region of the proximal and
 moderate lameness of the pelvic limb and heal usually within 3-4
distal growth plates of the femur and tibia, [4] [5] as well as distal-
months. On the other hand, pelvic ring fractures (e.g., symphysial
ly on the cannon bone (Mt Il). [4] One of the most frequent angu-
fractures) result in a severe lameness or the horse is unable to rise.
lar limb deformities of the pelvic limb is tarsus valgus, which how-
Here the pelvis fractures usually at several sites because of its con-
figuration as a relatively rigid ring. Such fractures are always asso-
ciated with the danger of rupture of blood vessels, which may result
- aui u paaoaui ou si nqeaoe aul j 'ssol ooq raeaie e u
ture, healing can also take place with conservative treatment. With
approx. 10 months
acetabular fractures, a severe arthrosis of the hip joint (coxarthro-
sis) must be expected and with this a permanent lameness. Fractures
of the pelvic symphysis in large horses are untreatable. [230]
Also, spontaneous stress fractures of the wing of the ilium occur
10-12 months
occasionally in young thoroughbreds in training (especially in hur-
approx.
dle-racehorses). If the dosal surface is involved, then the fracture
12 months
can occasionally be demonstrated sonographically, otherwise, to
 make the diagnosis, scintigraphy is the procedure of choice. [231]
24-36 months
18-30 months
16.3. For the femur, occasionally fractures of the third trochanter
are observed, fewer of the greater trochanter, in which the fracture
fragments are usually displaced owing to the pull of the attaching
musculature. Sometimes such fractures can be demonstrated sono-
graphically; besides that, scintigraphic examination is valuable in
pointing to the diagnosis. [231]
 Especially in foals there occasionally occur diaphysial fractures,
24-30 months
 the surgical therapy by suitable osteosynthetic procedures depends
on the age or the weight of the foals. [232]
 Moreover, sometimes avulsion fractures occur in the region of
24-30months
the origin of the peroneus tertius muscle and long digital extensor
9-12 months
from 1-2 months
muscle at the lateral femoral condyle. [233] [234] This chiefly in-
30-36 months 
volves young horses in which the bone tissue is still weakly develo-
 ped. On the other hand, in older animals rather a rupture of the
 peroneus tertius muscle in its middle is observed. [233] The thera-
pprox.16-24months
py is usually surgical, in which, eending on its size,the fracture
17-24 months
fragment is removed arthroscopically or fixed by internal fixation.
pprox.3months
[233] [234]
16.4. The medial ridge of the femoral trochlea is distinctly larger
than the lateral and has a nose-like bulge upon which the patella
can hook.
16.5. Fractures of the patella usually have a traumatic origin and
are especially often observed in show-jumpers in which the horse
has collided with an obstacle in the stifle region. [235] Sagittal frac-
  is n ed a no id p a no s
involves the patellar cartilage and with this the attachment of the
femoropatellar joint is usually also present. [235] [236] Beyond
approx. 6 months 
that, also transverse or crush fractures or fractures of the basis
patellae may occur [236] Especially fractures of the apex are
approx. 12 months
described in connection with desmotomy of the medial patellar lig-
ament (see proximal fixation of the patella, section 24.1). [231]
      s i  
8-12 months
 involvement of the joint or with smaller, non-dislocated fragments.
[236] On the other hand a surgical approach is indicated where
fragments up to the size of one quarter of the patella can be arthro-
-     o   o
 Fig. 16.1. Apophyseal and epiphyseal lines of fusion of the pelvic limb of the horse
ture-fragments, internal fixation is necessary. [237]
(closure of the growth plates after Butler et al., 2000). (Courtesy of Institut f. Vet-
erinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
130
16.6. Besides traumatic fractures of the tibia, especially in two year
are especially involved (Fig. 16.10). [27] Stress on the insufficiently
old thoroughbreds and trotters in training, incomplete stress or
ossified tarsal bones may result in a collapse and consequently in a
fatigue fractures (fissures) also occur. [16] [238] In young thor-
wedge-like deformity in the dorsala region. Sometimes there also
oughbreds often the caudolateral corticalis of the middle or distal
appears fragmentation of the bones concerned [23] [27] Such form
diaphysis is involved, [15] [16] but also such fractures are not rarely
changes of the tarsal bones are connected usually to limb deformi-
observed proximolaterally or proximocaudally. [15] [238] On the
ties (tarsus valgus or cow-hocked). [245] [23]
 other hand, stress fractures in trotters are almost exclusively in the
middle region of the diaphysis. [238] Because the fissure lines often
16.11. Fractures of the tarsal bones are sometimes hard to demon-
 are not radiographically demonstrable, investigation by scintigra-
strate owing to the complex radiography (Fig. 16.11.). Most often
phy is the method of choice to find the diagnosis. [231] [15]
slab fractures are present (but distinctly more rarely than on the car-
 Occasionally, also traumatic intra-articular fractures are ob-
pus), which are usually located dorsolaterally on the third tasal
 served in the region of the lateral malleolus of the tibia. Therapy is
bone and central tarsal bone. [246] [247] Thoroughbreds and trot-
surgical, in which case the fracture-fragment is usually arthroscopi-
 ters are mainly involved, occasionally also quarterhorses. [248] A
cally removed. [239]
wedge-shaped conformation of the bone is considered a predispos-
ing factor. In young thoroughbreds, this is relatively frequently
16.7. The intercondylar eminence of the tibia has two prominences 
observed in the dorsolateral region of the third tarsal bone. [249]
that are well demonstated on radiographs. The medial tubercle is
the more prominent and more frequently involved in fractures than
the lateral (Fig. 16.7., b). Such fractures are sometimes seen in asso-
 ciation with lesions of the cranial cruciate ligament, which attaches
cranial to the intercondylar eminence. Therapy depends on the size
a Remarks concerning the designation of direction on the pelvic limb: Cor-
of the fracture-fragment (arthroscopic removal or internal fixa-
responding to the relations on the forelimb, in the region of the distal
tion]. [240] [241]
limb (up to and including the tarsus) the terms "dorsal" or "plantar"
(toward the sole of the foot) are used in place of the designations “crani-
16.8. Owing to the exposed position of the tibial tuberosity, trau-
al" or, respectively, "caudal."
ma in this region (e.g., by collision with an obstacle during jump-
ing) may easily result in a fracture. The fracture-fragment is often
displaced proximocranially by the pull of the inserting middle patel-
[243] The femoropatellar joint is not usually involved. In young
horses (less than 3 years), the growth plate of the tibial tuberosity,
 pa a   q s s ia o s 
nosis (Fig. 16.7., a). In fractures without joint involvement, therapy
can be conservative; otherwise, a surgical approach is indicated
(internal fixation or removal of smaller fracture-fragments). [243]
16.9. The fbula often has several ossification centers, between
which a radiographically demonstrable split (radiolucent area) may
persist (Fig. 16.7., b). Such translucent lines must not be confused
with a rather rare fracture of the fibula. [244] In most horses the
distal fibula is reduced. Its distal epiphysis corresponds to the later-
al malleolus of the tibia, which thus has its own ossification center.
[3] In some pony breeds, a complete fibula (fibula completa) is
developed in an isolated case. Such a malformation occurs often
combined with flexural limb deformities or angular limb deformi-
ties (especially tarsus valgus). [17]
Fig. 16.10. a) Physiologic development of the tarsal bones of a 13 days old warm-
16.10. With respect to incomplete ossification of the tarsal bones
blood foal, b) Incomplete ossification of tarsal bone Ill (arrowhead) of a 14 days
principally the same is valid as for that of the carpal bones, in which
uaeuanely n -nh leg aipedouna y ylully sude.boe) eot pooquem pio 
 on the pelvic limb the central tarsal bone and the third tarsal bone
Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
Tibia
h
Calcaneus
Talus
T centr.
T I+Il
TIV
TI
Mt Il
Mt IV
Mt III
Fig. 16.7. a) Growth plate lines of fusion in the stifle joint region of a 6.5 months 
Fig. 16.11. Tarsal joint of an adult horse (dorsoplantar radiograph) with schemat-
old wammblood foal, b) Fracture of the intercondylar eminence of the tibia (arrow-
 ic representation of the individual bones.
head), fbula with radiolucent line (arrow) between separate ossification centers.
Mt II - IV: metatarsal bones II-IV, T I+Il,IlI - IV: tarsal bones I+llIlI-IV, T centr:
13 years Shetland pony. (Radiographs: Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauen-
 central tarsal bone. (Courtesy of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren.
tieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
Veterinarmed. Univ. Wien)
131
[250] Because in cases of conservative therapy, secondary degener-
my (section of its tibial insertion tendon) [257] [261] as well as
ative changes are to be expected in adjacent joints (tarsometa-
myotenotomy (section of muscle and tendon of insertion). [258]
tarsal-, distal or proximal intertarsal joints), especially in racehors-
The thigh musculature (semimembranosus or semitendinosus)
es a surgical therapy (internal fixation) is recommended. [246]
like the rump musculature can be used for intramuscular injection.
[247]
a pue raqn sisi an uaamaq aem si as uonoa a
 back of the stifle. [110] A possible complication is the development
16.12. Fractures of the talus and calcaneus are altogether rather
of a “fibrotic myopathy. " [258]
rare and mostly brought about by trauma. [251] To be sure, in thor-
oughreds and trotters, incomplete sagittal fractures of the talus
18.6. In the region of the calcanean tuber, the tendon of the super-
 occasionally occur. These usually start from the proximal articular
surface and are located between the ridges. [252] 
[134] It is kept in position by tendinous bands, which are attached
 Occasionally there occur rounded, accessory bone pieces plan-
laterally and medially at the calcanean tuber. [262] [134] Damage
tarly at the proximal end of the trochlea of the talus (trigonal bone
 to these bands may result in a luxation of the superficial digital flex-
of the tarsus) or distally at the medial ridge of the talus. These are
or tendon, in which case usually a lateral displacement is observed.
to be regarded as rare anatomical variations. [253]
[262] Besides conservative therapy, also a surgical fixation of the
calcanean cap is described. [262] [263]
16.13. The first and second tarsal bones are ordinarily fused at the
time of birth. [3] In some horses this fusion is incomplete, or even 
18.7. Paralysis of the peroneal neve (e.g., by an unfavorable posi-
two independent bones are developed. [253]
tion in anesthesia, trauma or tissue-irritating intramuscular injec-
 tions) may lead to a loss of function of the flexors of the hock and
18.1. An injury of the obturator nerve (e.g., as a result of a dysto-
extensors of the digit. A nearly complete loss of the angulation of
cia or pelvic fractures) may lead to a loss of function of the adduc-
the hock joint with maximal flexion of the digital joints is typical.
tors of the pelvic limb. In case of unilateral damage the horses stand
With advance of the affected limb, the hoof is dragged on the
with the pelvic limbs widely spread; with bilateral damage the hors-
 ground. If the horse has to bear weight on the limb, then it stands
es lie immovably with straddled pelvic limbs. [107]
 on the dorsal region of the fetlock. [107]
 For anesthesia of the peroneal nerve, see anesthesia of the pelvic
18.2. The gluteal muscles can be utilized for intramuscular injec-
limb [Fig. 22.1.1.).
tion. The injection site is midway between the coxal tuber and the
root of the tail and the needle is introduced in a craniodistal direc-
18.8. The peroneus tertius muscle is discussed together with the
tion. [110]
 passive stay-apparatus of the pelvic limb (section 24.2).
 A painful condition of the musculature (especially of the acces-
sory gluteal muscle) in the region between the coxal tuber and the
18.9. The medial tendon of insertion of the tibialis cranialis muscle
greater trochanter of the femur is designated as the "gluteal syn-
is also designated the spavin tendon. It attaches medioplantarly on
drome". This is especially observed in trotters; athletic horses are
the fused first and second tarsal bones, occasionally on the medial
also occasionally involved. The cause is not exactly known. Pre-
splint bone (Mt II) and is underlain by a synovial bursa. [264]
sumably the basis is a partial rupture of the muscle in the area of its 
 Sometimes inflammatory changes of the tendon or synovial bursa
 origin on the wing of the ilium. [254]
 are observed in connection with spavin.
18.3. Severe trauma in the hip, thigh or gluteal region as well as a
18.10. Myotenectomy (section/partial removal of the tendon and
deeply intramuscularly located abscess may lead to a paralysis of
muscle belly) of the lateral digital extensor muscle is a possible
the ischiadic nerve. The result is a loss of sensory and motor func-
 option for surgical therapy of stringhalt. [265] This disease is an
tions in the area of supply of the tibial and peroneal nerves, which
abnormality of the gait of the pelvic limb, which istriggered by dif.
have their origin from the ischiadic nerve. The affected limb can
ferent neuromuscular disturbances (among others, by a herbal
only be elevated and flexed to a slight degree. Besides this, a col-
lapse of the hock joint is typical as well as a knuckling over of the
tal limb). [265] [266] [267] Affected horses typically demonstrate
fetlock joint (non-physiological flexure). [107]
an exaggerated action of the pelvic limb with each stride, in which
the hock joint and stifle joint are suddenly moved convulsively and
18.4. If only the tibial nerve is injured, it may result in a loss of
the limb raised high.
function of the extensors of the hock and flexors of the digits. As a
consequence, the involved limb can be lifted, but weight bearing by
20.1. A thrombotic occlusion in the region of the termination of the
the hock joint is not possible. Besides the collapse in the hock joint,
[] d s jo aid eu i o pea a e
a knuckling over of the fetlock joint is usually also observed. [107]
The thrombus is usually located in the aorta or in the external iliac
 Anesthesia of the tibial nerve, which may be a part of the lame-
artery or internal iliac artery, sometimes also the femoral artery is
ness examination, will be described with the nerve blocks of the pel-
involved. [269] [268] The cause is not exactly known. Besides
vic limb (section 22.1., c).
hemodynamic factors and disorders of blood clotting, also parasitic
causes are mentioned. [268] A typical clinical sign is a stress-
18.5. An occasionally occurring abnormality of the gait of the
induced lameness of the pelvic limb, [269] [268] which presumably
pelvic limb is designated "fibrotic/ossifying myopathy." It is char-
has its origin in hypoxemia of the affected limb. To confirm the
acterized by fibrotic changes in the region of the flexor muscles of
 diagnosis, a rectal sonographic examination can be performed.
the stifle joint and is particularly observed in quarterhorses. [255] 
 Additional information may be obtained from Doppler sonogra-
[256] The semitendinosus muscle is predominantly involved; more
phya of the femoral artery. [271] Besides medicinal therapy, also
rarely, also the semimembranosus, gracilis or biceps femoris mus-
surgical removal of the thrombus by way of the femoral artery
cles. [255] [257] [258] Besides degenerative lesions, [259] trauma
(access in the region of the femoral triangle) is described. [270]
and infections (e.g., after intramuscular injections), [258] a cause
that is also considered is an increased tension on the insertion of the
semitendinosus muscle in case of an intensive stress on the pelvic
limb (e.g., by sliding stops in western riding). [255] A typical clini-
cal sign is a shortened forward phase in the stride, [256] in which
the forward movement is abruptly broken off and the hoof is
brought back to the ground after a short backward movement.
[260] [231] Usually also a thickening in the area of insertion of the
muscle involved is palpable. [256] [261] Sonographic investigation
gives additional indications of altered areas within the musculature.
a Doppler sonography yields information concerning blood-flow velocity
[256] [261] As therapy, three different surgical procedures are
described: myotomy or myectomy of the semitendinosus muscle
change in the frequency of sound waves in their refection from locally
(section or partial removal of the muscle at the level of the stifle
 changing (moving) interfaces (Doppler effect) in which case the erythro-
joint and removal of intramuscular adhesions), [256] [261] tenoto-
cytes in the bloodstream act as moving reflectors.
132
 22.1. Anesthesia of Nerves of the Pelvic Limb
as well as the structures which were already considered in the 4-
 Basically, diagnostic nerve anesthesia of the distal limb (up to and
point block are desensitized. [113]
including high four-point anesthesia) corresponds to what was giv-
d) Anesthesia of the tibial nerve is usually combined with anesthe-
en on the thoracic limb (Fig. 22.1.1.).
sia of the fibular nerve (peroneal nerve). With this technique, the
a) High 4-point anesthesia is performed about 3 cm distal to the tar-
distal tibia, the entire hock joint, the tarsal synovial sheath as well 
sometatarsal joint. Similar to the thoracic limb, it may be misinter-
as the total distal limb are desensitized. [114] Anesthesia of the per-
preted by an unintentional injection of the tarsal synovial sheath or
 oneal nerve is performed from the lateral side, about 10 cm proxi-
the distoplantar outpouching of the tarsometatarsal joint. [114]
mal to the tarsus, where its superficial branch is well palpable
b) In addition to the medial and lateral plantar metatarsal nerves,
between the long digital extensor muscle and the lateral digital
extensor muscle. [114] [113] At this site, the needle is introduced
nerveb and thus from the tibial nerve, there are on the pelvic limb
 directed toward the tibia and the deep peroneal nerve deeply with
also dorsal metatarsal nerves I and ml, which originate from the
 10-15 cc anesthesia solution fan-like injected. [114] Since the nerve
deep peroneal nerve (Fig. 22.1.1.). [113] To eliminate cortical pain
takes its course near the cranial tibial artery and vein, injection of
in the dorsal region of Mt II, the dorsal metatarsal nerves are also
the vessels demonstrates roughly the proper site for the needle. In
anesthetized by a subcutaneous deposit of 2-3 cc of anesthesia solu-
withdrawing the needle, the superficial peroneal nerve is also anes-
tion (high 6-point anesthesia). [114] [113] With this procedure,
 thetized by a subcutaneous injection of 5-10 cc anesthesia solution
injection of dorsal common digital vein II or the great metatarsal
(Fig. 22.1.1. and 22.1.2.). [114]
artery III (a. metatarsea dorsalis Ill) should be avoided.
c) With the limb lifted up, the tibial nerve is palpable as a firm cord,
 22.2. Dorsal metatarsal artery M, the great metatarsal artery, is the
about 6 mm thick, between the common calcanean tendon and the
main artery of the metatarsus of the pelvic limb. To take the pulse,
lateral digital flexor muscle. [114] Anesthesia of the tibial nerve is
this vessel can be palpated proximolaterally on the cannon bone
performed from the medial side, about 10 cm proximal to the cal-
between Mt II and the lateral splint bone (Mt IV). [272] [273] The
canean tuber. Subfascially, fan-like, 10-20 cc of anesthesia solution
 distal continuation of the vessel runs between Mt IlI and Mt IV in
is injected (Figs. 22.1.1. and 22.1.2.). [114] [113] The plantar part
 a gradually oblique distoplantar direction, [272] which has to be
 Of the tarsus, the distal Achilles tendon (common calcanean tendon)
considered if the distal splint bone is surgically removed. [274] 
b According to the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (1994), synonymous
 designation for the N. digitalis plantaris com. III
Lateral view
Plantar view
Dorsal view
Tibial nerve
Caudal cutaneous
sural nerve, tibial n
Supf. fibular (peroneal) n.
Deep fibular (p
onealj n.
Tibial nerve anesthesia
 Fibular (peroneal) nerve
anesthesia
 Medial plantar nerve
 Lateral plantar nerve 
 HPA, position of high plantar
(4-point, 6-point) nerve block
 Medial plantar metatarsal nerve
Lateral dorsal 
metatarsal nerve
Lateral plantar metatarsal nerve
HPA, position of
nicating branch
Medial dorsal
highplantar
nerve block Lateral plantar
metatarsal nerve
Lateral dorsal 
nerve
MPA, position of deep
metatarsal nerve 
4-point anesthesia
Communicating branch-
MPA, position of deep.
4-point anesthesia
 Dorsal branch, plantar
Dorsal branch, med/lat
digital n., anesthesia
plantar dlig. N.
Abaxial sesamoid block
TPA 2 -
 Lateral plantar digital nerve
Lateral plantar dligital nerve
TPA 2 
Medial plantar digital nerve
TPA 1 =
TPA 1
(lateral)
(medial)
ateral)
Fig. 22.1.1. Relevant nerves of the pelvic limb and their sites for anesthesia for lameness diagnosis. In the right part of the figure the tibial nerve including its distal con-
tinuation is yellow and the terminal branches of the common fibular (peroneal) nerve are dark green. HPA: high plantar nerve block, MPA: low 4-point anesthesia, TPA 1
133
22.3. The medial saphenous vein (or its cranial branch) is located
 lopment. In severe cases affected foals demonstrate a typical dog-
medially on the crus. Especially in foals, it can be used as an alter-
sitting posture because an extension of the stifle joint is impossible.
native to the external jugular vein for venepuncture or installation
[281] Therapy consists of a surgical deepening of the trochlear
of a catheter. [110]
groove with an associated repositioning of the patella. [281] [283]
This can be combined with a tightening of the medial joint capsule
24.1. The alternate passive fixation of the pelvic limb in the stifle
 including the fascia as well as a section of the lateral femoropatel-
joint, which enables the horse to stand without fatigue is deter-
 lar ligament and parts of the aponeurosis of the biceps femoris mus-
mined predominantly by the action of the quadriceps femoris mus-
cle. [281]
-uo A papxa ey os si suot as an e aa [tei] [s] 
traction of this muscle, that the patella, drawn proximally, glides on
 24.2. The reciprocal apparatus in the crural region allows only an
the nose-like bulge of the medial ridge of the trochlea and can be
 equal movement of stifle and hock joints. It is formed cranially by
anchored there with the help of the medial parapatellar fibrocarti-
the tendinous peroneus tertius muscle and caudally by the common
- a [eil s red pa e a a  
calcanean tendon (especially by the plantar tendon of the superficial
lodging of the fixed patella is brought about again by the contrac-
digital flexor muscle (Fig. 24.2.). [284] Occasionally the peroneus 
tion of the quadriceps femoris muscle, whereby the patella is turned
tertius muscle suffers a traumatically induced rupture, which is
 often located in the middle crural region. [233] [284] A typical clin-
 Disorders of the gliding movement of the patella on the medial ridge
ical sign is loss of the reciprocal apparatus and with this the possi-
of the trochlea are designated proximal patellar fixation. If the free-
bility of extension of the hock joint with the stifle joint flexed. In
ing of the patella is only delayed (babitual patellar fixation), with
 this condition, the common calcanean tendon is an entirely relaxed
flexion of the stifle joint there is a typical jerky movement of the
 and undulating structure. [284] To demonstrate the lesion of the
 affected limb. [275] The uneven movement of the patella is some-
 peroneus tertius muscle as well as to monitor the healing process,
times audible as a snapping sound. [276] With stationary patellar
sonographic examination is the first choice. [285]
fixation, flexion of the stifle joint is impossible. The limb is kept stiff
joint also cannot be flexed. [275] [276] Proximal patellar fixation
usually occurs bilaterally. A decrease in tonus of the quadriceps
-adsa os s oh 'as  e se papean si as so
cially young horses or horses in poor condition are affected. Beyond
that, a steep attitude of the pelvic limbs is predisposing. [277] [275]
[276] Initially, therapy can be conservative, whereby the exclusion
of predisposing factors as well as a monitored training for muscle
build-up have a special importance. [231] [277] [276] As a last
measure, surgical therapy is also possible in the form of a desmoto-
my of the medial patellar ligament 1-2 cm proximal to its attach-
ment to the tibia. [231] [275] Certainly, as a sequel often fragmen-
Stifle joint
tation of the distal patella or contour changes of the cranial border
of the tibia are observed. [231] These, however, as a rule, have no
Common calcaneal
tendon 
 clinical relevance. [275] Recently also a percutaneous splitting of
the proximal third of the medial patellar ligament is described.
Tibia
[278] [276]
 Particularly in newborn Shetland pony foals a lateral subluxation 
Fibularis (peroneus)
 tertius muscle
a traumatically induced patellar dislocation from this inherited
Hock (tarsal} join
Usually this condition has its basis in an inherited dysplasia (lack of
development) of the trochlea of the femur, in which mainly the
lateral ridge of the trochlea is affected. [281] [282] [283] Patellar
dislocation can vary according to the extent of the defective deve-
 Fig. 24.2. Semidiagrammatic representation of the reciprocal apparatus of the
 pelvic limb of the horse. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
G
(medial)
Tibialnerve
Deepperonealnerve
(lateral)
Supf. peroneal nerve
 Fig. 22.1.2. Cross-section of the left hind limb of a horse (about a handsbreadth
Fig. 24.3. a) Dorsoplantar radiograph of the tarsal joint with desmopathy of the
proximal to the tuber calcanei) to demonstrate the sites of injection of the tibial
 insertion of the suspensory ligament (interosseous muscle) at its origin (arrow), 11
nerve and deep and superficial fibular peroneal) nerves. 1: cranial tibial a./., 2:
 years wammblood mare, b) high degree of hyperextension of the fetlock joint and
cranial branch of the medial saphenous v. and saphenous a./n., 3: caudal branch 
distal displacement of the proximal sesamoid bones because of a functional loss
of the saphenous a./medial saphenous v., MDF: medial digital flexor muscle, PT:
 of the proximal portion of the suspensory apparatus (damage to the suspensory
fbularis (peroneus) tertius muscle, SDFT: superficial digital flexor tendon (plantar
ligament ), 24 years old wammblood gelding. (Courtesy of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei
tendon), TC:tibialis caudalis muscle. (Courtesy of Dr. Patan)
Huf-u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed. Univ. Berlin) 
134
horn predominates, the hoof can be protected by shoeing (horses in
pamanplantar
large cities). If the horn formation predominates and attrition is
deficient, then the hoof is trimmed professionally by the farrier.
 On account of seasonal changes in the annual rhythm, wild or
deep digta
semi-wild living horses (Przewalski horses) develop an autoregula-
Tlexor
tive mechanism for maintenance of hoof form and angulation,
constant and takes place after about a one year adaptive phase in
the wild or semi-wild reservation This is reached through the sea-
sonal rhythm in the rate of horn formation (1), in horn quality (2),
in ring formation of the hoof (3), in horn attrition (4) and in the 
physiological (directed) growth of the bearing surface (5), which
comes about through physiological (directed) longitudinal and
transverse fissures (6).
(dorsal)
1. The horn formation rate is least with about 3 mm in the month
thoracic imb
pelhic mb
of January and highest in August with a threefold intensity.
 2. The change in horn quality can be demonstrated by differences
 Fig. 24.4. Comparison of the strength of the accessory (check) ligament of the 
between the summer horn (formed in the summer months) and the 
 deep digital flexor on the thoracic and pelvic limbs.
winter horn. As a result of measurements of toughness and struc-
CDE: common digital extensor muscle, LDE: lateral digital extensor muscle,
tural changes, the winter horn can be assessed as firmer and more
 LoDE: long digital extensor muscle, MDF: medial digital flxor muscle, IOM: sus-
 stable than the loosened up summer horn.
 pensory ligament (interosseous muscle), LPL: long plantar ligament, SDFT:
3. Hoof rings develop owing to changes of food or seasonal changes
superficial digital flexor tendon, DDFT: deep digital flexor tendon. (Courtesy of Dr.
Patan)
 to the coronary border. After illnesses pathological horn rings may
develop, which are not parallel to the coronet (for example, the
 24.3. The suspensory ligament (m. interosseus), which originates
rings of hoof laminitis). Formally, convex hoof rings (elevated hoof
proximoplantarly on Mt II and on calcaneus, on the pelvic limb is
rings) can be differentiated from concave hoof rings (furrows
innervated only by branches of the tibial nerve. [244] [325a]
between the elevated rings). Elevated rings resemble the summer
 sdss a  an xd a i sn 
 horn of the ring-free areas and accordingly display a lower strength
ament are a relatively frequent cause of lameness in athletic horses
 in comparison to the ring-like furrows and winter horn.
4. In its annual course, horn attrition has a curve similar to the rate
 ao  s s a [  t] s
 of horn formation. It depends on the seasonal quality of the horn in
expressed than in the case of corresponding changes on the thoracic
wear as well as the seasonal changes in body weight and activity
limb, which is traced back to a compartment-like syndrome (simi-
 and also the condition of the ground.
lar to the carpal-canal syndrome). The cause is considered to be the
 5. Physiologic growth of the wall border of the hoof in May to Sep-
tember, when the hooves are longest, lead to a sudden shortening of
a thickening of the suspensory ligament probably results in an
the hoof, because roughly rectangular horn chips with a border
increased pressure on the adjacent medial and lateral plantar
length of several centimeters break out one after the other. Because
metatarsal nerves. [244] [1.51] The lesions in the region of the ori-
 the break away of the wall border is found roughly a fingerbreadth
 gin of the suspensory ligament are usually well demonstrable sono-
 distal to the solear border of the hoof, the living tissue remains
 graphically; sometimes also demonstrated by radiographic changes
 undamaged in painless condition.
in the form of avulsion fractures or bone densities at the proximal
 6. For the transverse fractures necessary for this break out, the dif-
Mt II (Fig. 24.3., a). [151] Besides conservative therapy (among
 ferences in horn quality along the ring-shaped projections and fur-
others, monitored activity program, local and systemic medication,
 rows are predisposing as fracture sites. The longitudinal fractures
autogenic bone marrow injection, shock-wave therapy) also differ-
 arise owing to the inclination for dessication and shrinkage of the
 ent surgical procedures are described such as fasciotomy [48] or
 inner coronary horn masses near the wall border, the horn cells of
neurectomy of the tibial nerve or the medial and lateral plantar
 which are porous like a sponge. Further factors are increased tissue
metatarsal nerves. [48] [151] Percutaneous osteostixis is a relative-
 tension and the influence of force in the course of the hoof mecha-
ly new procedure, by which several small holes are drilled through
 nism. These physiological fissure-formations and growth of the
the cortical substance in the region of origin of the suspensory liga-
wall border are to be distinguished from pathological forms, which
ment. [50]
txpand proximally as well as into the depth and can lead to scarred
painful, often suppurative inflammations of the corium. [291] [292]
24.4. On the pelvic limb, the accessory ligament of the deep flexor
-oa uoeinaoe an ooz aui ui nda are see aun n []
tendon (distal check ligament) is weaker than on the thoracic limb.
 nism is not working, because the mentioned seasonal changes are
lacking or underdeveloped. Comparable facts are found in domes-
tic horses kept in barns. Whether semi-wild domestic horses on a
semi-reservation develop an autoregulation mechanism shall be
studied in a current research project, in which case genetic influ-
Hoof
BIANCA PATAN, KLAUS-DETER BUDRAS
 ences are to be separated from environmental factors.
26.1. In the toe region, the normal hoof of the forefoot has an angle
26.2. Contusions of the corium (dermis) of the hoof (for example,
of 50-54° [288] with the ground and a length relationship of the
 by entrance of small stones, but also mistakes in trimming the hoof
wall of the toe with the wall of the quarter of 2:1 [289] to 3:1 [290]
or shoeing) may result in an aseptic laminitis in which local discol-
In the case of the normal hind hoof the angle of the toe is 53-57°
 oration of the hoof horn may occur because of hemorrhages in the
[288] and the length relationship between the wall of toe and quar-
corium (so-called “corns"). [294] [208]
ter is 3:2 [289] to 4:2 [290]. An obtusely angulated hoof with a toe
 If bacteria enter the corium, because of discontinuities in the
angle of 60-90° and high quarters is designated dlubfoot. A wide,
 horn structure, then a suppurative laminitis (so-called hoof abscess)
acutely angulated hoof with a flat sole in the same plane as the bear-
may develop. [208] Since with the formation of pus usually an
ing surface of the wall is designated flat foot. If the sole is dropped
increase of pressure develops within the hoof capsule, the horses
beyond the level of the bearing surface of the wall, then it is a
frequently show a high degree of lameness. [294]
pumice foot (dropped foot). In the contracted hoof, there is a grad-
 Hoof canker is the name given to a chronic proliferative lamini-
ual narrowing of the hoof, in which case according to the location
tis characterized by excrescences of the affected area of dermis.
 of the narrowed portion, quarter-narrow, coronet-narrow, sole-nar-
 [295] Typically, there is in addition a caseous, bad-smelling coating
row, and a narrowing of the bearing surface of the wall are distin-
on the proliferating masses, which develop as a result of a disturbed
guished. [289] [290]
 epitheliazation and cornification of the corresponding hoof epider-
 In the ideal case, the length of the hoof is kept constant by loss of
a a i o a ae  a [l  s
horn (especially, wearing off) and horn formation. If the wearing of
frog segment, but can spread to the sole- and wall-segment. [296]
135
The exact cause is unknown but anaerobic bacteria (especially
horn of the periople and the closely neighboring extremely hard
Fusobacterium necrophorum and Bacterioides spp.) seem to play
coronary horn. That the hardness of the horn within a segment can
an important role in the disease. [121] The most important surgical
vary considerably with water content is shown by the example of
therapeutic measure is the removal of the entire altered tissue. [296]
coronary horn, which from inside to outside and also from proxi-
[297]
mal to distal becomes distinctly harder with decreasing water con-
tent. [293] [301] [302] [303]
26.3. The hoof horn, formed by the epidermis of the hoof, shows in
 Lipid content likewise influences the firmness and consistency of
part considerable segment-specific qualitative differences, which
 the horn masses. Numerous lipid droplets in the horn cells function
 affect both horn structure and the mechanical-physical characteris-
 as an elasticity-giving factor and lend the typical eraser-like consist-
tics of the horn. Thus, the coronary and also the solear segment are
ency to the frog and heel-horn, which are rich in fat. In cooperation
characterized by very hard horn, whereas in the periople as well as
with the increased lipid-rich intercellular substance in numerous
the heel-frog segment a relatively soft and elastic horn is formed.
[298] [304] The differences in hardness and elasticity, which are
 effect an elastic absorbence of the stress loads, which predominate
based to a great extent on the different moisture content of the hoof
 in the horn of the frog and heel. [304]
horn as well as on variations of different structural parameters, re-
 Epidermal differentiations during cell replacement extend from
 present an adaptation to the mechanical demands of the hoof cap-
the synthesis stage (keratinization), where the parts of the horn cell
sule to the footing of the equine hoof. [298] [299] [300]
are synthesized, across the transformation stage (completion of
keratinization) with pre-programmed cell death, across the stage of
26.4. There are different criteria for the evaluation of the quality of
maturity with maximal resistance of the horn mass, to the ageing
the horn in the different parts of the hoof. [299] In no way is it to
be equated with the hardness of the horn. In adaptation to the dif-
the stage of decay. In the horn tubule medulla, this differentiation
ferent demands of the individual segments of the equine hoof, horn
 is passed through rapidly. The age-dependent decay of the medulla-
of good quality can completely fulfill a protective function against 
 ry cells is certainly significant for that reason, since it occupies a
 mechanical, chemical and microbial noxious agents. Horn of poor
quality is functionally limited and for that reason represents a
-n pd   aa  jo a  aa P ar
predilection site for hoof diseases. Horn masses are comparable to
nar horn. The early decay of medullary cells is already prepro-
a brick wall, in which the horn cells correspond to the bricks and
grammed at the beginning of differentiation in the phase of synthe-
the intercellular substance to the binding mortar. The integrity and
sis during keratinization, because in the process of cell replacement
functional "teamwork " of both components is qualitatively signifi-
the keratinizing epithelial cells are removed rapidly from their
cant. The horn cell consists of keratin filaments (diameter about 8
 blood supply in the dermal papillae, in which case their nutrition
nm) and the proteins associated with the keratin filaments, which
 becomes increasingly more critical. [305] The result of this is an
with one another and at the cell membrane of the horn cell are
incomplete keratinization and finally, during keratinization, a loo-
among others stabilized by disulfide bridges. In interaction with the
ser structure of the horn. On the one hand the decay of the medul-
horn cell, the intercellular substance guarantees a great stability of
lary cells provides a favorable effect on the light weight construc-
the horn cell association, when, as much as possible, it fills evenly
tion of the tubular horn; on the other hand it impairs its barrier
and entirely the narrow interceular gap. In dependence on its affil.
 function against ascending colonizing germs. However, this impair-
iation to a hoof segment, it contains different concentrations of gly-
ment is less grave in the coronary horn with its very long tubules
than in the white line where it may result in "white line disease",
teins for cell detachment with horn cell desquamation, and struc-
 because the barrier for the protection of the vital suspension of the
tural lipids to assure a semipermeable epidermal barrier. Besides
coffin bone is destroyed. With the decay of the medullary cells a
that, water and lipid content influence horn quality. The hardness
further important function, the storage of moisture, is lost. This is
of the horn increases with decreasing moisture content, and in view
 connected with the high lipid content and contributes in case of loss
of the high variation in moisture, the differences in the individual
 to the dessication of the surrounding horn portions.
hoof segments are remarkable. This concerns especially the soft
26.5. The hoof mechanism is brought about by segment-specific
differences in the quality of the horn masses, and results in shock
 absorption with the footing of the limb. We are dealing with an elas-
tic variation of the hoof capsule during the weight-bearing of the
hoof, which is characterized by an expansion of the quarters, a low-
ering of the frog and heels and a flattening of the sole in the caudal
part of the hoof as well as a narrowing of the coronet in the dorsal
half of the hoof. [290]
Fig. 26.4.1. Interaction between the dermal papillae, which convey blood vessels,
lae. The peripapillary cortex of the tubule is fommed by living epidermal cells
(marked yellow). The suprapapillary medulla of the tubule is formed above the
apex of the dermal papilla. It breaks down prematurely in many places and thus
Fig. 26.6.Scanning electron microgram of the horn tubules. The fountain-shaped
Baum, 1943)
tubules can be destroyed by bacterial decay (right.
136
26.6. The horn of the periople, heels and sole in this sequence reach
sion of the white line directed toward the solear horn is observed on
the sole surface. [82] [290] If a lameness develops, then the horn
column in its entire extent is surgically removed. In doing this the
iologic, normal, extent important biological functions such as the
formation of the decay horn of the sole for the maintenance of the
 and thus the danger of a rotation of the coffin bone exists. [311]
normal concavity of the sole, a precondition for the hoof mecha-
[82]
nism. Of all parts of the hoof, the coronary horn is most constant
 Disconnections in the region of the hoof plate (also called horn
and is normally not subjected to decay, if one disregards the
wall), which course in the longitudinal direction of the horn tubu-
medullary part. The normal ageing of the coronary horn with
les, are called horn cracks. [290] They can arise due to wounds at
increase of cracking and decrease in moisture is observed only dis-
the coronet or by extreme stress of certain parts of the wall (for
tal to the coffin bone-sole border and scarcely impairs the protec-
 example, as a result of mistakes in hoof trimming or horse shoeing).
tive function of the hoof. So far as the decay of the horn cells begins
prematurely and reaches pathological dimensions, it impairs the
health of the hoof depending on its location, by which the bearing
border of the hoof including the fixation bed of the hoof nails is
increasingly destroyed. To maintain hoof health, it is especially
important to arrest a premature ageing process. To do this, bal.
anced food rations can contribute with a sufficient supply of min-
erals such as zinc and selenium as well as trace elements such as sul-
 phur (by way of sulphur-containing amino acids such as methion-
ine and cysteine) and finally with vitamins (especially biotin). [305] 
[306]
26.7. The white line plays a special role in horseshoeing because in
-s e jo as un lel l p ae s jo an  s
taken placing of a hoof nail, injury to the solear or wall dermis
(direct mis-nailing, nail prick) or the bruising of the parietal dermis
(indirect mis-nailing, nail pressure) may be the result. Nailing is
omitted in the region of the quarters, to maintain the hoof mecha-
nism. [294] [289] [290]
White line disease is the name given to a disease of the hoof,
which is characterized by a progressive separation in the region of
 of the wall. [307] [308] The horn defect is as a rule filled in by crum-
bling, gray-black masses.[308] In severe cases a rotation of the cof-
fin bone may develop as in laminitis. [309] Up to now, the exact
cause is not known; animal husbandry, mechanical, and nutritional
factors as well as infection with certain fungi and bacteria are
 discussed. [307] [310] [309] [308] A predisposition to white line
disease is also given by changes in the hoof horn resulting from
chronic laminitis (founder). [310] [309]
26.8. A columnar thickening on the inner surface of the hoof plate
(horn wall), which is made up of scarred laminar and tubular horn,
is designated a zylindric keratoma. [82] [290] The cause is often
unknown; in discussion are traumata or chronic irritations, which
lead to a circumscribed inflammation of the parietal (wall) dermis.
[311] [290] Keratomas occur most frequently on the dorsal wall
and may cause a pressure atrophy of the parietal dermis and of the
coffin bone. [311] If the keratoma extends to the wall border of the
hoof (bearing surface of the wall), a locally circumscribed expan-
Fig. 26.8. In the middle figure are pictured the (often also normally occurring) sole-
 spur (1, apically at the wall-sole border, in prolongation of the central cuneal sul-
cus), a zylindric keratoma (2), which tapers toward the coronary segment, and two
horn calluses (3, hemispherical horn structures at the wall-sole border). These
normal or diseased horn structures can be recognized on the solear surface as 
Fig. 26.7. “White line disease" in chronic laminitis. As a result of the necrosis of
expansions of the white line (lowerfigure). On the distal phalanx (upperfigure with
the dermal papillae, the formation of full horn tubules (cf., page 27, below) in the
ossfied ungular cartilage), the sole spur sculpts a crenation at the solear margin
vicinity of the temminal papillae remains incomplete so that the barrier function of 
(1), the zylindric keratoma an elongate defect in the bone (2), and the horn callus
the white line is severely limited.
marks a hemispherical defect at the solear margin (3).
137
[294] Horn cracks are usually only associated with a lameness, if
lateral cuneal sulcus. [289] [208] The consequence is usually an
they penetrate the entire hoof wall and reach the dermis. [294]
injury and wound infection of internal hoof structures. According
[312] For healing to take place, the hoof capsule must be stabilized
to the location of the nail-penetration, the dermis, coffin or navicu-
in the regionof thecrack.[312]Ontheother hand,ahorn clft is
lar bone, the digital cushion, the deep flexor tendon, the
a defect in the horn wall that runs within the hoof plate parallel to
podotrochlear (navicular) bursa or the coffin joint may be affected.
the coronet and is usually a sequela of earlier wounds at the coro-
[289] [208] [296] A precise knowledge of the affected structures is
net. [290] A separation within the hoof plate, which usually shows
up between the internal coronary horn and the laminar layer, [290]
Thrush is an infection in the region of the frog by the development
sometimes also between the internal and middle coronary horn,
of which keratolytic microorganisms (especially Fusobacterium
[305] is designated hollow wall. Loose wall develops after a loss of
necrophorum) play a role. An accumulation of black, foul-smelling
horn of the white line, by which a separation between the hoof plate
masses in the region of the central or collateral cuneal sulci is
and horny sole develops. [290]
characteristic. Lameness is usually observed only if the infection is
spread to the more deeply located structures. [294] [191]
26.9. On the basis of its elastic and soft consistency, the horn of the
heel-frog segment is especially susceptible to penetrating wounds by
28.1. The Suspensory Apparatus of the Coffin Bone
pointed or acute objects (puncture wound by nails). [296] In this
The phylogenetic development of an animal adapted to run swiftly
case, the foreign object most frequently enters in the area of the col-
came about by an elongation and extension of the limbs with the
acquisition of a long stride for an increased speed. For this a length-
 ening and extension of the limbs is essential. These culminated in the
footing (contact of the limb with the supporting surface) at the bor-
der of the tip of the digit, of the weight-bearing border, where the
horseshoe is fixed (related to human conditions, it is comparable to
 the loading of the free border of our middle fingernail, by which the
total body weight would be borne). With the rhythm of the stride, the
 coffin bone sinks and rises to a slight degree at weight-bearing and
non-weight bearing. With this, according to the principal of a ham-
mock, the coffin bone is kept in a suspended position, by the sus-
pensory apparatus of the coffin bone, a nearly closed, caudally open,
surrounding suspension, which is balanced by the extensor tendon
 and the deep flexor tendon. At the tip of the coffin bone, there is
manifest a break in the fan-shaped reinforcement of the suspensory
apparatus of the coffin bone, reflected in a backward shift of the cof-
fin bone with an expansion of the white line as a result of the pow.
erful pull of the deep flexor tendon. By the suspension, the bony bor-
der of the solear surface of the coffin bone is protected against a non-
physiologic pressure load (comparable to the protection of the bony
dental alveolus by the periodontium for the “suspended tooth"). A
loss of function means an exungulation (or loss of the tooth).
Because the suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone in the case of
laminitis is overextended and partially ruptured, when the coffin
bone sinks down from its suspended position and is loaded ( bearing
significant weight fractures can ariseor a brim-like upward bending
of the bony border of the sole (Fig. 28.1.2.). At the dorsum of the
hoof, the bearing elements, the dermo-epidermal laminae are best
developed, i.e., they are longer and broader than in the other regions.
By the extreme enlargement of their surface, they guarantee the high-
est traction load (Fig. 28.1.1. left), but also the highest susceptibility
in the region of the quarter and the angle of the wall, and serves for
the indirect anchoring of the hoof capsule to the underlying ungular
cartilage. The enormous loading of the suspensory apparatus con-
tains risks-for example at the overcoming of an obstacle-for rup-
tures, which are lessened by special protective mechanisms. At both
ends there is a spring-like elastic end-fixation and intermediary fixa-
tions between. [313] [314]
Fig. 28.1.1. left: Dermal and epidermal suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone
from the proximal (above, enlarged about 10x) and distal half of the wall segment 
(below, enlarged about 90x).
Ib connective tissue of the primary lamella:; le epidermal primary lamella; R tubu-
 lar horn from the coronary segment, which serves the springy-elastic anchoring of 
the epidermal part of the suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone; llb connective
tissue secondary lamella; Ile epidermal noncornified secondary lamella, between
Ib and le there is a basal membrane; K cap-horn tubule.
Right: Histological section through the hoof capsule in chronic laminitis with coro-
nary horn tubules (above), old necrotic (middle) and new vital suspensory appara-
tus of the coffin bone (below). The new suspensory apparatus projects with knob-
 by thickenings between two necrotic lamellae of the old suspensory apparatus
Fig. 28.1.2. Chronic laminitis with brim-like drawn out apical part of the coffin
and, with the formation of dyskeratotic horn, produces a reparative connection
 bone owing to rotation of the bone. With this, the parallelism between the dorsal
between old and new lamellar structure that is scarcely loadable. 10ox. (Photo: Dr 
contour of the coffin bone and the hoof capsule (marking line) is lost. (Radiograph,
Marks)
Prof. Dr. Huskamp)
138
 At the coffin bone this is realized by a four-zoned insertion. The
 b. In case of a peracute, lightning-like, course of the disease, in rare
collagen fibers radiating out from the coffin bone penetrate one after
s o  ssae n   i s
the other the osseous tissue (1), mineralized (2) and non-mineralized
(3) cartilage and thickened connective tissue (4). The decrease in
[hoof capsule]].
hardness from inside to outside serves to protect against rupture.
so e si a s aqns ro ae jo as  
 The spring-like elastic fixation at the inner coronary horn of the
overextension and/or partial rupture of the suspensory apparatus,
  d ds     sidjo
which leads to a slight lowering of the coffin bone. This is visible
cells, which are structured according to the principle of a subdi-
above the coronet by the formation of an easily palpable cutaneous
vided water cushion, "wrap around" and anchor the spongy inner
 groove. In the area of expansion of the suspensory apparatus (wall
coronary horn tubules in a trajectorial (wagon-like) one-after-the-
 segment), acute inflammations occur, which can spread to the
 other arrangement. With laminitis the elasticity of the anchoring is
remaining areas of the hoof.
 lost because the horn cells of the laminae and the inner coronary
 d. With chronic laminitis, considerable destructions in the suspen-
tubules lose their sponginess and by this their elasticity.
sory apparatus lead to a distinct lowering of the coffin bone or to a
 Besides the two end-fixations, there are two elastic, spring-like
 more or less distinct rotation of the coffin bone. The latter occurs if
intermediary fixations between the parts of the suspensory appara-
the fan-shaped reinforcement of the suspensory apparatus at the tip
tus of the coffin bone, namely one time at the basement membrane
 of the coffin bone is ruptured and the deep flexor tendon exerts a
at the level of the dermal-epidermal border (see below) and the
 powerful pull (see page 29, below left). The pivot of rotation of the
other in the epidermal part of the suspensory apparatus at the kera-
coffin bone is located centrally in the coffin joint, and the parts of
tinization border, where ductile vital and keratinized, stiffened avi-
 the coffin bone, which appear as the points of a triangle - the exten-
tal epidermal cells lie on one another. Because on the one hand the
sor process (1), palmar/plantar process of the coffin bone (2) with
vital cels are stationary owing to their direct or indirect anchoring
 attaching ungular cartilage and the tip of the coffin bone (3) - have
 on the basement membrane (by way of hemidesmosomes) and, on
the greatest radius of action and cause the worst lesions of the tis-
the other hand, the keratinized cells migrate by the thrust of
sues. The blood vessels are most strongly affected. Through them
 growth, there are two functions (gliding-adhesive-mechanism) com-
 the disorder extends beyond the suspensory apparatus and finally
bined at the keratinization border, and for this reason, this border
-edde rosuadsns a jo aseasp u ae jo uod a parapisuoo s
 the horn of the sole and provoke a prolapse of the solear dermis.
ratus (laminitis).
Especially with neglect of hygiene there develops a colonizing of the
coffin bone by germs (osteomyelitis), in which case the prognosis
28.2. Laminitis
 becomes distinctly worsened. According to its severity, there is ini-
 Regarding its origin and significance, the German term "Hufrehe"
tially a lengthening (stretching) and finally a necrosis (dying away)
is disputed. The English concept of "laminitis" is more unequivocal
sa sii hn sde osdns a jo a ai j
and means inflammation of the laminar apparatus, which is locat-
bed, and the formation of a new second suspensory apparatus (Fig.
ed in the wall segment. The concept coincides with our interpreta-
28.1.1. right). This is comparable to the rejection of a traumatized
tion of laminitis as a disease of the suspensory apparatus of the cof-
fingernail with a subsequent new nail formation. Under the influ-
fin bone. Laminitis passes through several stages of the disease,
 ence of further existing disease, the new suspensory apparatus
which in each case is characterized by typical destructions of the
forms large masses of degenerated laminar horn with filling horn
suspensory apparatus.
between them (lamellar wedge under the old hoof capsule = scar-
a. The initial symptomless phase is characterized by disturbances
horn shield in clinical usage). The increase in tension in the tissue is
of the blood circulation, especially ischemia, in the blood vascular
an obstacle to growth, hinders the healing of the new suspensory
system of the suspensory apparatus. The cascade of destructions is
 apparatus and contributes to the severe deformation of the hoof, to
very difficult and not known in detail (see pathogenesis), and the
the formation of the “laminitis hoof" (extreme form = nosed hoof
reactions are partially realized at the molecular level. Depending on
= Knollhuf). If the new suspensory apparatus grows down to the
the etiology of the laminitis, the initial phase lasts only a few hours
hoof border, it appears as a second white zone (*double white
in case of traumatic and toxic laminitis, but in case of overloading
-edde aosuadsns mau ae pue sneredde aosuadsns pio au tau
laminitis lasts much longer, namely about 9 days, before the typical
 ratus are connected to each other entirely insufficiently by dyskera-
laminitis symptoms set in. [316]
totic (pathological) horn masses. Stresses (weight-bearing) result in
 more ruptures and further steps in the lowering of the coffin bone
and rotation of the coffin bone with the symptoms of further
Fig. 28.2.1. Grass-founder in a Przewalski horse. The extremely suffering animal
shows the typical body posture with disease of all hooves. Since the front hooves
bear about 60% of the weight, they are usually more strongly affected and are for
that reason more distinctly relieved than the hind hooves, which are placed for-
ward under the belly. By the forward displacement of the hooves the initially still
healthy quarter hind part) is more strongly loaded and thus the toe of the hoof, the
site of the initially strongest disease is somewhat relieved. In a herd of 16 Prze-
Fig. 28.2.2. Median section through the right front hoof in chronic laminitis. The
walski horses at the same nutritional level, only the three heaviest horses were dis-
 coffin bone is distinctly rotated and its apex perforates the solear horn. Linear
eased; whereas the remaining members of the herd reacted with strong diarrhea.
(dark) inclusions of air and exudate characterize the border between the old and
 The grass founder episodes appeared during a longer high pressure influence in
 the newly arising suspensory apparatus of the cofin bone, whose dyskeratotic
lamellar horn masses are called "scarhorn shield." (Specimen and photo: Dr.
very high fructose content. (Photo, Dr. Scheibe)
Marks)
139
episodes of laminitis. With this, the tissue just newly formed is
capillaries is unaffected. To that extent, pathological changes of
destroyed again by massive hemorrhages with toxin formation.
 both the epidermal border region and the blood vascular system are
significant for the pathogenesis of the laminitis. In the case of over-
 dominates over regeneration. The result is a late exungulation,
 loading laminitis (see below), vascular disturbances are of domi-
without prospects for healing.
nant or exclusive importance.
 The pathogenesis, the development of the disease with its diffe-
 The etiology of laminitis is manifold. The causes of the disease
rent phases, is still not clard in all particulars. There are two con-
are decisive for the special designation of the form of laminitis,
troversial opinions on the initial events of the disease, the one
 which can be classified into local and systemic (affecting the entire
resting on blood vascular disturbances, the second on a dermoepi-
body) diseases.
 dermal separation of the basal membrane.
A local disease exists in the case of overloading laminitis and
 The blood vascular disturbances with dominant vasoconstriction
  (s  aq s s 
  oi oroe - pasne are paq ardeo aui ui mo pana pe
laminitis (a kind of traumatic laminitis with attrition of the termi-
advocates of this theory - by vasoactive mediators, among others by
 ( aq Pd s pe i  p
biogenic amines. Following this, the thrombocytes are unable, to
hooves may be affected (overloading laminitis) or all hooves. An
 overloading laminitis can at first develop on a healthy limb if the
substance then develops its vasoconstrictive properties and leads to
limb is permanently and doubly loaded because the contralateral
damage to the tissues. [317] Consequences of the reduced flow and
limb is primarily diseased (for example by a fracture) and, for that
ischemia are later vasoconstrictor paralysis with dilatation of arte-
 reason, permanently relieved of weight-bearing.
rioles and venules, which mark the phase of inflammation. [318]
Systemic laminitis comprises the following forms: toxic laminitis
 The most recent theory on pathogenesis rests upon a separation
 including feeding-laminitis and hormonal, including iatrogenic lam-
 in the basal membrane at the dermoepidermal connection area as a
 initis (caused by the veterinarian owing to application of certain
result of an imbalance of the metalloproteinases, which among
glucocorticoids).
others are activated by endotoxins (Streptococcus bovis). [319] The
With systemic-toxic laminitis, induction is primarily by endoto-
metalloproteinases regulate the anabolism, catabolism and turn-
xins from general infectious diseases (for example, salmonellosis) or
over of all compounds of the basal membrane. The basal mem-
 from certain organs (for example, the retention of fetal membranes
brane, consisting of a basal lamina (laminin, fibronectin, collagen
 in the uterus or colic of the intestinal tract). Also in case of a feed-
type IV) and a fibroreticular lamina (collagens type II and VII),
 ing-laminitis an endotoxin effect is present. The feeding-laminitis
plays a key role in the protection of the epidermis and dermis and
may develop after uptake of raw grain (whoole corn, rye) or
 brought about artificially for experimental purposes. The associ-
- pe na paida o sisass e s
 ated grain laminitis depends on weather and season and is triggered
nization pass through the basement membrane in both directions.
 by fructanes. At high daytime and low nighttime temperatures with
Reduction in function or even loss of the basement membrane has
the most severe effects especially on the avascular epidermis, name-
occurs in certain grasses a very high content of fructose (fructan).
ly on the mechanical composition (adhesion, separation), the nutri-
tive function and differentiation especially of the epidermis (kerati-
nization and cornification). The abnormal, pathological activation
of the metalloproteinases leads to a breakdown of all components
 of the basal membrane and subsequently to a dermoepidermal sepa-
ration, whereby the epidermis and parts of the dermis of the suspen-
 sory apparatus are sloughed off like a glove from the hand. Inhibi-
of laminitis. [319] Separations are observed in all forms of lamini-
tis of different etiology also outside of this border region at many
sites, both in the dermis and the epidermis. [315]
 According to my own assessment there is no validity for the one
 or other theory to be exclusively right. Both theories have, accord-
ing to the form of laminitis with specific cause, a right to exist. On
the contrary, to the advocates of the separation theory it is not rea-
sonable that metalloproteinases should be exclusively directed to
the components of the dermoepidermal basal membrane; whereas,
the similarly structured basal membrane of directly adjacent blood
Fig. 28.2.4. Chronic hommonal laminitis. Shown are comparable horizontal sec-
tions directly above the solear border of the coffin bone, that is to say in the com-
 puted tomography section picture (above) and in the anatomical, sawed, section
(below). In the dorsal region of the (light cofin bone, the terminal anchoring of the
suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone exhibits lamella-like (serrated) projec-
tons of bone (sign of insertional desmopathy). The following intermediary dermis
appears dark (radiolucent and the outer-lying (gray hoof-plate reveals on the out-
 er end-anchoring of the suspensory apparatus complexes of lamellar horn (indi-
Fig. 28.2..wly fd ssesry apparatusof the coffinbne, wh r-
vidual horn lamellae cannot be seen). In the lamellar horn complexes, the individ-
mo-epidemmal lamellar apparatus is degenerated as a result of pressure-loading
Ual horny lamellae are fused with one another by tubularfilling horn-nasses simi-
lar to the zona alba. This structural change is typical for hommonal laminitis and is
 probably caused by an elevated cortisol level, which disturbs epidermal differen-
Marks)
 tation and causes a loss of synchronization in keratinization.
140
This normally is absorbed in the small intestine. Offered in abun-
 6. The aftercare requires hygienic antimicrobial protection for the
dance, this can result in a concentration in the cecum, which is
barrier of the vital suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone; name-
connected to an explosive multiplication of certain bacteria (e. g.
ly, for the white line [306] so long as this is still defective. This con-
Streptococcus bovis). The endotoxins produced break the barrier of
tinues up to one year after the inflammation subsides, because the
the cecum and reach the blood circulation. The direct or indirect 
 main part of the white line, the horn cells of the parietal laminae,
effect in producing disease of the suspensory apparatus of the coffin
need this time, to grow down from their site of formation at the
bone is still not known in all particulars. [320]
 coronary wall border to the weight-bearing hoof border below. The
Systemic-hormonal laminitis may develop secondarily due to a
 second component of the white line, the filling horn, is formed
tumor (adenoma) of the intermediate part of the pituitary gland.
 much farther distally, beneath the tip of the coffin bone and for this 
Such tumors occur more often than expected. At the University of
reason is able to regenerate much faster - within about 2 months.
Utrecht, The Netherlands, 48 cases were treated. [321] In these
 For further treatment measures, see textbooks of equine medical
 cases mostly (secondarily) the adrenal cortex is altered by hyper-
science.
trophy (Cushing's syndrome). The primary disease and the sec-
 ondary result are in most cases associated with an elevation of the
cortisol and ACTH-level in the blood. The cortisol elevation is also
 aq s si m s s (d)  
adenoma or adenocarcinoma of the adrenal cortex. The elevated
endogenous cortisol level induces or reinforces laminitis, because it 
Joints of the Pelvic Limb
BIANCA PATAN
 potentiates the vasoconstrictive action of biogenic amines. More-
over, horn quality is reduced because epidermal differentiation
30.1. In case of lamenesses of the pelvic limb, the cause of lameness
(keratinization and cornification) is affected. Horn of low quality
is relatively rarely located in the region of the hip joint. Occasion-
(scar horn) is produced in excess (see Fig. 28.2.4.). [322]
ally in small horses and ponies trauma-dependent luxations or sub-
The medicinal application of exogenous cortisol is contraindi-
 pa a s m  so ae si d ae p s
cated in case of suspected or an outbreak of laminitis, because an
the femur is usually displaced craniodorsally. [231] [325] Hip joint
 existing disorder may be aggravated. Certain cortisol medications 
dysplasia, which occurs relatively often in human beings and the
[9h] (su sson sr n uaaa a
dog, is described in foals likewise only in isolated cases. [326] Also
 From the knowledge of structural changes and the course of the
degenerative changes are rather rare and found usually secondarily
disease, the following conclusions can be drawn for the precise dia-
following fractures of the acetabulum, injuries to the ligament of
gnosis and individual treatment-strategy as well as the prognosis,
the head of the femur or after hip joint dysplasia. Radiographic
which is based on it.
examination of the hip joint is usually obtained under full anesthe-
 In most cases, the diagnosis of "laminitis" can be placed without
sia in dorsal recumbency, but it can also be attempted in the stand-
 doubt from the manifestation of pain, posture and movement as
ing position. Sonographic or scintigraphic examination furnishes
well as from the clinical parametes (pulsation, temperature and
additional information. [231] 
anamnesis). A differentiating fine diagnosis by application of ima-
 The landmark for injection of the hip joint is the greater
 ging procedures (x-ray, possibly computed tomography (CT), NMR
 trochanter, which is sometimes difficult to palpate in horses with a
(nuclear magnetic resonance) has this objective: To separate patho-
well  developed musculature. [114] The needle is introduced
logically altered and healthy parts of the hoof from each other, to
between the cranial part (convexity) and the somewhat more prox-
evaluate the degree of lowering and rotation of the coffin bone and
imally directed caudal part (summit) in a slightly craniodistal direc-
- depending on that - the broadening of the white line, which is also
tion. The needle is advanced along the neck of the femur up to a
relevant prognostically. The computed tomography gives informa-
depth of about 13-14 cm. (Fig. 30.1.). [114] [177] For anesthesia
tion concerning possible osteomyelitic changes in the coffin bone,
of the hip joint, 25-30 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution is
concerning location and extent of possible separations between the
required. [114]
parts of the suspensory apparatus of the coffin bone and perhaps
 For arthroscopy of the hip joint, access can also be selected
 concerning necrosis of the old and new formation of a replacement
Eu rau rar ay jo sed pepnes pue eui ay umiaq
 ss a o -ass s u-e see rouass
craniodistal direction. In this way, a large part of the head of the
spread of the *scar-horn-shield" (of the lamellar core of dyskerato-
femur and acetabulum, including the ligament of the head of the
tic masses of horn).
femur, is demonstrable. Further access for instruments is possible
 In view of the great variety in the course of the disease, the ortho-
4-6 cm cranial to the arthroscopic portal. [327]
pedic treatment strategy must take care for the individual needs of
the patient.
1. The primary cause of the disease (e.g., a bacterial infection) must 
 be eliminated by treatment of its cause.
2. To reduce the tremendous pain - among other reasons, on
account of the inflammation-dependent increase in tissue tonus in
 asu e  s d - e ru  
also an anti-inflammatory effect, because they inhibit the distribu-
tion of neuropeptides that foster inflammation at nerveendings.
may mislead the patient to careless movements, which again possi-
Subcutaneous
 bly may provoke further separations in the diseased suspensory
iliac (coxal) bursa
apparatus.
3. To spare the diseased suspensory apparatus, stressing move-
ments are restricted to an essential minimum (medications to rest
the animal with extension of periods of lying down are supportive
Hip joint 
 in avoiding further phases of coffin bone rotation).
4. Stress (weight-bearing) of the healthy parts of the hoof and the
Subcutaneous
sparing (unloading) of the diseased parts of the hoof is necessary.
 ischiadic bursa
-sns,) uepueq se io uousasu ieddde Aq aup s s
 pension" of the dorsal weight-bearing border and thus the sparing
of the dorsal part of the suspensory apparatus, which is most 
Trochanteric bursa
strongly affected). [316] [324]
of themiddle
 5. Relief of the tissue tonus is achieved by orthopedic measures, by
 gluteal muscle
rasping offor cutting grooves in the dorsal part of the hoof plate at
the level of the coronary wall border, where in many cases an acces-
 sory ungular cartilage (cartilago accessoria) is formed. This results
 according to the principle of causal histogenesis and is an expres-
Fig. 30.l. Injection of the hip joint. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie,
sion of increased tissue pressure (see figure, page 29 below).
Berlin)
141
30.2. The stifle joint is composed of three synovial spaces (femo-
cause of such defects is multifactorial, in which case, among others,
ropatellar joint as well as lateral and medial femorotibial joints),
nutrition, husbandry and genetic factors as well as endocrinologic
which are connected to one another in a variable manner. A com-
 dysfunctions, mineral imbalances, biomechanical trauma and rapid
munication between the femoropatellar and the medial femoro-
growth rate are discussed. [332 [333] [334] Most often the osteo-
tibial joint is most frequent (60%-80%); whereas, the lateral femo-
chondrotic changes are located in the middle area of the lateral
ridge of the trochlea; [330] [277] more rarely, the changes occur on
rarely (about 3%). [328]
the distal articular surface of the patella, on the medial ridge of the
The joint capsule of the femoropatellar joint comprises a spa-
trochlea or between the two ridges. [277] [331] Typical radio-
cious joint cavity, which extends proximally under the quadriceps
 graphic changes are large surface irregularities in contour or a flat-
muscle (suprapatellar recess). [179 [176] The lateral femorotibial
tening of the bone surface or a fragmenting of a cartilage-bone
joint forms the subextensor recess, which projects about 4-7 cm
squame. [231] [335] Sonographic examination gives additional
distally beyond the bony joint plane and ensheaths the common ten-
information about the surface of the cartilage. [329] Treatment of
don of origin of the long digital extensor muscle and fibularis (per-
 the affected foals may be a conservative one. [335] In the case of
oneus) tertius muscle in the extensor groove of the tibia. [329] This
 older horses with clinical signs a surgical procedure (arthroscopic
 curettage of the altered cartilage or removal of the fragment) is indi-
case of injuries in the region of the stifle joint. A further outpouch-
cated. [231] [331]
 ing of the lateral femorotibial joint is present under the tendon of
Subchondral bone cysts or cyst-like defects in the stifle joint are
origin of the popliteus muscle. [186]
 most often located in the medial condyle of the femur, more rarely
An increased filling of the femoropatellar joint sac is usually pal-
 distolaterally on the femur in the neighborhood of the intercondy-
pable as a fluctuating increase in girth between the patellar liga-
lar fossa or proximally on the tibia. [231] [277] The exact cause of
ments. If the limb is weight-bearing the latter are present as firm,
such lesions is not known. Discussion of triggering factors includes,
band-like structures between the patella and the proximal tibia (Fig.
among others, traumatic defects of cartilage and subchondral bone,
30.2.1.). The intermediate patellar ligament, which corresponds to
[336] gonitis as well as osteochondrotic changes. [337] Besides con-
the end-tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle, is underlain by a
servative treatment also a surgical procedure is described in the
bursa (proximal or, respectively, distal infrapatellar bursa) in its
form of an arthroscopic curettage of the defect. [231] [337]
region of origin on the patella as well as at its insertion on the tib-
 The two menisci of the stifle joint are fixed to the tibia by cranial
ial tuberosity (Fig. 30.2.3.). An inflammatory increase in size of the
and relatively short caudal ligaments. Additionally, the lateral
synovial bursa, like the infrapatellar fat pad between the medial or
meniscus is fixed to the caudomedial femur by the meniscofemoral
intermediate patellar ligment and the joint capsule, may simulate an 
ligament; whereas, the medial meniscus is associated with the medi-
increased filling of the femoropatellar joint sac. [176]
al collateral ligament (Figs. 30.2.1. and 30.2.2.). [176] Lesions of
 qe q d  s   
 the menisci in the form of vertical and longitudinal tears involve
of the cases of pelvic limb lameness are caused by changes in the
 predominantly the medial meniscus, in which case the lesions are
region of the stifle joint. [231] Bone lesions due to osteochondrosis
mostly localized at the cranial pole. [231] [277] [338] Often lesions
as well as subchondral bone cysts or cyst-like defects play a special
occur at the same time on the articular cartilage as well as at the cra-
role. [277] The most frequent soft tissue problem is proximal patel-
 nial, more rarely at the caudal, meniscal ligament, which may result
lar fixation; whereas, injuries to the menisci or the different liga-
 in instability of the meniscus. [231] [339]
mentous structures (cruciate ligaments, collateral ligaments, patel-
 The collateral ligaments originate on the medial or, respectively,
lar ligaments, and meniscal ligaments) are rather rarely diagnosed
lateral epicondyle of the femur. [186] The attachment of the medial
in the horse. [277]
 collateral ligament is to the medial condyle of the tibia with an
 A developmental disorder in the region of the articular cartilage
 intermediate insertion to the medial meniscus; [176] whereas, the
is designated osteochondrosis, in which case, on the pelvic limb the
lateral collateral ligament inserts only on the head of the fibula (Fig.
talocrural and stifle joint are affected most often. [330] Osteochon-
30.2.1.). [186] Lesions of the collateral ligaments due to trauma are
drotic changes of the stifle joint develop mostly at foal age between
 observed especially in jumpers, in which case the medial ligament is
a  ae a i  s jo su yin pe pu an
 more often involved and may be damaged together with the medial
most part temporary and may spontaneously reduce. [330] Lesions,
meniscus. [277] Beyond that, especially in jumpers, there sometimes
which are still demonstrable at the 8th month of postnatal life, are
 occur also lesions of the intermediate, more rarely of the lateral,
on the other hand usually permanent. [330] To be sure, the osteo-
 patellar ligament. [231]
chondrotic lesions become clinically relevant frequently only dis-
 The cruciate ligaments connect the femur to the tibia in the cen-
 [l ] sq  q     
ter of the stifle joint and give the joint its cranio-caudal stability.
Patella
Medial ridge of 
the trochlea 
 Patellar ligaments
Medial 
Intermediate 
Lateral 
Menisci
(craniomedial)
(caudolateral)
Fig. 30.2.2. a) Craniocaudal radiograph of a stifle joint. The rectangular frame
Fig. 30.2.1. Knee (stile) joint of the right pelvic limb. a: medial collateral ligament,
 shows the location of the sonogram. b) sonogram of the medial meniscus (longi
b: lateral collateral ligament. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
tudinal, linear array scanner 7.5 MHz). S: skin, MCL: medial collateral ligament.
(Sonogram: Dr J. Edinger, Chirurgische Tierkinik, Universitat Leipzig)
142
The cranial cruciate ligament originates craniomedial to the inter-
the same level between the tendon of the long digital extensor
condylar eminence of the tibia and inserts caudolaterally in the
 muscle and the lateral patellar ligament. [114] [184] A further pos-
intercondylar fossa of the femur. The origin of the caudal cruciate
sibility for injection of the joint is by way of the subextensor recess.
ligament is caudomedial on the tibia, its insertion is craniomedial in
 In doing this, the needle is introduced directly cranial to the com-
the intercondylar fossa of the femur. [329] Traumatically condi-
 mon tendon of origin of the long digital extensor and peroneus ter-
s  e  an ad  sa 
tius about at the level of the tibial tuberosity. The needle is directed
the caudal cruciate ligament. [231] Frequently, partial tears develop
proximomedially (Fig. 30.2.3., 2). [176] [273] Injection of the
either in the middle of the ligament or near its cranial attachment to
femoropatellar joint is lateral or medial to the middle patellar liga-
the tibia, [231] [277] in which case occasionally also avulsion frac-
 ment 2-4 cm proximal to the tibial tuberosity. [328] In this case, the
tures of a bone fragment can occur. [277] Defects in the region of
 needle is introduced perpendicular to the skin or directed slightly
the caudal insertion on the femur are rather rare. [277] Sometimes
 proximally (30.2.2., 3/4). Alternatively, injection of the femoro-
lesions of the cruciate ligaments appear together with other soft tis-
 patellar joint is possible from the lateral side. For this, the needle is
sue changes (for example, lesions of the menisci) or fractures in the
 introduced caudal to the lateral patellar ligament about 5 cm prox-
region of the intercondylar eminence of the tibia. [340] [341] The
 imal to the lateral tibial condyle and perpendicular to the long axis
 of the femur. The needle is advanced (about 1.5-2 cm) into the joint
and crus against one another) can be produced manually in man
between the lateral patellar ligament and the lateral ridge of the
and dog to demonstrate cranio-caudal instability in cruciate liga-
trochlea (Fig. 30.2.3., 5). [343] For anesthesia, about 20-30 cc of
ment ruptures. It cannot as a rule be demonstrated in the standing
 2% anesthesia solution is injected into the corresponding joint.
horse with cruciate ligament rupture. [231] [277]
[114] In interpreting joint anesthesia, the fact that the three joints
The soft tissue changes mentioned are, for the most part, demon-
can partially communicate is a consideration. [328] Moreover, in
strable by sonography (Fig. 30.2.2.) In doing this, the stife joint is
the stifle joint a diffusion of the anesthesia solution into the neigh-
examined from cranial and caudal, in which case the following can
 boring joint compartments must be taken into account. [344]
be demonstrated: the collateral ligaments, patellar ligaments, the
 For arthroscopy of the stifle joint, see p. 113.
joint capsule of the femoropatellar and femorotibial joints, parts of
the cartilaginous or bony surface of the joints (especially the cranial
30.3. The hock joint (tarsal joint) is composed of different joints,
and caudal third of the ridges of the femoral trochlea), the meniscal
which in part have their own synovial cavities. The tarsocrural joint
ligaments (but not the caudal ligament of the medial meniscus),
(talocrural joint), which is located between the tibia and the talus,
 parts of the menisci, the common origin of the long digital extensor
 is mainly responsible for the mobility of the tarsal joint. It has four
and peroneus tertius muscles as well as the tendon of origin of the
 recesses, which bulge outward with increased filling of the joint (so-
popliteus muscle. [329] [231] Even the cruciate ligaments can be
called bog spavin). [176] The two dorsal outpouchings lie medial
identified; however, the diagnostic value of sonographic demon-
 and lateral to the extensor tendons (long digital extensor m., per-
stration is questionable. [23i] Diagnostic arthroscopy of the stifle
 oneus tertius m. and cranial tibial m.). [345] The two plantar
joint provides additional information (section 3.2). If soft tissue
 pouches are found proximoplantar to the medial and lateral malle-
lesions are associated with chip-fractures or bony excrescences,
olus of the tibia. [176] There is always a communication with the
then radiographic changes can sometimes also be demonstrated.
 proximal intertarsal joint (talocalcaneal-centroquartal joint), a
[231] [277]
tight joint between the proximal and middle rows of the tarsal
 Because of the varying communications between the three syn-
-a   e    s  [i] [i] s
ovial compartments of the stifle joint, the synovial cavities must be
vance is the talocalcaneal joint, which is between the talus and cal-
injected individually in performing intra-articular anesthesia. [177]
caneus and also communicates with the tarsocrural joint. [346]
The medial femorotibial joint is accessible between the medial
 Also the distal intertarsal jointb (centrodistal joint) between the
patellar ligament and the medial collateral ligament. For the injec-
middle and distal rows of the tarsal bones as well as the tar-
tion of the joint, the needle is introduced about 1-2 cm proximal to
 sometatarsal joint (between the distal row of tarsal bones and Mt
the palpable border of the tibia perpendicularly through the skin
II-IV) are tight joints, which scarcely permit mobility. [176]
and advanced nearly horizontally into the joint. [114] [184] Injec-
 In about one third of horses the tarsometatarsal joint communi-
tion of the lateral femorotibial joint is possible between the tendon
cates with the distal intertarsal joint, [347] [348] in which case the
  p a pe a nsxa p  al jo
synovial cavities communicate in particular in the region of the
ment, directly proximal to the lateral border of the tibia. In doing
tarsal canal as well as between the third tarsal bone and the fused
this, the needle is introduced in a horizontal and slightly caudal
first and second tarsal bones. [65] In very rare cases even a com-
direction (Fig. 30.2.3., 1). Alternatively, the joint can be injected at
munication of the tarsometatarsal joint with the proximal inter-
tarsal and tarsocrural joint was observed. [347]
 Diseases of the tarsal joint are one of the most frequent causes of
lameness in the athletic horse. Degenerative joint changes (spavin),
which usually appear bilaterally, play a special role. [349] The dis-
tal intertarsal and the tarsometatarsal joint are encountered most
frequently [349] [350] more rarely, the proximal intertarsal or talo-
calcaneal joint. [346] [350] The disease commonly appears in older
athletic horses, but it may occur also in young animals (juvenile
dsd s e   as ss  lt 
Suprapatellarrecess
tion. [351] A frequent clinical sign is a lameness or stiffness of the
hind limb, which improves with movement. The flexion test of the
Proximal infrapatellar
- an sqxa a e s (si eds, pos  y
bursa
 ness and also pressure palpation in the medial region of the distal
tarsus (Churchill test) is often painful. [349] Radiographically, there
can be demonstrated, among others, a narrowing of the joint space,
Subextensor recess
subchondral areas with sclerosis (bone densities) or osteolysis (bone
 dissolution) as well as periarticular bone excrescences (Fig. 30.3.1.
  e s  ae aia sl tl 
Distal infrapatellar bursa
oped dorsomedially (in Ielandic horses, to be sure, rather dorso-
lateral) at the level of the distal tarsal joints and may be palpable or
moropatellarjoint
even visible in advanced cases. [349] [351] Especially in trotters,
 Medial femorotibial joint
sometimes also inflammatory changes in the region of the medial
teral femorotibial joint
Fig. 30.2.3. Injection of the lateral femorotibial joint: between the long digital
a according to the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (1994) two joints are
extensor muscle and the lateral collateralligament (1) orin the subextensor recess
distinguished: Art. talocalcaneocentralis and Art. calcaneoquartalis
(2), injection of the femoropatellar joint: (3)/(4) cranial access, (5) lateral access.
 y   y   oe 
(Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
talis
143
end-tendon of the cranial tibial muscle (cunean tendon) or the
 is injected. [114] In interpreting joint anesthesia, the relatively fre-
underlying synovial bursa (cunean bursa] are present. [264] [353]
quent communication of the tarsometatarsal joint with the distal
eiea  s so assqsas
intertarsal joint is to be noted. [347] [348] Also, owing to diffusion,
in girth in the medial region of the distal tarsal joints (so-called
desensitization of neighboring structures (proximal joint compart-
"spur-knot"). [349] Conservative possibilities of treatment include
 ments of the tarsal joint, [344] tarsal synovial sheath, insertion of
orthopedic shoeing, including correction of the hoof, systemic and
 the peroneus tertius and cranial tibial muscles as well as dorsal and
local medication as well as an adaptive exercise program. [354]
plantar metatarsal nerves [348]) are possible.
[352] More recently, the application of shock waves is recommend-
 Injection of the distal intertarsal joint is performed from the
ed. [355] If the conservative treatment is insufficient, different sur-
 medial side in the region of a depression between the fused tarsal
 gical measures of treatment can be applied. There is described,
bone I+II, tarsal bone II and the central tarsal bone. [365] [364]
among others, a partial removal of the articular cartilage of the dis-
 The needle is introduced through or directly distal to the medial
tal intertarsal or of the tarsometatarsal joint to further ankylosis
end-tendon of the cranial tibial muscle (cunean tendon) perpendi-
(stiffening) of the corresponding joint, [356] [354] [352] a tenecto-
cular to the skin (Fig. 30.3.2., 3). [114] [365] Alternatively, arthro-
my (section and partial removal) of the cunean tendon, [354] [353]
centesis of the distal intertarsal joint can be performed via a dorso-
drilling of the subchondral bone of tarsal Ill, the central tarsal
lateral approach, directly lateral to the long digital extensor tendon
bone, and metatarsal bone II for the reduction of intraosseous pres-
(Fig. 30.3.2., 4). [365a] For anesthesia of the joint, an injection of
sure, [354] [357] as well as a neurectomy of the deep peroneal and
4-5 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution is needed. [114]
partially the tibial nerve. [358]
 Injection of the talocrural joint is usually realized at the dorso-
 A further important disease of the hock joint is osteochondrosis
medial outpouching of the joint sac, in which case the needle is
within the talocrural joint, which is relatively often present espe-
introduced perpendicularly through the skin about 2.5-4 cm distal
-da1 loei Isl locelse] sasou pooquem pue siaon u 
to the well palpable medial malleolus of the tibia either cranial or
ical locations of osteochondrotic changes are the cranial sagittal
caudal to the cranial branch of the medial saphenous vein (Fig.
ridge of the tibia (86-9.5%), and the distal region of the lateral ridge
30.3.2., 1). [188] [194] In case of greater filling of the joint, alter-
of the trochlea of the talus (5-11%). [330] [65] Occasionally also
 natively the plantarolateral recess may also be injected (Fig. 30.3.2.,
the medial malleolus of the tibia or the medial ridge of the trochlea
 2). [114] For anesthesia of the talocrural joint, 20-30 cc of 2%
 of the talus is encountered. [361] [362] Radiographically, there is
anesthesia solution is injected into the joint, [114] in which case the
visible an irregular contour or flattening of the subchondral bone-
 proximal intertarsal joint is always also desensitized, since both
surface or fragmentation of a cartilage-bone chip (Fig. 30.3.1., 6) is
synovial spaces communicate. [114] [188]
established, [330] in which case the changes frequently occur bilat-
 For arthroscopy of the talocrural joint, see p. 113.
 erally. [65] Additional information on the cartilage-bone surface
 The details of the digital joints of the pelvic limb correspond to
can be obtained by sonographic examination. [363] Osteochon-
the relations on the thoracic limb.
drotic lesions often develop already in the first postnatal month, are
for the most part only temporary, and can regress spontaneously.
calcanean tuber, runs distally plantarolaterally and attaches to the
Changes that are still found at 5 months are on the other hand usu-
lateral splint bone (Mt IV) as well as the fourth tarsal bone and dis-
ally permanent. [330] Clinical signs {increased filling of the 
 tally on the calcaneus. An inflammatory thickening of this ligament
joint/lameness) however occur often at a later time, when the heavy
is visible in lateral view as a swelling (curb) on the plantarodistal
work begins. [361] If such clinical signs are present, a surgical treat-
region of the tarsus. [366]
ment (arthroscopic curettage of cartilage or removal of the frag-
ment) is indicated. [361] [362]
 30.4. The trochanteric bursa, which lies deep to the tendon of inser.
Injection of the tarsometatarsal joint is realized plantarolateral-
tion of the middle gluteal muscle on the greater trochanter of the
ly, directly proximal to the lateral splint bone, where a slight depres-
femur (Fig. 30.1), can occasionally be affected by inflammation. For
sion can be palpated. The needle is introduced into this depression
 injection of this synovial bursa, the needle is introduced directly at
between the splint bone and the tarsal bone IV in a dorsomedial and
 the level of the cranial part of the greater trochanter. It is directed
slightly distal direction (Fig. 30.3.2., 5). [114] [364] For anesthesia
horizontally through the skin and advanced until there is contact
of the tarsometatarsal joint, 4-8 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution
with bone. [367]
Talocrural joint
Proximal intertarsal joint
 Distal intertarsal joint 
Tarsometatarsal joint
(medial)
(lateral)
Fig. 30.3.1. a) hock joint with spavin changes: distal intertarsal joint nearly com-
pletely fused (arrow), 15 years Arabian mare, b) osteochondrosis dissecans in the
Fig. 30.3.2. Injection of the hock joint: Access in the dorsomedial (1) or plantaro-
hock joint: chip on the sagittal crest of the tibia (arrowhead), 2 years Appaloosa
lateral (2) recess of the talocrural joint, medial (3) and dorsolateral (4) approach to
stallion. (Courtesy of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veterinarmed.
the distal intertarsal joint, (5) injection of the tarsometatarsal joint. (Courtesy of 
Univ. Wien)
Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
144
Head
R BERG, K.-D. BUDRAS
32.1. Temporal fossa (p. 33.j): The temporal fossa lies dorsal and
medial to the zygomatic process of the squamous part of the tem-
  go ssd oz  oi pe se m e auq rd
bone. Besides the temporalis muscle, it contains fat tissue 
=
 extraperiorbital fat body). In old and chronically sick horses, the fat
body is for the most part reduced and for this reason, this part of
the temporal fossa becomes distinctly visible.
32.2. Age-determination by Examination of the Teeth
 e sd i a n a  
exact determination of age up to about the 8th year. After that, race,
feeding and maintenance play an increasing role as factors of uncer-
tainty, which permit only an approximate estimation of age and
age of 14-15 years" are advisable. For age determination or esti-
(medial view)
(lateral view)
mation by examination of the teeth the criteria mentioned below
are considered. These should be applied, as much as possible, in
Fig. 30.5. Tendon sheaths and synovial bursae in the tarsal region.
combination and not individually. The ranking corresponds to the
ea lepnes aun pue esnu loxe lebip leee aun po yeaus uopuen uouuo :e
 -exa Aq uoesa ae jo Aoeinooe aui jo iadsa ui aoueiod
muscle, b: tendon sheath of the medial digital flexor muscle, c: tendon sheath of
 nation of the teeth.
the tibialis cranialis muscle, d: tendon sheath of the long digital extensor muscle,
 Eruption of the deciduous premolars, P2-P4, takes place before,
e: tendon sheath of the lateral digital extensor muscle, f: subtendinous calcaneal
 and that of the other teeth after, parturition in certain time-inter-
bursa of the superficial digital fexor muscle, g: subtendinous bursa (cunean bur-
vals. An approximate rule of thumb for age determination is that
sa) of the tibialis cranialis muscle, h: subcutaneous calcaneal bursa. (Courtesy of 
deciduous incisor 1 erupts on the 6th day, deciduous incisor 2 in the
Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
6th week, and deciduous incisor 3 in the 6th month. Eruption of the
first molar of the mandible takes place just before the end of the first
year after parturition. During the intensive growth of the tooth at
the time of eruption, the root of the tooth causes temporarily a more
 30.5. An increased filling of the subtendinous calcaneal bursa of the
 or less distinctly visible and palpable elevation ("bump") at the ven-
tral margin of the mandible, which can be considered for the esti-
 e   s  s i i  
 mation of dental age (see radiograph, Fig. 32.2.1.) with a bump
ly under the superficial digital flexor tendon in the region of the cal-
 under the root of the first molar). Corresponding bumps occur tem-
caneus. It is, as a rule, a fluctuating swelling. [114] If, on the other
 porarily and in succession under the roots of the erupting perma-
hand, the calcanean subcutaneous bursa is increasingly filled, then
 nent premolars of two to four years old horses. The growth of these
a locally circumscribed increase in girth can be observed over the
permanent premolars causes a pressure on the deciduous teeth that
"ride" above them and in the same manner in the opposite direction
(so-called "capped hock"; Fig. 30.5.). [273]
on the ventral margin of the mandible, which is bowed ventrally as
bumps in the region of the concerned dental roots. After the erup-
 30.6. The subtendinous bursa of the cranial tibial muscle (B. die-
tion of the teeth and the elimination of the deciduous teeth, the
 kerboffi, cunean bursa) is found under the cunean tendon in the
upper obstacle is removed, the ventrally directed pressure ceases,
area of its insertion at the fused first and second tarsal bones (Fig.
 and the bumps disappear (Fig. 32.2.1.).
30.5.). Inflammation of the synovial bursa or tendon may occa-
The change of the incisor teeth takes place at 2? years (incisor
sionally play a role in spavin. [264] For the injection of the bursa,
tooth 1) or 3? years (incisor tooth 2) or 4 years (incisor tooth 3). A
the needle is introduced through the cunean tendon and advanced
 premature loss of deciduous teeth, for example in case of fraudulent
until bone is contacted. [114] [307] Alternatively the injection can
"breaking of teeth", causes a premature eruption of the permanent
be made directly distal to the cunean tendon, in which case, fol-
tooth, by which an older age would be simulated The inspection of
lowing this, the needle is advanced proximally under the tendon.
 the eruption of the teeth requires a clear separation between decid-
[114] For anesthesia of the bursa, 3-5 cc of 2% local anesthesia
uous and permanent teeth. The deciduous teeth are much smaller
solution is necessary. [114] [367]
and on the incisor teeth reveal a narrowing as a dental neck. The
crown, which is not covered by the gums (clinical crown), is bright-
30.7. The tarsal flexor tendon sheath surrounds the different con-
 ly white because it is not covered by yellowish cementum.
stituents of the deep flexor tendon in the tarsal region. [114] It
begins proximally at the level of the tuber calcanei and extends dis-
tally up to 7 cm distal to the tarsometatarsal joint. [114] [368] In
case of an increased filling of the synovial sheath, this becomes vis-
ible especially medial to, sometimes also lateral to, the calcaneus as
a swelling (thoroughpin). [369] [368] Owing to the relatively tight
flexor retinaculum, an indentation is visible in the middle region.
[114] Because the proximal part of the tarsal flexor tendon sheath
lies in the direct neighborhood of the plantar recess of the tar-
socrural joint (Fig. 30.5.), [114] [368] in cases of injuries in the
plantar tarsal region an opening of the two synovial structures must
the synovial sheath can be realized in its proximal or distal out-
pouching, in which case 10-15 cc of 2% local anesthesia solution is
required for the anesthesia. [114]
The other synovial structures in the tarsal region, which have to
be considered in case of injuries, are demonstrated in Fig. 30.5.
Fig. 32.2.1. Mandibular cheek teeth. The last premolar (let is found as a decidu-
ly before its eruption. M1 causes a bump on the ventral margin of the mandibule.
(Courtesy of Prof. Dr. Poulsen Nautrup)
145
The attrition of the tooth starts about 6 months after eruption,
ly by a long-oval occlusal surface (from 24 years at I1) (Fig. 32.2.4.,
when the antagonists come into contact. With physiological attri-
A-E).
tion the permanent incisor teeth will be worn down about 2 mm
 The curvature of the incisor arcade is at first semilunar and flat-
annually. Because the cups of the mandibular incisors with about 6
tens more and more to a “flattened" arch at 17 years of age, which
anassede
extends up to the 23rd year of age to a nearly straight arch and after
with at least 12 mm, it is clearly understandable that the cups of the
that finally appears "straight" (Fig. 32.2.5.).
mandibular incisors disappear earlier (Fig. 32.2.4.).
The angle between the incisor teeth of the upper and lower jaws
The disappearance of the cup is finished with the loss of the
 becomes increasingly more acute. Up to the age of 8 years the teeth
enamel spot (and of the cementum filling at the bottom of the cup).
meet at an angle of about 180. They stand roughly perpendicular-
Because the cup and the pulp cavity labial to it overlap each other,
ly to one another. Up to the 16th year of age the position of the
the dental star becomes visible before the final disappearance of the
mandibular incisors flattens distinctly in comparison to the still
cup. The dental star corresponds to the distal part of the pulp cavi-
steeply located incisors of the upper jaw. At the age of about 16
ty, which is filled by secondary dentine. Exposure of the pulp cavi-
 years, the angle is about 13.5°. In older animals also the incisors of
ty is prevented by formation of the secondary dentine. The disap-
the upper jaw stand increasingly flatter and from this results an
pearance of the cup is important for ageing by teeth and takes place
angle of about 90e (angular dentition at the age of about 25 years).
on the deciduous mandibular incisors at the age of 1 year (i1), or 1,
After this, the angle becomes still smaller in very old age (pointed
5 (i2), or 2 years (i3); on the permanent mandibular incisor teeth at
angular dentition at the age of about 30 years; Fig. 32.2.6.).
the age of 6 years (I1), or 7 years (I2) or 8 years (I3).
Galvayne's (G) groove is a longitudinal groove on the vestibular
The change of the form of the occlusal surface is also an impor-
surface of the corner incisor of the upper jaw. At an age of about
tant criterion for the ageing by teeth. The originally transverse-oval
10 years the groove appears proximally under the gum. At about 15
occlusal surface (from 6 years on I1) is continued by a round (from
 years it extends over the proximal half and at the age of about 20
12 years on I2), then by a triangular (from 18 years on I3) and final-
years over the entire extent of the (clinical) dental crown of the
Fig. 32.2.3. Longitudinal section through permanent P3 and I1 of the mandible.
Both teeth stil show signs of growth by their wide access to the pulp cavity. The
 premolar cheek tooth (let is still not in wear and distinctly reveals the three tooth
constituents. The bright white enamel borders externally on the dark cementum
        o  
extensively covered by the gum and is fixed within the bony alveolus and
anchored by the periodontium. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
Fig. 32.2.5. Semilunar arcade of the incisor teeth (Fig. above) and flatter arcade of
the incisor teeth (Fig. below).
 Fig. 32.2.4. Longitudinal section through the middle incisor (12) of the lower jaw
with opened pulp cavity and infundibulum. The occlusal surfaces show from
above to below: A. Beginning in wear, occlusal surface transverse-oval (5 years).
B. On the occlusal surface, which is stil ransverse-oval, the dental star appears
 as a dark streak labial to the infundibulum (9 years). C. On the rounded occlusal 
surface the transverse-oval, dark dental star lies labial to the white enamel spot
Fig. 32.2.6. Right: Profile of the incisor dentition at 3.5 years. Left: Profile of the
(12 years). D. Triangular occlusal surface with dental star (18 years). E. Long-oval
a po yuel au h on dn aao sauae m she gh ie uo osiu
occlusal surface with dental star (24 years).
crown and caudolingual hook at I3.
146
(abial)
lingual
506
505
504
503
502
501
601
602
603
604
605
606
111
110
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
P4
P2
P1
M1
M2
M1
P3
2
1
1
2
3
C
P1
P3
P4
M
M2
Mg
410
409
408
407
406
405
404
403
402
401
301
302
303
304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
806
805
804
803
802
801
701
702
703
704
705
706
lingual
lingual
0
bukkal
(labial)
bukkal
 PHARMACIA GmbH according to Dr. Fahrenkrug and Dr. Stelzer In veterinary medicine, the dental scheme according to TRIADAN (1972) has become prevalent. In 
this scheme, every tooth is uniquely defined by a three-digit number. The first digit (1, 2, 3 or 4) states the quadrant which “from the view of the handler" is numbered
 (nipper) receives then the number 101, spoken as “one - zero - one". The remaining teeth of the row, continuing toward the throat, are numbered further. In the decidu-
ous dentition the quadrants are designated 5-8. With the eruption of the first permanent tooth (change in dentition), the 1 2, 3, 4 enumeration of the quadrants begins.
tooth. With further eruption, the groove disappears again and is
the mandible and P2 of the maxilla have rostrally-directed roots; P3
still recognizable at the age of 25 years on the distal half of the
of both jaws are roughly perpendicular to each other, and the roots
crown and at 30 years recognizable only on the occlusal surface as
 of the following cheek teeth (P4-M1 in the maxilla and mandible)
a remnant (Fig. 32.2.6.).
are directed caudally (Fig. 34.1.). Inflammatory processes of the
The hook is observed temporarily on the corner incisor of the
roots of the last 3-4 cheek teeth may result in resorption of the thin
upper jaw at the age of 9 years and for the second time about at the
bony lamella covering them and this may lead to a maxillary sinusi-
age of 14 years and possibly a third time at the age of about 20
tis or to a sinusitis of one of the cavities connected with the latter.
years. It results from age-dependent changes in the position of the
The roots of these four cheek teeth project still very far into the
dental arcade, which result in a partial loss of wear. The corner inci-
maxillary sinus, if this is small (young animals). With increasing age
 sor of the upper jaw exhibits caudolingually a hook-like process
they move farther ventrally because of the emergence of the teeth
 and, in addition, I3 appears to bite-in (Fig. 32.2.6. left).
corresponding to their attrition. Owing to this, the maxillary sinus
becomes larger. What has to be taken into account is the length of
 Age-determination by Teeth in the Horse
the teeth, the divergence of the dental roots, which anyway is
Birth
p2, p3, p4 are erupted
6 days
 eruption i1
6 weeks
 eruption i 2
6 months
eruption i3
 5-9 months
 eruption P1
1 year
 disappearance of cup at i1
1.5 years
disappearance of cup at i2
2 years
disappearance of cup at i3
2.5 years
change I1
3.5 years
change I2
4.5 years
change I3
6 years
lower incisors: disappearance of cup at I1 (lower
jaw); occlusal surface transverse-oval
7 years
ZI ne dns jo aueaddesip shosiou aamoi
8 years
lower incisors: disappearance of cup at I3
9 years
rad le dn jo aueades sos radn
jaw); 1st hook at I3
10 years
upper incisors: disappearance of cup at I2
11 years
upper incisors: disappearance of cup at I3, Gal-
vayne's groove at the gum
12 tears
occlusal surface of I2 rounded
14 years
 2nd hook at I3
15 years
Galvayne's groove on the proximal half of the
crown of I3 (upper corner incisor)
16 years
incisor teeth of the jaws meet at an angle of about
13.59
18 years
occlusal surface of I3 triangular
20 years
Galvayne's groove entire length of the tooth
 (clinical crown of upper corner incisor)
25 years
angular dentition, Galvayne's groove in the distal
half of the crown of I3
30 years
 Galvaynes groove only still on the occlusal sur-
face of upper incisor; pointed angular dentition
Fig. 34.1. Punching-out of the teeth. “Glass head" showing the direction of the
34.1. Punching out of teeth. In the horse, the premolars and molars
The rostral (green) and caudal (yellow) maxillary sinuses are separated by the bony
usually cannot be extracted in the conventional way. It may be that
septum of the maxillary sinus (cf., Fig. 34.2, communication of the paranasal
they are loose in the alveolus*. They must be punched out. For this,
sinuses). The infraorbital canal lies in the dorsal third of the maxilary sinuses and
above that the nasolacrimal duct. Red: sphenoidal sinus; blue: frontal sinus in
cheek tooth with attention given to its implantation direction. P2 of
relationship to the brain. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
147
* Nowadays, a special extraction-forceps is on the market which, in many cases, makes punching-out of the tooth unnecessary.
 greater in the mandible than in the maxilla, and the increase in size
Major palatine artery and tooth extraction: In case of tooth
Of the maxillary sinus with advancing age.
extractions, the position of the major palatine artery at the hard
 Punching out of maxillary M1: In punching out M1 of the max-
palate should be taken into account. On the one hand it has a close
illa, attention must be paid to the facial artery and vein.
topical relationship to the maxillary cheek teeth (courses beside the
Shortening of the teeth: A shortening of the teeth is indicated in
 alveolar processes in the palatine sulcus); on the other hand, after
 having united with the artery of the other side, it passes through the
than the others), shear-mouth, and step-mouth as well as superior
interincisive canal and forms an important anastomosis with the
and inferior brachygnathia. In this way, the hooks, edges and exsu-
superior labial artery, the palatolabial artery (supplies the upper
perantia are smoothed off to the level of the other teeth. Attention
lip).
has to be paid to the physiological oblique inclination of the
 Parotid duct: At the punching out of maxillary M1, care should
occlusal surfaces.
 be taken to avoid an injury to the parotid duct.
Trephination in case of tooth disease in the maxilla: Diseases of
the teeth are found more often in older horses. The trephination
34.2. Connection of the paranasal sinuses (p. 35, above): In the
sites for the premolars and molars are on a line through the most
horse, all paranasal sinuses are connected to the maxillary sinus.
ventral point of the orbital margin and the ventral border of the
 Clinically, that means that from here any infection, which is derived
infraorbital foramen. For P2 the trephination site is in a transverse 
  e   i     
plane through the caudal end of the naso-incisive notch; for P3, 2
which form its floor—may spread to the other paranasal sinuses.
cm rostral to the infraorbital foramen; for P4, about 2 cm caudal;
 Practically, an infection of the frontal sinus may follow an infection
and for M1, about 4 cm caudal to this foramen; and for M2, about
 of the caudal maxillary sinus, since both are connected by way of
4 cm rostral to the medial angle of the eye. The root of M3 is
the frontomaxillary aperture (located dorsomedial to the medial
ai aun ul snus po au jo as uouda e Aq paqi
angle of the eye).
between the medial angle of the eye and the median plane). M1 is
Disease of the paranasal sinuses: “Secretion streets", which come
the most frequently diseased cheek tooth in older horses.
from the ventral nasal meatus at the level of the 2nd molar tooth out
 Lateral nasal artery and trephination: In trephination for punch-
 of the middle nasal meatus and run ventrally (rostrally), are an indi-
ing out of P4, the lateral nasal artery may be injured.
cation of disease of the paranasal sinuses.
Trephination of mandibular cheek teeth: In 5 years old and old-
er horses the apices of the roots of P2 through M1 are located on a
line directly above the ventral border of the mandible. The trephi-
nation site for P2 is found in a transverse plane through the middle
 of the clinical crown, that for P3 and P4 in a plane through the cau-
dal border of the clinical crown of the same tooth, that for M1
about 4 cm rostral to the vascular notch of the mandible as also that
for M2 about 4 cm above the ventral border of the mandible and 2
cm caudal to the vascular notch.
 Masseteric artery and trephination. At trephination of M2 and
M3 the masseter muscle must be transected. In this procedure, care
must be taken for the masseteric artery.
Cribbing: A vice of the horse, in which the incisor teeth are
pressed against the crib and the pharynx widened in order to swal-
low air (windsucking). The best treatment-results were obtained by
a combined resection of the sternothyroid, sternohyoid and omo-
hyoid muscles together with a transection of the ventral branch of
the accessory nerve. The latter is easily found, namely there, where
it enters the sternocephalic (= sternomandibular) muscle, close to
the muscle-tendon connection.
Fig. 34.2. Communication of the paranasal sinuses 
 Fig. 34.3. Flushing of the maxilary sinus. Opened paranasal sinuses, dorsal view 
Paranasal sinuses in rostrolateral view. 1. dorsal conchal sinus, 2. frontal sinus, 3.
(see also Fig. 34.1.)
ventral conchal sinus, 4. rostral maxilary sinus, 5. caudal maxilary sinus, 6.
Light blue: Dorsal nasal conchal sinus; dark blue: frontal sinus; red: sphenopala-
sphenopalatine sinus, a. frontomaxilary aperture, b. nasomaxillary aperture, c.
 tine sinus; yellow/green: caudal/rostal maxillary sinus with septum separating
maxillopalatine aperture, d. septum of the maxilary sinus, e. orbit, f. infraorbital 
them. The lower arrow points into the maxilopalatine aperture; the upper, into the
canal, f', infraorbital foramen.
sphenopalatinus sinus. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
148
Empyema of the sinus: Because of the anatomical communica-
cal branches. Both cross the masseter muscle ventral to the tem-
tion between the maxillary sinus and the ventral nasal concha, an
 poromandibular joint. Injury to the nerve at this site paralyzes the
empyema of the sinus in the horse can spread to the nasal concha.
lip, nostrils, as well as the cheeks of the horse and causes a hyper-
Purulent changes of the concha occur also without simultaneous
algesia of the area of supply of the branches of the auriculotempo-
 empyema of the sinus, and may result in a necrosis of the affected
ral nerve (V3), which run with the transverse facial artery and the
part of the nasal concha. In the horse, a similar communication
buccal branches of the facial nerve. The tonus of the contralateral
exists between the dorsal nasal concha and the frontal sinus (con-
normal muscles pulls the nose and lips to their side.
chofrontal sinus).
36.4. Anesthesia of the auriculopalpebral nerve (p. 37.15): The
 34.3. Flushing of the maxillary sinus: Sometimes it is possible to
auriculopalpebral nerve proceeds dorsally from the facial nerve
reach the large maxillary sinus from the middle nasal meatus and
 near the caudal border of the mandible and extends, caudal to the 
the nasomaxillary aperture. This yields the possibility of flushing.
 superficial temporal artery and vein, in the parotid gland or in rela-
which is of diagnostic and therapeutic value. Otherwise, the
 tion to the parotid lymph nodes. Here it divides into rostral auricu-
e huado udan ls e aq aissa aie sasnis iesueed
lar branches for the rostral ear muscles as well as the zygomatic
viewed with an endoscope.
branch, the nerve destined for the motor supply of the eyelids. The
 Trephination of the maxillary sinus: For trephination of the max-
 latter extends across the zygomatic arch or, respectively, the tempo-
illary sinus, knowledge of its borders as projected onto the surface
ralis muscle rostrodorsal to the lateral angle of the eye, where it
is of importance. Because the floor of the maxillary sinus is formed
ends in a dorsal branch for the dorsal part of the orbicularis oculi
by the alveoli of the maxillary cheek teeth, tooth diseases with rup-
muscle and the levator of the medial angle of the eye and a ventral
ture into the sinus may also provide an occasion for trephination as
branch for the ventral part of the orbicularis oculi muscle. Anes-
pathological content fills the maxillary sinus. It is important to
 thesia of the auriculopalpebral nerve (= motor innervation of the
know that in the horse all paranasal sinuses, and this includes the
 orbicularis oculi muscle) does not result in an analgesia, but in a
maxillary sinus, communicate with the middle nasal meatus (= sinus
 paralysis of the orbicularis oculi muscle, which enables a detailed
meatus) of the nasal cavity. There are two maxillary sinuses: the
 examination of the eyelids. The site for anesthesia lies just caudal to
large caudal maxillary sinus, and the small rostral maxillary sinus.
the caudal border of the mandible at the ventral border of the tem-
The trephination site for the first is located at a point, which is
 poral part of the zygomatic arch. The needle is directed dorsally.
reached 5 cm caudal to the rostral end of the facial crest on it and,
from here, 2-3 cm dorsal. The trephination site for the rostral max-
36.5. Paralysis of the buccinator muscle: The consequence of paral-
 in an n e   s m od e ie s ss e
ysis of the buccinator muscle is the accumulation of food within the
der of the facial crest. In most cases, the two sinuses are separated
oral vestibule. Normally this muscle presses the food between the
from one another by a septum (septum sinuum maxillarium), which
 dental arcades (maxillary and mandibular) back into the oral cavi-
 is 4-6 cm caudal to the rostral end of the facial crest. This septum
 ty proper and by this has an action opposite to the tongue during
is located about the middle of a line connecting the medial angle of
mastication. The accumulation of food in the oral cavity because of
the eye and the rostral end of the facial crest.
 damage to the facial nerve should not be confused with an inability
Cysts of the paranasal sinus: Although somewhat uncommon in
to swallow.
yearling foals, still a cyst appears most frequently at this agecom-
pared with other age-stages. On the affected side of the face, there
38.1. Temporomandibular joint: The temporomandibular joint has 
is commonly demonstrated a swelling somewhat dorsal and rostral
 clinical importance in cases of partial or total resection of the artic-
 to the facial crest.
ular disc (p. 39.22). The latter is about 3-5 mm thick. The joint cap-
sule is short and tight and connected to the articular disc. The trans-
34.4. Trephination of the frontal sinus and conchofrontal sinus.
verse facial artery and vein as well as the auriculotemporal nerve
 For trephination a line is drawn from the medial angle of the eye to
run ventral to the temporomandibular joint.
the median line of the head. The midpoint of this line is the site for
entrance with the trephine. The trephination opening is in the area
 of the rostral conchofrontal sinus.
performed at the oval notch of the foramen lacerum. The injection
site is on a line drawn from the lateral angle of the eye to the lower
 36.1. Venepuncture of the deep facial vein (p. 36.30): The deep
base of the ear. The needle is introduced about 1 cm ventral to the
facial vein can be used for venepuncture. The site of venepuncture
 middle of this distance. The direction of the needle is the opposite
is at the transition from the rostral to the middle third of the facial
 ear. The needle passes the mandibular notch and penetrates the tem-
crest (see also transverse facial vein).
same procedure must be repeated on the other side. With successful
36.2. Venepuncture of the transverse facial vein (p. 36.19): The
anesthesia, the paralyzed lower jaw hangs down. In this way, it is
transverse facial vein can be used to obtain venous blood or for
  xd a no  a a xa i aiss
intravenous injection. It runs directly ventral to the facial crest. The
 initial part of the esophagus. The mandibular foramen (p. 35.74)
injection site is found directly at the transition from the rostral to
- r a re r  ae   aq 
the middle third.
 ment of the teeth of the lower jaw. To find the mandibular foramen,
a line is drawn between the condylar process of the mandible,
36.3. Central paralysis of the facial nerve is a central injury to the
 obliquely across the masseter muscle, to the rostral border of the
facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). The facial nerve can also be injured
 vascular notch of the mandible. The mandibular foramen lies about
 peripherally. In the case of central paralysis of the facial nerve, the
at the middle of this line.
injury can be located on the line between the exit from the stylo-
mastoid foramen and the reflection around the caudal border of the
38.3. The inferior alveolar nerve (Fig. 38.5., 3, p. 150) can be
mandible or between the origin of the nerve from the medulla
 oblongata and its exit from the stylomastoid foramen.
mandible from a caudal or ventral direction. The entrance of the
 Peripheral paralysis of the facial nerve: The facial nerve (cranial
 nerve into the mandibular foramen and mandibular canal is palpa-
nerve VIl) is primarily the motor nerve for the superficially located
 ble from the oral cavity. The mandibular foramen can also be locat-
muscles of the head, that is, the muscles of facial expression.
 ed externally. It is located on the medial surface of the mandible, at
Although some of these muscles participate in mastication, they
 the cross-point of an extended line of the occlusal surfaces of the
should not be mistaken for the masticatory muscles, which are sup-
molar teeth and a line connecting the condylar process of the
plied by the mandibular nerve (= mandibular musculature). Fur-
 mandible and the vascular notch of the mandible. For anesthesia, a
thermore, it is to be noted that the facial nerve is not the sensory
needle about 20 cm long is advanced from the vascular notch medi-
nerve for the skin over these muscles; that is the trigeminal nerve.
 al to the mandible in the direction of the temporomandibular joint,
The extent of the paralysis of the facial nerve is decisive for prog-
 until this cross-point is approximately reached. [376]
nosis. Usually the facial nerve is damaged where it turns around the
caudal border of the mandible (= peripheral paralysis of the facial
 38.4. Anesthesia of the mental nerve (Fig. 38.5., 4, p. 150) is real-
nerve; e.g., after pressure from the halter, being put down under
ized at the mental foramen (p. 35.75), where the site of exit of the
 general anesthesia). Here it divides into its dorsal and ventral buc-
 a o, a o du a   aq  au p
149
 The thumb palpates the rostral end of the intermandibular space;
nasolabialis muscle. By light pressure, these muscles can be dis-
the index finger palpates the mental foramen about 2-3 cm dorsal
placed dorsally and the infrorbital foramen palpated. The position
and perhaps slightly rostral to the thumb,. The tendon of the
 depressor labi inferioris muscle must be displaced somewhat dor-
 grip" (middle finger lies in the arch of the naso-incisive notch-
sally.
thumb on the rostral end of the facial crest—-index finger is placed
 After piercing the skin, which may cause greater pain, the fol-
on the infraorbital foramen).
lowing will be anesthetized:
For implementation of the anesthesia the infraorbital artery and
 1. with the mental nerve the corresponding halves of the lower lip
vein should be kept in mind. Anesthesia of the infraorbital nerve at
and chin;
the infraorbital foramen enables operations on all premolars, on the
 2. with the rostral inferior alveolar branch the incisor teeth and the
first molar, on the incisor teeth, on the nasal wall, the hard palate,
canine tooth of the corresponding side;
the gums, the periosteum of this area, the maxilla, the upper lip and
3. with the terminal part of the inferior alveolar nerve the area up
on the nasal diverticulum of the corresponding side. During trephi-
to the first cheek tooth. [377]
nation for punching out P4 of the maxilla, the infraorbital nerve can
be injured. [377]
38.5. Anesthesia of the maxillary nerve (Fig. 38.5., 1): A block of
the maxillary nerve anesthetizes the maxillary cheek teeth, but it is
 38.7. Atrophy of the masticatory muscles can be the result of a
essential only for the last four. For anesthesia of first two cheek
 paralysis of the mandibular nerve. The masseter muscle may also
teeth and the incisors the more simple anesthesia of the infraorbital
atrophy due to a chronic myositis. [378]
nerve is to be recommended. The maxillary nerve runs through the
 pterygoplatine fossa (p. 33.A) and reaches the maxillary foramen
38.8. The salivary glands and their excretory ducts are compro-
(p. 33.58), where it should also be anesthetized. The site for anes-
mised by injuries, fistulas, dilatations and salivary calculi. Plant
thesia of the maxillary nerve is located about 2.5 cm ventral to the
constituents (e-g., oats) may penetrate into the salivary papilla and
lateral angle of the eye and ventral to the zygomatic arch. The nee-
function as a point of crystallization for the development of salivary
dle is directed medially and somewhat rostrodorsally and advanced
calculi (sometimes palpable). [379] [380]
deeply about 6.5-7.5 cm.
38.9. At the vascular notch of the mandible the facial artery is used
38.6. Anesthesia of the infraorbital nerve (Fig. 38.5., 2): The site for
for taking the pulse. The parotid duct also runs here. On its way to
blocking the infraorbital nerve is located in the infraorbital region.
the oral vestibule, the duct reflects from medial to ventral to lateral
The infraorbital foramen (p. 33.59) is found on a line between the
a  saasu aras aaey  ai sil auoq ai puoe
 naso-incisive notch and the beginning of the facial crest. The mid-
 animal. In view of a saliva production of about 15 liters per day by
dle of the line is sought and then proceeded a fingerbreadth in direc-
the parotid gland, the loss of fluid due to an external injury of the
tion toward the eye. It is to be noted that the infraorbital foramen 
duct may result in an irreversible exsiccosis (drying out). [381]
is covered by the levator labii superioris muscle and levator
[382]
38.10. Mandibular lymphocenter (p. 39.16): The mandibular lym-
phocenter comprises the clinically important mandibular lymph
nodes (Fig. 38.8.). These are located at the level of the vascular
notch directly beneath the skin of the intermandibular space, have
an arrowhead form and are palpable on the patient. Their efferent
ducts pass to the retropharyngeal lymphocenter.
Eye
BETTINA WOLLANKE, HARTMUT GERHARDS
40.1. Knowledge of normal anatomy is a basic precondition for
examination of the eye and, at the same time, is a great help in local-
izing and interpreting abnormal findings. The eye examination is
accomplished in the first instance visually as well as by simple tests
for visibility and light perception. Further possibilities for the exam-
ination are the application of imaging procedures. In this regard,
the ultrasound examination is of particular importance. An elec-
troretinogram (ERG) can give additional clarification as to func-
tional impairment of the retina (Fig. 40.1.1). Finally, in individual
Fig. 38.5. Anesthesia of the maxillary nerve (1) and its infraorbital nerve (2) in the
cases, slice-picture procedures like magnetic resonance tomography
infraorbital canal, of the inferior alveolar nerve (3) at the mandibular foramen and 
or computed tomography can also be useful (Fig. 40.1.2).
its mental nerve (4) at the mental foramen. Ophthalmic nerve (a) with the
 Fig. 38.8. Salivary glands. Ventral view at the throat. The facial a. and v. as well as
 Fig. 40.1.1 left: Eectroretinogram. The upper two curves were obtained from the
the parotid duct extend on the inner surface of the mandibular ramus. At the vas-
ight, normal eye. There is a normal reaction to flashes of light. The lower two
cular notch they reflect onto the lateral surface of the mandible (cf., p.33). The
 mandibular lymph nodes and, caudal to them, the larynx lie between the rami of 
reaction to the light-signal is observed.
the mandible. The mylohyoideus muscle is found ventral to the mentum (chin),.
 Fig. 40.1.2 (right): Magnetic resonance tomography. So-called coronary (crown-
between the ight and left halves of the body of the mandible.
like) section through the head of a horse with a tumor behind the eye (arrow).
150
 In examination of the eye, it is advisable to view and evaluate the
cate a visual disturbance (Fig. 40.1.4). The examination of the eye
 anatomical structures of the adnexa of the eye as well as the eyeball
 begins with an inspection of the region around the eye. In doing
itself in a sequence from external to internal. In the following, the
this, the horse is examined from anteriorly, comparing both sides,
eye examination is described with selected clinical cases.
 and checked for injuries, lacrimal flow, and asymmetries of the area
 Prerequisites for the Eye Examination. A room which can be
 around the eye, the eyeballitself, as well as the eyelids and the posi-
 darkened is essential for the eye examination. The most important 
tion of the cilia (Fig. 40.1.5a-c). In addition simple visual tests
instrument in examination of the equine eye is a direct ophthalmo-
should be carried out such as the menace gesture with the hand
scope (Fig. 40.1.6). The ophthalmoscope has different possibilities
 approaching from different directions. After that, there follows the
for adjustment. It can be used as a simple, bright-focal, light source,
examination of the eye and adnexa: eyelids, conjunctiva, lacrimal
as a magnifying lens, as a slit-lamp, as a Placido's disk (kerato-
 apparatus, the anterior chamber of the eye, iris (including the gran-
scope) as well as for direct ophthalmoscopy of the interior of the
 ula iridica and the pupillary reflex), lens, the vitreous chamber and
 eye. Additional instruments, for example, a head-band magnifying
the ocular fundus with the retina. For the examination up to and
lens or a qualitatively better slit-lamp than the one that is integrat-
 including the lens a bright focal light is necessary, a magnifying lens
where appropriate and, in individual cases, a slit-lamp. For the
ed in ophthalmoscopy. Additionally, in rarer cases, instruments can
examination of the vitreous body and the fundus of the eye, the
be useful for the opening or ectropionization of the eyelids (Des-
 direct ophthalmoscope is the instrument of choice. Moreover, for
marres lid-holder, Fig. 40.1.3a) or even the rostral displacement of
 the examination of the parts of the eye posterior to the iris, a dilat-
the nictitating membrane (for example, Graefe tissue-forceps, Fig.
ed pupil ("mydriasis") is prerequisite. Mydriasis often arises spon-
40.1.3b). Knob-cannulas (Fig. 40.1.3c), teat cannulas (Fig. 40.1.3d)
taneously in young and excited horses owing to a sympathetic tonus
or even simple venous in-dwelling cannulas (Fig. 40.1.3e) may be
(activation of the dilatator pupillae muscle). If, however, the pupil
used for flushing the nasolacrimal duct. Medications used for ocu-
 is not sufficiently wide to check the lens, vitreous body and retina
lar examinations are mydriatics (substances that dilate the pupil;
up to the periphery then a pupil dilated by a mydriatic is esential
i.e., the short acting Tropicamid), surface anesthetics and dyes for
for a meaningful examination of the eye.
demonstration of epithelial defects (fluorescein drops, in rare cases
 Direct ophthalmoscopy of the back-side of the lens and the vit-
also Bengal-pink). Sedation of the horse for examination of the eye
reous body is best realized at a distance of about 30 cm from the eye
is needed only in individual cases. Also, local anesthesia (auricu-
 of the horse at a dioptric value of +2 to +3. For the fundus of the 
lopalpebral nerve; reduces the movement of the upper eyelid) for 
 eye it is recommended to approach the equine eye as near as possi-
the examination of the eye is indicated only in very rare cases.
 ble (so long as the cilia are not contacted) in order that the view of
 Conduct of the Examination. One should always conduct the eye
the fundus is as large as possible. The adjustment of the diopters
examination in a systematic way so as not to overlook pathological
 here is about -4 to -5. Each investigator must find the dioptric val-
changes of the eyeball or its adnexa. In doing this, it is useful at first
 ues on the ophthalmoscope that are suitable for that person's use,
 a   s   a  m o
and there are distinct individual differences. In addition to the 
 unknown room. A tilted head or an unsure, staggering gait can indi-
 adjustment of the dioptric values of the ophthalmoscope, focusing
 Fig. 40.1.3a-e: Useful instruments for the examination of the eye in the horse.
Fig. 40.1.4: Oblique posture of the
Fig. 40.1.5a: Loss of hairs with chron-
head in unilateral blindness.
 ic lacrimation.
Fig. 40.1.5b: Ocular bulbs of diferent
Fig. 40.1.5c: Orbital fracture of the
Fig. 40.1.5d: Predilection-places for
Fig. 40.1.6: Examination of the eye.
size.
right eye.
orbital fractures in the horse. The
 One hand holds the halter, the other
 supraorbital foramen is especially fre-
hand holds the ophthalmoscope. An 
quently encountered.
assistant draws the attention of the
 horse (rustles with paper, if necessary.
so the horse will open the palpebral
fissure).
151
-do an o ais a u ua ns e aq aor aq u
 40.2. The Area Around the Eye. If the palpebral fissure is opened
thalmoscope to the eye. Persons wearing eyeglasses can leave their
normally and no painful eye disease exists, a chronic lacrimal flow
glasses off and adjust their vision by an appropriate dioptric choice
(Fig. 40.1.5a) points to a clogging of the lacrimal conduction sys-
on the ophthalmoscope. Example: With nearsightedness of -3
tem (lacrimal puncta of the upper and lower eyelids, lacrimal
diopters means that correspondingly 3 diopters have to be sub-
canaliculi, lacrimal sac, nasolacrimal duct, nasolacrimal ostium;
tracted from the recommended setting.
Fig. 40.2.1b). To determine if the lacrimal canal (nasolacrimal duct)
 During the examination of the eye the hand of the investigator
is clogged, fluorescein drops may be applied. If the lacrimal canal is
 should rest on the halter of the horse to sense defensive movements
 patent, the dye should be visible in the nostril after a few minutes
timely. The free hand holds the ophthalmoscope or another lamp
(Fig. 40.2.1a).
for examination of the eye (Fig. 40.1.6). If possible, touching the
 Causes of obstruction of the lacrimal canal may be inherited (for
horse in the neighborhood of the eye or even to spread the lids
 example, agenesis of the nasolacrimal ostium or, in rarer cases, of
should always be avoided since otherwise, inevitably, an increased
 other structures of the lacrimal conducting system) or acquired (for
effort to close the lids makes further examination more difficult or
 example, obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct by inflammatory
thwarted. Should the horse close the lids when light strikes the eye,
 products, compression of the nasolacrimal duct by inflammatory
then it is better to rustle with paper or to attract the attention of the
 products, compression of the nasolacrimal duct by space-occupy-
horse by other sounds in order to open the palpebral fissure again.
ing processes, or eyelid lacerations with involvement of the
lacrimal puncta or of the lacrimal canaliculus (Fig. 40.2.1e). In
some cases an irrigation or exploration of the lacrimal canal, in
individual cases also by surgical intervention, succeeds in restoring
the drainage of the lacrimal fluid via the proper channels (Fig.
40.2.1c, d).
 Orbital fractures appear frequently in the horse and are the result
of being kicked or running against hard objects (Fig. 40.1.5c). In
certain cases they may remain unnoticed and heal without clinical
   aq ar na i ss as u 
 orbit by the impressed orbit (notably fractures of the zygomatic
process of the frontal bone through the supraorbital foramen as
well as the zygomatic process of the temporal bone; see the Figs.
40.1.5d, 40.2.2). In these cases the cornea is no longer sufficiently
 moistened by the blinking of the lids. An operative reposition of the
bone-fragments is needed to avoid a corneal ulcer. More rarely,
there arise fractures of the floor of the orbit (sphenoid bone, pala-
tine bone, lacrimal bone), which lead to a sinking of the eyeball into
the orbit (Fig. 40.2.3). If at the same time as the periocular fractures
Fig. 40.2.1a: After application of fluorescein drops, if the nasolacrimal duct is
injuries (impressions) have developed in the region of the paranasal
 patent, the green color can in a short time be seen in the nasal vestibule.
sinuses, then a bloody nasal discharge may be observed.
Fig. 40.2.1b: Opening of the nasolacrimal duct (nasolacrimal ostium), near the 
 If, in comparing the two sides, the ocular bulbs are of different
 transition of the pigmented to the nonpigmented skin.
size, then either one of the two ocular bulbs is diseased or it is not
 Fig. 40.2.1c: Flushing of the nasolacrimal duct from the nostril. The catheter is
in its physiological position (Figs. 40.2.3 and 40.2.4). Measurement 
introduced into the nasolacrimal ostium.
of bulbar diameter by ultrasound is helpful to comparatively deter-
mine the size of the bulbs. If the diameter is different, examination
 ro qq r a raa ysa i sq r a j
smaller is diseased (for example, after a glaucoma = chronically
increased internal pressure). A decreased ocular bulb can be inher-
ited (designated as "microphthalmus" or develop after traumata or
as a result of uveitis (inflammation of the uvea = iris + ciliary body
Fig. 40.2.1d: A catheter is introduced from the lacrimal punctum of the lower eye-
lid into the nasolacrimal duct.
-und pe a wa se lm se angnsen jeseu au u wnso eosu au
tum of the lower eyelid). In the region of the maxilary sinus a shadow presents
itself arow), which points to a growth in this region and can represent a cause for
 marking of the lacrimal punctum of the lower eyelid as well as the nasolacrimal
 ostium in the nasal vestibule.
sean suauo bumoo Aydone eqing to saiap yoh halis s'z'ot b
Fig. 40.2.6 (second left:Different position of eye lashes. The cilia of the left eye
stand in a more acute angle to the cornea than those of the normal right eye; that
is, the palpebral fissure is increasingly closed (indication of ptosis, bulbar atrophy
or blepharospasm; in this case, ptosis with HORNER's syndrome, cf., Fig. 40.3.6).
Fig. 40.3.1a: Physiological fine folds of the lid.
Fig. 40.3.1b: Erased lid folds in palpebral edema.
 leio ue ui eo au jo aunsdxa pue uisnaud eina a zot b
ture.
Fig. 40.3.2 (left): Old, poorly adapted lid injury with exposure of the cornea and
 Fig. 40.2.3 (middle): Enophthalmos on the right side in a fracture of the floor of 
resulting corneal inflammation (exposure keratitis).
the orbit.
Fig. 40.3.3 (middle): Anesthesia sites for the (sensory) frontal nerve (2) as well as
Fig. 40.2.4 (righty: Bulbar protrusion on the left side due to retrobulbar tumor
the (motor) auriculopalpebral nerve (1).
growth.
Fig. 40.3.4 (right;: Equine sarcoid in the upper lid.
152
An incompletely opened palpebral fissure due to lack of motor
bulbi" (Fig. 40.2.5). A different position of the eyelashes may point
innervation is designated ptosis and points to a nerve injury. Unless
to a difference in size or non-physiological position of the eyeball,
(for diagnostic or therapeutic reasons) anesthesia of the auricu-
provided that there is no pain-conditioned closure of the papebral
lopalpebral nerve had been performed, the cause is often a central
fissure (Fig. 40.3.6) and no ptosis (Fig. 40.2.6).
nection with a Horner's syndrome (for example, mycosis of the
40.3. Eyelids. Healthy eyelids have fine folds and the border of the
 guttural pouch with damage to the cranial cervical ganglion of the
lid lies on the corneal surface (Fig. 40.3.1a). Swellings of the lid lead
sympathetic trunk, Fig. 40.2.6). If on the other hand the palpebral
to a loss of the fine folds and develop very rapidly in the loose con-
  si ii e sso ps osds si ans
nective tissue (Fig. 40.3.1b). They may be produced by edema,
cation of a painful ocular disease and belongs to the so-called
phlegmon, hematoma, emphysema or tumor. If there is no tumor,
 -d an jo ans opousds = sedsoda) apen asup,.
Aq aiaaaa ue Apider pan aq Ae suams p au u
= a + r  s = id + as 
dressings.
increased lacrimal flow; Fig. 40.3.6).
 Injuries of the lids should be treated as rapidly as possible to pre-
vent exposure of the cornea and the development of corneal defects.
 sa is u si   u jo ud p  't
The main goal in treatment of an injury to the eyelid is, insofar as it
indication of tetanus infection (Fig. 40.4.1a). This is especially the
is possible, physiological restoration of the border of the lid (Fig.
case if this protrusion can be provoked by raising the head of the
40.3.2). As a rule, the conjunctiva need not be sutured. The skin of
horse. The cause in this case is the contraction of the retrobulbar
the lid is sutured by small stitches in which no suture material is to
 muscles, which pull the ocular bulb caudally into the orbit. A pro-
touch the cornea. Uncomplicated lid injuries of cooperative patients
trusion of the third eyelid (usually unilaterally) may also occur in
can be sutured in the standing position under sedation and local
the case of an ocular bulb reduced in size (bulbar atrophy) or a bulb
anesthesia (anesthesia of the frontal nerve in the region of the supra-
displaced caudally into the orbit for other reasons (for example,
orbital foramen; Fig. 40.3.3). Only very rarely is anesthesia of the
fractures of the floor of the orbit, Fig. 40.4.1b, 40.4.2).
motor auriculopalpebral nerve indicated if excessive blepharo-
spasm exists (Fig. 40.3.3). Among the tumors of the lid, equine sar-
40.5. Conjunctiva. The most frequent disease of the conjunctiva is
coids occur most frequently. Since this kind of tumor can assume
 conjunctivitis, which is noticeable by a reddening of the conjuncti-
 different forms and can lie under the skin, it is sometimes not iden-
va and an increased lacrimal flow. Conjunctivitis usually occurs
tified as a tumor. The earlier this tumor is treated, the more favor-
 bilaterally. It may be an independent disease or an accompanying
able is the prognosis for preservation of the lid without impairment
sign of another ocular disease. With every conjunctivitis, and espe-
of function (Fig. 40.3.4).
 cially with unilateral and recurring conjunctivitis, a detailed eye
The most frequent defects of the lids are entropion (inward
 examination must be performed to recognize more dangerous eye
turning of the border of the lid) and ectropion (outward turning of
 diseases (for example, of the cornea and uvea), which always bring
the border of the lid) (Figs. 40.3.5a and b). Both may be the con-
about an accompanying conjunctivitis.
-p Aq saseo asau u paean aq ueo pue sau  jo auanas
 Eosinophilic inflammation is a special form of conjunctivitis that
ent techniques of plastic surgery. Entropion occurs often in neonate
results in deposition of hard, yellowish, crumbly material in the 
foals with hypovolemia and leads to corneal defects. In these cases
 conjunctiva, which can lead to a painful inflammation. In this con-
the position of the lids should not be treated by resection of the
 dition, both the conjunctiva and the cornea are frequently affected
skin of the lids, because this may later lead to the development of
(Fig. 40.5.1). More rarely, foreign bodies are found in the conjunc-
-ui a  pea raaq si sion jo uoa au suida 
tiva, which can lead to an irritation and, depending on the location,
tion of well tolerated and slowly resorbed substances into the low-
to corneal defects. Most frequently, we are dealing with hay or 
er eyelid. The border of the lid is brought into a physiological posi-
straw, chips, splinters of wood and metal.
tion by this injection, in which it also remains after reduction of
 Squamous cell carcinoma is the most frequently occurring tumor
 a y n o e ssn ssad  ss 
 of the conjunctiva. A predilection site for the growth of this tumor
by skin sutures without resection of lid skin can be performed. A
is the unpigmented conjunctiva of the third eyelid (Fig. 40.5.2a) as
 surgical treatment with resection of lid skin is in general not re-
well as the temporal bulbar conjunctiva of the limbus ("corneo-lim-
quired.
(lateral)
Fig. 40.3.5a: Entropion of the lower lid. Note the corneal defect and corneal
inflammation (keratitis, cloudiness of the cornea and corneal vascularization) as a
 result of hairs rubbing on the cornea.
Fig. 40.3.5b: Ectropion of the lower lid.
2.043
Fig. 40.3.6 (left: Blepharospasm in painful eye disease.
Fig. 40.4.1a (right): Protrusion of the nictitating membrane in tetanus.
eyelid; 2, 3, upper and lower lids; 4, lacrimal caruncle.
Fig. 40.4.1b: Protrusion of the nictitating membrane in bulbar atrophy.
153
bal squamous cell carcinoma"; Fig. 40.5.2b). The affected eye is
bar surface (Fig. 40.5.4). In the horse, contrary to other species, a
usually not painful over a long period, and the tumor growth is to
tear production that is too slight is a cause for disease only in very
be recognized by a chronic, increased mucopurulent discharge as
rare cases. However in both lacrimal glands often an infection with
well as by a conjunctiva-colored and slightly elevated finely tuber-
Thelazia lacrimalis is present, which usually takes its course with-
culate formation in the conjunctiva. Treatment consists of resection
 out symptoms. Adult worms can be grossly diagnosed with a more
 of the tumor as early and as completely as possible (partial resection 
 precise inspection of the conjunctiva and the mouths of the lacrimal
 of the third eyelid, resection of the bulbar conjunctiva and subse-
glands. The parasites are often found within the excretory ducts of
quent treatment of the tumor bed by laser). If the tumor growth is
 the lacrimal gland and their surroundings. In rare cases they can
already advanced and the cornea is also involved, then the progno-
also be detected on the cornea. In individual cases, infection with
sis is more cautious. In very far advanced diseases, metastases may
Thelazia lacrimalis may lead to a chronic inflammation of the
be found in the regional lymph nodes or other organs.
lacrimal gland (adenitis) and of the conjunctiva. It may even lead to
 a purulent abscessing adenitis, which requires the surgical removal
 40.6. Lacrimal Apparatus. The clogging of the lacrimal apparatus
of the lacrimal gland. Inflammation of the lacrimal gland can be
(page 40), which may lead to a chronic lacrimal flow, was discussed
 diagnosed by palpation after surface anesthesia of the conjunctiva.
in “Section 1. The structures, which are involved in the production
of tears also belong to the lacrimal apparatus. The mucin layer of
42.1. Cornea. Keratitis (inflammation of the cornea) is a very fre-
the lacrimal film is produced by the goblet cells of the conjunctiva
 quent disease of the cornea, which is characterized by opacities of the
and the most external (lipid) layer of the lacrimal film is produced
 cornea and the invasion of blood vessels into the cornea, which is
by the Meibomian (tarsal) glands near the border of the lid. Dis-
 normally not vascularized (Fig. 42.1.1). There are forms of keratitis,
eases are known only of the Meibomian glands. These may lead to
a sas ui e pud e ie nou  ars are y
inflammation and the formation of small abscesses. The serous lay-
 by opacities than by pain. Other keratitides, however, are extremely
er in the middle of the lacrimal film is produced by the lacrimal
 painful, even when the corneal alterations are very unobtrusive and
 gland. The dorsotemporal, flat lacrimal gland is located between 
can be recognized only by detailed observation under magnification.
the ocular bulb and orbit and releases its secretion via several open-
Although the cornea is physiologically entirely transparent and non-
ings of pinhead caliber into the dorsotemporal fornix (Fig. 40.5.3).
vascularized, it is very well supplied with nerves (unmyelinated nerve
The smaller accessory lacrimal gland (gland of the nictitating mem-
fibers) and sensitive to pain. Corneal inflammation may incline to
brane, superficial gland of the third eyelid) is located under the third
 recidivism (repeated occurrence). If the corneal epithelium is intact
eyelid, at its base. This releases its secretion by way of several small 
 and no infection exists, then most corneal inflammations respond
openings, which open in a mucosal fold on the corneal (bulbar sur-
 well to an anti-inflammatory treatment. If injuries result in tears of
face of the third eyelid. With ectropionization (outward rotation) of
 the corneal epithelium or if there is an increased internal ocular pres-
the third eyelid, this fold becomes visible in the middle of the bul-
sure, corneal edema can develop due to penetration of aqueous
Fig 40.5.1 (left: Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis with hard, crumbly inclusions and coating under the third eyelid.
 Fig. 40.5.3 (second right): Excretory ducts of the lacrimal gland in the temporal angle of the eye with a rostrally rotated ocular bulb, usually only visible as an indication.
Fig. 40.5.4 (right): Excretory duct in a mucosal fold under the third eyelid (see arrow).
 Fig. 42.1.1 (first left): Keratitis: Cloudy cornea and vascularization of the cornea.
Fig. 42.1.2 (second let): Elevated intraocular pressure (glaucoma): a) corneal edema; b) riboned (banded) opacities (= tears of the corneal endothelium and 
 DESCEMET's membrane) a consequence of increased intraocular pressure.
Fig. 42.1.3 (second right): Corneal defect stained with fluorescein.
Fig. 42.1.4 (right): Infected ulcer of the nasoventral cornea. Blood vessels grow from ventral into the cornea in the direction of the defect.
Fig. 42.1.6 (2nd to 4th left;: Placement of a subpalpebral catheter: (a) the spike of the catheter is pushed out from the dorsal fornix through the palpebral skin: (b) the T-
shaped end of the catheter is drawn into the dorsal fornix and in that way does not irritate the cornea: (c) placement of the catheter dorsally on the neck, attached to the 
 mane. The catheter facilitates the administration of medication also in the case of a temporary ankyloblepharon (lid closure).
loss of aqueous humor.
Fig. 42.1.8 (righty: Endophthalmitis: Very painful infection of the bulb, which leads to a disturbance of the general condition and which is frequently caused by strepto-
cocci or staphylococci.
154
humor into the cornea (Fig. 42.1.2a). Even if the fluid would be
42.2. Anterior Eye Chamber and Iridocorneal Angle. The anterior
absorbed again from the cornea and it was possible to successfully
 chamber of the eye is the space between the cornea and the iris. In
lower the elevated internal ocular pressure, so-called "band-like
adult warmblood horses it contains about 2.4 ml aqueous humor
 opacities" may persist (Fig. 42.1.2b).
and, in the center of the anterior chamber of the eye, the distance
 Afer injuries, superficial and medicamentally well treatable
from the corneal endothelium to the iris is about 5 mm. The poste-
defects within the cornea may develop. Some of these defects are
 rior chamber of the eye is located between iris and lens. It is dis-
visible with the naked eye, others can be easily identified only after
tinctly smaller than the anterior chamber and not completely
staining with fluorescein. With any injury to the corneal epithelium
observable (see the upper figure on page 43). With different diseases
(positive fluorescein test; that is, the primary stain remains adherent
 deposits can be found in the anterior chamber. The most frequent
to the cornea), it is important to abstain from the use of cortisone
finding is fibrin in the anterior eye chamber, which develops after
containing ointments (Fig. 42.1.3). If an initially harmless defect is
traumata or inflammation of the iris (" iritis"). It may be in the form
treated with cortisone, then the painfulness of the eye subsides
of very fine and tiny coagula, which are only visible with a very pre-
rapidly; however, the danger of an infection of the injury is in-
cise inspection of the anterior chamber (Fig. 42.2.1a). But there may
creased considerably. If an infection of the cornea develops, which
also be a great deal of fibrin in the anterior chamber (Fig. 42.2.1b)
leads to lysis of corneal tissue, one speaks of a corneal ulcer (Fig.
and sometimes the entire anterior eye chamber is filled by fibrin.
42.1.4). Certain, very aggressive microorgaisms (collagenase pro-
More rarely blood is found in the anterior chamber ("hyphema",
ducing Pseudomonadae) can breakdown the corneal parenchyma
 Fig. 42.2.1c). Blood may reach the anterior chamber following trau-
within a short time and lead to a rupture of the cornea. Some ulcers
mata or severe inflammation of the iris. Leukocytes may reach the
for that reason must be cleaned up surgically (Fig. 42.1.5) and sta-
 anterior chamber as a result of severe corneal inflammation, infec-
bilized by a sutured "conjunctival flap." In these cases it is advisa-
tious processes of the cornea or in the interior of the eye, as well as
ble to bring in a subpalpebral catheter into the dorsal fornix in
in rare cases in the course of uveitis (hypopyon). Very rarely, foreign
order to prevent the loss of the flap by the blinking of the eye and
bodies (for example, glass, metal, or wood splinters) can also be
a  s e oi ae a oil aa ai yo  q
found in the anterior chamber. Fibrin coagula in the anterior cham-
neck via a catheter) and to install a temporary ankyloblepharon
 ber usually dissolve by themselves, larger amounts of blood must be
(temporary artificial closure of the palpebral fissure), until the cor-
 dissolved with the use of medication or be surgically removed, and
nea is stabilized (about 12 days duration) (Fig. 42.1.6a, b, and c).
foreign bodies are removed surgically.
 Perforating corneal injuries are recognizable with the bulging of
 The ligamentum pectinatum is located circularly in the periphe-
iris tissue within the corneal lesion (Fig. 42.1.7). In uncomplicated
ry and meets the sclera at a right-angle. The ligamentum pectinatum
cases the cornea can be stabilized by suture, installation of a sub-
 in the horse is directly observable and gonioscopy of the iridocor-
palpebral catheter and a temporary ankyloblepharon (see corneal
 neal angle applied in other species is unnecessary in the horse (Fig.
ulcer), and often even visibility can be retained. If there is consider-
42.2.2). The iridocorneal angle of the horse is wide open and a
able intraocular hemorrhage, the lens dislocated and the retina
"narrow-angle glaucoma" (clogging of the iridocorneal angle by
 detached (if necessary, ultrasound examination), it is sometimes
advisable to remove the eyeball. If there is a bacterial or mycotic
 dominant drainage of the aqueous humor in horses is realized via
 infection of the interior of the eye (septic endophthalmitis) after cor-
 the suprachoroidal space, which exhibits a low resistance to drai-
neal injuries (ulcer or perforation), the danger exists that it may lead
nage ("uveoscleral drainage of aqueous humor" ). Glaucoma of the
to an ascending infection by way of the optic nerve and finally to an
 -iosse si s , on aue-uado, ue seme isoe si asi
encephalitis. The distance to the brain via the optic nerve is only a
ated with a diminished drainage of the aqueous humor owing to a
few centimeters. For this reason, often eyes that are involved in a
clogging of the trabecular meshwork at the chamber angle by pro-
severe ophthalmitis have to be removed (Fig. 42.1.8).
 ducts of inflammation and with that an increase in intraocular pres-
Fig. 42.2.1: Nonphysiological content within the anterior eye chamber: (a) very
 small and scarcely perceptible coagulum of fibrin; (b) large and easily recognizable
 coagulum of fibrin; (c) hyphema (blood within the anterior eye chamber).
Fig. 42.2.2 (left): Open and visible iridocorneal angle of the horse. The grey strip at the temporal corneal border is the pectinate ligament, which meets the cornea at a
right angle. Nasally and temporally it is normally easily seen, dorsally and ventrally it can be hidden by the eyelids or by pigmentation of the cornea near the limbus.
Fig. 42.2.3 (2nd left): Endoscopic view of the lens (L), zonule fibers (Zo), ciliary body (Zi) and ora serrata (OS) (beginning of the retina) from the vitreous body out. Above-
left, the pupil is visible though the lens.
 Fig. 42.3.2 (4th left): Iris coloboma: Nasal and temporal of the pupil. Temporally the border of the lens and the folded part (pars plicata) of the ciliary body are visible.
Fig. 42.3.3 (2nd right): Iris hypoplasia and "stromal cyst" ventral (cyst-like projection of the thin iris tissue owing to the fow of aqueous humor). Additionally, the conse-
 quences of posterior synechiae and a cloudy lenticular nucleus are present (the lens has a normal size, the cortex is however normally transparent and therefore not vis-
ible).
Fig. 42.3.4 (right): lridic granular cysts on the ventral border of the pupil.
155
sure ("secondary glaucoma"). In individual cases the iridocorneal
sponsive to the incident light, in a doubtful case (if, for example, no
angle may be clogged even by blood or connective tissue (after
response or only a weak response to a menace gesture results) the
hyphema), iris melanomas, iris cysts or a lens loosened by a partial
"consensual pupillary reflex" can also be checked. The consensual
rupture of zonular fibers, which may also be a reason for increase
pupillary reflex arises by the fact that in the optic chiasm a partial
in the intraocular pressure (Fig. 42.2.3).
decussation of nerve fibers of the left and right eyes takes place and
 Because narrow-angle glaucoma does not play a role in horses
the sphincter pupillae muscle of the second eye is activated via the
 and uveoscleral drainage of aqueous humor is fostered by atropine,
reflex arc. This means that in the case of light directed into the eye
the administration of atropine is indicated in horses with increased
with the pupil widened by medication, the pupil of the partner eye,
intraocular pressure (in contrast to other species in which glaucoma
which must not be brightly illuminated, must constrict. The move-
 must be regarded as a contraindicaton for the dispensing of atropi-
 ment of the pupil of the partner eye should be observed with mini-
ne). In addition, elevated intraocular pressure is treated with anti-
 mal tangential lighting of the anterior eye chamber from temporal.
inflammatory drugs as also with medications, which lower the pro-
If the consensual pupilary reflex does not appear, then there is reti-
duction of aqueous humor.
 nal damage of the brightly illuminated eye or a pathological process
 in the area of the visual pathways. If a pupillary reaction to light
42.3. Iris, Granula iridica and Pupil. The stroma of the iris is nor-
 results, then as a rule vision is present.
mally brownish pigmented and well vascularized. Frequently, in the
 Iridic granules (granula iridica) are found at the dorsal margin of
middle of the iris, there can be recognized a somewhat irregular
the pupil. These have in each horse a variable size and shape and
prominent ring of dark iris tissue, which represents a remnant of the
should not be confused with a tumor. Relatively often iridic granu-
embryonal pupillary membrane (Fig. 42.3.1). Congenital malfor-
lar cysts (fluid-filled, vesicularly enlarged iridic granules) are found,
mations are rare such as a persisting pupillary membrane or iris
which as a rule are an incidental finding and have no pathological
coloboma (Fig. 42.3.2). More often there appears a deficiency of
pigment of the iris tissue, which may involve one or both eyes, par-
tially (heterochromia) or completely (" wall-eye"; albinismus iridis
 by this or if the iridic granular cysts reach the corneal endothelium,
externum). Often these color variants go along with a broad white
where they irritate. In an individual case therefore it may be neces-
blaze or another white marking extended onto the orbital region.
sary to remove the iridic granules surgically. Adhesions between the
 Depending on the degree of pigment deficiency, the iris tissue
iris and the lens (posterior synechiae are a frequent result of pain-
 appears then blue, white—-very seldom—-reddish (albinism). In con-
ful inflammations of the iris, accompanied by miosis (constriction
 of the pupil) and fibrin accumulation in the anterior eye chamber.
to transparent (iris hypoplasia). The concerned tissue will then be
Sometimes these synechiae can be recognized only if the pupil is
pushed anteriorly by the aqueous humor formed behind the iris,
 dilated. The synechiae may concern small portions of the iris tissue.
and looks similar to a cyst (stromal cyst; Fig. 42.3.3). Within the iris
 In some eyes, howe ver, a larger area of adhesion occurs between iris
is located, the sphincter pupillae muscle which is innervated by
and lens (Fig. 42.3.5a and b). With posterior synechiae there often
 arises a deformation of the normally transverse-oval pupil (dysco-
which is innervated by sympathetic fibers. In very excited horses the
ria; Fig. 42.3.5b). Sometimes, with enlargement of the pupil, some
pupil is then sometimes very wide. A wide pupil can be obtained by
 iris tissue rips off, remains sticking on the anterior surface of the
medication, either by sympathomimetics (less effective) or by
lens (iris residuum), and is the only indication of a former iritis (Fig.
parasympatholytics (for example, atropine, very effective).
42.3.6). If the border of the pupil is circularly connected to the lens,
d  u o nd a go  a e u
then one speaks of a secclusio pupillae. If then the pupil is still co-
lary constriction, pupillary reflex) should be checked, before the
vered by fibrin, we are dealing with an occlusio pupillae (Fig.
pupil is enlarged by medication. In the case of nervous horses the
42.3.7). In both cases, flow of aqueous humor from the posterior
constriction of the pupil may be somewhat delayed and incomplete.
 chamber through the pupil into the anterior chamber is impaired, in
Movement should, however, always be observed. Also, in the pre-
 which case the iris tissue that is not adherent to the lens may bulge
sence of cataract, the reaction of the pupil is maintained, provided
 anteriorly ("Bundt-cake iris"). In white horses, rarely also in diffe-
there is no retinal damage. If the eye has been treated with a mydri-
 rently pigmented horses, intraocular melanomas (darkly pigmented
 atic prior to the examination and, for this reason, the pupil is unre-
tumors), which originate from iris tissue, can arise (Fig. 42.3.8). In
 Fig. 42.3.5: (a) Small posterior synechiae (adhesions between iris and lens) at "10 o'clock"; (b) areolar posterior synechiae and dyscoria. Additionally a cataract is present.
Fig. 42.3.6 (3rd left): Iris residuum in the center of the anterior surface of the lens.
Fig. 42.3.7 (2md right): Pupillary occlusion (pupil closed by fibrin) and “Bundt-cake iris" (Bundt-cake-like projection of the iris, the border of the pupil is adherent to the
lens).
Fig. 42.3.8 (right): Melanoma of the iris (pigmented tumor, which starts from the iris). Dorsonasally a brown pigment can be seen in the cornea. Additionally there is a
 smoky-milky cloudiness of the cornea and individual delicate ribbon-like opacities. In the left half of the pupil there is irregular brown tumor tissue.
Fig. 42.4.1: (a) Mature cataract (complete milky cloudiness of the lens); (b) Nuclear cataract (cloudiness of the nucleus of the lens); (c) “Suture-star cataract" (cataract in
156
the area of the lenticular sutures); (d) Vacuolar cataract in the region of the posterior surface of the lens.
contrast to the iridic granular cysts, the melanomas have an irregu-
vitreous chamber), but may show up first in the examination of the
 aue peuoun au ie mo on aaid pue anns i
fundus of the eye, in that uncommon dioptric values are needed for
these, corneal opacities often develop. With continuing growth a
focusing. Rarely, also colobomas of the lens can be observed with a
brown pigment can be observed within the cloudy cornea. If, with
 more dilated pupil (indentation of the lens border in the periphery)
expanding cloudiness, sight in the eye is no longer possible, ultra-
(Fig. 42.4.4).
sound examination can be helpful to assess the extent of the tumor
in the eye.
42.5. Vitreous Body. Direct ophthalmoscopy is imperative for
examination of the vitreous body. A frequent finding, which
42.4. Lens. The most frequent alteration of the lens is a cloudiness
 becomes visible in the course of time in every horse older than per-
(cataract; Fig. 42.4.1a-d). The cataract may be congenital, in young
haps 8 years, is liquefaction of the vitreous body. This liquefaction
horses genetically conditioned in the first months or years of life
 presents itself ophthalmoscopically as two mixed clear phases of
(juvenile) or as a consequence of inflammation, posterior synechiae
fluids (for example, egg-white in water). Sometimes also filamen-
or traumata (cataracta complicata). In old horses a senile cataract
tous structures of the framework of the vitreous body can be rec-
 can develop. The cataract may involve the entire lens or only parts
 ognized. A diffuse turbidity of the vitreous body as well as cloudy
of it. According to the location of the cataract, one speaks of a
 inclusions, which present themselves as dark inclusions in direct
"suture star" (turbidity or cloudiness in the region of the former 
 ophthalmoscopy, are as a rule the result of an uveitis (Fig. 42.5.1).
 Since these inclusions are not resorbed as fibrin is from the anterior
tical cataract (concerning the cortex of the lens), subcapsular
 eye chamber, in the inflammation-free interval that follows the
cataract (lying beneath the capsule of the lens) or capsular cataract
 abatement of an acute ocular inflammation they are also of impor-
(concerning the lens capsule) cataract (Fig. 42.4.1a-c). In a nor-
 tance as an indication of the existence of a recidivistic equine uveitis
mally transparent cortex, the cloudiness of the nucleus of the lens
(formerly “periodic ophthalmia"). The first changes are always
may simulate a microphakia. In these cases an examination by slit-
observable entirely in the periphery of the vitreous body, near the
lamp is helpful, because the slit-lamp makes the normally invisible
ciliary body. In the further course of the disease, the cloudinesses
cortex visible. Often, as a consequence of an uveitis, a vacuolar
 may be present in the entire vitreous chamber. A diffuse yellowish
cataract is present in the region of the posterior surface of the lens
 cloudiness of the vitreous body, a result of inflammation in the pos-
(Fig. 42.4.1d). Lens operations by phacoemulsification are now
 terior portion of the eye, is best seen by shining a light into each
technically possible (Fig. 42.4.2). (Phacoemulsification is a mini-
 pupil in a bilateral comparison (Fig. 42.4.2a-c). By superimposition
mally invasive operative technique by which the lens material is
 of the yellowish color in the vitreous chamber with the blue to
shattered by ultrasound and aspirated by way of a small incision in
greenish color of the fundus of the eye, the color that is observed in
the cornea. Simultaneously, the internal pressure of the eye is main-
 the pupil with lateral lighting appears strikingly green. Rarely the
tained by infusion.)
 diffuse cloudinesses of the vitreous body or inclusions in the vitre-
Subluxations (partial tearing out of the zonule fibers) of the lens
 ous body are the result of hemorrhage and then, with illumination,
may be inherited, a consequence of traumata, a chronic uveitis or a
reddish in color (Fig. 42.5.3).
chronic glaucoma with gradual enlargement of the ocular bulb.
With a widely dilated pupil, they can be recognized because the bor-
42.6. Fundus of the Eye and Retina. The fundus of the eye bears the
 der of the lens and possibly torn out zonular fibers become visible
r e sey in adei a 'e addn si u ini dei
in the periphery of the lens (Fig. 42.2.3). Complete luxations of the
ish to bluish color and is set through with small brown dots
lens can take place into the anterior eye chamber or into the vitre-
(WINSLOW's stars = transverse sections of small vessels running
ous chamber. The lens, which is usually cataractous, is then often
from the choroidea to supply the retina). The ventral part of the
well visible (Fig. 42.4.3a) or, in case of considerable cloudiness of
 ocular fundus is brown in color. The optic disc (papilla of the optic
the cornea, may be easily localized by ultrasound (Fig. 42.4.3b).
aden aun o uon a oi ln isn p si ia
 Concentric rings within the lens (Berlin rings), striking in ap-
lucidum (Fig. 42.6.1a-d). Only a few short blood vessels extend
pearance, are to be regarded as normal variants. Refraction anoma-
from the entrance of the optic nerve into the periphery.
lies of the lens appear in connection with its deformation (for exam-
 For ophthalmoscopic examination of the fundus, it is advisable
ple, lenticonus, bulging of the posterior surface of the lens into the
to focus first on the WINSLOW's stars to find the proper ophthal-
Fig. 42.4.2 (left: Phacoemulsification: Using a metal cannula the lens material is shattered by ultrasound and aspirated. At the same time, fluid is injected by means of
the surrounding plastic cannula and the metal cannula is cooled.
 Fig. 42.4.3 (middle): Luxation of the lens: (a) into the vitreous chamber (uxatio fentis posterior; (b) ultrasound image of posterior luxation of the lens.
Fig. 42.4.4 (right): Coloboma of the lens.
Fig. 42.5.1 (left: Cloudy, dark grey-brown inflammatory inclusions in the vitreous chamber as viewed by direct ophthalmoscopy.
uu aut pis yiog yo uoseduon e u dnd aun yo sos (o) saan ul Apoq snoa aut yo ssuino asn (a) :aa peuou (e) dnd aup o hoon (appiw z's'zt 
(normal) eye glimmers bluish, the left eye yellowish-green owing to cloudiness of the vitreous body in uveitis.
Fig. 42.5.3 (right): Hemorrhage of the vitreous body after trauma.
157
moscopic setting. After that, the fundus is examined in a meander-
 and darkness can be assumed, since the tapetum lucidum otherwise
ing manner and checked for alterations. The clinically important
reflects the light and enables a weaker intensity of light to be util-
changes are normally found in the region of the optic disc. Early
ized.
stages of retinal detachment (Fig. 42.6.2a) as well as signs of cho-
roiditis (Fig. 42.6.2b-d) and formations (structural changes) as a
 Application of Ophthalmic Ointments and Ophthalmic Drops
rule are revealed first in this region. Atrophy of the optic nerve is
 For the application of ophthalmic ointments, the upper eyelid is
recognizable as a strikingly pale color of the optic disc as well as an
pushed dorsally with the index finger in the palpebral sulcus and the
absence of the few blood vessels that are normally present.
lower eyelid somewhat lifted off the eyeball with the thumb. The
The retina consists of the layers of the neurosensory retina and
application of medication is preferably realized from temporal into
the pigment layer (stratum pigmentosum). In retinal detachment 
the space between the lower eyelid and the ocular bulb (Fig. 42.7).
(amotio or ablatio retinae), the neurosensory retina separates from
By blinking, ointments and drops are distributed over the entire
the pigment layer of the retina, so that there is only a light, curtain-
cornea.
like structure in folds, vesicles or in extended areas loosened from
 Subconjunctival injection. For subconjunctival injection, surface
the ocular fundus (Fig. 42.6.3); however, the pigmentation of the
anesthesia of the conjunctiva should be done initially. Ater the
fundus is entirely maintained (Fig. 42.6.2d).
action of the anesthetic has begun, a twitch is applied and a DES-
 After detachment of the retina, the pigment of the fundus appears
MARRES lid retractor fixed under the margin of the upper eyelid.
 still lighter and more iridescent, since the otherwise anteriorly loca-
 By raising the upper lid with the lid retractor the bulbar conjuncti-
ted retinal layers are lacking (hyperreflection). A red color of the
va can be exposed dorsally (Fig. 42.8). The injection is done with a
fundus (fundus albinismus) has no pathological significance and is
thin needle and the volume amounts to about 1-1.5 ml. This tech-
q pai  ams ue sq u u  pu e
- no sp jo uou a o pe aq u an
 does not represent a hyperemia in connection with an inflamma-
sone, insofar as the administration of ophthalmic ointments is not
tion, but shows only the absence of pigment, so that the view of the
 possible or has shown no effect. The injection of crystalloid solu-
choroidal blood vessels becomes possible (Fig. 42.6.1b). If the pig-
 tions should however be abandoned.
ment is absent, then in horses an impairment of vision in dim light
Fig. 42.6.1: (a) View of the physiological (normal) fundus of the horse: tapetum lucidum with wiNSLOw's stars dorsal, tapetum nigrum ventral, optic disc and individual.
centrifugallyrunning short blood vessels. (b) Albinism of the fundus (deficiency of pigment). Especially frequent if there are broad white markings on the head. (c) Choroidi-
tis inflammation of the choroidea) with pigment changes following vasculitis may also develop independentlyfrom uveitis. (d) Atrophy of the optic nerve (regression of
blood vessels and pale color of the optic disc).
Fig. 42.6.2: (a) Beginning “star-shaped" detachment of the retina (abiatio retinae, amotio retinae) (b-d) Extended retinal detachment. The pigment is retained in the fun
dus of the eye.
Fig. 42.6.3 (left: Retinal detachment, ultrasound image: At the optic disc as well as at the ora serrata, it remains
 attached a longer time; in between it is completely detached ("gullwing shaped"). R = retina; G = vitreous cham-
ber, L = lens; NO = optic nerve]
Fig. 42.7 (middle): Application of ophthalmic ointments. The index finger is in the palpebral sulcus of the upper
eyelid (the first distinct fold above the border of the lid; see Fig. 40.3.1 a) and lits this; the thumb opens the low-
er conjunctival sac.
Fig. 42.8 (right;: Subconjunctival injection beneath the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva.
158
Head Cavities
R BERG, K.-D. BUDRAS
the floor of the nasal vestibule. Apart from that, it is also possible
 to end up involuntarily in the nasal diverticulum.
44.1. Scars in the region of the nostril: Scar tissue in the vicinity of
 Trephination of the nasal cavity: The site of trephination depends
the nostril may restrict the ability to completely widen the nares,
 on the location of the pathological proces. The caudal boundary is
whereby the influx of air is reduced.
 a line between both medial angles of the eye. In the middle of the
head, the nasal cavity can be approached immediately beside the
44.2. Nasal diverticulum (= soft nose or also nasal trumpet, p.
median line, maximally 4 cm lateral.
45.20): The nasal diverticulum is a caudally blind-ending cutaneous
pouch about 3-6 cm long, which is located in the naso-incisive
 44.4. Inspection of the nasal mucosa (p. 45) is of clinical impor-
notch and accessible through the *false nostril." It is formed owing
tance. Externally, the pink mucosa of the horse is very well visible
to the presence of the alar fold (plica alaris) and is lined internally
 in the rostral part of the nasal cavity.
by a pigmented, predominantly hairless, skin. One ends up in this
 Ethmoidal hematomas are slowly spreading angiomatous mass-
diverticulum with the introduction of instruments (e.g, nasogastric
es, which develop from the mucosa of the ethmoidal conchae in the
tube, catheter for the guttural pouch, laryngoscope) if care is not
caudal part of the nasal cavity (see Fig. 44.3.). They occur in hors-
taken that these are led onto the floor of the nasal vestibule. An
es of middle age or older and show a preference to thoroughbreds.
 atheroma of the nasal diverticulum (epidermal inclusion cyst) may
 The most frequent signs are mostly unilateral hemorrhages of the
occur as a unilateral, rarely bilateral, fluctuating mass in the caudal
 nose. With increasing size of the hematoma, the nasal cavity, com-
region of the "false nostril." Usually, this atheroma does not
 monly the ventral nasal meatus, becomes partially or entirely
obstruct the airway and its elimination is rather a cosmetic prob-
 occluded. With progressive expansion, the hematomas may intrude
lem.
E u nsa uiso pue sasns l e Aexeu a o
 distortion of the facial bones.
44.3. Endoscopy of the nasal cavity (p. 45): Ventral and middle
nasal meatuses, medial part of the nasal cavity, nasal septum, exter-
 44.5. Resection of the nasal conchae: In foals up to 2 years of age a
 nal surfaces of the dorsal and ventral nasal conchae (see to the left
 mucoid degeneration of the nasal conchae may occur. Owing to the
of the figure).
long roots of the teeth, the caudal maxillary sinus at this time is still
 Parts of the middle nasal concha and parts of the ethmoidal
very flat. Since with the mucoid degeneration of the ventral nasal
labyrinth are accessible for inspection endoscopically. A flexible
 concha an empyema of the maxillary sinus is to be expected, ini-
endoscope facilitates an almost complete examination of the ventral
tially the latter is trephined in the region of the maxillary septum (=
and middle nasal meatuses and of the nasal conchae. If necessary, it
 septum sinuum maxillarium). Here, there is commonly found the
can also be introduced into the dorsal nasal meatus. The ethmoidal
 cupola whose wall consists of a softer, less firm, bone. The degen-
labyrinth can be better and more safely examined with a fiberscope.
erated and expanded dorsal nasal concha fills large parts of the
Endoscopy of the midle nasal meatus is of importance because of
 nasal and maxillary cavities.
the presence of the nasomaxillary aperture, which occasionally can
be identified as a slit in the caudal part of the meatus. Mostly the
 44.6. The site for trephination of the dorsal nasal concha is at the
 aperture is covered by the dorsal nasal concha, under the caudal
caudal part of the nasal bone, paramedian at the level of the medi-
part of which exudates can be observed should the occasion arise.
al angle of the eye (Fig. 34.3.).
Introduction of the nasogastric tube (p. 45): In the horse, the
most ventral and most spacious of the three nasal meatuses is used
44.7. Malformed nasal septum (see p. 51.a'-a"'): The nasal septum
may be thickened or bent by a congenital abnormality or fracture.
(stomach tube),. The ventral nasal meatus leads via the nasopha-
 Horses with such a nasal septum demonstrate usually a noise in the
ryngeal meatus (choana) directly into the pharynx. In doing this, at
 upper respiratory way.
the beginning, the tube passes a nasal mucosal fold, the basal fold,
which contains a well developed venous plexus (plexus cavernosus
44.8. Olfactory components, for example, of the vaginal secretions
conchae), which extends caudally upon the ventral nasal concha.
 or urine of mares in heat, are received by the vomeronasal organ. In
With the introduction of the tube this fold can be injured and there
stallions, this olfactory stimulus leads to sexual excitement and a
results more or less considerable hemorrhage from the venous
 behavioral response, which is designated Flehmen. In this response,
plexus (epistaxis). Improper handling may even fracture a nasal
 the lips are curled (contraction of the levator labii superioris muscle
on each side) and the head is fully extended.
especially if the instruments introduced are not pushed down upon 
44.9. The oral cavity of the horse is very long and narrow. The nar-
rowness of the mouth opening and the great depth of the oral cavi-
ty make clinical examination difficult. Nevertheless, the organs and
structures are accessible to an examination of the oral cavity for an
 average-sized hand.
 Endoscopy of the oral cavity offers the possibility of an inspec-
tion of the oral mucous membrane, the hard and soft palate, the
 cheek teeth, the gums and the root of the tongue. It is the one pos-
sibility for inspection of the oropharynx and especially the palatine
tonsil in the horse.
44.10. The palatine plexus (p. 45.q) is a venous cushion of the pala-
tine mucous membrane. These veins can fill greatly and swell the
a, auedde s leo uet sie u aadsa paaaso
(veterinary: "lampas" or "lampers").
44.11. Vascularization of the tongue—intralingual injection: The
body of the tongue is well vascularized. The effective concentration
of a medicament within the blood may be reached rapidly by an
 intralingual injection. Intralingual injection is an extraordinary
 of venous collapse.
 For intravenous lingual injection, the branches of the sublingual
and lingual veins are used. These veins are visible on the ventral sur-
Fig. 44.3. Endoscopy of the nasal cavity. Endoscopic view in the right caudal
face of the apex of the tongue and run about 1 cm from the lingual
nasal region. 1. dorsal nasal concha; 2. middle nasal concha; 3., 4. ethmoidal con-
 border. As experience shows, the rate of successful intravenous lin-
chae, 5. nasal septum. (Photo, Prof. Dr. Grabner)
 gual injection in the horse is 82%.
159
46.1. Lymphoid hyperplasia of the pharynx: In its mucosal lamina
 Dorsal displacement of the soft palate is diagnosed by the non-
propria and in its submucosa the pharynx contains collagenic and
visibility of the epiglottis in endoscopic examination. Normally the
elastic fibers mixed with lymphatic tissue and mucous glands. The
 epiglottis lies on the soft palate and projects into the nasopharynx.
If these conditions are inverse, the soft palate obstructs the aditus
 yearling is higher than in the adult horse. Even if this finding is usu-
laryngis during inspiration and disturbs expiration. It occurs more
ally considered normal for the juvenile horse, the dorsal displace-
 often in horses that are not yet adult and seems to have a relation
ment of the soft palate occurs more easily and more often in those
to a high-degree of lymphoid hyperplasia of the pharynx. Young
horses that have a pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia of third or
 horses with a smaller, flabby epiglottis are more inclined to a dis-
fourth degree. Higher degrees of pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia
diminish with increasing age of the horse.
and larynx seem to “mature" with increasing age with respect to
 In an endoscopic examination, paresis of the pharynx can be
size, rigidity and coordination.
observed as a collapse of the walls of the nasopharynx, which
The cleft soft palate (palatoschisis totalis) is a rare cleft formation
restricts the respiratory way. These signs may occur in horses with
 in foals and may reach a variable extent; sometimes it involves the
 a mycosis of the guttural pouch and dysphagia.
 total soft palate. In such foals, ingested material is discharged from 
 the nostrils (one or both) and usually they die of pneumonia.
46.2. The intrapharyngeal ostium (Fig. 46.4.) is an opening with a
 A lateral buccotomy (severance of the cheek from lateral) is a
"sphincter muscle" for the laryngeal crown and guarantees a direct
 method for treating palatoschisis totalis. Others are access by way
respiratory way (Fig. 48.2.): nasal cavity-respiratory pharynx-
 of the oral cavity, mandibular symphysiotom or laryngopharyngo-
laryngeal crown-trachea. A dislocation of the laryngeal crown into
tomy.
the oropharynx during high oxygen need (extreme stress, races)
Mandibular symphysiotomy (Fig. 38.8.): For the purpose of a
results in a sudden breakdown of the horse owing to an anoxemia.
successful implementation of larger surgical operations (e.g, cleft
This phenomenon, called “choking up", has its cause in a cramp of 
soft palate, palatoschisis totalis), the mandibular symphysis (inter-
the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles with backward dis-
 mandibular synchondrosis) can be split.
placement of the larynx. Also retraction of the tongue can dislodge
the laryngeal crown in such a way from the intrapharyngeal ostium
46.5. Guttural pouch: In the horse the auditory tube, which runs
(" swallowing of the tongue").
 between the pharynx and the middle ear, has a characteristic cau-
 doventral diverticulum, the guttural pouch. The opening between
46.3. The pharyngeal ostium of the auditory tube: This opening is
tube and guttural pouch is a long slit in the caudoventral tubal wall.
e ui s pe xydosu an u nod en aui oun auua a
aui ou uado aqnn aone a pue yonod pen aui yog au
 transverse plane through the lateral angle of the eye.
nasopharynx, they are often involved in respiratory diseases. Since
The guttural pouch valve is a prominent structure of the
the guttural pouch has a secretory mucous membrane, essentially
nasopharynx. It borders the pharyngeal openings of the Eustachian
catarrhal inflammations are found here. The guttural pouch may be
tubes and is about 3 cm in length. It is pressed against the pharyn-
subject to a mycotic infection, which erodes its dorsal wall by a
geal wall of each side and exhibits an oblique, sinuous course of its
diphtheritic inflammation and is responsible for several signs that
ventral free border. It is reinforced by a continuation of the medial 
 point to a damage of important blood vessels and nerves. The most
cartilage that supports the auditory tube. The slit-like pharyngeal
au jo aidnu oi uimo sixeisida eiey e aq piom aseo renoeioads
ostium of the auditory tube lies lateral to the guttural pouch valve,
 internal carotid artery.
is closed normally, and is opened if the horse swallows. In this way,
the pressure on both sides of the eardrum becomes equalized.
46.4. Soft palate (Fig. 46.4): It is the caudal continuation of the
hard palate and is remarkably long in the horse. In the resting state,
it hangs down in front of the epiglottis and is in contact by its free
border with the base of the epiglottis. This topographical relation
explains the inability of the horse to exert an oral respiration in res-
piratory problems and, on the other hand, the course of the ingesta
through the nasopharynx and the nasal cavity in case of vomitus (in
the horse, to be sure, very rare).
Fig. 46.4. Dorsal displacement of the sof palate. With the position of the instru-
Fig. 46.5.1. Endoscopic picture of the right guttural pouch, rostral view. The endo-
 ment in the nasal pharynx (ventral in the picture), the endoscopic picture shows a
 scope was introduced into the guttural pouch through the slit-ike opening of the
view of the soft palate in the picture, below) and the intrapharyngeal ostium in the
 pharyngeal ostium of the auditory tube (see text-figure, p. 46). With its perpendi-
 aul anqnsn jeabeudose buinuuoo au se lim se (aunoid aun to aiu 
 cular orientation, the broad, bright stylohyoideum separates the lateral recess
mucosa-covered corniculate process of the arytenoid cartilage projects from ven-
 (eft) from the medial recess tright). The medial recess contains the perpendicular
s xueud peuel au oui Auoe pue unso eueudeu an ou e
neurovascular fold, whose distinct (bluish) internal carotid artery reaches the low-
a result of the extension of the soft palate, that does not however apply to the
 er border of the picture and whose lighter glossopharyngeal nerve (central in the
d  to o adn   ns  pe o ses G
the free border of the softpalate (below in the picture), which caudally passes over
 the bean-shaped cranial cervical ganglion of the sympathetic trunk lies to the right
bilaterally into the palatopharyngeal arch. The reddening is the result of inflam-
 in the neurovascular fold. (Photo, Dr. Grabner, Berlin)
mation. (Photo, Prof. Dr. Grabner)
160
Cranial nerves VII, IX, X, XI and XII can be irritated by diseases 
formed bilaterally. By palpation, the rostral end of the lingual
of the guttural pouch. Damage to cranial nerve IX may cause loss
 process of the hyoid bone is established. From here one moves 2-3
of taste and sensibility at the root of the tongue, partial anesthesia
fingerbreadths rostrally and introduces the needle in a median and
of the pharyngeal mucous membrane and paralysis of the pharyn-
 perpendicular direction into the body of the tongue.
geal muscles. The horse is then unable to swallow. The ramus sinus
carotici, which is responsible for the regulation of blood pressure
 46.7. Retropharyngeal lymphocenter: This includes the medial (p.
and heart frequency, may also be encountered with damage to the
47.27) and lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes. The former lie on
glossopharyngeal nerve. In this situation, the corresponding regula-
the dorsolateral pharyngeal wall, medial to the mandibular gland
tion by afferent impulses of the pressoreceptors of the carotid sinus
and the digastric muscle. They are normally not palpable but, if
and of the chemoreceptors of the glomus caroticum to the medulla
 abscessed, can be incised from VIBORG's triangle,. The less numer-
 oblongata and to the nucleus of origin of the vagus nerve will be dis-
 ous and smaller lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes lie ventral to
turbed. Such a dysregulation continues on the corresponding effer-
the wing of the atlas on the internal carotid artery and the lateral
ents to the sinus node and AV-node of the heart.
side of the guttural pouch (p. 47.22).
o ss ied u a ssn x annau  ii a
the sensory and motor functions of the pharynx. With this there
 48.1. The larynx of the horse is of special importance for the vet-
exists the danger of an incurable swallow-pneumonia. A possible
erinarian. The purchase-examination should include a thorough
loss of the cranial and caudal laryngeal nerves causes an absence of
the sensory and motor functions of the larynx, with signs of laryn-
 geal roarer", in 90% of the cases there is in the forefront an unilat-
geal paralysis. Injury to cranial nerve XI is clinically not so grave
 eral (left-sided) paralysis of the dorsal cricoarytenoid muscle caused
by damage to the corresponding recurrent laryngeal nerve. In this
and sternocleidomastoid  [sternocephalicus  and  cleidomastoid] 
 case, there occurs a lowering of the arytenoid cartilage (Fig. 48.3.
muscles). If the XlIth cranial nerve is paralyzed, the lingual muscles 
 above, right) and—-connected to this—a slackening of the vocal fold
are involved. The tongue droops from the mouth and cannot be
on the same side. There originates here also the respiratory sound
retracted into the oral cavity. A late sequela is an atrophy of the
which is characteristic for this disease. In observing the laryngeal
tongue, which occurs also unilaterally if the nerve is damaged uni-
 lumen with a laryngoscope in such cases, the asymmetry of the rima
laterally. Damage to the cranial cervical ganglion of the sympathet-
 glottidis is striking.
ic is reflected in a narrowing of the palpebral fissure (loss of tonus
Treatment is directed to a surgical dilatation of the rima glottidis,
of smooth musculature of the eyelids) and by miosis (narrowing of
 and this is obtained by a ventriculectomy and an additional laryn-
the pupil due to denervation of the dilatator muscle of the pupil).
goplasty.
 Paralysis of the facial nerve occurs only rarely in connection with
 In the case of a ventriculectomy the mucosal lining of the laryn-
diseases of the guttural pouch. Of course, paralysis of the facial
 geal ventricle is removed and the caudal thyroid notch furnishes
nerve and the spread (of the disease process) onto the temporal
 surgical access for this. By the scar-formation that follows, the out-
bone may damage the inner ear and result in vestibular signs. [394]
 er wall of the laryngeal ventricle fuses with the inner wall, includ-
[395] [396] [397] [398] [399]
 ing the vocal fold, which is pulled laterally by contraction of the
- e ouoe au  jod  
scar tissue with enlargement of the rima glottidis.
nd si siog io sm e jo ynod p an u (ud
 Laryngoplasty is directed toward compensating for the loss of
caused by a functional disturbance, produced less by an organic
contraction of the dorsal cricoarytenoid muscle. Corresponding to
defect of the guttural pouch (mucosal fold on the floor of the slit-
the action of the paralyzed muscle, a stout alloplastic band is
like opening of the guttural pouch).
VIBORG's triangle: A triangle located at the transition from the
 head to the neck, which facilitates external access to the inflamed
 guttural pouch (Fig. 46.5.2). Its borders are dorsally the tendon of
the sternomandibular muscle (sternocephalicus muscle), rostrally
the cervical border of the mandible and ventrally the linguofacial
vein. Here the skin and cutaneous muscle are first incised, then the
parotid gland separated bluntly from the mandible. The blunt dis-
section process is continued on the medial aspect of the occipito-
mandibular part of the digastric muscle in a direction toward the
ear to reach the guttural pouch. Furthermore, if abscessed, the
medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes are incised from Viborg's tri-
angle. Normally, they are not palpable.
46.6. Anesthesia of the hypoglossal nerve: For anesthesia of the
tongue, the lingual nerve and hypoglossal nerve are important. Both
nerves are anesthetized from one location. The anesthesia is per-
 Fig. 48.1. Schematic cross-section through the larynx. 1. Position of the cricoary-
tenoid articulation under the arytenoid cartilage, 2. glotic cleft (rima glottidis), 3.
 cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle, 4. cricoarytenoideus lateralis muscle, 5.
vocalis muscle, 6. vocal ligament muscle in the vocal fold, the arrows on the right
 side give the direction of pull by the cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle and the
widening of the glottic cleft, and on the left side the direction of pull of the
Fig. 46.5.2. Ventral region of the head-neck border demonstrating Viborg's trian-
cricoarytenoideus lateralis muscle and the narrowing of the glotic cleft. (After
gle (surgical access to the gutural pouch).(Photo, Prof. Dr McCarthy, Sydney)
Dyce/Sack/Wensing [1991])
161
stretched from the origin of the muscle dorsomedial on the cricoid
tilage. Moreover, it is to be kept in mind that the ventral surface of
cartilage to the attachment of the muscle on the muscular process of
 l s a  si  ioi 
the arytenoid cartilage. In doing this, the muscular process is drawn
notch). In the case of the “roarer", the muscular process is distinct-
caudomedially as in a natural muscular contraction. This results in
ly palpable, because the dorsal cricoarytenoid muscle that attaches
 a craniolateral displacement of the vocal process of the arytenoid
 here is atrophied.
cartilage, by which the vocal fold is put under tension for enlarge-
 Accessibility of the larynx: In dorsal recumbency, the larynx of
ment of the rima glottidis. [400] [401] [402] [403]
the horse is reached from ventral between the palpable thyroid car-
tilage and the arch of the cricoid cartilage. The caudal thyroid
48.2. Epiglottic entrapment: This is understood as a “clasping" of
 notch, which is filled by the cricothyroid ligament, is located in the
the epiglottis. It is brought about by mucosal folds, the aryepiglot-
 median plane between the two laminae of the thyroid cartilage. In
tic folds, which normally lie below the epiglottis. As thick mucosal 
the “roarer operation" or ventriculotomy, one incises between the
membranes they border the laryngeal inlet laterally. Ventrally they
 two sternohyoid muscles in the median plane and cuts through the
are attached to the free border of the epiglottis, in its mucosal cov-
 cricothyroid ligament. Here is the single surgical access. It provides
 ering. Dorsally they course to the lateral and distal surfaces of the
ventral access to the lateral laryngeal ventricle (hemiplegia), to the
arytenoid cartilages and unite below the entrance to the esophagus.
 arytenoid cartilages (chondritis), to the soft palate (displacement),
to the oropharyngeal mucosa (entrapment), to the laryngopharyn-
 parts of the aryepiglottic folds. In doing this, these cover the typical
 geal mucosa (follicular pharyngitis-lymphoid hyperplasia) and to
vascular pattern, which normally lies upon the epiglottis (Fig.
 subepiglottic cysts. The lateral ventricle is invaginated and cut away
48.3.).
 at its borders to the laryngeal cavity.
 Epiglottis: Normally the epiglottis of the horse that is not yet
 adult is smaller and more flabby than in the adult. It lies on the cau-
dal free end of the soft palate. Although the size and the rigidity of
the epiglottis are not the only factors that are involved in dorsal
Ear
displacement of the soft palate (Fig. 46.4.), they appear yet to play
a role here. With increasing age the size and rigidity of the epiglot-
 50.1. Ear fistula: By an ear fistula one refers to a fistulous tract near
tis usually improve.
 the rostral border of the external ear from which a permanent or
intermittent secretion occurs. The cause is an erratic tooth or sever-
 po   (o x  go aos 
 al small malformed teeth. Their removal is indicated in sport and
horse can be inspected by a rhinolaryngoscope, which is introduced
 breeding horses for hygienic and cosmetic reasons.
through the ventral nasal meatus. In doing this, at the same time, an
evaluation of the mucous membrane of the nasal cavity, ethmo-
50.2Head tilt occurs in disease of the vestibular apparatus. It is
turbinalia and pharynx, including the entrance to the auditory tube
characterized by a tilting of the head-axis, which begins between the
(EUSTACHIAN tube) is possible.
ears and runs rostrally between the nostrils. The result is a lower
position of the ear, eye, and nostril of one side.
48.4. Laryngeal ventricle: In the horse it is an outpouching of the
 Bending attitude of the head: A bending attitude of head and
laryngeal mucous membrane, which has a depth up to 2.5 cm. It
neck can be observed with a brain lesion. In this, the described axis
extends between the vocalis muscle and ventricularis muscle in a
 in the head region remains straight. The head and neck are flexed
dorsocaudal direction along the medial surface of the thyroid carti-
to one side (pleurothotonus). The bending attitude of the head is
lage. Its blind end lies deeply at the level of the muscular process of
 not to be confused with head tilt.
the arytenoid cartilage. The laryngeal ventricle of the horse plays a
laryngeal nerve).
48.5.Endotracheal intubation: With endotracheal intubation the
angle between the oral cavity and the axis of the aditus laryngis
must be considered and compensated by lifting the head. In selec-
tion of a tube caliber for endotracheal intubation it is to be kept in
   ad s a si   an  
geal cavity (Fig. 48.6.).
 48.6. Palpation of the larynx: The larynx is easily accessible for pal-
pation from the ventral side. First, one palpates the arch of the
cricoid cartilage, the laminae of the thyroid cartilage (lateral and
rostral to the arch), the lamina of the cricoid cartiage and on each
side the muscular process of the lateral surface of the arytenoid car-
Fig. 48.2. Position of the epiglottis during breathing (let) and swallowing (right).
Fig. 48.3. llustration (above) and endoscopic picture (below) of the entrance to
 Breathing position (left) and swallowing position (right) of the epiglottis. In breath-
the larynx. with an opened glottic cleft (left) the vocal folds appear symmetrical
 ing, the epiglottis projects through the intrapharyngeal ostium into the nasal phar-
and are “framed" by a symmetrical entrance to the larynx. In “roarers" (above
au oy sae ueas e au 'ase s u umao, leuelaun pohed e se xs
ight, the glotic cleft is asymmetrical, which is concealed by the collapsed
nasal pharynx through the larynx into the trachea (large arrow). In swallowing the
mucosa-covered corniculate process of the arytenoid cartilage (the healthy right
epiglotis, sliding out from the intrapharyngeal ostium, by its retroflexion closes 
vocal fold is visible). The endoscopic pictures (below) reveal the opened (left) and 
the entrance to the larynx. By elevating the dorsum of the tongue, the bolus pass-
closed (right) glottic cleft and moreover the typical vascular pattern on the surface
es (small arrow) across the laryngeal entrance into the esophagus. A false pas-
 of the epiglotis, which is concealed in the case of epiglotic entrapment. (Cour-
 sage into the nasal pharynx is prevented by elevation of the soft palate. (Courtesy 
tesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
162
50.3. Site for taking the pulse—facial artery (Fig. 38.8.): The facial
Trigeminal nerve (V): The sensory part of the trigeminal nerve
artery is an important structure for taking the pulse. It lies in the
(ophthalmic nerve, maxillary nerve, and part of the mandibular
vascular notch (incisura vasorum facialium). The latter is a vascu-
nerve) is evaluated by control of the corneal and palpebral reflexes
lar notch at the ventral border of the mandible at the boundary
and sensibility in the head region. The latter is performed best on
between the body and ramus of the mandible (rostral border of the
 aa pin a jo id r a on an eso p a
masseter muscle). As the name implies, here several structures com-
(mandibular nerve) results in a paralysis of the lower jaw, mastica-
ing from the intermandibular space reflect onto the face. In partic-
 tory disturbances, saliva flow, the tongue's hanging from the mouth
ular, we are dealing with the facial artery, facial vein and the excre-
as well as an atrophy of the muscles, which are innervated by it
tory duct of the parotid gland. The pulse can be palpated if the fin-
(masseter, pterygoid, and temporalis muscles, and rostral part of the
 gertips press the facial artery medially against the mandible as a
digastric muscle).
hard base.
Abducent nerve (VI) and facial nerve (Vll) (see pp. 110/111).
Vestibulocochlear nerve (Vm): Nystagmus (involuntary move-
ment of the eye) with a peripheral lesion of the vestibular system is
rare in the horse, so that its occurrence usually speaks for a central
Central Nervous System
injury.
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), vagus nerve (X), and accessory
 52.1. Function of Cranial Nerves (see pp. 108-111)
 nerve (Xl): They provide sensory and motor innervation to the lar-
Olfactory nerves (I): The olfactory sense of the horse is evaluated
 ynx and pharynx (IX, X) as well as parts of the muscles of the neck
 only with difficultly. It can be tested, if the horse can smell the food,
 and shoulder. Besides brain diseases also peripheral injuries may be
E.g.,the hay, or the hand of the investigator.
the cause for disturbances of pharyngeal and laryngeal function
Optic nerve (ml): The visual sense of the horse can be examined in
(e.g, inflammation of the guttural pouch).
two ways: 1) With the aid of the menace (threatening) reflex and 2)
Hypoglossal nerve (Xll);: It supplies the motor innervation to all
by leading in the direction of large obstacles. Foals can see already
extrinsic and instrinsic muscles of the tongue. Injury results in a
a few hours after parturition; but do not yet know the menace
 deviation of the tongue to the normal side. A distinct atrophy may
reflex, which they need first to learn in a few days. If a sudden
 develop. In diffuse, severe cerebral damage a protrusion of the
movement is made with the hand in a direction toward the eye, the 
 tongue is possible (injury to the upper motor neurons, which con-
palpebral fissure is closed.
trol the function of the hypoglossal nerve).
 Oculomotor nerve (Mm): The function of the oculomotor nerve con-
sists of, among others, the regulation of the size of the pupil pupillary
52.2. Brain stem and spinal cord can, following a protozoan or her-
reflex). The parasympathetic fibers of the oculomotor nerve are
pes viral infection, be altered by degeneration or by inflammation.
responsible for the narrowing of the pupil (miosis; pupillary sphinc-
Consequences, among others, are lameness, ataxia, and muscle
ter muscle), the sympathetic fibers of the ophthalmic nerve for the
atrophy. [404] [405]
expansion (mydriasis; pupillary dilatator muscle). The diameter of
the pupil permits localization and prognosis of brain injury.
 Oculomotor nerve (M), trochlear nerve IV) and abducens nerve
(VI): These three cranial nerves coordinate the movement of the
eyes. For the examination of eye movements, the head of the patient
 is evaluated first at rest and then in movement.
 Strabismus: abnormal position of the ocular bulb: Injury to the
third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves may have strabismus as a con-
sequence. Injury to the oculomotor nerve yields a ventrolateral stra-
 bismus (with paralysis of the levator palpebrae superioris muscle);
that of the fourth cranial nerve, a rotational strabismus (the dorsal
 part of the eyeball is shifted laterally), and that of the abducens
nerve in a medial strabismus with an inability to retract the ocular
bulb. In contrast to the small animals a ventral strabismus in the
horse is physiological if the head is elevated.
 Fig. 48.6. "Glass-head" with the hyoid apparatus emphasized in yellow (cf., text-
Fig. 52.1. Canial nerves. Assignment of nerve fiber qualities to their areas of inner
figure, p. 34) and the laryngeal muscles marked in red (cf., p. 51). (Courtesy of 
vation.
Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
163
52.3. Cerebellar ataxia occurs especially in foals. Cerebellar func-
seal line of fusion to the dens, which closes at the age of 7-12
tions in the coordination of movement are disturbed and lead to the
months. [416] [417] Further epiphyseal lines of fusion of the atlas
loss of neuromuscular reflexes. [404] [405]
and axis are demonstrable only by computed tomography. [415]
 On the basis of changes in form of the cervical vertebrae, occa-
52.4. Cerebrospinal fluid: A clear, colorless plasma ultrafiltrate of
 sionally there occurs a narrowing (stenosis) of the vertebral canal
the brain and spinal cord. It is formed by the choroid plexuses of the
 and, in consequence of this, compression of the spinal cord (cervi-
ependymal lining of the cerebral ventricle, and the blood vessels of
cal  v
vertebral  malformation/malarticulation,
 cervical  stenotic
the pia mater as well as the encephalic arachnoidea. The main place
myelopathy, wobbler-syndrome). [418] [419] The resulting neuro-
of absorption is an arachnoid villus in the cerebral vein or venous
 logical signs are expressed as a rule in a disturbance in coordination
sinus. Other sites of absorption are the veins and lymph vessels
 of movement (spinal ataxia). Among others, it is typically a stag-
around the roots of the spinal nerves. The direction of flow of the
the limbs (dysmetria) and disturbed deep sensibility. [419] Depend-
aqueduct to the central canal. The cerebrospinal fluid may be used
 ing on the effect of the attitude of the neck on compression of the
for diagnostic purposes. The site for puncture to obtain cere-
spinal cord, two forms are distinguished. Dynamic (functional)
brospinal fluid (cerebellomedullary cistern, cisterna magna) lies on
the cross-point of the dorsal midline of the head with a transverse
vC2-6) or extension of the cervical vertebral column (predomi-
line through both cranial borders of the atlas.
nantly vC6-vT1); whereas, static (absolute) stenosis is independent
 of the position in which the neck is held. [420] [419] A further dif-
 54.1. A spinal ataxia occurs especially in young horses. Owing to a
ferentiation is possible according to causative factors. Type I is
spondylolisthesis (a gliding of vertebrae), compressons occur in the
cervical spinal cord with interruption of motor and sensory path-
 dritic) of the cervical vertebral column, for which reason, as a rule,
ways. [406] [378] [407]
foals or young horses of the age of 6 months to 2 years are affect-
ed. [420] [419] In this case, dynamic as well as static stenosis can
54.2. Epidural hemorrhages are traumatically caused and lead to a
appear. [420] These are caused, among others, by an enlargement of
loss of function of conduction pathways in the spinal cord. [378]
the caudal epiphysis or by a bowing in the region of the caudal epi-
physis in direction toward the spinal cord (intravertebral stenosis).
54.3. For epidural anesthesia the interarcuate space between the
[421] [420] Also, deformation of the articular processes (especially
sacrum and the first caudal vertebra or between the first two caudal
of cervical vertebrae vC3-5) is possible, which may result in an
vertebrae is chosen. [408] [378] [409]
instability of the cervical vertebral column and by this in subluxa-
tions (partial luxations) of the cervical vertebrae. [421] [419] In
54.4. Cerebrospinal fluid is obtained for diagnostic examination
addition, a caudal elongation of the dorsal vertebral arch may
from the subarachnoid space. To obtain larger amounts of cere-
develop, so that the latter projects caudally over the cranial epi-
brospinal fluid, with the head lowered (bent on the neck), the
physis of the next vertebral body. The consequence is a dynamic
atlantooccipital space is entered 6.5 cm caudal to the occipital pro-
(intervertebral) stenosis, in which case vC2-5 are especially affect-
tuberance, into the cerebellomedullary cistern. To obtain smaller
ed. [420] In the case of Type I1, in which no indications of develop-
 mental changes in the area of the cervical vertebrae are present, we
 space, which lies median on a line between the caudal ends of the
are presumably dealing with the late consequence of traumata.
two tubera coxae. A funnel-like access to the interarcuate lum-
 Degenerative changes of the vertebral joints (especially vC5-7) are
bosacral space lies between the spinous processes of the last lumbar
typical. In this case, on the basis of osseous proliferations or on
vertebra and the first sacral vertebra, which converge at their bases.
account of the proliferation of articular or periarticular soft tissues,
To obtain cerebrospinal fluid the needle must be introduced
 there is brought about a pressure damage of the spinal cord. [420]
through the dura mater into a partial enlargement of the subarach-
[419] Usually it appears for the first time at an age of 13 years,but
noid space that lies ventral to the end of the spinal cord. [383] [410]
it has been observed also in older horses (5-10 years). [419] The
More references related to the head: [411] [412] [413] [414]
usual radiographic examination of the cervical vertebral column
results often only in a suspect diagnosis. Precise information con-
cerning the extent and location of spinal cord compression is possi-
Neck and Back
BIANCA PATAN
ble with the aid of myelography (radiographic examination of the
cervical vertebral column after injection of radiographic contrast
 56.1. Because in young horses, the radiographically demonstrable
medium into the subarachnoid space). [420] Treatment of foals
epiphyseal lines of fusion of the cervical vertebral column may be
 a  i   s a  
tive feeding and limitation of movement). [420] [418] In advanced
know the time of closure of the epiphyseal lines. At the atlas an epi-
stages as well as in the case of Type II changes, surgical treatment is
physeal line is demonstrable only in dorsoventral view. It is closed
 possible in selected cases. [420] In doing this both in dynamic and
at 12 months. [415] On the other hand, on cervical vertebrae
static stenosis a vertebral arthrodesis (surgical stiffening of the
vC2-7, there can be demonstrated on the vertebral body in lateral
intervertebral joint) in the extension attitude of the neck can be per-
view, one cranial (closure at 2-5 years) and one caudal (closure at
formed. This results in a stabilization of the cervical vertebral col-
4-6 years) epiphyseal line each. The axis has moreover an apophy-
umn. In static stenosis, also a dorsal laminectomy (removal of part
Fig. 56.2.1. Multiple fractures of the thoracic vertebral spinous processes in the
region of the withers (arrow) with displacement of several fracture-fragments;
Fig. 56.1. Older vertical fracture in the region of the left cranial articular process of
 asterisk: cartilaginous caps of the spinous processes with isolated ossification
the 6th cervical vertebra (arrow), right = caudal 3 years old trotter mare. (Courtesy
 centers, right = caudal, 3 years old warmblood-gelding. (Courtesy of Klinik fur
of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veternnarmed. Univ. Wien)
164
of the vertebral arch) is possible to relieve pressure on the spinal
vT13-18) are usually involved, [423] because the greatest dorso-
cord. [418] [419]
ventral mobility of the vertebral column is found in this region.
 Luxations as well as fractures of the cervical vertebrae in the
[426] To be sure, the narrowing of the intervals between the spin-
region of the vertebral body or vertebral arch, which are caused by
 ous processes is not always to be evaluated as pathological, for
traumata (for example on account of a fall, injuries after being
 about one-third of the horses show no clinical signs. [423] A possi-
kicked, or strangulation by a halter) may cause a compression of the
ble explanation of the cause is physiological transformational
 spinal cord and by this clinical signs of spinal ataxia (wobbler-syn-
processes on the spinous processes, which are regarded as an adap-
drome) or even inability to rise or respiratory paralysis. [422] In this
tation to biomechanical loading. [426] [423] The attachment of the
case, the signs may appear immediately (for example, as a result of
 supraspinous ligament at the dorsocranial border of the spinous
focal hemorrhage or structural instability) or they are to be
 processes plays a special role in that in older horses it is often drawn
 observed only after a certain time, if stenosis of the vertebral canal
 out hook-like in the cranial direction. [426] Because the greatest
has developed owing to a callus formation. [420] In fractures of the
 dynamic forces on the equine back act at high speed and jumping.
 processes, on the other hand, rather a curvature or lateral flexion of
 racehorses and jumpers are considered especially vulnerable. [428]
the neck (torticollis) is to be observed. [422] The occipito-atlanto-
[423] In the case of the latter, a maximal curvature of the back is
axial region as well as the caudal neck region (vC5-vT1; Fig. 56.1.)
observed at the jump over the obstacle; whereas, in landing the back
 is a predisposing location for fractures or luxations. [420] In young
is maximally lowered. [428] Owing to the repeated nonphysiologi-
horses especially the epiphyseal growth plates are weak points.
 cal lowering of the back there occurs a regular pressing on each oth-
[422]
er of the spinous processes, which is regarded as the exciting cause
 Occipito-atlanto-axial malformation is a relatively rare congeni-
for the development of "kissing spines" in jumpers. Dressage, west-
tal anomaly of the cervical vertebral column. It is an inherited auto-
 ern, and pleasure horses may likewise be encountered, in which case
somal recessive and occurs most often in Arabian horses. [418]
 ul [et] paiae are sie as jo ae ue ie sasiou uao is
[417] The disease may have its basis in different anomalies as, for
ical examination typically there is observed a pressure-pain after
example, a fusion of the atlas and occipital bone, a hypoplasia of
 palpation of the spinous processes as well as pain reactions with
the dens of the axis or the development of additional vertebral
reflexly triggered dorsoflexion (lowering of the back). [428] [423]
 parts. [420] It is expressed in an extended head/neck-attitude, dys-
 In radiographic examination, besides the closeness of the spinous
metria as well as incoordination of the forelimbs and hind limbs
 processes, mostly local reactions in the form of border sclerotiza-
 ie ssd aee raa ae sis asa [itl [sit] (eixi)
or develop within the first months of life. [420]
within the bone) as also exostosis-like form changes (bone excres-
To obtain cerebrospinal fluid or the injection of radiographic
 cences) are observed (Fig. 56.2.2.). [423] The nonphysiological con-
contrast medium for myelography, the subarachnoid space can be
tact of the spinous processes may also lead to radiographically vis-
punctured at the atlanto-occipital space. To do this, with the head-
ible changes at other locations, thus, sometimes also arthrotic
neck in the flexed position, the needle is introduced perpendicular-
changes on the small vertebral joints are found (spondy-
ly to the skin on the midline at the level of the cranial borders of the
lartbropatbia deformans, spondylartbrosis). [426] Besides treat-
ment with medicaments, there is described a surgical procedure in
the anesthetized horse in lateral recumbency. [418]
the form of a partial resection of the affected spinous processes.
[427] [429]
56.2. The spinous processes of the thoracic vertebrae vT3-9 form
 Sometimes exostotic bone formations (spondylosis deformans)
the withers, the highest point of which is located in the region of
 can be demonstrated radiographically in older horses. These appear
vT5 or vT6. The position of the saddle is located in the region of the
ventrally on the vertebral bodies of the thoracic vertebral column
caudal thoracic vertebrae (vT10-18). [423]
(especially between vT11-16) and in part may even cause a bridge-
 In young horses the spinous processes of vT2-8(-9) are covered
formation (ankylosis) between adjacent vertebrae. [430] [431]
by cartilaginous caps, each of which has its own ossfication center
Their basis is a chronically degenerative disease of the ventral lon-
(Fig. 56.2.1. - asterisk). The corresponding apophyseal fusion-lines
close only at the age of 7-15 years and should not be confused with
 al rotation and lateral mobility in this region of the vertebral col-
fractures of the spinous processes (Fig. 56.2.1. - arrow). Such frac-
,   o  s s a [l ] 
tures, which usually are the consequence of trauma (for example
problems"; however, they are usually only chance radiographic
after overturning of the horse), heal frequently without surgical
findings without clinical relevance. [425]
intervention within 4-6 months. Mostly there remains a distinct
 Intervertebral disc problems in the thoracolumbar region (disco-
sagging of the withers, in which case the performance of the horse
 pathias) play only a secondary role in the horse. [428] [431]
commonly is not affected. [425]
 On the thoracic and lumbar vertebral column different inherited
 The interval between the spinous processes of the thoracic and
 or acquired deformations can be observed. A ventrally convex flex-
 lumbar vertebral column as a rule amounts to more than 4 mm.
[423] Approaching (interval less than 4 mm) and finally touching or
lordosis. Older breeding mares are often affected after a greater
 even overlapping spinous processes of the thoracic and lumbar ver-
 number of pregnancies. A dorsally convex curvature of the verte-
 a u sd y, jo as s e ae uo p
bral column (mostly in the region of vL1-5) is designated kyphosis
(thoracolumbar interspinal syndrome, kissing-spines syndrome).
pes    u psqo a so si y
[426] [427] [423] The spinous processes of vT10-vL4 (most often
from its mother. By scoliosis, one understands a lateral curvature of
the vertebral column (usually between vT10-18), which as a rule is
brought about by a unilaterally reinforced tonus of the back mus-
 cles (especially of the longissimus thoracis muscle; in clinical use,
 also designated longissimus dorsi muscle). [425]
56.3. The sacrum is connected to the pelvic girdle and accordingly
with the pelvic extremity by articulation (sacroiliac joint 
or
iliosacral joint). A tight ligamentous apparatus is present around
the joint. It is formed by the ventral and dorsal (pars brevis and pars
longa) interosseous sacroiliac ligaments as well as the broad sacro-
tuberous ligament. [176] Damage to the ligamentous apparatus and
by this a relaxation of the joint may occur as a consequence of trau-
the region of the iliosacral joint; whereas, subluxations (partial lux-
ations) are observed rather seldom. [231] Racehorses as well as
jumpers and dressage horses are especially frequently encountered
Fig. 56.2.2. “Kissing" spines in the caudal region of the saddle position with bony
[230], in which case apparently large warmblood horses in particu-
es, night = caudal 5 years old warmblood-gelding. (Courtesy of Klinik fur
lar have a predisposition for disease of the iliosacral joint. [432]
Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauentieren, Veterinammed. Univ. Wien)
[425] Horses usually show a certain stiffness and a low level of
thrust of the pelvic limb. [425] [230] If only the iliosacral joint is
165
involved, then the horses frequently demonstrate a unilateral mus-
 In the horse, it is not possible to obtain cerebrospinal fluid by
cular atrophy; however, as a rule, they exhibit no asymmetry in the
way of the sacrococcygeal interarcuate space, because the sub-
region of the sacral tuber. A unilateral projection of the sacral tuber
arachnoid space does not extend caudally beyond the sacrum.
occurs rather with changes of the dorsal ligamentous structures or
 However, epidural anesthesia is possible (e.g., for an operation in
a thickening of the subcutaneous tissue. [432] To be sure, an asym-
the region of the vulva). [377]
metry of the sacral tubers is frequently observed even in clinically
healthy horses. [231] Transcutaneous and rectal sonograpic investi-
56.5. In case of overloading of the nuchal ligament at its insertion
gation as well as scintigraphy provide useful information
for
(external occipital protuberance), pathological changes of the soft
obtaining the diagnosis. [432] To confirm the diagnosis, local
and bone tissues (insertional desmopathia) may occur. With radio-
regional infiltration of the iliosacral region can be performed. A
 graphic examination, sometimes exostoses of the occipital bone
9-15 cm long spinal needle is introduced axial to the sacral tuber at
(Fig. 56.5.) or calcifications in the nuchal ligament can be recog-
an angle of about 20c directed caudally (toward the opposite
 nized. Affected horses often put up resistance as well as a recidivis-
iliosacral joint) and advanced between the diverging spinous
tic shaking of the head when ridden. [433]
processes of vL6 and vS1 (Fig. 56.3., 3). At contact with bone in the
caudomedial region of the joint, 20 cc of a 2% local anesthetic solu-
 56.6. Inflammation and infection of the supraspinous bursa (bursa 
tion is injected and the procedure repeated on the opposite side.
subligamentosa supraspinalis or cucullar bursa) may result in the
[231] [432] This anesthesia is not entirely specific because of possi-
 development of the so-called fistulous withers. [434] A chronic dis-
ble diffusion to the interosseous sacroiliac ligaments or to the
charge of pus at the withers is typical. It is often resistant to treat-
longissimus dorsi muscle as well as to the dorsal branches of the
 ment. [435] In advanced cases it can proceed to a necrosis of sur-
sacral nerves. [432] A possible complication exists in the paresis of
rounding tissues (fascia, supraspinous ligament, cartilaginous caps)
up to a suppurative fusion of the spinous processes. [434] The sur-
articular injection of the iliosacral joint (partly with ultrasono-
 gical treatment comprises the opening up of the bottom of the fis-
graphic guidance) have been described (Fig. 56.3.). [432a, 432b]
tula and a removal of the synovial bursa. [434]
56.4. Cerebrospinal fluid may also be obtained in the standing
56.7. Inflammation of the nuchal bursa (bursa subligamentosa
horse from the subarachnoid space by way of the lumbosacral inter-
 nuchalis cranialis or caudalis) comprises a typical circumscribed
arcuate space. Access is between the palpable spinous process of the
swelling at the back of the neck (talpa). If the synovial bursa is sup-
last lumbar vertebra and the spinous process of the 1st sacral verte-
 puratively infected, a necrosis of the nuchal ligament and develop-
bra, which lies between the two palpable sacral tubers of the pelvis.
ment of a fistula with chronic discharge of pus may result. In this
The needle is advanced perpendicularly through the skin 10-12 cm
 case a surgical procedure in the form of a partial resection of the
deep. [377]
nuchal ligament and removal of the nuchal bursa is indicated. [434]
[435]
 Neck and Thoracic Cavity
K.-D. BUDRAS, R. BERG
58.1. In the operation for prevention of wind-sucking (cribbing) the
sternomandibular muscle is made nonfunctional by different meth-
ods. According to HUSKAMP et al. [436], this is realized by neurec-
tomy of the ventral branch of the accessory nerve. In other methods,
a muscular portion is cut out of the omohyoid, sternohyoid and
sternothyroid muscles. [437]
58.2. The descending pectoral muscle is well suited for intramuscu-
 lar injection. If infection or other incompatible situations should
occur, then developing accumulations of pus can be cut open (and
drained), because this is a most ventral site. [436] [438]
58.3. For venepuncture to obtain blood or for injection, the exter-
nal jugular vein is easily accessible in the cranial third of the neck.
This part is chosen for the reason that the external jugular vein is
subcutaneous here and uncovered or covered only by thin strands
Fig. 56.3. Potential approaches to the iliosacral joint: (1) cranial approach, (2)
of the cutaneus colli muscle and deeply is separated from the com-
craniomedial approach, (3) medial approach, (4) caudal approach. (Photo, Dr.
mon carotid artery by the omohyoid muscle. Paravenous injections
Patan)
(injections beside the vein) should be avoided under all circum-
stances. Deep injections—penetrating the omohyoid muscle—may
 be disastrous. An unintentional injection of certain medicaments
into the common carotid artery can be fatal. Whether or not the
injection needle is correctly found in the external jugular vein or
unintentionally in the common carotid artery is checked by means
 of the color of the blood and the blood pressure. Also unintention-
al injections into the carotid sheath may have severe consequences.
The carotid sheath is a derivative of the deep cervical fascia and sur-
rounds the common carotid artery together with the vagosympa-
thetic trunk and recurrent laryngeal nerve. A medicament injected
here in higher concentration results in damage to the nerves. The
 consequences could be a unilateral paralysis of the recurrent laryn-
geal nerve ("roarer") or a loss of cranial sympathetic nerve function
(HORNER's syndrome). [439]
58.4. Because the esophagus is palpable in the left middle third of
the neck, the correct position of the nasogastric tube can be checked
Fig. 56.5. Desmopathy in the region of the attachment of the funicular part of the
here.
nuchal igament on the external occipital protuberance (arrow), right = caudal, 9
years old warmblood mare. (Courtesy of Klinik fur Orthopadie bei Huf- u. Klauen-
tieren, Veterinanmed. Univ. Wien)
166
 60.1. In the case of a unilateral perforation of the pleural cavity, for
from the right coronary artery. As a species-specific characteristic,
example, in the lateral thoracic wall, the perforate mediastinum
the ox has at the left interventricular border an additional groove,
brings about an extension of pneumothorax to the opposite (ini-
the intermediate groove (sulcus intermedius), which contains the
tially intact) side of the body, which to be sure appears here in a
caudal cardiac vein (u cordis caudalis). In the horse, this groove
diminished degree. [440] [383]
 and vein are lacking.
60.2. In the lung auscultation and percussion field, if pulmonary
 present in the ox. The horse has a right azygos vein, which opens
emphysema is present, there can be observed a distinctly enlarged
into the cranial vena cava. [381] [444] [445] [446] [447] [448]
lung with caudal displacement of its basal border. Starting from a
[449] [450]
bronchitis with accompanying swelling of the respiratory mucous
membrane, the bronchial lumen becomes narrow in an obstructive
62.2. The puncta maxima are those places on the left or right tho-
ventilation disturbance, which brings about an inflation (overex-
racic wall where the cardiac valve sounds are most distinctly audi-
 pansion) of the pulmonary alveoli. The normal retraction in the
ble. [451]
expiratory phase is no longer assured. There develops an enforced
 The mitral valve (bicuspid valve) can be auscultated on the left
expiration with increased use of auxiliary expiratory muscles, espe-
side in the fifth intercostal space, three fingerbreadths caudodorsal
cially the abdominal muscles. [431] [441] [442] [443]
 to the olecranon tuber. For the aortic valve, the site of auscultation
is three fingerbreadths more dorsal through the fourth intercostal
62.1. The equine heart, isolated from the cadaver, can be differen-
space and for the pulmonary valve somewhat in-between in the
tiated from the bovine heart by the following characteristics:
 third or fourth intercostal space.
 According to age and functional condition, the form of the heart
The tricuspid valve is auscultated on the right thoracic wall a
 is rather pointed-conical in bovine and in the horse rather blunt-
handbreadth dorsal to the olecranon tuber in the third or fourth
conical.
intercostal space.
The fat tissue of the coronary grooves is almost white in the ox
 and more abundant and of firm crumbly consistency (a few bovine
62.3. With increasing age, especially on the aortic valve, fibrous
 breeds on the Channel Islands have a yellowish fat tissue similar to
 nodules appear on the free margin of the valve and degenerative
the horse).
fenestrations in the central valve region. However, these scarcely
 In the ox, the auricles, on their free borders, are more strongly
 give rise to functional limitations. [383] [380]
crenated than in the horse.
 The cardiac skeleton of the ox consists of a large and a small car-
62.4. The internal cardiac relations are connected with the action of
 diac bone; in the horse, on the other hand, two cardiac cartilages.
 the heart whose phases take place synchronously on the right and
The coronary arteries of the ox are arranged according to the
left heart. These phases are systole with isometric and ejection phas-
pattern of the left coronary supply type; that is, both interventricu-
es and diastole with relaxation and flling phases.
lar branches originate from the left coronary artery. On the other
Venous blood reaches the right atrium via the cranial and caudal
hand, in the horse a two-sided coronary supply type is present,
venae cavae as well as the right azygos vein and the coronary sinus.
whereby the paraconal interventricular branch originates from the
 Arterial blood flows from the lung via the pulmonary veins into the
left coronary artery and the subsinuosal interventricular branch
left atrium. At the boundary with the ventricles of the heart the
Fig. 58.3. Cross-section of the neck at the level of the border of the upper third
with demonstration of the external jugular vein and the common carotid artery
with the carotid sheath. I. superficial cervical fascia, ll. deep cervical fascia which 
envelops the cervical viscera with septal laminae and, as the carotid sheath,
Fig. 58.1. Cranioventral thoracic region with the descending superficial pectoral
 envelops the common carotid artery (6). 1. trachea; 2. esophagus; 3. funicular part
muscle (1) for intramuscular injection. 2. transverse superficial pectoral muscle, 3.
 of the ligamentum nuchae; 4. lamelar part of the ligamentum nuchae; 5. external 
cleidomastoideus muscle, 4. sternomandibularis muscle, 5. cutaneus colli mus-
 jugular vein in the jugular furow; 6. common carotid artery with accompanying 
cle, 6. omotransversarius muscle, 7. clavicular part of the deltoideus muscle (clei-
dobrachialis m.), 7'. Scapular part of the deltoideus muscle, 8. brachialis muscle,
 a, epaxial trunk and limb musculature; b, hypaxial trunk and limb musculature; c.
 9. lateral head of the triceps brachi muscle, 9'. long head of the triceps brachi
 omohyoideus muscle; d. sternomandibularis muscle. (Courtesy of Institut f. Vete-
muscle.
rinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
167
mitral valve (= bicuspid valve) is located left and the tricuspid valve
Abdominal Wall and Abdominal Cavity
 on the right side. During diastole in the relaxation phase, all cardiac
K.-D. BUDRAs, E. HENSCHEL
valves are closed with low or absent ventricular pressure. In the fill-
ing phase of diastole the atrioventricular valves are properly pushed
 open like flood gates by the surging blood stream. The flling of the
64.1. The linea alba is of substantial importance for abdominal sur-
cardiac ventricles is realized by three factors:
 gery. The preumbilical part of the linea alba is frequently chosen for
 By lowering and raising of the valve plane (at the atrioventricu-
access to the abdominal cavity, e.g., in ileus surgery. Here the linea
 are s d, fd a   s e  r
alba is 1-2 cm wide and has characteristic longitudinal fibers. On
ried out and by that the blood is sucked into the chambers. A low
its inner surface, there is a distinct ridge, which the surgeon cuts
resting pressure in the feeding veins contributes to the filling of the
 along to remain on the midline. With closure of the abdominal cav-
 ity, the connective tissue cord thus cut in half offers a firm and
ventricle.
 Contraction of the atria by the relatively weak atrial musculature
strong fixation for suture material. [4.52] [453] [454]
 is to be sure a slight factor, but is worth mentioning.
 e se sg  a n se  r 
 In the following systole, with increasing ventricular pressure the
chordae tendineae prevent a reflection of the cuspid valves back
 hernia. Acquired umbilical hernias may occur at any age and are of
into the atrial region. Rather, with backflow of the blood, there is a
a traumatic nature. The hernial porta is the (not closed) hernial
ring. The internal hernial sac consists of parietal peritoneum and
tension on these tendineae and an apposition of these valvular bor-
ders at the level of the valve plane and by this closure of the valves
 transversalis fascia. The evaginated external cutis is designated as
 according to the functional principle of a back-flap valve. The clo-
the external hernial sac. The content of the hernia consists mostly
sure of the two atrioventricular valves in combination with the iso-
 of loops of small intestine and portions of the greater omentum.
metric vibrations of the ventricular musculature causes the first
[45.5]
(longer) heart sound. This occurs during the isometric phase of ven-
 64.3. For the ventral (abdominal) hernia a pre-formed hernial por-
tricular contraction (systole). In the ejection phase, the second
ta does not exist. It can occur in the abdominal and flank region.
phase of systole, with increasing ventricular pressure, the blood is
 Often it is of traumatic origin. Scar hernias may develop several
driven into the efferent great vessels (left: aorta; right: pulmonary
weeks after an operation. In mares in late pregnancy, a hypogastric
trunk). At the end of the ejection phase, the three semilunar valves
at the origin of the great arteries are closed. This is realized at the
 hernia may be caused by rupture of the insertion of the rectus abdo-
beginning of diastole and the lowering of the blood pressure in the
minis muscle. [452] [378]
ventricles below that of the great arteries. The three pocket-like
valvulae of the semilunar valves are closed by their expansion due
64.4. In the case of costal laparatomy the last two ribs are resected
to the backward-flowing blood and the apposition of their borders.
with preservation of the periosteum. Access is chosen for the left
Closure of the semilunar valves at the origin of the great arteries
side for a splenectomy and on the right side for operations on the
 generates the second (short) heart sound (semilunar valve sound).
 base of the cecum, ileum, and duodenum. The suture material can
 Heart murmurs are abnormal and may be caused by persistence
 be nicely fixed within the periosteum, which is made stillstronger 
of the ductus arteriosus of BOTALLI (current noises) or by nar-
by periosteal ossification. [408] [453]
rowing (stenosis) or insufficient closure (insufficiency) of the valves
(valvular murmurs). A systolic murmur occurs between the first and
64.5. The external abdominal oblique muscle hypertrophies in
second heart sounds. A diastolic murmur occurs between the sec-
horses with emphysema. Because of the expiratory dyspnea, these
ond and first heart sounds. With attention to the puncta maxima,
 animals use more often the abdominal press for expiration.
.This
valvular murmurs can be assigned to specific heart valves.
causes a hypertrophy of the muscle, which is especially distinctly
 marked at the transition into its aponeurosis. This transition forms
the so-called "heave line", which runs about a handsbreadth cau-
doparallel to the costal arch. [456]
66.1. Knowledge of the position of the abdominal organs in rela-
tion to the abdominal wall are a precondition for clinical examina-
tion; e-g., for differential diagnosis of colic.
Auscultation (listening to the sounds of the organs) enables the
qualitative  and quantitative  identification  of  gastrointestinal
sounds, which are specific for certain parts of the intestine. On the
left dorsal abdominal wall, in the paralumbar fossa, sounds of the
small intestine are audible. On the left ventral abdominal wall spe-
 cific intestinal noises of the left dorsal and ventral ascending colon
can be evaluated. In the paralumbar fossa of the right dorsal
abdominal wall, between the costal arch and the tuber coxae, the
diagnostically important sound of the discharge of the small intes-
tinal content into the cecum can be realized. Since the mouth of the
ileum is located on the medial side of the cecum, not far from the
median plane, the faint noise of discharge of the small intestine can
 perhaps also be discerned in the left paralumbar fossa. Its absence
is indicative of an obstruction in the small intestine.
The cecum is accessible in the right paralumbar fossa for
endoscopy (typhloscopy) as well as a puncture with the trocar for
the relief of pressure after gas formation. A cecal fistula is imple-
mented farther cranially in the region of the right costal arch to
obtain juice of the cecum, colon and ileum. For this, the last two
ribs are resected. [378]
68.1. The round ligament of the liver (obliterated umbilical vein) is
especially distinctly developed in horses in the ventral pre-umbilical
abdominal wall. It is firmly connected to the peritoneum and, in the
case of laparotomy on the linea alba, serves for this reason as the
location for opening the peritoneal cavity. After blunt separation of
the subserous fat, the ligament, which is about 1 cm wide, is sharply
split on the midline and this gap then bluntly enlarged as desired.
 Fig. 62.4. Heart's action, represented on the opened heart with filing phase in
 The firmness of the ligament later secures the peritoneal suture and
diastole (above) and ejection phase in systole (below). (Courtesy of Institut f. Vete-
rinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
168
68.2. Gastrointestinal colic. Colic comprises gastrointestinal illness 
 Besides gastric relief for the prevention of a dreaded rupture of
(especially pain) and was derived originally from colon, the histor-
the stomach, the probe of the stomach has also a considerable diag-
ically presumed site of abdominal pain. Besides acute colic, there
nostic value and is principally implemented, if no compelling rea-
are also chronically recidivist colic forms, which are caused, for
example, by chronic blood circulatory disturbances or disturbances
qualitatively and quantitatively (pH value, amount, smell, color).
of innervation.
From a typically altered stomach content obtained by reflux, intes-
 For the necessary determination of the manifold causes of colic,
tinal obstruction can be concluded. [457] [458]
 a fine differential diagnostic is required.
Internal hernias are considered frequent causes of colic. The con-
 Rectal palpation, which is not free of risk for the veterinarian and
 genital (preformed) or acquired hernial porta causes the hernia-con-
the patient (danger of rectal perforation, see 70.8.), should be
-s on r nd e dop oi i (a) 
repeated several times if colic is suspected. This is done to follow the
ileus (intestinal obstruction) with the danger of a necrosis of the
course of the disease, if not contraindicated for compelling reasons 
 intestinal wall.
(e.g., if the horses are small or foals). Depending on the size of the
The hernia of the lienorenal space (bernia spatii lienorenalis)
 investigator and of the patient, rectal exploration may encompass
    sd   r  a  s
 almost the entire peritoneal cavity.
 into the lienorenal space. This lienorenal space (end of the pointer 
 The teniae of the large intestine, a concentration of the external
in Fig. 68.2.1.) lies between the dorsal abdominal wall and the
longitudinally-running muscle cells of the tunica muscularis, with
lienorenal ligament (blue band), which in elongation of the greater
 their typical number in certain parts of the intestine are important
omentum connects the dorsal end of the laterally placed spleen with
aids to orientation in identification of definite parts of the gut with
 a s  o asd si i  i d a a
possible variations from the norm. Their extraordinary tension
 parts of the ascending colon normally lie distinctly ventral to the
gives an indication of pathological alterations (e.g, flatulence).
 apex of the spleen. Since they are freely moveable and connected
 Rectal examination is usually very informative in regard to patho-
only with one another they can pass lateral to the spleen and raise
logical changes in position, content, size, movability, wall-thickness
themselves above its dorsal end into the lienorenal space (red-dot-
and consistency of the part of the gut. It is also informative for the
ted line). The longitudinally directed left ascending colon crosses
diagnosis of internal hernias. For this reason, in male animals, the
 then over the transverse lienorenal ligament and hangs over it as if
vaginal ring is examined for the presence of an inguinal hernia. For
upon a clothes-line.
details of the rectal palpation see page 178.
 In the case of hernia of the omental foramen (hernia foraminis
The entire intestinal tract, including the 
stomach, from an
applied-anatomical view has several congenital or acquired sites of
Fig. 68.2.2.) functions as a congenital hernial porta. Just like the
predilection, which are described in the following with respect to
examining hand in a necropsy, parts of the small intestine reach
the predisposition to colic.
from the right side, dorsal to the descending duodenum, between
 The stomach with its numerous structural predispositions for
the right kidney and liver via the epiploic foramen into the omental
colic diseases is not accessible by rectal palpation, at least in large
 bursa. This hernia leads with certainty to a strangulation and incar-
equine breeds. The equine stomach with its typical characteristics
 ceration of these intestinal parts, which can only be cured by a sur-
 gical operation. More frequently there are displacements (with
ents special problems for the veterinarian. Thus the oblique (acute-
 incarceration) of the intestine from left to right, and in doing so the
angled) implantation of the esophagus in the gastric wall and the
 greater omentum becomes ruptured by the intestinal loops or evagi-
strong cardiac sphincter prevent release of fluid, ingesta or gas by
nated and is pushed together with the intestine through the epiploic
way of the esophagus. A gastric overload or overstress develops
foramen. With atrophy of the right liver lobe, the epiploic foramen
os a a  asd  e   a
becomes enlarged with increasing age, and predisposition to the
 s ano a n e  ie ai es  a
 type of colic described here is increased.
signs of colic, a failure to relieve pressure is a professional blunder.
 Acquired or present (preformed) gaps in the different mesenter-
With introduction of the nasogastric tube, the hindrance of the car-
ies are also considered as hernial portas for internal hernias (mesen-
diac sphincter muscle is overcome by insufflation of air.
teric hernias).
Fig. 68.2.2. Epiploic foramen (A), which can be seen by lifing the ight lobe of the
Fig. 68.2.1. Lienorenal ligament (nephrosplenic ligament). In the case of reno-
liver dorsally. It can function as a hernial porta for an internal hernia with incarcer-
 splenic entrapment (hernia of the lienorenal space), the left parts of the large colon
 ation of loops of small intestine. 1. right lobe of the liver, 2. descending duodenum.
are displaced into the lienorenal space (red arrow), which is bounded dorsally by 
3. right kidney 4. base of the cecum, 5. body of the cecum, 6. collum coli rneck
the abdominal wall and ventrally by the lienorenal ligament (blue band between 
 of the right ventral colon leading from the cecocolic ostium), 7. right ventral colon,
the laterally placed spleen and the medialy placed lef kidney).
8. right dorsal colon.
169
 In the case of diaphragmatic hernias portions of the small intes-
hyperplasia of the smooth muscle of the intestine with a perma-
 d   ra d an   
 nently increased motility of the gut (e.g., increased peristalsis in
diac bursa (SUSSDORF's space) up to the base of the heart or by a
front of a narrowing obstacle).
traumatically acquired hernial porta into the pleural cavity. In these
 In the presence of extraordinarily increased gut motility, espe-
cases severe dyspnea arises as the result of a pneumothorax. Also
cially long mesenteries (mesojejunum, mesocolon descendens) can
external hernias such as inguinal hernias (see 74.3.), umbilical her-
 allow twisting of the mesentery (see jejunum, 70.4.). Also intestinal
nias (see 64.2.), hernias of the abdominal wall (ventral hernia, see
invaginations occur, especially at transitions from a freely movable
64.3.) and hernia of the linea alba (see 76.2.) can trigger colic signs
intestinal part into one, which is more constant in position (e.g..
 and are to be considered in the differential diagnosis.
 intussusception of the end of the jejunum into the ileum). A long
 Parts of the intestine with a narrow lumen and especially transi-
 mesentery is favorable for veterinary activities in the diagnosis and
tional regions with a wide to narrow lumen are a danger for obsti-
surgery of colic. The long mesocolon descendens allows a far reach-
pation by heavy, relatively dry intestinal content, which finally can
 ing rectal exploration (rectal palpation). At surgical operations, the
result in an ileus (obstipation of the bowel). Additional dangers can
affected part of the gut can be drawn out of the abdominal cavity.
arise by obturation in the presence of foreign bodies or enteroliths
 On the other hand, portions of the gut fused to the abdominal wall
(intestinal calculi), predominantly made up of ammonium-magne-
without mesentery formation are neither endangered by colic trig-
sium-phosphate. Obturation can also come about by the presence
 gering displacements (ectopias) nor can they be completely dis-
of phytobezoars (undigested compacted vegetable fibers), the devel-
 placed from the abdominal cavity.
opment of which is enhanced by dietary failures (e.g., after the reg-
 Unattached wide-lumen portions of the gut like the left parts of
ular feeding of bran to mill and bakery horses). Such bottlenecks are
the large colon and the body of the cecum with its apex can exhib-
found at the pylorus, the diverticulum caeci vitelli (MECKELs
it blockage as a result of torsion (twisting on the long axis),
diverticulum) of the jejunum, the ileal ostium, the cecocolic ostium,
() ssusp  ara rao (l ad aas aiddns poq au
at the pelvic flexure of the ascending colon and the transverse colon
from the cranial mesenteric root to the pelvic flexure by the right
after the transition from the very wide lumen of the right dorsal
 colic artery and the colic branch) is interrupted by torsions. This is
colon (ampulla coli). Acquired narrowing of the lumen of the intes-
 initially the case for the venous drainage and, after further increase
tine (stenosis) develops, among other things, by edematization of
 of the tonus of the tissues, also for the arterial supply. The anasto-
the intestinal mucosa after lacerations (e.g-, at parturition or
 moses that run transversely between the origins of the colic branch
improper rectal examinations) or disturbances in vascularization,
 and the right colic artery are a protective mechanism, which is lack-
including the formation of hematomas or by hypertrophy as well as
ing distally at the pelvic flexure of the ascending colon. At the pelvic
flexure, the named vessels (right colic artery and colic branch) pass
over into one another in end-to-end anastomosis. Thrombus for-
mations, which can be caused by parasitic larvae (strongylus vul-
garis), result in an edematization of the intestinal wall. This brings
about a narrowing of the gut lumen (stenosis) and finally to hem-
 orrhagic necrosis (incarceration).
 The vegetative (autonomic) nervous system regulates the motili-
ty of the intestine. Morphologically recognizable alterations can
result in disturbances in motility. A failure to develop the neural
myenteric plexus and submucosal plexus in the intestinal wallis one
 of these. Aneurysms (dilatations of blood vessels), which are caused
by migrating larvae of strongylids, occur particularly often and dis-
  s e s i an o uo an e i
 in an irritation of the adjacent solar (celiacomesenteric) plexus and
by this in motility disorders of the intestines. Autonomic irritations
that are not associated with morphological change are also held
responsible for colic diseases (e.g., changing weather, hypothermia
or overexertion). We are dealing here with the comparatively mild
course of the very frequent spastic colic with increase of tonus of the
 intestinal musculature, increased peristalsis and intestinal cramps,
which ease after some hours or end immediately after the applica-
[     s   ss yo 
[463] [464] [465] [466]
Gas colics (meteorism) arise with excessive gas formation, which
results in an inflation of the gastrointestinal tract. Treatment is
accomplished by probe with the nasogastric tube or trocarization,
e.g., of the cecum.
 In the last phase of pregnancy, position-changes within the
abdominal and pelvic cavities brought about by the growing fetus
or following parturition may cause a colic.
 Iatrogeniccaused or forced by the veterinarian—-colic signs can
 be brought about, for example, by improper rectal palpation (ede-
ma, hematoma).
 Fig. 68.3. Unfolding of the ascending colon (large colon) and displacement of the 
pelvic flexure to the left. Owing to the cecocolic fold, the body of the cecum with
70.1. Structural predispositions to colic in individual portions of
the apex is also displaced caudally and to the left. The entire jejunum was cut
the intestine. In regard to fatal stomach ruptures, a duodenal
through at the end of the ascending duodenum and at the transition to the ileum 
 obstruction (ileus) is much more dangerous the nearer it lies to the
and removed. The middle region of the descending colon was taken away.
pylorus.
Changes in the width of the lumen are demonstrated at the transition from the
stomach to the duodenum, at the opening of the ileum between the left side of the
70.2. The descending duodenum has a topographical relationship
base of the cecum and the body of the cecum, at the pelvic flexure between the
 to the base of the cecum. This has importance for the surgical inter-
wide left ventral colon and the narrow left dorsal colon, and at the stomach-like
vention of gastro-duodeno-jejunitis, which recently is appearing
dilatation of the right dorsal colon into the transverse colon. A very long band-ike
more frequently. This disease, the etiology of which is still uncer-
tain, results in a hindrance of passage in the entire region of the
 exhibits a distinct increase in width at the pelvic fexure. At different locations of
small intestine. Since, however, in the horse, the stomach and small
the ascending colon, a torsion around the longitudinal axis can occur and from
this results a torsion of the left ascending colon and also the sternal and diaphrag-
 intestine receive 70 liters of fluid daily (saliva, secretions) and these
 matic flexures or a total torsion of the entire ascending colon. The liver lies cranial 
to the stomach and the spleen to the left of the stomach. (Courtesy of Institut f.
of passage results inevitably in a reflux and thus an overload of the
Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
 stomach. Only the repeated introduction of the nasogastric tube can
170
prevent a rupture of the stomach. On the other hand a continuous
70.5.2. Typhlocolitis (colitis X) is an especially severe inflammation
provision of fluid is necessary to protect the animal from exsiccosis.
of the cecum and ascending colon, which is accompanied by colic
On the basis of the topographical relationship of descending duo-
signs (see textbooks of equine diseases).
denum and base of the cecum, HUSKAMP [467] performs a tem-
 porary duodenocecostomia in case of such a disease, thus establish-
70.5.3.Kinking of the relatively freely moveable body of the cecum
ing a connection between the descending duodenum and the head
with caudal displacement of the apex of the cecum occurs. This
(base) of the cecum. By this means, the fluid (and the ingesta) no
takes place at the junction of the body with the base of the cecum,
longer run back to the stomach, but over this connection into the
which is firmly fused to the dorsal abdominal wall.
 cecum and by this into the fluid-resorbing large intestine. The spe-
 cial technique of the operation, which shall not be described here,
70.5.4.Obstipation of the cecum starts at the base of the cecum and
leads to a spontaneous closure of the duodenocecostomia after the
can involve the overhanging free part of the base, by which finally,
disease has faded away, so that the physiological flow of the inges-
in an advanced stage of filling, the cecocolic ostium is closed. With
ta is restored.
this, the obstipation extends more and more onto the body of the
cecum and finally to the tip of the cecum, in which case the danger
70.3. The jejunum exhibits an especially long mesentery and can
of cecal rupture exists (sites of perforation: Fig. 70.5.4.).
because of its variable position be found in all possible regions of
the abdominal cavity. The long mesentery of the jejunum facilitates
70.6. The ascending colon is relatively and absolutely the heaviest
torsions of the mesentery (volvulus with strangulation ileus). At the
part of the intestine of the horse, which owing to its insufficient fix-
beginning and at the end of the jejunum the mesentery is shorter
ation is subjected to pathological displacements. Only the initial
and for that reason not involved in the pathological torsions of the
 part of the right ventral colon is stabilized by the base of the cecum
mesentery. [468]
and the right dorsal colon (ampulla coli) by the dorsal fixation of
the transverse colon.
 70.4. Under certain pathological conditions with increased peristal-
Thus, only the beginning and the end of the double horseshoe-
sis, the ileum and the terminal (distal) part of the jejunum of the
formation of the ascending colon are indirectly or directly fixed.
horse tend to intussuscept into the cecum. In this case, the mesen-
The portions of the ascending colon, which lie in-between are the
tery of this portion of the intestine is forced to become involved.
 more moveable the farther they are removed from the root of the
The vascular disturbance produced by these results after a short 
 mesentery and the longer the ligament-like mesentery between the
time in a life-threatening necrosis of the invaginated intestinal part.
 s s a s   y s o
This kind of ileus is only to be eliminated by surgical intervention.
the greatest mobility lie at the pelvic flexure of the two left layers of
HUSKAMP [469] connects the part of the intestine that is still intact
the colon. A pathological torsion around the longitudinal axis can
with the right ventral colon as a jejunocolostomy and, after com-
 involve both left parts of the ascending colon and also the sternal
plete displacement into the cecum, leaves the necrotic invaginated
 and diaphragmatic flexures (torsio coli ascendentis partialis) or the
 part to self-digestion. This disease is predominantly observed in
entire ascending colon (torsio coli ascendentis totalis). In the latter
smaller horse-breeds.
case, the torsion is found between the fixation of the right ventral
and right dorsal colon and the beginning of mobility at the begin-
 70.5.1.In cases of digestive disturbances accompanied by gas pro-
 ning and end of the double horseshoe-formation. [471] [472]
duction, the cecum can exhibit a tympany of the base of the cecum.
In this case, the free, overhanging part of the base of the cecum,
70.7. The descending colon, which clinicians also misleadingly call
the small colon, is subject to obstipation, torsion, and volvulus. If
By that the cecocolic ostium is displaced and spontaneous trans-
       Si  
portation of the gas prevented. Here, only puncture with a wide-
be successful here. [454] [473]
lumen needle (trocar) can provide pressure-relief. [469] [470]
70.8. The rectum displays craniodorsally a predilection site for
spontaneous ruptures, perforations and the formation of diverti-
culi. The anatomical basis for this rests on the special arrangement
of the longitudinal muscle cell layers of the tunica muscularis. The
 20-30 cm long rectum shows at its narrow place of transition from
the descending colon a new formation of the longitudinal muscular
layer of the tunica muscularis. The longitudinal muscle cell bundles,
which initially run predominantly in two tenias, distribute at the
beginning of the rectal ampulla around the entire circumference of
the intestinal tube. Strong muscle cell bundles, which are directed
dorsolateral to the caudal vertebral column, are formed immediate-
ly before the greatest circumference of the rectal ampulla, about at
the level of the last sacral vertebra. They continue caudally as the
Fig. 70.5.4. Perforation-sites of the cecum in order of frequency of their occur-
cecum, 3. dorsal base of the cecum, 4. dorsomedial base of the cecum, 5. disto-
Fig. 70.8. Rectum with dorsal muscle-weak “deltoid" (A) and oval places of ves-
lateral body of the cecum, 6. ventromedial base of the cecum. a. base of the
sel penetration (figure below) in part intraperitoneal (B, clothed by peritoneum
cecum, b. body of the cecum, c. apex of the cecum, d. ileum, e. collum (neck) of
 except at the attachment of the mesorectum), partly extraperitoneal (C, caudal to
the colon, f. right ventral colon, g. cecocolic fold, h. medial cecal a., v., and lymph 
 the sacrorectal pouch) in position. 1. cranial rectal a., 2. rectococcygeus muscle, 
nodes, i. lateral cecal a., v., and lymph nodes.
 3. retractor penis muscle, 4. external anal sphincter muscle.
171
 paired rectococcygeus muscles, which attach at the 4th caudal ver-
72.6. The broad sacrotuberous ligament, under the influence of
tebra. Craniodorsally at the beginning of the rectum, where the dor-
hormones, is increasingly saturated with fluid shortly before partu-
e jo eare pip i-as e 'is, i un (as pes
rition and becomes then softer. Thus, besides loosening the joint
length up to 20 cm is found in the area of reflection of the peri-
capsule of the iliosacral joint, the birth canal enlarges. [476] [477]
toneum from the sacrorectal pouch to the dorsal intestinal wall (see
[478]
page 85, above g). The caudal triangular part of it lies extraperi-
toneally and the cranial trigonal beginning still intraperitoneally at
72.7. The femoral ring forms the hernial entrance of the rarely
the attachment of the mesorectum. Here the tunica muscularis is,
occurring femoral hernia, in which loops of small intestine are dis-
with individual variation, about 1.5 mm, only half so thick as the
placed into the femoral triangle. In this case, there is rupture of the
rest of the rectal wall. In cases of extremely weak development with
less than 1 mm thickness, spontaneous ruptures may, in rare cases,
ring. The diagnosis is confirmed by palpation of the femoral trian-
occur in the region of the muscle-thin deltoid and without any rec-
gle and by rectal examination. Treatment: reposition of the hernial
ognizable reason (increase of pressure after a strong pressing effort,
content. Etiology: heavy pulling by the draft-horse. [479]
at heavy work or in laying the animal down for surgical operation).
a aq pasnn aq Ae suoad u pssansun, u o
-opau pin snoas Aq pay anb aq Aeu s eua au 't't
stallion. With rectal examination, even with professional skill and
cele with resulting testicular atrophy) or by blood (hematocele). A
without fault of the examining veterinarian a perforation of the
hydrocele may also occur after castration, and in this case a part of
muscle-thin deltoid of the rectum can result. In the case in which the
 the greater omentum is usually prolapsed through the vaginal ring
perforation is outside of this predilection site, say in the lateral or
 into the vaginal tunic. Thus, an open communication remains in the
ventral region with well-developed musculature, the perforation is
vaginal ring between the vaginal tunic and the peritoneal cavity. For
usually caused by an improper rectal palpation (professional blun-
 the stallion the occurrence of the hydrocele is described in associa-
der--iatrotrogenic cause). [474]
 tion with seasonal effects, age, restrictive movement and exchange
 processes between the lumina of the vaginal tunic and the peritoneal
cavity. Potency of mating and fertilization are usually not affected.
[480] [378]
Pelvis, Urogenital Organ
74.2. With different methods of castration, the vaginal tunic can
CHRISTINE AURICH, JORG AURICH, HARALD SIEME, K.-D. BUDRAS
either be opened (castration with opening of the vaginal tunic and
section of the ligated spermatic cord) or castration without opening
72.1. Fractures of the pelvic bones are of traumatic origin and
 the vaginal tunic is performed, in which case the entire vaginal tunic
involve predominantly the iliac shaft (body of the ilium), wing of
with its content is severed after ligature. In case of sterilization of
the ilium, tuber coxae, acetabulum, and the pelvic symphysis. For
the stallion (preservation of libido and external attributes), the vagi-
diagnosis, rectal palpation, among others, is indicated. [378] [475]
 nal tunic is opened and the dissected tail of the epididymis severed
after double ligation, one on the body of the epididymis and the
72.2. The sulcus for the accessory ligament of the femur (sulcus lig.
 other at the beginning of the spermatic cord. [481] [482] [483]
aCc. ossis femoris) is a species-specific characteristic of the equine
pelvis. [389]
72.3. The neurovascular structures that run in the obturator groove
(sulcus obturatorius), especially the obturator nerve, can be dam-
aged by bruising in the course of a difficult parturition (dystocia).
The resulting paralysis of the adductor muscles impairs the mother
in standing. [378]
72.4. Pelvic diameter (Fig. 72.4.).
72.5. Comparison of sex-specific differences of the pelvis (Fig.
72.5.). [383]
(cranial view)
 Fig. 72.4. Pelvic diameters with lines drawn between marked bony points at the
level of the terminal line. A. dorsal transverse diameter between the two sacral
wings, B. middle transverse diameter between the psoas minor tubercles, C. ven-
tral transverse diameter between the two iliopubic eminences, D. vertical diame-
ter between the cranial end of the pelvic symphysis and the vertebral column, E.
conjugate diameter between the cranial end of the pelvic symphysis and the
promontory of the sacrum.
Fig. 72.5. Mare (above) and stallion (below). Caudal view
172
74.3. In the clinic, inguinal hernia is subdivided according to the
be an occasionally occurring (insignificant) vaginal ring and the
extension of the hernial content into an inguinal hernia (restricted
 indication of a vaginal process. [484]
to the region of the inguinal canal) or a scrotal hernia. Usually an
indirect inguinal hernia is present, since the hernial content (loops
76.1. The prepubic tendon strengthens the mechanical bond at the
 ro r a j sd re i s jo
d  j a p a  s d
through the vaginal ring (hernial entrance) into the vaginal canal
pubic tendon can lead to a separation of the pelvic halves at the
and cavity of the vaginal tunic (hernial sac) and like the latter pass-
pelvic symphysis. The prepubic tendon is rectally palpable and its
es indirectly (on the long way) through the abdominal wall by way
lateral end marks the medial angle of both inguinal rings (internal
(deep) and external (superficial) inguinal ring). [485] [486]
this case, tears appear beside the vaginal ring and the hernial con-
tent passes through the abdominal wall beside the vaginal tunic (on
76.2. Rarely, a hernia of the linea alba occurs cranial to the umbili-
the short way). In the colt foal, indirect inguinal hernia is favored
cus. [378]
by a delayed testicular descent. In adult animals the hernial content
is usually incarcerated and causes intensive colic signs. The diagno-
76.3. The development of the udder prior to birth (mammogenesis)
sis is confirmed by rectal examination. In inguinal hernia the two
is realized under the influence of the estrogens and gestagens that
arms of an intestinal loop lie in the vaginal ring and the vaginal
 are produced within the placenta. The onset of lactation is linked to
tunic. The part that enters the vaginal ring is flled by gas and the
an increased secretion of prolactin from the anterior lobe of the
leaving part appears empty. About 6-10 hours after incarceration
hypophysis. The physiological daily production of milk in large
necrosis of the gut starts.
horses is between 15 and 20 liters. The clinically relevant diseases
 Therapeutic reposition of the hernial content is usually combined
of the udder are disorders of milk production, inflammatory
with a unilateral castration on the diseased side of the body.
changes, neoplasias and mammary edema of a higher degree. In the
 In the mare an inguinal hernia seldom occurs. Predisposing might 
horse, diseases of the udder can appear in each stage of reproduc-
tion. In 50% of the cases of mastitis, only one half of the udder (or
only one of the two mammary complexes of the half of the udder)
 is affected. The proven infectious microorganisms in equine masti-
tis are environmental germs that are common to the environment of
the animal. This lets appear probable a galactogenic infection in
many cases. Inflammation of the udder usually takes its course as a
catarrhal mastitis with preservation of the milk character, occasion-
ally also as a phlegmonous mastitis. The swelling, which starts from
the udder, extends to the premammary region; a swelling of the
pelvic limbs is also partly present. Blood and lymph vessels in the
premammary region as well as between the thighs may be congest-
ed and enlarged. In its further course, the development of abscesses
and connective tissue induration of the udder may occur Botry-
omycosis, which occurs nowadays only rarely, is a granulomatous
inflammation caused by staphylococcus aureus. The granulomas,
which develop over several months, result in a considerable increase
in size of the udder. A high degree of udder edema in the mare is not
rarely a problem immediately post partum. Owing to the enlarge-
ment of udder and teats and the substantial tension of the mamma-
ry skin, the udder is painful. Especially mares giving birth for the
first time then reject more or less violently the foal when it tries to
suck.
 Fig. 76.3.1. Between the connective tissue boundaries of the lobules, the hemi-
spherical udder of the young mare, reveals a yellowish-pink parenchyma. Usually
78.1. An acute renal failure occurs as a consequence of colic dis-
two glands are present for each half of the udder They can be distinguished by
 eases and is caused by a destruction in the nephron, chiefly in the
filling with artificially colored substances. At the base of the teat, the lactiferous
 proximal tubule. Hemodynamic causes, predominantly a drop-off
sinus is subdivided into an upper glandular, cistern and a lower, papillary, cistern,
in blood pressure in combination with hypovolemia and endotox-
which passes over into the narrow papillary duct ("streak canal"). (Courtesy of
 ins leads to a “shock kidney." In colic, because of the water loss due
Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin) 
 to extreme sweating and/or diarrhea, there is a reduction of the cir-
-xody) uaaxo jo Aiddns paonpau aui pooq jo sunoue sunen
emia), which accompanies this, destroys predominantly the proxi-
mal tubule, which in contrast to other sections of the tubule is
unable to generate anaerobic energy. Shortage of energy and
Fig. 76.3.2. The vessels extend in the gland parenchyma predominantly superfi-
7,5μm
24μm
cially (veins and lymph vessels) or deeply (arteries). Venous drainage is for the
most part caudal in its course of direction and the lymph vessels (drawn dark
brown) are directed approximately perpendicularly to the lymph nodes of the
Fig. 78.1. Scanning electron micrograph of the kidney. Proximal tubule from the
udder (superficial inguinal lymph nodes or mammary lymph nodes). For the
 nephron of a horse with colic with acute renal failure. Left: longitudinally sectioned 
nomenclature of the blood vessels, see p. 80. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-
tubule. The microvilli fuse to drop-shaped swellings with an apically open crater.
Anatomie, Berlin)
 Right: lumen-plugging cylinder from the cell detritus.
173
changes in calcium metabolism are considered as causes for the
 82.1. At the beginning of pregnancy, the ovary demonstrates folli-
breakdown of the cytoskeleton and especially the "terminal web",
 cle maturation and ovulation. Follicle formation and maturation
which with its filaments extends into the microvilli of the brush-
can be monitored by rectal palpation and ultrasound. A corpus
border epithelial cells of the proximal tubule. The destruction of the
luteum, however, is palpable only in the first 4 days following ovu-
"terminal web" causes the fusion of the microvilli to drop-like cyto-
lation. The size of the ovary is variable and depends on the phase of
plasmic projections into the lumen of the tubule (Fig. 78.1, left).
the estrous cycle. A few days after ovulation, the ovary is relatively
The rupture of these drop-like projections results in a massive
release of enzymes (gamma glutamyl transferase, yGT), which are
luteum-phase numerous follicles with a diameter of about 0.5-1 cm
measured in their proportion to creatinine in the urine for diagnos-
 are found. Under the influence of FSH (follicle stimulating hor-
tic purposes. The destruction of the "terminal web" accompanies
 mone) these continue to grow up to a size of 2 cm diameter With
the breakaway of cells from the epithelial cell association of the
the beginning of heat, a dominant follicle is selected from the folli-
proximal tubule. The cell detritus that arises forms into cylinders
 cles of a follicle wave. This follicle grows to pre-ovulatory size of at
that obstruct the lumen (Fig. 78.1, right). This chiefly leads to
least 4 cm, in exceptional cases, however, even to one of 6-7 cm in
mechanical closure of the following distal tubule and by this to
diameter; whereas, the other follicles involute. The fresh corpus
functional loss of the entire nephron. The elevated yGT-creatinine
luteum, which develops from follicular cells following ovulation,
content correlates with the degree of dehydration (reduction of
 has a diameter of 3-4 cm. The size of the follicle determines that it
body fluid) in colicky horses with renal disease. For that reason, it
extends beyond the region of the ovulation fossa. That is also valid
is considered a sensitive indicator for destruction of the epithelium
for the fresh corpus luteum, which reduces in size with increasing
of the proximal tubule. [525]
maturation and "retracts" from the ovulation fossa.
During pregnancy, besides the corpus luteum graviditatis, numer-
78.2. The mucous glands of the renal pelvis and the initial part of
 ous accessory corpora lutea form in the ovary under the influence of
the ureter, by their secretion, lend to the urine a mucous, perhaps
ECG (equine chorionic gonadotropin, formerly PMSG: pregnant 
even a sticky consistency. The normally sulphur-yellow and cloudy
mare serum gonadotropin). This takes place between the 37th and
appearing urine can assume rather a brown color if there is a high
120th day of pregnancy by folicle maturation and ovulation. After
bilirubin and phenol content and even a black-brown color if there
is a myoglobinuria. [487]
by the placenta. The ovaries are to a large extent atrophic. Already
immediately after parturition they resume again their functions.
78.3. The urethra of the mare is so short, of wide lumen and
stretchable that, on the one hand, prolapse of the urinary bladder
 The gonads (ovaries as well as the testicles) of the fetus undergo
into the vaginal vestibule is possible; and, on the other hand,
 a remarkable growth during pregnancy. About day 60 of pregnan-
removal of urinary calculi by the veterinarian is possible. In male
cy, when (owing to the formation of accessory corpora lutea under
animals for the removal of urinary calculi from the urinary bladder
the influence of ECG) the ovaries of the mare reach their maximum
and urethra, the long and narrow-lumened ischiadic portion of the
size, the fetal gonads weigh less than 1 gm. However, between day
100 and 200, there is a strong growth of the fetal gonad. With a
 anesthesia or a local block of the pudendal nerve is performed.
weight of about 70 gram their size exceeds in the 7th-gth month of
 pregnancy the size of the maternal ovaries, which at this time are
 80.1. The abdominal aorta and/or the external iliac artery of one or
without function. The increase in girth of the fetal gonads is
both sides of the body can be more or less completely closed by
 brought about by a massive proliferation and hypertrophy of the
thrombi. The disease starts from endothelial damage, which can be
 medullary interstitial cells. The cortex on the contrary stays behind
caused by parasitic larvae of strongylus vulgaris. The consequences
in its growth, so that the medulla is only partially covered by the
 of thrombus formation are disturbances in blood flow in the con-
cortex. After day 250 of pregnancy, the size of the fetal gonads
cerned region of supply and lameness, especially after extended
 decreases again so that at the time of birth they have a weight of
activity. In the case of unilateral disease the more poorly supplied
10-20 gram. The interstitial cells of the fetal gonads, which are
diseased limb is cooler to the touch than the healthy pelvic limb.
identical in the male and female fetus, synthesize steroid hormones,
The pulsation, which is taken in the femoral triangle, and realized
which are metabolized to gestagens and estrogens by the placenta
by rectal palpation, is more or less reduced in dependence on the
(fetoplacental unit). Placental gestagens are synthesized from day
size of the thrombus. If the disease is unilateral, then a comparison 
a o aqisuodsan auoe are otl Aep o pue Aoueuard jo 08
with the healthy side demonstrates it distinctly. The veins on the
 maintenance of pregnancy. Placental estrogens can be employed for
healthy side of the body are well vascularized and, on the diseased
pregnancy diagnosis from the 12oth day, but the diagnosis of preg-
extremity, more or less collapsed.
nancy per rectum with the aid of ultrasound technique is applicable
 Fig. 82.1. Demonstration of the cyclic-dependent functional condition of the genitalia of the mare.
(a: sonographic cross-section of the ovary with dominant folicle during estrus, a': sonographic cross-section of the ovary with corpus luteum on the gth day during
diestrus); (b: typical "wheel-spoke structure of the uterus in estrus, b': homogeneous ultrasound texture of a cross-section of the uterus in diestrus); (c: view of the por-
to vaginalis uteri of an estrous and c' of a diestrous mare); (d: hysteroscopic photo of the uterus insuflated with gas] of an estrous mare and d of a diestrous mare); (e:
hysteroscopic demonstration of the uterotubal papilla (papila uterina) of an estrous and e' of a diestrous mare). (Photos, Prof. Dr Sieme, Hannover)
174
essentially earlier, is more reliable, and speaks out more strongly.
pressure on the coronet, movement of the head after pressure on the
[488][489] [490] [491]
eyeball, swallowing reflex and suction reflex as well as the anal
 is s p sd arq u  ai  xa
 82.2. The uterine tube lies lateral to the ovary and—different from
directed caudally) it succeeds in part to reach the umbilical cord. A
the bitch—does not course in an arch. In the mare, the caudal part 
 positive umbilical pulsation shows that the foal is alive. In doubtful
 of the isthmus of the uterine tube functions also as a reservoir for
cases demonstration of the heartbeat of the foal by ultrasound can
 sperm. The site of fertilization is the ampulla of the uterine tube.
 be attempted.
Only on day 5-6 does the embryo arrive in the uterus in the moru-
 Obstetrical measures are the correction of a faulty presentation,
la stage. Conventionally, the semen—in the manner of a natural
mating—is transferred into the uterine body. However, it is also
section. Owing to the long limbs of the fetus the horse is predis-
possible, by rectal or sonographically conducted deep intracornual
 posed to anomalies in posture. Because of the bending of its back
insemination, to deposit the semen ipsilateral to the side of the dom-
d e qaq s sd po 
inant mature follicle, nearer in the direction of the uterotubal con-
tion in which the back is dorsal (sacrodorsal postion). A dorsopu-
nection. The aim of the deep intrauterine deposit of semen is pri-
 bic position (back in ventral position) or dorsoiliac position (back
marily to obtain fertilization with a distinctly lower dose of sperm
s e on Po aq uosan sn rg i (sod pae u
 cells than usual. [492] [493]
(sacrodorsal) position. The most frequent anomaly in presentation
is the breech presentation. This cannot be corrected and the foal
82.3. The uterus is so much altered from the 16th- gth day after con-
must be born by careful extraction; where appropriate, by cesarean
ception, that its rectal palpation permits a pregnancy diagnosis. The
section. Transverse presentations represent rare and complicated
uterine wall exhibits an increased tonus and one uterine horn has a
 obstetrical obstacles. In the case of bicornual pregnancy and trans-
fluctuating vesicle-like enlargement. With the aid of sonography,
verse presentation, the thoracic limbs and the head of the foal are
the diagnosis of twin pregnancy in the early phase of pregnancy is
important. Predominantly, twin-pregnancy is reduced spontaneous-
ly to a single pregnancy. Nevertheless, early veterinary intervention
is afforded, because twin-pregnancies maintained to the end of
 pregnancy result almost always in abortion. Besides rectal palpa-
tion and vaginoscopic examination of the internal genital organs of
the mare, sonography and hysteroscopy are of high diagnostic val-
ue in the framework of the gynecological examination of breeding
mares. [494] [49.5] [496] [380]
 Of the domestic animals, the horse exhibits the greatest variabil-
ity in the duration of pregnancy. The physiological duration of
 pregnancy is between 320 and 360 days. Parturition begins with a
passive opening of the cervix. After that is the active phase of par-
turition with the commencement of contractions. Mares can influ-
ence considerably the beginning of the active phase of parturition.
Birth begins only when the environment is recognized as safe, so
that more than 90% of foals are born at night. With the beginning
of contractions, the fetus in its fetal membranes is pushed into the
birth canal. With this, with regard for the foal, the birth canal
becomes slowly widened. About two hours after the opening stage,
rupture of the fetal membranes, the expulsive phase starts. It lasts
5-10 minutes. The expansion of the cervix by the fetus triggers
reflexly an increased secretion of the hormone oxytocin, which
Fig. 82.3.1. Afetus from the last third of pregnancy isin the body of the uterus and
stimulates contractions (Ferguson reflex). In addition, stretch recep-
the right uterine horn. In its immediate environment, it is surrounded by the amni-
tors in the roof of the vagina give rise to a neural stimulation of con-
otic vesicle and farther removed from the allantoic vesicle, which reaches into the
tractions and the abdominal press. Disturbances appear in about
 left uterine horn. To the left, the cervical canal is loosely closed and projects into
4% of all equine births. Causes of dystocias are predominantly
the vagina with the portio vaginalis cervicis (uteri). (Courtesy of Institutf. Veterinar-
anomalies of posture, position and presentation. Equine parturi-
Anatomie, Berlin)
tions are always emergency cases, which require immediate inter-
vention, since within a short time it can lead to the death of the
fetus; however, also to injuries to the mare.
 Physiologically, foals are anterior presentation (thoracic limbs
forward with extended head and neck resting on the limbs),
sacrodorsal position (the back dorsal), and in extended posture. For
 obstetrical procedures, whether the fetus is alive or dead is of deci-
 sive importance. Signs of life are the retraction of the limb after
Fig. 82.2. Hysteroscopic demonstration of the uterotubal papilla (papilla uterina) 
Fig. 82.3.2. At the expulsion phase of parturition, the mature fetus is in the birth
ipsilateral to the preovulatory follicle of a mare in estrus. Adhesion of a small vol-
 canal in dorsal (normall anterior presentation and, with that, the fetal membranes 
Ume of inseminate at the uterotubal papilla (papilla uterina) with vesicle formation.
are already ruptured. (Courtesy of Institut f. Veterinar-Anatomie, Berlin)
(Photo, Dr. Sieme, Hannover) 
175
found in one uterine horn, the pelvic limbs in the other. Bicornual
ume, which widens the inguinal canal for the passing testicle. In this
pregnancy with transverse presentation of the foal is always an indi-
stage of testicular descent, the gubernaculum testis has such a con-
cation for a cesarean section.
 In the last third of pregnancy as also during parturition a uterine
from the testicle by palpation. With subsequent regression of the
torsion may occur. The diagnosis is established chiefly by the find-
 gubernaculum testis, which results in a shrinkage, testicular descent
ings on rectal palpation. The most striking finding is a displacement
is irreversibly completed. The considerable susceptibility for dis-
of the broad ligaments of the uterus. The ligament on the side of the
turbances of this complicated procedure is expressed in cryp-
direction of the torsion runs vertically and is displaced caudally; the
  rad   e s   u r
opposite ligament runs horizontally or obliquely. In the region of
tively) enormous size of the testicle is an additional disruptive ele-
the site of the torsion a distinct constriction is palpable. Because the
 ment. The increase in volume is based on the proliferation of the tes-
thin-walled veins are pinched off first, but the thick-walled arteries 
ticular interstitial cells, which is most distinct in the 7h and 8th
remain passable, in cases of a high degree of torsion there is hem-
orrhagic infarction with damage to the uterine wall.
 passage through the inguinal canal, which takes place at the time of
 Before parturition as also during parturition rupture of the
 parturition, the size of the testicle is normally so far reduced that
uterus may occur. If a rupture before parturition is very large, the
 testicular descent can take place. A causal connection to cryp-
fetus can be displaced into the abdominal cavity. There it dies in a
torchidism does not exist. It is not possible to induce descent of the
few days because of involution of the uterus and separation of the
testicle by hormonal treatments of cryptorchids with HCG (human
placenta. Ruptures of intra-abdominal blood vessels and hemor-
chorionic gonadotropin) or GnRH (gonadotropin releasing hor-
rhage into the abdominal cavity or into the broad ligaments of the
 mone), because these substances result in growth of the testicle and
uterus because of ruptures of the uterine artery, of the uterine
 by that make descent more difficult. In case of bilateral cryp-
branch orthe external iliac artery are supposed to be responsible for
torchidism, infertility occurs because spermatogenesis is blocked at
up to 40% of all peripartum deaths in mares. Ruptures of vessels
the temperatures that are found in the abdominal cavity. Fertile
occur mostly during parturition but may occur also before birth,
sperm cannot be produced. To be sure, the function of the LEY-.
especiall in older mares. Predisposing are changes within the wall
 DIG's interstitial cells is only influenced to a slight degree, so that
of the arteries supplying the uterus in older mares (degenerative
cryptorchids almost always show stallion-like behavior The expres-
 changes of the internal elastic membrane, fibrosis of the intima,
sion of stallion-like behavior is however individually variable. The
accumulation of mucoid materials in the intima and media). [497]
presence of abdominal testicular tissue can be established by the
[498] [499]
torchidism fertility is maintained. Such stallions should, however,
82.4. The cervix uteri is about 5-7 cm long and so closed off by lon-
not be used for breeding because a genetic predisposition is present.
 gitudinal folds, however without transverse folds, that it can be eas-
 Abdominal testicles are smaller and have a slack consistency (com-
ily opened manually or with instruments. During estrus, the cervix
so on Alusau pun Aau (eq An lus e oi ared
is open wide and relaxed. The stallion enlarges this with the strong-
degeneration.
ly erect glans penis and deposits the ejaculate directly into the uterus
 Transcrotal sonography is a suitable aid in the imaging diagnos-
(uterine insemination). The looser closure signifies during pregnan-
tic of testicular structures, especially in the demarcation of tumor-
cy a latent danger for an abortion or for ascending infection. Scar
ous processes. In the framework of fertility diagnostics, the testicu-
formations due to parturitions or breeding injuries can however be
lar biopsy gives valuable clues. Testicular biopsy is performed either
the cause for narrowing of the lumen or for abnormal enlargement
on the standing, sedated, stallion or on the anesthetized stallion.
of the lumen. [391] [500]
 Puncture of the craniolateral region of the testicle is carried out with
 an automatized needle that penetrates the testicular coverings.
82.5. Vagina and vaginal vestibule form functional-anatomically
[z1s] [εss] [11s] [01s] [60s] [80s [z0s] [90s] [s0s]
the first important barrier against ascending infections in the mare.
Position and closure of the vulva are influenced by the duration of
 84.2. The testicular vein, which forms the pampiniform plexus by
use for breeding (number of foalings). Normal closure of the vulva
its extreme tortuosity proximal to the head of the epididymis, can
can be restored by proper surgical-plastic procedures. The vagina
exhibit diseased enlargements, which bring about varicoceles and
can exhibit perforations with opening into the peritoneal cavity
can lead to sterility. Vascularization of the testicle can be examined
dorsal or lateral to the portio vaginalis uteri in the dorsal vaginal
 and evaluated by doppler sonography in the region of the pampini-
fornix. These may be caused by a too vehement intromission of the
form plexus. [513] [386] [514]
penis or by oblique mounting. [501] [378] [487]
84.3. The tail of the epididymis, which is fixed to the bottom of the
'a aa a u 'a  ad si   a 
vaginal tunic by way of the ligamentum caudae epididymidis and by
 a closure of the vagina. By accumulation of secretion in the uterus
the proper ligament of the testis to the corresponding testicular
and vagina the hymen may project balloon-like into the vulva. [378]
 pole, is cut off in sterilization of the stallion. Sperm from the tail of
[502]
the epididymis of the stallion are fertile, so that a reserve of frozen
semen is possible from sperm of the tail of the epididymis obtained
82.7. The vulvar cleft (rima pudendi) may have a deficient closure
immediately after castration. [515] [408]
because of former injuries in dystocia or because of a strong reduc-
tion of the perivaginal fat tissue, which occurs regularly in older
84.4. For sterilization (vasoresection or vasectomy) the deferent
thoroughbred mares. This leads to the development of a pneu-
duct can be resected about a length of 2-3 cm. It can be found on
 movagina with a following pneumometra and chronic endometritis,
 the medial aspect of the spermatic cord after opening the vaginal
which leads to sterility. [503] [380]
tunic. [484] [516]
82.8. The clitoris is visible during estrus in the process of *wink-
 84.5. The stallion has a complete set of accessory genital glands,
ing." The clitoris is erected by contraction of parts of the bul-
 concerning which, besides the bilobar prostate, the ampulla of the
bospongiosus (constrictor vulvae, constrictor vestibuli muscle, and
 deferent duct, the seminal vesicle and the bulbourethral gland are
is exposed after widening of the labia of the vulva (signs of estrus).
each paired. The excretory ducts of the seminal vesicles and the
[439][504]
ampullae of the deferent ducts open together (ejaculatory duct) on
the dorsal surface of the proximal urethra, the so-called seminal col-
 84.1. The testicle may be concealed in incomplete testicular descent
liculus. This can be demonstrated endoscopically and a catheteriza-
unilaterally or bilaterally. It may remain in the abdomen (abdomi-
 tion of the ejaculatory duct is possible for diagnostic-therapeutic
nal cryptorchidism) or in the inguinal canal (inguinal cryp-
purposes.
torchidism). Affected animals are called cryptorchid colts.
 Functionally the secretions of the accessory sex glands contribute
 The descending testicle is connected caudally to the gubernacu-
to the composition of the ejaculate. For this, the bulbourethral
lum testis (mesenchymal condensation). The gubernaculum extends
 gland, together with the urethral glands, contributes the watery,
through the inguinal canal to the bottom of the vaginal process,
 clear, sodium chloride-containing fore-secretion, which serves pre-
which has arrived previously into the scrotum. At certain times and
ejaculatory neutralization and moistening of the male urethra as
certain locations the gubernaculum testis exhibits an increase in vol-
well as of the vagina. The main fraction of the ejaculate is rich in
176
sperm and essentially composed of the secretions of the testicle, tail
ulae of the erectile body is considered to be the cause, which is trig-
of the epididymis, the deferernt duct and the ampulla of the defer-
 gered by a decrease in the sympathetic tonus.
ent duct. The secretion of the tail of the epididymis, which is rich in
A loss of function of the sympathetic component of the pudendal
 sperm, contains great amounts of glyceryl-phosphorylcholine. The
spindle-shaped thickened terminal parts of the deferent ducts
by application of tranquilizers, not however by resection of the
(ampullae of the deferent ducts) produce besides ergothionin, cit-
 i  a l il  sd 
rate and fructose-specific proteins, which play a role in the matura-
the pudendal nerve, blockade of sympathetic axons and 522]
tion of the sperm and the process of fertilization. The alkaline secre-
tion of the seminal vesicle, which is rich in citrate and variable in
 84.8. For anesthesia of the penis, the pudendal nerve can be
consistency and quantity, forms the gel-fraction of the ejaculate and
blocked. [523]
contains different proteins, which function as decapacitation fac-
tors of the sperm. The prostate gland furnishes a watery secretion
 84.9. In the case of chronically obstructing urine concrements, the
that is rich in electrolytes. It consists only of the body (right and left
urethra of the male horse can be opened by a permanent fistula sur-
lobes connected by an isthmus); a disseminate part is absent in the 
 gically-installed in its proximal penile part (in the region of the per-
horse.
ineum). In this way, urine drainage free of disturbances can be guar-
 In azoospermia ejaculates, determination of the alkaline phos-
anteed. With this operation, there are always seeping hemorrhages
 phatase may be helpful for the differentiation of a testicular or post-
from the veins, because in every case the erectile body of the urethra
testicular cause of the condition (absence of mature sperm).
is injured. [524]
 Only the ampullae of the deferent ducts and the deferent ducts
are palpable per rectum. The prostate is extensively, and the bul-
 84.10. The glans penis is distinctly enlarged in erection owing to its
bourethral gland is entirely, covered by musculature and according-
ly, in the physiological condition, not directly palpable. Sonography
distinctly. The taking of swab samples is done on the protruded
is the means of choice for examination of the accessory sex glands.
 penis between the preputial laminae on the shaft of the penis, the
 In the clinical context, seminal vesiculitis is in the forefront. It
 fossa glandis and from the urethra. These are locations where smeg-
  o sss oi s pe sad o sede a
ma is normally found and which are naturally colonized by
diagnosis of an infectious cause, which stands always in the fore-
 microorganisms. A cleaning with detergents is not recommended,
 ground, besides the prohibition of mating, specific antibiosis is as a
since the natural germ flora would be changed. To demonstrate
rule successful. In case of a chronic apostematous course, seminal
pathogenic microorganisms, a swab for culture and subsequent
vesiculectomy with perineal access is indicated. [517] [518] [519]
investigation is carried out, especially in view of CEM (contagious
[520]
equine metritis). (Also in the mare, corresponding swabs for culture
 are taken from the clitoridal fossa and the vaginal vestibule.) [386]
 84.6. At the preputial ostium, the prepuce can exhibit an inherited
or acquired narrowing (phimosis). (Phimosis: gr. = to close, to nar-
row, narrowness) A paraphimosis is caused by a narrowness of the
preputial ring (anulus) of the preputial fold (internal lamina of the
prepuce). The penis, which has protruded from the preputial
ostium, can no longer glide back through the preputial ring and
responds with development of edema. [383]
 84.7. In the case of paralysis of the penis, the penis is permanently
 prolapsed (prolapsus penis). By this the penis is endangered by con-
tusions and other injuries as well as by edema and phlegmon. An
erection of the flaccid penis is not possible. Attempts to reposition
the penis are usually unsuccessful. Paralysis of the smooth muscu-
lature of the walls of the cavernous spaces as well as of the trabec-
(Sectio longitudinalis)
Fig. 84.6. Longitudinal section through the prepuce and the end of the penis. 1.
ym unso pendad 'g snus peuan z th) pio nendaud yim buu pendaid
external lamina (3") and internal lamina (3"), 4. preputial fundus, 5. corpus spon-
giosum glandis with proc. dorsalis glandis, 6. corpus cavernosum penis, 7. ure-
Fig. 84.10. Taking a swab-smear from the urethra, fossa glandis and the body
thra with surrounding corpus spongiosum penis.
(shaft) of the penis.
177
Rectal Palpation
that, as one's arm is removed, it is subjected to a quick and careful
check for adherent substances (mucus, blood, pseudomembranes,
(palpatio rectalis)
PETER S. GLATZEL
 parasites).
 A planned rectal examination is at first directed to the request for
In large animals, for clinical diagnosis, manual examination of
 investigation. In the case of a gynecologic request concerning, for
organs located in the pelvic and abdominal cavities (rectal palpa-
example, the phase of the cycle, the cause of sterility, artificial
tion) has a special importance. One is reminded of gynecologic,
semen transfer or control of pregnancy, the female genital organs
andrologic (pp. 75, 77, 81. 85) or colic diagnosis in surgery or of
are subjected to a corresponding examination. To do this, one's
the differential diagnosis of internal diseases (p. 66f, topography
 hand is initially introduced into the rectum up to the wrist. The pel.
and projection of abdominal organs). In the case of the horse,
vic floor is palpated with large, pendular movements, the hand and
before manipulations, it is advisable to discuss the risks of this pro-
fingertips slightly bent. The vagina is traced as a flabby, com-
cedure with the owner or authorized person and in a doubtful case
 pressed, displaceable tube about 2-3 cm wide and 1 cm thick (page
to have the request for examination in writing. Moreover, photo
83). This structure leads cranially—the arm is now in the intestine
 documentation may be indicated.
 e si s  xn a o a   i 
distinctly palpable cigar-shaped swelling, 1-2 fingers thick and
Preparation
about the length of one's thumb. It ends at the pecten ossis pubis
The manual rectal examination is also necessary before sonography
and guides the examining hand to the body of the uterus, a some-
 in order to have an idea of the actual situation and to be able to car-
what softer structure that also lies in the midline. Depending on the
ry out, in a directed manner, the sonographic clarification and doc-
status of the cycle, this is not always distinctly palpable; however, in
umentation that follows. In general, these examinations take place,
this area, the urinary bladder is palpable at the cranial margin of the
 apart from exceptions, on the standing horse. An optimal environ-
 pelvis ventrally. Depending on its state of fullness, it is a bottle-
ment for the examination is guaranteed by the use of a special stock.
shaped structure and sinks into the abdomen as a fluctuating thin-
With examinations in the barn or in the box, the head of the animal
 walled but firm structure. It is a good landmark for the investigator
can be held firmly by an assistant and one forelimb raised. Vicious 
 and in the ongoing procedure a good starting point for locating the
and nervous animals get a twitch. As a make-shift in heavy horses
 left and right horns of the uterus, which go out from the body of the
(cold bloods), the left or right hind limb (in examinations with the
uterus attached to the broad ligament of the uterus (lig. latum ute-
right or left hand) can be stretched or bound by a long rope. Dur-
ri). In this way, when the fingers are drawn analward over the ver-
ing the examination, to protect oneself from being kicked, one posi-
tex (apex) of the urinary bladder, the bifurcation of the two uterine
tions himself with the chest directly on the animal, nearly resting on
 horns falls into the slightly flexed fingers of the investigating hand.
the horse's rump. Additional protection can be attained by a bale of
From the body of the uterus, each of the uterine horns extends in a
straw behind the hind feet. Anesthesia in the standing animal or an
craniolaterodorsal direction in a concave arch. They have a variably
sd as  ss a  ess a si ise i
expressed consistency, which is dependent on the estrus cycle, and
ing, great unrest or sensitivity. For proper hygiene and to prevent
controlled endocrinologically (firm, estrogen influence; - flaccid,
the spread of disease, the use of protective clothing is recommend-
progesterone influence or lacking body function). Normally, their
ed. This includes covering the arm with a rubber sleeve about 70 cm
length is 15-30 cm, depending on the size of the mare, and their dia-
long and galvanized latex gloves for serial investigations or single-
meter ca. 2-4 cm in the nonpregnant state. If one follows their
use gloves, which must be inverted before the examination so that
 course in the direction of the paralumbar fossa, so the investigating
the seam will be inside. The examiner's hand, protected in this way,
hand feels at the end of each the walnut to goose-egg sized ovaries
is made slippery by corresponding lubricants, gel, vaseline or paraf-
(pages 82, 83). The uterine tubes are normally not palpable.
fin oil. Soap is less suitable for this purpose, since it can lead to the
With respect to a request for an andrological examination, rectal
drying out of the intestinal mucosa and by that to corresponding
examination takes place especially in the case of altered composi-
irritations and spasms.
 tion of the ejaculate or a purchase examination.
 The procedure is at first as in the mare. After evacuation of the
Examination
rectum, the hand seeks the urethralis muscle (page 81, 85), which is
During the lateral attachment of the tail to the croup by an assis-
 readily palpable on the floor of the pelvis. Owing to its distinct reac-
tant, attention is paid to the palpable resistance and flexibility of the
tion to being touched, the muscle is easy to palpate as a thumb- to
caudal vertebral column. Alterations may indicate traumata or the
 child's arm-sized, rapidly contracting structure, hands-deep in the
status of the cycle. After inspection of the perianal and perineal
 pelvic cavity. At its caudal end, the paired bulbourethral glands are
region, especially checking the closure of the anus and the vulvar
located. These are fingertip-sized and normally palpable only if
cleft, adhesions, neoplasms, ruptures and soilings indicative of for-
changes are present. At the cranial end of the urethralis muscle,
mer surgical operations or examinations, the present condition is
which is about the length of one's palm, is the access to the ejacula-
recorded. Also, the owner or his representative should be ques-
 tory ducts. These are the common passage of the paired seminal
tioned as well as perhaps photodocumentation made.
 vesicles and ampullae of the ductus deferens. The ducts lie beneath
To introduce the hand into the rectum, the fingers are placed
the prostate gland which, with its two lateral lobes, is applied ring-
together cone-like. With slight spiral movements one attempts to
like to the cranial end of the muscle. The seminal vesicles are found
overcome the resistance of the sphincter muscle. After penetration
to the left and right as thumb-sized, firm to slightly fluctuant,
into the gut, this clings to the arm like a sleeve. The hand is pushed
smooth structures alongside the shaft of the ilium. Beneath the
forward slowly and carefully, parallel to the vertebral column. At
seminal vesicles, the ampullae of the deferent ducts discharge also
the transition between the bottle-shaped part into the suddenly nar-
in this area into the ejaculatory duct. If one follows the deferent
rowing part of the rectum, the accumulating feces must be grasped
 ducts into the abdominal cavity to the left and right, somewhat
 and removed in order to prevent an overexpansion and, at this par-
laterally and cranial to the pecten ossis pubis, one encounters the
vaginal ring, the internal opening of the peritoneal outpouching of
gut. The feces are checked for color, consistency, admixture, para-
the vaginal process, which, as a testicular covering, has evaginated
sites and odor. Following renewed supply of the examiner's hand
into the scrotum. At the same time, one examines the parts of the
with copious lubricants, the internal exploration is continued. Peri-
abdominal wall that can be reached, pays attention to palpable
staltic waves of intestinal motor activity can be allowed to pass over
vibrations or crackle (roughness of the peritoneum), to painfulness
the hand and arm which lie quietly resting in the intestine. If in
 and the surface character of the area, the width of the internal ingui-
 pushing the hand farther forward, the gut wall should become more
nal ring, as well as the condition and sensitivity of the soft tissue
tense, then one should attempt to relieve the spasm, without apply-
 structures that pass here, as compared with both sides.
ing force, by slight spreading or vibration of the finger tips. In this
 A thorough palpation of the abdominal organs can be important
situation, attention should be paid, that the fingers, especially the
for the clarification of internal diseases or for the diagnosis of colic
thumb and little finger, do not make uncontrolled spreading move-
and making decisions for operation. In doing this, the spatial
ments, because by that the danger of rupture increases considerab-
Pns ojo p ep ssd sea
ly. Feces that appear again will be removed before the hand is
 be thought of as part of a cone, which, depending on the length of
moved forward. Within the rectum one determines its condition of
one's arm and the animal's size, reaches variably far cranially. In
fullness, the character of its content, its spatial relationships as well
medium-sized horses and at average arm's length, the craniodorsal
as the temperature and character of the mucous membrane. Beyond
 border of this cone is formed by the cranial half of the left kidney,
178
on the abdominal wall by the caudal end of the costal arch, and on
to be distinguished only by consistency and/or tension conditions).
the ventral abdominal wall by the line of junction of the meso- and
Beneath the contralateral left paralumbar fossa are found loops of
hypogastrium (page 66; 67).
small colon and jejunum. These lie between the layers of the left
For the planned examination, one palpates briefly the pelvic cavi-
colon and the cecum as well as caudal to the latter up to the pelvic
ty, its configuration, especially the internal pelvic symphysis on the
 inlet. In healthy animals only the more dorsally and caudally placed
pelvic floor as well as the form of the bony parts of the pelvis. On
 loops of small colon can be recognized by the palpable fecal balls
  e  s  sd   r  
which they contain as well as the teniae on their free wall. The loops
below the lumbosacral joint, at the distinctly palpable, finger-sized,
of small intestine normally cannot be clearly identified by palpa-
pulsating termination of the aorta. If one follows the vertebral
tion.
column cranially, one palpates to the left in the area of the cranial
 n ss ess rd    s 
angle of the paralumbar fossa, the caudal pole of the left kidney, ele-
 cecum the caudal mesenteric root (mesentery arising at the origin of
vated tumor-like from the abdominal wall. If the investigating hand
 the caudal mesenteric artery) renders only little resistance and is for
slides from here to the right side across the coil of intestine, it
this reason only recognizable in case of colic.
encounters the cranial mesenteric root, the touch of which usually
 For the sake of completeness, the liver may be mentioned. Only
triggers a sensible reaction of the animal. The tension, demonstra-
 in case of significant increase in girth is it palpable in the right renal
bility, and perhaps pulsation of this structure are important for the
 area and in the median plane.
colic diagnostic. After bypassing this structure and pressing further
forward to the right, to the right of the vertebral column, the cau-
dal pole of the right kidney can also be reached. Both kidneys are
examined for circumference, consistency, sensitivity and condition
Sonography in Equine Reproduction
of the surface. At the same time, the renal hilus is palpated with
attention to the renal arteries. Starting from the renal hilus, one
PETER S. GLATZEL
directs the finger about three fingerbreadths removed from the
abdominal aorta, alongside the dorsal abdominal wall, to the neck
 Increased attention to equine reproduction in veterinary practice
of the urinary bladder to ascertain possible changes of the ureter.
has awakened the need for a concentrated clinical, scientifically
 The ureter is normally not palpable. After further retraction of the
 sound and applications-oriented presentation of sonography in this
hand, the fluctuating urinary bladder is found as a structure lying
 area. This applies especially to the uses of this technique that, over
centrally in front of the pelvic inlet, which will serve as a landmark
time, has matured, is cost-effective, objective, reproducible, can be
for orientation.
 documented and, after a corresponding co-signing by the owner or
 animal caretaker, perhaps also can be used as a legal resource.
along the left abdominal wall to the caudal end of the costal arch or
For this reason it was the intention of this contribution, already
by sliding down from the ventral surface of the left kidney. The dor-
during the study of anatomy and as near to practice as possible, to
d i a a  aq o  as a o  
 introduce image analysis and documentation of ultrasonographic
fossa. It is palpated by sliding the fingers along its medial and lat-
eral surfaces, grasping its dorsal and caudal borders in several pla-
 pretations, this diagnostic procedure should be broken down to the
ces and in that way determining its thickness, the sharpness of its 
 extent that, in addition to practicing veterinarians, students also can
borders and swelling.
benefit.
 From the horizontal plane of the pubic border, the caudal two-
 For this reason emphasis was laid on studies of the uterus and
  r d q   e   r s
 ovaries before and after ovulation in the practical monitoring of fer-
searches the teniae, which are always palpable, and identifies with
tility of the mare. In this way, physiological findings are compared
their guidance, the position and expansion, the course, the tension
 and form the basis of corresponding clinical judgments.
and filling state as well as the consistency of the content. After this
 In particular, the most favorable time for mating or insemination
the hand is led craniodorsally up to the left kidney and moves then
 is discussed in the context of the use of liquid or frozen semen. The 
horizontally to the right half of the abdominal cavity, to find the
 establishment of pregnancy serves as a control.
stomach-like dilatation of the right colon (ampulla coli) in order to
In seasonal anestrus (days growing shorter) the horse shows an
 determine its position, girth, and consistency as well as its palpable
 indifferent sexual behavior, without an appreciable release of gona-
and respiratory mobility (even possible in horses with a height of
 dal hormones or the formation of larger follicles on the ovaries.
175 cm). In association with that, one searches the initial portion of
 In the cyclic mare, the changeover of the hormonal household
the small colon, which goes out from the ampulla coli in the left half
takes place during the mating period (days growing longer). The
of the abdominal cavity about 10 cm removed from the vertebral
 mating period is characterized by the regularly occurring proge-
 column. In small animals the blind sac of the stomach, if strongly
filled, can be reached here Starting from the hilus of the left kidney
 ovulation and a corresponding estradiol secretion during the heat
or following the course of the abdominal aorta, the hand encoun-
(estrus period). This basic pattern of gonadal hormone action trig-
ters a soft, elastic, sensible, ventrally fan-like expanding cord with
 gers on the one hand the typical signs of estrus and on the other
pulsating arteries, the cranial mesenteric root. On its caudal surface,
 hand the sexually indifferent behavior of mares in anestrus. Other-
about 20 cm distal to the abdominal aorta, one finds the duode-
wise they cause the morphological changes of the external genitalia.
num. It is normally soft, runs transversely, and (owing to its short
Owing to the increasing estradiol concentration at the beginning of
mesentery) can be displaced only a little. With this, the transrectal
 estrus, the vulva of the mare in heat is edematously swollen, flabby,
examination of the most cranially reachable parts of the abdomen
 and the mucosa of the vestibule exhibits a slight degree of hyper-
is concluded. For these investigations the examiner must shove
emia.
one's arm maximally into the intestine, nearly to the armpit. In
 The altered behavior of the mare as compared to the stallion can
doing this, in the case of left-right, to and fro, movements of the 
 be established best by testing with a stallion. This test of the mating
hand, attention must be paid that sudden movements of the arm-
behavior by the teaser-stallion should precede every other diagnos-
joints are avoided and the matching cranio-caudal movements in
tic procedure because, on the one hand, it contributes an important
the search for corresponding structures by cranio-caudal, to and
 partial finding in the diagnosis of the stage of the cycle. On the other
fro, movements of the arm, which follow the line of the vertebral
 hand, owing to a limited hormone release (LH) from the hypophy-
 column, must be realized much as one would move the arm in play-
 sis, the test acts to stimulate the endocrine system and in that way
ing the trombone.
 acts on the genital functions of the mare.
 After withdrawing the arm up to about the upper arm-cubital
 Size, symmetry and preparedness for conception with the even-
joint, the hand is advanced into the area of the right paralumbar
tual content of the uterus as well as the size and functional status of
fossa, and finds here the cecum, which is easily recognized by its
 the ovaries, including their functional structures, are perceived by
teniae. The cecum is also examined in its individual parts: head or
 transrectal palpation, recorded and considered in the evaluation of
base of the cecum (which includes its overhanging part) and body,
the stage of the cycle.
for pain, position, state of flling, and consistency. Besides that,
 In general, the uterus of the mare during estrus is of edematous 
attention is paid to the course of direction of its teniae. On the ce-
 consistency and has a moderate tonus.
cum's medial surface, about at the level last rib, one finds the site of
 Seventy-two hours before ovulation the consistency of the folli-
 discharge of the ileum into the cecum (the two parts of the gut are
 cles is firm in about 30% of the cases, soft in about 60% and very
179
soft in about 10% of the mares. Contrary to this, 12 hours before
 the ovaries. The latter lie about 1 - 3 handbreadths (depending on 
ovulation, 9% of the follicles still exhibit a firm consistency, about
the size of the mare) beside the bifurcation at the end of the uterine
 51% a soft consistency, and about 40% a very soft consistency. The
 horns. The horns are somewhat concave and ascend laterodorsally
 preovulatory follicle reaches a diameter of 35-55 mm, in exceptio-
from the bifurcation. Often the ovaries are hidden by the ovarian
nal cases a diameter of up to 100 mm.
bursa, so that this has to be first cautiously pushed aside.
 Palpation of the ovaries of the mare in the peri-ovulatory period
 On the ovaries special attention has to be paid to functional for-
 isa aq Passdxa are m s iss  ae
 mations, dark round, vesicular or polygonal greyish-white struc-
 readiness for defense by the mare. Transrectal palpation of the ova-
tures. Their expansion or diameter can be demonstrated by chang-
ries permits determination of an ovulation that has recently taken
ing the sound-plane and quantified with the help of standard
place; however, not a precise forecast, because this takes place in 
imaging equipment (freeze-function) plus the application of an inte-
 general on the last day of estrus, which from heat to heat can be
 grated measuring unit. One retains the findings recorded as indivi-
variably long.
dual frames, or they become records with the help of a Polaroid
At ovulation the follicle collapses and the formation of a crater is
camera, a thermophotocopier or video apparatus.
palpable in the area of the ovulation fossa of the ovary. This is filled
 In withdrawing the probe lightly across the pelvic floor the uter-
by a blood coagulum, which is designated, including the follicle
 ine body, cervix and vagina can be recognized caudal to the uterine
wall, as a corpus hemorrhagicum. This soft corpus hemorrhagicum
bifurcation, especially in the case of alterations, for example, filling.
can be confused with a follicle, ready for ovulation, but is differen-
 Altogether, one must realize that the sections produced here are
tiated by its “crunching like a snowball" under gentle pressure and
especially with the help of sonography. Only in exceptional cases is
the entire organ in different planes of section, to understand also a
the corpus luteum of the mare palpable in the first postovulatory
spatial dimension and localized limited events. Only under these
days. This is because it does not project over the surface of the ova-
 conditions are corresponding conclusions and diagnoses possible.
ry, but owing to anatomic peculiarities of the ovary of the mare
 For studies of the uterus the microscopic structure of its wall is
 develops in the interior of the ovary.
of central interest for the interpretation of the light-dark contrast
changes of the images (Fig. 2). According to the density of the
Equipment
corresponding histological layers, especially of the endometrium,
For sonographic examination of the internal sex organs of large ani-
 m  s go nap  o dap sad ae ara
mals, predominantly ultrasound instruments with a veterinary real-
whitish-grey stripes or rings (longitudinal section, cross-section).
time linear head or sector-scanner of 3.5 MHZ or, and chiefly, 5.0
 These show the endocrine-influenced secretory activities and with
MHZ (Fig. 1) are used. The 3.5 MHZ ultrasoundhead (US-head)
them the structural alterations of the parts of the mucosa that are
aui uo supuadap uu bz oi dn uoneauad jo ydap raean e sey
 dependent on the cycle. These structures are normally inconspicu-
texture of the tissue) at the cost of a slight loss of resolution (less
ous in the ultrasound image. During estrus, they are subjected to
clear images). It is also used for transcutaneous study, for example,
estrogen-dependent deposits of fluid, which lead to considerable
-u pas u Paoda si pe Z s au op a u
increases in volume in the tissues and, during high heat, they are
tion. It has slightly less depth of penetration (about 50 mm), but 
expressed in the ultrasound image in the form of so-called wheel-
better resolution (sharper images). We reach the genital organs most
spokes (Fig. 82.1b).
closely through the gut wall. For this reason, a sharp image is pos-
sible with the 5 MHZ head.
Conclusions from the sonographic examination
The fertility of a mare, her ability to conceive and maintain preg-
The Sonographic Examination
nancy up to the birth of a live foal, is decisively influenced by the
Immediately after completing the transrectal palpation, the probe
functional morphology of the endometrium. Also, in this direction,
(ultrasoundhead or transducer) is placed in the hollow of one's
the ultrasound examination can give corresponding hints to possi-
 palm so that the tip of the system lies under the index finger and its
 ble diseases, which is important for the prognosis of fertility.
cable, the connection to the computer, under the wrist. Now the
 A decisive factor for the quality of the endometrium seems to be
sound emitting/receiving surface (about 56 mm long, 9 mm wide) of
the age of the particular mare. In older mares, more often a persis-
the probe is covered with a layer of untrasound gel or good lubri-
 tence of an endometritis is established, which can lead to decreased
cant about the thickness of the back of a knife. Covered by the fin-
fertility up to infertility. Endometrial biopsies from older mares
gers on the sides and with the protection of the fingers, the instru-
(≥ 15 years) show an increase in inflammatory cell infiltrates and
ment is introduced into the empty ampulla of the rectum with a
fibroses as well as a reduced density of glands in comparison to
slight twisting movement. The fingers are drawn away from the
 younger mares (5-7 years). Although in the mare the sexual cycle is
ventral emitting surface of the probe and stabilize the probe on the
unlimited up to old age, with increasing age (> 14 years) or with
sides, so that, held between the thumb and ring finger, it can be
 guided from above by the index or middle finger. For orientation,
trium can be observed.
the hand is moved cranially as in rectal palpation until, cranial to
 The ovaries are well suited for ultrasound examination owing to
the pelvic inlet, the urinary bladder appears. The bladder appears
their size (up to the size of a fist), their fluid-filled (for example, fol-
dark and homogeneous. Cranial to the pecten ossis pubis the probe
 licles) and firm structures (for example corpora lutea), as well as
is titlted slightly cranioventrally. In the mare in breeding condition,
 their easy accessibility per rectum.
there now appears applied to the broad ligament of the uterus (lig.
 The gynecological ultrasound examination is to be associated
latum uteri) a whitish-grey structure about little-finger to thumb-
with the rectal palpation of the internal genitalia of the mare in
size, the uterus. Ater rotating the US-head about 45° in the direc-
order to objectify and document the findings on palpation. Thus,
tion of the tuber coxae, the bifurcation of the uterus becomes visi-
ble in cross-section as a grey, homogeneous structure. Starting from
this orientation point, the uterine horns can now be followed in a
dorsolateral direction along the shaft of the ilium and, after that,
Epi = lumenal epithelium; Dr = uterine gland; Bw = connective tissue
 Fig. 2: Histological work-up of an unsuspicious uterine biopsy of a mare at the
Fig. 1. Utrasound apparatus; above left, linear scanner placed in the hand for
beginning of the season. The epithelia of the uterine glands as well as of the ute-
examination.
180
follicles already with a diameter of < 30 mm can be demonstrated.
demonstrable by ultrasound, can be discussed. In this regard, the
Furthermore it is possible to show double ovulations, follicular
disappearance of the wheel-spoke structure (Fig. 82.1b), which is
atresia, tumors, hematomas, corpora lutea, and so on.
typical of the mare in heat, about 12 hours before ovulation repre-
To grasp the dynamics of follicular development, sonographic
sents an almost certain sign of impending ovulation.
examinations are conducted and documented at 12-24 hour inter-
With so-called problem-mares, tenuous clinical diagnoses can be
vals. In this way, the maturation of the dominant follicle can be fol-
 made on the basis of the clinical findings and with these especially
lowed and the timing of ovulation predicted.
the results of ultrasound investigations and documentations. The-
In general, during diestrus (Fig. 82.1a'), three to four small
 rapeutic possibilties of ovarial-conditioned fertility disturbances
(< 2.0 cm) follicles can be observed on both ovaries. Besides that, a
 can then be worked out. Disorders of ovulation due to endocrine
distinct corpus albicans is found on one of the two ovaries. About
derailments are regarded as causes of such disturbances. These
this time, selection of the dominant follicle begins, the divergence of
express themselves either in thin-walled large cystic structures,
follicular dynamics. The divergence is followed by the dominant
phase in the follicular dynamics. This is recognized by the fact that
 manent heat (nymphomania) or in thick-walled, firm progesterone-
from the 15th day of the cycle (post-ovulation) one follicle out of the
secreting structures, which cause an anestrus (Figs. 5a, b). Another
population, sometimes even on each ovary, shows an accelerated
 cause can be seen in a disturbed run-off of follicular dynamics in
growth. This dominant follicle increases rapidly in size and pre vents
which the divergence phase does not proced in a regular fashion
the growth of the remaining cohorts (Fig. 82.1a).
 and the ovary appears as a small cystic structure.
 From about the 16th day of the cycle, a strong increase in size of
 The large benefits of the ultrasound technique consist also in the
the largest follicle and a relative decrease in the size of the second
 fact that the success of the therapeutic measures introduced can be
largest follicle is recognized. From a size of about 3-3.5 cm the
 followed up and documented.
largest follicle becomes a GRAAFIAN follicle and prepares itself for
 Use of ultrasound in artificial insemination 
ovulation by corresponding internal reconstruction processes. On
 A further important field of application is artificial insemination
the day before the ovulation, the diameter of the GRAAFIAN folli-
(*a.i.").
s poas an ym is  o pe se uaq si a
 Naturally the best chance for conception exists if the mating or
remains at about 25-30 mm. In this process, there exists the possi-
 insemination takes place close to ovulation. In the mare, this is the
bility, especially under the influence of exogenous stressors (severe
 interval from 12 hours before to 6-8 hours after ovulation (Figs. 3,
weather change, change of food, change of personnel, change of
 4). Whether the mating should be done before or after ovulation
location, physical and psychological stress), that it comes to a com-
 depends mostly on the time between examinations, which is deter-
 plete regression of all formed follicles or that suddenly the concur-
 mined by practical conditions and is decided with the help of the
ring second largest follicle, usually on the contralateral ovary, takes
ultrasound findings.
 over the dominance and ovulates.
With insemination of fresh semen, to guarantee a good fertility,
 Double ovulations occur in horses in about 16-18% of the cases.
the insemination amount should be at least 500 million motile
In general, they are not wanted. For this reason their forecast is
 sperm cells. With insemination of cooled semen, however, the
important and possible by ultrasound investigation. In double-ovu-
recommendations are 1 billion sperm per insemination, because the
lation, two roughly equal-sized follicles mature, often on the same
vitality of the sperm decreases by cooling. The insemination volume
ovary. That such an event is developing is predictable, if from the
has a significant influence on the rate of fertilization. A volume be-
16th to 18th day of the cycle two follicles experience parallel
tween 10 and 25 ml is considered optimal. A larger insemination
changes.
volume, diluted semen, has a negative impact on the rate of preg-
 Up to two days before ovulation, there is observed an increase in
 nancy. The insemination interval is directed on the one hand to the
the echogenicity of the follicular fluid at the periphery of the folli-
 duration of the fertilization capability of the sperm cells in the fe-
cle that is approaching ovulation. Besides that, the follicl increases
 male genital tract and on the other hand to the life span of the ovu-
significantly in size and its internal pressure decreases. It loses its
lated ovum. Furthermore the duration of sperm transport and the
circular shape in favor of an oval, easily impressible shape of fluc-
capacitation of the sperm cells have to be borne in mind. These facts
tuating consistency. At first the follicular wall increases in thickness
have to be considered in the selection of the manner of insemina-
to become thin and pliant at its pole about 12-6 hours before ovu-
 tion, in order that the sperm cells can reach the site of fertilization
lation. Accordingly there exists the possibility of defining the peri-
before or immediately after ovulation.
meter of the time of ovulation by ultrasound diagnostics. By de-
With the help of ultrasound, the planning of insemination can be
tailed checking of the size of the follicle, its form, the strength of its
 carried out very precisely. In this regard, it is important to know
wall, and the increase in echogenicity of its borders, this is quite
possible with ultrasound (Fig. 3).
 For these processes, the uterotubal papilla (Figs. 82.1e, e') is
 a u  oi a nd ad jo si 
 obviously an important structure in its function in the storage and
 selection of sperm. In addition, it must be borne in mind that, on the
vesicle) from a corpus hemorrhagicum, which is uniformly echo-
 other hand, the maximal life span of the ovocyte is limited only to
 genic or with an anechogenic center (the central blood coagulum
 about 12 hours post-ovulation.
 For these reasons, in most insemination programs, insemination
evaluation of follicular growth, the stage of the cycle, and predic-
will be carried out every two days beginning with the second or
tion of ovulation, also the texture of the uterine lumen, which is
third day of heat up to the wearing off of external signs of heat or
the observation of ovulation. Altogether, this is a fairly expensive
 procedure, entirely apart from the logistic problems of the perma-
nent availability of semen.
examination. To do this, ultrasound examination is conducted at
two-day intervals from about the 16th-17th day of the cycle up to
the beginning of heat and the follicular dynamics are followed after
that in daily studies. In this way, ovulation and the time of fertiliza-
tion can, to a large extent, be predicted with certainty. Furthermo-
re, induction of ovulation is still possible by means of HCG injected
   n  i  
of
35 mm diameter and insemination 24 hours post-injection. If an
 ovulation has not taken place, perhaps a second insemination
should be performed 36-48 hours post-injection.
With inseminations that were performed later than 12 hours
post-ovulation only a low rate of success of pregnancy was re-
corded.
Fig. 3. Freshly ovulating (rupturing) GRAAFIAN follicle. (Courtesy of Prof. Glatzel.
 The presence of deep-frozen semen, owing to its practically unli-
Berlin)
mited storage capability in the deep frozen condition, brings the
181
advantage that the semen can be shipped anytime and accordingly
day 18 is of practical importance. At this time the embryonic vesi-
is available at the insemination station already before the mating
 cle is found as a symmetrically round sphere at the base of the uter-
season. Consequently its transport need not be coordinated with the
 ine horn or in the body of the uterus. From about day 16 post-con-
timing of the ovulation of the mare. Moreover, the presence of deep
ception through the so-called sensibilizing stage, the uterus is well
frozen semen makes possible the increased availability of interna-
 palpable as a firm structure. On the 20th day, the embryonic vesicle
tional stallions, the unlimited tournament-commitment of breeding
 assumes a more asymmetrical, polygonal form. On the 23rd day the
stallions even during the mating season as well as the installation of
embryo can be recognized. At this point in time, it has a length of
sperm banks. There are considerable individual variations with
 about 6 mm. From this time on, even the activity of the heart can
regard to the capability of deep-freezing and thawing of stallion
be observed.
sperm, so that the quality of the semen of some stallions after the
 Ultrasound investigations are indicated in the framework of ear-
freezing and thawing process can be considerably lowered and no 
ly pregnancy diagnosis in the case of unclear results of uterine pal-
satisfactory rate of pregnancy can be reached.
 pation, for the demonstration or exclusion of risky pregnancies
such as twin pregnancies, especially identical twins, as well as when
Examination for pregnancy
there is a suspicion of embryo resorption (Fig. 7).
In the mare a transrectal clinical examination (TU) for pregnancy is
If an, in general, undesirable twin-pregnancy is observed in due
 possible from the third week. The first two weeks post-conception
issd si oqa ue jo leoan pssans roe aep o dn a
present a stage without result by rectal examination. The embryo
by the so-called manual pinch (Fig. 8). After such a procedure, the
can be demonstrated by ultrasonography from day 9 or 10 post-
viability of the remaining embryo should be checked about 1 week
ovulation (Fig. 6). The examination for certain pregnancy about
later. Sex determination is the "high school" of ultrasound diagnos-
08.04.11
06.09.89:80592
28.03.111
Fig. 4. Organized late corpus hemorhagicum/early
Fig. 5a. Thin-walled, chambered large cyst. (Cour-
 Fig. 5b. Thick-walled, small persisting cysts. (Cour-
corpus luteum. (Courtesy of Prof. Glatzel, Berlin)
tesy of Prof. Glatzel, Berlin)
tesy of Prof. Glatzel, Berlin)
25
71
16:3
CALX:01.2CH
29.03.12
Fig. 8. Following removal of the upper embryonic 
vesicle (strong fold-formation of the damaged fetal
Fig. 6. Early gestation, day 12. (Courtesy of Prof.
Fig. 7. win pregnancy, day 16. (Courtesy of Prof.
membranes), surviving embryo distinctly shown.
Glatzel, Berlin)
Glatzel, Berlin)
(Courtesy of Prof. Glatzel, Berlin)
182
tics. It is possible from the 6th to the 8th week of pregnancy. In doing
this, the position of the sex hillock is checked and, for this, the pel-
vic girdle (hind limb) and the umbilical cord are sought. If the sex
hillock, a dense, about 0.5 cm long swelling is found between the
umbilical cord and pelvis, then it is a colt foal. If this structure is
found caudal to the pelvic girdle below the root of the tail, then we
are dealing with a filly foal. To be safe, an image should always be
documented and in case of doubt no statement should be made.
183
List of References
 Arthroscopy and Endoscopy in Veterinary Medicine
Lucas, J.M., Ros, M.W., Richardson, D.W., Post operative performance of
racing Standardbreds treated arthroscopicatly for carpal chip fractures: 176
Mllwraith, C.W., Experiences in diagnostic and surgical arthroscopy in the
cases (1986-1993). Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(1): p. 48-52.
horse. Equine Vet. J., 1984. 16(1): p. 11-19.
33.
Schneider, R.K., Bramlage, L.R., Gabel, A.A., Barone, L.M., Kantrowitz,.
Trotter, G.W., MCIlwraith, C.W., Advances in equine arthroscopy. Vet. Clin.
BM.,Incidence,tocationand clasificatin of 371 thirdcapat bone fractures
2.
in 313 horses. Equine Vet. J., 1988. 6 (Suppl.): p. 33-42.
North Am. {Equine Pract.), 1996. 12(2): p. 261-281.
34.
Mellwraith, C.W, Yovich, J.V, Martin, G.S., Arthroscopic surgery for the
treatment of osteochondral chip fractures in the equine carpus. J. Amer.
Vet. Med. Assoc., 1987. 191(5): p. 531-540.
Thoracic Limb
35.
Auer, JA., Watkins, J.P, White, N.A., Taylor, T.S., Rooney, J.R., Stab fractu-
Tes of the fourth and intermediate carpat bones in five horses. J. Amer. Vet.
3.
Butler, JA., Colles, C.M., Dyson, S.J, Kold, S.E., Poulos, PW., Clinicat radio-
Med. Assoc., 1986. 188: p. 595-601.
logy of the borse. 2 ed. Fusion times of physes and suture lines. 2000, Oxford:
36.
Nixon, A.J., Wilke, M., Fractures of the patmar aspects of the carpat bones -
Blackwell Science. 585-587.
A debilitating probtem. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 104-
4.
Embertson, R.M., Bramlage, L.R., Herring, D.S., Gabel, A.A., Physeat frac-
tures in the horse. I. Classification and incidence. Vet. Surg., 1986. 15(3): p.
106.
37.
Lewis, R.D., Carpal arthrodesis - indications and techniques. Proc. Am.
223-229.
Assoc. Equine Pract., 2001. 47: p. 480-483.
5.
Wagner, PC., Watrous, B.J., Equine pediatric orthopedics: pat S - physet
Katzenmeier,K,Praparatorische, rntgenotogischeund klinishe Befundeam
fractures. Equine Pract., 1990. 12(9): p. 21-25.
Karpat- und Metakarpatsketett des Pferdes im Hinbtick auf das Vorkommen
6.
Emberson, R.M., Bramlage, L.R., Gabel, A.A., Physeal fractures in the horse.
und die Pathogenese der mediaten Uberbeine. 1994, Tierarztl. Hochschule
II. Management and outcome. Vet. Surg., 1986. 15(3): p. 230-236.
Hannover: Hannover.
7.
Auer, JA.,Beitrag zurFruhdiagnose und Behandlung einer speziellen Stet-
39.
Losonsky, J.M., Knllr, S.K., Pijanowski, G.J., Prevatence and distibtion of
tungsanomatie beim Pferd. Pferdeheilkunde, 1989. 5(4): p. 201-205.
the first and fifth carpat bonesinStandardbred horses as determined by radio-
Greet, TR.C., Managing Flexural and Angular Limb Deformities: The
graphyetRadiol1988.29(5）:p.23623.
Newmarket Perspective. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 130-
40.
Stover, S.M., Pool, R.R., Morgan, J.P, Martin, R.B., Sprayberry, K., A reiw
136.
of bucked shins and metacarpal stress fractures in the thoroughbred race-
9.
Leitch, M., Muscutosketetat disorders in neonatat foats. Vet. Clin. North Am.
horse. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1988. 34: p. 129-134.
(Equine Pract.), 1985. 1(1): p. 189-207.
41.
Boston, R.C., Nunamaker, D.M., Gait and speed as exercise components of
10.
Brauer, TS., Booth, TS., Riedesel, E., Physeat growth retardation teads to cor-
risk factors associated with onset of fatigue injury of the third metacarpat
Tetion of intracarpat angutar deviations as wuell as physeat vatgus deformity.
bone in 2-year-old Thoroughbred racehorses. Am. J. Vet. Res., 2000. 61(6): p.
Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(3): p. 193-196.
602-608.
11.
Read, E.K., Read, M.R., Townsend, H.G., Clark, C.R., Pharr J.W., Wilson,
42.
Riggs, C.M., Whitehouse, G.H., Boyde, A., Pathotogy of the distat condyles
D.G., Effect of hemi-circumferential periosteal transection and etevation in
of the third metacarpat and third metatarsat bones of the horse. Equine Vet.
foats with experimentally induced angular limb deformities. J. Amer. Vet.
J, 1999. 31(2): p. 140-148.
Med Assoc,2002.221(4: p.536-540.
43.
Zekas, L.J., Bramlage, L.R., Embertson, R.M., Hance, S.R., Charaterisation
12.
Bleyaert H.E, Madison, JB., Comptete biceps brachi tenotoy to facilitate
of the type and tocation of fractures of the third metacarpatfmetatarsal con-
internatl fixation of supragtenoid tubercte fractures in three horses. Vet. Sur..
dytes in 13s horses in centrat Kentucky (1986-1994). Equine Vet. J., 1999.
1999. 28(1): p. 48-53.
31(4): p. 304-308.
13.
Dyson, S., Sixteen fractures of the shoulderregion in the horse.Equine Vet. J.
44.
Ellis, D.R., Somme obseruations on condylat fractures of the third metacarpus
1985. 17(2): p. 104-110.
and third metatarsus in young Thouroughbreds. Equine Vet. J., 1994. 26(3):
14.
Carer, B.G., Schneider, R.K., Hardy, J, Bralage, L.R., Bertone, A.L., Asses-
p. 178-183.
opnsasiaiunouipuu
45.
Pleasant, R.S., Baker, G.J, Muhlbauer, M.C., Foreman, J.H., Boero, M.J.,
cases (1972-1990). Equine Vet. J, 1993. 25(3): p. 203-207.
Stressreactionsandstressfractures oftheproximat patmaraspect ofthethird
15.
Mackey, V.S., Trout, D.R., Meagher, D.M., Hornof, W.J., Stress fractures of
metacarpal bone in horses: S8 cases (1980-1990). J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc.,
thehumrusradiusad tibiainhorses.linicalfaturesandadigraphi
1992. 201(12): p. 1918-1923.
and/or scintigraphic appearance. Vet. Radiol., 1987. 28(1): p. 26-31.
46.
Ross, M.W., Ford, T.S., Orsini, PG., Incomplete longitadinatl fracture of the
16.
O'Sullivan, C.B., Lumsden, J.M., Stress fractures of the tibia and humerus in
proximal patmar cortex of the third metacarpat bone in horses. Vet. Surg.
Thoroughbred racehorses: 99 cases (1992-2000). J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc.,
1988. 17(2): p. 82-86.
2003. 222: p. 491-498.
47.
Ross, M.W., Martin, B.B., Dorsomediat articular fracture of the proximat
Shamis, LD., Auer, J,Comptete unasand fibtas ina pony foat. J. Amer Vet.
aspect ofthe third metacarpal bone in Standardbred racehorses: seven cases
17.
Med. Assoc., 1985. 186(8): p. 802-804.
(1978-1990). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1992. 201(2): p. 332-335.
48.
o Aiosuadsns qm sussp uauo Aiosuadsns purxoid L yoog
18.
Denny, H.R., Barr, A.R.S., Waterman, A., Surgicat treatment of fractures of
the olecranon in the horse: A comparative review of 2S cases. Equine Vet. J.,
ment avutsion fractures. Equine Vet. Educ., 2003. 15(3): p. 132-133.
49.
Bramlage, L.R.,Gabel, A.A.,Hackett, R.P, Arutsion fractures of the originf
1987. 19(4): p. 319-325.
Murray, R.C., Debowes, R.M., Gaughan, E.M., Bramlage, L.R., Application
the suspensory ligament of the harse. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1980.
19.
ofa hook platefor management of equine unafractures.Vet. Surg, 1996.
176(10): p. 1004-1010.
25(3): p. 207-212.
50.
Launois, T., Desbrosse, F, Perin, R., Percutaneous osteostixis as treatment
Donecker, J.M., Bramlage, L.R., Gabel, A.A., Retrospective anatysis of 29
for avutsion fracturesofthe patmariplantar third metacarpalmetatarsal bone
20.
cortex at theoriginofthe suspensoryligament in 29 cases.EquineVet. Educ.
fractures of the otecranon process of the equine utna. J. Amer. Vet. Med.
Assoc., 1984. 185(2): p. 183-189.
2003. 15(3): p. 126-131.
Grondahl, A.M., The incidence of bony fragments and osteochondrosis in the
21.
Auer,J.A.,WatkinsJ.P,Treatment ofadius factures in thehorse.An aa-
metacarpo-and metatarsophalangeat joints of Standardbred trotters. J. Equj-
bysis of 1S clinical cases. Equine Vet. J., 1987. 19: p. 103-110.
ne Vet. Sci, 1992. 12(2): p. 81-85.
22.
SanderShamis,M.,Bramlage, LR.,Gable, A.A., Radius fractures in the r-
52.
Yovich, J.V., Mllwraith, C.W, Stashak, TS., Osteochondrtis dissecans of
se: α retrospective stady of 47cases. Equine Vet. J., 1986.18(6): p. 432-437.
Mellwraith, C.W., Incomptete ossification of carpat and tarsat bones in foats.
the sagittat ridge of the third metacarpat and metatarsat bones in horses. J.
23.
Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1985. 186(11); p. 1186-1191.
Equine Vet. Educ., 2003. 15(2): p. 79-81.
53.
Wissdorf, H., Otto, B., Hertsch, B., Keller, H., Stadtbaumer, G., Sch-
24.
McLaughlin, B.G., Doige, C.E., Fretz, PB., Pharr J.W, Carpat bone tesions
gliedmaβe - Fesselgetenkbereich/Vordermittelfuβbereich. 2 ed. Anatomie und
associated with angutar limb deformities in foats. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc.,
Propadeutik des Pferdes, ed. H. Wissdorf, Gerhards H., Huskamp, B., Dee-
1981. 178(3): p. 224-230.
gen, E. 2002, Hannover: Verlag M. u. H. Schaper Alfeld. 412-413, 426, 431.
25.
Ruohoniemi, M., Tulamo, R.M., Hackzell, M., Radiographic evatluation of
54.
Bramlage, LR., Bukowiecki, C.W., Gabel, A.A., The effect of training on the
ossification of the collateral cartilages of the third phalanx in Finnhorses.
suspensory apparatus of the horse.Proc. Am.Assoc. Equine Pract., 1989. 35:
Equine Vet. J., 1993. 25(5): p. 453-455.
p. 245-247.
26.
Adams, R., Poulos, P, A sketetat ossification index for neonatatl foats. Vet.
55.
Verschooten, F, Gasthuys, F, de Moor, A., Distat splint bone fractures n the
Radiol., 1988. 29: p. 217-222.
horse: an experimental and clinicat study. Equine Vet. J., 1984. 16(6): p. 532-
27.
Wong, D.M,Scarrtt,WK., Maxwell, V., Moon, M, Incote ossifict
536.
of the carpal, tarsat and navicutar bones in a dysmature foat. Equine Vet.
56.
Allen, D., White, A., Management of fractures and exostosis of the metacar-
Educ., 2003. 15(2): p. 72-78.
pats and metatarsats II and IV in 2S horses. Equine Vet. J., 1987. 19: p. 326-
28.
Palmer, S.E., Prevatence of carpal fractures in Thoroughbred and Standard-
330.
bred racehorses. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1986. 188(10): p. 1171-1173.
57.
Barber, S.M., Caron, J.P, Pharr, JW., Surgicat remouat of metacarpalmeta-
29.
Stephens, P.R., Richardson, D.W., Spencer, P.A., Slab fractures of the third car-
taTsat exostosis. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1986. 32: p. 371-383.
pal bone in Standardbreds and Thoroughbreds: 1SS cases (1977-1984).
58.
Keune, C., Grenz, G., Keller, H., Metacarpate Exostosen ais Lahmheitsursa-
J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1988. 193: p. 353-358.
che desPferdesund eine Moglichkeit ihrer operativen Behandlung.Pferde
30.
Bramlage, L.R., Schneider, R.K., Gabel, A.A., Blake-Caddel, L., A clinical pe-
heilkunde, 1997. 13(2): p. 117-127.
spective on lammeness originating in the carpus. Equine Vet. J., 1988.6 (Suppl):
59.
Holcombe, S.J., Schneider, R.K., Bramlage, L.R., Gabel, A.A., Bertone, A.L.,
p. 12-18.
Beard; W.L., Lag screw fixation of noncomminuted sagitat fractures of the
31.
Auer, J., Diseases of the carpus. Vet. Clin. North Am. Large Anim. Pract.,
proximal phatanx in raceborses: S9 cases (1973-1991). J. Amer Vet. Med.
1980. 2: p. 81-99.
Assoc, 1995. 206(8): p. 1195-1199.
185
60.
Markel, M.D., Richardson, D.W., Noncomminuted fractures of the proximat
89.  Parente, E.J., Richardson, D.W., Spencer, P, Basal sesammoidean fractures in
phalamx in 69 horses. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1985. 186(6): p. 573-582.
horses: 57 cases (1980-1991). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1993. 202(8): p.
61.
Fortier, L.A., Foerner, JJ, Nixon, A.J, Arthroscopic remouat of axiat oste-
1293-1297.
ochondral fragments of the plantarlpatmar proximal aspect of the proximat
90.
Torre, F, Motta, M., Incidence and distribution of 369 proximal sesamoid
phatanx in horses: 119 cases (1988-1992). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1995.
bone fractures in 354 standardbred horses (1984199s). Equine Pract., 1999.
206(1): p. 71-74.
21(8): p. 6-12.
62.
Sandgren, B., Bony fragments in the tarsocrural and metacarpo- or metatar-
91.
Henninger, R.W., Bramlage, L.R., Schneider, R.K., Gabel, A.A., Lag screw
sophalngeal joints inthe Standardbred horse-α radiographic survey Equine
and cancelous bone grafts fixation of transverse praximal sesamoid bone
Vet. J., 1988. 6 (Suppl.): p.66-70.
fractures in horses: 2S cases (1983-1989). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1991.
63.
Dalin, G., Sandgren,B., Carlsten, J., Plantar osteochondrat fragments in the
199(5): p. 606-612.
metatarsophalangeal joints in Standardbred trotters; resutt of osteochondro-
92.
Bertone, A.L., Equine fracture repair. Fractures of the proximal sesamoid
sis or traurma? Equine Vet. J., 1993. 16 (Suppl.): p. 62-65.
bones., ed. A.J. Nixon. 1996, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, S. 163-
64.
Nixon, AJ, Pool, RR, Histgic aprnce of axiat osthnat f
171.
ments from the proximoplantarproximopatmaraspet of the proximal pha-
93.
Fretz, B,Babr, S.M, Baily, J.V.,MKenzie,N.,Maaemnt of x
lamx in borses. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1995. 207(8): p. 1076-1080.
mat sesamoid bone fractures in the horse. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1984.
65.
 Sandgren, B., Dalin, G., Carlsten, J, Osteochondrosis in the tarscrurat oint
185(3): p. 282-284.
and osteochondrat fragments in thefettock joints in Standardbred trottes.
94.
Barclay, W.P, Foerner, JJ., Phillips, TN., Axiat sesamoid injuries associated
I. Epideiotogy. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 16 (Suppl.): p. 31-37.
wuith taterat condytar fractures in horses. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1985.
66.
Bukowiecki, C.F, Bramlage, LR., Gabel, A.A., Patmaplantar process frac-
186(3): p. 278-279.
tures of the proximat phalamx in 1S horses. Vet. Surg., 1986. 15(5): p. 383-
95.
Ellis, D.R., Fractures of the proximat sesamoid bones in thoroughbred foats.
388.
Equine Vet. J., 1979. 11(1): p. 48-52.
67.
Colon, J.L., Bramlage, L.R., Hance, S.R., Embertson, R.M., Quatitative and
96.
Southwood, L.L., Mcllwraith, C.W., Arthroscopic reouat of fracture frag-
quantitative documentation oftheracing performance of 461Thoroughbred
ments involving a portion of the base of the proximat sesamoid bone in
racehorses after arthroscopic remouat of dorsoproximat first phatanx oste-
horses: 26 cases (1984-1997). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2000. 217(2): p.
ochondrat fractures (1986-1995). Equine Vet. J, 2000. 32(6): p. 475-481.
236-240.
68.
Kawcak, C.E., Mcllwraith, C.W., Proximodarsat first phalanx osteochondral
97.
Southwood, L.L., Mllwraith, C.W., Trotter, G.W., Stashak, TS., Baxter,
chip fragmentation in 336 horses. Equine Vet. J., 1994. 26(5): p. 392-396.
G.M., Hendrickson, D.A., Arthroscopic remouat of apical fractures of the
69.
Elce, YA., Richardson, D.W., Arthroscopic remoual of dorsoproximat chip
sesamoid bone in horses: 98 cases (1989-1999). Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine
fractures of the proximat phatanx in standing horses. Vet. Surg., 2002. 31(3):
Pract.,2000. 46: p. 100-101.
p.195-200.
98.
Woodie, JB, Ruggles, A.J., Litsky, A.S., In vitra biomechanicat properties of
Litzke, L.F, Dietz, O., Handbuch Pferdepraxis. 2 ed. Krankheiten an Fessel-
2 compression fixation methods for midbody proximal sesamoid bone frac-
70.
tures in horses. Vet. Surg., 2000. 29(4): p. 358-363.
gelenk und Fessel., ed. O. Dietz, Huskamp B. 1999, Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke
Verlag. 879-900.
99.
Jaugstetter, H., Jacobi, R., Litzke, L.F, Dietz, O., Perivaskutare Sympathek-
Rose, PL., Seeherman, H, O'Callaghan, M., Computed tomographic euatua-
tomie, eine Therapiemoglichkeit beim Podatrochtose-/Sesamoidose-Syndrom:
71.
tion of comminuted middle phalangeat fractures in the horse. Vet. Radiol.
Eine Ubersicht. Tierarztl. Praxis (G), 2003. 31(1): p. 46-51.
Utrasound, 1997. 38(6): p. 424-429.
100.
Cornelissen, B.PM, Rijkenhuizen, A.B.M., Barneveld, A., The arteriat shift
72.
Tnibar, M., Auer, JA., Hmidouch, A., Azrib, R., Bzioui, A., La tansfixtin
features in the equine proximat sesamoid bone. Vet. Quarterly 18 (Suppl.),
dans le traitement des fractures chezle chevat: cas d'ue fracture comminuti-
1996: p. 110-116.
101. Hardy, J, Marcoux, M., Breton, L., Clinicat relevance of radiographic
ve de la deuxieme phatange. Pratique Vet. Equine, 1996. 28(4): p. 303-309.
73.
Nemeth,,Back, W., Theuseof wating cast to repai fractures inhorses ad
findings in proximal sesamoid bones of tuo-year-otd Standardbreds in their
first year of race training.J Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1991. 198(12): p. 2089-
ponies. Equine Vet. J., 1991. 23(1): p. 32-36.
74.
Scott, EA.,MDole,M.,Shires,M.H.,A eview of third phatanx fractues n
2094.
102.
Spike-Pierce, D.L., Bramlage, L.R., Correlation of racing performance with
the horse: sixty-five cases. J Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1979. 174(12): p. 1337-
Tadiographic changes in the proximal sesamoid bones of 487 Thoroughbred
1343.
yearlings. Equine Vet. J., 2003. 35: p. 350-353.
75.
Honnas, C.M., O' Brien, TR., Linford, R.L., Distal phatanx fractures in
103. Poulos, PW., Radiographic and histologic assessment of proximat sesamoid
horses. A survey of 274 harses with radiographic assessment of healing in 36
bone changes in young and working harses. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract.,
horses. Vet. Radiol., 1988. 29(3): p. 98-107.
1988. 34: p. 347-358.
76.
Schneider, J., Zur Atiotogie und Therapie der Hufbeinfraktur. Monatsh. Vet.
104. Dik, K.J., van den Belt, A.J.M., Enzerink, E, van Weeren, PR., The radioga-
Med., 1987. 42(13): p. 472-475.
phic development of the distal and proximal double contours of the equine
77.
Johnson, K.A., Smith, FW, Axiat compression generated by corticat and can
navicutar bone on dorsoproximat-patmarodistal oblique fupright pedal
celtous lag screws in the equine distal phalanx. Vet. J., 2003. 166(2): p. 159-
radiographs, from age 1 to 11 months. Equine Vet. J., 2001. 33(1): p. 70-74.
163.
105. Colles, C.M., Hotw to repair navicular bone fractures in the horse. Proc. Am.
78.
Hertsch, B., Hoppner, S., Zur Fraktur des Processus extensorius des Hufbei-
Assoc. Equine Pract., 2001. 47: p. 270-278.
nes beim Fohten. Pferdeheilkunde, 1998. 14(1): p. 11-18.
106.Nmh,,ik,J,Lag scwfixatinf saitl ailbfa
79.
Hertsch, B., Neuberth, M., Die isolierte Ossifikation am Hufbeinast des Pfer-
in five horses. Equine Vet. J., 1985. 17(2): p. 137-139.
des- eine differentiatdiagnostische Abgrenzung zu Hufbeinastfraktur und
107.Dietz, O., Krankheiten des Nervensystems. 1. Nichtinfektise Krankheiten.
Hufknorpetverknacherung. Pferdeheilkunde, 1991. 7(3): p. 169-174.
HandbuhdpaxisDiHsl 19St
80.
Dechant, J.E., Trotter, G.W., Stashak, TS., Hendrickson, D.A., Reouat of
 Ferdinand Enke Verlag. 623-636.
latge fragments of the extensor pracess of the distal phalanx via arthrotomy
108.
Dyson, S., Shoutder lameness in horses: an anatysis of S8 suspected cases.
in borses: 14 cases (1992-1998). J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 2000. 217(9): p.
Equine Vet. J., 1986. 18(1): p. 29-36.
1351-1355.
109.
Duncan, I.D., Schneider, R.K., Equine suprascaputar neuropathy (stweeny):
81.
Haynes, PF, Adams, O.R., Internat fixation of fractured extensor process of
clinicat and pathologic observations. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1985.
third phatanx in a horse. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1974. 164: p. 61-63.
31: p. 415-428.
82.
Budras, K.D., Patan,B, Schiel, C., Enwicklung und Stuktur des verhantn
110. Baumgartner, W., Applikation von Arzneimitttn und Diagnostika. 5 ed. Kli-
Sohtensporns samt Sohtenrandeinkerbung(Crena)des Hufbeins sowie der
nische Propadeutik der inneren Krankheiten und Hautkrankheiten der Haus-
Hornsaute samt Hufbeinrinne (Usur). Tierarztl. Monatschr. Wien., 1998.
und Heimtiere., ed. W. Baumgartner. 2002, Berlin: Parey Verlag. 358-361.
85(11): p. 369-376.
111. Wissdorf, H., Otto, B., Hertsch, B., Keller, H., Schttergtiedmaβe - Hufbe-
83.
Small wood, JE., Albright, S.M., Metcalf, M.R., Thral, D.E., Harrington,
reich. 2 ed. Anatomie und Propadeutik des Pferdes, ed. H. Wissdorf, Gerhards
B.D., A xeroradiographic study of the devetoping equine foredigit and meta-
H., Huskamp, B, Deeen, E. 2002, Hanmover: Verlag M. u. H. Schaper
carpophalangeal region from bith to six months of age. Vet. Radiol., 1989.
Alfeld. 382, 392.
30(3): p. 98-110.
112.
Rijkenhuizen, A.B.M., Die diagnostischen Anasthesien an der Vorderglied.
84.
Melo E Silva, S.R.A., Vulcano, L.C., Coltateral cartilage ossification of the
maβe des Pferdes. Pferdeheilkunde, 2001. 17(4): p. 330-338.
distatl phatanx in the Brazilian Jumper horse. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound, 2002.
113. Carter, G.K., Hogan, PM., Use of Diagnostic Nerve Blocks in Laeness Eua-
43(5): p. 461-463.
taation. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1996. 42: p. 26-32.
85.
Verschooten, F, van Warebeek, B., Verbeeck, J., The ossfiction of cata-
114. Bassage I, L.H., Ross, M.W., Diagnostic Anatgesia. Diagnosis and Manage-
ges of the distal phatx nthehre:ananatmicat, exprimental, radioga-
ment of Lameness in the horse, ed. M.W. Ross, Dyson, S.J. 2003, Philadel-
phic and clinicat study. J. Equine Vet. Sci., 1996. 16(7): p. 291-305.
phia: Saunders. 93-124.
86.
Honnas, C.M., Ragle, C.A., Meagher, D.M., Necrosis of the collaterat carti-
115.
Stanek, C., Girtler, D., Diagnostische Leitungsanasthesien an der Vorderex-
lage of the distat phalanx in horses: 16 cases (1970-1985). J. Amer. Vet. Med.
tremitat des Pferdes: ein Vorschtag zur Standardisierung. Pferdeheilkunde,
Assoc., 1988. 193(10): p. 1303-1307.
2002. 18: p. 617-621.
87.
Hill, A.E., Stover, S.M., Gardner, I.A., Kane, A.J,Whitcomb, M.B., Emerson,
116. Cornelissen, B.PM., Rijkenhuizen, A.B.M., Bareveld, A., The diagnostic mer-
A.G.,Risk factors forand outcomes of noncatastrophic suspensoryapparatus
ve btock of the sesamoidean nerve: desensitised structures and possible clini-
injury in Thoroughbred racehorses. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2001. 218(7):
cal apptications. Vet. Quarterly 18 (Suppl.), 1996: p. 97-102.
p.1136-1144.
117. Keg, PR., Schamhardt, H.C., van Weeren, PR., Barneveld, A., The effect of
88.
Honnas, C.M., Snyder, J.R., Meagher, D.M., Ragle, C.A., Traumatic disrup-
the highpatmarnerve blockandtheulnarnerveblockonlaenessprovoked
tion of the suspensoryaaatus in foatsCorellVet., 1990.0(2): p.123
bya colagenaseinduced tendonitis ofthelaterat branch of thesuspenry
133.
ligarment. Vet. Quarterly 18 (Suppl.), 1996. 18 (Suppl.): p. 103-105.
186
118. Muylle, S., Desmet, P., Simoens, P, Lauwers, H., Vlaminck, L., Histotogicat
148. Denoix, J.M., Guizien, I., Perrot, P., Injuries of the accessory ligament of the
study of the innervation of the suspensory ligament of the forelimb of the
superficiatdigital flexor tendon(proximatcheckligament) in sportandTace
horse. Vet. Rec., 1998. 142(22): p. 606-610.
horses. Pferdeheilkunde, 1996. 12: p. 613-616.
119.
Ford, T.S., Ross, M.W., Orsini, PG., A comparison of methods for proximat
149. Southwood, L.L., Stashak, TS., Kainer, R.A., Wrigley, R.H., Desmotommy of
patmar metacarpat anatgesia in horses. Vet. Surg., 1989. 18(2): p. 146-150.
theaccessoryligamentofthesupeficiatldigital flexortendoninthehorsewith
120.
Dabareiner, R.M., White, N.A., Sullins, K.E., Comparison of current techmi-
use of a tenoscopic approach to the carpat sheath. Vet. Surg., 1999. 28(2):
ques for patmar digitat neurectomy in horses. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract.,
p. 99-105.
1997. 43: p. 231-232.
150.
Auer, J.A., Flexurat deformties. 2 ed. Equine surgery, ed. J.A.Auer, Stick,JA.
121.
Stashak, TS., The foot. 5 ed. Adams' Lameness in horses., ed. TS. Stashak.
199,Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company. 752-765.
 2002, Baltimore: Lipincot Williams and Wilkins.664-680, 718-720.
151.
Dyson, S.J, Proximat metacarpal and metatarsal pain: a diagnostic chalenge.
122.
Textor, JA., Nixon, AJ.,Forter, L.A., Tenoscopic relese of the equine ca-
Equine Vet. Educ., 2003. 15(3): p. 134-138.
pal canat. Vet. Surg., 2003. 32(3): p. 278-284.
152.
Adams, S.B., Santschi, EM., Management of Congenital and Acguired Fle-
123.
Mackay-Smith, M.P., Cushing, L.S., Leslie, J.A.,Carpat canat* syndroe in
xurat Limb Deformities. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 117-
horses. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1972. 160(7): p. 993-997.
125.
124.
Dik, KJ, an en Bet, AJMegPR,Utasnogahic evattion f f
153.
Kohler, M., Therapie des Sehnenstetzfuβes bei Fohten und wachsenden Pfer-
lock amnuta igament constriction in the horse.Equine Vet. J., 1991. 23(4): p.
den. Tierarztl. Praxis, 2002. 30 (G): p. 51-57.
285-288.
154. Hunt, R.J., Flexurat Lib Deformity in Foats. Diagnosis and Management of
125.
Rothlisberger, U., Kaegi, B., Geyer, H., Auer, J.A., Das Fessetunnetsyndrom
Lamenessin the horse, ed. M.W. Ross, Dyson, S.J. 2003, Philadelphia: Saun-
beim Pferd: Literaturibersicht und retrospektive Untersuchung.Schweiz.
ders. 562-565.
Arch. Tierheilk., 2001. 143(6): p. 285-293.
155.
Hertsch, B., Zur Pathogenese des Strahtbeinsyndroms. Swiss Vet., 1993.
126.
Torre, F, Benazzi, C., Potschka, R., Constriction of the fetlock annutar liga-
11(Suppl.): p. 127-130.
ment: relationship between clinicat and histopathologicat findings. Pferde-
156.1
Rijkenhuizen, A.BM,Die arteriette Btutgefaβuersorgng des Strahtbeinsud
heilkunde, 1998. 14(6): p. 461-468.
ihre Beziehung zur Podatrochtose. Pferdeheilkunde, 1990. 6: p. 253-260.
127.
Stanek, C.,Edinger, H.,Rntgendiagnostik bei der Striktur des Fesseing-
157. Hertsch, B., Hoppner, S., Zur Diagnostik des Podatrochlose-Syndromsin der
bandes bzu durch das Fesstringband beim Pferd. Pferdeheilkunde, 1990.6:
Praxis. Pferdeheilkunde, 1999. 15(4): p. 293-308.
p. 125-128.
158. Seyrek-Intas, D., Tellhelm, B., Reckels, FJ., Interpretation und diagnostischer
128.
Fortier, L.A., Nixon, A.J., Ducharme, N.G., Mohammed, H.O., Yeager, A..
Wert verschiedener Rontgenbefunde a Strahtbein. Pferdeheitkunde. Pferde-
Tenoscopic examination and proximat annular ligament desmotomy for
heilk unde, 1999. 15(5): p. 406-418.
treatment of equine ,complex*digital sheath tenosymovitis.Vet.Surg.,1999
159.
Wright, IM., Kidd, L., Thorp, B.H., Gross, histologicat and histoorphome-
28(6): p. 429-35.
tricfeaturesofthenavicularboneand retated strutures inthehorse.Equine
129.
Booth, T.M., Lameness associated with the bicipitat bursa in an Arab stalion.
Vet. J., 1998. 30(3): p. 220-234.
Vet. Rec., 1999. 145(7): p. 194-198.
160.
.Clercq de, T., Verschooten, F, Ysebaert, M., A comparison of the patmara-
130.(
Crabill, M.R., Chaffin, M.K., Schmitz, D.G., Utrasonographic morphotlogy
proximat-paimarodista view of the isolated navicularbone to other views.
of the bicipitat tendon and bursa in clinicatly normal Quarter Horses. Am. J.
Vet. Radiol. Utrasound, 2000. 41(6): p. 525-533.
Vet. Res., 1995. 56(1): p. 5-10.
161. Ueltschi, G., Zur Rintgendiagnostik des Strahtbeins. Pferdeheilkunde, 2002.
131.
Estberg, L., Stover, S.M., Gardner, IA., Johnson, B.J, Case, J.T., Ardans, A..
18(3): p. 217-224.
Read, D.H., Anderson, M.L., Barr, B.C., Daft, B.M., Kinde, H., Moore, J..
162.
Busoni, V., Denoix,JM.,Ultrasonography of the podotrochtearaparatus i
Stoltz, J., Woods, LW., Fatal muscutosketetat injuries incurred during racing
the horse using a transcuneal approach: technique and reference images. Vet.
and training in Thoroughbreds. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1996. 208(1): p.
Radiol. Utrasound, 2001. 42(6): p. 534-540.
92-96.
163. Ueltschi, G., Stellenwert der Knochenszintigraphie und der Rontgenuntersu-
132.
Richardson, D.W., The metacarpophatangeat joint. Diagnosis and Manage-
chung beim Problemmkreis der Podatrachlose. Pferdeheilkunde, 1999. 15(2):
ment of Lameness in the horse, ed. M.W. Ross, Dyson, S.J. 2003, Philadel-
p. 122-128.
phia: Saunders. 348-362.
164.
Mair, T.S., Kinns, J, Jones, R.D., Bolas, N.M., Magnetic resonance imaging
133.
Bowman, K.E, Leitch, M., Nunamaker, D.M., Fackelman, G.E., Tate Jr., L.P.,
of the distal limb of the standing horse:Technique and review of 40 casesOf
Park,M.,Boles,C.L.,Raker, C.W.,Colicatins duing teatent fta
foot larmeness. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2003. 49: p. 29-41.
matic disuption of the suspensory apparatus in Thoroughbred horses. J.
165.
Ruohoniemi, M., Tervahartiala, P, Computed tomographic evatuation of
Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1984. 184(6): p. 706-715.
Finn harsecadaver forefetuith radiographicalty probtematic findings onthe
134.Seifele,.,Frewen,J,AktieBeegungsapparat,Msketsystem,Mygi.
flexor aspect of the navicular bone. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound, 1999. 40(3):
Bewegungsapparat. 7 ed Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere., ed. R. Nik-
p. 275-281.
kel, Schurmmer, A., Seiferle, E, Frewein, J., Wille, K.-H., Wilkens, H. Vol.
166.
Widmer, WR., Buckwalter, K.A., Fessler, J.E, Hill, M.A., van Sickle, D.C..
Band1. 2001, Berlin: Verlag Paul Parey. 489-492, 515-516, 552-553.
Ivancevich,S., Use of radiograhy, computed tmography and magnetic res-
135.
Ueltschi, G., Zut Diagnose von Interosseuslasionen an der Ursprungsstelle.
nance imaging for evatuation of navicutar syndrome in the horse. Vet. Radiol.
Pferdeheilkunde, 1989. 5(2): p. 65-69.
Utrasound, 2000. 41(2): p. 108-116.
136.
Denoix, J.M., Crevier, N., Azevedo, C., Ultrasound examination of the
167.
Denoix, JM., Thiaud, D., Ricco,B., Titudronate as α new theapetic aget
pastern in horses. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1991. 37: p. 363-380.
intheteatment of navicular disease:α doubtle-blind placebo-controlled clini-
137.
Dyson, S.J., Denoix, JM., Tendon sheath, and ligament injuries in the
cat triat. Equine Vet. J., 2003. 35(4): p. 407-413.
pastern. Vet. Clin. North Am.(Equine Pract.), 1995. 11: p. 217-233.
168.
Turner, A.S., Tucker, C.M., Die Wirkung von Isoxsuprinhydrchtorid bei der
138.
Schneider, R.K., Tucker, R.L., Habegger, S.R., Brown, J., Leathers, C.W., Des-
Behandtung der Hufrollenerkrankung: Eine Blindstudie.Pferdeheilkunde,
mitis of the straight sesamoideum ligament in horses: 9 cases (1995-1997). J.
1990. 6(2): p. 11-15.
Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2003. 222(7): p. 973-977.
169.
Willermen, M.A., Savelberg, H.H.C.M., Barneveld, A., The effect of ortho-
139.
Ross, M.W., Surgical Management of Superficial Digitat Flexor Tendinitis.
paedic shoeing onthe force exerted bythe deep digital flexortendon onthe
Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1997. 43: p. 291-296.
navicular bone in horses. Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(1): p. 25-30.
140.
Genovese, R., Longo, K., Berthold, B., Jorgenson, J, Quantiative sonoga-
170.Bar, K., Weile, M, Bodamr, J, Rupprecht, H, Schramm, M, Carbon, R.
phic assessment in the clinicat management of superficiat digital flexor inju-
Extrakorporale Stossuellentherapie (ESWT)-eineMoglichketzurTherapie
ries in thoroughbred acehorses. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1997.43: p.
der Podotrachlose. Tierarztl. Praxis, 2001. 29(3): p. 163-167.
285-290.
171.
Grenz, G., Eversfield, S., Beschreibung einer Operationsmethode zur Behand-
141.
Gillis, C.L., Rehabiliation of Tendon and Ligament Injuries. Proc. Am.
tung der Podotrochtose des Pferdes. Prakt. Tierarzt, 1985. 66: p. 221-223.
Assoc. Equine Pract., 1997. 43: p. 306-309.
172.
Wright, I.M., A study of 118 cases of navicular disease: treatment by navicu-
Smith, R.K.W, Birch, H.L., Patterson-Kane, J., Goodman, S., Cauvin, E.R.
(ar suspensory desmotomy. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 25(6): p. 501-509.
Goodship,A.E.,A review of the etiopathogenesis,and current proposed sta
173.1
Doyle,S.,White,N.A.,Diagnostic findings and prognosis follwing ath
tegiesfrprevention,fsueficiatdigialfexrtendnitisinthehrsec.
scopic treatment of subtle osteochondrat tesions in the shoutder joint of hor-
Am. Assoc. Equine Pract.,2000. 46: p. 54-58.
ses: 1S cases (1996-1999). J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 2000. 217(12): p.
143.
Micklethwaite, L, Wood, AK.W, Sehgal, C.M., Polansky, M, Dowling.
1878-1882.
B.A., Dart, A.J., Rose, R.J., Hodgson, D.R., Use of quantitative anatysis of
174. Boswell J.C., Schramme, M.C., Wilson, A.M., May, S.A., Radiologicat study
sonographic brightness for detection of early healing of tendon injury in
to evatuate suspected scaputohumeral joint dysplasia in Sheland ponies.
horses. Am. J. Vet. Res., 2001. 62(8): p. 1320-1327.
Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(6): p. 510-514.
144.
Kasashima, Y., Kuwano, A., Katayama, Y., Taura, Y., Yoshihara, T, Magne-
175.
Clegg, PD., Dyson, S.J., Summerhays, G.E.S., Schramme, M.C., Scaputoht-
tic resonance imaging application to live horse for diagnosis of tendinitis. J.
Vet. Med. Sci., 2002. 64(7): p. 577-582.
ponies. Vet. Rec., 2001. 148(6): p. 175-179.
145.
Rand, T., Bindeus, T., Alton,K., Voegele, T., Kukla, C., Stanek, C., Imhof, H.,
176.
Nickel, R., Schummer, A., Wille, K.H., Wilkens, H., Passiver Bewegungsappa-
Low-field magnetic resonance imaging (0.2 T) of tendons with sonographic
rat,Sketetsyste:Bndelere,Syndeslogia.7ed.Lehrbuch derAnatmi
and histologic correlation. Cadaveric study. Invest. Radiol., 1998. 33(8): p.
der Haustiere, ed. R. Nickel, Schummer, A., Seiferle, E., Frewein, J, Wille, K.-
433-438.
H, Wilkens, H. Vol. 1. 2001, Berlin: Verlag Paul Parey. 258-260, 263-268.
146.
Dowling, B.A., Dart, A.J, Hodgson, D.R., Smith, R.K.W., Superficiat digitat
177.
Lewis, R.D., Techniques for arthrocentesis of equine shoutder, etbou, stifle,
flexor tendonitis in the horse. Equine Vet. J, 2000. 32(5): p. 369-378.
cnd hip joint. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1996. 42: p. 55-63.
147.
Denoix, J.M., Busoni, V, Ultrasonographic anatomy of the accessory liga-
178.
Bertone, A.L., Mcllwraith, C.W., Osteochondrose of the equine shoutder:
ment of the superficiat digitat flexor tendon in horses. Equine Vet. J., 1999.
Treatment with arthrosopic surgeryProc.Am.Assoc.EquinePract.,1987.
31(3): p. 186-191.
33: p. 683-688.
18
179. Mcllwraith, C.W., Diagnostic and surgicat arthroscopy in the horse. 2 ed.
211. Keegan, K.G., Wilson, D.A., Kreeger, J.M., Ellersieck, M.R., Kuo, K.C., Li,
1990, Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger. 22, 33-43, 85-90, 113-158, 195-202,
Z.,Local distribution of mepivacaine after distal interphalangeal joint injec-
220-221.
tion in horses. Am. J. Vet. Res., 1996. 57(4): p. 422-426.
180.1
Bertone, A.L., Mellwraith, C.W., Powers, B.E., Stashak, T.S., Aanes, W.A.,
212. Sardari, K., Kazemi, H., Mohri, M., Effects of anatgesia of the distal inter-
Turner, A.S., Subchondrat osseous cystic tesions of the etbow of horses: con-
phalangeal joint and navicular bursa on experimental lameness caused by
servative versus surgicat treatment. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1986. 189(5):
sola pain in hrsesJ.VetMed,2002.49(9):p.47881
p. 540-546.
213.
Schumacher, J., Steiger, R., Schumacher, J, de Graves, F, Schramme, M.,
181.
Hopen, L.A., Colahan, PT., Turner, TA., Nixon, A.J., Nonsugicat treatment
Smith,,CkeMfftsfaeiftdist aeal j
of cubitat subchondral cyst-like lesions in horses: seven cases (1983-1987). J.
patmar digital nerves on lameness caused by solar pain in horses. Vet. Surg..
Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1992. 200(4): p. 527-530.
2000. 29(1): p. 54-58.
182.1
Mclwraith, C.W., Subchondrat cystic lesions in the horse - the indications,
214. Boening, K.J, von Saldern, ECh., Leendertse, I., Rahlenbeck, E, Diagnosti-
methods and resuts of surgery. Equine Vet. Educ., 1990. 2(2): p. 75-80.
sche und operative Arthroskopie am Hufgelenk des Pferdes. Pferdeheilkunde,
183.
Sams, A.E., Honnas, C.M., Sack, WO., Ford, TS., Communication of the
1988. 4(4): p. 155-160.
ulnaris lateratlis bursa with the equine etbow joint and evatuation of caudat
215. Haack, D., Hertsch, B., Baez, C., Zystoide Defekte im Hufbein des Pferdes.
arthrocentesis. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 25(2): p. 130-133.
Pferdeheilkunde, 1988. 4(4): p. 143-153.
184.1
Rose, R.J., Frauenfelder, H.C., Arthrocentesis in the horse. Equine Vet. J,
216. Verschooten, F, de Moor, A., Subchondrat cystic and retated tesions affecting
1982. 14(2): p. 173-177.
the equine pedat bone and stifle. Equine Vet. J., 1982. 14(1): p. 47-54.
185. Nixon, A.J., Arthroscopic approaches and intraarticutar anatomy of the equi-
217. Adams, M.N., Turner, TA., Endoscopy of the intertubercutar bursa in horses.
ne elbouo. Vet. Surg., 1990. 19(2): p. 93-101.
J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1999. 214(2): p. 221-225.
186.
Bowker, R.M., van Wulfen, K., Perry, R.L., Linder, K.L., Anatomy of the equ-
218.Wintzer, H-J.,Krankheiten des Pferdes. Ein Leitfaden fir Stuadium und Pra-
ne synoviat joint cavities of the forelimb and the hindlimb. Proc. Am. Assoc.
xis. 1999, Berlin: Verlag Paul Parey. 376.
Equine Pract., 1996. 42: p. 33-47.
219. Schramme, M.C., Boswell, J.C., Hamhougias, K., Toulson, K., Vitanen, M.,
187.
Ford, TS., Ross, M.W., Orsini, PG., Communications and boundaries of the
An in vitro study ta compare S different techniques for injection of the navi-
middte carpal and carpometacarpatl joints in horses. Am. J. Vet. Res., 1988.
cular bursa in the horse. Equine Vet. J., 2000. 32(3): p. 263-267.
49(12): p. 2161-2164.
Moyer, W., Carte, GK., Techmiques to facilitate inta-aticular inetin of
220.
Schumacher, J., Schumacher, J., Gillette, R., de Graves, F, Schramme, M.,
188.
equine joints. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1996. 42: p. 48-54.
Smith, R., Perkins, J., Coker, M., The effects of locat anaesthetic sotution in
the navicutar bursa of harses wuith lamenesscaused by distal interphalangeal
189.
Gough, M.R., Mayhew, G., Munroe, G.A., Diffusion of mepivacaine between
joint pain. Equine Vet. J., 2003. 35(5): p. 502-505.
adjacent synovial structures in the horse. Part I: Forelimb foot and carpus.
Equine Vet. J., 2002. 34(1): p. 80-84.
221.
Wright, LM., Phillis, TJ, Walmsley, J.P, Endoscopy of the navicutar bua:
Mellwraith, C.W, Robertson, J.T, Mclluraith and Turner's equine surgey:
Anewtechniqueforthetreatment of contaminatedand septicbursae.Equine
190.
aduanced techniques. 2 ed. 1998, Baltimore: Williams and Wikins. 150-174.
Vet. J., 1999. 31(1): p. 5-11.
191.
Wilke,M.,Nixn,A.J.,Malark, J.,Myhe,G,Fractues of the pama ast
222. Southwood, L.L., Stashak, TS., Kainer, R.A., Tenoscopic anatomy of the
of the carpat bones in horses: 10 cases (1984-2000). J. Amer. Vet. Med.
equine carpat fexor synoviat sheath. Vet. Surg., 1998. 27: p. 150-157.
Assoc., 2001. 219(6): p. 801-804.
223. Nixon, A.J, Schachter, B.L., Pool, R.R., Exostoses ofthe caudat perimeter of
192.
Denoix, J.M.,Jacot, S.,Bousseau, B., Perrot, P., Utrasonogaphic anatomy of
the radial physis as a cause of carpat synoviat sheath tenosynovitis and lame-
the dorsat and abaxil asects of the equine felock. Equine Vet. J, 1996.
ness in horses: 10 cases (1999-2003). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2004.
28(1): p. 54-62.
224(2): p. 264-270.
193.
Yovich, J.V, Turner, A.S., Stashak, T.S., Mcllwraith, C.W., Luxation of the
224. Konig, H.E., Breit, S., Schleip, D., Zur Anatomie der Fessetbeugesehmenschei-
metacarpophalangeat and metatarsophalangeal joints in horses. Equine Vet.
de des Pferdes. Wien. Tierarztl. Monatsschr., 1995. 82(1): p. 10-15.
J., 1987. 19(4): p. 295-298.
225.
Wilderjans, H., Boussauw, B., Madder, K., Simon, O., Tenosynovitis of the
194.
van Kruiningen, H.J., Practicat techniques for making injections inta joints
digital flexartendon sheath and annutar ligament constriction syndrome cau-
and bursae of the horse. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1963. 143: p. 1079-1083.
sed bytongitudinal tears inthedeep digitalflexortendon:aclinicatand sur-
195.1
Misheff,M.M.,Stover, S.M.,A coarisn of tuo techniques for artocen
gicat report of 17 cases in Warmbtood horses. Equine Vet. J., 2003. 35(3): p.
tesis of the equine metacarpophatangeal joint. Equine Vet. J., 1991. 23(4): p.
270-275.
273-276.
226. Neumeier, W, Waibl, H., Meyer, W., Topographie und Struktur des Vinctu
196.
Hogan, PM., Mellwraith, C.W., Honnas, C.M, Watkins, J.P., Bramlage, L.R.,
tendinis in der Fesselbeugesehnenscheide des Pferdes. Pferdeheilkunde, 2004.
Surgicat treatment of subchondrat cystic tesions of the third metacarpat bone:
20: p. 37-41.
resuts in 1S horses(1986-1994). Equine Vet. J, 1997. 29(6): p. 477-482.
227. Hassel, D.M., Stover, S.M., Yarbrough, T.B., Drake, C.M., Taylor, K.T., Pal-
197.
Kold, S.,Hickman,J, Three cases ofsubchondrat bone cysts inthe distal lim
mar-plantaraxial sesamoidean approach to the digitatflexortendon sheath in
of the horse treated by bone grafting via an extra-articular approach.Equine
horses. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 2000. 217(9): p. 1343-1347.
Vet. Educ., 1990. 2(2): p. 70-74.
228.
Edinger, J.K., Correlation between tenoscopic and uttrasonographic findings
198.Dabarenr, M.,White, N.A, Sullins, K.E,Metacapatgeat jt 
of the digital flexortendon sheath in horses.Proc. Europ. College Vet. Sug.
ovial pad fibrotic proliferation in 63 horses Vet. Surg., 1996. 25(3): p. 199-
2002. 11: p. 183-184.
206.
229.
Nixon, A.j., Endoscopy of the digital flexor tendon sheath in horses. Vet.
199.1
Kannegieter, N.J, Chronic proliferative synovitis of the equine metacarpo-
Surg., 1990. 19(4): p. 266-271.
phatangeat jaint Vet. Rec., 1990. 127(1): p. 8-10.
200.
Mosimann, W., Uber die Beuwegungsmglichkeit in den Zehengetenken des
Pferdes. Schweizer Archiv Tierheilk.,1958. 100: p. 7-14.
 Pelvic Limb
201.1
Miller, S.M., Stover, S.M., Taylor, K.T, Zarucco, L.A, Patmaroproximat
approach for arthrocentesis of the proximal interphalangeal joint in horses.
230. Nowak, M., Tietje, S., Krankheiten der Kreuzbeinregion und des Beckens.
Equine Vet. J., 1996. 28(5): p. 376-380.
2 ed. Handbuch Pferdepraxis., ed. O. Dietz, Huskamp, B. 1999, Stuttgart:
202.
Caron, J.P, Fretz, PB., Bailey, JV, Barber, SM., Prximat intehataneat
arthrodesisinthehorsea retrospective studyandamodified screwtechnique.
 Ferdinand Enke Verlag. 770-776.
231. Dyson, S.J., Lameness associated with the stife and petvic regions. Proc. Am.
Vet. Surg., 1990. 19(3): p. 196-202.
Assoc. Equine Pract., 2002. 48: p. 387-411.
203.
Schaer, T.P, Bramlage, L.R., Embertson, R.M., Hance, S., Proximat inter-
phatangeat arthrodesis in 22 horses. Equine Vet. J, 2001. 33(4): p. 360-365.
232.
Hance, S.R., Bramlage, L.R., Schneider, R.K., Embertson, R.M., Retrospecti-
Fleig,HthZuDiffieHfdKne
ve study of 38 cases of femur fractures in horses tess than one year of age.
204.
beim Pferd unter besonderer Bericksichtigung der rontgenologischen Unter-
Equine Vet. J., 1992. 24(5): p. 357-363.
suchung. Pferdeheilkunde, 1992. 8(2): p. 63-76.
233.
Blikslager, A.T., Bristol, D.G., Avutsion of the origin of the peroneus tertius
205.
MacLellan, K.N.M., Crawford, W.H., MacDonald, D.G., Proximal inter-
tendon in α foal. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1994. 204(9): p. 1483-1485.
phalangeat joint arthrodesis in 34 horses using two paralel 5.5-mm corticat
234. Holcombe, S.J, Bertone, A.L., Auutsion fracture of the origin of the extensor
bone scretws. Vet. Surg., 2001. 30(5): p. 454-459.
digitarum longus muscle in a foat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1994. 204(10): p.
206.
Watt, B.C., Edwards II, R.B., Markel, M.D., McCabe, R., Wilson, D.G.,
1652-1654.
Arthrodesis of the equine proximal interphatangeat joint:a biomechanicat
235. Dyson, S., Wright, I, Kold, S., Vatistas, N., Clinicat and radiographic featu-
comparison of twa 7-hole3.S-mm broad and two 5-hole 4.S-mm narrow
Tes, treatment and outcome in 1S horses with fracture of the medial aspect of
dynarmic compression plates. Vet. Surg., 2002. 31(1): p. 85-93.
the patella. Equine Vet. J., 1992. 24(4): p. 264-268.
207.
Denoix, JM., Functional anatomy of the equine interphatangeat joints.Proc.
236.Marble, G.P, Sullins, K.E.,Athroscopic reouat of patelar fracture frag-
Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1999. 45: p. 174-177.
ments in horses: five cases (1989-1998). J Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2000. 216:
208.
Knezevic, P, Hufabszess, Steingatten. Therapie und Prognose. Tierarztl. Pra-
p. 1799-1801.
xis, 1975. 3(2): p. 205-214.
237.
Hunt, R.J., Baxter, G.M., Zamos, D.T, Tension-band wiring and lag screu
209.
Mercado de, R.V., Stover, S.M., Taylor, K.T., Zarucco, L., Willits, N.H., Late-
sgnudfopsaasuoux
rat approach for arthracentesis of the distal interphatangeat joint in horses. J.
Vet. Med. Assoc., 1992. 200(6): p. 819-820.
Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1998. 212(9): p. 1413-1418.
238. Ruggles, A.J., Moore, R.M., Bertone, A.L., Schneider, R.K., Bailey, M.Q..
210.
Bowker, R.M., Rockershouser, S.J., Vex, K.B., Sonea, I.M., Caron, JP, Kotyk,
Tibiat stressfractures in racing standardbreds: 13 cases (1989-1993). J. Am.
R, Immunocytochemical and dye distribution studies of nerves potentially
Vet. Med. Assoc., 1996. 209(3): p. 634-637.
239.Wright, I.M.,Fractures of the lateral maleotus ofthetibia in 16horses.Equj
bursa of horses. J Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1993. 203(12): p. 1708-1714.
ne Vet. J., 1992. 24(6): p. 424-429.
188
240. Mueller, PO., Allen, D., Watson, E., Hay, C., Arthroscopic erovat ofa frag-
271. Warmerdam, E.P.L., Utrasonography of the femoral artery in six normat hor-
ment from an intercondylar eminence fracture of the tibia in a tuo-year-old
ses and three horses twith thrommbosis. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound, 1998. 39(2):
horse. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.,1994. 204(11): p. 1793-1795.
p. 137-141.
241.
Walmsley,J.P,Fracture f theintecondytaeminence of the tibia treated by
272.
Waibl, H., Wilkens, H., Minster, W., Arterien a Hinterfuβ des Pferdes. 3 ed.
Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere.Kreislaufsystem. Haut und Hautorga-
242.
Arnold, C.E., Schaer, T.P, Baird, D.L., Martin, B.B., Conseruative manage-
ne,dRNeShr leEHabeehHa
ment of 17horses with nonarticular fractures of the tibiat tuberosity. Equine
B, Wilkens H., Waibl, H. Vol. 3. 1996, Berlin: Verlag Paul Parey. 162.
Vet. J., 2003. 35(2): p. 202-206.
273.
Wissdorf, H., Hertsch, B., Keller, H., Stadtbaumer, G., Beckengliedmaβe:
243.
Wright, IM., Montesso, F, Kidd, L.J., Surgicat treatment of factures of the
Hintermittelfuβ-, Tarsat- und Kniebereich. 2 ed. Anatomie und Propadeutik
tibiat tuberosity in 6 adut horses. Equine Vet. J., 1995. 27(2): p. 96-102.
des Pferdes, ed. H. Wissdorf, Gerhards H., Huskamp, B., Deegen, E. 2002,
244.
Dyson, S., Proximal suspensory desmitis in the forelimb and the hindlimb.
Hannover: Verlag M. u. H. Schaper Alfeld. 528, 546, 570.
Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 137-142.
274. Richardson, D.W., Fractures of the smatt metacarpat and metatarsat bones.
245.
Dutton, D.M., Watkins, JP, Walker, M.A., Honnas, C.M.,Inomlte oif-
Current practice of equine surgery., ed M. White N.A. II, J.N. 1990, Phil-
cation of the tarsat bones in foats: 22 cases (1988-1996). J. Am. Vet. Med.
adelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company. 636-641.
Assoc., 1998. 213(11): p. 1590-1594.
275.
Miller-Kirchenbauer, D., Ffirst, A., Geissbihler, U., Kaegi, B., Auer, J., Di
Lindsay, W.A., McMartin, R.B., McClure, J.R., Management of stab fractures
246.
Desmotomie des mediaten Kniescheibenbandes zur Therapie der pathologi-
ofthe third tarsat bone in S horses. Equine Vet. J., 1982. 14(1): p. 55-58.
schen proximaten Pateltafixation - Eine Studie bei Pferden und Ponys. Pfer-
247.
Winberg,FG, Pettersson, H., Outome and acing performnce after in-
deheilkunde, 2001. 17(3): p. 208-216.
nat fixation of third and central tarsat bone stab fractures in horses: a review
276.
Tnibar, A.,Teatment of upward fixation of the patella in the horse: an up-
of 20 cases. Acta Vet. Scand., 1999. 40(2): p. 173-180.
date. Equine Vet. Educ., 2003. 15(5): p. 236-242.
248.
Murphey, E.D., Scheider, R.K., Adams, S.B., Santschi, E.M., Stick, JA., Rug-
277.
Jeffcot, L.,Kold, S.,Stifte lamess in the hrse: α survey f 86 refeed
gles,A.J., Long-term outcome of horses with a stab fracture of the centrat r
cases. Equine Vet J., 1982. 14(1): p. 31-39.
third tarsal bone treated conservativety: 2S cases (1976-1993). J. Am. Vet.
278.
Tnibar, M.A., Medial patellar ligament splitting for the treatment ofupward
Med. Assoc., 2000. 216(12): p. 1949-1954.
fixation of the patelta in 7 equids. Vet. Surg., 2002. 31(5): p. 462-467.
249.
Baird, D.H., Pilsworth, R.C., Wedge-shaped conformation of the dorsotaterat
279.
Finocchio, E.J., Guffy, M.M., Congentat pateltar ectopia in a foat. J. Am. Vet.
aspect of the third tarsat bone in the Thoroughbred racehorse is associated
Med. Assoc., 1970. 156(2): p. 222-223.
with development of stab fractures in this site. Equine Vet. J., 2001. 336): p.
280.
van Pelt, R.W., Keahey, K.K., Dalley, J.B., Congenitat bilateral patellar ecto-
617-620.
pia in a foat. Vet. Med. Small Anim. Clin., 1971. 66(5): p. 445-447.
250.
Kane, A.J., Park, R.D., Mellwraith, C.W., Rantanen, N.W., Morehead, J.P,
281.
Edinger, H.,tanek,C.,OperativeBehandlg eine beidseitigen ongenit
Bramlage, LR.,Radiographicchanges inThorougbredyearlings.Pat:Pre-
len stationaren Luxation derPatella nach lateral bei einem Shetiandfohten
vatence at the time of the yearling sates.EquineVet. J., 2003.35(4): p. 354
durch Keilosteotomie im Bereich der Trochtea ossis femoris. Pferdeheilkunde,
365.
Jakovljevic, S., Gibbs, C., Yeats, JJ., Traumatic fratures of the equine hock:
1991. 7(4): p. 197-203.
251.
282. Hermans, W.A., Kersjes, A.W., van der Mey, G.J.W., Dik, K.J., Investigation
α report of 13 cases. Equine Vet. J., 1982. 14(1): p. 62-68.
Hammer, E.J., Ross, M.W., Parente, E.J, Incoptete sagittat fractures of the
into the heredity of congenitat lateral patellar (sub)tuxation in the Shetland
252.
talus in 1 raceharses. Proc. Am.Assoc. Equine Pract., 1999.45: p. 162-163.
pony. Vet. Quarterly, 1987. 9(1): p. 1-8.
Roethlisberger, R., Ueltschi, G., Ein Beitrag zur radiotogishen Untersuchung
283.1
Rieland, E., Nowak, M., Toth, J, Neuschafer, A., Die chirurgische Behand-
253.
dssuusu
lung der kongenitalen lateraten Patelatuxation bei Shetlandfohten mittels
einer Teilosteotomie der Femuolfurche. Prakt. Tierart, 2002. 83(3): p.
5(4): p. 181-189.
254.
Churchill, E.A., The diagnosis and treatment of lameness of the petvic limb.
246-253.
Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1987. 33: p. 849-854.
284.
Granacher, A.,Der klinishe Fall.Ruptur des Muscutus fibutaris tertius. Tier-
255.
Adams, O.R., Fibratic myopathy and ossifying myopathy in the hindtegs f
ärztl. Praxis, 1994. 22(3): p. 208 u. 295.
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1961. 139(10): p. 1089-1092.
285. Leveille, R., Lindsay, WA., Biller, D., Ultrasonographic appearance of rup-
Magee,A.A., Vatistas, N.J.,Standing semitendinosus myotomy fr the tet-
tured peroneus tertius in a horse.J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1993. 202(12): p.
256.
ment of fibrotic myopathy in 39 horses (1989-1997). Proc. Am. Assoc. Equi-
1981-1982.
ne Pract., 1998. 44: p. 263-264.
286.
Cowles, R.R., Proximat suspensory desmitis - α qualitative survey. Proc. Am.
257.
Gomez-Villamandos, R., Santisteban, J.,Ruiz, I., Avila, I., Tenotomy of the
Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 143-144.
tibial insertionofthe semitendinosusmuscle of tuo horses with fibrotic myo-
287.
Gibson, K.T., Snyder, J.R., Spier, S.J., Ultrasonographic diagnosis of soft tis-
pathy. Vet. Rec., 1995. 136(3): p. 67-68.
ooussss
258.
Turner, A.S., Trotter, G.W., Fibrotic myopathy in the horse. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Vet. Educ., 2002. 14(3): p. 149-156.
Assoc., 1984.184(3): p.335-338.
288.
.Balch, O.,White, K., Butler, D., Factors invotved in the batlancing of equine
259.
Valentine, B.A., Rousselle, S.D., Sams, A.E., Edwards, R.B., Denervation
hooves J Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1991. 198(11): p. 1980-1989.
atrophy in three horses with fibratic myopathy. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.,
 288a. Spillner, M., Buda, S., Jacobi, R., Jauchstetter, H., Budras, K-D., Die perivas-
1994. 205(2): p. 332-336.
culare Sympathektomie beim Pferd. Tierarztl. Prax. 2008, 35G: p. 55-2.
260.
Clayton, HM., Cinematographic analysis of the gait of ame horses. V: Fibo-
tic myopathy. J. Equine Vet. Sci., 1988. 8(4): p. 297-301.
261.
Pickersgill, C.H., Kriz, N., Malikides, N., Surgicat treatment of semitendina-
The Hoof
Sus fibratic myopathy in an endurance horse-management,compliations
and outcome. Equine Vet. Educ., 2000. 12(5): p. 242-246.
289. Hermans, W.A., Hufpflege und Hufbeschiag. 1992, Stuttgart: Verlag Eugen
262.
Nixon,AJ.,Luxatin f the superficiat fexortendnat the catcaneat tbe.
Current practice of equine surgery., ed. N.A.1. White, Moore, J.N. 1990, Phil.
Ulmer. 36-38. 45-50, 185-188.
290. Ruthe, H., Miller, H., Reinhard, F, Der Huf. Lehrbuch des Hufbeschlages.
adelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company. 465-466.
5 ed. 1997, Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke Verlag. 30-36, 59-61, 177-197.
263.
Scott, E.A., Breuhaus, B., Gertsen, K.E., Surgicat repair of distocated superfi-
291. Schnitker, P., Der Setbstregutationsmechanismus der Huflange und Hufform
ciat digitat fexor tendon in a horse. J Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1982. 181(2): p.
171-172.
beim Przewatskipferd (Equus ferus Przewatski).in Fachbereich Veterinarme-
264.
Bogner, B., ock, P, Stanek, Ch., Korrelation radiologischer Befunde und
dizin. 2004, Freie Universitat Berlin: Berlin.
histotogischeVeranderungen an der medialen EndsehneundderBursa sub-
292.
Schnitker, P., Budras, K.D., Patan, B., The mechanism of setf-regutation of the
tendinea des M. tibiatis craniatis bei der Spaterkrankung des Pferdes.Pferde-
length of the hoof capsute related to the horn quality in Przeuatski horses.
heilkunde, 1998. 14(3): p. 197-204.
ActaVeeinaria Suppl,2003.72(7):p.448.
265.
Crabill,M.R.,Honnas, C.M.,Taylor,D.S., Schumacher, J, Watkins,. JP, Sy
293.
Patan, B., Saisonater Einftuf auf Hornbildungsrate, Hornabrieb und Horn-
der, J.R., Stringhatt secondary to trauma to the dorsoproximal region of the
smazsiauismaiduonpumpu
metatarsus in horses: 10 cases(1986-1991). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1994.
Fachbereich Veterinarmedizin. 2001, Freie Universitat Berlin: Berlin.
205 (6): p. 867-869.
294.
Dabareiner, R.M., Moyer, W., Carter, G.K., Trauma to the sote and wall. Dia-
266.
Gay,C.C., rasen, ., Richad,J,Hll,,Hsscitd s-
gnosis and Management of Lamenessin the horse., ed. M.W. Ross, Dyson, J.S.
hat in North Aerica. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 25(S): p. 456-457.
2003, Philadelphia: Saunders. 275-282.
267.
Huntington, PJ., Jeffcott, L.B., Friend, S.C.E., Luff, A.R., Finkelstein, D.I.,
295.
Wilson, D.G., Mays, M.B.C., Colahan, PT., Treatent of canker in horses. J.
Flynn, R.J., Australian stringhalt -epidemiological, clinical and neurologicat
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1989. 194(12): p. 1721-1723.
investigations. Equine Vet. J., 1989. 21(4): p. 266-273.
296.
Polltt, C., Farbatlas Huf. Anatomie und Klinik. 1999, Hannover: Schliter-
268.
Gerhards, H.,Rosenbruch, M., Intermittierendes Hinken beim Pfed -
sche. 132-133, 150-153.
Diskussion atiologischer und therapeutischer Aspekte an Hand eines Faltbei-
297.
Sherman, K., Ginn, PE., Brown, M., Recurrent canker in α Shire mare. J.
spieles. Prakt. Tierarzt, 1984. 65(8): p. 645-654.
Equine Vet. Sci., 1996. 16(8): p. 322-323.
269.
Edwards, G.B., Allen, W.E., Aorto-iliac thrombasis in two horses: clinicat
298.
.Hinterhofer, C., Stanek, C., Binder, K., Elastic modutus of equine hoof horn,
course of the disease and use of reat-timeutrasonography to confirm diagno-
tested inwat samptes, sote samples and frog samptes at varyingtevetsofmoi
sis. Equine Vet. J., 1988. 20(5): p. 384-387.
sture. Berl. Minch. Tierarztl. Wochenschr, 1998. 111(6): p. 217-221.
270.
Brama, PA.J., Rijkenhuizen, A.B.M., van Swieten, H.A., Warmerdam, E.P.L.,
299.
Patan, B., Budras, K-D., Segmentspezifitaten am Pferdehuf - Teil II:
Thrombosis of the aorta and the caudat arteries in the horse; additional dia-
Zusammenhang zuischen Hornstruktur und mechanisch-physikalischen
gnostics and a new surgical treatment. Vet. Quarterly, 1996. 18 (Suppl.): p.
Horneigenschaften in den verschiedenenHufsegmenten.Pferdeheilkd.,2003.
85-89.
19: p. 177-184.
189
 300. Hashimoto, Y., Reese, S., Bragulla, H., Budras, K.D., Eine lectinhistochemi-
330. Dik, K.J., Enzerink, E., van Weeren, PR., Radiographic development of oste-
sche Untersuchung der Epidermis von Haut und Huf des Pferdes. Anat.
ochondral abnormalities in the hock and stifle of Dutch Warmbtood foats,
Histol. Embryol., 1992. 21: p. 238-245.
from age 1 to 11 months. Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31 (Suppl.): p. 9-15.
301.1
Budras, K.D., Schiel, Ch., Milling, Ch., Patan, B., Methad for prepaing thin
331. Foland, J.W, Mcllwraith, C.W, Trotter, G.W., Arthroscopic surgery for oste-
sections ofuntreated equine hoof horn for electron microscopic examination.
ochondritis dissecans of the femoropatellar joint of the harse. Equine Vet. J.,
Microsc. Res. Tech., 2002. 58: p. 114-120.
1992. 24(6): p. 419-423.
302.
Anthauer,K.,Der segmentspeifishe Aufbau desIntezeltutarkittes in r
332. van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan, M.M.S., Mol, JA., Barneveld, A., Horma-
Hufepidemis desPfedesnFahereichVetinrmedin1996,reiU
nes, growth factors and other plasma variables in retation to osteochondrosis.
versitat Berlin: Berlin.
Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31 (Suppl.): p. 45-54.
303.
Budras, K.D., Huskamp, B., Normalisierung von Struktur und Quatitat der
333.
van Weeren,PR.,Barneveld, A., The effect of exercise on the distributin and
Hufkapset nach orthopadischer Behandlung der chronishen Hufrehe des
manifestation of osteochondrotic lesions in the Warmbtood foat. Equine Vet.
Pferdes. Arbeitstagung D. Vet. med. Ges., 1990. 11: p. 174-180.
J., 1999. 31 (Suppl.): p. 16-25.
304.
Frohnes, A-K.,Budras,K.D.,Endgene Einfuβfaktoren auf die Hornquattt
334.
van Weeren, PR., van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan, M.M.S., Barneveld, A.,
imSohten-undBatensegment desPferdehufes.Teit2:Intra-undInterzel-
The influence of birth weight, rate of weight gain and finat achieved height
tare Faktoren. Pferdeheilkunde, 2001. 17: p. 437-443.
and sex on the development of osteochondrotic tesions in a poputation of
305.
Konig, B., Budras, K.D, Struktur und klinish-funktinelle Bedetung der
genetically predisposed Warmblood foats. Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(Suppl.):p.
Kronhornstratifikationunter besondereBericksichtigung uonHornreifung.
26-30.
-atterung und -zerfal am Pferdehuf. Deutsche Tierrztl. Wochenschr., 2003.
335. Mclntosh, S.C., Mcllwraith, C.W, Naturat history of feoropatellar oste-
110(11): p.438-444.
ochondrosis in three crops of Thoroughbreds. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 16
306.
Budras, K.D., Schiel, Ch., Milling, Ch., Horn tubutes of the wuhite line: an
(Suppl-): p. 54-61.
insufficient barrier against ascending bacteriat invasion. Equine vet. Educ.,
336.
Ray, C.S., Baxter, G.M., Mllwraith, C.W., Trotter, G.W., Powers, B.E., Park,
1998. 10: p. 81-85.
R.D., Steyn, PF, Devetopment of subchondrat cystic lesions after articular
307.
Higami, A., Occurrence of white line disease in performance horses fed on
cartilage and subchondrat bone damage in young horses. Equine Vet. J., 1996.
tow-zinc and tow-copper diets. J. Equine Sci., 1999. 10(1): p. 1-5.
28(3): p. 225-232.
308.
Turner, TA., White line disease. Equine Vet. Educ., 1997. 9(6): p. 313-316.
337.
Textor, JA., Nixon, A.J, Lumsden, J., Ducharme, N.G., Subchondrat cystic
309.
OGrady,S.E., White line disease -an update. Equine Vet. Educ., 2002. 14(1):
lesions of the proximat extremity of the tibia in horses: 12 cases (1983-2000).
p. 51-55.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 2001. 218(3): p. 408-413.
310.
Kuwano, A., Yoshihara, T., Takatori, K., Kosuge, J., Onychomycosis in white
338. Walmsley, J.P, Phillips, T.J, Townsend, H.G.G., Meniscat tears in horses: an
line disease in horses pathology, mycology and clinical features.Equine Vet.
evatuation of clinical signs and arthroscopic treatment of 80 cases. Equine
J., 1998. 26 (Suppl.): p. 27-35.
Vet. J., 2003. 35(4): p. 402-406.
311.
Honnas, C.M., Keratomas of the equine digit. Equine Vet. Educ., 1997. 9(4):
339. Walmsley, J.P, Verticat tears of the craniat horn of the meniscus and its crani-
p. 203-207.
al ligament in the equine femorotibiat joint:7 cases and their treatment by
312.
Pardoe,C.H.,Wilson,AM,Iitmechanicat ppetiesf diffrentqu
arthroscopic surgery. Equine Vet. J., 1995. 27(1): p. 20-25.
hoof watl crack fixation techniques.Equine Vet. J., 1999. 31(6): p. 506-509.
340.
Edwards,R.B.I,Nixon, A.J.,Ausion of the craniat cruciate ligament ine-
313.1
Henke,F,Hufbeintrager und Hufmechanismus im Seiten,Trachten- und
tion in a horse. Equine Vet. J., 1996. 28(4): p. 334-336.
Eckstrebenteit des Pferdehufes.,inFachbereichVeterinarmedizin.1997,Freie
341. Prades, M., Grant, B.D., Turner, T.A., Nixon, A.J., Brown, M.P, Injuries to
Universitat Berlin: Berlin.
the cranial cruciate ligament and associated structures: summery of clinical.
314.1
Pellmann, R.,Budras,K.D.,Bragulla, H., Struktur und Funktion des Huf-
radiographic, arthroscopic and pathologicat findings from 10 horses.Equine
beintragersbeimPferdund seineBedeutungbeiderHufrehePferdeheikun
Vet. J, 1989. 21(5): p. 354-357.
de, 1996. 13: p. 53-64.
342.
van Pelt,R.W.,Intra-articutar injection of the equine stifle for therapeutic and
315.
Marks,G.,Makroskopische,licht-und etektronenoptische Untersuchung u
diagmostic purposes.J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc, 1965. 147: p. 490-498.
Morphatogie des Hyponychiums bei der Hufrehe des Pferdes., in Med. vet.
343. Hendrickson, D.A., Nixon, A.J, Comparison of the craniat and α new taterat
1984, Freie Universitat Berlin: Berlin.
approach to the femoropatellarjoint for aspiration and injection in horses. J.
316.
Budras, K.D., Huskamp, B., Belastungshufrehe -Vergteichende Betrachtun-
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1994. 205(8): p.1177-1179.
gen zu anderen systemischen Hufreheerkrankungen. Pferdeheilkunde, 1999.
344. Gough, M.R., Munroe, G.A., Mayhew, I.G., Diffusion of mepivacaine be-
15: p. 89-110.
tween adjacent symoviat structures in the horse.Part 2: Tarsus and stife.Equi-
317. Bailey, S.R., Baillon, M-L., Rycroft, A. N., Harris, P A., Elliott, J., Identif-
ne Vet. J., 2002. 34(1): p. 85-90.
cation of Equine Cecat Bacteria Producing Amines in an In Vitro Modet of
345.
Mllwraith, C.W., Foerner, JJ., Diagnostic and surgicat arthroscopy of the
Carbohydrate Ouerload. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 2003.
tarsocrurat tibiatarsat) jaimt. 2 ed. Diagnostic and surgical arthroscopy in the
69(4): p. 2087-2093.
horse., ed. C.W. Mcllwraith. 1990, Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger. 161-175.
318.1
Hood, D.M. The principtes of equine hoof watl confarmation. in 6th Geneva
346.
White, N.A, Turner,TA.,Hock laenessassociated with degeneration of the
Congress of Equine Medicine and Surgery. 1999. Geneva.
talocatcaneat articulation: report of tua cases in horses. Vet. Med. Small
319. Polit, C. The anatomy and physialogy of the hoof wall.in 6th Geneva con-
Anim. Clin., 1980. 75(4): p. 678-681.
gress of equine medicine and surgery. 1999. Geneva.
347. Bell, B.T., Baker, G.J., Foreman, J.H., Abbott, L.C., In vivo investigation of
320.
Budras, K.D., Scheibe, K., Patan, B., Streich, W.J, Kim, K., Laminitis in Prze-
communication between the distal intetarsal and tarsometatarsal joints in
watski horses kept in a semireserve. J. Vet. Science, 2001. 2: p. 1-7.
horses and pomies. Vet. Surg., 1993. 22(4): p. 289-292.
321. Rigs, C.M., Knottenbelt, D.C., Acute and subacute laminitis. Metabolic and
348. Dyson, S.J., Romero, JM., An investigation of injection techniques for locat
endocrine problems of the horse., ed. Watson. 1998, Philadelphia: Saunders
analgesia of the equine distat tarsus and proximal metatarsus. Equine Vet. J..
Comp. 1-22.
1993. 25(1): p. 30-35.
322.1
Budras, K.D., Assmann, G., Bragulla, H.,Huskamp, B. Hormonelle Hufrehe,
349.
Baxter, G.M., Southwood, L.L., Dechant,J.E., Diagnosis of distat tarsatl ostea-
verursacht durch Hypophysentumore. in XIl.Fachtagung fir Pferdekrank-
arthritis in horses. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet., 2003. 25(2): p. 138-146.
heiten antaβtich der Equitana. 1999. Essen.
350. Wyn-Jones, G., May, S.A., Surgicat arthrodesis for the treatment of ostea-
323.
Buda, S., Budras, K.D. Nature of ineruation of dermal blood vessets in the
arthrosis of the proximat intertarsal, distat intertarsal and tarsometatarsat
claw suggests a central and local co-regulation of microcircutation.in 13th
joints in 30 hrses a comarisn of four diffrent tecique. EquineVet.J,
Symposium and Sth Conference on Lameness in rurminants. 2004. Maribor,
1986. 18(1): p. 59-64.
Slovenija.
351. Eksell, P, Uhlhorn, H., Carlsten, J., Evatuation of different projections for
324.
Eustace, R.A. The treatment of chronic founder. in 6th Geneva congress of
Tadiographic detection of tarsal degenerative joint disease in Icelandic horses.
equine medicine and surgery. 1999. Geneva.
Malark, JA., Nixon, A.J., Haughland, M.A., Brown, M.P, Equine coxofe-
Vet. Radiol. Utrasound, 1999. 40(3): p. 228-232.
325.1
352.
Dechant, J.E., Southwood, L.L., Baxter, G.M., Crawford, W.H., Treatment of
morat tuxations: 17 cases (1975-1990). Cornell Vet., 1992. 82(1): p. 79-90.
distat tarsat steaarthtis using 3-driltract techique in 36 horses. Proc. Am.
325a. Schulze,T., Budras, K-D., Zur klinisch-fumktionelten Anatommie des M. inter-
Assoc. Equine Pract., 1999. 45: p. 160-161.
Osseus medius der Hintergliedmaβe im Hinblick auf die Insertionsdesmopa-
353.
Gabel, A.A., Treatment and prognosis for cunean tendon bursitis-tarsitis of
thie des Pferdes. Pferdeheilkunde, 2008, 24: p. 343-350.
Standardbred horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1979. 175(10): p. 1086-1088.
354. Baxter, G.M., Dechant, J.E., Southwood, L.L., Treatment of horses with distat
tarsat osteoarthritis. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet., 2003. 25(2): p. 148-155.
 Joints of the Pelvic Limb
355. McCarroll, G.D., McClure, S., Extracorporeat shack wave therapy for treat-
ment of osteoarthritis of thetarsometatarsal and distat intertarsat joints ofthe
326. Speirs, V.C., Wrigley, R., A case of bilaterat hip dysptasia in a foat. Equine Vet.
horse. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 2000. 46: p. 200-202.
J., 1979. 11(3): p. 202-204.
356.
Adkins, A.R., Yovich, JV., Steel, C.M., Surgical athrodesis of distat tarsa!
327.1
Nixon, A.J., Diagnostic and operative arthroscopy of the coxofemorat joint
joints in 17 horses clinically affeted with osteoarthritis. Aust. Vet. J., 2001.
in borses. Vet. Surg., 1994. 23(5): p. 377-385.
79(1): p. 26-29.
328.
Vacek, JR., Ford, T.S., Honnas, C.M., Communication between the femoro-
357. Jansson, N., Sonnichsen, H.V., Hansen, E., Bone spavin in the horse: fene-
pateltar and mediat and lateral femorotibiat joints in horses. Am. J. Vet. Res..
1992. 53(8): p. 1431-1434.
329.
Cauvin, E.R.J., Munroe, G.A., Boyd, J.S., Paterson, C., Ultrasonographic exα-
358.
Imschoot, J., Seenhaut, M., de Moor, A., Verschooten, F, Partiat tibiat eu-
minationofthefemorotibial articulation inhorses:imagingofthe craniat and
Tectomy and neurectomy of the deep peroneal nerve as a treatment of bone
caudat aspects. Equine Vet. J., 1996. 28(4): p. 285-296.
spavin in 24 horses. Equine Practice, 1995. 17(2): p. 8-13.
190
359. Brehm, W., Staecker, W., Osteochondrosis (OCD) in the tarsocrurat joint of
394. Cook, W.R., Campbell, R.S.F, Dawson, C., The pathology and aetiology of
Standardbredtrotters-correlation betweenradiographicfindings andracing
gutural pouch mycosis in the horse. Vet. Rec., 1968.83: p. 422-428.
performncePferdeheikude,2000166): p59593.
395.
Freeman, D.E., Donawick, W.J., Occtusion of internat carotid artery in the
360.
Sandgren, B., Dalin, G., Carlsten, J., Lundeheim, N., Development of oste-
horse by means of a balton- tipped catheter: clinical use of a method to pre-
ochondrosis in the tarsocrural joint and osteochondral fragments in the fet-
vent epistaxis caused by gutturat pouch mycosis. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc.,
lock joints of Standardbred trotters. II. Body measurements and clinicat fin-
1980. 176: p. 236-240.
dings. Equine Vet. J., 1993. 16 (Suppl.): p. 48-53.
396.
Kipar,A.,Frese,K.,Zungenahmung infolgeLuftsackmykose des Pfeds
361. Mcllwraith, C.W., Foerner, J.J.,Davis, D.M., Osteochondritis dissecans of the
Dtsch. vet. med. Ges./Fachgr Pferdekrankheiten, 1992. 12: p. 84-88.
tarsocrural joint: result oftreatment with arthroscopic surgery. Equine Vet. J..
397.
Konig, H.E.,Zur Topographie des Luftsackes(Diverticuturn tubae auditivae)
1991. 23(3): p. 155-162.
beim Pferd. Tierarztl. Prax., 1984. 12: p. 219-227.
362.
Torre, F, Toniato, M., Osteochondrat fragments from the mediat maleotus in
398.
McCarthy, PH., The Triangte of Viborg (Trigonum Viborgi) and its Anato-
horses: A comparison between radiographic and arthroscopic findings. Proc.
micat Relationship in the Normat Standing Horse. Anat. Histol. Embryol.,
Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1999. 45: p. 167-171.
1990. 19: p. 303-313.
363.
Tomlinson, J.E., Redding, W.R., Sage, A., Ultrasonographic euatuation of tar-
399.
Riedi, M., Topographie, Bau und Funktin der A. carotis int. des Pferdes.,n
socrurat joint cartilage in normat adut horses.Vet. Radiol. Utrasound, 2000.
Med. vet. 1922, Zirich: Zurich.
41(5): p. 457-460.
400.
Baker, G.J., Laryngeat hemiplegia in the horse. Comp. Cont. Ed., 1983. 5: p.
364.
Sack, W.O., Orsini, PG., Distat intertarsal and tarsometatarsal joints in the
61-66.
horse: communication and injection sites. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1981.
401.1
Huskamp, B.,Bockenhoff, G., Egebnisse der Kehikopfpfeiferoperation nach
179(4): p. 355-359.
Marks. Prakt. Tierarzt, 1978. 59: p. 302.
365. Kraus-Hansen, A.E., Jann, H.W., Kerr, D.V., Fackelman, G.E., Arthographic
402. Marks, D., Mackay-Smith, M.P, Cushing, LS. et al., Use of α prosthetic de-
analysis of communication between the tarsometatarsal and distal intertarsat
vice for surgical correction of laryngeat hemiptegia in horses. J. Amer. Vet.
joints of the horse. Vet. Surg., 1992. 21(2): p. 139-144.
Med. Assoc., 1970. 157: p. 157-163.
366.
Sullins, K.E., The tarsus: Curb. 5 ed. Adams' Lameness in horses., ed. TS.
Stashak. 2002, Baltirmore: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins. 972-973.
of larymgeat hermiptegia in horses. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1970. 157: p.
367.
Grant, B.D., Bursat injections. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1996. 42: p.
429-436.
64-68.
404. King, A.S., Physiologicat and clinical anatomy of the Domestic Mamals 
368.
van Pelt, R.W., Inflammation of the tarsat synoviat sheath (thoroughpin) in
Centratl nervous system. 1987: Oxford University Press.
horses. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1969. 155(9): p. 1481-1488.
405.
Seiferle, E., Zur makroskopischen Anatomie des Pferdegehirns. Acta anat.,
369.
Torre,,Becker,R.ChirurgischeBehandlung inerKubengalleSprugg
1957. 30: p. 775-786.
lenksbeugesehnengalle) bei einem Quarter Horse. Pferdeheilkunde, 1996.
406.
Braun, A., Der segmentate Feinbau des Ruckenmarks des Pferdes. Acta Anat.
12(1): p. 7-10.
10, 1950(Suppl. 12).
407.
Seiferle, E., Zur Ruckenmarkstopographie von Pferd und Rind. Z. Anat. Ent-
wicklgesch., 1939. 110: p. 371-384.
Head
408.
Berg, R., Angewandte und topographische Anatomie der Haustiere. 4 ed.
 1995, Stuttgart Jena: Gustav Fischer.
 370. Habermehl, K.H., Die Altersbestimmung bei Haus- und Labortieren. 2nd ed.
409. Hopkins, G.s., The correlation of anatomy and epidurat anesthesia in the
1975, Berlin: Parey.
dommestic animats. Cornell Vet., 1935. 25: p. 263-270.
371.
Joest, E., Handbuch der speziellen pathotogischen Anatomie der Haustiere.
410.
Ziegler, H., Zur Anatomie der Liquorpunktionsstelten bei Haustieren.
Bd. 1-8; 3. Aufl. 1969-1971, Berlin und Hamburg: Parey.
Schweiz. Arch. Tierheilkd., 1945. 87: p. 247.
372.
Quick, C.B., Rendano, V.R., The equine teeth. Mod. Vet. Pract., 1979. 60: p.
411.
Jaggy, A., Tipold, A., Die neurotogische Untersuchung beim Kleintier und
561-567.
beim Pferd, Opuscuta veterinaria. 1999: wak Verlag.
373.
Weber, W., Rontgen - anatomische Untersuchungen am Gesichtsschadet des
412.
Getty, R., Sisson and Grossman's Anatomy of the Domestic Animals. 5 ed.
Pferdes., in Med. vet. 1963, Hannover: Hannover.
1975, Philadelphia, London, Toronto: W. B. Saunders Comp.
374.
Wegner, M., Untersuchungen zur Zahnattersbestimmung beim Traber., in
413. Messonier, S.P, Veterinary neurology. 2000, Boston: Butterworth and Heine-
Med. vet. 1984, Freie Universitat Berlin: Berlin.
ma nin.
375.
Wissdorf, H., Kassianoff, I., Sack, W.O., Bubs - Physiotogische Umfangs-
414.
White and Moore, Current techniques in equine surgery and larmeness. 2 ed.
vermehrung am Margo ventratis mandibutae. Waltham Report, 1990. 31: p.
1988, Philadelphia: Saunders.
15-22.
376.
King, A.S., Riley, VA., A Guide to the physiotogical and clinicat anatomy of
the head. 4th ed. 1980, Liverpool: Dept. of Veterinary Anatomy.
Neck and Back
377.
Wissdorf, H, Gerhards, H., Huskamp,B., Deegen, E., Anatoie und Propa-
deutik des Pferdes. 2 ed. 2002, Hannover: Verlag M. u. H. Schaper Alfeld.
415. Maierl, J.,Zechmeister, R., Schill, W., Gerhards, H., Liebich, H.G., Rtge-
S. 95-97.
nologische Darsteltung der Wachstumsfugen an Atlas und Axis beim Fohten.
378.
Dietz, O., Schaetz, F, Schleiter, H., Teuscher, R., Hrsg.: Dietz, O., Henschel,
Tierarztl. Praxis (G), 1998. 26: p. 341-345.
E., Anasthesie und Operationen bei Groβ-und Kleintieren. 4 ed. 1988, Stutt-
416.Hertsch,B., Salam Ragab,A.E.,Rontgenotogische Untersuchung derEpiphy
gart: Enke.
senfugenschtieβung an den Halswirbetn beim Pferd. Berl. Minch. Tierarztl.
379.
Montane, L., Bourdelle, E., Bressou, C., Anatomie regionate des animaux
Wochenschr, 1977. 90: p. 172-176.
dormestiques. 1964, Paris: J.-B. Bailliere et Fils.
417.
Whitwell, K.E., Dyson, S., Die Rontgenologie der Hatswirbetsaute beim
380.
Wintzer, H.J, Krankheiten des Pferdes. 1982, Berlin u. Hamburg: Parey.
Pferd. Pferdeheilkunde, 1987. 3(4): p. 203-212.
381.
 Barone, R., Osteotogie. Anatomie comparée des mammiferes domestiques.
418. Pujol, B., Mathon, D., Le Wobbter Syndrome chez te chevat. Spondytomyeto-
Vol. 1. 1976, Paris: Vigot Freres.
pathie cervicate ou,Mal de chienEtude bibtiographique.Deuxieme partie.
382.
Nickel, R., Schwarz, R., Vergteichende Betrachtung der Kopfarterien der
Revue Med. Vet., 2003. 154(4): p. 289-306.
Haussitiee (Kate,Hd,Schein,Rind,chaf,Zie,fed)Z
419.
Wagner, PC., Grant, B.D., Reed, S.M., Cevical vertebat malformations.Vt.
Med. A, 1963. 10: p. 89-120.
Clin. North Am. Equine Pract., 1987. 3(2): p. 385-396.
383.
Dyce, K.M., Sack, W.O., Wensing, C.J.G., Anatomie der Haustiere. 1991,
420.
Mayhew, I.G.J., The equine spinal cord in heath and disease. I. The diseased
Stuttgart: Enke.
spinat cord. Proc. Am. Assoc. Equine Pract., 1999. 45: p. 67-84.
384.
Schaller, O.E., Hlustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature. 1992, Stutt
421.
Douglas, J., The pathogenesis and clinicat manifestationof equine osteochon-
gart: Enke.
drosis. Vet. Med., 1992. 87(8): p. 826-833.
385.
Bolz, W., Hrsg.: Dietz, O., Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chirurgie. 5. Aul. 1985,
422. Hertsch, B, Lieske, R., Hatsuwirbelfakturen beim Pfed. Tierarzl. Praxis,
Stuttgart: Enke.
1978. 6: p. 209-224.
386.
Budras,K.D., Fricke, W., Atas der Anatomie des Hundes. 6. Aufl. 2000, Han-
423. Ranner, W, Gerhards, H., Vorkommen und Bedeutung von Rickenerkran-
nover: Schlitersche Verlagsanstalt.
kungen - insbesondere des ,Kissing Spine-Syndroms - bei Pferden in Sticd-
387.
Gelatt, K.N., Textbook of Veterinary Ophtatmology. 1981, Philadelphia: Lea 
deutschtand. Pferdeheilkunde, 2002. 18(1): p. 21-33.
and Febiger.
424. Hertsch, B., Grimmelmann, E., Rintgenotogische Untersuchungen der Osi-
Zietzschmann, O., Tabenkrner der Haussaugetiere. Arch. mikrosk. Anat.,
fikationsvorgange am Widerrist beim Pferd. Zbl. Vet. Med. A, 1979. 26: p.
1906. 65: p. 611-622.
191-200.
389.
Nickel, R., Schummer, A, Seiferle, E, Lehrbuch der Anatmie der Haustiere.
425.Jeffcot, L.B.,Ruckenprobleme beim Athteten Pferd. 2.MaglicheDifferentiat
Vol. 1-4. 1982-1987, Berlin und Hamburg: Parey.
diagnosen und Therapiermethoden. Pferdeheilkunde, 1993. 9(4): p. 223-236.
390.
Hebel, R., Distribution of retinat ganglion celts in five mammatian species
426. Dammrich, K., Randelhoff, A., Weber, B, Ein morphotogischer Beitag zur
(pig, sheep, ox, horse, dog). Anat. Embryol., 1976. 159: p. 45-51.
Biomechanik der thorakolumbaten Wirbelsaiute und zur Pathogenese des Syn-
391.
Schnorr, B., Kressin, M., Embryologie der Haustiere. 4 ed. 2001, Stuttgart:
droms sich berihrender Darnfortsatze (KissingSpines-Syndrom) beiPferden.
Enke.
Pferdeheilkunde, 1993. 9(5): p. 267-281.
392.
Smollich, A., Michel, G., Mikroskopische Anatomie der Haustiere. 1985,
427.
Lauk,HD.,Kreling, I.,Behandtung desKissing spine-Syndros beim Pfed
Jena: Fischer.
-S0 Falte. Teil 2: Ergebnisse. Pferdeheilkunde, 1998. 14(2): p. 123-130.
393.
Gerdell, Nahtsterne in der Linse des Pferdeauges. Z. Vet. kde, 1899. 10: p.
428. Jeffcott, L.B., Dalin, G., Naturat igidity of the horse's backbone. Equine Vet.
533-534.
J, 1980. 12(3): p. 101-108.
191
429. Walmsley, J.P., Pettersson, H., Winberg, F, McEvoy, F, Impingerment of the
462. Kadletz, M., Anatomische Grundlagen der rektaten Untersuchung beim
dorsatspinousprocessesintwohundred andfifteenhorses: casesetetion, su-
Pferd. Wien. tierarztl. Mschr., 1930. 17: p. 765.
gicat technique and resutts. Equine Vet. J., 2002. 34(1): p. 23-28.
463.Konig,H.E.,Amselgruber,W.Funktionelle Anatomie der Eingeweidearterien
430.1
Klein, H.J, Hertsch, B., Dickmann, M., Wssdorf, H., Spondylosis anky-
in der Bauchhahte des Pferdes. Tierarztl. Prax., 1985. 13: p. 191-198.
sans und Spondylarthrose bei einer 1ljahrigen Kleinpferdestute. Pferdeheil-
464. Kopf, N., Anatomischer Leitfaden fir die Exptoration der Bauchhohte des
kunde, 1989. 5(2): p. 115-118.
Pferdes durch die mediane Laparatomie. Zentralbl. Vet. Med. A, 1980. 27: p.
431.
Townsend, H.G.G., Leach, D.H., Doige, C.E., Kirkaldy-Willis, W.H., Rela-
437-451.
tionship between spinat biomechanics and pathological changes inthe equine
465.
McCarthy,PH., Eyes et the tip of your fingers: The anatomy of the abdomi-
thoracotumbar spine. Equine Vet. J, 1986. 18(2): p. 107-112.
naland petvic viscera of the narcatized horse asperceived by patpation during
432. Dyson, S., Murray, R., Pain associated with the sacroitiac joint region: a ct-
exploratory laparotomy The Australian Equine Research Foundation, 1986.
nicat study of 74 horses. Equine Vet. J., 2003. 35(3): p. 240-245.
466.
Schmaltz, R., Uber die Plica gastropancreatica oder das Ligamentum gasto-
433.Huskamp, B, Nowak, M, Insertionsdesmopathien beim Perd und enige
duodenate und das Foramen epiptoicum beim Pferde. Berl. tierarztl. Wschr.,
ihrer Lokalisationen. Pferdehk., 1988. 4: p. 3-12.
1897. 13: p. 385-389.
434. Dietz, O., Krankheiten des Genicks und des Wideristes. 2 ed. Handbuch Pfer-
467.
Huskamp, B., Diagnosis of gastroduodeno-jejunitis and its surgicat treatment
depraxis, ed. O. Dietz, Huskamp, B. 1999, Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke Verlag.
by a temporary duodenocaecostomy. Equine Vet., 1985. 17: p. 314-316.
267-272.
468.
Schrmaltz, R., Anatomie des Pferdes. 2. Aufl. 1928, Berlin: Schoetz.
435. Rashmir-Raven, A., Gaughan, A.M., Modransky, P, Clerm, M.F, Fistutous
469. Huskamp, B., Uber einige Operationstechniken im Blinddarmbereich des
Withers. Comp. Cont. Educ., 1990. 12(11): p. 1633-1641.
Pferdes. Pferdehk., 1988. 7: p. 185-188.
470.Huskamp,B., Schwabenbauer, K., Pferdekamp, M.,Antage und Wartung von
Zakumfistetn beim Pferd.Fortschr. Tierphysiol. und Tierernahr., 1982. 13: p.
 Neck and Thoracic Cavity
7-12.
471.
Barclay, WP, Foerner, JJ, Phillips, TN., Votvotus of the large colon in the
436. Huskamp, B., Henschel, E., Arenhoevel, A., Technik und Ergebnisse einer
horse. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1980. 177: p. 629-630.
modernen Kopperoperation. Der prakt. Tierarzt, 1983. 64: p. 110-119.
472.
Martin, P, Zur Blind- und Grimmdarmentwicktung beim Pferd. Beit. path.
437. Donat, K., Der sog. M. brachiocephaticus des Pferdes. Berl. Minchn. Tier-
Anat. allg. Path. (Festschr E. Bostroem), 1921. 69: p. 512-516.
ärztl. Wschr, 1968. 81: p. 71-72.
473.
Koch, T., Berg, R., Lehrbuch der Veterinar-Anatomie. Bd. 1-3. 1981-1993,
438.1
Loeffler, K., Anatomie und Physiologie der Haustiere. 1970, Stuttgart: E.
 Jena: Fischer.
474. Oberlojer, H.G., Untersuchungen zur Frage des Auftretens von Spontanrup-
Umer.
De Lahunta, A., Habel, R.E., Apptied Veterinary Anatomy. 1986: W. B. Saun-
turen des Mastdarmes beim Pferd und zur Frage von deren rechtlicher Beur-
439.1
ders Comp., Philadelphia, London, Toronto.
teiltung., in Med. vet. 1984, Wien: Wien.
440.
Agduhr, E., Morphotogische Beveise fur das Vorhandensein intravitater Kom-
munikation zwischen den Kavitatender Pleurasacke beieinerReihe vonSiu-
getieren. Anat. Anz., 1927.64: p. 276-298.
Pelvis, Urogenital Organ
441.
 Jones, TC., Hunt, R.D., Veterinary Pathology. Sth ed. 1983, Philadelphia:
Lea and Febiger.
475. Preuf, F, Budras, K.D., Zur Homologie des Hufthockers und anderer Kno-
442. Schmaltz, R.,Atlas der Anatomie des Pferdes. T. 1: Das Skelett. 4. u. 5. Aufl
chenpunkte des Dambeins. Berl. Minchn. tierarztl. Wschr, 1969. 82: p.
{1924)
141-143.
T 2: Topographische Myologie. 5. Aufl. (1939)
476.
Bourdelle, E., Bressou, C., Anatomie regionate animaux domestiques. T1:
T 3: Die Lage der Eingeweide. (1914)
Equides. 1949, Paris: Bailliere et Fils.
T 4: Die Eingeweide. (1927)
477.
 Ellenberger, W, Baum, H., Handbuch der vergteichenden Anatomie der Haus-
T 5: Der Kopf. (1929). 1914-1939, Berlin: Schoetz, Berlin.
tiere. 18. Auflage. 1943, Berlin: Springer.
478. Teller, H., Die Architektur des breiten Beckenbandes beim Pferde.,in Med.
443. Steck,W., Lungenschattperkussion und Brustuwandschatlperkussion bei Groβ-
tieren. Schweiz. Arch. Tierheilkd., 1962. 104: p. 59-66.
vet. 1945, Hannover: Hannover.
479.Dietz,O.,Wiesner, E.,Handbuch derPferdekrankheiten fiWissenschaf nd
444.1
Hausotter, E., Das Herzsketett der Haussiuger Pferd, Rind, Schaf, Schuwein,
Praxis. T 1-3. 1982, Basel, Minchen, Paris: S. Karger.
Hund und Katze., in Med. vet. 1923, Wien: Wien. p. 311.
480. Henry, M., Amaral, D., Tavares, FF, Santos, N.R., Hydrocoete of the vaginat
445.
Hoffmann, V, Die Blutgefaβuersorgung des Pferdeherzens., in Med. vet.
cavity of staltions. J. Reprod. Fert. (Suppl), 2000. 56: p. 13-21.
1960, Giefen: GieBen.
481. Budras, K.D., Die M. compressor marmmae und fixator fundi uteri der Stu-
446.
Preuf, F, Zur Nomenklatur am Herzen. Anat. Anz., 1955. 103: p. 20-37.
te, zugteich ein Beitrag zur Abkunft des M. cremaster ext. des Hengstes. Zbl.
447.
Quiring, D.P., Baker, R.J., The equine heart. Amer. J. Vet. Res., 1953. 14: p.
Vet. Med., 1972. C 1: p. 350-362.
62-67.
482. Lowe, JE., Dougherty, R., Castration of horses and ponies by a primary
448.
 Schaller, O., Korrosionsanatomie des Pferdeherzens. Zbl. Vet. Med., 1958. 5:
closure method. J. Amer Vet. Med. Assoc., 1972. 160: p. 183-185.
p.152-170.
483.
Schebitz, H., Brass, W., Allermeine Chirurgie. 1975, Berlin und Hamburg:
449.
Schmack, K.H., Die Ventitebene des Herzens bei Pferd, Rind und Hund., in
Parey.
Med. vet. 1974, GiefBen: Giefen.
484.
Budras, K.D., Preuf, F, Traeder, W., Henschel, E:, Der Leistenspat und die
450.
 Simoens, P., de Vos, N.R., Lauwers, H., Illustrated anatomical nomenclatue
Of the heart and the arteries of the head and neck in the domestic marmmats.
Leistenringe unserer Haussaugetiere in neuer Sicht. Berl. Minchn. Tierarztl
Wschr., 1972. 85: p.427-431.
Mededel. Fakult. Diergeneskd Rijksuniv. Gent, 1984.
485. Habel,R.E., Budras,K.D., Anatomy of the prepubic tendon in the horse, cow,
451.1
Littlewort, M.C.G., The clinical auscutation of the equine heart. Vet. Rec.,
sheep,gat and dog.Am.J.Res,19923: p.2182195.
1962. 74: p. 1247-1259.
486.Preu,F,Budras, K.D., Traeder, W.,Arcus inguinatis und Tend prapubicus
452.
Adams, S.B., Surgicat approaches to the exploration of the equine abdomen.
des Pferdes und deren vergleichend - anatomische Bedeutung. Acta anat.,
Vet. Clin. North Am. (Large Anim. Pract., 1982. 4: p. 89-104.
1972. 82: p. 47-74.
487. Mosimann, W., Kohler, T, Zytotogie, Histologie und mikroskopische Anato-
mie. 1990, Berlin und Hamburg: Parey.
 Abdominal Wall and Cavity
488. Allen, WR., Fetomaternat interactionsand influences during equine pregnan-
cy. Reproduction, 2001. 121: p. 513-527.
453. Huskamp, B., Die mediane Laparotomie beim Pferd - Technik und Ergeb-
489.
Hay, M., Allen, R.W., An uttrastructurat and histochemicat study of the inter-
nisse. Dtsch. tierarzt. Wschr., 1976. 83: p. 276.
stitiat cels in the gonads of the femate horse. J. reprod. fertile. (Suppl.), 1975.
454.
Huskamp, B., Krankheiten des Verdauungsapparates und des Bauchfelts.
23: p. 557-561.
Handbuch der Pferdekrankheiten fir Wissenschaft und Praxis., ed. O. Dit,
490. Ginther, O.J., Reproductive biotogy of the horse. Basic and applied aspects. 2.
Wiesner, E. 1982, Basel: Karger.
Auflage. 1992: Equiservices, Cross Plains (WI), USA.
455.
Hickman, J., Equine surgery and medicine.Vol. 1/2.1985 und 1986, London:
491.
Pierson, R.A., Folliculogenesis and ovulation. Equine Reproduction., ed. A.O.
Acad. Press.
McKinnon, Voss J.L. 1993, Philadelphia, London: Lea and Febiger. 161-171.
456.1
Bradley, O.C., The topographical anatomy of the thorax and abdomen of the
492. Morrs, L.H.A., Allen, W.R., An overview of low dose insemination in the
horse. 1922, Edinburgh: W. Green and Son.
mare. Reprod Dom Anim, 2002. 37: p. 206-210.
 457. Barone, R., Sptanchnologie. Anatomie comparee des mammiferes domesti-
493.Sieme,H.,Bonk,A.,Ratjen,J,Klug,E,ath,D.,Effect of serm muer
ques. Vol. 3. 1976, Lyon: Lab.dAnat. Ecole Nat. Vet,.
and SitefTecbnique of insemination on pregnancy in mares. Pferdeheilkd.,
458.1
Neumanm-Kleinpaul, K., Schitzler, G., Untersuchungen uber Druckmessun-
2003. 19: p. 677-683.
gen,Ruptur,Fassunsvermgen und Gewicht am Magen des Pfedes.Ah.
494.
Ginther, O.J., Ultrasonic imaging and reproductive events in the mare. 1986:
wiss. prakt. Tierheilkd., 1940. 75: p. 370-386.
Verlag Equiservices, Cross Plains, Wisconsin, UA.
459.
Barone, R., La topographie des visceres abdominaux, chez les equidés dome-
495.
Bartmann, C.P, Schoning, A., Brickwedel, I., Ohnesorge, B., Klug, E.,
stiques. Bull. Soc. Sci. Vet. Lyon, 1952/53: p. 3-26.
Hysteroskopie und minimal invasive endouterine Chirurgie bei der Stute.
460.1
Boom de, H.PA., Functional anatomy an nervous control of the equine ali-
Pferdeheilkd., 1997.13: p. 474-482.
menary tract.J. S. Afr. Vet. Assoc., 1975. 46: p. 5-11.
496. MacPherson, M.L., Reimer, JM., Tuin reduction in the mare: current
461.
Dobberstein, J., Hartmann, H., Uber die Anastoosenbildung m Bereich der
options. Anim Repro Sci, 2000. 60-61: p. 233-244.
Blind- und Grimmdarmarterien des Pferdes und ihre Bedeutung fur die Ent-
497.Fowden, A., Silve,M.,Devetopment of the pituitary-adrenat axis in the fetat
stehung der emmbolischen Kolik. Berl.tierarzl. Wschr., 1932. 48: p. 397-402.
foal and lamb. Reproduction in Domestic Animals., 1995. 30: p. 170-177.
192
498.Vandeplassche,M.,Obstetician's view of the physiotogy of equine partut-
512. Geiger, G., Die Hodenhitten des Pferdes, ein ergainzender Beitrag zum Prin-
tion and dystocia. Equine Veterinary Journal, 1980.12: p. 45-49.
zip des Schichtenaufbaues der Skrotatvand. Berl. Minchn. tierarztl.Wschr.,
499. Vandeplassche, M., pathogenesis of dystocia and fetat matformation in the
1956. 69: p. 330-333.
horse.Journal of Reproduction and Fertility Supplement, 1987.35:p. 547-552.
513. Pozor, M., MCDonell, S.M., Testicular bloodflow in the stallion. Therioge-
500.
Zietzschmann, O., Kralling, O., Lehrbuch der Entwicktungsgeschichte der
nology, 2004. 61.
Haustiere. 2. Aufl. 1955,Berlin: Parey.
514.
Collin, B., La vascularisation arterietle du testicte chez le chevat. Zbl. Vet.
501.
Merkt, H., Merkt, J.C., Plastische Operation von Vulua und Scheidenvorhof
Med., 1973. C 2: p. 46-53.
bei der Stute. Pferdeheilkunde, 1986. 2: p. 55-58.
515.
Brimmer, J.E., Reger, H., Zinbinski, R., Squires, E.L., Effect of storage amd
502.
Zinnbauer, M.,Untersuchngen ibe den Hymen bei Pferd,Ziege, Schuen
S°C on the motuility and cryopreservation of stallion epididymal spermato-
und Hund. in Med. vet. 1927, Wien: Wien.
zoα. Theriogenology, 2002. 58: p. 405-407.
 503. Powell, D.G., David, J.D.S., Frank, C.J., Contagious equine metritis: the pre-
516.
Pascoe, J.R., Ellenburg, TV., Culbertson, M.R. et al., Torsion of the sperma-
sent situation reviewed and revised code of practice forits contol. Vet.Re.,
tic cord in the horse. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1981. 178: p. 241-245.
1978. 103: p. 399-402.
517.
Varner, D.D., Blanchard, T.L., Brinsko, S.P., Love, C.C., Taylor, TS., Johnson,
504.
Wissdorf, H., Poulsen-Nautrup, C., Beitrag zur Nomenklatur von Klitoris
L., Techniques for evatuation setected reproductive disorders of stallions.
undPraputiubeiderStuteimHinblickaufdieKlitorissnusektomie gemaβ
Anim. Reprod. Sci, 2000. 60-61: p. 493-509.
CEM-Bestimrungen. Tierarztl. Prax., 1986. 14: p. 371-375.
518.
Topfer-Petersen, E., Waberski, D., Hess, O., Bellair, S., Schambony Ekhlasi-
505.
Bartmann, C.P, Schoon, H.A., Lorber, K., Brickwedel, I., Klug, E., Testicutar
Hundrieser, M., Genzel, M., Reineke, A., Bedeutung des Seminatpiasmas fur
sonographyandbiopsyinthestallion-Indication,techniques and diagnostic
die Befruchtung. Tierarztl. Umschau, 1998. 53: p. 447-454.
retevance. Pferdeheilkd, 1999. 15: p. 506-514.
519.
Jude, R., Giese, A., Piumi, E, Guerin, G, Sieme, H., Topfer-Petresen, E.,Distl,
506.
Hillmann, R.B., Casey, PJ., Kennedy, PC., Hughe, J.P, Liu, LK.M., Testicu-
O., Leeb, T., Matecutar characterization of the CRISP-1 Gene-a candidate
la biopsy in the stattion. Proc. 6th Int Symp. Equine Reprod, 1994: p. 145-
gene for station fertility. Theriogenology, 2002. 58: p. 417-420.
146.
520.
Weber, J.A.,Woods, G.L., Tansretat utasonography fort the evatuatin of
507.
Cox, J.E., Edwards, G.B., Neal, PA., An anatysis of SOO cases of equine cryp-
stattion accessory sex glands. Stallion Management, The Vet. Clin. North
torchism. Equine Vet. J., 1979. 11: p. 113-116.
America, 1992. 8 (1): p. 183-190.
508.
Cox, J.E., Testosterone concentrations in normal and cryptorchid horses.
521.
Kist, D., Schaetz, F, Fortpflanzungsstorungen bei Haustieren. 6. Aufl. 1983,
Response to human chorionic gonadotrophin. Animal Reprod. Sci., 1989. 18:
Stuttgart: Enke.
p. 43-50.
522.
Preu,F, DieTunica atbuginea penis und ihre Trabeket bei Pferd und Rind.
509.
Cox, J.E.,Developmental abormatities of the mate eproductive tact. Eqi-
Anat. Anz., 1954. 101: p. 64-83.
ne Reproduction., ed. A.O. McKinnon, Voss, J.L. 1993, Philadelphia, Lon-
523.
Magda, JJ., Locat anesthesia in operations on the mate perineurm in horses
don: Lea and Febiger. 915-920.
(Abstr.), J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1948. 113: p. 559.
510.
Adams, O.R.,An impraved method of diagnosis and castration of cryptorchid
524.
Habel, R.E., The perineum of the mare. CornellVet., 1953. 43: p. 247-278.
horses. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc, 1964. 145: p. 439-446.
525.
Schulze, S.W., Budras, K.-D., Schusser, G.F, Licht- und etektronenmikroska-
511. Amann, R., Johnson, L., Pickett, B.W, Connection between the seminiferous
pische Darsteltung des proximatenTubutus bei gesundenPferden und kolik-
tubutes and efferent ducts in the stallion. Am. J. Vet. Res., 1977. 38: p. 1571-
krankenPferdenmit hamodynamisch induziertem akuten Nierenversagen.
1579.
Pferdeheilkd., 2004. 20: p. 118-126.
193
Index
The items in this index
arelisted
 popliteal 20
ulna 4
Cisterna chyli 60, 78
under the nouns.
Artery(ies), Arteria(ae), Vessels
Brain 52
Cleft, glottic 48
(continued)
Brainstem 163
Clitoris 82, 176
 pudendal external 72, 84
Branch, communicating 22
Clubfoot 135
A
 pudendoepigastric trunk 20
Bronchus principal 60
Cochlea of tibia 16
pulmonary 60
Bulb(s), Bulbus(i)
Aging by teeth 145
Colic 169
Ampulla coli 70
radial  8 
of penis 84
Colliculus(i)
Ampulla of deferent duct 84
retinal 42
of heels 26
seminalis 84
Angle, iridocorneal 42
saphenous 20
olfactory 52
Collum coli 70
Ansa cervicalis 50
scrapular dorsal 62
Bulla, tympanic 30
Collum glandis 84
Aorta 80
splenic 70
Bump 145
Colon 70, 178
Aperture, nasomaxillary 30, 148
subclavian 8,62
Bursa(ae)
ascending 66, 70, 179
Apparatus
subscapular 8
calcanean 18, 28, 145
descending 66, 70, 179
Hyoid 34
suprascapular 8
cucullar 166
small 70
lacrimal 40, 154
supreme intercostal 62
cunean 28,145
 transverse 70
suspensory of fetlock 12, 125
testicular 74, 84
infrapatellar 28, 143
Column, vertebral 56
suspensory of udder 76
thoracic internal 62
infraspinatus 14
Comissure of vulva 82
stay of forelimb 12
thoracic external 8
intertubercular 14, 125, 128
Conchae, ethmoidal 44
 stay of hindlimb 24, 134
thoracodorsal 8
navicular 14, 24,28, 128
nasal 44 
Arch, costal 64
tibial caudal 20
nuchal 56, 166
Conjunctiva 40, 153
t [eunsu
tibial cranial 22
olecranon 14, 128
Conus medullaris 54
transverse cubital 8
palatoglossal 44
omental 68
Cord, spermatic 74
ulnar collateral 8
ischial 72
ovarian 82
spinal  54
terminal 22
vertebral 62
precarpal 14, 128
Cornea 154
Artery(ies), Arteria(ae), Vessels
Arthroscopy 112
subcutaneous olecranon 128
Corona glandis 84
Ataxia, cerebellar 164
antebrachial 8
 subtendinous of comm. dig.
Corpus cavernosum 84
Ataxia, spinal 164
aorta 80, 168
extensor
14
Corpus hemorrhagicum 180
Axis, optic 42
 subtendinous of lat. dig. extensor
axillary 8
Corpus luteum 174
brachial 8,168
14
Corpus spongiosum 84
brachiocephalic trunk 62
supraspinous 56,166
Cremaster 74, 78
carotid common 48, 58, 62, 166
B
testicular 84
Crest(s)
carotid external 46
 Bands of large intestine 66, 70,
trochanteric 28, 141, 144
facial 32
carotid internal 46
179
nuchal 32
caudal 86
Bands of cecum 179
renal 78
cecal 70
Bars of hoof 26
C
Crib-biting 148
celiac70
 Birkeland fractures 117
Calcaneus 16, 143
Cryptorchid 176
cervical deep 62
 Bladder, urinary 78
Canal(s), Canalis(es)
Crown, clinical 32
cervical supf. 62
Blood supply
carpal 122
Crown of tooth 32
ciliary 42
of brain 52
central of brain 54
Crus {leg) 18
circumflex femoral 20
 of gastrointestinal tract 70
cervical 82
Crus(ra) of penis 84
of udder 80
femoral 72
circumflex humeral 8
Cuneus 26
circumflex iliac 64, 76, 78
Body, See also Corpus( ora)
inguinal74
Cup 146
colic branch 70
ciliary 42
pyloric 68
Cushion, coronary 26
colic right 70
 perineal 86
Canaliculi, lacrimal 40
Cushion, digital 26
collateral ulnar 8
vitreous 42, 157
Canine 34
coronary 62
Bone(s), See also (Os(sa).
Cardia 68
costocervical trunk 62
calcaneus 16
Carpus 126
D
cubital transverse 8
Cartilage(s)
cannon4
 Dentin, secondary 34
digital 10, 22, 118
carpal 2
arytenoid 48
Dentition 32
facial 50
coffin 117
cardiac 62
Dermis
femoral 20, 72
femur  6
cricoid 48
coronary 26
femoral, caudal 20
fibula 16
epiglottic 48
laminar 26
femoral, deep 20
hip 72
laryngeal 48
of frog 26
gastric left 70
humerus 4, 114
lingual 44
of sole 26
gluteal 20
hyoid  34
manubrial 56
 perioplic 26
hepatic 70
ilium 72
of hoof 4, 24, 137
Diameters of pelvis 72
iliac external 20, 174
ischium 72
 scapular 4
Diaphragm 60, 97
iliac internal 20
manubrium sterni 56
thyroid 48
pelvic 88,99
interlobar of kidney 78
metacarpal 4
tubal 46
urogenital 88
interosseous 8
metatarsal 16
Caruncle(s)
Diastema 44
lingual  50
navicular 4, 12,24
lacrimal 40
Diastole 168
linguofacial trunk 50
patella 16, 24, 28
 sublingual 44
Diencephalon 52
mammary 80
pelvis 172
Castration 172
Disc(s)
maxillary 46
phalanges 4
Cauda equina 54
Articular 38
median 8
phalanx distal 135
Cavity(ies)
intervertebral 156
 mesenteric caudal 70
pubis 72
abdominal 66
optic 42
mesenteric cranial 70
radius 4, 115
infraglottic 48
Diverticulum, nasal 44, 159
metatarsal 22,133
ribs 56
nasal 44
Duct(s), Ductus(us)
metatarsal dorsal 20, 133
sacral 165
oral 44, 159
Arteriosus of BOTALLI 160
metatarsal plantar 22
 scapula 4
thoracic 60
deferent 74, 84, 179
occipital 62
sesamoid 4
vaginal  74
ejaculatory 84
of brain 52
sesamoid prox. 12
Cecum 66, 70, 171, 179
hepatic common 68
of eye 42
sesamoid distal  12
Cerebellum 52
lactiferous 76
of penis 80
splint 4, 116
Cerebrospinal fluid 164
mandibular 38
ophthalmic 42
sternum 56
Cervix 82
nasolacrimal 40, 152
palmar 8, 10 
stylohyoid 46
Chambers of eye 42
 pancreatic 68
 palmar medial 8
talus 16
Chin 44
papillary 76
pedal dorsal 20,22
tarsal 16
Chorda tympani 38
parotid 38
plantar 20,22
tibia 16
Choroid 42
thoracic 60
tracheal 58
temporal 145
Horner's syndrome 153
Laryngopharynx 46
 Duodenum 70, 170
Frenulum, lingual 44
Humerus 4
Larynx 48
Frog 26
Humor, aqueous 42
Leg 18
Funiculus nuchae 56
Hydrocele 172
Lens 42, 157
E
Hymen 82, 176
Ligament(s), Ligamentum(a)
Ear 50
Hypophysis 52
accessory of femur 28, 64, 72, 76,
Ectropion 153
G
Hypothalamus 52
172
Eminence, iliopubic 76
Galvayne's groove 146
accessory of digital flexors 12,
 Eminence, intercondylar 16
Ganglion, cervical, cranial 46, 50
123
Endoscopy 113
Ganglion, mesenteric, caudal 80
annular digital 10
Entropion 153
Gland(s), Glandula(ae)
lleum 70
annular of fetlock 10, 122
Epididymis  84
adrenal 78
Ilium 72
broad 82
Epidural anaesthesia 164
buccal 38
Incisor 34, 146
coronary 68
 Epiglottic entrapment 162
bulbourethral 84
Infundibulum(a)
cricothyroid 48
Esophagus 58,62
mammary 76
of tooth 32,34
cruciate 28, 142
 Examination for pregnancy 182
mandibular 38
of uterine tube 82
falciform 68
 Eye examination 150
 of third eyelid 40
 of diencephalon 52
femoropatellar 28
Eyelid, third 153
parathyroid 50
Inlet, pelvic 72
femorotibial 28
parotid 38
Insemination 181
gastrosplenic 68
prostate 84
 Intervertebral disc problems 165 
inguinal 64, 74, 76
F
reproductive, accessory 84, 176
 Intersections, tendinous 64
navicular 24
Fascia(ae)
 salivary 38, 150
Intestine(s)  70
nuchal S6
deep of carpus 10
sublingual 38
Iris 42
iliac 74
thyroid 50
Ischium 72
of femoral head 28, 76, 172
lata 74
vesicular 84
of tail of epididymis 84
of forelimb 122
Glans 84
patellar 18,24, 28
of trunk 64
Globe 42
phrenicosplenic
169
spermatic 74
Glottis 48
 Jejunum 66, 70, 171
proper of ovary
82
transverse 64, 74
Granules, iridic 42, 156
Joint(s)
proper of testis 84
Femur 16
Groove(s)
 antebracheocarpal 126
renosplenic 68, 78
 Fibers, zonular 42
Galvayne's
146
carpal 12, 14, 126
round of bladder 78
 Fibrocartilage
intertubercular 4
coffin 12, 14, 128
round of liver 68, 168
 complementary of middle phalanx
jugular 58
digital  14 
round of uterus 74, 76, 82
4, 12
lateral pectoral 58
elbow 12,14, 126
sacrosciatic 72, 86, 165
 patellar 16
for accessory lig. 72, 172
femoropatellar 28, 141
scrotal 84
Fibula 16
for obturator structures 72, 172
femorotibial 141
sesamoidean 24, 123
Filum terminale 54
intermammary 76
fetlock 12, 14, 24, 127
supraspinous 56
Fimbriae 82
median pectoral 58
hip 28, 140
suspensory of ovary 82
Flehmen 159
 paracuneal 26
hock 26,142
suspensory of penis 74
 Flexure
Gubernaculums testis 176
iliosacral 166
tarsocrural 28
 diaphragmatic 70
Guttural pouch 46, 160
interphalangeal 14
transverse acetabular 28
pelvic 66, 70
intertarsal 28, 142
triangular of liver 68
Foramen(ina)
metacarpophalangeal 14 
vestibulal 48
caval 60
H
pastern 12, 14,127
vocal 48
epiploic 68, 169
 Haustra of large intestine 70
 phalangeal 24
Line(s), Linea(ae)
infraorbital 32 
Heart 62,167
shoulder 12, 14,125
alba 64,74, 76, 168
ischial 72
Heart valves 168
stifle 26, 142, 143
 of pleural reflection 60
jugular 32
Heat, foal 174 
tarsal 142, 143
terminal 72
lacerum 32
Heels of hoof 26
tarsometatarsal 28, 142, 144
white of hoof 26, 137
magnum 32
Hematocele 172
talocrural 144 
Lips 44 
obturator 72
 Hemispheres, cerebral 52
temporomandibular 38, 149
Liver 66
supraorbital 32
Hernia(s) 169
tibiofibular 28
Lobe(s) renal 78
vertebral lateral 56
femoral 72, 172
 Junction, corneoscleral 42
Locking of stifle 24
Fold(s)
foraminomentalis 169
Lordosis 165
alar 44
inguinal 173
Lung 60, 167
basal  44
mesenteric 169
个
Lung field 60, 167
caval 60
spati lieni renalis 169
Kidney 66, 78,173
Lymph node(s)
cecocolic 66, 70, 179
umbilical 168 
Kissing spines 165
axillary 8
duodenocolic 70
ventral 168
Kyphosis 165
cecal 70,102
ileocecal 70, 179
Hiatus
celiac 70
of flank 64 
aortis 60
cervical deep 58
 prepuptial  84
 esophageal 60
L
cervical supf. 8, 58, 102
straight 44
High four point block 133
Labium(a) 82
colic 70, 102
vestibular 48
High two point block 121
Lacerations, perineal 88
cubital 8
 Follicle of ovary 181
High palmar block 121
Lacertus fibrosus 12
gastric 70
 Formula, dental 32
Hoof 24, 26
Lacuna, muscular 72
 general 101—103 enter after
 Formula, vertebral 56
Hoof capsule 26
Lacuna, vascular 72
sort.
Fornix, vaginal 82
Hoof cartilages 118
Lake, lacrimal 40
hepatic 70
Fossa(ae)
Hoof, laminitis 139
Lamellae dermales 26
iliac 20,78
clitoral 82
Hoof wall 26
Lamina(ae)
inguinal deep 20,72
 for symphysial tendon 72
Hook, 7-year 146
dermal 26
inguinal supf. 20,78
Horn
epidermal 26
intercostal 62
intercondylar 16
cap 26
femoral72
jejunal 70,102
olecranon 4
connecting 26
femoralis fascialis 74
lumbar aortic 78
ovulation 82
intertubular 26
Lamina(ae) (Continued)
mammary 78
paralumbar 64
of hoof, quality 136
horny 26
mandibular 38
radial  4
terminal 26
nuchae 56
mediastinal 60
supracondylar 16
tubular 26
Laminitis 139
mesenteric caudal 70, 103
trochanteric 16
tubules 26
Laparotomy,transcostal 58, 168
pancreaticoduodenal 70, 102
196
parotid 38
extensor carpi ulnaris 6, 89
of perineum 99
thyropharyngeus 42, 87
Lymph node(s) (Continued)
extensor dig. common 6, 89
of pharynx 94
tibialis caudalis 16, 84
popliteal 20
extensor dig. lateral 6, 18, 89,
of respiration 98
tibialis cranialis 16, 84
pulmonary 60
91, 133
of shoulder 88
tarnsversus abdominis 58, 68,
renal 78
extensor dig. long 18,91
of shoulder girdle 58, 97
92
retropharyngeal 38,46, 161
extensor dig. brevis 91
of thigh 90
 transversus thoracis 91
sacral 78
Muscle(s), Musculus(i) (Continued)
of vertebral column 96
06 snizade1
scrotal 78
of tongue 50
 triceps brachi 10, 81
flexor carpi radialis 6, 89
 splenic 70
omohyoideus 58, 95,
 triceps surae 84
flexor carpi ulnaris 6, 89
sternal 60
omotransversarius 58, 97
ulnaris lateralis 4, 82
flexor dig. deep of forelimb 6,
subiliac 20
orbicularis 0culi 36, 93
vastus intermedius 84
12, 89
thoracic aortic 60
Muscle(s), Musculus(i) (Continued)
vastus lateralis 84
flexor dig. deep of hindlimb 18,
tracheobronchial 60
obicularis oris 32, 85
vastus medialis 84
91
flexor dig.lateral 18, 89
 palatopharyngeus 42, 87
ventricularis 42, 87
flexor dig. medial 18, 89
 parotidoauricularis 32, 85
vocalis 42, 87
M
Muscle(s), Musculus(i) Continued)
flexor dig. supf. of forelimb 12,
pectineus 16, 66,70,83
Malleolus(i) 16
pectoral 52, 91
zygomaticoauricularis 85
89
 Manubrium sterni 56
flexor dig. supf. of hindlimb 18,
pectoralis descendens 52, 91
zygomaticus 85
Margo plicatus 68
pectoralis profundus 52
Mydriasis 158
24, 91
Meatus, nasal 44
frontoscutularis 92
pectoralis transversus 52, 91
Mechanism, reciprocal 24
gastrocnemius 18, 91
peroneus tertius
16,22,84, 22.1
Mediastinum 60, 102, 167
gemelli 18, 90
pharyngeal 42
N
 Mediastinum testis 84
genioglossus 50, 95
Phillip's 82
Nasal Septum 159
Meniscus(i) of stifle 28
geniohyoideus 50, 95
platysma 89
Nasopharynx 46
Mesencephalon 52
 gluteal accessory
18,90,132
popliteus 16, 84
Neck 52
Mesentery 102
gluteal deep 18, 90
 psoas major and minor 92
Nerve(s), Nervus(i)
Mesocolon 70, 179
gluteal middle 18,90
pterygoideus 34, 86
abducent 40, 52, 163
Mesometrium 82
gluteal supf. 18, 90 
pterygopharyngeus 42, 87
accessory 46,52, 110,163
Mesorchium 84
gluteus 19
quadratus femoris 16, 83
alveolar 38, 149
Mesosalpinx 82
gracilis 76, 90
quadratus lumborum 92
auricular 36
Mesovarium 82
hamstring 18
quadriceps femoris 16, 84
auriculopalpebral 36, 110, 153
Midbrain  52
hyoepiglotticus 95
rectococcygeus 80, 93
auriculotemporal 38, 108
Molars 34, 145
hyoglossus 50, 95
rectus abdominis 58, 68, 92
axillary 6, 105
Mouth 44
hyoideus transversus 95
rectus capitis 90
blocks diagnostic 119
Muscle(s), Musculus(i)
hyopharyngeus 46, 94
rectus femoris 84
buccal 38, 108
abdominal 99 
iliacus 99
rectus of eye 36
chorda tympani 38, 110
 abdominal oblique 64, 74, 99
iliocostalis 96
rectus thoracis 91
ciliary long 40,42, 108
abductor pollicis longus 89
iliopsoas 72
retractor bulbi 36
cranial 163
adductor 18,90
infraspinatus 88
retractor clitoridis 80, 93
 cutaneous antebrachial 6, 8
adductor longus 76
intercostal 98
retractor costae 91
cutaneous femoral 20, 64, 76,
anconeus 88
interosseus 24,89,122,135
retractor penis 78, 80, 93
80, 106
articularis humeri 88
interscutularis 92
rhomboideus 52, 90
cutaneous sural 18,20, 22, 107
arytenoideus transversus 94
intertransversari 96
sacrocaudales 80, 89, 90
cutaneous of forelimb 8, 105
biceps brachii 6, 88
ischiocavernosus 85, 100
sartorius 16, 66, 84
cutaneous of hindlimb 20, 107
biceps femoris 18, 90
ischiourethralis 85
scalenus 90
digital 10,20, 105
brachialis 6, 88
laryngeal 48
scutuloauricularis supf. 85
ethmoidal 108
brachiocephalicus 58
latissimus dorsi 58, 97
semimembranosus 16, 83
facial 36, 110, 163
buccinator 92, 139
levator anguli oculi 36, 93
 semispinalis capitis 89
femoral 18, 72, 106
bulboglandularis 84
levator ani 93, 106
semitendinosus 16, 83
general 104—107
bulbospongiosus 84, 86, 100
levator labi superioris 86, 99
serratus dorsalis 91
genitofemoral 20, 72, 74, 76,
caninus 36,92
levator nasolabialis 36, 92
serratus ventralis 52, 91
108
ceratohyoideus 95
levator veli palatini 36, 93
soleus 16, 84
glossopharyngeal 46, 50, 110,
cervicoauricularis medius 92
levatores costarum 46, 94
sphincter anal 80, 93
163
cervicoauricularis profundus 92
lingualis proprius 95
sphincter colli 85
gluteal 18, 80, 106
cervicoauricularis sup. 36, 92
longissimus 96
spinalis 89
hypogastric 80
cervicoscutularis 92
longus capitis 97
splenius 89
hypoglossal 46,48, 52, 110, 163
ciliary 42
longus colli 97
sternocephalicus 52, 91, 52.2
iliohypogastric 106
cleidobrachialis 88
malaris 36, 93
 sternohyoideus 52, 88
ilioinguinal 106
cleidomastoideus 58, 98
masseter 38,93
sternomandibularis 42, 52, 91
infraorbital 38,108,156
coccygeus 86,99
mimetic 36
sternothyroideus 2, 88
infratrochlear 40
constrictor vestibuli 86, 100
multifidus 96
styloauricularis 85
intercostobrachial  8
constrictor vulvae 86, 100
mylohyoideus 38, 93,95
styloglossus 44, 88
ischiadic 107
coracobrachialis 88
oblique ventral of eye 40
stylohyoideus 34, 88
lacrimal  40 
cremaster 74, 76
obliquus capitis 97
stylopharyngeus 42, 87
larngeal 48, 110
cricoarytenoideus 94, 161
obturator 18, 76, 90
subclavius 52, 91
laryngeal (recurrent) 48, 58, 62,
 cricopharyngeus 48, 94
occipitohyoideus 95
sublumbar 92
166
cricothyroideus 94
occipitomandibularis 38
subscapularis 81
lingual 38, 108
cutaneous 58,95
ocular 40
supraspinatus 81
lumbar 74, 76, 104
cutaneous of face 92, 95
of arm 88
temporalis 34, 86
mandibular 38, 108, 149
cutaneous of trunk 64
of croup 90
tensor fasciae antebrachi 81
masseteric 38, 108
cutaneus colli 58, 95
of eye 40
tensor fasciae latae 16, 82
maxillary 38,40, 108, 150
cutaneus omobrachiais 64, 96
of eyelids 36
tensor veli palatini 42, 87
median 6, 105
cutaneus trunci 58, 64,95
of face 92
tenesor ventriculi laryngis 87
mental 34, 108,150
deltoideus 88
of facial expression 36
teres major 81
metatarsal 22
depressor labi inferioris 36, 92
of forearm 87
teres minor 81
metatarsal, dorsal 20, 107
diaphragm 60, 98
 of hip joint 87
Thiermess’ 82
musculocutaneous 6, 10s, 121
digastricus 40.93
of larynx 94
thyroarytenoideus 87
mylohyoid 38
extensor carpi obliquus 6, 89
of leg 91
thyroarytenoideus accessorius 87
nasociliary 40, 108
extensor carpi radialis 6, 89
of mastication 38, 93, 150
thyrohyoideus 44, 88
obturator 18, 106,132
9
oculomotor 40, 50, 108, 163
P
flexor 10
Tectum 52
olfactory 52, 108,163
Palate, hard 44, 160
Rhombencephalon 52
Teeth 30,32
ophthalmie 40, 108
Palate, soft 46, 160
Ribs 56
Teeth, aging by 145
optic 42, 52, 108, 163
Pancreas 68
Ring
Telencephalon 52
palmar 6, 10, 105,119
Papilla(ae)
femoral 72, 172
Tendon
pelvic 80
duodenal 68, 70
inguinal 64, 74
abdominal of ext.oblique 74
perineal 80, 86, 107
ileal 70
inguinal supf. 72
calcanean common 18
peroneal 18,22, 107
dermal accessory 26
 preputial 84
cunean 18
phrenic 56
dermal of hoof 26
vaginal 74
 pelvic of ext.oblique 74
plantar 18, 20,22,107
of tongue 44
prepubic 74, 76, 172, 173
pudendal 80, 86, 107
terminal 26 
sheaths 14 
radial 6, 105
uterotubal 181
S
supf. digital flexor 4, 123
rectal 80, 86, 107
Paralysis of penis 177
Sac(s), Saccus(i)
 symphysial 72
recurrent laryngeal 48, 58, 62,
Parametrium 82
blind, of stomach 68
Tenia(ae) 66, 70
166
Patella 16, 24,28, 134
cecus 68
 Teniae ceci 179
saphenous 18, 22,72, 106
Peduncles olfactory 52
 conjunctival 40
Testis(es) 84, 176
sciatic 18, 80, 107,132
Pelvic bone, fractures 172
lacrimal 40
Thorax 56
spinal 54, 64, 104
Pelvis, bony 72, 172
 pleural 60
Thymus 62
splanchnic 62, 70
Pelvis, renal 78, 174
 Sacculations of large intestine 70
Tibia 16, 131
subscapular 6, 105, 118
Penis 84, 177
Scapula 4
Tongue 44
supply of intestines 70
 Perineum 86
Scrotum 74
Tonsil(s)
 supraorbital 40, 108
Periople 26
Scoliosis 165
lingual  46
suprascapular 6, 105,118
Periorbita 40
Septum(a)
palatine 46
sympathetic trunk 50, 62
Phalanx(anges) 4, 26
nasal 44, 159
pharyngeal   46
temporal deep 38, 108
Phimosis 177
 penis 84
of soft palate 46
thoracodorsal 6
Pharynx 46
scrotal 74
tubal 46
tibial 18,107, 133
Pleura 60
Sex determination, ulti
Tooth, Teeth 34
trigeminal 38, 52, 108, 163
Plexus(us)
Sheath(es)
canine 34
Nerve(s), Nervus(i) (Continued)
brachial 6, 118
Carotid 166
molars 34
trochlear 52, 108, 163
choroid 52
carpal 14, 129
 premolars 34
ulnar 6, 118
lumbar of nerves 76
digital 10,14
surfaces 32
vagal trunks 70
pelvic of nerves 80
 synovial at hock 145
Wolf 32, 34
vagosympathetic trunk 58
sacral of nerves 80
synovial 14, 145
Trachea 50, 58
vagus 46, 50, 62, 156, 163
testicular of nerves 74
Sinus{s)
Tractus, olfactory 52
vestibulocochlear 52, 110, 156
venous of hoof 22
conchal 34
Triangle
zygomatic 40, 108
Podotrochlea 124
 conchofrontal 34
femoral 18, 72
 zygomaticofacial 40, 108
 Pouch guttural 46
frontal 34 
olfactory 52
 zygomaticotemporal 40
 Pouch rectogenital 82
lactiferous 76
Viborgs 46, 161
Nose 44
Pouch vesicogenital 82
maxillary 34, 148
Trochanter, greater 16, 130
Notch
Premolars 32, 145
paranasal 34, 148, 149
Trochlea of femur 16, 24
acetabular 72
Prepuce 84, 177
renal  78
Trunk
cardiac 60
 Prepuce of clitoral glans 82
sagittal of brain 52
linguofacial 50
carotid 30
Process(es)
sphenopalatine 34
pudendoepigastric 20
nasoincisive 30
corniculate 48
venous of brain 52
sympathetic 46, 50,62
thyroid 48
cuneiform 48
Slub fractures 115
vagal 70, 166
spinous 56
Sonography 143, 176, 179
vagosympathetic 58, 166
 styloid 4
Spavin 142
tracheal lymph 58
urethral 84, 177
Space
Tube auditory 50, 160
 Obstetrical measures 175
vaginal 64, 74
epidural 164
Tube uterine 82, 175
Ophthalmoscopy 157
vocal 48
lumbosacral 56, 166
Tuber
Orifice(s), See also Opening,
Promontory of sacrum 56
sacrococcygeal  166
calcanean 16
Ostium.
Prostate 84
subarachnoid 164
coxal 72
cecocolic 70
Protrusion of third eyelid 153
visceral of neck 58
ischial 72
nasolacrimal 38
Protuberance occipital external 30
Spine, ischial 72
olecranon 4
of nasolacrimal duct 44
Pubis 72
 Spines, kissing 164
Tubercle
 preputial 84
 Puncta maxima 168
Spleen 66, 68
for psoas minor 72
teat 76
Pupil  40
Star, dental 34
intermediate 4
urethral 82, 84
Pylorus 68
 Stay-apparatus of hindlimb 24
pubic 72
uterine 82
Stay-apparatus of forelimb 12
supraglenoid 114
Obturator groove 72
Stenosis, static, dynamic 164
Tuberosity
Omentum(a) 68
R
Sternum 56
deltoid 4
Opening; See also Ostium.
Radial paralysis 118
Stifle lock 24
teres major 4
frontomaxillary 34
Radius 4
Stomach 66, 68, 169
tibial 16, 131
 pharyngeal of auditory tube 46
Radi lentis 42
 Stratum externum of hoof 26
Tunic(s), Tunica(ae)
Ora serrata 42
Recess(es)
 Stratum internum of hoof 26
 albuginea 84
 Organ, vomeronasal 44
costodiaphragmatic 60
 Stratum medium of hoof 26
 abdominal 64, 74
 Oropharynx 46
renal 78
Sustentaculum tali 16
Os{ossa) coxarum 72, 172
suprapatellar 142
Symphysis, pelvic 72
fibrous of globe 42
Ossification, incomplete
115
Rectal palpation 178
 System, central nervous 52
vaginal  74
Ostium, See also Opening.
Rectum 70
System, ventricular of brain 52
vascular of eye 158
 intrapharyngeal 46
Reflex
Systole 167
Twin pregnancy 182
pharyngeal of auditory tube 160
corneal 42
uterine 82
palpebral 153
Outlet, pelvic 72
pupillary 156
T
U
Ovary 76, 174,180
Region, perineal
1 72, 86
Tail 86
Udder 76,173
Rete testis 84
Talus 16
Ulna 4
Retina 42, 157
Tapetum lucidum 42
Umbilicus 168
Retinaculum(a)
Tarsus 144
Ungula 26, 135ff
extensor 10
Teat 76
Ureter 78,174
198
Urethra, female 78, 174
cervical, supf. 58
pudendal 80
laryngeal 48
Urethra, male 84
cubital median  8
 pudendal, external accessory 72,
nasal 44 
Uterus 82,175
digital 10,22
80
oral 44 
Uterus, rupture 176
digital, dorsal common II 20 
pulmonary 60
vaginal 82, 176
Uveitis 157
digital, common II 20 
saphenous 20, 134
Vulva 82,176
facial 36
spur 8, 64
facial deep 36
temporal, supf. 36
facial transverse 36
testicular 176
W
Vagina 82, 176
iliac external 20
thoracic, supf. 8, 64
Wall
Vagus 48, 50, 62
jugular 36, 58
tibial, caudal 20
abdominal 64, 168
Valve, aortic 160
linguofacial  36
Ventricles, laryngeal 48, 162
of hoof 26
Valve, mitral 167
mammary 80
Ventriculus terminalis 54
thoracic 58,62
Valve, tricuspid 167
masseteric 36
Vertebra(ae) 56, 164
Windswept foal 130
Vein(s), Vena(ae)
maxillary 36
anticlinal  56
Wolf tooth 32, 34
azygos, left 167
median 8
caudal 56
auricular, caudal 36
obturator 20, 80
cervical 56, 164
buccal 36
occipital  36
lumbar 56
caudal vena cava 60
of stifle descending 20
sacral 56
Zona alba 26
cava 60
palmar 8, 10
thoracic 56, 165
 Zones of autonomous innervation
cephalic 8, 58,118
plantar 20, 22
Vesicle, seminal 84
 forelimb 6.1
cephalic, accessory 8
portal 68
Vestibule
199
Klaus-Dieter Budras · Robert E. Habel
Bovine Anatomy
An Illustrated Text
First Edition
Bovine Anatomy
Scientific Illustration
Gisela Jahrmarker · Renate Richter · Diemut Starke
 2003. 144 pp., 50 large-sized color plates and over 30 ill,.
9 3/4 x 13 1/2", hardcover
ISBN 978-3-89993-000-9
 82,- / $ 131,99 (US) / f 66,-
Bovine Anatomy is a superbly illustrated atlas containing
about 150 detailed color drawings based on dissections
specially prepared for that purpose. It combines the
advantages of both topographic and systematic methods
of anatomy and provides the reader with in-depth
information on the structure and function of all body
 systems and their interaction in the living animal.
This atlas is an essential learning resource for students, a teaching tool for instructors and course
directors, and a valuable reference for large animal practitioners.
● Fully illustrated with large-sized color drawings of the topographic anatomy of the entire body.
 accompanied by systematic illustrations of the bones, joints, muscles, organs, blood vessels, nerves,
and lymph nodes.
● Systematic tables of information on the muscles, lymph nodes, and peripheral nerves provides brief
data referenced to the text.
● Particular attention is paid on the histology, growth, and function of the bovine hoof.
Authors
Klaus-Dieter Budras, DVM, PhD, professor em., University of Berlin, Germany
Anita Wunsche, DVM, PhD, University of Berlin, Germany
Silke Buda, DVM, PhD, University of Berlin, Germany
yons paziuebio Ajateudoidde s l Auoteue auiaog siridap teut selpe-yooqixat papaau-yonu e s! s!ul 
that it can easily be the single book that veterinarians refer to when an anatomic question needs to be
answered about this species. It is most definitely worth the price."
JAVMA
 Subject to change.
schlutersche
Anatomy of the Dog
An Illustrated Text
Anatomy of the Dog
Fifth, revised edition
With Aaron Horowitz and Rolf Berg
 2007. 224 pp., 71 largesized color plates including
several illustrations, radiographs, drawings and
photographs, 9 3/4 x 13 1/2", hardcover
ISBN 978-3-89993-018-4
 86,- / $ 137,99 (US) / f 69,-
Already acknowledged by students and teachers as
an essential resource for learning and revision, this
book will also be a valuable reference for qualified
practitioners.
· Fully illustrated with color line diagrams, including unique three-dimensional
cross-sectional anatomy, together with radiographs and ultrasound scans
· Includes topographic and surface anatomy
· Tabular appendices of relational and functional anatomy
● New section on computed tomography
Authors
Klaus-Dieter Budras, DVM, PhD, professor em., University of Berlin, Germany
Patrick H. McCarthy, DVM, PhD, professor em., University of Sydney, Australia
Rolf Berg, DVM, PhD, professor, Ross University, St. Kitts, West Indies
Aaron Horowitz, DVM, PhD, JD, professor, Ross University, St. Kitts, West Indies
Wolfgang Fricke, medical illustrator, University of Berlin, Germany
Renate Richter, medical illustrator, University of Berlin, Germany
"If the practicing veterinarians have not bought an anatomy book since veterinary school, this
book is highly recommended; this is a book that one would be proud to use as a teaching tool
with clients."
JAVMA
"A region with which I was very familiar from a surgical standpoint thus became more
comprehensible.
[.] Showing the clinical relevance of anatomy in such a way is a powerful tool for stimulating 
students' interest. [..] In addition to putting anatomical structures into clinical perspective, the
text provides a brief but effective guide to dissection."
The Veterinary Record
Subject to change.
schlutersche
Ana bmy or be Ho rse has been accepted as a hig hly s uocessful
tent-atlas of eq uine anatomy. The c hapters on functio nal anatony
ofthis present 5th edition have been totaly reyised and inc lude
new chapters on the eye abdonen, female repoduction, ultra-
s0 nog aphy, and especially o thopedics.
- Full illustrated with cobr lined iagrans, including unique
41 w jeye6ot fu oeue (euoaes ssos jeuo suauip-aauy1
ladiographs and ultrasound scar6
- Includes topographic and surface anatony
uoeue (euojaunj pue leuojeau jo saoipuadde jejngel -
七
"The aimof the a uthors has been adrmirably achieved. The tertbook
is alresdy acknowledged as an essential resou ime for students and
teachers and will be an essential neference book for vateninary
plactitioners and hoise bovers in the Englsh -speaking wond.
Amentan Veternany Medrtal Asscia bon - l4lt4
"'This book would be a valuable reference book for students of
Jo fuew puy pnoys uoebins busjeid aul rfabins pue fuoqeue
t he descni ptiors and diagrams ertremely lseful."
Trsh vetenna ry jeurrar
vet
S