Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
FIVE
MINUTE
Small Animal
Dentistry
Second Edition
Edited by Heidi Lobprise
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
Small Animal Dentistry
Second Edition
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website, accessible at:
www.wiley.com/go/lobprise
The website includes Client Education Handouts that can be
downloaded, customized, and given to clients
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
Small Animal Dentistry
Second Edition
Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Senior Technical Manager
Virbac Animal Health
Fort Worth, Texas
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Inc., Publication
This edition hrsl published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley &r 5ons, lnc.
First edition @ 2007 Blackwell Publishing
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley &r 5ons, formed by the merger of Wileys global Scientihc, Technical and Medical
business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial offces:
2121 Stale Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, POl 9 SSQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial ofhces, for customer services and for informalion about how lo apply for permission lo reuse
Uhe copyright malerial in this book please see our websile al www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization lo photocopy ilems for internal or personal use, or lhe inlernal or personal use of specihc clients, is granted
by Blackwell Publishing. provided that the base [ee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 0l923. For those organizalions thal have been granted a pholocopy license by CCC, a separale system of paymenl5
'7107/l-9665-601t0-816 :l-N8sl are asrAras 8ugrodax [euogoesuerl a4n jo srasn roj sapo aaj a41 *paguerre uaaq seu
Designalions used by companies to dislinguish their producls are oflen claimed as lrademarks. All brand names and producl
names used in this book are lrade names, service marks, lrademarks or registered Lrademarks of their respective owners. The
publisher is nol associaled with any producl or vendor menlioned in this book. This publicalion is designed to provide accurale
and authorilative informalion in regard to the subjecl maller covered. l is sold on the underslanding lhal the publisher is nol
engaged in rendering professional services. lf professional advice or other experl assislance is required, the services of a
compelenl professional should be soughl.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lobprise, Heidi B.
Blackwell's hve-minute velerinary consult clinical companion : Smallanimal dentistry /
Heidi B. Lobprise. - 2nd ed.
P- ; cm.
Five-minule velerinary consull clinical companion
Small animal dentistry
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1SBN 978-0470-95996-1 (pbk.: alk. paper) l. Veterinary dentistry-Handbooks.
manuals, elc. 1. Tile. ll. Tille: Five-minule velerinary consull clinical companion. 1ll.
Title: Small animal dentistry.
[DNlM: l. Dentistry-veterinary-Handbooks. 2. Mouth Diseases-velerinary-
Handbooks. 3. Pels-Handbooks. 4. Tooth Diseases-velerinary-Handbooks. SF 867]
5F867.162 2012
636.089'76dc23
201 2016638
A calalogue record for this book is available from the Brish Library.
Wiley also publishes is books in a variely of eleclronic lormals. Some conlent thal appears in print may nol be available in
electronic books.
Cover design by Nicole Teut
pansurt eypaward nas-isag ueddol Aq Aa[axrag id cl/s'ol us nas
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no represenlalions or waranlies wilh respecl lo the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this work and specifcally disclaim all warranties, including without limilalion warranties of htnes for a parlicular
uarau pauenuo saaens pue ape all seaeu (euonouord ro sales Aq papuaxa ro paear aq Aeu Aueen on asodnd
may nol be suitable Ior every silualion. This work is sold with the underslanding Lhal Lhe publisher is nol engaged in rendering
legal, accounling, or other professional services. lf professional assistance is required, the services of a compelenl professional
person should be sought. Neither he publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an
organizalion or Websile is referred to in lhis work as a cilation and/or a polential source of further informalion does nol mean
hal the author or lhe publisher endorses the informalion the organizalion or Website may provide or recommendalions it may
make. Further, readers should be aware that lnternel Websiles listed in this work may have changed or disappeared belween
when this work was wrillen and when it is read.
12012
To Robert B. Wiggs,
who is greatly missed, and is completely credited (or to be blamed)
for getting me interested in the “wonderful world of dentistry.'
Contents
Contributors .
Preface
XiV
Acknowiedgments
XVli
section
Diagnostics
chapter
Oral Exam and Charting.
chapter
2
 Periodontal Probing
16
chapter
$
Transillumination
24
chapter
4
Intraoral Radiology.
28
section
Techniques
chapter
5
Complete Dental Cleaning.
61
chapter
6
Root Planing: Periodontal Pocket Therapy
69
chapter
Gingival Flaps.
79
chapter
8
Extraction Technique .
95
chapter
6
Oral Pain Management .
115
section
The Practice of Dentistry
chapter
10
The Business of Dentistry.
125
chapter
11
Technicians and Dentistry.
133
section 
IV
Oral/Dental Diseases (Developmental Oral/Dental Problems)
chapter
12
Persistent (Retained) Deciduous Teeth
143
chapter
13
Craniomandibular Osteopathy
148
vii
vili
CONTENTS
chapter
14
Enamel Hypocalcification.
152
chapter
15
 Eruption Disruption/Abnormalities 
157
chapter
16
Abnormal Number of Teeth (Decreased)
163
chapter
17
Abnormal Number of Teeth (lncreased)
168
chapter
18
Abnormal Tooth Formation/Structure.
173
chapter
19
Dentigerous Cyst
178
chapter
20
 Tight Lip Syndrome
183
chapter
21
 Palatal Defects (Congenital)
186
chapter
22
Bird Tongue (Microglossia).
192
chapter
23
Malocclusions of Teeth.
195
Section
V
Acquired Oral/Dental Diseases (Periodontal Problems)
chapter
24
Halitosis.
207
chapter
25
Periodontal Disease: Gingivitis
211
chapter
26
 Periodontal Disease: Periodontitis.
216
chapter
27
Gingival Hyperplasia.
224
chapter
28
 Oronasal Fistula
231
chapter
29
Stomatitis.
237
chapter
QE
Oral Ulceration and Chronic Ulcerative Paradental Stomatitis. .
243
section VI
Enamel and Dentin Problems
chapter
31
Discolored Tooth/Teeth.
251
chapter
32
Dental Caries (Cavities)
258
chapter
EE
Attrition/Abrasion//Wear of Teeth
271
section VlI
Endodontic Disease
chapter
34
Tooth Fracture .
279
chapter
35
Tooth Root Abscess (Apical Abscess)
288
chapter
96
 Pulpitis .
295
section Vill Neoplasia
chapter
LE
Epulis.
303
chapter
38
Melanocytic Tumors (Oral) .
310
ix
chapter
6E
Fibrosarcoma .
314
chapter
40
Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Gingiva)
318
chapter
41
Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Tongue).
322
chapter
42
 Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Tonsil)
326
chapter
t
Odontoma.
330
chapter
44
Tumors of Lesser Prevalence.
336
chapter
45
Papillomatosis (Oral).
341
section
IX
Trauma
chapter
46
Maxillary and Mandibular Fractures .
347
chapter
47
Temporomandibular Joint: Dislocation/Luxation/Intermittent
Open Mouth Locking. . .
358
chapter
48
Tooth Luxation or Avulsion.
363
section
X
Disorders Prevalent in Felines
chapter
6t
Tooth Resorption: Feline.
369
chapter
50
Caudal Stomatitis.
380
chapter
51
Chronic Osteitis/Alveolitis.
384
chapter
52
 Oral Manifestations of Feline Infectious Diseases.
389
section
IX
 Salivary and Other Special Problems
chapter
53
Salivary Mucocele (Sialocele)
397
chapter
54
Sialolith 
402
chapter
55
Salivary Gland Adenocarcinoma. .
405
chapter
56
Masticatory Muscle Myositis.
408
chapter
57
Trigeminal Neuritis (ldiopathic). 
412
chapter
58
 Pemphigus Vulgaris 
415
chapter
59
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex.
420
section Xll Exotic Pets
chapter  
60 Small Mammal Dentistry
429
CONTENTS
appendices
appendix A
The Use of Antibiotics in Veterinary Dentistry
441
appendixB
 American Veterinary Dental College Nomenclature
442
appendix
C
Dental Home Care.
462
Glossary
467
Index
483
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website, accessible at:
www.wiley.com/go/lobprise
The website includes Client Education Handouts that can be
downloaded, customized, and given to clients.
Contributors
James Mudie George Anthony, DVM, BSc (Agr), MRCVS, FAVD, DAVDC.
DEVDC, PAg
Referral Dentist
Central Animal Hospital
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
Redbank Veterinary Hospital
Tinton Falls, New Jersey
Larry Baker, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Northgate Veterinary Dentistry
Decatur, Illinois
Donald E. Beebe, DVM, DAVDC
Apnex Dog and Cat Dentistry, PC.
Veterinary Referral Center of Colorado
Englewood, Colorado
Jan Bellows, DVM, DAVDC, DABVP
All Pets Dental
Weston, Florida
Susan Berryhill, BS, RVT, VTS (Dentistry),CCRA
 Senior Veterinary Nursing Specialist
Pfizer Animal Health
Branson, Missouri
Bonnie Bloom, DVM, FAVD
1-20 Animal Medical Center
Irving, Texas
Randi Brannan, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Pfizer Animal Health
Portland, Oregon
xii
CONTRIBUTORS
William Gengler, DVM, DAVDC
Animal Dentistry and Oral Surgery
Madison, Wisconsin
Denton, Texas
Cecelia Gorrel, BSc, MA, DDS, Vet MB, MRCVS, Hon FAVD, DEVDC, European
and RCVS-Recognised Specialist in Veterinary Dentistry
Veterinary Oral Health Consultancy
Hampshire, United Kingdom
Fraser A. Hale, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Owner
Hale Veterinary Clinic
Guelph, Ontario
Canada
Barron P Hall, DVM, DAVDC, FAVD
Owner
Animal Dental Clinic
Vienna, Virginia
Thomas J. Klein, DVM
East Hilliard Veterinary Dental Services
Hillard, Ohio
Adjunct Professor of Veterinary Dentistry
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Matthew S. Lemmons, DVM, DAVDC
Carmel, Indiana
Annie Mills, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
 Florida Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery
Punta Gorda, Florida
R. Michael Peak, DVM, DAVDC
Tampa Bay Veterinary Specialists
Largo, Florida
CONTRIBUTORS
xili
Alexander M. Reiter, Dipl. Tzt., Dr. med. vet., DAVDC, EVDC
Associate Professor of Dentistry and Oral Surgery
Chief of the Dentistry and Oral Surgery Service
Department of Clinical Studies
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Sunny L. Ruth, DVM
 Richardson Veterinary Clinic
Richardson, Texas
Christopher J. Snyder, DVM, DAVDC
Clinical Assistant Professor
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin
Preface
The Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry is
designed as a quick reference text for the clinician and student of veterinary medicine
   s        a
human dentistry, and evidence-based data provide a strong foundation for the day-to-
day practical tactics the veterinary team must implement. Other resources can provide
the more profound details of the foundation; this text is meant to be kept close at
hand, to be brought out during procedures to guide the steps of the veterinarian and
technician.
The first edition included topics adapted from the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult:
Canine and Feline, for which I served as the dentistry section editor (for the last three
editions, following in the footsteps of Dr. Jan Bellows). All of the dentistry chapters
from the latest edition (fifth) of the Five-Minute Consult are included, plus pertinent
chapters from other sections in that text. A number of other topics were added from
those sections, as well as completely new sections in diagnostics and techniques, with
a large selection of images to guide the practitioner through the steps.
This edition has updated all of the topics chapters, including a more extensive version
of the “Small Mammal" topic to include other species such as ferrets and hedgehogs.
The “Oral Exam and Charting" topic received extensive revisions, and “Oral Pain
Management" was added to the “"Techniques" section. A new section—"The Practice of
Dentistry"-discusses the business of dentistry and the role of technicians. The resource
of images and definitions from the American Veterinary Dental College Nomenclature
webpage supplements the text in many topics. A more in-depth discussion of home
care—from instructions to products—is also included.
The Clinical Companion is organized into 12 sections:
· Section I, “Diagnostics," includes chapters on techniques for oral examination and
charting: periodontal probing to assess the extent of periodontal disease; transillu-
mination of teeth to determine vitality; and intraoral radiology, including extensive
images for positioning.
o a a  nod pd  d n  pp a
gingival flaps—for periodontal therapy and extractions; extraction techniques,
including sectioning. elevation, and closure; and the newest topic of oral pain
management discussing appropriate protocols and demonstrating regional and
local blocks.
AIX
PREFACE
· Section Ill, “The Practice of Dentistry" includes reviewing some of the business
aspects of dentistry, including how to implement goals in your practice, and the role
of the technician, one of the most important team members for this field
deciduous teeth, abnormalities in the number, structure and placement of teeth; lip.
palatal and tongue defects; and malocclusions.
· Section V “Periodontal Problems," starts looking at acquired oral/dental diseases, of
which periodontal disease in the most common. The stages of periodontal disease
are covered, as are complications of periodontal disease such as gingival hyperplasia,
cronasal fistulation, and ulcerative complications (stomatitis, chronic ulcerative
paradental stomatitis [CUPS])
issues, from discoloration and dental caries to wear of teeth.
· Section Vl1, “Endodontic Disease,” includes topics of tooth fracture, apical abscess.
and pulpitis
· Section Vlll, “Neoplasia," covers topics from the Five-Minute fifth edition (melano-
cytic tumors, squamous cell carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, and papilloma) with dental-
focused topics (epulis, odontoma), as well as a review of tumors of lesser prevalence.
including a review in tabular format.
· Section IX, “Trauma,” includes discussion on accurate diagnosis and assessment, as
well as treatment of conditions of maxillary and mandibular fractures, temporoman-
dibular joint (TMJ) disorders, and tooth luxation or avulsion.
· Section X, “Disorders Prevalent in Felines," focuses on conditions prevalent in, yet
not restricted to, cats: tooth resorption, (caudal) stomatitis, chronic osteitis/alveolitis
in older cats, and oral manifestations of feline infectious diseases (garnered from fifth
edition topics)
· Section Xl, “Salivary and Other Special Problems," deals with other oral diseases not
directly related to teeth, from salivary mucocele, stones, and tumors to myositis,
neuritis, and inflammatory issues such as pemphigus and eosinophilic granuloma
complex.
· Section Xll, “Exotic Pets," ends with a revised topic of “Small Mammal Dentistry”
facing ferrets, hedgehogs, and sugar gliders.
· Appendix A features a statement from the American Veterinary Dental College
regarding the use of antibiotics in veterinary dentistry.
· Appendix B is the complete compilation of nomenclature definitions and images
found throughout the text. These resources are used with permission from the Ameri-
   so a  n   e po     x 
of the basics of mechanisms of action to how to implement instructions and compli-
d a a n  p   on 'd o n ns 
· Handouts include customizable instruction sheets for clients on topics such as Oral
Dental Exam Check List, Periodontal Disease, Resorptive Lesions, Damaged Teeth.
and Home Care
Xvi
PREFACE
I would like to thank all the contributors to this and past editions, both my dental col-
leagues and those that agreed to have their topics included in this book. Thanks also
to Drs. Frank Smith and Larry Tilley for continuing to support the Five-Minute Veteri-
nary Consult and the multiple Clinical Companions, and the staff of Wiley-Blackwell
 for their patience and persistence in supporting this publication. And of course, I have
to thank my loving spouse, Joe, for putting up with all my projects!
Heidi B. Lobprise
Acknowledgments
Portions of chapters in this book have been provided by material contributed to
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline by the following authors:
Dennis B. Bailey
Margaret (Peggy) C. Barr
Steven M. Cogar
 Spencer A. Johnston
Thomas Klein
Susanne K. Lauer
Mylene-Kim Leclerc
Louis-Philippe de Lorimier
Elizabeth R. May
Anthony J. Mutsaers
Karen Helton Rhodes
Fred W. Scott
G. Diane Shelton
Alexander H. Werner
Jackie M. Wypij
xvii
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
Small Animal Dentistry
Second Edition
section
Diagnostics
chapter
Oral Exam and Charting
INDICATIONS
"Every mouth, every time": a complete oral examination should be performed when-
ever possible to detect lesions as early as possible.
■ Make it a part of puppy and kitten exams to start a lifetime of oral care (Fig. 1-1).
· Deciduous occlusion
· Broken or damaged teeth
 Proper eruption sequence
+1
Brushing/home care instruction
 Continue with oral examinations at each visit, making oral care a cornerstone of a
wellness program.
■ An alert oral exam can give a quick overview of oral conditions in most patients.
■ A complete oral examination can only be performed under general anesthesia and
will include physical examination of the oral and dental structures, periodontal
probing, transillumination, and intraoral radiography.
EQUIPMENT
Alert Exam
■ Adequate but gentle restraint
■Good lighting
■ Charts
Complete Exam
■ General anesthetic components, including monitoring
Good lighting
■ Mouth gags for accessibility (use particular caution with spring-loaded mouth
 gags)—they can damage teeth or strain the temporomandibular joint unnecessarily
Magnification (usually needed)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
5
 Figure 1-1 Perform an oral exam on every patient possiblefrom early ages on.
CHAPTER 1: ORAL EXAM AND CHARTING
 Figure 1-2 A dental mirror allows you to examine the distal aspects of molars during therapy.
■ Periodontal probe/explorer
Mirror (Fig. 1-2)
Transilluminator
■ Charts
PROCEDURE
Alert Examination
■ Use great caution with anxious, aggressive, or painful animals; examination may
have to be accomplished under sedation (carefully) or when the patient is
anesthetized.
■ With the patient gently restrained on the table, first observe the external structures
of the head for any irregularities—symmetry, swelling (Fig. 1-3), discoloration, dis-
charge; note any malodor (halitosis).
■ Gently hold the muzzle closed with your nondominant hand, and lift up the lips to
observe the buccallabial surfaces of the teeth. Note and record the following:
● Accumulations of plaque and/or calculus (Fig. 1-4)
· Missing teeth (circle on chart)
· Worn (AT for attrition), chipped, broken (FX for fractured), or discolored teeth
 Figure 1-3 Before looking inside the mouth, examine the entire head for abnormalities, such as the
generalized swelling of the muzzle of this dog.
 Figure 1-4 During the alert exam, many patients will let you examine the buccal surfaces of the teeth,
 and the extent of calculus and plaque can be estimated (significant accumulations in this patient).
CHAPTER 1: ORAL EXAM AND CHARTING
6
 Figure 1-5 This patient shows a variation from a correct "scissors" bite, with the left maxillary first incisor
positioned behind the mandibular incisors (crossbite)
· Gingival inflammation/overgrowth
Red or bleeding gingiva
 Gingival hyperplasia
 Possible presence of tooth resorption (TR)—feline and canine
· Position of teeth (occlusion)
Incisors should be in “scissor bite" (Fig. 1-5)
 Lower canine should be spaced equally between upper third incisor and upper
canine
Premolars should interdigitate in a “pinking shear" configuration
 Individual teeth in proper position
· Oral soft tissues
to lift tongue to view sublingual area (Fig. 1-6)
Complete Examination under General Anesthesia
■Reevaluate occlusion before intubation
■  Initial identification of significant lesions to help treatment planning and inform
owner of unexpected problems ("red flag check")
10
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 1-6 Sometimes further evaluation of the tongue is done under anesthesia: this patient exhibits the
 sublingual mucosa.
1Continue more extensive evaluation of indices (Table 1-1)
· Plaque index
·Calculus index (Fig. 1-7)
·Gingival index
■ Missing teeth: radiograph for embedded or unerupted teeth (see Chapter 16)
Supernumerary teeth: evaluate for potential interference, crowding (see Chapter 17)
Abnormal teeth: aberration in size, structure; evaluate for vitality (see Chapter 18)
■ Worn, chipped, or fractured teeth; discolored teeth (see Chapters 31, 33, and 34)
· Evaluate surface and determine if canal is exposed (use periodontal explorer)
(Fig. 1-8)
· Transilluminate to assess pulp vitality (see Chapter 3)
· Radiograph to evaluate periapical bone, canal size
■ Mobile teeth: assess periodontal status and/or root fractures (Table 1-2)
■ Oral soft tissues
· Oral masses (Fig. 1-9)
· Ulceration, depigmentation
■ Periodontal probing (see Chapter 2)
■ Intraoral radiographs (see Chapter 4)
TABLE 1-1 Periodontal Indices
Plaque index (Pl)
PO
No observable plaque
PI 1
 Plaque covers less than one-third of buccal surface
PI2
 Plaque covers between one- and two-thirds of buccal surface
P3
 Plaque covers greater than two-thirds of buccal tooth surface
Calculus index (Cl)
CI0
No observable calculus
CI1
Calculus covering less than one-third of the buccal tooth surface
C12
Calculus covering between one- and two-thirds of the buccal surface with
minimal subgingival extension 
C13
Calculus covering greater than two-thirds of the buccal surface and
extending subgingivally
Gingival index (Gl)
GI0
Normal healthy gingiva with sharp, noninflamed edges
GI1
Marginal gingivitis; minimal inflammation at the free margin; no bleeding
on probing
GI2
Moderate gingivitis; wider band of inflammation; bleeding on probing
15
 Advanced gingivitis; inflammation clinically reaching mucogingival junction;
 spontaneous bleeding sometimes present 
 Figure 1-7 A more accurate assessment of the extent of plaque and calculus accumulation can
(Pl 2—covering the calculus).
11
 Figure 1-8 Explorer used to detect pulpal exposure of this left maxillary fourth premolar with slab
fracture.
TABLE 1-2 Tooth Mobility Index
Tooth mobility (M)
M0
Physiological mobility up to 0.2 mm
M1
The mobility is increased in any direction other than axial over a distance of more
than 0.2 mm and up to 0.5mm
M2
The mobility is increased in any direction other than axial over a distance of more
than 0.5mm and up to 1.0mm
M3
1.0 mm or any axial movement
 Figure 1-9 Thoroughly examine all abnormalities in oral tissues (radiograph, biopsy) because early
detection is essential when dealing with oral tumors. This small mass on the palatal aspect of the right
12
CHAPTER 1: ORAL EXAM AND CHARTING
13
TABLE 1-3 Common Dental Abbreviations
AL
Attachment loss
OM
Oral mass
AT
Attrition (wear)
ONF
Oronasal fistula
CA
Caries
PE
 Pulp exposure
CWD
Crowding
PP
Periodontal pocket
ED
Enamel defect
RD
 Retained (persistent)
snonppap
EP
Epulis
RE
Root exposure
FE
Furcation exposure
ROT
Rotated tooth
FX
Fracture
RPC
Root planing, closed
HD
Gingival hyperplasia
RPO
 Root planing, open 
GV/GVP
Gingivectomy/plasty
RTR
Retained root
LPS
Lymphocytic plasmacytic
TR
Tooth resorption
(caudal) stomatitis
M
Mobile tooth
X
Extraction
(-) (cirdled)
Missing tooth
XS
Extraction, surgical
OP
Odontoplasty
XSS
Extraction, surgical, with
sectioning
Charting
■ Accurately record all variations from normal on chart (Table 1-3) (see Figs. 1-10 and
1-11)
■ Dental formulas
+
Canine permanent: 2 × (1 3/3; C 1/l; P 4/4; M 3/2) = 42
+
Canine deciduous: 2 × (1 3/3; C 1/l; P 3/3) = 28
+
Feline permanent: 2 x (1 3/3; C 1/l; P 3/2; M 1/1) = 30
· Feline deciduous: 2 × (1 3/3; C 1/l; P 3/2) = 26
■ Modified Triadan system can be used to identify teeth
·Quadrant numbering
jupenb uou iaddn :oo1, 
 “200": upper left quadrant
“300": lower left quadrant
“400": lower right quadrant
Tooth numbering
口
Start at central incisor: “_01"
Canines:“_04"
Fourth premolar:“_08"
  Example: right upper fourth premolar: *108"
 Example: left lower first molar: “309"
·Variations
 Feline: no maxillary first premolar or mandibular first and second premolars.
so “first" premolars are “106" and “206" in the maxilla, and “307" and “"407"
in the maxilla; only first molar present all four quadrants
Canine: no maxillary third premolar
 Deciduous teeth: “add" 400 to quadrant number—500 to 800; no deciduous
molars, only premolars
Main Street Veterinary Dental Clinic - Canine Dental Chart
Palenl #:
lenl：
0000?
Treatr
CeanPolshDenlal Exami_.
Pe riodonlics
Exodonlics
Comimemls:
enlal Del
 Figure 1-10 Canine Dental Chart (courtesy of Pfizer Animar Heaith—PAH0391 Dental Chart, p. 1).
14
CHAPTER 1: ORAL EXAM AND CHARTING
15
ChiefComplaint:
Brae
Radiographs
Full _Parlial_
_None
aan/PolishvDenlal Exar
uOpOUB
Maxilla
Right
Left
Mandible
 Figure 1-11 Feline Dental Chart (courtesy of Pfizer Animar Hearth—PAH0391 Dentar Chart, p. 2)
COMMENTS
■ A thorough examination can be performed on every patient in a reasonable amount
of time that is essential to detect any abnormalities that may be present.
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 2
Chapter 3
■
 Chapter 4
■Appendix B
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Periodontal Probing
INDICATIONS
1 Every patient that is anesthetized for any dental procedure should have a
complete dental examination performed, including periodontal probing of every
tooth surface.
EQUIPMENT
Periodontal Probe
■ Round, flat
Marked in millimeters—various markings (Fig. 2-1)
·Some marked with indentations at 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8,9, and 10 mm
· Some marked in alternating 3-mm bands of black and silver
■ Pressure-sensitive—plastic probe with additional indicator that is depressed when
too much pressure is applied
Periodontal Explorer (other End of Many Probes)
(pre-carious), open canals, and enamel defects, especially feline resorptive lesions
(Fig. 2-2)
■ Can be gently used subgingivally to detect calculus deposits
Blachwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
16
Figure 2-1 Two periodontal probes: the top one with marked indentations at 1. 2, 3. 5. 7. 8. 9. and 10
millimeters; the bottom one with alternating black and silver bands of 3 mm each.
 Figure 2-2 Explorer tip (shepherd's hook)
17
18
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
PROCEDURE
■  Initial assessment with probe before dental therapy to identify specific areas of
concern ("red flag check")—for better treatment planning and to inform owner of
unexpected problems
 Complete probing and charting must be done after plaque and calculus is removed
because areas will be occluded with the debris
■ After cleaning each "half-mouth,” examine and probe the buccalfacial surfaces of
the "up” side, and the lingualpalatal surfaces of the “down" side
 Gently insert the probe into the gingival sulcus, advancing to the depth of the sulcus
or pocket until touching the base (Fig. 2-3)
● Note: with inflamed pockets, the probe can easily be pushed past the base attach-
ment because the tissue is delicate—use great care!
■ "6-points" refers to gently placing the probe at the six line angles of the tooth (in
human dentistry with interproximal contact points, the probe cannot be advanced
circumferentially around the tooth).
 Measure and record abnormalities encountered:
 Periodontal pocket (PP): pathological depth greater than normal sulcus
 Greater than 2-3 mm in the dog (take size into account)
Greater than 0.5 mm in the cat (Fig. 2-4)
 Figure 2-3 The tip of a periodontal probe is gently inserted into the gingival sulcus or pocket, advanced
carefully to the base (without penetrating tissue further).
CHAPTER 2: PERIODONTAL PROBING
19
 Mark "Pp" and millimeter depth on chart—there may be several measurements
recorded around an individual tooth
bone loss (Fig. 2-5)
 Mark “RE" and millimeter depth on chart
If additional pocket formation, mark that as well
· Attachment loss (AL) (see Chapter 26)
 Combination of RE and PP
 Total AL is the measurement from the neck of the tooth (cementoenamel junc-
tion) to the depth of the pocket
· Furcation exposure (FE): space between roots of multirooted teeth are exposed
due to gingiva and bone loss
 Fl: stage l exists when a periodontal probe extends less than halfway under
the crown in any direction of a multirooted tooth with AL.
 F2: stage 2 exists when a periodontal probe extends greater than halfway under
the crown of a multirooted tooth with AL but not through and through.
  F3: stage 3 exists when a periodontal probe extends under the crown of a
multirooted tooth, through and through from one side of the furcation out
the other.
 Figure 2-4 Normal sulcus depth in a cat is usually less than 0.5mm.
20
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 2-5 Root exposure is so significant at this tooth that a ruler was necessary to measure the extent
of attachment loss: there was 2mm in pocket depth with an additional 13mm root exposure, a total of
15 mm attachment loss.
■ Areas of note: while every tooth surface should be probed and examined, there are
specific areas that demand special attention or can often be accompanied by minimal
outward indications:
· Palatal surface of maxillary canines (Fig. 2-6): an inapparent deep infrabony
pocket may be present, and if advanced, the bone loss can form a communication
into the nasal cavity which would then necessitate extraction of the canine and
special closure of the oronasal fistula (ONF; see Chapter 28). Early intervention
is essential.
●  Rostral'mesial surface of mandibular canines (Fig. 2-7): a significant pocket beside
the lower third incisor can significantly compromise the lower canine, and
advanced procedures may be used to save the incisor or more thoroughly treat the
lower canine once the incisor is extracted
· Lower first molar—mesial and distal surfaces (Fig. 2-8): deep pockets at either
 aspect of this tooth can lead to further compromise of the mandible itself, espe-
cially in small-breed dogs. Gingival margins may indicate no external problems,
so careful probing is essential.
■  Periodontal explorer
· Sharp tip is very tactile
 Evaluate areas of tooth wear or fracture to determine if canal is exposed
(Fig. 2-9)
 Evaluate areas of potential resorptive lesions in cats (Fig. 2-10)
 Figure 2-6 Probing the palatal surface of maxillary canine may reveal extensive pocket depth that may be
indicative of oronasal fistulation.
 Figure 2-7 Any attachment loss between the mandibular third incisor and canine can compromise the
tooth, so early intervention is essential
21
 Figure 2-8 A 4-5-mm pocket at the distal aspect of the mandibular first molar indicates significant
fir'stmolar.
i se 'o pasodxa s! leuen e j auaiap oi aens yooi uom uo pasn a pinous laoidxa aul biz ane 
papaod dind aul daay Aew eam (enpea :(anueleadde umog)
22
CHAPTER 2: PERIODONTAL PROBING
23
hyperplastic gingiva
COMMENT
■ Every clinic should provide sufficient instrumentation and sufficient time to thor-
oughly examine and probe the periodontal tissues around every tooth. It is a simple
procedure that is often overlooked or underperformed.
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 1
■ Chapter 26
 Appendix B ("Furcation Involvement/Exposure")
Abbreviations
AL, attachment loss; CEJ, cementoenamel junction; FE, furcation exposure; ONF, oro-
nasal fistula; PP, periodontal pocket; RE, root exposure.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Transillumination
INDICATIONS
■While any teeth that show some possibility of endodontic (pulp) compromise should
 be transilluminated, it is a simple procedure to provide this service to every tooth in
every mouth.
· Worn, chipped or fractured teeth: obvious injury, canal may or may not be
exposed (see Chapters 33 and 34)
 Discolored teeth: blunt trauma without enamel injury, indicative of pulpal hemor-
(9 p ie side as) a oi adnd yd j u no a
EQUIPMENT
  Transilluminator extension on otoscope device
■ Strong penlight
PROCEDURE
■ Once the second half/side of the mouth has been cleaned (calculus gone from crown
surfaces), gently prop open the mouth
 Place the transillumination beam behind the tooth being observed, and examine the
extent of light transmitted through the tooth
· Examine all "up-side" teeth, moving from tooth to tooth, beaming the light from
the lingual/palatal surface of the tooth outward
·Examine the "down-side" teeth, beaming the light from the buccal surface inward.
as you observe the palatallingual surface of the tooth being transilluminated
(Fig. 3-1)
 Compare extent of light transmittance from tooth to tooth and record any
variations
· Vital teeth should transilluminate well, allowing the light to pass through the tooth
structure, even showing the pink of the pulp (Fig. 3-2)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
24
 Figure 3-1 A bright light is shone through the tooth, here from the buccal surface, so the light can be
seen transmitting through to the lingual surface.
 Figure 3-2 Transillumination of this maxillary left second incisor shows good light transmission: the pulp is
apparentlyvital.
25
26
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 3-3 Transillumination of this maxillary left third incisor shows poor light transmission: the pulp is
apparently nonvital and warrants further diagnostic evaluation (radiography) and probable treatment (root
canal or extraction)
Nonvital teeth will not transilluminate well, appearing dark or dull, especially in
the chamber portion (central), although the light will sometimes shine through
the peripheral dentin to some degree (Fig. 3-3)
· Contrast similarly-sized teeth in cases that are subtly different
■]
Record any variation
■ Further evaluate teeth with intraoral radiographs to assess additional indications
 s    ss o    
Chapter 4)
COMMENTS
 This procedure is very simple to perform on all teeth immediately after the
cleaning.
■This procedure can also be used at the initial exam or at the beginning of the pro-
cedure to identify teeth that require additional evaluation and possible treatment
early in the process.
CHAPTER 3: TRANSILLUMINATION
27
■ Some teeth examined will be obviously nonvital, and others will be difficult to
determine.
■ If results are inconclusive, mark the chart as to the findings and note that further
monitoring will be needed.
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 1
■
 Chapter 31
Chapter 33
Chapter 34
■Chapter 36
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Intraoral Radiology
INDICATIONS
1 Intraoral radiology is an integral part of veterinary dentistry, from diagnostics to
therapy to evaluation of response to therapy.
 Ideal: full mouth radiographs on every patient, each dental visit
+
 Survey: assess normal anatomy, use as baseline
· Tooth abnormalities: size, structure, variation in number (absence or multiple)
· Periodontal disease: assess extent and nature of periodontal bone loss
 Endodontic disease: assess pulpal vitality—canal width and presence of periapical
bone loss
 Acquired diseases: caries, tooth resorption
 Trauma: evaluate extent of osseous and dental damage
Neoplasia: evaluate extent of osseous involvement
EQUIPMENT
■ Radiographic unit
· A dental radiographic unit at the dental station provides convenience to take
radiographs of every patient (Fig. 4-1)
 Wall-mounted, on a movable stand, or handheld units
 Digital radiography
  Direct digital radiography with sensor
 0 Sensor typically size #2, similar to #2 periapical intraoral film
 0Allows immediate review of image for adjustments
o Sensor is expensive to replace
  Indirect digital radiography
o Phosphor plates allow for additional sizes
0Takes a short time to scan the phosphor plate in order to review the image
Intraoral films-#2 and #4 are the common sizes (Fig. 4-2)
  Require development—chairside or automatic developer
 Time lapse before images can be reviewed on viewbox
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
28
0213A-35
 Figure 4-1 A dental radiographic unit is convenient for use at the dental station.
 Figure 4-2 Commonly used intraoral films: sizes #4 (occlusal), #2 (periapical), and #2 (digital sensor).
29
30
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
PROCEDURE
Taking Radiographs
■ For intraoral films, the patients must be under general anesthesia—all considerations
should be met (preoperative diagnostics, patient monitoring, and support)
 Some tools that can help in taking images include (Fig. 4-3)
● Flexible spiral perm roller (blue-found at beauty supply store): can be used to
keep sensor in proper position and as a soft mouth gag or wedge
· Two tongue depressors joined with a pushpin: simple device to help position
radiographic beam for intraoral films
 Roll of tape: to estimate the direction from which the radiographic beam should
be aimed
 Positioning of the film within the oral cavity and positioning of the radiographic
beam can be a challenge
 Place flat aspect of sensor or white side of film toward X-ray source
  Lead sheet on the back side of the film prevents backscatter, and embossed dot
on film will facilitate identification of teeth on image (Fig. 4-4)
   (          o  
dog, this may involve placing the sensor or film further onto the palate or deeper
in the intermandibular space.
two tongue depressors attached with a pushpin; and roll of tape.
SIDI
UBE
 Figure 4-4 The embossed dimple on the film helps in positioning the film for tooth identification.
 Figure 4-5 Intraoral films should be placed such that the image of the roots, not the crown, will be seen
 on the film; this film was placed against the palate to image the roots of the upper fourth premolar
31
32
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
■ Figure 4-6 Parallel placement of an intraoral film to image the mandibular premolars and molars, as
demmonstrated on this cat skull. Note that the corner is pushed into the intermandibular space.
 If the periodontal bone margin needed to be evaluated, place sensor centered
at the neck of the tooth.
■  Parallel technique
· Intraoral film or sensor placed lingual and parallel to (just inside and flat
against) the mandibular premolars and molars: place the diagonal of the film
across the position of the roots, with a corner sticking into the intermandibular
space (Fig. 4-6)
· Radiographic beam aimed perpendicular to both film and teeth
 Shadow technique (modified “bisecting angle” technique)
· In all other teeth, the sensor/film cannot be placed parallel to the teeth; there will
be some space between the tooth/root and film
· Position film as close to the tooth/root to be imaged as possible—you need to
evaluate the roots, not the crown
· If the beam was aimed perpendicular to the film (Fig. 4-7)
 This would result in a “shadow" or image of the tooth on the film that would
be too short (think of a tree at noon)
  Therefore: perpendicular to film—too short (of an image)
●If the beam was aimed perpendicular to tooth root(s) (Fig. 4-8)
 This would result in a “shadow" or image of the tooth on the film that would
be too long (think of a tree at daybreak)
 Therefore: perpendicular to tooth—too long (of an image)
 Figure 4-7 In imaging these maxillary incisors and canines, if the beam were aimed perpendicular to the
film, the images would be foreshortened.
33
34
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 4-9 By "splitting the difference" between the two positions, the images will be closer to the actual
size of the structures, minimizing distortion. The radiographic aid is placed with the green stick perpendicular
to the film and the red stick is perpendicular to the tooth (root). The beam is aimed midway between the
two sticks
 Split the difference—come halfway in between the two positions (Fig. 4-9)
 The resulting “shadow" or image will be a compromise between the foreshort-
ened and elongated images, with the image the approximate length of the
tooth itself.
 In some of the images, a positioning device was made of two tongue depressors.
The green portion is aimed perpendicular to the film, and the red portion
is aimed perpendicular to the tooth root. The X-ray beam/source is then
positioned midway between the two.
 The positioning tool made of regular tongue depressors (Fig. 4-3) has the terms
"Perpendicular to the Film—- Too Short" and “Perpendicular to the Tooth— Too
Long" printed on them to help determine the proper angles.
· Other teeth: dogs
Mandibular incisors/canines
0 Perpendicular to film (Fig. 4-10)—too short
0 Perpendicular to teeth (Fig. 4-1l)—-too long
0Split the difference (Fig. 4-12)
  Maxillary upper fourth premolar
0 Perpendicular to film (Fig. 4-13)—too short
0 Perpendicular to teeth (Fig. 4-14)—too long
o Split the difference (Fig. 4-15)
 Figure 4-10 Mandibular incisors/canines—beam perpendicular to film.
 Figure 4-11 Mandibular incisors/canines—beam perpendicular to teeth (roots),
35
 Figure 4-12 Mandibular incisors/canines—split the difference.
 Figure 4-13 Maxillary premolars/molars—perpendicular to film.
36
 Figure 4-15 Maxillary premolars/molars—split the difference.
37
38
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 4-16 Feline maxillary incisors/canines—perpendicular to film
· Other teeth: cats
 Maxillary incisors/canines
0 Perpendicular to film (green tongue depressor) (Fig. 4-16)
0 Perpendicular to teeth (red tongue depressor) (Fig. 4-17)
0Split the difference (Fig. 4-18)
Mandibular incisors/canines
0 Split the difference (Fig. 4-19)
Maxillary fourth premolar (see “Hint" section)
·When positioning the beam, make sure it is aimed directly over the tooth (maxil-
lary fourth premolar) or at midline (mandibular or maxillary incisors and canines
for symmetry) (Fig. 4-20)
 Adjust beam (laterally or obliquely for canines or mesially or distally for pre-
molars) to "move” the superimposed apices away from each other (Fig. 4-21)
Hint
 Maxillary incisors and canines: on most dogs and cats (not brachycephalic
breeds), align the flat end of the positioning device (blue) to be parallel to the
ventral fold of the nares (or haired portion of muzzle just under the nares) (Fig.
4-22); in many cases, this will closely approximate the correct beam alignment.
Position the beam initially based on the nares, and confirm the angle.
 Figure 4-17 Feline maxillary incisors/canines—perpendicular to teeth (roots)
 Figure 4-18 Feline maxillary incisors/caninessplit the difference.
6E
 Figure 4-19 Feline mandibular incisors/canines—split the difference.
 Figure 4-20 Dog—mandibular canines: beam aimed initially at midline; roots of canines will be
superimposed over premolar roots.
40
CHAPTER 4: INTRAORAL RADIOLOGY
41
xade auues jo abewi aneedas oi aupu woy Aeme weag isnipe sauuen sengipueu—boa iz-t ane 
from premolars.
· Challenging radiographs
 Dog: maxillary canine apex
 0Place sensor/film centered at the second premolar and palpate apex of canine
tooth (Fig. 4-23)
0 Aim beam toward palpated apex, slight oblique off midline (Fig. 4-24)
 Dog: maxillary molars
0  Place sensor/film lengthwise palatally—lined up with the two molars
 0 Aim beam from above and slightly behind—almost directed aimed at film
(Fig. 4-25)
  Dog: mandibular first premolars—challenging to place sensor far enough rostral
in the intermandibular space for true parallel image
 0 Intraoral: with sensor/film in place, aim beam from a position below (ventral)
and rostral; this will "push" the image onto the film (Fig. 4-26)
oExtraoral: with sensor/film underneath the premolar area on the opposite
side, aim beam at an oblique to where the mandibular teeth on the
other side are not superimposed (use tape roll to assist positioning)
(Fig. 4-27)
42
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 4-22 In most dogs (not brachycephalic) and even some cats, by aiming the beam perpendicular to
the ventral aspect of the nasal fold, the positioning will be adequate (approximates the "split the difference"
position).
 Dog: mandibular second and third molars
0 Position sensor/film further caudally, but also dorsally-do not let it slide
ventrally (keep in place with perm roller)
0Aim beam from a position caudal and dorsal to the film; this will "push" the
teeth onto the image, using the tape roll to assist (Fig. 4-28)
 Maxillary premolars of cats and brachycephalic dogs
0 Keep mouth open with clear mouth gag. place sensor/film under the maxil-
lary premolars on the down side, slightly dorsal to the teeth (Fig. 4-29)
0 Aim beam from above and caudally, at a slight oblique, so the image of the
"down-side” maxillary premolars will be projected on the film underneath
(follow the beam), and the “up-side" maxillary teeth will not be superim-
 posed (Fig. 4-30). Note or mark the film as extraoral for later identification
purposes.
 Figure 4-23 Dog—maxillary canine apex: place sensor/film centered at the second premolar and palpate
apexofcaninetooth
 Figure 4-24 Dog—maxillary canine apex: aim beam toward palpated apex, slight oblique off midline
43
 Figure 4-25 Dog—maxillary molars: place sensor/film lengthwise palatally, lined up with the two molars;
aim beam from above and slightly behind, almost directly aimed at film.
 Figure 4-26 Dog—mandibular first premolars—intraoral: with sensor/film in place, aim beam from a
wy aul ouo ahewi aut ysnd, lm suh eson pue (jeua) moig uoisod
44
 Figure 4-27 Dog—mandibular first premolars—extraoral film: tape roll used to asst beam positioning.
Figure 4-28 Dog—mandibular second and third molars: position sensor/film further caudally, but also
dorsally—do not let it slide ventrally (keep in place with perm roller); aim beam from a position caudal and
psisse on llou adei aul buisn 'abewi aul ojuo yiaai aul ysnd , 1m sun :wly aul on lesiop
45
 Figure 4-29 Maxillary premolars of cats and brachycephalic dogs. Keep mouth open with clear mouth
gag. place sensor/film under the maxillary premolars on the down side, slightly dorsal to the teeth.
 Figure 4-30 Aim beam from above and caudally. at a slight oblique, so the image of the "down-side"
teeth will not be superimposed. Note or mark the film as extraoral for later identification purposes.
46
CHAPTER 4: INTRAORAL RADIOLOGY
oNote: since the beam is further from the film than in an intraoral method
additional exposure time may be necessary.
Preparing Images and Films
■ An additional advantage of direct digital radiography is being able to immediately
adjust the positioning of an image, or to adjust the amount of exposure.
· For images through the maxilla, of apical regions, or extraoral views, higher expo-
sure times might be necessary to get sufficient clarity.
· For images through thinner bone, or to accurately assess the extent of periodontal
bone loss, shorter exposure times might be necessary (Figs. 4-3l and 4-32)
■While digital radiography is more convenient, being able to standard intraoral films
as a backup or for larger films (#4) can be advantageous.
■ Films can be developed in an automatic processor, taped to the lead edge of a larger
film, but can be lost within the unit.
■Small containers with rapid developing/fixing solutions and water can be placed in
the darkroom for hand dipping.
 Dental automatic processors can be used.
■  Chairside developer with rapid developing/fixing solutions can easily be used at the
dental area (Fig. 4-33).
▪ Film and clip carried into chamber; lid secured; film packet opened, film removed
from packet and clip attached to edge of film (Fig. 4-34)
 Figure 4-31 Radiograph of right maxillary fourth premolar and first molar shows apparent significant
 Figure 4-32 Second radiograph of maxillary premolar with decreased exposure shows moderate bone
loss, a more accurate assessment.
 Figure 4-33 A chairside developer allows for quick, simple hand developing at the dental area without
having to leave the patient.
48
CHAPTER 4: INTRAORAL RADIOLOGY
49
 Figure 4-34 A metal clip on the film will facilitate hand developing.
· Film agitated in developer
 Time depends on temperature, strength of solution
 “Spot" develop: observe developing changes through safety top: when no
further color change, advance to water rinse and then fixer
· Fix at least twice as long as developing time; if indistinct images or green discol-
oration, fix longer
· Rinse thoroughly! Precipitates may form after drying if not completely rinsed
· Store radiograph mounts in envelopes once completely dry; mark patient
information
Reading Films
■ In reading digital images, it will be like looking at films with the “dot" coming out
toward you.
■ This will be a view of the facial surfaces (vestibular, labial, buccal), as if you were
doing an oral exam.
· In some digital software programs, you can arrange the images for a full mouth
view, with the left side of the mouth on the right side of the screen and the right
side on the left screen (Fig. 4-35).
■ Identify the jaw: with each film, determine if it is the maxilla or mandible; rotate the
image to position roots accordingly (mandibular roots pointing down, maxillary
roots pointing up)
50
SECTION I: DIAGNOSTICS
 Figure 4-35 Digital films are captured as if you are viewing the film from the outside-in: you can the
arrange the films during exposure, or after, to correlate with the proper teeth.
1Identify side
· For canines and incisors: "shake hands"—-image's right is on your left and image's
left is on your right (Fig. 4-36)
 For premolars: determine “which way is the nose” (is the rostral aspect of the
image toward your right or toward your left)
 That determines the side (Fig. 4-37)
■  Exception: any extraoral film—right and left will be opposite as compared with an
intraoral film (Fig. 4-38)
Evaluation of Films
■Periodontal disease
· Assess the extent
  Estimate percent of attachment loss to determine stage of periodontal disease
 Extensive bone loss may alert you to compromised jaw strength if extractions
are planned
 Assess the pattern of bone loss
 Crestal bone loss: loss of osseous height or flattening in between teeth or in
furcation—one of the indicators of initial periodontal bone loss (Fig. 4-39)
 Horizontal bone loss: pattern of bone loss across several roots or teeth in a
flattened or scalloped loss; if accompanied by gingival recession, will result in
root and/or furcation exposure (Fig. 4-40)
 Figure 4-36 Reading a radiograph. With the incisors and canines, rotated so roots are oriented correctly.
"shake hands" with the teeth; the left teeth on the image are on your right side, and vice versa (dog-
mandibular incisors and right mandibular canine).
 Figure 4-37 Reading a radiograph. With premolars and molars, determine "where is the nose": if the
rostral aspect of the image is to the left, then the teeth are from the left quadrant (dog—left maxilla).
51
 Figure 4-38 An extraoral film is read just the opposite—right and left will be reversed as compared with
an intraoral film (even though the "nose is to the right") (cat—extraoral left maxillary premolars)
 Figure 4-39 The first indication of periodontal bone loss is crestal bone loss, usually at the height of bone
in between adjacent teeth (dog—left maxillary fourth premolar).
52
CHAPTER 4: INTRAORAL RADIOLOGY53
 Figure 4-40 Horizontal bone loss occurs with a linear pattern of bone height loss over several roots or
even teeth (cat—left mandible)
 Vertical bone loss: pattern of bone loss extending down the axis of a root or
 roots; often associated with a deep infrabony pocket; if extends to periapical
region, pulp can be compromised (Fig. 4-41)
■Endodontic disease
· Periapical bone loss: indication of extension of pulpal infection into periapical
region (Fig. 4-42)
· Canal width: disproportionate canal width (larger) as compared with similar tooth
may indicate the pulp is nonvital (dentin no longer being deposited) (Fig. 4-43)
■Tooth resorption (primarily cats, but also dogs)
· Evaluate distinction between tooth, periodontal ligament space, and bone
· In true odontoclastic lesions (type l), often the root structure is difficult to dis-
tinguish from surrounding bone, and no distinct periodontal ligament space is
visible (Fig. 4-44)
· In some cases where periodontal disease and attachment loss (gingiva, bone) has
exposed roots, there can be resorption, but the remaining root structure is intact.
distinguishable from surrounding bone and even separated from it by an intact
periodontal ligament space (Fig. 4-45)
■ Operative evaluation
·  Preextraction
 Evaluate integrity of periodontal ligament space; if not present, may indicate
resorption or ankylosis and typical extraction with periodontal ligament eleva-
tion may not be possible (Fig. 4-46)
 Figure 4-41 Vertical bone loss down a tooth root often results in deep infrabony pockets and can even
extend to involve the root's apex, which would compromise the tooth's vitality. as in the distal root of the
right mandibular first molar and the mesial root of the second molar (dog—right mandibular first molar).
 Figure 4-42 Periapical bone loss (halo of osteolucency around an apex) is generally a reliable indication of
a periapical abscess due to the loss of the pulp's vitality (dog—right mandibular molars).
54
 Figure 4-43 A tooth with a canal wider than a similar tooth is most likely nonvital (dog—left maxillary
Canine [to the right of the imagel).
 Figure 4-44 Odontoclastic lesions of feline teeth need to be assessed radiographically. often with the
presence of root resorption with indistinguishable root, periodontal ligament space, and alveolar bone
(cat-right mandibular third premolar).
5
 Figure 4-45 Some teeth that appear to have classic resorptive lesions display no odontoclastic activity or
root resorption on radiographs. These teeth are more periodontally involved, with root exposure due to
attachment loss (gingiva and bone loss), and subsequent erosion of the exposed portion of the root, but the
submerged root remains intact, along with a distinct periodontal ligament space (cat—right mandible)
 Figure 4-46 If there is extensive ankylosis or resorption of the roots, as in this dog's left maxillary
premolars, there is no periodontal ligament left to elevate, so the extraction procedure will be altered
(dog—left maxillary fourth premolar)
56
CHAPTER 4: INTRAORAL RADIOLOGY
57
 Figure 4-47 Radiographs will give an indication as to the severity of oral masses, particularly their osseous
involvement (cat—right mandible).
 Evaluate any abnormalities such as extra roots, abnormally shaped roots (dilac-
erated) or compromised bone
Trauma
· Intraoral films can target specific areas of traumatic damage
 Sometimes full-skull radiographs give a broader picture of the extent of damage
■ Neoplasia
· Any suspicious lesion should be radiographed and biopsied (Fig. 4-47)
COMMENTS
■  Every practice needs to consider implementing intraoral radiology to provide the
best level of dental care possible.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
Techniques
chapter
5
Complete Dental
Cleaning
INDICATIONS
To remove deposits of plaque, calculus, and debris from teeth
Another term, prophylaxis, is often used, but is less accurate, as it implies prevention,
which is the case only in cleaning teeth in stage l periodontal disease.
EQUIPMENT
■ Gloves, mask, eye protection
?
Dilute chlorhexidine rinse (0.12%)
Mouth wedge or gag
■Dental mirror
Calculus forceps (Fig. 5-1)
Scaler (ultrasonic, sonic) (Fig. 5-2)
Hand scaler (Jacquette)
■Disclosing solution (optional)
 Slow-speed polisher, prophy angle, prophy cup
■ Polishing paste
■Fluoride (optional)
PROCEDURE
1 General anesthesia with cuffed endotracheal tube, monitoring, supportive care
Gently flush oral cavity with dilute chlorhexidine (Fig. 5-3)
· Avoid getting solution on nasal mucosa, especially in cats
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
61
 Figure 5-1 Calculus forceps.
 Figure 5-2 Prophy paste, prophy angle, and ultrasonic scaling tip
62
CHAPTER 5: COMPLETE DENTAL CLEANING
63
■Figure 5-3 Applying dilute chlorhexidine prior to starting the dental procedure.
■ Initial assessment to identify areas of significant disease that might require therapy:
in particular, those areas that were not apparent on the alert examination
· Palatal aspect of maxillary canine—deep pockets
· Pockets at either aspect of mandibular first molar
·Any worn, chipped, fractured, or discolored teeth
 Gently dislodge larger sections of calculus with calculus forceps; take care not to
damage teeth (Fig. 5-4)
■ Use mechanized scaler (ultrasonic or sonic) to continue to remove gross deposits of
calculus from crown surfaces
■Use side of scaler tip, not end (Fig. 5-5)
· Use sufficient water spray for coolant; replace scaler stack if tip overheats
· Apply side of scaler to individual tooth for no longer than 10-12 seconds at a
time; return to the tooth later if additional scaling is necessary
· Use the sharp tip of a hand scaler (Jacquette) to remove remaining deposits of
calculus in grooves (upper fourth premolar development groove); do not use tip
of ultrasonic scaler there (Fig. 5-6)
· Use disclosing solution or air syringe to identify any remaining deposits of
calculus
 Complete examination, probing (Fig. 5-7), transillumination, and intraoral radiology
(see Chapters 1-4)
 Figure 5-4 Gently use the calculus forceps to dislodge large pieces of calculus.
 Figure 5-5 Use the side of the ultrasonic scaler head, not the tip.
64
 Figure 5-6 The sharp tip of a hand scaler can get the remaining calculus in developmental grooves.
 Figure 5-7 Once the calculus is gone, use a probe to identify possible presence of pockets.
65
66
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 5-8 Use copious prophy paste and moderate pressure to splay the prophy cup foot, but not to
excess.
■Additional therapy
· Periodontal pockets (see Chapter 6)
· Extractions as needed
■Polishing (Fig. 5-8)
pressure to gently splay the foot of the prophy cup
a a se  s  f  oa o  d a a 
amount of paste, or pressure to a safer level
Polish each tooth surface-no more than 5-l0 seconds per tooth; if further pol-
 ishing is needed, continue to other teeth and return to this tooth for additional
 polishing later
■Irrigation
· With an air-water syringe or blunt-tipped needle on syringe, rinse tooth surfaces
and subgingival areas to remove any remnants of calculus or paste, which could
cause a periodontal abscess if left (Fig. 5-9)
· The air syringe can be used to gently dry the tooth surface (or in the pocket) to
identify any calculus remnants (discolored or chalky) (Fig. 5-10)
■Fluoride
· For additional antibacterial activity; remineralization and desensitization.
· When indicated (avoid in renal patients), apply acidulated phosphate fluoride to
dry tooth surfaces and leave on according to manufacturer's recommendation
 Figure 5-g Thoroughly rinse the tooth surfaces.
 Figure 5-10 Air-dry the tooth surfaces to visualize remaining calculus.
67
89
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
· Air blow or wipe off; rinsing deactivates most fluorides
·Avoid allowing ingestion
COMMENTS
■ This complete dental cleaning description deals with crown surfaces only. It is
imperative to identify and treat any subgingival lesions thoroughly (see Chapter 6).
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■  Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 6
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Root Planing:
chapter
6
Periodontal Pocket
Therapy
INDICATIONS
 To remove deposits of plaque, calculus, and debris from the tooth surfaces in peri-
odontal pockets and gently debride the inner lining of the pocket
1 To further treat select periodontal pockets with subgingival medicaments to enhance
healing of the lesion
EQUIPMENT
1Periodontal probe (see Fig. 6-1)
Hand curette
W-3 plastic filling instrument (PF1)—*beaver tail"
 DoxirobeTM Gel (Pfizer Animal Health New York, NY)
■ Irrigation solution
PROCEDURE
1 Provide preoperative and intraoperative (local) analgesia where appropriate
■ Identify and select periodontal pockets of appropriate depth for additional therapy
(3-5 mm) (Fig. 6-2)
· These are moderate-depth, suprabony, soft tissue pockets
- e ad an pom (g  ) sid ans s saa 
gival flap to open the site for adequate cleaning (open root planning)
 Deeper infrabony pockets (with vertical bone loss) would require more advanced
periodontal procedure with gingival flap for access, complete curettage of infrabony
pocket, and placement of material to encourage bone regrowth
Select appropriate hand curette: curettes have a round toe at the end and rounded
(  -  s   s  
▪ Curettes are double-ended; the two ends are mirror images of each other, as only
one side will contact tooth surface for root planing
Blackwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
69
70
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
■Figure 6-1 Periodontal probe, hand curette (with round end), and W-3 "beaver tail" for packing
perioceutic.
· Curette working ends are numbered (e.g., ll/l2), with varying angulations
(designed in human dentistry to clean specific tooth surfaces)
  Some equipment companies have specialized veterinary curettes (feline)
● Size of working ends can also vary: some smaller types (mini) may be useful for
instrumentation in periodontal pockets of small dogs and cats
■ Insert curette head into depth of pocket, adjusting the cutting edge to contact the
tooth surface (closed face) (Fig. 6-3)
■ With a pull stroke, bring curette edge down the surface of the root, dislodging cal.
culus and debris; use this pull stroke in several different directions in a cross-hatching
pattern to effectively root plane the surface free from debris (Fig. 6-4)
■ As the surface is cleaned of debris, the tactile (and auditory) sensation will go from
a rough feel to a smooth feel
■ With light digital pressure on the external surface of the pocket, allow the opposite
edge of the curette to gently debride the diseased soft tissue (subgingival curettage
 or debridement); there will be moderate hemorrhage
■ Some (not all) ultrasonic units are made to allow subgingival cleaning, which allows
avitation of bacteria in addition to scaling
· Other ultrasonic scalers should not be used below the gum line, as once the tip
is buried, the water spray cannot adequately cool the tip. potentially causing
overheating and damage to tooth
■ Polish the crown surface and gently splay the foot of the prophy cup to polish a
millimeter or two of the root surface (Fig. 6-5)
(a)
 Figure 6-2 (a) Probe inserting into periodontal pocket—5mm in depth. (b) Probe placed at the 5-mm
mark on top of the gingiva to indicate the depth of the pocket.
71
(a)
[b]
 Figure 6-3 (a) Working edge of the curette placed against the tooth surface. (b) Curette advanced into
depth of the pocket.
 Figure 6-4 With a pull stroke down, calculus and debris in the pocket can be debrided (this is 
demonstrated in a specimen, so no bleeding is present, as would be the case in a patient).
 Figure 6-5 The prophy cup foot is splayed to polish the root surface of the pocket.
73
74
 SECTION II: TECHNIQUES
Figure 6-6 After irrigating all debris and prophy paste off of the tooth, a gentle blast of air into the
sulcus helps dry the area and shows clean surfaces.
 Irrigate then air-dry the area thoroughly to remove any remnants of calculus, debris,
or prophy paste (Fig. 6-6)
 Prepare the perioceutic (Doxirobe Gel) according to manufacturer's recommendations
· Once mixed, and before you disconnect the two syringes, balance the syringes
upright with syringe “A" on the bottom, to allow the gel to settle, then remove
the excess air and place the blunted tipped cannula on the syringe
■  Introduce the blunt-tipped cannula into the pocket, but not embedded into the soft
tissue; start with the tip at one extent of the pocket (Fig. 6-7)
■ Slowly inject the gel into the pocket; as the gel starts to extrude from the pocket.
move the cannula tip along the length of the pocket, flling the void with the gel,
but not overfilling (Fig. 6-8)
· To help with retention of the gel, use a finger to help keep it in the pocket and
gently scrape the tip of the cannula on the tooth surface at the end of the admin-
istration to dislodge the gel from the cannula tip
■ Place a drop of water to hasten the solidification of the gel, although it will harden
on its own in 1-3 minutes (Fig. 6-9)
■ Use the W-3 flat against the tooth to push the remaining gel underneath the gingival
margin (Fig. 6-10); use light digital pressure on a buccal pocket to force the gel into
the recesses of the pocket
 Figure 6-7 The blunt tip of the Doxirobe cannula is advanced toward the pocket.
(a)
 Figure 6-8 (a) Start to inject Doxirobe into the pocket. (b) Continue to inject the gel as you move the
cannula tip across the length of the pocket.
75
(b)
 Figure 6-8 Continueo.
 Figure 6-9 A drop of water will help to speed the firming of the gel
76
[a]
 Figure 6-10 (a) Use the flat end of the W-3 "beaver tail" to start packing the gel under the gingival
margin. (b) Continue packing until the gel is completely under the gingival margin.
77
78
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
■ Note: there are other perioceutics used in human dentistry and other products with
clindamycin
■ If fluoride is to be applied, do so after the gel, because water used to firm the gel
will deactivate the fluoride
   q     s      
not brush for 14 days, recheck at 2 weeks to assess healing and start brushing at
that time
Prescribe antibiotics and pain medication postoperatively as appropriate
■ Recheck and re-treat in 6 months
COMMENTS
■ Blunt or dull curettes will be ineffective in root planing: keep instruments
sharpened
■ Using the perioceutic without effective root planing will have poor results
■  Attempting to root plane or treat a pocket deeper than 5 mm without using a gingival
flap will be ineffective
■ Excessive pressure when root planing can damage the root surface
■
■
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 5
Abbreviations
PFl, plastic filling instrument or W-3.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Gingival Flaps
INDICATIONS
To access site for effective treatment
· Extraction site
 Flap design is discussed in this chapter; additional extraction steps discussed
 in Chapter 8
· Periodontal surgery of deep pockets (greater than 5 mm)
EQUIPMENT
15c scalpel blade (see Fig. 7-la)
■
 Periosteal elevator (Molt #2 and/or #4) (see Fig. 7-la)
Tissue forceps
■Small scissors (see Fig. 7-1b)
PROCEDURE
■ Adequate pain management: preoperative, multimodal, local blocks, and preopera-
tive dispensing
Appropriate antimicrobial selection
■ Flaps for extraction
· General concepts
 Adequate exposure is necessary to facilitate extraction procedure and flap
closure afterward
  Full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap is typically used
 Flap should extend through attached gingiva, past the mucogingival line, into
the alveolar mucosa, typically just past the edge of the tooth, in the interdental
area (Fig.7-2)
  Freshen the edge of the gingival margin with the blade by removing l mm before
the flap is elevated (Fig. 7-3)
Blackwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
79
[a]
Ssa
 Figure 7-1 (a) 15C scalpel blade, scalpel handle, Molt #2 periosteal elevator, Molt #4 periosteal elevator
(b) Thumb forceps, needle holders, and small, sharp scissors.
08
 Figure 7-2 Releasing incisions are full thickness, extending through the attached gingiva, past the 
mucogingival junction into the alveolar mucosa above (right maxillary canine).
Canine)
81
82
SEC TION I: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 7-4 The tip of the blade can be introduced into the sulcus to release the junctional epithelium
 around the tooth (right maxillary fourth premolar).
Introduce the blade tip into the sulcus around the tooth to release the junctional
epithelium at the base of the sulcus (Fig. 7-4)
 Elevate flap with periosteal elevator, to the level of the alveolar mucosa
(Fig. 7-5, a-c)
 Gently elevate or stretch the palatal or lingual gingiva as well (Fig. 7-5, d)
 Release tension on flap by excising periosteal layer on underside of flap (Fig.
7-6, a): pull up on flap with forceps, gently excise periosteal fibers until release
is apparent (Fig. 7-6, b); do not go through full thickness
 After the extraction, close flap with absorbable suture, simple interrupted
sutures
· Maxillary canines
 Make mesial (rostral) incision directly up (see Fig. 7-2)
 Make distal incision angled caudally following the direction of the root
(Fig. 7-7)
 Note: While there may be concerns about a distal incision interfering with
blood supply to the flap, extensive personal experience has shown this not
to be the case, particularly with broad-based flaps
 It is essential on this tooth to provide release by excising periosteal fibers.
&pecially if an oronasal fistula is present
[a}
[b]
 Figure 7-5 (a) The periosteal elevator is introduced at the edge of the flap. to elevate it full thickness
(right maxillary canine). (b) Elevation is continued, working the periosteal elevator along the length of the
flap (right maxillary fourth premolar). (c) Elevation is continued until the flap is released to the level past the 
before suturing (right mandibular first molar).
E8
d
 Figure 7-5 Continueo.
84
(b]
 Figure 7-6 (a) The periosteal fibers on the underside of the flap must be gently excised to remove tension
on the flap. (b) Once the fibers are excised, the flap can be extended easily, so when it is sutured, there will
benotension.
58
86
SECTION I: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 7-7 After the mesial (rostral) incision is made, a distal incision, angled distally to follow the root, is
made.
· Maxillary fourth premolar
 Mesial (rostral) incision is typically sufficient to release the flap; a distal incision
may damage salivary ducts (see Figs. 7-4 and 7-5. b)
At closure, the corner of the mesial incision edge will rotate to fit into the space
of the palatal root (Fig. 7-8)
· Mandibular canine
 Start incision at distal aspect of canine for 2-3 mm, following the linguodistal
direction of the root (Fig. 7-9)
 At the caudal extent of the first incision, make buccal and lingual releasing
 uu an no  pian (e or- i) und e un sisi
of mucosa on buccal aspect) (Fig. 7-10, b)
Additionally, an incision at the mesial (rostral) aspect of the tooth can be made
for additional release (Fig. 7-ll, a and b)
 Elevation of the lingual mucosa gives access for bone removal and elevation
(Fig. 7-11, c)
· Mandibular first molar
 Make mesial and distal incisions (Fig. 7-12)
 Once the tooth is extracted, gently elevate the lingual gingival margin suff-
ciently to provide release for adequate closure (see Fig. 7-5, d)
· Envelope flaps: for minor extractions that need minimal access, use the periosteal
elevator to gently stretch out the gingival margins, without a releasing incision,
and that can later be sutured at closure (Fig. 7-13)
 Figure 7-8 With proper release, the mesial corner of the flap can be rotated (after tooth extraction) to be
sutured near the site of the palatal root.
 Figure 7-9 An incision is made at the distal aspect of the lower canine, following the line of the root as it
is positioned medially/lingually.
8
(a)
[b]
pue lenbull yim uaed uoisui padeus e 'uoisui isy aul jo suaxa ennen aun i (e) oi- ana 
buccal/labial releasing incision can further provide access to the alveolar bone at the distal aspect of the 
tooth. (b) Extension of the buccal releasing incision, while preserving the frenulum, allows creation of a full
buccal flap
88
[a]
(b]
 Figure 7-11 An incision at the mesial (rostral) aspect of the mandibular canine will allow better access
with a full buccal flap. (a) An incision is made at the mesial aspect of the tooth. (b) The buccal flap is
elevated. (c) The lingual mucosa is elevated.
68
(C)
Figure 7-11 Continueo.
(a]
 Figure 7-12 (a) Distal releasing incision of right mandibular first molar. (b) Mesial (rostral) releasing incision
of right mandibular first molar.
90
(b)
 Figure 7-12 Continueo.
 Figure 7-13 Envelope flap to provide access without releasing incisions.
16
92
SEC TION I: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 7-14 For periodontal therapy. the releasing incision will be made at the line angle of an adjacent
tooth.
■ Flaps for periodontal surgery
· If a periodontal pocket is greater than 5mm, closed root planing will be
challenging and ineffective, so a gingival flap will expose the site for adequate
treatment
· As compared with extractions with interdental releasing incisions, the gingival
margin around the tooth to be periodontally treated should be preserved
Releasing incision should be made at the adjacent tooth, at the “line angle'
(Fig. 7-14)
 0 Halfway between the outside aspect of the tooth and the midpoint of the
root—the line angle
0 Not interdentally
0  Not at the furcation
0  Not directly over the midpoint of the root
 When there is interdental gingiva (col, papilla) between teeth and the flap is
to be made across several teeth, incise the interdental gingiva lingual or palatal
to the teeth, not directly over the height of the papilla (Fig. 7-15)
 Specially designed flaps, such as a crescent-shaped flap at the palatal aspect of
a maxillary canine, will expose the site for effective treatment of deep infrabony
 pockets that have not yet progressed to a oronasal fistula
0 Attention to the palatal artery to preserve it within the flap is optimum
CHAPTER 7: GINGIVAL FLAPS
6
 Figure 7-15 The interdental release is made at the lingual aspect of the mandibular incisors to preserve
the interdental gingiva.
 Elevate with periosteal elevator only as much as is needed to expose the area
to be treated
0 One exception is to elevate through the attached gingiva to the level of the
alveolar mucosa if the flap is to be sutured so the gingiva is placed further
apically down the root (apically repositioned flap [ARF]—a procedure used
          s
remaining attached gingiva and bone)
■Closure of flaps
· Small, absorbable suture material used in a simple interrupted pattern is typically
best
· In dogs, a small reverse cutting needle will help get through the tough gingiva
best
· In cats, a small taper needle may cause less trauma, especially in inflamed tissues
· With the palatal or lingual mucosa also elevated, pass needle/suture through this
tissue first, then through buccal mucosal flap
COMMENTS
Without flaps, certain treatments would be ineffective (root planing of deep pockets)
 or cause trauma to the patient (extraction without exposure for tooth sectioning or
alveolar bone removal)
94
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
■ Proper instruments and technique are essential; rough handling of delicate or inflamed
tissues could lead to loss of tissues and/or failure of procedure
■Failure to adequately release the tension of the flap (by resecting the periosteum on
the underside of the flap) is a common reason for failure to close, especially in closing
oronasal fistulas, where constant tension from respiratory movement is present
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 6
■ Chapter 8
Abbreviations
ARF, apically repositioned flap.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Extraction Technique
INDICATIONS
Cause for extraction
·Periodontal disease
· Endodontic disease: open canal; nonvital pulp; poor transillumination; periapical
bone loss
· Tooth resorption
 Retained (persistent) deciduous teeth
Supernumerary, crowded, or maloccluded teeth
■ Decision process: criteria
 Tooth: strategic versus nonstrategic; relative importance of tooth compared with
extent of therapy necessary to save it
· Patient: underlying systemic considerations may lead to a decision to extract a
tooth compared with additional efforts at periodontal therapy with frequent anes-
thetic episodes, chance of persistent inflammation, and so on
· Client: more advanced therapy will need a commitment for additional cost, home
care, and follow-up visits, as compared with extraction resolving the problem
EQUIPMENT
■ Instruments for gingival flap (see Chapter 7)
 Means of sectioning teeth and removing alveolar bone (alveoloplasty)
Power equipment
High-speed handpiece on air-driven unit
 Contra angle gear on slow-speed handpiece (micromotor unit)—set on highest
speed possible
·Cutting burs
 Crosscut fissure bur for sectioning teeth (#699, #700, #701)
Round bur for alveoloplasty (#2, #4, #6)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
95
a
[b
 Figure 8-1 (a) Dental extraction forceps, winged dental elevator, and crosscut fissure bur on high-speed
handpiece. (b) Dental elevators must be sharpened on a regular basis: a rounded edge on an Arkansas stone
 to fit the curve of the winged elevator can be used with a simple downstroke of the elevator on the edge
96
CHAPTER 8: EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE
6
·Dental elevators (Fig. 8-1, a)
 Various sizes and shapes
 Sharpened edge: elevators must be sharpened on a regular basis to allow the
     s       s
(Fig. 8-1, b)
·Extraction forceps
PROCEDURE
 General steps (for details, see individual descriptions)
 Adequate pain management: preoperative, multimodal, local blocks, and postop-
erative dispensing
Appropriate antimicrobial selection
+
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
· Access (see Chapter 7)
· Alveolar bone removal to access furcation or expose wide root structure (canines)
(Fig. 8-2)
· Section multirooted teeth with crosscut fissure bur, using bur flat on tooth, moving
from furcation down through the crown (shortest distance) (Fig. 8-3)
 On slow-speed handpiece, have an assistant drip water onto site to reduce heat
buildup
 Figure 8-2 Using a round bur on a high-speed handpiece, alveolar bone may be removed for better
access for sectioning at a furcation.
98
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
Figure 8-3 A crosscut fissure bur on a high-speed handpiece is used, with the length of the bur against
the tooth for optimal cutting.
·Elevation
 Position dental elevator
0 In periodontal ligament space: advance tip of dental elevator in between
tooth root and bone (Fig. 8-4)
■ With sharpened tip, take great care and have controlled use of the elevator
with the tip just past your finger and advance with caution to avoid
slipping
0  In between root section crowns, with care (Fig. 8-5)
0 Between crown/root section and adjacent tooth: be careful not to loosen
adjacent tooth (Fig. 8-6)
 Adjustment (rotation or other movement) of instrument to contact and push
tooth root to stretch and fatigue periodontal ligament (Fig. 8-7)
  Remove root segments with dental extraction forceps (Fig. 8-8);: if not ready to
be removed, with gentle rotation of the forceps, determine where further eleva-
tion is needed, or remove additional bone
 Debride/curette alveolus of debris with periosteal elevator (Fig. 8-9)
Smooth rough bony spicules on alveolar margin—round bur: alveoloplasty
(Fig. 8-10)
 Place osseopromotive substance in select sites to support osseous healing
(optional)
 Suture: nonabsorbable, simple interrupted
Uncomplicated elevation
· Access/exposure with envelope flap or simple releasing incisions (see Chapter 7)
(Fig. 8-11)
 Figure 8-4 A dental elevator, with its tip sharpened, is carefully advanced into the periodontal ligament
space in between the tooth and alveolar bone.
 Figure 8-5 A dental elevator can be used with controlled force between crown sections.
66
 Figure 8-6 A dental elevator can be used in between a tooth segment to be elevated and an adjacent
tooth, taking care not to loosen the adjacent tooth.
 Figure 8-7 The dental elevator can be rotated after placement to stretch and fatigue the periodontal
ligament.
100
 Figure 8-8 Once the periodontal ligament is completely fatigued, and the tooth is loose, it can be
 Figure 8-9 After the tooth has been removed, gently curette the alveolus to remove any debris or
infected tissue.
101
 Figure 8-10 Any rough edges of alveolar bone should be reduced and smoothed prior to flap closure.
O
O
 Figure 8-11 Envelope flap for simple exposure without releasing incisions.
102
CHAPTER 8: EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE
103
 Figure 8-12 Use a small crosscut fissure bur (#699) to section a feline mandibular third premolar.
 Section multirooted teeth with crosscut fissure bur (Fig. 8-12)
 Elevate root segments to loosen; remove with extraction forceps
·Debride socket; alveoloplasty
· Suture
Maxillary canine
· After the gingival flap is elevated, use round bur to make a groove at the mesial
(rostral) and distal aspects of the canine for 3-4 mm
· Using round or crosscut fissure bur, remove 2-3mm of buccal alveolar bone
plate (Fig. 8-13), to extend the alveolar opening to a location at the widest part
of the root
· Elevate and remove tooth or tooth root segments; debride socket; alveoloplasty:
suture
· If tooth does not loosen sufficiently initially, additional buccal bone removal may
be necessary
 Maxillary fourth premolar
· After the gingival flap is elevated, use round or crosscut fissure bur to remove
crestal alveolar bone to expose furcation, and use crosscut fissure bur to section
tooth between the mesiobuccal and distal roots, cutting through to the develop-
mental groove (Fig. 8-14, a); a second cut is made from the furcation mesially to
remove a triangular piece of tooth that will facilitate visualization of the furcation
between the two mesial roots (Fig. 8-14, b)
104
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 8-13 Grooves can be made in the alveolar bone at the mesial (rostral) and distal aspects of the
tooth to facilitate placement of the dental elevator. With a furrow made between the grooves, a few
millimeters of alveolar bone can be removed from the buccal surface of the maxillary canine to provide an
opening as wide as the root itself.
· Use the crosscut fissure bur to section the tooth between the two mesial (buccal
and palatal) roots; this cut should be made at the furcation between the roots
(Fig. 8-15)
· With the crosscut fissure bur, remove the distal aspect of the distal crown to
provide space for dental elevator (Fig. 8-16)
 If one root is removed, and the others are still solid, you can remove additional
bone in between the roots to better access the remaining roots; preserve as much
buccal cortical bone as possible
· Keep the interseptal bone in place initially to help elevate the palatal root out; if
the palatal root is retained, use the crosscut fissure bur in the alveolus coronal
to the root tip in a funnel-shaped action to allow easier access and elevation
(Fig. 8-17)
· If a buccal root is retained, further elevate the soft tissue to expose the jugae over
the root, and use the crosscut fissure bur in a "windshield wiper" action to remove
the buccal bone over the root to expose it for further elevation
Elevate and remove tooth segments; debride socket; alveoloplasty: suture
(Fig. 8-18)
· Do not use the burs to “pulverize” root tips out; infected debris can be forced into
deeper tissues and the root tips may even go into the nasal cavity
[a]
(C)
 Figure 8-14 (a) The crosscut fissure bur is used from the buccal furcation of the upper fourth premolar
through the crown, to the developmental groove. (b) A second section from the furcation rostrally will
remove a triangular piece of crown that will allow visualization of the furcation between the two mesial
roots.
105
(a)
 Figure 8-15 (a) Begin to section through the two mesial roots (buccal and palatal) at the distal midpoint 
106
■ Figure 8-16 A section of the distal aspect of the distal crown can be removed to provide space for the
dental elevator.
 Figure 8-17 Initially use the ridge of bone in between the roots for leverage to elevate the palatal root. If
the palatal root is not easily elevated, or the root tip is fractured, remove bone from the walls of the alveolar
socket to allow better access.
107
108
 SECTION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 8-18 Smooth the roughened edges of alveolar bone before suturing (alveoloplasty).
■ Mandibular first molar
· After the gingival flap is elevated, use round or crosscut fissure bur to remove
crestal alveolar bone to expose furcation, and use crosscut fissure bur to section
tooth between the roots, cutting through to distal aspect of the mesial crown
(Fig. 8-19)
· With the crosscut fissure bur, remove the distal aspect of the distal crown to
 provide space for dental elevator as the distal segment is elevated (Fig. 8-20)
 Often the distal root will elevate more easily; use a round bur at this point to
remove cancellous bone behind the mesial root to provide better access for the
elevator; avoid removing buccal cortical bone when possible, as it provides strength
for the mandible (Fig. 8-21)
(Fig. 8-22)
 Elevate and remove tooth segments; debride socket; alveoloplasty: consider
packing osseopromotive material; suture
 Do not use the burs to “pulverize" root tips out; infected debris can be forced into
 deeper tissues and the root tips may even go into the mandibular canal
Mandibular canine
· After the gingival flap is elevated, use round or crosscut fissure bur to remove a
 Figure 8-19 The lower first molar is sectioned with the crosscut fissure bur, starting at the furcation and
cutting through in front of the distal cusp.
 Figure 8-20 The distal root of the lower first molar is elevated.
109
 Figure 8-21 Once the distal root is gone, cancellous bone at the distal aspect of the mesial root can be
removed for better elevator access. Preserve the buccal cortical plate when possible.
Figure 8-22 A groove on the distal aspect of the mesial root can make elevation challenging.
110
CHAPTER 8: EXTRACTION TECHNIQUE
¥111
 Figure 8-23 Once the Y-shaped flap at the distal aspect of the canine is raised, remove a crescent-shaped
area of bone at the distal aspect of the mandibular canine to provide sufficient access to elevate the
broad root.
and make a groove at the mesial aspect of the tooth to help elevator placement
(Fig. 8-24)
· Before elevating, assess the degree of mandibular symphysis laxity/movement, if
any present (not uncommon in small dogs and cats), and record on chart
 Elevate carefully while supporting the mandible with the opposite hand; evaluate
integrity of symphysis and adjacent teeth (third incisor, first premolar) on a regular
basis. Elevate at the distal aspect of the tooth, following the line of the root
lingually (Fig. 8-25, a), and at the mesial aspect of the tooth, following the root
(Fig. 8-25, b).
· Remove tooth; debride socket; alveoloplasty; consider placement of osseopromo-
tive substance; suture. With adequate flap release, there should be no tension when
the buccal flap is extended over the defect for suturing (Fig. 8-26).
· If the tooth does not loosen sufficiently, additional bone may be removed, but be
careful with the mental foramen buccally and subgingival tissues lingually
■Tooth resorption
· If a tooth has been diagnosed as a true odontoclastic tooth resorption with
      a   o
112
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 8-24 A groove may be made at the mesial aspect of the mandibular canine for elevator
placement, but preserve as much cortical bone as possible.
obliterated, tooth root converting into osseous tissue), then a modified extraction
technique may be considered (see Fig. 4-36 in Chapter 4)
The term “crown amputation" might not be a favorable term to use with
clients
Follow all steps of local analgesia, flap (envelope), and sectioning tooth (if
multirooted)
·Begin elevation: the tooth crown will usually snap off (premolars); some canine
teeth will not be easily removed; crown amputation may be necessary in those
cases to avoid traumatizing the mandible
· Continue removal of remaining crown and smooth any remaining tooth edges or
bony spicules
Suture site closed (cruciate suture)
 Record odontoclastic resorption, modified technique; monitor for any persistent
inflammation
· Radiographs are essential! Some externally appearing “resorptive" lesions have
intact roots that must be elevated! (see Fig. 4-37 in Chapter 4)
(a)
 Figure 8-25 (a) Elevation of the distal aspect of the tooth should follow the line of the root lingually.
(b) As you elevate at the mesial aspect of the canine, follow the curve of the tooth downward and medially.
and try to protect the lower third incisor.
113
114
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 8-26 With proper flap procedures, the site should be closed without tension.
COMMENTS
 Extraction techniques should be sequential and deliberate, using patience
■]
 Rushing a procedure or using too much force can result in
·Broken root tips
·Broken jaws
· Instruments slipping into other tissues (eyes, etc.)
■
 Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
■
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 7
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Oral Pain Management
INDICATIONS
 To control oral pain preoperatively, perioperatively, and postoperatively by focal and/
 or systemic routes using multimodal therapy
EQUIPMENT: MATERIALS
Injectable Opioids and Alpha-2 Agonists
■Buprenorphine
 Butorphanol
■Hydromorphone
■ Morphine
■Oxymorphone
■Fentanyl
■Methadone
 Dexmedetomidine
■Xylazine
Local Anesthetics
■Bupivicaine, 0.5%
1-cc syringe
 25-27-gauge, 1-3-in. hypodermic needles
■ Dosage: cats and small dogs = 0.1 cc; medium dogs = 0.2 cc; large dogs = 0.3 cc
■Add buprenorphine (to double duration) at 3μm/kg in same syringer
Injectable Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NsAIDs)
■Carprofen
Meloxicam
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
115
116
 SECTION II: TECHNIQUES
Oral or Transmucosal Opioids
■Buprenorphine
■Methadone
MS Contin (time-released formulation of morphine sulfate)
Oral NSAIDs
■Carprofen
Meloxicam
■ Other veterinary-labeled NSAIDs
MECHANISM OF LOCAL ANESTHETICS
■ Inhibit sodium (Na) cations' passage through ion-selective Na+ channels in nerve
membranes by selectively binding these channels and thereby preventing nerve
impulse transmission
METHODS
Sites and Means for Control of Pain
■Local anesthesia agents and alpha-2 agonists will inhibit transduction at A-delta and
C nocioceptors and transmission of pain to the spinal cord
  Anti-inflammatory drugs are known to act both peripherally at the site of inflammation
and centrally to modulate spinal transmission
 Opioids can modulate pain centrally and locally
■ N-Methyl-D-aspartic (NMDA) antagonists, such as ketamine, can greatly decrease
central sensitization
PROCEDURE FOR REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
Anatomical Sites for Local Anesthetic Infusion?
■ Maxilla: at the pterygopalatine branch of the maxillary nerve (an extension of the
 trigeminal nerve) as it courses through the pterygoid fossa ventral to the junction of
the rostral/middle one-third of the zygomatic arch
·Access via the infraorbital foramen (Fig. 9-1)
 Premeasure hypodermic needle length from the infraorbital foramen to the junc-
tion of the rostral/middle one-third of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 9-2)
· Insert hypodermic needle slowly into the infraorbital foramen, extending caudally
to the level of the pterygopalatine nerve branch
123456
 Figure 9-1 Regional block of the mandible—access via the infraorbital foramen.
Mandibular n.
Lesser Palatine n.
Infraorbital n.
Buccal n.
Mental n.
Maxillary n.
Greater palatine n.
Inferior alveolar n.
Pterygopalatine n.
 Figure 9-2 Illustration of nerves of the canine skull.
117
118
SEC TION II: TECHNIQUES
 Figure 9-3 Intraoral approach to mandibular nerve block, needle medial to the ramus, caudal to the third
molar, coursing caudally toward the angular process of the mandible.
 Aspirate, rotate needle 90 degrees and aspirate, repeating the process to complete
360 degrees, infuse slightly, aspirate again; if no backflash of blood enters the
syringe, infuse desired volume slowly
· Gently remove hypodermic needle and hold pressure on the injection site for 1
minute to avoid hematoma formation
· Regional anesthesia will affect the oral tissue from the point of injection to the
midline and rostral, including the hard palate
 Mandible: at the entrance of the inferior mandibuloalveolar branch of the mandibular
nerve (an extension of the trigeminal nerve) into the mandibular foramen
Access the site by inserting the hypodermic needle medial to the ramus, caudal
to the third molar tooth coursing caudally toward the angular process of the man-
dible; to establish a target, place a finger extraorally on the angular process and
direct the needle toward and just short of your finger (Fig. 9-3)
· An alternate access is to imagine a line extending ventral from the lateral canthus
of the eye; enter via the skin medial to the ventral cortex of the mandible coursing
dorsally to a point approximately half the width of the body of the mandible?
 Aspirate and rotate the syringe as described above
·
 Infuse slowly and withdraw the needle; hold pressure as described above to
prevent hematoma formation
· The mandibular tissues will be anesthetized from the point of injection site rostral
to the midline and medial to but not affecting the tongue
CHAPTER 9: ORAL PAN MANAGEMENT
Onset and Duration of Regional Anesthesia
Bupivicaine has an onset of activity in 4-6 minutes5
■ The duration of bupivicaine as the sole regional anesthetic is 8-l0 hours; by adding
an opioid to the local anesthetic, the expected duration of anesthesia is doubled6.7
Dosage
■ Bupivicaine, 5% solution per site*
· Cats and dogs: <l0kg = 0.1 cc
● Dogs: 11-20kg = 0.2cc
· Dogs: >21kg = 0.3 cc
*Total dosage should not exceed 2 mg/kg, especially in cats
1 Opioid dosage when added to bupivicaine
●0.075 mg/kg (0.035 mg/lb) morphine
● 0.003 mg/kg (0.0015 mg/lb) buprenorphine
PERIOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
 Opioids have been shown to have a direct local analgesic effect in peripheral tissues.
Opioid receptors can be found on peripheral nerves and on inflammatory cells but
are not obvious until after the onset of inflammation. Proper selection of premedica
  d  a   aa  s   
incision we make begins the transduction process of pain. If we preempt pain, less
mediators of inflammation will be released peripherally, sending fewer signals to the
dorsal horn. Ketamine has been found to be an important analgesic in blocking the
NMDA receptor mechanism decreasing “wind up" pain. Opioids can modulate pain
locally and centrally. Local anesthesia agents will inhibit transmission of pain to the
spinal cord. Anti-inflammatory drugs are known to act both peripherally at the site
of inflammation and centrally to modulate spinal transmission. These drugs are
medetomidine are very potent and selective (both visceral and somatic) analgesics.
The duration of activity is approximately 3 hours. The ability to reverse medetomi
dine with atipamezole is an additional benefit when using this analgesic modality.
           s
acting at a different site along the pathway.
■ Opioids, NSAIDs, or alpha-2 agonist drugs can and should be used for analgesia in
conjunction with regional anesthesia. Common drugs used perioperatively are the
following:
· Medetomidine 1mg/mL intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) (atipamezole
5 mg/mL IM—reversing agent)
· Carprofen 2 mg/kg subcutaneous (SQ)
· Ketoprofen 1 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ
120
 SECTION II: TECHNIQUES
· Buprenorphine: dogs: 0.006-0.02 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ q4-8 hours
cats: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV, IM q4-8 hours
· Oxymorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ
●Hydromorphone: dogs: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
cats: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
· Morphine: dogs: 0.1-1.0 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ q4-6 hours
cats: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM, SQ q3-6 hours
· Butorphanol 0.2-0.6 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ
· Ketamine 2.0-6.0 mg/kg IV or IM
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
Oral medications for continued pain control are much easier to administer while the
regional anesthesia is present. Discharging patients who have several hours of regional
anesthesia duration remaining can be given oral pain medications with food. Some
common analgesics for oral use are as follows:
■ Carprofen (Rimadyl, Pfizer Animal Health, New York, NY) 2 mg/kg bid
■]
 Ketoprofen 2 mg/kg sid load dose followed by 1 mg/kg sid
 Deracoxib (Deramaxx, Novartis Animal Health, Greensboro, NC) 1.0-4.0 mg/kg sid
(high dose for acute, low for chronic)
■ Etodolac (Etogesic, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, St. Joseph, MO) 10-15 mg/kg
sid
■ Tepoxalin (Zubrin, Merck Animal Health, Summit, NJ) 20mg/kg sid load dose
followed by 10 mg/kg sid
·(Osteoarthritis labeling)
■ Meloxicam (Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica) 0.2 mg/kg sid load dose
followed by 0.1 mg/kg sid
■ MS Contin (Purdue Pharma LP, Stamford, CT) 0.5 mg/kg bid
■
 Tramadol 1-5 mg/kg qid-bid
■ Buprenorphine 5-40μg/kg (drops for sublingual absorption to effect in cats)
Excellent postoperative pain management can be achieved with opioids and NSAIDs
given concurrently for 3-5 days after surgery followed by 4-5 additional days of NSAID
therapy.
References
1. Butterworth JF, Strichartz GR. Molecular mechanisms of local amesthesia. Anesthesiology
1990;72(4):711-734
2. Kohrs R, Durieux ME. Ketamine: teaching an old drug new tricks. Anesth Analg 1998;
87(5):1186-1193
3. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Veterinary Dental Techniques. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
 4. Beckman BW, Legendre L. Regional nerve blocks for oral surgery in companion animals. Comp
Cont Ed Prac Vet 2002;24:439-444
CHAPTER 9: ORAL PAIN MANAGEMENT
5. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
Raven, 1997.
6. Candido KD, Winnie AP, Ghaleb AH, Fattouh MW, Franco CD. Buprenorphine added to the local
anesthetic for axillary brachial plexus block prolongs postoperative analgesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med
2002;27(2):162-167.
 7. Snyder CJ, Culp-Snyder LB. Infraorbital regional nerve blocks with mepivacaine decrease the anes-
thetic requirement of isoflurane in dogs using a model for pain associated with dental procedure.
JAVMA 201l (in press)
 8. Bonagura JD. Kirks Current Veterinary Therapy XIl Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 2000.
Author: William Gengler, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
The Practice of Dentistry
chapter
10
The Business of Dentistry
INTRODUCTION
In the last 30 years, the practice of veterinary medicine has come to mean much more
than providing good medical care. Running a good practice involves communication,
and the ability to solve problems and apply concepts of economics: in other words,
being good at business. Within that realm, issues with providing good dentistry carry
some of the same challenges with some unique situations as well. Since dental care is
 important throughout the life of the patient, providing good medicine gives everyone
a chance to build a good business as well. Some basic principles apply
It Is Difficult to Make Changes!
■Delegate
Define Challenges and Goals
■Prioritize goals
Set the Goals
1 SMART goals
■ Measure!
Build the Value
CHALLENGES
In Order to Set Most Goals, the Problem Needs to be Defined in
Relation to the Challenge or Problem
■ If you want dental income to increase, what have been the hurdles to achieving
the goal?
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
125
126
 SECTION I: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
Good Intentions Do Not Implement the Changes-A Good
Plan Does
■ Notes taken at a conference do not magically make the changes you want—your
team does (or does not)
Team Involvement
■ Buy-in from decision makers
· Most changes require resources—time, money and people
· Decision makers must be in agreement and encourage the team
■ Buy-in from the team
· Orders handed down without direction are likely to fade
· Input from the team to define the problem, collectively come up with potential
solutions and creatively determine action steps will help the team “own" the
solution and work together for the goal(s)
DEFINE THE PROBLEM OR GOAL
What Do You Want to Achieve?
■What is keeping you from achieving this?
· This further defines the underlying problem that is easier to define and easier to
set a goal to correct
Common Problems-Tied to Goals
■ Increase the number of dental procedures
· Do we have the capabilities to maximize our dental recommendations (l5-30
dental procedures per full-time equivalent veterinarians [FTE] per month)
 Facilities—space
Equipment
  Trained personnel
· Is every patient getting a dental exam, and is the level of disease recorded?
 Defined problem: we need to record dental exam on every patient
· Why are clients not compliant with recommendations for dental procedures or
home care?
 Defined problem: we need to improve communication and procedures to
increase compliance
0 Further defined: are clients reluctant due to cost or anesthesia concerns?
■We need to build the value of what we provide
■ Average income per procedure 
·Are we missing charges for everything we do in dentistry?
 e  rn sand a a p d pa 
CHAPTER 10: THE BUSINESS OF DENTISTRY
127
Are we reluctant to charge for the work we are doing?
 Defined problem: we need to make clients aware of the value and advantages
we provide with good professional dental care
■Number of radiographs
· Is every patient getting good radiographic assessment?
If not, why not?
0  Do we need to implement digital dental radiography?
0  Do we need to improve skills at taking radiographs?
0  Do we need to build the value of taking radiographs to justify the cost to
our clients?
■ Percent of revenue from dentistry
· As the above problems are identified and solved, the appropriate revenue for
dentistry should be realized
GOAL SETTING
SMART Goals
 SSpecific: smaller, distinct goals are more likely to be met
M—Measureable
· If you cannot measure where you are now, and where to want to be, how can you
tell if you succeeded
· If the numbers are not attained, need to ask...
 How can you improve?
 What did not go as planned?
  Is this actually a goal we can attain?
A—Attainable
· The proper resources (the proper equipment, training. or manpower) must be
available
■R—Realistic
· The goal should be reachable
· If a larger goal is desired, set midpoint goals
■T—Time
 Set a specific time frame in which to meet the goal, or midpoints
 Set someone specifically in charge of managing the activities to meet the goal in
the time allotted
Prioritize
■ Initially choose one to two goals based on their priority
+
 Ability to do with current resources
· Level of importance to clinic, patients, or in order to meet future goals
■ Once these goals are fulfilled, or on their way to being finished, introduce
another goal
128
SECTION III: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
COMMUNICATION
Teamwork
■Consistent message
· Veterinarians: build the medical message
·  Technicians: build the practical implementation
 Bridge to scheduling appointment 
Home care
· Front office staff: client service representatives
 Handling objections: reassurance
  si aa  mo as oi sd ui id  n o
 Scheduling protocols
Build the Value
 Client concerns about costs are real
 Better anesthetic protocols means less worry but increased costs
Show the value of what you do: a picture is worth...
· Dental photo album
Fluffy's day at the dentist
· Picture with radiograph: to show hidden problems where the tooth does not look
that bad
 Tooth resorption: feline or canine
  Periodontal bone loss with minimally affected gingiva
  Apical bone loss: small crown fracture or intact with nonvital pulp
· Before and after pictures
 With every dental procedure
 Added to dental photo album
· Dental report card
  Pictures representing stages of disease
 Have owner select which one matches their pet
 Show actual disease to owner
 Education about the impact of the disease
· *Red flag" check at initial examination: point out problems as well as plaque and
calculus
 Other lesions: additional reasons to have procedure
 Broken, chipped, or discolored teeth
Tooth resorption
· Use two words: pain and infection
 Most owners can relate to intense oral pain
 Correlate the plaque to bacteria and infection
· The systemic impact
 Do not overdramatize the association but give a realistic message that chronic
infection can impact overall health
CHAPTER 1O: THE BUSINESS OF DENTISTRY
Handouts for each condition
· Periodontal disease stages: at time of exam and post-op
  Generated by staging code at time of examination—descriptive of the level of
disease noted and recommendations
  Determined by extent of disease found during therapy—generated by group
code—stage of disease
0 Reminder for follow-up rechecks also generated through group code
· Tooth resorption, endodontic disease, and so on
 Consistent message from all team members (see above)
· Similar grading of disease stages for consistency
· Group codes with estimate ranges based on level of disease
Two statements for the bottom of the page on each estimate
0 Hidden problems are often discovered during the complete examination
under general anesthesia; we will need to be able to contact you to discuss
these, and their treatment may change the original estimate
0 Some patients benefit from staged therapy: getting the infection under control
with a thorough cleaning and assessment, and finishing oral surgery at a later
date (2-3 weeks later)
■ This can help if the owner cannot be contacted for additional treatment
issues
■ This can divide an excessively long procedure into two shorter anesthetic
events
■ For the later oral surgical procedures, the tissues (and patient) will be in
better shape and will respond better
 Testimonials from other clients (pet parents)
· Stage 4 “miracle dogs" that respond so well to treatment
Compliance
■ Internal compliance needs to come first—meet your team goals
Recommendations are not always followed
 American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) Trends: clinics choose dentistry to
work on compliance—there is a lot of opportunity in dentistry
■Again—consistent message
■ Set up standard operating procedure (SOP) for scheduling appointments at the time
of visit
· Relies on dental stage entered in records at every visit!
 Stages 3 and 4 should have their procedures scheduled before they leave the office
that day
 Phone in l-2 days if owner needs to look at calendar
· Stage 2 should have a postcard or call in 2-3 months
· Stage 1 should have a postcard or call in 4-6 months
SOP on number of procedures to schedule each day
· Also relies on dental stage being entered in records!
130
SECTION III: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
Determine total number of procedures that are reasonable for that day—time, staff.
equipment
· Determine a total "stage number"every case should not be a stage 4 with exten-
sive work
 For example, if up to three cases can be seen per day, set a "stage number" at
levels" should be booked for that day
 SOP for follow-up visits-can be implemented through group codes
Stage l: card/call for dental exam in 12 months
+
 Stage 2: card/call in 9 months
· Stage 3: card/call in 6 months
· Stage 4: card/call in 3-4 months
■ Compartmentalize the steps/charges to help spread out costs
· At the time of exam
 Blood work, other radiographs
 Dispense antibiotics, pain meds
· At 2-week recheck
  Reinforce message for daily home care
 Dispense home care supplies
■Home Care (see also Appendix C)
·Be the clients' trusted choice for the best aftercare
 Many over-the-counter options
· Brushing demonstration on model
At any exam
0 Final puppy visit
0 Two weeks after dental procedure
·“Taste test" the toothpaste selection
  Offer different flavors on tongue depressors
 Let the dog choose its favorite
· Customize the home care program
Client's lifestyle
  Pet-client ability
· If cannot brush daily, use chews, additives
· Compliance is important here as well
· Monthly reminders to pick up more supplies
ECONOMIC CHALLENGES
Lost Income
■ Dropped charges
· Bundled estimates with everything possible
· It is easier to delete things out than remember them
CHAPTER 1O: THE BUSINESS OF DENTISTRY
131
■ Group codes
· Estimates based on stage of disease
· Estimate ranges, not absolutes
· If a recent dental exam (3 months) has a stage recorded, an estimate can be made;
if not, offer complimentary dental examination upon which to base an estimate
Competition
■ Over-the-counter home care products
Supermarket purchases: 43% for dogs, 56% cats
Veterinary office purchases: 5%
 The veterinary professional team should be the best resource for recommendations
for complete oral health care of patients!
ACTION STEPS
Choose Your Goals-Identify the Problem,
Find the Solution-Prioritize
Consistently write stage of disease in records
 Develop SOP for scheduling procedures
 Take more dental radiographs
■ Build the value with pictures, photo albums, and report cards
 Develop group codes and handouts
■Be the primary resource for home care recommendations
Set Up SMART System for Each Goal
 Specific goal with team commitment
Measure what you are doing now, and set where you want to be
Keep it simple, attainable
■ Be reasonable with expectations
■ Set a specific time line, with a single person as the champion for the goal
Celebrate Success
■ Do something special for the team
■ Realize you are providing your patients with better medicine
Choose Your Next Goal-and Succeed Again!
See also the following chapter:
■ Appendix C
132
SEC TION II: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
Abbreviations
SMART goal, specific, measureable, attainable, realistic, time goal.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
Technicians and Dentistry
INTRODUCTION
Providing Optimal Dental Care for Veterinary Patients Is
a Collaborative Effort
■ Between veterinary professionals, pet owner, and pet
· It has been shown that a collaborative partnership between a veterinarian and a
client with clear recommendations and effective communication can increase
compliance
· Often, a technician has a good relationship-centered care approach with the pet
and owner, and can provide positive reinforcement for any recommendations, as
well as sharing personal experience
 Within the veterinary team: veterinarian, technician, assistant, front office staff
· A consistent message from all team members helps provide that effective com-
munication to the owner
 Any negative or noncommittal comment can greatly undermine the
recommendations
· The consistent message stems from a common belief that excellent dental care can
enhance the patients' health overall
口
strong evidence to the pet owner
口1
 Make sure the owners know the impact that oral infection can have, and the
discomfort or pain that pets may experience with oral disease
The Technician's Role
■ From the examination room to preparing the dental operatory and performing many
of the dental tasks, a well-trained technician is one of the clinic's best assets
■ It is important to be aware of each state's practice act to stay within the legal guideline
of practice for technicians (registered), assistants, and others
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
133
134
SEC TION II: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
CLIENT INTERACTION AND COMMUNICATION
Examination
■Patient history
· Dental-related aspects may include any changes in eating or grooming behavior,
or discomfort
· Determine what dental home care or chew toys are being provided
■ Initial patient examination
 If there is any discomfort or the patient is less than cooperative, minimize handling
of the mouth at this time
·Show client extent of plaque and calculus or presence of other outstanding lesions
(broken or discolored teeth, tooth resorption)
 With a dental report card or pictures showing periodontal disease stages,
             
the lips)
 Actual diagnosis and treatment recommendation will be provided by the
veterinarian
· Provide a dental photo album for pet owner to review while waiting
 A pictorial sequence of what happens during a dental procedure
 Before and after pictures
 Pictures of oral cavity with few external signs, paired with radiographs that
show the underlying disease
· Reinforce the message that good dental care is important for overall health, and
share personal experiences with own pets or other patients
 Concerns with cost: go over all the steps performed in the complete dental
cleaning and treatment
0 Costs can be spread out if blood work is done and some medications are
dispensed at the time of examination
0 Medical impact and increased cost may result if treatment is not done
 Concerns with anesthesia
 su   ao pu ae sand p ss, 
nificant disease
 0 Share details of preanesthetic blood screening. radiographs, and cardiac
assessment to minimize risks
0 Discuss balanced analgesia/anesthesia protocols designed to meet each
patient's needs
■ Pain management perioperatively
0 Discuss intraoperative patient support care
■  Intravenous (IV) fluids
■ Monitoring: blood pressure, pulse oximeter, respiratory
■ Body temperature support
CHAPTER 11: TECHNICIANS AND DENTISTRY
135
0  Discuss postoperative care
■ Recovery and pain management
■ Dispensed medications: antibiotics and pain management if needed
■ Follow-up by clinic: next day and at recheck
· Communicate initial findings and discussions with veterinarian and assist in
patient restraint for further examination
· Confirm that diagnosis code have been entered for patient
 Follow clinic procedures for communicating need to schedule procedure with
 pet owner and front office staff, or to set up reminder
Preoperative Period: Day of the Procedure
■ Review all anesthetic screening. protocols, and patient care
 Confirm instructions for food and water withheld
■ Confirm any medications given
■ Confirm contact information for perioperative communication—critical!
■Answer questions for pet owner, or refer to veterinarian for questions
Perioperative Communication
■If patient is admitted several hours before actual procedure, call owner to inform
them when procedure starts
■ Inform owner of status of procedure
· If additional procedures are substantially more than anticipated, veterinarian
should briefly communicate with owner for permission to proceed
■  Inform owner when patient is in recovery and estimated time of release
Discharge Communications
 Patient documentation
· Dental chart: show lesions found and treatment performed
· Radiographs: show radiographs and areas of concern
· Discharge instructions: diet, follow-up, home care
■ Dispense medications and instructions
■ Answer any questions
Follow-Up
■ Call next day to see how patient is doing: Comfortable? Eating?
■ Schedule follow-up visit in 2 weeks for evaluation and home care instructions
Home Care Instructions (See Appendix C)
 Again, consistent message on the importance of regular, effective home care
· Soft plaque starts to form hours after dental cleaning
· If not removed, plaque mineralizes into tartar
136
 SECTION II: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
· The infection and pain that can result from the bacteria in plaque is not good for
the patient
· Periodontal disease is preventable
■When to initiate home care program
· Any new pet: puppy kitten, or adoptee
· Two weeks after any dental procedure (once mouth has healed)
■Select appropriate program
· Customize recommendation for pet-owner combination
 Aggressive patients may not allow interaction
  Client lifestyle may not afford a regular schedule
· Pets at higher risk need more consistent care: small dogs, crowded teeth
■ Methods of home care
· Brushing is the gold standard
 Recommend daily brushing so the owner might at least brush 3 days a week
  Iraining starts gradually
0 Pick a quiet spot and a regular time
0 Let your pet pick the toothpaste (taste test in exam room)
o Let pet lick toothpaste off your finger first
oThen let them lick it off of the toothbrush
0 Gradually, get the pet used to smalls strokes of the toothbrush with paste on
the incisors, and eventually move to other teeth
 Reward pet at the end
 If they cannot brush, use other products on a daily basis (or on the days they
do not brush)
Toothpastes: often enzymatic (see Appendix C)
·Dental diets (see Appendix C)
 Mechanical or squeegee effect: fibers and size of kibble provide physical chewing
disruption of plaque and/or calculus accumulation
 Calcium chelator (hexametaphosphate): prevents or slows plaque from miner-
alizing into calculus
· Dental chews (see Appendix C)
 Primary mechanical effect from chewing
 Some additional ingredients: chlorhexidine or enzymatic
· Dental rinses, gels, water additives
 Chlorhexidine: antimicrobial standard for oral care
 Zinc: antiplaque; ascorbate: vitamin C
 Xylitol: antiplaque
 Numerous other additives
·Sealants
 Inert polymer (waxy): helps prevent bacterial adherence
0  Applied at time of procedure
0 Home application weekly
  Polymer that acts as a liquid bandage
0 Applied at time of procedure only
CHAPTER 11: TECHNICIANS AND DENTISTRY
137
THE OPERATORY
Equipment
 High-speed dental units
· Air pressure driven
 Air compressor
 Compressed gas tanks
· High-speed handpiece
 Cutting burs for extraction, surgery (see Chapter 8)
 Sonic scaler handpieces
· Low-speed handpiece: polishing, contra angles
·Air-water syringe
·Vacuum/suction
■Mechanical dental scalers (see Chapter 5)
· Ultrasonic scalers: magnetostrictive, piezoelectric
 Hand instruments (see Chapter 6)
· Hand curettes
+ Hand scalers
· Periodontal probe: explorer
· W-3 packing instrument
■ Extraction equipment (see Chapter 8)
·Periosteal elevators
+
 Dental elevators
· Suture material, needle holders, forceps
· Bone implant material
■ Maintenance
· Follow all manufacturer's instructions on regular maintenance, including air
compressors
· Set up maintenance chart with lubrication, cleaning、 and replacement
instructions
 Dental handpieces: cleaning and lubrication critical
· Good maintenance can help avoid expensive repairs and downtime
■ Cleaning and sterilization
· All equipment must be cleaned and maintained in between patients
· American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) recommendations call for steam
sterilization of instruments after each use
· Maintaining separate packs for use during day allows for cleaning of all sets at
end of day
■ Sharpening
·Hand curettes (see Chapter 6)
  Edge that will contact the tooth surface must be sharpened on a regular, if not
daily basis
138
 SECTION II: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
● Dental elevators (see Chapter 8)
  Edge of elevators must be sharp for introducing into periodontal ligament space
for optimal elevation
Preparation for the Procedures
■ Operatory setup
· Preprocedure equipment and supplies
 IV catheter, plug, tape, fluids
 Endotracheal tube selection, lube, local anesthetic (standby), tie-in
 Anesthetic mask: preoxygenate, anesthetic gas prior to intubation
  Monitoring equipment ready for use
·Dental deaning tray
 All necessary hand instruments: curette(s), scaler, probe, mirror, W-3
 Prophy angle and polishing paste
 Gauze sponges: for packing and wiping
 Scaler primed and ready to go
 0  Backup scaler insert available if first one overheats
·Procedures tray
 Extraction equipment
 Surgical equipment: blade, scissors, suture
PROCEDURES
Complete Dental Examination and charting
■ Initial assessment at the beginning of the anesthetic period will allow better treatment
planning for the patient
 o y p s p, rg oo *
 Deep pockets previously inapparent: maxillary canines, mandibular first molars
 Broken or discolored teeth (see Chapter 3)
Tooth resorption (see Chapter 49)
· Early detection allows for local/regional pain blocks, radiography, and notification
of owner
■ Thorough charting with all probing abnormalities, tooth abnormalities, and treat-
ments to be confirmed at end of procedures
· A completed, legible dental chart is an excellent discharge document for pet
owners
While the veterinarian should follow up with a complete assessment, they often rely
on the technician's observations
■ See Chapter 1
■ See Chapter 2
CHAPTER 11: TECHNICIANS AND DENTISTRY
139
Complete Dental Cleaning
■ The great majority of the dental procedure provided to the animal is done by the
technician
· Adequate training, proper equipment, and good patient care are important
■ See Chapter 5
Radiographs
■ Some veterinarians prefer to take intraoral radiographs, and are the ones to provide
the diagnosis
■ In most cases, technicians are suited for taking radiographs during the examination
and cleaning
■ See Chapter 4
Patient Monitoring and Care
n   s nd     s  
■ Follow clinic procedures for adequate patient monitoring and support
·  Preoperative assessment and medication
· IV catheter placement and fluid administration
· Monitoring: blood pressure, pulse oximeter, body temperature
● Maintain patient body temperature
■ Proper endotracheal tube and cuff inflation
·Avoid excessive inflation
· Detach tubing when rotating patient
■  Protect pharynx from debris
· Tilt head down
· Pharyngeal pack: gauze sponge with string attached
 Confirm removal at end of procedure
SUMMARY
■ A technician can be one of the most important team members in the practice of
dentistry
■ With proper training and available resources, the opportunities for providing good
 patient care are endless
■ For those with an extended interest, board specialization is possible in the field of
veterinary dentistry for registered technicians
· The Academy of Veterinary Dental Technicians (www.avdt.us)
· Governed by the Committee for Veterinary Technician Specialties (CVTS) of the
National Association of Veterinary Technicians in America (NAVTA)
140
SEC TION III: THE PRACTICE OF DENTISTRY
See also the following chapters:
■
 Chapters 1-8
■ Chapter 49
■ Appendix C
Authors: Susan Berryhill, BS, RVT, CVTS (Dentistry), CCRA; Annie Mills, LVT, CVTS
(Dentistry);: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Oral/Dental Diseases
section
IV
(Developmental Oral/
Dental Problems)
chapter
Persistent (Retained)
Deciduous Teeth
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ A retained or persistent deciduous tooth is one that is still present when the perma-
nent tooth begins to erupt, or has erupted
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs/cats
· Numerous factors influence the exfoliation of deciduous teeth
 Lack of permanent successor
Ankylosis of deciduous root to alveolus
12-1)
Incidence/prevalence: unknown
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Species
·Canine more likely than feline
■ Breed predilections
· Small-breed dogs: Maltese, poodle, Yorkshire terriers, Pomeranian, and so on
■Mean age and range
· During permanent tooth eruption phase
 Beginning at 3 months for incisors and up to 6-7 months for canine teeth and
molars
· May go undiagnosed until later in life
■Predominant sex:no correlation
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
143
144
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 12-1 Radiograph of developing permanent fourth premolar beneath the deciduous tooth in a dog.
When the permanent tooth erupts, the deciduous tooth should be exfoliated
CLINICAL FEATURES
 General comments
 n    d     s  
positions resulting in a malocclusion; early recognition and intervention is
essential
 Maxillary canine teeth erupt mesial (rostral) to the persistent deciduous
and third incisor leaving no room for the lower canine tooth to occupy
(Fig. 12-2)
 Mandibular canine teeth erupt lingual (medial) to the persistent deciduous
resulting in impingement on the palate (Fig. 12-3)
 All incisors erupt lingual to the persistent deciduous incisors; this can result
in an anterior crossbite
Physical exam findings
 Presence of deciduous tooth with permanent tooth erupting or fully erupted
 Abnormal position of permanent tooth due to persistence of deciduous tooth (see
"General Comments" section)
· Local gingivitis and periodontal disease due to crowding
· Oronasal fistula from base-narrow mandibular canine teeth
 Figure 12-2 Multiple persistent deciduous teeth, including the maxillary canine, with the permanent tooth
erupting mesial to the deciduous tooth.
 Figure 12-3 Permanent mandibular incisors and canines erupting lingual to the persistent 
deciduous teeth.
145
146
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
Deciduous with no permanent successor
  Deciduous tooth is usually smaller than the permanent tooth
 Deciduous tooth may remain intact and viable
 Frequently does not last the patient's lifetime
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Supernumerary teeth
■Gemination of the crown
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Complete oral examination
· Charting
  Indicate presence of persistent (retained) deciduous teeth
■Imaging
+
 Intraoral radiographs
  Distinguish between permanent and deciduous teeth 
 Evidence of root resorption of deciduous tooth
 Identify dental abnormalities prior to extraction
0 Persistent deciduous tooth with no permanent tooth
0 Retained root with crown missing
(  ,   
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
 Topical oral antimicrobial rinse prior to extraction
■Pain management prior to extraction
Procedures
■ Extraction of deciduous tooth
·Pain management
 Local/regional
Systemic
· General anesthesia with endotracheal tube in place
· Intraoral radiographs
CHAPTER 12: PERSISTENT (RETAINED) DECIDUOUS TEETH
147
·Elevation of deciduous tooth
 Careful, gentle elevation is critical
   d      s 
underlying structures)
 Fractured or retained root may need to be removed with a gingival flap
0  If a permanent tooth has erupted in an abnormal position, full root extrac-
tion of the deciduous tooth is essential
0 In some cases, the root may have already undergone resorption and need not
be extracted
■Patient monitoring and home care
· Restrict activity for the rest of the day
· Soft diet for 24 hours: canned or moistened dry kibble
   l     s
post-op
· No chew toys for 24 hours
Oral rinse or gel (chlorhexidine) for 3-5 days if indicated
· Continue daily toothbrushing after 24 hours
COMMENTS
 Client education
· May be prevalent in certain breeds/lines: avoid similar breeding
■Monitoring
· Start looking at the teeth from the first puppy/kitten visit
· Inform owners you will be evaluating for proper eruption of permanent teeth as
well as exfoliation of deciduous teeth
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Once extracted, there should be no further problems, unless resulting malocclusion
needs further attention
See also the following chapters:
 Chapter 15
■Appendix B ("Generations of Teeth in Diphyodont Species")
Author: Randi Brannan, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
13
chapter
Craniomandibular
Osteopathy
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■
 A nonneoplastic, noninflammatory proliferative disease of the bones of the head
 Primary bones affected: mandibular rami; occipital and parietal; tympanic bullae:
zygomatic portion of the temporal
 Bilateral symmetric involvement most common
■Affects musculoskeletal system
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Believed to be hereditary: occurs in certain breeds and families
■
West Highland white terriers: autosomal recessive trait
 Scottish terriers: possible predisposition
 Possible link to infection: pyrexia; histological evidence of inflammation only at the
periphery of the lesion
1 Young terrier with periosteal long bone disease: monitor for disease
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Scottish, cairn, and West Highland white terrier breeds: most common
■ Labrador retrievers, Great Danes, Boston terriers, Doberman pinschers, Irish setters,
English bulldogs, and boxers: may be affected
 Usually growing puppies 4-8 months of age
■
 No gender predilection
■Neutering may increase incidence
■ Usually relate to pain around the mouth and difficulty eating
■ Angular processes of the mandible affected: jaw movement progressively restricted
Difficulty in prehension, mastication, and swallowing: may lead to starvation
■  Lameness or limb swelling: may precede cranial involvement
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry,Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
148
CHAPTER 13: CRANIOMANDIBULAR OSTEOPATHY
149
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Temporal and masseter muscle atrophy: common
 Palpable irregular thickening of the mandibular rami and/or temporomandibular
joint (TMJ) region
■  Inability to fully open jaw, even under general anesthesia
Intermittent pyrexia: 40°C
■
 Bilateral exophthalmos
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Osteomyelitis: bones not symmetrically affected; generally not as extensive; lysis:
lack of breed predilection; history of penetrating wound
history of trauma
 Neoplasia: mature patient; not symmetrically affected; more lytic bone reaction;
metastatic disease
 Calvarial hyperostosis: young patient--frontal, parietal, and occipital bones; does not
involve mandible; may have long bone involvement
DIAGNOSTICS
 May note hypogammaglobulinemia or alpha-hyperglobulinemia
Serology: rule out fungal agents; indicated in atypical cases
Skull radiography: reveals uneven, beadlike osseous proliferation of the mandible or
tympanic bullae (bilateral); extensive, periosteal new bone formation (exostoses)
affecting one or more bones around the TMJ; may show fusion of the tympanic bullae
and angular process of the mandible
Computed tomography (CT): may help evaluate osseous involvement of the TMJ
Bone biopsy and culture (bacterial and fungal): necessary only in atypical cases; rule
out neoplasia and osteomyelitis
 Bone biopsy: reveals normal lamellar bone being replaced by an enlarged coarse-
fiber bone and osteoclastic osteolysis of the periosteal or subperiosteal region
 Bone marrow: replaced by a vascular fibrous-type stroma
· Inflammatory cells: occasionally seen at the periphery of the bony lesion
THERAPEUTICS
■Palliative only
■ High-calorie, protein-rich gruel diet: helps maintain nutritional balance
150
 SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
Drugs
■ Analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs: palliative use warranted
■Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): inhibit cyclooxygenase enzymes
 Deracoxib (1-2 mg/kg per os [PO] q24h, chewable)
Carprofen (2.2 mg/kg PO q12h or 4.4 mg/kg q24h)
·Etodolac (10-15 mg/kg PO q24h)
· Meloxicam (load 0.2 mg/kg PO, then 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h—liquid)
· Tepoxalin (load 20 mg/kg, then 10 mg/kg PO q24h)
· Firocoxib (5mg/kg PO q24h)
 May be used to minimize pain and decrease inflammation; may try buffered or
enteric-coated aspirin (10-25 mg/kg PO q8-12h), carprofen (2.2 mg/kg PO q12h),
etodolac (10-15 mg/kg, PO, once daily). phenylbutazone (3-7 mg/kg PO q8h, total
dose <800 mg/day), meclofenamic acid (0.5 mg/kg PO q12h), or piroxicam (0.3 mg/
kg PO q24h for 3 days, then q48h)
Procedures
■ Surgical excision of exostoses: results in regrowth within weeks
 Surgical placement of a pharyngostomy, esophagostomy, or gastrostomy tube: con-
sidered to help maintain nutritional balance
COMMENTS
■ Frequent reexaminations: mandatory to ensure adequate nutritional balance and
pain control
■ Do not repeat dam-sire breedings that resulted in affected offspring
■ Discourage breeding of affected animals
■Synonym: lion jaw
Expected Course and Prognosis
■Pain and discomfort may diminish at skeletal maturity (10-12 months of age); the
exostoses may regress
■Elective euthanasia may be necessary
Abbreviations
ALP, alkaline phosphatase; CMO, craniomandibular osteopathy; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs; TMJ, temporomandibular joint.
CHAPTER 13: CRANIOMANDIBULAR OSTEOPATHY151
Suggested Reading
           s
1998;142(17):455-459.
Huchkowsky SL. Craniomandibular osteopathy in a bullmastiff. Can Vet J 2002;43(11):883-885.
 LaFond E, Breur GJ, Austin CC. Breed susceptibility for developrmental orthopedic diseases in dogs.
JAAHA 2002;38(5):467-477.
 McConnell JF, Hayes A, Platt SR, Smith KC. Calvarial hyperostosis syndrome in two bullmastiffs. Vt
Radiol Utrasound 2006;47(1):72-22
Padgett GA, Mostosky UV. The mode of inheritance of craniomandibular osteopathy in West Highland
white terrier dogs. Am J Med Genet 1986;25(1):9-13
 Pastor KF, Boulay JP, Schelling SH, Carpenter JL. Idiopathic hyperostosis of the calvaria in five young
bullmastiffs. JAAHA 2000;36(5):439-445
Taylor SM, Remedios A, Myers S. Craniomandibular osteopathy in a Shetland sheepdog. Can Vet J
1995;36(7):437-439
Watson ADJ, Adams WM, Thomas CB. Craniomandibular osteopathy in dogs. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 1995;17:911-921.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult, 5th edition.
Authors: Steven M. Cogar, DVM; Spencer A. Johnston, VMD, DACVS
s
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgments: The authors and editors acknowledge the contribution of Peter D.
Schwartz and Peter K. Shires, who authored this chapter in the previous editions.
14
chapter
Enamel Hypocalcification
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Commonly referred to as enamel hypoplasia
   r      r os
can affect one or several teeth and may be focal or multifocal. The crowns of
affected teeth can have areas of normal enamel next to areas of hypoplastic or
missing enamel.
 Apparent defect in enamel surfaces, often pitted and discolored; focal or generalized
(Fig. 14-1)
 Defects due to disruption of normal enamel formation
 Influences during enamel formation (distemper, fever, etc.) over an extended time
may cause generalized changes; during a short time (focal, local; e.g., trauma, even
from deciduous tooth extraction) (Fig. 14-2) may cause specific patterns or bands
■ Most cases are primarily esthetic; some patients can have extensive structural
 damage, even root involvement
■ A more correct description would be enamel hypocalcification or hypomineralization
since the amount of enamel is adequate (not hypoplastic), but it has defects in cal-
cification that lead to enamel defect
· Enamel hypomineralization refers to the inadequate mineralization of enamel
matrix. This often affects several or all teeth. The crowns of affected teeth are
covered by soft enamel that may be worn easily.
 Teeth may be more sensitive with exposed dentin, and occasionally fractures of
severely compromised teeth occur; usually they remain fully functional
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
■Dogs/cats
·  Insult during enamel formation
 Canine distemper virus, fever, trauma (e.g., accidents, excessive force during
deciduous tooth extraction)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
152
 Figure 14-1 Enamel hypocalcification defects localized to this left maxillary canine.
 Figure 14-2 Multiple enamel defects apparent on permanent mandibular incisors and canines. Deciduous
teeth were extracted previously in this patient.
153
154
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Dogs (more common) and cats (less common)
■ Often apparent at time of tooth eruption (after 6 months of age) or shortly thereafter
(with signs of wear)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■  Irregular, pitted enamel surface with discoloration of diseased enamel and potential
exposure of underlying dentin (light brown)
 Early or rapid accumulation of plaque and calculus on roughened tooth surface;
possible gingivitis and/or accelerated periodontal disease
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Enamel staining: discolored but smooth surface (tetracycline) (see Chapter 31)
■
Carious lesions: cavities with decay (see Chapter 32)
■
 Amelogenesis imperfecta: genetic and/or developmental formation and maturation
abnormalities other than hypomineralization
■ Erosive lesions: similar to those found in cats
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
■
 Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
■]
 Intraoral radiographs are necessary to determine viability of roots
 Cases reported of abnormal root formation, no root formation, or separated crown
and root (Figs. 14-3 and 14-4)
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
■ Treatment depends on extent of lesions and equipment and materials available
■  Goal is to provide the smoothest surface possible
■
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
■
Optimal treatment
· Ideal treatment is to gently remove diseased enamel (enamel scrub) with white
stone burs or finishing disks on high-speed handpiece (adequate water coolant):
rotary burs can cause excessive damage and heat—handle with care!
 Figure 14-3 Generalized enamel hypocalcification of mandibular teeth.
 Figure 14-4 Radiograph of patient in Fig. 14-3: extensive root dysplasia of affected teeth. Extraction is
recommended, although it will be a simple procedure.
155
156
 SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
· Take care not to damage the tooth: excess enamel/dentin removal; hyperthermic
damage to pulp
· Focal defects may be amenable to composite or glass ionomer restoration, but
long-term success is poor; metallic crown restoration is an option for further
protection, but costly; many restorative materials (bonding agents, composites)
require use of light-curing units and appropriate skill levels
· Bonding agent recommended to seal exposed dentinal tubules and protect surface
Alternate treatment
 Without a high-speed handpiece and appropriate attachments, treatment can
be more challenging
 The soft, diseased enamel can sometimes be removed with ultrasonic scalers,
but take care to avoid damage and hyperthermia
 A strong fluoride treatment (in-hospital, on a dry tooth surface; varnish or
 strong sodium fluoride paste) can be used to decrease sensitivity and enhance
enamel strength
COMMENTS
■  Inform the owner that further degeneration of remaining enamel may occur, neces-
sitating additional therapy in the future
■ Recommend regular professional dental cleaning and a routine home care program
(brushing); may include weekly application of stannous fluoride at home (minimize
ingestion because of toxicity)
■Avoid excessive chewing on hard objects
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Good to fair to guarded (for the tooth), depending on extent of lesion and root
involvement
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 18
■ Chapter 31
■Chapter 32
■ Chapter 33
■ Appendix B ("Abnormalities of Enamel Formation")
Abbreviations
 EH, enamel hypoplasia/hypocalcification.
Suggested Reading
Wiggs BW, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
15
Eruption Disruption/
Abnormalities
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Delay, disruption, or lack of normal eruption sequence of teeth at anticipated or
appropriate times
■Embedded: soft tissue covering
· Operculum: tough fbrous gingival covering that may persist over the crown of a
tooth, even if eruption movement is completed; it may appear as an unerupted
tooth (Fig. 15-1)
 Impacted: hard tissue covering (bone, caught beneath adjacent tooth, deciduous
tooth)
■ Unerupted, submerged: other terms occasionally used
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Imbalances of endocrine system: retarded tooth eruption
Mechanical barriers: closed diastema, malocclusion
■ Persistence/retention of deciduous teeth
■ Trauma to developing tooth that would impair complete eruption or intrude the
tooth
 Familial/breed tendencies
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Occurring in dogs and cats
■ Monitor eruption sequence during appropriate period of development
·
Deciduous teeth
· Permanent teeth: 4-6 months
■ Delayed eruption: Tibetan terriers, Portuguese water spaniels, Chinese crested
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
157
158
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 15-1 Operculum covering mandibular incisors and canines
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Unerupted: absence of erupted crown; if not truly missing, it will be present radio-
graphically under the gingival surface
 Mandibular first premolars are a common tooth unerupted in boxers and bulldogs
(Figs. 15-2 and 15-3)
 Embedded
■
 Submerged
■ Operculum: crown may be nearly erupted to full height but is covered, partially or
completely, with thick fibrous operculum
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Hypodontia/partial anodontia: missing teeth (several)
 Anodontia: missing teeth (all)
 Figure 15-2 Apparently missing left mandibular first premolar.
 Figure 15-3 Radiograph of site (Fig. 15-2) shows unerupted first premolar
159
160
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Fractured crown (radiograph to confirm presence of root)
(o        s
■ Traumatic intrusion of tooth
DIAGNOSTICS
 Complete oral examination
■ Intraoral radiography: full mouth
· It is imperative to establish if any tooth remains submerged
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 Any mechanical barrier to continued eruption should be removed
 Operculum: excise gingiva covering the crown but retain sufficient attached
gingiva (at least 2-3 mm) (Figs. 15-4 and 15-5)
 Figure 15-4 Extensive operculum covering left mandibular premolars and molars
CHAPTER 15: ERUPTION DISRUPTION/ABNORMALITIES
161
 Figure 15-5 Operculectomy excision with flap repositioned and closed
 Cold steel (scissors, blade)
 Electrocautery (fully rectified—avoid injuring underlying structures)
  Laser (appropriate use)
 Gingivectomy bur (#12-fluted or #12-bladed bur on high-speed handpiece with
adequate coolant)
         
· Unerupted
 Assess structure to see if efforts to “repair" condition are reasonable
D
        s
fourth premolars, mandibular first molars)
0  Determine if potential for eruption is still present (open apex)
■ If the apex has already matured and closed, further eruption would not
be expected, even if the mechanical interference is released; extensive
orthodontic efforts may help to extrude the tooth, but such measures are
generally not recommended
■ Extraction of tooth with closed apex may be considered
· If any indication of a cystic formation around the tooth is present,
extraction and curettage of the site is essential (see Chapter 19)
· If imbedded for a significant amount of time without cystic or other
pathological changes, and if extraction would extensively damage sur-
rounding bone, continued monitoring may be sufficient
162
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
 Simple procedures (operculectomy): fair to good prognosis
· Continue to monitor periodontal sulcus depth
■ Unerupted teeth with open apices: fair prognosis depending on extent of
involvement
· Extraction may be necessary if no resolution
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 16 ("Anodontia")
■ Chapter 19
Suggested Reading
 Aller S. Retained deciduous teeth and delayed development of dentition of Tibetan terriers. Proceedings
of the Veterinary Dental Fonum, Las Vegas, NV, 1990:75-78.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
16
Abnormal Number of
Teeth (Decreased)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Absence of tooth or teeth due to developmental conditions, not to trauma or
extraction
· Total anodontia: absence of all teeth due to failure in development
· Partial anodontia: failure in development of part of the dentition
 Hypodontia, oligodontia: some teeth missing
· Edentulous: “without teeth"—but primarily due to tooth loss (e.g., end-stage
periodontal disease)
■ In dogs. premolars or distal molars are the most common missing teeth (Fig. 16-1)
■ If a deciduous tooth is missing, its permanent successor will probably not develop
as well
 If a permanent tooth is missing, and a deciduous tooth was not exfoliated and is still
present, if root structure is still stable, that deciduous tooth might stay functional
for a long time; lack of permanent tooth should be documented
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Dogs/cats
 Total and partial anodontia: typically hereditary and may be associated with ecto-
dermal dysplasia (rare)
 Bilateral patterns of missing teeth may be indicative of a genetic or familial ten-
dency, as opposed to a single missing tooth
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Any breed, size, or gender, but smaller breeds predominate
■ Some familial tendencies, breed prevalences
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
163
164
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 16-1 Bilaterally missing mandibular first premolar—confirmed radiographically.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Tooth not present (crown and root)
■Alveolar bone and gingival margin at site is regular, smooth, even slightly "scalloped'
appearance
■  No tooth structure present radiographically
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Delayed eruption
■ Unerupted teeth (see Chapter 15)
■  Invulsed tooth
■]
Extracted or lost due to periodontal disease or trauma
 Fusion tooth: if two teeth have fused, there will be a reduction in the tooth number
(see Chapter 18)
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
■  Intraoral radiographs essential
· Determine if teeth are truly missing, and/or if permanent teeth are present
(Fig. 16-2)
[a]
(b]
Figure 16-2 Nine-month old Chinese crested presented (for neutering) with 11 permanent incisors and
permanent molars; the remaining teeth were deciduous. (a) Permanent maxillary incisors in contrast to small
(c) Radiograph of mandibular premolars showing no permanent replacements with relatively stable deciduous
premolars. (d) Radiograph of mandibular incisors shows five permanent incisors (the left first mandibular
incisor is a deciduous one with resorbing root; it was extracted); the canines are deciduous, but with no
permanent successor, they were kept.
165
(C)
(d)
 Figure 16-2 Continued
166
CHAPTER 16: ABNORMAL NUMBER OF TEETH (DECREASED)
167
 Prepurchase full-mouth radiographs on 8-l0-week-old puppies can identify
if permanent tooth structures are present (although there is no guarantee they
will erupt)
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 None indicated unless an unerupted or involved tooth is found radiographically
■ Consider removing from breeding stock
COMMENTS
■ In some breeds (Doberman pinschers, rottweilers, or Schutzhund trained dogs), any
missing teeth may be considered a serious fault, and prepurchase radiographs on
 puppies may be helpful
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 15
■Chapter 18
Suggested Reading
Wiggs BW, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
17
chapter
Abnormal Number of
Teeth (lncreased)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Increased number of teeth from normal anticipated dentition
 Supernumerary: increased tooth number, often from separate tooth buds
■ Iwinning: a complete mirror image duplication of a tooth resulting from the cleavage
of a single tooth bud
Gemination: incomplete splitting of a tooth bud resulting in a connected, partial
duplication
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Dogs/cats
 During tooth development (where the dental lamina forms the tooth bud), stimu-
lation, possibly trauma at times, can cause additional bud formation or duplication
of an existing bud (twinning)
· If extra buds fail to split from the initial structure, a gemination tooth may result
(see Chapter 18)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Can occur in any breed, size, or gender
■]
 Breed prevalence: boxers, bulldogs
 Apparent at time of permanent tooth eruption; the presence of supernumerary
deciduous teeth requires radiographs since additional supernumerary permanent
teeth may have delayed eruption
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
168
CHAPTER 17: ABNORMAL NUMBER OF TEETH (INCREASED)
169
 Figure 17-1 Left supernumerary mandibular third incisors with crowding.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Increased number of teeth, frequently involving crowding and/or rotation, or dis-
placement of the supernumerary teeth (Fig. 17-1)
Dogs
■ Not uncommon
Cats
 Uncommon for actual supernumerary teeth; gemination of mandibular fourth pre-
molar slightly more common (Fig. 17-2)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Persistent (retained) deciduous teeth (see Chapter 12)
■ Gemination tooth
(   d s  m   
170
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 17-2 Feline—supernumerary right mandibular fourth premolars.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Complete oral examination
· Identify, count, and chart
 Distinguish “normal" tooth from supernumerary
 Determine if any consequences from crowding might occur
Intraoral radiographs (Figs. 17-3 and 17-4)
 Assess root structure
 Determine effect of crowding on bone mass
 Presence of additional, unerupted supernumerary teeth
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Assess extent of crowding and tooth malposition and potential impact on periodontal
health
■ Extract supernumerary teeth if problems are anticipated
■  Extract embedded supernumerary teeth
 Figure 17-3 Radiograph of a cat mandible with indistinct tooth structure causing displacement and
periodontal bone loss at the left mandibular fourth premolar.
 Figure 17-4 Once the fourth premolar is extracted, the retained roots of the supernumerary fourth
171
172
 SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
COMMENTS
■ Supernumerary teeth that are not problematic may be left
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Uneventful with extractions when appropriate
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 18
Suggested Reading
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
18
Abnormal Tooth
Formation/Structure
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
1Variation in tooth size
· Macrodontia: crown oversized, root normal
· Microdontia: crown normal shape, but small
· Peg tooth: small, cone-shaped tooth with a single cusp
Variation in tooth structure/shape
the roots by cementum and dentin
· Gemination: developing tooth bud undergoes an incomplete split, resulting in two
crowns with a common root canal
· Dilacerated: distorted or malformed tooth (crown or root); a general term that
may be used for many different presentations
· Dens-in-dente (tooth within a tooth): external layers invaginate into internal
structures with varying severity
 Shell teeth: crown present, but little to no root development
 Amelogenesis imperfecta: hereditary reduction in the amount of developed
enamel matrix
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
■ Stress or stimulus (trauma) at time of development can alter tooth formation
· Infection, trauma to tooth buds, or traumatic extraction of deciduous teeth during
permanent tooth formation can significantly alter the structure
 Genetic or familial tendencies not known for most conditions
■Dogs/cats
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
173
174
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
Figure 18-1 Extensive dilaceration at the palatal aspect of the right maxillary first molar. Pulpal exposure
 and compromise is likely.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■
See “Definitions/Overview” section
■Fusion: fused crown will be larger than a single tooth; there will be a reduced number
of teeth (two counted as one)
■ Gemination tooth: actual number of teeth will be unaltered, but one tooth will be
"Siamese twin"
■ Dilacerated teeth
·Any variation in structure or form: extra root, curved root
· Each tooth must be evaluated for integrity of the pulp system, as any disruption
in the continuity of the crown and roots may result in exposure of the pulp to the
external environment (Fig. 18-1)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Trauma to tooth structures
■ Developmental abnormalities
CHAPTER 18: ABNORMAL TOOTH FORMATION/STRUCTURE
175
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
■Intraoral radiographs
With any abnormal structure (dilaceration). pulpal integrity and the potential for
crowding must be evaluated
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
and/or crowns extends to the gingival margin or below (nidus for periodontal
disease)
· Gemination tooth: if tooth crowding results, extraction may be necessary
· Dilacerated tooth: if there is pulpal exposure or compromise, extraction is gener-
ally necessary
 In some cases, endodontic and restorative therapy may allow preservation of
the tooth
COMMENTS
 Abnormal development of mandibular first molars in small-breed dogs
· Dilaceration is more common, sometimes described as dens-in-dente
· As one of the first permanent teeth to form, there may be a mechanical challenge
(lack of space) in small dogs that impede proper crown root development
· Invagination of the enamel and/or cementum at the neck of the tooth, often with
some degree of gingival recession (Fig. 18-2)
·Radiographic signs (Fig. 18-3)
  Discontinuity between crowns and roots
  Possible pulp exposure and pulp stones
 Roots are convergent with wide canals (nonvital pulp)
 Periapcial/root abscessation with extensive bone loss
Expected Course and Prognosis
tooth)
 Figure 18-2 Small-breed abnormal mandibular first molar with defect at the neck of the tooth.
 Figure 18-3 Radiograph of abnormal mandibular first molar with slight convergence of roots, pulpal stone
(endolith) in crown, wide root canals, and periapical bone loss.
176
CHAPTER 18: ABNORMAL TOOTH FORMATION/STRUCTURE
177
■Guarded prognosis on dilacerated teeth with pulpal compromise, although extraction
is typically successful
Suggested Reading
Regezi JA, Sciubba U, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology Clinical Pathologic Correlations, 4th ed. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders, 1999
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
19
chapter
Dentigerous Cyst
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Cyst formation arising from the soft tissues attached to the crown of an unerupted
tooth
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs/cats
· Any breed which is at an increased risk for impaired eruption (see Chapter 15)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Boxers, bulldogs: mandibular first premolars—often bilateral
■ Unerupted teeth at 6-7 months of age, but cystic development may not occur until
much later, if at all
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs
■ Cystic changes may be clinically inapparent without diagnostic imaging
“Missing" tooth
■Formation of a nonpainful, soft swelling at the site of a missing tooth, often fluctuant
with fluid (Fig. 19-1)
■Radiographically: radiolucent unilocular (single-compartment) cyst originating
from the remnant enamel organ at the neck of the tooth and encompassing the crown
(Fig. 19-2)
· Unerupted teeth are commonly seen to be oriented horizontally
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
178
 Figure 19-1 Soft fluctuant swelling behind the right mandibular canine.
 Figure 19-2 Radiograph of rostral mandible showing right first premolar surrounded by cystic formation.
179
180
 SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
■ Patient may present, with no previous indications, for a pathological fracture of the
mandible due to cystic expansion and secondary resorption of surrounding bone
Cats
Uncommon
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Odontogenic keratocyst: cysts of the jaws demonstrating aggressive expansion that
may, or may not, be associated with unerupted teeth
■ Primordial cyst: cystic degeneration of tooth bud before enamel/dentin formation
(cyst without a tooth)
■ Oral mass—odontoma: tooth structures (complex or compound) sometimes con-
tained within cystic structure, but with different levels of organization
■ Transformation to ameloblastomas have been reported in humans, histological evalu-
ation of the cyst lining is recommended
DIAGNOSTICS
■Radiographs are essential in any instances of missing/unerupted teeth
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
■ If any indication of cystic formation is present
· Surgical extraction of the unerupted tooth (Figs. 19-3 and 19-4)
· Complete debridement of cystic lining and histological evaluation
■  If an embedded tooth has been present in a mature animal
 Assess for any cystic structure or other pathological lesions involving the tooth
 Continued monitoring with radiographs every 6-12 months may be reasonable if
surgical extraction would damage large amounts of bone
If a nonstrategic tooth can be easily extracted, it would be best to do so, even if cystic
changes are not present
 Figure 19-3 Excision of tissue reveals an embedded mandibular first premolar with extensive cystic
 Figure 19-4 Radiograph of bilateral unerupted mandibular canines with extensive dentigerous cyst
formation. Careful extraction spaced 4 months apart with cystic debridement and placement of an 
 osseopromotive substance resolved the problem.
181
182
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Good with early detection and extraction
■ Fair to guarded with extensive bone destruction or pathological fracture
See also the following chapter:
■Chapter 15
Suggested Reading
Regezi JA, Sciubba J, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology Clinical Pathologic Correlations, 4th ed. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders, 1999.
sas it :sishs onuaoioo uim ssop u shuy oionoisiu pue suais peo 'e ia 'a aaensia
(1995-2010). JAVMA 2011;239(11):1470-1476.
White SC, Pharoah MJ. Oral Radiology Principles and Interpretation, 5th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby,
2004.
Authors: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC; Christopher Snyder, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
20
Tight Lip Syndrome
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
between the cheeks and the lips and teeth)
Definition: The lower lip folds back and covers the mandibular teeth due to the
underdevelopment of or the absence of the lower lip anterior vestibule. This results
in an elevated appearance of the lower lip when the mouth is opened. At rest, the
lower lip may cover the incisors, canines, or even the premolar teeth depending on
the degree of hypovestibulosis.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Congenital, hereditary, or developmental factors
Systems affected: This syndrome can inhibit the full growth potential of the mandible.
resulting in a Class 2 malocclusion. It can also lead to an anterior malocclusion (Class
1 malocclusion) by forcing a distal or lingual displacement of the mandibular incisors
and sometimes canine teeth. In addition, the soft tissues of the lower lip are fre-
quently traumatized.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Tight lip syndrome is seen almost exclusively in Chinese Shar-Pei dogs but can be
 seen in other canine breeds. Evidence of tight lip can be detected shortly after birth
in more severe cases but is usually noticed following eruption of the deciduous teeth.
 Rarely, tight lip manifests after permanent tooth eruption.
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
183
184
SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Tight lip syndrome is classified according to the extent of the condition
· Type I (mild): lip covers incisors only
· Type II (moderate): lip covers incisors and canines
·Type II1 (severe): lip covers incisors, canines, and extends over premolars
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Other Class l or Class 2 malocclusions
 Other congenital, hereditary, developmental, or traumatic lip abnormalities
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Tight lip syndrome is diagnosed by gross physical examination of the oral cavity.
signalment, and history
■ Intraoral radiographs may be useful for assessing the stability of the associated
teeth or if orthodontic correction of the malocclusion is deemed appropriate (i.e.,
base-narrow canines causing palatal trauma) but are not necessary for making
the diagnosis
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
■  Postoperative antibiotics, such as amoxicillin/clavulanate (13.75 mg/kg per os [PO]
twice daily) or clindamycin (5-1l mg/kg PO twice daily), and analgesics are recom-
mended for a minimum of l week. Analgesic selection should be based on clinician's
preference and patient's discomfort and/or tolerance level.
■ Chlorhexidine or zinc oxide- and ascorbic-based oral rinses, solutions, or water
additives also help to minimize postoperative infection and to promote good oral
hygiene. Water additives may allow more passive and less traumatic cleansing of the
surgical site.
Procedures
■ Tight lip syndrome is improved or corrected with a surgical vestibular deepening
procedure, the extent of which is determined by the classification of the condition
CHAPTER 2O: TIGHT LIP SYNDROME
185
·Type I (mild): anterior vestibuloplasty
· Type I (moderate): anterior vestibuloplasty plus bilateral mandibular frenotomy
or frenectomy
· Type Ill (severe): anterior vestibuloplasty, bilateral mandibular frenectomy, and
possible posterior mandibular vestibule deepening
■ There are many forms of vestibuloplasty (see “Suggested Reading” section for texts
with additional detailed information). Free mucosal transplants, multiple sliding
epithelial flaps, transplant of a membrane material, and open incised procedures are
most common. For best visualization of the surgical site and esthetic, symmetrical
deepening of the vestibule, the patient should be placed in sternal recumbency with
the head suspended in a normal upright position.
COMMENTS
■Recheck examinations are recommended at 7-l0-day intervals until the oral tissues
have healed and all sutures have either resorbed or been removed
■ Postoperative infection or dehiscence can often be avoided with proper medications.
 good oral hygiene, and a soft diet free from any firm kibbles, chews, or toys until
the oral tissues have healed
■  Excessive scar tissue formation or asymmetrical releasing incisions may result in an
uneven or retightening of the lower lip.
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ If the lip tension is relieved and a vestibule is created at a young age (usually <6
months), it is very favorable for the mandible's growth potential to be much less
inhibited and the soft tissue trauma and malocclusion to be much less severe
■ Prognosis related to mandibular growth and malocclusion decreases with age and
maturation of the teeth and mandible as well as with subsequent surgical attempts
at correction due to increased scar tissue formation and stricture
See also the following chapter:
■ Appendix B ("Classification of Dental Occlusions in Dogs")
Suggested Reading
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. The Veterinarians Companion for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO:
AAHA Press, 2000.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
1997.
Authors: Sunny L. Ruth, DVM; Robert B. Wiggs, DVM, DAVDC; Heidi B. Lobprise,
DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
21
chapter
Palatal Defects
(Congenital)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Primary palatal cleft (palatoschisis): located at the junction/suture of the incisive
bone and one or both of the maxillary processes; may be associated with cleft lip
(cheiloschisis) (Fig. 21-1)
 Secondary palatal cleft: defect on midline behind incisal area involving the soft and/
or hard palate
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1Dogs/cats
· Failure of the developing paired palatine processes to fuse properly
· As in people, the cause is thought to be multifactorial: contributory risk genes
together with environmental influences (teratogen exposure) will result in a cleft
defect if a threshold is reached
· In many cases with a wide variety of breeds, there likely has been an intrauterine
insult during fetal development
  Teratogens include infectious agents, corticosteroids, excessive vitamin A or D,
 X-ray radiation, griseofulvin, hormones, and nutritional deficiencies
· In some, genetic predisposition: incomplete penetrance in shih tzu
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Any breed or gender if intrauterine insult
■Prevalence reported in brachycephalic breeds, beagles, cocker spaniels, dachshunds
■
 Secondary cleft readily apparent at birth if external clef lip (cheiloschisis) is present
■ Primary cleft: apparent with oral exam that each newborn should receive (Fig.
21-2)
· Newborn may have history of poor nursing. and decreased growth, with millk
draining or bubbling from nose
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
186
 Figure 21-1 Primary palatoschisis with cheiloschisis of a puppy.
Figure 21-2 Primary palatoschisis with cheiloschisis of a young adult.
187
188
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs
■Primary cleft palate
· Unilateral or bilateral cleft at rostral aspect of maxilla
 Often associated with cleft lip
· Seldom has clinical signs unless associated with a secondary cleft palate
· Dental anomalies, such a tooth number, size, and morphology are common in
both deciduous and permanent dentition; the maxillary third incisor in the vicinity
of the cleft is frequently involved
■ Secondary cleft palate
· Midline defect can be mild to extensive, involving hard and/or soft palate
· Unable to nurse effectively without proper suction
 Poor growth, unthrifty
 Milk drainage from nose, gagging, sneezing
 Can progress to rhinitis or even aspiration pneumonia, which can be fatal
Cats
■ Less common than in dogs
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Traumatic palatal defects
DIAGNOSTICS
 Complete oral examination: this should be an essential part of every newborn
examination
■ Intraoral radiograph to assess the extent of osseous involvement (Fig. 2l-3)
 Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
■
 Support patient with tube feeding
■
 Surgical repair at 2-4 months
CHAPTER 21: PALATAL DEFEC TS (C ONGENITAL)
189
 Figure 21-3 Radiograph of patient in Fig. 21-2 with extensive bone loss extending into palatine fissure
■ Plan procedure well
· Large flap with minimal tension
· Double-layer closure if possible (Fig. 2l-4)
·Atraumatic technique
· Avoid suturing over defect
· Maintain blood supply: incorporate appropriate vessels
· Do not oppose intact epithelium
■ Overlapping (hinge) flap
· Debride and open one side of defect: elevate off palate
· Harvest rectangular three-sided flap on second side: incisions at rostral and distal
extent of defect extended laterally, and joined by a third incision
Elevate flap, keeping defect edge intact to act as hinge
 Flip flap over (so palatal mucosa now faces defect opening) and suture under
the cut edge of the first side (pants over vest)
■Bilateral sliding bipedicle flap (modified Van Langenbeck)
· Debride defect edges on both sides
 Make bilateral incisions parallel to defect, close to lateral aspect of palatal
mucosa, longer than defect
 Undermine (tunnel), keeping rostral and distal aspects intact
 Adjust flaps toward midline and suture
 Sometimes a unilateral sliding flap will suffice if the defect is small
190
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
Figure 21-4 Palatal view of two-layer closure of patient in Fig. 21-2.
Palatal obturators sometimes made for significant defects that cannot be effectively
closed
COMMENTS
■Acquired palatal defects may occur due to trauma, foreign objects, or other factors;
closure methods may be similar to those discussed
Advise owner that more than one surgery is likely
■ As in humans, congenital palate defects in dogs and cats may predispose to middle
ear disease; any associated deafness could cause problems for working dogs
■ Note: Acquired palatal defects may occur due to trauma, foreign objects, or other
factors, often on midline; closure methods may be similar to those described; other
texts may be consulted
CHAPTER 21: PALATAL DEFECTS (C ONGENITAL)
191
Expected Course and Prognosis
■
 Primary palatal cleft closure: good, fair to guarded depending on extent of lesion and
condition of patient at time of surgery
Suggested Reading
       si     o   'i 
vitamin A in cats. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2003;87(1-2):42-51,
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Oral surgery. In: Harvey CE, Emily PP, eds. Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis
MO: Mosby-Year Books, 1993:340.
 Zoran DL. Diseases of the oral cavity and pharynx—congenital and developmental disorders. In:
Morgan RV, Bright RM, Swartout MS, eds. Handbook of Small Animal Practice, 4th ed. Philadelphia
Elsevier/Saumders, 2003:299.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
22
chapter
Bird Tongue (Microglossia)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Microglossia: small tongue, also known as bird tongue
·Hereditary defect resulting in a small, narrow, curled tongue that is ineffective for
nursing
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dog
Lethal, glossopharyngeal defect
 Simple, recessive autosomal defect
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Abnormal-shaped tongue in newborn
■Unthrifty, not nursing well, *fading puppy”
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs
■Narrow, pointed tongue (Fig. 22-1)
■ Curls upward and inward
■ Grossly normal deep base muscular layers
 Dysphagia: no swallow reflex when milk is placed on caudal tongue
■ No microscopic evidence of acquired structural lesion in nervous or muscular
systems
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
192
CHAPTER 22: BIRD TONGUE (MICROGLOSSIA)
■ Figure 22-1 Narrow, pointed tongue in an affected puppy.
DIEFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dogs
“Fading puppy” syndrome
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination at birth
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
None
194
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
COMMENTS
■ In one report of three littermates tube-fed to monitor development, and examination
at euthanasia at 7-8 weeks of age, multiple defects were observed (as compared with
normal littermates)
· Abnormal eye development and decreased sight
·Pronounced forehead concavity
· Delayed tooth eruption with lingual displacement
·
 Musculoskeletal: abnormal movements, posture
Ventrally flattened thorax
·1
 Brain: mild to extensive dilation of lateral ventricle in two puppies; one had gross
absence of the caudal part of the cerebellar vermis
·Absence of secondary ossification centers in long bones and calvarium
Expected course and Prognosis
Very guarded prognosis; euthanasia usually recommended
Suggested Reading
Hutt FB, De Lahunta A. A lethal glossopharyngeal defect in the dog. J Hered 197l;2:291.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB, De Lahunta A. Microglossia in three littermate pups. J Vet Dent 1994;11(4): 129.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
23
Malocclusions of Teeth
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
A malocclusion is any deviation from a normal occlusion due to skeletal influences
(asymmetry or other deviation of bone that support the teeth) or an abnormal
positioning of a tooth or teeth (dental malocclusion)
■ Normal occlusion: perfect interdigitation of maxillary and mandibular teeth (see
"Classification of Dental Occlusion in Dogs" section in Appendix B)
· Maxillary incisors are rostral to the mandibular incisors
 Crown cusps of mandibular incisors contact the cingulum of the maxillary
incisors ("scissor bite")
· Mandibular canines incline labially and are positioned equidistant between the
maxillary third incisor and canine in the interdental space (diastema)
· Maxillary premolars do not contact the mandibular premolars
 Crown cusps of the mandibular premolars are lingual to the maxillary
premolar arch
口
 Crown cusps of mandibular premolars bisect the interproximal spaces rostral
 s d) sd  s  
the mandibular fourth premolar and first molar
  Terms of malocclusion
· Neutroclusion (Class l)
 Normal rostral-caudal relationship of the maxillary and mandibular dental
arches
 Malposition of one or more individual teeth (see “dental malocclusions" below)
0 Dental malocclusion: tooth in anatomically correct position in the dental
arch, but
■Distoversion: abnormally angled in a distal direction ("snake tooth")
■ Mesioversion: abnormally angled in a mesial direction ("lance tooth")
■ Linguoversion: abnormally angled in a lingual direction ("base-narrow
mandibular canine")
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
195
196
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 23-1 Mild to moderate mesioversion (rostroversion) of mandibular canine possibly due to rostral
placement of mandibular canine, even though incisors still appear to be in a "scissor bite." Simple extraction
of the third incisor should provide this patient with a comfortable bite. (image courtesy of Larry Baker, DVM,
DAVDC)
 Labioversion: abnormally angled in a labial direction
■ Buccoversion: abnormally angled in a buccal direction
0 Crossbite: mandibular tooth/teeth have a more buccal or labial position than
antagonist maxillary tooth
■ Rostral crossbite: synonym: anterior crossbite—-incisors
■  Caudal crossbite: synonym: posterior crossbite—cheek teeth
· Mandibular distoclusion (Class 2):
Mandibular arch occludes caudal to its normal position relative to the maxillary
arch ("mandibular brachygnathism"; “overshot")
· Mandibular mesioclusion (Class 3):
Mandibular arch occludes rostral to its normal position relative to the maxillary
(, s , d , 
0  Incisors may still appear to be in scissor bite, but if the mandibular canine
placement seems too far forward, there is mandibular mesioclusion (Fig.
23-1)
Asymmetrical skeletal malocclusion
Mandibular-maxillary asymmetry
 0 Rostrocaudal direction: mandibular mesioclusion or distoclusion present on
one side; contralateral side normal alignment
 0 Side-to-side direction: loss of midline alignment of maxilla and mandible
CHAPTER 23: MALOCCLUSIONS OF TEETH
0 Dorsoventral direction: abnormal vertical space between opposing dental
arches when the mouth is closed (open bite)
“Wry bite": nonspecific term used to describe a wide variety of unilateral occlu-
sal abnormalities
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Risk factors
 Congenital or hereditary factors: skeletal malocclusions (Class 1, 2, and asym-
metry) and breed predilection
·  Traumatic injury affecting the jaws or teeth, especially during developmental and
growth phases
·  Mechanical misdirection
 Tooth eruption contact impediment
 Delayed loss of deciduous teeth (see Chapter 12)
 Delayed eruption of deciduous or permanent teeth
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Can occur in dogs or cats with primary (deciduous, temporary, baby) or permanent
dentition
■No sex predilections
■ No age predilections, other than malocclusions are typically discernable at the time
of or shortly following eruption of the deciduous or permanent teeth
 Significant jaw growth can occur up to 6-8 months (and longer in large breeds):
full evaluation can only be done once growth is complete
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Vary greatly according to the type, extend, and collateral injuries caused by the mal-
occlusion (see the description of malocclusions above)
■ May be associated with open or closed bites, or overcrowding of the teeth
■ Periodontal disease may result due to crowding or misalignment of teeth
■ Soft tissue defects may be seen both in the floor or roof of the mouth from traumatic
tooth contact
· In the roof of the mouth, the injuries may eventually extend in depth resulting in
oronasal fistula formation
■ Fractured (chipped or broken) or attrition (wear) teeth may result from improper
tooth contact
198
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 23-2 Significant base-narrow canine in addition to/or as a result of a Class 2 malocclusion
(mandible in distoversion). Even with an adequate diastema between the maxillary third incisor and canine,
movement would be complicated. (Image courtesy of Larry Baker DVM. DAVDC)
 Common malocclusion presentations
● Rostral (anterior) crossbite: maxillary incisors positioned distal to mandibular
incisors
 Level bite (cusp contact directly) or crossbite with abnormal contact and poten-
tial periodontal disease
Note: many
“rostral crossbites" may actually be due to a mild Class 3
malocclusion
Base-narrow canines: linguoversion of mandibular canine(s)
 Common sequelae to narrow mandible or delayed exfoliation of deciduous
mandibular canines (permanent tooth is deflected into a lingual position)
(Fig. 23-2)
 Significant trauma to the palate can result
● Lance teeth: rostroversion of maxillary canine(s)
  More common in dolichocephalic breeds (Shetland sheepdog); with significant
rostral deviation—crown nearly horizontal
  Mild to moderate rostroversion due to persistent deciduous tooth—-permanent
tooth erupts further rostral than normal
 Rostroversion of canine obliterates the diastema between the canine and third
incisor: this can result in malocclusion of the mandibular canine
CHAPTER 23: MALOCCLUSIONS OF TEETH
661
Caudal (posterior) crossbite
 More common in dolichocephalic breeds (collie)
 Reversal of the relationship of maxillary fourth premolar and mandibular first
molar; crown of fourth premolar buccal to molar
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Tooth displacement due to trauma, oral masses, or other causes
■ Mechanical block: open bite caused by foreign bodies, luxated or subluxated teeth,
or jaw fractures, even once healed, if stabilized in an abnormal position
■  Examine breed standards to determine what might be acceptable for the breed
· Boxers have a “normal" Class 3 malocclusion, as long as it is not exaggerated
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Based on visual and radiographic findings
 Impressions and models
 Oral photographs
■]
 Radiographs to evaluate tooth and jaw anatomy
■ Examine for supernumerary geminated, or fusion of teeth or roots, retained
deciduous teeth, retained roots, luxated teeth, and tooth or jaw fractures or
abnormalities
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
 If correcting with appliances, use oral hygiene products (zinc ascorbate oral gel, oral
chlorine dioxide solutions, 0.2% chlorhexidine oral rinse, etc.) during treatment
■  In most cases anti-inflammatory drugs and pain medications should be used
Procedures
■Deciduous tooth Class l malocclusions
· Careful and gentle extraction of the maloccluded deciduous teeth (interceptive
orthodontics) in hopes that the permanent teeth will erupt in the appropriate
position
· When performed at least 4 weeks prior to permanent tooth eruption (at 7-8
           
uncommon
200
 SECTION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
 Deciduous tooth Class 2, 3, asymmetric malocclusions
· Careful and gentle extraction of the maloccluded deciduous teeth in hopes that
the short jaws will be released from the bite interlock allowing it to grow, if the
genetic potential is present, prior to the permanent teeth erupting and bite inter-
lock reestablishing
· Should be performed at least 6 weeks prior to permanent tooth eruption; even
then, less than 20% success rate is common
 Interceptive orthodontics (select extraction of maloccluded deciduous teeth)
· Owner should be cautioned that any manipulation in the region of the submerged
 developing permanent tooth can cause damage ranging from slight enamel changes
to significant damage; careful monitoring at the time of permanent tooth eruption
is necessary
■ Permanent tooth Class l malocclusion
traumatic to the animal, treatment may not be necessary
 Extraction of offending teeth can many times be an effective alternative to more
classic orthodontic treatments
· Orthodontic treatment is usually based on prevention of improper contact trauma.
wear, or injury to hard or soft tissues, which may or may not include movement
of the tooth into its theoretical proper position
· Treatment of most Class l malocclusions deals primarily with tipping movements
of the teeth, although it may be required to provide proper retention
 Anterior crossbite: arch crowding may require odontoplasty (thinning) of teeth
to allow room for movement
0 Movement can be accomplished but is likely complicated and should be
handled by a specialist
 Base-narrow canine teeth: treatment is typically aimed at prevention of contact
trauma, pain and discomfort, and oronasal fistula formation
0 If the mandibular canines have just started to erupt into a lingual position,
"ball therapy" may influence a more buccal eruption sequence
in the mouth and of a size that will help “slide" the canines laterally: apply
the ball with gentle mouth closing pressure two to three times daily, a few
minutes at a time, and encourage play with the ball
0 If the tip of the mandibular canine barely touches the edge of the maxillary
required to bring the tooth into its proper position as it continues to erupt
0 Moderate cases may be easily managed by building a false crown with com-
posite material that will splay the false tip lateral to the gingival margin, with
eventual correction of the positioning
■ The diastema, or space between the maxillary canine and third incisor
must be present and sufficient for placement of the mandibular canine.
and the mandibular canine must be positioned to be moved into
thatspace
CHAPTER 23: MALOCCLUSIONS OF TEETH201
0 More severe base-narrow malocclusions typically require an orthodontic
appliance such as an incline plane to help guide the tooth in a tipping move-
 ment to a functional location or proper occlusion
 0 Mandibular canine extraction or crown reduction with vital pulpotomy can
provide the patient with a comfortable bite
· Lance tooth: a canine tooth angled forward (mesial)
 Untreated, crowding, and periodontal disease is common
 Orthodontic movement is possible, but complicated, so referral to a specialist
is necessary
· Base-wide canine teeth -teeth flare out laterally, sometimes in response to lance
canine teeth; exposed crowns may dry out and discolor, but treatment may not
be required
· Posterior crossbite
  In most cases no treatment is necessary as the bite is typically functional
 However, in traumatic situations, extraction of one of the offending teeth may
be curative
 Irue orthodontic correction can be long and tedious as more advanced orth-
odontic appliances are required, as well as blocking of the bite open, which
should only be attempted by well-qualified individuals
■Permanent tooth Class 2, 3, asymmetrical malocclusion
· Treatment should be based on providing a function nontraumatic occlusion for
the animal's medical health
· If this is already present, no treatment may be necessary
· Treatments may require advanced orthodontic and surgical procedures, and are
generally best handled by a specialist
COMMENTS
■Complications due to treatment attempts
· Untreated nonvital teeth
· Advanced periodontal disease, luxated or mobile teeth
· Problems with health of oral tissues
■Home care with appliance
· Iwice daily examination of appliance, flushing the mouth with an oral hygiene
solution or gel, no chewing of items, and a soft diet until the appliance is
removed
■Patient monitoring
· For the corrected occlusion to be stable, it needs to be self-retaining or it may
tend to revert to malocclusion
 Should be examined at 2 weeks, 2 months, and 6 months post appliance to see if
desired outcome is stable
· It is advisable at around 6 months post appliance for radiographs to be taken and
compared with the pretreatment films to determine if all teeth still appear vital
SEC TION IV: ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (DEVELOPMENTAL ORAL/DENTAL PROBLEMS)
(alive) and to evaluate root changes that may have occurred due to the pressures
of tooth/root movement during orthodontics
Prevention/avoidance:
· Careful selection of puppies with oral and general examination prior to purchase,
as well as examination and history of the sire and dame
· Selective breeding based on preferred breed characteristics
· Careful monitoring of deciduous and permanent tooth eruption for early detection
and treatment, if required
Possible complications
· With selective extractions of deciduous teeth prior to permanent tooth eruption.
there is a potential for injury to underlying permanent tooth buds either by direct
injury with extraction instruments or subsequent traumatic inflammation affect-
ing the development of the tooth growth and maturity
· These injuries may result in teeth becoming nonvital as they erupt, root dysplasia
or dilaceration, or crown hypoplasia or hypomineralization
· With orthodontic movement of permanent teeth, several conditions may
result, such as some degree of root resorption, root ankylosis, or nonvitality of the
tooth; these conditions are uncommon in properly managed orthodontic
procedures
■Associated conditions: lack of head symmetry, oral soft tissue trauma, chipped teeth.
desiccation of exposed tooth surfaces, and periodontal disease
■ Age-related factors: the condition is typically initially observed at less than 14 months
of age and usually shortly following tooth eruption
Ethical considerations
· Although animals have the medical right to as functional and correct an occlusion
as can be reasonably provided by therapy, animal club rules, professional associa-
tion principles, and state and country laws may at times conflict with the animals
rights to proper medical therapy, some kennel club rules make modification of
natural appearance, with certain exceptions, a cause for disqualification and
owners should be made aware of this
· When reasonable indications of hereditary involvement are present, the owner
should be informed, and should treatment be considered; the owner or agent
should acknowledge their responsibilities to inform people who have a right to
know of such alterations
· Additionally, the recommendation of possibly removing the animal from the
genetic pool by appropriate methods should be suggested
Expected course and Prognosis
 Course of treatment can vary with the type of malocclusion and the animal's nature
and habits (chewing, etc.)
■ Generally, most cases take l-7 months for the movement and retention phase.
depending on severity and if extrusion of tooth/teeth is required for stabilization of
the bite
CHAPTER 23: MALOCCLUSIONS OF TEETH
¥203
■ Prognosis is good to excellent in most treated patients; prognosis is fair to good in
most untreated malocclusions
■ Complications in untreated cases is typically a greater degree of problems with peri-
odontal disease, attrition or fractures of teeth, trauma to soft tissues, oronasal fistula
formation, and drying or desiccation of exposed tooth surfaces resulting in beige to
brown discoloration of said areas
■Some cases do not need or require orthodontic intervention
· In such cases, only routine observation for early detection and treatment of any
is advisable
See also the following chapter:
■ Appendix B ("Classification of Dental Occlusion in Dogs")
Abbreviations
AXB, anterior crossbite; CXB, caudal crossbite; PXB, posterior crossbite; RXB, rostral
crossbite.
Suggested Reading
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. The Veterinarians Companion for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO:
AAHA Press, 2000.
Wiggs BW, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgment: The author acknowledges the contribution of Robert Wiggs, who
authored this chapter in the previous editions
dient Education Handout
available online
Acquired Oral/Dental
Section
Diseases (Periodontal
Problems)
Chapter
24
Halitosis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
An offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
■ The sour milk odor accompanying periodontal disease may result from bacterial
populations associated with plaque, calculus, unhealthy tissues, decomposing food
particles retained within the oral cavity, persistent bleeding due to coagulation
abnormalities, or from tissue necrosis
■ Contrary to common belief, neither normal lung air nor stomach aroma contribute
■ The most common cause is periodontal disease caused by plaque: bacteria are
attracted to an acellular film formed from the precipitation of salivary glycoproteins
(the pellicle)
■ A bacterial biofilm forms over a freshly cleaned and polished tooth as soon as the
patient starts to salivate; bacteria attach to the pellicle within 6-8 hours; within days.
the plaque becomes mineralized, producing calculus upon which more plaque accu-
mulates; as plaque ages and gingivitis can progress into periodontitis (bone loss), the
bacterial flora changes from a predominantly nonmotile gram-positive aerobic coccoid
 flora to a more motile, gram-negative anaerobic population including Porphyromonas,
Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, and Actinomyces spp.
  The rough surface of calculus attracts more bacteria while irritating the free gingiva;
as the inflammation continues, the gingival sulcus is pathologically transformed into
a periodontal pocket; the pocket accumulates food debris, bacterial breakdown prod-
ucts, and resorbing bone, leading to halitosis
■ The primary cause of malodor is gram-negative anaerobic bacterial putrefaction that
generates volatile sulfur compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan,
dimethyl sulfide, and volatile fatty acids
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
207
208
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
■ Volatile sulfur compounds may also play a role in periodontal disease, affecting
the integrity of the tissue barrier, allowing endotoxins to produce periodontal
destruction, endotoxemia, and bacteremia
■ Multiple causes
·Eating malodorous food
· Metabolic: diabetes, uremia, bleeding disorders
 Respiratory: rhinitis, sinusitis, neoplasia
 Gastrointestinal: megaesophagus, neoplasia, foreign body
 Dermatologic: lip-fold pyoderma
Dietary: fetid foodstuffs, coprophagy
· Oral disease: periodontal disease and ulceration, orthodontic, pharyngitis, tonsil-
litis, neoplasia, foreign bodies
· Trauma: electric cord injury, open fractures, caustic agents
· Infectious: bacterial, fungal, viral
 Autoimmune diseases of the oral cavity
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Dogs and cats
■ Small breeds and brachycephalic breeds are more prone to oral disease because the
teeth are closer together, smaller animals live longer, and their owners tend to feed
softer food
■  Older animals are predisposed
CLINICAL FEATURES
 If due to oral disease, ptyalism, pawing at mouth, and anorexia may occur
■ In most cases with halitosis, it is seldom due to non-oral causes
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Hydrogen sulfide, mercaptans, and volatile fatty acids are the primary components
of halitosis; an industrial sulfide monitor can be used to measure sulfide concentra-
tion in peak parts per billion
■ Other diagnostic procedures to evaluate periodontal disease include intraoral radi-
ography, probing pocket depths, attachment levels, and tooth mobility
CHAPTER 24: HALITOSIS
607
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Antibiotics are not indicated as a primary treatment vehicle for halitosis
■ The American Veterinary Dental College has a position statement on the intermittent 
use of antibiotics at www.avdc.org (see Appendix A)
■ Controlling periodontal pathogens can help control dental infections and accompa-
nying malodor
■ The use of oral care products that contain metal ions, especially zinc, inhibits odor
formation because of the affinity of the metal ion to sulfur; zinc complexes with
hydrogen sulfide to form insoluble zinc sulfide; zinc interferes with microbial pro-
liferation and calcification of microbial deposits (by interfering with the crystal
development of calculus)
 Topical treatment with zinc ascorbate cysteine gel usually reduces halitosis within
30 minutes because of cysteine's effect on sulfur compounds in the mouth
■ Chlorhexidine used as a rinse or paste also helps control plaque, decreasing
eventual odor
Procedures
■ Once the specific cause of halitosis is known, direct therapy at correcting existing
pathology
■ Professionally clean the teeth when physical examination reveals gingivitis and/or
when calculus exists on the gingival tooth interface; cleaning removes plaque and
calculus above and below the gum line (with the help of hand instruments or scaler
tips designed to be used subgingivally), irrigates debris from the mouth, and polishes
the teeth. After teeth cleaning, a tooth-by-tooth examination for mobility, or support
 loss is conducted. Intraoral dental radiographs complete the oral assessment exam.
· In cases of minimal pockets, local antimicrobial administration may decrease
halitosis due to decreased pocket depth
· Home care is an essential part of a complete dental care program
  Daily brushing or wiping teeth to decrease plaque accumulation
  Use of weekly plaque reduction barrier gel
COMMENTS
 Synonyms
· Bad breath
· Foul breath
· Malodor
· Fetor ex ore
· Fetor oris
210
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
See also the following chapters:
Chapter 25
■ Chapter 26
■ Appendix C
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP Small Animal Dentistry. Philadelphia: Mosby, 1993.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Jan Bellows, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient EducationHandout
available online
Chapter
25
Periodontal Disease:
Gingivitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ A reversible inflammatory response of the marginal gum line; the earliest phase of
periodontal disease
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
■ The gingiva covers the alveolar processes of the mandible and maxillae and conforms
closely to the neck of the tooth
■ The gingiva is divided into attached and free, or marginal, portions: the attached
gingiva is tightly bound to the periosteum overlying the alveolar processes; the mar-
 ginal gingiva extends above the crest of the alveolar bone and tapers to a knifelike
edge that lies in contact with surface of the tooth
■ The gingival sulcus: the narrow cleft between the inner wall of the marginal gingiva
and the tooth; in dogs, normally <2-3 mm but may be deeper around the canine
teeth in large-breed dogs; in cats, normally <l mm
■ The junction between the gingiva and buccal oral mucosa appears as a distinct line
or furrow called the mucogingival line or junction
■ The connective tissue of the gingiva (lamina propria) contains an extensive array of
blood vessels, lymphatics, nerves, and collagen fibers; plasma cells, lymphocytes, and
neutrophils are also abundant and are important in local defense mechanisms 
 Crevicular fluid (gingival crevicular fluid [GCF]): plasma-derived; passes from the
gingival connective tissue through the crevicular epithelium to lavage the gingival
sulcus; flow occurs in response to bacteria (plaque) in the gingival sulcus; contains
immunoglobulins, other nonspecific antibacterial substances, and neutrophils as the
predominant cells; important in controlling the bacterial population
■  In healthy animals, gram-positive aerobic cocci and rods predominate in supragin-
gival plaque; anaerobes are more abundant subgingivally, and spirochetes are found
tightly packed in the apical region of the gingival sulcus
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
211
 SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
■ As gingivitis develops, anaerobes and spirochetes become increasingly more abun-
dant in the subgingival sulcus
■ In dogs, the bacteroides organisms (Bacteroides, Prevotella, Porphyromonas spp.)
and Fusobacterium spp. appear to be important pathogens; Porphyromonas and
s a  s       s
and elaborate endotoxins that can result in tissue destruction
■ The fact that these bacteria are present in disease and health and that periodontal
disease does not progress in linear fashion (i.e., periods of active disease are followed
by quiescent periods) indicates that host-bacteria interaction is important in the
pathogenesis of periodontal disease
■ Plaque: composed of bacteria, polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes (PMNs),
and salivary glycoproteins; forms within 24 hours on clean tooth surfaces; the
gingiva's inflammatory response to plaque consists of vasculitis, edema, and
collagen loss
■ Gingivitis of different severity can exist in one patient's mouth, based on the host's
immunocompetency and local oral factors
· Gingivitis is also referred to as stage l periodontal disease (see Chapter 26)
· Early gingivitis: a small amount of plaque, mild gum line erythema, and smooth
gingival surfaces (Figs. 25-1 and 25-2)
· Advanced gingivitis: subgingival plaque and calculus, moderate to severe ery-
thema, and irregular gingival surfaces
■Risk factors
·Age
· Head shape and occlusive pattern; crowding of teeth reduces natural cleaning
mechanisms (toy and brachycephalic breeds)
·Toy breeds affected earlier in life
· Soft foods
 Figure 25-1 Marginal gingivitis in a cat.
CHAPTER 25: PERIODONTAL DISEASE: GINGIVITIS
213
 Figure 25-2 Gingivitis.
· Open-mouth breathing
+
 Chewing habits
·Lack of oral health care
· Metabolic diseases such as uremia and diabetes mellitus predispose to more
pathogenic oral bacteria
·Autoimmune diseases
ssuch as pemphigus vulgaris and systemic lupus
erythematosus
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Dogs and cats
 Over 80% of pets 3 years old and older have gingivitis.
Higher prevalence earlier in life in toy breeds
 Cats generally are affected later in life than dogs
Usually detected during routine wellness examinations
Gingival swelling or bleeding
■Halitosis
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Halitosis
 Erythremic or edematous gingiva, especially buccal maxillary surfaces
Variable degrees of plaque and calculus formation
■ Gingival surfaces bleed easily on contact
214
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Periodontitis
■Stomatitis
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Anesthetized oral examination allows more thorough visual examination of all dental
surfaces; use of a periodontal probe helps distinguish between gingivitis (normal
sulcal depths of <3 mm in dogs and <l mm in cats) and periodontitis
■ The use of plaque-disclosing agents helps identify plaque and bacterial accumula-
tions on enamel surfaces
■ Biopsy and histopathology
THERAPEUTICS
■ Modify behavior to avoid chewing hard objects such as rocks and sticks and eliminate
repetitive trauma, if possible
 Stress the importance of home care and regular dental prophylaxis before lesions
develop (see also Appendix C)
■ Antibiotics are generally not necessary at this stage
Procedures
■Professional periodontal therapy followed by postoperative home care can completely
reverse gingivitis
■ Proper dental cleaning: complete oral examination; supragingival removal of
plaque and calculus; subgingival scaling and root planing (if needed); polishing:
subgingival irrigation; postcleaning examination; home care instructions; and follow-
up examinations
■ Eliminate predisposing factors such as retained deciduous teeth and crowded teeth
COMMENTS
■ Regular oral reexaminations are necessary so the clinician can determine the proper
interval between periodontal therapies and assess the effectiveness of oral home care;
these steps can cure gingivitis and help to avoid the progression to periodontitis
CHAPTER 25: PERIODONTAL DISEASE: GINGIVITIS 215
■ Gingivitis begins when bacteria invade the sulcular epithelium and connective tissue;
the inflammatory response results in swelling and reddening of the marginal gingiva,
which also becomes friable and bleeds easily; these lesions are reversible with dental
prophylaxis and home care; if not controlled at this point, the attached gingiva and
attachment apparatus (alveolar bone, periodontal ligament, and tooth root cemen-
■ Once periodontitis is established, the lesions are generally considered controllable
but not reversible
Uncontrolled periodontitis invariably leads to tooth loss
■ Always look for tooth resorption in cats, especially if gingivitis is focal or has the
 appearance of granulation tissue
Transient gingivitis is a common, self-limiting problem in teething animals; if inflam-
mation persists after adult tooth eruption, the cause should be determined
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 5
■ Chapter 26
■ Chapter 50
■ Appendix C
Abbreviations
FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; GCF gingival crevicular
fluid; PMN, polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes.
Suggested Reading
Bojrab MJ, Tholen M, eds. Small Animal Medicine and Oral Surgery. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger,
1990.
Colmery B, Frost P. Periodontal disease: etiology and pathogenesis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
1986;16:817-834
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1993.
  o  a e i  e     i a
Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1995:1097-1121.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
1997.
Authors: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC, Thomas Klein, DVM
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
26
chapter
Periodontal Disease:
Periodontitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Inflammation and infection of some or all of the tooth's support structures (gingiva,
cementum, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone); compared with gingivitis
(inflammation of the marginal gingiva), periodontitis indicates some degree of peri-
odontal attachment tissue loss
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 An intact epithelial barrier (junctional epithelium at the base of the gingival sulcus)
and high rate of epithelial turnover and surface desquamation prevent bacteria from
gaining direct access to tissue in a healthy state
· The normal level of the base of the sulcus is at the cementoenamel junction (CEJ)
 Some bacterial products may diffuse through the junctional epithelium to reach the
underlying gingival connective tissue; normal host defense mechanisms limit the
penetration of these products and their damaging effects
■Fluctuations in the host-parasite/pathogen equilibrium may result in cycles of either
diminished or increased intensity of the inflammatory response; it may be possible
to think of periodontitis as the outcome of an imperfectly balanced host-parasite
interaction
■ Caused by bacteria located in the gingival crevice; initially, a pellicle forms on the
deposited from saliva and gingival crevicular fluid; the pellicle attracts aerobic gram-
positive bacteria (initially Actinomyces and Streptococcus spp.); more bacteria soon
adhere, forming plaque; within days the plaque thickens, becomes mineralized and
transforms into calculus, which is rough and irritating to the gingiva; with deeper
accumulations, the oxygen is depleted and anaerobic motile rods and spirochetes begin
to populate the subgingival area; more plaque builds on top of the calculus; endotoxins
released by anaerobic bacteria cause tissue destruction and bone-loss periodontitis;
 host response to the bacteria and toxins present can also damage the host tissues
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley &r Sons, Inc.
216
CHAPTER 26: PERIODONTAL DISEASE: PERIODONTITIS
217
 An association has been established between periodontitis and microscopic hepatic.
renal, and central nervous system (CNS) lesions in some animals
Causes
  o ) s   s   o
· Periodontitis: dogs: pigmented and nonpigmented bacteroides (Porphyromonas
denticanis, Porphyromonas salivosa, Porphyromonas gulae, Prevotella spp., Bacteroi-
des spp.), Fusobacterium spp.
· Cats: Peptostreptococcus, Actinomyces, and Porphyromonas spp.
·Soft diet promotes periodontal disease through accumulation of plaque
·Lack of self-cleaning mechanism caused by teeth that are crowded or
maloccluded
 Risk factors
· Toy breeds with crowded teeth
● Dogs that groom themselves: causes hair to be imbedded in the gingival sulcus
· Other debilitating illnesses
· Poor nutritional state
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats 6 months and older may be affected
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Stage 1 (PD 1): gingivitis only without attachment loss; the height and architecture
 of the alveolar margin are normal
■ Stage 2 (PD 2): early periodontitis implies that there is less than 25% of attachment
loss; there are early radiological signs of periodontitis; the loss of attachment of
alveolar bone on the root is less than 25% as measured either by clinical attachment
level, or radiographically as determined by the distance of the alveolar margin from
the CEJ relative to the length of the root; at most, stage 1 furcation involvement
(Figs. 26-1 and 26-2)
■ Stage 3 (PD 3): moderate periodontitis implies that there is 25-50% loss of attach-
ment of alveolar bone on the root as measured either by clinical attachment level, or
radiographically as determined by the distance of the alveolar margin from the CEJ
relative to the length of the root; at most, stage 2 furcation involvement (Figs. 26-3
and 26-4)
■ Stage 4 (PD 4): advanced periodontitis implies that there is more than >50% loss of
attachment of alveolar bone on the root as measured either by clinical attachment
level, or radiographically as determined by the distance of the alveolar crest from the
CEJ relative to the length of the root; stage 3 furcation involvement will be involved
in multirooted teeth (Figs. 26-5 and 26-6)
 Figure 26-1 Apparent stage 2 periodontal disease in a dog with plaque, calculus, and gingival recession.
Confirmation of extent of attachment loss can be determined radiographically.
218
 Figure 26-3 Radiograph of stage 3 periodontal disease in a dog with more extensive bone loss.
 Figure 26-4 Radiograph of stage 3 periodontal disease in a cat with significant bone loss and the
potential for compromise of the distal root of the mandibular first molar
219
 Figure 26-5 Stage 4 periodontal disease in a dog: maxillary premolars.
 Figure 26-6 Radiograph of stage 4 periodontal disease (see Fig. 26-5) with extensive bone loss and
compromised teeth that require extraction.
220
CHAPTER 26: PERIODONTAL DISEASE: PERIODONTITIS
221
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Pemphigus
■Lupus
■ Oral neoplasia
■Stomatitis
DIAGNOSTICS
■Imaging
· Radiography: important diagnostic tool; as much as 60% of disease can be hidden
below the gum line
· No radiographic changes in stage l disease (gingivitis)
· Early radiographic signs of stage 2 disease include loss of density and sharpness
of the crestal bone; as periodontal disease progresses, loss of lamina dura miner-
alization apically and furcation involvement in multirooted teeth
+
 Severe periodontal disease appears radiographically as loss of bone support around
one or more roots: bone loss may be horizontal (a decrease in bone height around
one or more teeth), vertical (infrabony defect), or oblique (a combination of both)
■ Periodontal probing: "probing depth"—distance between free gingival margin and
apical extent of pocket; probing depths are generally related to the size of the dog-
in the medium-sized dog. pockets >2 mm and lmm in the cat are abnormal (see
Chapter 2)
■“Attachment loss" measures between CEJ and apical extent of pocket; normally, the
gingival sulcus is located at the CEJ; any attachment loss is abnormal
THERAPEUTICS
 The ultimate goal of periodontal therapy is to control plaque and prevent the destruc-
tion of periodontal disease from occurring: a willing patient and a client who can
provide home care are important considerations in creating a therapy plan
Drugs
■ Although antimicrobials are not the first-line treatment in cases of periodontal
disease, clindamycin and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid are approved for periodontal
disease; these may be used for a week before periodontal treatment, prior to anes
thesia, postoperatively for 7-10 days, and/or as intermittent therapy in select patients
(see Appendix A)
222 SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
■ Do not use chlorhexidine and fluoride products concurrently; combining the prod-
ucts may inactivate them; better to wait 30 minutes to 1 hour between use of a
dentifrice containing fluoride and a chlorhexidine rinse or gel
■Additional antibiotics: tetracycline, metronidazole
Procedures (see Chapter 5)
■ Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 Stage 1 or 2: professional cleaning, hand scaling. polishing, irrigation, treat minor
pockets, application of fluoride; application of a professional barrier gel after fluoride
in cases where the pet owner can provide home care; application of Sanos sealant
(AllAccem Inc., San Carlos, CA) in cases where owner cannot provide home care
(see also Chapter 6)
■ Stage 3: pocket depths (25-50% attachment loss—3-6 mm in dogs, 2-4 mm in cats;
above plus closed-root planing and subgingival curettage
· After thoroughly cleaning moderate pocket, placement of a local antibiotic gel
(DoxirobeTM Gel, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton PA; Clindoral, TriLogic Pharma,
Montgomery, AL) can help rejuvenate periodontal tissues and may reduce pocket
depth (see Chapter 6)
open root planing) or extract
· If 2-3 mm of healthy, attached gingiva is present, apically reposition flap to decrease
pocket depth in areas of alveolar bone loss; if not enough healthy gingiva remains
to apically reposition flap, rotated flap (from adjacent gingiva), free gingival flap.
or extraction
 Bone replacement procedures: with two-, three-, four-walled infrabony pockets
· Guided tissue regeneration: use barrier material to selectively promote regrowth
of bone and periodontal ligament, instead of epithelial or connective tissue, into
periodontal defects
· Periodontal splinting: can be used especially in the incisor areas to help stabilize
mobile teeth; criteria for splinting include normal periodontal support on both
sides of the tooth (teeth) to be stabilized, strict home care, and a cooperative
patient who will not chew on hard objects and destroy the splint
· Note: a detailed description of advanced periodontal procedures can be found in
many veterinary dental texts
COMMENTS
■Home care (see Appendix C)
· The Veterinary Oral Health Council (www.VOHC.org) accepts products that have
been shown to retard the accumulation of plaque and/or tartar by at least 20%
CHAPTER 26: PERIODONTAL DISEASE: PERIODONTITIS
223
· Amount and type of home care products dispensed depends on dental periodontal
pathology
 Stage 1 and 2: daily brushing with dentifrice
 Stage 3: established periodontal disease—daily brushing with fluoride-
containing toothpaste
 Stage 4: advanced periodontal disease—zinc ascorbate gel three to four times
 daily to help regenerate cellular collagen initially, with daily brushing once
stable
· The degree of periodontal pathology dictates recall interval; some patients are
checked weekly, while others can be evaluated every 3-6 months
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapters 1l and 2
■ Chapters 5 and 6
■ Chapter 25
■
 Appendix B (*Periodontal Disease"; *Periodontal Disease Classification")
■ Appendix C
Abbreviations
AVDC, American Veterinary Dental College; CEJ, cementoenamel junction.
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE. Periodontal disease in dogs. Vet Clin North Am 1998;28:1lll-ll28.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Jan Bellows, DVM, FAVDC, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
ClientEducationHandout
available online
27
Chapter
Gingival Hyperplasia
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Enlargement of gingival tissue due to proliferation of its elements (abnormal multi-
plication or increase in the number of cells in normal arrangement)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Dogs/cats
· Genetics: probable familial tendency—-boxers
· Hyperplastic response of gingival epithelial cells to likely due to chronic antigenic
stimulation of periodontal components
 Sometimes seen as a sequela to certain medications: diphenylhydantoin, cyclospo-
rine, nitrendipine, nifedipine
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Certain breeds: boxers, Great Danes, collies, Doberman pinschers, Dalmatians
 Gradual thickening and elongation of gingival margins
● May have oral odor (see Chapter 24)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Thickening and increase in height of attached gingiva and gingival margin, some-
times completely covering tooth surface
■]
 Resultant formation of "pseudopockets": increase in pocket depth due to increased
gingival height, not due to loss of attachment, unless untreated and progresses to
concurrent periodontal disease (Fig. 27-1)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
224
 Figure 27-1 Gingival hyperplasia is an overgrowth of the gingival margin that causes a deeper pocket,
not due to attachment loss (pseudopocket).
 Figure 27-2 While not a true gingival hyperplasia, local irritations of the buccal or lingual mucosa, such as
with "gum chewers" syndrome, can present with similar signs and need for evaluation for therapy and/or
biopsy. The additional hyperplastic tissue adjacent to the first and second molars should also be evaluated.
225
226
 SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
d a     ssd  e  
found
■ Locally affected areas other than the marginal gingiva may develop hyperplastic areas
due to chronic irritation, such as the “gum chewers" lesion in this patient's mucosa
(Fig. 27-2); these areas should be evaluated for therapeutic need
 May form as protruberant masses (grape cluster) at gingival margins; biopsy neces-
sary to rule out neoplasia
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Oral neoplasia: peripheral odontogenic fibromas (epulides) and so on
· Usually not generalized; sometimes osseous changes present
■ Oral papillomatosis
· Papilloma usually on mucosal surfaces
■ Operculum
 Seen in young animals during eruption phase of teeth; incomplete loss of gingival
tissue covering erupting tooth
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Presumptive diagnosis based on clinical appearance, especially if generalized and
found in breed with high predilection
■ Intraoral radiography to rule out any underlying osseous changes (more common
with epulides or tumors)
 Biopsy focal area or areas that do not respond to standard therapy
■ Histopathology to rule out neoplasia and other causes
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
 Oral antimicrobials (chlorhexidine, zinc ascorbate gel)
■Postoperative pain management
Procedures
■ Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
■ Gingivoplasty (recontouring) to remove excess gingival tissue and return pocket
depths to normal
CHAPTER 27: GINGIVAL HYPERPLASIA
227
· Local anesthetic injections/topical gels
· Periodontal probe to determine depth of pseudopocket
 Can mark pocket depth on outside of pocket with end of probe ("dots")
(Fig. 27-3)
·  Excise excess tissue and reshape gingival margin
 Cold steel: sharp, stout scissors or scalpel blade
o“Connect the dots" (made by probe) with blade to approximate normal
gingival margin
D
 Or use scissors following pocket depth to remove bulk tissue
 12-fluted bur on high-speed handpiece
0  Contour margin to feather angle
0 Assists in hemostasis
Electrocautery (Fig. 27-4)
0 Use fully or partially rectified current
 0  Do not damage underlying bone or tissue
 Time-consuming, needs patience
[a)
 Figure 27-3 (a) Measure the extent of the pocket with the periodontal probe. (b) Place the probe at the
same level on the outside of the pocket and insert the probe tip into the gingiva at that point, marking the
extent of the defect (bleeding point).
(b)
Figure 27-3 Continueo.
a
 Figure 27-4 (a) Patient with generalized gingival hyperplasia. (b) Electrocautery unit used for gingivoplasty.
(c) Postoperative appearance after gingivoplasty.
228
(b)
[C)
 Figure 27-4 Continued.
229
230
 SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
Excessive thickness: incisor and canine region
Modified Widman technique
0  Envelope flap to lift gingiva off tooth surfaces
0 Excision of tissue wedge to remove gingiva at the inside of the pocket to
provide a more narrow width of attached gingiva
 0 Suture interdentally to secure gingiva
 0 Digital pressure to reposition
 Tincture of myrrh and benzoin
  Use dropper: apply to cut margins and let dry—four to five layers
· Hemostatic solutions to aid in hemorrhage control as needed
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Chronic, recurring problem that often needs repeated therapy
■]
 Encourage the highest level of home care and regular professional cleaning
■ Regular dental cleanings and home care to minimize effects of plaque and bacterial
accumulation
■ Good prognosis with regular care
■Recurrence common
Abbreviations
GH, gingival hyperplasia/hypertrophy; GVP, gingivoplasty; GV, gingivectomy (actually
 y o s, s
Suggested Reading
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. The Veterinarian's Companion for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO:
AAHA Press, 2000.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry Principles & Practice. Philadelphia: Lippencott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
28
Oronasal Fistula
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ A pathological pathway between the mucosal surface of the oral and nasal cavities
(Fig. 28-1)
 Communication between the mouth and nasal cavity can occur from lesions around
 any of the maxillary teeth; the canine teeth are most commonly affected; defects are
vertical
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Can be caused by trauma, penetration of a foreign body, bite wounds, traumatic tooth
extraction, electrical shock, or oral cancer
Usually associated with advanced periodontitis of the maxillary canine tooth leading
to destruction of the bone separating the nasal and oral cavities
 Fistula width is related to the size of the dog: fistula depth to the chronicity of the
periodontal infection
■Dogs with uncorrected lingually displaced (base-narrow) canines and those with
mandibular distocclusion (prognathic or overbite) malocclusions causing the man-
dibular canines to penetrate the hard palate are predisposed
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Dog: dolichocephalic head types are affected most often, especially dachshunds
■ Can occur in cats but is rare
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
231
232
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 28-1 This chronic oronasal fistula with canine tooth already lost maintains a large opening into the
nasalcavity
CLINICAL FEATURES
Chronic rhinitis, with or without blood
 Sneezing also common, especially when the maxillary canines are digitally palpated
DIEFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Periodontal disease
■
Neoplasia
Trauma
■ Foreign body penetration
DIAGNOSTICS
■Maxillary canines are most commonly affected
The palatal root of the maxillary fourth premolar is the next most common
CHAPTER 28: ORONASAL FSTULA
■  Inserting a periodontal probe into the pocket along the palatine surface of the maxil-
lary canine tooth often causes hemorrhage from the ipsilateral nostril, confirming an
oronasal fistula
■Radiographs rarely diagnose oronasal fistula because the lesions are generally isolated
to the medial surface
 Radiographs may show foreign body entrapment, or lysis consistent with neoplasia
Cytology of nasal discharge
■Culture and sensitivity of discharge
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 Repair to prevent foreign material and infection from passing from the mouth into
the nose causing rhinitis, sinusitis, and possibly pneumonia
 Extract the tooth and close the defect; after extraction, the goal of surgical closure
is to place an epithelial layer in both the oral and nasal cavities
■ Full-thickness flap: after tooth extraction, a mucoperiosteal pedical flap may be
elevated from the dorsal aspect of the fistula, released, advanced to cover the defect,
above the defect, sutures at the edge of the defect (not over the void), and no tension
on the suture line (Fig. 28-2)
■ Double reposition flap: used for large fistulas or repair failures where no attached
gingiva remains or where periosteal tissue cannot be included; after extraction, the
first flap is harvested from the hard palate and inverted so that the oral epithelium
is toward the nasal passage (Figs. 28-3 and 28-4); the second flap is mucobuccal and
harvested from the alveolar mucosa and underside of the lip rostral to the fistula
(Fig. 28-5): it is sutured over the first flap and donor site (Fig. 28-6)
 Guided tissue regeneration of the maxillary canine may be used for repair of a deep
palatal pocket if not yet fistulated; a palatal flap is elevated to approach the infrabony
defect; soft tissue and calculus are removed from the defect with a curette
■ Bone grafts such as Consil (Nutramax Laboratories, Edgewood, MD), OsteoAllograft
(Veterinary Transplant Services Inc., Kent, WA) synthetic and natural hydroxyapa-
tite, autogenous and heterologous bone, polylactic acid, and calcium disulfate have
been used to exclude regrowth of gingival connective tissue and epithelium, promot-
ing regeneration of bone and periodontal ligament; the use of bone grafts is not
indicated in cases where the fistula extends into the nasal cavity
■Can surgically repair oronasal fistulas located in the central portion of the hard palate
with a transposition flap of the hard palate mucoperiosteum from tissue adjacent to
the defect
 Figure 28-2 When utilizing a full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap. the fibers of the inelastic periosteum on 
 the inner layer of the flap must be excised to release tension
 Figure 28-3 The initial palatal flap is harvested.
234
 Figure 28-4 The palatal flap is inverted to cover the fistula site and sutured.
 Figure 28-5 The second mucobuccal flap is harvested.
235
236
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 28-6 The second flap is sutured over the secured palatal flap.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ With adequate tissue and release of tension, healing should occur uneventfully
■ Owners should be cautioned that a persistent opening may be present due to constant
pressure of respiratory efforts on the site
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Jan Bellows, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
29
Stomatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
An inflammation of the soft tissues of the oral cavity, which may be caused by many
different stimuli of local or systemic origin
■ American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC) Nomenclature: oral and oropharyngeal
inflammation is classified by location
 n s  n    s  n  s
mouth; in clinical use, the term should be reserved to describe widespread oral
inflammation (beyond gingivitis and periodontitis) that may also extend into
submucosal tissues (e.g., marked caudal mucositis extending into submucosal
tissues may be termed caudal stomatitis) (Fig. 29-1)
·Gingivitis: inflammation of gingiva
 Periodontitis: inflammation of nongingival periodontal tissue (i.e., the periodontal
ligament and alveolar bone)
Alveolar mucositis: inflammation of alveolar mucosa
Sublingual mucositis: inflammation of mucosa on the floor of the mouth
Labial/buccal mucositis: inflammation of the lip/cheek mucosa
Caudal mucositis: inflammation of mucosa of the caudal oral cavity
· Contact mucositis and contact mucosal ulceration ("contact ulcers" and “kissing
ulcers"): lesions in susceptible individuals that are secondary to mucosal contact
with a tooth surface bearing the responsible irritant, allergen, or antigen
· Palatitis: inflammation of mucosa covering the hard and/or soft palate
● Glossitis: inflammation of mucosa of the dorsal and/or ventral tongue surface
· Cheilitis: inflammation of the lip (including the mucocutaneous junction area and
skin of the lip)
· Osteomyelitis: inflammation of the bone and bone marrow
· Tonsilitis: inflammation of the palatine tonsil(s)
· Pharyngitis: inflammation of the pharynx
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
237
238
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
Stomatitis
AVD
Infammation": http://avdc.org/nomenclature.html)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
  Inflammation and other changes may develop in the normal oral mucosa because of
the tremendous amount of vasculature in the area and its proximity to the external
environment
■ Can also affect behavior due to discomfort and difficulties in eating: ophthalmic
conditions due to proximity of some oral structures to ocular structures; and skin
conditions if inflammation extends to the perioral area
■Causes
·Anatomical
 Periodontal disease due to overcrowding of teeth
  Lip frenulum attachment
Tight lip syndrome in Shar-Pei (see Chapter 20)
· Metabolic
  Uremia and high ammonia levels in saliva
 Vasculitis and xerostomia seen with diabetes mellitus
 Macroglossia and puffy lips as seen with hypoparathyroidism
CHAPTER 29: STOMATITIS
Immunologic
口]
 Pemphigus foliaceous
 Pemphigus vulgaris (see Chapter 58)
 Bullous pemphigoid
  Systemic lupus erythematosus and discoid lupus erythematosus in the dog
  Acute hypersensitivity to drugs
·Infectious
口
Opportunistic oral flora secondary to oral lesions
口1
Mycotic stomatitis
 Systemic infections
 Leptospirosis: petechia
Feline leprosy (mycobacterium): raised plaques
 Calicivirus or herpesvirus infections: cats (see Chapter 52)
 Canine distemper
 Viral papillomatosis: dogs (see Chapter 45)
·Trauma
  Irritation from calculus and plaque
Foreign objects: gum chewers syndrome
 Electrical cord shock
 Chemical burns
 Lacerations
 Snake bite
Blows
 Trauma of the palate from base-narrow mandibular canine teeth
·Toxic
Certain plants
 Chemotherapy
Radiotherapy
 Chemical irritants
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
■  Ulcerative stomatitis in Maltese: higher incidence in males
■ Juvenile-onset periodontitis in young cats
Oral eosinophilic granuloma: most commonly in Siberian husky (may be hereditary)
(see Chapter 59)
■ Gingival hyperplasia in large breeds (see Chapter 27)
■ Rapidly progressive periodontitis seen mostly in young adult animals such as the
greyhound and the shih tzu
■  Lymphocytic plasmocytic stomatitis in cats (see Chapter 50)
■ Localized juvenile periodontitis in the maxillary or mandibular incisor region: espe-
cially common in miniature schnauzer
240
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■
Halitosis
■Pain
■ Ulcerated lesions
 Ptyalism
■
Edema
！
Periocular inflammation possible due to proximity to oral cavity
Extensive plaque and calculus. Note: look for ulcerative lesions on oral buccal and
labial surfaces that are adjacent to teeth with large amounts of calculus
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Oral ulcers (see Chapter 30)
Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis (CUPS)
■ Idiopathic osteomyelitis
DIAGNOSTICS
■
 Biochemical tests to detect other diseases
Immunologic testing
■
Mycotic cultures
Virus isolation
■
Toxicological studies
Serum protein electrophoresis
■
Endocrine tests
■ Radiography to identify osseous or dental abnormalities
■Biopsy
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
Antimicrobials
· Broad-spectrum antibiotics
· Amoxicillin-clavulanate
· Clindamycin
CHAPTER 29: STOMATITIS
241
· Metronidazole: 10 mg/kg q12h per os [PO] or 40-50mg/kg as a loading dose on
the first day, followed by 20-25 mg/kg q8h for 7 days or less
· Doxycycline: 5 mg/kg PO loading dose, 2.5 mg/kg PO 12 hours later, and 2.5 mg/
kg PO once daily thereafter
· Chlorhexidine solution or gel: plaque retardant
d n p  nss od on s p s p or 
accumulation
Anti-inflammatory drugs
· Prednisolone or prednisone
· For eosinophilic ulcer: 2-4.4 mg/kg PO once a day; for chronic cases use 0.5-
1.0 mg/kg PO every other day
· For adjunctive therapy of feline caudal stomatitis; may improve inflammation and
appetite
Procedures
■Correct nutritional or hydration deficiencies as needed, on an inpatient or outpatient
basis
 Can place feeding tube if necessary
 Dental disease or periodontal disease present should be treated
Sometimes most or all teeth must be extracted to resolve stomatitis
■ Oravet (Merial, Atlanta, GA) applied weekly to calculus-free teeth might be helpful
 in preventing further inflammation to oral tissues
COMMENTS
■ Laboratory tests when systemic disease is involved
■ Oral rinses and brushing the teeth with oral medications may be helpful, especially
with periodontal disease
■ Bacteremia from periodontal disease may cause renal, cardiac, hepatic, and pulmo-
nary disease
■ Periodontal disease associated with calculus is most often seen in old dogs and cats
and in susceptible breeds
■  Dental prophylaxis procedures have caused human infections
■ Safety glasses and a mask are recommended when performing such procedures
■Synonyms
· Trench mouth
· St. Vincent's stomatitis: an ulceromembranous stomatitis due to Fusobacterium
spp. and spirochetes
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 30
■ Chapter 50
■ Appendix B ("Oral and Oropharyngeal Inflammation")
242  SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Oral lesions of soft tissues and bone: differential diagnosis. In: Harvey CE, Emily
PP, eds. Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis, MO: CV Mosby, 1993:42-88.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
1997.
Author: Larry Baker, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Oral Ulceration and
chapter
30
Chronic Ulcerative
Paradental Stomatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Focal or multifocal loss of mucosal integrity of the superficial epithelial layers in
specific areas of the oral cavity
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Metabolic
· Diabetes mellitus
· Hypothyroidism
· Renal disease: uremia
■Nutritional
· Protein-calorie malnutrition
Riboflavin deficiency
■Neoplastic
· Dogs: malignant melanoma; squamous cell carcinoma; fibrosarcoma
· Cats: squamous cell carcinoma; fibrosarcoma; malignant melanoma
  Immune-mediated (see Chapter 58)
Pemphigus vulgaris: 90% have oral involvement
+
 Bullous pemphigoid: 80% have oral involvement
 Systemic lupus erythematosus: 50% have oral involvement
Discoid lupus erythematosus
■ Drug-induced: toxic epidermal necrolysis
Infectious
· Retrovirus: feline leukemia virus (FeLV)/feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
·Calicivirus: cats (see Chapter 52)
· Herpesvirus: cats
· Leptospirosis: dogs
· Periodontal disease: dogs and cats
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
243
244
SEC TION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
Traumatic
Foreign body: bone or wood fragments
· Electric cord shock
·Malocclusion
· Gum chewer's disease: chronic chewing of cheek
■ Chemical/Toxic
·Acids
· Thallium
■Idiopathic
· Eosinophilic granuloma: cats, Siberian huskies, Samoyeds (see Chapter 59)
● Lymphocytic-plasmacytic stomatitis (LPS): cats (see Chapter 50)
· Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis (CUPS): dogs; allergic, hypersensitivity
reaction to plaque
· Idiopathic osteomyelitis: dogs
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats of any age and either sex
■ Breed predilection for ulcerative stomatitis (aka CUPS): Maltese, Cavalier King
Charles spaniels, cocker spaniels, Bouvier des Flandres (Fig. 30-1)
■ Feline LPS: may have predilection for Somali and Abyssinian cats (see Chapters 29
and 50)
 Figure 30-1 Breed predilection for ulcerative stomatitis include Maltese dogs.
CHAPTER 3O: ORAL ULCERATION AND CHRONIC ULCERATIVE PARADENTAL STOMATITIS
245
■  Idiopathic osteomyelitis: may have predilection for cocker spaniels; complication
associated with CUPS
CLINICAL FEATURES
Halitosis
Gingivitis
Faucitis
Pharyngitis
Buccitis/buccal mucosal ulceration
Hypersalivation (thick, ropey saliva)
Pain
Anorexia
Mucosal ulceration—"kissing ulcers": common in CUPs (Fig. 30-2)
Plaque: with or without calculus
Exposed, necrotic bone: with alveolar osteitis and idiopathic osteomyelitis
Behavior changes secondary to oral sensitivity
Scar formation on lateral margins of tongue: with CUPs (Fig. 30-3)
Note: sometimes these signs will start following a routine dental cleaning on a previ-
by manipulation in the oral cavity
246
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
 Figure 30-3 Scar formation on lateral margins of the tongue in patient with CUPS.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ See the causes above
DIAGNOSTICS
History and oral examination: foreign bodies; malocclusions; chemical, toxic, and
electricalburns
■ Idiopathic conditions: clinical signs; history; breed predispositions; response to
therapy
Complete blood count (CBC), biochemistry, urinalysis, and thyroxine (T4):
 diabetes mellitus; renal disease; hypothyroidism; infections and for preoperative
considerations
■ Chronic conditions may have elevated serum total protein and elevated globulin
 Serology: FeLV/FIV test; titers for specific infections
Cultures: usually nonspecific; oral flora contaminants
■]
Biopsy/cytology: neoplasia, immune-mediated disease, and chronic inflammation
result in predominant lymphocytes and plasmocytes (CUPS and LPS)
■ Radiography: helps determine bony involvement and extent of idiopathic
osteomyelitis
THERAPEUTICS
■ Nutritional support: via pharyngostomy or esophagostomy feeding tube
■ CUPs: continuous, meticulous home care to prevent plaque accumulation; dental
cleaning initially and frequently; periodontal therapy; extraction of diseased teeth
■ Underlying metabolic or other disease: treat systemic illness appropriately
■ Warn client that prognosis is guarded, response to therapy depends on underlying
cause, and prolonged treatment and/or further extractions may be necessary
■ In CUPS or LPS, any level of home care that can be provided is encouraged (brush-
ing or topical antimicrobials)
Drugs
■ Antimicrobials treat primary and secondary bacterial infections; may be used inter-
mittently between cleanings for therapeutic assistance, but the owner must be cau-
tioned that chronic use could lead to antibiotic resistance; clindamycin (1l mg/kg
per os [PO] q12h); amoxicillin-clavulanate (12.5-25 mg/kg PO q12h); tetracycline
(10-22 mg/kg PO q8h)
· Some antimicrobials may upset the gastrointestinal tract
■ Anti-inflammatory/immunosuppressive drugs: the comfort of the patient must be
weighed against potential long-term side effects of corticosteroid usage; prednisone
(0.5-1.0 mg/kg q12-24h PO, taper dosage)
· Avoid corticosteroids in patients that may already be immunocompromised (i.e..
those with FeLV or FIV)
■ Mucosal protectants for chemical insults; sucralfate (1 g/25 kg q8h PO); cimetidine
(5-10 mg/kg q8-12h PO)
■ Analgesics: postextraction; carprofen (0.5mg/kg PO q12-24h): hydrocodone
(0.22 mg/kg q8-12h)
acid; stabilized chlorine dioxide for halitosis
■
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
Procedures
■ Select extractions (partial, caudal, or full mouth): may be indicated for chronic idio-
pathic conditions (e.g., CUPS and caudal stomatitis) to remove the source of reaction
(plaque/teeth)
 Removal of entire tooth structure: important in extraction treatment for caudal
stomatitis
248
SECTION V: ACQUIRED ORAL/DENTAL DISEASES (PERIODONTAL PROBLEMS)
 Removal of necrotic/avascular bone, gingival flap closure, and broad-spectrum anti-
biotics: indicated for idiopathic osteomyelitis; monitor for recurrence
COMMENTS
 Inflammation may take 4-6 weeks to subside after extractions due to plaque reten-
tion of sutures and tongue
 Synonyms
· Ulcerative stomatitis
· Gingivostomatitis
·St. Vincent's stomatitis
· Necrotizing stomatitis
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 29
■
 Chapter 50
■ Appendix B ("Oral and Oropharyngeal Inflammation")
Abbreviations
 CUPS, chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIV, feline
immunodeficiency virus; LPS, lymphocytic-plasmacytic stomatitis; T4, thyroxine.
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE. Vterinary Dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1985.
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. The Veterinarians Companion for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO:
AAHA Press, 2000.
Manfra Maretta S, Brine E, Smith CW, et al. Idiopathic mandibular and maxillary osteomyelitis and
bone sequestra in cocker spaniels. Proceedings of the Veterinary Dental Fonum, Denver, CO, 1997.
Smith MM. Oral and salivary gland disorders. In: Ettinger SJ, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Intermal Medi-
cine, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saumders, 2000:1114-1121
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Michael Peak, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient Education Handout
available online
section
VI
Enamel and Dentin
Problems
chapter
31
Discolored Tooth/Teeth
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Any change from the norm: the normal color varies and depends on the shade,
translucency, and thickness of enamel
■  Iranslucent enamel is bluish-white; opaque enamel is grey-white
 Extrinsic: from surface accumulation of exogenous pigment
 Intrinsic: secondary to endogenous factors discoloring the underlying dentin
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Extrinsic discoloration
Bacterial stains: chromogenic bacteria give a green to black-brown to orange color
 that is usually 1 mm above the gingival margin on the tooth
 Plaque-related: a black-brown stain; usually secondary to the formation of ferric
sulfide from the interaction of bacterial ferric sulfide and iron in the saliva; plaque
on the dentition is usually white
· Foods: charcoal biscuits and similar products penetrate the pits and fissures of
the enamel; foods that contain abundant chlorophyll can produce a green
discoloration
· Gingival hemorrhage: gives a green staining; results from the breakdown of hemo-
globin into green biliverdin
· Dental restorative materials: amalgam gives a black-gray discoloration
· Medications
 Products containing iron or iodine give a black discoloration
  Those containing sulfides, silver nitrate, or manganese give a gray-to-yellow to
brown-to-black discoloration
  Those containing copper or nickel give a green discoloration
 Products containing cadmium give a yellow-to-golden brown discoloration
(e.g., 8% stannous fluoride combines with bacterial sulfides, giving a black
stain; chlorhexidine gives a yellowish-brown discoloration)
Blackwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
251
252
SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
 Figure 31-1 Extrinsic metallic staining on mandibular molar (with attrition/abrasion of crown) due to
chewing on metal objects.
· Metal
 Wear from chewing on cages or food dishes (Fig. 3l-l)
  From removed orthodontic brackets or bands
· Crown fragments: less translucency due to dehydration of fragment
· Discolored restorations
Tooth wear with dentin exposure: tertiary dentin, reparative dentin, secondary
dentin
· A calculus-covered crown ranges in color from a dark yellow to a dark brown
■ Intrinsic discoloration
· Hyperbilirubinemia: affects all teeth
 Occurs during the developmental stages of the dentition (during dentin forma-
tion) as bilirubin accumulation in the dentin occurs from excess red blood cell
breakdown
Extent of tooth discoloration depends on the length of hyperbilirubinemia (one
gives a green discoloration
· Localized red blood cell destruction, usually one tooth
  Usually follows a traumatic injury to the tooth
0 Discoloration comes from hemoglobin breakdown within the pulp from
a pulpitis and secondary release into adjacent dentinal tubules (Fig. 3l-2)
CHAPTER 31: DISC OLORED TOOTH/TEETH
253
Figure 31-2 Intrinsic staining of maxillary canine likely due to blunt trauma causing pulpitis (chronic)
-osan no sis pdnd)  on (sdnd) yud  so uos o
tion) to black (liquefactive necrosis)
D
 Blood factors that cause tooth discoloration are hemoglobin, methemoglo-
bin, hematoidin, hemosiderin, hematin, hemin, and sulfmethemoglobin
 Amelogenesis imperfecta: developmental alteration in the structure of enamel
affecting all teeth
  Teeth have a chalky appearance and a pinkish hue
 Can be a problem in the formation of the organic matrix, mineralization of the
matrix, or the maturation of the matrix
H     a   
enamel separates easily from the dentin, resulting in grayish discoloration
 Both amelogenesis imperfecta and dentinogenesis imperfecta in humans are
inherited conditions that have many modes of inheritance: X-linked dominant.
X-linked recessive, autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive
 The mode of inheritance in animals has not been studied
· Infectious agents (systemic): parvovirus, distemper virus, or any infectious agent
that causes a sustained body temperature rise; affects the formation of enamel
  A distinct line of resolution is visible on the teeth; affects all teeth if extended
insult; results in enamel hypoplasia/hypocalcification where the pitted areas
have black edges and the dentin is brownish
· Dental fluorosis: affects all teeth; excess fluoride consumption affects the matura-
tion of enamel, resulting in pits (enamel hypoplasia) with black edges; the enamel
is a lusterless, opaque white, with yellow-brown zones of discoloration
 SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
· Tooth erosion from the exposure to acids from constant vomiting results in enamel
pitting and darkened staining
· Attrition: tooth-to-tooth wear results in crown loss and reparative dentin forma
tion (yellow-brown color)
· Abrasion: tooth wear against another surface—chewing on tennis balls or due to
chronic allergies (chewing the hair/skin)—results in reparative dentin formation
(yellow-brown)
· Aging: older animals' dentition is more yellow and less translucent
 Malnutrition (generalized, vitamin D deficiency vitamin A deficiency): if severe,
this can result in demarcated opacities on the enamel
■ Internal/external resorption
 Internal resorption: follows pulpal injury (trauma) causing vascular changes with
increased oxygen tension and a decreased pH, resulting in destruction (resorption)
of the tooth from within the pulp from dentinoclasts; tooth has pinkish hue;
usually one tooth affected
 External resorption: many factors cause this, such as trauma, orthodontic treat-
ment, excessive occlusal forces, periodontal disease (as well as treatment), tumors,
and periapical inflammation; reabsorption can occur anywhere along the periodon-
tal ligament and can extend to the pulp; osteoclasts resorb the tooth structure
  Often the area is repaired by deposition of osteodentin
■ Medications and discoloration
· Tetracycline: binds to calcium, forming a calcium orthophosphate complex that
is laid down into the collagen matrix of enamel; occurs on all teeth; occurs only
when the enamel is being formed; results in a yellow-brown discoloration
 With long-term use of tetracycline drugs in mature animals, discoloration of
the tooth occurs secondarily to the involvement of the underlying secondary
dentin formation
·Amalgam (as with extrinsic stains)
· lodine/essential oils
·Macrolide antibiotic (reported in humans)
 Due to increased number of karyopcynosis of the ameloblast at the transitional
stage of development resulting in vacuolar degeneration of the ameloblast and
cystic change at maturation resulting in hypocalcification giving a white dis-
colored lesion with horizontal stripes on the enamel
·From endodontically treated teeth with the medicaments penetrating the dentinal
tubules
· Bacterial “creeping" (leakage) occurs around the margins of a restoration and are
usually blackish in color
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Discoloration of the teeth or a tooth is extremely common in all animals
■Extrinsic staining is very common, especially bacterial stains; others are less common
CHAPTER 31: DISC OLORED TOOTH/TEETH
255
 Intrinsic staining is likewise very common, especially internal and external resorp-
tion, followed by localized red blood cell destruction; the other causes are rare
■ Dog and cat
· Affects all species, breeds
· No sex predilections
 The reported age range varies: when the condition affects the maturing enamel or
dentin it can be first noted after 6 months
CLINICAL FEATURES
Abnormal coloration to tooth or teeth
Pitted enamel with staining
 Fractured tooth
Rings or lines of discoloration around tooth or teeth
■ Wear on crowns of the dentition or in selected areas as in behavioral causes (cage-
biters—distal aspects of canines are affected)
 Erosion of enamel
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
1 Calculus on the teeth
■  Normal tooth aging: increased translucence
■ Food debris
DIAGNOSTICS
■Dental radiography is extremely useful in identifying internal or external resorption,
restorative materials, or bacterial stain from coronal percolation
■ If many teeth are affected, one tooth can be extracted and sent for histological
evaluation
· Tooth or teeth are discolored; enamel and/or dentin can be pitted or broken with
staining
· Extrinsic discoloration: all stain is in the enamel or exposed dentin, otherwise the
tooth structure is normal
· Intrinsic discoloration: hyperbilirubinemia; enamel hypoplasia; lines of resolution
on the tooth; all teeth affected
·Localized red blood cell destruction: stain in dentinal tubules; pulpitis/liquefactive
necrosis of the pulp
· Internal resorption: well-circumscribed enlargement of an area of the endodontic
system with granulation tissue containing many odontoclasts
256
 SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
·External resorption: moth-eaten loss of tooth structure anywhere along the
periodontal ligament; can extend into the endodontic system; areas of tooth
resorption have granulation tissue with many osteoclasts
● Fluorosis: enamel hypoplasia; enamel hypocalcification; medications; systemic
(e.g., tetracycline has irregular matrix formation to the enamel and dentin); all
teeth affected
· Amelogenesis imperfecta: irregular formation of the enamel matrix, mineraliza-
tion, or maturation
· Dentinogenesis imperfecta: irregular formation of dentin; enamel may be
separated from the dentin
■ Iransillumination with a strong fiber-optic light can benefit the clinician by
distinguishing between a vital and a necrotic pulp
THERAPEUTICS
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
■ Extrinsic stain removal (mainly cosmetic): remove inciting cause
■ Intrinsic stain treatment: functional and pain relieving
■Synonyms
· Intrinsic staining
· Tetracycline staining
· Extrinsic staining
· Chlorhexidine staining
Procedures
■Extrinsic stain (cosmetic): internal and/or external bleaching: veneers or crowns
· Polishing the affected teeth with 3% hydrogen peroxide in pumice will help
remove mild external stains; also, good home care with plaque control will check
redevelopment of some stains (plaque, calculus, bacterial stains)
■ Intrinsic stain (functional and pain relief): possible endodontic treatment (internal
resorption and localized red blood cell destruction)
■]
 Restorative procedures such as crowns or veneers to protect both tooth and pulp
■ Extraction of affected teeth may be required, especially with external resorption
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Varies depending on the etiology but can vary from just aesthetic issues to
significant pain
CHAPTER 31: DISC OLORED TOOTH/TEETH
257
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 4
■ Chapter 18
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Small Animal Dentistry. Philadelphia: Mosby, 1993.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: James M.G. Anthony, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
32
chapter
Dental Caries (Cavities)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Caries is the decay of the dental hard tissues (enamel, cementum, and dentin) due
to the effects of oral bacteria on fermentable carbohydrates on the tooth surface
 Caries is very common in humans in Westernized societies, where diets rich in highly
refined carbohydrates are the norm
 For various reasons (e.g., diet lower in carbohydrates, higher salivary pH, lower sali-
vary amylase, conical crown shape, different indigenous oral flora), caries is not
common in the domestic dog, but it does occur and should be looked for
s, a ah    o    d s  
Reading") reported that 5.3% of dogs 1l year of age or older had one or more caries
lesions, with 52% having bilaterally symmetrical lesions
· Caries can affect the crown or roots of the teeth and is classified as pit-and-fissure.
smooth-surface, 0r root caries (Figs. 32-l and 32-2)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Dogs
 Caries is caused by oral bacteria fermenting carbohydrates on the tooth surface.
leading to the production of acids (acetic, lactic, propionic) that demineralize the
enamel and dentin, followed by digestion of the organic matrix of the tooth by
 oral bacteria and/or leukocytes
 There is a constant exchange of minerals between enamel and oral fluids; if there
is a net loss of mineral, caries develops
· Early (incipient) caries may be reversible through remineralization
· Once the protein matrix collapses, the lesion is irreversible
 Any factors that allow prolonged retention of fermentable carbohydrates and bac-
 A deep occlusal pit on the maxillary first molar is the most common place for
caries to develop (Figs. 32-3, 32-4, 32-5. and 32-6)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
258
 Figure 32-1 Clinical appearance of a caries lesion of the mesial cusp of the left lower first molar tooth of
adog.
Figure 32-2 Radiographic appearance of a caries lesion of the mesial cusp of the left lower first molar
ag oi alam yioot st fl ydeibopen aui uo spuaxa uoisal aul dind aul oi aso moy ahon bop e jo yioo1
salvaged, it would have required endodontic therapy as well as restorative work.
259
 Figure 32-3 Pink disclosing solution (indicated by arrows) used to highlight deep occlusal pits on the left
   ae       si  o e     i
them with a pit-and-fissure sealant to prevent caries development is indicated.
(a)
(b)
Buccal
Occlusal
 Pit in 
cusp
occlusaltable
FAH/97
 Figure 32-4 (a) The tooth in has no occlusal pit and is not at risk of developing caries. (b) The tooth has a
'9-ze pue 5-ze shy ui pauno se salien buidoaaap jo ysiu jeaie ie s! pue algen lesno aui uo ld daap
260
Occlusal surface
Enamel
Dentin
FAH/97
Foodtrapped inocclusalpit
Earlycariesatbottom
andearlydemineralization
ofpitthroughenamel
ofenamel
and into dentin
pe saen Ae (ubia) jaeua jo uoiezil auuap Aiea pue iid jesnpno ui padde poos (an) s-ze anne 
bottom of pit through enamel and into dentin.
FAH/97
Carles progressing
Enamelhasbeenundermined
in dentin, undermining
andhascavedin,revealing
enamel
a large caries lesion
Figure 32-6 (Left) Caries progressing in dentin, undermining enamel. (Right) Enamel has been undermined
and has caved in, revealing a large caries lesion.
261
262
SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
· Dental surfaces in close contact with an established caries are at risk of developing
a lesion
· Deep occlusal pits and developmental grooves on the crown surface predispose to
pit and fissure caries (Figs. 32-7, 32-8, and 32-9)
● Tight interdental contacts predispose to smooth-surface caries (Figs. 32-10, 32-11,
32-12, and 32-13)
· Deep periodontal pockets predispose to root caries
 Figure 32-7 Pre-op photograph of a caries lesion in the developmental groove of the fourth upper
premolar tooth in a 4.5-year-old dog
 Figure 32-8 Intra-op photograph of a caries lesion in the developmental groove of the fourth upper
 premolar tooth in a 4. 5-year-old dog.
 Figure 32-9 Post-op photograph of a caries lesion in the developmental groove of the fourth upper
premolar tooth in a 4.5-year-old dog.
 Figure 32-10 The tight interdental contact between the mandibular fourth premolar and first molar lead
to a smooth-surface caries on the mesial aspect of the first molar.
263
 Figure 32-11 Radiograph of the mandibular fourth premolar and first molar
 Figure 32-12 The lesion was much more obvious following extraction of the fourth premolar
264
(a)
 Figure 32-13 The lesion was then debrided (a) and restored (b) with a bonded composite prior to closure
of the extraction site.
265
266
SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
 Animals with poorly mineralized enamel, lower salivary pH, diets high in ferment-
able carbohydrates, and poor oral hygiene are at risk of developing caries
■Cats
·To the author's knowledge, true carious dental decay has never been described in
the domestic cat
· In the past, feline tooth resorptions were erroneously termed “feline caries" but
have a totally different etiology and pathogenesis
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Caries occurs in dogs
■ Reported in cats: feline tooth resorptions have sometimes been misnamed feline
caries but are not carious lesions at all
■ There is no known breed, age, or gender predilection
■
 Of late, the author has observed a preponderance of pit-and-fissure lesions in the
occlusal tables of the maxillary first molar teeth in large-breed dogs such as Labrador
retrievers and German shepherds
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs
■ Incipient smooth-surface caries appears as an area of dull, frosty-white enamel when
the surface is dry
Figure 32-14 A large caries lesion of the right maxillary first molar tooth. Much of the crown is missing
already: this tooth is beyond restoration and requires extraction.
CHAPTER 32: DENTAL CARIES (CAVITIES)
267
 Clinical caries appears as a structural defect on the surface of the crown or root
■
The defect is frequently filled with or lined by dark, soft necrotic dentin (Fig.
32-14)
■ Affected dentin will yield to a dental explorer and can be removed with a dental
excavator or curette
Cats
■Not applicable
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dogs
■ Crown fracture, abrasive wear, attrition with exposed tertiary dentin, or extrinsic
staining
■]
Enamel hypocalcification with exposed and stained dentin
■Sound dentin is hard and will not yield to a dental explorer, whereas carious dentin
is soft and will yield to a sharp instrument
■ Root caries may be confused with external root resorption, although the distinction
would only be academic as either usually indicates extraction
The lesion should be staged as to the depth of the pathology
 Stage l: defect involves enamel only
 Stage 2: defect extends into dentin; pulp chamber not involved
+
 Stage 3: defect extends into pulp chamber
· Stage 4: significant structure damage of crown
 Stage 5: majority of crown lost; roots remaining
Cats
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions have been misnamed feline caries in
the past
DIAGNOSTICS
 Visual examination: clean, dry tooth surface under good light and magnification
■ Exploration with a sharp dental explorer: the explorer will sink into carious dentin
and stick, providing the sensation of "tug-back" upon withdrawal
 SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
 Subgingival exploration: reveals irregularities in the root surface
■ Intraoral dental radiography: to examine the affected tooth carefully, areas of
demineralization and tissue loss will appear as lucent areas contrasted against
radiodense normal dental tissues; if the lesion has penetrated into the pulp chamber,
there will be endodontic disease and there may be periapical disease evident
radiographically
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Postoperative broad-spectrum antibiotics may be indicated if there is pulp involve-
ment necessitating endodontic treatment or extraction
■ Postoperative analgesia: indicated following endodontic or exodontic treatment or
extensive restorative work
Procedures
■ Deep pits, particularly on the occlusal surface of the maxillary first molars.
    sd      o  
development
■ Incipient caries: can be arrested and possibly reversed by application of a fluoride
varnish or fluoride-releasing dentin bonding agent and modification of the risk
factors
■ Lesions that result in mild to moderate coronal tissue loss (stage 1 or 2): remove
carious dentin and unsupported enamel, then restore the coronal anatomy with
amalgam (traditional), bonded composite restorations, or prosthetic restorations
(Fig. 32-15)
■ Lesions that extend into pulp canal (stage 3): endodontic treatment must precede
restorative treatment
■ Lesions that result in extensive coronal tissue loss (stage 4 or 5): extraction may be
the only treatment option
■ Root caries: if the periodontal disease can be managed and the restoration placed
supragingivally, restoration may be possible; however, for most teeth with root caries,
extraction will be the treatment of choice
■ If only one root of a multirooted tooth is carious: extraction of the affected root with
endodontic treatment of the remaining root(s) is also an option
■ For patients at high risk of developing more lesions in the future: application
of a pit-and-fissure sealant on remaining teeth with occlusal surfaces may be
considered
[a]
(b]
 Figure 32-15 Pre-op (a) and post-op (b) photographs of a stage 2 caries in a deep occlusal pit of the left
maxillary first molar tooth. The entrance to the lesion was just a small dark spot (indicated by an arrow) but
below this, the lesion ballooned out into the dentin.
269
270
SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■
Stage l and 2 lesions, if well debrided and restored, bear an excellent long-term
prognosis
■ For more advanced lesions, the prognosis depends on proper endodontic treatment
as well as restoration to maintain or reestablish the anatomy and strength of the
crown of the tooth
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 18
■ Chapter 34
Suggested Reading
Hale FA. Dental caries in the dog. J Vet Dent 1998;15:79-83.
Author: Fraser A. Hale, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
33
Attrition/Abrasion/Wear
of Teeth
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Attrition: physiological or pathological wear of teeth as a result of activities such as
chewing, biting, or mastication; teeth wearing against other teeth
■ Abrasion: pathological wear of a tooth due to an external source or force such as
aggressive brushing, flossing, or aggressive use of dental instruments
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1  Dogs/cats
·Attrition
 Malocclusion that results in abnormal tooth-on-tooth contact
          o
Chapter 23)
0 Class 3 (brachycephalic): maxillary incisors hit medial surface of mandibular
canines and incisors
 Chewing on objects (hard toys, sticks, rocks, etc.)
 Dermatitis (chewing on hair, skin), atopy, pruritis, excessive grooming
·Abrasion
  Aggressive brushing/hand scaling
口
 Some define abrasion as wear caused by chewing on abrasive objects, including
hair (dermatitis)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Any breed, size, or gender
■ Brachycephalic with Class 3 malocclusion or level bite
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
271
272
 SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
■In instances of malocclusions and chewing habits involving moderately coarse
■ Few show outward clinical signs, even with significant wear
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Loss of crown height and/or structure at varying levels
· Tooth edges may be chipped and rough, or with gradual attrition, crown surfaces
are flat and very smooth at times with the presence of brown reparative dentin
visible in the center (Fig. 33-1)
· With excessive or rapid attrition, the surface may be fairly flat and smooth, but
the canal might be exposed or open
  Incisor wear may be due to level bite or dermatitis
 Flat wear of canines can be due to Frisbee catching
Attrition of the distal aspect of canines (cuspid) teeth indicate attempts to chew
at wire cages or fences (cage-biters) (Fig. 33-2)
 Flat wear of rostral premolars can be due to tennis balls
 Wear/fractures of carnassial teeth are often due to chewing on hard objects
■  Each tooth must be assessed for the presence of an open canal and radiographed (see
"Diagnostics" section)
[a
 Figure 33-1 Wear/attrition on incisors (a) and on canine (b) that have reparative dentin (dark brown area)
 but no apparent canal exposure.
(b)
 Figure 33-1Continueo.
 Figure 33-2 Attrition of distal aspect of mandibular canine resulting from "cage-biting" behavior.
Reparative dentin is evident, and a more complete evaluation is warranted. It is important to modify the
behavior because these teeth are at risk of fracture with additional trauma.
273
274
 SECTION VI: ENAMEL AND DENTIN PROBLEMS
Dogs
■ Relatively more common than in cats
Cats
■ Less common in cats; usually seen in instances of excessive grooming
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Tooth fracture
■Abnormal tooth shape: microdontia
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
· Dental explorer: palpate, draw across worn tooth surfaces
 Surface may be worn and smooth, or rough due to chips, minor fractures
with brown center but solid—reparative dentin forming to protect the
retreating pulp
 Open canal: compromised pulp
Transillumination (see Chapter 3)
Shine light through teeth to evaluate pulp vitality: a vital tooth will allow light to
shine through; to be used in conjunction with other diagnostics
■Radiographs (see Chapter 4)
· Evaluate canal width: disproportionately wider canal indicative of a nonvital pulp
d    s     sd  
· If inconclusive at the time: reevaluate on a regular basis, especially if trauma
continues
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated, if a procedure is indicated
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Gradual/chronic wear with vital pulp and no canal exposure: continue to monitor
and attempt to rectify cause
· Recommend modifications to chewing habits, treat dermatitis, and so on
■ Recent/acute wear or fracture with vital pulp and no canal exposure
· Consider dentinal bonding agent to seal dentinal tubules and attempt to rectify
275
■ Extensive wear with open canal or compromised pulp
· Extraction or endodontic (root canal) therapy
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■ Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
COMMENTS
■ When enamel is worn off and dentin is exposed, reparative dentin is deposited on
the pulpal side of the exposed dentin, allowing the pulp to retreat behind a layer of
mineralized tissue
· If gradual and chronic, this can provide protection, although the quality of the
reparative dentin is variable (related to intensity and duration of stimulus)
■ Dentinal sealants may be considered in cases of acute tubule exposure
· To prevent ingression of bacteria and bacterial by-products through the open
dentinal tubules
· To decrease sensitivity and discomfort by blockage of the outward movement of
dentinal fluids through the tubules, especially if the exposed surface is treated or
dried
· Dentinal sealants provide no benefit for chronic conditions with already-formed
reparative dentin; the tooth has already formed its own barrier
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 3
■ Chapter 34
Suggested Reading
rowbridge H, Kim S, Suda H. Structure and function of the dentin and pulp complex. In: Cohen S,
Burms RC, eds. Pathways to the Pulp, 8th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2002:444.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
VII
Endodontic Disease
chapter
34
Tooth Fracture
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Traumatic tooth injuries may involve fracture of enamel, dentin, and cement or
damage to the periodontium
■ May involve the crown and root of the affected tooth
Classified as uncomplicated fractures if they do not involve pulpal exposure and
complicated fractures if the pulp is exposed by the fracture line
 American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC) Nomenclature “Dental Fracture Clas-
· Enamel infraction (El): an incomplete fracture (crack) of the enamel without loss
of tooth structure (Fig. 34-1)
· Enamel fracture (EF): a fracture with loss of crown substance confined to the
enamel (Fig. 34-2)
● Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF): a fracture of the crown that does not expose 
the pulp (Fig. 34-3)
 Complicated crown fracture (CCF): a fracture of the crown that exposes the pulp
(Fig. 34-4)
 Uncomplicated crown root fracture (UCRF): a fracture of the crown and root that
does not expose the pulp (Fig. 34-5)
· Complicated crown root fracture (CCRF): a fracture of the crown and root that
exposes the pulp (Fig. 34-6)
· Root fracture (RF): a fracture involving the root (Fig. 34-7)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Untreated pulpal exposure invariably leads to pulpitis and eventually pulpal necrosis
 and periapical pathology
■ Pulpitis and pulpal necrosis may also occur with uncomplicated fractures, particu-
larly if the fracture line is close to the pulp chamber, which exposes a large number
Blachwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentisry Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
280
SECTION VIl: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Enamel
infraction
AVD
 Figure 34-1 Enamel infraction (El): an incomplete fracture (crack) of the enamel without loss of tooth
structure. (image courtesy of AVDC Nomenciature "Dental Fracture Classification": http://avoc.org/
nomencature.html)
of wide-diameter dentinal tubules and allows communication between the pulp and
the external environment
■ Generally the result of a traumatic incident (e.g., road traffic accident, blunt blow to
the face,chewing on hard objects)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs or cats
■No breed, age, or gender predilections
CLINICAL FEATURES
Crown fractures
· Clinical loss of tooth crown substance; may affect enamel only or enamel and
dentin; fracture line may be transverse or oblique
CHAPTER 34: TOOTH FRACTURE
281
Enamel
fracture
AVDO
· Uncomplicated fractures with the fracture line close to the pulp chamber: pale
pink pulp is visible through the dentin; gentle exploring will not allow the
explorer into the pulp cavity
· In complicated crown fractures, the pulp chamber is open and readily accessed
with an explorer
· The fresh complicated fracture is associated with hemorrhage from the pulp
· Older fractures may exhibit a necrotic pulp; clinically, the pulp chamber is filled
with dark necrotic material, and the tooth is often discolored
■Root fractures
· May occur at any point along the root surface; often in combination with fracture
of the crown, but may occur in isolation
· Fracture line may be transverse or oblique; segments may remain aligned or be
displaced
· Clinical signs indicating a possible root fracture include pain on closure of the
 mouth or during open-mouth breathing
· Abnormal horizontal or vertical mobility of a periodontally sound tooth may raise
suspicion of a root fracture
282
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Uncomplicated
crown
fracture
AVD
 Figure 34-3 Uncomplicated crown fracture (UcF): a fracture of the crown that does not expose the pulp
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Crown fracture: attrition, abnormal tooth formation
■Root fracture: luxation; definitive diagnosis of root fractures is by radiography
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Radiographs are mandatory
· Intraoral radiographic technique and dental intraoral film are required
 Radiographs reveal the full extent of the lesion and allow treatment planning
 Radiographs are required for adequate performance of endodontic procedures and
monitoring treatment outcome
■Transillumination to help determine tooth vitality: shine a bright light through the
tooth (otoscope light); a vital tooth should transilluminate well
■  Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
CHAPTER 34: TOOTH FRACTURE
283
Complicated
crown
fracture
AMX
 Figure 34-4 Complicated crown fracture (CCF): a fracture of the crown that exposes the pulp. (image
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
A broad-spectrum bacteriocidal antibiotic drug for 5-7 days may be indicated, for
example, when long-standing infection is present
Procedures
■  Uncomplicated crown fractures
 Remove sharp edges with a bur and seal the exposed dentin tubules with a suit-
able liner, dentinal bonding agent or restorative material
■ Complicated crown fractures
·  All require endodontic therapy if the tooth is to be maintained; extraction is pref-
erable to no treatment at all
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Uncomplicated
crown root
fracture
AVDX
 Figure 34-5 Uncomplicated crown root fracture (UcRF): a fracture of the crown and root that does not
expose the pulp. (mage courtesy of AVDC Nomenclature "Dental Fracture Classification": http://avoc.org/
nomenciature.htm)
Mature tooth
 Recent fracture in the mature tooth with the pulp still vital: two options exist,
 partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping (vital pulpotomy) followed by
restoration or conventional root canal therapy and restoration
 For partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping to succeed, the procedure
should be carried out within hours of the injury
Tell the client at the beginning that the procedure may not be the final treat-
ment: the tooth may require standard root canal treatment later if the pulp
becomes necrotic
 When the pulp is already chronically inflamed or necrotic, standard root canal
 therapy and restoration are the treatments of choice if the tooth is periodontally
sound
Immature tooth
 A vital pulp is required for continued root development; as long as the pulp is
vital, the treatment of choice is partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping.
followed by restoration
 If the pulp is necrotic, no further root development will occur; necrotic imma-
ture teeth need endodontic treatment to be maintained; remove the necrotic
CHAPTER 34: TOOTH FRACTURE
285
Uncomplicated
crownroot
fracture
AVDC
 Figure 34-6 Complicated crown root fracture (CCRF): a fracture of the crown and root that exposes
nomencfature.html)
tissue and pack the root canal with calcium hydroxide paste; some apexogenesis
(physiological event, continued root development) and apexification (closure
formed; change the calcium hydroxide every 6 months until the apex is closed
when a standard root canal is performed
  Immature teeth may be present in the mature animal if trauma to the develop-
ing teeth caused pulp necrosis; treat such teeth as you would any immature
teeth
■Root fractures
· Treatment of crown and root fractures depends on how far below the gingival
margin the fracture line extends
· If the fracture line does not involve the pulp and does not extend more than
 4-5 mm below the gingival margin, restorative dentistry can be performed; if the
fracture extends more than 5 mm below the gingival margin and involves the pulp.
the tooth should usually be extracted
·The fracture level determines the choice of treatment for horizontal root fractures;
a fracture in the apical region carries a better prognosis than one close to the
gingival margin
286
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Root
fracture
AVUC
Figure 34-7 Root fracture (RF): a fracture involving the root. (image courtesy of AVDC Nomenclature
"Dentar Fracture Classification": http://avoc.org/nomencfature.html)
A horizontal fracture of the coronal part of the root usually mandates tooth extrac-
tion; the main exception is the lower canine, since jaw stability and strength
depend on the canine roots; if the root is periodontally sound, it must receive
endodontic treatment after removal of the coronal portion
· Horizontal midroot and apical fractures will heal if the tooth is immobilized;
horizontal root fractures can heal by means of a dentinocemental callus, a fibrous
union, or an osteofibrous union
·If the pulp of the coronal fragment becomes necrotic, the fracture will not heal;
endodontic treatment of the coronal segment is indicated; the apical segment may
be left in situ if there is no radiographic evidence of periapical pathology; if radio-
graphic evidence of periapical pathology exists, remove the apical segment
COMMENTS
radiographs after 6 and 12 months, or at intervals determined by clinical signs, to
CHAPTER 34: TOOTH FRACTURE287
detect pulp death and consequent periapical changes indicating the need for root
canal treatment
■  Check the outcome of conventional root canal therapy radiographically 6-12 months
postoperatively; evidence of periapical pathology at this time indicates the need for
further endodontic therapy or extraction of the tooth; further endodontic therapy
consists of redoing the root canal therapy, often in conjunction with surgical
endodontics
■ Check uncomplicated fractures postoperatively with radiographs at 4-6 months to
assess periapical status
■ Avoid situations in which teeth are likely to be damaged; keep animal from chewing
 on hard objects such as rocks
■ To avoid complications, institute treatment within hours of injury
■ Untreated pulpal exposure invariably leads to pulpitis and eventual pulpal necrosis
 and periapical pathology
■ Arrested development of immature teeth
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Vary with vitality of the pulp, location of the fracture, and whether the tooth is
mature or immature (see “Procedures" section for a detailed discussion)
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 33
Suggested Reading
Gorrel C. Chapter 12—emergencies. In: Gorrel RC , ed. Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner.
Saumders, 2004:131-155.
 us fo po sa s san 'a Aasso u aa son uoso ' a
Dentistry. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1995:168-181.
Author: Cecilia Gorrel, BSc, MA, Vet MB, DDS, Hon FAVD, DEVDC, MRCVS, RCVS-
Recognised and European Specialist in Veterinary Dentistry
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient Education Handout
available online
35
chapter
Tooth Root Abscess
(Apical Abscess)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■An abscess is a localized collection of pus in a cavity formed by the disintegration
of tissues
 Accumulation of inflammatory cells at the apex of a nonvital tooth: periapical abscess
(Fig. 35-1)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
ence or absence of systemic signs and symptoms
■Acute exacerbation of a chronic periapical abscess is called a phoenix abscess
■ An abscess spreads along the pathway of least resistance from the tooth apex, result-
ing in osteomyelitis if perforated through the cortical bone, a cellulitis that can result
in extension into a draining tract
● Opening through the skin to create a cutaneous sinus (Fig. 35-2)
· Opening through the alveolar mucosa, often at or apical to the mucogingival
junction
■
 Systemic spread of bacteria (bacteremia and pyemia) can affect other organ systems
■ Periodontal disease can extend to the apical region of the tooth resulting in endodon-
tic involvement (perio-endo lesion)
■Potential causes
 Any pulpal trauma
· Direct blow causing fracture of the crown of severe pulpitis and pulpal necrosis
· Defense (fighting): the canines are most commonly affected
·Chewing hard objects (e.g., bones, hooves, rocks, wood, especially with knots):
carnassials are most commonly affected
· Malocclusive trauma
·"Tugging" rags with puppies
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
288
 Figure 35-1 Collection of purulent tissue at the apex of a nonvital tooth at extraction.
 Figure 35-2 Typical appearance of infraorbital abscess with draining tract opening below the eye: likely an 
extension of apical abscess and should be fully evaluated.
289
067
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
 Previous surgical repair to an area around the dentition: bone plating for fracture
repair
· Bacteria: the pulp can be affected by bacteria from dental caries, exposed dentinal
tubules
·A deep periodontal pocket, especially at the palatal root of a small dog, can encom-
pass the apex and bacteria can enter the pulp through the apex
 Septicemia: documented in humans but not yet proven in animals
 Thermal heat resulting in pulpal necrosis: electrical cord burns
 Diabetes or Cushing's disease
·Radiation necrosis
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
■Can occur in deciduous and permanent dentition
■ Usually occurs in active animals that bite or chew a lot or chase objects (balls.
cars, etc.)
■ Can involve any tooth; canines (trauma) and carnassial teeth (iatrogenic chewing)
are most commonly affected
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Tooth is visibly broken: 90% of cases
· Malocclusive trauma where there is constant trauma to the tooth is the
exception
■ Tooth may only be cracked with pulp or near pulp exposure
■ Tooth may appear discolored
■
 Tooth is not sensitive to cold or hot liquids or foods
 Note: acute tooth fracture with pulp exposure would be sensitive
■Facial swelling:
: usually localized but can spread, resulting in a cellulitis
(Fig. 35-3)
■ Draining tract exuding purulent material
·Cutaneous: below the eye (infraorbital abscess)
 Opening through the alveolar mucosa, often at or apical to the mucogingival
junction (mucosa draining tract coronal to the mucogingival junction would likely
be periodontal in origin) (Fig. 35-4)
Facial sensitivity may be slight, but could be extensive if there is no drainage
■]
 Increased accumulation of plaque and calculus on the affected side of the mouth
■ Animal does not want to chew, especially on the affected side (plaque and calculus
may accumulate more extensively)
■Animal may be head-shy
 Figure 35-3 Infraorbital facial swelling without draining tract.
 Figure 35-4 Draining tract opening just apical to the mucogingival junction, although the tooth appears
intact. Further evaluation revealed a tooth that did not transilluminate (nonvital) and radiographs indicative of
apical bone loss. Extraction was performed.
291
292
 SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Animal may bite but will release quickly instead of holding on
 Tooth may be asymptomatic for a long time but will be affected sooner or later
■ Tooth may be clinically asymptomatic, yet nonapparent problems, such as bactere.
mia, may be occurring.
■Tooth may be sensitive to percussion
■ A deep vertical periodontal pocket may extend to the apex of the affected tooth, or
may be formed from an extension from the apical infection (endo-perio lesion)
Putrid smell
 Tooth may be loose and painful on palpation
 May have facial lymphadenitis
 Sinusitis: maxillary sinus is most commonly affected
■ Sense of smell may be affected, especially with working dogs (drug or bomb-
sniffing)
7
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Tooth resorption: radiographs show no apical lucency or abscessation
 Squamous cell carcinoma and fibrosarcoma: rapidly growing and invasive; displace
and increase mobility of the teeth
■ Cementomas: radiographically show enlarged apical roots with a thin radiolucent
zone continuous with the periodontal ligament
■Ameloblastoma: displaces and increases mobility to the teeth; slowly enlarges
Cysts: radiographs usually show a very large lytic area; can mimic apical abscesses,
and apical abscesses can become cystic (radicular cysts, apical periodontal granulo-
mas); conventional endodontic treatment is unsuccessful; primordial cyst occurs
at the site of a congenitally missing tooth and radiographically has a round oval
radiolucency with a thin radiopaque border
 Dentigerous cyst: occurs from the follicular cyst of an impacted or embedded tooth
(usually the first premolars in dogs); radiographs show a tooth within the cyst
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Complete blood count (CBC) may show a leucocytosis and/or a mild regenerative
anemia
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
■  Intraoral radiographs are a key diagnostic aid
· Demonstrates thickening of the apical periodontal ligament; ill-defined radiolu-
cency; shows bone loss at the apex as the lesion becomes chronic (Fig. 35-5)
· As the lesion progresses, radiographic lesions consistent with osteomyelitis and
cellulitis occur
· If fistulization has occurred, can place a gutta percha cone into the sinus and take
a radiograph to identify the affected tooth
CHAPTER 35: TOOTH ROOT ABSCESS (APICAL ABSCESS)
293
Figure 35-5 Appearance of periapical lucency at the distal root of right maxllary fourth premolar, with
apparent fracture of the crown noted as well.
Transillumination with a strong fiber-optic light can help the clinician by distinguish-
ing between a vital and necrotic pulp (see Chapter 3)
Therapeutic diagnostics
Surgical removal of the abscess site (surgical endodontics) or extraction
· Endodontic treatment evaluation in 6 months to a year
■Histopathologic
· Apical area has a central area of liquefaction necrosis containing disintegrating
neutrophils and cellular debris, surrounded by macrophages, lymphocytes, and
plasma cells; can see bacteria
· Chronic changes as above, but tracts lead away from the central lesion and can
be lined with epithelium; may be osteomyelitis and cellulitis lesions or the outer
portion of granulation tissue becomes fibrotic and a capsule develops (radicular
cyst and/or a periapical periodontal granuloma)
assessment
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
· Broad-spectrum antibiotic postoperatively for 7-10 days
294
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
■Analgesics preoperatively, intraoperatively, and postoperatively for 3-4 days
· If a surgical endodontic treatment or an extraction was performed, a protective
collar may be required
Procedures
■ Drainage and elimination of the focus of infection
· Extraction of the tooth involved, with curettage of the apical infected area
· Endodontic treatment of the involved tooth
· Surgical endodontic treatment of the involved tooth if the apical lesion is large
· Chronic conditions require surgical removal of the granulation tissue and curet-
tage of the tract
■ After treatment, cold packs on the area will help reduce inflammation
· Complete rest for a few days
·Give nothing hard to chew for a few days
COMMENTS
■ Recheck 10 days postoperatively
· General examination of the area; percussion to test for sensitivity, healing of the
extraction or surgical endodontic site, and integrity of the endodontic access
fillings
■ Recheck in 6 months to a year; repeat radiographs to see if the lesion has resolved
(in endodontic treatment)
■Avoid traumatic injuries (e.g., letting the dog chase cars)
· Eliminate bones, hooves, and other chewable hard objects
+
 Stop throwing rocks or wood for the dog to retrieve.
·Decrease fighting
· Curtail bite work: avoid handler sleeves that have tears or hole in them
■Check the mouth regularly for broken or discolored teeth
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 3
Suggested Reading
Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Bouguot JE. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. Philadelphia: Saun-
ders, 1995.
Author: James M.G. Anthony, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
36
Pulpitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
1 Pulpitis: inflammation of the pulp in response to stimuli; most commonly used in
reference to a tooth discolored (pink, purple to gray) by blunt trauma
· Reversible: inflammatory changes of the pulp with potential resolution
· Irreversible: significant inflammatory changes with the end result of pulpal death
and necrosis
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs/cats
Noxious stimulus to the pulp that stimulates inflammation
 Blunt trauma/concussive force.
 Thermal trauma: improper scaling. polishing. electrosurgery or cavity
preparation
 Chemical trauma: improper use of restorative material
  Ischemic insult due to apical avulsion/intrusion or thromboembolism
 Pulpal exposure due to fracture or caries with resultant bacterial colonization
 Excessive orthodontic or occlusal forces
·Pulpal edema or hemorrhage
 Intrapulpal hemorrhage apparent when blood cells or pigments enter dentinal
tubules
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
295
967
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
· Size of pulp chamber and vascularity can influence its progression and
prognosis
  Immature patient with wide canal and minor insult: may be reversible
0 Pink discoloration resolves
 Older, more constricted pulp has less capacity to accommodate swelling and
 pressure, so pulpal compromise more likely
0 Pink discoloration transforms to gray or purple as pigment in dentinal
tubules degrades
 0 92% of discolored teeth are nonvital and need treatment, despite apparently
normal radiographic findings in some (47% had radiographic evidence of
nonvitality (see Hale in the “Suggested Reading" section)
 Nonvital pulp can be contaminated with bacteria anachoretically through a
hematogenous route
  Infective pulpitis can extend into a periapical infection with bone loss
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Any age, breed, or size
· Younger patients more likely to have resolution (reversible pulpitis)
■History of facial trauma
■Aggressive chewing behavior
■ Discolored tooth
■ In small animals, there is seldom evidence of discomfort or apical drainage
 In people, acute pulpitis in a closed tooth can initially be painful due to the
pressure, until the nerve of the pulp dies
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Discoloration of tooth: pink to purple/gray; tooth often intact (Fig. 36-1)
■ Transillumination of tooth: light does not transmit through tooth—it appears dark
or dull (see Chapter 3) (Fig. 36-2)
■Radiographic signs
· Radiographic evidence is lacking in 42% of intrinsically discolored, nonvital teeth
(see Hale in the “Suggested Reading” section)
· Wider than normal pulp canal due to odontoblast death and delayed maturation
(Fig. 36-3)
● Narrowed, strictured, or obliterated pulp canal due to accelerated calcification
·  Periapical radiolucency
· Internal or external root resorption
 Figure 36-1 Discolored left maxillary canine.
 Figure 36-2 Transillumination of a nonvital tooth: this light is diffused and does not transmit well through
the tooth.
297
867
SECTION VII: ENDODONTIC DISEASE
Figure 36-3 Radiograph of discolored tooth (to right of radiograph) shows a canal wider than similar
teeth. This tooth is nonvital
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■  Intrinsic staining (usually generalized)
 Exposure to circulating substances during tooth development (tetracycline, fluo-
rosis, hyperbilirubinemia)
poietic porphyria)
 Febrile disorders during tooth development (canine distemper)
Extrinsic staining (external discoloration)
· Stained pellicle
 Various dietary, chemical, and environmental factors
DIAGNOSTICS
■  Complete oral examination
Transillumination
CHAPTER 36: PULPITIS
299
 Intraoral radiography
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
With acute episode, may consider anti-inflammatory to decrease inflammation
Procedures
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 Early pulpitis with reasonable transillumination and no radiographic changes
· Continue to monitor: radiograph in 6-9 months
· Avoid additional trauma and/or stimulus
■  Irreversible pulpitis with indication of nonvital pulp
· Extraction or endodontic therapy (root canal)
COMMENTS
■A discolored tooth (slightly pink) in a young, large dog may have a chance of resolv-
ing, but a great majority of discolored teeth are nonvital and require treatment
Expected course and Prognosis
■ Few discolored teeth are reversible, but patient prognosis is good with appropriate
treatment
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 3
■ Chapter 31
Suggested Reading
Hale FA. Localized intrinsic staining of teeth due to pulpitis and pulp necrosis in dogs. J Vet Dent
2001;18(1):14-20.
Niemiec B. Fundamentals of endodontics. In: Holmstrom SE, ed. Veterinary Clinics of North America-
Small Animal Practice: Dentistry. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders, 2005:837-888
Authors: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC; Donald Beebe, DVM
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
Neoplasia
chapter
37
Epulis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC) Nomenclature: the term “epulis" (epu-
lides) is a general term referring to a gingival mass lesion of any type
 Classically considered as tumors of nonodontogenic origin that arise from periodon-
tal connective tissue that do not metastasize
· Categories of fibromatous (FE), ossifying (OE), acanthomatous epulis (AE)
■ FE and OE have been grouped together as variants of a fibromatous category?
 FE compared to and deemed equivalent to human peripheral odontogenic fibroma
(POF)²
World Health Organization's (WHO) “Histological classification of tumors of odon-
togenic origin of domestic animals"4 describes FE
positioned stellate mesenchymal cells, smooth fibrillar collagen matrix, and regu-
larly positioned and dilated but empty blood vessels
· Commonly observed cords of odontogenic epithelium and cell-poor collagen
matrix resembling alveolar bone, cementum, or even dentin
·Benign tumors
· Recent retrospective study subdivided the WHO FE category into focal fibrous
hyperplasia (FFH) and POF based on the presence of odontogenic epithelium
 FFH: inflammatory lesion, nonneoplastic; reactive lesion resulting from irrita-
tion caused by plaque and calculus
 Dense fibrous connective tissue with mature fibroblasts widely scattered
 Foci of dystrophic calcification amid cellular fibrous tissue
 Absence of odontogenic epithelium
口
 Strands of surface epithelium often visible within the fibrous tissue
        n
· Canine FE and human POF: equivalent
 Mass of cellular, fibroblastic connective tissue separated from surface epithe-
lium by a zone of histologically normal fibrous connective tissue, often in the
Blackwells Five-Minute Vterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
304
 SECTION VIII: NEOPLASIA
form of strands of interwoven within a looser connective matrix; connective
tissue highly vascular
 Rests of odontogenic epithelium in the connective tissue vary in number
 Bone and collagenous matrix (osteoid, dentinoid, or cementum-like) present
in variable amounts
■ Acanthomatous lesions are more distinct: termed either AE or canine (peripheral)
acanthomatous ameloblastoma (CAA)
· Consists of island and cords of squamous epithelium that have invaded irregularly
through a connective tissue stroma
· Basal cells arranged in palisades, vacuolated cytoplasm with reverse polarization
 of the nuclei and surround regularly arranged sheets of squamous epithelium
· No precise human equivalent
· AE/CAA has a clear clinicopathologic, morphological and biological differences
from other categories
 Characteristic aggressive infiltrative growth of epithelial cell component in spite
 of minimal cell atypia and few mitotic figures
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ It has been suggested that the FE category develop in response to chronic
inflammation/irritation
■ Acanthomatous lesions show extremely high and rapid recurrence with a poor
prognosis
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs: fourth most common oral mass
Cats: rare
■
Most common in brachycephalic breeds
■]
 Boxers have a higher incidence of FE/fibrous changes (Fig. 37-1)
■ Fiani retrospective study (see “Suggested Reading")
·CAA: 45% (higher than other studies, but possibly based on more referral cases)
 Rostral mandible most common site (mandibular site-to-maxillary site ratio:
2.3 to 1)
Mean: 8.8 years
 Golden retriever, Akita, cocker spaniels, shelties
· POF: 31%
 Rostral maxilla (maxillary-to-mandible site ratio: 1.7 to 1)
Male-to-female ratio (1.8 to 1)
Mean: 8.5 years
CHAPTER 37: EPULIS
305
 Figure 37-1 Fibrous epulis between right mandibular fourth premolar and first molar. (mage courtesy of
Thomas Klein)
·FFH: l6% (lower than other studies)
 Rostral mandible
Mean: 9.0 years
■ History often minimal: incidental finding detected on routine physical examination
· If severe (AE, CAA): excessive salivation, halitosis, dysphagia, bloody oral dis-
charge, weight loss
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Oral mass: in early cases, may appear as small pedunculated masses
 Displacement of tooth structures due to the expansile nature of the mass (AE/CAA)
 Possible facial deformity due to asymmetry of the maxilla or mandible
■Occasionally cervical lymphadenopathy
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Fibroma
1Benign polyp
306
SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
Malignant oral tumor
■
 Gingival hyperplasia
■  Differentiated from other types of masses by excisional biopsy coupled with radio-
graphic appearance
DIAGNOSTICS
■Cytological preparations are rarely diagnostic
■ A large, deep-tissue biopsy (down to bone) is required to differentiate from other
oral malignancies: fibroma, fibrosarcoma, or low-grade fibrosarcoma
■Determine tumor borders by intraoral radiographs
 Radiographs of AE/CAA typically demonstrate significant osseous changes with
expansion into adjacent tissues
 POF/FE-OE may not have well-defined borders on radiographs; tooth structures
are usually displaced; may have ossified component (Fig. 37-2)
■ Computed tomography (CT) scan may be necessary to detail the invasiveness of an
AE/CAA
 Figure 37-2 Ossifying epulis at the lingual aspect of left mandibular first molar. (image courtesy of
Thomas Klein)
CHAPTER 37: EPULIS
307
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Efficacy of outpatient chemotherapy is unreported; most tumors of mesenchymal
origin respond poorly
· Local control (palliation) with intralesionally administered cisplatin has been
reported
· Bleomycin injected locally has been successful in treating AE
· Chemotherapy can be toxic; seek advice before initiating treatment if you are
unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs
Procedures
 FE/POF: surgical excision with at least l-cm margins is usually curative; extraction
of associated teeth and curettage of the alveolar socket may be indicated; more
advanced cases may require en bloc tooth and bone excision
■ Ossifying lesion have a bony matrix and excision is often more difficult
■ AE: because of the aggressiveness of this tumor, at least 2-cm margins are recom-
mended; partial mandibulectomy or maxillectomy is often indicated by the location
of the tumor (Fig. 37-3)
 Figure 37-3 (a) Acanthomatous epulis: a more aggressive appearance. (b) Radiograph of acanthomatous
808
 SECTION VIII: NEOPLASIA
(b)
 Figure 37-3 Continueo.
■ Radiotherapy offers long-term control in dogs with an AE deemed inoperable; most
radiotherapy plans attempt 40-60Gy over 3-6 weeks
COMMENTS
 Thorough oral, head, and neck examination regularly after treatment
■Periodic intraoral radiographs, especially for AE/CAA
Expected Course and Prognosis
■AE/CAA are highly invasive to bone
■ Good prognosis expected when excisional margins are free of neoplastic cells (i.e.,.
excision includes normal bone)
■ Mean survival time after surgery of AE is 43 months (range: 6-134 months);
mean survival times for patients with AE, OE, and FE are 52, 29, and 47 months.
respectively
■  Mean survival after radiotherapy in dogs with AE ranges from l-l02 months (median:
37 months); the 1-year survival rate is 85%; the 2-year survival rate is 67%
■ Malignant transformation of an AE has been reported in up to 20% of irradiated
patients years after treatment, suggesting that an AE may be a precancerous lesion
CHAPTER 37: EPULIS
60
Abbreviations
AE, acanthomatous epulis; CAA, canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma; CT, computed
tomography: FE, fibrous epulis; FFH, focal fibromatous hyperplasia; OE, ossifying
epulis; POF, peripheral odontogenic fibroma.
References
 1. Dubielzig RR, Goldschmidt MH, Brodey Rs. The nomenclature of periodontal epulides in dogs.
Vet Pathol 1979; 16:209-214.
2. Baker IK, Van Cruemel AA. The alimentary system. In: Jubb KVF, Kennedy PC, Palmer N, eds.
Pathology of Domestic Animals, 3rd ed., vol. 2. London, UK: Academic Press, 1985.
3. Gardner DG, Baker DD. The fibromatous epulis in dogs and the peripheral odontogenic fibroma
 4. Head KW, Cullen JM, Dubielzig RR, et al. Histological classification of tumors of odontogenic origin
of domestic animals. In: Head KW, Cullen JM, Dubielzig RR, et al., eds. Histological Classification
of Tumors of the Alimentary System of Domestic Animals (WHO). Washington, DC: Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, 2007:46-57
Suggested Reading
Bjorling DE, Chambers JN, Mahaffey EA. Surgical treatment of epulides in dogs: 25 cases (1974-1984).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:1315-1318.
            
and focal fbrous hyperplasia in dogs: 152 cases (1995-2005). JAVMA 201l;238(4):495-500.
Thrall DE. Orthovoltage radiotherapy of acanthomatous epulides in 39 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1984;184:826-829.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Yoshida K, Yanai I, Iwasaki I, et al. Clinicopathological study of canine oral epulides. J Vet Med Sti
1999;61(8):897-902
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgment: The author acknowledges the contribution of Thomas Klein, who
authored this chapter in the previous editions.
38
chapter
Melanocytic Tumors (oral)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Progressive local invasion of neoplastic melanocytes within the oral cavity of dogs
and, less commonly, cats
Arise from the oral mucosa (gingiva, palate, tongue) and may grow rapidly
 Generally a nonencapsulated, raised, pigmented or not, friable, irregular, ulcerated,
and/or necrotic surface; often invasive into bone
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs/cats
 Most common oral malignancy in dogs: third most common in cats
 Metastasis common (80% metastasis rate in dogs); typically regional lymph nodes
and lungs, but many other sites possible
· Death from local recurrence or metastatic disease
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Occurs more commonly in dogs than cats
■Median age is 10-12 years in age
■ No clear sex predilection
■ Overrepresented breeds include cocker spaniels, miniature poodles, retriever breeds.
and Chow Chows (tongue)
■Excessive salivation
■Halitosis
Blachwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
310
CHAPTER 38: MELANOCYTIC TUMORS (ORAL)
311
 Dysphagia
Bloody oral discharge
■Weight loss
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Oral mass (up to one-third are poorly pigmented)
 Loose teeth
 Facial deformity
 Occasionally, regional lymphadenomegaly
■ Pain or discomfort
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Other oral tumors
■ Epulis
Gingival hyperplasia
■Tooth root abscess
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Large, deep-tissue biopsy (down to bone): required to obtain definitive diagnosis via
 n         s 
(would compromise local control with surgery)
 Fine-needle aspiration and cytology of regional lymph node recommended to evalu-
ate for regional metastasis even if they palpate normal in size
a diagnosis, particularly if amelanotic (one-third of cases)
■ Histopathology report should include mitotic index (mitoses per 10 high-power
fields), degree of atypia/differentiation, invasiveness, and surgical margins if exci-
sional biopsy
■Imaging
· High-detail skull radiography or dental radiographs: evaluate for osteolytic
changes
· Advanced imaging such as CT or MRl: better detail (especially maxilla) and
permits therapeutic planning (surgery or radiation therapy)
· Thoracic radiographs: evaluate lungs for metastasis
· Abdominal ultrasound: to complete clinical staging, occasional distal metastasis
in abdomen
312
 SECTION VIII: NEOPLASIA
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■Chemotherapy
· Carboplatin has been described for local or systemic control of oral melanoma in
dogs, with a response rate approximating 30%; other drugs used anecdotally
include dacarbazine and lomustine
· No effective chemotherapy has been described in cats
· Intralesional cisplatin (in collagen matrix) reported to provide local control in
50% treated dogs in a pilot study
· Piroxican may plan a minor role for alleviating pain and slowing tumor
progression
 Multimodal analgesia recommended to control pain and discomfort
 Chemotherapy can be toxic; seek advice from an oncologist before initiating treat-
ment if you are unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs
■Immunotherapy
· Many immunotherapies have been attempted with varied success
· A therapeutic vaccine is available that involves the injection of human cDNA
(xenogenic) coding for a melanocyte-specific protein, tyrosinase, and result in a
robust immune response
 The tyrosinase vaccine is approved for the postoperative treatment of stage ll and
Ill oral malignant melanoma and results in improved survival times, with minimal
side effects
Procedures
 Radical en bloc surgical excision: required (e.g., mandibulectomy or maxillectomy):
well tolerated by most patients; must have margins of at least 2 cm; improved survival
when excisional margins are free of neoplastic cells
Surgical removal of the draining lymph node is recommended when metastasis is
■Radiation
 Three to six, weekly to twice weekly, largest fractions of megavoltage radiation
therapy: good response rate (75%) and may offer long-term control with inoper-
able tumors
● Early radiation side effects, such as mucositis or dermatitis, may result from hypo-
fractional protocols
COMMENTS
■ Recommend physical examination and thoracic radiographs every 2 months to
monitor for local tumor recurrence and distant metastases
CHAPTER 38: MELANOCYTIC TUMORS (ORAL)313
Expected Course and Prognosis
 Depends on staging of disease; better prognosis with stage I
Complete surgical excision (local and regional lymph node when positive) is essential
to improve the prognosis; medial survival time with surgery alone varies with stage
·
 Stage I: over 18 months
· Stage II and 1l: 5-9 months, prognosis of stage II and II canine oral melanoma is
improved to over 18 months with the adjuvant use of the recombinant xenogenic
tyrosinase vaccine
· Stage IV: less than 3 months
 Survival with radiotherapy treatment alone (dogs): 5-8 months
■ Overall prognosis in cats: poor; most tumors are locally invasive and diagnosed late
in the course of the disease; cause of death is often due to disease progression
■ Overall prognosis in cats: poor; most tumors are locally invasive and diagnosed late
in the course of the disease; cause of death is secondary to local recurrence, dyspha-
 gia, and subsequent cachexia
Suggested Reading
in five cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2004;45:91-93
Proulx DR, Ruslander DM, Dodge RK, et al. A retrospective analysis of 140 dogs with oral melanoma
treated with extermal beam radiation. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44:352-359.
Rassnick KM, Ruslander DM, Cotter SM, et al. Use of carboplatin for treatment of dogs with malignant
melanoma: 27 cases (1989-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 200l;218:1444-1448.
Williams LE, Packer RA. Association between lymph node size and metastasis in dogs with oral
malignant melanoma: 100 cases (1987-2001). JAVMA 2003;222:1234-1236.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult, 5th edition.
Author: Louis-Philippe de Lorimier, Dr. med. vet., DACVIM (Oncology)
5th edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine, Oncology)
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
dient Education Handout
available online
39
chapter
Fibrosarcoma
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Fibrosarcoma (FSA) is a mesenchymal tumor characterized by malignant spindle
cells that produce varying amounts of collagen
 In dogs, FSA is the third most common oral malignancy (20% of all oral tumors)
■  In cats, FSA is the second most common oral malignancy (5-15% or all oral tumors)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Oral FSA arises most commonly in the gingiva; the palate can be affected, but usually
due to extensive of a maxillary gingival tumor; FSA arises occasionally from the lips
or cheek, and rarely the tongue
■ Histologically low-grade, yet biologically high-grade FSAs have been described, par-
ticularly in golden retrievers and other large-breed dogs
· Initially, on histopathology, these tumors were classified as benign lesions (nodular
fasciitis, chronic inflammatory nodules, granulation tissue) or low-grade FSA
  q  a r s r 
lymph node metastasis (20%), and pulmonary metastasis (12%) is present in
affected dogs
■Dogs/cats
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
■ Overall, large-breed dogs are predisposed; golden retrievers are overrepresented spe-
cifically for the histologically low-grade but biologically high-grade FSA variant
■ No breed predilections reports in cats
■ A slight male predilection has been inconsistently reported in dogs
■ Median age: 7 years (range: 1-16 years) in dogs and 10 years (range: 1-2l years)
in cats
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
314
CHAPTER 39: FBROSARCOMA
315
■Visible mass
■Hypersalivation
■Halitosis
■Dysphagia
■ Bloody oral discharge
■ Oral pain: head-shy behavior and/or decreased food intake despite showing interest
in food
■Weight loss
CLINICAL FEATURES
A sedated or anesthetized oral examination is often helpful
A firm, smooth mass is seen most commonly
■
 The overlying mucosa usually is intact, although trauma and ulceration from the
occlusal teeth is common with larger tumors
Halitosis, hypersalivation, and/or oral bleeding
Loose or missing teeth
Difficulty or pain when opening the mouth (especially caudal tumors)
Facial deformity
Ipsilateral mandibular lymphadenopathy (reactive hyperplasia or metastasis)
 Nasal discharge, epistaxis, or decreased air flow through the nares (maxillary tumors)
DIEEERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Amelanotic melanoma
 Squamous cell carcinoma
 Acanthomatous ameloblastoma (acanthomatous epulis)
■Fibromatous or ossifying epulis
■Osteosarcoma
 Tooth root abscess
Osteomyelitis
Dentigerous cyst
 Craniomandibular osteopathy (dogs, especially West Highland white terriers, cairn
terriers, and Scottish terriers)
DIAGNOSTICS
■Histopathology is required to reach a definitive diagnosis; all tissue removed should
be submitted to the pathologist; this allows for the most accurate diagnosis and
allows for margin evaluation to assess completeness of excision
316
 SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
 Cytology or histopathology of the ipsilateral mandibular lymph node recommended
to screen for metastasis
■ Skull or dental radiographs recommended to evaluate for bone involvement (present
in 60-70%)
■ Computed tomography (CT) imaging can more accurately stage local disease and is
useful for planning surgery and/or radiation therapy, it is especially helpful for maxil-
lary tumors and large or caudal mandibular tumors
 Thoracic radiographs are recommended to screen for metastasis
 If patient in undergoing CT, concurrent imaging of the thorax is recommended as a
more sensitive way to screen for pulmonary metastasis
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Adjuvant chemotherapy is reasonable given the moderate metastatic potential or oral
FSA, although there is relatively little information regarding efficacy
· Doxorubicin-based protocols may be instituted; consult a veterinary oncologist
for current recommendations
· Do not use doxorubicin in dogs with arrhythmias or decreased myocardial func-
tion; use cautiously in cats with renal insufficiency
■  Palliative care focuses on pain control; oral analgesics are discussed below; regional
nerve blocks can also provide analgesia for up to a few weeks
■Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
· Carprofen (2mg/kg per os [PO] q12h)
· Deracoxib (1-2 mg/kg PO q24h)
● Meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg/PO q24h)
· Firocoxib (5 mg/kg PO q24h)
· Tramadol (2-5mg/kg PO q6-12h)
· Gabapentin (10-15 mg/kg PO q8-12h)
■  Empiric antibiotic therapy can be considered for secondary bacterial infections
Procedures
■ Surgical excision: removal of the mass and adjacent bone (maxillectomy or
mandibulectomy) with a margin of at least 2-3cm is recommended whenever
possible
■ If excision is incomplete, adjuvant radiation therapy is recommended to improve
local control
■ Radiation therapy can be considered as a sole local treatment modality when surgery
is not possible or declined
CHAPTER 39: FBROSARCOMA
317
COMMENTS
 Physical examination and thoracic radiographs every 2-3 months
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Most patients die or are euthanized due to local disease
■ Overall metastatic rate is 20-30% (regional lymph nodes and lungs)
■ With surgery alone, individual prognosis depends on tumor size, tumor location, and
aggressiveness of surgery, median survival is 9-12 months, but long-term control is
possible with complete excision
■Combining surgery (incomplete excision) with radiation therapy, median survival is
18 months
■ With radiation therapy alone, median progression-free survival is 45 months for
tumors 2 cm, 3l months for tumors 2-4 cm, and 7 months for tumors >4 cm
■ There is limited information for cats, but prognosis is likely more guarded due to
the difficulty of complete surgical excision
Abbreviations
CT, computed tomography; FSA, fibrosarcoma.
Suggested Reading
Coyle VJ, Garrett LD. Finding and treating oral melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma and fibrosarcoma
in dogs. Vet Med 2009;104:292-305.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult, 5th edition.
Author: Dennis B. Bailey, DVM, DACVIM (Oncology)
Consuiting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine, Oncology)
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
40
chapter
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (Gingiva)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Malignant tumor of squamous epithelium
 Rapid progression (weeks); locally invasive, highly bone-invasive (77%)
■Most common oral malignancy in cats; reportedly second most common oral malig-
nancy in dogs
■ Metastasis: rare in cats; lymph nodes most common metastatic site; approximately
10-20% metastasis in dogs (lymph nodes, lungs), lower metastatic rate for rostral
lesions
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Potential risk factors in cats include flea collars, canned food, tuna, and possibly
tobacco smoke
■ Cause of death: secondary to local recurrence, dysphagia, and subsequent cachexia
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
■Mean age (dogs and cats): 10.5 years (range: 3-15 years)
■More common in medium- and large-breed dogs
■Mass
■ Excessive salivation
■Dysphagia
■Halitosis
Blachwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
318
CHAPTER 4O: SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA (GINGIVA)
319
■Bloody oral discharge
■Weight loss
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Erythematous, ulcerated, cauliflower lesion
Rostral mandible is the most common site
Loose teeth
 Facial swelling and/or deformity
Exophthalmos
■Pain on opening jaw
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Other oral malignancy: fibrosarcoma in cats; fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma in dogs
Epulis (see Chapter 37)
Tooth root abscess (see Chapter 35)
Benign growth or polyp
Gingival hyperplasia (see Chapter 27)
■ Eosinophilic granuloma complex (see Chapter 59)
DIAGNOSTICS
 Cytological evaluation of lesion: fine-needle aspiration samples often nondiagnostic;
obtain impression smear from an incisional biopsy specimen (wedge); ulceration,
 r     n 
 Large, deep-tissue biopsy (down to bone): required to sufficiently differentiate from
other oral malignancies via histopathology
■ Cytology and/or biopsy of regional lymph nodes (mandibular, retropharyngeal)
to evaluate metastatic disease (develop in approximately 10-30% of dogs: rare
in cats)
■ Skull radiography: evaluate bone involvement deep to the mass; requires 40-50%
bone destruction before evident radiographically
 Intraoral dental radiography: may improve ability to evaluate lesion
Computed tomography (CT) scan: ideal to evaluate soft tissue extension and bone
invasion and assess regional lymph nodes prior to surgical planning
  Thoracic radiography: three views to detect pulmonary metastasis (develop in 3-36%
of dogs; rare in cats)
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
 SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
Cisplatin (dogs): 60-70 mg/m' intravenously [IV] once every 3-4 weeks for four treat-
 s  s   p p d  sd n
the localized or metastatic lesion; nephrotoxic must use with saline diuresis (l8.3 mL/
kg/h IV over 6 hours; give cisplatin after 4 hours); pretreat with antiemetic
· Never use in cats
· Do not administer cisplatin with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs);
severe renal toxicity reported in dogs
for four to five treatments
 a i    s  a i (n x 
Piroxicam (dogs): 0.3 mg/kg per os (PO) daily; may be useful to induce partial remis-
sion in some patients; dosages in cats have not been established; however, 0.3 mg/kg
PO q48h has been used anecdotally
■ Chemotherapy may be toxic; seek advice from a medical oncologist before initiating
treatment if you are unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs
Procedures
■Dogs
· Radical surgical excision: required (e.g., hemimandibulectomy); usually well toler
ated by patient; survival improves when excisional margins are free of neoplastic
cells; margins of at least 2 cm necessary
· Cryosurgery: indicated for small lesions minimally adherent to the bone
Photodynamic therapy: adjunct to surgery may be effective for local control of
small tumors; median survival 17 months in eight dogs that responded
Radiation therapy: effective for long-term control; curative-intent treatment used
alone or in combination with surgery or chemotherapy
 Chemotherapy: alone or in combination with other treatment modalities; carbo-
platin, cisplatin
· Piroxicam may have some antineoplastic effects
· Analgesics for pain control and antibiotics for secondary bacterial infection may
be indicated
■Cats
· Surgery: most tumors are nonresectable; small rostral lesions may be excised with
wide 2-3-cm margins (hemimandibulectomy); cats do not tolerate aggressive oral
surgery as well as dogs
· Palliative reatments include coarse-fraction radiation therapy (<50% response)
· Bisphosphanates: used to palliate pain associated with bone invasion
· Analgesics for pain control and antibiotics for secondary bacterial infection may
be indicated
COMMENTS
■ Recheck with thorough physical examination, lymph node evaluation, and three-
view thoracic radiographs at 1 month, then every 3 months after complete excision
adjunctive therapies
■ Postoperative complications: tumor recurrence, ptyalism, mandibular drif leading
 to malocclusion, diffculty prehending food, inability to groom
Expected Course and Prognosis
■Dogs
· Negative prognostic factors: caudal or maxillary location; >2-cm diameter, older
age, incomplete excision
· Surgical excision: median survival 15-16 months, 34 months combine with radia-
tion therapy: better outcomes with mandibulectomy than maxillectomy
survival time of >18 months
· Piroxicam: 17% response rate with a median progression-free interval of 3.5-6
months
■Cats
· Surgical excision: median survival l year for resectable tumors; adjuvant radiation
therapy may extend survival
● Palliative radiation: median survival 2-4 months; 10 months if achieve complete
remission
· Cause of death: euthanized for focal recurrence, pain, anorexia, and cachexia
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 41
■ Chapter 42
Abbreviations
SCC, squamous cell carcinoma.
Suggested Reading
DeVos JP, Bum AG, et al. Piroxicam and carboplatin as a combination treatment of canine oral non-
tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma: A pilot study and a literature review of a canine model of human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Vet Comp Oncology 2005;3(1):16-24.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult,5th edition.
Author: Jackie M. Wypij. DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)
5th edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine, Oncology)
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
41
chapter
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (Tongue)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Malignant tumor of squamous epithelium
■Rare tumor that occurs more commonly in cats than in dogs
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Cats: most common lingual neoplasia, usually located at the ventral base of the
tongue at the frenulum; most often progresses locally prior to clinical evidence of
metastasis
   o p   s s o 
by way of lymphatic vessels to regional lymph nodes and lungs (37-43% at
examination)
■ Potential increased risk of feline oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) associated with
flea collars, canned food (particularly tuna), and possibly exposure to tobacco smoke
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Cats: middle-aged or old (>7 years)
 Dogs: average 10-ll years
· Females more commonly affected
· Large breeds more commonly affected, especially poodles, Labrador retrievers,
Samoyeds
■Excessive salivation ulceration
■Halitosis
 Dysphagia or difficulty prehending food
 Bloody oral discharge
■ Decreased appetite
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
322
CHAPTER 41: SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA (TONGUE)
323
■Weight loss
■Poor grooming (cats)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Incidental
 Tongue mass: may be small, white, cauliflower-like, nodular lesions with a broad
base on examination
■ Facial swelling or deformity
 Intramandibular swelling (cats)
 Cervical lymphadenomegaly: occasionally
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Other lingual malignancy (melanoma, sarcoma)
Trauma
■ Ulcerative glossitis
■ Benign lesion (papilloma)
■Infection/abscess
DIAGNOSTICS
■  Thorough physical examination of the cervical region to detect lymphadenomegaly
(mandibular and retropharyngeal nodes) with cytology and/or lymph node biopsy
to evaluate for metastasis; more common in dogs
 Cytology: impression smear obtained from an incisional biopsy specimen (wedge);
may yield diagnosis; however, ulceration, inflammation, and secondary infections
may limit diagnostic utility
■Deep-tissue biopsy: necessary for definitive diagnosis
■
 Skull radiography: of limited utility as bone involvement is rare
Thoracic radiographs: three views required to evaluate lungs for metastasis (usually
nodular); more common in dogs
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Chemotherapy: no effective agents available for local or systemic control; chemo-
therapy agents useful in oral SCC have been used anecdotally for lingual SCC
324
 SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
●Piroxicam (dog): 0.3 mg/kg per os (PO) q24h
  Dosages have not been established for cats; however, 0.3 mg/kg has been used
anecdotally
· Chemotherapy may be toxic; seek advice from a medical oncologist before
initiating treatment if you are unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs
Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Procedures
    s      s  
ranted; function of the tongue after recuperation is usually acceptable
■ Postsurgical care (e.g.、 esophagostomy or gastrotomy tube) by owner often
required
■ Partial glossectomy: may be performed on the rostral half (mobile tongue) or
longitudinal half of the tongue (40-60% removed); more than 50% of patients have
incomplete surgical margins
 Subtotal glossectomy may be considered in select cases
■ Other surgical methods (e.g., electrocautery and cryosurgery) do not offer any
 additional advantage to conventional excision
■ Cervical lymphadenectomy: rarely curative, perform only for diagnosis or before
adjuvant therapy
 Response to radiotherapy: poor (<7 weeks); may be used adjunctively on microscopic
disease postoperatively
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
Prognosis: grave, owing to extensive local disease (cat) and moderate rate of metas-
tasis (dog)
 Survival after surgical excision (dogs): <25% survive after l year
■Negative prognostic factors (dogs)
· Caudal location, incomplete excision, recurrence, larger size
· Histological grade (grade I tumors medical survival 15 months compared with
grade II-Ill tumors, median survival 3-4 months)
■ Piroxicam: 17% response rate in oral SCC with a median progression-free interval of
   s n i  sd o  s
■ Prognosis in cats similar to other oral sites of SCC
■ Cause of death: secondary to local recurrence, dysphagia, and subsequent cachexia
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 40
■ Chapter 42
CHAPTER 41: SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA (TONGUE)
325
Abbreviations
SCC, squamous cell carcinoma.
Suggested Reading
Z  so n jo aa aasa  sag 's a f sog i as
dogs: 1999-2005. JAAHA 2008;44(6):308-319.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult, 5th edition.
Author: Jackie M. Wypij, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)
5th edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine, Oncology)
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
42
chapter
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (Tonsil)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
a ss sou po s aq   ansd  p 
arising from the tonsillar fossa into tonsillar lymphoid tissue
sn po s jo %o sso   sp u u a 
 Highly locally invasive into soft tissues
■Early metastasis; considered systemic at diagnosis as 70-90% eventually metastasize
regardless of local control (lymph nodes, lungs, other distant organs)
Commonly unilateral; may be bilateral
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Middle-aged or old (range: 2.5-17 years) dogs and cats
■
 No known breed or sex predilection
■
Exact cause unknown; however, l0 times more common in animals living in an urban
environment than in those living in a rural environment
■ Excessive salivation
■Halitosis
■Dysphagia
■Bloody oral discharge
■Weight loss
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Abnormally large tonsil (oral mass)
■
 Cervical lymphadenomegaly possible
■Pain upon opening jaw
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
326
CHAPTER 42: SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA (TONSIL)
327
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Abscess
 Salivary gland tumor
 Metastatic neoplasm (oral melanoma, sarcoma)
Tonsillitis
 Tonsillar crypt foreign body
 Salivary gland tumor
■Mast cell tumor
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Thorough physical examination of the cervical region: detect abnormally large.
regional lymph nodes (e.g., mandibular and retropharyngeal)
Cytological evaluation of lesion
· Fine-needle aspiration samples often nondiagnostic
· Obtain impression smear obtained from an incisional biopsy specimen (wedge):
ulceration, inflammation, and secondary infection may limit diagnostic utility
■ Large, deep-tissue biopsy: required to sufficiently differentiate from other oral
malignancies
■ Skull radiography: rarely demonstrates bone involvement deep to the mass
■ Thoracic radiography: three views to detect lung metastasis; 10-20% positive for
metastasis at presentation; 60-85% metastasis at death
■ Computed tomography (CT) scan: evaluate local extension of primary tumor as well
as mandibular and retropharyngeal lymph node involvement; recommended prior to
surgical or radiation therapy planning
■ Abdominal ultrasonography: evaluate abdominal organs; in dogs 20% disseminated
metastasis to multiple organs at death
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Chemotherapy: anecdotal reports of cisplatin or bleomycin having been used with
limited success
· Cisplatin (dogs): 60-60mg/m² intravenously (IV) once every 3-4 weeks for four
treatments; provides marked palliation of clinical signs; response depends on
severity of the localized or metastatic lesion; nephrotoxic—must use with saline
328
 SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
diuresis (18.3 mL/kg/h IV over 6 hours; give cisplatin after 4 hours): pretreat with
an antiemetic
 Never use in cats
 Do not administer cisplatin with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs); severe renal toxicity reported in dogs
● Carboplatin: dogs 300 mg/m² IV every 3 weeks; cats 200-250 mg/m² IV every 3-4
weeks for four to five treatments
● Piroxicam (dogs): 0.3 mg/kg per os (PO) q24h; dosages in cats have not been well
established; however, 0.3 mg/kg PO q48h has been used anecdotally
Doxorubicin: dogs >10kg, 30mg/m² IV; dogs <10kg, 1 mg/kg once every 2-3
weeks for five treatments
■ Chemotherapy may be toxic; seek advice from a medical oncologist before initiating
 treatment if you are unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs
Procedures
■ Surgery: most are inoperable; aggressive excision may be warranted in patients with
airway obstruction; tonsillectomy, when done, should be bilateral
n o  o  (  )   
 Other surgical methods (e.g., electrocautery and cryosurgery): no advantage over
conventional excision
 Postoperative complications: tumor recurrence; may need feeding tubes postopera-
tively, especially cats (long term), may need soft foods to minimize ulceration and
after oral surgery
■ Cervical lymphadenectomy: rarely curative; perform only for diagnosis or before
adjuvant therapy
■ Regional radiation therapy
COMMENTS
■ Most patients euthanized within months for local progression or metastasis; patients
with curative-intent therapies should be rechecked with physical examination and
evaluation for metastasis at l month, then every 3 months
■ Local regrowth may be assessed by serial CT scans
Expected course and Prognosis
■  Prognosis: grave owing to extensive local disease and high rate of recurrence (tongue,
pharynx, lymph nodes) and metastasis; few patients survive >6 months after
diagnosis
■ Surgery (dogs): median survival 2 months, <10% l-year survival rate
■ Surgery and radiation therapy (dogs): median survival 1l0 days, 22% 1-year survival
rate
 sn a  :(so  p  
CHAPTER 42: SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA (TONSIL)  329
 Surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy (dogs): median survival 270 days
■ Regional radiotherapy: 75% local control rare, partial responses observed (25-63 Gy)
and palliation of signs (3-9 months)
■ Systemic chemotherapy (dogs): survival 60-130 days
■ Piroxicam has a 17% response rate in oral squamous cell carcinoma with a median
 progression-free interval of 3.5-6 months; three of five dogs with tonsillar squamous
cell carcinoma exhibiting a partial remission or stable disease
■ Minimal information in cats; however, appear to carry a grave prognosis
See also the following chapters:
■Chapter 40
■Chapter 41
Abbreviations
CT, computed tomography; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma
Suggested Reading
cell carcinoma—a case series of five dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47(4):216-220.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Five-Minute
Veterinary Consuit, 5th edition.
Author: Jackie M. Wypij, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Oncology)
Consuiting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine, Oncology)
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
43
chapter
Odontoma
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Odontoma: oral mass that arises from odontogenic epithelial and mesenchymal
origin
·Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma (AFO) (formerly ameloblastic odontoma): radiolu-
 cent mass with osteolysis and varying amounts of intralesional mineralization
 Complex odontoma: radiodense mass with fully differentiated dental components
(more organized than AFO), but unorganized at the cellular level with no tooth-
like structures
 Compound odontoma: mass with fully differentiated dental components resulting
in the presence of denticles (toothlike structures; see “Clinical Features" section)
■ Hamartoma: proliferation of normal cellular components with an abnormal
organization—not a true neoplasm (applicable to complex and compound odontoma
types)
   e nu   s  n  di    
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Dogs/cats
·AFO
 Mixed odontogenic tumor with differentiation of odontoblasts, ameloblasts,
and cementoblasts embedded in cellular mesenchymal tissue
 Reciprocal inductive interaction of epithelial and mesenchymal tissues
 World Health Organization (WHO) classification as a benign neoplasm with
 possible reoccurrence
 Complex odontoma
 Inductive processes resulting in dental components but not fully organized
· Compound odontoma
 Differentiation of dental components into varying levels of organization—
denticles
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
330
CHAPTER 43: ODONTOMA
331
 Figure 43-1 Expansile mass on right mandible of dog with displacement of permanent teeth
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Typically found in young animals
 Oral swelling or mass (Fig. 43-1)
■ Delayed deciduous tooth exfoliation or delayed or abnormal tooth eruption at site
CLINICAL FEATURES
■AFO
· Most lesions are radiolucent with single or multiple (multilocular) expansile
lesions of irregular configurations of dental components
· Some lesions are associated with impacted teeth
● Neoplastic mechanism: may recur (WHO—benign neoplasm)
■ Complex
 Disorganized tissues within a thin, fibrous capsule
· Radiographically, often a radial structure of hard tissue particles inside a radiolu-
cent zone, embedded in the maxilla or mandible
· Erupted teeth in that area may allow for communication between the odontoma
and oral cavity, with a potential for bacterial contamination and infection
332
SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
 Figure 43-2 Presence of denticles between the right maxillary fourth premolar and first molar indicate the
 probability of compound odontoma
Compound
· The presence of denticles is pathognomonic (Fig. 43-2)
 Small, rudimentary teeth with crown formed, but the roots are often misshapen
(dilacerated) (Fig. 43-3)
Denticles often associated with radiolucency
 May be embedded or have some extent of eruption
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Infection
■Foreign body
■ Other oral masses
·Ameloblastic fibroma: similar to AFO but would contain no hard tissue
· Calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (CEOT)
 Osteolysis but not mineralization or dental (mesenchymal) aspect
Slow, not inductive, noninvasive
·Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumor (APOT)
 Similar to CEOT, but amyloid is produced in APOT
 Shares biological features with ameloblastoma
 Peripheral odontoma (four human cases diagnosed)
  Develops in gingiva or alveolar mucosa with no attachment to bone
 Associated with impacted or retained teeth
 Similar to erupted odontoma
(a)
(b]
Figure 43-3 (a) Radiograph of lesion in Fig. 43-1: caudal mandible with evidence of hard tissue particles
and denticles. (b) Radiograph of lesion in Fig. 43-1: mid-mandible.
EEE
334
SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
■ Figure 43-4 Radiograph of oral mass in the right maxilla with presence of denticles and
unerupted canine.
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
Intraoral radiography (Fig. 43-4)
■Histopathology
■ Advanced imaging typically not warranted
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■
■AFO
· More aggressive excision may be necessary due to neoplastic classification
· Monitor for local recurrence
■ Complex and compound odontoma
 Enucleation and intracapsular excision with aggressive debridement of cyst walls
(Fig. 43-5)
· More aggressive surgical excision can decrease the chance of recurrence
· No chemotherapeutic regimens recommended
· Rarely, radiotherapy may be beneficial by treating microscopically recurring disease
CHAPTER 43: ODONTOMA
335
Figure 43-5 Surgical excision of lesion in Fig. 43-1: numerous hard tissue particles and denticles
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ AFO: fair to guarded prognosis, as there is a chance of recurrence
 Complex and compound odontoma: short- and long-term prognosis good with ade-
quate therapy
Abbreviations
AFO, ameloblastic fibro-odontoma; APOT, amyloid-producing odontogenic tumor;
CEOT, calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor; WHO, World Health Organization.
Suggested Reading
Felizzola C, et al. Compound odontoma in three dogs. J Vet Dent 2003;20(2):79.
Sowers J, Gengler W. Diagnosis and treatment of maxillary compound odontoma. J Vet Dent
2005;21(1):26
Walker KS, Lewis JR, Durham AC, Reiter AM. Diagnostic imaging in dental practice. Odontoma and
impacted premolar. JAVMA 2009;235(11):1279-1281.
Authors: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC; Matthew Lemmons, DVM
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
44
chapter
Tumors of Lesser
Prevalence
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ A variety of less common oral tumors may be diagnosed in dogs and cats
 Any abnormal mass or inflamed lesion should be evaluated
■ This chapter contains a compilation of information about various tumors (see
Table 44-1)
·  This information was selected from chapters in the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult,
5th edition (topics and authors listed at the end of this chapter)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■  Variable appearance and biological characteristics of tumors
■ Incidence and/or extent of malignancy varies according to tumor type 
· Lesion, lymph nodes, and potential distant sites of metastases should be staged
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Most oral tumors are detected in middle- to advanced-aged patients
 Undifferentiated malignant tumor may be found in large-breed dogs under 2 years
of age
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Location and appearance of tumor often dependent on cell type (i.e., muscle cell
derivative)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry,Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
336
Con tinued
eingipuew
dentigerous cysts;
 Differential DX 
 ameloblastoma
osteochondro-
osteop athy:
EJ
Rad/Chemo TX
cispla tin (dogs
stabilize tumor
anisuodsai
Rad: primary
matrix, may
DIOJDUOU
effective
leseu
ize
because of local
Radical excision:
Radical excision:
improves
with 2-3-cm
ineffective
metastasis
with clean
Treatment
control
Thoracic radiographs for
required to
differentiate from
 Skull radiographs
ignancies
 Diagnostics
sutticiently
other oral
Skull, dental
00Sy
(auog
I :NT
mes
JQneUIU
Metastasize!
is 15-30%;
have
euth
 Slow to
Local
ymphadenopathy
bupnpoid jowm
nonencapsulated
ulcerate;
invasion; slowly
Characteristic
Common
Malignant,
surface
TABLE 44-1 Tumors of Lesser Prevalence
 Signalment
(mandible)
20
pu 11
young dogs
mandible
Location
Maxilla or 
10U)
malignant
tumor
Tumor
337
myoblastoma
sew woua
Differential DX 
malignant 
la
Rad/Chemo TX
tumors
specific
 Partial glossectomy
40-60% is well 
tolerated in 
eostomy
Treatment
g
aspirate occasionally
differentiate striated
eoplasm; usually
does not afford a
form other spindle
chymal
markers may
cell neoplasms
 Diagnostics
e 515a66ns
oaua
aspirate
5sa66ns
defiai
! pue
Cytol
mes
sau
primary muscle
metastasis to
(multiple
Local
localized swelling
(adult variety) or
Characteristic
embryoni
 predilection 
 Juvenile variety:
 Signalment 
 sex or
to old
TABLE 44-1 (Continued)
common)
Location
Rhabdomyoma
338
 Epulis; malignant oral
 Other round cell
mast cell tumor
TVT: poorly
melanoma
tumor;
tumors:
 Radiation therapy
disfigurement
associated with
umor mass,
palenInag
may be
surger
 u! znsau
AIky
ensure complete
Aggressive surgical
Radical surgical
casionally
margins to
excision:
exCIsIOn
excision
invasive
XEU
often show bone lysis
la
punou isisofueyosiue
not
Fine-needle aspirate
deep to the
Aessanau
ar1iso
112
malignant
invasive) form 
subtypes exist
tumors are
possess
histological 
ertie
behavior
locally 
(highly
but p
e
snQ
plasmacytoma or
multiple myeloma
sseous
 smooth, firm
 nonulcerated
metastasis of
Oral tumor of
abe ueaw
cats
plo pue
.5
Aew sJownl 
dental 
arcade
arise
tar
3
!05
mucocutaneous
Ameloblastoma
Plasmacytoma,
340
SEC TION VII: NEOPLASIA
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Other oral tumors
■ Infections lesions: bacterial; fungal
DIAGNOSTICS
■
 Histopathologic analysis of biopsy: incisional or excisional
■]
 Intraoral radiography to assess extent of osseous involvement
■ Assessment of potentially involved lymph nodes
THERAPEUTICS
 See Table 44-1 listing individual tumor types for highlights of therapeutic options
See topics listed below for further details (from the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult
5th edition)
· These topics will list additional references
COMMENTS
■ Early detection, diagnosis, and appropriate therapy are essential
See also the following:
Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 3rd edition
deLorimier L-P: "Oral Cavity Tumors, Undifferentiated Malignant Tumors"
■]
Bailey DB: "Chondrosarcoma, Oral"
Mutsaers AJ: "Rhabdomyoma"
■ Mutsaers AJ: “Rhabdomyosarcoma"
■
Morrison WB: “Ameloblastoma'
■Morrison WB:“Plasmacytoma,Mucocutaneous"
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
45
Papillomatosis (oral)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Cutaneous and mucous membrane lesions of dogs and cats caused by papillomavi-
ruses (PVs)
1Warts or verrucae most common
 Viral plaques, sometimes progressing to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) or invasive
carcinoma, recognized in dogs and cats
■ Bowenoid in situ carcinoma (BIsC) most common PV in cats
■ Most verrucae of dogs are exophytic; raised or inverted
1 papillomas not
uncommon
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Oral verrucae in naive dogs and recovered animals immune
 Dogs: cutaneous papillomas thought to involve cell-mediated immunologic defects
 Older and immunosuppressed cats develop plaques or BISC
■ Canine plaques: genetic basis in some breeds
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Dogs
· TIwo genetic virus types with at least six strains and six syndromes
 Young dogs with footpad lesions
 Discrete pigmented papules, plaques, nodules in young adult dogs
· Miniature schnauzer, pug: pigmented plaque
+
 Oral, ocular, and genital papillomas generally in young dogs
· Cutaneous papillomas at any age
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
341
342
SEC TION VIII: NEOPLASIA
Cats
More common in older cats; associated with being immunocompromised (e.g..
feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV])
·Cutaneous lesions
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Dogs
· Cutaneous papilloma often pedunculated, consisting of fronds of epithelium, up
to 1 cm in diameter and located anywhere
 Oral papillomas in young dogs involve lips, gums, tongue, palate, oropharynx,
and esophagus; interfere with prehension and swallowing: trauma results in severe
halitosis and ptyalism (Fig. 45-1)
 Lesions may be confined to genital or eyelid regions
 Inverted papillomas less common and often on ventral abdomen, up to 2 cm, and
have a central pore
· Canine plaque most often seen in miniature schnauzer and pug: rarely transform
to SCC; ventral abdomen and inner thigh regions often involved
 Figure 45-1 Oral papilloma on the palate of a young dog. (mage courtesy of Dr. Larry Baker)
CHAPTER 45: PAPILLOMATOSIS (ORAL)
343
Cats
 Exophytic papillomas exceedingly rare; more common are simple pigmented
plaques, which may progress to BIsC or to invasive carcinoma
+Cats often 10 years or older; may have other systemic disease causing immuno-
suppression (e.g.,FIV)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Dogs: oral cavity and oropharynx
 Fibromatous epulis
· Transmissible venereal tumor
· If ulcerated, SCC
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Oral papillomatosis
 Gross appearance typical appearance; biopsy confirms the diagnosis
+
 Cutaneous verrucae and plaques in dogs and cats require histopathology
 Immunohistochemistry demonstrates viral antigens within the lesions; polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) not as definitive
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Systemic corticosteroids: withdraw if severe or persistent oral or cutaneous disease
recurs
■ Persistent disease (dogs): may treat with autovaccination; use heat-inactivated
autogenous vaccine; treatment controversial
■ Cats: diagnosis for visceral disease or causes of immunosuppression; interferon or
imiquimod (Aldara, Medicis, Scottsdale, AZ) therapy for plaques and BISC
 Interferon (IFN-w): 1 MU/kg subcutaneously three times per week for 4 weeks
Procedures
■ Most lesions generally regress spontaneously (especially oral forms)
 n :(sa  Xs ix)   non n  
being occluded; patient is unable to eat comfortably; aesthetic reasons
344SECTION VII: NEOPLASIA
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
COMMENTS
■
Separate dogs with oral papillomatosis from susceptible animals
■ Commercial kennels with outbreaks of oral papillomatosis: may consider use of
autogenous vaccines
■ Live canine oral PV vaccine: reported to induce hyperplastic epithelial tumors and
SCC at vaccination sites; latency period 1l-34 months
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Dogs: prognosis usually good; incubation period 1-8 weeks
· Regression usually occurs at 1-5 months; lesions may persist for 24 months
or more
■ Cats: long-term prognosis for plaques and BIsC depends largely on concurrent
disease
Abbreviations
BISC, Bowenoid in situ carcinoma; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIV, feline immunode-
ficiency virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PV, papillomavirus; SCC, squamous cell
carcinoma.
Suggested Reading
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walder EM, Affolter VK. Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd ed. Oxford:
Blackwell Science, 2005.
Sumdberg JP Papillomaviruses. In: Castro AE, Heuscele WP, eds. Vterinary Diagnostic Virology
St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1992:148-150.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Blackwells
Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 5th edition.
Author: Elizabeth R. May, DVM, DACVD
Consulting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline)
5th edition): Alexander H. Werner, VMD, DACVD
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgments: The author acknowledges the contribution of Edward G Clark and
Suzette M LeClerc, who authored this chapter in the previous edition.
section
IX
chapter
46
Maxillary and
Mandibular Fractures
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Factures of the mandible, maxilla, and associated structures are classified as to location,
severity (tooth involvement, soft tissue tears, and type of bone fracture), and effects of
the muscles of mastication on reduction.
Effects of the Muscles of Mastication
The muscles closing the mouth typically help to reduce factures against the opposing
jaws, unless they are also seriously involved. The muscles opening the mouth (primarily
the digastricus) may reduce or displace a fracture (Fig. 46-l).
 Favorable: fracture reduced by muscles of mastication
Nonfavorable: fracture displaced by muscles of mastication
Classification of Symphyseal Injury
■ Iype I: separation, no break in soft tissue
 Type Il: separation, break in soft tissue
■ Type Ill: separation, break in soft tissues and comminution of bone; broken teeth
not unusual
Teeth involved should be addressed and may be maintained during the bone healing
process (i.e., endodontics or restoration), when possible. If required, they are extracted
following bone healing. Occasionally teeth may need extraction prior to fracture repair,
 but this may contribute to instability of the fracture line and affect attachment of splint
materials.
Classification of Jaw Fractures by Location
 A: central incisors (mesial midline) to canine teeth (mandibular symphyseal separa-
tion is common secondary to trauma in young cats)
· Note: mandibular symphyseal laxity is a common finding in cats and small dogs
■ B: from canine to second premolar
C: second premolar to first molar (carnassial tooth)
Blackwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
347
348
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
Muscle forces that
close the jaw
Favorable
fracture line
 Muscle forces that
(a)
open the jaw
 Muscle forces that
close the jaw
Unfavorable
fracture line
Muscle forces that
open the jaw
(b)
 Figure 46-1 llustration comparing favorable (a) and nonfavorable (b) mandibular fractures. (Courtesy of
Dr. Robert Wiggs)
D: from first molar to the angle of the mandible
 E: angle of the mandible
F: coronoid process
G: condylar process
■
H: midline palate
■
 1: nonmidline palate
 J: massive or combination of fractures
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
Injury trauma, and predisposing factors
■]
Risk factors
 High-risk environment or temperament (for injury)
 Oral infections: may predispose to weaker jaws more prone to injury (i.e., osteo-
myelitis, periodontal disease)
· Neoplasia: may predispose to weaker jaws more prone to injury
·Metabolic diseases: certain metabolic diseases may predispose to weaker jaws more
prone injury
CHAPTER 46: MAXILLARY AND MANDIBULAR FRACTURES
349
 Traumatic injury affecting the jaws or teeth
· Congenital or hereditary factors resulting in weakened or deformed jaw bone
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Can occur in dogs or cats
■
No sex predilection
No specific age predilection
■ No breed predilection
CLINICAL FEATURES
1Vary greatly according to the location, type, extent (see above), cause, and underlying
risk factors resulting in the injury
■ Not uncommon to also have facial deformity, malocclusion, fractured teeth, oral or
nasal bleeding, and inability to properly close the jaw
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Based on visualization, palpation, and radiographic findings
 Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) conditions (see Chapter 47)
·Dislocations
·Dysplasia
·Fractures
· Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO) (see Chapter 13)
·Ankylosis
· Flaring of the coronoid process
 Tooth subluxation/luxation (interference with jaw closure) (see Chapter 48)
Endodontic disease (tooth abscess, etc.)
 Foreign body lodge in or near the oral cavity
■Maxillary or mandibular nerve injury or disease
■]
 Eosinophilic myositis
■Neoplasia
DIAGNOSTICS
 As required to assess and treat shock from initial injury
 As required to assess animal prior to surgery
■ Oral exam
■Imaging
350
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
 Figure 46-2 Extraoral radiograph: good for survey films but lacks the detail of intraoral films
 Intraoral radiographs
·Extraoral radiographs (Fig. 46-2)
· Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MR1)
■Neurological exam
■Biopsy with histopathology if indicated
■ A through and complete physical examination is very important in traumatic jaw injuries
as many unseen or multiple injuries and complications are possible
THERAPEUTICS
Based on type of fracture, available equipment, supplies, and the doctors knowledge.
comfort level, and experience. Treatment selection is based also on four major points:
1. Reduce fracture, reasonable contact of fracture ends, if possible
2. Reestablishment of natural occlusion, if possible
3. Stabilization sufficient for proper healing
4. Salvage condition (nonrepairable or nonstabilizable condition)
Typical Types of Treatments for Classes of Fractures
■  Interarch stabilization (typically for classes D, E, F G, and J)
· Tape muzzle
·Cross-arch wiring
CHAPTER 46: MAXILLARY AND MANDIBULAR FRACTURES
351
 Composite fixation of cross-arch teeth (sometimes used in combination with
dental pins)
■ Intra-arch stabilization (typically for classes H and 1)
· Pin and wire combination
·Dental wiring
· Acrylic or composite splint
■Intraoral stabilization with splint: composite or acrylic splint (typically for classes A,
B, C, H, I, and J)
■  Intraoral stabilization with wire (typically for classes A, B, C, H, I, and J)
· Interdental wiring: ivy loop, Stout's multiple loop, Essig technique, and Risdon
wiring technique
· Dental wiring: circumdental used for anchorage for composite and acrylic splints
(pigtails, cerclage, or twists)
· Osseous wiring: circumferential, transosseous, transcircumferential
■ Internal fixation (for most classes of fractures, but must be used selectively with
consideration of teeth and roots): orthopedic wire, plates, screws
■ External fixation (for most classes of fractures, but must be used selectively
with consideration of teeth and roots): intramedulary (IM) pins with bars (stainless
steel or carbon) or tubing (Penrose or other tubing) reinforced with composite
or acrylic
■Combination of fixations (most classes of fractures)
■ Salvage surgery condition (typically for class J fractures)
· Condylectomy: nonrepairable factures of the IMJ
· Cheiloplasty: salvage procedure to maintain reasonable mandible support in
certain nonunion conditions
· Rostral (or other) mandibulectomy: used in certain nonunion or massive injury
conditions
Drugs
■  Pain management (see Chapter 9)
·Local anesthesia
 Intraoral local blocks
 Regional nerve blocks: mental nerve, mandibular nerve, infraorbital nerve,
maxillary nerve
· Injectables: butorphanol tartrate, buprenorphine, nalbuphine
· Patches: fentanyl
· Oral: carprofen, butorphanol tartrate, hydrocodone, and so on
■ Antibiotics: broad spectrum based on history health, and chemistry profile if deemed
appropriate
Procedures
A few basic treatments are presented. However, many treatments are beyond the
scope of this material and can be explored in the reading list. As with all fractures, the
352
 SEC TION IX: TRAUMA
objectives of fracture reduction, reestablishment of normal occlusion and appropriate
stabilization for the fracture, should be paramount. Any teeth that are or that became
nonvital will need eventual endodontics (root canal therapy) or extraction once the
fracture and jaw are stable.
■ Warning: Acrylics give vapors that can be hazardous and should be used in well
ventilated areas. In addition, acrylics generate heat during the thermochemical reac-
tion during setting. Therefore, acrylics with a low thermal rating should be used
when applied directly to the teeth. Otherwise, thermal injury to teeth may result in
pulpitis that may be reversible or occasionally nonreversible resulting in the teeth
becoming nonvital.
● If acrylics are used, place the powder and liquid in a salt-and-pepper fashion in
small increments to avoid hyperthermic reactions, until the desired shape and
density of splint is attained
· Finish and smooth with acrylic bur on high-speed handpiece.
Acrylic or composite splint: The use of acrylic is inexpensive, easy to obtain, and
(i.e., ProtempTM GarantTM , 3M ESPE, Pomona, CA) are generally easier to work with,
have little exothermal reaction, have less odor hazards, and is this author's preference
and is the procedure described here.
·The animal must be intubated. It may be preferred to place a pharyngostomy tube.
· Cleanse the oral cavity with an oral chlorhexidine solution.
· Inject local anesthesia appropriately.
· Assess the fracture by visual, palpation, and radiographic means.
+
 Soft tissue laceration of injuries should be appropriately cleansed and sutured.
·
 Reduce the fracture in proper occlusion.
· Bony voids or defects should be filled with osseoconductive, osseopromotive, or
osseoinductive bone matrix materials
· Address any injured teeth. It is generally best to maintain injured teeth during the
healing stage, when possible, as they provide additional anchorage for the splint.
In addition, extracted teeth near the fracture line may cause bone void problems
that may impede healing (Fig. 46-3).
· Clean the teeth to which the splint is to be applied.
· Polish the surface with flour of pumice and then rinse. It is best not to use standard
prophy pastes for these as they contain oils, waxes, and fluorides that may inhibit
conditioning of the enamel and dentin surfaces.
 Intraoral wiring may be used in combination with the composite to establish an
improved anchorage between the jaw and splint, and is generally recommended.
Ivy loop, Stout's loop, or simple pigtail wires may be used for anchorage to teeth
in addition to the bonding agent. Pigtail wires are simply a loop of wire placed
around the neck of a tooth just below the buccal bulge, and are a simple and
highly effective means of placing wire anchorage. Some teeth have shapes that do
not lend themselves to holding a wire near the gingival margin by natural reten
tion. In these cases, a #2 or #4 round ball bur may be used to create a small reten-
tive groove in the enamel. This groove should be kept shallow and in the enamel,
 Figure 46-3 While the first molar on the left mandible of this young dog will eventually need extraction,
for stabilization of the jaw fracture initially, it should be maintained for additional anchorage for any fixation
method, including splints.
if possible. This can be repaired by odontoplasty, bonding agents, and composites
once the appliance is removed following jaw fracture healing.
· Apply a 37% phosphoric acid to etch the teeth that the splint is to be applied.
This will improve the attachment of the composite and allow for the use of a
bonding agent if preferred.
· Remove the acid after 30-60 seconds with a water rinse.
· Dry the teeth with the air of the three-way air-water syringe. Well-etched enamel
 of teeth will appear to have a chalky appearance when the air is blown across
them.
· A dentinal or enamel bonding agent can now be applied to the acid-etched teeth.
S  d     s  
power for the splint to the teeth and is generally recommended. Follow the manu-
facturer's instructions concerning application, as some are self-curing, while others
require a curing light for setting of the bonding agent. Typically, the bonding agent
is applied with a disposable applicator brush.
+
 Apply a separator agent (boxing or rope wax, petroleum jelly, OraVetTM, Merial,
Duluth, GA) to the teeth of the opposite arcade or any teeth you do not wish the
composite to adhere to. This is done to prevent the composite from bonding to
these teeth during the occlusal stage and bonding the mouth shut during the
setting stage.
· Place composite cartridge (Protemp 3 Garant) in syringe gun.
·Remove cartridge tip seal or old mixing tip.
354
 SECTION IX: TRAUMA
properly attached. Always check the instructions for the product you purchase to
know how to properly attach the tip. Some screw on, others twist on. Some have
a notch on one side of the attachment base that must be properly aligned for the
unit to work properly and not contaminate the remaining material within the tube
resulting in the entire cartridge setting up in a short period of time.
· Pull the dispensing trigger of syringe gun to begin expressing the catalyst and base
in the composite cartridge through the mixing tip.
           ,   
from the mixing tip should be thrown away as it may not have a proper
mixture.
· Rapidly apply the composite as it comes from the mixing tube tip directly to the
area decided upon for the splint.
· Once the full thickness of composite desired has been applied, the teeth should
be quickly placed into articulation with the opposing teeth in order to assure that
there will be no occlusal interferences once the splint hardens. The tip should be
 left on the cartridge for storage. The material in this tip will harden, protecting
the remainder in the cartridge.
· Excess or rough areas of splint can be removed with a white stone or fluted bur
bone file if a dental unit is not available.
· To further smooth the surface of the splint, a layer of unfilled resin can be
applied to the surface of the composite of the splint (self- or light-cure; cure as
required).
■Circumferential osseous wiring or suturing (wiring around the bone; used most com-
monly for symphysis separations) (Fig. 46-4)
· 20- or 18-gauge needle used as wire passer
· 24-28-gauge wire, in small breeds or cats, absorbable (long acting) or nonabsorb-
able 1 to 2-0 suture material can sometimes be substituted for wire
· Run wire from stab incision (ventral midline intermandibular space) to vestibule:
pass behind canines, down through vestibule on opposite side, and back down
through the ventral incision
· Tighten wire to reduce fracture, but do not overtighten the wire ends or the teeth
may be pulled too far medially (base-narrow) and hit the palate
· If teeth go base-narrow, either loosen the wire ends or place a second figure-8-
shaped wire lopped around the canine teeth and subgingivally under the
mandible
· Finishing twist can be extra or intraoral (intraoral finishing twists may need a
protective coating of acrylic or other material to prevent wire ends from irritating
the oral tissues)
Additional treatment considerations
· Bone graft: use for any class of fracture for areas of bone loss to reestablish struc-
tural stability
  Autograft: bone graft from same individual
CHAPTER 46: MAXILLARY AND MANDIBULAR FRACTURES
355
 Figure 46-4 Three illustrations of circumferential wiring for stabilization of mandibular symphysis fracture/
luxation in a cat. (Courtesy of Dr Robert Wiggs)
 Allograft: bone graft from same species (Osteoallograft, Veterinary Transplant
Services, Kent, WA)
 Alloplast: artificial graft material (e.g., Consil, Nutramax Labs, Edgewood, MD.
or Osteoallograft)
 Xenograft: graft material from another species
·  Teeth in the fracture line should be maintained by appropriate treatment until the
fracture heals, if possible, as removal may result in additional fracture stabilization
problems and reduced splint anchorage
· Awareness of occlusion, tooth roots, and anatomy during treatment is critical
· Treatment with composite/acrylic splints in association with wiring is generally
very effective; may allow for improved occlusal reestablishment and less dental
trauma
·  Pharyngostomy tube aids in occlusal checks intraoperatively
356
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
COMMENTS
■Patient management
·Antibiotics (see “Drugs" section)
· Pain management
Medications (see “Drugs" section)
 Orthodontic wax: soft pliable wax sent with owner to periodically cover
irritating wires
· Oral irrigants: use twice daily for oral hygiene and to reduce oral bacteria
 Chlorhexidine oral solutions help reduce oral bacteria
 Zinc and ascorbic acid solutions help reduce bacteria and stimulate soft
tissue healing
· Water additives containing chlorhexidine may aid in the reduction of oral bacteria
and aid in healing. The use of water additives may allow for a more passive and
less traumatic cleansing of the surgical site than the use of rinses or gels that
require opening of the mouth and manipulation of the surgical sites.
· Diet: soft food or gruel may be required during healing
· Nutritional and fluid maintenance required
· Chew exercise: avoid any hard chew items during healing process
·Avoid excessive manipulation of surgical site during the healing process
■ Follow-up and appliance removal
 Physical recheck 2 weeks postoperative
 Radiographic recheck 4-6 weeks postoperative and every 2 weeks until fracture
is healed and/or appliances removed
● Fracture site may temporarily (l-2 weeks) be more at risk to refracture when the
support of the appliance is removed
· Once the fracture line is stable, compromised teeth may need additional endodon-
tic treatment (root canal, etc.) or careful extraction
 Should the healing process result in a malocclusion, orthodontics, endodontic, or
selective exodontia (extraction) may be required
Potential complications
· Malocclusion
 Dental attrition
 Possible required extractions
· IMJ arthritis
 Chronic or intermittent TMJ pain
 Possible required condylectomy
·Endodontic disease
·Osteomyelitis
· Nonunion
· Sequestrum
· Dehiscence
· Neurological defects
CHAPTER 46: MAXILLARY AND MANDIBULAR FRACTURES 357
·  Facial pain syndrome
·
 Impaired mastication
· Temporary weight loss
· Soft tissue trauma due to appliance or wires
· Ankylosis of mandible at the TMJ or zygomatic arch area
· Facial pain syndrome, acute or chronic: from nerve trauma from injury or as a
complication of surgery
· Nerve damage to motor function
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Generally good; however, predisposing factors, initiating force, location, type of
fracture, quality of home care, and selection of treatment modality all affect the
healing outcome
■ 4-12 weeks to bony union
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 47
■ Chapter 48
Abbreviations
CMO, craniomandibular osteopathy; CT, computed tomography; IM, intramedulary:
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging: TMJ, temporomandibular joint.
Suggested Reading
Fossum TW. Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2002.
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. The Veterinarians Companion for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO:
AAHA Press, 2000.
Manfra Marretta S. Maxillofacial surgery. In: Holmstrom SE, ed. The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1998:1285-1296.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
1997:259-279.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB, Mitchell PQ. Oral and periodontal tissue maintenance, augmentation, reju-
Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saumders, 1998:1165-1188.
Author: Barron Hall, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgment: The author/editor acknowledges the prior contributions (including
illustrations) of Dr. Robert Wiggs, who assisted with this topic in the previous edition.
Cient Education Handout
available online
47
chapter
Temporomandibular
Joint: Dislocation/
Luxation/Intermittent
Open Mouth Locking
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Disorders of the temporomandibular joint (IMJ) lead to an alteration of the normal
function of the masticatory system as the mobility and function of the joint are
compromised
 Genetic, traumatic, degenerative, or idiopathic causes may result in pain, occlusal
dysfunction, joint laxity, chronic arthritis, or open-mouth locking
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs/cats
 Trauma may cause fractures or a luxation resulting in immediate problems, as well
as future degenerative problems
● Mandibular neuropraxia: carrying heavy objects by mouth
· Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM): adult; large breeds (e.g.、 German
shepherds)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ No breed, sex, or age predisposition in most IMJ disorders
■
 Open-mouth mandibular locking: basset hounds; Irish setters
 There may be a genetic predisposition in certain breeds (e.g., basset hounds) to
develop TMJ disorders
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
358
CHAPTER 47: DISLOCATION/LUXATION/INTERMITTENT OPEN MOUTH LOCKING
359
 Figure 47-1 Skull simulating locking of the coronoid process of the mandible lateral to the
zygomatic arch.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■General
· Difficulty opening and/or closing mouth
· Laxity or excessive lateral movement of the mandible
· Pain when masticating. yawning, and/or vocalizing
■Specific
· TMJ luxation/subluxation: history of trauma or mouth locked open; radiographic
evidence of luxation
· Open-mouth mandibular locking: coronoid process of the mandible "slips" lateral
to the ventral surface of the zygomatic arch and is locked in that position; large
bulge palpated on affected side of face (Fig. 47-1)
 Traumatic injury: evidence of trauma; mouth dropped open; mobility of mandible
(may have multiple fractures); radiographs indicate fracture
 Osteoarthritis/chronic posttraumatic changes: crepitation and pain when eating or
if mandible is forced to move; radiographs may show osseous reaction indicative
of arthritic changes; ankylosis
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO) (see Chapter 13): dogs
Primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism
360
 SECTION IX: TRAUMA
Mandibular neuropraxia: stretching of the nerve branches (motor) of the masticatory
muscles; usually caused by carrying heavy objects in the mouth; mandible hangs
open but can be easily closed manually (dogs)
■ MMM: autoimmune disease of type 2M myofibers of masticatory muscles supplied
by trigeminal nerve with necrosis, phagocytosis, and fibrosis; trismus progresses to
( i  o aa) si o oi a s
DIAGNOSTICS
 Serum autoantibodies to type 2M myosin: to rule out MMM
■
Muscle biopsy: to rule out MMM
■ Cytology of fluid aspirated from IMJ: may be beneficial in diagnosis of a polyar-
thropathy in which the articular surfaces of the joint are inflamed
■Imaging
· Skull radiography: essential to perform proper radiographic technique in order to
visualize the TMJs
● Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): gold standard for imaging the TMJ
· Computed tomography (CT): very helpful for proper assessment and planning
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
 Analgesics: for painful disorders
■ Anti-inflammatory drugs: for postoperative pain and chronic inflammation
■Muscle relaxants: help prevent increased muscle activity due to chronic pain response
Procedures
■Definitive treatment is aimed at eliminating or altering the etiologic factor responsible
for the disorder, as well as correcting the problem
 TMJ luxation: traumatic; luxation often occurs in a rostral direction; place a “dowel'
(pencil) across the mouth between the carnassial teeth (Fig. 47-2); gently close the
rostral portion of the mouth with a gentle “push" to reduce the luxation (push cau-
dally for a rostral luxation); chronic luxation may not reduce and may require surgery
 Open-mouth mandibular locking: immediate attention; sedate animal, open the
mouth further, and apply gentle pressure on the bulging coronoid process to allow
 it to slip back under the zygomatic arch; surgical managementexcise ventral portion
of the zygomatic arch and/or a dorsal portion of the coronoid process to relieve future
lockings
■ Injury or fracture at TMJ: depends on extent of damage; fixation is difficult; condy-
lectomy sometimes necessary
361
 Figure 47-2 With a luxation of the temporomandibular joint, a dowel can be placed in between the
carnassial tooth with gentle pressure to close the rostral portion of the mouth to reduce the luxation.
Chronic osteoarthritis or ankylosis: if severe, condylectomy may be needed, possibly
bilaterally
 Referral to a specialist may be advised
+
 Semi-emergent tracheostomy may be necessary
· Remove zygoma, callus, condyle, angular process and caudal ramus: small
rongeurs or piezosurgery unit
· Caution with maxillary artery and facial nerve
· Use muscle flap between cut surfaces to minimize reankylosis
+1
 Exercising full range of motion to inhibit callus formation
“Dropped jaw” (mandibular neuropraxia): conservative treatment; rest, anti-
inflammatory drugs
■ MMM: immunosuppressant medications; possible forcible, gradual opening of mouth
COMMENTS
■ Each case should be carefully followed because of the progressive changes that may
occur in the TMJ, especially after traumatic injury
 Avoid situations that allow for trauma (pets running loose)
■ In many cases after surgical treatment involving IMJ disorders, arthritis may
develop later
Expected Course and Prognosis
 Depends on the disorder afflicting the TMJ and the degree to which it is affected
362
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 46
■ Chapter 56
■ Chapter 57
Abbreviations
CT, computed tomography; MMM, masticatory muscle myositis; MRI, magnetic reso-
nance imaging: TMJ, temporomandibular joint.
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Small Animal Dentistry. Philadelphia: Mosby-Year Book, 1993.
Okeson JP. Management of Temporomandibular Disorders and Occlusion. St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year
Book, 1998.
i  a            
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997:127-130.
Authors: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC; Bonnie Bloom, DVM
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
48
Tooth Luxation
or Avulsion
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Luxation of a tooth can be either vertical (i.e., an intrusion or extrusion) or lateral
■ An intrusion occurs when the tooth is pushed apically into the alveolar bone
■ An extrusion occurs when the tooth is dislocated vertically partially out of the
alveolus
■ Lateral luxation: the affected tooth is tipped in either a labial or a palatal/lingual
direction; can occur when trauma pushes the crown in one direction and the root
in the opposite direction; always associated with a fracture of the lingual or labial
alveolar bone plate that allows the tooth to luxate rather than fracture
 An avulsed tooth has been totally luxated from its alveolus
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Luxation/avulsion: usually results from a traumatic incident (e.g., road traffc
accident or dog fight)
■ The trauma causes injury to the periodontium, thus allowing abnormal tooth
mobility and malpositioning
■  The upper canine tooth is the most commonly luxated/avulsed tooth
■ Advanced periodontitis will predispose
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ In some, a history of facial trauma
■Oral discomfort, swelling, reluctance to eat
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
363
364
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
CLINICAL FEATURES
■  Intrusion: tooth appears shorter than normal; no tooth mobility detected
■ Extrusion: tooth appears longer than normal and is mobile both vertically and
horizontally
■ Lateral luxation: tooth crown is displaced in either a labial or palatal/lingual
direction
Avulsion: intact tooth is totally displaced from its alveolus
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ For luxation: root fracture where the coronal segment is displaced
■ For avulsion: tooth lost due to severe periodontitis
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Radiographs are mandatory
■
 Intraoral radiographic technique and dental X-ray flm are required
 Intrusion: narrowing of the periodontal ligament space in the apical region
 Extrusion: widening of the periodontal ligament, especially in the apical section
· Lateral luxation: widening and narrowing of the periodontal ligament space and
fracture of the alveolar bone plate
· Avulsion: empty but intact alveolus
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Use of a broad-spectrum bacteriocidal antibiotic is recommended; if oral hygiene is
 maintained, only a short course is necessary
■  If no oral hygiene measures are possible, antibiotics may be indicated throughout
the period of fixation
■ Daily rinsing with 0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate solution will diminish the need
for prolonged administration of antibiotics
■Appropriate pain management
CHAPTER 48: TOOTH LUXATION OR AVULSION
365
Procedures
■ Replace and fix the tooth in its normal position; bond with acrylic splints and
fine ligature wire—an effective method of achieving stabilization and occlusal
alignment
■ Handle the avulsed tooth only by its crown and rinse gently with sterile saline solu-
tion; if severely contaminated, the tooth root can be gently cleaned with sterile gauze
swabs moistened with saline
■ Be gentle; tooth handling should be kept to a minimum; it is essential not to remove
 the periodontal ligament from the root; a viable periodontal ligament is necessary
for healing
■ Replace the tooth in its bony socket; there is usually no need to remove the blood
clot from the alveolus; the tooth is just firmly placed in its bony socket and fixed in
that position
■Contraindications for repositioning a luxated or avulsed tooth are deciduous teeth,
severe periodontitis, caries, or resorptive lesion
 The two most important factors determining the result of treatment are the length
of time the avulsed tooth has been out of its bony socket and the medium in which
the tooth has been stored during this period
■ The sooner an avulsed tooth is reimplanted, the better the prognosis; optimal results
are achieved if the tooth is reimplanted within 30 minutes of avulsion; do not let the
avulsed tooth dry prior to reimplantation; the best medium for storing an avulsed
tooth is saline; if not available, use millk
 Advise clients to place the tooth in either saline or milk and bring the affected animal
in for treatment as quickly as possible
The appliance for fixation is usually left in place for 4-6 weeks; maintain oral hygiene
during this period; a water pick or curved-tip syringe is used to flush debris from
between the splint, teeth, and soft tissue; rinsing the oral cavity with chlorhexidine
solution is also useful
■ The appliances are removed with pliers or high-speed drill; at this stage the tooth
should be stable or very slightly mobile; take radiographs; if the tooth is still loose,
reimplantation has failed and it should be extracted
COMMENTS
 An avulsed tooth invariably develops pulpal necrosis; the tooth must receive end-
Best to perform endodontic therapy when the appliance is removed
 External root resorption and ankylosis commonly follow reimplantation
 Luxated teeth often suffer pulp necrosis; check at regular intervals
 Signs of pulp pathology (e.g., tooth discoloration or radiographic evidence of periapi-
cal pathology) are indications for endodontic treatment
366
SECTION IX: TRAUMA
Suggested Reading
Gorrel C. Chapter 12—emergencies. In: Gorrel C, ed. Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner.
Saumders, 2004:131-155.
Gorrel C, Robinson J. Endodontic therapy. In: Crossley DA, Penman S, eds. Manual of Small Animal
Dentistry. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1995:168-181
Author: Cecilia Gorrel, BSc, MA, Vet MB, DDS, Hon FAVD, DEVDC, MRCVS, RCVS-
Recognised and European Specialist in Veterinary Dentistry
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
Disorders Prevalent
in Felines
chapter
49
Tooth Resorption: Feline
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Tooth resorption is defined as resorption of dental hard tissue by odontoclasts
■ Odontoclasts derive from hematopoietic stem cells, migrate from blood vessels of the
periodontal ligament and alveolar bone toward the external root surface (external
resorption), or are recruited from blood vessels of the pulp and move toward the
dentinal surface facing the pulp tissue (internal resorption)
■ Idiopathic resorption: can affect any root surface of a single tooth or of multiple
teeth; there is no history of trauma, tooth bleaching, endodontic disease, orthodontic
 treatment, neoplasia, or systemic conditions
■ External resorption
· Cervical root resorption after blunt trauma (which can have occurred years prior
to the clinically apparent resorption) or tooth bleaching (mainly a problem in
humans)
· Apical root resorption due to the following:
  Periapical disease after pulpal inflammation/infection
 Orthodontic treatment (resorption arrests after discontinuation of tooth
movement)
· Apical, lateral, and/or cervical root resorption due to neoplasia
 Benign neoplasm with expansive growth cause pressure resorption along the
root surface
 Malignant neoplasm with infiltrative growth cause invasive resorption with
moth-eaten root appearance
 Other reported links with external resorption include (but are not limited to)
hypoparathyroidism, drugs (e.g., anticonvulsants), radiation therapy oxalosis,
tumoral calcinosis, and Paget's disease
■Internal resorption
· Often described as oval-shaped radiolucency within the pulp cavity of teeth with
at least some vital pulp tissue remaining
· May be caused by trauma (e.g., concussion) or vital pulp therapy (e.g., use of
calcium hydroxide as pulp capping agent)
Blackwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
369
370  SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
■ The following description of tooth resorption is focused on the progressive disease
affecting multiple teeth, as recognized in the domestic cat (feline tooth resorption).
but dogs (canine tooth resorption) and other mammals (including man) can occa-
sionally be affected as well
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Synonyms of tooth resorption include feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion (FORL),
neck lesion, feline caries, cervical line erosion, and external root resorptior
· "Neck lesion" is a topographical distinction only
 as  s  s n a ,  is, s  
nature and not caused by acidic agents and/or cariogenic bacteria
■ Tooth resorption is an external resorption of unknown cause, affecting any tooth
surface of multiple, if not all, teeth
 Reported prevalence rates range between 25% and 75%, and the disease is rarely seen
 in cats younger than 2 years of age
■ Possible reported causes include periodontal disease, anatomical peculiarities,
mechanical trauma, immunosuppressive viruses, increased vitamin A intake, and
increased vitamin D intake
■ Histological examination of clinically and radiographically healthy teeth from cats
with tooth resorption on other teeth showed periodontal ligament degeneration,
hypercementosis, decreased width of the periodontal space, and dentoalveolar anky-
losis, but inflammatory cells did not play a primary role in the initiation of the disease
■ Cats with tooth resorption apparently have significantly increased serum levels of
25-hydroxyvitamin D compared with cats without the disease, indicating that cats
with tooth resorption must have had a higher dietary intake of vitamin D compared
with cats without the disease
■ Cats with tooth resorption apparently have significantly decreased urine specific
gravity compared with cats without the disease, indicating that there is a trend toward
decreased renal function in cats with tooth resorption
■Risk factors may include preexisting periodontal disease, trauma from occlusion, and
diets high in vitamin D
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Tooth resorption does usually not become clinically apparent prior to 4-6 years
of age
■ There is no gender or breed predisposition, but purebred cats may develop the disease
at a younger age compared with other breeds
■ Most cats do not show obvious clinical signs; owners may report difficulty eating
hard food, refusal to drink cold water, and repetitive lower jaw motions (jaw
opening reflex)
CHAPTER 49: TOOTH RESORPTION: FELINE
371
■  Tooth resorption apical to the gingival attachment is asymptomatic, unless associated
with endodontic and/or periapical disease
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Oral examination is performed under general anesthesia
■ Fractured crowns, "red spots" at the cervical portion of teeth, and missing teeth may
readily be noticed
■ A fine-pointed dental explorer is run across the crown surfaces of all teeth to detect
any irregularities associated with tooth integrity
■  Probing of defects may cause bleeding from inflamed granulation tissue
 The gingiva may appear bulgy, inflamed, and friable in areas of missing teeth (suspect
root remnants)
 The bone at the alveolar margin may be thickened ("alveolar bone expansion"), and
teeth may appear elongated or extruded ("supereruption" of canine and other teeth)
■ American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC) Nomenclature “Classification of
Tooth Resorption" (see Appendix B) (images courtesy of AVDC: http://avdc.org/
nomenclature.html)
Tooth
resorption
stage 1
AVDC
Figure 49-1 Stage 1 (TR 1): mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel). (mage
courtesy of AVDC Nomenclature "Classification of Tooth Resorption": http://avoc. org/nomencfature. html)
372
SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
Tooth
resorption
stage2
AVUC
Figure 49-2 Stage 2 (TR 2): moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel with
loss of dentin that does extend not into the pulp cavity). (mage courtesy of AVDC Nomenclature
"Classification of Tooth Resorption": http://avoc. org/nomenctature.htm)
· Tooth resorption is classified based on the severity of the resorption (stages l-5)
and on the location of the resorption (types 1-3)
 Stages of tooth resorption (TR): this classification is based on the assumption that
tooth resorption is a progressive condition
 Stage 1 (TR l): mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and
enamel) (Fig. 49-1)
 Stage 2 (TR 2): moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum
and enamel with loss of dentin that does extend not into the pulp cavity)
(Fig. 49-2)
    s s        
enamel with loss of dentin that extends into the pulp cavity); most of the tooth
retains its integrity (Fig. 49-3)
    s ss   s   t  
enamel with loss of dentin that extends into the pulp cavity); most of the tooth
has lost its integrity
0 TR 4a: crown and root are equally affected (Fig. 49-4, a)
CHAPTER 49: TOOTH RESORPTION: FELINE
Tooth
resorption
stage 3
AVDC
S  a pe  o  sl ns  eap dap  l  a at ana 
of dentin that extends into the pulp cavity): most of the tooth retains its integrity. (image courtesy of AVDC
Nomenclature "Classification of Tooth Resorption": http://avoc.org/nomenclature. html)
o TR 4b: crown is more severely affected than the root (Fig. 49-4, b)
0TR 4c: root is more severely affected than the crown (Fig. 49-4, c)
口
 Stage 5 (TR 5): remnants of dental hard tissue are visible only as irregular
radiopacities, and gingival covering is complete (Fig. 49-5)
 Types of resorption, based on radiographic appearance
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 1 (Tl) appearance, a focal or multifocal
radiolucency is present in the tooth with otherwise normal opacity and normal
periodontal ligament space (Fig. 49-6)
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 2 (T2) appearance, there is narrowing or
disappearance of the periodontal ligament space in at least some areas and
decreased radiopacity of part of the tooth (Fig. 49-7)
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 3 (T3) appearance, features of both types
1 and 2 are present in the same tooth; a tooth with this appearance has areas
of normal and narrow or lost periodontal ligament space, and there is focal or
multifocal radiolucency in the tooth and decreased radiopacity in other areas
of the tooth (Fig. 49-8)
(a)
(b)
Tooth
Tooth
resorption
resorption
stage4a
stage4b
AVD
AVD
(c)
Tooth
resorption
stage4c
AM
 Figure 49-4 Stage 4 (TR 4): extensive dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel with
loss of dentin that extends into the pulp cavity): most of the tooth has lost its integrity. (a) TR 4a: crown and
root are equally affected. (b) TR 4b: crown is more severely affected than the root. (c) TR 4c: root is more
severely affected than the crown. (mage courtesy of AVDC Nomencfature "Classification of Tooth
Resorption": http://avoc. org/nomenclature. html)
374
Tooth
resorption
stage5
AVLX
Figure 49-5 Stage 5 (TR 5): remnants of dental hard tissue are visible only as irregular radiopacities, and
http://avoc. org/nomencfature.htm)
Type 1
with otherwise normal opacity and normal periodontal ligament space. (mage courtesy of AVDC
Nomenciature "Classification of Tooth Resorption": http://avoc.org/nomenclature. htm)
375
Type2
 Figure 49-7 Tooth with type 2 (T2) appearance: there is narrowing or disappearance of the periodontal
ligament space in at least some areas and decreased radiopacity of part of the tooth. (mage courtesy of
AVDC Nomencfature "Classification of Tooth Resorption": hrtp://avoc.org/nomencfature.html)
Type3
 Figure 49-8 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 3 (T3) appearance, features of both types 1 and 2 are
ad is io mu pue eu jo see sy aue seadde s y yron  yron aes aui ui suaad
ligament space, and there is focal or multifocal radiolucency in the tooth and decreased radiopacity in other
areas of the tooth. (mage courtesy of AVDC Nomenctature "Classification of Tooth Resorption": http://
avdc.org/nomenclature.html)
376
CHAPTER 49: TOOTH RESORPTION: FELINE
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Periodontal disease
 Traumatic tooth fracture
■]
Root remnants
■
Tooth resorption due to other causes
DIAGNOSTICS
 Chemistry panel and complete blood count
Urinalysis in older animals
■ Dental radiography is an invaluable tool in diagnosing tooth resorption that is missed
on clinical examination; full-mouth dental radiographs should be obtained of all
teeth in cats
■ See the types of resorption above
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
■Restorative treatment shows poor success rates (10-20%) after a follow-up period of
2-3 years
1 Extraction is the treatment of choice for root remnants and any TR-affected
teeth
■ Multirooted teeth must be sectioned prior to luxation and elevation of tooth
segments
 Surgical extraction with flap creation and alveolectomy will facilitate removal of
fragile teeth, (fractured) roots, and root remnants
■ Large mucoperiosteal flaps may be made in quadrants with multiple teeth to be
extracted
sutures
■ Reexamination is performed in 2 weeks to evaluate extraction sites
2 radiographic tooth resorption
Drugs
■There is no reliable prevention strategy available at this time
 Topical administration of fluoride agents has never been proven to prevent or slow
down tooth resorption in cats
378  SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
● Maxillary infraorbital, mandibular, and middle mental nerve block(s)
· Determine total dose of local anesthetic that can be used in the patient and do not
exceed this dose; this can be important in small cats
· Opioid medication upon extubation (e.g., hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg intramuscu-
lar [IM]]
· Postoperative pain control for 2-3 days as needed: opioids (e.g., butorphanol
0.2-0.4mg/kg per os [PO] tid, transdermal 25 mcg fentanyl patch if multiple
extractions were performed) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
for minor pain
■Chlorhexidine gluconate rinse, spray, or gel (0.1-0.2%) administered to oral tissues
twice a day for 2 weeks
■ Antibiotics are not usually necessary post extraction unless another medical condi-
tion or extensive tissue trauma at the extraction site is present
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
 Possible complications include fractured teeth and roots, root remnants, regional
trauma due to improper extraction technique, infection, and future development of
TR on other teeth
■ Clinical examination and full-mouth dental radiography should be performed once
a year
■ Excellent prognosis for healing of extraction sites if the procedures were properly
performed
■ Fair to guarded prognosis with regard to preventing the development of FORL on
other teeth (inform clients about the need for continued clinical and radiographic
monitoring)
Abbreviations
CORL, canine odontoclastic resorptive lesion; FORL, feline odontoclastic resorptive
lesion; ORL, odontoclastic resorptive lesion; TR, tooth resorption.
Suggested Reading
 DuPont GA, DeBowes LJ. Comparison of periodontitis and root replacement in cat teeth with resorp-
tive lesions. J Vet Dent 2002;19:71-75
Gorrel C, Larsson A. Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions: unveiling the early lesion. J Small Anim
Pract 2002;43:482-488.
Reiter AM, Lewis JR, Okuda A. Update on the etiology of tooth resorption in domestic cats. Vt Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2005;35:913-942.
Reiter AM, Lyon KF, Nachreiner RF, Shofer FS. Evaluation of calciotropic hormones in cats with
odontoclastic resorptive lesions. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:1446-1452.
CHAPTER 49: TOOTH RESORPTION: FELINE
379
Reiter AM, Mendoza K. Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions—an umsolved enigma in veterinary
dentistry Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:791-837.
Author: Alexander M. Reiter, Dipl. Tzt., Dr. med. vet., DAVDC, EVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient Education Handout
available online
50
chapter
Caudal Stomatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ An uninhibited, excessive immune inflammatory response affecting the oral cavity
in cats
■ Marked caudal mucositis extending into submucosal tissues (Fig. 50-1)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Cause unknown; bacterial, viral (calici virus), and immunologic etiologies (bacterial
persistence) suspected
Significant findings of feline coronavirus in one study
Immunosuppression from feline leukemia virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency
virus (FIV) can also lead to nonresponsive infections; most affected cats are negative
for FeLV and FIV
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Cats
■ Purebred breeds predisposed: Abyssinian, Persian, Himalayan, Burmese, Siamese,
and Somali
CLINICAL FEATURES
■
Ptyalism
■Halitosis
■Dysphasia
■Anorexia: prefers soft food
Blachwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
380
CHAPTER 5O: CAUDAL STOMATITIS
381
Caudal mucositis
AVD
■ Figure 50-1 Caudal stomatitis/mucositis. (mage courtesy of AVDC Nomenctature "Oral and
Oropharyngear Inffammation ": http://avdc.org/nomenclature.html)
■Weight loss
 Scruffy haircoat
Erythematous, ulcerative, proliferative lesions affecting the gingiva, glossopalatine
arches, tongue, lips, buccal mucosa, and/or hard palate
■ Gingival inflammation completely surrounds the tooth, compared with gingivitis.
which usually only occurs on the buccal and labial surfaces
■May extend to the glossopharyngeal arches as well as the palate
DIEFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Periodontal disease
■ Oral malignancy
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Polyclonal gammopathy secondary to antibody production following bacterial inva-
sion into periodontal tissues
382
 SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
 Leukocytosis and eosinophilia may be present
Calici virus titer
■  Intraoral radiographs to evaluate periodontal disease and feline oral odontoclastic
resorptions
■ Biopsy (especially unilateral lesions) to rule out neoplasia, primarily squamous cell
carcinoma
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
Medication and other therapies have been used with limited long-term success; lack
of permanent response to conventional oral hygiene, antibiotics, anti-inflammatory
drugs, and immunosuppressives is typical
■ Antibiotics: clindamycin (5 mg/kg ql2h), azithromyicn, metronidazole, amoxicillin,
ampicillin, enrofloxacin, tetracycline
■ Corticosteroids: prednisone (2mg/kg initially daily, followed by every other
day); methylprednisolone acetate (2mg/kg q7-30 days) may also help control
inflammation
          
months), then every 14-35 days
 Chlorambucil: 2 mg/m? orally every other day or 20 mg/m² every other week
■
 Bovine lactoferrin (40 mg/kg) applied to the oral mucous membranes
CO, laser to remove the inflamed tissue
■Megestrol acetate 1 mg/kg
■Levamisole
■Cyclophosphamide
■Cyclosporine
Procedures
■  First-line therapy involves teeth cleaning above and below the gingiva as well as strict
home care and treatment (extraction) for teeth affected with grades 3 and 4 peri-
odontal disease and/or tooth resorption
 Currently, the only treatment that delivers 60-80% (depending on the study) cure
without the use of follow-up medications is extraction of all teeth distal to the canines
■ To aid the extractions; flap all quadrants and use a high-speed bur with water spray
to remove a trough of bone where the roots were, thus removing most of the keratin-
ized gingiva, periodontal ligament, and periradicular alveolar bone; before suturing.
"smooth down" the alveolar socket to remove sharp edges
■ If patients do not respond to extraction of the teeth distal to the canines, remove
all teeth; when extracting the teeth, pay meticulous attention to removing all
tooth substance; take intraoral radiographs before and after surgery: postoperative
CHAPTER 5O: CAUDAL STOMATITIS
E8E
application of fluocinonide 0.05% (Lidex Gel, Medicis, Scottsdale, AZ) to the
 gingival margin helps in the healing process
■ Refractory cases with extensive proliferative lesion in the caudal oral cavity and
pharynx warrant a more guarded prognosis; in some cases, monthly carbon dioxide
laser rastering have resulted in some successful resolutions
See also the following chapters:
■ Chapter 29
■ Appendix B ("Oral and Oropharyngeal Inflammation")
Abbreviations
FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus.
Suggested Reading
Harvey CE, Emily PP: Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis, MO: CV Mosby, 1993
Lyon K. Gingivostomatitis. In: Holmstrom SE, ed. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal
Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saumders, 2005:891-911.
Wiggs RB, Lobrise HB. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven
1997.
Author: Jan Bellows, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
Consu/ting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient Education Handout
 available online
51
chapter
Chronic Osteitis/Alveolitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Response to chronic periodontitis seen most commonly in the alveolar bone of the
maxillary canine teeth of older cats characterized by thickening or bulging of the
alveolar bone (peripheral buttressing or expansile osteitis), periodontal pocketing
with or without extrusion, or supereruption of the teeth
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Most often found in cats
· Chronic periodontitis
 Constant bacterial stimulation
 Alveolar osseous changes leading to thickening of bulging of the alveolar bone
(Fig. 51-1)
n pn un iaod on pia u ons pad  jo so 
mobility
 Supereruption of one or more teeth with apical bone deposition (Fig. 51-2)
· Often bilateral, but one side can be more advanced
■ Mild form sometimes seen in the alveolar bone of the maxillary and mandibular
 canine teeth of brachycephalic dogs
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Older cats, any breed or gender
■ Thickening or bulging of alveolar bone of the maxillary canine teeth
■ Uncommonly oral pain is present
Discomfort with mobile teeth
· Discomfort when supererupted maxillary canine contact lower lip
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
384
 Figure 51-1 Bilateral maxillary canine teeth: chronic osteitis with bulging of the alveolar bone.
 Figure 51-2 Supereruption of left maxillary canine with additional gingival recession
385
386
SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
CLINICAL FEATURES
Bulging of buccal alvolar bone
· Gingiva stretched thin over bone
· Variable gingival inflammation, but usually minor
■ May have periodontal pockets
· Often exhibit vertical bone loss with infrabony pockets
■ May exhibit extrusion or supereruption of one or more teeth
· Extended tooth length may cause trauma to lower lip
 May progress to tooth mobility
■ Oronasal fistulation is possible
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Oral mass: squamous cell carcinoma common in older cats
· Typically, neoplasia is not bilateral
DIAGNOSTICS
 Complete oral examination with periodontal probing
· Record any periodontal pockets, gingival bleeding. or tooth mobility
· Pay particular attention to probing depth of palatal side of maxillary canine teeth
■ Intraoral radiographs (Fig. 51-3)
Assess extent of osseous involvement
Assess root stability and attachment loss
■Biopsy
· If unilateral or aggressive osseous changes
·If unresponsive to therapy
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Procedures
 If mild periodontal changes are present (moderate pocket depth, no mobility, minimal
extrusion, no oronasal fistulation)
CHAPTER 51: CHRONIC OSTEITIS/ALVEOLITIS
387
infrabonypocket.
· Complete dental cleaning with root planing and subgingival curettage with
or without perioceutic therapy (DoxirobeTM Gel, Pfizer Animal Health, New
York, NY)
·May blunt tip of maxillary canine if traumatizing lower
■ Extraction if extensive periodontal disease is present (deeper pockets, mobility.
extensive extrusion or patient discomfort, oronasal fistulation)
· Buccal attached gingiva may be very thin
· An effective gingival flap may be difficult to elevate
388
SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
● May need gentle osteoplasty of buccal alveolar bulge
· Gently elevate palatal mucosal edge to facilitate closure
· Gently blunt the mandibular canine that can now traumatize the upper lip without
exposing the pulp chamber
■ Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Good, with appropriate treatment
■ Guarded to poor if neoplasia is present
Suggested Reading
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Domestic feline oral and dental disease. In: Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB, eds.
Vterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997:485-486.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
dient Education Handout
available online
Oral Manifestations of
chapter
52
Feline Infectious
Diseases
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 This chapter will primarily cover the oral ramifications/manifestations/aspects of
three feline infectious diseases: feline calicivirus (calici, FCV), feline immunodefi-
ciency virus (FIV), and feline leukemia virus (FeLV). For a more complete discussion
 of other body systems affected, detailed therapeutic regimens, and discussions, please
see the corresponding chapters in Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition, listed at the end of this chapter.
· Calici: a common viral respiratory disease of domestic and exotic cats character-
ized by upper respiratory signs, oral ulceration, pneumonia, and occasionally
arthritis, or a highly fatal systemic hemorrhagic disease
· FeLV: a retrovirus (Gammaretrovirus genus) that causes immunodeficiency and
neoplastic disease in domestic cats
· FlV: a retrovirus that causes an immunodeficiency disease in domestic cats; same
genus (Lentivirus) as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent
of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDs) in humans
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1Calici
· A small, nonenveloped single-stranded RNA virus
● Numerous strains exist in nature, with varying degrees of antigenic cross-reactivity
and more than one serotype
· Relatively stable and resistant to many disinfectants
· Rapid cytolysis of infected cells with resulting tissue pathology and clinical disease
 Gastrointestinal: ulceration of the tongue common; occasional ulceration of the
hard palate and lips; infection occurs in intestines; usually no clinical disease
(respiratory, ophthalmic, musculoskeletal)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
688
冏06E
 SEC TION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
■FeLV
· Early infection consists of five stages
 Viral replication in tonsils and pharyngeal lymph nodes
   Infection of a few circulating B lymphocytes and macrophages that disseminate
the virus
 Replication in lymphoid tissues, intestinal crypt epithelial cells, and bone
marrow precursor cells
 Release of infected neutrophils and platelets from the bone marrow into the
circulatory system
  Infection of epithelial and glandular tissues, with subsequent shedding of virus
into the saliva and urine
· An adequate immune response stops progression at stage 2 or 3 (4-8 weeks after
exposure) and forces the virus into latency
● Persistent viremia (stages 4 and 5) usually develops 4-6 weeks after infection, but
may take 12 weeks
· All other body systems (other than hemic/immune and nervous) may develop
immunosuppression with secondary infections or development of neoplastic
disease
· Cat-to-cat transmission: bites; close casual contact (grooming); shared dishes or
litter pans
· Perinatal transmission: fetal and neonatal death of kittens from 80% of affected
queens; transplacental and transmammary transmission in at least 20% of surviv-
ing kittens from infected queens
■FIV
· Infection disrupts immune system function; feline lymphocytes and macrophages
serve as the main target cells for virus replication
· Patients are clinically asymptomatic until cell-mediated immunity (CMI) is
disrupted
· Macrophages: main reservoir of virus in affected cats throughout body
· Coinfection with FeLV may increase the expression in many tissues
· Body systems other than immune/renal, nervous: result of immunosuppression
and secondary infections
· Cat-to-cat transmission: usually by bite wounds; occasionally perinatal transmis-
sion; sexual transmission uncommon
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Calici
· Persistent infection common
· Clinical disease: common in multicat facilities and breeding catteries
· Young kittens—6 weeks old—most common, but any age may show disease
  Usually occurs in young kittens whose maternally derived immunity has waned
·Lack of vaccination or improper vaccination
391
 Concurrent infections with other pathogens (e.g., feline herpes virus [FHV-l] or
feline panleukopenia virus [FPV])
· Multicat facilities with poor ventilation
· Routine vaccination: reduced incidence of clinical disease; has not decreased the
prevalence of the virus
■FeLV
· Prevalence highest between 1 and 6 years of age; mean age 3 years
· Kittens more susceptible; most neonatal susceptible; <30% susceptible by 16
weeks of age
· Male-to-female ratio—1.7:1—aggressive, roaming
● Prevalence in the United States: 2-3% of healthy cats; decline since 1980s
■FIV
· Prevalence of infection increases with age
· Mean age 5 years at time of diagnosis
● United States and Canada: 1.5-3% in healthy cats; 9-15% in cats with signs of
illness
 Recurrent minor illnesses: especially with upper respiratory and gastrointestinal
signs
CLINICAL FEATURES: RELATED TO ORAL CAVITY
(OTHER SYSTEMS MAY BE AFFECTED)
Calici
 May present as an upper respiratory infection with eye and nose involvement, as
an ulcerative disease primarily of the mouth, as pneumonia, as an acute arthritis,
as a systemic hemorrhagic disease, or any combination of these
· Sudden onset and anorexia with ocular or nasal discharge with little or no
sneezing
· Ulcers on the tongue, hard palate, lips, tip of nose, or around claws may occur
without other signs
■FeLV
Gingivitis, stomatitis, periodontitis
· Clinical signs of FeLV-induced immunodeficiency cannot be distinguished from
those of FIV-induced immunodeficiency
■FIV
· Gingivitis, stomatitis, periodontitis: 25-50% of cases
· Associated disease cannot be clinically distinguished from FeLV-associated
immunodeficiencies
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Calici, FeLV, FIV
· Other infections: bacterial, parasitic, viral, or fungal
392
SEC TION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
DIAGNOSTICS
■Calici
· Serological testing on paired serum samples: detect a rise in neutralizing antibody
titers against the virus
· Cell cultures to isolate the virus: oral pharynx and other tissues
· Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
· Gross pathological findings: ulcerations on the tongue, lips, hard palate
FeLV
 Serological testing
  Indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test: antigens in leukocytes and platelets;
 97% of IFA positive remain persistently infected and viremic for life
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA): detects antibodies. more
sensitive for early or transient
· Lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltrates: gingiva, lymph nodes and other
lymphoid tissues, spleen, kidney, liver, and brain
FIV
 Serological testing: ELISA routine screening: Western blot confirmatory testing of
ELISA positive; kittens (maternal antibodies) and vaccinated cats may test positive
for antibodies
· Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR): inconsistent results
THERAPEUTICS
FeLV/FIV
· Management of secondary and opportunistic infections: primary consideration
 Supportive therapy (e.g., parenteral fluids and nutritional supplements) may be
useful
Drugs
■Calici
· Appropriate
vaccination recommendations
(see Five-Minute
Veterinary
Consultation)
· No specific antiviral drugs that are effective
 Broad-spectrum antibiotics: usually indicated (e.g., amoxicillin at 22 mg/kg per 0s
[PO] ql2h) as appropriate for secondary bacterial infections
■FeLV
·  Immunomodulatory drugs or antiviral
Systemic corticosteroids: use with caution because of the potential for further
immunosuppression
CHAPTER 52: ORAL MANIFESTATIONS OF FELINE INFECTIOUS DISEASES
393
FIV
· Gingivitis and stomatitis may be refractory to treatment: use of antiviral, immu-
nomodulatory, antimicrobial, and supportive therapy discussed more completely
in Five-Minute Veterinary Consultation
· Antibacterial or antimycotic drugs: useful for overgrowth of bacteria or fungi:
prolonged therapy or doses may be required
Procedures
■FeLV
· Oral treatment or surgery: dental cleaning, tooth extraction, gingival biopsy
■FIV
· Oral treatment or surgery: frequently required; dental cleaning, tooth extraction,
gingival biopsy
COMMENTS
American Association of Feline Practitioners classifies FHV, FPV, and calicivirus as
core vaccines; vaccinate all cats with these three agents on the initial visit (as early
as 6 weeks): repeat q3-4 weeks until 6 weeks; 1 year after, then calici every 3 years
·Calici
  Provide outpatient care when possible and soften foods
 Affected cats may also be concurrently infected with FHV-l, especially in mul-
ticat and breeding facilities
Isolation and vaccination with outbreaks (see Five-Minute Veterinary
Consultation)
 Synonym: feline picornavirus (older classification)
·FeLV
 Prevent contact with FeLV-positive cats
 Quarantine and test incoming cats before introduction into multiple-cat
households
 Discuss good nutrition and routine husbandry for control of secondary bacte-
rial, viral, and parasitic infections
 Vaccines: most commercial vaccines induce virus-neutralizing antibodies spe-
cific for gp70; reported efficacy ranges from <20% to almost 100%, depending
 on the trial and challenge system; test cats for FeLV before initial vaccination;
if prevaccination testing is not done, clients should be aware that the cat may
already be infected
·FIV
  Inform client that the infection is slowly progressive and healthy antibody-
positive cats may remain healthy for years
 Advise client that cats with clinical signs will have recurrent or chronic health
 problems that require medical attention
394
 SECTION X: DISORDERS PREVALENT IN FELINES
  Discuss the importance of keeping cats indoors to protect them from exposure
· In cats with inflammatory oral disease, viral assessment is essential in determining
appropriate therapy and outcome
Expected Course and Prognosis
■Calici
· Oral ulcers and the acute arthritis usually heal without complications
· Clinical disease: usually appears 3-4 days after exposure
· Once neutralizing antibodies appear, about 7 days after exposure, recovery is
usually rapid
 Prognosis excellent, unless severe pneumonia develops
· Recovered cats: persistently infected for long periods; will continuously shed small
quantities of virus in oral secretions
■FeLV
·Persistently viremic cats: 50% succumb to related diseases within 2-3 years after
infection
■FIV
· Within the first 2 years after diagnosis or 4.5-6 years after the estimated time of
infection, about 20% of cats die but 50% remain asymptomatic
· In late stages of disease (wasting and frequent or severe opportunistic infections).
life expectancy is about 1 year
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 50
Abbreviations
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FCV, feline calicivirus; FeLV, feline leu-
kemia virus; FHV-1, feline herpes virus; FPV, feline panleukopenia virus; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus.
See also the following:
See topics in the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 5th edition
Information was compiled from topics in the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine
and Feline, 5th edition:
■ Fred W. Scott: “Feline Calicivirus Infection" (Stephen C. Barr, consulting editor)
 Margaret C. Barr: *Feline Leukemia Virus Infection (FeLV) and Feline Immunodefi-
ciency Virus Infection (FIV)” (Stephen C. Barr, consulting editor)
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Cient Education Handout
available online
section
IX
Salivary and other
Special Problems
chapter
53
Salivary Mucocele
(Sialocele)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Salivary mucoceles are nonepithelial-lined cavities filled with saliva that has leaked
 from a damaged salivary gland or duct and are surrounded by granulation tissue that
forms secondary to inflammation caused by the free saliva.
■ There are four major pairs of salivary glands: parotid, mandibular, sublingual, and
zygomatic. Smaller buccal salivary glands are located in the soft palate, lips, tongue,
and cheeks.
■ The types of mucoceles are listed in Table 53-1. The most common type occurs with
rupture of the sublingual duct.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cause is rarely identified. Suspected causes are as follows:
 Blunt trauma to the head and neck (choke chains)
·Bite wound
·Penetrating foreign body
·Ear canal surgery
·Sialoliths
· Dirofiliariasis
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Three times more frequent in dogs than in cats
All breeds are susceptible; commonly affected breeds include miniature poodles
(pharyngeal mucoceles), German shepherds, dachshunds, and Australian silky
terriers
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
868
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
Table 53-1 Types of Mucoceles
 Salivary mucocele type
Location
Gland /duct involved
Cervical mucocele
Intermandibular space, jaw angle,
Sublingual
upper cervical region
Ranula
Sublingual tissues
Mandibular or sublingual
 Pharyngeal mucocele
 Pharyngeal wall 
Sublingual
Zygomatic mucocele 
Ventral to the globe
Zygomatic
Parotid mucocele
Angle of the jaw, ventral to ear
Parotid
Complex mucoceles
Depending on gland/duct involvement
Two or more glands/ducts
■
 Slight predisposition of males compared with females
■ No age predisposition
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Cervical mucocele
 Soft, fluctuant, minimal, or nonpainful gradually developing cervical mass
 Pain is usually manifested only during the acute-manifestation phase of the
mucocele
■Ranula
· Sublingual, soft, froglike swelling (Rana temporaria L., frog)
· Often blood-tinged saliva secondary to self-trauma while eating
Zygomatic mucocele
Periorbital facial swelling
Exophthalmos
 Divergent strabismus
▪Periocular pain
· Pressure-related neuropathy of the optic nerve
■ Pharyngeal mucocele
+
 Abnormal tongue movement
 Respiratory distress
Dysphagia
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Sialoadenitis (second most common salivary disease, usually involving the mandibu-
lar gland, often concurrent with sialoceles)
CHAPTER 53: SALIVARY MUCOCELE (SIALOCELE)
Sialoadenosis
plasms exclusively found in cats)
 Sialoliths (calcium phosphate or carbonate) (see Chapter 54)
■Cervical abscess
■ Salivary gland infarction (95% occur in mandibular gland)
■Foreign body
■Hematoma
 Cystic or neoplastic lymph nodes
Tonsil cysts
 Thyroglossal cysts (rare, congenital)
 Cystic Rathke's pouch and branchial cysts (rare congenital)
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Diagnosis is based on history visual examination, and paracentesis of the mass
 Determine the site of origin with help of oral examination, palpation, sialography, or
exploration of the mucocele
■Imaging
·Rarely needed
· Plain cervical radiographs only to identify sialoliths, foreign bodies, or neoplasia
· Skull radiographs sometimes helpful to differentiate neoplastic disease from
zygomatic mucocele if cytological evaluation is indeterminate
· Sialography (injection of iodinated, water-soluble contrast agent into the salivary
duct) is reserved for patients with trauma, previous surgeries, or fistulous draining
tracts
· Retrobulbar ultrasound shows a cavitary lesion in 75% of zygomatic mucoceles
and 50% of retrobulbar abscesses
· Cross-sectional imaging can be valuable to differentiate neoplastic from nonneo-
plastic disease
■Aseptic paracentesis
· Differentiates mucoceles from neoplasia, abscesses, and sialoadenitis
· Aspirated fluid is viscous, yellowish, clear, or blood-tinged with a low cell
count; inflamed sialoceles are characterized by low-grade chronic plasmacytic-
lymphocytic inflammation
· Cytological evaluation (Wright's stain) reveals diffuse or irregular clumps of
pink to violet staining mucin, large phagocytic cells with small, round nuclei and
foamy cytoplasm, intermixed salivary gland epithelial cells, and nondegenerate
neutrophils in small numbers
· Stain with a mucus-specific stain (e.g.. periodic acid-Schiff) for definitive
diagnosis
400
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Antibiotics based on bacteriologic evaluation, if concurrent abscess or sialoadenitis
Procedures
 Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
 Patients with acute respiratory distress (pharyngeal mucoceles) might need to be
 intubated or have a temporary tracheostomy performed
 Complete surgical excision of the involved gland-duct complex and drainage of
the mucocele is the treatment of choice; prolonged drainage can be achieved
with marsupialization of ranulas and pharyngeal mucoceles and with placement of
Penrose drains in cervical mucoceles
COMMENTS
 Nonsurgical treatment of salivary mucoceles with repeated drainage or injection
of cauterizing or anti-inflammatory agents is not curative, and will complicate
subsequent surgery by causing abscessation or fibrosis
■Patient monitoring
· Penrose drains are usually removed 24-72 hours following surgery
· Drain site should heal by second intention and
d contraction  following
marsupialization
 Possible complications
· Seroma formation (17% for resection of mandibular and sublingual mucoceles)
· Infection
● Mucocele recurrence (<5% with complete resection)
■Synonyms
· Sialocele
·Salivary cyst
·Honey cyst
■Associated conditions
sialoceles
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Excellent prognosis with complete surgical excision
■ Previous infection or injection complicates successful surgical excision
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 54
CHAPTER 53: SALIVARY MUCOCELE (SIALOCELE)401
Suggested Reading
Cannon Ms, Paglia D, Zwingenberger AL, et al. Clinical and diagnostic imaging findings in dogs
Dunning D. Salivary gland. In: Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Saumders, 2003:558-561
Hedlund CS. Salivary mucoceles. In: Fossuum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Mosby, 2002:302-307.
 Ritter MJ, von Pfeil DJ, Stanley BJ, Hauptman JG, Walshaw R. Mandibular and sublingual sialocoeles
in the dog: a retrospective evaluation of 4l cases, using the ventral approach for treatment. N Z
Vet J 2006;54(6):333-337.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Blackwells
Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, Sth edition.
Author: Susanne K. Lauer, DVM, DACVS, CCRP
5th edition): Albert E. Jergens, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
54
chapter
Sialolith
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Sialolith: salivary stone; formation of stone or concretion in salivary duct or gland
■ Mucocele stone: soft calculi or mineralized tissue within a mucocele
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
 Dogs/cats
 Sialolith composed of magnesium carbonate, calcium carbonate, and/or calcium
phosphate
· Most commonly found in mandibular glands, but can occur in any gland
· In most cases, likely secondary to inflammation, possibly secondary to trauma
Secondary obstruction can cause swelling of gland with eventual atrophy
■ Mucocele stone: precipitation of fibrin and mucin or mineralized fragments of
mucocele lining that sloughed
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Rare
■ No breed, age, or gender predilections
■
 Swelling (often over the parotid gland)
· With or without pain
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Sialolith
+
 Swelling in affected area
· Hard mass sometimes palpated
Blachwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
402
CHAPTER 54: SIALOLITH
403
Mucocele stone
 Concretion within area of mucocele
DIEEERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Sialoadenitis
 Salivary neoplasia
■ Foreign body
DIAGNOSTICS
Palpate externally and through oral cavity
Complete oral exam
Intraoral or survey radiographs (Fig. 54-1)
 Sialography: retrograde canulation of parotid salivary ducts with injection of contrast
medium
 Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
■Figure 54-1Radiograph of large sialolith in a cat
404
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
THERAPEUTICS
Procedures
 Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
■
Sialolith
· If the sialolith is small, pressure behind the concretion, moving forward quickly
may move the sialolith out of the duct
■ Make incision over stone and remove
· Do not suture; allow to heal by secondary intention
 Scarring may occur if sutured
· Atrophy, if present, may be permanent
■ Mucocele (see Chapter 53)
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Best prognosis for salivary gland functional return is early detection and sialolith
removal before atrophy
■ Otherwise xerostomia is possible
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 53
Suggested Reading
sa s mms ' iu   n a es a jo ssais  
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Fditor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
chapter
55
Salivary Gland
Adenocarcinoma
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Tumor arising from major (e.g. parotid, mandibular, sublingual, or zygomatic) or
minor glands
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHVSIOLOGY
Mandibular or parotid glands constitute 80% of cases
 Mandibular gland most frequently affected in dogs
 Parotid gland most frequently affected in cats
Locally invasive
 Cats have more advanced disease than dogs at time of diagnosis
■ Metastasis: regional lymph node in 39% of cats and 17% of dogs at diagnosis; distant
metastasis reported in 16% of cats and 8% of dogs at diagnosis but may be slow
to develop
■ Other salivary gland neoplasms: carcinoma; squamous cell carcinoma; mixed
neoplasia
 Epithelial malignancies: constitute roughly 85% of salivary gland tumors
 Fibrosarcomas, lipomas, mast cell tumors, and lymphomas have involved the salivary
glands by direct extension and invasion
Adenomas comprise only 5% of salivary tumors
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
Mean age 10-12 years
Siamese cats may be at relatively higher risk
Male cats affected twice as often as female cats
■ No other breed or sex predilection has been determined
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
405
406
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Unilateral, firm, painless swelling of the upper neck (mandibular and sublingual),
er base (parotid), upper lip or maxilla (zygomatic), or mucous membrane of lip
(accessory or minor salivary tissue)
 Other signs may include halitosis, weight loss, anorexia, dysphagia, exophthalmos.
Horner's syndrome, sneezing, and dysphonia
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Squamous cell carcinoma
■
Mucocele/sialocele (see Chapter 53)
■
Abscess
 Soft tissue sarcoma (e.g., malignant fibrous histiocytoma or fibrosarcoma)
■Lymphosarcoma
DIAGNOSTICS
■Imaging
 Regional radiographs: usually normal; may see periosteal reaction on adjacent
bones or displacement of surrounding structures
· Thoracic radiographs: indicate to check for lung metastases
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) or computed tomography (CT) imaging allows
superior discrimination of tumor for surgery and/or  for radiation treatment
planning
■Histopathology
Cytological examination of aspirate: differentiate salivary adenocarcinoma from
mucocele and abscess
 Needle core or wedge biopsy: definitive diagnosis
■ Appropriate preoperative diagnostics when indicated prior to procedure
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Chemotherapy: largely unreported
Procedures
■ Aggressive surgical resection: when possible; most are invasive and difficult to excise
■ Radiotherapy: good local control and prolonged survival in three reported cases
CHAPTER 55: SALIVARY GLAND ADENOCARCINOMA
407
radiation can achieve local control and long-term survival, but further studies are
needed to determine the most effective treatment, including the possible role for
chemotherapy
■ Appropriate antimicrobial and pain management therapy when indicated
■ Appropriate patient monitoring and support during anesthetic procedures
COMMENTS
■ Evaluations: dictated by tumor growth; every 3 months reasonable if aggressive
surgery and/or radiation employed
■ Temporary acute side effects (e.g., moist dermatitis with alopecia) expected with
radiation therapy
Expected Course and Prognosis
■  Improved survival time in dogs without evidence of nodal or distant metastasis at
diagnosis; clinical stage not prognostic for cats
■ Median survival 550 days for dogs and 516 days for cats in retrospective study
  Local control through radiation or multiple surgeries remains critical
Abbreviations
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Suggested Reading
Hammer A, Getzy D, Ogilvie G, et al. Salivary gland neoplasia in the dog and cat: suurvival times and
prognostic factors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:478-482.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Blackwell's
Five-Minute Veterinary Consuit: Canine and Feline, Sth edition.
Author: Anthony J. Mutsaers, DVM, DACVIM
Consuiting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 5th
edition): Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
56
chapter
Masticatory Muscle
Myositis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Focal inflammatory myopathy affecting the muscles of mastication (temporalis and
masseter muscles) and sparing the limb muscles
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Suspected immune-mediated cause owing to autoantibodies against type 2M fibers
and a positive clinical response to immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids
■ Unknown genetic cause
■ As with autoimmune diseases in general, the appropriate genetic background must
exist
■ Cavalier King Charles spaniels (CKCS) have a familial form and may be affected at
less than 6 months of age
■
 Possible previous bacterial or viral infection
 Vaccination may exacerbate active disease
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Dogs: various breed predilections
· Rottweilers, Dobermans, Samoyeds, and CKCS develop severe forms
■No obvious age or sex predilections
■ Usually related to abnormalities of jaw movement, jaw pain, and masticatory muscle
atrophy; not a “tabletop" diagnosis; usually requires laboratory testing to confirm
diagnosis
■ Acute or chronic pain when opening the jaw; inability to pick up a ball or get food
 into the mouth; acutely swollen muscles; progressive muscle atrophy
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
408
CHAPTER 56: MASTICATORY MUSCLE MYOSITIS
409
CLINICAL FEATURES
Marked jaw pain with manipulation and/or trismus (the inability to open the jaw).
even under general anesthesia
Muscle swelling with exophthalmos
■  Inability to open the jaw under anesthesia
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Retro-orbital abscess: probe behind last upper molar
 Temporomandibular joint disease: radiographically abnormal joint
 Polymyositis: high serum creatine kinase; generalized electromyogram (EMG) abnor-
malities; diagnostic muscle biopsies
■ Neurogenic atrophy of temporalis muscles: determined by EMG and muscle
biopsy
Atrophy of masticatory muscles from corticosteroids: history of corticosteroid use;
characteristic changes on muscle biopsy
■ Atrophy of masticatory muscles from endocrine disorders: test for thyroid and
adrenal disorders
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Serum creatine kinase: normal or mildly elevated during acute phase; hyperglobu-
linemia in some; peripheral eosinophilia not consistent
Muscle biopsy: diagnostic test of choice for masticatory disease
■  Immunocytochemical assay: demonstrate autoantibodies against masticatory muscle
type 2M fibers in frozen muscle biopsy sections; negative in polymyositis and extra-
ocular disease
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA):—demonstrate autoantibodies against
masticatory muscle type 2M fiber proteins
■Imaging
· Radiography of the temporomandibular joints
· Orbital sonogram: for extraorbital disease; demonstrate swollen extraocular
muscles
· Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl): for demonstration of inflammation in
muscles
■ EMG: differentiate between extraocular disease and polymyositis; abnormal mas-
ticatory muscles in masticatory myositis only: generalized abnormalities in
polymyositis
410
 SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
■Pathological findings
· Swelling or atrophy of the masticatory muscles
· Biopsy specimen: may see myofiber necrosis, phagocytosis, mononuclear cell
infiltration with a multifocal and perivascular distribution
· May see myofiber atrophy and fibrosis with chronic condition; eosinophils rare
THERAPEUTICS
■ Patient may require liquid food or gruel until jaw mobility is regained; may need a
gastric feeding tube to facilitate fluid and caloric intake
Drugs
Corticosteroids
· Immunosuppressive dosages, tapered as jaw mobility, swelling, and serum creatine
kinase return to normal
· Maintained at lowest alternate-day dosage that prevents restricted jaw mobility
· Treated for a minimum of 6 months
· Watch for infection and undesirable side effects of corticosteroids
 Intolerable side effects of corticosteroids: institute a lower dose and combine
with another drug (e.g., azathioprine)
· Clinical signs may recur if treatment is stopped too soon
COMMENTS
Synonyms: eosinophilic myositis; atrophic myositis
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Good prognosis if treated early with adequate dosages of corticosteroids
■ Jaw mobility should return to normal unless the condition is chronic and severe
fibrosis develops
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 47
Abbreviations
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EMG, electromyogram; MRI, magnetic
resonance imaging.
Suggested Reading
Melmed C, Shelton GD, Bergman R, Barton C. Masticatory muscle myositis: pathogenesis, diagnosis
and treatment. Compend Contin Educ 2004;26:590-605.
CHAPTER 56: MASTICATORY MUSCLE MYOSITIS 
411
Nanai B, Phillips L, Christiansen J, Shelton GD. Life threatening complication associated with anes-
thesia in a dog with MMM. Vet Surg 2009;38:645-649.
Orvis JS, Cardinet GH Il. Canine muscle fiber types and susceptibility of masticatory muscles to
myositis. Muscle Nerve 1981;4:354-359.
Podell M. Inflammatory myopathies. Vet Clin North Am 2002;31:147-167.
Shelton GD. Canine masticatory muscle disorders. In: Kirk RW, ed. Current Veterinary Therapy X.
Philadelphia: Saumders, 1989:816-819.
Shelton GD, Cardinet GH Il, Bandman E. Canine masticatory muscle disorders: a clinicopathological
and immunochemical study of 29 cases. Muscle Nerve 1987;10:753-766.
Author: G. Diane Shelton, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
3rd edition): Peter K. Shires, BVSc, MS, DACVS
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
57
chapter
Trigeminal Neuritis
(Idiopathic)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Sudden bilateral paralysis of trigeminal mandibular branches resulting in inability to
close the mouth
 Lesions are characterized by extensive nonsuppurative trigeminal neuritis, demyelin-
 ation, and rare axonal degeneration affecting all portions of the trigeminal nerve and
ganglion without brain stem involvement
■ Also referred to as dropped jaw, trigeminal neuropathy, mandibular paralysis
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Unknown
■ Autoimmune disorder suspected
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Primarily adult dogs
■Rare in cats
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Acute onset of a dropped jaw
■ Inability to close the mouth
Drooling
 Difficulty in prehending food, messy eating
■ Swallowing is intact when food and water are placed in the caudal portion of the
mouth
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
412
CHAPTER 57: TRIGEMINAL NEURITIS (IDIOPATHIC)
413
 Approximately one-third of affected dogs will exhibit loss of facial sensation
(s   n no sid s  s  
■ Long-term muscle atrophy depending on degree of axonal involvement
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Musculoskeletal disorders of the temporomandibular joints and jaw: differentiated
by history of trauma and pain and physical examination findings
Rabies: always initially consider until there is sufficient evidence to rule it out
Encephalitis involving the motor nuclei of bilateral trigeminal nerve
Neoplasia: both mandibular nerves secondary to myelomonocytic leukemia, lympho-
sarcoma, and neurofibrosarcoma reported; usually does not have an acute onset
■ Masticatory muscle myositis: presentation excludes this condition characterized by
trismus and difficulty/inability to open the mouth (see Chapter 56)
DIAGNOSTICS
■No specific test
■Skull radiography magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and
muscle biopsy: rule out the differentials
· MRI: diffuse enlargement of affected nerves that appear isointense to hyperintense
on I2 weighted images if edema is present; contrast enhancement on postcontrast
Tl weighted images
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
■ Corticosteroids are not indicated as there is no evidence that they improve
recovery
· Furthermore, side effects (polyuria/polydipsia) can make management difficult
Procedures
■ Recovery within 2-3 weeks of onset; supportive treatment necessary during this
period
■ Outpatient if owner is able to help the patient eat and drink
■ Patient cannot prehend and move food and water to the throat, but can swallow
if the bolus is placed in the caudal portion of the mouth and the jaw is manually
held closed
414  SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
■ Water and slurry food can also be placed, with a syringe, in the corner of the mouth
with head slightly elevated
■ Fluids: subcutaneously if oral support is insufficient
■ Esophagostomy or gastrotomy tubes: rarely necessary to maintain adequate food
 intake; requires help when eating and drinking
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Self-limiting disorder
■Full recovery in 2-4 weeks
■ Bilateral symmetrical masticatory muscle atrophy but without trismus
See also the following chapter:
■ Chapter 56
Abbreviations
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Suggested Reading
Mayhew PD, Bush WW, Glass EN. Irigenminal neuropathy in dogs: a retrospective study of 29 cases
(1991-2000). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002;38:262-270.
This topic was edited for oral/dental content from previous publication in Blackwells
Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline, 5th edition.
Author: Mylene-Kim Leclerc, DVM, MVSc, DACVP
Consulting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition): Joane M. Parent, DVM, MVetSc, DACVIM
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Acknowledgment: T. Mark Neer for this chapter in past editions
chapter
58
Pemphigus Vulgaris
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Pemphigus: a group of autoimmune dermatoses characterized by varying degrees of
ulceration, crusting, and pustule and vesicle formation
 Affects the skin and sometimes the mucous membranes
 Iypes: pemphigus foliaceus (PF), pemphigus vulgaris (PV), pemphigus erythemato-
sus (PE), panepidermal pustular pemphigus/vegetans (PEP), canine benign familial
chronic pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease), paraneoplastic pemphigus (PP)
 PV is the primary form involving the oral cavity (90% of patients showing oral signs),
and is the focus of discussion for this chapter
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ PV: second most common type, the most severe form (although rare, PEP may be
more severe)
 Mediated by tissue-bound autoantibody deposition just above the basement mem-
brane zone; results in deeper ulcer formation
■ Severity of ulceration and disease: related to depth of autoantibody deposition (e.g.-
PF—autoantibody deposition in the superficial layers of the epidermis)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Dogs and cats
■ Usually middle-aged to old animals
Blachwell Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentisry Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
415
416
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Oral ulceration frequent and may precede skin lesions
■Ulcerative lesions, erosions, epidermal collarettes, blisters, and crusts
■ More severe than PF and PE
■ Affects mucous membranes, mucocutaneous junctions, and skin; may become
generalized
 Axillae and groin areas often affected
■May have positive Nikolsky's sign (new or extended erosive lesion created with lateral
pressure is applied to the skin near an existing lesion)
■
Anorexia, depression, and fever
■
Variable pain and pruritis
■
Secondary bacterial infections common
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Bullous pemphigoid
■
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
 Drug eruption
■Mycosis fungoides
■ Lymphoreticular neoplasia
■ Ulcerative stomatitis causes, candidiasis
Erythema multiforme
DIAGNOSTICS
■Leukocytosis
and
1 hyperglobulinemia
1sometimes  noted, but abnormalities
uncommon
■ Antinuclear antibody: may be weakly positive in PE only
■ Cytology of aspirates or impression smears of pustules or crusts: acantholytic cells
and neutrophils
■Bacteriologic culture: identify secondary bacterial infections
 Biopsies of lesional or perilesional skin: acantholysis and intraepidermal clefting:
microabscess or pustule formation; surface acantholytic keratinocytes
■ Location of epidermal lesions: varies with disease; PF and PE have subcorneal or
intragranular clefting and acantholysis; PV and PEP have suprabasilar clefting
  Immunopathology of biopsied skin via immunofluorescent antibody assays or immu-
nohistochemical testing: may demonstrate positive staining in the intercellular spaces
in 50-90% of cases
CHAPTER 58: PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
417
· Results can be affected by concurrent or previous corticosteroid (or other immu-
nosuppressive drug) administration; indirect immunofluorescence usually
negative
THERAPEUTICS
■  Initial inpatient supportive therapy for severely affected patients
■ Outpatient treatment with initial frequent hospital visits (every 1-3 weeks); taper to
every l-3 months when remission is achieved and the patient is on a maintenance
medical regimen
■ Low-fat diet to avoid pancreatitis predisposed by corticosteroids and (possibly)
azathioprine therapy
Severely affected patients may require antibiotics
Drugs
Corticosteroids
· Prednisone or prednisolone: 1.1-2.2mg/kg/day per os (PO) divided q12h to
initiate control
· Minimum maintenance: 0.5 mg/kg PO q48h
· Taper dosage at 2-4-week intervals by 5-10 mg per week
■Cytotoxic agents
· More than half of patients require the addition of other immunomodulating drugs
· Generally work synergistically with prednisone, allowing reduction in dose and
side effects of the corticosteroid
· Azathioprine: 2.2mg/kg PO q24h, then q48h (dogs); infrequently used in cats.
owing to potential for marked bone marrow suppression; feline dose l mg/kg
q24-48h
· Chlorambucil: 0.2 mg/kg daily; best choice for cats
● Cyclophosphamide: 50 mg/m² PO body surface area (BSA) q48h (dogs)
· Cyclosporine: 15-27 mg/kg daily PO; limited application
· Dapsone: 1 mg/kg PO q8h; then as needed (dogs): limited application
■Chrysotherapy
· Often used in conjunction with prednisone
· Auranofin: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q12-24h
■Precautions
· Corticosteroids: polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, temperament changes, diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, and hepatotoxicity
· Azathioprine: pancreatitis
·Cytotoxicdrugs:
leukopenia,  thrombocytopenia,  nephrotoxicity.  and
hepatotoxicity
· Chrysotherapy: leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, nephrotoxicity. dermatitis,
stomatitis, and allergic reactions
418  SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
·Cyclophosphamide: hemorrhagic cystitis
 Immunosuppression: can predispose animal to Demodex, cutaneous and systemic
bacterial and fungal infection
■ Alternative corticosteroids
· Use instead of prednisone if undesirable side effects or poor response occur
· Methylprednisolone: 0.8-1.5 mg/kg PO q12h; for patients that tolerate prednisone
poorly
· Triamcinolone: 0.2-0.3 mg/kg PO q12h; then 0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48-72h
· Glucocorticoid pulse therapy: 1l mg/kg intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone
sodium succinate for three consecutive days to induce remission; limited
application
■Miscellaneous
· Tetracycline and niacinamide: 500 mg PO q8h (dogs >10 kg); half doses for dogs
<10 kg: limited application
COMMENTS
■ Monitor response to therapy
■ Monitor for medication side effects: routine hematology and serum biochemistry.
especially for patients on high doses of corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, or chryso-
therapy; check every 1-3 weeks, then every 1-3 months when in remission
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ PV and PF
· Therapy with corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs needed
● Patients may require medication for life
● Monitoring necessary
· Side effects of medications may affect quality of life
· May be fatal if untreated (especially PV)
· Secondary infections cause morbidity and possible mortality (especially PV)
Abbreviations
PE, pemphigus erythematosus; PEP, panepidermal pustular pemphigus; PF, pemphigus
foliaceus; PP, paraneoplastic pemphigus; PV, pemphigus vulgaris.
Suggested Reading
Ackerman LJ. Irmmune-mediated skin diseases. In: Morgan RV, ed. Handbook of Small Animal Practice,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1997:941-943.
Angarano DW. Autoimmune dermatosis. In: Nesbitt GH, ed. Contemporary Issues in Small Animal
Practice: Dermatology. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:79-94.
Rosenkrantz Ws. Pemphigus foliaceous. In: Griffn CE, Knochka KW, MacDonald JM, et al., eds.
Current Veterinary Dermatology. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1993:141-148
CHAPTER 58: PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
419
This material was edited from Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and
Feline, 5th edition ("Pemphigus").
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, DACVD
Consuiting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition): Alexander H. Werner, VMD, DACVD
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
59
chapter
Eosinophilic Granuloma
Complex
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■Cats: often confusing term for three distinct syndromes—eosinophilic plaque, eosin-
ophilic granuloma, and indolent ulcer.
· Grouped primarily according to their clinical similarities, their frequent concur-
· Oral lesions seen most commonly in indolent ulcers and eosinophilic
granulomas
 Dogs: eosinophilic granulomas in dogs (EGD) rare
 Not part of a disease complex
· Specific differences from cats are listed separately
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Eosinophil: major infiltrative cell for eosinophilic granuloma, eosinophilic plaque.
and allergic miliary dermatitis, but not indolent ulcer; leukocyte located in greatest
numbers in epithelial tissues; most often associated with allergic or parasitic con-
ditions, but has a more general role in the inflammatory reaction
Genetic: several reports of related affected individuals and a study of disease develop-
ment in a colony of specific pathogen-free cats indicate that, in at least some indi-
viduals, genetic predisposition (perhaps resulting in a heritable dysfunction of
eosinophilic regulation) is a significant component for development of eosinophilic
granuloma and indolent ulcer
Lesions of all four syndromes may develop spontaneously and acutely
 Development of eosinophilic plaques can be preceded by periods of lethargy
A seasonal incidence is common and may indicate insect or environmental
allergen exposure
· Waxing and waning of clinical signs is common in all four syndromes
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
420
 Eosinophilic plaque: hypersensitivity reaction, most often to insects (fleas, mosqui-
toes); less often to food or environmental allergens; exacerbated by mechanical
trauma
■Eosinophilic granuloma: multiple causes, including genetic predisposition and, pos-
sibly, hypersensitivity
  Indolent ulcer: may have both hypersensitivity and genetic causes
 Allergic miliary dermatitis: very common hypersensitivity reaction, most often to
fleas
EGD: may have both a genetic predisposition and a hypersensitivity cause (especially
 in nongenetically susceptible breeds)
■Skin/exocrine: the integument is most often affected
■Oral cavity
· Eosinophilic granuloma can affect the tongue, palatine arches, and palate
 EGD: most often affects the tongue and palatine arches; reported cutaneous lesions
on the prepuce and flanks
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
The true complex restricted to cats
· Indolent ulcer: no age predisposition reported
 Cats: predilection for females has been reported only for indolent ulcer
· Genetically initiated eosinophilic granuloma: <2 years of age
· Allergic disorder: >2 years of age
· Eosinophilic plaque: 2-6 years of age
■ Eosinophilic granulomas (EGD) occur in dogs and other species, but are not con-
sidered part of this disease complex
· Siberian huskies (76% of cases), Cavalier King Charles spaniel, possibly German
Shepherd
· Usually <3 years of age
·Males (72% of cases)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■  Distinguishing among the syndromes depends on both clinical signs and histopatho-
logic findings
■ Lesions of more than one syndrome may occur simultaneously
  Eosinophilic granulomas: occasionally overlapping presentations
· Distinctly linear orientation (linear granuloma) on the caudal thigh
· Individual or coalescing plaques located anywhere on the body; ulcerated with a
"cobblestone” or coarse pattern, white or yellow, possibly representing collagen
degeneration
422
 SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
Lip margin and chin swelling ("pouting")
· Footpad swelling. pain, and lameness (most common in cats under 2 years
of age)
 Oral cavity ulcerations (especially on the tongue, palate, and palatine arches)
(Fig. 59-1)
 Cats with oral lesions may be dysphagic, have halitosis, and may drool
■ Eosinophilic plaques
 Alopecic, erythematous, erosive patches, and plaques or well-demarcated, steep-
walled plaques
· Usually occur in the inguinal, perineal, lateral thigh, and axillary regions
· Frequently moist or glistening
· Regional lymphadenopathy common
■ Lesion development may stop spontaneously in some cats, especially with the
heritable form of eosinophilic plaque
■Indolent ulcers
· Classically concave and indurated ulcerations with a granular, orange-yellow
color, confined to the upper lips adjacent to the philtrum (Fig. 59-2)
1 EGD: ulcerated plaques and masses; dark or orange color
· Most often affects the tongue and palatine arches
·Reported cutaneous lesions on the prepuce and flanks
■ Figure 59-1 Indolent ulcer.
CHAPTER 59: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
423
 Figure 59-2 Eosinophilic granuloma on palate.
■ Allergic miliary dermatitis: multiple brown/black crusted and erythematous pau-
pules; lesions more often palpated than visualized; may be associated with alopecia;
usually associated with pruritis; frequently affects the dorsum
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Includes the other diseases in the complex
Herpes virus dermatitis
■ Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
■ Unresponsive lesions: exclude pemphigus foliaceus, dermatophytosis and deep
fungal infection, demodicosis, pyoderma, and neoplasia (especially metastatic
adenocarcinoma and cutaneous lymphosarcoma)
 EGD: neoplasia, histiocytosis, infectious and noninfectious granuloma, trauma
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete blood count (CBC): mild to moderate eosinophilia
 FeLV and FIV: pruritic diseases have been associated with these viruses
■  Impression smears from lesions: large numbers of eosinophils
 Comprehensive flea and insect control: assist in excluding flea or mosquito bite
hypersensitivity
424
SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
■Food-elimination trial: for all cases; feed a protein (e.g., lamb, pork, venison, or
rabbit) to which the cat has never been exposed; use exclusively for 8l0 weeks;
then reinstitute previous diet and observe for development of new lesions
■ Atopy: intradermal skin testing (preferred); inject small amounts of dilute allergens
intradermally: positive reaction (allergy) is indicated by the development of a hive
or wheal at the injection site
■ Histopathologic diagnosis: required for distinguishing the syndromes
· Indolent ulcer: severe ulceration of the epidermis or mucosa with eosinophilic
degranulation at the level of necrosis; fibrosing dermatitis and neutrophilic inflam-
mation; significant eosinophilic infiltration unusual
· Eosinophilic granuloma: distinct foci of eosinophilic degranulation and collagen
 degeneration similar to granuloma formation (flame figures); keratinocyte apop-
tosis associated with eosinophils, eroded, ulcerated, and exudative acanthotic
epidermis
· Eosinophilic plaque: severe epidermal and follicular spongiosis and mucinosis
with eosinophilic exocytosis; intense eosinophilic dermal infiltrate common;
epidermis commonly eroded or ulcerated
· EGD: foci of palisading granulomas and flame figures surrounding collagen fibers;
infiltrate with eosinophils mixed with macrophages, mast cells, plasma cells, and
lymphocytes
· Allergic miliary dermatitis: discrete foci of epidermal erosion and necrosis with
brightly eosinophilic crusts; dermal perivascular to interstitial eosinophil-rich
infiltrate
THERAPEUTICS
■ Most patients can be treated as outpatients unless severe oral disease prevents ade-
quate fluid intake
■  Identify and eliminate offending allergen(s) before providing medical intervention
■ Hyposensitization of intradermal skin test-positive cats: successful in a majority of
cases; preferable to long-term corticosteroid administration
 Discourage patient from damaging lesions by excess grooming
 Inform clients about the possible allergic or heritable causes
■ Discuss the waxing and waning nature of these diseases
■ Responsible clients may choose to postpone medical intervention, unless severe
lesions develop
Drugs
■ Indolent ulcer
· Injectable or oral corticosteroids
 Injectable methylprednisolone: 20 mg/cat, repeat in 2 weeks (if needed); most
common treatment:; tachyphylaxis common with repeated injections; not
advised for long-term therapy
CHAPTER 59: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX 425
  Corticosteroids: ongoing treatment with prednisone (3-5 mg/kg q48h) required
to control lesions; steroid tachyphylaxis may occur and may be specific to the
drug administered; may be useful to changing the formulation; other drugs:
dexamethasone (0.1-0.2mg/kg q24-72h) and triamcinolone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg
q24-72h); higher induction dosages may be required but should be tapered as
quickly as possible
S   s   s  s      
side effects rare; no specific treatment monitoring required
·Some cases improve with antibiotics: clindamycin 5.5mg/kg bid per os (PO).
cephalexin (22 mg/kg PO q12h), amoxicillin trihydrate-clavulanate (12.5 mg/kg
PO ql2h), or trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 15 mg/kg bid
Eosinophilic plaque and granuloma
· Some case improve with antibiotics: clindamycin 5.5 mg/kg bid PO, cephalexin
(22 mg/kg PO q12h), amoxicillin trihydrate-clavulanate (12.5 mg/kg PO q12h), or
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 15 mg/kg bid
treatment
· Topical: fluocinolone/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to individual lesions; not
    d       
lesions
■Alternate therapies
· Chlorambucil 0.1-0.2 mg/kg q 48-72h
· Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg daily to q48h
· Doxycycline 5-10 mg/kg q24h
S           s
■EGD
· Oral prednisone: 0.5-2.2 mg/kg/day initially; then taper gradually
· Cessation of therapy without recurrence is common
■Alternative drug
· Megestrol acetate: 2.5-5mg every 2-7 days; significant incidence of side effects
(diabetes, mammary cancer) preclude use in all but severe, recalcitrant cases
■Patient monitoring
· Corticosteroids: baseline and frequent hemograms, serum chemistry profiles, and
urinalyses with culture
· Selective immunosuppressant drugs: frequent hemograms (biweekly at first, then
monthly or bimonthly as therapy continues) to monitor for bone marrow sup-
pression; routine serum chemistry profiles and urinalyses with culture (monthly
at first, then every 3 months) to monitor for complications (renal disease, diabetes
mellitus, and urinary tract infection)
Procedures
■ EGD: individual lesions may be excised if being mechanically traumatized and medi-
cally unresponsive
426
 SECTION XI: SALIVARY AND OTHER SPECIAL PROBLEMS
COMMENTS
■Synonyms
· Feline eosinophilic skin diseases
· Eosinophilic granuloma: feline
collagenolytic
granuloma; feline linear
granuloma
· Indolent ulcer: eosinophilic ulcer; rodent ulcer, feline upper lip ulcerative
dermatitis
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Lesions should resolve permanently if a primary cause (allergy) can be determined
and controlled
Most lesions wax and wane, with or without therapy; thus, an unpredictable schedule
of recurrence should be anticipated
■ Drug dosages should be tapered to the lowest possible level (or discontinued, if pos-
sible) once the lesions have resolved
■ Lesions in cat with inheritable disease may resolve spontaneously after several years
■ EGD: lesions may be recalcitrant to medical intervention
Abbreviations
EGD, eosinophilic granulomas in dogs; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIV, feline immu-
nodeficiency virus.
Suggested Reading
Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 1995;25:833-850.
Rosenkrantz Ws. Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex. In: Griffn CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald
JM, eds. Current Veterinary Denmatology: The Science and Art of Therapy. St. Louis, MO: Mosby,
1993.
This material was edited from Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and
Feline, 5th edition ("Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex").
Author: Alexander H. Werner, VMD, DACVD
Consu/ting Editor (in Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline,
5th edition): Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, DACVD
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
section
XII
Exotic Pets
chapter
60
Small Mammal Dentistry
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■  In rodents and rabbits, many dental problems are directly related to the continuous
growth pattern of incisors and some cheek teeth
· Elodont: continuously growing and erupting
·Aradicular: open-rooted tooth
 Hypsodont: long anatomical crown compared to the root
 Acquired dental disease (ADD): improper wear; multifactorial
 In caviomorph rodents (guinea pigs, chinchillas), all teeth grow continuously and
have open-rooted apices, similar to rabbits (but rabbits have a second pair of maxil-
lary incisors—small peg teeth)
■ In murine rodents (rats, mice, hamsters, gerbils), the molars have closed roots
· Anelodont: not continually growing and erupting
· Radicular: closed root apex
+1
Brachydont: short crown compared to the root (similar to human teeth)
■Dental formulae
●Rabbits: 2 × (I 2/l; C 0/0; P 3/2; M 3/3) = 28
· Chinchilla: 2 × (1 1/l; C 0/0; P 1/l; M 3/3) = 20
· Rat, hamster (golden and Russian): 2 × (1 1/l; C 0/0; P 0/0; M 3/3) = 16
● Prairie dog: 2 × (1 1/l; C 0/0; P 2/l; M 3/3) = 22
 due to lack of normal physiological attrition, which would offet continuous growth
  Rodents and rabbits normally have an anisognathic relationship: maxilla wider than
mandible
■ In other small mammals, teeth have closed roots and do not continuously erupt, so
dental issues are often related to diet or acquired disease (trauma)
+ Ferrets: 2 (1 3/3; C 1/l; P 3/3; M 1/2) = 34
Carnivore/omnivore: teeth similar to cat
 Fractured canine teeth are the most common presentation
 Can develop periodontal disease: home care can be helpful
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
429
430
 SECTION XII: EXOTIC PETS
·Hedgehogs: 2 (1 2-3/2; C 1/l; P 3-4/2-3; M 3/3) = 34-40
Insectivore
Primitive tooth structure
·Sugar glider: 2 ( 1 3/2; C 1/0; P 3/3; M 4/4) = 40
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Rabbits
· Incisors: the most common clinical presentation due to visibility
 Congenital: mandibular prognathism/maxillary brachygnathism
0  Lack of proper positioning leads to overgrowth of incisors
 Trauma: common in rabbits due to a fall or chewing on cage
 Malocclusion of cheek teeth: incisor malocclusion is secondary
 Metabolic bone disease
0 Decreased calcium levels; lack of exposure to natural sunlight
0 Demineralization of bones and teeth
· Cheek teeth
 ADD: elongation of crowns
0 Abnormal occlusal plane: "wave mouth"
■ Spikes lingually on mandibular cheek teeth can damage the tongue
■ Spikes buccally on maxillary cheek teeth can damage buccal mucosa
 0 Can lead to deformity of mandibular ventral cortical bone (pressure extend-
ing apically)
0 Crown fracture
■Apical abscess
■Guinea pig
·  Incisor malocclusion less frequent
Almost always secondary to ADD of cheek teeth
 Mandibular incisors normally long in appearance
0 Improper trimming can cause problems
Tooth fractures less frequent
 Mandibular prognathism/maxillary brachygnathism not documented
· Metabolic bone disease not reported
· Malocclusion and excessive crown elongation of cheek teeth common
 Presenting signs are usually more severe than in rabbits
 Mandibular cheek teeth can elongate over the tongue (seldom lacerate the
tongue), sometimes in a complete bridging (tongue tie)
 Elongation pressure on apices
0 Pressure on intra-alveolar nerves painful and difficult to resolve
Chinchilla
·  Incisor malocclusion less frequent than in rabbits
Almost always secondary to cheek teeth malocclusion
CHAPTER 6O: SMALL MAMMAL DENTISTRY
431
 Fracture more common than guinea pigs
· Prognathism/brachygnathism and metabolic bone disease not documented
· Cheek teeth elongation: signs at presentation generally less severe than in
guinea pig
 Apical deformities of cheek teeth
 Perforation of cortical bone, but fewer abscesses than rabbits
 Hamsters (golden and Russian)
· Incisor fractures common, but difficult to see
+
Cheek teeth may have wear, caries, and fractures
■Gerbil
● Incisor malocclusions due to wear or fracture
■Rat
· Cheek teeth: fractures and caries
■Prairie dog
· Incisor fractures common: falls and chewing on cages
·Pseudo-odontoma
Dysplastic maxillary incisors: malocclusion due to trauma, fraction, or improper
trimming
Interference with proper eruption
 Pressure: apical growth and deformation of germinal tissue
0 Irregularities of new dentin
D
 Progress to severe root deformation, leading to progressive nasal obstruction
(not neoplastic)
■Dietary influences
+
 Inadequate roughage for attrition
· Excessive selenium or deficiency of vitamin C (guinea pigs)
  Impaired collagen synthesis that could impact periodontal ligament (PDL),
leading to tooth mobility
  Mobile teeth may drift out of proper occlusal alignment
Diseases secondary to dental problems
·“Dental disease syndrome"
 Rabbits: usually in poor condition
0 Skin: slobbers due to hypersalivation or poor grooming (Fig. 60-1)
 0 Ocular disease: epiphora or later abscessation due to lacrimal duct
involvement
 0 Tongue/mucosa: lacerations, defects due to crown overgrowth
0 Abscesses/osteomyelitis
Guinea pig
 0 Gastrointestinal: reduced food intake can slow peristalsis—bloat
0Skin and ocular disease less common
 0 Abscesses less common
 Chinchilla
0  Epiphora due to nasolacrimal duct involvement
432
SECTION XII: EXOTIC PETS
 Figure 60-1 "Slobbers" or wet dewlap on a rabbit due to hypersalivation.
Hamsters
 0  Facial mass secondary to periapical abscess
0 Cheek pouches: impaction, prolapsed, or neoplasia
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Reluctant to eat or dysphagic
■Weight loss, unthrifty, not grooming self 
Bruxism: tooth grinding
 Swelling or abscessation
Nasal discharge
■
Slobbers: excessive drooling with or without moist dermatitis
■ Ocular disease: epiphora or discharge
CHAPTER 6O: SMALL MAMMAL DENTISTRY
433
 Figure 60-2 With rodent cheek dilators, mandibular cheek teeth lingual overgrowth is apparent.
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Elongated crown or “roots" (submerged portion of crown)
· Maxillary incisors may start curling into mouth with elongation
 Disruption of proper occlusion: difficulty closing mouth if cheek teeth involved
 Incisor changes readily apparent
 Cheek teeth aberrations seen on with closer examination (endoscopy, otoscope
cone) (Fig. 60-2) or radiographically
■Apical swelling: cystic changes or abscessation with drainage
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Oral mass
■Oral foreign body
434
SECTION XII: EXOTIC PETS
DIAGNOSTICS
Complete oral examination
· Otoscope may be used to facilitate initial examination on alert patient
· General anesthesia is necessary for a complete oral examination if problems are
suspected
 Rabbit/rodent mouth gag: avoid excessive stretching
Cheek dilator
口
 Spatula: deflect and protect tongue and soft issue
 Rodent table/retractor/restraint
 Lighted bivalve speculum
 Endoscopy: if available
■Radiography
· Extraoral film: #4 dental film or standard film
 Lateral: evaluate occlusal plane and occlusion (Fig. 60-3)
 Oblique lateral views (left and right): allow visualization of mandibular roots
on one side and maxillary roots of the other
· Intraoral films: #2, #0, or #l
  In larger rabbits or rodents, or in ferrets
· Assess apical changes: extensive root changes can lead to perforation of cortical
bone or abscessation
· Assess premolars and molars: occlusal surfaces
· Contrast material in nasolacrimal duct
 Figure 60-3 Radiograph of chinchilla shows disruption of occlusal plane and appropriate contact due to
over growth of crowns.
CHAPTER 6O: SMALL MAMMAL DENTISTRY
435
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs
 Appropriate antimicrobial therapy if abscessation or slobbers present
· Broad spectrum likely warranted, but limited choices
  Risk of gastrointestinal flora disruption
 Rabbit coprophagic habits important to consider with oral medications
Procedures
■ Equipment
· Mouth gag, cheek dilator, spatula, and rodent table as described above
 High-speed dental handpiece: straight handpiece, with protective shield
+
 Cutters/nippers or dental rasps (diamond rasps or thin bone files) for small spikes
+
Crossley luxators: incisors and cheek teeth
 Occlusal adjustment of teeth: tooth height reduction
· Incisors
 Every 3-6 weeks or as needed
  Diamond bur on high-speed handpiece with light touch: protect soft tissue
o Bur guard
 Do not use cutting disk or nail trimmers
 Restore natural chisel shape (due to more enamel on facial surfaces) should be
retained if possible
  Complete assessment of cheek teeth is necessary
· Cheek teeth
 Every 6-8 weeks or as needed
Tooth rongeurs
 n p  p  n   q  
 Diamond bur on high-speed handpiece with light touch: protect soft tissue with
bur guard or spatula
 Protect soft tissues: tongue, cheeks
 0 Large artery at distal edge of mandible: rabbit
Extraction
· Consider incisor extraction if challenging to keep teeth equilibrated
 Long, curved root: surgical extraction would damage bone
 PDL: intermediate plexus
0 Elevation to fatigue the coronal aspect of the PDL often allows enough
release of tooth
 Elevate carefully with small luxators, minimize rotation
0 Blunted, curved hypodermic needles may be used as small luxators
 Once loose, gently rock the tooth in the socket to destroy the germinal tissue
at the apex; or press tooth back into sulcus with small rotation to extirpate the
pulp completely
436
 SECTION XII: EXOTIC PETS
 Gently remove tooth and pulp
 Incomplete extraction will likely result in regrowth of tooth
 Curette, flush, and suture
 Maxillary incisors are more curved, so exert extraction force in an arc similar
to the curve
· Cheek teeth
 Intraoral: rostral or loose cheek teeth, or brachydont cheek teeth
o Sever PDL with curved needle
0 Luxator used on tooth: elevate; examine for root fragments
  Extraoral: distal cheek teeth; mandibular cheek teeth
0  Approach through irregular bone or fenestrate
0  Loosen tooth/fragment with luxator or needle
0 Close if not infected
■ Marsupialize if infected
Abscessation treatment
Approach through site of drainage or swelling
 Dissect out the wall of the abscess, removing all purulent material
 Curette region, removing diseased portions of teeth, extracting all involved teeth
· Debride bone with small rongeurs
·Thoroughly flush site
· Seldom should these be closed
 Marsupialization allows postoperative monitoring and treatment with eventual
healing by second intention
 Placement of antibiotic impregnated polymethylmethacrylate beads can be tried,
but with a higher rate of treatment failure
COMMENTS
■ Most cases encompass a myriad of conditions and complications due to the delicate
balance that is disrupted
■ Address dietary corrections needed: roughage, ascorbic acid
· If there is no cheek teeth issues and the incisors are treated appropriately, the case
may be well managed
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ With early detection and appropriate, regular treatment, fair prognosis if secondary
problems can be avoided
■ With complicated disease, particularly with advance caudal teeth problems, there
will be a poor prognosis
Abbreviations
PDL, periodontal ligament.
CHAPTER 6O: SMALL MAMMAL DENTISTRY
437
Suggested Reading
Capello V, Gracis M. Rabbit and Rodent Dentistry Handbook. Lake Worth, FL: Zoological Education
Network, 2005.
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Prevention and treatment of dental problems in rodents and lagomorphs. In:
Crossley D, Penman S, eds. Manual of Small Animal Dentistry, 2nd ed. Cheltenham, UK: British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1995:84-92.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consuiting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Appendices
Appendix
A
The Use of Antibiotics in
Veterinary Dentistry
The AVDC endorses the use of systemic antibiotics in veterinary dentistry for treatment
of some infectious conditions of the oral cavity. Although culture and susceptibility
testing is rarely performed on individual patients that have an infection extending from/
to the oral cavity, the selection of an appropriate antibiotic should be based on published
data regarding susceptibility testing of the spectra of known oral pathogens.
Patients that are scheduled for an oral procedure may benefit from pre-treatment
with an appropriate antibiotic to improve the health of infected oral tissues. Bacteremia
is a recognized sequela to dental scaling and other oral procedures. Healthy animals are
able to overcome this bacteremia without the use of systemic antibiotics. However, use
 of a systemically administered antibiotic is recommended to reduce bacteremia for
animals that are immune compromised, have underlying systemic disease (such as
clinically-evident cardiac, hepatic, and renal diseases) and/or when severe oral infection
is present.
Antibiotics should never be considered a monotherapy for treatment of oral infec-
tions, and should not be used as preventive management of oral conditions.
Adopted by the Board of Directors, April 2005.
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
441
B
Appendix
American Veterinary
Dental College
Nomenclature
INTRODUCTION
■ American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC) has adopted the following items as
standard nomenclature for use in College documents. Trainees submitting case
reports for AVDC credentials review are required to use these terms.
 Copyright of the images is owned by AVDC, and they are used with permission. The
AVDC Board gratefully acknowledges the Veterinary Information Network (VIN)
for developing and donating the tooth fracture and tooth resorption diagrams. The
clinical images are provided by diplomates of AVDC.
 s d n n     
nomenclature.html
NOMENCLATURE OF SPECIFICTEETH
■ The incisors will be referred to as: (right or left) (maxillary or mandibular) first,
second, or third incisors numbered from the midline.
■  In the cat, the tooth immediately distal to the maxillary canine is the second premo.
lar, the tooth immediately distal to the mandibular canine is the third premolar.
■ The existence of the conventional anatomical names of teeth as well as the various
(right or left), (maxillary or mandibular), (first, second, third, or fourth), (incisor,
canine, premolar, molar), as applicable, written out in full or abbreviated.
· The modified Triadan system is presently considered to be the tooth numbering
system of choice in veterinary dentistry, gaps are left in the numbering sequence
where there are missing teeth (e.g., the first premolar encountered in the feline
left maxilla is numbered 206, not 205; the two lower right premolars are 407 and
408, not 405 and 406).
· Both the use of anatomical names and the modified Triadan system are acceptable
for recording and storing veterinary dental information. The use of anatomical
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
442
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
names in publications is required by many leading journals and is recommended.
It offers the advantage of veterinary dental publications being understandable to
other health professionals and scientists with an interest in veterinary dentistry.
SURFACES OF TEETH AND DIRECTIONS IN THE MOUTH
Vestibular/Buccal/Labial
■Vestibular is the correct term referring to the surface of the tooth facing the vestibule
or lips.
■ Buccal and labial are acceptable alternatives.
Lingual/Palatal
 Lingual: the surface of a mandibular or maxillary tooth facing the tongue is the
lingual surface.
■  Palatal can also be used when referring to the lingual surface of maxillary teeth.
Mesial/Distal
■ Mesial and distal are terms applicable to tooth surfaces.
■ The mesial surface of the first incisor is next to the median plane; on other teeth it
is directed toward the first incisor.
■ The distal surface is opposite from the mesial surface.
Rostral/Caudal
■Rostral and caudal are the positional and directional anatomical terms applicable to
the head in a sagittal plane in nonhuman vertebrates.
■Rostral refers to a structure closer to, or a direction toward the most forward structure
of the head.
 Caudal refers to a structure closer to, or a direction toward the tail
■ Anterior and posterior are the synonymous terms used in human dentistry.
GENERATIONS OF TEETH IN DIPHYODONT SPECIES
■ Deciduous and permanent are the anatomically correct terms to denote the two
generations of teeth in diphyodont species.
· It is acceptable to use “primary" instead of deciduous in communicating
with clients.
■ The deciduous dentition period is that period during which only deciduous teeth
are present.
444
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
The mixed dentition period is that period during which both deciduous and perma-
nent teeth are present. The permanent dentition period is that period during which
only permanent teeth are present.
■ The term "persistent deciduous tooth" is etymologically correct, although the term
"retained deciduous tooth" is commonly used. The latter term, however, can be
confused with an unerupted deciduous tooth.
JAWS. SALIVARY GLANDS. AND LYMPH NODES
Jaws
All mammals have two maxillas (or maxillae) and two mandibles. The adjective
'maxillary" is often used in a wider sense, for example, "maxillary fractures," to
include other facial bones, in addition to the maxillary bone proper.
Nomina Anatomica
Veterinaria (NAV) term
Anglicized version
Comments
Mandibula
Mandible
All animals have two mandibles,
not one; removing one entire
mandible therefore is a
 mandibulectomy not a
hemimandibulectomy
Corpus mandibulae
Body of the mandible
The part that carries the teeth;
often incorrectly referred to as
horizontal ramus
 Pars incisiva
 Incisive part
The part that carries the incisors
Pars molaris
Molar part
The part that carries the
premolars and molars
premolar-molar part would
probably have been more
accurate
Margo alveolaris
Alveolar margin
Often incorrectly referred to as
alveolar crest
Margo ventralis
Ventral margin
Canalis mandibulae
Mandibular canal
Contains only the neurovascular
bundle often incorrectly
referred to as the medullary
cavity of the mandible
Foramina mentalia
Mental foramens or
Rostral, middle, or caudal mental
foramina
foramina in the dog and cat
Ramus mandibulae
Ramus of the mandible
The part that carries the three
processes often incorrectly
referred to as the vertical
ramus
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
445
Nomina Anatomica
Veterinaria (NAV) term
Anglicized version
Comments
Processus angularis/angulus
Angular process/angle
 mandibulae
of the mandible
Processus coronoideus
Coronoid process
Processus condylaris
Condylar process
Often incorrectly referred to as
condyloid process 
Caput mandibulae
Mandibular notch
The notch on the caudal aspect,
between the coronoid and
condylar processes; not to be
confused with the facial
vascular notch
Incisura vasorum facialium
Facial vascular notch
Shallow indentation on the
ventral aspect of the
mandible, rostral to the
angular process; poorly
defined in carnivores
Foramen mandibulae
Mandibular foramen
The entrance to the mandibular
canal
Articulatio intermandibularis
Intermandibular joint
Discus articularis
Articular disk
Often incorrectly referred to as
meniscus
Articulatio intermandibularis
Intermandibular joint
Synchondrosis
Mandibular symphysis
 Scapino RP The third joint of the
intermandibularis
canine jaw. J Morphof
1965:116:23-50.
Collum mandibulae
Neck of the mandible
The narrow part of the condylar
process supporting the head
 Incisive bones: in domestic animals, the correct name for the paired bones that carry
the maxillary incisors, located rostral to the maxillary bones, is incisive bones, not
premaxilla.
Mandibular Salivary Gland and Lymph Node
   ans  ) p  e a s s 
mandibular lymph node.
■ The term “submandibular,” as used in humans, is incorrect due the difference in
topography of these structures.
Fauces
 The fauces are defined as the lateral walls of the oropharynx that are located medial
to the palatoglossal folds.
■ The areas lateral to the palatoglossal fold, commonly involved in feline stomatitis.
are not the fauces.
446 APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
Hard Palate
 The midline of the hard palate is not a symphysis but is formed by the interincisive
suture, the median palatine suture of the palatine processes of the maxillary bones,
and the median suture of the palatine bones.
Juga Surrounding Teeth
■ The alveolar jugum (plural alveolar juga) is the palpable convexity of the buccal
alveolar bone overlying a large tooth root.
DEFINITIONS OF STAGE, GRADE, AND INDEX
Stage: the assessment of the extent of pathological lesions in the course of a disease
that is likely to be progressive; for example, stages of periodontal disease, staging of
oral tumors, and so on.
■ Grade: the quantitative assessment of the degree of severity of a disease or abnormal
condition at the time of diagnosis, irrespective of whether the disease is progressive:
for example, a grade 2 mast cell tumor (based on mitotic figures).
■ Index: a quantitative expression of predefined diagnostic criteria whereby the pres-
ence and/or severity of pathological conditions are recorded by assessing a numerical
value; for example, gingival index, plaque index, and so on
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Periodontal Disease Classification (the Degree of Severity of
Periodontal Disease Relates to a Single Tooth; a Patient May Have
Teeth that Have Different Stages of Periodontal Disease)
Normal (PD O): clinically normal; no gingival inflammation or periodontitis clinically
evident.
 Stage 1 (PD 1): gingivitis only without attachment loss; the height and architecture
of the alveolar margin are normal.
■ Stage 2 (PD 2): early periodontitis; less than 25% of attachment loss or at most, there
is a stage l furcation involvement in multirooted teeth; there are early radiologic
signs of periodontitis; the loss of periodontal attachment is less than 25% as measured
either by probing of the clinical attachment level, or radiographic determination of
the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative to the
length of the root.
 s s n p o d   )   
either by probing of the clinical attachment level, radiographic determination of the
distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative to the
length of the root, or there is a stage 2 furcation involvement in multirooted teeth.
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE 447
■ Stage 4 (PD 4): advanced periodontitis: more than 50% of attachment loss as
measured either by probing of the clinical attachment level, or radiographic deter
mination of the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction
relative to the length of the root, or there is a stage 3 furcation involvement in mul-
tirooted teeth.
FURCATIONINVOLVEMENT/EXPOSURE
 s        ) a  s
than halfway under the crown in any direction of a multirooted tooth with attach-
ment loss.
■Stage 2 (F2, furcation involvement) exists when a periodontal probe extends greater
than halfway under the crown of a multirooted tooth with attachment loss but not
through and through.
■ Stage 3 (F3, furcation exposure) exists when a periodontal probe extends under the
crown of a multirooted tooth, through and through from one side of the furcation
 out the other.
Tooth Mobility
■ Stage l (Ml): the mobility is increased in any direction other than axial over a dis-
tance of more than 0.2 mm and up to 0.5 mm.
■ Stage 2 (M2): the mobility is increased in any direction other than axial over a dis-
tance of more than 0.5 mm and up to 1.0 mm.
 Stage 3 (M3): the mobility is increased in any direction than axial over a distance
exceeding 1.0 mm or any axial movement.
DENTAL FRACTURE CLASSIFICATION
■ Enamel infraction (El): an incomplete fracture (crack) of the enamel without loss of
tooth substance (Fig. B-l).
■ Enamel fracture (EF): a fracture with loss of crown substance confined to the enamel
(Fig. B-2).
■ Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF): a fracture of the crown that does not expose
the pulp (Fig. B-3).
■ Complicated crown fracture (CCF): a fracture of the crown that exposes the pulp
(Fig. B-4).
■ Uncomplicated crown root fracture (UCRF): a fracture of the crown and root that
does not expose the pulp (Fig. B-5).
■ Complicated crown root fracture (CCRF): a fracture of the crown and root that
exposes the pulp (Fig. B-6).
Enamel
infraction
AVDC
 Figure B-1 Enamel infraction (EI)
Enamel
fracture
AVDC
 Figure B-2 Enamel fracture (EF)
448
Uncomplicated
crown
fracture
AVUC
 Figure B-3 Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF)
Complicated
crown
fracture
AVDC
 Figure B-4 Complicated crown fractures (CCF)
449
Uncomplicated
crownroot
fracture
AVDC
 Figure B-5 Uncomplicated crown root fracture (UCRF)
Complicated
crownroot
fracture
AVDC
 Figure B-6 Complicated crown root fracture (CCRF)
450
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
451
Root
fracture
AWX
 Figure B-7 Root fracture (RF).
Root fracture (RF): a fracture involving the root (Fig. B-7)
 This tooth fracture classification can be applied for brachydont and hypsodont teeth.
which covers domesticated species and many wild species. Fractures of teeth in some
wild species may not fit into this classification because of differences in the tissues
present in the teeth.
· For brachydont teeth, the following definitions of crown, crown root, and root
apply:
 Crown: enamel and dentin
 Crown root: enamel, dentin, and cementum
 Root: dentin and cementum
· For most hypsodont teeth, the following definitions of crown, crown root, and
root apply:
Crown: clinical crown
Crown root: clinical crown and reserve crown
 Root: reserve crown and/or root
ABNORMALITIES OF ENAMEL FORMATION
■ Amelogenesis  imperfecta  includes  genetic  and/or developmental  enamel
formation and maturation abnormalities such as enamel hypoplasia and enamel
hypomineralization.
452
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
 Enamel hypoplasia refers to inadequate deposition of enamel matrix. This can
affect one or several teeth and may be focal or multifocal. The crowns of affected
 teeth can have areas of normal enamel next to areas of hypoplastic or missing
enamel.
Enamel hypomineralization refers to inadequate mineralization of enamel matrix.
This often affects several or all teeth. The crowns of affected teeth are covered by
soft enamel that may be worn rapidly.
CLASSIFICATION OF TOOTH RESORPTION
Tooth resorption is classified based on the severity of the resorption (stages 1-5) and
on the location of the resorption (types 1-3).
Stages of Tooth Resorption
■ Stage 1 (TR 1): mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum, or cementum and enamel)
(Fig. B-8).
■ Stage 2 (TR 2): moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum, or cementum and
enamel with loss of dentin that does not extend to the pulp cavity) (Fig. B-9).
■ Stage 3 (TR 3): deep dental hard tissue loss (cementum, or cementum and enamel
with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth retains its
integrity (Fig. B-10).
Tooth
resorption
stage 1
AV
Figure B-8 Stage 1 (TR 1)
Tooth
resorption
stage2
AVDC
 Figure B-9 Stage 2 (TR 2).
Tooth
resorption
stage 3
AVDC
 Figure B-10 Stage 3 (TR 3).
453
454
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
Tooth
resorption
stage 4a
AVX
Figure B-11 Stage 4a (TR 4a)
1 Stage 4 (TR 4): extensive dental hard tissue loss (cementum, or cementum and
enamel with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth has
lost its integrity.
· TR 4a: crown and root are equally affected (Fig. B-ll)
· TR 4b: crown is more severely affected than the root (Fig. B-12)
· TR 4c: root is more severely affected than the crown (Fig. B-13)
 Stage 5 (TR 5): remnants of dental hard tissue are visible only as irregular radiopaci-
ties, and gingival covering is complete (Fig. B-14).
■ The AVDC classification of tooth resorption is based on the assumption that tooth
resorption is a progressive condition.
Types of Resorption Based on Radiographic Appearance
1 On a radiograph of a tooth with type l (Tl) appearance, a focal or multifocal radio-
 lucency is present in the tooth with otherwise normal radiopacity and normal peri-
odontal ligament space (Fig. B-15).
■ On a radiograph of a tooth with type 2 (T2) appearance, there is narrowing or disap-
pearance of the periodontal ligament space in at least some areas and decreased
radiopacity of part of the tooth (Fig. B-16).
■ On a radiograph of a tooth with type 3 (T3) appearance, features of both type 1
and type 2 are present in the same tooth. A tooth with this appearance has areas of
normal and narrow or lost periodontal ligament space, and there is focal or multifocal
radiolucency in the tooth and decreased radiopacity in other areas of the tooth
(Fig. B-17).
Tooth
resorption
stage4b
AVDC
Figure B-12 Stage 4hb (TR 4b).
Tooth
resorption
stage4c
AVDC
Figure B-13 Stage 4c (TR 4c).
455
Tooth
resorption
stage5
AVDC
Figure B-14 Stage 5 (TR 5).
Type 1
A
Figure B-15 Type 1 (T1).
456
Type 2
Figure B-16 Type 2 (T2)
Type 3
Figure B-17 Type 3 (T3).
457
458 APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
■ Abbreviations: a tooth with a Stage 4b lesion that has a type 2 radiographic appear
ance would be abbreviated TR-S4b-T2.
CLASSIFICATION OF DENTAL OCCLUSION IN DOGS
Normal Occlusion in a Dog
■ An ideal occlusion can be described as perfect interdigitation of the upper and lower
teeth. In the dog. the ideal tooth positions in the arches are defined by the occlusal.
interarch, and interdental relationships of the teeth of the archetypal dog (i.e., wolf).
This ideal relationship with the mouth closed can be defined by the following:
· The maxillary incisor teeth are all positioned rostral to the corresponding man-
dibular incisor teeth.
· The crown cusps of the mandibular incisor teeth contact the cingulum of the
maxillary incisor teeth.
· The mandibular canine tooth is inclined labially and bisects the interproximal
(interdental) space between the opposing maxillary third incisor tooth and
canine tooth.
· The maxillary premolar teeth do not contact the mandibular premolar teeth.
· The crown cusps of the mandibular premolar teeth are positioned lingual to the
arch of the maxillary premolar teeth.
The crown cusps of the mandibular premolar teeth bisect the interproximal (inter-
dental) spaces rostral to the corresponding maxillary premolar teeth.
·The mesial crown cusp of the maxillary fourth premolar tooth is positioned lateral
to the space between the mandibular fourth premolar tooth and the mandibular
first molar tooth.
Malocclusion
■ A malocclusion is any deviation from normal occlusion described above. Malocclu-
sion may be due to abnormal positioning of a tooth or teeth (dental malocclusion)
or due to asymmetry or other deviation of bones which support the dentition (skel-
etal malocclusion).
■Terms of malocclusion:
· Neutroclusion (Class l malocclusion; MAL/l): a normal rostral-caudal relation-
ship of the maxillary and mandibular dental arches with malposition of one or
more individual teeth.
· Mandibular distoclusion (Class 2 malocclusion; MAL/2): an abnormal rostral-
caudal relationship between the dental arches in which the mandibular arch
occludes caudal to its normal position relative to the maxillary arch.
● Mandibular mesioclusion (Class 3 malocclusion; MAL/3): an abnormal rostral-
caudal relationship between the dental arches in which the mandibular arch
occludes rostral to its normal position relative to the maxillary arch.
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE  459
Dental malocclusions
· Distoversion (DV) describes a tooth that is in its anatomically correct position in
the dental arch but which is abnormally angled in a distal direction
· Mesioversion (MV) describes a tooth that is in its anatomically correct position
in the dental arch but which is abnormally angled in a mesial direction
· Linguoversion (LV) describes a tooth that is in its anatomically correct position
in the dental arch but which is abnormally angled in a lingual direction
· Labioversion (LABV) describes an incisor or canine tooth that is in its anatomi
cally correct position in the dental arch but which is abnormally angled in a labial
direction.
● Buccoversion (BV) describes a premolar or molar tooth that is in its anatomically
correct position in the dental arch but which is abnormally angled in a buccal
direction.
· Crossbite (XB) describes a malocclusion in which a mandibular tooth or teeth
have a more buccal or labial position than the antagonist maxillary tooth. It can
be classified as rostral or caudal.
· In rostral crossbite (RXB; similar to anterior crossbite in human terminology), one
or more of the mandibular incisor teeth is labial to the opposing maxillary incisor
teeth when the mouth is closed.
· In caudal crossbite (CXB; similar to posterior crossbite in human terminology),
one or more of the mandibular cheek teeth is buccal to the opposing maxillary
cheek teeth when the mouth is closed.
Skeletal malocclusions
· Symmetrical skeletal malocclusion is defined in “Terms of Malocclusion" (Classes
1-3) at the top of this section.
·  Asymmetrical Skeletal Malocclusion
 Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry describes skeletal malocclusions that can
occur in a rostrocaudal, side-to side, or dorsoventral direction.
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a rostrocaudal direction occurs when man-
dibular mesioclusion or distoclusion is present on one side of the face while
the contralateral side retains normal dental alignment.
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a side-to-side direction occurs when there
is loss of the midline alignment of the maxilla and mandible.
 Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a dorsoventral direction results in an open
bite (OB), which is defined as an abnormal vertical space between opposing
dental arches when the mouth is closed.
 The expression “wry bite" is a layman term that has been used to describe a
wide variety of unilateral occlusal abnormalities. Because “wry bite" is non-
specific, its use is not recommended.
· AVDC abbreviations for malocclusions in dogs
 The diagnosis for a patient with malocclusion can be abbreviated as: MAL
(malocclusion)/l or 2 or 3 (= malocclusion class designation)/specific maloc-
clusion abbreviation and tooth or teeth number(s).
460
 APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
0 Example: MAL/l/RXB202 for a dog with Class 1 occlusion and a rostral
crossbite of the second incisor.
If multiple teeth have the same malocclusion, include the tooth numbers with
a comma in between, for example, MAL/l/RXB202,302.
ORAL AND OROPHARYNGEAL INFLAMMATION
Oral and oropharyngeal inflammation is classified by location as follows:
· Gingivitis: inflammation of gingiva
· Periodontitis: inflammation of nongingival periodontal tissues (i.e., the periodon-
tal ligament and alveolar bone)
·Alveolar mucositis: inflammation of alveolar mucosa (i.e., mucosa overlying the
alveolar process and extending from the mucogingival junction without obvious
demarcation to the vestibular sulcus and to the floor of the mouth)
· Sublingual mucositis: inflammation of mucosa on the floor of the mouth
· Labial/buccal mucositis: inflammation of lip/cheek mucosa
· Caudal mucositis: inflammation of mucosa of the caudal oral cavity, bordered
medially by the palatoglossal folds and fauces, dorsally by the hard and soft palate.
· Contact mucositis and contact mucosal ulceration: lesions in susceptible individu-
als that are secondary to mucosal contact with a tooth surface bearing the respon-
sible irritant, allergen, or antigen; they have also been called “contact ulcers" and
"kissing ulcers"
· Palatitis: inflammation of mucosa covering the hard and/or soft palate
· Glossitis: inflammation of mucosa of the dorsal and/or ventral tongue surface
· Cheilitis: inflammation of the lip (including the mucocutaneous junction area and
skin of the lip)
 Osteomyelitis: inflammation of the bone and bone marrow
 Stomatitis: inflammation of the mucous lining of any of the structures in the
mouth; in clinical use, the term should be reserved to describe widespread oral
inflammation (beyond gingivitis and periodontitis) that may also extend intc
submucosal tissues (e.g., marked caudal mucositis extending into submucosal
tissues may be termed caudal stomatitis)
· Tonsillitis: inflammation of the palatine tonsil
· Pharyngitis: inflammation of the pharynx
■ A definitive diagnosis of inflammation often cannot be made based on physical
examination findings alone.
ORAL MASSES
lesion of any type. Examples of epulides include focal fibrous hyperplasia, peripheral
APPENDIX B: AMERICAN VETERINARY DENTAL COLLEGE NOMENCLATURE
461
odotogenic fibroma, acanthomatous ameloblastoma, nonodontogenic tumors, pyo-
genic granulomas, and reactive exostosis.
■ The AVDC Nomenclature Committee is working with human oral pathologists, vet-
erinary pathologists, and veterinary oncologists to develop a set of names for specific
tumor types that will be acceptable for standard use in veterinary dental patients.
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consulting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Appendix
Dental Home Care
Having clients provide dental home care is one part of a complete dental care program
■ The goals in home care include the following:
· To help minimize the accumulation of plaque and calculus
 Bacterial plaque is the most important substrate in the initiation and establish-
ment of periodontal disease
· Maintain oral hygiene
· Help prevent development of gingivitis and periodontal disease
■Home care options
· A large variety of products and ingredients are available (see Table C-l)
 The home care products table (Table C-l) covers some of the broader catego-
ries; it is not meant to be inclusive of every product type available
 The products mentioned in the table are not inclusive of all choices possible
· Brushing remains the gold standard: effective removal of plaque with a soft-
bristled toothbrush and dentifrice on a daily basis
Dentifrice (toothpastes)
0 Often flavored, to enhance pet compliance with brushing efforts
o Properties of enzymatic activities or tartar control depend on the
ingredients
■ Most studies cannot separate the mechanical effect from the effect of
the agent
0  Dentifrice can be added to dental chews to add to mechanical effects
·Mechanical chewing
 Dogs with access to chewing materials had less calculus accumulation, gingi-
vitis, and periodontitis than those without enhanced chewing activity
 Diets and treats with mechanical or abrasive action can be an effective adjunct,
with adequate chewing time
  Objects that are too hard can cause soft tissue injury and break teeth
 Objects with fibers could get entwined or further loosen a tooth
· Chemical agents
 Variety of agents. including those that decrease mineralization of plaque
into calculus (hexametaphosphate [HMP]) and those that are antimicrobial in
nature (chlorhexidine, etc.) (see Table C-l)
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
462
 Diets to be used as only
 Diets to be used as only
Always supervise use and
(Con tinued)
Can dry out—keep bag 
one part of complete 
one part of complete 
Avoid hard treats that 
 Match appropriate size
 Dogs with chewing
and type toy to pet 
recommendations 
recommendations
materials had less
home care.
home care 
Comments
pasop
+
Science Diet? Oral care
Maintenance dog food 
 Purina Dental Chews
Eukanuba Adult 
Vetradent chews
VEGGIEDENT@
r Shield 
Greenies@
Friskies
Multiple 
Productsa
diet 
+
+
 Other glutens present 
not evaluated on their 
damage soft tissue and 
maintain contact with
 Specific dietary needs 
Additional ingredients 
not evaluated on their
Additional ingredients
No direct effect on 
chlorhexidine, etc.)
periodontal disease 
Does not remove 
loosen teeth with
Harder toys can 
tooth surface 
fracture teeth 
dentifrice,
plaque
Cautions
UAC
+
 Mechanical cleansing due
Help prevent plaque from
 mineralizing into calculus
Consumable items that 
to texture, size, fiber 
Chewing activity with
 Rely on mechanical
impact (some caloric
HMP binds salivary
Vinimal nutritional 
No wheat gluten 
 animal protein
 Features/Benefits
 abrasion
Z-shaped
content
calcium
content)
TABLE C-1 Home Care Products 
plaque
2
Product type/ingredient
hexametaphosphate
Compressed tapioca
or other ingredients
Compressed wheat 
Polyphosphates;
 Mechanical
Dental treats 
based with
chlorophyll
compressed
Vegetable
Dental chews
Chew toys
(HMP)
Diet 
463
toxicity at recommended 
 Best as pre-op oral rinse
for use in chewing aids
Concerns of xylitol
negligible
Comments
+
CETAQUADENT water
●CET Oral Hygiene Rinse
healthymouthTM water
● Oxyfresh products
additives and gels 
MAXIGUARD Gel
BreathaLyser
ESSENTIAL
additive
Productsa
OraZn@
+
Limited animal studies 
 Limited human studies 
chlorhexidine against 
 Initial human studies 
 alcohol, have natural 
May stain pellicdle and
supragingival calculus
Not as effective as
 Some contain no 
May alter taste
 decreased
Can increase 
ingredients 
gingivitis)
plaque
Cautions
teeth
(with
+
+
bacterial numbers, plaque 
Antimicrobial activity may
Reduce salivary bacterial
Nonspecific antimicrobial 
controlling plaque and
numbers and plaque
Essential oils: thymol,
Reduction in salivary.
Variety of properties 
malodor——zinc binds 
Cationic bisbiguanide
eucalyptol, menthol
activity
Antimicrobial activity
Biocidal oxohalogen
Binds to pellicle and
chemical agent for 
Low cytotoxicity
May help control 
6
Sugar alcohol 
Some degree 
slowly released
 Features/Benefits
antimicrobial
gingivitis
oxidant
TABLE C-1 (Continwed)
Product type/ingredient
 ascorbate, gluconate
Additives, rinses, and
Phenol derivatives 
Herbal: magnolol,
Chlorine dioxide
Soluble zinc salts:
antioxidants 
Chlorhexidine
erythritol
honokiol
Enzymes,
464
CET Tartar Control 
Note: Sanos Dental
Toothpaste
Oravet
product
 toothbrushing—not as 
conjunction with other 
 Studies indlude use in
home care efforts
 a single agent 
No studies in 
oxidase, lactoperoxidase
 HealthyMouth LLC. Malibu, CA
 Dual enzyme: glucose
professional cleaning
Weekly application at
Physical (electrostatic)
attachment of plaque
 Flavor enhance pet
 Additional abrasives
Applied following.
N 'alsagon 'sponpoid iad plaus deiei piays ieiiel
. KS
barrier to repel
HO
Canada
Laboratory Inc.,
 antibacterial 
Inert polymer 
MO
 sanpejnuew diau pue sponpoid aen auone
Hill's Prescription Diet: Hills Pet Nutrition, 
'NO
nome
N
imRex
Oxyfresh: Oxyfresh, 
Tartar control
Dental sealants 
Toothpastes 
Science Diet?
aLyser:
ESSENTIAL
Breatha
465
466
APPENDIX C: DENTAL HOME CARE
0 Chlorhexidine has been extensively studied, and is often used as a
comparison
 Contact time for optimal incorporation into the pellicle or for impact on oral
microbes may be a limiting factor
0 For human products: “swish and spit"
0 Gels may allow for longer contact time
 Water additives: to help fight oral odor, decrease microbes, provide antioxi
dants, and support gingival health (variety of claims) (see Table C-1)
■ With so many choices, it is imperative for the veterinary care team to help guide the
owner in choosing the correct method of dental home care for that pet, and to
encourage its regular implementation
·  A collaborative partnership with clear recommendations and effective communica-
tion in a relationship-centered care approach has been shown to enhance client
adherence
· In the exam room, have a “caddy” with home care options and discuss how the
owner can customize their pet's program
· Have a taste test between two or three toothpastes to see which one is the dog's
favorite (use tongue depressors)
· Demonstrate brushing technique on a dental model, or show a video
· Go over instructions on water additives so proper concentrations are given
· Remind owner to monitor pet whenever a new chew treat or device is offered to
make sure they are chewing it correctly and not ingesting large pieces
· Set up reminder system for dental home care products on a monthly or
bimonthly basis
■ The Veterinary Oral Health Council (VOHC) authorizes the use of its seal on prod-
used as directed.
· Submission of results of clinical trials is voluntary
· If the submitted data demonstrates the level of dental efficacy required, the seal
 is awarded
· The seal has been awarded to products sold just by veterinarians, and to over-the-
counter (OTC) products as well
·Products include dental diets, rawhide treats, chew treats, water additives, tooth-
paste, sealants, and gels
■ Other products may have data from studies and clinical trials, yet have not chosen
to submit to the VOHC; lack of a seal does not mean it is an inferior product
■ VOHC recognizes that there is a preset standard, and the consumer sees the
same seal whether a product meets that standard by just a little bit or exceeds the
standard greatly
Author: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Consu/ting Editor: Heidi B. Lobprise, DVM, DAVDC
Glossary
Abrasion
Pathological wear of a tooth due to an external source or
force such as aggressive brushing, flossing, or aggressive
use of dental instruments
Abscess
Localized collection of pus in a cavity formed as a result
of the disintegration of the tissues
Acanthomatous epulis
See Canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma
(AE)
Aerobic
Bacteria that thrive in the presence of oxygen
AFO
See Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma
AL
See Attachment loss
Allograft
Graft (bone) from same species
Alloplast
Artificial graft material
Alveolar mucosa
 Mucosa between the mucobuccal fold and gingiva
Alveolar mucositis
Inflammation of alveolar mucosa
Ameloblastic fibro-
Radiolucent mass with osteolysis and varying amounts of
odontoma (AFO)
intralesional mineralization
Amelogenesis imperfecta
Hereditary reduction in the amount of developed enamel
matrix
Anachoresis
Exposure to bacteria through a hematogenous route
Anaerobic bacteria
Bacteria that thrive in the absence of oxygen
Anelodont
Tooth that is not continuously growing/erupting: finite
 period of eruption, until the time of maturation and
closure of apex
Anisognathic
Inequality of the widths of the mandible and maxilla seen
in many species
Ankylosis
A conjoining or fusion of the root to alveolar bone when
the periodontal ligament is lost between them
Anodontia
A complete absence of teeth due to failure during
development
Anterior crossbite (AXB)
See Rostral crossbite
Apex
End of the root
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
467
468
GLOSSARY
Apexification
Physiological process of the apex's closure with hard
tissue by the action of cementoblasts and odontoblasts
Apexogenesis
Continued maturation and closure of an immature root
Apical
Toward or of the root
Apical abscess
Abscess at the apex of the tooth
Apically repositioned flap
Gingival flap attached in a position more apical than its
(ARF)
original site; often done to appose attached gingiva with
underlying bone to reduce pocket depth
Aradicular
Open-rooted tooth ("no root")
ARF
See Apically repositioned flap
Atraumatic malocclusion
Malocclusion due to genetic malpositioning
Attached gingiva
Tightly adherent gingiva extending from the free gingival
margin to the alveolar mucosa (at the mucogingival
line)
Attachment loss (AL)
The measurement between the CEJ and apical extent of
the pocket
Attrition
Physiological or pathological wear of teeth as the result
of activities such as chewing, biting, or mastication; teeth
wearing against other teeth
Autograft
Graft (bone) from same individual
Avulsion
Total luxation or removal, as in a tooth from its socket
AXB
See Anterior crossbite
Bacteremia
Presence of bacteria in the bloodstream
Base-narrow canine (BNC)
Class l malocclusion with tips of mandibular canine(s)
displaced lingual to normal contact point, often touching
the palate
Base-wide canine
Class l malocclusion with tips of the mandibular canines
displaced buccally or laterally often due to closure of
maxillary diastema by rostroversion of the canines
Beaver tail
Common term used for aW-3 instrument or plastic filling
instrument (PFl) for packing perioceutic
Bilateral sliding bipedicle
Technique of palatal defect repair where the two defect
flap
edges are apposed by elevating under the mucosa on each
side, and advancing the sides medially to close to each
other
Biofilm
 Complex, cooperating populations of different bacteria
genera, along with a glycocalyx composed of exopolysac-
charide fibers
Bird tongue
Alternate name for microglossia, a hereditary defect
resulting in a small, narrow, curled tongue that is ineffec-
tive for nursing: a lethal, glossopharyngeal defect
BNC
See Base-narrow canine
Brachycephalic
Individuals with short, broad facial profiles such as boxers
and bulldogs
GLOSSARY
469
Brachydont
Short-crowned tooth; that is, crown above the gingiva;
root below the gingiva
Buccal
Pertaining to the cheek; toward the cheek
Buccoversion
Abnormally angled in a buccal direction
CA
See Caries
Cage-biters
Syndrome with attrition of the distal aspect of the
canines
Calculus
Mineralized dental plaque
Calculus index (CI)
Method of measuring the extent of calculus present
Canine acanthomatous
Consists of islands and cords of squamous epithelium
ameloblastoma (CAA)
that have invaded irregularly through a connective tissue
stroma
Canine odontoclastic
 Progressive resorptive disease affecting multiple teeth
resorptive lesion
(CORL)
Caries (CA)
Decay of hard dental tissues (enamel, cementum, and
dentin) due to the effects of oral bacteria on fermentable
carbohydrates on the tooth surface
Caries, clinical
Appears as a structural defect on the surface of the crown
or root, often filled or lined by dark, soft necrotic dentin
Caries, incipient caries
Early caries; appears as an area of dull, frosty-white
enamel when the surface is dry
Caries, pit-and-fissure
Carious lesion located in the development grooves or
caries
occlusal fissures in a tooth
Caries, root caries
Caries located on the root
 Caries, smooth-surface
Carious lesion on a flat surface of a tooth
caries
Carnassial
The largest shearing teeth: maxillary fourth premolars
and mandibular first molars in dogs and cats
Caudal crossbite (CXB)
Mandibular first molar has a more buccal or labial posi-
tion than maxillary fourth premolar; synonym—-posterior
crossbite
Caudal mucositis (caudal
 Inflammation of mucosa of the caudal oral cavity surface-
stomatitis)
bearing the responsible irritant, allergen, or antigen
Cavities
Defect in a tooth due to decay
CEJ
See Cementoenamel junction
 Cementoenamel junction
The region where the root (cementum) and crown
(CEJ)
(enamel) meet; the neck of the tooth
Cervical line lesion or
See Tooth resorption
erosion (CLL)
Cervical mucocele
Mucocele in the intermandibular space; sublingual gland
involved
Chairside developer
Portable tabletop container with solutions for developing
intraoral films in the operatory
470
GLOSSARY
Cheilitis
Inflammation of the lip (including the mucocutaneous
junction area and skin of the lip)
Cheiloplasty
Surgical correction or manipulation of the lips, often to
decrease the oral opening
Cheiloschisis
Cleft lip; a defect in the lip
Chlorhexidine
Solution used in the treatment of periodontal disease;
shown to inhibit plaque formation and onset of gingivitis
Chronic osteitis or
Thickening or bulging of alveolar bone of the maxillary
alveolitis
canine teeth in cats in response to chronic periodontal
stimulation
Chronic ulcerative
 Focal or multifocal loss of mucosal integrity of the super-
paradental stomatitis
ficial epithelial layers in specific areas of the oral cavity
(CUPS)
C1
See Calculus index
Circled
Missing tooth
CLL
See Cervical line lesion or erosion
CMO
See Craniomandibular osteopathy
Col
Area of interdental papilla lying cervical to the interproxi-
mal tooth contacts
Complex odontoma
Radiodense mass with fully differentiated dental compo-
nents but unorganized at the cellular level with no tooth-
like structures
Complicated crown
A fracture of the crown that exposes the pulp
fracture (CCF)
Complicated crown root
A fracture of the crown and root that exposes the pulp
fracture (CCRF)
fracture
Complicated tooth
Tooth fracture that exposes the pulp
fracture
Compound odontoma
Mass with fully differentiated dental components result-
ing in the presence of denticles (toothlike structures)
Condylectomy
Excision and removal of the condyle
Contact mucositis and
Lesions in susceptible individuals that are secondary to
contact mucosal
mucosal contact with a tooth
ulceration (contact
ulcers" and “kissing
ulcers")
CORL
See Canine odontoclastic resorptive lesion; Tooth
resorption
Craniomandibular
A nonneoplastic, noninflammatory proliferative disease
osteopathy (CMO)
of the bones of the head
Crestal bone loss
Initial pattern of bone loss in periodontal disease where
the interdental alveolar crest is blunting or lost
Crevicular fluid
See Gingival crevicular fluid
Crossbite (XB)
Mandibular tooth/teeth have a more buccal or labial posi-
tion than antagonist maxillary tooth
GLOSSARY
471
CUPS
See Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis
Deciduous
The primary dentition or first set of teeth that are typi-
cally shed prior to permanent tooth eruption
 Dens-in-dente
Literally, tooth within a tooth; external tooth layers
invaginated into internal  structures with  varying
severity
Dental fluorosis
 Disruption in the mineralization of forming teeth due to
excess ingestion of fluoride, often seen as chalky white
spots or discoloration of the enamel
Dental malocclusion
Class 1 malocclusion with appropriate jaw length but
teeth in improper position
Denticles
Toothlike structures
Dentigerous cyst
Cyst formation originating from tissue (remnant enamel
organ) surrounding the crown of an unerupted tooth
Dentin
Hard calcified tissue making up the bulk of the tooth;
dentin is under the enamel of the crown and the cemen-
tum of the root
Dentinal bonding agent
Material used to enhance the bonding of a restorative
agent to dentin; can sometimes be used as a sealant
Dentinogenesis imperfecta
A hereditary condition in which dentin is abnormally
formed
Diastema
Space in between teeth; typically refers to the space
 between the maxillary third incisor and canine in the dog
and cat
Dilacerated
 Distorted or malformed tooth; a general term that may be
used for many different presentations
Direct pulp capping
Placement of medicaments on the surface of exposed pulp
to stimulate dentinal production
Distal
 Positional term used to describe away from the median
line of the face
Distoversion
Abnormally angled in a distal direction
 Dolichocephalic
A long, narrow facial profile (collies, dachshunds)
 Double reposition flap
Repair technique for oronasal fistula with initial palatal
flap supported by a second mucoperiosteal or buccal
pedicle flap
Dysphagia
 Decreased or absent swallowing capability
ECG
See Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Ectodermal dysplasia
A group of inherited disorders that affect the ectoderm,
the outer layer of the embryo, skin, sweat glands, hair,
teeth, and nails may be affected
ED
See Enamel defect
Edentulous
Absence of teeth due to pathological loss
EGD
See Eosinophilic granuloma in dogs
EH
See Enamel hypocalcification and Enamel hypoplasia
Elodont
Continuously growing and erupting teeth
472
GLOSSARY
Embedded
Tooth that is incompletely erupted but with soft tissue
covering it
Enamel
Hard calcified tissue covering the crown of a tooth; the
hardest substance in the body
Enamel defect (ED)
Lesion or defect in enamel
Enamel fracture (EF)
A fracture with loss of crown substance confined to the
enamel
Enamel hypocalcification
 Decreased calcification of the enamel
(EH)
Enamel hypoplasia (EH)
Decreased formation of enamel
Enamel infraction (EI)
An incomplete fracture (crack) of the enamel without loss
of tooth structure
Endodontic
Pertaining to the pulp system
Envelope flap
Raising of the gingiva from an underlying site or lesion
by using a periosteal elevator at a horizontal release site
without vertical releasing incisions
Eosinophilic granuloma
Disease complex of three distinct syndromes in cats char-
complex (ECG)
acterized by eosinophilic infiltrate
Eosinophilic granuloma in
Ulcerated plaques and masses on the tongue and palatine
dogs (EGD)
arches; some cutaneous forms in Siberian huskies
Eosinophilic granulomas
Occur in a distinctly linear orientation (linear granu-
loma) on the caudal thigh or as individual or coalescing
plaques anywhere on the body
Eosinophilic plaque
Alopecic, erythematous, erosive patches, and plaques that
usually occur in the inguinal, perineal, lateral thigh, and
axillary regions
EP
See Epulis (plural: epulides)
Epulis (plural: epulides)
A general term referring to a gingival mass lesion of any
(EP)
type
Exfoliation
The process of losing a deciduous tooth as its succes-
sional tooth replaces it
External resorption
Resorption of cementum, extending into dentin, due to
forces or stimuli outside the root
Extraction
X
Extraction, surgical with
XSS
sectioning
Extraction, surgical
XS
Extrinsic
Originating outside a structure
Extrude
To force out
Fading puppy
Broad term used to describe a newborn puppy that does
 not thrive for various reasons, often undiagnosed
Familial
With a tendency to be of higher incidence within a family
 or line; insufficient data to determine if hereditary
GLOSSARY
473
FE
See Furcation exposure
Feline caries
Synonym for tooth resorption, but not accurate, as there
is no decay
Feline odontoclastic
See Tooth resorption
resorptive lesion
Fibromatous epulis (FE)
See Peripheral odontogenic fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Slowly progressive and locally invasive mesenchymal
 malignancy; metastasizes late
Focal fibrous hyperplasia
Inflammatory lesion, nonneoplastic; reactive lesion result-
(FFH)
ing from irritation caused by plaque and calculus
FORL
See Tooth resorption
Fracture
FX
 Free gingival
See Marginal gingiva
 Frenulum
Fold of alveolar mucosa forming a noticeable ridge of
attachment between the lips and gingiva
Furcation exposure (FE)
Exposure of the point at which roots diverge in a multi-
rooted tooth, evident with gingival and bone loss
Fusion tooth
Two separate forming tooth structures joined to form a
single structure; sometimes joined just at the roots by
cementum and dentin
FX
Fracture
GCF
See gingival crevicular fluid
Gemination
Incomplete duplication of a tooth with incomplete sepa-
ration, often resulting in two crowns with a common root
system
GH
See Gingival hyperplasia
G1
See Gingival index
Gingiva
Gum tissue that immediately surrounds the teeth and
alveolar bone
Gingival crevicular fluid
Plasma-derived fluid that passes from the gingival con-
(GCF)
nective tissue through the crevicular epithelium to lavage
the gingival sulcus
Gingival hyperplasia (GH)
Proliferation of the attached gingiva
Gingival index (GI)
Method of measuring the extent of gingival inflammation
present
Gingivectomy/plasty (GV/
 Periodontal surgery used to correct gingival deformities
GVP)
of contour not associated with periodontal pockets
Gingivitis
 Inflammation of the gingiva
Glossitis
Inflammation of mucosa of the dorsal and/or ventral
tongue surface
GS
See Plasma cell gingivitis and pharyngitis (gingivo-
stomatitis)
GTR
See Guided tissue regeneration
474
GLOSSARY
Guided tissue regeneration
Attempt to repair or recover lost periodontal tissues
(GTR)
through directed therapy to encourage regeneration of
optimal tissues
GV/GVP
See Gingivectomy/plasty
Halitosis
Bad breath, malodor
Hamartoma
Proliferation of normal cellular components with an
abnormal organization; not a true neoplasm
Hand scaler
Dental hand instrument with sharp tip used to remove
plaque and calculus from tooth crowns
Hexametaphosphate
Substance used in some dental diets to retard the miner-
alization of plaque into calculus
Horizontal bone loss
Pattern of periodontal bone loss with the alveolar
bone level dropping linearly across several roots or
teeth
Hypodontia
A decreased number of teeth; also called oligodontia or
partial anodontia
Hypovestibulosis
See Tight lip
mandibularis
Hypsodont
 Tooth with long anatomical crown
 Idiopathic osteomyelitis
A condition of necrotic bone development after extrac-
tions in CUPS patients of unknown etiology
 Impacted
Tooth that is incompletely erupted with hard tissue cover-
ing it, impeding its continued eruption
Indolent ulcer
Raised and indurated ulcerations confined to the upper
lips adiacent to the philtrum
Infrabony
Referring to bone loss or pocket that extends vertically
below the edge or level of the alveolar bone
 Interceptive orthodontics
Orthodontic management of deciduous malocclusion
with select and careful extractions
 Interdental
 In-between adjacent teeth
 Intermediate plexus
Unique configuration of periodontal ligament fibers that
interdigitate in the PDL space to allow for continuous
eruption
 Internal resorption
 Resorption of dentin of a tooth that begins internally.
from the pulp cavity
 Interproximal
 Between the proximal surfaces of adjoining teeth in the
 same arch
Intrinsic
Lying entirely within a structure
 Intruded tooth
Tooth that has been moved apically. often due to
trauma
 Irreversible pulpitis
 Inflammation of the pulp that results in pulpal death and
necrosis
Junctional epithelium
Epithelium that acts to hold mucosa in the base of the
gingival sulcus to the tooth
GLOSSARY
475
Kissing lesions or ulcers
See Contact mucositis
Labial/buccal mucositis
Inflammation of the lip/cheek mucosa
Labioversion
Abnormally angled in a labial direction
Lactoperoxidase
Enzymes used in some dental products to augment
normal salivary peroxidase production for a mild anti-
plaque and antibacterial effect
Lance teeth
Class l malocclusion with mesioversion or rostroversion
of maxillary canine(s)
 Level bite
Mild form of Class 3 malocclusion in which the incisal
edges meet
Line angle
Angle formed by two walls or surfaces (i.e., mesiolingual
line angle)
Lingual
 Pertaining to or in the direction of the tongue
Linguoversion
Abnormally angled in a lingual direction
LPS
See Lymphocytic-plasmacytic stomatitis
Luxation
Partial or complete dislocation from a joint or position
 Lymphocytic-plasmacytic
See Plasma cell gingivitis and pharyngitis
stomatitis (LPS)
M
See Mobility or mobile tooth
Macrodontia
Tooth with oversize crown, normal root
Macroglossia
Large tongue
 Malocclusion
 Improper relationship of the dentition due to malposi-
tioning of teeth or misalignment of jaws
Malocclusion, Class 0
Normal occlusion (orthocclusion)
Malocclusion, Class 0,
Breed normal prognathia (boxer)
type 3
Malocclusion, Class 1
Jaws correct length but teeth in improper inclination
(version or tilt); dental malocclusion
Malocclusion, Class 2
Skeletal malocclusion in which mandible is short in rela-
tionship to maxilla; undershot
Malocclusion, Class 3
Skeletal malocclusion in which mandible is long in rela-
tionship to maxilla; overshot
Malocclusion, Class 4
Skeletal malocclusion of a special form of “wry bite" in
which both a long and a short jaw are involved
Malodor
Bad breath; halitosis
Mandibular distoclusion
Mandibular arch occludes caudal to its normal position
(Class 2)
relative to the maxillary arch
 Mandibular fracture,
Mandibular fracture (caudodorsal) in which the two por-
favorable
tions are reduced or compressed by the muscles of
mastication
Mandibular fracture,
Mandibular fracture (caudoventral) in which the two por-
nonfavorable
tions are displaced by the muscles of mastication
Mandibular mesioclusion
Mandibular arch occludes rostral to its normal position
(Class 3)
relative to the maxillary arch
476
GLOSSARY
Mandibular neuropraxia
Open-mouth condition that can be closed passively with
little effort, due to trauma to the masticatory nerves while
carrying heavy objects in the mouth
Marginal gingival
Crest or edge of gingiva around the tooth, unattached or
free (gingival margin)
Marsupialization
Surgical opening of ranulas or pharyngeal mucoceles that
are left open to drain
Masticatory muscle
 Immune-mediated inflammatory (
 disease that affect the
myositis (MMM)
muscles of mastication (type 2M muscle fibers) that can
progress to necrosis, atrophy, and inability to open the
mouth
Melanoma or melanocytic
Neoplasm derived from melanin-producing cells; the
tumor
most aggressive oral tumor, with local invasion, recur-
rence, and high rate of early metastasis
Mesial
Toward the midline of the dental arch
Mesioversion
Abnormally angled in a mesial direction
MGL
See Mucogingival line
Microdontia
Tooth with normally shaped crown but undersized
Microglossia
See Bird tongue
Missing tooth
Circled on chart
MMM
See Masticatory muscle myositis
Mobile tooth (M)
Tooth that moves beyond normal expectations with digital
 or instrument pressure
Mobility (M)
Index of measuring the extent of tooth mobility
Modified Angle
Classification of veterinary malocclusions based on
Classification System of
human references
Malocclusion
Modified Triadan
Tooth numbering system that assigns a three-digit value
to each tooth based on quadrant and position within that
quadrant
Modified Van Langenbeck
 See Bilateral sliding bipedicle flap
Modified Widman
Periodontal surgery technique that uses a reverse
technique
bevel incision to remove diseased tissue liming the
pocket
Mucocele stone
 Precipitation of fbrin and mucin or mineralized frag-
ments of mucocele lining that sloughed
Mucogingival line (MGL)
 Delineation between the attached gingiva and alveolar
mucosa; mucogingival junction
Mucoperiosteal
 Full-thickness gingival flap that extends through mucosa
and periosteum
Neck lesion
See Tooth resorption
Neutroclusion (Class I)
Normal rostral-caudal relationship of the maxillary and
mandibular dental arches with malposition of one or
more individual teeth (see Dental malocclusion)
GLOSSARY
Oblique bone loss
A combination of horizontal and vertical bone loss
Obturator
Device or appliance used to occlude an opening
Occlusal pit
Indentation of tooth on its occlusal surface (molars)
Occlusal plane
The surface formed by the occlusal surfaces of cheek teeth
(premolars and molars)
Odontoclast
Cell derived from hematopoietic cells or from pulpal
vessels that resorb dental hard tissues
Odontoma
Oral mass that arises from mixed odontogenic origin.
both epithelial and mesenchymal
Odontoplasty (OP)
Adjustment of tooth contours
Oligodontia
A decreased number of teeth; also called hypodontia
OM
Oral mass
ONF
See Oronasal fistula
OP
See Odontoplasty
Open mouth mandibular
Syndrome with open mouth locking due to IMJ laxity
locking
that allows the coronoid process of the mandible to slip
lateral to the ventral border of the zygomatic arch
Operculectomy
 Resection of soft tissue persistently covering a partially
erupted tooth
Operculum
Tough fibrous gingival covering that may persist over the
crown of a tooth, even if eruption movement is completed
Oral mass
OM
Oronasal fistula (ONF)
Defect between the oral cavity and nasal cavity
Osseoconductive
 Product that aids in regenerating new bone in an osseous
site
Ossifying epulis (OE)
See Peripheral odontogenic fibroma
Osteomyelitis
Inflammation of the bone and bone marrow
Osteoplasty
Remodeling of bone
Overlapping flap
Technique of palatal defect repair where the edge of one
harvested flap is inserted in between or under the layers
of the other side of the defect
Overshot
See Malocclusion, Class 3
Palatal
Pertaining to or in the direction of the palate
Palatitis
Inflammation of mucosa covering the hard and/or soft
palate
Palatoschisis
Palatal cleft; a defect in the palate
Papilla
 Interdental gingival mound
 Papillomatosis
Proliferative cutaneous and
1 mucosal tumors caused
by a group of nonenveloped, double-stranded DNA
papillomaviruses
Parallel technique
Placement of intraoral film in a position parallel to the
tooth and/or roots
Partial anodontia
A decreased number of teeth; also called hypodontia
 Partial pulpectomy
Removal of a portion of the pulp
478
GLOSSARY
PDL
Periodontal ligament
PE
Pulp exposure
Peg tooth
Small, cone-shaped tooth with a single cusp
Pellicle
An acellular film formed on tooth surfaces from the pre-
cipitation of salivary glycoproteins
 Pemphigus erythematosus
One of a group of autoimmune disorders characterized
by varying degrees of ulceration, crusting, and pustule
and vesicle formation
 Pemphigus foliaceus
One of a group of autoimmune disorders characterized
by varying degrees of ulceration, crusting, and pustule
and vesicle formation
Pemphigus vegetans
One of a group of autoimmune disorders characterized
by varying degrees of ulceration, crusting. and pustule
and vesicle formation
Pemphigus vulgaris
One of a group of autoimmune disorders characterized
by varying degrees of ulceration, crusting, and pustule
and vesicle formation; vulgaris is the second most
common type, with vesiculobullous lesions progressing
to ulcers and oral cavity involvement in 90% of cases
 Periapical
Around the apex
 Periapical bone loss
Pattern of bone loss around the apex of the tooth
Perioceutic
Medication placed in a treated periodontal pocket
Periodontal explorer
Dental hand instrument with thin, sharp. curved end
used to tactically detect enamel defects
 Periodontal ligament
Connective tissue (mainly collagenous fibers in bundles)
(PDL)
that surrounds the root and connects it to the alveolar
bone
Periodontal pocket (PP)
Pathological formation of a space in between tooth and
surrounding tissues, beyond the depth of a normal sulcus
 Periodontal probe
Dental hand instrument with millimeter markings that
are used to measure the extent of attachment loss, reces-
sion, and pockets
 Periodontal splinting
Use of stabilization to immobilize teeth during periodon-
tal healing
Periodontitis
Inflammation and infection of some or all of the tooth's
supportive tissues (periodontium), indicative of some
degree of attachment loss
Periosteal elevator
 Dental instrument used to raise or elevate gingival tissue
from underlying bone for flap formation
 Perosteitis
Inflammation of the periosteum
 Peripheral odontogenic
Mass of cellular, fibroblastic connective tissue separated
fibroma (POF)
from surface epithelium by a zone of histologically normal
fibrous connective tissue with rests of odontogenic epi-
thelium in the connective tissue
GLOSSARY
479
Persistent (retained)
 Deciduous tooth that is still present when the permanent
deciduous
tooth begins to erupt or has erupted
PFI
See Plastic filling instrument
 Pharyngeal mucocele
Mucocele in the pharyngeal wall; sublingual gland
involved
Pharyngitis
Inflammation of the pharynx
 Phoenix abscess
Acute exacerbation of a chronic periapical abscess, often
with significant pain
PI
See Plaque index
Pit-and-fissure sealant
Flowable composite used to prophylactically protect
indentations of teeth from carious formation
Plaque
Collection of bacteria, salivary glycoproteins, and extra-
cellular polysaccharides that adhere to the tooth surface
Plaque index (PI)
Method of measuring the extent of plaque accumulation
on a tooth surface
 Plasma cell gingivitis
An uninhibited, excessive immune inflammatory response
 and pharyngitis
affecting the oral cavity in cats
(gingivostomatitis) (GS)
 Plastic filling instrument
Dental hand instrument used for working with composite
(PFI)
(plastic) restoratives
 Posterior crossbite (PXB)
See Caudal crossbite
PP
See Periodontal pocket
 Primary palatal cleft
Palatoschisis or defect located at the junction of the inci-
sive bone and one or both of the maxillary processes
 Primordial cyst
Cystic degeneration of tooth bud before enamel and
dentin formation
 Probing depth
The distance between the free gingival margin and the
apical extent of the pocket
Pseudopocket
A "false" pocket, often used to describe the space created
with a hyperplastic gingival margin; no true attachment
loss is typically present (attachment level at CEJ)
 Ptyalism
Excessive salivation
 Pulp exposure (PE)
 Defect that allows communication of the pulp cavity with
the environment
Pulpal necrosis
 Degradation and death of the pulp
Pulpitis
 Inflammation of the pulp in response to stimuli; most
 commonly used in reference to a tooth discolored by
blunt trauma
PXB
See Posterior crossbite
Radicular
Tooth with a true root
Ranula
Mucocele in the sublingual tissues; mandibular gland
involved
RD
See Retained deciduous
RE
See Root exposure
480
GLOSSARY
Remnant enamel organ
Persistence of the ectodermal epithelial structure that
leads to the formation of tooth enamel
Reparative dentin
 Dentin that is formed in response to a noxious stimulus
or trauma
Resorptive lesion (RL)
See Tooth resorption
Restoration
Repair of enamel or dentin defect with materials to seal
and return to normal structure and function
Retained deciduous (RD)
See Persistent (retained) deciduous
Retained root (RTR)
 Remaining root segment after incomplete extraction
Reversible pulpitis
 Inflammation of the pulp that can subside without com-
promising the vitality of the pulp
RL
See Resorptive lesion
Root exposure (RE)
Exposure of root surface due to gingival and bone
recession
Root fracture (RF)
A fracture involving the root
Root plane
Procedure for cleaning and scaling the surface of a root
exposed by periodontal attachment loss
Root planing, closed
Cleaning and scaling the surface of a root within a peri-
(RPC)
odontal pocket without creating a gingival flap
Root planing, open (RPO)
Cleaning and scaling the surface of a root accessed by a
gingival flap
Rostral crossbite (RXB)
Mandibular incisors have a more buccal or labial
position than maxillary incisors: synonym—anterior
crossbite
ROT
See Rotated tooth
Rotated tooth (ROT)
Tooth in abnormal linear position
RPC
See Root planing, closed
RPO
See Root planing. open
RTR
See Retained root
Salivary mucocele
Also called sialocele; nonepithelial-lined cavity filled with
saliva that has leaked from a damaged salivary gland or
duct and surrounded by granulation tissue that forms
secondary to inflammation caused by the free saliva
Scissor bite
Normal relationship of maxillar incisors overlapping the
mandibular incisors
Sealant
 Dental material used to protect and seal exposed dentinal
tubules
Secondary palatal cleft
Palatoschisis or defect located on the palatal midline
behind the incisive area involving the soft and/or hard
palate
Shadow technique
 Modified bisecting angle technique; method of taking
intraoral radiographs where the film cannot be placed
parallel to the tooth/roots
Shell teeth
Crown present, but little to no root development
GLOSSARY
481
Sialoadenitis
Inflammation of a salivary gland
Sialography
Imaging technique performed by injecting contrast media
into salivary duct with retrograde cannulation
Sialolith
Formation of stone or concretion in salivary duct or
gland; also called salivary stone
Skeletal malocclusion
Malocclusion due to improper mandible-to-maxilla length
relationship (Classes 2, 3, and 4)
Slobbers
Moist dermatitis of rabbits on ventrum of neck due to
excessive salivation, often caused by malocclusion
Squamous cell carcinoma
Malignant tumor of the squamous epithelium with a vari-
able presentation on the mucosa, gingiva, tongue, or
tonsil
Stage l periodontal disease
Gingivitis only without attachment loss
Stage 2 periodontal disease
Early periodontitis with up to 25% attachment loss, often
with early radiographic signs of bone loss
Stage 3 periodontal disease
Moderate periodontitis with up to 50% attachment loss,
including possible pocket formation, gingiva and bone
loss, and up to stage 2 furcation involvement
Stage 4 periodontal disease
Advanced periodontitis with greater than 50% attachment
loss, often with extensive gingiva and bone loss, radio-
graphically evident
Stomatitis
 Inflammation of the soft tissues of the oral cavity which
may be caused by many different stimuli of local or sys-
temic origin
Strategic tooth
A tooth with significant structure or function
Subgingival curettage
Debridement of subgingival pockets
Sublingual mucositis
Inflammation of mucosa on the floor of the mouth
Sulcus
The narrow cleft or space between the inner wall of the
marginal gingiva and the tooth
Supereruption
Excessive eruption of a tooth beyond normal crown
height
Supernumerary
Extra teeth
 Temporomandibular joint
 Joint composed of the condylar process of the vertical
(TMJ)
ramus of the mandible and the mandibular fossa of the
temporal bone of the skull
Tight lip
Folding back of the lower lip due to underdevelopment
of or absence of the anterior vestibule, to the extent that
the incisors and even canines are covered by the lip
TMJ
See Temporomandibular joint
Tonsilitis
Inflammation of the palatine tonsil(s)
Tooth resorption (TR)
Dental hard tissue loss (cementum, or cementum and
enamel), classified based on the severity of the resorption
(stages l-5) and on the location of the resorption (see
Appendix B)
482
GLOSSARY
Transillumination
Assessment of the reflectivity of the tooth structure to
evaluate vitality of the pulp by placing a light behind the
tooth and observing its transmission through the tooth
Trigeminal neuritis
Acute onset of inability to close the jaw owing to bilateral
dysfunction of the mandibular branch of the trigeminal
nerves
Trismus
 Inability to open the jaws
Twinning
Duplication of a tooth
Uncomplicated crown
A fracture of the crown that does not expose the pulp
fracture (UCF)
Uncomplicated crown root
A fracture of the crown and root that does not expose the
fracture (UCRF)
pulp
Uncomplicated tooth
Tooth fracture that does not involve the pulp
fracture
Undershot
See Malocclusion, Class 2
Vertical bone loss
Pattern of periodontal bone loss with a deep vertical loss
of bone down the root of a tooth
Vestibuloplasty
Surgical correction of vestibule, often used to deepen the
vestibule in cases of tight lip
Vital pulpotomy
Term once used to describe a partial pulpectomy with
pulp capping
W-3
See Beaver tail
X
See Extraction
Xenograft
Graft material from another species
Xerostomia
Dry mouth; decrease or cessation of salivary production
XS
Extraction, surgical
XSS
Extraction, surgical with sectioning
Zygomatic mucocele
Mucocele ventral to eye; zygomatic gland involved
nd ex
Note: Page numbers in italics reler to fgures.
Abnormal teeth (formation), 173-177
Anaerobic bacteria, 207, 216
amelogenesis imperfecta, 173
Anelodont teeth, 429
dens-in-dente, 173, 175
Anisognathic, 429
dilacerated, 173, 174, 175, 176
Ankylosis, 53
fusion, 173, 174
Anodontia, 158, 163
gemination,173,174
Anterior crossbite (AXB), see Rostral crossbite
macrodontia, 173
Anterior vestibuloplasty, 185
microdontia, 173
Apex, 161
shell-teeth, 173
Apexifcation, 285
Abnormal tooth number
Apexogenesis, 285
decreased, 163-167
Apical abscess, 288-294, 289, 291
 anodontia partial, 163
draining tract, 291
edentulous, 163
infraorbital abscess, 289, 290
hypodontia, 163, 164-166
periapical lucency 293
increased
Apical root resorption, 369
germination,168
Apically repositioned flap (ARF), 93
supernumerary, 168,169, 170
Aradicular teeth, 429
twinning.168
Attached gingiva, 211
Abrasion, 271-277
Attachment loss (AL), 19, 217, 21l, 221
cage-biters, 273
Attrition, see Abrasion
reparative dentin, 272, 273
Autograft, 354
Abscess, 288
Autoimmune diseases, 415
rabbit, 430, 431, 433, 436
Avulsion/luxation (tooth), 363, 364
Acanthomatous epulis, 303
avulsion, 363-365
Acrylic splint, 352
extrusion, 363, 364
Aerobic bacteria, 207
intrusion, 363, 364
Alert examination, 5
lateral luxation, 363, 364
Allogralt, 354
Alloplast, 354
Bacteremia, 241l, 441
Alveolar mucosa, 237
Ball therapy, 200
Alveolitis, 384-389
Base-narrow canine (BNC) teeth, 198, 231
Alveoloplasty, 97, 101, 102, 108
Base-wide canine teeth, 201
Ameloblastic fbro-odontoma (AFO), 330
Beaver tail, 69, 70, 77
Ameloblastoma, 304, 339
 Bilateral sliding bipedicle flap, 189
Amelogenesis imperfecta, 173, 253, 256, 451
Biofilm, 207
American Veterinary Dental College, 237, 371,
Bird tongue (microglossia), 192-194, 193
441-461
Bleeding point, 227
Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumor (APOT),
 Bonding agent, see Dentinal bonding agent
332-335
Bone gralt, 222, 233, 354
Anachoresis, 296
Bowenoid in situ carcinoma (BISC), 341
Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, Second Edition.
Heidi B. Lobprise.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
483
INDEX
Brachycephalic, 42
Cheiloplasty, 351
Brachyodont, 429
Cheiloschisis, 186, 187, 189, 190
Broken teeth, see Tooth Iractures
Chewing behavior, 280, 462
Brushing, 136, 462, 465
Chinchillas, 429, 430. See also Rodents
Bruxism, 432
Chlorhexidine, 61, 63,356, 364
Buccal, 443
Chondrosarcoma, 337
Buccal salivary gland, 97
Chronic osteitis/alveolitis, 384-388
Burs
osseous bulging, 385, 387
cutting cross-cut fssure, 95, 96, 98
super-eruption, 384, 385
gingivectomy, 161,267
Chronic ulcerative paradental stomatitis (CUPS),
Business, of dentistry, 125-132
243-249
build value, 138
idiopathic osteomyelitis, 245, 246
education, 128
ulceration, 245
group codes, 129, 131
Clinical caries, see Caries
handouts, 129
Circumferential wiring, 354
home care, 130
Clelt palate, see Palatal clelts
SMART goals, 125, 127
Col, 92
teamwork, 128
Complete dental cleaning, 61-68
equipment, 61, 62
Cage-biters, 272
procedure, 61, 63
Calcilying epithelial odontogenic tumor (CEOT), 332
technician, 138
Calcinosis, 369
Complex odontoma, 330-335
Calculus, 216
Complicated tooth Iractures, see umder Tooth Iracture
Calculus forceps, 62, 63, 64
Composite splint, 352
Calculus index (CI), 10, 11
Compound odontoma, 330-335
Calicivirus, see Feline calicivirus
Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO), 148-151
Canal exposure, see Pulp exposure
Crestal bone loss, 50, 52
Canine dental chart, 15
Crevicular luid, see Gingival crevicular Iluid
Canine odontoclastic resorptive lesion (CORL), see
Crossarch wiring, 350
Tooth resorption
Crosscut hssure burs, see Burs
Canines, 13, 20, 21, 231,363
Crown amputation, 112
extraction,99,100,104
Crown Iractures, see under Tooth Iractures
gingival laps, 81-86
Curettes, 69, 70, 72-73
radiographs,40,41,43
Cutaneous sinus draining tract, 288
Canines
Cutting burs, see Burs
mandibular extraction, III-I14
mandibular gingival Mlaps, 86, 87-90
Deciduous teeth, 13, 143-147, 443
Caries (CA), 258-270, 259-266
Dens-in-dente, 173
incipient, 258,268
Dental caries, see Caries
pit-and-fssure, 258, 259, 268, 269
Dental charts, I4, 15
root, 262, 268
Dental elevators, 96, 97
smooth-surlace, 262, 264
Dental formulas
 pit-and-fissure sealant, 268
dogs and cats, 13
procedures, 268
small mammals, 429
staging, 267
Dental luorosis, 253
Caudal crossbite, 198
Dental home care, 130, 135, 136, 462466
Caudal stomatitis/mucositis, 380-383
Dental malocclusion, see Malocclusion
glossopharyngeal arches, 381
Dental mirror, 7
Cavities, see Caries
Dental radiographic unit, 29
Cementoenamel junction (CEJ), 216
Dental wiring, 351
Cervical line lesion (CLL) or erosion, see Tooth
Denticles, 330, 332, 334
resorption
Dentigerous cyst, 178-182, 179, 181
Cervical mucocele, 398, 399
Dentinal bonding agent, 156, 274, 275, 353
Cervical root resorption, 369
Dentinal sealants, 274, 283
Chairside developer, 47, 48
Dentinogenesis imperlecta, 253
Charting, 5-15
Developmental groove, 262
Cheek tooth overgrowth, 430, 433, 434, 435
Diastema, 200
INDEX
485
Dilacerated teeth, 173, 174
teeth
Direct pulp capping, 284
mandibular canine, 108, 1ll, 113
Discolored teeth, 251-257
mandibular hrst molar, 108
extrinsic staining, 251,252
maxillary canine, 103
intrinsic staining,252,253
maxillary fourth premolar, 103
Distemper virus, 152
Extraoral flm, 41, 42, 45, 46, 52
Dolichocephalic, 231
Extrinsic staining, 251, 252
Double reposition Ilap, 233
Extrusion,364
Draining tract, 291
Dysphagia, 192, 399
Fading puppy syndrome, 193
Familial syndromes, see Hereditary/genetic/lamilial
Ectodermal dysplasia, 163
syndromes; Hereditary syndromes, cat breed
Edentulous, 163
predisposition; Hereditary syndromes, dog
Elevation, 98, 99-101, 107, 109, 112, 113, 147
breed predisposition
Elodont teeth, 429
Faucitis, see Glossopharyngeal arches
Embedded teeth, 157, 158, 179
Feline calicivirus (FCV), 389-394
Enamel delect (ED), 152, 153
Feline caries, see Tooth resorption
Enamel hypocalcifcation (EH), 152-156, 153, 452
Feline dental chart, 14
Enamel hypoplasia (EH), 452
Feline dentistry, 367-394
Enamel scrub, 154
eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC), 420-426
Endodontic disease, 53, 54, 55, 283
envelope Ilap, 91
Envelope lap, 86, 91, 102
extraction canine, 99
Eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC), 420-427
gingivitis, 212
diagnostics, 423-424
periodontitis, S3
eosinophilic granuloma in dogs (EGD), 420-427
 premolar sectioning, 103
eosinophilic plaque, 420-427, 423
radiographs
eosinophilic ulcer, 420-427
incisors, 38
indolent ulcer, 420-427, 422
extraoral, maxillary premolars, 42, 46, 52
therapy, 424-425
stomatitis,238,239
Eosinophilic myositis, see Masticatory muscle myositis
sulcus, 19
Epulis (EP), 303-309, 460
Feline immunodefciency virus (FIV), 389-394
acanthomatous epulis (AE), 303-308, 307, 308
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 389-394
 canine (peripheral) acanthomatous ameloblastoma
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion (FORL), see
(CAA), 303-308
Tooth resorption
hbromatous epulis (FE), 303, 305,307
 Feline resorptive lesion (FRL), see Tooth resorption
[ocal hbrous hyperplasia (FFH), 303, 305
Ferrets, 429, 430
ossilying epulis (OE), 303, 306
 Fibromatous epulis (FE), 303
 peripheral odontogenic hbroma (POF), 303-308
Fibrosarcoma (FSA), 314-317
Eqwipment, 137
Fluoride, 6l, 66, 156
Eruption, 143, 144
Fluorosis, 253, 256
Eruption disruption, 143, 144, 157-163
Fractures (FX), maxillary and mandibular, 347-355.
 delayed eruption, 157
See also Tooth fractures
embedded tooth, 157, 179
classihcation, 347-348
impacted tooth, 157
[avorable/non-{avorable, 347, 348
opereulum, 160,161,162
symphyseal classification, 347
unerupted tooth, 157-159, 161, 178
treatment
Exloliation, 143, 147
acrylics, 352
Exposed dentin, 152
bone graft, 354-355
External hxation, 351
circumferential wiring, 354-355
External resorption, 254
composite, 352-354
Extraction Jorceps, 96, 97
external fxation, 351
Extractions (X), 95-114
internal fxation, 351
 alveolar bone removal, 97
intraarch stabilization, 351
deciduous extractions, 147
intraoral wiring, 352
elevation,98
interarch stabilization, 350
equipment, 96
splint, 351
sectioning teeth, 97, 105, 106, 109
Free gingiva, 211
486
INDEX
Frenulum, 88
Chinese crested, 157
Furcation exposure (FE), 19, 217
cocker spaniel, 186, 244
Fusion tooth, 173, 174
collie, 199
dachshund, 186, 231
Gemination, 168, 173, 174
Dalmatian, 224
Gingiva, 211
Doberman Pinscher, 148, 224, 408
Gingival crevicular Iluid (GCF), 211
dolichochephalic breeds, 231
Gingival laps, 79-94
English bulldog, 148, 168, 178
mandibular canine, 86, 87-90
German shepherd, 358, 421
mandibular frst molar, 86, 90-91
Great Dane, 148, 224
maxillary canine, 82, 8486
greyhound, 239
maxillary fourth premolar, 82, 83, 86
Irish setter, 148, 358
mucoperiosteal lap, 79
Labrador, 148
periodontal Mlaps, 92, 93
Maltese, 143, 239, 244
Gingival hyperplasia (GH), 12, 224-230, 225, 227-229
miniature schnauzer, 239
Gingival index (GI). 11
Pomeranian,143
Gingival sulcus, 211, 216
poodle, 143
Gingivectomy (GV), see Gingivoplasty
Portugese water dog, 157
Gingivitis, 211-215, 212, 213, 217
Samoyed, 408
Gingivoplasty (GVP), 200, 226, 229
Scottish terrier, 148
Gingivostomatitis, see Stomatitis
Shar Pei, 183
Glossopharyngeal arches, 381
Shetland sheepdog, 198
Guided tissue regeneration (GTR), 222, 223
Shih Tzu, 239
Guinea pigs, 430, 431. See also Rodents
Siberian husky, 239, 421
Gum chewers, 10, 225, 226
Tibetan terrier, 157
West Highland white terrier, 148
Halitosis, 207-210, 240
Yorkshire terrier, 143
Hamartoma, 330
Hypsodont teeth, 429
Hand curettes, 70, 72
Hand scaler, 65
Idiopathic osteomyelitis, 245
Hedgehogs, 430
Impacted tooth, 157
Hereditary/genetic/familial syndromes
Incipient caries, 258, 268. See also Caries
anodontia, 163
Incisor overgrowth, 268, 429, 430, 433, 435
bird tongue, 192
extraction,435
craniomandibular osteopathy, 148
Incisors, 13
delayed eruption, 157
radiographs, 33, 35, 42
gingival hyperplasias (lamilial), 224
Indolent ulcer, 420-427
MMM, 408
Inlrabony, 52, 69
palatal defects, 186
Interarch stabilization, 350
tight lip, 183
Interceptive orthodontics, 199
ulcerative stomatitis, 244
Interdental wiring, 351
Hereditary syndromes, cat breed predisposition
Intermediate plexus, 435
Abyssinian, 244, 380
Internal fxation, 351
Burmese, 380
Internal resorption, 254, 369
Himalayan, 380
Intra-arch stabilization, 351
Persian, 380
Intraoral flms, 28, 29, 30, 49
Siamese, 408
 Intraoral radiography, 28-58
Somali, 244, 380
eqwipment, 28, 29
Hereditary syndromes, dog breed predisposition
evaluation of flms, 50-56
Bassett, 358
endodontic disease, 53
beagles, 186
periodontal disease, 50, 53
Boston terrier, 148
tooth resorption, 53
Bouvier, 244
preparing images, 47-49
boxer, 148, 168, 178, 224
reading films, 49, S1
brachycephalic breeds, 186, 271
caries, 264,259
Cairn terrier, 148
cheek teeth overgrowth, 434
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, 244, 408, 421
chronic osteitis, 387
INDEX
developmental problems, 144, 155, 159, 166, 171,
dental malocclusion, 195
176,179, 181, 189
buccoversion, 196
endodontic disease, 53, 54,56,298
crossbite, 196
mandibular [racture, 350, 353
distoversion, 195
periodontal disease, 47, 48, 50, 52, 53, 218-221
labioversion, 196
sialolith, 403
linguoversion, 195
tooth resorption, 53, 56, 293
mesioversion, 195, 196
taking radiographs, 30-46
rostroversion, 196
parallel technique, 32
ethical considerations, 202
shadow technique, 32-41
lance teeth, 198
challenging views, 41-46
normal occlusion, 195
 Intraoral stabilization, 351
procedures, 200-201
 Intraoral wiring. 352
ball therapy, 200
Intrinsic staining, 252, 298
interceptive orthodontics, 200
 Intruded tooth, 364
rostral (anterior) crossbite, 198
Intrusion, 364
scissor bite, 195, 196
Irreversible pulpitis, 295
skeletal malocclusion, 197
 Irrigation, 66
terms of malocclusion, 195, 196
Ivy loop wiring, 351
“wry" bite, 197
Malodor, see Halitosis
Jaw [ractures, see Fractures, maxillary and mandibular
Mandibular Iractures, see Fractures, maxillary and
 Junctional epithelium, 216
mandibular
Mandibular glands (salivary), 398
Kissing lesions/ulcers, 237, 245
Mandibular neuropraxia, 358
Mandibular rami, 444
Lactoperoxidase, 465
Marginal gingiva, 217
Lagomorphs, 429-437
Marsupialization, 400
acquired dental disease (ADD), 429, 431
Mastication muscles, 149
cheek teeth, 430
Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM), 358,
dental formula, 429
408-411
diagnostics, 434
Maxillary Iractures, see Fractures, maxillary and
incisors, 430
mandibular
procedures, 435
Melanocytic tumor, 310-313
abscess treatment, 436
Mesial, 443
extraction incisors, 436
Microdontia, 173
occlusal adjustment, 436
Microglossia (bird tongue), 192-194, 193
Lance tooth, 363
Missing teeth, 159, 163, 178
Lateral luxation, 363
Mobile tooth, 13
Level bite, 198
Mobility (index), 12, 447
Line angle, 92
Modihed bisecting angle technique, 32
Lion jaw, 150
Modified extraction, 112
Lockjaw syndrome, 358, 409
 Modiied Triadan system, 13, 442
Luxation, see Avulsion/luxation
 Modifed Widman technique, 230
Luxation TMJ, 359, 360
Molars, 13, 20, 22, 175, 176, 259, 260
Lymphocytic plasmacytic stomatitis (LPS), see
extraction, 97, 99, 109-111
Stomatitis
gingival Mlaps, 84, 86, 90, 91
radiographs, 45
Macrodontia, 173
Mucocele stone, 403
Malocclusion, 195-203
Mucogingival line (MGL), 217
AVDC classihcation, 458-460
Mucoperiosteal Mlap, 79, 377
base narrow canines, 198
caudal (posterior crossbite), 198
Neck lesion, see Tooth resorption
class l: neutroclusion/dental malocclusion, 195
 Necrotizing stomatitis, see Chronic ulcerative
class 2: mandibular distoclusion, 183, 196, 231
 paradental stomatitis
class 3: mandibular mesioclusion, 196
Neoplasia, 57, 301, 344
 class 4: asymmetrical skeletal malocclusion, 196
Nerve injury, 412
 deciduous tooth malocclusion, 199
Nonvital pulp, 26, 55, 176, 296
INDEX
Obturators, 190
Pemphigus, 415-419
Occlusal pit, 258
pemphigus erythematosus (PE), 415
Occlusal plane, 430
pemphigus folliaceus (PF), 415, 418
Occlusion, 9, 195
pemphigus vulgaris, 415-418
Odontoclast, 369
Periapical bone loss, 28, 54, 288, 293
 Odontoclastic resorption, see Tooth resorption
Perioceutic, 74, 75-77
Odontogenic tumor, 330
Periodontal disease, 211-223, 446-447
Odontoma, 330-335
etiology/pathophysiology, 211-212, 216-217
ameloblastic hbro-odontoma (AFO), 330, 331, 333,
gingivitis, 211-215
334
periodontitis, 216-223, 237
complex odontoma, 330, 331,334
stagel: gingivitis, 211-215, 217
compound odontoma, 330, 332, 334, 332-335
stage 2: early periodontitis, 217, 218
hamartoma, 330
stage 3: moderate periodontitis, 217, 219
Oligodontia, 163
stage 4: advanced periodontitis, 217, 220
Open apex, 161
therapy
Open-mouth mandibular locking, 359
antimicrobials, 221-222
Operculectomy, 161, 162
complete dental cleaning, 61-68, 209, 214
Operculum,158,160
GTR, 222
Oral examination, 5-15
periodontal pockets, 69-78, 222
 Oral papilloma, see Papillomatosis
periodontal splint, 222
Oral tumors, see Neoplasia
Periodontal explorer, 16, 17, 20, 22, 23
Oral ulceration, see Chronic ulcerative paradental
Periodontal lap, 92, 93
stomatitis
Periodontal ligament (PDL), 53, 216
Oronasal hstula (ONF), 231-236
Periodontal pocket (PP), 18, 69, 222
bone gralt, 235
therapy, 69-78
double reposition ap, 234-236
Periodontal probes/probing, 16-23, 17, 18, 70, 71, 222
[ull-thickness lap, 235
Periodontal splinting, 222
guided tissue regeneration, 235
 Periodontal surgery, 92
Osseopromotive substance, 98
Periodontitis, 216-223. See also Periodontal disease
Osseous wiring, 351
Perio-endo lesion, 288
Ossilying epulis (OE), 303
Periosteal elevator, 79, 80, 83
Osteomyelitis, 237, 288, 356
Persistent (retained) deciduous teeth, 143-147, 145
Osteoplasty, 388
Pharyngeal mucocele, 397
Overlapping Ilap, 190
Pharyngitis, 237
Overshot, see Malocclusion
 Pharyngostomy tube, 355
Phoenix abscess, 288
Pain management, 115-123
Pig tail wires, 351
alpha-2-agonists, 115
Pit-and-hssure caries, 258, 259, 268, 269. See also
local anesthetics, 1l5, 119
Caries
NSAIDs, 115
Pit-and-hssure sealant, 268
opioids, 115, 119
Plaque, 212
regional anesthesia
 Plaque index (PI), 11
mandible, 118
 Plasma cell gingivitis and pharyngitis
maxilla, 116, 117
(gingivostomatitis). See Stomatitis
Palatal clefts, 186-191
Plasmacytoma, 339
Palatal laps, 233
 Plastic filling instruments (PFI), 69
Palatoschisis, see Palatal clelts 
polishing. 66
Papilla, 92
polymyositis, 409
Papillomatosis, 341-346, 342
Posterior crossbite (PXB), see Caudal crossbite
 Papillomavirus, 341
Prairie dog, 429, 431
Parallel technique, 32
 pseudo-odontoma, 431
Parotid glands, 397
Premolars, 13
Parotid mucocele, 398
extraction, 98,100, 101, 105-108
Partial anodontia, 163
gingival laps, 83,85, 86,87
Partial pulpectomy, 284
radiographs,37, 45,46
Peg teeth, 173
Primary palatal clelt, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190
Pellicle, 207, 216
 Probing depth, 18
INDEX
Prophy paste, 62, 66, 78
Shadow technique (radiographs), 32
 Prophylaxis, see Complete dental cleaning
Shell teeth, 173
Pseudopocket, 224, 225
Shepherd's hook, see Periodontal explorer
Ptylism, 240, 245
Sialoadenitis, 398, 400
Pulp, 295
Sialoadenosis, 399
Pulp exposure (PE) (canal exposure), 12, 274, 279,
Sialoceles, see Salivary mucoceles
281
Sialography, 399
Pulpal necrosis, 279 365
Sialoliths, 397, 402-404
Pulpitis, 253, 279, 295-301
Skeletal malocclusion, 197
Pulpotomy, 284
Slab Iracture, 12
Slobbers, 431, 432
Rabbits, see Lagomorphs
Smooth-surface caries, 262, 264. See also Caries
Radicular teeth, 429
Splinting, 251
 Radiographs, see Intraoral radiography
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Ranula, 399
gingival, 318-321
Reparative dentin, 22,272
tongue, 322-325
Resorptive lesion, see Tooth resorption
tonsilar, 326-329
Restoration, 156
Stages, of periodontal disease, see under Periodontal
Retained deciduous (RD) teeth, see Persistent
disease
(retained) deciduous teeth
Stomatitis, 237-242, 238
Reversible pulpitis, 295
Stout's loop wiring, 351
Rhabdomyoma, 338
Strategic tooth, 161
Rhabdomyosarcoma, 338
 Subgingival curettage, 70
Rodents
Sublingual glands (salivary), 397
caviomorph, 429
Submerged teeth, 157
chinchillas, 429, 430
Sugarglider, 430
guinea pigs, 430,431
Sulcus, 211, 216
dental formulae, 429
Supereruption, 371, 384
diagnostics, 434
Supernumerary teeth, 168, 169, 170
diseases, 431433
Symphyseal injury, 347
murine
gerbils, 429, 431
Tape muzzle, 350
hamsters, 429, 431
Technicians, 133-141
rats, 429, 431
eqwipment and care, 137
procedures, 435
home care, 135
Root abscess, see Apical abscess
 patient monitoring, 39
Root caries, 262, 268. See also Caries
Temporalis muscle, 408
Root exposure (RE), 19, 20
Temporomandibular joint disorders, 149, 358-362
Root Iractures, see under Tooth Iractures
injury, 359, 362
Root planing, periodontal pocket therapy, 69-78
luxation/subluxation, 359, 360
curettes, 69, 70, 72-73
open mouth locking, 358, 359, 360
perioceutic, 74, 75-77
osteoarthritis, 358, 361
subgingival curettage, 70
Tetracycline, 254
Root planing, closed (RPC), 13, 72, 73
Thermal trauma/pulpitis, 297
Root planing. open (RPO), 13, 69
Tight lip syndrome, 178-182
Rostral crossbite, 9, 198
Tincture, of myrrh and benzoin, 230
 Rostral mandibulectomy, 351
Tongue, squamous cell carcinoma, 322-325
Rotated tooth (ROT), 13
Tongue tie, 430
Tonsil
Salivary gland adenocarcinoma, 405-407
cyst, 327
Salivary glands, 397
squamous cell carcinoma, 326-329
Salivary mucocele/sialocele, 397-401
Tooth avulsion/luxation, see Avulsion/luxation
Scissor bite, 9, 196
Tooth Iractures, 279-287
Sealants, 275
AVDC classihcation, 447-451
Secondary palatal clelt, 186, 188
complicated crown [ractures (CCF), 279, 283
Sectioning, 98, 100,103, 105, 106
complicated crown root Iractures (CCRF), 279,
 Sharpening dental elevator, 96
285
490
INDEX
Tooth Iractures (Continued)
Trigeminal neuritis, 412-414
enamel Iractures (EF), 279, 281
Trismus, 409
enamel infractions (EI), 279, 280
Twinning, 168
root Iractures (RF), 279, 286, 281
uncomplicated crown Iractures (UCF), 279, 282
Ulcerative stomatitis, 239. See also Chronic ulcerative
uncomplicated crown root Iractures (UCRF),
paradental stomatitis
279, 284
Ultrasonic scaler, 63, 64, 137
procedures, 283-286
Uncomplicated tooth Iracture, see under Tooth
apexiication, 285
fracture
apexogenesis, 285
Undershot teeth, 196
complicated mature, 284
Unerupted teeth, 157, 158, 159, 178
 complicated inmature, 284, 285
root Iracture, 285
Verrucae, 341
uncomplicated Iractures, 283
Vertical bone loss, 53, 58
yital pulpotomy (partial pulpectomy and direct
Vestibuloplasty, 181
pulp capping),284
Vincent's stomatits, see Chronic ulcerative paradental
Tooth mobility index, 12, 447
stomatitis
Tooth numbers, 13
Vital pulpotomy, 284
decreased, 163-167
VOHC,222
increased, 168-172
Tooth resorption (TR),55,56,369-379,452-458
W-3 beaver tail, 69
extraction, 112,377
Warts, oral, 341
radiographs, 53, 55, 56
Wave mouth, 430
stages (1-5), 371-375, 372, 452
"Wry bite,” 197
types (1-3), 375-376, 373, 454
Tooth root abscess, see Apical abscess
Xenogralt, 354
Transillumination, 24-27, 256, 274, 293, 296, 297
Xerostomia, 238
Trauma, 345-366
Trench mouth, see Stomatitis
Zygomatic mucocele, 398