Clinical
Small
Animal
Care
PROMOTINGPATIENT
HEALTHTHROUGH
PREVENTATIVENURSING
KIMMWUESTENBERG
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Clinical Small
Animal Care
Promoting Patient Health
through Preventative Nursing
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/wuestenberg
The website includes:
·Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
· Editable Word files containing the general forms found in Appendix 4
· Powerpoint files containing the employee skill and knowledge advancement
plans found in Appendix 5
Clinical Smalli
Animal Care
Promoting Patient Health
through Preventative Nursing
Kimm Wuestenberg, CVT, VTS (ECC, SAIM)
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Iic., Publication 
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global
Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO198SQ,0K
Editoriaf offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8sQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing. provided that the base fee is paid directly to
the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by Ccc, a separate system of
payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service
are 1SBN-13: 978-0-8138-0514-6/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks,
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
1 sariaias jeuoissajond buapuan ui pabebua pou sl jauslgnd aun peul buipueisiapun
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubfication Data
Wuestenberg, Kimm.
Wuestenberg.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-0514-6 (pbk. : alk. paper)
I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases-nursing. 2. Patient Care-veterinary. 3. Veterinary
Medicine-methods. SF 774.5]
636.089'073-dc23
2011037206
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
Set in 9/12.5 pt Interstate Light by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be
created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the
professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential
source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further,
readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
12012
Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
Section 1 Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health
3
1The Elements of Environmental Husbandry
5
 2  Considerations in Patient Management
11
3Patient Exam and Assessments
27
4  Nutritional Notability
43
Section 2 Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient
49
 5 Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
51
6 Physical Therapy Applications
61
7 Perioperative Patient Management
67
8Executing Emergency Care
75
9 Harmonizing Hospice Needs
89
Section 3 Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters
95
10
Venous and Arterial Catheter Care
97
11
Indwelling Urinary Catheter Care and Maintenance
107
12
Feeding Tube Care
115
13
Nasal Oxygen Catheter Care
123
14
Tracheostomy Tube Care
125
15
Chest Tube Care
129
Section 4 Comprehensive Areas of Focus
131
16
Cardiovascular Nursing
133
17
Regard for the Respiratory Patient
145
18
 Grasping Gastrointestinal Nursing Care
161
19
Rendering Renal Care
175
 20 Endocrine Nursing Encounters
185
21
Nursing Care of the Neurological Patient
191
A
vi
Contents
Musculoskeletal Minding
201
23 Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
215
Appendix 1 Formulas
231
Appendix 2Anatomy Illustrations
239
Appendix 3Clinical Quick Reference Guides
245
Appendix 4General Forms
255
Appendix 5Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans
263
Index
271
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/wuestenberg
The website includes:
· Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
· Editable Word files containing the general forms found in Appendix 4
· Powerpoint files containing the employee skill and knowledge advancement
plans found in Appendix 5
Preface
I will always remember my very first patient suffering from multiple organ dysfunction
of times before Angel, but I remember her because I learned an invaluable lesson from
her that night. In that 13-hour shift,I was given the opportunity to take patient care to
the next level. As I cared for her, I also learned what her body was doing physically.
from the sequence of dysfunctional microvascular blood flow to internal organ deterio-
ration. I learned the common pathway of the disease process and more importantly,
what measures we could take in attempts to stop the process. That night I learned that
critical thinking skills, anticipation of ensuing body processes, and hands-on nursing
Patient care and husbandry is one of the noblest nursing tasks that we have; however,
diagnostics, therapeutics, and even performing procedures. Unfortunately, there are
lost toes and limbs due to improper bandaging techniques. More recently, in 2oo9, 1
ment scald. In essence, this equates to nearly two decades of observing a challenging
enigma in this profession-the inability for veterinary practices and personnel to uphold
A veterinary patient receiving proper nursing care has a better chance at recovery
because of those nursing interventions.
In my own personal experiences, I have learned that turning away from a patient
receiving a blood transfusion is not a good idea. I have learned that a medication dose
use the check system. I have underestimated the temperature of a heat source; con-
versely, I have underestimated the physiological effects of hypothermia. I have learned,
and I will continue to learn. we all must continue to build our talents, recognize the
vii
viiPreface
powerful skill in our thinking and with ambition, dedication, and a true love for animals,
and with this profession, be the best that we can possibly be for these precious patients
we are fortunate enough to care for.
I would like to thank you, the reader, for your contribution to this profession, your
devotion, and your passion for veterinary nursing.
KimmWuestenberg
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to thank the person who introduced me to veterinary
teaching veterinary nursing to a 17-year-old high school student in 1993 and not only
succeeded, but became one of the most influential people in my career.
I would like to thank Margaret Mils for taking me under her wing and setting the
stage for future accomplishments; Jim Minnick for not only teaching me how to perform
a thoracocentesis 6 months out of school, but for telling me that I should be performing
awe euoissajoid pue uosiad saag punone-le ue ag dl mou jo aidwexa ue buas
Felock for sharing my passion for veterinary nursing, encouraging me, supporting me,
and being the best friend a girl could have; Linda Merrill, you are an absolute inspiration
and I'm honored to know you. Thanks to the Academy of Veterinary Emergency &
Critical Care Technicians (AVECCT) and the Academy of Internal Medicine for Veterinary
Technicians (AlMvT) for bringing so much to my life, my career, and this fantastic
profession.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family whom I love dearly with all my heart: my
beloved father, Richard, whose words to me throughout his life were "You can do any-
potential before I did; my brother, Jason, for the sibling rivalry that encouraged me to
animals has inspired me. Most of all, I would like to thank my beautiful sons, Imre
Albrecht and Kayden Avery, for all the joy, love, laughter, challenges, adventures, and
growth you bring to my life . . . you are both so very special, I love you and I thank you
for enriching my life.
K.W.
iX
Clinical Small
Animal Care
Promoting Patient Health
through Preventative Nursing
Section 1
Clinical Fundamentals in
Promoting Good Health
Chapter 1
The Elements of
Environmental
Husbandry
Nursing care of the veterinary patient involves astute knowledge of normal anatomy
ing skills. However, a key nursing aspect often overlooked is basic nursing care of the
patient and the patients' environment. Influences such as noise, temperature, hygiene,
surgical site infection, and a longer hospital stay, which means a possibility of develop-
ing a nosocomial infection. This section will cover basic nursing skills which have a
profound affect on the patients' ability to recover from illness.
Nosocomial infections
Nosocomial infections are those that occur within the hospital setting, often referred
to as "hospital-acquired" infections. They are also known as "super infections" or
"super bugs," since nosocomial infections pose a great threat to the debilitated and
immunocompromised veterinary patient. Microorganisms such as bacteria take Darwin's
'survival of the fittest'" theory to the next level when it comes to multiple antibiotic
resistances in a hospital setting. They not only survive, they thrive, and veterinary
for nosocomial infections tend to be higherin intensive or critical care settings; however,
incidence is not limited to these areas. In addition, human nosocomial infections tend
to be one of the leading causes of death in the intensive care unit (IcU) due to causing
septic shock and subsequent multiple organ failure. Surprisingly, sources of nosocomial
infections are the patient and the healthcare worker.
Pathogens such as Escherichia coti, Pseudamonas spp., Acinetobacter spp., Serratia
spp., Enterobacter spp., and Klebsiella spp. are common culprits of nosocomial infec-
tions. More recently, methicillin-resistant Staphyiococcus aureus (MRSA), methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus intermedius (MRSl), vancomycin-resistant Staphyfococcus
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
5
6  The Elements of Environmental Husbandry
aureus (VRSA), and vancomycin-resistant Enferococci (VRE) have made way to veteri-
nary practices. Sources for these infections include (but are not limited to) venous
access sites, urinary catheter sites, and surgical sites or wounds. Maintenance and
to prevention of nosocomial infection and is discussed in the section "Proper Care of
Tubes and Catheters."
become fomites and transfer microorganisms from one patient to another. when these
microorganisms are transferred to an ill or injured patient, the effects can be devastat-
ing due to the compromised immune system of the patient. Hand washing mechanically
removes debris and transient microorganisms. A non-antimicrobial soap should be used.
as resistance to an antimicrobial soap can build. Warm water should be used during a
thorough wash and the hands dried completely. either with paper towels or a hot air
dryer.
In addition to hand washing. the patients' housing should be properly disinfected at
least every 24 hours, more frequently as needed (soiling with urine, feces, vomit, blood,
etc.). The patients' bedding should also follow these guidelines, being changed or
washed at least every 24 hours. Soiled bedding should be removed immediately and
replaced with fresh, clean bedding. A visual surveillance of the patients' immediate
environment should be frequent, ensuring a clean housing area at all times.
Disinfectants and detergents can be placed on a rotating schedule to prevent resistance
such as exam tables, surgical tables, kennels, and kennel doors as well as containers
holding products used on patients (cleansers, gauze, etc.) to monitor the hospital envi-
ronment for potential pathogens (Fig. 1.1).
Sx Table
oodwouS
PUN911
DANESCEANH
Kennel
Figure 1.1 Culture survey of nosocomial pathogens.
Cinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   7
Bedding and dish rotation
General standards for kennel cleaning include providing fresh bedding and complete
disinfecting of the kennel at least once in a 24-hour period, more frequently if needed.
      n  e   
Kennels should be cleaned first from the top, then the sides, and finally the bottom. The
kennel doors should be cleaned inside and out. Large runs should be power washed and
a squeegee used to remove excess water. It is recommended to deep clean all kennels
and cages once a week and rotate disinfectants to prevent nosocomial infections.
Bedding materials may range from mats, paper, sheets, towels, or blankets. Patients
requiring long-term care or those with a decreased ability to ambulate should have thick
bedding to prevent decubital ulcers. Although blankets and towels provide warmth and
comfort to the patient, it is essential for the nursing staff to maintain cleanliness of
these materials. They should be checked, both visually and by touch, to ensure the
material has not been soiled. Soiled materials should be removed from the kennel, the
kennel disinfected, and fresh bedding material placed. Providing comfortable, clean
bedding to the patient may require more work; however, the benefits to the patient are
dynamic (Fig. 1.2).
Cats and smaller dogs may feel more comfortable when given a bed to rest in. A towel
can be rolled up and placed in a circular shape. Adding a small box to a kennel may also
   a  sa a  s s  ss 
Dishes should be rotated at least every 24 hours or more frequently if needed. Dried
food material or contaminated water remaining in dishes may contribute to bacteria
grow bacteria in rapid numbers. Food left out may begin to have a strong odor or may
food not consumed within 2 hours and store perishable diets in a refrigerator at 409F.
Bacteria may still grow in this temperature so all food should be inspected prior to
feeding.
'juaed ouieyab e u! pasn ped juaquosge pue buippag papped z'l ajnbiy
8 ■ The Elements of Environmental Husbandry
Figure 1.3  Many cats prefer to remain hidden while hospitalized. Here a simple
cardboard box was used.
Noise and air quality
Ventilation, heating, and cooling are essential in maintaining patient husbandry in a
clinical setting. Reducing noise is also imperative when it comes to patient comfort.
with a door in which the vocal patients are kept. However, with this door being closed
and several animals being excited and vocal, humidity and heat may result in unfavor-
active, or brachycephalic patients may need to be kept in a cooler area. It is important
the patients' housing quarters.
Loud noises may startle patients suffering from anxiety, contributing to unfavorable
psychological effects. When possible, loudly vocal patients disrupting ill, injured, or
anxious patients should be removed from the area. In some cases, the vocal patient is
suffering from anxiety or pain; these patients should be assessed for level of comfort
and therapeutics administered as deemed appropriate.
Circadian rhythm
The circadian rhythm is a 24-hour cycle in which animals undergo biochemical and
circadian cycle include (but are not limited to) hormone production, digestion, and
thermoregulation.
These processes may be influenced by the environment. For instance, the hormone
a si e sa  l  e  a an a s ua
absent during daylight hours. Melatonin is one of the hormones responsible for regulat-
ing the sleep-wake cycle; however, it is also thought to play a positive role in the
immune systems' ability to fight infectious disease. Serotonin is the other main hormone
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   9
regulating the sleep-wake cycle. Serotonin works opposite of melatonin, peaking during
melatonin production and sleep, light stimulates serotonin production and the wake
period of the circadian cycle. This becomes an important factor for patients receiving
care in 24-hour facilities. When possible, lights should be dimmed during the overnight
hours of hospitalization to keep this cycle regulated.
Infectious disease protocols
tion ward). ldeally. the isolation ward would be in a completely separate buildingi
however, it is often located in a se parate area of the practice with limited traffic. Having
the isolation ward within the practice allows for personnel to observe and monitor these
gloves, masks, shoe covers and caps for personnel to use, and an entire set of medical
supplies, food dishes, and litter pans which remain in isolation. As a general rule, if
something enters the isolation ward, it should not come out. This is not always possible,
isolation ward. The fewer staff members entering and exiting the ward, the better
chances that disease will not spread so long as proper procedures are followed.
Traditionally. a separate bag for soiled laundry is kept and washed separately from
other laundry. The disposable items such as shoe covers, gloves, and caps should be
discarded prior to exiting the ward. Hands should be washed and a foot bath containing
a disinfectant walked through while exiting. Once a patient leaves the isolation ward, it
should undergo thorough sanitation. It is also recommended to have negative airflow
into the isolation so when the entryways are opened, air moves into the ward, prevent-
s   su e  s a  s  i
humidity. and temperature control is essential (Fig. 1.4).
Figure 1.4 Microscopic view of mixed bacteria: cocci, bacilli, and spirochete.
10  The Elements of Environmental Husbandry
Chapter references and further reading
S. Bateman (2OO8a) MRSA and MDA microbes: the OSU experience. International Veterinar y
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
S. Bateman (2008b) Infection control practices. International Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Symposium.
R. Cheek (2oo9) what can you get from your pet? Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(6): 32-38.
A. Gordon (2009) You, the clinic, and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 3o(1): 24-33.
L. Limon (2006) Nosocomial infections. The National Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journar Winter: 29.
T. Mansueto (2oo4) Canine parvovirus infection- nursing is key. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1l): 78l-785.
J. Wilson (2oo7) Avoiding nosocomial infections. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journal Summer: 64-68.
Chapter 2
Considerations in
Patient Management
Hygiene and grooming
When veterinary patients are hospitalized, daily grooming and hygiene should be imple-
mented by the veterinary staff. Grooming aids in cleanliness and ultimately has positive
are unable to or uninterested in grooming themselves. When this occurs, the veterinary
nursing staff should ensure the patient is groomed daily or more frequently if needed
(Fig. 2.1).
Patients should be brushed daily to help stimulate secretions from the sebaceous
glands of the skin. Brushing will also help reduce matting and, in cats, reduce the risk
of trichobezoars ("hair balls"). Brushing the patient will also serve as an opportunity to
examine the skin for ectoparasites, wounds, petechiae or ecchymosis, jaundice, ery-
thema, or any other abnormalities in the integumentary system. Patients should be
brushed gently so as to prevent unnecessary pain. Brush strokes should be long and
brushed.
One of the most neglected aspects of veterinary patient care is instituting baths.
Many recumbent or ill patients are soiled in their own feces, urine, or vomit while hos
pdde rends auaieau jo uoesidde aun pue Ap paned sl ing aui uaio col pazeiid
This leaves the skin vulnerable for infection. Any time a patient has soiled themselves,
a bath or bathing of the local area is in order as long as the patient is stable enough to
sustain the bath (Fig. 2.2). For patients with respiratory compromise or severe debilita-
tion and anxiety, alternative methods can be used such as spot bathing with a bowl of
be thoroughly cleansed to prevent scald and skin infection. The patient can be dried
can be placed between the warmed air and the patient; if the air is too hot for the hand
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
11
12   Considerations in Patient Management
Figure 2.1 Smaller breeds prone to epiphora should have their tear secretions cleaned
from hair and skin daily to prevent skin infection (lacrimal flush in a Yorkshire terrier
suffering from dermatitisdue toexcessivetearing).
Figure 2.2  Preparing to bathe a dog with hemorrhagic gastroenteritis.
of the veterinary personnel, then it is most likely too hot for the patient and should be
as providing positive psychological benefits of bonding with the caregiver during this
time. Patients suffering from emesis should have their mouths rinsed after an episode
and, when necessary. hair clipped or cleansed and affected skin cleansed (Fig. 2.4).
of infection. It is recommended to use a size 10 clipper blade, being careful in prevention
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health  13
Figure 2.3 Excrement scald as a result of poor hygiene.
Figure 2.4 Vomitus soiled muzzle in an anesthetic patient.
urinary catheter should be placed if patient and condition allows. Disposable absorbent
the material, sparing the patients' skin from exposure (Table 2.1, Figs. 2.5-2.9).
Nails should be clipped if they interfere with the patients' ability to ambulate. Older
dogs tend to exercise less and have longer nails. Couple this with weakness, tile or slick
floors, and anxiety and the result is generally an undesirable situation. Clipping the
14
 Considerations in Patient Management
Table 2.1F
Preventing decubital ulcers and excrement scald
Frequency
Rationale
Rotate patient position
Every 2-4 hours
Altering positions will allow
from lateral, sternal,
for perfusion of pressure
semisternal, and opposing
points, helps prevent
lateral recumbency
atelactasis
Provide thick, soft
Bedding at all times,
Bedding will help prevent
bedding, baby
with rearrangement at
decubital ulcers by relieving
mattresses, pillows, pet
each rotation. Bedding
pressure points. Areas of
beds, and so on
changed as frequently
interest for padding include
as necessary to
the shoulders, hips, elbows,
provide a clean
lateral metatarsals, and
environment
lateral metacarpals
Full or partial bathing;
As frequently as
Sponge bathing can be used
sponge bathing
 needed to keep patient
to remove smaller amounts
clean; any time the
of debris, while partial and 
patient is soiled with
full baths should be given to
urine, feces, vomit,
ensure clean skin, preventing
food, and so on
scald from the excrement
Towel or blow drying
After bathing; warm or
Maintain euthermia, prevent
cool air can be used
moist dermatitis
with blow drying
Use of disposable pads
Change when soiled
Promote cleanliness in cases
of diarrhea or emesis.
 Consider placing a urinary
catheter and balancing fluid
ins/outs with excessive
urination
Use of over-the-counter
After bathing
Diaper rash ointments will
(OTC) topical ointments
help protect the skin while
an creams
hemorrhoid creams placed
over areas at risk of
decubital ulceration will
cause vasoconstriction,
reducing the inflammation
Implement physiotherapy
When applicable
Refer to section on physical
therapy
(Fig. 2.10).
Exercise and walks
Exercise and walks tend to be more pressing in dogs than in cats. Cats will often urinate
and defecate in a litter box when they are in a kennel. Dogs, particularly those who are
house trained, will tend to hold their bladder and bowels as long as they are kenneled.
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   15
Figure 2.5 A recumbent patient, Maddie is resting in an elevated lateral recumbency
onlayersofbedding.
Dogs on higher fluid rates, those suffering from diarrhea or urinary infections and
diabetics should be taken out for frequent walks. Care should be taken with patients
suffering from anemia as overexertion and collapse is a possibility. Geriatric patients,
patients suffering from osteoarthritis or recent trauma, fractures, or wounds should
have slower, short walks on even ground. Patients with neurological conditions may
need assisted walks, either being carried outside or supported with a towel or harness.
Caution should always be displayed when a cardiac or respiratory patient is to be taken
out for a walk, as too much exertion can prove to be fatal. Patients should be assessed
for mental alertness, respiratory effort, ability to ambulate without excessive effort,
and vital signs prior to a walk.
Exercise will promote coughing, clearing the airways in patients who have been
housed in a kennel. During daylight hours, the sunshine will stimulate vitamin D produc-
tion in the body, which aids in the proper function of the immune system. Sunlight also
stimulates alertness and, in humans, has been shown to improve depression.
Although cats generally are not taken outside in the sunlight and fresh air, they too
can receive the benefits of exercising. Cat toys can be used to stimulate the cat's mind
and body while in the hospital. Additionally, a cat can be taken into an exam room and
exposed to catnip (also called catmint or Nepeta cataria), which contains a chemical
herb. Not all cats will respond to catnip, and some will have an effect of calmness rather
than activity.
Routine assessment and treatments
mented as often as necessary, depending on the nature of the condition. It is not
16■
Considerations in Patient Management
Figure 2.6 Semisternal recumbency instituted in a recumbent Great Dane.
Figure 2.7 The same patient, resting in right lateral recumbency.
uncommon for patients in the ICU to have continuous monitoring 24 hours a day until
status has improved.
The veterinarian or technician usually creates the treatment plan, indicating a set
schedule for obtaining vital signs, administering medications, and walking outside.
Veterinary nursing applications should also be implemented. For instance, the recum-
instituted, bedding changed, and fluid balances calculated. Unfortunately, when these
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health
1■17
Figure 2.8 The use of a commercial pet bed in an anemic patient receiving a whole
bloodtransfusion.
Figure 2.9 Demonstration of poor husbandry in a cat with glomerulonephritis: vomitus
visible on fur surrounding chin; vomitus and blood are evident on bedding; and
edematous extremities, which would benefit from massage and range-of-motion
exercises.The tail,however,is wrapped for hygiene.
tasks are not definitively outlined in a treatment schedule, they may become overlooked
patients. when a staff member has been caring for a particular patient, they may be
Additionally, a bond is established and the patient then knows the individual and may
feel more comfortable. An alternative method of monitoring includes having veterinary
18   Considerations in Patient Management
Figure 2.1o Overgrown nail in a cat which has penetrated through and exited
surrounding tissue.
Figure 2.11 A recumbent patient placed in clear view rather than in a run or kennel to
optimize husbandry and needs.
personnel rotate between patients. This technique can bring a fresh assessment, notice
Pain assessment
Recognizing signs of pain and advocating pain management is a paramount element of
patient care. It is well recognized that patients, both veterinary and human, suffer from
remain in uncontrolled pain. It is assumed that any condition which may cause pain to
awabeuew uid o dais isu aul 'llam se siewue oi uied asne paapui pinom suewnu
is clinically recognizing signs of pain.
From a physiological standpoint, common vital sign parameters will reflect the stimu-
mydriasis. Although these are physiological effects of pain, it is important to note that
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   19
Table 2.2 Recognition of pain
Physiological
· Increased heart rate and blood pressure; peripheral
affects
vasoconstriction with possible cool extremities;prolonged
capillary refill time (CRT)
· Tachypnea or panting
· Ptyalism, inappetance, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation
· Muscle fasciculations, weakness, difficult or reluctant ambulation
· Neutrophilia, Iymphocytosis, hyperglycemia, and polycythemia;
elevated cortisol and catecholamine
Behavioral
·Vocality
affects
·Pacing or lack of mobility
· Aggression or apprehension
· Inadequate or absent grooming
· Lack of appetite
Localized
·Eye: squinting, rubbing eye
areas
· Ear: shaking head, rubbing or scratching ears
·Mouth: ptyalism, cautious eating or drinking
· Musculoskeletal:ataxia or other altered gait, reluctant when
ambulating, dysuria, stranguria, or tenesmus
· Abdomen: splinting, postural changes ("hunched back"),
anorexia, or vomiting
· Thorax: respiratory rate and pattern changes, orthopnea,
reluctant ambulation, vocality
·Extremities:nonweight bearing,licking,biting or chewing
·Perianal: licking, chewing, tenesmus, or scooting
Table 2.3 Physiological processes of pain
Transduction
Translation of stimuli into electrical activity
Transmission
Movement of the impulses to spinal cord
Modulation
Movement of impulses from spinal cord to brain
Perception
The brain recognizing the pain
fear, stress, and anxiety can also stimulate the "fight-or-flight'" response with similar
clinical responses.
Behavioral changes, in addition to physiological parameters, will aid in the assessment
of pain. The behavioral response to pain may vary not only between dogs and cats, but
also between breeds. Some breeds tend to have a high tolerance to pain while others
may not. There is not an established standard veterinary pain scale; however, the major
ity of pain scales in use are based on behavioral characteristics for a specific species.
Some behavioral changes in response to pain are listed in Table 2.2.
Veterinary technicians work more closely with the patients so it is only practical and
good reasoning for the veterinary support staff to be advocates of pain management.
There are many techniques to providing pain management, including (but not limited
to) the application of physical therapy. the use of narcotics and anti-inflammatory
with a chest tube may benefit from a local anesthetic administered into the thorax (via
the chest tube). while a patient with pitting edema would benefit from physical therapy
applications (Table 2.3).
Considerations in Patient Management
Psychological health
Hospitalized patients require certain emotional needs as well as physical environmental
needs to be met. Many times these patients are painful, scared, nervous, and uncom-
fortable. It may bring comfort to the pet to have blankets, beds, or toys from home as
well as receiving visits from family members. Occasionally. when owner visits end, some
patients go through a period of extreme anxiety. In those cases, visits may not be in
the best interest of the patient (Figs. 2.12 and 2.13).
aul uim puog aul aopg pue puaed aul asea diau ae siuawssasse ue suawiea
Figure 2.12 Post-operative pain management: B.B.is recovering with his own (catnip) toys.
Figure 2.13 A nervous dachshund has been provided toys from his home to help ease
hishospitalstay.
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   21
comfort. Care should be taken to minimize loud or sudden movements which may startle
the patients. Some patients may also benefit from a more secluded area of housing.
benefit from the vocal patient being moved to a more secluded, calm area of the prac-
tice. In extreme cases of anxiety, sedatives may be warranted to allow the patient (and
other hospitalized patients) to rest peacefully.
Care for the recumbent patient
Recumbency can occur in several disease states, from a neurological condition to criti-
cal illness. Nonambulatory patients should be provided with soft bedding, with attention
to pressure points such as shoulders, stifles, and hips. These areas are prone to devel-
oping decubital ulcers or "bed sores." This serious and sometimes fatal condition is a
reflection of nursing care provided. Decubital ulcers can be preventable and efforts
should always be made in anticipation of the occurrence. Proactive measures include
the use of blankets, crib mattresses, pet water beds, and pressure-relieving foam mate
such as the elbow or hip. Decubital ulcers occur when there is either a lack of circula
occurs. If the wounds break open, the risk of infection and subsequent sepsis is a serious
one as it may be the be-all and end-all to the already immunocompromised patient (Fig.
2.14, Table 2.4).
Figure 2.14 Decubital ulcers in a geriatric patient.
Considerations in Patient Management
Table 2.4 Decubitus ulcer classification
Stages
Description
Nursing interventions
Stage
Superficial,
Astute recognition and therapeutics: relieve
one
nonblanchable erythema
pressure using devices such as cushions,
improve patient nutrition and hydration,
implement comprehensive wound
evaluations
Stage
Epidermis and dermis
Continue measures to alleviate pressure,
two
injury, partial thickness
clean wounds and cover open wounds.
loss, ruptured or intact
Wound care may range from wet-to-dry
abrasion noted
bandages to hydrotherapy for debridement
or the application of hydrocolloid dressing
or hyperbaric oxygen (topical or chamber
therapy)
Stage
 Injury to the
Maintain and potentially improve previous
three
 subcutaneous layer, full
therapeutics such as nutrition and fluid
thickness loss
therapy; consider low laser therapy
Stage
Injury extends to muscle,
Consider advocating surgical intervention
four
joint capsule, or bone
(closure, flap, or graft)
Recumbent patients should be rotated at least every 2-4 hours, moving from lateral
to sternal or semisternal recumbency as permitted by patient needs and condition.
Positional changes will not only help prevent pressure sores, it will also help prevent
atelactasis.
Finally, recumbent patients without indwelling urinary catheters require assistance
with micturition. In efforts to promote natural urination, recumbent dogs may be carried
outside and assisted while cats may be assisted in a litter box. If the patients' physical
state does not allow for this technique, or if the technique is unsuccessful, then manual
ness, and ease of manual voiding. with manual expressing of the bladder, attention to
the urine quantity and quality (gross examination) should be evaluated. Recumbent
patients are often unable to fully void the bladder of urine. This remaining urine collects
and bladder infections ensue, resulting in a classic strong odor (Fig. 2.15).
Detecting abnormalities
The ability to detect abnormalities in the veterinary patient is one of great skill.
 a t     e  u    
tics administered, and then recognizing when those observations have deviated, is a
talent in itself. with experience and continuous learning, specific characteristics of
conditions and symptoms of conditions will become more easily recognized.
Documentation is essential when it comes to detecting abnormalities. Documentation
should include (but is not limited to) alertness, vital sign notation, fluid balances, heart
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   23
and lung sounds, positional arrangement, behavioral observations, and nutritional
status. Each change or abnormality should be documented, regardless how casual,
  i  il         
pathophysiology of their patients condition, but also recognize changes and prepare
for (and hopefully prevent) the next step of the disease process. Proactive nursing care
Figure 2.15Escherichia coli (bacilli) in a bladder infection of a geriatric patient. A
white blood cell (wBC, center) is also present.
Figure 2.16 Tommy resting comfortably (fibrosarcoma in the left pelvic limb).
Figure 2.17 The previous patient, Tommy, suffering from post-operative pain
(amputation). Note the change in expression, particularly the eyes.
Figure 2.18 A vestibular yet comfortable Pharaoh Hound.
24
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   25
Figure 2.19 A German Shepherd Dog with a painful neck wound.
Chapter references and further reading
A. Gottlieb (2oo2) Analgesic options for managing pain in cats and dogs. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospitaf Staff 23(10):638-645.
A. Gottlieb (20o9) No pain plenty of gain. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journal for
the Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(3): 16-22.
Technicians in America Journal Spring: 54-58.
J. Kerr (2oo8) Unique feline monitoring and management techniques. International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
H. Madsen (2oo5) Perioperative pain management. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 359-368.
J. Mott (2oo4) Ethical decision making: dealing with dilemmas and improving patient care.
Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(2):
126-131.
M. Schaer (2003) Clinical pearls in intensive and critical care | and ll. Western Veterinary
Conference.
N. Schaffran (1998) Pain in critically ill small animals: ethical aspects. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(5): 349-353.
N. Schaffran (2oo2) Common protocols for pain management. Veterinary Technician the
Compiete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 23(12): 748-753.
N. Schaffran (2o03) Pain relief as a practice standard. Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(1): 36-38.
R. Sereno (2005) Pain management for cancer patients. The Nationaf Association of
Veterinary Technicians in America Journaf winter: 45-50.
Chapter 3
Patient Exam and
Assessments
Obtaining and interpreting vital signs
Obtaining, interpreting, and assessing vital sign parameters of a patient is generally an
involved process. The patient should undergo a primary survey. noting any changes in
mentation, posture, pain level, urination, or defecation. The basic parameters to be
measured include the temperature, heart rate, pulse quality. respiration, mucous
membrane (MM) assessment, and capillary refill time (CRT). By obtaining and document-
ing the findings in these measurements, abnormalities in body systems can be
Pathophysiology, detailed monitoring, and interventions can be found in the compre-
hensive areasof focussection.
Temperature
The temperature can be measured using aural, axillary, toe web, esophageal, or rectal
routes, with the latter being most reliable. Temperatures obtained via the aural (ear)
route can be used in patients with rectal abnormalities; however, with the L-shaped ear
with fractious patients; however, obtaining a temperature via this route takes a minimum 
of 4 minutes for accuracy (using a mercury thermometer) and the results can be falsely
temperature reading. A difference greater than 7° can indicate poor perfusion.
monitors and are generally reserved for anesthetized patients. Obtaining the tempera-
ture rectally is the most common and preferred approach. This method is the most
accurate and reliable. The rectal method should be used with caution when the animal
has sustained injury (or surgery) in the rectal area.
Clinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing. First Edition
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
27
28  Patient Exam and Assessments
Figure 3.1 Warming techniques including circulating water blanket, IV fluid warmer,
and warming the airway.
An animal's body temperature can be an indicator of several conditions. Stress can
cause a slightly elevated temperature, but other conditions such as infection, heat
exhaustion, seizures, and certain toxicities (i.e., toad toxicity) can also cause an eleva
tion. Hypothermia can be caused by conditions such as shock, metabolic crisis, environ-
mental conditions, and anesthesia.
When a patients' body temperature is significantly out of normal range, it is important
that the animal's temperature is not adjusted too quickly. If there is a rapid change in
temperature, it could cause serious problems for the patient. For instance, rapid cooling
tion. Rapid heating can cause vasodilatation, which may result in lowering the blood
pressure of the animal. lf external heating or cooling sources are necessary, the tem-
perature should be adjusted slowly and ceased once the animal is within 2? of normalcy.
and3.2).
Pulse and heart rate
The pulse represents the left ventricular force or delivery of blood to the body. When
pinous asind yoei aaains aue ui panioui ag osie pinous peau aui 'asind aui buissasse
represent one cardiac cycle; therefore, with each heartbeat, there should be a pulse
that follows. However, there are times when there is not a palpable pulse detected with
with (but not limited to) primary cardiac disease, splenic masses, gastric dilatation and
Cinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health  29
Figure 3.2 Warming the patient airway.
Table 3.1Cardiac murmurs
Grade (intensity)
Description
I/VI
Barely audible, soft murmur audible after few minutes of
auscultation
I/VI
Heard immediately, soft murmur localized to one valve area
I1/VI
Immediately audible, moderate intensity, noted at more than
one location
IV/VI
Moderate to loud intensity, but no precordial thrill
v/VI
Loud intensity, palpable precordial thrill present
VI/VI
Loud intensity, precordial thrill, audible with stethoscope
away from thoracic wall
should be observed. If the pulse is very strong or bounding, it can be indicative of pain,
anxiety, or hypertension. If the pulse quality is weak or poor, it can be indicative of poor
perfusion, low blood pressure, or end-stage disease.
The heart should be auscultated and observed for the presence of heart murmurs,
arrhythmias, bradycardia, tachycardia, or muffled sounds. Some animals develop
murmurs during illness, in which the murmur goes away once the patient has recovered.
A murmur will have a "whoosh" sound instead of clear, distinct heart sounds the normal
healthy cardiac patient has. There are different degrees of murmurs. Muffled or absent
heart sounds can be associated with fluid in the thoracic cavity, particularly the peri-
cardium (Table 3.1).
Normal Heart Rates:
Small dog: 100-160 beats per minute
Medium to large dogs: 60-100 beats per minute
Cats: 110-240 beats per minute
30  Patient Exam and Assessments
Respiration rate and pattern
pattern. Abnormal respiratory patterns can oftentimes help determine the area of the
respiratory system affected. An increase in inspiratory effort, marked with open mouth
breathing or gasping motions, usually corresponds to an upper airway condition. There
may be an audible sound (stridor or stertor) with respirations when there is upper
airway involvement.
a        a   
contracting, is indicative of a lower respiratory condition. Some conditions associated
with abdominal breathing and expiratory distresses are right-sided heart disease, dia-
phragmatic hernia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and pneumonia.
Certain conditions may have little or no inspiratory or expiratory effort; however, the
animal may still be in respiratory distress. Watching the pattern is important. Shallow,
fast respirations are associated with conditions such as a pneumothorax and a pleural
effusion. Animals with asthma, pulmonary contusions, or pulmonary thromboembolism
(PTE) can appear to have severe inspiratory and expiratory effort at the same time,
along with open mouth breathing and tachypnea.
oue uoeidsui yiog jo peau ag pinous sunos ueaig 'shunl aun bueiinosne uaum
expiration. As with the heart, it is a good idea to listen to normal, healthy lungs of
sounds that may be noted are wheezes (whistling) and crepitant and crackling rales
(popping or bubbling sounds). wheezes are associated with bronchitis and asthma.
nary edema, near drowning, etc.). It is important to note which side of the thorax the
sounds were observed, and whether it was the cranial (toward the head) or caudal
(toward the tail) area of the thorax, and whether the sounds were heard upon inspira-
tion or expiration.
Normal Respirations:
Dog: 8-20 breaths per minute
Cat: 8-30 breaths per minute
MM and CRT
In addition to the TPR, the pet's MMs and CRT should be assessed. The gingival MMs
are primarily observed; however, the conjunctiva or perianal region can be used for
be difficult to assess. Pale MMs can be an indicator for conditions such as shock, anemia
hypothermia, or pain. Bright red, injected, or hyperemic MMs can indicate conditions
such as septic shock, hypertension, or toxicosis. MMs displaying a brown color can
indicate acetaminophen or carbon monoxide toxicosis while yellowing. or icterus, typi
cally accompanies conditions of the hepatobiliary system. Cyanosis is often observed
in patients suffering from respiratory distress. Cyanosis is usually one of the last indica
tors that the pet is hypoxic.
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   31
Figure 3.3 Normal pink MM color in a dog with oral squamous cell carcinoma.
The MM should also be assessed for moisture. Tacky (dry/sticky) MMs can be indica
tive of dehydration, whereas moist MMs can be associated with toxins, nausea, or
overhydration.
The CRT is obtained by pressing on an area of the gingival MMs. The area will become
blanched, then fill with color again. The total time this should take is 1-2 seconds. A CRT
seconds can indicate poor perfusion. The CRT can be utilized as a quick reference of
the patients' perfusion. A measurement of blood pressure should be performed if the
CRT is either rapid or delayed (Figs. 3.3-3.6).
Patient monitoring equipment
Although there are many useful machines and monitoring units readily available in most
    a   a   n sss 
being said, utilizing the available instrumentation will help in better assessment and
perhaps verification of clinical findings by the veterinary personnel. Most commonly
used devices are blood pressure monitors, pulse oximetry machines, electrocardio-
graphs, and capnographs. These machines are useful in both perioperative nursing and
in monitoring the ill or injured patient.
Blood pressure monitoring
Blood pressure can be measured using direct or indirect means. Direct blood pressure
sure monitoring is obtained by using either an ultrasound flow detector (Doppler) or an
32  Patient Exam and Assessments
Figure 3.4 Cyanotic MM color in a dog suffering asphyxia due to rattlesnake
envenomation.
Figure 3.5 Pale MM due to hemorrhage.
should be monitored in any patient with cardiovascular instability or any patient under-
going anesthetic or surgical procedures. Measurements are commonly taken by using
the extremities, though the tail can be used, and in instances of cardiopulmonary arrest,
the Doppler transducer may be placed on the cornea to detect blood flow to the brain.
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health  33
Figure 3.6 Pallor of third eyelid with concurrent hyphema of the eye in a
coagulaopathy.
formula S + (2 × D)/3 can be used. Oscillometric blood pressure machines typically
calculate the MAP so this formula is more often used when using the Doppler to obtain
bloodpressurevalues.
Blood pressure cuff selection can greatly influence readings. A cuff that is too small
may cause a falsely elevated blood pressure while a large cuff can falsely lower the
reading. The cuff width should be approximately 40% of the limb circumference. A quick
estimation can be made by choosing a cuff with the same height as the width of the
portion of the extremity to be used. The bladder of the cuff should be placed over the
artery. The cuff should be completely deflated in between measurements to prevent
inaccurate readings (Figs. 3.7-3.9).
Pulseoximetry
The pulse oximeter is a machine that gives a percentage of oxygen saturation in the
body. Most machines give an audible pulse rate with tone sounds corresponding to the
the tongue does not necessarily represent the oxygen saturation in a particular extrem-
ity. The normal oxygen saturation reading is 95% or greater.
Oxygen content should also be assessed when evaluating oxygen saturation. The
normal oxygen content is 20 mL/dL, with an acceptable range of 17-24 mL/dL. The value
of a patients' oxygen content can be obtained by using this simple formula:
Oxygen content =1.36 xsaturation x (packed cell volume/3))
This formula is important to incorporate into oxygenation status, as a severely
anemic patient can have a saturation of 96%, but may have dangerously low oxygen
content since oxygen is transported via hemoglobin molecules within a red blood cell.
Figures 3.7-3.9 Blood pressure cuff placement; note the ladder of the cuff is on the
medial aspect of the limbs and the ventral aspect of the tail.
34
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health  35
tion within a vessel, it does not measure or provide information about the delivery of
oxygen to other tissues in the body (perfusion).
Capnography
by taking the measurements from the remaining air at the end of the endotracheal tube.
thesia machine, and the occurrence of apnea.
Ilisusuallya steep climb,representing the expiratoryupstroke when carbon dioxide
in carbon dioxide as oxygen is entering the airway.
Electrocardiography (EcG)
Electrocardiograms are commonly used intraoperatively as a tool for cardiac monitor-
ing. From intraoperative care, the use of electrocardiograms can expand to monitoring
dycardia, tachycardia, or auscultated dysrhythmias.
The amplitude of the complex shows the amount of electrical activity and the duration
shows the length of time involved with the conduction. Each (normal) complex is made
of up of the P wave, the QRS complex, and the T wave.
The P wave occurs from depolarization (contraction) of the right and left atria and
is the first wave in the complex. The Q, R, and S waves make up the QRS complex, which
represents ventricular depolarization (contraction). The T wave is the last wave of the
interval marks the time from atrial depolarization to ventricular depolarization. The QT
interval marks the time in which ventricular depolarization and repolarization occur.
the beginning of ventricular repolarization (Table 3.2, Fig. 3.10).
Thermoregulation
Induced hypothermia has been used in medicine since the time of Hippocrates and is
still currently used in modern medicine in both ischemic and nonischemic conditions.
Hypothermia has shown to be beneficial in treatment of brain injury. cardiac arrest,
36  Patient Exam and Assessments
Table 3.2 Determining heart rate and rhythm using the electrocardiogram
Obtaining the heart rate:
RR interval (1500 or 3000) method:
50mm/s: count the number of small boxes between two R waves and divide
by 30o0 to get beats per minute.
25mm/s: count the number of small boxes between two R waves and divide
by 15oo to get beats per minute.
Sequence method:
Count the number of R waves (or P waves) in a 6-second strip and multiply
by 10.
Observing the heart rhythm:
PR interval:
The time from the signal in the sinoatrial (SA) node, which depolarizes the
atria to the moment the signal crosses into the ventricle, usually through
the atrioventricular (AV) node.
QRS segment:
The time it takes to depolarize the ventricles
QT interval:
The onset of ventricular depolarization to the completion of ventricular
repolarization.
Normal parameters
Description
Canine (seconds)
Canine (mV)
Feline (seconds)
Feline (mV)
P wave
0.04
0.4
0.04
0.4
PR interval
0.06-0.13
0.05-0.09
QRS
0.05-0.06(max)
2.5-3.0
0.04(max)
0.9 (max)
complex
(max)
QT interval
0.15-0.25
0.12-0.18
ST segment
0.2 (max)
0.1 (max)
T wave
<25%of R
<25% of R
wave height
wave height
stroke, and status epilepticus. while some patients may benefit from induced hypother-
mia, an unplanned hypothermia may contribute to prolonged recovery. impaired blood
clotting, altered drug metabolism, surgical site infection, and even cardiovascular
ischemia.
Human studies have shown that maintaining euthermia in perioperative patients
contributes to patient comfort and satisfaction. Veterinary patients undergoing an
anesthetic procedure should have vital signs obtained prior to anesthesia and vigilantly
watched for hypothermia throughout the procedure. Additionally. preventative mea-
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health  37
iVet"
124三
91
124
Figure 3.10 Multiparameter monitor displaying left bundle branch block (ECG) and low
oxygen percentage(pulse oximeter).
intraoperative, and postoperative warming according to human anesthetic nursing
literature.
It is well recognized that anesthetic agents and opiates contribute to hypothermia.
Patients suffering from cardiovascular impairment consequently suffer reduced
blood flow to vital organs such as the kidneys, which receive approximately 25% of
cardiac output, and the liver, which receives approximately 33% of cardiac output.
tissues and vital organs as well as creating venous stasis. Hypothermia-induced vaso-
In addition to cardiovascular effects, hypothermia has shown to directly affect the
immune system and coagulation, which may contribute to increased blood loss and need
for blood transfusions. Perioperative hypothermia has been associated with wound
infections, blood loss, myocardial ischemia, pain, prolonged recovery time, and cardiac
contribute to poor oxygenation when dysfunctional blood flow is present, prolong the
healing of traumatic or chronic wounds, and contribute to a longer hospital stay. placing
the patient at risk for nosocomial infections.
The veterinary nursing staff should institute guidelines for hypothermic and anes-
for patient thermal monitoring will benefit the patient as well as designate responsibility
and accountability for the patients' thermoregulation. A guideline for the use of thermal
38  Patient Exam and Assessments
interventions may also be helpful since a variety of warming sources are available in
most practices.
External heating applications include the use of commercially available tools such as
forced-air warming systems, heating pads that may or may not include water circula
tion, heat lamps, and heating disks. Alternatively, warming applications commonly made
in the clinic include the use of hair dryers, rice bags, and warm fluid bags or bottles.
A great risk of external heating is the induction of thermal injury to the patients'
dermis. Any time external heating is applied to a patient special care must be taken
to monitor for excessive heat. warm-air units are usually low risk when it comes to
thermal injury.
It is important to understand that many external heating sources are warming
just that, the external body. and not necessarily warming the patents' core. Internal
mented by the use of warmed intravenous (Iv) fluids, warmed lavage fluids during surgi-
cal procedures, and warmed inhaled oxygen and gases. In some cases, warm water
enemas can be used as a warming technique. Although internal warming is effective, it
cannot be depended on alone and should be used in conjunction with other methods of
warming.
 it is important to understand the effects of hypothermia on patients with inadvertent
hypothermia and recognize those at risk for hypothermia. Being proactive in thermo-
at risk for hypothermia (Figs. 3.11-3.13, Tables 3.3 and 3.4).
MAXRATEF2DmL/hrIV
Figure 3.11 Fluid warmer.
Figure 3.12 Circulating water blanket.
Figure 3.13 Warming disks.
Table 3.3 Vital sign parameters
Heart rate (beats per minute)
Small dog: 100-160 beats per minute
Medium to large dogs: 60-100 beats per minute
Cats: 110-240 beats per minute
Respirations (breaths per minute)
 Dog: 8-20 breaths per minute
Cat: 8-30 breaths per minute
Temperature
100.5-102.50F
MM
Coral pink, moist
CRT
<2 seconds
Blood pressure
120/80
MAP 70-110
Central venous pressure (CvP) 0-5mmH0
39
Table 3.4Patient monitoring flow sheet
Date:
Patient:
Owner:
Condition:
Dr:
Tech:
Meds
StrengthDose
Route
Time
InitialsDNR:
wt:
IVC
Special Concerns:
FluidType:
Rate:
TotalVolume:
Monitoring:
Pulse Ox
Bp
ECG
Temp
Capnograph
Other:
Time:
FluidsIn
Fluids Out
ORate
Pulse Ox:
Temp:
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
06
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
HR
Notes:
RR
(
Sys
Dias V
MAP☆
DNR, do not resuscitate; Wt, weight; IVC, intravenous catheter; Pulse Ox, pulse oximetry: ECG,
systolic; Dias, diastolic; Post-Op, postoperative.
40
Clinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health    41
Chapter references and further reading
B.Bulmer (2006) Performing a cardiovascular physical examination.Veterinary Medicine
January.
R. Gfeller, et al. (1994) Physical exam checklist for pets. Veterinary Information Network.
E. Mazzaferro (2oo3) Respiratory system evaluation and monitoring. American Animal
Hospital Association Scientific Program.
R. Pottie, et al (2007) Effect of hypothermia on recovery from general anesthesia in the dog.
Austrafian Veterinary Journal 85(4).
H. Ruess-Lamky (2oo8) Anesthetic monitors: understanding their use and limitations. The
M. Tefend (2004) Hemodynamic monitoring of critically ill patients. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(7): 468-480.
L. Waddell (20o8) Monitoring the cardiovascular compromised patient. International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
Chapter 4
Nutritional Notability
recovery. Patients should be assessed individually and a nutritional plan instituted
based on the underlying disease and specific needs of the patient. In essence, nutrition
should be applied as an addition to medical therapeutics, helping to harmonize the
dynamics of veterinary care.
There are six fundamental nutrients animals need: protein, carbohydrates, fats, vita
non-energy-producing nutrients. Energy-producing nutrients produce energy through
the processes of digestion, metabolism, and conversion. Non-energy-producing nutri-
Energy-producing nutrients: Proteins, carbohydrates, and fats
in a diet, and nonessential amino acids which the body can synthesize if needed. Protein
 alou e busaeid se llam se sanssi apog jauno pue 'suebio 'alosnw bupiing jol pasn 
hormonal processes and enzymes. Once protein has been used for these purposes, it
will then be used for energy, albeit less efficient energy when compared to the energy
from carbohydrates and fats.
Carbohydrates have the primary function of providing energy and are classified
as either soluble or insoluble. Soluble carbohydrates can be used for energy immedi-
be beneficial in regulating intestinal peristalsis, blood glucose levels, and aid in weight
loss. Unused carbohydrates are stored by the body. either in the liver as glycogen or
as fat.
Clinicar Smaff Animar Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
43
44Nutritional Notability
Fats contain more concentrated energy than any other nutrient and are made up of
the palatability of foods and increasing the caloric density. The more fat a diet contains,
the higher the calories it contains.
Non-energy-producing nutrients: Vitamins, minerals, and water
Vitamins are only required in small amounts, yet they play a large role in maintaining
physiological functions. Vitamins are either water soluble or fat soluble. Water-soluble
vitamins are absorbed by the small intestines. The body does not store excess water
soluble vitamins and the remainders are excreted in urine. Fat-soluble vitamins, however,
are stored by the body in the liver or in fat.
Minerals, which can be divided into macrominerals or microminerals, are necessary
to ensure normal metabolic processes take place. Macrominerals play a role in pro
cesses such as electrolyte and water balance, acid-base balance, muscle contraction,
and nerve conduction. Microminerals, or "trace" minerals, are utilized for biochemical
processes in the body. Minerals work closely together and when there is an overabun-
dance of one mineral, another may then become deficient.
Water is the most essential nutrient required, providing the basis for metabolism of
all other nutrients. In adults, 7o% of body weight is made up of water. Water deficiency
Nutritional differences between dogs and cats
There are differences in physiological nutritional needs and the institution of nutritional
delivery between dogs and cats. Dogs are more likely to eat while hospitalized and if
not eating on their own, can be coaxed or syringe fed with less difficulty than cats.
Patients refusing to eat should be assessed for pain or inability to eat on their own,
encourage eating. Hand feeding is very rewarding to both the patient and the caregiver
and helps establish a bond.
food can be tasted when the patient licks the area. Once the patient tastes the food,
they are often eager to continue eating. This is especially the case in patients suffering
from decreased olfactory senses, such as upper respiratory infections. Warming the
meals can also help strengthen the odor and promote eating.
plates. Occasionally, attempting to feed a reluctant patient with a spoon may be a suc
Additionally, some pets prefer dry to canned food or vice versa. If a patient is continu-
ously reluctant to eat, the pet owner should be asked about the normal diet eaten.A
Cinical Fundamentals in Promoting Good Health   45
Table 4.1Nutritional formula guideline
Steps
Formula
START with resting energy requirements
30 × kg + 70 = BASIC 24-hour
(RER)
caloric requirements
Then ADD individual factors:
Canine maintenance energy requirements (MER)
Growth < 4 months
RER×3
Growth>4 months
RER×2
Adult
RER x 1.6
Geriatric
RER x 1.4
Gestation
RER x 1.8 (early) to 3 (late)
Lactation
RER x 4-8 (or ad lib)
Working
RER x 2-8 (light to heavy work load,
respectively )
Feline maintenance energy requirements (MER)
Growth
RER x 2.5
Adult
RER x 1.2
Geriatric
RER x 1.1
Gestation
RER x 1.6 (early) to 2.0 (late)
Lactation
Ad lib
Multiply by illness factors
Cage rest
MER x 1.0-1.2
Postoperative
MER x 1.2-1.5
Trauma or sepsis
MER × 1.2-1.5
least desirable diet for the patient is better than no nutrition at all. This is especially
the case in cats as they are at risk of developing hepatic lipidosis with an episode of
anorexia.
If hand feeding, spoon feeding, and coaxing are not successful, the patient should be
syringe fed so long as it does not cause harm (anxiety, stress) to the patient and the
digestive tract is functional. There are instances where delivering nutrition parenterally
or with the use of enteral tubes is required to meet nutritional requirements safely. Ill
or injured patients require higher calories to sustain an increase in metabolic rate or
catabolism will ensue. When nutrition is inadequate, the patient is at risk for a longer
hospital stay, delayed wound healing, immunosuppression, muscle weakness, low serum
albumin levels, and, in cases where bacterial translocation occurs, sepsis, organ failure
and death (Figs. 4.1 and 4.2, Tables 4.2 and 4.3).
Figure 4.1 Tube feeding a neonate.
Figure 4.2 Placement of a nasogastric tube.
46
Table 4.2 Nursing implications
Disease state
Dietary
 Clinical applications
considerations
modifications
Congestive
Fish oil
Reduce inflammatory cytokines,decrease
heart failure
supplement
cachexia, may improve food intake
Sodium
May allow lower dosages of diuretics
restriction
High quality
Helps meet maintenance requirements
protein
(unless kidney disease is present) and
maintain lean body mass
Potassium
Loop diuretics can contribute to
assessment
hypokalemia while potassium-sparing
diuretics can contribute to hyperkalemia
Taurine
Supplement in diet-related dilated
supplement
cardiomyopathy (DCM) in cats or metabolic
defects in dogs. May have positive inotropic
effects and help regulate calcium in
myocardium
n-3 fatty acids
Reduce inflammation, suppress arrhythmias,
supplement
improve appetite (avoid flaxseed oil and cod
liver oil)
Chronic renal
Protein
In advanced renal failure, uremia
failure
restrictions
Phosphorus
Slows progression of renal disease
restriction
Avoid
Can contribute to metabolic acidosis
acidifying diets
Diabetes
Fiber
Calorie dense,reducing weight and insulin
mellitus
requirements, may help glucose regulation
(primarily beneficial in dogs)
High protein,
In cats, can help reduce insulin requirements
low
or eliminate need for insulin in some cases
carbohydrate
Urolithiasis
Canned diet
Decrease urine specific gravity, particularly
in cats
Acidifying diet
Reduce recurrence of struvite and calcium
oxalate stones, may not be necessary in
dogs with struvites
Evaluate
Vitamin C will acidify urine, vitamin D can
supplements
contribute to hypercalciuria
47
48Nutritional Notability
Table 4.3 Nutrient summary
Energy producing
Proteins
Carbohydrates
Fats
Non-energy producing
Vitamins
Minerals
Water
Chapter references and further reading
L. Freeman (2008a) Take-out nutrition: what to send the sick ones home with. International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
L. Freeman (2oo8b) Nutrition in the critically ill then and now. International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
J. Hurst (2o04) Feeding dogs and cats: different needs for different stages. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(8): 538-547.
D.Proulx (2O03a) Critical care nutrition I. Western Veterinary Conference.
D. Proulx (2003b) Critical care nutrition lIl. Western Veterinary Conference.
M. Scherk (2oo9) Feline nutrition. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians in
America Journaf winter: 38-44.
J. Womack (2o03) Providing nutritional support to critical care patients. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(6): 376-386.
r  e o e go     (  
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospitai Staff 23(12): 724-728.
A. Wortinger (2oo4) Feeding habits of cats. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal for
the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1l): 762-765.
A. Wortinger (2oo9) The benefits of using nutrition in the management of critical care cases.
26-28.
D. Zoran (2003) Critical care nutrition. Western Veterinary Conference.
Section 2
Applied Nursing of the
Veterinary Patient
Chapter 5
Monitoring the
Fluid Therapy
Patient
Fluid therapy is used to treat conditions such as dehydration and shock, to correct
electrolyte abnormalities, and to maintain homeostasis during anesthetic and surgical
veterinary profession that requires knowledge and understanding of mathematical
formulas, routes of delivery, fluid selections, common additives used, and potential risks
involved. It is important to recognize that not all veterinary fluid therapy cases are
treated with a standard formula. Many times medical conditions such as cardiac, pul-
monary, or even cerebral disorders may require an alteration of the fluid therapy plan
for the patients' safety.
Mechanisms of fluid therapy
nates. Two-thirds of that volume is intracellular, mostly found in skeletal muscles, blood
Fluid within cells is termed intracellular fluid (ICF), and fluid outside the cells (vessels
and tissue) is termed extracellular fluid (ECF).
branes. Water moves from less concentrated solutions to more concentrated solutions
through this membrane (osmosis). Osmotic pressure is the force that moves fluid to
create an equal balance between ICFs and EcFs. Osmotic pressure is exerted by the
number of particles present (plasma osmolality), not the mass (weight) of the particles.
"Tonicity" is a common term used when referring to osmotic pressure.
Electrolytes also play a major role in fluid movement because electrolytes are dis-
solved mainly in water. Electrolytes are considered balanced when their concentration
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
51
52   Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
in fluid compartments remains normal and constant. Balance is primarily obtainec
through reabsorption of sodium and potassium.
Fluid selections for the veterinary patient
Crystalloids are isotonic solutions that do not have osmotic pressure; therefore, they
of those fluids will remain in circulation while 8o% moves into interstitial spaces to
a longer period of time because they have a large molecular weight and surface arear
therefore, they cannot easily pass through the small openings in the selectively perme-
able membranes.
Table 5.1 lists the commonly used fluids in the veterinary practice and their purpose
Fluid administration routes
Fluids can be administered in a variety of routes (Fig. 5.1). The most common routes
include oral, subcutaneous, and intravenous. Other routes that can be used, but less
frequently, include intraperitoneal and intraosseous.
Subcutaneous fluids are generally used in mild cases of dehydration and are a great
choice when hospitalization isn't required but fluid therapy is still indicated. Subcutaneous
fluids should not be used in severely dehydrated or debilitated patients. Fluid of choice
would be an isotonic, nonirritating fluid (dextrose should not be given subcutaneously
[SQ]) and no more than 10mL/lb. given at each injection site to ensure complications
(such as sloughing) do not arise.
routes as it does require the use of a catheter. However, it is a more rapid route and
volumes can be given at a controlled, precise rate (Fig. 5.2).
Fluid therapy calculations
There are three fundamental goals in fluid therapy: Replace the existing fluid loss
(deficit), prevent further loss (maintenance), and replace further losses (contemporary
or ongoing losses).
Deficit volume
The deficit volume is the amount of fluids the patient has lost prior to clinical presenta-
tion. Some causes for fluid loss include, but are not limited to, vomit, diarrhea, anorexia,
hemorrhage, and heat exhaustion.
The physical findings, the packed cell volume (PcV), and the estimated fluid loss. Since
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient
■
53
Table 5.1 Common fluid selection
Crystalloids
Tonicity
Uses
0.9% NaCI
Isotonic
Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia,
(physiological
hypercalcemia, metabolic alkalosis,
saline)
renal failure, diabetes mellitus
0.45% saline with
Hypotonic (mildly)
Heart disease (congestive heart
2.5% dextrose
failure [CHF]), liver disease, edema,
ascites
Dextrose 5% in
Hypotonic
Hypernatremia, sodium-intolerant
water
patients, sepsis, provide intracellular
carbohydrate source, provides free
water (should not be given SQ)
LRS
Isotonic
Shock, maintenance, deficit
replacement, diuresis, acidosis (has
calcium)
Normosol
Isotonic
Shock, maintenance, deficit
replacement, diuresis, acidosis (does
not have calcium)
3% normal saline
Hypertonic
Rapidly increase intravascular
volume (shock, trauma, gastric
dilatation-volvulus [GDv])
Colloids
Contents
Uses
Whole blood
All cellular and
Anemia, blood loss
plasma components
Pasma (FFP,
Natural colloids
Hypoproteinemia, liver disease, and
platelet-enriched
(albumin and
volume replacement
plasma [PEP])
globulin)
Hemoglobin-based
Hemoglobin-based,
Anemia
oxygen carriers
oxygen-carrying fluid
Hetastarch
Synthetic colloid
Hypovolemic shock,
(hydroxyethyl starch
hypoproteinemia
and saline)
the owner is usually the estimator of fluid loss prior to arrival, this method is usually
the least reliable method of determining a deficit volume (see Appendix 1).
Physical findings
In order to determine a deficit volume by the patient's physical findings, this simple
formula can be used (Table 5.2):
Deficit volume (mL) = % dehydrated xbody weight (lb.) × 454 x0.80.
The percent dehydrated is based on an examination. The number O.80 is used because
only 8o% of the fluid deficit should be replaced. Administering the full deficit while
adding the maintenance requirements may increase the risk of fluid overload.
54   Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
Figure 5.1 Patient receiving intravenous fluid therapy with protective catheter care
instituted.
Figure 5.2 Central venous catheter placed in the jugular vein when peripheral access
could not be obtained.
PCV method
Another method for determining the fluid deficit is by using a simple blood test, the
in dogs is 45% and in cats is 35%. The formula is written as follows:
Deficit replacement volume = 10 mL xkg x % in PCv increase.
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   55
Table 5.2 Clinical determination of dehydration severity
Percent dehydrated
Physical attributes
<5%
History of fluid loss, but no physical findings
5%
Dry mucous membrane (MM) (tacky), but no panting or
pathological tachycardia
7%
Mild to moderate decrease in skin turgor, dry MM, slightly
tachycardic, normal pulse pressure
10%
Moderate to marked decrease in skin turgor, dry MM,
tachycardic, decreased pulse pressure
12%
Marked loss of skin turgor, dry MM, significant signs of
shock
Estimated losses
This is the least reliable method as owners are generally unable to accurately determine
fluid quantities since fluids tend to absorb into blankets, towels, carpets, or spread over
a hard surface such as tile. As a general rule, it is assumed that animals with vomiting
and diarrhea lose 4 mL/kg/day.
Maintenance volume
Calculating the maintenance volume is the next step in determining the fluid therapy
regimen. Maintenance volume is the normal amount of fluid that an animal should
The following is the formula for maintenance volume calculation:
24-hour maintenance volume (mL) = 30 × kg+ 70.
The total fluid volume can then be further divided to gather an hourly rate. After the
24-hour period, another exam or PcV should be performed to reevaluate the hydration
status and then once again obtain a fluid regimen for the next 24 hours. Patients receiv
ing fluids should always receive close monitoring. with appropriate modifications based
on frequent reassessments.
Contemporary losses
Contemporary or ongoing losses are fluid losses that occur after a fluid therapy regimen
inspected. As a common guideline, the ongoing losses are calculated by doubling the
lost and the size and overall health of the patient.
Ongoing losses = 2 x volume lost.
56   Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
Fluid additives
It is often necessary to supplement patient fluids with certain nutrients. For instance,
an animal that has been vomiting or has diarrhea may have a low potassium level or a
neonatal patient may have trouble regulating glucose levels and may need dextrose
supplementation.
It is important to take into consideration appropriate calculations when fluids require
additives. Miscalculating potassium may have lethal effects as hyperkalemia (high
potassium blood levels) may result in cardiac failure. Potassium is supplied in mEq/mL,
or milliequivalents per milliliter, as opposed to the more commonly seen unit of mea
surement, milligrams. Milliequivalents are a unit of measurement used for electrolytes
because it is expressing the number of ionic charges.
To calculate mEq additives you can use this simple formula:
Desired amount (mEq)/available (stock) concentration (mEq/mL)
=amount (mL) to add.
the bag several times. If it is not mixed well, an overabundance of potassium may enten
the administration set at a fatal concentration.
Additionally. if the total desired amount of potassium is 2o mEq/L, be aware of
already existing potassium in certain fluid selections. For example, lactated Ringer's
solution (LRS) contains 4 mEq/L of potassium.
The most notable fluid additive miscalculations occur when a percent solution is
required, such as 5o% dextrose. A percent (%) is a concentration unit per 100 in which
the item of importance precedes the percent symbol. Two components make up a
percent solution, the solute (item) and the solvent (the item in which the solute is
disso|ved).
Desired strength of solution _Volume of stock solution to use
Available strength in stock
Total volume of solution
Example:
2.5%XmL
50%  100 mL
ayew ol junowe leiol aul s! ool pue :uibuaiis bnap algeleae aul s! %og :asn o]
Cross-multiply and divide:
2.5X_250
X=5mL.
5010050X
of solute to 100 mL of solvent, there is now a total of 105ml, as opposed to the 100 mL
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   57
Table 5.3Common fluid additives
Common fluid additives
Use
Potassium chloride (KCl)
Vomiting, diuresis, hypokalemia
Dextrose (2.5%, 5%, etc.)
Hypoglycemia, anorexia, sepsis,
hyperthyroidism
Vitamin B complex
Anorexia
Figure 5.3 Patient receiving long-term intravenous fluid therapy post-rattlesnake
envenomation.
to keep an accurate 2.5% solution. When performing calculations, it is imperative to
required a total amount of 1L, it would need to be converted to 10o0 mL prior to calcu-
lating (Table 5.3).
Monitoring the patient
All animals receiving fluid therapy should be carefully monitored (Fig. 5.3). Too little
fluid can lead to dehydration and hypotension and an overdose of fluids can lead to
pulmonary edema and even death. As the fluid therapy patient stabilizes, adjustments
to the rate of fluid administration and type of fluids required may be necessary. These
adjustments can be made by performing laboratory tests such as packed cell
volume and total solids (PCv/TS) and electrolytes and also by observing clinical changes
which may indicate the patient is well hydrated.
58   Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
Figure 5.4 Urinary catheter placed to monitor fluid balances.
Unfortunately. a common problem that occurs while administering fluid therapy is
running off-schedule with the delivery rate and time. This may be due to the patient
resting in a way that occludes the flow, or conversely, standing and allowing a rush of
fluids to enter the vein. In either case, the fluid rate needs to be recalculated but the
ule to avoid fluid overload.
Signs and symptoms of fluid overload include nasal secretions (usually a clear nasal
discharge), tachycardia, lung sounds upon auscultation, coughing. and restlessness.
Patients receiving fluid therapy should routinely have their lungs auscultated. In the
urine output is 1-2 mL/kg/h. If these subtle symptoms are missed by the caregiver, then
serious fluid overloading can ensue. Clinical signs of serious overloading include tachy-
edema, chemosis, or exophthalmia. Patients may also suffer from diarrhea, depression,
pulmonary edema, and pleural effusion (Fig. 5.4).
Fluid balances should be assessed at least once daily in the stable patient, and more
hypotension. Urine production generally reflects overall tissue perfusion. with each
cardiac cycle, the kidneys receive 25% of cardiac output. Normal urine output is 1-2 mL/
obtained. Additionally. other excretory means such as diarrhea, emesis,or even pleural
fluid from a chest tube should be calculated in the fluid balancing. Patients should be
weighed at least once a day. with critical patients at risk of third spacing fluid shifts
being weighed up to every 2-4 hours as part of the balancing. Fluid balancing is impera-
tive in recognizing underhydration, overhydration, and organ function (Table 5.4,
Figs. 5.5-5.7).
Table 5.4 Fluid therapy nursing implications
Fluid therapy
Frequency
Reasoning
nursing implications
Patient weight
At least once a day,
Body weight changes can
more frequently for
indicate diuresis or fluid
renal or
retention, can detect third
hypoproteinemic
spacing of fluids
patients
Physical assessment
Every 2-6 hours,
Evaluate hydration, prevent
depending on
dehydration or overhydration,
clinical condition
monitor patient fluid delivery
route for extravasation, assess
patient needs
Fluid balances
Every 4-12 hours
Early recognition of oliguria,
based on clinical
prevent anuria; early recognition
condition
of fluid overload
Laboratory testing
Every 24 hours, 0r
Monitor hydration status, detect
as needed if
iatrogenic anemia (hemodilution),
warranted
detect electrolyte abnormalities
Figure 5.5 Crystalloids LRS, sodium chloride, and Normosol-R.
59
60■
 Monitoring the Fluid Therapy Patient
Figure 5.6 Colloids fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and hydroxyethyl starch.
Figure 5.7 Whole blood.
Chapter references and further reading
T. Hackett (2008) Fluid therapy. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians in
America Journaf Summer:58-63.
P. Hellyer (2002) Fluid therapy: a cornerstone of safe anesthesia. The National Association
of Veterinary Technicians in America Journar Winter: 35-38.
J. Kerr (20o9) Fluid therapy: a team approach to patient hydration. Veterinary Technician
the Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(5): 16-23.
B. Rieser (2003) Logical fluid therapy. Western Veterinary Conference.
Chapter 6
Physical Therapy
Applications
pain. In the recumbent patient, thoracic physical therapy helps improve breathing, thus
increasing oxygen in systemic circulation. In addition, physical therapy is a noninvasive
treatment, is generally low cost, and has psychological benefits for the patient. The
main forethought in performing physical therapy is having an accurate understanding
cal therapy in the critical patient can help prevent secondary conditions from arising.
Critical or recumbent patients often suffer from secondary illnesses such as atelectasis,
pneumonia, thrombosis, and muscle atrophy. Instituting a physical therapy plan in the
intensive care unit (lcU) has many benefits for the patient.
range of motion (ROM, PROM), thermal agents, positioning, postural drainage, percus
sion, vibration, and low level lasers. Physical therapy can be performed every 4-8 hours
depending on the patients' needs. Massage and RoM exercises will help circulation,
reducing the risk for thrombosis. RoM exercises will help prevent or reduce muscle
atrophy. Thermal agents include the application of heat and/or ice. While heat dilates
the capillaries and allows for better blood flow to the region, ice will cause vasoconstric-
be implemented in the ICU patient due to the inability to productively cough. Activity
stimulates coughing: therefore, the recumbent, obtunded, or comatose patient may
accumulate respiratory secretions and suffer from conditions such as pneumonia as a
sequela (Figs. 6.1 and 6.2).
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
61
Figure 6.1 Intravenous (IV) catheter abscess 4 days postremoval.
Figure 6.2 Same wound after 24 hours of physical therapy. Massage and
hydrotherapy was used.
62
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient  63
Figure 6.3 Swim therapy in a dachshund with intervertebral disk disease (IVDD)
suffering hind limb paresis following thromboembolism.
techniques improve circulation, and thus should be performed distal to proximal on the
extremities.
Rehabilitation exercises such as ROM and PROM are used in the ICU to improve
circulation and prevent peripheral edema in addition to preventing muscle atrophy.
The extremities should be flexed and extended prior to ROM exercises. In PROM, the
veterinary personnel are moving the extremities and the joints in a slow cycling motion,
while active Rom involves the patient actively moving and resisting. Several sets are
(Fig. 6.3).
Thermal agents, as mentioned above, will provide analgesia and reduce inflammation.
The application of cold packs is typically used within the first 24-48 hours of injury
or surgery every 4-6 hours. After the initial 24 to 48-hour period, heat is then
used at the same interval schedule. Care should be taken to prevent patient burns. A
towel should be placed between the agent and the patient when heat and cold applica-
sss a e s   e   s ae  a s
(F1g. 6.4).
lateral recumbency throughout the hospital stay. Decubital ulcers, pneumonia, and
Adequate blankets, pillows, cushions, and mattresses should be used in the recumbent
64   Physical Therapy Applications
with severe edema.
Thoracic physical therapy, or chest physiotherapy (CPT), includes postural drainage,
percussion, and vibration. Other treatments that may be used in conjunction with
thoracic physical therapy include nebulization and suctioning of secretions. Percussion,
inhalation and exhalation. This technique helps break up secretions. Vibration can then
airways. Vibration is performed on exhalation and involves rapidly moving hands in a
tapping motion over specific areas of the chest. Vibration is less forceful than percus-
age uses gravity to drain secretions in the lungs and into the main airway and also
or, if able, the patient may cough the secretions out of the airway. Assisted cough may
be required if the patient is unable to remove mucus from the airway. Assisted cough
should be performed with the patient in sternal recumbency and can be induced by
pressure is placed on the cranial abdomen, thrusting cranially on exhalation, may also
aid in coughing up secretions (Table 6.2).
Postural drainage is not without risks. There can be significant side effects such as
oxygen deficiency, an increased intracranial pressure, decreased blood pressure, bleed-
ing into the lungs, pain, vomiting (with or without aspiration), and injury to the spinal
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   65
Table 6.1 Example of potential physiotherapy interventions
ICU-specific conditions
Physical therapy techniques
Neurological (i.e., spinal cord injury,
 Positioning, PROM, massage, postural
paralysis, paresis)
drainage with or without percussion,
and vibration
Soft tissue (i.e., muscle atrophy, wound
Positioning, laser, PROM, massage, ice
care, edema, inflammation)
Respiratory (i.e., pneumonia, atelectasis,
PROM, massage, percussion, vibration,
mechanical ventilation)
postural drainage
Table 6.2 Postural drainage techniques
Position
Action focal point
Left lateral recumbency with hind end
Lateral segment of left caudal lung
elevated 400
lobe; lateral segment of the right
caudal lung lobe
Sternal recumbency with hind end
Left and right caudal dorsal lung fields
elevated 400
Dorsal recumbency with hind end
Left and right caudal ventral lung fields
elevated 400
Dorsal recumbency with hind end
Right middle lung lobe
elevated 40°, front end rotated 1/4 turn
to the right with a pillow under the right
side of thorax
Sternal recumbency with front end
Left and right cranial dorsal lung fields
elevated 400
Dorsal recumbency with front end
Left and right cranial ventral lung fields
elevated 400
cord. In human studies, cardiac arrhythmias have been noted during postural drainage
and percussion of ICU patients. Human precaution guidelines to heed include patients
ribs, recent surgeries, open wounds, burns, and pulmonary embolism. Veterinary pre
cautions published include coagulopathies and cardiac disease in addition to the
positions for up to 15 minutes, with recumbent patients receiving drainage therapy
every 6-8 hours. The goal of thoracic physical therapy is to ensure the patient is able
to breathe in adequate amounts of oxygen and sputum secretions are being removed
from the lungs. Arterial blood gases may be performed to monitor the results of tho-
racic physical therapy as well as manual auscultation and assessment of lung sound
changes.
66■ Physical Therapy Applications
Chapter references and further reading
T. McLaughlin (2Oo9) Hydrotherapy-offering a new lease on life. Veterinary Technician the
Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 3o(1): 20-23.
J. Osborne, N. Sharp (1998) Putting "wobblers" back on track. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(8): 519-527.
V. Rhodes (2o05) Osteoarthritis in a senior pet. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(10): 702-704.
Chapter 7
Perioperative Patient
Management
Perioperative nursing
Perioperative nursing refers to patient nursing from the preoperative time,throughout
the surgical or anesthetic procedure, and care for the patient postoperatively. Surgical
Whenever possible, it is recommended that the same veterinary technician care for the
patient from the preoperative phase to the intraoperative phase and throughout the
vital sign trends, and any astute detection of changes in clinical conditions. Patients
undergoing surgical procedure are at risk for developing nosocomial infections, there?
fore proper perioperative nursing is imperative to help reduce the risks of infection
Preoperative patient nursing
Any patient undergoing an anesthetic or surgical procedure should have a physical
exam performed within a reasonable amount of time prior to the procedure (such as
2-6 hours). The patient identity. procedure, and special implications, such as heart
disease or adverse reactions to medication, should be confirmed. Vital signs should be
assessed and documented to establish a baseline of normal values for the patient. Vital
sign parameters will often alter throughout and after anesthetic procedures. Identifying
normal values in each patient will help the nursing staff detect abnormalities beyond
surgical and anesthetic influences.
Once the patient status and procedure has been verified and the patient has been
lished for the patient, fluid therapy calculated, and the surgical site prepared if an
incision is to be made during the procedure. In an ideal situation, patients would be
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
67
68 Perioperative Patient Management
Figure 7.1 Surgical preparation of a patient with spay dehiscence.
bathed prior to surgery, removing excess debris; however, this practice is often only
reserved for major surgical procedures such as total hip replacements. Care should be
Surgical site infections most commonly develop from normal skin flora, such as
Staphyiococcus and Streptococcus. The hair should be clipped liberally with a general
should be vacuumed and the surgical site scrubbed with a germicidal soap. These
preparations should be performed outside of the surgical suite. Once the patient has
been transported to the surgical suite, a final surgical scrub (usually three separate
scrubs) should ensue (Fig. 7.1).
Intraoperative patient nursing
be the focus of this section. whenever possible, the use of multiparameter monitoring
P a          
begin with lubrication of the eyes to prevent drying of the cornea and risks of subse
quent ulceration. Excess secretions in the mouth should be cleared and a patent airway
verified. Once the patient is positioned for the procedure, areas exposed should be
assessed for the potential to apply warming devices. The patients' body temperature
should be closely monitored and proactive measures taken to prevent hypothermia
(Fig. 7.2).
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient  69
Figure 7.2 Anesthetic monitoring system.
The veterinary technician should establish at least one source to obtain a pulse
throughout the procedure. Common areas include the dorsal metatarsal, femoral,
jugular, and sublingual vessels. A hand may also be placed on the heart to confirm
heartbeat, but monitoring pulse quality and trends or changes in the quality can be
be detected, proving to be lifesaving. Electrocardiographs are useful in detecting
arrhythmias commonly seen in anesthesia such as premature ventricular contractions
and atrioventricular heart blocks. However, they should not be relied upon for an
Blood pressure monitoring is essential because anesthesia can cause a slowed heart
rate and thus lower blood pressure. The mean arterial pressure (MAP) should remain
above 60 mmHg with a preferential range of 70-110 mmHg. When the MAP drops below
60 mmHg, vital organs such as the liver and kidneys are not receiving adequate perfu-
(Fig. 7.3).
Throughout the procedure, the respiratory rate and pattern should be continuously
monitored in addition to repeatedly verifying the airway. Endotracheal tubes can
become occluded with secretions; anesthetic tubes may become kinked or dislodged;
and reservoir bags may detach, leak, or overfill. Capnographs are useful in detecting
exhausted carbon dioxide absorbent, monitoring inspired and expired carbon dioxide
a mainstem bronchus.
Lastly. the depth of anesthesia and management of pain should be continuously
deficient of inhalant anesthetics. Patients should be kept in an anesthetic depth where
they are not experiencing pain or sensation of surgery, but not so deep to result in
dangerousvitalsignparameters.
70Perioperative Patient Management
Figure 7.3  Blood pressure monitoring is especially crucial in cases of hemorrhage.
This patient, Azo, suffered from a ruptured liver mass and subsequent liver lobectomy.
Azo recovered well despite the hypotensive challenges experienced throughout surgery.
recovery kennel should be warmed, with sufficient clean and padded bedding for
comfort. Additionally. assessment should be made for other needs such as oxygen
an Elizabethan collar in ophthalmic surgeries.
Postoperative patient nursing
surgery and long-term monitoring when the patient remains hospitalized for days after
the procedure. In initial phases of postoperative recovery, endotracheal extubation is
intact until the patient has gained control of the gag reflex. If the endotracheal tube is
removed prior to the presence of a gag reflex, the patient may be at risk for airway
obstruction, such as in patients with an elongated soft palate, or aspiration pneumonia
in cases of postoperative emesis. Additionally. if the cuff is deflated and the patient
does not have a gag reflex, aspiration of content such as mucous secretions or even
vomitus is possible. Occasionally a patient will wake violently from anesthesia, making
it a difficult task to deflate the cuff and remove the tube in a timely fashion. It is impera-
tive to prevent the patient from severing the tube by biting it or causing tracheal
damage while thrashing with the tube in place. Sedatives or additional analgesics may
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   71
Figure 7.4 Immediate postoperative regurgitation.
placed to prevent post-operative damage to the eye.
The patient should be monitored for heart rate, respiratory rate, and evaluated for
signs of pain and level of consciousness. Once the patient is stable and alert, the inter-
pain management, or the administration of other medications may be warranted (Fig.
7.5, Table 7.1).
Table 7.1Example of anesthetic monitoring flow sheet
Date:
Patient:
Owner:
RiskFactor:123 4 5
Procedure:
Dr:
Tech:
PreAxMedStrengthDose
Route
Time
Initials
Time:
Temp:
Wt:
HR:
RR:
MM:
IVC
Ax Type:
Special Concerns:
Fluid Type:
Rate:
Total Volume:
Induction
Dose
AmtGivenRoute
Time
Monitoring:
Pulse Ox
BP
Chamber
Mask
ETTubeSize:
ECG
Temp
Capnograph
Other:
Intra-Op
Strength
Dose
Route
Time
Initials
Ax Start:
Ax End:
Sx Start:
Sx End:
Extubated:
Time:
Ax Rate:
[O Rate
Pulse Ox:
ETCO2
Temp:
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
06
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Notes:
Post-OpTime
HR
RR
Temp
RR
Sys A
Dias
MAP☆
rate; MM, mucous membrane; IVC, intravenous catheter; Ammt, armount; ET, endotracheal; Intra-Op, intraoperative;
Pulse Ox, pulse oximetry; ECG, electrocardiography; Sx, surgery; BP, blood pressure; ETCO2, end-tidal COz; Sys,
Systolic; Dias, diastolic; MAP, rmean arterial pressure; Post-Op, postoperative.
72
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   73
Chapter references and further reading
C. Cornell (200la) Anesthesia equipment. Wild West Veterinary Conference.
C. Cornell (2o01b) High risk anesthesia. wild West Veterinary Conference.
'ulied Ill Allrln aul jo juawabeuew bussinu slleuisauv/anliesadoisod (looz) slaea "H
Wild WestVeterinary Conference.
E. Durham (2oo5) Arterial blood pressure measurement. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 324-339.
S. Greene (2003) Monitoring the anesthetized patient. Western Veterinary Conference.
P. Hellyer (2002) Fluid therapy: a cornerstone of safe anesthesia. The National Association
of Veterinary Technicians in America Journaf Winter: 35-38.
 S. Kaiser-Klinger (2008) Troubleshooting emergency anesthesia. International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
V. Lukasic (2o06) Anesthesia of the pediatric patient. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journaf Fall: 52-57.
L. Madsen (2o05) Perioperative pain management. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 359-368.
C. Mosley (2o06) Anesthetic management of the geriatric patient. The Nationaf Association
of Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Summer: 52-57.
B. Rhodes (2o03) Hypothermia and frostbite in pets. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for theVeterinaryHospitalStaff 24(11):750-756.
H. Ruess-Lamky (2oo8) Anesthetic monitors: understanding their use and limitations. The
Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Spring: 6O-67.
S.Shackelford (20o4)Aseptictechnique for surgery.Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1): 49-52.
r         e 
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(7): 468-480.
A. Weil (2oo5) Anesthetic emergencies. The National Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journal Spring: 42-49.
Chapter 8
Executing
Emergency Care
The recognition and treatmentof shockcontinuesto be achallengein veterinary medicine.
Early recognition from veterinary personnelin conjunction with prompt, efficient resusci-
tation efforts contribute to the successful treatment of shock. A good, general under-
standing of the pathophysiology of shock is not only essential in immediate resuscitation,
but it isalso a key indicator foranticipating events in both the prearrest and postresuscita-
tion stages. Recognizing the clinical signs associated with shock states is imperative.
Shock is defined as a disturbance of function, an imbalance between delivered oxygen
blood functions to deliver oxygen, nutrients, and hormones, among other necessities,
and it aids in the maintenance of the body's fluid balance. All tissues in the body need
blood flow to deliver nutrients and carry away wastes. Oxygen delivery to the body
tissues is dependent on cardiac output, which is determined by heart rate and stroke
volume (consisting of cardiac preload). If cardiac function and perfusion is impaired,
neurohormonal responses ensue and inflammatory mediators contribute to a vicious
drug" in emergencies. The cardiovascular and respiratory systems should immediately
be assessed and evaluated for functional oxygen delivery.
metabolism ensues, causing the pH to fall, leading to metabolic acidosis. An acute
compensatory sympathetic response causes major arteries and veins to constrict.
Initially. capillaries constrict, causing a decreased perfusion to tissues; however, as
is restricted, causing a volume shift of blood accumulating in the venules. This local
"pooling" is responsible for the misdistribution of blood flow. Fluid and protein then
leaks into the surrounding tissues, which concentrates the blood and increases viscosity
on a microvascular level. Prolonged vasoconstriction results in loss of blood flow to
Cfinicar Smaff Animar Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing. First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
75
76■
Executing Emergency Care
vital organs which were previously protected by arterial shunting. The end result is
catastrophic as this terminal phase of shock is reached.
There are three defined clinical stages of shock: early (compensatory) stage, middle
(decompensatory) stage, and the end (terminal) stage of shock. Vital sign parameters
have been developed for each stage to better classify the progression of the shock
process. when an emergent patient presents, the most life-threatening conditions
should be addressed first, and quickly, to prevent further deterioration (Tables 8.1
and 8.2).
Table 8.1
Types, causes, and examples of shock
Types of shock
Cause
Examples
Hypovolemic
Low blood volume
Anemia, hemorrhage
Neurogenic
Nervous system effect
Toxins such as ethylene glycol
or strychnine
Cardiogenic
Heart disease
Congestive heart failure (CHF),
pericardial tamponade
Anaphylactic
Massiveimmuneresponse
Bee sting, vaccination
Septic
Bacteria endotoxin
Sepsis
Table8.2
Stages of shock
Physical
Compensatory
Decompensatory
Terminal stage
parameters
stage
Heart rate
Normal to mild
Tachycardia
Severe bradycardia
elevation
Pulse quality
Normal to bounding
Poor
Absent
Blood pressure
Normal
Hypotension
Severe hypotension
Respiratory
Eupneic or mild
Tachypnea
Bradypnea or
rate
elevation
apnea
Mucous
Normal to injected
Pallor
Pallor
membrane
(MM)
Capillary refill
<1 second
>2 seconds
>5 seconds or
time (CRT)
absent
Temperature
Euthermic or
Hypothermia
Profound
slightly elevated
hypothermia
Mentation
Normal, alert, or
Depressed or
Stuporous or
excited
obtunded
comatose
Physiological
Neurohormonal
Shunting of blood
Dysfunctional blood
effects of
(neuroendocrine)
to vital organs, O2
flow, circufus
shock
response,
consumption
vitiosis, impending
hypermetabolic
dependant on O2
CPA
delivery,
metabolic acidosis
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   77
Initial assessments of the emergent patient
A CRASH PLAN is an acronym for a guide in the assessment of body organs and
of a few short minutes (Table 8.3).
Airway
Check the patient for breathing. If they are not breathing, check for an obstruction of
the airway. Oftentimes there is a tennis ball or bone that has become lodged, asphyxiat-
ing (suffocating) the pet (Figs. 8.1-8.3).
Table 8.3A CRASH PLAN
Acronym
Airway
Circulation
Respiratory
Abdomen
Spine
Head
Pelvis
Limbs
Arteries and veins
Nerves
Figure 8.1 Radiograph of esophageal foreign body.
Executing Emergency Care
Figure 8.2 Removal of the esophageal foreign body.
Figure 8.3 The foreign body.
Circulation
Check the patient for a heartbeat and for pulse quality. If there is no heartbeat and no
pulses can be palpated, then cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPcR) should
begin at this time.
Respiratory
Observe the patient's chest. Watch for a rise and fall indicating respirations. A hand
may also be placed in front of the mouth or nose to feel for a breath. If the patient is
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient   79
Figure 8.4 Intubation due to edema-induced asphyxiation in a rattlesnake
envenomation patient.
apneic (not breathing), then manual (artificial) respirations should be performed. Mouth-
to-snout resuscitation can be used until an endotracheal or transtracheal airway can
be established (Fig. 8.4).
Abdomen
Take note of any swelling of the abdomen or any perforations in the abdomen. An
evisceration is where the abdominal organs have herniated through the abdominal wall.
This can occur with dog bite wounds, vehicle accidents, and other traumas. In this case,
it is best to wrap a sterile, saline-soaked lap sponge (no cotton) over the area until
surgical correction can be performed. Impalement occurs when an object has become
lodged into an animal, such as trying to jump a fence or falling from heights. The impor
tant thing to remember with impalement is that the object should never be removed
from the pet, as it is most likely acting as a pressure point to several arteries and
Swelling should be assessed immediately to decipher between fluid and air. The vet
erinarian will make the diagnosis, but it is important for nursing personnel to understand
the clinical presentation of each condition as either of these conditions can pose a life-
threatening emergency. If the abdomen is air filled as in a GDv (gastric dilatation-
volvulus), a gastrocentesis should be performed to relieve the pressure on the abdominal
aorta and vena cava, improving circulation. If the abdomen is fluid filled, a diagnostic
abdominocentesis should be performed. Ascites can be relieved by therapeutic abdomi-
nocentesis, where a pressure bandage may be beneficial in a hemoabdomen and surgery
may be required for peritonitis (Figs. 8.6-8.8).
80Executing Emergency Care
Figure 8.5 Arrow impalement of cat.
Figure 8.6 Lateral radiographic view of gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
Spine
If the patient is nonambulatory, it is recommended to keep them flat in lateral recum-
bency until a neurological and orthopedic exam can be performed. If the pet has a
history of back disease or is showing clinical signs of back problems, such as hunching
the back, dragging the hind legs, or exhibiting ataxia, the patient's spine should be kept
Head
Along with mentation, the head should be examined for any wounds indicating head
trauma. A PLR (pupillary light reflex) can also help determine head trauma. Pupils
should be equal and they should respond (constrict) when shined with a light. If head
towel, pillow, 0r blanket (Figs. 8.10 and 8.11).
Figures 8.7 Therapeutic abdominocentesis in congestive heart failure (CHF).
Figures 8.8 Abdominal fluid palliatively removed from a boxer with heart failure.
Figure 8.9Schiff-Sherrington posturing.
81
Figure 8.10Patient with head trauma.
Figure 8.11 Hyphema oculus sinister (OS; blood in the anterior chamber of the left
eye).
82
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient  83
Figure 8.12 Compound fracture of the humerus.
Pelvis
If a pelvic fracture is noted, urine output must be monitored while the patient is in the
hospital to ensure normal function of the bladder.
Limbs
Limbs should be assessed for open wounds and fractures. It is recommended to stabilize
bacterial infection. Bacteria grow at the rate of 1o° every hour; the sooner the wound
is cleaned, the better for the pet (Fig. 8.12).
Arteries and veins
 paldde ag pinous sabepueg aunssaud jo anssald bupaaig loy pualed aui aaauns
anbiuanol e buialdde uaym uayel ag pinous aieo eioads snui 'abewep anssil jo aaau
will control bleeding.
Nerves
a nerve, nerve root, or nerve plexus due to trauma. Toxicosis may also result in nervous
system dysfunction. Quick assessments that are used include proprioception and reflex
84
Executing Emergency Care
Figure 8.13  Neurological assessment of a patient with vestibular signs.
Table 8.4 Common emergencies
Type of emergency
Details to elicit from the client
Urinary difficulties
Straining noted, color of urine, vocalizing (painful),male
or female, history of urinary problems
Toxicity
Product name, type of product, quantity ingested, time
frame of ingestion, product package
Vomiting or diarrhea
Productive vomit versus retching, frequency, quantity,
consistency, color
Seizure
History, duration, frequency,exposure to toxins, current
medications
Type of trauma, degree of force, area of trauma,
obvious injuries, safe transport instruction
touching the floor. If the communication between the paw and brain are intact, the pet
will turn its paw right side up. Reflex assessment will give information regarding the
specific neural pathways, and whether or not they are intact (Fig. 8.13, Table 8.4).
Emergency medications
Upon resuscitation efforts, medication can be administered via intravenous (Iv), intra
tracheal (IT), and intracardiac routes. Occasionally. venous access is a challenge and
certain medication may be administered via intraperitoneal, intramuscular, and sublin-
gual routes. Classic emergency pharmacology consists of positive inotropes, positive
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient  85
chronotropes, and antiarrhythmics. Oxygen continues to be one of the first-line drugs
as the body is hypoxic when in a shock state.
force and rate: it increases cardiac output, constricts peripheral vessels causing
increase in blood pressure, and it also increases blood glucose levels. Dobutamine
tissue perfusion. Dopamine is also similar to epinephrine, and will dilate the renal
arteries when used at low doses, thus improving perfusion to the kidneys. Atropine
is an anticholinergic drug used to increase the heart rate (positive chronotropic
drug).
Antiarrhythmic agents commonly used include both ventricular and supraventricular
arrhythmias and hypertension. Isoproterenol is a beta-adrenergic positive inotrope and
it is used to treat heart blocks, sinus bradycardia, and SSS (sick sinus syndrome).
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic that is beneficial in the treatment of ventricular arrhyth-
mias and fibrillation by mode of anesthetizing the heart. Bretylium tosylate and mag-
nesium chloride are older chemical defibrillators used to treat ventricular fibrillation. A
newer, more popular replacement is amiodarone, which increases the cardiac action
potential duration.
decreases intracranial pressure (IcP) caused by swelling of the brain. While mannitol is
not used in the initial shock resuscitation phase, it should be considered in patients with
In more recent years, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) has gained attention
for its use in the treatment of shock. The main effect of vasopressin is peripheral
vasoconstriction greater than that of epinephrine during hypoxic and acidotic
states. When compared to epinephrine in clinical studies, vasopressin was shown to
sustain better vital organ perfusion, thus resulting in a prolonged survival. Patients
who received vasopressin were also determined to have better pulmonary gas
exchange.
Successful treatment of shock continues to be a major focus, with some studies
proving medical advances, if not beneficial medical breakthroughs, in the treatment
global perfusion in efforts to correct occult shock, implementing antioxidant fluids, and
process.
In addition to new fluids and medications on the rise, there are new devices to assist
with resuscitation. A respiratory impedance threshold device (lTD) is gaining attention
in the veterinary community. This device causes a small vacuum to accumulate in the
thoracic cavity during inspiration, thus pulling more blood into the heart and increasing
cardiac preload (and hopefully cardiac output).
It appears that new shock treatments will be available in the next several years. The
abnormalities and prevention of deterioration of disease states is the key to success
for the patient (Tables 8.5 and 8.6).
Table 8.5 Cardiac compression techniques
Cardiac compression techniques
Benefits/indications
Lateral recumbency
Small, narrow chest
Dorsal recumbency
Large, barrel chest
Cardiac pump
Patients less than 151b
Thoracic pump
Patients over 151b
Simultaneous ventilation and cardiac
Greater blood flow, pressure, and return
compressions (SvCC)
Interposed abdominal compressions
Improves venous return and cranial blood
(IAC)
flow
Continuous chest compressions
Improves neurological outcome
Open chest compressions
Provides better cerebral and coronary
blood flow than external compressions
Active compression and decompression
Increased blood flow to the brain,
devices
increased survival rates in human studies
Table 8.6
Emergency drug dosing table
Drug
IV dose
Action
Atepamezole (5 mg/
Same dose as Domitor used; can
Medetomidine
mL)
repeat with half dose
reversal
Atropine (0.54mg/mL)
1mL/401b (up to 0.05mg/kg)
Parasympatholytic
Bretylol (50mg/mL)
0.4mL/101b bolus, repeat dose
Chemical defibrillator
over 10 minute if needed (5-
10mg/kg)
Dobutamine (12.5mg/
0.16mL/lb in 100mL chamber ran
+Inotrope, systemic
mL)
at 1mL/min (using 10mcg/kg/min)
vasodilation
(2-20mcg/kg/min)
Dopamine (40mg/mL)
0.01mL/1b in 100mL chamber ran
+Inotrope,
at 1mL/min (using 2mcg/kg/min)
vasoconstriction
(1-10mcg/kg/min)
Dopram (20mg/mL)
0.2 mL/lb (2 mg/kg)
Respiratory stimulant
Epinephrine 1:1000
1mL/201b or 1mL/101b IT (0.1mg/
+Inotrope,
(1mg/mL)
kg IV; 0.2 mL/kg IT)
+chronotrope
Hydroxyethyl starch
20mL/lb rapid IV infusion (20mL/
Colloid
(6% solution)
kg/day;10mL/kg/day feline dose)
Lidocaine 2% (20mg/
1mL/201b; 1mL/101b fel (2mg/kg)
Antiarrhythmia
mL)
(0.5mg/kg feline dose)
(ventricular)
Mannitol 20%
5mL/lb over 20-30 minutes
Osmotic diuretic
(200mg/mL)
(0.5g/kg)
(cerebral edema)
Mg chloride (00mg/
10mL over 2 minutes (2g over 2
Chemical defibrillator
mL)
minutes)
Naloxone (0.4mg/mL)
1mL/201b (0.4mg/kg)
Opiate antagonist
 Sodium bicarbonate
10mL/201b SLOW (1mEq/kg)
Akalinizing agent
8.4% (1mEq/mL)
86
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient  87
Chapter references and further reading
J.L. Cornick-Seahorn, S. Marks (1998) Emergency! Treating patients in shock. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(5): 355-369.
H. Davis (2oo1) Initial management of the emergent or critically ill patient. Wild West
Veterinary Conference.
  
Technicians in America Journal Winter: 39-43.
J. Keefe (20o8) Emergencies: get a grip. International Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Symposium.
C. Norkus (2008) Management of cardiopulmonary arrest. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(11): 671-676.
J. Proulx (2oo3) Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation. American Animal Hospital
Association Scientific Program.
R. Scalf (2006) Canine traumatic injury. The National Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journal winter: 37-42.
M. Schaer (2003) Metabolic and electrolyte emergencies. Western Veterinary Conference.
R. Wells (2008) CPCR: overview and updates. International Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Symposium.
K. Wuestenberg (2008) Recognition and treatment of shock. International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
Chapter 9
Harmonizing
Hospice Needs
Pet hospice care is an alternative means to managing end stages of life when a natural
death is preferred by the owner or until the decision for euthanasia can be made.
Hospice care is a palliative therapy, meaning it is not a cure, but an extension of life by
treating ailments in the most effective manner while providing comfort and care in
terminally ill animals. Veterinary hospice care began in the late 1970s; however, it
wasn't until recently that it has become more widely recognized. More and more pet
hospice care may also provide the same benefits to pet owners. The compassionate
and supportive experience of veterinary hospice may help the owner emotionally during
the shortened life expectancy.
Home hospice veterinary care is gaining in availability with the help of the human
portive care to terminally ill pets while allowing family members to spend quality time
caring for them. while the veterinarian and veterinary staff may work with families to
provide in-home hospice care, many pets remain in the hospital while decisions are
being made by pet owners. The decision of euthanasia is undoubtedly a difficult one.
succumb.
have a personalized plan developed which consists of the pet's needs, the owner's
or would like to delay euthanasia, hospice care is a means for the pet to live out the
rest of their life while under the medical care of veterinarians, technicians, and assis-
tants while also receiving care from their owners and family members (Fig. 9.1).
Family members should be properly trained in husbandry for debilitated animals as
well as obtaining basic vital sign parameters such as a heart rate or pulse rate and
Cfinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
89
90■
Harmonizing Hospice Needs
Figure 9.1  The human animal bond.
Figure 9.2 Providing veterinary hospice counseling to the family.
assessment, body temperature, and respiratory rate. It is imperative that terminally ill
patients arefrequentlyassessedfor pain levelsandsignsoforganfailure. Pharmacological
intervention plays a major role in hospice care, and although protocol standards have
not yet been set, it may be in the near future. Additionally. hygiene and husbandry is
an essential aspect of hospice care. Hospice hygienic needs are quite similar to those
of the recumbent patient.
The veterinary healthcare team should remain in close contact with the pet owners
during hospice. Availability for pain management, nursing care, or euthanasia should
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient ■  91
be available 24 hours a day. If hospice care is taking place outside of the veterinary
practice, home visits by veterinarians, veterinary technicians, or assistants should be
arranged on (at least) a daily basis to ensure the pet's medical needs are being met.
This visit may also be used as a respite care, where the family members can spend this
time tending to their day-to-day responsibilities (Fig. 9.2).
Veterinary hospice care is unique in that it allows pet owners and family members to
experience caregiving in the comfort of their home while also experiencing the process
of death in an environment other than in-clinic euthanasia. All family members, includ-
ing children, are encouraged to participate in the care of the terminal patient. Much like
the process of performing physical therapy. the loving care involved in hospice care
can strengthen or deepen the bond between the pet and family members. Hospice care
is a time-consuming service for the veterinary healthcare team and may require addi-
tional resources such as psychologists or grief counselors, homeopathic or holistic
veterinarians, massage therapists or veterinary chiropractors, pastoral counselors or
animal chaplains, and even pet sitters for respite (Fig. 9.3, Table 9.1)
Figure 9.3 Keeping geriatric pets comfortable.
Table 9.1 American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) guidelines for hospice care
Family/household dynamics are a consideration when deciding whether veterinary
hospice care is appropriate. Veterinarians should counsel clients regarding the
severity of their animal's illness or condition and the expected outcome. Clients
also should be informed of their responsibilities as well as the services to be
providedbytheveterinarian.
As with any service,fees should be discussed and agreed upon before hospice
service is provided.
(Continued)
92 ■  Harmonizing Hospice Needs
Table 9.1(Continued)
Patients should be kept as free from pain as possible and in a sanitary state.
Appropriate analgesics may be needed, and, subject to applicable practice acts, the
veterinary hospice team should be prepared to train clients in the administration of
drugs and other necessary routine care. Clients and caregivers may need to be
instructed in the assessment of patients' pain levels and stages of organ system
frequent basis. Veterinarians should recognize that this is an emotional and
stressful time for clients of terminally ill companion animals and, despite training by
the veterinary hospice team, clients may not be able to perform necessary medical
treatments in the home setting. Regular visits will allow veterinarians and their
staff to assess how clients are coping with treatment protocols.
The veterinary practice must have an appropriate Drug Enforcement Administration
and state license, and keep records of all drugs and supplies dispensed.
Veterinary staff should be part of the veterinary hospice team. Insurance coverage
for staff must be considered, and should include liability and travel coverage. The
latter is important if staff members will be traveling to and from the client's
residence.
Clients should be advised, preferably before the animal dies, of their options
concerning care of the animal's remains.
In the case of home deaths, clients may need confirmation of death through
absence of vital signs or pronouncement of death by the attending veterinarian.
Euthanasia service should be available if the client and veterinarian at any time
believe this service is appropriate. If clients are to be present, they should be
informed of the events involved in euthanasia prior to their occurrence. Clients may
need time alone with the deceased companion animal.
Optimally, veterinary care should be available at all times. This includes after-hours
referral for emergency care or advice.
Records must be kept of all interactions with patients and clients, including visits,
patient observations, treatments, telephone conversations, and instructions.
A team approach, encompassing professionals in veterinary medicine and
psychosocial care is the ideal. The veterinary hospice team should be prepared to
recommend that clients contact licensed mental health professionals who are
trained and experienced in grief and bereavement.
Approved by the AVMA Executive Board April 2001; reaffirmed April 2007.
Chapter references and further reading
American Veterinary Medical Association. 2007. Guidelines for veterinary hospice care.
March 2o07. http://www.avma.org/issues/policy/hospice_care.asp
E. Bittel (2008) Quality of life - quality of death. First International Symposium on Veterinary
Hospice Care, Davis, CA. http://landofpuregold.com/cancer/the-pdfs/quality.pdf
M. Cohan (2o05) Euthanasia and pet bereavement. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(10): 706-710.
K. Herzberg (2oo9) Postoperative nursing care for intervertebral disc disease. Veterinary
Applied Nursing of the Veterinary Patient93
K. Maroccino (2008) Veterinary hospice care: its history and development. The Latham
Letter. Fall 2008, Volume Xxlx, No. 4.
R. Sereno (2oo5) Pain management for cancer patients. The Nationaf Association of
Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Winter: 45-50.
R. Timmins (2oo8) A family veterinarian's perspective on the human-animal bone and
Section 3
Proper Care of Tubes
and Catheters
Chapter 10
Triflex.
Venous and
Arterial
Catheter Care
Peripheral intravenous catheters (IvCs) are the most common means of gaining venous
surgical procedures as well as a means of delivering fluid therapy to ill or injured
patients. Although these catheters are routine in practice, it is essential that the prac
tice of caring for these catheters become routine. The typical life span of a peripheral
catheter is 3 days, although it is possible to maintain them longer, even up to 5 days.
IVCs should be viewed as a direct line to the heart, and thus should be handled as
aseptically as possible.
The root of the problem is twofold: first, by securing and bandaging an unclean cath-
that bacteria are attracted to blood. In most cases, blood will contaminate the skin
during the initial placement of the catheter, although it is possible (and often a chal-
lenge) to place the catheter without a drop of blood spilled. when this blood is not
removed from the skin prior to taping and bandaging, a culture medium, in essence, is
being created.
is clean and dry. Any time the bandage is wet, it must be changed to prevent infection.
It is not uncommon for these bandages to become soiled with vomit, urine, blood, or
fluid solutions. The catheter should be flushed with a heparinized saline every 8 hours.
When attachments such as connectors or extension sets become engulfed with blood
or blood clots, the sets should be changed and replaced with new connection sets. The
decision to cover an IvC or to leave it visible is up to the practices of the facility and
10.1 and 10.2).
At least once every 24 hours, the catheter bandage should be removed and the inser-
tion site observed for erythema, phlebitis, discharge, or other signs of infection. If the
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
97
98■
Venous and Arterial Catheter Care
Figure 1o.1IV catheter abscess.
Figure 1o.2  Obtaining sample for culture. Result: Escherichia coff.
catheter site displays signs of infection, it should be removed and replaced in a separate
with blood, urine, or other material. The toes should be examined for swelling, coolness,
observed, noting any swelling or pain to the touch, indicating lack of patency or possible
phlebitis or infection (Fig. 10.3). Once the catheter site has been disinfected and thor-
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters■99
Figure 10.3  Phlebitis and edema at an IV catheter site.
wrap and then secure with a tertiary layer such as a flexible bandage material. The
catheter or of the catheter itself (Fig. 10.4).
Maintaining the central venous catheter
Central venous catheters have a wide variety of use in veterinary medicine, from admin-
istering parenteral nutrition, to measuring central venous pressure (CvP), or are simply
used as a blood collection port in patients requiring serial blood tests with atraumatic
collection. Central venous catheters can remain in place longer than peripheral IvCs
single, double, and multiple lumens, which allows for multipurpose use from one cen-
trally placed catheter.
While central venous catheter use is particularly beneficial for many critically ill or
where they are contraindicated. For instance, a patient with head trauma suffering from
poor blood drainage from the cerebral venous system may acquire cerebral edema if
a central venous catheter is placed in the jugular vein. Additionally, it may be safer
100  Venous and Arterial Catheter Care
Figure 10.4 Securing the catheter with bandage material.
Table 10.1 Blood sampling steps using a central venous catheter
1. Flush catheter with 1-2mL of heparinized saline
2.Remove 3mL blood, save syringe
3. Remove desired blood sample
4. Inject heparin/blood solution in small or anemic patients
5. Flush catheter with 2-3mL of heparinized saline
Table 10.2CVP procedure
Normal range 0-5mmHO
Jugular central venous catheter is required
Manometer is held at level of heart
Steps:
1. Turn off to manometer (catheter patency)
2. Turn off to patient (filling the manometer)
3. Ensure no air or bubbles are in manometer
4.Turn off to fluid bag
5. Manometer fluid will drop to CVP reading
6. Fluid will slightly fluctuate as the heart beats
testing rather than risk severe hemorrhage from central venous catheter placement.
In the same respect, patients in a hypercoagulable state, such as immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia or a protein-losing nephropathy, are at greater risk for developing a
pulmonary thromboembolism or suffering from thrombosis of the vena cava (Tables
10.1 and 10.2).
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters
■101
Figure 10.5  Blood collection using a central venous catheter.
Figure 10.6 Central venous catheter placed using the jugular vein.
tion for erythema, phlebitis, or signs of thrombosis or other signs of infection. In addi-
tion, due to the large diameter of the catheter, there is often more bleeding and bruising
at these catheter sites. It is recommended to unwrap the catheter bandage material
instead of cutting the bandage material because it is possible to cut the catheter,
sending it into systemic circulation. There is usually a portion of the catheter hidden
10.5-10.7).
102 Venous and Arterial Catheter Care
Figure 10.7 Radiograph confirmation of central venous catheter placement.
Intraosseous catheter care and maintenance
Intraosseous (lO) catheters have been used in human medicine since 1922, yet they are
often underutilized in veterinary medicine. An IO catheter can be lifesaving during an
emergency where venous access is difficult to establish or maintain due to collapse.
and hypodermic needles are also acceptable for use as lO catheters. Fluid therapy,
medications, and even blood products can be delivered via the lO route, in most cases
at the same rate as intravenous (Iv) administration. In fact, IO access provides a faster
delivery than peripheral venous access and the same rate of delivery as central venous
makes these catheters invaluable in an emergency.
Additionally, lO catheters provide quick, easy venous access for neonates, small
cases. lO catheters should be avoided in bones which have sustained a fracture or previ-
ous lO catheter; if there is an infection or wound at the proposed insertion site; or in
situations where placement landmarks are not detectable, such as edema.
of the femur. Other sites include the large trochanter of the humerus, the diaphysis of
the ulna, the tuberosity of the tibia, and the iliac portion of the pelvis. These catheters,
to a network of venous sinusoids in the medullary canal that lead to the nutrient vessels
that flow directly into systemic venous circulation.
When placed and maintained properly, the risks of complications are minimal. Risk
data for human lO catheter complications are at a rate of less than 1%. Nonetheless.
there are complications that should be understood in order to appropriately monitor
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters   103
the patient with lO access. Placement risks include fracture of the bone, epiphyseal
damage, which may lead to a bone growth disturbance, damage to the sciatic nerve,
and extravasation.
With regard to clinically monitoring the patient with an established lo catheter,
complications such as pain, osteomyelitis, infection, and dislodgement of the catheter
rarely noted in veterinary medicine is acute compartment syndrome (ACS). ACS typi-
the foramen of a nutrient vessel, etc.) has caused an increased pressure in osseofascial
pain, paralysis, paresis, cold limb, or an absent pulse. Current therapeutics for ACS
is limited to emergency surgical fasciotomy or amputation. The use of osmotic
diuretics is a therapeutic possibility that has undergone recent investigation in human
medicine.
Maintenance of the lO catheter will be a short-lived experience as these catheters
is possible with proper care and patient consideration. lO catheters can be painful for
soon as possible. However, while the catheter is in place, maintenance is very similar
to peripheral catheter care. The insertion site should be kept clean and covered if pos-
to the patient directly, or with "butterfly" tape tabs. As with all catheters, keeping the
catheter site should be flushed with heparinized saline and disinfected at least every
24 hours. Tubing (T-ports, extension sets, etc.) should be replaced as needed. The
patient should be monitored for pain, swelling, or signs of infection (Fig. 10.8).
Figure 10.8lo access.
104   Venous and Arterial Catheter Care
Venous access ports
Venous access ports or devices are used for patients receiving long-term fluid or drug
administration, such as oncology patients receiving chemotherapy or chronic renal
for long-term conditions or for those patients with difficult-to-access veins. Venous
tive catheter placement, they are painless once in place, and they provide a means of
quick venous access (either for blood collection or medication and fluid delivery).
Another benefit of venous access ports is that nutritional therapy can be delivered as
they reside in a large vessel, most commonly the jugular vein. Venous access ports are
surgically placed while the patient is under anesthesia. Care of the venous access port
flushing the device with heparinized saline after use to ensure patency. Occasionally a
local anesthetic may be needed while using the port if the needle insertion will be over
a considerable amount of time and the patient is in discomfort.
Maintaining the arterial catheter
Arterial access is often reserved for direct blood pressure monitoring and serial blood
gas analysis and is not used as a route of fluid therapy. It is an invasive procedure, with
the dorsal metatarsal artery being the most common site of catheter placement. Arterial
aseg-pine pue uabaxo buibeuew pue buisoubeip jo jued leiuassa ue aie saseb pooig
status disorders. Arterial catheters are generally reserved for critically ill respiratory
or metabolic patients.
Arterial catheters should be flushed with at least 3ml of heparinized saline every
2 hours. The catheter and attachments should be kept clean, free of blood and
other debris. The catheter site should be monitored for signs of infection such as phle-
bitis, erythema, or edema. The catheter should be removed if signs of infection occur
(Table 10.3).
Table 10.3
3Quick reference of venous access catheter maintenance
Catheter
General maintenance
type
Peripheral
· Keep bandage clean and dry
· Replace T-port as needed
· Remove catheter if signs of infection
Central
·Keep bandage clean and dry
venous
· Strip down, re-wrap, flush with heplock and disinfect every 24 hours
·Flush with a heplock every 6 hours if not used for fluid therapy
· Replace T-port as needed
· Remove catheter if there are signs of infection
·Watch for swelling (facial or distal extremities if saphenous/femoral)
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters
105
Table 10.3
(Continued)
Catheter
General maintenance
type
Arterial
· Flush with at least 3ml of heplock every 2 hours
· Keep art line clean, free of blood
· Monitor for signs of infection
10
· IO catheter care is same as IvC care
· Keep site clean and dry
· Flush with heplock and disinfect every 24 hours
· Replace T-port as needed
· Remove catheter if signs of infection
· Watch for swelling
· Recommended to replace with IV access as soon as possible
Chapter references and further reading
S. Bateman (2oo3a) Placing central venous catheters. Western Veterinary Conference.
S. Bateman (2003b) Tips for IV care. Western Veterinary Conference.
T. Crowe (2oo3) Vascular access techniques. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journal Spring: 45-48.
S. Erickson (2oo8) Thoracocentesis, chest tube management and arterial sampling.
T. Hacket (2o03) Vascular access tips in cats. Western Veterinary Conference.
D. Heath (1998) Lifeline to recovery: intravenous catheterization techniques. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(1O): 614-621.
J. Keefe (2Oo8) Central lines, female urinary catheterization, N/G tube placement.
O. Lanz (2003) Long term vascular access. Western Veterinary Conference.
D. Reeder (2oo8) Arterial blood pressure monitoring. Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(8): 478-483.
N. Royer (1998) Placing a catheter in a dorsal pedal vein. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(1): 58-59.
H.Ruess-Lamki (2008) The fine art of art(erial) lines. International Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Symposium.
K. Wuestenberg (2008) Intraosseous catheters, abdominocentesis, gastric lavage and neo-
natal resuscitation. International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
Chapter 11
Indwelling Urinary
Catheter Care
and Maintenance
Urinary catheters which are placed for long-term use require special attention by the
nursing staff to ensure that patient health is not compromised. In addition, monitoring
the urine output will give valuable information about the patient such as indications of
urinary tract infection, fluid overload, and kidney function. Proper urinary catheter
maintenance and patient nursing care will help reduce the risk of nosocomial infections
and complications associated with indwelling urinary catheters. Clinical scenarios where
indwelling urinary catheter placement is indicated include (but are not limited to) condi-
tions such as urinary tract obstruction, the critical care patient (monitoring perfusion
and renal function), recumbent or paralyzed patients, and patients with neurogenic
bladder dysfunction.
Daily catheter care
The urinary catheter should be thoroughly examined at least every 2 hours to ensure
that the catheter and collection set is patent, the patient is producing urine, and the
urinary catheter is clean and free of fecal material, vomitus, or any other debris.
Females are at higher risk for fecal contamination of the urinary catheter due to the
external genitalia being in close proximity to the rectum. The patient's skin surrounding
the urinary catheter should also be examined for signs of infection. Urine can leak
around the catheter and soil the skin, leading to scald and infection.
Every 8 hours the catheter should be flushed with 5-10 mL of sterile saline to ensure
it is patent. Blood clots and other flocculent material may obstruct the catheter, indicat-
ing the catheter should be replaced. The catheter and external genitalia should also be
disinfected with a light povidone-iodine solution or O.05% chlorhexidine solution every
as cleaning alone may lead to bacteriuria.
Clinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
107
108   Indwelling Urinary Catheter Care and Maintenance
Figure 11.1 Proper urinary catheter positioning.
Figure 11.2 Improper urinary catheter placement due to measuring error.
Urinary catheters may remain in place for 3-4 days. If infection is suspected (fever,
purulent discharge, sediment exhibiting white blood cells [wBcs] and bacteria, strong
urine odor, etc.), the urinary catheter should be removed. If warranted, the patient may
have a new urinary catheter placed (Figs. 11.1 and 11.2).
Daily collection set care
the use of a closed urinary collection system. Collection sets will help reduce the risk
of urinary tract infections as well as help maintain patient hygiene and more specifically,
decrease the likelihood of urine scalding of the patients' skin.
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters  109
Figure 11.3 Gross exam of methemoglobinuria
The collection set should always be kept below the level of the patient. This will
prevent the urine from traveling from the collection set back into the bladder (retro-
grade urine flow). The collection set and lines should be changed every 24 hours and
replaced with a new collection system.
Urine collecting in the set should be evaluated and removed from the bag every 2
hours. Ports already existing in the collection set may be used to remove the urine.
Alternately, a three-way stopcock may be placed on the line and used as a means of
urine removal. A gross examination of the urine should be performed and documented
in the medical record. Key points in the gross examination include the description of
color, turbidity, odor or volume-including the detection of any changes in these areas.
It is also recommended to perform a urinalysis every 24-48 hours to monitor for signs
of urinary infection. If an infection is suspected, a urine sample may be taken from the
collection bag, line, or the catheter itself and submitted for culture and sensitivity
testing (Figs. 11.3-11.6).
systems may be made in the clinic using fluid bags, administration sets, and extension
items may be removed from the line or secured open with porous tape. If new fluid bags
(emptied) and lines are not being used for the set, then it is recommended to sterilize
the collections systems prior to use (gas sterilization). The addition of 3% hydrogen
hydrogen peroxide encounters blood can obstruct the urine flow. It should be noted
that hydrogen peroxide addition to collection sets may also alter urinalysis results (Figs.
11.7-11.9).
Patient nursing
Figure 11.4 Centrifuged urine sample revealing hematuria.
Figure 11.5 Microscopic examination of wBC cast and bacilli found in urine sediment.
110
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters   11
Figure 11.6 Struvite crystals.
Figure 11.7 Removing administration clamp.
flow. It is not uncommon for the patient to circle, pace, or ambulate in a manner that
obstructs the flow. If the patient has other tubing in place (feeding tube, intravenous
catheter, nasal oxygen, etc.) the lines may become entangled, causing obstruction of
flow. The remaining external urinary catheter and proximal collection set line should
be taped to the tail (parallel) to help prevent inadvertent removal of the urinary cath-
eter through patient movement. In patients lacking a tail, the urinary catheter and
collection tubing may be taped to one of the rear extremities.
112  Indwelling Urinary Catheter Care and Maintenance
Figure 11.8 Securing the flow dial in "open" position.
Figure 11.9 Complete urinary collection set using intravenous administration set and
fluidbag.
Normal urine output is 1-2 mL/kg/h. Volumes less than this rate are considered oliguric
and can indicate poor perfusion and/or impaired renal function. Volumes which are
greater than 1-2mL/kg/h can indicate diuresis or patient volume overload. It is not
attention to fluid balances should be taken to ensure the patient is not overhydrated.
In addition, patients with low blood pressure may progress into acute renal failure,
exhibited by oliguria (0.25-0.5 mL/kg/h) or anuria (no urine production). Monitoring the
urine production is essential in preventing patient deterioration in these cases.
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters
113
Miscellaneous urinary tubes
Occasionally the need arises for a patient to require a nontraditional means of eliminat-
ing urine. Patients with cancers of the bladder, urethra, or genitourinary region may
l     e a    e o a
the gastrotomy tube, provides a patent pathway to the exterior of the patient where
the tube can be handled by caregivers. The cystotomy tube requires that a caregiver
uncap the tube and allow the patient's bladder to be voided of urine every 4-8 hours.
This tube should also be inspected and disinfected at least once a day.
Another alternative urinary catheter is one which resides in the ureter. Ureteral cath-
eters can be utilized for disease states involving the bladder, urethra, or genitourinary
regions such as in prostatic cancers. Additionally. when obstruction of the distal ureter
is present, a ureteral catheter can help prevent hydronephrosis and provide a means of
eliminating urine. Ureteral catheters require absolute securing and careful handling of
the external portion of the catheter. The catheter should be covered or bandaged and
should be examined and disinfected at least once a day (Tables 11.1 and 11.2).
Table 11.1 Urinary catheter care maintenance
Quick reference
Task
Includes
Frequency
Rationale
Patient
Keeping skin clean,
As often as
Prevent infection, skin
hygiene and
observing collection
possible;
scalding, obstruction of
catheter
set for urine
every2
urine flow
patency
production and flow;
hours at
catheter replacement
minimum
if necessary
Flush and
Flush with 5-10mL of
Every 8
Prevent nosocomial
disinfect
sterile saline; disinfect
hours; more
infection and ensure
catheter site
with povidone-iodine or
frequent if
catheter patency
chlorhexidine, place
indicated
antimicrobial ointment
Urine gross
Color, odor, turbidity,
Every 2
Detect urinary infection,
exam and
and volume; balancing
hours: more
overhydration,or poor
documentation
fluid ins/outs
frequent if
perfusion/kidney
indicated
dysfunction
Change
Removal of collection
Every 24
Prevent nosocomial
collection
bag, line, and extension 
hours; more
infection; maintain
system
sets and placement of
frequent if
accurate current gross
new system
indicated
exam
Perform
Gross exam, chemistry,
Every
Identify signs of
urinalysis
urine specific gravity
24-48
 infections or changes in
(USG), and sediment
hours: more
patient status
examination; remove
frequent if
(glycosuria, USG,
or replace catheter as
indicated
cylindruria, etc.)
indicated
114
■
 Indwelling Urinary Catheter Care and Maintenance
Table 11.2
Urinary catheter troubleshooting guide
Problem
Considerations
Urine not flowing
· Make sure collection lines are not kinked or twisted, flush
into collection set
to ensure patency
·Disconnect collection set and flush catheter (checking
patency)
· Confirm catheter placement (radiograph)
· Measure the patients' blood pressure (ensuring adequate
perfusion, detecting oliguric or anuric renal failure)
· Evaluate patient status (i.e., multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome [MODS]]
Significant amount
· Consider size of catheter;replacement may be indicated
of urine leakage
·Follow insufflation guidelines (Foley catheters)
around catheter
·Flush catheter (ensure patency)
Perform cytology of fluid to rule out purulent discharge
· Arrange a disposable bed pad or towel to protect the
patient from soiling skin
Patient chewing on/
· Place larger E-collar
licking catheter or
· Consider chew deterrent spray
collection line
· Place towel over collection line
Catheter slipping out
·Resuture
of place (moving
· Anchor to tail with tape
distally from original
· Confirm catheter placement (radiograph)
position)
Patient discomfort
· Consider analgesics
·Resuture or retape catheter if too much tension being
placed
· Observe for signs of infection
Chapter references and further reading
A. Battaglia-Lawrence (1998) Urinary catheter placement in male dogs. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(9):570-573.
J. Keefe (2oo8) Central lines, female urinary catheterization, N/G tube placement.
S. Okumura (2005) Urine collection techniques. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journaf
for the Veterinary Hospitaf Staff 26(10): 720-725.
K. Stafford (2oo4) Enhanced radiographic studies. Veterinary Technician the Compiete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(6): 384-393.
Chapter 12
Feeding Tube Care
and energy. Good nutrition improves the likelihood of recovery as illness creates a state
in skeletal and smooth muscle weakness, a disruption of the gastrointestinal mucosal
barrier, gastrointestinal ileus, and weakening of the immune system. The overall con-
sensus in meeting the nutritional requirements of ill or injured patients is to utilize the
gut if it works.
tube feeding is typically reserved for neonates and is an intermittent procedure without
the requirement of indwelling tube care (Figs. 12.1 and 12.2). Nasogastric (NG) and naso-
esophageal (NE) tubes are utilized for short-term feedings while esophagostomy (EG)
and gastrostomy tubes can be used for longer periods of time, allowing the patient to
return home with the owner administering the feedings. Other feeding tubes used are
for use in the critically ill hospitalized patient.
NG and NE tubes
NG and NE feeding tubes are utilized for short-term nutritional delivery (typically less
than 7 days). The tube is placed in the nostril and advanced into the esophagus or
smaller diameter than other conventional feeding tubes, thus requiring liquid diets.
NG and NE tubes are often used in patients with increased nutritional requirements,
recent anorexia (less than 5 days), or in the event of anticipated anorexia (full mouth
extraction). They are easily placed and maintained for patients who do not tolerate oral
feedings. Additionally. medication can be administered via NG and NE tubes.
Clinicar Smaff Animar Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
115
Figure 12.1 Passing an orogastric tube in a neonate.
Figure 12.2 Removal of the tube after feeding. Note the tube is kinked to prevent
aspiration of contents into thelungs.
116
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters  17
Figure 12.3 Local anesthetic placed into the nasal passages to ease the passing of the
tube.
There are instances where it is not recommended to use NG or NE tubes. Some condi-
tions include, but are not limited to, uncontrollable vomiting. nasal cavity fracture,
rhinitis, loss of the gag reflex, and altered mentation. Patients with brain, esophageal,
pharyngeal, or biliary tract surgery or trauma are not suitable for NG/NE tube
placement.
Complications which may arise often result from overfeeding. Overfeeding may result
in reflux or vomiting, which may result in an array of events from vomiting and chewing
the tube itself to aspiration pneumonia. Epistaxis or sinusitis can also occur, as well as
skin infections at the site where the tubes are secured.
These tubes typically are low maintenance. The tube entry site should be kept clean
and free of secretions or food. Dermal infections can occur when contact points are
left unclean. Some patients may attempt to dislodge the tubes, therefore placement of
anElizabethancollar maybenecessary.
Prior to each feeding, the tube should be aspirated to remove any residual stomach
juices. After each feeding, the tube should be flushed with water to prevent food from
tube may be made by flushing with warm water (Figs. 12.3-12.5).
EG tube care
EG tubes are often utilized when longer periods of assisted nutrition are needed. These
tubes are generally well tolerated and can remain in place anywhere from 1 week to 3
18Feeding Tube Care
Figure 12.4 Pressing the nose dorsally will open the passageway, easing placement.
Figure 12.5 NG tubes can be secured in the alar fold.
months at the very most. Esophageal feeding tubes are indicated when nutritional
    os s      
is adequate. Like the NE tubes, they should not be used in patients with delayed gastric
emptying or uncontrollable vomiting. In addition, they should not be used in patients
with esophageal disorders or with recent biliary surgery.
Maintenance of the EG tube involves daily evaluation of the insertion site for signs
of infection. The protective covering (usually stockinet) should be changed every 3-5
days or sooner if soiled. Like the NE tube, the tube must be aspirated prior to use and
flushed with water after use. It is recommended to wait 24 hours after placement before
feedings are implemented (Figs. 12.6 and 12.7).
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters  119
Figure 12.6 EG tube in a geriatric patient, Maddie, who is receiving a slow continuous
rate infusion (CRl) of a nutritional supplement diet.
Figure 12.7 Securing an EG tube to be used for intermittent feedings using surgical
steel.
Gastrostomy tubes
Gastrostomy tubes are indicated when assisted feeding is expected to last at least 2
weeks, but can be used for several months. Like the EG tube, they can allow for home
feedings but feedings should be sustained for the first 12-24 hours after initial place-
ment. These tubes are placed either via endoscope, laparotomy, or percutaneously.
Some patients with gastrotomy tubes may require an Elizabethan collar to prevent
120  Feeding Tube Care
on a daily basis, aseptically handled, and disinfected. The dressing-again the stockinet
is typically used-should be changed every 3-5 days or sooner if soiling occurs. Like the
other indwelling feeding tubes, the stomach contents should be aspirated prior to
feeding and the tube flushed with water after the feeding.
Miscellaneous tubes
Jejunostomy and duodenostomy tube insertion sites should be routinely evaluated
for position as well as for signs of infection. Nutritional delivery through these tubes
is usually through a constant rate infusion of a liquid diet. It is of utmost importance
that the intravenous fluid delivery set and nutritional feeding delivery sets are
properly and accurately attached to the correct port. Allowing the enteral nutrition to
be delivered intravenously can prove to be a fatal error. It is recommended to
clearly label all lines leading to the patient to prevent errors such as this from happen-
ing (Fig. 12.8).
EGTuBE
Figure 12.8  Labeling fluid therapy pump and food delivery pump.
Proper Care of Tubes and Catheters   121
Chapter references and further reading
J.Keefe (2008) Central lines,female urinary catheterization, N/G tube placement.
International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
P. Mullane (1998) Practical neonatal care: tube feeding. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(8): 532-535.
J.Proulx (2003) Critical care nutrition ll. Western Veterinary Conference.
 o     e  ( e 
Program.
B. Womack (2o03) Providing nutritional support to critical care patients. Veterinary Technician
A. Wortinger (2oo5) The ins and outs of feeding tubes. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(1): 1l-22.
D. Zoran (2003) Enteral nutrition for anorectic cats. Western Veterinary Conference.
Chapter 13
Nasal Oxygen
Catheter Care
There are several effective ways of administering oxygen to the veterinary patient.
Each delivery method comes with advantages and disadvantages which are taken into
consideration when determining each individual patient's oxygen therapy needs. Clinical
methods of oxygen delivery are discussed further in both the cardiac and respiratory
sections as well as in the emergency response section.
Nasal oxygen insufflation is a beneficial therapeutic for many conditions, particularly
anemia, cardiogenic disease, lung parenchymal disease, and pleural space disease. Uses
also include (but are not limited to) toxicities, central nervous system trauma, and
ventilation-perfusion mismatching. These catheters, or cannulas, can be used long term
with usually minimal patient discomfort. Nasal oxygen tubes are easily placed and allow
oxygen sets made for human use may be utilized. Due to the potential for dislodgement,
patients using a human oxygen set should be restricted to those with minimal activity.
Red rubber catheters are most commonly stapled or sutured into place. It is important
to ensure the patients' comfort with appropriate placement and minimal tension at the
site of attachment. If the patient is uncomfortable, they are more likely to attempt to
dislodge the cannula. An Elizabethan collar will help reduce the risk of dislodgement as
long as the patient allows for it. In addition, the oxygen system tubing may be secured
to the patient with bandage material. This will help prevent the weight or pull of the
tubing from dislodging the catheter.
Humidifiers are recommended if nasal insufflation is to last longer than 2 hours. Dry
oxygen can cause an increase in secretion viscosity, cause mucociliary dysfunction, and
degenerate respiratory epithelium, all of which may increase the risk of a respiratory
infection in the patient. In addition, dry oxygen can dehydrate the nasal mucosa
and cause discomfort to the patient and, in some instances, cause epistaxis. Oxygen
humidification systems create an ideal humidity of 30%-40%. The humidification
Bubbles are then formed, and as they rise to the surface, pick up water vapor, which
can be delivered to the patient. Humidifiers should always be kept in an upright position
       a  s  e  
Cfinicar Smaff Animar Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing. First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
123
124    Nasal Oxygen Catheter Care
Table 13.1 Nasal oxygen delivery rates
Weight (in kg)
Fi0 0f 30%-50%
Fi0 of 50%-75%
Fio of 75%-100%
(L/min)
(L/min)
(L/min)
0-10
0.5-1
1-2
3-5
10-20
1-2
3-5
>5
20-40
3-5
>5
>5
Oxygen flow rate depends on desired O2 percentage and patient body weight. Higher flow rates mean
greater risk of complications.
Table 13.2 Troubleshooting guide
Problem
Potential solutions
Dry nasal mucosa or epistaxis
Decrease oxygen flow rate; alternate tube
placement to opposite nasal passage;
consider the use of bilateral insufflation
Decreased oxygen delivery to the
Check all tubes (catheter, oxygen tubing to
patient
humidifier, oxygen line to oxygen source) for
occlusions; check oxygen supply
Water in the oxygen tube
Check humidifier, ensure it is in upright
position
Patient displays signs of dyspnea
Evaluate the oxygen delivery system;
or poor oxygenation
evaluate the patient based on clinical
condition
maintenance of the humidifier requires replacing the water on a daily basis. It is recom-
mended to use distilled water.
Although nasal oxygen catheters can be used long term (up to 1-2 weeks), the cath-
eter itself should be replaced every 48-72 hours, alternating with the opposite nostril
to help prevent patient discomfort due to nasal mucosa irritation. It's also important to
routinely check the catheter attachment sites and clean any debris, particularly near
the alar folds, which may contribute to dermal irritation or infection.
At times, bilateral nasal oxygen tubes are placed. Insufflation of both nasal passages
allows for higher flow rates to be obtained while reducing patient discomfort. A study
published in 2002 showed that FiOz and Pa0z rates were the same whether the oxygen
was delivered via one tube or two tubes. The study showed that the benefit of utilizing
bilateral nasal cannulas was the patient comfort level that was achieved. Although the
use of bilateral catheters may not change delivery values, it may help the patient be
more tolerable when high flow rates are required. Special care should be taken when
using bilateral oxygen catheters, as prolonged administration of oxygen at high flow
rates can cause oxygen toxicity in the patient (Tables 13.1 and 13.2).
Chapter references and further reading
E. Mazzaferro (2oo3) Oxygen therapy. American Animal Hospital Association Scientific
Program.
Chapter 14
Tracheostomy
Tube Care
Tracheotomies are typically performed in emergency situations; however, they are also
placed as a palliative tool to improve quality of life in some cases where the upper
airways are obstructed (tumors, for instance). In the emergent patient, a large-bore
peripheral intravenous catheter can be inserted into the trachea and oxygen attached
to the catheter (transtracheal catheter). This is a temporary procedure, used while
awaiting a tracheotomy.
Once the tracheotomy has been performed, a tracheostomy tube will be placed, creat-
available tracheostomy tubes are available with introducers, inflatable cuffs, or without
a cuff and with interchangeable filter inserts or cannulas. Alternatively, a clear endo
rial is preferred.
The tracheostomy tube is sutured in place and should be secondarily anchored
around the neck by umbilical tape and then bandaged with a sterile wound dressing
and light wrap. The bandage should be changed on a daily basis or sooner if soiling
occurs. The surgical site should be disinfected and observed for signs of infection during
this time. The recommended disinfectant solution is a 50:50 mixture of hydrogen
peroxide and either sterile water or sterile saline. The tracheotomy site and tracheos-
in between the tube collar and skin to prevent pressure. Additionally, immediate obser-
-anns auiia 'easaudwa lo aeowau lo suis aue joi aew aa pinous suo
 ous or mediastinal. with longer term care, complications include tracheal irritation or
infection.
More pressing aspects of tracheostomy tube care involve continuous patient monitor-
ing, promoting a patent airway, and frequent hygienic care of the tube itself. The tube
itself may leak, kink, may become dislodged, or even occlude with secretions or mucous
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
125
126
■
Tracheostomy Tube Care
Table 14.1Tracheostomy tube maintenance
Procedure
Frequency
Description
Supplies needed
Irrigation
Every 2-4
Inject saline into tube,
2mL saline (cats),
hours
with or without coupage,
5-10mL(dogs)
use in conjunction to
suctioning
Suction
Immediately
Connect Ambu bag to
Oxygen source,
preoxygenation
prior to
tube, administer four to
electrocardiograph
suction
five manual breaths
(ECG) monitor
using 100% 0xygen
Suction
Every 6-8
Insert catheter until
Sterile gloves,
hours
resistance noted, pulling
sterile red rubber
back slightly, institute
catheter or other
suction at -80 to
suitable suction
-120mmHg, twisting
tubing (less than
catheter as it is
1/2 diameter of
withdrawn
tracheostomy
Potential complications:
tube), Suction unit,
hypoxia, lung collapse,
with or without
cardiac arrhythmias, and
saline
hypotension
Replace inner
with suction
Remove cannula,
A new or clean
cannula
procedure
suction, then replace
(sterile) cannula
insert
Troubleshooting
As needed
Remove inner cannula,
Oxygen, intubation
a dysfunctional
deflate cuff, maneuver
equipment, new
tube
ormanipulate tube
tracheostomy
placement, suction if
tube, pulse
possible, replace tube if
oximetry, ECG
needed, check oxygen
source and connection
when applicable,
auscultate lungs and
evaluate patient status
plugs. Breath sounds should routinely be evaluated; the patient's tube requires irriga
and a patent airway. Refer to Table 14.1 for procedure.
Tracheostomy tubes with inflatable cuffs should be inflated to a point where a slight
as this increased pressure can lead to tracheal tissue necrosis. Periodic deflation of the
cuff does not necessarily prevent tracheal necrosis. Typically. tracheostomy tubes
should be replaced once a week unless complications occur sooner (Table 14.1, Figs.
14.1-14.3).
TERINARY
0800
Figure 14.1 Packaged tracheostomy tube.
Figure 14.3 Tracheostomy tube and insert.
Figure 14.2  Tracheostomy tube.
127
128Tracheostomy Tube Care
Chapter references and further reading
K. Kinnerney (2oo9) Tracheostomy tube care. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journaf
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 3o(2): 20-23.
D. Waldron (2003) Using tracheostomy tubes. Western Veterinary Conference.
Chapter 15
Chest Tube Care
A thoracocentesis may be performed in patients suffering from a pneumothorax, pleural
effusion, chylothorax, hemothorax, or pyothorax. Thoracocentesis may be used as a
thoracocentesis has been performed three times, a chest tube should be placed as the
condition has not resolved. There are risks with performing a thoracocentesis, including
to procedure restraint. Ensuring patient safety should always be a priority when per-
forming a thoracocentesis. If the stress, anxiety, or resistance is too great, a reassess-
a patient with heart failure and subsequent pleural effusion may benefit from a diuretic
and oxygen therapy prior to attempting a thoracocentesis. However, in the instance of
a pneumothorax, time is crucial, and a sedative or analgesic may ease the procedure.
It is important to remember that patients in respiratory distress are very fragile and
may succumb to procedure restraint. Patient mentation, mucous membrane color, and
respiratory pattern and effort should be closely monitored.
Thoracostomy tubes are generally implemented when either effusion or air continu
commercially available chest tubes; however, red rubber catheters can also be used.
The benefit of commercially available tubes is that most are made with a one-way valve,
preventing air to enter the thoracic space. They often have multiple drainage holes as
well, preventing occlusion of the catheter or tube.
With the initial placement of a chest tube, aspiration should be implemented every
15-30 minutes as volume and patient status permits, increasing aspiration as necessary
or air production and the patient status. Patients should be repositioned during aspira
tion, moving from lateral to sternal recumbency in the attempt to collect more fluid.
When necessary. a continuous suction unit may be used. Some patients may produce
a significant amount of fluid or air and never reach negative pressure with intermittent
aspiration.
Cfinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
129
130Chest Tube Care
be placed on either the left or right side. The skin over the 12th rib is manipulated crani-
ally prior to insertion, leaving a subcutaneous tunnel between the entry into the thorax
system. It is recommended to disinfect the chest tube every 8-12 hours, focusing on
the distal end of the tube and seals or caps. The bandage should be stripped down and
infection. If signs of infection are present, the tube should be removed. If patient dis-
comfort is noted, a local anesthetic may be injected through the tube to provide relief.
Cytological examination of aspirated contents should be performed every 24-48
hours. Sample analysis should include color, turbidity, and odor. Normal pleural fluid
volume is less than 1mL/kg of body weight. It is typically clear to straw in color and
may be clear to slightly turbid. Pleural fluid normally has no odor, few erythrocytes, a
total protein less than 2.5-3g/dL, and less than 10,000 nucleated cells per microliter,
primarily neutrophils (75%o). Exudates tend to be highly cellular with a high protein.
Transudates have lower cell numbers with or without low protein levels. Septic samples
will exhibit a marked increase in neutrophils, toxic neutrophils, and bacteria. Hemorrhage
will be noted by the presence of blood and a peripheral packed cell volume (PcV) should
be obtained and compared to the PCV of the chest fluid to rule out an active or recently
a total protein of 2-6g/dL
The patient with a chest tube should be monitored for signs of respiratory pattern
and observed for signs of occlusion or leakage. The chest tube may become occluded
status begins to deteriorate. Fluid may leak around the tube insertion site so skin should
be kept clean and a seal may be applied to help reduce leakage (such as an antibiotic
pneumothorax if torn or uncapped. All caps, attachments, tubing, and additional instru-
mentation used should be secured. Once air or fluid production remains less than 2 mL/
bandage is generally placed around the chest for 24 hours postremoval.
Chapter references and further reading
S. Erickson (2008) Thoracocentesis, chest tube management and arterial sampling.
International Veterinary Emergency and Critical CareSymposium.
D. Schroeder, V. Skala, C. Nielsen (2o05) Managing pyothorax in a dog. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 340-350.
Section 4
Comprehensive Areas
of Focus
Chapter 16
Cardiovascular
Nursing
Basic anatomy and physiology overview
The heart is a muscle that holds the primary purpose of pumping blood to the tissues
and organs of the body. The body's blood functions to deliver oxygen, nutrients, and
hormones, among other necessities, to the body's tissues. The blood also carries away
waste products from those tissues and it aids in the maintenance of the body's fluid
balance. All tissues in the body need blood flow to deliver nutrients and carry away
wastes. Cardiac preload (blood entering the heart) in conjunction with the rate and force
of the heart pumping determines the cardiac output, or delivery of blood to the body
tissues.
  ae  u s  a e ae a sai l 
cles of the heart perform the pumping or forward moving blood flow. There are four
valves which open and close to direct the blood flow. The valves, in respect to blood
flow, are the tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve, mitral valve, and aortic valve. Furthermore,
the heart is surrounded by the pericardial sac, which holds a small amount of fluid to
prevent friction as the heart pumps.
The cardiovascular system is divided into two divisions-pulmonary circulation and
systemic circulation. As blood enters the right atrium via the vena cava, it travels
which leads to the lungs. This cardiac blood flow is termed pulmonary circulation
because the lungs are perfused by the right side of the heart. Once the gas exchange
has occurred in the lungs, blood travels back to the heart via the pulmonary arteries
and enters the left atrium, traveling through the mitral valve to the left ventricle, and
finally out to the body via the aorta. Left-sided cardiac circulation is then termed sys-
temic circulation (Fig. 16.1).
In order for the cardiovascular system to work efficiently, the valves and chambers
must work efficiently and rhythmically. Adequate preload combined with effective
cardiac contraction will determine the afterload, or perfusion to the body. If there is a
Cfinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
133
134
Cardiovascular Nursing
Left pulmonary artery
Aorta
Right pulmonary artery
 Right azygous vein
Pulmonary veins
Left subclavian artery
Coronary sinus
Branchio cephalic trunk.
Cranial vena cava
Caudal vena cava
Right atrium
Left ventricle -
Apex
Aorta
Pulmonary trunk
Left subdavian artery
Cranial vena cava
Pulmonary veins
Caudal vena cava
Branchiocephalic trunk
Right auricula
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Conus arteriosus
Left ventricle
Apex
Right ventricle
searet
Apical cardiac notch
Figure 16.1 Diagram of the heart. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and
Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. Wiley-Blackwell, 2o08.
decrease in blood flow, or if the cardiac pump itself is dysfunctional, the result is an
inadequate outflow to the body (poor systemic circulation). The term systolic refers to
the active phase (pumping) while diastolic refers to the relaxing or refilling phase of
the cardiac cycle.
In addition to the anatomical makeup of the heart, the cardiac conduction system
plays a role in performance. Each individual heart muscle cell has the ability to relax
impulse across the cell membrane. Relaxation (repolarization) occurs as the membrane
returns to resting state. Contraction and relaxation occurs via sodium, calcium, and
potassium channels which alternately open and close, allowing the charged ions to flow
acrossthemembranes.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   135
Sinoatrial (SA) node
Left AV fibers
James internodal tract
Bundle of His
Atrioventricular (AV) node
Left crus
Right crus
Purkinje fibers
Figure 16.2 Conduction system of the heart. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M.
and Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. Wiley-Blackwell, 2o08.
The cardiac conduction system is made up of the SA node, the AV node, the bundle
of His, the right and left bundle branches, and the Purkinje fibers. The SA node (sino-
atrial node) is the cardiac muscle located where the cranial vena cava meets the right
atrium. The AV node (atrioventricular node) is in the septal wall of the right atrium. The
bundle of His connects the AV node to the ventricular septum and separates into the
are muscle fibers that are located beneath the endocardium. The SA node is the primary
conduction system to the Purkinje fibers (Fig. 16.2).
Lastly, neuroendocrine influences play a role in cardiovascular system function. The
pressure, thus delivery) as well as chronotropic and inotropic performance of the
cardiac pump itself. If cardiac function and perfusion is impaired, neurohormonal
responses ensue and inflammatory mediators contribute to a vicious cycle as decom
pensation occurs.
Assessing the cardiovascular patient
Considering the cardiovascular system has the capability to influence both the internal
and external respiration of a patient, numerous scenarios could cascade in the
136   Cardiovascular Nursing
warrants investigation, if not already done.
Patients with cardiovascular conditions may display symptoms such as (but are not
limited to) exercise intolerance, fatigue, cough which may or may not be productive,
ascites, abdominal or labored breathing. and cyanosis. It's important to note that
primary respiratory disease may present with similar symptoms as cardiovascular
Starting with the primary survey. patient mentation will allow for a quick triage of
sists, the patient loses consciousness. Patient mental awareness gives a quick, short
term evaluation of hemodynamics as parameters may change acutely in the cardiac
patient.
The assessment of cardiac function involves auscultation of the heart, monitoring
of the mucous membranes (MMs). It is important to note that with every heartbeat, a
pulse should then follow. Some arrhythmias will cause a deviation in this normal pattern,
palpable, negatively affecting perfusion. Furthermore, it is important to appreciate that
pale or cyanotic MM color is considered to be the last sign of internal hypoxia. There
usually is a state of hypoperfusion which may be detected by assessing the cardiac
output of the patient (heart rate, pulse quality and rhythm, blood pressure monitoring.
etc.).
In the respiratory survey, attention to the respiratory rate, pattern, effort, and
posture should be observed and documented in addition to any abnormal lung sounds
auscultated. Along with respiratory difficulties, hyperthermia often occurs. It is impor
tant to consider monitoring the temperature of these patients and maintain euthermia
through cooling techniques when indicated.
Common cardiovascular diseases and conditions
Pericardial disorders such as effusion and tamponade occur when the pericardial sac
accumulates excessive fluid buildup. The cause may be due to pericarditis, which is an
infection of the heart (fungal, bacterial, etc.) or tumor related (chemodectoma, heman
giosarcoma, etc.). A pericardial tamponade is a life-threatening effusion where the
pressure from the excessive fluid around the heart is so great that the heart cannot
prevents the cardiac muscle from performing. limiting cardiac output and tissue perfu
sion. These patients can progress to organ failure and death if the pressure is not
relieved from the pericardial space.
sided heart failure due to the decreased cardiac output. They may tire easily or appear
weak. Upon auscultation, the heart may sound muffled, although heart sounds are often
absent. Patient monitoring includes detail to mentation, blood pressure monitoring, and
Comprehensive Areas of Focus 137
Figure 16.3 Pericardial effusion radiograph.
(pericardial window) may also be warranted in patients with a pericardial effusion or
tamponade(Fig.16.3).
Cardiomyopathies are a primary myocardial disease in which the function of the
monly seen in cats), the heart muscle thickens, making cardiac output a strenuous task
for the heart. DcM is a condition in which the heart muscle has become dilated and
enlarged, resulting in ineffective pumping action. DcM is seen in dogs and cats, but
most often associated with large breed dogs. Cats can get DcM when their diet is taurine
deficient. RCM is less common than HCM and DCM, but it is seen in cats. Fibrosis in the
left ventricles causes dysfunction and they are unable to fill with blood, preventing
adequate perfusion to the body.
Valvular disordersinclude stenosis (narrowing) and insufficiency (abnormal perfor
mance) of the heart valves. The most common valves associated with stenosis are the
pulmonic and aortic valves (semilunar valves). Insufficient valves, also referred to as
leaky valves, are most commonly associated with the AV valves (tricuspid and mitral
Valves).
Congenital disorders are defects in which the animal is born with and are not neces
sarily hereditary traits. These disorders can be divided into two sections-the failure of
fetal structures to close and the failure of fetal structures to develop normally. Cardiac
fetal structures which fail to close include atrial septal defects (ASDs) and patent ductus
arteriosus (PDA). In an ASD, blood flows from the right atria to the left atria and vice
blood. A PDA is a failure of the ductus arteriosus to close following birth. Blood contin-
ues to flow from the pulmonary artery directly into to the aorta, bypassing pulmonary
138 Cardiovascular Nursing
      
arterial and venous blood through a hole between the right and left ventricles in the
in which normally the left arch persists.
Congestive heart failure (cHF) is the end result of cardiac conditions such as fetal
tis, and so on. when the failure occurs on the right side of the heart, the patient often
develops ascites due to the inability of forward flow. Likewise, left-sided heart failure
is often associated with pulmonary edema as blood traveling from the lungs to the left
side of the heart is unable to circulate in an efficient manner. CHF affects the patients'
is easily overexerted. It is important to keep in mind that many cardiac patients, not
only CHF patients, can deteriorate rapidly and even succumb to the stresses of handling
(Figs. 16.4 and 16.5).
Figure 16.4 Radiograph of CHF and pulmonary edema in a dog.
Figure 16.5 Radiograph of pleural effusion in a cat due to heart failure.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   139
Patients with CHF often have secondary conditions such as pleural effusion, pulmo
pharmaceutical intervention such as loop diuretics, positive inotropes, beta blockers,
istered and if the patient has anxiety. sedatives may be warranted. Therapeutic thora-
cocentesis may be performed in the event of pleural effusion or significant ascites in
to move further caudally, allowing more air into the lungs with inspirations.
Patient monitoring includes observing for signs of dyspnea, pale or cyanotic MMs,
weak pulses and prolonged CRT, crackle sounds upon lung auscultation (pulmonary
edema), and even hypothermia. In patients with pulmonary edema, white or pink frothy
fluid may be noted from nostrils (fulminating pulmonary edema), or coughing of this
fluidmayoccur.
Arrhythmias are a disorder of the rhythm, or synchronicity, of the heart beating.
Arrhythmias are often classified as supraventricular (atrial) or ventricular, denoting the
origination of the dysrythmia. In addition, bradyarrhythmias are associated with a slow
heart rate (bradycardia). and tachyarrhythmias occur when there is a rapid heart rate
(tachycardia). Considering that the electrical conductivity of the heart is associated with
structure performance, a patient with an arrhythmia, whether primary or secondary.
Would.
A key nursing skill for detecting arrhythmias is to always palpate pulses while aus
cultating the heart. For every heartbeat, a pulse should then follow. Often pulses are
obtained, or heart rates are obtained but they are not performed together, which is
  s            
should also be auscultated as rhythm and rate can be an indicator of arrhythmias
(F1g. 16.6).
Hemodynamics refers to the circulation of blood flow. The force of blood against the
walls of vessels as it moves is termed blood pressure. A specific pressure must be met
to ensure that tissues and vital organs are perfused in the body. Hypertension is a
condition in which blood pressure is above, or higher, than normal range. Causes can
eisauisaue se yons saieis paliedwi (oi paiwi pou ing) oi anp ag aew il 'abuel lewou
or shock. In both scenarios, blood pressure monitoring is a key tool. A hypertensive
patient may suffer from epistaxis, hematuria, and ocular hemorrhage due to the exces
ment can occur. The hypotensive patient may progress to a critical shock status.
Shock is considered to be an imbalance between delivered oxygen and consumed
causes an energy deficit as mitochrondia are no longer able to generate adenosine
metabolic acidosis. An acute compensatory sympathetic response causes major arteries
and veins to constrict. Initially, capillaries constrict, causing a decreased perfusion to
Figure 16.6 Common cardiac arrhythmias. A. Second-degree atrioventricular (AV)
block. Note the third recorded impulse is missing a QRS complex following the P wave.
B. Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs). The first, third, and fourth complexes are
all VPCs (uniform/unifocal). C. Bigeminy. Normal complexes alternating with VPCs. D.
Sustained VPCs. There are no normal complexes seen. E. Multiform (multifocal) VPCs.
The first two complexes are normal, while the rest are VPCs. F. Bundle branch block.
This appears similar to ventricular tachycardia (VTach) but P waves are present. G.
Atrial premature complexes. Note lack of baseline; the T wave immediately proceeds
into P waves. H. Atrial fibrillation in a 13-year-old German Shepherd dog. Note the
"shaky" baseline with no definitiveP waves.
140
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   141
tissues; however, as anaerobic metabolism progresses, blood flow into the capillaries
is increased as outflow is restricted, causing a volume shift of blood accumulating in
the venules. This local "pooling'" is responsible for the misdistribution of blood flow.
Fluid and protein then leaks into the surrounding tissues, which concentrates the blood
and increases viscosity on a microvascular level. Prolonged vasoconstriction results in
loss of blood flow to vital organs which were previously protected by arterial shunting.
The end result is catastrophic as this terminal phase of shock is reached.
Other cardiovascular conditions commonly seen are distal aortic thromboembolism
are usually feline and may or may not have a documented history of cardiomyopathy.
ATE occurs when a thrombus from the left atrium is released into circulation and
episode of hind-end paralysis or paresis and lack pulses. Hind extremities are more often
affected, but forelimbs can be affected as well. These patients are usually in pain, may
be vocal, and sometimes will present with respiratory distress (possibly due to pulmo-
nary thromboembolism).
Patient nursing care of the ATE patient includes pain management, oxygen adminis-
tration if needed, physical therapy. and supportive care. The administration of throm-
bolytic agents may influence nursing implications as these medications come with a
wide variety of potential complications which can make for a challenging case. In
extreme cases, the patient may undergo surgery to remove the thrombus, or amputa-
tion of a limb which has suffered necrosis.
Caval syndrome occurs when adult heartworms (Dirofiaria immifis) occlude the tri-
cuspid valve and cause right-sided heart failure due to the presence of worms in both
the right atria and ventricle. These patients are generally weak and have pale MMs with
a prolonged CRT due to reduced cardiac output. The jugular veins may also be distended
and the patient may be tachypneic (Tables 16.1 and 16.2).
Table 16.1Patient care quick reference guide
Parameter
Evaluation and diagnostics
Potential interventions
Mentation: dulled,
Check response to stimuli,
Oxygen administration
obtunded, stuperous,
heart rate, pulse quality.
(hypoxia), colloid
comatose or
obtain blood pressure or
administration and
unconscious
central venous pressure
pharmaceutical
(CVP), oxygen saturation,
intervention (hypotension),
and monitor urine output
urinary catheter placement
Heart: new murmur,
Check pulse quality and
Pharmaceutical
new arrhythmia,
synchronicity, perform
intervention, continuous
bradycardia or
diagnostic ECG, balance
ECG monitoring, adjust
tachycardia
fluid ins/outs (murmur)
fluid therapy, and further
diagnostics if warranted
(Continued)
Table 16.1 (continued)
Parameter
Evaluation and diagnostics
Potential interventions
Perfusion:
Check mentation,
 Oxygen administration,
hyperdynamic,
auscultate heart, obtain
colloid administration
bounding, strong
blood pressure, oxygen
(hypotension),
pulse quality; poor,
saturation, diagnostic ECG,
pharmaceutical
weak or thread
consider CvP or arterial
intervention, continuous
pulse quality; pulse
blood pressure (ABP) if
multiparameter monitoring;
deficits; prolonged
available
therapeutic
CRT; muddy, pale or
pericardiocentesis if
cyanotic MM
warranted
Respiratory pattern:
Auscultate lungs
Oxygen administration,
inspiratory or
bilaterally, check oxygen
pharmaceutical
expiratory dyspnea,
saturation, patient may
intervention, therapeutic
bradypnea,
require minimal handling to
thoracocentesis or
tachypnea,
prevent respiratory arrest
abdominocentesis if
orthopnea,
warranted
abdominal or
labored respirations
Hyperthermia: due
Check oxygen chamber
Consider alternative
to dyspnea-induced
temperature, confirm
oxygen delivery routes,
anxiety
oxygen delivery to patient,
apply ice packs to oxygen
evaluate fluid therapy
chamber, direct a
temperature and
circulating fan towards
discontinue the use of
patient if possible, offer
warmedIV fluids
water to patient if possible
Table 16.2
Cardiac auscultation points
Anatomic evaluation
Stethoscope location
Stethoscope location (feline)
(canine)
Tricuspid valve
Low right, third to
Right, fourth to fifth at
fourth intercostal space
costochondral junction
Pulmonary valve
Low left, third
Left, second to third
intercostal space
intercostal space
Mitral valve
Left, fifth at
Left, fifth to sixth
costochondral junction
costochondral junction
Aortic valve
High left, fourth
Left, second to third above
intercostal space
the pulmonic region
142
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   143
Chapter references and further reading
B. Brewer (2oo3) Echocardiography basics: echocardiographic findings in acquired heart
disease. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf for the Veterinary Hospital Staff
24(11): 781-789.
A. Campbell (2oo8) Pericardial effusion. International Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Symposium.
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(3): 169-179.
K. Glaze (1998b) Congenitalheart disease: part ll. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf
for the Veterinary Hospitaf Staff 19(5): 339-347.
A. Gottlieb (2oo4) Compassion for a cat with saddle thrombus. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(6): 430-432.
P.Plummer (2oo9)Cavalsyndrome and pulmonary arterialhypertension.Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(6): 16-21.
J.Romich (1998)You've gotta have heart.Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal for
the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(5): 331-336.
J. Rush (2oo8) Heart failure in dogs and cats. International Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Symposium.
R. Stepien (2003) Interpreting heart murmurs. Western Veterinary Conference.
L. Waddell (2008) Monitoring the cardiovascular compromised patient. International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
S. Ware (2oo1) Facilitating the management of heart failure patients. Wild West Veterinary
Conference.
Chapter 17
Regard for the
Respiratory Patient
The respiratory system overview
The respiratory system consists of the lungs and air passageways which lead to the
lungs. Several structures exist to modify the air en route to the alveoli of the lungs,
filtering, warming. and moistening it. The respiratory system is also involved in
vocalizing.
The upper respiratory tract consists of the nose, the paranasal sinuses, pharynx,
larynx, and trachea. The external nose is comprised of the nasal planum, nares, and
philtrum, while the internal nose is made up of the nasal septum and chonchae, or
leseu aul pue snbeudosa aui on aiiaes eio aul sioauuoo peul aemabessed e sl xuaseud
passage with the larynx. There are three divisions of the pharynx: the nasopharynx,
division. It extends from the caudal aspect of the internal nares, contains the hard
larynx contains the epiglottis, cartilages (thyroid, arytenoids, and cricoid), ventricular,
and vocal folds. The pharynx continues to the esophagus and the larynx continues to
the trachea. The trachea directs inhaled air from the upper airway to the lungs. It divides
into two portions at an area called the tracheal bifurcation, leading to the left and right
mainstem bronchi (Fig. 17.1).
The lower respiratory tract is housed in the thorax and contains the tracheal bifurca
tion and the lungs. The mainstem bronchi divide into smaller bronchi, which subdivide
further into the smallest air passageways called bronchioles. Gas exchange occurs in
the alveoli residing at the terminal end of these bronchioles. The caudal border of the
thorax is formed by a dome-shaped musculotendinous structure called the diaphragm.
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
145
146   Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.1 Ventral view of the thoracic cavity: lungs, trachea, and diaphragm.
Reprinted with permission from Adams, D. Canine Anatomy: A Systemic Study, Fourth
Edition. Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
lungs inflated. If this vacuum is lost, the lungs will be unable to inflate, resulting in
middle, caudal, and accessory) and two left lung lobes (cranial and caudal). The cranial
left lung lobe has a cranial and caudal portion.
Respiratory physiology involves ventilation and respiration. Inspiratory ventilation is
air movement into the lungs, while expiratory ventilation is moving the air out of the
the external intercostal muscles. The lungs move with the thoracic wall due to the
vacuum, and as the wall expands, the lungs also expand, allowing an influx of air.
Expiratory ventilation is attributed to abdominal and intercostal muscle action, forcing
the diaphragm cranially (Table 17.1).
There is a volume of air in the respiratory tract, which is nonfunctional in gas
airways-nasal passages, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. Physiological dead space is
the volume of the lung that does not eliminate carbon dioxide. In healthy animals, this
space.
Respiration is the gas exchange between oxygen and carbon dioxide. Internal respira-
tion occurs on a cellular level in the capillaries of the body's tissues while external
via diffusion and red blood cells remove the oxygen and carry it to the body tissues
(Fig. 17.2).
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   147
Table 17.1 Lung volumes
Total lung capacity
Maximum volume of air the lungs can hold
Vital capacity
Maximum volume of air that can be inspired and
expired
Tidal volume
Volume of air that is inspired and expired during
normal breathing
Functional residual capacity
The volume of air present in the lungs following
maximum expiration It is determined by the sum
ofresidualvolume and expiratoryreservevolume
Figure 17.2 The terminal branch of the airway including alveoli and vasculature.
Reprinted with permission from Adams, D. Canine Anatomy: A Systemic Study, Fourth
Edition. Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Ventilation is involuntary, regulated by a central controller located in the brain and
peripheral controllers in the lungs, thorax, and carotid bodies. The medulla is respon-
sible for the rate of respirations. Low carbon dioxide levels in blood decrease the rate
ofrespiration. Oxygencontentof blooddoes notcontrol respiratory rate.Chemoreceptors
lung which limit the expansion of lung lobes and respond to irritants (i.e., cough reflex).
Upper airway receptors function in the sneeze and cough reflex.
tory dyspnea may also be noted. Nasopharyngeal conditions include brachycephalic
syndrome, epistaxis, rhinitis, and sinusitis. Neoplastic tumors may also occur at the
mucosa of the nasal passages. The most commonly seen are nasal adenocarcinoma and
SCC (squamous cell carcinoma). Brachycephalic syndrome occurs in short-nosed breeds
such as pugs, bulldogs, Pekingese, Persian cats, and so on. Brachycephalic breeds tend
the arytenoids cartilages pouches out into the glottis), and a hypoplastic trachea where
the trachea is smaller in proportion to the dog's size. Each of these can lead to respira-
tory difficulties, particularly in episodes of stress or anxiety. It is important to recognize
that these breeds can easily become overheated, either in the environment or upon
148 Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.3 Patient with epistaxis.
Figure 17.4 Using a white towel or blanket can help monitor the bleeding.
breeds.
Epistaxis, or nosebleed, can have many causes; trauma, foreign bodies (foxtail, blade
of grass), coagulopathies (thrombocytopenia), neoplasia, and Ehrtichia (tick fever) are
some common causes. Treatment usually involves maintaining hemostasis in cases of
'inidiau ag aew uoeas 'aden lelln jo busyoed azneh buisn anoum jo ulm 'alis
and less movement will usually result in less irritation and dislodging of the clot (Figs.
17.3 and 17.4).
Rhinitis is an infection or inflammation of the nasal passages. It can be bacterial, viral,
fungal, or parasitic. Bacterial is usually secondary to a foreign body, or an oronasal
fistula resulting from an infected tooth root. Viral causes include the upper airway
disease complexes such as distemper, parainfluenza, adenovirus type 2 in the dog, and
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  149
rhinotracheitis, calici, and chlamydia in the cat. Fungal infections are seen most often
in the dolichocephalic breeds (long nose). The fungal spores colonize in the turbinates
or Cryptococcus. Lastly. parasitic infections can lead to rhinitis. Pneumonyssoides
caninum is a mite that can infect the dog's nasal and sinus passages. It is often an
overlooked cause of chronic sneezing and epistaxis in the dog. Sinusitis is an infection
or inflammation of the sinus cavities. It often accompanies rhinitis and can also be
bacterial, fungal, viral, parasitic, or allergic.
The pharynx is mostly skeletal muscle. The two most commonly seen problems con-
sis may have difficulty swallowing and may aspirate stomach contents, leading to
the pharynx. Common conditions affecting the larynx include laryngeal spasm, stenosis,
collapse, and laryngitis, which is an inflammation or infection of the larynx. Laryngeal
airway. Cats are particularly prone to this condition, especially when endotracheal
as well as topically applying a local anesthetic such as lidocaine. Laryngeal stenosis
collapse or paralysis ("Lar-Par") is a medical emergency if the animal is unable to
and subsequent airway obstruction occurs. Usually. the animal will be sedated and
intubated to establish a patent airway. Once respirations normalize, the animal may be
extubated and kept mildly sedated. Surgical correction may be required and is often
recommended.
stenosis can occur following trauma or infection or it may be hereditary. with trauma
toy breeds such as the Yorkshire terrier. Tracheal collapse causes upper airway obstruc
tion resulting in dyspnea, stress, and anxiety. These patients often display a classic
"goose honk" sound as they attempt to move air. Initial treatment usually involves
sedation and intubation in severe cases. Surgical correction may follow, where tracheal
Nursing observations of patients with upper airway disease consist of monitoring
with neck extension, is a clear sign of dyspnea. The patient is trying to open the airways
tion should be continuously assessed. The change in breathing pattern and effort will
be an initial indicator of dyspnea; however, if these signs are not detected, the patient's
mentation will dull as hypoxia ensues. It is imperative to prevent this by clinically moni-
toring the respiratory patient at all times. Any animal with the respiratory compromised
should be placed in a location where continuous monitoring can take place.
tachypneic or nervous, anxious, or painful. Any time a patient is unable to exchange
150Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.5  Lateral radiograph of tracheal stenosis in a Yorkshire terrier.
air, hyperthermia is a true risk. Temperatures should be frequently evaluated with
modifications in the environment to maintain euthermia. Circulating air fans can be
used, as well as placing ice packs in the kennel or allowing the pet to rest on a cool,
damp towel. if thermoregulation is not achieved, it is possible that further measures
may need to be taken. It may be necessary to sedate and intubate an anxious, hyper
thermic pet to control breathing and thermoregulate. Additionally. if upper airway
dyspnea persists, a tracheotomy may be indicated to allow adequate ventilation. Oxygen
therapy may or may not benefit the patient with upper airway disease, depending on
the nature or location of the problem. For instance, if a patient has laryngeal paralysis,
Lower respiratory diseases include those of the thorax, the lung parenchyma, and
and pleuritis (Fig. 17.6).
Pneumothorax occurs when there is air in the pleural space. This is usually due to
dnu anssi bunl paseasip uaum snoso ueo xeouiownaud ,snoaueiuods, e ing ewne
tures (bulla) and enters the pleural space via the lungs. A tension pneumothorax or
closed pneumothorax occurs when air enters the pleural space and is unable to exit.
This is the most deadly type of pneumothorax. The patient becomes "barrel chested'
there is an opening in the thoracic wall, providing air movement into and out of the
saua jie uaum xeouiownaud uado ue ui pasodxa ag aew anssi bunl aneds leanaid
into the pleural space during a pneumothorax, the natural vacuum is decreased or no
longer exists. Immediate treatment for pneumothorax involves thoracocentesis or chest
tube placement. In cases of an open pneumothorax, plastic wrap can be used to bandage
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   151
Figure 17.6 Lateral radiograph of a pneumothorax; note the "floating" heart.
Table 17.2 Clinical recognition of pneumothorax and pleural effusions
Clinical recognition of pneumothorax
Clinical recognition of pleural effusion
· Shallow, rapid respirations (tachypnea)
· Respiratory effort
· Dyspneic, open-mouth breathing
· Distended chest
· Diminished heart and lung sounds
· with or without cyanosis, pallor
· with or without "barrel chest"(tension
· Quiet lung sounds ventrally
pneumothorax)
· with or without lung tissue exposure
·Loud breath sounds dorsally
(open pneumothorax)
· Can be "spontaneous" but usually have
· with or without murmur, history of
a history of trauma
heart disease or trauma
· with or without ascites
·with or without jugular distension
A flail chest presents when two or more fractures occur on three or more ribs, causing
instability. The affected area of the chest moves in during inspiration and out during
as a result of vehicular trauma or bite wounds, especially when a larger animal has
attacked a smaller one in the thoracic region. External support can be implemented by
bandaging the chest or suturing tongue depressors to the site, stabilizing the fracture.
Surgery is typically performed 24 hours later unless the condition worsens. The patient
is to be placed flail side down until surgical correction is performed (Fig. 17.7).
Pleural effusion occurs when there is fluid buildup in the pleural space. This fluid can
be transudative, exudative, or can be of another type (i.e., chylous). Pleuritis, or inflam-
mation of the pleura, creates a friction sound upon lung auscultation. Pleuritis causes
152 Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.7  Lateral radiograph of a pleural effusion; note the classing "leafing' of the
lung.
a large amount of fluid production and subsequent respiratory impairment. In chronic
Bronchitis or bronchiolitis is an infection or inflammation of the bronchi. It can be
viral, bacterial, or allergic in origin and is a fairly common problem in the dog and cat.
Most cases start out as allergic and then a secondary bacterial infection occurs.
Bronchitis causes excess mucous production and a productive cough. Over time, the
small airways become thickened and the animal has decreased vital capacity.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (CoPD) is when chronic inflammation of the
expiration difficult, resulting in poor gas exchange.
Emphysema is often a result of chronic scarring (fibrosis) of the lung tissue. The lungs
expiration. Asthma or allergic bronchospasm is a common problem in the cat. wheezing
will be noted, along with a mixed inspiratory/expiratory dyspnea.
Pneumonia is an infection of the lungs and can be bacterial, fungal, or viral. The
alveolus becomes flooded with liquid and cellular debris such as white blood cells or
bacteria. Animals with pneumonia will have a productive cough. Some causes of pneu-
pulmonary edema and it can be difficult to distinguish the two. Acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS) is a severe form of pulmonary edema. It results from trauma,
shock, sepsis, or some other insult to the lung which alters the permeability of the
alveolar cells. Unfortunately, ARDS is associated with a high mortality rate (Table 17.3).
Thrombosis may occur in the lungs with some cardiac conditions as well as inflam-
matory conditions. Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) is when a blood clot in the lung
prevents a portion of the lung tissue from receiving blood, resulting in respiratory
distress and hypoxia. Severe thrombosis can ultimately lead to death. Aortic thrombo-
distal aorta and may accompany a PTE in some cases (Table 17.4).
Comprehensive Areas of Focus 
153
Table 17.3 Causes of pulmonary edema
Causes of pulmonary edema
Mechanism
Congestive heart failure (CHF)
 Inadequate cardiac function leading to altered
blood flow
Electrocution
The electrical shock alters the permeability of
the cells
Smoke inhalation
Smoke damages the cells, altering permeability
Heat stroke
Change in temperature alters permeability
Anaphylaxis (cats)
The lungs are the shock organ for cats
latrogenic
Fluid overload by veterinary personnel
Table 17.4Examples of ventilation-perfusion mismatch
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch (v/Q mismatch)
Example
The lung is ventilated but not perfused (oxygen
Pulmonary thromboembolism
present, but no blood delivery)
The lung is perfused but not ventilated (blood
Pneumothorax
delivery, but no oxygen)
Figure 17.8 Lateral radiographs of lung metastasis in a feline, Tommy.
The lung is also a common site for metastatic disease; however, lung neoplasia may
be primary. Cancers involving the thorax may affect the respiratory system of a patient
due to pleural effusion, lung consolidation, or the tumor size or location (Fig. 17.8).
Nursing implications of lower respiratory disease are similar to those of the upper
airway. Like upper airway disease, these patients will display orthopneic breathing.
increased respiratory effort, changes in pattern as dyspnea progresses, and loss of
mentation. Unlike many upper airway diseases, nasal oxygen cannulas may be beneficial
to the patient. Additionally, therapeutic thoracocentesis (or abdominocentesis in cases
 of ascites) may be palliative and potentially curative in cases such as pneumothorax
(Fig. 17.9).
154  Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.9 Palliative thoracocentesis in an 8-month-old kitten diagnosed with FIP at
2monthsofage.
Figure 17.10 Neck extension in a dyspneic patient.
Nursing observations and interventions of the patient suffering from respiratory
disease are an essential and potentially life-saving aspect of clinical care. The nursing
staff should anticipate intense monitoring, evaluating, and critical thinking of stages to
follow in the disease process.
Respiratory patients should be kept in an area where they are in constant supervision
tinuously) assessed. The patients' respiratory pattern, rate, and effort should always
be assessed along with frequent auscultation of lung sounds. Inadequate ventilation
can also lead to patient stress, thus exacerbating dyspnea. Respiratory patterns should
o aposida ue puaaaud oi buipuey ol loud paienieaa Aigipne pue passasse Allensia ag
stress-induced respiratory arrest. It should be recognized that cyanosis is one of the
(Figs. 17.10 and 17.11).
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  155
Figure 17.11 Lateral radiographs of patient in Fig. 17.10; cardiomegaly and pulmonary
edema.
Figure 17.12 Lateral radiograph of pleural effusion due to lymphoma.
Patients who suffer from pleural effusions tend to have decreased heart and lung
Traumatic injury to the respiratory system should be considered a life-threatening
emergency requiring immediate care. Thoracic trauma can result in pneumothorax,
respiratory distress (Figs. 17.12-17.14).
156   Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.13 Fluid removed by thoracocentesis.
Figure 17.14 Microscopic examination of sample.
should be assessed by skin turgor, balancing fluid input and output, and utilizing labora-
tory tests such as packed cell volume/total solids (Pcv/TS) and electrolytes.
Nebulization and chest physiotherapy may be indicated in some respiratory condi-
tions such as pneumonia. If the patients' status allows, slow, short walks will help clear
the airways of secretions as exercise promotes this natural process.
The first priority in a patient suffering from respiratory distress is administering
oxygen and ensuring that a patent airway and ventilation has been established. Some
cheal intubation, and manual ventilation to stabilize.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  157
Figure 17.15Administration of "flow-by" oxygen.
Oxygen delivery techniques
dyspneic patient is a high-risk patient and care should be taken to ensure comfort and
subsequent easing of respirations (Fig. 17.15).
Oxygen kennels and chambers are available for delivering oxygen. The downfall of
this method of delivery is that it restricts the technician from physically monitoring the
patient. As the kennel or chamber door opens, oxygen is released from the kennel and
 e sa       o si  
oftentimes take several minutes to fill to an acceptable level of oxygen.
sui uabaxo laallap oi pasn ag Aew (shello-i) shelloi ueuiagezila pue sysew uabaxo
allows for hands-on patient monitoring of the veterinary staff. Some patients undergo
stress while wearing the E-collar or having the mask in close proximity, so again, care
a means for the patients' carbon dioxide to be removed. An opening in the E-collar and
removing the rubber seal of a face mask will ensure the patient's exhaled carbon dioxide
is released from the devices and the patient will not be rebreathing the carbon dioxide
(Fig. 17.16). Alternatively, a "flow-by" technique may be used, delivering oxygen without
theuseofamask.
well tolerated by the dyspneic patient. The catheter is inserted into the nostril and
anins pue 'uabe siauisaue jeoidol e 'uesiagnl e buisn snuiues lepaw aui ol paoeid
(or staples). The oxygen tubing is then connected to the nasal catheter. Human oxygen
158Regard for the Respiratory Patient
Figure 17.16 An E-collar modified with plastic wrap to create an oxygen collar; note
the opening to ensure CO outlet.
Figure 17.17 Placement of nasal oxygen cannula.
cannulas may be used, but stabilizing the placement may prove to be challenging (Fig.
17.17).
Lastly, a tracheal catheter or tracheostomy tube may be placed in the event of upper
upper airway is not obstructed and the patient is severely dyspneic, sedation and endo-
tracheal tube placement with manual (or ventilator) respirations may be beneficial to
the patient (tracheal collapse, tracheal edema, pulmonary edema, etc.; Table 17.5).
Comprehensive Areas of Focus 
■159
Table 17.5 Lung auscultation reference and breath sounds
Lung auscultation reference
Four quadrant
Craniodorsal; caudodorsal; craniovental; and caudoventral
Left and right side evaluation
Breath sounds
Normal
Vesicular
Lung parenchyma; best heard on inspiration
Bronchial
Trachea and large bronchi; best heard on expiration
Adventitious
Dry or moist rales; note location (i.e., tracheal vs. pleural)
Crackles
Fluid, mucus, or thicken walls of small airways
Dry crackles:Solid material in bronchi or trachea
Moist crackles: air movement through fluid
Crepitant: fine crackles
Rhonchus
Dry, coarse rale in bronchial tubes
Grunt
Quick, sharp sound made when air is forced against (closed)
glottis
Friction
Abrasive sound synchronous with respiration; caused by
inflammation of serous surfaces in pleural cavity (ie., pleuritis)
Wheezes
High-pitched sound, usually upon expiration (i.e., bronchitis)
Dull/muffled
Collapse or consolidation (i.e, pneumothorax, hydrothorax)
Peristaltic
Sounds made by gastrointestinal (Gl) tract (i.e., diaphragmatic
hernia)
Chapter references and further reading
A. Breton (2oo9) Acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Veterinary
Technician the Compfete Journaf for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 3o(1o): 26-30.
C.Hedlund (2003a)Brachycephalic syndrome.Western Veterinary Conference.
C. Hedlund (2003b) Evaluation of laryngeal disease. Western Veterinary Conference.
C. Hedlund (2003c) Laryngeal paralysis. Western Veterinary Conference.
C. Hedlund (2003d) Tracheal collapse. Western Veterinary Conference.
B. Marcucci (2oo4a) Feline asthma: causes and diagnosis. Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(12): 807-813.
B. Marcucci (2oo4b) Feline asthma: treatment and prognosis. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospitat Staff 25(12): 820-826.
S. Marks (2003) Respiratory emergencies. Western Veterinary Conference.
E. Mazzaferro (2003) Respiratory system evaluation and monitoring. American Animal
Hospital Association Scientific Program.
M. Tefend (2004) Gussie: a Rottweiler with breathing problems. Veterinary Technician the
Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(12): 830-834.
Chapter 18
Grasping
Gastrointestinal
Nursing Care
Digestive system
The oral cavity contains the lips, teeth, gingiva, tongue, hard palate, and tonsils.
Swallowing begins with the movement of material (bolus) to the back of the mouth and
moves toward the pharynx. The pharynx functions in deglutition and serves as a
common pathway for food entering the digestive system as well as air entering the
lungs. Food then enters the cervical esophagus, which is a muscular tube that carries
food via peristalsis to the thoracic esophagus, terminating at the cardia of the stomach
(Fig. 18.1).
The stomach functions to store and mix ingesta with secretions, creating a smooth
are four regions of the stomach: the esophageal; the cardiac (entry): the fundus, which
is the true body of the stomach containing gastric glands; and the pylorus (exits). The
pylorus is a peristaltic pump that is able to pass the smaller contents to the small
intestine. The small intestine is the longest portion of the alimentary canal with two
types of motility, segmentation and peristalsis. Segmentation consists of short contrac-
tions, while peristalsis is a wave-like contraction. The small intestine consists of the
duodenum, the jejunum, and the ilium. The duodenoum is the first section of the bowel
and controls gastric emptying. The common bile duct, which delivers bile from the
gallbladder, and pancreatic duct (delivers enzymes) empty into the duodenum. The
jejunum is the longest portion of the small bowel and is freely moveable. The ileum is
the shortest portion and it terminates at the ileocecolic junction of the large intestine.
The large intestine consists of a cecum, colon, rectum, and anus. The segmental con-
to as peristalic contractions, and finally, filling of the cecum from the colon is termed
retrograde contractions. The cecum has no function, while the colon serves to remove
water from the stool. The colon has three portions: the ascending. transverse, and
The rectum terminates at the anus, a muscular sphincter (Fig. 18.2).
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
161
Cardiac gland
Esophageal-
region
region
Bile duct
,Pyloric sphincter
Pyloricgland
Major duodenal
region
papilla
Minor duodenal
papilla
Pancreatic
ducts
Proper gastric
gland region
Figure 18.1 Diagram of the stomach. Reproduced with permission from McCracken, T.
and Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentials, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Liver-
Stomach
Cut edge of
greateromentum-
-Spleen
Duodenum-
Coils of
jejunum
Urinary bladder -
Figure 18.2
Diagram of the abdominal cavity. Reproduced with permission from
McCracken, T. and Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentiais,
Revised Edition. Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
162
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   163
salivary glands, liver, gall bladder, and pancreas. The salivary glands produce amylase,
an enzyme that breaks down carbohydrates, and lipase, the enzyme that breaks
down fat. Saliva serves to lubricate the dry food, clean the coat while grooming. and
protect the teeth against decay. Salivation (ptyalism) is controlled by the nervous
system.
Liver and gall bladder
The liver is located directly caudal to the diaphragm. In most domestic species, the liver
artery, portal vein, and biliary ducts. The liver cells produce bile acids and bile pigments.
Bile acids are necessary for the digestion of fats. Bile pigments give the yellow color.
The gallbladder is usually located on the right aspect of the liver, nestled in between
neutralizes the acid pH of the ingesta. There are four enzymes secreted: trypsin (protein
digestion), amylase (carbohydrate digestion), lipase (fat digestion), and chymotrypsin
(protein digestion).
Oral cavity conditions consist of periodontal disease, dysphagia, ulcers, cancers,
foreign bodies, and many more. Periodontal disease is common in dogs and cats. A large
teeth with pulp exposure are a site for infection as well as pain since the pulp chamber
contains blood supply and nerves (Figs. 18.3-18.5)
Figure 18.3 Periodontal disease.
164  Grasping Gastrointestinal Nursing Care
Figure 18.4 Fractured and abscessed canine tooth.
Figure 18.5 Cervical line lesions in lower premolars and enamel defect of canine tooth.
Dysphagia, or difficulty masticating food and swallowing, is frequently associated with
the lungs. Oral ulcers are seen in uremic patients or those who have suffered chemical
burn or electrocution. Common cancers of the mouth include melanoma and squamous
cell carcinoma. Lastly, foreign bodies such as bones and plant material may cause
Common esophageal conditions include esophagitis, megaesophagus, and strictures.
se yns sanog uhiaio ol anp ag ueo pue snbeudosa aul jo uoewweui si sibeudosi
bones, gastric reflux, caustic substances such as chemicals, or Spirocerca fupi, an
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   165
Figure 18.6 Contrast study revealing megaesophagus.
esophageal parasite of the dog. Signs of esophagitis include ptyalism and difficulty
swallowing (Fig. 18.6).
aum pue 'aiosnw e si snbeudosa aul 'snbeudosa aul jo uoelp sl snoeudosaeba
dilated, it loses the ability to adequately move food boluses into the stomach. These
a stricture is formed around the esophagus by the right aortic arch and the area cranial
to the stricture becomes dilated. Megaesophagus can be acquired as seen with myas
ing of the esophagus, usually occurring as a result of scarring from esophagitis. Large
food particles areunable topass and regurgitation occurs.
Gastric conditions
Vomiting, or emesis, is a contraction of the abdominal wall to empty contents within
stomach involvement. Vomiting is controlled by receptors in the stomach and in the
brain. Gastritis is a condition in which inflammation of the stomach occurs. Lymphocytic
plasmacytic enteritis is a chronic food allergy disorder that is most often seen in cats.
Gastric ulcers may be primary or secondary and cause ulceration of the gastric
mucosa. Gastric ulcers can cause hematemesis,but even more severe, perforation of
the stomach. Gastric neoplasia can occur, with the most common being gastric lym-
vomiting and weight loss.
Pyloric outflow problems can occur such as pyloric hypertrophy, a thickening of the
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDv) is a life-threatening surgical emergency. The
stomach rotates, swells, and impedes circulation to the stomach and the caudal vena
cava. Symptoms include retching, pacing, panting, abdominal distension, and shock. If
left untreated, the symptoms will progress to end-stage shock and death (Tables 18.1
and 18.2, Figs. 18.11 and 18.12).
Figure 18.7 Gastric lavage in rodenticide toxicosis.
Figure 18.8 Rodenticide ingestion evidenced.
166
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   167
Figure 18.9 Material removed via lavage.
Figure 18.10 Rock foreign body.
Enteric: intestinal disorders
Diarrhea occurs when there is an excess of fluid in the stool. Small bowel diarrhea refers
bowel diarrhea, or colonic, is noted by frequent episodes of a small quantity diarrhea.
Often mucus and blood is present, along with tenesmus.
Enteritis is an infection or inflammation of the intestines. Many cases are viral such
as canine parvovirus and feline panleukopenia, but bacterial infections such as salmo-
nella and campylobacter can also occur. Additionally, protozoal infections such as
Coccidia and Giardia may result in enteritis. Toxicosis and immune-mediated diseases
can also cause enteritis (Figs. 18.13-18.15).
Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis or HGE is most common among small breed dogs, par
ticularly Boston terriers and poodles. Symptoms include passing frank bloody diarrhea;
168
Grasping Gastrointestinal Nursing Care
Table 18.1 GDV overview
Stomach expansion
· Rapid accumulation of air
· Malposition
· with or without volvulus
Stomach rotates 90-2700
· Distal esophagus/gastroesophageal junction torsion
clockwise
·Airis unable to escape
· Fundus of the stomach lies against the ventral
abdominal wall
·The pylorus moves dorsocranially to the left
·Body of stomach moves from left to right side of
abdomen
Stomach holds air and fluid
· Bacterial formation produces an increase in air
Spleen
Connected to the stomach by ligaments and vessels
· Becomes displaced
· May become torsed-secondary splenomegaly
Pressure causes blood flow
·Abdominal vena cava
obstruction
· Portal vein-hepatic ischemia
· Splenic vessels-splenic ischemia
Gastric necrosis
·Leads to grave prognosis
Gastric decompression and
· Improves venous return
shock treatment
· Improves cardiac output
· Improves blood pressure
· Shock =tissue hypoxia
Methods of decompression
· Orogastric intubation ("stomach tube")
· Gastrocentesis ("trocar")
Table 18.2
Signs and symptoms of GDV
Signs and symptoms of GDV
Common signalment
Panting
Deep-chested dogs
Pacing
Large, giant breeds
Uncomfortable
Can affects smaller breeds
Nonproductive retching
Males appear to be at greater risk
Ptyalism
Increased age = increased risk
Firm, distended abdomen
Highest risk →7-12 years
With or without pulse deficits
Generally over 2 years of age
Shock
Can affect any age
sometimes large clots will be noted. The patients typically have an elevated packed cell
volume (PCV) and low protein levels (Table 18.3).
Intussusception is a condition resulting in telescoping of the bowels, with ileum being
the common site of the event. This can occur in cases such as canine parvovirus, whip
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  169
Figure 18.11 GDV with foreign body (rock).
Figure 18.12Lateral radiograph of GDV.
Malabsorption is a condition in which nutrients are not absorbed through the intes
tinal mucosa. Diarrhea results from bacterial overgrowth. These animals are usually
does, literally "saw" through the intestines, perforating it. This can be materials such
as string or yarn.
Mesenteric torsion occurs when the connective tissue and mesenteric artery that
supplies the entire jejunum is twisted (torsed) and obstructs circulation. This is a life-
170■
 Grasping Gastrointestinal Nursing Care
Figure 18.13 Clostridium in fecal cytology.
Figure 18.14 Campylobacter in fecal cytology.
Colonic
Colitis, or inflammation or infection of the colon, results in frequent voiding of low
volume mucoid to bloody stools. Tenesmus is often present. Causes can include whip-
worm infection, stress, or diet change. Boxer colitis, however, is an immune-mediated
disease similar to Crohn's disease in humans.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   171
Figure 18.15 Giardia cysts in fecal cytology.
Table 18.3
3Types of diarrhea
Osmotic
Additional water pulled into Gl tract
Altered mucosal
Inflammatory, infectious, or infiltrative where water
permeability
(and nutrients) cannot pass through intestinal wall
Abnormal motility
Rapid movement of contents through Gl tract
Secretory
Cells of intestinal lining secrete more than they absorb
Pancreatic
Pancreatitis is an inflammation of the pancreas. This is a common disorder in the dog
and is becoming more frequently diagnosed in the cat. Symptoms range from gastro-
disseminated intravascular coagulation (Dlc), and death. A common cause of pancre-
atitis is the consumption of a high protein and high fat meal.
Pancreatic insufficiency is less common. Animals suffering from this condition will
tend to have soft, greasy, foul-smelling stools. They are often thin animals with poor
coats. German Shepherd Dogs (GSDs) are most commonly associated with this disease.
Hepatic
Hepatic conditions include hepatitis, portacaval shunt (PSS), hepatic lipidosis (HL), and
hepatobiliary disorders. PSS occurs when the portal vein has diverted blood away from
the liver, instead moving it to the vena cava. HL is seen in overweight cats who have
172  Grasping Gastrointestinal Nursing Care
Table 18.4 Clinical signs of liver disease and late-stage liver disease
Clinical signs of liver disease
Anorexia
Hiding
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Dehydration
Weight loss
Exercise intolerance
Behavioral changes
Failure to groom
Late-stage liver disease
Jaundice
Effusion
been subjected to a prolonged fasting (or anorexic) period, usually greater than 2-3
days. A sudden diet change in a previously healthy cat can also induce this disease. As
the animal fasts, the liver is literally replaced by fat that has been pulled in from adipose
tissue. Hepatobiliary disorders involve both the liver and the biliary tract (Table 18.4).
hygiene, monitoring of excretory losses, and balancing the losses. Excretory losses such
as vomit, diarrhea, and urine output should be quantitated and qualitated with a descrip-
tion recorded in the record. Patients suffering from diarrhea should have frequent walks
(dog) and fresh litter boxes available for cats. Patients who are eating yet not producing
bowel movements should be monitored closely with potential interventions of a diet
change or enema administration.
Patients should always be clean of feces, vomit, urine, and so on. If a patient suffers
skin injury. Protective ointments may be applied once the skin is clean and dry. Areas
soiled by vomit such as the muzzle or forelimbs require cleaning. A "bedside" bath can
Other interventions include monitoring electrolyte disturbances, renal function,
cardiac arrhythmias (i.e., GDv), DlC (i.e., pancreatitis), or signs of bacterial translocation
sures would be taken to prevent bacterial translocation, but veterinary personnel
should always anticipate this possibility.
Patients with liver disease may only become clinical once the liver reserve capacity
has become exhausted. Clinical signs of liver disease may range from vomiting to jaun-
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   173
disease is present, all major organ systems require clinical monitoring as multiple organ
failure is a possible sequela. Fluid balances, respiratory analysis, mentation, and cardio
Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base status should be monitored, as well as signs of bleeding.
ascites, and cerebral edema.
Chapter references and further reading
J. Grady (2008) Acute abdominal conditions. International Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care Symposium.
J. Hoskins, et al. (2oo5) Liver disease in dogs and cats. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 370-377.
J. Kristel (20o8) Options for treating a fractured tooth. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(2): 92-99.
C. Lecoindre (2006) Flexible Gl endoscopy in cats. The National Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journaf Fall: 4O-45.
E. Mazzaferro (2003) Pre- and post-op management of gastric dilatation-volvulus. American
Animal Hospital Association Scientific Program.
Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(1): 34-39.
C.Norkus,H.Juda (20o5) Gastric dilatation-volvulus.Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(4): 269-280.
J. Weese (2oo8) Beneficial bacteria: a primer on probiotics and Gl health. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(6):332-333.
A. Wortinger (2oo5) Canine pancreatitis. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journal Spring: 37-41.
A. Wortinger (20o9) Dealing with diarrhea woes. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(6): 22-28.
Chapter 19
Rendering
Renal Care
The excretory system
Overview of anatomy and physiology
There are four divisions of the urinary system: the kidneys, ureter, urinary bladder, and
urethra (Fig. 19.1). The ultimate function of the kidney is to clean the blood delivered to
it of toxic metabolites, help maintain blood pressure by wasting or conserving water
near the spine and are generally easily palpable. In most species, the right kidney is
placed cranially and the left kidney is placed caudally. The kidney is divided into three
parts: the cortex, medulla, and the pelvis. The nephron is the basic structural and func-
portion brings blood to and from the kidney via the glomerulus while the filtration
portion filters the plasma, adding or removing water, electrolytes, and toxins from the
plasma.
The ureters are structures of tubular smooth muscle that carry the filtrate, or urine,
the trigone region. The urinary bladder is a sac-like structure of smooth muscle that
has the ability to expand as it becomes filled, then contract to a small size to expel the
urine. When empty, the bladder is almost completely in the pelvic cavity.
The urethra is the duct that carries the urine from the bladder to the outside of the
body. It is comprised of both smooth and skeletal muscle. The urethra of the male is
much longer and narrower than the female, which is why male cats and dogs become
obstructed by uroliths more often than females.
Uropoieses is the formation of urine and involves three steps: filtration, reabsorption,
and secretion. As blood enters the glomerulus, water, salt, glucose, electrolytes, and
amino acids move into the Bowman's capsule and then become what is known as "glo-
merular filtrate." The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the rate at which urine is
formed. The GFR is caused by blood pressure. With an increased GFR, there is an
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
175
176  Rendering Renal Care
CAUDALVENACAVA
ABDOMINALAORTA
Figure 19.1 Kidneys, ureters, and bladder with surrounding vasculature. Reprinted with
Publishing, 2004.
increase in pressure, which may be due to overhydration, vasoconstriction, or sodium
retention, for example. A decreased GFRis due to decreased pressure, and may be seen
in cases of dehydration, vasodilation, or hemorrhage.
Reabsorption occurs in the proximal convoluted tubules and the loop of Henle. Water,
bicarbonate, glucose, amino acids, and electrolytes are reabsorbed from the glomerular
filtrate into the peritubular capillaries. During secretion, urea is converted to ammonia,
while hydrogen conversion depends on the body's needs. Potassium and organic com-
pounds such as medications or toxins are then transported to the distal convoluted
tubules (Fig. 19.2).
Hormonal regulation also influences the urinary system. The antidiuretic hormone
(ADH),or vasopressin,regulates the reabsorption of water within the kidney (an increase
in ADH will cause an increase in water reabsorption in the kidney). Aldosterone is a
hormone that stimulates sodium reabsorption in the kidney. An increase in sodium leads
to water retention and increased water retention leads to increased blood pressure. It
sodium and blood pressure is thus dependent on hormone regulation. Micturition, or
voiding of the bladder, is under the influence of neurological controls. There are two
Comprehensive Areas of Focus
177
Blood pressure
Baroreceptors
 Sympathetic
Kidney
NS activity
Filtrate formed
Renin release
Angiotensin II
Sodium
reabsorption from
Aldosteronerelease
kidneys
from adrenal cortex
Water
ADH release from
reabsorption from
posterior pituitary
kidneys
Vasoconstriction
Blood volume
Blood pressure
Figure 19.2
Renin-angiotensis system diagram. NS, nervous system. Reprinted with
permission from Akers, M. and Denbow, M. e. wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
valves located at the top of the urethra: the internal smooth muscle sphincter, which
is involuntary, and the external sphincter, which is voluntary.
Renal injury occurs in three ways: prerenal, which occurs before filtration, renal, and
postrenal, involving the urinary tract. Prerenal includes poor renal blood flow conditions
such as dehydration, shock, or low blood volume. Renal conditions involve the kidneys
in either acute or chronic failure. Acute renal failure (ARF) symptoms include oliguria
or anuria, enlarged kidneys, and a rapid decline in renal function. ARF can be caused
by toxins, heatstroke, diabetes mellitus (DM), and other metabolic diseases. Chronic
renal failure (CRF) is seen in elderly, dehydrated animals. They often have a history of
weight loss, excessive water drinking, and urination. Animals with CRF will produce large
volumes of urine and have small kidneys, as opposed to ARF. The cause of CRF can be
unknown, due to a kidney infection or from chronic toxicity to the kidney. Nephritis
is a degenerative condition of the nephrons, which is a common cause of CRF. Low
protein diets are recommended for patients with renal injury. as this reduces the work-
load of the kidneys. Anemia may also be seen as the kidneys produce the hormone
erythropoietin.
Postrenal injury occurs as a result of lower urinary tract perforation or obstruction.
Urinary tract obstruction, or UTO, occurs when small crystals form in the urine, creating
calculi or uroliths that prevent the outflow of urine from the bladder. The obstruction
178Rendering Renal Care
Figures 19.3 Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiograph views of enlarged kidney and
bladder in a male cat with UTO.
can occur in the bladder or urethra, although kidney stones may result in an obstructed
ureter. when the urethra is obstructed, the bladder continues to enlarge due to urine
can succumb to severe metabolic disturbances such as hyperkalemia. Symptoms may
and frequent episodes of scant urine. Males are most commonly affected by urinary
obstructions due to the narrow urethra when compared to the female urethra. Immediate
treatment establishing a patent urine outflow is imperative to prevent toxic buildup in
the body and bladder rupture (Figs. 19.3-19.5)
Other urinary conditions include glomerular nephritis, which is an immune-mediated
fluid-filled cysts occupy the kidney. Hydronephrosis is a condition in which the renal
pelvis is stretched and distended with fluid (urine) and eventually the tissue becomes
fibrosed.
Urogenital conditions
Dystocia is one of the most common emergencies of the reproductive system (Figs. 19.6
  i  (      a  
size and position, uterine inertia, exhaustion, and premature placental separation in
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   179
Figure 19.4 Lateral radiograph of nephrolith, ureterlith, and uroliths.
Figure 19.5 Bladder palpation technique in a cat.
Figure 19.6Lateral radiograph.
addition to metabolic disturbances. History will usually include prolonged laboring
petanceor vomiting.
A pyometra is a large, purulent uterus. It is very common in the dog, especially
the older female. There are two classifications for pyometra, open and closed. In an
open pyometra, the cervix is open and able to drain, creating a foul-smelling bloody
180 Rendering Renal Care
Figure 19.7Venrodorsal view of dystocia in a Pomeranian dog
discharge, usually postestrous cycle. In a closed pyometra, the cervix is closed, creating
a very large, toxic uterus. Symptoms for both classifications include lethargy, vomiting,
leukocytosis (seen in early-to-middle-stage pyometra), or leukopenia (seen in late stage,
usually due to sepsis); an open pyometra will have a discharge. Radiographs will show
an enlarged uterus (Fig. 19.8).
Uterine prolapse occurs when the uterine is expelled out of the body through the
vagina. It can often accompany dystocia. Clinical signs include the presence of the
uterus, usually with a history of recent parturition.
Nursing interventions
Patients with renal compromise require astute monitoring of fluid balances. Fluid bal-
ances primarily include quantitating fluid therapy delivery and urine output. If a chest
tube or peritoneal dialysis tube is in place, the fluid obtained from the chest tube should
be included, as well as the fluid administered and aspirated from peritoneal dialysis.
Any fluid losses from vomiting or diarrhea should also be calculated. Patients should
also be weighed, at minimum every 12 hours. In severe cases, monitoring weight may
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   181
Figure 19.8Pyometra.
Figure 19.9Uremic ulcers in an azotemic dog.
excess fluid, resulting in edema of the limbs and fluid accumulation in body cavities.
indwelling urinary catheter to aid in accurate balancing. Patients at bare minimum
should produce 1-2mL of urine per pound per hour. Patients with urine output below
this rate should be assessed for additional therapy. Diuretics or medications to dilate
the renal arteries, promoting blood flow to the kidney, may be warranted. Body weight
assessment and fluid balance intervals may need to be increased. The patient with renal
failure should also be assessed for mental status as multiple organ dysfunction can
quickly ensue as the kidneys further deteriorate. The patient should also be assessed
for oral ulceration (uremic ulcers) and frequent oral rinses should be scheduled to aid
in oral health. A typical renal diet is low in protein to reduce the workload of the kidneys
(Figs. 19.9-19.11).
Figure 19.10 Neck ventroflexion in a hypokalemic cat.
B
Figure 19.11 Bladder study. A. Ventrodorsal view of a pneumocystogram (negative
contrast study). B. Lateral view of a double-contrast cystogram. C. Ventrodorsal view of
double-contrast cystogram. These studies are useful in identification of masses, calculi,
orrupture.
182
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  183
Chapter references and further reading
of Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Summer: 43-48.
G. Grauer (2003a) Preventing acute renal failure. American Animal Hospital Association
ScientificProgram.
G. Grauer (2oo3b) Management of complications of feline chronic renal failure. American
Animal Hospital Association Scientific Program.
M. Kerl (2008) Renal failure in cats: new concepts. International Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Symposium.
I. Lane (2003a) Renal failure in cats I and Il. Western Veterinary Conference.
1. Lane (2003b) Upper tract uroliths in cats. Western Veterinary Conference.
J. Lulich (2003) Managing reversible renal failure I and ll. Western Veterinary Conference.
P.Matthews (2005)A dog with transitional cell carcinoma.Veterinary Technician the
Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(5): 220-221.
T. Rieser (2003a) Canine and feline urethral obstructions. Western Veterinary Conference.
T. Rieser (2003b) Acute renal failure. Western Veterinary Conference.
T. Rieser (2oo8) Renal emergencies: diagnosis and treatment. International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium.
S. Ross (2oo3) Renal and ureteral urolithiasis. American Animal Hospital Association
Scientific Program.
K. Stafford (2oo4) Enhanced radiographic studies. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(6): 384-393.
Chapter 20
Endocrine Nursing
Encounters
The endocrine system
Hormones are control chemicals that are produced, stored, and released by specialized
glands in the body and have a specific effect on certain target tissues. The endocrine
with the nervous system. There are 13 endocrine glands in the mammal.
The pituitary. or "master gland," is located in the base of the brain and has three
divisions: the anterior, intermediate, and posterior lobes. The anterior lobe produces
growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone
(LH). The intermediate lobe produces melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) and the
posterior lobe produces oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH), in addition to acting
The thyroid glands are two glands located in the neck region, just caudal to the larynx.
They produce triiodothyronine (Ts), thyroxin (T4), and calcitonin, and store iodine.
Triiodothyronine targets most tissues and is necessary for the proper function of the
nervous and muscular systems. Triiodothyronine also influences protein synthesis and
prevent excess calcium by removing the excess calcium out of the serum, preventing
gastrointestinal absorption of calcium and excreting excess calcium via renal tubules.
The parathyroid is located near the thyroid gland and produces the hormone para-
thormone. Parathormone regulates calcium and phosphorus levels and targets the
bone, kidney, and intestines. It releases calcium from the bones, promotes the absorp-
tion of calcium from the gastrointestinal system, and promotes the absorption of
calcium while preventing phosphorus absorption in the renal tubules. All of these
functions together increase serum calcium levels, having the exact opposite effect of
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
185
186  Endocrine Nursing Encounters
inextracellularfluid.
sinogen. Gastrin also stimulates the pancreas to increase insulin production and the
            
has the opportunity to be broken down. The hormone cholecystokinin stimulates the
gallbladder to release bile into the duodenum. The pancreas contains the islets of
Langerhans, which are a small cluster of cells that release the hormones glucagon and
insulin.
Glucogon stimulates the formationof glucose by converting liver glycogen to glucose.
It prevents the insulin from lowering the blood sugar too low, thus preventing hypogly-
cemia. Insulin converts glucose to glycogen, lowering the blood glucose levels.
The adrenal glands are a pair of glands located just cranial to each kidney. There are
called the adrenal cortex. The adrenal medulla is a true endocrine gland, but is also
considered part of the nervous system. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are the hor-
mones produced in the adrenal medulla. Epinephrine stimulates adrenaline, or a sym-
pathetic response. Norepinephrine causes vasoconstriction, increasing blood pressure.
Both of these hormones target the heart, vessels, and most other tissues. The adrenal
and metabolize fat and protein. Mineralocorticoids are also found in the adrenal cortex
Aldosterone targets the kidney and stimulates water and sodium retention. Sex hor-
also produce two hormones, renin and erythropoietin. Renin causes an increased blood
pressure by the action of the adrenal cortex, and erythropoietin is the hormone that
stimulates red blood cell production.
terone; the testes, which produce testosterone; the thymus, which stimulates immunity
in the young; the pineal gland, which produces melatonin and regulates gonadotropins;
and lastly, the placenta, which produces hormones that maintain pregnancy in some
species (Fig. 20.1).
Endocrine diseases are classified as "hyper" or "hypo," either too much production
of a hormone or not enough production. Hormones need to bind to a receptor to func
tion, therefore occasionally there is adequate hormone but the receptor is not function
ing (Fig. 20.2).
Pineal gland
Adrenalgla
Kidney
Ovary
Placenta (female)
Hypophysiscerebri
(Pituitary gland)
 Parathyroid glands
Thyroid gland
PancreasSmall
Testis (male)
Stomach
intestint
Figure 2o.1 Location of major endocrine organs. Reprinted with permission from
McCracken, T.and Kainer. R. Color Atlas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentials,
Revised Edition. Wiley-Blackwell, 2o09
Figure 2o.2 Hyperadrenocorcism in a Tibetan terrier.
187
188  Endocrine Nursing Encounters
Hypoadrenocorticism or hypoadrenocortisolism (Addison's disease) can cause low
blood pressure due to hyperkalemia, anorexia, and muscle weakness. Symptoms
reported by owners are usually episodes of intermittent anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea.
hyperkalemia, leading to bradycardia and shock.
Common thyroid gland disorders include hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.
lethargy. skin, and hair coat abnormalities such as rough, brittle hair and thick, heavy
skin. Hyperthyroidism primarily affects cats and is relatively rare in dogs but can occur
tability, and the pet may be hyperactive.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) affects both dogs and cats, among other species. A lack of
 insulin production by the pancreas causes blood glucose levels to elevate. Signs include
weight loss, polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia. Vomiting and lethargy may also
           
The patients may suffer from anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, severe dehydration, and
critical, often presenting comatose or near comatose and require medical management
to correct the metabolic abnormalities.
Diabetes insipidus is caused by a lack of ADH, and excessive loss of fluid coupled with
amounts of water are excreted in the urine, causing a decreased urine specific gravity.
Since endocrine disorders can be due to many aspects of the body, such as adrenal,
and laboratory values should be assessed, as well as implementing applied patient care
gression (Tables 20.1 and 20.2).
Table 2o.1Endocrine disorders and symptoms
Condition
Commonly associated clinical symptoms
Adrenal
Hypoadrenocorticism
Weight loss, anorexia, weakness, lethargy, collapse,
(Addison's disease)
muscle fasciculations, intermittent vomiting, diarrhea,
melena or hematochezia, polyuria, polydipsia.
Addisonian crisis: hypovolemic shock, bradycardia
Hyperadrenocorticism
Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, bilateral symmetrical
(Cushing's disease)
alopecia, thin skin, hyperpigmentation of skin, pendulous
abdominal distension
Pheochromocytoma
Tachycardia, tachypnea, severe hypertension (retinal
detachment, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperemic skin, etc.),
shock
Comprehensive Areas of Focus 
■189
Table 20.1 (Continved)
Condition
Commonly associated clinical symptoms
Pancreatic
DM
Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, weight loss, cataract
formation, lethargy, muscle atrophy
DKA
Anorexia, vomiting, acetone odor of breath, depressed,
obtunded or comatose, icterus
Insulinoma
Weakness, ataxia, seizures, muscle fasciculations,
polyphagia
Thyroid
Myxedema coma
Bradycardia, hypothermia, thickened skin, nonpitting
edema, decreased level of consciousness (LoC),
hypoventilation
Thyroid storm
Severe hyperthermia, cardiac arrhythmias, vomiting,
stupor, coma
Parathyroid
Hypoparathyroidism
Aggression, facial rubbing, panting, nervousness, muscle
fasciculations, tetany, generalized, seizures, weakness,
lethargy and anorexia
Hyperparathyroidism
Polyuria, polydipsia, dysuria, pollakiuria, hematuria,
anorexia, vomiting, constipation
Table 20.2 Splenic conditions
Splenic torsion
Associated with gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV)
Splenomegaly
Inflammatory, hyperplastic, congestive, infiltrative
Trauma
Blunt or penetrating
Splenic masses
Neoplastic or benign
Chapter references and further reading
E. Behrend (2oo3) Diabetes insipidus and other causes of polyuria/polydipsia. Western
Veterinary Conference.
A. Breton (2o05) The spleen anatomy and common complications. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(8): 554-564.
D. Elliot (2Oo5) Feline diabetes mellitus. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journaf Fall: 36-41.
S.Krick (2002) Understanding hypothyroidism. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journal
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 23(10): 634-636.
S. Krick (2003a) Understanding Cushing's disease in dogs. Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(1): 40-42.
S. Krick (2oo3b) Understanding diabetes mellitus. Veterinary Technician the Compiete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(2): 123-127.
T. Rieser (2003) Initial treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis. Western Veterinary Conference.
190Endocrine Nursing Encounters
M. Schaer (2003) Endocrine emergencies. Western Veterinary Conference.
B. Tabor (2oo8) Understanding and treating diabetic ketoacidosis. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(4): 227-233.
L. williams, R. Bagely (1998) Diagnosing and managing canine hyperadrenocorticism.
47-56.
Chapter 21
Nursing Care of
the Neurological
Patient
Nervous system
The nervous system is a communication network with three basic functions of sensing.
integrating, and motor. The sensory portion of the nervous system detects change in
The motor response commands muscles to move or for glands to respond by producing
secretions.
There are two types of cells in the nervous system: glial cells (nonneuronal), which
impulses. Afferent nerves are those that conduct impulses toward the central nervous
21.2).
The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord. The meninges cover the brain and
spinal cord and are made up of three layers: the pia mater (inner layer), the arachnoid
(middle layer), and the dura mater (outer layer). Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) circulates
between the layers of the meninges and cushions the brain as well as regulating the
diencephalons, and the brain stem. The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is
considered the highest center, the portion of conscious thought, and perception of
diencephalon is made up of the thalamus, hypothalamus, and pituitary. While the thala
mus functions in sensory impulses and consciousness, the hypothalamus is a commu-
nication center for both the nervous system and the endocrine system. The pituitary is
often referred to as "the master gland," as it is involved with hormones, temperature
to the spinal cord and is made up of the medulla oblongata, the pons, and the midbrain.
Many of the cranial nerves originate in the brain stem and autonomic control of the
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
191
Dendrites
Mitochondria
Golgi Apparatus
Telodendria
Nucleus
Node of
Schwann Ranvier
Cell
Collatera
AxonHillox
Axon
Terminal Bouton
(Synaptic Terminal)
Figure 21.1 Diagram of a typical neuron. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and
Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animais. Wiley-Blackwell, 2o08.
Epidural space
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
Gray matter -
Figure 21.2
Meningeal layers. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and Denbow,
M.Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals.wiley-Blackwell,2o08.
Central Nervous System (CNS)
Peripheral Nervous System (CNS)
●Brain
+Cranial Nerves
+ Spinal Cord
+Spinal Nerves
Sensory (Afferent) Division)
Motor (Afferent) Division)
+ Somatic and visceral
Motor nerve fibers
sensory fibers
+Spinal Cord
Autonomic Nervous System
Somatic Nervous System
● Involuntary nerve fibers
Voluntary(somatic) nerve
fibers
Parasympathetic Division
Sympathetic Division
+ Anabolic
+ Fight or Flight
Figure 21.3 CNS and PNS organization. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and
Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animais. wiley-Blackwell, 2o08.
192
Comprehensive Areas of Focus
193
Table 21.1 Cranial nerves
Cranial nerve
Name
Function
1
Olfactory
Sensory neurons for smell
Ⅱ1
Optic
Sensory neurons for sight
Oculomotor
Motor nerve for most of the muscles of
theeye
IV
Trochlear
Motor nerve that supplies the dorsal
oblique muscle of the eye
V
Trigeminal
Mixed nerves; sensory: eye and face;
motor: mastication
VI
Abducens
Motor nerve that supplies the retractor
and lateral rectus muscles of the eye
VII
Facial
Mixed nerves; sensory: cranial 2/3 for
taste; motor: facial expressions and
muscles of the ear
VII
Acoustic
Sensory nerves for hearing and
equilibrium (vestibular dz)
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Mixed nerves; sensory: pharynx and
caudal 1/3 of the tongue for taste; motor:
muscles of the pharynx (swallowing)
X
Vagus
Mixed nerves; sensory: pharynx and
larynx; motor: heart, lungs and muscles
of the larynx. The vagus nerve is the
longest cranial nerve; it runs throughout
the thorax and the abdomen.
XI
Spinal accessory
Motor nerve that supplies the muscles of
 the shoulder and neck
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor nerve that controls the muscles of
the tongue
tors inform the CNS of stimuli and then motor neurons travel from the CNS to the
muscles and glands, which ultimately take action or respond to the stimuli. The PNS is
made up 12 pairs of cranial nerves, which originate in the brain, and 31 spinal nerves,
which originate in the spinal cord. Unlike the cranial nerves, all of the spinal nerves are
    sau  e s     
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is made up of motor and sensory nerves and
has automatic functions. The ANS divides into two separate portions, the sympathetic
endings of the sympathetic nervous system release epinephrine, which results in physi-
ological changes of an increased heart rate, blood pressure and respiration, bron-
chodilation and mydriasis, and finally, slowing of gastrointestinal (Gl) activity. The
parasympathetic nervous system is one of cholinergic affects and controls the normal
194
Nursing Care of the Neurological Patient
Higher brain functions
Memory, learning, integrating sensory information
Sensory
Brain motor center
Processing in the
(Conscious and
brain
subconscious)
Sensory pathwa
Somatic nervous
Autonomic nervous
system
system
 Somatic sensory
Visceral effectors
receptors
Skeletal mu scle
Smooth muscle,
cardiac muscle, glands
Figure 21.4 Integration of somatic and atonomic nervous systems. Reprinted with
permission from Akers, M. and Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic
Animais. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
homeostatic mechanisms of the body. Parasympathetic nerve fibers release acetylcho-
parasympathetic response results in decreased heart rate, respirations, Gl activity, and
anal sphincter tone while increasing respiratory and salivary secretions, as well as
miosis.
The somatic nervous system is one of conscious, voluntary functions. It is made up
of motor and sensory nerves. Communication occurs through the actions of the sodium-
potassium pump. Sodium is constantly being moved out of the cell, while potassium is
brought back in to the cell. This process is always active, even during the resting phase
open, allowing the ions to flow into the cell. This creates a positive electrical charge.
During repolarization, the sodium channels close while potassium channels open.
Potassium is brought back into the cell while sodium is forced out, creating a negatively
must be strong enough to cause complete depolarization. If the stimulus is not strong
enough (threshold not met), the active pump would just move the small number of
sodium ions back out of the cell. If more channels open and more sodium ions enter
nothing" principle in that the neuron either depolarizes to complete maximum, or it
refractory phase occurs when the cells cannot respond to new stimuli because they are
in the process of repolarizing. Saltatory conduction is a rapid "leaping" conduction that
occurs because the myelin sheath has a protective barrier that does not allow sodium
within. In this type of nervous tissue conduction, the depolarization wave will occur in
Comprehensive Areas of Focus
195
Table 21.2 Synapse function
Presynaptic neuron
Releases a chemical to stimulate the next nerve cell
Neurotransmitter
Chemical transmitted between nerve cells
Excitatory
Causes an influx of sodium, causing a reach in threshold
(depolarization)
Inhibitory
Keeps the cell from reaching threshold (depolarization)by
bringing chloride into the cell
Postsynaptic neuron
Receives the neurotransmitter
Synaptic end
Found on the axon of the presynaptic neuron; it contains
mitochondria for the process
Receptors
Specific areas on the postsynaptic membrane that will
allow certain transmitters to bind
 Spinal
cord
Promarymotor
cortex
Hypothalamus
Autonomic
 ganglia
Skeletal muscle
Visceral effectors
A
B
Figure 21.5 Organization of (A) somatic and (B) autonomic nervous systems.
Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of
Domestic Animais. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
the nodes of Ranvier, skipping from one node of Ranvier to the next, and continuing on
with the wave becoming accelerated, making transmission very rapid (Table 21.2, Fig.
21.5).
Diseases of the nervous system can be central (CNS), peripheral (PNS), or both. A
very common CNS disorder is a seizure. Seizures are transient disturbances of brain
function. They have a sudden onset of convulsions and then the seizure ceases spon-
taneously. There are several classifications and causes of seizure activity (Table 21.3).
Neoplastic brain tumors can occur in many locations of the brain. They may be benign
or malignant. Meningioma is a benign growth of the meninges. The growth often places
o sisaieaed se yons suois snoas sasnes pue paoo leuids pue uieag aun uo aanssaid
blindness. Encephalitis occurs when there is infection of the brain; it can be viral, fungal,
or bacterial in nature. Symptoms of encephalitis include nervous irritation, muscle
196
■
 Nursing Care of the Neurological Patient
Table 21.3 Seizures
Type
Description
Grand mal
Generalized seizure; cerebral in origin. There are no localizing
signs; the animal loses consciousness, generalized muscle
activity, ptyalism, chewing, opisthotonos, paddling, and
urination and defecation.
Petit mal
A mild and brief generalized seizure. Less violent than grand
mal
Focal
Partial seizure; a seizure restricted to a focal area of the
brain and signs will correspond to the affected area.
Localized region: tremors in one limb, "bubble gum" chewing,
fly biting, behavioral changes, and episodes of blindness.
Tonic-clonic
Alternating from rigidity (tonic) to jerking movements (clonic)
Cluster seizures
Frequent episodes of seizure activity
Status epilepticus
Sustained seizure; these are medical emergencies as body
temperatures can elevate to fatal
Causes
Metabolic causes
Hypoglycemia (insulinoma)
Hypocalcemia (eclampsia)
Hypomagnesemia
Toxins (rodenticides, insecticides, mycotoxins, scorpion
envenomation)
Hypoxia (asphyxiation)
Physical causes
Tumors (brain tumor, cyst on the brain)
Ischemia (CVA,aneurysm)
Idiopathic epilepsy
A seizure disorder of unknown origin. It is a heritable disorder
in many breeds. Usually epileptics will have their first seizure
before the age of 4.
tremors, convulsions, weakness, paralysis, and coma or death. Canine distemper virus
cephalitis/myelitis (GME), and Pug Dog encephalitis (PDE), which is seen in young Pugs,
are all encephalitides. Metabolic disorders such as hypoglycemia can also result in
seizure activity. Hepatic encephalitis occurs in states of severe liver disease where
can occur in conditions such as portosystemic shunt (PsS), hepatitis, and hepatic lipi-
tremors, hypermetric gait, ataxia, nystagmus, and menace deficits. In pure cerebellar
disease, mentation is normal. The causes can be congenital, acute, infectious, degenera-
in kittens born to a cat infected with panleukopenia. Acute injuries such as cerebral
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  197
vascular accident (CvA) or trauma and infectious agents like feline infectious peritonitis
(FIP) or toxoplasmosis can also lead to cerebellar hypoplasia.
Spinal cord diseases can occur due to trauma, such as fracture, Schiff-Sherrington
syndrome results from a lesion between C3 and T2, usually due to trauma. The result
is front-end extensor rigidity while the hind end of the animal is paretic. These animals
are typically in pain and treatment will be based on the nature of the lesion. IVDD occurs
when the cartilaginous disk(s) between the vertebras become displaced. This condition
extrusion, protrusion, or herniation of disk material. Fibrocartilagenous embolism (FCE)
occurs when intervertebral disk material has been extruded and forced into the menin-
fungi, chemical, or metastatic malignant cells. Signs of meningitis include fever, hyper-
can be long term while the underlying cause is treated. Cervical spondylomyelopathy.
also known as "wobbler syndrome," occurs with anatomical abnormalities which result
in spinal cord compression. This condition can be hereditary and is seen more frequently
in Great Danes, Dobermans, and Rottweilers. Symptoms of Wobbler syndrome include
cervical neck pain, uncoordinated gait, carrying the head low/reluctant to extend neck,
ataxia of the hind limbs, loss of muscle tone, and tetraparesis.
plexus avulsion is most often seen following a motor vehicle accident. The animal is
bumped in the shoulder by the car (brachial plexus) and subsequent radial nerve
animals will chew at the limb. The nerve damage may be temporary or permanent. Many
intramuscular (lM) injections. The animal may limp or, in severe case, be unable to
extend the knee, flex the hock, or bear weight. Radial nerve injuries can accompany a
humeral fracture, but may also be caused by improper tourniquet technique. Acquired
neuropathies include polyradiculoneuritis, Horner's syndrome, vestibular disease, and
thought to be associated with raccoon saliva but newer cases have proved otherwise.
Polyradiculoneuritis is a progressive weakness of the limbs that may progress to quad-
riplegia. In rare, severe cases, respiratory paralysis occurs and death ensues. Patients
can require several months of supportive care for full recovery. Tick bite paralysis is
similar to polyradiculoneuritis but is caused by a tick. Upon removing the tick, recovery
additional 3-4 weeks. Horner's syndrome is a condition that can be peripheral or central
in nature. Symptoms include enophthalmus, ptosis, and miosis (Fig. 21.6). Vestibular
accompanied by anxiety and nausea.
idiopathic ("old dog vestibular") (Fig. 21.7).
Figures 21.6 Horner's syndrome in (A) a Labrador retriever and (B) a Weimaraner.
B
Figures 21.7 Vestibular disease in (A) a Bichon Frise and (B) a terrier mix.
198
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  199
Table 21.4 Levels of consciousness
Level of consciousness
Clinical observation
Alert
Awake, aware, no altered mentation noted
Lethargic
Drowsiness with response to stimuli
Obtunded
Drowsiness with decreased or slow response to stimuli
Stuporous
Only vigorous stimuli will arouse
Comatose
Unresponsive
bency. Conscious patients permitted to eat yet lack the coordination to do so (i.e.,
vestibular disease) may require hand feeding as well as help drinking. Some neurological
conditions, such as myasthenia gravis, may require the use of lower Gl feeding tubes
due to esophageal dysfunction.
Assisted walks can be accomplished by using a commercially available (pelvic harness)
or by holding a towel or sheet which has been placed under the caudal abdomen to use
as a sling. Care should be taken to efficiently provide support, while ensuring that the
patient is not overexerted.
Recumbent patients arelikelycandidates for physicaltherapy applications.
to devastating infections so prevention via bladder maintenance is essential. If a recum-
for the patients' hygiene and bladder health.
elevation. A towel or small pillow can be used to obtain elevation. Patients with head
trauma should be constantly monitored for level of consciousness (Table 21.4).
As with any patient, measures should be taken to prevent decubital wounds. This
holds especially true for the neurological patients who are unable to ambulate on their
mented as well, changing from right lateral to sternal, left lateral, or semisternal recum-
bency every 4 hours at least. By implementing positional changes, pressure sores and
atelectasis will hopefully not occur.
Chapter references and further reading
C. Dewey (2008) CNS trauma: the first 48 hours. International Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care Symposium.
K. Herzberg (2009) Postoperative nursing care for intervertebral disc disease. Veterinary
200  Nursing Care of the Neurological Patient
N. Olby (2o06) Seizure management: diagnostic and therapeutic principles. The Nationaf
Association of Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Summer: 34-39.
J. Osborne, N. Sharp (1998a) Putting "wobblers" back on track-part I. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(7): 449-459.
J. Osborne, N. Sharp (1998b) Putting "wobblers" back on track-part Il. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(8): 519-527.
A. Perkinson (2o04) Small animal neurologic examination: a practical guide. Veterinary
Technician the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(6): 414-424.
S. Platt (2003) Small animal vestibular disease. American Animal Hospital Association
ScientificProgram.
B. Sturges (2003) Vestibular disease. Western Veterinary Conference.
L. Vaughn (2oo8) Canine tick paralysis. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journal for the
Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(8): 472-477.
Chapter 22
Musculoskeletal
Minding
Overview of anatomy and physiology
Approximately 6o% of the body is made of muscle. There are three types of muscle:
skeletal, which is responsible for movement; smooth (or visceral) muscle; and cardiac
muscle. Skeletal muscle is composed of cylindrical, multinucleated fibers which produce
overlapping each other. Actin is a thin filament, whereas myosin is a thick filament, and
triphosphate (ATP). Skeletal muscle is attached to the bone via tendons (connective
tissue; Fig. 22.1).
Motor nerves branch out, innervating many individual muscle fibers, creating a motor
unit. The muscle-innervated fibers receive the stimulus and contract simultaneously.
enhancing the effect of each individual cell. The terminal ends of each motor neuron
tylcholine. Acetylcholine is an excitatory neurotransmitter, while acetylcholinesterase
works to cease muscle activity by breaking down, or destroying. the acetylcholine.
of contraction. In a relaxed state, the actin filaments barely overlap each other. In the
contracted state, they slide over each other and are pulled inward among the myosin
filaments so they overlap each other almost entirely.
Smooth muscle, or visceral muscle, also uses acetylcholine; however, the physical
arrangement of smooth muscle fibers is different from that of skeletal muscle. Smooth
muscle requires more calcium ions than skeletal muscle and many smooth muscles
require extracellular calcium. Calcium can diffuse to all parts of smooth muscle, allowing
contractility. In order to relax the muscle, calcium must be removed out of the smooth
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
201
202■
Musculoskeletal Minding
Epimysium
Perimysium
Skeletalmusclefiber
Muscle fascicle
Skeletalmusclefiber
8
Blood vessels
Capillary
En domysium
Sarcoplasm
En domysium
Myofibril
Perimysium
Satellite cell
Nucleus
Epimysium
Nerve
Mitochondria
Figure 22.1 Skeletal muscle diagram. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and
Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. Wiley-Blackwell, 2oo8.
muscle fibers. There are no neuromuscular junctions in smooth muscle like there are
in skeletal muscle. Nerve fibers instead branch out over muscle fibers and transmit
either acetylcholine or norepinephrine to the cells via interstitial fluid. Acetylcholine
excites the muscle to contract while norepinephrine inhibits contractions. The terminal
axons of smooth muscle have multiple varicosities which hold vesicles containing ace-
tylcholine and norepinephrine (Table 22.1).
Bones have many functions, primarily giving form and rigidity to the body while allow-
ing for movement. They also protect vital organs and support soft tissues. Bones serve
as a site for blood formation and a storage area for minerals, particularly calcium and
phosphorus. There are two divisions of the skeleton, the axial skeleton and the appen-
dicular skeleton. The axial skeleton consists of the skull, the hyoid apparatus, vertebral
column, the costa, and the sternum. The appendicular skeleton is comprised of the
limbs. When two or more bones are joined together, a joint is formed. The bones are
held by fibrous tissue, elastic tissue, and cartilaginous tissue (Fig. 22.2).
The skeleton is composed of organic bone, which gives elasticity and flexibility, and
inorganic bone, which is mainly comprised of calcium and phosphorus at a 1:1 ratio. The
formation of bone is called ossification and occurs in two ways: intramembranous and
endochondral. Intramembranous growth occurs in flat bones, creating a wider and
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   203
Table 22.1 Movement mechanisms
Muscle type
Action
Flexor
Decreases the angle of the joint
Extensor
Increases the angle of the joint
Adductor
Moves limbs toward the median plane
Abductor
Moves limbs away from the median plane
Joint type
Action
Plane
Gliding motion in one plane only
Ball and socket
Wide range of motion in many planes
Hinge
Flexion and extension, limited rotation
Pivot
Movement through longitudinal axis
Saddle
Similar to a hinge joint, but with more limited range of motion
Axialskeleton
Appendicularskeleton
Figure 22.2 The axial and apendicular skeleton. Reprinted with permission from
Akers, M. and Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animais. Wiley
Blackwell, 2008.
thicker structure. Enchondral growth occurs in long bones, lengthening from the physis
or epiphyseal growth plates.
There are two types of structure of bone, compact and cancellous. Compact bone
forms the hard, outer layer of bones while cancellous (trabecular or "spongy") bone is
The outermost layer of the bone is called the periosteum. The periosteum is comprised
of osteoblasts, lymph, blood, and nervous tissue supply and also serves as a point of
attachment for ligaments and tendons. Moving further into the bone, the cortical bone
is a dense, hard compact bone, which then surrounds the cancellous bone. within the
204
Musculoskeletal Minding
cancellous bone, there is an epithelial layer, called the endosteum, which is rich in
osteoblasts and blood. The medullary canal contains the red and yellow bone marrow.
In young animals, the red marrow is wide and contains a large amount of hematopoeitic
stem cells. In older animals, the red marrow has been replaced by fat and the canal
becomes narrower as blood cell production takes place at the end of long bones (Fig.
22.3).
Bone is rich in blood and nerve supply at the periosteum. There are two major blood
supplies to the bone, the nutrient artery and the periosteal vessels. It is through these
vessels that blood supply is increased and fracture sites can be stimulated to heal. The
nutrient artery is an arterial blood supply to the long bones and the periosteal vessels
supply the extremities of the long bones and most of the flat bones. The vessels and
Articular
Spongy bone
cartilage
Red marrow
Epiphysis
Metaphysis
Diaphysis
Medullary cavity
Compact bone
Yellow marrow
Metaphysis
Epiphysis
Periosteum
Articular
cartilage
Metaphysis
Metaphysis
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Epiphysis
人
Spongy bone
Spongy bone
Compact bone
Medullary cavity
B
Figure 22.3 Diagram of long bones. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and
Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. wiley-Blackwell, 2o08.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   205
Table 22.2 Skeletal structures and functions
Axial skeleton
Made up of many small bones which fuse together to form
one solid structure. Three divisions:
Cranium: contains frontal bone, parietal bone, occipital
bone, temporal bone, sphenoid bone, and ethmoid bone
ll. Facial bone: contains palatine, zygomatic, lacrimal, nasal
bone, vomer, nasal concha, pterygoid, and the bones
containing the teeth
Ill. Middle ear or auditory ossicles: contains malleus, incus,
and stapes
Hyoid apparatus
Supports the larynx and the tongue
Vertebral column
Forms the spine, protects the spinal cord, and nerves. There
are five divisions:
1. Cervical: vertebrae of the neck; dogs and cats have
seven cervical vertebrae; the first is referred to as the
atlas, the second referred to as the axis
Il. Thoracic: vertebrae that articulate with a rib; dogs and
cats have 13
Ill. Lumbar: vertebrae of the lower back; dogs and cats have
seven
IV. Sacral: vertebrae of the sacrum; fused bones which
attaches to the pelvis; dogs and cats have three
V. Coccygeal: vertebrae of the tail; dogs and cats have
0-24
Costa
Ribs; one pair for each of the thoracic vertebrae. Dorsally
bone and ventrallycartilage
Sternum
Flat bone found ventrally at the middle of the chest wall;
manubrium is the cranial end and the xiphoid process is the
caudal end
Appendicular skeleton
The forelimb
Scapula, humerus, radius, ulna, carpus, metacarpus,
phalanges
The hindlimb
Pelvic girdle (ilium, ischium, pubis, acetabulum), femur,
patella, tibia, fibula, flabella, tarsus, metatarsus, phalanges
nerve supply are very important in fracture healing as bone is able to remodel in
response to stress applied to it (Table 22.2, Fig. 22.4).
Traumatic muscle injuries
Tendonitis usually occurs with a tear or injury of a tendon, may cause localized pain,
inflammation, and swelling. Muscle strains are a tear of the muscle tissue where a
muscle is pulled against a force, exceeding the capacity. These muscles are swollen and
206
 Musculoskeletal Minding
Nasal bone
 Oco p1al boile
Maxilla
Ma ndble
e p
Fa bella
boiles
Kainer, R. Color Atlas of Smalfl Animal Anatomy: The Essentiais, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
painful for the animal. Lacerations, when surgically repaired, generally heal quite well
as muscle tissues have a good blood supply.
Infectious muscle disease
Clostridial diseases, primarily tetanus, live in the soil and inhibit nerves, causing contrac-
tion of large muscles. Affected muscles usually are the masticatory, triceps, and quad-
riceps. while the most susceptible hosts are horses and cattle, it may affect dogs and
cats. Botulism is the most potent neurotoxin known. The most common cause in humans
is from improperly storing canned foods. Botulism causes acute, flaccid paralysis and
death usually results from respiratory paralysis. Clinical signs appear within 12-36 hours
species but is most common in the cat. Neosporum caninum is a recently recognized
protozoal disease similar to toxoplasmosis. It is seen in young dogs and may contribute
to muscle disease in puppies.
Immune-mediated diseases
Myasthenia gravis occurs when autoantibodies are directed against acetylcholine
receptors of the muscle. This leads to profound weakness, paralysis, and paresis.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  207
asans pue uoieidse pool ol peal ues l! se uaouoo buisinu e sl sisaleied leabeudosi
quent pneumonitis. Masticatory muscle myositis (trigeminal neuritis) is focal, affecting
Metabolic disorders affecting muscle
sudden increase in oxygen requirement by striated muscles, causing an increase in
lactate production and metabolic acidosis and electrolyte imbalances ensue. Signs of
bradycardia and cardiac arrest, hyperthermia, muscle rigidity, tachypnea with progres-
sion to dyspnea, and finally. apnea. Electrolyte imbalance, particularly calcium and
potassium, may cause muscle weakness. Electrolyte imbalances can also have profound
effects on the heart and cause arrhythmias. Hyperkalemia can cause bradycardia and
lead to asystole while hypokalemia can cause profound weakness. Endocrine disorders
such as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and hyperadrenocortisolism (Cushing's) are
also associated with muscle weakness.
Orthopedic
Growth disorders
off into the joint space and causes pain. The shoulder joint is the most commonly
affected joint. Canine hip dysplasia (CHD) is a heritable disorder of the formation of the
hip joint. The acetabulum and femoral head is flattened, turning the ball and socket joint
into a C-shaped joint with a lot of laxity or movement. Elbow dysplasia is a disorder of
the formation of the elbow. The most common problem area is an un-united anconeal
intolerant of movement and arthritis will rapidly develop in these joints. Panosteitis,
diet has been implicated, leading to the development of large breed-specific diets. The
condition is worse when large breed puppies are fed high-protein, high-calorie, and
occur at 4-12 months of age and usually the long bones are the affected bones.
Premature physeal closure usually results from a compressive or crushing injury to the
growth plate. In a complete closure, one leg will be shorter than the other, while a partial
closure results with one side of the bone growing longer than the other, causing the
bonetocurve
208   Musculoskeletal Minding
Diseases of the bone
Osteomyelitis is an infection of the bone or marrow cavity. There are many causes of
osteomyelitis, including (but not limited to) bacterial or fungal infections, open fracture,
osteosarcoma or secondary (metastatic) tumors associated with cancers such as Iym-
phoma, mammary gland adenocarcinoma, and perianal gland carcinomas. Nutritional
disease of the bone is usually a result of vitamin D imbalance or an improper calcium
to-phosphorus ratio in the diet (ratio should be 1:1). Vitamin D is necessary in the uptake
of calcium and phosphorus from the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract. Osteoporosis is a defi-
leading to soft bone and otherwise known as "rickets." Metabolic bone disease is an
osteomalacia that occurs due to vitamin D deficiency, from either diet, lack of sunlight,
Diseases of the joints
Degenerative joint disease (DJD) is osteoarthrosis, and commonly known as arthritis.
DJD is a painful condition which can develop as a result of trauma, malformation, or
joints, causing pain and inflammation. Dislocation of the joint is referred to as luxation.
It can be complete or partial and canbe traumatic or hereditable, such as patellar luxa-
tion. Sprains are a trauma to the ligament of a joint, causing instability. In a severe
sprain, the ligaments may be completely torn. The carpal joint is the most common joint
affected in dogs and cats, most likely due to jumping. Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
the tibia becomes fixed in position and the femur moves forward. Bursitis is an inflam-
mation of the bursa (tendon sheath filled with synovial fluid) of a joint. It usually occurs
over a bony protrusion of a joint, with the biceps tendon sheath being the most com
monly affected area in dogs.
Miscellaneous orthopedic diseases
niation) of the disk material into the vertebral canal. Pressure may be placed on the
spinal cord, leading to paralysis or paresis. IvDD is most frequently seen in chondro-
dystrophic breeds such as the dachshund or Basset Hound, but can affect many breeds
of dogs. Spondylosis is a condition where degeneration and bridging of the vertebral
signs. Cauda equina is a condition of instability and bridging of the lumbosacral (LS)
joint. Pain is associated with jumping, and severe cases have fecal and urinary inconti-
erative disk material into the meningeal or intramedullary blood vessels. FCE can cause
acute pain, paresis, 0r paralysis (Table 22.3).
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   209
Table 22.3 Wounds and fractures quick reference
Types of wounds
Abrasion
The surface of the skin is damaged; however, the
damage does not extend to the subdermal layer
Full-thickness defect
The entire layer of skin is missing or torn, revealing
the muscle or tissue
Laceration
The skin is cut; usually less damage to the adjacent
tissues, but tendons and arteries may suffer trauma
Avulsion
The skin is pulled away from the underlying tissues
Crush
Crushed under pressure or force; associated with the
greatest degree of tissue trauma
Wound conditions
Clean
Surgical wounds; decontaminated then surgically
repaired
Clean/contaminated
Relatively clean wounds; less than 6 hours old
Grossly contaminated
Contain debris; require extensive debridement and are
more likely to become infected
Infected
Purulent discharge, necrotic tissue; healing cannot
occur until the infection is under control
Types of fractures
Greenstick
Fine, hair-like fracture not completely separated from
the shaft
Oblique (spiral)
Break in the shaft that results in two long, sharp
points
Transverse
A direct break across the shaft of the bone
Comminuted
A highly fragmented fracture
Salter-Harris
Occurs at the growth plate
Fracture classifications
Open
Break in the skin; with or without visualization of bone
Closed
No break in the skin
Wounds and fractures
Wounds are classified by the type of wound and the condition of the wound (Fig. 22.5).
various chemical mediators are released. The wound will be red, swollen, warm to the
touch, and usually painful. Next, the debridement phase takes place. This a natural
re-epithelialization and contraction of the wound. Granulation tissue, which bleeds
easily but is resistant to infection, is formed and fills in the wound. Lastly. the matura
tion phase takes place. This phase may take several years as collagen remodels the
wound scar.
210  Musculoskeletal Minding
Figure 22.5 Abscess from a cat bite wound.
In addition to the natural healing processes, there are medical management classifica
tions of wound healing. First intention healing is the surgical repair of a wound; second
intentionhealing,wounds takelonger tohealandlarge scars areanticipated.
skin is available to surgically close the wound.
A fracture is a break in the bone. Fractures generally heal well, but slowly. When a
bone is fractured, the blood vessels in the area rupture, resulting in hemorrhage. A clot
then forms and fibroblasts subsequently form granulation tissue and new capillaries
within this clot. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts begin dividing rapidly and a large callus is
formed at the end of each bone, eventually bridging the aperture. When the callus
becomes fully mineralized, it is remodeled into true bone (this process may take years).
can occur due to a lack of bone-to-bone contact, excessive movement at the fracture
site, or in cases of infection, such as osteomyelitis. The main goals in fracture fixation
are to immobilize the fracture site, maximize the blood supply, and full return to func-
tion while minimizing contamination or infection (Fig. 22.6).
Patients with conditions affecting the musculoskeletal system often need help
to ensure perfusion, cleanliness, and comfort. Bandage types, wound dressings,
and frequency of changes are generally dependent on the nature of the wound.
Bandages that have changed position from original placement or are soiled should be
changed. Additionally, patients should be assessed when licking, chewing, biting, or
displaying pain associated with the bandage as these are signs of concern (Fig.
22.7-22.9).
Figure 22.6 Fractured humerus.
Figure 22.7 Bite wound.
211
Figure 22.8Irrigating the wound.
Figure 22.9 A convenient tie-on bandage was used due to the location of wound.
212
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   213
Chapter references and further reading
L. Beagan (2oo2) Wound healing principles and management. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 23(11): 667-673.
S. Budsberg (2oo5) Diagnosis and treatment of osteomyelitis. The Nationaf Association of
Veterinary Technicians in America Journal Summer: 45-49.
K.Herzberg (20o9) Postoperative nursing care for intervertebral disc disease. Veterinary
J. Osborne, N. Sharp (1998a) Putting "wobblers" back on track-part I. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(7): 449-459.
J. Osborne, N. Sharp (1998b) Putting "wobblers" back on track-part Il. Veterinary Technician
the Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 19(8): 519-527.
C. Rhodes (2o05) Osteoarthritis in a senior pet. Veterinary Technician the Complete Journal
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(10): 702-704.
M. Rhyne (2oo9) Canine osteaosarcoma. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf for the
Veterinary Hospital Staff 30(12): 12-18.
R. Scalf (2oo6) Canine traumatic injury. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journaf winter: 37-42.
S.Stanley (2oo7) Impaired wound healing challenges.The Nationaf Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journaf Fall: 39-45.
L. Vaughn (2oo8) Canine tick paralysis. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journat for the
Veterinary Hospita/ Staff 29(8): 472-477.
Chapter 23
Tending to the
Skin and
Special Senses
The skin is the largest organ system of the body, making up approximately 6% of body
weight. The skin serves as a barrier from the environment, providing protection from
There are three layers: of the skin: the epidermis, the dermis and the subdermis. The
epidermis is the avascular outermost layer of the skin. The dermis is of connective
tissue origin and contains the epidermal appendages (hair, nails, and the apocrine,
eccrine, and sebaceous glands), blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The subdermis is
mostly made up of fat cells but it also contains blood vessels, nerves, and loose con-
nective tissue. The subdermis functions to store fat, preserve body heat, and
thermoregulate.
Special senses
The function of the eye is vision. When light passes through the pupil, the lens refracts
it to the photoreceptors. The response is then transmitted from the optic nerve to the
brain for interpretation. The eyeball, or globe, is made of three layers. The first layer
is a fibrous layer consisting of the sclera, which makes up the white part of the eye,
and clear and serves to refract light. The second layer in the globe is the vascular tunic,
contractile action. The ciliary muscles alter the shape of the lens, enabling the eye to
focus distance. The iris is the colored portion of the eye and resides between the cornea
and the lens. The lens is an avascular clear structure made of protein that focuses light
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing,First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
215
216  Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Epidermis-:
Sebaceou
glands
ee nerve
Merkel
buipua
Root hai
Dlexuse
Meissner's
corpuscle
Pacinian
corpuscle
Hair follicle
Adipose
tssue
Figure 23.1 Diagram of dermis. Reprinted with permission from Akers, M. and Denbow,
M.Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. Wiley-Blackwell, 2oo8.
presence of light, whereas cones detect color.
The globe is separated into three chambers: the anterior, posterior, and vitreous
chambers. The anterior chamber is a fluid-filled cavity between the front of the lens
and the cornea. The anterior chamber contains the aqueous humor, a fluid that main-
tains intraocular pressure. The posterior chamber is a fluid-filled cavity between the
iris, lens, and ciliary body. Lastly, the vitreous chamber, containing vitreous humor, is
located between the iris and the retina. The vitreous humor is a semisolid substance
that resides between the retina and the lens (Fig. 23.2).
The eyes have several accessory structures with specific functions. The orbit is
formed by the maxilla, zygomatic, frontal, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones. The palpebrae,
or eyelids, function to keep the cornea moist, spreading secretions over the globe. Cilia
(eyelashes) line the upper and lower eyelids and respond to stimulus with the blink
reflex. A thin membrane, the conjunctiva, covers the inside of the eyelids as well as the
cated. The lacrimal glands, sac, and duct work together in the production and secretion
of tears. Tears act to flush debris from the eye and moisten or lubricate. The nictitating
membrane ("third eyelid") is a plate of cartilage covered by conjunctiva. It is located
or under anesthesia. The average dog has a peripheral vision of 120o in each eye, while
cats have a peripheral vision of 90? in each eye
The ear functions in the special sense of hearing. Sound waves transmit through the
ear, reach the auditory nerve, and then travel to the brain for interpretation.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus 
217
 Dorsal straight muscles
Sclera
Ciliary body
Choroid - contains tapetum
Optic retina
Vitreous body
Zonular
fibers
Optic disk
Pupil-
Lens
Opticnerve
Cornea
Iris-
Blood vessels
to retina
Anterior
 Retinal blood
chamber
vessels
Posterior
chamber
Ciliary
Ventral straight muscles
process
Kainer, R. Color Atlas of Smafl Animal Anatomy: The Essentials, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
The external ear is made up of the auricle, or pinna, and the external auditory canal.
The external auditory canal, or meatus, is the portion of the ear that transmits sound
to the middle ear. The middle ear is comprised of the tympanum ("eardrum"); the
Eustachian tube, which connects the middle ear to the nasopharynx; and the tympanic
bulla. The tympanic bulla is the osseous chamber of the middle ear. It houses three
ossicles: the incus, malleus, and stapes. The inner ear contains the vestibule, which aids
in balance and equilibrium, and the semicircular canals that contain an area called the
cochlear duct and organ of Corti, processes sound waves and vibration which send
nerve impulses to the brain (Fig. 23.3).
Integumentary system conditions
Pyoderma is an infection of the skin, usually bacterial, fungal, or both. Superficial
staphylococcus pyoderma can be primary or secondary with clinical presentation
218
 Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Pinna
Lateral
border~
Vertical ear canal
Hoizontal ear canal
Temporal muscle
Cutaneous
 marginal pouch 
Brain
Auditory
Auricular cartilage
ossicles
Anular cartilage
Cochlea
Parotid gland
Mandibular gland
Tympanic membrane
(eardrum)
Middle ear
Figure 23.3 Diagram of the ear. Reprinted with permission from McCracken, T. and
Kainer, R. Color Atlas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentials, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Moist pyoderma, or "hot spot," is most commonly associated with flea bite dermatitis
(licking and chewing at affected areas), but can occur in environments where the ani-
mal's hair remains moist and warm, such as inadequate drying after a bath or swimming.
Skin fold pyoderma is a superficial pyoderma occurring in the skin fold regions of certain
breeds such as the Chinese Shar-Pei, pug. Pekingese, and bulldog. Patients with skin
folds should have the folds hygienically wiped at least once a day to prevent infection.
'saiddnd ui uaas Allesiads 'ewnapoad ydeis leiduadns sauroue s! ,ewsapoad Addnd
The pustules are sterile and not contagious so this is usually controlled with topical
shampoos and creams. Deep pyoderma is an infection of the deeper layers of the skin,
often extending into the dermis. These animals are usually systemically ill, often requir-
ing oral or injectable antibiotics (Figs. 23.4 and 23.5).
Folliculitis is a variant of staph infection; the bacteria are infecting the hair follicles.
It is usually treated with topical management (clip and clean, topical antimicrobial
Comprehensive Areas of Focus
■219
Figure 23.4Moist pyoderma on the ventral neck of a dog.
Figure 23.5 Gram stain cytology: laboratory culture results: hemolytic streptococcus.
agents). Feline acne is a folliculitis of the chin in cats. It often begins as comedones
(blackheads), which progress to folliculitis.
cat. The inner pinna may have a thick, blackened skin, hair loss, a yellow/creamy dis-
 )          
Allergic dermatosis is an allergy or hypersensitivity. Atopic dermatitis is an inhalant
220   Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Figure 23.6 Ear cytology: yeast.
the mast cells release histamine in the skin and the pet itches. Flea allergy dermatitis
saliva of the flea. It is important to note that flea allergy is different from flea irritation.
Food allergy dermatitis is most often caused by meat proteins such as beef, chicken,
or lamb, but wheat can also cause problems. Most of these animals also suffer from
 ss   a    e e  
dermatitis is a reaction to an allergen that comes in contact with the skin. Affected
areas are common on the ventral abdomen. Carpet powders, detergents, and so on are
usually the culprit. Plastic and metal food dishes can also cause contact dermatitis
around thelips and muzzle.
Seborrhea is a disorder of the sebaceous gland and keratinization of the skin. It can
be a primary or secondary disease. Seborrhea sicca is considered "dry" as the gland
does not produce normal amounts of sebum, resulting in dry, flaky skin. Seborrhea
layers of greasy scales.
result in hair loss and crusting on the face, muzzle, and ears. Systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE) causes symmetrical skin lesions and usually have other signs associated
with the condition such as polyarthritis and kidney disease (Fig. 23.7).
Endocrine diseases that affect the skin are occurring from the inside of the body and
displayed on the outside.
Hypothyroidism is commonly seen in the dog, whereas hyperthyroidism is more com-
frequent ear infections, and hair loss with pigmentation on the tail. They may have
thickened skin as well. Hyperthyroid cats are often underweight and irritable. They may
also have a concurrent renal disease.
Hyperadrenocortisolism, or Cushing's disease, occurs when too much cortisone is
produced from the adrenal glands.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   221
Figure 23.7 Skin biopsy of a dog with pemphigus.
Figure 23.8 Cytology of an MCT.
Neoplasias commonly affecting the skin include squamous cell carcinoma (ScC),
malignant melanoma, and mast cell tumors (McT).
SCC is seen more frequently in cats on ears, nose, and around the eye, and in the
oral cavity, particularly sublingual. It begins as "solar dermatitis" with red, scaly areas.
It rarely metastasizes but is locally invasive and will recur. Malignant melanoma is
usually found in the oral cavity but may be present on the skin. Oral melanoma can be
mistaken for pigmented gums; it is important to note that melanoma is brown/black
but has rough, uneven edges. McT are small tumors/nodules on the skin, but can
become malignant. These tumors should not be overly palpated as they contain hista
mine and could release a large amount of histamine and other vasoactive substances
(Fig. 23.8).
222    Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Other skin conditions include discoid lupus, which is crusting, hair loss, and photo
sensitivity seen on the bridge of the nose. Zinc deficiency can result in hair loss, thick-
ened gray-white skin, and may be seen in dogs fed a poor quality diet. Psychogenic
alopecia occurs when animals lick or chew excessively (neurotically), damaging the skin
and hair. An acral lick granuloma is a common behavioral trait in dogs. It may start as
an allergic condition, and then the animal licks and chews the spot until it becomes a
thickened area of tissue.
Eye (Fig. 23.9)
blepharitis, distichia, conjunctivitis, and follicular ophthalmitis. Entropion occurs when
the eyelid rolls inward and rubs on the cornea, causing irritation. Ectropion is the oppo
site; the eyelid rolls outward, leaving the cornea exposed and dry. Distichia is a condition
in which the eyelashes rub on the cornea due to abnormal location. Blepharitis is an
inflammation of the eyelids, whereas conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva.
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually viral (calicivirus, feline viral rhinotracheitis).
Follicular ophthalmitis, otherwise known as "cherry eye," is a condition of hypertro
phic and everted nictitating membrane.
Common diseases of the globe include corneal ulceration, keratoconjunctivitis sicca
occur when the epithelium of the cornea is interrupted. Ulcers can be caused from a
patients will be at risk for corneal ulceration. A cataract is a cloudy lens which may be
due to geriatric, heritable, or disease-related causes such as diabetes mellitus. Lenticular
sclerosis, however, is the natural aging process of lens hardening. which may be con-
fused with cataract formation. Uveitis is an inflammation of the uvea and usually sec-
ondary to a serious disease such as toxoplasmosis, lymphoma, or fungal infections.
Glaucoma is a painful condition in which intraocular pressure is increased. Patients with
Figure 23.9 Iris cysts.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus  223
Figure 23.10 Corneal ulcer depicted by fluorescein stain.
Figure 23.11 Cataract formations in a cat with aqueous misdirection.
sodes, a blue haze of the eye may be described by the owner. Additionally, it should be
known that patients with glaucoma are at risk for luxating the lens, either into the
anterior chamber or posterior chamber (Figs. 23.10 and 23.11).
Proptosis is a traumatic expulsion of the globe from the orbit. These patients should
be seen immediately and the expulsed eye lubricated until surgical correction can be
performed. Retinal detachment is most notably caused by hypertension and may be
seen in patients with renal disease, hyperthyroidism, or other conditions causing sys-
and a visual retina.
Aural conditions most commonly seen include otitis, aural hematoma, and parasitism.
Blood vessels in the ear rupture, usually from the pet shaking its head.
tion (Figs. 23.12 and 23.13).
224   Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Figure 23.12 Ear infection: cytology revealed bacilli, cocci, mucous threads, and white
blood cells (wBCs).
Figure 23.13Microscopic view of ear cytology; pseudomonas was cultured.
Nursing interventions (Fig. 23.14)
Patients with ocular disease should be thoroughly assessed as systemic disease often
ties, and positional abnormalities. The eyes should be kept clean of debris, moist with
Comprehensive Areas of Focus225
lubricant or drops if the patient lacks the ability to close the eye(s). Any patient with
23.15, Table 23.1).
The ears should be kept clean and although ear infections may not be a primary
disturbance in the patient, the ears should be treated accordingly (Figs. 23.16-23.18).
Figure 23.14 Retinal detachment in a panleukopenia survivor.
Figure 23.15 An Elizabethan collar placed on a puppy with an eye injury to prevent
self-trauma during the healing process.
Table 23.1 Ocular observations
IoP (intraocular pressure): usually decreased in infection and elevated with
Schirmer tear test: tests aqueous portion of tear production. Usually decreased in
KCS and increased in epiphora.
Fluoroscein stain: tests for corneal lesions. The second layer of the cornea will
uptake stain if the surface layer is damaged, leaving the second layer exposed.
PLR (pupillary light reflex): Light response test; tests the integrity of the eyeball
and serves as an aid when assessing mental status.
Miotic pupils: small, constricted pupils (light)
Mydriatic pupils: large, dilated pupils (dark)
Anisocoria: Unequal pupil size (Head trauma, feline leukemia virus [FeLV])
Hyphema: blood in the anterior chamber of the eye (trauma)
Strabismus: abnormal pupillary placement; lateral, medial, divergent, or convergent
Figure 23.16 Microscopic view of Otodectes.
Figure 23.17 Petechiae.
226
Comprehensive Areas of Focus227
The skin should always be kept clean and dry. free of excrement such as urine,
feces, vomitus, and saliva. Skin color should be assessed (i.e., jaundice, erythema), as
well as examined for the development or changes in bruising patterns (Figs. 23.19 and
23.20).
Figure 23.18Ecchymosis.
Figure23.19Demodex infection.
228  Tending to the Skin and Special Senses
Figure 23.20 Microscopic view of Demodex.
Chapter references and further reading
S. Bartelt (2o04) The art of tonometry. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journal for the
Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1): 24-26.
P. Basilio (2oo9) Golden ophthalmic rules. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journaf for
the Veterinary Hospitaf Staff 3o(10): 21.
L. Beagan (2002) Wound healing principles and management. Veterinary Technician the
Compfete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 23(1l): 667-673.
M. Berg (2oo9) Oral pathology. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians in America
Journaf Winter: 27-31.
M. Bough (2oo5) Decontamination procedures. Veterinary Technician the Compfete Journal
for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(8): 548-552.
A. Breton (2oo5) Deadly dermatological diseases. The National Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journal Summer: 38-44.
A. Gordon (2oo8) Diagnosis of food allergies in dogs and cats. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 29(6): 350-353.
S. Krick (2oo3a) Dermatologic disorders and behavior. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospitaf Staff 24(8): 542-546.
S. Krick (2oo3b) Understanding dermatophytosis. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(8): 514-516.
S. Krick (2004) Understanding glaucoma. Veterinary Technician the Compiete Journal for the
Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1): 34-36.
S. Lemarie (2oo3) Fundamentals of the skin- A cornerstone course. Western Veterinary
Conference.
Comprehensive Areas of Focus   229
D. Letavish (2004) Ophthalmic examinations: the technician's role. Veterinary Technician the
Complete Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 25(1): 10-23.
S.Osborn (2003a) Cutaneous manifestations of systemic disease.Western Veterinary
Conference.
S. Osborn (2003b) Management of canine Cushing's disease. Western Veterinary Conference.
S. Osborn (2003c) Review and update for autoimmune skin disease.Western Veterinary
Conference.
S.Rhodes (2003) How to handle treating burn injuries. Veterinary Technician the Compfete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 24(6): 392-398.
O. Samples (2oo5) Basics of ear infections of dogs. Veterinary Technician the Complete
Journal for the Veterinary Hospital Staff 26(4): 281-286.
R.Scalf (2006) Canine traumatic injury.The Nationaf Association of Veterinary Technicians
in America Journal Winter: 37-42.
B. Stanley (2o07) Impaired wound healing challenges. The Nationaf Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America Journaf Fall: 39-45
Appendix 1
Formulas
Fluid therapy
 Fluid calculations
Formulas
Deficit volume (in mL)
% dehydration x body weight
(lb.) x 454 x 0.80
Or % dehydration x body weight
(kg.)×1000× 0.80
Or every 1% increase in packed cell
volume (PCV) =10mL/kg deficit
(using normal values of feline PCV
35% and canine PCV 45%)
Maintenance volume (in mL)
30 × kg + 70 = 24 hours maintenance
Or 1mL/lb/h
0r 50mL/kg/day (20mL/kg/day
insensible losses, 20mL/kg/day
urine,10mL/kg/day feces)
Contemporary losses (vomit/diarrhea)
Milliliters lost × 2
Gravity flow fluid administration calculation
Formula: fluid rate x drip set divided by 360 = drops per 10 seconds
Example: deliver 40mL/h using a 20 drops/mL admin set
Solve: 40 x 20 divided by 360 = 2drops delivered every 10 seconds
Common administration sets
10 drops/mL
15 drops/mL
20drops/mL
60drops/mL
Clinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
231
232
■
Formulas
Nutrition
Nutritional formulas
Resting energy
24-hour RER (kcal) = 30 × body weight(kg) + 70 or
requirements (RER)
60x body weight(kg) for cats and small dogs
Maintenance energy
24-hour MER (kcal) = RER x 1.8
requirements (MER)
Illness energy
24-hour IER (kcal) = RER x illness factor
requirements (IER)
Description
Illness factor
Cage rest
1.2
Surgery/trauma
1.3
Multiple surgery/trauma
1.5
Sepsis/neoplasia
1.7
Burns/scalding
2.0
Growth
2.0
Volume of diet to feed
24-hour volume (in milliliters) = IER/energy density
(kilocalories per milliliter)
Manual hemogram
Manual hemogram
Value
Procedure
Normal range
Hemoglobin
PCV/3
8-18
(Hgb) estimate
Red blood cell
PCV/6
5-10
(RBC) estimate
Mean corpuscular
PCVx10
40-77
volume (MCV)
RBC
Mean corpuscular
Hgb × 10
13-19
hemoglobin
RBC
(MCH)
Mean
Hgbx100
30-36
corpuscular
PCV
hemoglobin
concentration
(MCHC)
Platelet
100x (oil immersion)
200,000-900,000
estimate
Use feathered edge of smear
Average of 10
fields x 15,000 = platelet
count
(Continued)
Manual hemogram
Value
Procedure
Normal range
White blood cell
Observe on 40x
6,000-19,000
(WBC) estimate
Average number of wBCs of
5 fields x 100 and divide by 4
WBC differential
Count 100 WBCs on
Neutrophils
immersion oil (or high dry)
Categorize accordingly
Bands:0%-3%
Note abnormal morphological
Segs: 60%-77%
features (toxicity
quantitation)
Note that a 200 cell count
Eosinophils: 2%-10%
can be used and may be
more accurate
Basophils: Rare
Lymphocytes:12%-30%
Monocytes: 3%-10%
RBC
Observe shape, color, size, and arrangement and the
morphology
presence of parasites
Reticulocyte
Stain blood with new
<1%
count
methylene blue (NMB) x 10
minutes
Prepare blood smear
Regenerative response:
Observe on 100x (oil
1%-8% mild
immersion)
Calculate % of reticulocytes
9%-15%moderate
per1000RBCs
Cats: count aggregate, not
>15% marked
punctate
233
234
■
Formulas
Measurement conversions
Common conversions
1tbsp.
=3tspn.
1fl oz
=2tbsp.
1/4cup
= 4tbsp.
1/2 cup
=8tbsp.
1cup
= 8 oz or 240mL
1 pint
= 2 cups or 16 oz or 480mL
1 quart
= 4cups or 2pints or 960mL
1gal
= 4quarts
1ft
=12in.
1yard
=3ft
1tspn.
= 5mL or 60drops (gtts)
1tbsp.
=15mL
10z
=30mL
1g
=0.0350z
1lb
= 454g
1kg
= 2.2Ib
1in.
=2.54cm
1 dram
= 4mL
1 grain
=64mg
1 kilocalorie (kcal)
=1000 calories
Temperature conversion
Centigrade to Fahrenheit
Multiply centigrade number by 9 then
divide by 5 and add 32 for Fahrenheit
value
Fahrenheit to centigrade
Subtract 32 from the Fahrenheit number,
multiply by 5 then divide by 9 for the
centigrade value
Formulas
235
Body surface conversion
Weight
Canine
Weight
Canine
Weight
Feline
Weight
Feline
(kg)
(m²)
(kg)
(2w)
(kg)
(m²)
(kg)
(2w)
0.101
26
0.886
0.2
0.034
5.2
0.300
2
0.160
27
606'0
0.4
0.054
5.4
0.307
3
0.210
28
0.931
0.6
0.071
5.6
0.315
4
0.255
29
0.953
0.8
0.086
5.8
0.323
5
0.295
30
0.975
1
0.100
6
0.330
6
0.333
31
0.997
1.2
0.113
6.2
0.337
7
0.370
32
1.018
1.4
0.125
6.4
0.345
8
0.404
33
1.029
1.6
0.137
6.6
0.352
6
0.437
34
1.060
1.8
0.148
6.8
0.360
10
0.469
35
1.081
2
0.159
7
0.366
11
0.500
36
1.101
2.2
0.169
7.2
0.373
12
0.529
37
1.121
2.4
0.179
7.4
0.380
13
0.553
38
1.142
2.6
0.189
7.6
0.387
14
0.581
39
1.162
2.8
0.199
7.8
0.393
15
0.608
40
1.181
3
0.208
B
0.400
16
0.641
41
1.201
3.2
0.217
8.2
0.407
17
0.668
42
1.220
3.4
0.226
8.4
0.413
18
0.694
43
1.240
3.6
0.235
8.6
0.420
19
0.719
44
1.259
3.8
0.244
8.8
0.426
20
0.744
45
1.278
4
0.252
6
0.433
21
0.759
46
1.297
4.2
0.260
9.2
0.439
22
0.785
47
1.302
4.4
0.269
9.4
0.445
23
0.817
48
1.334
4.6
0.277
9.6
0.452
24
0.840
49
1.352
4.8
0.285
9.8
0.458
25
0.864
50
1.371
0.292
10
0.464
236
■
 Formulas
Cytotoxic clearing times
Cytotoxic excretion
Urine
Actinomycin D
Dacarbazine (DTIC)
Cisplatin
Bleomycin
Chlorambucil
Cyclophosphamine
Carboplatin
Melphalan
Methotrexate
Mitoxantrone
Minimal excretion: doxorubicin, vincristine, vinblastine
Vomit/feces
Actinomycin D
Mitoxantrone
Vinblastine
Doxorubicin
Vincristine
Minimal excretion: cisplatin, DTIC
Questionable excretion: bleomycin, cyclophosphamine
Estimated clearing time
<1 hour
Bleomycin, cytosine arabinoside, 5-fluorouracil,
2-3 hours
Carboplatin
<12 hours
Chlorambucil, melphalan, methotrexate
24 hours
Vincristine, vinblastine
30-36+ hours
Actinomycin D, doxorubicin, L-asparaginase
<72 hours
Cyclophosphamine
5+days
Cisplatin, mitoxantrone
Arterial blood gas
Arterial blood
Canine
Feline
Unit of
gas parameters
measurement
pH
7.35-7.45
7.24-7.45
pH units
PaO2
80-110
96-118
mmHg
CO2
35-45
25-37
mmHg
HCO,
22-27
15-22
mmol/L, mEq/L
Base excess
-2 to +2
-2 to +2.5
mmol/L, mEq/L
SO2
06<
06<
Percent
Anion gap
12-20
12-18
mEq/L
A-a gradient
10-20
10-20
mmHg
Formulas 
■237
Quick reference chart
Condition
 Primary disturbance
Compensatory factor
Metabolic acidosis
Decreased HCO,
Decreased PaCO2
Metabolic alkalosis
Increased HCO
Increased PaCO2
Respiratory acidosis
Increased PaCO2
Increased HCO,
Respiratory alkalosis
Decreased PaCOz
Decreased HCO,
pH
PaCO2
HCo,
Fully compensated parameters
Respiratory acidosis
Normal, but <7.40
Increased
Increased
Respiratory alkalosis
Normal, but >7.40
Decreased
Decreased
Metabolic acidosis
Normal, but <7.40
Decreased
Decreased
Metabolic alkalosis
Normal, but >7.40
Increased
Increased
Partially compensated
Respiratory acidosis
Decreased
Increased
Increased
Respiratory alkalosis
Increased
Decreased
Decreased
Metabolic acidosis
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Metabolic alkalosis
Increased
Increased
Increased
"ROmE" mnemonic
Respiratory
Opposite
pH
Increased
PaCO2
Decreased
Alkalosis
pH
Decreased
PaCO2
Increased
Acidosis
Metabolic
Equal
pH
Increased
HCO3
Increased
Alkalosis
pH
Decreased
HCO
Decreased
Acidosis
Emergency drug doses
Emergency drug dosing table (continued on next page)
Weight
Epi (low,
Atropine
Vasopressin
Bicarb (8.4%, Dopram
Lidocaine (2%
Mannitol (20% Mg chloride 
Naloxone
#s
1:1000)
(0.54mg/mL) (201U/mL)
1mEq/mL)
(20mg/mL) (K9), 20mg/
20 mg/mL)
(200mg/
(0.4mg/
8
mL)
mL)
mL)
1
0.05mL
0.04mL
0.02mL
0.5mL
0.2mL
0.05mL
5mL
10mL
0.05mL
5
0.25 mL
0.2mL
0.1mL
2.5mL
1mL
0.25mL
25 mL
Over 2
0.25mL
minutes
10
0.5mL
0.4mL
0.2mL
5mL
2mL
0.5mL
50mL
0.5mL
15
0.75mL
0.6mL
0.3mL
7.5mL
3mL
0.75mL
75mL
0.75mL
20
1mL
0.8mL
0.4mL
10mL
4mL
1mL
100mL
1mL
25
1.25mL
1mL
0.7mL
12.5 mL
5 mL
1.25 mL
125 mL
1.25mL
30
1.5mL
1.2mL
0.8mL
15 mL
6mL
1.5mL
150mL
1.5mL
35
1.75 mL
1.4mL
0.9mL
17.5 mL
7mL
1.75 mL
175mL
1.75 mL
40
2mL
1.6mL
1mL
20mL
8mL
2mL
200mL
2mL
45
2.25mL
1.8mL
1.1mL
22.5 mL
7W6
2.25 mL
225 mL
2.25mL
50
2.50mL
2mL
1.2mL
25mL
10mL
2.5mL
250mL
2.5mL
55
2.75mL
2.2mL
1.3mL
27.5mL
11mL
2.75mL
275mL
2.75mL
60
3mL
2.4mL
1.4mL
30mL
12 mL
3mL
300mL
3mL
65
3.25mL
2.6mL
1.7 mL
32.5mL
13mL
3.25mL
325mL
3.25mL
70
3.5 mL
3mL
1.8mL
35mL
14mL
3.5mL
350mL
3.5 mL
75
3.75mL
3.2mL
1.9mL
37.5 mL
15 mL
3.75mL
375mL
3.75mL
80
4mL
3.4mL
2mL
40mL
16 mL
4mL
400mL
4mL
85
4.25mL
3.6mL
2.1mL
42.5mL
17 mL
4.25mL
425mL
4.25 mL
06
4.5 mL
4mL
2.2mL
45mL
18 mL
4.5mL
450mL
4.5 mL
95
4.75mL
4.2mL
2.3mL
47.5 mL
19 mL
4.75mL
475 mL
4.75mL
100
5mL
4.4mL
2.4mL
50mL
20mL
5 mL
500mL
5mL
Dose
0.1mg/kg
0.05mg/kg
0.8IU/kg
1mEq/kg over
2mg/kg
2mg/kg;
0.5 g/kg over
2g over 2
0.4mg/
double for
10 minute
0.5 mg/kg fel
20-30 minute
minute
kg
intratracheal (IT)
Appendix 2
Anatomy "ustrations
Rostral
Cranial
Caudal 
Dorsal
Proximal
Ventral
Caudal
Cradia
DOrSE
Planta
Distal
Figure A1 Positional and directional terms. Reprinted with permission from McCracken,
T. and Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Smalf Animal Anatomy: The Essentials, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
239
Medianplane
Transverseplane
Median
plane
Medial
atera
Color Atfas of Smaff Animal Anatomy: The Essentiais, Revised Edition.Wiley-Blackwell,
2009.
Caudal auncule
Maxlla
C9 udal ve na G9va
e te b ral
Re I9l
Inbernal ug ulaf
Bachooeghalic
Rght ommon liac
Dra nal gl ube al
vedian sacf
lnbe rnal la
Lngual
Cs udal glule
ernal ug ular
er
ude ndal
Aollary
nal tharaac
Fe m
snouae
snU
 q [1I
Figure A3 Major veins in felines. Reprinted with permission from McCracken, T. and
Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentiais, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell,2009.
240
 Superiaal te mgoral
Oca pital
Ve be b ral
umbaf
me se nibe II
nllexiliac
nal ilaG
rcu ml
Figure A4 Major arteries in felines. Reprinted with permission from McCracken, T. and
Kainer,R.Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentials,Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell,20o9.
Op hthalinc ple.xu
Ca udal aucul&
teb1&
O ininan illac
Dramal ve ina Gs
Rghtnte nal llac
ght a
ate ial gl ute&
Lng uofaaal
n6 lepne
1xlla1y
ght extennal ilac
1nal μgula1
te nal μugula1
Fe in01a
Medial sa p he no u
Late tal sa phe nou
aal b bi
Figure A5 Major veins in canine. Reprinted with permission from McCracken, T. and
Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentials, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell,20o9.
241
Iean6epne
rnal liac
Aollar
Dorsal pedal
FigureA6
Major arteries in canines. Reprinted with permission from McCracken, T.
and Kainer, R. Color Atfas of Small Animal Anatomy: The Essentiais, Revised Edition.
Wiley-Blackwell,2009.
242
Rwave
Twave
Qwave
Pwave
QRScomplex
R wave
P wave P wave
Twave
QRS complex
B
Figure A7 Heart excitation and electrocardiograph (ECG) tracing. Reprinted with permis-
sion from Akers, M. and Denbow, M. Anatomy and Physiology of Domestic Animals. Wiley
Blackwell, 2008.
243
Appendix 3
Clinical Quick
Reference Guides
Abbreviations
Prescriptions
Exam
Rx
To take
Hx
History
SID
Once a day
PE
Physical exam
BID
Twice a day
SOAP
Subjective, objective,
assessment, plan
TID
Three times a
TPR
Temp, pulse, respiration
Aep
QID
Four times a day
HR
Heart rate
qd,q24h
Once daily
RR
Respiratory rate
QOD,eod
Every other day
MM
Mucous membranes
prn
As needed
CRT
Capillary refill time
a.c.
before meals,
WT
Weight
ante cibum
p.c.
after meals, post
kg
Kilograms
cibum
po, per os
By mouth
Ib.
Pounds
NPO
Nothing by mouth
9
Grams
AS
Left ear
m²
Meters squared
AD
 Right ear
QAR
Quiet, alert, responsive
(Continued)
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
245
246
Clinical Quick Reference Guides
(Continued)
Prescriptions
Exam
AU
Both ears
BAR
Bright, alert, responsive
OS
Left eye
p/u
Polyuric
OD
Right eye
p/p
 Polyphagic
OU
Botheyes
p/d
 Polydipsic
Gtt, gtts
Drop, drops
e/d/u/d
Eating, drinking,
urinating, defecating
de3
Capsule
C-S
Coughing, sneezing
tab
Tablet
P/A
Vomiting, diarrhea
sol
Solution
BM
Bowel movement
oint
Ointment
u/o
Urine output
pwd
Powder
r/o
Rule out
bol
Bolus
ENT
Ears, nose, throat
SS
One-half
EENT
Eyes, ears, nose, throat
One
Dx
Diagnosis
OTC
Over the counter
DDx
Differential diagnosis
888
Blood-brain
Px
Prognosis
barrier
TD
Transdermal
WNL
Within normal limits
IM
Intramuscular
RTG
Ready to go
SQ, SC
Subcutaneous
PT
Physical therapy
ID
Intradermal
CPT
Chest physiotherapy
IP
Intraperitoneal
P&A
Percussion and
auscultation
IT
Intratracheal
ML
Midline
IA
Intra-arterial
TLC
Tenderloving care
Vital signs
Parameter
Feline
Canine
Heart rate (HR)
160-220 beats per minute
100-160bpm (small breed)
(bpm)
60-100bpm (large breed)
Respiratory rate (RR)
20-30breaths per minute
10-30 breaths per minute
Temperature
100.5-102.5F
100.2-102.89F
Blood pressure
120/80; mean arterial
120/80;MAP 80-90mmHg
pressure (MAP) 80-90mmHg
Clinical Quick Reference Guides
247
Emergency assessment
Triage: airway, breathing, circulation (ABCs)
Supportive care
Fluid balance
Blood pressure
Perfusion
Heart rate and rhythm
Pulse quality and synchronicity
Oxygenation and ventilation
Database: packed cell volume/total solids (PCv/TS), blood glucose (BG), arterial
blood gas (ABG), electrolytes
Mentation
Body systems review
 Pain management
Stages of shock
Physical
Compensatory
Decompensatory
Terminal stage (end
parameters
stage (early
stage (middle
phase)
phase)
phase!
Heart rate
Normal to mild
Tachycardia
Severe bradycardia
elevation
Pulse quality
Normal to
Poor
Absent
bounding
Blood pressure
Normal
Hypotension
Severe hypotension
Respiratory rate
Eupneic or mild
Tachypneia
Bradypnea or apnea
elevation
Mucous
Normal to injected
Pallor
Pallor
membrane (MM)
Capillary refill
<1 second
>2 seconds
>5 seconds or
time (CRT)
absent
Temperature
Euthermic or
Hypothermia
Profound
slightly elevated
hypothermia
Mentation
Normal, alert, or
Depressed or
Stuperous or
excited
obtunded
comatose
Physiological
Neurohormonal
Shunting of blood to
Dysfunctional blood
effects of shock
(neuroendocrine)
vital organs, O2
flow circulus
response,
consumption
vitiosis, impending
hypermetabolic
dependent on O2
cardiopulmonary
delivery, metabolic
arrest (CPA)
acidosis
248
Clinical Quick Reference Guides
Types of shock
Types of Shock
Cause
Examples
Hypovolemic
Low blood volume
Anemia, hemorrhage
Neurogenic
Nervous system effect
Toxins such as ethylene
glycol or strychnine
Cardiogenic
Heart disease
Congestive heart failure
(CHF), pericardial tamponade
Anaphylactic
Massive immune response
Bee sting, vaccination
Septic
Bacteria endotoxin
Sepsis
Electrolyte disorders
Electrolyte disorders
Potential causes
Hypokalemia
Dilutional, alkalosis, gastrointestinal (Gl) loss, renal loss
Hyperkalemia
Urinary tract obstruction (UTO), hypoadrenalcorticism,
Addisonian crisis
Hypocalcemia
Hypoparathyroidism, hypoproteinemia, vitamin D
deficiency, hyperphosphatemia, malabsorption, acute
pancreatitis, chronic renal disease, eclampsia
Hypercalcemia
Pseudohyperparathyroidism, primary hyperparathyroidism,
cholecalciferol-containing rodenticides
Hyponatremia
Water excess or salt loss
Hypernatremia
Water loss or salt gain
Cinical Quick Reference Guides
■249
Anesthesia (Ax) monitoring and troubleshooting
Setup
·Assess oxygen supply
· Test Ax machine for leaks
· Double-, triple-check all attachments on machine
·Verify COz adsorbent is not exhausted
· Examine the Ax patient
· Be familiar with conditions/diseases and signalment
· Be familiar with the mode of action and side effects of Ax agents used
. Hydromorphone/morphine may cause vomiting
. Buprenorphine may cause low body temperature
. Acepromazine may cause low blood pressure
.Propofol may cause apnea
. Some opiates can result in a mild hyperthermia, especially in cats
. Medetomadine causes a slow heart rate due to core shunting
· Be familiar with the surgery (Sx)/Ax procedure and anticipate responses
. Neuters: May become light with testicular pulling
. Spays: May become light with ligament, ovarian, or uterine horn pressure/
handling
. Dentals: May become light during extractions, probing, and even scaling and
 polishing
° Hypothermia: Particularly in small patients, open chest/abdomen, or long
procedures
Multiparameter monitoring
· YOU are the BEST monitor!
. Physical assessment of respiratory rate and pattern
. Physical assessment of heart sounds and pulse quality
· Electrocardiography (ECG)
。Heart rate and rhythm
· Capnograph
o Respiratory rate and gas exchange
·Pulse oximetry
. Oxygen saturation of hemoglobin
. Oxygen detected in that vessel only!
· Blood pressure
. Systemic perfusion!
.Must remain above 6OmmHg
. If blood is flowing to the tissues → hypoxia → cell death
·Temperature
. Patients kept warm recover smoother
o Less chance of infection
o Less painful
· Constant assessment
. Heart rate and pulse rate/quality
. Respiratory rate and pattern
. Body temperature
o Ax depth: under enough to not feel pain, but not so deep they become
compromised
250
Clinical Quick Reference Guides
Transfusions
Anemias
Cause
Examples
Regenerative
Parasitism blood loss
Internal
Hookworm
External
Flea, louse, tick
Excessive red blood cell (RBC) destruction
Extracorpuscular
Immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia
Intravascular
fragmentation
Intracorpuscular
Lead poisoning
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Nonregenerative
Nutritional
Deficiency in iron, copper
Bone marrow failure
RBC aplasia
Aplastic anemia
Anemia of chronic disease
Renal, hepatic, neoplastic
Hemostatic disorders
Coagulation
Congenital
Factor I: Congenital afibrinogenemia
protein disorders
Factor Il: Prothrombin disorders
Factor Vlll: Hemophelia A
Factor IX: Hemophelia B
Acquired
Anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Thrombocytopenia
Congenital
Cyclic hematopoiesis in gray Collie dogs
Acquired
Ehrlichia
Primary immune mediated
Thrombocytopenia
Vaccine-induced thrombocytopenia
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia
Platelet
Congenital
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
dysfunction
(intrinsic)
Canine thrombopathia
Congenital
Von Willebrand disease
(extrinsic)
Acquired
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
May occur secondary to systemic or
infectious disease
Drugs inhibiting platelet response
Pathological
Primary or inherited anticoagulant disorders
thrombosis
Secondary or acquired anticoagulant disorders
Simple 10-step blood cross-match
1. Centrifuge donor and recipient ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood
(lavender top tube, LTT) for 10 minutes
2.Label two plain red top tubes "Donor"and "Recipient""
3. Remove plasma from tubes and place accordingly
4.Remove O.2mL of RBCs from EDTA and tube
5. Place in 4.8mL of normal saline
6. Mix gently
8.Prepare accordingly:
Major: Add O.1mL of Donor RBC solution and O.1mL Recipient plasma
Minor: Add O.1mL of Donor plasma and O.1mL Recipient RBC solution
Control: Add O.1mL of Recipient plasma and O.1mL Recipient RBC solution
9. Incubate at room temperature for 15 minutes
10. Examine all samples grossly and microscopically for hemolysis or agglutination
Blood product transfusion reference
Fresh whole
Collected immediately prior to transfusion
blood
Viable platelets, RBCs, white blood cells (WBCs), all
clotting factors, and plasma proteins
Stored whole
RBCs, wBCs, plasma proteins
blood
Platelets viable for 2 hours
Clotting factors (V, Vlll) viable for 24 hours
pRBCs
RBCs separated from plasma
Fresh frozen
Plasma separated from fresh whole blood
plasma (FFP)
Frozen within 6-8 hours of collection
Contains all clotting factors, including factors V and VIlll
Frozen (stored)
Separation of plasma and RBCs after centrifugation (at
plasma (FP)
any time)
Prepared >6-8 hours after blood collection = small
amounts of factors V and vlll
Does contain all vitamin K-dependent factors = effective
in the treatment of warfarin toxicity
Contains plasma proteins
Cryoprecipitate
Prepared from FFP
Concentration 10-fold less than FFP of clotting factor
Villl, von willebrand factor, and fibrinogen
Contains clotting factors Xl and Xlll and fibronectin
Immune
Acute hemolysis
Delayed hemolysis
reactions
Fever
Anaphylaxis
(Continued)
251
(Continued)
Blood product transfusion reference
Nonimmune
Septicemia
Air embolism
Circulatory
reactions
overload
Hypercalcemia
Hemorrhagic
Transmission of
diathesis
disease
Septicemia
Packed red
Irregular clumps of white or
WBCs and platelet
blood cells
off-white material or layers
aggregates: use
(PRBC)or
floating on top
filter
whole blood
Regular, entire white bodies
Possible bacteria
artifacts
colonies: do not use
White flecks resembling paint
Fat -will dissolve
chips
into solution as the
unit is warmed.
Visible hemolysis in the segments
Outdated or
H!un Jo
contaminated with
bacteria: do not use
FFP artifacts
White stringy material
Precipitated
coagulation factor
VIll and fibrinogen:
use filter
Milky white in color when thawed
Fat
Regular, entire white bodies
Possible bacteria
colonies: do not use
252
Clinical Quick Reference Guides
253
Pearls of wisdom
Pearls of wisdom
Mucous membrane assessment
Pallor
Hypoxia, shock, anemia, epinephrine injection
Yellow hue
Anemic pallor plus icterus
Orange hue
Pink mucous membranes plus icterus
Gastrointestinal
Bile in vomitus
Signifies pyloric patency
Coffee ground vomitus
Gastric ulcers, uremic gastritis
The more feculent the vomitus
The lower the obstruction
Melena or black stools
Upper Gl bleed/lesion, thrombocytopenia,
swallowing blood, iron, charcoal
Frank red stool
Large bowel
Urogenital
Bilirubinuria in cats
Suggests liver disease
Glycosuria
Can occur with diabetes, proximal renal tubular
disease, stress, intravenous (Iv) dextrose
Marked hyperglycemia with
Consider oliguria/anuria
minimal glycosuria
Milky urine
Pus, chyle, crystals
Cardiorespiratory
Muffled chest sounds
Fluid, mass, air, obesity, deep chested
Diffuse muffling
Usually chest fluid
Dorsal muffling
Air or mass in chest
Coughing cat
Allergic bronchitis, flukes, lung worms,
heartworms, hair in trachea. Cats with heart
disease rarely cough
Acute respiratory distress
Sudden onset diffuse pulmonary infiltrates
syndrome (ARDS)
Hyperventilation
Cardiorespiratory, pyrexia, brain disease,
Cushing's, metabolic acidosis, anxiety, pain,
shock, anemia
(Continued)
(Continued)
 Pearls of wisdom
X-ray
Good side UP, Oxygen available
Coagulation
Clot tube doesn't clot
Consider coagulopathy
Pale petechia
Thrombocytopenia plus anemia
Lumbosacral petechia
Fleas plus thrombocytopenia
Normal bleeding time
Ensures adequate platelet hemostasis
Normal platelet count
Does not ensure adequate platelet hemostasis
Neuro
Traumatic ear flush
Can lead tovestibular disease
Rapid onset lower motor neuron Ticks, organophosphate, botulism,
(LMN) paralysis
polyradiculoneuropathy, metronidazole, coral
snake
Oliguric renal failure
Hyperkalemia
High output chronic renal failure Normal potassium level or hypokalemia
General
Clean patient
Happy patient
Body bandage in cats
Causes pseudoparalysis
Urine specific gravity (USG)
Prior to fluid therapy
Fever
 Plus immune-mediated disease-appetite can
persist
Plus sepsis-anorexia
Early signs of weakness
Hind legs
Skin turgor
Difficult to assess with cachexia and obesity
Diabetic order
BG level, feed, insulin
Diabetes mellitus
Increased USG
Diabetes insipidus
Decreased USG
Source: Schaer, M. Clinical pearls in intensive and critical care I & Il (VET-78, VET-79). New Jersey
Veterinary Medical Association Annual Meeting, 2010.
254
Appendix 4
General Forms
Sample treatment flow sheet
Patient
Weight
Ib.
kg
Client
Diagnosis
Phone #
Fluid Type/Rate
Date
Caloric Requirements
8AM 10AM12PM 2PM 4PM 6PM 8PM 10PM 12AM2AM 4AM 6AM
Fluid Total
Temp
HR/Pulse
Quality
RR/Pattern
Mentation
Walk
u/o
BM
Diet
Calories In
Medications:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
Other:
Notes on Back
2
3
4
5
6
了
10
12
Clinicar Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heafth through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
255
Daily Care
Flush IVC
StripDown and Rewrap IVC
Clean Kennel, Fresh Bedding
Maintain Hygiene
CalculateIns/Outs
Additional Treatments every
hours
BP
ECG
U.Cath Care
Oxygen
PLR
Central Line Care
Rotate
Heat/lce
10 Cath Care
PROM
Massage
Chest Tube Care
Nebulize
Coupage
Feeding Tube Care
InitialsNotes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
6
10
11
12
256
General Forms
257
ICU monitoring flow sheet
Date:
Patient:
Owner:
Condition:
Dr:
Tech:
Meds
Strength Dose
Route
Time
InitialsDNR:
wt:
IVC
Special Concerns:
Fluid Type:
Rate:
TotalVolume:
Monitoring:
Pulse Ox
Bp
ECG
Temp
Capnograph
Other:
Time:
FluidsIn
Fluids Out
ORate
Pulse Ox:
Temp:
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
06
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
HR
Notes:
RR
Sys
Dias V
MAP☆
258
■
General Forms
Anesthetic record
Date:
Patient:
Owner:
RiskFactor:12 3 45
Procedure:
Dr:
Tech:
PreAx Med
Strength
Dose
Route
Time
Initials
Time:
Temp:
Wt:
HR:
RR:
MM:
IVC
Ax Type:
Special Concerns:
Fluid Type:
Rate:
Total Volume:
Induction
Dose
Amt Given
Route
Time
Monitoring:
Pulse Ox
BP
Chamber
Mask
ETTubeSize:
ECG
Temp
Capnograph
Other:
Intra-Op
Strength
Dose
Route
Time
Initials
AxStart:
Ax End:
Sx Start:
SxEnd:
Extubated:
Ax Rate:
ORate
Pulse Ox:
ETCO2
Temp:
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
06
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
HR
Notes:
Post-OpTime
HR
RR
Temp
RR
Sys 
Dias V
MAP☆
General Forms
■259
Patient order sheet
Patient_
Owner
Date
Fluids
IVC→Bolus
Rate_
SQ Fuids → Amount
Fluid Type: LRS Norm-R
0.9%NaCI
Other_
Fluid Additives Vitamin B
KCI
Dextrose
Other_
Blood Collection
In-House → PCV/TS
Glucose
CBC Chemistries Coags
Other_
Urine Collection → Free Catch Catheter Cystocentesis
In-House U/A
 Chemistry Only
USG OnlySediment Only
C/S
Other_
Ancillary Testing
ECGBP
Pulse OximetryRadiographs U/S
Meds
ROUTE
Medication and Concentration
Amount (mg/mL)
PO SQ IM IV
PO SQ IM IV
PO SQ IMIV
PO SQ IM IV
PO SQ IM IV
Nutrition
NPO Special Diet
Feed q
hours
Other:
260
General Forms
Case transfer form for opposing shifts
Date_
Dr.
Primary Technician(s)
PetName
Owner
Client#
Signalment,
Diagnosis/Reason for Treatment
Treatments (Tx) Needed As Follows:
Time
Tx
Completed (Initial)
General Forms
261
ABC animal hospital
Client communication log
Dr.A
Dr.B
.c
Patient:
Owner:
Client #:
Date:
LaboratoryResults:
 Miscellaneous:
Appointment Needed
Abnormal
Comment:
Recheck
Consult
>TelephoneFollow-Up withTech
other
OKforAx
Diet/Nutrition
Recheck Labs
Physical Therapy
days
Diagnostics
weeks
Lab Work (In-House)
months
>Lab Work (Outside Lab)
Other:
Urine via Cystocentesis
>Urine Drop Off
Prescriptions:
Fecal Drop Off
New Medication
>Hw Test Due
Medication Change
Cytology
Due for Lab Work
>Radiograph
Needs Exam Before Next Refill
Ultrasound (In-House)
Needs Exam Before This Refill
>ECG
Other:
Tonometry
Blood Pressure (Doppler)
Referral Needed:
Other:
Surgical
Notes:
 Internal Medicine
Dermatology
Ophthalmology
Dentistry
1Technician Arranged Appointment
Owner Notified
Date:
Time:
Technician Initials:
Talked Directly to Owner
 Left Message on Answering Machine/Voicemail 
Unable to Reach Owner-3 Attempts:
Date/Time
Date/Time
Date/Time
Comments:
Appendix 5
Employee Skill and Knowledge
Advancement Plans
Assistant level skills mastery form
General nursing
Skill to be mastered
Completed
Date
Supervisor
Basic medical terminology
Canine restraint
Feline restraint
Knowledge of normal vital signs
Obtain vital signs
Obtain history from client
Assist DVM in exam room
Vaccination knowledge and understanding
Heartworm disease knowledge
and understanding
Benefits of o/c and ovh
Dental care/health
Importance of fecal testing (parasites)
TNT
Ear clean
Anal gland expressing (internal and external)
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
263
264■
 Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans
Pharmacology skills
Knowledge of drug classifications
Pharmacology terminology
Prepare prescriptions
Log control substances
Perform drug calculations
(have a tech check)
Administer oral medications
Administer SQ injections
Apply topical medications
Instill ear medications
Instill eye medications
Medicated bathing
Laboratory skills
Properly log lab samples
Prepare requisition form
Prepare cytology samples
Proper handling of specimens
(urine, tissue, serum, etc.)
Perform urine chemistry and USG
Perform PCv/TS
Make a blood smear
Perform HWT (4dx)
Perform FeLV/FIV test
Perform CpL test
Perform Giardia snap test
Perform Parvo test
Prepare direct fecal
Prepare fecal floatation
Use in-house laboratory machines
Prepare Bartonella test
Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans   265
Radiology skills
Properly measure for radiographs
 Properly perform radiographs (positioning)
Develop radiographs
Label and file radiographs
Dental radiograph developing (manual)
Knowledge of digital radiographs/
radiograph program
Properly use PPE
Understand radiograph anatomy
Perform Barium series
Anesthesia skills
Basic understanding of Ax effects on patient
Basic understanding of multiparameter
monitoring
Familiarity with types of Ax
Understanding of Ax machine
Ax machine testing
Ax machine troubleshooting
Ax machine maintenance
(including CO absorbent)
Assist with Ax monitoring under
supervision of a technician
Sx room maintenance
Proper Sx pack maintenance
(clean, wrap, sterilize)
Front office skills
Proficient medical documentation
Prepare treatment plans (estimates)
Create an office visit
(DVM-not boarding/grooming)
Prepare Rx labels
Telephone skills
Greet clients
266
■
 Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans
Technician level 1 skills mastery form
General nursing
 Skill to be mastered
Completed
Date
Supervisor
Emergency response and preparedness
Triage (telephone and clinical)
Hospitalized patient care
IVC maintenance
U. catheter maintenance
Fluid calculations
Fluid additives
Fluid selection knowledge
Hygiene care for the ill or injured pet
Nutritional support
Oz administration
Nebulization
Advanced vital signs
(lung sounds, heart sounds, etc.)
Monitoring patient ins/outs
Doppler blood pressure measurement
STT
Tonometry
Fluoroscein staining
Cephalic blood collection
Saphenous blood collection
Jugular blood collection
Endoscope cleaning and care
Common disease knowledge
Client communication (normal lab results,
handle medical questions)
Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans   267
Laboratory skills
Identify bacteria and yeast under microscope
Properly inoculate microbiology media
Identify contents in urine sediment
Prepare out-of-state laboratory specimens
Perform manual platelet count
Perform WBC differential
Identify RBC morphology
Perform bile acids testing
Collect specimen for c/s
Collect specimen for cytology
Understand CBC components
Understand chemistry test results
Anesthesia skills
Ax/pre-Ax calculations
Thorough understanding
of multiparameter monitoring
Use of suction
 Dental scale and polish
Dental radiography
Assist routine surgeries
Identify, understand, and troubleshoot
monitor abnormalities
Ax vital sign documentation
Endotracheal tube extubation
Postoperative recovery
268
■
Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans
Technician level 2 skills mastery form
General nursing
Skill to be mastered
Completed
Date
Supervisor
Place IVC
Place male u. cath
Place female u. cath
Place central venous catheter
(femoral, saphenous)
Calculate nutritional requirements
Scrub into surgical procedures
Cystocentesis via u/s
FNA
Extensive pathophysiology knowledge
Diagnostic ECG
Advanced endoscopy knowledge
Care for PEG/EG tubes
Care for thoracostomy tube
Transfusion medicine
Laboratory skills
ACTH stimulation test
Low-dose dex suppression testing
Prepare out-of-state laboratory specimens
Perform FNA
Blood culture collection and preparation
RBC fragility test
Saline agglutination test
Blood cross-matching
Anesthesia skills
Ax induction (under DvM supervision)
Endotracheal intubation
High-risk Ax patients, thoracic surgeries
Perform dental Ax blocks
Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans   269
Technician level 3 skills mastery form
General nursing
Skill to be mastered
Completed
Date
Supervisor
Properly place jugular central venous catheter
Pace lO catheter
Arterial blood sample collection
Arterial catheter placement
Perform gastriclavage
Perform gastrocentesis (GDV)
Abdominocentesis
Thoracocentesis
Perform cystogram (cath, contrast media, etc.)
Post-CPCR care/ICU nursing
NG tube placement
Nasal Oz tube placement
Peritoneal lavage
Tracheotomy tube care
Advanced transfusion medicine
CRI calculations
Laboratory skills
Identify abnormal blood cells
Identify abnormal FNA cells
Evaluate CSF fluid
Evaluate microbiology specimens
Assist with bone marrow biopsy
270■
 Employee Skill and Knowledge Advancement Plans
Ten qualities of highly effective veterinary staff
Adapted from the Veterinary Healthcare Team of Arizona
Accountability
I am answerable for my actions.
Knowledge
I am eager to learn and understand.
Empathy
I am able to identify with the feelings of others.
Dedication
I am devoted to my purpose.
Professionalism
I conduct myself with confidence and competence.
Loyalty
I am faithful to the performance of my duties.
Respect
I am considerate of other people and things.
Responsibility
I have an ability to exercise control.
Positive Attitude
I am capable of maintaining a favorable mindset.
Tolerance
I allow others to express their differences.
Note: Page entries followed by a "t" denote tables.
Advancement of skills and knowledge (career
pericardial disorders 136-137
goals) 263-269
quick reference tables 141-142t
Anatomy lllustrations
valvular disorders 137
arteries 241, 242
Catheter(s),care
body planes 240
arterial 104
directional terms 239
central venous 99-102
veins 240, 241
intraosseus 102-103
Anesthetic nursing care 28, 35-37, 67-72,
nasal (oxygen insufflation) 123-124
130,156,216, 249t
peripheral venous 97-99
Arrhythmias 29, 47, 65, 69, 136, 139-140, 171,
quick reference tables 104t
207
urinary 107-114
medications to treat 85-86
Chemotherapy. See Cytotoxic drug clearing
time
Bed sores. See Decubital ulcers
Chest, physiotherapy 64-65
Bladder. See Excretory System
Chest tube(s), care 128-130
Blood gases 236-237
Circadian rhythm 8-9
Blood pressure 19, 28-29, 39, 40, 64, 69-70,
Cranial nerves 193t
175, 186, 192. See also Cardiovascular
Cytotoxic drug clearing times 236
system
emergencies and shock 76, 85,247
Decubital ulcers (pressure sores, bed sores) 7,
monitoring 31-34, 104, 112
21-22, 61, 63, 199
normal parameters 246
classification 22t
Blood transfusions 250-252
prevention 14t
Breathing. See Respiratory system
Dehydration 31, 57, 59
determination of 51-55
Capnography 31, 35, 60
fluid therapy calculations 231
Cardiomyopathies 137
in kidney disease 176-177,188
Cardiovascular system
in liver disease 170
anatomy and physiology 133-135
Digestive system 161-172
cardiac compression techniques 86
anatomy and physiology 161-163
congenital disorders 137
colon 169
nursing care 135-142
enteric conditions 167-169
Clinicaf Smaff Animaf Care: Promoting Patient Heaith through Preventative Nursing, First Edition.
Kimm Wuestenberg.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
271
272
Index
Digestive system (cont'd)
Heart assessment 28-29
esophageal conditions 164- 165
Hospice care 89-92
gastric conditions 165-170
Husbandry
hepatic 170
environment 7-9
nursing care 170-171
patient 11-13
oral cavity conditions 163-164
Hydration assessment. See Fluid therapy
pancreatic conditions 169-170
Infectious disease protocols 9
Ear
Integumentary system 215-216
anatomy and physiology 216-217
conditions 217-222
conditions 223
Intra-operative nursing care 68-70
nursing care 225
ECG. See Electrocardiography
Kidneys. See Excretory system
EKG.See Electrocardiography
Electrocardiography (ECG, EKG) 35-37,
Liver conditions 170
134-135, 243
nursing care 170-171
Electrolyte disorders 248
Emergency medicine 75-87
Machines. See Monitoring equipment
drug dosage chart 86, 238
Mental health. See Psychological health
quick reference tables 247-248t
Monitoring equipment 30-39
stages of shock 76t
Mucous membranes 30-31
shock physiology 75-76,139
Musculoskeletal system
Endocrine system
anatomy and physiology 201-205
adrenal gland disease 187-189
muscle conditions 205-207
anatomy and physiology 185-187
orthopedic conditions 207-208
Exam (patient) 11
wounds and fractures 209-212
basic 27-32
in dehydration 54
Nervous system
in emergencies ("a CRASH plan") 77-84,
anatomy and physiology 191-194
77t
nervous system conditions 194-197
Excretory system
nursing care 197-199
anatomy and physiology 175-177
Nosocmial infections 5-6
nursing care 180
prevention 6-7
renal injury 177-188
Nutrition 43-48
Eye. See Ophthalmic system
feeding tube(s), care 115-121
requirements 45
Feeding tube(s). See under Nutrition
in specific disease states 47t
Fluid therapy 51-60, 181
additives 56-57
Ophthalmic system
balances 58-59
anatomy and physiology 215-217
deficit volume calculations 52-55
conditions 222-228
maintenance 55
nursing care 224-225
monitoring (patient) 57-60
Oxygen, delivery
 ongoing losses 55
nasal cannula/catheter insufflation 123-124
Formulas
transtracheal catheters 125
body surface conversion table 235t
fluid drip rates (manual) 231
Pain assessment 18-20
fluid therapy 231
Patient care forms 255-261
hemogram 232
Pearls of wisdom 253-254
measurement conversions 234
Pericardial disorders. See under
nutrition 232
Cardiovascular system
temperature conversions 234
Pharmacology abbreviations 245-246
Physical therapy 61-65
Gastric dilatation and volvulus 79-80,
 Post-operative nursing care 70
165-167
Pre-operative nursing care 67-68
Gastrointestinal system. See Digestive
Pressure sores. See Decubital ulcers
system
Psychological health 20-21
Index
273
Pulse assessment 28-29
Skin.See Integumentary system
oximetry 33-35
Surgical nursing care. See Anesthetic nursing
care
Recumbent patient 21-24
Renal system. See Excretory system
Temperature, body 27-28
Respiratory system
regulation of 35-39
anatomy and physiology 145 -147
Tracheostomy tube(s), care
lower airway conditions 150-153
125-127
nursing care 150-159
patient assessment 30
Urinary catheter(s).See under Catheter,
quick reference tables 147t, 151t, 153t, 159t
care
upper airway conditions 147-150
Urinary system. See Excretory system
Urogenital conditions 178-80
Shock 5,28,30,37,51,130,141,152,177,188,
247-248t. See aiso under Emergency
Venous access port(s) 104
medicine
Vital sign(s), parameters 246