Clinical Endocrinology
of Companion Animals
JACQUIE
RAND
EDITOR
Ellen N. Behrend, Danielle Gunn-Moore and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
SECTION EDITORS
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Clinical Endocrinology
of Companion Animals
Clinical Endocrinology
of Companion Animals
Edited by
Jacquie Rand
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and
Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorialoffices
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply
amoeq-aamuoammmm ne asqa ino aas asead yooq sun u eae nuados a asnau o usad ro
is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by
ra uoda [os a o sa r sao a ae uaaq s sad jo ass aas e 
are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-0583-2/2013.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Clinical endocrinology of companion animals / edited by Jacquie Rand.
p.cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
[DNLM: 1. Endocrine System Diseases-veterinary. 2. Endocrine Glands-physiopathology. 3. Endocrine System
Diseases-diagnosis.
.4. Pets. SF 768.3]
SF768.3.C55 2012
636.089'64-dc23
2012014134
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Cover design by Modern Alchemy LLC
Set in 9.5/11.5pt Sabon by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1 2013
Dedication
This book is dedicated to the important people who shaped my life and goals
My parents, Geoff and Moira, who inspired me to be the best I could be, to never accept mediocrity
from myself, and to always remain optimistic about achieving my goals. They are not here to see the book
published, but their legacy remains.
 My husband, Tom, who is my greatest supporter, through the challenging times and the good times
 in life, always there, encouraging me to follow my dreams and be happy.
My daughter, Lisette, who reminds me to maintain a balance in my life and inspires me to be a better
role model.
Merlin, our characterful Burmese cat, who has lived a fullife despite many twists and turns-
surrendered to a municipal animal facility and, on death row, acquired as one of my research cats,
identified as insulin resistant and predisposed to diabetes, adopted into our family—and who sat beside
me or on my desk as I wrote and edited chapters for this book.
Thank you all for your inspiration.
Contents
Contributors
Preface
XV
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs
Ratty Lathan
2
Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats
22
DanielleGunn-Moore andKerrySimpson
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species
28
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Critical Illness-Related Corticosteroid Insufficiency (Previously Known
as Relative Adrenal Insufficiency)
36
Linda Martin
 Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs
43
Ellen N.Behrend and Carlos Melian
Primary Functioning Adrenal Tumors Producing Signs Similar to Hyperadrenocorticism
Including Atypical Syndromes in Dogs
65
Kate Hill
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats
71
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
Primary Functioning Adrenal Tumors Producing Signs Similar to Hyperadrenocorticism
Including Atypical Syndromes in Cats
80
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets
86
Nico J. Schoemaker
10
Hyperadrenocorticism and Primary Functioning Adrenal Tumors
in Other Species (Excluding Horses and Ferrets)
95
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
11
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses
100
Catherine McGowan
12
Primary Hyperaldosteronism
115
Andrea M. Harvey and Kent R. Refsal
vili Contents
13
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs
128
Claudia E.Reusch
14
 Pheochromocytoma in Cats
137
DanielleGunn-Moore andKerry Simpson
15
Canine Diabetes Mellitus
143
Linda Fleeman and Jacquie Rand
16
 Feline Diabetes Mellitus
169
JacquieRand
17
 Diabetes Mellitus in Other Species
191
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward and Jacquie Rand
18
 Canine Diabetic Emergencies
201
Rebecka S. Hess
19
 Feline Diabetic Ketoacidosis
209
JacquieRand
20
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/Insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses
217
John Keen
21
 Insulinoma in Dogs
229
Rebecka S. Hess
22
 Insulinoma in Cats
240
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
23
Insulinomas in Other Species
245
Sue Chen and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
24
Gastrinoma, Glucagonoma, and Other APUDomas
253
Craig Ruaux and Patrick Carney
 Hypothyroidism in Dogs
263
David Panciera
26
 Hypothyroidism in Cats
273
Danielle Gunn-Moore
27
Hypothyroidism in Other Species
278
JaniceSojka Kritchevsky
28
 Hyperthyroidism in Dogs
291
David Panciera
67
Hyperthyroidism in Cats
295
Mark E.Peterson
30
Hyperthyroidism/Thyroid Neoplasia in Other Species
311
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Contents
 Hypocalcemia in Dogs
315
Patricia A.Schenck and Dennis Chew
321
 Hypocalcemia in Cats
326
Patricia A.Schenck and Dennis Chew
33
Hypocalcemia in Other Species
335
Michael Stanford, John Keen and Michelle L.Campbell-Ward
34
 Hypercalcemia in Dogs
356
Patricia A. Schenck and Dennis Chew
35
Hypercalcemia in Cats
373
Dennis Chew and Patricia A.Schenck
36
 Hypercalcemia in Other Species
385
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
37
 Nutritional Secondary Hyperparathyroidism in Reptiles
396
Kevin Eatwell
38
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs
404
Annemarie M.WY. Voorbii and Hans S. Kooistra
39
Hyposomatotropism in Cats
416
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
40
Acromegaly in Dogs
421
Hans S. Kooistra
41
Acromegaly in Cats
427
David Church and Stijn J. M.Niessen
 Diabetes Insipidus and Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs
436
Katharine F Lunn and Katherine M. James
43
Diabetes Insipidus in Cats
450
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
44
Hyponatremia, SIADH, and Renal Salt Wasting
458
Katherine M.James
45
 Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders
467
Cheri A.Johnson
46
 Progesterone and Prolactin-Related Disorders; Adrenal Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
487
Cheri A.Johnson
47
Pathologic Reproductive Endocrinology in Other Species
504
John Keen and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Index
512
Contributors
 Ellen N. Behrend, VMD, PhD, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Joezy Griffin Professor
Dept. Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward, BSc, BVSc(Hons I), DZooMed(Mammalian), MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
Taronga Conservation Society Australia
Taronga Western Plains Zoo- Wildlife Hospital
Dubbo, New South Wales, Australia
Patrick Carney, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Staff Internist
 Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment & Specialties Walpole
MA Clinical Assistant Professor
 Department of Clinical Sciences Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA, USA
Sue Chen, DVM, DABVP - Avian Practice
Gulf Coast Avian and Exotics
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Houston, Texas, USA
Dernis Chew, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
 Professor, Emeritus
Center for Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio, USA
David Church, BVSc, PhD, MACVSc, ILTM, MRCVS
Royal Veterinary College
University of London
London, United Kingdom
Contributors
XD
Kevin Eatwell, BVSc (hons), DZooMed (Reptilian), Dipl. ECZM (Herp), MRCVS
RCVS specialist in Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
European Recognised Veterinary Specialist in Zoological Medicine (Herpetological)
Lecturer in Exotic Animal and Wildlife Medicine
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
University of Edinburgh
Hospital for Small Animals
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
Roslin, Midlothian, United Kingdom
Linda Fleeman, BVSc, PhD, MANZVS
Animal Diabetes Australia
Rowville Veterinary Clinic, Rowville
Boronia Veterinary Clinic, Boronia
Lort Smith Animal Hospital, North Melbourne
Victoria, Australia
Danielle Gunn-Moore, BSc, BVM&S, PhD, FHEA, MACVSc, MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine
Professor of Feline Medicine and Director of Teaching Hospitals
Royal(Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and The Roslin Institute
The University of Edinburgh
Hospital for Small Animals
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
Roslin, Midlothian, Scotland
Andrea M. Harvey, BVSc DSAM(Feline) Dipl. ECVIM-CA MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine
European Veterinary Specialist in Internal Medicine
International Society of Feline Medicine
Wiltshire, United Kingdom
Rebecka S. Hess, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine
Chief, Section of Medicine
Department of Clinical Studies-Philadelphia
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Kate Hill, BVSc, MANZCVSc, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Senior Lecturer
Director Centre for Service and Working Dog Health
Institute of Veterinary, Animal and Biomedical Science
Massey University
New Zealand
Katherine M. James, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Veterinary Information Network
Davis, California, USA
Cheri A. Johnson, DVM, MS, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor and Chief of Staff
Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan, USA
xit  Contributors
John Keen, BSc, BVetMed, PhD CertEM (IntMed), Dipl. ECEIM MRCVS
RCVS and European Specialist in Equine Internal Medicine
Dick Vet Equine Hospital
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
Easter Bush
Roslin, Midlothian, United Kingdom
Hans S. Kooistra, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ECVIM-CA
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Uurecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Janice Sojka Kritchevsky, VMD, MS, Dipl. ACVIM (Large Animal
Internal Medicine)
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine West
Lafayette, Indiana, USA
Patty Lathan, VMD, MS, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Assistant Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
Mississippi State University College of Veterinary Medicine
Starkville, Mississippi, USA
Katharine F. Lunn, BVMS, MS, PhD, MRCVS, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal
Internal Medicine)
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Linda Martin, DVM, MS, Dipl. ACVECC
Associate Professor Emergency and Critical Care
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Catherine McGowan, BVSc, MACVSc, DEIM, Dipl. ECEIM, PhD, FHEA, MRCVS
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease,
Faculty of Health and Life Sciences
University of Liverpool
Leahurst, United Kingdom
Carlos Melian, DVM, PhD
 Director of Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Trasmontana s/n, 35416 Arucas, Las Palmas, Spain
Contributors
xifi
Stijn J. M. Niessen, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ECVIM, PGCVetEd, FHEA, MRCVS
Lecturer Internal Medicine
Royal Veterinary College
University of London
Research Associate
Diabetes Research Group
Newcastle Medical School
United Kingdom
David Panciera, DVM, MS, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
 Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Mark E. Peterson, DVM, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Director of Endocrinology and Nuclear Medicine
Animal Endocrine Clinic
New York, New York, USA
Jacquie Rand, BVSc, DVSc, MACVS, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Professor of Companion Animal Health
Director Centre for Companion Animal Health
School of Veterinary Science
The University of Queensland
Australia
Nicki Reed, BVM&S, Cert VR, DSAM (Feline), Dipl. ECVIM-CA, MRCVS
European Veterinary Specialist in Small Animal Medicine
Lecturer in Companion Animal Medicine
Head of the Feline Clinic
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
The University of Edinburgh
Hospital for Small Animals
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
Roslin, Midlothian, United Kingdom
Kent R. Refsal, DVM, PhD
Professor, Endocrine Section
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
Michigan State University
Lansing, Michigan, USA
Claudia E. Reusch, DVM, Dipl. ECVIM-CA
Professor
Head of Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine
Vetsuisse Faculty
University of Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
Craig Ruaux, BVSc, PhD, Dipl. ACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
Assistant Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
Contributors
Patricia A. Schenck, DVM, PhD
Section Chief, Endocrine Diagnostic Section
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
Michigan State University
Lansing, Michigan, USA
Nico J. Schoemaker, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ECZM (Small Mammal and Avian),
Dipl. ABVP-avian
Division of Zoological Medicine
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Kerry Simpson, BVM&S, Cert VC, PhD, FACVSc (Feline Medicine), MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine
The Feline Expert
London, United Kingdom
Michael Stanford, BVSc, FRCVS
Birch Heath Veterinary Clinic
Birch Heath Road
Tarporley, Cheshire, United Kingdom
Annemarie M. W.Y. Voorbij, DVM, MS
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Preface
The inspiration for the format of Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais was from teaching students
 in the clinic and consulting with busy veterinarians in busy practices. There was clearly a need for a quick
reference guide that had detailed information, but in a format designed to easily find that information. My
hope is that this book will provide valuable assistance for clinicians in diagnosing and managing endocrine
cases in practice, as well as for students wishing to quickly find information to help with a case or learn in
greater depth the details of diseases of the endocrine system. My aim is that this book be a quick reference
book for practical use, to be referred to in the consulting room and in the field.
I thank the section editors, Ellen Behrend, Danielle Gunn-Moore, and Michelle Campbell-Ward, for their
absolute dedication to making this a quality publication with the most current information known in vet-
erinary science on endocrine diseases of the various companion animal species. I also thank the many con-
 tributors for the richness of their contributions, which represents the sum of many decades of combined
knowledge.
I found it fascinating learning of the susceptibility of some exotic companion species to certain endocrine
diseases. I hope you also enjoy and find useful the breadth of this book across the common, and not so com-
mon, companion animals that veterinarians see in practice
CHAPTER 1
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs
Patty Lathan
Pathogenesis
● Primary hypoadrenocorticism results from the destruction of >90% of the adrenal cortex.
● Most cases are presumed to be due to an immune-mediated process.
● Combined glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency occur most frequently, but isolated glu-
cocorticoid deficiency (*atypical hypoadrenocorticism") is probably underdiagnosed.
Classical Signs
● Young to middle-age dogs are predisposed, as are poodles, West Highland White Terriers, and Great
Danes.
● Addison's disease is known as the “Great Pretender" because nonspecific signs such as lethargy,
 decreased appetite, and weight loss predominate.
● Gastrointestinal signs such as vomiting and diarrhea are also common.
● Patients may present in hypovolemic shock or following collapse.
Diagnosis
● ACTH stimulation test demonstrates minimal cortisol response.
Treatment
● Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid supplementation, ± intravenous fluids and supportive
therapy.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Pathophysiology:
1. Most patients with naturally occurring hypoadrenocorticism ("Addison's disease") suffer from
combined glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency:
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Capsule
Zona glomerulosa
S73
Zona fasciculata
Zona reticularis
Medulla
The zone glomerulosa is responsible for mineralocorticoid synthesis, whereas the inner two layers are responsible for
glucocorticoid and sex hormone synthesis. (lmage provided by Dr. Jim Cooley.)
a. Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid secreted in the outermost layer of the adrenal cortex, the
zona glomerulosa (Figure 1.1). The major action of aldosterone is the conservation of sodium and
water, and excretion of potassium and hydrogen ions (acid), from the distal renal tubule. In
normal dogs, secretion of aldosterone is stimulated by hypovolemia and hyperkalemia and is
primarily regulated by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). In patients with
hypoadrenocorticism and subsequent aldosterone deficiency, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and
hypovolemia are common.
b. Cortisol is a glucocorticoid produced in the inner-most layers of the adrenal cortex, the zonae
fasciculata and reticularis. Cortisol has activity in almost every cell in the body. Functions include
stimulation of gluconeogenesis and erythropoiesis, maintenance of gastrointestinal mucosal integ-
rity, and suppression of the inflammatory response. Additionally, cortisol has important roles in the
maintenance of blood pressure and contractility of the heart. Cortisol requirements increase during
times of stress. Cortisol release from the adrenal cortex is controlled by adrenocorticotropic hormone
testinal signs, lethargy, hypoglycemia, hypotension, and anemia.
 2. Some patients with hypoadrenocorticism suffer from isolated glucocorticoid deficiency. In these cases,
aldosterone secretion is preserved, and electrolyte abnormalities are not present. Patients with isolated gluco-
corticoid deficiency are often said to have “atypical hypoadrenocorticism" or "atypical Addison's disease."
B. Etiology:
1. Primary hypoadrenocorticism results from the destruction of greater than 90% of the adrenal cortex.
Most cases of naturally occurring hypoadrenocorticism in dogs are idiopathic, most likely due to
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex. Rarely, infiltration of the adrenal cortex by fungal
disease, amyloidosis, or neoplasia has been reported. Trauma, hemorrhage, and infarction may also lead
to hypoadrenocorticism.
2. Drug-induced adrenocorticolysis can also result in hypoadrenocorticism in dogs being treated for
hyperadrenocorticism:
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs
(a)
(b)
Stress
Stress
T
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus
CRH
CRH
Pituitary
Pituitary
ACTH
ACTH
ACTH
ACTH
 Cortisol
 Cortisol
 Cortisol
Adrena
Adrenal
Adrena
Fgure 1.2  (a) The hypothalamic pituitary axis without negative feedback. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is released 
by neurons in the hypothalamus and transported to the anterior pituitary by portal circulation. CRH then stimulates the release
of ACT'H from the pituitary gland into systemic circulation. ACT'H then stimulates the synthesis and secretion of cortisol.
(b) Negative feedback is the mechanism by which the endocrine system regulates secretion of its hormones. In the HPA-axis,
ACT H feeds back to the hypothalamus to inhibit continued release of CRH, which then leads to decreased release of ACTH.
Cortisol feeds back to both the hypothalamus to decrease CRH secretion, and to the pituitary gland to decrease ACTH release.
By this mechanism, the H PA-axis is able to maintain the physiologically necessary concentration of cortisol in the
bloodstream—not too much,nor toolittle.
a. Adrenocortical necrosis caused by mitotane is usually selective to the zonae fasciculata and retic-
ularis, resulting in decreased cortisol production. However, inadequate monitoring or use in a
particularly sensitive patient may lead to destruction of the cells of the zona glomerulosa, resulting
in aldosterone deficiency as well.
b.
 The other commonly used medication to treat hyperadrenocorticism is trilostane. As an inhibitor
of at least one enzyme involved in steroid synthesis (3B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase), trilostane
overdose may lead to cortisol deficiency and, less frequently, aldosterone deficiency. Additionally,
idiosyncratic adrenocorical necrosis has been reported to occur in some dogs taking rilostane,
resulting in hypoadrenocorticism.
 3. Hypoadrenocorticism secondary to decreased ACTH production is characterized by isolated glucocor-
ticoid deficiency since ACTH has little regulatory control of aldosterone production:
a. The most common form of secondary hypoadrenocorticism is iatrogenic, resulting from exoge-
nous glucocorticoid administration (Figure 1.3). Exogenous glucocorticoids inhibit the release of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland. Adrenal gland atrophy then occurs,
resulting in decreased secretion of cortisol. Following acute withdrawal of the exogenous glucocor-
ticoid, a stressful event will cause increased release of ACTH, but the atrophied adrenal glands will
be unable to respond by secreting an appropriate amount of corisol, which may result in signs of
cortisol deficiency. Chronic administration of glucocorticoids is more likely to result in hypoadreno-
corticism than short-term use, and longer-acting repositol steroids (such as methylprednisolone ace-
tate) are more potent suppressors of ACTH than shorter-acting glucocorticoids (such as oral
prednisolone). Topical, otic, and ophthalmic preparations containing glucocorticoids may also lead
to iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism, particularly in smaller patients.
4 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Chronic glucocorticoid
administration
口
Clinical signs of
hyperadrenocorticism
Adrenocortical atrophy
(feedback inhibition)
Abrupt discontinuation of
administratior
Cortisol
deficiency
Clinical signs of
hypoadrenocorticism
hyperadrenocorticism"). At the same time, the exogenous glucocorticoid provides feedback inhibition to the pituitary gland,
decreasing the production of ACT'H. Without ACT'H, the dog's own adrenal glands atrophy. While the dog is still taking the
exogenous glucocorticoids, the dog will appear to have hyperadrenocorticism. Upon abrupt withdrawal of the steroid, the dog's
own atrophied adrenal gland will be unable secrete cortisol, potentially resulting in clinical signs of hypoadrenocorticism.
Clinical signs may be seen more often following a stressful event in these patients.
b. Naturally occurring causes of secondary hypoadrenocorticism include pituitary masses, trauma,
or other lesions that inhibit ACTH release.
4. At this time, the etiology of atypical hypoadrenocorticism (isolated glucocorticoid deficiency)
is unknown. ACTH deficiency has been ruled out in many cases. It may be the result of partial
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex, sparing the zona glomerulosa. Although some
have hypothesized that atypical hypoadrenocorticism is simply an early manifestation of " typical"
hypoadrenocorticism, many patients never lose their ability to secrete aldosterone.
C.Risk factors for hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Dogs with other immune-mediated endocrinopathies, such as diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism,
may be at increased risk for hypoadrenocorticism.
2. Dogs with the disease are more likely to have clinical signs during or following a stressful event.
11.
Signalment
A.A
 Any breed of dog may be afflicted with hypoadrenocorticism, including mixed-breeds. However, an
increased prevalence of hypoadrenocorticism has been documented in all sizes of poodles, West Highland
white terriers, Great Danes, bearded collies, Portuguese water dogs, Leonbergers, Nova Scotia duck-tolling
retrievers, and possibly Saint Bernards.
B. A genetic basis has been proved in standard poodles, Bearded collies, and Nova Scotia duck-tolling
retrievers.
C. Young to middle-aged dogs (2-5 years old) are predisposed. However, dogs of any age can be diagnosed
with hypoadrenocorticism. Nova Scotia duck-tolling retrievers may be diagnosed at a younger age, as early
as 2 months.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs  5
D. Females appear to be predisposed in some studies, while other studies reveal a more equal distribution
between the sexes.
E.Dogs diagnosed with isolated glucocorticoid deficiency have a similar signalment to those with com-
bined mineralocorticoid/glucocorticoid deficiency. As a population, however, dogs with atypical Addison's
tend to be 2-3 years older at diagnosis compared to those with typical Addison's.
Il. Clinical Signs
A. The clinical manifestation of hypoadrenocorticism is highly variable in presenting complaint, chronic-
ity, and severity. Some dogs present for chronic clinical signs, whereas others present more acutely in
"Addisonian crisis.? Rigid rules differentiating acute from chronic hypoadrenocorticism do not exist; the
diagnosed and treated early in the course of the disease, many dogs with chronic signs will decompensate
and present in crisis. However, they will be discussed separately, since initial treatment differs. Likewise, dogs
with isolated cortisol deficiency (atypical hypoadrenocorticism) will also be discussed separately in order to
highlight the contrasting features.
1. Chronic hypoadrenocorticism:
a. Addison's disease often causes vague, nonspecific clinical signs that can be confused with other
diseases, thus earning it the moniker "The Great Pretender" (Table 1.1). Most patients experience
lethargy, decreased appetite, and weight loss with varying severity. The owner may report that the
patient just is not acting normally. A waxing and waning pattern, with improvement of clinical signs
specifically noted following fluid or steroid administration, is common (Schaer and Chen 1983;
Herrtage 2000).
h. Vomiting and diarrhea are frequently reported, with or without concurrent melena. Rectal exam-
ination may also reveal melena previously unnoticed by owners. Dogs occasionally present with
of cortisol on the gastrointestinal mucosa. Exacerbation of or onset of gastrointestinal signs follow-
critical that hypoadrenocorticism is considered in patients diagnosed with “stress colitis,” particu-
larly if the diarrhea is accompanied by melena, vomiting, and/or generalized lethargy and weakness.
c. Patients may also exhibit polyuria and polydipsia. This is likely due to a combination of the
decreased renal medullary concentration gradient resulting from hyponatremia, and decreased
sodium (and, consequently, water) resorption in the collecting ducts of the kidney.
d. Some dogs with hypoadrenocorticism present with generalized or hindlimb weakness, which may
be the primary presenting complaint (Figure 1.4). Reflexes are generally normal in these dogs. The
dogs have hindlimb weakness only. Another hypothesis is that electrolyte abnormalities lead to aber-
rant neuromuscular function. Whatever the cause, hypoadrenocorticism should be considered in
patients that are “down in the hindlimbs."
e. Some dogs with hypoadrenocorticism have concurrent megaesophagus. Rarely, regurgitation is
the major presenting complaint in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. The severity of the megaesopha-
gus is variable; regurgitation may be noted, but radiographic evidence without clinical signs is also
possible. The esophageal dilation seems to be less severe than that seen in other cases of megae-
sophagus. Proposed explanations for this megaesophagus include disturbed neuromuscular function
caused by electrolyte abnormalities and muscle weakness secondary to cortisol deficiency.
Hypoadrenocorticism is one of the few underlying causes of megaesophagus in which appropriate
 treatment results in the resolution of esophageal abnormalities, so it should be ruled out in all cases
of megaesophagus.
f. Muscle cramping has been described in two Standard Poodles with hypoadrenocorticism. Again, aber-
rant electrolyte concentrations are hypothesized to cause an underlying neuron conduction abnormality.
2. Acute hypoadrenocorticism:
clinical signs described for patients with chronic hypoadrenocorticism may be found in dogs with an
6Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Table 1.1  Clinical signs and physical exam findings in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.
Clinical signs and physical exam findings
Incidence (%)
Lethargy/depression
06
 Decreased appetite/anorexia
80
Vomiting
80
Weakness
70
Weight loss
45
 Diarrhea
40
Waxing/waning illness
40
Dehydration
40
Hypothermia
35
 Shaking/shivering
30
Weak pulses
30
 Polyuria/polydipsia
25
Melena
15
Painful abdomen
15
Data modified fronm Willard et al. (1 982); Peterson et al. (1996); and Melian and Peterson (1996).
Figure 1.4 Hypoadrenocorticism is known as "The Great Pretender" because of the variety of presenting complaints and
clinical signs seen in patients. This &-year-old bearded collie presented for hindlimb weakness and collapse. Serum chemistry
revealed hyperkalemia and hyponatremia, and ACT'H stimulation confirmed hypoadrenocorticism.
 d   s a  a  a r 
vomiting and/or diarrhea. Collapse secondary to hypovolemia and/or generalized weakness is not
uncommon.
h. Classic signs of hypovolemic shock are usually present, including weak pulse, pale mucous
membranes, and prolonged capillary refill time; hypothermia occurs occasionally. Heart rate, how-
ever, is variable. Whereas most dogs in hypovolemic shock are tachycardic (>160 bpm), patients in
hypoadrenocortical crisis often have a normal to decreased heart rate. This is due to the effects of
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs  7
hyperkalemia in lowering the heart rate. Thus, the presence of a decreased or normal heart rate
("relative bradycardia") in a patient in hypovolemic shock should raise suspicion of hyperkalemia
kalemia is critical for the survival of the patient.
C. Melena is frequently present in patients in Addisonian crisis, and may be severe enough to
necessitate blood transfusion. Hematochezia is seen less frequently. Melena may be noted on initial
exam, or may not be evident until after beginning therapy. Progressively decreasing hematocrit
during treatment (more than by hemodilution alone) should increase suspicion of melena, and the
possibility of melena should not be excluded due to its initial absence in feces or upon rectal
1-2 days. It is not uncommon for melena to appear 2-3 days into treatment. For this reason,
hospitalization is recommended until the hematocrit stabilizes or increases.
d. Generalized muscle weakness results in shaking and/or shivering in some patients.
e. Rarely, severe hypoglycemia leads to seizures in dogs with Addison's disease
3. Atypical hypoadrenocorticism:
Ss      sd   n   so 
(lethargy, weight loss, and anorexia) as other dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.
h. Gastrointestinal signs (vomiting and diarrhea) are also common, and megaesophagus and seizures
(secondary to hypoglycemia) have been reported with atypical hypoadrenocorticism as well.
and hyponatremia do not occur in these dogs. Hypotension is possible, however, as a result of
decreased vascular tone in the absence of cortisol. Acute collapse secondary to hypoglycemia and
hemorrhagic shock secondary to GI hemorrhage has also been reported in this group of Addisonian
patients.
d. Patients with atypical Addison's disease have a slightly longer duration of clinical signs prior to
diagnosis. This may be due to the fact that diagnosis is delayed because there are no electrolyte
disturbances to stimulate the clinician's suspicion of hypoadrenocorticism.
IV. Diagnosis
A
Chronic hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Most of the diagnostics performed in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism are done early in the workup,
often prior to significant suspicion of hypoadrenocorticism. A complete blood count, serum biochemis-
try analysis, and urinalysis should be performed in each patient with clinical signs consistent with
hypoadrenocorticism (Table 1.2). It is critical that electrolyte analysis is included in the biochemistry
panel, as sodium and potassium abnormalities are often the first specific indicators of hypoadrenocorti-
cism. Additionally, electrolyte disturbances are common in patients with gastrointestinal signs of any
etiology, and need to be addressed during treatment:
a. Serum biochemistry and urinalysis:
  (oe) a ae  i, m s  (l
(85%} at diagnosis. Potassium concentration usually remains below 8 mEq/L, but may be as high
as 11 mEq/L. Sodium concentrations are usually in the range of 120-140mEq/L, but may be as
low as 100 mEq/L. Some present with one abnormality without the other (e.g., hyperkalemia
without hyponatremia). Hypochloremia often parallels hyponatremia and is seen in approxi-
mately half of the patients. Electrolyte disturbances are not always present early in the course of
disease; they may appear when the patient's disease progresses, or not at all, as with atypical
hypoadrenocorticism.Emphasis is sometimes placed on calculation of the Nat/K+ ratio. The lower
the sodium and the higher the potassium concentration, the lower the ratio. The lower the ratio,
the higher the likelihood that the patient has Addison's disease (Adler et al. 2007). However, a
high ratio does not rule out hypoadrenocorticism, nor does a low ratio definitively diagnose it;
thus, the utility of the ratio is debatable. Any dog with hyponatrermia or hyperkalemia should be
considered a suspect for hypoadrenocorticism, regardless of the ratio.
8Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Table 1.2  Clinicopathologic abnormalities common with hypoadrenocorticism.
Hyperkalemia
Hyponatremia
Hypochloremia
Azotemia
Isosthenuria
Hypoalbuminemia
Hypercalcemia
Hypocholesterolemia
Lymphocytosis
Lack of stress-related neutrophilia
Eosinophilia
2) Azotemia is a frequent finding, and is usually prerenal in nature. Both creatinine (increased
in 65% of cases) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (increased in 90%) concentrations increase
as a result of decreased renal perfusion due to hypovolemia; BUN may be further increased by
GI blood loss. Phosphorus is also usually increased in azotemic patients (70% of all
Addisonians):
a) Despite the prerenal nature of the azotemia, most dogs with hypoadrenocorticism also
have a urine-specific gravity <1.030 (frequently <1.020). This is more dilute than would be
expected in most patients with prerenal azotemia alone. For this reason, many of these patients
are incorrectly thought to be in renal failure. It is imperative that clinicians consider hypoad-
renocorticism as a differential diagnosis in any azotemic dog, particularly if the dog has a
history of gastrointestinal signs.
3) Impaired excretion of acid (H+ions) in the distal tubule results in mild metabolic acidosis in
half the canine Addisonians.
4) Approximately 15% of Addisonian dogs have hypoalbuminemia. Although the mechanism
gastrointestinal absorption, or decreased hepatic synthesis.
5) Although hypocortisolemia should result in decreased hepatic gluconeogenesis, hypoglycemia
occurs infrequently (15%) in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, and is usually subclinical. However,
Hypoadrenocorticism should always be a differential diagnosis for an adult dog with severe
hypoglycemia.
6) Total and ionized hypercalcemia occurs frequently, in approximately 30% of hypoadrenocor-
tical dogs (Adamantos et al. 2008). Mild increases in calcium are most common, but severe
hypercalcemia is possible. The reason for this hypercalcemia is unclear, but is likely related to
decreased renal clearance. Hypoadrenocorticism accounts for anywhere from 5% to 25% of
dogs with hypercalcemia; thus, it should be considered a differential diagnosis in the workup of
hypercalcemic dogs.
7) Decreased hepatic production and gastrointestinal malabsorption are suspected to cause
hypocholesterolemia in approximately 10% of Addisonian dogs.
 8) Hepatic hypoperfusion and cholestasis may play a role in the mild to moderate increases in
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and aspartate aminotransferase
(AST) seen in 20-30% of hypoadrenocortical dogs.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs g
b.Complete blood count:
1) Cortisol released during illness in dogs with normal adrenocortical function often results in
 the “stress leukogram" of neutrophilia, lymphopenia, monocytosis, and eosinopenia. These
Lymphocytosis and eosinophilia, part of the "reverse stress leukogram," are only present occa-
sionally (10% of cases), while the final component, neutropenia, is rarely present. Despite the
infrequent occurrence of the reverse stress leukogram, the absence of a stress leukogram in a sick
2) Approximately 30% of dogs are anemic at diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, with the
proportion increasing to approximately 70% following rehydration. The anemia is typically
normochromic, normocytic, nonregenerative, and mild. Dogs with more severe anemia almost
always have evidence of gastrointestinal blood loss, even if not evident at presentation.
2. Radiographs and ultrasound are often performed in patients that present for gastrointestinal signs,
including most patients with hypoadrenocorticism. Although results are generally nonspecific, there are
some findings commonly present in Addisonian dogs:
 a. Thoracic radiographs usually reveal nonspecific signs of hypovolemia, including microcardia and
 decreased size of the caudal vena cava and pulmonary vessels (Figure 1.5). Megaesophagus may also
be seen, as discussed above.
b. Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound may reveal microhepatica, consistent with hypovolemia.
Adrenal gland length and thickness, on average, are lower in Addisonians than in normal dogs
(Figure 1.6). However, there is significant overlap between values in normal and Addisonian dogs.
One study reported that the length and thickness of the left adrenal in a small group of hypoadreno-
cortical dogs was 10.0-19.7 mm (median, 13.1 mm) and 2.2-3.0 mm (median, 2.4 mm), respectively.
The same measurerments (length, thickness) of the left adrenal in a group of normal dogs were
13.2-26.3 mm (median, 17.4 mm) and 3.0-5.2mm (median, 4.1 mm). Despite the trend in smaller
adrenal gland measurements in hypoadrenocortical patients, the difference in values is not signifi-
10  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
(a)
(b)
My aon usoouapeody ym son ui spues ieuape leus Aian sau! uao punosen ieug (e) y' ani
thin this left adrenal gland is (3.3 mm), compared to the one from a normal dog in (b). (b) Note the peanut shape and width
(6.7 mm) of this normal left adrenal gland, compared to the gland from an Addisonian dog in (a). (Images provided by Drs. Erin
Brinkman and Erica Baravik.)
3. Specific endocrine tests:
a. The ACTH stimulation test is required for definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism. A supra-
physiologic dose of ACTH is given to maximally stimulate the adrenal glands (Figure 1.7). In dogs
with normally functioning adrenal glands, ACTH stimulation will result in a significant increase in
cortisol concentration. In hypoadrenocortical dogs, minimal to no increase in cortisol concentration
will occur:
1) Protocol:
a) A baseline blood sample is obtained.
b) Synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin or tetracosactrin), 5μg/kg (0.005 mg/kg) (up to a maximum
of 250 μg/dog) is given, intravenously (Lathan et al. 2008).
c) A 1 h post-ACTH blood sample is drawn.
d) Pre- and post-ACTH samples are submitted for cortisol analysis.
e) Due to inconsistent results, compounded ACTH gel is not recommended for the diagnosis
of hypoadrenocorticism.
f) In canine Addisonian suspects, intravenous administration of cosyntropin is recommended
over intramuscular adminisration due to potentially altered intramuscular absorption in
dehydrated and/or hypovolemic patients.
2) Interpretation of the ACTH stimulation test is based on the value of the post-sample:
a) A post-sample of <2.0μg/dL (55 nmol/L) is consistent with a clinical diagnosis of hypoad-
renocorticism. Lack of response to ACTH stimulation demonstrates that the adrenal cortex is
incapable of secreting cortisol, even when stimulated with a much higher amount of ACTH
than the body produces:
i. The ACTH stimulation test does not differentiate between primary adrenocortical
failure and secondary hypoadrenocorticism due to decreased ACTH secretion. Without the
trophic effects of ACTH, the adrenal cortex atrophies, disabling a response to exogenous
ACTH. Thus, dogs with primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism both fail the ACTH
stimulation test.
prolonged administration of exogenous glucocorticoids, will also have a post-stimulation
cortisol concentration < 2.0 pg/kg (55 nmol/L). However these patients should be easy to
differentiate based on historical evidence of glucocorticoid administration.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs11
Fgure 1.7  An ACT H stimulation test is required for definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism. In order to avoid problems
with absorption, synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) is given intravenously in Addison's disease suspects.
b) A post-sample >2μg/dL (55 nmol/L) rules out the clinical diagnosis of hypoadrenocorti-
cism in most patients.
c) Administration of glucocorticoids prior to the ACTH stimulation test can alter the test in
two different ways:
i. Several synthetic glucocorticoids, including prednisone and methylprednisolone, cross-
tions will be falsely elevated following administration of other glucocorticoids. To avoid
this, the only glucocorticoids that should be given near the time of the test are dexametha-
sone and triamcinolone. Short-acting glucocorticoids, such as prednisone or methylpredni-
solone succinate, should be withheld for 12-24h before the test. Longer-acting repositol
steroids, such as methylprednisolone acetate, may cross-react with the assay for up to
4 weeks following administration. If glucocorticoid supplementation is necessary prior to
completion of the ACTH stimulation test, dexamethasone or triamcinolone should be
given.
il. Short-term administration of glucocorticoids within a month of the test may lead to
decreased response to ACTH, depending on patient sensitivity, dosage, and duration of
 treatment. Exogenous glucocorticoid administration (oral or topical) inhibits the release of
endogenous ACTH, which causes atrophy of the adrenal cortex. Following removal of the
source of exogenous glucocorticoid, the adrenocortical function slowly recovers. However,
if an ACTH stimulation test is performed prior to full recovery, the post-stimulation corti-
sol may be below normal. A post-ACTH cortisol concentration between 2μg/dL (55 nmol/L)
and 5pg/dL (138 nmol/L) is often the result of recent steroid administration as compared
to spontaneous hypoadrenocorticism:
12  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
i) Chronic administration of glucocorticoids may lead to suppression of the hypothalamic
pituitary axis (HPA) and subsequent decreased response to ACTH for more than a month
following discontinuation of the medication.
3) For the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, the use of synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin or tetra-
cosactrin) is recommended. Compounded gel formulations are available, but testing results are
not as consistent with the gels as they are with synthetic ACTH:
a) If compounded ACTH gel must be used, it is recommended to obtain two post-stimulation
cortisol samples at 1 and 2h, due to inconsistent results from the use of the gel.
4) After a 250pg vial of cosyntropin or tetracosactrin is opened, it can be frozen in plastic
syringes and stored for up to 6months. ACTH binds to glass, so glass syringes should not be used.
Freezing in 50μg aliquots allows dosing for 10 kg dogs with each syringe and minimizes waste.
Once thawed, cosyntropin should not be refrozen; a frost-free freezer should NOT be used
because of the freeze/thaw cycles
h. A baseline cortisol concentration is a relatively inexpensive way to rule out hypoadrenocorticism.
In almost all patients with hypoadrenocorticism, a baseline cortisol sample will be <2pg/dL
(55 nmol/L) (often <1 μg/mL (28 nmol/L)), so a baseline cortisol sample >2 μg/dL (S5 nmol/L) rules
out hypoadrenocorticism in a given patient. However since normal dogs can have baseline cortisol
odq o on pd aq  isn uos H ue (ro s) rz > sas
renocorticism. A baseline cortisol concentration can only be used to rule out hypoadrenocorticism
NOT to confirm it:
cortisol values between 2 pg/dL (55 nmol/L) and 3pg/dL (83 nmol/L). Therefore, strong clinical
suspicion of hypoadrenocorticism would mandate an ACTH stimulation test in a dog with base-
line values between 2pg/dL (55 nmol/L) and 3 μg/dL (83 nmol/L).
 Acute hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Patients presenting in hypoadrenocortical crisis have similar diagnostic findings as patients with
chronic clinical signs (see above). However, abnormalities are often more severe and can be immediately
life-threatening (Figure 1.8):
weakness, but severe hyperkalemia may be immediately life-threatening. Individual patients vary in
susceptibility to the debilitating effects of hyperkalemia, but potassium concentrations less than
ness and moderate to severe cardiac dysfunction, and may be fatal. Values >9.0mEq/L usually lead
to severe cardiac dysfunction and are often fatal:
1) Cardiac function in these patients should be monitored by electrocardiogram (ECG). Although
ECG changes do not correlate exactly with specific potassium concentrations, they tend to appear
in the following order, with increasing severity of hyperkalemia:
a) Increased T-wave amplitude
b) Shortened Q-T interval.
C) Decreased P-wave amplitude.
d) Prolonged P-R interval.
e) Absent P-wave (sinoatrial standstill).
f) Severe bradycardia.
g)Asystole.
h) Bizarre QRS complexes, including paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and ventricular
fibrillation, may also be seen.
h. Most patients in Addisonian crisis will have significant prerenal azotemia on presentation, which
resolves upon correction of hypovolemia. Severe or prolonged hypovolemia, however, can result in
ischemic renal damage secondary to hypoperfusion. If tubular epithelial damage results from the
ischemia, renal azotemia may occur; however, with appropriate supportive care most patients fully
recover renal function. Severe gastrointestinal blood loss is more common in patients in crisis, and
may also lead to more severe azotemia (increased BUN).
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs13
Fgure 1.8 Stressful events often precipitate hypoadrenocortical crises. This &-year-old Bassett hound underwent anesthesia for mass
removal from a toe, and collapsed the next day. She presented nonresponsive, in severe hypovolemic shock. Electrocardiogram
revealed spiked T-waves and flattened P-waves, the first evidence of hyperkalemia. Preanesthetic serum chemistry (2 days before
presentation) revealed a potassium concentration at the high end of normal and normal sodium concentration.Following collapse,
her potassium concentration was 8.3 mEq/L, and sodium concentration was still within reference range (143 mEq/L)
c. Hemogram findings are similar between the chronic and acute presentation. Anemia may be
 more severe with the acute form due to gastrointestinal blood loss, and is often much more apparent
following rehydration. Since patients in hypovolemic shock are severely stressed, the absence of a
stress leukogram in this situation should alert the clinician to consider hypoadrenocorticism.
C. Atypical hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Dogs with isolated glucocorticoid deficiency may have any of the same laboratory abnormalities as
 dogs with combined mineralocorticoid and glucocoricoid deficiency, with the exception of hyper-
kalemia, hyponatrermia, and hypochloremia. However, there are some differences in the frequency and
severity of these abnormalities:
a. Since patients with atypical hypoadrenocorticism are much less likely to present in hypovolemic
shock, fewer patients are azotemic. The degree of azotemia is usually less severe than that found in
typical Addisonians.
h. Anemia is more common in dogs with isolated cortisol deficiency. This is most likely because
atypical Addisonians are less hemoconcentrated at presentation (when values are taken for use in
comparative studies) than typical Addisonians. Atypical patients have lower serum albumin concen-
frations than typical patients, as well, supporting the hemoconcentration hypothesis.
C. Serum cholesterol concentrations are lower in dogs with atypical hypoadrenocorticism. The
    d   e  l      
diagnosis.
14  Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
2. Specific endocrine tests:
a. The ACTH stimulation test is required for definitive diagnosis of atypical hypoadrenocorticism;
h. Although atypical Addison's is an uncommon disease, treatment is simple and inexpensive.
Because patients without mineralocorticoid deficiency do not have electrolyte abnormalities,
atypical hypoadrenocorticism should be considered in most patients with unexplained gas-
trointestinal signs, lethargy, weight loss, and polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD). Measurement of the
baseline cortisol concentration can be very helpful for ruling out hypoadrenocorticism in these
patients.
lar clinical signs, due to their shared isolated cortisol deficiency. Endogenous ACTH levels should be
measured to differentiate between primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism. High levels indicate
that the patient has primary hypoadrenocorticism (due to lack of negative feedback on the pituitary
from cortisol), whereas low values are consistent with secondary hypoadrenocorticism. Since
secondary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by a pituitary lesion, this information is helpful in direct
ing further diagnostics, such as advanced imaging of the brain, in these cases. Additionally, patients
with secondary hypoadrenocorticism should never acquire electrolyte abnormalities, whereas
patients with atypical Addison's may.
d. Pre- and post-ACTH stimulation aldosterone concentrations may be measured to help confirm
isolated cortisol deficiency. Dogs with atypical Addison's should exhibit an increase in aldosterone
concentration following stimulation, while minimal to no increase in aldosterone concentration is
suggestive of a combined mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid deficiency:
1) Unfortunately, interpretation of post-stimulation aldosterone concentrations is not straight-
forward, as cut-off values between dogs that will develop electrolyte abnormalities and dogs that
will not, have not been established. At this time, it appears that dogs with normal electrolyte
concentrations, but minimal increase in aldosterone concentration following ACTH stimulation,
may be at risk of developing electrolyte abnormalities in the near future.
V.1
Differential Diagnoses
A.Chronic and acute hypoadrenocorticism
The differential diagnoses for Addison's disease include conditions leading to hyperkalemia and hypona-
tremia, gastrointestinal signs, and azotemia (Table 1.3). Focusing on the causes of hyperkalemia and
hyponatremia is usually most beneficial, as there are fewer rule-outs than for gastrointestinal disease
and azotemia:
1. Patients with Addison's disease are commonly misdiagnosed with acute renal failure (ARF) due to
the overlap of clinical signs and diagnostic findings. Gastrointestinal signs often accompany ARF due to
 the stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone by uremic toxins. ARF may also result in hypona-
 tremia and hyperkalemia in oliguric and anuric dogs.Azotemia is present in most patients with hypoad-
renocorticism and all patients with ARF. Usually, prerenal causes of azotemia are differentiated from
renal causes by evaluation of the urine-specific gravity. Dogs with renal azotemia lose the capacity
to concentrate urine, so the urine is typically isosthenuric (1.008-1.012). In most dogs with prerenal
azotemia, urine concentrating ability is maintained, and the urine specific gravity (USG) is >1.030, an
appropriate response to dehydration.
 In many dogs with Addison's disease, however, the USG is <1.020, despite the absence of underlying
renal disease. Thus, clinicians may inadvertently believe that a dog with Addison's disease actually has
ARF. Considering that the prognosis for a patient with hypoadrenocorticism is usually good, whereas
prognosis for ARF is variable, misdiagnosis may not only delay appropriate treatment, but may sway
the owners toward euthanasia.
There are several ways to differentiate the two diseases. The first is to perform an ACTH stimulation
 test; unfortunately, results are not generally available immediately or during emergency hours.
Practically speaking, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism respond to fluid therapy much more quickly than
dogs with renal failure. Azotemia typically decreases within the first 12-24 h, and the dog's clinical
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs 15
Table 1.3Differential diagnoses.
Differential diagnoses for hyperkalemia and hyponatremia
Hypoadrenocorticism 
Acute renal failure
Urinary tract obstruction/uroa bdomen
Trichuriasis
Severe gastrointestinal disease
Peritoneal effusion
Chylothorax
 Diabetic ketoacidosis
Congestive heart failure
Hepatic failure/cirrhosis
Primary polydipsia
 Inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) secretion
Mannitol administration
Hypothyroid myxedema 
Massive tissue trauma
·Crush injury
Aortic thromboembolism
Rhabdomyolysis
 Diuretic administration
Furosemide
Spironolactone
 ACE-inhibitor administration
 Metabolic acidosis 
Pregnancy
Artifacts
 Erythrocyte lysis in Japanese breeds
Marked thrombocytosis
Marked leukocytosis
The conditions highlighted in gray represent the most common differential diagnoses
 in dogs with hyponatremia and hyperkalenia that are later diagnosed with
hypoa drenocorticism.
 in dogs with ARF unless anuria or oliguria is present following rehydration. Thus, if the patient is
 producing an adequate amount of urine following rehydration, the hyperkalemia and hyponatremia are
much less likely to be caused by ARF. Occasionally, oliguria or anuria is misdiagnosed in an Addisonian
patient. The most common reason for this is failure to allow for adequate rehydration prior to deter-
2. Urinary tract obstruction and uroabdomen often result in hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and poten-
tially abdominal pain, and should be ruled out in Addisonian suspects.
16  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
3. Dogs suffering from whipworm infestation may also have hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, vomiting,
and diarrhea, in addition to melena ("pseudohypoadrenocorticism"). For this reason, all patients with
to have both hypoadrenocorticism and whipworm infection, causing more severe disease than either
alone:
a. Severe gastrointestinal disease from other causes (Ancylostomiasis, Coccidiosis, idiopathic
 hemorrhagic gastroenteritis) may also lead to pseudohypoadrenocorticism.
 4. Other reported causes of concurrent hyperkalemia and hyponatremia include peritoneal effusion,
chylothorax, congestive heart failure, pregnancy, and severe acidosis.
B.
Atypical hypoadrenocorticism:
hypocholesterolemia and hypoalbuminemia. Thus, other causes of GI disease with malabsorption, such
as inflammatory bowel disease and lymphangiectasia, are often considered concurrently. Additionally,
since signs are often exacerbated following a stressful event, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism may be
thought to have “"stress colitis" or hemorrhagic gastroenteritis. It is imperative that atypical Addison's
disease be considered in these cases so that it is not missed.
2. Some dogs with polyuria and polydipsia are also eventually diagnosed with atypical hypoadrenocor
ticism, and PU/PD may be their only presenting complaint. The potential differential diagnoses are too
extensive to list here, but hypoadrenocorticism should remain on the list of differential diagnoses for
patients with polyuria and polydipsia.
Vl. Treatment
Chronic hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Treatment of combined cortisol and aldosterone deficiency requires lifelong glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid supplementation. Chronic therapy is started in patients that do not present in crisis,
and following stabilization of those patients that do:
a twice daily pill, fludrocortisone, or a monthly injection, desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP),
can be used for mineralocorticoid supplementation:
1) DOCP is a long-acting injectable mineralocorticoid with no glucocorticoid activity. It is
initially administered at a dose of 2.2mg/kg, subcutaneously or intramuscularly, every
25 days:
a) Adjustment of dose and dosing interval are based on electrolyte concentrations measured
at specific times following administration:
i. Electrolytes are first rechecked 2 weeks after the injection. Dosage of the FOLLOWING
injection will be adjusted based on these values:
i) If sodium and potassium concentrations are within the reference range, the dose
remains the same.
ii) If hyponatremia or hyperkalermia is present, dose should be increased by about 10%.
ii) If hypernatremia or hypokalemia is present, dose should be decreased by about 10%.
iv) In small patients (5kg or less), doses may be adjusted by up to 25% at a time.
v) If it is determined that the dose should be increased, measurement of electrolytes at
day 25 is recommended to ensure that electrolyte values are not dangerously altered.
However, adjustment of dose interval (see below) is postponed until after the following
injection.
ii. Dosing interval is determined by measurement of electrolytes on day 25:
i) If sodium and potassium concentrations are within reference range, the dosing inter-
val should remain the same, and the injection is to be given every 25 days.
ii) If hyponatremia or hyperkalemia is present, the dosing interval should be decreased
by 1-2 days, and the next injection should be given in 23-24 days.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs17
iii) If hypernatremia or hypokalemia are present, the dosing interval should be increased
by 1-2 days, and the next injection should be given in 26-27 days.
iv) Following each dosing interval change, the interval should be adjusted based on
electrolyte concentrations measured prior to the next DOCP administration, as described
above.
ili. Electrolytes should be rechecked at the above intervals each time the dose or dosing
 interval is changed, and then every 3-6 months thereafter.
iv. DOCP is an expensive medication, and owners will frequently ask for ways to decrease
the cost. If electrolyte concentrations are normal on the day of the injection, the interval
may be increased by 2 days, up until the interval is 30 days (or approximately once per
month). This helps decrease expense and also helps owners remember the date of the next
injection:
i) Although some dogs may only require injections every 6 weeks, monthly injections
are recommended in order to help establish a consistent routine for the owner. Longer
dose intervals are acceptable, but may result in decreased owner compliance.
v. Another way to decrease expense is to decrease the total dose. Some dogs do well on
1 mg/kg/month. However the starting dose should be 2.2 mg/kg, and the dose decreased
slowly (10% at a time) as long as electrolyte concentrations remain in the reference range
immediately prior to the next injection. Use of this protocol saves money; however, using a
lower dose leaves less room for error on the dosing interval. It is imperative that owners
wishing to use a lower dose adhere tightly to the dosing schedule.
vi. The potential cost savings associated with prolonging the dose interval and/or decreas-
ing the dose must be weighed against the expenses associated with the required monitoring
following each adjustment. These adjustrments are much more cost-effective for larger
patients.
vi. Some owners will attempt to decrease cost by extending the dosing interval themselves.
Owners must be sternly warned that doing this increases the chances of their dog going into
Addisonian crisis, which will most definitely be more costly, and potentially result in the
death of their pet.
b) Subcutaneous administration results in good control in most patients. However, there are
occasional patients whose electrolyte values do not correct as expected. This may be due to an
absorption problem. Most of these patients respond well to intramuscular injection.
C) There are few side effects of DOCP, although polyuria and polydipsia have been reported.
 It is less common with DOCP than with fludrocortisone, and may actually be due to the pred-
nisone that the dog is on concurrently. However, if PU/PD are suspected to be due to the
DOCP, decreasing the dose may decrease or eliminate this side effect.
d) All patients receiving DOCP will need additional daily glucocorticoid supplementation.
 2) Fludrocortisone is a shorter-acting oral mineralocorticoid with some glucocoricoid activity.
The initial dose is 0.02 mg/kg/day, divided:
a) The dose is adjusted based on weekly electrolyte concentrations, until the dose stabilizes:
i. If the patient's electrolyte values are within reference range, the dose is maintained.
il. If hyperkalermia or hyponatremia is present, the dose is increased by 0.05-0.1 mg/day.
ili. If hypokalemia or hypernatremia is present,the dose is decreased by 0.05-0.1 mg/day.
 is a  im sd s    
wan uo Aressasau Aensn nou si es diaq Kew kepayyu i'o jo asop e ie pooy
however.
 b) Once the dose has stabilized, electrolytes should be rechecked every 3-6 months. The dose
frequently needs to be increased within the first 1.5 years of therapy.
C) Polyuria, polydipsia, and less frequently polyphagia, panting, and hair loss are reported in
oo a on p aq An n sis a aoso o sp aos
properties of fludrocortisone, and should resolve if the patient is switched to DOCP (with
concurrent prednisone).
18  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
hypoadrenocorticism. Prednisone is the most frequently used glucocorticoid. The physiologic dosage
of prednisone is 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day:
1) The prednisone dose is titrated “to effect,” according to clinical signs. The dose is increased if
lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, or melena occurs. The client is instructed to pay close atten-
tion to the dog's attitude, and the dose should be increased if the dog is not "acting herself?" The
dose is decreased if side effects of glucocorticoid excess are present, such as PU/PD, polyphagia, or
panting.
2) The prednisone dose needs to be increased by 2-10 times when the dog is in a stressful situa-
tion. This may include any trips to the veterinarian (such as to check electrolytes), new visitors in
 the home, a new addition to the household, vacation, etc. The increased dose is started the day or
morning prior to the beginning of the stressful event, and continued for a day or two afterward.
With time and guidance, the client should be able to determine the optimal dose for the patient in
times of stress:
i. Remember that any unrelated illness places additional physiologic stress on the patient
and will require additional glucocorticoid administration.
ii. It must also be noted that an increase in clinical signs, such as vomiting or diarrhea.
suggests that the prednisone dose needs to be increased. Physiologic doses of prednisone
should not cause gastric ulceration or other gastrointestinal side effects, so gastrointestinal
signs usually mandate an increase in prednisone dose.
3) Whereas fludrocortisone has some glucocorticoid activity, DOCP does not. Thus, all patients
on DOCP need daily glucocorticoid supplementation, whereas about half of the patients on
fludrocortisone do not:
i. Dogs taking fludrocortisone should be started on 0.1 mg/kg/day of prednisone, divided
BID or once daily. At the 1 week electrolyte recheck examination, the dose may be decreased
by 50% if signs of cortisol deficiency (such as gastrointestinal signs or lethargy) are not
present. It may be discontinued if these signs are still absent 1 week later. The dose should
be increased at any point when signs of cortisol deficiency return, and the dose should be
increased during stressful situations, as described above.
B.Acute hypoadrenocorticism:
1. An Addisonian crisis is an immediately life-threatening condition that requires rapid intervention.
The initial goals of treatment are in order of importance to correct hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, and
associated arrhythmias, hypoglycemia, acidosis, and hypercalcemia, if present:
 tremia, hypochloremia, and most cases of hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. One-third to one-
half of the shock volume (90 mL/kg) of an isotonic replacement crystalloid should be given initially.
 Response should be assessed based on heart rate, pulse quality/blood pressure, capillary refill time,
and mental status. Additional fluids should then be given if necessary:
1) Because of the high sodium and chloride content, and lack of potassium, 0.9% NaCl has
raditionally been recommended as the fluid of choice for treating patients in adrenocortical crisis.
However, Normosol-R and lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) are preferred by some clinicians. The
low potassium content in these fluids still allows for correction of hyperkalemia, and they correct
acidosis more quickly that 0.9% saline.
2) Hetastarch (hydroxyethyl starch) may also be used for treatment of hypovolemic shock.
particularly in hypoalbuminemic patients. A dose of 5-10 mL/kg is given as a bolus with the initial
bolus of crystalloids for more rapid fluid resuscitation.
3) Care should be taken not to increase the sodium concentration more than 0.5 mEq/h (12 mEq/
day) in patients with hyponatremia. An abrupt change in extracellular sodium concentration (and
subsequent osmolality) may lead to myelinolysis and neurologic signs. Hypertonic saline should
NEVER be used to treat a patient in Addisonian crisis.
h. If hypoglycemia is suspected or proven, an IV dose of 1 mL/kg of 25% dextrose in saline (a 1:1
mixture of 50% dextrose and 0.9% saline) should be administered. This should be followed by a
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs 19
1.25-5% solution of dextrose in the patient's crystalloid fluids. Five percent dextrose (D5W) should
not be given, as the fluid becomes hypotonic after the dextrose is metabolized, resulting in inadequate
intravascular fluid expansion.
c. Fluid therapy alone is usually adequate to treat the hyperkalemia. However, in cases of severe
hyperkalemia (>9.0mEq/L) and/or life-threatening arrhythmias (severe bradycardia, absent P-wave,
idioventricular rhythm), specific therapy is indicated:
1) Calcium gluconate is administered for its cardioprotective effects, which are rapid and will
often maintain the patient's life while allowing time for fluids and other therapies to take effect.
It does not, however decrease the potassium concentrations. 0.5-1.5 mL/kg of calcium gluconate
is given slowly over 15 min, while monitoring the ECG for new arrhythmias (such as shortened
Q-T interval) and further decreased heart rate due to calcium administration. Administration
should be stopped if new arrhythmias occur.
 2) Intravenous regular insulin may also be given in concert with dextrose to drive potassium intra-
cellularly. 0.2-0.5 U/kg of regular insulin is given, followed by 2g of dextrose (diluted to 25% in
an isotonic crystalloid) per unit of insulin administered. Blood glucose concentration should then
be monitored and dextrose should be added to the replacement fluids to produce a 1.25-2.5%
dextrose solution.
d. Glucocorticoid deficiency may contribute to the hypotension seen in dogs in crisis, and is also
responsible for the hypoglycemia, gastrointestinal signs, and general debility. Supplementation
 pe  r ar ro    n 
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate, at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg IV, is recommended. Since it has 7-8 times
 the glucocorticoid activity as prednisone, this is equivalent to 2 mg/kg of prednisone, or 10 times the
physiologic dose:
1) Other glucocorticoids, such as hydrocortisone sodium succinate (0.5 mg/kg/h) and predniso
lone sodium succinate (2mg/kg), have also been recommended. Hydrocortisone is an ester of
cortisol, with equivalent glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid activity:
i. Most synthetic glucocorticoids, with the exception of dexamethasone and triamcinolone,
interfere with the cortisol assay. Thus, only these glucocorticoids should be given prior to com-
pleting the ACTH stimulation test. This advantage and its availability make dexamethasone the
author's glucocorticoid of choice for treating an Addisonian crisis.
ii. Although dexamethasone and triamcinolone do not interfere with the cortisol assay, they
do inhibit ACTH release, resulting in adrenocortical suppression. Administration of even a
single dose of 0.1mg/kg of dexamethasone can result in decreased cortisol response to
ACTH administration for 3 or more days. However, post-stimulation cortisol concentra-
o s n as s o )   ss q nou os so
following a single dose. Administration of multiple doses of dexamethasone, or chronic
administration, will result in adrenocortical atrophy and decreased cortisol concentration
following ACTH stimulation for a longer period of time, and could lead to iatrogenic
hypoadrenocorticism.
e. Additional supportive therapy should be provided as necessary. For example, dogs with gastroin-
testinal signs (vomiting, diarrhea, and melena) are given gastroprotectants, including H,-blockers and
sucralfate. Due to the potential for bacterial translocation from the GI tract, the author also admin-
isters prophylactic ampicillin, although this is controversial. Some dogs have such severe GI blood
loss that packed red blood cell or whole blood transfusion is necessary.
f. Following initial stabilization, frequent reassessment is necessary. Fluid rates should be adjusted to
correct dehydration and azotemia, while keeping up with maintenance requirements and ongoing
losses. Electrolyte values should be rechecked following fluid resuscitation, and then frequently
(q 6-12 h) until the potassium and sodium concentrations stabilize. Too rapid correction of hypona-
tremia should be avoided.
g. Following definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, mineralocorticoid supplementation should
be provided. Intravenous therapy is continued until the dog is able to eat and maintain hydration on
her own:
20  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
1) Since correcting hyponatremia too rapidly can result in myelinolysis, mineralocorticoid sup-
plementation should be postponed until the sodium concentration is closer to normal (approxi-
h. Dexamethasone or another parenteral glucocoricoid is continued at a dose of 0.2mg/kg/day
until prednisone is tolerated. Prednisone is then administered at 1 mg/kg divided BID until the patient
leaves the hospital, after which it is slowly tapered to physiologic dose:
1) Most patients respond quickly to therapy and dramatically improve within hours. However,
more debilitated patients, particularly the ones with severe hyperkalemia, may take 2-3 days to
C.Atypical hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Dogs with isolated cortisol deficiency require only glucocorticoid supplementation. Prednisone is
initially given at 0.1-0.25 mg/kg/day. Dose titration is the same as described above. The goal is to give
enough prednisone to control the dog's clinical signs of hypoadrenocorticism, but not so much as to
cause side effects of glucocorticoid supplementation. Additional prednisone (2-10 times the normal
dose) must be given prior to stressful events.
initial diagnosis. In two studies (Lifton et al. 1996; Thompson et al. 2007), only 3 out of 29 dogs with
isolated cortisol deficiency developed mineralocorticoid deficiency, from 3 weeks to 7months following
initial diagnosis. However, another case series suggests that over half of these dogs will develop miner-
alocorticoid deficiency at a later time. At this time, it is impossible to determine which dogs will do so
Thus, vigilant monitoring by the owner is imperative. Reevaluation of electrolytes at 1 and 3 months
following initial diagnosis, and then every 6 months thereafter seems prudent in these cases:
a. Patients with secondary hypoadrenocorticism are glucocorticoid deficient only, requiring pred-
nisone administration as described above. Unlike dogs with atypical hypoadrenocorticism, these
patients should never develop electrolyte abnormalities.
Vll. Prognosis
A. With prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment, the prognosis for patients with naturally occurring
hypoadrenocorticism is excellent, and patients usually enjoy a good quality and normal span of life. The
need for consistent treatment and patient monitoring must be stressed to owners, as skipping medication or
renocortical crisis.
B. With prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment, the prognosis for patients with iatrogenic hypoad-
renocorticism is also excellent. The hypoadrenocorticism may be transient or permanent, depending on
the cause.
VIlll. Prevention
A.At this time, it is not possible to prevent idiopathic primary hypoadrenocorticism in most dogs. However,
selective breeding may help decrease the prevalence in some breeds in which the mode of inheritance has
been determined, such as the Standard Poodle, Portuguese water dog, and Nova Scotia Duck-tolling retriever.
References and Further Readings
Adamantos S, Boag A. Total and ionised calcium concentrations in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 2008; 163(1):25-26.
Adler JA, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Abnorrmalities of serum electrolyte concentrations in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet
Interm Med 2007;21:1168-1173.
Herrtage ME. Hy poadrenocorticism. In: Ettinger SJ, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine, Sth edn. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2000, pp. 1612-1622.
corticism in dogs. JVIM 2008;22:1070-1073.
1996;209:2076-2081.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Dogs21
(1979-1993). JAVMA 1996;208(1):85-91.
Schaer M, Chen CL. A clinical survey of 48 dogs with adrenocortical hypofunction. JAAHA 1983;19:443-452.
Thompson AL, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Anderson JD. Comparison of classic hypoadrenocorticism with glucocorticoid-deficient
hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 46 cases (1985-2005). JAVMA 2007;230:1190-1194.
Willard MD, Schall WD, McCaw DE, Nachreiner RF. Canine hypoadrenocorticism: Report of 37 cases and review of 39 previously
reportedcases.JAVMA1982;180:59-62.
CHAPTER 2
Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
Pathogenesis
● Hypoadrenocorticism is caused by a deficiency of glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids.
Classical Signs and Diagnosis
● Weakness, lethargy, depression, and anorexia.
● Hyperkalemia (Table 2.1), hyponatremia, abnormal Na:K ratio.
● Lack of response to ACTH stimulation, high endogenous ACTH concentration.
Treatment and Prognosis
● Supplementation with glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids.
● Excellent prognosis.
1. Pathogenesis
 Overview ofHypoadrenocorticismThe adrenal cortex is responsible for the production of mineralocorticoids
(from the zona glomerulosa) and glucocorticoids (from the zonae fasciculata and reticularis):
1. The secretion of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa is a complex process, predominantly influenced
by potassium and angiotensin II and to a lesser extent by sodium and circulating concentrations of
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), whereas glucocorticoid secretion is influenced almost exclusively
by the release of ACTH. Glucocorticoids have an inhibitory influence on the release of ACTH, thereby
regulating the plasma levels via negative feedback.
2. Hypoadrenocorticism results from a deficiency of glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids. This can
occur as a result of either destruction of the adrenal cortex—primary hypoadrenocorticism—or a
deficiency in the production of ACTH from the anterior pituitary, secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
B. Primary hypoadrenocorticism arises from destruction of the adrenal cortex. This is most commonly
idiopathic or presumed to be immune mediated. Less common causes include infiltrative diseases such as
lymphoma, amyloidosis or granulomatous disease, hemorrhagic infarction, and iatrogenic destruction:
of ACTH is increased.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
22
Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats 23
Table 2.1 Main differential diagnoses for hyperkalemia in the cat.
Differential diagnosis
Hyperkalemia
Decreased loss
Urethral obstruction
Urinary tract rupture
Anuric/oliguric renal failure
Hypoadrenocorticism
Translocation from intracellular fluid
 Reperfusion syndrome
Acute acidosis
Insulin deficiency
Tumor lysis syndrome
Hemolysis
2. For adrenal insufficiency to occur, it is believed that at least 90% of the adrenal cortex must be
destroyed. As this is generally a gradual process, a partial insufficiency may initially occur, characterized
by inadequate adrenal reserve. In such cases, basal hormone secretion may be adequate, but lack of
adrenal reserve results in an inability to respond to stress.
3. The lack of mineralocorticoid results in an inability to conserve sodium, which can rapidly become
 deplete in animals which have decreased dietary intake due to anorexia or increased loss due to vomiting
or diarrhea. Sodium depletion results in a decreased circulating blood volume and hypotension. In
addition, the lack of aldosterone results in potassium retention and myocardial hyperexcitability (the
resting membrane potential is shifted to a less negative value, closer to the threshold potential, and
repolarization time is shortened). Concurrent hypoxia, acidosis, and hyponatremia further increase the
 myocardial irritability and the risk of arrhythmia.
fat metabolism, and gastrointestinal signs including, vomiting, anorexia, and abdominal pain.
 5. Typically, as all the layers of the adrenal cortex are affected, there are deficiencies of both
mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids. However, occasionally the zona glomerulosa function
remains intact so the classical electrolyte alterations are not seen; this is known as “"atypical"
hypoadrenocorticism.
C. Secondary hypoadrenocorticism is most commonly associated with the administration of drugs, such as
corticosteroids or progestogens, which suppress ACTH synthesis and/or release. However it can also be the
result of an underlying hypothalamic-pituitary disorder such as a tumor trauma, or a congenital defect:
1. The decreased ACTH production results in decreased production of glucocorticoids and atrophy of
the zonae reticularis and fasciculata. However mineralocorticoid production is relatively unaffected as
ACTH plays only a minor role in the production of aldosterone. Therefore, the clinical features of
secondary hypoadrenocorticism are similar to those seen in “atypical" primary hypoadrenocorticism;
that is, the electrolyte imbalances do not occur.
D. Hypoadrenocorticism in cats:
1. Primary hypoadrenocorticism is a rare disorder in cats; there have been fewer than 40 cases described
as either case reports/series or in textbooks. The majority have been idiopathic, although two were
secondary to neoplastic infiltration of the adrenal glands and one occurred following trauma.
 2. latrogenic cases of secondary hypoadrenocorticism have been described following the administration
of either exogenous corticosteroids or megestrol acetate, but no cases of naturally ocurring secondary
hypoadrenocorticism have been described. Typically, hypoadrenocorticism is evident based on ACTH
present, they are more often referable to iatrogenic hyperadrenocorricism. Suppression of the adrenal
cortex can be prolonged and requires as long as 4 months to recover from even one dose of long-acting
steroid, for example, methylprednisolone.
24  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Tasker et al., 1999. With permission.)
Il.Signalment
14 years, and the majority have been in either domestic short- or long-haired cats; one case has been described
in a British short-haired cat. There appears to be no gender predisposition in cats, which is in marked
contrast to dogs, where approximately 70% of cases occur in females.
III. Clinical Signs
 A. Owners have reported that clinical signs have been present from as few as 1-2 days or as long as
3-4 months.
B. The most comrmon clinical sings include lethargy, depression, anorexia, and weight loss, although,
collapse, dysphagia, weakness, vomiting, polyuria, and polydipsia have also been reported. Clinical signs
typically wax and wane, and often respond temporarily to symptomatic treatment with intravenous (IV)
fluid therapy and/or corticosteroid administration.
IV. Diagnosis
 A. Hematological abnormalities are not commonly reported, but have included mild normocytic normochromic
nonregenerative anemia, lymphocytosis, and eosinophilia.
B. Alterations in serum biochemistry typically include azotemia and hyperphosphatemia, but occasionally
involve mild increases in alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin:
1. The azotemia is generally prerenal in origin, as a result of dehydration.
2. However, urine specific gravity is rarely above 1.030. Although the inability to concentrate urine is
not fully understood, it is thought to be the result of the hyponatremia, which leads to medullary wash-
out and potentially interferes with the release of vasopressin.
3. Approximately one third of cats tested have had a decreased total CO, reflecting a metabolic acidosis,
ion secretion.
4. Serum electrolyte alterations include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and abnormal serum sodium:
potassium ratio. Occasionally, hypochloremia and either hypo- or hypercalcemia have been reported.
C.
Thoracic radiography may reveal microcardia and hypoperfusion of the lungs (Figure 2.1).
D. Electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities include sinus bradycardia and atrial premature complexes.
However, these alterations have only been reported in a small number of cats:
1. The classical ECG alterations associated with hyperkalemia (i.e., spiking of the T wave, shortening of
the Q-T interval, prolongation of the P wave, PR interval and QRS complex) have not been reported in
cats with hypoadrenocorticism. Why these changes have not been seen is unclear but may reflect
relatively mild hyperkalemia (the highest reported potassium level being 7.6mmol/L).
Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats 25
Table 2.2Testing cats with suspected hypoadrenocorticism.
Test
Protocol
Interpretation
Collect baseline blood sample for cortisol
IM test
concentration. Inject ACT'H gel (2.2 U/kg)-
Low or low-normal baseline cortisol concentration
Collect further samples at 1 h and 2 h
with minimal response to ACTH gel administration
IV test
Collect baseline blood sample for cortisol
Low or low-normal baseline cortisol concentration
concentration. Inject 125 μg of synthetic ACT'H
with minimal response to ACTH gel administration
(cosyntropin or tetracosactrin). Collect further
samples at 30 min and 1 h
ACT'H conc.
Collect blood sample into EDTA; centrifuge and 
 Demonstration of an elevated ACTH concentration in
freeze plasma in plastic tube. Ship frozen
a cat with hypoadrenocorticism confirms primary
disease
IM—intramuscular; IV—intravenous; ACTH conc.—endogenous ACTH concentration.
E. The ACTH stimulation test is the “gold standard" for diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in cats
(Table 2.2). However, a range of protocols have been reported:
1. A study to compare the effect of administering cosyntropin by IV and intramuscular (IM) routes
demonstrated higher peak levels of both ACTH and cortisol, and a longer duration of adrenocortical
stimulation after IV administration. Peak cortisol concentration was obtained 60-90 min after IV
administration.
2. A separate study assessed the effect of two synthetic corticotropin preparations (tetracosactrin and
cosyntropin) in healthy cats; again mean plasma cortisol concentration reached a peak and plateaued
between 60 and 120 min, then gradually decreased over 5 h.
3. This contrasts with a further study where IV tetracosactrin produced a significant rise in plasma
cortisol level by 60 min, but the peak was not achieved until 180 min, and levels were still significantly
elevated 5 h post injection.
4. It is unclear why these studies demonstrated such differing times to peak cortisol concentra-
tion, however, it remains that two studies demonstrated a significant increase in cortisol 60 min
after corticotropin administration, although the time to peak response showed some variability
between cats.
 5. The dose-response relationship berween cortisol and incremental doses of cosyntropin (1.25-125 μg
[V) has also been evaluated in normal cats. These studies showed that while all doses produced a
significant increase in plasma cortisol, this effect was prolonged at higher doses. Therefore, the higher
 dose (125 μg) of cosyntropin is recommended for cats.
6. A synthetic ACTH gel preparation ( Repository Corticotropin Injection, USP, Organics/LaGrange Inc.,
Chicago, Illinois) has also been evaluated for use in cats. A dose of 2.2mg/kg administered by IM injection
 resulted in a peak cortisol response within 1-2h.
 7. From these studies two regimes for ACTH stimulation testing have been proposed in cats, these are
summarized in Table 2.1.
F. Plasma endogenous ACTH:
1. In cases of primary hypoadrenocorticism, plasma ACTH is elevated; of the cases reported, ACTH
ranged from 500-8000 pg/mL (reference range: <10-125 pg/mL). Demonstration of an elevated ACTH
in a cat with an inappropriate response to ACTH stimulation testing confirms destruction of the adrenal
cortex. However, a similar pattern can be obtained from cases which are receiving drugs such as
ketoconazole, which blocks the synthesis of cortisol.
2. Cats treated chronically with glucocorticoids or progestogens (such as megestrol acetate) can have
low or undetectable cortisol levels at baseline and on stimulation. However, these drugs block the
production of ACTH; hence endogenous ACTH is low, confirming secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
26  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
V.
 Differential Diagnosis
See Table 2.1 for the most common differential diagnoses for hyperkalemia in the cat which is the most
consistent finding in cats with hypoadrenocorticism.
VI.'
Treatment
A.
 If a cat presents in a hypoadrenal crisis, the initial therapy should aim at restoring the circulating blood
volume, providing a source of glucocorticoid and correcting serum electrolyte disturbances:
1. Aggressive IV administration of isotonic fluid therapy should be given; ideally with 0.9% sodium
chloride. This is given at 40 mL/kg/h for the first 1-2h until circulatory volume has been restored, then
decreased to 60 mL/kg/q 24h and tapered over the next few days as the electrolyte abnormalities
resolve and the cat begins to maintain its own hydration.
2. Glucocorticoid deficits should be addressed by the administration of IV dexamethasone (0.1-2 mg/kg).
Ideally, an ACTH stimulation test should be performed prior to the administration of any gluco-
corticoid; however, low doses of dexamethasone do not interfere with concurrent ACTH stimula-
             
prednisolone (0.2 mg/kg/q 24 h).
3. Mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone acetate (0.05-0.1 mg/PO q 12-24 h) can be
instigated once the cat can swallow. Alternatively, repositol desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP) can
from 12.5 mg/cat every month or 2.2 mg/kg every 25 days. In some countries, desoxycorticosterone
acetate (DOCA) is available in oil as a long-acting preparation (not to be confused with the short-
acting preparation).
4. Cats with hypoadrenocorticism typically respond more slowly to treatment than dogs, with weak-
ness, anorexia, and lethargy persisting for 3-5 days despite correct management.
5. Cats diagnosed with hypoadrenocorticism require lifelong medication. The dose of mineralocor-
ticoid should be adjusted as necessary based on the results of serum electrolyte testing performed
at 1-2 week intervals during the initial stabilization period. Glucocorticoid replacement is ideally
(Depo-Medrol; 10 mg/month IM) can be administered to cats which are difficult to pill. However, this
protocol is not ideal and may predispose to the development of diabetes mellitus in the long term.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 In cats surviving the initial hypoadrenal crisis, the prognosis is excellent; in one report six of seven cats
that survived the initial crisis were alive for a mean of 36 months and in one case that the author has treated
was still alive 10 years after initial presentation.
VIll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
 Calsyn JDR, Green RA, Davis GJ, Reilly CM. Adrenal pheochromocytoma with contralateral adrenocortical adenorma in a cat.
JAAHA 2010;46:36-42.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hypoadrenocorticism in cats. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology
and Reproduction, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
Feldman EC, Peterson ME. Hypoadrenocorticism. Vet Clin N Am Smaft Anim Prac 1984;14:751-766.
Ferasin L. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in a cat following a short therapeutic course of methylprednisolone. JFMS
2001;3:87-93.
Myers NC, Bruyette Ds. Feline adrenocortical diseases: Part I—Hypoadrenocorticism. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anirm)
1994;9:144-147.
Parnell NK, Powell LL, Hohenhaus AE, Patnaik AK, Peterson ME. Hy poadrenocorticism as the primary rmanifestation of
lymphoma in two cats. JAVMA 1999;214:1208-1211.
Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. Primary hypoadrenocorticism in ten cats. JVIM 1989;3:55-58.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Cats27
Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ. Comparison of the imrmunoreactive plasma corticotrophin and cortisol responses to two
synthetic corticotrophin preparations (tetracosactin and cosyntropin) in healthy cats. AJVR 1992a;53:1752-1755.
 Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ. Comparison of the intravenous and intramuscular routes of administering cosyntroopin for
corticotropin stimulation testing in cats. AJVR 1992b;53:1392-1395.
Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ. Dose-response relation between plasrma concentrations of corticotropin and cortisol after
administration of incrermental doses of cosy ntropin for corticotropin stimulation testing in cats. AJVR 1993;54:300-304.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Foodman MS, Piccolie A, Quimby FW. Adrenal function in the cat: Cormparision of the effects of
cosyntropin (synthetic ACTH) and corticotrophin gel stimulation. Res Vet Sci 1984;37:331-333.
dexamethasone sodiurm phosphate in healthy cats. Arm J Vet Res 1987;48:1717-1724.
Sparkes AH, Adams DT, Douthwaite JA, Gruffydd-Jones TJ. Assessment of adrenal function in cats: Responses to intra venous
synthetic ACTH. JSAP 1990;31:2-5.
Tasker S, Mackay AD, Sparkes AH. A case of primary hypoadrenocorticism. JFMS 1999;1:257-260.
CHAPTER 3
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Hypoadrenocorticism in Horses
Pathogenesis
● Primary hypoadrenocorticism may occur in critically ill adult horses due to damage to the adrenal
glands.
● Relative adrenal insufficiency is common in septic and premature foals.
● Secondary hypoadrenocorticism may occur following abrupt cessation of corticosteroid or anabolic
 steroid therapy.
Classical Signs
● Vague and variable nonspecific signs including lethargy, poor hair coat, exercise intolerance, and
weight loss.
Diagnosis
● Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test.
Treatment
● Electrolyte correction with fluid therapy.
● Glucocorticoid supplementation.
1. Pathogenesis
A.
 Hypoadrenocorticism results from an inadequate production of glucocorticoids and/or mineralocoricoids
by adrenocortical cells:
1. Primary hypoadrenocorticism occurs when there is permanent damage to (or removal of) more
than 90% of the adrenal cortices:
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
28
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species   29
a. This may occur in critically ill horses (e.g., those with colic, enterocolitis, endotoxemia, or sepsis)
because the adrenal gland is a shock organ and adrenal hemorrhage, thrombosis, and cortical necrosis
may lead to adrenal atrophy and dysfunction. In fact, adrenocortical hemorrhage and necrosis are
common findings at necropsy in adult horses that succumb to acute severe gastrointestinal disease and
endotoxic shock, although antemortem evidence of adrenocortical dysfunction is often lacking in
suchcases.
h. Classic hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) resulting from immune-mediated adrenocortical
destruction has not been described in the horse.
C. Irreversible adrenocortical tissue destruction may occur due to neoplastic infiltration or infectious
organism presence in the adrenal gland/s but is rare.
2. Secondary hypoadrenocorticism is characterized by deficient production and/or secretion of
ACTH which leads to atrophy of the adrenal cortices. Secondary hypoadrenocorticism can be caused
by large nonfunctional tumors in the hypothalamus or pituitary or more commonly iatrogenically
due to prolonged suppression of ACTH by drugs. In adult horses, secondary hypoadrenocorticism is
most commonly associated with discontinuation of long-term glucocorticoid or anabolic steroid
treatment.
B. A syndrome of adrenal exhaustion often referred to as "turnout" or "steroid letdown syndrome" characterized by
lethargy, anorexia, and poor performance is anecdotally reported in racehorses. It has been attributed to adrenal
insufficiency associated with chronic stress or long-term steroid administration. Laboratory tests, however
have failed to provide convincing evidence of adrenal insufficiency in such cases.
C. While permanent adrenocortical insufficiency is rarely diagnosed in equine practice, emerging evidence
suggests that transient reversible adrenocortical dysfunction resulting in cortisol insufficiency frequently
develops during critical illness in horses and foals. This syndrome is termed relative adrenal insufficiency
(RAI) or critical ilness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI) and can contribute substantially to
morbidity and mortality associated with the primary disease:
1. Research in human medicine suggests that RAICIRCI can result from temporary suppression of the
a. Inhibition of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) and/or ACTH secretion.
b. Decreased sensitivity to CRH or ACTH at their respective target tissues.
C. Exhaustion of adrenocortical cortisol synthetic capacity.
d. Impaired response to cortisol in the peripheral tissues.
 2. The specific mechanisms leading to the development of RAI/CIRCI are poorly understood but may
involve a combination of factors:
a. Direct damage to the HPA axis components from the primary disease.
h. Inhibition of hormone production by medications used to treat the primary disease.
host's own immune and inflammatory responses.
D. Premature and septic foals appear to be particularly sensitive to adrenal insufficiency:
1. Compelling evidence suggests that maturation of the equine HPA axis occurs much later than in other
species. The fetal foal's adrenal gland is incapable of synthesizing cortisol until very late in gestation and
maturation of the system continues during the first few weeks/months of life:
a. Premature foals have low baseline cortisol and concurrent high ACTH concentrations compared
to term foals implying an impaired adrenocortical sensitivity to ACTH and/or a limited cortisol
synthetic capacity (Table 3.1).
b. By 12-24h of age, mean basal cortisol concentrations are lower in healthy neonatal foals than
reported mean concentrations in healthy adult horses despite the foals having comparable or higher
concurrent ACTH concentrations.
2. The specific cause of the impaired cortisol responses of neonatal foals is unknown. However, the fetal
and neonatal HPA axis immaturity may impair the foal's ability to respond to physiologic stress and
disease during the neonatal period.
 3. The mechanisms and management of RAI/CIRCI in critically ill foals require further investigation.
30 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Table 3.1 Comparison of serum cortisol and endogenous ACTH concentrations in newborn
 premature and full-term foals.
Time of sample collection
Premature foal
Full-term foal
Serum cortisol
1 20min after birth
<3
12-14
concentration (μg/dL)
Endogenous ACTH
3 0min after birth
650
concentration (pg/mL)
11.
Signalment
A.
 Premature foals are predisposed to adrenal insufficiency.
11.
 Clinical Signs
A.
 Depression.
B.
Anorexia.
C.
Exercise intolerance.
D.
Weight loss.
E.
 Poor hair coat.
F.
Lameness.
G.
Mild abdominal discomfort.
H.
Dehydration.
Bradycardia/bradydysrhythmia.
Seizures.
Iv.
. Diagnosis
A.
 A complete history must be obtained including performance, previous disease, drug administration, and
potentially stressful conditions.
B.
 Hematology and serum biochemistry analysis may be supportive: results may be normal, or abnormali
ties such as anemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hyperkalemia, and/or hypoglycemia may be present.
C. 1
Baseline cortisol and ACTH levels as well as the ACTH stimulation test are critical to achieve a diagnosis.
Note that cortisol levels feature daily fluctuations and single measurements do not provide sufficient diagnostic
information on their own. Horses with hypoadrenocorticism have low cortisol concentrations and do not or
only minimally respond to ACTH administration:
1. ACTH stimulation test—adult horses:
a. Obtain a baseline blood sample in heparinized or plain tubes immediately before ACTH
administration.
b. Give 1IU/kg natural ACTH gel intramuscularly (IM) between 8 and 10 am; or 100 IU (1 mg)
synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) intravenously (IV) between 8 am and 12 noon.
C.(
Obtain follow up blood samples 2 and 4h after ACTH administration.
d. Horses with a functional adrenal gland should have a 2-3-fold increase in plasma cortisol concen-
tration after ACTH stimulation as compared with baseline values.
2. Cosyntropin stimulation test-foals:
a.(
Obtain a baseline blood sample for cortisol analysis.
h.
Administer 0.01-0.2μg/kg (low-dose protocol) or 1-2 μg/kg (high-dose protocol) of cosyntropin
IV. (The high-dose test may be less sensitive for the diagnosis of the transient reversible HPA axis
suppression that occurs in RAI/CIRCI.)
C. Collect additional blood samples at 30, 60, 90 and 120 min.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species  31
d. With the low-dose protocol, cortisol should peak at a value twice the baseline at 30 min; with the
high-dose protocol, cortisol should peak at 90 min at 2-3 times the baseline test. Time of day should
not affect results. Results should be compared with age-matched controls or to values generated in the
same laboratory.
e. In one study, premature foals showed a blunted cortisol response to exogenous ACTH with only a
28% increase in plasma cortisol 30-60 min after stimulation compared with a 208% increase in
normal-term foals.
 age-matched controls) is associated with a high probability of foal mortality.
D
 Postmortem examination findings may include adrenocortical hemorrhages and necrosis, as well as
adrenal atrophy and fibrosis.
Differential Diagnosis
A
Primary gastrointestinal disease.
Toxin ingestion.
B
Renal disease.
D.
 Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (see Chapter 11).
E.
Laminitis.
F.
Sepsis.
Vl.
Treatment
A
Rest and supportive care.
 Restore electrolyte balance with appropriate fluid therapy.
Glucocorticoid supplementation:
1. Prednisolone sodium succinate (up to 300 mg q 24 h IV or IM) is the initial treatment of choice for
hypoadrenocorticism
2. Low doses of dexamethasone are the second option.
3. Alternatively oral prednisolone (200-400 mg/horse) can be used and may be a consideration for
longer term use.
4. Prednisone (40mg per os [PO] q 12 h or 50mg IV) has been used to reat foals with adrenal insuf-
ficiency; however, the use of this drug orally in horses is questionable as it is poorly absorbed from the
equine intestinal tract and the active metabolite, prednisolone, is rarely produced. In contrast, oral
 prednisolone has excellent bioavailability.
5. soflupredone acetate (0.02mg/kg q 24h for 10 days) has been reported to ameliorate the clinical
signs of secondary hypoadrenocorticism (due to abrupt cessation of an anabolic steroid) in a horse
with preexisting pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction.
 6. Triamcinolone and prednisolone acetate should be avoided.
 7. If a prolonged course of glucocoricoid therapy is anticipated, gradual tapering of the dose is recom
mended before treatment is discontinued.
Vll. Prognosis
Prognosis is fair for cases with iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism.
B.
Guarded in cases with severe electrolyte aberrations (hyperkalemia, hypochlorermia, and/or hyponatremia)
or concurrent sepsis.
C.
 Poor in premature foals.
VIlll. Prevention
4.
Judicious use of therapeutic corticosteroids/anabolic steroids in horses including prescription of grad
32  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Hypoadrenocorticism in Ferrets
Pathogenesis
● latrogenic hypoadrenocorticism, an uncommon complication of subtotal or bilateral adrenalec-
tomy.
Classical Signs
● Lethargy, weakness, and anorexia days to weeks after adrenal surgery.
Diagnosis
● Evaluation of serum electrolytes.
Treatment
● Glucocorticoid and/or mineralocorticoid supplementation.
Pathogenesis
A.
carried out for the treatment of adrenal disease in ferrets (see Chapter 9). It may also occur following the use
of mitotane. Signs occur days to weeks postoperatively.
Signalment
A.
 No sex predilections have been identified. Adrenal disease affects adults (generally > 2-3 years of age).
IIl. Clinical Signs
A.
 Development of the following signs days to weeks following surgery:
1. Lethargy/weakness.
2. Anorexia.
IV.  Diagnosis
A.
 Evaluation of serum electrolytes: Demonstration of abnormalities such as hyponatremia, hypochloremia,
V.
 Differential Diagnosis
A.
anorexia.
B.
Metastases or cachexia associated with advanced adrenal neoplasia.
C.
Postsurgical infection/sepsis.
D.
Other systemic disease, for example, cardiac or hepatic dysfunction that may have been exacerbated by
the surgery.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 Glucocorticoid (if not already prescribed) and/or mineralocorticoid supplementation titrated to the
individual and tapered to the lowest dosage interval to prevent clinical signs:
nisone 0.25 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h.
2. Mineralocorticoids:
a Fludrocortisone acetate 0.05-0.1mg/kg PO q 24 h or divided q 12h.
b. Deoxycorticosterone pivalate 2 mg/kg IM q 21 days.
B.
If critically ill, fluid therapy to correct electrolyte aberrations is indicated.
C.
Monitor electrolytes carefully and adjust the therapeutic regimen as required.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species  33
Vll. Prognosis
4.
 Fair if identified early and appropriate therapy instituted.
B.
Poor if severe electrolyte abnormalities are present.
C.
 Recurrence of adrenal disease is common following surgery, especially if follow-up hormonal therapy
is not given (see Chapter 9).
Vlll. Prevention
A
 Judicious use of glucocorticoids (often long term) and regular electrolyte monitoring following subto-
tal or total bilateral adrenalectomy in ferrets.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Pet Birds
Pathogenesis
● Limited information exists regarding this condition in birds.
Classical Signs
● Dehydration, weakness, mild gastrointestinal signs, and/or feather loss.
Diagnosis
● No reports of antemortem diagnosis exist but measurement of serum electrolytes and the ACTH stim-
ulation test may prove useful for suspected cases.
Treatment
● Based on limited anecdotal reports of glucocorticoid/mineralocorticoid supplementation.
Pathogenesis
A
 Although there are no appropriately documented cases of hypoadrenocorticism in pet birds,it is likely
that adrenal deficiency does occur in this group:
1. As in other species, adrenal cell atrophy or necrosis may be induced by autoimmune diseases, neo-
plasia, inflammation, infectious diseases, amyloidosis, trauma, or drugs (e.g., mitotane, trilostane).
2. Rapid withdrawal of exogenous corticosteroids may result in iatrogenic hypoadrenocoricism.
11.
Signalment
A
 Given the lack of documented cases, no information regarding sex, age, or species predisposition exists.
11.
 Clinical Signs
A.
Dehydration.
B.
Episodes of weakness.
C
Vague gastrointestinal signs, for example, anorexia, periodic diarrhea, and generalized abdominal
tenderness.
D.
 Feather loss.
Iv.
Diagnosis
A.
There are no clinical reports of antemortem diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in birds.
B.
 Electrolyte abnormalities such as hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and a sodium to potassium ratio of <27:1
 are highly sugestive of hypoadrenocorticism.
C
Concurrent anemia and hypoglycemia may also be present.
D.
Low urine specific gravity may be identified.
E.
 corticosterone concentration before and after ACTH stimulation. In all avian species tested, corticosterone, not
34  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
cortisol, is the main corticosteroid produced by the “adult" adrenal gland. Hypoadrenocorticism may exist
even if the resting corticosterone level is normal. Extrapolating from other species, hypoadrenocorticism should
be suspected when little or no increase in the corticosterone blood level is seen after ACTH administration:
1. ACTH stimulation protocols have been established in psittacines, raptors, chickens, and ducks:
a. A baseline blood sample is collected.
h. ACTH 16-50IU is administered IM.
C. A second blood sample is collected 1-2 h after ACTH administration.
d. Quantification of corticosterone in both blood samples requires an assay specific to this hor-
 mone, for example, radioimmunoassay.
e. In general, ACTH causes a peak corticosterone response within 30-60 min after injection with a
return to baseline levels within 120-240 min. Pre- and post-ACTH corticosterone concentrations
vary significantly among avian species. In healthy cockatoos, macaws, Amazon parrots, and lori-
keets the mean post-ACTH corticosterone concentrations are 4-14 times the mean baseline concen-
 tration. The sensitivity and specificity of the test remains undetermined and further investigation is
required in relation to interpretation of test results.
F. The use of ACTH blood concentration to differentiate primary from secondary hypoadrenocorticism has
not been investigated in birds.
G. Postmortem examination may be required for definitive diagnosis. Adrenal degeneration histologically is
characterized by swelling, vacuolation, and/or necrosis of adrenocortical cells and appears to be a relatively
common finding in birds.
V.
Differential Diagnosis
A.
Renal disease.
Gastrointestinal disease.
C.
Hepatic disease.
Vl.
Treatment
A
The following have been suggested as treatment protocols for psittacine birds:
1. Fludrocorisone in the drinking water at a dose of 0.4mg/L.
2. Hydrocortisone 10 mg/kg IM q 24h.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 No information is available regarding prognosis of this condition in birds.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Corticosteroid treatment should be slowly tapered off to prevent the development of iatrogenic
hypoadrenocorticism.
References and Further Readings
Couetil LL, Hoffman AM. Adrenal insufficiency in a neonatal foal. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1998;212: 1594-1596.
de Matos R.Adrenal steroid metabolism in birds: Anatomy, physiology and clinical considerations. Vet Clin North A Exot
Anim Pract 2008;11:35-57.
Dowling PM, Williams MA, Clark TP. Adrenal insufficiency associated with long-term anabolic steroid administration in a
horse. JAm Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:1166-1169.
Dybdal NO, McFarlane D. (2009) Adrenal glands. In: Smith BP, ed. Large Anirmat Internat Medicine,4th edn. St Louis: Mosby,
2009, pp. 1345-1347.
Eiler H, Goble D, Oliver J. Adrenal gland function in the horse: Effects of cosyntropin (synthetic) and corticotropin (natural)
stimulation. A J Vet Res 1979;40:724-726
Gold JR, Divers TJ, Barton MH, et al. Plasma adrenocorticotropin, cortisol and adrenocorticotropin/cortisol ratios in septic
and normal-term foals. J Vet Inter Med 2007;21:791-796.
Hart KA, Ferguson DC, Heusner GL,et al. Synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation tests in healthy neonatal foals.
J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:314-321.
Hypoadrenocorticism in Other Species 35
Hurcombe SD, Toribio RE, Slovis N, et al. Blood arginine vasopressin, adrenocorticotropin hormone and cortisol concentrations
at admission in septic and critically ill foals and their association with survival. J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:639-647.
Lothrop CD. Diseases of the endocrine system. In: Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, eds. Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1996, pp. 368-379.
Lumeij JT. Endocrinology. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, eds. Avian Medicine—Principtes and Appfication.
Lake Worth: Wingers, 1994, pp. 582-606.
Marik P. Critical illness related corticosteroid insufficiency. Chest 2009;135(1):181-193.
McGavin M, Zachary J. Pathologic Basis of Veterinary Disease, 4th edn. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Oglesbee BL. The S-Minute Veterinary Consuit: Ferret and Rabbit. Ames: Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
Onderka DK, Claffey FP. Adrenal degeneration associated with feather loss in a macaw. Can Vet J 1987;28{4):193-194.
Orsini JA, Donaldson MT, Koch C, et al. Iatrogenic secondary hypoadrenocorticism in a horse with pituitary pars intermedia
dysfunction (equine Cushing's disease). Equine Vet Edu 2007;19(2):81-87.
Peroni DL, Stanley S, Kollias-Baker C, et al. Prednisone per os is likely to have limited efficacy in horses. Equine Vet J
2002;34:283-287.
Rae M.Avian endocrine disorders. In: Fudge AM, ed. Laboratory Medicine—Avian αnd Exotic Pets. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2000, pp. 76-89.
Rossdale P, Ousey J. Studies on equine prermaturity 6: Guidelines for assessment of foal maturity. Equine Vet J 1984;16{4):300-302.
Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, Howard EB, et al. Chronic endocrine disorder associated with inclusion body hepatitis in a
sulfur-crested cockatoo. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;179{11):1273-1276.
Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, Richkind M, et al. Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of adrenal insufficiency in psittacine
birds. Calif Vet 1982;5:26-30.
Silver M, Ousey J, Dudan F, et al. Studies on equine prermaturity 2: Post natal adrenocortical activity in relation to plasma
Sojka JE, Levy M. Evaluation of endocrine function. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 1995;11:415-435.
Toribio RE. Adrenal glands. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internal Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis: Saunders
Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1248-1251.
Can J Vet Res 2009;73(1):65-72.
CHAPTER 4
Critical Illness-Related Corticosteroid
Insufficiency (Previously Known as
Relative Adrenal Insufficiency)
Linda Martin
Pathogenesis
● Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI), previously known as relative adrenal
insufficiency, is a syndrome that can occur in the critically ill; it does not occur in stable patients.
● Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) dysfunction in CIRCI is relative and transient. The
syndrome is characterized by an inadequate production of cortisol and/or ACTH in relation to an
increased demand during periods of severe illness; HPA function normalizes after resolution of the
critical illness.
● The pathogenesis of CIRCI in animals is unknown, but its development is most likely multifactorial,
 involving a complex interaction berween the endocrine and immune systems.
Classical Signs
● Hypotension and hemodynamic instability that persists despite adequate fluid resuscitation and
vasopressor therapy.
● Signs may be vague and nonspecific, such as depression, weakness, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain.
Diagnosis
● CIRCI should be considered as a differential diagnosis in all critically ill patients requiring
vasopressor support.
● No consensus exists regarding how to identify veterinary patients with CIRCI.
● Critically ill patients with CIRCI may have normal or elevated basal serum cortisol concentrations
and a blunted response to ACTH stimulation.
● Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia are uncommon in CIRCI, unlike typical spontaneous hypoad-
renocorticism.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
36
Criticaf fness-Related Corticosteroid fnsufficiency (Previousty Known as Relative Aorenaf fnsufficiency)  37
Treatment
● Currently, no guidelines exist for the treatment of CIRCI in veterinary critically ill patients; however,
it is reasonable to start corticosteroid therapy in volume-resuscitated, vasopressor-dependent animals
after performing an ACTH stimulation test.
● The appropriate dosage, duration, and type of corticosteroid therapy is unknown in veterinary
patients with CIRCl; however, it is reasonable to give supplemental doses of corticosteroids at
physiological to supraphysiological dosages (0.25-1 mg/kg q 24 h of prednisone) until the results of an
ACTH stimulation test are available.
● Corticosteroids can be continued in patients that have (1) a normal or elevated basal cortisol
 concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration less than the normal reference range;
(2) a normal or elevated basal cortisol concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration
that is <5% greater than the basal cortisol concentration (flat line response); (3) a delta cortisol
concentration <3 μg/dL (83nmol/L) where delta cortisol is the difference between basal and
ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentrations; or (4) demonstrated a significant improvement in
cardiovascular status within 24 h of starting corticosteroid therapy. Therapy can be discontinued in
those that respond appropriately to ACTH.
● Because the HPA dysfunction in CIRCI is transient, lifelong therapy with corticosteroids is not
required and is tapered and discontinued after resolution of the critical illness.
Pathogenesis
A. CIRCI is increasingly being recognized in human critically ill patients with systemic inflammation
associated with sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome/acute lung injury, severe hepatic disease, trauma,
acute myocardial infarction, or following cardiopulmonary bypass.
B. Insufficient adrenal and/or pituitary function has been identified in dogs with sepsis/septic shock, trauma,
 gastric volvulus-dilatation, neoplasia (i.e., lymphoma and several different types of nonhematopoietic
tumors), and genetic mutation of the multidrug resistance gene ABCB1 (formerly known as MDR1).
C. Insufficient adrenal function has been identified in cats with neoplasia (ie., lymphoma), trauma, and
sepsis/septic shock.
D. Many illnesses have been associated with CIRCI; however, all human patients diagnosed with CIRCI are
critically ill. CIRCI has not been documented in stable patients with minor trauma, mild hepatopathy, or
localized infections.
E. HPA dysfunction in CIRCI is relative and transient. The adrenal glands produce and secrete cortisol, but
 the quantity is inadequate for the degree of physiological stress or illness. Following recovery from critical
illness, HPA dysfunction resolves.
F. The pathogenesis of CIRCI in dogs is unknown, but the development of this syndrome is most likely
multifactorial, involving a complex interaction between the endocrine and immune systems.
G. Possible mechanisms for the development of CIRCI in humans and animals include:
1. Proinflammatory cytokine (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-α)-mediated inhibition of CRH and ACTH
secretion resulting in decreased cortisol production.
2. Proinflammatory cytokine (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-1)-mediated glucocorticoid
receptor dysfunction and reduction in receptor numbers. A reduction in the activity or number of
receptors would reduce the ability of cells to respond appropriately to cortisol.
 3. Corticostatin-mediated ACTH receptor antagonism. Corticostatin, a peptide produced by immune
cells, impairs adrenocortical function by competing with ACTH and binding to its receptor.
4. Leptin-mediated inhibition of the HPA axis. Leptin, an adipose-derived hormone, inhibits the HPA
axis during stress or illness.
5.
Tissue resistance to the actions of glucocorticoids.Several factors may be involved, including decreased
access of cortisol to tissues secondary to a reduction of circulating cortisol-binding globulin concentrations
and increased cytokine (i.e., interleukin-2, 4, and -13}-mediated conversion of cortisol (active) to
38 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
cortisone (inactive). Such mechanisms can account for decreased glucocorticoid activity while serum
6. Disruption of pituitary and/or adrenal gland function secondary to extensive tissue destruction of
these organs by infection, infarction, hemorrhage, or thrombosis.
7. ABCB1 gene mutation resulting in the lack of P-glycoprotein, the ABCB1 gene product, at the
blood-brain barrier:
a) P-glycoprotein normally restricts the entry of cortisol into the brain, limiting cortisol's feedback
inhibition of CRH and ACTH.
b) In ABCB1 mutant dogs, P-glycoprotein is not present, allowing greater concentrations of cortisol
to be present within the brain, thus augmenting feedback inhibition of the HPA axis and, ultimately,
impedance of sufficient cortisol secretion.
C) Thus, the mutation may lead to the inability to appropriately respond to critical illness and stress
Il. Signalment
A. Since CIRCI is caused by various serious illnesses, it can occur in dogs and cats of any breed, age, or sex.
B. Due to the ABCB1 gene mutation, it is possible that there is a genetic or breed predilection in canine CIRCI;
however this has yet to be proven. The ABCB1 mutation has been identified in herding breed dogs, such as
Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs, Old English Sheepdogs, and Australian Shepherds and has been found at a higher
frequency in sight hounds, such as Long-haired Whippets and Silken Windhounds, as well as in McNabs.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Clinical signs of CIRCI can be vague and nonspecific, such as depression, weakness, fever, vomiting, diar-
rhea, and abdominal pain. Additionally, clinical signs of the underlying disease process responsible for CIRCI
(e.g., septic shock, hepatic disease, trauma, etc.) can mask the clinical features of CIRCI.
B. The most common clinical abnormality associated with CIRCI in human patients with septic shock is
IV. Diagnosis
A. CIRCI should be considered as a differential diagnosis in all critically ill patients requiring vasopressor
support.
B. Laboratory assessment of human criticallyill patients with CIRCI may demonstrate an eosinophilia and/
or hypoglycemia.
C. Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia are uncommon in humans with CIRCI, and to date, have not been
reported in canine or feline critically ill patients with insufficient adrenal or pituitary function.
D. Human patients with CIRCI typically have normal or elevated basal serum cortisol concentrations and a
shock, trauma, and neoplasia.
E. No consensus exists regarding the identification of patients with CIRCI in human or veterinary medicine.
A variety of tests have been advocated, including measurement of a random basal cortisol concentration,
ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration, delta cortisol concentration (i.e., the difference obtained when
subtracting basal from ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration), the ratio of cortisol concentration to that
 of endogenous ACTH, and combinations of these methods.
1. Evaluation of adrenal function typically involves performance of an ACTH stimulation test:
a The most commonly used protocol for ACTH stimulation testing in dogs involves the intravenous
h. In cats, intravenous administration of 125 μg of cosyntropin/cat is commonly used.
C. Serum or plasma is obtained for measurement of cortisol concentration before and 60 min after
ACTH administration in both dogs and cats.
2. The standard doses of cosyntropin (5 pg/kg in dogs and 125 μg/cat) currently used in ACTH stimula-
tion testing are greater than that necessary to produce maximal adrenocortical stimulation in healthy
small animals:
a. Doses as low as 0.5 pg/kg in healthy dogs and 5 pg/kg in healthy cats have been shown to induce
maximal cortisol secretion by the adrenal glands.
b. The use of higher doses may be supraphysiologic and may mask subtle decreases in adrenal gland
reserve and hinder identification of dogs and cats with CIRCI.
3. Low-dose (0.5 μg/kg IV) ACTH stimulation testing has been compared to standard-dose (5 μg/kg IV)
ACTH stimulation testing in critically ill dogs:
a In the study, every critically ill dog that was identified by the standard-dose ACTH stimulation test to
have insufficient adrenal function (i.e., ACTH-stimulated serum cortisol concentration below the reference
range or <5 % greater than the basal cortisol concentration) was also identified by the low-dose test.
h. Additional dogs were identified with adrenal insufficiency by the low-dose ACTH stimulation test,
which were not identified by the standard-dose test.
C. Thus, ACTH administered at a dose of 0.5 μg/kg IV appears to be at least as accurate in determining
adrenal function in critically ill dogs as the IV administration of ACTH at 5pg/kg. The low-dose
ACTH stimulation test may even be a more sensitive diagnostic test in detecting patients with
insufficient adrenal gland function than the standard-dose test.
4. Serum free cortisol concentration:
a. Assays that measure cortisol concentration typically measure total hormone concentration (i.e.,
serum free cortisol concentration plus a protein-bound fraction).
b. However, the serum free cortisol fraction is believed to be responsible for the physiologic function
of the hormone. Therefore, serum free cortisol concentrations may be a more precise predictor of
adrenal gland function.
C. The relationship between free and total cortisol varies with serum protein concentration:
1) In human critically ill patients, cortisol-binding globulin and albumin concentrations can
decrease by approximately 50% due to catabolism at inflammatory sites and inhibition of hepatic
synthesis via cytokine induction.
2) Therefore, serum total cortisol concentration may be falsely low in hypoproteinemic patients,
resulting in overestimation of CIRCI.
3) Serum free cortisol concentration is less likely to be altered in states of hypoproteinemia.
 Consequently, serum total cortisol concentrations may not accurately represent the biological
activity of serum free cortisol during critical illness.
d. Several human studies suggest that serum free cortisol concentrations are a more accurate measure
of circulating glucocorticoid activity than total cortisol concentrations.
e. At this time, canine and feline studies are lacking and the ability to measure serum free cortisol
concentration is not widely available:
1) Serum free and total cortisol concentrations have been compared in one study of critically ill dogs.
2) Fewer critically ill dogs with adrenal insufficiency (i.e., an ACTH-stimulated serum cortisol
concentration below the reference range or <5% greater than the basal cortisol concentration)
were identified by serum free cortisol concentration than serum total cortisol concentration.
However, basal and ACTH-stimulated serum total cortisol concentrations were not lower in
 3) The significance of this finding is unknown and warrants further investigation in veterinary patients.
 5. The delta cortisol concentration has been advocated as a method to identify critically ill patients with
CIRCI in both human and veterinary medicine:
a. A study in human patients with septic shock found that a basal cortisol concentration <34 μg/dL
(938 nmol/L) combined with a delta cortisol concentration ≥9 μg/dL (250nmo/L) in response to a
250pg/person ACTH stimulation test were associated with a favorable prognosis:
1) Additionally, a basal cortisol concentration >34 pg/dL combined with a delta cortisol
2) Since these values successfully predicted outcome, a delta cortisol concentration of <9 μg/dL is
frequently used as a diagnostic criterion for CIRCI in human critically ill patients.
h. Veterinary studies have also assessed delta cortisol concentrations as a criterion for diagnosing
CIRCI in critically ill patients:
40  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Critically ill patient suspected to have CIRCl
(especially if refractory hypotension present)
 Assess basal cortisol concentration
Below the reference range
Within the referencerange
Above thereference range
CIRCI unlikely
 Perform ACTH stimulation test 
To date no veterinary studies
have dccumented low basal
cortisol concentrations in CIRCI
 patients; *however, absolute
 ACTH-stirmulated cortisol
Delta cortisol 
ACTH-stirmulated
spontaneous hypcadrenocorticisrm
 concentration below
concentration
cortisol concentration 
is possible)
reference range
 3ug/d
< 5% greater than basal
(83 nmol/L)
 cortisol concentration
Perform ACTH
 CIRCI possible 
 stimulation test
Considersupplemental corticosteroid therapy
Figure 4.1Strategy for diagnosis and treatment of critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in dogs. *Low basal
Cortisol concentrations have been documented in dogs with neoplasia; however, these dogs were not critically ill and did not
have clinical signs consistent with CIRCI.
1) One study found that septic dogs with delta cortisol concentrations <3 μg/dL (83 nmol/L) after
 a 250 pg/dog ACTH stimulation test were more likely to have systemic hypotension and decreased
survival.
2) Additionally, another study investigating acutely ill dogs (i.e., dogs with sepsis, trauma, or
gastric volvulus-dilatation) found that dogs with delta cortisol concentrations ≤3 μg/dL (83 nmol/L)
after a 5 pg/kg ACTH stimulation test were more likely to require vasopressor therapy as part of
 their reatment plan.
3) Whether or not delta cortisol concentrations of ≤3 μg/dL (83 nmol/L) can be used as a criterion
to diagnose all populations of veterinary critically ill patients with CIRCI has yet to be determined.
G. Normal reference ranges do not exist for basal and ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentrations in critically
ill dogs and cats.
H. Based on the current veterinary literature, there are three scenarios which may indicate the presence of
1. Dogs with a normal or elevated basal cortisol concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol
concentration less than the normal reference range.
2. Dogs with a normal or elevated basal cortisol concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol
concentration that is <5% greater than the basal cortisol concentration (flatline response).
3. Dogs with a delta cortisol concentration <3 μg/dL (83 nmol/L) (Figure 4.1).
1. Based on a few clinical studies and case reports, CIRCI appears to occur in cats. However, diagnostic
criteria are undetermined at this time.
V. Differential Diagnosis
A. The following conditions may also produce hypotension that is poorly responsive to fluid and/or
vasopressor therapy:
1. Sepsis/septic shock/systemic inflammatory response syndrome without the presence of CIRCI.
 2. Absolute spontaneous hypoadrenocorticism.
3. Decompensated hypovolemic shock.
4. Cardiovascular disease:
Criticaf fness-Related Corticosteroid fnsufficiency (Previousty Known as Relative Aorenar fnsufficiency)  41
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Overdose of vasodilator therapy.
5. Hypermagnesemia.
6. Diabetic ketoacidosis.
7. Anaphylaxis.
Vl. Treatment
4.
 Human critically ill patients with CIRCI that are reated with supplemental doses of corticosteroids are
 more likely to be quickly weaned from vasopressor therapy and ventilatory support; some treated populations
of critically ill patients are more likely to survive than patients with CIRCI that do not receive corticosteroid
supplementation:
1. The optimal dose and duration of treatment with corticosteroids in human patients with CIRCI is
yet to be determined.
2. The dosages of corticosteroids used to treat human patients with CIRCI are referred to as
supplemental, physiological, supraphysiological, low dose, or replacement.
3. Most human protocols have used dosages of 200-300 mg IV q 24 h of hydrocortisone for an average
a so e raa se  Aid si sop  pi a (t b Ai  5'ta'7) uosd  0
infusion or divided and given every 6 h.
4. Hydrocortisone is one-fourth as potent as prednisone and one-thirtieth as potent as dexamethasone.
Therefore, doses equivalent to that for hydrocortisone are 0.7-1 mg/kg q 24h prednisone or 0.1-0.4
mg/kg q 24h dexamethasone.
 5. The hydrocortisone dose currently recommended for CIRCI in human patients is supraphysiological
(the human physiological dose of hydrocortisone is 0.2-0.4 mg/kg q 24h), resulting in a serum cortisol
concentration several times higher than that achieved by ACTH stimulation. This regimen was initially
based on the maximum secretory rate of cortisol found in humans following major surgery.
B
 Currently, there are no guidelines for treatment of CIRCI in veterinary critically ill patients.
C
 It is reasonable to start volume-resuscitated, vasopressor-dependent animals on corticosteroid therapy
after performing an ACTH stimulation test:
 1. When the test results are available, treatment can be withdrawn in animals that responded normally
to the ACTH stimulation test.
2. Corticosteroids can be continued in patients that have (a) a normal or elevated basal cortisol
 concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration less than the reference range; (b) a nor-
mal or elevated basal cortisol concentration and an ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration that is
<5 % greater than the basal cortisol concentration (flat line response); (c) a delta cortisol concentration
24 h of starting corticosteroid therapy.
D. The appropriate dosage, duration, and type of corticosteroid therapy are unknown in veterinary patients
with CIR CI:
1. It is reasonable to give supplemental doses of corticosteroids at physiological to supraphysiological
dosages (1-4.3 mg/kg IV q 24 h of hydrocortisone [the total daily dose can be divided into four equal
doses and given every 6 h or as a constant rate infusion], 0.25-1 mg/kg IV q 24h of prednisone [the
total daily dose can be divided into two equal doses and given every 12h], or 0.04-0.4 mg/kg IV q 24 h
ofdexamethasone)
E.
 Because the HPA dysfunction in CIRCI is transient, lifelong therapy with corticosteroids is not thought
to be required and is generally tapered after resolution of the critical illness. The corticosteroid dose can be
tapered by 25% per day following the resolution of the critical illness. The ACTH stimulation test should be
 repeated following the resolution of critical illness and discontinuation of corticosteroid therapy to confirm
the return of normal adrenocortical function.
Vll. Prognosis
Human critically ill patients with CIRCI have a worse prognosis than those with normal HPA function:
1. Nonsurvivors typically have low basal cortisol concentrations (<9pg/dL), very high basal cortisol
concentrations (>44 μg/dL or 1215 nmol/L), and/or a low cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (delta
cortisol concentration <9μg/dL)
42 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Prior to corticosteroid therapy, a poor cortisol response to ACTH stimulation (delta cortisol
3. In some patients, replacement therapy with corticosteroids (i.e., 200-300mg hydrocortisone or equiva-
lent per day) improved survival without causing overt harm (e.g., infection or gastrointestinal hemorrhage).
Prognosis is not fully known for dogs with CIRCI:
1. Delta cortisol concentrations ≤3 pg/dL after ACTH stimulation in septic dogs were associated with
systemic hypotension and decreased survival.
concentrations <3 pg/dL after ACTH stimulation were more likely to require vasopressor therapy.
3. Elevated basal serum cortisol and decreased basal serum thyroid concentrations at 24 and 48h after
hospital admission were associated with death in dogs with parvoviral enteritis.
4. Elevated basal serum cortisol and endogenous ACTH concentrations with decreased basal serum
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Preemptive genotyping of dogs that come from breeds with a known high frequency of the ABCB1
genetic mutation may help identify animals with the genetic abnormality that may develop CIRCI if they
become critically ill. ABCB1 genotyping is available through the Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology
Laboratory at Washington State University (www.vetmed.wsu.edu/depts-VCPL/).
B.
 CIRCI is not a primary disease; it develops secondary to critical illnesses. To prevent CIRCI, critical
illnesses must also be prevented, which may not be possible in all cases.
References and Further Readings
Boozer AL, Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, et al. Pituitary-adrenal axis function in dogs with neoplasia. Vet Comp Oncof
2005;3(4):194-202.
Burkitt JM. Relative adrenal insufficiency. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K. eds. Smaff Animat Criticat Care Medicine, 1st edn.
St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders Elsevier, 2009, pp. 318-320.
Burkitt JM, Haskins SC, Nelson RW, et al. Relative adrenal insufficiency in dogs with sepsis. J Vet Intern Med
2007;21(2):226-231.
Costello MF, Fletcher DJ, Silverstein DC, et al. Adrenal insufficiency in feline sepsis. In: Otto CM, ed. Armerican Coftege of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Postgraduate Course 2006:Sepsis inVeterinary Medicine,abstract 5.North Grafton,
Massachusetts: American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 2006, p. 41.
DeClue AE, Martin LG, Behrend EN, et al. Cortisol and aldosterone response to various doses of cosyntropin in healthy cats.
JArt Vet Med Assoc 2011;238(2):176-182.
Durkan S, de Laforcade A, Rozanski E, et al. Suspected relative adrenal insufficiency in a critically ill cat. J Vet Ermerg Crit
Care 2007;17(2):197-201.
Foley C, Bracker K, Drellich S. Hypothalamic-pituitary axis deficiency following traurmatic brain injury in a dog. J Vet Emerg
Cnit Care 2009;19(3):269-274.
Martin LG, Behrend EN, Holowaychuk MK, et al. Comparison of low-dose and standard-dose ACTH stimulation tests in
critically ill dogs by assessment of serum total and free cortisol concentrations. J Vet Intern Med 2010;24{3):685-686.
Martin LG, Groman RP. Relative adrenal insufficiency in critical illness. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2004;14{3): 149-157.
Martin LG, Groman RP, Fetcher DJ, et al. Pituitary-adrenal function in dogs with acute critical illness. JAm Vet Med Assoc
2008;233(1):87-95.
Mealey KL, Gay JM, Martin LG, et al. Comparison of the hypothalarmic-pituitary-adrenal axis in MDR1-1A and MDR1
wildtype dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007;17(1):61-66.
Peyton JL, Burkitt JIM. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in a dog with septic shock. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2009;19(3):262-268.
Prittie JE. Adrenal insufficiency in critical illness. In: Bonagura JB, Twedt DC, eds. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV,
1st edn. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders Elsevier, 2009, pp. 228-230.
Prittie JE, Barton LJ, Peterson ME, et al. Hypothalarmo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function in critically ill cats. In: Hughes D,
ed. Proceedings of the 9th Internationat Veterinary Emergency and Criticat Care Symposium, abstract 17. San Antonio,Texas:
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society, 2003, p. 771.
puppies with parvoviral diarrhea. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2007;231(10):1534-1539.
Schoeman JP, Rees P, Herrtage ME. Endocrine predictors of mortality in canine babesiosis caused by Babesia canis rossi. Vet
Parasitol 2007;148(2):75-82.
CHAPTER 5
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs
Ellen N. Behrend and Carlos Melian
Pathogenesis
● The clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) result from chronically elevated serum cortisol
concentrations.
● More than 80% of dogs with HAC have pituitary-dependent disease due to an adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH}-secreting adenoma; approximately 80% originate in the adenohypophysis (anterior
pituitary) and 20% in the intermediate lobe.
● In 15-20% of cases, HAC is caused by a benign or malignant adrenal tumor.
● Ectopic ACTH secretion may occur but is extremely rare in dogs.
● latrogenic HAC can be caused by administration of exogenous glucocorticoids of any form.
Classical Signs
● Older small breed dogs are predisposed to spontaneous HAC.
 Progressive polyuria/polydipsia is the most common clinical sign.
● Polyphagia, weight gain, abdominal distension, panting, weakness, and/or lethargy may occur.
● Dermatologic changes frequently exist, including alopecia, hyperpigmentation, comedones, and
 pyoderma.
● Iatrogenic HAC can occur in any dog; clinical signs are identical to the spontaneous disease.
Diagnosis
and differentiating tests, designed to ascertain whether the disease is pituitary- or adrenal-based.
● Screening tests include the ACTH stimulation test, low-dose dexamethasone suppression test and
urine cortisol:creatinine ratio.
● Differentiating tests include measurement of endogenous ACTH concentration, high-dose dexa-
methasone suppression test and imaging, most commonly abdominal ultrasound.
 Choice of screening and differentiating tests depends on the situation.
● latrogenic HAC is diagnosed based on history and ACTH stimulation testing.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2
44 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Treatment
● Mitotane is an adrenocorticolytic agent that is relatively specific for the adrenal zona fasciculata
and zona reticularis.
● Trilostane is a synthetic steroid analogue that inhibits the secretion of adrenal steroid hormones.
● Ketoconazole also inhibits secretion of adrenal steroid hormones but is less effective.
● Selegiline inhibits the enzyme monoamine oxidase B and, as a result, increases hypothalamic dopamine
concentrations, which, in turn, inhibit ACTH secretion from the intermediate lobe of the pituitary; it is
effective in at most 20% of cases of pituitary-dependent HAC.
● Treatment for iatrogenic HAC consists of weaning the patient off the exogenous glucocorticoid.
1. Pathogenesis
A. The clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) result from chronically elevated serum cortisol
concentration
B. Spontaneous HAC in dogs can be caused by excessive corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone
[ACTH]} secretion or by a functional adrenocortical tumor that autonomously secretes cortisol:
1. The most common cause of ACTH hypersecretion is a pituitary tumor leading to adrenocortical
hyperplasia and excessive glucocorticoid secretion.
2. Ectopic ACTH secretion or food-dependent hypercortisolemia has been reported rarely in dogs.
C. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH):
1. Around 80-85 % of dogs with spontaneous HAC have PDH.
 2. Most dogs with PDH have a pituitary tumor, but pituitary hyperplasia rarely causes HAC.
the remainder originates in the intermediate lobe
4. The most common type of pituitary tumor is a microadenoma measuring <10 mm in height; larger
pituitary tumors (macroadenomas) occur in 10-25% of patients.
 5. Pituitary carcinoma causing HAC is rare.
D. Functional Adrenal Tumor (FAT):
of pituitary control.
2. Hypercortisolemia will suppress secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and ACTH
from the hypothalamus and pituitary, respectively, leading to atrophy of normal adrenocortical tissue,
including the whole cortex of the contralateral gland.
3. Approximately 50% of FAT are adrenocortical adenomas and 50% adenocarcinomas. They are
 usually unilateral but can present bilaterally.
4. Occasionally FAT and PDH occur concurrently.
E. A report of the occurrence of PDH in a family of seven Dandie Dinmont terriers supports the role of
genetic factors.
F.
 ACTH-independent HAC due to food-dependent hypercortisolemia was reported in a Vizsla dog with
signs of hypercortisolemia. Testing indicated an increased morning urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio,
which further increased (>100 %) after a meal and the meal-induced increase was prevented with octreo-
tide. Low plasma ACTH concentrations were present without evidence of an adrenal tumor. Based on
similar cases in humans, it was proposed that there was ectopic expression of gastric inhibitory peptide
(GIP) receptors coupled to steroidogenesis, which resulted in stimulation of cortisol secretion associated
with eating.
I1. Signalment
A.1
 Mean age at diagnosis is 9-11years; almost all dogs with HAC are older than 6years.
B. No sex predilection in dogs with PDH. Although 60-65% of dogs with a FAT in one report were female,
a sex predilection was not proven.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs45
wasting.
('sjuuay tagoy la jo Asanos ydeisooud) 'seaie paae ayi u! (eoniapun) shiey Arepuosas jo ssol pue uoeluawsidiadsy
C. Poodles, dachshunds, various terrier breeds, German shepherd dogs, beagles, and boxers appear to be at
greater risk of developing HAC.
D. PDH tends to occur in smaller dogs; approximately 75% of dogs with PDH weigh <20 kg. In contrast,
almost 50% of dogs with FAT weigh >20kg.
Ill. Clinmical Signs
A.
 Common clinical signs:
1. Earliest signs in most dogs are polyuria and polydipsia; eventually affects 90% of dogs with HAC by
 the time of diagnosis. Hypercortisolemia seems to interfere with the action and/or release of antidiuretic
hormone.
2. Alopecia, usually truncal and bilaterally symmetrical, is common (60-75%) and in some dogs is the
first sign noticed by the owners (Figure 5.1).
3. Other common dermatologic signs are a failure to regrow shaved hair; presence of thin, hypotonic
 skin; hyperpigmentation (Figure 5.2); pyoderma; and/or comedones, and increased susceptibility to
bruising (Figure 5.3).
46 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Figure 5.3An 11-year-old male Yorkshire terier with PDH that developed extensive bruising following jugular venipuncture.
4. Glucocorticoid excess appears to have a direct effect on appetite, causing polyphagia and weight gain
in most dogs (50-90%).
5. Hepatomegaly is present in 80-90% of dogs. Redistribution of fat from various storage areas
to the omentum, hepatomegaly, poor tone of abdominal wall musculature, and a distended urinary
bladder usually cause a distended or pendulous abdomen (Figure 5.4), that is, a classic "pot-bellied
appearance".
6. Muscle weakness and lethargy are often present (50-85%) and may be evidenced as reluctance or
inabiliry to jump; protein catabolism accounts for muscle wasting and, therefore, weakness.
embolism, abdominal enlargement, and bronchial calcification.
 8. Hypercortisolism may decrease plasma concentration of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing
hormone causing testicular atrophy and anestrus.
B. Less common clinical signs:
1. If present, calcinosis cutis is highly suggestive of a diagnosis of HAC, but is not a common finding:
a. The lesions consist of irregular plaques in or under the skin that feel firm or brittle (Figure 5.5).
b. They are caused by dystrophic calcium deposition in the dermis and subcutis.
 2. Pseudomyotonia is a myopathy characterized by persistent, active muscle contraction.
a. It usually affects the pelvic limbs causing a stiff gait.
h. Controversy exists as to whether pseudomyotonia is caused by HAC or is a comorbid condition
worsened by HAC.
3. Facial nerve paralysis; cause in dogs with HAC not clear.
4. Neurologic signs:
a. Occur due to the presence of a pituitary macroadenoma.
b. Initially behavioral changes are noted; can progress to disorientation, listlessness, ataxia, aimless
 pacing, mental dullness, and stupor. Seizures are rarely seen.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs47
Fgure 5.4 An &-year-old male Yorkshire terrier with PDH. Note the abdominal distension, comedones, thin skin, and visible,
prominent abdominal vessels.
(b)
(a)
Fgure 5.5  (a) A 10-year-old female spayed Labrador retriever with calcinosis cutis. Note the multifocal to coalescing, raised
masses on the lateral aspect of the neck; the masses were palpably firm. Diffuse to patchy alopecia was present in the affected
areas. (b) A 3.5-year-old male English bulldog with severe calcinosis cutis, presumed to be due to iatrogenic administration of
glucocorticoids. The lesions were erythematous and alopecic with crusting due to excoriation and secondary bacterial infection.
Note that the clinical signs of iatrogenic and spontaneous HAC are identical. (Photographs courtesy of Dr. Robert Kennis.)
 p as l siss as sd  q id  un o no si i 
pituitary macroadenoma; anorexia is likely due to increased intracranial pressure.
C. Complications of HAC:
1. Urinary tract infection (UTI) is common in dogs with HAC due to the immunosuppressive effects of
cortisol excess and urine retention. However, the anti-inflammatory effects of glucocorticoids may mask
the clinical signs. Recurrent infections are possible elsewhere, especially the skin.
48  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
 2. Dogs with HAC have increased urinary calcium excretion and a tenfold higher risk of developing
calcium-containing uroliths compared to those without.
3. More than 80% of dogs with HAC have a systolic blood pressure >160 mm Hg and, thus, have
hypertension.
4. Approximately 75% of dogs with HAC are proteinuric with a urine protein:creatinine ratio >1.0
(reference range < 0.5):
a. May be related to blood pressure.
 b. The higher the blood pressure in one study, the greater the amount of protein lost in the urine and
the more likely that glomerular damage was present.
5. Pulmonary thromboembolic disease, a rare complication of HAC, can cause moderate to severe
respiratory distress.
6. As cortisol antagonizes the actions of insulin, approximately 5-10% of dogs with HAC have diabetes
mellitus, typically with insulin resistance.
D. Severity of clinical signs varies greatly between patients.
E. Clinical signs of iatrogenic HAC:
1. Due to continued glucocorticoid administration and are indistinguishable from those of spontaneous HAC.
 2. Alternatively, signs of hypoadrenocorticism can be precipitated by acute cessation of exogenous
glucocorticoid administration or too rapid dose reduction.
IV. Diagnosis
 sop  pd aq a  a ss  n  p a aq   no si 
appropriate clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities.
B. Routine laboratory testing:
1.CBC:
a. Stress leukogram, which includes an elevated WBC count with neutrophilia, monocytosis,
lymphopenia, and/or eosinopenia, is frequently present.
b. Approximately 80% of dogs with HAC have eosinopenia and lymphopenia.
 C. Less common findings include thrombocytosis and mild erythrocytosis.
2. Serum chemistry:
the reference range in approximately 90% and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) elevations are proportion-
ately greater than that for alanine aminotransferase (ALl').
h. Cholesterol and total CO, may be elevated.
c. Hyperglycemia is common but only about 1o% of dogs with HAC have concurrent diabetes mellitus
d. Blood urea nitrogen may be decreased due to the polyuria/polydipsia.
3. Urinalysis:
 a. Usually reveals low specific gravity, that is, <1.015, as 90% of patients with HAC have polyuria/
polydipsia.
b. Proteinuria is present in the majority; usually low grade.
C. Due to the immunosuppressive effects of hypercortisolemia, UTI may be present. Hematuria and
 bacteriuria may be noted; even with infection pyuria may or may not be present since cortisol sup-
presses WBC function.
d. Glycosuria is present if diabetes mellitus occurs concurrently.
C. Endocrine testing:
1. It is required in dogs with history, clinical signs, and laboratory abnormalities suggestive of HAC to
make the diagnosis.
2. It is not recommended to perform testing for HAC in sick dogs until nonadrenal illness has been
resolved, if possible
3. Endocrine testing is divided into screening and differentiating tests:
a. Screening tests are designed to determine if HAC present or not.
h. Once a diagnosis of HAC is made, a differentiation test should be performed to determine if PDH
or FAT is present.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 49
C. Differentiation provides information crucial to therapeutic decisions and an accurate prognosis.
d. Differentiation tests should never be performed before a diagnosis of HAC is made via
screening tests.
4. All cortisol concentrations below are used for illustration purposes; check with your own laboratory
for its normal ranges and cutoff values. To convert nmol/L to μg/dL, divide by 27.6.
5. Screenning tests:
a. Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio (UC:CR):
1) Protocol: Have client collect urine sample at home when the pet is not stressed and bring to
clinic; centrifuge sample and submit supernatant.
2) Principle: Urine cortisol excretion increases as a reflection of augmented adrenal secretion of
 the hormone, whether PDH or FAT present; creatinine normalizes the reading for the urine concen-
tration.
 3) Interpretation: An elevated UC:CR is consistent with the presence of HAC:
a) It is a sensitive marker of HAC, and present in 90-100% of affected dogs.
b) False-positive results are common; only about 20% of dogs with an elevated UC:CR
have HAC
C) A normal ratio makes diagnosis of HAC very unlikely (<10% chance).
d) Since the chance of a false-positive result is great, an ACTH stimulation test or low-dose
dexamethasone suppression test must always be done to confirm the presence of HAC.
h. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST):
1) Protocol:
 a) Collect a blood sample—check with your laboratory to see if plasma or serum needed.
b) Administer dexamethasone or dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 0.01-0.015 mg/kg IV or
IM; IV preferred.
C) Draw blood samples 4 and 8h after dexamethasone administration.
2) Principle:
a) In normal dogs, dexamethasone will feedback and turn off ACTH secretion from the pitui-
tary, and, as a result, cortisol concentration will be low 4 and 8h later for example, < 30 nmol/L.
pue 'H yo uoissanddns pnred 1o ou os Keou ynom nou saop yoeqpay 'Had u (q
consequently cortisol, occurs.
C) With FAT, the tumor secretes mainly or wholly autonomously of ACTH influence, so ACTH
suppression has little to no effect on cortisol concentration.
3) Interpretation (Figure 5.6a):
a) Lack of suppression 8h after an injection of a low dose of dexamethasone (e.g., cortisol
>30 nmol/L) is consistent with a diagnosis of HAC.
b) Highly sensitive; approximately 95% of dogs with HAC are not suppressed 8h post-
dexamethasone.
C) In dogs, there is a relatively high chance of a false-positive result, up to 50%, if nonadrenal
illness is present.
d) Lack of suppression at 4 h (e.g., >30 nmol/L) but with full suppression at 8h (e.g., <30 nmol/L)
sn ra sd sn r ss si iq   ni no  ss
warranted.
e) With certain results, the LDDST may also serve as a differentiation test:
i. f the cortisol concentration in the 8h sample is >30 nmol/L, the result is consistent
with HAC.
ii. If,in addition, there is suppression at 4h post-dexamethasone (i.e., an "escape" at 8 h post-
dexamethasone) and/or the 4- and/or 8h post-dexamethasone samples are <50% of base-
line, the results are consistent with PDH.
ii. If criteria for PDH are not met, chances are still approximately 50/50 for PDH versus a
FAT.
iv. If the baseline cortisol concentration is close to 30 nmol/L or suppression is just at 50%,
presence of PDH should be confirmed by other means.
50 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
(a)
LDDST
8 h sample <30 nmol/L*
8h sample ≥30 nmol/L*
Not consistent with HAC
Consistent with HAC
4 h sample < 30 nmol/L*
and/or
4 and/or 8 h sample < 50% baseline?
Yes
No
 Consistent with PDH 
PDH or AT
*Check with own lab for value
eACTH
HDDST
imaging
(b)
HDDST
8 h sample <30 nmol/L*
8 h sample ≥30 nmol/L*
 Consistent with PDH !
Consistent with PDH or AT
4 h sample <30 nmol/L*
 and/or
4 and/or 8 h sample < 50% baseline?
Yes
No
Consistent with PDH
PDH or AT
Different from LDDST
eACTH!
; imaging_!
HAC. (b) Algorithm for interpretation of high-dose dexamethasone suppression test results for differentiating between
c. ACTH stimulation test:
1)Protocol:
a)  Collect a blood sample-check with your laboratory to see if plasma or serum is needed.
b) Administer cosyntropin at a dose of 5ug/kg (maximal dose 250μg/dog) IV or IM;
IV preferred.
C) Collect a blood sample 60 min later.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs  51
 ACTH stimulation test
Post-ACTH cortisol below the reference range
Post-ACTH cortisol above referencerange
Addison's
HAC
Addison's
HAC
 suspect
suspect
suspect
suspect
Addison's
1. latrogenic HAC
Addison's
Consistent
(post-ACTH
2. Inactive ACTH
ruled out
with HAC
usually
3. On treatment for HAC
(15% chance
nondetectable)
4. AT (rare reason for result)
false
positive)
Post-ACTH cortisol within reference range
Addison's
HAC
suspect
 suspect
Addison's
15%chance
ruled out
false negative
Fgure 5.7
Algorithm for interpretation of ACTH stinmulation test results for diagnosis of (screening for) HAC.
d) Compounded formulations may not work; however if using, collection of samples at both
 60 and 120 min after ACTH administration is recommended to ensure peak concentration
measured.
2) Principle:
a) ACTH stimulates adrenocortical cortisol secretion.
b) Reserve capacity of adrenal cortex is increased either due to bilateral hyperplasia (PDH)
or FAT.
 C) In iatrogenic HAC, ACTH secretion is chronically suppressed due to administration of
 exogenous glucocorticoids and as a result, bilateral adrenocortical atrophy occurs.
3) Interpretation (Figure 5.7):
a) Spontaneous HAC:
 A response greater than normal is consistent with a diagnosis of spontaneous HAC.
ii. Overall sensitivity of the test is approximately 80%; for PDH, sensitivity is approxi-
mately 87%, while for HAC due to a FAT, it is approximately 61%.
ili. Test is more specific in dogs than the LDDST; there is only a 15% chance of a false-
 positive result in a dog with nonadrenal illness.
iv.
 ACTH stimulation testing can never differentiate between PDH and FAT.
b) Iatrogenic HAC:
An ACTH stimulation test is the only test that can diagnose iatrogenic HAC.
11.
 Basal and post-ACTH cortisol concentrations are typically low to unmeasurable.
ili. Full diagnosis is made with a history of glucocorticoid exposure by any route, presence
of consistent clinical signs and a post-ACTH cortisol concentration below the reference
range.
52  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
6. Differentiating tests:
a. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST):
1) Protocol: Same as for LDDST, but dexamethasone dose is 0.1 mg/kg.
2) Principle: Same as for LDDST; due to the higher dexamethasone dose used, more suppression
of cortisol secretion may be seen in PDH cases than when a low dose is administered.
3) Interpretation (Figure 5.6b):
a) Two responses are consistent with PDH:
1.
 Complete suppression, for example, <30 nmol/L, at 4 and/or 8 h post-dexamethasone.
ii. Concentrations are <50% of baseline 4 and/or 8h post-dexamethasone.
b) If baseline value is close to 30 nmol/L or suppression is just at 50%, presence of PDH should
be confirmed by other means.
C) A HDDST can never confirm the presence of a FAT; if criteria for diagnosis of PDH is not
met, there is a 50/50 chance the patient has PDH or a FAT.
b. Endogenous ACTH (eACTH) concentration:
1) Protocol: Requires only a single blood sample but special handling is needed; check with your
laboratory for instructions.
2) Principle:
a) With PDH, eACTH concentrations are inappropriately high due to secretion from the
tumor.
b) With FAT, the cortisol secreted from the tumor feeds back and turns off ACTH secretion so
concentrations are low.
3) Interpretation:
a) In patients with PDH, eACTH concentration is normal to increased
b) With FAT, eACTH concentration is below normal.
C) eACTH can be used to confirm the presence of a FAT.
d) A gray zone exists in the results:
1.
 If the patient's eACTH concentration falls into this zone, results are not diagnostic.
il. With repeat testing when the original concentration measured is in the gray zone (approx-
imately 15% of cases), approximately 96% have definitive differentiation.
ii. There is no way to predict when eACTH concentration will be in the gray zone.
D. Imaging and Pathology:
1. Abdominal radiographs:
 a. These may differentiate PDH from FAT.
b. Approximately 40-50% canine FAT are able to be visualized; in dogs, presence of adrenal miner-
alization is highly suspicious for the existence of a FAT.
2. Chest radiographs are indicated in patients with a FAT to check for metastases.
3. Ultrasonography:
a. Useful for differentiating PDH from FAT and staging FAT:
1) Bilateral adrenal enlargement is present in >90% of dogs with PDH.
2) With FAT, typically the tumor is visualized on one side and atrophy of the contralateral gland
 may be evident; atrophy can be difficult to assess with ultrasound and may not be apparent.
h. Ultrasonography can never be used as a screening test as bilateral adrenal enlargement may
be seen associated with chronic nonadrenal illness; FAT can be small and difficult to see with
ultrasonography.
 C. Vena caval, hepatic, or renal invasion is an indicator of FAT malignancy.
4. CAT Scan (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MR):
a. CT and MR are often useful for demonstrating pituitary macroadenomas.
b. Some authors advocate routine pituitary imaging in all dogs when PDH is diagnosed, because
radiation therapy (a treatment modality required for a pituitary macroadenoma) is more effective for
smaller tumors. Follow-up and treatment recommendations vary depending on tumor size.
5. Adrenal biopsy is usually performed on FAT obtained via adrenalectomy rather than biopsy and is
often needed to differentiate benign versus malignant tumor.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 53
6. Pathologic findings:
a. PDH:
1) Gross examination reveals a normal to enlarged pituitary and diffuse or nodular bilateral
adrenocortical enlargement.
2) Microscopically, any of the following may be observed: pituitary adenoma, adenocarci
noma, or corticotroph hyperplasia of anterior pituitary or intermediate lobe. Adrenocortical
hyperplasia will be present.
b. FAT:
1) Gross examination reveals a variable-sized adrenal mass, atrophy of the contralateral gland
(rarely bilateral tumors), and metastasis in some patients with adrenal carcinoma; invasion into
2) Microscopically, see adrenocortical adenoma, carcinoma, or, rarely, hyperplasia
C. With any form HAC, general changes of cortisol excess may be seen such as cutaneous atrophy,
glomerulopathy, etc.
V.Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses will depend on the organ systems affected.
B.
Polyuria/polydipsia:
1. Numerous differentials exist (see Chapter 42).
 2. Most common causes of polyuria/polydipsia in dogs, along with HAC, are chronic renal failure and
diabetes mellitus.
C. Polyphagia:
1. Numerous differentials exist.
 2. Polyphagia may be physiological, for example, pregnancy.
 3. Most common pathological differentials to consider are diabetes mellitus, neoplasia, malassimilation
syndromes, and administration of certain drugs, especially glucocorticoids, progestins, anticonvulsants,
and cyproheptadine.
D. Dermatological issues:
1. Differentials for bilaterally symmetrical alopecia include hypothyroidism, sex hormone dermatoses,
Alopecia X, and sex hormone-secreting adrenal tumors.
 2. Differentials for recurrent pyoderma include hypothyroidism, atopy, lea allrgy, and food allergy.
E.
. Enlarged abdomen:
1. In HAC, could be due to weight gain, hepatomegaly, fat redistribution, and/or weakening of the
body wall.
 2. Differentials for unexplained weight gain include hypothyroidism, lack of activity, insulinoma, and
acromegaly.
3. Differentials for increased abdominal circumference include fluid accumulation, for example, ascites.
tumor, organomegaly, and pyometra.
4. Differentials for hepatomegaly include glucocorticoid administration, hepatic abscess, nonspecific
glycogen deposition, primary hepatic tumor diabetes mellitus, and acromegaly.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 General principles:
1. Client education:
a. If using medical therapy, lifelong therapy is required.
b. With mitotane and trilostane, many follow-up visits will be required in order to tailor the dose to
the patient; serious side effects are possible with both medications.
C. If an adverse reaction to mitotane or trilostane occurs-discontinue drug, give prednisone, and
have a veterinarian reevaluate next day; if no response to prednisone is noted in a few hours, veteri-
narian should evaluate immediately
2. Surgical considerations:
a. Surgery is the treatment of choice in dogs with adrenocortical adenomas or nonmetastasized
carcinoma unless the patient is a poor surgical risk:
54  Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animais
1) Appropriate personnel and facilities are required, as adrenalectomy is a technically demanding
2) Removal of tumor and vena caval thrombi can be performed; surgery is not expected to
be curative in such cases, but long-term survival can be achieved, for example, >1 year.
3) Depending on patient status, medical control of HAC may be desirable prior to surgery, if possible.
b. Hypophysectomy has been described, but is generally not available in the United States.
C. Bilateral adrenalectomy is not used for treatment of canine PDH.
3. Response to treatment:
a. Timing of response is similar regardless of modality used:
1) Once control is achieved, certain signs resolve within 7-10 days; initially, an increased activity
level and decreased polyuria and polydipsia are noted.
 2) Certain signs, for example, dermatological, may take several months to completely resolve.
 3) Normalization of liver enzymes can take greater than 1year and may never occur.
4. Special circumstances:
a. Treatment of patients with a pituitary macroadenoma:
1) Radiation therapy is required for local control of a pituitary macroadenoma.
 2) Since eACTH concentrations may take several months to decrease, the HAC should be con-
trolled medically in the interim.
b. Treatment of patients with concurrent HAC and diabetes mellitus:
1) Treatment of diabetes must be initiated immediately to protect beta cells from glucose toxicity.
However, tight glycemic control will likely not be achieved.
2) Control of HAC should be accomplished as soon as possible to obviate glucocorticoid-induced
insulin resistance.
 3) Careful monitoring of the diabetes needed; insulin needs can decrease rapidly with control of HAC.
 4) Prednisone administration (0.4 mg/kg once daily) has been recommended until medical control
of HAC is achieved to ease the transition.
B. Medical treatment of spontaneous HAC:
1. Mitotane (o,p'-DDD, Lysodren):
a. General info
1) Destroys glucocorticoid-secreting cells of the adrenal cortex:
a) Zonae fasciculata and reticularis are targeted.
b) Zona glomerulosa, that is, the zone that secretes aldosterone, is relatively spared but can be
destroyed as well.
 2) Mitotane is one of two main drugs used for medical management of PDH in dogs.
3) May be drug of choice for medical management of FAT since it may destroy tumor cells as well
 as control cortisol secretion.
4) Used in two treatiment phases:
a) Induction (or loading) which consists of daily drug administration, ideally BID.
b) Maintenance, in which the drug is dosed on a weekly basis; the dose is usually divided into
 0 po  a  so  on o
5) Should be given with food to increase drug absorption.
 6) Use with caution in patients with renal insufficiency and primary hepatic disease.
b. Protocol for treating PDH:
1) Induction (Figure 5.8):
a) Initial loading dose is 40-50 mg/kg, divided twice daily if possible.
h) Doses higher than 50 mg/kg/day increase the risk of complete corisol deficiency.
C) Loading should continue umtil at least one endpoint is noted (i.e., decreased appetite, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, listlessness, or decreased water intake [<60 ml/kg/day; 1 cup =240 mL and
1 oz =30 mL]) or maximum 8days.
d) At that time, an ACTH stimulation test is performed.
e) Goal is for both basal and post-ACTH cortisol concentration to be in ideal range of approx-
imately 30-150nmol/L (check with your own laboratory for ideal range).
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs  55
Mitotane
40-50 mg/kg divided BID
Decreased appetite, vomiting, diarrhea,
listle ssness or water intake<60 ml/kg/day
HO
Maximum of 8 days
ACTH stimulation test
Response below ideal
Response ideal
Response above ideal
 No further mitotane;
Begin maintenance
Continue loading 5-7 days
if cortisol
 50 mg/kg/week divided
 OR until clinical signs develop
nondetectable,
 that loading complete
measure Na/K;
小
(see above)
Retest in 7-21 days
Response below ideal
Response ideal
If cortisol
nondetectable,
measure Na/K
Fgure 5.8
considered to be the "ideal range" for basal and ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration; it is approximately 30-150nmol/L
or 1-5μg/dL pre- and post-ACT'H.
f) Induction is continued with repeat testing as necessary until adequate response is seen.
g) Average length of induction is 11 days.
h) If a dog does not respond to the induction protocol after 14 days, the following factors
should be considered:
The patient may have a FAT which are more resistant to mitotane.
 The patient may be inherently resistant to mitotane; some dogs with PDH have required
 30-60 days of daily therapy or high doses.
ii. The induction dose is too low, that is, <40mg/kg/day.
iv.
 The drug is not being absorbed well. Ensure the medication is given with food, prefera-
bly a fatty meal.
V.
The diagnosis may be incorrect or the patient is suffering from iatrogenic HAC.
vi. Lack of owner compliance.
2) Maintenance (Figure 5.9):
a) Once control is achieved, initiate maintenance therapy at 50 mg/kg/week divided into two to
three doses over the course of a week.
b) First recheck ACTH stimulation test should be done 30 days after control is achieved, then
 at 3 and 6 months and every 3-6 months thereafter or any time clinical signs return.
C) All dosage adjustments should be based on ACTH stimulation testing (maintain basal
and post-ACTH cortisol levels within ideal range).
56 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Scheduled routine recheck or if clinical signs of HAC develop
 ACTH stimulation test
 Response below ideal
Response ideal
Response above ideal
No further mitotane;
 Continue therapy as is
Post-ACTH
Post-ACTH moderately
if corti sol
mildly elevated
 or severely elevated
nondetectable,
(150-300 nmol/L)
(>300 nmol/L)
measure Na/K.
Repeat ACTH
stimulation in
7-21 days
Increase mitotane
Reinitiate loading therapy
dose 25% and repeat
for 5-7 days and
ACTH stimulation test 
follow induction protocol
in 4 weeks
including ACTH stimulation
Response below ideal
Response ideal
When control achieved 
as judged by ACTH stimulation,
If cortisol
 Reinitiate maintenance
reinstitute maintenance therapy
nondetectable,
therapy 25% lower dose
 at a 50% higher dose
measure Na/K
Figure 5.9
 Algorithm for maintenance therapy using mitotane for PDH. Check with your reference laboratory for what is
considered to be the "ideal range" for basal and ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration; it is approximately 30-150nmol/L
or 1-5 μg/dL pre- and post-ACTH.
i.
 Stop administering mitotane and administer physiological doses of prednisone (0.1 mg/kg
BID).
11.
 Be aware that to obtain meaningful test results, do not administer prednisone within 12h
before an ACTH stimulation test.
ii. Perform ACTH stimulation tests after 7days initially; frequency of repeat testing will
depend on whether cortisol concentrations increase at subsequent tests or not.
iv. Cortisol secretion usually recovers in weeks to a couple months but can take longer.
V.
 Once cortisol concentration is in ideal range, discontinue prednisone and begin mainte-
 nance therapy.
vi. If dog had been on maintenance therapy when it became cortisol deficient, once cortisol
 concentrations return to ideal range, restart maintenance at 25% lower dose.
e) If relapse occurs at any time while on maintenance therapy, as indicated by cortisol levels
 above ideal range:
Dose adjustments are required.
11.
 If post-ACTH serum cortisol concentration 150-300 nmol/L, increase maintenance dose
25% and re-evaluate with an ACTH stimulation test in 4 weeks.
ili. If post-ACTH serum cortisol concentration is >300 nmol/L:
Reload for 5-7 days and do an ACTH stimulation test.
 Continue loading until cortisol concentration is in ideal range, then reinitiate weekly
p r o a  s a
ili) Retest with an ACTH stimulation test in 30 days.
iv.
 One study determined the chance of relapse to be approximately 60% for dogs with
PDH treated with mitotane; starting maintenance therapy at 50 mg/kg/week may decrease
the relapse rate.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 57
Mitotane @ 50-75 mg/kg divided
BID
and
 Prednisone @ 0.1 mg/kg BID
 Decreased appetite, vomiting,
diarrhea, listlessness,
or water intake < 60 ml/kg/day
OR
Maximum of 14 days
 ACTH stimulation test 
No change in ACTH response
Response ideal
Partial response
Increase mitotane dose by 50 mg/kg/day
 Begin maintenance
 Continue mitotane and
 Continue prednisone as is 
Mitotane: 75-100 mg/kg/
prednisone 10-14 days
Treat 10-14 days or until signs
week divided
 OR until signs of
 of loading complete
Prednisone: 0.1 mg/kg BID
loading complete 
cortisol concentration is approximately <30 nmol/L or <1 μg/dL pre- and post-ACTH; normal resting range is approximately
30-1 60nmol/L or 1-5pg/dL.
f) The maintenance dose required may vary over time in an individual patient and is hugely
variable between dogs.
C. Protocol for treating FAT:
1) Induction (Figure 5.10):
a) Initial loading dose is 50-75 mg/kg, divided twice daily if possible.
h) Loading should continue until at least one endpoint is noted (i.e., decreased appetite, vomit-
 ing, diarrhea, listlessness, or decreased water intake [<60 mL/kg/day]) or maximum 14 days.
C) At that time, an ACTH stimulation test is performed.
d) Goal is low-to-nondetectable(i.e.,<30 nmol/L)basal and post-ACTH cortisol concentrations:
i. Dose should be increased by 50 mg/kg/day every 10-14 days if control has not been
 achieved as judged by an ACTH stimulation test.
ii. f adverse effects develop due to mitotane, administration should continue at highest
tolerable dose.
e) Induction is continued with repeat testing as necessary until adequate response is seen.
f) Since goal is to create glucocorticoid insufficiency, give physiologic doses of prednisone
during loading.
g) Induction typically requires higher doses and is of longer duration than for treatment of
PDH; in one study of 32 dogs with a FAT, total induction time ranged from 10 days to 11 weeks
with a mean of 24 days.
2) Maintenance (Figure 5.11):
a) Once control is achieved, maintenance therapy should begin at 75-100 mg/kg divided over
 the course of a week or at the highest tolerable dose.
h) First recheck ACTH stimulation test should be done 30 days after control is achieved, then
every 3 months thereafter or any time clinical signs return.
 C) All dosage adjustments should be based on ACTH stimulation testing.
d) If cortisol levels pre- and post-ACTH rise into normal resting range (i.e., 10-160 nmol/L),
increase maintenance dose 50% and recheck in 4 weeks.
58  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animats
Scheduled routine recheck or if clinical signs of Cushing's syndrome develop
ACTH stimulation test
Response ideal
Response within normal
Response above normal
resting range
re sting range
Continue therapy as is
 Increase mitotane dose 50%
Reinstitute induction therapy
if no side effects mitotane;
and repeat ACTH stimulation
and follow induction protocol
if side effects, decrease to
in 4 weeks
 including ACTH stimulation
 max tolerable dose
When control achieved
as judged by ACTH stimulation,
reinstitute maintenance therapy
at a 50% higher dose
Figure 5.11 Algorithm for maintenance therapy using mitotane for FAT. "Ideal range" for cortisol basal and ACTH-stimulated
cortisol concentration is approximately <30nmol/L or <1 μg/dL pre- and post-ACTH; normal resting range is approximately
30-160nmol/L or 1-5 pg/dL.
e) If cortisol levels rise above 160 nmol/L for pre- and post-ACTH, reload until control is
achieved, then reinstitute weekly maintenance dose at a 50% higher dose.
f) As long as glucocorticoid insufficiency is present, give prednisone at 0.1 mg/kg q 12 h.
g) One study determined the chance of relapse is approximately 65% for dogs with FAT treated
with mitotane.
d. Adverse effects:
1) Side effects of mitotane are not uncommon:
a) Occur in approximately 25% and 33% of dogs with PDH on mitotane during the induction
 and maintenance phases, respectively.
b) Occur in approximately 60% of dogs with FAT on mitotane; they are more common in dogs
with FAT than with PDH due to the high doses of mitotane required.
2) Side effects are mild in most dogs and include lethargy, weakness, anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, ataxia, disorientation, dullness, and iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism; hepatopathy rarely
reported.
3) A CBC, biochemistry panel, and ACTH stimulation test should be performed at every
checkup and every time a dog on trilostane is ill.
4) If vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, weakness, and/or anorexia occur in a dog on mitotane:
a) It could be a direct adverse effect or due to hypocortisolemia.
b) Mitotane administration should be stopped, physiological doses of prednisone administered,
 an ACTH stimulation test performed and serum electrolyte concentrations measured.
C) If the clinical signs are due either to hypocortisolemia or a direct effect of mitotane, they
should resolve quickly with prednisone administration. If the signs do not abate, presence of a
nonadrenal illness should be suspected.
d) If the side effects are a direct toxicity, mitotane dose reduction may be necessary or an alter-
nate dosing scheme can be used, for example, divide the dose into smaller amounts to be given
more frequently during the course of the week.
e) If hypocortisolemia is present, prednisone therapy should be instituted; if aldosterone
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 59
5) If weakness, dullness, disorientation, and/or ataxia occur in a dog on mitotane:
a) Could be due to direct drug toxicity or may suggest the presence of a pituitary macroadenoma.
b) If direct drug toxicity, signs should resolve in a few hours.
C) CT or MRI is required to confirm the presence of a large tumor.
6) Aldosterone deficiency is possible secondary to mitotane therapy:
 a) Occurs in up to 10% of patients receiving mitotane therapy.
b) Diagnosis is made on the basis of appropriate clinical signs and presence of cortisol deficiency
 as documented with ACTH stimulation testing, concurrent hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia.
C) If it occurs, it is likely the patient will have permanent complete adrenocortical insufficiency;
therefore, treatment for hypoadrenocorticism should be initiated (see Chapter 1).
2. Trilostane:
a. Trilostane is a synthetic steroid analogue that inhibits the synthesis and secretion of steroids in the
adrenal cortex, particularly cortisol and, to a lesser extent, aldosterone:
(aH-te) aseuoauap pnoraisxopa-ie ai jo noai aanaduon e se Auneu sioe i (1
enzyme.
2) Trilostane reaches peak blood concentrations at 1.5-2 h post-pill and concentrations return to
baseline levels after 10-18 h.
3) The duration of cortisol suppression is variable, but in most dogs, cortisol concentrations
remain suppressed less than 13h.
h. It is recommended that trilostane be administered with food to enhance absorption.
C. It is not recommended in dogs with primary liver disease or chronic kidney disease.
d. Treatment protocol:
1) Current starting dose recommended by the manufacturer is 3-6 mg/kg once daily (SID).
 2) We recommend starting with a lower dose (1-2 mg/kg SID or 1 mg/kg BID).
3) Adjustments will need to be made based on clinical signs and results of routine blood tests and
ACTH stimulation testing (Table 5.1).
4) Even if duration of trilostane effect is shorter than 24h, good control of the disease can be
achieved with once-daily administration (Figure 5.12).
 5) Dogs that do not show significant clinical improvement despite adequate cortisol concentra-
tions at peak effect will likely benefit from changing to twice-daily administration (Table 5.1).
6) Initial reevaluation visits should be scheduled in 7-10 days, a month later, and every
3 months thereafter once the dog is clinically doing well and the cortisol concentrations are
acceptable. Until that time, ACTH stimulation tests should be performed 7-10 days after every
dose adjustment.
 7) A CBC, biochemistry panel, and ACTH stimulation test should be performed at every checkup
and every time a dog on trilostane is ill.
8) ACTH stimulating testing:
a) To interpret the ACTH stimulation test correctly, it must be performed at a specific time
post-pill (i.e., started 4-6h after trilostane is administered in order to evaluate peak effect; one
author prefers doing the test closer to 4 h than 6h); the optimal time for post-pill testing is not
truly known.
b) When using trilostane twice daily, the ACTH stimulation test can be performed as well
8-12h post-pill to make sure cortisol is not suppressed just before trilostane administration.
c) Performing the test 20-24h post-pill can be useful to document short duration of trilostane
action in a dog on SID treatment that is not responding clinically despite adequate cortisol
 concentration at peak trilostane action.
d) Trilostane absorption is increased when given with a meal. Thus, if the pill is normally given
with food, it should be given that way on the day of testing.
e. Adverse effects:
1) Trilostane is well tolerated in most dogs.
 2) Side effects (e.g., decreased appetite, lethargy, or hyperkalemia) are usually mild and can occur
in up to 25% of dogs.
Table 5.1
I Dose adjustment of trilostane treatment is based on clinical signs and results of routine blood and ACT'H
 stimulation tests.
Improvement or resolution of clinical signs
Results from ACTH stimulation
Blood tests
test performed 2-4 h post-pill
Adjustment
↓ Alkaline phosphatase
Post-ACTH cortisol: 
Dose unchanged
50-200 nmol/l
↓ Alkaline phosphatase
 Post-ACTH cortisol:
Discontinue trilostane aclministration for 5-7 cays, then
<50 nmol/L
restart trilostane with a 25-50% cose recuction and retest in
2 weeks. lf post-ACTH cortisol values rermain <5Onrmol/1
with the reclucec close, ciscontinue trilostane inclefinitely and
retest in a month anc every 3 rmonths thereafter until recovery
↓ Alkaline phosphatase
 Post-ACTH cortisol:
Dose unchanged, rmonitor clinical signs closely for
>200 nmol/l
recurrence
Mild hyperkalermia
 Post-ACTH cortisol: 
Dose unchanged
(K: 5.5-6.5 mEq/L)
 50-200 nmol/l
 Persistence of clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism
Results from ACTH stimulation
Blood tests
test performed 2-4 h post-pill
Adjustment
↑ Alkaline phosphatase
Post-ACTH cortisol:
Increase the close by 25-50% and retest in 2-4 weeks.
>200 nmol/l
Do not increase the close in the first recheck to avoid
increasing the risk of subsequent overdose!
↑ Alkaline phosphatase
Post-ACTH cortisol:
Consicler short cluration of trilostane action as a problerm.
 50-200 nmol/l
Perform a 24-h post-trilostane ACTH stirmulation test or a
24-h UC:CR to confim short cluration or change to BID
aclministration starting with the same caily dose clivicled.
Retest in 2-4weeks
Patient is ill
Results from ACTH stimulation
Blood tests
test performed 2-4 h post-pill 
Adjustment
↓ Alkaline phosphatase 
 Post-ACTH cortisol:
Discontinue trilostane acministration for 1 month, acminister
<50nmol/l
glucocorticoid as needled and retest with an ACTH
stirmulation test in a month. Then if cog has signs of HAC and
he post-ACTH cortisol is >250nrmol/l, reinstitute trilostane
treatrment with a 25-50% dose recuction. 1f
hypoaclrenocorticisrm persists, acrenal necrosis is likely
Azotemia, ↑ K, ↓ Na
Post-ACTH cortisol:
Discontinue trilostane acministration for 1 month;
<50 nmol/L
acrminister intravenous NaCl, glucocorticoids, and 
mineralocorticoics as needed and retest with an ACTH
stirmulation test in 1 month. Then if cog has signs of HAC
anc the post-ACTH cortisol is >250 nmol/l, reinstitute
trilostane treatment with a 25-50% cose recuction. 1f
hypoacrenocorticism persists, acrenal necrosis is likely
*CBC, biochenistry panel, and ACTH stinulation test should be performed at every scheduled checkup and every time a dog on trilostane
is ill.
*Signs of HAC: increased appetite, polyuria/polydipsia, panting, distended abdomen, weakness
llness decreased appetite, voiting, trembling, dehydration, weakness
*If the ACTH stimulation test is performed 8-12 h post-pill, the ideal range for post-ACTH cortisol concentration is 50-250 nmol/L
*Dogs should be retested 2-4weeks after any dose adjustment. Once good control of the diseaseis achieved, the patient should be
evalu ated every 3 months.
(Table adapted from: Melian C, Perez-Alenza MD & Peterson ME. (2010) Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs. In: Textbook of Veterinary Interna
Medicine, Vof. 2, eds S.f. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman, 7th edn. po. 1816-1840. Saunders, Philadelphia.)
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 61
(a)
(b)
Fgure 5.12 (a) An &-year-old mixed breed dog with PDH showing alopecia and a distended abdomen. (b) Clinical signs of
HAC resolved after treatment with trilostane. The dog is currently doing well after 33 months of treatment.
3) More serious side effects (e.g., depression, vomiting, shaking, or weight loss) are typically due
to transient hypocortisolism and hypoaldosteronism and are uncommon, but can occur at any time
during trilostane treatment.
 4) Adrenal function may remain suppressed for months or indefinitely in dogs receiving trilostane
treatment:
si anp aul anus oe aiape ue se paioadxaun sim wsioouapeodu pesonoi (e
believed to act by inhibiting adrenocortical enzymes for <24 h.
b) Histological evaluation of the adrenal glands of dogs treated with trilostane has shown
variable degrees of adrenocortical necrosis and hemorrhage, mostly in the zona fasciculata, but
the zona glomerulosa may be affected as well.
5) Considering the potential serious complications, it is extremely important to carefully monitor
dogs receiving trilostane and perform the recommended reevaluations, even if a dog is doing
clinically well.
f. Trilostane has been used successfully to treat FAT, prolonging survival and improving quality of
life, but is only suppressing cortisol secretion and not killing tumor cells.
62  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animais
3. L-Deprenyl (selegiline hydrochloride; Anipryl):
a. FDA approved for treatment of PDH.
 b. Mechanism of action: Decreases pituitary ACTH secretion by increasing dopaminergic tone in the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis, thus decreasing serum cortisol concentrations.
C. Uses:
1) Indicated only for reating uncomplicated PDH.
2) Not recommended for dogs with concurrent illnesses such as diabetes mellitus
 3) Since works by controlling ACTH secretion, cannot be used to treat FAT.
d. Protocol:
1) Initiate therapy with 1mg/kg daily and increase to 2mg/kg/day after 2months if response
inadequate.
 2) If higher dose also ineffective, switch to alternative therapy.
 3) No objective monitoring; assessment of efficacy based on subjective evaluation of remission of
clinical signs.
e. Efficacy questionable; one study found 20% efficacy and another judged L-deprenyl ineffective.
f. Adverse effects such as anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, and diarrhea are uncommon (<5% of dogs)
and usually mild.
 g. Disadvantages include poor efficacy, need for lifelong daily administration, and medication
expense.
4. Ketoconazole:
 a. Mechanism of action:
1) Inhibits multiple adrenocortical enzymes involved in hormone synthesis, including cortisol.
 2) May also block glucocorticoid receptors.
b. Indications:
1) Can be used to treat PDH or FAT.
2) Can be used in dogs unable to tolerate mitotane.
3) May be useful for palliation of clinical signs of HAC in dogs with FAT.
c. Protocol:
1) Dose is 10 mg/kg q 12h initially; up to 20 mg/kg q 12 h needed in some dogs.
 2) Monitoring done by performance of ACTH stimulation tests with same goals as for
mitotane.
d. Efficacy approximately 50% or less.
e. Adverse effects uncommon and usually mild but include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy.
 thrombocytopenia, and idiosyncratic hepatopathy.
f. Use with caution in patients with primary hepatic disease or thrombocytopenia; effect on breeding
ability unknown.
5. Retinoic acid:
a. Mechanism of action:
1) May induce cellular differentiation and apoptosis.
2) May decrease ACTH synthesis.
 3) May inhibit pituitary tumor development and proliferation.
h. 9-cis retinoic acid has been used to treat a total of 27 dogs with PDH in two studies.
C. Unfortunately, as ACTH stimulation tests were not used for monitoring, results difficult to interpret.
d. Pituitary tumor size significantly decreased in 14 dogs that were treated for 180 days.
e. Although results were promising, much more work needs to be done before retinoic acid therapy
can be recommended.
f. In addition, retinoic acid at the doses used in the study would likely be cost prohibitive to most
owners.
6. Cabergoline:
a. Mechanism of action: Cabergoline is a dopamine D2 receptor agonist; it decreases pituitary ACTH
cortisol concentrations.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Dogs 63
h. Only limited use so far:
1) One study reported with 42 dogs.
2) Long-term efficacy 42% (17/42 dogs); seven additional dogs responded transiently.
3) Unfortunately, as ACTH stimulation tests were not used for monitoring, results are difficult to
interpret.
4) A significant reduction in tumor size was noted overall
5) The only adverse effect noted was vomiting after the first one or two doses in some dogs.
6) The dogs that responded had significantly smaller tumors than those that did not.
C. Although results were promising, more work needs to be done before cabergoline therapy can be
recommended.
Treatment of iatrogenic HAC:
1. The patient needs to be tapered off glucocorticoid supplementation until their adrenal gland func-
tion recovers.
2. Protocol for tapering:
 a. The dose of glucocorticoid should be decreased to physiological doses of prednisone as quickly as
possible; the tapering rate will depend on the disease being treated, the current dose, the chronicity
of therapy, steroid administered, etc.
h. If adrenal suppression is secondary to topical glucocorticoid administration, topical administra-
tion should be stopped and oral prednisone initiated at physiological doses.
c. If a physiological dose is tolerated for a week without clinical signs of cortisol deficiency, the
dosage should be reduced by administering the drug every other day.
d. After 2 additional weeks at the new dose, the dosage should be further reduced by giving the
 medication every third day.
e. After another 2-3 weeks, prednisone most likely can be discontinued. Ideally, however, before
discontinuation, an ACTH stimulation test should be performed 12 h after the last dose of pred-
nisone to ensure the patient has a normal adrenal reserve.
 3. If the glucocorticoid therapy must be maintained to treat a disease process and no alternative is
available, the dose should be decreased to the lowest dose possible of the least potent glucocorticoid to
control the disease for which it is being administered; whether the clinical signs of iatrogenic HAC will
abate depends on the final dose achieved.
D.Drugs to avoid in dogs with HAC:
1. Do not use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in dogs with uncontrolled HAC.
2. Drugs that increase blood pressure or coagulation should be used with caution
Vll. Prognosis
A
Untreated HAC is generally a progressive disorder with a poor prognosis.
B.
 PDH due to a microadenoma:
1. If treated, usually a good prognosis.
2. Median survival time with mitotane or trilostane treatment approximately 2 years; at least 10%
survive 4 years.
 3. Dogs living longer than 6months tend to die of causes umrelated to HAC.
PDH due to a macroadenoma:
1. Depends on presence of neurologic signs.
2. With neurologic signs present, poor to grave prognosis.
 3. With no or mild neurologic signs, fair to good prognosis with radiation and medical therapy.
D.FAT:
1. Adrenal adenomas usually have a good to excellent prognosis with removal.
2. Small carcinomas (not metastasized) have a fair to good prognosis overall, and a good to excellent
 prognosis with surgical resection.
3. Large carcinomas and FAT with widespread metastasis generally have a poor to fair prognosis, but
impressive responses to high doses of mitotane are occasionally seen.
64  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
七.
Iatrogenic HAC has a good to excellent prognosis with ability to wean the patient from glucocorticoid
therapy; if weaning not possible, decrease dose of exogenous glucocorticoid to absolute minimum required
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 None known for spontaneous HAC.
B.
 For iatrogenic HAC, limit exogenous glucocorticoid use of any form to the least potent form with the
shortest duration of action at the lowest dose and for the shortest interval possible.
References and Further Readings
Alenza DP, Arenas C, Lopez ML,et al. Long-term efficacy of trilostane administered twice daily in dogs with pituitary-dependent
hy peradrenocorticism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42(4):269-276.
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ. Diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North A 2001;31:985-1003.
Aust Vet J 2003;81:600-607.
Braddock JA, Church DB, Robertson ID,et al. Inefficacy of selegiline in treatment of canine pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. Aust Vet J 2004;82:272-277.
Castillo V, Giacomini D, Paez-Pereda M, et al. Retinoic acid as a novel medical therapy for Cushing's disease in dogs.
Endocrinology 2006;147:4438-4444.
Castillo VA, Gomez NV, Lalia JC, et al. Cushing's disease in dogs: Cabergoline treatrment. Res Vet Sci 2008;85:26-34.
Canine Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 252-357.
Kintzer P, Peterson ME. Mitotane (0, p’ -ddd) treatment of 200 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
J Vet Intern Med 1991;5:182-190.
Kintzer P, Peterson ME. Mitotane treatment of cortisol secreting adrenocortical neoplasia: 32 cases (1980-1992). J Amm Vet
Med Assoc 1994;205:54-61.
Galac S, Kars VJ, Voorhout G, et al. ACTH-independent hyperadrenocorticism due to food-dependent hypercortisolemnia
in a dog. A case report. Vet J 2008;177:141-143.
Melian C, Perez-Alenza MD, Peterson ME. Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of
Veterinary Internat Medicine, Vol. 2, 7th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2010, pp. 1816-1840.
Neiger R, Ramsey L, O'Connor J, et al. Trilostane treatment of 78 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Vet Rec 2002;150(26):799-804.
Ortega T, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al. Systemic arterial blood pressure and urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;209(10):1724-1729.
Reusch CE, Sieber-Ruckstuhl N, Wenger M, et al. Histological evaluation of the adrenal glands of seven dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism treated with trilostane. Vet Rec 2007;160(7):219-224.
Vaughan MA, Feldman EC, Hoar BR, et al. Evaluation of twice-daily, low-dose trilostane treatment administered orally
in dogs with naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism. J Amm Vet Med Assoc 2008;232(9):1321-1328.
CHAPTER 6
Primary Functioning Adrenal Tumors
Producing
 Signs Similar
to Hyperadrenocorticism Including
Atypical Syndromes in Dogs
Kate Hill
Pathogenesis
● Most adrenal tumors secrete cortisol, but oversecretion of other adrenal hormones is also possible
● Adrenal tumors (particularly adenocarcinomas) may secrete adrenal sex hormones due to disruption
 of normal adrenal function.
● Progestins can act as glucocorticoid receptor agonists.
● Serum cortisol concentrations may be normal to subnormal in these cases
Classical Signs
 Signs are the same as for hypercortisolism.
● Include polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, pendulous abdomen, excessive bruising, panting, alopecia,
clitoral hypertrophy, testicular atrophy, anestrus, weakness/lethargy, exercise intolerance, muscle
 atrophy, and obesity.
Diagnosis
● Clinical signs of hypercortisolism, with serum cortisol concentrations below or within the reference
range on ACTH stimulation or low-dose dexamethasone testing and elevated concentrations of adre-
 nal sex hormones on ACTH stimulation testing.
Treatment
● Goal of treatment for functional adrenal tumors is resolution of clinical signs with surgical excision
 of the adrenal mass.
● If surgical excision is not possible or a tumor is not present, medical therapy may help with clinical
signs, with mitotane being the drug of choice.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
66  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Cytochrome P450 enzymes present in the adrenal cortex
Cholesterol
 17 α-Hydroxylase(P450 c17)
17 20 Lyase (P450 c17)
Dehydroepi-
Pregnenolone
 17 Hydroxypregnenolone
androsterone
3β-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
17 α-Hydroxylase(P450 c17),
17 20 Lyase (P450 c17)
Progesterone
17Hydroxyprogesterone
Androstenedione
 21β-Hydroxylase
P450 c21
11-Deoxycorticosterone
11-Deoxycortisol
 11β-Hydroxylase
P450 c11
Corticosterone
Cortisol
Aldosterone synthase
P450 c11AS
Aldosterone
Figure 6.1  Cytochrome P450 enzymes present in the adrenal cortex.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Hyperadrenocorticism is defined as an excessive production of any of the adrenocortical hormones.
Secretion of hormones other than cortisol has been well documented in humans with adrenal carcinomas. In
the veterinary literature, a few case reports exist of dogs with adrenal carcinomas showing clinical signs of
hyperadrenocorticism, but with normal cortisol concentrations, and that have increased adrenal sex hormone
and/or mineralocorticoid concentrations. To date, the author is not aware of any cases of canine adrenal
adenomas causing increases in adrenal hormones other than cortisol:
1. The exact pathogenesis and mechanism of increases in adrenal steroids other than cortisol in adrenal
carcinomas is unclear. In humans, aberrant biosynthetic pathways resulting in a deficiency of the
adrenal steroidogenic enzymes 21β-hydroxylase (P450 c21) and 11β-hydroxylase (P450 c11) have been
well documented in adrenal carcinomas. The enzyme deficiencies result in an increased concentration
and secretion of precursor steroids (Figure 6.1).
2. The invasion of malignant adrenal tissue into the adrenal cortex may disrupt or destroy enzymatic
pathways, which can also result in increased steroid precursors.
3. Progestins (and possibly other steroid intermediates) can displace cortisol from its serum-binding
protein, resulting in elevated circulating concentrations of free cortisol, the active form of cortisol.
Elevations in free cortisol concentrations may then cause the associated clinical signs of hyperadrenocor-
ticism.
 4. Progestins can act as glucocorticoid agonists, and hence result in glucocorticoid activity.
 5. Elevated secretion of mineralocorticoids alone should not cause signs similar to hypercortisolism (see
Chapter 12).
B. A syndrome of “atypical hyperadrenocorticism"has been defined as the presence of clinical signs consistent
with hyperadrenocorticism due to corisol excess, but negative results on standard ACTH stimulation and/or
low-dose dexamethasone testing. Dogs with atypical hyperadrenocorticism will have an increase in adrenal
sex hormones (cortisol precursors):
Primary Functioning Aorenal Tumors Producing Signs Simiar to Hyperadrenocorticism 67
(a)
(b)
Fgure 6.2 (a) A dog diagnosed with atypical hyperadrenocorticism. The dog presented for a thinning hair coat, polyphagia.
and a perianal adenoma that was most likely induced from the increase in adrenocortical hormones. The cortisol testing was
0.4-1.6ng/mL). (b) Same dog as in (a); note the thinning hair coat on the dorsum.
1. Both pituitary- and adrenal-dependent forms (i.e., adrenal tumor) have been documented.
 2. The exact pathophysiology of atypical hyperadrenocorticism has not been documented. It has been
postulated that some of these may be early cases of hyperadrenocorticism where the cortisol concentrations
have not increased enough to be detected.
3. Rarely, inadverent exposure to hormone creams containing progestins can produce a syndrome
consistent with typical hyperadrenocorticism. More often, these preparations are combined with
estrogen and produce signs of hyperestrogenism.
4. Total cortisol concentrations, not free cortisol concentrations, are typically measured in standard
ACTH stimulation tests and dexamethasone suppression tests. In cases of atypical pituitary-dependent
HAC, since cortisol precursors may increase serum free cortisol concentrations, it is possible that total
cortisol concentrations are within the reference range, but free cortisol concentrations are elevated.
Signalment
A
Middle-aged to older animals.
B
Currently no breed or sex predilection has been identified.
II. Clinical Signs
4
Clinical signs are similar to those of hypercortisolism in dogs (see Chapter 5).
B.
 Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and alopecia are predominantly reported.
Pendulousabdomen,excesive ruising,panting,alopecia,clitoralhyperrophy, esticularatrophy, anoesrs,
weakness/lethargy, exercise intolerance, muscle atrophy, and obesity can also occur (Figure 6.2a and b).
IV. Diagnosis
4.
 This is a clinical disorder. Clinical signs consistent with hypercortisolemia must be present, but standard
diagnostic testing for hyperadrenocorticism (ACTH stimulation test, low-dose dexamethasone suppression
test, etc.) has resulted in subnormal, normal, or equivocal results.
B.  CBC, serum chemistry, and urinalysis are usually consistent with hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 5).
68 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
C. Diagnosis is based on the ACTH stimulation test where assays are performed on an extended range of
adrenal hormones. Elevations in the ACTH-stimulated hormone concentrations are considered diagnostic for
 the disease Ideally cortisol, progesterone, and 17-hydroxy-progesterone concentrations are analyzed, with the
possible addition of androstenedione and estradiol if ACTH-stimulated concentrations of cortisol and the pro-
gestins are within the reference ranges. Aldosterone and corticosterone concentrations may also be requested if
mineralocorticoid excess is a possibility (e.g., hypernatremia, hypokalemia, clinical weakness, etc., are present).
D. It is important to realize that adrenal hormones can be increased in dogs with nonadrenal illness and
also in dogs with adrenal medullary tumors. Results must be interpreted along with the clinical signs of the
Jo le ui aseanoui aieuoodoid e aaeq oi readde 'eiseidoau se yons 'aseasip ieuarpeuou qm shop auos dop
the adrenal hormone concentrations (which may include cortisol concentrations). One study of dogs with
nonadrenal neoplasia showed that 32/35 (91%) had normal cortisol concentrations post-ACTH stimulation,
but 11/35 (31%) had increased 17-hydroxy-progesterone concentrations after ACTH stimulation.
F. The sensitivity and specificity for adrenal hormone precursor concentrations for diagnosis of atypical
hyperadrenocorticism have not been determined. The sensitivity and specificity of 17-α-hydroxy-progesterone
concentrations in the diagnosis of typical hyperadrenocorticism was calculated at 71% when using a cut off
of 2.5 ng/mL (8.5 nmol/L). When interpreting post-ACTH concentrations of 17-hydroxyprogesterone for
atypical adrenocortical neoplasia, it has been suggested to interpret results below 5 ng/mL (16.5 nmol/L)
with care. Post-ACTH stimulation reference ranges for 17-hydroxyprogesterone are usually in the range of
0.4-2.8 ng/mL (1.2-8.5 nmol/L).
F.  Abdominal ultrasonography to examine the adrenal glands for the presence of unilateral or bilateral
tumors is required as well as to investigate the potential for metastasis. Metastasis can be local or can be to
the liver. Hepatomegaly is also common. Ulrasound can indicate the tumor is malignant if metastasis or vas-
cular invasion is present; the absence of such findings, however does not necessarily mean the tumor is benign.
G. Three-view thoracic radiographs should also be taken to ensure thoracic metastasis is not present.
H. Advanced imaging using CT or MRI may be required prior to surgery of the adrenal tumor to further
identify metastasis or vascular invasion.
1.]
 Histology of the tumor is required to differentiate adrenal adenoma from carcinoma. Biopsies are usu-
ally obtained surgically, but can be performed under ultrasound guidance or with laparoscopy.
 Positron emission tomography (PET) CT, if available, may also help locate metastasis.
K.  Repeated blood pressure measurements and a fundic examination are also recommended to ensure
hypertension is not present. The presence of systolic blood pressure measurements greater than 160 mm Hg
will most likely require therapy. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) such as benazepril (0.25-
0.5mg/kg q 24h/os) or enalapril (0.25-0.5 mg/kg q 12-24h/os) can be administered. Calcium-channel
blockers such as amlodipine (0.1-0.4 mg/kg q 24 h/os) can also be used in conjunction with ACEI or alone.
V.]
Differential Diagnosis
A.
Other causes of polyuria and polydipsia.
B.
Other causes of polyphagia.
C.
 Other causes of bilaterally symmetrical nonpruritic alopecia.
Vl. Treatment
A.Adrenocortical neoplasia:
tissue (see Chapter 5). Adrenalectomy should be performed by an extremely experienced surgical team
for the best results to be achieved.
2. Medical management with ketoconazole (10-15mg/kg/day) or trilostane (3-10mg/kg/day) is
however it could be used, staring at 25-37.5 mg/kg q 12h PO. The goal of therapy is to minimize
clinical signs prior to surgery. As cortisol concentrations are usually normal in affected dogs prior to
medical therapy, cortisol concentrations should be monitored to ensure they do not decrease into the
hypoadrenocortical range with presurgical treatment. Both the basal and the ACTH-stimulated cortisol
 concentration should be within the basal reference range prior to surgery. Residual tumor or metastasis
should be treated with mitotane.
Primary Functioning Aarenat Tumors Producing Signs Simitar to Hyperadrenocorticism 69
3. Medical therapy of adrenocortical tumors with trilostane or mitotane has been reported in dogs.
Higher doses of mitotane are usually required for adrenocortical carcinomas and relapses occur in
around 50% of cases treated medically. Mitotane can be adrenolytic and is the drug of choice (if avail-
able) when there are metastases or residual disease after surgery:
a. The induction dose of mitotane is 25-37.5 mg/kg PO q 12h for 7-10 days (mean dose required
in one study was 46 mg/kg/day for 14 days followed by an ACTH stimulation test every 10-14 days.
ocortical tumors is to create cortisol deficiency, that is, nondetectable basal and ACTH-stimulated
cortisol concentrations. If there is still a response to the ACTH stimulation test, mitotane is increased
in 50 mg/kg/week increments. Once control is achieved, maintenance therapy should be initiated at
75-100mg/kg/week divided into two to four treatment doses. The maintenance dose after a mean
 treatment time of 13.2months in 30 dogs with cortisol-secreting adrenal tumors ranged from
35-1273 mg/kg/week. ACTH stimulation tests are performed every 3 months (see Chapter 5).
h. Trilostane therapy (3-10 mg/kg/day PO) has provided a palliative response and prolongs life but
will not stop tumor growth or metastasis. The aim is to have an ACTH-stimulated cortisol concen
[ration of less than 5 pg/dL (150 nmol/L). ACTH stimulation tests should be performed 4 h post pill
administration.
Atypical hyperadrenocorticism:
1. Medical management alone using trilostane or mitotane has been used successfully to treat both
17-hydroxyprogesterone concentrations; therefore, mitotane may be the preferred reatment. Cortisol
 concentrations need to be monitored with an ACTH stimulation test.
2. Therapy with melatonin (3 mg twice daily by mouth for dogs <30 Ib [13.5kg] or 6 mg twice daily
for dogs >30 Ib) has been suggested.
3. A combination of melatonin (3-6 mg) and mitotane has been used to treat dogs with alopecia and
sex hormone imbalance (Alopecia X). Partial or complete hair growth occurred in 60% of dogs (Frank
et al. 2004b)
4. Other drugs that have been suggested to treat atypical hyperadrenocorticism include lignan and
ketoconazole.
Vll. Prognosis
A
The prognosis for adrenal carcinomas is good if surgical excision can be performed and metastasis is
not present. Median survival of dogs with surgery if no metastasis is present is 17.5-36 months.
B.
 Prognosis is poor if metastasis or local vascular invasion is present.
C
For adrenal tumors treated with mitotane, in one study mean survival was 16.4 months (median
11.5 months, range 20 days to 5.1 years).
 In three dogs with adrenal tumors treated medically with trilostane, survival ranged from 9-16 months.
E.
 Dogs with atypical hyperadrenocoricism have a good prognosis if the clinical signs can be controlled
with medical therapy.
VIlll. Prevention
A
 There is no known prevention for this condition. Anecdotally, some cases of atypical hyperadrenocor-
References and Further Readings
Anderson CR, Birchard SJ, Powers BE, Belandria GA, Kuntz CA, Withrow SJ. Surgical treatment of adrenocortical tumors: 21
cases {1990-1996). J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:93-97.
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL, Whitley EM, Smith AN, Busch KA. Serurm 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone and
corticosterone concentrations in dogs with nonadrenal neoplasia and dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2005a;227:1762-1767.
Behrend EN, Weigand CM, Whitley EM, Refsal KR, Young DW, Kemppainen RJ. Corticosterone- and aldosterone-secreting
adrenocortical tumor in a dog.J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005b;226:1662-1666.
70 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Benchekroun G, De Fomel-Thibaud P, Lafarge S, Gomez E, Begon D, Delisle F, Moraillon R, Heripret D, Maurey C,
Rosenberg D. Trilostane therapy for hyperadrenocorticism in three dogs with adrenocortical metastasis. Vet Rec
2008;163:190-192.
Benitah NM, Feldman EC, Kass PH, Nelson RW. Evaluation of serurm 17-hydroxyprogesterone concentration after
administration of ACTH in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;227:1095-1101.
Brown CG, Graves TK. Hyperadrenocorticism: Treating dogs. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2007;29:132-144.
Chapman PS, Mooney CI, Ede J, Evans H, O'Connor J, Pfeiffer DU, Neiger R. Evaluation of the basal and post-
dogs. Vet Rec 2003;153:771-775.
Eastwood JM, Elwood CM, Hurley KJ. Trilostane treatment of a dog with functional adrenocortical neoplasia. J Small Anim
Pract 2003;44:126-131.
Frank LA, Davis JA, Oliver JW. Serum concentrations of cortisol, sex horrmones of adrenal origin, and adrenocortical steroid
intermediates in healthy dogs following stimulation wfth two doses of cosyntropin. Arn J Vet Res 2004a;65:1631-1633.
Frank LA, Hnilica KA, Oliver JW. Adrenal steroid horrmone concentrations in dogs with hair cycle arrest (Alopecia X) before
and during treatment with melatonin and mitotane. Vet Dermatol 2004b;15:278-284.
Hill KE, Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Koshko MA, Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Nelson RW, Blevins WE, Oliver JW. Secretion of sex
horrmones in dogs with adrenal dysfunction. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:556-561.
Kintzer PP, Peterson ME. Mitotane treatment of 32 dogs with cortisol-secreting adrenocortical neoplasms. JArt Vet Med Assoc
1994;205:54-61.
Kyles AE, Feldman EC, De Cock HEV, Kass PH, Mathews KG, Hardie EM, Nelson RW, Ikiw JE, Gregory CR. Surgical
managerment of adrenal gland tumors with and without associated tumor thrombi in dogs: 40 cases (1994-2001). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2003;223:654-662.
with adrenocortical neoplasia. Vet Rec 1999;144:551-554
(accessed on February 26, 2010).
Ristic JME, Ramsey IK, Heath FM, Evans HJ,Herrtage ME. The use of 17-hydroxyprogesterone in the diagnosis of canine
hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 2002;16:433-439.
Samuels MH, Loriaux DL. Cushings-syndrorme and the nodular adrenal-gland. Endocrinot Metab Clin North At
1994;23:555-569.
Scavelli TD, Peterson ME, Matthiesen DT. Results of surgical-treatment for hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical
neoplasia in the dog—25 cases (1980-1984). JArm Vet Med Assoc 1986;189:1360-1364.
Schwartz P, Kovak JR, Koprowski A, Ludwig LL, Monette S, Bergman PJ. Evaluation of prognostic factors in the surgical
treatment of adrenal gland tumors in dogs: 41 cases {1999-2005). J Ar Vet Med Assoc 2008;232:77-84.
Syme HM, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Treadwell NG, Thompson MF, Snyder PW, White MR, Oliver JW. Hyperadrenocorticism
associated with excessive sex horrmone production by an adrenocortical tumor in two dogs. J Ar Vet Med Assoc
2001;219:1725-1728.
CHAPTER 7
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
Pathogenesis
 Excess cortisol as a result of a pituitary or adrenal tumor.
● Frequently results in insulin resistance and secondary diabetes mellitus.
● Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism is rare in the cat.
Classical Signs
● Most cats are middle aged to old.
● Moderate to severe polyuria and polydipsia (often secondary to diabetes), poor coat, fragile skin
syndrome, pot belly.
Diagnosis
● Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is the screening test of choice; but needs to be used in
combination with other tests.
Treatment
 Medical therapy with trilostane and/or surgical removal of one or both adrenal glands.
Pathogenesis
A. Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism is a relatively uncommon disease in the cat; approximately
70 cases have been published. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism has been seen only occasionally as cats
appear to be relatively resistant to the deleterious effects of exogenous corticosteroids. The paucity of pri-
mary hyperadrenocorticoid cases may stem from the cats’ ability to remain asymptomatic despite large
doses of corticosteroids:
1. However the incidence in cats is not dissimilar to that reported in humans, whereas dogs seem to be
predisposed to the development of this condition.
B. Approximately 80% of feline primary hyperadrenocorticism are caused by an adrenocorticotropin
(ACTH)-secreting pituitary tumor. The high circulating levels of ACTH result in bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
ClinicalEndocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
72 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Table 7.1Differential diagnoses for insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus (DM) and
skin fragility in cats.
Differential diagnosis
Insulin-resistant DM (see Chapter 16)
Obesity
Infection
Inflammatory process
Neoplasia
 Drug administration 
Acromegaly
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperthyroidism
Sex hormone-producing tumors
 Skin fragility
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Diabetes mellitus
Chronic disease especially liver
disease
Excessive exogenous
glucocorticoids
 Pancreatic carcinomas
Cutaneous neoplasms
Sex hormone-secreting neoplasms
Ehlers- Danlos syndrome
(i.e., pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism; PDH). The majority of these tumors are adenomas, with
50% being large enough to visualize on CT or MRI.
C. Approximately 20% of cases are caused by functional adrenal tumors (adrenal-dependent hyperadreno-
corticism; ADH) that autonomously secrete cortisol or occasionally other steroid hormones; 50% of these
tumors are benign adenomas, and 50% are malignant adenocarcinomas.
11.1
Signalment
A.
~11 years). There appears to be no breed predisposition (the majority of cases have been domestic short- or
long-haired cats), and there appears to be no gender bias.
IIl. Clinical Signs
A. In general, clinical signs are not detected in cats until they develop diabetes mellitus (as a result of insu-
lin antagonism by the elevated cortisol concentration). Therefore, the majority of cats diagnosed with
hyperadrenocorticism (approximately 80%) have concurrent diabetes mellitus, and many of the clinical
signs can be attributed to this disease (Table 7.1):
1. The most commonly reported clinical signs include polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, weight loss,
generalized muscle loss, weakness, and lethargy. Affected cats often have poor coat condition, with
spontaneous alopecia or failure of hair regrowth after clipping, and fragile thin inelastic skin that bruises
easily and is prone to tearing (i.e., fragile skin syndrome).
2. Cats frequently have a potbellied appearance which is thought to result from the catabolic effects of
 cortisol weakening the abdominal muscles and alterations in fat distribution leading to an accumulation
of mesenteric fat.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats73
B. The most commonly reported abnormalities on physical examination are abdominal enlargement, muscle
atrophy, thin skin, and an unkept hair coat or hair loss (Figure 7.1). Hepatomegaly has been reported in
approximately 20% of cases, although this is not an uncommon finding in cats with diabetes mellitus. Less
thought to result from diabetic neuropathy), bruising, seborrhea, or occasionally a palpable abdominal mass.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Clinical pathology changes are highly variable, with the classic changes reported in dogs not generally
being reliable indicators of hyperadrenocorticism in cats:
1. Abnormalities detected on routine hematology may include a stress leukogram (neutrophilia and/or
lymphopenia) or occasionally, a mild variably regenerative anemia.
2. Serum biochemistry may demonstrate increases in liver enzymes, although these alterations are
present far less frequently in feline hyperadrenocorticism than they are in the canine form of the disease:
a. Cats do not have a “steroid-induced" isoenzyme of serum alkaline phosphatase (AP) and therefore
AP is rarely elevated. Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity is increased slightly more
frequently, but many cats with elevations in this enzyme have concurrent hepatic disease.
h. Since hyperadrenocorticism is frequently associated with diabetes mellitus, serum biochemistry
Hypercholesterolemia may be seen, but only in cats with concurrent diabetes mellitus.
C. Azotemia is not an uncommon finding; however, whether or not this is related to the disease
process, concurrent diabetes mellitus, or intrinsic renal insufficiency is unclear.
d. Urinalysis generally reveals a specific gravity >1.020. However the assessment of urine specific
gravity is inaccurate in the face of significant glucosuria, and as no studies have assessed urine
osmolality, no inferences can be made regarding the renal function in these cats.
e. Other less common findings may include hypokalemia, hyperglobulinemia, and hypothyroxinemia.
B. Endocrine screening in cats includes the urine cortisol to creatinine ratio (UC:CR), low-dose dexameth-
asone suppression (screening) test (LDDST), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test
(Table 7.2):
1. Urine cortisol to creatinine ratio (UC:CR):
 ment of urinary excretion of cortisol over several 24 h periods which reflects secretion from the adre-
nal glands. Because secretion can be pulsatile, 24 h collection in a relaxed environment increases the
reliability of this test.
h. In cats, 24 h urine sample collection is problematic and the hospital environment leads to stress
and increased cortisol levels. Therefore, a “shortcut" method is to assess the cortisol concentration
in a randomly collected sample, and then calculate the ratio of the concentration of cortisol to
creatinine.
 C. Protocol: Collect a urine sample, centrifuge it, and submit the supernatant.
d. The test is very sensitive so a normal ratio (<1.3x 10 after the results have been converted into US
units) almost always rules out hyperadrenocorticism, whereas a ratio >3.6x 10 may be suggestive of
hyperadrenocorticism. Unfortunately, the test is not very specific as an increased ratio can also be
associated with nonadrenal illness, especially diabetes mellitus and hyperthyroidism. The test is more
reliable if the sample is collected at home since that cat is less likely to be stressed
2. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression (screening) test (LDDST):
a Dexamethasone suppresses the hypothalamic synthesis and secretion of corticotrophin. Decreased
corticotrophin then decreases the production and release of ACTH and therefore the stimulus for the
adrenal glands to produce cortisol. Dexamethasone also directly suppresses ACTH production from
the pituitary.
h. However, if a cortisol-producing adrenal tumor is present, ACTH is already suppressed (due to the
autonomous secretion of cortisol, and its negative feedback on the production and release of ACTH).
Therefore, administration of dexamethasone will have no/minimal influence on the already decreased
ACTH release, and autonomous cortisol production will be unaltered.
74  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 7.1  Cat with hyperadrenocorticism (a) Note the poorly kept hair coat and poor muscling; (b) skin tear. (c) The ventrum
demonstrates alopecia, comedones, and calcium deposits within the skin, and the blood vessels can be clearly visualized.
C. Similarly, in individuals with a pituitary tumor that is producing ACTH; corticotrophin production
is already reduced and the administration of dexamethasone will not influence the serum cortisol
concentration.
d. Protocol: Collect a baseline blood sample, then give dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg IV) and collect
further blood samples after 4-8 h. The dose of dexamethasone used in cats is higher than the 0.01 mg/
kg used in dogs. This is because the lower dose has been found to be less sensitive in cats, where
10-15% of normal cats and some cats with nonadrenal ilness failed to suppress.
e. Normal cats should have a serum cortisol concentration of <1.4 μg/dL (<38 nmol/L) or less
than 50% of the predexamethasone level at both 4 h and 8h. Most cats with hyperadrenocorticism
(80-95%) fail to suppress at 8h, (while suppression at 4 h but not at 8h is consistent with PDH).
f. Although false negatives may occur in mild cases of hyperadrenocorticism, this test is sensitive and
a very good screening test for hyperadrenocorticism.
3. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH—corticotropin) stimulation test:
a. Administration of synthetic ACTH will stimulate cortisol production from the adrenal glands.
However, in cases with adrenocortical hyperplasia (as occurs in pituitary dependant hyperadrenocor-
ticism) or those with adrenal cortisol-producing tumors, this stimulation will be excessive.
h. There are various protocols which have been reported including both IV and IM routes of administra-
tion. However the IV route is generally preferred because it gives a more marked and prolonged elevation
in cortisol, with the peak occurring between 60-240 min after injection of synthetic corticotrophin.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats 75
Table 7.2
 Screening test for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in cats.
Test
Protocol
Interpretation
Usefulness
UC:CR
Collect urine sample,
Normal ratio (US units)
Good sensitivity: but
 centrifuge, and submit 
<1.3x10' ratio >3.6x105;
not very specific-
can
supernant
highly suggestive HAC
 be improved by
performing in home 
environment
LDDST
Collect baseline blood
Normal cats cortisol
Good screening test,
sample for cortisol
concentration <1.4 μg/dL
good sensitivity
 concentration. Inject 
(38nmol/L), or less than 50%
0.1 mg/kg
of baseline value at 4 and 8h.
dexametha sone IV.
No suppression at 8 h is
Collect further
suggestive of HAC;
samples at 4h and 8h
 suppression at 4 h but not 8 h
suggestive of PDH
ACT'H stim.
Collect baseline blood
Normal basal cortisol level is
Poor sensitivity, fair
sample for cortisol
 0-5 μg/dL (0-138 nmol/L). At 
 specificity. Good from
 concentration. Inject
1-2 h, this should increase to 
differentiating
0.125-0.25 mg of
5-1 5μg/dL (138-414nmol/L).
iatrogenic HAC from 
synthetic ACTH IV.
Cats with HAC increase to
primary HAC
Collect further
>19 pg/dL (>525 nmol/L)
samples at 1h and 2h
UC:CR—urinary cortisol to creatine ratio; HAC—hyperadrenocorticism; LDDST—ow-dose dexamethasone
suppression test; PDH—pituit ary-dependant hypera drenocorticism; ACTH stin.-
—ACTH stimulation test.
C. Protocol: Collect a baseline blood sample, give 0.125-0.25 mg of synthetic ACTH IV, then collect
further blood samples after 1 ± 2 h.
d. The normal basal serum cortisol concentration should be 0-5 μg/dL (0-138 nmol/L); 1h and/or 2 h
after ACTH, the cortisol concentration in a normal cat should be 5-15 μg/dL (138-414 nmol/L), but
o     (  
e. Unfortunately, ACTH stimulation tests are not a sensitive screening test for feline hyperadreno-
 corticism, with false negatives reported in a significant percentage (30-40%) of cats, and false
positives can also occur. For this reason, the UC:CR and LDDST are preferred screening tests in
cats. However, ACTH stimulation testing is useful in differentiating between cases of iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism and primary hyperadrenocorticism, as cats with iatrogenic disease do not
stimulate.
C. Differentiating PDH from ADH—Additional tests are used to try to differentiate PDH from adrenal
neoplasia (Table 7.2):
1. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST):
a. This works in a similar manner to the LDDST, with the exception that a high dose of dexametha-
sone is given. The autonomous production of cortisol by an adrenal tumor will remain unaltered.
However some pituitary neoplasms retain some sensitivity to ACTH, and therefore large doses of
dexamethasone can result in suppression in PDH.
b. Protocol: This test is performed as for the LDDST except that the cat is given 1.0 mg/kg IV of
dexamethasone. A >50% decrease in plasma cortisol concentration at either 4 or 8 h, or a plasma
 cortisol concentration <1.4 μg/dL (38 nmol/L) at either 4 or 8h is suggestive of PDH; whereas failure
to meet any of these criteria is inconclusive.
C. An alternative “at home" protocol has gained favor as it is easy to perform and interpret, gives
more consistent results than the standard HDDST, reduces the stress to the cat, and reduces the risk
of bruising.
76  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
d. Protocol: The owner collects a urine sample from the cat on the morning of day 1 and day 2, and
then gives three oral doses of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg/dose) at 8h intervals at 8am, 4 pm and
12 pm, or 2 doses at 4 pm and 12pm, then collects a third urine sample on the morning of day 3. They
then deliver all three samples to the veterinarian for submission for UC:CR assessment.
e. The mean of the first 2 UC:CRs gives the "basal value" and acts as a screening test, confirming the
day 3 is <50% of the “basal value." Cats with PDH may or may not suppress, while cats with
adrenal-dependant hyperadrenocorticism do not suppress.
f. There are a number of methods that owners can use to collect urine; as the cat is using the litter
box lift the tail a little and collect using a gravy ladle or similar device or replace litter with small
gravel stones of the type used in aquariums or other nonabsorbent litter such as small plastic beads.
2. Endogenous (basal) ACTH secretion is elevated in cases of PDH, but suppressed in ADH:
a Protocol: A blood sample is collected, placed into an EDTA tube, spun immediately, and the plasma
transferred into a plastic tube. The plasma is then frozen and shipped frozen to the laboratory.
b. In cats with PDH, the plasma ACTH concentration is usually above 45 pg/mL (9.9 pmol/L), com-
pared to being low (<10pg/mL or 2.2 pmol/L) in both normal cats and those with adrenal tumors.
Results between 10 and 45 pg/mL (2.2 and 9.9 pmol/L) are considered nondiagnostic.
3. Abdominal radiographs may reveal nonspecific changes such as an increased fat deposition, osteope-
nia, distension of the urinary bladder, dystrophic mineralization, and hepatomegaly. Occasionally the
adrenal mineralization should not be overinterpreted as it occurs in ~30% of normal cats.
4. Abdominal ultrasonography, CT, or MRI can all be used to determine the shape and size of the
adrenal glands:
a. Ultrasonography is a relatively useful method of determining adrenal size and can aid in the
differentiation of ADH from PDH. Unilateral adrenal enlargement is typical of an adrenal tumor
whereas bilateral enlargement usually indicates PDH, although it can occasionally result from
bilateral adrenal tumors.
b. CT and MRI can also be used to image the pituitary gland as well as the adrenal glands; about
 50% of the pituitary tumors are large enough to be visualized using these techniques.
D. Making a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism can be very difficult as the clinical signs are often less
dramatic than in dogs and the results of the specific tests are often inconsistent. Therefore, it is usually neces-
sary to use a combination of tests.
V. Differential Diagnoses
 See Table 7.1 for the differential diagnoses for skin fragility and for insulin resistant diabetes mellitus (also
see Chapter 16).
Vl. Treatment
A. There are several options for the treatment of feline hyperadrenocorticism. However, the ideal treatment
B. Various medical therapies have been attempted in cats but these have generally given poor results. It has
been suggested that medical therapy should perhaps be reserved for presurgical stabilization, rather than
long-term control:
1. While mitotane has been shown to be well tolerated in healthy cats, it has been used to treat very few
cats with hyperadrenocorticism. Use of this drug gave poor results in one cat at 25 mg/kg/q 24h for
25 days, longer courses and/or higher doses have been more effective in a small number of cases.
2. Treatment with ketoconazole can cause considerable toxicity and has given very mixed results when
used in cats with hyperadrenocorticism.
3. Metyrapone has shown potential positive effects in a small number of cats; however, it can be difficult
to obtain.
4. There is little information available on the use of l-deprenyl for the treatment of feline
hyperadrenocorticism.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats  77
5. Trilostane has given the most promising results of the medical approaches, albeit in a small number
of published cases. Trilostane inhibits 3β-17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and therefore blocks the
synthesis of adrenal and gonadal steroid hormones:
a. It has been used for the treatment of both PDH and ADH in dogs with good results.
h. In cats with PDH that were treated with trilostane, there was a reduction in their clinical signs and
their endocrine tests improved. Although they still required exogenous insulin, they survived for many
months on treatment.
c. Trilostane has also been used to treat a single feline case of bilateral adrenal enlargement with
excessive sex hormone production (but no hypercortisolemia), in which it induced moderate clinical
improvement.
d. Trilostane has typically been given at 30 mg/cat orally q 12-24 h (ranging from 10mg/cat q 24h to
60 mg/cat q 12h), long term. Side effects appear to be rare in cats, although trilostane is not
recommended in patients with renal insufficiency, and in some dogs, it causes mild lethargy and
-opodsy on aueal sisoru repe uim pneisse si arer Aiaa pue 'sadde pasear 
corticism
e. It should be used with caution in cats, and close monitoring is essential (repeated serum biochem-
istry, hematology and assessment of the pituitary-adrenal axis).
6. Cobalt irradiation for the treatment of PDH by the ablation of the pituitary tumor has been used in a
small number of cats. To date, this technique has given mixed results, although there are reports of some
good survival times and resolution of diabetes in a few cases.
C. Surgical options for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism include adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy;
1. Historically, the difficulties with medical therapy have meant that adrenalectomy has been considered
the treatment of choice in cats with hyperadrenocorticism; however this may be changing with the
apparent success of trilostane treatment (see above). Where a single adrenal tumor is present, the removal
 of the affected adrenal gland is recommended. However, if PDH or bilateral adrenal tumors are present
bilateral adrenalectomy is recommended:
a. Postoperative complications may be reduced by early diagnosis. However, while surgery can pro-
vide successful treatment, the risk of hemorrhage, fatal perioperative hypoadrenal crisis, cardiac of
renal failure, sepsis, or surgical complications are great and the procedure should only be performed
by an experienced surgical team.
h. A further complication is the diabetic state of the cat and this must also be given consideration.
While attempting to treat the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism, exogenous insulin is still necessary
to control blood glucose and reduce loss of beta cells from glucose toxicity. Various combinations of
short-, intermediate-, or long-acting insulin have been administered for stabilization of the diabetes,
can fluctuate, it is recommended that home monitoring be performed to facilitate good glycemic con-
 trol and increase the probability of diabetic remission. If home monitoring cannot be performed, it is
recommended that doses do not exceed 2.2 IU/kg/dose.
C. Short-term postoperative glucocorticoid administration is needed after unilateral adrenalectomy
because the contralateral gland will be temporarily atrophied. However, long-term treatment will be
needed after bilateral adrenalectomy and should also include mineralocorticoids
cessfully performed in a small number of cats with PDH. However, facilities offering this technique are
limited as it requires specialist surgical facilities, the same type of perioperative management as with
bilateral adrenalectomy, and poses many potential complications.
Vll. Prognosis
4
Without treatment, the prognosis is poor; most cats die or are euthanized within a month of diagnosis:
1. Surgical options are not without risk. If successful, surgery for PDH will reduce the signs of hyper-
adrenocorticism, but carries with it the risk of hypoadrenal crisis. In addition, tumor expansion may
cism should resolve and the diabetic state may become less insulin resistant or even resolve.
78 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Medical management with trilostane appears to ameliorate the signs of hyperadrenocorticism but
it may not alter the need for exogenous insulin; and diabetic cats are still susceptible to diabetic com-
plications. Irrespective of these complications, the authors have had success treating cats with trilos-
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Boag AK, Neiger R, Church DR. Trilostane treatment of bilateral adenal enlargement and excessive sex steroid horrmone
production in a cat. J Soc Admin Pharmacol 2004;45:263-266.
Bruyette DS. Adrenal function testing. In: August AR, ed. Consutations in Feline Internat Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders, 1994.
2003;5:529-533
Chapman Ps, Kelly DF, Archer J, et al. Adrenal necrosis in a dog receiving trilostane for the trearment of hyperadrenocorticism
JSocAdminPharmacol 2004;45:307-310.
Daley CA, Zerbe CA, Schick RO, et al. Use of metyrapone to treat pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat with
large cutaneous wounds. JAVMA 1993;202:956-960.
De Lange MS, Galac S, Trip MR, et al. High urinary corticoid/creatinine ratios in cats with hy perthyroidisrm. JVIM
2004;18:152-155.
Duesburg C, Peterson ME. Adrenal disorders in cats. Vet Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract 1997;27:321-347.
Duesburg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Adrenalectomy for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in cats: 10 cases
{1988-1992). JAVMA 1995;207:1066-1070.
Eastwood JM, Elwood CM, Hurley KJ. Trilostane treatment in a dog with functional adrenocortical neoplasia. J Soc Adrmin
Pharmacol 2003;44:126-131.
Eliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PD, Samii VF, Nelson RW. Prevalence of pituitary turmours among diabetic cats with insulin
resistance.JAVMA 2000;216:1765-1768.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hyperadrenocorticism in cats (Cushings Syndrome). In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and
Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
in cats. Domest Anim Endocrinof 1995;12:355-362.
Gunn-Moore D. Feline Endocrinopathies. Vet Clin North Am Smaff Anim Pract 2005;35:171-210.
Henry CJ, Clark TP, Young DW, et al. Urine cortisol:creatinine ratios in healthy and sick cats. JVIM 1996;10:123-126.
Immink WF, van Toor AJ, Vos JH, et al. Hyperadrenocorticism in four cats. Vet Q 1992;15:81-85.
Jones CA, Refsal KR, Steven BJ, et al. Adrenocortical adenocarcinoma in a cat. JAAHA 1992;28:59-62.
Kaser-Hotz B, Rohrer CR, Stankeova S,et al. Radiotherapy of pituitary tumours in five cats.J Smatl Anim Pract 2002;43:
303-307.
Meij BP, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A. Progress in transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of pituitary-dependant hyper-
adrenocorticism in dog and cats. Mot Cell Endocrinot 2002;197:89-96.
Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS, et al. Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of pituitary-dependant
hyperadreniocorticism in 7 cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:72-86.
Moore LE, Biller DS, Olsen DE. Hyperadenocortissm treated with metytapone followed by bilateral adrenalectomy. JAVMA
2000;217:691-694
Myers NC, Bruyette DS. Feline adrenocortical diseases: Part II-Hypoadrenocorticism. Sem Vet Med Suig (Smaff Anirm)
1994;9:144-147.
Neiger R, Witt AL, Noble A, et al. Trilostane therapy for the treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in 5 cats.
JVIM 2004;18:160-164.
Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Smith MC. Hyperadreenocorticism in cats: Seven cases {1978-1987). JAVMA 1988;193:245-250.
cosy ntropin {synthetic ACTH) and corticotrophin gel stimulation. AJVS 1984;37:331-333.
Schwedes CS. Mitotane (0, p'-DDD) treatment in ac at with hyperadrenocorticism. J Soc Admin Pharmacot 1997;38:520-524.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Cats 79
Skelly BJ, Petrus D, Nicholls PK. Use of trilostane for the treatment of pituitary-dependant hyperadrenocorticism in a cat. J Soc
Admin Pharmacol 2003;44:269-272.
Smith MC, Feldman EC. Plasma enodgenous ACTH concentrations and plasma cortisol responses to synthetic ACTH and
dexamethasone sodium phosphate in healthy cats. AJVR 1987;48:1717-1724.
 Sparkes AH, Adams DT, Douthwaite JA, Gruffyd-Jones TJ. Assessment of adrenal function in cats: Responses to intra venous
synthetic ACTH. JSAP 1990;31:2-5.
Valentine RW, Ssilber A. Feline hyperadrenocorticism: A rare case. Feline Practice 1996;24:6-11.
Watson ADJ, Church DR, Emslie DJ, Middeton DJ. Comparative effects of proligestone and megestrol acetate on basal
plassma gluscose concentrations and cortisol responses to exogenous adrenocorticotrophic horrmone in cats. Res Vet Sci
1989;47:374-376.
Watson PJ, Herrtage ME. Hy peradrenocorticism in six cats. J Soc Adrmin Pharmacot 1998;39: 175-1 84.
Widmer WR, Guptill L. Imaging techniques for facilitating diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. JAVMA
1995;206(12):355-362.
Willard MD, Nachreiner RF, Howard VC, Fooshee SK. Effect of long-term administration of ketoconazole in cats. AJVR
1986;47:2510-2513.
Zerbe CA. Feline hyperadrenocorticism. In: Kirk RW, ed. Current Veterinary Therapy X. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1989.
Zerbe CA, Refsal KR, Peterson ME, et al. Effect of non-adrenal illnes on adrenal function in the cat. AJVR 1987;48:45 1-454.
Zimmer C, Horauf A, Reusch C. Utrasonographic examination of the adrenal gland and evaluation of the hypophyseal-
adrenal axis in 20 cats. JSAP 2000;41:156-160.
CHAPTER 8
Primary Functioning Adrenal Tumors
Producing Signs Similar to
Hyperadrenocorticism Including Atypical
Syndromes in Cats
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
Pathogenesis
Very rare condition.
● Adrenocortical carcinoma producing excessive progesterone.
Classical Signs
● Older cats.
● Clinical signs similar to hyperadrenocorticism: polyuria, polydipsia, skin changes including alopecia
 and dermal fragility.
Diagnosis
● Identification of an adrenal mass and demonstration of elevated progesterone levels
Treatment
Adrenalectomy.
● Medical management with trilostane.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Excessive hormone production from an adrenocortical neoplasm:
1.
Zona glomerulosa produces mineralocorticoids (aldosterone).
Zona fasciculata produces predominantly cortisol, corticosterone, and deoxycorticosterone.
3.
 Zona reticularis produces predominantly androgens, estrogens, and progesterones.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals,First Edition.Edited byJacquie Rand.
 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
80
Primary Functioning Aorenar Tumors Producing Signs Similar to Hyperadrenocorticism 81
 Cholesterol
A P450 scc (cholesterol
side chain cleavage enzyme)
 Pregnenolone
17 OH
 Dehydroepi
BP450c17 (17α-hydroxylase)
Pregnenolone
androstenedione
C
C
 3β hydroxysteroid
C
dehydrogenase
 Progesterone
17 0H
Androstenedione
 Progesterone
D
D P450c21 (21β-hydroxylase)
11
11 Deoxycortisol
Testosterone
Deoxycortisone
E
P450c11AS(11β-hydroxylase;
aldosterone synthase)
Corticosterone
Cortisol
Oestradiol
Aldosterone
Zona glomerulosa
Zona fasciculata
Zona glomerulosa
Fgure 8.1:
 Steroid hormone synthesis within the adrenal gland.
B.
 All steroid hormones are synthesized from cholesterol (see Figure 8.1).
C.
 Excessive circulating hormone levels may arise as a result of:
1. Increased production or secretion from neoplastic cells of the adrenal cortex due to increased adrenal
cortical cell mass.
2. Aberrant synthetic pathways leading to altered steroidogenesis; deficiency of some enzymes may lead
to increased levels of precursors not yet reported in cats.
 3. Increased peripheral conversion of precursors (not yet reported in cats).
D. Progesterone particularly may mimic signs of hyperadrenocorticism when present in excess:
1. Progesterone can bind to cortisol binding protein, displacing cortisol and increasing levels of free but
not total cortisol.
thalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, affecting the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test
and decreasing total cortisol.
3. Progesterone can bind directly to the glucocorticoid receptor in dogs and man (although this has not
been shown for cats).
 4. Progesterone may cause insulin antagonism, contributing to hyperglycemia and glucosuria.
E.
 Risk factors for development of adrenocortical neoplasias have not been identified.
E
 The condition is very rare, with only six cases reported in the literature. Of these six cases, two had
concurrent hyperaldosteronism (see Table 8.1).
(666 L) 4!!
Nelson (2004)
DeClue et al.
e al. (2000)
Quante et al.
Briscoe et al.
Reference
Boord and
Rossmeisl
-hyperadrenocorticism;
(2005)
(2009)
(2009)
12 months post 
Died 3 months 
 post diagnosis
Survived 1 year
post surgery
Died 3 days 
8 weeks post 
post surgery
Euthanized
Outcome
diagnosis
surgery
1 stimulation test; HAC-
N/A
insulin, and potassium 
Aminoglutethimide
Aminoglutethimide
Benazepril, aspirin,
Adrenalectomy
 Adrenalectomy
Adrenalectomy
spironolactone,
Management
(4weeks)
"sownt puel8 leuaipe usnpoid losuos-uou yum paieisosse ws!uosouapeiady jo sases pauodai Aisno!aid l8 ajqel
/N
Right adrenal cortical carcinoma
 carcinoma
Secreting progesterone and
Secreting progesterone and
Secreting progesterone and 
Secreting progesterone
Secreting progesterone
Bilateral adrenal cortical
Secreting progesterone 
 Metastasis in lung
Left adrenal mass
aldosterone
carcinomas
 aldosterone 
Diagn osis
increase with ACTH ST
increase post-ACTH ST
increase post-ACTH ST
progesterone, with 
progesterone, with 
progesterone, with 
progesterone and
post-ACTH ST 
Sex steroids
progesterone
High basal 
progesterone
High basal 
High basal
High basal 
High basal
High basal 
Normal, but
suppression
(0.1 mg/kg)
(0.01 mg/kg)
(0.1 mg/kg)
(0.01 mg/kg)
LDDST
delayed 
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
P,U
Consistent with
iatrogenic HAC
Consistent with 
iatrogenic HAC
Consistent with
iatrogenic HAC
Consistent with
iatrogenic HAC
Consistent with
iatrogenic HAC
Consistent with 
iatrogenic HAC
ACTH ST
DSH; 14 yo; FN
DSH; 7 yo: MN
DLH; 9 yo: MN 
DLH; 12 yo; 
Russian Blue;
Signalment
Himalayan;
NW OA 
8 yo: MN 
MN
82
Primary Functioning Adrenat Tumors Producing Signs Simitar to Hyperadrenocorticism 83
comedones; lower right: prominent vessels.
11.
Signalment
A
B.
 No breed predisposition has been identified.
C.
 The majority of reported cases (five of six) have been in neutered male cats.
Il. Clinical Signs
A.
 Polydipsia and polyuria are consistent features. This may be due to progesterone causing an increase in
free cortisol or due to insulin antagonism.
B.
Polyphagia is an inconsistent finding, only specifically reported in two cases.
C.
 Coat changes generally consist of bilaterally symmetrical alopecia, often most prominent ventrally. The
hair may be easily epilated, and the coat may appear dry or greasy. Comedones, scale, and prominent blood
vessels are other skin changes reported in this condition (see Figure 8.2).
D.
 Dermal atrophy is often reported, with skin fragility resulting in spontaneous tearing in two cases.
E.
'papuaisp ro snonpuad ieadde Aeu uauopqe aul
E
Behavioral changes, notably aggression, have been reported in one case.
G.
 Evidence of cardiac disease such as gallop rhythm, cardiac murmur, cardiomegaly, and/or pericardial
effusion has been identified in 50% of the cases.
IV.  Diagnosis
A
 Routine hematology may be unremarkable, although microcytosis was reported in one case.
B.
 Elevated blood glucose and fructosamine consistent with concurrent insulin antagonism is often identified.
C.
 Hypokalemia was identified in three of six cases. The presence of hypokalemia should alert the clinician
to pursue investigation for concurrent hyperaldosteronism, which was confirmed in two of six cases.
D.
Urinalysis may identify glucosuria.
E.
 ACTH stimulation tests usually show a minimal increase in cortisol poststimulation, consistent with a
pattern of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. Basal cortisol values may also be low due to the suppressive
effect of progesterone and increased free cortisol on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
84  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
F. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression tests (LDDST) have shown varied response, partly due to the use of
different doses of dexamethasone. Due to low basal cortisol values, the degree of suppression may appear
minimal; however values at 4 and 8 h are low, which is consistent with the response expected from a normal cat.
G. Elevation in basal progesterone is a consistent feature. Progesterone was measured following ACTH
stimulation in four cases and did show an increase; however a dynamic test is not necessary.
H. Assessment of other adrenocortical steroid hormones may identify abnormal levels of other sex
hormones, such as testosterone.
 Abdominal ultrasonography to demonstrate the presence of an adrenal mass. Adrenocortical carcino-
mas are predominantly unilateral, but a bilateral condition has also been reported.
 Histopathology to confirm the presence of carcinoma; ideally with immunohistochemistry to demonstrate
functional production of progesterone.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
 Hyperadrenocorticism is the primary differential from the history and clinical signs. A low basal cortisol
may increase the suspicion for a progesterone-secreting tumor over a cortisol-secreting tumor, supported by
minimal increase in response to ACTH stimulation. Basal progesterone levels should enable differentiation
 from classical hyperadrenocorticism.
B.  Diabetes mellitus may be associated with some of the clinical signs (polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia,
abdominal distension, hyperglycemia, and glucosuria), but does not usually present with skin changes and
C. Paraneoplastic alopecia, typically associated with pancreatic neoplasia often has a similar ventral distri-
bution. The skin often has a glistening appearance and does not tend to exhibit fragility, a skin biopsy could
differentiate the two conditions.
D. Feline-acquired skin fragility syndrome may be iatrogenic in association with administration of gluco-
corticoids or progestogens, and can also be seen in association with diabetes mellitus or severe liver disease.
Idiopathic cases have also been reported.
Vl. Treatment
A. Surgical treatment:
1. Adrenalectomy has the potential to be curative; however, metastatic disease may be present at the
time of diagnosis.
2. Complications associated with adrenalectomy include hemorrhage, poor wound healing, thrombo-
embolic disease and postoperative hypoadrenocorticism.
3. Perioperative management with glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids should be considered due to
atrophy of the contralateral adrenal gland.
4. Preoperative medical managerment should be considered to allow resolution of the skin fragility prior to
surgery.
B.Medical treatment:
1. Aminoglutethimide is an inhibitor of P450scc, the side chain cleavage enzyme responsible for con
verting cholesterol to pregnenolone (see Figure 8.1). Its use has been reported in two cats, which showed
initial clinical improvement with a dose of approximately 6mg/kg. Side effects reported in humans
include nausea, anorexia, and rashes. In one cat treated for 6 weeks resolution of diabetes mellitus and
skin thinning was followed by development of gynecomastia. It was thought that the rapid fall in pro-
gesterone levels may have stimulated prolactin secretion.
2. Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (see Figure 8.1). By block.
ing the synthetic pathways of progesterone, it could theoretically allow reversal of the clinical signs.
success reported at doses of 30-60 mg/cat/PO q 24h. However, it has not been used to treat this form of
atypical hyperadrenocorticism and its use in a case of excessive estradiol and testosterone production in
 i ana e as 's au pns un i t os on aln ri 
noma, but it may be useful for stabilizing patients prior to surgery.
3. Concurrent diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 16) and hyperaldosteronism (see Chapter 12) if present
should also be managed appropriately.
Primary Functioning Adrenar Tumors Producing Signs Similar to Hyperadrenocorticism 85
Vll. Prognosis
4
 Surgical management has resulted in variable survival times of 3 days to >1 year post surgery.
 Medical managerment has resulted in shorter survival times of 8 weeks to 3 months.
C.
A guarded prognosis would have to be given due to the insidious onset of the clinical signs, which may
lead to a protracted diagnosis with the increased risk of metastatic spread prior to therapy.
Vlll. Prevention
A
 Due to the rare and spontaneous nature of these tumors, no advice can be given regarding prevention.
References and Further Readings
Boag AK, Neiger R, Church DB. Trilostane treatrment of bilateral adrenal enlargement and excessive sex steroid hormone
production in a cat.J Smatf Anirm Pract 2004;45:263-266.
Boord M, Griffin C. Progesterone secreting adrenal mass in a cat with clinical signs of hy peradrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1999;214:666-669.
Briscoe K, Barra VR, Foster DF, et al. Hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism in a cat. J Fetine Med Surg 2009;11:758-762.
DeClue AE, Breshears LA, Pardo ID, et al. Hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism in a cat with an adrenal cortical
carcinoma. J Vet Inten Med 2005;19:355-358.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hyperadrenocorticism in cats {Cushing's syndrome) In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and
Feline Endocrinotogy and Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders, 2004, pp. 358-393.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, Walde EJ, Affolter VK. Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science Ltd., 2005.
Quante S, Sieber-Rickstihl N, Wilhelm S, et al. Hyperprogesteronism due to bilateral adrenal carcinomas in a cat with
diabetes mellitus. Schweiz Arch Tierheitkd 2009;151:437-442.
Rossmeisl JH, Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Siems J, et al. Hyperadrenocorticism and hyperprogesteronemia in a cat with an adreno-
cortical adenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:512-517.
CHAPTER 9
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets
Nico J. Schoemaker
Pathogenesis
● Surgical neutering results in elevated gonadotropins.
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) receptors in the adrenal gland become activated.
 Elevated LH results in secretion of androgens and estrogens.
Classical Signs
O No sex predilection.
 Most ferrets are >3 years.
 Symmetrical alopecia.
 Estrous in neutered female ferrets (jills) and increased sexual behavior in neutered male ferrets (hobs).
· Increased skin odor.
O Pruritus.
Diagnosis
Ferret with classical signs.
● Ultrasound assists in locating affected adrenal gland(s).
● Hormone analysis is helpful for monitoring treatment.
Treatment
● Surgery has long been the treatment of choice.
● GnRH agonists, such as deslorelin and previously leuprolide acetate, are very effective in managing
the majority of cases.
● Melatonin is reported, but not advised.
1. Pathogenesis
 A. Adrenal disease can refer to changes of the adrenal cortex and/or the adrenal medulla. Pathologic changes
involving the adrenal medulla are most often the result of a pheochromocytoma (uncommon in ferrets).
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
86
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets  87
Fgure 9.1 Histological section of an adrenal gland of a healthy ferret: M=medulla, R=zona reticularis, F= zona fasciculata,
G=zona glomerulosa, C= capsule, V=adrenolumbar vein.
The most common form of adrenal disease in ferrets is hyperadrenocorticism, also referred to as adrenocortical
disease, in which the adrenal cortex is affected. The adrenal cortex consists of three layers:
1. The zona glomerulosa, which is the outermost layer of the adrenal cortex and produces mineralocor-
ticoids (primarily aldosterone).
 2. The zona fasciculata, which consists of an outer and inner part and produces glucocorticoids (cortisol
and corticosterone) and androgens.
3. The zona reticularis, the most interior zone, which is extremely variable in its prominence and cellular
composition. This zone contains the smallest cells of the adrenal cortex and produces primarily andro-
gens (Figure 9.1).
Thus, in principle, three distinct syndromes may arise in adrenocortical hyperfunction: hyperaldosteron-
ism, hypercortisolism, and hyperandrogenism. In neutered pet ferrets, hyperandrogenism is the most
common form of hyperadrenocorticism, resulting in increased plasma concentrations of androstenedi-
one, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, and estradiol.
These include (early) neutering of ferrets, housing ferrets indoors, and genetic background:
1. Neutering—-In recent years, evidence has been gathered that increased concentrations of gonadotro-
pins, which occur after neutering (due to the loss of negative feedback), stimulate the adrenal cortex,
eventually leading to an adrenocortical neoplasm. Important research findings in this area indicate that
a significant correlation exists between the age at neutering and the age at onset of hyperandrogenism,
and that luteinizing hormone receptors in the adrenal cortex of ferrets are only functional in the altered
adrenal glands and not in healthy adrenal glands. Initially it was believed that neutering at an early age
 a sn   n no  a r n r   s
is, however just as common in the Netherlands, where most pet ferrets are neutered between 6 and
12 months of age, compared to the USA, where most pet ferrets are neutered at an age of 6 weeks.
Although less common, it should be noted that adrenal disease may also occur in intact ferrets, but is
more difficult to diagnose as most clinical signs are difficult to differentiate from the normal hormonally
2. Housing ferrets indoorsThe hypothesis that ferrets that are kept indoors have a higher chance of
developing hyperandrogenism compared to ferrers housed outdoors is consistent with the above-men-
tioned hypothesis. Ferrets that are kept indoors will generally be exposed to more hours of light per day
as well as intact ferrets. The fact that adrenal gland disease is less common in the United Kingdom can
be explained by the fact that many ferrets there are still kept outdoors without being neutered.
3. Genetic background—In the USA, a specific breeding facility, which provides an estimated 80% of all
American ferrets, has been blamed for the high occurrence of hyperandrogenism in American ferrets.
This claim, however, does not account for the high prevalence of hyperandrogenism in other parts of the
88  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Figure 9.2 Alopecia in a ferret with hyperadrenocorticism.
world (e.g., the Netherlands). Dutch ferrets are not sourced from this facility and therefore do not have
the same genetic background. Although the breeding facility cannot be blamed for the high incidence of
 In humans, three different hereditary syndromes have been recognized in which multiple endocrine
neoplasms are seen (MEN1, MEN2a, and MEN2b). Since insulinomas and adrenal gland tumors are
frequently seen simultaneously in ferrets, a condition similar to MEN in humans may exist. At the
o a  i i s n s e rl  q  i 
one adrenal gland without atrophy of the contralateral adrenal gland. In the other 15% of cases, bilateral
enlargement is present.
D. The adrenal glands can be histologically classified as (nodular) hyperplasia, adenoma, and
adenocarcinoma. The histological diagnosis, however, does not provide information on functionality of the
tumor nor does it provide any prognostic information. Pituitary tumors have not been found to be associated
with adrenal tumors in ferrets.
 podr uaq su s g po poad e p sa n un sopdau o aand a 1
be 0.55% (95%, confidence interval: 0.2-1.1%). There are no reports on what percentage of ferrers eventu-
ally develop neoplastic adrenal glands. This may be as high as 75%
major complaint in this ferret was severe polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD).
G. A case of primary hyperaldosteronism has also been reported in a ferret.
Il.Signalment
Although initial reports suggested that the majority of ferrers with adrenocortical disease were females, a
Dutch study could not confirm this sex predilection. In the author's practice in the Netherlands, slightly more
 male than female ferrets with hyperandrogenism are seen. In the USA, diagnosis of hyperandrogenism in
ferrets may occur as early as 2 years of age. In the Netherlands, however, most cases are seen in ferrets older
than 3 years of age. This age difference is a reflection of the age at which ferrets are neutered in each country.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
 Alopecia, which is frequently symmetrical, is commonly, but not always seen (Figure 9.2). Sometimes
only a thinning of the hair coat is seen. Loss of hair at the base of the tail in the absence of ectoparasites is
also suggestive for hyperandrogenism. Alopecia usually begins in spring, which coincides with the start of
 the breeding season, and may disappear without treatment. The next year the alopecia commonly recurs
after which it usually does not resolve spontaneously at the end of the breeding season.
The skin is usually not affected, although some excoriations may be seen. While hair loss on the tail may be
a preliminary presentation of hyperandrogenism, it is also frequently seen in ferrets with seasonal alopecia.
It is important to differentiate between these two conditions.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets89
B. A neutered jill with vulvar swelling (the most recognizable sign of estrous) which is older than 3 years is
likely to have an adrenal tumor.
C. Recurrence of sexual behavior after neutering in hobs, but sometimes also in jills, is frequently seen. This
is often accompanied by an increased skin odor produced by the sebaceous glands.
D. Dysuria and eventually urinary obstruction may be seen in hobs. These clinical signs can be attributed to
the presence of periprostatic or periurethral cysts, which are formed under the influence of adrenal androgen
secretion. This association is frequently overlooked by practitioners who are not familiar with this disease.
E.
 Mammary gland enlargement is sometimes seen in jills.
E
 Pruritus—a sign which is commonly associated with an infectious cause for alopecia—is frequently seen
cally looked for an association between the pruritus and a (secondary) Malassezia infection, but did not find
this association.
G. PU/PD are reported in ferrets with hyperandrogenism. It is not clear, however, whether adrenal hormone
production is responsible for these signs, or if these (elderly) ferrets have concurrent kidney disease. In a
minority of cases, a LH-dependent hypercortisolism may be responsible for the PU/PD.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Clinical signs—Although many advanced techniques can be used in diagnosing hyperadrenocorticism in
ferrets, the recognition of clinical signs related to the production of sex steroids remain the most important.
craniomedial to the cranial pole of the kidney(s), representing the enlarged adrenal gland(s). The right adre-
nal gland is more difficult to palpate due to the overlying right caudate process of the caudate liver lobe.
C. Plasma hormone analysis_Hormones that are commonly elevated include androstenedione, estradiol,
and 17-hydroxyprogesterone. Blood can be sent to the Clinical Endocrinology Service of the College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, for analysis of these hormones. Dehydroepiandrosterone sul-
Jo ano no auo jo uoal pnodonun rloi ou Auanno si nq iaued siu ui papnnu aq oi pasn aie
the abovementioned hormones is considered to be diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism. However, plasma
concentrations of these hormones in intact female ferrets are identical to those in hyperadrenocorticoid fer-
rets. This hormone panel is therefore not considered of aid by the author in differentiating between a ferret
with hyperandrogenism and one with an active ovarian remnant. Hormone measurement, however, can be
 used to monitor treatment and progression of this disease.
 Plasma concentrations of ACTH and α-MSH do not change in ferrets with hyperandrogenism and are there-
fore not helpful for making a diagnosis.
 Plasma cortisol concentrations have—just as in dogs—been found to be nondiagnostic as well.
ACTH stimulation tests and dexamethasone suppression tests—as commonly used in dogs with Cushing's
syndrome—are not considered diagnostic in ferrets.
D. Urinary hormone analysis—An increased urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio (UCCR) can be found in fer-
rets with adrenocortical disease. The UCCR, however, is considered to be of limited diagnostic value because
this ratio is also increased in intact ferrets during the breeding season and in ferrets with an active ovarian
remnant. If a large population of ferrets needs to be screened for hyperandrogenism, the UCCR may func-
tion as a preliminary screening test.
E. Abdominal ultrasonography--Abdominal ultrasonography is very useful to determine size and location
of the affected adrenal glands. This technique does not provide any information on hormone release. It is
therefore possible that only one adrenal gland is enlarged, while both adrenal glands contribute to the
androgen release. It is also possible that a ferret has hyperandrogenism without being able to determine
which adrenal gland is affected. Abdominal ultrasonography is useful for visualization of an ovarian
remnant (an important differential diagnosis). Other abdominal organs, such as the prostate, can also be
evaluated.
 It may be difficult to distinguish an adrenal gland from an abdominal lymph node. By using specific land-
marks, the adrenal glands can be fairly easily detected in nearly 100% of ferrets. The left adrenal gland is
located lateral to the aorta, at the level of the origin of the cranial mesenteric and celiac arteries. The right
adrenal gland is more difficult to locate. The caudate process of the caudate liver lobe may be used as an
acoustic window. When using this window, the three major vessels (aorta, portal vein, and caudal vena cava)
90  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 9.3 Ultrasound image of an enlarged right adrenal gland of a ferret with hyperandrogenism. The gland is located dorsal
to the caudal vena cava (CvC). A mineralisation is seen in the center (white arrow)
Figure 9.4 Swollen vulva and thinning of the abdominal fur. Swelling can be seen both in a ferret during estrous as well as in
a ferret with hyperandrogenism.
in that area are located. The vena cava is the most lateral and dorsal of the three. The portal vein has a much
wider diameter compared to the caudal vena cava. The right adrenal gland is attached to the dorsolateral
surface of the caudal vena cava, at the level of and/or immediately cranial to the origin of the cranial mesen-
teric artery (Figure 9.3). The adrenal glands of ferrets with hyperandrogenism may have one or more of the
following signs: a significantly increased thickness, a rounded appearance, a heterogeneous structure, an
increased echogenicity, and sometimes contain signs of mineralization.
V.Differential Diagnoses
A。
 Hormonal The most important differential diagnoses for a jill with signs of hyperandrogenism are a
non-ovariectomized animal or one with active remnant ovaries (Figure 9.4). A Sertoli cell tumor in intact
hobs and hypothyroidism are also possible, but are considered rare.
B。
 Infectious—Dermatophytosis and demodicosis may lead to alopecia and pruritus in ferrets. A bacterial
dermatitis may also present in a similar way. In all these conditions, skin lesions will be present. These
lesions, other than an incidental superficial scratch mark, are not seen in ferrets with hyperandrogenism.
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets91
Fgure 9.5 Photo of the right adrenal gland of a ferret seen from the internal surface of the caudal vena cava showing vessels
entering the adrenal gland (arrow).
C. Noninfectious Severe alopecia and pruritus in a ferret has been seen due to food intolerance. This fer
ret had identical signs to those seen in a typical ferret with hyperandrogenism. Ultrasonography, hormone
analysis, and surgery, however could not confirm this diagnosis. As soon as the ferret was switched to a
of weeks.
Vl. Treatment
 The optimal treatment for hyperandrogenism in ferretrs is a combination of surgery and placement of an
implant containing deslorelin (a depot GnRH analogue). Many different factors influence the eventual
 choice of treatment. An owner may decline surgery based on criteria such as the age of the ferret, presence
of concurrent disease (cardiomyopathy), risk of surgery when the right or both adrenal glands are involved,
and financial limitations.
A.
 Surgery-Surgical removal of the left adrenal gland is relatively easy. The adrenal gland is dissected out
of the retroperitoneal fat and the adrenolumbar vein is ligated. The location of the right adrenal gland makes
it much more difficult to remove. The close proximity to the liver and the dorsolateral attachment to the
caudal vena cava makes a dorsal approach more logical. This is in fact the surgical approach to the adrenal
glands in humans. In ferrets, however, an abdominal approach is most commonly used. Since there is a close
 connection between the right adrenal gland and the caudal vena cava (Figure 9.5), either a part of the
adrenal needs to be left attached to the vena cava (Figure 9.6) or part of the wall of the vein has to be
removed. Ligation of the caudal vena cava is only possible if this vein is already occluded for a major portion
of its diameter and collateral veins have opened up. If this is not the case, there is a risk of hypertension distal
to ligation which may lead to acute kidney failure. Different surgical protocols have been proposed for
removing bilateral adrenocortical tumors. Many advise to leave part of an adrenal gland behind, while
others advise to remove both adrenal glands. It would seem likely that hypoadrenocorticism would occur
after removing both glands, but this seems to occur only in a minority of cases. Cryosurgery and injection
with alcohol has also been proposed. With cryosurgery, however, it is uncertain how much tumor has actually
been destroyed. Alcohol injection in dog testes has been found to be very painful. Since less painful alternatives
are present, this technique is not advised by the author.
B。
Hormone treatment:
1. GnRH agonist—The most effective drugs at the present time are the depot GnRH agonists of which
leuprolide acetate (Lupron Depot, TAP Pharmaceutical Products Inc.) is the most well known. This
drug is not registered for use in animals, but for men with prostate cancer. Deslorelin is another GnRH
dogs in Australia (Suprelorin?, Peptech Animal Health Pty Limited, Australia) and Europe (Suprelorin?,
92  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 9.6 Resection of an adrenal tumor from the caudal vena cava of a male ferret with hyperandrogenism. In this case, the
tumor could be dissected free from the vena cava.
Figure 9.7  Placement of an implant containing a slow release form of deslorelin (GnRH agonist) in a ferret. Distraction with
food enables placement of the implant without anesthesia.
Virbac Animal Health, France). Advantages of these implants over leuprolide acetate are: (1) the drug
does not need to be reconstituted; (2) it lasts much longer than the depot injections; (3) it is registered
for use in animals; and (4) it is cheaper. These implants have been found to be very effective for treating
hyperandrogenism in ferrets. As it is now commercially available, it has become the drug of choice
(Figure 9.7).
Leuprolide acetate provides a suitable alternative where deslorelin is not available. The Lupron 30-day
 Depot formulation is given in a dose of 100 μg IM for ferrets <1 kg and 200 pg IM for ferrets over 1 kg.
This drug will suppress adrenocortical hormone release for at least 1 month in ferrets and may even last
up to 3 months. Some veterinarians use a 3-month formulation (which is exactly three times as expensive),
but this drug does not seem to work three times longer than the 30-day formulation.
It may seem strange that a depot GnRH agonist is used in ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism, when the
increased release of GnRH and gonadotropins that occur post neutering are responsible for the disease
in the first place. To understand the mechanism behind this treatment, it is important to know that
pituitary and hypothalamic hormones are released in a pulsatile fashion. Gonadotropins are only released
when GnRH is secreted in pulses. The depot GnRH agonist overrides the pulsatile release, thereby
Hyperadrenocorticism in Ferrets93
blocking the release of gonadotropins. The administration of a depot GnRH agonist therefore results
in an initial single release of gonadotropins, followed by baseline concentrations. This initial release
 may exaggerate clinical signs, which may last for up to 2 weeks after placement of the implant.
2. Flutamide—Flutamide (10 mg/kg, PO, q 12 h) inhibits androgen uptake and may therefore be benefi-
cial in the first weeks of treating ferrets with a GnRH agonist, when gonadotropins are increased.
ferrets. Mink receiving such an implant develop appealing thick furs. This has also been reported in
ferrets. Melatonin supposedly suppresses the release of GnRH. In the early 1980s, researchers showed
that ferrets, which were kept under 8h light:16h darkness (8L:16D), would come into estrus only
7 weeks later than ferrets exposed to long photoperiods (14 L:10D). It is therefore debatable if mela-
 tonin is indeed capable of suppressing the release of gonadotropins. Clinical improvement, however is
seen in hyperadrenocorticoid ferrets either receiving 0.5 mg melatonin daily PO or an implant contain-
ing 5.4 mg melatonin. In the study in which melatonin was given orally, however, hormone concentra
tions, in general, rose and the tumors continued to grow. This treatment may therefore pose a risk to the
and this deterioration will not be evident to an owner. Home medication with melatonin, which can
been purchased in drugstores in the USA, may delay the initial presentation of ferrets with hyperadren
Ocorticism to veterinarians.
4. Ketoconazole and mitotane—Ketoconazole and mitotane (o,p'-DDD) are well known drugs for
reating hypercortisolism in dogs and humans. These drugs have also been tried in ferrets, but both were
not considered very effective and should therefore be considered obsolete
5. Trilostane—Trilostane (Vetoryl?, Arnolds Veterinary Products/Dechra Veterinary Products), a
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3B-HSD) blocker, has become an important drug for treating
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Since 3β-HSD is necessary for the synthesis of
androstenedione and 17-hydroxyprogesterone, it is tempting to speculate that this drug would be very
once daily to a ferret with hyperadrenocorticism. Within a month, the owner complained that the alo-
pecia and vulva swelling in the ferret increased. Plasma hormone analysis showed a decreased
17-hydroxyprogesterone concentration but increased concentrations of androstenedione, oestradiol,
and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. These results can be explained by the fact that a decrease of 3β-
HSD may lead to an activation of 17,20-lyase and thus the androgen pathway. More research is there-
fore necessary before this drug can safely be administered to ferrets.
Vll. Prognosis
4
Without treatment:
1. Ferrets with adrenal pathology may survive for years with this condition. Pruritus, however, may be
unbearable for the animal, and some of these animals appear to be more lethargic as well. Rupture of
the caudal vena cava may occur if the right adrenal gland invades this vein.
 2. Anemia due to prolonged hyperestrogenism is rare in jills with adrenal tumors.
 3. Ferrets with urinary blockage need immediate medical intervention (cystocentesis, catheterization,
 and placement of a prepubic catheter) to combat uremia and/or bladder rupture.
B.
After surgery:
1. After surgical removal of a unilateral adrenal tumor, the disease commonly recurs due to develop-
ment of disease in the contralateral adrenal gland. It is therefore advised to administer a deslorelin
implant at the time of surgery to prevent further stimulation of the contralateral gland.
Afterdeslorelintreatment:
1. Approximately 10% of ferrets seem to develop adrenal carcinomas after 1.5-2 years of treatment.
More research is necessary to better understand the pathogenesis and incidence of this phenomenon. In
the meantime, young ferrets with an adrenal tumor may benefit from surgical removal of the affected
adrenal gland in conjunction with hormone therapy to reduce the risk of such complications.
2. In a small proportion of ferrets, adrenal tumors are no longer under control of pituitary LH release
and produce their hormones autonomously. In these cases, deslorelin therapy is not effective.
94  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Vlll. Prevention
A. Since surgical neutering in ferrets has been implicated as an etiological factor in the development of
hyperandrogenism in this species, a search for alternative contraceptive methods has been made. In jills.
neutering is necessary to prevent pancytopenia due to elevated estradiol plasma concentrations during a
persistent estrous. In hobs, there is no medical need for castration. Males are mainly castrated to (1) prevent
reproduction; (2) reduce intraspecies aggression enabling them to be kept in groups; and (3) decrease the
intensity of the musky odor produced by the sebaceous glands.
In hobs, deslorelin implants suppress plasma follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and testosterone concentra-
tions, decrease testis size, and inhibit spermatogenesis. In addition, the musky odor, sexual behavior, as well
as aggressive behavior are reduced. The suppressed testosterone concentrations indicate that LH plasma
concentrations are also suppressed. In jills, deslorelin implants may induce a temporary estrous, which may
last up to 4 weeks. In general, however, this period will last up to 2 weeks.
Deslorelin is therefore considered a suitable alternative for surgical neutering in ferrets. Whether these
implants will actually reduce the incidence of hyperandrogenism in ferrets remains uncertain
References and Further Readings
Desmarchelier M, Lair S, Dunn M, et al. Primary hyperaldosteronism in a domestic ferret with an adrenocortical adenoma.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;233:1297-1301.
Kuijten AM, Schoemaker NJ, Voorhout G. Utrasonographic visualization of the adrenal glands of healthy and hyperadreno-
corticoid ferrets. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43:78-84.
Quesenberry KE, Rosenthal KL. Endocrine diseases. In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents;
Clinicat Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003, pp. 79-90.
Rosenthal KL, Peterson ME. Evaluation of plasma androgen and estrogen concentrations in ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism.
J A Vet Med Assoc 1996;209:1097-1102
Rosenthal KL, Peterson ME, Quesenberry KE, et al. Hy peradrenocorticism associated with adrenocortical turmor or nodular
hyperplasia of the adrenal gland in ferrets: 50 cases {1987-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:271-275.
Schoemaker NJ, Kuijten AM, Galac S. Luteinizing horrmone-dependent Cushing's syndrome in a pet ferret (Musteta putorius
furo).Domestic Animat Endocrinology 2008;34:278-283.
Schoemaker NJ, Mol JA, Lumeij JT, et al. Plasma concentrations of adrenocorticotrophic hormone and alpha-melanocyte-
stimulating hormone in ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) with hyperadrenocorticism. Amm J Vet Res 2002;63:1395-1395.
Schoemaker NJ, Schuurmans M, Moorman H, et al. Correlation between age at neutering and age at onset of hyperadrenocor-
ticisrm in ferrets. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:195-197.
Schoemaker NJ, Teerds KJ, Mol JA, et al. The role of luteinizing horrmone in the pathogenesis of hyperadrenocorticism in
neutered ferrets. Mol Cefl Endocrino! 2002;197:117-125.
Schoemaker NJ, van Deijk R, Muijlaert B, et al. Use of a gonadotropin releasing horrmone agonist implant as an alternative for
surgical castration in male ferrets {Mustela putorius furo). Theriogenotogy 2008;70:161-167.
Schoemaker NJ,Wolfswinkel J, Mol JA,et al. Urinary excretion of glucocorticoids in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
ferrets. Domest Anim Endocrinol 2004;27:13-24.
Vinke CM, van Deijk R,Houx BB, et al. The effects of surgical and chernical castration on intermale aggression, sexual
behaviour and play behaviour in the rmale ferret (Musteta putorius furo). Appl Anim Behau Sci 2008;1i5:104-121.
Wagner RA, Bailey EM, Schneider JF, et al. Leuprolide acetate treatment of adrenocortical disease in ferrets. J Arm Vet Med
Assoc 2001;218:1272-1274.
with adrenocortical disease. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:910-914.
CHAPTER 10
Hyperadrenocorticism and Primary
Functioning Adrenal Tumors in
Other Species (Excluding Horses
and Ferrets)
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Pathogenesis
● Hyperadrenocorticism associated with pituitary dysfunction or adrenal neoplasia has been described
in rodents and birds.
● latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism may result from the administration of exogenous corticosteroids
Classical Signs
● Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss.
● Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia (rodents).
Diagnosis
 Generally based on history and clinical signs.
● Laboratory confirmation is difficult due to patient size and a lack of validated protocols.
● Definitive diagnosis may only be possible at necropsy.
Treatment
● Scant information is available regarding medical and surgical treatment options for spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism.
● In cases of iatrogenic origin, discontinue exogenous corticosteroid therapy.
Hyperadrenocorticism and functional adrenal tumors in ferrets and horses are covered in Chapters 9
and 11, respectively. This chapter focuses on these conditions in pet rodents and birds.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
北
96  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Pathogenesis
A.
Rodents:
1. Hyperadrenocorticism is an uncommon diagnosis in pet gerbils but is seen in repeatedly bred and
aging laboratory gerbils. The disease is often linked to myocardial necrosis/fibrosis, diabetes, and obesity
in this species. Elevated serum triglycerides, enlarged pancreatic islets, thymic involution, adrenal hem-
orrhage, adrenal lipid depletion, and hepatic lipidosis may also be seen. Some affected animals may have
pheochromocytomas.
2. Adrenocortical adenoma is one of the most common benign neoplasms in the Syrian hamster.
Adrenocortical adenocarcinoma and a pituitary chromophobe adenoma have also been reported in
hamsters and these neoplasms have been implicated in clinical cases of hyperadrenocorticism.
 3. There is a single case report describing hyperadrenocorticism in the guinea pig.
B.1
Birds:
1. Only limited information is available regarding spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism in pet birds.
2. Pituitary adenomas are the most commonly reported neuroendocrine tumors in birds. Pituitary car-
cinoma and adenocarcinoma have also been reported. These pituitary tumors may be nonfunctional or
sia. Primary neoplastic diseases of the adrenal gland are also reported in birds and can vary from benign
adenomas to malignant adenocarcinomas.
sugar than insulin in birds. Many suspected diabetic patients seen may in fact be Cushingoid.
4. Chronic stress may result in adrenal hypertrophy from continual ACTH stimulation.
C.All:
a jo n ai n rs sads e u ro  opda oo 'l
enous corticosteroids. Birds appear to be more sensitive to the secondary effects of corticosteroids than
mammals.
Il.Signalment
 D. In gerbils, the disease occurs in higher prevalence in older breeders (both males and females) although a
cause and effect relationship has not been established.
E.  In hamsters, older males are overrepresented.
Ill. Clinical Signs
F.
Rodents:
1. Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia, often of the flank/thigh area.
2.
 Hyperpigmentation.
3.
Skin thinning.
4. Hepatomegaly.
 5. Polydipsia.
6. Polyuria.
7. Polyphagia.
8.
Behavioral changes.
9. Weight loss.
10. Bilateral exophthalmos has been reported in a guinea pig.
G. Birds:
1. Polyuria.
2.
Polydipsia.
3. Weight loss or gain.
4. Polyphagia.
5. Feather picking.
6. Reproductive abnormalities.
7. Muscular weakness and atrophy.
8. Intra-abdominal fat accumulation.
Hyperadrenocorticism and Primary Functioning Aorenar Tumors in Other Species 97
IV. Diagnosis
Rodents:
1. The diagnosis is generally presumed on the basis of history and clinical signs.
 2. The practicalities of obtaining blood from small patients to run diagnostic tests may prove problem-
atic. Additionally, it is important to consider that both cortisol and corticosterone rise through stress due
 to handling and restraint and during pregnancy.
 3. In hamsters, demonstration of elevated blood cortisol (normal range 13.8-27.6 nmol/L [0.5-1.0μg/
dL]) has been described in clinical cases. Alkaline phosphatase may also be elevated (normal range
a. As hamsters secrete both corticosterone and cortisol, it has been suggested that both should be
measured to assess adrenocortical function accurately.
4. Measurement of basal salivary cortisol values and the ACTH stimulation test have been validated in
guinea pigs and proved to be useful in confirming the diagnosis in the single case report in this species.
a. 20IU ACTH was administered intramuscularly and saliva samples collected before and 4 h after
administration. Saliva samples were analyzed by radioimmunoassay and post-ACTH cortisol levels
were markedly elevated in the patient compared to controls.
 5. There is one report of urine cortisol:creatinine ratio being used as a screening test for a suspected case
in a hamster. A 24h urine sample was collected for analysis, however, no reference ranges have been
established for this test in rodents.
 6. Abdominal ultrasonography may reveal enlarged adrenal glands in affected rodents.
B.Birds:
1. There are no reported cases of hyperadrenocorticism in birds with antemortem confirmation of the
diagnosis.
 2. In all avian species tested corticosterone, not cortisol, is the main corticosteroid produced by the
"adult" adrenal gland. So theoretically, confirmation of clinical suspicion of hyperadrenocorticism
(Cushing's syndrome) can be attempted by determining the plasma corticosterone level before and after
ACTH stimulation. An exaggerated increase in coricosterone after ACTH stimulation is expected in
clinical cases; however, it must be remermbered that corticosterone concentrations may be affected by the
time of day, season, reproductive activity, genetics, and degree of stress. A one-time determination of
corticosterone concentration in the blood does not accurately reflect adrenocortical function and is not
considered an appropriate diagnostic tool in birds
3. ACTH stimulation protocols have been established in psittacines, raptors, chickens, and ducks.
a. A baseline blood sample is collected.
h. 16-50 units of ACTH are administered intramuscularly.
C. A second blood sample is collected 1-2h after ACTH administration.
d. Quantification of corticosterone in both blood samples requires an assay specific to this hormone,
for example, radioimmunoassay.
e. In general, ACTH causes a peak corticosterone response within 30-60 minutes after injection with
a return to baseline levels within 120-240 minutes. Pre- and post-ACTH corticosterone concentra-
 lorikeets, the mean post-ACTH corticosterone concentrations are 4-14 times the mean baseline con-
centration. The sensitivity and specificity of the test remains undetermined and further investigation
is required in relation to interpretation of test results.
4. Extrapolating from mammalian medicine, a dexamethasone suppression test may also be used to aid
the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism. There is limited information available regarding its use in pet
birds, but some research has been undertaken in relation to the effects of dexamethasone on corticoster-
one levels in pigeons and chickens.
5. Hemogram "stress" abnormalities may be seen, for example, leukocytosis and heterophilia.
6. It may be valuable to evaluate hepatic function as concurrent hepatopathy is likely (e.g., hepatic lipidosis).
 7. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria may be seen.
 8. Necropsy, histopathology, and immunohistochemistry may be required for definitive diagnosis.
98  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
V
Differential Diagnoses
Gerbils/hamsters:
1. Ectoparasites.
2. Dermatophytosis.
3. Epitheliotropic lymphoma (hamsters).
Guinea pigs:
1. Cystic ovarian disease (see Chapter 47).
2.1
Vitamin C deficiency.
3. Alopecia of pregnancy.
4. Barbering.
5. Diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 17).
Birds:
1. Diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 17)
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Rodents:
1. In the hamster, there is one report of effective treatment with metyrapone 8 mg orally given daily for
1 month. Alopecia resolved within 12 weeks of treatment. However in another hamster, metyrapone
 at the same dosage and mitotane (5mg q 24h for 30 days) were both ineffective.
2. In a guinea pig, 2-6 mg trilostane per os q 24 h was used successfully. Careful monitoring of basal
salivary cortisol concentrations was essential to ensure adequate therapy and reduce potential side
effects at higher dose rates (inappetence and weight loss).
3. Surgical removal of the affected gland via flank laparotomy (if a functional adrenal tumor is diag.
nosed). Techniques have been described for various species.
Birds:
1. Mitotane has been suggested as a therapeutic consideration in birds. However, no reports of medi-
cal or surgical treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in birds have been described. This is likely a conse-
 quence of the difficulty in achieving an antemortem diagnosis.
latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism:
1. Discontinue exogenous corticosteroid therapy.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
There is limited information available regarding prognosis of adrenal dysfunction in these species. Due
 to the likelihood of concurrent disease and limited therapeutic options, survival times of geriatric patients
VIlll. Prevention
A.
There are no known preventative measures for spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism in rodents or birds
B.
 Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism may be avoided by judicious use of therapeutic corticosteroids in all
species. Due to their apparent increased sensitivity, particular care should be taken when considering gluco-
corticoid therapy in birds: the dosage should be lower than in mammals, the duration of the treatment lim-
ited, short-acting corticosteroids selected in preference to longer acting formulations, and topical application
chosen when possible.
References and Further Readings
Adamcak A, Kaufman A, Quesenberry K. What's your diagnosis: Generalized alopecia in a Syrian hamster. Lab Ani 
1998;27(6):19-20.
Bauck LB, Orr JP, Lawrence H. Hyperadrenocorticism in three teddy bear hamsters. Can Vet J 1984;25{6):247-250.
Brink-Johnsen T, Brink-Johnsen K, Kilham L. Gestational changes in hamster adrenocortical function. J Steroid Bioche
1981;14:835-839.
de Matos R. Adrenal steroid metabolism in birds: Anatomy, physiology and clinical considerations. Vet Clin North Amm Exot
Anim Pract 2008;11:35-57.
Hyperadrenocorticism and Primary Functioning Aorenar Tumors in Other Species 99
Lawrie A. Systemic non-infectious disease. In: Harcourt-Brown N, Chitty J, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2005, pp. 245-265.
Lumeij JT. Endocrinology. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, eds. Avian Medicine—Principies and Application. Lake
Worth: Wingers, 1994, pp. 582-606.
Martinho E. Suspected case of hyperadrenocorticism in a golden hamster (Mesocricetus auratus). Vet Ctin North Arm Exot
Anim Pract 2006;9:717-721.
Orr H. Rodents: Neoplastic and endocrine disease. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rodents and Ferrets.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 181-192.
Ottenweller JE, Tapp WN, Burke JN, et al. Plasma cortisol and corticosterone concentrations in the golden harmstet
(Mesocricetus auratus). Life Sei 1985;37:1551-1558.
Percy DH, Barthold sW. Pathology of Laboratory Rodents and Rabbits, 3rd edn. Ames: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
Rees Davies R. The small sick psittacid. In: Harcourt-Brown N, Chitty J, eds. BSAVA Manua! of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2005, pp. 266-279.
Starkey SR, Morrisey JK, Stewart JE, et al. Pituitary-dependent hy peradrenocorticism in a cockatoo. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2008;232(3):394-398.
Wesche P. Rodents: Clinical pathology. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manual of Rodents αnd Ferrets. Gloucester
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 42-51.
Westerhof I, Pellicaan CH. Effects of different application routes of glucocorticoids on the pituitary-adrenocortical axis in
pigeons (Cotumbia livia domestica).J Avian Med Surg 1995;9(3):175-181.
Westerhof I, Van den Brom WE, Mol JA, et al. Sensitivity of the hypothalarmic-pituitary-adrenal system of pigeons {Colurmbia
tivia doestica) to suppression by dexarmethasone, cortisol, and prednisolone. Avian Dis 1994;38:435-445.
Zeugswetter F, Fenske M, Hassan J, et al. Cushing's syndrome in a guinea pig. Vet Rec 2007;160(25):878-880.
CHAPTER 11
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars
Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses
Catherine McGowan
Pathogenesis
● Equine hyperadrenocorticism is almost invariably associated with pituitary dysfunction, a condition
referred to as pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID).
● As the name suggests, it affects the pars intermedia of the pituitary gland not the pars distalis.
● It causes a loss of dopaminergic inhibition of the pituitary pars intermedia resulting in increased
pituitary peptide production including C-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (c-MSH), adrenocortico-
tropic hormone (ACTH), and β-endorphin.
● PPID is a neurodegenerative disease associated with aging, most closely related to human Parkinson's
disease.
Classical Signs
● It is a common (20%) problem of horses, ponies, and donkeys 15 years of age and older with no
breed or sex predilection.
● A variable combination of clinical signs is seen, the most common of which is hirsutism.
● Other signs include polyuria and polydipsia, hyperhidrosis, muscle catabolism, and weight redistri-
bution resulting in a loss of epaxial musculature and a potbellied appearance.
● Secondary infections and/or delayed wound healing are commonly encountered.
● Laminitis is frequently the most devastating consequence and may necessitate euthanasia.
Diagnosis
● Hirsutism is pathognomonic for PPID but diagnosis should be confirmed in all horses where treat-
 ment is initiated in order to have baseline endocrine values for monitoring purposes.
● Basal ACTH concentration or the low-dose dexamethasone stimulation test are most commonly
used.
● ACTH or c-MSH response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone or domperidone can also be used.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
100
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 101
● Resting blood insulin and glucose concentrations are nonspecific but are recommended for
 monitoring purposes.
Treatment
● Dopamine agonists—pergolide mesylate is the drug of choice.
● Management of the horse including attention to hooves, teeth, deworming and clipping the hair
coat, as well as clinical and endocrinological follow up are critical to the success of treatment.
 Pathogenesis
1. It is almost invariably associated with pituitary dysfunction, hence the name pituitary pars intermedia
dysfunction (PPID). The condition has also been referred to, sometimes misleadingly, as equine
Cushing's disease/syndrome, pituitary/hypophyseal/chromophobe adenoma, pars intermedia adenoma/
hyperplasia, diffuse adenomatous hyperplasia of the pituitary, and pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
nr pas  lm i r sp e sid d a pd au s
this chapter:
 a. Unlike Cushing's disease in dogs and humans, adrenocortical hyperplasia and hypercortisolemia
are not consistent findings in horses with PPID.
h. Only one case of adrenal gland-dependant equine Cushing's syndrome has been reported.
C. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism has also been reported but is much less common than PPID.
2. As the name suggests, PPID affects the pars intermedia of the pituitary gland:
a. The pituitary gland (hypophysis) is comprised of rwo lobes: the anterior lobe (adenohypophysis)
and the posterior lobe (neurohypophysis). The anterior lobe is further divided up into three parts; the
pars intermedia, distalis, and tuberalis.
b. When the pituitary gland is viewed histologically, three distinct areas can be appreciated, the pars
nervosa (or neurohypophysis), the pars distalis, and the pars intermedia. The part of the pituitary
gland affected in the horse with PPID is the pars intermedia (Figure 11.1).
C. The pars intermedia is comprised entirely of the melanotrope cell type that synthesizes and pro-
cesses a range of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) peptides. The melanotrope processes the parent
POMC peptide further than the pars distalis so that the range of peptides produced are different from
the pars distalis and include alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH), corticotrophin like
intermediate peptide (CLIP), beta endorphin, and gamma-lipotropin. While POMC processing is
markedly elevated, the relative proportions of peptides released from affected horses appears
unchanged when compared with normal horses (Figure 11.2).
d. Excessive hormone production leads to hyperplasia of that part of the pituitary gland which may
or may not then progress to adenoma formation (Figure 11.3).
3. PPID involves a loss of dopaminergic inhibition of the pituitary pars intermedia:
a. The pars distalis is well vascularized and receives releasing and inhibitory factors from the
hypothalamus that control secretion.
h. The pars intermedia is poorly vascularized and relies on neurotransmitters released from axons
 from the hypothalamus to control secretion, especially tonic inhibition by dopamine, mediated by
 dopaminergic D2 receptors on the melanotropes.
d ssxa ro aqisodr i rdasr  a aq panu audop Aq uou si yo s au '
intermedia activity and PPID
4. PPID is a neurodegenerative disease associated with aging, most closely related to human Parkinson's
disease:
a. This is a factor that is important to convey to owners of affected horses as older terms such
as pituitary adenoma or tumor may imply to owners that this condition is untreatable or that the
prognosis is hopeless.
102Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Pars distalis
Acidophil
Basophil
Chromophole
Pars intermedia
Pituitary gland
Pars luberali
Pars nervosa
Pars nenvosa
Pars inlarmadia 
 Pars dislalis 
Figure 11.1
 Equine pituitary anatomy and histology. (Photo courtesy of Cathy McGowan.)
POMC
Proopiocortin
ACTH
β-Lipotropin
Y-MSH
α-MSH
CLIP
β-Endorphiny-Lipotropin
β-MSH
corticotrophin like intermediate peptide; MSH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone; POMC, proopiomelanocortin.
b. In studies of pituitary glands, there was a marked reduction in dopamine (to < 12% of the control
value) in affected horses compared with controls, but no change in serotonin concentrations between
horses with PPID and control horses.
C. Immunohistological studies of pituitary glands of horses with PPID have shown that there is a
marked reduction (to <20% of the control value) in tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker of functional 
 dopaminergic neurons, and a 50% reduction in the cell bodies of the dopaminergic neurons compared
to controls, as in Parkinson's disease.
d. Further, studies have shown an increased oxidative stress marker, 3-nitrotyrosine, and expression
of alpha-synuclein in horses with PPID with both of these also found to occur in patients with
Parkinson's disease.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses103
Figure 11.3 Enlarged pituitary gland post mortem in a horse. (Ilmage courtesy of Prof. Derek Knottenbelt.)
Table 11.1 Mean age, clinical signs, and their frequency of occurrence in eight case series of horses with pituitary pars
intermedia dysfunction.
Heinrichs
Hillyer
Boujon
van der Kolk
Couetil 
Schott
Donaldson
McGowan
et al.
et al.
et al.
et al.
et al.
et al.
et al.
 and Neiger
Clinical sign
(1990)
(1992)
(1993)
(1993)
(1996)
(2001)
(2002)
(2003)
 Total number
19
17
5
21
22
77
27
20
studied 
Mean age (years)
19
20
18
21
21.5
23
19 (median)
19
Mirsutism
47%
%6
100%
100%
%56
%E8
%65
100%
Laminitis
NR
82%
NR
24%
59%
52%
74%
80%
Weight loss or
NR
%88
60%
%8E
50%
47%
%EE
65%
 redistribution
Lethargy
NR
82%
20%
NR
41%
%9E
%6 l
%56
Polyuria/polydipsia
26%
76%
NR
NR
%7E
34%
%L
55%
Hyperhidrosis
NR
%65
60%
5%
14%
%EE
%67
30%
Bulging
NR
12%
40%
19%
%6
30%
26%
50%
supraorbital fat
Concurrent
21%
%99
40%
19%
%9E
NR
%0E
%5E
infections
NR = not record ed.
1.
 Signalment
 PPID is a common condition, affecting approximately 20% of horses, ponies, and donkeys 15 years of
 age and older with no breed or sex predilection:
1. The average age of diagnosis is 15-20 years (Table 11.1).
 2. The main risk factor for development of PPID is increasing age.
104  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fgure 11.4  Hirsutism is the most common clinical sign in horses with PPID.
3. PPID is very rare in horses < 10 years of age.
B.  Despite earlier clinical case series reporting a seemingly increased proportion of ponies affected, ponies
are not considered to be at increased risk. Ponies may appear overrepresented because:
1. People may be more likely to keep ponies for longer than horses due to easier management.
2. Hirsutism is often more noticeable in pony breeds.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
 A variable combination of clinical signs may be seen (Table 11.1):
1. The clinical syndrome fall across a spectrum of advancing severity associated with advancing disease.
2. The total number of clinical and historical signs of PPID increases in proportion with increasing
plasma concentrations of the pituitary peptides ACTH and α-MSH.
3. A similarly variable spectrum of pituitary pathology is described from focal or multifocal hypertrophy
 or hyperplasia, to diffuse adenomatous hyperplasia, to adenomatous hyperplasia with microadenomas,
to adenoma formation.
B.
 Clinical signs are hallmarked by hirsutism (excessive hair growth):
finding associated with PPID.
 2. Hirsutism is not a normal feature of aging and is pathognomonic for PPID.
 3. Hirsutism may range from delayed shedding each year, uneven hair coat with patches of alopecia, to
a permanent long or even curly hair coat (Figure 11.4).
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 105
Fgure 11.5 Muscle catabolism and weakness, with a potbelly and "sway back" appearance.
Fgure 11.6 Sinusitis in this horse secondary to reduced immunity associated with PPID
C. Despite the relatively low proportion of ACTH among POMC peptides released from the abnormal pars
intermedia, many of the clinical signs are attributed to hyperadrenocorticism:
1. These include polyuria and polydipsia probably associated with direct effect of cortisol on antidiuretic
hormone (ADH) production, although likely to be exacerbated by osmotic diuresis in hyperglycemic
horses.
 2. Muscle catabolism and weight redistribution:
a. Horses usually appear underweight, with loss of muscle over their back and a potbellied appear-
ance, attributed to the catabolic effects of hypercortisolemia (Figure 11.5).
h. These signs are also associated with atrophy of type II muscle fibers, typical of steroid-induced
myopathy as found in other species.
3. Susceptibility to infections and reduction in healing, for example, oral ulcerations, skin infections,
periodontal disease, and sinusitis (Figure 11.6):
106  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Figure 11.7 Styrofoam pads support this aged mare with PPID with severe (Grade 3) laminitis.
Figure 11.8 Pony demonstrating marked hyperhidrosis.
a Unexplained periodontal disease, sinusitis, or recurrent infections in the aged horse should alert
practitioners to the possibility of PPID.
4. Recurrent or chronic laminitis, most likely via the induction of insulin resistance secondary to the
prolonged hyperadrenocorticism (Figure 11.7):
a. Laminitis is frequently the most devastating consequence and may necessitate euthanasia.
h. Laminitis in an aged horse without evidence of systemic illness or history of a feeding accident
should be investigated in every instance for an underlying endocrinopathy (equine metabolic syndrome
and/or PPID).
D. Other clinical signs may be attributable to other POMC peptides. However, the effects of other peptides
secreted from the pars intermedia are not well known; neither are the effects of compression of the pars
nervosa or pars distalis which may occur in some horses:
1. Lethargy is often attributed to excess β-endorphin activity.
2. Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) may be associated with catecholamine effects from the adrenal
medulla, as a result of hirsutism reducing thermoregulatory capability or even due to the effects of
compression of an enlarged pituitary gland onto the thermoregulatory centers (Figure 11.8).
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 107
3. Effects from an adenoma or enlarged pituitary on the brain stem are rare, although blindness has
been reported:
(Figure 11.3), although further extension from an adenoma would be very unlikely.
h. Seizures have been rarely reported in horses with PPID but the cause of the seizures has not been
demonstrated to be due to the pituitary disease.
E. PPID causes a combination of clinical signs, especially lethargy and wasting, which are often considered
indicative of a poor quality of life. However, these clinical signs have been consistently and successfully
reversed by medical therapy.
Clinical Pathology:
1. Routine hematology and biochemistry are not useful in the diagnosis of PPID as horses with PPID
have no significant difference from age-matched normal horses:
a. A stress leukogram, as seen in dogs, is not present.
b. Aged horses, irespective of whether they have PPID or not tend to have a relative lymphopenia.
c. Inflammatory changes, if present, represent concurrent illness rather than the effects of
hypercortisolemia.
2. Routine hematology, serum biochemical analysis, and urinalysis may, however, provide valuable
information about concurrent problems in an aged horse.
 3. Routine hematology and biochemistry are also useful in the assessment and monitoring of a horse
with PPID with respect to prognosis and response to therapy.
IV. Diagnosis
4.
 Diagnosis of PPID is based on history, clinical signs, and laboratory findings:
1. A variety of diagnostic laboratory tests is available but one limitation is that a gold standard
antemortem test has yet to be identified. A definitive diagnosis may be achieved via postmortem exam-
ination in combination with clinical signs but this is of limited value to the practicing clinician.
B. It is important to consider the reasons for diagnosis, before deciding on a diagnostic protocol:
1.Aims of diagnosis:
a. To determine the need for treatment.
b. To obtain prognostic information.
C. To obtain baseline information in order to monitor the response to therapy.
d. To differentiate from insulin resistance or equine metabolic syndrome.
C. To determine the need for treatment:
1. If the reason for diagnosis is to initiate and potentially monitor therapy, then the method of diagnosis
 needs to be most accurate as treatment is expensive and lifelong.
 2. There are basically two types of endocrine tests, basal and dynamic.
3. Basal tests are those that can be obtained with a single sample and are popular with veterinarians and
clients due to simplicity and reduced cost, especially considering that testing may need to be repeated
regularly following diagnosis:
a However, the benefits may be partially offset by the reduction in sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis.
4. Basal plasma ACTH concentration is currently the best option for a basal diagnostic test:
a. Sensitivities and specificities of > 80% have been reported with a single cutoff value, with increased
sensitivities and specificities > 90% if seasonally adjusted reference ranges are used instead of a single
cutoff value.
b. ACTH concentrations will increase in the autumn months, with horses with PPID potentially
having more pronounced increases.
c. Some laboratories are now able to correct for the seasonal effects on ACTH and can provide
altered diagnostic ranges for samples collected during this period.
d. Cutoff values for diagnosis of PPID using basal plasma ACTH concentration will vary depending
(67) 1od 99 po   oo1  n rog dx rg q s ss a 
can be used as a cutoff for non-autumn months (>80% sensitivity and specificity), or 10.3 pmol/L
108  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
sasioy ui ssai uoissaiddns auoseyaexap asop mol auioy losoioid   t'tl ajgel
 Collect a baseline serum blood sample followed by injection of 40μg/kg dexamethasone intramuscularly.
 Collect a second serum sample between 18 and 24h later and submit both to a laboratory for cortisol analysis.
(Heparinized plasma samples can also be taken.)
 Cortisol is reasonably stable so both samples can be submitted as whole blood together, although it is pertinent to chill
the samples (in a refrigerator).
Normal horses show suppression of cortisol concentration of around 70-80% from baseline.
 Following administration of dexamethasone, affected horses have serum cortisol >40 nmol/L (1.45 pg/dL) from a
baseline of around 100 nmol/L (3.62 pg/dL) while normal horses have suppression to <20nmol/L (0.72 pg/d L).
 The "gray zone" in horses that suppress between 20 and 40 nmol/L (0.72 and 1.45μg/dL) is difficult to interpret. Horses
with high baseline values (>1 50nmol/L (5.44 μg/dL)) usually have slightly less suppression and values less than
40nmol/L are considered a normal suppression in this case. However, if in doubt, the test should be repeated or a basal
adrenocorticotropic hormone concentration determined to help conf irm the result.
e. ACTH is labile and the EDTA plasma samples should be separated and chilled within 3h of
collection, frozen within 12h, and sent frozen to the laboratory. Plasma samples must not be kept in
glass tubes as the ACTH is adsorbed onto glass.
f. This can be achieved in practice provided you take a pipette, plastic storage container and cooler
with ice packs with you (many laboratories provide collection packs). Blood can be collected in an
EDTA vacutainer, allowed to separate by gravity, and separated and chilled on ice within an hour. It
is advisable to check with your laboratory for any additional requirements they may have before
collecting the sample.
5. Basal α-MSH may offer some advantages over basal ACTH as it is specific to the pars intermedia
and not part of the adrenocortical axis (less affected by stress), but is well correlated to ACTH in the
field setting
measurement of basal hormone levels because they evaluate the integrity of endocrine regulatory feed-
back loops:
a. The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test has the highest reported sensitivity and specificity
for the diagnosis of PPID. When samples are collected 20h apart, the test has been reported to
approach 100% sensitivity and specificity (Table 11.2).
h. The aim of the test is to detect a failure of suppression of cortisol following the administration of
dexamethasone in horses with PPID.
C. The rationale is that the ACTH and resultant adrenal cortisol production from affected horses are
not affected by negative feedback. The pars intermedia is not affected by negative feedback, so affected
horses fail to show a suppression of cortisol following administration of the exogenous glucocorticoid,
dexamethasone.
d. The test is affected by season, with the potential for false-positive diagnoses during the autumn
months.
 e. The dexamethasone suppression test is not affected by the time of day; however, frequently it is
convenient to perform an overnight test starting the afternoon before.
7. Other dynamic tests include the combined dexamethasone suppression/thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH) stimulation test and ACTH or α-MSH response to domperidone or TRH. These tests may offer
increased diagnostic capability but are not considered as first choice for field testing.
8. Risks of dynamic endocrine tests:
a Some veterinarians and horse owners have raised concern about the possibility of exacerbating
laminitis or inducing an attack of laminitis due to administration of dexamethasone.
h. In the author's opinion, there is little doubt that excessive prolonged doses of corticosteroids can
cause laminitis, particularly in a predisposed horse. However, the risk of the dexamethasone
suppression test is minimal, and the benefits outweigh the risks. The dose given is low, less than half
a single therapeutic dose, and given only once.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 109
D. To obtain prognostic information and to obtain baseline information in order to monitor the response
to therapy:
1. A horse with unequivocal hirsutism and three or more clinical signs of PPID may not require a
diagnostic test to determine the need for treatment. However, prior to commencement of treatment,
baseline and prognostic tests should be obtained.
2. Insulin is the most important prognostic test and will correlate with laminitis:
a. PPID horses with high insulin (>1305 pmo/L [188 μlU/mL] are more likely to develop laminitis and
not survive 2 years compared to those with low to moderate elevations (<430 pmol/L [62 μIU/mL]).
at 12 pm midday after the morning feed has been removed at least 4 h before.
 3. Blood-glucose concentration is also useful for prognostic purposes:
a. Blood glucose concentration is not very sensitive as a diagnostic test as not all horses with PPID
develop hyperglycemia; however,those that do have hyperglycemia often have more advanced disease,
possibly with additional disease stress and/or pancreatic exhaustion.
values (except during the autumn) can be considered a poor prognostic indicator:
a. ACTH concentration should decrease on pergolide therapy and can be used to adjust the dose if
improvements of ACTH do not occur.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. In cases where hirsutism is not apparent or laminitis is the primary clinical sign, it is important to differentiate
PPID from Equine metabolic syndrome (see Chapter 20), both of which are associated with insulin resistance:
1. Dynamic or basal tests of pituitary peptides or the dexamethasone suppression test will be the best
way to differentiate the two syndromes (see above).
B. In the absence of hirsutism, other clinical signs suggestive of PPID may be explained by a number of
differential diagnoses:
1. Polyuria and polydipsia may be caused by neurogenic or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, psychogenic
2. Weight loss and muscle wasting may be associated with dental disease, parasitism, or other age-
related conditions.
VI. Treatment
4
 There are several factors to consider regarding if and when to treat:
1. Medical therapy does improve quality of life of affected horses.
 2. All owners should be informed and given the option of treatment.
3. General preventive care and improved husbandry by owners as an adjunct to medical therapy is
4. Attention to diet is also important. Horses with PPID are aged and potentially in a catabolic state so
it is important to provide a balanced diet with adequate high quality protein and to supplement for trace
minerals and vitamins. Large reductions in caloric intake are not recommended, although ensuring PPID
horses are not overfed so as to remain/become fat is important.
B. Many veterinarians and owners will wait until clinical laminitis develops; however, this is not advised as
this may increase the risk of euthanasia when the first episode occurs.
C.
 In the past, medical treatment of PPID has fallen into three basic classes of medication:
1. Cortisol inhibitors (trilostane).
 2. Serotonin antagonists (cyproheptadine).
3. Dopamine agonists (pergolide and bromocriptine).
D. The current recommendation is to use pergolide mesylate (Prascend?, Boehringer Ingelheim; [1mg
scored tablets]) as first-line therapy:
1. Medical treatment of PPID has been used for almost 30 years with early reports in textbooks and
review articles originally advocating cyproheptadine, pergolide, or bromocriptine predominantly on a
theoretical basis from extrapolation from the human literature.
110  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
2. However, based on cumulative evidence, pergolide has become the standard of care recognized in the
equine internal medicine literature in horses with PPID.
3. Pergolide (Prascend?, Boehringer Ingelheim) has recently been licensed in some EU countries for use
in horses.
E. Dopamine agonists: Pergolide and Bromocriptine:
1. The first report of medical treatment of PPID in the scientific literature described a single horse given
three dopamine agonists after which the effects of POMC peptides and cortisol were measured.
2. This landmark study demonstrated the benefit of dopamine agonists:
a. There was inhibition of all the measured POMC peptides (ACTH, β-endorphin, CLIP, α-MSH, and
B-MSH) by dopamine infusion, bromocriptine given subcutaneously or orally, and pergolide given orally.
3. Practically, pergolide mesylate was shown to be the most appropriate dopamine agonist among the
three used. In oral capsule form at a dose rate of 5 mg given once was well tolerated and effective at
lowering POMC peptides for the duration of the measurement period (48 h):
umooy sapidad od un asearun puoqai e panond pue aoe nous sm uoisnui aunuedo e
cessation of the infusion.
b. Bromocriptine was poorly absorbed orally, and while therapeutic levels and an appropriate
   n m og    sm ( oi)   a e  d
not well tolerated by the horse. In an attempt to overcome this, subcutaneous injections were used, but
these caused local swelling and reactions.
4. Retrospective clinical trial data have shown pergolide treatment to decrease plasma ACTH
concentration and improve clinical signs based on owner reports in as many as 85 % of horses with PPID
over approximately 2 months of therapy.
5. Pergolide therapy has been shown in several publications to be superior to cyproheptadine therapy
and other studies have shown pergolide treatment to be effective after a failed period of cyproheptadine
treatment:
a. When the effects of pergolide and cyproheptadine were compared in a retrospective study of PPID
17 of 20 owners reported that pergolide treatment resulted in clinical improvement.
b. In another study, pergolide was also shown to be a more effective treatment for PPID than
cyproheptadine in terms of clinical response (17/20 favorable outcome for pergolide vs 3/7 for
6. Pergolide has been associated with few side effects where horses start at a dose of 0.002 mg/kg. The
most frequently reported side effect is that of mild inappetence or reduced appetite and the majority of
horses respond to a reduction in dose and then a more gradual increase in dose:
a. Side effects of inappetence and depression were more commonly reported in earlier studies where
initial doses were at the high end of the dose range.
7. The general approach to treatment with pergolide is start at a low dose, increase until clinical signs
and endocrine values are well controlled (or signs of intolerance, e.g., inappetence are observed), and then
slowly reduce to the lowest effective dose for each horse:
a. Due to severity and stage of disease and the individual physiological response to therapy, individual
horses may respond differently to treatment.
h. A dose of 0.001-0.002 mg/kg q 24h, which represents low dose therapy, is an appropriate starting dose.
C. The dose should be increased slowly from the starting dose, every 2-4 weeks, depending on clinical
and endocrinological response to up to 0.01 mg/kg q 24 h.
d. Many horses may be able to be maintained on 0.002 mg/kg (low dose), but in the author's opinion,
attempting to maintain horses on a lower dose places the horse at risk of treatment failure due to
inadequate dose.
F. Cortisol inhibitors: Trilostane:
1. Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of 3-B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.
-uap sm Od ut b y/1 1e auison 'id ym saou oz un Apns aadsod 1ea-z e u '7
strated to be effective in reducing the clinical signs of PPID, and horses showed a reduction in the cortisol
response to TRH 30 days after commencing treatment.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 111
3. Trilostane acts peripherally to reduce clinical signs of disease:
a. Ir reduces the effects of hyperadrenocorticism by inhibiting adrenal cortical glucocorticoid
production.
4. Clinical signs, for example, laminitis, muscle catabolism and polyuria/polydipsia and secondary
infections can be reduced.
5. Trilostane can be considered as an adjunct therapy for PPID rather than the main treatment (i.e.,
pergolide).
Serotonin antagonists: cyproheptadine:
1. Cyproheptadine has been advocated for the management of PPID in horses on the basis of the fact
that high doses of serotonin may stimulate the release of ACTH from the pars intermedia.
 2. However, in studies in horses, serotonin stimulation had been shown to have no influence on gene
expression of POMC in the pars intermedia.
3. While a marked reduction in dopamine (to <12% of the control value) in PPID affected horses
compared with controls has been shown, there was no change in serotonin (5-HT) concentrations
between horses with PPID and control horses.
4. Despite the lack of pathophysiological justification, there have been some reports of clinical benefit
from the use of cyproheptadine and it has been used more recently as an adjunct therapy in horses
responding poorly to pergolide therapy. The reported dose is 0.25 mg/kg PO q 24h for 4-8 weeks,
increasing to q 12h dosing at that time if there is a poor response on the basis of clinical signs and
repeat laboratory testing.
 5. However the majority of data supports a lack of effect of cyproheptadine and it has been suggested
 that any improvement noted with cyproheptadine is due to management adjustments (deworrming.
dental work, and improved nutrition) rather than the effects of the drug itself.
6. In one study, management adjustments had been performed before the onset of therapy and no effect
of cyproheptadine therapy could be detected.
H. Monitoring:
 1. Once treatment has been initiated, it is important to continue to monitor the horse clinically as well
and endocrinologically.
 2. Horses affected with PPID are aged, and as such more susceptible to diseases associated with aging
 including dental disease, lameness, respiratory disorders and skin disorders.
3. Owners should be encouraged to monitor appetite, hair coat (clip if necessary), water intake and bed
wetting when housed, body condition score including estimation of muscle loss as well as fat score,
laminitis/lameness, and general demeanor.
4. Horses with PPID will be more susceptible to secondary infections and regular clinical examinations
and hematological and biochemical profiles are warranted.
5. Monitoring will be quite regular initially as the horse starts treatment.
6. Clinical data as well as baseline plasma ACTH concentration or dexamethasone suppression test,
serum insulin concentration, and blood or urine glucose measurement can be performed:
a. The author recommends monthly monitoring initially, with adjustment to the dose of pergolide
depending on the response.
h. Subsequent monitoring can be 3 monthly to 6 monthly, depending on the horse's response.
7. A suggested treatment and monitoring protocol is outlined in Table 11.3.
Vll. Prognosis
A. In general, milder cases respond extremely well to medical therapy and treated horses can return to full
fumction, many cases able to compete in their respective disciplines.
B.  More severe cases often respond well too, but very advanced cases or those complicated with secondary
  'o     n o
1. In such cases, it is important to utilize endocrinological and clinical variables to determine the
response to medical therapy and formulate a prognosis.
 2. The prognosis is poor if ACTH and insulin remain markedly elevated despite appropriate therapy at
recommended doses.
112  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
This example assumes no concurrent disease and controlled laminitis at the time of treatment. If concurrent disease or
uncontrolled laminitis are present, clinical examinations and repeat diagnostic evaluation will necessarily fall within 
in a shorter time frame.
1. Obtain baseline endocrine and clinical values, for example, basal insulin and glucose, basal adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACT'H), and documented clinical examination findings.
2. Owners should be encouraged to monitor appetite, hair coat, water intake and bed wetting when housed, body
oueap ieaual pue ssauawelsue aoss ley se lm se ssol apsns jo uesa supnu aros uouos
monthly
 3. Calculate the starting dose of pergolide based on 0.002 mg/kg PO q 24 h to the nearest 0.5 mg.
Horse body weight (kg)
Starting daily dose (mg)
Dosage range (μg/kg)
200-350
0.5
1.3-2.5
350-600
1.0
1.7-2.5
601-850
1.5
1.8-2.5
4. After 1 month of once daily treatment, reevaluate baseline endocrine and clinical values as well as owner-reported
improvements. You should expect one or more clinical signs to improve and/or the basal ACTH to have returned to
normal or close to normal range for that time of year.
5. If clinical and/or endocrine improvements are not noted, increase the dose by 0.001 mg/kg.
sageen jeiaoouua pue suls leue iun syl too'o Ag asp aui ui sass ym Alyuo aeniea g
have improved or a maximal dose of 0.01 mg/kg has been reached.
Do aelsaaui pue sylw too'o jo stuawaoui Ag asop aui anpai 'paaiasgo ane uoissaidap io auaaddeui jo suis f 
concurrent disease.
8. Once the signs have been successfully controlled, veterinary monitoring can reduce to two to four times per year.
Aue u uoenoaap s aeui j! uejeujan jiaui yale pue Ayuow iseal le jotuow oianuuos pinous siaumo 6
clinical sign.
10. If signs are well controlled for >3 months, a slow reduction in the dose by 0.001 mg/kg/month can be attempted,
with a minimal dose not less than 0.002 mg/kg.
C.
Horses treated with medical therapy earlier especially prior to the development of laminitis, have the
best outcome.
D.
 Long-term therapy has been shown to be safe and evidence of reduced effectiveness of pergolide over
the time frames used for horses (2-7years) has not been observed.
While affected horses tend to be older, they should not be undervalued or overlooked. Trends in horse own-
ership are changing and aged horses are more frequently presented for veterinary care. They may be highly
experienced athletes or valued by their owners as a companion or teacher.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Although there are no specific preventative measures, the importance of early diagnosis and initiation
 of therapy cannot be overstated.
References and Further Readings
Neurouscut Disord 2006;16(11):737-744.
Edc 1992;4:119-122
Hyperadrenocorticism (Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction) in Horses 113
Beech J Tumors of the pituitary gland (pars interrmedia). In: Robinson NE, ed. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1983, pp. 164-169.
Beech, J Turmors of the pituitary gland (pars interrmedia). In: Robinson NE, ed. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine 2.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987, pp. 182-185.
Beech J. Treatment of hypophysial adenomas. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
1994;16:921-923.
Vol. 2, 5th edn. St Louis: Mosby, 1999, pp. 1951-1967.
1993;109(2):163-78.
Cohen ND, Carter GK. Steroid hepatopathy in a horse with glucocorticoid-induced hyperadrenocorticism. J Arm Vet Med
Assoc 1992,200:1682-1684.
of hy peradrenocorticism. J Vet Int Med 1996;10( 1): 1-6.
dysfunction (equine Cushing's disease). J Vet Int Med 2002;16(6):742-746.
Donaldson MT, McDonnell SM, Schanbacher BJ, et al. Variation in plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone concentration and
dexamethasone suppression test results with season, age, and sex in healthy ponies and horses. J Vet Intern Med
2005;19(2):217-222.
Vet Med Assoc 1994;204(4):627-632.
1Sth Annuat Forum of the American Coltege of Veterinary Internal Medicine.1997,pp.470-472.
Heinrichs M, Baumgartner W, Capen CC. Immunocytochemical demonstration of proopiomelanocortin-derived peptides in
pituitary adenomas of the pars interrmedia in horses. Vet Patho! 1990;27(6):419-425.
Jorgensen Hs. Studies on the neuroendocrine role of serotonin. Dan Med Bufl 2007;54{4):266-88.
Love S. Equine Cushing's disease. Br Vet J 1993;149(2):139-153.
ous dopaminergic neurodegenerative disease. Ageing Res Rev 2007;6{1):54-63.
McFarlane D, Toribio RE. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (equine Cushings disease). In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon
DC, eds. Equine Internal Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis: Saunders, 2010, pp. 1262-1270.
McGowan TW. Aged horse health management and welfare. PhD Thesis, University of Queensland. 2009.
McGowan CM, Neiger R. Eficacy of trilostane for the treatment of equine Cushing's syndrome. Equine Vet J 2003;
35{4):414-418
McGowan CM, Frost R, Pfeiffer DU, et al. Serurm insulin concentration in horses with equine Cushing's syndrome: Prognostic
value and response to a cortisol inhibitor. EquineVet J 2004;36(3):295-298.
Miller MA, Pardo ID, Jackson LP,et al. Correlation of pituitary histomorphometry with adrenocorticotrophic hormone
2008;45(1):26-38.
Millington WR, Dybdal NO, Dawson R, Jr., et al. Equine Cushing's disease: Differential regulation of beta-endorphin
processing in tumors of the interrmediate pituitary. Endocrinology 1988;123(3):1598-1604.
peptide and cortisol levels basally and in response to diagnostic tests. Endocrinology 1982;110(4):1430-1441.
Perkins GA, Lamb S, Erb HN, et al. Plasma adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) concentrations and clinical response in horses treated
for equine Cushing's disease with cyproheptadine or pergolide. Equine Vet J 2002;34(7):679-685.
Schott HC, Coursen CL, Eberhart SW,et al. The Michigan Cushing's project. In: Proceedings of the 47th Annuat Convention
of the American Association of Equine Practitioners. 2001, pp. 22-24.
Schott HC, 2nd. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction: Equine Cushing's disease. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
2002a;18(2):237-270.
Schott HC, 2nd. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction: Equine Cushing's disease. In: Robinson, NE, ed. Current Therapy in
Equine Medicine, Sth edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002b, pp. 807-811.
Schott HC, 2nd. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction: challenges of diagnosis and treatment. In: S2nd Annuat Convention of
the American Association of Equine Practitioners. San Antonio, Texas. Ithaca: International Veterinary Information Service
{www.ivis.org); Document No. P5308.1206, 2006.
Toribio RE. Pars interrmedia dysfunction {equine Cushing's disease). In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internat
Medicine, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 1327-1337.
Toribio RE. Adrenal glands. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internat Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis: Saunders.
2010, pp. 1248-1251.
114Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
van der Kolk JH, Ijzer J, Overgaauw PA, et al. Pituitary-independent Cushing's syndrome in a horse. Equine Vet J
2001;33(1):110-112.
van der Kolk JH, Kalsbeek HC, van Garderen E, et al. Equine pituitary neoplasia: A clinical report of 21 cases (1990-1992).
Vet Rec 1993;133(24):594-597.
Wilson MG, Nicholson WE, Holscher MA, et al. Proopiolipomelanocortin peptides in normal pituitary, pituitary tumor, and
plasma of norrmal and Cushing's horses. Endocrinotogy 1982;110(3):941-954.
CHAPTER 12
Primary Hyperaldosteronism
Andrea M. Harvey and Kent R. Refsal
Hyperaldosteronism
Pathogenesis
● Primary hyperaldosteronism is most commonly due to a aldosterone-secreting adrenal neoplasm
(adenoma or carcinoma).
● Usually unilateral neoplasia, but can be bilateral.
● Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia has been described but fewer reports to date.
Classical Signs
● Middle-aged to older cats and dogs, no breed or sex predispositions.
● Hypokalemic polymyopathy.
● Hypertensive retinopathy/sudden onset blindness in cats.
● Clinical signs similar to hyperadrenocorticism in dogs if tumor is also secreting glucocorticoids.
Diagnosis
● Elevated plasma aldosterone concentration.
● Exclusion of diseases associated with secondary hyperaldosteronism and/or low/normal plasma
renin activity and/or high aldosterone:renin ratio.
● Presence of adrenal mass (in the case of neoplasia).
● Adrenal tumors may secrete excess of multiple corticosteroids; elevated concentrations of other
hormones may be documented.
Treatment
● Antihypertensive treatment (amlodipine besylate).
● Potassium supplementation.
 Spironolactone (aldosterone antagonist).
● Adrenalectomy for unilateral adrenal neoplasia is the preferred treatment.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
115
116Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
1. Pathogenesis
A. Hyperaldosteronism results from increased secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal glands and may be
of primary or secondary etiology:
1. Primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) occurs when there is an inappropriate increase in aldosterone
secretion, independent of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). It was first reported in 1983
in a cat with an adrenocortical carcinoma. Since 1999, it has been reported in 35 more cats and 9 dogs;
2. Secondary hyperaldosteronism occurs as a response to stimulation of the RAAS and, therefore, may
occur as a compensatory response to counteract dehydration, hypotension, reduced renal perfusion (most
commonly secondary to renal disease), or sodium deficiency (reduced intake or increased loss).
B. The RAAS acts to maintain the volume of extracellular fluid, circulatory pressure, and electrolyte home-
ostasis:
1. Active release of renin is stimulated predominantly by decreased renal perfusion, detected by barore-
ceptors in the afferent arterioles.
 2. In the circulation, renin acts on angiotensinogen, to form angiotensin I, which is then converted to
angiotensin II by angiotensin-converting enzyme.
sodium reabsorption, stimulating aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex, and exerting negative
feedback on renin release.
C. Aldosterone is synthesized from cholesterol through a series of intermediary metabolites including pro-
gesterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone, and corticosterone in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. In the
kidneys, aldosterone acts on the distal collecting tubules and collecting ducts, promoting sodium reabsorp-
tion with concurrent loss of potassium and hydrogen ions.
D. Stimulation of the RAAS, therefore, results in an increased circulatory pressure via vasoconstriction and
sodium retention, with subsequent loss of potassium and hydrogen ions.
E. PHA is most commonly caused by adrenal neoplasia:
1. Unilateral adrenocortical adenoma or carcinoma occurs with approximately equal frequency in cats.
Adrenocortical carcinomas appear to predominate in dogs. Metastases from adrenal carcinomas have
been reported in both cats and dogs.
2. Bilateral adrenal adenomas have also been recognized in two cats. Another cat was reported to have
developed a right adrenal carcinoma 2 years after a left adrenal adenoma was surgically removed.
3. Adrenal tumors may produce exceses of multiple corticosteroids:
sia in two cats, and one of the authors (AH) has observed a few similar cases. The affected cats also
had diabetes melitus and dermatologic changes, both atributed to progesterone excess.
h. Elevations of both aldosterone and corticosterone associated with adrenal tumors have been
4. Concurrent elevations of aldosterone, progesterone, and corticosterone may be more common in cats
than previously recognized. A recent laboratory survey of feline sera submitted for assay of aldosterone
identified elevations of progesterone of potential clinical significance in almost half of the samples where
baseline aldosterone exceeded 3000 pmol/L.
5. A pathologic mineralocorticoid excess can occur even when there are low concentrations of aldoster-
one. Case reports of people and one dog have identified adrenal tumors where mineralocorticoid steroi-
dogenesis did not advance beyond production of 11-deoxycorticosterone. This intermediate metabolite
 of steroidogenesis exerts mineralocorticoid bioactivity and, thus, signs identical to PHA when produced
in excess.
F. Nontumorous hyperaldosteronism (idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia) has been described in a series of 11
cats and in 1 dog:
1. Affected animals have clinical signs consistent with mineralocorticoid excess despite normal or mildly
elevated baseline concentrations of aldosterone.
2. Hyperplasia of the zona glomerulosa was the lesion described when the opportunity for histopatho-
logic examination was made available.
Primary Hyperaldosteronism 117
Fgure 12.1The cat was significantly hypokalemic—note the ventroflexion of the neck which is a classic presentation of
hypokalemic polymyopathy. The cat was unable to lift his head. (Photo courtesy of Dr Séverine Tasker of The Feline Centre,
Langford Veterinary Services, University of Bristol.)
11.
Signalment
4.
 Middle-aged to older cats and dogs:
 2. Age of onset for cases of adrenal hyperplasia appears similar, with ages ranging from 11 to 18 years
 in the reported feline cases. An 8-year-old Yorkshire terrier is the single dog reported with this condition.
B. No breed predispositions noted:
1. Most reported cases have been domestic shorthair cats, with one each of domestic longhair, Siamese,
Burmese, and Burmilla being diagnosed with adrenal neoplasia.
2. Adrenal tumors causing hyperaldosteronism have been reported in a German shorthaired pointer,
 Doberman pinscher beagle, and mixed breed dogs.
C. No sex predisposition exists; almost all reported cases have been neutered, with roughly equal propor-
 tions of female and male for both cats and dogs.
Il1. Climical Signs
A
 The major clinical signs are similar, whether PHA results from adrenal adenoma, carcinoma, or hyperplasia.
 B. Most commonly, the major initial presenting signs relate directly to increased aldosterone concentra-
tions and can be divided broadly into two main groups:
1. Hypokalemic polymyopathy:
a. Most common presentation for adrenal neoplasia cases. Cervical ventroflexion is most frequently
reported (Figure 12.1), but hind limb weakness and ataxia, or, less commonly, limb stiffness, dyspha-
 gia, and collapse may also be seen. Clinical signs associated with myopathy may be mild and episodic
or severe and acute in onset.
h. Hypokalemic polymyopathy is a less common major presenting sign for adrenal hyperplasia cases
(3 of 11 reported feline cases).
2. Retinopathy associated with hypertension in cats:
a. Intraocular hemorrhage or acute onset blindness resulting from retinal detachment (Figure 12.2a,
b) due to hypertension is less commonly the main presenting sign in cases of adrenal neoplasia (2 of
 36 reported cats). However subclinical hypertension is common in cats and has been reported in dogs
with aldosterone-secreting adrenal neoplasia.
h. Hypertensive retinopathy appears to be a more common major presenting sign in cases of adrenal
hyperplasia (7 of 11 reported cats). Overall, hypertension appears to be more severe in this group of cats;
systolic blood pressure was above 185 mm Hg in all11 reported cases and was > 200 mm Hg in 6/11 cats.
118Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.2 (a) Iridal hemorrhage in a cat with systemic hypertension. (b) Retinal detachment in a Cat with systemic hyperten-
sion. The cat presented with sudden onset blindness. Note that the retinal blood vessels are clearly visible, a typical appearance
with retinal detachment. (Photos courtesy of Tim Knott, Rowe Veterinary Group, UK.)
C. Clinical signs related to glucocorticoid/progestin excess:
 ism will often display polyuria, polydipsia, and a potbellied appearance. The attending clinician may
initially suspect hyperadrenocorticism.
2. Hyperprogesteronism in cats:
 a There are two detailed case reports of cats with aldosterone-secreting adrenal tumors that have
had concurrent hyperprogesteronism, and the authors have also encountered a few cats with concur-
rent hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism that presented similarly to the reported cases.
b. Signs of hyperprogesteronism usually predominate, resulting in very similar clinical signs to
those encountered with hypercortisolemia, namely secondary diabetes mellitus, polyuria, polydip-
sia, polyphagia, poor coat condition, seborrhea, thin fragile skin, and a potbellied appearance
(Figure 12.3a, b). Elevated serum progesterone concentrations may contribute to muscle weakness,
which may be attributed initially to hypokalemic polymyopathy. Clinical signs of hypertension also
may be present.
D. Less common clinical signs:
1. Other possible clinical signs associated with hypertension may include neurological signs such as
seizures, ataxia, and behavioral changes as a result of central nervous edema, hemorrhage, or ischemia.
2. Polyuria and polydipsia in 15% of cats with aldosterone-secreting adrenal neoplasia.
3. Polyphagia in 10% of cats with aldosterone-secreting adrenal neoplasia. Adrenocortical cortisol secre-
tion was normal, but other hormones were not assessed. Therefore, whether the polyphagia is due to the
hyperaldosteronemia or to an excess of a different hormone is unknown.
E.
 Clinical signs related to renal disease:
1. In the cats with nontumorous hyperaldosteronism (i.e., adrenal hyperplasia), laboratory evidence of
progressive renal disease is common.
2. Three of 11 cats underwent necropsy confirming bilateral adrenal hyperplasia along with histopatho-
logical renal changes consisting of hyaline arteriolar sclerosis, glomerular sclerosis, tubular atrophy, and
 interstitial fibrosis. Such changes are classically recognized in humans with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia,
suggesting the renal disease is a consequence of hyperaldosteronism. Clinical signs related to progressive
renal disease may, therefore, develop in cats with adrenal hyperplasia.
 Clinical signs related to concomitant illness:
1. Cats with PHA can be older, so concurrent disease may be present which may divert attention from
the possibility of hyperaldosteronism, for example, concomitant chronic kidney disease or hyperthyroid-
ism may be assumed wrongly to be the sole cause of hypokalemia and/or hypertension.
Primary Hyperaldosteronism 119
(a)
(b)
Fgure 12.3 Both cats were diagnosed with concurrent hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism due to unilateral adrenal
carcinomas. (a) This cat's initial presenting problems were progressive symmetrical alopecia, seborrhea oleosa, and abdominal
distension.With time, diabetes melitus. polyphagia, failure of hair regrowth, andhind limb weakness developed. (b)Note the
very thin skin and prominent cutaneous blood vessels commonly seen in cases of hyperprogesteronism. (Photos courtesy of
Langford Veterinary Services, Bristol, UK.)
2. The presence of left ventricular hypertrophy, systolic heart murmur, tachycardia, gallop rhythm, of
dysrhythmias strongly suggest the presence of cardiomyopathy which may be secondary to hypertension
and/or concurrent disease such as hyperthyroidism. Cardiac disease associated solely with PHA has not
been described in cats but may be possible due to cardiac effects of aldosterone.If a patient in congestive
heart failure has an elevated plasma aldosterone concentration, however secondary hyperaldosteronism
should be the primary consideration.
Bunpoid-auorisopie ue qm ieo auo u paodai uaaq seu I adi eiseidoau auopua adninn '
 adenoma and concurrent insulinoma and functional parathyroid adenoma.
IV. Diagnosis-Laboratory Assessment and Diagnostic Imaging
A. Hematological and biochemical features:
1. No specific hematological abnormalities have been identified for PHA.
2. On serum biochemistry, hypokalemia is most often present; however, the degree is variable:
a. Hypokalemia, especially in cats, is identified for many other reasons and other causes should be
excluded first.
b. Persistence of hypokalemia despite supplermentation with potassium is a common factor that
prompts suspicion of hyperaldosteronism.
C. Most reported cases of PHA due to adrenal neoplasia were moderately to severely hypokalemic;
however, this could, in part, reflect the fact that persistent hypokalemia may be considered a prereq-
uisite before hyperaldosteronism is considered as a differential diagnosis.
d. In the described cases of adrenal hyperplasia, hypokalemia was much less common and usually
only mild.
e. The presence of only mild hypokalemia or normokalemia does not, therefore, exclude the possibil.
ity of PHA.It should be considered as a differential diagnosis for hypertension even in the absence of
hypokalemia.
f. Serum sodium concentrations usually are normal. Hypernatremia has been reported only in three
cats with PHA and, in all cases, was mild. The lack of significant hypernatremia may be explained by
concurrent volume expansion secondary to sodium retention.
f. Creatine kinase usually is elevated in cats with polymyopathy, with the degree of elevation also
highly variable.
120  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
1.3d
Figure 12.4 Ultrasound image illustrating the typical hypoechoic appearance of an adrenal mass of the right adrenal gland.
(The left adrenal gland is also visible.) The histopathology was consistent with an adrenal adenoma. A unilateral adrenalectomy
was successful in managing the case. (Image Langford Veterinary Services, Bristol, UK.)
f. Metabolic alkalosis is often present, likely related to aldosterone-mediated excretion of hydrogen ions.
g. Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentrations may be elevated at the time of diagnosis,
1) The presence of azotemia may hinder the diagnosis of PHA in some cases, because the presence
of hypokalemia and/or hypertension may be considered a consequence of primary renal disease.
2) Progressive renal disease is likely to occur as a sequela of uncontrolled PHA (particularly due to
adrenal hyperplasia) with renal damage occurring because of a combination of elevated intraglo-
merular capillary pressure, inflammation, and fibrosis, which are a direct effect of angiotensin II
and chronic hypokalemia. Until there is routine access to a plasma renin activity assay or clinical
validation of a mineralocorticoid suppression test in veterinary medicine, differentiation of primary
renal disease (with or without secondary hyperaldosteronism), from PHA with secondary renal
disease, will pose a diagnostic challenge for clinicians.
B. Diagnostic imaging:
1. Radiography:
 s  o t s si s n  iq  a  a ss  
 radiographs, it is more likely to be an adrenocortical carcinoma than an adenoma. Presence of adrenal
calcification is not necessarily significant as up to approximately 33% of normal older cats can have
adrenal calcification.
 b. Pulmonary metastases can occur albeit infrequently; therefore, thoracic radiographs to screen for
metastases should be performed prior to consideration of surgery.
2. Ultrasonography:
a. Currently ultrasonography is the best described imaging modality for detecting adrenal masses in
dogs and cats.
b. In all reported feline cases of PHA in which adrenal ultrasonography has been performed, umilat-
eral adrenal enlargement with evidence of an adrenal mass has been identified, ranging from 10 to
46 mm in diameter in cats and larger in dogs (Figure 12.4).
C. The contralateral adrenal gland may appear normal in appearance or may be unidentifiable. It is
vital that the contralateral gland be assessed, because bilateral adrenal neoplasia has also been reported.
d. Ultrasonography should also attempt to identify the presence and extent of invasion of the caudal
vena cava by the tumor or related thrombus and the presence of metastases to other organs.A close
Primary Hyperaldosteronism121
Fgure 12.5 T ,-weighted sagittal MRl scan of the abdomen from the cat shown in Figure 12.4, demonstrating the significantly
caudal vena cava. (lmage Langford Veterinary Services, Bristol, UK.)
e. With adrenal hyperplasia, subtle abnormalities such as an increase in adrenal echogenicity or areas
of calcification and thickening and/or rounding of one pole of one or both adrenal glands may be
present. However, in some cases, there are no visible changes.
3. Advanced imaging:
a. Other imaging modalities, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography
(CT), and saphenous venography, have been reported in a small number of cases in an attempt to
establish the extent of the adrenal mass before undertaking surgery (Figure 12.5).
h. Due to the small number of cases of aldosterone-secreting tumors in which these modalities have
been utilized, their benefit for affected patients is unclear. However as such studies are useful for pre-
operative planning for other types of adrenal tumors, their performance should be considered in cases
of hyperaldosteronism as well.
C. Endocrine assays:
1. Plasma Aldosterone Concentration (aldosterone):
a. Confirming the diagnosis relies mainly on demonstration of an elevated aldosterone concentration.
b. The assay is widely available at commercial endocrine laboratories and requirements for collection
 an ACTH stimulation test for aldosterone measurement.
C. Aldosterone has been elevated in all reported cases of feline PHA associated with adrenal neoplasia.
Mineralocorticoid excess has been reported in a dog with an adrenocortical carcinoma due to a hor-
 mone other than aldosterone, that is, 11-deoxycorticosterone.
d. There is wide variation in aldosterone concentration in normal animals and those with secondary
hyperaldosteronism. Therefore, results must be assessed relative to clinical signs. Demonstration of
elevated aldosterone concentration alone does not distinguish between primary and secondary hyper-
aldosteronism.
e. Histopathological confirmation of the neoplasm together with resolution of clinical signs and nor-
malization of aldosterone postoperatively assist in confirming the diagnosis in adrenal neoplasia cases.
122  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
f. In cases of early PHA, and particularly in bilateral adrenal hyperplasia cases, aldosterone can be
within the upper end of reference range at initial presentation.
g. Ideally, aldosterone should be interpreted together with plasma renin activity, which would be
 expected to be elevated in cases of secondary hyperaldosteronism and low or normal in cases of PHA.
2. Plasma renin activity:
of the renin-angiotensin system, which is most commonly done by measuring plasma renin activity.
h. Measuring plasma renin activity is problematic. The assay is not widely commercially available for
veterinary application. Plasma samples must be processed quickly and kept frozen until assay to avoid
drugs (e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and β-blockers). Dietary salt intake also may
 influence plasma renin activity.
C. Plasma renin activity in cats with PHA due to adrenal neoplasia have been low or normal, so nor-
mal renin activity does not exclude the possibility of hyperaldosteronism caused by an adrenal tumor.
3. Aldosterone:renin activity ratio:
 a The aldosterone:renin activity ratio is the most reliable screening test for PHA in human medicine,
with a high ratio being indicative of the diagnosis.
b. Use of the ratio has assisted in the diagnosis of the 11 reported cases of nontumorous PHA. The
cats had high-normal to increased aldosterone and low-normal or decreased plasma renin activity at
 presentation. Elevation of the aldosterone:renin activity ratio was the evidence for inappropriate
excess of aldosterone secretion.
C. Nontumorous PHA is more difficult to diagnose without assessment of plasma renin activity and
aldosterone:renin activity ratio. Potential causes of secondary hyperaldosteronism should be excluded
with appropriate testing including investigation for renal, livel, and cardiac disease. However, given
that nontumorous PHA can cause progressive renal disease, distinguishing between PHA and second-
ary hyperaldosteronism in an azotemic patient is problematic without assessing plasma renin activity.
4.Mineralocorticoid function tests:
a In human medicine, mineralocorticoid function tests are used as confirmatory tests for PHA, as
false positive results can arise using the aldosterone:renin activity ratio alone.
(e.g., oral sodium loading, saline infusion, fludrocortisone administration with sodium supplementa-
tion, and the captopril challenge test).
 5. Mineralocorticoid function tests are being investigated for use in cats:
a Preliminary studies showed that administration of enalapril for 5 days or increased dietary sodium
 intake did not suppress production of aldosterone in healthy cats.
h. Administration of fludrocortisone acetate (0.05mg/kg) for 4 days decreased the urinary
 aldosterone:creatinine ratio in healthy cats.
6. Measurement of other steroid hormones:
 a Assessment of progesterone, corticosterone, and cortisol responses to ACTH stimulation and dexa-
 methasone suppresion testing may be warranted if clinical signs raise concern for glucocorticoid excess.
increased corticosterone related to an adrenocortical tumor have had normal to low baseline concen-
trations of cortisol with subnormal responses to ACTH-stimulation.
C. Assays for aldosterone, cortisol, or progesterone are readily available at veterinary diagnostic lab-
oratories. Assays for corticosterone or 11-deoxycorticosterone may have to be arranged in specialty
laboratories that perform steroid assays for characterization of congenital adrenal hyperplasia in
humans.
7. Due to the current difficulty in measuring plasma renin activity and lack of a defined mineralocorti-
coid suppression test in cats, two different diagnostic algorithms are suggested. Both are based initially
on identification of appropriate clinical signs and documentation of an elevated aldosterone, and then
one is further based on the ideal situation where aldosterone:renin activity ratio and/or mineralocorticoid
function tests are available (Figure 12.6a); the other is an alternative algorithm which can be used when
Primary Hyperaldosteronism 123
there is a lack of available aldosterone:renin activity ratio and/or mineralocorticoid function tests
(Figure 12.6b).
V. Differential Diagnoses
4，
Hypokalemia:
1. Reduced intake (e.g., anorexia, IV fluids containing inadequate potassium).
2. Increased loss:
a.
Gastrointestinal loss (e.g., vomiting and diarrhea).
b. Urinary loss (e.g., renal disease, diuresis, diabetic ketoacidosis and PHA).
3. Intracellular translocation (e.g., metabolic alkalosis, hyperthyroidism, insulin therapy, and Burmese
hypokalemic polymyopathy).
B. Hypertension:
1. Renal disease.
2. Hyperthyroidism.
3. PHA.
4. Pheochromocytoma.
5.(
 Other diseases that are associated with hypertension in humans and may be associated with hyperten-
sion in cats but have not yet been identified as a cause of feline hypertension include obesity, diabetes
mellitus, and hyperadrenocorticism.
(a)
Clinical signs consistent with hyperaldosteronism (HPA)
(hypertension and / or hypokalemia)
Lowerhalf nomal range or
Measure plasma aldosterone
below HPA very unlikely
(deoxycorticosterone-secreting
adrenal tumor not reported in cats)
Elevated
 Mid to high normal
adrenal ultrasound
Measure plasma renin activity (PRA)
or mineralocorticoid function test (MFT) not yet defined
4
Adrenal mass
No mass
Normal PRA
Low PRA (elevated
measure PRAor
+ MFT
aldosterone/PRA) + MFT
perform MFT
▼
Adrenal ultrasound
Rule outs for
secondary HPA
Primary HPA:
LowPRA
Inc PRA
No mass
Adrenal mass
adrenal tumor
+MFT
+MFT
Reninoma?
Primary HPA:
not reported
Adrenal tumor or
in cats
idiopathic hyperplasia
with incidentaloma?
Primary HPA:
Measure other adrenal
 idiopathic hyperplasia
steroids?
orrepeat ultrasound in2-3months
Fgure 12.6
Proposed algorithms for investigation for hyperaldosteronism in cats. (a) Algorithm suggested when measurement
of plasma renin activity/mineralocorticoid function tests available.
124 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
(b)
Clinical signs consistent with hyperaldosteronism (HPA)
(hypertension and /or hypokalemia)
4
Measure plasma aldosterone (PAC)
Elevated
Not elevated
Investigate other potential causes of
clinical signs
Adrenal ultrasound
If mid to high normal repeat PAC in 3-6 months
Adrenal mass identified
No adrenal mass
 Search for causes of
identified
secondary HPA
▼
PHA: adrenal tumor
 Screen for increased
All causes of
Azotaemia
progesterone or cortisol
secondary HPA excluded
 identified 
▼
PHA: adrenal
Without PRA
hyperplasia or
impossible to
adrenal mass
know if SHA or
missed
PHA (adrenal
hyperplasia)
with secondary
 renal dysfunction
Treat surgically (if no metastases and CvC invasion)
confirm by measuring PAC post adrenalectomy if performed
Normalization of PAC confirms adrenal mass was source of
aldosterone or treat medically
(spironolactone + amlodopine if hypertensive
+ potassium supplementation if hypokalemic)
Treat medically (spironolactone
Treat medically
if surgery not possible
+ amlodopine if hypertensive +
(spironolactone +
 potassium supplementation if
 amlodopine if 
hypokalemic)
hypertensive+
Repeat adrenal
potassium
ultrasound in 3-6 months
supplementation 
if hypokalemic)
and monitor
clinicalresponse
Figure 12.6 (contd)
available. (Reproduced from Refsal KR, Harvey AM. Consuitations in Feline Internar Medicine, Chapter 24, Volume 6. St Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, Figure 24.9 A and B, 2010, p. 262. With permission.)
Primary Hyperaldosteronism125
C. Adrenal mass:
1. Functional neoplasm (adenoma or carcinoma):
a. Adrenal cortex: may secrete aldosterone, progesterone, cortisol, corticosterone, testosterone, or
other corticosteroids.
h. Adrenal medulla: may secrete epinephrine/norepinephrine.
 2. Nonfunctional neoplasm (e.g., incidentaloma and metastatic neoplasm).
 3. Benign mass, for example, hematoma and abscess.
D. The most important differential diagnoses for both hypertension and hypokalemia occurring together
are renal disease and PHA. As progressive renal disease can occur as a consequence of PHA, all patients with
significant hypertension and/or hypokalemia should be assessed for the possibility of PHA
VI. Treatment
A.
 Medical management:
1. Initial treatment of PHA is directed at controlling hypokalemia and/or hypertension
 2. Treatment of hypokalemia:
a. Potassium supplementation has been effective using potassium gluconate at doses of 2-6mEq PO
q 12 h in cats.
b. In three dogs (30-45 kg body weight) with mineralocorticoid excess related to adrenocortical
 neoplasia, the daily amount of oral potassium supplementation ranged from 8 to 60 mEq.
C. Intravenous potassium chloride-supplemented fluids may be required in more severely hypoka-
lemic cases.
3. Treatment of hypertension:
a. Amlodipine besylate (0.625-1.25 mg/cat PO q 24 h) is the initial treatment of choice for hyperten-
sion due to hyperaldosteronemia in cats. Most hypertensive cats become normotensive with amlodi-
pine treatment, but higher doses sometimes are required. Hypertension can become refractory to
treatment.
h. The best therapy in affected dogs is unknown.
4. Antagonism of aldosterone:
a. Spironolactone, a competitive aldosterone receptor antagonist, is also recommended (2-4 mg/kg
 b. Severe facial dermatitis in Maine coon cats was reported as a potential side effect of spironolactone.
5. Treatment of concurrent excess of other steroids:
a. Effective medical management has not yet been described in cats. Use of aminoglutethimide has
been reported for preoperative stabilization in one cat but was of questionable benefit. One author
(AH) has used trilostane in one cat, but it was not successful in suppressing progesterone concentra-
tions. However, trilostane remains the best therapeutic option and further data are needed.
h. Administration of mitotane achieved suppression of aldosterone, cortisol, and corticosterone in a
dog with an adrenal mass, but the onset of dermatologic and neurologic signs resulted in euthanasia
by day 129 after diagnosis.
c. Current experience with medical management of adrenal tumors that secrete excesses of othei
corticosteroids in addition to aldosterone is very limited. General principles regarding use and moni-
toring of multiple therapeutic agents would be the same for cats and dogs. A course of such medical
management could also be employed to improve the condition of the animal in preparation for adre-
nalectomy.
B. Surgical management:
1. Unilateral adrenalectomy is a potentially curative treatment for unilateral adrenal masses and is the
 preferred therapy; however, it is a high risk procedure and should be performed only by a skilled surgeon
where intensive care facilities are available:
a. High perioperative mortality; approximately 33% (5/15 cats) of reported cats died intraopera
tively or postoperatively, most commonly as a result of severe, acute hemorrhage from the caudal
small number of cats.
126Clinicat Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
b. Patients should be stabilized medically prior to surgery and meticulous preoperative planning is
required. A successful laparoscopic adrenalectomy has been described in a cat (Smith et al. 2012).
C. Complications of postoperative adrenal insufficiency have not been associated with excision of
aldosterone-secreting tumors in cats; however patients should be monitored for this. Postoperative
hyperkalemia, requiring transient administration of fludrocortisone, has been occasionally encoun-
tered.
d. Cats or dogs with concurrent hyperprogesteronism or hypercortisolemia pose additional surgi
cal risks, including wound dehiscence, sepsis, and thromboembolic disease and can have postopera-
tive glucocorticoid deficiency.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
Adrenal neoplasia:
1. The prognosis does not appear to be worse for cats with nonmetastatic carcinomas compared to those
with adenomas.
2. Medical management alone has been associated with nonmetastatic survival times of 7 months to
984 days, in four of five treated cats. The survival time in one cat receiving medical treatment alone
was limited to 50 days, attributed to owner noncompliance. Cause of death is most commonly chronic
kidney disease, thromboembolic disease, or refractory hypertension.
3. Adrenalectomy is associated with a good prognosis if the patient survives the immediate peri- and
postoperative periods. Ten of fifteen adrenalectomized cats survived the postoperative period with
 has experienced successful management of concurrent hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism
with adrenalectomy; however follow-up times are currently still short.
B
Nontumorous PHA. There is a lack of available long-term follow-up data. Most cases would be
expected to eventually succumb to renal disease but may be well managed medically with amlodipine and
spironolactone for some time.
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
Hyperaldosteronism in Other Species
A.
 There is a single case report of PHA as a result of an adrenocortical adenoma in a 6-year-old neutered
female domestic ferret.
B.
High concentrations of sex hormones were also present.
C.
Clinical signs began with lethargy, alopecia, and pruritus and progressed to include dyspnea and weak-
D
 Hypertension and hypokalemia were effectively managed medically, as discussed for cats; however,
continued dyspnea necessitated euthanasia 2 months postdiagnosis.
上.
    s     n
References and Further Readings
Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S. Prirmary hyperaldosteronism in the cat: A series of 13 cases. J Fetine Med Surg 2005;7:173.
Behrend EN, Weigand CM, Whitley EM, et al. Corticosterone- and aldosterone-secreting adrenocortical tumor in a dog. J Amt
Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:1662.
Breitschwerdt EB, Meuten DJ, Greenfield CL, Anson LW, Cook CS, Fulghum RE. Idiopathic hy peraldosteronism in a dog. J Ar
Vet Med Assoc 1985;187(8):841-845.
Briscoe K, Barrs VR, Foster DF, Beatty JA. Hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism in a cat. J Fetine Med Sug
2009;11(9):758-762
De Clue AE, Breshears LA, Pardo ID, et al. Hyperaldosteronisrm and hyperprogesteronism in a cat with an adrenal cortical
carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:355.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;233(8):1297-1301.
Primary Hyperaldosteronism 127
Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC, Galac S, Cammelbeek SE, van Laar KJ, Boer P, Kooistra HS. Urinary aldosterone to creatinine
ratios in cats before and after suppression with salt or fludrocortisone acetate.JVet Int Med 2008;22(6):1283-1288.
 Javadi S, Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC, Kooistra HS,et al. Primary hyperaldosteronism, a mediator of progressive renal disease in
cats.Domest Anim Endocrinol2005;28:85.
MacDonald KA, Kittelson MD, Kass PH. Effect of spironolactone on diastolic function and left ventricular mass in Maine
coon cats with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Vet Int Med 2008;22(2):335-341.
Case report. J Vet Intern Med Sci 2008;70:317.
MacKay AD, Holt PE, Sparkes AH. Successful surgical treatment of a cat with primary aldosteronisrn. J Fetine Med Surg
1999;1:117.
Moore LE, Biller DS, Smith TA. Use of abdominal ultrasonography in the diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism in a cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;217:213.
Refsal KR, Harvey AM. Primary hyperaldosteronisrm. In: August JR, ed. Consutations in Feline Internat Medicine, Chapter 24.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 254-267.
Reine NJ, Hohenhaus AE, Peterson ME,et al. Deoxycorticosterone-secreting adrenocortical carcinoma in a dog. J Vet Intern
Med 1999;13:386.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, van Vonderen IK, Mol JA, Voorhout G, van Sluijs FJ, IJzer J, van den Ingh TS, Boer P, Boer WH.
Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria as the leading symptom. Domest Anim Endocrino! 2001;20(3):227-240.
Shiel R, Mooney C. Diagnosis and managerment of primary hyperaldosteronism in cats. In Pract 2007;29:194.
Smith RR, Mayhew PD, Berent AC. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for rmanagement of a functional adrenal tumor in a cat. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2012;241(3):368-372.
CHAPTER 13
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs
Claudia E. Reusch
Pathogenesis
● Catecholamine-producing tumor mostly from adrenal medulla, in rare cases from extra-adrenal
chromaffin tissue.
● Slow growing, but potentially malignant.
● Clinical signs result from catecholamine excess or size/invasiveness of tumor.
● Catecholamine secretion from the tumor is highly unpredictable.
Classical Signs
● Highly variable, occur several times per day or reoccurrence after days, weeks, or months.
● Weakness and episodic collapse most frequent signs.
'sp go %os knxordde u Auo tisuradk o
Diagnosis
· Very challenging due to vague clinical signs.
● Clinical diagnosis usually made on a combination of clinical suspicion, detection of an adrenal mass
by ultrasonography, and, if available, increased urinary normetanephrine:creatinine ratio.
● Definitive diagnosis by histopathology.
Treatment
●Adrenalectomy.
● Preoperative medical management with phenoxybenzamine.
1. Pathogenesis
A. The cells of the adrenal medulla are called pheochromocytes or chromaffin cells. They can be regarded
 as modified postganglionic sympathetic neurons lacking axons. Innervation is by preganglionic fibers of
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
128
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs 129
extra-adrenal chromaffin tissue is also present adjacent to the aorta, in the carotid bodies, or viscera and
within sympathetic ganglia.
B.
 Pheochromocytomas are rare catecholamine-producing neuroendocrine tumors which arise from the
adrenal medulla in the vast majority of cases. Occasionally, tumors derive from extra-adrenal chromaffin
tissue and are referred to as paragangliomas:
other tissues is seen in more than 50% of dogs (based on necropsy results at the time of death); sites of
metastasis are regional lymph nodes, spleen, liver, kidney, pancreas, lung, heart, bone, and CNs. In the
2. The tumors are usually slow growing. Size is extremely variable and ranges between a few millimeters
to more than 10cm in diameter at the time of diagnosis.
 3. Most tumors are umilateral, but in approximately 5-10% of cases both adrenal glands are affected.
They may coexist with cortisol-producing adrenocortical tumors, ACTH-producing pititary tunors, or
other endocrine tumors.
nature of the tumor.
C. Catecholarmines are synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine and include dopamine, norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) and epinephrine (adrenaline). They are stored within chromaffin cells until release. Plasma
half-life of catecholamines is very short (1-3 min). They are metabolized into the inactive compounds
1. Catecholamines bind to α-and β-adrenergic receptors (respectively to their subtypes Q, α, B, B, and
B) and induce “fright, fight, and flight" reactions. Most importantly, they increase heart rate and con
tractility, blood pressure, respiration rate; relax the gastrointestinal tract and urinary bladder muscula
ture; and increase blood glucose, free fatty acids, and alertness (Table 13.1).
 2. In healthy dogs, the content of the adrenal medulla is approximately 30% norepinephrine and 70%
epinephrine. Both are stored within chromaffin cells and are secreted in response to exercise, danger,
surgery, hypovolermia, hypotension and hypoglycemia, as well as many other stress-associated stimuli.
 3. In dogs with pheochromocytoma, the proportion of the hormones may be different from that of
normal dogs. According to preliminary studies, the tumors may secrete more norepinephrine than
 epinephrine. Hormone secretion may be constant or sporadic and is highly unpredictable. The mecha-
nism responsible for the release of catecholamines from a tumor is not well understood.
11.1
 Signalment
A.
The disease may occur at any age; however, it is most commonly seen in older dogs (>8 years).
B.
 There is no apparent sex and breed predisposition.
l1. Clinical Signs
A.
The clinical presentation is highly variable.
B. Signs may be apparent several times per day or may only reoccur after days, weeks, or months. Severity
of the disease ranges from dramatic and life threatening to very mild. Some pheochromocytomas are hormo-
nally silent.
C. Due to their mostly paroxysmal appearance, clinical signs are usually not evident at the time of physical
examination.
D.
         
E.
Clinical signs may be categorized as (Table 13.2):
1. Nonspecific: anorexia, weight loss, lethargy.
2. Related to the cardiorespiratory system and/or hypertension: tachypnea, panting, tachycardia,
cardiac arrhythmias (mainly tachyarrhythmias), collapse, pale mucous membranes, nasal, gingival, of
ocular hemorrhage, and acute blindness due to retinal detachment.
3. Related to the neuromuscular system: weakness, anxiety, pacing, muscle tremors, seizures.
4. Miscellaneous: polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, diarrhea, painful abdomen.
5. Related to large, malignant tumors: abdominal distension, ascites, and hind-limb edema.
Intraabdominal or retroperitoneal hemorrhage due to tumor rupture is also possible, but occurs rarely.
OH
Tyrosine
HO-
NH
OH
HO
Dopa
日
HO-
NH
HO
Dopamine
HO-
NH
HO
CH0
一
Norepinephrine
HO-
日
NH2
Normetanephrine
HO
CH.0
H
CH3
Epinephrine
Metanephrine
HO：
HO
NH
人
Figure 13.1
 Biosynthesis and metabolism of catecholamines (simplified)
Table 13.1
Responses of selected tissues to catecholamines.
Receptor
Organ/tissue
type
Effect
Cardiovascular system
β,
Increase in heart rate, increase in contractility
Vasoconstriction
β
Vasodilation in skeletal muscle arterioles, coronary
 arteries, and all veins
Bronchial muscles
β
Relaxation
Gastrointestinal tract
d'x
Decrease in motility
Pancreatic islets
C
Decrease in insulin and glucagon secretion
d
Increase in insulin and glucagon secretion
Liver
d'x
Increase in glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
 Adipose tissue
d
Increase in lipolysis
Urinary bladder
C
Increase in sphincter tone
d
Relaxation of M. detrusor
130
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs 131
Table 13.2  Clinical signs in dogs with pheochromocytoma
Categories
Clinical signs
Unspecific
Anorexia, weight loss lethargy
Related to cardiorespiratory system and/
Tachypnea, panting, tachycardia, arrhythmias,
or hypertension
collapse,* pale mucus membranes, nasal-, gingival-,
ocular hemorrhage, acute blindness
Related to neuromuscular system
Miscellaneous
PU/PD, vomiting, diarrhea, painful abdomen
Related to large, malignant tumor
Abdominal distension, ascites, hind-limb edema,
intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal hemorrhage
* Most frequent signs.
F. The most common signs are weakness and episodic collapse.
G. Other signs may be seen in metastatic disease, depending on the organ involved. Ataxia and paresis have
been described in dogs with metastasis in the vertebral canal.
H. Similar neurological signs (e.g, pain, ataxia, paresis, paralysis) may be seen if a paraganglioma metasta-
sizes to the spinal cord.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Since clinical signs are vague, diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is challenging. Additional difficulties may
arise from the fact that the frequency of concurrent disease is high (approximately 50%) and may affect
diagnostic test results. Clinical diagnosis usually is a combination of clinical suspicion, detection of an
adrenal mass by ultrasonography, and, if available, demonstration of an increased urinary normetanephrine:
creatinine ratio. Definitive diagnosis is by histopathology.
B. Clinical pathology:
1. There are no consistent abnormalities on complete blood count, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis.
2. Various findings are possible, none of which would raise specific suspicion of pheochromocytoma:
mild nonregenerative anemia, stress leukogram, mild thrombocytopenia or thrombocytosis, increased
serum alkaline phosphatase or alanine aminotransferase activity, azotemia, hypoalbuminemia, mild
hyperglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, proteinuria, hypoisosthenuria, or isosthenuria. Laboratory results
may also be completely normal.
C. Blood pressure measurement (Table 13.3):
 pheochromocytoma and is also frequently found in hyperadrenocorticism, which is one of the most
important differential diagnoses.
2. Due to the episodic secretion of catecholamines, hypertension is only present in approximately 50%
 of dogs at the time of examination. With repetitive measurements on consecutive days, hypertension may
be picked up in a higher percentage of dogs.
3. Hypertension varies from mild to severe. “Typical" systolic measurements are between 200 and
 240 mm Hg, the maximum systolic blood pressure reported so far is 325 mm Hg.
D. Diagnostic imaging:
1. Radiography:
d  s p   g a     s s
Detection of a soft tissue mass in the area of the adrenal glands may be possible with large masses or
 masses which are calcified; the latter, however, is rare with pheochromocytomas.
h. Thoracic radiographs are helpful to search for pulmonary metastasis.
2. Abdominal ultrasonography:
a. Ultrasonography has major advantages over radiography for adrenal imaging: higher resolution to
visualize small masses, potential to detect retroperitoneal effusion and tumoral invasion into
132 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 13.3 Blood pressure in dogs with pheochromocytoma.
No. of dogs with
pheochromocytoma
Definition
Range of
revealing hypertension 
 of systolic
systolic blood
(total no. of dogs with blood 
hypertension
pressure
pressure measurements)
Measuring technique
(mmHg)
(mmHg)
Reference
1(1}
Indirect, oscillometric
 Not given 
200-240
Williams and Hackner
Indirect, Doppler
200-240
(2001)
0(1)
Indirect, Doppler
Not given
110
Whittemore et al. (2001)
1(1)
Indirect, Doppler
Not given 
240
Brown et al. (2007)
6 (7)
Indirect, Doppler
>160
164-325
Gilson et al. (1994)
10 (23)
Indirect, oscillometric
>160
135-214
Barthez et al. (1 997)
3 (5)
Indirect, Doppler
>160
55-270
Kook et al. (in press)
surrounding vessels and tissues, and assessment of other abdominal organs for distant metastasis.
Sensitivity is higher than radiography, but is not 100%.
h. The adrenal glands are usually evaluated with a 7.5 MHz transducer. There are a number of tech-
niques for locating the adrenal glands with the patient either in dorsal or lateral recumbency. We
prefer to image the left adrenal with the patient in dorsal recumbency and the right adrenal with the
patient in left lateral recumbency.
C. Often pheochromocytoma is only considered as a diagnosis after an adrenal mass has been detected
by ultrasonography.
d. Masses have a wide range in size (a few millimeters to more than 10 cm in diameter).
e. Small masses can be embedded within the parenchyma so that the shape of the adrenal gland
appears normal. Detection requires high resolution of the ultrasound equipment and good operator
skills. With larger masses, normal shape is lost.
f. Masses may be hypoechoic, isoechoic, or hyperechoic to the adjacent renal cortex or have mixed
echogenicity. They may also contain anechoic, non-far-enhancing areas which represent foci of necro-
sis and hemorrhage (Figure 13.2).
g. Mineralization is rare in pheochromocytomas, in contrast to cortisol-producing masses.
h. No patern of echogenicity or architecture is specific for pheochromocytomas, other adrenal
masses, for example, cortisol-producing tumors, look similar.
i. Invasion into surrounding vessels (most often into the caudal vena cava) with tumor thrombosis
diu aq  oou rddo mo roos aioap aq a
 Tumors are usually unilateral, with the contralateral adrenal gland being of normal shape and size.
k. However, exceptions occur, such as bilateral pheochromocytomas, coexistence with other tumor
types (e.g., cortisol-producing adrenal tumor) or with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, ren-
dering interpretation of ultrasonographic findings difficult.
3. CT and MRI:
 a Both modalities are more sensitive than ultrasonography for identifying adrenal masses and, in
ing if the mass is surgically resectable.
h. They also do not allow a definitive diagnosis, that is, discrimination berween pheochromocytoma
and other adrenal masses.
C. CT and MRI require general anesthesia and the use of contrast media which may carry the risk of
a hypertensive crisis and cardiac arrhythmias.
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs  133
2160454
24Aug09
TIs0.3MI0.8
C8-5Stanclard/Dogb
15:04:46
Bild 2355.7 c
170dB/C3
0.96cm
Fgure 13.2 Ultrasonographic image of a pheochromocytoma in the left adrenal gland of an 11-year-old Cairn terrier. The
n  sxaeie s! (us s ais a px ym en y si ss au jo as
of the Unit of Diagnostic Imaging, Vetsuisse Faculty Zurich, Switzerland.)
4. Scintigraphy and positron emission tomography:
a. Scintigraphy with 1231-labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (123-MIBG) and positron emission tomog-
raphy with p- [18 F]fluorobenzylguanidine (p-[18 F]PFBG) take advantage of the fact that the radiop-
harmaceuticals have similar uptake mechanisms as norepinephrine and accumulate in the adrenal
medulla.
 h. They may be more specific for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma than the other imaging modal-
ities and may aid in differentiating adrenal masses.
C. However, sensitivity may be lower. The use of the techniques has so far only been described in a
very small number of dogs.
d. Scintigraphy may also be useful to detect bone metastasis at an earlier stage of the disease than
radiography.
 5. Fine needle aspiration and biopsy:
a. Nearly no information is available on fine needle aspirate or biopsy of pheochromocytoma in dogs.
b. Potential risks associated with the aspiration/biopsy procedure itself are hemorrhage, arrhythmias,
and hypertensive crisis.
C. Additionally, small samples may not always allow differentiation between cortical and medullary
tumors nor between benign and malignant tumors.
6. Hormonal testing:
a. In humans, diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is mainly based on biochemical detection of excessive
amounts of catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine) and their metabolites (metanephrine, nor-
metanephrine) in urine collected over 24 h. Measurement of plasma metanephrines is a more recently
available test:
1. Both tests (urine and plasma) have high sensitivity and specificity.
2. False-negative results may occur in patients with mild disease or with intermittent catechola-
mine secretion.
3. False-positive results are possible with various diseases and drugs, for example, phenoxyben-
zamine, calcium channel blockers, metoclopramide, glucocorticoids, and β-blockers.
 b. In dogs, urinary catecholamine and metanephrine concentrations have only recently been evaluated:
1. Dogs with pheochromocytoma have significantly higher urinary ratios of epinephrine, norepi
nephrine, and normetanephrine:creatinine than healthy dogs. The least overlap is seen with regard
to the urinary normetanephrine:creatinine ratio (Figure 13.3).
134  Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
p<0.01
p<0.001
p<0.05
1000-
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
Q
200
100
Healthy
HAC
PHEO
Figure 13.3 Urinary normetanephrine:creatinine ratios in healthy dogs (n=10), dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (HAC, n= 13),
and dogs with pheochromocytoma (PHEO, n=7). In the group of dogs with HAC open circles represent dogs with pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism, closed circles dogs with cortisol-producing adrenal tumors.
2. When the ratios were compared between dogs with pheochromocytoma and dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism (as one of the main differential diagnoses), only the urinary normetanephrine:
 3. A cutoff value of urinary normetanephrine:creatinine ratio of four times normal is associated
with pheochromocytoma. However, lower values do not exclude the disease and repetitive testing
may therefore be required.
4. Sample collection and urine processing have specific requirements such as need for sample
acidification, protection from light, and cooled or frozen storage. Close collaboration with the
laboratory is, therefore, necessary.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A.
 Since clinical signs are often vague and nonspecific and usually associated with more common diseases,
pheochromocytoma is often not considered as a differential diagnosis.
B.
 Depending on the clinical presentation, diseases of various organ systems have to be considered:
1. Cardiovascular.
2. Respiratory.
3. Neuromuscular.
4. Metabolic/endocrine.
C. Due to the routine use of abdominal ultrasonography, the finding of an adrenal mass has become
frequent. Differential diagnoses for adrenal masses are:
1.Hypersecretory tumors:
Cortisol-producing (most frequent).
a
b.
 Cortisol-precursor-producing, for example, 17-α-hydroxy-progesterone.
C.1
Pheochromocytoma.
d. Aldosteronoma (very rare in dogs).
2. Nonfunctional masses:
a Myelolipoma.
b. Cyst.
Pheochromocytoma in Dogs 135
C. Abscess.
d. Hematoma.
e. Metastasis.
Treatment
 Adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice and should be performed as soon as possible
1. Preoperative medical management:
 a Medical therapy with the noncompetitive C-adrenergic blocker phenoxybenzamine should be
started immediately after diagnosis and given for at least 1-2 weeks before surgery.
b. Phenoxybenzamine decreases perioperative mortality in dogs undergoing adrenalectomy for
pheochromocytoma. Although the exact mechanism is unknown, the beneficial effects may be due
to phenoxybenzamine's ability to block the effects of excessive adrenergic stimulation, that is,
reverses vasoconstriction and hypovolemia.
C. Optimal dose of phenoxybenzamine has not been studied in dogs. Currently, we start with
0.25 mg/kg BID and increase gradually every few days until a dosage of 1-2 mg/kg BID is reached.
Careful monitoring is required since some dogs may develop hypotension; in those cases, the dosage
of phenoxybenzamine should be decreased.
2. Anesthesia and surgery:
 a Surgical rermoval of a pheochromocytoma is a high risk procedure and is technically demanding.
Therefore, it should only be done by a team of experienced surgeons and anesthetists in a facility in
which intensive postoperative care is guaranteed.
b. Monitoring by EKG and systemic blood pressure measurement should be done during surgery
and for 1-2 days thereafter.
C. Potential life-threatening complications are common, in particular during induction of anesthe-
sia and manipulation of the tumor. They include severe tachycardia and various other types of
occur postoperatively.
B
Medical management:
1. In some dogs, adrenalectomy may not be an option due to tumor size, extensive invasion into
surrounding tissue, distant metastasis, serious concurrent disease, or owner constraints.
 2. Medical management may also be an option in dogs with recurrence of pheochromocytoma after
surgery or in which tumor resection was incomplete.
 3. Treatment of choice is phenoxybenzamine. The aim is to control the effects of excessive catechola-
 mine secretion; the drug does not have an effect on tumor growth or metastasis.
 4. Starting dosage of phenoxybenzamine is 0.25 mg/kg BID which is gradually increased until clinical
signs are controlled, hypotension occurs, or a maximum dosage of 1 mg/kg BID is reached.
Vll.
Prognosis
A
 Prognosis depends on many factors such as general condition of the patient, size and invasiveness of
 the tumor, experience of the surgeon and anesthetist, quality of postoperative care, and occurrence of perio-
perative complications.
B.
sd Si s s  s d d ae  e s 
C.
Very little data are available for dogs which are only treated medically. Survival for more than a year
has been seen in some cases.
VIlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, et al. Pheochrormocytoma in dogs: 61 cases (1984-1995). J Vet Intern Med 1997;11:272-278.
Radiol Utrasound 2002;43:183-186.
136 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Berry CR, Wright KN, Breitschwerdt EB, et al. Use of 1Jodine metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy for the diagnosis of a
pheochromocytoma in a dog. Vet Radiot Ultrasound 1993;34:52-55.
Ultrasound 1997;38:448-455.
Bouayad H, Feeeney DA, Caywood DD. Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 13 cases {1980-1985). J Arm Vet Med Assoc
1987;191:1610-1615.
Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R, et al. Guidelines for the identification, evaluation, and rmanagement of systermic hypertension in
dogs and cats. Journat of Veterinary Internat Medicine 2007;21:542-558.
Gilson SD, Withrow SJ, Wheeler SL, et al. Pheochrormocytorma in 50 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1994;8:228-232.
adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma. J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:1333-1339.
Kook PH, Boretti FS, Hersberger M, et al. Urinary catecholarmine and rmetanephrine to creatinine ratios in healthy dogs at
home and in a hospital environrment and in 2 dogs with pheochromocytoma. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:388-393.
Kook PH, Grest P, Quante S,et al. Urinary catecholamine and metanephrine to creatinine ratios in 7 dogs with pheochromo-
cytoma. Vet Rec 2010;166:169-174.
1998;34:365-371.
Rizzo SA, Newman SJ, Hecht S, et al. Malignant mediastinal extra-adrenal paraganglioma with spinal cord invasion in a dog.
J Vet Diagn Invest 2008;20:372-375.
Rosenstein Ds. Diagnostic imaging in canine pheochrormocytoma. Vet Radiot Ultrasound 2000;41:499-506.
Santamarina G, Espino L, Vila M, et al. Aortic thromboembolism and retroperitoneal hemorrhage associated with a pheochro-
mocytoma in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 2003;17:917-922.
Von Dehn BJ, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Pheochrormocytoma and hyperadrenocorticism in dogs: Six cases (1982-1992).
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:322-324.
Whittemore JC, Preston CA, Kyles AE, et al. Nontraumatic rupture of an adrenal gland tumor causing intra-abdorminal or
retroperitoneal hemorrhage in four dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2001;219:329-333.
Williams JE, Hackner SG. Pheochromocytoma presenting as acute retroperitoneal hemorrhage in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2001;11:221-227.
CHAPTER 14
Pheochromocytoma in Cats
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
Pathogenesis
· Functional tumor of the adrenal medullary chromaffin cells
Classical Signs
● Highly variable; polyuria, polydipsia, aggression, agitation, hyphema, inapperence, lethargy, inter-
 mittent vomiting, tachypnea, and seizures.
Diagnosis
● Demonstration of a mass and increased catecholamines or their serum metabolites.
Treatment and Prognosis
● Surgical resection with or without therapy for hypertension and treatment of concurrent neoplasia.
● Outcome is highly variable.
1. Pathogenesis
A. The adrenal medulla contains chromaffin cells which are derived from the neuroectoderm and are able to
synthesize, store, and secrete the catecholamines epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline):
1. In addition to the chromaffin cells within the adrenal medulla, there are occasional extra-adrenal
chromaffin cells within and about the sympathetic ganglia.
B. Pheochromocytoma are tumors of neuroectodermal origin that arise from the chromaffin cells within the
adrenal medulla. Occasionally, tumors of chromaffin cells may occur at distant locations; these extra
adrenal pheochromocytomas are termed paragangliomas. Both pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas
are rare in the cat.
C. The chromaffin cells within the adrenal medulla are capable of amine precursor uptake and decarboxyla
tion. Synthesis of epinephrine and norepinephrine commences with the hydroxylation of tyrosine by tyrosine
hydroxylase, to form dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA), which is in turn converted to dopamine (Figure 14.1).
ClinicalEndocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
137
138  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
HO
OH
HO
HO
OH
HO
HC
HC
OH
yrosine
Dopamin
henylethanolam
hydroyla
acid
B-hydroyla
methyltransferase
CH2
CH2
CH2
CHOH
CHOH
CH-COOH
CH- COOH
HO
CH2
HO
NH2
'HN
'HN
NH2
NH-CH3
L-tyrosine
L-dopa
Dopamine
L-norepinephrine
L-epinephrine
Negative feedback
Figure 14.1 Catecholamine biosynthetic pathway: The formation of norepinephrine occurs via a series of enzymatic reactions.
Pea spa 'sn singuaso 'd Apuog ul elnpaw euanpe ayn pue saumeloyoaie 'at unon 'i sngspuen woy padep)
Control and Disease, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1980, pp. 1621-1693.)
Once formed dopamine is transported into intracellular vesicles within the chromaffin cell, where the enzyme
dopamine β-hydroxylase converts it to noradrenaline. The formed noradrenaline can then undergo methyla-
tion to form adrenaline, which accounts for 60% of the adrenal catecholamine output in the cat:
1. A rise in the noradrenaline level has a negative feedback on the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (the rate
limiting step in the formation of the catecholamines) (Figure 14.1).
D. In pheochromocytoma, this negative feedback is lost, and increased catecholamine synthesis can occur.
Pheochromocytoma typically release norepinephrine. However, some produce both epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine, and occasionally cases produce epinephrine alone:
1. In humans, the secretion of dopamine or other peptides have been reported, including vasoactive
intestinal peptide, somatostatin, calcitonin, corticotrophin-releasing hormone, adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), atrial natriuretic peptide, α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, parathyroid-related
peptide, and opioid peptides.
E. In the normal adrenal gland, catecholamine release is mediated by neural impulses. Since pheochromocy-
 tomas are not innervated, catecholamine release is thought to occur by diffusion of storage granules:
1. However, this process is poorly understood, with unpredictable release of catecholamines in response
to physiological stressors such as hypotension, hypoxia, hypoglycemia, fear, and stress.
2. It is also recognized that catecholamines may be released in response to physical manipulation of the
tumor and in response to a variety of drugs including metoclopramide and histamine.
3. While most tumors produce paroxysms of hormone release, some produce hormones constantly.
F. The variety of substances produced by these tumors, coupled with the (often) paroxysmal nature of secre-
tion, makes pheochromocytoma hard to diagnose.
I1. Signalment
A. To date, the authors are only aware of nine cases of pheochromocytoma, and one paraganglioma diag-
nosed in cats. All cases have occurred in domestic short-haired cats; six in males and three in females. A wide
variety of ages have been reported, ranging from 7 to 18 years.
Pheochromocytoma in Cats 139
Figure 14.2 Assessment of blood pressure should be a routine part of the physical examination of any cat suspected of having
an adrenal gland disorder.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
The clinical signs associated with pheochromocytoma can result from the presence of the mass, excretion
 of excessive amounts of catecholamines, and/or the presence of other neoplasms. Many of the clinical signs
are vague:
1. The paroxysmal nature of hormone excretion means that clinical signs may be present intermittently.
The frequency and length of these paroxysms has not been documented in cats, however, in people they
can occur as frequently as several times per day, or as infrequently as several times per month, and may
last from 1 min to several hours.
B. In the cat, reported clinical signs include polyuria, polydipsia, aggression, agitation, hyphema, inappe
tence, lethargy, intermittent vomiting, tachypnea, and seizures.
C.
 In the majority of cats, physical examination has been reported to be relatively normal; however, docu-
mented abnormalities include a heart murmur (two cases), palpable abdominal mass (three cases), potbellied
appearance (one case, with concurrent hyperadrenocorticism), and poorly kept hair coat (rwo cases).
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Investigations should include assessment of blood pressure (Figure 14.2); which has been elevated in at
least two cases.
B. Routine laboratory evaluation is generally umremarkable or demonstrates nonspecific alterations such as
azotemia, increased ALT, decreased potassium, hypercarbia, and increased triglycerides and creatine kinase.
C. Urinalysis is typically unremarkable, although several authors have reported a specific gravity below
1.030.
D. Abdominal radiography has detected an abdominal mass in one case and is reported to be useful in the
Pnus uezan ppe jo asd a ram ssin ann jo oe un sss jo o!
 not be overinterpreted as it occurs in ~30% of normal cats. Thoracic radiography should be performed as
this may reveal cardiomegaly, metastasis, or concurrent neoplasms.
E. Abdominal ultrasonography has been used to detect tumors in many of the feline cases. This can also be
used to detect metastasis or concurrent disease and in assessment for neoplastic invasion of the kidney or
vena cava:
1. In cats, tumors of the adrenal gland have ranged from 0.76 cm to 2.2 cm (normal short axis measurement
for the adrenal gland being reported as 0.29-0.53cm). The single paraganglioma was a 3 x 4 cm mass.
E.
 CT and MRI have been employed in other species for the detection of pheochromocytoma and for
assessment of disease progression.
140  Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Normetanephrine
MAO
COMT
Norepinephrine
MAO
COMT
3, 4 Dihydroxymandelic acid
Vanillymandelic acid
MAO
Epinephrine
COMT
Metanephrine
MAO
Figure 14.3 Catabolic pathways for the breakdown of catecholamines. Unchanged catecholamines and their metabolites are
excreted primarily in the urine. MAO, monoamine oxidase; COMT, catechol-o-methyl transferase. (Modified from Levine R],
Landsberg L. In: Bondy PK, Rosenburg LE, eds. Duncan's Diseases of Metabolism, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WM Saunders,
1974, p. 1196.)
G. In people nuclear scintigraphy techniques, using either iodine metaiodobenzylguanidine (I-MIBG) or
somatostatin (octreotide) have proven useful in the detection of pheochromocytoma and for staging the
disease.
H. In order to demonstrate that an adrenal mass is functional and producing catecholamines, chemical
confirmation should be performed. This can be achieved by assessing the urinary excretion of unconjugated
catecholamines and/or their metabolites (Figure 14.3):
1. Ideally, this involves a 24-h urine collection, performed while the patient is at rest. The urine should
be acidified to achieve pH < 3 and refrigerated.
2. Alternatively, spot urine samples can be assessed, and results expressed per unit of creatinine; however
 3. Unfortunately, the logistics of sample collection, storage and lack of normal data for cats, make these
techniques problematic.
1. Plasma levels of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine can be assessed, although there is wide
variation within normal animals, and high levels can be invoked by stress or excitement. Assessment in dogs
has suggested that plasma levels of norepinephrine > 1500 pg/mL and epinephrine > 300 pg/mL are consistent
with a diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
  q    d n   r   
decreases neurologically mediated release of catecholamines from normal adrenal glands, which does not
occur with pheochromocytoma:
e isod ue pe asq ie psssse are si aoiin as pe assad ponq 'doad un 'l
istration of clonidine (0.3 mg/70 kg). Blood pressure should decrease after clonidine administration,
 but in people with pheochromocytoma, the serum catecholamine levels remain >500 pg/mL and decrease
by <50%.
 K.Other protocols which are described in the human literature involve the administration of phentolamine
(a rapidly acting Q,-antagonist) while monitoring for a decrease in blood pressure. However, this test yields
many false-positive results in people and is associated with life-threatening hypotension and shock.
L. Alternatively, drugs such as histamine, tyramine, metoclopramide, and glucagon can be administered to
stimulate catecholamine secretion. Again this is generally not recommended as these tests also yield a high
number of false positive results and can mediate a hypertensive crisis in patients with pheochromocytoma.
M. To date, neuroendocrine tests have only been performed in two reported feline cases:
1. In the first, plasma adrenaline concentration was twice that of an age-matched control cat and
reduced to a subnormal level postsurgical removal of the mass.
2. More recently, plasma normetanephrine and metanephrine levels were assessed in a cat with pheo-
  s   n     on   
metanephrine levels were not significantly different between the groups, normetanephrine levels were
significantly higher in the cat with pheochromocytoma, suggesting that in some cases, assessment of
these metabolites may be useful in cats.
Pheochromocytoma in Cats 141
Table 14.1 Main differential diagnoses for adrenal masses and
hypertension in the cat.
Differential diagnosis
Adrenal mass
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome)
Phaeochromocytoma
Nonsecretory tumors
Hypertension
Chronic renal failure
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Acromegaly
Phaeochromocytoma
 Differential Diagnosis
See Table 14.1.
Vl.
. Treatment
4.
 Surgical removal of the mass remains the treatment of choice for pheochromocytoma. However prior
to surgery the cat should be stabilized:
1. In humans, an α-adrenergic antagonist such as phenoxybenzamine is administered for 2-4 weeks
 prior to surgery to decrease the effects of chronic vasoconstriction and therefore result in fewer hyper-
tensive crisis in the perioperative period.
2. Alternative therapies used in people include prazosin hydrochloride, the calcium channel blocker,
nifedipine, and ACE inhibitors.
 3. In the face of acute perioperative hypertensive crises, intravenous phentolamine or sodium nitro-
prusside can be administered.
4. If cardiac tachyarrhythmias are present, it is recommended that a β-blocker is used. However, drugs
with β2 activity should only be used with preexisting C-adrenergic blockade in order to avoid exacer-
bating hypertension. Propranolol (0.4-1.2mg/kg PO q 8-12h) has been recommended for use in the
cat. The short-acting B-blocker, esmolol (200-500 μg/kg IV over 1 min, then 25-200 μg/kg/min IV con-
stant rate infusion) can be used to treat intraoperative arrhythmias.
5. During the operative period, the blood pressure should be closely monitored. Of the cases reported
in cats; five underwent exploratory laparotomy, one of these cases died after removal of the tumor, and
another was euthanized following the development of thromboembolic complications postoperatively.
The remaining three demonstrated dramatic decreases in blood pressure upon removal of the neoplasm.
 In all three cases, the hypotension was successfully managed by either the administration of dopamine
or by increasing the rate of administration of fluid therapy. One of these cases went on to develop
chronic hypertension, a phenomenon that has been reported occasionally in people after successful
removal of pheochromocytoma, but is poorly understood.
Vll. Prognosis
4.
The prognosis for cats with pheochromocytoma appears highly variable. Of the reported cases, only
five underwent exploratory laparotomy and surgery, with rwo further cases being euthanized for concurrent
disease (lymphoma and pyelonephritis), and pulmonary metastases reported in a further case. Of those cats
undergoing surgery, two were euthanized in the perioperative period and three survived surgery, with follow.
up being reported at 3 weeks, 18 months, and 36 months:
1. In people and dogs, pheochromocytoma are recognized in association with concurrent neoplasms;
50-54% of dogs are reported as having concurrent tumors.
2. A similar correlation may exist in cats. Of the reported cases, one cat had a concurrent adrenocorti-
cal adenoma (this was successfully removed at the same surgery as the pheochromocytoma, and the cat
142 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
was reported to be alive 36 months post surgery), one cat had concurrent apocrine gland adenocarci-
noma (this cat died of thromboembolic complications in the postoperative period); a further case was
identified with concurrent bronchoalveolar carcinoma, which was removed at a successive surgery (the
cat remaining alive and well, despite persistent hypertension, at 18 months post diagnosis), and one
case was euthanized because concurrent lymphoma. In the light of these findings, care should be taken
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J. Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 61 cases (1984-1995). JVIM 1997;11:272-278.
Calsyn JDR, Green RA, Davis GJ, Reilly CM. Adrenal pheochrormocytoma with contralateral adrenocortical adenoma in a cat.
JAAHA 2010;46:36-42.
Carpenter JL, Andrews LK, Holzworth J. Tumors and tumorlike lesions. In: Holzworth J, ed. Diseases of the Cat: Medicine
αnd Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, 1987.
Chun R, Jakovljevic S, Morrison WB, Denicola DB, Cornell KK. Apocrine gland adenocarcinoma and pheochrormocytoma in a
cat. JAAHA 1997;33:33-36.
Duesburg C, Peterson ME. Adrenal disorders in cats. Vet Clin North Am Smmalfl Anim Pract 1997;27:321-347.
1993;7:199-201.
Kemppainen RJ, Behrend E. Adrenal physiology. Vet Clin North Amm Small Anim Pract 1997;27:173-186.
Maher ER. Pheochromocytoma in the dog and cat: Diagnosis and management. Sein Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
1994;9:158-166.
Maher ER, Mcneil EA. Pheochromocytoma in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Smafl Anim Pract 1997;27:359-380.
McMillan F. Functional pancreatic islet cell tumor in a cat. JAAHA 1985;21:741-746.
Myers NC, Bruyette DS. Feline adrenocortical diseases: Part II—Hypoadrenocorticism. Semin Vet Med Surg (Smatt Anim)
1994;9:144-147.
Patnaik AK, Erlandson RA, Lieberman PH, Welches CD, Marretta SM. Extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma (paraganglioma) in
a cat. JAVMA 1990;197:104-106.
Wimpole JA, Adagra C, Billson M, Pillai DN, Foster D. Plasma metanephrines in healthy cats, cats with non-adrenal disease
and a cat with phaeochromocytoma. JFMS 2010;12(16):435-440.
Zimmer C, Horauf A, Reusch C. Ultrasonographic examination of the adrenal gland and evaluation of the hypophyseal-
adrenal axis in 20 cats. JSAP 2000;41:156-160.
CHAPTER 15
Canine Diabetes Mellitus
Linda Fleeman and Jacquie Rand
Pathogenesis
● Diabetes mellitus is caused by absolute or relative insulin deficiency.
● In populations in which female dogs are routinely neutered, the majority of cases have type 1
 diabetes mellitus caused by immune destruction of pancreatic β cells.
● In approximately 30%, diabetes is due to extensive pancreatic damage from chronic pancreatitis.
● In intact bitches, a form analogous to human gestational diabetes can occur during diestrus or pregnancy.
● Canine diabetes also occurs in association with corticosteroid therapy, hyperadrenocorticism, or
 progesterone-induced acromegaly.
Classical Signs
● Most diabetic dogs are over 5 years of age with the highest prevalence occurring between 8 and
12 years of age.
● Intact females are at increased risk, especially if they are also overweight.
● Typical signs are polydipsia, polyuria, lethargy, weight loss, polyphagia, poor hair coat, and reduced
immunity.
Diagnosis
● Hyperglycemia (blood glucose concentration >200mg/dL [>11mmol/L]) with glucosuria and
 consistent clinical signs.
Treatment
● The two primary goals of therapy for diabetic dogs are:
1. Resolution of all clinical signs.
 2. Avoidance of insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
● An additional goal is diabetic remission for those dogs with reversible causes of insulin resistance
such as diestrus, pregnancy, or progesterone-induced acromegaly.
● Lifelong exogenous insulin therapy is usually required unless there is prompt diabetic remission.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
143
144 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
● It is important to feed consistent meals at fixed times so the postprandial period matches periods of
 maximal insulin activity.
● Serial blood glucose concentration curves should be combined with additional indicators of glyce-
mic control, such as changes in water intake, body weight, and urine glucose concentrations when
appraising insulin dose.
● f chronic pancreatitis is present, it is important to manage the consequences and risk factors of
this condition.
I. Pathogenesis
A. In dogs, multiple underlying pathological processes result in diabetes and the most common are type 1,
I aai a sp q jo os isa ie u aii ae sp an m u sod u a
diabetes based on histological and autoantibody evidence of immune destruction of β cells:
1. Clinical and epidemiological factors in dogs closely match those of human patients with the human
latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) form of type 1 diabetes.
2. Type 1 diabetes is due to absolute insulin deficiency caused by immune destruction of pancreatic β cells.
 3. Evidence is mounting for a genetic basis for canine diabetes mellitus
4. The association with the major histocompatibility complex alleles on the dog leukocyte antigen gene
 a. Once begun, B-cell destruction proceeds by common pathogenic pathways.
b. A seasonality to the diagnosis of canine diabetes, with the incidence peaking in winter, suggests
that environmental influences might have a role in disease progression just prior to diagnosis.
C. Diestrual or gestational diabetes:
1. Results from a relative insulin deficiency associated with insulin resistance.
 2. Diabetes diagnosed in a bitch during either pregnancy or diestrus is comparable to human gestational
diabetes.
 3. The periodic influence of diestrus-associated insulin resistance likely contributes to the increased risk
 of intact female dogs for developing diabetes.
4. Hormonal influences during diestrus and pregnancy:
a. Progesterone stimulates the mammary glands to produce growth hormone.
b. Both hormones induce insulin resistance.
C. In some cases, excess growth hormone production causes clinical signs of acromegaly (see Chapter 40).
5. The risk of diabetes is increased in intact bitches if they are also overweight, probably due to an addi-
tive effect of diestrus- and obesity-associated insulin resistance.
   e r r n s  s  r a s  
increased risk for developing diabetes.
D. Other specific types of diabetes:
1. Diabetes caused by chronic pancreatitis is the result of an absolute insulin deficiency due to extensive
inflammatory destruction of pancreatic tissue:
a Pancreatitis is responsible for the development of diabetes mellitus in approximately 30% of dia-
b. Progressive destruction of both endocrine and exocrine tissue will result in loss of insulin-secreting
β cells, glucagon-secreting α cells, and exocrine acinar cells:
1) Glucagon has an important role in the counter-regulatory response to hypoglycemia and is there-
fore crucial in protecting diabetic dogs from the life-threatening consequences of insulin overdose.
 2) Impaired glucagon counter-regulatory response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia in diabetic
dogs has been associated with episodes of clinical hypoglycemia.
Canine Diabetes Melitus  145
C. Diabetic dogs with chronic pancreatitis can also develop exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI).
d. Although no evidence exists that type 2 diabetes occurs in dogs or that obesity-associated insulin
resistance has a key role in the pathogenesis of canine diabetes; there is evidence that obesity is a risk
causes of insulin resistance if present, and magnify the adverse effect on glycemic control of loss of
B-cell function from any other cause.
metabolism have been implicated as potential etiological factors in dogs with obesity-associated
2. Diabetes associated with diseases that cause insulin resistance:
a. Canine diabetes mellitus secondary to glucocorticoid therapy, hyperadrenocorticism, or acromegaly
h. As most dogs do not develop diabetes with chronic glucocorticoid therapy or spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism, progression to overt diabetes might require preexistent, underlying reduced
β-cell mass or function, for example, from immunological processes or chronic pancreatitis.
E. Insulin deficiency results in the classical signs of diabetes mellitus: polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, an
increased appetite, and lethargy:
1. Polyuria is the result of osmotic diuresis caused by persistent glucosuria. The patient compensates by
increasing water intake to prevent dehydration.
2. Weight loss and lethargy occur because insulin deficiency results in decreased ability to metabolize the
mutrients absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract as well as urinary loss of glucose and amino acids.
Il. Signalment
 A. Most diabetic dogs are over 5 years of age with the highest prevalence occurring between 8 and 12 years
of age.
 B. Intact females are at increased risk, especially if they are also overweight.
C. Although mixed breed dogs are more commonly affected, some pure breeds are overrepresented.
D. Breed predisposition for developing diabetes varies with geographic region:
1. In the USA, breeds at increased risk for developing diabetes include Miniature Schnauzer, Bichon
Frise, Miniature poodle, and Samoyed.
2. In the UK, Samoyeds, Tibetan terriers, Cairn terriers, Miniature Schnauzers, Yorkshire terriers, Border
terriers, and Labrador retrievers are overrepresented.
3. In Sweden, the most commonly affected breeds are Australian terrier Samoyed, Swedish Elkhound.
and Swedish Lapphund.
III. Clinical Signs
A. Uncomplicated diabetes mellitus:
1. Diabetic dogs classically present with polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, an increased appetite, and
lethargy.
 2. The onset of these classic clinical signs is typically insidious,ranging from weeks to months in duration,
 and may initially be unnoticed or considered insignificant by the owner.
B. Sick diabetic dogs:
1. The importance of the compensatory role of polydipsia and polyphagia in the pathophysiology of
diabetes mellitus becomes apparent when they do not occur. Any concurrent illness in diabetic dogs that
causes inappetence or anorexia and vomiting is rapidly complicated by dehydration, depression, and ketosis.
2. The majority of diabetic dogs that present with diabetic ketoacidosis have at least one concurrent
disease, with acute pancreatitis being the most common diagnosis.
3. When present, chronic pancreatitis is likely the result of recurrent episodes of subclinical or clinical
acute pancreatitis:
a. It can be associated with minimal clinical signs in some dogs.
b. Other dogs have recurrent episodes of clinical acute pancreatitis of variable severity.
146 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
(a)
(b)
(c)
ae oys paudeioud op pags pioie-l u (e) op e ui sen sagep yo udoaaa I's an
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. (b) The same dog 3 months later. Diabetic cataracts had developed rapidly and the owners
reported sudden vision loss. (c) The same dog following phacoemulsification surgery to remove the cataract from the right eye.
('gt:otsoooz snsoy weuie sop sgeip aul jo juawaeuew wai-suon sf puey 'wn uewaald woig)
4. Concurrent exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI):
a. Is usually characterized by continued weight loss despite high calorie intake and good glycemic control.
h. Affected dogs often will produce feces three or more times per day which may or may not be
 normal in appearance.
C. Diabetic cataracts:
1. Cataract formation is the most common, and one of the most important, long-term complications
associated with diabetes in dogs (Figure 15.1).
2. They are irreversible and can progress quite rapidly.
 3. Approximately 30% of diabetic dogs already have reduced vision at initial presentation.
4. Cataracts will develop within 5-6 months of diagnosis in the majority of diabetic dogs and, by
16 months, approximately 80% have significant cataract formation.
a. It is evidenced by perilimbal hyperemia and reduced intraocular pressure.
b. If lens-induced uveitis is not treated, it can progress and cause permanent ocular damage.
6. The risk of cataract development seems to be umrelated to the level of hyperglycemia, but increase
with age.
IV. Diagnosis
B. Increased serum liver enzyme activities and concentrations of cholesterol and triglycerides are commonly
noted in newly diagnosed diabetic dogs. In most cases, they return to within the reference range with
successful diabetic management.
Canine Diabetes Mellitus 147
Bacterial cystitis:
1. Should be screened for in all cases when diabetes is first documented.
 2. Diagnosis requires microbial urine culture because results of a routine urinalysis and sediment exam
in diabetics can be misleading.
3. It is commonly present in diabetic dogs and sometimes is not associated with obvious clinical
signs.
D. The diagnosis of concurrent pancreatitis can be difficult because all available diagnostic tests have
limitations:
1. The most sensitive test is measurement of canine serum pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI).
2. The most specific test is ultrasonography performed by a skilled operator.
3. Low serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) may identify concurrent EPI:
a. Measurement of TLI to diagnose EPI is most useful when severe insufficiency exists.
b. The TLI concentration can be transiently increased when there is concurrent EPI and active
 pancreatic inflammation.
C. Thus, diagnosis of EPI may be missed if the inflammation increases the TLI concentration to
within the normal range.
4. For diabetic dogs suspected to have concurrent EPI but not confirmed by TLI concentration, a
therapeutic trial with oral pancreatic enzyme supplementation might assist with diagnosis
E. In dogs with poorly controlled diabetes:
1. Diagnosis of other concurrent conditions such as hyperadrenocorticism or hypothyroidism can be
challenging.
 2. Glycemia and the clinical signs of diabetes should be as well controlled as possible before performing
tests such as the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, the ACTH stimulation test, or free T4 assay
which can be affected by diabetes and lead to false diagnoses of hyperadrenocorticism and
hypothyroidism.
V.  Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses for polydipsia and polyuria in dogs:
1. Includes chronic renal failure, hypercalcemia, hyperadrenocorticism, hypoadrenocorticism, and
Pyelonephritis as well as less commonly encountered problems such as hepatic insufficiency,
hyperthyroidism, central diabetes insipidus, and psychogenic polydipsia (see Chapter 42).
 2. An important differential diagnosis for polydipsia and polyuria in intact bitches is pyometra.
 3. Glucosuria without hyperglycemia (blood glucose concentration <180 mg/dL [<10 mmol/L]) occurs
with renal glycosuria:
a. Primary renal glycosuria is a hereditary disease in Basenjis and Norwegian Elkhounds.
h. Acquired renal glycosuria is usually caused by toxic damage to the proximal renal tubules.
B. Differential diagnoses for weight loss with a normal or increased appetite in dogs include gastrointesti
 nal malassimilation disorders and EPl, cachexia associated with conditions such as malignant neoplasia and
cardiac failure, and endocrinopathies such as hyperthyroidism.
C. Differential diagnoses for polyphagia include hyperadrenocorticism, drug therapy with corticosteroids
Or phenobarbital, gastrointestinal malassimilation disorders, EPl, and primary polyphagia, that is, neuro-
logical disease.
Vl. Treatment
A.
Treatment of diabetes in sick dogs:
1. Diabetes mellitus with or without ketoacidosis presents an additional treatment challenge in dogs
that are sick and require hospitalization.
2. The majority of diabetic dogs that present with diabetic ketoacidosis have at least one concurrent
disease, with acute pancreatitis being the most common:
a. With appropriate therapy, dogs with both acute pancreatitis and diabetic ketoacidosis appear to
have a similar chance of survival as those with diabetic ketoacidosis alone, although they typically
require hospitalization for a longer period.
b. Management of acute pancreatitis is primarily directed at the various clinical sequelae.
C. The goal of treatment is to support the patient until there is spontaneous recovery.
148   Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
3. Diabetic dogs with anorexia have a high risk of hypokalemia:
or a 50:50 combination of KCl and KPO) from the outset.
b. Potassium depletion:
1) Results from decreased intake due to anorexia and increased loss due to vomiting and diuresis
2) Fluid therapy causes dilution of circulating potassium levels and promotes further renal loss.
3) Insulin therapy and correction of acidosis causes potassium to move from the extracellular
space into cells.
c. In critically ill patients, adjustment of the amount of potassium supplementation should ideally be
based on results of serum potassium concentration monitoring.
4. If the patient was previously diagnosed with diabetes and is on maintenance insulin, longer-acting
insulin preparations such as lente or neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin should be discontinued
and replaced with short-acting insulin until the animal is recovered and eating well:
a. Suitable short-acting preparations include regular insulin (e.g., Actrapid, Novo Nordisk), lispro
insulin (Humalog, Eli Lilly) or insulin aspart (NovoRapid, NovoLog [in USA]; Novo Nordisk).
h. Administration protocols involving either constant rate intravenous infusion or intermittent
intramuscular/subcutaneous injections are effective:
1) Constant rate intravenous infusion protocols are often simpler and less labor intensive for
management of prolonged anorexia in diabetic dogs.
pban si dumd uonsnu pue au uonsue pg aerds e ieun si sensos uu aui (7
 in addition to those used for supportive fluid therapy.
C. An initial insulin infusion rate of 50 mU/kg/h is recommended:
1) This rate is easily achieved by administering a 50 mU/mL solution (25 U insulin in 500 mL
saline) at 1 mL/kg/h.
 2) All flow rates and doses should be based on estimated ideal body weight and not actual body
weight.
 3) Aim for a decrease in blood glucose concentration of approximately 50 mg/dL/h (3 mmol/L/h).
d. When the patient's blood glucose concentration reaches 180-270 mg/dL (10-15 mmol/L):
1) The initial rate should be halved to 25 mU/kg/h (0.5 mL/kg/h of this solution).
2) At the same time, the maintenance fluids should be changed to contain 2.5% dextrose and
30-40 mEq/L (30-40 mmol/L) potassium.
e. The insulin infusion rate is adjusted up or down to maintain blood glucose concentration at
145-270mg/dL (8-15 mmol/L).
f. If the dog's illness is associated with substantial insulin resistance:
1) An insulin infusion flow rate of up to 150 mU/kg/h (3 mL/kg/h of the solution described above)
 may be required to maintain blood glucose concentration at 145-270mg/dL (8-15 mmol/L).
2) As the dog recovers and insulin resistance resolves, the insulin infusion flow rate will need to be
decreased.
g. f there is not substantial insulin resistance, a reliable means of achieving a fairly stable blood
glucose concentration in an anorexic diabetic dog is to balance intravenous infusion of insulin at
25 mU/kg/h (0.5mL/kg/h of the solution described above) with a maintenance infusion of 2.5%
dextrose in 0.45% saline with 30-40 mEq/L (30-40 mmo/L) potassium at 6 mL/kg/h.
h. When a previously anorexic diabetic dog begins to eat, the intravenous insulin flow rate usually
needs to be increased to manage postprandial glycemia.
5. Once the diabetic dog has recovered and has a normal appetite:
a. Therapy with short-acting insulin can be discontinued.
 b. A maintenance protocol using a longer-acting insulin preparation administered every 12 h can be
introduced or resumed.
c. Intravenous insulin infusion should continue until immediately prior to subcutaneous administration
of longer-acting insulin.
6. Intermittent intramuscular/subcutaneous injections are also effective and in some settings are simpler
for clinical staff to administer and less expensive for the client:
Canine Diabetes Mellitus 149
a. Low doses of regular or lispro insulin can be used
b. An initial dose of 0.25 U/kg is injected intramuscularly after intravenous fluid therapy has
commenced with Lactated Ringer's solution with 30-40 mEq/L (30-40 mmol/L) potassium. For dogs
weighing < 10 kg, a starting dose of 2 U/dog is appropriate.
in glucose concentration of approximately 50 mg/dL/h (3 mmol/L/h).
d. When a blood glucose concentration of 145-270 mg/dL (8-15 mmol/L) has been achieved, the
maintenance fluids should be changed to contain 2.5% dextrose and 30-40 mEq/L (30-40mmol/L)
 potassium. Insulin therapy is then continued at 0.1-0.4 U/kg subcutaneously every 4-6h as required
to maintain a blood glucose concentration of 145-270mg/dL (8-15 mmol/L). Monitoring blood
 glucose concentration at least every 2h is recommended at this stage.
B. Management of diabetic dogs requiring elective general anesthesia:
1. Half the usual dose of insulin should be administered in the morning when food is withheld.
2. Whenever possible, general anesthesia should be scheduled early in the day so, if the procedure allows,
the patient can be recovered and discharged to the home environment before the next insulin injection
and meal are due.
3. Intravenous administration of an insulin constant rate infusion is recommended while the dog is
hospitalized with the goal of maintaining blood glucose concentration at 110-270mg/dL (6-15 mmol/L):
a. Blood glucose concentration should be monitored every 1-2h and intravenous fluids continued
until discharge.
b. If the blood glucose concentration is 110-270mg/dL (6-15 mmol/L), intravenous infusion of insulin
(solution of 25 U insulin in 500mL saline) at 25 mU/kg/h (0.5 mL/kg/h) with a maintenance infusion of 2.5 %
dextrose in 0.45% saline with 20-40 mEq/L (20-40 mmol/L) potassium at 6 mL/kg/h is recommended.
c. If the blood glucose concentration is >270mg/dL (>15 mmol/L), intravenous infusion of insulin at
25 mU/kg/h (0.5 mL/kg/h of the solution described above) with a maintenance infusion of lactated
Ringer's solution with 20-40 mEq/L (20-40 mmol/L) potassium is recommended.
d. If the blood glucose concentration is <110mg/dL (<6 mmol/L), a maintenance infusion of 2.5%
dextrose in 0.45% saline with 20-40 mEq/L (20-40 mmol/L) potassium at 6 mL/kg/h is recommended
and insulin infusion should be withheld until the blood glucose concentration is > 110 mg/dL (>6 mmol/L)
C. Choosing a blood glucose meter:
1. A wide range of portable blood glucose meters are available:
a. Most are sufficiently accurate and precise to be useful for monitoring blood glucose concentration
in diabetic dogs.
h. Meters designed for use by humans often give lower results than the laboratory reference method.
2. The AlphaTRAK blood glucose meter (Abbott Animal Health):
a. Is designed specifically for veterinary patients.
b. Gives precise and more accurate blood glucose measurements for dogs than blood glucose meters
designed for human samples.
c. It requires only 0.3 pμL of blood and, therefore, is suitable for home monitoring of blood glucose
concentration as well as for hospital use
d. The AlphaTRAK meter provides results above the laboratory reference method more often than
3. If there is ever any doubt about the accuracy of a blood glucose concentration measurement, the best
approach is to repeat the measurement using the same meter or a laboratory reference method.
D. Options for monitoring blood glucose concentration in hospitalized dogs:
1. Continuous monitoring of subcutaneous or interstitial glucose concentration:
a. Provides several advantages for diabetic dogs compared with traditional methods of serial blood
glucose monitoring, with the major one being that glucose measurements are obtained every 3-5 min
allowing clinicians to base treatment decisions on much more detailed glycemic data.
h. The Guardian? REAL-Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring System (CGMS) (Medtronic)
provides glucose results in real time and uses wireless technology:
150  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 15.2 The Guardian REAL-Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring System (CGMS) (Medtronic) provides glucose
monitor provides data when it is within 2.0yd (1.& m) of the sensor and thus works well when attached to the front of the
 patient's kennel door.
1) The monitor does not need to be attached to the patient (Figure 15.2).
 2) Strong correlation exists between interstitial and blood glucose concentrations in diabetic dogs
with a delay of 5-12min.
3) Importantly, the CGMS system can facilitate detection of brief periods of hypoglycemia
(Figure 15.3).
4) Limitations of the system include a 2-3h set up period before glucose readings are obtained
and the requirement for 2-3 blood samples to be collected every 24h during monitoring for
calibration. It is preferable to avoid calibrating the CGMS when blood glucose is changing rapidly
 5) The most reliable location for placement of the CGMS sensor is the dorsal neck (Figure 15.4)
6) The CGMS provides dlinically accurate glucose concentrations in ketoacidotic dogs, although
 the device may not function as well in severely dehydrated patients.
7) The CGMS does not provide reliable data in dogs during general anesthesia.
C. Other continuous interstitial glucose monitors, such as the GlucoDay (Menarini Diagnostics) and
other Medtronic CGMS:
1) Do not provide results in real time and so glycemic data are not available until the device is
disconnected from the dog.
 2) They are, therefore, less useful for monitoring sick diabetic dogs in which ongoing treatment
decisions are based on curent blood glucose measurements.
 3) They are more appropriately used in the hospital or home environment for monitoring glycemia
in stable patients.
d. As with all methods of monitoring glycemia, it is not advisable to rely on continuous interstitial
glucose monitors as the sole monitoring tool.
e. If there is doubt about the accuracy of interstitial glucose results, the best approach is to immediately
obtain a blood glucose measurement.
2. Venous blood can be obtained by direct venipuncture, from an indwelling peripheral or central
intravenous catheter or by lancing the marginal vein of the lateral pinna:
small gauge needle will improve patient comfort and cause minimal damage to the vein.
b. Blood collection from indwelling peripheral and central intravenous catheters is very well tolerated:
1) Catheters in diabetic dogs should be flushed with heparinized saline (1 U/mL) following blood
collection to protect against thrombus formation and catheter occlusion.
C. Small venous blood samples can be readily obtained from the marginal vein of the lateral pinna of dogs:
https://carelink.minimed.com/reporter/secure/ReportServer/1219371760366.pdf-WindowsInternetEx...×
https://carelink.m
ver/1219371760366.pdf
Google
https://carelink.n
.com/rep
·目
PageTools
Medtronic
DailySummaryforLindaFleeman
12/08/2008
HbA1c:NoData
Mon
108788
Glucose(mmol/L)
GuardianBGMeterBGSensor
SensorAlarm
TargetRange
Hypo
■
B2.00
04:00
06:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
Insulin Injection Log
FastShort50/5070/30IntermediateLong>
02:00
10:00
12:00
6:00
18:00
20:00
22:00
Wed00:00
Figure 15.3 Graphical output from a Guardian? REAL-Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring System (CGMS) manufactured by
the diabetes division of Medtronic, Inc. attached to a diabetic dog with a history of poor diabetic control. Note the precipitous
hypoglycemia, and then very rapid rebound to hyperglycemia within 10min. The dog showed no clinical signs of hypoglycemia
and remained asleep during this period. The data were interpreted as evidence of Somogyi phenomenon and a recommendation
was made to decrease the insulin dose. The Guardian® REAL-Time Continuous Ciucose Monitoring System is not approved by
U.S. FDA for use in any animats.
Fgure 15.4 The most reliable location for placement of the Guardian REAL-Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring System
(CGMS) sensor in diabetic dogs is the dorsal neck.
151
152  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.5 Measurement of capillary blood glucose concentration from the buccal mucosa. (a) The upper lip adjacent to the
canine tooth is turned up to expose the buccal mucosa and saliva is wiped away with a swab. (b) The vacuum-lancing device is
applied to the buccal mucosa at the level of the canine tooth. (c) The vacuum-lancing device is removed when an adequate
aldwes ayi pue doip poolg ayi oi pa!jdde s! jalaw asoonjs ayi jo dji isal ay.l aoeyns jesosnw ayi uo juasaid s! poolg jo junowe
is drawn into the test strip.
1) The area should first be warmed with a damp cloth, warmed moist cotton ball, or heat pack.
2) Second, petroleum jelly is applied to the area and the vein nicked with a lancing device. The
petroleum jelly causes the blood drop to bead on the surface and prevents spreading of the sample
into the surrounding fur.
3) Occasionally, gentle massage around the nick site is required to generate a sufficient drop.
4) The technique can be performed with minimal physical restraint and is usually well tolerated.
3. Measurement of capillary blood glucose concentration in diabetic dogs is an alternative to the
techniques using venous blood:
 a. Similar to the marginal pinnal vein method, major advantages of capillary blood glucose measurement
are that it can reliably be performed with minimal restraint and in patients with difficult venous access.
b. Sites suitable for collection of capillary blood samples in dogs include:
1) The buccal mucosa.
 2) The medial aspect of the pinna.
 3) The main paw pad.
4) The carpal pad.
 5) An elbow callus.
6) Skin that has been clipped of hair, for example, the base of the tail.
C. Collection of capillary blood from the buccal mucosa employs a technique similar to that used for
assessment of buccal mucosal bleeding time:
Si eaes pue esoonu jeoonq aui asodxa oi pairaaa si qnooi aunueo aul oi uaoelpe di raddn aul (l
wiped away.
2)A standard or a vacuum-lancing device such as the CareLance (i-SENS) is applied to the mucosa
 at the level of the canine tooth and the device is triggered.
3) If a standard lancing device is used, the device is removed once it has been triggered and the
upper lip is held away from the sampling site until the blood drop has reached sufficient size.
4) If a vacuum-lancing device is used, the piston is slowly released and a vacuum forms within the
end cup, causing the mucosal surface to bulge and the blood drop to enlarge.
5) A glucose meter that can operate with sample sizes <SμL, such as the AlphaTRAK meter
(Abbott Animal Health), is required to maximize success in obtaining a glucose measurement; the
volume of blood obtained can be a limiting factor for meters requiring larger volumes (Figure 15.5).
Canine Diabetes Meitus 153
d. For collection of capillary blood from skin sites:
1) The lancing device is placed on the site and triggered.
2) If a standard lancing device is used, the area surrounding the site can be gently massaged to
encourage enlargement of the blood drop.
 3) If a vacuum-lancing device is used, the vacuum action causes the blood drop to enlarge.
4) When the medial pinna is sampled, a folded gauze swab is held against the lateral pinna to
swab is not excessive because this may occlude blood flow to the site of sampling and prevent
 enlargement of the blood drop.
E. Goals of long-term management:
1. The two primary goals of therapy for diabetic dogs are:
a. Resolution of clinical signs.
b. Avoidance of insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
2. An additional goal is diabetic remission:
a. Remission is possible for dogs with diabetes due to severe insulin resistance if they have sufficient
residual β-cell function.
b. Remission requires both reduction of hyperglycemia by treating with insulin plus prompt elimination
 of insulin resistance.
C. Remission is most likely in animals with diestrus or gestational diabetes and in those that develop
diabetes while receiving medication known to cause insulin resistance, such as glucocorticoids.
 3. Resolution of all clinical signs is best achieved using a regimen of fixed daily insulin doses and feeding
consistent meals:
 a. Lethargy tends to resolve rapidly and dogs become more active and responsive soon after initiation
of insulin therapy.
b. Weight loss is usually arrested before optimal glycemic control is achieved.
C. Complete resolution of polyuria and polydipsia will not occur until the blood glucose concentration
is below the renal threshold (approximately 200 mg/dL [11 mmol/L]) most of the time.
initiated before control of hyperglycemia is achieved.
4. Avoidance of insulin-induced hypoglycemia:
 r s  a  nn    se  a s e
b. A conservative approach to insulin dosing, twice daily insulin administration, and complementary
nutritional strategies greatly reduce the risk.
F. Choosing the right insulin preparation for long-term management:
1. Alarge variety of human insulin preparations are available as well as veterinary preparations registered
specifically for use in dogs and cats (Table 15.1):
a. Although limited veterinary information exists on most of the recently released human products,
all are potentially efficacious for treatment of diabetic dogs.
 h. Good glycemic control can be achieved with most insulin preparations.
C. Some preparations are easier to use, because they have a more predictable effect between dogs and
in the same dog on different days.
d. Generally, the longer the duration of action of insulin, the greater the variability in response
between dogs receiving the same dose.
2. Lente insulin:
 a. The only preparation available is Vetsulin (in the USA) or Caninsulin (elsewhere in the world)
 made by MSD Animal Health, a 40 U/mL porcine insulin zinc suspension specifically registered for
veterinary use.
b. There is good evidence that this insulin product is effective for the reatment of diabetes in dogs.
C. It has an intermediate duration of action.
d. It is a combination of 30% short-acting semilente and 70% longer-acting ultralente insulins; the
e. The median duration of action is 14 h:
154Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 15.1
Currently available insulin products. *
Size of
Concentration   Brand
multiuse
Type of insulin
(U/mL)
name(s)
Manufacturer
vials (mL)
 lnjection pen availability
Veterinary insulin preparations
Insulin zinc
40
Vetsulin;*
MSD Animal
2.5 and 
VetPen in 2 sizes: 0.5-8U
suspension (lente)
 Caninsulin 
Health 
10; 2.7 mL
(0.5 U increments) and 
cartridges
1-6 U (1 U increments)
Protamine zinc
40
ProZinc
Boehringer
10
None
insulin (PZI)
Ingelheim 
Traditionally available human insulin preparations
Regular insulin
100 (and 
Humulin R
Eli Lilly
3 and 10
None
500**)
 Regular insulin
100
ActRapid
Novo Nordisk
10
 NovoPens including
Junior/Demia
Isophane (NPH)
100
Humulin N
Eli Lilly
10
HumaPen Luxura incl.
insulin
HD;a Humulin N Penb
Isophane (NPH)
100
Protaphane
 Novo Nordisk
10
NovoPens incl. Junior/
insulin
Demi;a Innolet; NovoLetb
 pue jeinsai %0s
100
Mixtard
 Novo Nordisk
None
NovoPens including
 50% isophane (NPH)
50/50
Junior/Demi; InnoLeta
30% regular and 
100
Mixtard
 Novo Nordisk
None 
 NovoPens including
70% isophane (NPH)
30/70
Junior/Demi;a InnoLeta
30% regular and 
100
Humulin
 Eli Lilly
10
HumaPen Luxura incl.
 70% isophane (NPH)
70/30
HD;: Humulin 70/30 Penb
New human insulin preparations
 Insulin lispro 
100
Humalog
Eli Lilly
3 and 10
Humapen Luxura
including HD;* Autopen;*
KwikPenb
Insulin aspart
100
NovoLog;
 Novo Nordisk
10
 NovoPens including 
NovoRapid 
Junior/Demi;a Flex Penb
Insulin glulisine 
100
Apidra
Sanofi Aventis
10
OptiClik;a SolarStarb
50% lispro and 50%
100
Humalog
Eli Lilly
10
HumaPen Luxura
 lispro protamine
Mix 50/50
including HD;* KwikPenb
30% aspart and 70%
100
NovoLog
Novo Nordisk
10
 NovoPens including
aspart protamine
Mix 70/30;
 Junior/Demi;a Flex Penb
NovoMix 30
25% lispro and 75%
100
SojeunH
Eli Lilly
10
HumaPen Luxura
 lispro protamine
Mix 75/25
including HD;a KwikPenb
Insulin glargine
100
Lantus
Sanofi Aventis
10
Autopen;a SolarStarb
Insulin detemir 
100
Levemir
Novo Nordisk
10
 NovoPens including Junior/
 Demi;a Flex Penb
*Availability and brand names of commercial insulin products and injection devices change over time and vary between countrie5.
Availability of Vetsulin in the USA has recently been affected.
** 500 U/mL included to alert reader to its existence, but no indication for its use exists in snmall animals.
* Insulin injection pen that uses 3 mL cartridge refills. All deliver 1 U dose increnments, except for the NovoPen Junior/Demi and the
HumaPen Luxura HD which deliver 0.5 U increnents.
bPreflled disposable 3mL insulin injection pen. All deliver 1 U dose increments, except for the Novolet which delivers 2 U dose increments.
Canine Diabetes Melitus 155
1) Significant lowering of blood glucose concentration occurs in the majority (90%) of dogs for
12h or more.
2) Thus, it is suited to a twice daily dosing regimen in diabetic dogs and a meal can be fed at the
time of the insulin injection.
f. The 40 U/mL veterinary preparation is advantageous for small dogs, which might require a total
insulin dose of only 1 or 2 U:
1) It is recommended that VetPen insulin dosing pens are used to ensure accuracy and precision of
dosing.
 2) If syringes are to be used, dosing is simpler and more accurate if specific U-40 syringes are pre-
scribed with this product.
g. Availability of Vetsulin in the USA has recently been affected; however supply of Caninsulin
elsewhere is not affected and has been reliable for many years.
3. Isophane/NPH insulin:
a. Examples are Humulin N (Eli Lilly) and Protaphane (Novo Nordisk).
b. Has an intermediate duration of action and is effective for the treatment of diabetes in dogs when
administered twice daily.
C. Postprandial hyperglycemia can occur in some well-regulated diabetic dogs when meals with high
insoluble fiber content are fed at the same time as NPH insulin injection.
d. Thus, the ideal time for feeding such meals might be 1-2h after the insulin injection, which may
not be convenient for many owners.
4. Premixed combinations of 30% regular and 70% isophane (NPH) insulin:
a. Humulin 70/30 (Eli Lilly) and Mixtard 30/70 (Novo Nordisk) are still available in most countries.
b. They are 100 U/mL premixed combinations of 30% short-acting and 70% intermediate-acting insulin
C. They have a similar action to lente insulin in most dogs, although in others, duration is shorter.
They are suited to a twice-daily dosing regimen in diabetic dogs where the meals are fed at the same
time as the insulin injections
5. Recombinant human protamine zinc insulin:
a. The release of ProZinc (Boehringer Ingelheim) provides a veterinary product to fill the gap in the
market created by the discontinuation of PZI-VET.
h. It is not generally recommended as a first choice therapy for diabetic dogs as it has a less predictable
action with a slower onset than lente insulin or the 70% or 100% NPH preparations.
a. Humalog Mix 75/25 (Eli Lilly) is marketed for human diabetics as an improved product that can
be used twice-daily, a replacement for Humulin 70/30. It is a mix of 75% insulin lispro protamine
suspension and 25% insulin lispro injection (rDNA origin).
b. NovoLog 70/30 (Novo Nordisk) is a similar product with 70% insulin aspart protamine and 30%
insulin aspart.
C. In humans, compared with Humulin 70/30, Humalog Mix 75/25 and NovoLog 70/30 have a more
rapid and predictable onset of glucose-lowering activity, with greater reduction in postprandial glyce-
mia when administered with a meal, and appear to have a similar duration of action to lente (Vetsulin/
Caninsulin) in many dogs. Because of the rapid onset of action, initial dosing should be conservative
(0.25 U/kg lean body weight).
d. Currently no information has been published on the use of these new premixed combinations for
 the management of diabetes in dogs:
1) Research in diabetic dogs is warranted as the product(s) might prove reliable and efficacious
when administered twice-daily at the same times as meals.
2) Based on data in humans, it appears the risk of hypoglycemia might be greatest in the first 2 h after
injection in dogs, so it will likely be crucial that meals are always consumed at the time of injection.
7. Insulin glargine and insulin detemir:
a. Products are Lantus (Sanofi Aventis) and Levemir (Novo Nordisk).
b. They are long-acting synthetic insulin analogues:
1) Developed for human diabetics to provide continuous basal insulin concentrations that inhibit
hepatic glucose production.
156   Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Figure 15.6 The HumaPen Luxura HD pen (Eli Lilly) and the NovoPen Junior (USAyDemi (elsewhere) pens (Novo Nordisk)
deliver accurate and precise insulin doses in 0.5 U increments.
 2) The therapeutic aim is to mimic the physiological pattern of basal insulin secretion of healthy
subjects.
 3) In humans, the basal insulin levels provided by these products are supplemented at meal
times by administration of short-acting insulin preparations that act during the postprandial
period.
C. Preliminary investigation of the treatment of diabetic dogs with glargine insulin indicated that the
success rate might be lower than with lente insulin.
d. Levemir insulin is more potent than insulin preparations traditionally used in diabetic dogs:
1) Thus, its usefulness in small dogs is limited.
adjustments based on daily blood glucose concentration testing suggested that such a protocol
might be a useful option for dogs inadequately controlled with other insulin preparations.
e. Until there is further evaluation of their efficacy for the treatment of diabetes in dogs, insulin
glargine or detemir are not recommended as a first choice of insulin therapy.
G. Insulin dosing pens:
1. Insulin dosing pens are designed to be used by people with no formal medical training:
a. The goal is to make the task of measuring and administering insulin doses easier, less painful, and
more accurate and precise.
b. They can provide the same benefit for diabetic animals and their owners.
2. Insulin dosing pens are much more accurate and precise than insulin syringes:
a. For example, when administering a dose of 1U of a 100 U/mL insulin preparation, the mean dose
delivered using the Autopen (Owen Mumford) is 0.93 U (range: 0.63-1.20 U) and for the SolarSTAR
pen (Sanofi Aventis) is 1.02 U (range: 0.60-1.40 U).
b. In comparison, for pediaric nurses administering a dose of 1 U using 0.3 mL or 0.5mL insulin
syringes, the mean ±SD dose was 1.64±0.38 (range: 0.65-2.80 U).
C. Importantly, it can be seen that most syringe-measured low doses exceed the intended dose.
3. HumaPen Luxura HD pen (Eli Lilly) and the NovoPen Jumior (USA)/Demi (other countries) pens
(Novo Nordisk):
a. They are specifically designed for use in babies and children and deliver accurate and precise
insulin doses in 0.5 U increments (Figure 15.6).
h. As these pens can be used with the 3mL cartridges of all the intermediate-acting 70% and 100%
NPH insulin preparations, they are particularly suitable for use in diabetic dogs.
4.Storage:
 a. Before insulin cartridges are opened, they should be stored in the refrigerator.
h. However once opened and in use, most pens should not be refrigerated but instead kept at room
temperature, that is, <30 *C (<86 °F} away from direct heat and light
5. Using a pen:
a. Before each use, insulin dosing pens typically need to be primed with 2 U until a stream of insulin
d a m rn nou as on nsm s  a se
Canine Diabetes Melitus 157
h. During injection, the needle must be left in the skin for several seconds while the injection button
is held down.
C. When the needle is removed after injection, it is normal for a drop of insulin to be visible on the tip
of the needle.
H. Avoiding insulin-induced hypoglycemia and dosing errors:
1. A prudent approach for the majority of diabetic dogs is to adopt a twice-daily insulin-dosing regimen
at the outset.
2. High doses of insulin and episodes of hypoglycemia are more common in diabetic dogs that receive
insulin only once daily.
3. Insulin dosing pens are recommended because they are associated with fewer dosing errors and more
accurate dosing.
4. f it is not posible to administer an insulin injection on time, the best approach is to skip that injection
and resume insulin administration at the next scheduled time:
a. Missing a single injection will have negligible consequences. However, regularly missing insulin
injections willikely result in poor control and may precipitate diabetic ketoacidosis.
h. In contrast, late administration of insulin can lead to overlap of insulin action (and therefore
overdose) if the following insulin injection is administered on time.
C. The usual meal can be fed whenever an insulin injection is missed.
5. Insulin overdose:
a. Overdose may occur when there is good glycemic control resulting in lower blood glucose
levels at the time of insulin administration (for example, less than 180-215mg/dL or
10-12 mmol/L). Appropriate dose adjustment based on knowledge of how the dog typically
responds, and careful home monitoring is advised to achieve excellent glycemic control while
avoiding hypoglycemia.
h. Diabetic dogs with good glycemic control should, therefore, be closely monitored.
6. A variety of management and medical factors increase the risk of insulin overdose, including:
a. Incomplete mixing of insulin suspensions.
h. Administration of insulin at irregular intervals.
C. Inappetence.
d. Excessive exercise.
e. Improved insulin sensitivity associated with the end of diestrus, discontinuation of drugs that
induce resistance, or treatment of concurrent disease such as hyperadrenocorticism.
 a. Half the usual insulin dose should be administered because the risk of hypoglycemia is increased if
insulin is administered when the dog does not eat.
h. Inappetence or anorexia might signify the presence of concurrent disease.
C. Therefore, owners should seek prompt veterinary advice whenever a diabetic dog shows unexpected
inappetence or anorexia.
8. Care must be taken when dispensing insulin syringes to owners to ensure that there is no confusion
regarding dosing:
a. For example, the graduations on many 1mL insulin syringes are equal to 2 U, while graduations
on most 0.3 mL and 0.5 mL insulin syringes are 1 U.
yolume from graduations on syringes designed for use with 40 U/mL insulin.
 9. Care must also be taken when dispensing insulin dosing pens:
a. Only insulin dosing pens designed for the specific insulin preparation will deliver accurate doses.
typicaly much smaller insulin doses are delivered.
b. The instructions for use of the insulin dosing pen must always be followed exactly.
1.What to do if clinical hypoglycemia occurs:
 s so an o e e pa inos rmo an doap oa po sis  f 'l
a. Hand-feeding might be necessary to encourage the dog to eat.
h. If the dog is unwilling or unable to eat:
158 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animais
1) Syrup containing a high glucose concentration can be administered orally.
2) Suitable syrups are marketed for use by human diabetics and should be kept in reserve by all
owners of diabetic dogs.
 3) When the dog recovers, a meal of the dog's usual food should be fed immediately.
C. The owner should then contact their veterinarian before the next insulin injection is due, at which
point dosage reduction is usually recommended.
2. If profound hypoglycemia occurs or mild hypoglycemia does not respond to the above treatment:
a. Oral glucose can always be tried first if safe for the owner and dog, for example, if the dog is
conscious and not having a seizure.
b. f oral glucose is not successful, the hypoglycemia should be managed initially with an intravenous
bolus of 50% dextrose at a dosage of 1 mL/kg (0.5 g/kg) administered slowly.
C. The bolus should be followed with an intravenous constant rate infusion of 2.5% dextrose in
0.45% saline at 6 mL/kg/h until the blood glucose is >180 mg/dL (>10 mmol/L).
d. The dog's usual food can be fed as frequent small meals.
e. Insulin should be withheld until the blood glucose is >180 mg/dL (>10 mmol/L), which may some-
times take several days.
J. Nutritional management:
1. Feeding consistent meals at fixed times each day is crucial to successful management of diabetes in dogs:
a. Commercial dog foods usually result in postprandial elevation of blood glucose concentration
from 1 to 6h following consumption.
b. Meals should be timed so that maximal exogenous insulin activity occurs during the postprandial
period:
1) Thus, dogs should be fed within 1h of administration of lente or NPH insulin.
2) In some dogs receiving NPH insulin, postprandial hyperglycemia is reduced by feeding the meal
 1-2 h after the insulin injection, and this has been reported to improve glycemic control in dogs fed
diets with high insoluble fiber content.
 3) When a twice-daily insulin dosing regimen is used, a feasible compromise is to feed the dog just
before or immediately following each insulin injection.
C. The majority of diabetic dogs will readily consume meals twice-daily if the meals are highly palat-
able; each meal should contain half the dog's daily caloric requirement.
d. Dogs are more likely to readily accept a diet that has a formulation similar to the diet they were
consuming before diagnosis of diabetes.A practical approach is to obtain a diet history at the time of
diagnosis and then negotiate an agreement with the owner on a set meal that will be fed every 12h.
e. In the majority of cases, the most appropriate meal comprises a complete and balanced commercial
dog food formulated for adult maintenance with < 10% of the calories from treats or other foods.
f. For finicky eaters, the meal should be fed at the time of insulin administration and remain available
until the expected end of the period of maximal exogenous insulin activity.
g. If treats are fed, they should be consumed during the expected period of maximal exogenous insu-
lin activity. All treats containing high sugar or fat should be avoided.
2. Particular care should be taken to ensure a consistent source and content of dietary carbohydrate:
a. The major determinant of the postprandial glycemic response in dogs is the total carbohydrate
content of the meal.
b. As many of the clinical signs of diabetes mellitus are attributable to hyperglycemia, it is rational to
limit the glycemic load following each meal.
C. Therefore, a moderately carbohydrate-restricted diet (e.g., carbohydrate <30% ME) is recom-
mended.
diet with moderate-fiber content (30-40g/1000 kcal) has not been clearly demonstrated:
a. Based on the evidence of a recent randomized clinical trial, routine recommendation of high-fibel,
moderate-carbohydrate, moderate-fat diets is not indicated for diabetic dogs managed with lente insulin.
h. Importantly, the traditionally recommended high-fiber, moderate-fat diet caused significant weight
loss, and thus is not suitable for diabetic dogs with thin body condition.
Canine Diabetes Mellitus159
c. For diabetic dogs managed with NPH insulin, some evidence exists that the traditionally
d. In addition, increased dietary fiber content in excess of that routinely recommended for healthy
dogs might be associated with other unwanted side effects, such as inappetence, diarrhea, and flatulence.
4. Dietary fat restriction (e.g., fat <30% ME) should be considered for diabetic dogs with concurrent
chronic pancreatitis or persistent hypertriglyceridermia:
a. Hypertriglyceridemia has been proposed as a possible inciting cause of canine pancreatitis.
b. Pancreatitis is commonly seen in diabetic dogs, indicating that the diabetic state might also be a
risk factor for pancreatitis.
C. However, dogs with diabetes secondary to chronic pancreatitis likely also have substantial loss of
exocrine pancreatic function and will be at increased risk for loss of body weight when fed a restricted
fat diet.
d. A more targeted approach is to only recommend dietary fat restriction for diabetic dogs if there is
persistent hypertriglyceridemia once good glycemic control has been established.
e. Clinical response to the diet should be evaluated by monitoring body weight and serum triglyceride
concentration.
 5. The optimal level of dietary protein for diabetic dogs has not been determined:
a. It is rational that recommendations would be no different than for nondiabetic dogs.
b. As both carbohydrate and fat are usually restricted in diabetic dogs, dietary protein will often
provide a substantial source of calories (e.g.: protein >30% ME).
K. Monitoring clinical signs and response to therapy at home:
1. Establishing a practical routine for the dog's owner:
a. Many owners of diabetic dogs welcome the opportunity to monitor their pet's response to therapy,
although compliance can be very variable.
b. Compliance is markedly improved if a close rapport between the owner and the clinician managing
the case exists as well as appropriate individualization of the dog's therapeutic and monitoring
regimen.
 C. The clinician must invest time to educate the owner about canine diabetes and its management as
 well as to provide support and guidance while the owner becomes accustomed to the treatment and
monitoring procedures and establishes a practical routine.
2. The primary aim of therapy in diabetic dogs is to achieve resolution of clinical signs:
b. If the dog drinks >60 mL/kg/day or is lethargic or losing weight, adjustment of the insulin dose is
probably required.
3. Owners of diabetic dogs should be encouraged to keep detailed records of their dog's progress
(Figure 15.7):
a. Appetite, general demeanor, and behavior should be recorded daily.
b. Insulin dose and meal composition and amount consumed should be recorded twice daily.
C. Water intake over 24h should be measured at least once weekly:
1) If more than one pet drinks from the same bowl, it is still useful to measure the volume drunk
by all the animals.
2) The diabetic dog typically is the reason for most of the variation in water consumed in multi-pet
households.
d. Urine glucose and ketones should be measured at least once weekly:
1) Persistent negative glucosuria might indicate an increased risk of hypoglycemia.
 2) Ketonuria usually indicates illness or very poor diabetic control.
e. Body weight should ideally be recorded once weekly, preferably always using the same scale.
4. In addition to appraisal of the owner's insulin dosing technique, compliance of both the owner and the
patient with the feeding recommendations must be routinely evaluated to ensure appropriate timing and
consistency of the meals. An approach that is often successful following each reappraisal is to recommend
the “dose” of food along with the dose of insulin to educate the owner of the importance of carefully
weighing or measuring the food in the same manner that they carefully prepare the dose of insulin.
160 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Page Layout
Data
Review
View
回里
Fon
Q
门
國
日
Splt
PagePageBreak
oom
100%
11both
1625/
ames
7pm
700grams cannedfood.2/3cupIner bits
ups dry food
/
am&7gm
am&7pm
11bot
cups dry food
700gramscannedfood.2/3cuplinerbits.1smac
2130/8/10
11both
2585
231/9/1
31/8/1
at10.35
3/9/
11bot
cupsdrytooo
S-100
10at7pm
11bot
11bot
cups dry food.
700grams canned food.2/3cup Inerbits.1smack
elaxoed
ot teste
1/6/1
am&7pm
cups dry food.
700gramscanned food.2/3cupliverbits.1smack
elaxced
at7pm
9.6
pod.
2/3cuo
11/9/1
.25res（24hours
13/9/10
m8 7pm
11 both
20at7pm
11botl
cups dry food
between5&10
between 5 & 10
9
94
5litres(24hou
Fgure 15.7
An example of a spreadsheet that can be used by an owner of a diabetic dog to record their pet's clinical progress.
 Measurement of long-term glycemia: fructosamine and glycosylated hemoglobin:
1. Measurement of fructosamine or glycosylated hemoglobin is an additional method for assessing
glycemic control.
2. Fructosamine and glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations provide approximate measures of average
blood glucose concentration over the preceding 2-4 weeks and 3-4 months, respectively, and thus are
indicators of longer-term diabetic control.
3. Measurement of either is most useful when there is little available information about recent clinical
signs or when results of serial blood glucose measurements do not match with the reported clinical signs.
4. Monitoring the trends in serial measurements of fructosamine or glycosylated hemoglobin in an
individual diabetic dog allows evaluation of glycemic response to management changes.
5. A major limitation with these measures is that they represent average glycemia and give no information
about the degree of fluctuation around that average:
a. Therefore, they do not indicate the risk of hypoglycemia on the current insulin regimen.
h. It is recommended that an additional monitoring tool, such as a serial blood glucose curve,be used
 to determine how to adjust insulin therapy.
M. Monitoring glucose concentrations at home:
1. Some owners are able to perform home serial blood glucose concentration curves:
a. Single,sporadic measurements provide little useful clinical information for monitoring glycemic control,
with the exception of measurements taken when there are signs suggesting hypoglycemia or vague clinical
signs of unknown origin. Serial blood glucose concentration curves that follow a similar protocol to those
obtained in hospital provide the most accurate information for adjustment of insulin dose.
h. As with blood glucose curves obtained in a hospital, results must be related to the dog's clinical signs.
C. A practicalapproach is to use knowledge of the dog's clinical signs to guide the timing of home-generated
blood glucose curves. For example, if there is marked variability in 24 hour water intake, owners can be
advised to perform a glucose curve during a period when the dog is not drinking much water and/or
there is no glucosuria. This approach would increase the chance of detecting hypoglycemia.
Canine Diabetes Melitus  161
d. Home-generated serial blood glucose curves are as reliable as hospital-generated curves, and may
 provide better information in dogs affected by stress of hospital visits.
e. Home-generated serial blood glucose curves also demonstrate the same considerable day-to-day
well controlled.
f. The major advantages of home-monitoring are:
1) Measurements can be easily obtained at any time and can be repeated if equivocal results are
obtained.
2) Cost is minimal compared with a veterinary visit.
g. Samples can be obtained either from the marginal vein of the lateral pinma, by collection of capillary
blood, or by direct venipuncture, as described previously.
h. For successful integration in the pet's diabetic management, it is important that clinic staff take the
o sadus uuqo aid oi rumo ai moe pue raia  jo asn uo raumo a ainpe o a
their pet to identify the best sites for that dog-owner combination:
1) Once an owner is familiar with the technique, they usually need practice with the dog at home
before they develop sufficient skill to generate a serial blood glucose curve.
 2) Micromanagement with frequent adjustment of insulin dose should be avoided.
3) Owners who choose home monitoring often need to be advised against overzealous blood glu-
cose measurement and interpreting the results themselves.
2. Continuous interstitial glucose concentration monitoring systems can also be used in the home
a. Continuous glucose monitoring systems that give results in real time (e.g., the Guardian? REAL-
Time CGMS, Medtronic) and systems that provide data at the end of the monitoring period (e.g.
GlucoDay (Menarini Diagnostics) can both be used at home.
h. Important advantages of continuous monitoring systems over intermittent blood glucose measurement
are that they facilitate detection of brief periods of hypoglycemia and provide information overnight.
C. One limitation is that the systems must be calibrated with blood glucose concentration two to three
 times every 24h, so that there is still a requirement for blood sampling during monitoring.
d. Cost is another limitation, particularly the ongoing cost of the glucose sensors.
N. Hospital-generated serial blood glucose concentration curves:
1. Serial blood glucose concentration curves are most useful in cases where the clinical history is
inadequate and home glucose monitoring is not being performed. However, it is important to recognize
that, if used alone, they can be an unreliable clinical tool for evaluation of insulin dose in individual
diabetic dogs because of high day-to-day variability in results and the impracticality of performing multi-
day consecutive curves:
a. Additional indicators of glycemic control, such as changes in water intake, appetite, body weight,
and urine glucose concentrations, should always be considered when appraising insulin dose.
h. The large day-to-day variability of the curves and the serious sequelae that might result from
insulin overdose justify the need for a conservative approach to dosage recommendation. For
example, when blood glucose measurements and assessment of clinical signs indicate that there is
very good glycemic control, dosage increases should typically be limited to increments of 0.5 or
1.0U of insulin.
2. One of the principal reasons for performing a serial blood glucose curve in a diabetic dog is to
evaluate whether the insulin dose can be increased without risk of inducing hypoglycemia:
a. The risk of hypoglycemia is particularly important whenever recommending insulin doses >1 U/kg.
h. Although assessment of clinical signs is valuable for identifying dogs with poor glycemic control,
 it is often not effective for identifying dogs at risk of clinical hypoglycemia.
3. The standard protocol for generating a serial blood glucose curve in a veterinary clinic is:
a. Admit the dog into the clinic before administration of the morning insulin injection.
b. Obtain a baseline blood glucose reading.
162 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
If the nadir is <55 mg/dL (3 mmol/L), or the dog has shown
Decrease the 12 hourly insulin dose by 50%
clinical signs of hypoglycemia
If the nadir is 55-90mg/dL (3-5 mmol/L), or if either pre-insulin 
Decrease the 12 hourly insulin dose by 20%
blood glucose value is <1 80mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
(rounded down to nearest unit of insulin)
If the final pre-insulin blood glucose is <90mg/dL (5 mmol/L)
Withhold insulin overnight and feed the dog as
usual. Decrease the 12 hourly insulin dose by 20%
(rounded down to the nearest unit of insulin) the
following morning. If the pre-insulin blood glucose is
<55 mg/dL (3 mmol/L), decrease the 12 hourly insulin
dose by 50%.
If the nadir is 90-145 mg/dL (5-8 mmol/L) and both pre-insulin
The dog likely has optimal clinical control and
blood glucose values are >180 mg/dL (10mmol/L)
does not require an insulin dosage adjustment.
If the nadir is >145mg/dL (8mmol/L), and the pre-insulin blood
Increase the 12 hourly insulin dose by 20%
glucose values are >180mg/dL (10mmol/L)
(rounded down to nearest unit of insulin).
If very high blood glucose measurements are recorded in an
 The possibility of insulin resistance should be
insulin-treated diabetic dog, e.g., values in excess of 550mg/dLconsidered if insulin dose is>1 U/kg.
(30 mmol/L)
The findings of a serial blood glucose curve should always be related to the history, physical examination findings, and changes in body
weight before a final decision is made regarding insulin dose. If a diabetic dog is not lethargic, has a stable body weight, has no ketonuria,
is drinking <60 mL/kg/day, and glycenic control is very good, but an increase or decrease in insulin dosage is suggested by the serial blood
glucose curve, then insulin dosage adjustments of no more than 1 U are advised, regardless of the dose the dog is receiving.
C. The usual insulin dose and meal is then given.
d. Blood glucose measurements are obtained every 2h umtil the next insulin injection is due.
4. Having the owner administer the morning insulin injection provides an opportunity to review injection
 technique and correct any problems.
5. If the dog refuses to eat, subsequent blood glucose values are likely to be lower than if the dog eats
normally:
a. In this situation, it is probably best to cancel the serial blood glucose curve on that day and
reschedule.
b. The protocol can be modified on the next occasion to allow the owner to take the dog home of
to a less stressful environment after the baseline blood glucose reading is obtained and the usual meal
fed there.
C. The dog should be returned to the hospital before the next blood glucose reading is due.
d. Alternatively, the morning pre-insulin blood glucose reading can be omitted from the serial blood
glucose curve and the dog brought to the hospital after the morning insulin injection and meal have
been given at home.
6. Guidelines for evaluation of serial blood glucose curves in diabetic dogs are primarily based on the
nadir, or lowest blood glucose reading obtained, and the two pre-insulin blood glucose values ( Table 15.2):
a. The first pre-insulin blood glucose value is the reading obtained before the morning insulin injection:
1) The pre-insulin blood glucose values provide an indication of the likely blood glucose level
when the dog is due for an insulin injection at home.
2) Appropriate adjustment of dose using dosing guidelines (Table 15.2) is important to avoid
hypoglycemia as the effects of the previous insulin injection might overlap with the next insulin
dose and produce an additive effect.
h. The second pre-insulin blood glucose is the sample taken before the next insulin injection is due,
usually 12h after the first.
C. The nadir (lowest) concentration, together with consideration of pre-insulin blood glucose concen-
tration, provides an indication of the maximal insulin dose that can be used to avoid hypoglycemia:
Canine Diabetes Mellitus  163
1) The nadir can occur at any point in the blood glucose curve, including just prior to an insulin
injection.
 2) The time to nadir influences dose recommendations but can vary considerably, even in the same
dog over consecutive visits.
7. Severe episodes of hypoglycemia following insulin overdose can result in compensatory hyperglycemia,
also termed the Somogyi phenomenon:
a. The hyperglycemia sometimes persists for several days.
h. Serial blood glucose assessment performed shortly after an episode of clinical hypoglycemia may
result in a curve similar to that obtained following insulin underdosing.
8. If there is ever any doubt about the interpretation of a serial blood glucose curve, it is always safest to
err on the side of caution and decrease the dog's insulin dose.
9. Home measurerment of blood glucose concentrations at the time of vague or suggestive signs of
hypoglycemia is valuable in differentiating subsequent compensatory hyperglycemia from other causes
of hyperglycemia.
O. Insulin resistance:
1. The majority of uncomplicated diabetic dogs are stabilized on an insulin dose of approximately
0.5U/kg and few require doses >1.0 U/kg.
2. Insulin resistance should be suspected at insulin doses exceeding 1.5 U/kg.
3. Errors in insulin handling or administration should be differentiated from insulin resistance and
occasionally can mimic insulin resistance.
4. The major differential diagnoses for insulin resistance are:
a. Concurrent disease or drug therapy.
h. Compensatory hyperglycemia secondary to insulin overdose (Somogyi phenomenon).
5. Errors in insulin handling or administration:
a. Insulin can become inactivated if exposed to temperatures >30°C (>86°F) or light for prolonged
 periods or if shaken vigorously:
 1) Most insulin suspensions must be gently mixed prior to administration or doses might vary
 greatly. It is recommended that Vetsulin (USA)/Caninsulin (elsewhere) be well mixed prior to
dosing to ensure accuracy.
 2) An expedient method of ruling out the possibility of inactivated insulin when investigating
apparent insulin resistance is to change to a new vial of insulin.
b. Administration issues:
o an na e oi  a  ae are ss  go s   (1
 syringe can lead to dosing errors.
2) Dosing errors are less frequent with insulin dosing pens than with needles and syringes.
 3) However insulin-dosing pens must be primed prior to administration of each dose to ensure
there is no air in the system.
4) It is also important to check that the dosing dial has returned to the “zero" position after each dose.
 5) Although experienced owners of diabetic dogs rarely report difficulty with administration of
 insulin to their pet, it is important to review their injection technique for errors whenever insulin
resistance is investigated.
6. Concurrent disease or drug therapy causing insulin resistance:
a. May be suspected based on history and physical examination findings and can be further
investigated by performing hematology, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and microbial culture and
sensitivity of the urine.
h. Almost any concurent disease can cause insulin resistance that affects diabetic control.
c. Hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism are two important causes of insulin resistance in diabetic
dogs, and they can present a diagnostic challenge in a diabetic dog.
d. Systemic and topical corticosteroids are the drugs most commonly associated with insulin resistance.
e.
 Obesity causes insulin resistance.
f. Other causes of insulin resistance can include liver disease, dental infections, neoplasia, organ
failure, and hyperlipidemia.
164  Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
g. Anti-insulin antibodies occur in some insulin reated dogs but their clinical significance is unclear,
and they are only very occasionally suspected as a cause of insulin resistance. In humans, they more
often prolong the duration of insulin action than result in insulin resistance.
h. Insulin resistance and poor glycemic control lasting several days is often associated with episodes
of active pancreatitis in dogs with underlying chronic pancreatitis. Dogs may be inappetent and/or
have vomiting associated with the episodes:
i. Once a cause of insulin resistance has resolved or is removed, insulin sensitivity can be expected to
improve and there will be increased risk of hypoglycemia unless the insulin dose is decreased.
7. Compensatory hyperglycemia secondary to insulin overdose (Somogyi phenomenon) is one of the
 most common causes of insulin resistance in diabetic dogs:
a. There is typically a period of good glycemic control that is followed by deteriorating glycemic con-
 trol despite increasing insulin doses:
1) The period of good glycemic control may be very brief.
2) It is sometimes missed, especially if dose adjustment is based only on results of serial blood
glucose concentration curves without careful consideration of the dog's clinical signs.
b. In insulin-treated diabetic people, hypoglycemic events occur more frequently during the night
than during the day:
1) The same may be true for dogs.
2) Therefore, insulin-induced hypoglycemia may be missed with only day time monitoring.
 Continuous subcutaneous glucose monitors are a useful diagnostic aid for detecting night time
hypoglycemia (Figure 15.3)
 P  s ls r sd o er r 
glycemia.
d. For diabetic dogs receiving insulin doses >1.5 U/kg where administration/dosing errors and con-
current disease/drugs have been ruled out, it is recommended that the insulin dose be decreased to O.5 U/
kg and the response to the change monitored:
1) If insulin resistance was due to compensatory hyperglycemia secondary to insulin overdose,
2) If there is another cause of insulin resistance, clinical signs typically become much worse
within 24h; the previous insulin dose can be resumed and the investigation for another cause
continued.
P. Excessively short- or long-duration of insulin action may result in poor glycemic control with ensuing
hyperglycemia and/or hypoglycemia:
1. Excessively short- or long-duration of insulin action may be suspected based on results of serial blood
glucose testing.
2. Serial blood glucose curves vary from day-to-day along with apparent duration of action.
3. Excessively short duration of insulin action:
a. The diagnosis must be supported by compatible clinical signs such as polydipsia; in some dogs
polydipsia repeatedly occurs for only a few hours before an insulin injection is due.
b. Must be differentiated from compensatoryhyperglycemia secondary to insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
C. Can be associated with insulin resistance and investigation for concurrent disease is indicated.
d. If short duration is confirmed and insulin overdose and concurrent disease ruled out, the same
insulin preparation may be administered every 8 h or a different insulin preparation with an expected
longer duration may be trialed.
4. Long duration of insulin action as a cause of hyper- and/or hypoglycemia:
 a. Usually responds to a decrease in the 12 hourly insulin dose.
h. It is not usually necessary to decrease the frequency of insulin administration.
Q. Management of concurrent chronic pancreatitis:
1. Chronic pancreatitis in diabetic animals can have important clinical implications:
a. In addition to the possibility of episodes of acute pancreatitis, progressive destruction of both
endocrine and exocrine tissue will result in loss of insulin-secreting β cells, glucagon-secreting Q cells,
and exocrine acinar cells:
Canine Diabetes Mellitus  165
1) Therefore, the glucagon counter-regulatory response to hypoglycemia might be reduced.
2) Avoidance of insulin overdose is one of the primary goals of treatment of diabetic animals and
h. Loss of body weight and condition despite polyphagia are presenting signs for both diabetes
mellitus and EPI:
1) If weight loss continues despite adequate glycemic control, the possibility of concurrent EPI
should be considered.
2) Evaluation of frequency of defecation (more than twice a day) and fecal consistency (may or
 may not be normal) can assist with diagnosis.
3) Serum TLI concentration should be measured and/or a therapeutic trial with pancreatic
enzyme supplementation performed (Figure 15.8).
 4) The goal is to identify EPI early in the clinical course so pancreatic enzyme supplementation
can be started before excessive body condition is lost.
2. Reducing the risk of pancreatitis in diabetic dogs:
1) Increased serum triglyceride concentrations are commonly seen in diabetic dogs
2) Thus, the diabetic state might also be a risk factor for pancreatitis
b. Restriction of dietary fat is an important part of the management of hypertriglyceridemia in dogs
and is recommended for diabetic dogs when hypertriglyceridemia cannot be corrected by exogenous
insulin therapy:
eridemia and to assess the response to feeding a fat-restricted diet (Figure 15.9).
2) Dietary fat restriction (i.e., <30% ME) should be recommended for all diabetic dogs with
fasting serum triglyceride concentration > 500 mg/dL (>5.5 mmol/L).
 3) For diabetic dogs with good glycemic control, dietary fat restriction to <30% ME is recommended
(ott) ot< si nsn n s  
4) Fasting triglyceride levels are expected to decrease in response to dietary fat restriction.
 5) Therefore, if fasting serum triglyceride concentration is >400 mg/dL (>4.4 mmol/L) when the
dog is being fed a diet with <30% ME fat, further restriction of dietary fat to <20% ME is
recommended.
C. An alternative or adjunct to monitoring fasting serum triglyceride concentrations is to monitor
postprandial concentrations:
1) Fasting triglyceride concentration might not accurately predict the postprandial peak
concentration in dogs, which could be an important limitation when monitoring response to
dietary fat restriction.
2) As serial postprandial blood sampling is routine in diabetic dogs when assessing glycemia, it
is convenient to also evaluate triglycerides at the same time:
a) Point-of-care meters such as the CardioChek PA test system can be used.
b) Peak blood triglyceride concentration will most likely occur 2-6 h after a typical meal
formulated for adult maintenance, so blood triglyceride concentrations should be measured at
2, 4, and 6h after a meal.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
Well-controlled diabetic dogs have a similar chance of survival to that of non-diabetic dogs of the same
age and gender, although death is still more frequent during the first 6 months of therapy.
B.
The case-fatality fate of diabetic dogs seen at referral veterinary hospitals in North America has
decreased from 37% to 5% over the past 30 years:
1. In a review of diabetic dogs 27 years ago, 50% were alive 2 months after initial diagnosis and went
on to be successfully managed, often for periods of several years.
 2. Major improvements in the level of care and therapy available for diabetic dogs have been achieved
since then, and the survival rate is now much higher.
166 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Diagnosis of
diabetes
mellitus
 Dog has normal
Dog has
or increased
decreased
appetite
appetite
Treat clinical
complications and/or
concurrent diseases
1.
 Implement a regimen of twice-daily feeding. Each meal should contain half the daily caloric
matched to the timing of the insulin injections. It is important that the meals are consistent and not
varied from meal to meal.
2.
Select a diet that is highly palatable for the individual dog and formulated for canine adult
maintenance with moderate dietary fiber (30-40g/1000 kcal) and carbohydrate (< 30% ME) content.
3.
If there is a history or clinical evidence of concurrent pancreatitis, consider recommending that the
dietary fat is also restricted (< 30%ME) (see Figure15.9).
Dog loses body
Dog has stable body
Dog gains body
 weight and condition
weight and condition
weight and condition
▼
Adjust insulin dose to
Adjust insulin dose to
Adjust insulin dose to
optimize glycemic control
optimize glycemic control
 optimize glycemic control
and increase caloric intake
and decrease caloric intake
at each meal
at each meal
 Dog has thin body
 Dog has overweight
condition
body condition
Increase caloric intake at
Decrease caloric intake at
each meal
each meal
If weight loss continues despite
good glycemic control, consider
evaluating exocrine pancreatic
function by measuring cTLI or
 performing a therapeutic trial 
Dog has ideal body
with pancreatic enzymes
condition
Figure 15.8Algorithm for adjustment of insulin dose and caloric intake in diabetic dogs.
Canine Diabetes Mellitus 167
Diagnosis of
diabetes
mellitus
Persistent
History or clinical evidence of
Severe hypertriglyceridemia
hypertriglyceridemia
concurent pancreatitis
(>500 mg/dL)
>400 mg/dL despite good
glycemic control
Recommend dietary fat restriction (< 30%ME)
Monitor body
Monitor fasting serum
 condition
triglyceride concentration
Fasting
Fasting
triglyceride
triglyceride
<400 mg/dL
>400 mg/dL
Dog loses body
condition
Check glycemic control and
consider further dietary fat 
restriction (e.g.,<20%ME)
Check glycemic control
Dog maintains body
and increase caloric
 intake at each meal
condition
If weight loss continues despite
good glycemic control, consider
evaluating exocrine pancreatic 
function by measuring cTLI
cTLI <2.5 μg/L
cTLI 3.0-5.0 μg/L
cTLI >5.0 μg/L
 Begin pancreatic
enzyme replacement
Monitor cTLI and 
Checkfor concurrent
consider pancreatic 
disease and consider
enzyme replacement
 increasing dietary fat content 
and/ortrial pancreatic enzyme
replacement
Fgure 15.9 Algorithm for monitoring fasting triglyceride concentrations and adjustment of dietary fat intake in diabetic dogs.
168 Clinicat Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Vlll. Prevention
Type 1 diabetes mellitus in dogs is likely caused by multiple interacting genetic and environmental
influences and there is no information on prevention of this form of diabetes.
B.
Diestrus and gestational diabetes can be prevented by neutering of female dogs. For entire bitches, the
risk of developing diabetes might be decreased by maintenance of lean body condition.
C.
 There is little available information on prevention of chronic pancreatitis leading to diabetes in dogs.
It is possible that maintenance of lean body condition and early treatment of hyperlipidemia might decrease
 the incidence or progression of chronic pancreatitis in dogs.
References and Further Readings
Alejandro R, Feldman E, Shienvold FL, et al. Advances in canine diabetes mellitus research: Etiopathology and results of islet
transplantation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;193:1050-1055.
Briggs CE, Nelson RW, Feldman EC,et al. Reliability of history and physical examination findings for assessing control of
glycemia in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 53 cases (1995-1998). JArm Vet Med Assoc 2000;217:48-53
management of diabetes mellitus. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 2002;38:239-245.
Catchpole B, Ristic JM, Fleeman LM, et al. Canine diabetes mellitus: Can we learn new tricks from old dogs? Diabetologid
2005;48:1948-1956.
Davison LJ, Herrtage ME, Catchpole B. Study of 253 dogs in the United Kingdom with diabetes rmellitus. Vet Record
2005;156:467-471.
Davison LJ, Slater LA, Herrtage ME, et al. Evaluation of a continuous glucose monitoring system in diabetic dogs. J Ssmaff
Anim Practice 2003;44;435-442.
Davison LJ, Weenink SM, Christie MR, et al. Autoantibodies to GAD65 and IA-2 in canine diabetes mellitus. Vet Immmunol
Immumopathol 2008;126(1-2):83-90.
Fall T, Hedhammar A, Wallberg A,et al. Remission of diestrus diabetes in Elkhounds is predicted by glucose concentrations at
France. 2010, p. 259.
Fall T, Johansson Ks, Juberget A, et al. Gestational diabetes mellitus in 13 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2008:22(6):1296-1300.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW (eds). Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. St Louis:
Elsevier, 2004, pp. 486-538.
Fleeman LM, Rand JS. Management of canine diabetes. Vet Clin North A Small Anirm Pract 2001:31:855-880.
Assoc 2003;222(3):317-321.
Fleeman LM, Rand JS. Diabetes rmellitus: Nutritional strategies. In: Pibot P, Biourge V, Elliott D, eds. Encyclopedia of Canin
Canine Nutrition. Paris, France: Aniwa Publishing, 2006, pp. 192-215.
diabetes.J Small Anirm Practice 2009;50: 604-614.
Fleeman LM, Rand JS, Morton JM. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of porcine insulin zinc suspension in eight
diabetic dogs. Vet Rec 2009;164:232-237.
Ford SL, Rand JS, Ghormley TM, et al. Evaluation of determir insulin in diabetic dogs managed with horme blood glucose
monitoring (Abstract). In: ACVIM Forum, Anaheim, CA, USA, 2010, p. 442.
Congress Proceedings, abstract 99. Toulouse, France, 2010, p. 260.
Guptill L, Glickman L, Glickman N. Time trends and risk factors for diabetes mellitus in dogs: Analysis of Veterinary Medical
Data Base records {1970-1999). Vet J 2003:165;240-247.
Hess RS, Saunders M, van Winkle TJ. et al. Concurrent disorders in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 221 cases (1993-1998). J A
Vet Med Assoc 2000:217(8):1166-1173.
Rand JS, Fleeman LM, Farrow HA, et al. Canine and feline diabetes mellitus: Nature or nurture? J Nut!
2004:134:2072S-2080S.
ketoacidosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010;20(3):303-312.
Thoresen Sl, Lorenzen FH. Treatment of diabetes rmellitus in dogs using isophane insulin penfills and the use of serum
fructosarmine assays to diagnose and monitor the disease. Actα Vet Scand 1997;38(2):137-146.
Wiedmeyer CE, Johnson PJ, Cohn LA, et al. Evaluation of a continuous glucose monitoring system for use in dogs, cats, and
horses.J Ar Vet Med Assoc 2003:223:987-992.
CHAPTER 16
Feline Diabetes Mellitus
Jacguie Rand
Pathogenesis
● Hyperglycemia occurs as a result of a relative or absolute deficiency of insulin.
● Most cases are presumed to have type 2 diabetes.
● Other specific types of diabetes occur secondary to acromegaly, hyperadrenocorticism, and pancreatitis
and account for a minority of cases in general practice.
Classical Signs
● Most cats are >8 years of age, with a peak onset of 10-13 years of age.
● Moderate to marked polyuria/polydipsia, usually of 2-12 weeks duration prior to diagnosis.
Weight loss, polyphagia, or inappetence.
● More often overweight, but may be normal weight or underweight.
Diagnosis
● Persistent hyperglycemia with glycosuria.
Treatment
 Long-acting insulin, low-carbohydrate diet, and normalization of body condition
Prognosis
● Excellent with appropriate therapy if type 2 diabetes; with comorbidities such as pancreatitis or
 acromegaly, prognosis is good to guarded depending on therapeutic options available.
1.
Pathogenesis
A. Most diabetic cats appear to have type 2 diabetes mellitus, previously called adult-onset diabetes or
noninsulin-dependent diabetes:
1. Type 2 diabetes is characterized by decreased insulin secretion, insulin resistance, and amyloid
 deposition in the pancreatic islets:
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
169
170 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Glucose
Glucose
Normal Insulin Resistance
Figure 16.1 Insulin resistance requires more insulin (stars) to be secreted to achieve the same glucose uptake (arrows) into
Compared with when insulin sensitivity is normal. (With permission from Rand JS.)
Figure 16.2 Normal pancreatic islet with surrounding exocrine tissue. Beta cells are stained in the islet to show the hormone
amylin. (From Rand JS, Martin G]. Management of feline diabetes mellitus. Endocrinofogy 2001:31(5):881-913. With
permission. The Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice, Elsevier.)
a. When there is insulin resistance (Figure 16.1), more insulin is required to maintain blood glucose
concentrations in the normal range compared with when insulin sensitivity is normal. Prolonged
demand for increased insulin secretion from the beta cells to overcome insulin resistance eventually
leads to beta cell failure.
h. Deposition of amyloid in pancreatic islets is a characteristic finding in diabetic cats and contributes
cosecreted with insulin from beta cells.
Feline Diabetes Mellitus171
Fgure 16.3 Pancreatic islet from a diabetic cat showing extensive amyloid deposition damaging beta cells and reducing
insulin secretion. (From Rand JS, Martin G). Management of feline diabetes mellitus. Endocrinology 2001:31(5):881-913. With 
permission. The Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice, Elsevier.)
Feline diabetes—pathogenesis
Insulin resistance (genotype, obesity, physical inactivity, drugs)
一
Increased insulin production
Amyloid deposition
β Damage → β cell failure
Glucose toxicity
Glucose: 7-12 mmol/L (126-216mg/dL)
Hyperglycemia
Cat requires low carbohydratediet +
ideal weight + physical activity ±
 oral hypoglycemics
Insulin-dependent diabetes
Fgure 16.4 Mechanism for development of type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance stimulates increased insulin secretion to
maintain blood glucose in the normal range. With time, chronic hypersecretion of insulin damages the beta cells and blood 
 glucose concentration starts to increase. If this mild increase in blood glucose is detected as being persistent and not
attributed to stress, with appropriate management, glucose will normalize. To facilitate the compromised beta cells to secrete
sufficient insulin to maintain euglycemia, body condition should be kept lean, a low-carbohydrate diet fed, and physical
activity encouraged to increase insulin sensitivity. If this mild hyperglycemia is not detected, persistent low-grade
hyperglycemia will further suppress beta cell function through the phenomena of glucose toxicity. Blood glucose will
continue to rise, exacerbating glucose toxicity and diabetes ensues, which in most cats is initially insulin dependent. (From
Marshall and Rand, 2009. With permission.)
B. Risk factors for diabetes include old age, male gender obesity, physical inactivity, confinement indoors,
breed (Burmese in Australia, New Zealand and the UK; Maine coon, domestic longhair, Russian blue, and
 Siamese in the USA), and repeated or long-acting steroid or megestrol acetate administration. Many of these
risk factors cause insulin resistance and increase the demand on beta cells to produce insulin (Figure 16.4).
C. Prevalence of diaberes in cats in North America, the UK, and Australia is approximately 1:81 to 1:250
cats depending on the population studied; prevalence in Burmese cats in Australasia is approximately 1 in
50 cats, with 1 in 10 cats that are 8 years of age or older affected.
172  Clinicat Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Insulin Concentrations
Insulin μU/mL
50
40
Glucose30mmol/L(540 mg/dL)
30
20
10
0
10
15
20
25
Day
pwots sda) sien sagep pasouep Amau ui uas Aeidi auei aui u sueuauo asosns poig yly Auasisiad
3 0 mmol/L) causes rapid suppression of insulin secretion from beta cells even in healthy cats, to levels seen in newly
diagnosed diabetic cats. This phenomena is called glucose toxicity. Eventually, it leads to beta cell damage and loss of beta
cells. (With permission from Rand JS.)
D. At diagnosis, endogenous insulin secretion is usually very low:
1. This is probably because of the combined effects of:
a. Impaired insulin secretion associated with the beta cell defect causing type 2 diabetes.
h. Amyloid deposition in the islets which is toxic to beta cells.
C. Suppression of insulin secretion by glucose toxicity (Figure 16.5).
E.
Glucose toxicity is defined as suppression of insulin secretion by persistently (>24-h duration) high blood
glucose. Good glycemic control is essential to reverse glucose toxicity:
1. Suppression of insulin secretion by glucose toxicity is initially functional and reversible, later it results in
structural changes in beta cells. Over weeks and months, changes become irreversible, and beta cells are lost.
S  r  e   s r s s r  s  s
causing decreased insulin secretion or impaired insulin action {insulin resistance). In primary accession
practice in Western countries, other specific types of diabetes account for approximately 5-10% of cases,
whereas in referral practice they are more common and account for 20% or more of cases:
1. Growth hormone-producing tumors (acromegaly) appear to be the most common other specific type 
of diabetes and are underdiagnosed. Referral institutions in the UK and USA report acromegaly in
approximately 25-30% of diabetic cats; the high incidence likely reflects the populations studied.
2. Pancreatic neoplasia is a significant cause of diabetes in referred populations of diabetic cats in North
America, accounting for as many as 9-18% of feline diabetics necropsied at referral institutions.
3. Histological evidence of pancreatitis is commonly associated with feline diabetes (50% of diabetic
cats have pancreatitis lesions at necropsy):
a. In most cats, pancreatitis is not severe enough to cause diabetes alone, but probably contributes to
some loss of beta cells.
 b. A small number of cats appear to have diabetes as a result of end-stage pancreatitis.
4. Hyperadrenocorticism is an infrequent specific type of diabetes associated with insulin resistance, but
is more common in the cases seen in referral practice.
5. Hyperthyroidism results in glucose intolerance and insulin hypersecretion, which may be the result of
insulin resistance in the liver since insulin sensitivity of peripheral tissues seems unaltered. Glucose
which might be the result of weight gain and resultant obesity. In prediabetic cats, the superimposed
glucose intolerance of hyperthyroidism could precipitate overt diabetes.
G. Chronic kidney disease is relatively common in diabetic cats, firstly because most are aged, and secondly,
there is increasing evidence that suggests that diabetic nephropathy is also a feature of the disease in cats, as
Feline Diabetes Mellitus173
Fgure 16.6 A plantigrade stance and/or muscle weakness is observed in a significant proportion of newly diagnosed diabetic
cats. Presence of a plantigrade stance is negatively associated with the probability of remission, likely because it indicates
long-standing hyperglycemia. (Photo from R. Marshall. With permission.)
is in humans. In a study of Ss diabetic cats, the proportion of persistently azotemic cats increased with age,
with the highest frequency (31%) in the ≥10 to <15 years age group, but a surprising 18% of cats had
statistically more likely to have evidence of microalbuminemia and proteinuria, and histopathologic lesions
consistent with diabetic nephropathy have been reported in diabetic cats.
Il. Signalment
A. Cats are typically ≥8 years of age and with a peak age of onset of 10-13 years of age.
B. Diabetic cats are more often male than female (2:1 ratio), except for Burmese cats.
C. Body condition is more often overweight (40%) than normal (35%} or underweight (25%).
D. Burmese cats are overrepresented in the UK, Australia, and New Zealand; in the USA, Maine coon,
domestic longhair, Russian blue, and Siamese cats are overrepresented.
Ill. Clinmical Signs
A. Earliest signs are polyuria and polydipsia (80% of cats), and nocturia and urinary incontinence may be
reported.
 i          ( s  
reported by a minority of owners (<20%) at the time of diagnosis.
C. At initial diagnosis, some cats have decreased appetite (50%) and are depressed and others are
polyphagic.
D. Lethargy or depression (50%) may be present. Other cats are alert at presentation.
E. Muscle wasting (50%) and weakness are often present and may be evidenced as reluctance or inability
to jump.
F.
 Dehydration (50%) is common in cats that are lethargic and inapperent.
G. Vomiting occurs in one-third of cats, but is usually infrequent.
H. Hepatomegaly (20%) from hepatic lipidosis and occasionally jaundice may be present.
1.
 Rear limb weakness or plantigrade posture (hocks touching the ground) is present in approximately 50%
of diabetic cats secondary to diabetic neuropathy. Weakness is more common than plantigrade posture
(Figure 16.6).
J.Acetone odor, which has a similar odor to nail polish remover or acetone, may be evident on the breath,
and occurs on average 5 days before ketonuria is detected.
K. Poor unkempt (50%) scurfy hair coat may be evident.
174  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
IV. Diagnosis
A. In most cats, a single blood glucose concentration measurement of >20 mmol/L (360 mg/dL) is diagnostic
of diabetes. However some sick or very stressed cats occasionally have glucose concentrations >20 mmol/L
(360 mg/dL).
B. If blood glucose is 12-20 mmol/L (216-360 mg/dL), persistent hyperglycemia must be demonstrated to
differentiate diabetes mellitus from acute stress-induced hyperglycemia. Retest cats 4-6h later and if still
(polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia with weight loss) with glycosuria and demonstration of either increased
plasma fructosamine, glycated hemoglobin, beta-hydroxybutyrate, or ketonuria are also useful for
differentiating diabetes from stress-induced hyperglycemia.
C. Plasma fructosamine >400μmol/L is indicative of diabetes mellitus. However some diabetic cats have a
normal fructosamine concentration and, occasionally, nondiabetic sick cats have mildly increased fructosamine
concentrations. Fructosamine increases above the reference range (400 μmol/L) within 7-10 days of marked
hyperglycemia (e.g., 30 mmol/L; 540 mg/dL) and takes 3 weeks to plateau:
1. One study showed that fructosamine concentration was only intermittently above the upper limit of
the reference range in cats with persistent hyperglycemia of 17mmol/L (mg/dL) for 6 weeks.
2. Measurement of fructosamine is most useful in situations where the clinical history is poor. However
assessing urine for glucose and ketones and hospitalizing the cat and repeating blood glucose measurements
later and if still hyperglycemic and ketonuria is absent, retest the next day to confirm persistent hyperglycemia.
The presence of ketonuria and hyperglycemia has close to a 100% specificity for diabetes mellitus.
D. Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) has been used for both diagnosis and monitoring of diabetic cats, but
is less commonly used than fructosamine. It reflects blood glucose concentration over the previous 6-8 weeks.
Some veterinary laboratories provide routine analysis and there are also point-of-care meters available.
There is considerable variation in the literature on the reference range in cats, depending on the assay used.
As with fructosamine, there is some overlap in values between normal and diabetic cats, especially those
with rmore acute onset of signs or with less severe hyperglycermia.
E.1
 Persistent hyperglycemia longer than 24 h is associated with diabetes mellitus in nearly all cats.
concomitant serious illness is diagnostic. Diabetic cats with blood glucose below the renal threshold
(14-16 mmol/L; 250-290 mg/dL) will have no or minimal signs of diabetes:
1. Occasionally, transient hyperglycemia longer than 24 h duration occurs with serious illness and
resolves within a few days. These cats likely have underlying impaired glucose tolerance:
(342mg/dL)
        ( )  (   
with appropriate doses of insulin, even if it is not clear if the hyperglycemia is illness associated.
3. Hyperglycemia longer than 24 hsuppresses insulin secretion, and therefore should be managed promply.
F. Plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate >1 mmol/L (10 mg/dL) is indicative of diabetes mellitus. However some
diabetic cats have normal plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate:
indicates ketonemia. It detects mainly oxaloacetate rather than beta-hydroxybutyrate, the predominant
ketone in cats.
b. Ketonemia detected by laboratory measurement of beta-hydroxybutyrate occurs within about
 2 weeks of marked hyperglycemia.
c. Ketonuria detectable with a urine dipstick occurs approximately 5 days after plasma beta-
hydroxybutyrate exceeds the renal threshold and is measurable in urine.
V.  Differential Diagnoses
A. Stress hyperglycemia results from struggling or illness. Beware of misdiagnosis in cats with stress
hyperglycemia from illness or struggling, which also have concomitant disease that produces similar signs to
diabetes mellitus, for example, renal failure or hyperthyroidism:
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 175
1. Stress hyperglycemia associated with struggling can increase blood glucose by as much as 10mmol/L
(180mg/dL) and result in transient hyperglycemia. However, blood glucose concentration is generally
<10 mmol/L (180mg/dL) within 4-6h if the cat is hospitalized and further struggling does not occur.
 2. Stress hyperglycemia associated with illness may persist for several days and exceed 20 mmol/L
(360mg/dL). If blood glucose remains elevated in a sick cat for 12-24h, treat the cat with appropriate
doses of insulin and closely monitor blood glucose.
cat. Generally the polydipsia in hyperthyroidism is less pronounced. Elevated thyroxine concentration is diag-
 nostic, but in sick cats with hyperthyroidism, thyroxine concentration may be high end of the normal range.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 General principles:
1. The primary goal of therapy in a newly diagnosed cat is to achieve euglycemia with remission of
insulin therapy (called diabetic remission).
2. Cats in which remission is not possible, the primary goals are to resolve the clinical signs of diabetes
 and to avoid life-threatening clinical hypoglycemia.
B. Diabetic remission:
1. Achieving noninsulin dependence or diabetic remission improves the health and quality of life for the
cat, decreases the cost and inconvenience for the owner, and should be the main goal determining choice
of therapy in newly diagnosed diabetic cats.
2. Depending on the treatment implemented, 20-90% of newly diagnosed diabetic cats will undergo
remission of their diabetes in 1-4 months (mean 2 months), if good glycemic control is achieved
3. Early control of hyperglycemia is a critical factor in achieving diabetic remission. Cats started on an
intensive protocol of glycemic control within 6months of diagnosis were significantly more likely to
achieve diabetic remission (84% remission rate) than those intensively controlled later than 6 months
(34% remission, p= 0.0002).
4. Excellent glycemic control facilitates diabetic remission by enabling beta cells to recover from glu-
cose toxicity. Excellent glycemic control is aided by use of long-acting insulin, especially glargine and
detemir administered twice daily, and a low-carbohydrate diet, together with careful monitoring of
blood glucose concentration and appropriate dose adjustments:
a. Remission rates of approximately 90% or more can be achieved in newly diagnosed diabetic cats
and the insulin dose adjusted to achieve excellent glycemic control.
 5. Remission is more common in diabetic cats recently treated with insulin-antagonistic drugs, such as
megestrol acetate or long-acting steroids, and cats without signs of diabetic neuropathy.
6. Other factors associated with remission are mean blood glucose <16 mmol/L (290mg/dL) within
 3 weeks of initiation of treatment and older age of cat. Cats less likely to achieve remission had increased
cholesterol, evidence of plantigrade stance, and required a higher maximum dose of insulin to gain
glycemic control (median dose was 50% higher 0. 66 vs 0.43 U/kg)
 Oral hypoglycemic agents:
1. Oral hypoglycemic agents work by stimulating insulin secretion and/or improving insulin sensitivity
or decreasing glucose absorption.
2. For initial management, cats with clinical signs of diabetes should be treated with insulin. Better
glycemic control will be achieved using insulin rather than oral hypoglycemic agents or diet alone:
a. Insulin is more potent in decreasing blood glucose; this enables beta cells to overcome the effects
of glucose toxicity.
3. Approximately 5-30% of cats have adequate clinical control using oral hypoglycemic drugs which
stimulate insulin secretion. The sulphonylurea, glipizide, is the most widely used oral hypoglycemic drug
for cats. However, remission rates are significantly lower (18%) using oral hypoglycemic agents than
with insulin (> 80%) in newly diagnosed diabetic cats.
4. Oral hypoglycemic drugs are most useful as sole treatment when:
a. Beta cells are not markedly suppressed by glucose toxicity (e.g., blood glucose is <14 mmol/L
[<250mg/dL]].
176 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Plasma glucose concentrations
Single meal feeding (men ± SEM) n= 12
140
High carbohydrate
/6u)
(mm
High carbohydrate + acarbose
Low carbohydrate
ntrations
120
icer
con
100
6
ose
oon6
oone
1
80
5
04
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time (h)
Figure 16.7  Blood glucose concentrations measured over 24 h in healthy cats after eating a meal of a high-carbohydrate 
(50% ME) or low-carbohydrate (6% ME) diet. Note that blood glucose concentrations after eating a high-carbohydrate diet
y pai sien aos rap aepyogien-mol e suee jae ueui jauay lueuls ane pue suea jae y oz ioi paeala uiea
the high-carbohydrate diet were administered acarbose at 25 mg/kg orally at the time of feeding. Acarbose decreases blood
glucose concentrations for &h after eating and must be dosed twice daily, even if the cat eats only once a day. Feeding a
low-carbohydrate diet is as effective as acarbose. Acarbose is useful in diabetic cats with advanced renal failure that require a
low-protein (high-carbohydrate) diet to decrease azotemia. (With permission from Rand JS, unpublished data.)
b. The owner refuses to give insulin injections. However, this decision markedly reduces the probability
of remission. A better option is to hospitalize the cat and intensively treat with insulin for 3-4 weeks
with the aim of inducing remission.
5. Acarbose decreases glucose absorption from the gastrointestinal tract and can be used as an adjunct
 to insulin therapy. However the same effect on blood glucose concentration can be achieved by feeding
a low-carbohydrate diet (Figure 16.7):
a. Acarbose is indicated in cats with advanced renal failure that require a restricted protein diet which is
consequently high in carbohydrate. Acarbose must be administered orally twice daily and is of most ben-
efit in cats eating most of their food at the time of acarbose administration rather than ad libitum eating.
D. Choice of insulin:
1. The insulin chosen will influence the probability of remission; because remission has substantial
health benefits for the cat, and cost and lifestyle benefits for the owner, choice of insulin should be
 governed by maximizing remission in newly diagnosed diabetic cats.
2. Based on one study in newly diagnosed diabetic cats, glargine was associated with the highest remission
rates (>90%) followed by beef/pork PZI (40%) and porcine lente (30%) insulin. Recombinant PZI and
beef/pork PZl have been shown to have similar efficacy in cats.
3. Detemir is reported to have similar remission rates to glargine in cats.
4. Based on remission rates in newly diagnosed diabetic cats, glargine and detemir are first choice insulins
in cats and PZI is a second choice insulin. Lente insulin is a third choice insulin, and NPH is not
recommended. Ultralente is unavailable in most countries.
5. However in many European countries, there is a legal requirement to first use an insulin licensed for
veterinary use. Use of these insulins reduces the probability of remission. It is recommended that if
remission is not achieved within 4-6 weeks of therapy with a veterinary-use insulin, detemir or glargine
should be used in newly diagnosed diabetic cats.
6. Glargine (Lantus, Aventis) or detemir (Levemir, Novo Nordisk) are the insulins of choice in diabetic
cats. They have a longer duration of action resulting in significantly higher remission rates in newly
a. Glargine and detemir should be administered twice daily to have the highest probability of remission.
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 177
7. Lente and NPH (Isophane) insulins have too short a duration of action to be recommended as a first
choice insulin in diabetic cats. Remission rates are significantly lower (30%} in newly diagnosed diabetic
cats than with glargine and detemir (>90% remission rates in newly diagnosed diabetic cats). However,
clinical control is often good, and signs of diabetes resolve in the majority of cats:
a. Lente and NPH must be given at least twice daily in all cats, and many cats would have better
glycemic control with treatment three to four times daily.
h. For approximately 2-4 h twice a day, there is minimal exogenous insulin action when using these
insulins. This means that most diabetic cats have episodes of marked hyperglycemia >16 mmol/L
(>288 mg/dL) twice daily, which exacerbates glucose toxicity, and makes diabetic remission less likely
than when using longer acting insulins.
 8. Because of the small doses used in cats, 40 U/mL insulin is preferable to 100 U/mL insulin. However,
Western countries. Using 0.3-mL insulin syringes is advantageous when using 100 U/mL insulin. Small
doses (<1U) can also be dispensed by calculating the number of drops/U for a given needle size and
discarding the appropriate number of drops prior to administering the desired dose. Hold the syringe
vertically with the needle pointing down to count drops/U, and to discard drops prior to administering
required dose.
9. Beef or pork insulins have a longer duration of action than human insulin. Most insulin licensed for
veterinary use was pork or beef/pork mixes, but many are no longer available. At the time of writing.
veterinary-use insulins are recombinant PZI (PZIVet; Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica) and porcine lente
amino acid sequence to human insulin or has substitutions to alter duration of action. The new insulin
analogues developed for use in people have very prolonged action, and therefore species of origin is no
longer a consideration in choice of insulin in cats.
10. Eating does not need to be coordinated with insulin administration, because the postprandial increase
 in blood glucose is very prolonged in cats. The postprandial period depends on the amount eaten and the
carbohydrate content of the food. For example, for diets with high carbohydrate content (>40% ME;
metabolizable energy), the postprandial increase is 12-14 h if fed twice daily and 15-24 h for once daily
(Figure 16.7).
11. Feed a low-carbohydrate diet (<15% of energy from carbohydrate) because it lowers blood glucose,
reduces insulin requirement, and increases the probability of remission (Figure 16.7):
a. It is very important to continue to feed a low-carbohydrate diet once the cat is in remission, to
continue to minimize the demand on beta cells to secrete insulin.
12. Underweight and normal bodyweight cats need a high-quality, calorie-dense feline diet that is
palatable. Feed a low-carbohydrate diet (<15% of energy) and adjust amount fed to maintain ideal body
condition:
a. A diet with 12% of energy from carbohydrate (ME) resulted in significantly higher remission rates
(68%) in diabetic cats than a diet with 26% energy from carbohydrate (42% remission). Typical
premium dry cat foods have 30-40% energy from carbohydrate and supermarket brands have
typically 40-50%. For comparison, prescription weight loss feline diets are typically around 20% t0
<30% and diabetic diets are 6-24%.
h. Because chronic kidney disease is not uncommon in diabetic cats (persistent azotemia was present
 in 17% of diabetic cats 5-10year age, and 31% diabetic cats >10years of age), dietary selection
should consider phosphate content. Nonprescription diets with very low carbohydrate that are
predominantly meat or fish based have high phosphate content and should not be fed to diabetic or
prediabetic cats with evidence of chronic kidney disease.
13. Obese cats should have their energy intake restricted to reduce body weight by 1-2% per week. Use
a low-carbohydrate diet (<15% ME) formulated for management of diabetes and obesity; diets designed
for weight loss have increased concentrations of essential nutrients. Canned diets appear to improve
satiety in some cats compared to dry food. Obesity decreases insulin sensitivity by 50%, and puts greater
achieves remission without substantial weight loss
178  Clinicat Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
14. Hypoglycemia kills cats:
a. Teach owners to recognize signs (abnormal fear, hiding, dazed drumken look, dilated pupils.
wobbliness, weaknes, head or body tremors, twitching, seizures, or coma). Signs may occur with
ittle warning in cats that have apparently excellent clinical control of their diabetes.
h. In cats with mild signs, feed the cat immediately, preferably with a palatable, high-carbohydrate
food, for example, a maintenance dry cat food for adult cats. Signs often resolve within 1-2 h.
C. For cats with marked signs, the owner should immediately start treatment with honey or a glu-
cose syrup designed for human diabetic patients, given per os. If the cat is having seizures, rub honey
aaau aun papiaond) aus unsu pneiqn aun Susn won rad aaig no sun au oui dnas no
d. Cats with severe signs require intravenous (IV) glucose or glucagon:
1. Give 50% dextrose at 0.5-1.0mL/kg IV.
2. If IV access is not possible, 50% dextrose (0.5-1.0mL/kg) or corn syrup (0.25-0.5 mL/kg)
administered per os or rubbed on the gums may be effective, but glucagon 0.2s-1.0mg
intramuscularly (IM) is superior. Glucagon must be followed by IV dextrose once seizures have
stopped to maintain blood glucose.
e. Reevaluate the cat; usually the insulin dose needs to be decreased by 50-70%. Some cats will no
longer require insulin, because their diabetes is in remission:
1. It is important to check if the cat is being inadvertently overdosed. This can occur when
different syringes have been dispensed with a different volume per gradation than was previously
used. For example, for many brands of syringes, the gradations on a 1-mL (100 U/mL) syringe
represent 2 U, whereas on a 0.5-mL syringe they represent 1 U. If owners are switched to 1-mL
syringes, the dose may be inadvertently doubled if the same number of graduations are used to
dose the insulin. Similarly, a switch from syringes designed for U100 insulin to those for U40
insulin may result in an inadvertent 2.5 times increase in dose.
f. As in humans, glargine and detemir use appears to be less frequently associated with clinical
to rigorously control blood glucose concentrations.
15. For treatment of “sick" and ketoacidotic diabetic cats see Chapter 19, Ketoacidosis.
16. Treatment of “healthy" diabetic cats:
a. If the cat is not very depressed or dehydrated, start glargine or detemir subcutaneously. The same
starting dose is suitable for PZI and lente insulin (Tables 16.1 and 16.2):
1. Use an initial dose of 0.25 U/kg ideal body weight q 12h, if blood glucose is between 12 and
19mmol/L (220-350 mg/dL)
2. Use an initial dose of 0.5 U/kg ideal body weight q 12 h,if blood glucose is 20 mmol/L (360mg/
dL) or more.
3. Alternatively, start with 1 U/cat and increase sequentially as required.
17. Response to treatment can be evaluated in a number of ways, and no individual modality should be
used as the sole parameter for adjusting therapy.
18. A combination of measurement of blood glucose concentrations together with owner assessment of
clinical signs, and changes in body weight, water intake, and urine glucose are the best indicators of
glycemic control.
19. Measurement of blood glucose concentration is the cornerstone of effective monitoring and
adjustment of insulin dose and is essential if a cat is to have the best chance of diabetic remission.
20. Glycemic control should also be monitored using clinical parameters (water intake, urine glucose
concentration, and body weight).
21. Water drunk is a better indicator of mean blood glucose and level of clinical control than is
fructosamine concentration:
a. Water drunk of ≤10 mL/kg/24 h on canned food or ≤60 mL/kg/24 h on dry food indicates excellent
glycemic control.
h. Water drunk should be measured at home on at least 2 consecutive days to provide a more
accurate estimate. Ideally, an owner should keep a daily diary of water drunk if blood glucose con-
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 179
Table 16.1  Dosing protocol for cats on long-acting insulin (glargine, detemir, and PZl) and glucose monitoring every
weeks for 4-6 weeks and then every 2 weeks until stable or in remission.
Parameter used for dosage adjustment
Change in dose
Use an initial dose 0.5 U/kg of ideal body weight BID if blood
glucose is ≥360 mg/dL (≥20mmol/L) and 0.25 U/kg BID if glucose
<360mg/dL (<20mmol/L)
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration >2 16 mg/dL (>12 mmol/L)
Increase by 0.25-1 U per injection
and/or
Use water drunk and urine glucose as a guide
to dose change
 If nadir blood glucose concentration >180mg/dL (>10mmol/L)
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration 180<216 mg/dL
Same dose
(10-12mmol/L)
and/or
If nadir blood glucose concentration is 90-1 60mg/dL (5-9 mmol/L)
If nadir glucose concentration is 65-72 mg/dL (3.5-4 mmol/L)
Water drunk, urine glucose, and next
 preinsulin glucose concentration to
determine if insulin dose is decreased or
maintained
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration <1 80mg/dL (10 mmol/L)
Reduce by 0.5-1 U per injection or if total
and/or
dose is 0.5-1 U SID or less, stop insulin and
If nadir blood glucose concentration is <65 mg/dL (<3.5 mmol/L)
check for diabetic remission
If clinical signs of hypoglycemia are observed 
Reduce by 50%
In fractious cats where blood glucose measurement is not possible,
use water drunk and urine glucose to adjust dose. However,
glycemic control will likely be inferior, and remisson delayed or not
obtained
If water intake is <20 ml/kg on wet food or <60mL/kg on dry food
Same dose
If water intake is >20 mL/kg/24 h on wet food or >60 mL/kg/24h
Increase dose by 0.5-1 U per injection
pooj Aip uo
If urine glucose is ≥2 +(scale 0-4 +)
Increase dose by 0.5-1 U per injection
If urine glucose is negative
Reduce dose every 2 weeks by 0.5-1 U per
injection. Check for diabetic remission if dose
is 0.5-1 U SID
Paranmeters for changing insulin dosage when using long-acting insulin in diabetic cats being assessed with serial blood glucose measurenent
every 3-4 h over 12 h every 5-7 days. Blood glucose concentrations are adjusted for using a glucose meter calibrated for feline blood.
centration is not being intensively monitored on a daily basis (three or more measurements daily).
Water drunk provides useful additional information if measured on 2 consecutive days prior to
measurement of a hospital generated blood glucose curve.
C. Measurement of water drunk is a valuable tool for fractious cats, where it is difficult to obtain a
 blood glucose measurement that is not affected by stress:
1. In these cats, combining water drunk with urine glucose measurements can lead to successful
management. However lack of blood glucose measurements limits how tightly blood glucose
concentration can be controlled and therefore decreases the probability of diabetic remission.
22. Monitoring urine glucose is very useful. This can be accomplished using poorly absorbent litter
material such as silicon beads or shredded paper which allows collection of urine for testing with a
180 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 16.2   Dosing protocol for cats on intermediate-acting insulin (lente and NPH).
Blood Glucose Variable
Recommendation
Use an initial dose 0.5 U/kg of lean body weight BID if
blood glucose is ≥360mg/dL (220mmol/L) and 0.25 U/Kg
BID if glucose <360mg/dL (<20 mmol/L); do not increase in
first week, but decrease if necessary
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is <210 mg/dL
Withhold insulin and check for diabetic remission
(<12mmol/L)
If preinsulin blood glucose concentration is 211-250 mg/dL
Total dose should be no more than 1 U/cat bid
(13-16 mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose concentration is <54 mg/dL (<3 mmol/L)
Dose should be reduced by 50%
If nadir blood glucose concentration is 54-90 mg/dl
Dose should be reduced by 1 U per injection if poor
(3-5mmol/L)
control of clinical signs of diabetes; dose should 
remain the same if exemplary control of clinical signs
If nadir blood glucose concentration is 91-180mg/
Dose should remain the same
dL(6-9 mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose concentration is >1 80 mg/
Dose should be increased by 1 U per injection
dL(>10 mmol/L)
If nadir blood glucose concentration occurs within 3 h of
Change to long-acting insulin
insulin administration or blood glucose returns to baseline
within 8h
If the nadir blood glucose concentration occurs at &h or
Once daily administration may be used, although twice
later
daily administration at a reduced dose is preferred
Source: Adapted from: Rand JS, Marshall R. Diabetes mellitus in cats. Vet Cfin North Am Smaff Anim Pract 2005;3S(1):211.
Parameters for changing insulin dose and frequency based on blood glucose measurenents when using intermediate-acting insulin. Insulin dose
adjustments are based on monitoring blood glucose concentration every 2 weeks with serial measurements every 2h until 2-4h after nadir.
dipstick. Alternatively, a litter box glucose detector system such as Glucotest (Nestlé Purina) can be added
to the box filler and reacts to urine with a color change to indicate glucosuria. Some owners are able to
train the cat to tolerate a dipstick applied to the urine stream during urination. Alternatively, some of the
urine-soaked litter can be mixed with water and tested with a dipstick after straining through a cloth.
a. Weekly urine glucose monitoring is helpful for detecting diabetic remission, especially in cats
treated with lente, NPH, or ultralente insulin. Cats with negative urine glucose should have blood
glucose concentration evaluated for evidence of remission.
h.
 With the long duration of action of glargine, there should be minimal periods when blood glucose
is >14 mmol/L (240 mg/dL), and hence stable cats should almost always be 0 or 1+ for urine glucose.
A value 2+ or greater likely indicates that an increase in dose is required. Urine glucose concentration
useful for increasing the insulin dose, especially in fractious cats where blood glucose measurements
cannot be obtained without considerable stress (Figure 16.8).
C.
 Because cats treated with lente, NPH, or ultralente insulin usually have hyperglycemia within
6-10 h after insulin administration, which persists until the next dose, it is not recommended to use
urine glucose measurements to increase the dose of these insulins.
23. Monitoring fructosamine or glycated hemoglobin concentration can be a useful indicator of glycemic
control in cats susceptible to stress hyperglycemia and/or if the owner is unable to measure water intake.
Fructosamine concentrations >500-550 μmol/L (normal <400 μmol/L) or glycated hemoglobin >3% to
4% (normal <2.6%) are consistent with poor glycemic control.
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 181
Monitoring—urine glucose
700
Lente
/6w)
30
500
400
20
300
Renal
200
threshold
8
10
100
Glargine
m
2
6
8
10
12
Time (h)
ung lin eag esuis sadu! ll 'ensonha ou si aaui y anaaui uoe unsui snouaoxa ou si aayn uooau
Basing dose increases on urine glucose when using lente or NPH insulin can result in severe clinical hypoglycemia; nadir
glucose concentration may be in the normal range but substantial glycosuria is still present because of the short duration of
insulin action. In contrast, because glargine and detemir have a long duration of action with a carryover effect when
administered twice daily, urine glucose is often negative in well-controlled cats and is not a specific indicator of remission.
However, when blood glucose measurements are problematic, for example, fractious cats, urine glucose concentration can be
used to increase the dose. (From Marshall and Rand, 2006. With permission.)
E. Measurement of blood glucose concentration:
1. The distribution of glucose between red blood cells and plasma is different in human beings and cats.
As a result, whole blood meters calibrated for human blood consistently read lower than the actual value
measured in feline plasma. For some meters, this translates to a value which on average is 1-2 mmol/L
(18-36mg/dL) lower than the actual serum or plasma blood glucose concentration, which translates to
20-40% less for values in the normal or hypoglycemic range.
2.  If using a glucometer internally calibrated for feline use (e.g., AlphaTRAK, Abbott Laboratories) or
a serum chemistry analyzer, use the published or laboratory reference range for cats, (e.g. 3.6-7.5 mmol/L;
65-135 mg/dL). If using a whole blood meter calibrated for human blood, aim for a target blood glucose
concentration of 2.8-5.6mmol/L (50-100 mg/dL), and if using a plasma-equivalent meter calibrated
for human blood, aim for a target blood glucose intermediate between these two ranges. Note that
plasma-equivalent test strips can be purchased for meters which previously displayed glucose values for
whole blood and will then display plasma-equivalent values.
F. Monitoring blood glucose concentration:
1. The protocol for serial blood glucose evaluation comprises administration of the cat's usual meal and
insulin dose in the morning and 12h later at night:
 a. Blood glucose is measured with a portable glucose meter every 2h (intermediate-acting insulin) or
 every 3-4h (long-acting insulin), beginning immediately prior to the morning insulin injection and
 meal, and continuing until the nadir (lowest glucose concentration) is clearly evident (intermediate-acting
 insulin) or until the next insulin injection (long-acting insulin).
2.
 Results of serial blood glucose concentration testing determine whether the insulin dose should be
increased, left unchanged, or decreased, or the type of insulin should be changed.
3.1
 Dosage changes can be made based on a number of different blood glucose parameters, and opti-
 mally should include more than one parameter. Preinsulin glucose concentration, nadir (lowest) glucose
concentration, and mean glucose concentration afe most often used. Nadir glucose concentration is the
 most important parameter to indicate increases and decreases in dose. When it is in the low end of the
 normal range, no further dose increases can be made:
a. Time to nadir and the time to return to baseline glucose concentration are used as indicators for
G. Home monitoring (Figures 16.9-16.11):
182Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Figure 16.9 Home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations have a number of advantages including more frequent blood
glucose measurements on which to base insulin dose increases. Glucose concentration is less likely to be affected by stress or
inappetence. Reduced cost and greater convenience for the owner are also factors. (a) Foot pad is warmed to facilitate blood 
(p) pue aldes pooig uiengo oi auel luisn (o 'g) aem joy y lo aemoiw ui pawem lleg loom uono isiow e suisn mo
Feline Diabetes Mellitus183
(Photo from S. Ford. With permission.)
Fgure 16.11
Home monitoring of blood using the ear veins. (Photo from S. Ford. With permision.)
1. Home monitoring provides a number of advantages including decreasing stress to the cat. Stress can
lead to spuriously high glucose concentrations if the cat struggles during exarmination or blood collction.
Home monitoring also decreases the cost and inconvenience to the owner, and typically is performed
more often than blood glucose measurements by the attending veterinarian, so it provides increased
information to make blood glucose adjustments.
184  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Glargineday1
n=8
40
(mmol/
35
30
500
25
mg/dL
20
glucc
15
250
po
10
Blo
5
1
Oh
2h
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
Time
Dose
reduced
Figure 16.12  Day 1 blood glucose concentrations measured over 12 h in newly diagnosed diabetic cats treated with glargine
at 0.5 U/kg if blood glucose ≥20mmol/L (360 mg/dL). Note range of differing responses. (From Marshall and Rand. With
permission.)
2. Typically the measurements taken are preinsulin glucose concentration, and then every 2 h until a nadir
is evident (intermediate-acting insulin) or every 3-6h until the next insulin injection (long-acting insulin).
3. If possible, a blood glucose measurement before bedtime provides additional information.
4. A dosing protocol has been developed (Table 16.3) and successfully used by committed owners
 prepared to measure blood glucose concentration at least three times daily. Remission rates of 84% were
achieved in previously reated cats swapped to the protocol within 6 months of diagnosis.
5. Owners using the protocol need to liaise closely with their veterinarian; initially appointments should
be made weekly for review of the owner's log book of blood glucose concentrations, insulin dose and
clinical signs, and for physical assessment of the cat, including body condition:
a. The owner must also know how to recognize signs of hypoglycemia and be able to take appropriate
action.
6. Adjusting insulin dose using glargine, detemir, and PZI (Table 16.1):
a. If using glargine, detemir, or PZl, adjust the dose based on nadir (lowest) glucose and preinsulin
glucose concentration (concentration immediately before next insulin injection).
h. In general, increase the dose by 1z-1 U/cat q 12h every 5-7days to achieve a nadir glucose
concentration of 5-7.5mmol/L (90-135 mg/dL) (Figures 16.12-16.15). Once clinical signs have
resolved and the blood glucose is relatively controlled, a nadir in the normal blood glucose range can
       ( o    
blood or 2.8-5.6 mmol/L (50-100 mg/dL) measured with a whole blood meter calibrated for human
 blood, and intermediate between these rwo ranges, if measured with a plasma-equivalent meter cali-
brated for human blood.
7. Adjusting insulin dose using lente insulin (or NPH or ultralente insulin) (Table 16.2):
a. In some countries, insulin registered for veterinary use must be used initially in treating diabetic
cats. In those countries, porcine lente insulin (Caninsulin or Vetsulin; Schering-Plough Intervet) is the
usually the most available product.
b. When using lente, NPH, or ultralente insulin, adjust dose based on nadir (lowest) glucose concentration
and clinical signs.
C. Do not use preinsulin blood glucose concentration to increase the dose, only to decrease the dose.
There is little appreciable insulin action after 8-10h, so for most cats on these insulins, the preinsulin
glucose concentration cannot be decreased by increasing insulin dose. In general, aim for a glucose
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 185
Table 16.3 Dosing protocol for cats on long-acting insulin (glargine and detemir) and home glucose monitoring a mininun of three tines per day.
Parameter used for dosage adjustment
Chan ge in dose
Phase 1: lnitial dose and first 3 days on glargine or
detemir
 Begin with 0.25 IU/kg of ideal weight BID
OR
If the cat received another insulin previously, increase
o reduce the starting dose taking this information
into account. Glargine has a lower potency than lente
insulin and PZl in most cats
Cats with a history of developing ketones that remain
Increase by 0.5 IU per injection
>17 mmol/L (300mg/dL) after 24-48h
If blood glucose is <3.6 mmol/L (<65mg/dL)
Reduce dose by 0.25-0.5IU per injection depending on if cat 
on low or high (>3 U/cat) dose of insulin
Phase 2: lncreasing the dose
 If nadir blood glucose concentration >17 mmol/L
Increase every 3 days by 0.5 IU per injection
(1p/8w 005<)
If nadir blood glucose concentration 11-17 mmol/L 
Supuadap uooau! iad nis'o-sz'o Ag shepe Aaa aseaul 
(1p/8u 00e-002)
on if cat on low or high (>3U/cat) dose of insulin
If nadir blood glucose concentration <11 mmol/L
Increase every 5-7 days by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection
(200mg/dL) but peak is> 11 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
depending on if cat on low or high dose of insulin 
If blood glucose is <3.6 mmol/L (< 65mg/dL )
Reduce dose by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection depending on if cat
on low or high dose of insulin
If blood glucose at the time of the next insulin
Initially test which of the alternate methods is best suited to 
injection 3.6-7.5mmol/L (65-135 mg/dL)
the ind ividual cat:
a. Feed cat and reduce the dose by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection
depending on if cat on low or high dose of insulin 
b. Feed the cat, wait 1-2 h, and when the glucose
concentration increases to >7.5 mmol/L (135 mg/dL) give the 
 normal dose. If the glucose concentration does not increase
within 1-2 h, reduce the dose by 0.25 1U or 0.51U per
injection (as above)
C. Split the dose: feed cat, and give most of dose immediately
and then give the remainder 1-2 h later, when the glucose
concentration has increased to >7.5 mmol/L (135 mg/dL)
If all these methods lead to increased blood glucose
concentrations, give the full dose if preinsulin blood glucose
concentration is 3.6-7.5mmol/L (65-135 mg/dL) and observe
Closely for signs of hypoglycemia. In general, for most cats,
the best results in phase 2 occur when insulin dose is as
consistent as possible, giving the full normal dose at the 
 regular injection time
 Phase 3: Holding the dose. Aim to keep blood
glucose concentration within 3.5-11 mmol/L
(65-200 mg/dL) throughout the day.
If blood glucose is <3.6 mmol/L (<65mg/dL)
Reduce dose by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection depending on if
cat on low or high dose of insulin
(Continued)
186 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 16.3 (Continued)
 Parameter used for dosage adjustment
Change in dose
If nadir or peak blood glucose concentration
Increase dose by 0.25-0.51U per injection depending on if cat 
>11 mmol/L (> 200mg/dL)
on low or high dose of insulin and the degree of hyperglycemia
Phase 4: Reducing the dose. Phase out insulin slowly
by 0.25-0.5 U depending on dose.
When the cat regularly (every day for at least one
Reduce dose by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection depending on if cat
week) has its lowest blood glucose concentration in
on low or high dose of insulin
 the normal range of a healthy cat and stays under
7.5 mmol/L (135 mg/dL) overall
If the nadir glucose concentration is between 3 and
Reduce dose by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection depending on if cat
3.5 mmol/L (54 and 63 mg/dL) at least three times on
on low or high dose of insulin
separate days
If the cat drops below 3 mmol/L (54 mg/dL) once
Reduce dose immediately by 0.25-0.5 IU per injection
 depending on if cat on low or high dose of insulin 
If peak blood glucose concentration >11 mmol/L
Immediately increase insulin dose to last effective dose
(>200mg/dL)
Phase 5: Remission. Euglycemia for a minimum of 
14 days without insulin.
Criteria for changing insulin dosage when using the long-acting insulin glargine (Lantus), detemir (Levenir) or PZl (ProZinc), together with
home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations in a protocol ained at achieving intensive blood glucose control. Blood glucose should
be measured at least three times daily with a glucometer. This has not been tested with veterinarian-measured blood glucose curves once
every week or 2 weeks, and Table 16.1 is recommended if intensive home monitoring is not being performed.
 NB. The blood glucose values have been adjusted for use with a portable glucose meter calibrated for feline blood (e.g-, AlphaTRAK,
Abbott Laboratories, CA, USA), where the normal blood glucose range is 3.6-7.5 mnol/L (65-135 mg/dL).* If using a whole blood meter
calibrated for human blood, aim for a target blood glucose concentration of 2.8-5.6 mmol/L (50-100 mg/dL1, and if using a plasma-equiva-
lent meter calibrated for human blood, aim for a target blood glucose intermediate between these two ranges. Note that plasmma-equivalent
test strips canbe purchased for meters which previously displayed glucose values for whole blood.
If using a meter calibrated for use with human blood which displays values for whole blood, these meters may measure 30-40% lower
in the low end of the range than glucose concentrations measured using a serum chenistry analyser or a plasnma-equivalent meter
calibrated for feline use. Meters calibrated for feline blood may read higher or lower than the actual value, in contrast to consistently lov
readings for meters validated for human blood.
Dose increases are per injection per cat.
Source: Adapted from Roomp PK, Rand Is. Intensive blood glucose control is safe and effective in diabetic cats using home monitoring and
treatment with glargine. I Feline Med Surg 2009;11(8):668-682.
* Reeve-Johnson, M, Rand J5, Vankan D et al Reference values for casual blood glucose in healthy, aged cats measured from ear or pad
sample using a portable glucose meter fVim 2012;26:755.
nadir of 7-9mmol/L (126-162 mg/dL) in the first 1-2 months. Later a nadir of 3.6-7.5mmol/L
(65-135 mg/dL) can be achieved in cats that are well controlled.
d. Rebound hyperglycemia may be a consequence of aiming for a low nadir too early in the
stabilization process, especially if using lente, ultralente, or NPH insulin or mixes. It also leads to an
apparent decrease in duration of action.
8. Diabetic remission usually occurs in the first 4 months of therapy, and occurs most often in the
46 weeks of treatment in newly diagnosed cats appropriately managed on glargine or detemir and a
a preinsulin blood glucose concentration of <12mmol/L (216 mg/dL). Decrease insulin dose gradually to
0.5-1 U/cat q 12 h or even q 24 h. If urine glucose is still negative and preinsulin blood glucose is still
low on a minimal dose of insulin, stop insulin and monitor blood glucose for 12-24 h. If blood glucose
remains low, send the cat home on a low-carbohydrate diet and reevaluate in 1 week:
a. To maximize the probability of remission, insulin dose should be slowly reduced. Premature
cessation of insulin therapy leading to hyperglycemia may delay remission for weeks or months.
Feline Diabetes Mellitus187
Glargine day 3
n=8
Increase 
40
dose
(mmol/L)
35
30
500
glucose
20
/bu
15
250
Blood
5
0
Oh
2h
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
Time
Dose
Same
reduced 
dose
Fgure 16.13 Day 3 blood glucose concentrations measured over 12 h in newly diagnosed diabetic cats treated with glargine.
Note range of differing responses. (From Marshall and Rand. With permission.)
Glargine day 10
n=8
35
Dose
glucose(mmol/L)
increase
30
25
500
20
mg/dL
15
10
250
Blood
0
oh
2h
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
Dose
Time
Decrease
reduced 
dose
Fgure 16.14
1 Day 10 blood glucose concentrations measured over 12 h in newly diagnosed diabetic cats treated with
 glargine. Note range of differing responses. (From Marshall and Rand. With permission.)
Serial blood glucose curves
Days 1-3, 10(Mean±SEM; n=6)
600
500
0/6u)
30
dglucose(mmol/L)
400
16 mmol/L=
20
300
288 mg/dL
200
=renal threshold in healthy cats
10
pOC
100
０2４681012
０２４６８１012
０２４６１０12
0 2 4 6 8 1012
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 10
Fgure 16.15
 Mean blood glucose concentrations measured over 12h in newly diagnosed diabetic cats on days 1, 3, and 10
after initiation of treatment with glargine at an initial dose of 0.5 U/kg (blood glucose ≥20 mmol/L; 360 mg/dL). Note how
rapidly mean blood glucose decreases over time. (From Marshall and Rand. With permission.)
188  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
9. Approximately 25-40% of cats in remission relapse and need to restart treatment with insulin:
a. Attention to achieving a lean body weight, feeding a low-carbohydrate diet (<15% metabolizable
energy (ME) from carbohydrate), and avoiding corticosteroid administration will help to prevent
relapse.
h. Owners should closely monitor blood glucose concentration in remission cats on a weekly basis. If
a non-fasted glucose concentration is consistently 10 mmol/L (180mg/dL) or higher (or fasted
>7.5 mmol/L; 135 mg/dL), therapy aimed at achieving euglycemia should be reinstituted. Early institu-
tion of insulin therapy facilitates glycemic control being achieved with low doses of insulin, for exam-
ple, 0.5-1 U q 12-24 h
C. If blood glucose is not being monitored at home, the owner should closely monitor water intake
and urine glucose. If these increase, insulin therapy should be immediately reinstituted (after confirm-
ing increased water consumption is associated with hyperglycemia and not other causes such as
chronic kidney disease).
1) Of relapsing cats, approximately 25% will achieve a second remission if insulin therapy is
promptly reinstituted.
H. Poorly controlled cats on high doses of insulin:
1. Cats on insulin doses of >1.5-2 U/kg that are not well controlled should be assessed to determine the
cause of the apparent insulin resistance.
  t no< r ri sd  ss  d  si  
body condition score, polyphagia, lethargy, and a poor hair coat; an insulin dose higher than normal
(1.5-2 or more IU/kg/injection); and either a nadir glucose >10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL) or hypoglycemia
3. The most common problems resulting in poor control are excessive dose when intermediate-acting
insulin is used, too short duration of insulin action, inadequate insulin action, and acromegaly (resulting
 in marked insulin resistance and inadequate insulin action).
 4. If inadequate insulin action, first nule out insulin storage or mixing (lente) problems by replacing with
a new bottle of insulin:
a. Watch the owner give the insulin to ascertain if administration technique is correct and that air
 bubbles in the insulin syringe are not reducing insulin dose (common in elderly owners with failing
eyesight).
 b. Check calibration of the glucose meter if home monitoring is being used.
C. Check that a change in type of insulin syringe has not lead to an inadvertent change in insulin dose
because of differences in volume that each graduation represents on different syringes (0.5- and 1-mL
[100-U/mL] syringes and 40-U/mL syringes).
5. Poor absorption can be differentiated from insulin resistance as a cause of inadequate insulin action
by giving regular or glargine insulin (0.5 U/kg lean body weight or 2 U/cat) IM and assessing response.
6. Check duration of action and if glucose lowering effect lasts <8-10 h, change to a long-acting insulin
such as detemir or glargine:
a. In many cats treated with the intermediate-acting insulin such as lente and NPH (isophane), these
potent insulins rapidly lower blood glucose.
b. This stimulates counter-regulatory responses, even when blood glucose concentration is not in the
hypoglycemic range.
C. The resulting counter-regulatory response increases blood glucose concentration and causes an
apparent short duration of insulin action and insulin resistance.
d. Because the glucose lowering effect of lente and NPH in cats is <8-10h, most diabetic cats have
blood glucose concentrations of 20-24 mmol/L (360-430mg/dL) at the time of the next insulin dose.
Use of a potent insulin with short duration of action such as lente, predisposes cats to premature
counter-regulation before glucose concentration reaches the hypoglycemic range, because of the rapid
decrease in blood glucose concentration from a high preinjection concentration.
e. The result is that in some cats, lente and NPH insulins may only lower blood glucose for 2-3 h.
This inherent short duration of action of lente, NPH, and ultralente insulins, coupled with the
counter-regulation response can result in insulin dosage being wrongly increased, predisposing to
hypoglycemia, rebound hyperglycemia, and insulin resistance.
Feline Diabetes Mellitus 189
7. When using lente, NPH or ultralente, some cats are mistakenly labeled problem cats when the
clinical signs are well controlled, but blood glucose measurements are less than ideal:
a. This usually occurs when there are unrealistic goals for glycemic control using intermediate
acting insulin and lack of understanding that for 2-4 h twice daily, cats treated with these insulins
have negligible blood glucose lowering effect from the insulin:
1) If the glucose nadir is below 10 mmol/L (182 mg/dL) after each insulin injection, peak action
adequate. These cats usually have good clinical control (stable body weight, good coat condi-
tion, active, alert, water drunk <100 mL/kg/24 h) but glycemic control is often inadequate to
achieve remission.
control and improve the probability of remission.
8.
If there is minimal response to insulin and dose is >1.5-2 U/kg after at least 3-4 weeks of therapy,
obtain a minimum data base of CBC, biochemistry, and urinalysis and include feline pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity (fPLi), thyroxine, and urine culture to rule out underlying causes for poor control.
9.  Identification and resolution of chronic infection can result in improved glycemic control. If sig-
nificant dental disease is present, a full dental including removal of infected tooth roots should be
performed, because in some cats diabetic control improves once chronic infection is eliminated.
10. Acromegaly is increasingly being recognized as a cause of insulin resistance and poor glycemic
controlin diabetic cats. In some cats, it results in extreme insulin resistance requiring very high insulin
doses (e.g., >5-20 U/cat q 12h) to control blood glucose. Measurement of insulin-like growth factor
(IGF-1) and imaging of the brain are recommended for diagnosis (see Chapter 41).
11. Hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 7) is a less common cause of poor control.
Vll.  Prognosis
A.
Prognosis is relatively good in insulin-dependent cats, considering average age at diagnosis is
10-13 years. Prognosis is greatly improved if remission is achieved.
Vlll. Prevention
A
 Obesity, physical inactivity, and repeated long-acting steroid or megestrol acetate administration are
preventable risk factors for type 2 diabetes.
B
 Individuals predisposed to type 2 diabetes should not become obese, and would likely benefit from a
low-carbohydrate diet:
1. Individuals predisposed to type 2 diabetes through low insulin sensitivity (as evidenced by increased
fasting glucose to insulin concentration ratio) include obese cats, aged cats of Burmese breed (European
type) and/or cats being administered corticosteroids.
2. Individuals predisposed to type 2 diabetes through reduced beta cel function include cats with
evidence of impaired glucose tolerance (blood glucose >7.3 mmol/L or 132 mg/dL at 2h after 0.5 g/kg
glucose concentrations 7.6-10 mmol/L; 135-180 mg/dL).
References and Further Readings
Crenshaw KL, Peterson ME. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of cats with diabetes melltus: 104 cases
{1992-1994)- J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;209(5):943-949.
Link K, Rand J. Changes in blood glucose concentration are associated with relatively rapid changes in circulating fructosa
mine concentrations in cats. J Fefine Med Surg 2008;10:583-592.
Marshall R, Rand J, Morton J. Insulin glargine has a long duration of effect following adrministration either once daily or
twice daily in divided doses in healthy cats. J Fetine Med Surg 2008;10:488-494.
daily glucose concentrations than lente insulin in healthy cats. J Vet Pharmacot Ther 2008;31:205-212.
Roomp K, Rand Js. Intensive blood glucose control is safe and effective in diabetic cats using home monitoring and treatrment
with glargine. J Fetine Med Surg 2009;11{8):668-682.
190Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Marshall RD, Rand JS, et al. Treatment of newly-diagnosed diabetic cats with glargine insulin improves glycemic control and
results in higher probability of remission than protarmine zinc and lente insulins. J Feline Med Suig 2009;11{8):683-691.
2000, pp. 1438-1460.
 Norman EJ, Mooney CT. Diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus in five cats with somatotrophic abnormalities. J
Fetine Med Surg 2000;2(4):183-190.
Rand JS. Use of long-acting insulin in the treatment of diabetes mellitus. In: August JR, ed. Consuttations in Fetine Internat
Medicine, London: Elsevier Saunders, 2009, vol. 6, pp. 286-296.
Rijnberk A.Acromegaly. In: Etinger SJ, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine, Sth edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2000,
pp.1370-1379.
Updated protocols for monitoring are available on: www.uq.edu.au/ccah.
CHAPTER 17
Diabetes Mellitus in Other Species
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward and Jacquie Rand
Diabetes Mellitus in Horses
Pathogenesis
● Diabetes mellitus is defined as persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria from either absolute or relative
hypoinsulinemia; insulin resistance is often an underlying factor.
● Diabetes is an uncommon condition in horses.
● Insulin resistance is commonly associated with metabolic syndrome or pituitary pars intermedia
dysfunction in this species.
Classical Signs
● Depression, polyuria, polydipsia, rough hair coat, and weight loss.
Diagnosis
● Demonstration of persistent hyperglycemia
Treatment
● Underlying conditions, if identified, must be addressed.
 Limited clinical data is available on the use of insulin, glyburide, and metformin.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Diabetes mellitus is defined as persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria from either absolute or relative
hypoinsulinemia:
1. Chronic insulin resistance is believed to be a contributing factor in most horses.
2. Horses are less susceptible than humans and cats to beta cell failure and overt diabetes as a result of
chronic insulin resistance.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
191
192   Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
3. Most cases of insulin resistance in horses are associated with pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction
(see Chapter 11), metabolic syndrome (obesity-associated) (see Chapter 20) or hyperlipemia
4. Diabetes mellitus is associated with disturbances in the secretion of, and sensitivity to, hormones
such as insulin, glucagon, catecholamines, growth hormone, and glucocorticoids.
B.
 Type 1 diabetes mellitus is a term used to describe diabetes due to immune-mediated destruction of
 e    i p sn      q 
mented cases of type 1 diabetes in horses reported in the literature.
C. Type 2 diabetes mellitus describes a form of diabetes which occurs secondary to chronic peripheral
insulin resistance associated with genotype and obesity and results in absolute or relative beta cell failure.
In the initial stages, it is associated with increased insulin concentrations:
1. Overt type 2 diabetes is rarely detected clinically in horses. However, impaired glucose tolerance and
impaired fasting glucose, stages between normal and diabetic, are relatively common in horses.
2. Impaired glucose tolerance refers to delayed return to baseline glucose concentrations after an
above the upper limit of the normal range but below those considered diabetic. Although the cut point
for diabetes in horses has not yet been defined, glucose concentrations in the range of 7-10 mmol/I
3. The metabolic syndrome represents a metabolic state between normal and overt diabetes and in horses
and ponies is more common than diabetes mellitus. It is associated with impaired glucose tolerance, insulin
resistance, obesity, and often laminitis. It may progress to overt type 2 diabetes mellitus in unmanaged
cases. See Chapter 20 for a detailed discussion of impaired glucose tolerance.
D. Other specific types of diabetes resulting from beta cell destruction or insulin resistance are uncommon in
horses. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction is relatively common in aged horses and is associated with increased
production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) resulting in insulin resistance; however it rarely progresses
to overt diabetes. Other less common causes of diabetes in horses are pancreatitis from parasite migration,
chronic pancreatitis, and ovarian tumors. Gestational diabetes has also been reported with pregnancy.
Il.Signalment
 A. No specific sex or breed predispositions have been identified, although horses at risk of developing equine
 metabolic syndrome or pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction are likely to be overrepresented, including obese
 and aged horses and ponies.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
Depression.
B.
Polyuria.
C.
o<  ) 
D.
Polyphagia.
E.
 Progressive weight loss.
F.
Rough hair coat.
G. Ketone odor.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is based on serial measurement of serum glucose to demonstrate persistent hyperglycemia
>11.1 mmol/L; 200 mg/dL:
1. Persistent hyperglycemia with hypoinsulinemia is consistent with advanced beta cell failure and
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, which may or may not be associated with underlying insulin
resistance; persistent hyperglycemia with hyperinsulinemia indicates the presence of insulin resistance
 and less advanced beta cell failure.
Glucosuria, ketonemia, and ketonuria may also be present.
C.
 Horses with diabetes mellitus should be investigated to determine the underlying cause, for example,
various test protocols are available (see Chapters 11 and 20).
Diabetes Meitus in Other Species 193
V.
Differential Diagnoses
4.
 Older horses that present with signs such as lethargy, polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss should be
screened for pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction, as this a more frequent cause of these clinical signs than
diabetes mellitus; in such cases, polyuria/polydipsia is probably the result of a direct effect of cortisol on
 antidiuretic hormone (ADH) production (unless overt diabetes has developed secondary to chronic insulin
resistance).
B.
Factors that induce temporary hyperglycemia should be excluded, for example:
1. High carbohydrate diets.
2. Stress.
3. Exercise.
 4. Glucocorticoid treatment.
 5. Sedation with xylazine and ketamine.
C
Horses with pheochromocytomas may be hyperglycemic.
Vl.
Treatment
Depends on the underlying cause and severity of the hyperglycemia:
1. If impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose are the result of inadequately managed
metabolic syndrome or pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction, management is as described for these
conditions in Chapters 11 and 20.
2. If overt diabetes mellitus with glucosuria is diagnosed regardless of cause, treatment with insulin is
indicated to protect beta cells from glucose toxicity and further loss. This has been attempted in a num-
ber of cases with variable results:
a Concurrent management of underlying conditions such as obesity or pituitary pars intermedia
dysfunction to reduce insulin resistance should be a high priority because if beta cells are protected,
overt diabetes is potentially reversible
b. Recommended doses for insulin are 0.05-0.1IU/kg/intravenously q 8-12h for regular insulin
and 0.54.0 IU/kg/intramuscularly q 12h for protamine zinc insulin.
C. During treatment, glucose concentrations must be monitored and adjustments to insulin dosing
made accordingly. Always start with a low dose.
d. Insulin administration can lead to hypoglycemic shock and as such a dextrose solution should
be available at the initiation of therapy and when adjustments are being made.
3. The role of supportive treatment cannot be overemphasized.
4. In one case of pancreatic beta cell failure, treatment with glyburide (0.02 mg/kg) and metformin
(1.9mg/kg) lowered interstitial fluid glucose concentrations to normal ranges.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Given the relatively few documented cases of diabetes mellitus in horses, limited information regarding
prognosis is available.
B.
be considered guarded for horses with overt diabetes (hyperglycemia sufficient to cause glucosuria), unless
an underlying cause is identified and successfully managed, and hyperglycemia controlled prior to advanced
beta cell failure.
C.
 Impaired glucose tolerance and impaired fasting glucose are considered prediabetic but can be
reversed if the underlying cause such as obesity or pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction is managed
successfully.
VIll. Prevention
4
There are no specific preventative measures, although early recognition and provision of appropriate
therapy for cases of equine metabolic syndrome and pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction may prevent
diabetes mellitus from developing.
194  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Diabetes Mellitus in Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents
Pathogenesis
● Spontaneous diabetes mellitus is a very uncommon condition in ferrets, rabbits, and rodents (except
degus); the pathogenesis is poorly understood.
● Extrapolation from the development of diabetic models in biomedical research suggests that genetic
and dietary factors may be implicated depending on the species.
● Iatrogenic diabetes mellitus in ferrets may occur secondary to surgical insulinoma debulking.
Classical Signs
● Lethargy, weight loss, polyuria or dysuria, polydipsia, altered appetite, and cataracts (rodents).
Diagnosis
Treatment
● For spontaneous diabetes mellitus in ferrets, protocols developed for feline patients are considered
appropriate.
● Iatrogenic postsurgical diabetes mellitus in ferrets may resolve without treatment.
● In rabbits and rodents, treatment tends to focus on dietary management and supportive care.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Ferrets:
1. Spontaneous diabetes mellitus is a very uncommon condition in ferrets and not well documented in the
veterinary literature. In theory, it may be caused by a lack of insulin, insulin resistance or a glucagonoma
but the precise pathogenesis is not completely understood.
2. Most cases of diabetes mellius in this species occur iatrogenically following aggressive pancreatectomy
to debulk insulinomas (see Chapter 23).
B. Rabbits/rodents:
1. As a general rule, diabetes mellitus is a very rare diagnosis in pet rodents and rabbits. While many
laboratory strains have been developed as models for diabetes research with the disease induced experi-
 mentally by a variety of mechanisms, the incidence of spontaneous disease in the pet population appears
to be very low and cases are limited to individual and often anecdotal case reports in species such as rats,
gerbils, guinea pigs, and chinchillas.
2. The one exception appears to be in degus. Diabetes mellitus is a commonly reported disease in this
and pelleted feeds high in starch) and become obese. The condition is thought to be noninsulin dependent
(type 2 diabetes) and may be associated with islet amyloidosis. Viral involvement has also been implicated.
Similar to dogs, degus have high aldose reductase activity in the lens. This enzyme converts glucose via an
alternative glucose reduction pathway to sorbitol. Sorbitol increases the osmotic pressure and water influx
in the lens, and if glucose concentrations are chronically increased, this results in cataract formation.
3. Genetically linked spontaneous diabetes mellitus is reported in some lines of Chinese hamsters.
The disease in this species arises due to degranulation of beta cells and a primary deficiency in insulin
synthesis.
I1. Signalment
A.]
 No known age or sex predilections have been recognized for spontaneous diabetes mellitus in these species.
B. Certain strains of laboratory rabbits and rodents have been bred specifically as models for diabetes
research in the biomedical field; however, these are rarely seen in companion animal clinical practice.
Diabetes Melitus in Other Species 195
Fgure 17.1  Early cataract formation in a diabetic degu. The ocular pathology in this animal resolved following treatment and
dietary correction. (Courtesy of Georgina Viktoria Papp and Matyas Liptovszky.)
C. Any ferret that has undergone aggressive surgical excision of an insulinoma is considered at risk of
 developing iatrogenic diabetes mellitus.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Lethargy/depression.
B. Weight loss or obesity.
C. Polyphagia or anorexia/inappetence.
D. Polydipsia.
E. Polyuria or dysuria.
F. Rapidly forming, bilateral cataracts (especially in guinea pigs and degus) which occur as the hyperglycemia
overwhelms the normal metabolic pathways in the lens (Figure 17.1).
G. Infertility (guinea pig sows).
IV. Diagnosis
A. Ferrets:
1. A persistent blood glucose concentration>22.2mmol/L (400 mg/dL) and glucosuria in a ferret with
consistent clinical signs is considered diagnostic.
 2. Low blood insulin concentrations and normal to high blood glucagon concentrations may be seen.
resistance or the presence of a glucagonoma.
 3. Concurrent ketonuria may be present in severe cases.
4. A complete blood count, serum biochemistry panel, survey radiography, and/or ultrasonography are
recommended to rule out concurrent disease. Arteriosclerosis and hepatic lipidosis, for example, have
 been reported in diabetic ferrers.
B. Rabbits/rodents:
1. The diagnosis is made on the basis of serial blood and urine sampling. Persistent glucosuria, ketonuria,
and marked hyperglycemia are highly suggestive of diabetes mellitus but note that mild glucosuria is not
considered a significant finding. The ability to diagnose this disease can be problematic due to difficulties
in obtaining repeated blood samples as a result of small patient size. Results may be confounded by the
  era ssns e da o sds ss  n
2. In guinea pigs, a glucose tolerance test has been described.
A baseline blood sample is collected and oral glucose is administered (2g/kg body weight) following an 18-h
fast. Glucose concentrations in guinea pigs with normal glucose tolerance return to baseline by 3 h.
196   Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
Handling/stress hyperglycemia.
B.
Hyperglycemia can be seen in the terminal stages of gut stasis or acute intestinal obstruction in rabbits
and rodents.
C.
 Hyperthermia can be associated with hyperglycemia
D.
 Insulin metabolism and blood glucose levels may vary in hamsters due to estivation and hibernation cycles.
Primary cystitis.
F.
 Renal disease.
G.
Pregnancy toxemia/ketosis.
H. Hepatic lipidosis.
Vl. Treatment
A. Ferrets:
1. The aim of treatment is to try to normalize the blood glucose concentration without the development
of hypoglycemia. Few ferret-specific protocols have been described. As obligate carnivores with a similar
glucose metabolism to that of cats, following the recommendations for feline patients (see Chapter 16) is
 considered appropriate.
 2. Treatment is often not required if diabetes has developed as a postoperative complication following
insulinoma debulking; the condition is often fransient and the glycemic status normalizes within
1-2 weeks after surgery.
 3. Insulin therapy is generally indicated if the blood glucose concentration is consistently >16.7mmol/L
(300mg/dL). Reported empirical starting insulin doses in ferrets include:
a. Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH, isophane insulin), 0.1-1.0 IU/ferret sc q 12 h.
h. Although ultralente (1 IU/ferret q 24 h) has been reported as efficacious, it is no longer available in
most countries.
C. Glargine is the insulin of choice in cats and would likely be of use in ferrets at a low dose (e.g.:
initial dose of 0.5 U/ferret and titrate as needed; note glargine cannot be diluted).
d. Detemir (Levemir, Novo Nordisk) is reported to be efficacious in cats and can be diluted using the
manufacturer-supplied Insulin Diluting Medium (Novo Nordisk). Although there are no reports of its
use in ferrets, based on its use in dogs and cats, and its ability to be diluted, detemir is potentially a
useful insulin for this species. In dogs and cats, the average dose is lower than for other insulins, and
a starting dose of 14 that of other insulins would be recommended (e.g., 0.1-0.2 U/kg q 12-24 h) and
titrate upwards. Small doses (<1U) can be dispensed by calculating the number of drops/U for a given
needle size and discarding the appropriate number of drops prior to administering the desired dose.
e. After beginning insulin, the dose is gradually increased until the patient is no longer hyperglycemic
or ketonuric.
4. Insulin therapy should be started in hospital for close monitoring and the ferret discharged only once
the blood glucose is stabilized between 6.9 and 11.1 mmol/L (125 and 200mg/dL).
5. Urine should be monitored closely by the owner for the presence of glucose and ketones. Realistically,
the goal is to have a trace urine glucose reading and negative ketones.
6. Offering a low-carbohydrate, high-protein diet is recommended as an adjunctive measure
B. Rabbits/rodents:
1. Dietary modification to lower fat content (or replace animal fat with vegetable fat), limit starch and
 fruit intake, and ensure a high protein and high fiber ration is provided.
2. Gradual weight reduction in obese patients is encouraged through calorie restriction, although any
3. Supportive care:
a. House on deep absorbent bedding and change daily.
h. Wet food to increase fluid intake.
C. Train the owner to give subcutaneous fluids.
d. Monitor food intake and weight closely.
e. Reduce stress by ensuring animals have appropriate companionship (e.g., house in pairs) and
provide sufficient refuges/hide areas.
Diabetes Melitus in Other Species 197
4. Medication may be considered if hyperglycemia cannot be controlled by dietary management and
supportive care. As in other species, initial doses should be conservatively low and adjusted according
to blood and/or urine monitoring. Established protocols do not exist and the literature provides only
scant information as a guide:
a Insulin,; the following initial suggested doses have been reported anecdotally:
1) NPH insulin-1 IU q 12h for a guinea pig; 2 IU q 12h for a hamster.
2) Porcine lente insulin (Caninsulin; Vetsulin)—1-2 IU/kg subcutaneously q 12h for a rat; 2 IU
q 24 h for a chinchilla.
b. Sorbinil, an aldose reductase inhibitor has been used in treating and preventing diabetic
 neuropathy and cataract formation in degus.
C. Glipizide has been reported for the treatment of type 2 noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
in a guinea pig.
Vll.  Prognosis
4
Guarded to poor in cases of spontaneous diabetes mellitus as blood glucose concentrations appear to
be difficult to regulate in these species.
B.
 Good in relation to diabetes secondary to insulinoma resection.
C.
 Spontaneous remission has been reported in guinea pigs.
VIlll. Prevention
A
 No specific preventative measures have been identified in relation to spontaneous diabetes mellitus in ferrets.
B.
Given the apparent link berween diabetes and obesity and inappropriate dietary management in
rodents, the most sensible preventative action for the life of the animal is ensuring good quality species-
appropriate nutrition, taking care to avoid overfeeding.
 In colony situations where genetically induced diabetes mellius is suspected, affected animals should
not be allowed to breed.
Diabetes Mellitus in Pet Birds and Reptiles
Pathogenesis
● The existence of true diabetes mellitus in birds and reptiles is debatable and the pathogenesis of
disease in suspect cases is unclear.
Classical Signs
● Polyuria and polydipsia.
Diagnosis
● Persistent hyperglycemia with accompanying clinical signs following exclusion of other causes of
hyperglycemia.
Treatment
● Can be challenging.
 Supportive care ± medical therapy (e.g., insulin or glipizide).
 Pathogenesis
A. The existence of true diabetes mellitus in birds and reptiles is debatable and the pathogenesis of disease in
suspect cases is unclear. The importance of insulin in birds is not well understood but it is known to be
released in response to a wide range of stimuli, not just glucose. Some birds (e.g., ducks) and reptiles (e.g.
lizards) have been shown to have high alpha cell predominance in the pancreas and elevated levels of gluca-
gon are thought to play a significant role in the maintenance of blood glucose levels. As such, glucagon excess
has been proposed as a cause of avian diabetes rather than hypoinsulinemia
198   Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
B. In reptiles, diabetes may develop secondary to the loss of pancreatic islet cell function due to severe
inflammatory disease or trauma.
C.A functional pancreatic glucagonoma has been described in a rhinoceros iguana leading to hyperglycemia
11.1
 Signalment
A.
 Avian diabetes is most commonly reported in budgerigars, cockatiels, and some larger parrots; especially
 those with a history of obesity and poor nutrition.
B.
 Of all the reptile groups, the disease appears to be most often diagnosed in chelonians.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Polyuria (which may be reported by clients of birds as diarrhea).
B.
Polydipsia.
C.
Weight loss.
D. Polyphagia.
E.
 Dehydration.
F.
Weakness, depression, anorexia, and/or regurgitation especially if concurrent disease is present.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Birds:
1. The normal range for plasma glucose in pet birds is significantly higher than that observed in mam-
mals with ranges from 10.0 to 27.8 mmol/L (180-500 mg/dL), depending on species. Values >44.4 mmol/L
(>800 mg/dL) are considered diagnostic for diabetes mellitus.
2. Ketonuria and glucosuria support the diagnosis. When collecting urine for analysis, it is important
not to contaminate the sample with feces or uric acid crystals to ensure an accurate result
3.A glucose tolerance test has been described in which 2g glucose/kg is administered orally to a fast-
 ing bird and blood glucose is measured at 0, 10, and 90 min. However rigorous guidelines on interpreta-
tion of results in pet birds do not exist.
B. Reptiles:
1.  Persistent hyperglycemia (>11.1-16.65 mmol/L; 200-300 mg/dL) with or without concurrent glucosul-
ria is consistent with a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
2.  Blood insulin levels may be useful but normal values have not been established.
C. Collection of a full history, a complete blood count, biochemistry profile, survey radiographs, viral
screening, and fecal analysis as appropriate to the case should be undertaken to rule out other causes of the
clinical signs and hyperglycemia.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A. Birds:
1. Transient stress hyperglycemia.
2. Hepatic or renal disease.
3. Gastrointestinal disease.
4. Pancreatic neoplasia.
 5. Herpes, pox, or polyomavirus resulting in pancreatic pathology.
6. Toxicity or septicemia.
7. Treatment with certain drugs, for example, medroxyprogesterone, aminoglycosides, sulfonamides,
tetracyclines, and cephalosporins.
8. Fecal or uric acid contamination of a urine sample
9. Hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 10).
10. Steroid administration.
11. Glucagonoma.
B.
Reptiles:
1.1
Hyperglycemia in reptiles is more often related to metabolic conditions, other systemic diseases and
environmental and physiologic variables than true diabetes mellitus. Some of these include:
a. Stress.
h. A recent meal (hyperglycemia may be seen for several days after a meal).
Diabetes Melitus in Other Species199
C. Season—-temperate species may have higher blood glucose levels at certain times of year, for example,
during the breeding season or at emergence from hibernation.
d. Glucose levels vary with body and liver condition.
e. Pancreatitis.
f. Renal failure.
g. Glucagonoma.
Vl. Treatment
General:
1. All attempts to rule out underlying disease and environmental or physiological influences should be
made before the use of insulin or other glucose-regulating drugs is considered.
2. On the basis of a thorough clinical evaluation, supportive care including fluid therapy, alimentation,
supplemental vitamins, liver support, and other appropriate chemotherapeutics should be initiated.
3. Treatment of any underlying or concurrent condition must be attempted if the disease is to be
adequately controlled.
B. Glucose-regulating medication in birds:
1. Treatment for suspected avian diabetic patients is not always easy or successful. Many patients are small,
owner compliance can be poor and therapeutic protocols have not been well established. In addition, insulin
should be to eliminate the clinical signs, rather than provide strict glycemic control.
2. Some birds appear to respond well to insulin therapy but in others the response can be erratic and
vary with the species and individual. The peak and duration of effect of commercially available products
is unknown in birds.
3. All birds undergoing insulin therapy should be hospitalized at the initiation of treatment. The
initial recommended starting dose is 0.1-0.2 IU/kg regular insulin. Serial blood glucose monitoring
is recommended—with samples collected before insulin and every 2-3 h after dosing for up to 24 h.
The use of urine reagent strips can be valuable in very small birds where repeat blood sampling is
problematic.
4. Once stable, longer-acting insulin (neutral Hagedorn or protamine zinc insulin) may be used.
Doses vary significantly and should be titrated. The reported range is 0.067IU/kg to 3.3 IU/kg
intramuscularly q 12-48 h.
5. In small patients, regular or NPH insulin may be diluted for accurate dosing. If product-specific dilu-
ents supplied by the manufacturer are used, these products appear to remain stable for 30 days once
the dilution should be made up immediately prior to administration.
6. At-home monitoring usually relies on urine testing (ideally twice daily) but note that samples can
be difficult to obtain if the bird is not polyuric. To avoid inducing life-threatening hypoglycemia, it is
preferable to maintain the bird at trace/low levels of glucosuria. Owners should be warned of the signs
 of hypoglycemia (extreme lethargy, weakness, and seizures).
7. Recheck visits should be arranged 1 week after initial discharge and thereafter as dictated by alterations
 in clinical condition. In well-stabilized birds, rechecks may be as infrequent as every 6 months.
8. Some clinicians report that bovine and porcine protamine-zinc insulin (Caninsulin, Vetsulin) produces
 the best long-term control of clinical signs whereas human recombinant insulin produces little or no
response.
9. Oral glipizide 0.5-1.0mg/kg q 12 h has been used with varied success.
C. Glucose-regulating medication in reptiles:
1. Little information is available regarding the specific treatment of diabetes in reptiles.
tration of mammalian insulin. For example, insulin given intracelomically may take 24 48 h to be
effective, so dosage reevaluations should only be made after several days.
3. Insulin, glipizide, and somatostatin have been used with limited success in an Asian water dragon.
4. Starting anecdotal doses for insulin therapy are:
200 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
a. Lizards: 5-10 IU/kg q 24-48 h
b. Snakes and chelonians: 1-5IU/kg q 24-48 h.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 No information is available regarding the prognosis of this condition in birds.
 For reptiles, the prognosis is poor; all documented cases of persistent hyperglycemia in reptiles in the
literature have failed to survive.
Vlll. Prevention
 No specific preventative measures have been identified for these groups.
References and Further Readings
Chen S. Pancreatic endocrinopathies in ferrets. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11:107-123.
Durham AE, Rendle DI, Newton JE. The effect of metformin on measurerments of insulin sensitivity and beta cell response in
18 horses and ponies with insulin resistance. Equine Vet J 2008;40:493-500.
Eiler H, Frank N, Andrews FM, et al. Physiologic assessment of blood glucose homeostasis via cormbined intravenous glucose
and insulin testing in horses. American J Vet Res 2005;66:1598-1604.
Harcourt-Brown F Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Edinburgh: Butterworth Heinemann, 2002.
Hoefer H, Latney L. Rodents: Urogenital and reproductive system disorders. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat
of Rodents and Ferrets. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 150-160.
Hudelson KS, Hudelson PM. Endocrine considerations. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, eds. Clinicat Avian Medicine, Vol. 2.
Florida: Spix Publishing, 2006, pp. 541-557.
2005;226(542):584-588.
Keeble E. Rodents: Biology and husbandry. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rodents and Ferrets. Gloucester:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 1-17.
Lawrie A. Systemic non-infectious disease. In: Harcourt-Brown N, Chitty J, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2005, pp. 245-265.
McArthur S, McLellan L, Brown S. Gastrointestinal system. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, eds. BSAVA Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 210-229.
Montiani-Ferreira F Rodents: Ophthalmology. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rodents and Ferrets.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 169-180.
Murphy JC, Crowell TP, Hewes KM, et al. Spontaneous lesions in the degu. In: Montali RJ, Migaki G, eds. The Cormparative
Pathotogy of Zoo Anirmats. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1980, pp. 437-444.
Orr H. Rodents: Neoplastic and endocrine disease. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rodents and Ferrets.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 181-192.
Pratt SE, Geor RJ, McCutcheon LJ. Repeatability of 2 methods for assessment of insulin sensitivity and glucose dynarmics in
horses. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19:883-888.
Quesenberry KE, Rosenthal KL. Endocrine diseases. In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbit and Rodents
Clinicat Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2004, pp. 79-90.
Schott HC, I. Polyuria and polydipsia. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internat Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis:
Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1214-1218.
Stahl SJ. Hyperglycemia in reptiles. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders Elsevier,
2006, pp. 822-830.
Toribio RE. Endocrine pancreas. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds.Equine Internat Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis:
Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1260-1262.
CHAPTER 18
Canine Diabetic Emergencies
Rebecka S. Hess
Pathogenesis
● Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a severe form of complicated diabetes mellitus (DM) which requires
emergency care.
● Acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities can be life threatening.
● The hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS) is a rare complication of canine DM which also
requires emergency care.
● The hyperosmolarity of the HHS is associated with hypernatremia, but it is not associated with 
hyperglycemia.
Diagnosis
● In diabetic dogs, a venous pH of < 7.35 and a blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration > 2.0 mmol/L
 or presence of ketones in the urine confirm a diagnosis of DKA.
● A serum osmolality >310 mOsm/L has been used to define hyperosmolarity with severe cases having
osmolality >330 mOsm/L).
Treatment
● Fluid therapy and correction of electrolyte abnormalities are the two most important components
of therapy for DKA
● Following 6h of fluid therapy and electrolyte supplementation for DKA, hyperglycemia is corrected
by administration of a rapidly acting insulin.
● Presence of concurrent disease increases the risk for DKA or HHS and must be addressed as part of
the diagnostic and therapeutic plan.
● Bicarbonate therapy is usually not needed to treat DKA, and its use is controversial.
● Treatment of HHS is similar to treatment of DKA, except that special attention must be given to
slow correction of hypernatremia with 0.9% saline so that the serum sodium concentration decreases
no more than 0.5 mEq/L/h
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
201
202 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
Prognosis
● About 70% of dogs treated for DKA are discharged from the hospital after a median of 6 days of
hospitalization.
● The degree of base deficit is associated with outcome in dogs with DKA.
● The prognosis for HHS is considered guarded to poor.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a severe form of complicated diabetes mellitus (DM) which requires
emergency care. Ketones are synthesized from fatty acids as a substitute form of energy, because glucose
does not enter cells. Excess keto-acids results in acidosis and severe electrolyte abnormalities, which can be
life threatening:
tration cannot meet metabolic demands:
 a. Ketone bodies are synthesized from acetyl-CoA, which is a product of mitochondrial β-oxidation
of fatty acids:
1) The ATP-dependent oxidation of fatty acids is associated with breakdown of two carbon
fragments at a time and results in formation of acetyl-CoA.
2) In nondiabetics, acetyl-CoA and pyruvate enter the citric acid cycle to form ATP. However, in
diabetics, glucose does not enter cells in adequate amounts and pyruvate production by glycolysis
is decreased. The activity of the ciric acid cycle is, therefore, diminished, resulting in decreased
acetyl-CoA utilization.
 3) The overproduction and underutilization of acetyl-CoA leads to its accumulation.
h. Synthesis of acetyl-CoA is also facilitated by decreased insulin and increased glucagon concentrations:
1) The anabolic effects of insulin include storage of fatty acids in adipose tissue.
2) Similarly, the catabolic effects of glucagon include lipolysis.
3) The resultant decreased fatty acid uptake into adipose tissue and increased lipolysis result in
elevated acetyl-CoA concentration.
C. Acetyl-CoA is the precursor used for ketone body synthesis.
d. The three ketone bodies synthesized from acetyl-CoA include beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate,and
acetone. Acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate are anions of moderately strong acids; therefore, their
accumulation results in ketotic acidosis. Metabolic acidosis may be worsened by vomiting, dehydration,
and renal hypoperfusion.
 2. Metabolic acidosis and the electrolyte abnormalities which ensue are important determinants in the
outcome of dogs with DKA.
3. It was previously believed that dogs that develop DKA have zero or undetectable endogenous insulin
concentration:
a. However, in a study that included seven dogs with DKA, five of them had detectable endogenous
serum insulin concentrations.
b. The same study found that two of seven dogs with DKA had endogenous serum insulin concentra-
tion within the normal range.
C. Therefore, it is possible that other factors, such as elevated glucagon concentration, contribute to
development of DKA. Glucagon concentration may be elevated due to concurrent disease.
glycemic state (HHS) is a rare complication:
1. Traditionally, DKA and HHS have been thought of as two extremes of diabetic complications with DKA
characterized mainly by ketosis and acidosis, and HHS characterized by severe hyperglycemia and dehydration:
a. In human beings, DKA was believed to develop acutely, over a 24-h period in young patients with
type I DM, whereas HHS was thought to develop over a 10-day period in older patients with type II DM.
Canine Diabetic Emergencies 203
h. However, more recently, it has become apparent that some aspects of DKA and HHS can develop
simultaneously in an individual.
C. A mixed state of HHS and DKA is detected in about 30% of humans examined for a diabetic
emergency. Additionally, HHS has been well documented in young patients, including pediatric
patients with types I or II DM.
 2. Therefore, strict guidelines for clearly differentiating HHS from DKA may not always be clinically
important.
3. The American Diabetes Association has recommended that the terms hyperosmolar nonketotic diabete
sis may be present in these patients and that varying degrees of mental alterations may be noted.
1.
Signalment
The median age of dogs with DKA is 8 years (range, 8 months to 16 years).
C.
 Because HHS is rare, data are limited but signalment of affected dogs appears to be similar to those
observed in dogs with DKA.
Il. Clinical Signs
A. Clinical signs and physical examination findings in dogs with DKA may be attributed to chronic
untreated DM, presence of concurrent disease, or the acute onset of ketoacidosis:
1. The most common clinical signs of dogs with DKA are polyuria and polydipsia, lethargy, inappetence
or anorexia, vomiting, and weight loss.
2. Common abnormalities noted on physical examination of dogs with DKA are subjectively over
weight or underweight body condition, dehydration, cranial organomegaly, abdominal pain, cardiac
murmur, mental dullness, dermatologic abnormalities, dyspnea, coughing or abnormal lung sounds, and
cataracts. Some of the findings may be due to concurrent disease and not DKA itself.
B. Concurrent disease has been confirmed in approximately 70% of dogs with DKA:
1. The most common concurrent diseases noted in dogs with DKA are acute pancreatitis, bacterial
urinary tract infection, and hyperadrenocorticism.
2. It is possible that presence of concurrent disease results in elevated glucagon concentration and
increased risk of DKA.
C. Because HHS is rare, data are limited, but clinical signs appear to be similar to those observed in dogs
with DKA.
IV. Diagnosis
 A. In diabetic dogs, a venous pH of < 7.35 and a blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration >2.0 mmol/L
or presence of ketones in the urine confirm a diagnosis of DKA.
B. A thorough diagnostic evaluation is warranted because most dogs with DKA have a concurrent disorder.
Successful management of the patient depends on the clinician's ability to diagnose and treat the concurrent
disorder.
C. Clinicopathologic abnormalities are helpful in establishing a diagnosis of DKA and pursuing diagnosis
of a concurrent disorder:
1. Complete blood count: Approximately 50% of dogs with DKA have a nonregenerative anemia
(which is not associated with hypophosphatemia), left-shifted neutrophilia, or thrombocytosis.
2. Chemistry screen:
a. Persistent hyperglycemia is apparent in all dogs diagnosed with DKA, unless they are insulin treated.
b. Alkaline phosphatase activity is elevated in almost all dogs with DKA.
C. Alanine aminotransferase activity, aspartate aminotransferase activity, or cholesterol concentra-
tion are increased in about half of the dogs with DKA.
d. Electrolyte abnormalities are common.
3. Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia:
  s    -o  si n  s o 
However total body potassium is reduced.
204  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
h. Hyperkalemia may develop as excess positively charged hydrogen ions shift from the extracellular
fluid into cells. Positively charged potassium ions then shift out of cells to compensate for the electric shift.
d. Thus, initially, an animal with DKA may appear to have hyper- or normokalemia.
e. However with rehydration, potassium ions are lost from the extracellular fluid and true hypokalemia
becomes apparent.
f. Hypokalemia may be exacerbated by binding of potassium to keto-acids, vomiting, and anorexia.
h. The most important clinical significance of hypokalemia in DKA is profound muscle weakness
which may result in respiratory paralysis in extreme cases.
4. Hypophosphatemia:
 a Most dogs are normo- or hypophosphatemic at diagnosis, but some have hyperphosphatemia.
Total body phosphorus is reduced.
h. Hyperphosphatemia develops when phosphate shifts from the intracellular space to the extracellular
as a result of hyperglycemia, acidosis, and hypoinsulinemia
C. Osmotic diuresis or fluid therapy along with insulin therapy causes extracellular phosphate depletion
leading to whole body phosphate depletion.
d. Hypophosphatemia related to DKA has been associated with seizures in one dog.
e. Severe hypophosphatemia can lead to hemolysis; however, anemia can occur in dogs with DKA in
the absence of hypophosphatemia as well.
 5. In contrast to humans, dogs with DKA usually do not have low ionized magnesium (iMg2+ concentration)
at the time of initial examination. In 78 dogs with uncomplicated DM, 32 dogs with DKA, and 22 control
sop gono pue a neduoun m sop on prdo v
6. Hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and decreased ionized calcium concentration have also been documented
in about 50% of dogs with DKA.
  n  i   s    i d s  s  
approximately 33% of dogs with DKA and is not correlated with degree of acidosis.
8. Urinalysis:
a. It is usually indicative of glucosuria.
b. Proteinuria may also be apparent.
C. Ketonuria may not be detected because the nitroprusside reagent in the urine dipstick reacts with
acetoacetate and acetone but not with beta-hydroxybutyrate, the dominant ketone body in DKA.
Measurement of serum beta-hydroxybutyrate is more sensitive than measurement of urine ketones.
d. The number of white blood cells (WBC) per high power field is usually 5 or less despite the fact
that 20% of dogs with DKA have aerobic bacterial growth on urine culture of a sample obtained by
cystocentesis. Lack of pyuria is likely due to immunosuppression of diabetics and decreased ability to
mobilize WBC to the site of infection
9. Aerobic urine culture is warranted in all dogs with DKA because urinary tract infections are common,
and a urine sediment may not be an effective screening test for an infection in these dogs.
D. Additional testing such as adrenal or thyroid axis testing, pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity measurement,
liver function tests, or liver biopsy will depend on the need to evaluate dogs for specific concurrent disorders,
depending on their clinical signs and physical examination and clinicopathologic abnormalities.
E. Imaging modalities including abdominal radiographs or ultrasound or thoracic radiographs may also be
needed in order to evaluate concurrent disorders.
F.1
Diagnostic criteria for HHS:
1. As defined for humans by the American Diabetes Association:
a Criteria include a blood glucose concentration > 600 mg/dL (33 mmol/L), venous pH >7.30, serum
bicarbonate >15 mEq/L, a small or no detectable amount of urine or serum ketone concentration,
effective serum osmolality >320 mOsm/kg, and altered mental status.
h. Effective osmolality, which does not depend on blood urea nitrogen, can be calculated using different
formulas including the following: Effective Ps = 2xplasma [Na*] + [glucose mg/dL]/18
2. In diabetic dogs, a diagnosis of HHS is based on documenting hyperosmolarity in a diabetic:
Canine Diabetic Emergencies 205
a. However, data regarding the definition of hyperosomlality in diabetic dogs is lacking.
b. In one study of 14 diabetic dogs, normal osmolality (measured or effective) was defined as
<310mOsm/L and marked hyperosmolarity was defined as >330mOsm/L.
 osmolality is >320 mOsm/kg.
d. Effective osmolality in diabetic dogs is correlated to Na, but not to glucose concentration, which
has a minor impact.
3. A search for a concurrent disease is important in HHS
V. Differential Diagnoses
A
 Differential diagnoses for ketosis include DKA, acute pancreatitis, starvation, low carbohydrate diet,
persistent hypoglycemia, persistent fever or pregnancy.
B. Differential diagnoses for metabolic acidosis include DKA, renal failure, lactic acidosis, toxin exposure,
severe tissue destruction, severe diarrhea, or chronic vomiting.
C. In nondiabetics, stress hyperglycemia, postprandial hyperglycemia, or hyperglycemia secondary to
hyperadrenocorticism, acromegaly, pheochromocytoma, pancreatitis, and other conditions, is usually mild
in comparison to the hyperglycemia that develops in DKA.
D. Additional causes of hyperosmolarity or hypernatremia in diabetic dogs may include excessive gastroin-
testinal or renal fluid loss, or rarely, concurrent diabetes insipidus, inadequate water intake, primary hyper-
aldosteronism, salt poisoning, or iatrogenic hyperosmolar intravenous (IV) fluid administration.
Vl. Treatment
A. Administration and careful monitoring of IV fluid therapy is the most important component of treat-
ment for DKA:
1. No controlled veterinary studies exist that allow for a sound recommendation as to which commer-
cially available isotonic crystalloid solution is best to use.
2. The American Diabetes Association advocates the use of 0.9% saline for treatment of DKA because
of its relatively high sodium concentration. Since most published literature advocates the use of 0.9%
saline (albeit in humans), it is also recommended here for use in dogs.
3. Regardless of which fluid type is used, the dog must be monitored carefully, in particular in regard to
hydration, mental status, and electrolyte concentrations:
a. Sodium imbalances should not be corrected at a rate that exceeds 0.5 mmol/L/h
h. The rate of fluid administration depends on the percent dehydration of each dog, presence of
other conditions (such as heart disease), and ongoing losses (e.g., due to vomiting and diarrhea in
acute pancreatitis). However, dogs with DKA are generally very dehydrated and, therefore, the rate
offluid administration is usually high.
C. Fluid therapy may contribute to a decrease in blood glucose concentration by improving renal
 perfusion and decreasing the concentration of counter-regulatory hormones, most importantly glucagon.
d. Fluid therapy also contributes to resolution of the acidosis.
B. Correction and monitoring of electrolyte abnormalities is the second most important component of
tion rates may be required:
1. A dog that appears hyperkalemic at the time of initial examination may become hypokalemic shortly
 ai ue  ssod nsie q pien aq un eaoa 'uiq si ar p r
tinuous rate infusion (CRI) at a rate that should not exceed 0.5 mEg/kg/h (Table 18.1).
2. When phosphate concentration is <1.5 mg/dL (0.5 mmol/L), hypophosphatemia is corrected with a
CRI of potassium phosphate (the solution contains 4.4 mEq/mL of potassium and 3 mmol/mL (93 mg/
mL) of phosphate at a rate of 0.03 mmol/kg/h phosphate IV. Administration of potassium must be taken
into account when giving potassium phosphate for correction of hypophosphatemia.
3. A magnesium sulfate solution (containing 4 mEq/mL) given IV as a CRI of 1 mEq/kg/24 h has been
used successfully for correction of hypomagnesemia:
a. Toxicity of erroneously administered IV magnesium has been reported in one dog with acute renal
disease. Signs of magnesium toxicity included vomiting, weakness, generalized flaccid muscle tone,
mental dullness, bradycardia, respiratory depression, and hypotension.
206 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animais
Table 18.1 Potassium supplementation in hypokalemic dogs.*
Serum potassium 
Potassium (mEq) added to 250-ml
concentration (mmol/L)
fluid bag
1.6-2
20
2.1-2.5
15
2.6-3.0
10
3.1-3.5
7
*Not to exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h.
Table 18.2 Administration of IV insulin in dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis.*
 Blood glucose concentration 
Rate of administration
(mg/dL and mmol/L)
Fluid composition 
(mL/h)
>250 mg/dL (14 mmol/L)
IDeN %6'0
10
200-250 mg/d L
0.45% NaCI + 2.5% dextrose
7
(11-14 mmol/L)
150-200 mg/dL
0.45% NaCI+ 2.5% dextrose
5
(8-11 mmol/L)
100-150 mg/dL
0.45% NaCI + 5% dextrose
5
(5.5-8mmol/L)
<100 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/ L)
0.45% NaCI + 5% dextrose
 Stop fluid administration
*2.2 U/kg of regular crystalline insulin added to 250 mL of 0.9% NaCl solution.
h. Care must be taken to administer IV magnesium only to patients that have documented decreased
iMg concentration.
C. Most dogs with DKA have increased iMg concentration at admission, and, therefore, they do not
require IV magnesium supplementation at that time.
4. Hyponatremia can be corrected by administering a solution of 0.9% saline.
C. Correction of hyperglycemia in DKA is performed by administering a rapidly acting insulin. Insulin treat-
ment is started after 6h of fluid therapy. At the moment, regular insulin is most commonly used and recom-
mended (Humulin R?, Novolin R?) (Table 18.2):
1. Regular insulin is administered as an IV CRI or intramuscularly (IM).
 2. When IV regular insulin is administered as a CRI, blood glucose is measured every 2 h.
:ou aaaa panseu si asonie pooia pue rnou aaa uaig si nI ' panaispe si unsu remar ua 't
a. The initial dose of IM therapy is 0.2 U/kg regular insulin IM, followed by 0.1 U/kg regular insulin
IM 1 h later.
b. Treatment with IM regular insulin is continued with doses of 0.05 U/kg/h, 0.1 U/kg/h, or 0.2 U/
kg/h if blood glucose drops by more than 75 mg/dL/h (4mmol/L), between 50-75 mg/dL/h
(3-4 mmol/L), or by <50 mg/dL/h (3 mmol/L), respectively.
4. Several new rapidly acting insulin products have been introduced to the market and are being used
successfully in management of humans with DKA. The use of one such insulin, Lispro, is safe and effec-
tive in dogs with DKA.
5. A dog can be transitioned to intermediate- or long-acting insulin, given subcutaneously, when it is
eating full meals reliably:
Canine Diabetic Emergencies 207
 a. When the dog reaches a stage in which its appetite is predictable and good, administration of the
short-acting insulin is discontinued several hours before the expected administration of the interme-
diate- or long-acting insulin.
h. Moderate hyperglycemia should be present when the subcutaneous insulin is administered.
L1.
 Acidosis in DKA patients is usually corrected with IV fluid administration and insulin therapy alone.
The use of bicarbonate treatment for correction of acidosis in humans with DKA is controversial
1. The American Diabetes Association recommends bicarbonate supplementation only in DKA patients
 in which arterial pH remains <7.0 after 1 h of fluid therapy.
 2. Possible risks associated with bicarbonate treatment in humans with DKA include exacerbation of
hypokalemia, increased hepatic ketone production, paradoxical cerebrospinal fluid acidosis, cerebral
edema, and worsening intracellular acidosis due to increased carbon dioxide production.
3. If the American Diabetes Association guidelines were to be applied to dogs, bicarbonate treatment
would not be indicated in most dogs with DKA, because the majority have a venous pH >7.0.
4. A recent retrospective study of 127 dogs with DKA reported that both the degree of acidosis and IV
sodium bicarbonate therapy were associated with poor outcome. It is not known if bicarbonate therapy
 5. Should the clinician deem bicarbonate therapy necessary, despite the risks associated with such
therapy, a possible bicarbonate treatment protocol may be to administer sodium bicarbonate at
        [s  xn x     
ing venous pH every hour:
a. However, it is important to note that no studies exist to support the above or any other specific
bicarbonate treatment protocol in dogs with DKA.
h. The American Diabetes Association recommends treating DKA patients that maintain a pH of
s e  s io oi e aqq s bz um a p go I re o />
that does not exceed 155 mEq/L of sodium, over 1h. The pH of these patients is monitored every 1 h
and treatment is repeated until pH is 7.0 or greater.
E.
 Presence of concurrent disease is believed to contribute to development of DKA. Therefore, identifica-
e panoarp sauean aiedoidde an luiond pe eq aop yoe ieu aseasip iuanuoo soads aui po uon
alleviating the concurrent disease is indicated. It is possible that treatment of concurrent disease decreases
glucagon secretion and contributes to improved diabetic regulation and resolution of DKA.
Treatment of HHS is similar to treatment of DKA in that dehydration, hyperglycemia, electrolyte
abnormalities, and concurrent disease must be addressed:
1. However, in treatment of HHS, it is crucial to lower serum sodium concentration slowly, in order to
decrease the risk of fluid shifting from the extracellular compartment to the brain.
2. During the hyperosmolar state, idiogenic osmoles are formed in the brain, in order to protect the
brain from fluid loss. However, once formed, these idiogenic osmoles are cleared slowly, and a rapid
decrease in serum osmolality due to rapid lowering of blood sodium concentration could lead to a fluid
shift into the brain, and brain edema.
3. Therefore, it is crucial that serum sodium concentration be corrected at a rate of <0.5 mEq/L/h:
a.
 0.9% saline is the safest fluid, as it is likely to decrease sodium concentration slowly.
b. However, careful monitoring of electrolytes is indicated, as in DKA, to ensure that correction of
 electrolyte concentrations is appropriate.
Vll. Prognosis and Prevention
A.
 Most dogs (70%) treated for DKA survive to be discharged from the hospital. Median hospitalization
time for dogs with DKA is 6 days:
1. At least 7% of dogs develop recurring episodes of DKA.
 2. Dogs with coexisting hyperadrenocorticism are less likely to be discharged from the hospital.
3. The degree of base deficit is associated with outcome.
B. It is possible that early intervention and prevention of disease concurrent with DM may decrease the
 intervention and insulin therapy may prevent complications such as DKA.
208 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
C. Mortality in humans with HHS is high, and is higher than that reported in humans with DKA:
1. Mortality in humans with HHS ranges from 15-50% but is difficult to determine due to presence of
2. Although the prognosis is also believed to be guarded to poor in dogs with HHS, specific numbers or
large studies supporting this belief are lacking.
References and Further Readings
American Diabetes Association. Hyperglycermic crises in adult patients with diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2739-2748.
Duarte R, Simoes DMN, Franchini ML, et al. Accuracy of serum beta-hydroxybutyrate measurerments for the diagnosis of
diabetic ketoacidosis in 116 dogs. JVIM 2002;16:411-417.
Durocher LL, Hinchcliff KW, DiBartola SP, et al. Acid-base and hormonal abnormalities in dogs with naturally occurring
diabetes mellitus. JAVMA 2008;232:1310-1320.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Diabetic ketoacidosis. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine Endocrinology and
Reproduction. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2004.
Fincham SC, Drobatz KJ, Gillespie TN, et al. Evaluation of plasma-ionized magnesium concentration in 122 dogs with
diabetes mellitus: A retrospective study. J VIM 2004;18:612-617.
Ganong WF. Review of Medicat Physiology, 18th edn. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997.
Hume DZ, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Outcome of dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis: 127 dogs {1993-2003). JVIM 2006;20;547-555.
Kitabchi AE, Nyenwe EA. Hyperglycemic crises in diabetes mellitus: Diabetic ketoacidosis and hy perglycemic hyperosmolar
state. Endocrinot Metab Clin North Amm 2006;35:725-751.
Nugent BW. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state. Emerg Med Clin North Am 2005;23:629-648.
Parsons SE, Drobatz KJ, Lamb SV, et al. Endogenous serum insulin concentration in dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis. J Vet
Emerg Crit 2002;12:147-152.
Schaer M. Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycernic hyperosrmolar syndrome. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of
Veter inary Internat Medicine, 7th edn. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2010.
Schermerhorm T, Barr SC. Relationships between glucose, sodium and effective osmolality in diabetic dogs and cats. JVECC
2006;16(1):19-24.
Sears KW, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Use of lispro insulin for treatment of dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis. JVIM
2009;23:696(#40a).
Willard MD, Zerbe CA, Schall WD,et al. Severe hypophosphaternia associated with diabetes mellitus in six dogs and one cat.
JAVMA 1987;190:1007-1010.
CHAPTER 19
Feline Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Jacquie Rand
Pathogenesis
● Diabetic ketoacidosis is caused by severe insulin deficiency.
Classical Signs
● In its mild form, cats with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) appear as typical diabetics.
● In the severe form, cats can present moribund or severely depressed and have marked dehydration.
● Preceding history of polydipsia, polyuria, and weight loss.
● Ketone odor on the breath.
Diagnosis
● Marked hyperglycemia, ketonemia, ketonuria, and acidosis.
Treatment
● Fluid expansion, provision of NaCl-containing fluids, and insulin administration to rapidly correct 
acidosis.
● Severe form constitutes a medical emergency.
1.1
 Pathogenesis
A.
 The extent of insulin deficiency in diabetic ketoacidosis and the severity of electrolyte and acid-base
derangements, as well as the presence of other comorbidities directly impact the severity of disease. Signs
range from those typical of diabetes to a severe medical emergency requiring immediate intervention:
1. Severe insulin insufficiency leads to a rapid breakdown of fat, releasing fatty acids into the circulation
hepatic metabolism of free fatty acids to triglycerides.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
209
210 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
 2. Free fatty acids are oxidized to acetoacetate which is converted to beta-hydroxybutyrate or acetone
which can be used as an alternate to glucose as an energy source (see Chapter 18, Canine diabetic
emergencies, for more details of biochemistry).
3. Insulin insufficiency reduces intracellular glucose concentrations to a level that is insufficient for
normal metabolism, resulting in some tissues utilizing increased circulating ketones instead of glucose as
their main energy source.
 4. I uncomplicated by precipitating conditions, ketonemia and ketoacidosis can occur approximately
12 and 16 days, respectively, after glucose-stimulated insulin concentrations are suppressed to fasting
levels. Ketoacidosis can occur as early as 4 days after ketonemia is first detected.
 5. Marked suppression of insulin secretion occurs on average 4 days after blood glucose concentrations
reach 30 mmol/L (540 mg/dL).
6. Increased concentrations of counter-regulatory hormones (e.g., cortisol, glucagon, catecholamines,
and growth hormone) may also be involved.
 7. Although ketoacidosis can occur purely as a result of marked insulin deficiency, in many cats DKA
appears to be associated with precipitating factors such as infection and pancreatitis, especially necrotiz-
ing pancreatitis.
 8. The ketonemic state causes central nervous system depression and ketones act on the chemoreceptof
trigger zone to produce nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. In the kidney, ketones promote osmotic water
loss in the urine.
9. Dehydration results from inadequate fluid intake in the face of accelerated water loss secondary to
glucosuria and ketonuria. The subsequent drop in blood volume reduces tissue perfusion and compounds
the acidosis through lactic acid production.
10. In severe cases of DKA, cats have marked dehydration and extensive loss of electrolytes including
sodium, potassium, magnesium, and phosphate. Some of these plasma deficiencies are compounded by
the intracellular redistribution of electrolytes occurring after insulin therapy.
11. Due to the extreme electrolyte and fluid imbalance, cats with severe DKA can readily develop renal
failure. Hyperviscosity, thromboembolism, and severe metabolic acidosis may also be present. All of
these conditions are potentially fatal, and a significant number of cats die from the severe form of dia-
betic ketoacidosis.
12. Clinically and biochemically, cats with DKA and/or hyperosmolar hyperglycemia can be classified
into four different categories, which will determine treatment and prognosis:
a. Cats with minimal depression or dehydration but ketones and acidosis are detected biochemically
b. Marked depression and dehydration are present along with severe elecrrolyte abnormalities in the
absence of other life-threatening conditions. These cats respond rapidly to appropriate fluid, electro-
lyte, and insulin therapy and are generally eating and able to be managed on subcutaneous (SC)
insulin within 1-2days.
C. Severe ketoacidosis compounded by other life-threatening conditions, typically acute necrotizing
pancreatitis, sepsis, and/or acute renal failure. Typically these cats require longer than 1-2days of
appropriate therapy before they are eating and can be managed with SC insulin. Of cats dying with
ketoacidosis, acute necrotizing pancreatitis was a frequent cause of death.
d. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (formally called nonketotic hyperosmolar diabetes) is a
rare diabetic emergency. These cats have extreme hyperglycemia (>33 mmo/L [600 mg/dl],
hyperosmolality (>350 mOsm/L), severe dehydration, and severe depression. In the classical
criteria for nonketotic hyperosmolar diabetes, ketosis and acidosis are absent, but the American
Dia betes Association recommends the use of the term hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state in rec-
ognition that approximately 30% of human patients have a mixed condition with some ketosis
and acidosis.
B. Risk factors for developing diabetic ketoacidosis include:
1. Undiagnosed diabetes mellitus.
2. Inadequate insulin dose or dosing frequency or missed insulin dose(s)
 3. Intercurrent illnesses such as sepsis or acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
Feline Diabetic Ketoacidosis  211
 Signalment
A.
Signalment is that for diabetic cats, that is, typically cats >8years of age, with most cats between
10-14years of age.
B. Risk factors for diabetes and hence DKA include senior age, male gender, obesity, Burmese breed of
European blood lines, and physical inactivity. In USA, Maine coon, domestic longhair, Russian blue, and
Siamese are overrepresented.
Ill. Clinical Signs
of body water on initial presentation.
B. Cats with severe diabetic ketoacidosis often present recumbent with marked dehydration, hypovolemia,
metabolic acidosis, and shock.
C.
 Ketone odor, which has a similar smell to nail varnish remover or acetone, may be evident on the breath.
D. Typically there is a history of polydipsia and polyuria for weeks to months and several weeks of prior
weight loss. However, in some cats, owners do not report polyuria and polydipsia. Lack of owner awareness
of the initial classical signs of diabetes puts cats at significant risk of developing DKA.
E. Cats with mild diabetic ketoacidosis display typical diabetic clinical signs and may have the same preced.
ing history as cats with a more serious form of the disease, but can appear bright and alert on presentation.
F. 
 Severe forms of the disease constitute a potentially fatal medical emergency that needs immediate atten-
tion to correct dehydration, electrolyte disturbances, and acidosis.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Most cats have marked hyperglycemia (usually >24 mmol/L [436 mg/dL]; range 16 to >35 mmol/L
[290 to >630 mg/dL]), glucosuria, ketonemia (beta-hydroxybutyrate >0.5 mmol/L; average 4-5 mmol/L),
ketonuria and acidosis (pH <7.3; TCO, i.e.serum bicarbonate <12mmol/L [12 mEq/L]) (average 8 mmol/L
[8 mEq/L]}:
1. The predominant ketone in plasma and urine in cats is beta-hydroxybutyrate, but urinary
dipsticks detect mainly acetoacetate. However cats presenting with clinical signs of DKA are typically
ketonuric.
 2. Using a cut point of 1.5 mmol/L for urinary ketones, the sensitivity and specificity of urine dipsticks
for detecting DKA in cats were reported to be 82% and 95%, respectively; when used with a cut point
of 4 mmol/L in plasma, sensitivity/specificity were 100% and 88% for detecting DKA.
 3. Addition of hydrogen peroxide to urine does not improve the sensitivity of urine dipsticks to detect
urinary ketones.
4. Dipsticks and portable meters for measuring beta-hydroxybutyrate are available and are more
sensitive for detecting ketosis in cats.
is detectable in the urine and up to 11 days after beta-hydroxybutyrate is above the reference range in
plasma (0.5 mmol/L); therefore, cats are ketonemic well before ketones can be detected in urine with a
dipstick.
6. Cats with ketonemia but without significant acidosis usually appear as “healthy" diabetic cats.
 7. Fasting visible lipemia is detectable approximately 1 week before ketonuria is detectable on dipsticks.
 B.  It is essential that a minimum data base is obtained for guiding treatment which should include packed
cell volume (PCV), white cell count (WCC), total protein, potassium, phosphorus, total carbon dioxide/
bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and calcium, in addition to glucose and ketones:
1. Potassium, phosphate, and bicarbonate must be measured on admission, and in critically ill cats, at
least 2-3 times per day in the first 1-2 days. Although concentrations of potassium and phosphate may
be elevated or normal (or subnormal) on admission, cats should be monitored frequently in the first
 24-48 h as plasma concentrations of these electrolytes can drop rapidly once fluid and insulin therapy
begins.
C. If intercurrrent disease is suspected, ultrasonography or other diagnostics such as radiography may be
indicated, for example, to assist in identifying pancreatitis:
1. Urine sediment should be examined for signs of infection.
212  Clinicat Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
V.  Differential Diagnoses
A. Although diagnosis is rarely a problem in the severe form of DKA, identification of a precipitating
comorbidity can be more difficult:
1. Cats with acute necrotizing pancreatitis, sepsis, acute renal failure, and/or other life-threatening
conditions need to be differentiated from those with uncomplicated DKA.
2. Cats with DKA which do not respond within 1-2 days to fluid, electrolyte, and insulin therapy should
 be suspected of having underlying disease. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis was a frequent cause of death
in one study.
B. Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (formally nonketotic hyperosmolar diabetes). These cats have
severe depression. In the classical form of nonketotic hyperosmolar diabetes, cats are not ketotic or acidotic;
however, mixed forms occur with severe hyperosmolality compounded by ketoacidosis
C. Any severe illness resulting in severe depression, recumbency, and dehydration can clinically appear as
DKA, especially if there is preceding polyuria or polydipsia. However, these can be easily differentiated from
DKA on the basis of the absence of marked hyperglycemia, ketonuria, and glucosuria.
D. Proximal tubulopathy (Fanconi-like syndrome) associated with dried meat treats that are flavored with
 p  e         s r ,
Ketonuria can be present but persistent hyperglycemia >12 mmol/L is not present. Urinary fractional
excretion studies show increased fractional excretion of phosphate with or without increases in fractional
excretion of other electrolytes.
Vl. Treatment
A. Key points of treatment are correcting fluid and electrolyte imbalances and insulin therapy:
1. Appropriate fluid and electrolyte replacement is the number one priority when treating a DKA cat.
Careful monitoring of serum potassium and phosphorus during fluid therapy is essential.
2. Insulin treatment should begin 1-2h after fluid and electrolyte therapy. If the cat is severely
hypokalemic, delay insulin treatment to 3-4 h after the commencement of fluid therapy.
 3. As it is common to have intercurrent disease in DKA cats, appropriate diagnostics and management
of other conditions may also be necessary.
B. Most DKA cats are moderately to severely dehydrated (7-12% water loss) on initial presentation;
therefore, fluids are essential and lifesaving:
1. Although both 0.9% or 0.45% intravenous saline are used, 0.9% is more common and is advocated
by the American Diabetes Association for human DKA patients. Use of hypotonic solutions (0.45%) is
advocated by some because of the hyperosmolality of the plasma, but its use is controversial and there
are no studies in cats to make evidence-based recommendations. Lactated Ringer's solution or
Normosol-R are sometimes used because of their alkalizing effect.
2. Fluid rate administration is dependent on clinical assessment of hydration status, degree of shock,
and the presence of concurrent disease with the aim to correct fluid deficits over 12-18h using typical
flow rates of 60-150 mL/kg/24h. Flow rates appropriate for shock therapy should be used for cats with
severe signs of dehydration and poor perfusion. Reduce the flow rate if depression worsens, however, as
cerebral edema is a possible complication. Despite significant plasma glucose elevations, many DKA cats
are protected from marked hyperosmolality by whole body hyponatremia, because sodium rather than
glucose is the major contributor to osmolality. This can be seen from the equation: Osmolality=2
(Na +KmE/L) +0.05 (glucose mg/dL) +0.33 (BUN mg/dL) [Normal range 290-310 mOsm/kg]. Hence
many cats do not have severe hyperosmolality, with one study indicating only one third of sick diabetic
cats were hyperosmotic (>350 mOsm/kg).
3. Diabetic cats have relatively high maintenance fluid requirements due to high continual fluid losses
secondary to glucosuria and ketonuria. Careful monitoring of DKA cats is essential to assess hydration
status and adequacy of urine output. During hospitalization, continual monitoring of the cat's weight
can help detect under- and overhydration. The estimated percent dehydration on admission can be used
as a guide to calculating target body weight; account for 0.5-1% body weight loss per day associated
with fasting.
Feline Diabetic Ketoacidosis 213
Table 19.1Potassium supplementation in hypokalemic cats.
Serum potassium (mmol/L
Potassum (mmol or mEq)
[mEq/L])
added to 250-mL fluid bag
<2.0
20
2.0-2.5
15
2.5-3.0
10
3.0-3.5
7
Infuse at a rate <0.5 mmol/kg/h (mEq/kg/h).
4. For cats with the hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state, fluid replacement must be cautious to avoid
adverse cerebral effects. It is recommended that 60-80% of the deficit be replaced over 24h and serum
osmolarity should not be decreased by more than 0.5-1 osmol/h.
C. Electrolytes: Monitoring and correction of electrolyte abnormalities is an important component of
therapy for DKA cats. It is essential that fluids are appropriately supplemented to replenish depleted
electrolytes:
1. Potassium: If serum potassium concentrations are imitially normal or decreased, immediate supple-
mentation is required:
a. Following initiation of fluid therapy and insulin treatment, potassium levels will decrease and life-
threatening hypokalemia can rapidly worsen.
h. Potassium supplementation at 40-80 mEq/L (40-80mmol/L) may be required depending on the
potassium concentration and rate at which it is falling.
C. If hyperkalemia is present, continual monitoring is essential and potassium supplementation should
be withheld until serum levels are within the normal range.
d. Initial supplementation should be given at 30-40 mmol/L if serum potassium concentrations are
not available; otherwise, supplement fluids using standard dosing protocols (Table 19.1).
2. Phosphorus: On initial presentation, plasma phosphorus levels may be normal, decreased, or increased,
while intracellular tissue phosphorus is usually depleted:
a. Subsequent correction of metabolic acidosis and commencement of insulin therapy results in a
shift of extracellular phosphate to intracellular tissue causing rapid and severe hypophosphatemia.
h. Hypophosphatemia in cats should be considered life threatening as it results in Heinz body
formation and hemolytic anemia.
including neuromuscular signs, hypotension, and hypernatremia.
d. Normal or subnormal serum phosphorus levels (<0.48 mmol/L; <1.5 mg/dL) require supplementa-
tion with potassium phosphate and careful monitoring of serum for hemolysis.
e. Along with phosphorous, potassium is also usually depleted in DKA; therefore, one approach is to
divide potassium equally as potassium chloride and potassium phosphate.
f. Alternatively, phosphate can be added to a calcium-free fluid and infused at 0.01-0.03 mmol/L/
kg/h (0.03-0.09 mg/dL/kg/h). If hemolysis is evident in conjunction with a decreasing PCV, provide a
matched blood transfusion.
3. Acidosis: Intravenous fluid therapy and insulin administration usually rapidly corrects acidosis in
DKA patients. Generally mild to moderately-severe acidosis (HCO,- ≥ 7 mmol/L; 7mEq/L) resolves with
fluid and insulin therapy alone, and bicarbonate administration is only recommended when HCO, is
<7 mmol/L (7mEq/L). This recommendation is also supported by the American Diabetes Association in
human DKA patients with bicarbonate supplementation only indicated if arterial pH remains <7.0 after
1h of fluid therapy:
a. The disadvantages of bicarbonate therapy include accelerated development of hypokalemia and
214 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
h. In cats where severe acidosis is associated with depression, decreased cardiac contractility, and
 peripheral vasodilatation, bicarbonate may need to be administered to avoid severe central nervous
system acidosis; however, care must be taken to correct the metabolic acidosis slowly.
C. Add bicarbonate to fluids at the rate of: HCO,- (mEq)=body weight (kg)x0.4 x(12- patient's
HCO,-)×0.5
D. Insulin: Insulin therapy is essential in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis because it is required
to inhibit further ketone formation and promote glucose and ketone metabolism by insulin sensitive
tissues:
1. Commence fluid and electrolyte replacement first, as insulin therapy will worsen hypokalemia and
hypophosphatemia, sometimes markedly, resulting in possibly fatal electrolyte disturbances. While
decisions on when to start insulin therapy yary with the experiences of the individual veterinarian, in
general wait 1-2h after commencement of fluid therapy:
a. Insulin therapy can begin if serum potassium concentrations are within the normal range after 2h
of fluid therapy.
b. Insulin therapy can be delayed a further 1-2h if serum potassium is still below 3.5 mmol/L
(3.5 mEq/L), allowing fluid therapy to replenish the potassium deficit.
C. It is essential that insulin therapy is initiated within 4h of starting fluids.
2. The aim with insulin treatment is to gradually decrease blood glucose concentrations by approximately
4 mmol/L/h (75 mg/dL/h) until 12-14 mmol/L (216-250 mg/dL) by increasing glucose uptake into cells
for energy metabolism and reducing gluconeogenesis.
3. Route of administration of insulin can vary depending on protocol. Many practitioners find
tals use continuous intravenous protocols. While many protocols may be effective in reducing plasma
glucose and ketone concentrations, there is debate regarding the most appropriate route for initial insulin
administration.
4. Once the patient is rehydrated and serum glucose is reduced to 10-14 mmol/L (180-250mg/dL), regard-
less of initial protocol, change to SC insulin. Use SC regular insulin every 6-8h or long-acting insulin
(preferred) every 12h (glargine, detemir or PZI) or porcine lente insulin where there is a legal requirement
to first use a veterinary use insulin. Alternatively maintain on regular insulin IM (q 4-6h) until eating:
a. IM protocol: There are several methods in common use, including regular insulin once every hour
or once every 4h and glargine administration every 4 h:
1) Regular insulin; hourly protocol: Give cats with severe DKA an initial loading dose of 0.2 U/
kg followed by 0.1 U/kg hourly. Once blood glucose is 12-14 mmol/L (216-250mg/dL),
discontinue IM injections and change to SC insulin (either regular insulin every 6-8h or standard
maintenance insulin every 12 h). Dextrose can be added to fluids to maintain blood glucose con-
2) Regular insulin; 4-hourly protocol: Regular insulin can be administered IM every 4 h. While the
4-hourly protocol may seem appealing to many practitioners due to reduced labor, care must be
taken as blood glucose concentration can occasionally drop precipitously presumably due to
 depots of insulin absorbed from previously poorly perfused muscles.
3) Glargine protocol: Glargine has the same pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic effect as
regular insulin when given IM or SC. An effective and simple protocol in cats is to initially give
glargine at 2 U/cat SC and 1 U/cat IM regardless of body weight, and repeat the IM dose 4 or
more hours later if the blood glucose concentration is >14-16 mmol/L (250-290mg/dL), and the
decrease in glucose concentration has not exceeded 4 mmol/L/h; repeat SC administration every
12h and adjust dose as necessary.
4) Add glucose to the fluids once blood glucose is 12-14 mmol/L (216-250mg/dL).
 5) In one study, more than half the cats on this protocol were able to change to SC insulin only
within 24h after initiation of insulin. Cats respond remarkably well, with most cats eating within
1-2days if there is no concurrent disease.
6) This protocol has advantages of reduced cost for the client, is less time-consuming, and is
simple to follow.
Feline Diabetic Ketoacidosis 215
7) Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic: Delay insulin therapy for 2-4 h after initiation of fluid therapy.
Give regular insulin at 0.2 U/kg initially and then at 0.05-0.2 U/kg every hour and ensure hypergly-
h. Intravenous protocol: There are two main methods for intravenous insulin administration:
1) To prepare the infusion add 25 U of regular crystalline insulin (DO NOT USE lente or NPH) to a
500-mL bag of 0.9% saline. This produces a concentration of 50μ/mL which is infused at 1 mL/kg/h.
Hourly blood glucose monitoring is essential and infusion rate can then be adjusted up or down
accordingly to achieve a decrease in blood glucose concentration of 2.8-4.2mmol/L/h (50-75 mg/dL/h)
2) Alternatively, if using a 250-mL bag of 0.9% saline, add 1.1 U/kg body weight and infuse
initially at 10 mL/h to provide approximately 0.05 U/kg/24h. Adjustment to the rate of infusion
can then be made based on subsequent blood glucose concentration.
3) An infusion or syringe pump should be used to administer insulin via a second infusion line
attached by a Y piece to the maintenance fluid line. Alternatively two separate catheters can be used
to provide both insulin and fluids separately. Due to insulin's binding affinity to plastic and glass,
the first 50 mL run through the line should be discarded
4) For both intravenous methods described above, infuse insulin until blood glucose concentration
falls to 12-14 mmol/L (216-250mg/dL), then halve the rate of flow or switch to IM administration
of regular insulin every 4-6 h. Alternatively, if hydration status is good, switch to SC administration
of regular insulin every 6-8 h or standard maintenance insulin SC.
5) Add 50% dextrose to the fluids to create a 5% dextrose solution (e.g., 100 mL of 50% dextrose
in 1L of fluids). This solution should be administered to prevent decreasing blood glucose concen-
tration below 10-12 mmol/L (180-216 mg/dL) and to avoid hypoglycemia while enabling insulin
therapy to be maintained to reverse ketone production.
D
Food: It is essential to get DKA cats to eat as soon as possible, as prolonged anorexia can result in fur-
ther complications especially in obese cats. Preferably use a low carbohydrate food; however, palatable foods
may be used initially to encourage eating. Force feeding may be necessary, but can lead to food aversion.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
B.
Prognosis for recovery from DKA varies and mortality rates from tertiary referral hospitals range from
18-36%. Higher survival rates (up to 100%) have been reported in uncomplicated DKA cases.
C
 Survival rates are also affected by delay in seeking treatment and inability to provide intensive care for
several ill cats.
D.
remission than diabetic cats without DKA. Another study reported that cats were more likely to resolve their
DKA and achieve remission than to die from DKA.
VIlll. Prevention
A.
 As risk factors for cats developing DKA include undiagnosed diabetes mellitus and inadequate insulin
 dose or frequency of administration, early diagnosis of DM and appropriate insulin therapy will decrease the
incidence of DKA in cats.
B.
Prevention and early intervention of disease concurrent with diabetes mellitus may also prevent com-
plications such as DKA.
L
As obesity and repeated glucocorticoid administration are risk factors for diabetes, they should be
avoided in cats 8 years of age or older.
References and Further Readings
DiBartola S, Panciera DL. Fluid therapy in endocrine and metabolic disorders. In: DiBartola S. ed. Fluid, Electrolyte αnd
Acid—Base Disorders in Small Animat Practice, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, 2006, pp. 478-489.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Diabetic ketoacidosis. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine Endocrinology and
Reproduction, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, 2004, pp. 580-615.
216 Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Hume DZ, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS, et al. J Vet Intern Med. 2006;20:547-55 5.
Koenig A, Drobatz KJ, Beale AB, King LG, et al. Hy perglycemic, hyperosmolar syndrome in feline diabetics: 17 cases
(1995-2001). J Vet Emerg Med Crit Care 2004;14:30-40.
Marshall RD, Rand JS, Gunew MN, Menrath VH. Glargine adrministered intramuscularly is effective for treatrment of feline
diabetic ketoacidosis, 2010 ACVIM Forum Abstracts, J Vet Intern Med 2010;24:686-687.
Nelson R. Diabetes mellitus. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2005,
Pp.1563-1591.
Maintenance protocols for insulin administration are available. Available at: www.uq.edu.au/ccah/index.html?page=41544
CHAPTER 20
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/lnsulin
Resistance Syndrome in Horses
John Keen
Pathogenesis
● Equine metabolic syndrome (EMS) is a newly characterized syndrome of insulin resistance (IR)
 predisposing horses to laminitis.
● IR is reflected by subtle or more obvious changes to glycemic status.
● Obesity and genetic susceptibility play a key role in the EMS.
● The link between EMS and laminitis is not currently clear but may involve chronic low-grade
 inflammation and/or changes in vascular function.
Classical Signs
● Signs of EMS are similar to pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) or equine Cushing's disease
but lacking key crucial signs of PPID such as hirsutism.
● Overweight or obese (body condition score >3/5; >6/9) and/or accumulation of fat in specific sites
such as the nuchal crest, rump, supraorbital region, and prepuce or mammary region.
● Repeated bouts of clinical laminitis.
● Signs of chronic low grade subacute laminitis such as divergent laminar rings, convex/flat sole, and
widened white line.
● Infertility in mares.
Diagnosis
● Phenotype and clinical signs raise an index of suspicion.
 Assess glycemic status.
O Resting metabolic profile.
O Tests of glucose and insulin dynamics.
● Exclude PPID on the basis of clinical signs and tests.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
217
218Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Treatment
● Feed and exercise management.
● Some medications to improve insulin sensitivity and help weight loss are currently undergoing
scrutiny.
1. Pathogenesis
The Equine Metabolic Syndrome (EMS) is a term used to define a complex metabolic disorder in horses
and ponies which phenotypically is characterized by adiposity (either localized in specific regions or
increased risk of developing pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (equine Cushing's disease) may also be
components of the syndrome. IR appears to be a key factor in the pathogenesis of the EMS, and IR may
also represent a common factor increasing the risk of laminitis from a variety of clinical risk factors
(Figure 20.1).
A. Insulin sensitivity and IR: definitions and consequences:
1. Insulin sensitivity is defined as the glucose lowering effect of a given amount of insulin (pancreatic
beta cell derived hormone). IR refers to markedly decreased insulin sensitivity:
a. In a normal physiological state, the increase in glucose concentrations following a carbohydrate
meal stimulates insulin secretion which maintains glucose concentrations in the normal range.
h. In horses with IR, insulin concentrations are increased to compensate for the effects of reduced
insulin sensitivity; when beta
cells
cannot adequately compensate, glucose concentrations also
 increase. IR is characterized by hyperinsulinemia, or abnormal glycemic and insulin responses to an
oral or intravenous glucose and/or insulin challenge.
2. In the earlier stages of dysregulation, resting glucose concentrations are normal (or slightly increased)
a. With impaired glucose tolerance, there is a delayed return of glucose and insulin concentrations to
normal after a glucose challenge. The underlying IR results in resting insulin concentrations above the
normal reference range and increased insulin secretion during the glucose tolerance test.
3. As IR becomes more severe and beta cells are unable to fully compensate by secreting adequate
amounts of insulin to maintain normoglycemia; concentrations of both insulin and glucose are increased
at rest.
Equine
cushing's
disease
Exogenous
Genetics
steroids
Obesity
Stress?
Insulin resistance
Laminitis
Figure 20.1 Clustering of clinical risk factors for equine laminitis. Insulin resistance is common to all of these risk factors.
 Genetic predisposition and obesity are currently thought to be key clinical components of the disorder termed equine
metabolic syndrome (EMS).
Equine IMetabolic Syndrome/insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses 219
Insulin resistance
Euglycaemia>>>>>>>|GT>>>>>>>>Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Fgure 20.2 Insulin resistance develops gradually, with impaired glucose tolerance preceding overt type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Horses are rarely diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus, but many are likely to demonstrate impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT).
4. The ultimate event is marked hyperglycemia in the face of decreased insulin secretion as a result of
pancreatic cell failure (i.e., decompensation) (Figure 20.2). Resting glucose concentrations that are
 markedly increased signify the onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
5. More subtle alterations in glycemic status such as impaired glucose tolerance may be most
relevant to the situation in horses and ponies, where overt type 2 diabetes mellitus is rarely detected
clinically:
mize postprandial glucose increases, particularly in at risk individual horses and ponies. Identifying
these at risk horses is therefore crucial.
6. Strict criteria have been defined for normal glycemic status in humans. The situation is currently less
clear in horses although many studies have started to define relevant criteria:
a. Measuring compounds which reflect long-term glycemic status, such as fructosamine or glyco-
 sylated hemoglobin, may also be appropriate, although this has met with limited succes in horses
thus far.
7. The direct consequences of IR are not known. Studies in other species suggest that persistent
hyperglycermia has detrimental effects on vascular cellfunction, especially endothelial cells. Furthermore
insulin has direct vasoactive properties; in IR, persistent hyperinsulinemia may potentially be derrimental.
 Experimentally, laminitis can be induced in horses and ponies with very high concentrations of insulin
sustained over 48-72h while maintaining euglycemia.
B. The role of obesity:
The link between obesity, EMS and laminitis is unclear. While IR may promote fat deposition, obesity
(particularly abdominal obesity) is likely a major contributor to IR. In addition to producing the breakdown
products of fat (e.g., fatty acids) which themselves affect glucose metabolism, adipocytes are metabolically
active and appear to produce a number of hormones and cytokines that promote IR:
1. Cytokines: for example, tumor necrosis factor (TNFo) and interleukins:
a. Increased TNFo concentrations have been recorded in insulin resistant ponies predisposed to
 developing laminitis and in obese mares.
2. Adipokines: these are secretory products of adipose tissue:
a. Some adipokines, for example, resistin, promote IR whereas others, for example, adiponectin.
promote the actions of insulin.
of the human metabolic syndrome. Leptin concentrations are raised in obese horses.
c. It is proposed that in human metabolic syndrome, an imbalance occurs, favoring production of the
hormones promoting IR. This may be due to increased deposition of certain types of fat cells in
certain locations.
d. The potential role of adipokines in equine obesity and predisposition to laminitis is currently
undergoing further scrutiny.
C. The role of inflammation and vascular dysfunction:
Chronic low-grade inflammation, particularly involving the vasculature, may be an important factor in the
pathogenesis of the EMS:
2. Furthermore, in human metabolic syndrome there is biochemical evidence of vascular dysfunction
and oxidative stress prior to clinical signs of cardiovascular disease or the vascular complications of
220 Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Figure 20.3 Foot of a pony with EMS and chronic laminitis; note the laminar rings which diverge toward the heel region.
diabetes. Vasoconstrictor mediators such as endothelin are raised while vasodilator mediators are
reduced. Mediators involved in the coagulation cascade and cellular adhesion to endothelial cells are
also raised. These factors may be related to hyperglycemia and/or hyperinsulinemia.
 3. No changes in such mediators were noted in preliminary studies of ponies with EMS predisposed to
laminitis or indeed in horses with pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction.
D. Other concepts:
1. Diet has an important influence on the expression of EMS and in affecting glucose and insulin
dynamics. For example, differences in glycemic status and blood presure between laminitis-prone and
non-laminitis-prone ponies were most apparent when grazing summer pasture.
2. Glucocorticoids: the similarities between pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction and EMS are intrigu-
ing in terms of fat distribution and predisposition to laminitis. Laminitis has anecdotally been linked to
iatrogenic corticosteroid administration. Furthermore, dexamethasone treatment can induce IR in
horses. It has been proposed that local, tissue specific cortisol concentrations may be important in
human metabolic syndrome and the same may be true of horses. The enzyme 11 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta HSD-1) which controls the intracellular concentration of active cortisol
may be important in this regard.
Il.Signalment
A. Predisposed breeds for the EMS include UK native pony breeds such as Highland, Shetland, Welsh,
Dartmoor ponies, etc. and in the USA breeds such as Morgan and Paso Fino. These breeds are not however
exclusively at risk. Donkeys may also be predisposed.
B. All ages of horse may be affected, including young adults, in contrast to PPID which is usually a disorder
of aged horses.
C. No sex predisposition has been shown for EMS as yet:
1. In one study evaluating predisposition to laminitis in a closed herd of ponies at pasture, stallions were
considerably less likely to become laminitic compared to mares.
2. Other studies of laminitis itself have not shown a sex predisposition; both sexes may be affected.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Repeated bouts of clinical laminitis and/or signs of chronic low-grade subacute laminitis such as diver-
gent laminar rings, convex/flat sole, and widened white line are the most clinically important signs
(Figure 20.3).
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses  221
Fgure 20.4  Increased fat deposition in the neck crest of a horse creating a mounded appearance and a neck that loses its
sideways flexibility.
Fgure 20.5 Increased fat deposition in the supraorbital region of a horse with EMS.
B. Affected cases are usually overweight or obese (body condition score >3/5 on the Carroll and Huntington 
scale or >6/9 on the Henneke scale) and/or show accumulation of fat in specific depot sites such as the
nuchal crest (Figure 20.4), the rump, the supraorbital region (Figure 20.5), and the prepuce or mammary
region (Figure 20.6):
1. Subjective neck crest scores (0-5) have been developed and correlate well with objective neck meas-
urements as well as blood variables indicative of altered glycemic status.
C. Chronic reproductive cycling abnormalities in mares may occur with EMS, similar to obesity in other
species such as dairy cattle.
D. One study showed that relative hypertension may also be a feature of the EMS although this is not other-
wise clinically apparent:
1. As values for blood pressure vary widely in horses and will depend upon the method used, no recom-
mendations for "cutoff" values indicating hypertension can be given at the present time.
2. The relative hypertension may reflect microvascular dysfunction which may predispose to laminitis.
222  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animats
Figure 20.6 Fat deposition in the mammary region of a mare with EMS.
IV. Diagnosis
A. If a horse is overweight/obese and suffers recurrent bouts of laminitis, then it probably has underlying
 metabolic predisposition to obesity and laminitis and, in the absence of PPID, may be classified as suffering
colic, colitis, metritis, pleuritis, etc.) should be considered as metabolically at risk and therefore potentially
classified as suffering from EMS:
1. Pasture associated laminitis, typically seasonal, is the most important group of horses in this regard.
 2. Examples of horses with unexplained laminitis include those that develop laminitis post vaccination
or following exogenous steroid administration.
remodeling of the pedal bone and laminar lucencies.
tor of the degree of severity of IR and beta cell failure and also provides a benchmark to monitor response
to any treatment regimen adopted. Evaluation of all variables must be taken in the clinical context. In many
established:
1. Resting metabolic profiles:
a. Glucose and insulin. The simplest approach is measurement of a single resting glucose concentra-
tion along with measurement of serum insulin concentration. This may be carried out in conjunction
with tests to rule out PPID (see Chapter 11):
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses 223
n i n o no ro a k  s o ie ns e pe r (l
but concentrates must be excluded for 12h prior to testing.
supportive evidence of IR. Horses with normoglycemia and insulin concentrations >694 pmol/L
(100 mlU/L; 100μIU/mL) have more extreme evidence of IR and are at high risk of laminitis. It
should be noted, however that insulin assays vary between laboratories, and therefore using a
laboratory-specific reference range for interpretation of results is essential:
a) Note insulin conversion factors are as follows: Insulin (μU/mL)x6.945=(pmol/L);
1 mIU/L =1 μIU/mL).
 2) Glucose concentrations are rarely above the upper limit of the reference range in EMS but often
toward the upper end of the range (upper limit of reference for glucose =6mmol/L [108 mg/dL]).
3) High glucose concentrations in a nonstressed resting horse suggest severe IR and some degree
of beta cell failure. In a small minority of horses, this progresses to type 2 diabetes (diabetes mel
litus in horses occurs most commonly secondary to PPID and would be classed as “other specific
type of diabetes").
4) In humans, impaired fasting glucose is defined as glucose concentrations above normal but less
than diabetic. Individuals with impaired fasting glucose are considered prediabetic and at increased
risk of developing diabetes. Equivalent glucose concentrations for horses for impaired fasting glu-
cose in horses would be 7-10 mmol/L (126-180 mg/dL) and diabetic >10 mmol/L (>180 mg/dL).
b. A mild increase in liver derived enzymes (e.g., gamma-glutamyl transferase and glutamate dehy-
drogenase) is often also apparent and likely to relate to the mild triglyceridemia (and therefore trigly-
ceride infiltration of the liver) in these cases rather than primary liver dysfunction.
C. Since dyslipidemia is a feature of EMS, lipid profiles may also be useful, although this has not yet
been fully evaluated clinically. Triglyceride >0.64 mmol/L (57mg/dL) was used as one feature to
predict susceptibility to laminitis in one study.
d. Other blood variables which have been shown to be abnormal in EMS cases (e.g, adipokines,
markers of systemic inflammation), although of great interest from a research point of view, are
unlikely to provide valuable and cost effective diagnostic use until considerable work has gone into
2. Proxies for measures of IR:
a. Proxies (or surrogates) are calculations based on resting blood concentrations of insulin and/or
glucose.
b. They are commonly used in large-scale human studies due to the ease of collection compared to
 dynamic profiles and their enhanced ability to detect IR compared to resting concentrations of insulin
alone.
C. Two proxies that have been shown to be the most accurate representation of dynamic insulin
sensitivity status in horses are:
1) The reciprocal of the square root of insulin (RISQI)=1/√insulin (mIU/L).
MIRG is not a useful proxy when resting insulin is >347 pmol/L (50 mIU/L).
d. These proxies have been used to predict susceptibility to laminitis in conjunction with clinical
(body condition score >6/9) and biochemical [triglyceride concentration >0.64 mmol/L (57 mg/dL)]
data:
1) The reference values used for the proxies in that study were normal ≥0.32 (μIU/mL)-o.s for
RISQI and normal <5.6 mIU2 / (10.L.mgg) for MIRG.
2) Note that these values indicated good accuracy for diagnosing predisposition to laminitis in a
closed herd. The cutoff values may not be appropriate for all horses and ponies nor if insulin is
measured in other laboratories. Nevertheless, differences in these proxies between normal and
EMS horses have been noted in outbreed populations of horses.
e. Although more work is required to develop cutoff values for these proxies to determine IR versus
non-IR, they may be useful for monitoring response to therapeutic approaches adopted.
224 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Table 20.1
 Dynamic tests for equine glycemic/insulin status applicable to clinical practice.
Test
Method
Interpretation
Oral glucose
1 g/kg glucose is administered as a
Blood glucose should double within 2 h and
tolerance test
20% solution
normalize within 6 h. Glucose
(OGTT)
Blood glucose and insulin levels are
(>11.1 mmol/L; 200 mg/dL) or delay to
normal levels is indicative of insulin
tested prior to administration and at
30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 240min
resistance. Beware of other conditions which
could affect this test, for example,
gastrointestinal dysfunction. Using the
insulin levels as well as glucose gives more
information. It has been suggested that an
I:G at 90 min may be a convenient 
parameter to test for insensitivity. I:G
>0.3-0.5 (insulin measured in mlU/L or μlU/
mL and glucose in mg/dL) suggests relative 
insulin resistance. Total insulin secretion is
also raised with insulin resistance. Note
when also evaluating insulin, horses with
type 2 diabetes mellitus (rare) may have low/
 normal insulin and high resting glucose and
glucose responses
Intravenous
0.5 g/kg dextrose as 50% solution IV
Normal is >300% increase in glucose at
glucose
following 12-h fast. Collect samples
1 5 min followed by rapid decrease;
tolerance test 
for glucose and insulin at 0, 0.25, 0.5,
plus >600-700% increase in insulin at 15
(IVGTT)
1, 2, (3,4, 5, 6)h
and 30min, followed by a decrease.
Glucose and insulin concentrations should
return to baseline within 1-2h
Combined
Collect baseline blood sample for
Impaired glucose tolerance is the
intravenous
glucose and insulin. Infuse 50% 
maintenance of blood glucose above
glucose and
dextrose (0.15g/kg), immediately
baseline for >45 min. Insulin levels should
insulin
followed by 0.10 U/kg regular insulin.
decline to <695 pmol/L (100 ml U/L;
tolerance test
Further samples are collected for
1 00 μIU/mL) by 45 min; anything longer is
(CGIT}
glucose at 1, 5, 25, 35, 45, 60, 75,
suggestive of IR
90, 105, 120, 135, and 150min; and
for insulin at 45 min
 3. Dynamic assessment of glycemic status:
 a Dynamic tests are more likely to detect subtle alterations in glycemic and insulinemic status.
h. These methods are however more complex, time consuming, and expensive.
C. As with resting profiles, for all dynamic tests, horses are best stabled overnight with no concentrate
feed for 12h but a small amount of grass hay may be offered. Water should be removed 2h prior to
testing in oral tests.
d. Table 20.1 describes the method and interpretation of four methods for dynamic assessment
of glycemic status that have been evaluated in the horse. The more complex hyperinsulinemic
 euglycemic clamp method, deemed by many to be the gold standard for assessing insulin sensitiv-
ity, is not described as it is not applicable to general practice. Another useful research tool is the
frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test (± insulin modification) with minimal
model analysis.
e. Figures 20.7 and 20.8 show a schematic representation of the two commonly used tests: the oral
glucose tolerance test and the combined intravenous glucose and insulin test. The latter has been
recommended following a recent American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine consensus
statement.
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses 225
15
- Normal ponies
+ Normal horses
 Obese/cushingoid
horses
Blood
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time (min)
Fgure 20.7 Schematic blood glucose curves following intragastric administration of 1 g/kg glucose (20% solution). Note the
increased peak and longer duration of hyperglycemia in ponies and those considered insulin resistant (obese/EMS and pituitary
pars intermedia dysfunction/Cushingoid).
20
- Abnormal
Normal
10
50
100
150
Time
Fgure 20.8 Schematic blood glucose curves following intravenous administration of glucose and insulin. Note that in the
"normal" curve, the blood glucose quickly (<45min) drops below the resting glucose level and is maintained at this level
ui joy auiaseg ayt aoge pauieuiew si asonl aun 'ases (jeouge) juersisai usnsui aui ym iseuos ul isal ayi nousnou
duration of the test.
Differential Diagnoses
A
 Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) is the most important clinical differential diagnosis for
EMS and steps should be made to rule out this endocrine disorder, as treatment for PPID is well character-
ized and effective. Since PPID develops insidiously, dynamic endocrine tests may be required to fully rule out
this condition rather than relying on resting hormone analysis (see Chapter 11).
B.
 Hypothyroidism is rare in horses. Despite the fact that ponies with EMS may have low T concentra-
tions, dynamic thyroid evaluation tests have shown that hypothyroidism is not the cause of EMS.
Vl. Treatment
At present, the major approach to managing the EMS is control of energy intake combined with judicious
exercise in those individuals where this is possible. Some medical treatments under evaluation at the time of
writing are also described.
Feeding and supplements:
1. Feeds with a low Gl should be chosen, that is, low soluble carbohydrate and high structural carbohy.
drate. Complete starvation is not advised as this promotes a survival mode of increased IR, thus poten-
tially exacerbating the EMS. Furthermore, many donkeys and ponies (especially the Shetland breed) are
226 Clinica Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Grass should be avoided or restricted in EMS horses since soluble (i.e., readily available) carbohydrate
content can be unacceptably high, particularly during the growing seasons. Restricted grazing practice
must be balanced with the need for exercise; therefore, the use of grass muzzles or strip grazing may be
advantageous.
3. Fructans and other soluble carbohydrates (e.g., starch) are highest in the grass during the daytime
 therefore early morning (except after frost) or night grazing may be preferable.
4. Grass hay is a good source of preserved forage but may be variable in soluble carbohydrate content
 therefore best practice is to encourage owners to have the quality analyzed.
5. Soaking hay (12h is suggested to be optimal) may reduce the soluble carbohydrate as it gets trapped
in the water although the efficiency of this varies with the grass types and methods used. Do not soak
haylage.
6. An amount of 1.5-2% of estimated ideal body weight of dry (presoaked) hay (i.e., 1.5-2kg hay per
100kg) is recommended as an initial ration for weight loss. This may be reduced to a minimum of 1% of
body weight but be aware that unacceptable behavioral stereotypies may develop at this ration level.
7. If further feeding is required in addition to forage, then other low GI foods may be acceptable. For
example, sugar beet (unmolassed) has a very low Gl, as does alfalfa/lucerne chaff which is often suitable
for older ponies with bad dentition. Alternatively, there are good proprietary compounded feeds specially
 designed for laminitic horses.
 8. Minerals, vitamins, and trace elements should be supplemented for those solely on a forage ration.
9. There is some evidence to suggest that antioxidant therapies protect against vascular dysfunction in
human diabetics and others at risk of cardiovascular diseases; their usefulness in horses is unknown at
present. Studies in ponies with a previous history of laminitis have shown conflicting evidence of redox
dysfunction.
B. Exercise:
1. Exercise is avoided in clinical laminitis but, when the pony is clinically stable, exercise should be
gradually built up and actively encouraged:
 a Exercise has been shown to improve insulin sensitivity in horses.
b. A recent study has shown that an increasing regimen of 2-4h exercise per week (comprising a
walking warm up, trotting, and a walking warm down) spread over 3 days combined with feed restric-
 tion improved insulin sensitivity and achieved beneficial weight loss.
 ro  ya no e e s  so 
2. Placing an animal out to grass is beneficial to encourage exercise, but can be difficult at the high-risk
times of year. Grazing muzzles which limit intake are useful in this regard.
C. Medications under investigation:
1. Humans with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus are often treated with oral hypoglycemic agents, for
and unlike some other drugs used for human diabetes, will not cause hypoglycemia:
 a Studies of metformin in horses have shown mixed results depending on the study type and dose used.
b. One study using metformin doses of approximately 2.8-8.4mg/kg PO BID in obese mares con-
cluded that this drug showed no long-term improvement in insulin sensitivity.
C. In a longitudinal intervention study of 18 horses and ponies, metformin administration at 15 mg/
kg PO BID improved insulin sensitivity and decreased the secretion of insulin, as measured by proxy
 assessment from resting blood insulin and glucose values, at least in the short term.
d. A recent controlled study however suggested that 15 mg/kg of metformin BID PO is not effective
 in improving insulin sensitivity in obese ponies.
e. Other studies have shown that oral bioavailability of metformin at a dosage of 15 mg/kg PO BID
O1 paneduos) suoeuaouoo snadeiaqns ieul pue (%s>) sasiou pey un Aeioadsa rood Aaa s
those in humans) are detectable in plasma.
2. Thyroid supplementation has been administered to many obese laminitis in the belief that the
horses were suffering from hypothyroidism. This is unlikely in the majority of cases. Nevertheless, it
may be that thyroid supplements could be an aid in the short term to help lose weight and increase
insulin sensitivity:
Equine Metabolic Syndrome/insulin Resistance Syndrome in Horses 227
a. It has been shown that administration of 24-48 mg thyroxine per day can lead to weight loss and
improve insulin sensitivity in normal horses. This has yet to be evaluated as a method of improving
insulin sensitivity and reducing risk of laminitis in "at risk" horses.
 3. There is great interest in human medicine in a group of compounds known as thiazolidinediones
which lower IR (these are so-called insulin enhancers) by acting on nuclear receptor proteins
known as PPARs. Pioglitazone administration to lean healthy horses did not improve insulin
sensitivity.
4. In theory, considering its possible involvement in omental adiposity and the human metabolic syn-
drome, antagonism of cortisol activity may be advantageous. No such drugs are currently licensed for
clinical use in the horse:
a. Trilostane, a 11betaHSD inhibitor licensed for canine Cushing's disease, has been used in EMS
(approximate dose 1 mg/kg) and demonstrated minimal beneficial effects. Control animals were not
evaluated.
5. In view of their currently questionable efficacy and lack of veterinary licensing, use of medications
without also instituting management changes should be avoided.
Vll.  Prognosis
 Prognosis is good in animals without laminitis or overt diabetes provided successful weight loss is
achieved and soluble carbohydrate intake is controlled.
B.
 Prognosis is guarded in those cases with repeated bouts of severe clinical laminitis which are likely to
have had irreparable damage to the laminar attachrment or those with overt diabetes.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Devise dietary and exercise regimes carefully for those breeds considered at risk of developing EMS
and feed to maintain an ideal body condition (<6/9).
B.
 Early recognition of the condition and subsequent changes in management may reduce the risk of
laminitis developing.
Further Readings
Asplin KE, Sillence MN, Pollitt CC, et al. Induction of laminitis by prolonged hyperinsulinaermia in clinically normal ponies.
Vet J 2007;174:530-535.
Bailey SR, Habershon-Butcher JL, Ransom KJ, et al. Hypertension and insulin resistance in a mixed-breed population of
ponies predisposed to laminitis. American J Vet Res 2008;69:122-129.
Carroll CL, Huntington PJ. Body condition scoring and weight estirmation of horses. Equine Vet J 1988;20:41-45.
Carter RA, Geor RJ, Staniar WB, et al. Apparent adiposity assessed by standardised scoring systems and morphometric
measurements in horses and ponies. Vet J 2009;179:204-210.
Durham AE, Rendle DI, Newton JR. The effect of metforrmin on measurements of insulin sensitivity and b cell response in
18horses and ponies with insulin resistance. Equine Vet J 2008;40:493-500.
Filer H, Frank N, Andrews FM, et al. Physiologic assessment of blood glucose homeostasis via combined intravenous glucose
and insulin testing in horses. A J Vet Res 2005;66:1598-1604.
Frank N, Elliott SB, Boston RC. Effects of long-terrm oral administration of levothyroxine sodiurm on glucose dynarmics in
healthy adult horses. Ar J Vet Res 2008;69:76-81.
Frank N, Geor RJ, Bailey SR, et al. Equine Metabolic Syndrome. J Vet Intern Med 20 10;24:467-475.
Freestone JF, Beadle R, Shoemaker K,et al. Improved insulin sensitivity in hyperinsulinaemic ponies through physical
conditioning and controlled feed intake. Equine Vet J 1992;24:187-190.
Geor RJ. Metabolic predisposition to laminitis in horses and ponies: obesity, insulin resistance and metabolic syndromes.
JEquine Vet Sci2008;28:753-759
Gordon ME, Jerina ML, Raub RH, et al. The effects of dietary manipulation and exercise on weight loss and related indices of
health in horses. Compar Exerc Physio! 2009;6:33-42.
Henneke DR, Potter GD, Kreider JL,et al. Relationship between condition score, physical measurements and body fat
percentage in mares. Equine Vet J 1983;15:371-372.
Hoffman RM, Boston RC, Stefanovski D,et al. Obesity and diet affect glucose dynamics and insulin sensitivity in
Thoroughbred geldings. J Anim Sei 2003;81:2333-2342
Hustace JL, Firshman AM, Mata JE. Pharrmacokinetics and bioavailability of metformin in horses. Am J Vet Res 2009;70:665-668.
228 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Vet J 1986;18:97-101.
Johnson PJ. The equine metabolic syndrome peripheral Cushing's syndrome. Vet Clim North Arm Equine Pract 2002;18:271-293.
2004;36:41-45.
Johnson PJ, Messer NT, Slight SH, et al. Endocrinopathic laminitis in the horse. Clin Techn Equine Pract 2004;3:45-56.
Johnson PJ, Slight SH, Ganjam VK, et al. Glucocorticoids and laminitis in the horse. Vet Clin North Arm Equine Pract
2002;18:219-236
Keen JA, McLaren M, Chandler KJ, et al. Biochemical indices of vascular function, glucose metabolism and oxidative stress in
horses with equine Cushing's disease. Equine Vet J 2004;36:226-229.
 Neville RF, Hollands T, Collins SN, et al. Evaluation of urinary TBARS in normal and chronic larminitic ponies. Equine Vet J
2004;36(3):292-294.
Tiley HA, Geor RJ, McCutcheon LJ. Effects of dexamethasone on glucose dynamics and insulin sensitivity in healthy horses.
Am J Vet Res 2007;68:753-759.
Tin worth KD, Edwards S, Noble GK, Harris PA, Sillence MN, Hackett LP. Pharmacokinetics of metformin after enteral
administration in insulin-resistant ponies. Ar J Vet Res 2010;71:1201-1206.
Treiber K, Carter R, Gay L, et al. Inflammatory and redox status of ponies with a history of pasture-associated laminitis.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol2009;129:216-220.
Treiber KH, Kronfeld Ds, Hess TM, et al. Evaluation of genetic and metabolic predispositions and nutritional risk factors for
pasture-associated laminitis in ponies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:1538-1545.
Vick MM, Adams AA, Murphy BA, et al. Relationships among inflammatory cytokines, obesity, and insulin sensitivity in the
horse. J Anim Sci 2007;85:1144-1155.
Vick MM, Sessions DR, Murphy BA, Kennedy EL, Reedy SE, Fitzgerald BP. Obesity is associated with altered metabolic and
reproductive activity in the mare: effects of metformin on insulin sensitivity and reproductive cyclicity. R eprod Fertil Dev
2006;18:609-617.
Walker BR. Glucocorticoids and cardiovascular disease. Eur J Endocrinot 2007;157:545-559.
CHAPTER 21
Insulinoma in Dogs
Rebecka S. Hess
Pathogenesis
● Most insulinomas are malignant carcinomas with local, vascular, lymphatic, hepatic, and other
 metastatic spread.
● Excess secretion of insulin leads to hypoglycemia which is the cause of most of the clinical signs.
Signalment
● The mean age of dogs with insulinoma is 9 years.
● There is no apparent sex or breed predilection.
Classical Signs
● Most clinical signs are due to the effect of hypoglycemia on the central nervous system (neurogly-
copenia) and include seizures, collapse, weakness, ataxia, disorientation, mental dullness, and visual
disturbances.
● Other clinical signs are related to excess catecholamine release and include tremors, hunger, and
 nervousness.
● Physical examination is unremarkable in most dogs. Some dogs may have weight gain, be postictal,
 or have a peripheral polyneuropathy.
Diagnosis
● A clinical suspicion of insulinoma is established with documentation of appropriate clinical signs,
hypoglycemia, and concurrent absolute or relative hyperinsulinemia.
● The diagnosis of insulinoma is confirmed with histologic examination and immunohistochemical
staining of the pancreatic mass.
Differential Diagnosis
● Differential diagnoses for hypoglycemia include insulinoma, exrapancreatic tumor, hypoadreno-
corticism, liver dysfunction/failure, malnutrition, pregnancy, sepsis, extreme exercise, xylitol ingestion,
and many drugs. Factitious hypoglycemia can also be considered.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
229
230  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Treatment
● The main component of treatment for an acute hypoglycemic crisis consists of IV dextrose
administration.
● The long-term treatment of choice for insulinoma is surgical resection of the tumor and gross
metastases.
● Long-term medical treatment may consist of dietary modification and treatment with prednisone,
streptozocin, diazoxide, and synthetic somatostatin.
Prognosis
● Median survival time is about 1 year with a range of 0 days to 5 years.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Canine insulinoma is an uncommon condition. However, insulin-secreting beta cell neoplasia is the most
common islet cell neoplasia in dogs, possibly due to the fact that beta cells comprise approximately 70% of
cells in the islets of Langerhans.
B. Most canine insulinomas are malignant:
1. In two immunocytochemical reports, 25 of 26 insulinomas were carcinomas and only one was an
adenoma.
 2. About 80% of pancreatic tumors are solitary and most are located in one of the two limbs of the
pancreas rather than in the body (Figure 21.1). Occasionally, no discrete nodule or nodules are apparent
3. The rate of detected metastatic lesions at the time of initial diagnosis in 187 dogs from different stud-
ies ranged from 45-75% and is higher in studies based on necropsy than in those based on surgical
biopsies.
 4. Clinical staging of pancreatic tumors according to the World Health Organization defines three
stages:
a. Stage I as T1N0M0 (presence of a primary Tumor and absence of regional lymph Node and dis.
tant Metastases)
b. Stage II as T1N1M0 (presence of a primary Tumor and regional lymph Node metastases with no
distant Metastases).
c. Stage Ill as T1N1M1 or T1N0M1 (presence of a primary Tumor with distant Metastases and with
or without regional lymph Node metastases).
d. Most dogs with insulinoma have stage II or stage II disease at the time of diagnosis. The most
common sites of metastases are regional lymph nodes, vasculature, and the liver, although metastatic
disease is possible anywhere.
C. While the etiology of insulinoma is not known, local growth hormone production, which is not associ-
ated with elevated plasma growth hormone concentration, has been documented in primary and metastatic
canine insulinoma lesions. It is possible that local growth hormone affects insulinoma cell proliferation
through paracrine or autocrine mechanisms.
D. Proliferation of beta cells results in excess secretion of insulin and, therefore, hypoglycemia. The most
important compensatory mechanisms for hypoglycemia are inhibition of insulin secretion and stimulation 
of counter-regulatory hormone secretion:
1. Glucose is the primary regulator of insulin secretion. When glucose enters beta cells through the
with the formation of ATP. ATP, in turn, closes ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Closure of the K channels
decreases K+ efflux, resulting in depolarization of the beta cell and opening of voltage-sensitive Cat2
channels. Increased cytoplasmic Ca+2 concentration results in insulin exocytosis.
insulinoma in Dogs 231
Duodenum
Solitaryi
inoma
Pancrea
Fgure 21.1  Most insulinomas are solitary nodules within one of the two pancreatic limbs. (Courtesy of Dr. Lillian Aronson.)
2. In normal animals, insulin secretion is completely inhibited when blood glucose is <80 mg/dL
(4.4 mmol/L). However, insulin secretion from neoplastic beta cells is independent of blood glucose
concentration and persists despite low blood glucose concentration. Therefore, one of the hallmarks of
insulinoma is the finding of absolute or relative elevations in blood insulin concentration despite low
blood glucose concentration.
3. The four counter-regulatory hormones secreted in response to hypoglycemia are glucagon, catecho-
lamines, growth hormone, and glucocorticoids. Of these hormones, glucagon and catecholamines are
 most important in increasing blood glucose concentration.
1.
 Signalment
A.
 The mean age of dogs with insulinoma is 9 years, with a range of 3-15 years.
 B. Although any breed dog can develop insulinoma, it has been reported mainly in medium to large breed
dogs. Controlled studies of breed risk for insulinoma have not been published.
C. There is no apparent sex predilection for the disease.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
 Most clinical signs are due to the effect of hypoglycemia on the central nervous system (neuroglycope-
nia) or to hypoglycemia-induced catecholamine release:
1. Glucose is the single most important energy source in the brain, and carbohydrate storage in neural
tissue is limited. Therefore, brain fumction depends on a continuous supply of glucose. Clinical signs
attributable to neuroglycopenia include seizures, collapse, weakness, ataxia, disorientation, mental
dullness, and visual disturbances.
2. Clinical signs related to excess catecholamine release and stimulation of the sympathetic nervous
system include tremors, hunger and nervousness.
B.
 The severity of clinical signs increases as blood glucose decreases, and severe hypoglycemia can ultimately
result in coma and death.
 Clinical signs may also be related to the duration and rate in which hypoglycemia develops; a gradual
decrease in blood glucose concentration may be less likely to stimulate catecholamine secretion.
D. Clinical signs can be episodic because secretion of counter-regulatory hormones increases blood glucose
concentration and temporarily resolves neuroglycopenic clinical signs.
E.
 Feeding can result in either alleviation or exacerbation of clinical signs:
1. If feeding restores blood glucose concentration to normal, clinical signs will resolve.
2. However feeding may also stimulate insulin secretion and exacerbate the hypoglycemia.
232  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 21.1  Clinical signs reported in 206 dogs from several studies.
Clinical sign
Number of dogs (%)
Seizure
100 (49)
Collapse
84 (41)
Generalized weakness
79 (38)
 Shaking/trembling/muscle twitching
45 (22)
Ataxia
45 (22)
 Exercise intolerance
30 (15)
Hind limb weakness
28 (14)
 Disorientation/bizarre behavior/hysteria
19 (9)
 Polyphagia
16 (8)
 Polyuria and polydipsia
16 (8)
 Stupor/lethargy
12 (6)
Focal facial seizures
6(3)
 Obesity or weight gain
6 (3)
 Blindness
5 (2)
Anorexia
5 (2)
Diarrhea
4 (2)
Head tilt 
2(2)
Nervousness
2 (2)
F.
 Fasting, exercise, or excitement can worsen clinical signs by decreasing blood glucose concentration or
increasing sympathetic stimulation.
G. Clinical signs reported in 206 dogs from several studies are listed in Table 21.1. While most dogs have
 more than one of these clinical signs, some dogs have none. Reported duration of clinical signs prior to diag-
nosis varies from 1 day to 3 years.
H. Physical examination is unremarkable in most dogs with insulinoma:
1. Dogs may be overweight due to the anabolic effects of insulin.
2. Postictal findings may be apparent if the dog had a recent seizure.
3. A peripheral polyneuropathy characterized by tetraparesis and decreased or absent appendicular
reflexes has been described in association with insulinoma in 13 dogs:
a. The etiology of insulinoma-associated peripheral neuropathy is not known.
paepa-aun sseidoaured e se sdonaaap Auiedonnaunod aun rel pansans uaaq seu i 'q
disorder unrelated to the metabolic changes associated with insulinoma.
IV. Diagnosis
A.  A clinical suspicion of insulinoma is established with documentation of:
1.
Appropriate clinical signs as described in Table 21.1.
2. Hypoglycemia (i.e., blood glucose concentration <60 mg/dL; 3.3 mmol/L). It is important to note that
many portable blood glucose meters tend to give a slightly lower blood glucose reading in dogs com-
pared to commercially available analyzers that use a reference method based on the hexokinase reaction.
However meters calibrated for dogs such as the Abbott AlphaTRAK meter give more accurate readings,
 3. Concurrent absolute or relative hyperinsulinemia:
insulinoma in Dogs233
a. Blood for measurement of insulin concentration should only be collected when the blood glucose
is <60mg/dL (3.3 mmol/L).
h. Normal insulin concentrations can vary between laboratories and must always be interpreted in
consideration of the blood glucose concentration:
1. If insulin concentration is below the reference range, a diagnosis of insulinoma is highly unlikely.
(i.e., relative hyperinsulinemia), a diagnosis of insulinoma should be considered possible, and
testing should be repeated as described below.
3. Absolute hyperinsulinemia, that is, insulin concentration above the reference range, with
concurrent hypoglycemia confirms a diagnosis of insulinoma.
4. Identification of a pancreatic mass with imaging studies may strengthen the suspicion for the presence
of insulinoma.
B. The diagnosis of insulinoma is confirmed with histologic examination and immunohistochemical staining
of a pancreatic mass.
C. Complete blood count, chemistry screen, and urinalysis are usually unremarkable aside from low blood
glucose concentration:
1. While hypoglycemia is observed in most dogs with insulinoma, especially if the measurement is
repeated on more than one occasion, it is important to remember that some dogs with insulinoma may
be euglycemic on repeated measurements.
2. Mild hypokalemia and elevations in alkaline phosphatase or alanine aminotransferase have also been
documented. Liver enzyme elevation is unrelated to the presence of metastases.
D. If a dog suspected of having an insulinoma is euglycemic, the following steps are followed in order to
establish a diagnosis:
1. The measurement of blood glucose concentration is repeated.
 2. The dog is fasted under careful observation, and blood glucose concentration is measured every
1-2h. In most dogs with insulinoma, hypoglycemia will develop within 12h of fasting. Blood for
measurement of insulin concentration is collected when the animal is hypoglycemic, and the dog is
then fed.
 3. A small number of dogs will not exhibit hypoglycemia, even upon repeated measurements and after a
prolonged (48-72 h) fast. Measurement of a low fructosamine concentration has been used to strengthen
the clinical suspicion of insulinoma in several dogs with euglycemia.
4. Glycosylated hemoglobin A1c concentration has been low in some dogs with insulinoma, but not in all.
5. Repeated measurements of fasted serum insulin concentration may also aid in the diagnosis. One
study of dogs with an insulinoma found that 76% of dogs had an absolute increase in fasted serum insu-
lin concentration when it was measured once and 91% of dogs had an absolute increase when it was
measured twice.
E. Other tests have been described for the diagnosis of insulinoma:
1. Insulin-to-glucose and glucose-to-insulin ratios are not recommended because of their low sensitivity,
and the amended insulin-to-ghucose ratio is not recommended because of its low specificity.
2. Additional tolerance and stimulation tests have been described but are not advocated under any
circumstance because of questionable usefulness and potentially fatal side effects such as hypoglycemia
and seizures.
F. Various imaging modalities may aid in establishing a clinical suspicion of insulinoma:
1. Most dogs with insulinoma have normal abdominal and thoracic radiographs.
2. When combining the results of several studies in which abdominal ultrasound was performed in
87 dogs with insulinoma, a pancreatic mass was identified in 49 (56%) dogs and abdominal metastasis
was noted in 17 (19%). Thus, an abdominal ultrasound may be helpful in increasing the clinical suspicion
of the presence of a pancreatic mass and metastases (Figure 21.2), but both false positive and false
negative results have been described.
 3. A single, optimal imaging technique for identifying insulinomas in humans has yet to be identified:
a. A high-quality dual-phase thin-section multidetector-computed tomography (CT) of the pancreas
 is effective in identifying a pancreatic mass in most affected humans.
234  Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Duodenum
sulinoma
elage la jo Asano) 'sasee jo %os inoge ui ssew yeaioued e supaiap u! nydlay s! punosein ieujwopgy z'iz auni
Seiler.)
h. Intraoperative, intraductal ultrasonography, which is not widely available, is more sensitive than
CT in detecting small (1-3 mm diameter) insulinomas in humans.
4. CT has been reported in a small number of dogs with insulinoma, but its diagnostic sensitivity has yet
to be determined. In one study in which 14 insulinomas were imaged by ultrasound, CT, and single-
photon emission CT, CT correctly identified the highest number of tumors (10/14, 71%).
insulinoma, dual-phase CTA identified the insulinoma in all three, two of which did not have a pancre-
atic mass identified on ultrasound. In two dogs, strong enhancement of the insulinoma was noted during
the arterial phase of the study only, suggesting the possible importance of CTA (Figures 21.3-21.5).
6. Intravenous administration of radioactively labeled synthetic somatostatin followed by whole body
scintigraphy is of limited value in imaging insulinomas in humans, likely because the number of somato-
statin receptors expressed in human insulinomas is low. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy has been
reported in a small number of dogs with insulinoma and appears to have low specificity:
a. Abnormal foci of activity were observed in all dogs 1-24 h after administration of the radioligand.
b. Accurate localization of the tumor was achieved in only 1 of 5 dogs.
V. Differential Diagnoses
 A. Differential diagnoses for hy poglycemia may be divided into those associated with excess secretion of
insulin or insulin-like factors, decreased glucose production, excess glucose consumption, drug-associated,
xylitol ingestion, or spurious causes:
1. Disorders in which the most important mechanism for hypoglycemia is excess secretion of insulin or
insulin-like factors include insulinoma or extrapancreatic tumor, most commonly hepatoma or intestinal
leiomyosarcoma. Islet cell hyperplasia occurs in humans and may exist in dogs.
2. Conditions associated with decreased glucose production include: hypoadrenocorticism, hypopituita-
rism, growth hormone deficiency, liver dysfunction/failure and glycogen storage diseases. Neonates of
any breed and juveniles of toy breeds can easily become hypoglycemic if not eating adequately. Prolonged
fasting, that is, >7-14 days except in toy breeds where shorter fasts can be an issue, malnutrition, or
pregnancy may also result in hypoglycemia.
 3. Excess glucose consumption may develop in sepsis or extreme exercise.
4. Some of the many drugs reported to induce hypoglycemia in human beings include: insulin, oral
hypoglycemic agents (e.g., sulfonylurea), salicylates (e.g., aspirin), acetaminophen, beta-blockers
(e.g., propranolol), beta-2 agonists, ethanol, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants
Insulinoma in Dogs235
Fgure 21.3
Dual-phase computed tomographic angiography prior to contrast administration. An insulinoma is not yet visible
within the pancreas. (Courtesy of Dr. Wilfried Mai.)
Fgure 21.4 Dual-phase computed tomographic angiography during the venous phase of the study. Some enhancement of the
insulinoma is apparent. (Courtesy of Dr. Wilfried Mai.)
Insulinoma
Pancreas
Fgure 21.5  Dual-phase computed tomographic angiography during the arterial phase of the study. Strong enhancement of the
insulinoma is apparent. (Courtesy of Dr. Wilfried Mai.)
(e.g., amitriptyline), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g., captopril), antibiotics (e.g., tetracy.
cline), lidocaine overdose, and lithium. The incidence of these toxicities in dogs is unknown.
5. Xylitol is a sweetening additive in some chewing gums, candy, diet foods, and dental products:
aq Ae qnum euahodau punoond oi peal ueo pue shop ui anoiaas unsun suaiod e si ll 'e
associated with liver failure.
h. Doses of xylitol >0.1 g/kg body weight have been associated with hypoglycemia, whereas doses
higher than 0.5 g/kg body weight have been linked to liver failure.
6. Factitious hypoglycemia may occur when blood cells are not promptly separated from serum; in cases
of severe polycythemia or leukocytosis, factitious hypoglycemia will develop because of cellular metabo-
lism of glucose if serum separation is delayed by more than only 1 h.
Vl. Treatment
A. Therapy for insulinoma can be divided into treatment of an acute hypoglycemic crisis and long-term
management.
B. The main component of treatment for an acute hypoglycemic crisis consists ofIV dextrose administration:
1. Dextrose can be given as a slow bolus (0.5 g/kg IV, diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride at a ratio of 1:3).
 2. The bolus should be followed by an IV continuous rate infusion (CRI) of dextrose (2.5-5% in water).
 Dextrose must be administered with caution because it can stimulate insulin secretion and exacerbate
hypoglycemia.
 3. Dextrose administration can be discontinued when clinical signs resolve, even if mild hypoglycemia
persists. In most dogs, neuroglycopenia will resolve with administration of dextrose.
C. In the unlikely event that the dog fails to respond to dextrose administration alone, dexamethasone
(0.1 mg/kg IV every 12 h) or somatostatin analogue (octreotide, 10-50 μg SCevery 8-12 h) may be administered.
D. In severe cases, a dog may have to be sedated with diazepam or pentobarbital for several hours while
the above treatment is continued and until seizures resolve.
E. Cerebral hypoxia may lead to cerebral edema; if cerebral edema is suspected, it can be treated with
    7   7 s %  
F.Use of a glucagon CRI (5-13 ng/kg/min with or without a concurrent 10% dextrose infusion) has been
reported in one dog with insulinoma-associated hypoglycemia:
1. Clinical signs attributed to hypoglycemia resolved within 20 min and hypoglycemia resolved within 1 h.
 2. Glucagon increases blood glucose concentration by promoting glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
However, glucagon also directly increases insulin secretion, and animals should be monitored carefully
for the possibility of worsening hypoglycemia.
G. The long-term treatment of choice for insulinoma is surgical resection of the tumor and gross metastases:
in estimating survival time.
 2. If postoperative hyperglycemia develops, it is usually transient and resolves once normal beta cells,
which have been suppressed by excess insulin secretion from neoplastic cells, regain their function.
Transient hyperglycemia may resolve with no exogenous insulin therapy within 24-72 h or require
several days of insulin therapy.
3. About 10% of dogs will develop diabetes mellitus and require treatment with exogenous insulin for
1-37 months.
4. Other postoperative complications include acute pancreatitis, diabetic ketoacidosis, delayed wound
healing, ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest, hemorrhage, sepsis, and leukopenia. Death due to
surgical manipulation of the pancreas has been reported infrequently in recent years.
is not performed. Medical therapy can be divided into cytotoxic treatment directed at destroying insulin-
1. Streptozocin is a nitrosourea antibiotic derived from the bacteria Streptomyces achromogenes:
a. Streptozocin is a cytotoxic drug that selectively destroys beta cells located in the pancreas o1
metastatic sites.
insulinoma in Dogs 237
b. The drug is nephrotoxic and has been reported to cause acute renal failure and renal tubular
atrophy in dogs.
C. Diuresis with saline decreases contact time between the drug and renal tubular epithelial cells and
may reduce the risk of nephrotoxicity.
d. Successful use of streptozocin was reported in a study of 17 dogs, rmost of which had surgery with
incomplete resection of gross lesions:
oidans oi 1od 1 e ro ( y/T 81) apo uos %6'o iim pieal am so1 (l
administration, during two more hours of streptozocin treatment, and for 2 additional hours after
treatment.
3) Butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg IM) was administered immediately following streptozocin therapy as
an antiemetic, but vomiting still occurred in about 30% of treatments.
4) Other side effects included diabetes mellitus, transient hypoglycemia and seizures, transient
hyperglycemia, transient elevations in alanine aminotransferase, azotemia, mild thrombocytope-
nia, or mild neutropenia
5) Although a few dogs appeared to have a prolonged survival due to streptozocin treatment,
median duration of normoglycemia in streptozocin treated dogs was 163 days, which was not
significantly different than control dogs treated surgically or medically. Further studies are needed
in order to determine if the benefits of streptozocin treatment outweigh its risks and costs.
 2. The main modes of relieving hypoglycemia, typically added in a stepwise progress when blood glucose
is no longer controlled, include dietary modification and treatment with prednisone, diazoxide, or
synthetic somatostatin:
a. Small frequent meals (every 4-6 h) of a diet high in protein, fat, and complex carbohydrate are
recommended, and simple sugars (present in some soft moist dog foods) should be avoided.
b. Glucocorticoids:
1) They increase blood glucose concentration by increasing gluconeogenesis, elevating glucose
6-phosphatase activity, decreasing blood glucose uptake into tissues, and stimulating glucagon
secretion.
2) Glucocorticoids can be administered intravenously during an acute hypoglycemic crisis in the
form of dexamethasone or can be given orally once the patient is stable.
3) For long-term use, prednisone is given at a dose of 0.5-4 mg/kg/day PO beginning at the lower
end of the dose, with gradual increases as needed.
4) It is the least expensive and most commonly used drug for treatment of canine insulinoma
C. Diazoxide:
1) Mechanism of action:
It is a benzothiadiazine derivative whose main action is to inhibit closure of ATP-dependent
K+ channels in beta cells, preventing depolarization of beta cells and inhibiting opening of
voltage-dependent Ca+ channels. Decreased Ca²t influx results in decreased exocytosis of
insulin-containing secretory vesicles.
a) Diazoxide also increases blood glucose concentration in depancreatized dogs by increasing
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and inhibiting tissue uptake of glucose.
 2) Diazoxide is administered at a dose of 10-40 mg/kg/day PO divided every 8-12 h, beginning
at the lower end of the dose, with gradual increases as needed.
3) Approximately 70% of dogs with insulinoma respond to treatment with diazoxide.
 4) Side effects are uncommon and include ptyalism, vomiting, and anorexia. However, in human
beings, myocardial ischemia, salt and water retention, hyperglycemia, hypotension, and cerebral
ischemia have been reported.
 5) Diazoxide is only available as a liquid and is very costly, especially in comparison to prednisone.
d. Octreotide:
1) It is a long-acting synthetic somatostatin analogue whose main mode of action is to inhibit
insulin secretion.
238 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2) In human beings, the action of octreotide is dependent on its binding affinity to any of the five
somatostatin receptor subtypes present in the tumor. Despite the fact that dogs have only one
a) The lack of a dependable response to octreotide in dogs has been attributed to octreotide
inhibition of glucagon and growth hormone secretion. If suppression of glucagon and growth
hormone secretion is of greater magnitude and duration compared to suppression of insulin
secretion, octreotide may actually cause worsening hypoglycemia.
b) Additionally, some canine insulinomas may not have somatostatin receptors.
3) However a study of 12 dogs with insulinoma found that when octreotide was administered to
dogs at doses of 50 pg/dog SC (median dog weight was 23.3 kg) once, baseline plasma insulin
concentrations decreased significantly but plasma concentrations of glucagon, GH, and ACTH
were unchanged. These findings warrant longer term studies of a long-acting octreotide product
in dogs with insulinoma.
4) No adverse side effects have been reported in dogs, but in humans they are mild and include
pain at the site of injection (which can be reduced if octreotide is warmed to room temperature
before administration), nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, or steatorrhea.
 5) Similar to diazoxide, octreotide is also costly, especially when compared to prednisone.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Median survival time of 142 dogs reported in different studies that underwent partial pancreatectomy
was 12-14 months with a range of 0 days to 5 years.
B.
While surgical intervention significantly improves survival as compared to medical management alone,
most dogs die of metastatic disease, regardless of the type of treatment.
C.
 Dogs with clinical stage I of the disease have a significantly longer disease-free interval, and about 50%
are expected to be normoglycemic 14 months postoperatively compared to only 20% of dogs with clinical
stage II or III
D.
Young dogs have a worse prognosis.
E.
 Dogs with postoperative hyperglycemia or normoglycemia have a significantly better prognosis than
those with hypoglycemia.
F.
mun in eousn m saop an u sa iz jo a iaans up e poan Aps s
partial pancreatectomy and a median survival time of 3.6 years in the subgroup of dogs that received
 prednisone in addition to partial pancreatectomy.
G.
 A low mitotic rate within the tumor is strongly associated with survival of human beings with
insulinoma. While a correlation berween the number of mitotic figures per high power field and local inva-
 siveness of the tumor has been documented in dogs, a significantly worse prognosis in dogs with a high
 mitotic count has yet to be established.
p ra pue sis eruo 'iam Apoq 'xas (sisoond ssrom e oa sop sn an ro) aoy  '
tion, ultrasonographic detection of pancreatic mass, tumor location, gross presence of metastatic disease,
 and blood glucose or insulin concentration are not significantly associated with prognosis.
VIlll. Prevention
 No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Caywood DD, Klausner JS, OLeary TP, et al. Pancreatic insulin-secreting neoplasms: Clinical, diagnostic, and prognostic
features in 73 Dogs. JAn Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:577-584.
Davison LJ, Podd SL, Ristic JME, et al. Evaluation of two point-of-care analysers for measurerment of fructosarmine or
haemoglobin A1c in dogs. J Smatl Anim Pract 2002;43:526-532.
Dunayer EK, Gwaltney-Brant SM. Acute hepatic failure and coagulopathy associated with xylitol ingestion in eight dogs.
J A Vet Med Assoc 2006;229(7):1113-1117.
insulinoma in Dogs 239
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hypoglycemia. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine Endocrinology and
Reproduction, 1st edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1987, pp. 304-327.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia: Insulinoma. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine Endocrinology
and Reproduction, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 616-644.
hypoglycermic crisis in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:27-32.
of canine insulinomas. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:168-176.
Hawkins KL, Summers BA, Kuhajda FP, et al. Immunocytochemistry of normal pancreatic islets and spontaneous islet cell
tumors in dogs. Vet Patho! 1987;24:170-179.
 Iseri T, Yamada K, Chijiwa K, et al. Dynamic computed tomography of the pancreas in normal dogs and in a dog with
pancreatic insulinoma. Vet Radiot Uttrasound 2007;48:328-331.
Kruth SA, Feldman EC, Kennedy PC. Insulin-secreting islet cell tumors: Establishing a diagnosis and the clinical course for
25 dogs. JAVMA 1982;181:54-58.
Lamb CR, Simpson K W, Boswood A, et al. Ultrasonography of pancreatic neoplasia in the dog: a retrospective review of
16 cases. Vet Rec 1995;137:65-68.
Leifer CE, Peterson ME, Matus RE. Insulin-secreting tumor: diagnosis and medical and surgical management in 55 dogs.
JAVMA 1986;188:60-64.
Lester NV, Newell SM, Hll RC, et al. Scintigraphic diagnosis of insulinoma in a dog. Vet Radio! Ultrasound 1999;40:174-178.
Madarame H, Kayanuma H, Shida T, et al. Retrospective study of Canine insulinomas: Eight cases (2005-2008). J Vet Med Sci
2009;71(7):905-911.
Mai W, Caceres AV. Dual-phase computed tomographic angiography in three dogs with pancreatic insulinoma. Vet Radio!
Ultrasound 2008;49:141-148.
Mellanby RJ, Hertage ME. Insulinoma in a normoglycaemic dog with low serum fructosamine. J Small Anir Pract
2002;43:506-508.
{1989-1999). JAVMA 2002;221:811-818
Polton GA, White RN, Brearley MJ, et al. Improved survival in a retrospective cohort of 28 dogs with insulinoma. J Smalt
Anim Prαct 2007;48:151-156.
Robben JH, Pollak YW, Kirpensteijn J,et al. Comparison of ultrasonography, computed tomography, and single-photon
emission computed tomography for the detection and localization of canine insulinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:15-22.
Schrauwen E, Van Ham L, Desmidt M,et al. Peripheral polyneuropathy associated with insulinoma in the dog: Clinical,
pathological, and electrodiagnostic features. Prog Vet Neurof 1996;7:16-19.
Tobin RL, Nelson RW, Lucory MD,et al. Outcome of surgical versus medical treatment of dogs with beta cell neoplasia:
Trifonidou MA, Kirpensteijn J, Robben JH. A retrospective evaluation of 51 dogs with insulinorma. Vet Q 1998;20:S114-S116.
CHAPTER 22
Insulinoma in Cats
Danielle Gunn-Moore and Kerry Simpson
Pathogenesis
● Functional tumor of pancreatic beta cells
Classical Signs
● Typically attributable to hypoglycemia: seizures, lethargy, weakness, muscle twitching, and collapse.
Diagnosis
● Hyperinsulinermia in the face of hypoglycemia.
● Identification of mass.
Treatment and Prognosis
● Surgical resection with or without ad lib feeding and corticosteroid administration.
● Highly variable outcome.
1. Pathogenesis
A. The beta cells (located in the pancreatic islets) are responsible for monitoring and controlling blood glu-
cose concentration. In the normal pancreas, these cells produce, store, and secrete insulin. Unlike the major-
ity of cells, glucose uptake into beta cells is insulin independent. If the blood glucose concentration is elevated,
 the beta cells can detect this, with the predominant glucose "sensor" being glucokinase (GCK). This protein
Aq paienai si aus sil jo uoissaidxa al pue 'sen iaist oneanued ai u aua  aui Aq roy papon s!
glucose concentration:
1. It is the beta cells' ability to sense and uptake glucose in an insulin independent manner, and then
release insulin in response to the blood glucose concentration, that allows the ratio of blood glucose
concentration to insulin concentration to be kept relatively constant in a healthy animal, even during a
prolonged fast.
B. Insulinomas are functional tumors of the pancreatic beta cells that autonomously synthesize and secrete
insulin, even in the face of hypoglycemia. This predisposes animals to hypoglycemic crises during fasting and
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
240
insulinoma in Cats   241
exercise. These tumors retain some responsiveness to many of the normal stimuli for insulin secretion, but
demonstrate an exaggerated response. Therefore, animals with insulinoma are at risk of hypoglycemia after
eating or with the administration of glucose containing intravenous fluids:
1. Compared to normal pancreatic tissue, GCK expression may be elevated in insulinoma tissue from
cats. As GCK is the predominant glucose "sensor" within the beta cells, this over expression may increase
insulin secretion and glucose sensitivity.
.
 Signalment
 Insulinomas are rare tumors in cats; only 19 cases appear in the literature, and some only provide
histology:
1. Where documented, the age of these cats ranged from 3 to 17 years, with only two <13 years of age.
 2. Three cases have been reported in neutered female cats and seven in neutered male cats.
 3. Six cases occurred in domestic short- or long-haired cats, four in Siamese cats, two in Persian cats;
earlier reports of insulinoma, and this has lead to the suggestion that this breed may be predisposed.
However, whether or not this is true remains unknown.
I. Clinical Signs
A. Clinical signs are generally present for weeks to months prior to investigation. They typically included
seizures, lethargy, weakness, muscle twitching, and collapse, although inappetence, diarrhea, and weight loss
have also been reported:
1. One case had cervical ventroflexion and intermittent bouts of constipation, in addition to lethargy
and exercise intolerance. However, this cat was diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type I
(MEN I), having a concurrent aldosterone-secreting tumor within the adrenal gland and a functional
parathyroid adenoma, which most likely account for these additional signs.
B.Seizures are commonly reported in cases of insulinoma. The central nervous system (CNS) is particularly
susceptible to the effects of low blood glucose. This is because the carbohydrate reserves in neural tissue are
limited and cellular metabolism is highly dependent on glucose supplies. In mammals, the cerebral cortex is
typically most susceptible to decreased glucose concentrations so seizure activity is seen before other areas
of the CNS and other organs, such as the heart, liver, and kidneys are affected.
C. Hypoglycemia stimulates the release of counter-regulatory hormones, such as glucagon, catecholamines,
cortisol, and growth hormone, which antagonize the effects of insulin and so increase the blood glucose
1. In the reported cases, seizures generally lasted for a very short period and were either not treated or
responded to oral glucose supplementation. However, one case remained disorientated between seizures
and developed irreversible neurologic complications after surgical removal of the pancreatic mass, and
one cat had seizures of 1-2 h duration.
2. Interestingly, seizure activity has only been reported associated with feeding in two cases. In dogs
ate clinical signs. However, in the cat, postprandial glucose surges do not appear to occur in the same
manner as in dogs. This species variation may therefore account for the lack of correlation between
feeding and clinical signs.
D. Reported findings on physical examination are highly variable. Some cats have appeared relatively unre
markable, while others have been depressed, weak, disorientated, hypothermic, bradycardic, have a gallop
rhythm, and variable menace response. One cat had previously had recurrent bouts of severe regenerative
anemia, which was present at the time of referral.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Hematological abnormalities have rarely been reported in cases of insulinoma; those documented include
anemia and mild thrombocytopenia. However the latter result was obtained from an automated reader and
a blood smear was not performed. A further case was leukopenic, with neutropenia and lymphopenia.
B.
from 0.99 to 2.09 mmol/L (reference range: 3.5-5.0 mmol/L):
242 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 22.1 Insulinoma in a cat identified at exploratory laparotomy. This mass was not detected on abdominal ultrasonography.
(From Reimer et al., 2005.)
1. In general, the remainder of the routine biochemistry is unremarkable, although two cats were mildly/
moderately azotemic and one cat had elevated calcium and sodium concentrations and a decreased potas
sium concentration; however, that case also had concurrent elevations in aldosterone and parathyroid
hormone and was diagnosed with MEN I.
C. Urinalysis is generally unremarkable or may demonstrate isosthenuria.
D. Blood pressure, when assessed, has been normal to slightly decreased.
E.
 Thoracic radiography has been normal in all reported cases.
F. Abdominal ultrasonography has only been reported in four cases, and a pancreatic mass was only identi-
fied in one, highlighting the fact that a negative ultrasonographic examination does not rule out insulinoma
(Figure 22.1).
G. Nuclear scintigraphy using radiolabeled somatostatin analogs has been used in the assessment of islet cell
tumors in people. This technique relies on the binding of analogs to somatostatin receptors, of which there
   e  s n s s s r s a  s s 
 of canine insulinoma, but to date has not been assessed in feline insulinoma. However, its use may be limited
 in this species as immunohistochemical staining of insulinomas suggests that somatostatin receptors are not
always present in cats.
H. In order to diagnose an insulin-secreting tumor, blood insulin concentration should be assessed in the
face of concurrent hypoglycemia. In a normal animal, hypoglycemia suppresses insulin secretion, resulting
in low insulin concentrations. However, if an insulinoma is present,the beta cells within the neoplasm tend
to be less responsive to hypoglycemia so the insulin secretion is not suppressed and the insulin concentration
is normal or increased:
1. The serum insulin levels have been reported in three cats diagnosed with insulinoma and have been
inappropriately normal or increased.
1. Histopathological assessment of resected tumors should be performed. Chromogranin A is stored and
co-released with insulin from beta cells and is a useful immunological marker which can be used to deter-
mine if the mass is neuroendocrine in origin; abundant Chromogranin A is consistently reported in insu-
have demonstrated patchy insulin staining, with >50% of cells staining positive in one report and no insulin
to vary between neoplasms.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. There are several differentials for hypoglycemia in cats (Table 22.1). While evidence of an inappropriate
insulin concentration in the face of hypoglycemia strongly suppors the diagnosis of an insulin-secreting tumor,
similar resulrs can be obtained with beta cell hyperplasia. To date, this condition has not been reported in the
insulinoma in Cats 243
Fgure 22.2  Insulinoma production of tumor markers and islet hormones was determined by immunohistochemistry.
Chromogranin A, a marker for endocrine tumors, was expressed by 100% of tumor cells. (From Jackson et al., 2009.)
Table 22.1 Differential diagnosis for hypoglycemia.
Insulin overdose
Hepatic disease
Sepsis
Neonatal hypoglycemia
Insulinoma
Insulin-secreting neoplasm
Storage disease
Hypoadrenocorticism
Beta cell hyperplasia
Vl. Treatment
4.
 Surgical resection is recommended as it may potentially cure cases with a solitary lesion:
1. Surgical exploration of the abdominal cavity allows abnormal tissue to be identified and resected or,
if a mass cannot be identified, some authors recommend partial pancreatectomy. However, this is prob-
masses having been reported in the left limb (n = 3), right limb (n = 2) and at the angle of the pancreas
between the portal vein and the pancreatic duct (n = 1).
 2. In cases where the mass is nonresectable, surgery allows the mass to be debulked and this can aid in
the stabilization of the patient. However, cases have not yet been managed like this in cats as the masses
have been simall, varying in size from 4 mm to 3 cm.
 3. Surgical exploration of the abdominal cavity is also useful in the prognostic evaluation, allowing the
clinician to assess the other organs for presence of metastases.
4. The main risks associated with surgery are pancreatitis and postoperative diabetes mellitus, which
can be transient or permanent.
B.
Medical therapy has been limited in cats. Regular feeding of small feeds or dried ad lib food has been
reported to be of some benefit. In addition, glucocorticoids can be used to antagonize the effects of insulin
and stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis. Frequent feeding and glucocoricoid therapy have successfully palli-
ated clinical signs for 8 and 17 months after the recurrence of clinical signs in cats which had previously had
surgical resection of insulinoma:
1. Other potential therapies which have been used in dogs include octreotide and diazoxide,but to date
neither of these has been tried in the treatment of insulinoma in cats.
244  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animats
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 The prognosis for cats with insulinoma appears highly variable. Of the cats which have undergone
10 months. Of these cases, the first also received medical therapy and was euthanized 4 weeks later, the
tion of the blood glucose concentration, the third also received medical therapy and survived for 2 years
postdiagnosis, and the last represented with hypoglycemic crisis and died 18 months post surgical resection;
postmortem examination revealed metastases in the liver and pancreatic lymph nodes. The two other cases
where surgical resection was performed were alive and asymptomatic at the time that they were reported, 6
and 32 months postoperatively.
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Carpenter JL, Andrews LK, Holzworth J. Tumors and tumorlike lesions. In: Holzworth J, ed. Diseases of the Cat: Medicine
αnd Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1987.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Insulinoma. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinotogy and Reproduction,
3rd edn. St Louis: WB Saunders, 2004.
Hawks D, Peterson ME, Hawkins KL, Rosebury WS. Insulin-secreting pancreatic (islet cell) carcinoma in a cat. JVIM
1992;6:193-196.
Jackson TC, Debey B, Lindbloom-Hawley S, Jones BT, Schermerhorm T. Cellular and molecular characterization of a feline
insulinoma. JVIM 2009;23:383-387
Kraje AC. Hypoglycemia and irreversible neurological complications in a cat with insulinoma. JAVMA 2003;223:812-814.
McMillan F. Functional pancreatic islet cell tumor in a cat. JAAHA 1985;2 1:741-746.
Myers NC, Andrews GA, Chard-Bergstrom C. Chrormogranin A plasma concentration and expression in pancreatic islet cell
tumors of dogs and cats. AJVR 1997;58:615-620.
 O'Brien TD, Norton F, Turner TM. Pancreatic endocrine tumour in a cat: Clinical, pathological and immunohistochemical
evaluation. JAAHA 1990;26:453-457.
Reimer SB, Pelosi A, Frank JD, Steficek BA, Kiupel M, Hauptman JG. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I in a cat. JAVMA
2005;227:101-104.
CHAPTER 23
Insulinomas in Other Species
Sue Chen and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Pathogenesis
● Insulinomas are pancreatic beta cell tumors that overproduce insulin despite inhibitory stimuli and
 may release excessive amounts of insulin with provocative stimuli.
● Hypoglycemia ensues due to the inappropriate elevations of insulin.
● Although insulinomas are one of the most common neoplasms noted in ferrets, they are rarely
reported in other species except dogs.
Classical Signs
● Affected ferrets are usually between 4 and 6 years of age.
● Lethargy, weakness, and ataxia with progression of signs if left untreated.
● Signs can be intermittent, with normal activity between bouts of weakness.
Diagnosis
● Persistent hypoglycemia.
Treatment
● Surgicalexcision of the insulinoma; medical management of hypoglycemia with prednisone or diazoxide
With the exception of ferrets, dogs, and cats,insulinomas have not been reported in other species other than
 in two case reports: one describing insulinoma in two guinea pigs identified postmortem and one in which
the cause of episodic seizure in a 12-year-old Shetland pony broodmare was attributed to a pancreatic
adenoma. In the author's practice (Chen), we believe we had a rabbit with insulinoma based on clinical
symptoms and response to diazoxide. This chapter will focus primarily on the disease in ferrets since infor-
mation on insulinomas in other species is limited.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
245
246  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animats
Pathogenesis
A.
 Insulinomas produce their effects through secretion of an excessive amount of insulin:
1. Insulin is secreted indiscriminately and the tumors are not responsive to normal inhibitory stimuli
such as low blood glucose or elevated insulin levels.
2. Provocative stimuli, such as a rapidly increasing glucose level, can stimulate excessive insulin secre-
tion from these tumors causing a profound rebound hypoglycemia.
3. Insulin decreases circulating blood glucose levels by a number of methods:
a. Inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.
b. Rapid uptake of glucose into peripheral tissues.
C. Promotes the storage of glucose as glycogen in the muscle and liver.
d. Promotes the conversion of excess glucose into fatty acids.
B. Insulinomas are one of the most commonly diagnosed neoplasms seen in middle-aged to older ferrets
with a reported incidence of 25% (382 of 1525) and 21.7% (139 of 574) of neoplasms diagnosed in two
large retrospective studies.
C. A majority of these tumors occur in North America. A few cases of beta cell tumors have been reported
 ara xa s are a no  pn a e 'de ins 'sn  us
compared to in North America:
1. Ferrets in the United States are supplied by a small number of breeders, thus limiting their genetic
diversity. It is thought that there may be a genetic component in the development of insulinomas.
D. An inappropriate diet may be a contributing factor in the development of insulinomas in ferrets:
1. Most ferrets in the United States are fed a commercial kibble diet, which is higher in carbohydrates
than the whole prey diet commonly fed in the United Kingdom.
2. Diets that are high in carbohydrates may have a negative effect on glucose metabolism in ferrets (a
strictly carnivorous species).
e so re qnon 'saou s on sndoss  ais u sn ans sonsn '1
occasionally noted.
F.  Multiple pancreatic nodules due to local recurrence is a common finding:
1. Metastasis to other organs is uncommon. When it does occur, the regional lymph nodes, liver, and the
spleen are the most commonly involved.
Il.Signalment
A.
 Most ferrets begin exhibiting clinical signs around 4-6years of age, although it appears that younger
ferrets are increasingly being affected.
B.
 There are conflicting reports on whether males are slightly overrepresented over females.
C.E
 Ferrets with insulinomas can have varying body conditions especially if they have concurrent diseases
(e.g., adrenal disease, lymphoma).
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Clinical signs include mental dullness, irritability, and lethargy. Owners often assume the behavior is a
slowing down due to old age (Figure 23.1).
 Nausea can result in ptyalism or pawing at the mouth.
C.
Stargazing, hindlimb weakness, and ataxia are often noted as the hypoglycemia worsens.
D.
 Severely hypoglycemic ferrets may exhibit generalized seizures or may be comatose on presentation
正
 Clinical signs are often episodic, with bouts of normal activity between periods of lethargy.
F.
of clinical signs often progresses if left untreated.
IV. Diagnosis
A. A presumptive diagnosis of insulinoma is made in ferrets when they demonstrate a fasting blood glucose
<60 mg/dL (<3.2 mmol/L),especially in the presence of clinical symptoms and these symptoms cease after a
feeding or intravenous administration of glucose. (Figure 23.2):
1. In patients where an insulinoma is suspected but the fasting blood glucose is within normal limits
90-125 mg/dL (5.0-7.0 mmol/L), a carefully monitored 3-4 h fast may be required to confirm hypoglycemia.
insulinomas in Other Species247
Fgure 23.1 Most ferrets with insulinoma are presented for lethargy and weakness that may wax and wane, but is often
progressive. Owners may also report the ferret seems to be sleeping more or is not as easily rousable.
39
AsCEerESaL
XLOO）HE（0
Fgure 23.2 Handheld glucometers can be used to quickly assess the relative blood glucose level; however, it should be noted
that many handheld glucometers are not validated for ferrets.
B. Elevated insulin levels >108 μU/mL (>773 pmol/L) with concurrent hypoglycemia supports the diagnosis
of an insulinoma:
1. A normal or even low insulin level does not necessarily rule out the presence of an insulinoma due to
a presumed erratic insulin secretion by some insulinomas.
C. Diagnostic imaging, such as radiography and ultrasonography, is usually unrewarding as a majority of
the nodules are only a few millimeters in diameter.
D. Histology of surgical biopsies is required for definitive diagnosis:
1. Most insulinomas are composed of cords and nests ofeosinophilic polyhedral cells on a fine fibrovascular
stroma.
 2. Though most are usually well circumscribed, some tumors can be infiltrative.
 3. The tumor cells may be described as hyperplasia, adenomas, or carcinomas and a specific nodule may
have a combination of any of these processes.
 4. Most islet celltumors express strong immunoreactivity for insulin, though immunostaining for peptide
V.  Differential Diagnoses
A. Increased glucose utilization and impaired hepatic function during sepsis can lead to hypoglycemia.
248  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Figure 23.3 Evaluate both limbs of the pancreas for insulinomas (arrow). Most insulinomas are no more than a few millimeters
'salnpou awos Ajuap! oi painbal ag Aew seaioued ayi jo uoedled aual pue jajaweip u!
B. Hepatic insufficiency (e.g., hepatic neoplasia, cirrhosis, portal caval shunts) can result in hypoglycemia
due to impaired hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.
 e ssoe edau red  ris paod u siu jo ae sea 
result in hypoglycemia.
D. Improper prolonged storage of blood samples can artifactually decrease blood glucose levels.
E.
Generalized weakness, lethargy, and hindlimb ataxia can also be seen in ferrets with cardiac disease
(e.g., canine heartworm Dirofilaria immitis), renal disease (e.g., urinary blockage from prostatomegaly),
gastrointestinal disease (e.g., gastric foreign body, enteritis), and other neoplasms (e.g., lymphosarcoma).
These diseases should be considered in any weak ferret especially if the blood glucose is within normal
limits.
Vl. Treatment
A. Surgical therapy:
1. Surgical excision of the insulinomas is considered the treatment of choice. (Figure 23.3). However, due
to the high incidence of local recurrence, surgery is rarely curative long term.
2. Improved clinical signs and longer survival times have been noted for ferrets that have had their
insulinomas removed:
a Reported disease-free intervals have ranged from 0 to 23.5 months (medians of 234 days, 240 days,
and 10.6 months).
h. Owners should be advised that surgery should not be considered curative, but that it may
temporarily stop or slow the progression of disease for a longer disease-free interval.
C. Incomplete resolution of clinical signs may be due to remaining microscopic diseased islet cells.
One case study demonstrated as many as 52% (26 out of 50) of ferrets remained hypoglycemic after
surgery. However, these ferrets may require lower doses of medication to be symptom free than before
the surgery.
d. Some ferrets may have a transient hyperglycemia after removal of an insulinoma. Most of these
resolve on their own within a few weeks
3. To prevent a hypoglycemic crisis, an intravenous catheter should be placed preoperatively to administer
a constant rate infusion of a balanced electrolyte solution supplemented with 2.5-5 % dextrose pre-, peri-,
and postoperatively.
4. Careful visualization and gentle palpation of both limbs of the pancreas is performed to locate
pancreatic nodules. Pancreatic nodules can be individually removed or in the case of multiple nodules, a
partial pancreatectomy can be performed.
insulinomas in Other Species  249
Table 23.1 Drug dosages for treating hypoglycemia in ferrets.
Drug
Dosage
Prednisolone
0.25-2 mg/kg PO q 12 h 
Diazoxide
5-30 mg/kg PO q 12 h
Octreotide
1-2 μg/kg q &-12h; equivocal results noted 
Dextrose 50%
To be given during a hypoglycemic crisis; 0.25-2 mL of
50% dextrose diluted 1:1 with LRS or saline.
Administer as a slow intravenous bolus to effect.
Start at the low end of the dose range when starting pallative therapy. Check the blood 
glucose level every S-7 days and increase the dosage increnentally as needed to manage
the hypoglycemia and clinic al symptom5.
 5. A full abdominal exploratory is highly recommended to evaluate areas of potential metastasis and to
evaluate for any concurrent conditions such as adrenocortical neoplasia or lymphoma
6. Postoperative complications such as pancreatitis appear to be uncommon in ferrets.
B. Medical (palliative) therapy (Table 23.1):
1. The goal of medical therapy is to increase blood glucose levels to the point where clinical signs are
abated, but not necessarily to reestablish normoglycemia. Most ferrets enjoy an improved quality of life
with palliative therapy; however, the owners must be advised that it does not provide a cure for
insulinomas and increasing doses may be needed over time.
2. Glucocorticoids (i.e., prednisone and prednisolone) increase a patient's blood glucose level by
increasing hepatic gluconeogenesis, decreasing glucose uptake by peripheral tissues, and inhibiting insulin
binding to insulin receptors:
a. Doses range from 0.5 to 2 mg/kg PO q 12 h. Start at a low dose and increase the dose incrementally
as needed to control clinical symptoms.
b. Initially, the blood glucose should be rechecked within 5-7days to assess if the dose needs adjusting.
C. Most ferrets are relatively resistant to the immunosuppressive effects of prednisolone. However,
possible side effects of long-term glucocorticoid therapy include polyuria and polydipsia, abdominal
weight gain, and slow or impaired hair growth in any shaved areas.
3. Diazoxide, a nondiuretic benzothiadiazine, increases blood glucose levels by directly inhibiting
pancreatic insulin secretion by preventing the release of insulin from insulin granules. Additionally,
diazoxide stimulates the release of epinephrine which in turn promotes hepatic gluconeogenesis and
glycogenolysis and decreases cellular uptake of glucose. It does not possess any antineoplastic activity:
a. Dosing starts at 5-10 mg/kg q 12h PO and is gradually increased to a maximum of 30mg/kg q
12 h if lower doses do not control clinical signs adequately.
b. Diazoxide can be added to the treatment regimen when glucocorticoids alone no longer control
clinical symptoms or can be used by itself.
C.
 Adverse side effects are not commonly noted, but can include anorexia and vomiting.
d. Diazoxide should be used cautiously in patients with renal disease or congestive heart failure as it
can cause sodium and fluid retention.
the sporadic use of octreotide in ferrets has produced equivocal results:
a. This medication may be useful in some insulinoma patients that are refractory to other types of
 treatment. However, not all insulinomas are responsive to this medication because pancreatic islet cell
tumors have varied expression of somatostatin receptors.
due to suppression of glucagon.
250 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Presentation of weak, lethargic ferret
Check blood
glucose
lIf glucose is<80
lf glucose >80
 Administer intravenous
 Fast patient for
bolus (0.25-2mL)
3-4 h
of 50% dextrose diluted
1:1 with saline or LRS.
Assess patient for other causes of
Titrate to effect
 lethargy—patient is not hypoglycemic 
Place onto
Start prednisolone
Offer patient 
maintenance fluids
or diazoxide
kibble, syringe
with 5% dextrose
food if not eating
Reassess blood glucose levels
Taper dextrose concentration
 in maintenance fluids
The end goal is to control
gradually over 12-24 h.
 clinical symptoms, not to
Taper more slowly if the
reestablish
blood glucose drops or
normoglycemia
clinical signs reoccur
Figure 23.4 Management of a hypoglycemic crisis. Note that glucose units refer to measurement in micrograms per deciliter.
C. Reported dosage is 1-2 pg/kg q 8-12h subcutaneously.
C. Management of a hypoglycemic crisis (Figure 23.4):
1. If a ferret is lethargic or comatose on presentation to the clinic, quickly assess the blood glucose level
2. Administer intravenously slowly 0.25-2mL of 50% dextrose diluted 1:1 with saline or Lactated
ringer's and titrate to effect:
a. If a ferret continues to seizure despite an intravenous dextrose bolus, diazepam (1 mg/kg IV) may
be administered.
3. After the initial dextrose bolus, the patient should be placed on maintenance fluids supplemented with
 5% dextrose to prevent a rebound hypoglycemic episode.
4. Oral medications that increase the blood glucose level (i.e., prednisolone or diazoxide) and small
feedings should be initiated once the ferret is able to swallow.
Insulinomas in Other Species251
Fgure 23.5 Kibble should be available at all times and in easily accessible places. A kibble that is high in protein and low in
carbohydrates is recommended to prevent dramatic swings in blood glucose.
5. As the blood glucose stabilizes through oral medications and feedings, the patient should be gradu-
ally weaned off intravenous dextrose and fluids.
D.
Home management of insulinomas:
1. Owners should be counseled on the clinical signs of hypoglycemia, such as lethargy, ataxia, or
drooling (nausea). Changes in diet and management of hypoglycemic episodes must be discussed with
the owner if the ferret is to have any quality of life.
2. Diet modification to a high-protein, low-carbohydrate kibble helps decrease the consumption of
simple carbohydrates which can induce a rebound release of insulin, thus triggering a hypoglycemic
episode. (Figure 23.5):
a Owners should be instructed to discontinue all treats that are high in simple sugars, including
raisins, peanut butter and any ferret supplements containing corn syrup or dextrose.
h. When changing brands of kibble, make sure the ferret accepts the new diet as some ferrets can
be picky eaters and may inadvertently go into a hypoglycemic crisis from not eating. Owners may
consider gradually mixing the new food in with the old kibble to improve acceptance.
3. Kibble should be available to the ferret at all times. In homes where ferrets are allowed to run free in
a ferret-proofed area, instruct owners to provide multiple feeding stations so that food is easily accessible.
4. I mild clinical signs are noted, owners should feed the ferret immediately. Oftentimes mild clinical
signs improve once the ferret is fed.
5. f the owner finds their ferret comatose or exhibiting seizures, owners should drip corn syrup (e.g-;
VI1.
Prognosis
4
The prognosis is good to excellent for an improved quality of life with palliative care, but the owners
 must be informed that the medicines are only controlling the clinical signs and not providing a cure for the
insulinoma. The dose of medications may need to be increased over time as needed to help control clinical
symptoms.
 Because of the high rate of local recurrence, the prognosis for a long-term cure is guarded to poor.
Surgical excision is required for any cessation of clinical signs though the disease-free period can vary
greatly.
VIll. Prevention
4
It is thought that diets high in sugar or simple carbohydrates are believed to be risk factors in the develop
ment of insulinomas. A high-quality kibble that is high in protein and low in carbohydrates may be beneficial.
252 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
References and Further Readings
Antinoff N, Hahn K. Ferret oncology: Diseases, diagnostics, and therapeutics. Vet Clin North Amm Exot Anim Pract
2004;7(3):579-625.
Antinoff N, Williams BH. Neoplasia. In Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinicat Medicine
αnd Surgery, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 104-105.
57 cases (1986-1994). J Ar Vet Med Assoc 1996;209(10):1741-1745.
Chen S. Pancreatic endocrinopathies in ferrets. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11{1):107-123.
Ehrhart N, Withrow SJ, Ehrhart EJ, et al. Pancreatic beta cell turmor in ferrets: 20 cases {1986-1994). J Arn Vet Med Assoc
1996;209(10):1737-1740.
Lewington JH. Endocrine diseases. In: Lewington JH, ed. Ferret Husbandry, Medicine and Surgery. Edinburgh: Elsevier Science
Limited, 2000, pp. 211-222.
Li X, Fox JG, Padrid PA. Neoplastic diseases in ferrets: 574 cases {1968-1997). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1998;212(9):1402-1406.
Rosenthal KL, Wyre NR. Endocrine diseases. In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinicat
Medicine and Surgery, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, pp. 92-102.
Rosenthal KL.Ferret and rabbit endocrine disease diagnosis. In: Fudge AM, ed. Laboratory Medicine: Avian and Exotic Pets.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2000, pp. 319-24.
Ross MW, Lowe JE, Cooper BJ,et al. Hypoglycemic seizures in a Shetland pony. Cornell Vet 1983;73:151-169.
Vanmnevel JY, Wilcock B. Insulinoma in 2 guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). Can Vet J 2005;46(4):339-341.
Weiss CA, Willams BH, Scott MV. Insulinoma in the ferret: Clinical findings and treatment comparison of 66 cases. J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 1998;34(6):471-475.
CHAPTER 24
Gastrinoma, Glucagonoma, and
Other APUDomas
Craig Ruaux and Patrick Carney
Pathogenesis
● Neoplastic transformation of neuroendocrine (Amine Precursor Uptake and Decarboxylation
[APUD]} cells.
● Clinical syndromes generally caused by elevated secretion of functional endocrine products.
● May be orthoendocrine (i.e., produce the same hormone as the cell type of tumor origin) or
paraendocrine (i.e., produce a hormone not normally made in the cell type of origin).
● Majority are malignant, but adenomas do occur.
● Chemodectoma (dog), medullary thyroid carcinoma (dog), gastrinoma, and carcinoid are the most
commonly reported; glucagonoma is less frequent in dogs and has not been reported in cats.
● Somatostatinoma and pancreatic polypeptidoma have been reported in one dog each.
Classical Signs
● Vary with tumor type and hormone(s) elaborated.
● Gastrinoma: Most dogs are >8 years old and feline cases have been 8-12 years of age; vomiting.
weight loss, decreased appetite, diarrhea (dog), gastric mucosal hypertrophy, and duodenal ulcerations.
 Glucagonoma: Most reported cases in older adults to geriatric; characteristic crusting, ulcerative
lesions of extremities, pressure points, and mucocutaneous junctions; lack of appetite, lethargy.
 Somatostatinoma: weight loss.
● Pancreatic polypeptidoma: signs similar to gastrinoma.
Diagnosis
● Presumptive based on clinical signs and elevated serum/plasma hormone assay.
● Definitive diagnosis via immunohistochemistry of tumor.
Treatment
● All tumors: surgical resection/debulking and supportive care.
● Gastrinoma: proton pump inhibitors, somatostatin analogues.
● Glucagonoma: amino acid supplementation.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
253
254 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 24.1 Composite of four endoscopic images showing severe duodenal ulceration in a dog with gastrinoma. (Images
courtesy of Dr. C. Ludlow, Animal Specialty Hospital, Rockledge, FL.)
1. Pathogenesis
A. APUDomas arise from neoplastic transformation of neuroendocrine (APUD) cells with similar
biosynthetic pathways and ultrastructural characteristics; these include:
1. Pituitary corticotrophs producing ACTH (see Chapters 5 and 7) give rise to hyperadrenocorticism.
 2. Pancreatic islet β cells producing insulin (see Chapters 21-23) which give rise to insulinomas.
 3. Pancreatic islet α cells producing glucagon give rise to glucagonomas.
4. Thyroid C-cells producing calcitonin give rise to medullary thyroid carcinomas.
 5. Gastric and duodenal G-cells producing gastrin give rise to gastrinomas:
a. Gastrin is not produced in the normal adult canine pancreas.
h. While the origin of pancreatic gastrinomas has not been identified, they may arise as paraendocrine
tumors of islet cells or from persistence and transformation of fetal islet cells, which do express
gastrin.
6. Adrenal medullary chrormaffin cells producing epinephrine and norepinephrine give rise to
 pheochromocytomas (see Chapters 13 and 14).
 7. Chemoreceptor (carotid, aortic body)cells with no known endocrine function give rise to chemodectomas.
 8. Pancreatic islet, gastric, and small intestinal cells producing vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) give
rise to VIPomas.
 9. Pancreatic islet 8 (delta) cells producing somatostatin give rise to somatostatinomas.
10. Pancreatic PP cells producing pancreatic polypeptide give rise to pancreatic polypeptidomas.
11. Gastrointestinal and respiratory enterochromaffin cells producing serotonin, histamine, and kallikrein
give rise to carcinoids.
B。
 Secretion of active hormones or hormone derivatives/analogues is responsible for the majority of clinical
signs observed with gastrinoma, glucagonoma, and VIPoma:
1. Gastrinoma:
a.
Gastrin stimulates gastric acid secretion.
b. The presence of excess gastric acid leads to greatly reduced gastric pH, causing gastroduodenal
[ oa rs  d i sd   (r ) 
Gastrinoma, Glucagonoma, and Other APUDomas 255
Figure 24.2 Footpads of a dog showing characteristic skin lesions of hepatocutaneous syndrome. Note marked hyperkeratosis
and crusting of foot pads with deep ulcerative fissures.(Image courtesy of Dr. Oliver Garden, Royal Veterinary College,
London.)
ifritation, altered gastrointestinal motility, and inactivation of pH-sensitive digestive enzymes such as
trypsin, pancreatic lipase, and amylase.
C. Malabsorptive diarrhea develops secondary to enzyme inactivation and altered motility, contributing
to weight loss.
d. Gastric hyperacidity, mucosal irritation, and mucosal (antral/pyloric) hyperrophy contribute to emesis.
2. Glucagonoma:
a. Glucagon stimulates both breakdown of glycogen and gluconeogenesis within the liver while
signaling for insulin release from the pancreas. The end result of normal glucagon secretion is to
elevate blood glucose concentrations and allow peripheral tissues to utilize the glucose.
h. In excess, glucagon may lead to insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, hypoaminoacidemia (perhaps
due to gluconeogenesis), and nonspecific secondary vacuolar hepatopathy.
C. The pathogenesis of the characteristic skin lesions seen in patients with glucagonoma (variously
called superficial necrolytic dermatitis [SND], necrolytic migratory erythema [NME], or metabolic
epidermal necrosis [MEN]; Figure 24.2) is poorly understood:
1) Lesions may relate to persistent hypoaminoacidemia resulting in depletion of epidermal protein.
2) A direct effect of glucagon, zinc deficiency, hypoalbuminemia, or essential fatty acid deficiency
have all been postulated to cause the skin lesions, but objective evidence in support of any
possibility is lacking in the literature.
3. VIPoma:
a. Causes Verner-Morrison syndrome, characterized by profuse watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and
achlorhydria (hence its other name, WDHA syndrome).
b. It has not been identified in companion animals.
C. Carcinoids, chemodectomas, medullary thyroid carcinomas, somatostatinomas, and pancreatic
polypeptidomas usually do not cause clinical signs due to an endocrine product; clinical signs generally
relate to tumor location, size, presence of any metastases, and interference with adjacent organ function:
1. Carcinoids:
a. Occur primarily throughout the gastrointestinal tract, with less common occurrences in the liver,
gallbladder and lungs.
h. They produce a characteristic hormone-driven syndrome of torso and facial flushing and diarrhea
vomiting, dyschezia, weight loss) in animals:
256 Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
1) It is unclear if this is due to lack of release of serotonin, histamine, and kallikrein or to the
difficulty of assessing clinical signs of flushing in veterinary patients.
2) Diarrhea occurs in 32% of affected dogs but may be caused by the physical presence of the
tumor rather than hormone elaboration, particularly given that diarrhea is rare in extraintestinal
carcinoids. The incidence of diarrhea in cats with carcinoids is unclear.
c. One case of a carcinoid in a dog that was presumed to secrete ACTH, leading to Cushing's syndrome.
has been reported. However the presence of ACTH could not be demonstrated in the carcinoid.
2. Chemodectomas:
 a. Have been reported in dogs and cats, but are more common in dogs.
h. They have not been documented to actively secrete neurotransmitters or hormones. Clinical signs
arise from tumor location and interference with the function of adjacent organs.
C. Aortic body tumors account for 83% of chemodectomas, carotid body tumors account for 15.5%,
2.5% occur in both locations simultaneously, and <0.2% occur elsewhere.
d. Aortic body tumors may lead to heart failure, pericardial effusion/cardiac tamponade, ascites, and/
or pleural effusion by compressing the heart or great vessels, rupturing with subsequent hemorrhage
into the pericardium or thorax, or generating malignant effusion.
e. Carotid body tumors may cause the same clinical signs and complications as aortic body tumors,
but they also commonly compress or infiltrate cervical structures.
f. Metastases may occur to virtually any location, although the majority of chemodectomas (roughly
75 %) are benign.
g. Boxers and Boston terriers are markedly overrepresented:
1) Account for 39% and 17% of cases, respectively, resulting in a relative risk (risk ratio) of
9.3-26.3 for Boxers and 8.8-19.2 for Boston teriers.
2) While unproven, it is hypothesized that a combination of genetics and stimulation of
chemoreceptors due to chronic hypoxia leads to malignant transformation of cells within the
aortic and carotid bodies.
h. Chemodectomas will not be discussed further in this chapter as they do not result in an
endocrinopathy.
3. Medullary thyroid carcinomas are rare tumors of calcitonin-secreting cells, accounting for 36% of
canine thyroid carcinomas. They have not been reported in cats:
a. Sporadic and familial canine cases have been reported, indicating both spontaneous oncogenesis
and genetic influence may play a role in tumoral etiology. While human familial medullary carcinoma
is almost invariably linked to mutations in the proto-oncogene RET, similar mutations were not
identified in the one reported pedigree of a canine family with medullary thyroid carcinoma.
b. Up to 100% of canine medullary thyroid carcinomas are immunohistochemically positive for the pres-
ence of calcitonin. No assay is commercially available for measuring circulating serum calcitonin concen-
trations, which might help as a serum biomarker to distinguish medullary from follicular thyroid tumors.
C. Despite secreting excessive amounts of calcitonin, human medullary thyroid carcinomas are not
is thought to be true of dogs. Because the endocrine component of this tumor is believed to be clinically
silent, medullary carcinomas will not be discussed further.
4. The normal role of somatostatin is to inhibit the release of virtually all pancreatic and digestive hormones:
 a. "Somatostatin syndrome” in humans includes hypogastrinemia-mediated reduction in gastric acid
secretion, gallbladder disease attributed to lack of regular contraction, and diarrhea and steatorrhea
due, in part, to ineffective digestion in the face of altered gastrointestinal pH. However the syndrome
is extraordinarily rare in humans with a somatostatinoma.
b. Compatible findings were not reported in the one affected dog.
5. Pancreatic polypeptide has a biphasic effect on digestive secretions, initially stimulating digestive enzyme
release and gallbladder contraction, then inhibiting both. It also promotes satiety and gastric emptying:
a. Little is known about the clinical syndrome(s) associated with excessive production in humans.
h. The single affected dog reported experienced vomiting and gastrointestinal ulceration, which are
rare in human cases.
Gastrinoma, Giucagonoma, and Other APUDomas  257
Signalment
4.
Gastrinoma:
1. Dogs:
a. Median age of 10 years at diagnosis with a range of 3.5-12 years.
b. Of the 21 dogs with gastrinoma, 3 were German shepherds, 2 were Shih-tzus, and 5 were mixed
 breeds; no breed predisposition can be inferred from the limited number of reported cases.
C. No sex bias is evident.
2. Cats (n=4):
a. Median age of 10 years at diagnosis with a range of 8-12 years.
h. Three were domestic shorthair cats, while one cat's breed was not reported.
C. Only one cat was male, but the number of reported cases is too small to draw any conclusion about
sex distribution.
B. Glucagonomas have been reported in nine dogs and no cats:
1. Median age is 9 years old, with a range of 5-13 years.
 2. No purebred was represented more than once, with three mixed breeds.
3. Males outnumber females by 2:1, but the small sample size makes this difficult to extrapolate
C. Carcinoids have been reported in at least 35 dogs and 5 cats:
1. Dogs:
a. Average age of 9.3 years, with a peak at 10 years of age.
h. No sex or breed predisposition is evident, although 4 of 18 were German shepherds and 2 of 18
were whippets.
2. Cats:
a. Affected cats ranged from 9 to 15 years old.
b. Insufficient information is available with respect to sex or bred predisposition.
D. Somatostatinoma has been reported in only one dog, a 10-year-old spayed female Portuguese water dog
with a concurrent metastatic hepatic gastrinoma.
F. Pancreatic polypeptidoma has been reported in only one dog, a 7-year-old spayed female cocker
spaniel.
Ill. Clinmical Signs
A. Gastrinoma:
1. Dogs:
a. Vomiting (90%), weight loss (81%), and inappetence (62%) are most common, with diarrhea
occurring in slightly less than half.
b. Melena, hematochezia, hematemesis, and pyrexia are infrequent presenting complaints, but may
indicate more emergent disease.
C. Emaciation, thin body condition, or weight loss noted in 62%.
d. Pale mucous membranes noted in 24%, and cranial abdominal pain found on examination in 14%.
2.Cats:
a. Of the four cats reported, all presented with vomiting, two with weight loss, and one each with
b. Physical examination findings varied, with the most fully documented case noted as thin with a
poor hair coat and having pale mucous membranes and a systolic heart murmur.
B. Glucagonoma:
1. Marked ulcerative, crusted lesions of the distal extremities, pressure points (hocks, elbows), and/or
mucocutaneous junctions occur in 1o0%:
a. Often begins on distal extremities, particularly on footpads, which develop marked hyperkeratosis
and fissures (Figure 24.2).
h. Digital lesions may lead to overt lameness or a mincing gait.
C. Truncal lesions tend to lag behind, generally first appearing on the ventrum.
 2. Nondermatologic signs are vague and nonspecific, with decreased appetite (44%) and lethargy (33%)
being most common.
258 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
3. On physical examination, muscle atrophy (33%) and depressed mentation (22%) were the only
 nondermatologic signs.
C. Carcinoid:
1. Dogs—Perhaps reflecting the wide anatomic distribution of carcinoids and the lack of a common
Sd n   nd  s  s o s
a. Diarrhea (32%), weight loss (32%), vomiting (29%), and inappetence are most common.
h. Two patients presented for evaluation of visible anorectal masses, and one (pulmonary) carcinoid
was considered an incidental finding.
2. Cats-Chronic vomiting reported in one case of gastric carcinoid.
D. Somatostatinoma: The sole repored case presented with a 2-month history of weight loss and historically
 elevated liver enzymes. Physical examination findings were not reported.
E. Pancreatic polypeptidoma: The sole reported case presented with a 6-week history of progressive disease
 that included vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, and weight loss. Physical examination was unremarkable.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Gastrinoma—Presence of an elevated fasting serum gastrin concentration along with appropriate clinical
signs should raise clinical suspicion of the presence of a gastrinoma:
1. A blood sample for measurement of serum gastrin concentration is often only submitted upon
discovery of gastroduodenal ulceration, but evaluation should be considered in any patient with evidence
 of unexplained gastrointestinal hemorrhage:
 a Elevations in gastrin concentrations reported in veterinary gastrinoma patients have ranged from
twofold increase to >200-fold.
h. For patients with smaller relative gastrin elevations, provocative testing with 2-4 U/kg secretin IV
and evaluation of serum gastrin at 0, 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 min postinjection is recommended. Secretin
should not cause a rise if the hypergastrinemia is not due to a gastrinoma. At least doubling of the
of a gastrinoma.
C. Other causes of hypergastrinemia exist besides gastrinoma, for example, administration of proton
pump inhibitors or H2 receptor antagonists and other diseases (see section on Differential Diagnoses
below).
2. Patients have often failed to respond to empirical symptomatic therapy for gastritis, although marked
improvement may be seen in some with proton pump inhibitors.
3. Diagnostic imaging:
a Barium contrast radiographic studies of the stomach or abdominal ultrasound may identify gastric
 mucosal defects consistent with ulceration.
b. Abdominal ultrasound failed to identify a discrete pancreatic tumor in five of five dogs and one of
two cats.
C. CT and MRI may be used to attempt to localize a tumor but pancreatic islet cell tumors of the size
d. Nuclear scintigraphy using a radiolabeled somatostatin analogue (Octreoscan) is commonly used
 in human medicine and accurately identified a gastrinoma in one dog.
mucosal thickening and gastric and duodenal ulceration (Figure 24.1):
a While ulceration most commonly involves the stomach and/or duodenum, ulcers involving the
esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and (rarely) jejunum may occur in any combination or singly.
Duodenal ulcers tend to be large, multifocal lesions, commonly visualized immediately after the
pylorus (i.e., cranial to the major duodenal papilla).
h. Endoscopy is contraindicated if a perforating ulcer is suspected (e.g., presence of pyrexia, severe
abdominal pain, marked left shift, etc.).
C. The overwhelming majority (10 of 13 in which gastrointestinal biopsy results were reported) have
inflammatory infiltrates identified on biopsy, but do not respond as expected with treatment. No
specific infiltrate type predominated.
Gastrinoma, Giucagonoma, and Other APUDomas  259
 5. Definitive diagnosis relies on histopathology and immunohistochemistry from a primary or
metastatic tumor.
B. Glucagonoma is presumptively diagnosed by demonstration of compatible clinical signs (dermatologic)
combined with skin biopsy and measurement of plasma glucagon concentration:
hyperplasia, and extensive crusting. Evidence of secondary infection is common and should be addressed
but will not lead to resolution of the lesions:
a. Within the veterinary literature, the skin lesions are identified in dogs with liver disease
approximately four times as commonly as in dogs with identified glucagonoma.
h. Many reported cases (approximately 1/3), however, did not document exhaustive examination of the
between glucagonoma and the skin lesions in dogs may be underestimated.
2. Plasma glucagon concentration is typically elevated despite normoglycemia or hyperglycemia.
Reported glucagon concentrations have been 1.6-7.5 times higher than the reference range.
3. Specific serum amino acid concentrations, when measured, are generally below the reference range:
a. In the few reported cases (n =3) where circulating amino acids were measured and reported, most
measured amino acid concentrations have been low; of 22, 5, and 24 amino acids measured,
concentrations of 22, 4, and 20 were below the reference range, respectively.
h. In general, the ratio of branched chain to aromatic amino acids is decreased.
C. Determination of serum amino acid concentrations requires specialized laboratory services (e.g.,
the Amino Acid Laboratory at UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, see http://www.vetmed.
ucdavis.edu/VMB/aal/index.cfm) and is not routinely available.
4. Diagnostic imaging:
a. Ultrasound, CT, or MRI may be used to localize the tumor, but, as with gastrinomas, the majority
of tumors will not be detected.
b. Octreoscan has not been used for diagnosis of canine glucagonoma, but likely has utility.
 5. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical identification is required for definitive diagnosis.
C. Carcinoids are most often detected via common imaging modalities such as plain abdominal radiographs
or ultrasound examination. Fine needle aspirates may provide some information, but definitive diagnosis
relies on biopsy.
 D. Somatostatinoma has only been diagnosed via surgical excisional biopsy.
 E. Pancreatic polypeptidoma was presumptively diagnosed in one dog based on profoundly elevated fasting
serum pancreatic polypeptide concentration; the diagnosis was confirmed at necropsy:
1. Fasting hypergastrinemia was also found, but provocative testing with secretin did not result in
further elevation of gastrin, effectively ruling out gastrinoma.
 2. A pancreatic mass was visualized via transabdominal ultrasonography.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. Gastrinoma:
1. Any cause of acute or chronic vomiting should be considered, including inflammatory bowel disease,
 infiltrative neoplasia (e.g. gastrointestinal lymphoma), dietary indiscretion, foreign body ingestion, mast
cell disease, gastroduodenal neoplasia, gastric hamartoma, Plysaloptera spp. (cat, dog) or Ollulanus
tricuspis (cat) infestation, Helicobacter-associated gastritis, hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy, gastric
pythiosis, irritant toxin ingestion, acute or chronic pancreatitis, hepatobiliary disease, renal disease,
intracranial disease (neoplastic, inflammatory, or infectious), atrophic gastritis, Basenji enteropathy,
2. Presence of an elevated serum gastrin concentration is not considered diagnostic for gastrinoma:
a. It is particularly important to realize that administration of proton pump inhibitors or H2 receptor
antagonists will elevate serum gastrin concentrations.
 e    e no     s  
required), renal failure, hypo/achlorhydria, hepatic disease, Basenji enteropathy, and hypertrophic
pyloric gastropathy.
260 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
B. Glucagonoma must be differentiated from nonglucagonoma SND also called hepatocutaneous syndrome
which shares apparently identical gross and histopathologic dermatological findings:
1. Measurement of plasma glucagon concentration, identification of a pancreatic tumor and liver
function testing should help to distinguish berween the two, with glucagon concentrations elevated in
patients with glucagonoma and within the reference range in those with liver disease as the cause of SND.
 2. Plasma glucagon assay is available from a limited number of specialist laboratories. Sample handling
and storage conditions are stringent.
3. While glucagonomas may lead to persistently elevated blood glucose concentration or overt
insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus,it should beremembered that a significant proportion of nonglucagonoma
SND patients have concurrent diabetes mellitus.
4. Differential diagnoses for the characteristic skin lesions include ectoparasitism, canine distemper (footpad
hyperkeratosis), chemicalirritant injury, folliculitis/furunculosis, zinc deficiency, and immune-mediated
dermatopathies.
C. Carcinoid tumors may mimic a variety of diseases depending on the tumor location:
1. Once a tumor is identified, it should be distinguished from other neoplasms, granulomas, abscesses,
and cysts via fine needle aspiration, incisional biopsy, or excisional biopsy.
2. Cytology of a carcinoid will reveal characteristic bare nuclei against a background of cytoplasm,
typically without marked criteria of malignancy (i.e., appear neuroendocrine).
3. Cytology can differentiate a carcinoid from non-neuroendocrine tumors, but will be unable to distinguish
carcinoids from other neuroendocrine tumors
D. Somatostatinoma and pancreatic polypeptidoma:
1. Should be considered when a pancreatic tumor is identified in association with consistent clinical signs
2. These tumors can only be differentiated from other islet cell tumors (e.g., insulinoma, gastrinoma)
immunohistochemically.
Vl. Treatment
A. General principles:
1. Surgical resection of tumor and metastases, if present, is the only definitive treatment and should be
attempted if feasible.
 2. Local invasion, high rates of metastasis, and difficulty in locating the tumor pre- or intraoperatively
 all severely limit the likelihood of curative surgery.
B. Gastrinoma:
1. In patients with unresected, partially resected, or metastatic disease, simultaneous aggressive antacid
and gastroprotective therapy is indicated:
a Omeprazole (1 mg/kg PO q 24 h) is preferred due to noncompetitive inhibition of gastric acid
secretion.
b. H2 antagonists (famotidine 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV/SC/PO q 24 h, ranitidine 2 mg/kg IV/SC/PO q 12 h)
 may be used, but are less effective than proton pump inhibitors due to the competitive mode of action.
C. Sucralfate 0.5-1.0 g PO as a liquid slurry q 8 h.
2. Octreotide, a somatostatin analogue that inhibits secretion by pancreatic islet cells and gastric cells,
has been used in a small number of cases and appears effective:
a Initial dose is 2-20 μg/kg SC q 8-12 h. In two cases, repeated dose escalation was required.
h. Cost may limit use, particularly in larger patients.
3. In patients with actively bleeding ulcers:
a Intervention with fluid therapy, blood product administration, and intensive monitoring may be
required.
h. Sucralfate may be given at an increased frequency (e.g., q 30 min) or at an initially increased dose
aqiouaq ainoe dois diay oi (8 o1 oi dn)
4. Perforated ulcers are a surgical emergency.
5. Total gastrectomy is used in humans with nonresectable or metastatic gastrinomas, removing the
target organ of the excess gastrin. It has not been reported in any veterinary gastrinoma patients, likely
due to the difficulties of managing such a patient long term.
Gastrinoma, Giucagonoma, and Other APUDomas
261
6. Chemotherapy is also used in some human patients:
a Most protocols incorporate streptozotocin, dacarbazine, and/or 5-flurouracil and show a modest
benefit.
h. Concerns about the toxicity of streptozotocin in companion animals have limited is use in the
 past. However, use with a diuresis protocol greatly improves safety.
C. To our knowledge, no veterinary gastrinoma patient has been treated with chemotherapy to date.
Glucagonoma:
1. In patients with unresected, partially resected, or metastatic tumors, no proven treatments exist.
2. Octreotide may decrease the amount of glucagon secreted, and chemotherapy protocols like those
proposed for gastrinoma may be of limited benefit.
3. Intravenous amino acid supplementation may alleviate dermatologic signs, and dietary supple-
 mentation with protein of high-biological value, zinc, and essential fatty acids has been proposed.
D
Carcinoids are treated with surgical resection and/or chemotherapy as above.
E.
 The one dog with somatostatinoma was treated with an H2 antagonist, omeprazole, metoclopramide,
and metronidazole:
1. Treatment efficacy and survival cannot be evaluated in the one reported case because the
somatostatinoma was a comorbid condition (concurrent gastrinoma).
 2. f curative surgery cannot be performed, chemotherapy with streptozotocin, doxorubicin, and/or
dacarbazine could be considered.
Given that the majority of clinical signs with pancreatic polypeptidoma in humans are related to mass
effect, surgical resection/debulking should be considered. Symptomatic therapy with the possible addition of
octreotide may help palliatively.
Vll. Prognosis
4
Gastrinoma:
1. In dogs, overall prognosis is poor, with a median survival of approximately 2 months. Of 15 dogs, 5 were
reported to have died or been euthanized within a week of presentation. Two dogs were alive at >2 years.
2. In contrast to dogs, prognosis in cats is fair based on the limited number of cases reported. Three of
the four cats were alive at 1 year, with the fourth cat surviving only 3 weeks. One cat died at 18 months,
and one was alive at 17 months.
Glucagonoma:
1. Grave prognosis, with a median survival time of less than a week from the time of diagnosis.
2. One patient with a primary pancreatic tumor and pancreatic lymph node metastasis removed
surgically appeared to have complete resolution; however the case is unusual for the length of time
clinical signs were noted (16 months) prior to diagnosis, perhaps suggesting a more indolent tumor
despite the presence of local metastasis.
Carcinoid:
1. For dogs, prognosis appears to depend largely upon the presence or absence of metastases:
a. Median survival reported to be <1 week for patients with metastases.
h. Patients without metastases tended to be alive at the time of last follow-up (times vary widely
 from months to years) in the majority of reports.
2. For cats, prognosis appears grave, but is likely biased by the small number of cases:
a. Four of the five cases died or were euthanized within a very short period after presentation. All
four had multiple metastases.
b. The one cat without observable metastases was lost to follow-up 21 weeks postsurgery.
D
The dog with a somatostatinoma was euthanized 2 months postoperatively for esophageal stricture.
E.
Vlll. Prevention
A
With the exceptions of chemodectoma in Boxers and Boston terriers (and certain familial multiple
endocrine tumor presentations), no risk factors for the development of APUDomas have been identified.
B
 f breed or familial disposition is present, selective breeding and further elaboration of possible genetic
underpinnings may prove useful in reducing incidence.
262 Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
References and Further Readings
associated with hypoaminoacidaemia and skin lesions. J Srmaff Anim Pract 2000;41{9):402-406.
Altschul M, Simpson KW, Dykes NL, Mauldin EA, Reubi JC, Cummings JF. Evaluation of sormatostatin analogues for the
detection and treatment of gastrinoma in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1997;38(7):286-291.
Diroff JS, Sanders NA, McDonough SP, Holt DE. Gastrin-secreting meoplasia in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 2006;20(5): 1245-1247.
Hoenerhoff M, Kiupel M. Concurrent gastrinoma and somatostatinoma in a 10-year-old Portuguese water dog. J Commp Pathot
2004;130(4):313-318.
Langer NB, Jergens AE, Miles KG. Canine glucagonoma. Compend Contin Vet 2003;25(1):56-63.
Lurye JC, Behrend EN. Endocrine tumors. Vet Clin North A Small Anim Pract 2001;31(5):1083-1109.
Papadogiannalkis E, Frangia K, Matralis D. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in a dog associated with hyperplasia of pancreatic
neuroendocrine cells.J Smalt Anim Pract 2009;50(6):318.
Simpson KW, Dykes NL. Diagnosis and treatment of gastrinoma. Semin Vet Med Surg (Smalt Anim) 1997;12(4):274-281.
excision of a glucagon-secreting pancreatic neoplasm in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;33(4):313-319.
CHAPTER 25
Hypothyroidism in Dogs
David Panciera
Pathogenesis
● Primary hypothyroidism resulting from gradual destruction of the thyroid gland by autoimmune
lymphocytic thyroiditis or idiopathic atrophy is responsible for the vast majority of cases.
● Secondary, tertiary, and congenital hypothyroidism are rare.
Classical Signs
. Occurs most commonly in middle-aged purebred dogs.
Weight gain, lethargy, and exercise intolerance.
● Dermatologic abnormalities, including alopecia, poor hair coat, seborrhea, and hyperpigmentation.
● Generalized or focal peripheral neuropathy is a less common neurologic complication of hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis
● Hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and mild nonregenerative anemia are common but not
diagnostic for hypothyroidism.
● Diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of appropriate clinical signs and some combination of
serum thyroxine and free thyroxine concentrations below and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
 concentration above their respective reference ranges.
Treatment
● Levothyroxine supplementation results in rapid complete resolution of most clinical signs; some
signs, for example, dermatologic, may take a few months.
 Pathogenesis
A. The vast majority of dogs with hypothyroidism have primary hypothyroidism, that is, the disease originates
in the thyroid gland:
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
263
264  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
1. Primary hypothyroidism is due to an immune-mediated lymphocytic thyroiditis or idiopathic follicular
atrophy. Follicular atrophy is likely end-stage thyroiditis. Autoantibodies to thyroglobulin (TgAA), the
major follicular colloid protein in the thyroid gland, are a marker of autoimmune thyroiditis.
2. A hereditary component to hypothyroidism is likely in many purebred dogs. Golden Retrievers and
 Doberman Pinschers have been shown to be at increased risk for developing hypothyroidism, and
Beagles and Borzois have been shown to have heritable lymphocytic thyroiditis. Other breeds with a
high incidence of TgAA and thus at risk for hypothyroidism include English Setters, Old English
Sheepdogs, Boxers, Giant Schnauzers, Dalmatians, Maltese, and many others.
3. Thyroiditis results in gradual destruction of the thyroid gland, with progression of thyroid gland
dysfunction likely occurring over many months to even years.
4. No other risk factor, including vaccination, has been identified as a factor in development of canine
hypothyroidism.
releasing hormone (TRH, tertiary hypothyroidism) account for <5% of cases of canine hypothyroidism
Most dogs with these forms of hypothyroidism have clinical signs associated with pituitary, hypothalamic,
or midbrain dysfunction in addition to those attributable to hypothyroidism.
C. Congenital hypothyroidism is a rare disorder resulting from any of a number of defects in hormone
synthesis, TSH secretion, or iodine deficiency.
Il.Signalment
A. The average age at diagnosis is about 7 years, with a range of 0.5-15 years.
B. Golden Retrievers and Doberman Pinschers have been shown to be at increased risk, but many other
 breeds as mentioned above are also likely predisposed. There is no important predisposition based on gender.
 n u as p e se po aq si i siop ui rr a si a  
terriers, as well as in litters of boxers, giant schnauzers, and Scottish deerhounds.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. The decrease in metabolic rate with thyroid hormone deficiency is reflected by weight gain and obesity
that is present in about 50% of cases (Table 25.1).
B.  Lethargy and exercise intolerance are common, but often noted only in retrospect by many owners after
initiation of thyroid hormone supplementation because of their gradual onset and mild nature. The exercise
intolerance and weakness result from a combination of the global effects of hypothyroidism on metabolism
as well as a myopathy that is frequently present, albeit mild.
C. Dermatologic abnormalities, including alopecia, seborrhea or dry, scaly skin, and poor hair coat occur in
60-80% of affected dogs. Alopecia often begins in areas of friction such as the tail or neck (Figure 25.1) and
can progress to bilateral symmetrical truncal alopecia, often with hyperpigmentation in areas of alopecia
(Figure 25.2). Pyoderma, otitis externa, Malassezia dermatitis, and comedones can also occur. Myxedema, a
nonpitting thickening of the skin associated with hyaluronic acid deposition in the dermis, occasionally is of
 a p ( o o  go ts   i   
1. Generalized peripheral neuropathy is manifested by generalized weakness, ataxia, hyporeflexia,
proprioceptive deficits, similar to other causes of neuropathy.
2. Localized peripheral neuropathy most commonly involves the vestibulocochlear nerve, resulting in
head tilt, nystagmus, strabismus, ataxia, and circling, or the facial nerve with subsequent loss of motor
function to facial muscles.
3. Megaesophagus and laryngeal paralysis have been diagnosed in dogs with hypothyroidism, but it
remains to be established that hypothyroidism causes these abnormalities. Resolution of megaesophagus
or laryngeal paralysis following levothyroxine supplementation is poorly documented.
E. Myopathy is probably a common consequence of hypothyroidism, but rarely results in overt clinical
abnormalities. However the improvement in activity and exercise tolerance after supplementation with
thyroid hormones may in part result from resolution of the myopathy.
F.
 Central nervous system involvement has been identified infrequently in hypothyroid dogs:
Hypothyroidism in Dogs 265
Table 25.1 Clinical findings in dogs with hypothyroidism.
Historical or physical examination abnormality
Percent affected
Dermatologic abnormalities
88
Alopecia
40
Flaky skin or seborrhea 
22
Pyoderma
14
Dry or poor hair coat
6
Obesity
49
Lethargy
48
Weakness
12
Bradycardia
10
Facial nerve paralysis
4
Peripheral vestibular disease
E
Generalized polyneuropathy
2
Central vestibular disease
Unknown
Infertility
Unknown
Clinical pathology abnormality
Hypercholesterolemia
75
Anemia
96
Fgure 25.1 Alopecia of the tail ("rat tail") in a hypothyroid Labrador Retriever.
1. Disease has been localized to the myelencephalon or vestibulocerebellum on neurologic examination
and some cases have had documented infarction.
2. Nystagmus that is vertical or alters direction with change in body position, abnormal postural reactions,
 paresis, and altered consciousness may be seen.
266 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 25.2  Bilaterally symmetrical, truncal alopecia with hyperpigmentation typical of hypothyroidism.
pue anueieadde ynd, aul aney aui jo snogns ay jo suuaypyi u sunsal ing l!d uejawy ue ui ewapaxiw e'sz aunsi
"'tragic facial expression" are typical.
3. Affected dogs often do not have other signs of hypothyroidism.
 4. Clinical signs are largely reversible with thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
G. Cardiovascular abnormalities in hypothyroid dogs include bradycardia, weak pulses, low voltage ECG
complexes, first-degree atrioventricular block, and decreased myocardial contractility. Rarely, myocardial
dysfunction can result in congestive heart failure that is reversible with levothyroxine treatment.
H. Reproductive abnormalities can occur:
1. Infertility in bitches can result from prolonged, severe hypothyroidism.
likely to be weak and have a low body weight and are more likely to be stillborn than those born to
euthyroid bitches.
 3. The estrous cycle is not altered by hypothyroidism.
4. Hypothyroidism has no important negative effects on reproduction in males.
 Ocular abnormalities attributed to hypothyroidism include corneal lipid dystrophy, corneal ulcers, and ante-
rior uveitis, although little evidence supports an association. Tear production has been shown to be normal or
reduced in hypothyroid dogs, but overt keratoconjunctivitis sicca has not been attributed to hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism in Dogs 267
While hypothyroidism has been suggested to cause bleeding in dogs as a result of von Willebrand factor
deficiency, mumerous studies have documented normal von Willebrand factor concentrations and normal
hemostasis in hypothyroid dogs.
K.1
 Myxedema stupor or coma is a rare manifestation of hypothyroidism:
1. Characterized by mental dullness or coma, hypothermia without shivering, proprioceptive deficits,
 bradycardia, hypotension, and nonpiting edema. Other signs of hypothyroidism may also be present.
 2. Rottweilers and Doberman Pinschers may be predisposed.
 3. Concurrent illness is common.
 4. Hypercholesterolemia, hyponatremia, lipemia, and normocytic normochromic anemia are frequently
present.
L
Secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism can result in clinical signs due to hypothyroidism as described
above or signs due to local disease:
1. Deficiencies of other hypophyseal hormones can result in diabetes insipidus, secondary hypoadreno-
corticism, or growth hormone deficiency arising from destruction of normal pituitary gland.
 2. Neurologic signs can result if the underlying disease, that is, trauma, neoplasia, or vascular abnormali-
ties result in damage to the hypothalamus or midbrain.
M. Congenital hypothyroidism is a rare disease that can be caused by a variety of defects in iodine uptake
or hormone synthesis in the thyroid gland or can result from pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction:
1. Disproportionate dwarfism results in slow growth, short limbs, and delayed skeletal maturation due
to epiphyseal dysgenesis.
 2. Broad head, macroglossia, delayed dental eruption, abdominal distension, constipation, and ataxia
are typically present.
 3. Depending on the etiology, some affected pups may have a goiter.
 4. Effects on the central nervous system development cause mental retardation, difficulty training, and,
possibly, obtundation. The disease can be fatal in severely affected pups.
Clinicopathologic Findings
A. Hypercholesterolemia is present in approximately 75% of cases, and hypertriglyceridemia is also common.
B. Mild elevation of creatine kinase and hyponatremia can occur occasionally. Elevated alkaline phos
phatase and alanine aminotransferase activities have been reported but are not clearly associated with
hypothyroidism.
C. A mild, normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia is present in 25-40% of dogs.
D. Serum fructosamine can be mildly elevated.
IV. Differential Diagnoses
A.  Alopecia in hypothyroidism must be differentiated from other endocrine disorders such as hyperadreno-
corticism and alopecia X, follicular dysplasia, telogen effluvium, flank alopecia, and infectious diseases. Poor
hair coat, seborrhea, and recurrent bacterial and yeast cutaneous infections can occur as a result of numer-
ous other disorders.
B.
 Obesity or weight gain results most commonly from overfeeding but can also occur in hyperadrenocorticism.
C. Lethargy and exercise intolerance can occur as a result of numerous metabolic, neurologic, or cardiovascular
disorders.
 D. Peripheral neuropathy can be due to a primary neurologic disorder (e.g., congenital, immune-mediated,
neoplastic, paraneoplastic, infectious, idiopathic) or can occur secondary to metabolic diseases (e.g., insu-
linoma, diabetes mellitus), neoplasia, toxins, or trauma.
E. Central vestibular disease may result from neoplasia, inflammatory disorders (granulomatous menin-
goencephalitis, vasculitis), cerebrovascular disease, or infection.
F
 Infertility in bitches could be caused by numerous hormonal, infectious, or primary uterine disorders
Bo  p   s r r  re   
due to primary cardiac disease.
H. Hypercholesterolemia can be a postprandial change or be caused by hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes
mellitus, cholestasis, pancreatitis, protein-losing nephropathy, or primary hyperlipidemia disorders.
268 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
V.Liagnlosis
A. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism is made on the basis of abnormal thyroid function tests and appropriate
clinical signs. Serum free thyroxine (fT4) measured using the equilibrium dialysis method is the best single test
for diagnosis of hypothyroidism. However serum total thyroxine (T4) is most commonly used for routine
testing because of availability, rapid turnaround time, and cost. Concurrent measurement of serum TSH
increases the accuracy of both T4 and fT4. Serum total thyroxine (T4) concentration is the most practical
single test for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the dog:
1. Serum T4 is below the reference range in over 90% of hypothyroid dogs. A T4 concentration above
the lower end of the reference range eliminates hypothyroidism as a diagnosis in most cases:
a. Dogs with early hypothyroidism may have clinical signs of hypothyroidism yet have a low normal
serum T4 concentration.
b. Autoantibodies to T4 may interfere with the T4 assay and result in a false increase in T4 concentration
to a level above or within the reference range.
2. Serum T4 is below normal in 20-25% of euthyroid dogs with clinical signs that could be consistent
with hypothyroidism:
a. The lack of specificity is why a diagnosis of hypothyroidism should be made with caution when
T4 is used as the sole test of thyroid function.
b. Routine screening of dogs without linical signs of hypothyroidism, for example, geriatric profiles,
 is not recommended and will result in frequent false positive tests.
3. Good quality control is essential for accurate measurement of T4, including in-hospital assays.
4. Factors that frequently result in serum T4 concentrations being below the reference range in euthyroid
dogs include breed-specific normal variations, nonthyroidal illness, and administration of some drugs:
a. Sight hounds, including Greyhounds, Whippets, Scottish Deerhounds, Basenji, and Sloughis, have
a significantly lower normal range for serum T4 concentration than other breeds, with values often
falling below the reference range of most laboratories.
h. Nonthyroidal illness frequently induces a low T4 concentration and is more likely to happen with
more severe illness or specific diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism. Serum total T4 is not a reliable
test for hypothyroidism in such cases.
c. Drugs, including sulfonamides, glucocorticoids, phenobarbital, clomipramine, and, to a much
lesser degree, aspirin and carprofen, can decrease serum T4 concentration. Chronic administration
of sulfonamides (>24 weeks) can induce clinical hypothyroidism. Chronic phenobarbital
administration and treatment with high doses of corticosteroids frequently decreases serum T4
below the reference interval and may do the same to free T4.
B. Serum fT4 concentration is the most accurate single test for diagnosing hypothyroidism, with higher
1. T4 is highly bound to transport proteins, with only 0.1% unbound or “free". Only unbound T4 is
able to leave the circulation and enter cells, thus it represents the metabolically active form of
circulating T4.
2. FT4 can only be measured accurately using an equilibrium dialysis assay. Other assays for fT4
provide little if any advantage over measurement of total T4.
3. Serum fT4 is below the reference range in up to 98% of hypothyroid dogs:
a. Thus, measurement of serum fT4 is a more sensitive test for diagnosis of hypothyroidism than is
measurement serum total T4.
b. FT4 measured by equilibrium dialysis is not affected by T4 autoantibodies, accounting for much
of the improved sensitivity over serum T4.
4. Serum fT4 is more specific than measurement of T4 because many of the factors that lower serum
T4 concentrations have less effect on fT4:
a. Nonthyroidal illness alters fT4 concentrations less frequently than it does serum T4. However,
a decrease in fT4 to below the reference range.
h. While some drugs have less effect on fT4 than T4, sulfonamides, glucocorticoids, and phenobarbital
administration result in reduction of fT4 similar to T4.
Hypothyroidism in Dogs  269
c. Greyhounds and Salukis have lower fT4 concentrations than typically noted in other breeds, but
similar changes have not been found in other sight hound breeds
5. Measurement of fT4 by equilibrium dialysis is recommended in cases where nonthyroidal illness of
drug administration that may alter thyroid function is present and diagnostic testing cannot be delayed
until these factors are resolved. In addition, fT4 is an important diagnostic tool in cases of suspected
hypothyroidism where serum T4 is normal or T4 autoantibodies are present.
C. 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine (T3) is the metabolically active form of thyroid hormone. The circulating T3 con
centration is equally derived from secretion by the thyroid gland and from deiodination of T4 in peripheral
tissues. Thus, because it is primarily an intracellular hormone, serum T3 concentrations frequently do not
accurately reflect thyroid fumction:
1. Measurement of serum T3 is, in general, not a useful test since it has poor sensitivity and specificity
for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
2. Serum T3 may be useful in diagnosis of hypothyroidism in sight hounds, particularly greyhounds
where both serum T4 and fT4 concentrations are normally below the standard reference ranges.
D. TSH (thyrotropin) is a glycoprotein produced by the pituitary gland that is the primary stimulus for
secretion of T4 and T3 from the thyroid gland. It is controlled primarily by stimulation from hypotha
lamic secretion of TRH and by negative feedback inhibition from circulating thyroid hormones,
particularly fT4:
1. TSH concentration increases as thyroid hormone concentrations decrease during development of
primary hypothyroidism. Because the majority of cases of hypothyroidism in dogs are primary, TSH
would be expected to be elevated.
2. However, measurement of serum TSH concentration is not very sensitive for diagnosis of hypothy-
roidism, being elevated in 65-75% of dogs with hypothyroidism:
a. The reason for the insensitivity of TSH measurement is not clear.
h. It may be related to exhaustion of pituitary secretion of TSH with prolonged hypothyroidism or
altered posttranslational glycosylation of TSH in hypothyroid dogs so the hormone is not detected
by the current assay.
 3. The combination of elevated serum TSH and decreased T4 or fT4 has a specificity of 98% for diag-
nosis of hypothyroidism:
a. Measurement of TSH with T4 or fT4 is very useful because of the high specificity of this test
combination.
b. Therefore, it is recommended that TSH be measured routinely in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
4. Nonthyroidal illness can cause an increase in serum TSH concentration, but infrequently (3-15%).
5. Drugs that decrease T4 and fT4, including sulfonamides and phenobarbital, can increase serum TSH
concentration. Elevated TSH is not typically found in dogs administered glucocorticoids despite the
decrease in thyroid hormone concentrations.
6. The reference range of TSH is similar in sight hounds and other breeds.
E. Other tests of thyroid function are used infrequently or in special circumstances, such as in dogs with
nonthyroidal illness or when results of standard tests are conflicting:
1. TSH response test evaluates the reserve function of the thyroid gland. It is more accurate than basal
thyroid function tests, but results can still be affected by nonthyroidal illness and drug administration:
a. Protocol: Obtain blood sample for serum T4 concentration before and 6 h after intravenous admin-
istration of 150 pg human recombinant TSH.
b. A post-TSH T4 concentration <19 nmol/L is diagnostic of hypothyroidism while a T4 > 30 nmol/L
is consistent with normal thyroid function.
c. Human recombinant TSH is very costly. Once reconstituted, it can be stored frozen for at least
8 weeks without loss of activity.
2. The TRH response test is performed by measuring either T4 or TSH after TRH administration. Because
the T4 response is small and inconsistent and measurement of TSH concentration does not reliably distinguish
euthyroid and hypothyroid states, this test is not recommended.
3. Thyroid scintigraphy using radioactive sodium pertechnetate has been shown to be the most accurate
method for differentiating hypothyroidism from euthyroidism in dogs with decreased serum T4
270 Clinical Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
concentrations. Because access to this test is limited, it requires anesthesia, a period of isolation after the
test, and is costly, the use of thyroid scintigraphy for diagnosis of hypothyroidism will be infrequent.
4. Thyroid gland ultrasound examination has been used in an attempt to differentiate hypothyroidism
 from nonthyroidal illness in dogs with serum T4 concentration below the reference range. Thyroid gland
size and echogenicity are decreased in hypothyroid dogs, the parenchyma may be heterogenous, and the
margins of the thyroid gland are irregular compared with euthyroid dogs. Ultrasonography may be
useful in dogs with nonthyroidal illness if testing cannot be delayed until resolution of the illness.
Thyroidal ultrasonography, however, requires great skill and practice.
F
Tests of thyroid autoimmunity are useful for diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis, but are not measures
of thyroid function:
1. Antithyroglobulin antibodies are formed as a result of an autoimmune response to thyroglobulin,
 the major protein in the colloid of the thyroid gland:
a. As a marker of thyroiditis, antithyroglobulin antibodies are present in about 50% of hypothyroid
dogs, with a prevalence that is highly variable amongst specific breeds.
b. Antithyroglobulin antibody results are useful for interpreting thyroid function tests that are
equivocal or discordant (such as decreased T4 and normal TSH); a positive autoantibody test would
be supportive of thyroid disease.
C. Dogs with a positive antithyroglobulin antibody test and normal thyroid function test results are at
increased risk for developing hypothyroidism, and annual testing of thyroid function is recommended.
2. Anti-T4 and anti-T3 antibodies occur in some dogs with autoimmune thyroid disease:
a. Their importance lies primarily in their interference with assays of T4 and T3:
1) The presence of anti-T4 antibodies results in a false elevation of the measured hormone
concentration
2) The presence of anti-T3 antibodies results in false elevation of the measured hormone
concentration in the vast majority of laboratories; in some laboratories, anti-T3 antibodies cause
the apparent serum T3 concentration to be falsely low:
a) Approximately 15% of hypothyroid dogs have anti-T4 antibodies. Some of these dogs
have markedly elevated measurements of serum T4 and are easily identified as having anti-T4
antibodies. Up to 10% of hypothyroid dogs may have lower antibody levels that result in an
elevation of T4 into the reference range, making diagnosis of hypothyroidism challenging.
b) While some laboratories estimate anti-T4 antibody levels, measurement of fT4 by equilibrium
dialysis is the most effective method to diagnose hypothyroidism in these cases.
G.
 Therefore, recommendations for routine testing of thyroid function are as follows:
1. Measure serum T4 and TSH in all cases; a diagnosis of hypothyroidism is nearly certain if T4 is
decreased and TSH is elevated. Alternatively, fT4 concentration can replace the T4 concentration with
a slight increase in accuracy.
2. Serum fT4 concentration should be measured in cases where T4 and TSH are either inconclusive, anti-
T4 antibodies are suspected or known to be present, or nonthyroidal illness exists. While serum fT4 may
be more accurate when dogs are receiving some medications such as carprofen or corticosteroids, most
drugs that have the potential to lower T4 can lower fT4 as well.
3. Be aware of the effects that nonthyroidal illness and medications have on thyroid function tests.
When possible, delay testing until these confounding factors can be alleviated.
4. Appropriate response to levothyroxine administration should confirm diagnosis
Vl. Treatment
A. Levothyroxine is the only thyroid hormone that is indicated for treatment of hypothyroidism. Other
preparations, including dessicated thyroid, liothyronine, and combinations of T4 and T3 have no place in the
over generic preparations.
B.
Treatment can be administered at 0.02 mg/kg once daily with resolution of clinical signs in most cases. In
dogs >40 kg, a dose based on body surface area (0.5 mg/m') should be considered to avoid oversupplementation.
It is recommended to not exceed a dose of 0.8 mg when instituting treatment regardless of body weight. However,
Hypothyroidism in Dogs  271
if adequate post-pill concentrations are not achieved, the dose can be raised. Subsequent alterations in dose
should be made based on therapeutic monitoring:
consider increasing the frequency of administration to q 12 h.
3. The initial dosage should be decreased to 0.o05 mg/kg if the dog has concurrent diabetes mellitus,
serum T4 concentration are reached. Because hypothyroidism induces insulin resistance, the insulin dosage
will have to be reduced during initiation of levothyroxine administration in many diabetic dogs, and careful
 monitoring for hypoglycemia should be instituted.
4. A commercially available liquid levothyroxine preparation has higher bioavailability than tablets, but
the recommended initial dosage is the same.
5. Administration with food may decrease bioavailability.
C. Treatment of a dog with evidence of autoimmune thyroid disease is not indicated unless hypothyroidism
is present.
D. Treatment of a dog with myxedema stupor or coma should consist of passive warming to prevent cutaneous
vasodilation and worsening of hypotension, judicious fluid therapy, treatment of any concurrent disease, and,
ideally, intravenous administration of levothyroxine.
complete resolution within 46 weeks. However some dogs require up to 12 weeks for resolution and a few
may have long-term residual neurologic deficits such as head tilt or partial facial nerve deficits. Hair regrowth
may require several months to be complete.
F. Therapeutic monitoring should be performed after 6-8 weeks of treatment, even though steady state is
reached within 1-2, in order to allow sufficient time to assess both thyroid hormone concentrations and the
clinical response:
1. The clinical response is the most important parameter to monitor.
 2. Serum T4 concentration should routinely be measured, while the value of measuring serum TSH has not
been determined.
3. The maximum serum T4 concentration after oral administration occurs approximately 4 h after admin-
istration. The desired "post-pill" serum T4 concentration 4 h after administration in most laboratories is
40-70 nmol/L.
4. If monitoring is performed 24 h after administration of the previous dose of levothyroxine, the serum T4
should be within the lower 25-50% of the reference range.
5. If serum TSH is measured, it should be suppressed to within or below the reference range. Because of the
relatively poor sensitivity of the current TSH assay, it is not possible to use serum TSH concentration as a
measure of oversupplementation.
consideration to factors that could have decreased the serum T4 on that day (failure of levothyroxine admin-
istration) should be considered prior to any dosage increase.
7. Agood clinical response with a post-pill serum T4 above the therapeutic range should prompt a reduction
in the levothyroxine dosage.
 8. I treatment of a concurrent illness is undertaken at the same time as initial levothyroxine administra-
tion, any clinical improvement noted could be due to treatment of the concurrent disease rather than
resolution of hypothyroidism. This is of particular importance if the initial diagnosis of hypothyroidism
was tentative.
9. If improvement in clinical signs has not occurred within 8 weeks of beginning treatment and the post-pill
concurrent disease should be considered.
272 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
10. Failure to achieve both therapeutic serum T4 concentrations and a good clinical response may be
the result of poor bioavailability. While no consistent difference has been documented between specific
brands of levothyroxine, failure to respond to one preparation should prompt consideration of admin-
istration of levothyroxine from a different manufacturer.
Complications of treatment, namely clinical hyperthyroidism due to oversupplementation, are uncommon:
1. Clinical signs of hyperthyroidism include polydipsia, polyuria, hyperactivity, panting, tachycardia,
weight loss, and vomiting.
 2. If hyperthyroidism is suspected, a serum T4 should be measured and levothyroxine treatment dis-
continued pending results.
3. After cessation of levothyroxine administration for 2-3 days, therapy should be reinstituted with at
least a 25% reduction in dosage. Follow-up evaluation for resolution of clinical signs of hyperthyroid.
ism and serum T4 measurement should be performed in 1-2 weeks.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
The prognosis for complete recovery is excellent in most cases of hypothyroidism.
B.
The prognosis for dogs with myxedema coma is guarded.
C.
 Dogs with congenital hypothyroidism may have residual mental retardation and skeletal abnormalities
including degenerative arthropathy.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Diaz-Espineira MM, Mol JA, Peeters ME, et al. Assessment of thy roid function in dogs with low plasma thyroxine concentration.
J Vet Intern Med2007;21:25-32.
Dixon RM, Reid SWJ, Mooney CT. Epidermiological, clinical, haematological and biochemical characteristics of canine
hypothyroidism. Vet Rec 1999;145:481-487.
Dixon RM, Reid SWJ, Mooney CT. Treatment and therapeutic monitoring of canine hypothyroidism. J Smatl Anim Pract
2002;43:334-340.
Gulikers KP, Panciera DL. Influence of various medications on canine thyroid function. Comapend Contin Educ Pract Vet
2002;24:511-523.
Mooney CT, Siel RE, Dixon RM. Thyroid horrmone abnormalities and outcome in dogs with nonthyroidal illness. J Srmatf
Anim Pract 2008;49:11-16.
Panciera DL. A retrospective study of 66 cases of canine hypothyroidism. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:761-767.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triiodothyronine, free thy roxine, and thyrotropin
concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:1394-1402.
Scott-Moncrieff JC. Clinical signs and concurrent diseases of hypothyroidisrm in dogs and cats. Vet Clin N Arm Small Anirm
2007;37:709-722.
CHAPTER 26
Hypothyroidism in Cats
Danielle Gunn-Moore
Pathogenesis
● Most cases are iatrogenic, following treatment for hyperthyroidism.
● There has been one case of adult-onset primary hypothyroidism due to immune-mediated thyroiditis.
● A small number of congenital cases have resulted from a variety of different underlying defects;
most have been genetic and one was due to head trauma.
Classical Signs
● latrogenic cases may show weight gain, lethargy, inappetence, an ill-kempt coat, and alopecia of the
pinnae.
● Congenital hypothyroidism varies depending on the underlying defect. Kittens typically develop
disproportionate dwarfism, appear mentally dull, retain deciduous teeth, have constipation, a soft
"kitten coat,” and may have a goiter.
Diagnosis
● Circulating thyroxin (T,) and free T, concentrations should be low or low normal. Confirmation
usually relies on thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) or thyrotrophic-releasing hormone (TRH)
response tests or measurement of baseline TSH concentration.
● Kittens may have radiographic changes including delayed closure of ossification centers in long bones.
Treatment
 Oral levothyroxine (L-T,) (0.05-0.1 mg/cat 24h).
Pathogenesis
 Hypothyroidism is a relatively rare condition of cats:
1. Most cases are iatrogenic, and occur following treatment for hyperthyroidism, either by bilateral
thyroidectomy, I131 treatment, or an overdose of antithyroid drugs.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
273
274Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 26.1 Five-month-old domestic short-haired kitten with congenital hypothyroidism. Total T, level 0.6 nmol/L. Note
peong paieua ue pue pog punoi e 'sgwil ous Ag paziaeieuo wsemp aeuoodoidsi jo sulis pue ainens lews aui
head (Picture by Sarah Roberts.)
2. Adult-onset primary hypothyroidism appears to be very rare in cats. It has been well described in a
single 5-year-old domestic cat (resulting from immune-mediated thyroiditis) and in a single 19-year-old
Lynx (where 60-90% of its thyroid gland had been replaced with adipose tissue).
 3. Congenital hypothyroidism has been recognized more frequently, not only in domestic short-haired
cats (Figure 26.1) but also in cats of the Abyssinian breed. The condition has resulted from a number of
different causes, including defective thyroid hormone synthesis (presumably related to abnormal
peroxidase activity); thyroid dysgenesis; an inability of the thyroid gland to respond to TSH; and
juvenile-onset immune-mediated thyroiditis:
a. Most of these cases appear to have been inherited as autosomal recessive traits.
h. Feeding kittens on an all-meat diet may, very occasionally, result in hypothyroidism.
C. One case of secondary hypothyroidism (with concurrent central diabetes insipidus) resulted from
head trauma.
Il.Signalment
A.
cats are typically over 8 years of age.
B.
 Congenital hypothyroidism has been seen in domestic short-haired cats and Abyssinian cats, with no sex
predisposition.
C.
 Spontaneous acquired hypothyroidism was reported in a 5-yeal-old domestic short-haired cat.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Many iatrogenic cases remain subclinical. However, when they do have clinical signs, affected cats tend
 to show marked weight gain, lethargy, inappetence, and, occasionally, hypothermia and bradycardia. Skin
changes may include a dull, dry, ill-kempt hair coat, with matting and seborrhea, and affected cats may
develop alopecia of the pinnae, which in some cases may also affect the pressure points, tail-base, and caudal
flanks. Since acquired hypothyroidism predisposes to renal insufficiency, polyuria and polydipsia may also
be present.
Hypothyroidism in Cats  275
Fgure 26.2 Same kitten as in Figure 26.1. Note the retained deciduous teeth (Picture by Sarah Roberts.)
B. The cat with adult-onset hypothyroidism presented with extreme lethargy, hypothermia, poor hair
regrowth after clipping, seborrhea, and puffy facial features (presumable resulting from myxedema).
1. Affected kittens typically appear norrmal at birth, but by 4-8 weeks of age their growth rate slows
down. Signs of disproportionate dwarfism develop by the time the kittens are 6-9months old. This is
characterized by short limbs, a round body, and an enlarged broad head:
a. However, an 18-month-old cat with secondary hypothyroidism that had developed after head
trauma was poorly grown for its age, but had normal head and limb proportions (this may have been
because the trauma occurred when the cat was already 8 weeks of age, rather than earlier).
Affected kittens are generally mentally dull and lethargic, they become hypothermic and bradycardic,
and may suffer recurrent episodes of severe constipation. Deciduous teeth are usually retained until
12-18 months of age (Figure 26.2), and the coat may either have only a few guard hairs and retain its
undercoat or become very shaggy. Seizures have been seen in occasional cases. In cats with thyroid
dyshormonogenesis defects, goiter is evident from 6 months of age:
a. Kittens with immune-mediated thyroiditis typically die within 1-2 weeks of developing clinical
signs at 1-2 months of age; kittens with TSH resistance usually die by 16 weeks of age, while the
changes in kittens with thyroid peroxidase defects may become less pronounced with time.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Routine hematology may dermonstrate mild anemia, while serum biochemistry may show hypercholes-
 terolemia and/or indication of renal insufficiency (particularly in iatrogenic cases).
B. In affected kittens, radiographic changes may include delayed closure of ossification centers in long
bones, plus shortening and scalloping of the ventral borders of the vertebral bodies.
C.
Circulating T, and free T, concentrations should be low or low normal in all cases:
1. However, care is required with interpretation as low Ty concentrations are commonly associated with
nonthyroidal illness.
 2. Concurrent assessment of free T, concentration may improve the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis.
 3. While the thyroid-suppressive effects of certain drugs (e.g., glucocorticoids, anticonvulsants, sulfona-
mide antibiotics, and some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents) are well known in dogs, their effects
in cats have generally been less well studied.
D. Confirmation usually relies on results from TSH or TRH response tests:
1. The TSH test is performed by collcting a blood sample for a basal total T, determination, giving
0.1 IU of TSH/kg body weight IV, then collcting a second blood sample for repeat total Tq assessment
after 6h. In a hypothyroid cat there should be no stimulation.
276 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. The TRH test is performed in the same manner as described in the section on hyperthyroidism
However the total Tq increase is less than that seen following TSH administration and is more prone
to being complicated by severe nonthyroidal illness.
E.
Other tests can also be considered: These include assessing a baseline TSH concentration. While feline
specific reagents are not currently available, studies using canine reagents for the detection of endogenous
TSH and antithyroglobulin look promising (http://www.animalhealth.msu.edu/Sections/Endocrinology/
Thyroid_Feline.php):
1. Cats with hypothyroidism should have an increased TSH concentration, and the presence of circulat-
ing thyroglobulin and thyroid hormone antibodies may help in confirming lymphocytic thyroiditis.
2. A diagnosis of lymphocytic thyroiditis has previously been confirmed by thyroid biopsy in an adult
cat and some kittens.
 3. Diagnosis of the precise underlying genetic defects requires specific investigations.
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
The major differential diagnoses for congenital hypothyroidism include a number of lysosomal
storage diseases (e.g., mucopolysaccharidosis) and possibly, chondrodysplasia, congenital hyposoma
totropism, or even a congenital portosystemic liver shunt. However, diagnosis is not always straightfor-
ward as one case of congenital hypothyroidism was found to have a reduced serum concentration of
insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) plus abnormal liver function tests, all of which resolved on treatment
for congenital hypothyroidism.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
 Treatment requires giving oral levothyroxine (0.05-0.1 mg/cat q 24 h) then adjusting the dose based on
the clinical response after 4-6 weeks; twice daily dosing may be needed in some cats.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 In iatrogenic and adult-onset hypothyroidism, the response to treatment is usually excellent and the
prognosis very good.
B.
Without treatment, kittens with TSH resistance usually die by 16 weeks of age:
1. Giving prophylactic levothyroxine to kittens genetically at risk of developing immune-mediated
thyroiditis may reduce the severity of the disease.
2. In general, the response to treatment in congenitally affected kittens has been variable, often with
incomplete resolution of clinical signs.
3. That said, even late detection is not necessarily deleterious: for example, a female cat presented at
18 months of age with acute renal failure and a 3-year-old male cat presented with constipation, both
responded well to supplementation with levothyroxine and lived for a number of years on medication.
ossification centers had closed.
Vlll. Prevention
monitoring and dose adjustment when using anti-thyroid medication, by using lower doses of radioactive
iodine, and by not performing bilateral thyroidectomies.
References and Further Readings
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Hypothyroidism. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine Endocrinotogy and
Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis: WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 86-151.
Greco Ds. Diagnosis of congenital and adult-onset hypothyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2006;21(1):40-44.
Greer LL, Troutman M, McCracken MD, Ramsay EC. Adult-onset hypothyroidism in a lynx (Lymx canadensis). J Zoo Wiid!
Med (2003;34(3):287-291.
Jones BR, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Sparkes AH, Lucke VM. Preliminary studies on congenital hy pothyroidism in a farmily of
Abyssinian cats. Vet Rec 1992;131:145-148.
Hypothyroidism in Cats  277
Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Gopal MS, Herrtage ME. Secondary hypothyroidism following head traurma in a cat. J Fetine Med
Surg 2005;7:135-139.
treatrment with the pretreatment pattern of sodium pertechnetate Tc 99m uptake in the thyroid gland in cats with
hyperthyroidism: 165 cases (1990-2002). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2005;226(10):1671-1675.
Peterson ME. Feline hypothyroidisrn. In: Kirk RW, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy X. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1989,
pp.1000-1001.
Peterson ME, Ferguson DC. Thyroid disease. In: Ettinger SJ, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, 1989, pp. 1654-1667.
Churchill Livingston, 1989, pp. 1101-1103.
Rand JS, Levine J, Best SJ, Parker W. Spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroidism in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 1993;7(5):272-276.
organification: Data suggesting loosely anchored thyroperoxidase. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 1991;125{4):435-340.
Sparkes AH, Jones BR, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Walker MJ. Thyroid function in the cat: Assessment by the TRH response test and
the thyrotrophin stimulation test. J Smaff Anim Pract 1991;32:59-63.
Szabo SD, Wells KL. What is your diagnosis? J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2007;230( 1):29-30.
Tanase H, Kudo K, Horikoshi H, Mizushima H, Okazaki T, Ogata E. Inherited hypothyroidism with thyrotropin resistance in
Japanese cats. JEndocrinol 1991;129(2):245-251.
Traas AM, Abbott BL, French A, Giger U. Congenital thyroid hypoplasia and seizures in 2 littermate kittens. J Vet Intern Med
2008;22:1427-1431.
in decreased IGF-1 concentration and abnorrmal liver function tests. J Fetine Med Surg 2010;12:487-490.
Williams TL, Elliott J, Syme HM. Association of iatrogenic hypothyroidism with azotemia and reduced survival time in cats
treated for hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 2010;2:1086-1092.
CHAPTER 27
Hypothyroidism in Other Species
Janice Sojka Kritchevsky
Hypothyroidism in Foals
Pathogenesis
● Results from a deficiency in thyroid hormone in utero.
 The most common presentation is as part of the thyroid gland hyperplasia and musculoskeletal
deformities (TS-MSD) syndrome; the exact etiology of this condition remains unknown.
● Hypothyroidism occurs when the diet of the dam has a deficient or excess iodine concentration.
Classical Signs
● No breed or sex predilection.
● Dysmaturity despite prolonged gestation (340 days or greater).
● Musculoskeletal abnormalities--particularly failure of the cuboidal bones of the carpus and tarsus
to ossify and mandibular prognathism.
Diagnosis
● Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) response test to document low baseline levels of thyroxine (T4)
 and triiodothyronine (T3) and failure of T3 to increase after TRH administration.
Treatment
 Thyroid hormone supplementation.
· Removal of excess iodine source if present.
 Treatment of TS-MSD is often unsuccessful due to the severity of musculoskeletal deformities.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Iodine deficiency or excess can cause congenital goiter and hypothyroidism. The dam is invariably
unaffected. This is due to two reasons:
1. The thyroid gland in a healthy adult possesses the ability to autoregulate when presented
with abnormally high iodine concentrations. The fetal thyroid gland does not autoregulate.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
278
Hypothyroidism in Other Species  279
Thyroid function is permanently altered if abnormal iodine intakes are present and congenital
hypothyroidism will result.
1. The euthyroid state is not necessary to maintain relatively normal function in the adult horse, but it
is crucial in the fetus and neonate for the development of the normal skeleton and nervous system. Thus,
the effects of hypothyroidism in the developing foal are much more severe than those seen in an adult
animal.
B.Daily iodine intake in horses in North America is typically 2 mg, which is twice the requirement for the
average horse.
C.
 Pregnant mares fed an iodine-deficient diet will have weak or dead foals with goiter and alopecia.
 a  s a  is  a j s i s ia e ro 
1. Congenital goiter has been reported in foals when mares have been supplemented with as little as
35 mg/day of iodine.
 2. Any time a foal with an abnormal thyroid gland is observed, it should prompt the practitioner to take
a detailed dietary history of the dam
 3. If a high iodine product such as natural seaweed extract is being fed, feed analysis that determines the
total iodine concentration in the diet should be performed
E.  TH-MSD has been reported in the Pacific Northwest region of the North American continent although
1. In some instances, multiple cases occur on one farm in a season. Dams have normal thyroid function
at the time of parturition and are asymptomatic.
2. The exact cause of TH-MSD is still not determined. An epidemiologic study of foals with this
syndrome revealed that pregnant mares that were fed green feed, did not receive supplemental mineral,
Or grazed irrigated pastures had an increased risk of producing foals with the syndrome.
 3. A combination of nitrate ingestion and low iodine levels in the feed may be responsible for the condition.
Il.Signalment
A.
 Neonatal and congenital; problems associated with hypothyroidism are present from birth.
B.TS-MSD often presents as a herd problem with multiple foals from the same farm affected. The problem
 may be present in a particular year and then not reoccur despite no obvious change in management.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. The most frequent clinical signs of hypothyroidism in foals include goiter (enlarged thyroid gland),
ruptured common digital extensor tendon, failure of the cuboidal bones of the carpus and tarsus to ossify,
and mandibular prognathism.
 B. Affected foals are delivered after prolonged gestation (340 400 days). Despite the prolonged gestation foals
are dysmature with short, silly hair coat, pliable ears, muscle weakness, and incomplete skeletal development.
C.
 Less commonly reported clinical signs include dry hair coat, poor suckle reflex, angular limb deformi
ties, subnormal temperature, anemia, persistent lipemia, and listlessness.
D.
 Foals often require assistance to stand and suckle.
E.
Muscle weakness may result in respiratory distress without other clinical signs.
IV. Diagnosis
A.Histopathology of the thyroid gland in foals with TH-MSD reveals colloid goiter with a large variation
in follicular size or thyroid hyperplasia with small, crowded, irregular follicles.
B.  The circulating blood concentrations of total and free T3 and T4 are quite elevated in normal neonatal
foals when compared to adult horses-and can be up to ten times normal adult values:
1. Serum thyroxine levels reach adult values by 16days of age, but free T4 and T3 and total T3 remain
above adult levels at 3 months of age.
 2. Serum T3 levels rise in the first hours after birth as T4 levels fall, suggesting that T4 is being con-
verted to T3 at this time. The need of foals for high thermogenic capacity and rapid bone and nervous
system growth has been postulated as the reason for increased thyroid hormone values.
3. Because of the neonate's high circulating T3 and T4 concentrations and the rapid fall in these values
after birth, it is important to know a foal's exact age when evaluating blood hormone values.
C. Results of thyroid function testing differ between neonates and adult horses:
280 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 27.1 Flow chart for evaluating a foal with suspected hypothyroidism.
Clinical signs
Nonthyroid disease rule outs
 Prolonged gestation
Evaluate mare's diet for presence of fescue
Evaluate mare's history; some mares have prolonged
gestational lengths
 Mule foals have prolonged gestation compared to horses
Signs of dysmaturity—silky hair coat,
 Placental insufficiency
floppy ears, weakness
Fescue toxicosis
Sepsis
Wea kness, unable to stand
Sepsis, prematurity
Poor suckle reflex
Sepsis, ischemic encephalopathy
 Angular limb deformities
 Uterine malposition 
Prematurity
Incomplete ossification of carpal
Prematurity, dysmaturity
or tarsal bones
Prognathism
Poor conformation
Goiter
Excess or deficient iodine during gestation
1. T3 increases after thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) administration in 1-day-old foals while the
response of T4 is quite variable. This suggests that a rise in T3 concentrations is a better measure of
thyroid function than T4 in neonates.
2. Determining thyroid hormone concentrations in age-matched controls may assist in the evaluation
of test results.
D
 Characteristic musculoskeletal lesions can be detected via careful physical examination and radiography.
1. Radiographs of carpi and tarsi will reveal characteristic lack of calcification of cuboidal bones.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Differential diagnosis for dysmaturity after prolonged gestation includes ingestion of Acremonion
 coenophialum-infected fescue during gestation. Fescue toxicosis produces multiple abnormalities such as
dysmaturity, weakness at birth, and prolonged gestation that are also seen in TH-MSD.
B.
Differential diagnoses for weakness and poor ventilation include prematurity and placental
insufficiency.
c.
Sepsis, either bacterial or viral, is always a possibility when presented with a weak neonatal foal that
is unable to stand without assistance. (Table 27.1).
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Remove foal from excess iodine source if present. Iodine is concentrated in mare's milk, thus lactating
mares need to be on proper iodine levels in their diet to avoid exposing the foal to high levels of the element.
B.
Iodine supplementation is indicated if a deficiency exists.
c.
Thyroid hormone supplementation: synthetic thyroxine administered at a dose of 20 μg/kg.
Vll.  Prognosis
A.
Prognosis for foals with TS-MSD is extremely poor due to the extensive skeletal lesions.
B.
 Prognosis for foals that suffer from hypothyroidism due to other causes is good with proper thyroxine
supplementation and correction of dietary iodine levels.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 The diets of pregnant mares should be evaluated to ensure an appropriate amount of iodine is pro-
Hypothyroidism in Other Species 281
Hypothyroidisn in Adult Horses
Pathogenesis
● Hypothyroidism in adult horses is caused by a decrease in circulating thyroid hormone concentrations
and an inability of the thyroid gland to respond in an appropriate fashion to stimulation.
Classical Signs
● Documented thyroid deficiency in adult horses is extremely rare; most horses that fit the "classical"
definition of thyroid disease actually suffer from equine metabolic syndrome due to insulin resistance.
● Hypothyroidism can lead to parasympathetic dysfunction of the face resulting in keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca.
● Poor hair coat, exercise intolerance, and agalactia may be the result of hypothyroidism in adult horses.
Diagnosis
● Exclusion of nonthyroidal illness.
● Evocative testing with TSH or TRH.
Treatment
● T4 administered at a dose of 20 μg/kg.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Biologically active thyroid hormone, primarily in the form of free T3 (fT3), binds receptors within the
cell nucleus. These stimulate transcription factors to act upon DNA response elements to enhance the
expression of genes:
1. Increased enzyme synthesis accelerates cellular energy production and heat is generated as a result.
2. In addition to its effects on energy metabolism, thyroid hormone is essential for both prenatal and
postnatal developmental events including organ formation and skeletal maturation.
3. T4 may have some direct physiologic effects as well, particularly in maintaining neuronal integrity.
B. The majority of circulating thyroid hormone is bound to thyroid hormone-binding globulin and other
blood proteins.
C. Unbound hormone is also referred to as free hormone and is the biologically active form.
D. Free T3 is supplied from both circulating bound T3 and thyroxine (T4):
1. Small quantities of free T4 (fT4) are also produced and enter tissues, but the biological activity of this
hormone is estimated to be one-fifth that of fT3.
 2. The action of 5'-monodeiodinase generates T3, while 5-monodeiodinase activity results in the synthesis
of inactive reverse T3
E.
 Thyroid hormone secretion is dependent upon adequate blood concentrations of TSH, also referred to as
 thyrotropin, and an appropriate supply of iodine:
1. TSH originates from the pars anterior of the pituitary gland.
2. Central nervous system tissues including the hypothalamus monitor blood concentrations of free
thyroid hormone, particularly fT4.
 3. Detection of low thyroid hormone concentrations elicits a rise in TRH secretion by the hypothalamus.
 Release of TSH from the anterior pituitary gland is stimulated by TRH.
F.
 Iodide is actively transported into the colloid of thyroid follicles and rapidly oxidized to iodine by hydro.
gen peroxide. Thyroperoxidase catalyzes the oxidation of iodide and mediates the subsequent iodination of
tyrosine residues within thyroglobulin.
G. This enzyme uses selenium as a cofactor, and selenium deficiency may result in a secondary decrease in
circulating thyroid hormone levels.
282 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
H. Thyroglobulin is secreted by follicular cells and accumulates within the colloid
1. Monoiodotyrosines located on adjacent thyroglobulins couple together follicular cells internalize
thyroglobulin by pinocytosis, and T3 and T4 are liberated through the action of lysosomal proteases.
J. In adult horses, however, there does not appear to be a clear relationship between dietary iodine and
hypothyroidism due to the adult horse thyroid's ability to auto regulate and maintain normal function
despite a wide range of iodine intake.
1.
 Signalment
A.
 The typical age range of horses described as hypothyroid is 6-13 years.
B.
 No breed or sex predilection has been identified.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
 Hypothyroidism can lead to parasympathetic nerve dysfunction:
1. This, in turn, can lead to keratoconjunctivitis sicca, hyperemic and edematous conjunctiva, dull
cornea, decreased tear production, blepharospasm, dry nasal mucosa, head shaking and rubbing, and
excess Flehmen response.
2. Obesity and fat deposits along the body may also be present
B. Clinical signs of horses with experimentally induced hypothyroidism include: hypothermia, facial
swelling, poor quality hair coat, limb edema, cold intolerance, bradycardia, alopecia, anemia, decreased
cardiac output, and increased plasma and blood volumes. Also observed are increased blood cholesterol,
failure of growth plates to close, and stunting in growing animals.
C. Incremental treadmill exercise challenges reveal that hypothyroid horses have reduced distances to
fatigue and lower maximal oxygen, maximal heart rate, and maximal velocity parameters.
D. True hypothyroidism that is documented via evocative testing in adult horses has been described but is
extremely rare:
1. Clinical signs reported from poorly documented cases of naturally occurring thyroid disease include
 decreased libido, lethargy, muscle disease, anhidrosis, agalactia, poor performance, and infertility.
E.  It is now known that the “classic" clinical presentation of hypothyroidism in adult horses; cresty neck,
increased adipose deposition, laminitis, and infertility, is actually that of idiopathic insulin resistance of
equine metabolic syndrome (see Chapter 20):
1. The distinction berween equine metabolic syndrome and hypothyroidism can be confusing because
T4 administration as a pharmacologic agent has been advocated in the treatment of equine metabolic
syndrome.
2. In these instances, T4 is believed to increase overall metabolic rate and enhance fat metabolism
leading to increased insulin sensitivity.
 3. The administered thyroid hormone is not replacing an endogenous deficiency.
F. Tumors, primarily adenomas, are relatively common in aged horses. They often produce goiter, or
IV. Diagnosis
A.Endogenous T4 and T3 assays are often the first step in establishing a diagnosis. Free hormone is the
biologically active form of both hormones.
B. Determination of the concentrations of free T3 and T4 using equilibrium dialysis will produce the most
accurate indication of thyroid status:
1. There is no documentation in the horse that determining free thyroid hormone values, by any method,
leads to a superior diagnostic accuracy of hypothyroid or euthyroid states.
 2. This is even true in instances when phenylbutazone or other highly protein-bound substances have
been administered.
3. Normal range for equine free T4 via equilibrium dialysis is 7-47 pmol/L (0.54-3.65 ng/dL).
C. Because of the large number of factors that affect resting T4 and T3 levels (Table 27.2), low blood
1. Factors that will result in decreased thyroid hormone concentrations include: high energy diets.
concurrent disease, particularly pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) or other endocrine
Hypothyroidism in Other Species 283
Table 27.2Factors that affect thyroid hormone values in horses.
Age—Thyroid concentrations decrease over the life of an animal
Ambient temperature—Decreased temperatures stimulate higher thyroid hormone concentrations
Diet--Particularly abnormal iodine concentrations or increased dietary carbohydrate or protein concentrations
Diurnal variation—T4 is highest in the evening while T3 is highest in the morning
Training—-Thyroid hormone values decrease with training
Pregnancy—-Thyroid hormone values increase slightly
Ovulation—-T4 decreases on the day after ovulation
Illness--Euthyroid sick syndrome may result in decreased thyroid hormone concentrations in animals that are ill or in
negative energy balance
awoipuis yogeaw auinba ym sasioy ui paseanoap ag uen suoeuauon auowiou pioiylsaseasip auoopua lauo
and pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction
 Phenylbutazone
Diphenylhydantoin
Glucocorticoids
Phenobarbital
Sulfa antibiotics
Furosemide
Insulin 
Radio-contrast agents
Halothane
A wide variety of factors can affect thyroid hormone concentrations in a euthyroid animal. For this reason, evocative testing is always
 preferred when making a diagnosis of thyroid dysfunction.
abnormalities, age, diurnal variation, climate, stage of estrus cycle, pregnancy, level of training, and
dietary iodine.
2. Therapeutic agents that may cause decreased thyroid hormone levels include: phenylbutazone, sulfa
antibiotics, glucocorticoids, insulin, radio contrast dyes or other iodine-containing products, halothane,
diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital, and furosemide.
D. Any horse with a suspected endocrine problem should be tested for both insulin resistance and equine
PPID in addition to having their thyroid function evaluated.
E. TRH and TSH response testing is the best way to establish a diagnosis of hypothyroidism:
1. TRH is currently umavailable except as a reagent grade chemical. It will produce increases in thyroid
hormone levels in horses, but its use in client-owned animals is problematic.
2. Administration of TSH may not be practical due to difficulty in locating an affordable source of the
compound. However the best means to determine if the thyroid gland is functioning is to perform a
response test.
3. After a baseline determination of T3 and T4, either 0.5-1 mg TRH or 5IU TSH is given intravenously
and blood collected again at 2 and 4h. In normal horses, the T3 value will be double baseline at the 2-h
collection point and the T4 value will be double the baseline concentration at the 4-h point (see Table 27.3).
4. Because of the expense of TRH and likelihood that other endocrinopathies exist, evaluating both pars
intermedia function (by assessing blood ACTH before and 30 min after TRH administration) and thyroid
function after TRH administration is often indicated.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. The classic "hypothyroid" cresty necked, laminitic horse probably has equine metabolic syndrome
(Table 27.4; see Chapter 20).
B. Equine Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction (see Chapter 11).
C. Any illness may result in euthyroid sick syndrome. Thyroid disease should not be diagnosed if any other
debilitating disease is present.
284 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Table 27.3 Protocol for evocative testing using TSH and TRH in horses and foals.
TSH adult
jeoy HS1
TRH
Dose
2.5-5.0 IU
5.0 IU
0.5-1.0mg
Route
IV
V
IV
Time of sample
0, 2, and 4 or 6 h
0 and 3h
0, 2, and 4h
Expected T4 results
2 xbaseline at 4 or 6h
Inconsistent 
2 xbaseline at 4 h 
Expected T3results
2 xbaseline at 2 h
>50% of baseline at 3 h
2 xbaseline at 2 h
Source: Sojka JE. Hypothyroidism in horses. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1 995;17:845-852.
TSH=thyroid-stimulating hormone; TRH =thyroid-releasing hormone. TRH is commercially available but quite 
expensive. TRH that is not used once reconstituted can be kept frozen until needed;this will prolong its useful *shelf
life." TsH is not available in a form that is labeled for parenteral administration. It can be obtained from chemical
inq Buas ypueasau e ui ateudoudde s! s!ul daly aodw e yanouut passed Buiaq lae pauaisiuiupe pue saueduos
may not be in the context of a client-patient-clinician relationship.
Table 27.4Flow chart for evaluating a horse with T4 and T3 blood concentrations below the reference range.
 Clinical signs or clinical pathology findings
Assessment
Cresty neck, increased adiposity, laminitis
Horse suffers from either equine metabolic syndrome or
 PPID; test for these conditions
Concurrent disease present
Euthyroid sick syndrome
Horse receiving medications, particularly sulfa 
Suppression due to medication
antibiotics or phenylbutazone
Horse tested after ingesting meal high in carbohydrate,
 Balance diet; retest after fasting or ingestion of grass
 potein, zinc, or copper
hay
 Presence of goitrogens in the feed or endophyte-infected 
Remove from diet
fescue
Diet too high or low in iodine
Balance diet
Horse presents with keratoconjunctivitis, alopecia, or cold
Consider hypothyroidism if other causes ruled out
intolerance
 Because primary hypothyroidism is so rare in adult horses, every attempt should be made to rule out other causes of low thyroid hormione
values.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Synthetic thyroxine administered at a dose of 20 μg/kg (10 mg for a 500-kg horse) maintains normal
T3 and T4 concentrations for 24 h.
B.
 Manufacturer's instructions should be consulted and serum thyroid hormone measurements repeated
every 6-8 weeks to ensure adequate dosing.
C.
 As with other hormone therapies, gradual weaning is recommended if therapy is discontinued.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Hypothyroidism is not a life-threatening condition in adult horses. Hormone supplementation should
be effective if patients are assessed and monitored appropriately.
Hypothyroidism in Other Species 285
Vlll. Prevention
4
 No specific preventative measures for this condition have been identified although ensuring a
balanced diet is provided is prudent.
Hypothyroidisn in Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents
Pathogenesis
● Decrease in circulating thyroid hormone concentrations and inability of the thyroid gland to
respond in an appropriate fashion to stimulation.
Classical Signs
● Thyroid enlargement (goiter) can develop in rabbits and other herbivorous species ingesting plants
high in goitrogenic substances.
● Disease of the thyroid gland in ferrets and rats has been limited to neoplastic diseases. Clinical signs
such as weight loss and anorexia are referable to the neoplastic condition.
Diagnosis/Treatment
● Naturally occurring, clinical hypothyroidism has not ben reported in these species.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Herbivorous animals are susceptible to the effects of goitrogenic plants (Table 27.5) if they are fed as a
high enough percent of the total diet:
1. Rabbits on a cabbage diet develop goiter.
2. Signs referable to hypothyroidism are not present.
B.Although thyroid disease has not been described in ferrets, normal thyroid hormone values and response
to TRH and TSH testing have been reported.
 Signalment
A.
 Herbivorous species may be susceptible to the effects of goitrogenic substances in certain plants.
B.
 Adult rabbits consuming diets a large percentage of which consists of cruciferous plants such as broc-
 coli, cabage, and mustard greens.
IIl. Clinical Signs
A.
 An enlarged thyroid gland in a rat or ferret would be consistent with neoplastic disease.
 B. Thyroid problems may be an incidental finding at post mortem, but could result in premortem disease
 such as weight loss, alopecia, and anorexia.
IV. Diagnosis
 There is no commercially available assay for endogenous TSH in these animals. Because TSH is an
extremely species-specific compound, using assays designed for other species is not a valid means of assessing
thyroid function.
xas ss ieoss  anp aq a m sa  p nah pou ui sn e si ar
B.
or diet:
1. Resting T4 values range between 19.3 and 38.6nmol/L (1.5 and 3pg/dL).
2. Resting T3 values range from between 0.9 and 1.5 nmol/L (60 and 95 g/dL).
3. After administration of 500pg TRH to adult male ferrets, T4 doubled over baseline at 6h After
administration of 1IU TSH, T4 doubled over baseline at the 2-, 4-, and 6-h time points post
injection.
4. There was no change in T3 at any time point after TRH or TSH administration.
286 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 27.5 Goitrogen-containing plants.
Chard
Bok choy
White mustard seed
Cauliflower
Flixweed
Strawberries
Tansy mustard
Spinach
Kohlrabi
 Pears
Rape seed and meal
Peaches
Kale
 Sweet potatoes
Broccoli
 Collard greens
Cabbage
Horseradish
Brussel sprouts
Millet
Rutabaga (Swede)
 Peanuts
 Chinese cabbage
Pine nuts
Turnip root
Bamboo shoots
Flax
Radish
Soybean
Many of the plants that inhibit iodine absorption
are members of the genus Brassica. These contain L-5-vinyl-
2-thiooxazolidone, which has been determined to be the
primary goitrogenic factor. Other compounds in plants that
prevent thyroid hormone formation include cyanides,
thiourea, thiouracil, thiocyanate, and sulfonanmides. Some
products, such as rapeseed, can be fed safely if they have
been processed to remove the goitrogenic substance5.
5. TRH administration resulted in transient salivation, hyperventilation, vomiting, and depression in
male ferrets. For this reason, TSH is the preferable compound to use in evocative testing of thyroid
function.
C.
TSH is not available in a form labeled for medical use. Reagent grade TSH is available for purchase
 and has been used in experimental studies. Its use on client-owned animals is problematic.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Rabbits may suffer from disease of the thymus.
B.
 Other, more common, neoplastic conditions should be considered in ferrets with swelling of the cervi-
cal region.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
 Remove goitrogens from the diet if they are identified in a dietary history.
B.
Feed a balanced diet that has adequate iodine content.
Vll.
Prognosis
A.
No data is available with respect to prognosis.
Vlll. Prevention
A
No specific preventative measures for this condition have been identified although ensuring the diet
contains sufficient iodine is prudent, as well as limiting the amount of goitrogenic plants offered.
Hypothyroidism in Other Species287
Hypothyroidism in Pet Birds
Pathogenesis
● Iodine deficiency—either absolute or relative causes decreased circulating thyroid hormone
 concentrations.
● Consuming goitrogenic substances binds iodine and makes it unavailable for metabolic needs.
Classical Signs
● Nonpruritic feather loss, with no skin inflammation.
● Increased body weight.
● Goiter is most commonly observed in budgerigars and pigeons.
Diagnosis
● Total T4 values below reference ranges.
● No response to TRH administration.
Treatment
 Correct diet if goitrogens are present or iodine deficiency exists.
● T4 supplementation.
Pathogenesis
T3 has a shorter half-life in birds than in mammals.
B.
 Thyroid hormone secretion is directly influenced by ambient temperature, photoperiod, and dietary protein.
1.
 Signalment
A. Macaws, particularly blue and gold macaws-represented half of all cases of hyperplastic goiter in over
12000 avian accessions in one survey.
B.
 Functional hypothyroidism is uncommon in birds. It has been documented in a single case report describing
disease in a scarlet macaw.
C. No known sex predilection.
Il. Clinical Signs
A.
 In one case report, the presenting clinical sign was feather loss without pruritus:
1. Contour feathers were lost primarily rather than other feather types.
 2. Also described was increased subcutaneous fat and epidermal atrophy with no evidence of inflammation.
B. Birds with enlarged thyroid glands may have difficulty swallowing or breathing if the goiter presses on
cervical tissue.
C. Less well-documented clinical signs include docile nature, atherosclerosis, and obesity.
Iv.
Diagnosis
4.
Scintigraphy using Te99m pertechnetate can detect hypothyroidism, but is not clinically available.
 Serum total T4 concentrations can be determined, but a onetime measurement is not diagnostic of a
hypothyroid or euthyroid state. Clinical signs and other findings must also be taken into consideration as well.
 Sample must be submitted to a laboratory that can accurately measure avian samples.
D.
 Thyroid hormone concentrations are quite a bit lower in birds compared to mammals, and many
diagnostic laboratories cannot measure avian samples with sufficient accuracy:
1. Radioimmunoassay (RIA) for total T4 has been recently developed for psittacine birds and is
considered the most accurate measure.
As in mammals, the TSH response test is the best way to document hypothyroidism:
1. It is difficult to locate a source of pharmaceutical grade TSH, limiting the usefulness of this test.
288  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 27.6
Resting thyroxine values and results of TSH testing in selected species of birds.
T4 baseline
H1 50d t1 
T3 baseline
H81 ps0d E1
Cockatoos
17.5 (13.6)
45.2 (35.1)
1.88 (1.22)
2.57 (1.67)
Parrots
10.5 (8.19)
35.3 (27.4)
1.94 (1.26)
2.48 (1.61)
Scarlet Macaw
1.7 (1.34)
8.3 (6.46)
1.29 (0.84)
1.06 (0.69)
Blue and Gold Macaw
4.4 (3.41)
15.9 (12.36)
1.16 (0.75)
1.08 (0.70)
African Grey Parrot
1.8 (1.42)
12.0 (9.3)
2.02 (1.31)
2.26 (1.47)
Conure
2.3 (1.76)
17.4 (13.5)
1.29 (0.84)
1.77(1.15)
Cockatiel
15.2 (11.83)
50.2 (39.0)
2.31 (1.45)
2.57 (1.67)
Source: Lothrop CD, Loomis MR, Olsen JH. Thyrotropin stinulation test for evaluation of thyroid function in
psittacine birds. JAVMA 1985;186:47-48.
All values are in nmol/L. (Conventional values in ng/mL are given in parenthesis); post TRH samples were
 collected 6 h after administration of TSH.
2. Serum thyroid hormone concentrations before and after thyroid-stimulating hormone administration
have been published (Table 27.6).
3. Serum T3 concentration did not increase significantly after TSH stimulation.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Feather loss is most commonly attributable to feather plucking which has a host of causes including
behavioral, infectious, and reproductive disorders.
 Obesity due to overfeeding and inadequate exercise is common in cage and aviary birds.
c.
Dyspnea or difficulty swallowing may indicate respiratory or upper alimentary tract disease.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Evaluate diet and ensure adequate iodine. Eliminate potential goitrogens (Table 27.5).
B.
In one report, a scarlet macaw received 0.02ng thyroxine PO q 12h for 5 months, then q 24h until
signs of hypothyroidism resolved.
VIll.
Prognosis
A.
Limited data is available regarding prognosis.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Ensure diet provides sufficient iodine and does not contain excessive amounts of goitrogen-containing plants
Hypothyroidism in Pet Reptiles
Pathogenesis
● A variety of improper management and dietary factors can cause thyroid gland dysfunction.
Classical Signs
● Goiter.
● Anorexia, lethargy, depression, obesity, and stunting may also be present.
Diagnosis
● Careful history of animal husbandry practices and diet to rule out goirogens or iodine imbalance.
● Low total thyroxine concentrations.
Hypothyroidism in Other Species  289
Treatment
● Feed balanced diet.
● Maintain proper thermal gradients and light cycles in the animal's environment.
Table 27.7Total T4 values in selected species of reptiles.
Species
Total T4
Green iguana
3.81±0.84 (0.3±0.07)
Fence lizard
4.81 -6.78 (0.37 -0.53)
Garter snake
0.90-1.67 (0.07 -0.13)
Corn snake
0.45- 6.06 (0.035- 0.47)
 Ball python 
0.93 -4.79 (0.072-0.37)
Red-tailed boa
≤0.24 - 3.98 (≤0.02 - 0.31)
 Milk snake
0.27 -2.94 (0.021 -0.23)
Desert tortoise
0.35-4.0 (0.027 -0.31)
Source: Rivera 5, Lock B. The reptilian thyroid and parathyroid glands.
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11(11:163-176.
All values in nmol/L (Conventional values in μg/dL given in parenthesis).
Pathogenesis
4
 Thyroid hormone maintains ecdysis, reproduction, tail regeneration, growth, and metabolic rate.
B.
Abnormal light cycles, temperature gradients, or hibernation conditions will affect reptilian thyroid
hormone concentrations.
Goiter will develop if excess or deficient iodine is fed in the diet:
1. Herbivorous reptiles will develop goiter if goitrogenic plants are fed as a significant part of the diet.
D.
 Over supplementation of iodine interferes with production of thyroxine resulting in hypothyroidism.
 Signalment
4
Herbivorous reptiles, particularly iguana.
B.
 Iguana ingesting cruciferous plants as a large percent of their total diet.
I1. Clinical Signs
4.
Goiter.
B.
 Hypothyroidism in iguanas leads to lethargy, weight gain, obesity, decreased rate of growth, and
increased docility. Signs resolve within a couple of weeks after goitrogenic foods are eliminated from the diet.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 RIA to measure total T4 is the most sensitive assay. Blood values for total T4 in a variety of reptilian
species is given in Table 27.7.
B.
Circulating thyroid hormone concentrations in reptiles are lower than in mammalian species and are
often outside the detectable range of many clinical pathology laboratories.
C. Anatomic location and appearance of the thyroid gland varies greatly among reptilian species, making
detection of thyroid enlargement difficult in some species.
 Differential Diagnoses
4.
 Lethargy, decreased rate of growth, and increased docility are more often directly attributable to
general husbandry-related issues such as inappropriate temperature and light provision, and malnutrition.
 290  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Hypothyroidism is rarely diagnosed in reptiles; as such thorough evaluation of patients with nonspecific
clinical signs is essential to rule out more common health problems.
B
Weight gain is usually due to overfeeding.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
 Feed a balanced diet appropriate for the reptile species in question.
B.
Eliminate or greatly reduce the number of goitrogenic foods offered.
C.
Ensure overall husbandry is appropriate for the affected species.
VIl.
Prognosis
A.
'apeu are saaueuo Kipueqsnq rauno pue iaip J poog aq pinous sisouaoid aul
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Ensure the environment and diet are appropriate for the given species.
B.
 For herbivorous species, limit the amounts of goitrogenic plants offered.
References and Further Readings
Allen AL, Doige CE, Fretz PB, et al. Hyperplasia of the thyroid gland and concurrent musculoskeletal deformities in western
Canadian foals: Reexamination of a previously described syndrome. Can Vet J 1994;35:31-38.
Breuhaus BA, Refsel KR, Beyerlein SL. Measurement of free thyroxin concentration in horses by equilibriurm dialysis. J Vet
InternMed2006;20:371-376.
Fox JG, Dangler CA, Snyder SB, et al. C-cell carcinoma (medullary thyroid carcinoma) associated with multiple endocrine
neoplasms in a ferret (Mustela putorius). Vet Pathot 2000;37:278-282.
Frank N, Sojka J, Messer NT. Equine thyroid dysfunction. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2002;18(2):305-320.
Heard DJ, Collins B, Chen DL, et al. Thyroid and adrenal function tests in adult male ferrets. Arm J Vet Res 1990;51:32-35.
Vet Med Assoc 1985;186:47-48.
Oglesbee BL. Hypothyroidism in a scarlet macaw. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:1599-1601.
Rivera S, Lock B. The reptilian thyroid and parathyroid glands. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11{1):163-176.
Schmidt RE, Reavill DR. The avian thyroid gland. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11{1):15-24.
Schwarz BC, Sallmutter T, Nell B. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca attributable to parasympathetic facial nerve dysfunction
associated with hypothyroidism in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;233:1761-1766.
Sojka JE. Hypothyroidism in horses. Compend Contin Educ Vet 1995;17:845-852.
CHAPTER 28
Hyperthyroidism in Dogs
David Panciera
Pathogenesis
● Hyperthyroidism is caused by excessive thyroid hormone secretion by a functional thyroid tumor,
usually a malignant thyroid carcinoma.
Classical Signs
O Older dogs, particularly boxers, beagles, and golden retrievers are affected.
● Weight loss, polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, panting, muscle wasting, tachycardia, dyspnea, and a
 mass in the ventral cervical area are the most common findings.
Diagnosis
● Elevated serum T4 concentration confirms hyperthyroidism, while incisional or excisional biopsy of
 the cervical mass confirms the diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma.
Treatment
● Surgical excision of the tumor, radioiodine administration, or external beam radiation therapy are
 effective for control or cure of thyroid carcinoma and control of signs of hyperthyroidism.
 Pathogenesis
A. Hyperthyroidism is caused by thyroid neoplasia:
1. Thyroid carcinoma is the cause of the vast majority of cases of canine hyperthyroidism.
2. Rare causes of canine hyperthyroidism include benign adenoma and struma cordis (ectopic thyroid
tissue in the heart).
 3. Tumor location ranges from the base of the heart to the base of the tongue.
 4. Only 10-20% of thyroid carcinomas result in hyperthyroidism, while the remainder are nonfunctional.
5. The cause of thyroid neoplasia in the dog is not known.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
291
292 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
I1. Signalment
A. The median age at diagnosis of dogs with thyroid tumors is 9-10 years.
B.
Boxer, beagle, and golden retrievers are predisposed to develop thyroid tumors.
C.
There is no gender predilection.
IlI. Clinical Signs
A. Clinical signs of thyroid neoplasia result from either thyroid hormone excess, local effects of the tumor,
or metastasis.
B.S
 Signs of hyperthyroidism are similar to those in cats:
1. The most common historical complaints present in >50% of cases include:
a. Weight loss despite normal or increased food intake caused by increased metabolic rate.
h. Polyuria and polydipsia due largely to increased cardiac output and renal blood flow.
C. Increased activity or restlessness and panting.
2. May cause tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, thin body condition, muscle wasting,
and panting.
C. The mass is frequently found by the owner, and can result in dysphagia, dyspnea or cough, and
dysphonia due to compression or invasion of the esophagus, trachea, or recurrent laryngeal nerve,
respectively.
 D. Regional lymph node enlargement, including nodes both cranial and caudal to the mass, may be present
 in dogs with metastasis.
 E. The most common physical examination finding is a palpable ventral cervical mass, present in over 75%
of cases, regardless of the functional nature of the tumor:
1. It can be difficult to determine if the tumor is unilateral or bilateral in many cases.
 2. Small thyroid masses may require careful, deep palpation of the entire ventral cervical area for detection.
F.Thyroid tumors infrequently occur at the base of the tongue, in the cranial mediastinum or at the heart
base with a resultant oral mass, pleural effusion, or edema of the head and front limbs, respectively.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Clinicopathologic findings:
1. Routine complete blood count, serum chemistries, and urinalysis are usually normal.
2. Elevated liver enzyme activity and azotemia are occasionally present in dogs with thyroid carcinoma
independent of the functional status of the thyroid tumor and are not related to hyperthyroidism or the
presence of metastasis to the liver or kidneys.
B. Hyperthyroidism is confirmed by finding an elevated serum total T4 concentration in a dog with appro-
priate clinical signs and a mass consistent with thyroid neoplasia
C. Diagnosis of a thyroid neoplasm is determined by biopsy:
 po uo an st p p a in  po po a t si asn a a 'l
mass, but it is difficult in most cases to determine if the tumor is benign or malignant:
 a. Hemodilution of aspiration samples sometimes results in nondiagnostic cytology.
h. If the sample is contaminated with a large amount of blood, preparing the smear using a technique
of the smear.
C. Significant hemorrhage can occur after fine needle aspiration.
2. Surgical incisional biopsy to obtain a wedge of tissue is recommended because surgery allows the best
chance to control the potential severe hemorrhage due to biopsy.
3. Percutaneous needle core biopsy is not recommended because of the risk of hemorrhage.
D. Staging of thyroid carcinoma is important because metastasis is present at diagnosis in 35-40% of dogs
:Aenuae %os oi dn ul sdojaaep pue
1. The hungs are most commonly affected and metastatic lesions are often small, indistinct, and numerous
rather than the more typical metastatic pattern.
2. Lymph node metastasis is also common.
 3. Staging to detect metastasis should include fine needle aspiration of retropharyngeal, submandibular
and cervical lymph nodes, and thoracic radiographs.
Hyperthyroidism in Dogs 293
E.
 Cervical radiographs may allow documentation of a mass and displacement of surrounding structures,
but are rarely necessary.
F. Ultrasound examination of the tumor and neck is useful in determining if the mass is unilateral or bilateral
and extent of invasion of surrounding tissue (important prognostic indicators). Ultrasound may also be useful
G. Thyroid scintigraphy with 9mtechnetium pertechnetate may be useful in detecting ectopic tissue or
 than scintigraphy for detection of pulmonary metastasis, although scintigraphy can rarely identify metas
tasis not visible on thoracic radiographs.
H. Cardiac arrhythmias and hypertension may be present, so an ECG and measurement of systemic arterial
blood pressure should be considered.
V.Differential Diagnoses
A. Possible causes of a ventral cervical mass other than thyroid neoplasia include abscess, salivary mucocele,
sialadenitis, foreign body, or granuloma. Nonthyroid neoplasia in the soft tissues of the neck (e.g., lymphoma,
salivary neoplasia, rhabdomyosarcoma, and leiomyosarcoma) or metastasis to lymph nodes from tumors of
the head and neck are other causes.
 B. Weight loss and polyphagia could be caused by diabetes mellitus, maldigestion, or malabsorption.
C. The causes of polyuria and polydipsia are numerous (see Chapter 42), but diabetes mellitus should be
considered along with hyperthyroidism given the other signs that are usually present.
Vl. Treatment
A. Treatment largely targets management of the malignancy, often without specific treatment of the hyper-
thyroidism.
mazole or propylthiouracil:
1. While efficacy and dosages have not been wellestablished in dogs, methimazole should be initiated at
5-10 mg q 12h and dosage adjusted based on clinical response and serum T4 concentration afer
24 weeks of treatment.
2. If methimazole is not effective, propylthiouracil (3 mg/kg q 8 h) can be used with similar monitoring.
antagonist such as atenolol or propranolol.
D. Hypertension is usually most effectively treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor such
as enalapril or benazepril.
E.
Surgical excision of the neoplasm:
1. Treatment of choice when the tumor is not deeply attached (mobile on palpation) and is unilateral.
2. Complications:
a. Because of the vascular nature of thyroid carcinomas, hemorrhage can be severe and is the most
common complication.
h. Hypoparathyroidism can occur as a consequence of parathyroidectomy if bilateral thyroidectomy
is attempted.
 C. Damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve or vagosympathetic trunk can result in laryngeal paralysis
 Or megaesophagus.
d. General anesthesia may exacerbate cardiac arrhythmias due to hyperthyroidism
Radioactive iodine (13'1):
1. Highly effective in treatment of hyperthyroidism and results in resolution of the hyperthyroidism
within 2 weeks of administration.
2. A very high dose of i31I must be administered, so time in isolation is much longer posttreatment and
3. Fatal myelosuppression has been reported in a few dogs treated with radioiodine for thyroid cancer.
4. The optimal dosage of radioiodine has not been determined.
 5. May be useful to downsize tumor prior to surgery or as an adjunct following incomplete surgical
resection.
 294  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
External beam radiation therapy is effective:
1. Should be considered particularly in dogs with invasive thyroid carcinomas.
2. The reduction in tumor size may occur slowly, with a maximum effect requiring several months to
over 1 year.
H.
Chemotherapy:
1. Should be considered in cases where distant metastasis is present and possibly following surgery o1
  s  e  s  r   
 eral, and vascular invasion) or when resection is incomplete.
 2. Has limited efficacy in treatment of thyroid carcinoma in dogs, although little investigation into this
 treatment modality has been umdertaken.
3. Treatment with doxorubicin or cisplatin has resulted in a response in approximately 40-50% of
cases, but survival has been much shorter than with other reatment modalities.
Hypothyroidism can be a complication of most of the treatments, so levothyroxine supplementation
should be instituted if clinical signs and thyroid function tests confirm its presence.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Smaller and freely moveable tumors carry a better prognosis than those that are fixed to surrounding
tissue or larger. The incidence of metastasis is increased when the tumor diameter exceeds 5 cm or when both
lobes of the thyroid gland are affected.
B
Without treatment, median survival of dogs with thyroid carcinoma has been reported to be 3 months,
 ao o a  s aos  s nq
 Dogs with mobile thyroid carcinomas treated by surgical excision have a median survival time of
over 3 years.
D.
 Dogs treated with radioiodine have a median survival of 27-30 months, although dogs with metastatic
disease have a shorter survival (12-19 months).
E.
 External beam radiation therapy of dogs with fixed, invasive carcinormas results in median survival of
 2-4 years or longer; even dogs with extensive metastasis can have prolonged survival.
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine thyroid tumors and hy perthyroidism. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine
Liptak JM. Canine thyroid carcinoma. Clin Tech Smatt Anirm Pract 2007;22:75-81.
Theon AP, Marks SL, Feldman ES, Griffey S. Prognostic factors and patterns of treatment failure in dogs with unresectable
differentiated thyroid carcinomas treated with megavoltage irradiation. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:1775-1779
Worth AJ, Zuber RM, Hockin M. Radioiodide (1'I) therapy for the treatrment of canine thyroid carcinoma. Aust Vet J
2005;83:208-214.
CHAPTER 29
Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Mark E. Peterson
Pathogenesis
● Hyperthyroidism occurs as a result of an increase in the circulating concentrations of the thyroid
hormones, thyroxine (T), and triodothyronine (T,).
● Benign thyroid adenoma (adenomatous hyperplasia) affecting one (30%) or both lobes (70%) of
the thyroid gland is the most common cause.
Classical Signs
● Most cats are >10 years of age, with a median age of 13 years.
● Weight loss despite an increased appetite.
● Hyperactivity and vomiting common.
● Palpable thyroid nodule in most cats.
Diagnosis
● High serum concentrations of total T confirms diagnosis in most cats.
Treatment
● Antithyroid drugs (methimazole, carbimazole).
● Surgical thyroidectomy.
 Radioactive iodine (radioiodine; 1311).
● Nutritional therapy (low-iodine diet).
1. Pathogenesis
A. Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is a multisystemic disorder resulting from excessive circulating concen-
trations of the active thyroid hormones T, and T-
B. Benign adenomatous hyperplasia (adenoma) of one (30%) or both (70%) thyroid lobes is the most com-
mon pathological abnormality associated with hyperthyroidism in cats, occurring in 96-98% of cases.
C. Thyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of hyperthyroidism in cats, accounting for approximately 2-4% of cats.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
295
296 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
D. To date, the underlying etiology responsible for the thyroid changes remains obscure and is probably
multifactorial. However, studies have indicated numerous environmental and nutritional factors, which may
play a role in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
E.
Possible risk factors:
1. Diet composed entirely or primarily of canned cat food.
2. Certain varieties of canned cat food (fish, liver or giblet flavor).
3. Cans with plastic linings and pop-top lids may pose a greater risk than sachets or cans which require
a can opener to open them. This is potentially due to the release of chemicals such as bisphenol-A and
4. Diets containing either excess or deficient amounts of iodine have been implicated.
5. Regular use of insecticidal products (flea products) on the cat or fly sprays within the household.
6. Exposure to herbicides and fertilizers.
7. Exposure to flame-retardant chemical contaminants including polybrominated diphenyl ethers
(PBDEs). Excessive PBDEs have been identified in household dust from contaminated carpet padding;
polyurethane foams, furniture, and mattresses.
I1.Signalment
B。
 Only 5% of hyperthyroid cats are <10 years of age.
C. There is no obvious breed susceptibility. Two genetically related breeds (Siamese and Himalayan
roidism.
D. Male and female cats are affected equally.
Ill. Clinical Signs
 A. The typical historical findings and clinical signs of hyperthyroidism are listed in Table 29.1.
common that it should always be considered in cats that have lost weight, whether supporting signs such as
tachycardia are present or not.
C. The weight loss seen in cats with hyperthyroidism is often associated with an increased appetite.
However some cats maintain a normal appetite or even develop a reduced appetite.
D. Hyperactivity, exhibited particularly as nervousness, restlessness, and aggressive behavior, may be
the cat and are therefore often more noticeable to veterinarians than to owners themselves.
E. Anxiety and restlessness can be obvious to owners if the cat yowls. Aimless pacing and easily interrupted
sleep patterns have been described and this presumably reflects a state of confusion, anxiety, and nervousness.
F.
 Skin changes that often develop in hyperthyroid cats include a dull or matted hair coat. Some hyperthy-
G. Gastrointestinal signs including vomiting or diarrhea are not uncommon in cats with hyperthyroidism:
1. Vomiting may be associated with rapid overeating; diarrhea is most likely due to intestinal hypermo-
tility although malabsorption is also a factor.
H. Polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD) occur in about half of hyperthyroid cats, but PU/PD can be marked in
some cats:
1. Various mechanisms may be responsible, including concurrent primary renal dysfunction, renal med-
ullary washout because of increased renal blood flow, and primary polydipsia because of a hypotha-
lamic disturbance.
I. Heart murmur and other cardiac signs are common and frequently the most significant findings on
initial physical examination:
1. Tachycardia (rate >240 beats per minute) is found in about half the hyperthyroid cats.
2. A powerful apex beat and systolic murmurs are also commonly encountered. Such murmurs are fre-
quently associated with dynamic right and left ventricular outflow obstruction rather than primary
mitral or tricuspid regurgitation. Hyperthyroidism is probably the single most important factor for the
development of murmurs in older cats.
Hyperthyroidism in Cats 297
Table 29.1 Clinical findings in cats with hyperthyroidism.
s
 Percentage of cats
Historic owner complaints
WWeight loss
85-95%
Polyphagia
60-75%
Polyuria/polydipsia
45-60%
Increased activity, anxiety
30-55%
Vomiting
30-45%
 Dyspnea, tachypnea, or panting 
20-35%
Diarrhea
15-20%
Large fecal volume
10-20%
Decreased appetite
 5-1 0%
Decreased activity
5-1 0% 
Weakness
5-1 0%
 Physical examination findings
Large thyroid gland 
80-95%
Thin (low body condition score)
60-70%
Hyperkinesis
50-65%
Tachycardia
50-60%
Heart murmur
35-55%
Unkempt hair coat, matting, alopecia
15-30%
Gallop rhythm
15-25%
Aggressive
10-15%
Hypertension
10-15%
Increased nail growth
 5-1 0%
Congestive heart failure
1-2 %
 3. Gallop rhythms attributed to rapid ventricular filling can also occur.
4. Occasionally arrhythmias are found, particularly ectopic atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.
 Mild to moderate hypertension was previously considered important in hyperthyroid cats. However,
these cats are typically only mildly hypertensive and, when present, may simply reflect the reduced
tolerance of hyperthyroid cats to stressful situations such as the veterinary examination ("white-coat"
phenomenon).
K. Palpable goiter is present in most, if not all, cats with hyperthyroidism. Thyroid lobes are not normally
palpable. In hyperthyroid cats, either unilateral or bilateral thyroid enlargement (goiter) is invariably present
since all hyperthyroid cats have either adenomas or carcinomas as the underlying cause of the disease:
1. There are two general techniques used to palpate the thyroid gland in cats:
a. With the classic palpation technique: the cat is restrained in sitting position and the front legs held
still. The neck of the cat is extended, and the clinicians' thumb and index finger are placed on each side
aou e jo uondied unqnuun jeuas an oi xie a uon spiemump idams pue eaunn ai jo
subcutaneous nodule or a *blip" that slips under the fingertips determines the presence of a goiter.
298 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 29.2  Common hematological and biochemical abnormalities
associated with hyperthyroidism in cats.
Percentage of cats
Complete blood count 
Erythrocytosis
30-55%
Anemia
1-5%
Lymphopenia 
15-40%
Eosinopenia
15-35%
Leukocytosis
15-20%
Serum chemistry profile
High alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
80-90%
High alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
60-75%
High aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
30-45%
Azotemia
20-25%
Hyperglycemia
15-20%
Hyperphosphatemia
10-20%
Hyperbilirubinemia
3-4%
Complete urinalysis
Specific gravity >1.040
40-60%
Specific gravity <1.015
%9-E
Proteinuria (high protein:creatinine> 0.4)
%0/-06
h. With the alternative Norsworthy technique, the clinician is positioned directly behind the standing
cat. The head of the cat is raised and turned (45°) alternatively to the right or left, away from the side
that is assessed (i.e., to palpate the right thyroid lobe, turn the cat's head to the left). The tip of the
clinician's index finger is placed in the groove formed by the trachea and sternothyroid muscle just
below the larynx and then moved downwards in the groove to the thoracic inlet). If the thyroid lobe
 is enlarged, a characteristic "blip" is felt as the index finger passes the goiter.
L.  Rarely cats develop apathetic hyperthyroidism and present with apathy, depression, weakness, and anorexia:
1. Although weight loss is present in these cats, it is accompanied by anorexia, instead of increased
appetite. Most cats with apathetic hyperthyroidism have concurrent severe nonthyroidal illness such as
renal failure, cardiac disease, or neoplasia.
IV. Diagnosis
A. A variety of procedures, including a complete blood count, serum chemistry analysis, and complete uri-
nalysis, are recommended in the workup of all cats with suspected hyperthyroidism (Table 29.2). Often this
 database simply lends support to the diagnosis, but these screening tests are most useful if concurrent disor-
 ders are present and an accurate prognosis is required. Specific thyroid function tests, especially a total
serum T, determination, are necessary to confirm a diagnosis.
B. Hematological findings are usually nonspecific and mostly not clinically important (Table 29.1). Anemia,
when present, is almost never caused by the hyperthyroid state and a search for another cause should be
undertaken.
C.
 Serum biochemistry abnormalities are common in cats with hyperthyroidism (Table 29.1):
1. Mild to marked increases in the serum activities of many liver enzymes, including alanine aminotrans-
ferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) are the most common and striking biochemical abnormalities
Hyperthyroidism in Cats   299
of feline hyperthyroidism. These liver enzymes changes and T, concentrations are related, with liver
enzyme abnormalities being more common in cats with severe hyperthyroidism. These high liver enzymes
2. Before treatment, mild to moderate increases in serum concentrations of urea and creatinine may be
found in just over 20% of hyperthyroid cats. Such a prevalence of concurrent renal dysfunction or
chronic kidney disease (CKD) is not unexpected in a group of older or aged cats:
a. These abnormalities, particularly the high urea concentration, may be exacerbated by the increased
 protein intake and protein catabolism of hyperthyroidism.
h. On the other hand, in hyperthyroid cats without concurrent CKD or azotemia, circulating creati-
nine concentrations are lowered, which may be related in part to a loss of muscle mass.
c. However this lowering of serum creatinine (and urea in some cats) is primarily the result of the
cations in assessing the presence of primary renal dysfunction in hyperthyroid cats (see below).
D. Urinalysis is generally unremarkable but is useful in differentiating other diseases with similar clinical
signs such as diabetes mellitus:
1. The urine-specific gravity is variable, but concurrent (masked) renal disease should be considered in
all cats that have values <1.040. Cats with concurrent CKD can occasionally have values >1.040 but
most cats have less concentrated urine.
2. Mild proteinuria is commonly observed and may reflect glomerular hypertension and hyperfiltration
or differences in tubular handling of protein. Proteinuria found on routine urinalysis should be con-
firmed by measuring the urine protein:creatinine (UPC) ratio:
a. Normal cats have a UPC ratio of <0.2, where many hyperthyroid cats have borderline high (0.2-
0.4) or overt proteinuria (>0.4).
b. Such proteinuria resolves upon successful treatment of hyperthyroidism.
E. On thoracic radiography, mild to severe cardiac enlargement is evident in about half of hyperthyroid cats:
1. In the vast majority of cats, this cardiomegaly is reversible with correction of the hyperthyroid state
 2. With severe hyperthyroidism, cats may develop congestive heart failure, as evidenced by pleural effu-
sion and pulmonary edema on thoracic radiography.
F.β The most common echocardiographic findings in hyperthyroid cats include left ventricular hypertrophy,
left atrial and ventricular dilation, and interventricular septum hypertrophy:
1. However, most of these changes are subtle and are of little clinical relevance.
G. Confirming the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism requires use of one of more thyroid function tests to dem-
onstrate increased production of circulating thyroid hormones, suppressed pituitary thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) secretion, or increased thyroidal radioisotope uptake:
1. Elevated circulating thyroid hormone concentrations (T, and T,) are the biochemical hallmarks of
hyperthyroidism and are extremely specific for its diagnosis with very few false positive results reported.
Methods for their measurement are readily accessible, relatively cheap, and do not involve specific sam-
pling requirements:
a. Serum total T, is preferable as a screening test for hyperthyroidism with a test sensitivity of over
90% (Figure 29.1). However approximately 10% of all hyperthyroid cats have serum total T,
concentration within the reference range limits. Such T, values are usually within the mid to high end
of the reference range. Thus, while a high total T, value is indicative of hyperthyroidism, finding a
single reference range T, value does not preclude such a diagnosis:
1) In early or mildly affected cases, serum total T concentrations can fluctuate in and out of the
reference range. Such fluctuation occurs in all hyperthyroid cats but the degree of fluctuation is of
little diagnostic significance in cats with markedly elevated T, concentrations.
2) Severe nonthyroidal illness is capable of suppressing serum total T concentrations to below the
reference range in euthyroid cats. Similarly, marginally elevated serum total T, concentrations may
be suppressed to the mid to high end of the reference range in cats with mild hyperthyroidism and
concurrent moderate to severe nonthyroidal disease
300 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
300
23
260-
20
160-
12
140
10
120
/br
8
100
14
r
erl
80
6
60-
40
2
20-
Normal
HyperthyroidOther illness
Figure 29.1  Box plots of the serum concentrations of total T, concentrations tests in 172 clinically normal cats, 917 cats with
untreated hyperthyroidism, and 221 cats with nonthyroidal disease. For each box plot, the T-bars represent the main body of
data, which in most instances is equal to the range. The box represents the interquartile range (i.e., the 25th percentile to 75th
percentile range or the midle half of the data). The horizontal bar in the box is the median. Outlying data points are repre-
sented by open circles. The shaded area indicates the reference interval, which was established by use of the nonparametric
method of percentile estimates with confidence intervals to determine the 2.5th percentile to 97.5th percentile range for results
from the clinically normal cats (From Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. Measurement of serum concentrations of free
thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total triiodothyronine in cats with hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal disease. / Am Vet
Med As5oc 2001;218:529-336, with permission)
3) In early or mildly hyperthyroid cats (with no concurrent illnesses), serum total Tq concentra-
tions will eventually increase into the diagnostic thyrotoxic range upon retesting a few weeks later.
4) Concurrent hyperthyroidism should always be suspected in severely ill cats with mid to high
reference range serum total Ty concentrations.
 5) Alternatively, other diagnostic tests may provide a means of diagnosing hyperthyroidism in
these cats (see below).
b. Serum total T, is less useful than T as a diagnostic test, since over 30% of hyperthyroid cats have normal
circulating T, concentration. The majority of hyperthyroid cats with normal T, concentrations are early or
mildly affected. Measurement of total T, is not recommended for investigation of hyperthyroidism in cats.
C. Determination of serum free Tq concentrations, as measured by equilibrium dialysis, is a more
      on i sn  s
1) Up to 98% of hyperthyroid cats will have a high free T value, compared to 90% of cats with
high total T, values.
2) Free Ty cannot, however, be used as a routine screening test since nonthyroidal disease can cause
falsely high free T, values in up to 12% of nonhyperthyroid cats (Figure 29.2). These cats generally
have corresponding total T, values in the lower half or below the reference range.
3) Caution is therefore advised in using serum-free T measurements by equilibrium dialysis as the
sole diagnostic test for hyperthyroidism. It is more reliable if interpreted with a corresponding total
T value. High-normal total and free T, concentrations are consistent with hyperthyroidism,
Hyperthyroidism in Cats  301
200
15.5
14
175
12
150
8
10
125
ud)
T4 (ng/
L4
100
ee
8
-free
ur
Ser
75
Ser
50
25
Normal
Hyperthyroid  Other illness
Fgure 29.2 Box plots of the serum concentrations of free T, concentrations tests in 172 clinically normal cats, 917 cats with
untreated hyperthyroidism, and 221 cats with nonthyroidal disease. See Figure 29.1 for key (From Peterson ME, Melian C)
Nichols R. Measurement of serum concentrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total triiodothyronine in cats with
hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal disease. / Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;218:529-336, with permission).
2. In human patients, measurement of circulating TSH concentration is usually used as a first-line dis-
criminatory test of thyroid function:
a. A species-specific feline TSH assay has not yet been developed; however, assays for measuring
canine TSH (cTSH) are widely available, and it has been suggested that TSH measurement using this
test may provide some diagnostic information in cats with suspected hyperthyroidism.
h.
Theoretically, as in people, it could be expected that TSH levels should be low in early stages of
hyperthyroidism before the T, is elevated.
C. Caution is advised in interpreting TSH values in cats. The current canine assays only detect approx-
imately 35% of recombinant feline TSH, making it difficult to distinguish normal values from the
rad  sie  padxa sa psss
d. Perhaps the only use for such TSH measurement would be to exclude hyperthyroidism, that is,
finding a normal rather than suppressed cTSH value.
3. With thyroid imaging (scintigraphy), hyperthyroid cats usually exhibit increased thyroidal uptake of
radioisotope: radioactive iodine (123 or 131) or technetium-99M as pertechnetate (mTcO-):
a. Percentage uptake or increased thyroid:salivary ratio may be calculated and both are strongly cor-
related with circulating thyroid hormone concentration and provide a sensitive means of diagnosing
hyperthyroidism (Figures 29.3-29.5).
have access to the nuclear medicine equipment needed to obtain thyroid images or perform thyroid
uptake determinations.
4. In cats with suspected hyperthyroidism but normal serum Tq concentrations, dynamic thyroid func-
tion testing (e.g., T, suppression test or the TRH stimulation test) can be used to help in diagnosis.
However, in the majority of hyperthyroid cats found to have a normal T, concentration, identification of
302  Clinical Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
Figure 29.3 Normal thyroid image (scintigraphy) performed using 99 m-Tc04- in a 16-year-old neutered male DSH cat with a
This study was performed toinvestigate the potentialfor earlyhyperthyroidism but was interpreted as normal.Note the bilateral
symmetry of the thyroid lobes as well as the normal size and normal thyroid:salivary uptake ratio of <1.0. This cat was
subsequently diagnosed with alimentary lymphosarcoma based on endoscopically acquired intestinal biopsies.
concurrent disease, repeat total T values, or simultaneous measurement of free T, concentrations allows
confirmation of the diagnosis. Further diagnostic tests are rarely required:
a. Protocols and interpretive advice for these tests are outlined in Table 29.3.
h. Nowadays such dynamic tests should only be considered in cats with clinical signs suggestive of
hyperthyroidism when repeated total T4 concentration remains within reference range or free T4
 analysis and thyroid imaging is unavailable or diagnostically unhelpful.
V.1
 Differential Diagnoses
A.Because the clinical signs of hyperthyroidism in cats can be so variable and generally affect many body
systems, a number of differential diagnoses must be considered in cats having a possible diagnosis of hyper-
thyroidism. These diseases include diabetes mellitus, CKD, hepatic disease, gastrointestinal disease, and
neoplasia.
B. Similarly, because heart murmurs and cardiomegaly are so common in hyperthyroid cats, primary car-
diac disease (cardiomyopathy) must also be considered, as should cardiac disease secondary of other condi-
tions, for example, hypertension, acromegaly, etc.
C. Finally, anxiety-related misbehavior must also be included in the differential list.
Vl. Treatment
A.
General principles:
1. Hyperthyroidism can be treated in four ways: medical management with methimazole or carbima-
zole, surgical thyroidectomy, radioactive iodine (13'I) and nutritional therapy.
ing a treatment plan for the individual hyperthyroid cat.
Hyperthyroidism in Cats303
Fgure 29.4 Thyroid scintigraphy performed using 99 m-Tc04- on a 9-year-old spayed female DLH cat with a history of weight
aun pue auei auanajan aui uunim sem is,ien siul 'ensjod pue eisdipklod swoiduns leusauionsel jo jasuo juanai 'ssl
free T, was elevated. This patient has a small unilateral, left-sided thyroid adenoma. Note the increased radionuclide uptake
(thyroid:salivary uptake ratio >1.0) in a mildly enlarged left thyroid lobe combined with the absence of visualization of the right
thyroid lobe secondary to feedback suppression.
Iobes.
304  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 29.3  Commonly used protocols for dynamic function tests for the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in cats
TRH
T. suppression
stimulation
TSH stimulation
Drug
Liothyronine (Cytomel)
TRH
Bovine TSH
Human TSH
Dose
25μg & hourly for 7 doses
0. 1 mg/kg
0.51U/kg
0.025-0.20mg/cat
Route
Oral
Intravenous
Intravenous
Intravenous
Sampling times
0 and 2-4h after last dose
0 and 4 h
0 and 6h
1 and 6-8h
Assay
Total T,
Total T。
Total T,
Total T,
Total T,
Interpretation
Euthyroidism
>50% suppression
>60% increase
>100% increase
>100% increase
Hyperthyroidism
< 35% suppression
<50% increase
Minimal/no
Not determined
increa se
T, thyroxine; T, triodothyronine; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
 3. Medical management and nutritional therapy are considered “reversible,” whereas surgical thyroidectomy
4. The major advantages and disadvantages of the main forms of therapy are outlined in Table 29.4.
B. Treatment considerations:
1. Concurrent conditions (nonthyroidal disorders):
a. CKD is very common in older cats so it is not surprising that CKD is commonly found concurrent
mask underlying CKD:
1) Because it is not always possible to predict which hyperthyroid cats have underlying CKD, a treat-
ment trial with methimazole, carbimazole or possibly, nutritional therapy should be considered in all
cats in which CKD is suspected.
2) Immediate permanent therapy (131I or surgical thyroidectomy) without a methimazole/carbima-
zole trial is only appropriate for relatively young cats with completely normal serum urea and
creatinine concentration, and urine specific gravity of >1.040.
3) The serum T and renal parameters should be rechecked after 30 days methimazole/carbimazole
administration. If renal parameters remain normal after euthyroidism is restored, it is safe to pro-
ceed with permanent therapy such as thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine.
4) Mild to moderate kidney disease should not preclude permanent treatment of hyperthyroidism.
Recent research provides evidence that hyperthyroidism may contribute to the development or pro-
gression of CKD in cats, suggesting that leaving a hyperthyroid cat untreated (or poorly regulated
with methimazole) may be detrimental to long-term kidney function. Treating and curing hyperthy-
 roidism may help to both reverse renal damage and preserve the remaining kidney function.
h. Cardiac disease associated with hyperthyroidism is mild and reversible in most cats with hyperthyroid-
ism. Murmurs and tachycardia are common but often do not result in clinical signs. On the occasions
when cats show more severe cardiac changes such as congestive heart failure or aortic thromboembolism,
these should be stabilized before a cat undergoes thyroidectomy or radioiodine therapy.
and is generally reversible upon induction of euthyroidism. Conversely, some cats are normotensive
when hyperthyroidism is diagnosed but may become hypertensive after becorming euthyroid. Most of
these cats, however, have some degree of concurrent renal disease. If hypertension is severe or persists
after treatment of hyperthyroidism, these cats should be managed with amlodipine.
liver enzymes (serum ALT and ALP). At the time of diagnosis, it is not always possible to know if
increased liver enzymes are due to hepatic disease unrelated to hyperthyroidism or merely a
Hyperthyroidism in Cats305
Table 29.4  Advantages and disadvantages of treatment modalities for cats with hyperthyroidism.
Methimazole or carbimazole
Surgery
Radioiodine
Availability of treatment
Readily available
Skilled surgeon needed 
 Radiation license needed
Ease of treatment
Intermediate
Most difficult
Simple
Hospitalization time
None
1-7 days
1-4 weeks
Anesthesia required
No
Yes
No
Time until euthyroid
1-3 weeks
1-2 days
1-12 weeks
Persistent
Low (Dose-related)
Rare (usually ectopic tissue)
Low (Dose-related)
hyperthyroidism
 Reversible or permanent 
Reversible
 Permanent
 Permanent 
Cures disease
No (tumor continues to grow)
Yes
Yes
Relapse/ recurrence
High
Intermediate
Low
 Lifelong medication 
Yes
No
No
Cost
Variable
Intermediate to high
Generally highest
(inexpensive in short-term)
Complications
Hypoparathyroidism
Never
Common
Never
Permanent
Never
Intermediate
Rare (Dose-related)
hypothyroidism
Anorexia, vomiting
Common
Rare
Never
Hematologic effects
Rare (thrombocytopenia,
Never
Rare (Only with
 agranulocytosis, serum ANA)
very high doses)
Neurologic Damage
Never
Rare (vocal cord
Never
paralysis, Horner's syndrome)
 manifestation of hyperthyroidism. If underlying primary liver disease is expected, especially if the
cat is showing signs of apathetic hyperthyroidism (e.g., anorexia, depression, etc.), a treatment
trial with methimazole or carbimazole should be considered.
 s  n  r e  n  so s s sn  a
 therapy costs far less initially. However the cost of ongoing monitoring can exceed that of thyroidec-
tomy or 131I therapy over a period of many months to years.
C. Medical therapy:
1. Chronic management with antithyroid drugs is a practical treatment option for many cats. Medical
 management requires no special facilities and is readily available. Anesthesia is avoided, as are the surgi-
cal complications associated with thyroidectomy ( Table 29.4).
2. However, medical management has many disadvantages. This form of treatment is not curative, is
highly dependent on owner and cat compliance and requires regular biochemical monitoring to ensure
the efficacy of treatment. Most importantly, the thyroid tumor continues to grow and, after many months,
may transform from adenoma to thyroid carcinoma in some cats.
 3. Long-term medical management is best reserved for cats of advanced age or for those with concurrent
diseases, and for when owners refuse either surgery or radioactive iodine.
 4. In addition to long-term treatment, medical management is also necessary prior to surgical thyroidec-
tomy to decrease the metabolic and cardiac complications associated with hyperthyroidism. Short-term
medical management is often recommended as trial therapy prior to 131 therapy to determine the effect
of restoring euthyroidism on renal function.
306  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
5. Methimazole and carbimazole are antithyroid drugs used in cats:
a Methimazole is specifically licensed for treatment of feline hyperthyroidism both in Europe and
USA as 2.5- and 5-mg tablets (Felimazole, Dechra Veterinary Products):
1) For most hyperthyroid cats, a starting dose of 2.5 mg methimazole is administered once to twice
daily as recommended.
b. Carbimazole is available for human use in many European countries (NeoMercazole, Amdipharm),
Australia, and Japan. It exerts its antithyroid effect through immediate conversion to methimazole
when administered orally:
1) For most hyperthyroid cats, a starting dose of regular carbimazole of 5 mg twice daily is effective
in restoring euthyroidism.
C. Carbimazole, as a novel once daily controlled-release formulation (10- or 15-mg tablets) was
recently licensed for cats in Europe (Vidalta, Intervet Schering-Plough). Administration of this drug
with food significantly enhances its absorption:
1) The starting dose for controlled release carbimazole is 15 mg administered once daily. In cats with
mild hyperthyroidism (total T, concentration <100 nmol/L), a 10 mg once daily is recommended.
d. Carbimazole and methimazole can be reformulated in a pluronic lecithin organogel (PLO) for
transdermal administration:
1) Both antithyroid drugs are generally effective in cats when administered at a dose of 2.5 mg
twice daily transdermally. The gel is applied in a thin layer to the nonhaired portion of the pinnae
 2) Transdermal administration is associated with fewer gastrointestinal side effects than the oral
route, but some cats resent manipulation of their ears and crusting can occur between doses leading
to erythema.
 3) Such custom formulation increases expense of therapy and the stability of the product is not
guaranteed.
4) Owners need to be cautioned to use gloves for application; allergic skin reactions have occurred
in owners.
e. Monitoring of cats on antithyroid drugs is extremely important:
1) Initially, cats should be reassessed after 2-3 weeks and a serum total Tq concentration meas-
ured. If euthyroidism has not been achieved, the dose of methimazole or carbimazole can be
increased in 2.5-5 mg increments, reassessing the cat again in 2-3 weeks. Lack of owner or cat
compliance should first be eliminated as a reason for a failure of therapy.
2) When monitoring, time of serum T, sampling in relation to the administration of the antithy-
roid drug is not important.
3) The goal of medical therapy is to maintain total Tq concentrations within the lower half of the
reference range.
4) For long-term management (once euthyroidism has been achieved), the daily antithyroid drug
dosage is adjusted to the lowest possible dose that effectively maintains euthyroidism. Once the
dosage has stabilized, the cat should be monitored every 3-6 months and as needed clinically.
f. Because antithyroid medications have no effect on the underlying lesion, the thyroid nodules con-
tinue to grow larger and larger over time. This may necessitate an increased daily dose with time
g. Most clinical adverse reactions occur within the first 3 months of therapy:
1) Mild clinical side effects of vomiting, anorexia, or depression occur in approximately 10-15%
of cats, usually within the first 3 weeks of therapy. In most cats, these reactions are transient and
 do not require permanent drug withdrawal.
2) Early in the course of therapy, mild and transient hematological abnormalities, including lym-
phocytosis, eosinophilia, or leucopenia, develop in up to 15% of cats without any apparent clinical
effect. More serious hematological complications occur in <5% of cats and include agranulocyto-
sis and thrombocytopenia.
3) Self-induced excoriations of the head and neck occasionally develop, usually within the first
6 weeks of therapy.
 4) Hepatopathy characterized by marked increases in liver enzymes and bilirubin concentration
 occurs in <2% of cats. Withdrawal of the medication and symptomatic therapy is required.
Hyperthyroidism in Cats  307
 5) Other rarely reported side effects include a bleeding tendency without thrombocytopenia, pro-
longation of clotting times, and acquired myasthenia gravis.
6) All of the adverse effects are reversible upon discontinuation of the medication.
D. Surgical thyroidectomy:
1. Thyroidectomy is a highly curative treatment for hyperthyroidism. However thyroidectomy can be
associated with significant morbidiry and mortality, especially in cats with severe hyperthyroidism
(Table 29.4).
greatly minimized. The last dose of methimazole or carbimazole should be given on the morning of surgery.
β-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs (e.g: propranolol or atenolol) should be used, or nutritional therapy
could be considered
4. Surgery entails either unilateral or bilateral thyroidectomy. Because most cats have involvement of
both thyroid lobes, bilateral thyroidectomy is indicated in most cats.
5. The two major techniques for bilateral thyroidectomy include the intracapsular and extracapsular
methods. The aim of both techniques is to remove the adenomatous thyroid tissue while preserving
parathyroid function:
a. The major problem with the intracapsular technique for thyroidectomy is that it can be difficult to
remove the entire thyroid capsule (and therefore all abnormal thyroid tissue) while concurrently pre-
than that of the intracapsular technique because the entire thyroid capsule is removed together with
the thyroid lobe.
geal nerve damage (most commonly associated with voice change), and Horner's syndrome (Table 29.4):
 a. The most serious complication is hypocalcemia, which develops after the parathyroid glands are
injured or inadvertently removed. Since only one parathyroid gland is required for maintenance of
normocalcemia, hypoparathyroidism develops only in cats treated with bilateral thyroidectomy.
h. If the surgeon recognizes that all parathyroid glands have been inadvertently removed, they can
autotransplant parathyroid tissue into a muscular pouch in the neck where revascularization and
return of function may occur.
C. After bilateral thyroidectomy, it is important to monitor serum calcium concentration daily until it
has stabilized within the normal range.
develop within 1-3 days of surgery.
e. Although mild hypocalcemia (6.5-7.5 mg/dL; 1.6-1.9 mmol/L) is common during this immediate
postoperative period, laboratory evidence of hypocalcemia alone does not require treatment. However,
if accompanying signs of muscle tremors, tetany, or convulsions develop, therapy with vitamin D and
calcium is strongly indicated.
f. Although hypoparathyroidism may be permanent in some cats, spontaneous recovery of parathy.
roid function may occur weeks to months after surgery.
7. Temporary hypothyroidism develops in most cats after unilateral or bilateral thyroidectomy, with
serum T, concentrations falling to subnormal levels for 2-3 months. However, clinical signs of hypothy-
roidism are rare and oral levothyroxine (L-T) supplementation is rarely required (Table 29.4):
a. If signs of postoperative hypothyroidism do develop (e.g., severe lethargy), L-T, (0.1 to 0.2 mg/day)
can be given, but this supplementation can generally be stopped after 2-3 months.
b. Serum T concentrations almost always spontaneously return to reference range limits within a
few weeks to months in cats treated with thyroidectomy.
8. Because of the potential for recurrence of hyperthyroidism, all cats should have serum T concentration
monitored once or twice a year (Table 29.4):
308 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
a  If hyperthyroidism recurs after bilateral thyroidectomy, treatment with either antithyroid drugs or
athyroidism) is considerably higher in subsequent operations.
E. Radioactive iodine therapy:
1. Radioactive iodine (radioiodine; 13'1) provides a simple, effective, and safe treatment for cats with
hyperthyroidism and is regarded by most veterinarians to be the treatment of choice for cats with
hyperthyroidism.
2. Treatment with radioiodine has many advantages over other treatment methods:
 a It avoids inconvenience of daily oral administration of antithyroid drugs as well as the side effects
 commonly associated with these drugs.
b. Radioiodine also eliminates the risks and perioperative complications associated with anesthesia
and surgical thyroidectomy (Table 29.4))
C. A single administration of radioiodine restores euthyroidism in most (95%) hyperthyroid cats. The
therapy is simple and relatively stress free for most cats.
 3. There are some downsides of radioiodine treatment, however:
 a Irs use requires special radioactive licensing and hospitalization facilities, and extensive compliance
with local and state radiation safety laws.
b. Major drawback for most owners is that their cat must be kept hospitalized for a certain period of
time (5-10 days in most treatment centers; but up to a month in some places) and visiting is not
allowed.
4. The principle behind this treatment is that thyrocytes concentrate iodine but do not differentiate
between stable and radioactive iodine:
tic thyroid cells, where it irradiates and destroys the hyperfunctioning tissue.
h. In hyperthyroid cats, any normal thyroid tissue tends to be protected from the effects of radioio-
dine, because the uninvolved thyroid tissue is suppressed and receives only a small dose of radiation.
5. The goal of treatment is to administer a dose of radioiodine that will restore euthyroidism while
avoiding iatrogenic hypothyroidism. Unfortunately, there is no definitive method to determine the best
dose of 1311 for cats:
 a Fixed doses are not recommended as they can provide too low a 13'1 dose and not cure the disease.
More commonly, fixed dose methods give too high a 13'I dose, resulting in hypothyroidism.
b. More precise, variable i3'I doses can be estimated by use of a scoring system that takes into con-
sideration the severity of clinical signs, the size of the cat's thyroid gland, and the serum T, concentra-
D sn aq ose un li as (s  n m p aq  isnd ao an n
   s e           
Approximately 5% of cats, however fail to respond completely and remain hyperthyroid after reatment
with radioiodine:
a In cats that remain hyperthyroid 3 months after initial 1311 treatment, retreatment is generally
recommended because virtually all cats with persistent hyperthyroidism after the first treatment can
be cured by a second treatment.
7. A proportion of cats treated with radioiodine will develop permanent hypothyroidism, with clinical
signs developing 2-6 months after treatment:
a Clinical signs associated with iatrogenic hypothyroidism may include lethargy, nonpruritic
seborrhea sicca, matting of hair, and marked weight gain; bilateral symmetric alopecia does not
develop.
 b. Diagnosis of hypothyroidism is based upon clinical sign, subnormal serum total T and free T4
 concentrations, high serum cTSH values, and the response to replacement L-T, therapy).
C. Lifelong L-T, supplementation is needed (i.e., 0.1-0.2 mg L-thyroxine per day).
8. Relapse after 13i1 is possible but rare. When it does occur, relapse generally develops berween 2
mended.
Hyperthyroidism in Cats 309
500
400
300
(/lowu)
250
thyroxine
200
Serum
150
8
100
8
50
白
阜
Pretreatment
7-25 days
2-3 months6-12 months
(524)
(524)
(519)
(502)
Fgure 29.6 Box plots of serum T, concentrations in 524 cats before and at various times after administration of radioiodine
for treatment of hyperthyroidism. See Figure 29.1 for key. Shaded area indicates normal ranges for T, concentration for cats.
(From Peterson ME, Becker DV. Radioiodine treatment of 524 cats with hyperthyroidism. / Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:
1422-1428, with permission).
9. In cats with thyroid carcinoma (incidence <2-4% of all hyperthyroid cats), radioiodine offers the best
chance for successful cure of the tumor because it concentrates in all hyperactive thyroid cells, that is,
carcinomatous tissue, as well as metastasis:
a. Thyroid carcinomas are more resistant to the effect of 131 than thyroid adenomas (adenomatous
hyperplasia) and the size of thyroid carcinomas is usually much larger.
h. Therefore, extremely high doses of radioiodine (1110 mBq) are almost always needed for destruc-
tion of all malignant tissue.
C. A combination of surgical debulking followed by high-dose 131I is also useful in treating cats with
thyroid carcinoma.
d. Longer periods of hospitalization will be required with use of such high-dose 131I administration
because of the prolonged radioiodine excretion.
E.
Nutritional therapy (iodine-deficient diet):
1. Recent studies have indicated that use of a diet with restricted iodine levels (Hill's Prescription Diet y/d
Feline -Thyroid Health) can result in normalization of T, levels in hyperthyroid cats and provide a fur-
ther option for medical management of this disease. The basis for using this diet is that iodine is an
essential component of both T4 and T3; without sufficent iodine, the thyroid cannot produce excess
thyroid hormones. This is an iodine-deficient diet, containing levels below the minimum daily require-
ment for adult cats.
2. By 4 weeks, about 70% of hyperthyroid cats exclusively eating y/d will be euthyroid. By 8 weeks,
about 90% of cats will be euthyroid. By 12 weeks, almost all cats should have normal T, values. This
 therapy appears to be more effective in cats with only moderate elevations of Tq than cats with severe
hyperthyroidism.
 3. A major indication for the use of this y/d diet for management of feline hyperthyroidism is in cats that
 are not candidates for definitive treatment of the underlying thyroid tumor(s) with surgery or radioio-
dine, which remains the treatments of choice. In addition, nutritional management with y/d food (canned
rather than the dry y/d) could be considered in cats whose owners are not able to give oral medication or
in cats that develop side effects from methimazole/carbimazole.
310 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
4. Despite some advantages, nutritional management has many disadvantages:
a First of all, feeding this diet cannot cure hyperthyroidism. Rather, feeding y/d just offers control
(withholding fuel for thyroid tumor). The thyroid tumor remains and will continue to grow larger. As
now documented in cats with long-standing hyperthyroidism, transformation of adenoma to thyroid
carcinoma can occur unless definitive treatment (surgery or radioiodine treatment) is used to cure the
disease.
h. The cats fed this diet must not eat any other cat diet, table food, or treats because even tiny
amounts of iodine may lead to failure of this diet to effectively control hyperthyroidism.
C. If the diet is stopped, relapse will develop; the cat must eat only this diet for rest of his/her lifetime.
d. The long-term consequences of this iodine deficient diet are not known, especially in normal cats
in households that are also fed this diet. For this reason, y/d should not be the only diet fed to normal
cats, which can be an issue for owners with multiple cats in the same household.
            
carbohydrate, relatively low-protein diet. Feeding y/d for long periods is less than an "ideal" diet for
 an obligate carnivore, especially in an older hyperthyroid cat with severe muscle wasting.
VIl.1
Prognosis
A.
With proper treatment, the prognosis of most cats with hyperthyroidism is good to excellent.
B.
The specific prognosis for each individual cat depends on the cat's age and condition at the time of
diagnosis, duration of the disease, and the presence of concurrent diseases (e.g., CKD).
C.
 Like most other diseases, hyperthyroidism is best diagnosed and treated in its early rather than the
advanced stages. The prognosis also depends on the treatment type as well as the cat's response to treatment.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Unfortunately, there is no known way to prevent the development of hyperthyroidism in cats.
References and Further Readings
Birchard SJ. Thyroidectomy in the cat. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2006;21:29-33.
Frenais R, Rosenberg D, Burgaud S, Horspool LJ. Clinical efficacy and safety of a once-daily forrmulation of carbimazole in
cats with hyperthyroidism. J Smaff Anim Pract 2009;50:510-515.
Hibbert A, Gruffydd-Jones T, Barrett EL,et al. Feline thyroid carcinoma: Diagnosis and response to high-dose radioactive
iodine treatment.J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:116-124.
Langston CE, Reine NJ. Hyperthyroidism and the kidney. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2006:21:17-21.
Melendez LM, Yamka RM, Forrester SD et al. Titration of dietary iodine for reducing serum thyroxine concentrations in
newly diagnosed hyperthyroid cats [abstract]. J Vet Intern Med 2011;25:683.
Peterson ME. Diagnostic tests for hyperthyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anirm Pract 2006;21{1):2-9.
1422-1428.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Hurvitz AI. Methimazole treatment of 262 cats with hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 1988;2:
150-157.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R. Measurement of serurm concentrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total
triiodothyronine in cats with hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal disease. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2001;218:529-536.
Peterson ME, Ward CR. Etiopathologic findings of hyperthyroidism in cats. Vet Clin North Am Smatl Ani Pract
2007;37:633-645.
Trepanier LA. Pharmacologic management of feline hyperthyroidism Vet Clin North Arm Smalf Anir Pract 2007;37:775-788.
Wakeling J, Moore K, Elliott J,et al. Diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in cats with mild chronic kidney disease. J Smalt Anirm Pract
2008;49:287-294.
Yu S, Wedekind KJ, Burris PA et al. Controlled level of dietary iodine norrmalizes serum total thyroxine in cats with naturally
occurring hyperthyroidism [abstract]. J Vet Intern Med 2011;25:683.
CHAPTER 30
Hyperthyroidism/Thyroid Neoplasia
in Other Species
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Pathogenesis
● Clinical hyperthyroidism is rare in horses, small exotic mammals, birds, and reptiles: few
documented cases exist.
● Thyroid neoplasia is more common but is rarely associated with overt clinical disease.
Classical Signs
O Often none.
● Palpable ventral cervical mass in the case of neoplasia
● Weight loss, excitability, polyphagia, and tachycardia in clinical cases.
Diagnosis
● Demonstration of increased circulating concentrations of free fractions of thyroid hormones.
O Complicated by lack of validated assays for many species.
● Suspected neoplasms can be biopsied.
Treatment
● May not be required depending on clinical signs.
 Thyroidectomy/surgical excision of neoplasms.
Pathogenesis
A. Hyperthyroidism is defined as a pathologic and sustained state of hypermetabolism caused by elevated
concentrations of thyroid hormones (thyroxine [T4] and triodothyronine [T3]) in the circulation.
B. In general terms, causes of hyperthyroidism include hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules, thyroid neoplasia,
oversupplementation of exogenous thyroid hormone and pituitary dysfunction leading to increased thyroid-
stimulating hormone secretion which results in increased T4 production.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
311
312Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
C. High thyroid horrmone concentrations are a feature of certain physiological states and thyroid hormone
levels may vary due to external influences. These factors should be considered when interpreting hormone
levels for a particular individual:
1. In horses, high thyroid hormone levels are seen during pregnancy in mares, in fetuses in late pregnancy,
and in foals in the first few weeks of life
2. Thyroid hormone concentrations in birds and reptiles are influenced by ambient temperature,
photoperiod, food intake, and dietary composition. As such thyroid size can vary seasonally. In rela
tion to avian hatchlings, thyroid function varies widely between species (it is well developed in precocial
species compared to altricial species).
 3. Thyroid hormone metabolism plays an important role in molting (birds) and ecdysis/shedding
(reptiles).
D. Clinical hyperthyroidism is rare in horses, small exotic mammals, birds, and reptiles: few documented
cases exist. Although hyperthyroidism due to thyroid neoplasia has been occasionally reported, most cases
 of neoplasia of this gland are not associated with thyroid dysfunction:
1. Horses are at risk of accelerated thyroid hormone production when exposed to increased quanti
ties of iodine-containing compounds such as expectorants, counterirritants, some drugs (e.g., sodium
iodide, potassium iodine, and iodinated glycerol), contrast media, leg paints, and povidone-based
shampoos.
2. There are no reports of hyperthyroidism in the horse associated with an autoimmune condition.
E. Thyroid neoplasia has been reported in many species and may originate from undifferentiated cells,
parafollicular cells, and follicular epithelial cells. (Note that birds do not have parafollicular cells in their
thyroid glands.) However, overt clinical disease is rarely described in cases of thyroid neoplasia:
1. Thyroid gland neoplasia is not uncommon in horses. Benign microfollicular adenoma is the most
commonly diagnosed type. The vast majority of cases are euthyroid, but both hypothyroidism and
neoplasia (MEN) has also been described in horses in which multiple endocrine gland neoplasms occur,
including thyroid involvement.
2. Thyroid neoplasia, including adenoma and adenocarcinoma is frequently reported in psitacine birds
The tumors are not usually functionally secreting.
 3. A single case report of hyperthyroidism in a green iguana atributed the condition to a thyroid follcular
adenoma. Thyroid gland adenomas and carcinomas have been reported in chelonians.
Il. Signalment
A. Horses:
1. Thyroid neoplasia tends to occur more frequently in lightweight breeds than in draft breed horses.
i) ss ro    si ido  
a. A survey of aged horses revealed thyroid tumors in 30% of the animals; with no tumors in horses
<18 months old.
B.Birds:
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Regardless of the species involved, many thyroid neoplasms produce no clinical signs and the disease is
diagnosed as an incidental finding at necropsy.
B. Horses:
1. Weight loss, cachexia, tremors, excitability, tachycardia, tachypnoea, polyphagia, and sweating have
been described in suspect hyperthyroid cases.
2. Constant swallowing or changes in respiration may occur as a result of the space-occupying nature
of large thyroid neoplasms.
C. Birds:
1. Palpable mass in the neck.
2. Respiratory signs referable to the mass placing pressure on the trachea.
3. Signs of crop dysfunction (e.g., regurgitation, dysphagia).
1
Reptiles:
2. Weight loss, polyphagia, hyperactivity, increased aggression, loss of dorsal spines (iguanas), and
tachycardia may be seen.
 3. Hyperthyroidism has been suspected in snakes that undergo frequent ecdysis.
Iv.
Diagnosis
4.
 Demonstration of increased circulating concentrations of free fractions of thyroid hormones. Note that
validated assays to test samples from many species have not been reported. In such cases, it may be useful to
test a number of clinically normal age-matched controls for comparison:
 For example, in the case report describing hyperthyroidism in an iguana, the measured T4 level
(30 nmol/L [2.33 pg/dL]) in the patient was found to be significantly higher than the level measured in
clinically healthy adult iguanas (3.81 ±0.84 nmol/L [0.30±0.07μg/dL]).
B.
One case report describes a T3 suppression test in which T4 concentrations did not decrease in an
affected horse compared with controls.
C.
Thyroid neoplasia can be confirmed by cytology of fine needle aspirate samples or preferably histopatho.
logical examination of biopsy samples. Immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy may be necessary to
distinguish between some types of thyroid neoplasia.
Differential Diagnoses
A
Cervical masses may be caused by goiter, neoplasia associated with other cervical structures, abscesses,
granulomas, or crop impactions.
B.
Weight loss accompanied by neurological and/or cardiovascular disturbances may be due to a wide
variety of systemic diseases, many of which are more common than thyroid disease. A thorough history and
clinical examination is warranted in all cases regardless of species.
VI.
Treatment
Horses:
1. Antithyroid therapy has been used in the form of potassium iodide at a dose of 1g per horse q
24 h per os.
 2. Thyroidectomy may be necessary but has variable success.
 3. In cases of thyrotoxicosis due to exposure to iodine-containing compounds, administration of gluco.
corticoids may alleviate the signs.
B
Clinically silent thyroid neoplasms do not usually warrant treatment, although surgical excision is
recommended for large masses. Potential complications of surgery include infection, hemorrhage, and
in horses laryngeal hemiplegia. Given that the parathyroid glands of some species (e.g., horses, reptiles)
are not connected to the thyroid itself, hypocalcemia is not always considered a complication. Once
the thyroid gland has been removed, thyroid hormone supplementation may be required to maintain
concentrations of thyroid hormones within the normal reference range. Patients that have undergone
unilateral/partial thyroidectomy or tumor debulking do not usually require thyroid hormone
supplementation:
1. Thyroidectomy in an iguana case proved to be curative; with T4 levels comparable to clinically
healthy adults 173 days post surgery.
A snake with excessively frequent ecdysis (every 2 weeks) responded to methimazole (1 mg/kg q 24 h)
was not confirmed by measurement of thyroid hormone levels.
D.
 Radiotherapy has not been reported to date in these species for the treatment of thyroid neoplasia
Vll.  Prognosis
Most thyroid tumors are benign and are not associated with thyroid dysfunction. The prognosis is
therefore good in the majority of cases.
VIlll. Prevention
4
There are no specific preventative measures.
314 Clinicar Enaocrinology of Companion Animals
References and Further Readings
Breuhaus BA. Thyroid glands. In: Smith BP, ed. Large Anirmat Internat Medicine, 4th edn. St Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier, 2009,
pp.1347-1351.
Frye FL. Biormedicat and Surgicat Aspects of Captive Reptile Husbandry, 2nd edn. Malabar: Krieger Publishing, 1991.
Garner MM. Overview of biopsy and necropsy techniques. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptite Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2006, pp. 569-580.
Hermandez-Divers SJ, Knott C, MacDonald J. Diagnosis and surgical treatment of thyroid adenoma-induced hyperthyroidism
in a green iguana (Iguana iguana). J Zoo Wildt Med 2001;32(4):465-475.
Leach MW. A survey of neoplasia in pet birds. Sein Avian Exot Pet Med 1992;1:52-64.
Lightfoot TL. Overview of tumours: Section I—Clinical avian neoplasia and oncology. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, eds.
Clinicat Avian Medicine, Vol. 2. Palrm Beach, FL: Spix Publishing, 2006, pp. 560-565.
Percy DH, Barthold SW. Pathology of Laboratory Rodents and Rabbits, 3rd edn. Ames, IO: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
Rae M. Endocrine diseases in pet birds. Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 1995;4:32-38.
J Vet Intern Med 1998;12:475-477.
Reavill DR. Neoplasia. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Anirmal
Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 309-318.
Schmidt RE, Reavill DR. The avian thyroid gland. Vet Clin North Amm Exot Ani Pract 2008;11:15-23.
Toribio RE. Thyroid gland. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internat Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1251-1260.
CHAPTER 31
Hypocalcemia in Dogs
Patricia A. Schenck and Dennis Chew
Pathogenesis
 Clinical signs only result when ionized calcium (iCa} falls below a critical level.
 Causes of hypocalcemia can be parathyroid independent or parathyroid dependent.
● The most common cause of acute hypocalcemia in combination with clinical signs related to
hypocalcemia is periparturient tetany (eclampsia).
● Hypocalcemia is usually underestimated in dogs when serum total calcium (tCa) is used.
● Hypocalcemia based on low serum tCa concentration is commonly seen with hypoalbuminemia;
however, low iCa concentration may or may not be present.
Classical Signs
● The most common clinical signs associated with hypocalcemia are muscle tremors and fascicula-
tions, facial rubbing, muscle cramping, stiff gait, seizures, restlessness, aggression, disorientation, and
cutaneous hypersensitivity.
● Acute development of hypocalcemia is typically associated with severe clinical signs; there may be
few clinical signs of hypocalcemia if the underlying problem is chronic.
Diagnosis
● Hypocalcemia is defined as a tCa concentration <8.0 mg/dL (2.0 mmol/L) or iCa concentration 
<5.0mg/dL (1.25 mmol/L).
● Parathyroid hormone (PTH) should be measured in conjunction with iCa to determine whether
PTH production is appropriate; measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be helpful to iden-
tify cases in which decreased intake of vitamin D is the cause of hypocalcemia.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
315
316Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Treatment
● Specific therapy depends on the cause of hypocalcemia.
Acute symptomatic hypocalcemia requires treatment with IV calcium salts to effect.
● Symptomatic subacute and chronic hypocalcemia require treatment with oral calcium salts and/or
active vitamin D compounds.
Prognosis
● Prognosis depends on the underlying cause of hypocalcemia.
● Prognosis is excellent for properly treated eclampsia and good to excellent for primary hypopara-
thyroidism.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Serum tCa is composed of protein-bound calcium (pCa), complexed calcium (cCa), and iCa. The iCa
fraction is the biologically active fraction.
B.1
 Hypocalcemia develops when there is a decrease in bone mobilization of calcium, an increase in loss of
calcium in urine or milk, a decrease in gastrointestinal calcium absorption, calcium translocation intracel-
lularly, or a combination of these mechanisms:
1. A decrease in serum iCa typically stimulates the synthesis and release of PTH from the parathyroid glands.
 2. PTH causes a decrease in urinary calcium excretion, and an increase in bone resorption.
3. PTH also stimulates production of calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D), the active form of Vitamin
D, from 25-hydroxyvitamin D by upregulation of the renal enzyme 1o-hydroxylase.
4. Calciriol causes an increase in calcium absorption in the gut and also increases bone resorption.
5. Increased PTH production continues if a continued decrease in iCa concentration exists or there is
persisting hyperphosphatemia. This creates a secondary hyperparathyroidism in which PTH is elevated,
and serum iCa concentration is within the reference range or low.
C. Causes of hypocalcemia are listed in Table 31.1.
D. Mechanisms for hypocalcemia in eclampsia include a poor dietary calcium source, calcium loss during
lactation, and/or abnormal parathyroid gland function.
E. Primary hypoparathyroidism is usually idiopathic, though immune mechanisms are thought to be impor-
rupts the blood supply to the parathyroid glands), spontaneous infarction of a parathyroid gland tumor, and
both acute hypermagnesemia or severe magnesium depletion.
Table 31.1  Causes of hypocalcemia in dogs.
Most common
Occasional
Uncommon
Hypoalbuminemia
Soft tissue trauma or rhabdomyolysis
Lab error
Azotemic chronic kidney disease
Hypoparathyroidism
 Improper anticoagulant (EDTA)
Puerperal tetany (eclampsia)
Ethylene glycol intoxication
 Infarction of parathyroid gland adenoma
Acute renal failure
Phosphate enema
Intestinal malabsorption or severe
Acute pancreatitis
Post-NaHCO, administration
sarvation
Cause not identified (often trivial
Emergency and critical care (sepsis,
Hypovitaminosis D
magnitude and transient)
SIRS)
 Diabetes mellitus 
Rapid infusion of phosphate
Vitamin D-resistant rickets
 Drug administration
Blood transfusion with citrated
 anticoagulant
Hypocaicemia in Dogs 317
Fgure 31.1Lymphocytic-plasmacytic parathyroiditis as the cause for primary hypoparathyroidism in a Schnauzer dog. Note
infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells surrounding chief cells (C) of the parathyroid gland in what is thought to be an
yi upiaus ' uagoy la jo Asano) lielldes - des anss puels pioiyieied suuoouny shonsap leui uoai aunwu!
Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine).
F. Mechanisms of low iCa in pancreatitis include sequestration of calcium into peripancreatic fat (saponi-
fication), increased circulating free fatty acids, increased calcitonin secretion, and PTH resistance or deficit
resulting from hypomagnesemia.
G. Decreased calcitriol synthesis and mass law interactions of calcium with increased serum phosphorus
concentration are probable causes of hypocalcemia in chronic renal failure.
H. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with lack of sufficient dietary vitamin D intake
I.With rhabdomyolysis, hypocalcemia usually occurs as a consequence of calcium translocation into dam-
aged muscles.
J. One possible mechanism of hypocalcemia in small intestinal disease is an increase in calcium/fatty acid
complexes in the intestinal lumen that decrease intestinal calcium absorption. Also, malabsorption of vita-
 min D can lead to hypovitaminosis D and decreased intestinal calcium absorption.
 K. Bicarbonate administration IV results in increased protein binding of calcium, thereby decreasing the iCa
fraction.
L. After acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia, if it occurs, is the result of parathyroid
gland atrophy and inadequate ability to synthesize and secrete PTH. This happens most frequently following
 the removal of a parathyroid adenoma that has caused primary hyperparathyroidism.
M. Tumor lysis syndrome occurs when there is rapid destruction of tumor cells following chemotherapy
which can result in hyperphosphatemia. Hypocalcemia develops when calcium precipitates with phosphate
and the salts are deposited into soft tissues.
N. Phosphate enemas result in hypocalcemia after rapid absorption of phosphate and subsequent mass law
interaction with serum calcium.
O. Oxalate metabolites that result from ethylene glycol toxicity can chelate calcium and become deposited
 in soft tissues, resulting in hypocalcemia.
 P. Vitamin D-Resistant Rickets (VDRR): VDRR type 2 is a genetic condition associated with downregula-
 tion of the function or numbers of vitamin D receptors in target tissues. Circulating calcitriol concentrations
will be elevated. VDRR type 1 is associated with a genetic defect in the metabolic activation of 25-hydroxy-
vitamin D to the most active vitamin D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol). Circulating calci-
triol concentrations are, therefore, low.
Q. After its rapid infusion, phosphate complexes with circulating calcium and promotes deposition of cal
cium phosphate salts into soft tissues due to mass law interactions.
 R. The cause of hypocalcemia in emergency and critical care patients is largely unknown and likely to be
multifactorial.
318 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
Figure 31.2 Eclampsia in a bitch shortly after parturition. Note rigor in between seizures. IV needle has been placed for the
Figure 31.3 Multiple punctate cortical ("snowflake") cataracts may occur in dogs with hypocalcemia secondary to primary
hypoparathyroidism. (Courtesy of Dr. Anne Gemensky Metzler, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine)
S.
 Diabetes mellitus—cause of hypocalcemia is unknown.
 Drug administration: Enrofloxacin—cause unknown; mithramycin—decreased osteoclastic bone resorp-
tion; bisphosphonates—decreased osteoclastic bone resorption.
I1. Signalment
more common in those with large litters.
B.  Breeds at higher risk for primary hypoparathyroidism include miniature schnauzers, standard schnau
zers, Scottish terriers, West Highland white terriers, and dachshunds. Mean age of occurrence is 6 years;
females are more commonly affected.
C.
There does not appear to be any age-, sex-, or breed-related predispositions for the other causes of hypocalcemia.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Decreased serum iCa concentration increases excitability of neuromuscular tissue, which accounts for
many of the clinical signs of hypocalcemia:
1. The most common clinical signs associated with hypocalcemia are muscle tremors and fasciculations,
facial rubbing, muscle cramping, stiff gait, seizures, restlessness, aggression, disorientation, and hyper-
sensitivity (Figure 31.2).
2. Clinical signs of hypocalcemia that may occur include panting, pyrexia, lethargy, depression, ano-
rexia, tachycardia, and posterior lenticular cataracts (Figure 31.3).
Hypocaicemia in Dogs  319
3. Uncommon clinical signs of hypocalcemia include polyuria, polydipsia, hypotension, respiratory
arrest, or death.
those in chronic renal failure) may not show clinical signs of hypocalcemia until serum tCa concentration
is <5.0 mg/dL (1.2 mmol/L):
1. Acute development of hypocalcemia is typically associated with severe clinical signs.
 2. If the underlying problem has been chronic and there has been sufficient time for physiologic adapta
tion, then few clinical signs of hypocalcemia may be present.
 3. Clinical signs of hypocalcemia are uncommon when hypocalcemia occurs in association with secon-
dary hyperparathyroidism and chronic renal failure.
C. Electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities can impact hypocalcemia:
calcemia following increased binding of iCa to protein sites.
2. Rapid infusion of alkali to correct metabolic acidosis can cause seizures in those with marginal hypocalcemia.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Definition of hypocalcemia:
2. Using serum iCa, hypocalcemia is usually defined as a concentration <5.0 mg/dL (1.25 mmol/L).
 3. There can be unpredictable discordance between serum tCa and serum iCa measurements. In one
study, 27% of sick dogs were classified as hypocalcemic by tCa, but when iCa was measured, 31% were
hypocalcemic. Hypocalcemia is usually underestimated in dogs when serum tCa is used.
4. Hypocalcemia based on serum tCa is relatively common in sick dogs.
B.Measurement of calcium:
1. Trivial decreases in serum tCa are common and may not be persistent. Pursuit of a specific diagnosis
in these instances is not warranted.
 2. Serum iCa concentration should be measured any time that a persistent decrease in serum tCa is
detected. Serum iCa should especially be measured in all cases of chronic renal failure since the diagnos-
tic error in using tCa to predict iCa increases greatly with this disorder.
3. Do not use adjustment formulas to correct the tCa to serum total protein or albumin concentration
as the formulas do not accurately predict the serum iCa concentration.
4. Do not directly compare serum iCa results to those obtained from heparinized plasma or whole blood
(from a blood gas analyzer or point-of-care analyzer). The iCa concentration is lower in heparinized
plasma or whole blood than in serum.
 5. Do not use EDTA plasma for collection of blood for iCa measurement. EDTA chelates calcium, and
EDTA plasma will yield falsely low iCa results.
6. In dogs, serum tCa is normally 9.0-11.5mg/dL (2.2-3.8 mmo/L) and serum iCa is normally
5.0-6.0mg/dL (1.2-1.5 mmol/L).
7. To convert mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply mmol/L by 4.
C. PTH should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement to determine whether PTH production
is appropriate:
1. Patients with low iCa and low PTH concentrations have absolute hypoparathyroidism. If serum iCa
is low and PTH is within the reference range, the PTH response is inappropriate, as PTH is expected to
be elevated with low iCa.
 2. Hypocalcemia associated with increased serum PTH is classified as parathyroid-independent hypo-
calcemia. In these cases, hypocalcemia exists from redistribution of calcium into other body spaces,
excess phosphorus effects, or from deficiencies of vitamin D or dietary calcium.
of vitamin D is the cause of hypocalcemia.
E. Calciriol measurement may be useful to differentiate VDRR from those with renal disease in patients
with normal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration. Calcitriol concentrations are increased in those
with type 2 VDRR and decreased in those with type 1.
320 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Minimum database: CBC
Serum biochemistry, urinalysis ± imaging
 Decreased serum total calcium
(repeatable)
lonized calcium
Do NOT use
lonized calcium
Normal
"correction"formulas
Decreased
No obvious diagnosis after
history
SOME with
(drug, diet, environment)
 physical examination
hypoalbuminemia or
 hypoproteinemia
minimum database
Metabolic acidosis
Overhydration:
subacute to chronic
PTH low
PTH above normal range
or within normal range
(Parathyroid independent—
(parathyroid dependent)
secondary
hyperparathyroidism)
Primary
Secondary
Normal 25(OH)-vitamin D
hypoparathyroidism
hypoparathyroidism:
Redistributive, acute:
low magnesium status
Alkalosis
Eclampsia
Soft tissue trauma
Low 25(OH)-vitamin D
Pancreatitis
Measure
Inadequate dietary vitamin D
Tumor lysis
 25(OH)-vitamin D
Primary Gl disease
High phosphate disorders
Chronic disease/malnutrition
Chronic:
High phosphorus diets
Primary renal disease
Team Calcium—2010
Vitamin D resistant ricketts
Measure
The Ohio State University
calcitriol
 Michigan State University
College of VeterinaryMedicine
High calcitriol:
Low calcitriol:
Vitamin D resistant rickets type 2
 Primary renal disease
Vitamin D resistant rickets type 1
Figure 31.4  Diagnostic algorithm for hypocalcemia.
E.
 Causes of hypocalcemia are listed in Table 31.1. Identification of the underlying cause of hypocalcemia
requires appropriate diagnostic testing. Most cases of hypocalcemia are parathyroid independent, that is,
G. Hypoalbuminemia is the most common condition observed with hypocalcemia based on serum tCa
 measurement but the least important:
1. Hypocalcemia is usually mild, and there are no clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
Hypocalcemia in Dogs  321
2. Do not use correction formulas to adjust serum tCa to serum total protein or albumin. These correc-
tion formulas do not improve the prediction of actual iCa concentration.
H. Renal failure is the second most common disorder associated with hypocalcemia:
1. Most dogs with azotemic chronic kidney disease (CKD) and decreased serum iCa concentration do
not show clinical signs directly related to hypocalcemia.
 2. Decreased serum iCa concentration is seen in approximately 30-40% of dogs with CRF.
 3. Acute renal failure and postrenal failure results in hypocalcemia that is more likely to be symptomatic.
I.  Emergency and critical care:
patients.
2. Sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, hypomagnesemia, and blood transfusions have
been associated with hypocalcemia. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation may also result in hypocalcemia.
 Acute pancreatitis may be associated with hypocalcemia.
K. Dogs with diabetes mellitus may exhibit hypocalcemia:
1. In one study, approximately 47% of dogs with nonketotic diabetes had hypocalcemia; in another
study, 52% of dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis had ionized hypocalcemia.
 2. In the second study, survival was correlated to degree of anemia, hypocalcemia, and acidosis.
L. Puerperal (periparturient) tetany (eclampsia) usually occurs about 1-3 weeks postpartum in females of
small breeds, especially those with a small body weight to litter number ratio:
1. iCa is < 3.2 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L) in nearly all dogs with clinical signs.
2. Some dogs have iCa < 3.2 mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L) but do not display classic signs of hypocalcemia.
M. Rhabdomyolysis may be associated with hypocalcemia, but clinical signs directly referable to hypocalce-
mia are uncommon.
N. Small intestinal disease, especially lymphangiectasia, may be associated with hypocalcemia:
2. Serum PTH is typically elevated, and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D is low (due to its loss in nonab-
sorbed fat through the stool).
O. Alkali (sodium bicarbonate) administration can result in serum total and ionized hypocalcemia.
P上
Acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia.
Q. Tumor lysis syndrome.
R. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with diets providing excess phosphate, insuf-
ficient calcium, or both:
1. Serum iCa concentration typically is low, with an elevation in PTH concentration. iCa can be restored
to normal due to the correcting effects of increased PTH in some cases.
2. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism tends to cause osteopenia of the long bones and verte-
brae. A stiff gait, bone pain, and multiple bone fractures are common. This is a syndrome that occurs
mostly in young growing dogs fed a predominantly meat-based diet.
3. With the feeding of a BARF (biologically appropriate raw food or bones and raw food) or other
unbalanced homemade diets, the occurrence of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is more likely.
 a  s p a a   sson  s  si  p t
 it is normal to low in nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
S. Drug administration:
1. Drugs that can induce hypocalcemia include enrofloxacin, mithramycin, bisphosphonates, and phos-
phate enemas.
 2. Phosphate enemas should not be used in small dogs or debilitated patients of any size. Clinically
occult hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia were reported in dogs in which a sodium phosphate enema
was used as a bowel prep prior to colonoscopy, but they resolved within 24h.
I. Primary hypoparathyroidism is an absolute or relative deficiency of PTH secretion that may be perma-
nent or transient:
1. Since magnesium status can impact PTH secretion, measurement of ionized magnesium is recom-
mended in cases of hypoparathyroidism. A large percentage of dogs with primary hypoparathyroidism
(58%) also exhibit low or marginal ionized magnesium concentration.
322 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Serum tCa concentration is usually <6.5 mg/dL (1.6mmol/L), and most have hyperphosphatemia
Mean serum iCa concentration in hypoparathyroid dogs was 3.16 mg/dL (0.79 mmol/L) in one study
(reference range 5.0-5.8 mg/dL; 1.25-1.45 mmol/L).
3. Most dogs have episodes of tetany or seizures.
4. Primary bypoparathyroidism is characterized by low serum iCa concentration with an inappropri-
ately low PTH concentration.
U. Following ethylene glycol ingestion, seizures may be noted within hours of ingestion.
V. Differential Diagnosis
A. Other causes of neuromuscular clinical signs similar to those produced by hypocalcemia include primary
brain disease (epilepsy, brain tumors, encephalitis, etc.), glycogen storage disorders, hepatic encephalopathy,
toxins (strychnine, metaldehyde, etc.), and musculoskeletal disorders (myopathies, arthritis, hip dysplasia, etc.).
Vl. Treatment
A.(
General treatment for hypocalcemia is listed in Table 31.2.
rapidity of development of hypocalcemia, the trend of serial serum calcium measurements, and the underly.
ing disease:
1. Puerperal tetany is the condition that most often requires acute correction of hypocalcemia:
a. After treatment with intravenous calcium gluconate, iCa is normal within 25 min in most dogs.
h. Nearly all dogs are discharged within several hours of treatment.
C. Puppies <4 weeks old should be removed for 24 h and fed a canine milk replacer. Those older than
4 weeks can be weaned.
d. Calcium carbonate 50 mg/kg q 12h with meals for remainder of lactation period. Vitamin D may
also be required.
2. Primary hypoparathyroidism is the only condition requiring both acute and chronic therapy. Both
calcium and vitamin D supplementation are usually necessary. Magnesium supplementation may also be
beneficial if serum ionized magnesium concentration was initially marginal or low.
roid adenoma:
 a. Therapy should be initiated before the development of clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
b. Supplementation with active vitamin D metabolites should be started prior to surgery in patients
with severe hypercalcemia, traditionally defined as having a serum tCa concentration of 14.0mg/dL
(3.5 mmol/L) or greater.
C. Supplementation with active vitamin D metabolites will be necessary in those in which postsurgi-
cal calcium concentration rapidly declines to below the reference range.
C. The goal of therapy is to increase serum iCa concentration to alleviate clinical signs of hypocalcemia and
 to minimize the likelihood of developing hypercalcemia. The target serum iCa concentration is just below or
in the lower part of the reference range.
D. Acute management of hypocalcemia includes treatment with intravenously administered calcium salts:
1. Calcium gluconate is the calcium salt of choice because it is nonirritating if injected perivascularly
2. The heart rate and electrocardiogram should be monitored during infusion of calcium salts.
Bradycardia may signal the onset of cardiotoxicity from rapid infusion of calcium.
E. Subacute management of hypocalcemia:
1. The initial calcium injection will decrease signs of hypocalcemia for 1-12h.
2. Vitamin D metabolites such as calcitriol should be administered as soon as possible if hypocalcemia
is expected to be protracted (e.g., primary hypoparathyroidism, parathyroid gland atrophy from long-
standing hypercalcemia). Calcitriol will exert initial effects on the intestine within 3-4 h but maximal
effects to enhance intestinal absorption of calcium will take several days.
 3. Continuous intravenous calcium infusion is recommended until oral medications provide control of
serum calcium concentration.
4. Subcutaneous administration of calcium salts should not be given, even if diluted. Some dogs exhibit
severe reactions to the subcutaneous administration of calcium salts, resulting in euthanasia.
Aew sieaw ym pap!p (epayswoo l 'g'a) sasop yay!
Time for toxicity effect to
1 -18 weeks. Although less
xpensive then calcitriol,
 Supplement of choice
and greater risk of
SQ calcium salts—can cause severe skin necrosis/
Ajensenuad ssne Alawaxa se Al uanig Alu
lypercalcemia
2-14 days
esolve
juawalddns wniales uowwos jso
Infusion to maintain normal Ca
May cause gastric irritation
Time for maximal effect to
calcium salts SQ
clinical eclampsia
Comment
5-21 days
1 -4 days
OCCur
Initial: 4000-6000 U/kg/
1000-2000 U/kg once
Initial: 20-30ng/kg/day
maintenance: 5-15 ng/
daily to once weekly
. Slow IV to effect 
(0.5-1.5mL/kg IV)
b. 5-15mg/kg/h Iv 
day: maintenance:
5-1 5 mg/kg/h Iv 
 25-50mg/kg/day
3-4days:
Dose
Aep/ay
*Do not mix calcium solution with bicarbonate-containing fluids as precipitation may occur.
.6
Calcium content 
 9.3 mg of Ca/ml
27.2 mg of Ca/ml 
40% tablet
1 3% tablet
27.2%
%0 I
 325, 650mg tablets
Table 31.2  Treatment of hypocalcemia.
Preparation
10% solution 
10% solution
Many sizes
Many sizes
Powder 
Parenteral calcium*
Calcium gluconate
Calcium carbonate
Calcium gluconate 
Calcium chloride
Calcium chloride
(ergocalciferol)***
Oral calcium**
Calcium lactate 
Vitamin D
Vitamin D
Drug
323
324 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Chronic management of hypocalcemia:
1. Supplemental calcium is administered orally. Calcium carbonate is most commonly used.
o d  sid r s s s    
or postoperative hypocalcemia that fails to resolve spontaneously:
a. Ergocalciferolis inexpensive, but high doses are necessary, and time to effect is long. Hypercalcemia
frequently develops during its use, due to its high lipid solubility and time required to saturate fat
stores, and is prolonged even after discontinuation of supplementation.
b. Calcitriol is the active vitamin D metabolite and the supplement of choice. Calcitriol has a short
half-life with a rapid onset of action. If hypercalcemia occurs due to overdose, the hypercalcemia
quickly subsides after withdrawal of calcitriol.
c. The goal for optimal concentration of circulating calcium is to be slightly lower than the normal
fange:
1) This helps protect the kidneys.
2) PTH normally removes calcium from renal tubular fluid.
3) At higher circulating calcium concentrations, more calcium is filtered at any level of glomeru
lar filtration rate (GFR), providing more tubular exposure to calcium and the calcium is not
removed in the absence of PTH.
4) Hypercalciuria poses a risk for development of renal dysfunction and CKD as well as urinary
stone formation
G. Periods of hypocalcemia and hypercalcemia often occur sporadically during initial management of
 those with chronic hypocalcemia, as dose adjustments are made in an attempt to achieve optimal circulating
calcium concentrations:
1. Daily measurement of circulating calcium concentration is necessary during initial stabilization. iCa
 measurements are preferred over tCa during acute management.
2. Weekly serum calcium measurement is sufficient during maintenance therapy until the target serum
calcium concentration has been maintained. Use of serum tCa is often adequate to make clinical deci-
sions during this time, especially if serum ionized and tCa concentrations have paralleled each other
during earlier treatments.
 3. Serum calcium concentration should be measured every 3 months in patients with hypoparathy-
roidism. Some patients are sufficiently stable that twice yearly evaluations will suffice.
H.
 Owners should be aware of clinical signs of hypercalcemia (e.g., polydipsia, polyuria, anorexia, vomiting.
and lethargy) and should be instructed to seek veterinary care if they occur.
 Patients that can maintain serum iCa concentration within the target range can be managed successfully
+
for years. Calcitriol maintains serum iCa concentration in the target zone better than other vitamin D sup-
plements.
Vitamin D metabolite treatment is gradually tapered and discontinued in dogs with postsurgical
hypoparathyroidism because the hypocalcemia is usually transient:
1. Vitamin D compounds are typically tapered first by about 25% to see if circulating iCa remains at
the desired level. If reasonable levels are maintained, a further taper of 25% is attempted.
2. Calcium compounds are usually tapered after the decrement in vitamin D treatments have resulted
 in a stable level of calcermia, usually by 25% at each interval.
3. Dogs with hypocalcemia typically require treatment for 6-12 weeks after removal of a parathyroid gland.
4. Permanent hypoparathyroidism is likely if there is failure to maintain acceptable serum iCa concen-
tration after the reduction of vitamin D metabolite dose at 3 months.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Chronic kidney disease: The prognosis overall is guarded and dependent on appropriate therapy and
response to treatrment. Improvement in iCa status often accompanies optimal serum phosphorus control and
    m d
B.
 Emergency and critical care: The prognosis is dependent on treatment and response to therapy for
sepsis and critical illness.
Hypocalcemia in Dogs  325
Acute pancreatitis: The prognosis overall is dependent on the response to therapy. Hypocalcemia typi-
cally resolves as does the pancreatitis.
D.
Diabetes mellitus: The prognosis for resolution of hypocalcemia is unknown.
E
Eclampsia: The prognosis for resolution of hypocalcemia is excellent following appropriate therapy.
Rhabdomyolysis: Hypocalcemia typically resolves as the underlying muscle injury improves.
G.
to0 treatment. Prognosis could be guarded to excellent depending on the underlying cause.
H.
 Alkali administration: Prognosis for restoration of normal serum calcium is excellent following cessa-
tion of alkali treatment.
Acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia: The prognosis is guarded for restoration of normocalcemia
without calcium-specific treatments. With appropriate therapy, prognosis is good to excellent.
Tumor lysis syndrome: Prognosis is poor to grave due to the underlying malignancy.
K.
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism: Prognosis is excellent if a proper diet is provided.
Drug administration: Prognosis for restoration of normocalcemia is variable depending on the type of
drug. The prognosis for survival following phosphate enema administration can be poor (depending on the
magnitude of hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and renal failure).
M.Primary hypoparathyroidism: Prognosis for normocalcemia and overall survival is good to excellent
with appropriate therapy. Prognosis for long-term survival is lower in those that develop hypercalcemia in
N. Ethylene glycol toxicity: Prognosis is grave.
VIlll. Prevention
4.
 Feed a nutritionally complete and balanced diet to prevent the occurrence of nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
B.
 Limit exposure to drugs or compounds that can cause hypocalcemia (e.g., ethylene glycol, mithramy-
cin, phosphate enemas, etc.).
C
 Ensure that females of small dog breeds with large litters receive an adequate diet with adequate calo-
ries and calcium to prevent eclampsia.
D.
calcemia due to parathyroid gland disease, for example, adenoma.
Provide optimal serum phosphorus control in patients with chronic renal failure; calcitriol therapy for
References and Further Readings
Drobatz KJ, Casey KK. Eclampsia in dogs: 31 cases (1995-1998). JAmm Vet Med Assoc 2000;217(2):216-219.
Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, Ward CR. Concurrent disorders in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 221 cases {1993-1998).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;217(8):1166-1173.
Holowaychuk MK, Hansen BD, DeFrancesco TC, Marks SL. Jonized hypocalcemia in critically ill dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2009;23(3):509-513.
Hume DZ, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Outcome of dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis: 127 dogs {1993-2003). J Vet Intern Med
2006;20(3):547-55 5.
17 cases. Aust Vet J 2006;84(8):285-290.
Schenck PA. Serurm ionized magnesium concentrations in association with canine calciurm metabolic disorders. J Vet Intern
Med 2008;22(3):796-797.
Schenck PA and Chew DJ. Prediction of serurn ionized calciurm concentration by use of serurm total calciurm concentration in
dogs. Ar J Vet Res 2005;66(8):1330-1336.
Schenck PA and Chew DJ. Calciurm: Total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Smalt Anirm Pract 2008;38{3):497-502.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Rosol TJ. Disorders of calcium: Hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Dibartola S, ed.
Fluid Therapy in Smalt Anirat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2006, p. 122-194.
CHAPTER 32
Hypocalcemia in Cats
Patricia A. Schenck and Dennis Chew
Pathogenesis
 Clinical signs only result when ionized calcium (iCa) falls below a critical level.
 Causes of hypocalcemia can be parathyroid independent or parathyroid dependent.
 The most common cause of chronic hypocalcemia is primary hypoparathyroidism.
● The most common cause of acute hypocalcemia in combination with clinical signs related to hypo-
calcemia is periparturient tetany (eclampsia).
Classical Signs
● The most common clinical signs associated with hypocalcemia are muscle tremors and fascicula-
tions, facial rubbing, muscle cramping, stiff gait, seizures, restlessness, aggression, disorientation, and
hypersensitivity.
● Anorexia and lethargy are common signs of hypocalcemia in the cat and prolapse of the third eyelid
is occasionally observed with acute hypocalcemia.
 Acute development of hypocalcemia is typically associated with severe clinical signs; there may be
few clinical signs if the underlying problem is chronic.
Diagnosis
 Hypocalcemia is defined as a total calcium (tCa) concentration <7.0mg/dL (1.7Smmol/L) or iCa
concentration <4.5mg/dL (1.1 mmol/L).
● Parathyroid hormone (PTH) should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement to deter-
mine whether PTH production is appropriate; measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be
helpful to identify cases in which decreased intake of vitamin D is the cause of hypocalcemia.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
326
Hypocalcemia in Cats 327
Treatment
● Specific therapy depends on the cause of hypocalcemia.
 Acute symptomatic hypocalcemia requires treatment with intravenous (IV) calcium salts, to effect.
● Symptomatic subacute and chronic hypocalcemia require treatment with oral calcium salts and/or
active vitamin D compounds.
Prognosis
● Prognosis depends on the underlying cause of hypocalcemia.
● Prognosis is excellent for properly treated eclampsia and good to excellent for primary hypopar-
athyroidism.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Serum tCa is composed of protein-bound calcium (pCa), complexed calcium (cCa), and iCa. The iCa
fraction is the biologically active fraction.
calcium via urine or milk, a decrease in gastrointestinal absorption of calcium, translocation of calcium
intracellularly, or a combination of these mechanisms:
1. A decrease in serum iCa typically stimulates the synthesis and release of PTH from the parathyroid gland.
 2. PTH causes a decrease in urinary calcium excretion and an increase in bone resorption.
3. PTH also stimulates the production of calciriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) from 25-hydroxyvitamin D
'sxorpau-i jo uoneina-dn Aq (a uuea uory aa u panoid)
4. Calcitriol causes an increase in vitamin D absorption in the gut and also increases bone resorption.
 5. Increased production of PTH continues if there is a continued decrease in iCa concentration or per-
sisting hyperphosphatemia. This creates a secondary hyperparathyroidism in which PTH is elevated and
serum iCa concentration is within the reference range or low.
C. Causes of hypocalcemia are listed in Table 32.1.
D. Hypoalbuminemia is the most common condition associated with hypocalcemia, but the least important.
Hypocalcemia is usually mild, and there are no clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
E. Azotemic chronic kidney disease (CKD): Decreased calcitriol synthesis and mass law interactions of
calcium with increased serum phosphorus concentration are probable causes of hypocalcemia.
 F. Emergency and critical care cases:
1. Low serum iCa concentration is common in the intensive care setting and is more common in septic
patients.
 2. Urethral obstruction, eclampsia, sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, hypomagnesemia,
and blood transfusions have been associated with hypocalcemia. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation may
also result in hypocalcemia.
G. Pancreatitis: Mechanisms of low iCa include sequestration of calcium into peripancreatic fat (saponification),
 increased free fatty acids, increased calcitonin, and PTH resistance or deficit resulting from hypomagnesemia.
H. Eclampsia: Mechanisms for hypocalcemia include a poor dietary source of calcium, loss of calcium dur-
ing lactation, and/or abnormal parathyroid gland function.
I. Urethral obstruction: Low serum iCa concentration is not a consequence of deficient secretion of PTH,
 nor does it appear related to serum concentrations of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol. Ir likely is a consequence
of increased serum phosphorus concentration.
 Rhabdomyolysis or soft tissue trauma: Hypocalcemia usually occurs as a consequence of translocation
of calcium into damaged muscles.
K.:
 Severe small intestinal disease: Mechanisms of hypocalcemia include calcium/fatty acid complexes in the
intestinal lumen that decrease intestinal calcium absorption. Malabsorption of vitamin D can also lead to
hypovitaminosis D and decreased intestinal calcium absorption.
328 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 32.1 Causes of hypocalcemia in the cat.
Most common
Occasional
Uncommon
Hypoalbuminemia
Soft tissue trauma or rhabdomyolysis
Lab error
Chronic renal failure
Hypoparathyroidism
Improper anticoagulant (EDTA)
Puerperal tetany (eclampsia)
Ethylene glycol intoxication
Infarction of parathyroid gland
Acute kidney failure
Phosphate enema
adenoma
Acute pancreatitis
Post-NaHCO, administration
Rapid infusion of phosphate
Undefined
Intestinal malabsorption or severe
starvation
Hypovitaminosis D
Blood transfusion with citrated
anticoagulant
L.Alkali administration: Results in increased protein binding of calcium, thereby decreasing the iCa fraction.
M. Acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia: This happens most frequently following removal of a parathy-
roid adenoma that has caused primary hyperparathyroidism and atrophy of nontumorous parathyroid tissue
N. Tumor lysis syndrome: Occurs when there is rapid destruction of tumor cells following chemotherapy.
O. Drug administration can cause hypocalcemia:
1. Drugs that can induce hypocalcemia include enrofloxacin, mithramycin, bisphosphonates, and phos-
phate enemas.
P.
Phosphate enemas: Result in hypocalcemia after rapid absorption of phosphate and subsequent mass
law interaction with serum calcium. They should not be used in cats as they are too dangerous, especially if
they are sick before the enema.
Q. Ethylene glycol toxicity: Oxalate metabolites can chelate calcium and become deposited in soft tissues,
resulting in hypocalcemia.
R. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism: Associated with lack of sufficient dietary vitamin D or low
calcium/high phosphorus concentrations in the diet. This most commonly occurs in cats fed mainly meat
diets (cow's milk provides insufficient calcium to correct imbalance).
S. Primary hypoparathyroidism: Surgical removal or injury to the parathyroid glands during thyroidec-
parathyroid tissue occurs sporadically.
T.Vitamin D-dependant rickets: Type 2 is a genetic condition associated with down-regulation of the func-
tion or numbers of vitamin D receptors in the target tissues (resulting in high circulating calcitriol). Type 1
is associated with a genetic defect in the metabolic activation of 25(OH) vitamin to the most active vitamin
 D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, resulting in low circulating calcitriol.
Il.Signalment
A.
 Primary hypoparathyroidism: Occurs more often in male cats. Siamese cats may be overrepresented.
B. Other causes of hypocalcemia: There does not appear to be any age-, sex-, or breed-related predisposi-
tions for these disorders.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Decreased serum iCa concentration increases excitability of neuromuscular tissue, which accounts for
many of the clinical signs of hypocalcemia:
1. The most common clinical signs associated with hypocalcemia are muscle tremors and fasciculations,
facial rubbing, muscle cramping, stiff gait, seizures, restlessness, aggression, disorientation, and hyper-
sensitivity:
a. Neuromuscular signs in cats with primary hypoparathyroidism are similar to those in dogs
Anorexia and lethargy are more comrmon in cats than in dogs, but seizures have not been reported to
be induced by excitement, as occurs in dogs.
Hypocalcemia in Cats 329
(Courtesy of Dr. Philip Lerche, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine.)
2. Other clinical signs of hypocalcemia may include panting, Pyrexia, lethargy, depression, anorexia,
tachycardia, and posterior lenticular cataracts. In contrast to dogs, prolapse of the third eyelid is occa-
sionally observed in cats with acute hypocalcemia, but is not usually seen with chronic hypocalcemia
(Figure 32.1).
 3. Uncommon clinical signs of hypocalcemia include polyuria, polydipsia, hypotension, respiratory
arrest, or death.
4. Clinical signs of acute postoperative hypocalcemia following thyroidectomy are similar in dogs
and cats:
a. Tetany or facial twitching has not been observed in cats after thyroidectomy until serum tCa con
centration is <6.9mg/dL (1.7mmol/L).
B. Clinical signs usually do not occur until serum tCa is <6.5mg/dL (1.62 mmol/L). Some patients (espe-
 oi> si o i s  o go sis i os no  (  son 
dL (1.25 mmol/L), likely a consequence of CKD-associated acidosis that shifts calcium from protein bound
stores so that more exists in the ionized form:
1. Acute development of hypocalcemia is typically associated with severe clinical signs.
 2. If the underlying problem has been chronic and there has been sufficient time for physiologic adapta-
tion, then there may be few clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
 3. Clinical signs of hypocalcemia are uncommon when hypocalcemia occurs in association with renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
C. Electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities can impact hypocalcemia:
1. Exercise or excitement associated with respiratory alkalosis may cause hypocalcemia.
 2. Rapid infusion of alkali to correct metabolic acidosis can cause seizures in those with marginal hypo
calcemia due to increased binding of calcium at the expense of iCa.
3. Correction of hypokalemia in cats with concurrent hypocalcemia can precipitate the onset of clinical
signs of hypocalcemia.
[V. Diagnosis (see Figure 31.4, Diagnostic algorithm for hypocalcemia)
A. Definition of hypocalcemia:
1. Using serum tCa, hypocalcemia in cats is usually defined as a concentration <7.0 mg/dL (1.75 mmol/L).
330 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Using serum iCa, hypocalcemia is usually defined as a concentration <4.5 mg/dL (1.1 mmol/L).
3. There can be unpredictable discordance between serum tCa and serum iCa measurements. In one
study, 49% of sick cats were classified as hypocalcemic based on serum tCa concentration. When iCa was
is used.
4. Hypocalcemia based on serum iCa is relatively common and was observed in 27% of sick cats in
one study.
B. Measurement of calcium:
1. Trivial decreases in serum tCa are common and may not be persistent. Pursuit of a specific diagnosis
 in these instances is not warranted.
serum iCa should also be measured in all cases of azotemic CKD. It is debatable if iCa should be deter-
mined in patients with mild decreases in total serum calcium associated with hypoalbuminemia.
3. Do not directly compare serum iCa results to those obtained from heparinized plasma or whole blood
ized plasma or whole blood than in serum.
4. Do not use EDTA plasma for collection of blood for iCa measurement. EDTA chelates calcium, and
EDTA plasma will yield falsely low iCa results.
5. In cats, serum tCa is normally 8.0-10.5 mg/dL (2.0-2.6mmol/L), and serum iCa is normally 4.5-
5.5 mg/dL (1.1-1.4 mmol/L).
6. If serum tCa is <6.0mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L) or iCa is <3.2mg/dL (0.8 mmol/L), clinical signs are usually
present.
 7. To convert mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply mmol/L by 4.
C. PTH should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement in patients with chronically low tCa
1. Patients with low iCa and low PTH concentrations have absolute hypoparathyroidism. If serum iCa
is low and PTH is within the reference range, the PTH response is inappropriate (sometimes referred to
 2. Hypocalcemia associated with increased serum PTH is classified as parathyroid-independent hypoc-
alcemia. In these cases, hypocalcemia exists from redistribution of calcium into other body spaces, excess
phosphorus effects, or from deficiencies of vitamin D or dietary calcium.
D. Measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be helpful to identify cases in which decreased intake
or malabsorption of vitamin D is the cause of hypocalcemia.
E. Calcitriol measurement may be useful to differentiate vitamin D resistant rickets from those with
azotemia CKD in patients with normal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration:
-a rs  aq   a  s r  'l
roidism, normal 25-hydroxyvitamin D, high plasma calcitriol concentrations, and clinical signs of rickets.
2. Type 1 rickets is characterized by similar findings except that there are low concentrations of calcitriol
 indicative of an activation defect involving renal 1-alpha-hydroxylase that normally facilitates conver-
sion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.
requires appropriate diagnostic testing. Most cases of hypocalcemia are parathyroid independent, that is,
PTH concentration is appropriately increased.
G. Hypoalbuminemia is the most common cause of hypocalcemia, but is usually mild and not associated
with clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
H. Azotemic kidney disease is associated with hypocalcemia:
1. Most cats with azotemic CKD and decreased serum iCa concentration do not show clinical signs of
hypocalcemia.
2. In cats with azotemic CKD, about 15% were hypocalcemic based on serum tCa concentration. Based
on iCa concentration, 14% of cats with moderate azotemic CKD and 56% with advanced azotemic CKD
had hypocalcemia. Hypocalcermia is underappreciated when based on results of tCa measurement, espe-
cially with advancing azotemia.
Hypocalcemia in Cats  331
3. Acute renal failure and postrenal failure results in hypocalcemia that is more likely to be symptomatic.
It is difficult in these clinical settings to determine with certainty which signs are specifically due to
hypocalcemia, as other electrolyte and acid-base disturbances often occur concomitantly.
1. Emergency and critical care cases:
1. Low serum iCa concentration is common in severely ill cats, especially septic patients, or cats with
urethral obstruction, eclampsia, sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, and hypomagne-
semia, or following blood transfusions or cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
J. Acute pancreatitis may be associated with hypocalcemia:
1. In cats with acute pancreatitis, iCa was low in 61% of cats in one study.
 2. Pansteatitis has been repored to create severe hypocalcemia in a cat from similar mechanisms.
K. Puerperal (periparturient) tetany (eclampsia) is rare in cats which more commonly exhibit signs during
the last 3 weeks of pregnancy:
1. Signs of depression, weakness, tachypnea, and mild muscle tremors are most common; vomiting and
anorexia are less common, and prolapse of the third eyelid occurs in some cats. Hypothermia (instead of
hyperthermia as seen in dogs) is observed.
L. Urethral obstruction: Hypocalcemia was present in 34% of cats with urethral obstruction in one
study:
1. Serum iCa was >3.2 but <4.0mg/dL (>0.8 but <1.0mmol/L) in 14% and ≤3.2 mg/dL (≤0.8 mmol/L) in
6% of cats with urethral obstruction in one study.
2. Hypocalcemia is likely to develop in cats that have hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis.
3. Alkalinizing infusions to correct metabolic acidosis are often considered for treatment of cats with
lrethral obstruction, but these can decrease both tCa and iCa concentrations which can be dangerous as
tetany can develop, as well as increasing risk for respiratory and cardiac collapse in those with marginal
iCa at presentation.
M. Rhabdomyolysis may be associated with hypocalcemia, but clinical signs are uncommon.
N. Small intestinal disease may be associated with hypocalcemia:
1. Protein-losing enteropathy is also associated with low iCa and low ionized magnesium.
2. Serum PTH is typically elevated in these cases, and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D is low.
O. Alkali (sodium bicarbonate) administration can result in hypocalcemia:
1. Twitching has been observed on rare occasion during infusion of sodium bicarbonate solutions to cats
with urethral obstruction.
P. Acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia.
Q. Tumor lysis syndrome.
 R. Drug administration can cause hypocalcemia including enrofloxacin, mithramycin, and bisphospho-
nates.
S. Phosphate enemas can cause rapid onset of hypocalcemia associated with rapid absorption of phospho.
rus, especially if the cat is dehydrated before the enema.
I.  Following ethylene glycol ingestion, seizures may be noted within hours of ingestion.
U. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with diets providing excess phosphate, insuffi-
cient calcium or both:
1. Serum iCa concentration typically is low, with an elevation in PTH concentration.
2. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism tends to cause osteopenia of the long bones and verte-
brae. A stiff gait, bone pain, and multiple bone fractures are common.
3. History of feeding of BARF (biologically appropriate raw food or bones and raw food) and other
unbalanced homemade diets, which makes the occurrence of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
more likely.
4. In six young cats with nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, serum iCa and phosphorus con-
centrations were low. Calcitriol concentration was increased in most, and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
concentration was low. PTH concentration was increased in all cats. These cats had been fed either
meat only, meat combined with vegetables, or vegetables only. Dietary calcium intake was less than
one-tenth of the minimal nutritional requirement. An unfavorable calcium to phosphorus ratio existed
for all diets.
332 Clinica Endocrinology of Companion Animals
V. Primary hypoparathyroidism is an absolute or relative deficiency of PTH secretion that may be
permanent or transient. Hypoparathyroidism is rare in cats:
1. Since magnesium status can impact PTH secretion, measurement of ionized magnesium is recom-
mended in cases of hypoparathyroidism. A large percentage of cats with primary hypoparathyroidism
(52%) exhibit low or marginal ionized magnesium concentration.
2. Serum tCa concentration is usually <6.5 mg/dL (1.62 mmol/L) and most have hyperphosphatemia
Mean serum iCa concentration in hypoparathyroid cats was 2.9mg/dL (0.72 mmol/L) in one study (ref-
erence range 4-5.6 mg/dL; 1.0-1.4mmol/L).
3. Primary hypoparathyroidism is characterized by low serum iCa concentration with an inappropri-
ately low PTH concentration.
4. Primary hypoparathyroidism requires lifelong treatment with calcium and vitamin D supplementation.
V.  Differential Diagnosis
A. Other causes of neuromuscular clinical signs similar to those produced by hypocalcemia include primary
brain disease (epilepsy, brain tumors, encephalitis, etc.), glycogen storage disorders, hepatic encephalopathy,
toxins (strychnine, metaldehyde, etc.), musculoskeletal disorders (myopathies, arthritis, hip dysplasia, etc.).
Vl. Treatment
A. For general treatment for hypocalcemia including doses of drugs, please refer to Table 31.2, Treatment
of hypocalcemia.
B. Treatment must be individualized based on the severity of clinical signs, magnitude of hypocalcemia,
rapidity of development of hypocalcemia, and the trend of serial serum calcium measurements:
out gestation and lactation.
3. Primary hypoparathyroidism is the only condition requiring both acute and long-term therapy. Both
calcium and vitamin D supplementation are usually necessary. Magnesium supplementation may also be
beneficial if serum ionized magnesium concentration was initially low.
4. Hypocalcemia should be anticipated in cats undergoing parathyroidectomy for treatment of parathy-
roid adenoma:
a. Therapy should be initiated before the development of clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
b. Supplementation with active vitamin D metabolies should be started prior to surgery in patients
with severe hypercalcemia (see Table 31.2, page 324 for dose).
and to minimize the likelihood of developing hypercalcemia.
D. Acute management of hypocalcemia includes treatment with intravenously administered calcium salts
(see Table 31.2, page 324 for dose):
1. Calcium gluconate is the calcium salt of choice because it is nonirritating if injected perivascularly.
 2. Subcutaneous administration of calcium salts should not be given, even if diluted, as reactions severe
enough to cause death or warrant euthanasia are known to occur in dogs and severe calcinosis has been
described in one cat.
3. The heart rate and electrocardiogram should be monitored during infusion of calcium salts
 Bradycardia may signal the onset of cardiotoxicity from rapid infusion of calcium.
E. Subacute management of hypocalcemia:
1. The initial injection of calcium will decrease signs of hypocalcemia for 1-12 h.
2. Vitamin D metabolites such as calcitriol should be administered as soon as possible (see Table 31.2).
Calcitriol will exert initial effects on the intestine within 34 h but maximal effects of enhanced calcium
absorption may be exerted within 1-4 days.
3. Continuous IV infusion of calcium is recommended until oral medications provide control of serum
calcium concentration.
F. Chronic management of hypocalcemia:
Table 31.2, Treatment of hypocalcemia, for doses of calcium products).
Hypocalcemia in Cats 333
2. Vitamin D supplementation is necessary for patients with primary hypoparathyroidism or postop-
erative hypocalcemia that fails to resolve spontaneously (see Table 31.2, Treatment of hypocalcemia, for
doses of vitamin D products):
a. Ergocalciferol is inexpensive, but high doses are necessary, and time to effect is long. Ergocalciferol
is highly lipid soluble and undergoes extensive storage in fat. Once fat is saturated with this
compound, the risk of the development of hypercalcemia greatly increases if the clinician becomes
impatient and continues to escalate the dose because of suboptimal levels of circulating calcium.
If overdosed, hypercalcemia is often prolonged (weeks to months).
h. Calciriol is the active vitamin D metabolite and the supplement of choice. Calcitriol has a short
half-life in the circulation with a rapid onset of action. If hypercalcemia occurs due to overdose, the
hypercalcemia quickly subsides after withdrawal of calcitriol since its biological effect half life is
several days.
 Periods of hypocalcermia and hypercalcemia occur sporadically during initial management of hypocalcemia:
1. Daily measurement of serum tCa concentration during stabilization is necessary; weekly serum cal-
cium measurement is sufficient during maintenance therapy until the target serum calcium concentra
tion has been maintained. Serum calcium concentration should be measured every 3 months in patients
with hypoparathyroidism.
H.  Hypercalcemia is a serious adverse side effect of treatment that can result in renal damage or death
Owners should be aware of clinical signs of hypercalcemia (anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, polydipsia, polyuria).
 Patients that can maintain serum iCa concentration within the target range can be managed successfully
for years:
zone than are other vitamin D supplements.
Vitamin D metabolite treatment is gradually tapered and discontinued in cats with postsurgical hypopar-
athyroidism because the hypocalcemia is usually transient:
1. Most cats are able to maintain normal serum iCa concentrations 2 weeks after thyroidectomy,
although some may take as long as 3 months.
2. Permanent hypoparathyroidism is likely if there is failure to maintain acceptable serum iCa concen-
tration after the reduction of vitamin D metabolite dose at 3 months.
Vll. Prognosis
A. Chronic kidney disease: The prognosis overall is guarded and dependent on appropriate therapy and
supplementation with active vitamin D compounds.
B. Emergency and critical care cases: The prognosis is dependent on treatment and response to therapy for
sepsis and critical illness.
C.
cally resolves as the pancreatitis resolves.
D.Urethral obstruction: Most cats survive with appropriate therapy for urethral obstruction.
E.
 Eclampsia: The prognosis for resolution of hypocalcemia is excellent following appropriate therapy.
F.
Rhabdomyolysis: Hypocalcemia typically resolves as the underlying muscle injury improves.
G.S
 Small intestinal disease: Improvement in calcium status depends on the underlying disease and response
to treatment. Prognosis could be guarded to excellent depending on the underlying cause.
H. Alkali administration: Prognosis for restoration of normal serum calcium is excellent following cessa-
tion of alkali treatment.
Acute reversal of chronic hypercalcemia: The prognosis is guarded for restoration of normocalcemia
without calcium-specific treatments. With appropriate therapy, prognosis is good to excellent.
  a on a  on rod si sor as sis r
K.
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism: Prognosis is excellent if a proper diet is provided, although
skeletal deformity may persist and predispose to constipation.
Drug administration: Prognosis for restoration of normocalcemia is variable depending on the type of
334 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
M.
 Primary hypoparathyroidism: Prognosis for normocalcemia is good to excellent with appropriate
therapy. Prognosis is lower in those that develop hypercalcemia in response to therapy with ergocalciferol.
N.
Ethylene glycol toxicity: Prognosis is grave.
VIll. Prevention
A.
 Feed a nutritionally complete and balanced diet to prevent the occurrence of nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
Limit exposure to drugs or compounds that can cause hypocalcemia (ethylene glycol, mithramycin,
 phosphate enemas, etc.).
C.
Make sure that female cats receive a balanced diet with adequate calories and calcium during the last
3 weeks of pregnancy to prevent eclampsia.
D
 Initiate vitamin D supplementation prior to parathyroid gland removal in those patients with severe
hypercalcemia to prevent development of hypocalcemia after removal of a parathyroid adenoma.
E.
 prevention/control of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism may help maintain serum iCa.
References and Further Readings
Drobatz KJ, Hughes D. Concentration of ionized calciurm in plasma from cats with urethral obstruction. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
1997;211{11):1392-1395.
urethral obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005;15(3):179-184.
Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ. Incidence and prognostic value of low plasma ionized calcium concentration in cats
with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases {1996-1998). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2001;219(8):1105-1109.
Naan EC, Kirpensteijn J, Kooistra HS, Peeters ME. Results of thyroidectomy in 101 cats with hyperthyroidisrm. Vet Surg
2006;35(3):287-293.
Schenck PA. Serum ionized magnesium concentrations in association with feline calciurm metabolic disorders. J Vet Intern Med
2008;22(3):797.
Schenck PA and Chew DJ. Calcium: Total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim Pract 2008;38{3):497-502.
Schenck PA and Chew DJ. Prediction of serurm ionized calcium concentration by serum total calcium concentration in cats.
Can J Vet Res 2010;74 (3):209-213.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, and Behrend EN. Updates on hypercalcemic disorders. In: August J, ed. Consutations in Feline Internat
Medicine, St. Louis: Elsevier. 2005, pp. 157-168.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Rosol TJ. Disorders of calciurm: Hypercalcemia and hypocalceria. In: Dibartola S, ed.
Ftuid Therapy in Smatt Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier. 2006, pp. 122-194.
Tomsa K, Glaus T, Hauser B, Fluckiger M, Arnold P, Wess G, Reusch C. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in
six cats. J Smaff Anim Pract 1999;40f11):533-539.
Zini E, Hauser B, Ossent P, Dennler R, Glaus TM. Pansteatitis and severe hypocalcaemia in a cat. J Fetine Med Surg
2007;9(2):168-171.
CHAPTER 33
Hypocalcemia in Other Species
Michael Stanford, John Keen
and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Hypocalcemia in Horses
Pathogenesis
● Signs of hypocalcemia are due to derangements in the ionized fraction of total plasma calcium.
● Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is the most important hormone regulating calcium levels.
● The most common causes of hypocalcemia are lactation, gastrointestinal disease, and strenuous exercise.
Classical Signs
● Muscle fasciculations and/or muscle stiffness/tetany.
● Synchronous diaphragmatic flutter/thumps.
● Smooth muscle dysfunction (e.g., gastrointestinal ileus).
● Seizures or coma if severe and prolonged.
Diagnosis
● Clinical signs.
● Low plasma ionized calcium (<1.5 mmol/L) or total calcium (<2.6 mmol/L).
Treatment
● Intravenous calcium borogluconate to effect.
● Oral calcium supplementation long term.
1. Pathogenesis
 A. Calcium disribution and control mechanisms:
1. Intracompartmental distribution.
Only 0.1% of total body calcium is in extracellular fluid. The rest is found in the skeleton (99%) or
intracellular compartments (0.9%). Of the calcium portion in plasma, approximately 40-45% is bound
ClinicalEndocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
335
336  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Gut
VitD
Chief
PTH
Kidney
tca
Ca+
cell
Bone
Figure 33.1  Diagram showing the crucial role of parathyroid hormone (PTH) in the face of hypocalcemia in the horse.
Calcium sensors in the chief cells of the parathyroid gland sense low ionized calcium levels thereby increasing PTH secretion
PTH effect is mainly not only on the kidney to increase calcium absorption but also on bone to effect release of calcium and
on the gut (via increased activation of Vitamin D) to effect increased absorption.
to anionic proteins (mainly albumin), 5% is complexed with small anions (e.g., lactate), and 55-60% is
ionized. The ionized form is the biologically active form therefore it is derangements to ionized calcium
levels rather than the total plasma calcium that lead to clinical signs of hypocalcemia.
2. Control of calcium levels.
As in other species, calcium is controlled by three hormones: PTH and vitamin D which aim to increase
ionized calcium levels (Figure 33.1) and calcitonin which aims to lower calcium levels. In horses, PTH is
of primary importance and consequently most is known about this hormone. Vitamin D is thought to
have minor importance in the horse while little is known about calcitonin. Key features of calcium
homeostasis in the horse are:
 a. The kidney is the major site for control of calcium and phosphorous levels and the site of vitamin
 D activation. Large amounts of calcium are excreted through the urinary tract in normal horses. PTH
increases calcium resorption and decreases phosphate resorption.
b. Calcium extraction from the diet, which occurs mainly in the proximal small intestine, is very
efficient in horses.
 C. Vitamin D appears to have minimal regulatory effect on calcium absorption from the gut in the
horse.
d. Dietary constituents such as phosphorous and oxalate can affect calcium balance long term by
impairing gut absorption.
B. Causes of hypocalcemia:
There are many causes of hypocalcemia in the horse including:
1. Prolonged exercise—low calcium may be due to losses in sweat or due to respiratory and/or metabolic
alkalosis:
a. These conditions are most likely to occur in endurance type events or following exertion during
warm weather conditions.
 2. Lactation: due to calcium sequestration in the milk.
3. Gastrointestinal diseases including colitis:
a. Hypocalcemia is probably due to a combination of electrolyte losses in the gastrointestinal tract
along with the effect of sepsis and endotoxemia.
4. Sepsis/systemic inflammatory response syndrome/endotoxemia:
a. The pathophysiological mechanisms causing hypocalcemia with this syndrome are largely obscure,
but are possibly due to interstitialintracellular sequestration of calcium or derangements in the hor-
mones controlling calcium (e.g., impaired PTH secretion).
a. Lack of PTH activity reduces calcium resorption from the renal tubules, reduces bone mobiliza-
tion, and affects gut uptake of calcium via vitamin D. The net result is low ionized calcium.
h. This condition may be a primary parathyroid problem or secondary to low plasma magnesium.
7. Severe rhabdomyolysis: may cause calcium sequestration into degenerating cells, reducing plasma
ionized calcium levels.
Hypocalcemia in Other Species 337
 8. Any condition causing alkalosis: this increases calcium binding to anionic proteins, causing a reduc-
tion in ionized calcium.
 9. High dietary phosphorous or oxalates: these may antagonize calcium uptake from the gastrointes-
tinal tract.
10. Low serum albumin reduces the total calcium (40-45% of total calcium is bound to albumin) but
 does not affect the ionized level unless there are other processes concurrently affecting ionized levels.
C. Effects of hypocalcemia:
Extracellular ionized calcium is important for stabilizing cell membranes of excitable cells such as nerve and
skeletal or cardiac muscle; the effects of acute hypocalcemia are therefore increased excitability/activity in
such tissues. In contrast, extracelular calcium is essential for contraction of smooth muscle; therefore,
hypocalcemia leads to impaired smooth muscle contractility. Chronic calcium deficiency, a much rarer con-
dition in the horse, leads to abnormalities in bone and cartilage.
D. Pathogenesis of synchronous diaphragmatic flutter/"thumps": calcium, along with other cations,
antagonizes sodium permeability through cell membrane ion channels. Therefore in hypocalcemia, cell
membranes, including those of neurons, become hyperexcitable. Since the phrenic nerve courses over the
right atrium, contraction of the heart leads to rhythmic stimulation of the phrenic nerve and therefore
diaphragm twitching in synchrony with the heart beat. Other ion (e.g., magnesium) and fluid deficits may
contribute to this effect. Clinically, there is twitching of the flank and often a sound is audible (hence the
term "thumps").
Il.Signalment
 There is no known breed or age predisposition for hypocalcemia. The disorder is seen more frequently how-
 ever in lactating mares.
Il1. Clinical Signs
A. Acute hypocalcemia:
Clinical signs of acute hypocalcemia are very varied and depend on the degree of hypocalcemia as well as the
chronicity. They include effects on the following:
1. Skeletal muscle:
a. Increased muscle tone including trismus (spasm of masticatory muscles-"lockjaw")
b. Gait abnormalities:
1) Stiff, stilted, sometimes hypermetric gait.
2) Hind limb ataxia.
C. Muscle fasciculations (especially the temporal, masseter, and triceps muscles).
2. Cardiac muscle:
a. Tachycardia.
b. Cardiac arrhythmias.
3. Neurological system:
b. Convulsions/seizures.
C. Coma.
4. Smooth muscle:
a. Dysphagia.
b. Ileus.
5. Other:
a. Salivation.
b. Anxiety.
C. Profuse sweating.
d. Elevated body temperature.
e. Death.
B. Chronic hypocalcemia/calcium deficiency:
Clinical signs of chronic calcium deficiency are considerably rarer and comprise skeletal abnormalities
such as lameness and increased predisposition to fracture. Note that calcium levels measured in the blood may
338 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Table 33.1Likely degree of hypocalcemia in the horse based on the severity of clinical
signs (Cas = total calcium; Ca, = ionized calcium).
Cact (mmol/L)
Ca, (mmol/L)
Severity of clinical signs
2-2.6
1.1-1.5
MILD: increased excitability
1.25-2
0.7-1.1
MODERAT E: tetanic spasms and incoordination
<1.25
<0.7
SEVE RE: recumbency and stupor
be within normal reference ranges or only marginally low. PTH levels are usually high. Therefore, clinical
signs of acute hypocalcemia noted above may not be readily evident.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
Signalment, in particular lactating mares.
B.
 History and clinical signs.
C.
 Low serum calcium levels. Ideally, the ionized fraction should be measured although this may not always
be possible. If only total calcium can be measured, then the ionized fraction may be estimated. A useful guide
 to the degree of hypocalcemia based on clinical severity is shown in Table 33.1.
D. Magnesium is often low (<0.6mmol/L [1.5 mg/dL]) in cases of hypocalcemia and may contribute to the
clinical signs; therefore, this should also be measured concurrently.
E.
 Evaluating cases with recurrent hypocalcemia or possible chronic calcium deficiency:
1. PTH is low (<0.25 pmol/L) in hypoparathyroidism leading to hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia
(>1.8 mmol/L [5.6 mg/dL]). Magnesium may also be low, as a consequence of or perhaps contributing to
the disorder.
2. Vitamin D appears to have limited importance in the horse with regard to calcium metabolism.
 Deficiencies have not been reported in the literature.
3. Evaluating the oxalate content of the diet may be useful, although signs of chronic deficiency are
 more common than overt hypocalcemia in these cases.
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
Tetanus.
B.
 Laminitis.
Acute rhabdomyolysis.
D. Equine grass sickness.
Vl. Treatment
A. Some horses may not require treatment. For example, racehorses after racing may develop a self-resolving
hypocalcemia due to a mild respiratory or metabolic alkalosis. If in doubt, treatment should be initiated
before signs progress.
B。
 Intravenous administration of calcium-containing solutions is very effective:
1. In the UK, available preparations of calcium borogluconate (20 and 40%) provide approximately
6 and 12g of calcium per 400mL, respectively.
2. As an approximation, an ionized blood calcium level of 1.2 mmol/L (4.81 mg/dL) with a total cal.
cium of 2.5 mmol/L (10.02 mg/dL) corresponds to a 6-7 g deficit of calcium in a 500-kg horse.
3. As a rule of thumb therefore, with moderate signs of hypocalcemia, 400-600mL of 20% calcium
borogluconate diluted at least 1 in 4 with saline, Hartmann's solution, or dextrose saline is effective.
4. Administration should be slow (over at least 15 min) and clinical monitoring is essential during
administration in case of cardiac arrhythrmias. The infusion should be stopped if there is an alteration in
cardiac rate or rhythm.
C. Relapses can occur; therefore some cases may require repeated or continued treatment. Reanalysis of
calcium levels on a regular basis is essential.
Hypocaicemia in Other Species 339
D.
Oral supplementation of calcium carbonate: 20 g/day is the basic equine requirement for calcium in a
500-kg horse. In times of high demand such as pregnancy, lactation, growth, or intense exercise, 40-80 g/day
 may be more appropriate.
E.
 In endurance events, horses may benefit from preemptive electrolyte supplementation.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Good with appropriate therapy in cases of acute hypocalcemia.
VIlll. Prevention
4
 Ensure calcium intake is sufficient, especially in high risk individuals, for example, lactating mares and
endurance horses.
B
Avoid dietary items high in oxalates.
Hypocalcemia in Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents
Pathogenesis
● Low ionized calcium levels.
● May occur due to increased calcium demands in the periparturient period or during lactation;
dietary factors are likely to contribute.
Classical Signs
● Neurological signs ranging from ataxia or tremors through to coma.
Diagnosis
● Based on signalment, history, clinical signs, and blood biochemistry.
Treatment
● Calcium administration; dietary correction.
Pathogenesis
Hypocalcemia may develop during late gestation, the periparturient period or lactation in breeding
 animals as a result of increased calcium demand. It may be associated with pregnancy toxemia.
Low dietary calcium and high dietary phosphorus are predisposing factors.
C
 Rabbits have an unusual calcium metabolism resulting in a 30-50% higher normal serum calcium
concentration than other mammals (Table 33.2):
1. Rabbit serum calcium concentrations vary widely and reflect dietary intake.
2. Fractional urinary excretion of calcium is approximately 44% in the rabbit, compared to <2% in
most mammals.
3. Passive absorption of dietary calcium from the gastrointestinal tract is very efficient and does not
require vitamin D if dietary levels of calcium are adequate.
4. Rabbits consuming a low-calcium, high-phosphorus diet (e.g., a diet of exclusively commercial cereal/
legume mixes) may develop mutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism characterized by increased serum
PTH, hyperphosphatemia, hypovitaminosis D, and decreased bone mass. When alveolar bone is lost, the
bone of the mandible may be most affected and acquired dental disease may be the end result.
Signalment
Obese multiparous females with large litters may be more at risk of developing hypocalcermia.
1.
 Clinical Signs
 Neurological signs which may include ataxia, posterior paresis/paralysis, tremors, convulsions, or coma.
4.
340 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Table 33.2
Reference ranges for normal total calcium levels
in rabbits, ferrets, and selected rodent species.
Total calcium
Total calcium
Species
(mmol/L)
(mg/dL)
Rat
1.9-3.2
7.6-12.8
Mouse
1.1-2.4
4.4-9.6
Gerbil
0.9-1.5
3.6-6.0
Hamster
2.1-3.1
8.4-12.4
Guinea pig
2.4-3.1
9.6-12.4
Chinchilla
1.4-3.0
5.6-12.0
Rabbit
3.0-4.2
12.0-16.8
Ferret
1.9-2.4
7.6-9.6
Generalized weakness, depression
c.
Anorexia.
D.
Collapse.
E.
 Clear acidic urine in the herbivorous species which tend to have calcium crystalluria and as such
cloudy urine in health.
IV.
Diagnosis
A.
 Based on review of reproductive status and diet along with clinical signs.
B.
Demonstration of a low serum calcium level, preferably the ionized fraction.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Pregnancy toxemia.
B.
Viral, protozoal, or bacterial meningitis/encephalitis (e.g., lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, toxo-
plasmosis, listeriosis, encephalitozoonosis, rabies).
C
Trauma (e.g., head or spinal).
D.
Central nervous system neoplasia.
E.
Heat stress.
Baylisascaris infection.
G.
Toxicity (e.g., heavy metals, botulism).
H.
Epilepsy.
1.
Trixacarus caviae infection (guinea pigs).
I.
Insulinoma (ferrets) (see Chapter 23).
Vl.
Treatment
A.
 For immediate treatment, 100 mg/kg calcium gluconate can be given im, ip, or sc. This may be diluted
with warmed isotonic fluids prior to administration.
B.
 If a dietary deficiency is suspected, the inclusion of calcium rich foods or oral supplementation should
be considered.
Vll.
 Prognosis
A.
 Fair to good if the diagnosis is reached promptly and appropriate treatment provided without delay.
VIll. Prevention
A.
 Ensure the diet of breeding females is sufficiently high in calcium. Supplementation should be considered
where dietary levels are considered inadequate.
Hypocalcemia in Other Species341
Hypocalcemia in Pet Birds
Pathogenesis
● Hypocalcemia occurs when there is a low serum ionized calcium concentration.
● Most cases in captive birds are acknowledged to be associated with nutritional secondary hyperpar-
athyroidism associated with feeding a diet with inadequate calcium and/or vitamin D content.
Classical Signs
● Seizures in adult birds.
● Juvenile osteodystrophy in growing birds.
Diagnosis
● Measurement of low serum ionized calcium concentration.
Treatment
● Calcium supplementation.
● Vitamin D supplementation and provision of UV-b radiation to stimulate endogenous Vitamin D
synthesis.
Pathogenesis
A. Control of calcium metabolism in birds:
1. Calcium is the most prevalent mineral in the adult bird constiruting over 30% of the total mineral
content. It exists as three fractions in avian serum: an ionized salt, calcium bound to proteins, and complex
calcium bound to a variety of anions (citrate, bicarbonate, and phosphate).
2. Calcium has two important physiological roles in the bird providing structural strength for the avian
skeleton and playing a vital role in many biochemical reactions within the body via its concentration as
the ionized salt in tissue fluids.
3. Ionized calcium, the physiologically active fraction of serum calcium, is essential for bone homeostasis,
muscle and nerve conduction, blood coagulation, and the control of hormone secretion, particularly vitamin D,
and PTH.
4. The control of calcium metabolism in birds has developed into a highly efficient homeostatic system
able to respond quickly to sudden demands for calcium. This is required for the production of hard-
shelled eggs and the rapid growth rate in young birds.
5. Calcium is controlled mainly by PTH, metabolites of vitamin D, and calcitonin that act on the target
organs (liver kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and bone) in direct response to changes in serum ionized calcium
concentrations.
6.
 Estrogen and prostaglandins also have a role in calcium regulation in the bird.
7. There are distinct differences between the mammalian and avian system. The most dramatic difference
between the two phylogenetic groups is in the rate of skeletal metabolism in birds at times of demand.
Domestic chickens will correct hypocalcemic challenges within minutes, whereas similarly challenged
mammals respond over a period of 24 h.
8.1
 Egg-laying hens require 10% of the total body calcium reserves for egg production in a 24h period.
The calcium required for eggshell production is obtained by increased intestinal absorption and from the
highly labile reservoir found in the medullary bone, normally visible radiographically in sexually mature
female birds (Figure 33.2).
9. In the normal bird, serum ionized calcium concentration is kept within a tight range by the controlling
influence of PTH.
10. The parathyroid glands, found at the thoracic inlet of the bird, normally respond to hypocalcemia by
increasing their rate of secretion of PTH from the chief cells.
342  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Figure 33.2A dorsal-ventral radiograph of an egg bound Blue-Fronted Amazon parrot. The film demonstrates the presence of
medullary bone in mature fema le birds. The characteristic fluffy appearance of medullary bone can be visualized in the medullary
cavity of the femur. The bird was diagnosed with egg peritonitis and a salpingohysterectomy was performed to remove the egg.
11. Hypocalcemia occurs when there is a failure of the parathyroid controlled homeostatic mechanisms
that normally protect against falling blood calcium concentrations.
B. Nutrition of cage and aviary birds:
1. Chronic malnutrition is a common clinical presentation in captive parrots characterized by multiple
nutrient deficiencies or excesses rather than problems with a single dietary component, usually associated with
feeding seed-based diets. The calcium content of seeds traditionally fed to psittacine birds is low (<0.1%):
a It has been shown that parrots fed diets consisting of <50% balanced formulated food risk defi-
ciency of several vitamins and minerals, particularly vitamin A, vitamin E, and calcium.
2.  Raptors fed an unsupplemented all meat diet are susceptible to disorders of calcium metabolism.
They should always receive whole prey in their diet.
3. The absorption and excretion of phosphate and calcium is interdependent. The dietary calcium to
phosphate ratio is therefore important and calcium to phosphate ratio of 2:1 (as in bone) is considered
optimal for birds:
a. Many seed diets contain suboptimal ratios often as high as 1:37. This is certainly considered to be
a factor in the development of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
4. The nutritional requirements of birds vary with their physiological state:
a. At maintenance only small amounts of dietary calcium are required to replace losses through
urine and feces. This is thought to be <0.2-0.5 % in adult nonlaying chickens.
h. The calcium requirement increases in the egg laying bird:
1) During the breeding season, many species in the wild supplement their diet with insects in
order to increase their dietary calcium and protein.
2) The increased calcium requirement depends on clutch size and frequency in addition to the
amount of calcium deposited in the shell.
 3) Small birds have a higher calcium requirement as they lay proportionately larger eggs than
bigger birds.
4) Precocial species have a higher calcium requirement than altricial birds due to producing
larger eggs.
 5) The increase in calcium requirement in laying pet birds is less than in production poultry. The
calcium requirement of a laying hen is between 2.25 % and 3.25% for continuous egg production,
but cockatiels will produce well-shelled eggs on 0.85% dry matter calcium.
6) The majority of the calcium for the shell is obtained from medullary bone formed in the weeks
before egg production so any increase in calcium requirement is spread over a period of time.
Hypocalcemia in Other Species343
Fgure 33.3 Juvenile osteodystrophy in a 12-week-old hand-reared grey parrot. There is severe bowing of the tibiotarsus.
Fgure 33.4 Section of cortical bone from a skeletally normal 12-week-old grey parrot (hematoxylin and eosin 200 x).
C. The calcium requirement is high in the growing chick:
1) During growth, the requirement for calcium is highest at the start of life decreasing as full adult
size is reached.
 2) The calcium requirement of chickens is significantly affected by the growth rate of the birds.
3) Psittacine chicks (altricial birds) experience rapid skeletal growth and would be expected to
have greater requirements than precocial birds due to greater growth rates and poor calcification
of the skeleton at hatching, but surprisingly, this increase is not excessive (1% dry matter of diet
appears sufficient).
4) The correct vitamin D, content, however, is essential and failure to provide sufficient would be
expected to cause osteodystrophy in young psittacine chicks (Figures 33.3-33.5).
5. Vitamin D:
a Vitamin D, was traditionally classed as a fat-soluble vitamin. It is now classified as a steroid hormone.
b. It is supplied via the diet or by endogenous synthesis from vitamin D; precursors requiring exposure
to UV-b light. There is some evidence that vitamin D, metabolism varies between avian species but
vitamin D, deficiency is a relatively common problem in companion birds:
344 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 33.5 Section of cortical bone from a grey parrot with juvenile osteodystrophy. There is a loss of normal osteoid and
replacement with fibrous tissue especially in the periosteal region (hematoxylin and eosin, 200x).
Figure 33.6Traditional bird seed mix. Although this type of seed mix is imbalanced and encourages selective feeding, it is
 still the most common diet used by aviculturists for captive psittacine birds.
1) Poultry do not have a dietary requirement for vitamin D, if they receive adequate radiation in
the 285-315 nm spectra.
2) In poultry, endogenous vitamin D, synthesis occurs on the featherless areas of the legs and face.
 3) The ultraviolet light required for endogenous vitamin D, synthesis can either be supplied naturally
from full spectrum sunlight or using artificial lamps manufactured to provide UV-b radiation. Exposure
to direct unfiltered sunlight is the optimal way to provide UV-b light.
4) As most domestic poultry and captive parrots are kept indoors, they are prone to vitamin D
deficiencies unless fed a diet with adequate vitamin D, or supplied artificial UV-b light.
 5) UV-b lamp technology is constantly changing but a useful source of up-to-date information is
available via http://www.uvguide.co.uk.
6. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is a sequel to a nutritional imbalance characterized by an
increase in PTH secretion in response to a disturbance in mineral homeostasis. It is the most common
cause of hypocalcemia in pet birds:
a. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in captive cage and aviary birds and poultry has
traditionally been attributed to feeding cereal/seed-based diets with a low vitamin D, and calcium
content (Figure 33.6).
Hypocaicemia in Other Species345
alaan! yo auapa saeu ydeoen aui oned ai ande pi-uo-g ue jo ydeisel jenua-lesiop  re any
osteodystrophy with bowing in both tibiotarsi. There is also obvious distortion in both wings. The radiographs were taken as
part of a postpurchase examination and the bird was otherwise healthy.
b. These diets are also typically high in phosphate, which forms phytate complexes with the calcium
 reducing bioavailabilty of the mineral.
C. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in carnivore avian species, including raptors, is associated
with feeding unsupplemented all meat diets with an inappropriate calcium:phosphate ratio.
during bone growth or remodeling of the adult skeleton:
a. Metabolic bone disease is usually due to primary nutritional deficiencies.
b. Osteodystrophy is defined as the failure of normal bone development.
C. Clinically, osteodystrophy presents as distortion of bone, with associated increased susceptibility
to pathological fractures and abnormalities of both gait and posture.
d. Osteodystrophy has been demonstrated in many species of birds radiographically (Figures 33.7
and 33.8):
osteodystrophy.
2) It has been postulated that the hand rearing of young psittacine birds may predispose to osteodys
trophy due to increased activity and lack of sibling support.
Il. Signalment
d r  pren sis  m d a a sd ar  
birds fed similar diets.
B. Juvenile grey parrots more frequently present with juvenile osteodystrophy compared with other psittacine
birds fed similar diets (Figure 33.9).
C. Goshawks are more susceptible to hypocalcemic seizures compared with other raptor species.
D. All raptor chicks fed unsupplemented all meat diets are susceptible to osteodystrophy.
346Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
skeletal growth in the species.
Figure 33.9  A 6-week-old captive bred hand-reared grey parrot with severe juvenile osteodystrophy. There is obvious bilateral
bowing of the tibiotarsus. Radiography revealed evidence of osteodystrophy in wings, legs, and spine with numerous pathological
leoppe ou ym ap leaia e uo paieai puey uag pey pig aul 'spunoi aueuny uo paziueuna sem pg aul 'sainey
ca lcium or vitamin D, supplementation.
Hypocaicemia in Other Species347
Figure 33.10Radiograph of a Harris Hawk chick fed an unsupplemented all meat diet. There is a pathological fracture of the
left tibiotarsus. The bird was euthanized due to the severity of the condition.
E. Poultry kept indoors and fed diets containing inadequate calcium and/or vitamin D are susceptible to
osteodystrophy during growth or cage layer paralysis as adults (neurological symptoms associated with low
blood ionized calcium concentrations).
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Signs in adult birds are similar to those for acute hypocalcemia in other species resulting from enhanced
neuromuscular irritability.
B. Range from slight ataxia and head twitching to full seizures.
C. The wings are usually extended with severe loss of coordination and the birds may exhibit nystagmus
with pronounced facial twitching.
D. The birds show irritable and abnormal behavior.
E. Hypocalcemic females, paricularly poultry species, can present with egg binding although this is more
usually due to oversized, overproduced, or malpositioned eggs rather than an absolute calcium deficiency.
 F. Birds can produce poor quality egg shells or deformed eggs when fed a diet containing low calcium or
vitamin D,:
G. Hypocalcemia in captive hand-reared parrot and raptor chicks presents as a metabolic bone disease
(specifically juvenile osteodystrophy) with deformity of the long bones and pathological fractures identified
radiographically (Figure 33.10).
H. Osteodystrophy can occur in growing poultry denied access to adequate calcium, vitamin D, or UV-b
radiation.
IV. Diagnosis
A. The measurement of serum ionized calcium, rather than serum total calcium, provides a more precise
estimate of an individual's calcium status especially in the diseased avian patient (Table 33.3). A laboratory
reference range for ionized calcium in healthy grey parrots was found to be 0.96-1.22 mmol/L (3.85-
Ss   r n s s p ( a's
1. The majority of veterinary pathology laboratories only report a total calcium value, which reflects the
 total combined levels of ionized calcium, protein-bound calcium, and complexed calcium.
348  Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Table 33.3  Normal ranges for calcium metabolism in birds.
Parameter
Reference range
lonized calcium (mmol/L)
0.96-1.22
Total calcium (mmol/L)
2.00-3.00
Inorganic phosphate (mmol/L)
1.00-3.40
25-hydroxycholecalciferol (nmol/L)
7.20-3 80.00
Parathyroid hormone (pg/mL)
<7.00*
1 ,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (nmol/L)
<10.00*
Magnesium (mmol/L)
0.88-1.28
'spuiq auipenisd loy aauel asuaajau paysuqnd ou se Auunod jodt 
2. This can lead to misinterpretation of calcium results in birds, as any change in protein-bound calcium
3. In laying female birds, serum albumin levels may rise by up to 100% to provide albumin for yolk and
albumen production. A blood sample analyzed at this time shows inflated total calcium concentrations
due to an increased protein-bound calcium fraction while the ionized calcium level is not affected.
4. The binding reaction between the calcium ion and albumin is strongly pH dependent so acid base
imbalances will also affect ionized calcium levels.
5. Blood samples for ionized calcium assays should be analyzed as soon as possible after venipuncture
as changes in the pH of the sample will affect the accuracy of the ionized calcium levels.
6. It is important to chill the samples immediately to reduce glycolysis by the red blood cells which
continue to produce lactic acid as a by-product reducing the pH of the sample.
7. The sample will lose carbon dioxide if it is exposed to room air, increasing the pH of the sample and
subsequently reducing the ionized calcium measured.
i e Ais on p ua nou s  on d rg sis ads p sond r  '
calcium assays.
9.  Heparin binds calcium. This is a potential problem with analyzing bird samples, as heparin is the
normal anticoagulant used. Each unit of heparin has been demonstrated to bind 0.oo1 mmol/L of ionized
calcium. It is therefore important to achieve the correct ratio of heparin anticoagulant to blood volume
by filling the blood sample tubes with the required amount.
10. The thick-billed parrot has lower ionized calcium concentrations than those reported for other birds
(0.82-1.13 mmol/L [3.29-4.53 mg/dL])
B. In normocalcemic birds the concentration of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol is not expected to fall below
26 nmol/L (10.4 ng/mL) and would normally be expected to be above 50 nmol/L (20.0 ng/mL):
1. The concentration of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol correlates well with dietary vitamin D, intake or
exposure to UV-b light.
2.  The measurement of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol is considered the best assessment of vitamin D, status
in an individual as it has a longer half-life than other vitamin D, metabolites.
3. Sample handling for vitamin D, assays is not critical and assays are available for both plasma and
serum samples. There is no requirement for freezing samples prior to analysis, as the vitamin is stable at
foom temperature. Repeated freeze-thaw cycles of the sample should be avoided, however as the hormone
will denature.
 4. Vitamin D, results need to be interpreted in context of the diet and the levels of UV-b light received
by the individual.
C. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism can be diagnosed by direct measurement of PTH:
1. Most human assays concentrate on the mid and terminal segments of the PTH molecule due to the
very short half-life of the biologically active 1-34N sections
Hypocaicemia in Other Species 349
Fgure 33.11 Parathyroid gland from a juvenile peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) with nutritional secondary hyperparathy-
roidism. The bird presented with bilateral pathological fractures of the tibiotarsi. The gland demonstrates hypertrophy of the chief
Xz asui saewi uie uoeusew xoz uisoa pue uxaeway pue aui nounoy uoelonen jo auaia ym sii
 magnification).
1.4
1/101
1.2
(mm
r
0.8
0.6
0.4
uo
0.2
Day 1
Day 3
Day 5
Day 7
Day 9
Time after treatment commenced
Fgure 33.12
2. Unfortunately correlation in structure between the poultry and mammalian PTH molecule is very
poor in the middle and terminal sections so PTH assays have traditionally been difficult in birds.
 3. The avian and mammalian PTH molecule has greatest homology in the biologically active 1-34 N
regions. Only assays measuring the 1-34 N section are relevant in birds, and these are increasingly
commercially available
4. PTH is extremely labile and any assay requires exacting sample handling to produce good results.
5. The hormone is labile at >20°C (68 *F) so it should be analyzed immediately following venipuncture or
the sample rapidly frozen to -70°C (-94 *F). Repeated freeze-thaw cycles will also denature the hormone.
6. Proteolytic enzymes present in serum and plasma affect PTH and it is apparently more stable if blood
is taken into sample tubes containing EDTA or protease inhibitors such as aprotinin.
7. Histological examination of the parathyroid gland of birds suffering from nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism show hypertrophic chief cells and considerable vacuolation (Figure 33.11).
 Differential Diagnoses
Neurological signs may be attributable to:
1. Hepatic encephalopathy.
2. Hypoglycemia.
350  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
High Potency Courseim diet).
3. Toxicity (e.g., heavy metals, pesticides, plants, drugs).
4.
 Infectious central nervous system disease (bacterial, fungal, parasitic, viral).
5.
Epilepsy.
6.
Trauma.
B
Fractures/bone deformities in young birds may be traumatic in origin.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Calcium gluconate (10%) 10-50mg/kg intramuscularly (IM) q 12 h.
B.
Vitamin D, 3300 IU/kg IM.
c.
Provision of UV-b radiation.
D.
E.
Consider surgery to repair pathological fractures or corrective surgery in severe cases of juvenile
osteodystrophy.
F.
Correct husbandry by providing a balanced diet containing adequate vitamin D and calcium. Ensure
 birds receive UV-b radiation either through natural sunlight or artificial lamps.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Excellent in adults after acute signs subside and husbandry has been corrected.
B.
Good in chicks suffering from juvenile osteodystrophy although chronic orthopedic disease may be
a problem.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Provide diet with adequate vitamin D, and calcium content:
1. Formulated diets are recognized to prevent nutritional problems in cage and aviary birds.
with problems as intake cannot be effectively monitored. Additionally, the provision of a formulated
diet has been dermonstrated to be more successful in preventing nutritional problems in birds as it
eliminates selective feeding (Figure 33.13).
 3. Raptors should be fed whole adult prey iterms at least once per week to prevent disorders of calcium
metabolism.
 4. Provision of soluble limestone grit is a useful source of calcium for poultry.
Consider UV-b provision:
1. Poultry only require 30 min UV-b radiation per 24h for adequate vitamin D synthesis.
Hypocaicemia in Other Species  351
  q     e          
birds kept indoors.
. Prevent excessive movement in young hand-reared chicks by creating nests or rearing birds in small groups.
Hypocalcemia in Pet Reptiles
Pathogenesis
● Usually secondary to nutritional or renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Classical Signs
● Muscle tremors or fasciculations.
Diagnosis
● Based on history, signalment, clinical signs, and serum ionized calcium levels.
Treatment
 Calcium administration and husbandry correction.
Pathogenesis
A
 Hypocalcemia in reptiles is most commonly seen in animals with nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
(see Chapter 37).
 B. Vitamin D, deficiency and improper dietary calcium:phosphorus ratio are implicated (e.g., feeding a
carnivore an exclusively red meat diet).
C.
 Hypocalcemia may also occur as a consequence of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
11.
 Signalment
A.
Il1. Clinical Signs
A. Muscle tremors and fasciculations; tetany. The initial signs may be unilateral or bilateral twitching of the
digits which progresses to generalized tetanic spasms.
B.
Flaccid paralysis.
C.
 Death can occur due to heart failure.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
History.
B.
 Clinical examination.
 Radiography to identify hypomineralized bone if prolonged hypocalcemia is suspected.
D.Serum calcium levels; as total blood calcium levels may be normal or subnormal, it is preferable to measure
ionized calcium.
E.
. Serum phosphorus levels are usually elevated.
 Differential Diagnoses
4.
Septicemia/toxemia.
B.
 Bacterial, fungal, viral, or parasitic meningitis/encephalitis
Trauma.
D.
Toxicity.
E.
Hepatic or renal disease.
Hypoglycemia.
352 Clinica Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Central nervous system neoplasia.
H。
 Other nutritional deficiencies (e.g., thiamine, biotin, vitamin E/selenium).
VI.
Treatment
A.
Administration of parenteral calcium (10-200 mg/kg calcium gluconate subcutaneously, intramuscu-
larly, intracelomically or intravenously) q 6-8 h as required for immediate therapy of reptiles with neuro-
logical signs.
B.
Once stabilized, parenteral calcium may be discontinued and oral calcium glubionate/borogluconate
(10 mg/kg q 12-24 h) or calcium carbonate powder used as a supplement while efforts are made to correct
any underlying causes.
Vll.  Prognosis
A. Fair if identified in the early stages, and rapid treatment/husbandry correction is possible.
 B. Poor if hypocalcemia is prolonged and associated with severe clinical signs.
Vll1. Prevention
A.
 Providing the appropriate husbandry (including nutrition and environmental conditions) for the species
concerned is of paramount importance
References and Further Readings
Aguilera-Tejero E, Estepa JC, Lopez I, et al. Polycystic kidneys as a cause of secondary hypoparathyroidism in a horse. Equine
Veter inary Journa! 2000;32(2):167-169.
Anillon A, Scott ML, Krook L, et al. Metabolic response of laying hens to different dietary levels of calcium, phosphorus and
vitamin D. The Cornell Veterinarian 1977;167:413-444.
Arnold SA, Kram MA, Hntz HF,et al. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in the parakeet. The Cornell Veterinarian
1973;64(1):37-46.
Baker DH, Biehl RR, Emmert JL. Vitarmin D, requirerment of young chicks receiving diets varying in calcium and available
phosphorus. British Pouttry Science 1998;39(3):413-417.
Bannister DW, Candlish JK. The collagenolytic activity of avian medullary bone: Effect of laying status and parathyroid
extract. British Pouttry Science 1973;14:121-125.
Bar A, Rosenberg J, Perlman R, et al. Field rickets in turkeys; relationship to vitarmin D. Poutry Science 1987;66:68-72.
Bar A, Sharvit M, Noff D, et al. Absorption and excretion of cholecalciferol and of 25 hydroxycholecalciferol and metabolites
in birds. J Nutr 1980;110(10):1930-1934.
Bar A, Vax E, Striem S. Relationship among age, eggshell thickness and vitamin D metabolism and its expression in the laying
hen. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology. Part A, Molecular  Integrative Physiology 1999;123(2):147-154.
Barber PJ, Elliot J, Torrance AG. Measurement of feline intact parathyroid hormone: Assay validation and sample handling
studies. The Journal of Small Animat Practice 1993;34:614-619.
Barlet JP. Plasma calcium, inorganic phosphorus and magnesiurn levels in pregnant and lactating rabbits. Reprod Nut Deu
1980;20:647-651.
2006,pp. 239-250.
Bentley PJ, ed. Calcium metabolism. In: Commparative Vertebrate Endocrinology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998, pp. 269-301.
Blind E, Gagel RF. Assay rmethods: Parathyroid horrmone, parathyroid hormone-related protein and calcitonin. In: Favus MJ,
ed. Prier on the Metabotic Bone Disease and Disorders of Bone Metabolism, Sth edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and
Wilkins, 1999, pp. 119-128.
Blunt JW, Deluca HF, Schnoes HK. 25 hydroxycholecalciferol: A biologically active metabolite of vitamin D, Biochermistry
1968;7:3317-3322.
Brue RN.Nutrition. In: Ritchie RW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, eds. Avian Medicine: Principats and Applications. Lake Worth,
Florida: Wingers Publishing, 1994, pp. 63-95.
Burgos-Trinidad M, Brown AJ, DeLuca HF. A rapid assay for 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D hydroxylase.
Anatytical Biochemistry 1990;190(1): 102-107.
Bush BM. In: Interpretation of Laboratory Results for Small Anumal Clinicians. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific, 1991, pp. 367-368.
Candlish JK, Taylor TG. The response time to the parathyroid horrmone in the laying fowl. J Endocrino! 1970;48:143-144.
Carpenter JW. Exotic Animat Formmulary, 3rd edn. St Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
Carrier D, Auriemma J. A developmental constraint in fledging time in birds. Biologicat Journat of the Linnean Society
1992;47:61-77.
Hypocaicemia in Other Species 353
Carrier D, Leon LR. Skeletal growth and function in the Californian Gull (Larus californicus)-J Zool Soc Lond
1990;222:375-389.
Castillo L, Tanaka Y, Wineland MJ,et al. Production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 and formation of medullary bone in the
Classen HL. Management factors in leg disorders. In: Whitehead CC, ed. Bone Biology and Sketetat Disorders in Pouttry.
Poutry Science Symposiurm Nurmber Twenty-three.Oxford: Carfax Publishing Company, 1992, pp. 201-203.
Couetil LL, Sojka JE, Nachreiner RF. Primary hypoparathyroidism in a horse.Journat of Veterinary Internat Medicine
1998;12:4549.
Dacke CG. Calcium homeostasis. In: Whittow GC, ed. Sturkie's Avican Physiology, Sth edn. London: Academic Press, 2000,
pp. 472-485.
Deftos LJ, Roos BA, Oates EL. Calcitonin. In: Favus MJ, ed. Prirmer on the Metabolic Bone Disease and Disorders of Bone
Metabolism, Sth edn. Philadelphia: Lippencott, Williams and Wilkins, 1999, pp. 99-104.
Earle KE, Clarke NR. The nutrition of the budgerigar (Melopsittacus undutatus). J Nutr 1991;121:186-192.
Eckermann-Ross C. Hormonal regulation and calcium rmetabolisrm in the rabbit. The Veterinary Clinics of North Armerica.
Exotic Animat Practice 2008;11:139-152.
Edwards HM Jr. Nutritional factors and leg disorders. In: Whitehead CC, ed. Bone Biology and Sketetat Disorders in Pouttry
Poutry Science Symposiurm Nurmber Twenty-three. Carfax Publishing Company, Oxford, 1992, pp. 167-195.
Edwards HM Jr. Nutrition and skeletal problems in poultry. Poutry Science 2000;79(7):1018-1023.
Edwards HM Jr. Effects of UVB irradiation of very young chickens on growth and bone development. Br J Nutt
2003;90(1):151-160.
cholecalciferol, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, protein and synthetic zeolite. Pouttry Science 1992;71{12):2041-2055.
Etches RJ. Calciurm logistics in the laying hen. J Nutr 1987;117:619-628.
Fowler ME. Metabolic bone disease. In: Fowler ME, ed. Zoo and Witd Animat Medicine, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
1986, pp. 63-82.
Freedman MT, Bush M, Novak GR. Nutritional and metabolic bone disease in a zoological collection: A review of radiographic
findings. Sketetat Radiology 1976;1:87-96.
cytoprotective effects. J Chem Ecol 1999;25(4):897-922.
1991;260(23):E471-E476.
Graveland J. Avian eggshel formation in calciurm rich and calcium poor habitats—Importance of snail shells and anthropogenic
calcium sources. Canadian Journal of Zoofogy 1996;74:1035-1044.
Graveland J, Van Gijzen T. Arthropods and seeds are not sufficient as calciurm sources for shell forrmation and skeletal growth
in passerines. Ardea 1994;82:299-314.
Harcourt-Brown F. Textbook of rabbit medicine. Edinburgh: Butterworth Heinemann, 2002.
Harcourt-Brown NH. Incidence of juvenile osteodystrophy in hand reared parrots (Psittacus e psittacus). Vet Rec
2003;152:438-439.
Harcourt-Brown NH. Development of the skeleton and feathers of dusky parrots {Pionus fuscus) in relationship to their
behaviour. Vet Rec 2004;154:42-48.
Hess L, Mauldin G, Rosenthal K. Estimated nutrient content of diets comrmonly fed to pet birds. Vet Rec 2002;1 50:399-403.
Hochleithner M. Convulsions in African Grey parrots in connection with hypocalcaermia: Five selected cases. Proceedings 2nd
European Symposium Avian Medicine and Surgery,1989,pp. 44-52.
Hochleithner M, Hochleithner C, Harrison GL. Evidence of hypoparathyroidism in hypocalcaermic African Grey Parrots. The
Avian Exainer, special supplement spring. HBD International Ltd., Brentwood, 1997.
Schaefer K, Herrath DV, eds. Vitamin D, Chemicat, Biochemical and Clinicat Endocrinology of Calcium Metabolism. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter, 1982, pp. 1151-1156.
Hollamby S. Rodents: Neurological and musculoskeletal disorders. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rodents
and Ferrets. Gloucester: British Small Anirmal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 161-168.
Hollis BW, Clemens TL, Adams JS. Vitamin D, metabolites. In: Flavus MJ, ed. Prirmer on the Metabofic Bone Diseases and
Disorders of Minerat Metabolism, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 1999, pp. 124-128.
Howard LL, Kass PH, Lamberski N, et al. Serum concentrations of ionized calcium, vitarmin D, and parathyroid hormone in
captive thick billed parrots (Rbynchopsitta pachyrbyncha). Journal of Zao and Widlife Medicine 2004;35(2):147-153.
Hudson NP, Church DB, Trevena J, et al. Primary hypoparathyroidism in two horses. Australian Veterinary Journat
1999;77:504-508.
Hurwitz S. Calcium homeostasis in birds. Vitamins αand Hormones 1989;45:173-221.
and Biochemical Implications. New York: Academic Press, 1991, pp. 229-235.
Ibanez R. Bone mineral density measurement techniques. Anates det Sistema Sanitario de Navarra 2003;26:19-27.
354 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
eds. Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 2002;11{2):84-94.
eds. Equine Sports Medicine and Surgery, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 899-918.
Keeble E. Neurology. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 273-288.
Kenny AD. Parathyroid and ultimobranchial glands. In: Sturkie PD, ed. Avian Physiology, 4th edn. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1986, pp. 466-478.
Kirk wood JE, Duignan PJ, Kemper NF, et al. The growth rate of the tarsormetatarsus of birds. J Zool Soc Lond 1989;217:
403-416.
Klasing KC. Minerals. In: Klasing KC, ed. Comparative Avian Nutrition. New York: CAB International, 1998, pp. 290-295.
of prey and pigeons. Praceedings of the Association of Avian Veterinarians. Lake Worth, USA, 1988, pp. 37-59.
2001;15:257-275.
Koutsos EA, Tell LA, Woods LW,et al. Adult cockatiels (Nymphicus boftandicus) at maintenance are more sensitive to diets
containing excess vitamin A than to vitamin A-deficient diets. J Nutr 2003;113(6):1898-1902.
Kratser FH, Vohra P. Chelates in anirmat nutrition. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1986.
Lewis PD, Perry GC, Morris TR. Utraviolet radiation and laying pullets. British Poutry Science 2000;41(2):131-135.
of biological activity. J Biol Cherm 1991;266:3709-3714.
Loveridge N, Thomson BM, Farquharson C. Bone growth and turnover. In: Whitehead CC, ed. Bone Biology and Sketetat
Disorders in Poutry. Poutry Science Syposiurm Nurmber Twenty-three.Oxford: Carfax Publishing Company, 1992,pp. 3-11.
Lumeij JT. Relationship of plasma calcium to total protein and alburnin in grey (Psittacus erithacus) and Amazon (Amazona
spp-) parrots. Avian Pathology 1990;19:661-667.
Lumeij JT, Remple JD, Riddle KE. Relationship of plasma total protein and albumin to total calciurn in peregrine falcons
(Fatco peregrinus). Avian Pathology 1993;22:183-188.
MacWhirter P. Malnutrition. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, eds. Avian Medicine: Principles and Application.
Lake Worth, Florida: Wingers Publishing, 1994, pp. 842-861.
Mattila P, Lehikoinen K, Kiskinen T, et al. Cholecalciferol and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol content of chicken egg yolk as
affected by the cholecalciferol content of feed. Journat of Agricutturat and Food Chemmistry 1999;47(10):4089-4092.
McDonald LJ. Hypocalcemic seizures in an African Grey parrot. Can Vet J 1988;29:928-930.
Mehotra M, Gupta SK, Kumar K, et al. Calcium deficiency-induced secondary hyperparathyroidism and osteopenia are rapidly
reversible with calcium supplermentation in growing rabbit pups. Br J Nutr 2006;95:582-590.
Meredith A. General biology and husbandry. In: Meredith A, Flecknell P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery.
 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2006, pp. 1-17.
Meredith A, Johnson-Delaney C, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Exotic Pets, Sth edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, 2010.
Morrissey RL, Cohn RM, Empson RN Jr, et al. Relative toxicity and metabolic effects of cholecalciferol and 25 hydroxycholecal-
ciferol in chicks. J Nutr 1977;107(6);1027-1034.
National Research Council Nutrient Requirements of Poultry. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1994.
Norman AW. The avian as an animal model for the study of the vitamin D endocrine system. The Journal of Experirmentat
Zoology 1990;4(Suppl):37-45.
effects of dietary calcium intake. Bone 2001;29(1):62-69.
Rabbits and Rodents—Clinicat Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 183-193.
chromatography, and some of its properties. Generat and Comparative Endocrinotogy 1984;53(2):224-231.
Randell MG. Nutritionally induced hypocalcermic tetany in an Amazon parrot. Journat of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 1981;179(111):1277-1278.
chicks. Journat of Zoology 1986;210:23-43.
Robben JH, Lumeij JT. A comparison of parrot food commercially available in the Netherlands. Tijdschrift Vaor
Diergeneeskunde 1989;114(1):19-25.
Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW. Egg binding in caged and aviary birds. Modern Veterinary Practice 1984;65(6):437-440.
Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, Lane RA. The hypocalcaemic syndrome in African Greys: An updated clinical viewpoint.
Proceedings Association of Avian Veterinarians, 1985, pp. 129-132.
Roudybush TE. Nutrition. In: Rosskopf W, Worpel R, eds. Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins, 1996, pp. 218-234.
Hypocaicemia in Other Species 355
Roudybush TE.Psittacine nutrition. The Veterinary Clinics of North America.Exotic Animat Practice 1999;2(1):111-125.
Schoemaker NJ, Lumeij JT, Dorrestein GM, et al. Nutrition-related problems in pet birds. Tijdschrift Voor Diergeneeskunde
1999;124(2):39-43.
Stanford MD. The rmeasurement of ionised calciurm in grey parrots. In: Proceedings of the British Veterinary Zoologicat Society
Zoological Saciety Spring meeting Chester, 11-12 May, 2002a, pp. 37.
Stanford, M.D. Deterrmination of 25-hydroxyvitamin D in seed fed grey parrots. Proceedings of Joint Nutritionat Symposium,
Anttwerp, Belgiu, 21-25 August, 2002b pp. 142-141.
Stanford MD. Cage and aviary birds. In: Meredith A, Redrobe S,eds. BSAVA Manuat of Exotic Pets. Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, 2002c, p. 161.
Stanford MD. Measurement of ionised calcium in grey parrots (Psttacus e. erithacus): The effect of diet. Proceedings of the
European Association of Avian Veterinarians 7 European meeting,Tenerife,Spain,April 22-26,2003a,pp.269-275.
Stanford MD. Measurement of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol in captive grey parrots (Psittacus e erithacus). Vet Rec
2003b;153:58-59.
Stanford MD.Clinical pathology of hypocalcaemia in grey parrots. Proceedings of the Internationat Conference on Exotics
200s, Fort Lauderdate, Florida, US. 2005a, 7.2 Supplement, pp. 28-34.
Stanford MD. Nutrition and nutritional disease. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Psittacine Birds,
2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2005b, pp. 136-155.
Stark JM,Ricklefs RE. The development of the skeleton. In: Stark JM, Ricklefs RE, eds.Avian Growth and Devetopment
Evolution within the Altriciat-Precociat Spectrum. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998, pp. 64-74.
Taylor TG, Dacke CG. Calciurm metabolism and its regulation. In: Freeman BM, ed. Physiotogy and Biochermistry of the
Domestic Fowt, Vol. 5. London: Academic Press, 1984, pp. 125-170.
Thorp BH. Abnormalities in the growth of leg bones. In: Whitehead CC, ed. Bone Biology and Sketetat Disorders in Poutry.
Poutry Science SymposiumNumber Twenty-three.Oxford: CarfaxPublishing Company,1992,pp.147-167.
Tian XQ, Chen TC, Lu Z, et al. Characterization of the translocation process of vitamin D3 from the skin into the circulation.
Endocrinology 1994a;135(2):655-661.
Toribio RE.Calcium disorders. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds.Equine Internat Medicine, 2nd edn. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, 2004, pp. 1295-1327.
Ullrey DE, Allen ME, Baer DJ. Forrmulated diets versus seed mixtures for psittacines. J Nutr 1991;121{11 Suppl):S193-S205.
Ullrey DE, Bermard JB. Vitamin D Metabolism, sources, unique problems in zoo animals, meeting needs. In: Fowler ME, Miller
RE, eds. Zoo and Witd Anirmat Medicine Current Therapy, 4th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999, pp. 63-78.
Williams TD, Reed WL, Walzem RL. Egg size variation: Mechanisms and hormonal control. In:. Dawson A, Chaturvedi
CM, eds. Avian Endocrinology. Pangbourne: Alpha Science International Ltd., 2001, pp. 205-213.
Wilson S, Duff SR. Effects of vitamin or rmineral deficiency on the rmorphology of medullary bone in laying hens. Research in
Veterinary Science 1991;50(2):216-221.
Yarger JG, Saunders CA, McNaughton JL, et al. Comparison of dietary 25-hydroxycholcalciferol and cholecalciferol in broilet
chickens. Pouttry Science 1995;74(7): 1159-1167.
CHAPTER 34
Hypercalcemia in Dogs
Patricia A. Schenck and Dennis Chew
Pathogenesis
● Clinical signs occur when serum ionized calcium (iCa) rises above a critical level.
● Causes of hypercalcemia can be parathyroid independent or parathyroid dependent (primary
hyperparathyroidism).
● The most common cause of hypercalcemia in dogs is malignancy.
Classical Signs
● The most common clinical signs associated with hypercalcermia include polyuria, polydipsia,
anorexia, lethargy, and weakness.
● If iCa concentration is >1.75 mmol/L (7.0mg/dL), clinical signs are usually present.
Diagnosis
● Hypercalcemia is defined as a total calcium (tCa} concentration >12.0 mg/dL (3.0 mmol/L) or iCa
concentration > 6.0 mg/dL (1.50 mmol/L).
● Hypercalcemia is usually overestimated when serum tCa concentration is used.
● Parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration should be measured in conjunction with iCa measure-
 ment to determine whether PTH production is appropriate.
● Measurement of PTH-related protein (PTHrP) concentration may be helpful in cases of suspected
 malignancy.
● Measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be helpful to identify cases of vitamin D toxicity.
Treatment
● Specific therapy depends on the cause of hypercalcemia.
● If serum tCa is >16 mg/dL (4 mmol/L), aggressive therapy is usually warranted.
● General therapy includes the administration of fluids, diuretics, glucocorticoids, and/or bisphosphonates.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
356
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 357
Prognosis
● Prognosis is dependent on the underlying cause of hypercalcemia.
● Prognosis is good for most cases of primary hyperparathyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism, and
hypervitaminosis D if treatment is adequate.
1.
Pathogenesis
A. Serum tCa is composed of protein-bound calcium (pCa; 34%), complexed calcium (cCa; 10%), and iCa
(56%). The iCa fraction is the biologically active fraction.
B. Development of hypercalcemia:
1. Normal hormonal action:
a. PTH secretion from the parathyroid glands is responsible for the minute-to-minute control of
circulating calcium concentration through rapid effects on bone mobilization; it works to increase
serum calcium concentration. In the kidney, PTH increases calcium reabsorption and promotes phos-
phorus excretion.
b. Calcitriol, that is, active vitamin D secretion from normal kidneys manages the day-to-day control
of calcium, largely through effects on intestinal calcium absorption; it works to increase serum cal-
cium concentration.
C. Calcitonin secreted from the thyroidal parafollicular cells serves to minimize postprandial hyper-
calcemia; its effect on overall calcium metabolism is minor.
2. Hypercalcemia develops primarily when there is an increase in bone mobilization of calcium or a
decrease in urinary calcium loss:
a. An increase in serum iCa concentration decreases PTH secretion, increases intracellular degradation
of PTH by chief cells, and decreases PTH synthesis from normal parathyroid glands.
 h. Calcitonin secretion is stimulated in an attempt to minimize the magnitude of hypercalcemia.
C. Calcitriol synthesis is decreased both through direct inhibition by iCa and by decreased stimulation
because of decreased PTH concentration.
d. The outcome of the above response is to increase urinary calcium excretion and to decrease the degree
 of bone mobilization of calcium as countervailing mechanisms to limit the degree of hypercalcemia.
3. In primary hyperparathyroidism, the abnormal parathyroid gland(s) (parathyroid adenoma,
carcinoma, or hyperplasia) continues to secrete PTH even though hypercalcemia is present and is termed
a "parathyroid-dependent" hypercalcemia. There is an increased serum iCa concentration with an
inappropriately high PTH secretion.
4. In “parathyroid-independent” causes of hypercalcemia, hypercalcemia occurs due to many processes
including elaboration of other secretory factors (such as PTHrP, interleukins, or tumor necrosis factor)
or as a result of excessive vitamin D ingestion:
a. In these instances, the parathyroid gland responds in a normal fashion to hypercalcemia, and PTH
secretion is very low.
b. Thus, in parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia, serum iCa concentration is elevated and PTH
 shows appropriate suppression (below normal or in the lower third of the reference range).
C. Causes of hypercalcemia are listed in Table 34.1.
D. Transient hypercalcemia:
1. Dehydration is occasionally associated with serum tCa concentrations of 12.0-13.5mg/dL
(3.0-3.4 mmol/L).
 2. Increased serum albumin or total protein can result in an increased serum tCa concentration as more
calcium binds to protein.
E.
Hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Approximately half the cases have an elevation of serum tCa, but only about 25% have a mild
elevation of serum iCa.
2. The pathogenesis of hypercalcemia in hypoadrenocorticism is not fully understood
358 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
Table 34.1[
 Differential diagnosis for hypercalcemia.
Nonpathologic causes
Transient causes
Nonfasting (minimal increase)
Hemoconcentration
 Physiologic growth of the young
Hyperproteinemia
Lab error 
Severe environmental hypothermia (rare)
Spurious
Hyperlipidemia
Pathologic or consequential—-persistent causes
Parathyroid dependent: primary hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid independent:
 Malignancy associated (most common cause of hypercalcemia in dogs)
Lymphoma (common)
Anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma (common)
Multiple myeloma
Metastatic bone tumors (rare)
Miscellaneous tumors (lymphocytic leukemia, mammary carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, testicular interstitial cell tumor, lung carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, thyroid 
adenocarcinoma, clitoral adenocarcinoma, and osteosarcoma)
Idiopathic hypercalcemia (most common association in cats; very uncommon in dogs)
Hypoa drenocorticism
Renal failure
Hypervitaminosis D
latrogenic
House plants (calcitriol glycosides; Cestrum diurnum or day-blooming jessamine)
Rodenticide (cholecalciferol)
 Antipsoriasis creams (calcipotriol or calcipotriene containing)
Granulomatous disease
Blastomycosis, schistosomiasis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, panniculitis, injection granuloma, and
serile dermatitis
 Skeletal lesions (nonmalignant; uncommon)
 Osteomyelitis (bacterial or mycotic)
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
 Craniomandibular osteopathy
Disuse osteoporosis (immobilization)
 Ingestion of excessive calcium-containing intestinal phosphate binders
 Ingestion of excessive calcium supplementation (calcium carbonate)
 Raisin/grape toxicity
 DMsO administration to treat calcinosis cutis
Hypervitaminosis A
Aluminum exposure (intestinal phosphate binders)
Acromegaly
Modified from Schenck PA, Chew Dl. Hypercalcenmia: A quick reference. Vet Cin North Am Smalfl Anim Pract 2008;38:449-453.
3. Some of the increase in tCa can be accounted for by hemoconcentration.
E.
 In azotemic chronic kidney disease (CKD), serum tCa concentration may be elevated, but serum iCa is
uncommonly so:
1. In most cases, the increase in serum tCa is due to an increase in the cCa fraction.
2. Iatrogenic factors may play a role:
b. The use of calcium carbonate-containing intestinal phosphate binders may cause hypercalcemia.
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 359
3. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism:
a. The iCa fraction increases due to a change in the set point for iCa.
b. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism involves a subset of patients with azotemic CKD that develop
elevated iCa concentration and excessive PTH secretion that is not inhibited by high serum iCa
concentration.
C. It is likely that such patients had high PTH concentrations in association with normal or low
serum iCa concentration (i.e., renal secondary hyperparathyroidism) earlier in the clinical course of
azotemic CKD.
d. Autonomous PTH secretion from the parathyroid glands is unlikely, but the set point for PTH
secretion may be altered in chronic renal failure (CRF) such that higher iCa concentrations are neces-
sary to inhibit PTH secretion:
glands, and calcitriol-vitamin D receptor interactions caused by uremic toxins may contribute to
the increased set point.
2) Decreased calcium receptor number, which both establishes the set point and depends on calci-
triol functionality for synthesis of its mRNA from parathyroid cell DNA, may also contribute to
the altered set-point.
e. Dogs with elevated iCa concentration and marked hyperparathyroidism may have greater calci-
 triol receptor deficits in their parathyroid cells, which leads to poorly controlled PTH synthesis and
parathyroid gland hyperplasia.
f. Deficient calcitriol functionality caused by vitamin D receptor deficits may also lead to calcium
receptor deficits and the set point elevations involved in tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
G. Cancer-associated hypercalcemia:
1. Types include humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy and local osteolytic hypercalcemia induced by
 metastases to bone or malignancies in the bone marrow.
2. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy:
a. Mechanisms:
1) Excessive PTHrP secretion plays a role in the pathogenesis of hypercalcemia in most cases.
    o         (
 malignancy.
b. Lymphoma:
1) Associated with humoral hypercalcemia.
2) Hypercalcemia is found in 20-40% of cases.
3) Lymphomas associated with hypercalcemia are usually T cell, and approximately 30% of
lymphomas are T cell.
C. Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine glands of the anal sac:
1) Associated with humoral hypercalcemia.
2) Hypercalcemia is noted in approximately 50% of cases.
melanoma, or carcinomas originating in the lungs, pancreas, thyroid gland, skin, mammary gland,
 nasal cavity, and adrenal medulla.
3. Local osteolytic hypercalcemia:
a. Due to metastatic bone disease or hematologic malignancies in the bone marrow.
b. Hypercalcemia is due to induction of local bone resorption.
C. Carcinomas of the mammary gland, prostate, liver, and lung most frequently metastasize to bones
in dogs; and the humerus, femur and vertebrae are the most common sites of metastasis.
d. Hematologic malignancies that can cause hypercalcemia are most commonly multiple myeloma
and lymphoma:
1) Thus, Iymphoma can cause hypercalcemia by two mechanisms—humoral and local osteolysis
2) Hypercalcemia has been reported in 17% of dogs with multiple myeloma.
360  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
H. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. In Keeshonden, the gene associated with the development of primary hyperparathyroidism has been
identified.
2. A single parathyroid gland adenoma is the underlying lesion in most dogs, regardless of
breed.
3. Multiple adenomas may be found in a small percentage.
4. Parathyroid gland carcinoma is rare and parathyroid gland hyperplasia an uncommon lesion causing
primary hyperparathyroidism.
Hypervitaminosis D:
1. Causes:
a. Excessive dietary supplementation of vitamin D (cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol).
h. Overdose of calcitriol (1-25 dihydroxyvitamin D), dihydrotachysterol cholecalciferol (vitamin
D,), or ergocalciferol (vitamin D,) during treatment of hypoparathyroidism or overdose of calci-
 triol for renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
c. Ingestion of plants containing glycosides of calcitriol (i.e., Cestrum diurmum or day-blooming
jessamine, not to be confused with jasmine).
d. Ingestion of a cholecalciferol-containing rodenticide.
e. Ingestion of topical ointments containing vitamin D analogues (calcipotriene) for treatment of
human psoriasis:
1) The minimal lethal dose of calcipotriene is 65 μg/kg in dogs.
 2) There is rapid onset of hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, with rapid catabolism of
calcipotriene.
3) Hypercalcemia decreases after several days.
  i no  a   d se  
osteoclastic bone resorption and calcium reabsorption from renal tubules also contribute.
J. Granulomatous disease:
1. Hypercalcemia results from calcitriol synthesis by activated macrophages within granulomatous
inflammation.
2. Granulomatous diseases associated with hypercalcemia include blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis, schistosomiasis, panmiculitis, injection-site granuloma, and dermatitis.
K. Other uncommon or rare causes of hypercalcemia:
1. Acute intrinsic renal failure
a. Occasionally associated with mild hypercalcemia, especially during the diuretic phase of
recovery.
b. Mechanism unknown.
2. Nonmalignant skeletal lesions:
a. Hypercalcemia due to local osteolysis.
b. Causes include bacterial and fungal osteomyelitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy, and cranioman-
dibular osteopathy.
 3. Disuse osteoporosis after prolonged immobilization due to loss of bone mineral.
4. Overuse of calcium-containing intestinal phosphate binders can cause hypercalcemia due to simple
oversupplementation.
 5. Overdose of calcium-containing compounds:
a. Can occur during treatment of hypocalcemia.
 h. Hypercalcemia due to spontaneous ingestion of rocks containing calcium carbonates has been
described in a dog.
6. Grape or raisin toxicity:
a. In some cases of grape or raisin ingestion associated with acute intrinsic renal failure, mild to
severe total hypercalcemia develops, but iCa status has not been reported.
h. The pathogenesis of nephrotoxicity associated with grape or raisin ingestion is unknown, but
ochratoxin may be a toxic component.
c. Ingestion can be as little as 0.41-1.1 oz of grapes or raisins per kilogram body weight.
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 361
Signalment
Hypoadre-nocorticism:
e aq on Aia ao are sop aen (sient aoe u) sop re un uo an 'l
than males.
 Pyrenees, Rottweilers, standard Poodles, West Highland white terriers, soft-coated Wheaten teriers,
bearded collies, Nova Scotia duck-tolling retrievers, and Chinese cresteds.
 3. A genetic basis has been proven in standard poodles, bearded collies, and Nova Scotia duck-tolling
retrievers.
B. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. The mean age of affected dogs is 10.5 years.
 2. Breeds with an increased risk include the Keeshond, Briard, Armerican Eskimo, English setter Siberian
husky, Rhodesian ridgeback, Norwegian elkhound, Irish setter, wirehaired fox terrier English Springer
spaniel, Australian shepherd, Dachshund, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, and golden retriever.
3. A genetic basis has been proven in Keeshonden.
4. Dogs with a decreased risk include the cocker spaniel, German shepherd dog, Shetland sheepdog,
Labrador retriever, and miniature schnauzer.
C. Various age, breed, or sex predispositions exist for other causes of hypercalcemia; the reader is referred
to specific texts on those topics.
I. Climical Signs
A. Polyuria, polydipsia, anorexia, lethargy, and weakness are the most common clinical signs of
hypercalcemia in dogs:
1. Vomiting, depression, weakness, and constipation can occur.
 2. Uncommon signs include cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, muscle rwitching, and death.
B. Clinical signs are most severe when hypercalcemia develops rapidly.
C.
The magnitude of the hypercalcemia is also important:
1. f serum tCa is >15.0 mg/dL (3.7mmol/L) or iCa is >7.2 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L), clinical signs are usually
present.
2. If serum tCa is >18.0 mg/dL (4.5 mmol/L) or iCa is >8.8 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L), the patient is usually
critically ill.
 D. Interaction with phosphorus is important. If serum tCa (mg/dL) multiplied by the serum phosphorus
(mg/dL) concentration is >70, tissue mineralization is likely.
 Clinical signs due to the disease causing the hypercalcemia may also be present:
1. Hypoadrenocorticism should be considered as a differential diagnosis in any case of hypercalcemia.
2. With primary hyperparathyroidism, clinical signs related to hypercalcemia are either mild (e.g., poly-
dipsia, polyuria, lethargy, and weakness) or absent in many affected dogs:
a In a review of 210 dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism, no clinical signs were noted in 71%
of dogs. The most common clinical signs were related to urinary tract infection or urolithiasis.
b. Urinary tract infection was present in 29% of dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism, and
urolithiasis was reported in 31%.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Definition of hypercalcemia (Figure 34.1):
1. Using serum tCa, hypercalcemia is usually defined as a concentration >12.0mg/dL (3.0mmol/L).
2. Using serum iCa, hypercalcemia is usually defined as a concentration >6.0mg/dL (1.50 mmol/L).
 3. Unpredictable discordance between serum tCa and serum iCa measurements often exists, especially
in dogs with CRF:
a. In one study, 21% of dogs with azotemic CKD were classified as hypercalcemic based on serum
tCa, but when iCa was measured, only 8% were hypercalcemic.
b. Hypercalcemia is usually overestimated in dogs when serum tCa concentration is used.
4. Hypercalcemia based on serum iCa is relatively common and was observed in 19% of sick dogs in one study.
362Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
 Increased serum total calcium
(repeatable)
Do Not use
"correction" formulas
lonized calcium
lonized calcium
Normal or low
Minimum database
Increased
(MDB); CBC, serum
biochemistry, UA,
No obvious dianosis
±imaging
after history (drug, diet,
Lipemia
environment)physical
examination,andMDB
 Increased binding
to proteins
Increased binding.to
complexes (renal failure)
PTH high
PTH below normal
or upper two-thirds
or lower third
Dehydration:
referencerange
reference range
 Subacute to chronic
(parathyroid
(parathyroid
independent)
dependent)
Alkalosis:
Metabolic andrespiratory
Primary hyperparathyroidism
(or tertiary in CRF)
Measure
Measure
25(OH)-vitamin D
PTH-rP
High:
Neoplasia likely
Normal:
High 25(OH)-vitamin D
Normal 25(OH)-vitamin D
with low,normal, or high
Does NOT
calcitriol
Idiopathic (cats)
 exclude neoplasia
Ergo-or cholecaciferol
Malignancy associated
Caicipotriene toxicity
toxicity
Day-blooming jessamine
Abdominal ULS 
Chest radiograph
rectalexam
Measure calcitriol
Rule out:
LSA
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
Carcinoma
Bone marow neoplasia
Low to normal calcitriol 
High calcitriol
Idiopathic (cats)
Calcitriol overdose
Malignancy associated
 Malignancy associated
Calcipotriene toxicity
Granulomatous disease
 Day-blooming jessamine
Figure 34.1  Algorithm for approach to definitive diagnosis for hypercalcemia. (Modified from Schenck PA, Chew D).
ULS—ultrasound, LSA—lymphosarcoma.
B.
Measurement of calcium:
1. Serum iCa concentration should be measured any time that an increase in serum tCa is detected.
Serum iCa should also be measured in all cases of CRF
2. Do not use adjustment formulas to correct the tCa to serum total protein or albumin concentration
as these formulas do not accurately predict the serum iCa concentration.
3. Do not directly compare serum iCa results to those obtained from heparinized plasma or whole blood
(from a blood gas analyzer or point-of-care analyzer). The iCa concentration is lower in heparinized
plasma or whole blood than in serum.
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 363
4. Do not use EDTA plasma for collection of blood for calcium measurement. EDTA chelates calcium,
and EDTA plasma will yield falsely low results.
5. In dogs, serum tCa is normally 9.0-11.5mg/dL (2.2-2.9mmol/L) and serum iCa is normally
5.0-6.0 mg/dL (1.2-1.5 mmol/L).
6. To convert mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply mmol/L by 4.
C. PTH concentration should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement to determine whether
PTH production is appropriate:
1. Patients with elevated iCa and inappropriately high PTH concentrations typically have primary hyper-
parathyroidism. If serum iCa is elevated and PTH is within the upper two-thirds of the reference range
or elevated, the PTH response is inappropriate, as PTH is expected to be low (below normal or in the
lower third of the reference range) with elevated iCa.
2. Hypercalcemia associated with low serum PTH is classified as parathyroid-independent
hypercalcemia.
3. Of hypercalcemic canine samples submitted for hormone analysis to specialist endocrinology labora
hypercalcemia. However, because of sample bias, primary hyperparathyroidism is overrepresented
D. Measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration may be helpful to identify cases in which
increased vitamin D intake is the cause of hypercalcemia.
 E. Calciriol concentration measurement may be helpful in patients with normal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin
 D concentration.
 IF.  Other tests may be indicated depending on the suspected underlying cause.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. Potential causes of hypercalcemia are listed in Table 34.1.
primary hyperparathyroidism, and renal failure (elevation of serum tCa but not iCa)
C. Transient hypercalcemia:
1. Should be suspected if dehydration is present and serum tCa concentrations are mildly elevated
(12.0-13.5 mg/dL or 3.0-3.4 mmol/L) or serum albumin or protein concentrations are increased.
2. In addition, serum calcium concentration will rapidly return to normal when dehydration has been
corrected.
D. Hypoadrenocorticism:
1. The hypercalcemia is typically mild.
 2. The magnitude of hypercalcemia is greater in more severely affected dogs.
 3. Serum tCa concentration returns to normal after 1-2 days of hormone replacement therapy.
 4. Some combinations of hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and decreased sodium:potassium ratio suggest
the diagnosis.
5. Hypercalcemia due to hypoadrenocorticism in the absence of altered sodium and potassium concen-
trations, though possible, is rare.
E. Azotemic CKD:
1. The finding of hypercalcemia with primary renal azotermia poses a diagnostic problem since hypercal-
cemia can cause renal failure or can develop as a consequence of renal failure.
2. Serum iCa concentration is usually normal to low in patients with azotemic CKD.
3. Measurement of serum iCa concentration to assess calcium status is critical in azotemic CKD:
a. Serum tCa measurement incorrectly assesses iCa status in about 36% of dogs with azotemic CKD.
hb. Adjustment formulas should not be used, as they do not accurately determine iCa status in approx-
imately 53% of dogs with azotemic CKD.
C. Serum tCa measurement or adjusted tCa measurement overestimates hypercalcemia and underes-
timates hypocalcemia in dogs with azotemic CKD.
4. The incidence of elevated tCa in azotemic CKD is about 14%, and increases with the severity of
azotemia. Fewer than 10% of dogs with azotemic CKD have increased serum iCa concentrations.
5. In tertiary hyperparathyroidism, azotemic CKD patients have increased iCa with excessive PTH secretion.
364 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Figure 34.2 Mediastinal lymphosarcoma associated with hypercalcemia in a dog. Note mass cranial to the heart on this
lateral radiograph of the thorax. (Courtesy of Dr. Felipe Galvao, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine and
the Radiology Section).
F. Cancer-associated hypercalcemia:
1. This is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in dogs.
iCa concentration is increased, PTH is suppressed (below normal or in the lower third of the reference
range) and PTHrP is increased. Hypophosphatemia is often present if kidney function is normal.
 3. In dogs, malignancies commonly associated with hypercalcemia include T-celllymphoma (Figure 34.2)
and adenocarcinoma of the apocrine glands of the anal sacs.
4. f hypercalcemia due to malignancy is suspected:
 a. A complete physical exam should be repeated paying particular attention to lymph nodes. A thor-
ough rectal exam should be done with careful palpation of the anal sacs and sublumbar lymph nodes.
b. Any enlarged lymph nodes should be aspirated and cytology performed.
C. Three-view thoracic radiographs should always be done:
1) The mediastinum should be evaluated for the presence of a mass.
 2) Metastatic disease from the tumor causing the hypercalcemia may be present.
d. Abdominal ultrasound may be helpful:
1) May identify a tumor anywhere.
 2) Particular attention should be paid to the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes for the presence of
lymphoma.
1) Aspirate and cytology of lymph nodes that palpate normally.
 2) Bone marrow aspirate and cytology.
 5. Tumors of the apocrine gland of the anal sacs:
a. Should not be confused with the common perianal adenoma that is not associated with
hypercalcemia.
h. On occasion, both anal sacs may feel normal but metastases are detected in the regional lymph
 nodes. Repeated palpation of the anal sac often discloses the primary nodule that was missed.
C. Circulating PTHrP concentrations are highest in dogs with apocrine adenocarcinomas of the anal
sac and sporadic carcinomas associated with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy.
6. Hematologic malignancies:
a. Hematologic malignancies that cause hypercalcemia are typically multiple myeloma and lymphoma
(Figure 34.3).
h. With multiple myeloma:
1) Bone marrow aspirate and cytology should be performed.
Hypercalcemia in Dogs 365
Fgure 34.3 Local osteolytic hypercalcemia associated with lymphosarcoma in the vertebral body of a dog. This lesion was
sudeioipei uo jo Asdoioau le ssol auog snoigo jo suipusy aul rosle suelio leunaui aos pue aeigaan jauio ui juasad
usually excludes humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. Hypercalcemia is largely the result of activated osteoclastic bone
resorption from the local lesion. (Courtesy of Dr. Donald Meuten North Carolina State Univeristy and Dr. Dennis Chew
The Ohio State University).
 2) Osteolytic disease may be present on radiographs.
3) Hyperglobulinemia due to a monoclonal gammopathy may be present.
4) Urine should be screened for the presence of Bence-Jones proteinuria.
7. Tumors metastatic to bone:
 a. Solid tumors that metastasize to bone rarely produce hypercalcemia.
 b. Carcinomas of the mammary gland, prostate,liver, and lung most frequently metastasize to bones
in dogs, with the humerus, femur, and vertebrae being the most common sites.
C. Primary bone tumors are not often associated with hypercalcemia.
d. Areas of osseous pain should be radiographed; radiographic lesions should be aspirated and/or
biopsied with appropriate evaluation (e.g., cytology and/or histopathology, culture, etc.).
G. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. Primary hyperparathyroidism is uncommon. In about 90% of dogs with primary hyperparathy-
roidism, it is caused by a single parathyroid adenoma (Figure 34.4).
2. In primary hyperparathyroidism, serum iCa concentration is elevated and PTH is inappropriately
high for the level of hypercalcemia:
a. In a review of 210 dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism, all had hypercalcemia and 65% had
hypophosphatemia.
b. Serum PTH concentration was within the reference range in 73% of dogs and above the reference
range in the rest.
 3. A parathyroid mass is rarely if ever palpable in dogs.
4. Ultrasonography of the neck can be helpful in the diagnosis, but it requires operator experience and
 an ultrasound umit with a high-frequency transducer to achieve good resolution (Figure 34.5).
H. Hypervitaminosis D:
1. Clinical signs are those encountered with development of ionized hypercalcemia, though often they
are more severe due to rapid and severe increases. Soft tissue mineralization is more severe with
hypervitaminosis D; tongue necrosis may be a more specific lesion in dogs.
2. Should be suspected with history of acces to rodenticides, plants that cause hypercalcemia
(i.e., Cestrum diurnum or day blooming jessamine, not to be confused with jasmine), or antipsoriasis
creams as well as in dogs that are treated with any form of Vitamin D and/or oral calcium supplements.
 3. Hypercalcemia usually develops within 24 h after ingestion and is often severe.
4. Hyperphosphatemia is often noted, and azotemia is initially absent but can subsequently develop.
366 Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
(b)
(a)
-eradsy ym sop e jo anss! pioiyn u! pappagwa uoas (eles u! (al eouape pioisyened aliel aluis (e) t'te auni
cemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism. (Courtesy of Dr. Charles Capen, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary
Medicine). (b) Multiple parathyroid adenomas in a dog with primary hyperparathyroidism. Though this is less common than the
finding of a single adenoma, as many as four adenomas can be encountered. It is difficult to make the histopathologic
aes oiyo aul 'apoen Aen la jo Asano) 'eiseldiadky puels pioiyieied pue sewouape aldnnw uaameg uouis
RT THY
MI=0.4
2.030cm
3Dist=0.627cm
Figure 34.5 Ultrasonography of a single large parathyroid gland adenoma associated with hypercalcemia in a dog. If a
parathyroid gland nodule >2 mm is found, surgery is usually recommended. A parathyroid nodule of 2-4 mm is consistent
with hyperplasia and >4 mm that of adenoma. (Courtesy of the Radiology Section Center for Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio
State University).
5. PTH concentration is suppressed.
6. Vitamin D metabolite concentrations:
a. Serum concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D will be elevated in cases of treatment overdose, chole
calciferol rodenticide ingestion, or excessive dietary supplementation of vitamin D.
b. Concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be normal in cases of plant or antipsoriasis ointment
ingestion.
1.Granulomatous disease:
1. Clinical signs of the underlying disease (e.g., blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and
schistosomiasis) may predominate and can include uveitis, bone pain, cutaneous masses and/or draining
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 367
 2. Serum iCa concentration is increased, and PTH is suppressed; PTHrP should be normal to undetectable.
 3. Serum calcitriol concentrations are increased. Decreasing levels of calcitriol accompany successful
treatment that restores normocalcemia.
4. Specific tests may be indicated depending on the suspected disease, for example, serum fungal titers,
 PCR, or urine antigen testing.
 Acute intrinsic renal failure can be diagnosed based on acute onset of renal disease and ruling out other
causes.
K.
 Nonmalignant skeletal lesions:
1. Radiographs of the affected bone will be necessary for diagnosis
2. Bone biopsy may be required:
a. Histopathology should be performed.
b. Bacterial and fungal cultures should be submitted if indicated.
C. Fungal titers may be of use if fungal disease is suspected.
L
 Disuse osteoporosis after prolonged immobilization can be diagnosed based on history.
M. Overuse of calcium-containing intestinal phosphate binders should be suspected based on history of
administration.
N. Hypercalcemia from spontaneous ingestion of rocks should be suspected based on history.
O. Grape or raisin toxicity should be suspected based on history of ingestion.
VI. Treatment
A.
B. The magnitude of hypercalcemia, rate of development, whether the calcium concentration is continuing
to increase, and modifying effects of other electrolytes and acid-base disturbances should all be considered
when deciding on a treatment plan:
1. Serum tCa concentration of 16 mg/dL (4 mmol/L) or greater usually warrants aggressive therapy
s   n s s    n ne  ni 
are severe.
2. Depending on the degree of neurologic, cardiac, and renal dysfunction induced by the hypercalcemia
and concurrent deleterious factors, animals with serum tCa <16mg/dL (4 mmol/L) may also require
aggressive treatment.
 3. Acidosis magnifies the effects of hypercalcemia by shifting more calcium to the ionized fraction.
 4. Serum phosphorus concentration is important in decision making because soft tissue mineralization
phorus concentration, both in mg/dL, is >70.
5. Animals with rapid and progressive development of hypercalcemia usually display severe clinical
signs and require aggressive therapy.
L.
. Removal of the underlying cause of the hypercalcemia is the definitive treatment.
D. Supportive therapy is often needed to decrease serum calcium concentration to a less toxic level while
waiting for a definitive diagnosis to be established.
E. Parenteral fluids, furosemide, sodium bicarbonate, glucocorticoids, or combinations of these treatments
reduce serum calcium concentrations in most animals:
1. Fluid therapy:
a. The first goal of fluid therapy is to correct dehydration because hemoconcentration contributes to
hypercalcemia.
b. Dehydration should be corrected within 4-6 h of presentation in animals with severe clinical signs
of hypercalcemia. Normocalcemia may be restored by fluid therapy alone if the hypercalcemia was
initially mild.
c. Physiologic saline (0.9% NaCl) is the solution of choice. It is preferred to lactated Ringer's solu
tion since it contains no calcium and more sodium than lactated Ringer's solution.
d. The intravenous (IV) route is always needed for treatment of ionized hypercalcemia in animals
with severe clinmical signs. Subcutaneous fluids are not helpful initially but could be useful when wean-
ing off IV fluids or in those dogs with minimal hypercalcemia.
368 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Table 34.2Treatment of hypercalcemia.
Treatment
Dose
 lndications
Comments
Volume expansion
SQ Saline (0.9%)
75-100mL/kg/day
 Mild hypercalcemia
Contraindicated if peripheral
edema is present 
IV saline (0.9%)
100-125 mL/kg/day
 Moderate to severe
 Contraindicated if congestive
hypercalcemia
heart failure and/or
hypertension present
Diuretics
Furosemide
1 -4 mg/kg q 8-12 h Iv, SQ.
Moderate to severe
Volume expansion is necessary
 PO; constant rate infusion
hypercalcemia
prior to use of this drug
0.2-1 mg/kg/h
Glucocorticoids
Prednisone
1-2.2 mg/kg BID PO,
Moderate to severe
 Use of these drugs prior to.
SQ, IV
hypercalcemia
identification of etiology of 
hypercalcemia may make
definitive diagnosis difficult 
Prednisolone
5-20 mg/cat/day PO
Feline idiopathic
Follow by 6ml tap water and 
hypercalcemia
"buttering" of nose
Dexamethasone
 0.1-0.22 mg/kg BID IV, SQ
lnhibition of bone 
resorption
Calcitonin
4-6 IU/kg SQ BID to TID
Hypervitaminosis
Response may be short lived.
D toxicity
Vomiting may occur
Bisphosphonates
 Moderate to severe chronic
Expensive
hypercalcemia
Large and rapid doses IV
associated with acute renal
failure
 Etidronate
5-15 mg/kg Daily to BID
Clodronate
 20-25mg/kg in a 4-h IV 
Approved in Europe;
infusion 
availability in USA limited 
Pamidronate
1.3-2.0mg/kg in 150ml
Hypervitaminosis D
Well studied in dogs
0.9% saline in a 2-h IV
 infusion; can repeat in 
1-3 weeks
Alendronate
1-4 mg/kg, q 48-72 h PO;
Adjunctive therapy for
1 0-30mg/cat once weekly
malignancy-associated
followed by 6mL PO tap
hypercalcemia or primary
water and "buttering" of 
hyperparathyroidism
lips
Feline idiopathic
hypercalcemia
 Shifting of ionized
calcium to other
fractions
Sodium
1 mEq/kg slow IV bolus
 Severe, life-threatening
 Requires close monitoring.
bicarbonate
(may give up to 4 mEq/kg
hypercalcemia
Rapid onset of action
total dose)
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 369
2. Diuretics:
a. Furosemide is important for treatment of persistent hypercalcemia.
h. Furosemide promotes enhanced urinary calcium loss.
C. Thiazides should not be used since they may result in hypocalciuria and may aggravate
hypercalcemia.
d. Adequate hydration before initiation of and during furosemide administration is essential
3. Sodium bicarbonate:
a. Serum iCa concentration is reduced with sodium bicarbonate infusion as the serum pH becomes
 more alkalotic, calcium binding to serum proteins increases.
h. Infusion of sodium bicarbonate is most often used in the presence of severe metabolic acidosis or
in those with severe hypercalcemic crisis (e.g., collapse, encephalopathy, and cardiac arrhythmia)
C. Reduction in total serum calcium concentration is slight after sodium bicarbonate administration
alone.
d. Sodium bicarbonate infusion is most likely to be helpful in combination with other reatments.
4. Glucocorticoids:
a. Glucocorticoids can significantly reduce serum iCa concentration in patients with hypercalcemia.
especially those with lymphoma, apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sacs, multiple mye
loma, thymoma, hypoadrenocorticism, hypervitaminosis D, hypervitaminosis A, or granulomatous
disease.
b. When possible, glucocorticoids should be withheld from animals for which a diagnosis of the
uderlying disease has not been established:
1) Lymphocytolysis can make a cytologic or histopathologic diagnosis of lymphoma much more
difficult or impossible. Effects of glucocorticoids may similarly make it difficult to definitively
diagnose leukemias or multiple myeloma as the cause for hypercalcemia.
 2) Treatment with glucocorticoids alone before initiation of a traditional combination chemo-
 therapy protocol for lymphoma can potentially decrease survival duration by 50%.
5.Calcitonin:
a. Treatment with calcitonin may be useful in those with severe hypercalcemia. It is almost always
used in combination with other treatments and is not considered effective alone.
b. Calcitonin treatment is expensive, its effect is umpredictable, effects are short lived, and resistance
 often develops after a few days.
 C. Vomiting and anorexia are common side effects in dogs.
6. Bisphosphonates:
a. Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption by decreasing osteoclast activity and function.
b. Bisphosphonates are given when the underlying disease causing the hypercalcemia cannot be
vitaminosis D (cholecalciferol) or from malignancy that is nonresectable and not responding to
chemotherapy.
C. Dehydration should be corrected before bisphosphonate use to lessen the chance of renal injury.
d. IV infusion of pamidronate has been used to treat hypercalcemia. Clodronate has also been used
clinically to treat hypercalcemia.
F. Specific treatment for hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Treatment of dehydration and hormone deficiencies is key (see Chapter 2).
2. Hypercalcemia usually resolves with specific treatment for hypoadrenocorticism and does not require
further therapy.
G. Specific treatment for azotemic CKD:
1. A complete description is beyond the scope of the book and the reader is referred elsewhere.
2. Treatment with low-dose calcitriol therapy to reduce PTH synthesis improves quality of life, reduces
progression of chronic renal disease, and prolongs life.
3. Low-dose calciriol therapy is considered after dietary phosphate restriction and use of intestinal
phosphate binders to control serum phosphorus levels to <5.5 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L), preferably to levels
<4.5 mg/dL (1.45 mmol/L).
370  Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 34.6  Obvious parathyroid gland mass at surgery in a dog with primary hyperparathyroidism. Note polar mass
embedded in the thyroid gland that is nearing complete excision. (Courtesy of Dr. Stephen Birchard, The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine)
4. Ideally, PTH concentrations are monitored during treatment with calcitriol to ensure it either decreases
 or stays within the reference range.
 5. Hypercalcemia is very uncommon in dogs treated with lower dosages of calcitriol (2.5-4.0 ng/kg/day).
iCa provides more useful information especially for those with azotemic CKD. Calcium should be meas-
ured at 1 and 4 weeks after initiating therapy and then every 4 months thereafter to ensure that hypercal-
cemia does not develop.
H. Specific treatment for hypervitaminosis D:
1. When associated with cholecalciferol intoxication, treatment of hypercalcemia may be necessary for
several weeks because of the long half-lives of cholecalciferol (29 days in dogs) and vitamin D metabolites:
a. Aggressive therapy for 1 week or more may be required.
h. Maintenance therapy with prednisone and furosemide should be continued for 1 month.
C. A low-calcium diet is important to reduce intestinal calcium absorption.
 ras xo e ra) saq sosod isn -e 7
chloride, and lanthanum carbonate):
a. May be beneficial in addition to a phosphorus-restricted diet to minimize the degree of hyperphos-
 phatemia, hopefully restoring serum phosphorus concentration to within the reference range.
h. Doses are usually from 30 to 100 mg/kg divided in meals and adjusted based on the serum
phosphorus concentration achieved.
 3. IV pamidronate protocols are very useful during treatment of hypervitaminosis D (Table 34.2). Since
this compound may take up to 72h to achieve salutary effects, other treatments to control hypercalcemia
must be initially given until this effect is achieved.
.
Specific treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. Surgery to remove the parathyroid adenoma is the treatment of choice (Figure 34.6). Occasionally,
more than one parathyroid gland mass is visible which should also be removed:
a. In 47 dogs undergoing surgery to remove a parathyroid mass, 94% resulted in control of
hypercalcemia.
h. Hypercalcemia resolved in 1-6 days.
c. Hypocalcemia may occur postoperatively, especially if the serum tCa is >14mg/dL (3.5 mmol/L)
before surgery:
1) Hypocalcemia without clinical signs usually does not require treatment unless the serum tCa is
<6mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L).
2) Treatment with supplemental calcium or vitamin D metabolites is required if tCa is <6mg/dL
(1.5 mmol/L) or clinical signs of hypocalcemia are present (see Chapter 31).
3) If the patient is treated with oral calcitriol (7.5 ng/kg/BID) for 7-10 days prior to surgery,
hypocalcemia in the postsurgical period can be minimized.
Hypercaicemia in Dogs 371
d. If the patient is unstable, bisphosphonate therapy for 1-2 months prior to surgery may decrease
the serum calcium concentration, increase the chance for renal repair and increase the recovery of
the atrophied parathyroid glands.
2. Ultrasound-guided ethanol ablation is an alternative to surgery:
 a In a review of 110 dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism, 72% of ethanol ablation procedures
resulted in resolution of hypercalcemia within 1-4 days.
b.Requires extensive technical expertise.
3. Ultrasound-guided radiofrequency heat ablation of the parathyroid mass is also used as a
treatment:
a In 49 dogs treated with heat ablation, 90% experienced control of their disease with resolution
 of the hypercalcemia within 1-6 days.
h. Requires extensive technical expertise and the equipment is expensive.
C. If multiple masses present, surgery may be preferred.
Vll.  Prognosis
A
B.
Hypoadrenocorticism: Excellent following fluid repletion and replacement hormone therapy; with
spontaneous disease, lifelong therapy is required.
C
Renal failure:
a. Usually tCa, not iCa, is increased in azotemic CKD so calcium-specific reatment is not indicated.
b. An increased tCa concentration is not known to be associated with pathology in the face of a nor-
mal iCa.
D
lent for the initial response of hypercalcemia to treatment and poor for long-term survival due to the under-
lying malignancy.
Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. In cases of parathyroid gland adenoma, the prognosis is excellent following surgical removal.
 2. In cases of parathyroid adenocarcinoma, prognosis is guarded depending on the ability to remove
581days.
Hypervitaminosis D: Good to excellent if hypercalcemia is identified and adequate treatment started
early enough.
G.
Granulomatous disease:
 a Good to excellent if the cause is fungal and the organisms can be eradicated.
b. Good to excellent for control of sterile dermatitis and panniculitis while on glucocorticoids.
C. Good to excellent if sterile granulomatous masses can be completely excised.
H.
1.
 Nonmalignant skeletal disease: Good if the underlying lesion such as hypertrophic osteodystrophy or
craniomandibular osteopathy resolve.
VIlll. Prevention
Prevent exposure to excessive vitamin D.
B.
Prevent exposure to grapes and raisins.
Prevent ingestion of excessive calcium supplementation or calcium carbonate-containing rocks
References and Further Readings
Adamantos S, Boag A. Total and ionised calciurn concentrations in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 2008;
163(1):25-26.
Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Khan SA, Mazzaferro EM, Morrow CMK. Acute renal failure in dogs after the
ingestion of grapes or raisins: A retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). J Vet Intern Med 2005;19(5):663-674.
Feldman EC, Hoar B, Pollard R, Nelson RW. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with primary hyperpar
athyroidism: 210 cases (1987-2004). JAr Vet Med Assoc 2005;227(5):756-761.
372 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Gow AG, Gow DJ, Bell R, Simpson JW, Chandler ML, Evans H, Berry JL, Herrtage ME, Mellanby RJ. Calcium metabolism in
eight dogs with hy poadrenocorticism. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50(8):426-430.
Hare WR, Dobbs CE, Slayman KA, et al. Calcipotriene poisoning in dogs. Vet Med 2000;95:770-778.
Hostutler RA, Chew DJ, Jaeger JQ, et al. Uses and effectiveness of pamidronate disodiurm for treatment of dogs and cats with
hypercalcermia. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:29-33.
Messinger JS, Windham WR, Ward CR. Ionized hypercalcemia in dogs: A retrospective study of 109 cases (1998-2003). J Vet
Intern Med 2009;23(3):514-519.
Morrow CMK, Valli VE, Volmer PA, et al. Canine renal pathology associated with grape or raisin ingestion: 10 cases. J Vet
Diagn Invest 2005;17:223-231.
Rasor L, Pollard R, Feldman EC. Retrospective evaluation of three treatment methods for primary hyperparathyroidism in
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43(2):70-77.
Rosol TJ, Nagode LA, Couto CG, et al. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related protein, PTH, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in
dogs with cancer-associated hypercalcemia. Endocrinotogy 1992;131:1157-1164.
 Rumbeiha WK, Fitzgerald SD, Kruger JM, et al. Use of pamidronate disodium to reduce cholecalciferol-induced toxicosis in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2000;61:9-13.
 Rumbeiha WK, Kruger JM, Fitzgerald SF, et al. Use of pamidronate to reverse vitamin D3-induced toxicosis in dogs. Arm J Vet
Res 1999;60:1092-1097.
Am J Vet Res 2005;66(8):1330-1336.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ. Calcium: Total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008;38(3):497-502.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Rosol TJ. Disorders of calcium: hypercalcermia and hypocalcemia. In: Dibartola S, Ed.
Fluid Therapy in Smatt Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 122-194.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;223:825-831.
CHAPTER 35
Hypercalcemia in Cats
Dennis Chew and Patricia A. Schenck
Pathogenesis
● Clinical signs occur when serum ionized calcium (iCa) rises above a critical level.
Aid) suapuadap pronueied no supuadapu proreied aq uen euasesradau jo sesne o
hyperparathyroidism).
 The most common causes of hypercalcemia in cats are idiopathic hypercalcemia, chronic renal
failure (total calcium [tCa]), and malignancy.
● Hypercalcemia is usually underestimated when serum tCa is used.
Classical Signs
● The most common clinical sign associated with hypercalcemia is anorexia; other common signs
include vomiting, depression, weakness, and constipation. Polyuria and polydipsia are much less
commonly reported than in dogs.
● Clinical signs are most severe when hypercalcemia develops rapidly.
● Cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia may have no clinical signs, or transient signs thought to be
insignificant.
Diagnosis
● Hypercalcemia is defined as a tCa concentration >11.0mg/dL (2.75 mmol/L) or iCa concentra-
tion >5.7 mg/dL (1.40 mmol/L)
● Parathyroid hormone (PTH) should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement to determine
whether PTH production is appropriate.
● Measurement of PTH-related protein (PTHrP) may be helpful in cases of suspected malignancy;
 measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be helpful to identify cases of vitamin D toxicity.
Treatment
● Specific therapy depends on the cause.
● General therapy includes the administration of fluids, diuretics, glucocorticoids, and/or bisphosphonates.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
373
374  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
Prognosis
● Prognosis is dependent on the underlying cause.
● Prognosis is good for most cases of idiopathic hypercalcemia, vitamin D toxicity, primary
.]
Pathogenesis
A. Serum tCa is composed of protein-bound calcium (pCa), complexed calcium (cCa), and iCa. The iCa
fraction is the biologically active fraction.
B. Development of hypercalcemia:
1. Hypercalcemia develops primarily when there is an increase in bone mobilization of calcium, an
increase in intestinal calcium absorption, or a decrease in urinary loss of calcium (decreased glomerular
filtration rate [GFR] or increased tubular reabsorption of calcium). Hypercalcemia based on measurement
of tCa but not iCa can occur with increases in circulating complexes (as can happen in azotemic chronic
kidney disease [CKD]}:
a. An increase in serum iCa concentration decreases PTH secretion if the parathyroid gland is healthy,
h. Increased calcitonin secretion is stimulated in an attempt to minimize the magnitude of hypercalcemia.
C. Calcitriol synthesis in the kidney is decreased both through direct inhibition by iCa and by
decreased stimulation because of decreased PTH concentration.
d. The overall outcome is to increase urinary excretion of calcium and to decrease the bone mobilization
of calcium in an effort to limit the degree of hypercalcemia.
2. In primary hyperparathyroidism, the parathyroid adenoma continues to secrete PTH even though
hypercalcemia is present. This is termed a “parathyroid-dependent" hypercalcemia. With primary
hyperparathyroidism, there is an increased serum iCa concentration, with an inappropriate PTH
secretion. Most cases in cats are caused by a single parathyroid adenoma.
3. In “parathyroid-independent" causes of hypercalcemia, hypercalcemia occurs due to other secretory
factors (such as PTHrP, interleukin, or tumor necrosis factor) or as a result of excessive vitamin D
and PTH secretion is very low. Thus in parathyroid-independent hypercalcemias, serum iCa concentration
aierda al oi ssuodsar un uoissiddns anedondde smous Hid pue pneaale s!
C. Causes of hypercalcemia are listed in Table 35.1.
D. Transient hypercalcemia:
1. Dehydration is occasionally associated with mild increases in serum tCa concentrations that rapidly
return to normal when dehydration has been corrected.
 2. Increased serum albumin or total protein can result in an increased serum tCa concentration as more
calcium binds to protein.
E. Idiopathic hypercalcemia has been recognized in the last 20 years in cats. It now appears to be the most
common cause of hypercalcemia in cats in the USA. The pathogenesis of idiopathic hypercalcemia is
unknown. It does not appear to be due to excessive serum vitamin D or calcitriol concentrations, though
 s   s g snn , i s  q o s s
nutrients in the diet may play a role, but this has not been proven. A role for acquired dysfunction of the
calcium-sensing receptor is possible but has not been investigated.
F.
 Cancer-associated hypercalcemia: Mechanisms of hypercalcemia include humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy, and local osteolytic hypercalcemia induced by metastases to bone, and malignancies in the
bone marrow.
G. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy: Excessive secretion of PTHrP plays a role in the pathogenesis of
hypercalcemia in some cases, but cytokines such as IL-1, TNF-o, and TGF-α may also cause hypercalcemia:
1. Metastatic tumors and hematologic malignancies: Hypercalcemia is due to the induction of local bone
resorption.
Hypercafcemia in Cats 375
Table 35.1  Causes of hypercalcemia in cats.
Nonpathologic
Transient or inconsequential
 Nonfasting (minimal increase)
Hemoconcentration 
 Growth in young cats
Hyperproteinemia
Laboratory error
Hypoadrenocorticism
Spurious (lipemia, detergent contamination of sample)
Severe environmental hypothermia
Pathologic or consequential (persistent)
Parathyroid dependent: primary hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid independent:
Idiopathic hypercalcemia
 Malignancy associated
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma [head and
neckl, and other carcinomas)
Hematologic malignancies (lymphoma, multiple myeloma, myeloproliferative disease, leukemia)
Metastatic or primary bone neoplasia—not reported in cats
Chronic renal failure (elevation of tCa)
Hypervitaminosis D (iatrogenic, plants, rodenticide, antipsoriasis creams)
Granulomatous disease (blastomycosis, mycobacteriosis, dermatitis, panniculitis, injection reaction)
Acute renal failure (diuretic phase)
Nonmalignant skeletal lesions (osteomyelitis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy)
Excessive calcium-containing intestinal phosphate binders
Excessive calcium supplementation
Hypervitaminosis A
 Acromegaly
Thyrotoxicosis
Aluminum exposure (intestinal phosphate binders)
H. CKD (IRIS stages 2-4)Serum tCa may be elevated, but serum iCa is uncommonly elevated:
1. The increase in serum tCa may be due to an increase in the cCa fraction as in dogs, but this has not
been proven in cats.
 3. The use of calcium carbonate intestinal phosphate binders may cause hypercalcemia.
4. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism occurs in some CRF patients with long-standing
secondary
hyperparathyroidism. The iCa fraction increases due to a change in the set point for iCa.
 Tertiary hyperparathyroidism refers to the condition in a small subset of CKD patients with CKD who
develop increased iCa with excessive PTH secretion. It is likely that these patients had renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism earlier in the clinical course of CKD. Downregulation of the vitamin D receptor in the
 parathyroid glands plays a pivotal role in this and occurs secondary to calcitriol deficits encountered during
azotemic CKD.
 Primary hyperparathyroidism is rare and most cases in cats are caused by a single parathyroid
adenoma.
 K. Hypoadrenocorticism is a rare cause of hypercalcemia in cats.
376 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
L. Hypervitaminosis D: Toxicity results from excess cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol, 25-hydroxyvitamin D,
calcitriol, or analogues of calcitriol. Hypercalcemia results from increased intestinal absorption of calcium,
but increased osteoclastic bone resorption and calcium reabsorption from renal tubules also contribute:
1. Vitamin D toxicity in cats is uncommonly reported due to the fact that cats appear to be somewhat
resistant to cholecalciferol toxicity when the diet is otherwise complete and balanced.
2. Causes of hypervitaminosis D:
          
azotemia, high concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and/or renal calcification has been described
in cats fed a commercial cat food in which the cholecalciferol content of the diet greatly exceeded the
dietary requirements of vitamin D
b. Overdose during treatment of hypoparathyroidism.
C. Ingestion of plants containing glycosides of calcitriol (Cestrum diurnum, Solanum malacoxylon, and
Trisetum flavescens)
d. Ingestion of cholecalciferol-containing rodenticide.
e. Ingestion of topical ointments containing vitamin D analogues (calcipotriene) for the treatment of
exist for cats following licking of ointment off humans, unlike dogs that usually ingest the tube. It
would be anticipated that toxicity would be far less severe with gradual ingestion of these small
amounts from licking.
 M. Granulomatous disease—Hypercalcermia results from calciriol synthesis by activated macrophages in
granulomatous inflammation:
1. Granulomatous disease associated with hypercalcemia includes histoplasmosis, Nocardia, and
mycobacterialinfection. Cats with blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, actinomyces, and injection-site granulomas
have been observed to have hypercalcemia, possibly due to enhanced synthesis of calcitriol.
Il.Signalment
A.  Idiopathic hypercalcemia:
1. Cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia range from 0.5 to 20 years old (mean 9.8 years).
 2. There is no sex predilection, but long-haired cats are overrepresented.
B. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. Primary hyperparathyroidism is rare in cats.
 2. The mean age of affected cats is approximately 13 years.
3. There is no sex predilection, but Siamese cats appear to be predisposed.
C. Other causes of hypercalcemia: There does not appear to be any age, breed-, or sex-related predispositions
for the other causes of hypercalcemia.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Anorexia is the most common clinical sign of hypercalcemia in cats:
1. Vomiting, depression, weakness, constipation, polyuria, and polydipsia may occur.
2. Uncommon signs include cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, muscle twitching, and death.
B.
 Clinical signs are most severe when hypercalcemia develops rapidly.
C.
 The magnitude of the hypercalcemia is also important:
1. If serum tCa is >15.0mg/dL (3.75 mmol/L) or iCa is >7.2mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L), clinical signs are
usually present.
2. If serum tCa is >18.0 mg/dL (4.5 mmol/L) or iCa is >8.8 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L), the patient is usually
critically ill.
D. Interaction with phosphorus is important. I serum tCa (mg/dL)xphosphorus concentration is >70,
tissue mineralization is likely.
E.  Cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia may have no clinical signs. In one study, 46% of cats with idiopathic
hypercalcemia had no clinicalsigns, 18 % had mild weight loss with no other clinical signs, 6% had inflammatory
bowel disease, 5% had chronic constipation, 4% were vomiting, and 1% were anorectic. Uroliths or renoliths
were observed in 15 % and calcium oxalate stones were specifically noted in 10% of cases. Cats with idiopathic
hypercalcemia do not commonly exhibit polyuria and polydipsia.
Hypercalcemia in Cats 377
 Clinical signs are vague in cats with Vitamin D excess, and include anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, tremors,
constipation, and polyuria (especially if renal damage has been sustained).
G.Hypercalcemia usually develops within 24 h after ingestion of rat-bait poison containing cholecalciferol.
and is often severe. Hyperphosphatemia is often noted, and azotemia is initially absent but can subsequently
develop. PTH concentration is suppressed by the hypercalcemia (a parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia).
H. In primary hyperparathyroidism, clinical signs related to hypercalcemia are either mild (anorexia,
polydipsia, polyuria, lethargy, and weakness) or absent in many affected cats. Calcium-containing uroliths
may occur. A mass associated with the parathyroid gland is palpable in about 50% of cats with primary
hyperparathyroidism. This mass lesion is sometimes confused with an enlargement of the thyroid gland.
IV. Diagnosis
Definition of hypercalcemia:
1. Using serum tCa, hypercalcemia is usually defined as a concentration >11.0mg/dL (2.75mmol/L),
though many labs list an upper reference range closer to 10.0 mg/dL (2.5 mmol/L).
 2. Using serum iCa, hypercalcemia is usually defined as a concentration >5.7mg/dL (1.40 mmol/L).
 3. There is often an unpredictable discordance between serum tCa and serum iCa measurements. In one
study, 7% of cats were classified as hypercalcermic based on serum tCa, but when iCa was measured, 17%
were hypercalcemic. Hypercalcemia is usually underestimated in cats when serum tCa conicentration is used.
 4. Hypercalcemia based on serum iCa is relatively common and was observed in 17% of sick cats in
one study.
B. Measurement of calcium:
1. Serum iCa concentration should be measured any time that an increase in serum tCa is detected.
Serum iCa should also be measured in all cases of azotemic CKD
2. Do not directly compare serum iCa results to those obtained from heparinized plasma or whole
 blood (when using a blood gas analyzer or point-of-care analyzer). The iCa concentration is lower in
heparinized plasma and whole blood than in serum.
EDTA plasma will yield falsely low iCa results.
4. In cats, serum tCa is normally 8.0-10.5 mg/dL (2.0-2.6 mmol/L) and serum iCa is normally 4.5-5.5mg/
dL (1.1-1.4mmol/L).
 5. To convert mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply mmol/L by 4.
C.  PTH should be measured in conjunction with iCa measurement, to determine whether PTH production
is appropriate:
1. Patients with elevated iCa and inappropriately high or "normal" PTH concentrations have primary
hyperparathyroidism. If serum iCa is elevated and PTH is within the upper reference range or elevated,
the PTH response may be inappropriate, as PTH is expected to be suppressed with elevated iCa. About
10% of hypercalcemic cats have primary hyperparathyroidism based on analysis of samples submitted
to veterinary endocrine labs.
 2. Hypercalcemia associated with low serum PTHisclassified as parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia.
 About 80% of hypercalcemic cats have parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia.
D. Measurement of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be helpful to identify cases in which increased intake
of vitamin D is the cause of hypercalcemia
上.
.Calcitriol measurement may be helpful in patients with normal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration.
 Differential Diagnoses
A.  Potential causes of hypercalcemia are listed in Table 35.1. An algorithm for the diagnostic approach for
definitive diagnosis of hypercalcemia is identical for dogs and cats and is listed in Figure 34.1.
B. In cats from North America, idiopathic hypercalcemia is the most common cause of hypercalcemia
although surveys for the causes of hypercalcemia have not been reported in cats since 2000; CKD (elevation
of tCa but not iCa) and neoplasia are listed as the most common causes of hypercalcemia in the literature.
C.
 Transient hypercalcemia:
1. Dehydration resulting in increased serum albumin or total protein is occasionally associated with mild
increases in serum tCa concentrations that rapidly return to normal when dehydration has been corrected.
378 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
D. Idiopathic hypercalcemia:
1. Idiopathic hypercalcemia appears to be the most common cause of hypercalcemia in cats in the USA
2. No clinical signs are observed in half the cases. Rermaining cats had signs associated with hypercalcemia
including mild weight loss, chronic constipation, vomiting, and anorexia. Uroliths or renoliths were
observed in 15%.
3. Hypercalcemia is often discovered during review of results from routine serum biochermistry (preanesthesia.
wellness exams, and minor GI signs).
4. Increased serum iCa, suppressed PTH (parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia), normal
range 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and negative PTHrP are expected findings in cats with idiopathic
hypercalcemia:
a Serum phosphorus is usually in the normal range unless it is increased due to concurrent CRF.
b. Mean urinary specific gravity was 1.036 in one study; cats with hypercalcemia often maintain the
ability to concentrate urine to >1.030 if they do not have concurrent CKD.
5. The diagnosis of idiopathic hypercalcemia is largely one of exclusion.
E. Cancer-associated hypercalcemia:
1. This is one of the most common causes of hypercalcemia in cats.
2. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy:
a Malignancy causes a parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia, where serum iCa concentration is
O1 drHd jo sioae oi anp suasaid aq ueo euaieudsoudodkH passaiddns si HLd pue pasear
h. In the cat, malignancies commonly associated with hypercalcemia include lymphoma, multiple
myeloma, squamous cell carcinoma, bronchogenic carcinoma/adenocarcinoma, osteosarcoma
fibrosarcoma, undifferentiated sarcoma, undifferentiated renal carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma of
the lung and diaphragm, and thyroid carcinoma. Approximately one-third of tumors associated with
hypercalcemia in cats are lymphoma, another one-third are squamous cell carcinoma, and the
remaining one-third from other carcinomas. Lymphomas are less common in cats with hypercalcemia
than dogs with hypercalcemia.
C. With lymphoma, involvement has been renal, generalized, gastrointestinal, mediastinal, laryngeal,
nasal, or cutaneous.
d. Squamous cell carcinoma has been found in mandibular, maxillary, pulmonary, and ear canal
locations.
e. Excessive secretion of PTHrP plays a role in the pathogenesis of hypercalcemia in some cases, but
cytokines such as IL-1, TNF-α, and TGF-α may also cause or contribute to the development and
maintenance of hypercalcemia.
 3. Tumors metastatic to bone:
a. Solid tumors that metastasize to bone produce hypercalcemia by the induction of local bone resorption
associated with tumor growth, but this is not a common occurrence.
h. Primary bone tumors are not often associated with hypercalcemia.
4. Hematologic malignancies: These malignancies are typically multiple myeloma and lymphoma.
F. CKD:
1. Finding hypercalcemia in a cat with primary renal azotemia poses a diagnostic problem since
2. Serum tCa is elevated in 11.5-58% of cats with azotemic CKD, and the incidence of elevated tCa
increases with severity of azotemia
3. Serum iCa concentration is usually normal to low in cats with CRF:
 a Cats with azotemic CKD have a higher incidence of ionized hypercalcemia as compared to dogs;
in 102 cats with azotemic CKD, 29% were hypercalcemic, 61% were normocalcemic, and 10% were
hypocalcemic based on serum iCa concentration.
4. Measurement of serum iCa concentration to assess calcium status is critical in azotemic CKD:
     o   n     s
CKD.
h. Serum tCa measurement underestimates hypercalcemia and overestimates normocalcemia in cats
with azotemic CKD.
Hypercalcemia in Cats 379
5L8
14.0MH2
RT
Dist=1.568cr
Dist=0.9380
Fgure 35.1  Cystic changes associated with a parathyroid gland carcinoma in a cat. (Courtesy of Dr. Kelly Cairns and the
Radiology Section Center for Veterinary Medicine,The Ohio State University.)
5. Causes of increased calcium in azotemic CKD:
a. The cCa fraction may be increased, causing an increase in the tCa fraction; iCa concentrations are
normal in these instances.
h. An increase in iCa may be associated with the use of calcium carbonate intestinal phosphate
binders. Serum iCa will rapidly return to normal after discontinuation of treatment.
C. Ionized hypercalcemia may occur in patients who receive excessive doses of calcitriol. Hypercalcemia
is very uncommon in patients treated with lower dosages of calcitriol (2.5-4.0 ng/kg/day).
G. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism occurs in a small subset of CRF patients with CKD who develop increased
iCa with excessive PTH secretion. It is likely that these patients had renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
earlier in the clinical course of CKD:
1. Azotemic CKD and the presence of ionized hypercalcemia occur in some cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia
(PTH is generally increased in those with azotemic CKD and is low in idiopathic hypercalcemia).
H. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
1. Clinical signs related to hypercalcemia are either mild or absent in many affected cats. A cystic mass
roidism.
 2. Serum iCa concentration is elevated, and PTH is inappropriately high for the level of hypercalcemia
(either elevated or in the upper part of the reference range).
 3. Ultrasonography of the neck can be helpful in the diagnosis, but it requires an ultrasound unit with
a high-frequency transducer to achieve good resolution. Identification of an enlarged parathyroid
gland(s) >4 mm provides support for this diagnosis. Some cats have cystic changes around the parathyroid
tumor (Figure 35.1).
Hypoadrenocorticism:
1. Hypoadrenocorticism is rare in cats, and hypercalcemia is noted in only about 8% of them based
on tCa.
 2. Serum tCa concentration returns to normal after 1-2 days of steroid replacement therapy.
Hypervitaminosis D:
1. Toxicity results from excess cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol, 25-bhydroxyvitamin D, calcitriol, or analogues
of calcitriol.
2. Serum concentration of 2s-hydroxyvitamin D will be elevated in cases of treatment overdose,
cholecalciferol-rodenticide ingestion, or excessive dietary supplementation of vitamin D. Concentration
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D may be normal in cases of plant or psoriasis ointment ingestion.
380 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 35.2
 Treatment of hypercalcemia.
Treatment
Dose
 lndications
Comments
Volume expansion 
SQ saline (0.9%)
75-1 00mL/kg/day
Mild hypercalcemia
Contraindicated if peripheral
edema is present
IV saline (0.9%)
100-125 ml/kg/day
Moderate to severe
Contraindicated in congestive
hypercalcemia
heart failure and hypertension
Diuretics
Furosemide
1-4 mg/kg q 12 h-q 8h Iv,
Moderate to severe
Volume expansion is necessary
SQ. PO
hypercalcemia
prior to use of this drug
Glucocorticoids
 Prednisone
1-2.2 mg/kg q 12 h PO, SQ,
Moderate to severe
 Use of these drugs prior to
IV
hypercalcemia
identification of etiology may
 make definitive diagnosis difficult
Dexamethasone
0.1-0.22 mg/kg q 12 h IV, SQ
 Inhibition of bone
resorption
Calcitonin 
4-6 IU/kg SQ q 12 h to q 8h
Hypervitaminosis D
Response may be short lived.
Vomiting may occur.
toxicity
 Bisphosph onates
Etidronate (EHDP)
5-15 mg/kg daily to q 12 h
 Moderate to severe chronic
Expensive
hypercalcemia
Clodronate
20-25mg/kg in a 4-h IV
Approved in Europe; availability
infusion
in USA limited
 Pamidronate
1.3-2.0mg/kg in 150ml
Well studied in
0.9% saline a 2-h IV infusion;
hypervitaminosis D in dogs
can repeat in 1-3 weeks
Alendronate
1-4 mg/kg q 48-72 h PO
Malignancy associated
hypercalcemia adjunctive;
primary hyperparathyroidism
adjunctive
10-30mg/cat once weekly
Idiopathic
followed by 6mL PO tap
hypercalcemia—cats 
water and "buttering" of lips
K
Granulomatous disease:
1. Hypercalcemia in the presence of granulomatous disease is rare but occurs associated with
histoplasmosis, Nocardia, and mycobacterial infection, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, actinomyces, and
injection-site granulomas.
 2. Serum iCa concentration is increased and PTH is suppressed (a parathyroid-independent hypercalcemia).
Vl. Treatment
A.
For an overview of treatment, see Table 35.2.
B.
 As in dogs, the magnitude of hypercalcemia, rate of development, whether the calcium concentration is
continuing to increase, and modifying effects of other electrolytes and acid-base disturbances should all be
considered when deciding on a treatment plan:
1. The degree of neurologic, cardiac, and renal dysfunction induced by the hypercalcemia and other
 concurrent deleterious factors dictate the need for aggressive treatment.
Hypercafcemia in Cats  381
2. Acidosis magnifies the effects of hypercalcemia by shifting more calcium to the ionized fraction.
3. Serum phosphorus concentration is important in decision making because soft tissue mineralization
is potentiated by hyperphosphatemia.
and require aggressive therapy.
C. Removal of the underlying cause of the hypercalcemia is the definitive treatment.
D. Supportive therapy is often needed to decrease serum calcium concentration to a less toxic level while
waiting for a definitive diagnosis to be established.
E. Parenteral fluids, furosemide, sodium bicarbonate, glucocorticoids, or combinations of these treatments
reduce serum calcium concentrations in most animals that are severely affected (acutely ill):
1. Fluid therapy:
a. The first goal of fluid therapy is to correct dehydration because hemoconcentration contributes to
hypercalcemia.
h. Dehydration should be corrected within 4-6h of presentation in animals with severe hypercal-
cemia. Normocalcemia may be restored by fluid therapy alone if the hypercalcemia is initially
mild.
C. Physiologic saline (0.9% NaCl) is the solution of choice for correction of dehydration and hyper
contain any calcium and contains more sodium that lactated Ringer's solution, which promotes renal
loss of calcium.
2. Diuretics:
b. Furosemide promotes enhanced urinary calcium loss.
C. Thiazides should not be used since they may result in hypocalciuria and may aggravate hypercalcemia.
d. Adequate hydration during furosemide administration is essential.
3. Sodium bicarbonate:
a. Infusion of sodium bicarbonate has been studied in cats at 1-4 mEq/kg as a bolus infusion.
b. This treatment is most often used in the presence of metabolic acidosis or in those cats with a
severe hypercalcemic crisis (collapse, encephalopathy, and cardiac arrhythmia).
C. Sodium bicarbonate infusion is most likely to be helpful in combination with other treatments.
d. Serum iCa concentration is reduced with sodium bicarbonate infusion because the pH becomes
more alkalotic, and there is increased binding of calcium to serum proteins.
4. Glucocorticoids:
a. Glucocorticoids can significantly reduce serum iCa concentration in patients with hypercalcemia.
especially in those with lymphoma, multiple myeloma, thymoma, hypoadrenocorticism, hypervitami-
nosis D, hypervitaminosis A, or granulomatous disease.
h. When possible, corticosteroids should be withheld from animals for which a diagnosis has not
been established because lymphocytolysis can make a histopathologic diagnosis of lymphoma much
more difficult or impossible.
5. Calcitonin:
a. Treatment with calcitonin may be useful in those with severe hypercalcemia.
h. Calcitonin treatment is expensive, its effect is unpredictable, effects are short lived, and resistance
often develops after a few days.
c. Vomiting and anorexia are common side effects in dogs.
6. Bisphosphonates:
a. Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption by decreasing osteoclast activity and function.
h. Dehydration should be corrected before bisphosphonate use to lessen the chance of renal injury.
c. Intravenous infusions of pamidronate and clodronate have been used to treat hypercalcemia in a
few cats.
d. Oral alendronate has been used in a limited number of cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia with
apparent safety and efficacy. Oral alendronate at 3 mg/kg once weekly for 22 weeks followed by 9mg/kg
odontoclastic resorptive tooth lesions. The usual starting dose for treatment of idiopathic hypercalcemia
382 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Chronic hypercalcemia—Not sick
Intent to treat or not?
Repeatable hypercalcemia (total calcium)
Clinical signs = none or mild; nonspecific 
Normal physical exam
Minimal other biochemical alterations
No obstruction to urine outflow
from calcium oxalate stones
↑ >1.0 mg/dL
Normal ionized
↑ lonized cakcium
(>0.25 mmol/L)
cakcium
Above upper range
↑< 1.0 mg/dL
No calcium-specific
(<0.25 mmol/L)
Specific calcium
treatment
Above upper range
 treatment
Evidence of calcium toxicity?
↑ BUN
↑ Creatinine
↑ Phosphorus
↓ Urine specific gravity
Urinary stones
Gl signs——constipation, weight loss, vomiting
Does calcium
NO
further ↑?
YES
Monitor
NO
q1-3months
Figure 35.2 Algorithm for use in deciding if chronic hypercalcemia should be treated now or if watchful waiting could be safe.
using alendronate is 10 mg/cat/week. Based on the response in iCa, the dose is adjusted to a final dose of
5-30 mg/cat/week (Figure 35.3) It is important to give alendronate on an empty stomach. Bisphosphonates 
are poorly absorbed in general and this absorption approaches 0% with food in the stomach so we
recommend a 12-h fast followed by pilling. Alendronate administered in tuna water was significantly less
bioavailable than alendronate delivered in water in one study. Due to concerns about esophagitis, we
recommend following the pill by 6mL tap water and *burttering" of the nose to enhance salivation and 
speed the transit of the medication to the stomach.
F.
 Specific therapy for idiopathic hypercalcemia (Figures 35.2 and 35.3 provide algorithms to help in
deciding if treatment is needed now or not, and what treatment path may be chosen):
1. The feeding of increased dietary fiber decreases serum iCa in some cats but not others. The beneficial
effect of a higher fiber diet may be through decreasing the intestinal absorption of calcium.
2. The feeding of a renal veterinary diet sometimes decreases serum iCa in some cats but not others. The
beneficial effect may be through less acidification or other unknown nutrient interactions of these diets.
Hypercalcemia in Cats 383
 Treatment considerations for nonclinical or minimally symptomatic
IDIOPATHICionized hypercalcemia(cats)
Change diet:
Higher-fiber
Renal diet
Oxalate prevention
6 week recheck
Normal ionizedcalcium
↑ lonized calcium
Continue
Add prednisolone
Start (or increase dose)
diet
 5-10 mg/cat/day
bisphosphonates
5-30 mg alendronate
1 month
per cat per week
recheck
Recheck
↑lonized
3-6 months
calcium
↑Prednisolone
1 month
↑lonized
to 10-20 mg/cat/day
recheck
 calcium
Normal
ionized calcium
historically after diet modification has failed to control circulating calcium, bisphosphonates appear to be emerging as the
peferred second choice of treatment.
 3. Prednisolone therapy may result in long-term decrease in iCa concentration. The effects may last for
p rad ien rad auosupand o-s jo sasop e sien aos u srean oi s
 4. When dietary modification and prednisolone fail to decrease serum iCa concentration, bisphosphonate
treatment can be considered.
i t ssd an si raa odoii im sin ro aai aqsd oi sd a 's
 magnitude of ionized hypercalcemia continues to increase or clinical signs become more obvious:
a.
 Aggressive treatment to decrease serum calcium is warranted in cats with CRF or those with
calcium-containing urinary stones.
 6. Specific treatment for idiopathic hypercalcemia is impossible because the pathogenesis remains
nl ri aou puoas au auoaq seu aeuopue ajes suaredde pue aeoa oi ana 'umouun
of IHC after or in addition to dietary modification in our hospital. Reports of the efficacy of alendronate
in restoration of normocalcemia have yet to be published in a series of cats.
treatment of choice:
384 Clinica Endocrinology of Companion Animals
  ps   o   se rno n sod  '
vitamin D metabolites may be required. Hypocalcemia without clinical signs usually does not require
treatment unless the serum tCa is <6 mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L).
2. We have less experience in cats using a preemptive protocol with calcitriol treatment to minimize
postsurgical hypocalcemia.
H.
 Specific treatment for secondary hyperparathyroidism: Treatment with low-dose calciriol therapy to
reduce PTH synthesis conceivably improves quality of life, reduces progression of renal disease, and pro-
longs life, but evidence-based medicine for this is not as established as that for the dog. There is generally no
calcemia attributed to the development of tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
Treatment of vitamin D toxicity should be aggressive and may need to be prolonged. Greater survival
 has been reported in cats than in dogs following ingestion of rat bait containing cholecalciferol.
Vll.  Prognosis
A.
Prognosis is dependent on the underlying cause.
B.
 Idiopathic hypercalcemia: Prognosis is good to excellent for initial restoration of normocalcemia with
treatment.
C.
lowing treatment of the underlying malignancy. Prognosis is poor to grave for long-term survival from the
malignancy.
D.
 Hypervitaminosis D: Prognosis is good for resolution of hypercalcemia.
VIlll. Prevention
A.
 Prevent exposure to excessive vitamin D in rodenticides, houseplants, and antipsoriasis creams.
References and Further Readings
Barber PJ, Elliott J. Feline chronic renal failure: calciurn homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. J Smatt
Anim Pract 1998;39:108-116.
Bolliger AP, Graham PA, Richard V, et al. Detection of parathyroid horrmone-related protein in cats with humoral
hypercalcemia of malignancy. Vet Clin Patho! 2002;31:3-8.
Chew DJ, Leonard M, Muir W 3rd. Effect of sodium bicarbonate infusions on ionized calcium and total calcium
concentrations in serum of clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res 1989;50:145-150.
Chew DJ, Schenck PA. Advances in the treatment of hypercalcemia—The veterinary perspective. Proceedings frorm the
American Coltege of Veterinary Internal Medicine Meeting,Anaheim, CA, 2010.
Hostutler RA, Chew DJ, Jaeger JQ, et al. Uses and effectiveness of pamidronate disodiurm for treatrment of dogs and cats with
hypercalcemia. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:29-33
Midkiff AM, Chew DJ, Randolph JF, et al. Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2000;14:619-626.
Mohn KL, Jacks TM, Schleim KD,et al. Alendronate binds to tooth root surfaces and inhibits progression of feline tooth root
resorption: A pilot proof-of-concept study. J Vet Dent 2009;26(2):74-81.
Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, McManus PM. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective study. Vet Clin Pathot
2005;34(4):341-352.
Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. Primary hypoadrenocorticisrm in ten cats. J Vet Intern Med 1989:3:55-58.
Savary KC, Price GS, Vaden SL. Hypercalcemia in cats: A retrospective study of 71 cases (1991-1997). J Vet Intern Med
2000;14:184-189.
Schenck PA. Serurm ionized rmagnesiurm concentrations in dogs and cats with hypoparathyroidism. J Vet Intern Med
2005;19(3):462.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ. Prediction of serum ionized calciurm concentration by serum total calcium concentration in cats. Can J
Vet Res 2010;74(3):209-213.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Behrend EN. Updates on hy percalcemic disorders. In: August J, ed. Consuttations in Feline Internat
Medicine. St.Louis: Elsevier, 2005,pp. 157-168.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Rosol TJ. Disorders of calcium: Hy percalcemia and hy pocalcermia. In: Dibartola S, ed.
Ftuid Therapy in Smatt Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 122-194.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Refsal K, et al. Calcium rmetabolic hormones in feline idiopathic hypercalcemia. J Vet Intern Med
2004;18:442.
CHAPTER 36
Hypercalcemia in Other Species
Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Hypercalcemia in Horses
Pathogenesis
● Multiple causes including renal failure, hypervitaminosis D, neoplasia, hyperparathyroidism, and
 granulomatous disease.
 Can lead to cardiac rate and rhythm abnormalities and soft tissue mineralization of vital organs.
Classical Signs
● Anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, poor performance, depression, polyuria/polydipsia, and other signs
dependent upon underlying cause.
Diagnosis
● Serum biochemistry.
Treatment
● Fluid therapy, furosemide diuresis, glucocorticoids, or surgery, for example, for neoplasia.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Hypercalcemia is defined as an elevated serum calcium level (i.e., >3.4 mmol/L [13.5 mg/dL]).
B. Parathyroid hormone (PTH), calcitonin, and vitamin D act in conjunction with the intestine, bone, kid-
neys, and parathyroid glands to maintain calcium homeostasis. Disturbances in calciurm homeostasis result-
ing in hypercalcemia occur with organ dysfunction, abnormalities in hormonal balance or production of a
PTH analogue. Regardless of the underlying pathology, hypercalcemia can lead to cardiac rate and rhythm
abnormalities and soft tissue mineralization of vital organs.
C. Hypercalcemic disorders in the horse can be divided into two broad groups:
1. Parathyroid-dependent hypercalcemia/primary hyperparathyroidism.
ClinicalEndocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
385
386 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Hypercalcemia independent of parathyroid gland function (i.e., hypercalcemia develops despite para
thyroid gland suppression). This may be seen in a variety of conditions (e.g., renal failure, vitamin D
intoxication, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and neoplasia).
D. Parathyroid-dependent hypercalcemia:
1. Primary hyperparathyroidism results from parathyroid hyperplasia or parathyroid adenoma forma-
tion. It is rare in horses.
2. In this condition, the chief cells of the parathyroid gland secrete excessive and autonomous amounts
lead to increased renal calcium reabsorption (hypocalciuria), decreased phosphorus reabsorption (hyper-
phosphaturia), increased bone resorption, and increased 1,25 (OH), D, synthesis.
3. The end result is loss of cortical bone and the development of a condition termed osteodystrophia
fibrosa, in which there is an excessive accumulation of subperiosteal unmineralized connective
tiss ue.
E. Hypercalcemia independent of parathyroid gland function:
1. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism/renal failure:
b. Horses with chronic renal failure tend to be hypercalcemic but this is thought to be due to an
inability of the kidneys to eliminate calcium rather than an elevated PTH level. In fact, serum PTH
concentrations in horses with chronic renal failure and hypercalcemia are often in the low to normal
fange. Serum phosphorus concentrations are variable and unlike in other species with renal disease,
may be low.
2. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism:
 a Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is associated with diets with one or more of the fol-
lowing features:
1) Low in calcium and/or high in phosphorus.
 2) High in oxalates.
 3) With a phosphorus:calcium ratio of 3:1 or higher.
h. Such diets are associated with hyperphosphatemia and the induction of parathyroid cell hyperplasia.
Although some horses with this condition are hypercalcemic, the majority are normocalcemic or
slightly hypocalcemic.
3. Hypervitaminosis D:
a Hypervitaminosis D is a potentially fatal condition that can occur due to intoxication with either
ergocalciferol (vitamin D,) or cholecalciferol (vitamin D,).
h. In addition to oversupplementation, it may also occur due to the ingestion of plants containing
vitamin D analogues such as Solanum glaucophyllum (S. maiacoxylon) in South America, S. sodo-
 maeum in Hawai, day blooming jasmine (Cestrum diurnum) in the southern United States, and
Trisetum flavescens in Europe.
C. Hypervitaminosis D increases the intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption of calcium and
phosphorus.
d. As vitamin D is an important negative regulator of parathyroid cell proliferation, hypervitaminosis
 D causes parathyroid cell atrophy and decreased PTH secretion. In addition, the associated hypercal-
 cemia contributes to decreased PTH secretion, lowering bone turnover.
4. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM):
a HHM, also referred to as pseudohyperparathyroidism, refers to a paraneoplastic condition of
 horses with certain types of neoplasia. In fact, hypercalcemia is the most common paraneoplastic find-
ing in horses. The development of hypercalcemia in these cases is thought to be due to secretion of
PTH-related protein (PTHrP) by the neoplastic cells.
b. PTHrP interacts with PTH receptors to increase renal reabsorption of calcium, renal elimination
 of phosphorus, and bone resorption.
C. In horses, HHM has been demonstrated in cases of gastric, vulvar, and preputial squamous
cell carcinoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, multiple myeloma, lymphosarcoma, and amelo-
blastoma.
Hypercaicemia in Other Species 387
5. Neonatal hypercalcemia and asphyxia:
a. Some authors have reported hypercalcemia in neonatal foals that does not appear to be associated
with renal failure, excessive PTH secretion, or excessive calcium administration. A consistent feature
 of these cases is peripartum asphyxia. Many of these foals have severe hypotension, somnolence, and
d arssnxa e  ed  ren si siod  eixse ro a s
tion of PTHrP are thought to play a role.
6. Idiopathic systemic granulomatous disease:
a. This is a rare immune disease of horses and ponies characterized by granuloma formation in sev-
eral organs including the skin.
h. Increased expression of PTHrP by the macrophages of granulomas has been found in a pony with
this condition and may explain the hypercalcemia that is seen in some cases.
Signalment
4.
Varies with the underlying condition, for example:
1. Chronic renal failure is more common in middle-aged to older horses (>15 years)
2. Some types of neoplasia that are associated with hypercalcemia are more common in certain groups.
For example, cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma tends to occur in middle-aged to older horses with
unpigmented areas of skin.
Ill. Clinical Signs
4.
Hypercalcemia, regardless of etiology, can cause a variety of nonspecific clinical signs:
1. Polyuria/polydipsia and/or dehydration (due to the direct effects of calcium on renal function and/or
secondary to renal mineralization).
2. Lethargy/depression.
 3. Cardiac dysrhythimias (due to reduced membrane excitability).
4. Gastrointestinal signs, for example, colic, choke, or constipation.
 5. Weight loss/poor body condition and inappetence.
6. Poor performance.
B. Depending on the underlying disease process, other clinical signs may be noted:
athyroidism).
2. Lameness, stiffness, or reluctance to move (hypervitaminosis D, bone neoplasia, primary
hyperparathyroidism, or nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism).
roidism).
4. Crusting skin lesions often affecting mucocutaneous junctions and coronary bands (systemic granu-
lomatous disease).
 5. Enlarged lymph nodes (lymphoma).
6. Palpable mass (neoplasia or granuloma).
7. Renal pain (chronic renal failure).
8. Dysuria (chronic renal failure).
9. Sudden death (due to cardiovascular mineralization) (hypervitaminosis D).
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Measurement of serum total calcium is required for diagnosis. Values >3.4 mmol/L (13.5 mg/dL) are
consistent with hypercalcemia in horses.
B. A detailed history must be obtained and other diagnostic tests will be necessary to identify the underly-
ing etiology (and thereby determine prognosis and optimal treatment protocols) (Tables 36.1 and 36.2).
Given the relative incidence of the causative diseases, it is suggested that:
1. Initial efforts concentrate on assessing renal function and the possibility of hypervitaminosis D.
2. If neither renal failure nor vitamin D intoxication seems likely and hypercalcermia persists, attempt to
exclude neoplasia.
Table 36.1
 A guide to the diagnosis of common and uncommon causes of hypercalcemia in the horse.
Diagnostic test
Expected/suggestive results
Common causes
Chronic renal failure
Transrectal examination of
Palpable renal abnormalities (firm, irregular surface); renal pain;
the urinary tract
palpable (enlarged) ureters; occasionally palpable ureteroliths
Hematology and serum
Azotemia; mild anemia; hypoalbuminemia;
biochemistry
hypophosphatemia; electrolyte aberrations
Urinalysis
Isosthenuria (u.s.g= 1.008-1.012): moderate to marked 
proteinuria may be seen depending on the etiology of the
renal dysfunction 
 Renal ultrasonography
Small renal size, abnormal renal architecture, and/or
variably increased echogenicity suggestive of fibrosis
Ultrasound guided renal biopsy
Histopathological evidence of renal pathology
Hypervitaminosis D
History
Oversupplementation with vitamin D or ingestion of plants
containing vitamin D analogues
 Serum biochemistry
Azotemia; hypochloremia; hyperphosphatemia
Measurement of serum levels
Elevated
of vitamin D metabolites
Urinalysis
 Often hyposthenuria or isosthenuria
Radiography
Increased bone density; decreased size of medullary cavity;
calcification of soft tissues
Necropsy
Mineralization of kidneys, liver, lymph nodes, lungs,
ligaments, tendons, large vessels, and/or endocardium;
osteopetrosis of long bones; parathyroid gland atrophy-
although this can be challenging to assess as the glands are
small and vary in location
Uncommon causes
Neoplasia (humoral 
Biochemistry
Hypophosphatemia
hypercalcemia of 
PTH assay
Low to normal
malignancy)
PT'HrP assay
Elevated
 Urinalysis
Hypocalciuria; hyperphosphaturia
FNA and/or biopsy of any mass
Presence of neoplastic cells on cytology and/or
or masses; collection of
histopathology
 abdominal or thoracic fluid
where indicated
Hyperparathyroidism 
 Serum biochemistry
Hypophosphatemia (primary hyperparathyroidism) or
hyperphosphatemia (nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism)
Measurement of serum levels
Low to normal
of vitamin D metabolites
PTH assay
High
Urinalysis
Hypocalciuria; hyperphosphaturia
 Radiography
Decreased facial and long bone density: fibrous proliferation 
of the max illa and mandible; resorption of the dental alveolar
sockets; loss of the lamina dura surrounding the molars
Nasal endoscopy
 Stenosis of the nasal passages
Necropsy
Enlargement of the maxilla and mandible; accumulation of
fibrous tissue around the facial bones; stenosis of the nasal
 passages; loose cheek teeth; increased bone fragility;
parathyroid gland hyperplasia
PTH = parathyroid hormone; PTHrP= parathyroid hormone-related protein; FNA =fine needle aspirate; u.s.g = urine specific
gravity.
388
Hypercalcemia in Other Species  389
Table 36.2 Equine reference values for total calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid
hormone (PTH), and parathyroid hormone-related protein (PT HrP).
Parameter
Normal range
Total calcium
2.8-3.4mmol/L (11.1-13.5mg/dL)
 Phosphorus
0.39-1.6mmol/L (1.2-4.8mg/dL) 
PTH 
1-4 pmol/L (9.5-38pg/mL)
PTHrP
<1 pmol/L (<10pg/mL)
 3. Finally if all the previous work-up has failed to identify a cause, rarer hypercalcemic syndromes
should be considered, for example, hyperparathyroidism and systemic granulomatous disease.
D. Note that blood samples collected in standard EDTA tubes may clot if the serum calcium concentration
is markedly elevated. This occurs when there is insufficient EDTA to bind all the calcium, leaving some avail-
able to complete the clotting process.
V.Differential Diagnoses
A.
 Given that a proportion of the extracellular calcium is protein bound, total calcium results should be
interpreted in light of total protein and albumin concentrations. Total serum calcium may be falsely elevated
if the horse is hyperalbuminemic; equally hypoalbuminemia may obscure true hypercalcemia.
B.
Hemolysis and lipemia may falsely elevate total calcium results.
C.
 Other conditions that may present with similar nonspecific clinical signs:
1. Renal disease without hypercalcemia.
2. Hepatic disease.
3. Diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 17).
4. Cardiac disease.
5. Hypoadrenocorticism (see Chapter 3).
6. Any disease that results in anemia.
Vl. Treatment
4.
 Hypercalcemia rarely presents as an equine emergency.
B.
 If total calcium levels are markedly elevated, the following medical treatment may be indicated:
1. Intravenous fluid therapy with 0.9% saline solution.
2. The administration of loop diuretics. Furosemide is the diuretic of choice because it inhibits the
 sodium/potassium/chloride cotransporter in the distal tubules, thereby increasing the urinary excretion
of calcium. Thiazide diuretics are contraindicated because they stimulate calcium reabsorption.
 Other therapeutic measures should be directed toward addressing the underlying disease process:
1. Chronic renal failure:
a. Intravenous or oral fluid therapy will promote dieresis.
h. Antibiotics may be indicated if secondary infection is present.
C. Dietary management should focus on low-calcium, limited-protein (<10%) rations and free access
to water electrolytes, and carbohydrates.
d. Vitamin B and anabolic steroids may be helpful to stimulate appetite.
e. Any nephrotoxic medications must be discontinued.
f. Electrohydraulic or laser lithotripsy via an endoscope inserted into the ureter is the recommended
approach to the treatment of the rare cases with obstructive nephrolithiasis or ureterolithiasis.
2. Vitamin D intoxication:
a. Discontinue supplementation/eliminate access to causative plants.
 b. Glucocorticoids may be helpful because in horses they decrease intestinal absorption of calcium,
increase urinary excretion of calcium, and decrease bone resorption.
c. Dietary calcium and phosphate levels should be decreased.
390  Clinicat Endocrinorogy of Companion Animats
d. The use of calcium binding agents such as sodium phytate which is high in many cereals has
been proposed as an adjunctive measure.
3. Neoplasia:
a. Surgical excision, radiotherapy, or cryosurgery may be options for localized tumors resulting in
HHM.
h. Some horses with lymphoma may improve with chemotherapy.
4. Primary hyperparathyroidism:
a. Theoretically, parathyroidectomy is the treatment of choice, although this is often impractical
for several reasons (e.g., localizing the pathologic gland is challenging, cost).
Vll.  Prognosis
A.
 The prognosis for horses with hypercalcemia is variable depending on the underlying disease, but in
alization.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Avoid oversupplementation with vitamin D.
B.
Eliminate access to plants that contain vitamin D analogues.
C.
 Provide appropriate treatment for renal disease and neoplasia in the earliest stages when possible.
Hypercalcemia in Rabbits
Pathogenesis
● May develop secondary to high dietary calcium intake, chronic renal failure, hypervitaminosis D,
and a variety of other diseases.
● Sequelae include renal calcification and arteriosclerosis.
Classical Signs
● Anorexia, weakness, weight loss, polyuria/polydipsia, and other signs dependent upon underlying
cause.
Diagnosis
● Serum biochemistry.
Treatment
● Dietary correction, fluid therapy, supportive care, and treatment of any underlying disease process.
Pathogenesis
A.
Rabbits have an unusual calcium metabolism resulting in a 30-50% higher normal serum total cal-
rable to that of other mammals:
1. Rabbit serum calcium concentrations vary widely and reflect dietary intake.
 2. Fractional urinary excretion of calcium is approximately 44% in the rabbit, compared to <2% in
most mammals.
3. Passive absorption of dietary calcium from the gastrointestinal tract is very efficient and does not
require vitamin D if dietary levels of calcium are adequate.
B
Total blood calcium levels may be affected by age and reproductive status.
C.
Compared to other mammalian species, a reduction in PTH concentration occurs at relatively high
levels of blood calcium.
Hypercalcemia in Other Species 391
D. Causes of hypercalcemia in the rabbit include:
1. High dietary calcium intake.
2. Chronic renal failure (impaired calcium excretion).
3. Primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism. Development of secondary hyperparathyroidism as a
complication of chronic renal failure depends on the mineral content of the diet. Rabbits fed a normal
diet of ~1.2% calcium and 0.6% phosphorus have been shown to develop hypercalcemia, hypophos-
 phatemia, and low PTH levels in the course of chronic renal failure, therefore suggesting that rabbits are
resistant to renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. However, hyperparathyroidism can develop if uremic
rabbits are fed a low-calcium, high-phosphorus diet.
4. Paraneoplastic syndrome (e.g., secondary to lymphoma, thymoma, or primary/metastatic osteolytic
bone neoplasia).
5. Osteomyelitis or diffuse osteoporosis.
6. Granulomatous disease.
7. Severe hypothermia.
8. Hypervitaminosis D (via rodenticide or plant ingestion or excessive supplementation) which results
in metastatic calcification of soft tissues, including the kidney, liver, arterial walls, and muscle.
E.
 Rabbits are especially predisposed to the renal consequences of hypercalcemia (impaired renal function;
calcification) as the urinary system is the main route for calcium excretion. Initially, renal compromise will
be subclinical but progressive mineralization of the kidney causes nephron damage and chronic renal failure.
F.
 Spontaneous aortic arteriosclerosis has been reported in hypercalcemic rabbits and in rabbits fed a diet
high in calcium and vitamin D.
I1.Signalment
A.
 There are no reported sex or breed predispositions.
I. Clinical Signs
4.
 Clinical signs tend to be nonspecific and vary depending on the underlying etiology:
1. Weight loss/poor body condition.
2. Weakness.
 3. Polyuria/polydipsia.
4. Dysuria/hematuria.
5. Anorexia.
 6. Gastrointestinal ileus or diarrhea.
7. Decreased appetite.
8. Palpably small and irregular kidneys.
9. Ataxia or paralysis.
10. Death.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
Measurement of serum total calcium is required for diagnosis. Values >4.2 mmol/L (16.8mg/dL) are
consistent with hypercalcemia in rabbits. Ideally, ionized calcium should also be measured.
B.
 A nonregenerative anemia may be detected on hematology if renal compromise is a feature.
C.
 Radiography may reveal calcification of soft tissues, including the renal vessels and the aorta.
D.
 Renal function should be assessed (serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and renal ultrasonography).
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
 An erroneous diagnosis of hypercalcemia is frequently made by clinicians unfamiliar with the high nor-
 mal total serum calcium levels of rabbits compared to other mammals.
B.
Lipemia may artifactually elevate total calcium values.
Vl. Treatment
A.
Dietary correction is indicated if calcium and/or vitamin D levels are considered excessive.
B.
Fluid therapy (0.9% sodium chloride) is indicated if renal function is compromised.
 Treat any identified underlying disease process and provide general supportive care.
392  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Vl1.1
Prognosis
A.
 Good if hypercalcemia simply reflects a high dietary calcium intake, and soft tissue calcification and
renal failure have not yet developed.
B
Guarded to poor if hypercalcemia is secondary to an underlying disease process.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Avoid excessive dietary levels of calcium and vitamin D.
B.
Avoid access to rodenticides that contain vitamin D.
Hypercalcemia in Pet Birds and Reptiles
Pathogenesis
● May be physiological (most common) or pathological in origin.
Classical Signs
● Physiological: none.
● Pathological: anorexia, polyuria/polydipsia, depression, muscle weakness, and painful joints.
Diagnosis
● Measurement of total (and ideally ionized) calcium in the blood.
Treatment
● Physiological: none required.
● Pathological: fluid therapy and dietary correction.
Pathogenesis
A
Physiological hypercalcemia:
1. Hypercalcemia in birds and reptiles is most often physiological in origin and associated with
increased estrogen secretion, production of calcium-binding proteins (e.g., albumin), calcium mobiliza-
tion from medullary bone, and lipemic interference.
2. In oviparous species, increased phosphorus and calcium concentrations are observed during egg
formation in females. Generally, these occur together and the calcium:phosphorus ratio stays above 1
in healthy individuals. If the calcium:phosphorus ratio is <1, renal disease should be investigated.
3. In laying female birds, the serum albumin level may rise by up to 100% and total calcium can be as
high as 10 mmol/L (40 mg/dL) without clinical complications.
R
Pathological hypercalcemia:
1. Pathological hypercalcemia in birds and reptiles occurs most commonly due to long-term provision
of a diet with excessive calcium and/or vitamin D, levels. This is usually associated with overzealous
use of vitamin and/or mineral supplements. The feeding of plants containing vitamin D analogues may
also result in hypercalcermia. Vitamin D, oversupplementation is exacerbated by high dietary levels of
calcium or phosphorus. Hyperparathyroidism, neoplasia, osteomyelitis, and granulomatous disease
are other possible causes of hypercalcemia but their association with calcium derangements remains
largely undescribed in these taxonomic groups.
2. Little information is available regarding the required and toxic levels of vitamin D for most avian
and reptilian species.
3. Long-term consumption of high levels of calcium may interfere with magnesium, manganese, and
zinc absorption causing secondary deficiencies.
Hypercaicemia in Other Species 393
(including arterial walls and kidneys), visceral gout, urate nephrosis, and/or demineralization of bone.
Signalment
A
Entire female birds and reptiles are predisposed to physiological hypercalcemia.
B.
Macaws, cockatiels, and African grey parrots appear to be particularly sensitive to vitamin D toxicity.
C.
Budgerigars appear to be sensitive to hypercalcemia associated with high dietary calcium levels.
11.
Clinical Signs
4
Physiological hypercalcemia:
1. None other than normal reproductive activity, for example, egg laying.
B.
Pathological hypercalcemia:
1. Poor weight gain in growing animals.
 a     no s l  rs o  
ferred to the embryo).
3. Depression.
4. Anorexia.
5. Nausea.
6. Polyuria/polydipsia.
7. Painful joints.
8. Muscle weakness.
9. Disorientation.
Iv.
Diagnosis
4
 Hypercalcemia is diagnosed on the basis of biochemistry confirming high blood calcium levels. Ideally,
both total and ionized calcium should be measured. Where available, species specific reference ranges should
be sought for comparison.
B
 If hypercalcemia is confirmed and not likely to be associated with normal physiological processes, the
1. A thorough dietary history should be obtained.
 2. Radiography is useful to assess bone density, renal size, and to detect mineralization of tissues.
 3. Assessment of uric acid levels in blood: hyperuricemia frequently accompanies pathological hyper
calcemia.
4. Measurement of vitamin D3 metabolites in the blood may aid the diagnostic process although for
the majority of species more research is required to validate these tests and define reference ranges.
Differential Diagnoses
As is the case in mammals, it appears that correlations between calcium, total protein, and albumin
exist in birds and reptiles. However, the specific relationship differs markedly between species. Total calcium
values should not be interpreted without consideration of the total protein and albumin concentration.
B.
Hemolysis, lipemia, and bacterial contamination of the sample may falsely elevate total calcium results.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Physiological hypercalcemia does not require treatment.
B.
Pathological hypercalcemia is treated by diuresis with a calcium-deficient crystalloid, for example,
0.9% sodium chloride, and dietary correction:
e  sp ssid ed  e aq r n as l
 2. Cortisol has been suggested as an adjunctive measure for the treatment of vitamin D toxicity in reptiles.
Vll. Prognosis
A
 Poor in the case of pathological hypercalcemia if tissue calcification and visceral or articular gout are
present.
Vlll. Prevention
A
Feed a balanced diet appropriate for the species concerned, ensuring dietary levels of calcium and
vitamin D are not excessive.
394 Clinica Endocrinology of Companion Animals
References and Further Readings
Boland RL. Solanurm malacoxylon: A toxic plant which affects animal calciurm metabolism. Biormed Environ Sci 1988;1:414-423.
Calvert I. Nutritional problems. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Reptiies, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 289-308.
Campbell TW. Clinical pathology of reptiles. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptite Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders
Elsevier, 2006, pp. 453-470.
Dorrestein GM, de Wit M. Clinical pathology and necropsy. In: Harcourt-Brown N, Chitty J, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Psittacine
Birds, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2005, pp. 60-86.
Echols MS. Evaluating and treating the kidney. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, eds. Clinicat Avian Medicine, Vol. 2. Palm
Beach: Spix Publishing, 2006, pp. 451-491.
Eckermann-Ross C. Horrmonal regulation and calcium metabolism in the rabbit. Vet Clin North Amm Exot Anim Pract
2008;11:139-152.
Frank N, Hawkins JF, Coueil LL,et al. Primary hyperparathyroidism with osteodystrophia fibrosa of the facial bones in a
pony. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;212:84-86.
Garibaldi BA, Pecquet Goad ME. Hypercalcemia with secondary nephrolithiasis in a rabbit. Lab Anim Sci
1988;38(3):331-333.
Harcourt-Brown F. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Edinburgh: Butterworth Heinermann, 2002.
Harr KE. Diagnostic value of biochemistry. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, eds. Clinicat Avian Medicine, Vol. 2. Palm Beach:
Spix Publishing, 2006, pp. 611-629.
Harrington DD. Acute vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) toxicosis in horses: Case report and experimental studies. JAm Vet Med
Assoc 1982;180:867-873.
toxicity of vitamins D2 and D3. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;182:1358-1369.
Jenkins JR. Clinical pathology. In: Meredith A, Flecknell P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2006:pp. 45-51.
Johnston MS, Ivey ES. Parathyroid and ultirmobranchial glands: Calcium metabolism in birds. Semin Avian and Exot Pet Med
2002;11(2):84-93.
Lavoie J-P, Hinchcliff, KW. Blackwetl's Five-Minute Veterinary Consutt: Equine, 2nd edn. Ames: Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, 2008.
Lumeij JT. Relationship of plasma calcium to total protein and albumin in grey (Psittacus erithacus) and Amazon (Amazond
spp.) parrots. Avian Pathot 1990;19:661-667.
Lumeij JT, Remple JD, Riddle KE. Relationship of plasma total protein and albumin to total calciurm in peregrine falcon
(Fatco peregrinus). Avian Pathot 1993;22:183-188.
Macwhirter P. Malnutrition. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, eds. Avian Medicine—Principles and Application. Lake
Worth: Wingers, 1994, pp. 842-861.
pseudohy perparathyroidism. Equine Vet J 1989;21:221-226.
de Matos R. Calcium metabolism in birds. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2008;11:59-82.
Oglesbee BL. The S-Minute Veterinary Consutt: Ferret and Rabbit. Ames: Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2006, pp. 96-102.
Peauroi JR, Fisher DJ, Mohr FC, et al. Primary hyperparathyroidism caused by a functional parathyroid adenoma in a horse.
J Ar Vet Med Assoc 1998;212:1915-1918.
Reusch B. Urogenital system and disorders. In: Meredith A, Flecknell P, eds.BSAVA Mamuat of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery,
2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2006, pp. 85-95.
Rosol TJ, Nagode LA, Robertson JT, et al. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy associated with ameloblastoma in a horse.
J Ar Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:1930-1933.
Roudybush T. Nutritional disorders.In: Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, eds. Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins, 1996, pp. 490-500.
Schoemaker NJ, Lumeij JT, Beynen AC. Polyuria and polydipsia due to vitamin and mineral oversupplermentation of the diet
of a salmon crested cockatoo (Cacatua motuccensis) and blue and gold macaw (Ara ararauna). Avian Patho! 1997;26:201-209.
Schott HC 11. Chronic renal failure in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2007;23:593-612.
Sellers Rs, Toribio RE, Blomme EA. Idiopathic systemic granulormatous disease and macrophage expression of PTHrP in a
miniature pony. J Comp Pathol 2001;125:214-218.
Shell LG, Saumders G. Arteriosclerosis in a rabbit. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989;194(5):679-680.
Stanford M. Calcium metabolism. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, eds. Clinicat Avian Medicine, Vol. 1. Palm Beach: Spix
Publishing, 2006, pp. 141-151.
Hypercalcemia in Other Species 395
Suva LJ, Winslow GA, Wettenhall RE, et al. A parathyroid hormone-related protein implicated in malignant hypercalcemia:
Cloning and expression.Science 1987;237:893-896.
Toribio RE. Parathyroid gland and calcium dysregulation. In: Smith BP, ed. Large Animat Internat Medicine, 4th edn. St Louis:
Mosby Elsevier, 2009, pp. 1355-1363.
edn. St Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2010, pp. 1277-1291.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1995;206(6):820-822.
Endocrinofogy 1989;125:2683-2690.
vitamin D. Lab Anim Sci 1990;40(2):212-215.
CHAPTER 37
Nutritional Secondary
Hyperparathyroidism in Reptiles
Kevin Eatwell
Pathogenesis
● Hyperparathyroidism occurs as a result of a deficiency (relative or absolute) of calcium.
● Most cases in reptiles are due to a lack of dietary calcium in combination with insufficient ultraviolet
{UV}-b radiation.
● Other factors can be involved such as high phosphorus diets, suboptimal temperatures, or increased
demand for calcium.
● Snakes fed whole mammal prey are not reported to suffer from this condition.
Classical Signs
● Skeletal deformity and compressible face or shell (chelonians).
● Lack of truncal lifting.
Tetany and seizures (lizards) or flaccid paralysis (chelonians).
● Prolapse of cloacal organs.
Diagnosis
● Clinical history.
● Low blood ionized calcium.
● Radiographic or CT evidence of pathological fractures and low bone density.
Treatment
 Calcium and vitamin D therapy.
● Phosphate binders and calcitonin may be indicated.
Supportive care and stabilization.
Treatment of secondary complications and/or underlying disease states.
Husbandry improvement including UV-b provision.
● Dietary correction.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
396
1. Pathogenesis
A. A reduction in the ionized calcium level in the circulation leads to the release of parathyroid hormone
(PTH) from the parathyroid gland. This acts on the osteoclasts of the reptile to liberate calcium and other
products from the bony cortices, which provide the structural framework and strength of the skeleton, and to
 increase renal tubular reabsorption of calcium while simultaneously increasing phosphorus excretion in the
urine. PTH also acts on the kidney to stimulate the release of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (active vitamin
  oi s a to pe n jo idn asi on asin a o si   u a
more calcium from the bone stores. Low blood ionized calcium leads to increased nerve excitability and
reduced motor end plate function:
1. In chronic cases, a compensatory parathyroid hypertrophy results. Importantly, the negative feedback
 mechanism that normally operates may fail, such that increasing serum calcium no longer suppresses the
production of PTH from a now overactive parathyroid gland.
B. In clinical cases, problems are usually caused by one or more of the following factors: dietary calcium
deficiency, imbalances in the dietary calcium to phosphorus ratio, and hypo- or hypervitaminosis D. A lack
of vitamin D (cholecalciferol) can be due to either dietary deficiency or failure to provide adequate UV-b
radiation (naturally or artificially).
C. The ultimate result is:
1. A reduction in blood ionized calcium levels leading to tetany and flaccid paralysis (when there is a
sudden demand for calcium or the case has become severe).
2. And/or a reduction in the skeletal calcium content and hence structural strength, leading to soft
 malleable bones, when the deficiency has been medium to long term. This represents the most common
form of metabolic bone disease in reptiles.
 1. Suboptimal environmental temperatures. Production of vitamin D, in the skin is crucially tempera
ture dependent.
 2. No artificial UV-b light provided and/or insufficient exposure to natural sunlight, especially for diur
nal species.
 3. UV-b light bulb in need of replacement.
4. UV-b light placed too far away from the reptile.
 5. Artificial UV-b source placed too far away from the basking site.
6. Diet with an inverted calcium to phosphorus ratio.
7. Lack of appropriate dusting of herbivorous food with a calcium and vitamin D supplement.
 8. Lack of appropriate dusting and gut loading of invertebrate prey with a calcium and vitamin D
supplement.
 9. Overfeeding leading to excessive growth rate.
10. Lack of exercise.
E. Animal risk factors include:
1. Hepatic disease.
2. Renal disease.
3. Skin disease.
4. Reproductive activity.
Il. Signalment
A. Juvenile or rapidly growing lizards and chelonians are more commonly affected by the depletion of bone
stores.
B.
C.
 Most cases present with a history of poor husbandry and diet.
D. Snakes fed whole mammal prey are not reported to suffer from this condition.
III. Climical Signs
A. Deformity of the skeletal elements leading to distorted shape (vertebral column and long bones of
the limbs) and compressible skull (Figure 37.1). Stunted growth may be a feature in young animals. The lay
term "rubber jaw" is often used by owners to describe facial deformities that result.
398 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
the skull and jaw bones are easily compressible.
sisApoasAp woy Suuayns s! pue punois ayl yo Apog sl! yll ol algeun s! (euenai euenal) euensi uaais sul Z'Ze aunsiy
(abnormal skin sloughing).
B. Lack of truncal lifting (Figure 37.2).
C.
Pathological fractures of the limbs.
D. S
 Shell deformities and softening of the carapace and plastron in chelonians (Figure 37.3).
E.
Dermal hemorrhages between the epidermal scutes and the dermal bone in chelonians.
F.
Cloacal prolapse of the hemipenis, cloaca, colon, bladder, or oviducts are all possible (Figure 37.4).
G. Hypocalcemic tetany in lizards; only anecdotally reported in chelonians. Muscle fasciculations and
hyperreflexia may also be seen.
H. Hypocalcemia causing flaccid paralysis in lizards and chelonians.
Dysecdysis (abnormal sloughing) and general debility due to chronicity of the disease process.
Secondary renal disease contributing to collapse.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Clinical history in combination with typical clinical signs is indicative of NSHP.
Nutritionar Secondary Hyperparathyroidism in Reptiles
399
Fgure 37.4  A box turtle ( Terrapene carolina) with a cloacal prolapse. This can present as a complication of hypocalcemia
in both lizards and chelonians.
B. A significant amount of the body's circulating calcium may be protein bound but the proportion bound
is highly variable and as such total calcium values are not helpful in the diagnosis of NSHP.
C.
lonized calcium will be reduced (typically <2.4 mg/dL [0.6 mmol/L]) in cases of hypocalcemic tetany or
paralysis.
D. 25-hydroxycholecalciferol levels may be reduced. However, there are only a few reports of norrmal values
 in reptiles which can make interpretation of results challenging.
E. Radiography or CT examination may demonstrate reduced bone density, bone deviations, fibrous
 osteodystrophy, or pathological fractures. In older animals, bone deviations with acceptable bone density
or healed fractures can indicate historic NSHP.
F. Reproductive activity should also be critically assessed using radiography, ultrasound, or celioscopy, as
 concurrent reproductive disease may require medical or surgical treatment as part of the therapy for NSHP
(Figure 37.5).
400 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 37.5 A lateral horizontal beam radiograph of a female veiled chameleon (Chamaereo catyptratus). Bone density is poor
and the animal is gravid with multiple follicles filling the entire coelomic cavity.
V.1
 Differential Diagnoses
A. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. Severe renal disease can lead to reduced active vitamin D production
and lead to similar clinical signs. Equally concurrent renal disease in patients with NSHP is possible as exces-
for renal disease and this may include blood biochemistry, assessment of the glomerular filtration rate, or renal
B. " Other bone disorders such as spinal osteomyelitis (bacterial or fungal) can be seen in aged lizards.
Hypertrophic osteopathy, osteopetrosis, and Paget's disease (osteitis deformans) have also been reported
in reptiles.
C. Cloacal prolapses can also occur due to trauma of the local tissues, excessive straining due to cloacoliths,
egg production, foreign body ingestion, and parasitism. Radiography, fecal parasitology, and cloacal endoscopy
may be required to rule out these conditions.
D. If neurological signs are present with ionized calcium levels over 2.4 mg/dL (0.6 mmol/L), the clinician should
look towards other differentials such as trauma, infectious agents, xanthomatosis, hypoglycemia, or toxins.
E. Trauma leading to fractures of the limbs in lizards. In these cases, the bone density willbe assessed as normal
 on radiography or CT examination.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 General principles:
1. The primary goals of therapy are:
a. To achieve eucalcemia.
h. To provide supportive care.
C.
 To control and correct secondary complications such as cloacal prolapses.
d. To identify any underlying predisposing disease states and manage these.
e. To provide dietary and husbandry correction long term. Considerations include appropriate
background and basking temperatures are suitable for the species, and providing access to natural
sunlight and/or an appropriate artificial UV-b source.
 2. A suggested protocol is outlined in Table 37.1 but is subject to much variation depending on the severity
of the case.
B.
3.Thermal therapy:
1. Allreptiles should be warmed to their optimal temperatures prior to the administration of therapeutics.
These are species specific and ranges should be sought from reference material:
Nutritional Secondary Hyperparathyroidism in Reptiles
401
Table 37.1:
 Suggested treatment protocol for collapsed hypocalcemic reptiles.
Day 1
Diagnostic procedures
 Radiography and blood profile (including ionized calcium,
uric acid, and phosphorus levels) to evaluate disease status
Treatment
Warm the reptile to its optimal temperature
Provide fluid therapy at 30 mL/kg, by parenteral routes
Provide a Uv light source 
 Start parenteral calcium gluconate therapy at 100-200 mg/
kg q 6h (give slowly and dilute with fluids if using
intravenous or intraosseous routes)
Consider treatment with 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
at 1 ng/kg PO q 12 h
Treat any secondary complications and underlying
 conditions accordingly
Day 2
 Diagnostic procedures 
 Consider reevaluating ionized calcium levels to determine
when parenteral calcium therapy can be stopped 
Treatment
Start supportive nutrition if urinated
Provide oral 25-hydroxycholecalciferol or cholecalciferol
and calcium therapy
Day 3
Treatment
Stop oral 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol therapy
 Continue supportive care and oral calcium and vitamin
Dtherapy
Place an esophagostomy tube if required
Send home once stable with ongoing medication
Day 7
 Diagnostic procedures
Reevaluate ionized calcium levels
Treatment
Consider salmon calcitonin at this point
Note: The protocol used may need to be modified depending on the species presented, the severity and chronicity
 of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, and any concurrent disease problens identified.
a. An even background temperature should be provided for collapsed reptiles (as they are unable to
move about freely to thermoregulate).
b. In reptiles capable of thermoregulation, a basking site should be provided.
C. Calcium therapy:
1. Even in animals with acceptable levels of ionized calcium, calcium therapy is indicated. This provides a
source for not only stabilizing the blood levels but also integration into the bone matrix. Caution is to be
advised in those animals suffering from hyperphosphatemia as calcium therapy can lead to further eleva-
tions in phosphorus by decreasing glomerular filtration rate, renal blood flow, and leading to the release
of phosphorus from cells. Phosphorus binders can be used alongside diuresis to reduce phosphorus levels:
 a. Parenteral calcium gluconate can be used in severe cases and is given by any parenteral route. For
intravenous or intraosseous use, it is best diluted with fluids and administered slowly. Dosages com-
 monly employed are 100-200mg/kg, every 6h. Ideally, treatment should be based on serial ionized
calcium concentrations and the clinical response to therapy.
b. Oral calcium supplementation should be provided in those animals with an acceptable ionized
calcium level that are well enough to tolerate oral therapy. This can be provided either in a liquid
format, such as calcium borogluconate, or as calcium carbonate powder. Levels provided are arbitrary
but dosing regimens are often provided on commercial products.
D. UV light:
1. This should be provided to all reptiles suffering from NSHP, specifically UV-b light (wavelength
290-320 nm). Some species have a greater ability to utilize UV light than others for the production of
vitamin D:
402 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
a. An artificial light source should be used. Many designs are commercially available for reptiles and
include metal halide and mercury vapor lamps (which also act as heat sources), compact bulbs, or
fluorescent tubes. The output of these sources should be verified at the reptile's level with a UV meter.
Exposure levels required vary among reptile species.
b. Solar radiation should also be provided when weather conditions allow exposure to direct unfiltered
E. Vitamin D therapy:
1. Vitamin D can be given in any of three formulations: oral cholecalciferol, 25-hydroxycholecalciferol,
or 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. Many oral formulations contain cholecalciferol in combination with
calcium. Ideally, measurement of the blood 25-hydroxycholecalciferol should be perforrmed to avoid
toxicity. Nephrocalcinosis is a potential complication of therapy. It should be noted that the ability of all
species of reptile to utilize oral vitamin D is questionable:
a. 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol is available as oral capsules containing 0.25 or 0.5 μg. The capsule
contents can be mixed with olive oil to increase absorption. It is generally only used in the initial phase
of treatment, where immediate effectiveness is required. The recommended dose is based on anecdotal
reports: 1 ng/kg is given orally q 12 h.
 b. 25-hydroxycholecalciferol or cholecalciferol can be provided at the same time and can be continued
over the first few weeks.
F. Supportive care:
1. It is highly likely that reptiles suffering from NSHP will have had reduced access to food and water
prior to presentation:
 a Fluid therapy should be administered by parenteral or enteral routes depending on the severity of
the case. This is of particular importance for phosphate diuresis when reptiles are suffering from
hyperphosphatemia.
h. Nutritional support is of secondary importance after the animal has been successfully rehydrated
and any electrolyte imbalances corrected. If the reptile is anorexic, as is often the case, nutritional
support can be achieved using a number of commercially available products. Liquidized food can be
should be considered. The metabolic rate of reptiles is much lower than mammals and the level of
nutritional support is adjusted accordingly.
G. Providing exercise:
1. Exercise is vital in order to stimulate normal bone growth due to mechanical loading and this is often
overlooked. Caution is advised though as those reptiles considered at risk of pathological fractures will
require their activity to be initially curtailed:
a Getting tortoises or large lizards outside in a rumn is probably one of the best options both for the
physiological and psychological well being of the reptile.
enclosure should be based on the relative size of the reptile and the room temperature. The reptile
should be returned to its enclosure prior to excessive cooling.
H. Phosphorus binders:
1. Where phosphorus has been elevated, phosphorus binders may be used to reduce the risk of
 mineralization of tissues, prior to calcium supplementation. Phosphate binders only act on intestinal
phosphorus:
a Aluminum hydroxide can be given orally at a dose rate of 50mg/kg q 12h. Care has to be taken
with commercial antacids as some can contain magnesium at excessive levels for reptiles.
b. Calcium acetate, citrate, or carbonate also act to bind phosphorus and can be given orally.
C. Fluid diuresis will also reduce plasma phosphorus levels.
Calcitonin therapy:
1. There have been some studies on the effects of serial injections of calcitonin in reptiles. Calcitonin acts
to reduce bone liberation of calcium. However, some studies have shown calcitonin to have limited effects
even with daily administration in reptiles. It is best used in combination with serial monitoring of blood
ionized calcium levels to reduce the risk of hypocalcermia and to permit evaluation of its effectiveness:
Nutritional Secondary Hyperparathyroidism in Reptiles403
a Salmon calcitonin (a synthetic calcitonin) is available commercially and has been used at a dose
after a further week. In chelonians, a dose of 1.5 IU/kg has been recommended as a one-off treatment.
PTH therapy:
1. In humans, PTH is used to treat osteopenia as it has an anabolic effect on bone. There have been no
such effects reported in reptiles.
Treatment of underlying predisposing factors or secondary complications:
1. This is an important aspect of therapy and may influence prognosis. The reader is directed to more
detailed texts on the management of related conditions:
a Underlying conditions such as reproductive disease should be diagnosed and managed appropri-
ately.
h. Secondary complications such as cloacal prolapse will require specific treatment.
C. Renal function should be evaluated in every patient and if renal disease is diagnosed, it must be
treated accordingly.
d. External coaptation, such as lightweight splints, should be used to stabilize pathological frac-
 tures. Internal fixation implants are not appropriate.
Vll.  Prognosis
 Prognosis depends on the severity of the case presented and can vary from good to grave. Severe cases
s Apuasn pue aderi on podsn lm sas ra sna a to pazuna a pnors
although anatomical distortions willremain long term. Many reptiles can lead acceptable lives despite this,
provided that mobility and respiration are not overly impaired. Some chelonians will require modification of
the carapace to allow free limb and head movement.
Vlll. Prevention
 Providing the appropriate husbandry (including nutrition and environmental conditions) for the spe-
cies concerned is of paramount importance. Identifying animals in greater need of calcium and vitamin D is
important (such as growing juveniles or reproductively active females) as their environment and diet will
 need to be modified accordingly.
 References and Further Readings
Bentley PJ. Hormones and calcium metabolism. In: Bentley PJ, ed. Comparative Vertebrate Endocrinology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1976, pp. 218-241.
Burgmann PM, Mcfarlen J, Thiesenhausen K. Causes of hy pocalcaermia and metabolic bone disease in Iguana iguana. J Smaff Exot
Ani Med 1993;2(2):63-68.
Calvert I. Nutritional problems. In: Girling S, ed. BSAVA Manuat of Reptiies, 2nd edn. Cheltenham: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 289-308.
Klaphake E. A review of phosphorous for the reptile practitioner. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet 2001;281-286.
1981;44:476-479.
Mader DR. Metabolic bone diseases. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptite Medicine and Sturgery, 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders, 2006,
pp. 841-851.
Mader DR, Garner MM. Metabolic bone disease in reptiles. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet 200 1;287-289.
McArthur S, Wilkinson RJ, Barrows MG. Tortoises and turtles. In: Meredith A, Redrobe S, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Exotic pets,
4th edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2002, pp. 208-222.
calcitonin in green iguanas, Iguana iguana. In: Danes J, Dacke C, Filk C, Gay C, eds. Catcium Metabolism: Comparative
Endocrinology. Bradley Stoke, Bristol: BioScientifica Ltd, 1999, pp. 75-80.
Ullrey DE, Bermard JB. Vitamin D: Metabolism, sources, unique problems in zoo animals, meeting needs. In: Fowler ME,
Miller RE, eds.Zoo and Wid Animat Medicine, Current Therapy, vol. 4, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999, pp. 63-78.
CHAPTER 38
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs
Annemarie M.W.Y. Voorbij and Hans S. Kooistra
Pathogenesis
 Congenital hyposomatotropism or pituitary dwarfism occurs most often as an autosomal, recessive
inherited disorder in German shepherd dogs or breeds in which German shepherd dogs have been used
 in the breeding.
● Congenital hyposomatotropism in these breeds is characterized by underdevelopment of the
pituitary gland and a deficiency of growth hormone (GH), thyrotropin, prolactin, and gonadotropins,
whereas corticotropin secretion is unaffected.
● A mutation of the Lhx3 gene is the most likely cause of congenital hyposomatotropism.
● Acquired or adult-onset GH deficiency may be caused by damage to the pituitary gland. The exact
 pathogenesis of other forms of so-called spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism is not completely
clear.
Classical Signs
of the puppy hair coat with concurrent lack of guard hairs and bilaterally symmetrical alopecia.
● Spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism has been proposed as an explanation for some forms
of alopecia.
Diagnosis
● Insufficient GH response to stimulation of the somatotropic cells and low plasma insulin-like
 growth factor-I (IGF-I) concentration.
● Congenital hyposomatotropism in German shepherd dogs and related breeds can be diagnosed with
a specific DNA test.
Treatment
● Porcine GH or progestins.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
404
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs 405
1.Pathogenesis
A. The pituitary gland consists of two main parts: the adenohypophysis (anterior pituitary) and the
neurohypophysis (posterior pituitary).
B. The adenohypophysis contains a functionally diverse population of highly specialized cell types that are
classified according to the tropic hormones they produce:
1. Somatotropic cells secrete GH.
 2. Lactotropic cells secrete prolactin.
 3. Gonadotropic cells secrete the gonadotropins luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH).
4. Thyrotropic cells secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH or thyrotropin).
 5. Corticotropic cells synthesize the precursor molecule proopiomelanocortin (POMC), which gives rise
to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH or corticotropin).
C. Congenital hyposomatotropism:
1. The development of the adenohypophysis is a highly differentiated process that is tightly regulated by the
coordinated actions of numerous transcription factors. The individual hormone-secreting cells emerge in a
 2. Any defect in adenohypophyseal development may result in isolated or combined pituitary hormone
deficiency.
 3. In dogs, congenital hyposomatotropism, that is, congenital GH deficiency or pituitary dwarfism, is the
most striking example of pituitary hormone deficiency.
 4. Congenital hyposomatotropism is known to occur in different dog breeds, including the Karelian bear
dog, Czechoslovakian wolfhound, and Saarloos wolfhound. However, the condition is encountered most
often in German shepherd dogs.
5. German shepherd dogs with congenital hyposomatotropism have a combined deficiency of GH, TSH,
prolactin, and the gonadotropins. In contrast, ACTH secretion is preserved.
6. Originally, pressure atrophy of the adenohypophysis by cystic enlargement of Rathke's cleft was
unlikely to cause pressure atrophy and because ACTH secretion is umaffected in pituitary dwarfs, it was
concluded that cyst formation could not be the cause of the disorder.
7. Congenital hyposomatotropism is caused by a simple, autosomal, recessive genetic abnormality.
encoding a transcription factor that precludes effective expansion of pituitary stem cells after the
differentiation of corticotropic cells is the cause of this disorder.
9. Recent research has revealed that a mutation of the gene encoding for the transcription factor Lhx3 is
the most likely cause of congenital hyposomatotropism in German shepherd dogs and breeds in which
German shepherd dogs have been used in the breeding, like Czechoslovakian wolfhounds, Saarloos
wolfhounds, and, probably also, Karelian bear dogs.
D. Acquired hyposomatotropism in mature dogs:
1. Damage to the pituitary gland, for example, due to hypophysectomy or pituitary irradiation as in the
 treatment of pituitary-dependent hypercortisolism, is an obvious cause of acquired hyposomatotropism.
Irradiation will rarely result in clinical signs of GH deficiency.
2. In addition, spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism has been proposed as an explanation for
some forms of alopecia in certain breeds. Although treatment with heterologous GH is quite often
ineffective, the condition has been given names such as adult-onset GH deficiency and GH-responsive
 dermatosis. Uncertainty about the pathogenetic role of GH is ilustrated by the coining of alternative
names such as castration-responsive alopecia and alopecia X.
usidonouosodau panbse kisnouiuods aae oi pasoddns spood arnuur pue sueiueruon u 
 the alopecia may actually be the result of mild hypercortisolism.
Il. Signalment
A. Congenital hyposomatotropism can be encountered in different dog breeds, including the Karelian bear
dog, Czechoslovakian wolfhound, and Saarloos wolfhound. However, the condition has the highest
406 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
litermate (left). Note the proportionate growth retardation, the retention of secondary hairs (puppy hair coat), and the lack of 
primary or guard hairs of the dog with congenital hyposomatotropism.
Figure 38.2 A 6-year-old male miniature poodle with progressively worsening truncal alopecia. Basal and GHRH-stimulated
 plasma GH concentrations were low, consistent with a possible diagnosis of spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism.
prevalence in German shepherd dogs (Figure 38.1). Because it is an autosomal inherited disorder, there
is an equal distribution between males and females.
B.
 Spontaneous adult-onset hyposomatotropism has been reported mainly in breeds such as the Pomeranian,
miniature poodle (Figure 38.2), chow chow, and keeshond. It is reported to occur in both sexes and at any
age, but usually beginming at 1-3 years of age.
ll. Clinical Signs
A。
 Congenital hyposomatotropism:
1. Congenital hyposomatotropism can lead to a wide range of clinical manifestations and not all dwarfs
display the same clinical signs. An overview of the clinical manifestations and postmortem findings
associated with congenital hyposomatotropism is given in Table 38.1.
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs 407
Table 38.1  Clinical manifestations and postmortem findings associated with
congenital hyposomatotropism in dogs.
Musculoskeletal
Dermatologic
 Stunted growth
Soft, wooly haircoat
Thin skeleton 
Retention of lanugo hairs
Changes in ossification centers
Lack of guard hairs
 Delayed closure of growth plates
Isolated patches of guard hair
Delayed dental eruption
Bilateral symmetrical alopecia at
trunk, neck, and proximal extremities
 Fox-like facial features
Hyperpigmentation of the skin
Muscle atrophy
Thin, fragile skin
Wrinkles
Reproduction 
Scales
Cryptorchidism
Comedones
 Flaccid penile sheath
Papules
Failure to have estrus cycles
 Pyoderma
Seborrhea sicca
Other signs
Shrill, puppy-like bark
Postmortem findings
Signs of secondary hypothyroidism
Pituitary cysts
 Mental dullness
Atrophy adenohypophysis
Impairment of renal function
Hypoplasia thyroid gland
Persistent ductus arteriosus
Modified fron Nelson, 2003.
2. All dwarfs display a variable degree of proportionate growth retardation (Figure 38.3). During the
first weeks of their lives, pituitary dwarfs may be of normal size, but after this period, they will grow
more slowly than their litter mates. By 3-4 months of age, affected pups are obviously the runts of their
litter and they will never attain full adult dimensions.
ondary hairs (puppy hair coat) with concurrent lack of primary or guard hairs and bilateral symmetrical
alopecia (Figure 38.4). The alopecia mostly occurs on the trunk, neck, and proximal extremities.
4.1
 Most German shepherd dwarfs have a pointed muzzle, resembling that of a fox (Figure 38.5).
 5. Also dermatological problems such as hyperpigmentation, scaling, and bacterial pyoderma are com-
monly seen in dogs with congenital hyposomatotropism (Figure 38.4).
6. Male German shepherd dwarfs commonly display umilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism. Female
dwarfs often have frequent anovulatory estrous cycles; anovulatory cycles will not be followed by a
huteal phase and, consequently, the bitch will be in heat much more often than usual.
B.
 Acquired hyposomatotropism in mature dogs has been proposed as an explanation for some forms of
alopecia, mainly involving the trunk, caudal surfaces of the thighs, perineum, and neck.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Although the medical history and clinical manifestations may often be highly suggestive of congenital
hyposomatotropism, other endocrine and nonendocrine causes of growth retardation have to be excluded first.
408 Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Figure 38.3  A 6-month-old German shepherd dog with congenital hyposomatotropism, sitting next to a skeleton of an adult
healthy dog of a small dog breed. The dwarf has the same body proportions as the skeleton.
Figure 38.4 A 5-month-old German shepherd dog with congenital hyposomatotropism. Note the retention of secondary hairs
(puppy hair coat) and the alopecia.
B. Routine blood work normally does not reveal abnormalities, except that the plasma creatinine concen-
tration is elevated in most of the pituitary dwarfs. Since the lack of GH and thyroid hormones may result in
maldevelopment of the glomeruli, pituitary dwarfism can be associated with decreased glomerular filtration.
Although creatinine is typically mildly elevated with a normal BUN and concentrated urine in the early
stages, renal failure can develop over time.
C. As expected in secondary hypothyroidism, that is, due to pituitary failure, the plasma concentrations of
thyroxine (T) and TSH are usually low.
D. The function of the somatotropic cells can be evaluated directly by measuring the circulating GH con-
centration. However, since the basal plasma GH concentration may also be low in healthy dogs, a stimula-
tion test is required for the diagnosis of GH deficiency.
E. Definitive diagnosis of pituitary hormone deficiency should rely on evaluation of pituitary responsive-
ness to provocative testing, that is, challenging the adenohypophyseal cells by stimulation with releasing
hormones. To determine if a dog has GH deficiency, a stimulation test with GH-releasing hormone (GHRH),
in an intravenous dosage of 1 pμg/kg body weight, may be used. Alternatively, α-adrenergic drugs such as
clonidine (10 μg/kg body weight) or xylazine (100 μg/kg body weight) can be used. The plasma GH concen-
tration should be determined before and 20-30min after intravenous administration of the stimulant. In
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs409
Figure 38.5 German shepherd dwarf with the characteristic pointed muzzle and fox-like facial features, typical of affected dogs.
healthy dogs, plasma GH concentrations should increase at least rwo- to fourfold after administration of the
stimulant. In contrast, there will be no significant rise in plasma GH concentration in pituitary dwarfs.
F. Another test to determine the responsiveness of the somatotropic cells is the ghrelin stimulation test.
HH ti suiod arou ua 'sop no u pue saop u aseaan H jo roens suod e si u
Human ghrelin is administrated intravenously at a dose of 2 pg/kg body weight. A post-ghrelin plasma GH
concentration of more than 5 pg/L excludes congenital hyposomatotropism.
G. Unfortunately, in many countries a commercial canine-specific GH assay is not available. However, the
function of the somatotropic cells can also be evaluated indirectly by measuring the circulating IGF-I con-
centration. Breed and body size have to be taken into account when interpreting the plasma IGF-I concentra
tion. Although the mean plasma IGF-1 concentration of dogs with congenital hyposomatotropism is
considerably lower than that of healthy dogs, there may be some overlap.
H. To test the secretory capacity of the other hormone producing pituitary cells, the adenohypophysis can
by stimulated with corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH, 1 μg/kg body weight), thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH, 10 μg/kg body weight), and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH, 10 μg/kg body weight).
The results of the combined pituitary anterior lobe function test in healthy dogs and German shepherd dogs
with congenital hyposomatotropism are depicted in Figure 38.6.
I. The morphology of the pituitary gland may be investigated with computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging. In most German shepherd dwarfs, an intrapinuitary cyst can be identified at a young age
(Figure 38.7A), which gradually enlarges during life (Figure 38.7B). Because healthy dogs may have pituitary
cysts as well, pituitary dwarfism cannot be diagnosed based upon the presence of a pituitary cyst alone.
 The finding that German shepherd dogs with congenital hyposomatotropism have a mutation of the gene
encoding the transcription factor Lhx3 has resulted in the development of a genetic test. With this genetic
test, not only dwarfs but also carriers of the mutation can be identified. The test is currently only performed
at the Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals of Utrecht University.
K. Hypophysectomy leads to a very low plasma GH concentration that does not respond to stimulation and
a relatively low plasma IGF-I concentration.
L. In other forms of so-called spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism, the GH response to stimulation
is less well defined. In about one-third of the cases, the GH response to stimulation is normal. Furthermore,
also in many Pomeranians without alopecia, the circulating GH concentration does not increase significantly
after stimulation.
20
40
15
30
(/6)
/6T
10
Prolactin
20
HS
10
15
15
30
45
-15
15
30
45
Time (min)
Time(min)
1.20
30
1.00
0.80
20
(1/6)
(1/6T) H7
0.60
HSL
0.40
10
0.20
0.00
-15
0
15
30
45
-15
15
30
45
Time (min)
() 
400
300
ACTH (ng/)
200
100
-15
0
15
30
45
Time (min)
Figure 38.6 Mean (±SEM) plasma concentrations of growth hormone (GH), prolactin, thyrotropin (TSH), luteinizing hormone 
(LH), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) during a combined pituitary anterior lobe function test in eight German shepherd
Hypo5omatotropism in Dogs411
(a)
(b)
y wsidonoiewosodsy leuauos yim sop piaydays uewa plo-yuow-g e po alew! o paueyua-iseuoy (e) Z'se anay
the base of the brain, the contrast-enhanced pituitary is visible.The pituitary is of normal size (height 3.6 mm, width 4.3mm),
'ww s'g nyalay) pahiejua s! Aieninid ayi 'sieal e jo ase ayi ry (g) 1sis e jo aouasaid ayi oi anp eaie juaonjoipei e suieluos ing
width 5.4 mm). The greater part of the pituitary lacks contrast enhancement due to the presence of the cyst that has increased in
M. Another reason why it has to be questioned whether true GH deficiency exists in these alopecic dogs with
so-called spontaneously acquired hyposomatotropism is that their plasma IGF-I concentrations have been
reported to fall within the reference range.
412  Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
 Congenital hyposomatotropism:
1. Probably the most important differential diagnosis of congenital hyposomatotropism is congenital
hypothyroidism. In contrast to congenital hyposomatotropism, congenital hypothyroidism leads to dis-
proportionate dwarfism.
 2. Other endocrine disorders such as juvenile diabetes mellitus and juvenile hyperparathyroidism should
be considered as well.
3. Failure to grow can also be caused by nonendocrine diseases like renal disorders, cardiac diseases,
chondrodystrophy, hepatic diseases, esophageal obstruction, gastrointestinal disorders, exocrine pancre-
atic insufficiency, and even malnutrition.
5. The possibility that the apparently dwarfed animal is simply a smal individual should also be considered.
B
Acquired hyposomatotropism in mature dogs:
1. Alopecia in adult dogs may be attributable to any of the endocrine diseases known to result in skin
 atrophy and hair loss (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypercortisolism, and hyperestrogenism due to a testicular
tumor).
Vl. Treatment
A.
GH substitution:
1. Since canine GH is not available for therapeutic use, in the past there have been attempts to treat dogs
with hyposomatotropism with human and bovine GH. Unfortunately, formation of antibodies directed
against human and bovine GH precludes their use.
istration will not result in the formation of antibodies, because the amino acid sequence of porcine GH
is identical to that of canine GH
 3. The recommended subcutaneous starting dose for porcine GH is 0.1-0.3IU/kg body weight, three
times a week.
B. Progestins:
1. Because progestins are able to induce the expression of the GH gene in the mammary glands, and
because mammary GH in dogs is released into the systemic circulation, dogs with hyposomatotropism
can also be treated with progestins, such as medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) (Figure 38.9).
2. MPA should be administered subcutaneously in doses of 2.5-5 mg/kg body weight, initially at 3-week
intervals (for five times) and subsequently at 6-week intervals.
3. Unfortunately, treatment with MPA does have some quite undesirable side effects, such as recurrent
periods of pruritic pyoderma, cystic endometrial hyperplasia with mucometra in female animals, and,
infrequently, development of mammary tumors. Even though plasma concentrations of GH may not
exceed the upper limit of the reference range, some dogs may still develop acromegalic features. This may
be reversed by discontinuing treatment for a few months, certainly when the plasma IGF-I concentration
approaches 200 pg/L. Endometrial hyperplasia can be prevented by ovariohysterectomy prior to treat-
ment.
C. Treatment with porcine GH or progestins may result in GH excess and consequently side effects such as
diabetes mellitus may develop. Therefore, monitoring the plasma concentrations of GH and glucose every
3 weeks is recommended. Long-term dose rates should depend on measurements of the plasma concentra-
tion ofIGF-l
D. Whether therapy will lead to linear growth of a dwarf is dependent on the status of the growth plates at
dwarfed animals.
E. A beneficial response in the skin and hair coat usually occurs within a few months after the start of
a si s  a yo q  n o s o a sr d un 
F.
cases, be accompanied by treatment with synthetic levothyroxine. All dogs with pituitary dwarfism due to
the Lhx3 gene mutation will have TSH deficiency and, thus, should be treated with L-thyroxine. Other less
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs413
(a)
(b)
auiod ym juaan ae pue (e) anoeg wusidoneosy eiuauos ym punouom soojees aiewal   any
growth hormone and L-thyroxine(b).
common causes of congenital hyposomatotropism may not be accompanied by TSH deficiency. Levothyroxine
is administered orally, with a starting dose of 15 pg/kg body weight, twice daily. The plasma thyroxine con-
centration should be monitored closely, because the absorption and metabolism of levothyroxine is variable.
The dosage may have to be adjusted several times before a satisfactory clinical response is reached (see
Chapter 25 on Canine hypothyroidism).
to stimulation, treatment with GH has been reported to be effective. In others, seemingly unrelated measures
such as castration or administration of testosterone were followed by the appearance of a new hair coat.
414Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
(a)
(b)
progesterone acetate and L-thyroxine (b).
H.
Because the alopecia of miniature poodles and Pomeranians with supposed spontaneously acquired
also result in regrowth of hairs in these dogs (see Chapter 5 on Canine hyperadrenocorticism).
Vll. Prognosis
A.
Without proper treatment, the long-term prognosis of congenital hyposomatotropism is poor. By the
age of 3-5 years, affected dogs usually have become bald, thin, and dull, possibly due to progressive loss of
pituitary function, continuing expansion of pituitary cysts, and/or progressive renal failure. At this stage,
owners usually request euthanasia for their dog, if they have not done so long before this.
B.
 Although the prognosis improves when dwarfs are properly treated with either porcine GH or proges-
tins (and levothyroxine),their prognosis still remains guarded.
Vlll. Prevention
A. The identification of the mutation in the Lhx3 gene associated with congenital hyposomatotropism in
German shepherd dogs (and breeds in which German shepherd dogs have been used in the breeding) has
Hyposomatotropism in Dogs 415
enabled the development of a DNA test. With this DNA test, not only dwarfs but also carriers of the
mutation can be identified. When all potential breeding animals are screened with this DNA test, eradication
of this form of congenital hyposomatotropism is within reach.
References and Further Readings
Andresen E, Willeberg P. Pituitary dwarfism in German shepherd dogs: Additional evidence of simple autosomal recessive
inheritance. Nord Vet Med 1976;28:481-486.
Bhatti SFM, De Vliegher SP, Mol JA, Van Ham LML, Kooistra HS. Ghrelin-stimulation test in the diagnosis of canine pituitary
dwarfism. Res Vet Sci 2006;81:24-30.
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Vaessen MMAR, Mol JA, Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A. Alopecia in pormeranians and miniature poodles in
association with high urinary corticoid:creatinine ratios and resistance to glucocorticoid feedback. Vet Rec 2007;160:393-397.
shepherd dogs with congenital dwarfism. Vet Rec 1999;144:644-646.
Kooistra HS. Growth horrmone disorders: Acromegaly and pituitary dwarfism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of
Veterinary Internat Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2010, pp. 1711-1716.
Kooistra Hs, Voorhout G, Mol JA, Rijnberk A. Combined pituitary horrmone deficiency in German shepherd dogs with
dwarfism.Domest Anim Endocrinol2000;19:177-190.
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Selman PJ, Rijnberk A. Progestin-induced growth horrmone (GH) production in the treatment of
dogs with congenital GH deficiency. Dormest Anirm Endocrinol 1998;15:93-102.
Meij BP, Mol JA, Bevers MM, Rijnberk A. Residual pituitary function after transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in dogs with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrino! 1997;155:531-539.
Meij BP, Mol JA, Hazewinkel HAW, Bevers MM, Rijnberk A. Assessment of a combined anterior pituitary function test in
1996;13:161-170.
Nelson RW. Disorders of the hy pothalammus and pituitary gland. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG, eds. Smafl Animat Internat
Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis: Mosby, 2003, pp. 660-680.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. Hypothalamus-pituitary systerm. In: Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, eds. Clinicat Endocrinology of Dogs
and Cats, 2nd edn. Hannover: Schlitersche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co., 2010, pp. 13-54.
Smmons, DM, Voss JW, Ingraham HA, Holloway JM, Broide RS, Rosenfeld MG, Swanson LW. Pituitary cell phenoty pes
involve cell-specific Pit-1 rmRNA translation and synergistic interactions with other classes of transcription factors. Genes Dev
1990;4:695-711.
Voorbij AMWY, Kooistra HS. Pituitary dwarfism in German shepherd dogs. J Vet Clin Sci 2009;2:4-11.
dogs (Abstract). Proceedings of the 16th ECVIM-CA Congress, 2006, p. 176.
Zhu X, Gleiberman AS, Rosenfeld MG. Molecular physiology of pituitary development: Signaling and transcriptional
networks. Physio! Rev 2007;87:933-963.
CHAPTER 39
Hyposomatotropism in Cats
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
Pathogenesis
● Primary deficiency of growth hormone as a result of a congenital anomaly.
Classical Signs
● Failure of growth, typically evident frorm 2-3 months of age.
● Small-statured animals are usually in proportion unless concurrent deficiency is also present in
other pituitary hormones, primarily thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
Diagnosis
● Definitive diagnosis requires evidence of lack of increase in growth hormone levels in response to
stimulation with xylazine, clonidine, or human growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH).
● Presumptive diagnosis may be made by ruling out other causes of small stature and demonstrating
low levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1).
Treatment
 Specific treatment requires growth hormone replacement, which is currently unavailable.
 Pathogenesis
A. Primary deficiency of growth hormone:
1. Congenital either due to cystic formation of the pituitary gland, or pituitary hypoplasia. It is thought
that cystic changes may develop within the pituitary secondary to abnormal development of the pituitary
cells rather than necessarily being the primary defect.
2. Acquired due to destruction of the pituitary gland from inflammatory, neoplastic, traumatic, or 
vascular disease. This etiology has not been documented in cats.
B.S
 Secondary deficiency of growth hormone:
1. Due to lack of GHRH from the hypothalamus. GHRH stimulates release of growth hormone from
the anterior pituitary gland.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
416
Hyposomatotropism in Cats 417
2. Suppression of growth hormone has been documented in humans with a number of endocrine disor-
ders and in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism; however, this has not been documented in cats.
 Peripheral insensitivity to growth hormone:
1. In these situations, production of growth hormone is adequate, with high levels due to lack of nega-
tive feedback, but production of IGF-1 is reduced, possibly due to abnormalities in the growth hormone
receptor.
2. This type of abnormality has not been identified in cats.
D.
 Growth hormone has direct effects on fat and carbohydrate metabolism, causing lipolysis and increased
glucose synthesis (see Figure 39.1).
Growth hormone stimulates production of IGF-1 which, in conjunction with growth hormone, pro-
Cases with congenital hyposomatotropism may have concurrent deficiencies in other hormones pro-
duced by the anterior pituitary, the most significant of which is TSH. In cases of panhypopituitarism, defi-
ciencies of prolactin, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, and adrenocorticotrophic hormone
may also be present.
Il. Signalment
A.
 In cats, only the congenital form of the disease has been identified, with kittens typically presenting at
3-6 months of age.
B.1
 Due to the paucity of reports, no conclusion can be drawn regarding breed or sex predispositions.
II. Clinical Signs
A.1
 Poor body growth:
1. Initial growth for the first 1-2 months of life appears normal.
2. At 3-4 months kittens become small, relative to their litter mates.
3. Solitary deficiency of growth hormone leads to “proportionate dwarfism" where the kitten's head
and limbs appear in proportion, but the overall stature is reduced.
α. adrenergic stimulati on 
HYPOTHALAMUS
β adrenergic stimulation
 Dopaminergic stimulation 
GHRH
Somatostatin
Ghrelin
PITUITARY
GH
HO
UVER
LIPOLYSIS
GLUCONEOGENESIS
INSULIN ANTAGONISM
IGF-1
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
INSULIN RECEPTOR
SKELETAL GROWTH
Figure 39.1 (
Growth hormone physiology. GHRH=growth hormone-releasing hormone, GH=growth hormone, IGF-1 =
insulin-like growth factor-1, +=positive feedback, -= negative feedback.
418 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
4. Concurrent deficiency of TSH will result in “disproportionate dwarfism." These kittens have flat,
broad heads, thick tongues, and square limbs. In addition these kittens may appear mentally retarded
and suffer from constipation.
5. Radiography of older animals may reveal delayed closure of physeal growth plates. The limb bones
are of normal length in hyposomatotropism but are shortened with panhypopituitarism.
B.
Dentition may be slow to erupt, but is usually normal.
C.
 Coat changes may be apparent:
1. The coat is often soft, due to the absence of primary guard hairs and retention of secondary hairs.
2. Alopecia may develop, as secondary hairs are easily epilated, especially at sites of wear.
D. Corneal edema has been reported in association with congenital hyposomatotropism in a kitten.
1. IGF-1 is thought to play a role in maintenance of corneal transparency and proliferation of corneal
cells.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Routine hematology and biochemistry are often unremarkable. Azotemia may be present and has been
attributed to lack of development of glomeruli due to growth hormone deficiency.
B. Basal growth hormone concentration is often inconclusive as values may be within reference range, due
to the pulsatile nature of growth hormone secretion. In addition, growth hormone has historically been dif-
ficult to assay in cats. Recently, a growth hormone assay has been validated in the cat for assessment of
acromegaly and this may be of use in investigation of hyposomatotropism.
C. Growth hormone stimulation tests assess the capability of the pituitary to secrete growth hormone.
While they have been used in dogs, their use has not been reported in cats. The canine protocols are:
1. Xylazine stimulation test:
 a Plasma sample obtained before and 15, 30, 45, and 60min after IV administration of 100 μg/kg
xylazine.
h. Plasma GH >10 ng/mL 15-30 min after xylazine administration would be considered normal.
2. Clonidine stimulation test:
a Plasma sample obtained before and 15, 30, 45, and 60min after IV administration of 10pg/kg
clonidine.
h. Plasma GH >10 ng/mL 15-30 min after clonidine administration would be considered normal.
3. GHRH stimulation test:
a Plasma sample obtained before and 10, 20, 30, 45, and 60 min after IV administration of 1pg/kg
human GHRH.
b. Plasma GH >10 ng/mL 15-30 min after GHRH administration would be considered normal.
4. Side effects from xylazine and clonidine include sedation, vomiting, bradycardia, and hypotension.
 5. Side effects from GHRH appear less common, but GHRH may be difficult to source.
D. IGF-1 assessment:
 2. Low to undetectable values would be consistent with hyposomatotropism.
E.  Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test:
1. This is required to rule out concurrent hypothyroidism.
2. Total thyroxine (T) and free T, may be low in the absence of hypothyroidism due to sick euthyroid
syndrome.
3. The lower limit of the TSH assay is not sufficiently sensitive to differentiate TSH deficiency from
normal cats.
4. A TSH stimulation test is not appropriate, as the thyroid glands are functional in congenital hypothy-
roidism. A TRH stimulation test is required to demonstrate inadequate production of TSH.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. Small stature, but proportionate appearance:
1. Poor nutrition:
a Inadequate diet: this should be ascertained from the dietary history.
b. Parasitism: this can be identified readily by fecal analysis.
Hyposomatotropism in Cats 419
c. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: a history of diarrhea is likely to be present. Confirmation
requires demonstration of low feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity.
2. Portosystemic vascular anomaly: the history may suggest other signs such as ptyalism (salivation),
hyporexia, or evidence of hepatoencephalopathy. Elevated bile acids or ammonia warrants imaging
studies to be performed.
3. Congenital cardiac disease: the history may be suggestive of exercise intolerance, and clinical exam-
4. Congenital renal disease is likely to be identified following urinalysis and serum biochemistry. It
 should be borne in mind that young kittens cannot concentrate their urine as well as adults.
Small stature with disproportionate appearance.
1. Endocrine:
 a. Hypothyroidism: see previous discussions and Chapter 26.
2. Lysosomal storage disorders:
 a. Clinical signs may vary depending on the specific enzyme deficiency, but gangliosidosis, muco-
polysaccharidosis, and mucolipidosis typically are associated with stunting of growth.
b. Concurrent signs may include neurological abnormalities or hepatomegaly.
C. Radiography may reveal epiphyseal dysplasia.
d. Urine may be tested for heparin sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, and/or dermatan sulfate by toluidine
 blue spot test, which may support the diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis.
3. Chondrodystrophy:
a. This may be a spontaneous mutation or a deliberate breeding policy (e.g., Munchkin cats)
 b. Radiography will confirm joint and limb malformation.
Vl.
Treatment
Specific treatment requires therapy with growth hormone replacement:
1. The use of recombinant human, bovine, or porcine growth hormone has not been reported in the cat.
 2. Use of any of these forms of growth hormone carries the risk of antibody formation, hypersensitiv-
ity reactions, or anaphylaxis.
3. Development of diabetes mellitus could be a theoretic risk from overdose of growth hormone.
 Progestogens have been used successfully in dogs:
 mammary gland.
2. The use of progestogens has not been considered of merit in cats as:
a. A previous study failed to demonstrate an increase in growth hormone following administration
of megestrol acetate for 12 months.
h. Production of growth hormone from the mammary gland has been demonstrated following pro-
gestogen administration in cats in association with fibroadenomatous hyperplasia. The complica-
tions associated with this condition do not merit the use of progestogens to stimulate growth
hormone production.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Due to the lack of specific therapy, prognosis remains guarded, with a shortened life expectancy.
B.
The coat changes and small stature in themselves are not problematic to the animal.
VIll. Prevention
A
 No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Donaldson D, Billson FM, Scase TJ, Sparkes AH, McConnell F, Mould JRB, Adams V. Congenital hy posormatotropisrm in a
domestic shorthair cat presenting with congenital corneal oedema. J Srmall Anirm Pract 2008;49:306-309.
420 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Disorders of growth horrmone. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Peline Endocrinotogy
αnd Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders, 2004, pp. 45-84.
Jones BR. Hypothyroidism. In: August JR, ed. Consuttations in Feline Internat Medicine 3. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997,
Pp.147-150.
Knottenbelt CM, Hertage ME. Use of proligestone in the rma nagement of three German shepherd dogs with pituitary
dwarfism. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:164-170.
tion of mamrmary epithelium: Induction of the local biosynthesis of growth hormone (GH) in the mammary glands of dogs,
cats and humans. J Steroid Biochem Mol Bio! 1996;57(1-2):67-71.
 Niessen SJM, Khalid M, Petrie G, Church DB. Validation and application of a radioimmunoassay for ovine growth hormone
in the diagnosis of acromegaly in cats. Vet Rec 2007;160:902-907.
Ordas J, Millan Y, Espinosa de los Monteros A, Reymundo C, Martin de las Milas J. Immunohistochemical expression of
progesterone receptors, growth horrmone and insulin growth factor-I in feline fibroadenomatous change. Res Vet Sci
2004;76(3):227-233.
1987;42(3):354-357.
CHAPTER 40
Acromegaly in Dogs
Hans S. Kooistra
Pathogenesis
● Acromegaly is a syndrome of bony and soft tissue overgrowth and insulin resistance due to exces-
sive growth hormone ( GH) secretion.
● In most cases, either endogenous progesterone secretion or exogenous progestin administration give
rise to acromegaly.
● Rarely primary hypothyroidism or an adenoma of somatotrophs, that is, cells of the pituitary gland
that secrete GH, cause acromegaly.
Classical Signs
● Thick skin folds, wide interdental spaces, snoring, and generalized visceromegaly resulting in
 abdominal enlargement.
● Polyuria and sometimes polyphagia. The polyuria is usually without glucosuria, but overt diabetes
 mellitus may develop.
Diagnosis
● Hyperglycemia, which in most cases is mild but in some dogs is marked and associated with diabe-
tes mellitus.
● Elevated plasma concentrations of GH and/or insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I).
Treatment
● Ovariectomy in case of progesterone-induced acromegaly.
● Withdrawal of progestin administration and/or progesterone receptor blockers in case of progestin-
induced acromegaly.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
421
422 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Hypothalamus
GHRH
Somatostatin
Pituitary
GH
Indirect effect
Directeffect
(Growth promotion)
Insulin antagonism
Liver
Lipolysis
Hyperglycemia
Protein synthesis
Chondrogenesis
Growth
GH. The pituitary GH secretion is under inhibitory (somatostatin) and stimulatory (GHRH) hypothalamic control and is also
modulated by negative feedback control of insulin-like growth factor-l (IGF-l) and GH itself. The direct catabolic (diabetogenic)
actions of GH are shown on the left side of the figure, and the indirect anabolic actions are shown on the right.
1. Pathogenesis
 A. Like the other hormones released by the pituitary gland, GH is secreted in a pulsatile fashion.
B. Pituitary GH secretion is regulated mainly by the opposing actions of the stimulatory hypothalamic pep-
tide GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) and the inhibitory hypothalamic peptide somatostatin. The GH pulses
predominantly reflect the pulsatile delivery of GHRH, whereas GH levels between pulses are primarily
under somatostatin control (Figure 40.1).
C. Endogenous progesterone and administration of progestins may result in elevated plasma GH concentra-
tions and physical changes of GH excess in dogs. Progesterone/progestin-induced GH is produced in the
mammary glands, indicating that in dogs circulating GH not only originates from the pituitary but also may
be of mammary origin.
with higher basal GH secretion and less pulsatile GH secretion during stages with a high plasma progester-
one concentration.
E. The effects of circulating GH can be divided into two main categories: rapid catabolic actions and slow
(long-lasting) hypertrophic actions (Figure 40.1):
1. The acute catabolic actions are mainly due to insulin antagonism and result in enhanced lipolysis.
gluconeogenesis, and restricted glucose transport across the cell membrane. The net effect of these cata-
bolic actions is promotion of hyperglycemia.
 2. The slow anabolic effects are mainly mediated via IGF-I. IGF-I is produced in many different tissues and,
in most of these tissues, has a local growth-promoting effect. The main source of circulating IGF-I is the liver.
F. Acromegaly is a syndrome of bony and soft tissue overgrowth and insulin resistance due to excessive GH
secretion.
G. As in humans and cats, GH excess can be caused by a somatotroph adenoma of the pituitary gland,
of the estrous cycle) or exogenous progestins (e.g., used for estrus prevention) give rise to acromegaly in
and physical changes of acromegaly in dogs.
Acromegaly in Dogs423
.
Signalment
A.
 Mainly middle-aged and elderly female dogs in the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, typically 3-5 weeks
after estrus, or after treatment with progestins for estrus prevention. Rarely in male dogs after administra-
tion of progestins, for example, for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
B.
 Somatotroph adenomas are also found mainly in middle-aged and elderly dogs.
C. 
 Primary hypothyroidism is mainly a condition of young adult to middle-aged dogs (see Chapter 25).
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
 Signs of GH hypersecretion tend to develop slowly and are characterized initially by soft tissue swelling
of the face and abdomen.
B. In some acromegalic dogs, severe hypertrophy of soft tissues of the mouth, tongue (Figure 40.2), and
pharynx causes a respiratory stridor and even dyspnea.
C. 1
glucosuria, but overt diabetes mellitus can develop due to GH-induced insulin resistance
D. Physical examination may reveal thick skin folds, especially in the neck, prognathism, and wide inter-
dental spaces (Figure 40.2). Prolonged GH excess also leads to generalized visceromegaly resulting in
abdominal enlargement.
F. Changes of acromegaly secondary to primary hypothyroidism tend to be much more subtle than in other
such as some widening of the interdental spaces along with elevated plasma GH and IGF-I concentrations.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Laboratory investigation in acromegalic dogs will often reveal hyperglycemia although the elevation is
variable and typically below the renal threshold (approximately 216 mg/dL; 12 mmol/L). The plasma glucose
 that is, diabetes mellitus is present. Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase activity may also be noted.
 B. Radiography and ultrasonography may reveal visceromegaly, but these findings are quite nonspecific.
C. Because of the variation in amino acid sequence of GH in different species, plasma GH concentrations
should be determined by a canine-specific radioimmunoassay. Unfortunately, in many countries a commer-
cial canine-specific GH assay is not available.
D. The basal plasma GH concentration in acromegalic dogs often exceeds the upper limit of the reference
range. However, if the disease is mild or just beginning, the basal plasma GH concentration may still be
within the reference range. Conversely, a high GH value may be the result of a secretory pulse in a normal
dog. The exact sensitivity and specificity of the test remain to be determined.
E.
. Nonresponsiveness of normal or elevated plasma GH levels to stimulation (e.g., by GHRH, in an intra-
venous dosage of 1 μg/kg body weight) or suppression (e.g., by somatostatin, in an intravenous dosage of
 H  so   siso an ios rg  (m oq o
should increase at least two- to fourfold following GHRH administration.
F. Being bound to proteins, the plasma IGF-I concentration is much less subject to fluctuation than that of
GH. In addition, the amino acid sequence of IGF-I is less species-specific than that of GH and, therefore,
IGF-I can be determined in a heterologous (human) assay.
G. Thus, IGF-I measurements can be used as a diagnostic test for acromegaly. However, there is some over-
lap in plasma IGF-I concentrations between healthy dogs and individuals with acromegaly. The exact sensi-
tivity and specificity of the test remain to be determined.
H. A strong linear correlation exists between plasma IGF-I concentration and body size. For example,
plasma IGF-I concentrations in standard poodles are about six times higher than in toy poodles. Therefore,
breed and body size have to be taken into account with the interpretation of the plasma IGF-I concentration.
L. It is usually advisable not to delay treatment of progesterone-induced acromegaly pending the results of
GH and/or IGF-I measurements, for the sooner treatment is started, the greater the chance of preventing
permanent diabetes mellitus.
 A pituitary tumor causing hypersecretion of GH can be visualized by computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
424 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 40.2 An &-year-old female shepherd dog (a) that developed acromegaly after treatment with progestins for estrus
prevention. Note the thick skin folds, especially in the neck, the hyperplasia of the gingiva, the widening of the interdental
spaces (b), and the relatively large tongue (c).
V. Differential Diagnoses
Several other conditions may also be associated with polyuria and increased appetite, such as hypercorti-
solism and hyperthyroidism. Polyuria during the luteal phase may also be due to pyometra, but in these cases
the clinical presentation is usually quite different.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 Progesterone-induced acromegaly can be treated effectively by ovarifohyster)ectomy.
In cases in which the GH excess did not lead to complete exhaustion of the pancreatic β cells, elimination
of the progesterone source by ovarifohyster)ectomy may prevent persistent diabetes mellitus. If on the day
sqe rog Adrai uns (ro ti<) r/ < si toauo asong poonq sy rns rae
mellitus should be instituted (see Chapter 15). In insulin-treated dogs, blood glucose concentrations should
be closely monitored to prevent iatrogenic hypoglycemia, especially in first 1-3 weeks after surgery when
insulin requirements may decrease rapidly as beta cell function recovers. Beta cell function may improve
sufficiently to maintain euglycemia once glucotoxicity resolves, especially in dogs with blood glucose con-
centrations of <290 mg/dL (< 16 mmol/L).
Acromegaty in Dogs 425
C.
 In dogs with progestin-induced GH excess, progestin administration should be discontinued immedi-
ately and for the remainder of the dog's life.
D. Administration of progesterone receptor blockers such as aglepristone may help to treat progestin-
induced acromegaly. Administration of a weekly dosage of 10 mg/kg subcutaneously resulted in a significant
tion may result in an even better outcome. Unfortunately, the optimal dosage has not been determined.
t.
 Treatment with levothyroxine of dogs with primary hypothyroidism results in normalization of serum
concentrations of GH and IGF-I.
 In dogs with acromegaly due to a somatotroph adenoma, treatment should be directed at the pituitary
lesion. In principle, there are three options: medical treatment, radiation therapy, and hypophysectomy:
1. Medical treatment with long-acting somatostatin analogues, such as octreotide and lanreotide,
 improves symptoms of acromegaly in most human acromegalic patients, with normalization of plasma
concentrations of IGF-I and tumor shrinkage occurring in approximately 50% of cases. There is, how
ever no experience yet with use of these drugs in dogs with a functional somatotroph adenoma and
they are expensive.
 2. Radiation therapy may shrink the pituitary tumor and may improve diabetic control in acromegalic
dogs.
3. Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy has been performed successfully in dogs with hypercortisolism
due to a corticotroph adenoma and may also be an effective treatment option for animals with a soma-
totroph adenoma. Although, like in human medicine, it is probably the method of choice, experience
in dogs is limited so far.
Vll. Prognosis
4.
 In general, the prognosis is good after ovarifohyster)ectomy in dogs with progesterone-induced acro-
megaly, good after withdrawal of progestin administration in progestin-induced acromegaly, and excellent in
dogs with primary hypothyroidism treated with levothyroxine, provided that acromegaly did not result in
persistent diabetes mellitus. In case of acromegaly due to a functional somatotroph adenoma, the prognosis
depends on the successfulness of the treatment at the pituitary level.
B.
 The appearance of the dog may change dramatically after treatment of acromegaly, due to the reversal
of the soft tissue changes. The size of the abdomen decreases, as does the thickening of oropharyngeal soft
Ol readde iou op inq alqisiaain aq oi readde saueuo Auoq auL bunous paieiosse aui snul pue sanssn
cause clinical problems
C.
 In cases in which the GH excess did not lead to complete exhaustion of the pancreatic β cells, the
elimination of the progesterone source by ovari(ohyster)ectomy or discontinuation of progestin administra-
tion may prevent persistent diabetes melltus. After diabetes mellitus begins, the sooner insulin therapy is
 instituted to protect the beta cells from glucotoxicity and surgery is performed, that is, within a few weeks,
the higher the chance the diabetes will resolve.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
No known prevention.
References and Further Readings
Bhatti SFM, Duchateau L, Okkens AC, van Ham LML, Mol JA, Kooistra HS. Treatment of growth hormone excess in dogs
with the progesterone receptor antagonist aglépristone. Theriogenology 2006;66:797-803.
Diaz-Espineira MM, Mol JA, Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. Adenohypophyseal function in dogs with primary hypothyroidism and
non-thyroidal illness. J Vet Intern Med 2009;23:100-107.
Diaz-Espineira MM, Mol JA, van den Ingh TSGAM, van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. Functional and
2008;35:98-111.
Fracassi F, Gandini G, Diana A, Preziosi R, van den Ingh TSGAM, Famigli-Bergamini P, Kooistra HS. Acrormegaly due to a
somatotroph adenoma in a dog. Dormest Anirm Endocrinol 2007;32:43-54.
426 Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animals
Kooistra HS. Acromegaly and pituitary dwarfism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine,
7th edn. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2010, pp. 1711-1716.
Meij BP, Voorhout G, van den Ingh TSGAM, Hazewinkel HAW, Teske E, Rijnberk A. Results of transsphenoidal hypophyec-
tormy in 52 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticisrm. Vet Surg 1998;27:246-261.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS. Hypothalarmus-pituitary system. In: Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, eds. Clinicat Endorinology of Dogs
and Cats, 2nd edn. Hannover: Schlitersche Verlagsgeselschaft mbH & Co., 2010, pp. 13-54.
Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, van Garderen E, Rijnberk A. Progestin-induced growth hormone excessin the dog
originates in the mammary gland. Endocrinology 1994;134:287-292.
CHAPTER 41
Acromegaly in Cats
David Church and Stijn J. M. Niessen
Pathogenesis
● Acromegaly occurs as a result of excessive growth hormone (GH) production.
● Most cases are presumed to be caused by a functional benign pituitary tumor.
Classical Signs
● Most cats are >6 years of age, with a median age of 11 years.
● Moderate to marked polyuria/polydipsia due to uncontrolled diabetes mellitus.
● Initial weight loss followed by weight gain, or weight gain and marked polyphagia.
● Although some show marked physical changes (broad facial features, abdominal [organ] enlarge-
 ment, prognathia inferior, clubbed paws), most look like any regular diabetic cat.
Diagnosis
● Clinical picture in combination with markedly elevated insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and/or
GH and a pituitary mass (computed tomography [CT], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI].
Treatment
● Conservative treatment with long-acting insulin to control hyperglycemia, or definitive treatment
Pathogenesis
A.
 Feline acromegaly is also called feline hypersomatotropism.
 B. The most common cause of feline acromegaly is a GH-producing adenoma in the pituitary gland (micro-
or macroadenoma) which disturbs the normally meticulously regulated GH production (Figure 41.1).
C. Overproduction of GH has a range of effects on a cat, including:
1. Direct anabolic and catabolic effects of GH. Most importantly, GH is a modulator of insulin sensitiv-
ity and when present in excess can cause diabetes melitus. This explains why the great majority of
 reported acromegalic cats have had concurrent insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
427
428 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus
GHRH SS
GHRH SS
+
一
Pituitary
 Pituitary
adenoma
GH
GH+++
Soft tissue,
Soft tissue,
Liver
Liver
cartilage,
cartilage,
IGF-1+++
bone, etc.
IGF-1
bone, etc.
Note: presence of
nsumn necessar
Figure 41.1 Left: Normally GH secretion is finely regulated through stimulation by growth hormone releasing hormone
an e yegaay aeau ynoui se la se 'snweleyiody aui ui panpoid yog (ssi ueisoeos Ag uotgiu! pue (hah)
(ll aui ui Aueuiwopaid panpoid) t-il pue (end aui ui panoid) jast! h Ag snweeuody pue Aend aui go jaaal
Right: In an acromegalic cat, a pituitary adenoma produces excessive GH, resulting in elevated production of IGF-1 if insulin is
present in the portal circulation. The pituitary adenoma is not sensitive to negative feedback and the fine regulation is lost.
2. Indirect anabolic effects of IGF-1. The excess GH stimulates the production of IGF-1, predominantly
by the liver. Insulin has a permissive role in this process-in other words hepatocytes can only produce
IGF-1 in the presence of insulin. When IGF-1 is abnormally elevated for extended periods of time,
patients can suffer from excessive tissue growth and deformations of internal and/or external organs.
3. Neurological signs due to a gradually expanding pituitary tumor (more likely with a macroadenoma).
Arn pue Sumona mos pue uanuq qnoq aq on pual shounl au se uouonun raamou ane asau
produce signs referable to an expanding intracranial lesion.
D.
 Rare cases of pituitary hyperplasia are possible.
E.
Progesterone-induced GH overproduction by the mammary gland, as seen in the dog, has not been
described as a clinical problem in the cat.
Il. Signalment
A. Prevalence of acromegaly among diabetic cats with variable control in North America and the UK was
found to be higher than expected; approximately 1:3 to 1:4 diabetic cats. The disease is therefore likely
underdiagnosed in poorly controlled diabetic cats; additionally, a high prevalence was found among
"insulin-resistant diabetic” cats in the Netherlands. The prevalence among all newly diagnosed diabetic cats
 and among nondiabetic cats is currently unknown.
 B. Factors associated with acromegaly include being middle- to old-aged, male gender and suffering from
insulin resistant diabetes mellitus:
1. In a large study of acromegalic cats, median age was 11 years (age range: 6-17 years).
2. Like regular diabetic cats, acromegalic cats are more often male than female (ratio 8:1).
3.5-9.2kg) in a large cohort of acromegalic cats. Acromegalic cats are believed to be less likely to be
underweight.
 4. Domestic short-haired cats seem predominantly affected. A genetic predisposition of certain breeds
has not yet been recognized.
Acromegaly in Cats 429
Fgure 41.2 Acromegaly can cause a "clubbed" appearance of the lower extremities (previously published in / Vet intern 
Med, Blackwell-Synergy).
 n   q n   s     s   
acromegalic diabetic cats (median 7IU q 12 h [range 1-35 IU q 12h] compared to median 3 IU q 12 h for
non-acromegalic diabetic cats).
II. Clinical Signs
A.
 The earliest witnessed signs tend to be those of unregulated diabetes mellitus: polyuria and polydipsia,
as well as nocturia and urinary incontinence.
B.
uncomplicated primary diabetes mellitus, the excess in GH is likely to play an important role in this phe.
 nomenon. This is substantiated by the frequent observation of persistent, and often extreme, polyphagia,
despite apparent reasonable control of the diabetes mellitus in acromegalic cats treated with insulin only.
Weight gain can be seen, but is not always present. However if present in an uncontrolled diabetic cat
this should prompt assessment for acromegaly.
D. Changes in physical appearance may be present but are not always noted by the owner because of their
 gradual onset. These changes may include:
1. Weight gain.
2. Increase in paw size (Figure 41.2).
3. Broad facial features (Figure 41.3).
4. Protrusion of the lower jaw (prognathia inferior) (Figure 41.4).
 5. Increased inter-dental space.
6. Abdominal enlargement.
7. Large tongue.
 Lameness might occur due to GH- and IGF-1-induced degenerative arthropathy.
E
 Respiratory stridor or “snoring" has been reported in >50% of cases and is thought to be due to a GH/
IGF-1-induced increase in soft tissue in the oropharyngeal region.
G.
 iss srd q ri (ido re ad nd r ssa q r
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus.
H.
 Reported possible central nervous system signs include lethargy, impaired vision, vocalizing, seizures,
vestibular signs, and Horner's syndrome (these though tend to be uncommon in view of the benign and slow
growing nature of pituitary tumor).
 Physical examination can reveal abdominal organomegaly (particularly liver and kidneys).
Auscultation may reveal a systolic cardiac murmur or gallop rhythm (reportedly in 24% of cases),
O1 anp saaueuo Kroiedsau ro 'sagueuo peipresoAu paonpul- I-l/H oi Arepuosas aq oi pazisauodu
430 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 41.3 The external appearance of an acromegalic cat can vary from classic, including obvious broadening of facial
features (left), to undistinguishable from any other diabetic cat (right).
Figure 41.4  Protrusion of the lower jw (prognathia inferior) may be a feature of an acromegalic cat.
congestive heart failure or referred upper respiratory stridor. However, whether cardiovascular
o  e o r sn      a s
seems debatable.
K
 Tachypnea or dyspnea might be witnessed as a consequence of acromegalic-induced congestive heart
sis in rodsi radn and pnos  a nssn s ieueoo jo juaea ro a
while the former produces signs referable to intrathoracic disease.
 Poor and umkempt hair coat may be seen.
M. Hypertension has previously been suggested to be prevalent among acromegalic cats and cats can
therefore present with hypertension-associated clinical signs, including acute blindness due to ocular
hemorrhage. However in the largest case series of acromegalics reported to date, hypertension was NOT
more prevalent than would be expected in a group of age-matched control cats. In the authors' opinion, an 
 increased prevalence in acromegalic cats seems unlikely.
N. An acromegalic cat can also present with diabetic ketoacidosis due to suboptimal diabetic control or
secondary complicating disease.
Acromegaty in Cats 431
O. Because the severity of insulin resistance can vary day to day, clinical signs of hypoglycemia can occur
secondary to exogenous insulin-induced hypoglycemia at times of lower insulin resistance. The latter might
present as a dazed drunken look, dilated pupils, wobbliness, weakness, head or body tremors, twitching.
seizures, or coma.
P.  It is important to note that not all of these signs will be consistently present in all cats, especially early
in the disease process. Acromegalic cats can be morphologically indistinguishable from non-acromegalic
diabetic cats at the time of diagnosis, which could account for the possibility of current underdiagnosis of
this endocrinopathy (Figure 41.3).
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Acromegaly should be considered in any diabetic cat with insulin resistance.
B.
 Unfortunately, no single diagnostic test that is 100% sensitive and specific for acromegaly exists.
C. It is necessary to combine clinical signs and results of several diagnostic tests to attain a diagnosis with
a reasonable level of confidence.
D. Circumstantial evidence might be gathered through:
1. Routine serum biochemistry: elevated total protein levels and hematocrit may be evident, in addition
to diabetes-associated changes. Anecdotally hyperphosphatemia can also be seen. Nevertheless, in the
 only study comparing routine clinical pathology in acromegalic versus non-acromegalic diabetic cats,
hyperproteinemia was the only genuinely overrepresented parameter among acromegalic cats.
 2. Imaging of the thorax or abdomen: increased size of liver kidneys and/or adrenals and pancreatic changes
may be seen. An increased size of the cardiac silhouette and signs of congestive heart failure have been
3. Other radiographic abnormalities encountered in feline acromegalics can include: increased
 oropharyngeal soft tissue; degenerative arthropathy with periarticular periosteal activation, osteophytes,
and hyperostosis of the calvarium.
4. Echocardiography might reveal changes similar to those found in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or
might be unremarkable.
E. Direct evidence might be provided by:
1. Measuring serum IGF-1: a single measurement has proven to be an important and practical screening
a. Documenting an elevated IGF-1 concentration does not constitute a final diagnosis, but merely
indicates further testing is indicated.
b. Documenting a low IGF-1 makes acromegaly less likely, yet does not completely exclude it. Portal
insulin is necessary for the production of IGF-1. Therefore, newly diagnosed diabetic cats with
acromegaly (that are not yet receiving exogenous insulin) might have lower IGF-1-levels, which will
rise into the acromegalic range after initiation of exogenous insulin therapy.
1. Feline GH measurement has proven equally useful. Reasonable specificity (95%) and sensitivity
(84%) were reported using a particular assay and one particular cutof concentration. However, in view
of the pulsatile secretion of GH in non-acromegalic and acromegalic cats, false positives can be recorded,
as well as false negatives.
 2. Combining IGF-1 and GH determination will significantly increase diagnostic accuracy.
 3. Once IGF-1 and/or GH elevation has been established and are suggestive of acromegaly, intracranial
imaging is indicated. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) are useful to visualize a pituitary abnormality, and, if present, this provides a satisfactory level of
confidence in the diagnosis (Figure 41.6).
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. Other common causes of true or apparent insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus need to be excluded,
including:
1. Management associated causes:
a. Incorrect insulin administration
b. Incorrect insulin storage.
432  Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animats
Figure 41.5  Careful observation of the clinical features of these two insulin-resistant diabetic cats suggests acromegaly to be
more likely in the cat on the left(broad facial features) and hyperadrenocorticism in the cat on the right (fur color changes; see
Chapter 7 for hyperadrenocorticism in the cat). Both diagnoses were subsequently confirmed on the basis of IGF-1, CT, and
LDDST, as well as a favorable response to trilostane treatment (latter in right cat only)
C. Use of inactive insulin preparations.
d. Underdosing.
e. Somogyi overswing (hypoglycemia induced hyperglycemia).
f. Short duration of insulin action.
2. Infectious disease (e.g., urinary tract infection, dental disease).
 3. Inflammatory disease (e.g., pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, gingivostomatitis).
4. Concurrent endocrinopathies:
a.
Hyperthyroidism.
b. Hyperadrenocorticism.
C. Iatrogenic hormone administration (corticosteroids, megestrol acetate).
5. Any other disease (including obesity, neoplasia, nephropathy, and cardiovascular disease).
6. Stress hyperglycemia mimicking true insulin resistance.
B. Differentiation of acromegaly from pititary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (Chapter 7) is particu-
larly important, since this disease can also cause true insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, weight gain despite
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus and it is potentially associated with adrenomegaly and a pituitary tumor on
CT or MRI. In addition, urine cortisol:creatinine ratios can also be elevated in acromegalic cats. Successful
differentiation can often be achieved through:
1. Careful assessment for specific clinical features which differ between the two diseases:
a. Acromegaly: broad facial features, clubbed paws, arthropathy, prognathia inferior, particularly
severe insulin resistance.
h. Hyperadrenocorticism: frail skin, fur changes, bruising, less severe insulin resistance (Figure 41.5).
2. GH and/or IGF-1 determination.
3. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test and/or low-dose dexamethasone suppression
test (LDDST).
Vl. Treatment
A.
 The primary goal of therapy is to achieve a good quality of life through combating the primary disease
process and/or secondary complications, and ideally both.
B.1
 Unfortunately, the ideal treatment protocol to achieve this has yet to be established.
Acromegaly in Cats  433
Fgure 41.6 CT image of an acromegalic cat with a macroadenoma (indicated with red circle). Radiotherapy has the potential
to reduce the size of the pituitary mass, but the effect can be unpredictable both in timing and in nature. Left: at time of
diagnosis; right: 6 months after radiotherapy.
C. A conservative or definitive approach can be chosen, alongside addressing acromegaly-associated
complications.
D. Conservative approach: this involves primarily treating the diabetes mellitus with insulin. However,
obtaining glycemic control is often difficult, requiring high doses of insulin. Nevertheless, such high-dose
 insulin treatment can prove acceptable in individual patients and certainly could be attempted if more
definitive treatment options are not available:
satisfactory clinical improvement is achieved with resolution of clinical signs referable to uncontrolled
diabetes, and blood glucose concentrations and/or glycated proteins also improved.
2. Home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations and appropriate adjustment of insulin dose accord-
ing to blood glucose concentrations is particularly useful because of fluctuating insulin resistance. This
relative to the level of hyperglycemia present at the time of the due insulin dose.
control (in particular, the ravenous polyphagia often seen in acromegaly) will not necessarily be reduced
with improved diabetic control; thus in a proportion of acromegalics, resolution of polyphagia cannot be
used as an indicator of improved diabetic control. In these cats, blood glucose concentrations (especially
 if measured at home), water drunk, and glycated protein measurements can provide a better indication
 of diabetic control than improvement in signs of polyphagia.
4. Sometimes, more intense insulin therapy is required to bring the diabetes under control. This could
include a period of continuous intravenous insulin infusion or the use of more intense subcutaneous
insulin regimes including using combinations of long-acting insulin twice daily and short-acting insulin
given two to four times daily with a meal.
E.
 Definitive—this primarily involves trying to decrease the hypersecretion of GH by the pituitary:
1. Radiotherapy remains the only currently widely available means of correcting the underlying cause of
The principal aim of radiotherapy is to reduce GH production to levels that are no longer clinically
significant, and the secondary goal is to reduce tumor size (Figure 41.6):
a. Unfortunately, radiotherapy is more suited to reducing the size of the tumor than achieving a dra-
matic reduction in autonomous GH and IGF-1 production.
434  Clinicaf Endocrinology of Companion Animals
b. While radiotherapy has been generally effective in resolving or minimizing neurological signs refer-
able to an expanding intracranial lesion, its efficacy in resolving the clinical signs referable to the
C. While the insulin resistant diabetes mellitus has resolved or become more controllable in some cats,
it has remained unchanged in others, despite broadly similar radiotherapy protocols.
d. However, a recent report offers greater encouragement with 13 of 14 insulin-resistant diabetic
acromegalic cats responding favorably to the administration of an average total radiation dose of
3700 cGY administered as an incremental, hypofractionated dosage protocol of 10 doses.
e. What is also clear is that serum IGF-1 concentration is not a suitable measure by which remission
from the general features of acromegaly or the insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus may be assessed,
because concentration does not change substantially during or after radiotherapy regardless of the
changes in diabetic control, insulin requirement or GH concentration.
f. While radiotherapy may be a plausible option for some, the need for multiple anesthetics, unpre-
dictable response, limited availability, and significant costs make it unsuitable for many owners.
g. Additionally, as acromegaly is primarily a disease of autonomous endocrine activity it seems
counterintuitive to hope a therapeutic modality aimed principally at cell destruction is likely to be
the optimum management option. Consequently, efforts to develop alternative treatment methods
that are more suited to directly dealing with the hormonal disturbances are an area of active research.
2. Hypophysectomy/cryohypophysectomy: hypophysectomy is the treatment of choice for human
patients with acromegaly and can result in fast and complete normalization of GH levels:
a. Both experience with and access to transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in acromegalic cats is
currently limited.
 h. Cryohypophysectomy also requires further evaluation and longer term follow-up before it can be
recommended at this stage.
F. Medical treatment has so far proven ineffective. The dopamine agonists and somatostatin analogues that
have been tested to date have not resulted in detectable clinical improvement:
1. Pegvisomant, a GH-receptor antagonist, effective in most human acromegalics, remains to be tested
incats.
G. Addressing acromegaly-associated complications and comorbidities:
1. Analgesia should be provided to palliate arthropathies.
2. Any other disease, genuinely or coincidentally associated with the acromegalic state or merely age
related, should be assessed and treated appropriately to ensure a good overall health status:
a. For example, if congestive heart failure is present, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
diuretic treatment, and regular veterinary assessments are required. When using these drugs, special
patients with diabetes-induced osmotic diuresis.
h. Similarly, renal disease or hypertension, whether a specific consequence of acromegaly or merely
a comorbidity, will require specific treatment and monitoring (e.g., renal diet, ACE-inhibitors,
phosphate binders, calcitriol, etc., in addition to regular assessment of serum biochemistry and
urinalysis; amlodipine, regular blood pressure, and retinal evaluation).
H. Hypoglycemia represents a genuine danger in acromegalic cats:
1. Any cat on high-dose insulin therapy is vulnerable to severe clinical hypoglycemia, which can prove
fatal if not swiftly and appropriately treated.
2. Home monitoring of blood glucose and good communication between the attending clinician and
owner will be crucial for prevention and early detection of hypoglycemia (see Chapter 16).
3. Cats that have undergone radiotherapy are especially vulnerable to iatrogenic hypoglycemia if a
 decrease in insulin resistance associated with the onset of treatment effect remains undetected and blood
glucose is not measured before each insulin injection.
4. For owners not capable or willing to perform home blood glucose monitoring weekly urine glucose
monitoring could provide a less optimal yet alternative safety aid for detecting diabetic remission or
improvements post-radiotherapy:
a. Cats with negative urine glucose should be evaluated immediately.Such evaluation is also indicated
when polyuria and polydipsia decline dramatically or resolve.
Acromegaty in Cats 435
5. Some authors recommend never giving >2IU/kg/cat/ dose if the owner is not able to monitor the cat
closely for signs of possible hypoglycemia and/or are unable to home monitor blood glucose con-
control will substantially impact on the cat's quality of life.
Vll. Prognosis
A. Reported survival times of both aggressively and conservatively managed acromegalic cats vary enor-
  e s  r  s p s m e o r s si s  s
causes unlikely to be related to acromegaly.
B.
A direct comparison between survival times of both aggressively and conservatively treated cats has
never been made.
C.
 Successful treatment with insulin, while addressing acromegaly-associated complications and/or coin-
cidental comorbidities, can still achieve an acceptable quality of life in a proportion of cats. Prevention of
severe clinical iatrogenic hypoglycemia is essential in achieving a successful outcome.
D.
chosen treatment option. Recently developed standardized and validated quality of life measurement tools
for diabetic cats can prove essential in such objective assessment and may stimulate and guide a productive
discussion between clinician and owner. This would also ensure that the impact of the cat's acromegaly on
the owner's life does not remain unaddressed.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
There is currently no method to prevent acromegaly.
B.
 Early detection can prevent unnecessary suffering and the additional costs associated with attempting
to achieve good glycemic control of the diabetic cats.
C.
 Early detection will also allow for an early proactive approach to the possible secondary effects of acro-
megaly, especially if a definitive treatment option is chosen. However successful diabetic remission following
radiotherapy does not necessarily coincide with remission of other GH- and IGF-1-induced clinical signs.
References and Further Readings
Berg RI, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Kass PH, Pollard R, Refsal KR. Serurm insulin-like growth factor-I concentration in cats
with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:892.
Brearley MJ, Polton GA, Littler RM, Niessen SJ. Coarse fractionated radiation therapy for pituitary tumors in cats: a
retrospective study of 12 cases.Vet Comp Oncol 2006;4:209.
Dunning MD, Lowrie CS, Bexfield NH, Dobson JM, Herrtage ME. Exogenous insulin treatrment after hypofractionated
radiotherapy in cats with diabetes mellitus and acrormegaly. J Vet Intern Med 2009;23:243.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Disorders of growth hormone. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology
and Reproduction, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders, 2004, p. 69.
Littler RM, Polton GA, Brearley MJ. Resolution of diabetes mellitus but not acromegaly in a cat with a pituitary
macroadenoma treated with hypofractionated radiation. J Smafl Anim Pract 2006;47:392.
Niessen SJ, Khalid M, Petrie G, Church DB. Validation and application of an ovine radioimmunoassay for the diagnosis of
feline acromegaly. Vet Rec 2007;160:902-907.
Niessen SJ,Petrie G, Gaudiano F, Khalid M, Church DB.Routine ctinicat pathotogy findings in fetine acromegaty. Proceedings
of the BSAVA Congress, Birmingham, UK. 2007, p. 482.
Niessen SJ, Petrie G, Gaudiano F, Khalid M, Smyth JB, Mahoney P, Church DB. Feline acromegaly: An underdiagnosed
endocrinopathy? J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:899.
diabetes mellitus. J Vet Intern Med 2010 Sep-Oct;24(5):1098-1105.
Norman EJ, Mooney CT. Diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus in five cats with somatotrophic abnorrmalities
J Feline Med Surg 2000;2:183.
Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al: Acromegaly in 14 cats. J Vet Intern Med 1990;4:192.
Slingerland LI, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A, Kooistra Hs. Growth horrmone excess and the effect of octreotide in cats with
diabetes mellitus. Domest Anim Endocrinot 2008;35{4):352-361.
CHAPTER 42
Diabetes Insipidus and Polyuria/
Polydipsia in Dogs
Katharine F. Lunn and Katherine M. James
Pathogenesis
 Central diabetes insipidus is due to a lesion in the neurohypophysis (posterior pituitary).
● Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is due to renal inability to respond to antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
● Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may be primary (congenital) or secondary (due to one of a large
number of diseases that prevent or diminish the renal response to ADH).
Classical Signs
● Polyuria-polydipsia (PUPD).
● Other central nervous system signs are possible with central diabetes insipidus, depending on the
underlying cause.
● The myriad disease syndromes that result in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus often have other primary
clinical signs, for example, hyperadrenocorticism or renal failure.
● Patients may develop inappropriate urination associated with a high urine volume if they are unable
to get outside to void often enough.
● Patients already predisposed may become acutely clinical for incontinence.
Diagnosis
· Investigation of causes of PUPD.
● Central diabetes insipidus is suspected after ruling out nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and primary
polydipsia.
Water deprivation test (WDT) should rarely be necessary.
● Response to synthetic ADH can be used to support a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus.
Treatment
● Constant access to water is essential in all cases of PUPD except primary polydipsia
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals,First Edition.Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
436
Diabetes Insipidus and Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs437
 Synthetic ADH analogues can be used to manage central diabetes insipidus.
 Thiazide diuretics may be used to manage primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
● Nonspecific therapies to reduce urine volume such as reducing solute (e.g., sodium) intake rarely
have a significant effect on PUPD.
1. Pathogenesis
A. Normal cellular function requires tight regulation of plasma osmolality, which is achieved through
regulation of water balance:
 1. Normal water balance depends on an intact thirst mechanism, osmoreceptors in the brain, appropri-
ate release of antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin or ADH) from the posterior pituitary, and renal ability
to respond to ADH.
 2. In the kidneys, ADH binds to V, receptors in the collecting ducts, initiating the insertion of water
channels (aquaporin-2) into the apical membranes of the renal tubular epithelial cells
3. In the presence of a hypertonic renal medullary interstitium, water moves by osmosis from the renal
collecting ducts into the interstitium.
4. The release of ADH, and thus concentration of urine, will occur in response to an increase in plasma
osmolality.
 5. Conversely, when plasma osmolality is low, ADH secretion is suppressed and dilute urine is produced.
B. Polyuria and polydipsia are the classic signs of diabetes insipidus:
1. However, it is important to understand that there are many causes of polyuria/polydipsia and that the
term diabetes insipidus can be broadly applied to encompass most of them.
 2. In evaluating a patient with polyuria/polydipsia, it is useful to classify the causes of PUPD as central
diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
and primary polydipsia.
 3. Primary polydipsia is less common; rmost patients with PUPD have a primary polyuria.
 4. Some patients with polyuria/polydipsia have both a primary polyuria and a primary polydipsia
concurrently
5. Although the distinction between primary polyuria and primary polydipsia may be useful when con-
sidering the mechanisms of PUPD, it should be noted that polyuria and polydipsia almost always occur
together, even when clients may report otherwise. Excess water losses from the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract
history.
C. Central diabetes insipidus (also termed neurogenic diabetes insipidus) is an uncommon or rare condition,
due to a deficiency of ADH and may be total or partial:
1. Dogs with complete central diabetes insipidus are unable to concentrate their urine in response to
water deprivation; their urine is persistently hyposthenuric, even in the face of a significant water
deficit.
2. Dogs with partial central diabetes insipidus retain the ability to partially concentrate their urine in
response to water deprivation; the urine may become isosthenuric or slightly more concentrated in
response to water deprivation.
 3. Dogs with central diabetes insipidus are capable of responding to exogenous administration of ADH
analogues.
4. Damage to the neurohypophysis causes central diabetes insipidus. It may occur at the level of the
hypothalamic nuclei (supraoptic and paraventricular) or at the level of the axons that transport ADH to
the posterior pituitary. It may result from trauma, surgery, congenital malformations, or primary or
metastatic neoplasia
5. Many cases of canine central diabetes insipidus appear to be idiopathic, with no cause identified on
brain imaging or necropsy.
438 Clinical Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
1
Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is rare in dogs:
1. Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus results from a congenital inability of the renal tubules to
respond to ADH.
2. It could potentially arise from abnormalities in the V, receptors, postreceptor signaling mechanisms,
or the aquaporin-2 water channels.
F
Secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus accounts for the majority of cases of canine polyuria/polydipsia?
1. In secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, another disease process interferes with the renal tubular
response to ADH, possibly by affecting the binding of ADH to its receptors or disrupting postreceptor
mechanisms.
2. Because the movement of water from the renal tubules to the medullary interstitium occurs by osmo
sis, any decrease in the osmotic gradient will affect the ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine in
response to ADH
3. Thus, renal medullary solute washout and osmotic causes of PUPD also fall within the category of
secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
4. Table 42.1 lists the causes of polyuria/polydipsia in dogs and the suspected mechanism of each. To
facilitate diagnostic investigation, the causes of secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are ordered by
estimated relative frequency.
Il.Signalment
A.
 The signalment for central diabetes insipidus depends on the underlying cause:
1. There is no particular breed or gender predisposition.
2. Trauma can occur at any age.
 3. Congenital malformations would be expected to manifest in young dogs, and neoplasia is more likely
 in older animals.
B. Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus would be expected to occur in puppies and young dogs:
1. There are rare reports in a variety of breeds.
2. Sex predilection would depend on the mode of inheritance. For example, an X-linked disorder has
been described in huskies, in which the V, receptors show a low affinity for ADH binding.
C. The signalment for secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is determined by the underlying cause. For
 reported breed predilections for this disorder.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. The cardinal clinical sign of central diabetes insipidus is polyuria/polydipsia with hyposthenuria:
1. In complete central diabetes insipidus, the polyuria/polydipsia is profound and continuous. Affected
dogs may drink to the exclusion of other activities, and severely affected patients may lose weight as the
 thirst drive overrides an appetite for food.
 2. Dogs with partial central diabetes insipidus are also polyuric/polydipsic, but less markedly so.
3. Dogs with central diabetes insipidus will quickly develop hyperosmolar dehydration if they do not
have constant access to water. They then may even try to drink unexpected liquids, such as their own
urine.
B. Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus also causes significant polyuria/polydipsia and hyposthenuria.
Puppies with renal dysplasia causing primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may also have signs of uremia.
C. The polyuria/polydipsia in secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may vary from mild to severe:
1. Degree depends on the underlying cause.
  in ss a a  siis s u s  si 
underlying disease. Examples include polyphagia and skin and coat changes in hyperadrenocorticism,
 mental dullness with liver failure, or weight loss and vomiting with renal failure.
3. However it is important to recognize that PUPD can be the first or only apparent clinical sign in
some disorders that cause secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. For example, hypercalcemia of
malignancy may cause polyuria/polydipsia before the onset of specific clinical signs of neoplasia, pyelo-
nephritis may cause polyuria/polydipsia in the absence of fever or renal pain, and leptospirosis may
present with polyuria/polydipsia as its only sign.
Diabetes insipidus and Potyuria/Potyoipsia in Dogs
439
Table 42.1(
Causes of polyuria-polydipsia in dogs.
Relative frequency
Mechanism(s)
as a cause of
Classification
Disease or disorder
of PUPD
PUPD
Method of diagnosis
Primary
Primary (psychogenic)
Abnormal thirst
Uncommon
Exclusion of other causes
polydipsia
polydipsia
Entertainment test (see
Chapter 44)
Rarely WDT
Primary
Central diabetes
Absence or deficiency
Rare
Exclusion of other causes;
polyuria: CD]
insipidus
of ADH
Response to DDAV P
Rarery WDT
Primary
Primary (congenital)
 Renal tubular
Veryrare
Exclusion of other causes
polyuria:
 nephrogenic diabetes
 insensitivity to ADH
WDT or lack of response
1°ND1
insipidus
to DDAVP
Primary
Chronic renal failure
Osmotic diuresis
Very common
 Serum chemistry
polyuria:
Urinalysis
2° ND1
±Measurement of GFR
 Diabetes mellitus
Osmotic diuresis
Very common
 Serum chemistry
Urinalysis
 Serum fructosamine
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Renal tubular
Common
ACTH stimulation test
 insensitivity to ADH
Low-dose dexamethasone
(Partial CDl);*
 suppression test
(Psychogenic)
Pyelonephritis
Renal tubular
Common
Urinalysis
insensitivity to ADH
Urine culture
Loss of medullary
 Abdominal ultrasonography
hypertonicity
Pyelocentesis
Contrast radiography
Polyuric acute
Osmotic diuresis
Common 
 Serum chemistry
renal failure
Urinalysis
 Postobstructive
Osmotic diuresis
Common
History and PE
diuresis
 Downregulation of
Serum chemistry
aquaporin-2
Hypercalcemia
Renal tubular
Common
Serum calcium (total and
 insensitivity to A DH
ionized)
Leptospirosis
 Renal tubular
Regionally
Serology
 insensitivity to ADH?
common
PCR
Hypoadrenocorticism
Decreased medullary
Uncommon
 ACT'H stimulation test
hypertonicity
 Reduced sodium and
water absorption in
renal tubules 
 Renal medullary
 Decreased medullary
Uncommon
History
solute washout
hypertonicity
Identify underlying
cause
Liver failure
Decrea sed medullary
Uncommon
Serum chemistry
hypertonicity
Bile acids
(Psychogenic)
Pyometra
 Renal tubular
Uncommon
History and PE
insensitivity to ADH 
Abdominal imaging
(Continued)
Table 42.1
(contd)
Relative frequency
Mechanism(s)
as a cause of
Classification
Disease or disorder
of PUPD
PUPD
 Method of diagnosis
 Portosystemic shunt
 Decreased medullary
Uncommon
Bile acids
hypertonicity
Abdominal ultrasonography
(Psychogenic)
Computed tomography
(Increased GFR)
Transcolonic portal
 scintigraphy
Intestinal
 Renal tubular
Rare
Abdominal imaging
leiomyosarcoma
insensitivity to ADH
Exploratory surgery
Chronic partial
 Downregulation of 
Rare
Abdominal imaging
ureteral obstruction 
aquaporin-2
 Primary renal
Osmotic diuresis
Rare
Urinalysis
glycosuria, Fanconi
Urine electrolyte and amino
syndrome, and other 
acid analysis
tubulopathies
Hyperthyroidism
Decreased medullary
Rare
Serum T4 ± free T4
hypertonicity
Thyroid scintigraphy
(Psychogenic)
Hyponatremia
Decreased medullary
Rare
Serum chemistry
hypertonicity
 Pheochromocytoma
 Action of 
Rare
History and PE
catecholamines
 Abdominal imaging 
 Polycythemia
Action of ANP
Very rare
CBC
(CDI}
Hypokalemia
Decreased medullary
Very rare
Serum chemistry
hypertonicity
Downregulation of
aquaporin-2
Acromegaly
 Renal tubular
Veryrare
History and PE
insensitivity to ADH
GH or IGF-l levels
(Partial CDI)
Primary
 Renal tubular
Very rare
Electrolytes
hyperaldosteronism 
insensitivity to ADH
Renin activity
(CD)
Aldosterone levels
Miscellaneous
Diet or drug therapy.
Various
Common
History
e.g., low-protein diet,
high salt intake (diet, 
treats, road salt),
anticonvulsants,
glucocorticoids,
diuretics
Splenomegaly
Unknown 
Rare
 Abdominal imaging 
Gastrointestinal
Unknown
Rare
History and PE
disease
Abdominal imaging
Endoscopy
Exploratory surgery
Classification of the causes of PUPD in dogs, with associated mechanism(s) and methods of diagnosis. Within the category of secondary
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the causes are ordered by estimated relative frequency.
*Itens in parentheses are additional proposed mechanisms for PUPD.
PUPD=polyuria-polydipsia; WDT=water deprivation test; CDl=central diabetes insipidus; ADH=antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin);
DDAVP=1 -desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin (desmmopressin); 1° NDl=primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; 2° NDl=secondary
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; GFR=glomerular filtration rate; ACTH=adrenocorticotropic hormone; PE=physical examination;
PCR=polymerase chain reaction; T4 =thyroxine; fT4=free thyroxine; ANP=atrial natriuretic peptide; CBC=complete blood count; 
GH =growth hormone; IGF-I=insulin-like growth factor I; TSH=thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Diabetes insipidus and Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs  441
V.Diagnosis
 The hallmark of diabetes insipidus (whether central or nephrogenic) is polyuria/polydipsia:
1. The diagnosis of polyuria/polydipsia is achieved when the client observes increased urine output or water
intake, or both, and/or the clinician consistently detects an inappropriately low urine specific gravity (USG).
2. It is rarely necessary, often difficult, and typically not diagnostically informative to measure urine
Owner observations in conjunction with measurement of urine specific gravity are usually sufficient to
confirm the problem.
Ao ieun seisdpkiod Ared jo sisouep un isiss Aeu pue suod ae paneuanuon isou sin ie
manifest when associated with daytime drinking behaviors.
 4. Water should not be deliberately withheld from dogs with polyuria/polydipsia unless primary
polydipsia has been confirmed.
B. When considering urine specific gravity, it is important to consider what is appropriate rather than what
is normal:
1. A low urine specific gravity is expected in patients receiving medical therapy with certain drugs, for
example, diuretics or glucocorticoids, and is an expected normal physiological response in a dog that
 drinks a large armount of water for fun or as a response to stress or boredom.
 2. In contrast, a low urine specific gravity is not appropriate in a patient that has been deprived of water
and becomes dehydrated.
3. Terms such as hyposthenuria, isosthenuria, and hypersthenuria are useful in describing urine specific
gravity results, but they are not closely correlated with specific diagnoses (Table 42.2).
C. The diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus or primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is accomplished
through ruling out other causes of polyuria/polydipsia. When the differential diagnoses have been narrowed
down to central diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and primary polydipsia, a water
deprivation test may be considered to differentiate between these conditions. However because central dia-
 betes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and primary polydipsia are uncommon, the water
deprivation test is rarely necessary.
D. A staged approach to the investigation of polyuria/polydipsia will ensure that the more common
causes are diagnosed, before potentially performing an unnecessary water deprivation test. This
approach also encourages the use of safe, simple, and relatively inexpensive testing, before progressing
to tests that are more complex to perform or interpret, more expensive, or associated with more risk to
the patient:
1. Signalment, history, and physical examination will allow logical ordering of the differential diagnoses
for polyuria/polydipsia. For example, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is unlikely in an elderly
dog and hyperadrenocorticism is unlikely in a puppy:
cally) and also investigate the possibility of excessive salt ingestion.
b. If in doubt about the drug history, clients can be asked to bring medications to the clinician for
inspection.
2. Serum chemistry profile, complete blood count, and urinalysis can be used to immediately rule out or
rule in many differential diagnoses for polyuria/polydipsia. Serum chemistry and hematology are
expected to be normal in well hydrated dogs with central diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabe-
tes insipidus (unless accompanied by renal failure), and primary polydipsia.
 3. Particular attention should be paid to serum sodium concentration ([Na+]), which reflects water bal-
 ance and can sometimes direct the further workup of polyuria/polydipsia:
a. Elevated [Na*] is consistent with a water deficit, and therefore supports primary polyuria as the
cause of polyuria/polydipsia.
h. However, [Na*] is only expected to be elevated in patients that have an abnormal thirst response
 or limited access to water. Even patients with complete central diabetes insipidus can maintain normal
[Nat] if they have continued access to water and the ability to drink.
442 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Table 42.2
 Interpretation of urine specific gravity.*
Corresponding
Clinical
urine osmolality
Urine specific gravity
description
(mOsm/kg)
lnterpretation
<1.008
Hyposthenuric or
<300
Severe PUPD
dilute urine
Consistent with CDl, NDl, or primary polydipsia
Chronic renal failure afone unlikely
1.008-1.012
Isosthenuric or
290-310
Mild to moderate PUPD
fixed range urine
Complete CDl unlikely
May occur with partial CDl, many causes of 2o NDI,
 0 primary polydipsia, depending on water intake
1.012-1.030
Minimally
>310-1000
Mild PUPD
concentrated
Complete CDl ruled out 
urine
Partial CDl unlikely
Consistent with primary polydipsia, depending on
water intake
 May occur with 2 NDl, depending on cause and
severity
>1.035
Hypersthenuric or   >1 500
Obligate PUPD ruled out
highly
Primary polydipsia after water restriction or normal
concentrated
animal
urine
Definition and interpretation of urine specific gravity values. PUPD=polyuria-polydipsia; CDl=central diabetes insipidus;
NDl=nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; 2°=secondary. Adapted from Lunn and James (2007).
Buequauos s,puaed e aesau o Buduane uaum suauaunsau Aea syads auun jeaas uego ot papuua ae sueiu
ability Interpretation of a single value can be misleading; repeated measurement of urine specific gravity can more accurately determine
the presence and severity of PUPD.
C. Decreased [Nat] is consistent with an excess of free water and this finding would support primary
polydipsia as the cause of polyuria/polydipsia. However, if renal water excretory mechanisms are
intact, [Na'] may remain within normal limits.
d. Thus, [Nat] can help direct further diagnostic testing, but may be normal in many dogs with
plasma volume or hypovolemic conditions such as hypoadrenocorticism, excessive renal Na loss, or
GI fluid loss. Such patients with hyponatremia may have polyuria/polydipsia, but will also likely have
other clinical signs associated with the primary condition.
4. Urine culture is mandatory in the evaluation of dogs with polyuria/polydipsia. Pyelonephritis is a
cause of secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and many causes of polyuria/polydipsia predispose
patients to urinary tract infections:
a. If pyelonephritis is suspected, it should not be ruled out if a single urine culture is negative.
h. Further testing should be considered, such as repeated cultures, abdominal ultrasonography,
aspiration of one or both renal pelves under ultrasound guidance, or pyelography through the admin-
istration of contrast intravenously or by direct injection into the renal pelvis under ultrasound
guidance.
5. Leptospirosis titers are recommended in dogs with polyuria/polydipsia, unless they live in a desert
be sufficient, but should be interpreted in conjunction with the vaccination history.
6. Fasting and postprandialbile acids are used to test for acquired liver failure or portosystemic shunting.
Diabetes insipidus and Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs  443
7. The selection of endocrine tests is guided by patient signalment; history; clinical signs; and the results
of serum chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis:
a. Hyperthyroidism is rare in dogs, but can be ruled out with measurement of serum thyroxine.
h. The ACTH stimulation test is recommended as the initial screening test for spontaneous hyper
adrenocorticism as it can also detect hypoadrenocorticism and iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism.
A low-dose dexamethasone suppression test should follow a normal ACTH stimulation test if there is
8. Thoracic and abdominal radiography and/or abdominal ultrasonography are used to screen for a
disease, and partial urinary tract obstruction. Contrast radiography, nuclear medicine, computed tomog
raphy (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) might be used to investigate specific differential
diagnoses.
9. Measurement of glomerular filtration rate is indicated for dogs that are suspected to have chronic
renal disease but that have normal blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations:
a. Azotemia is expected after the loss of 75% of glomerular filtration rate, but polyuria/polydipsia
occurs when approximately 66% of glomerular filration rate is lost, particularly in nonproteinuric
renal disease. Thus, chronic renal failure can initially manifest as polyuria/polydipsia without azotemia.
b. Methods for assessment of glomerular filtration rate include iohexol clearance, exogenous creati-
 nine clearance, and nuclear scintigraphy.
10. Brain imaging with CT or MRI is indicated in patients in which acquired central diabetes insipidus
is suspected.
11. The water deprivation test is rarely indicated in the diagnosis of polyuria/polydipsia, because most
causes can be diagnosed with the work-up outlined above. The water deprivation test is designed to
differentiate between central diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and primary
polydipsia:
a. Primary polydipsia is uncommon, central diabetes insipidus is rare, and primary nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus is very rare.
h. Most patients with polyuria/polydipsia have secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and the
water deprivation test cannot distinguish between primary and secondary nephrogenic diabetes insip-
idus; thus, the differentiation must be accomplished by a complete diagnostic investigation of all
potential causes of secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus before a water deprivation test is con-
templated.
E. Before performing the water deprivation test, the following must be considered:
1. Prerequisites for the water deprivation test:
a. All causes of polyuria/polydipsia have been ruled out, except for central diabetes insipidus, primary
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and primary polydipsia.
b. Access to 24-h care with frequent observation of the patient.
C. Ability to weigh the patient, empty the bladder, and assess urine specific gravity as often as
hourly.
d. Ability to measure electrolytes (particularly sodium), BUN, and creatinine in-house.
e. The patient is clinically normal, apart from polyuria/polydipsia, and is mentally alert.
 2. The water deprivation test is contraindicated if:
a. All causes of polyuria/polydipsia have not been ruled out, apart from central diabetes insipidus,
primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and primary polydipsia.
b. 24-h care is unavailable.
C. Urine specific gravity, serum electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine concentrations cannot be measured
in-house.
d. The patient is clinically sick or mentally dull.
e. The patient is dehydrated.
f. The patient is hypernatremic.
The patient is azotemic.
h. Urine specific gravity >1.030 (this patient has already passed the test).
444 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
3. The water deprivation test is particularly dangerous in patients with
a.Chronic renal failure.
b. Pyelonephritis.
C. Hypoadrenocorticism.
d. Hypercalcemia.
e. Leptospirosis.
f. Liver failure.
Thus, allattempts must be made to rule out these diagnoses before a water deprivation test is considered.
4. Modified water deprivation tests in which the client withholds water from the pet overnight, with the
urine specific gravity measured the following morning, are neither safe nor diagnostically helpful. It should
be remembered that some dogs with polyuria/polydipsia, such as those with complete central diabetes
insipidus, have a significant obligate urine production. In these patients, 12 h of water deprivation would be
equivalent to a few days of water deprivation in a dog with a normal urine volume and could result in death.
F. The water deprivation test evaluates both the patient's ability to produce endogenous ADH and the
kidneys’ ability to respond to it. If there is no response to water deprivation, vasopressin or an exogenous
ADH analogue (DDAVP; 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin; desmopressin) is administered. When the
modified water deprivation test is performed, renal medullary solute washout is corrected through gradual
water deprivation before abrupt water deprivation is initiated:
1. Predicted response to the water deprivation test:
 a. Primary polydipsia: urine will be concentrated in response to water deprivation.
h. Complete central diabetes insipidus: urine remains hyposthenuric during water deprivation, but
specific gravity increases after DDAVP administration.
C. Partial central diabetes insipidus: urine specific gravity may increase into the isosthenuric range (or
slightly higher) during water deprivation and will increase further after DDAVP administration.
d. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus: urine specific gravity does not increase in response to water depri-
vation or DDAVP administration.
2. The phases of the modified water deprivation test, with a brief summary of interpretation of results, are
cipal, the test is difficult to perform and interpret, time consuming, and potentially dangerous.
3. Complications and caveats in interpreting the water deprivation test:
a. Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may be indis-
tinguishable in a water deprivation test; thus, every effort must be made to rule out secondary nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus before performing the test.
h. Depending on the underlying cause, dogs with secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may pro-
duce a urine specific gravity in the 1.008-1.020 range in phase 2 (abrupt water deprivation) and be
misdiagnosed as having central diabetes insipidus.
C. Because the polyuria/polydipsia in hyperadrenocorticism may have components of psychogenic
polydipsia, partial central diabetes insipidus, and secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism can respond in a variety of ways to the water deprivation test.
d. Dogs with primary polydipsia may produce a urine specific gravity of <1.030 in phase 2 if renal
 medullary solute washout has not been corrected. This is less likely to occur if phase 1 (gradual water
 deprivation at home) is incorporated into the water deprivation test.
4. Serum and urine osmolality in the water deprivation test:
a. Osmolality is determined by the number of particles in a solution, whereas specific gravity is also
affected by particle size.
b. Comparison of urine and serum osmolality can more accurately determine urine-concentrating
ability during the water deprivation test than measurement of urine specific gravity.
C. H a specific gravity of 1.030 is not reached, the end of phase 2 of the water deprivation test may be
more accurately defined when the urine osmolality reaches a plateau and does not vary by more than
5% over three urine collection periods, 1h apart.
Diabetes Insipidus and Potyuria/Potydipsia in Dogs
445
Table 42.3
The modified water deprivation test.
Phase
Summary
End point 
asod.nd
Expected response
Primary
Polydipsia
CD]
ND]
Phase 1
Gradual water
Water
Correct renal
May concentrate
Failure to
 Failure to
 deprivation at 
intake=1 00mL/ 
 medullary
urine (USG
concentrate
concentrate
home, over
Aep/ay
solute washout
>1.030*); if so,
3-5 days
 Patient lethargic
test complete
 or water seeking
Phase 2
Abrupt water
Loss of >5%
1.Maximally
USG >1.030;*
Complete
1° NDI:
 deprivation in 
 body weight 
stimulate ADH 
test complete
CDI:
USG <
the hospital
release
USG <
1.008*
 Any abnormal
1.008*
 clinical signs 
2° ND|**:
USG >1.030
2. Assess renal
 Partial 
USG <1.008
Azotemia
response to
CDI:
-1.020*
Hypernatremia
ADH
USG 1.008-
1.020*
Phase 3
Response to
2-12 h
 Assess renal
Phase 3 not
Increase in
No increase
exogenous
(depending on 
response to
performed
USG
in USG
ADH with 
ADH product 
ADH
compared
compared to
ongoing water
(pasn
to phase 2
phase 2
deprivation in
the hospital
Phase 4
Gradual
2 h, if patient
Return to
reintroduction
clinically normal 
normal
of water in the 
drinking
hospital
behavior
Sunmnmary of the phases of the water deprivation test (WDT). This table provides an outline of the test and expected responses. It does not
provide sufficient detail for safely performing a WDT. The reader should consult more detailed texts or refer the patient to a specialist
(recommended) if considering the WDT. UsG=urine specific gravity.
*Urine specific gravity values are provided here for simplicity, but it is recomimended that urine and serum osmolality be evaluated when
performing the WDT. See text for further details.
**Itisimportant to note that 2a NDI should have been ruled out before performing the WDT. Therefore, these values are provided for
illustrative purposes only. The results of the WDT are very difficult to interpret if 2o NDl has not been investigated and ruled out.
d. Osmolality can be approximated by multiplying the last two numbers of the specific gravity by 36;
for example, a urine specific gravity of 1.010 is approximately equivalent to an osmolality of
360mOsm/L
e. Measurement of osmolality is much less readily available than urine specific gravity. However,
urine and serum samples should be frozen and can later be analyzed if it is determined that measure-
ment of osmolality will provide additional diagnostic information.
f. Osmolality measurements are often very valuable in interpreting the results of the water depriva-
tion test, particularly in more difficult cases. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that osmolality be
 measured whenever possible. This is another reason to recommend referral to a specialist if the water
deprivation test is being considered.
446 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
G. A DDAVP response trial can be used to confirm a suspected diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus, thus
avoiding a water deprivation test:
1. Prerequisites for a response trial include:
a. All causes of secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus have been ruled out.
urine specific gravity measurements, and absence of response to environmental modification.
C. The patient can be closely observed and water intake measured. Hospitalization is not necessary,
but the patient should not be left unattended at home for more than a few hours when the test is
started.
2. How to perform the test:
a. Measure water intake over 2-3 days.
h. Measure urine specific gravity prior to starting DDAVP.
C. Administer DDAVP (intranasal preparation [0.1 mg/mL]: 1-4 drops twice daily in conjunctival sac)
for 5-7 days; monitor water intake and urine specific gravity.
d. Decreased water intake (>50%) or increase in urine specific gravity (>50%) support a diagnosis of
central diabetes insipidus.
3. A theoretical risk of the DDAVP response trial is water intoxication and hyponatremia in a patient
with primary polydipsia, because the normal renal diluting mechanism will be compromised; however,
this appears to be a rare complication in clinical practice.
V. Differential Diagnoses
A. The differential diagnoses for diabetes insipidus include all the potential causes of polyuria/polydipsia,
B. Primary polydipsia is abnormal thirst behavior resulting in increased water intake, with a compensatory
polyuria. In humans, it may be associated with psychiatric disorders:
1. In dogs, primary polydipsia is most commonly seen as a behavioral problem in dogs that are hyperac-
tive, bored, stressed, exercise restricted, or attention seeking.
They may also concentrate their urine in response to environmental changes that cause changes in behav-
q a as a s e p m eiaod srosd sxa i  e axa ro ro
at the veterinary clinic or when kept highly entertained (see Chapter 44 for entertainment test).
3. Primary, or psychogenic, polydipsia may also partially explain the polydipsia that can be associated
with hyperthyroidism, hepatic encephalopathy, hypercortisolemia, GI disease, splenomegaly, or, excep-
tionally rarely, lower urinary tract infection.
 4. A distinction in behavioral polydipsia that is normal versus abnormal is rarely made in veterinary
medicine:
a. Clinically, a dog with polydipsia severe enough to create hyponatremia should clearly be classed as
abnormal since the behavior can result in serious self-harm.
h. Dogs with behavioral polydipsias due to activities like swimming or merely preferring to drink
more than most dogs, while they may be noticeably polydipsic to their owners at certain times of day,
are not necessarily abnormal.
C. Primary polyuria encompasses all the remaining causes of PUPD, including central diabetes insipidus and
 all forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
D. The causes of polyuria/polydipsia, and, therefore, the differential diagnoses for central diabetes insipi-
dus, are listed in Table 42.1. When investigating a patient with polyuria/polydipsia, it can be very useful
to start with a complete list of all differential diagnoses, in order to ensure that all possible causes are
considered:
1. The diagnostic plan can be based on clinical suspicion and consideration of the most common causes
of polyuria/polydipsia, as outlined in Table 42.1.
2. Medical problems identified other than polyuria/polydipsia should be pursued concurrently as
their investigation may lead to a specific diagnosis more efficiently than the evaluation for polyuria/
polydipsia.
Diabetes Insipidus and Polyuria/Potydipsia in Dogs
447
Table 42.4 Causes of PUPD in dogs organized by body system.
Metabolic!
Endocrine
Renal
hematological
Abdominal
Miscellaneous
Central diabetes 
Primary nephrogenic
Hypercalcemia
Liver failure
Primary
insipidus
diabetes insipidus
polydipsia
 Diabetes mellitus
 Chronic renal failure
Hyponatremia
Pyometra
Renal 
medullary
solute washout
 Hyperadrenocorticism 
Pyelonephritis
Hypokalemia
Portosystemic shunt 
Diet
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Polyuric acute renal
 Polycythemia
Leiomyosarcoma
Medications
failure
 Hyperthyroidism
Postobstructive
 Splenomegaly
Excess salt
diuresis
ingestion 
 Pheochromocytoma
Leptospirosis
Gastrointestinal
disease
Acromegaly
 Chronic partial
ureteral obstruction
Primary
Tubulopathies
hyperaldosteronism
(Fanconi syndrome,
primary renal
glycosuria)
body systems approach, as outlined in Table 42.4.
4. Finally, the plan can also follow the framework described under "Diagnosis" above.
 Regardless of the approach used to investigate the patient with polyuria/polydipsia, it is most important
the diagnostic plan is modified as results are obtained:
1. The order of testing should ensure that potentially life-threatening disorders are diagnosed as early
as possible.
 2. Conversely, central diabetes insipidus is not life threatening (as long as affected patients have con-
stant access to water) and, therefore, a water deprivation test or DDAVP trial can, and should, be
delayed until all other causes of polyuria/polydipsia have been ruled out.
Vl. Treatment
Treatment of central diabetes insipidus is not essentialif the patient has partial central diabetes insipidus
and the magnitude of polyuria/polydipsia is tolerable, as long as the patient has constant access to water.
Dogs with complete central diabetes insipidus are profoundly polyuric/polydipsic, and most owners will,
therefore, elect to treat them. However if the dog has access to the outdoors for frequent urination and a
constant water supply is guaranteed, medical therapy is not essential. The necessity of a constant water
due to their obligate polyuria if deprived of water for any period of time:
1. If medical treatment is elected, partial central diabetes insipidus may respond to administration of
thiazide diuretics (see primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus below).
 2. Total or partial central diabetes insipidus may also be managed with ADH analogues, usually DDAVP.
There are several options available in the United States for administration of DDAVP:
 a. Conjunctival: 0.1 mg/mL solution (5mL) of DDAVP for nasal administration; as most dogs will
not tolerate the nasal route, a pharmacist can transfer the solution to a sterile dropper bottle; dose is
1-4 drops in the conjunctival sac once or twice daily; adjust dose for optimal clinical effect.
448 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
b. Nasal: 1.5mg/mL solution (2.5 mL) for nasal administration; this formulation is not usually
used in dogs.
C. Oral: 0.1 mg and 0.2 mg tablets are available. Starting dose is 0.1 mg (per dog) three times daily.
Bioavailability may be low or variable in dogs; adjust dose for optimal clinical effect.
d. Injectable: 4 pg/mL solution is available in 1-mL ampoules or 10-mL multidose vials. This for-
mulation is expensive; if an injectable product is required (e.g., during the water deprivation test)
the 0.1 mg/mL nasal solution can be passed through a filter to create a sterile solution.
e. All of these options are relatively expensive. Clinicians may prefer to begin with conjunctival
administration of the 0.1 mg/mL nasal solution. If the patient responds, oral DDAVP can be tried,
and may be less expensive in some cases. It may also be possible to target therapy with DDAVP to
uoiu ie sioopui sdaals inq Kep au sunp sroopino si ieui op e rog amuau
Dogs with primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should be managed by allowing constant free access
fo water.
C.
Thiazide diuretics (e.g., chlorothiazide) may reduce polyuria in patients with primary nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus and central diabetes insipidus:
1. Thiazides inhibit Na reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule. This leads to hypovolemia, which
in turn stimulates proximal tubular reabsorption of Na and water. As a result, delivery of water to the
collecting ducts is decreased, with associated reduction in urine output.
2. The dose of chlorothiazide is 20-40 mg/kg PO twice daily.
 3. Hypokalemia is a potential side effect and serum potassium should be monitored.
 Treatment for secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus depends on the underlying cause. Affected
patients should have continuous access to water.
Primary polydipsia is managed by water restriction and behavioral modification.
E.
 For dogs with a profound primary polyuria, clinicians should consider monitoring serum potassium
and magnesium concentrations, and supplementing as necessary, as urinary losses will be increased. Similarly,
it might be anticipated that water-soluble vitamins will be depleted in these patients.
Vll. Prognosis
 Prognosis for central diabetes insipidus is good if there is no associated structural brain disease; other-
wise, prognosis is determined by the underlying cause. Polyuria/polydipsia in central diabetes insipidus can
 be managed medically; however, treatment may be discontinued due to expense.
B
 Prognosis for primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is guarded to poor; these dogs may develop con-
current signs of uremia.
C.
 Prognosis for secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is dependent on the underlying cause.
D.
Prognosis for primary polydipsia is good.
VIlll. Prevention
Prevention is dependent on the underlying cause.
References and Further Readings
Cohen M, Post GS. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a dog with intestinal leiomyosarcoma. J Ar Vet Med Assoc
1999;215(12):1818-1820.
Cohen M, Post GS. Water transport in the kidney and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. J Vet Intern Med 2002;16(5):510-517.
Cohen M, Post GS, Wright JC. Gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma in 14 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2003;17(1):107-110.
Couto CG. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG, eds. Small Animat Internat Medicine, 4th ed.
St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier, 2009, pp. 1260-1270
vascular anomalies before and after surgical ligation. J Vet Intern Med 1999;13(5):465-471.
DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water: Hypernatremia and hyponatrermia. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and
Acid-Base Disorders in Smalt Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 47-79.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Saunders, 2004.
Diabetes Insipidus and Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs449
Grauer GF, Pitts RP. Primary polydipsia in three dogs with portosystemic shunts. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987;23{2):197-200
Harb MF, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Central diabetes insipidus in dogs: 20 cases {1986-1995). J Arm Vet Med Assoc
1996;209(11):1884-1888.
Henderson SM, Elwood CM. A potential causal association between gastrointestinal disease and primary polydipsia in three
dogs. J Small Ani Pract 2003;44(6):280-284.
Hoppe A, Karlstam E. Renal dysplasia in boxers and Finnish harriers. J Smaft Ani Pract 2000;41(9):422-426.
 James KM, Lunn KF. Norrmal and abnormal water balance: Hyponatremia and hypernatremia. Compend Contin Educ Vet
2007;29(10):589-609.
Lunn KF. Managing the patient with polyuria and polydipsia. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, eds Kink's Current Veterinary
Therapy X1V, St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2008, pp. 844-850.
Lunn KF, James KM. Norrmal and abnormal water balance: Polyuria and polydipsia. Cormpend Contin Educ Vet
2007;29(10):612-624.
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. J Recept Res 1992;12(3):351-368.
Mulnix JA, Rijnberk A, Hendriks HJ. Evaluation of a modified water-deprivation test for diagnosis of polyuric disorders in
dogs. J Ar Vet Med Assoc 1976;169(12):1327-1330.
JD, eds.Kirk's Cumrent Veterinary Therapy X1lI,2000, pp. 325-326.
Polzin DJ, Osborme CA,Ross S Chronic kidney disease. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,eds.Textbook of Veterinary Internat
Medicine, 6th edn. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005, pp. 1756-1785.
Ramsey IK, Dennis R, Herrtage ME. Concurrent central diabetes insipidus and panhypopituitarism in a German shepherd dog.
J Small Anim Pract 1999;40(6):271-274.
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, van Vonderen IK, et al. Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria as the leading symptom. Dormest Ani
Endocrinol2001;20:227-240.
Schwedes Cs. Transient diabetes insipidus in a dog with acromegaly. J Smatl Anim Pract 1999;40(8):392-396.
Takemura N.Successful long-term treatment of congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a dog. JSmall Anim Pract
1998;39(12):592-594.
                 s  
1987;191(9):1095-1100.
van Vonderen IK, Meyer HP, Kraus JS, et al. Polyuria and polydipsia and disturbed vasopressin release in 2 dogs with
secondary polycythemia. JVet Intern Med 1997;11(5):300-303.
J Vet Intern Med 1999;13(5):419-425.
and polydipsia. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18(6):800-806.
CHAPTER 43
Diabetes Insipidus in Cats
Nicki Reed and Danielle Gunn-Moore
Pathogenesis
● Inadequate production or secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH—vasopressin) by the posterior
pituitary (central diabetes insipidus), or lack of responsiveness to ADH by the kidney (nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus).
● Reported cases in cats have all been central diabetes insipidus.
● Underlying identified etiologies for central diabetes insipidus include congenital anomalies, trauma,
and neoplasia, but idiopathic cases are also reported.
Classical Signs
● Marked polyuria due to inability to concentrate urine. The polyuria is accompanied by marked
polydipsia, often in excess of 200 mL/kg/q 24h
● Urine-specific gravity (USG) is consistently low, usually< 1.010.
Diagnosis
● Diagnosis requires elimination of other causes of polyuria/polydipsia.
● Confirmation of diabetes insipidus requires performance of a water deprivation test; patients with
diabetes insipidus are unable to concentrate their urine after 3-5% dehydration.
● Patients with central diabetes insipidus are able to concentrate their urine following administration
of synthetic ADH.
● Patients with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are unable to respond to administration of synthetic ADH.
● Assessment of response to a therapeutic trial with the ADH analogue desmopressin (1-deamino
 9-D-arginine vasopressin; DDAVP) is a safer alternative to performance of a water deprivation test.
Treatment
 Treatment of central diabetes insipidus involves treatment with DDAVP, a synthetic analogue of ADH.
● Sodium restriction is beneficial for both central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Thiazide diuretics may be considered for nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
papiaoid si reem oi saooe snonunuoo paplaord 'uondo ue si Adeiaql on ●
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
450
Diabetes insipidus in Cats 451
Pathogenesis
 A. All reported cases of feline diabetes insipidus have been central diabetes insipidus (CDI), rather than
 primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in origin:
1. Central diabetes insipidus is due to failure to synthesize or secrete antidiuretic hormone (ADH—
2. The inability to secrete ADH, in response to increasing plasma osmolarity or decreasing plasma
volume, results in an inability of the kidneys to reabsorb water. This inappropriately increases
plasma osmolarity further, while urine remains dilute (see Figure 43.1).
B. Central diabetes insipidus may arise as a result of:
1. Trauma resulting in damage to the pituitary gland.
2. A congenital or idiopathic anomaly.
3. Neoplasia or an infectious/inflammatory disease process affecting the pituitary gland.
C. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus results when the kidney has lost its ability to respond to ADH:
CNS
HYPOTHALAMUS
BARORECEPTORS
OSMORECEPTORS
.++*
ADH
10% ↓ VOLUME
 2% ↑OSMOLALITY
POSTERIOR
PITUITARY
↑ BLOOD PRESSURE
ADH
ADH
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
EB
CAMP Cyclic adenosine
L OSMOLALITY
↑VOLUME
工
monophosphate
105
ATP
PK
Protein kinase
WATER REABSORPTION
PK
ADH
V2 ADH receptor
DISTAL TUBULE
AND COLLECTING
Water
DUCT
APICAL
Aquaporin channel
Fgure 43.1F
tricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus in response to increased osmolality or decreased plasma volume. The ADH
causes exocytosis of the granules and release of ADH. ADH binds to the V, receptor on blood vessels to cause vasoconstriction,
and the V , receptor in the distal tubules and collecting ducts of the kidney. Following binding to the V, receptor, the second
messenger cAMP causes activation of protein kinases. This results in movement of aquaporin channels from their intracellular
location to the apical membrane. Insertion of these channels enables water reabsorption, thus increasing plasma volume and 
decrea sing osmolality.
452 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
1. Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is the result of an abnormality with the ADH receptor. This
has not been reported in cats.
2. Secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may be seen in association with a number of
insufficiency, and pyometra, where the production of ADH is adequate, but its action at the
receptor is compromised.
 Signalment
A.
Reported cases have varied in age from 8 weeks to 6 years.
B. No sex or breed predilection has been identified.
IIl. Clinical Signs
A. Marked polydipsia and polyuria is reported consistently. Polyuria is the primary problem as these cats
are unable to adequately concentrate their urine. The polydipsia is secondary to compensate for the excessive
renal fluid loss:
1. Water consumption will exceed 100 mL/kg/q 24 h, and consumption of 250mL/kg/q 24 h is not unusual.
2. Cats may seek water from unusual sources such as dripping taps and toilets.
B. Owners may not be specifically aware of polyuria in cats, especially if liter boxes are used. Polyuria may
manifest as:
1. Litter boxes being required to be changed more frequently.
 2. Litter boxes feeling heavier when changed at regular intervals due to the increased volume of urine.
3. Cats spending longer time outdoors due to the need to urinate more frequently.
C. Marked polyuria may lead to cats being presented for inappropriate urination out of the liter box. This
can lead to investigations for urinary disorders unless the concurrent polydipsia is identified.
D. Weight loss may be a feature in some cases due to:
1. Filling of the stomach with water suppressing appetite.
2. Calories expended on drinking and urinating.
E. Neurological signs may be evident in cases of neoplastic or inflammatory infiltration or where trauma
has resulted in damage to the pituitary gland. Mydriasis and proprioceptive deficits have been reported in
association with traumatic diabetes insipidus.
F. Physical examination may be unremarkable, other than evidence of dehydration.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Initial investigation should comprise confirmation of polydipsia and polyuria. Water consumption
should be measured and USG assessed. If water consumption is< 100 mL/kg/q 24h, or USG> 1.025, then
diabetes insipidus should be ruled out.
B. Routine hermatology may be within reference range, or the hematocrit may be elevated if the cat is
dehydrated.
C. The abnormalities most frequently identified on biochemistry are elevated total protein, urea, and
creatinine, attributed to dehydration and elevated sodium, consistent with hyperosmolarity. Biochemistry
results may be normal.
D. Urinalysis consistently identifies dilute urine. USG is typically less than 1.010 and urine osmolality is less
than plasma osmolality (< 310 mOsm/kg).
E. Plasma osmolality is usually increased (reference range 280-310mOsm/kg). If osmolality cannot be
measured directly, it may be estimated by the following formulas:
1. [2(Na+ + K+) (mEq/L)]+[glucose (mg/dL)/18]+[BUN (mg/dL)/2.8]
2. [2(Na+ + K+) (mmol/L)]+[glucose (mmol/L)]+[BUN (mmol/L)]
F.
 Confirmation of diabetes insipidus requires demonstration of an inability to concentrate urine in the
face of increased plasma osmolality:
1. Causes of secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should be investigated and ruled out before
2. Patients that are clinically dehydrated on presentation should not be subjected to a water deprivation
test—they have already failed this test if their urine remains dilute.
Diabetes insipidus in Cats  453
Start water restriction 3-5 days prior to test.
Gradually reduce water to 60 mL/kg/day
Withold food from 12 h before the start of the
test
Start the test first thing in the morning (8-9 a.m.) place
 an indwelling urinary catheter and empty the bladder.
Measure USG (+/- osmolality). Obtain a blood sample and
measure HCT and TP (+/- urea, creatinine, and osmolality).
Weigh the cat
Every hour check hydration status and weight. Empty the
urine collection system and check UsG (+/- osmolality).
HCT, TP, urea, and creatinine should be evaluated
periodically
Loss of 3-5% bodyweight
USG > 1.030. STOP the test.
 elevation in
Cat does not have
urea/creatinine
diabetes insipidus
Administer DDAVP
Continue to monitor
parameters as before
↑ in USG >1.025
↑ in USG <1.025 supports
supports CDI
NDl or reconsider other
Offer small volumes of water
to drink over next 2 h,
then ad lib
 protein; CDI = central diabetes insipidus; NDl=nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; DDx =differential diagnoses.
3. The presence of polyuria/polydipsia can affect the renal concentrating ability due to medullary solute
washout. Gradually reducing water consumption for 72 h prior to starting the water deprivation test may
be beneficial, as it can restore the medullary concentration gradient:
a. Water may be reduced by 10% per day for 5-7days prior to starting the test, to a minimum
yolume of 60 mL/kg.
b. Water may be reduced to 120 mL/kg/day, 90mL/kg/day, and 60 mL/kg/day, 72, 48, and 24 h,
respectively, before starting the test.
4. A suggested protocol for the water deprivation test is given in Figure 43.2:
454 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Water deprivation test
1.06 -
Normal range of
1.05 
concentration
Ae.6
1.04 -
specific
Nomal
1.03
CDI
NDI
1.02
Isosthenuric
1.01 -
range
12345678910111213141516171819
Time (h)
Figure 43.3 Characteristic responses to the water deprivation test in normal patients and those with diabetes insipidus. CDl=central
diabetes insipidus; N Dl = nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; ADH =administration of exogenous source of antidiuretic hormone.
a. Placement of an indwelling urinary catheter is likely to require sedation or general anesthesia.
Alpha 2 agonists should not be used as they can interfere with the release of ADH. Alternatively, the
bladder may be emptied by manual expression, but this is less accurate for ensuring complete
emptying, and could traumatize the bladder.
h. The end point of the test is when the cat has become 3-5% dehydrated, as assessed by changes in
weight, as this indicates maximal stimulation of ADH release. This may also be assumed by failure
of urine osmolality to change over three consecutive measurements. Increase in total proteins, hema-
tocrit, or changes in USG are considered less reliable.
C. Normal cats may take 2-3 days to become 5% dehydrated, their USG will increase to 1.047-
1.087, and urine osmolality increases to 1581-2984mOsm/kg. Cats with diabetes insipidus may
become dehydrated within 12h, and the USG remains hyposthenuric (< 1.007).
G. Differentiation between central diabetes insipidus and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus relies on the
demonstration of an increased urine concentrating ability in response to administration of exrinsic ADH
(see Figures 43.2 and 43.3):
 Once the end point of the water deprivation test is reached, an exogenous form of ADH should be
administered by one of the following methods:
intravenously.
h. Aqueous vasopressin (Pitressin?, Parke Davis)—0.5 U/kg intramuscularly.
C. DDAVP intranasal drops (100 μg/mL):
i. Four drops instilled intranasally or into the conjunctival sac.
il. 5 pg by subcutaneous or intravenous injection. This formulation is not sterile, therefore use of
a bacterial filter is recommended.
 The bladder is emptied periodically and USG continues to be monitored:
 a. Following vasopressin,the bladder should be emptied every 30 min and USG measured. An effect
is expected after 1-2 h.
h. Following desmopressin, the bladder should be emptied every 1-2 h and USG measured. An effect
is expected after 2-8 h.
3.
An increase in urine osmolality of 50-600% or USG to> 1.020 following administration of ADH is
supportive of a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus.
Diabetes insipious in Cats 455
4. Failure to demonstrate an adequate response to ADH is supportive of a diagnosis of nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus.
H. Following completion of the test, water should be gradually reintroduced with small volumes offered for
 the first 2h to prevent vomiting from excessive ingestion or water intoxication. Water should also be offered
if the cat becomes hypernatremic, azotemic, or shows signs of altered mentation.
Complications that may be associated with the water deprivation test include:
1. Development of severe hyperosmolality or hypernatremia. Fluid therapy with 0.45% NaCl, or in
severe cases, 0.9% NaCl may be required.
2. Requirement to place an indwelling urinary catheter, inaccuracies if it is removed mid-test, and
3. Failure to respond to administration of DDAVP or aqueous vasopressin due to loss of medullary
4. Failure to detect an increase in USG due to monitoring for an insufficient period after administration
of DDAVP.
 5. Water intoxication may occur if free access to large quantities of water is permitted following comple-
tion of the test. This can cause cerebral edema.
J. Due to the problems associated with the water deprivation test, a therapeutic trial may be considered as
an alternative method of diagnosing diabetes insipidus. Other differential diagnoses should be ruled out
prior to performing a therapeutic trial:
n 'in an is on rod sg rog aoq ie ain rnm sinn a sase rao a 'l
samples are collected to measure USG and/or osmolality.
2. Therapy is then started with DDAVP.
 3. After S-7 days, several urine samples are obtained for measurement of USG (+/- osmolality).
 4. A reduction in thirst and increase in urinary concentrating ability (>50%) is supportive of a
diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus. Cats with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus would show minimal
response.
K. Imaging of the pituitary region (MRI or CT) may assist in establishing an underlying etiology, particularly
if neoplasia is of concern in an older animal.
V.  Differential Diagnoses
 A. Other causes of polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD) should be investigated and ruled out before performing
a water deprivation test:
1. Kidney disease is the most common cause for PU/PD:
a. The degree of PU/PD is likely to be more marked with diabetes insipidus than with kidney
disease.
b. The urine concentrating ability is usually fixed in the isosthenuric range (1.007-1.015) in renal
disease, or higher.
C. Azotemia may be present in patients with diabetes insipidus due to dehydration and absent in cats
with early kidney disease (IRIS stage I).
d. If there is any doubt, creatinine clearance tests (endogenous or exogenous) may be performed to
assess glomerular filtration rate, and a water deprivation test should NOT be performed.
e. Urine culture should be performed to investigate pyelonephritis, but a negative culture does not
definitively rule it out.
 2. Diabetes mellitus is another common cause of PU/PD. Both glycosuria and hyperglycemia will be
present (see Chapter 16).
3. Hyperthyroidism does not typicaly cause such marked PU/PD as diabetes insipidus. Assessment of
thyroid hormone status, along with other clinical signs, is likely to confirm this diagnosis (see Chapter 29).
4. Hyperadrenocorticism is a rare cause of PU/PD in cats, and is likely to be accompanied by other
clinical signs such as coat changes, hepatomegaly, and evidence of diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 7).
5. Other systemic causes of PU/PD, for example, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, and hepatic disease, are
likely to have been identified on initial screening blood work.
6. Psychogenic polydipsia is a rare cause of PD/PU in dogs and has not been reported in cats
456 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animars
Treatment
 Central diabetes insipidus is managed by replacement of ADH with synthetic analogues.
B.
 ADH is also known as arginine vasopressin. The 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin synthetic ana-
logue (DDAVP or desmopressin) is most commonly used to treat this condition. It has reduced effects on
systemic blood pressure compared to ADH, but has a greater antidiuretic effect, which is sustained for
longer than the natural hormone.
L
DDAVP is available in a number of different formulations:
1. Nasal drops (100 pg/mL): whilst these can be administered intranasally, this is not easy in cats so
the preferred route of administration is into the conjunctival sac. Typically 1-3 drops are given
q 8-12h; 1 drop is reported to be equivalent to 1.5-4 pg DDAVP.
2. Oral tablets (0.1 mg): oral doses of 25-50μg q 12h have been reported to control feline cases of
diabetes insipidus.
3. Injection (4 μg/mL): doses of 0.5-2μg q 12-24 h by subcutaneous injection have been recom-
mended; however, one feline case described in the literature required a dose of 5 pg q 12 h to control
clinical signs. As discussed under the diagnosis of diabetes insipidus, the nasal drop formulation may
be administered subcutaneously; however, the product is not sterile which may cause some concerns
for long-term use.
D.
 Response to therapy can be variable, so doses need to be adjusted on an individual basis.
E.
 Conjunctival administration can be associated with conjunctival irritation due to the acidic nature of
the drops. Drug absorption may be inconsistent.
F.
potent, with a shorter duration of action, and more expensive. Use of this drug has not been reported in cats
G.
 Patients with both central diabetes insipidus and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should be fed a low
sodium diet. This encourages sodium avidity in the proximal tubules, which results in passive reabsorption
of water. The diet should comprise < 0.9 g NaCl/1000 kcal ME.
H.
 Cases of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus show a minimal response to therapy with DDAVP. Alternative
drugs that could be used for this condition are:
1. Thiazide diuretics which work by decreasing sodium reabsorption in the ascending loop of Henle.
This reduces plasma sodium levels in animals that already have a reduced plasma volume. The combi-
nation of reduced sodium and extracellular volume promotes sodium retention in the proximal tubule
of the kidneys. Water is also passively reabsorbed reducing the volume and increasing the osmolality
of the urine produced. Potassium supplementation may be required when treating with thiazide diuret-
ics. Feeding of a low sodium diet is necessary if thiazide diuretics are used.
2. Chlorpropamide is a sulfonylurea drug thought to augment the effects of ADH on the kidney,
although the exact mechanism of action is unknown. Doses of 10-30 mg/kg/PO q 24 h have been
reported, with variable efficacy. As chlorpropamide is used in the management of hyperglycemia,
hypoglycemia may be seen with it, unless animals are fed small frequent meals.
o s q  s od an m do u rmo an  prd ondo rn sn i o
ppiaord q isn raie apisino ssanne ro tosiaord ain ai aenbape aaeq al ji sop ueui sien m anssi te
 at all times, however, as these cats may rapidly become severely dehydrated if unable to replace their fluid losses.
Treatment of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus includes management of the underlying disease.
Vll.  Prognosis
A.  The prognosis for diabetes insipidus is usually good, particularly if therapy induces remission of clini-
cal signs.
B.
Owner compliance and the cost of therapy may result in premature euthanasia of these patients
c.
 The prognosis is poorer for cases in which underlying brain pathology has developed than in idio-
pathic cases.
D
 The prognosis for congenital cases may be affected by whether or not concurrent deficiencies of other
pituitary hormones exist.
Vlll. Prevention
No known prevention.
Diabetes insipidus in Cats 457
References and Further Readings
Aroch I, Mazaki-Tovi M, Shemesh O, Sarfaty H, Segev G. Central diabetes insipidus in five cats: Clinical presentation,
diagnosis and oral desmopressin therapy. J Fetine Med Surg 2005;7:333-339.
 Burmie AG, Dumn JK. A case of central diabetes insipidus in the cat: Diagnosis and treatment. J Small Anim Pract
1982;23:237-241.
Campbell FE, Bredhauer B. Trauma-induced central diabetes insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J 2008;86:102-105
Court MH, Watson DJ. Idiopathic neurogenic diabetes insipidus in a cat. Aust Vet J 1983;60:245-247.
and Acid-Base Disorders in Smalf Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders Elsevier, 2006.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Water metabolism and diabetes insipidus. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Fetine
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders, 2004, pp. 2-44.
Green RA, Farrow CS. Diabetes insipidus in a cat. J Ar Vet Med Assoc 1974;164(5):524-526.
Small Anim 1987;9(7):752-756.
 Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Gopal MS, Herrtage ME. Secondary hypothyroidism following head traurma in a cat. J Feline Med
Surg 2005;7:135-139.
 Nichols, R. Clinical use of the vasopressin analogue DDAVP for the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes insipidus.
In: Bonagura JD, ed. Kirk's Curent Veterinary Therapy X!ll, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 2000, pp. 325-326.
Pittari JM. Central diabetes insipidus in a cat. Feline Pract 1996;24:18-21
Rogers WA, Valdez H, Anderson BC, Comella C. Partial deficiency of antidiuretic hormone in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1977;170( 5): 545-547.
Smith JR, Elwood CM. Traumatic partial hypopituitarism in a cat. J Small Anirm Pract 2004;45:405-409.
Winterbottom, J. Mason KV. Congenital diabetes insipidus in a kitten. J Smatt Anirm Pract 1983;24:569-573.
CHAPTER 44
Hyponatremia, SIADH, and
Renal Salt Wasting
Katherine M. James
Pathogenesis
● Hyponatremia exists whenever there is an excess of water relative to sodium in the extracellular
fluid (ECF).
● Two main causal categories of hyponatremia exist that reflect the mechanisms whereby it develops:
 translocational and hypoosmolar.
● Pseudohyponatremia is an in vitro artifact that may be observed when measuring serum sodium
concentration ([Nat]) by flame photometry when plasma lipids or proteins are elevated.
Classical Signs
● Clinical signs of hyponatremia result from the effects of hyponatremia on the central nervous
system (CNS). Reduction of the plasma [Nat] causes water movement from the ECF into cells.
Signs result from cerebral edema: lethargy, confusion, nausea, vomiting, seizures, and coma.
 Development of clinical signs depends both on magnitude of hyponatremia and the rate at which
it develops.
● Although severe hyponatremia can itself lead to permanent neurologic damage, too rapid a rate of
correction of serum [Na] in patients with chronic hyponatremia can result in severe and potentially
irreversible neurologic sequelae.
● Polydipsia and polyuria will be present in patients whose hyponatremia is a result of hyperglycemia,
 primary polydipsia, or obligate polyuria associated with ECF volume depletion in patients who are
able to drink (e.g., Addison's disease).
Diagnosis
● Distinguishing between the mechanistic causes of hyponatremia relies heavily on a complete history
 and an analysis of the patient's other problems.
● Hyponatremia is a water balance problem; the clinician must determine “Why is there too much
water?"
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
458
Hyponatremia, SiADH, and Renar Salt Wasting
459
Treatment
● Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
● Behavioral therapy is warranted for dogs that have compulsive water drinking behavior to the
extent that hyponatremia results.
● Renal salt wasting is managed by salt supplementation.
● Some forms of hyponatremia require careful restriction of water intake.
 Pathogennesis
A. Normal cellular function requires tight regulation of plasma osmolality, which is achieved through
regulation of water balance:
1. Normal water balance depends on:
a. An appropriate thirst mechanism.
h.
 Osmoreceptors in the brain.
C.
Appropriate release of antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin or ADH) from the posterior pituitary.
d. Renal ability to regulate water excretion, which includes the ability to:
1) Conserve sodium.
2) Respond to ADH by concentrating the urine.
3) Excrete solute-free water in the absence of ADH by diluting the urine.
2. Because cell membranes are permeable to water, cells are in osmotic equilibrium with the fluid that
surrounds them. Therefore, by stabilizing body fluid tonicity, osmoregulation controls cell volume, which
is, in turn, critical for normal cell function
3. When plasma osmolality (pOsm) is low, ADH release is suppressed and dilute urine should be
produced.
 4. When hypovolemia is present concurrently with low plasma osmolality (pOsm), however, ADH will
still be released despite the signal from low pOsm not to release ADH:
a. ADH release is not as sensitive to hemodynamic stimuli as it is to changes in pOsm.
b. However, when the hemodynamic stimulus is sufficiently strong, the ADH response will be of
greater magnitude than inhibition induced by low pOsm, and ECF volume will be preserved at the
expense of further decreased osmolality.
5. Plasma sodium concentration is the key determinant of the osmolality of body fluids. Glucose and
 urea make minor contributions in normal animals, as reflected in the following equation*:
Plasma osmolality = 2 [Na*](mEq / L) + [glucose] (mg/ dL)/ 18 + [BUN] (mg / dL)/2.8.
B. Water balance is both tightly and briskly regulated:
1. Clinicians should become familiar not only with the reference ranges for plasma [Na*] from their
laboratory, but also with the mean and variance in the patient population of their practice.
2. The amount of deviation in the pOsm that would ordinarily alter ADH and thirst in an individual
animal is lesser in magnitude than laboratory normal ranges (e.g., a 1-2% change in osmolality is suffi-
cient to induce or suppress thirst).
3. Because laboratory reference ranges are often wider than differences that are important for clinical
 decision-making, trends in [Nat] even while still inside the published range may be important.
4. Changes in pOsm result in rapid, that is, within minutes, changes in thirst and ADH secretion.
C. Hyponatremia is usually, but not exclusively, associated with hypoosmolality. Exceptions are
pseudohyponatremia and translocational hyponatremia secondary to hyperglycemia or the presence of
*This equation is a simplification because it does not account for the fact that plasma is only 93% water, that sodium salts are
incompletely dissociated in solution, that some anions are polyvalent, or that Ca, Mg, and K+ salts also contribute. However,
these factors cancel out nurmerically, allowing 2 [Na+] to be used as an estimate of the osmotic effect of the plasma ions.
460  Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Hyponatremia
Hypoosmolarhyponatremia
Pseudohyponatremia
Defect inrenal waterexcretion
Hyperlipidemia
Volumedepletion
② Hyperproteinemia
Advancedrenalfailure
Diuretics
SIADH
Decreasedsoluteintake
Translocational hyponatremia
2Waterintakeexceedinga
normalrenalexcretory
①Hyperglycemia
capacity
(normalosmolargap)
2Exogenous solutes
Mannitol
·Glycine
Figure 44.1  Mechanistic localization of hyponatremia (From James KM, Lunn KF Normal and abnormal water balance:
exogenous osmoles, for example, mannitol, in which alternative osmoles are present in large concentra-
tion (Figure 44.1):
1. Normal or elevated effective measured serum osmolality suggests either pseudohyponatremia or
translational hyponatremia:
a. The distinction of "effective" is used because blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is an ineffective osmole
and does not contribute to tonicity.
h. An effective measured serum osmolality is determined by subtracting serum urea nitrogen, in mmol/L,
from measured pOsm. To covert from US units to SI, divide BUN measured in mg/dL by 2.801.
2. Pseudohyponatremia reflects an in vitro artifact observed when measuring serum [Na*] by flame
photometry in the presence of elevated plasma lipid or protein concentration:
a. In these situations, the measured [Nat]is lower than the true [Nat].
b. Although newer ion-selective electrodes have largely eliminated this problem in undiluted samples,
hyponatremia.
3. Translocational hyponatremia may be divided into two categories:
 a. Conditions in which the measured and calculated serum osmolalities are the same (hyperglycemia).
 b. Conditions in which an osmolar gap is present and measured osmolality is greater than
calculated.
1) In this case, some osmoles are clearly present and are measured, but their identity is not known
2) Unidentified osmoles may include mannitol, glycine, and alcohols such as ethanol and ethylene
glycol. Only impermeant solutes (e.g. glucose in the absence of insulin, mannitol, glycine) willead
to water translocation from inside to outside cells and cause hyponatremia.
D. For true hypoosmolar hyponatremia, two principal pathophysiologic mechanisms exist, which underlie
the approach to the problem diagnostically:
1. The first mechanism is impaired renal excretion of free water or, in other words, impaired diluting ability.
In this situation, the animal is unable to excrete maximally dilute urine (urine osmolality < 100 mOsm/L).
Hyponatremia, SiADH, and Renar Salt Wasting
461
2. Several disease states and conditions can be associated with impaired renal diluting capacity and
impaired free water excretion:
a. Hypovolemia impairs renal diluting ability. It can reflect absolute volume depletion caused by gas.
trointestinal, skin, or renal losses or, alternatively, be present in high volume edematous states associ-
ated with reduced effective plasma volume:
1) Whenever absolute or effective plasma volume is decreased, the ensuing reduced renal perfusion
imits the quantity of glomerular filtrate reaching the diluting segment of the kidneys.
2) In volume depletion, sodium conservation in the proximal nephrons is enhanced and less
sodium reaches the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop.
3) ADH may also be released in response to volume depletion, overriding the effect of the
hypotonicity (which would normally inhibit ADH release), and compounding the defect in water
excretion. This override to the control of ADH secretion—where control of hypovolemia and
avoidance of shock outranks hyponatremia—occurs in patients with Addison's disease or renal salt
wasting.
 4) Similarly, gastrointestinal sodium losses in a patient that is still drinking water will result in
hypovolemic hyponatremia.
h. Another disease state associated with impaired diluting ability is advanced renal failure, that is,
IRIS stage IV or a GFR < 10% of normal, in which the ability to excrete water is approximately 20%
of that of normal, healthy kidneys. In early and moderate renal failure, the kidneys retain some
 tubular function and thus meaningful diluting capacity, albeit somewhat less than normal.
C. In contrast to hypovolemia, where the ADH elevations are appropriate (i.e., to prevent hypo-
volemic shock), the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH) refers to conditions in which
the ADH elevation leading to hyponatremia is not a consequence of volume depletion:
depletion.
 2) SIADH, although well described in humans, is rarely reported in dogs or cats and in some cases
may reflect incorrectly diagnosed renal salt wasting (also called cerebral salt wasting)
3) SIADH in humans may be associated with the following conditions: (1) ectopic ADH produc-
tion (by certain neoplasms), (2) administration of exogenous ADH or oxytocin, (3) enhanced
hypothalamic ADH secretion (due to neuropsychiatric disorders, drugs, or pulmonary disease), or
(4) potentiation of ADH effects (due to drugs).
4) SIADH in dogs has been reported associated with neurological diseases, including hydrocepha-
lus and meningoencephalitis. It has been tentatively diagnosed and reported in other clinical
d. Certain diuretics, such as loop diuretics or thiazides, impair renal water excretion because they
 decrease sodium transport in the diluting segment of the nephron.
e. Decreased renal diluting ability is also reported with highly reduced dietary solute intake:
1) One feature that distinguishes this cause of decreased free water excretory capacity from others
is that the urine osmolality (uOsm) will be <100 mOsm/L.
 2) This scenario occurs with the practice of "beer potomania”" in humans, a syndrome in which
individuals consume large quantities of beer (which is hypoosmolar) with inadequate food intake,
leading to insufficient dietary solute and impaired ability to excrete free water. Such an occurrence
would be highly unexpected in dogs or cats.
3. The second principal mechanism for development of hypoosmolar hyponatremia, which is a less
common cause of hyponatremia, is when water intake exceeds maximal renal excretory capacity:
a. Renal diluting capacity is adequate in normal circumstances to keep pace with even
ardent drinkers. Thus, most primary polydipsias, including behavioral, do not result in overt
hyponatremia.
b. In humans, hyponatremia may be seen with the polydipsia that may accompany psychosis.
C. Perhaps it is valid to make a similar distinction in dogs with so-called psychogenic polydipsia:
1) Those with primary behavioral polydipsia sufficient to cause dilute urine would be judged to
have routine behavioral polydipsia.
462  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
2) Those with primary polydipsia sufficient to cause the medical complication of hyponatremia
would be assessed to have obsessive polydipsia.The latter situation is more common in nervous
or hyperactive dogs that respond to the stress of confinement or boredom by drinking obsessively.
 Such dogs usually have a hyposthenuric urine-specific gravity (USG) and mild hyponatremia.
 r e   a  a    t
a. Thus, patients with primary polydipsia are more likely to have overt hyponatremia when impaired
renal water excretion is present concurrently.
h. It is important clinically to assess primary polydipsic patients with hyponatremia for concurrent
renal diluting defects such as inappropriate or abnormally regulated ADH secretion before assuming
 obsessive polydipsia is the sole mechanistic reason for hyponatremia.
I1. Signaliment
A. There is no specific signalment associated with hyponatremia itself. However, some diseases character-
ized by hyponatremia are overrepresented for certain signalments.
B.  Dogs belonging to breeds that require a high level of daily exercise and stimulation may be more prone
 to boredom and compulsive drinking behavior.
C. Some dog breeds are at higher risk for diabetes melitus, including females and members of certain breeds
(Australian Terriers, Samoyeds, Swedish Elkhounds, and Swedish Lapphunds) and are thus at risk for trans-
lational hyponatremia; however, the risk of hyponatremia depends solely on the presence of hyperglycemia.
 D. Addison's disease, which is often but not invariably associated with hyponatremia, is overrepresented in
certain breeds including West Highland white terriers, standard poodles, great Danes, and bearded collies.
Young to middle-aged dogs are predisposed.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. The clinical signs of hyponatremia arise from its effects on the CNS. Reduction of the plasma [Nat]
causes water to move intracellularly from the ECF. Signs result from osmotic cerebral edema: lethargy,
confusion, nausea, vomiting, seizures, and coma:
1. In contrast to most other types of cerebral edema in which the fluid accumulation is extracellular,
hyponatremia results in brain cell swelling.
2. Development of clinical signs depends on both the magnitude of hyponatremia and its rate of
development; signs of chronic hyponatremia are generally more subtle and nonspecific than are those of
acute hyponatremia.
B。
 Mild hyponatremia, when not associated with hypovolemia, may be asymptomatic.
C. Dogs with obsessive behavioral polydipsia sufficient to cause hyponatremia will have marked polyuria
and polydipsia.
 D. Patients with hyponatremia may have myriad other clinical signs depending on their underlying disease.
IV. Diagnosis
p onsd rn go ond ai o e ssop an u ds  e s 
translational hyponatremia should be eliminated from consideration:
1. Evaluation of the blood sample for lipemia and assessment of the plasma protein concentration can
rapidly rule out pseudohyponatremia.
2. Translocational hyponatremia is easily dismissed by assessment of serum glucose concentration and
 the absence of a history of administration of an exogenous solute, such as mannitol, it can be confirmed
by determining that the effective measured pOsm is not normal or increased.
B. If the above are ruled out, clinicians are then left to answer the question “Why is there too much water?"
Recalling the mechanisms whereby hyponatremia develops, clinicians must distinguish primary polydipsia
exceeding renal excretory capacity from impaired diluting capacity (impaired water excretion), although the
two may exist simultaneously:
1. Patients with primary polydipsia of sufficient severity to cause hyponatremia are expected to have a
USG less than 1.008.
Hyponatremia, SiADH, and Renat Sait Wasting
463
behavioral polydipsia, the history is often informative. Upon questioning, the owners may report that the
pet is "high strung," easily bored, or left alone for long periods:
a. Suspicion of obsessive behavioral polydipsia is often easily confirmed by doing an “entertainment
test" to see whether the USG, particularly the first one of the morning, will become concentrated if
:ep may e jo poad e rog pauiaiua shemie pue Asnq Ara ida si op aul
1) It is important for such testing that the client always provides the dog something more
interesting to do than drink water, but water should always be available.
2) This method of ruling in primary polydipsia is often easier and far less expensive than a
gradual water deprivation test. It can be done at home by clients using refractometers provided
on loan.
3) An entertainment test may also rule in primary behavioral polydipsia in patients whose thirst
is not sufficient to cause hyponatremia.
h. Gradual water deprivation tests can also be done to confirm a suspicion of primary polydipsia:
1) The author's preferred approach is to measure the daily water intake when the dog is drinking
its usual amount.
2) Then on subsequent days, decrease the volume by 4-5% per day, while maintaining a consistent
feeding and exercise schedule.
3) Each morning of the test, the patient should be weighed and the USG, plasma [Nat], and
BUN measured.
4) The test is stopped when the dog concentrates the urine to greater than 1.035 (confirms primary
 polydipsia) or any of monitored parameters suggest ECF volume depletion (diagnosis is the patient
has primary polyuria).
 5) Azotemia is an absolute contraindication to starting or continuing the test.
3. Other primary polydipsias, such as accompany hepatic encephalopathy or Cushing's syndrome
(where polyuria and polydipsia can both be simultaneously primary) rarely cause overt hyponatremia in
4. The patient should be carefully assessed for ECF volume depletion on physical examination because
the presence or absence of volume depletion will be critical to the choice of therapy:
a. ECF volume depletion can exist at a level of up to at least 5% loss of body weight without detect-
able clinical signs in some animals.
h. As clinical estimates of body fluid deficits can be inaccurate, the patient history should be carefully
yomiting, diarrhea, or an increased urine volume are known to be present.
C. The plasma [Na*] does not provide any measurement of the total amount of sodium in the ECF,
and therefore does not reflect the ECF or total body fluid volume. Thus, the plasma [Na*] cannot be
used to determine if the patient is hypovolemic. The sodium content, and thus the total fluid volume
 of the body, can be normal, increased, or decreased with hyponatremia.
d. Echocardiography and detection of lower than normal chamber volumes for the patient's size may
provide support for the presence of hypovolemia, particularly in cats.
 5. For more difficult cases, laboratory evaluation which includes pOsm, uOsm, and urine [Na] may
help clinicians to distinguish between impaired water excretion and primary polydipsia:
a. Hyponatremic animals with a uOsm > 100 mOsm/L have impaired water excretion.
 b. A decreased pOsm together with a uOsm < 100 mOsm/L suggests primary polydipsia (when poly-
uria is present) or low solute intake (in which case a recognizable increase in urine volume may be
noteworthily absent).
C. As decreased solute intake is rare in the veterinary setting, a low uOsm more typically suggests
primary polydipsia.
6. A low urinary [Na] (< 20 mEq/L in human patients and likely applicable to dogs) suggests hypovolemia
as the cause of hyponatremia. Patients with SIADH, diuretic-induced hyponatremia, mineralocorticoid
deficiency, renal salt-wasting syndrome, or renal failure should have urine [Nat] >20mEq/L.
7. Determination of plasma ADH concentration is not reliable to aid in the diagnosis of SIADH due to
erratic secretion of excessive ADH in some cases and possible ADH hypersensitivity in others:
464  Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
l.
Vasopressin assays exist for research purposes but may not be available clinically
b. Furthermore, patients with renal salt-wasting syndrome also have elevated ADH due to the pres-
ence of hypovolemia. This creates a diagnostic difficulty in distinguishing these two syndromes when
the presence of ECF volume depletion is not clearly evident.
V.]
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
 Once laboratory error, pseudohyponatremia, and translocational hyponatremia are excluded, the patient
 must then have some form of hypoosmolar hyponatremia.
B. Primary polydipsia is abnormal thirst behavior resulting in increased water intake with a compensatory
polyuria:
2. Primary polydipsia may also partially explain the polydipsia that can be associated with hyperthy-
roidism, hepatic encephalopathy, hypercortisolemia, gastrointestinal disease, splenomegaly, o1, excep-
tionally rarely, lower urinary tract infection.
3. Primary polydipsia is comparatively less common in cats, but the differential diagnoses are expected
 to be similar. Behavioral polydipsia associated with pleasure drinking from faucets or fountains, par-
ticularly with the owner present, is observed in cats but would not be expected to be severe enough to
cause hyponatremia.
C. Differential diagnoses for hyponatremia associated with impaired renal diluting capacity depend on the
presence or absence of hypovolemia:
1. Hypovolemia results from loss of sodium and water in excess of intake. Once hypovolemia is
established, differentials emerge from the analysis of the source of the loss:
a. Both primary and secondary gastrointestinal diseases can result in gastrointestinal loss.
b. Excess loss through skin should be apparent.
C. Primary renal losses, a diagnosis supported by the presence of polyuria and polydipsia, can exist
due to hypoaldosteronism, hypocortisolism, renal failure, renal salt-wasting syndrome, and chronic
renal sodium loss due to diuretics (including the diuretic effect of glycosuria in diabetes).
2. Patients with decreased effective plasma volume, but elevated true plasma volume, will have edema,
ascites, or effusions associated with congestive heart failure, liver failure, or renal failure most com-
monly with proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia.
 3. Patients with impaired renal diluting capacity without hypovolemia or low effective plasma volume
have either SIADH or low dietary solute intake, both of which are rare. The most common cause of
SIADH in veterinary patients may be the use of exogenous DDAVP to treat polyuria/polydipsia in
patients that do not have central diabetes insipidus.
4. The most clinically difficult assessment may involve distinguishing SIADH (no hypovolemia) from
renal salt wasting (with hypovolemia), because of the difficulty in determining whether ECF volume
depletion is present. In human medicine, differences between the two groups with respect to blood uric
 acid levels and fractional uric acid excretion may aid in distinguishing them, but such comparisons may
not apply to dogs or cats.
Vl. Treatment
A. Empirical treatment for hyponatremia depends primarily on the underlying mechanism. Thus, the
patient's volume status must be assessed to determine appropriate fluid therapy:
1. Patients with hypovolemia(i.e., negative sodium balance) require restoration of the ECF sodium con-
tent, repletion will return control of ADH secretion and thirst to osmotic factors, and the kidneys will
excrete the excess free water once the diluting defect resulting from the hypovolemia is corrected:
  r     q a     s 
hypertonic to the patient's pOsm) fluid replacement.
h. Recall that in a hyponatremic patient, a fluid that is truly isotonic would in fact be of lower
actually mildly hypertonic for hyponatremic patients.
c. Fluids that are hypotonic to the patient should always be avoided, as should hypertonic saline,
uless death from hypovolemic shock is imminent.
Hyponatremia, SiADH, and Renat Satt Wasting
465
2. If the patient is not severely hyponatremic, typical fluid rates for ECF volume restoration (thus depend-
[Na*] more than 8mEq/L/24 h should be applied.
3. Even if isotonic fluids are used, solute-free water will be excreted once hypovolemia is corrected, and
this alone could lead to rapid correction of hyponatremia. Thus, serial monitoring of serum [Na'],
approximately every 6h, is essential in these patients.
4. Since hypovolemia is a result of fluid losses exceeding intake, provision must be made in the fluid
therapy prescription to meet any ongoing losses in addition to restoration of deficits until the underlying
disease (such as Addison's disease or primary gastrointestinal disease) can be resolved with appropriate
 specific therapy.
B. Patients with translocational hyponatremia may have different fluid needs depending on the osmole
involved:
1. The most common clinical scenario is unregulated diabetes mellitus, in which hypovolemia is often
 present and will need to be corrected. Subsequent initiation of insulin therapy willower plasma glucose
concentration and cause excess ECF water to return to its intracellular location.
2. Serum electrolyte concentrations should be monitored with the therapeutic use of mannitol or
ethanol so that burgeoning electrolyte disorders are detected early and overt hyponatremia can be
prevented.
C. Patients with edema, pleural effusion, and/or ascites have excess ECF sodium content and an even greater
excess of ECF water:
1. Therapy is more challenging because these patients have a decreased effective plasma volume and
 renal mechanisms for sodium retention are stimulated.
2. Correction of hyponatremia generally requires restriction of water intake to below that of urine out-
put, which can be very difficult because thirst is stimulated.
3. Therapy for the primary underlying disorder is required and, thus, specific therapy to correct the
hyponatremia prior to diagnostics is generally not indicated.
 i   e  n   s    
they may have clinical signs related to their hypotonicity:
1. Treatment is generally by water restriction and careful monitoring. Water restriction is often self-
imposed as the patients have sufficient neurologic deficits that they do not drink.
2. Serial monitoring of plasma [Na*] is necessary to adhere to the rule of not increasing [Na'] by more
than 8 mEq/L/24h. Although uncommon, should the plasma [Na] increase more rapidly than 1 mEq/L
 every 3h, free water can be given as part of the maintenance fluid or feeding prescriptions. Using 50%
 of a maintenance rate and a maintenance solution is a reasonable starting point.
3. Tube feeding for provision of calories may be problematic if the tube diameter requires the addition
of water to get food through the tube.
E. In all cases, moderation in therapy should be key:
1. Serum [Na+]should be measured frequently and therapy adjusted to ensure that chronic hyponatremia
is not corrected by more than 8 mEq/L/day.
2. Although there are no "rules" for how frequently to monitor (and frequency may decrease as severely
affected patients improve), a central venous catheter to allow frequent sampling and monitoring as often
 as every 3-4 h is recommended initially.
 F.  Disease syndromes associated with hyponatremia may have their own primary treatment:
1. Long-term management of dogs with primary polydipsia centers on behavioral modifications. Water
restriction may be required in some cases, but must be done judiciously because the water requirements
of dogs can change dramatically depending on heat, humidity, and lifestyle.
 2. Vasopressin receptor antagonists have been studied in dogs with SAIDH with partial effect. Renal
water excretion is improved. However, hyponatremia may not be fully corrected without concurrent
water restriction. Oral urea has been used successfully in humans with SIADH.
3. Hypoadrenocorticism is treated with mineralocorticoid and/or glucocorticoid replacement
therapy.
466 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
4. Other forms of renal salt wasting are treated with salt supplementation:
a. Such patients are highly variable in their salt requirements.
s s oum osiad e mou on res soe u) poo siued an pnes si rone au 'q
might add salt for taste) and increased the amount based on results of frequent monitoring. Because
of the negative effect of salt on appetite and its ability to induce vomiting, smallbut very frequent
dosing is the preferred approach.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
lae upon correction is minimal.
B.
mal neurological function if correction of their hyponatremia is done carefully and deliberately.
C.
Prognosis in all cases of hyponatremia is influenced by the presence of associated diseases.
Vll1. Prevention
A.   Hyponatremia associated with overzealous use of hypotonic fluid therapy is prevented with careful
B
 Hyponatremia secondary to primary polydipsia is usually prevented with behavioral enrichment and
modification:
1. Water restriction is necessary for severe cases but must be done with extreme care.
 2. The volume of water a dog must drink to keep up with insensible fluid losses varies greatly with
changes in environment conditions and lifestyle.
References and Further Readings
Black RM. Diagnosis and management of hyponatrermia. J Intens Care Med 1989;4:205-220.
Chastain CB, Panciera D.Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone in a dog with meningoencephalitis
Sm Anim Clin Endocrinol 2004;14(1):5-6.
1999;35:493-497.
DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water: Hypernatremia and hyponatremia. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, αnd
Acid-Base Disorders in Smatt Animat Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 47-79.
survival, and breed distribution. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21{6):1209-1216.
Fleeman LM, Irwin PJ, Phillips PA, et al. Effects of an oral vasopressin receptor antagonist {OPC-31260) in a dog with
syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Aust Vet J 2000;78(12):825-830.
James KM, Lunn KF. Norrmal and abnormal water balance: Hyponatremia and hypernatremia. Comp Cont Educ Pract
2007;29(10): 589-609.
Laureno R, Karp B1. Myelinolysis after correction of hyponatrermia. Ann Int Med 1997;126( 1):57-56.
Lunn KF, James KM. Normal and abnormal water balance: Polyuria and polydipsia. Comp Cont Educ Pract 2007;
29(10):612-624.
166 (8):1056-1062.
O'Brien DP. CNS effects of sodiurm irmbalances. Proceedings of the 24th ACVIM Forurm, 2006, pp. 323-324.
O'Brien DP, Kroll RA, Johnson GC, et al. Myelinolysis after correction of hyponatrermia in two dogs. J Vet Int Med
1994;8(1):40-48.
Shiel RE, Pinilla M, Mooney CT. Syndrorme of inappropriate antidiuretic horrmone secretion associated with congenital
hydrocephalus in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45(5):249-252.
Sterns RH, Ocdol H, Schrier RW, et al. (1994) Hyponatremia: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and therapy. In: Narins RG, ed.
Maxwell and Kteeman's Clinicat Disorders of Fluid and Electrolyte Metabalism, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994, pp. 583-615.
Sterms RH, Spital A, Clark AC. Disorders of water balance. In: Kokko JP, Tannen RL, eds. Fluids and Electrolytes,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996, pp. 63-109.
Tyler RD, Qualls CW Jr, Heald RD, et al. Renal concentrating ability in dehydrated hyponatremic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1987;191(9):1095-1100.
CHAPTER 45
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders
Cheri A. Johnson
Unique Considerations for Correct Assessment of Sex Hormone
Excess or Deficiency
A. Normal reproductive endocrinology and physiology vary greatly according to the species,the stage of the
estrous cycle in females, the presence of one versus two functional testes in males, and in both sexes, accord-
ing to the neuter status (sexually intact versus gonadectomy).
B. The endocrine laboratory must determine, validate, and provide its normal ranges of the reproductive
hormones for sexually mature animals according to species, according to the stage of the estrous cycle in
females, and according to the neuter status in both males and females.
C. Gonadectomy is the most common cause of low concentrations of sex steroid hormones. Primary testicular
or ovarian failure and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are rarely documented in dogs and cats.
D. In dogs and cats, a gonadal source of excess sex steroid hormones is far more likely than is an adrenal
source. Exogenous sources, such as inadvertent exposure to human birth control or hormone replacement
medications, should also be considered.
Testicular neoplasia
Ovarian follicular cysts
Ovarian remnant
Vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse
Mammary neoplasia
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Perineal hernia
Perineal adenoma
Post-spay/neuter effects
Post-spay urinary incontinence
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
467
468 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
ESTROGEN-RELATED DISORDERS
1.]
Pathogenesis (General)
A.
 Allendogenous estrogen is synthesized from androgens (Figure 45.1) via an irreversible reaction catalyzed
by aromatase (cytochrome P-450 19).
B.
The primary source of estrogen is the gonads:
1. Females:
a. The ovarian follicular theca cells produce androgens that are aromatized to estradiol by the
follicular granulosa cells.
b. Estrogen production represents the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle.
C. Estrogen actions:
1) Stimulates growth of mammary ductal epithelium and connective tissue.
 2) Stimulates growth, blood supply, and water retention in the uterus, vagina, and vulva; these, in
turn, cause the vulvar swelling and sanguineous discharge associated with proestrus and estrus
("heat” or “season") in bitches.
 3) Causes cornification of vaginal and preputial epithelium.
4) Causes the behavioral changes necessary for breeding, which include increased vocalization
(queens), and increased receptivity to males, eventually allowing copulation (bitches and queens).
5) Estrogens imcrease the frequency and magnitude of gonadotropin pulsatility until the LH surge
occurs.
6) Luteinizing hormone (LH) causes the ovarian follicles to ovulate and become corpora lutea
(CLs), which produce progesterone. (This represents the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle).
d. Estrus:
1) Bitches typically cycle only once every 6-8 months. Heat lasts an average of 18 days (range from
6 to 38 days) and is followed by a luteal phase (progesterone) lasting more than 60 days even in
nonpregnant bitches. The CLs produce progesterone throughout gestation, which averages 63 days.
 2) Cats, being induced to ovulate by coital stimulation, have multiple anovulatory cycles lasting
about 6 days and occurring every 14-21 days throughout the breeding season (photoperiod of
≥ 12h of light) if they are not breed. Some cats do ovulate without coital stimulation. When a cat
-Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
 Progesterone
Aldosterone
Dehydroxyepiandrosterone (DHEA)
17α-hydroxyprogesterone
(Placenta; liver)
Estriol
Androstenedione
Cortisol
Aromatase
(Adipocyte; etc.)
Estrone
Testosterone
Aromatase
5α-reductase
Estradiol
Dihydrotestosterone
Figure 45.1 Schematic representation of steroidogenesis. Dashed arrows indicate multiple intervening steps.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 469
ovulates but does not conceive, CLs produce progesterone for only 30-50 days. The CLs produce
progesterone throughout the 65 day gestation.
2. Males:
estradiol by the Sertoli cells, and/or by the Leydig cells themselves, and/or by the germ cells, depending
on the species of animal.
3. Extra-gonadal estrogen production:
a. Estrogens (estradiol, estrone, estriol) are also formed by aromatization of androgens in adrenal,
brain, prostate, breast, bone, liver, and adipose tissue. Aromatase has only intracellular function, con-
verting intracellular androgens to intracellular estrogen. However, the liver and adipocytes contribute
small amounts to systemic estrogen concentrations as well.
C. Estrogen receptors (ER):
1. There are two estrogen receptors, α and β, that have both overlapping and distinct functions.
2. Estrogen receptors have different tissue distribution and binding affinity. The estrogenic effects may
be enhanced in some tissues and suppressed in others. There is also variation among species.
Hyperestrogenism
Pathogenesis
● Hyperestrogenism occurs most commonly as a result of excessive production of estrogen by testicular
tumors in male dogs, particularly Sertoli cell tumor and by ovarian follicular cysts or ovarian remnants in
females.
● An adrenal source of estrogen that is the cause of clinical signs of hyperestrogenism has not been
 documented in dogs or cats.
● Exogenous estrogen could cause similar clinical signs.
Classical Signs
● Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification in male and female dogs.
This has not been reported in cats.
● Gynecomastia, pendulous prepuce, testicular mass, atrophy of the contralateral testis, infertility, and
signs associated with prostatomegaly in male dogs. This has not been reported in cats.
● Vulvar swelling and sanguineous discharge typical of proestrus/estrus in bitches, and behavioral
signs of estrus in both bitches and queens. Persistent estrus and ovulation failure in intact females with
cystic follicles. Resumption of estrous cycles in spayed females with ovarian remnant.
Diagnosis
 Clinical signs consistent with estrogenic effects.
Vaginal or preputial cytology demonstrating cornified epithelial cells.
 Low serum concentrations of LH.
 Testicular tumor found by palpation or ultrasound in male dogs.
● Ovarian remnant or cystic follicles found by ultrasound in female dogs and cats.
Treatment
● Remove the source of estrogen.
Pathogenesis
A.
 The estrogen source is the gonads in almost allcases:
1. Males:
470 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animais
a. Sertoli cell tumors are the most common cause of hyperestrogenism; however, neoplastic Leydig
cells (interstitial cell tumor) and germ cells (seminoma) occasionally also produce pathologic amounts
of estrogen.
h. Testicular neoplasia is more common in cryptorchid testes than in scrotal testes.
C. Testicular neoplasia is extremely rare in cats.
2. Females:
a. Ovarian follicular cysts produce estradiol and cause persistent heat.
h. "Spayed" bitches and queens with ovarian remnants may resume cycling.
hormone production. However, hormone-producing granulosa cell tumors have been reported in
ovarian remnants as well as intact ovaries.
B. Extra-gonadal sources:
1. There have been no conclusive reports of excessive adrenal production of estrogens that are the cause
 of clinical signs of hyperestrogenism in dogs or cats with adrenal disease.
2. In normal male and female dogs, intact or neutered, serum concentrations of estradiol remain in the
normal basal range in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) administration.
C. Exogenous estrogens:
1. These could cause similar clinical signs as endogenous hyperestrogenism, including persistent estrus
in females, but resumption of cyclic estrous activity would be very unlikely.
2. Several plant compounds, known as phytoestrogens, have estrogenic activity. One group of phytoes.
rogens, isoflavones, is found in soybeans, which are a common ingredient in commercial dog foods.
Although the concentrations of phytoestrogens in soy-containing dog food are high enough to have
 postmenopausal symptoms in women have been implicated as an inadvertent source of estrogen for pets.
Il. Signalment
 s  s o n n   e  si n  s  n  s
extremely rare in cats.
B.
Young, intact female dogs and cats with ovarian follicular cysts, during their first or second estrous cycle(s).
C. Female dogs and cats with ovarian remnants are of any age, and any time (weeks to years) after having
been spayed.
Il1. Clinical Signs
A. Testicular tumors secreting estrogen:
1. Most common clinical signs in dogs are dermatologic including bilaterally symmetrical, non-pruritic
alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification, with signs of “feminization": gynecomastia and pen-
dulous prepuce.
2. On further evaluation, a testicular mass with atrophy of the contralateral testis and decreased fertility
are also found. Tumors are more common in cryptorchid testes than scrotal testes.
3. Testicular tumors are extremely rare in cats.
B.
 Ovarian follicular cysts:
1. Most common clinical sign is persistent heat (proestrus+estrus), lasting longer than 35-40 days in
bitches or longer than 16 days in queens.
2. The cysts are typically anovulatory but ovulation occasionally occurs and may lead to mammary
development typical of luteal activity (i.e., progesterone).
C.
 Ovarian remnants in spayed females:
1. More common in bitches than in queens.
2. Most common clinical sign is return to estrous cycling months to years after ovariohysterectomy
(range 1 month to 10 years, with a median of 17 months).
3. Bitches with ovarian remnant may have dermatologic changes as do males with hyperestrogenism,
with or without return of estrous cycles.
D. Estrogen-induced bone marrow toxicity in dogs:
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 471
1. Clinical signs associated with estrogen-induced bone marrow toxicity include pallor, weakness and
lethargy (anemia), bleeding (thrombocytopenia), or fever and bacterial infections (neutropenia).
Less common findings:
tenesmus, but prostatomegaly may be an asymptomatic incidental finding.
2. Mammary tumors
 3. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra:
b. May also occur as a result of persistent estrogen production from ovarian follicular cysts of
ovarian remnants.
4. Vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse.
IV. Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of hyperestrogenism is suspected on the basis of history and physical examination findings.
B. Males:
a testicular tumor.
2. If one is not found by palpation of the scrotal testes, testicular ultrasound can be performed.
 3. The possibility of umrecognized cryptorchidism should be considered for dogs with classic clinical
signs, but lacking a solid history of having had two scrotal testes removed at the time of castration.
Careful palpation of the inguinal-scrotal region and abdominal ultrasound can be used.
4. Hyperestrogenism can cause cornification of the preputial epithelium (see vaginal cytology below);
C. Females:
1. It is usually important to confirm that hyperestrogenism exists and could reasonably be the cause of
the clinical signs.
2. This is most easily accomplished with vaginal cytology demonstrating a high percentage of cornified
epithelial cells as with proestrus and estrus:
a. Absence of cornification does not exclude the possibility of estrogen as the cause of the clinical signs.
b. For accurate interpretation, vaginal cytology should be performed when cycling females are
actually displaying signs of heat. Between cycles, estrogen concentrations are low, and the vaginal
epithelium will be primarily non-cornified.
C. Some bitches with hyperestrogenism have dermatologic signs but are not cycling. Results of vaginal
cytology are then variable.
3. Abdominal ultrasound:
a. Abdominal ultrasound is used to confirm the presence of cystic ovary(ies) in intact females with
persistent estrus.
b. With skill ultrasound is also very useful for finding ovarian remmants in spayed females.
4. Serum LH concentrations can be used to identify females with ovarian remnants:
a. Gonadal sex hormones suppress LH from the pituitary via negative feedback (Figure 45.2).
b. Therefore, a finding of low LH concentration confirms the presence of a gonad (or, much less
likely, exogenous sex hormones).
C. In the absence of ovaries and the hormones they produce, there is no negative feedback and serum
LH concentrations will be elevated.
d. During estrus, the LH surge (i.e., high LH concentrations) induces the ovaries to ovulate.
e. Thus, a finding of high LH indicates either the female has no ovarian tissue or she has ovarian
tissue, is in heat, and is about to ovulate. The latter can be confirmed by physical and behavioral
signs of estrus, vaginal cytology, repeating the LH assay in a day or two, or by measuring progesterone.
5. Serum progesterone concentrations:
a. After ovulation, the ovarian follicles become CLs and produce progesterone.
h. The finding of serum progesterone concentrations >3ng/mL (9nmol/L) at least 5-7 days after the
signs of heat have abated confirms the presence of an ovary.
472 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Hypothalamus
GnRH
：
Pituitary
LH and FSH
Gonad
Ovary
Testis
Estradiol
Progesterone
Testosterone
Figure 45.2 Schematic representation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis and feedback loops. Dashed line indicates
direct feedback from gonad to hypothalamus.
C. The advantage of measuring progesterone is that it can be done days or weeks after the female is
no longer showing the clinical signs suspected to represent heat:
1) In normal bitches, progesterone may remain elevated for as long as 60 days, but by then serum
concentrations will be approaching those of anestrus or spayed females.
2) In queens, serum progesterone concentration will only be increased if ovulation occurred,
which usually requires coital stimulation. If a queen does ovulate, progesterone may remain
elevated for 30-40 days in the absence of pregnancy.
d. Low progesterone concentrations have no diagnostic significance. They could represent:
1) Normal anestrus in an animal with ovaries, or the true absence of ovarian tisue in a spayed animal.
2) Absence of sufficient coital stimulation to cause the LH surge and induce ovulation in a queen.
3) An ovarian remmant that does not respond normally to LH (ovulation failure), or, if it does,
corpus luteal function does not continue normally (premature luteolysis).
e. Induction of ovulation to confirm ovarian remnant may be attempted during estrus by administra-
tion of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) or human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG):
1) They mimic (hCG) or induce (GnRH) LH. Consultation with the endocrinology laboratory is
recommended because the dosage and sampling protocols vary among laboratories. Typically,
 ssa p uao su i (i 7'z ro) op 1d o-7 1o i ad  s7 
normal females.
2) Response to GnRH or hCG varies according to the stage of the ovarian cycle. For this reason, the
results do not reliably confirm or deny the presence of an ovarian remnant. When given during estrus,
ovulation is expected. When a single dose is given during anestrus, ovulation is unlikely to occur.
3) If GnRH or hCG successfully induce ovulation, 5-7 days later progesterone concentrations rise
above 3ng/mL (9nmol/L) and confirm the presence of ovarian tissue.
4) Lack of response (i.e., low progesterone) could indicate that the female was not actually in
estrus when the drug was administered, or any of the explanations for low progesterone concen-
trations listed above.
D. Measurement of serum estradiol concentrations usually is not helpful to differentiate normal from
pathologic conditions in dogs.
E. A hematology evaluation should be performed in dogs with hyperestrogenism to evaluate for estrogen-
induced bone marrow suppression.
V. Differential Diagnoses
B. In female dogs, other causes of sanguineous vulvar discharge, such as pyometra, or vaginal or uterine
neoplasia can be differentiated on the basis of the following:
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders  473
1. If pyometra is present, neutrophilic inflammation and bacteria will be found on vaginal cytology.
2. Hemorrhage (i.e., red blood cells) will typically be the primary cytologic finding with neoplasia
because the most common tumor, leiomyoma, does not readily exfoliate.
C. In female cats, the normal frequent estrous cycles that occur every 14-21 days might be confused with
abnormal persistent estrus caused by cystic ovarian follicles.
D. In female cats, behavior such as urinating outside the litter box (suspected marking territory), and
increased affectionate behavior or excessive vocalization, which have a variety of potential causes, could be
erroneously attributed to estrus behavior.
Vl. Treatment
A
Treatment consists of removing the estrogen source.
B
Ovarian remnant:
1. Whenever possible, the suspicion of ovarian remnant should be supported by endocrine findings
such as cornified vaginal epithelium, or low LH, or high progesterone, or confirmed with ultrasound
before exploratory laparotomy is undertaken.
2. The ovarian remnant will be located in the typicallocation for ovaries and the ovarian pedicle. Although
experimental studies in normal bitches and queens have demonstrated that ovarian tissue sutured into
the mesentery may revascularize, the published evidence from spontaneously occurring clinical cases
of spayed biches and queens with ovarian remnants examined at diagnostic laboratories and in
surgical practices shows that the remmants are in the typical location for ovaries and are not ectopic:
a. Remnant ovaries may be unilateral or bilateral.
b. Remnants can easily be overlooked if the surgical exposure is inadequate.
C. The remainder of the reproductive tract and the mammary glands should be thoroughly evaluated
 because neoplasia of the reproductive ract is commonly (33 %) found in animals with ovarian remnants.
Testicular neoplasia:
sent. Therefore, confirmation of hyperestrogenism need not be done pre-operatively when a testicular
tumor is found.
2. On the other hand, if a neoplastic cryptorchid testis is suspected, its existence should be confirmed
if possible prior to exploratory laparotomy.
3. Unilateral castration of the affected testis could be considered for a dog that still has value as a stud.
 4. The testicle should be submitted for histopathologic evaluation.
.Ovarian follicular cysts:
1. May resolve spontaneously, but watchful waiting of persistent estrus should not continue for very
long (perhaps only 2 months) because of the adverse effects of estrogen on the uterus increasing suscep-
tibility to pyometra, and possibly also on the bone marrow in bitches.
2. Treatment (GnRH, 2.2pg/kg, IM, q 24h for 3 days) to induce ovulation and interrupt the follicular
 l ro aa a a isa  's ro ps   aa a po a
30-50% of cases).
3. Ovariohysterectomy is curative:
a. Unilateral oophorectomy could be considered for valuable brood stock with unilateral cysts:
1) Whether the contralateral ovary will then begin normal function will remain to be seen.
 2) Whether hereditary factors are involved in the development of cystic ovaries is unknown.
.
Bone marrow suppression:
1. Should be reated with appropriate supportive care, such as blood transfusion for severe anemia and
prophylactic antibiotic therapy for severely neutropenic patients.
2. Colony-stimulating factor therapy can also be used. Lithium therapy has also been mentioned.
Vll. Prognosis
 Ovarian remnant: prognosis for recovery from hyperestrogenism is excellent when the remnant is found
and removed. Neoplasia in other parts of the reproductive tract must be addressed.
3.
Testicular neoplasia:
1. Following castration, the prognosis for recovery from hyperestrogenism is excellent.
474  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animats
2. If unilateral castration is performed in a stud:
a. Suppression of gonadotropins and spermatogenesis by the excess estradiol should be reversible in
 an otherwise healthy dog younger than 10 years of age.
b. Older dogs are expected to have an age-related decline in fertility, irrespective of testicular neoplasia
 3. The testicle should be submitted for histopathologic evaluation:
a. If the tumor is malignant, staging and appropriate adjunct therapy should be considered in consulta-
tion with a veterinary oncologist.
h. Prognosis for malignant testicular tumors is guarded.
C.
 Ovarian follicular cysts causing persistent estrus: prognosis excellent with oophorectomy and poor
(50%) for medical management.
D.
 If bone marrow suppression is present, prognosis is guarded.
VIll. Prevention
A.
 Complete surgical excision of both gonads.
B.
ently may be transferred from owner's skin to the dog being held in arm or nuzzling face, or by the dog
licking owner's skin.
Vaginal Hyperplasia-Prolapse
Pathogenesis
● Vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse in bitches is an unusual response to estrogen that occurs during
proestrus or estrus.
Classical Signs
● Edematous and/or hyperplastic mass protruding from the vulva of a bitch in heat (Figure 45.3).
Diagnosis
● Made on the basis of physical findings and confirmation that the bitch is in heat.
Differential Diagnoses
● True vaginal prolapse that occurs during parturition. This would involve the entire vagina.
● Vaginal neoplasia. This would not be cyclic in nature.
Treatment
● With rare exceptions, vaginal hyperplasia resolves spontaneously within 2 weeks of the end of heat.
● Ovariohysterectomy is curative. Vaginal hyperplasia resolves within 7-14 days. Resection of the
hyperplastic tissue is usually not necessary.
Pathogenesis
A.
Vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse in bitches is an unusual response to estrogen that occurs during proestrus
or estrus when estrogen concentrations are high.
B.
The edematous and hyperplastic change affects a small portion (1 cm or so) of the vaginal floor, imme-
diately cranial to the urethral papilla. Only the edematous, hyperplastic tissues become prolapsed. The rest
of the vagina is normal.
C.
 It occurs during estrus and, with rare exceptions, resolves spontaneously within days of the end of
estrus. Once started, it usually recurs during each subsequent heat.
D
 Heredity has not been determined, but the condition appears to be familial in nature.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 475
Fgure 45.3Type ll vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse in a Labrador retriever.
Signalment
A
Young, intact bitch, usually beginning in one of her first few cycles and recurring during each subse-
quent cycle thereafter.
B.
Vaginal hyperplasia has not been reported in queens.
11.
Clinical Signs
A.
A young bitch that is in heat.
 Type Iis primarily an edematous smooth mass, which remains within the vagina and vestibule. It would
likely go unnoticed except that it prevents breeding.
C.
 Type II is a large hyperplastic mass protruding from the vulva (Figure 45.3), but arising from a stalk at
the same small area of the vaginal floor.
D.
 Least often there is circumferential involvement of the vaginal wall (Type Il).
E.
pregnancy that vaginal hyperplasia may recur at that time.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Made on the basis of physical findings and confirmation that the bitch is in heat.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
True vaginal prolapse that occurs during parturition, not during heat, and involves the entire vagina.
B.
Vaginal neoplasia, the appearance of which is not cyclic in nature. With the exception of transmissible
476 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Vl. Treatment
A.
 With rare exceptions, vaginal hyperplasia resolves spontaneously within 2 weeks of the end of heat
(estrogen).
B.
 Ovariohysterectomy is curative. Vaginal hyperplasia resolves within 7-14 days unless it has been recur-
rent for so many cycles that the tissue has also become fibrotic. When that occurs, resection of the hyperplas-
tic tissue in addition to ovariohysterectomy may be necessary.
C.
 Prolapsed tissue should be protected from trauma and ulceration until regression.
D. In bitches kept for breeding, artificial insemination can be used to bypass the hyperplastic tissue, which
resolves spontaneously during pregnancy and rarely recurs at parturition.
E.
 Surgical excision of the hyperplastic tissue without ovariohysterectomy does not prevent recurrence, but
the size during subsequent cycles may be reduced. Excision during estrus requires meticulous hemostasis.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
Excellent with ovariohysterectomy.
B.
 Left intact, this is typically a recurrent problem with subsequent cycles. Due to its recurrent nature, the
 inconvenience of managing the prolapsed tissue, and a possible genetic basis, affected bitches usually are not
kept in the breeding program.
VIlll. Prevention
A.
Ovariectomy.
Mammary Neoplasia
Pathogenesis
● Relative to being intact, ovariohysterectomy (spay) of female dogs and cats prior to 1year of age is
highly protective against future development of mammary neoplasia.
· Mammary neoplasia is rare in males.
● About half of mammary tumors in bitches are benign, whereas in cats they are almost always 
malignant.
q A pue 'shn an on pue sou qdul peuoin on aziseisiu sho Aru suu ●
locally invasive.
Classical Signs
● Nodule or mass in one or more mammary glands, or along the mammary chain, with or without
invasion into surrounding tissues.
● Discharge from the nipple.
● Most animals are 10-12 years old and intact, or were spayed after 2 years of age.
Diagnosis
● Highly suspected based on physical findings and signalment. Confirmed by histopathologic evaluation.
Treatment
● Complete surgical excision.
● Adjunct chemotherapy for malignant and metastatic mammary tumors.
Pathogenesis
A.
 Mammary neoplasia is the most common tumor in female dogs and the third most common tumor in
queenis.
 Estrogen appears to be the major hormone involved. Ovariohysterectomy (spay) prior to 1year of age
B.
is highly protective against future development of mammary neoplasia:
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 477
1. The risk of mammary carcinoma is reduced by 91% in cats spayed before 6 months of age, by 86%
r1v 'aoe po s1eak 7 pue I uaamiaq pakeds sieo ul %ll Aq pue 'aoe jo 1eak 1 anojeq pakeds sies u
 24 months of age, spaying is not protective.
2. Spaying bitches at or before 1 year of age is significantly protective (odds ration 0.01), and the pro-
tective effect diminishes when spayed between 1.1 and 2.5 years of age (odds ratio 0.11) and berween
2.6 to 5.0 years of age (odds ratio 0.3).
 Treatment with exogenous progesterone is a risk factor for mammary carcinoma:
1. As many as 25% of dogs with marmmary tumors are reported to have been treated with progestins.
Benign mammary tumors are found in as many as 70% of bitches receiving long-term progestin therapy.
2. Thirty-six percent of male cats with mammary carcinoma had been treated with progestins.
D. In dogs, malignant and benign mammary tumors express estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) recep-
associated with higher histologic grade, tumor invasion, and metastasis. Conversely, the presence of PR, with
or without ERo, is associated with longer 1 year survival after mastectomy. In addition to prognosis, this
may have therapeutic implications as it does in women.
E.
 Metastasis to local lymph nodes and lungs is common for malignant mammary tumors.
Feline mammary tumors are usually malignant.
11.
Signalment
A.
Most are females, 10-12 years old.
B.
 Most are intact, or were spayed after 2 years of age.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A.
Nodule or mass in mammary gland(s) or along mammary chain, with or without invasion into sur-
rounding tissues.
B.
 Discharge from the nipple.
C.
 Local lymph nodes (axillary, inguinal) may be enlarged.
D.
Systemic illness or cachexia in animals with advanced cancer.
E.
 Inflammatory carcinoma is characterized by ulceration and extensive invasion into surrounding skin
and soft tissue without distinct nodularity of the mammary tissue.
IV.  Diagnosis
4.
 Fine needle aspiration may yield a cytologic diagnosis of neoplasia. However, negative cytologic evidence
for neoplasia does not exclude the diagnosis. Inflammation or necrosis may be associated with some tumors,
B.
Histopathologic evaluation of the mass and its margins is essential following surgery.
C.
 Evaluation for metastatic disease (local nodes, chest radiographs, abdominal ultrasound).
Differential Diagnoses
 Fibroadenomatous mammary hyperplasia occurs in young, cycling queens and usually affects all glands
simultaneously.
B. Mastitis causes abnormal milk, and is a postpartum disorder in bitches. Mastitis is extremely rare in
queens.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 Complete surgical excision of the mass is the mainstay of treatment. Lumpectomy or mastectomy as
indicated.
B. Adjunct chemotherapy for malignant tumors should be considered in consultation with a veterinary
oncologist.
C. Hormonal therapy for breast cancer is well established in human medicine. Results vary according to
the hormone receptors expressed by the tumor. Many veterinary studies assessing the effects of simultaneous
ovariohysterectomy (i.e., hormonal deprivation) and mastectomy lack hormone receptor evaluation of the
tumor making it difficult to draw conclusions regarding efficacy. Therapeutic trials with the selective
estrogen-receptor modulator (ERM) tamoxifen have shown undesirable estrogenic effects in dogs.
478 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Vll. Prognosis
A.
The prognosis for benign mammary tumors following complete excision is excellent.
B.
The prognosis for malignant tumors depends upon the size of the tumor, histologic grade, local inva-
sion, and the presence of metastasis.
C.
 The prognosis for inflammatory mammary carcinoma is grave.
VIlll. Prevention
A.
Ovariectomy prior to first estrous cycle is the most protective against future development of marmmary
neoplasia.
B
 Protective effects of ovariectomy diminish with age as number of estrous cycles experienced increases:
1. By 24 months of age, ovariectomy is no longer protective in queens.
2. By 2.6-5 years of age, the protective effect has decreased to an odds ratio of 0.3 in bitches.
ANDROGEN-RELATED DISORDERS
Pathogenesis (General)
A
Testosterone:
1. In males, the primary source of testosterone is the Leydig (interstitial) cells of the testes.
 2. In females, testosterone is made in the theca cells of the ovarian follicles and promptly converted to
estradiol in the granulosa cells.
3. Small amounts are made in the adrenal gland.
4. Testosterone is the obligate precursor of both estradiol and dihydrotestosterone:
a. Testosterone is converted in the gonad and peripheral tissues to estradiol by aromatase and to
dihydrotestosterone by 5 0-reductase (Figure 45.1).
associated with being male.
and libido, the development of the epididymis and vas deferens, and muscularity. Testosterone mediates
the inguinal-scrotal phase of testicular descent by causing regression of the cranial suspensory ligament.
The transabdominal phase of testicular descent is androgen-independent.
B
Dihydrotestosterone causes sexual maturation at puberty, virilization of the external genitalia, and
development of the prostate.
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
Pathogenesis
● Dihydrotestosterone promotes prostate growth throughout life.
● Prostatomegaly is found in more than 60% of intact male dogs over 5 years of age and in 95% of
intact male dogs by 9 years of age.
● Prostatic disease of any kind is rare in cats.
Classical Signs
● Sexually mature, intact male dogs, usually older than 5 or 6 years.
● The most common clinical signs are tenesmus or sanguineous urethral discharge.
● Dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia are otherwise normal and healthy.
● Many dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia have no clinical signs. Prostatomegaly is an incidental
finding on physical examination or diagnostic imaging.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 479
Diagnosis
● Benign prostatic hyperplasia is highly suspected based on the history and the physical examination
findings of nonpainful, symmetrical enlargement of the prostate in an otherwise healthy, mature,
intact male dog.
● Radiographs or ultrasound can be used to confirm prostatomegaly.
● Fine needle aspiration or prostatic biopsy can be done to confirm the diagnosis of benign prostatic
hyperplasia, but this is usually not necessary.
Treatment
Castration is the treatment of choice because it is curative.
● When castration is not an option for a symptomatic dog, anti-androgen therapy can be used.
Pathogenesis
Dihydrotestosterone is the primary hormone involved with prostatic development:
1. Benign prostatic hyperplasia in dogs is characterized by hyperplasia of the compound tubuloalveolar
glandular elements, often with the development of small (few mm) cysts.
2. After castration, the prostate is comprised mainly of ductal elements, the glandular and stromal
elements having atrophied.
B.
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia is rare in cats.
Signalment
4.
Sexually mature, intact male dog, usually older than 5 or 6 years:
1. Prostatomegaly is found in more than 60% of intact male dogs over 5 years of age and in 95% of
intact male dogs by 9 years of age.
Il. Clinical Signs
A.
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia does not cause systemic illness. Dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia are
otherwise normal and healthy.
 The most common clinical signs are tenesmus or sanguineous urethral discharge.
 Unlike the situation in men, benign prostatic hyperplasia in dogs is rarely associated with urine
retention:
1. When prostatic disease is associated with urine retention in dogs, prostatic neoplasia is a more likely
cause.
D. Many dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia have no clinical signs. Prostatomegaly is an incidental
finding on physical examination or diagnostic imaging.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Physical examination findings of nonpainful, symmetrical enlargement of the prostate in an otherwise
 healthy, mature,intact male dog. The prostate is best examined by sirmultaneous abdominal and rectal palpa-
tion of the gland:
1. When the history and physical findings are typical of benign prostatic hyperplasia, additional diag-
nostic tests are usually not performed.
B. Radiographs can be used to confirm prostatomegaly, which has been defined as prostatic diameter
greater than 70% of the pelvic canal as seen on the lateral view:
1. Radiographs are also useful for evaluation of the sublumbar lymph nodes and the boney pelvis and
lumbar spine for evidence of metastasis typical of prostatic neoplasia.
C. Ultrasound of the prostate will show homogenous, symmetrical enlargement, often with small (mm)
anechoic cysts. The capsule is smooth and intact. The urethra is normal. Local lymph nodes are normal
480 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
1. When these ultrasonographic changes typical of benign prostatic hyperplasia are found in a castrated
dog, they should prompt evaluation for unrecognized cryptorchidism.
2. With the exception of unrecognized cryptorchidism, prostatomegaly in a castrated dog is considered
to be neoplastic until proven otherwise.
Fine needle aspiration or prostatic biopsy can be done to confirm the diagnosis of benign prostatic
hyperplasia, but this is usually not necessary:
1. More often, these would be performed when other prostatic disorders, such as prostatitis or neo-
plasia, are suspected in addition to, or instead of, benign prostatic hyperplasia.
2. Samples should be submitted for culture and cytologic or histopathologic evaluation.
F. The first and third fractions of the canine ejaculate are comprised of prostatic fluid. With symptomatic
benign prostatic hyperplasia, the prostatic fluid is commonly hemorrhagic, or it may be normal.
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Prostatitis, with or without concomitant benign prostatic hyperplasia.
B.
Prostatic neoplasia is the most likely cause of a “normal-" or large-sized prostate in a castrated animal,
and should prompt immediate evaluation.
C.
Prostatic abscess and prostatic cysts are also causes of prostatomegaly, but they are easily differentiated
 from benign prostatic hyperplasia on the basis of the ultrasonographic finding of fluid-filled cavities, and on
the basis of fluid cytology.
VI.
Treatment
A.
Treatiment is not necessary for asymptomatic dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Watchful waiting
is a reasonable alternative.
B
Castration of symptomatic dogs is the treatment of choice because it is curative. Prostatic size decreases
significantly within 7-10 days. Involution is complete by 12 weeks.
C.
When castration is not an option, anti-androgen therapy can be used. Clinical signs begin to resolve
after about a week of treatment. These drugs are not as effective as castration in resolution of clinical signs,
and the results are temporary, although they often last for many months after the drug has been discontinued:
1. The progestins megestrol acetate (0.5 mg/kg, orally, q 24 h, for 10 days to 4 weeks), delmadinone
acetate (0.1 mg/kg subcutaneously at 0,1 and 4 weeks), and medroxyprogesterone (3 mg/kg subcutane-
ously, once) have been recommended:
a. In addition to causing adrenal suppression and insulin resistance, progestins can suppress 
spermatogenesis, spermatozoal motility, and serum testosterone concentrations.
2. Finasteride is a drug that inhibits 5-α-reductase, thereby inhibiting the conversion of testosterone
to dihydrotestosterone. Oral doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg q 24 h, or 5 mg/dog/day, have been recommended:
     s          
volume, semen quality and libido are reportedly not affected, but this may not be true for all dogs.
h. Finasteride is teratogenic and should not be handled by pregnant women.
Vll.  Prognosis
A. The prognosis for benign prostatic hyperplasia is excellent. Many animals are asymptomatic and
remain so for years.
B.
 Castration can be performed at any time after the diagnosis of benign prostatic hyperplasia, and it is
curative.
C.
Medical management is usually effective. There are potential side effects.
D.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia may predispose to the development of bacterial prostatitis. In dogs with
bacterial prostatitis, castration hastens the recovery.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Castration before middle age.
B.
Castration at any time will resolve benign prostatic hyperplasia and prevent recurrence.
C.
Castration does not prevent prostatic neoplasia, the other important cause of prostatomegaly in old
dogs.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders  481
Perineal Hernia
Pathogenesis
● Male dogs and cats account for 98% and 75% of reported cases of perineal hernias, respectively.
● The cause of perineal hernias remains unknown. The majority (83 %) of affected dogs are intact but
the majority of cats are castrated males.
Classical Signs
● The most common clinical signs are tenesmus, constipation, and bulging of the perineum.
Diagnosis
● The diagnosis is made on the basis of physical examination, rectal palpation, and diagnostic imaging.
Treatment
● Surgical repair is generally more successful than medical management.
Pathogenesis
A
The cause of perineal hernias remains umknown. Nearly all (98%) the dogs with perineal hernias are
 males and the majority of them are intact (83%). Most (75%) cats with perineal hernias are also males, but
the majority of them are castrated.
B. No differences in serum concentrations of testosterone and estradiol, or expression of relaxin and
relaxin-like factor have been found between dogs with and without hernia. However androgen receptors are
lower and relaxin receptors higher in number in the pelvic diaphragm muscles of dogs with perineal hernias
than those without.
C.
 Contrary to earlier speculation, prostatomegaly appears not to contribute to the development of
perineal hernias in dogs since it was detected in only 11.5% of the dogs, and of those prostates that were
biopsied, 50% were histologically normal.
D.
Concurrent lower urinary tract disease or megacolon are identified in 50% of cats with perineal
hernia.
11.
Signalment
A.
 Perineal hernias occur almost exclusively in males. The average age is 9-10 years.
11.
. Clinical Signs
A.
The most common clinical signs are tenesmus, constipation, and bulging of the perineum.
B.
 Retroflexion of the urinary bladder into the hernia occurs more often in dogs (20%) than cats (2.5%),
 and is often associated with signs of uremia.
IV.
Diagnosis
A.
The diagnosis is made on the basis of physical examination, rectal palpation, and diagnostic imaging.
B.
 Diagnostic imaging is particularly helpful for assessing the position of the urinary bladder and the
contents of the hernia.
Differential Diagnoses
4
Other causes of tenesimus such as colonic or rectal disease, or constipation.
B.
 Other cases of perineal swelling such as anal sac disease, neoplasia, or abscess of perineal soft tissue
or bone.
Vl.
Treatment
4.
Surgical repair is generally more successful than medical management with stool softeners and such.
Surgical repair is essential if urinary bladder entrapment has occurred.
482 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 In cases without bladder involvement, the prognosis is fairly good; however, continuation of some
 clinical signs and recurrence of hernia and/or peri-incisional cellulitis occur in about 20% of cases.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 For dogs, castration before middle age.
B.
 For cats, it is unknown if concurrent lower urinary tract disease or megacolon are merely coincidental
or if they play a role in the development of perineal hernias.
Perineal Adenomas
Pathogenesis
● Androgen-dependent hepatoid tumors.
Classical Signs
● Somewhat friable, firm, singular, raised masses that occur on the perineal skin or tail near the anus
 of old intact male dogs. They are occasionally found on the prepuce or inguinal skin.
Diagnosis
● The diagnosis is usually made on the basis of the signalment and physical examination.
Treatment
● Castration, which will cause the mass to regress.
O Surgical excision of the mass is often also performed.
Pathogenesis
A
Androgen-dependent hepatoid tumors.
1I1.
Signalment
A.
Geriatric, intact male dog.
1l.
Clinical Signs
A.
They are usually somewhat friable, firm, single, raised masses that occur on the perineal skin or tail
 near the anus. They are occasionally found on the prepuce or inguinal skin.
B
Should one occur on a female or castrated male, a source of androgen should be investigated.
c.
 Perineal adenomas are rarely, if ever, seen in cats.
Iv.
Diagnosis
A.
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the signalment and physical findings and confirmed by cytologic
 evaluation of specimens obtained by fine needle aspiration.
B.
 Surgical specimens should be submitted for histologic confirmation of the benign nature of the tumor,
particularly if they occur on a female or castrated male.
Differential Diagnoses
A.
Other skin tumors.
B.
Malignant hepatoid tumor.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Castration, which will cause the mass to regress.
B.
Surgical excision of the mass is often also performed.
C.
Adjunct therapy for malignant tumors should be considered in consultation with a veterinary
oncologist.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders483
Vll.
Prognosis
A
The prognosis is excellent umless castration is not performed or if the tumor is too large for complete
excision.
B.
The prognosis for malignant tumors is guarded.
VIll. Prevention
A
Castration.
Relative Deficiency Of Estrogen And Other Sex Hormones
Pathogenesis
● The gonads are the primary source of the sex hormones. After castration and ovariohysterectomy,
 serum concentrations are dramatically reduced.
● Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and primary ovarian or testicular failure are rarely documented
 in dogs or cats as causes of sex hormone deficiencies.
Classical Signs
● Occur after castration or ovariohysterectomy in male and female dogs and cats of any age or
breed.
● Absence of estrous cycles and sexual behavior in females. Diminished urine marking, roaming.
mounting, and fighting in males.
● Decreased odor of urine in male cats.
● Increased body fat.
● Increased risk of urinary incontinence in female dogs, especially those spayed at a young age.
Diagnosis
● Usually based solely on the occurrence of the classical signs in an otherwise healthy, gonadecto-
mized animal.
● Exclusion of other causes of weight gain or urinary incontinence.
Treatment
● None is usually indicated. The behavioral changes are usually desired.
● To maintain optimal body condition, decrease caloric intake to match decreased metabolic rate.
● Post-spay urinary incontinence in female dogs usually responds well to α-adrenergic drugs such as
phenylpropanolamine (PPA), or to estrogen, or a combination of the two.
Pathogenesis
A
The gonads are the primary source of the sex hormones. By far the most common cause of relative
deficiencies in the sex hormones is gonadectomy. After castration and ovariohysterectomy, serum concentra-
tions are dramatically reduced.
B
 Diminished concentrations of sex hormones result in a decreased metabolic rate in males and females,
a decrease in spontaneous physical activity, and a short-term increase in appetite, which all lead to an
n a  j ao n oi pen  so jo  s n aq  
unchanged.
C
Gonadectomy affects behavior, but not of all dogs or all cats similarly.
D.
A relationship berween the development of urinary incontinence and spaying has long been recognized
because a relative deficiency in estrogen is known to exist, and because reatment with estrogen improves the
condition in spayed female dogs:
484 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
1. There is evidence that estrogen deficiency is not the sole factor. In the absence of the negative feedback
exerted by the gonadal hormones on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, serum concentrations of
FSH and LH are chronically elevated (Figure 45.2). Differences in expression of LH-, FSH-, and GnRH-
receptors in the lower urinary tract and differences in bladder contractility have been demonstrated
among intact versus gonadectomized male and female dogs. The differences are greater in females than
 in males, greater in spayed females than in intact females, and greatest in spayed female dogs that are
incontinent.
2. The risk of developing urinary incontinence is especially increased in female dogs spayed before
3 months of age.
E. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is rarely documented in dogs and cats. Lacking normal func-
tion of gonadotropic hormones such as GnRH, LH, and/or FSH, there is failure of normal gonadal
development:
1. Lacking the gonadal sex hormones, sexual maturation does not occur. Affected animals have
underdeveloped genitalia, absent or delayed puberty, absence of secondary sex characteristics, and
infertility.
F.   Acquired testicular or ovarian failure is uncommon:
1. In males, spermatogenesis is usually affected long before androgen production is diminished and
therefore the clinical signs are typically limited to testicular atrophy and infertility. Secondary sex char-
acteristics and behavior, and prostatic development are usually normal.
 2. In females, the clinical signs include infrequent or absent heat cycles, or if cycles occur, ovulation
failure.
Il.Signalment
A. No specific signalment exists.
 B. Changes can occur in any dog or cat regardless of breed or age at neutering.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Obesity:
1. Unless caloric intake is diminished to match the changed metabolic state, males and females will gain
weight after gonadectomy.
B. The odor of the urine of males, especially tom cats, becomes less pungent after castration.
C. The most predictable effect of gonadectomy is on sexual behavior, which is eliminated in females but
may persist in males for several months to a year:
1. Despite the fact that testosterone is metabolized within hours of castration, 20% of male cats and
 80% of male dogs continue to display copulatory patterns for weeks after castration, and 60% of male
dogs still show the pattern at least occasionally for 1 year.
 2. Roaming, mounting, and urine marking are significantly diminished in the majority of male dogs and
cats after castration.
3. In cats, fighting with other males is also significantly diminished.
4. In dogs, aggression toward other dogs and toward people, familiar and unfamiliar, is relatively
unchanged by castration. It is significantly decreased in fewer than 20% of male dogs after castration.
 5. The effects of castration are not influenced by the duration of the behavior or the amount of behav-
ioral experience prior to castration.
been observed after ovariohysterectomy in some individual animals in a variety of breeds.
E. Urinary incontinence in spayed bitches:
1. Affected bitches had normal micturition prior to being spayed. Urinary incontinence develops months
to years later.
2. Incontinence occurs when the animal is sitting or lying, and is relaxed and at rest, most often when
she is asleep. Typically, at all other times, the animal is continent and micturition is normal.
3. Urethral pressure is diminished. Detrusor (bladder) muscle function is typically normal, except
perhaps at the level of the trigone. For this reason, the condition has been called urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence, or USMI.
Estrogen- and Androgen-Related Disorders 485
4. Reportedly occurs in as many as 20% of spayed bitches.
 5. The risk of developing urinary incontinence is further increased in female dogs spayed before
3 months of age. In bitches, the increased risk of creating a pet with urinary incontinence should be
weighed against any perceived benefit of early spaying.
IV. Diagnosis
A.1
 Diagnosis is made mainly on the basis of history, clinical signs, and physical examination findings.
 B. Measurement of serum hormone concentrations is not helpful unless there is a suspicion that the animal
is not actually neutered.
C. For urinary incontinence, a urethral pressure profile can confirm the diagnosis of USMl, but the
 procedure is not widely available and usually is not necessary.
V.  Differential Diagnoses
A. Differential diagnoses for obesity include overfeeding (which, relative to the decreased metabolic state
caused by neutering, is the cause of post-neuter weight gain), insufficient exercise, and metabolic diseases
such as hypothyroidism.
B. Differential diagnoses for changes in hair coat quality or color include endocrine diseases such as
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or hyperestrogenism.
C. Differential diagnoses for acquired urinary incontinence include a wide variety of urethral, bladder, and
neurological disorders.
Vl. Treatment
A.  Unless caloric intake is diminished to match the changed metabolic state, males and females will gain
weight after gonadectomy and obesity can result.
B. For urinary incontinence in bitches caused by USMI, treatment with α-agonists is very effective (90%),
as is treatment with estrogen (60-80%). The two can also be used in combination, often at reduced doses
for each:
1. α-agonists:
a. PPA, 1.5 mg/kg (or 12.5-75 mg/dog), PO, q 8-12h.
b. Ephedrine, 1.2 mg/kg PO, q 8 h.
C. Pseudoephedrine, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg, PO, q 12h.
d. Side effects include tachycardia, anxiety, hypertension, anorexia, aggression.
e. These are semi-controlled substances.
2. Estrogens:
a. Diethylstilbestrol (DES), 0.1-1.0mg/dog, PO, q 24h for 5-7 days, then weekly as needed
(compounding pharmacy; quality depends on source).
b. Stilbestrol, 0.04-0.06 mg/dog, PO, q 24 h, for 5-7 days then reduced weekly to 0.01-0.02 mg/dog/
day.
d. Side effects include signs of estrus, behavior change, myelosuppression, pyometra in uterine
stump.
3. GnRH analogs:
a. Depot leuprolide, 11.25 mg/dog subcut, redose as needed.
h. Depot deslorelin, 5-10mg/dog, subcut, redose as needed.
C. These drugs downregulate chronically elevated LH and FSH. Reportedly 40-90% effective and
long duration of control (70-575 days). No reported adverse effects.
4. Urethral submucosal bulking agents:
a. Reduce urethral luminal size, thereby increasing pressure.
h. Sixty-eight percent of treated bitches with collagen implants were continent for 1-64 months
(mean 17 months).
C. Limited availability of collagen implant. Other bulking agents are under investigation.
5. Additional investigation into therapeutic options for post-spay urinary incontinence, such as use of
hydraulic sphincters, is ongoing.
486 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 Prognosis for obesity is good with appropriate exercise and diet management.
B.
Prognosis for spay incontinence:
1. Response to treatment with C-adrenergic drugs (e.g., PPA), with or without estrogen, is generally
good, but requires life-long therapy.
 2. Urethral bulking agents such as collagen implants are also successful, but with time will require
re-treatment. The availability of collagen is intermittent.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Do not remove the gonads. This will maintain sex hormone production and preserve the behavioral
and physical manifestations of sexual maturity.
Prevent obesity by adjusting caloric intake and exercise.
C.
Delay ovariohysterectomy beyond 3 months of age to decrease the risk of urinary incontinence in
bitches.
References and Further Readings
Ball R, Birchard S, May L, et al. Ovarian rermnant syndrome in dogs and cats: 21 cases (2000-2007). J Arm Vet Med Assoc
2010;236:548-553.
Belsito K, Vester B, Keel T,et al. Impact of ovariohysterectomy and food intake on body composition, physical activity and
adipose gene expression in cats. J Anir Sei 2009;87:594-602.
Coit VA, Dowell FJ, Evans NP. Neutering affects mRNA expression levels for the LH- and GnRH-receptors in the canine
urinary bladder. Theriogenotogy 2009;71:239-247.
Dorfmann M, Barsanti J. Diseases of the canine prostate gland. Compend Contin Educ 1995;17:791-810.
Hart B,Barrett R. Effcts of castration on fighting, roaming, and urine spraying in adult male cats. JA Vet Med Assoc
1973;163:290-292.
Hosgood G, Hedland Cs, Pechman RD,et al. Perineal herniorrhaphy: perioperative data from 100 dogs. J Arm Anirm Hosp
Assoc 1995;31:331-342.
Lane IF, Westropp JL. Urinary incontinence and rmicturition disorders: Pharmacologic management. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt
DC, eds. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2009, pp. 955-959.
Lofstedt RM, VanLeeuwen JA. Evaluation of a commercially available luteinizing horrnone test to for its ability to distinguish
between ovariectomized and sexually intact bitches. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2002;220:1331-1335.
Mann FA, Nonneman MS, Pope ER, et al. Androgen receptors in the pelvic diaphragrm muscles of dogs with and without
perineal hernia. Am J Vet Res 1995;56:134-139.
Merlo DD, Pellegrino RC, Ceppi M, et al. Cancer incidence in pet dogs: findings of the animal tumor registry of Genoa, Italy.
J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:976-984.
Neilson J,Eckstein R, Hart B.Effects of castration on problem behaviors in male dogs with reference to age and duration of
behavior. J Amm Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:180-182.
Olson PN, Mulnix JA, Nett TM. Concentration of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone in the serum of
sexually intact and neutered dogs. An J Vet Res 1992;53:762-766.
Overley B, Shofer MH, Goldschmidt MH,et al. Association between ovariohysterectomy and feline mammary carcinoma.
J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:560-563.
2001;219:1110-1114.
Reichler IM, Jochle W, Piche CA, et al. Effect of long-acting GnRH analogue or placebo on plasma LH/FSH, urethral pressure
profiles and clinical signs of urinary incontinence due to sphincter mechanism incormpetence in bitches. Theriogenology
2006;66:1227-1236.
Reichler IM, Welle M, Eckrich C,et al. Spaying-induced coat changes: the role of gonadotropins, GnRH and GnRH treatment
on the hair cycle of female dogs. Vet Dermatol 2008;19:77-87.
carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2000;14:266-270
Zoran DL. Anorectal disease. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine, 6th edn. St. Louis
Elsevier Saunders, 2000, pp. 1418-1419.
CHAPTER 46
Progesterone and Prolactin-Related
Disorders; Adrenal Dysfunction
and Sex Hormones
Cheri A. Johnson
Pyometra
Mammary hyperplasia in cats
Hypoluteoidism
Prolactin
Galactorrhea (false pregnancy)
Sex hormones and adrenal disorders
PROGESTERONE-RELATED DISORDERS
1. Pathogenesis (General)
A. The primary source of progesterone is the corpus luteum of the ovary:
1. With ovulation, the follicular theca and granulosa cells luteinize and become the corpora lutea, which
produce progesterone.
2. Progesterone production represents the huteal phase of the ovarian cycle or diestrus.
3. Progesterone action:
a. Causes development of the mammary alveoli, enabling milk production.
b. Stimulates growth and secretory activity of the endometrial glands and inhibits myometrial
contractility.
C. In the hypothalamus, reduces amplitude and frequency of basal gonadotropin releasing hormone
(GnRH) secretory spikes, prevents the next estrous cycle, and inhibits the preovulatory LH surge.
 4. Elevated concentrations of progesterone suppress lactation and, during pregnancy, inhibit the onset of
labor.
 contribution of progesterone, if any, is negligible:
1. Oophorectomy will terminate pregnancy at any stage.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
487
488  Clinicat Endocrinotogy of Companion Animats
 2. Conversely, the corpus luteum lifespan depends on the presence or absence of pregnancy in the queen,
but not the bitch:
a. The corpus luteum of a queen that was induced to ovulate but did not become pregnant will
function for 30-50 days after breeding.
b. In pregnancy, the corpus luteum function throughout gestation, which averages 65 days in queens.
3. The corpora lutea of the bitch are unique in that they produce progesterone for more than 60 days,
e shp sg si s u us jo qu arae a rd e si ari nou ro ra
breeding.
C. Progesterone is an obligate precursor of cortisol ( Figure 45.1).
D. Progestagins have been used therapeutically:
1. To suppress estrus in bitches and queens.
2. For treatment of "false pregnancy" in bitches.
 3. For treatment of a variety of dermatologic conditions in cats.
4. To suppress aggressive behavior, roaming, urine spraying, and mounting behavior in males.
 5. For treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia in dogs.
6. For treatment of hypoluteoidism in bitches.
Il. Diagnosis (General)
A.
 Some considerations for laboratory assessment of progesterone are unique.
B. Sample handling:
1. Serum-separator tubes must never be used for sample collection because progesterone concentrations
will be spuriously and significantly decreased.
2. Because refrigeration of canine blood in serum tubes significantly decreases progesterone concentra-
tion in freshly drawn samples, samples should be held at room temperature and serum separated as soon
as possible after clot maturation:
 a. Blood samples that cannot be centrifuged promptly should be held at room temperature for at least
2 h prior to refrigeration.
b. Afer 2 h at room temperatrure, refrigeration of whole blood is no longer harmful.
C. Some laboratories may accept heparinized plasma. Storage prior to centrifugation of heparinized
samples at room temperature (22*C) or refrigerated (4°C) for up to 5h has no significant effect on
plasma progesterone concentrations.
C. Progesterone concentrations are higher in serum than in plasma.
D. Serum progesterone concentrations are approximately 1.5 times greater when measured by radioimmu-
noassay than by chemiluminescent immunoassay.
 s s  m  on  aq r aa s  n s 1
reproductive hormones. Endocrine laboratories must determine, validate, and provide their own reference
ranges for the reproductive hormones for sexually mature animals according to:
1. Species.
2. Stage of the estrous cycle in females.
 3. Neuter status in both males and females.
UNDUE RESPONSE TOPROGESTERONE
Pyometra
Pathogenesis
● Progesterone increases the number and secretory activity of endometrial glands, which can result in
cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH).
● Fluid may also accumulate in the uterine lumen causing hydrometra or mucometra.
Progesterone and Prolactin-Rerated Disorders; Aorenar Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
68
 Secondary bacterial infection of the CEH-affected uterus causes pyometra.
● Thus, pyometra is seen during diestrus (i.e., usually within 60 days after heat) or after exogenous
progestin administration.
Signalment
● Mature, sexually intact, cycling bitches and queens.
● Bitches and queens treated with exogenous progestin therapy.
● Bitches of any age having been given exogenous estrogens.
Classical Signs
● Occurs in mature, sexually intact, cycling bitches and queens.
● Lethargy, anorexia, yomiting.
● Polydipsia/polyuria in bitches.
● Purulent vulvar discharge is present in most, but not all, cases.
Diagnosis
● Highly suspected based on signalment, history, and the physical findings of uterine enlargement and
purulent vulvar discharge.
● Abdominal imaging and supporting hematology findings.
Treatment
● Fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy along with definitive treatment.
● Definitive treatment to remove the infected uterine material includes surgical or medical options.
● Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice, especially for animals not intended for future
breeding.
● In animals intended for future breeding, prostaglandin F2α or progesterone-receptor blocker to
cause evacuation of uterine contents.
Prognosis
● Good for survival. Mortality rates of 5-28%
● With medical management, recurrence is likely; however, subsequent pregnancy rates after
 prostaglandin F2α treatment for open-cervix pyometra are 70-80%.
Pathogenesis
A.
 In dogs and cats, progesterone initiates endometrial hyperplasia by increasing the number and secretory
function of the endometrial glands.
B.
 When the secreted fluid accumulates in the uterine lumen, hydrometra or mucometra result.
C. The abnormal uterus becomes infected, presumably via ascending bacteria from the vagina, causing
pyometra:
1. E coli is the most commonly isolated organism.
2.
 The morbidity and mortality associated with pyometra are the result of the bacterial infection.
3.1
 Pyometra is a life-threatening disease.
 4. Sepsis can develop at any time.
D. Pyometra develops during the luteal phase of the cycle when progesterone concentrations are high,
typically within 4-8 weeks of having been in heat:
1. It is more common in bitches because of the long (>60 days) duration of diestrus that follows every
cycle.
490 Clinicar Endocrinology of Companion Animals
2. Although some queens do ovulate spontaneously, more commonly, queens are only under the influ-
ence of progesterone if they are induced by coitus to ovulate.
 3. Pyometra is distinctly different from metritis, which is typically a postpartum disorder and is not
hormonally mediated.
E。
F.
 Exogenous estrogens (e.g., estradiol cypionate (ECP) for mismating) can also increase the risk of
pyometra, presumably via their effects on progesterone receptors.
G. E. coli and its endotoxins cause glomerular and renal tubular damage, that is, azotemia and proteinuria,
and unconcentrated urine, respectively.
Il.Signalment
A.
Mature, sexually intact, cycling bitches and queens. The mean age for both species at the time of
diagnosis is about 8 years.
B.
Sexually intact bitches and queens of any age treated with exogenous progestin therapy.
C. Bitches of any age having been given exogenous estrogens to prevent pregnancy following inadvertent
breeding. Estrogens are rarely administered to queens.
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia alone would likely cause no clinical signs except perhaps decreased
fertility.
B. Hydrometra and mucometra:
1. Clinical signs typically are limited to uterine enlargement with or without abdominal distention or
mucoid discharge.
2. Lethargy or abdominal discomfort may be present.
 3. Queens will also have a prolonged interestrual interval because progesterone wil suppress the next cycle.
4. The clinical signs could be mistaken for pregnancy.
 Clinical signs of pyometra include lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, and, in bitches, polydipsia/polyuria:
1. Purulent vulvar discharge is present in most, but not all cases:
a. The term "open-cervix pyometra" has been used when a vulvar discharge is present.
h. The term "closed-cervix pyometra" has been used when a vulvar discharge is absent.
2. An enlarged uterus and dehydration are found on physical examination.
3. Rectal temperature is usually normal or low. Fever is uncommon.
4. Sepsis and shock often develop quickly
IV.  Diagnosis
A.  Pyometra is highly suspected by finding uterine enlargement and purulent/septic vulvar discharge on
physical examination with a history of recent heat or treatment with exogenous progestins or estrogen.
B.Confirmed by abdominal ultrasound, which will show echogenic fluid in the uterine lumen and often a
thickened uterine wall with endometrial cysts.
C. The pyometra uterus appears as a tubular structure of soft tissue density in the caudal abdomen on
radiographs. Sometimes the size and radiographic appearance are similar to what would be seen in
mid-pregnancy, prior to calcification of fetal skeletons.
D.
Laboratory findings:
1. On a hemogram, the most common finding is a leukocytosis, which can be profound (50,000-
100,000/μL) and is characterized by neutrophilia with a left shift, a monocytosis, and evidence of WBC
toxicity:
a. However the total WBC is quite variable and there may be a leukopenia with a degenerative
left shift.
b. A mild non-regenerative anemia is usually present.
2. Unconcentrated urine and proteinuria are common in bitches but not in queens with pyometra.
3. Azotemia of prerenal and renal origins is fairly common in bitches with pyometra.
4. Although not routinely performed, results of vaginal cytology confirm that the discharge is septic
(degenerate neutrophils with bacteria).
Progesterone and Prolactin-Related Disorders; Adrenat Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
491
V.  Differential Diagnoses
Pregnancy with concomitant illness:
n lm ead ienl on ps (ns pe) sip an asaq ia idu t si s '
nate pregnancy.
2. Can be differentiated with ultrasound.
B. Hydrometra or mucometra:
1. With hydrometra, the uterine fluid seen on ultrasound is typically anechoic.
2. Vaginal cytology findings with mucometra are mucus without bacteria or significant numbers of
 inflammatory cells.
 3. The WBC profile is essentially normal in most cases.
C. Metritis:
1. Meritis is distinct from pyometra, is typically a postpartum disorder, and is not hormonally mediated.
VI. Treatment
A. Patients should be hospitalized and receive fluid therapy. Intravenous fluid therapy should be prompt
and aggressive to correct shock and dehydration, and maintain adequate perfusion.
B. Patients should receive antibiotic therapy:
1. Pending culture results, appropriate bactericidal antibiotic likely to be effective against E coli, the
most commonly isolated organism, should be initiated. Typically these include enrofloxacin (and other
fluoroquinolones), trimethoprim-sulfonamide, and amoxicillin-clavulanate.
 2. Culture and susceptibility testing are important:
a. Almost 40% of the E. coli isolated from dogs with pyometra are resistant to multiple drugs.
h. Organisms other than E. coli may be isolated.
C.
 Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice because the results are immediate and it is curative.
D.
. Because pyometra will eventually recur, nonsurgical management is usually reserved for relatively
healthy animals that will be bred in the future:
1. The prognosis for achieving another pregnancy (discussed below) is an important factor to consider.
 2. Results of medical management are better for treatment of open-cervix than closed-cervix pyometra.
 3. Medical management of pyometra is not recommended for animals that are critically ill because
results take days to achieve.
正.
 Medical treatment has focused on the use of luteolytic and uterotonic drugs to decrease progesterone
 production and to cause myometrial contractions that expel uterine contents, respectively:
1. Options:
a. Prostaglandins have both effects.
h. Cabergoline, a dopamine agonist, suppresses prolactin secretion; in bitches, prolactin is luteotropic.
C. Aglepristone, a competitive antagonist of the progesterone receptor, blocks the effects of proges-
 terone, thus causing cervical dilation and uterine contraction.
 2. These agents wil terminate pregnancy, so they should not be handled by pregnant women.
3. These agents have been used alone or in combination according to a variety of protocols to take
advantage of synergistic effects and minimize adverse effects.
4. Adverse effects:
a. Prostaglandin F2α:
1) Commonly causes panting, salivation, emesis, defecation, urination, mydriasis, and nesting
behavior.
2) In queens, it may also cause grooming behavior and vocalization.
3) Adverse reactions usually occur within 5 minutes of administration and usually resolve within
60 minutes.
4) Although side effects are common, they are usually not severe. The severity of reaction is
 directly related to the dosage administered and inversely related to the number of adminisrations.
 Reactions tend to become milder with subsequent injections.
h. Cloprostenol, a synthetic prostaglandin, reportedly has fewer side effects, but gastrointestinal
signs occur in 30-50% of bitches given the drug.
492 Clinicat Endocrinology of Companion Animals
C. Gastrointestinal signs are the most common side effect of cabergoline. (A veterinary preparation
is not currently available in the USA.)
d. Aglepristone causes transient pain or swelling at the injection site:
1) Its ability to cause cervical dilation may make aglepristone an attractive treatment option,
especially for certain cases with closed-cervix pyometra.
Treatment is monitored on the basis of improving clinical condition, increased vulvar discharge
 indicative of uterine emptying, and improving laboratory parameters:
1. The efficacy of uterine emptying is monitored by ultrasound.
2. Treatment is "to effect." It is continued until the uterus is empty, which is typically 7-14 days.
3. From the onset of treatment, the clinical condition of the patient is expected to improve. If this is not
the case or if the clinical condition deteriorates, ovariohysterectomy should be performed.
G.
1. Bitches and queens: Prostaglandin F2α (Lutalyse?, Pfizer) as a single agent; 0.1-0.25 mg/kg, SC,
q 12-24 h.
2. Bitches only (dosages not yet established for cats): Cloprostenol (Estrumate, Schering-Plough)
plus cabergoline (Dostinex?, Pfizer, compounded to appropriate concentration; Galastop?, Ceva
Vetem):
a. Cabergoline, 5 μg/kg, PO, q 24 h, for 7 days, plus cloprostenol, 1μg/kg, SC, q 24 h, for 7 days.
h. If no response and patient's condition remains stable, cloprostenol may be continued alone (with-
out cabergoline) for 7 more days.
3. Bitches and queens: Aglepristone (Alizine, Virbac) alone:
a. 10 mg/kg, SC, one dose on days 1, 2 (or 3), and 8 (or 7).
b. Reevaluate at day 14; if not resolved and the patient's condition remains stable, one additional
dose of 10 mg/kg, SC, may be administered on day 14.
4. Bitches only: Aglepristone plus cloprostenol (dosages not yet established for cats):
a. Aglepristone, 10 mg/kg, SC, once daily on days 1, 2, and 8, plus cloprostenol, 1μg/kg, SC, q 24h
on days 3 through 7.
h. Reevaluate on day 14, if not resolved and the patient's condition remains stable, one additional
dose of aglepristone, 10 mg/kg, SC, may be administered on day 14.
Vll. Prognosis
For animals undergoing ovariohysterectomy:
1. Despite appropriate supportive and surgical management, morbidity of 3-20% and mortality of
5-28% have been reported.
2. The majority of cases do survive the perioperative period, and for them the prognosis is excellent.
B.
 Data on mortality associated with nonsurgical management is very limited because medical manage-
or does not improve:
1. However in one study of 52 bitches with pyometra, 13 failed to respond to treatment with aglepris-
tone with or without cloprostenol:
a. Ten of them then had ovariohysterectomy.
h. One was euthanized because of declining health.
C. One died and one was lost to follow-up, giving at minimum a mortality rate of 8% (1/13).
C. 
 Success of medical management of pyometra in the bitch has been evaluated in two ways. One is that
the bitch herself recovers. The other is by evaluating subsequent pregnancy rates, which has been done for
both bitches and queens:
1. The most significant justification for medical management is to have another litter.
 2. The prognosis for recovery from open-cervix pyometra and subsequent pregnancy during the next
2 years is good following treatment with prostaglandin F2α:
a. Pregnancy rates of around 80-90% are reported for bitches and queens with an open cervix.
b. To date, although the bitches themselves recovered, pregnancy rates of only 25-34% are reported
for bitches with closed-cervix pyometra.
Progesterone and Prolactin-Related Disorders; Adrenat Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
493
c. There are apparently no reports of pregnancy following medical management of closed-cervix
feline pyometra in the English-language literature.
d. Reported recurrence rates for animals kept in their breeding programs are more than
70% for bitches and 15% in queens in the 2 years following successful treatment with prosta-
glandin F2α.
a. Five of 29 (17%) bitches failed to respond to treatment and were spayed.
h. Six of the remaining 24 (25%) had recurrence of pyometra at their first posttreatment estrus.
C. Only two of the bitches were subsequently bred, and one of them (50%) conceived.
4. To date, data on response to treatment with aglepristone are also somewhat limited:
a. Twelve of 20 (60%) bitches and 9 of 10 (90%) queens recovered after treatment with aglepris-
tone alone.
h. Pyometra did not recur in the treated queens during the next 2 years. There is no information on
subsequent fertility in the queens because none were bred.
5. In different studies, recovery from pyometra occurred in 84% of 32 and 100% of 15 bitches treated
with aglepristone plus cabergoline:
a. In the two reported studies, only 6 of the 47 bitches were bred after treatment with aglepristone
with or without cloprostenol, and 5 (83%) became pregnant.
b. Recurrence rate of pyomerra in bitches during the first 2 years after treatment was approximately
20%.
D.
 Breeding as soon as possible after treatment is important, especially for bitches because of the long
1. With each cycle, there is a risk of recurrence of pyometra.
 2. The goal is to obtain the desired number of puppies before recurrence.
. The long-term prognosis for fecundity after medical management is relatively poor particularly in
bitches:
1. Pyometra, a potentially life-threatening disease, will eventually recur.
 2. Most affected animals are already middle-aged, beyond their reproductive prime.
F
Recurrent pyometra:
1. There are a few reports of successful treatment of recurrent pyometra in bitches.
2. However, given the age of the animals and the expected poor fertility under these circumstances,
and the confident expectation of yet another recurrence of pyometra, opting for permanent resolution
via ovariohysterectomy would be a prudent consideration.
Vlll. Prevention
A
Ovariohysterectomy prior to middle age.
B.
Ovariohysterectomy will prevent recurrence.
Avoid the use of exogenous progestins in sexually intact females.
C
D.
Avoid the use of exogenous estrogens in females during the diestrus stage of ovarian cycle.
Mammary Hyperplasia in Cats
Pathogenesis
● In cats, pathologic fibroadenomatous mammary hyperplasia occasionally develops in response t0
endogenous or exogenous progestins.
Signalment
● Cycling queens of any age, but it is most common in young cats (≤1 year).
● Intact or spayed female or neutered male cats being treated with exogenous progestins.
494 Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals
Classical Signs
● Rapid, massive enlargement of all mammary glands, which may outgrow the blood supply and
begin to ulcerate (Figure 46.1).
Diagnosis
● Physical examination.
● History of recent estrus cycles or progestin therapy.
Differential Diagnosis
● Mammary neoplasia.
● Mastitis.
Treatment
● Remove the progesterone source. This is usually accomplished by a flank approach for ovariohyster-
ectomy.
● Discontinue exogenous progestins.
Prognosis
● Excellent following ovariohysterectomy.
Pathogenesis
A.
 The normal mammary development induced by progesterone is evident approximately 30 days after
estrus in bitches and in queens that ovulate. This is an expected normal occurrence after ovulation because
 of the influence of progesterone, whether or not pregnancy exists.
B.
 In cats, pathologic fbroadenomatous mammary hyperplasia occasionally develops in response to
endogenous or exogenous progestins.
Il.Signalment
A.
1. Most common in young queens (≤ 1year).
2. Often they are pregnant.
B. Intact or spayed females or neutered male cats being reated with exogenous progestins.
l1. Clinical Signs
A. Rapid, massive enlargement of all glands, which may outgrow the blood supply and begin to ulcerate
(Figure 46.1).
B.
 Tachycardia is found in some affected cats.
C. Affected cats are usually otherwise healthy, although they may be quite thin, especially if they are also
pregnant.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Physical examination.
History of recent estrus cycles or progestagin therapy.
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
Mammary neoplasia:
1. Usually does not affect all the glands simultaneously to the same massive extent.
2. Is not common in young cats.
Progesterone and Prolactin-Rerated Disorders; Aorenal Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
S6t
(a)
(b)
Fgure 46.1  (a and b) Feline mammary fibroadenomatous hyperplasia in an 18-month-old queen. Notice the ulceration of the
caudal glands. (Courtesy of Dr. Jennifer Simon.)
496 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Mastitis:
1. Rarely occurs in queens.
2. When it does, it is a postpartum disorder.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
 Affected cats are often pregnant. Owners and veterinarians must be aware that removing the effect of
progesterone, medically or surgically, will terminate the pregnancy.
B
Remove the source of progesterone:
1. This is usually accomplished by a flank approach for ovariohysterectomy.
2. The progesterone receptor blocker, aglepristone, 20 mg/kg on day 1 (or 10 mg/kg on days 1 and 2),
SC, once weekly has also been used successfully:
a. Resolution occurs after 1-4 weeks
h. Pregnant cats reated with aglepristone aborted and subsequently developed endomerritis, which
necessitated ovariohysterectomy.
C.
There are reports of a few pregnant queens with mammary hyperplasia that were not treated and had
a successful pregnancy:
1. One was able to nurse her litter.
2. Others have not nursed, and the kittens were hand-reared or died.
D.
 Mastectomy could be considered for necrotic or severely ulcerated glands, but this is usually not necessary.
E.
Abscesses of the hyperplastic tissue have been managed by surgical drainage and antibiotic therapy.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
Excellent following ovariohysterectomy or discontinuation of exogenous progestins. Resolution is
expected over 1-4 weeks, depending upon the severity of the condition.
B.
If these fail, aglepristone can be used as described above, and is likely to be effective.
VIll. Prevention
A.
Ovariohysterectomy.
Avoid exogenous progestin therapy in cats.
OTHER UNDUE RESPONSES TO PROGESTERONE
Progestins induce significant adrenal suppression, especially in cats.
I1.
 Progestins cause insulin resistance in both dogs and cats and their administration can cause overt
diabetes mellitus (Chapter 15).
A.
 In cats, progestin-induced diabetes is reported exclusively with the use of exogenous progestins, not as
a result of endogenous progesterone.
B.
 On rare occasions, diabetes mellitus develops in bitches as a result of endogenous progesterone during
normal diestrus or pregnancy:
1. Assuming that glucose toxicity is controlled with insulin therapy before extensive pancreatic β-cell
apoptosis occurs, diabetes will resolve when diestrus ends and progesterone concentrations wane,
provided there is no other underlying case of β-cell destruction.
2. f pancreatic β-cells are stillfunctional, the need for exogenous insulin will abruptly disappear when
progesterone concentrationsfall.
 3. Great care must be taken to avoid insulin overdosage and potentially fatal hypoglycemia at this time.
Ill. In bitches, progesterone can induce mammary gland production and secretion of growth hormone,
which adds to the insulin resistance associated with endogenous progesterone, and results in diabetes mellitus
with some features of acromegaly.
Iv.
Exogenous long-acting progestins can cause a change in coat color at the injection site.
V.
 Exogenous progestins may promote mammary tumor growth.
Vl. Ovarian luteal cysts produce progesterone, which will suppress the next estrous cycle and cause a
prolonged interestrual interval.
Progesterone and Prolactin-Rerated Disorders; Aorenaf Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
497
Progesterone Deficiency
Pathogenesis
● Luteal insufficiency, hypoluteoidism, results in serum progesterone concentrations below the
reference range.
Signalment
● Pregnant bitches or queens with pregnancy loss.
● Nonpregnant bitches with recurrent, frequent estrus cycles occurring at < 5 month intervals.
Classical Signs
● Spontaneous abortion or premature labor in pregnant bitches.
● Short interestrual intervals of less than 4-5 months, and infertility in bitches.
Diagnosis
● Measurerment of serum or plasma progesterone concentrations during pregnancy or diestrus.
Differential Diagnosis
● More common causes of pregnancy loss in bitches and queens, such as infection or endometritis
● In bitches with abnormal cycles, erroneous history of dates of previous estrous cycles.
● In bitches, other causes of infertility.
● Ovulation failure.
Treatment
● In cases where insufficient progesterone is documented, progestin therapy may be helpful to
 maintain pregnancy.
● Progestin therapy to prolong the interestrual interval in bitches with recurrent short interestrual
intervals.
● Ovariohysterectomy in animals not intended for future breeding.
Pathogenesis
4
 Luteal insuffciency, that is, hypoluteoidism, results in serum progesterone concentrations below the
reference range.
 B. The pathophysiology is not understood, but in bitches, prolactin and relaxin, as well as progesterone,
may be involved.
C.
 Hypoluteoidism is an uncommon cause of pregnancy loss in dogs and cats:
 2. A premature drop in progesterone concentration below 2ng/mL usually results in embryonic death
'roqel aeuand ro ruooqe snoannods suanbasqns pue qeap ieiag ruodosan juanbasqns pue
depending on the stage of gestation at which it occurs.
 3. In bitches, prolactin is the main luteotropic hormone from mid-pregnancy onward:
a. Relaxin is synthesized by the placenta in bitches and queens, beginning as early as day 20
of gestation and continuing throughout pregnancy. It declines rapidly after parturition or abortion:
1) In pigs, relaxin stimulates prolactin release.
2) Whether it does so in bitches and queens, and thus might have a luteotropic role, is unknown
at this time.
498 Clinicar Endocrinorogy of Companion Animals
4. Fetal death in bitches and queens may be the cause of declining progesterone concentrations, as well
as the result of it
D. Hypoluteoidism has been reported and studied mainly in bitches, but premature luteolysis and the
subsequent decline in progesterone and termination of pregnancy can also occur in queens.
F. In normal nonpregnant bitches, the corpora lutea persist and produce progesterone for a duration of
and in concentrations similar to that of pregnancy (i.e., for at least 60 days) after every heat:
1. When the normal duration and concentration of progesterone is diminished by exogenous luteolytic
agents such as prostaglandins or if corpus luteum function is spontaneously insufficient, the next estrus
cycle usually occurs earlier than normal.
2. When the interval between heat cycles is less than 5 months, bitches are often infertile.
Il.Signalment
A.
 Pregnant bitches or queens with pregnancy loss.
B。
 Nonpregnant bitches with recurrent, frequent estrus cycles occurring at <5 month intervals. German
Ill. Clinical Signs
A. Early embryonic death (which would present as apparent failure to conceive), spontaneous abortion, or
premature labor in pregnant bitches or queens.
B. Recurrent short interestrual intervals of less than 4-5 months in bitches, which is usually also associated
with infertility.
IV. Diagnosis
A. Documentation of progesterone deficiency by measuring serum or plasma concentrations during
pregnancy or diestrus.
pregnancy-specific hormone relaxin in serum and/or by monitoring fetal viability and development with
ultrasound. Relaxin is produced by the placenta and therefore its subsequent absence would indicate that
pregnancy does not exist.
C.
 Exclusion of more common causes of embryonic or fetal death or premature labor, such as infection.
D.
 For infertile animals with short interestrual intervals:
1. Confirmation that other common causes of infertility were not involved.
2. Documentation that ovulation did occur by the finding of serum progesterone concentrations of
greater than 10 ng/mL in late estrus or early diestrus.
V.1
 Differential Diagnoses
A.
 More common causes of pregnancy loss in bitches and queens, such as infection or endometritis.
B.
 In bitches with abnormal cycles, erroneous history of dates of previous estrous cycles.
C.
 In bitches, irrespective of interestrual interval, other causes of infertility, such as:
1. Poor semen quality.
2. Insemination during estrus at times other than the optimal ferile period.
 3. Only one insemination during the cycle.
4. Lack of intrauterine deposition of frozen-thawed semen.
D. Ovulation failure, rather than premature luteolysis, in bitches with short interestrual intervals.
 Ovulation failure,rather than premature luteolysis, in bitches or queens with presumed, but unconfirmed
(by ultrasound or serum concentrations of relaxin) early embryonic death.
Vl. Treatment
  no s     p si asnd  arm sn  
fetal death, or premature labor such as infection, have been excluded, progestin therapy may be helpful to
maintain pregnancy:
1. Initiation of treatment is based on history of when previous pregnancy loss occurred and by
monitoring of serum progesterone concentrations.
Progesterone and Prolactin-Rerated Disorders; Aorenal Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
499
2. A variety of progestins have been used to treat apparent luteal insufficiency in pregnant bitches.
These include:
a. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) 0.1 mg/kg, orally, once daily.
h. Altrenogest, 0.088 mg/kg, orally, once daily.
C. Progesterone in oil solution, 1-2 mg/kg, IM, every other day.
3. To avoid prolonged gestation:
a. Orally administered progestins are discontinued several days prior to the expected due
date.
h. Progesterone in oil is discontinued at day 50-55 of gestation.
4. Adverse effects:
a. In addition to possible prolonged gestation, in people, progestins can cause congenital abnor-
virilization of the external genitalia of female feruses, especially when administered during the first
4 months of pregnancy.
b. Facial deformities were reported in one of four pups in a litter from a bitch treated with MPA
for hypoluteoidism.
 For infertile bitches with interestrual intervals of <4 months that were properly bred to fertile males
and are known to have ovulated:
1. The next estrus cycle may be suppressed with either:
a. Megestrol acetate, 2mg/kg, PO, q 24h, for 8 days.
b. Chlormadinone, 0.5 mg/kg, PO, q 24h, for 8 days.
 2. Treatment begins within the first 3 days of the onset of proestrus (first day on which a sanguineous
vulvar discharge is observed).
ads is ai uo suu paarq ieudo sn a a e on prq aq pnos s '
ous cycle following treatment.
Vll.  Prognosis
A.
The prognosis for maintaining a normal pregnancy in a bitch with suspected hypoluteoidism is
somewhat guarded because the diagnosis is difficult to confirm in the first place.
B.
 However, in animals where other causes of pregnancy loss have been excluded and in which fetal death
does not pre-date low serum concentrations of progesterone, treatment has resulted in full-term pregnancies.
Litter size, however, has been smaller than normal.
L.
 The prognosis for achieving normal pregnancy in previously infertile bitches with interestrual intervals
of <4-5 months is apparently good when they are bred on the first spontaneous cycle after having had one
cycle suppressed.
VIll. Prevention
A
 For animals not critical to the breeding program, ovariohysterectomy.
B.
 In a bitch with normal estrous cycles, avoid estrus induction for the sole purpose of shortening the
interestrual interval.
Prolactin
Pathogenesis (General)
A
Prolactin is the hormone that initiates and maintains lactation.
In bitches, prolactin is also luteotropic.
C
Serum concentrations rise during pregnancy and through the first postpartum week. The secretion of
prolactin is mediated by dopamine.
d ss ose snq u rd ne sno se snso sd u do  '
secretion.
 E. Stimulation of the chest wall, mammary gland, and nipple increase prolactin secretion.
500 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Galactorrhea (or so-called False Pregnancy)
Pathogenesis
● Galactorrhea is lactation that is not associated with pregnancy.
● The decrease in serum concentrations of progesterone at the end of diestrus in bitches causes an
increase in prolactin secretion.
● Galactorrhea rarely, if ever, occurs in cats.
Classical Signs
● Sexually intact bitch at the end of diestrus (i.e., approximately 60 days after heat).
● Galactorrhea, nesting, and maternal behavior.
Signalment
● Cycling bitches, 60-90 days following estrus.
Diagnosis
● History of recent heat and not having been pregnant.
● Presence of lactation.
Differential Diagnosis
● Pregnancy.
● Mastitis.
● Mammary neoplasia.
Treatment
● None required. Spontaneous recovery occurs, usually in 1-2 weeks.
O Galactorrhea is considered to be normal in bitches.
Prognosis
● Excellent, although frequently recurrent with subsequent cycles
Pathogenesis
 A decrease in serum progesterone concentrations stimulates increased prolactin concentrations:
1. In bitches, progesterone concentrations drop at parturition, at the end of normal diestrus, after ova-
riectomy performed during diestrus, and after discontinuation of exogenous progestin administration.
2.
 Sometimes this decline in progesterone concentration is of sufficient magnitude to cause galactor-
rhea, that is, lactation that is not associated with pregnancy.
 In intact bitches, galactorrhea, nesting, and maternal behavior occur so commonly at the end of dies-
trus that they are considered to be normal:
1. The condition is usually referred to as false pregnancy or pseudopregnancy, but these are misno-
 mers because the endocrinologic events (low progesterone, high prolactin), and physiologic manifesta-
 tions are typical of the immediate postpartum period, not of pregnancy.
2.
Why some bitches and some cycles have overt clinical signs and others do not is unknown, but
non-endocrine factors, such as relative over-nutrition, are known to be involved.
C
Galactorrhea is rare in queens.
11.
Signalment
A.
Cycling bitches, 60-90 days following estrus.
Progesterone and Profactin-Related Disorders; Adrenal Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
501
B
 In bitches, shortly after ovariectomy performed during diestrus, or discontinuation of exogenous
progestins.
.!.
Clinical Signs
Lactation not associated with pregnancy:
1. The quantity and quality of mammary secretions are variable.
 2. They may be minimal and watery to overt dripping of milk.
B
 Nesting and maternal behavior, such as “adopting” toys.
IV.
Diagnosis
A.
Physical examination findings.
B
 History of recent (approximately 60 days ago) heat or discontinuation of progestin administration.
Differential Diagnoses
4
Pregnancy:
1. It is important to exclude pregnancy as a diagnosis.
 2. If a bitch is pregnant and displaying nesting behavior with lactation, parturition is imminent and
immediate preparations should be made.
 3. Several of the medications used to treat galactorrhea are abortifacient.
Mastitis rarely, if ever, occurs with false pregnancy:
1. Mastitis, which occurs during postparrum lactation, might be a consideration in a stray bitch with
unknown history of recent parturition.
2. Physical examination would likely find postparrum lochia (vulvar discharge).
Mammary neoplasia may cause abnormal secretions from the nipple of the affected gland, but the
secretion is not milk.
Vl.
Treatment
A
 The clinical signs of false pregnancy typically resolve spontaneously in 1-2 weeks. Treatment is not
usually necessary.
B
Medical therapy:
1. If treatment is desired, typically because of the behavioral signs more so than lactation, options are:
a.
 Cabergoline (Galastop?, Ceva Vetem; Dostinex?, Pfizer), 5 μg/kg, orally, once daily for 4-7 days.
b. Metergoline (Contralac?, Virbac) 0.1 mg/kg, orally, twice daily for 8 days.
2. Both are very effective in suppressing lactation.
 3. Both will terminate the pregnancy if one is present and unrecognized.
 4. Side effects are gastrointestinal upset.
 5. Progestins will also suppress lactation, but clinical signs often recur when progestins are
discontinued.
C
 Ovariohysterectomy will prevent recurrence.
Vll.
Prognosis
Excellent, although recurrence with subsequent cycles is common.
B.
Galactorrhea is not associated with any other reproductive disorders:
1. To the contrary, it provides strong evidence that the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis is intact.
During the preceding cycle, ovulation occurred, luteal function was sufficient to cause normal mam-
 mary development, and prolactin concentrations were adequate to cause lactation.
Vlll. Prevention
A
Ovariohysterectomy.
Sex Hormones and Adrenal Hyperplasia or Neoplasia
Pathophysiology
Sex steroid hormones are synthesized in the adrenal glands from cholesterol:
1. Synthetic pathways are the same as in the gonads
502  Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animats
(Figure 45.1).
B. Corticotropin (ACTH) effectively stimulates production of cortisol and of sex hormones and steroid
hormone intermediates of adrenal origin:
1. This occurs in normal dogs as well as dogs with non-adrenal illness and no evidence of hyperadreno-
corticism.
 2. The changes in serum concentrations of sex hormones and steroid hormone intermediates parallel
those in cortisol concentrations
C. Estrogens:
1. Unlike the situation in ferrets, no reports exist of excessive adrenal production of estrogens causing
clinical hyperestrogenism (Chapter 45) in dogs or cats.
2. In normal male and female dogs, intact or neutered, serum estradiol concentrations do not increase
in response to ACTH administration.
 3. A few dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have been reported to have normal basal estradiol concentra
tions with post-ACTH concentrations above the reference range, but no clinical signs associated with
hyperestrogenism were present.
D.Androgens:
1. An adrenal source of excess testosterone causing pathologic virilization in dogs has not been
documented:
a. Some dogs with adrenal dysfunction have been reported to have serum testosterone concentra-
 tions in the reference range before and after ACTH administration.
b. Others have normal basal concentrations with post-ACTH concentrations of testosterone and/or
androstenedione above the reference range, but no clinical signs of pathologic virilization, such as
the development of benign prostatic hyperplasia in a castrated male or masculinization of external
genitalia in a female.
s pannsea aun inq 'op anen piaeds e un paiodan aram souape peauad sano "
testosterone, which varied between high and low concentrations, did not correlate with development
of the adenomas
2. Rarely, an adrenal source of testosterone has been documented to cause clinical signs in cats:
 a. An adrenocortical tumor in a 13-year-old neutered male cat without hypercortisolemia but with
urine odor, urine spraying, and an enlarging face.
h. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused virilization of the external genitalia in a 6-month-old
female calico cat.
E. Progesterone:
1. In health, the adrenal contribution to systemic progesterone concentrations is negligible.
2. In healthy male and female dogs, intact and neutered, and in healthy neutered and intact female cats,
ACTH administration causes a concomitant increase in serum concentrations of progesterone and
cortisol:
a. This normal response must be taken into account before attributing pathology to the finding of
 increased serum concentrations of progesterone or 17α-hydroxyprogesterone, especially in animals
with hypercortisolemia
h. The correlation between serum concentrations of cortisol and progesterone in response to ACTH is
not surprising, given that progesterone and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone, a metabolite of progesterone,
are obligate precursors of cortisol.
c. In healthy bitches during estrus, diestrus, and pregnancy, serum concentrations of
17α-hydroxyprogesterone are higher than in spayed bitches with hyperadrenocorticism.
F.17α-hydroxyprogesterone:
1. Pathologic adrenal production of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone in the absence of hypercortisolemia can
cause clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities similar to those seen with classic hyperadrenocorticism
(Chapter 5).
Progesterone and Prolactin-Related Disorders; Adrenat Dysfunction and Sex Hormones
503
2. Because serum cortisol concentrations in these cases are within reference ranges, the situation has
been called atypical hyperadrenocorticism.
3. To diagnose excessive adrenal 17α-hydroxyprogesterone production:
a. The initial diagnostic approach is as described for hyperadrenocorticism.
b. When non-endocrine laboratory and diagnostic results are supportive of a diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism but corisol concentrations are within the reference ranges, measuring
17α-hydroxyprogesterone and other sex hormones can be considered.
C. It is important to first exclude hypercortisolemia because progesterone and/or 17α-hydroxyproges-
 terone typically parallel the changes in cortisol as described above.
G. Taken together, the studies in dogs and cats suggest that—with the exception of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone,
which increases concomitantly with cortisol in normal animals and in animals with adrenal and non-adrenal
illness—an adrenal source of pathologic concentrations of sex hormones causing clinical signs typical of the
sex hormone's biologic activity is extremely rare.
References and Further Readings
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL,et al. Serum 17-α-hydroxyprogesterone and corticosterone concentrations in dogs
with nonadrenal neoplasia and dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2005;227:1762-1767.
Benitah N,Feldman EC, Kass PH,et al. (2005) Evaluation of serum 17α-hydroxy progesterone concentration after
adrministration of ACTH in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. JAr Vet Med Assoc 2005;227:1095-1101.
Bromel C, Feldman E, Davidson A,et al. Serurm 17α-hydroxyprogesterone concentrations during the reproductive cycle in
healthy dogs and dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2010;236:1208-1214.
Burstyn U. Management of mastitis and abscessation of mammary glands secondary to fibroadenomatous hyperplasia in
a primiparturient cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2010;236:326-329.
Corrada Y, Arias D, Rodriguez M, et al. Combination dopamine agonist and prostaglandin agonist treatment of cystic
endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex in the bitch. Theriogenotogy 2006;66:1557-1559.
Dow SW, Olson PN, Rosychuk RAW, et al. Perineal adenomas and hypertestosteronermia in a spayed bitch with pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Arm vet Med Assoc 1988;192:1439-1441.
Fieni F. Clinical evaluation of the use of aglepristone, with or without cloprostenol, to treat cystic endometrial hyperplasia-
pyometra complex in bitches. Theriogenofogy 2006;66:1550-1556.
Frank L, Rohrbach B, Bailey E, et al. Steroid hormone concentration profiles in healthy intact and neutered dogs before and
after cosyntropin administration. Dormest Anim Endocrinol 2003;24:43-57.
Frank L, Schmeitzel L, Oliver J. Steroidogenic response of adrenal tissue after administration of ACTH to dogs with
hypercortisolemia. J Ar Vet Med Assoc 2001;218:214-216.
Gorlinger S, Kooistra HS, van den Brock A, et al. Treatment of fibroadenornatous hyperplasia in cats with aglepristone.
J Vet Int Med 2002;16:710-713.
Hll K, Scott-Moncrieff C, Koshko M, et al. Secretion of sex horrmones in dogs with adrenal dysfunction. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2005;226:556-561.
Johnson CA. High-risk pregnancy and hypoluteoidism in the bitch. Theriogenotogy 2008;70:1424-1430.
A clinical study. Theriogenology 2007;67:1032-1038.
Wanke MM, Loza ME, Rebuelto M. Progestin treatment for infertility in bitches with short interestrous interval.
Theriogenology 2006;66:1579-1582.
CHAPTER 47
Pathologic Reproductive Endocrinology
in Other Species
John Keen and Michelle L. Campbell-Ward
Granulosa-Theca Cell Tumor in the Mare (GTCT)
Pathogenesis
● A benign tumor arising from secretory cells of the ovarian follicle
Classical Signs
● All ages are affected, but predominantly young adult mares.
● Behavioral changes occur due to hormones released from neoplastic granulosa and/or theca cells.
Diagnosis
● Rectal examination with/without rectal ultrasonography.
● Elevated plasma inhibin and/or other hormones from the GTCT.
Treatment
● Surgical removal.
1. Pathogenesis
A. GTCT is caused by a tumor, almost invariably benign, arising from the secretory cells of the ovarian
follicles, that is, granulosa and/or theca interna layers. It is often hormonally active, producing the clinical
signs listed below. Production of inhibin by the tumor cells is mainly responsible for the inactive contralat-
 eral ovary, by suppressing follicle-stimulating hormone release from the pituitary gland.
Il. Signalment
A. All ages are affected but predominantly young adult mares. There are no known breed predispositions.
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Anirmals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
504
Pathofogic Reproductive Endocrinology in Other Species 505
1218
Figure 47.1 Appearance of a granulosa-theca cell tumor per rectum using two-dimensional "B" mode ultrasound. Note the
IIl. Clinical Signs
 GTCT is the most common hormonally active neoplasm in the equine ovary. Behavioral and reproductive
changes are common:
A.Stallion-like behavior and phenotype:
1. Mares may become aggressive and show, for example, mounting behavior.
 2. Some mares may develop a thick nuchal crest or enlarged clitoris.
3. Stallion-like changes occur when neoplastic thecal cells comprise a significant portion of the tumor
(commonly).
B.
 Mares may be anovulatory, showing a lack of cycling throughout the breeding season.
 Nymphomania or persistent estrus may occur.
D.
 Gastrointestinal signs may occur as a complication of usually larger tumors.
1. Colic and weight loss are the most common signs.
 2. Adhesions, torsion, and hemorrhage of a tumor have also been reported.
E.
 Some mares may have no clinical signs.
IV. Diagnosis
A.
 Rectal examination reveals a large ovary, with a small contralateral ovary. The tumor may or may not
 be lumpy on palpation.
B. Per rectum ultrasound examination usually reveals multiple hypoechoic multiloculated cyst-like struc
 t a e p e  si o e  s
1. Occasionally GTCTs have solid tissue echogenicity or a single cystic structure is seen.
 2. There should be a small contralateral ovary with little or no follicular activity.
C. Hormone assays may be used to aid or confirm a diagnosis of GTCT. One should note that hormone
levels released from normal and abnormal ovaries may periodically fluctuate raising the possibility of false-
negative or false-positive results:
1. Inhibin: this hormone is high (>0.7 ng/mL) in most cases (~90%).
  ) (    
a. Normal mares can also have high levels.
h. Those exhibiting stallion-like behavior are more likely to have high testosterone.
3. Progesterone levels are usually low. If progesterone is greater than 1 ng/mL, then GTCT is unlikely.
4. Estradiol is often high, but may be normal.
 5. Anti-Millerian hormone has recently been suggested to offer potential as a diagnostic test for GTCT
but commercial assays are not currently available.
D. Histopathology of a surgically removed ovary (Figure 47.2) is required to fully confirm the diagnosis
of GTCT.
E.
 Reevaluation after a specified time period is recommended if doubts over the diagnosis exist.
506 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 47.2 Appearance of surgically removed granulosa-theca cell tumor following sectioning. Note the multiple fluid-filled
Cavities containing serous fluid. (Image courtesy of Miss Safia Barakzai MRCVS).
V.
Differential Diagnoses
A
 Differential diagnoses for the clinical signs include:
1. Psychological behavioral changes.
2. Gestation.
3. Chromosomal abnormalities (intersex).
K
Differential diagnoses for a palpable and/or ultrasonographically large ovary are:
Transitional period ovary: multiple nondominant follicles.
2.
Gestation: secondary follicular activity may be prominent in the first 2 months of gestation.
3.
Hemorrhagic anovulatory follicle.
4.
Other ovarian neoplastic masses are rare:
a.
Teratoma: these have no effect on behavior the contralateral ovary, or cycling.
 Dysgerminoma: again no effect on behavior, the contralateral ovary, or cycling. These can how-
ever metastasize.
C.
Cystic adenoma: little effect on contralateral ovary or cycling but may secrete testosterone.
d.1
Lymphoma: no effect on behavior, the contralateral ovary, or cycling.
5. Ovarian abscessation. This is rare in the absence of prior interventional procedures such as follicu-
lar aspiration. The appearance is a thick-walled capsule containing variably hyperechoic material.
VI.
Treatment
A
 thesia) and laparoscopy methods have been described.
Vll.:
 Prognosis
Good. Normal ovarian activity will usually return within 12 months (average 7 months).
VIlll. Prevention
A
There are no known preventative measures.
Cystic Ovarian Disease in Rodents
Pathogenesis
● Cysts containing clear, serous fluid may develop spontaneously from the rete ovari in middle-aged
 to older rodents, especially guinea pigs and gerbils.
Pathofogic Reproductive Endocrinology in Other Species507
Classical Signs
● Non-pruritic bilaterally symmetrical alopecia of the flanks and lumbosacral area.
● Abdominal distension.
● Anorexia, depression, and/or respiratory difficulty.
Diagnosis
● Abdominal palpation.
● Ultrasonographic examination of the ovaries.
Treatment
● Ovariohysterectomy or ovariectomy.
Pathogenesis
A.
Cysts containing clear, serous fluid may develop spontaneously from the rete ovari in middle-aged to
older rodents, especially guinea pigs and gerbils. The cysts tend to increase in size over time and can be up to
7cm in diameter in guinea pigs and up to 5 cm diameter in gerbils. They are usually bilateral, but unilateral
disease has been reported. Cysts may be singular or multilobular.
B.
 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia, mucometra, endometritis, and fibroleiomyomas may occur concurrently.
C.
 The cysts may be functional, that is, cause an increase in serum estrogen or progesterone. Clinical signs
often reflect both elevated hormone levels and the space-occupying nature of the cysts.
Il.Signalment
A.
 Cystic ovarian disease is a common condition of female guinea pigs with a reported incidence of 76%.
It is most often diagnosed in guinea pigs 2-4 years of age.
Cystic ovaries also occur commonly in aged female gerbils (incidence 20-50%).
C.
The incidence in hamsters is 2%.
Il1. Clinical Signs
 Non-pruritic alopecia (usually bilaterally symmetrical) often over the flank and lumbosacral area.
B.
 Abdominal distension.
C
 Enlargement of the external genitalia.
D.
 Failure to breed or reduced litter size.
E.
Anorexia or reduced appetite.
Depression.
G.
 Respiratory difficulty in severe cases.
IV. Diagnosis
4.
 The cysts are usually initially detected during examination via abdominal palpation.
B.
Ultrasonography of the reproductive structures can confirm the diagnosis.
Histopathology of surgically excised ovaries of affected animals reveals cysts lined by low cuboidal to
columnar epithelial cells. Solitary cilia or tufts of cilia are present on the luminal surface of some cells and
there may be marked compression of the ovarian tissue. In advanced cases, only remnants of the ovary are
found.
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
 Alopecia of pregnancy, that is, bilateral non-pruritic flank alopecia seen in guinea pig sows in advanced
pregnancy or early lactation.
B.
 Ovarian or other neoplasia.
C.
Ascites.
D.
 Respiratory disease.
508 Clinical Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 47.3 Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice for guinea pigs with ovarian cystic disease. Note the large
fluid-filled cysts present on both ovaries.
Vl.
Treatment
A.
Surgical removal of the ovaries (ovariohysterectomy or ovariectomy) is the treatment of choice (Figure 47.3).
B.
 Percutaneous drainage of cysts has been reported and may provide immediate relief from the pressure
and pain associated with cysts but is not curative.
C
Termporary improvements in clinical signs have been seen with intramuscular administration of 100 IU human
id e pie un ss omi rp n e ao ro ssp aai r m ao dono s
D
Alternative adjunctive therapeutic options aimed at suppressing sex steroidogenesis and associated
clinical signs in guinea pigs prior to surgery include:
1. Leuprolide acetate (30 day depot of 200 μg/guinea pig IM).
2. Placement of a 4.7 mg deslorelin implant SC.
L
Nutritional support and analgesia are critical presurgical considerations.
Vll.Prognosis
A.
 The prognosis is good in the absence of concurrent disease. A degree of permanent alopecia may
remain following surgery.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
Ovariohysterectomy or ovariectomy in nonbreeding animals will prevent the condition.
Follicular Stasis in Pet Reptiles
Pathogenesis
● Hormonal disturbances allow ovarian follicles to form without progression to ovulation. Large
bunches of follicles can develop to occupy a significant proportion of the coelomic cavity.
● Coelomitis may develop if vitellin/yolk leakage occurs.
Classical signs
● Anorexia.
● Lethargy.
● Coelomic distension (lizards).
Pathologic Reproductive Endocrinofogy in Other Species 509
Diagnosis
● Radiography and/or ultrasonography.
Treatment
● Coeliotomy and ovariosalpingectomy.
Pathogenesis
A
 Follicular stasis (sometimes referred to as preovulatory egg binding) is a relatively common problem in
pet reptiles. Hormonal disturbances allow ovarian follicles to form without progression to ovulation, but the
species, absence of a male, stress or other medical conditions are thought to contribute.
B.
 The follicles may become atretic and be resorbed without illness. However if resorption of follicles does
tion of the coelomic cavity is occupied. The space-occupying nature of the follicles can then cause secondary
problems, such as respiratory difficulty or gastrointestinal obstruction.
C. Additionally, inflammation of the follicles and ovary frequently develops and commensal bacteria (e.g.:
Salmonella sp.) may inoculate the yolked follicles during vitellogenesis. Yolk, containing vitellin, may leak
out of the follicles into the surrounding tissue and a severe coelomitis can result.
11.
 Signalment
A.
 Adult female tortoises and lizards isolated from males seem to be particularly prone to this condition.
I. Clinical Signs
A.
Anorexia.
B.
Lethargy.
C
Coelomic distension (lizards).
D.
 Early cases may have no clinical signs.
IV. Diagnosis
A. The history and physical examination may provide a tentative diagnosis in some patients; for example,
in larger lizards the follicles may be palpable.
B. Radiography and/or ultrasonography are the preferred noninvasive tools for confirmation of the diag-
nosis. Ultrasound examination of the ovaries in tortoises is achieved via the prefemoral fossae (immediately
in front of the hind limbs).
C.
 Plasma chemistry may show elevated triglycerides, calcium, phosphorus, and albumin associated with vitel-
logenesis. If the condition is chronic, hypoalbuminemia from anorexia and hepatic lipidosis may be seen. Hema-
 tology will often reveal anemia of chronic disease and leukocytosis associated with inflammation and/or infection.
V.
 Differential Diagnoses
A. As the clinical signs tend to be nonspecific (anorexia and lethargy), a thorough diagnostic workup
 including gathering detailed information on husbandry is indicated in most cases.
B.
 Important differential diagnoses to consider include:
1. Postovulatory egg binding.
2.
Traumatic yolk coelomitis.
3.
Gastrointestinal impaction.
4. Gastrointestinal parasitism/enteritis.
5. Urolithiasis.
Vl. Treatment
A.
 Improvement of diet and husbandry (including appropriate photoperiod and the ability to thermoregu-
late properly), ability to have social interaction with a male, and providing a suitable nesting area for non-ill
 patients with follicular stasis may be sufficient to resolve the problem.
510 Clinicar Endocrinofogy of Companion Animals
Figure 47.4 Coeliotomy in a Hermann's tortoise for surgical treatment of chronic follicular stasis. Note the large grape-like
bunch of yolk-filled follicles.
B.
 For patients that present with illness, ovariectomy or ovariosalpingectomy is indicated once stabilized
(Figure 47.4). The coelormic cavity will need to be lavaged copiously during surgery to remove yolk that may
have leaked from the friable follicles before or during surgery.
Vll. Prognosis
A.
 In cases in which coelomitis has developed, the prognosis is poor if aggressive medical therapy and
surgical correction is not promptly provided.
Vlll. Prevention
A.
 Ensure appropriate husbandry conditions are provided for captive reptiles, including a biologically
suitable photoperiod and thermal gradient.
B.
 Provide a nesting site for females, regardless of whether they are housed with a male or not.
c.
Consider ovariosalpingectomy for nonbreeding animals.
References and Further Readings
Bailey MT, Troedsson MHT, Wheaton JE. Inhibin concentrations in mares with granulosa cell tumours. Theriogenotogy
2002;57:1885-1895.
normal equine 0varies. Theriogenology 2008;70:968-977.
Collins BR. Endocrine diseases of rodents. Vet Clin North Am. Exot. Anim. Pract 2008;11:153-162.
Eatwell K. Lizards. In: Meredith A, Johnson-Delaney, C, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Exotic Pets, Sth edn. Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, 2010, pp. 273-293.
Johnson JD. Urogenital system. In: Girling, SJ, Raiti, P, eds. BSAVA Manuat of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, 2004, pp. 261-272.
Johnson-Delaney C. Guinea pigs, chinchillas, degus and duprasi. In: Meredith A, Johnson-Delaney, C, eds. BSAVA Mamual of
Exotic Pets, Sth edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2010, pp. 28-62.
1987;24:335-339.
McCue PM, Roser JF, Munro CJ,et al. Granulosa celtumours of the equine ovary. Vet Clin N Arm - Equine 2006;
22:799-817.
O'Rourke DP. Disease problems of guinea pigs. In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents -
Clinicat Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St. Louis: Saunders, 2004, pp. 245-254.
Orr H. Rodents: neoplastic and endocrine disease. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, eds. BSAVA Manual of Rodents and Ferrets,
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2009, pp. 181-192.
Pathologic Reproductive Endocrinorogy in Other Species511
Percy DH, Barthold SW. Pathology of Laboratory Rodents and Rabbits, 3rd edn. Ames : Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
Sayers I, Smith I. Mice, rats, hamsters and gerbils. In: Meredith A, Johnson-Delaney C, eds. BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets,
Sth edn. Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2010, pp. 1-27.
Yarborough TB. Ovariectomy techniques. In: Robinson NE, Sprayberry KA, eds. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine 6,
St Louis: WB Saunders, 2009, pp. 781-784.
ndex
'saqei on proq ui asoq isainatg on iajai soa ui siaqunu aaed ranon
acromegaly
prognosis,69
atypical syndromes
cats
signalment,67
cats see adrenal tumors, cats, 814
clinical signs, 429-30
treatment,68-9
dogs see adrenal tumors, dogs, 66-9
diagnosis, 431-3
rodents and birds
pathogenesis, 427-8
clinical signs, 96
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
prevention,435
diagnosis, 97-8
clinical signs, 479
prognosis, 435
pathogenesis, 96
diagnosis, 479-80
signalment,428-9
prevention,98
pathogenesis, 479
treatment,432-5
prognosis,98
prevention,480
saop
signalment, 96
prognosis,480
clinical signs,423
treatment,98
signalment, 479
diagnosis, 423
adrenocorticotropic hormone
treatment, 480
diabetes mellitus, 423
(ACTH)
blood glucose, canine diabetes mellitus
dyspnea, 423
administration, 30-31,34
continuous monitoring,
pathogenesis, 422
basal and post-ACTH cortisol
subcutaneous/interstitial
respiratory stridor, 423
concentrations, 57
concentration, 149-51
signalment, 423
basal plasma concentration, 107-8
hospital-generated serial
treatment,424
endogenous (basal) secretion, 74
concentration curves
ACTH see adrenocorticotropic
production, 3-4,4
glycemic control, 161
hormone (ACTH), 3-4,
 proportion, POMC peptides,
guidelines, evaluation,162,162
30-31,74-5,105-8
105-6
hypoglycemia, 163
acute renal failure (ARF)
simulation test, 25,25,74-5
increment, insulin dose and
Addison's disease, 14
stimulation test, 38, 39, 41, 50, 59
standard protocol, 161-2
hyperkalemia and hyponatremia,
synthetic,74
insulin dose and caloric intake
dogs, 15
adult-onset diabetes/noninsulin-
adjustment algorithm, 165, 168
ADH see anti-diuretic hormone
dependent diabetes, 169
measurement, capillary
{ADH), 437, 451
alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
concentration,152,152-3
adrenal tumors
hepatic hypoperfusion and
owners, home serial concentration
cats
cholestasis, 8
curves,160-161
clinical signs, 83, 83
serum,73
selection, meter, 149
diagnosis, 83-4
androgen-related disorders
venous blood, 150, 152
pathogenesis, 81-2
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 443
prevention,85
perineal adenomas,482-3
BPH see benign prostatic hyperplasia
prognosis,85
perineal hernia,481-2
(BPH), 478-80
signalment,83
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH)
treatment, 84
physiology, 451, 451
canine diabetic emergencies
dogs
plasma osmolality, 437
clinical signs, 203
clinical signs, 67, 67
APUDomas see gastrinoma, 254-5,
diagnosis, 203-5
diagnosis,67-8
258-9
differential diagnoses, 205
pathogenesis, 66, 66-7
ARF see acute renal failure (ARF),
pathogenesis,202-3
prevention,69
14, 15
 prognosis and prevention, 207-8
Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals, First Edition. Edited by Jacquie Rand.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
512
tndex 513
signalment, 203
chronic renal failure (CRF), 359
desoxycorticosterone pivalate
treatment,205-7
CIRCI see critical illness-related
(DOCP)
canine diabetes mellitus clinical signs,
corticosteroid insufficiency
glucocorticoid
145-6, 146
{CIRCI),29,38-42
supplementation,18
diagnosis, 146-7
CKD see chronic kidney disease
mineralocorticoid
pathogenesis, 144-5
(CKD), 172-3, 177, 188,
supplementation, 16
prevention,168
358-9,371
side effects, 17
prognosis,165
computed tomographic angiography
diabetes insipidus and PUPD, dogs
signalment,145
{CTA),234,235
clinical signs,438
treatment
continuous glucose monitoring
diagnosis
avoidance, insulin-induced
system (CGMS)
blood urea nitrogen, 443
hypoglycemia/dosing
Glucoday and Medtronic, 150
causes, body system, 447,447
errors,157
Guardian REAL-Time, 150,
computed tomography
blood glucose concentration,
150,151
(CT), 443
hospitalized dogs, 149-53
continuous rate infusion {CRI), 205,
hyponatremia, 446
chronic pancreatitis, 164-7
206,236
 magnetic resonance imaging
clinical hypoglycemia, 157-8
corticotropin-releasing hormone
(MRI),443
elecive general anesthesia, 149
{CRH), 409
urine specific gravity, 441, 442
fructosamine and glycosylated
CRF see chronic renal failure
water deprivation test,
hemoglobin, 160
(CRF), 359
444, 445
glucose concentrations
CRH see corticotropin-releasing
pathogenesis
monitoring,home,160-161
hormone (CRH), 409
causes, dogs, 438, 439-40
glycemic control, 164
CRI see continuous rate infusion
plasma osmolality, 437
goals, long-term
{CRI),205,206,236
polyuria and polydipsia, 437
 management, 153
critical illness-related corticosteroid
primary nephrogenic,438
 hospital-generated serial blood
insufficiency (CIRCI)
secondary nephrogenic, 438
glucose concentration
clinical signs, 38
prevention,448
curves,161-3
development, 29
prognosis,448
insulin dosing pens, 156, 156-7
diagnosis
signalment, 438
insulin resistance,163-4
ACTH simulation, 38
treatment, 447-8
monitoring, clinical signs and
conditions, hypotension,
diabetes insipidus, cats
response,159-60
40-41
clinical signs, 452
nutritional management, 158-9
dogs, delta cortisol
diagnosis
pancreatitis risk reduction, 165
concentration, 40,40
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH),
preparation,insulin,1536
hyponatremia and
454, 454
selection, blood glucose
hyperkalemia, 38
imaging, pituitary region, 455
meter, 149
identification,veterinary
water deprivation test, 453,453
sick dogs, 147-9
patients,38-40
pathogenesis, 451-2
canine hyperthyroidism
pathogenesis, 37-8
prevention,456
clinical signs, 292
prevention, 42
prognosis, 456
diagnosis, 292-3
prognosis,41-2
signalment, 452
pathogenesis, 291
research, human medicine, 29
treatment,456
prevention, 294
signalment, 38
diabetes mellitus (DM)
prognosis, 294
treatment, 41
canine see canine diabetes mellitus,
signalment, 292
CTA see computed tomographic
144-67
treatment, 293-4
angiography (CTA), 234,235
feline see feline diabetes mellitus,
CEH see cystic endometrial
 cystic endometrial hyperplasia
170-189
hyperplasia (CEH), 488
(CEH), 488
ferrets, rabbits and rodents
CGMS see continuous glucose
cystic ovarian disease, rodents
cataract formation, diabetic
monitoring system (CGMS),
clinical signs, 507
degu, 195
150-151
diagnosis, 507
diagnosis, 195
chronic kidney disease (CKD)
ovariohysterectomy, 508, 508
differential diagnoses, 196
feline diabetes mellitus, 172,
pathogenesis, 507
pathogenesis, 194
177,188
prevention,508
prevention,197
pathogenesis,hypercalcemia, 358-9
prognosis, 508
prognosis, 197
renal failure, 371
signalment,507
signalment,194-5
tertiary hyperparathyroidism, 359
treatment,508
treatment,196-7
514index
diabetes mellitus (DM) (cont'd)
overweight/obese and
feline DKA
horses
suffers, 222
clinical signs, 211
clinical signs, 192
proxies, measurements, 223
diagnosis, 211
diagnosis, 192
radiographic evaluation, 222
differential diagnoses, 212
differential diagnoses, 193
resting, metabolic
pathogenesis
pathogenesis, 191-2
profiles, 222-3
insulin deficiency, 209-10
prevention,193
differential diagnoses, 225
risk factors, 210
prognosis,193
pathogenesis
prevention,215
signalment, 192
diet and glucocorticoids, 220
prognosis, 215
treatment,193
inflammation and vascular
signalment, 211
 pet birds and reptiles see pet birds
dysfunction, 219-20
treatment
and reptiles, diabetes mellitus,
and insulin sensitivity,
acidosis, 213-14
198-200,392-3
218-19, 219
dehydrated, 212-13
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
obesity role, 219
fuid, electrolyte imbalances and
canine diabetic emergencies
risk factors, equine laminitis,
insulin therapy, 212
abnormalities, 203
218,218
food, 215
acidosis, 207
prevention,227
jnsulin,214-15
administration and monitoring,
prognosis,227
phosphorus, 213
IV fluid therapy, 205
signalment,220
potassium supplementation,
aerobic urine culture, 204
treatment
hypokalemic cats, 213, 213
correction and monitoring,
deeding and supplements,
feline diabetes mellitus
electrolyte abnormalities,
225-6
blood glucose concentration
205-6
exercise, 226
measurements,176,176
cCorrection, hyperglycemia, 206-7
medications, 226-7
diagnosis, 174-5
defined, 202
endocrine tests, chronic
pathogenesis
and HHS, 202-3
hypoadrenocorticism, 10, 11
amyloid deposition, pancreatic
median hospitalization, 207
endogenous ACTH (eACTH), 52, 54
islets,170,170,171
cats
 EPI see exocrine pancreatic
insulin resistance, 170, 170
electrolyte abnormalities, 213
insuffciency (EPI), 147, 165
insulin secretion measurements,
hyperosmolar hyperglycemia, 210
equine metabolic syndrome (EMS)
172, 172
intravenous fluid therapy and
see EMS/IR symdrome, horses,
 mechanism, type 2 diabetes
insulin administration,
218-27
development, 171, 171
213-14
ER see estrogen receptors (ER), 469
suppression, insulin secretion,
monitoring,212
estrogen receptors (ER), 469
172, 172
prognosis,215
estrogen-related disorders
prevention, 189
feline see feline DKA,209-15
hyperestrogenism see
prognosis,189
diabetic remisssion,175,186
hyperestrogenism, 469-74
signalment,173
DKA see diabetic ketoacidosis
mammary neoplasia see mammary
treatment
(DKA),202-7,210-15
neoplasia, 476-8
blood bleb, pisiform pad,
DOCP see desoxycorticosterone
pathogenesis
181, 183
pivalate (DOCP), 16-18
estrogen receptors (ER),469
blood glucose
gonads, 468-9
concentration,181,182,
eACTH see endogenous ACTH
steroidogenesis, 467, 468
184,184,187
(eACTH), 52, 54
vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse see
blood glucose curve, 180, 181
EMS/IR syndrome, horses
vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse,
controlled cats, doses of
clinical signs
474-6
insulin, 188-9
and chronic laminitis, foot,
exocrine pancreatic
diabetic remission, 175
220, 220
insufficiency (EPI)
dosing protocol, 178, 179,
chronic reproductive cycling
and diabetes mellitus, 165
180, 184,185-6
abnormalities, mares, 221
trypsin-like immunoreactivity
home monitoring, blood,
fat deposition, 221,221, 222
(TLI), 147
181, 183
relative hypertension, 221
oral hypoglycemic agents, 175-6
diagnosis
FAT see functional adrenal tumor
principles, 175
blood glucose curves, 224,225
{FAT),44,49, 52,57,63-4
follicular stasis, pet reptiles
dymamic tests, glycemic/insulin
feline-acquired skin fragility
clinical signs, 509
status, 224, 224
syndrome,84
diagnosis, 509
index 515
pathogenesis, 509
glucokinase (GCK), 240, 241
pathogenesis, 44
prevention, 510
GnRH see gonadotropin releasing
prevention,64
prognosis,510
hormone (GnRH), 472, 478
prognosis,63-4
signalment, 509
gonadotropin releasing hormone
signalment, 44-5
treatment
(GnRH)
treatment,55-60
coeliotomy, Hermann's tortoise,
administration,472
ferrets
510, 510
response,472
clinical signs, 88, 88-9
diet and husbandry, 509
testosterone, 478
diagnosis, 90
functional adrenal tumor (FAT)
granulosa-theca cell tumor
pathogenesis, 87-8
cortisol secretion, 52
(GTCT),mare
prevention,94
induction therapy algorithm,
clinical signs, 505
prognosis,93
mitotane, 57, 57
diagnosis
signalment, 88
maintenance therapy algorithm,
histopathology, 505, 506
treatment, 91-2
mitotane,57,58
per rectum,505,50s
hypercalcemia
pathogenesis, 44
pathogenesis, 504
cats
prognosis, 63-4
prevention,506
causes,374,375
protocol, 57
prognosis,506
clinical signs, 376-7
tmor secretion,49
signalment,504
diagnosis, 376-80
treatment, 506
pathogenesis, 374-6
galactorrhea
growth hormone (GH)
prevention,384
clinical signs, 501
acquired hyposomatotropism, 413
prognosis,384
diagnosis, 501
hypercortisolism, 414
signalment, 376
pathogenesis, 500
hypoglycemia, 241
treatment,380,380-384
prevention, 501
insulinoma cell proliferation, 230
dogs
prognosis, 501
physiology, 417,417
clinical signs, 361
signalment, 500-501
plasma concentrations, 409, 410
diagnosis, 361-7
treatment, 501
progesterone, 144
pathogenesis, 357-60
gastrinoma
secretion, regulation,422,422
prevention,371
diagnosis, 258-9
substitution,412
prognosis,371
pathogenesis
synthetic levothyroxine,412
signalment,361
duodenal ulceration, 254, 254
treatment,369-71
hepatocutaneous syndrome,
HDDST see high-dose
horses
255, 255
 dexamethasone suppression
clinical signs, 387
prevention,261
test (HDDST), 50, 52, 75-6
defined, 385
prognosis, 261
HHS see hyperosmolar
diagnosis, 387,388, 389
signalment,257
hyperglycemic state (HHS),
hypervitaminosis D, 386
signs,257
202-3,207
idiopathic systemic
treatment,260-261
high-dose dexamethasone
granulomatous disease, 387
gastrointestinal (GI) disease
suppression test (HDDST),
neonatal hypercalcemia and
blood loss, 8, 19
50, 52,75-6
asphyxia,387
ileus, 7
Horner's syndrome, 307
pathogenesis,385-7
GCK seε glucokinase (GCK), 240,
HPA axis see
prevention,390
241
hypothalamic-pituitary-
prognosis,390
GH see growth hormone (GH),
adrenal axis, 29,37,41
parathyroid hormone
144,230,241,409-14,
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC)
(PTH), 385
417, 422
cats
signalment, 387
GI disease see gastrointestinal
clinical signs, 724
treatment,389-90
disease,7, 8,19
diagnosis, 73-6
pet birds and reptiles, 392-3
gucagonoma
pathogenesis, 71-2
rabbits
diagnosis,259, 260
prevention,78
clinical signs, 391
pathogenesis, 255
prognosis,77-8
diagnosis, 391
prevention, 261
signalment, 72
pathogenesis, 390-391
prognosis,261
treatment,76-7
prevention, 392
signalment, 257
dogs
prognosis,392
signs, 257-8
cinical signs, 45-7
signalment, 391
treatment, 261
diagnosis, 48-53
treatment, 391
516index
hypercholesterolemia,267
prognosis,309
pet birds
hyperestrogenism
radioactive iodine therapy, 308
clinical signs, 33
clinical signs, 470-471
serum T concentrations,
diagnosis, 33-4
diagnosis
308,309
 pathogenesis and
alopecia and
signalment, 296
signalment, 33
hyperpigmentation, 472
treatment,304-5,305
prevention,34
females,471-2
horses
prognosis,34
hematology, 472
clinical signs, 312
treatment,34
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
diagnosis, 313
hypocalcemia
axis, 471, 472
pathogenesis, 312
cats
males, 471
prevention,313
clinical signs, 328-9
serum estradiol, 472
prognosis,313
diagnosis, 329-32
pathogenesis, 469-70
signalment,312
pathogenesis, 327-8
prevention, 474
treatment,313
prevention,334
prognosis, 473-4
hypoadrenocorticism
prognosis,3334
signalment, 470
cats
signalment,328
treatment,473
clinical signs, 24
treatment,332-3
hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp
diagnosis, 23-6
diagnosis, 338,338
method, 224
pathogenesis, 22-3
dogs
hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state
prevention,26
clinical signs, 318-19
(HHS)
prognosis, 26
diagnosis, 319-21
characterization,202-3
signalment,24
pathogenesis, 316-18
treatment, 207
treatment, 26
prevention,325
hyperparathyroidism
dogs
prognosis, 324-5
primary
acute,12-13,13
signalment,318
cystic changes, cat, 379, 379
atypical, 13-14
treatment,322-4
parathyroid adenoma, 374, 375
chronic, 7-12
ferrets, rabbits and rodents
signalment,376
clinical signs, 5-7
calcium levels, 339, 340
ultrasonography, neck, 379
differential diagnoses, 14-16
diagnosis, 340
tertiary
endocrine tests, 10-12
pathogenesis, 339
chronic kidney disease
gastrointestinal signs and
prevention, 340
(CKD), 375
hypotension, 7
prognosis,340
development, 384
glucocorticoids, 369
signalment, 339
parathyroid hormone (PTH), 375
pathogenesis, 2-3
signs, 339-40
treatment,384
pathogenesis,
treatment,340
therapy, 383-4
hypercalcemia, 357
pathogenesis, 335-7
hypersecrete adrenocorticotropic
prevention, 20
pet birds see Pet birds,
hormone (ACTH),97
prognosis, 20
hypocalcemia, 345-51
hyperthyroidism
signalment,4-5
pet reptiles,351-2
birds
treatment,16-20,369
prevention, 339
clinical signs, 312
ferrets
prognosis,339
diagnosis, 313
diagnosis, 32
signalment,337
pathogenesis,312
pathogenesis, 32
signs, 337-8
prevention,313
prevention,33
treatment,338-9
prognosis,313
prognosis,33
hyponatremia, SIADH and renal salt
signalment,312
signalment and clinical
wasting
treatment, 313
signs,32
clinical signs, 462
cats
treatment, 32
diagnosis, 462-4
clinical signs, 296-8
horses
 pathogenesis
diagnosis,298-302
clinical signs, 30
mechanistic localization,
Horner's syndrome, 307
diagnosis, 30-31
460, 460
methimazole and
pathogenesis, 28-30
plasma osmolality, 459
carbimazole, 306
prevention,31
water balance, 459
nutritional therapy, 309-10
prognosis,31
prevention,466
pathogenesis, 295-6
signalment, 30
prognosis, 466
prevention,309
treatment, 31
signalment, 462
index  517
treatment
signs, 274-5
pathogenesis, 246
disease syndrome, 465-6
treatment, 276
prevention,251
empirical, 464-5
dogs
prognosis,251
pleural effusion, 465
diagnosis, 268-70
signalment, 246
translocationa, 465
pathogenesis, 263-4
signs, 246,247
water intoxication,465
prevention,272
treatment
hyposomatotropism
prognosis,272
drug dosages, 249
cats
signalment, 264
kibble, diet modification, 251
cardiac disease, 419
signs,264-6
management of a hypoglycemic
chondrodystrophy, 419
treatment,270-2
crisis, 250
clinical signs, 417-18
ferrets, rabbits and rodents
surgical therapy, 248-9
congenital renal disease,419
clinical signs, 285
insulin preparation, canine diabetes 
diagnosis, 418
diagnosis, 285-6
mellitus
endocrine, 419
pathogenesis, 285
glargine and detemir, 155-6
lysosomal storage disorders, 419
prevention,286
isophane/NPH, 155
pathogenesis, 416-17
prognosis,286
lente, 153,155
poor nutrition,418-19
signalment,285
products, 153, 154
portosystemic vascular
treatment, 286
recombinant human protamine
anomaly, 419
foals
zinc,155
prevention, 419
clinical signs, 279
short acting lispro/aspart,
prognosis,419
diagnosis, 279-80
protamine,155
signalment,417
pathogenesis, 278-9
insulin resistance {IR) syndrome see
treatment,419
prevention,280
EMS/IR syndrome,horses,
dogs
prognosis,280
218-27
adenohypophysis, 405
signalment,279
congenital, 406-7,407
treatment,280
LDDST see low-dose dexamethasone
CRH, 409
pet birds, 287-8
suppression (screening) test
diagnosis, 407-9
pet reptiles, 288-90
{LDDST),49,50,73,75
GnRH, 409
hypovolemia, 461
LH see luteinizing hormone (LH), 93,
pituitary gland, 405
94,468,471,472
prevention,414-15
idiopathic hypercalcemia
low-dose dexamethasone suppression
prognosis, 414
algorithm,chronic,382,382
(screening) test (LDDST), 49,
signalment,405-6
treament paths, 382,383
50,73, 75
treament, 412-13
injection technique, 162, 163
luteinizing hormone (LH), 93, 94,
TRH,409
insulin enhancers, 227
468,471,472
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
jnsulinomas
(HPA) axis
cats
mammary hyperplasia, cats
dysfunction, CIRCI, 37, 41
clinical signs, 241
clinical signs, 494
fetal and neonatal immaturity, 29
diagnosis, 242-3
diagnosis, 494
maturation, equine, 29
pathogenesis, 240-241
feline fibroadenomatous,
research,human medicine,29
prevention,244
494, 495
hypothyroidism
prognosis, 244
pathogenesis, 494
adult horses
signalment, 241
prevention,496
clinical signs, 282
treatment,243
prognosis,496
diagnosis, 283-4
diagnosis
signalment, 494
pathogenesis, 281-2
handheld glucometers, 246, 247
treatment, 496
prevention,285
hepatic insufficiency, 248
mammary neoplasia
prognosis,284
dogs
clinical signs, 477
signalment,282
clinical signs, 231-2,232
diagnosis, 477
treatment, 284
diagnosis,233-5
pathogenesis, 476-7
cats
differential diagnoses, 234, 236
prevention,478
diagnosis,275-6
pathogenesis,230-231, 231
prognosis,478
pathogenesis, 273-4
prevention,238
signalment, 477
prevention, 276
prognosis,238
treatment, 477
prognosis,276
signament,231
mare see Granulosa-theca cell tumor
signalment,274
treatment, 236-8
(GTCT), mare, 504-6
518index
neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH),
perineal
pathogenesis,289
155,158
adenomas,482-3
prevention, 290
nonketotic hyperosmolar
hernia,481-2
prognosis,290
diabetes, 210
pet birds
signalment, 289
 NPH see neutral protamine
hypoadrenocorticism see
treatment, 290
Hagedorn (NPH), 155, 158
hypoadrenocorticism, pet
PHA see primary hyperaldosteronism
nuclear scintigraphy techniques, 140
birds, 33-4
(PHA),116-26
nutritional management,canine
hypocalcemia
pheochromocytoma
diabetes mellitus, 158-9
diagnosis, 347-9
cats
nutritional secondary
formulated pellet diets, 350, 350
clinical signs, 139
hyperparathyroidism, reptiles
juvenile osteodystrophy,
diagnosis, 139-41
clinical signs
345,346
pathogenesis, 137-8, 138
abnormal skin sloughing,
pathogenesis, 341-4
prevention,142
398,398
prevention, 350-351
prognosis,141-2
cloacal prolapse, 398, 399
prognosis, 350
signalment, 138
female veiled chameleon,
signs, 347
treatment,141
399, 400
treatment, 350
dogs
yellow bellied terrapin, 398, 399
hypothyroidism
clinical signs, 129, 131
diagnosis, 398400
clinical signs, 287
diagnosis, 131-5
differential diagnosis, 400
diagnosis, 287-8
pathogenesis, 129-30
pathogenesis, 397
pathogenesis, 287
prevention,135
prevention,403
prevention,288
prognosis,135
prognosis,403
prognosis,288
signalment,129
signalment, 397
signalment, 287
treatment,135
treatment
treatment, 288
pituitary-dependent
calcitonin therapy, 402-3
 pet birds and reptiles
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH)
calcium therapy, 401
diabetes mellitus
cobalt irradiation, 77
hypocalcemic, 400, 401
clinical signs, 198
differentiation, ADH, 75-6
 parathyroid hormone (PTH)
diagnosis, 198
female poodle,45,45
therapy, 403
differential diagnoses, 198-9
maintenance therapy algorithm,
thermal therapy, 400-401
pathogenesis, 197-8
mitotane, 55,56
UV light, 401-2
prevention,200
male Yorkshire terrier, 45, 46
vitamin B therapy, 402
prognosis,200
microadenoma and
signalment,198
macroadenoma, 63
optimal imaging technique, 233-4
treatment,199-200
spayed female mixed breed
hypercalcemia
dog, 45, 45
parathyroid adenoma, 374, 375
clinical signs, 393
transsphenoidal
 parathyroid hormone (PTH)
diagnosis, 393
hypophysectom, 77
bone mobilization, 356
pathogenesis, 392-3
pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction
chronic renal failure (CRF), 359
prevention, 393
(PPID)
hypomagnesemia, 317
prognosis,393
clinical signs
jonized calcium levels, 336,336
signalment,393
hirsutism, 104,104
osteopenia, 403
treatment, 393
 marked hyperhidrosis, 106, 106
parathyroid gland,327
pet reptiles
and mean age,frequency,
vitamin D,397
hypocalcemia
103, 104
pathologic reproductive
diagnosis, 351
muscle catabolism and
endocrinology
differential diagnosis, 351-12
weakness, "sway back"
cystic ovarian disease, rodents,
pathogenesis, 351
appearance,105,105
506-8
prevention,352
sinusitis, 105, 105
follicular stasis, reptiles, 508-10
prognosis,352
styrofoam pads, 106,106
granulosa-theca cell tumor
signalment,351
diagnosis
(GTCT), 504-6
signs,351
hirsutism, 109
 PDH see pituitary-dependent
treatment,352
Jaboratory tests, 107
hyperadrenocorticism
hypothyroidism
 prognostic and baseline
{PDH), 45-6, 55-6,
clinical signs, 289
information, 109
63, 75-7
diagnosis, 289-90
protocol, LDDST, 108, 108
index519
pathogenesis
signalment,117
pathogenesis, 483-4
enlarged pituitary gland post
treatment,125-6
prevention,486
mortem, 101, 103
 progesterone deficiency
prognosis,486
equine pituitary anatomy and
clinical signs, 498
signalment, 484
histology, 101, 102
diagnosis,498
treatment, 485
proopiomelanocortin processing,
pathogenesis, 497-8
renal salt wasting see hyponatremia,
101,102
prevention,499
SIADH and renal salt wasting,
prevention,112
prognosis,499
459-66
prognosis,111-12
signalment,498
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
signalment,103-4
treatment, 498-9
system (RAAS), 2, 116, 122
treatment
progesterone-related disorders
cortisol inhibitors, 110-111
diagnosis,488
sex hormones and adrenal
dopamine agonists, 110
pathogenesis, 487-8
hyperplasia
factors, 109
pyometra see pyometra, 489-93
17α-hydroxyprogesterone,
monitoring,111-12,112
prolactin,499
502-3
 pergolide mesylate, 109-10
 proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
androgens, 502
serotonin antagonists, 111
oral capsule form, 110
corticotropin, 502
polyuria-polydipsia (PUPD) see
pars intermedia, 101
estrogens, 502
diabetes insipidus and PUPD,
proportion,ACTH,105-6
progesterone, 502
dogs, 437-48
protamine zinc insulin (PZI)
sex steroid hormones, 501-2
POMC see proopiomelanocortin
dosing protocol, cats, 178,
steroid letdowm syndrome, 29
(POMC), 101, 105-6,110
179, 184
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH
 PPID see pituitary pars intermedia
recombinant and beef/pork,176
secretion (SIADH) see
dysfunction (PPID), 103-12
PTH see parathyroid hormone
hyponatremia, SIADH and
primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA)
(PTH), 317,327,336,356,
renal salt wasting,459-66
clinical signs
359,397,403
hyperaldosteronism and
pyometra
thyroid neoplasia see
hyperprogesteronism, cats,
clinical signs, 490
hyperthyroidism, 295-313
118, 119
diagnosis, 490
thyrotropin-releasing hormone
hypokalemic, 117, 117
pathogenesis, 489-90
(TRH), 409
iridal hemorrhage and retinal
prevention,493
TRH see thyrotropin-releasing
detachment, 117, 118
prognosis,492-3
hormone (TRH), 409
diagnosis
signalment,490
trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI),
adrenal mass, 125
treament,491-2
147, 165
endocrine assays, 121-3,
PZI see protamine zine insulin (PZI),
123-4
176,178,184
urine cortisol to creatinine ratio
hematological and biochemical
{UC:CR), 49, 73, 76
features, 119-20
RAAS see renin-angiotensin-
hypoechoic appearance, adrenal
aldosterone system (RAAS),
vaginal hyperplasia-prolapse
mass,120,120
2,116,122
clinical signs,475
hypokalemia and
relative adrenal insufficiency (RAI)
diagnosis, 475
hypertension,123
see critical illness-related
pathogenesis, 474
renal disease, 125
corticosteroid insufficiency
prevention, 476
 T,-weighted sagittal MRI scan,
{CIRCI),29,38-42
prognosis,476
abdomen, 121, 121
relative deficiency, estrogen and sex
signalment, 475
pathogenesis, 116-17
hormones
treatment,476
prevention,126
clinical signs, 484-5
prognosis,126
diagnosis, 485
water deprivation test, 444, 445
Keep up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
 on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALwAYS respect your e-mail
WILEY
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
exchange your e-mail address to any
outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
www.wiley.com/email