General Pathology
for Veterinary Nurses
Harriet Brooks
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
General Pathology
for Veterinary Nurses
Harriet Brooks
BVetMed, MSc, PhD, MRCVS, FHEA
Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms, Herts
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Publicatiori
This edition first published 2010
 2010 by Harriet Brooks
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007.
Blackwells publishing programme has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical, and Medical business to form Wwiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO19 8SQ,United Kingdom
Editorial offices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for
 leaew uoudon ay asnai o uoissad iof Adde ot aoy pnoqe uoeou!
this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been
asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the
publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed
as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade
names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective
owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in
this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
of a competent professional should be sought
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Brooks, Harriet W.
        s
p.: cm.
Includes index.
1. Veterinary pathology.  2. Veterinary nursing.  I. Title.
 [DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases-physiopathology-Nurses' Instruction.
2. Pathology.Veterinary-Nurses'Instruction. SF 774.5 B873g 2010]
SF774.5.B76 2010
636.089607-dc22
2009027991
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Set in 10/12.5pt Avenir by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Malaysia
12010
ontents
About This Book
Dedication
ix
Acknowledgements
X
 Introduction to Veterinary Pathology
1
What is pathology?
2
Who 'does' pathology?
3
 Pathology as an academic subject
9
2Aetiology
11
Introduction
12
Aetiology - the study of the causes of disease
13
3Cell Injury
23
Lesions - structural and functional changes
24
Definitions of cell response or injury following
harmful stimulus
24
Cellular degeneration
26
Cell death - necrosis
30
Extracellular changes
35
4Inflammation
41
What is inflammation?
42
Acute inflammation
43
Chronic inflammation
55
iv
Contents
5 Pathology and the Immune System
65
The normal immune system
66
Diseases of the immune system
84
6 Tissue Repair
97
Definition of tissue repair or healing
98
Tissue repair - general and specific examples
103
 Healing in various tissues
108
Healing regulation and control
109
What can impair, prevent or alter healing?
109
Circulatory Disorders
113
The normal circulatory system
114
Oedema
122
Impaired blood supply to tissues
127
Clotting (coagulation) of blood
132
Shock
145
8 Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
153
Atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia and metaplasia
154
Neoplasia
157
Glossary
189
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
215
Further Reading
237
Index
239
About This Book
Don't skip this part! This section will explain how to get the most
from this book.
Aims of this section
To introduce general pathology
To explain the format of the book
To give some general information
Welcome to general pathology!
al 'teua buamsue atojeg irooyied lelauah Aq ueau am op ieym
Us talk about pathology in its broadest sense.
What is pathology to you?
-u hah oum 'sins haded u! aldoad se sisibolouied jo yusyn Aeu noy
your everyday life. If you are already studying for your nursing quali-
uo passed aq oi nnalqns Aueaup e se Aoolouied mala Keuu nof 'uoiesy
the way to the more exciting subjects of surgical or medical nursing.
You may have completed your studies and feel you 'got by' without
:KemAue Kboloyied yonu oot mouy ot bu!peau
Well, I hope that, through this book, I can help you to view pathology
as not so boring after all, and relevant to every one of us involved in
veterinary medicine.
01 lenuao s! l! :asinu Areuueien e se op nor e suidiapun Abojouied
veterinary science. Apart from some elective surgical procedures, all
vi
About This Book
curring within the body. Understanding these pathological processes
to follow the rationale of the treatments used in the clinics, and to
explain the conditions and procedures to anxious owners. A good un-
derstanding of pathology will turn a competent veterinary nurse into
an outstanding one.
So, what is pathology?
This question will be answered more fully in the first two chapters, but
briefly, pathology is the study of the effects of disease on the body.
It is a broad subject, encompassing a number of sub-divisions such
as general pathology, systematic (or special) pathology and clinical
pathology.
This book concentrates on general pathology, which is the study
of the basic pathological processes that are not specific to particular
le u aues au ynu Aaid aie uoeuoy inoun pue uoeuueu!
parts of the body, and so are considered under the heading of general
pathology.
Other textbooks and references will cover systematic pathology,
discussing specific organ systems. If you refer to these texts you will
u!eb nof 1ey1 X6olouied |elaua6 jo abpa|mouy ay4 Aldde 01 alqe aq
from this book.
Clinical (or chemical) pathology is the pathology used in the labora-
tory, whether the practice laboratory or a diagnostic laboratory - many
general nursing texts cover basic clinical pathology, e.g. urinalysis or
blood biochemistry, so I have not covered these aspects in this book.
The format of this book and how to use it
Each chapter starts with two boxes, one giving an outline ofthe chapter
and the other explaining the aims of the chapter. Read the aims box
carefully. Understanding the aims of each chapter will help to guide
your reading of the topic.
sidot uieu ou laideyo yeea dn bupiap shuipeay-qns ate aiau
and at the end of each chapter is another text box summarising the
main points covered in the chapter.
More boxes!
Dotted through the text there are diagrams and tables and a few pho-
tographs, all included as numbered boxes. These numbered boxes
About This Book
vIi
topics will be encountered three times - in the text, in the diagram
osje ueo salqen pue sueibeip ayl 'ueibeip ayi on uoides e se pue
be used as a revision aid if you are unlucky enough to be facing ex-
aminations. A glossary of terms used in the book, or that you may
come across in your reading, is included towards the back of the
book.
You might find that some areas do not have summary boxes when
you feel you could do with them or a useful term is omitted from the
glossary: in this case, draw up your own boxes to help your study and
add missing words to the glossary - do not just accept what I have
given you! Remember this book is just a starting point for you - use
it to gain the basics and the confidence to start to read around the
subject. Who knows where you could end up?
Questions, questions!
Each chapter finishes with up to six test yourself questions. The ques-
tions vary slightly in their format and some require short snappy an-
swers, whilst others could almost require short essay answers. These
are to help you make sure you have understood what you have read;
is enne oi aill eu no isou no sdlay em aaeum ui uaun an
and write your answers from memory, you may like to jot notes or key
words or you may find just reading through the questions helps you.
At the end of the book are some suggested answers; however, you
choose to use the questions, try not to cheat! It will help you most if
you have a go at answering the questions yourself before you read my
suggestions.
The book is designed to be a workbook. If this is your own book, do
not be afraid to personalise it - jot notes or reminders in the margin,
cross reference to published articles or to other parts of the book, or
to cases you have seen in the clinics. Annotate the diagrams; draw
moustaches on the cartoons. Make this book totally yours. (Note - do
not do this if it is a library copy, if you are reading this in a bookshop
or if it belongs to someone else.)
Your roles
You will need to be an active reader to get the most from this book!
Many sections within this book build on one another. Some prior knowl-
Keu no os 'paiadxa s! AboloisAyd pue Auuoieue 'Kboloisly jo abpa
need to refer to other texts or study notes to supplement some areas
if you are uncertain what is being discussed.
vili
About This Book
Get in touch - the author would like to hear from you if you have
comments or complaints, or suggestions for future editions.
Most of all, I hope you will enjoy reading and using this book and
that it might change your mind about pathology (unless, of course you
liked it all along!).
This book is dedicated to my parents, with fondest love
Acknowledgements
I am indebted first and foremost to Wiley-Blackwell for inviting me to
write this book, and thanks to many people there, but especially Katy
Loftus, for encouragement, advice and extreme patience during its
protracted production.
Many thanks also to all of my family, especially my mother and
husband, for their support, love and a good deal of humour; I might
have given up many times had you not all kept me going. Thanks also
to Joe, my husband, for comments on Chapter 5, and for the use of
his photograph in that chapter, and to Helen Wakeham for allowing us
to photograph her sow and piglets.
My beloved canine companions - Daisy, Dilly and Edie - deserve a
mention for keeping my spirits high and for taking me out for many a
good walk to clear my mind.
aauien lot leuaieuu buyaeat Arooyied Auu uo paseg s! yoog s!ul
nurses at the Royal Veterinary College. So finally, but certainly not
least, I acknowledge all past and future trainee veterinary nurses who
have inspired me to write the book; I truly hope it helps to underpin
your chosen careers, and I wish you every happiness and success in the
future.
Harriet Brooks
Chapter 1
Introduction to
Veterinary
Pathology
What is pathology?
Who 'does' pathology?
Anatomic pathology
Clinical pathology
Microbiology
Parasitology
Immunology
Toxicology
Veterinary forensic pathology
Government agency laboratories
Pharmaceutical laboratories
Pathology as an academic subject
2
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 1
To define pathology as part of (veterinary) medicine
 To define general pathology as part of pathology
To briefly discuss how pathology is used everyday, and who uses it
and where it is used
What is pathology?
The word pathology comes from two Greek words, Pathos - which
ng 'sens auo youm bueos, lo aouaedxe, sueau Aleial
which in this context is used in terms of suffering from a disease, and
-logy meaning 'word', 'speech' or 'reason'. The suffix -logy is used in
compound words (when it is added to another word such as in biology.
uas, lo jo Ans, shau! h! uaun pue 'oououa pue ooisyd
of'.
So, pathology is the branch of medical science that involves study of
the causes of diseases, how they develop and their effects on the body.
It encompasses any deviation from a healthy or normal condition in
any living creature. There is even a branch of horticulture that involves
stucy of pathology in plants
In pathology, the effects of diseases can be studied at various levels:
the whole body, the organs or tissues, cells and even within cells (at
sub-cellular evel) (see Box 1.1).
Introduction to Veterinary Pathology
5
Box 1.1 What is pathology?
 Pathology is the branch of medical science involving study of the causes of diseases,
how they develop and their effects on the body.
Pathology includes consideration of any deviation from a healthy or normal con-
dition, in any living creature (including plants).
In pathology, the effects of diseases are studied at various levels: the whole body,
the organs or tissues, the cefls and even within cells (at sub-cellular level).
Organ
Whole body
liver
Bopxp!s
Individual
cell
Sub-cellular - organelles, proteins and so on.
Who 'does' pathology?
You might answer that question by saying pathologists do, and that
is certainly correct. We will discuss pathologists in a moment, but the
pathologically trained' professionals are not the only ones actively en-
oot aie nor 'anineid lelauae ui buiyuom aie nor f Aholouied u! pabeo
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
As we said at the beginning of this chapter, pathology involves not
just study of what causes diseases, but also how diseases develop and
their effects on the body. Every time you record the temperature, pulse
and respiration of a patient, use a dipstick to test an animal's urine.
run an automated blood analyser, change the dressing on an infected
wound, or advise an owner about flea control to help their cat's red
itchy skin, or diet to control diarrhoea in a sensitive golden retriever,
you are assessing the deviation from a healthy or normal condition
in the animal; you are assessing pathological changes. So, you and
the vets, physiotherapists and others with whom you work use their
knowledge of pathology. But there will be times when you require
help from a pathology diagnostic laboratory to make the diagnosis;
perhaps you need tests beyond the scope of your practice laboratory.
Pathology laboratories may be independent businesses, or they may
be based at a university veterinary school, or they may be government
classified accordling to the type of diagnostic work they do, though a
few will be all-rounders and will do everything!
Anatomic pathology
Anatomic pathologists study disease by looking at tissue and organs.
This may be by performing post-mortem examinations (also called
necropsies) and writing a post-mortem report, or by looking at tissues
from live animals (called biopsies). Anatomic pathologists will look at
the tissues or organs by eye (gross examination) to identify abnormal-
ities, but also use histologic sections, mounted on glass slides to look
at the tissue under the microscope (see Box 1.2).
Clinical pathology
Clinical pathologists assess disease in an
animal by studying body fluids (such as
blood, urine, joint fluid, abdominal tap
fluid, cerebrospinal fluid and so on). They
may look at the chemical composition(clin-
ical biochemistry) or the types of cells in the
fluid or in an FNA, using a microscope to
study a stained smear of the sample on a
glass microscope slide (this is called cytol-
ogy). Clinical pathologists might spot bac-
teria or other infectious organisms in a cy-
tology preparation.
Introduction to VeterinaryPathology
Box 1.2 How histology sections are produced (see diagram below)
B.
A. A dog is presented at the vet's surgery with a skin tumour.
 B. Taking a biopsy, the vet decides to remove the tumour, perhaps after performing
a fine-needle aspirate (FNA) and checking what the mass is. The vet and owner
decide that they would like to send the mass to a pathologist to confirm the
diagnosis. The mass is placed in a fixative solution which will preserve the tissue
by fixing (denaturing) the proteins. Usually, a 10% solution of formalin is used
(10% formol saline). In this example, the vet has removed (excised) the whole
Sl anssi e jo ed e Auo sawos sdog uoisixa ue pales sl sn 'sse
the laboratory in a leakproof, wide-mouthed container.
C.  In the laboratory, the tissue is processed by embedding it in a paraffin wax block
(i). When this is done, very thin, almost transparent, slices of the tissue can be
taken (ji), using an extremely sharp cutting instrument, called a microtome (i).
These slices are so thin that 1 cm of tissue could be sliced 50o0 times.
D. A thin slice of the tissue is placed flat (mounted) on a glass microscope slide
(iv), and dyed using histological stains. The standard staining method uses the
stains haematoxylin and eosin (often shortened to 'H and E') which stains the
sections pink and blue. The stains allow the pathologist to examine the tissues
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 1.2 (Continued) How histology sections are produced
a very thin glass cover slip (v) which is glued on top. Finally, the slide is labelled
with a reference number and other laboratory details (vi).
E. The pathologist examines the tissue section under the microscope and writes a
tumour, the pathologist may also be able to tell whether the vet has managed to
remove it all or whether further surgery at the site is advisable (the pathologist
can tell this by looking at the edges of the tumour and observing whether there
is a rim of normal tissue around the edge - the excision margins)
can indicate an increase in white blood cells (leucocytes) in an anima
fighting an infection or a decrease in red blood cells (erythrocytes) in
an animal with anaemia.
An anatomic or clinical pathologist may suspect that infectious or-
ganisms are involved in the disease and may suggest a fresh (unfixed)
sample should be sent for microbiology (see below) if the practice has
not already done this
Microbiology
Microbiologists study infectious organisms that may be associated with
diseases, more specifically, bacteriologists study bacteria, virologists
ples, such as urine, pus, mucus or even tissue may be sent to micro-
biology laboratories where they have the equipment, skills and exper-
tise to grow (culture) and identify infectious organisms. In the case of
bacterial infection, they may also be able to assess which antibiotics
the organism is likely to be killed by (the sensitivity of the organism)
which gives the vet an indication of what treatment to use.
Parasitology
Although the very small creatures studied by microbiologists could
be described as being parasitic, parasitologists tend to be associated
with the study of slightly larger organisms which live on or in other
animals. So, parasitology encompasses the study of, for instance, par-
asitic worms in the gut, fleas living on the skin or demodex mites living
in hair follicles.
IntroductiontoVeterinaryPathology
Immunology
Sometimes an infectious organism is suspected of causing disease in
an animal, but that organism itself cannot be cultured in the microbiol-
ogy laboratory or seen in samples under the microscope. In this case,
the immunology laboratory may be able to tell whether the animal has
been infected by the suspected organism by looking for antibodies.
Antibodies are produced by the body's immune system to help fight
disease (this is part of what is known as an immune response); specific
antibodies are produced for specific infectious agents, so finding cer-
tain antibodies will indicate that an animal has come into contact with
a certain infectious agent (or has responded to a vaccine).
gens. These antigens are a sort of 'fingerprint' which the immune
system can usually recognise as being 'foreign' and this stimulates the
immune response. Sometimes specific antigens can be detected in
samples by immunological tests.
Such immunological tests may be done on blood serum (this is called
serology). Some immunological tests can also be carried out on tissues
ing. Alltypes of cells of the body have their own 'fingerprint', though in
a healthy individual the immune system recognises these and doesn't
start to react against them. Sometimes we can use this property of
cells to confirm the diagnosis, for instance, if a pathologist is having
trouble identifying a particular skin tumour under the microscope im-
munostains for specific cell types can be applied to the tissue and can
help to reveal the identity of the tumour.
Toxicology
In some cases, toxicologists may be asked to anal-
yse samples for toxins or poisons, for instance, you
or the pathologist might send stomach contents, urine
or even fresh tissue from a necropsy in the case of
an animal suspected of being poisoned. The labora-
POISON
tory may need some guidance as to which toxic sub-
stance is suspected, such as a reliable history of known
or likely contact of an animal with that particular sub-
stance. Note also that very often the toxins or poisons
break down or are metabolised after having their dam-
aging effects, and may not be detected in biological
samples. In these cases, the animal presents with clin-
ical signs that require diagnosis and treatment, such as a severely
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
priority is to treat the anaemia, and toxicology may not be helpful,
though it could be argued that confirming the cause of the animal's
signs may help to prevent poisoning in other animals.
Veterinary forensic pathology
There are a small number of veterinary pathologists who deal with
forensic cases; that is, cases where there may be suggestions of cru-
elty or malicious harm to men or animals, or police involvement due to
suspected illegal activity of one sort or another. This subject is beyonc
the scope of this book, and it is usually best for general practices to
seek advice if they get drawn into such a case unless they are expe
rienced in dealing with them. As a rule of thumb all those involved
with the case, including veterinary nurses, may be asked to give evi-
dence at a later stage, and should always keep notes, photographs,
logged telephone calls or case records securely and safely stored, in
gation. Any biological material, including bodies of deceased animals,
should be logged and labelled, and stored securely until removal by
an authorised person.
Government agency laboratories
and work for government agency laboratories. These laboratories prin-
pathologists are important in helping to maintain herd or flock health
diseases and to protect our food quality (and safety) and human
health.
Pharmaceutical laboratories
Veterinary pathologists work at pharmaceutical laboratories too. Here
they will help to investigate diseases and to develop drugs to treat men
and animals. They will also take an interest in apparent unexpected
drug reactions.
Introduction to Veterinary Pathology
Pathology as an academic subject
This chapter has so far discussed some of the ways pathology is car-
ried out in practice and who undertakes it. Pathology is a broad aca-
demic subject, and when we study it, we often divide it into gen-
eral pathology and systematic (or special) pathology. What does this
mean?
· General pathology is the study of processes in disease, without
necessarily limiting discussion to one particular tissue or organ.
For instance, inflammation and neoplasia are general pathological
processes.
· Whereas systematic (special) pathology is the study of the effects of
disease with special reference to a specific tissue or a body system.
For instance, dermatitis (inflammation in the skin) and osteosar-
coma (neoplasia of bone) are examples of systematic or special
pathological changes.
From now on this book focuses on general pathology, but we will
use examples of specific organs or body systems to help you un-
derstand the processes we are discussing, and perhaps to relate the
topic to diseases you may have encountered in general veterinary
practice.
Summary of key points in Chapter 1
·Pathology is the study of the causes of diseases, of how
they develop and their effects on the body. It encompasses
creature.
· Veterinary pathology is carried out by a number of different people,
 from nurses and vets in general practice to trained pathologists in
 academia or industry.
· General pathology is the study of processes in disease, without
limiting discussion to a particular tissue or organ. Inflammation and
neoplasia are examples of general pathological processes.
Systematic (special) pathology is the study of general pathology
processes but with special reference to specific tissues or body
systems, for instance, dermatitis (inflammation in the skin) and os-
teosarcoma (neoplasia of bone) are examples of systematic or spe-
cial pathological changes.
10
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Test yourself questions on Chapter 1
1.  What is meant by the term 'pathology'?
2.Briefly discuss the work of
 a. anatomic pathologists and
b. clinical pathologists.
3. a. What organisms are studied by microbiologists? (list as many
types as you can)
b.
Still thinking about microbiology, what is meant by 'sensitivity
and why is it helpful and/or important?
 4. Briefly suggest some sensible actions to take if you are involved in
a case which involves the police or other authorities.
5. Why are veterinary pathologists important for the health of human
beings?
6.What is meant by'general' pathology and how does it differ from
systematic' or 'special' pathology?
Chapter 2
Aetiology
Introduction to aetiology
Aetiology - the study of the causes of disease
What are aetiological agents?
Classification of aetiological agents
Classification of diseases
What determines whether disease occurs?
12
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 2
To define the term aetiology and discuss the main types of aetio.
logical agents
To discuss other factors which may act with aetiological agents in
the development of disease
To consider the main ways in which aetiological agents cause
disease
Introduction to aetiology
Let us start with a few terms you may come across in your reading
Aetiology is pronounced eet-ee-ology. In American textbooks you may
see it spelt without the first 'a' - etiology, but it is still pronounced as
above.
You would have spotted that aetiology is another compound word
-ap ,Ahoi-, yo!ym u! (l laidey u! passnosip 'Kholoyied piom aye ay!)
notes 'study of' or 'science of'. The first part comes from the Greek
word 'aitia' meaning 'cause'. So, aetiology means the study or science
of the causes of disease.
The word pathogenesis is associated with aetiology. Pathogene-
Siyn ul ing 'l laideyo u! paonpou! se 'uiebe soyied, saaloaui sis
case it is linked with genesis, which comes from the Greek verb
for 'to become' or 'to produce, to bring forth'. Thus, pathogene-
sis relates to things which produce disease, and tends to be used
when discussing how factors lead to disease, or the mechanisms
of disease development. It describes the chain of events from the
initial stimulus to the manifestation of the disease or the lesion
produced.
There are some other terms we use which relate to pathogenesis.
A factor which is capable of producing disease may be referred to
as pathogenic, and an infectious agent (bacteria, virus and fungus)
capable of causing disease may often be referred to in non-specific
terms as a pathogen. The term aetiological agent is also used for a
factor capable of causing disease.
 Do not worry too much about these terms at this stage; you will
become more familiar with their usage as you read through this book
and other texts.
So, now we have got some definitions out of the way; let us start to
discuss aetiology.
Aetiology
13
Aetiology - the study of the causes of disease
Diseases occur when a harmful trigger (of whatever type) causes loss of
normal health or disrupts a tissue or organ. Many diseases tend to have
distinct and recognisable cause(s) (aetiology), development processes
(pathogenesis), lesions and clinical signs.
Let us consider a familiar example to illustrate this. Two cats have
a fight, and a few days later one of them develops an abscess in the
skin on its back. Now think about the features of diseases in turn and
apply them to our cat:
Cause(s): bacteria from one cat's mouth are introduced into another
cat's skin via the teeth.
Development process: the bacteria multiply and start up the process
of inflammation in the skin of the bitten cat. Inflammatory cells and
bacteria die and accumulate as a pool of pus', with a rim of active
inflammation around it (an abscess).
Lesion: surface skin wound and scab; abscess in the skin; heat (due to
inflammation).
Clinical signs: pain, heat, swelling, pus, depression, loss of appetite,
grumpiness etc.
In other cases it may be harder to clearly define diseases in this way.
they may be made more complex by other factors such as secondary
infections. Development processes may be altered by other concur-
rent diseases. Finally, especially in veterinary patients, the lesions and
clinical signs are often complicated by self-trauma - the animal licking.
biting or scratching a diseased area, for instance.
We now go on to discuss some of the aetiological agents and some
of the complicating factors that can affect disease development.
1 Pus = thick fluid sometimes formed as a result of inflammation, consisting
of white blood cells (especially neutrophils, see Chapter 4), dead cells and
often also containing living and dead bacteria. By the way, note the correct
spelling. Examiners HATE to see it referred to as 'puss"!
14
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
What are aetiological agents?
We said above that aetiological agents are factors capable of
causing disease or tissue damage. Our knowledge of aetiological
In historical times, evil spirits, bad humors and foul smells were
all considered to cause disease. Old rags were thought to cause
bubonic plague (the Black Death) during medieval times - it was
actually fleas on rats living in the rags which carried the plague
bacterium.
1600s, allowing closer study of tissues and even description of bac-
teria, though the role of bacteria in disease was not recognised for
another 200 years or so. Rudimentary, though successful, attempts at
vaccination for diseases we now know to be caused by viruses, such as
smallpox, were carried out from the 1770s.
Yeasts and fungi were first recognised for their roles in fermen-
tation, and later some types of these organisms were found to be
involved in disease especially in patients with weakened immune sys-
tems. The roles of nutrition and hygiene started to be taken seri-
ously in the late 1800s and continued to gather momentum since
was linked to a particular supply of drinking water in Lambeth, and
since then our understanding of the infectious and environmental
factors involved in disease development and tissue injury has grown
enormously.
Sadly, the great wars have added to our understanding of physi-
cal trauma (but also have clearly illustrated the importance of emer-
gency nursing for longer-term prognosis). More recently, molec-
ular biology has increased our knowledge of the DNA in our
genes; this has helped us to recognise the genetic basis of some
diseases.
Throughout this book, we shall tend to consider aetiological agents
in general terms, though we shall use a few specific examples to illus-
trate pathological processes. Other textbooks will be the sources of
more specific information on causes of particular diseases (see Further
Reading, page 238).
Classification of aetiological agents
To help our understanding we can usefully classify aetiological agents
in various ways. You may see other classifications in other textbooks,
Aetiology
15
Box 2.1 Classification of aetiological agents
Internal factors
Genetic - defects or mutations
Immune system - defects or abnormal responses
 Aging - natural processes or premature aging
External factors
Physical - trauma, pressure etc.
Chemical - toxins, poisons, heavy metals etc
Infectious - parasites, bacteria, viruses, fungi etc.
Environmental - nutrition (deficiencies or excesses)
- temperature
- hygiene
-radiation, e.g. uftraviolet light
but a helpful start is to consider aetiological agents as internal or
external factors, such as in Box 2.1.
Think about the table in Box 2.1 - does it work for you?
You might wish to slightly reclassify some items, for instance, in external
factors (the bottom half of the table), physical and chemical factors
could be classified under environmental factors. Or temperature of the
environment could be considered a physical factor. Should hormones
be included in the list of internal factors, after all they have detrimental
effects in disorders like hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) and
diabetes mellitus?
Do not be afraid to annotate or draw up your own version of this
table as you read on through this book!
Classification of diseases
Diseases can broadly be considered as follows.
Acquired diseases
These are diseases which develop at some stage during life, as a result
of the effects of one or more aetiological agent acting during life.
Examples of acquired diseases would be pneumonia or dermatitis
due to fleas.
16
General Pathology forVeterinary Nurses
Congenital diseases
These are diseases which the animal or person is born with. Congenital
diseases occur because the aetiological agent acts on the developing
embryo or foetus, on the uterus or placenta, or on the mother, either
before or during pregnancy. Note that clinical signs of a congenital
Aayl 'al u! lael dn moys Keu ang 'yuig ne uaes aq nou Aeuu aseasip
are still called congenital and not acquired because the aetiological
agent actually had its effect before birth.
Developmental abnormalities, such as heart defects, and forms of
muscular dystrophy in certain dog breeds, such as golden retrievers,
would be examples of congenital diseases (see Box 2.2).
 Some diseases, notably cancers, are a bit more difficult to divide up
this way as they may involve both congenital and hereditary damage
to genes and exposure to some factor(s) during life to start the cancer
growing (see section on Neoplasia in Chapter 8). In diseases involv-
ing both acquired and congenital phases, we consider that the initial
congenital gene mutation has made that individual susceptible to later
dliseases if he or she comes into contact with a suitable trigger factor
during life.
Idiopathic diseases
There are some diseases of which we do not (yet) know the cause,
though they may have recognisable development processes, lesions
or clinical signs. These are diseases we refer to as idiopathic.
What determines whether disease occurs?
Simple diseases
If a disease has an uncomplicated development that could be sum-
marised as:
aetiological agent + tissue = disease
it would be known as a simple disease (see Box 2.3).
In reality, there are few diseases or disorders which are this uncom-
plicated, and in the vast majority of cases we need to consider what
other factors act to make disease more likely to occur in the animal, or
which modify the disease (for instance, factors which make the disease
the course of a disease are shown in Box 2.4.
Multifactorial diseases
So, rather than being simple, as defined above, many diseases are
more complicated and their course is affected or modified by lots of
other factors and infectious agents. A good example of just such a
Aetiology
17
Box 2.2 Congenital versus hereditary diseases
People often get confused between congenital and hereditary diseases.
Congenital means a disease that is present at birth or develops due to the effects
of some aetiological factor on the developing embryo or foetus, on the mother before
or during pregnancy, or on the uterus or placenta.
Let us consider some hypothetical rabbits! Male and female hypothetical rabbit
mate and the female gets pregnant. At some stage, either before or during her
pregnancy she is exposed to or encounters a harmful stimulus (aetiological factor) of
some type - it might be an infection or a poison, for instance. As a result of this some
or, more likely, all of her babies from that litter are born with a hypothetical disease -
let us say it makes their ears go spotty and drop off. Future litters of babies are not
necessarily affected.
M
+
Litter 2
Aetiological factor acts on the developing baby,
As a result babies in Litter 1 are born with or
on the mother before or during pregnancy, or on
 develop congenital 'spotty-dropping-off'ear
the uterus or placenta of Litter 1.
disease.
A hereditary condition is a disease or disorder that can be passed on from either
or both parents to their offspring. More than one offspring may be affected, and
successive offspring may also have the disease.
In this case, either the male or female hypothetical rabbits have a gene which
the gene from either mum or dad. In this case, all future litters involving the parent
who carries the gene may inherit the necessary gene and could be afflicted with the
disorder. Some animals may carry the gene but not show the disease. (Note that this
is a very simplified explanation to help to explain the difference between congenital
and hereditary! Please consult more specific texts for further details of genetics if
required.)
Litter 1
Litter 2
One of the parent hypothetical rabbits carries a
 Baby rabbits who inherit the gene may also
 gene which predisposes him to an inherited form
develop, or be born with, the inherited 'spotty-
of 'spotty-dropping-off' ear disease.
dropping-off' ear disease.
18
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 2.3 Diagrammatic representation of a simple disease
Aetiological
agent
Aetiological agent acts on cell
Cell
Altered, damaged or
dead cell
In a simple disease, an aetiological agent acts on a tissue or organ in the body
(represented here by a very simplistic diagram of a cell). The aetiological agent
causes cell damage or a change in normal function of the cell
If many cells are affected the result is that the function of the whole organ, of
which the cell is a part, is altered and consequently disease occurs in the animal.
A disease with such an uncomplicated development can be summarised as:
aetiological agent + tissue = disease
Aetiology
19
Box 2.4 Factors which make disease more likely to occur or which
can modify the course of the disease
·Age
 Often very young or old patients are more vulnerable
to diseases
Immune system
Lack of immunity in young, unvaccinated or naive* an-
imals, or any cause of reduced immunity in a previous
immune animal will increase vulnerability to diseases
Genes
 A fault or mutation in a gene may make an animal more
susceptible to the disease-causing agent
Other disease
Having another disease already can often increase vul-
nerability by reducing the animal's ability to produce an
immune response
 Environmental factors Poor hygiene, extremes of temperature, mental stress,
hunger, thirst, overcrowding etc. can increase vulnera-
bility
Some drugs
Certain drugs may affect the course of a disease, for
instance, corticosteroids which may be used to reduce
 inflammation but can also limit immune responses and
healing processes
*Naive - pronounced 'ny-eeve'. This means animals who have not encountered a particular
infectious agent before and so have not developed immunity to it.
multifactorial disease is canine infectious respiratory disease (CIRD)
often called 'kennel cough' (see Box 2.5).
CIRD involves viruses and bacteria, but is also associated with var-
ious other factors, such as barking, housing in groups, age and so
on; there is even a suggestion that certain breeds of dog are more
vulnerable to contracting respiratory disease.
You can see that control, prevention and treatment of multifactorial
diseases are somewhat more complicated than that for simple dis.
giving advice or devising treatment and control plans.
So, this concludes a brief discussion of aetiology, or causal factors,
of disease. In the next chapters, we look more atthe responses, desired
and harmful, of the body to these causal factors.
2
Box 2.5 Canine infectious respiratory disease, an example of multifactorial disease
Age
Infectious agents
(e.g.bacteria and viruses)
Breed
Other disease
RESPIRATORY
DISEASE
Immunity
Crowding
Physiologic stresses
(e.g. malnutrition, pregnancy.
lgh
whelping and lactation)
Environment
(e.g. temperature humidity
Irritation
and hygiene)
(e.g. barking. dust,
gases and fumes)
Aetiology
21
Summary of key points in Chapter 2
·Aetiology is the study or science of the causes of disease, whereas
the pathogenesis of a disease is how certain factors lead to the
disease, or the mechanisms of disease development.
A few diseases are simple in their pathogenesis - an aetiological
agent causes disease.
Many diseases are multifactorial - the animal is made more vul-
nerable to disease caused by the agent because of the effects of
modifying factors (such as environment, age, nutrition, other infec-
tions etc.).
Test yourself questions on Chapter 2
1. What is meant by the term 'aetiology' (or etiology)?
2.
What does it mean if a factor is described as 'pathogenic'?
3.E
 Briefly discuss the classification of aetiological agents, including
examples to illustrate your answer.
4. Write short notes to indicate the difference between (i) acquired
diseases, (ii) congenital diseases and (iii) idiopathic diseases.
 5. Suggest up to six factors which may modify the course of a multi-
factorial disease in an animal, including those factors which make
disease more likely to occur in a particular animal.
Chapter 3
Cell Injury
Lesions - structural and functional changes
 Definitions of cell response or injury following
harmful stimulus
Cellular degeneration
Cell death - necrosis
Types of necrosis
Sequelae of necrosis
Extracellular changes
Mineralisation
Crystals
Protein
24
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 3
 To introduce the concept of structural and functional cell changes
in response to harmful or injurious stimuli as the basis of gross
pathological lesions
 To define cell changes as reversible (for instance, adaptation and
degeneration) or irreversible (such as cell death - necrosis), and to
discuss commonly encountered examples of each
To discuss some common extracellular changes in tissues in re-
sponse to various stimuli
Lesions - structural and functional changes
Lesions are pathological changes in tissues or organs. We think of le-
sions as abnormalities we can see, such as an area of abnormal colour
on a liver or an ulcerated area on the skin; we call them gross lesions
to remember that gross lesions are actually manifestations of abnor-
malities or changes in the cells which make up that tissue or organ (we
can call these changes or abnormalities in cells cellular lesions). These
changes in cells occur in response to injurious, that is harmful, stimuli
(in other words, aetiological agents, see Chapter 2).
So, if abnormalities occur at the cellular level they are likely to lead
to changes in tissue structure. The other effect they may have is to alter
the function of the tissue, so for instance a harmful toxin that damages
liver cells will, if enough liver cells are damaged, alter the function of
the liver (as well as altering the look - colour, texture, size, shape - of
the liver) (see Box 3.1).
You might think that there would be lots of different cellular re-
sponses to all the dlifferent harmful stimuli which may be encountered;
in fact, there are only a few broad categories of cellular change (though
there are lots of different effects on the animal depending which cells
are affected). We shall discuss the cell changes in detail in this chapter
and also in Chapter 8. You will find that these cell injuries will crop up
throughout this book, so it is worth getting the hang of them at this
stage.
We start by defining two important categories of cell changes in
Anu s alqisiaaaui pue algishaaau - nus inguy on asuodsa
Definitions of cell response or injury following harmful stimulus
Reversible cell injury- cell injury causes alteration or loss of cell function
and structural changes, but the cell can recover and regain structure
Cell Injury
25
Box 3.1 Lesions - structural and functional changes
Lesions are pathological changes in tissues or organs. We think of lesions as abnor
 malities. When we can see the abnormalities with the naked eye we call them gross
lesions.
Gross lesions are really manifestations of abnormalities or changes right down at
the microscopic level - in the cells which make up that tissue or organ (i.e. cellular
lesions).
Cellular lesions occur in response to injurious (harmful) stimuli (aetiological agents).
Abnormalities occurring at the cellular level can therefore cause changes in tissue
structure, but also in the function of the tissue.
For instance, consider a busy liver cell. A harmful toxin comes into contact with
this cell and causes harm to the cell in some way - perhaps it damages one of the
tiny structures (organelles) within the cytoplasm which are important for the function
of the cell. This damage is the cellular lesion.
Toxin damages organelle,
andcausesaceffufarlesion
Ouch
The cellular lesion affects the function of our liver cell and it will not be able to do
its job properly, or may even die because of the lesion in its organelle. If lots of cells
in the liver also come into contact with the toxin and all are similarly affected then
the function of the liver as a whole may be affected, plus the look of the liver may be
altered.
Toxin darages organelles of lots of cells, causing
celfufar lesions in them all.
As a result, the function of all these cells (shown in
white) is irnpaired - thus, the function of the liver as
a whole may be affected. In addition, the physical
appearance of the liver may change. In this diagram,
the affected cells have died as a result of their
cellular lesions and have become pale and shrivelled.
The gross lesion on the surface of the liver would be
 pale and sunken.
Cells do not always die and shrink; they can also
become enlarged or change to another type of
cell, for instance, but in so doing they can cause
altered structure and function of the tissue as a
whole.
26
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
and function if the injuring stimulus is removed. These are also called
sublethal cell injuries/changes, that is 'not quite lethal injuries.
Irreversible cell injury -- cell injury causes alteration or loss of cell func-
tion and structural changes, but the cell cannot recover if the stim-
ulus stops or is removed. In other words, the cell passes a 'point of
no return' and even if the harmful stimulus stops, the cell will simply
die (see necrosis) (see Box 3.2).
The type of change in the cell or tissue depends on a number of
factors specific to the harmful stimulus and to the tissue itself; these
are summarised in Box 3.3.
So to summarise, the cells' responses to injurious or harmful stimuli
are:
Degeneration - which is a reversible response
But in the case of prolonged exposure of the cell to a harmful stimulus,
or exposure to a very severe (large) stimulus, or if the cell has a poor
blood supply, or in a cell with high metabolic rate, cellular degeneration
may progress to:
·Necrosis - which is an irreversible response and the cell dies.
There are other changes which can occur which involve the cell re-
sponding (adapting) by
Changes in cell growth, size, number - these can be either re-
versible or irreversible (see Chapter 8).
Box 3.8 includes a summary of all these cellular responses.
In this chapter, we will discuss the various types of cellular degen-
when cells die (necrosis).
Cellular degeneration
Cellular degenerations usually involve accumulation of substances
within cells. There are various types of substances which may
accumulate and the following discussion concerns some of the more
common intracellular accumulations. In severe cases of the accumu-
lations described below, the affected organ will become swollen and
discoloured because so many (if not all) of the cells making up the
organ are swollen with the accumulated substance (see Box 3.4).
· Accumulation of cellular components: As cells age, old and non-
functional cellular components (organelles) may shrivel up or be
Cell Injury
27
Box 3.2 Reversible versus irreversible cell changes
Reversible cefl injury or change - cell injury causes alteration or loss of cell function
and structural changes, but the cell can recover and regain structure and function if
Harmful stimulus damages
organelle causing a cellular
lesion
Ouch!
Harmful stimulus stops
Cell may have temporarily had to alter
That's
its structure or function to cope with the
better!
damage it has sustained but it can
recover afterwards.
Irreversible cell injury - cell injury causes alteration or loss of cell function and struc-
tural changes, but the cell cannot recover if the stimulus stops or is removed. In other
words, the cell passes a 'point of no return' and even if the harmful stimulus stops
the cell will simply die (see necrosis).
Harmful stirmulus damages
organelle causing a celfular
lesion
The damage was too great or too
REALLYhurts
sustained, or the cell was not able
to alter itself to cope.
Cell dead
Harmful stirmulus stops
28
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 3.3 Factors affecting the type of cellular damage which occurs in
response to a harmful stimulus
Factors specific to the injurious stimulus
Factors specific to the target tissue
Duration - how long the harmful
 Blood supply - how well supplied with
stimulus goes on for
blood the tissue is
Size - how large the harmful stimulus is
·Metabolic characteristics - how
metabolically active the tissue is
broken down, but their constituents may not be entirely removed
from the cytoplasm. They tend to accumulate as fatty, protein or
crystal deposits and can often be seen when the cells are examined
under the microscope.
sauquau llao on abeuea :(bulams Aonop) abueyo yidopAg 
means that cells swell with fluid. Occurs in many cell types, e.g.
early stages of liver cell damage by toxins.
Fatty change: Fat(lipid) accumulates in cells because of increased or
long-term fat breakdown in the body and thus the cells encounter
increased or long-term levels of fat in their immediate environment.
(This happens in malnutrition, when body fat is broken down and
carried to the liver for metabolism, because there are inadequate
dietary sources of energy. The liver cells therefore are presented
with large amounts of fat in the blood entering the liver.) Fatty
change can also occur because the ability of cells to metabolise
normal amounts of fat is decreased by cell damage (decreased cell
metabolism because of toxic damage, or reduced oxygen supply
due to heart dysfunction, respiratory disease or anaemia, or in di-
cause) in the livers of older cats.
Pigments: Accumulated pigments may be endogenous (produced
by the body) such as haemosiderin  (breakdown product of
red blood cells, which may accumulate if there is marked red blooc
cell breakdown) or bile (again associated with breakdown of red
blood cells). Bile pigments accumulate in disorders which cause
jaundice, such as liver disease. Melanin is the brown pigment in
skin and may accumulate in skin cells in certain conditions such as
chronic dermatitis, causing the skin to darken.
Accumulated pigments may also be exogenous, or foreign to the
body, such as carbon from pollution, which may accumulate in the
lungs of animals living in built-up areas. Other exogenous pigments
can also accumulate in cells, indeed we make use of the fact since
the inks used in tattoos accumulate in cells in the skin!
Cell Injury
29
 Proteins: Viruses have to use cells of living creatures to manufacture
protein as they do not have the capacity to do so for themselves;
without using cells this way, viruses would not be able to reproduce
themselves. Because of this, in some viral diseases, viral proteins
accumulate within cells and can be seen under the microscope as
so-called viral inclusions. Some viral inclusions are very characteristic
infection, even before virology has been carried out.
Box 3.4 Types of cellular degeneration
Cellular degenerations usually involve accumulation of substances within cells. There
are various types of substances which may accumulate; this table is a summary of
some of the more common intracellular accumulations.
In severe cases of the accumulation the affected organ will become swollen and
discoloured.
Accumulation
Examples
●Cellular components
 As cells age, old and non-functional organelles may
shrivel up or be broken down, but their constituents
may remain in the cytoplasm. They accumulate as
fatty. protein or crystal deposits, and can be visible
under the microscope.
Hydropic change
 Damage to cell membranes means that cells swell
(cloudy swelling)
with fluid, e.g. early stages of toxic damage to liver
cells.
●Fatty change
Fat (lipid) accumulates in cells because of increased
or long-term fat breakdown in the body (as in malnu-
trition) or because the ability of cells to metabolise
normal amounts of fat is decreased by cell damage
(e.g. decreased cell metabolism because of toxic
damage or reduced oxygen supply or in diabetes
mellitus). Fatty change can occur for uncertain rea-
sons in the livers of older cats.
●Pigments
Endogenous
Produced by the body. such as haemosiderin (from
口
red blood cell breakdown), or bile pigments (accu-
mulate in jaundice). Melanin accumulates in chronic
dermatitis.
Exogenous
Foreign to the body, e.g. carbon from pollution, in
the lungs of animals in built up areas, tattoo inks.
●Proteins
Accumulation of viral proteins within cells, can be
seen microscopically as viral inciusions. Some viral
inclusions are very characteristic and diagnostic
30
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 3.5 Common causes of necrosis
e uaum snsso Aew se yns (/ laideu aas 'eiuaeussi) Addns poola paseaoaa
blood vessel is damaged or blocked
· Pressure, for instance, from a tumour pressing on the area or prolonged presence
of a tight bandage
Burns - note that burns may be caused by heat, extreme cold (freezer burn) or
caustic chemicals
Trauma - causing damage to blood vessels or pressure on tissues
 Poisons and toxins - kill off cells by harmful effects on metabolism
Infectious agents (bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites) - damage cells in various
ways
When the insult is severe or prolonged, the cell reaches a point at
which it starts to die or undergo the process of necrosis, discussed next.
Cell death - necrosis
Necrosis is death of cells or tissues in a living animal. Note that when
an animal dies the cells and tissues of that animal will also die as their
an nou s! pue sishjoine palleo s! ssaooud siyh 'dons saddns uabixo
same as necrosis, which is specifically death of cells in a living animal.
There are a number of injurious stimuli that may result in necrosis (see
Box 3.5). If you read through Box 3.5 you will see that these causes
tend to involve either direct tissue damage or indirect damage due to
injury to the blood supply of the tissue.
Not all necrosis in every tissue is the same in type or appearance.
The type of necrosis that results in any given site depends on:
· the characteristics of the cells affected
· the characteristics of the tissues affected
· the cause of the necrosis
· other factors that might be involved, e.g. enzymes, bacteria and
viruses
So, let us expand this list by discussing some different types of
necrosis and their characteristic features.
Types of necrosis (see Boxes 3.6(a) and 3.6(b))
Coagulative necrosis
Coagulative necrosis is the most common type of necrosis and it occurs
in many of the 'solid' organs such as the kidney and heart. Affected
pey Aaui ybnoui se uy pue aled aie pue ainns liaun uieii suebio
been cooked. The dead cells often retain their outline when viewed
Cell Injury
31
under the microscope but are pale-staining and ghost-like. After a
period of time, inflammatory cells move in to start to remove the
dead cells (see Chapter 4), so the appearance of coagulative necrosis
changes with time.
Proteins are released by the damaged and dying cells and are use-
ful in the veterinary clinic as they can be detected in blood samples
and used as diagnostic indications of the presence of tissue damage
in certain organs. Examples of 'diagnostic' proteins are the enzymes
cle damage, and alanine aminotransferase (AAT) which are useful to
indicateliver damage.
Liquefactive necrosis (sometimes called colliquative necrosis)
Liquefactive necrosis refers to areas of necrosis which become liquefied
due to release of powerful enzymes which degrade the dead cells and
extracellular components leaving a thick soup. This type of necrosis
is characteristic after insults to the brain such as follows interruption
of the blood supply (infarction, see Chapter 7) or bacterial infection
(meningitis). In the latter case, the enzymes are produced by both the
bacteria and by inflammatory cells which arrive to fight the infection.
Liquefactive necrosis in the brain is also known as malacia.
Caseationnecrosis
In caseation necrosis, the dead tissue is converted to a cream cheese
texture (hence the name - caseous means'cheesy'l). This type of necro-
culosis and is due to the presence of special fats in the bacterial wall
which prevent liquetaction taking place
Fat necrosis
Fat necrosis occurs after inflammation in/around fatty tissue, and oc-
curs because enzymes degrade fat cells. The fat becomes hard and
nodular. This is seen in the abdomen after pancreatitis, when pancre-
atic enzymes eak into the fat in the peritoneum. It can sometimes occur
occur on the shoulders (withers) of draft animals, such as horses or
oxen, with badlly fitting harnesses.
Gangrene
Gangrene is a variant of coagulative necrosis and is the necrosis that
occurs specifically due to loss of blood supply to an area, especially
an extremity such as a foot, ear tip or tail. In most cases bacteria are
 o    n  ll    
them when the necrosis was occurring. In all cases the affected part is
cold to touch.
32
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Four types of gangrene are described:
·
 Dry gangrene: No bacteria are involved. The tissue is dry and shriv-
elled, and is discoloured.
· Gas gangrene: Gas-producing bacteria proliferate in the necrotic
tissue. The affected tissue has a crackly (crepitant) feel.
■
and is very foul smelling (putrefactive).
Wet gangrene: Bacteria are present and there is inflammation of
adjacent non-necrotic tissue (inflammation in connective tissue is
called cellulitis). The area swells and oozes fluid.
Sequelae of necrosis
'Sequelae' (plural), from 'sequel (singular) - in other words, what hap-
pens next, or the likely/possible next stages. The sequelae of necrosis
s! aieiauabal oi Age shl se yons) panloaui anssi aun uo puadap
blood supply etc.), the extent of the necrosis and whether the injuri-
ous stimulus has stopped or whether it is ongoing.
Possible sequelae are listed below and some will be discussed fur-
ther in the next few chapters. More than one of these possibilities may
occur at any site of necrosis.
Tissue regeneration: Healing of the area by replacement of dead
cells by cells of the same type (see Chapter 6).
by fibrous (scar) tissue (see Chapter 6).
Erosion or Ulceration: Loss of cells from a surface in or on the body.
usually accompanied by inflammation (see Chapter 4). There is ex-
posure of underlying tissues which is then vulnerable to bleeding
(haemorrhage - see Chapter 7) or infection and continuation of
inflammation.
Sequestration: The area of dead and dying cells becomes walled-
off (isolated) from the rest of the body by a dense rim of fibrous
tissue, which means that the necrotic process, usually accompanied
by inflammation (see Chapter 4), can continue inside (as an abscess)
Sometimes the contents of the abscess break through the fibrous
wall, spreading the inflammation and/or infection.
The preceding pages have discussed cellular changes in response
to harmful stimuli. There are some changes which can occur outside or
around cells (extracellular changes), and these are discussed below
Cell Injury
33
Box 3.6 (a) Types of necrosis
Coagulative necrosis
The most common type of necrosis, occurring in many of the 'solid' organs
(e.g. kidney and heart).
Affected organs retain their structure but are pale and firm (as though cooked).
The dead cells retain their outline but are pale and ghost-like.
 After a period of time inflammatory cells move in to start to remove the dead
cells (see Chapter 4), so the appearance of coagulative necrosis changes with
time.
Inflammatory cell
Pale ghost-like cells retain
Eventually, the dead cells are
their cellular outlines.
removed by inflammatory cells.
Liquefactive necrosis (sometimes called colliquative necrosis)
the dead cells and surrounding tissues leaving a thick soup.
Especially characteristic to the brain where it is called malacia, e.g. it occurs
after interruption of the blood supply or bacterial infection (meningitis). In the
latter case, the enzymes are produced by both the bacteria and by inflammatory
cells which arrive to fight the infection.
Bacteria
 Necrotic cells and surrounding tissue liquefied by powerful enzymes produced by inflammatory
cells and sometimes by bacteria.
34
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 3.6 (a) (Continued) Types of necrosis
Caseation necrosis
The dead tissue is converted to a cheesy texture.
Usually associated with chronic bacterial infections such as tuberculosis and is
due to the presence of special fats in the bacterial wall which prevent liquefaction
taking place.
Bacteria with
fats in their walls
Cheesy mass
of necrotic cells
In certain chronic bacterial infections, such as tuberculosis, special fats in the bacterial 
wall prevent liquefaction of the necrotic tissue taking place. The dead tissue is converted
to a cheesy texture.
Fat necrosis
Occurs after inflammation in/around fatty tissue, due to enzymes which de-
grade fat cells. The fat becomes hard and nodular.
Seen after pancreatitis, when pancreatic enzymes leak into the abdomen.
Sometimes occurs in fat subjected to trauma such as on the shoulders (withers)
of draft animals, such as horses or oxen, with badly fitting harnesses.
Hard nodular mass
Fat cells
of necrotic fat cells
Inflammation in or around fatty tissue, with release of enzymes which then degrade fat
cells. The fat becomes hard and nodular.
Cell Injury
35
Box 3.6 (b) Summary of gangrene
 Gangrene
A variant of coagulative necrosis.
 Occurs due to loss of blood supply to an area, especially extremities such as
limbs, ears or tail tips.
Bacteria are usually involved (contaminated wounds).
In all cases the affected part is cold to touch.
Four types of gangrene described:
 Dry - no bacteria.
The tissue is cold, shrivelled and discoloured
Gas - gas-producing bacteria proliferate.
The affected tissue has a crackly feel (crepitus).
 Moist - pus-producing bacteria proliferate.
Characteristically is rotten and foul smelling (putrefactive).
Wet - bacteria are present and there is inflammation of adjacent non-necrotic
tissue (cellulitis).
The area swells and oozes fluid.
Extracellular changes (see Boxes 3.7 and 3.8)
Mineralisation
Calcification is the deposition of calcium salts in normal or abnormal
tissues. Tissue containing deposited calcium salts is hard or gritty to
touch and the calcium deposition can be felt as a scraping sensation
when the tissue is incised with a knife. Two broad types are described -
cystrophic calcification and metastatic calcification.
 Dystrophic calcification: In this form of calcification, calcium is de-
posited locally at sites of tissue damage (especially necrosis). For
instance, it may occur in fatty tissue after pancreatic inflammation.
·Metastatic calcification: This form of calcification is associated with
persistent high calcium levels throughout the body so that tissue
is bathed in blood and fluids containing excess calcium. Causes of
metastatic calcification include vitamin D toxicity, excess parathy-
tumours, see Chapter 8) and kidney failure.
Other examples of mineralisation
 Dental plaque: Gum inflammation, bacteria from the mouth and
mineral in saliva combine to form a hard crust on the gums called
plaque.
36
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
1
Kidney, bladder or bile stones (calculi): The normal contents of a
hollow or tubular organ become thickened by mucus or sediment;
this, combined with bacteria, high local mineral levels and dead
cells, allows formation of hard stones (calculi or liths). The stones
vary slightly in colour and form depending on the mineral compo-
sition. See also urates/uric acid.
Crystals
Certain substances, entering via skin, lungs or intestinal tract, may lead
to formation of crystalline material which can accumulate in various
tissues. For instance, when animals drink liquid antifreeze (ethylene
glycol) or eat certain plants, calcium oxalate crystals may accumulate
in the kidneys (both inside and outside the cells) and cause necrosis
and renal failure.
Urates/uric acid
Uric acid crystals and urates deposit in tissues in the disease called
gout. This occurs when there is excess production or insufficient ex-
cretion of the metabolic waste-product uric acid. When uric acid levels
in blood exceed a certain level, the uric acid can no longer remain dis
solved in solution and urates or uric acid crystals deposit at various sites
causing inflammation and pain. Gout occurs in the joints, kidneys and
other organs (articular, renal and visceral forms of gout, respectively)
in birds, snakes, mink and man.
Dogs normally convert uric acid to a protein (allantoin) in the liver as
part of their metabolism. Dalmation dogs lack a liver enzyme required
to metabolise uric acid in this way and consequently excrete uric acid
in their urine. As a result, Dalmation dogs can develop urate or uric
acid urinary calculi (uroliths).
Protein
A dense protein called amyloid can accumulate in certain chronic in-
as an aging change. Amyloid is an abnormal protein form, and, once
As it builds up it can seriously hinder the function of affected tissues
and even cause cell death.
Cell Injury
37
Box 3.7 Summary of some of the main extracellular changes
Mineralisation
Calcification
1
Dystrophic calcification - calcium is de-
(deposition of calcium
posited in areas of tissue damage (espe-
salts in normaf or
cially necrosis), e.g. in fatty tissue after
abnormal tissues).
pancreatitis.
1
Metastatic calcification is associated with
persistent high body calcium leveis in
blood and fluids, e.g. vitamin D tox-
icity. excess parathyroid hormone (or
parathyroid-like hormone produced by
certain tumours) and renal failure.
Dental plaque: Gum inflammation, bacteria and mineral in saliva
combine to form a hard crust on the gums.
Kidney, bladder or bile stones (calculi): Contents of hollow or tubular
combined with bacteria, high mineral levels and dead cells hard
calculi (or liths} may form.
Crystals
Calcium oxalate oystals can accumulate in the kidneys (both inside
and outside the cells) and cause necrosis and renal failure. This
occurs when animals drink liquid antifreeze (ethylene glycol) or eat 
certain plants.
Urates/uric acid
Gout - deposition of uric acid crystals and
urates in tissues. Occurs when there is ex-
cess production, or insufficient excretion,
of the metabolic waste-product uric acid.
Gout occurs in articular, renal and visceral
forms in birds, snakes, mink and man.
 Dalmation dogs lack a liver enzyme re-
quired to metabolise uric acid to a pro-
tein (allantoin) in the liver, and excrete
uric acid in their urine. Hence these dogs
may develop urate or uric acid urinary cal-
culi (uroliths).
Protein
A protein called amyloid can accumulate in certain chronic
infectious, inflammatory, immune, metabolic or neoplastic diseases
or as an aging change.
Amyloid is an abnormal form of protein, and it is very resistant to
removal by enzymes. As it accumulates it can seriously hinder the
function of affected tissues.
38
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 3.8 Summary of cellular changes in response to a harmful
stimulus discussed in Chapters 3 and 8
This table is intended as a checklist or a revision aid. You will need to get the details
of each process from elsewhere in the book.
Reversible
Cell degenerations - intracellular accumulation of substances
(Chapter 3)
Old cellular components
Aging process
Fluid
Hydropic change
Lipids
Fatty change
1
Proteins
Viral inclusions
Pigments
snouabopua
Bile pigment (bilirubin),
haemosiderin, melanin
exogenous
Carbon, tattooing ink
Alterations of cell growth, size and number(see Chapter 8)
Atrophy
Hyperplasia
1
Hypertrophy
Metaplasia
Irreversible
Cell death -necrosis (Chapter 3)
·
Coagulation
·
Liquefaction 
Caseation
1
Fat necrosis
Gangrene
Aup
ogas
omoist
owet
Alterations of cell growth, size and number (see Chapter 8)
Neoplasia
Extracellular
Mineral
accumulations
口
dystrophic calcification
(Chapter 3)
0metastatic calcification
口
other
 Dental plaque
Crystals
Kidney, urinary bladder
and gallstones
Protein
Gout, calcium oxalate
crystals
Amyloid
Cell Injury
39
Summary of key points in Chapter 3
· Gross pathological lesions are manifestations of changes/injury at
cellular level.
·Cell changes can be reversible (the cell can recover when the harm-
ful stimulus stops) or irreversible (cell dies or cannot return to nor-
mal) depending on factors specific to the harmful stimulus and to
the tissue affected.
 Many reversible cell changes involve accumulation of endogenous
Or exogenous substances within the cell.
to the tissue affected and other factors involved.
There are also extracellular accumulations or changes.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 3
1. Write short notes to define and illustrate the term 'lesion', including
reference to reversible and irreversible cell changes.
2. Give three examples of types of cellular degeneration and associ-
ated clinical signs or conditions.
 3. What is meant by the term coagulative necrosis? What does a tissue
that has undergone coagulative necrosis look like? How may we
detect necrosis in veterinary practice?
4. Tissue regeneration is one sequel of necrosis, name one other
recognised sequel of necrosis.
5.Calcification is a common extracellular tissue degeneration.
a. Define calcification and describe the physical appearance of
calcified tissues.
b. What is meant by dystrophic calcification?
c.What is meant by metastatic calcification?
 6.Gout occurs in certain veterinary species. What species are most at
risk? What forms of gout are recognised? Briefly describe how gout
is caused.
Chapter 4
Inflammation
What is inflammation?
Nomenclature
Acute inflammation
Chronic inflammation
42
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 4
 To introduce the concept of inflammation as a protective response
To become familiar with the vascular changes in acute inflammation,
also the cells involved and the main histological features of acute
and chronic inflammation
 To discuss local and systemic effects, potential harmful effects and
sequelae of acute and chronic inflammation
What is inflammation?
and veterinary professionals alike will say a particular area of skin, an
eye or ear of an animal looks 'inflamed', but what do we mean when
we say this? Usually, we are referring to redness, swelling and tender-
ness of the affected part; in this chapter, we will discuss what causes
inflammation.
Inflammation is defined as a complex progression of blood vascular
and tissue changes that develops in response to tissue injury. What
is often not appreciated is that inflammation is primarily a protective
response. There are various protective mechanisms (phagocytic cells,
leucocytes and antibodies) which circulate in the blood. Inflammation
is a response that extends these defences of the blood out into the
tissues, and prepares the way for repair of the tissue. The inflammatory
response often works in concert with, and is directed by, cells of the
immune system.
Whilst the protective role of inflammation is less commonly appre-
ciated, the fact that uncontrolled or inappropriate inflammation can
be harmful or destructive (even life-threatening if severe) is more com-
monly recognised. Inflammation which has become severe is usually
the reason for animals with inflammatory conditions being presented
often exacerbated by self-harm (self-trauma) - scratching, licking, bit-
ing etc. - which can cause further tissue damage or introduce infection.
Inflammation is cescribed as acute or chronic, and this infers not
just the duration of the inflammatory response but also indicates dif-
ferences in the inflammatory cells involved.
Nomenclature
We indicate inflammation in various organs or tissues by using the suffix
(word ending)'-itis' afterthe Greek word forthe organ. So, for instance,
Inflammation
43
Box 4.1 Summary of the introduction to inflammation
Inflammation is:
·usually denoted by the suffix 'itis' after the Greek word for the organ (e.g. hep-
atitis, nephritis, enteritis etc.)
· a complex progression of blood vascular and tissue changes that develops in
response to tissue injury
 a protective response, which extends the defences of the blood out into the
tissues and prepares the area for repair
 may become uncontrolled or inappropriate, and then can be painful, harmful or
even life-threatening
often exacerbated in veterinary species by self-trauma (scratching, licking and
biting)
described as acute or chronic, depending on the duration and cell types involved
inflammation in the liver is known as hepatitis; kidney, nephritis; small
intestine, enteritis; colon, colitis; skin, dermatitis and so on.
So, let us consider the two types of inflammation - acute and
chronic - in more detail, and discuss what these terms mean, and
the differences between them.
Acute inflammation
From: Latin 'acutus' = sharp. Indicating a disease of short and sharp
course
Acute inflammation is the initial reaction of a tissue to injury. It aims to
rapidly contain, dilute and remove the harmful stimulus which has set
off the inflammatory response, and to prepare the tissues for repair.
The (local) clinical signs of acute inflammation
There are five typical local signs of inflammation, which are also known
as the cardinal signs of inflammation. These cardinal signs will be famil-
iar to anyone who has seen an inflamed lesion. The cardinal signs are
redness, heat in the tissue, pain and swelling, and often, loss of func-
 ue uieae suais ieuiie asaua sisll h't xog hed paahe aut jo uo
this box, next to each English term you will see a Latin term in italics.
In some pathology textbooks you will see these Latin words used, as
these are the terms coined by early pathologists, such as Celsus and
Galen, who originally defined the cardinal signs of inflammation. No-
tice that the Latin term tumor is used but that this is a non-specific
or neoplastic growth (see further discussion of this in Chapter 8).
44
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.2 The cardinal signs of acute inflammation
Redness - rubor
Heat - calor
Pain - dolor
Swelling - tumor
Loss of function - functio laesa
Some pathology textbooks tend to use the Latin terms for each of these signs so
   e    e       s
are the terms coined by early pathologists who first defined these cardinal signs of
inflammation.
Notice that the Latin term tumor is used for swelling but that this term is often
used to denote cancer or neoplastic growth (see further discussion of terminology of
neoplasms in Chapter 8).
What causes acute inflammation? In other words, what do we mean
by harmful stimuli for inflammation? There are a number of causes
of inflammation such as presence of infectious agents or physical
insults like trauma and burns. The immune system is involved in in-
flammation; indeed, the immune system is important in directing the
inflammatory response. The immune system is also involved in in-
something (see Chapter 5). Finally, the presence of dead tissues (necro-
sis) for whatever reason, e.g. an interruption to the blood supply (see
Chapter 7), can be a stimulus for an inflammatory response.
Causes of acute inflammation include:
·Infection - bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites
Immune responses, hypersensitivities
Physical causes - trauma, heat, cold, radiation and chemicals
Presence of dead tissue (necrosis) due to a number of causes, e.g.
ischaemia (see Chapter 7), or cdamaging effects of infectious organ-
isms on cells
The three phases of acute inflammation
Acute inflammation is composed of three phases, which can be sum-
marised as:
Vascular - change in blood vessel diameter
Exudative - increases in blood vesselleakiness resulting in fluid
leakage from the circulation
· Cellular - leucocytes leave blood vessels, travel to site of injury and
become activatec
Inflammation
45
Box 4.3 Diagram of a capillary bed
Before considering the three phases of acute inflammation it is probably a good idea
to remind ourselves that all tissues have a vast meshwork of fine blood vessels called
capillaries (which form the capillary bed) and which receive arterial blood from the
heart via an arteriole, and drain blood into the venous circulation, which carries it
we are concerned particularly with their invo vement in acute inflammation.
Note the round cells, called mast cells, which are numerous in connective tissues -
especially associated with blood vessels. We shall discuss mast cells and their actions
in relation to phase 2 of acute inflammation.
Capillary bed in tissues
Arterial inflow
(oxygenated blood
from the heart)
Venous
outflow (blood
containing CO2
and wastes from
the tissues)
back to the
heart)
Mast cell
These three phases are discussed in more detail below. Note that
curing inflammation there will be overlap of the phases, and more
than one phase may be occurring at any one time.
Before considering the phases of acute inflammation it will be help-
ful to remember that all tissues have a meshwork of fine blood vessels
(the capillary bed) which receives arterial blood from the heart via an
arteriole, and drains blood into the venous circulation, which takes
it back to the heart and then to the lungs. (See Box 4.3; see also
Chapter 7 for more features of the circulatory system and capillaries in
particular.)
Vascular phase of acute inflammation
The vascular phase is sub-divided into two parts:
1. 'White line' is transient (lasting only a few seconds) and com-
prises a short period of constriction in the arteriole supplying
46
General Pathology forVeterinary Nurses
the capillary bed. The white line is a reflex smooth muscle re-
sponse; you can demonstrate this by firmly dragging the blunt
end of a pen across your skin. You should see a brief white line
appear!
2. Hyperaemia is a longer period (lasting several minutes or even
mediators from the damaged tissue and from the plasma. Hyper-
aemia causes the area to become red and to feel warm (see Box
4.4). (Note that in American texts the spelling is hyperemia.)
Exudative phase of acute inflammation
The result of the exudative phase is, as the name suggests, escape
or exudation of protein-rich fluid from the blood into the surrounding
damaged tissue.
dothelial) cells of the capillaries since these endothelial cells can be
injured by the same harmful stimulus that triggered the inflammatory
response in the first place. Hence, physical damage, toxic agents, in-
fection, enzymes and oxygen free radicals could stimulate exudation
of fluid from blood into tissue. The injury to the endothelial cells sim-
ply makes them less efficient at lining blood vessels and the capillaries
become leaky (at least, more leaky than normal - see Chapter 7). In
the exudative phase of acute inflammation, however, we are really
concerned with a 'deliberate' leakiness, orchestrated by cells of the
acute inflammatory response. The chief cells involved in this are mast
cells.
Mast cells are large round cells that are widespread in the body
in connective tissues, strategically placed beside capillary beds (we
introduced them in Box 4.3). Mast cells contain packets of potent
chemicals in their cytoplasm (these packets are called intracytoplasmic
granules). When mast cells are stimulated they release the contents
of their intracytoplasmic granules (degranulate) so that the contents
escape and act on nearby cells or tissues. The contents of mast cell
intracytoplasmic granules include histamine, which has a number of
biological effects, but importantly for our current discussion, histamine
causes increased vascular permeability by stimulating the endothelial
cells to contract. This cell contraction opens up holes in the capillary
walls (intercellular junctions) allowing the escape of the protein-rich
exudate into the surrounding tissue. Histamine is also, incidentally,
able to cause vasodilation.
Mast cells can be triggered to degranulate by a number of stimuli
ayi s! 1l (g't xog aas) Aem aaoaioid e u! buoe semle tou ale pue
fever sufferers' lives a misery at certain times of the year!
Inflammation
47
Box 4.4 Hyperaemia
Hyperaemia is part of the second phase of acute inflammation and consists of a
released by the damaged tissue.
Blood flow to the area markedly increases as a result of the vascular dilatation and
this causes the area to become red and to feel warm (two of the cardinal signs of
acute inflammation).
Normal capillary bed
Arterial inflow
Venous
outflow
Hyperaemic capillary bed in acute
inflammation
Action of chemical mediators
from damaged tissue
48
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.5 Mast cells and exudation
All blood vessels are lined by a layer of slender cells called endothelial cells which
together make up the inner layer of the vessel wall - the endothelium. We will
discuss the structure of capillaries more in Chapter 7; for now, it is the role of the
endothelium in the exudative phase of acute inflammation which interests us.
Capillaries do not have much structure to their walls, so in effect the walls of
capillaries are little more than a thin 'crazy paving' of endothelial cells (see diagram
below). As a result they are naturally slightly leaky to fluid (see Chapter 7).
 Intercellular junction
Diagram of a capillary - the wall is composed of a single layer of endothelial cells.
In the exudative phase of acute inflammation, we are really concerned with a 'delib-
erate' leakiness, orchestrated by cells of the acute inflammatory response. The chief
cells involved in this process are mast cells.
Mast cells are large rounded cells that are widespread in the body in connective
tissues, and especially in connective tissue surrounding capillary beds (see Box 4.3).
Mast cells contain packets (called intracytoplasmic granules) of potent chemicals.
When mast cells are stimulated (by various stimuli) they release the contents of
their intracytoplasmic granules (a process called degranulation) so that the chemicals
escape and can then act on nearby cells or tissues.
Diagram of a mast cell - the
cytoplasm contains numerous
granules which contain potent
chemicals, such as histamine.
When mast cells are stimulated
to degranulate, the chemicals
are released into the surrounding
tissues.
The chemical contents of mast cell granules include histamine which has a number
of biological effects including the ability to increase vascular permeability (leakiness)
by stimulating the endothelial cells to contract. This cell contraction opens up gaps
Inflammation
49
Box 4.5 (Continued) Mast cells and exudation
between the endothelial cells { intercellular junctions) effectively forming holes in the
capillary walls, and allowing the escape of the protein-rich fluid (exudate) into the
surrounding tissue. Histamine is also able to cause vasodilation directly so can also
contribute to the vascular phase of inflammation.
Escape of protein-rich exudate
Intercellular junctions opened up by
the contraction of endothelial cells 
due to the effects of histamine
Mast cells respond to a number of triggers, and do not always have protective
intentions. It is the effects of histamine from inappropriately stimulated mast cells
that makes hay fever sufferers' lives such a misery at certain times of the year!
Note that exudation may also occur when there has been direct damage to the
stimulus that triggered the inflammatory response in the first place. Hence, physical
exudation of fluid from blood into the tissues. The injury to the endothelial cells
makes them less efficient at lining blood vessels and the capillaries become more
leaky than normal, and more fluid leaks out than the drainage function of the venous
and lymphatic circulations can cope with (see Chapter 7).
The leaked fluid accumulates in the tissues causing heat, swelling and pain (more
cardinal signs of acute inflammation!)
Because the capillaries are made leaky by the opening up of gaps
between the endothelial cells, large molecules in the blood (like pro-
teins) and cells are also able to escape into the tissues. This is why in-
flammatory exudate is rich in protein. Normally, the proteins and cells
Aelldeo aui ui suooun! teinllaotaiui aui ybnoiyi ssed oi ahiel oot aie
walls. The typical composition of inflammatory exudlate is shown in Box
4.6. Exudation of fluid causes swelling, heat and pain in the area.
50
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.6 Typical contents of inflammatory exudate
Water
Electrolytes
Plasma proteins (albumin, globulin and fibrinogen)
Red blood cells
 Platelets
Cellular phase of acute inflammation
The cellular phase of acute inflammation is a period of 'recruitment' of
white blood cells (leucocytes) to the site of injury. The leucocytes aim
to destroy bacteria at the site, to direct other cells of the inflammatory
buiAp pue peap buiaoual Aq ssau ayt dn uealo oi ueas ot pue ssaooud
cells, paving the way for the healing process to start.
The main leucocyte involved in acute inflammation is the neutrophil.
See Box 4.7 for the main features of neutrophils.
Recruitment of neutrophils in the cellular phase
of acute inflammation
In small veins (venules) and capillaries near the site of tissue damage.
neutrophils marginate, which means they move towards the endothe-
lial walls of the blood vessels, then they loosely stick to the walls and
roll slowly along. At an intercellular junction between endothelial cells,
they migrate out through the vessel wall (with the fluid exudate). Once
in the tissue, using their natural motility, the neutrophils continue to
migrate to the site of damage (see Box 4.8).
At the site of tissue camage the neutrophils degranulate, releasing
their active granules into the area to kill bacteria (which they then
ingest and destroy) and proteases to clean away the dead and dying
tissue, thus preparing the site for healing (see Chapter 6).
When this cellular migration involves many cells, the fluid exudate
which is also being produced becomes cloucy and is called a cellular
exudate.
As well as local effects there are more general (systemic) effects of
inflammation, discussed in the next section. You may recognise many
of these as clinical signs in animals in your clinic.
Systemic effects of acute inflammation
Increased body temperature (fever)
0 Caused by chemical mediators of inflammation circulating in the
aui u! sauuas Aoieinbal aunieaduai uo bune pue poolg
brain
Inflammation
51
Box 4.7 Essential features of the neutrophil
Cartoons of neutrophils. These small round
cells have segmented nuclei and granules in
their cytoplasm.
Features of neutrophils
· Neutrophils (NLs) are characteristic and diagnostic for acute inflammation
NLs have segmented nuclei (see cartoons above)
 NLs have intracytoplasmic granules, the contents of which include
0substances able to kill bacteria (antimicrobial factors)
 enzymes able to digest protein ( proteases)
NLs originate in the bone marrow and circulate in the blood
·They do not live very long and if they attack bacteria they usually die in the process
Actions of neutrophils
NLs are the first defence against invading microbes
 They are also involved in the initial removal of dead tissues
They are able to move (motile), and are attracted to sites of tissue damage by
chemical mediators produced by other cells
NLs themselves produce mediators which regulate inflammation
NLs stick to, ingest and destroy microbes by digesting them using the contents of
their granules (phagocytosis) (see also macrophages, Box 4.12 - later this chapter)
·Changes in blood (haematology)
0 Increased release of mature neutrophils from bone marrow
Stimulation of production of new (immature) neutrophils - re-
ferred to as a 'shift to the left' or a 'left shift'
Possibly anaemia - the chemical mediators of inflammation can
exert an inhibitory effect on the red cell producing part of bone
marrow
·Pain
Direct nerve stimulation by chemical mediators or contents of
neutrophil granules
0 Indirect due to fluid accumulation, forcing tissue components
apart
52
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.8 Recruitment of leucocytes in the cellular stage of acute
inflammation
A: In venules and capillaries, the leucocytes (such as neutrophils or NLs) marginate,
that is they move to the edge of the blood vessels and loosely stick to the endothelial
wall. They then roll slowly along the walls.
Red blood cells
Direction of
blood flow 
NLS
Endothelial cells
B: Near to the site of tissue damage, the leucocytes stop and squeeze through a
junction between the endothelial cells.
C: The leucocytes travel through the tissue until they reach the site of damage and
then they release the contents of their granules (degranulate).
Leukocytes use the contents of their granules to kill bacteria,
neutralise toxins, breakdown dead and dying tissue etc.
Site of tissue damage
Inflammation
53
Depression (malaise), anorexia, nausea
 Due to the effects of pain
 Or due to the effects of chemical mediators on the brain
Muscle pain (myalgia)
Breakdown of muscle by chemical mediators
Weight loss
Muscle breakdown
 Nausea, anorexia or pain causing loss of appetite
 Or due to the effects of chemical mediators on appetite centres
in the brain (Box 4.9)
Box 4.9 Systemic effects of acute inflammation
increased body temperature (fever)
 Caused by chemical mediators of inflam-
 mation circulating in the blood and acting
on temperature regulatory centres in the
brain
Changes in haematology
Increased release of mature neutrophils
from bone marrow
● Stimulation of production of new (imma-
ture) neutrophils - referred to as a 'shift
to the left' or‘left shift'
●Possibly anaemia - the chemical medi-
ators of inflammation can exert an in-
hibitory effect on the red cell-producing
part of bone marrow
Pain
 Direct nerve stimulation by chemical me-
diators or contents of neutrophil granules
 Indirect due to fluid accumulation, forcing
tissue apart 
Depression (malaise), anorexia, nausea
Due to the effects of pain
 Or due to the effects of chemical media-
tors on the brain
Muscle pain (myalgia)
 Breakdown of muscle by chemical medi-
ators
Weight loss
Muscle breakdown
Nausea, anorexia or pain causing loss of
appetite
 Or due to the effects of chemical media-
tors on appetite centres in the brain
54
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Some specific types of acute inflammation
The above description is a general account of acute inflammation, in-
volving production of a cellular (neutrophilic) exudate. There are some
specific types of acute inflammation, which involve different types of
exudate. For instance
·Serous exudate has a low cell content but is composed of the high
protein fluid described earlier in this chapter.
■
Haemorrhagic exudate contains numerous red blood cells in the
serous fluid, with or without leucocytes.
 Fibrinous exudate contains abundant sticky protein called fibrin
(see also discussion of blood clotting in Chapter 7). This type of
pleura or peritoneum are inflamed (see section Harmful effects of
acute inflammation).
· Purulent or suppurative exudate contains many dead and dying
neutrophils and bacteria (pus) (see section Harmful effects of acute
inflammation).
· In addition to these, combinations may occur such as mucopurulent
these terms!
Remember, inflammation aims to protect the body by seeking out
and destroying damaging or harmful stimuli (whatever they may be),
limiting their spread and cleaning up afterwards so that healing can
ensue. Sometimes, however, inflammation can have harmful effects
on the animal and we have discussed some of these when looking
at systemic effects of acute inflammation. The following list indicates
some of the especially bad effects of acute inflammation.
Harmful effects of acute inflammation (see Box 4.10)
aeo iou op aun pue 'suiaod isabip teyi sauazua uieuoo sydo
what proteins they digest. If lots of neutrophils are activated, there
can therefore be damage to surrounding tissue, not just the site of
the original damage.
 Systemic effects may be severe: If you refer again to the list of
systemic effects of acute inflammation you will appreciate that in
severe cases there is the potential for considerable pain, loss of
appetite, weight loss and fever, for instance.
 Excessive loss of serum: This can cause marked swelling, with prob.
lems of pain, irritation and self-trauma. In really severe cases, fluid
loss may contribute to shock (see Chapter 7).
Inflammation of vessel walls (vasculitis): Vasculitis can cause exces-
sive leakiness of blood vessels, haemorrhage or tendency for blood
Inflammation
55
to clot inappropriately (thrombosis), and can impair blood supply
to tissue (ischaemia and infarction) (see Chapter 7).
·Hypersensitivity reactions: In animals sensitive to certain protein
triggers (allergens) mast cell degranulation can be excessive and
the immune system can direct a very marked and inappropriate in-
flammatory response. Some of the very itchy skin diseases we see
in veterinary species are examples of hypersensitivities; these con-
ditions often involve eosinophils instead of neutrophils (see later).
·Severe fibrin exudation: As noted above, the sticky protein fibrin
tends to accumulate on serous membranes such as pleura (which
cover the lungs and line the rib cage), the pericardium (around
the heart), or the peritoneum (which surrounds the abdominal con-
tents). The fibrin subsequently is replaced by fibrous tissue (by the
process of organisation - see Chapter 6) forming a firm scar (adhe-
sion). In some circumstances and locations, this fibrous scarring can
be damaging and hinder normal function of the organ. For instance,
pleural adhesions that form after severe pneumonia can affect lung
expansion. Adhesions forming after inflammation of peritoneum
(peritonitis) may bind segments of gut tightly together or even en-
circle the gut causing an effective blockage of the intestine.
 Suppurative exudate: Suppurative exudate can become walled off
an abscess) which refuses to clear up or occasionally bursts out.
Abscesses which choose to burst internally may lead to conditions
such as septic peritonitis or pericarditis, which in worst cases may
lead to potentially fatal septic shock (see Chapter 7).
Box 4.11 is a handy summary of acute inflammation. We now move
on from acute inflammation to discuss longer-term inflammatory re-
sponses.
Chronic inflammation
From: Greek 'chronos' = time, of long duration; indicating a disease
of slow progress and long continuance
Chronic inflammation is defined as the persistence of the inflammatory
year or more). Compare the time scale of acute inflammation earlier in
this chapter.
Chronic inflammation is not exudative and involves the formation
of fibrous tissue (fibrosis, see Chapter 6). Different cells are involved
too, with macrophages (Box 4.12) and cells of the immune system
(ymphocytes and plasma cells; Box 4.13) being important. Mast cells
and neutrophils play lesser roles in chronic inflammation, if they are
involved at all.
56
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.10 Harmful effects of summary of acute inflammation
Excessive tissue damage
Leucocytes like NLs contain enzymes that digest
proteins indiscriminately. If lots of NLs are activated
they can damage surrounding tissue, not just the
site of the original damage.
Systemic effects may be severe
In severe inflammation there may be considerable
pain, loss of appetite, weight loss and fever.
Excessive loss of serum
Causes marked swelling. with pain, irritation and
self-trauma. If very severe, fluid loss may contribute
to shock.
Inflammation of vessel walls
Causes excessive leakiness of blood vessels, and
(vasculitis)
haemorrhage or inappropriate clotting (thrombo-
sis), impairing blood supply to tissue (ischaemia and
infarction).
Hypersensitivity reactions
In animals sensitive to certain protein triggers (af-
lergens) mast cell degranulation can be excessive
and the immune system directs a marked and in-
appropriate inflammatory response, e.g. very itchy
skin diseases (often involving eosinophils instead of
NLs).
Severe fibrin exudation
Fibrin accumulates on serous membranes, e.g. the
 pleura, pericardium or peritoneum. The fibrin is re-
placed by fibrous tissue (organisation) forming a scar
(adhesion). In some circumstances and locations this
fibrous scarring hinders normal function of the or-
gan.
off by fibrous tissue
 or bursts. Abscesses which burst internally may lead
to septic peritonitis or pericarditis, which can cause
potentially fatal septic shock.
Box 4.11 Summary of acute inflammation
Vascular - change in blood vessel diameter. White line followed by hyperaemia.
Exudative - increase in blood vessel leakiness resulting in fluid loss. Mast cells are
important.
Cellular - leucocytes leave blood vessels, travel to site of injury and become activated
(degranulate). NLs are important
Inflammation
57
Box 4.12 Features of macrophages
Cartoon of a macrophage
A large rounded cell with a single rounded
nucleus
Features of macrophages
 Macrophages are large rounded cells with single rounded nuclei
They are produced in the bone marrow
1
palle ane uaun puei anssli an latua pue (saouo sei poolq aui u laaen sa
macrophages) (see diagram below)
They are longer-lived than NLs, with a 30-60 day life span
They are larger and move more slowly than NLs
 Origin of tissue macrophages
Monocyte in blood circulation
Long bone containing bone
marrow
Macrophage in tissue
Actions of macrophages
Very efficient at phagocytosis. Have intracytoplasmic vacuoles containing enzymes
which they use to digest the target (see A. B. and C. below)
 Macrophages do not necessarily die when they attack a target and can live to
fight another day (unlike NLs)
They can digest a wider range of targets than NLs, including foreign material
 In the case of particularly persistent targets, foreign material that is hard to digest
for instance, macrophages are directed by lymphocytes to increase their killing
 power by joining forces. When they do this they form very large cells with lots of 
nuclei (multinucleated giant cells) (see D. below)
Macrophages also produce mediators which regulate inflammation, immune re-
sponse, and repair processes
58
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.12 (Continued) Features of macrophages
Phagocytosis
 A. The macrophage engulfs a particle to be destroyed, keeping it in a vacuole within
its cytoplasm. B. Enzymes from its intracytoplasmic granules are secreted into the
vacuole. C. The particle is broken down and eventually the fragments may be
extruded ("spat out") by the macrophage, which can then attack another foreign
particle.
Multi-nucleated giant cell
Lymphocyte
With very persistent inflammatory stimuli (e.g. foreign material), macrophages
may be directed by lymphocytes to gang together and form multi-nucleated
giant cells.
the mediators which encourage fibrous tissue formation can stimulate
division and growth of other cells too.
The main types of chronic inflammation
Two main types of chronic inflammatory response are described,
known as granulomatous and non-granulomatous (or diffuse) chronic
inflammation, which refers to the pattern of inflammatory cells seen
under the microscope.
Inflammation
59
Box 4.13 Lymphocytes and plasma cells
A lymphocyte - a small round cell with
sparse cytoplasm and a round nucleus.
A plasma cell - a medium-sized oval cell with a
round nucleus towards one end, which looks a bit
like a clock face.
Features and actions of lymphocytes and plasma cells
Lymphocytes are small and round with relatively little cytoplasm. Plasma cells are
oval shaped. Both have round nuclei and are sometimes known as the mononu-
clear cells
 They are of bone marrow or thymus origin
 They are important cells of the immune system
 They are involved when the immune system directs inflammatory processes
 Lymphocytes produce inflammatory mediators which regulate chronic inflamma-
tion
 Plasma cells are a variant of lymphocytes and produce antibodies (see Chapter 5)
Non-granulomatous chronic inflammation involves loose clusters of
inflammatory cells with no particular arrangement and a variable back-
-ins ul Ayaoaay io eisediady aalieai ym o 'sisoiqy jo punoia
thicken and become greasy because of hyperplasia in the skin glands.
The wall of chronically inflamed gut may also become thickened com-
pared with normal.
Granulomatous chronic inflammation describes inflammation com-
posed of distinct arrangements of inflammatory cells called granulo-
mas (see Box 4.14). Granulomas are made up of central collections of
macrophages with other mainly mononuclear inflammatory cells clus-
tered around the macrophages and a rim of fibrous tissue around the
outside.
Specialised forms of macrophages may be present, such as mult-
inucleated giant cells (see Box 4.12) which are formed by fusion
pyogranulomatous. This means that there are neutrophils as well
as macrophages in the centre of the granulomas. Feline infectious
60
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.14 Structure of a granuloma (diagrammatic and not to scale)
Wall of developing filbrous tissue
Fbroblasts
(cells which
form fibrous
(anssg
t+
Zone of
lymphocytes
and plasma
cells
Central area contains:
macrophages (and possibly multinucleated giant cells)
there may also be neutrophils in certain circumstances (pyogranulomatous inflammation)
dead and/or dying cells
proteins
foreign material or infectious agents 
This diagram demonstrates the structure of granulomas in chronic granulomatous
inflammation. The components of a granuloma tend to form recognisable patterns,
zone of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and all are encircled by variably mature fibrous
tissue (depending how long-standing is the granuloma).
Granulomas may be single and large (grossly visible lumps) or they may be smaller
and multiple so the affected tissue feels thickened and nodular (lumpy).
Granulomas form when the cause of the inflammation resists destruction by other
inflammatory or immune-mediated processes. Foreign material (sutures or splinters)
will stimulate a granulomatous inflammatory response, as will resistant infectious 
organisms, like bacteria with capsules of waxy coats (e.g. the tuberculosis bacillus) or
parasites with tough outer walls.
Some immune responses are associated with granuloma formation and, in certain
cases, hypersensitivities.
Inflammation
61
peritonitis (FlP) virus causes inflammation which is characteristically
pyogranulomatous (see also Chapter 5).
Granulomas may be single and large (grossly visible lumps) or they
may be smaller and there may be lots of them, so an affected tissue
feels thickened and nodular (lumpy). They form when the cause of the
mediated processes. Foreign material, like sutures or splinters, will
 initiate granulomatous inflammation, as will resistant infectious organ-
isms, like bacteria with protective capsules or waxy coats (such as in
tuberculosis) or parasites with tough outer walls. Certain immune re-
sponses are associated with granuloma formation and, in certain cases,
hypersensitivities.
Eosinophilic granuloma in cats
A specific granulomatous condition, which does not involve the typical
cell types discussed above, is eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC)
in cats. Eosinophilic granuloma is actually a hypersensitivity reaction;
i snnus reined e o 'em pateaahexa ue ui lo Aaiedoiddeui
comprises a number of skin lesions, often involving the lip or face. The
lesions are firm and usually ulcerated. Eosinophils have granules in their
cytoplasm (intracytoplasmic granules), the contents of which are quite
damaging to tissues (Box 4.15). Eosinophil accumulation and activation
(degranulation) is usually accompanied by local tissue camage which
stimulates a secondary acute inflammatory response.
Sometimes we do not know the stimulus for EGC (an idiopathic re-
sponse), but one example of an eosinophilic granulomatous inflamma-
such as a mosquito, biting the cat on a sensitive area such as the nose
Returning to the more typical manifestation of chronic inflammation,
we now discuss what harmful effects it can have on the animal.
Harmful effects of chronic inflammation
·Long-term diseases: Chronic inflammation is often associated with
long-term diseases, which result from lasting dysfunction of the
affected organ or tissue. For instance, persistent renal disease due
to chronic nephritis (inflammation of the kidney), or unremitting
diarrhoea or weight loss due to chronic enteritis.
· Weight loss or poor weight gain: As well as possible direct effects
of the chronic inflammatory process there can be weight loss or
poor weight gain due to chronic effects of chemical mediators (see
also Systemic effects of acute inflammation).
62
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 4.15 Eosinophils
Features and actions of eosinophils
Eosinophils (ELs) are formed in bone marrow
Like neutrophils (NLs), they are smallround cells with multilobed nuclei, but they
stain a slightly different colour to NLs in histological sections - tending to look
red
Horse ELs are expanded by lots of large granules, which makes them look like
small bunches of grapes under the microscope
Eosinophil
Horse eosinophil
1
needed
 ELs are motile (like NLs)
 They have intracytoplasmic granules which contain
0Enzymes similar to NLs
0 Also, a range of additional highly active degradative and anti-inflammatory
proteins specific to ELs
 ELs are associated with:
oParasite infestations
0 Allergic reactions and hypersensitivities
shuabe jebiel abewep 0h puai si3 'sin ueui os ssal yonoui slroobeyd aie s73
( like parasites) by releasing their granule contents towards the target. Other in-
flammatory cells can then move in to remove the remains of the target
ELs can damage tissue if they over-secrete their enzymes (for instance in allergies)
·Loss of organ/tissue function: There can be loss of tissue func
tion due to the presence of the inflammatory process, for instance,
chronically inflamed gut will not absorb nutrients efficiently, but also
chronic inflammation may cause unremitting pain, swelling, fibrosis
(scar formation), discharge (if associated with a focus of walled-off
suppuration) and so on. Muscles in affected limbs may atrophy.
or scar tissue becomes excessive, or there may be metaplasia of
epithelial cells to another type with dlifferent functions (see Chap-
ter 8).
Inflammation
63
Tumour formation: In rare cases, chronic inflammation may even
lead to formation of a tumour at the site.
levels of inflammatory mediators.
·Changes in the blood: Long-term stimulation of the bone marrow
and utilisation of white cells can alter the haematology results. The
white cells will tend to increase as will levels of proteins called
globulins which are associated with antibodies (see Chapter 5), but
there will usually be a decrease in the red cell producing part of the
bone marrow, so chronic inflammation is accompanied by anaemia
One final note on spelling, have you noticed that inflamed' contains
only one 'm', whilst 'inflammation' has two of them? These are two
more words that examiners like to see spelt correctly!
Summary of key points in Chapter 4
Inflammation is a complex progression of vascular and cellular
 changes in response to tissue injury, which operates in concert with
the immune system.
· Inflammation is a protective response, but sometimes it becomes
exaggerated, inappropriate or harmful.
·Acute inflammation is the initial short-term response, in which blood
vessels dilate and become permeable with escape of fluid exudate,
and white blood cells such as neutrophils are recruited from the
vessels.
 Chronic inflammation occurs in the presence of continued or longer
term stimuli and is dominated by macrophages and cells of the
immune system (lymphocytes and plasma cells) with fibrous tissue.
   d a as e e s a
mation, though chronic inflammation can also be diffuse (non-
granulomatous).
64
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Test yourself questions on Chapter 4
1.Define the term 'inflammation' and then write some brief notes on
the main features of inflammatory responses.
2.  a. Name the three phases of acute inflammation.
b.  What are the five (local) clinical (or cardinal) signs of acute inflam-
mation and what phase(s) of acute inflammation do you think
are likely to contribute to each of the signs you have listed?
3.a.
Why is the tissue fluid which results in the exudative phase of
acute inflammation high in protein?
b.[
 List three typical components of an inflammatory exudate, apart
from protein.
4. Describe how an abscess may form at the site of inflammation.
5.  Briefly discuss the difference between acute and chronic inflamma-
tion, remembering to indicate which cells are important.
indicate the appearance of each of these types of chronic
inflammatory response.
b. Draw a simple diagram of a granuloma - indicate arrangement 
of the main cell types likely to be involved.
Give an example of a veterinary disease characterised by gran-
ulomatous inflammation.
Chapter 5
Pathology and the
Immune System
The normal immune system
Why do animals need an immune system?
How does the immune system work?
The lymphocyte families
Diseases of the immune system
Disorders of reduced immune function
Disorders of increased or inappropriate immunity
66
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 5
To summarise the immune system's role as a protector, the different
parts of the immune system (innate and adaptive immunity, and cell
mediated and humoral immunity) and the links with inflammation
To discuss diseases due to under-reactivity of the immune system
(allergy), or inability to distinguish 'self (autoimmunity)
The normal immune system
Why do animals need an immune system?
Animals (and humans) encounter potentially harmful infectious agents
all the time. On a daily basis, bacteria, viruses or fungal spores may
be swallowed or inhaled, try to colonise the skin, urinary or repro-
ductive tracts, or may penetrate the mucous membranes. Some form
of defence system is vital for survival in the face of these potential
invasions.
no anpau on algissod se ieojuaiky se aa on  am suuny s
levels of exposure to infectious organisms; we try to keep ourselves and
our environments as clean as we can. If we keep or care for animals,
em uealo aaey Kan heun ainsua pue Auelnbal ino uaun uealo am
and fresh food. This care is even more important with sick humans or
animals who are especially vulnerable to infections.
Whilst we can reduce our exposure to potential infections by hy-
giene we do not and cannot rely entirely on cleanliness to avoid in-
called the immune responses, which serve to protect us from infec-
tions. In most cases, the immune system works well and infectious
agents are immobilised or destroyed, and fail to cause clinical disease.
In this chapter, we will briefly review how the immune system nor-
mally works. The immune system is highly complex, however, and more
:yoog s!t jo adoos ayt puoag si alou pue uouny sh! jo Apnis paeiap
you are advised to refer to the readings lists at the back of the book
Sometimes, the immune response is overwhelmed or is unable to
work adequately, and we will discuss this when we look at diseases
due to immunodeficiency or immunosuppression. We also need to
consider diseases which occur when the immune system fails to distin-
guish between potentially harmful things and the body's own tissues,
a phenomenon known as autoimmunity.
Pathology and the Immune System
67
How does the immune system work?
 The immune system is divided into two broad categories, innate and
adaptive immunity.
Innate (natural or native) immunity
One of the first types of defence is known as the innate immune re-
sponse (also sometimes called the natural or native immune system).
Innate immunity is composed of chemical mediators of inflammation
(see Chapter 4 for discussion of inflammation) and several plasma pro-
teins, as well as cells able to phagocytose (ingest and destroy) foreign
material, such as neutrophils and macrophages, and a specific type of
lymphocyte with the heroic name of natural killer (NK) cells (see later
note) (see Box 5.1).
In addition to components of the innate immune system, various
natural barriers of the body act as physical barriers to invasion - the
fortress walls. These barriers include the epithelial covering surfaces of
structures such as the skin, respiratory or urinary tracts or gut. In some
areas, the epithelial surfaces are further protected by mucus, fats (such
as sebum on the skin's surface) or protein (such as the top - cornified -
surface of the skin), or by the tiny hair-like structures called cilia, which
help to clear mucus and foreign material out of the respiratory tract.
Physical barriers and the innate immune responses are the first lines
of defence that protect us from the majority of infections that continu-
ally challenge us. The innate immunity is able to respond very rapidly.
within hours, of an encounter with an infectious agent. It recognises
broad groupings of foreign molecules (known as antigens - see later).
In other words, the innate immune response recognises 'families' of
bacteria and viruses, though does not act specifically towarcds individl-
Ual members of the families as does the adaptive immune response,
ciscussed next.
Adaptive (acquired or specific) immunity
The other broad category of the immune response is known as adap-
tive immunity (also known as acquired or specific immunity). Adaptive
immunity is formed by mechanisms that are stimulated to respond by
lots of other foreign molecules. Another characteristic of the adap-
tive immune response is that it develops a 'memory' of the required
response for a particular foreign molecule. Next time the animal en-
counters a similar infection, the immune response to that particular
-al ayt u! tueyodui ose s! s!yi - ,palleoai, aq ueo juabe snojoaju!
sponse to vaccines and will be discussed again later.
Before we continue it would be worth defining a word which will crop
up many times during our discussion of the adaptive immune system -
68
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.1 Diagram of the components of innate immunity
The innate immune system (also called the natural or native immune system) is the
body's first line of defence. It is always ready to act to prevent invasion by infectious
of encountering an infectious agent. They recognise broad 'families' of bacteria
and viruses, though its response is not as specific as that of the adaptive immune
response.
The innate immune response includes chemical mediators of inflammation (cy-
tokines) and several plasma proteins as well as cells able to phagocytose (ingest and
destroy) foreign material, such as neutrophils and macrophages, and a specific type 
of lymphocyte called a natural killer celf.
As well as the cells, proteins and chemical messengers of innate immunity, the
body's first defences to invasion include physical barriers such as epithelial surfaces
of skin, respiratory or urinary tracts or gut and other protective devices such as cilia,
mucus, fats or protein layers.
Foreign material
 or infectious
organism
Surface features
Epithelial surface
T lymphocyte
Neutrophil
Inflammatory mediators
Plasma proteins
 NK cell
Blood vessel
Macrophage
Pathology and the Immune System
69
antigen. Antigen comes from the term antibody-generating, referring
to a molecule able to stimulate the production of specific antibodies as
part of the immune response. A molecule which can stimulate antibody
production in this way is also said to be antigenic. As you will see later,
we now know that the immune system involves more than antibodies,
so the modern definition implies all substances that are recognised by.
alnoalou e yons pue 'uadoid s!yi loj pasn aq osle Aeu uabounwu!
is then said to be immunogenic. But do not worry too much about the
distinction between these terms at this stage.
Antigens are usually proteins or complex sugars which are part of
microorganism's capsule or cell wall, or the flagellae (tendrils which
usjuebio aya Kq paonpoid suixot osle ing '(aaou usjuebio aui day
may be antigenic. Host cells may also carry an antigenic molecule on
cytosed an infectious organism.
lens, may also be antigenic since the immune system recognises them
as foreign to the body (non-'self'). Tumour cells are sometimes so ab-
normal that they too can carry surface markers which are antigenic to
the host's own immune system. Other clinically significant examples of
sue cells or transfused blood cells since these can stimulate an immune
response in the recipient animal, causing rejection of tissue transplants
or widespread destruction of transfused blood cells leading to anaemia
and jaundice.
At this stage, it is worth making sure that you are familiar with the
main cell types involved in the adaptive immune system, which are
lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages. We met these cells in
the previous chapter when we discussed inflammation. Try the test
yourself questions in Box 5.3 and refer back to Chapter 4 for more
details, before you read on.
You should have noticed that macrophages appear in both the de
scriptions of the innate and adaptive immunity. We will come back to
this later.
The following is a simplified discussion of the adaptive immune sys-
tem. As previously suggested, if you need more details on immunology
you are recommended to have a look at one of the excellent books on
veterinary immunology (some are suggested in the section of further
reading at the end of this book).
Note from Box 5.2 that the main cells of the immune system belong
to certain cell families. It is easiest to consider these families in turn as
we discuss the immune response.
70
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.2 Diagram of cells of the adaptive immune response (see text
for more details)
Stem cell of immune system
Lymphoid stem cell
Monocyte
Cells of B
Cells of T cell line
cell line
NK cells
Dendritic cell
Immature
Immature
B cells
T cells
Macrophage
Mature T cells
Plasma
'Present' foreign
cells
substances (antigen) to
T cells
Direction of other cells
Phagocytosis
Direct attack of cells
Antibody
or microorganisms
production
Direction of other
cells
Humoral response
Cell-mediated response
Pathology and the Immune System
71
Box 5.3 Test yourself revision box on macrophages, lymphocytes
and plasma cells (see Chapter 4 for more details on these cells)
1. What do macrophages look like? - i.e. are they large or small cells? How many
nuclei do they have? What shape are their nuclei?
2. Where in the body are macrophages produced?
3.  Macrophages travel from their site of origin in the blood to the tissues. What are
they called when they are in the blood?
4.  Macrophages are very efficient at phagocytosis. What is meant by phagocytosis?
Name another phagocytic cell type.
 5. With what type of inflammation are macrophages especially associated?
6. Lymphocytes and plasma cells are sometimes called the mononuclear cells. What
do lymphocytes look like?
7. How do plasma cells differ in appearance from lymphocytes?
8. What are the sites of origin of lymphocytes and plasma cells?
9.  Lymphocytes are involved when the immune system and inflammation are linked.
How do lymphocytes regulate inflammation?
10. What important part of the immune response do plasma cells produce?
GeneralPathologyforVeterinaryNurses
The lymphocyte families
Lymphocytes are small round cells with sparse cytoplasm and single
round nuclei. Lymphocytes are found throughout the body tissues and
suehio yim patelosse Aleioadsa aie Aayt ing 'yduk pue poolg aui u!
of the lymphoid system (such as the lymph nodes, bone marrow, spleen
and the thymus in young animals). Lymphocytic cells belong to the B
cell line or the T cell line; each line has clifferent specific roles in the
immune response.
The B cellline
Lymphocytes of the B cell line (known as B cells) originate in the bone
u pue uaalds aun 'sapou yduA u! punoy aie pue sleuuueuu ul moeu
part of the immune response.
Antibodies (also known as immunoglobulins or lgs)
These are specialised proteins which recognise and help to destroy for-
such as bacteria and viruses. Antibodies are formed from paired chains
of proteins of different sizes (known as heavy and light chains), which
are linked so that the structure forms a sort of "Y' shape (see Box 5.4).
In mammals there are five different groups of antibody, known as
isotypes, which are classified according to the type of heavy chain they
have. Each of the groups performs different roles in the body, and
helps the immune system to make the appropriate response to each
type of 'foreign' object the body encounters.
Although the general structure of all antibodies is similar, a region
at the very tip of the arms of the 'Y' shape is very variable. This variabil-
ity of the tip structure means that millions of antibodies with slightly
different structures exist. It is this variable region that recognises and
binds to a distinct part of an antigen in a highly specific way, like a
unique key which fits only one lock. The antigen-binding site is actually
formed by the cleft between the tip of a light chain and a heavy one
(refer again to Box 5.4). This highly specific binding allows antibodies
to identify and attach only to their target antigen - in the midst of
the millions of different molecules which they may encounter - both
foreign and 'self (see later, this section).
The many variants of antibody, each able to bind to a different tar-
get, allow for a huge diversity of antibodies and means that the immune
system is able to recognise an enormous range of different antigens.
-oae l! uabjue ue ot saypene pue sasubosau Apoqaue ue uaum
tively 'labels' the antigen, marking it out for attack by other parts
of the immune system. Antibodies can also directly inhibit the harm-
ful effects of an infectious agent by, for example, binding to and
 Pathology and the Immune System
73
Box 5.4 (a) Diagram of an antibody (immunoglobulin). (b)
 Diagrammatic representation of an immunoglobulin on the surface of
a B cell, acting as an antigen receptor for the cell
Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are formed from paired chains of proteins of different
sizes (known as heavy and light chains), linked so that the whole structure forms a 'Y
shape.
Variable region
-many different shapes
- binds to antigen
(antigen-binding site)
Light chain
 Light chain 
 Bonds, joining protein
chains together
Heavy chains
(a)
B cell
Variable regions
- bind to antigen
Cell nucleus
Heavy chains, embedded
Cell membrane
in cell membrane
(b)
74
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.4 (a) (Continued) Diagram of an antibody (immunoglobulin).
(b) Diagrammatic representation of an immunoglobulin on the surface
of a B cell, acting as an antigen receptor for the cell
There are five different groups of antibody (called isotypes) in mammals, which are
performs slightly different roles in the body, ensuring the immune system responds
Most of the structure of different antibodies is similar; however, a region at the
tip of the arms of the 'Y' shape varies and this variability of the tip structure means
that millions of different antibodies exist.
This variable region recognises and binds very specifically to a distinct part of an
a heavy one. The highly specific binding means that antibodies identify and attach
only to their target antigen and the many variants of antibody allow for an enormous
range of different antibodies. Thus the immune system recognises a huge number of
different antigens.
When an antibody recognises and attaches to an antigen it labels the antigen for
attack by other parts of the immune system. Antibodies can also directly inhibit the
harmful effects of an infectious agent by binding to it and blocking vital parts of the
pathogen that it needs to cause an infection in the host.
Antibodies are either attached to B cells (immunoglobulins) or are secreted in
soluble form into body fluids by plasma cells, which develop from stimulated B cells.
When antibodies fimmunoglobulins, lgs) are fixed on the surface of B cells by their
heavy chains (the bottom of the 'Y' shape), the variable antigen-binding sites stick out
(bottom diagram) and are able to bind antigen. Thus, the Igs act as receptors which
which 'fits' its Ig receptors, it is prompted to start proliferating and its offspring are
stimulated to produce more antibodies.
therefore blocking a part of the pathogen that it needs in order to
cause an infection in the host.
Antibodies are either attached to B cells (in which case, strictly
speaking, they are referred to as immunoglobulins) or are secreted
in soluble form into bocy fluids by plasma cells, which develop from
stimulated B cells. When antibodies (immunoglobulins) are fixed on
the surface of B cells, their heavy chains (the bottom of the 'Y' shape)
are embedded in the cell membrane so leaving the variable antigen-
binding sites sticking out, and therefore able to bind antigen (see the
bottom diagram of Box 5.4). Thus, the B cells in effect have receptors
on their cell surfaces which recognise specific foreign antigens. When
a B cell comes into contact with an antigen which 'fits' its receptors it
aday I e palleo aoydiua o ad layoue Ag paisisel paiduoid s
cell - more later) to start dividing. This means that one B cell makes
Pathology and the Immune System
75
many similar 'offspring' cells (called a clone of cells) that are capable
of making more identical antibody to that produced by the original B
cell. Thus the output of that particular antibody is greatly increased
Plasma cells cevelop from antigen-stimulated B cells in the lymph
nodes and spleen. When fully developed, the plasma cells migrate
are antibody tactories, able to secrete many thousands of antibody
antigen-specificity to the surface receptor (immunoglobulin) of the
original 'parent' B cell (Box 5.5). Thus, all the new antibodies produced
recognise the same antigen that triggered the B cells to proliferate in
the first place.
After the initial stimulation by the antigen, the B cell response dies
down but the antibody-producing cells have 'memory', and when the
antigen is encountered on subsequent occasions, these specific B cells
will respond more quickly and to a greater extent. So animals are said
from. This is also the basis of vaccination; when the vaccinated animal
vaccinated, it will mount a rapid and strong immune response and
avoid development of disease.
 Earlier we noted that different groups or classes (isotypes) of anti-
bodies have slightly differing roles in the body. Some immunoglobulin
auo Aeu noy uaboyed jo sad uieuao buyby ui nuenodui aie 1o
reading; you may, for instance, hear about immunoglobulins G or A (or
dlifferent classes of immunoglobulin and, for your information, the ma-
jor roles of the classes are summarised in Box 5.6. Note that there are
structural differences between the classes of immunoglobulin (not re-
lated to the variation in the antigen-receptor) and this means that some
classes are bigger molecules than others, and this affects their roles.
Complement
Antibodies themselves cannot kill invading microorganisms; they sim-
ply label the organism so that another part of the immune system can
destroy it. One important mechanism for this destruction of antibody-
labelled microbes is the complement system. The complement system
is a system of proteins which, when triggered, forms a chain or cascade,
each protein being converted from an inactive to an active (enzyme)
form; this active form then activates the next protein in the chain. It is
a similar arrangement of the blood clotting cascade (see Chapter 7).
One of the triggers for the complement protein cascade is the binding
ofantibodytoantigen.
76
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.5 The production of an antibody-secreting plasma cellfrom an
antigen-stimulated B cell
When a B cell comes into contact with an antigen which 'fits' its surface receptors
(specific immunoglobulin), it is prompted to start proliferating and its offspring are 
stimulated to produce more antibodies with the same antigen specificity.
Surface immunoglobulin
- a specific receptor for 
B cell
an antigen
Antigen binds
Antigen-stimulated B cell
proliferation
Some of B cell progeny develop into
plasma cells
Plasma cells secrete soluble
immunoglobulin (antibody) with same
specificity of immunoglobulin of original
antigen-stimulated Bcell
Pathology and the Immune System
77
Box 5.5 (Continued) The production of an antibody-secreting plasma
cell from an antigen-stimulated B cell
Plasma cells develop from antigen-stimulated B cells in the lymph nodes and
spleen. When they are fully developed, the plasma cells leave these tissues and
travel around the body.
Plasma cells are able to secrete vast numbers of antibody molecules. The antibody
the same antigen that triggered the parent B cell to proliferate.
The antibody response to an antigen has'memory' which persists after the initial
stimulation by the antigen dies down. When the antigen is encountered the next
time, and on subsequent occasions, the specific B cells will respond more quickly
e on aui aosaa, aey on pies ane siee asaul laxa saneain e on pue
disease they have previously recovered from. This is also the basis of vaccination;
when a vaccinated animal encounters the infectious organism against which it was
vaccinated, it will mount a rapid and strong immune response, and the clinical signs
of the disease will not develop.
The result of the cascade is that target cells carrying the antigenic
killed by damage to their cell membranes by the final stage of the
complement system.
clumped together and immobilised by the complement proteins mak-
ing them vulnerable to attack by phagocytic cells.
Finally, complement is involved in inflammation by various direct
and on white blood cell (neutrophil and macrophage) recruitment and
activation (see Box 5.7) (see also Chapter 4 to remind yourself of the
vascular and cellular events in acute inflammation).
Now let us turn our attention to the other lymphocyte family.
The Tcell line
T cells originate in bone marrow but mature in the thymus (hence T
cells!). The thymus is an organ in front of the heart in the chest (and
-ph snu aul siejue buno Aaa ui (yoau eua ayn saauos
ually shrinks, and almost disappears altogether, as the animal grows
up. Mature T cells are found in the lymph nodes and spleen, but they
also circulate throughout the body (see Box 5.8).
branes and that these then acted as specific receptors for recognising
78
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.6 The roles of different classes of immunoglobulins
(antibodies)
Found
Major roles or activities
IgG
In serum
Inflammation (very small molecule so can es-
cape from leaky vessels - see Chapter 4), es-
pecially where microbes are involved.
IgM
 In serum (soluble form)
Very large molecule, so stays in bloodstream
Also on surface of B cells
and is involved in defending against viruses
and in a number of other aspects of the im-
mune response.
B cell antigen receptor.
IgA
On body surfaces (urinary.
Passes through epithelial cells on body sur-
respiratory tracts, skin,
faces in secretions and fluids (also enters
 mammary gland and 
 bloodstream). Helps to prevent antigens at-
intestine)
taching to body surfaces.
IgE
 On body surfaces
Usually acts with other cells and components
of immune system to trigger acute inflam-
 mation. Involved in defence against parasitic
worms. Involved in type I hypersensitivity (see 
later).
IgD
 Only in some species
B cell antigen receptor.
Primarily on surface of B
cells
Serum (soluble form)
In mammals there are five different groups of antibody, known as isotypes, classified according to
the type of heavy chain they have. Each of the groups performs different roles in the body and helps
alget siul siaunosua Apog ay uabgue jo adi yoea oi asuodsai st! loii ot watsAs aunwwi au
summarises the different types of antibody and indicate where they tend to be found and what sort
 of immune response they are associated with.
Note that lgM and IgD (in species which have it) act as B cell receptors.
There are structural differences between the classes of immunoglobulin which are not related to
'sho uu sanao jahbiq ae sasse aos ieu suea sl rdaa uabue au ui uoeea a
and this affects their roles.
antigen? T cells also have specific antigen receptors on their cell sur-
faces. T cell receptors are related to, but not the same as, B cell
receptors. In other words, they are not actually immunoglobulins but
they are similar in some ways and they make each T cell specific in their
response to antigen.
The antigen is 'presented' to the T cells by other cells called antigen-
presenting cells. Cells which can act as antigen-presenting cells include
our old friends macrophages, also B cells, and another type of cell
which we have only mentioned in passing so far - the dendritic cells.
Pathology and the Immune System
61
Dendritic cells have long processes, a bit like cellular arms (see Box
5.8(b); they can also live for a very long time.
So, the T cells are waiting in the lymphoid organs (lymph nodes
they 'found' in the nearby tissues. The antigen-presenting cells may
take the microorganisms inside themselves by phagocytosis, but then
they 'process' the antigen and carry it on their surfaces so that it can
be recognised by cells of the immune system. The antigen-presenting
cells carry the antigen to the lymphoid organs where they 'show it' to
the T cell. If the T cell has the correct antigen receptor and 'recognises?
 the antigen as something foreign or harmful, it willrespond by initiating
an immune response.
The T cells which respond in this way are known as T helper cells
because they 'help' the immune response in a number of ways. First, T
helper cells encourage B cell proliferation and immunoglobulin secre-
tion by secretion of chemical messengers which direct the B cells.
Thelper cells also stimulate another type of T cell, called a cytotoxic
T cell, whose role, once activated by the T helper cell, is to directly
destroy any host cells harbouring the offending antigen. Note that
the 'toxic' part of cytotoxic means 'damaging' rather than being a
abeuep aun teun sieipu! -oo, pue) uosiod io uixoi e oi aouaiaial
is aimed at cells).
Why should T cells want to damage cells? Well, if the stimulating
o peun ym paoaju! llao Aue uaun 'unaioeg e lo sna e s! uabiue
ganism will carry the antigen on its surface - a sort of label that says
that the cell is infected.
Box 5.7 Diagram of the complement system
The complement system is a system of proteins which, when triggered (e.g. by
the binding of antibody to antigen), form a chain or cascade, each protein being
converted from an inactive to an active (enzyme) form. The active form then activates
the blood clotting cascade (see Chapter 7).
The result of the complement cascade is (i) target cells carrying the antigenic
molecule, perhaps because they are infected by microorganisms, are killed by dam-
age to their cell membranes by the final stage of the complement system; (i) microbes
are clumped together and immobilised by the proteins, making them vulnerable to
rect and indirect effects on blood vessel walls and on white blood cell recruitment
and activation (see Chapter 4 to remind yourself of the protective role of acute
inflammation).
80
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.7 (Continued) Diagram of the complement system
The complement cascade
1. Antibody binds to antigen
2. Complement cascade is triggered
1st inactive complement
1st active complement
protein
protein
3. Each protein is converted from an inactive to an +
active (enzyme) form
 2nd inactive complement
2nd active
protein
complement protein
 4. The active form then activates the next protein in
the chain
Several
more steps
etc.
Final
active
The results of
protein
complement activation
i. Cell membranes of cells
carrying antigen damaged
(kills cell)
ii. Microbes clumped
together and immobilized 
(vulnerable to phagocytosis)
Direct effects on blood
vessel walls (vasodilation
and leakiness)
Mast cell degranulation
(indirect effects on blood
vesse walls)
ii. Involvement in acute inflammation
White blood cell
(protective response)
 recruitment and activation
Pathology and the Immune System
81
which are recognised by T cells and can act as antigen to stimulate the
T cells, so in some cases the body will mount an immune response to
tumours (see Chapter 8).
Stimulated cytotoxic T cells leave the lymphoid organs and set off
to seek out antigen and kill the cells associated with it, such as cells
infected with virus or bacteria, or tumour cells, by producing proteins
which directly or indirectly cause the death of the infected cell.
We noted in our discussion on B cells that there is an element of
encountered the B cell response will ensue more quickly and will be
end cells known as memory T cells persist after an immune response
to a particular antigen has subsided.
The immune responses which involve activation and action of cells
(macrophages, NK cells, antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes), and
the release of various chemical messengers (called cytokines) are clas
sified as cell-mediated immunity (CMl). CMl does not involve antibod-
antibodies is known as humoral immunity, from the Latin word 'humor'
meaning fluid. Humoral immunity refers to the ability of body fluids,
Box 5.8 (a) The T cell family of lymphocytes
T cells originate in bone marrow, but mature in the thymus in young animals. Mature
T cells are found in the lymph nodes and spleen, but they also circulate around the
body.
but not the same as, B cell receptors (see Box 5.4).
Antigen-presenting cells (macrophages, dendritic cells or B cells) 'find’ antigen
in the nearby tissues and return with it to the lymphoid organs (lymph nodes and
spleen). Here they 'present' the antigen to the T cells. If the T cell has the appropriate
 sllas  i s  ae  s  podse m slle  a s
they secrete chemical messengers (cytokines) which stimulate B cell proliferation and
the role of cytotoxic T cells is to destroy other cells harbouring the offending antigen.
Stimulated cytotoxic T cells leave the lymphoid organs and set off to seek out and
destroy the antigen and the cells associated with it.
Cytotoxic T cells kill these other cells by inserting lethal proteins through the outer
membrane of the target cell.
As with B cells and the humoral response, there is 'memory' involved in the T cell
82
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.8 (a) (Continued) The T cell family of lymphocytes
Stem cell of immune system
Lymphoid stem cell
NK cells
Cells of T cell line
Attack of tumour cells or
cells infected with viruses
Do notrequireprevious
Mature
exposure to antigen 
unstimulatec
T cell
Part of the innate immune
system
Memory T
cells
T Helper
Cytotoxic
T cells
cells
Direction of other
 Attack of cells or
Allowmore
cells by production
microorganisms
rapid and 
of chemical
greater
mediators
response next
time the
antigen is
encountered
Cell-mediated response
which do not necessarily contain cells, to mount an immune response
(which they do because of the presence of antibodies).
Note that not just T helper cells, but many cells of the immune sys-
tem the chemical messangers cytokines and that these direct and en-
hance other aspects of the immune response, and direct both humora
 Pathology and the Immune System
83
Box 5.8 (b) (Continued) The actions of stimulated T cells
Antigen presenting cells
travel to lymphoid
Macrophage
organs to present
Lymphoid organ
antigen to T helper cell
Antigen-stimulated
B cell
T cell antigen
receptor
Dendritic
cell
Thelper
Antigen-
cell
stimulated B
cell
proliferation
helped by T
Cytotoxic
helper cell 
Tcells
Some of B cell
progeny develop
into plasma cells
Tissues
Lymphoid organ
or tissues
Plasma cell in lymph nodes or out in
tissues secretes soluble
Stimulated cytotoxic T cells leave
immunoglobulin (antibody) with same
lymphoid organ to seek out and
specificity as surface immunoglobulin
destroy the antigen and the cells
of original B cell
associated with it
84
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
munity and inflammation as they direct aspects of both processes.
Natural killer cells
In our discussion of the innate immune system earlier in the chapter, we
heard about a type of lymphocyte with the curious name of natural killer
cell! These probably develop from the same cell line as the T cell fam-
ily of lymphocytes (see Box 5.8) but they are different in their actions.
NK cells are large lymphocytes with abundant granules in their cyto-
plasm, hence their alternative (but less exciting) name of large granular
they have the ability to rapidly destroy certain abnormal cells such as
tumour cells and cells infected with viruses. They do not require 'prim-
ing' by previous encounters with the abnormal cells, as do their more
sophisticated cousins the T cells or their dlistant relatives the B cells.
That concludes our very simplified discussion of the normal immune
system. Box 5.9 contains a diagrammatic summary and it might be
helpful to look again at Boxes 5.1-5.8 as well before you read on.
There may be terms in those boxes that now become clearer.
Diseases of the immune system
Disorders of reduced immune function
Immunodeficiencies
We now turn our attention to what can go wrong with the immune
responses, and we start with diseases associated with reduced func-
tion of the immune system. As you might imagine, disorders causing
reduced immunity cause increased vulnerability to disease in the af-
those associated with inherited defects in the immune system - and
secondary disorders - those resulting from another disease, disorder
or condlition which secondarily cause a decrease in immune function.
Primary immunodeficiency
Primary immunodeficiencies are uncommon congenital disorders in
bouts of infectious disease in young animals especially where unusual
they are still protected by antibodies passed to them by their mothers
(that is whilst they were dleveloping in the uterus or after birth via
mother's milk). When their mother's protection stops they become
vulnerable to disease.
Pathology and the Immune System
85
Box 5.9 Summary of the immune responses
A. Foreign substance carrying antigenic molecule negotiates physical barriers to
face (perhaps stuck in mucus) and will attract antibodies and white cells in
secretions.
B. Components of the innate immune system may be able to disable and destroy
substance. Natural killer cells can rapidly, but non-specifically, respond to and
destroy cells infected with viruses, or certain tumour cells.
C. Antigen-presenting cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and B cells ingest foreign
material and 'process' the antigen molecule, displaying it on their cell surfaces.
They then carry it back to a lymphoid tissue, such as a local lymph node. B cells
which act as antigen-presenting cells have immunoglobulin on their surfaces which
is specific for the antigen, recognising only that antigen molecule.
D. In the lymphoid tissue the antigen-presenting cells 'show' the antigen molecule
oasai asens e ym las adiau I e 'si reun lis sadau I aredoidde ue o
which'fits'theantigen.
 E. The T helper cell stimulates antigen-specific B cells to proliferate. Antigen-specific
B cells have immunoglobulin on their surface which 'fits' the antigen too.
F. Some of the daughter cells of the stimulated B cell become plasma cells. In the
of the same specificity as the surface immunoglobulin receptor of the original
stimulated B cell.
G. Secreted antibodies bind to antigen molecules, labelling them for other parts of
the immune system.
H. Binding of antigen and antibody triggers the cascade of complement proteins.
- asqowi pue dnio o alge sl apses uawaldos jo ponpoid eu aul 1
crobes, stimulate inflammation (a protective response) and kill cells carrying anti-
gen.
J. The T helper cell in the lymph node also stimulates cytotoxic T cells.
K. Cytotoxic T cells travel out of the lymph node and seek out and kill cells carrying
the antigen molecule.
Both the B cell and T cell arms of the immune response have memory so that the
next time this particular antigen is encountered, they can respond more quickly and
to a greater extent.
86
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 5.9 (Continued) Summary of the immune responses
Foreign substan ce
carrying antigenic
molecule
P
Physical barriers
NK cell
B
Neutrophil
Macrophage
 Inflammatory mediators
Plasma proteins
Thelper
Bcel
Cytotoxic
Plasma cell
K
Cells carrying
Antigen-
antigen killed
 specific
antibodies
Pathology and the Immune System
87
Such animals also fail to respond to vaccinations which require an
immune response to work against common diseases, and treatment for
the infections may be unsuccessful or only partially successful. These
white cell counts) or blood biochemistry (abnormal globulin levels).
Examples of mechanisms of primary immunodeficiencies include
abnormalities in immunoglobulins, cells (neutrophils, macrophages or
Iymphocytes) or in complement proteins. Well-known examples of pri-
mary immunodeficiency diseases are the group of diseases known as
severe combined immunodeficiencies (or SCiD) in certain breeds of
are affected.
Confirmation of a primary immunodeficiency requires specialist
and usually require referral to an immunologist.
Treatment of primary immunodeficiencies is clifficult because of
the inherent vulnerability to disease of an animal with such a disor-
der. Symptomatic treatment and anti-microbial treatment may provide
temporary relief but the longer-term prognosis is very poor.
Secondary immunodeficiency
to some other disease, disorder or physiological condition.
Some important conditions associated with secondary immunodefi-
ciency are:
·Physiological states: Age, breed, gender, pregnancy, season of the
year, stress and trauma, diet and hormones are all known or be-
lieved to affect immune function in animals. Suppression of the
immune system occurs during pregnancy: indeed, this mechanism
aims to stop the mother rejecting the developing embryo. A side
effect of this, however, is the likelihood that, for instance, Demodex
oerel pue Aueuaaid bunp Aidnu lm sayoia ui sanu us
and then be transmitted to the puppies.
· Chronic diseases: Chronic diseases appear to interfere with function
of cells, such as lymphocytes or neutrophils. The sorts of diseases
implicated in immune suppression include various infections, es-
pecially long-term skin infections, and viruses. Some viruses (such
as canine distemper and feline infectious peritonitis (FlP)) cause
immunosuppression because they tend to proliferate in, and ulti-
mately destroy, lots of cells involved in the immune responses (such
as lymphocytes).
Two other important viruses that suppress the immune system
are feline immunodeficiency virus (FlV) and feline leukaemia virus
88
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
(FeLV). FIV has several effects on infected cats (such as tumour for-
mation and neurological disease) but, importantly for the purposes
 of this discussion, it causes immunosuppression in these cats. It has
its immunosuppressive action by targeting T lymphocytes, similar
to the human (and primate) condition of HIV AIDS. Affected cats
then become susceptible to, and may die from, a number of other
infectious agents which normally would not cause serious disease
in animals with fully-functioning immune systems.
FeLV also causes loss of normal immune function. FeLV has detri-
mental effects on bone marrow (the source of many cells involved
in immune and inflammatory responses) and, as with FIV, cats (and
especially kittens) succumb to other infections, rather than to the
leukaemia it also causes and which gives the virus its name. Bone
marrow depletion causes anaemia as well and this may be detected
clinically.
 Drugs and vaccines: Certain administered drugs are implicated in
immunodeficiency states. Examples of this are the glucocorticoids
(corticosteroids) which have anti-inflammatory effects but also dli-
certain vaccines cause a transient decrease in lymphocyte numbers
in the blood (lymphopenia) which potentially could make an animal
more vulnerable to other infections for a short while. This is partly
the reason we try to make sure that we only vaccinate animals that
are clinically healthy, and advise that puppies and kittens are kept
away from possible sources of infection (i.e. other animals) for a
period after vaccination.
Neoplasia: Occasionally, animals have abnormalities of im-
munoglobulin formation (and function). This can occur with cer-
tain tumours of plasma cells. Abnormal (and non-functional) im-
munoglobulins accumulate in the blood and urine and can be de-
tected in the laboratory.
 Failure of passive immunity: Young animals gain inmmunity from their
mothers by transfer of the mother's antibodies during their time in
the womb, or by the consumption of colostrum within 12-48 hours
after birth (a process known as passive immune protection). Passive
immunity is especially important for protection of the newborn ani-
mal from potential pathogens in their environment before they are
able to mount an effective immune response for themselves (see
Box 5.10).
Animals that do not consume sufficient colostrum, perhaps because
they are too weak to stand, or their mothers are too poorly to allow
Pathology and the Immune System
89
Box 5.10 Passive immune protection of young animals
Newborn piglets, still coated with foetal fluids and membranes, demonstrate the
strong instinct to find their mother's teats as soon as possible after birth.
Young animals gain immunity from their mothers by transfer of the mother's anti-
bodies during pregnancy, or by consuming the rich first-milk - colostrum - soon after
important for protecting the young animal from environmental infections before they
are able to mount an effective immune response themselves. Young animals that
drink insufficient colostrum, perhaps because they are too weak to stand, or their
mothers are too poorly to let them suck, are vulnerable to early infections, especially
if the environment is contaminated.
puy Aq paudeboioud sialbid pue mo alumog aor jo Asanoo ydeboioud
permission of Helen Wakeham.
suckling, may be vulnerable to infections early in life, especially if
the environment is dirty and contaminated.
The previous discussion involves dlisorders due to insufficient func-
tion of the immune system. Diseases also occur if the immune system
works too much or works inappropriately and these two mechanisms
form the basis of the disorders discussed in the next two sections -
hypersensitivities and autoimmunity.
06
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Disorders of increased or inappropriate immunity
Hypersensitivities
sensitivity reactions) are excessive reactions mediated by the immune
 system to stimuli which would not be harmful in a normal animal. If you
are a hay fever sufferer you will recognise this syndrome. Something
like pollen grains will make you have the miserable signs of itchy, runny
eyes and persistent sneezing at certain times of the year, whereas oth-
ers in your family or circle of friends will be unaffected. This type of
nised and each has a slightly different mechanism. The four types of
hypersensitivity are classed as types one, two, three and four and are
conventionally written with a Roman numeral (l, Il, Ill and IV). In re-
ality, clinical syndromes involving hypersensitivity reactions will often
involve more than one of the types I-IV.
Each type of hypersensitivity is described below and Box 5.11 is
a brief summary of each type and its mechanism; you may find it
helpful to refer back to the discussion of the normal immune system
to understand these mechanisms of hypersensitivity.
Type I hypersensitivity
Type I hypersensitivity is also known as immediate hypersensitivity and
it is the basis of acute allergic responses. In this hypersensitivity re.
sponse, antigens (or allergens) to which the animal is sensitised cause
specific antibodies (immunoglobulins) to stimulate mast cells to de-
granulate. Degranulation means that the stimulated mast cells release
the contents of their intracytoplasmic granules.
Reminder
Contents of mast cell granules include histamine, a potent biological
stimulate endothelial cell contraction. This action opens up gaps
between the endothelial cells in the capillary walls, allowing escape of
protein-rich exudate into surrounding tissues. Histamine also causes
vasodilation (see Chapter 4).
After reminding yourself of the properties of mast cells in the text
box above (and from our discussion of mast cells from Chapter 4) you
will predict that the effects of mast cell degranulation are dilation of
nearby blood vessels and seepage of oedema fluid and proteins (exu.
Pathology and the Immune System
91
Box 5.11 The four categories of hypersensitivity disease
tions mediated by the immune system in response to stimuli that would be relatively
unimportant in a normal animal. Hypersensitivities are classified as four types and
each type is conventionally designated a Roman numeral (l, Il, Ill and IV). In reality,
clinical syndromes involving hypersensitivity reactions will often involve more than
one of the types I-IV occurring together.
       x   t      s
 and its mechanism.
Type
Mechanism
Example of disease
Immunoglobulins stimulate marked
Anaphylactic shock
mast cell degranulation
Food allergies (skin or GIT
disease)
Reaction to insect bite or sting
Antibodies inappropriately label cells
Blood transfusion reactions
of the body as 'foreign' or harmful'.
Target cells then killed by other parts
 of the immune system
Damage caused to tissue by
Widespread pyogranulomatous
accumulation of
inflammation centred on blood
antigen-antibody-complement protein
vessels in feline infectious
complexes
peritonitis
IV
T helper lymphocytes direct immune
Allergic contact dermatitis
response to cells
additional effects, depending on where the mast cell response occurs,
for instance, in the respiratory tract the smooth muscle surrounding the
airways also constricts impairing airflow in the airways (as in asthma). In
the skin, nerve endings are stimulated and so there is extreme itchiness
(pruritus).
The effects of mast cell degranulation in type I hypersensitivity can
sometimes be more widespread than a particular area, leading to
a stimulus to which the host is especially sensitive. Anaphylaxis causes
shock - a severe acute fall in blood pressure (see Chapter 7)
Eosinophils tend to be present in type I hypersensitivity reactions
as they are attracted to degranulating mast cells. Once attracted
92
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
intracytoplasmic granules and cause tissue damage and secondary
inflammation. The feline eosinophilic granuloma complex mentioned
 in Chapter 4 is also thought to be a form of type I hypersensitivity.
Type Il hypersensitivity
to kill cells of the body. This occurs because the target cells have
been inappropriately labelled with antibodies as 'foreign' or 'harmful'.
(Remember that'cytotoxic' means something that is very damaging to
cells but does not imply a toxin or poison is involved. Remember also
that antibodies coat substances - including cells - to label them for
dlestruction by other parts of the immune system.)
A reasonably common example of a type ll hypersensitivity response
of clinical significance is immune-mediated destruction of red cells
causing anaemia, as happens in blood transfusion reactions.
Type Ill hypersensitivity
accumulation of antigen, antibody and complement proteins - form-
ing protein clumps called antibody or immune complexes. Clumps of
antigen, antibody and proteins of the complement cascade actually
form in most immune responses but they are usually ultimately de-
stroyed by phagocytic cells. When there has been excessive immune
stimulation, the complexes can build up and resist degradation. The
immune complexes may remain at their site of formation or they may
they form the presence of these immune complexes stimulates loca
inflammation which then causes damage to the surrounding tissues.
Excessive formation of immune complexes can occur in certain in-
fectious diseases such as FiP in which inflammation, mostly pyogran-
ulomatous (pyogranulomatous means granulomas with neutrophils as
lius uo paua si (t laideu aas - aua aue ui sabeydoiou se llam
blood vessels (vasculitis) in many organs, causing widespread vascular
damage.
Type IV hypersensitivity
essentially an inflammatory response, involving cells of the immune
the sensitised animal is exposed to the stimulus to which it is sensitive
are T helper cells; there is also activation of macrophages and B lym-
Pathology and the Immune System
93
subsequently recruited via chemical messengers (cytokines) secreted
by the initially stimulated immune cells and hence the delay in mani-
festation of the response.
Allergic contact dermatitis is an example of such a response, and
the cause of the response may be identified by carrying out a patch
samples of suspect allergens to an area of skin and seeing whether
there is a local response.
Autoimmune disorders
Autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system mounts an
immune response against the body's own tissues because normal pro-
teins on the surface of cells are regarded as 'foreign'. There are various
reasons why this attack of the body's own cells may occur and mech-
anisms, including failure of regulatory control of the immune system
or new exposure of self-antigens that are normally in protected sites,
 aq Aeu aa au ui se yons) uass aunuwi au woy eme upy.
volved. Certain viruses may trigger autoimmunity by mimicking normal
proteins, or by other means of which we are not quite sure!
There are a number of autoimmune disorders in veterinary species,
including the pemphigus complex of skin diseases. In these diseases,
which occur in dogs, cats, goats and horses, the immune attack is di-
rected at proteins in the epidermis, or epithelial surface of the skin.
The epidermal layer is killed off and therefore these diseases are char-
acterised by blistering, erosion and ulceration, of the skin and muco-
cutaneous junctions
Another disease in this category is autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
(AlHA) which is recorded in a number of species but mostly occurs
in dogs. Affected animals present with clinical signs associated with
Auoen) sieaqueay piden aaey Kaun pue pabielua aq Aeuu suaalds
late to alterations in the surface of red blood cells by other factors
such as drugs or viruses. Some cases seem to be associated with
stresses of various kinds, such as other diseases or pregnancy, for
instance.
Masticatory myopathy is an autoimmune disorder in which the im-
mune response is directed against the muscle fibres of the masticatory
culty opening and closing their jaws and the sides of their heads may
be painful and either swollen or shrunken (muscle atrophy - see Chap-
ter 8). They may have associated abnormalities in their eyes such as
inflammation (conjunctivitis) or even protrusion of the eyeballs from
the eye sockets.
94
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Treatment of autoimmune diseases (in those conditions able to be
dampening down the immune system. This can have the unwanted
effect, however, of leaving the animal vulnerable to other diseases,
especially infections.
Summary of key points in Chapter 5
The body's defences against harmful invaders are composed of the
pue ssens eada sisss aun ade an pue ae
associated protective devices also provide physical barrier defence
for the body.
The adaptive immune system is sub-divided into cellular (lym-
phocyte and macrophage) responses and humoral (antibody) re-
sponses.
 There are links between the immune system and the inflammatory
responses also wound healing, since some cells are common to each
response, also important chemical messengers (mediators) called
cytokines are involved in all processes.
The immune responses are protective but some disorders or dis-
cies are due to decreased immune function. This may be primary
(an inherited genetic disorder) or secondary to another disease or
disorder (chronic disease, physiological factors, drugs or neoplasia).
Hypersensitivities occur when the immune response overreacts or
reacts inappropriately to a stimulus. There are four types of hyper-
sensitivity with slightly differing mechanisms.
Autoimmune diseases occur when the immune system directs its
aimed at destroying the molecule ensues.
Pathology and the Immune System
95
Test yourself questions on Chapter 5
1. List all the defences of animals against invading infectious organ-
isms.
2. From which two words is the term 'antigen' derived?
3. Answer the following true/false questions relating to the immune
system:
i. Lymphocytes are small round cells with sparse cytoplasm and
single round nuclei.
li1. Lymphocytes are only found in organs of the lymphoid system.
ili. Lymphocytic cells belong to the B cell line or the T cell line.
iv. A major role of plasma cells is to phagocytose bacteria.
v. T cell receptors and immunoglobulins on B cells make the cells
specific in their response to antigen.
vi. Antibodies are formed from paired chains of proteins in a 'Y"
shape and it is the bonds joining the chains which make them
specific to a particular antigen.
vii. When a vaccinated animal encounters the infectious organism
against which it was vaccinated, it will mount a rapid and strong
immune response because the specific antibody-producing B
cells have 'memory'.
vilil. Antibodies are able to kill invading microorganisms.
ix. Cells called antigen-presenting cells are able to alert T cells
fectious organisms.
x. Unlike B cells, T cell responses do not have 'memory' of previous
encounters with particular antigens.
4.9
 Some important conditions are associated with immunodeficiency;
complete the following sentences:
· Primary immunodeficiencies are suspected in cases of
in young animals.
●Physiological states such as
are often associated with immunodeficiency.
·Certain chronic diseases are associated with immunodeficiency,
and this may be because they
96
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Test yourself questions on Chapter 5 (Continued)
· With respect to young animals, passive immunity includes
Failure of passive immunity in young animals can occur because
 5. a. Give a brief definition of 'hypersensitivity'.
b.  Choose one type of hypersensitivity (type I, II,Ill or IV) and write
brief notes on its characteristic features.
6.  a. Give a brief definition of 'autoimmunity'.
b.E
Briefly, what is the treatment or control of autoimmune diseases
based upon, and what general side effect is possible?
Chapter 6
Tissue Repair
Definition of tissue repair or healing
Regenerative capacity of cells
Tissue repair - general and specific examples
Healing in various tissues
Liver
 Kidney and lungs
Heart
Nervous system
Healing regulation and control
What can impair, prevent or alter healing?
Proud flesh
98
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 6
 To discuss regeneration and organisation in tissue repair and
healing
To introduce the concept of labile, stable, permanent cells and of
stem cells, and their differing abilities to regenerate themselves,
and how this difference affects how a particular tissue heals
by first intention (primary union) and second intention (secondary
union) in deeper wounds
Definition of tissue repair or healing
Following damage, all tissues (except teeth) are able to heal to a
certain extent. Tissue repair or healing is defined as the process by
which cells lost by non-reversible cell damage (see necrosis, Chap-
ter 3) are replaced by living tissue. This new living tissue is not nec-
essarily the same as the tissue it is replacing. The extent to which the
new tissue is the same as the tissue that was previously there depends
on:
the regenerative capacity of the cells in tissue
· the extent of the defect to be filled (that is the amount of necrotic
tissue requiring replacement)
1. Regeneration: Replacement by cells of the same type. The necrotic
cells themselves are dead so they cannot regenerate. Instead, it is
aas - oi alge ahe Aayt jl aielauabau yolym slao buiall bupunons
discussion of different cell types below) and fill in the gap left by
the dead cells.
2. Organisation: Replacement by fibrovascular connective tissue (scar
tissue). This occurs when cells are not able to regenerate them-
selves or where there has been a large area of necrosis, so living
regenerative cells are further away from the centre of the area of
damage or cannot fill the gap quickly enough.
Box 6.1 is a flow diagram to summarise tissue repair and we shall
discuss the processes involved in this chapter.
Box 6.1 Flow diagram to simplify healing and repair
Non-reversible cell damage
(necrosis )
 Small area of
 Damaged cells are from a
Large area of
Damaged cells are from a
necrosis
population able to
necrosis
population with limited
regenerate (labile or stable
ability to regenerate
cell types)
(permanent cell types)
Regeneration predominates
Organisation predominates
Replacement by cells of the same type. The surrounding
Replacement by fibrovascular connective tissue (scar
Tissue
living cells regenerate and fill in the gap left by the dead
tissue). Occurs when the surrounding living cells are
(necrotic) cells.
not able to regenerate themselves or are too far away
from the centre of the area of damage, or can't fill the
gap quickly enough.
Repair
6
100
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Regenerative capacity of cells
Cells are divided into labile, stable and permanent cell populations
according to their ability to replace themselves (see Box 6.2).
In any one organ both of the processes of regeneration or organi-
sation may occur due to the different cell types which make up each
organ, e.g. liver is composed not just of liver cells, but also connective
tissue cells and blood vessel endothelial cells; muscles contain not just
muscle fibres, but also connective tissue, blood vessels, nerves and
so on. One of the processes will tend to predominate, however, and
which of the processes is most important in repair of a damaged or-
aneldal ot uebio aui jo sllao uieuu aut jo Aullge ayr uo spuadap ueb
themselves.
Regeneration
For damaged tissue to heal by regeneration, the cells that make it
up must be able to divide by the process of mitosis. Cells vary in
this ability and can be broadly categorised as labile, stable or per-
manent (see Box 6.2 for definitions and examples of the different cell
Box 6.2 Cell populations according to their ability to replace
themselves
Labile cells:
Cells continue to multiply by mitosis through-
out life and replace those lost due to normal
turnover
Examples of labile cells:
Epidermal cells of the skin surface and in-
testinal epithelial cells, lymphoid cells of the
immune system and haematopoietic (blood-
producing) cells of bone marrow
Stable cells:
Have long life spans, do not normally
turnover quickly but following tissue injury
they rapidly divide to replace damaged cells
Examples of stable cells:
Epithelial cells in liver, kidney and lung
Permanent cells:
Have no or very limited capacity to regener-
ate new cells
 Examples of permanent cells:
 Neurons in brain and spinal cord and cardiac
muscle cells
Note that there are also
Stem cells:
Stem cells are present in labile and stable
populations. After division, stem cells can dif-
ferentiate according to the body's or tissue's
requirements
Tissue Repair  101
populations). There are also cells known as stem cells, which can divide
and differentiate along many different paths to form dlifferent mature
cell types.
Organisation
cause they are not labile or stable cell populations, or where the dam-
aui Aq liedau lm eaie ayi 'os op on waun lof teaib oon nsn! s! abe
process of organisation.
Organisation is divided into three phases: the demolition or inflam-
matory phase, the granulation phase and the maturation phase. These
phases are discussed below. It should be borne in mind that the phases
Phases of organisation (see Box 6.3)
· Demolition or inflammatory phase: In the demolition or inflamma-
tory phase, 'cleaning-up' of the wound or damaged tissue occurs.
onou 'sabeydooeu pue sldonau Aq Aue paouad si si
lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils may be involved under
some circumstances. (See Chapter 4 for properties of neutrophils
and other cells involved in inflammation.)
· Granulation phase: In the granulation phase immature connective
tissue (granulation tissue) is formed to start to fill in the wound.
Note that granulation tissue is not the same thing as granu-
loma formation (see chronic granulomatous inflammation in Chap-
ter 4).
· Maturation phase: In the maturation phase the immature fibrous
called fibrosis. The result of this phase is formation of a fibrous scar.
To appreciate the difference between the tissue formed in the last
Box 6.4.
As you see from Box 6.4, the amount of granulation tissue, fibrosis
and, therefore, scar formation depends on the extent of damage and
therefore the size of the wound to be filled. In the next section, we
dliscuss how different sorts of wounds are healed, using skin wounds as
an example. We will then briefly discuss healing in some other major
tissues in the body. Before we leave this section, however, Box 6.5
summarises what we have discussed so far.
102
GeneralPathologyforVeterinaryNurses
Box 6.3 Diagrammatic representation of the phases of wound
organisation
A skin wound is used as an example.
 Scab filling the wound
Epidermis
Macrophages and neutrophils
Capillaries
Mature fibrous tissue
For simplicity, all phases are shown in one diagram - note that, in most wounds, there
will be a gradual progression from one phase to the next as time goes on.
A. Demolition or inffammatory phase. This is the phase of 'cleaning-up' of the wound
or damaged tissue, mainly by neutrophils and macrophages.
B. Granulation phase. In the granulation phase, immature connective tissue (granu-
lation tissue formation) is formed to start to fill in the wound. Granulation tissue
consists of immature fibre-producing cells (fibroblasts) and capillaries which grow
into the area from adjacent tissue.
C. Maturation phase. This is the maturation of the immature fibrous tissue formed
S aseud st jo hnsan aul 'sisonay palles ssaoid e Aq aseyd uoenuena aun u
formation of a fibrous scar.
Tissue Repair
103
Box 6.4 The differences between granulation tissue and fibrous
tissue
Granulation tissue
Fibrous tissue
Immature connective tissue
 Mature connective tissue
Forms rapidly as a scaffold for stronger
■
Collagen (protein fibre)-rich
repair
 Strong component of repair
Amount depends on size of defect
When fully mature fibrosis contracts
(scar)
Amount depends on size of defect
Tissue repair - general and specific examples
1. Healing where there has been epithelial damage only (Box 6.6):
Using skin as our example, consider a minor and superficial skin
wound where there has been damage only to the outermost layer
(the epidermis). When the epidermis is damaged, there will be
exudation of serum (see again acute inflammation, Chapter 4). This
coze will dry and harden to form a scab. Skin scab is dried serum
 protein (fibrin), sometimes with some dead and dying white cells,
Box 6.5 Summary of the introduction to tissue repair and wound
healing
 Tissue healing or repair = the process by which necrotic cells are replaced by
living tissue
 Most tissues are able to repair, but the new cells may not be the same as the cells
they are replacing
Regeneration = replacement by cells of the same type
Organisation = replacement by fibrovascular connective tissue (scar tissue)
 The extent to which each of these processes occurs depends on:
0How well the cells in the tissue are able to regenerate (regenerative capacity)
oHow big is the area of necrosis
 Cells are categorised as labile, stable and permanent according to their ability to
divide (by mitosis, i.e. their regenerative capacity). There are also stem cells
l anp sno Ae (uoesuebio pue uoeauabaii sassaod yoq 'suebio Aue ul 
different celltypes which make up the tissue (e.g. epithelial cells and connective
tissue cells)
104
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
such as neutrophils, stuck in the scab especially where there has
been bacterial contamination of the wound. This scab serves to
protect the next stage in the healing process. Underneath the dried
scab there is proliferation of the epithelium (in our skin example,
the proliferating epithelium will be epidermis - the top covering
layer of skin) from around the edge of the wound. The epithelial
cells proliferate readily by mitosis since they are labile cells (see
earlier, this chapter).
The proliferating cells gradually move across to form a contin-
Sulleaan Aeme slley qeos aut Kllenuaag 'qeos yreauaq lakel snon
the newly regenerated and healed epidermis beneath. In this case
there is minimal granulation tissue and fibrosis (scar formation).
We have used skin in our example but note that the essentials
of healing described are the same in other tissues that have an
epithelial (covering) surface.
2. Healing of deeper or more severe wounds where more than ep-
situation, depending on the extent of the wound to be filled.
good example of the sort of wound that would heal by first
intention (or primary union) would be a clean, incised (surgical)
wound. The wound will be deeper than just the epidermis but
the edges of the wound will be neat and closely apposed (es-
pecially if sutured) and there should be no or very few bacteria
present to contaminate the wound.
The surface epidermis will regenerate as described above.
Whilst underneath the epidermal layer a soft jelly-like protein
plug of the serum protein, fibrin, will form. This will be re-
placed by a slender seam of granulation tissue in 5-7 days via
organisation and by mature fibrosis (scar) in 2-3 weeks. Note
these timings. This is why we tend to leave stitches in place
am Aym pue sainpaoid leoibins isou hahe sep ol seal ie lo
 suggest continued lead walking for dogs and restrict them from
jumping up into cars or onto furniture for sometime afterwards.
b.
Second intention/secondary union or healing of a wound where
there is a tissue defect (see Box 6.7(b)): Edges of wound are
widely separated, tissue has been lost and the defect contains
exudate and necrotic debris (and possibly bacterial contamina-
tion if the wound is not surgical). In this case the defect must
again fill in by granulation, maturing to fibrosis, but more of
it must form to fill the gap. As before, the fibrous tissue ma-
tures but this may take several weeks, and when it contracts
Box 6.6 Healing where there is epithelial damage only
Simplified diagrams of healing in a superficial and uncomplicated skin wound
Wound
Fibrin plug (scab)
Epidermis
Epidermal (epithelial) cells 
starting to grow across the
wound
Dermis
Issue
eRepair
A superficial wound involving only the
A superficial scab (fibrin plug) forms and
The fibrin plug falls away (or is picked
epidermis.
protects the epidermal cells which start to
off!!) to reveal the healed epidermis
proliferate and move across to heal the
(epithelial) layer. There is minimal
wound.
scarring.
06
Box 6.7 (a) Healing by first intention
Simplified diagrams of first intention healing in a surgical skin wound
A clean, neat wound through epidermis
Minimal scab (fibrin plug) formation,
The epidermis heals and the fibrin plug is
and dermis.
allowing the three phases of wound
replaced (by organisation) by minimal 
healing to take place.
 mature fibrous tissue.
Box 6.7 (Continued) (b) Healing by second intention
Simplified diagrams of second intention healing in a skin wound with a greater loss of tissue than shown in Box 6.7(a).
Tissue
A larger wound involving epidermis and
 More scab (fibrin plug) formation 
The fibrin plug is replaced (by
dermis.
required to fill gap than in Box 6.7(a),.
 organisation) by a larger fibrous tissue
Repair
which takes longer to organise.
(scar) than in Box 6.7(a). This scar will
 Epithelium takes longer to grow over
 contract as it matures. If epithelial re-
the top and may not manage to grow
growth was incomplete, the fibrous scar
back completely.
will extend to the skin surface.
108
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
the resulting scar may pucker up or form an indentation, and
therefore a less cosmetic result.
Healing in various tissues
What about healing in other tissues apart from skin? Well, the principles
we have just discussed in skin still apply, so to illustrate this let us look
at a few different organs and see how they tend to heal.
Liver
Liver has excellent powers of regeneration provided damage is not
too extensive or chronic. In the case of chronic or extensive damage
to the liver both regeneration and organisation occur, so there will be
mitotic division of functional liver cells plus some scarring.
There is a specific condition of the liver in aged dogs called nodu-
lar liver regeneration. This condition has an uncertain cause, possibly
involving a toxin, but it seems that there is ongoing liver damage
with focal (nodules) of regeneration and intervening scar tissue so that
eventually the liver can resemble a large bunch of grapes.
Kidney and lungs
These tissues have some regenerative ability if the injury is not too ex-
tensive and the supporting connective tissues remain intact. Usually.
there is incomplete regeneration and healing by organisation (scar-
ring).
Heart
if neighbouring cells are irreversibly damaged, so the heart tends to
heal by organisation (scarring). Areas of fibrous scarring are not able to
contract; a scarred heart (after bouts of damage such as ischaemia, see
Chapter 6) therefore may be less efficient at contracting and pumping
blood.
Nervous system
·Peripheral nervous system: Regrowth of parts of surviving nerves is
possible, so in time an area may regain at least part, if not all, of its
nerve supply.
Tissue Repair 109
·Central nervous system: In the central nervous system (brain and
nerves. Note that this is a very active area of research, so repair of
spinal injuries may, in time, become possible with treatment.
Healing regulation and control
Protein growth factors (produced by inflammatory cells) stimulate and
factors from damaged tissue, or the quality of the blood supply. In-
hibitory as well as stimulatory factors are involved to allow remodelling.
and to stop healing processes when required - that is, when adequate
healing has been achieved.
What can impair, prevent or alter healing?
· Severe prolonged damage: In which there has been loss of the
connective tissue framework or too many of the cells have been
cells unable to regenerate anyway). These conditions tend to favour
repair by fibrosis (scarring) rather than regeneration.
· Contamination: Presence of large amounts of exudate, dirt, bacteria
and/or necrotic tissue tend to prolong the inflammatory phase and
delay healing.
ons loy pauinbau s! Addns poolg poob y :Ajddns poojq aienbepeul 
cessful healing.
·Systemic hormonal disorders: Such as diabetes mellitus and hyper-
adrenocorticism tend to alter metabolism and activity of the cells
involved.
· Inadequate nutrition: Protein and energy are particularly important
for healing.
· Movement: Such as inadequate immobilisation of a healing limb
tends to allow wound edges to move against each other and this
impairs healing.
·Self-trauma: Licking, biting, scratching of wounded areas may allow
bacterial contamination or irritation, which prolongs inflammation
and slows healing.
· Old age: Later in life, blood circulation may be poorer and state of
nutrition more variable. Fibrous tissue may proliferate (organisation)
but regeneration is impaired.
· Immunodeficiency diseases: Immune cells are important in directing
bacterial contaminants to survive.
110
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
1
Chemotherapeutic drugsand radiation: Have detrimental effects on
many actively dividing cells, including the cells important in healing.
Denervation (loss of, or damage to, nerves): Alters movement of
limbs (possibly allowing more movement of wound edges), de-
creases blood supply to area, and may encourage self-trauma since
there will be reduced pain sensation in the affected area.
Proud flesh
Equine nurses in particular may encounter an aberrant type of healing.
ysal pnoid ysal ,pnoud, se umoux s! yr!ym 'shal ,sasioy uo Alensn
is excess granulation tissue that forms a domed area protruding from
or standing 'proud' of the adjacent skin level. Proud flesh can form
where epithelial regeneration is slower or less effective than healing in
the underlying tissues. The underlying tissues granulate more quickly
and since they do not have the overlying epidermis to guide them this
granulation tissue just goes on forming. Proud flesh can be cut away
surgically but will simply reform unless there is an overlying epithelia
in horses with proud flesh, to control and direct proper wound healing.
Summary of key points in Chapter 6
How tissues repair or heal after injury depend on the ability of the
cells making up that tissue to regenerate themselves (i.e. whether
they are labile, stable or permanent cells)
isation; both processes tend to occur in most tissues. In areas with
less ability to heal by regeneration (more permanent cells), more
organisation will occur and scars are more likely to form. Scars are
non-functional, but tough, fibrous tissue.
In superficial (epithelial) wounds, the epidermis readily regenerates
under a protective serum crust. In deeper wounds, the regeneration
of the epidermis acts as a guide and protector for the underlying
tissues, which tend to repair by organisation.
The amount of organisation required to fill a wound is related to
the degree of scar formation (fibrosis). Simple clean wounds heal by
first intention (primary union) with little scarring. More extensive or
contaminated wounds heal by second intention (secondary union)
with more marked scar formation.
Tissue Repair
111
Test yourself questions on Chapter 6
1. In healing of tissue, the extent to which the new tissue is the same as
the tissue that was previously there depends on which two factors?
 2. What is meant by regeneration of tissue? Write briefly how it differs
from organisation.
3. Name the three phases of organisation, and write brief notes about
what occurs in each stage.
4.[
 Describe healing in a skin wound where there has been relatively
5.B
e jo buay ssnosp Aaa 't uosanb on lamsue sno uo bg 
clean, incised (surgical) skin wound (i.e. which extends through the
epidermis and into the dermis below). How would this differ in an
irregular, non-surgical wound which again involves both epidermis
and dermis?
6. Give four factors which may impair, prevent or alter healing in do-
mestic animals.
Chapter 7
Circulatory
Disorders
The normal circulatory system
Special note regarding capillaries
Lymphoid circulation
How does interstitial fluid gather in the tissues?
Oedema
Types of oedema (see Box 7.5)
Distribution of oedema
Impaired blood supply to tissues
Ischaemia
Infarction
Clotting (coagulation) of blood
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Haemorrhage (or hemorrhage)
Thrombosis
Embolism
Shock
Pathological effects of shock
114
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 7
To define the main disorders of the circulatory system relating to
tissue perfusion and blood clotting, namely, oedema, ischaemia,
infarction, haemorrhage, thrombosis, embolism and shock
To understand the pathogenesis of these conditions and their
pathological effects on the body
The normal circulatory system
necrosis and inflammation that we discussed in earlier chapters. You
might find it useful to ensure you refer back to these topics as you read
in your mind.
First, some revision. It is worth reminding ourselves a few basic
facts about the blood circulatory system in animals. Think about the
following questions - cover up the answers and test yourself:
·What are the functions of the (blood) circulatory system in animals?
0Transport of blood constituents such as O2, nutrients, salts, waste
products (e.g. COz and urea), hormones and chemical messen-
gers (called mediators)
0 Regulation of body temperature conserving heat for vital areas
by constriction of capillaries in non-vital parts, like the skin. Trans-
porting warm blood to the skin and dilating the capillaries to help
cool the body down
0 Defences against diseases - inflammatory cells and inflammatory
mediators
 0 Fluid regulation - water, salts and proteins
0 Blood clotting mechanisms - platelets and proteins to slow or
stop bleeding
What are the components of blood in animals?
0 Red cells
 White cells
o Platelets
0 Water
0 Plasma proteins
o Salts
0 Other:
Circulatory Disorders
115
■Hormones, enzymes, inflammatory mediators, antibodies and
growth factors
■ Potentially also - pharmacological substances (treatments,
anaesthetics and preventative drugs), pathogens (infectious
agents), toxins and neoplastic cells
·What are the components of the circulatory system itself? (see Box
7.1)
Special note regarding capillaries
jo sau Aueu Aa aie alau - slassa aue lius Aaa aie saelde
amount of blood.
Here are a few important facts about capillaries:
· Capillaries form fine capillary beds which are situated between the
arterial flow (blood from the heart) and the venous flow (blood
returning to the heart)
· The amount and speed of blood flow in these areas is affected by
various influences.
·All vessels are lined by a layer of flat cells called endothelial cells
which form the inner endothelium. Whereas bigger vessels have
outer ayers of smooth muscle and connective tissue around the
endothelium, capillaries lack this extra structure to their wall. Cap-
Suaed Azeo paiarel-albuis e ueui alouu yonu jou aie sllem Aell!
of endothelial cells (Box 7.2). Endothelial cells secrete a substance
called a glycoprotein. This glycoprotein has some important ac-
tions, which are particularly vital in capillaries:
capillaries do not clog up with blood clots, which would be catas-
trophic for the animal's blood circulation.
between endothelial cells (the gaps between the crazy paving
tiles - see Box 7.2).
· Capillaries are normally slightly leaky and there is a small net out-
flow of fluid from capillaries into surrounding tissues, and then it
becomes known as interstitial fluid. Interstitial fluid bathes the cells
and tissues but is 'outside' of the blood vessels. Fortunately, oth-
no pue sanss ino u! pinge ym dn bulams daay pinom am asimua
blood circulation would run out of fluid, the lymph vesseis are able
to gather up this excess fluid and return it to the blood circulation
(see section lymphoid circulation on page 120).
116
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.1 The components of the blood circulatory system
Heart: The heart is divided into left and right sides, and into four chambers - the left
and right atria and the left and right ventricles.
The atria are smaller and their walls are not as muscular as the ventricles. Blood
from the body enters the right ventricle; blood from the Iungs enters the left ventricle.
Blood then passes into the more muscular ventricles and is pumped (by the con-
traction of the heart muscle) to the body from the left ventricle (the start of the
systemic circulation) and to the lungs from the right ventricle (the start of the pul-
monary circulation). The left ventricle is the most muscular chamber because the
blood from this chamber has further to go.
There are valves between the atria and the ventricles which make sure all the
blood passes to the ventricles and does not flow back into the atria again.
The blood to the body is freshly oxygenated because it has just returned to the
heart from the lungs. The blood to the lungs has just returned from the body and is
low in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide.
Arteries: The arteries are the blood vessels which carry blood from the heart to
either the body or the lungs. The main artery from the left side of the heart is the
aorta, the main artery from the right side of the heart is called the pulmonary artery.
are called arterioles. Arterioles lead into the smallest vessels called capillaries (see
below). Arteries have thick muscular walls because they operate at high pressure and
they transmit the beat of the heart muscle (which can be felt as the pulse). This is
high pressure spurts and arterial 'bleeds' can be difficult to stop simply by applying
pressure.
heart is the vena cava, the main vein to the right side of the heart is the pulmonary
vein. There are smaller vessels in the venous system called venules (similar to the
     sl   s s    s
less pressure. Venous 'bleeds' do not spurt and many can be stopped by applying
pressure to the damaged vessel as this encourages blood clotting.
Capillaries: In the tissues, whether the lungs or the tissues of the body, there
are very thin-walled vessels called capillaries, which form fine meshes called capillary
beds. The capillary beds ensure maximum contact between blood and tissues and
bed are known as the arterial supply; the blood vessels leaving the capillary bed are
known as the venous supply.
There is another circulatory network called the lymphatic circulation which drains
fluid from the tissues, which has leaked out from the blood back into the blood
circulatory system (see text and Box 7.3)
The following diagram is a summary of the main parts of the blood circulatory
system (the lymphatic system is omitted for simplicity but is dealt with in Box 7.3).
CirculatoryDisorders
117
Box 7.1 (Continued) The components of the blood circulatory system
Venous side of
Arterial side of
blood supply to
blood supply to
capillary bed
capillary bed
Capillary bed in
LUNGS
De-oxygenated
blood from
Oxygenated blood
right side of
heart to lungs
from lungs to left
side of heart
VENULES
ARTERIOLES
PULMONARY
PULMONARY
VEIN
ARTERY
PULMONARY
CIRCULATION
LEFT SIDE OF
RIGHT SIDE
HEART
OFHEART
AORTA
SYSTEMIC
CIRCULATION
VENA CAVA
ARTERIOLES
VENULES
Oxygenated
blood from left
side of heart to
De-oxygenated
body
blood from body to
right side of heart
Capillary bed in ALL
TISSUES OF THE
BODY
Arterial side of
Venous side of
blood supply to
blood supply to
capillary bed
capillary bed
118
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.2 The structure and function of capillaries (Part 1)
As shown in Box 7.1, capillaries form fine capillary beds which are situated between
the arterial flow (blood from the heart) and the venous flow (blood returning to the
heart). The diagram below shows a simplified representation of a capillary bed.
The fine mesh-work of the capillary bed ensures the maximum supply of oxygen
and nutrients to the tissues from the blood, and allows waste from the tissues to be
removed as efficiently as possible.
Capillary bed
Arterial inflow
Venousoutflow
Interstitium
Leakage of fluid to and
 from the interstitium
The amount and speed of flow of blood through capillary beds is affected by
various factors, which act to open up (dilate) or close (contract) the arterial inflow or
venous outflow vessels.
Capillaries are normally leaky and there is an outflow of fluid to and fro from
capillaries into surrounding tissues and back again (see dotted arrows in the diagram
of the capillary bed above). The fluid contributes to interstitial fluid which bathes the
cells and tissues, but is outside of the blood vessels {in the virtual space called the
interstitium).
 There is normally a small net outflow into the interstitium, i.e. slightly more escape
of fluid from the capillary bed than is re-absorbed. Fortunately, so that we do not
keep swelling up with fluid in our tissues, excess fluid is gathered up by the lymph
vessels and drained back into the blood circulation (see lymphoid circulation, text
and Box 7.3).
Circulatory Disorders
119
Box 7.2 (Continued) The structure and function of capillaries (Part 2)
All blood vessels are lined by a layer of slender cells called endothelial cells which
together make up the inner layer of the vessel wall - the endothelium.
normal circumstances, glycoprotein:
aul ul busnolp poolg shuaaaid pe uedanes e uo bueoo ypls-uou e aill sioeo
vessels
protects the intercellular junctions between endothelial cells (ie. the gaps be-
tween the crazy paving tiles)
In the bigger blood vessels (arteries, veins, arterioles and venules) the endothe-
lium is supported by outer layers of smooth muscle and connective tissue. Capil-
laries do not have this extra structure to their walls, so in effect capillary walls are
formed from not much more than a thin-layered 'crazy paving' of endothelial cells
Diagram of the wall of an artery
Endothelial layer - single layer of
cells
Outer layers of smooth muscle
and connective tissue
Veins are thinner walled than arteries, as they are under less pressure, but they are still more
substantial than capillaries - see below.
Diagram of a capillary - the wall is composed
of a single layer of endothelial cells
Note that these two diagrams are not to the
same scale - arteries are much, much bigger
than capillaries!
 Intercellular junction
120
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Lymphoid circulation
Lymph vessels gather up fluid called interstitial fluid from the tissues
(interstitium) and return it to the blood vascular system. (This fluid is
called lymph when it is in the lymphoid circulation (see Box 7.3).)
 Lymph vessels are thinner walled and are at lower pressure than
blood vessels. Like blood vessels they are of various sizes, starting small
(like capillaries) and getting gradually larger as they drain back towards
the blood circulatory system. They have lymph nodes at intervals along
them, which act as filters and are important in the function of the
immune system.
Box 7.3 The lymphoid circulation
As discussed in Box 7.2, capillaries are leaky and there is an outflow of fluid to the
surrounding tissues and back again. The fluid which leaves the capillaries contributes
exchange and removal of waste products from the cells.
There is normally a small net outflow of fluid into the interstitium - that is fluid lost
from the circulation in the tissues slightly exceeds the amount re-absorbed. Normally.
to prevent us swelling up due to accumulated fluid in our tissues, the excess interstitial
fluid is collected by the lymph vessels and drained back into the blood circulation
(pale grey dotted arrows in diagram below). The fluid in the lymphoid circulation is
called lymph.
Lymph vessels are thinner walled and are at lower pressure than blood vessels
Like blood vessels they are of various sizes, starting small (like capillaries) and getting
ymph nodes at intervals along them, which act as filters and are important in the
 function of the immune system. (Lymph nodes can also inadvertently filter neoplastic
cells, as we discuss in Chapter 8.)
Capillary bed
Venous outflow
Leakage of fluid into the
interstitium
Lymphatic outflow
Circulatory Disorders
121
Box 7.3 (Continued) The lymphoid circulation
The exact position of the vessel draining lymph into the blood circulatory system
varies slightly between species but it is usually somewhere near to the right atrium.
 Diagram of the lymph circulation - the lymph is drained back to the blood circu-
latory system near to the right atrium
For simplicity, the arterial side of the circulation is not shown. In addition, note that 
the pulmonary circulation is not shown, but lymph vessels also drain the interstitial
 tissue around capillary beds in the lungs.
Main lymph vessel
Vena cava
Capillary bed
Lymph nodes - "filters"
along the lymph vessel
Animals with increased outflow of fluid from the blood circulation, or with de-
creased drainage of lymph accumulate interstitial fluid, and this is called oedema
(see text).
The lymph drains back into the blood circulation near to the right
side of the heart. The exact position of the vessel draining lymph into
the blood varies slightly between species.
How does interstitial fluid gather in the tissues?
There are two forces which affect the pressure of fluid within the cir-
culation (see Box 7.4):
122
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure of fluid in blood vessels. Think
of the pressure that builds up in a hosepipe when you turn on the
tap. The walls of the hose become tense as the pressure of the
water builds up and if you do not steady the free end of the hose.
the water (hydrostatic) pressure makes the hose whip round like an
 angry snake. The hydrostatic pressure of the blood normally tends
to push fluid out into the interstitium from the (leaky) capillaries.
 Osmotic pressure is the pressure that develops due to differences
in the concentration of substances dissolved in fluid (solutes) sep-
arated by a slightly leaky membrane (such as a capillary wall). If
two solutions, one concentrated and one dilute, are separated by a
leaky membrane, the water will tend to flow into the more concen-
trated side in order to even up (equilibrate) the concentrations of
the two solutions. We say that the solute that is acting to draw wa-
ter through the leaky membrane is osmotically active. In the body.
solutes exerting osmotic pressure include salts (such as sodium
chloride) and, especially important in the blood, plasma proteins.
We noted above that capillary walls are normally slightly leaky.
Large molecules, like proteins in blood (plasma proteins), however,
are not normally able to pass across the leaky capillary walls as they
are too big. This means that they are usually retained within the
blood circulation and exert osmotic pressure, tending to draw fluid
from the interstitium and into the blood. Though, as noted above,
in a healthy individual there is normally a slight net loss of fluid from
blood into the interstitium.
Oedema
Oedema (or edema in American texts) is the accumulation of excessive
amounts of interstitial fluid. Oedema fluid causes a soft swelling of the
tissue, which characteristically can be 'pitted' - this means that you
can press into the surface of oedematous tissue with your finger or an
instrument and leave an indentation. (Conversely, swelling due to, for
instance, a soft tumour will not 'pit' when pressed.)
There are different types of oedema depending on how the fluid
accumulation has been caused. In all of these types of oedema, the
lymphatic circulation is not able to remove adequately the excess fluid
from the tissues.
Types of oedema (see Box 7.5)
· Inflammatory oedema occurs when there is a site of inflam-
mation in the body. Inflammation often leads to damage to the
CirculatoryDisorders
123
Box 7.4 Hydrostatic and osmotic pressure
Hydrostatic pressure = the fluid pressure in blood vessels. The
hydrostatic pressure of the blood normally tends to push fluid out
into the interstitium from the leaky capillaries.
Osmotically active
 Solutes (especially
plasma proteins)
Blood vessel wall
Fewer osmotically active
solutes in interstitium
Osmotic pressure = the pressure that develops due to differences in the
concentration of substances (solutes) dissolved in fluids either side of a
slightly leaky membrane (such as a capillary wall). If two solutions, one
concentrated and one dilute, are separated by a leaky membrane, the water
will tend to flow into the more concentrated side until the concentrations of the
two solutions are evened up (equilibrated). We say that the solute that is
acting to draw water through the leaky membrane is osmotically active. In the
chloride) and, especially important in the blood, plasma proteins.
Note that there are osmotically active substances in the interstitium and so
there will be an osmotic pull from the blood into the interstitium as well,
tending to equilibrate the solutions either side ofthe vessel wall.
In a healthy individual there is normally a slight net loss of fluid from blood into the
interstitium.
124
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.5 Summary of types of oedema
Think about the ways these types of oedema develop, you should be able to follow
the process through.
Type of
Fluid
How does it
oedema
characteristic
develop?
Why does it develop?
Inflammatory
High protein
Leaky capillaries
 Damage to endothelial wall
 Contains cells
(cellular)
Non-
Low protein
↑ plasma
↑ venous pressure due to heart
inflammatory
hydrostatic
disease;
pressure
↓ venous outflow (blockage
- neoplasia, fibrosis/scars and
trauma}
↓ plasma osmotic
e.g. loss of plasma pro-
pressure
tein (malnutrition, chronic di-
arrhoea); renal disease;
↓ synthesis of plasma pro-
tein (chronic liver disease);:
anaemia
↑ tissue osmotic
↑ salt and water retention (kid-
pressure
ney disease)
↓ ymph drainage
Lymphatic obstruction (block-
age - neoplasia, fibrosis/scars
(ewne pue
endothelial lining of the capillaries, meaning that they be-
come more leaky than normal, allowing even large molecules
like plasma proteins to move out into the interstitium. You will
remember from the discussion above that large molecules, like
plasma proteins, exert osmotic pressure, therefore when they
escape into the interstitium they attract fluid out from the blood
too. The plasma proteins do not enter the lymphatic circulation
but hang around in the tissues keeping much of the accumulated
fluid with them.
Inflammatory oedema characteristically is high in protein content
and may be very cellular as it contains white cells attracted to the
site of inflammation (see Chapter 4).
Non-inflammatory oedema has a number of causes, discussed be-
low. The endothelial lining of the capillaries more often remains
intact in non-inflammatory oedema, so this form of oedema fluid
tends to be low in protein and usually does not contain cells.
Circulatory Disorders
125
Causes of non-inflammatory oedema
static pressure may happen for a number of reasons (see next
paragraph) but however it occurs, the increased pressure in the
circulation pushes fluid out into the interstitium.
How could this increase in hydrostatic pressure occur? It occurs
because of an increase in pressure in the venous circulation, in other
words, on the 'return to heart side' of the capillary bed. This may be
due to a simple blockage, not allowing blood to pass back to the
heart (e.g. a tumour, or scar tissue, or pressure from a constricting
bandage for instance) or there could be heart disease in which case
the heart cannot pump blood onwards into the arteries, causing a
back-pressure in the venous circulation.
 Decreased plasma osmotic pressure: If the osmotic pressure of the
blood plasma is decreased the blood loses its ability to retain fluid
is loss of plasma protein, such as in malnutrition or in chronic diar-
rhoea or renal disease. Osmotic pressure may decrease if plasma
puouuo ui se yons 'sauenb aenbape u! paonpoud pou si uiaioid
liver disease. Finally, chronic anaemia may cause a decrease in
plasma osmotic pressure.
· Increased tissue osmotic pressure: Osmotic pressure works both
ways across the blood vessel walls since the interstitial fluid ex-
erts its own osmotic pressure. If the osmotic pressure of the
interstitium is increased, for instance, if there is salt retention
due to kidney disease, then the interstitial fluid can draw wa-
ter from the blood by osmosis. In kidney disease there may be
decreased fluid excretion in urine too, further exacerbating the
problem.
·Lymphatic obstruction: If the lymph drainage system is not working
efficiently, perhaps because the lymph vessels are blocked, then
the normal small net outflow of fluid from the blood circulation
becomes a problem. The fluid accumulates in the interstitium
Keu abeyoolg e yons 'slassaa yduukl ayn Ag paaouau hou s! pue
happen due to a tumour, or scar tissue, or pressure from a
constricting bandage, for instance, or simply due to immobility.
since the fluid flow in the low-pressure lymphatic vessels is aided
by movement of the limbs. If the nearby veins are also affected
by the same constrictions as the lymphatic vessels then the
problem is even worse. (Note arteries and arterioles are harder
to constrict because they have thick muscular walls, whereas
veins, venules and lymphatic vessels have thinner collapsible
walls.)
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Distribution of oedema
Oedema may form in different ways and to different extents, depend-
ing on the cause.
· Localised oedema: One area affected, such as oedema caused by
an area of inflammation or a local blockage of venous or lymph
flow, e.g. tight bandage or plaster cast on a limb.
ag oi Aayll aow pue peaidsapim sl syi wapeo pasiaue
caused by diffuse problems with venous drainage (e.g. heart dis-
ease) or general decrease in osmotic pressure (loss of plasma pro-
tein due to chronic diarrhoea).
 Dependent oedema: This is when gravity tends to lead to pooling of
the lower part of the legs.
· Oedema in specific locations: Oedema may be assigned a partic-
jo uojejnunsoe) xeiouioiply inoqe leay Keu nof pue aueu tejn
fluid inside the thoracic cavity of the chest); hydropericardium (ac-
cumulation of fluid inside the pericardial sac around the heart); and
ascites (accumulation of fluid inside the peritoneal cavity of the
abdomen).
· Anasarca: This is diffuse marked accumulation of fluid just under the
skin (subcutaneous fluid) and it may happen as a result of chronic
heart failure, though dead baby animals may occasionally be found
to be anasarcous at the time of birth and the mothers are then un-
able to give birth to them naturally, and require a caesarean section.
In most instances oedema is an indication of something else going
wrong in the body (e.g. heart disease) but it may not necessarily be
harmful in itself. There are some situations, however, when oedema
itself may be damaging and even life-threatening.
When may oedema be life-threatening?
Think about what oedema is - an accumulation of fluid. In certain
circumstances this will be particularly damaging, such as:
· Pulmonary oedema: Accumulation of fluid in the lungs. This is what
happens in chronic heart disease. If not treated, the fluid builds up
and affects the function of the lungs causing breathlessness and
coughing.
· Brain: The brain is encased in a rigid container, the skull, so if
swelling due to oedema of the brain (cerebral oedema) occurs,
the brain presses against the skull and serious brain impairment
may result, leading to headaches, loss of consciousness and slowed
breathing. This can happen in a condition known as salt poisoning.
Circulatory Disorders
127
pue latem oi ssaooe aienbapeui aaey (sbid se yons) sleuujue uaum
are eating relatively salty rations.
·Larynx: Accumulation of fluid in the throat, for instance, when an
animal catches a bee and is stung. The venom in the sting damages
endothelial cells and makes the blood vessels leaky so that cedema
accumulates in the mouth and throat and this can stop the animal's
breathing.
Impaired blood supply to tissues
Two terms are used in pathology in relation to decreased blood supply
to tissues, these are:
sion and therefore decreased supply of vital nutrients, especially
oxygen, to that area.
· Infarction means death (necrosis) of the area of tissue as a result of
ischaemia.
Both these terms are discussed in more detail in the next sections.
Ischaemia
This is pronounced is-kee-mia and comes from the Greek words 'is-
chein' meaning 'to hold back' and 'haemo' which refers to blood. So lit-
erally, ischaemia means preventing blood from flowing into the tissue
The effects on the tissue of a period of reduced blood supply can
be reversible, in other words, tissue damage either will not result from
a period of ischaemia or it will occur but will not be permanent (i.e. the
tissue heals), but this depends on:
bunsai aheuep anss!l :euayos! jo poad aur jo uoeanp aul .
from a short period of ischaemia is more likely to be reversible than
extended periods of ischaemia.
· The metabolic demands of the tissue: An organ with a low metabolic
rate and therefore low requirements of vital nutrients and oxygen
is less likely to be damaged by a period of ischaemia.
Causes of ischaemia
See Box 7.6 for common causes of ischaemia.
Infarction
Infarction is the death (necrosis) of tissue as result of ischaemia. An
infarct is an area of ischaemic necrosis in a tissue or organ (Box 7.7),
so in this case the period of ischaemia has had permanent effects
128
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Thrombosis
Embolism
Vasoconstriction
Intravascular coagulation
Mass of any material
Spasm in wall of vessel,
(blood clotting within 
travelling in blood and 
various causes
blood vessels of a living
able to lodge in vessels
animal - not the same as
blood clotting as a
response to vessel
damage)
Compression
Vasculitis
Vessel damage
For example, due to a
 Inflammation of the
Vessels torn by a bad
tumour growing next to
vessel wall
wound or bone fracture
vessel,
or a tight bandage
Circulatory Disorders
129
Box7.7Infarction
Infarction is defined as death (by necrosis) of tissue as result of ischaemia (loss of
blood supply).
An infarct is an area of necrosis due to ischaemia (or ischaemic necrosis) in a tissue
or organ.
Usually, it is the arterial supply that is affected in some way to cause arterial infarc-
tion of the affected tissue; venous infarction does occur though it is less common.
The diagram below represents a block of cells, to which the arterial blood supply
thrombus blocking an arteriole. The artery affected is a smaller branch towards the
end of the arterial supply so a focal infarct has resulted - that is, a well-defined area
of necrosis has developed as a result.
Infarction - area of
dead tissue
Arterial supply to
Thrombus
blocking
tissue
 arteriole
The diagram below represents as global infarction; there is blockage of a large
 or proximal artery (an artery nearer to the heart) which is responsible for supplying
blood to wider area. In this case there is more severe or extensive infarction of the
tissue.
Arterial supply to
tissue
s
bocking
artery
Infarction - area of
dead tissue
130　
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Usually, the arterial supply is compromised in some way causing arterial
infarction of a tissue; less commonly, venous infarction occurs.
The extent of infarction (that is the extent of necrosis in a tissue)
depends on:
· the level of the vessel blocked and
· the presence of an alternative blood supply (see below in the sec-
tion Which organs are most sensitive to ischaemia?)
So, for instance, a focal infarction would result from blockage of a small
or terminal artery. Examples of focal infarction would include:
·blockage of an artery in the kidney cortex
·blockage of an artery or arteriole in the heart causing myocardial
infarction
(Strongyle) infection in horses
Global infarction, on the other hand, occurs when there is blockage
of a large or proximal artery (artery nearer the heart) which is respon-
sible for supplying blood to a wider area of the organ or tissue; in this
case, there will be more severe or extensive infarction of the tissue.
For instance, an entire lung lobe may be infarcted due to torsion of
the lobe (twisting of the lobe causing blockage of the arterial supply
to that lobe).
Progression of an infarct
When irreversible ischaemia occurs and the affected tissue starts to die
there are recognisable stages of development of the resulting infarct.
(See Box 7.8. You may also find it helpful to refer back to the section
on tissue healing in Chapter 6.)
·An area of pale tissue (pallor) will be visible from approximately
24 hours after the blood supply has been interrupted. The pale
au g palddns Aleuou anss jo eare au oi puodsaoo lm eae
now impaired blood vessel. This early infarct will be surrounded by
a zone of inflammation (an inflammatory border).
Healing by regeneration or organisation of the area (see tissue
healing, Chapter 6).
· Organisation (if tissue is not able to regenerate) will mean that scar
tissue will form (see tissue healing. Chapter 6). In the final stage the
scar contracts. This contraction is responsible for the hard shrunken
nature of old established infarcts, for instance, the kidneys of old
cats with chronic infarcts are nodular, small and firm.
Circulatory Disorders
131
Box 7.8Progression of an infarct
When an infarct starts to develop due to ischaemia in a tissue there are recognisable
stages of development.
Pallor (paleness) - visible from approximately 24 hours after the blood supply has
o auoz e aq paunons aa lm neui Aea sll lassa pooa paniedui mou a
inffammation (an inflammatory border).
The following diagram builds on the simplified version in Box 7.6 to illustrate these
changes.
Infarction - area of
dead tissue. Appears
 pale with a peripheral 
zone of inflammation.
Arterial supply to
tissue
Thrombus
blocking
arteriole
If tissue is not able to regenerate, then organisation of the area follows (see Chapter 6).
Organisation of
infarcted area -
formation of
immature fibrous
tissue.
Fibrous scar forms in area of organised tissue. In the final stage the scar contracts,
which is responsible for the hard shrunken nature of old established infarcts.
Old established infarction.
Mature fibrous tissue has
 developed which has
contracted and formed a
hard scar, which deforms
the tissue in this area.
132
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Which organs are most sensitive to ischaemia (and therefore to
infarction- death of tissue)?
Organs or tissues whose cells are very sensitive to decreased oxygen
supply (hypoxia) are likely to be most harmed by ischaemia. Examples
of such sensitive tissues are brain, kidney and heart.
Which organs are less sensitive to ischaemia?
Tissues less sensitive to ischaemia are mainly those with more than one
blood supply, so if one is diminished, vital nutrients and oxygen can
be supplied by other vessels, e.g. lung, liver, muscle and intestine.
We now move on from impaired blood supply to discuss the impor-
tant process of blood clotting, and then to learn about what can go
wrong to alter normal blood clotting.
Clotting (coagulation) of blood
Blood clotting (coagulation) depends to a large extent on conversion
of a soluble protein in the blood called fibrinogen to the insoluble
protein fibrin. Strands of fibrin are an important part of the structure of
a blood clot. Formation of fibrin is brought about by a chain reaction
or cascade of enzymes in the blood. These enzymes are called clotting
factors and they are produced as an inactive form by the liver. The
inactive form of each factor is activated in sequence during the clotting
cascade, each newly formed active factor then activates the next factor
in the chain (this is a similar arrangement to the complement cascade
of proteins of the immune response - see Chapter 5). Several steps in
this cascade also require calcium and several require vitamin K, to help
the reactions to occur.
You may see reference in other texts to two initial pathways of clot-
ting factor activation called the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways, which
are triggered by slightly different things, but the final part of the pro-
cess is the same - the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. Further details
of the coagulation cascade may be found in other pathology text-
books, especially those dealing with clinical pathology. The process is
summarised in Box 7.9.
So, fibrin is the fibrous protein part of a blood clot but particles
called platelets are also an important part of the clotting process. Box
7.10 discusses a few features of platelets before going onto describe
blood coagulation in more detail.
There are a number of triggers for the coagulation process, such
as damage to blood vessel walls which exposes the blood to collagen
underlying the damaged endothelium, or contact between blood and
abnormal surfaces, such as glass (as may happen to a blood smear
on a microscope slide or a blood sample in a plain tube without
Circulatory Disorders
133
Box 7.9 Fibrin formation in blood coagulation (see also Box 7.11)
Part of blood clotting (coagulation) depends on conversion of a soluble protein in
the blood called fibrinogen to an insoluble one called fibrin. Strands of fibrin bind 
particles called platelets together to form a blood clot (see Boxes 7.10 and 7.11).
Formation of fibrin is brought about by a chain of enzymes in the blood, called
clotting factors; these enzymes are produced as an inactive form by the liver. The
inactive form of each factor is activated in sequence during the coagulation cascade,
each newly formed active factor activating the next factor in the chain (compare the
 complement cascade of proteins in our discussion of immunology - see Chapter 5).
Several steps in this cascade also require calcium and several require vitamin K to
help the reactions occur.
There are two initial pathways of clotting factor activation, called the extrinsic and
intrinsic pathways, which are triggered by slightly different things, but the final part
of the process is the same - the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin.
The coagulation cascade
1. Cascade is triggered, e.g. by
damage to the endothelial lining
of a blood vessel
Ist inactive clotting
Ist active clotting factor
factor
 2. The cascade continues, several of the steps requiring
 additional calcium and several requiring vitarmin K
2nd active clotting
2nd inactive dotting factor
factor
etc.
Several
3. At the end of the cascade, whichever way it started, is the
more ste ps
 production of the insoluble protein, fibrin from soluble, fibrinogen
Fbrinogen
Fbrin
(solubie)
(insoluble)
The results of the
coagulation cascadle
4. The fibrin coats platelets, which have aggregated at
the site of endothelial damage (see also Box 7.11)
5. Finally, the fibrin is stabilised (called 'cross-linking)
134
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.10 A few features of platelets
Platelets:
· are flat structures, which contain cytoplasm, other cellular components (or
ganelles) and numerous granules
are formed in bone marrow from fragmented large cells called megakaryocytes
 clump together (aggregate) and become activated and then contract in clotting
 contain granules which, when the platelets are activated, release products that
regulate clotting (and that are also actively involved in inflammation and repair)
anti-coagulant). Endothelial cells themselves are also able to initiate the
coagulation cascade. To describe the coagulation process in general
terms we will discuss what happens when a blood vessel is damaged.
When a vessel is cut or torn, blood starts to escape (haemorrhage)
and blood clotting or coagulation is triggered to try to limit, or prefer-
ably stop, the blood loss (haemostasis). There are recognised stages
in the process of coagulation (Box 7.11):
·Vasoconstriction: A transient reflex contraction of the smooth mus
cle in the vessel wall which squeezes the vessel and may help to
reduce blood loss. (This blood vessel contraction is not likely to be
strong or persistent enough to stop bleeding altogether but it may
help to reduce blood loss.)
 Primary haemostasis: Injury to the endothelium (from whatever
damaged the blood vessel) makes platelets stick to it and become
activated.
■
 Secondary haemostasis: The coagulation cascade referred to above
is activated by the released contents of the platelet granules result-
ing in fibrin formation.
· Clot formation: Fibrin and platelets clump together at the site of
vessel damage to form a solid plug (clot or thrombus).
Note that there is a system that can counteract the coagulation
process. This system is called fibrinolysis, literally. 'lysis' or splitting of
fibrin. In the normal circulation a delicate balance is maintained (Box
7.12) - blood needs to be fluid to circulate and to carry out its impor-
tant transport functions, but equally, it is important that the clotting
system is on 'stand by' to plug quickly any leaks in the circulation.
Circulatory Disorders
135
Box 7.11 Clot formation on a vessel wall
The coagulation process can be triggered by various things such as damage to
blood vessel walls or contact between blood and abnormal surfaces (such as glass -
this happens when normal blood is applied to a microscope slide, for instance).
To illustrate the general features of the coagulation process the following dis-
cussion uses the example of damage to a blood vessel wall as the trigger (diagram
A).
When a vessel is cut or torn, blood starts to escape (haemorrhage) and blood
coagulation (haemostasis) is triggered to limit, and preferably stop, the blood loss.
There are recognised stages in the process of haemostasis:
Vasoconstriction - a short-term reflex contraction of the smooth muscle in the
vessel wall which constricts the vessel to try to reduce blood loss (diagram B). (This
blood vessel contraction is not likely to be strong or persistent, so is not enough to
stop bleeding altogether).
 Area of damage
A: Area of damage to vessel,
B: Local short-term contraction of
causing loss of endothelial cells
smooth muscle of vessel wall.
and exposure of tissues beneath
the endothelial layer.
Primary haemostasis
 the exposure of the tissues beneath the endothelium attracts
platelets and activates them so that they stick to the area and to each other (diagram C).
Secondary haemostasis - next, the coagulation cascade of proteins is activated, resulting
in fibrin formation. The fibrin and platelets clump together at the site of the damage to
form a solid plug (clot or thrombus)(diagram D).
Platelet
Fibrin
C: Platelets clump together on
D: The platelets contract and release
the surface of the exposed sub-
the contents of their granules which
endothelial tissues.
help to promote the coagulation
 cascade; fibrin is produced.
136
General Pathology forVeterinary Nurses
Box 7.12 The delicate balance of coagulation and fibrinolysis in the
bloodvascularsystem
 In order to carry out its transport functions, blood obviously needs to be fluid to
circulate freely so blood clotting in the blood vessels is not desirable under normal
circumstances. On the other hand, it is important that there is also a system to
quickly plug any leaks in the circulation to prevent escape of blood, so a clotting
system must be on 'stand by' to do this. For normal functioning of the circulatory
system a delicatebalancehas to existbetween these two activities.
 s s  n   s  -al,  
lier). The system which counteracts coagulation is called fibrinolysis (literally 'lysis' or
splitting of fibrin).
Coagulation
Fiorinolysis
system
system
A delicate balance exists between the coagulation and fibrinolysis systems in
the normal circulation.
of one or other of these functions. The result of inappropriate clotting or tendency
to haemorrhage could be harmful, or even fatal, for the animal.
Circulatory Disorders   137
aged vessels, which would be disastrous for the animal. To stop this
ical processes, but that derangements or extremes of either process
may be harmful or even fatal for the animal.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
A specific disorder of clotting is disseminated intravascular coagulation
over the body. DlC is caused by widespread damage to the endothe-
lium of blood vessels in all parts of the body. This damage may be
caused by toxins in the bloodstream such as those generated in se-
vere infections. There is diffuse endothelial necrosis because of the
toxic damage and this triggers formation of blood clots all over the
body. In response to this there is then excess triggering of fibrinolysis
to try to break down the clots
The consequences of DlC include marked depletion of clotting
factors (called a consumption coagulopathy, because clotting factors
are said to be consumed or used up). As a result there will be multiple
small haemorrhages all over the body. Although the individual
haemorrhages are often small, they are so numerous and widespread
that they represent a huge loss of circulating blood volume (see
section Shock on page 145). The large number of clots which are not
broken down effectively will also cause widespread infarction in many
tissues and organs. As you may appreciate, development of DIC is a
very poor sign for the animal.
Haemorrhage (or hemorrhage)
Haemorrhage is used to denote blood loss from the circulatory system.
Causes of haemorrhage
· Blood vessel damage, e.g. trauma (RTA, bone fracture and spleen
rupture).
·Ulceration of body surfaces - such as stomach or skin ulcers - which
ischaemic necrosis.
·Rupture of a tumour - many tumours (or neoplasms) have good
blood supplies (in Chapter 8, we shall discuss this aspect in more
sociated with extensive blood loss if they rupture or ulcerate.
138
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
·
Haemorrhages can also occur when there is a shift of the delicate
clot/fibrinolysis balance in favour of bleeding. This is what happens
in disorders called coagulopathies.
Coagulopathies
Coagulopathies are disorders of the coagulation mechanism that result
from deficiency or infectiveness of any stage of the clotting process.
Coagulopathies are described as being acquired or congenital. Some
coagulopathies may be undetected, until unexpected, possibly severe
bleeding occurs after minor surgery or after a modest wound. In severe
cases the animal may be lame due to bleeding into joints or may
pass blood in the faeces. Because of the risk of previously undetected
coagulopathy, coagulation tests are often carried out on animals prior
to surgery to assess clotting function.
eases and may be caused by transient reduction in production, or
excessive use (consumption), of clotting factors (see DIC above).
factor production, aided by vitamin K. Recall that this vitamin
is important in several steps of the coagulation cascade. Liver
disease therefore has the potential to decrease clotting.
0  Rodenticides(rat or mouse poisons): Anti-coagulating rat poisons
(e.g. dicoumarol known as Warfarin) act by inhibiting the liver
enzymes which are responsible for synthesis of several clotting
factors.
0 Vitamin K deficiency: Vitamin K is important in the synthesis of
several clotting factors. Dietary deficiency or gut disease poten-
tially causes a decrease in levels of vitamin K in the body, again
affecting blood clotting.
 0 Consumption: Clotting factors may become used up (consumed)
in certain pathological situations when widespread clotting has
occurred, secondary coagulopathies can then follow, causing
tendency to bleed, as in DlC (see above).
0 Infectious agents: Certain viruses, such as infectious canine
hepatitis (lCH) virus, damage blood vessel endothelial cells. This
factors, causing secondary tendency to bleed. Feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP) virus in cats is associated with inflammation of
blood vessels (vasculitis) and this can cause diffuse clotting and
thus DlC. In septicaemia, certain bacteria (such as Salmonella or
Leptospira) or some bacterial toxins can similarly damage the en-
dothelium causing widespread clotting then secondary bleeding.
0 Other severe diseases: Tissue necrosis, burns, tumours and snake
venoms can initiate DIC.
Circulatory Disorders
139
Congenital coagulopathies: There are a number of congenital
haemophilias in animals of which haemophilia A and von Wille-
brand's disease are the most common.
0 Haemophilia A: This is a deficiency of one of the clotting factors
in the clotting cascade which is called factor Vll. The deficiency
is caused by decreased synthesis or secretion, or by formation
of abnormal ineffective forms of factor Vll. Haemophilia A has
been recorded in dogs (mild, moderate or severe forms), cats,
horses and cattle.
0von Willebrand's disease (dogs): von Willebrand factor (vWF) is a
glycoprotein produced by the endothelial cells and by platelet-
producing megakaryocytes in bone marrow. vWf is able to bind
to both platelets and endothelial cells and hence encourages
platelet aggregation in the clotting process. The disease occurs
-qns) iualeddeu! aq uasa Aeuu l! pue sbop u! AjaAas bujAuea u!
clinical), and can be triggered by stress or other diseases.
Haemorrhage varies in significance to the animal, with some occur-
rences being more harmful than others.
What factors determine the clinical significance of haemorrhage?
· Where the bleeding occurs: If haemorrhage is into a low-pressure
inadequate spay ligature, then bleeding will be able to continue
almost unchecked if not treated. Any clots formed may be simply
'pushed' off by the force of blood behind them. If bleeding occurs
aoneu e oui se yons 'ainssaid eool layhiy sey yeiym eaie ue ou!
in the case of bleeding around a fractured bone, for instance, a
large bruise, the haemorrhage may be prevented from getting too
serious because the muscle and connective tissue in the area will act
like a pressure bandage, and clotting is more likely to be successful
at stopping the flow.
·How fast the bleeding occurs: Again, this may relate to pressure
bupaala s! lassaa jo ad yoiym osle ing eare buipunons aun u
An artery will bleed faster than a vein and the blood loss will be
more serious and less likely to clot successfully without treatment.
As well as determining the likely success of the clotting process, the
speed of blood loss will determine how sick the animal becomes
as a result of the haemorrhage. An animal can adapt to slow loss
of blood, such as chronic blood seepage from a small stomach
ulcer. Rapid loss of blood, however, such as occurs from a ruptured
spleen, is likely to cause sudden serious decrease in blood pressure,
and more dramatic clinical consequences.
·How much blood is lost: Again, small slow losses can be compen-
sated for by increased production of blood cells in the marrow and
140
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
by drinking or retaining more water. Large losses may exhaust the
marrow and be more difficult for the animal to recover from without
treatment.
Types of haemorrhage
Haemorrhages of different types or at different sites have specific
names. As well as haemorrhage of free blood from a wound, categories
of haemorrhage include:
· Haematoma which is localised and confined seepage of blood out
of the circulation into adjacent tissues (known as extravasation of
blood), e.g. bleeding into a muscle as a result of blunt trauma.
·Petechiae and ecchymoses are small haemorrhages onto or under
organ surfaces. Petechiae are fine, often pinpoint haemorrhages,
whilst ecchymoses are larger.
·Melaena is partially digested blood, which becomes black and tarry
the faeces of animals with stomach haemorrhage (e.g. a bleeding
gastric ulcer).
the particular cavity affected, e.g. haemothorax, haemopericardium
and haemoperitoneum.
 Retinal haemorrhages affectthe back of the eye in animals with high
blood pressure, and can be detected using an ophthalmoscope.
The preceding discussion has involved lack of effective clotting. If the
dlelicate balance between clot formation and fibrinolysis shifts in favour
of fibrin formation then inappropriate or excessive clotting (thrombus
next section.
Thrombosis
Note that thrombosis (formation of a thrombus) differs from blooc
the coagulation cascade, can still develop outside of the circulatory
system (e.g. in plain glass blood tubes or on glass slides) and can
develop in animals after death. Thrombus formation, on the other
hand, is specifically an abnormal process involving clotting of blood
within an intact circulatory system and in a living animal.
There are certain predisposing factors, i.e. certain conditions usually
need to apply, for thrombus formation. These factors are known as
Virchow's triad (pronounced Verr-choff). Any one of these factors can
result in thrombus formation though in many conditions more than one
factor will be present.
Circulatory Disorders
141
Box 7.13 Key features and definitions related to thrombosis
Haemostasis = normal clotting reaction
Thrombosis = pathological or inappropriate clotting reaction
Thrombus = solid clump of blood constituents
0Formed within heart or vessels
0 Formed in a living animal
Virchow's triad
For thrombi to form in the circulatory system of living animals there
need to be:
·Changes in vessel wall(s): Such as physical damage (trauma), chem-
ical injury, infection or bacterial endotoxic damage, for instance.
· Changes in flow (slow or turbulent flow): Note that a vicious cir-
cle will be established as the resultant thrombus itself will cause
turbulence.
· Changes in blood constituents (increased tendency to clot also
called hypercoagulability): This happens in renal failure, diabetes
mellitus, heart failure, severe trauma or burns and disseminated
cancer, for instance.
A thrombus forms in layers and these can sometimes be seen under
the microscope. The layers in a thrombus are due to platelets ag-
 gregating first, and then attracting fibrin with blood cells, which then
attracts more platelets and so on.
Thrombi may form in the venous side of the circulation or in the
arterial side. An example of venous thrombosis is deep vein thrombo-
sis (DVT) when blood clots form in the veins of the legs. In humans
this has been associated with protracted periods of inactivity such as
recuperation after an operation or on a long haul aircraft journey. The
consequences of DVT are cedema of the affected limb or pulmonary
embolism (a bit of the blood clot in the leg breaks away, and passes
through the heart to finally lodge in the lungs - see section Embolism).
Arterial thrombosis may be caused by heart disease. In this case,
blood clots form on faulty heart valves due to local turbulent flow, and
can break away and travel to other parts of the body in the arterial
circulation. They may then lodge in vessels (thromboembolism, see
later) and cause infarction (and ischaemia) of the affected tissue or
organ.
A number of things can happen to a thrombus once it has formed
(see Box 7.14), it may be broken down by phagocytic cells (like neu-
 'iemed io 'iaialduoo (t laidey aas 'sabeydooeu pue sydo
142
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
ually be organised and become fibrous (see Chapter 6); this fibrous
the vessel. Alternatively, the thrombus may organise but become re-
canalised - that is little channels, lined by endothelial cells, form which
allow blood to flow once more. As discussed above and in the next
section, some of the thrombus may break away and lodge elsewhere
(a thromboembolus).
Embolism
An embolus is a mass of material able to lodge in a vessel and block it.
The plural of embolus is emboli. Emboli cause ischaemia and infarction
(see earlier).
The effects of emboli depend on:
·where in the circulation they originate from and
·where in the circulation they lodge
The majority of emboli are derived from thrombi (and are known as
thromboemboli), in other words, they are bits of larger blood clots
that break away and travel in the circulation until they lodge in smaller
vessels and block them.
In some heart diseases, blood clots (thrombi) form on the heart
break away and travel in the circulation. The resulting effects depend
·Valvular thrombosis on the left side of the heart can lead to emboli
in the systemic circulation.
·Valvular thrombosis on the right side of the heart can lead to emboli
in the pulmonary circulation (lungs).
'Saddle thrombus' and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats
An example of thromboembolic disease not uncommon in veterinary
practice is so-called 'saddle' thrombus (thromboembolus in the cau-
dal aorta or iliac arteries) in cats with the congenital heart disease
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The thromboembolus interrupts blood
supply to the hind legs and affected cats initially may be restless or
throw themselves around (which is assumed to be due to a severe 'pins
and needles' feeling in their legs). Later, if the condition progresses
unchecked, there is loss of pulse in the hindlimbs, coldness of the hind
paws and loss of sensation and muscle control (see Box 7.15).
As well as thrombi, other materials or substances are potential
sources of emboli, which can lodge in blood vessels and block them.
Circulatory Disorders
143
Box 7.14 Fate of a thrombus
Lysis and resolution
 Inflammatory cells break 
Thrombus is either
down the thrombus
completely removed
(top of diagram) or leaves
a slight thickening of the 
vessel wall (bottom of
diagram)
Organisation
Fibrous scar contracts
Thrombus
Recanalisation
End view
Intravascular coagulation
Endothelial-lined channels form
Thromboembolism
Fragment of thrombus
breaks off and may lodge
elsewhere
144
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.15 'Saddle' thrombus in cats
An example of thromboembolic disease which is not uncommon in veterinary prac-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A thrombus forms in the heart and a thromboembolus
dislodges from this primary site and enters the main artery leaving the left side of
the heart - the aorta.
The thrombus can lodge in the lower part of the caudal aorta, at the point where
this artery divides to supply blood to the hind legs and tail. The unfortunate cartoon
cat in the diagram below has a 'saddle' thrombus.
Thrombus forms on valves of left
side of heart
Thromboembolus breaks away from
 primary thrombus in heart and travels
in aorta
Caudal aorta
Thromboembolus, or "saddle"
thrombus lodges at the point of
branching of the caudal aorta
lliac arteries = blood 
supply to the hind
The thromboembolus
legs
interrupts blood supply to
the hind legs causing
discomfort, progressing to
loss of pulse and
coldness of the hind 
limbs, also numbness and
loss of muscle control
Circulatory Disorders
145
Examples of other forms of embolus
·Embolus of tumour cells: A malignant tumour, such as a mammary
carcinoma in a dog, can invade into a blood vessel. A small embolus
(metastasis) of tumour cells may then travel in the circulation to
another site, commonly the lungs and establish another tumour.
· Parasitic emboli: In some countries where heartworm (dirofilaria) is
common, larvae from the heartworm may travel from the heart and
lodge in the capillaries of the lungs of affected dogs.
·Fat emboli: When a long bone fractures, fat from the central marrow
cavity may enter the blood circulatory system. Fat emboli have
peou u! paunju! sjewjue jo sbunl ayt u! punoj uaaq Ajeuoiseooo
traffic accidents (RTAs)
 Infective/inflammatory emboli: Infectious agents, necrotic tissue,
leucocytes and fibrin may enter the circulation from a site of infec-
tion or inflammation; infection may be spread around the body this
way (haematogenous spread).
· Foreign material: When the circulatory system is exposed by injury.
bloodstream and travel to another site. Some foreign matter could
establish secondary granulomatous inflammation (foreign body re-
sponse - see Chapter 4 on inflammation).
 Fibrocartilage emboli: when the cartilage and fibrous cushion be-
tween vertebral bones (vertebral or spinal disc) degenerates due to
old age or traumatic damage in dogs, it can rupture ('slipped disc')
stream, and lodge somewhere else, such as the lungs.
Gas emboli: This is why we are careful to expel air from syringes
before giving an intravenous injection. Gas or air bubbles can lodge
in the bloodstream and act as solid obstructions. This is also some-
thing that can be a problem to deep-sea divers when they come to
the surface too quickly and gas bubbles expand in their blood (this
condition is called 'the bends'!).
Shock
Shock is a term which is often misused. We hear about it in the news-
papers or on the TV when we are told that someone who has had a
traumatic or frightening experience is being 'treated for shock'. When
something dramatic happens to us we are often frightened, shaky, and
weak for a while afterwards and in this case the problem is perhaps
more often a psychological effect - we are said to have had a shock.
In this chapter and in the context of the circulatory system we are
referring to a dlifferent type of shock - a physiological or pathological
146
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
effect. In this context shock is defined as a state of circulatory col-
lapse, resulting in a severe state of reduced blood perfusion of tissue
blood.
In shock, there is a mismatch between the total blood volume, and
the volume of the circulatory system. In other words, the blood volume
is 'too small' to fill the circulatory system, because there has been a
decrease in the blood volume or because the circulatory system has
effectively increased in size (by dilation of blood vessels) or because of
failure of the heart to pump blood around the circulatory system. There
is therefore a decreased effective circulating blood volume (and there-
fore circulation of oxygen, nutrients, warmth, waste products etc.).
 There are differenttypes of shock (Box 7.16) but many of them share
similar mechanisms, so for the purposes of discussion, we can group
the different forms of shock for convenience of discussion (see below).
Note, however, that in some severe diseases more than one type of
e s! ualqoid aun neyi puiu ui daay pue pasoduadns aq Aeu yoous
decreased effective circulating blood volume.
Hypovolaemic shock: Shock due to decreased blood volume. Hypo-
volaemia means decreased blood volume. Causes of hypovolaemic
shock therefore include severe haemorrhage or dehydration. Hypo
volaemia would also occur where there has been major leakage of
fluid from the circulation into the interstitial fluid. This would occur
if something caused suddenly increased permeability (leakiness') of
auos ui yoous jo asneo aun jo hed si usiueyoa siut pue saellde
fatal infections.
Vasodilation: This causes a marked increase in 'size' of the circulatory
system in comparison to the amount of blood it holds; in effect, a
pooling of blood in the dilated part of the circulation occurs (and
therefore lack of effective circulation). In fact, it is the low-pressure
capillaries that dilate. Though so small, capillaries are very numerous
and have a huge potential volume, so when they are dilated they
can hold a substantial amount of the animal's total blood. The blood
effectively 'pools' in the capillary beds
There are a number of examples of forms of shock where vasodila-
tion is the mechanism.
Septic or toxic shock is caused by vasodilation of capillaries in abdom-
inal organs. Toxins involved in toxic shock include bacterial toxins,
toxins released by damaged tissue (e.g. in cases of gangrene)
and some venoms. In some severe intections, toxins will cause
(see earlier dliscussion, this chapter, page 137). This damage willalso
CirculatoryDisorders
147
Box 7.16 Causes and types of shock (Part 1)
Hypovolaemic shock - shock due to decreased blood volume.
 Normal
Reduced
blood 
blood
volume
volume due
to loss of
fluid
Causes of hypovolaemic shock include severe haemorrhage, dehydration, marked loss of
fluid from the circulation into the interstitium (e.g. due to sudden marked increase in
permeability of capillaries as can occur in some fatal infections).
Shock due to vasodilation - vasodilation causes a marked increase in 'size' of the circulatory
system in comparison to the amount of blood it holds. In practice, often one part of the 
circulatory system dilates so blood pools in the dilated part (and therefore is less available to
circulate through the rest of the system).
 Normal
Vasodilation,
blood
causing
volume
pooling of 
blood
It is usually capillaries that dilate and the blood 'pools' in the capillary beds. Though so small,
capillaries represent a huge potential volume because they are so numerous; when dilated,
capillaries can hold a substantial amount of the animal's total blood.
148
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 7.16 (Continued) Causes and types of shock (Part 2)
Examples of forms of shock which involve vasodilation are:
?Septic or toxic shock caused by vasodilation of capillaries in abdominal organs due
to bacterial toxins, toxins released by damaged tissue (e.g. in cases of gangrene)
and some venoms.
treme pain. Nerves stimulate vasodilation and hence pooling of blood
Anaphylactic shock due to extreme hypersensitivity. Something to which the
animal is sensitive stimulates diffuse and marked mast cell degranulation. The
contents of the released mast cell granules stimulate widespread vasodilation.
In anaphylactic shock, vasodilation may occur in the arteriolar and venous parts
of the circulation as well as the capillary bed.
Cardiogenic shock - acute cardiac failure causes severe marked decrease in car-
diac output because the heart is suddenly unable to pump the blood effectively.
cause increased permeability of the capillaries, hence fluid
loss (hypovolaemia) will compound the vasodilation.
Neurogenic shock occurs in animals when severely frightened or trau-
matised, or in extreme pain. Nerves stimulate vasodilation and
hence pooling of blood. Neurogenic shock may compound the ef-
fects of psychological shock (fright or trauma) discussed at the start
of this section.
Anaphylactic shock is an example of extreme hypersensitivity. Some-
thing to which the animal is sensitive (the allergen) stimulates
marked mast cell degranulation (see Chapter 4, Inflammation, for
actions of mast cell granules). The contents of the released mast cell
granules stimulate vasodilation. In anaphylactic shock, vasodilation
may occur in the arteriolar and venous parts ofthe circulation as well
Cardiogenic shock - acute cardiac failure causes severe marked de-
crease in cardiac output because the heart is suddenly unable to
pump the blood effectively.
Pathological effects of shock
Many of the pathological effects of shock result from the decreased
functions of the circulatory system at the start of this chapter). So, in a
severely shocked animal the following pathological effects may result:
· Ischaemia due to decreased Oz supply causes necrosis, especially
in the most vulnerable organs (brain and heart)
Circulatory Disorders
149
· Decreased  oxidative  metabolism (and increased  anaerobic
metabolism) which causes altered acid-base evels in the blood.
The pH of the blood decreases and becomes dangerously acid (aci-
dosis) which is harmful to a number of cell functions. The acid-base
levels cannot be corrected as they normally would by the kidney.
 gut and lungs, as the function of these organs is also compromised
by decreased blood perfusion. Altered oxidative metabolism also
causes hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar levels).
 The sympathetic (autonomic) nervous system and hormones divert
blood from non-essential areas such as muscle and skin to vital
organs such as the brain.
aya ui aseauoui ue asneo osle Aeu uaisrs snoaau sauredluns ayl
reduced circulation.
· In the later stages, hypoxia (Oz depletion) causes irreversible paral-
ysis of the peripheral circulation (flaccid vasodilation) which causes
stagnation of blood in capillaries (sludging).
The clinical signs of shock
The signs are similar in man or animals and if you have completed first
aid training you will be familiar with them.
Note that in some cases clinical signs are specific to a particular
cause of shock (e.g. hypovolaemic, toxic, infectious, cardiogenic or
anaphylactic shocks) but the general effects on the circulation are sim-
ilar in most if not all cases:
■
cold extremities
·core temperature high or low depending on cause of shock
·shivering in early stages
·heart rate may be increased or may be irregular and/or decreased
· weak peripheral pulse
■
 collapsed circulation (it may be hard to find a vein for intravenous
injections or infusions)
 respiratory rate maybe increased initially but maydecrease if animal
loses consciousness
· pale or discoloured (brick red or even blue) mucous membranes
slow capillary refill times
1
lethargy. lack of interest in surroundings, depression (and these
effects may be accompanied or exacerbated by signs of pain, if
shock is due to blood loss after trauma)
·loss of consciousness
·muscle weakness
· decreased urine production
· decreased blood pressure
150
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
You may be able to add further signs you have or will see in relation
to shock resulting from particular causes.
Summary of key points in Chapter 7
· Oedema is accumulation of excessive interstitial fluid to cause a
soft pitting swelling of affected areas. There are different causes of
oedema but in all, the lymphatic circulation is unable to adequately
remove excess fluid from the tissues.
Ischaemia is decreased blood flow (perfusion) and resulting de-
Infarction is death (necrosis) of the area as a result of ischaemia. A
period of ischaemia may not cause infarction if it is of short duration
or in a tissue with a low metabolic rate.
·Coagulopathies are disorders of the clotting (coagulation) mecha-
nism resulting from deficiency or infectiveness of any stage of the
clotting process. Coagulopathies are acquired or congenital.
Haemorrhage may result from coagulopathy or from trauma, ulcer-
ation or rupture of a neoplasm.
 Thrombosis is a pathological clotting reaction resulting in the for-
mation of a thrombus within the heart or blood vessels of a living
animal. Changes in the vessel wall, the blood flow, or in the con-
stituency of the blood promote thrombosis.
An embolus is a mass of material able to lodge in a vessel and
block it. Emboli cause ischaemia and infarction. Most emboli are
derived from thrombi (thromboemboli). Examples of other forms of
embolus are tumour cells, parasite larvae, fat emboli, infective or
inflammatory material, foreign material and gas.
 Shock is a state of circulatory collapse resulting in severely reduced
perfusion of tissue. In shock, there is a mismatch between the total
blood volume and the volume of the circulatory system. There are
a number of causes of shock though the effects and clinical signs
are similar in each.
Circulatory Disorders
151
Test yourself questions on Chapter 7
1.
Answer the following true/false questions.
i. Capillaries represent a very large total volume of the blood
circulatory system.
i. Capillary beds carry blood from the venous circulation to the
arterial circulation.
ii. Capillary walls are composed of layers of smooth muscle, fibrous
tissue and basement membranes.
iv. Capillary walls are normally impermeable to fluid.
v. Lymph vessels have thicker walls than blood vessels because
they are under higher hydrostatic pressure.
vi. The lymph system communicates with the blood circulatory sys-
tem, and thus lymph fluid drains into the blood stream.
vii. Lymph vessels have lymph nodes at intervals, which act as filters
and are important in the function of the immune system.
vii. Oedema is the accumulation of interstitial fluid in the tissues
which causes a soft swelling of the tissue, which can be 'pitted'
ix. In non-inflammatory oedema in which the endothelial lining of
the capillaries remains intact the resultant oedema fluid tends
to be low in protein and usually does not contain cells.
x. Oedema is always life-threatening.
2. a. In relation to decreased blood supply to the tissues, contrast
the terms ischaemia and infarction.
b. List six common causes of ischaemia.
c.  What is meant by a global infarction?
d. Draw a very simple flow diagram to illustrate the stages of
development of an infarct.
3. a.
 What part does the soluble protein, fibrinogen, play in blood
coagulation?
b. Briefly indicate why vitamin K is important to blood coagula-
tion.
4.
a.
Discuss the factors which determine the clinical significance of
haemorrhage in animals.
b. A dog in your care develops black tarry faeces - what would
you suspect was happening in the digestive tract, and in which
part of the tract would you suspect it was occurring? How
would your answer differ if there was fresh blood in the faeces?
152
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Test yourself questions on Chapter 7 (Continued)
5. a. What is meant by embolus?
b.E
Briefly describe formation of a thromboembolus in the case of
heart valve disorders.
c. Give three examples of other forms of embolus.
6. a. Define 'shock'.
b.B
 Briefly outline the various main types of shock according to the
way they develop.
C.
 Give five typical clinical signs of shock.
Chapter 8
Disorders of
Cell/Tissue Growth
Atrophy. hypertrophy. hyperplasia and metaplasia
Neoplasia
Neoplasia terminology
Stages of tumour development
Loss of control of cell proliferation
Loss of normal cell differentiation
What causes gene damage and allows a tumour to
develop?
Modifiers of tumour growth
 Rates of tumour growth
Tumour growth patterns
Metastasis
Routes of metastasis
Diagnosis of neoplasms in veterinary general practice
154
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Aims of Chapter 8
 To introduce the concepts of reversible and irreversible changes in
cell or tissue growth or size as responses to stimuli
To define some of the most commonly encountered changes in
cell or tissue growth or size - atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia,
metaplasia and neoplasia
To discuss causes, development and effects of these changes and 
to become familiar with common examples
In Chapter 3, we discussed changes in cells in response to stimuli and
noted that these changes may be reversible or non-reversible. Re-
ment, in which case the stimulus is the change in the environment.
These changes help the cell to survive and cope with an altered envi-
ronment. If the change in the environment continues, the cell will not
function and metabolism. So, in summary, cellular adaptation means
reversible changes in cells in response to a physiological or injurious
stim ulus.
Reversible cell adaptations include degenerations (discussed in
Chapter 3) and changes in growth or size, and these are discussed
in the next section.
anidepe lle aie eiseldeiau pue eiseidiadky 'Kydouadky Kydot
changes in cells which help the cell to cope with an alteration in its
environment. We will discuss each in turn, starting with a definition of
each term (see also Box 8.1).
Atrophy is shrinkage in the size of cells (and therefore the tissue
of which the cell forms part) in response to a stimulus. There are a
number of causes of atrophy; these and some examples are shown in
Box 8.2. Note that many of these causes of atrophy are interrelated,
e.g. pressure on an area, such as a limb with a tight bandage, involves
reduced blood and nerve supply but also muscle atrophy due to the
animal not being able to use and exercise the limb normally.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
155
Box 8.1 Atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia and metaplasia
Atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia and metaplasia are adaptive changes in cells
which help the cell to cope with an alteration in its environment.
Atrophy = shrinkage in the size of cells (and therefore the tissue of which the cell
forms part) in response to a stimulus.
There are a number of causes of atrophy such as disuse, loss of blood or nerve
supply, inadequate nutrition, decreased hormone supply, aging and pressure.
Atrophy
Hypertrophy = increase in size of cells in response to a stimulus.
Hypertrophy may be normal (physiologica), e.g. muscle development with exer-
cise or changes in the uterus in pregnancy.
Hypertrophy may also be considered abnormal (pathologica), e.g. heart muscle
in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophy may occur most in stable cell populations, that is cells that do not
undergo division (mitosis) readily.
Hypertrophy
Hyperplasia = increase in the number of cells, e.g. in lactating mammary glands,
in bone marrow (production of more red blood cells) in long-standing anaemia, in
the liver after toxic damage, or hyperplasia of the gums in chronic gum and dental
disease.
Hyperplasia tends to occur most in labile cell populations, which are able to divide
readily by mitosis.
Sometimes, hypertrophy and hyperplasia will occur together.
Hyperplasia
alteration of an epithelium (e.g. the lining of the urinary bladder) to a tougher more
protective (squamous) one in response to, for instance, chronic inflammation (pres-
ence of bladder stones).
Metaplasia
156
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.2 Causes of atrophy
Disuse
May happen in the muscles of a limb encased in a plaster
cast
Loss of nerve supply
May affect muscles in a limb when the main nerve plexus
has been damaged in a RTA
 Decreased blood supply
If the blood supply to an area is impaired by a vessel block-
age then atrophy of the affected part may ensue (note that
if the blood supply is completely cut off ischaemia and in-
farction are possible - see Chapter 6)
Inadequate nutrition
This relates to inadequate blood supply. An example of
this is atrophy of the liver in a puppy with a portosystemic
shunt. The shunt diverts blood away from the liver so that
the liver cells are deprived of nutrition
Decreased hormone
For instance, mammary glands of bitches tend to atrophy
stimulation
once they have been spayed
Aging
Muscles tend to atrophy with age
Pressure
The atrophying effect of pressure may relate to effects of
impaired blood supply, nerve supply or disuse (see above)
Hypertrophy is the increase in size of cells in response to a
-snu se yons '(eoiboloissyd) euou aq Aeu Aydoadkh 'sninus
cle development with exercise or development of the mucosal
considered abnormal (pathological), such as in heart muscle in a con-
dition in cats called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The heart mus-
cle becomes hypertrophied, possibly as an inherited condition, and
the heart gradually fails. (See also discussion of 'saddle' thrombus in
Chapter 7.)
Hypertrophy may occur most in stable cell populations (see Chap-
ter 6), that is ones which undergo division (mitosis) slightly less
readily.
Hyperplasia, on the other hand, is increase in the number of cells.
The mammary gland undergoes hyperplasia during lactation as a nor-
mal physiological part of the reproductive cycle. Other tissues will
respond to pathological stimuli by hyperplasia, such as bone marrow
producing more red blood cells in chronic anaemia or the liver re-
generating to replace cells damaged by toxins. In some cases, the
response may be excessive, such as hyperplasia of the gums in chronic
dental disease. This causes firm nodules of gum tissue to form around
the teeth, which entrap more food and bacteria and can exacerbate
the inflammation. Hyperplasia tends to occur most in labile cell pop-
ulations, able to divide readily by mitosis, though note that in some
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
¥157
lm eiseldiadky pue Aydouadky suotpuo auos lapun pue sad lla
occur together.
yonoun 'eiseldadky saobiapun Apean laall aun 'aaoge patou sy
all aun ul eiseidiadky payeu eumauos jo alduexa leinoimed e
 is the condition of nodular liver regeneration, already discussed in
Chapter 6.
Metaplasia is conversion of one mature tissue type into anothel
different type, such as alteration of an epithelium, for example the
lining of the urinary bladder, to a tougher more protective (squamous)
one in response to, for instance, chronic inflammation due to presence
of bladder stones.
Now, we move on to a very important non-reversible change in cell 
 growth and number, that of neoplasia (cancer or tumour formation).
Neoplasia
Neoplasia is the proliferation of abnormal cells to form neoplasms
(cancers or tumours) (Box 8.3). Unlike the reversible changes, atro-
chapter, neoplasia is a non-reversible change and neoplastic cells can-
not revert to normal once the stimulus is removed. In fact, neoplastic
changes (transformations) are genetic mutations and become part of
the genetic make-up of the neoplastic cells, and as such are passed on
to new cells when the neoplastic cell divides. What this means is that
a tumour originates from one cell which transformed to a neoplastic
type and continued dividing to produce clones of itself.
Normal cells communicate with each other and tend to grow in
a coordinated manner, stopping division when no more cells are re-
quired, but neoplastic cells lack this coordination with normal tissue
and go on growing and dividing in an uncontrolled manner, often to
the detriment of the normal tissues surrounding them, as we shall see
later.
Neoplasia terminology
Let us start this discussion of neoplasia by clarifying some terminology.
First of all, what is the difference between tumours, cancers and neo-
plasms? Well, neoplasm is the term used to describe a mass of cells
which are growing as a result of a neoplastic transformation. Neo-
plasms may be malignant or benign.
Cancer is a less formal but highlyfamiliar term. It tends to be used tc
denote malignant neoplasms and is a term that is often quite frighten-
ing for owners. Tumour is again a highly familiar and historic term but
158
General Pathology forVeterinary Nurses
Box 8.3 Neoplasia
Neoplasia = uncontrolled proliferation of abnormal cells to form neoplasms.
Neoplasia is a non-reversible change; the neoplastic cells cannot revert to normal
once the stimulus to divide is removed.
Neoplastic cells have genetic mutations (transformations) which can be passed on
to new cells when the neoplastic cell divides.
Normal cell
Normal
Abnormal (transformed)
daughter cell
daughter cell with a.
genetic mutation 
 Mutation passed on
Normal cell
behaviour
 Neoplastic cells forming
a neoplasm.
Neoplastic cells may
start to behave and/or
look more and more
abnormal as the tumour
grows
Thus, tumours originate from one transformed cell which continued to divide and
produce clones of itself.
Normal cells communicate with each other and grow in an orderly and coordi-
uncontrolled manner, often to the detriment of adjacent normal tissues.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
it is in actual fact usually mis-used. Tumour is really a non-specific term
meaning a 'swelling' in the body. It could mean a neoplasm (benign
or malignant), but strictly speaking it could equally mean an abscess,
a swollen lymph node, or a focal fluid accumulation - anything that
causes a firm local swelling.
Recall that one of the cardinal signs of inflammation (see Chapter 4)
is'swelling', referring to the accumulation of inflammatory exudate,
and that this phenomenon is also referred to in some older texts by
the classical term tumor.
in the context of neoplasia, and certainly most owners will be familiar
with this meaning and are often slightly more comfortable with the use
of this word. Both these familiar terms will be used during the rest of
this chapter, but in all cases we are referring to neoplastic growth.
Tumour nomenclature
Tumours are named according to the neoplastic cell of which they are
made up; in other words, the cell which transformed and divided to
produce the tumour. The name is modified according to the broad
or mesenchymal (see Box 8.4 for definitions of these terms). The name
is further modified according to whether the tumour is benign or ma-
lignant. The terms in italics in Box 8.4 are used at the end of the tumour
name and you can see that they convey quite a bit of information about
the tumour.
Box 8.4 Tumour nomenclature
Tumour
Cell
Benign
Malignant
Epithelial*
2Wo-
-{adeno)carcinoma*
Mesenchymal1
-oma
-sarcoma
Epithelial cells arecoveringcell,such as thecellsof the epidermisof the skin,therespiratory
epithelium which lines the trachea (windpipe) or the intestinal epithelium.
 All glands in the body are also lined by epithelial cells and these can, in certain circumstances,
transform and form neoplasms. Inserting the term 'adeno' into the tumour name indicates that it is
formed from a glandular epithelium.
1 whereas epithelial cells are covering cells, mesenchymal cells are structural or flling in' cells.
Mesenchymal cells include bone, cartilage, collagenous fibrous tissue, but also the red and white
blood cells and the cells from which they develop (bone marrow or haematopoietic cells).
160
GeneralPathologyforVeterinaryNurses
The broad terms epithelial and mesenchymal used in Box 8.4 stem
from terminology used in embryology, the study of the development
of embryos.
This business of naming tumours might all seem a bit confusing, so
jo auos ssouoe auoo aaey Apeaule Aeu nor :salduuexe auos lapisuo
these tumours during your clinical work. Refer to the text box above
and try to follow the terminology used to name these tumours.
Examples of naming of tumours
Osteosarcoma - 'osteo' means concerning the bones, so the trans
formed cell was a bone cell; 'sarcoma' means a malignant mes-
enchymal cell tumour.
Sebaceous adenoma -a benign glandular epithelial cell tumour, specif-
ically the transformed cell was a cell of the sebaceous glands in the
skin.
Mammary adenocarcinoma - a malignant epithelial cell tumour formed
from a transformed mammary gland cell.
Dermal fibroma - a benign tumour of fibrous tissue of the skin's dermis;
the transformed cell was of the type involved in producing collagen
infibrous tissue.
Note that the process of tumour development is known as carcinogen-
esis and something that acts as a trigger for a neoplasm to develop is
dlescribed as being carcinogenic - this refers to its potential to cause
ahns uah aun se suouiie isn nou pue usedoau jo ad ue
noun tueuoeu e Adul pnoo pue boouiuah slyn o suodaoxa
is benign - in these cases we usually clarify what type of tumour we
mean, such as 'malignant melanoma'. Though lymphoma remains an
accepted exception!
Do not get too alarmed if this naming seems confusing at this stage.
you will become familiar with these terms during your clinical work.
There are recognised stages in tumour development and these are
discussed in the next section.
Stages of tumour development
pue juenodwi ue s! sleujue pue uau u! suaudolarap noun jo Aons
-abeueuu laoueo ui saoueape oi pal sey pue yoieasal jo eaie buimoib
prognosis than previously. In this section, we discuss some of what is
currently known about development of tumours.
Tumour development occurs in stages (Box 8.5), requiring first of
all an initiating event (examples are discussed below), which leads to
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth   161
Box 8.5 Summary of the stages of tumour development
initiation
A trigger factor or event that causes irreversible genetic changes
producing a transformed cell
Promotion
A factor or event that causes the transformed cell to proliferate, forming
a neoplasm
Progression
Spontaneous occurrence of new genetic mutations in offspring of the
original transformed cell possibly increasing malignant behaviour of the
tumour
damage to the DNA in the genes of a single cell in a population.
This initiated (or transformed) cell looks and, initially after transfor-
mation at least, behaves normally, harbouring its abnormal genetic
material for some time, maybe even years, without ill-effect to the
animal.
This genetic abnormality gives the cell an advantage over its normal
neighbours so that at some stage, it will start to proliferate in re-
sponse to another stimulus. This stage is called promotion. Promotion
is an event that causes the transformed cell to proliferate producing a
neoplasm, and in so doing passing its genetic abnormalities on to its
offspring.
Later still, there is likely to be a stage called progression which is
formation of new genetic mutations, the most 'successful' of which (in
 neoplasia terms), will encourage proliferation of increasingly aberrant
tumour.
We will look at what can cause gene damage (the initiators and
promoters of tumour cevelopment) in the next section, but first let us
just consider in what ways tumour cells differ from normal
Two fundamental alterations to normal cell behaviour underlie tu-
mour development. Neoplasia involves:
loss of control of cell proliferation and
·loss of normal cell differentiation
Loss of control of cell proliferation
Neoplastic cells do not grow and divide according to the body's re-
quirements as other cell types do, they can continue dividing and
growing without regard for the control processes that act on normal
tissues.
Box 8.6 illustrates the stages that a normal cell must undergo wher
it divides into two new daughter cells; this process is known as the cell
cycle.
162
General Pathology forVeterinary Nurses
Box 8.6 The cell cycle and loss of its control in neoplasia
Many cells are able to divide and therefore reproduce themselves (see also Chapter
'subio aianpoidai au u wads lo shha bulnpoid ui panou nou aie seui slla (a
in other words, most cells of the rest of the body (known as somatic cells) divide
by mitosis. Mitosis is a complex process involving the cell dividing into two equal
parts. This might sound simple, but think what might be involved in this process and
what the result would be if the process did not go smoothly or correctly! The nuclear
material (DNA) of the cell must be duplicated carefully and then shared out equally
so that each daughter cell gets all of the information and components it needs to 
stage below.
 Daughter cell
Exit
Phase of cell division
The cell
cycle
Resting phase
2nd gap phase
1st gap phase
2
Phase of production of DNA
At point 1 in the diagram above, a cell is 'instructed' by various chemical messengers
(growth factors) to start the process of division and to proceed through a temporary
'gap' phase to the second phase - that of production of DNA (2). There then follows
another gap phase (3) and then the cell enters the phase of division (4), in which the
nucleus and cytoplasm are split, culminating in two new daughter cells (5). Each of
these new cells can then proceed through the cell cycle. Alternatively, cells can take
a break from the cell cycle at this point and enter a resting phase (6). This resting
phase is of variable length and accounts for the differing readiness to divide of labile
and stable cell populations in the body (see Chapter 6). Growth factors wake a cell
out of its resting phase and stimulate it to start the phase of DNA production.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
163
Box 8.6 (Continued) The cell cycle and loss of its control in neoplasia
Certain cells may leave the cell cycle permanently (7) by entering the ominously
named phase of terminal differentiation. Terminally differentiated cells cannot
 to divide and die off at the end of their lifespans (permanent cells are of this type,
Chapter 6).
Control of the cell cycle
The cell cycle is somewhat of a series of challenges for the cell and only cells which
successfully pass all the tests manage to complete the cycle, ending up as two cells!
So how is this controlled?
As already indicated, cells are stimulated to start the process of division by growth
factors acting at 1 (and 6) on our simplified diagram of the cell cycle.
But as well as stimulatory factors, there are also checkpoints along the way which
monitor the cell's progress and allow it to continue to the next stage or slow it down
(or even stop it going any further).
These factors can be summed up as growth-promoting factors and growth-
inhibiting factors, and cell proliferation depends on a balance between the activity
of these two types of factors - summarised in the following cartoon.
Growth-inhibiting
Growth-promoting
factors slow
factors encourage
down or stop the
The cell
the cell to pass
cell's progress
cycle
through the cell
through the cell
cycle and to divide
cycle (cellless 
(producing two
likely to dlivide.
daughter cells).
 or divides more
 slowly).
Net result is that the cellis encouraged to
divide according to the needs of the body.
Growth-promoting factors encourage the cell to keep moving through the cell cycle.
Conversely, ifthey detect a fault in a cell's DNA during the cell cycle, growth-inhibiting
factors will slow down its progress allowing time for repair of the fault. If the fault
cannot be rectified, these factors can stop the process and can even direct the cell
a sort of quality control system for dividing cells.
164
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.6 (Continued) The cell cycle and loss of its control in neoplasia
Neoplastic cells proliferate in an unregulated fashion and not according to the body's
requirements as other cell types do. This is because transformed (neoplastic) cells
tend to have abnormal (mutated) growth-promoting and growth-inhibiting genes so
that uncontrolled division of the cells is possible, thus leading to development of a
 its growth-promoting genes become more active, thus pushing the cell through the
cell cycle more often and at a faster rate (and in an uncontrolled manner).
Transformed cell
Too much
The cell
growth-
Too little growth-
cycle
promoting
inhibiting factor
factor
cannot manage
encourages
to slow down or
the cell to 
stop the cell's
keep
progress through
dividing.
the cell cycle
Net result is that the cell enters the cell cycle anc
divides not according to the needs of the body.
Even in a normal animal a small amount of genetic damage occurs as time goes by
and the animal ages, but as we discussed above, there are checkpoints in the cell
cycle which monitor the 'health' of the DNA and many harmful abnormalities can be
detected and the damage repaired or the cell directed to destroy itself.
Because transformed cells are dividing without adequate regulation and often
more rapidly than normal cells, they are even more prone to make mistakes in dividing
more and more genetic mutations develop during the progression stage of tumour
development.
Control of cell proliferation normally depends on a balance between
certain genetically determined growth-promoting factors and growth-
inhibiting factors. These factors act at various stages on the cell cycle
of the dividing cells to encourage them to continue with the cycle and
divide, or to stop the process and remain undivided, according to the
body's needs.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
165
Transformed cells which go on to start neoplasms have abnormal
growth-promoting genes and growth-inhibiting genes, so that uncon-
trolled and often rapid division of the cells is possible.
Even in a normal animal a small amount of genetic damage will
occur as the animal ages. There are checkpoints in the cell cycle which
monitor the 'health' of the DNA and harmful abnormalities can often
uaun pauiedai ag touueo t! f 'pauiedai abeep aue pue paaiap aa
the cell selflessly destroys itself.
Because transformed cells are dividing in an unregulated way, they
are even more prone to make mistakes, and even more marked genetic
abnormalities can develop. As stated above, such abnormal cells would
normally be destroyed byvarious checks in the normal cell proliferation
system, but in neoplasia the abnormal cells 'slip through the net' and
are allowed to survive. This is how more and more genetic mutations
develop during the progression stage of tumour development.
Loss of normal cell differentiation
Consider one of the fertilised eggs or ova in a bitch's uterus after a
successful mating. That single cell contains all the genetic informa-
tion reguired to make a whole dog. half from the mother (from the
unfertilised egg) and half from the father (from the sperm). The egg
develops into an embryo by dividing and producing more and more
cells, but not all of these cells will look the same or be performing the
same functions in the developing embryo and later in the fully formed
dog. Some of these cells will have the ability to secrete hormones,
some will line the gut and will be absorptive, some will become muscle
cells and be able to contract, and some will transmit nerve impulses
and so on. The cells are said to differentiate, in other words, to follow a
particular 'career' path. All these cells have the same genetic informa-
tion hidden away inside them; each cell could potentially make a whole
dog, but as lots of cells actually work together to make the dog, each
cell only needs to use a small percentage of their genetic information
according to the requirements of their location and functions.
Neoplastic cells, on the other hand, show abnormal differentiation
such as inappropriate proliferation, abnormal growth patterns or in-
appropriate hormone production. The reason they do this is because
they re-awaken some of their 'dormant' genetic material; genetic in-
formation that a normal cell at that site and doing that job would
not need to utilise. The cells become 'less well differentiated', and in
terms of the tumour they form, the poorer the cellular differentiation,
the poorer the prognosis for the animal, because the more inappro-
priately behaved the cells are going to be. We will discuss this aspect
166
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
of tumours a little later in this chapter (see 'What effects do tumours
have on animals?'and paraneoplastic effects').
What causes gene damage and allows a tumour to develop?
A number of agents or risk factors have been associated with tumour
development, and the list may grow as research identifies more po-
tential carcinogens. A few carcinogens are listed below, but note that
agents will act as initiators and some as promoters.
Examples of potential carcinogens
· Chemicals: For example, chemical factors contained in bracken,
which can cause bladder cancer in cattle which graze on the fern.
Also, the chemicals in tobacco smoke are potent carcinogens for
humans.
·Viruses: Examples include Papillomavirus (the'wart' virus, related to
the virus that causes human cervical cancer) and retroviruses (feline
leukaemia virus, FeLV).
Radiation: Isotopes and ultraviolet light (sunlight).
Hormones: For instance steroid hormone and growth hormone -
both these types of hormone may be implicated in mammary tu-
mours in some species.
Bacteria and parasites: A species of bacterium called Helicobacter
may be involved in stomach cancer in some species. In warm cli-
mates, infection of dogs by a nematode (roundworm) causes large
granulomas (see chronic inflammation, Chapter 4) to form in the
comas to develop.
Modifiers of tumour growth
·Most tumours are more likely to occur with increasing age of animal.
This effect may be due to accumulation of genetic damage with
time, decreased immune function, or to a delay between initiation
(transformation) and promotion and clinically detectable tumour.
Although there are certain tumours which affect only young animals,
e.g. some brain tumours in young dogs, histiocytoma in the skin of
dogs and certain lymphoid tumours in cats.
 There are breed predispositions for some tumours, such as os-
teosarcoma in large breeds of dog, brain tumours in some brachy-
Bernese Mountain dogs. With the development of the canine
genome project, the genetic basis of these breed-specific tumours
may well become known.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
167
Rates of tumour growth
are often slow growing or remain almost unchanged for long periods
of time.
The rate at which a tumour grows depends to a large extent on the
rate of tumour cell proliferation, in other words, the speed with which
cells divide and form new cells which are also capable of division. There
are, however, factors which can modify this rate of proliferation. Be-
cause they are dividing in an uncontrolled and uncoordinated manner,
This means that the offspring of tumour cell division may not inherit all
the genetic material they require for full function. Not all tumour cells,
for instance, have the ability to divide successfully and some cells may
be so defective that they cannot survive, and will die anyway.
Another reason for the difference in rate of tumour growth relates
to differences in the adequacy of the blood supply of the tumour.
Tumour cells, like all cells in the body, require a blood supplyto provide
nutrients and oxygen and to remove waste products of metabolism
their own blood supply. Blood vessels in tumours tend to be rather
of rapidly proliferating tumour cells. This means that larger or more
rapidly growing tumours may contain areas of necrosis (infarction -
see Chapter 7) due to ischaemia.
Angiogenesis
bring forth.
As previously pointed out in the discussion of rates of tumour growth
above, tumour cells require a blood supply to provide nutrients and
oxygen and to remove waste products of metabolism just as do normal
cells of the body. Tumour cells secrete a chemical messenger which
encourages new blood vessels to sprout from venules and capillaries
in adjacent tissue (see Box 8.7). This process is known as angiogen-
esis and the factor the cells secrete is called, appropriately, tumour
angiogenesis factor (TAF).
Without a blood supply, tumours would not be able to expand be-
yond a few millimetres diameter, needing to rely on diffusion of gases
from the interstitial fluidl. A blood supply is also required by the tu-
moursfor sustained tumour growth and fortumour spread (metastasis),
168
GeneralPathology forVeterinary Nurses
Diffusion of O2, nutrients and waste
products to and from cells
Tumour
cells
Capillary
TAF = Tumour angiogenesis factor produced
by the tumour cells
In the diagram above, a small cluster of tumour cells are secreting tumour angiogen-
esis factor (TAF).
Below, the TAF has stimulated a small vessel to sprout from the adjacent capillary.
nutrients, and removing waste from the tumour cells. This allows the tumour to grow
in size from just a few clustered cells as shown above.
Blood vessels simulated by tumour cells are usually
wiggly (tortuous), irregular and thin-walled.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
169
though note that angiogenesis occurs in both benign and malignant
sunoun
You are probably aware of specific tumours of blood vessels (hae
mangioma and haemangiosarcoma). In these tumours the neoplastic
cells are transformed blood vessel cells. In angiogenesis the cells form-
ing the blood vessels are not neoplastic, they are simply responding
to instructions issued by the neoplastic cells.
The blood vessels formed are sometimes not very efficient. They
may be small and tortuous (wiggly) and often leaky, as though the cells
[euan dolaap Aeu sinoun bumoia Apiden Aym Aed si siyl 'slla
areas of ischaemic necrosis.
Tumour growth patterns
Tumours have a number of different growth patterns (see Box 8.8).
These growth patterns are usually related to whether the tumour is
benign or malignant, though growth patterns may also be dictated by
location. Within tissue, benign tumours tend to form discrete masses,
with well-defined margins. So, for instance, a benign mammary tumour
may be palpated as a firm round structure, which is freely movable un-
der the skin. They tend to enlarge by expanding and sometimes com-
pressing normal tissues around them, often forming a fibrous capsule,
but in any case there is usually a distinct border between tumour and
normal tissue. At surgery, such a benign mass is easy to remove and is
often said to 'shell out' easily. On organ surfaces, benign tumours are
often well-defined domes or plaques, though some protrude (some-
-ounpad se paqosap ag Aeu pue aoeuns aua woiy (payeu sau
lated. If they have a 'frilly' surface, somewhat like a sea anemone, they
may be described as papillary.
Malignant tumours, on the other hand, are usually less discrete.
Within tissues they often extend in an irregular manner into adjacent
normal tissue; this is known as local invasion. It can be harder to see or
feel the edge of such invasive tumours and because of this it can be
harder to completely excise them at surgery. The surgeon will need to
take a wide margin of apparently normal tissue to try to ensure com-
plete removal of the tumour. On tissue surfaces, malignant tumours
are more likely to be ulcerated or eroded and to get secondarily in-
fected. Note that there can be exceptions to these general rules, so be
careful about giving owners advice as to whether the tumour is likely
to be benign or malignant until you are sure.
Metastasis
As discussed in the last sections, some non-benign tumours will invade
locally by sending tendrils of tumour cells into adjacent normal tissue
170
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.8 Tumour growth patterns
The growth pattern (shape) of a tumour often relates to whether the tumour is
benign or malignant (though location may also affect the way a tumour grows).
 Benign tumours tend to grow as well-defined and discrete masses that may be
freely movable under the skin or in other loose tissues, or that can be readily dissected
These tumours tend to enlarge by expansion, sometimes compressing adjacent
so ansdes aul waan punone alnsdes snoay e busaey uao pue 'sanss leou
where the tumour has compressed normal tissues so much that the cells die (necrosis
due to pressure, see Chapter 3) and fibrosis occurs (see Chapter 6)
It is usually easy to recognise where tumour ends and normal tissue begins!
(a) A small benign tumour (grey 'cells)
(b) The same benign tumour shown in
growing amongst normal (white) cells
(a) has now grown a bit bigger and 
of a tissue. Benign tumours tend to
has compressed the normal cells 
grow by expansion (shown by
around it.
arrows).
Normal cells in
 surrounding tissue
Fibrous capsule, forms where
Normal cells in surroundling
the pressure of the growing
tissue being compressed by
tumour has killed off local
nown bupuedxa
normal cells.
Occasionally, they may protrude from the surface and are then described as pe-
dunculated. If they have a rough or 'frilly' surface they may be described as papillary
(c) A small benign tumour
(d) A small benign tumour
(e) A small benign tumour
growing as a dome-shaped
growing as a flattened
growing as a pedunculated
structure on the surface of a
plaque on the surface of
structure on the surface of
tissue or organ, e.g. the skin.
a tissue or organ.
a tissue or organ.
All of these tumours have well-defined deep edges, and a capsule may form at the deep
(anoqe (q) ui se) 5lla2 jewou ssauduos Aay se 5unowni aut jo sabpa
Once again, these tumours should be relatively easy to dissect out at surgery.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
171
Box 8.8 (Continued) Tumour growth patterns
Malignant tumours are usually less well-defined, and often extend in an irregular
manner into adjacent normal tissue - this is known as local invasion. It can be harder
to see or feel the edge of tumours that grow by invasion and because of this they
can also be more difficult to dissect out completely at surgery. The surgeon will
usually try to remove a wide margin of apparently normal tissue to try to make sure
that the tumour has been adequately removed.
(g) The same malignant tumour shown
in (f) has now grown a bit bigger and has
(f)A small malignant turnour (grey
invaded into the normal tissue around it.
'cells') growing amongst normal
(white) cells of a tissue. Malignant
turmours tend to grow by invasion
 An area of necrosis may develop in
(shown by arrows).
the middle of the tumour.
Normal cells in
urrounding tissue
Normal cells in surroundling
tissue less likely to be
compressed by expanding
tumour as it extends invasively
Less likely that fibrous
between the cells.
 capsule forms at margin
 of turnour as there is less
Tumour cells may 'break
compression of normal 
away' from the main turour
Cells.
mass (see metastasis,
later).
On tissue surfaces, malignant tumours are more likely to be ulcerated or eroded (h),
and therefore to bleed and get infected.
0
uoeain euan si aaui ueio no anssi e jo anens au uo buimoa inown sueue  (y)
 of the top surface of the tumour, and this can bleed and become infected.
Note that the tumour invades the normal tissues at its deep edges; these tumours can be
dlifficult to dissect out at surgery, and the surgeon may take a wide margin of tissue which
looks normal to try to ensure complete removal of the tumour.
172
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.8 (Continued) Tumour growth patterns
around the inner surface of the wall(i). This is called annular growth, and when it is
extensive it may cause blockage of the organ, leading to secondary disorders such as
constipation or urine retention (depending on the organ affected). Annular growth
can, in theory, occur with both benign and malignant tumours, but the malignant
ones, which spread more readily, tend to cause most problems. The tumour in the
organ wall may often ulcerate and bleed and so blood may be detected in the
faeces, vomit or urine, and can be an indication of the presence of the tumour.
Aeu inoun e jo ymo.6 enuuy uebio mooy e jo lem au u noun e jo ymo.n enuu (
ayl u! paatap aq kewu pooig os pue 'paalg pue atelanin Aeu inownt ayt pue 'uebio aut ypoia
faeces, vomit or urine, and can indicate the presence of the tumour.
suebio lo seaue lauio ot peaids se aues aui lou s! uoiseau! leool
which is the process known as metastasis. So, metastasis is the spread
of malignant tumour from its site of origin (primary tumour) to form a
secondary tumour which is also called a metastasis (plural metastases).
or tertiary tumours though this is less common; unfortunately with
 many malignancies, the animal may not survive long enough for tertiary
tumours to become established.
When considering treatment options for an animal with a tumour, it 
aui se yons seaie ueos on lo ydeiboipei e ayet oi aoioeid uouoo s!
chest or liver to look for metastases before proceeding with treatment
of the primary site. This procedure is often called a 'met check'.
There are a number of ways tumours can metastasise and these are
discussed in the next section.
In order to metastasise, tumour cells require certain properties; they
need to be able to move away from the main tumour site by interacting
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
173
Box 8.9 Metastasis of tumour cells via a vessel
Primarytumoul
Jnown'
migrate through connective tiss
Blood or lymph vessel
3. Tumour cells stick to
M Ia55
4. Tumour cells squeeze
 through the vessel wall
5. Tumour cells travel in the blooc
rrow part of the vessel
 or lymph as a small raft of cells
7.Tumour cells migrate through
the connective tiss
sue again, settle
ondary tumour
illustrated in the cartoon.
1. They need to be able to move away from the main tumour site and to migrate
by interacting with connective tissues (2).
If they are going to use blood or lymph vessels to metastasise they need to stick
to (3.) and then pass through the vessel walls (4).
They need to travel in the blood or lymph and resist possible attack by the body's
immune system (5).
 aue    an  lss n jo d m e ui   
and pass out through the vessel wall again (6). Then they may need to migrate again
through connective tissue at another site, and in another tissue type, to be able to
establish at a new site (7) in order to form a secondary tumour.
Only a proportion of tumour cells are able successfully to pass all these tests, so
the primary tumour site will form a secondary tumour.
with connective tissues; they may need to pass through blood or lymph
vessel walls; they need to resist possible attack by the body's immune
system, and they need to be able to establish at a new tissue site
in order to proliferate and form a secondary tumour (Box 8.9). Only
 a proportion of tumour cells are able successfully to pass all these
174
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
lie anounn le sou pue 'ssauisng suaeeui ue si sisisiau os siss
tumour mass.
Routes of metastasis
There are a number of possible ways for tumour cells to spread, dis-
preferred method of spread and some have preferred sites for their
metastases to develop. For instance, metastases of prostate tumours
in dogs will tend to establish in bone, whilst secondary malignant mam-
mary tumours will usually occur in mammary lymph nodes.
· Metastasis via haematogenous spread: Haematogenous spread
means spread of tumour cells via the blood circulatory system. This
often also involves the lymphatic vessels since the lymph system
drains into the blood vascular circulation. Haematogenous spread
is mainly responsible for secondary tumours that grow in the liver,
lungs and spleen.
·Metastasis via lymphatic spread: Lymph vessels are relatively'easy
routes of spread for tumour cells. They are thin-walled and flow
is under low pressure. When tumour cells enter lymphatic vessels
near the primary tumour site, they travel to lymph nodes (which oc
cur at intervals along the lymphatic circulation) and may establish a
secondary tumour within the nodes. If the tumour cells are able to
u ishy os op Aiensn Im saui sapou ui sunounn Aepuonas ysllqeisa
lymph nodes local to the primary tumour site. This is why vets will
often seek out and sample local lymph nodes at the time of inves-
tigation of the primary tumour; the pathologist may be able to find
tumour cells in the node and this can provide valuable prognostic
information for the clinician and nurses. If tumour cells bypass the
jueis!p alou ie deua ot abeueu ls Keu Kaui apou yduk isi
sites (so called skip metastasis), so absence of a secondary tumour
spread of the primary tumour.
In many cases the lymph node will be enlarged if there is a sec-
ondary tumour within it. Note however that if the primary tumour
-ua ag llam Aeu sapou ydrui buuieip sh! 'paaju! pue patearin s!
larged because they are reacting to the infection rather than there
spread of tumour cells along serosal surfaces (or serosae - pro-
nounced ser-ro-zee). Serosae are the slender tissue sheets or
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
175
Box 8.10 Summary of routes of metastasis of tumours
Haematogenous spread
Spread of tumour cells via the blood circulatory system
(may also involve lymphatic vessels since the lymph
system drains into the blood circulation).
Mainly involved in development of secondary tumours
in the liver, lungs and spleen.
Lymphatic spread
1
Spread of tumour cells in the lymph vessels.
Lymph vessels are 'easy' routes of spread for tumour
cells (thin walled, low pressure flow).
 Tumour cells entering lymphatic vessels near the pri-
mary tumour may spread first to a local lymph node
aayt jnown, Aepuosas e ysllqeisa Aew pue
Local lymph nodes are often sampled at the time of
investigation of the primary tumour to see whether the
tumour has already spread.
1
 Skip metastasis is when tumour cells do not establish
in the first lymph node but pass through it and form a
secondary tumour at a more distant site. Thus, absence
of a secondary tumour in the first lymph node does not
rule out metastatic spread.
An enlarged lymph node may mean there is a tumour in
it. May also mean that there is infection of the primary
tumour (especially if ulcerated) because infection and
inflammatory cells will also be draining in the lymph
from the primary tumour site to the local lymph node.
Serosal spread
 Spread of tumour cells along serosal surfaces (or
serosae), such as peritoneum (covering abdominal or-
gans), pleura (covering the lungs) and the epicardium
of the heart.
 Sometimes called serosaf seeding because neoplastic
cells from tumours that form on/near serosal surfaces
spread along the membranes like scattered seeds.
 These metastases stimulate the serosae to produce
protein-rich fluid (exudate).
Smears of fluid exudates from the abdomen or chest
can be examined for presence of tumour cells.
intra-organ spread
 Spread of tumour from one site in a particular organ
to another site within the same organ.
1
 Uncommon means of tumour spread.
May involve local surface 'seeding', e.g. along the in-
ner lining surface of the trachea in the case of lung
tumours, or may actually be via local blood or lymph
drainage.
176
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
membranes that line body cavities and encase and suspend organs.
Examples of serosae are the peritoneum which covers the abdom-
inal organs, the pleural membranes which suspend the lungs and
the epicardium of the heart. Neoplastic cells from tumours that
form on or near the serosal surfaces are able to spread along the
membranes like scattered seeds - so this method of tumour spread
is sometimes called serosal seeding. These types of metastases of-
ten stimulate the serosae to produce a protein-rich fluid (exudlate)
which also contains free-floating tumour cells. Thus, fluid exudlates
from the abdomen or chest can be used diagnostically, when col-
lected and examined as a smear under the microscope.
■
pands uebio-eui 'sounos l ss peaids uebio-eiiui ea siseisia
means spread of tumour from one site in a particular organ to an-
other site within the same organ. This is an uncommon means of tu-
mour spread and is thought to occur by various routes such as local
surface 'seeding', e.g. along the inner lining surface of the trachea
in the case of lung tumours, or via local blood or lymph drainage.
Note that not all malignant tumours do metastasise; some remain at
their primary site and are locally invasive, though these can prove
difficult to excise and often regrow at the site after surgery.
What effects do neoplasias have on the animal?
Physical presence of the tumour: Some effects of neoplasia on affected
animals are simply due to the abnormal presence of a growing
mass, and though many of the most harmful effects of tumours
are associated with malignant masses, some benign tumours are
harmful merely because of their position. So a tumour in the lungs
stimulate vomiting whilst one in the urinary bladder may lead to
inability to urinate. Brain tumours press on the brain as they grow
within the rigid skull, adversely affecting brain function.
Bleeding and infection: Ulcerated, infected or highly vascular tumours,
with a tendency to bleed easily, may provide additional clues to
their presence because of blood, bacteria or inflammatory cells in
sputum, vomit or urine.
 Pain: Tumours may cause considerable pain due to pressure on or
 invasion into other organs; for instance, invasion of bone by tumour
metastases is very painful.
Weight loss: Tumours are often associated with loss of body condition
addeui o buoa 'easneu on Aepuonas ag Aeu siyi busm o
tence. Marked wasting, known as cachexia, is also a primary effect
of tumours and is due to the tumour secreting chemical messen-
gers which increase breakdown of muscle (catabolic effects). Similar
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
177
chemical messengers can lead to other non-specific signs such as
fever (pyrexia of unknown origin, or PUO) or anaemia or leukope-
nia (decreased white blood cell count) due to inhibition of bone
marrow.
Change in haematology: Ulcerated tumours of body surfaces can be-
come infected, causing changes in the blood profile (increased neu-
trophils, for instance - see Chapter 4). In some cases the animal's
response to the infection will be inhibited by effects of the tumour
on the bone marrow. Blood clotting may also be adversely affected
due to bone marrow inhibition, but also to any effects the tumour
Chapter 7).
Inappropriate behaviour - increased or decreased hormone secretion:
Many tumour cells still retain the functions of their normal cell of
origin (see discussion of differentiation, earlier this chapter, page
165), but tend not to respond to normal control mechanisms.
In the case of tumours derived from a hormone-secreting cell
gland of elderly dogs can lead to a form of hyperadrenocorticism
or Cushing's disease. The tumour cells secrete adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) which stimulates the cells of the adrenal cortex to
produce cortisol. The tumour cells in the pituitary are resistant to the
negative feedback mechanism that normally tones cown their ACTH
secretion when cortisol levels in the body reach a sufficient level.
Stimulation of the adrenal glands continues unchecked producing
the clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), such
and reduced ability to mount an inflammatory response.
The opposite of hypersecretion by endocrinologically active
(hormone-secreting) tumour cells is also occasionally found. In this
case the tumour mass is composed of neoplastic cells that are not
-moa ayl '(le ie auowoy anpoid ou op a'!) anre Aleuooung.
ing mass of these inactive tumour cells presses on adjacent normal
cells in the endocrine organ causing them to atrophy or die off
the inactive tumour cells take up more space than normal active
endocrine cells. This so-called space-occupying effect is at least
partially responsible for the complex effects of Cushing's disease
appetites and abnormal hair coats, and these changes are thought
to be partially due to pressure of a growing pituitary tumour on the
oy algisuodsa s! yeiym (snueleyodky au) uieig jo eaie juaneoe
regulation of body temperature, appetite and hair shedding.
178
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Paraneoplastic syndromes: Another variation on this theme of secre-
tion of substances by tumour cells is the secretion of substances not
actually of endocrine origin. This is the mechanism of a phenomenon
called paraneoplastic syndrome (Box 8.11).
An example of this in veterinary medicine is encountered in
some carcinomas of the anal sac and in some lymphomas. In these
tumours, the neoplastic cells 'switch on' the ability to secrete a
substance closely related to parathyroid hormone (PTH) which is
normally produced by the parathyroid glands. Normal PTH acts
to increase blood calcium levels partly by encouraging release of
calcium from bone. It does this by stimulating large cells called os-
at the bone's surface and release calcium into the bloodstream.
The impostor hormone, produced by the neoplastic cells, is called
parathyroid-related peptide or PThRP for short. PThRP acts in the
cium level (hypercalcaemia) can be a diagnostic sign for these two
tumours (see Box 8.12).
The immune system and neoplasia
It is known that incidence of malignant tumours of some types increases
in animals with poor immune systems (immunocompromised animals).
So, could it be that other animals with adequate immune function are
 able to make an immune response, and limit the development of these
malignancies?
When viewed under the microscope, some tumours are surrounded
by clusters of lymphocytes (these cells are associated with immune re-
 sponses - see Chapter 5). In some of these cases an apparent response
by the immune system is associated with better prognosis and even
with reduction in size (regression) of tumours.
An example of immune-mediated regression of a tumour is the cu-
tumours are often excised and sent to a pathology laboratory to con-
firm the diagnosis. Under the microscope, clusters of lymphocytes are
often present at the edges of these tumours and, if not surgically
removed, most simple benign histiocytomas would eventually be de-
stroyed by the immune system. The possibility of a role of the immune
certain tumour types will be developed in the future.
Another example of the immune response fighting tumours, encour-
aged by vaccination, is with tumours known to be caused by a virus.
Box 8.11 Paraneoplastic syndrome: inappropriate production of a hormone or substance which
mimics a normal hormone
Tumour cells, e.g. carcinoma of the
anal sac or lymphoma in dogs
Digestion of bone by osteoclasts 
causes calcium to enter the blood 
(hypercaicaemia) -this can be
Tumour cells produce a hormone which
detected in a blood sample and 
can give an indication that a
mmimics parathyroid hormone, called 
parathyroid hormone-related peptidle
tumour might be present.
(PThrP, for short).
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
Osteoclasts
Bone
osteoclasts, are normally instructed by parathyroid hormone
to break cown bone. The osteoclasts obey the PThrP produced
by the tumour
urcells,because to them theabnormal hormone
seems just the same as normal parathyroid hormone!
.
180
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.12 Summary of the effects of tumours
Physical presence of the
1
 Abnormal presence of a growing mass compresses normal
tumour
tissues or causes blockages of hollow organs.
Bleeding and infection
Ulcerated, infected or highly vascular tumours, with a ten-
dency to bleed easily, may shed blood, bacteria or inflam-
matory cells in sputum, vomit or urine.
Pain
Due to pressure on or invasion into other organs, e.g. in-
vasion of bone by tumour metastases is very painful.
Weight loss
1
May be secondary to nausea, vomiting or inappetence.
1
Tumour cachexia (marked wasting) is also due to the
tumour secreting chemical messengers which increase
metabolic breakdown of muscle.
Non-specific signs due
to chemical messengers
Such as fever (PUO), and anaemia or leukopenia (decreased
secreted by tumour cells
white blood cell count) due to inhibition of bone marrow.
 Change in haematology
 Ulcerated tumours can become infected, causing changes
in the blood (e.g. increased neutrophils)
 Inflammatory response may be inhibited by inhibitory ef-
fects of the tumour on bone marrow.
 Blood clotting may also be adversely affected due to bone
 marrow inhibition, also to the effects the tumour may have
on liver function and decreased clotting factors.
 Inappropriate behaviour,
ie. increased or
1
 Many tumour cells retain the functions of their normal cell
of origin but tend not to respond to normal control mech-
decreased hormone
 secretion
anisms.
 In the case of tumours derived from hormone-secreting
(endocrine) organs, the cells may secrete inappropriately
high levels of hormone.
Alternatively, endocrine tumours may be composed of neo-
plastic cells that do not produce hormone. The growing
tumour presses on adjacent normal cells in the endocrine
organ causing atrophy or necrosis. The function of the en-
docrine organ is reduced as a result.
Paraneoplastic
syndromes
Secretion of substances not normally secreted by the cells
from which the tumour forms, e.g. hormones may be se-
creted by tumour cells which are not of endocrine origin
(Box 8.11}.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth   181
These tumours could be prevented by vaccinations specifically against
the virus. The vaccine aims to ensure that the host's own immune sys-
tem fights off the virus when the host is exposed to it, and therefore
is feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) vaccination, and in human medicine
a vaccine against human papilloma virus (HPV), intended to prevent
cervical cancers, has recently been developed.
This is a rapidly developing area, but the intriguing possibility of
control or treatment of neoplasia by vaccination is likely to receive
considerable attention in the future.
Diagnosis of neoplasms in veterinary general practice
Not so long ago it was sufficient to find out whether a tumour in
an animal was benign, in which case the prognosis was likely to
be good, or malignant, in which case it was not. Nowadays, ad-
vances in our understanding of tumour development, with increased
availability of specific treatments, and owners prepared to try treat-
important.
 Primary assessment of a tumour patient is likely to start with clinical
examination and include blood and urine sampling and radiography,
as appropriate.
Depending on interest and experience in the practice, cytology
the tumour has spread to another site. Cytological techniques used in
 general practice are thin smears on glass microscope slides of samples
such as fine-needle aspirates (FNAs), which may be gently sucked with
a syringe (aspirated) from the middle of the tumour. FNAs may also
be made from fluids such as bronchiolar lavage (BAL - washed from
the trachea), urine or peritoneal tap fluids. Finally, a tumour or part of
a tumour may be dabbed on to the glass slide to produce impression
smears of tissues. All these preparations may be air-dried, stained and
examined under the microscope in the practice laboratory. Alterna-
tively, the dried slides may be sent to a pathology laboratory so that
the clinical pathologist can examine them.
Cytology is a useful early step in diagnosis, being relatively cheap.
are useful for assessing some of the cell features included in Box 8.14
and may allow rapid diagnosis or at least might indicate that further
procedures (such as biopsy) are warranted.
The next step is examination of tissue (histology) rather than smears
of cells (cytology). Histology involves microscopic examination by a
pathologist, of formalin-fixed tissues collected at surgery (biopsy). (See
182
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.13 Useful information for the pathologist
When you send any formalin-fixed tissue (biopsy) to the laboratory for histology (in
addition to clinical history, signs and signalment) note down:
Site of tumour(s)
How long the tumour(s) took to develop
Measurements (approximate are better than nothing!)
Other features, e.g. describe ulceration, haemorrhage
 Evaluate and comment upon local invasion if possible/appropriate
 Evaluate and comment upon attachment to surrounding tissues (or comment on
how easy it was to remove - 'shell out')
Evaluate and comment upon local lymph node involvement (if possible)
If there is more than one tumour - examine, describe and sample as many as possible
Include and comment upon imaging results (radiography, scan results etc.)
Chapter 1 for information on how the formalin-fixed specimen ends up
under the pathologist's microscope.)
An incisional biopsy is when a part (a slice or a needle core) is
removed and fixed. An excisional biopsy, on the other hand, is the
term used when the entire mass has been removed and fixed. If the
removed specimen is large it is best to cut it into smaller pieces to
allow the formalin to penetrate before you send it to the laboratory. If
this is not done, the centre of the specimen will not fix properly and
     o ()   s 
In order to offer a diagnosis, the pathologist interprets cellfeatures
of the neoplastic cells, but also assesses relationships of the tumour
cells to normal tissue and looks for signs of invasion of the tumour. The
practice must send some paperwork with the tissue, in order to provide
well as the clinical history and signalment of the animal it is really help-
ful for the pathologist to have information about the tumour(s) and any
other relevant information which may help (Box 8.13). The pathologist
will assess histological features such as those summarised in Box 8.14.
In addition, the pathologist may be able to indicate whether the mass
The excision margins are the amount of normal tissue surroundling the
tumour on the microscope slide. The pathologist may be able to find
microscopic evidence of local invasion of tumour cells into adjacent
tissues, which may not have been apparent when the specimen was
performing more surgery to remove a little more tissue from the previ-
ous surgery site, ensuring clean excision margins (free of tumour cells).
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
183
Box 8.14 The histological features of benign versus
malignant tumours
Benign tumour cells (or low grade
malignancy)
Malignant cells
· Cells and nuclei are relatively uniform
● Cells and nuclei are non-uniform
(look like cells of origin)
(tissue of origin may be not be clear)
(see photographs in Box 8.15)
● Mitotic index* - may be low or high
● Mitotic index* - may be low or high
●Uniform mitotic figures
● Abnormal or irregular mitotic figures
(see photographs in Box 8.15)
· Arrangement of tumour cells may look
● Tumour usually does not retain
similar to the normal tissue of origin
recognisable tissue architecture
(recognisable tissue architecture)
● No indication of invasion of adjacent
● Invasion of adjacent tissues and/or
tissue
vessels (see photographs in Box 8.15)
● Tumour cells in other tissues (e.g. local
ymph node)
● Necrosis within tumour
 Mitotic index is a count of the number of cells seen to be dividing by mitosis (or the number of
mitotic figures). For instance, an average of the counts of mitoses per ten high power views under the
microscope of the tumour is given as the mitotic index.
 Mitotic figures are made up of the separating nuclear material of cells undergoing division by
mitosis. They appear under the microscope as two equal-sized densely staining frilly bands in normal
celldivisions. In abnormal divisions the nuclear material divides unequally or appears in strange forms,
like "Y' or 'X' shapes, or even stranger arrangements (Box 8.15).
Sometimes, especially if cells appear very abnormal under the mi-
croscope, a diagnosis is not able to be made by standard histology.
The pathologist and the vet may decide to use more specialist tech-
niques to make the diagnosis. These techniques include an extremely
high-powered microscope called an electron microscope, or immuno-
histochemistry (discussed next).
Immunohistochemistry
This is very specific staining based on immune reactions. Solutions of
to the tissue section on a microscope slide. The antibodies are labelled
with a colour (usually brown) which can be seen under the microscope
and they attach themselves to their specific target protein. If antibodies
to tumour cells suspected of being present are used then this tech-
nique will confirm a presumptive diagnosis. In this way the pathologist
can recognise very specific cell types, and can say more accurately
what sort of tumour is present.
184
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Box 8.15 Photographs of normal and abnormal mitoses
Mitoticfigures
They are drawing apart and when the cell divides, each new cell will get an equal
share of the nuclear material.
(b)Below, an abnormal or bizarre mitotic figure in a malignant tumour on a dog's
leg. There has been very uneven division of nuclear material, with one large
irregular main band and several small blobs of nuclear material beside this.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
185
Box 8.15 (Continued) Photographs of abnormal cellular features and
metastasising neoplastic cells
Neoplastic cells may have abnormal cell shapes and sizes
(c)Above, nuclei of tumour cells in this photograph from the same tumour as shown
 in (b) are very irregular in shape, size and appearance. Some cells have more than 
one nucleus.
(d}
Below, a 'raft' or micrometastasis of tumour cells in a blood vessel from a ma-
lignant tumour in a horse's foot. You can spot irregular nuclei of a some loose
tumour cells amongst the red blood cells too.
Raft
186
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
In the future, it is likely that more techniques will be developed for
the investigation of tumours in veterinary practice. For instance, the
cells and are discussed next.
Tumour markers
or the regrowth of tumours, requiring collection of blood samples by
standard methods. An example of their use is in men to detect or to
monitor prostate cancer. Detection of the marker, known as prostate-
specific antigen (PSA), in blood samples provides a potential screening
test for early detection of the disease before clinical signs start. Further-
more, reappearance of the marker some time after surgical removal of
the tumour can indicate that the tumour has regrown.
It is possible that tumour markers will become used in veterinary
medicine, as research has so far included their investigation in various
tumours in dogs including prostate tumours, and tumours of liver,
biliary tract, pancreas and testes.
In conclusion, we now have a far greater understanding of how neo-
plasms (tumours) develop in men and animals, including the specific
causes and mechanisms of cell transformation for numerous tumour
types. There are newer, sometimes more reliable and sophisticated
methods of diagnosing neoplasia and treating cancers. In many cases
treatments are able to spare normal cells and target only the neo-
plastic ones. Owners also have greater knowledge and experience)
additionally, they may pay into insurance schemes, or for various other
reasons be more inclined to opt for treatment -perhaps at a specialist
Oncology, the study of neoplasms and their development, is a
-d uouido ishy e ui busyom ae nor  uaag play buuedxa Apide
tice, from which animals are referred to specialist centres for treatment,
Aaun pue nos ym euiue liaui ssnsip oi paau Aeu shaumo paom
may have special nursing requirements when the animal returns from
with the scientific advances and treatments, and nursing techniques,
for animals with neoplasia.
Disorders of Cell/Tissue Growth
187
Summary of key points in Chapter 8
· Atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia and metaplasia are reversible
adaptive changes in cells which help the cell to cope with an alter-
ation in its environment.
 Atrophy is shrinkage in the size of cells (and therefore the tissue
of which the cell forms part) in response to a stimulus. There are a
number of causes of atrophy.
Hypertrophy is increase in size of cells in response to a stimulus,
whereas hyperplasia is increase in the number of cells. Sometimes
both processes occur together.
Metaplasia is conversion of one mature cell type to another.
■
 Neoplasia is an irreversible cell change. It involves the proliferation
of abnormal cells to form neoplasms (cancers or tumours). Unlike
the reversible changes, neoplastic cells cannot revert to normal
once the stimulus is removed.
Neoplastic changes (transformations) are genetic mutations and are
passed on to new cells when the neoplastic cell divides. All tumours
therefore originate from one transformed cell. Neoplastic cells grow
and divide in an uncontrolled manner.
-oas woy ol sllas snouni jo peaids jo ssasoid aue sl siseiseia
ondary tumours (metastases). There are various routes of metasta-
sis.
 Neoplasms have various direct and indirect harmful effects on ani-
mals. It may be that the immune response could be manipulated to
fight certain tumours.
 There are various clinical and pathological diagnostic techniques for
recognising tumours and for making a prognosis.
188
General Pathology for Veterinary Nurses
Test yourself questions on Chapter 8
1. a. List four common reversible cell adaptations /changes involving
altered cell growth or size
b.(
 Construct a simple diagram to illustrate the changes you have
named in part 1.a.
c. Define neoplasia, and indicate what fundamental way neoplasia
differs from the changes you listed in part 1.a.
2.a.9
Stages of changes to the genetic make-up of a cell are fun-
damental to tumour development, name the three stages of
genetic abnormality that are recognised in the development of
tumours.
b. A factor able to cause permanent DNA damage and thus lead
to tumour formation is called a carcinogen. List some groups of
carcinogenic factors for domestic animals.
3. Draw up a simple table outlining the most common differences
between benign and malignant tumours
4. a. What is meant by the term metastasis?
b.  Name three means by which tumours metastasise.
 5.   Make short notes to discuss two of the ways a tumour exerts harmful
effects on an animal.
 6. Discuss cytology in the diagnosis of neoplasms in veterinary general
practice.
Glossary
190
Glossary
This glossary is a quick reference list of terms used in this book, plus a
few extra ones that you may come across in your further reading, with
definitions. It is not meant to be a comprehensive medical dictionary.
Jo buiueisiaoun anor u! inydiay ag ot Aax!l spiom jo is!l e s! ing
general pathology.
Most of the following terms appear in italics when you encounter
them elsewhere in this book. There is cross-reference between terms
in this glossary too, also indicated by words in italics.
Abscess A localised accumulation of pus, often with a fibrous wall
Alleiadsa 'uoreau Aoteuueui ue jo hinsau au s yrm 'tl punoie
where bacteria and necrosis are involved. See pus and suppuration.
Acquired diseases  Diseases that develop at some stage during life.
as a result of the effects of one or more aetiological agent acting
during life. See also aetiology and aetiological agent.
 in the body against infectious agents and other foreign molecules.
See adaptive immune system/response.
Acute inflammation Rapidly developing inflammation, usually of rel-
atively short duration, and characterised by blood vessel dilation
and leakiness (oedema) and by influx of neutrophils. See also in-
flammation and chronicinflammation.
Adaptive immune system/response A defensive system in the body
which is specifically stimulated to respond by infectious agents and
other foreign molecules. Responses are cellular, involving T lympho-
of antibodies (immunoglobulins) by activated B lymphocytes. Also
known as acquired or specific immunity.
Adenocarcinoma A malignant tumour formed from glandular cells,
such as mammary gland cells. See also carcinoma and sarcoma.
Aetiological agent A factor capable of causing disease. See also
aetiology, pathogen and pathogenic.
Aetiology  The study of the causes of disease.
  y  o i  se   
mune response involving release of active substances by stimulated
mast cells in response to an antigen (see below). See also anaphy-
laxis.
Anaemia
9Abnormally ow haemoglobin or red blood cell level in the
blood, which affects the oxygen carrying function of the blood.
Anaphylactic shock Severe acute fall in blood pressure due to ex-
treme hypersensitivity of an animal. Something to which the animal
is sensitive (the allergen) stimulates marked mast cell degranulation.
The contents of the released mast cell granules stimulate dilation of
bloodvesselswhichcauses thesuddendecreaseinbloodpressure.
Glossary
191
See also allergy, anaphylaxis, hypersensitivity, shock, cardiogenic
shock, hypovolaemic shock, neurogenic shock, toxic shock, septic
shock and types I-IV hypersensitivity reactions.
Anaphylaxis A very sudden severe, maybe life-threatening, immedi
ate allergic or type I hypersensitivity reaction to a stimulus to which
the host is especially sensitive.
Anasarca Generalised accumulation of tissue fluid all over the body
droperitoneum.
Anatomic pathology Pathology which involves the examination of
called necropsies) or looking at tissues from live animals (called
biopsies). Anatomic pathologists look atthe tissues or organs by eye
(gross examination) to identify abnormalities, but also use histologic
sections mounted on glass slides and stained, to examine the tissue
under the microscope.
Antibodies Special proteins produced by certain cells of the body's
o (molaq aas) uabue uhiaio e oi asuodsau ui uaisss aunu!
known as immunoglobulins. Antibody production is part of what is
known as the immune response. See also plasma cells.
Antibody complexes Clumps of antigen and antibody which form
the complement cascade and are usually ultimately destroyed by
phagocytic cells. See also type Ill hypersensitivity.
Antigen Any foreign substance (such as an infectious organism) that
can stimulate an immune response in the host. See also antigenicity
and blood groups.
Antigenicity The tendency for a foreign substance (such as an infec-
tious agent) to be recognised by an antibody or lymphocyte and to
provoke an immune response.
Apoptosis A form of cell cdeath that is caused by release of protein-
digesting enzymes within the cell. Apoptosis occurs under both
normal and pathological conditions. For instance, it is involved in
[eouau ayn u! osle ng 'oqua buimoa aun jo ,bulapou, leuou
(by death) of cells infected by some viruses. Apoptosis is distinct
from necrosis.
Ascites Abnormal accumulation of fluid within the abdomen. Seealso
oedema.
Atraphy When cells within a tissue shrink, causing the whole organ
composed of those cells to decrease in size.
Autoimmune disease A disease which results when the immune sys-
tem attacks the body's own tissues.
Autolysis Literally means the splitting (or breaking up) of self. Refers
to cells being digested by enzymes contained within their cytoplasm
192
Glossary
(in vesicles called lysosomes). Usually used in the context of death
of cells in a body after death, i.e. post-mortem decomposition. See
also lysosomes and necrosis.
BacteraemiaBacteria circulating in the blood. See also septicaemia.
Basophil  A cell with a segmented nucleus and intracytoplasmic gran-
ules (which stain blue in histological sections). Basophils take part
allergy and type Vimmediate hypersensitivity.
Benign tumour  A tumour which is usually well-cdemarcated and does
mour.
Biopsy Specimen from a live animal (such as a tumour, a skin lesion,
as pue uewo u paxy si yym (uhio euaui ue jo aaid e o
of various sizes, and may include all or only part of a lesion of
excisional biopsy.
Blaod coagulation Clotting of the blood protein fibrin and platelets.
See coagulation.
Blood groups Proteins of a certain type, which are on the surface
of red blood cells. If red blood cells bearing one type of protein
are injected into a host whose red blood cells carry a different
suiaioid ayn uay (dnoih poolg layioue jo s! nsoy ayn 'a'!) ulaioid
of the injected cells act as antigens. An immune response against
 the injected cells ensues and they are destroyed. This is the basis of
terms of blood group. See also antigen and antigenicity.
Calciffcation  Normal in some tissues (bones or teeth), but also refers
to abnormal deposition of hard calcium in disease or in damaged
tissues ('dystrophic' calcification) or when the level of calcium in the
blood is abnormally high ('metastatic' calcification)
Carcinogen  An agent (often refers to a chemical) capable of causing
tumours to develop in animals exposed to that agent.
Carcinogenesis  The mechanisms and processes of tumour develop-
ment in the body. See also oncogenesis which may be used inter-
changeably with carcinogenesis.
Carcinoma  A malignant tumour (neoplasm) originating from cells of
epithelial type, that is cells of body surfaces. See also sarcoma.
Cardiogenic shock  Sudden potentially life-threatening fall in blood
pressure due to acute heart failure. The failed heart is suddenly
unable to pump blood effectively and this causes a marked de-
crease in cardiac output. See also shock, anaphylactic shock,
hypovolaemic shock, neurogenic shock, toxic shock and septic
shock.
Glossary
193
Caseation necrosis A type of cell necrosis characterised by the dead
tissue acquiring a cheesy consistency with loss of normal cellular and
organ architecture. See also necrosis, coagulative necrosis, liquefac-
tive necrosis, fat necrosis, gangrene, wet gangrene, dry gangrene
and gas gangrene.
Cell-mediated immunity/immune response An immune response
involving lymphocytes and macrophages, rather than antibodies.
See also humoral immunity.
Celfular degeneration Reversible cell damage, from which the cell
can recover if the damaging stimulus is removed. See also cloudy
swelling, irreversible cell damage and necrosis.
Cellulitis  Inflammation in connective tissue.
Chemical pathology
/ The type of pathology used in the laboratory.
See clinical pathology.
Cholestasis  Stoppage of the flow of bile in the biliary tract; may result
in jaundice.
Chronic inflammation Slowly developing or long-lasting inflamma-
tion, usually involving macrophages and proliferation of fibrous tis-
sue. See also infammation and acute infammation.
Clinical pathology The type of pathology used in the laboratory.
whether a practice laboratory or a diagnostic laboratory. For in-
stance, urinalysis or blood biochemistry are clinical or chemical
imal by studying body fluids (such as blood, urine, joint fluid, ab-
dominal tap fluid, cerebro-spinal fluid and so on) or by microscopic
examination of stained cells from the fluids, or from fine-needle aspi-
rates (FNAs). See also cytology and general pathology for contrast.
Cloudy swelling  Early stage of reversible cell damage (see cellular
degeneration), in which the cell swells with water and the cytoplasm
becomes pale. See also reversible and irreversible cell damage and
necrosis
Coagulation (of blood) The clotting of blood as a result of the ac-
tivation of a series of proteins, which forms a fibrin clot and coats
platelets (and other cells). Blood coagulation is meant to be a safety
mechanism to prevent leakage of blood from the circulation in the
event of blood vessel damage. In some instances, however, it can
occur inappropriately and be harmful. See also consumption coagu-
lopathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, haemorrhage and
thrombus.
Coagulative necrosis Aform of cell death (necrosis) in which the cell
contents become coagulated and form an amorphous mass, but
the cell's outline (basic architecture) is retained. See also necrosis,
caseation necrosis, liquefactive necrosis, fat necrosis, gangrene, wet
gangrene, dry gangrene, moist gangrene and gas gangrene.
194
Glossary
Coagulopathy General term meaning a disease affecting the blood
clotting system; it is usually used in connection with diseases which
result in decreased clotting ability (bleeding tendency). See also
consumption coagulopathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation
and haemorrhage.
Collagen A firm fibrous protein, stronger and more permanent than
fibrin, and produced by cells called fibroblasts in the connective
tissue of the body. See also fibrin and fibroblasts.
0 pies s! pue uabelloo jo shol suieiuoo anssi snoug! snouabeloo
be collagenous. See also fibrin and fibroblasts.
Complement A cascade of serum proteins activated by the process
of antibody binding to antigen, and which results in cells being
destroyed or by clumping of bacteria or other foreign substances.
Congenital disease/condition  A condition present at birth that has
 been caused by something which happened to the developing em-
bryo or foetus before birth. Congenital conditions are not neces-
sarily hereditary (able to be passed on to the offspring of the af-
fected animal). See hereditary disease/condition and genetic dis-
ease/condition.
Consumption coagulopathy When haemorrhages occur as a result
of clotting factors being used up (consumed) due to another pro-
cess, such as widespread clotting (see disseminated intravascular
coagulation). Note that consumed or consumption in this case is not
connected with eating something (oral consumption) so is not refer-
ring to the animal eating a poison such as rat poison, for instance.
Consumed/consumption have alternative meanings connected with
something being 'used up'; it is this meaning that is relevant in this
context.
Crepitus  Used to describe the feel of fractured bone fragments rub-
bing together, also the feel of gas in tissues, such as occurs in gas
gangrene.
Cytokine Chemical messengers produced by various cell types,
which are important in cell-to-cell communication in immune re-
sponses and in inflammation.
Cytology Examination of cells in body fluid or in a fine-needle aspi-
rate, by use of a microscope to study a stained smear of the sample
on a glass microscope slide
Cytotoxic This is a broad term meaning harmful or lethal to cells.
Note that, despite its sound, the term is not used solely in refer-
ence to toxins, for instance, there is a class of the immune cells
T lymphocytes known as cytotoxic lymphocytes.
reaction. An immune response in which elements of the immune
Glossary
195
system are directed to kill cells of the body because the target cells
have been inappropriately coated with antibodies.
Degranulation The release of the active contents of granules in the
cytoplasm of cells such as neutrophils, mast cells and eosinophils
when the cells are activated.
ity. An inflammatory response, involving cells of the inmune system,
which can take several hours (24-72 hours) to develop after the an-
imal is exposed to the stimulus to which that animal is sensitive.
Dendritic cells Large, long-lived cells with cellular processes (arms),
that act as antigen-presenting cells. That is to say, they pick up
antigen in the tissues, carry it back to the lymphoid organs and then
'hold it out' for recognition by lymphocytes called T cells, in order
to stimulate an immune response.
Disseminated Widespread or diffuse in the body.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DiC) A serious, usually
fatal, condition in which there is diffuse activation of the blood
clotting mechanism throughout the blood circulation of a live ani-
mal. As a result, clotting factors may be used up (consumed) and so
widespread small haemorrhages may ensue secondarily. See also
coagulopathy and consumption coagulopathy.
Dry gangrene  A type of tissue death due to loss of blood supply. No
bacteria are involved. The tissue feels cold, dry and shrivelled, and
is discoloured. See also gangrene, gas gangrene, moist gangrene
and wet gangrene.
Dystrophic calcificatian  Abnormal deposition of hard calcium in dis-
ease or in damaged tissues. See also calcification and metastatic
calcification.
Ecchymoses Discrete haemorrhages in the skin or within (or on) or-
gans, larger than petechiae. See also haemorrhage, petechiae and
haematoma.
EffusionAn abnormal accumulation of fluid in a body cavity or area.
 Embolus A substance (fluid, solid or gas) which is able to lodge in a
blood vessel and cause a blockage. See also infarction, ischaemia.
thrombus and thrombosis.
Endogenous Refers to something formed, produced or acting from
within the body (or cell). For instance, endogenous glucocorticoids
are produced by the adrenal glands. The opposite of exogenous.
Endothelium The lining layer of blood and lymph vessels formed by
a thin single layer of flattened (endothelial) cells.
Eosinophil  A white blood cell with a complex segmented (or lobed)
nucleus (i.e. not a single rounded nucleus, like a macrophage)
Eosinophils have granules in their cytoplasm and the contents of
196
Glossary
the granules are released when the cells are activated. Eosinophils
are often associated with parasite infections or with allergies or
sensitivities.
Erosion Partial loss of the surface layer of an organ or tissue, for
instance, gastric erosion or erosion of the skin. See also ulcer.
Excision margins An assessment by the pathologist of the amount
of normal tissue included around the edge of a biopsy of a lesion,
are adequate or good then the tumour may have been completely
cision margins are narrow or that tumour cells extend to the edge of
the specimen, then further surgery at the site may be required to try
to remove remaining tumour cells, and stop the tumour regrowing
at that site
Excisional biopsy Removal of a pathological lesion (such as a tu-
mour or ulcer), usually with some surrounding normal tissue. This is
fixed and sent to the pathologist for examination. See also excision
margins and incisional biopsy.
Exogenaus Refers to something formed, produced in or acting from
outside the body (or cell). For instance, exogenous glucocorticoids
are given as corticosteroid injections, though the body also pro-
duces steroids (see also endogenous).
ExudateAccumulation of protein-rich fluid due to leakiness of blood
vessels, for instance, inflammatory exudate. See also transudate.
a reversible cell change. See also cloudy swelling and cellular de-
generation.
Fibrin A protein formed by the activation of fibrinogen. Fibrin tends
to form a soft gel-like mass, which plugs wounds or damaged areas
of endothelium and forms the founcation of blood clots or wound
healing.
to fibrin (gel-like clots of insoluble protein) in the processes of clot-
ting or tissue repair.
Fibrosis The formation of the strong fibrous protein, collagen, usually
as part of the scar process when badly damaged tissues heal. See
also organisation and tissue repair.
Gangrene A variant of coagulative necrosis. Gangrene isthe necrosis
that occurs due to loss of blood supply to an area, especially an
extremity. The affected part is cold to touch. Four types of gangrene
are described, dry, gas, moist and wet.
Gas gangrene A type of tissue death due to loss of blood supply.
 In this form of gangrene, gas-producing bacteria proliferate in the
necrotic tissue. The affected tissue has a crackly (crepitant) feel. See
Glossary
197
also gangrene, dry gangrene, moist gangrene, wet gangrene and
crepitus.
General pathology The study of the basic pathological processes
that are not specific to particular organs or tissues. For instance,
processes such as cell degeneration, inflammation and tumour for-
paapisuoo aie os pue 'oog aun jo shed le u eluis aie uoeu
under the heading of general pathology.
Genes Segments of chromosomes, genes are made up of deoxyri-
bonucleic acid (DNA). Each gene contains the information for a
particular physical or functional characteristic of the cell. All cells
contain all the genetic information of the animal, but not all genes
will be functional in every cell all of the time.
Genetic disease/condition A disease caused by an abnormality in
the genes of an animal. This abnormality may be passed on to the
offspring. See hereditary condition or disease.
Globulins A group of soluble proteins in blood serum; includes the
immunoglobulins. See antibodies
Granulation tissue  A type of soft spongy connective tissue which
forms early in the process of tissue healing. Granulation tissue con-
tains cells which produce collagen fibres, capillaries, and inflamma-
tory cells. Note that granulation tissue is not the same thing as
 granulomatous inflammation. See also organisation.
Granuloma A specific arrangement of inflammatory cells, principally
macrophages, which can occur in certain types of chronic inflamma-
tion. See also granulomatous inflammation.
Granulomatous inflammation Granulomatous inflammation is a form
of chronic inflammation which primarily involves macrophages,
though sometimes other cell types (such as plasma cells and lym-
phocytes) help out. Often the inflammatory cells are arranged in
 granulomas. Note that granulomatous inflammation is not the same
thing as granulation tissue.
Haematocrit The proportion of blood which is composed of cells.
The haematocrit varies under certain physiological or pathological
conditions. For instance, dehydration will increase the haematocrit
See also haemoconcentration.
Haematology Specifically the study of cell types in blood. For in-
stance, haematology can indicate an increase in white blood cells
(leucocytes) in an animal fighting an infection or a decrease in red
blood cells (erythrocytes) in an animal with anaemia.
Haematoma  A type of localised haemorrhage, usually within a solid
organ or tissue, e.g. aural haematoma, or bruising within muscle.
See also haemorrhage, ecchymoses and petechiae.
Haemoconcentration  An increase in the proportion of cells in the
blood due to a decrease in the fluid content. See also haematocrit.
198
Glossary
Haemolysis Destruction of red blood cells often due to an inappro-
priate immune response to the red cells. See also blood groups.
Haemopericardium, haemothorax, haemoperitoneum The prefix
and into the peritoneal cavity (around the abdominal organs).
Haemorrhage Escape of blood from the blood vascular system. See
also haematoma, ecchymoses and petechiae.
Hereditary disease or condition A disorder that can be passed on
from either or both parents to their offspring. More than one off-
spring may be affected, or successive offspring may have the dis-
ease.
Histamine A potent biological chemical, which is produced by mast
cells. Histamine has a number of actions, including the ability to
 stimulate endothelial cell contraction, which opens up gaps be-
tween the cells in the capillary walls, thus allowing the escape
able to cause vasodilation. See also acute inflammation and type
hypersensitivity.
from a diseased animal or from a specific lesion. The tissues are fixed
(e.g. in formalin) or frozen, processed, cut into a very thin section
and mounted on a glass slide. They must then be stained to make
the cells show up more clearly when examined microscopically.
-al aunuwi aut jo yed peul asuodsau aunwwyunuw! jesowng
sponse which is dependent on antibodies, rather than the action of
cells of the immune system. See also cell-mediated immunity.
mulation of fluid in the area indicated, in these instances in the
pericardial sac (around the heart) and in the thorax. See also ascites
and oedema.
Hydrostatic pressure Literally, water pressure. In blood vessels the
hydrostatic pressure of the blood normally tends to push fluid out
into the tissue (interstitium) from the capillaries. See also osmotic
pressure.
Hyperaemia
An increased blood flow to an area, usually due to in-
creased flow through a dilated capillary bed. The area becomes hot
and reddened as a result, such as in acute inflammation.
Hypercoagulability In blood, the increased tendency to clot. See
also Virchow's triad.
Hyperplasia  Enlargement of an organ due to an increase in the num-
ber of its cells. See also hypertrophy.
and directed by the immune system, in response to a trigger which
Glossary
199
might be relatively harmless to another individual. See also imme-
Hypertrophy  Enlargement of an organ due to an increase in the size
of its cells. See also hyperplasia.
Hypavolaemia An abnormal decrease in blood volume in the circu-
ation. See also shock.
Hypovolaemic shock A marked, possibly life-threatening, decrease
in blood pressure due to decreased blood volume. Causes of hypo-
volaemic shock include severe haemorrhage or dehydration. Hypo-
volaemia would also occur where there has been major leakage of
fluid from the circulation into the interstitial fluid. This might result
ness) of capillaries; this mechanism is part of the shock associated
with some fatal infections. See also shock, anaphylactic shock, car-
diogenic shock, neurogenic shock, toxic shock and septic shock.
latrogenic A disease or disorder directly caused by medical or surgi-
cal intervention.
lcterus The yellow discolouration of tissues caused by bile pigment
in the circulation. Also called jaundice.
Idiopathic A disease or condition for which we do not (yet) know the
'sassaooud suaudolaap alqesjubosal arey Keu l! ybnoui 'asnen 
lesions or clinical signs. See also aetiology. iatrogenic, hereditary.
genetic and congenital diseases/conditions.
See allergy and anaphylaxis.
Immune response  The specific defensive response by the host to for-
eign antigen. This response involves various cells and proteins of the
immune system. The immune response is usually beneficial, though
lo aedoiddeu! buiag Ag njuey ag Aeu l! suopuoo auos u!
excessive; alternatively, the immune system does not respond suffi-
ciently to protect the host. See also immunoglobulins, immunology.
Immunity Resistance to a disease because the host is able to defend
itself from foreign antigens and make an immune response. See
also immune response, immunoglobulins, immunology, antibodies,
antigen and antigenicity.
quately for various reasons. See also immuneosuppression.
Immunodeficiency  A state in which the immune system fails to func-
tion adequately. Immunodeficient animals are prone to other dis-
eases. Divided into primary and secondary immunodeficiencies.
Immunoglabulins A protein produced as part of the immune re-
sponse. See also antibodies and globulins.
Immunology The study of the immune system.
200
Glossary
Immunostaining
Immunological tests may be done on blood serum
(this is called serology) but some immunological tests can also be
known as immunostaining. All types of cells of the body have their
au uo pae (suiaod Aensn) sauisqns jo udiaaug, umo
outer surfaces; in a healthy individual, the immune system recog-
nises these and does not start to react against them. Sometimes
we can use this property of cells to confirm the diagnosis, for in-
stance, if a pathologist is having trouble identifying a particular skin
tumour under the microscope immunostains for specific cell types
can be applied to the tissue and can help to reveal the identity of
the tumour.
Immunosuppression
When the immune system is inhibited by drugs
or other processes. Immunosuppressed animals are prone to other
diseases.
 Incisional biopsy  When only a representative part of a pathological
lesion (such as a tumour or ulcer) is removed, fixed and sent to the
pathologist for examination. The pathologist's diagnosis may then
indicate whether more of the esion should be removed or whether
 it can be treated without further surgery. See also excisional biopsy.
Incubation period The period of time between exposure of the an-
imal to an infectious organism and the first appearance of clinical
signs of disease caused by the organism. Also called latent period
or latency.
Infarction Death (necrosis) of an area of tissue as a result of is-
chaemia. See also ischaemia and perfusion.
Inflammation  Asequence of blood vascular and cellular events which
occur in response to a potentially harmful stimulus. Inflammation
attempts to remove the stimulus and prepare the tissue for repair.
can then itself be harmful. See also acute and chronic inflammation.
Initiation In tumour formation, the transformation of a cell by a car-
cinogenic agent. See also carcinogen and carcinogenesis.
Innate immune system The first line of the body's defences; com-
posed of chemical mediators of inflammation, plasma proteins and
cells able to phagocytose, such as neutrophils and macrophages,
and a type of lymphocyte called a natural killer cell. Also known as
the natural or native immune system. Sometimes natural barriers of
the body, which act as physical barriers to invasion, are classified as
part of the innate immune system.
Interstitial fluid The fluid that is in the tissue spaces between cells
This fluid leaks from capillaries and is drained back to the blood
circulation by the lymphatic vessels. See also lymph.
fluid.
Glossary
201
Intussusception  When a tubular structure (such as a segment of the
intestine) 'telescopes' into an adjacent segment.
Invasion In cancer pathology, this is a trait of malignant tumour cells
which enables them to infiltrate surrounding tissues and blood and
ymph vessels, and thereby to spread (by metastasis).
Irreversible cell damage/change A type of cellular change which
occurs in response to a harmful (or physiological) stimulus from
which the cell cannot recover if the damaging stimulus is removed.
The cell seems to pass a 'point of no return' and cannot revert
to normal and usually does not survive. See also cloudy swelling.
cellular degeneration, reversible cell damage and necrosis.
Ischaemia Decreased blood flow to an area of tissue and therefore
decreased supply of vital nutrients, especially oxygen, to that area.
See also infarction and perfusion.
-itisUsed at the end of a word to denote inflammation in the partic-
ular tissue, such as dermatitis or enteritis (inflammation in the skin
and intestine, respectively). See pleurisy for an exception.
JaundiceThe yellow discolouration of tissues caused by bile pigment
in the circulation. Also called icterus.
Keratinisation The production of the hard horny protein, keratin, by
cells. For instance, may happen in areas of wear and tear, such as on
the elbows of elderly dogs. (Note that normal skin has a relatively
thin protective layer of keratin on its surface.)
Labile cells Cells that are continually dividing to replace lost cells,
such as cells in the skin or the surface of the intestine. See also
stable, permanent and stem cells.
of the innate immune system and is able to destroy certain abnormal
cells such as tumour cells and cells infected with viruses. Also known
as natural killer cells.
Latent periodPeriod between an animal being exposed to the cause
of a disease and the first clinical signs of the disease. Also called
latency or incubation period.
Lesion  An abnormality associated with injury or cell damage.
Leucocytes General term for white blood cells.
Leukaemia Proliferation of neoplastic white blood cells. The abnor-
mal cells circulate in the blood.
Liquefactive necrosis Aform of cell death (necrosis) in which the cell
contents become liquefied by powerful enzymes, which degrade
the dead cells and extracellular components. This type of necrosis is
characteristic of insults to the brain such as infarction or bacterial in-
fection. See also necrosis, caseation necrosis, coagulative necrosis,
fat necrosis, gangrene, wet gangrene, dry gangrene, moist gan-
grene and gas gangrene.
LymphClear fluid that flows within the lymphatic circulation.
202
Glossary
LymphadenopathyA non-specific term used to cenote enlargement
of the lymph nodes due to any cause.
Lymphocytes A small round white cell with a single nucleus. Lym-
phocytes are important in the immune response but they can also
direct inflammatory responses. See also memory cells.
powerful protein-digesting enzymes. See also phagocytosis.
Macrophages  Large phagocytic cells with single round nuclei. They
especially associated with chronic inflammation. See also granulo-
matous inflammation, granuloma and phagocytosis.
Malignant tumour A tumour whose cells are able to invade adjacent
tissue and to spread, usually by lymph or blood vessels, to form
secondary tumours (metastases) elsewhere in the body. See also
benign tumour, metastasis and neoplasia.
Marginatian In acute inflammation, when white cells gather on the
endothelial walls of small blood vessels in readliness for leaving the
vessel and travelling to the site of inflammation. See also acute
inflammation.
Mast cells Large round cells that are widespread in the body, tending
to be positioned beside capillary beds. Mast cells produce potent
chemicals which they store in granules in their cytoplasm. When
they are stimulated (by a number of stimuli), the mast cells degran-
ulate, releasing the chemicals. The contents of mast cell granules
include histamine, which has several biological actions such as dila-
tion, and increasing the leakiness, of blood vessels. See also acute
inflammation and type I hypersensitivity.
Melaena Partially digested blood, from, for instance, a stomach ul-
cer, which gives the faeces a dark colour.
been exposed to an antigen. These cells have the ability to mount a
not previously encountered the antigen. See also antigen and
lymphocytes.
Metaplasia Conversion of one mature tissue type into another. For
 instance alteration of an epithelium, like the lining of the urinary
bladder, to a tougher more protective (squamous) one in response
to chronic inflammation, in this case due to the presence of bladder
stones, for example.
vade adjacent tissue and spread, usually by lymph or blood vessels,
to form secondary tumours (metastases) elsewhere in the body. See
also benign and malignant tumour and neoplasia
Glossary
203
Metastatic calcification Abnormal deposition of hard calcium in tis-
sues when the evel of calcium in the blood is abnormally high. See
also calcification and dystrophic calcification.
more specifically, bacteriologists study bacteria, virologists study
such as urine, pus, mucus or tissue may be sent to microbiology lab-
oratories where potentially harmful infectious organisms associated
with them can be grown in culture and identified. In the case of bac-
terial infection, the sensitivity of the organisms (i.e. which antibiotics
may kill or limit its growth) can be assessed which gives the vet an
indication of what treatment to use.
Mitosis A form of cellular division in which the cell separates the
chromosomes in its nucleus into two identical sets at the start of
the process. Thus, the aim of mitosis in normal cells is that the two
'daughter' cells produced at the end are genetically identical to
each other and to their parent cell.
Moist gangrene Atype of tissue death due to loss of blood supply.
In this form of gangrene, pus-producing bacteria proliferate in the
rotten and is very foul smelling (putrefactive). See also gangrene,
dry gangrene, gas gangrene and wet gangrene.
Monocytes  Immature macrophages circulating in the blood.
Multifactorial disease A disease whose development and course is
affected or modified by many factors and/or infectious agents. See
also aetiology and simple disease.
Mutation An alteration in the DNA of a cell, which may be the first
stage in development of a tumour.
Native immune system The first line of the body's defences. Also
known as the innate or natural immune system. Sometimes natural
barriers of the body (physical barriers to invasion) are classified as
part of the innate immune system. See innate immune system.
Natural immune system The first line of the body's defences. Also
known as the innate or native immune system. See innate immune
system.
Natural killer cells A type of lymphocyte that acts as part of the
innate immune system and is able to destroy certain abnormal cells
such as tumour cells and cells infected with viruses. Also known as
large granular lymphocytes.
Necropsy  Post-mortem dissections of animals involving examination
of organs (called autopsies in human pathology). Usually, a report
logical results as well. See histopathology.
204
Glossary
Necrosis
Death of cells in a living organism, without specific refer-
ence to its cause. See also gangrene, dry gangrene, gas gangrene,
moist gangrene, wet gangrene, caseation, coagulative, liquefaction
necrosis and fat necrosis. Finally, compare with autolysis.
Neoplasia  The process by uncontrolled cell division leading to de-
velopment of a neoplasm or tumour. Distinct from hyperplasia. See
also neoplasm or tumour.
NeoplasmAmass formed from abnormal and uncoordinated division
of cells. The terms tumour or growth are also used. See also tumour.
Neurogenic shock  Dramatic decrease in blood pressure which may
occur in animals when severely frightened or traumatised, or in ex-
treme pain. Nerves stimulate dilation of blood vessels and so there
au punoduo Aeu yoous ouaonan poola jo bulood paeu s!
effects of psychological shock (fright or trauma). See also shock,
anaphylactic shock, cardiogenic shock, hypovolaemic shock, toxic
shock and septic shock.
Neutropenia A decrease in the number of circulating neutrophils in
the blood. See also leucopenia and pancytopenia.
Neutrophil  A small phagocytic cell with a complex segmented nu-
cleus (similar to an eosinophil; not a single round nucleus as in a
macrophage). Neutrophils usually die in the process of phagocy-
tosis. They are particularly associated with acute inflammation and
with bacterial infections. See also neutropenia.
Neutrophilia High numbers of neutrophils in the blood. Usually in-
body. See also neutrophil and neutropenia.
Nodular Composed of small lumps or bumps (nodules) which are
formed by proliferation or grouping of similar cells. Dense clusters
of inflammatory cells may gather in the skin in certain skin conditions
and the resulting swellings (nodules) can be palpated, or even seen
in short-coated animals.
Noxious Harmful or injurious. A noxious stimulus is something that
causes cell or tissue damage.
OedemaAbnormal accumulation of fluid in the tissues due to eak-
age from blood vessels or decreased drainage of lymph, or when
there is general circulatory failure. Leakage from vessels occurs in
acute inflammation or when vessel walls are damaged. Decreased
drainage of lymph occurs when there is a tumour or fibrous scar
blocking the lymph vessels. General circulatory failure occurs with
severe heart disease.
-oma Used at the end of a word, usually to denote a benign tumour,
e.g. lipoma and hepatoma, as opposed to liposarcoma and hepa
tocarcinoma the malignant counterparts of these tumours. (Though
Glossary
205
note also melanoma and lymphoma are usually malignancies, and
granuloma, which is a chronic inflammatory condition and not a
neoplasm at all.)
cinogenesis and neoplasia which are usually used interchangeably
with oncogenesis.
-opathy Used at the end of a word, usually to denote a pathological
involved. Examples include lymphadenopathy, hepatopathy or der-
matopathy being a pathological condition of the lymph glands, liver
and skin, respectively, without reference to type of abnormality.
Organisation The process of tissue repair by formation of spongy
immature fibrous tissue with many capillaries (see granulation tissue)
anss snoigy snouabelloo lauy Aa paoeldau Auanbasgns s! yorm
(see fibrosis or scar tissue). See also tissue repair.
Osmotic pressure The pressure that develops due to differences in
the concentration of solutes in water across a slightly leaky mem-
brane (such as a capillary wall). In the body, solutes which exert os-
motic pressure include salts and, especially important in the blood
plasma proteins.
Oxygen free radicals Highly reactive forms of oxygen, which are
products of metabolism, but which are normally removed by cellu-
lar processes. Under certain circumstances (exposure to ultraviolet
light, or other radiation, for instance) the free radicals can build up
in cells and be highly damaging to cellular structures.
Pancytopenia  A decrease in all cell types in the blood (white and red
blood cells and platelets).
Paraneoplastic effect/syndrome A disorder that develops in an an-
imal with a neoplasm, which is indirectly linked to the tumour. An
example of a paraneoplastic effect is the development of high blood
calcium (hypercalcaemia) in an animal with lymphoma. This is due to
the tumour secreting a substance that stimulates bone destruction,
and the calcium level in the blood increases as a result of this bone
destruction.
Parasite An organism that lives on or in the body of the host, and
which depends on the host for nutrition or protection or the correct
environment for a certain stage (or stages) of its life cycle.
Passive immunity The process by which young animals gain immunity
from their mothers, by transfer of maternal antibodies during their
time in the womb or by the consumption of colostrum soon after
birth. Passive immunity is especially important for protection of the
young from pathogens in their environment before they are able to
mount an effective immune response themselves.
206
Glossary
Pathogen A non-specific term used to denote an infectious agent
(e.g. bacteria, virus or fungus) capable of causing disease. See also
aetiology, aetiological agent, pathogenic factor and pathogenesis.
Pathogenesis Used when discussing how factors lead to disease, or
the mechanisms of disease development. It describes the chain of
events from the initial stimulus to the manifestation of the disease
or the lesion produced.
Pathogenic factor A factor that is capable of producing disease. An
infectious agent capable of causing disease may often be referred to
in non-specific terms as a pathogen. See also aetiology, aetiological
agent and pathogenesis
lutely characteristic or typical for a particular disease or condition.
Pathology The study of the effects of disease on the body includes
Pathology encompasses a number of sub-divisions such as general
pathology, systematic (or special) pathology and clinical (or chemi-
cal) pathology.
Pedunculated On a stalk. Usually used to describe the appearance
of tumours growing on stalks from body surfaces such as the skin.
Perfusion The adequate circulation of blood to an area or tissue. See
also ischaemia and infarction.
Permanent cells Cells with limited, or no, capacity to divide and
proliferate; they tend to last a long time and are not replaced when
they die, e.g. brain cells. See also stable cells and labile cells.
Petechiae Small discrete haemorrhages in the skin or within (or
on) organs; smaller than ecchymoses. See also haemorrhage and
haematoma.
Phagocytosis  The process by which certain cells engulf and digest a
microbe, a foreign particle or another cell. See also neutrophils and
macrophages.
aill ehio ue uoj anssjo aldues eus e Alensn si sil  sdoig yauid
the gut, upper respiratory tract or urogenital tract. A pinch biopsy is
collected by taking a little chunk of the tissue using special forceps
with an endoscope.
Plasma The clear fluid portion of blood that remains after red and
white cells and platelets are removed (usually the cells are made
to sink to the bottom of the blood sample by spinning the blood
very fast in a centrifuge). Plasma consists of water, salts, enzymes,
 antibodies and other proteins. It differs from serum in that plasma
contains fibrinogen and other soluble clotting elements. See plasma
proteins.
Plasma cells A form of lymphocyte capable of producing antibodies
as a part ofthe humoral immune response. Plasma cells are not really
Glossary
207
anything to do with plasma, other than the fact that antibodies they
produce are included amongst the plasma proteins.
including blood clotting, fighting diseases (antibodies), maintaining
Aeu al suoung iea hueodui auo pue ainssid souso
also be referred to as serum proteins. See also plasma.
Platelets Also called thrombocytes. Small cells circulating in the
clotting. platelets clump together (aggregate) and adhere to the
inner (endothelial) surface of a damaged vessel wall. Aggrega-
tion and adhesion of platelets along with the protein fibrin form
the platelet plug part of a blood clot. Platelets do not have a
nucleus.
Pleurisy Inflammation of the pleura, the covering of the lungs. Tends
to be used rather than the term pleuritis. See also -itis.
pneumonitis is the general term for inflammation of the lungs, whilst
See also -itis.
Primary immunodeficiency  Disorder in which the immune system
fails to function adequately due to an inherited defect in the im-
mune system. See also immunodeficiency and secondary immunod-
eficiency.
Prognosis  The predicted progress of a disease and likelihood of re-
covery or length of survival of a patient after a particular diagnosis
has been made. Knowing the prognosis for a disease helps deter-
mine which treatments to use. In veterinary medicine, knowing that
on whether to try certain treatments, or to use supportive therapies,
or even to put the animal to sleep to limit suffering.
Pruritus Itchiness. Pruritus may predispose to self-trauma in many of
our veterinary species. Note the spelling, with -us at the end and
not -is; it is not an -itis word.
ueho ue uo anss jo aldues lleus e Aensn si s!ui Asdog yound
like the skin. Punch biopsies are collected by cutting a little core of
the tissue using a special circular tool, a bit like a miniature cookie
cutter.
Purulent Contains pus. Related word is purulence. See also pyo-and
suppuration or suppurative.
Pus Creamy material containing live and dead neutrophils, necrotic
tissue and bacteria. Note the spelling; one -s at the end and not two!
Avoid use of the term pus-sy to describe something which contains
ose aas 'aaeinddns lo iuanund io pall-snd Aes oi leneg 'snd
abscess and suppuration.
208
Glossary
eauord ui se 'uoeinddns o uornpoid snd aouap oi pasn -ord 
which is pus in the uterus. A pyogenic infection is one caused by
types of bacteria that characteristically cause suppurative lesions.
See also purulent.
Quiescent May refer to cells that are 'resting', i.e. not dividing. Alsc
used to mean cells that normally have a low level of division or
proliferation (see stable cells)
Reactive Used to denote something that happens in response to
a stimulus. For instance, if an animal has an infected skin wound
there may be a reactive increase in number (hyperplasia) of cells
of the immune system (lymphocytes) in lymph nodes near to the
wound. As a result of the lymphocyte hyperplasia the lymph nodes
would increase in size - and this would also be considered a reactive
change (reactive lymphadenopathy).
Recanalisation One of the better consequences of thrombus for-
mation. Small channels form through the thrombus and become
lined by endothelial cells and therefore re-establish some blood
flow through the previously blocked (thrombosed) vessel.
Regeneration When a lesion heals with cells that are identical to the
damaged and lost cells (i.e. as opposed to repair by organisation).
Repair When damaged tissue heals, either by replacement of the
lost cells by identical ones (regeneration) or by organisation (and
fibrosis)
Retroviruses
Viruses that, amongst other effects on the host, are
associated with causing certain neoplasms, e.g. feline leukaemia
virus (FeLV) is a retrovirus implicated in formation of some tumours
in cats.
Reversible cell damage/change  Atype of cellular change which oc-
ym uoy sninus (iesboloisyd ho) inguey e o asuodsau ui shn
the cell can recover if the damaging stimulus is removed. See also
cloudy swelling, cellular degeneration, irreversible cell damage and
necrosis.
jo sllao uoj bueuiuo (useldoau) anounn sueubeu  ewoes
connective tissue, or blood or lymphoid cells rather than cells of
body surfaces. See also carcinoma.
Scar/scar tissue Irreversible production of firm collagenous fibrous
tissue in an area of marked or chronic damage. The collagen fibres
in mature scars often contracts so that older scars appear puckered.
See also fibrosis and organisation.
Sclerosis Irreversible formation of large amounts of firm (collagen-
containing or collagenous) fibrous tissue in an organ, usually due to
chronic disease or damage. The affected organ feels tough and may
be irregular if the fibrous tissue has contracted (like a scar) or if it
is interspersed by little islands (nodules) of normal cells. Sclerosis of
Glossary
209
the liver in long-standing liver disease (or in chronic alcoholism) can
cause the liver to become firm, shrunken and irregular (nodular).
fails to function adequately because another disease, disorder or
system. See also immunocompromise, immunodeficiency and pri-
mary immunodeficiency.
Self-trauma When animals damage themselves. Many skin condi-
tions in our veterinary patients are altered or exacerbated by the
animals scratching, licking or biting the area due to itchiness (pru-
ritus) or due to altered or even loss of sensation. Self-trauma may
also be a manifestation of a behavioural or stress-related problem,
e.g. feather pecking in birds.
Septic Infected. See also septic shock, pus, abscess and suppuration.
Septicaemia  A life-threatening  condition  which  occurs  when
causing systemic illness. See also bacteraemia.
Septic shock Life-threatening decrease in blood pressure due to di-
lation of capillaries in the abdominal organs. A type of toxic shock,
the toxins involved being bacterial toxins. See also shock, anaphy-
lactic shock, cardiogenic shock, hypovolaemic shock, neurogenic
shock and toxic shock.
uoy shnsau yolym uotpuos leoibolouied e s! elanbas y (alejanbas
another disease or injury. The plural is sequelae. An example of a
 sequela would be ischaemic necrosis in an organ as a result of block-
age of a blood vessel by a thromboembolus. The sequelae of severe
acute inflammation would include ulceration, fibrosis (scarring) and
abscessation.
Serology  Use of blood serum to carry out immunological tests for di-
infectious organisms, in which specific antibodies produced by the
immune system to the infectious agent can be detected, indicating
that the animal has been exposed to the organism in question.
Serum The clear fluid left behind when blood clots. It differs from
plasma in that it does not contain fibrinogen nor many other soluble
clotting factors (since these help to form the clot and therefore are
removed from the liquid part of the blood when the clot forms)
threatening. In shock there is a mismatch between the total blood
volume and the volume ('size') of the circulatory system (the blood
volume is 'too small' to fill the circulatory system). Causes of shock
include a decrease in the blood volume (haemorrhage or dehydra
tion) or an effective decrease in the size of the circulatory system
(by vasodilation) or acute failure of the heart to pump blood around
210
Glossary
the circulatory system. See also anaphylactic shock, hypovolaemic
 shock, neurogenic shock, toxic shock and septic shock.
Simple disease A dlisease which has an uncomplicated development
that could be summarised as aetiological agent + tissue = disease.
See also aetiology and multifactorial disease.
to organ systems. Also called systematic pathology.
Specific immune system/response Specific defence mechanisms in
the body against infectious agents and other foreign molecules. See
adaptive immune system/response.
Stable cells Cells with long life spans which do not normally divide
and proliferate but which can do so if required to (i.e. to replace lost
sia). Examples of stable cells are epithelial cells in liver, kidney and
lung. See also permanent and labile cells.
o ls aineu e oui dolaap ueo ieya lis auneuui, uy jas was
any of a number of different cell types. So when a stem cell divides,
each new cell has the potential to either remain as a stem cell or to
become another type of cell with a more specialised function such
as a muscle cell, a liver cell, or a brain cell.
Suppuration Formation of pus as a sequela of acute inflammation.
See also abscess and pus.
-oy snd g pasaioeieao buyiauos aqunsep on pasn aaenddns
mation or suppuration, e.g. a suppurative skin wound. See also
purulence.
characteristic of a particular disease or disorder.
cial reference to a specific tissue or a body system. For instance,
dermatitis (inflammation in the skin) or osteosarcoma (neoplasia of
bone) are examples of systematic or special pathological changes.
Also known as special pathology. See also general pathology for
contrast.
Systemic Concerning all body systems, organs or tissues.
Thrombaembolism When a clot of blood travels from the site at
which it formed in the blood circulation of a living animal and lodges,
causing ischaemia. See also thrombosis, thrombus and thromboem-
bolus.
Thrombaembolus A clot of blood that breaks away from a primary
clot (thrombus) which has formed in the circulation of a living animal.
The second clot, the thromboembolus, travels in the blood until it
lodges somewhere else and can then produce ischaemia. See also
thrombosis, thrombus and thromboembolus
Glossary
211
ThrombosisBlockage of blood vessels by a blood clot that forms
within the circulatory system of a living animal. See also thrombus,
thromboembolus and thromboembolism.
Thrombus A mass of coagulated blood, which forms within the cir-
culatory system of a living animal. A thrombus may form at sites of
endothelial damage or turbulent blood flow or when blood is espe-
cially thick (Virchow's triad). The plural is thrombi. See also coagu-
lation, disseminated intravascular coagulation and haemorrhage.
Tissue regeneration When a lesion heals with cells that are iden-
tical to the damaged and lost cells (i.e. as opposed to repair by
organisation).
o suauaneldau Aq aura 'sleay anssll pabeup uaum jiedau anssi
fibrosis).
Torsion When an organ or tissue twists around itself (such as a seg-
ment of intestine) or at its site of attachment or suspension (for
instance, when the part of the peritoneum that suspends the spleen
in the abdomen twists). Torsion can cause obstruction of a hollow
organ, like the gut or uterus, but also compresses blood vessels
running to the affected area and therefore can cause ischaemia and
oedema of the tissue. See also volvulus.
Toxaemia Presence of a toxin in the blood circulation.
Toxicology In some cases, toxicologists may be asked to analyse
samples for toxins or poisons, for instance, you or the pathologist
might send stomach contents, urine or even fresh tissue from a
necropsy of an animal suspected of having been poisoned.
Toxic shack Life-threatening decrease in blood pressure due to dila-
tion of capillaries in the abdominal organs. The toxins involved be-
ing bacterial toxins. See also shock, anaphylactic shock, cardiogenic
shock, hypovolaemic shock, neurogenic shock and septic shock
Toxin A naturally produced substance which has a harmful effect;
poisons in certain plants, or harmful substances produced by some
bacteria.
Transformation The process by which normal cells change to be-
come neoplastic. See also carcinogenesis, oncogenesis or neopla-
sia.
Transudate The accumulation in tissues of fluid which has low pro-
tein content and which has leaked from the circulation due to low
osmotic pressure in the blood or high blood pressure. See also
exudate and oedema
Tumour Strictly speaking, any swelling in the body, though is usually
used to denote a neoplasm.
212
Glossary
cells and released into the blood (or other fluids). Tumour markers
can be detected in samples of blood/fluid and can then aid diagnosis
and prognosis.
Type I hypersensitivity reaction Also known as immediate hyper-
cause specific antibodies (immunoglobulins) to stimulate mast cells,
making them release the contents of their intracytoplasmic granules
(degranulate). The effects of this are dilation of nearby blood vessels
and seepage of oedema and serum proteins (exudate) and, later, in-
flux of inflammatory cells. In the respiratory tract the smooth muscle
lining the airways also constricts (as in asthma) and in the skin, nerve
endings are stimulated so there is extreme itchiness (pruritus). The
effects can sometimes be more widespread leading to generalised
anaphylaxis. See also allergy. mast cells and histamine.
sensitivity. An immune response in which elements of the immune
system are directed to kill cells of the body because the target cells
have been inappropriately coated with antibodies.
Type llf hypersensitivity reaction Damage caused to tissue by the
accumulation of clumps of antigen--antibody-complement protein
reactions (called antibody complexes) when there has been exces
sive immune stimulation. Presence of the complexes initiates inflam
mation which leads to the tissue damage. See also complement.
Type IV hypersensitivity reaction
Also known as delayed-type hy-
 actions of T lymphocytes, which can take several hours (24-72 hours)
to develop after the sensitised animal is exposed to the stimulus to
which it is sensitive
Ulcer An area of damage to a covering layer in the body (or epithelial
surface) which involves the entire depth of the epithelium, exposing
the underlying tissue. For instance, an ulcer of the epidermis of the
skin exposes the underlying dermis and leaves it vulnerable to sec-
ondary infection. An ulcer of the epithelium of the stomach exposes
the underlying tissues of the wall and can result in haemorrhage
from blood vessels in the wall, or even penetration through the wall
into the abdominal cavity. Compare erosion.
Urticaria A red, swollen and very itchy (pruritic) reaction in the skin
siy se umouy Aueindod 'asuodsau Aalnisuasiadsy I ad e on an
or a rash.
Vasculitis Inflammation of the wall of blood vessels.
Vasoconstriction Narrowing of a blood vessel due to contraction (or
spasm) of the smooth muscle within its wall.
Glossary
213
Vasodilation  Increase in the diameter of a blood vessel due to relax
ation of the smooth muscle within its wall.
Vector Refers to an animal, often an insect, which can carry an infec-
tious agent and pass it between hosts. Examples of vectors would
be the midge, which carries the bluetongue virus between suscep-
tible ruminants, the mosquito which transmits heartworm to dogs
and cats in some countries, and the flea, which is implicated in the
transfer of a number of different infectious agents.
Vesicle A fluid-filled lesion (commonly known as a blister) which oc
curs on the skin or on mucous membranes, such as in the mouth.
Vesicles are delicate and the top surface usually gets damaged or
ruptures to leave behind an erosion or ulcer, depending how deep
the vesicle extended within the epithelial surface.
Viraemia Presence of virus within the blood circulatory system.
thrombus in the circulatory system of a living animal. These are:
· Changes in vessel wall(s) such as physical damage (trauma),
chemical injury, infection and bacterial endotoxic damage.
·Changes in flow (slow or turbulent flow).
· Changes in blood constituents (increased tendency to clot, also
called hypercoagulability). This happens in renal failure, diabetes
mellitus, heart failure, severe trauma or burns, and widespread
cancer, for instance.
Any one of these three factors can result in thrombus formation,
though in many conditions more than one factor will be present at
the same time. See also thrombus.
Virulence The ability of an infectious organism to cause disease after
infecting a host.
Volvulus  Usually referring to a twist in the mesenteric suspension of
the intestine which effectively forms a pinched-off or isolated loop of
bowel. Volvulus is a cause of blockage (obstruction) of the intestine,
also it can cause ischaemia of the gut wall due to blood vessels
becoming compressed in the twist and can be a life-threatening
condition. See also torsion.
Wet gangrene  A type of tissue death due to loss of blood supply. In
this form of gangrene, bacteria are present and there is inflammation
of adjacent non-necrotic tissue. The area swells and oozes fluid. See
also gangrene, dry gangrene, moist gangrene and gas gangrene.
Wheal A focal area of cedema in the skin, such as occurs after light
trauma or insect bite.
Answers to Test
Yourself Questions
216
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
This section suggests suitable answers to the test yourself questions
for each chapter. Sub-headings tell you which chapter each block of
six questions refer to. These are suggested answers, and you may have
written answers in a slightly different way, which may still be perfectly
make sure you understand the topics of the question in the first place.
Also, you may feel that I have included more information in some of
my answers than the question seemed to require. This was deliberate!
I hope that this section will serve as a useful revision aid for you, and
that by putting my answers in context (which often means adding a
bit of extra information) will help you to learn and understand the
subjects more fully. Please note that in a written exam situation it is
very important to make sure you 'answer the question'; giving masses
of extra information to your examiner, which he or she has not actually
asked you for, costs valuable time and may not gain you any extra
to be awarded for each question and tailor your answer accordingly.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 1
1. Definition of 'pathology'
From the Greek words, pathos - used in terms of suffering from
a disease, and -logy used to infer 'study of' or 'science of'.
The branch of medical science that involves study of the causes
of diseases, how they develop and their effects on the body. It
encompasses any deviation from a healthy or normal condition in
any living creature.
The effects of diseases are studied at the level of the whole
body, the organs or tissues, the cells and within cells (sub-cellular
[evel).
2. The work of (a) anatomic pathologists and (b) clinical pathologists:
a. Anatomic pathologists study disease by looking at tissue and
organs, such as in post-mortem examinations (necropsies), or
by looking at tissues from live animals (called biopsies).
Anatomic pathologists look at the tissues/organs by eye
(gross examination) to identify abnormalities and under the mi-
croscope (histology slides).
b. Clinical pathologists assess dlisease by studying body fluids (e.g.
blood, urine, joint fluid, abdominal tap fluid, cerebrospinal fluid
etc.).
They may look atthe chemical composition (clinical biochem-
istry) or use a microscope to study a stained smear of the sam-
ple on a glass microscope slide to examine the types of cells
in the fluid or in a fine-needle aspirate (FNA) (called cytology).
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
217
Clinical pathologists might also see bacteria or other infectious
organisms in a cytology preparation.
Haematology is specifically the study of cell types in blood.
3. a. Organisms studied by microbiologists.
Microbiologists stucy infectious organisms such as bacteria,
viruses, fungi and yeasts.
b. Still thinking about microbiology, what is meant by 'sensitivity'
and why is it helpful and/or important?
Clinical samples may be sent to microbiology laboratories
where they can grow (culture) and identify bacteria. Sensitivity
means identifying which antibiotics the organism is likely to be
killed by. This is important because it gives the vet an indication
of what antibiotic treatment to use, and (for a bonus mark!) may
help to reduce the development of resistance to antibiotics by
bacteria.
4. Some sensible actions to take if involved in a case which involves
the police or other authorities:
i. Seek advice (pathology laboratory, veterinary forensic pathol-
ogist, University Pathology Department) unless experienced in
dealing with such cases.
 il. Keep careful notes, photographs, logged telephone calls or case
records securely and safely stored.
il1. Any biological material, including bodies of deceased animals,
should be logged and labelled, and stored securely until re-
moval by an authorised person.
5. Why are veterinary pathologists important for the health of human
beings?
Veterinary pathologists involved in maintaining herd- or flock-
health on farms and nationally help to prevent widespread infec-
tious diseases and to protect food quality and safety.
Veterinary pathologists may also be the first to recognise
'zoonotic' diseases - these are diseases able to pass from animals
to man.
6. 'General' pathology and 'systemic' or 'special' pathology:
i. General pathology is the study of processes in disease and is not
 necessarily limited to discussion of a particular tissue or organ.
ii. Systematic (special) pathology is the study of the effects of dis-
ease with reference to a specific tissue or body system.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 2
1.  Definition of 'aetiology' (or etiology).
Aetiology means the study or science of the causes of disease.
218
Answers toTest Yourself Questions
2. What does it mean if a factor is described as 'pathogenic'?
The factor is capable of producing disease.
Also, an infectious agent (bacteria, virus and fungus) capable of
causing disease may often be referred to in non-specific terms as
a pathogen.
3. Classification of aetiological agents, including examples.
Lse a different classification system
Internal factors
●Genetic-defects or mutations
● lmmune system - defects or abnormal responses
● Aging - natural processes or premature aging
External factors
● Physical - trauma, pressure etc.
● Chemical - toxins, poisons, heavy metals etc.
● Infectious - parasites, bacteria, viruses, fungi etc
● Environmental - nutrition (deficiencies or excesses)
- temperature
- hygiene
-radiation, e.g. ultraviolet light
4. Short notes on the differences between (i) acquired diseases, (ii)
congenital diseases and (ji) idiopathic diseases:
i. Acquired diseases develop at some stage during life as a result
of the effects of one or more aetiological agent acting during
life.
if. Congenital diseases are diseases which the animal is born with.
Congenital diseases occur because the aetiological agent acts
on the embryo or foetus, on the uterus or placenta, or on the
mother, either before or during pregnancy. Clinical signs of a
Aeu ing 'yuig ie uaas Aessaoau nou are aseasip lenuaauo
show up later in life.
l. Idiopathic diseases are diseases of which we do not (yet) know
the cause, though they may have recognisable development
processes, lesions or clinical signs.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
219
5. Suggest up to six factors which may modify the course of a multi-
factorial disease in an animal, including those factors which make
Housing in groups, over-crowding, age (very old or very young),
cinated or no immunity, no colostrum (first milk) from the mother.
inappropriate immune response (too little or too much), nutri-
tional state (hunger, malnutrition or obesity), genes, thirst, poor
hygiene in the environment, poor air-quality, fatigue, inappropri-
aou jo yuin oi alge ag eu no ..  'ssas, pugsny ood o e
factors.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 3
1. Short notes to define 'lesion':
i. Structural and functional changes.
il. Pathological changes in tissues or organs. Both gross changes -
abnormalities we can see, and changes in the cells which make
up that tissue or organ (cellular changes).
i. These changes occur in response to injurious or harmful stimuli
(aetiological agents),
iv. Reversible cell injuries (the harmful stimulus causes alteration or
loss of cell function and structural changes but the cell recovers
if the stimulus is removed) or irreversible cell injuries (cell injury
causes alteration or loss of cell function and structural changes,
but the cell cannot recover if stimulus stops or is removed, i.e.
cell dies).
v. Examples of reversible injuries are cell adaptations such as some
changes in cell growth, and cellular degeneration. Examples of
irreversible cell injuries are neoplastic transformation and necro-
sis.
2.Examples of cellular degeneration and associated clinical signs or
conditions.
Note that you may have found other examples of clinical signs
or conditions associated with cellular degeneration during your
reading of clinical experience; these are just some examples:
i. Accumulation of cellular components in aging cells.
ii. Hydropic change (fluid swelling), e.g. liver cell damage by toxins.
ill. Fatty change - fat accumulating in cells because of increased
or long-term fat breakdlown in the body, e.g. malnutrition, de-
creased metabolism of cells damaged by toxins, or reduced
oxygen supply due to heart dysfunction.
Note also idiopathic fatty change in the livers of older cats.
220
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
lae) uuapisouaey spnoui - snouabopua b'a 'siuaubid 'a!
haemorrhage), bile (in jaundice), melanin (in chronic dermati-
tis); exogenous - includes carbon (from pollution), tattoo inks.
V. Proteins, e.g. viral inclusions.
3. Coagulative necrosis:
i. The most common form of necrosis, occurring in many of the
'solid' organs.
il. Organs retain their structure but are pale and firm as though
cooked.
ili. The dead cells often retain their outline when viewed under the
 microscope but are pale-staining and ghost-like. Inflammatory
cells move in to start to remove the dead cells (demolition phase
of healing).
iv. Proteins are released into the blood by the damaged and dy-
 ing cells and are useful diagnostically, e.g. creatine kinase (CK)
(indicate muscle damage) and alanine aminotransferase (AAT)
(indicate liver damage).
4. Sequelae of necrosis (apart from tissue regeneration):
0 scar formation
0 ulceration
0 sequestration
5. a. Calcification is the deposition of calcium salts in normal or ab-
normal tissues and affected tissue is hard or gritty to touch and
the calcium deposition can be felt as a scraping sensation when
the tissue is incised with a knife.
b.
 Dystrophic calcification is the deposition of calcium in areas of
tissue damage (especially necrosis).
c. Metastatic calcification is the deposition of calcium associated
vitamin D toxicity, excess parathyroid hormone (or parathyroid-
 like hormone produced by certain tumours) and renal failure.
6. Gout occurs as articular, renal and visceral forms in birds, snakes
and mink.
Uric acid crystals and urates deposit in tissues when there is
excess production or insufficient excretion of the metabolic waste-
product uric acid. When uric acid levels in blood exceed a certain
level, the uric acid crystallises from solution at various sites causing
 inflammation and pain.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 4
1. Definition of inflammation with brief notes:
· A complex progression of blood vascular and tissue changes
that develop in response to tissue injury.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
221
sive mechanisms of the blood (phagocytic cells, leucocytes and
antibodlies) out into the tissues.
· Prepares the way for repair of the tissue.
· Often works with, and is directed by, cells of the immune system.
· Under certain circumstances uncontrolled or inappropriate in-
flammation is harmful or destructive (even life-threatening if se-
vere).
-Hias Aq paiequanexa uato si uoeuuegu! 'saoads Aeuaea ul 
trauma - scratching, licking, biting etc. - which can cause further
tissue damage or introduce infection.
· Described as acute or chronic which infers not just the duration
· Usually indicated by the ending '-itis' after the Greek word for
the organ, e.g. hepatitis, nephritis, enteritis, colitis, dermatitis
etc.
2. a. The three phases of acute inflammation:
· vascular
· exudative
· cellular
b. The five (local) clinical (or cardinal) signs of acute inflammation
and the phase(s) likely to contribute:
· redness - vascular phase
· heat in the tissue - vascular
· pain - vascular and exudative phases, plus chemical messen-
 gers from inflammatory cells - i.e. cellular phase.
● swelling - exudative (vascular)
-aud omi aas os 'bulams pue uied oi anp - uoouny jo ssol ·
ous bullet points
3. a. Why is the tissue fluid which results in the exudative phase of
acute inflammation high in protein?
Capillaries are made leaky by the opening up of gaps be-
tween the endothelial cells, large molecules in the blood (like
proteins) and cells are able to escape into the tissues. Normally.
junctions in the capillary walls.
b. Typical components of an inflammatory exudate.
Water, electrolytes (salts), plasma proteins (albumin, globulin
and fibrinogen), erythrocytes (red blood cells) and platelets.
4. Describe how an abscess may form.
Suppurative exudate can become walled off by fibrous tissue
and remain as a pocket of inflammation which refuses to clear up
or occasionally bursts out.
5. Brief discussion of the difference between acute and chronic in-
flammation:
222
Answers toTestYourself Questions
· Acute inflammation is the initial reaction of a tissue to injury
which aims to rapidly contain, dilute and remove the harmful
stimulus, and to prepare the tissues for repair. Acute inflam-
mation involves the blood vascular system (vascular phase) and
exudation of protein-rich fluid from the blood into the surround-
ing camaged tissue. Inflammatory cells, especially neutrophils,
are recruited to the area and leave the blood circulation in the
exuded fluid, and then to help to destroy the cause of the inflam-
mation (phagocytosis). Mast cells are important as they contain
 granules which they release and which dilate blood vessels and 
make them leaky - allowing exudation and leucocyte recruit-
ment.
· Chronic inflammation is the persistence of the inflammatory re-
dn sdeuuad) sep tl-0l Alateuixoidde ueya labuol loy asuods 
to year or more). Chronic inflammation is not exudative and in-
volves the formation of fibrous tissue and different cells, such
as macrophages, and cells of the immune system (lymphocytes
and plasma cells). Mast cells and neutrophils play lesser roles
in chronic inflammation, if they are involved at all. Chronic in-
flammation may also be accompanied by reactive hyperplasia
or hypertrophy in surrounding tissues, as the mediators which
encourage fibrous tissue formation can stimulate division and
growth of other cells too.
6.a.
 The two main types of chronic inflammation and the appear-
ance of each of these types of chronic inflammatory response.
Granulomatous and non-granulomatous (or diffuse) chronic
inflammation, according to the pattern of inflammatory cells
seen under the microscope.
Non-granulomatous chronic inflammation - tissue may
thicken and may look and feel 'leathery'
Granulomas may be single and large (forming a well-defined
lump), or smaller and multiple - so tissue feels thickened and
nodular ('knobbly' or containing lots of small lumps).
main cell types involved (see Box 4.14).
-unu pue sllydonau Aigissod pue sabeydouoeu lenua
ucleated giant cells, with other mainly mononuclear inflamma-
tory cells (lymphocytes and plasma cells) clustered around the
macrophages and a rim of fibrous tissue around the outside.
c. Example of a disease characterised by granulomatous inflam-
mation
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), tuberculosis, some para-
would allow feline eosinophilic granuloma!
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
223
You could have foreign body response to splinters or sutures
too - things that resist destruction by the acute inflammatory
response.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 5
1. List the first lines of defences of animals against invading infectious
organisms:
· Innate (natural or native) immunity - chemical mediators of in-
flammation, several plasma proteins, phagocytic cells, such as
neutrophils, macrophages and natural killer cells.
· Adaptive (acquired or specific) immunity.
· Natural barriers of the body including the epithelial covering
surfaces of structures such as the skin, respiratory or urinary
tracts or gut.
· In some areas, epithelial surfaces are further protected by mucus,
fats (e.g. sebum) or protein, or by the cilia.
2.'Antigen' is formed from the words antibody generating
3.True/false questions
i. True.
ii. False: Whilst they are especially associated with organs of
the lymphoid system (lymph nodes and lymph, bone mar-
row, spleen and the thymus in young animals), lymphocytes
are found throughout the body tissues and in the blood.
ll. True: Lymphocytic cells belong to the B cell line or the T cell
line; each line has different specific roles in the immune re-
sponse.
iv. False: A major role of plasma cells is to manufacture large
quantities of antibodies, and not to phagocytose bacteria.
v. True.
vi. False: Antibodies are formed from paired chains of proteins in
a 'Y' shape but it is the variable region at the tips of the "Y"
shape which gives the antibody its specificity to a particular
antigen, and not the bonds joining the chains.
vii. True: Specific antibody-producing B cells have 'memory', and
will respond more quickly and to a greater extent in vaccinated
animals.
vill. False: Antibodies themselves cannot kill invading microorgan-
isms; they simply 'label' the organism so that another part
of the immune system can destroy it, e.g. the complement
cascade.
ix. True: The antigen is 'presented' to the T helper cells by
other cells called antigen-presenting cells - these include
224
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
macrophages, B cells and dendritic cells. If the T cell has the
correct antigen receptor and 'recognises' the antigen as some-
thing foreign or harmful, it will respond by helping to initiate
an immune response.
x. False: T cell responses also have 'memory', in fact specific T
cells called memory T cells persist after an immune response
to a particular antigen has subsided.
4. Some important conditions associated with immunodeficiency:
· Primary immunodeficiencies, i.e. uncommon congenital disor-
ders in animals, suspected when there are persistent or repeated
bouts of infectious disease in young animals.
·Physiological states such as age, breed, gender, pregnancy, sea-
son of the year, stress and trauma, diet and hormones.
· Chronic diseases, especially certain viruses, which appear to in-
terfere with function of cells, such as lymphocytes or neutrophils.
·Passive immunity is the mechanism whereby young animals gain
immunity from their mothers by transfer of the mother's anti-
bodies during their time in the womb, or by the consumption of
colostrum within 12-48 hours after birth.
· Failure of passive immunity - animals that do not consume suffi-
cient colostrum, perhaps because they are too weak to stand, or
their mothers are too poorly to allow suckling, may be vulnerable
to infections early in life
5. a. Definition of 'hypersensitivity"
sive reactions mediated by the immune system to stimuli which
would not be harmful in a normal animal.
b. Notes on one type:
·Type I hypersensitivity (immediate hypersensitivity), the ba-
sis of acute allergic responses. Antigens (or allergens) to
which the animal is sensitised cause specific antibodies (im-
munoglobulins) to stimulate mast cells to degranulate. This
leads to dilation of nearby blood vessels and seepage of ex-
udate and, later, influx of inflammatory cells to the area. Ad-
ditional effects, depending on where the mast cell response
occurs, include smooth muscle constriction in the respira-
tory tract and stimulation of nerve endings in the skin (caus-
ing pruritus). The mast cell degranulation can sometimes be
more widespread leading to generalised anaphylaxis, which
causes shock. Eosinophils may be present - attracted to de-
granulating mast cells. They may release the contents of their
own granules causing tissue damage and secondary inflam
mation.
· Type Il hypersensitivity (cytotoxic hypersensitivity). Elements
of the immune system directed to kill cells of the body
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
225
because the target cells have been inappropriately labelled
with antibodies as 'foreign' or 'harmful'.
·Type lf hypersensitivity. Tissue damage caused by the ac-
cumulation of antigen, antibody and complement proteins
which form antibody or immune complexes - clumps of anti-
gen, antibody and complement proteins which would nor-
mally be destroyed by phagocytosis cells. When there has
been excessive immune stimulation the complexes can build
-al Aeu saxalduoo aunuui aul 'uoepeibap isisal pue dn
main at their site of formation or circulate in the blood
stream and lodge elsewhere. They stimulate local inflamma-
tion which then causes damage to surroundling tissues, such
as widespread vasculitis.
 inflammatory response involving cells of the immune system,
which can take several hours to develop after the sensitised
animal is exposed to the stimulus to which it is sensitive.
Involves initially T helper cells, also macrophages and B lym-
phocytes, and later more macrophages, lymphocytes and
neutrophils (via chemical messengers secreted by the initially
stimulated immune cells).
6. a. Definition of autoimmunity.
When the immune system mounts an immune response
against the body's own tissues because normal proteins on
the surface of cells are regarded as 'foreign'. Mechanisms, in-
clude failure of regulatory control of the immune system or new
exposure of self-antigens that are normally in protected sites.
Certain viruses may trigger autoimmunity by mimicking normal
proteins, for instance!
b. Treatment of autoimmune diseases and side effects.
Treatment broadly involves controlling the inappropriate im-
mune response by dampening down the immune system. This
can have the unwanted effect of making the animal vulnerable
to other diseases, especially infections.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 6
1. Extent to which the new tissue is the same as the tissue that was
previously there depends on:
· the regenerative capacity of the cells in tissue
· the extent of the defect to be filled
surrounding living cells multiply and fill in the gap left by the deac
226
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
cells. To do this, the cells that make up the tissue must be able to
divide by the process of mitosis.
connective tissue (scar tissue), which occurs when cells are not able
to regenerate themselves, or where there has been a large area
of necrosis so living regenerative cells are further away from the
centre of the area of damage or cannot fill the gap quickly enough.
3. The three phases of organisation:
· Demolition or inflammatory phase. This is the phase in which
'cleaning-up' of the wound or damaged tissue occurs. This is
performed mainly by neutrophils and macrophages, though lym-
phocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils may be involved under
some circumstances.
· Granulation phase. In the granulation phase immature connec-
tive tissue (granulation tissue) is formed to start to fill in the
wound.
· Maturation phase. In the maturation phase, the immature fibrous
tissue formed in the phase of granulation matures by a process
called fibrosis. The result of this phase is formation of a fibrous
scar.
4.Healing where there has been epithelial damage only:
· When the epidermis is damaged there will be exudation of serum
which will dry and form a scab of dried serum protein (fibrin),
donau se yns 'sllan atym buip pue peap yim Aaisso
the epidermis from around the edge of the wound. The epithelial
 cells proliferate readily by mitosis since they are labile cells.
· The proliferating cells move across to form a continuous layer
beneath scab. Eventually, the scab falls away revealing the newly
regenerated and healed epidermis beneath. In this case there is
minimal granulation tissue and fibrosis (scar formation).
5. Healing of a clean incised (surgical) wound versus larger, irregular,
contaminated wound.
The surface epidermis will regenerate as described in your an-
swer to question 4. Underneath the epidermal layer a soft protein
plug of fibrin will form. This will be replaced (in 5-7 days) by a
aneiu Ag pue (uoesiuehio Ag) anss uoeinueb jo ueas lapuals
fibrosis (scar) in 2-3 weeks. This process is known as healing by
primary union or first intention.
Whereas if there is a tissue defect the edges of the wound are
widely separated and the cefect contains exudate and necrotic
debris (and possibly bacteria). In this case the defect fills in by
granulation, maturing to fibrosis, but more of it must form to fill the
gap. As before the fibrous tissue matures, possibly taking several
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
227
healing and may be less cosmetic. This process is known as healing
by secondary union or second intention.
6. What can impair, prevent or alter healing?
Choose from the following:
· Severe prolonged damage with loss of the connective tissue
framework or too many of the cells have been damaged to be
able to regenerate the tissue (or they are permanent cells). These
conditions tend to favour repair by fibrosis.
· Contamination - exudate, dirt, bacteria and necrotic tissue.
· Inadequate blood supply
· Systemic hormonal disorders - such as diabetes mellitus, hyper-
adrenocorticism which alter metabolism and activity of cells.
· Inadequate nutrition - protein and energy are particularly im-
portant for healing.
· Movement, such as inadequate immobilisation of a healing limb,
causes wound edges to move against each other.
· Self-trauma - licking, biting, scratching of wounded areas, allow-
ing bacterial contamination or irritation, and prolonging inflam-
mation and slowing healing.
· Old age - blood circulation may be poorer and state of nutrition
more variable.
· Immunodeficiency diseases - immune cells direct the inflamma-
tory phase of organisation. Impaired immune function also allows
bacterial contaminants to survive.
· Chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation have detrimental effects
on actively dividing cells, including the cell important in healing.
· Denervation alters movement of limbs, decreases blood supply
and may encourage self-trauma due to reduced pain sensation
in the affected area.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 7
1. Answer to true/false questions.
i. True: Capillaries are very small but very numerous, so their
total volume means that all together they can contain a
huge amount of blood - this is significant in development of
shock.
ii. False: Capillaries form fine networks, or capillary beds which
are situated between the arterial flow (blood from the heart)
and the venous flow (blood returning to the heart). The amount
and speed of blood flow in these areas is affected by various
influences.
228
AnswerstoTestYourselfQuestions
i1. False: Capillary walls are not much more than a single-layered
crazy paving of endothelial cells.
iv. False: Capillaries are normally slightly leaky, so there is a small
net outflow of fluid from capillaries into surrounding tissues
(known as interstitial fluid). Interstitial fluid bathes the cells and
tissues but is 'outside' of the blood vessels.
v. False: Lymph vessels are thinner walled and are at lower pres-
sure than most blood vessels
vi. True: Like blood vessels lymph vessels are of various sizes, start-
ing small (like capillaries) and getting gradually larger as they
drain back towards the blood circulatory system somewhere
near the right side of the heart.
vi. True: Lymph vessels have lymph nodes at intervals, which act
as filters and are important in the function of the immune
system.
vill. False: Oedema is the accumulation of interstitial fluid in the
tissues which causes a soft swelling of the tissue, which can
be 'pitted'. There are different types of oedema but in all of
these types of oedema, the lymphatic circulation is not able to
remove adequately the excess fluid from the tissues.
ix.True.
x. False: Though there are some situations in which oedema may
be damaging and even life-threatening (oedema of the lungs,
brain or larynx, for instance). In most instances, oedema is an
indication of something else going wrong in the body (e.g.
heart disease) but it may not necessarily be harmful in itself.
2. a. Contrast the terms ischaemia and infarction.
Ischaemia is decreased blood flow or perfusion and therefore
decreased supply of vital nutrients, especially oxygen, to an
area. Infarction means death (necrosis) of the area of tissue
as a result of ischaemia (i.e. an infarct is an area of ischaemic
necrosis in a tissue or organ).
b. Six common causes of ischaemia.
You should have included thrombosis, vasoconstriction, em-
bolism, compression, vasculitis and vessel damage. See Box 7.6
for diagrams (you could have included simple diagrams in your
answer).
c. Global infarction.
Global infarction occurs when there is blockage of a large
for supplying blood to a wider area of tissue; in this case, there
will be more severe or extensive infarction of the tissue than a
focal infarction due to blockage of a smaller artery.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
229
d.
 Simple flow diagram to illustrate the stages of development of
an infarct. Something like this would do, though you may have
yourownversion.
Regeneration
of damaged
Healing
An area of pale
tissue
tissue (palflor),
with inflammatory
border
Organisation of
Scarring and
the area of
contraction of scar
pallor
3.a. The part played by fibrinogen in blood coagulation.
 Blood clotting depends to a large extent on conversion
of fibrinogen in the blood to an insoluble form called fibrin.
Strands of fibrin are part of the structure of a blood clot.
b. Why vitamin K is important to blood coagulation?
Formation of fibrin is brought about by a cascade of enzymes
called clotting factors, produced by the liver. The inactive form
of each factor is activated in sequence during the clotting cas-
cade, each newly formed active factor then activates the next
factor in the chain. Several steps in the cascade reguire vitamin
K to help the reactions to occur.
4.
a.
Factors which determine the clinical significance of haemor-
rhage in animals:
· Where the bleeding occurs - e.g. haemorrhage into a low-
pressure area, such as the abdomen will continue almost
unchecked if not treated. Any clots formed may be simply
'pushed’ off by the force of blood behind them. Whereas
bleeding into an area which has higher local pressure, such
as into a muscle in the case of a large bruise, is more likely
to slow and possibly stop on its own.
the surrounding area but also which type of vessel is bleed-
ing. Arteries are at higher pressure than veins and will bleed
faster than a vein and the blood loss will be more serious and
less likely to clot without treatment. The speed of blood loss
determines how sick the animal becomes since an animal can
adapt to slow oss of blood, whereas rapid loss of blood will
cause sudden serious decrease in blood pressure (shock)
· How much blood is lost - again, small slow losses can be
compensated for by increased production of blood cells in
the marrow and increased intake or retention of fluid. Large
230
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
losses exhaust the marrow and be more difficult for the ani-
mal to recover from.
b. A dog in your care develops black tarry faeces - what would
you suspect was happening in the digestive tract, and where?
How about if there was fresh blood in the faeces?
Black and tarry faeces suggest bleeding into the digestive
tract (or melaena). Furthermore, since it is black and tarry, you
would suspectthatthe blood has been partially digested, which
suggests the bleeding is in the 'higher' digestive tract (e.g. a
bleeding gastric ulcer). Fresh blood would suggest lower tract
 bleeding - e.g. a haemorrhage in the large intestine (inflamma-
tion or tumour, for instance).
5. a. What is meant by embolus?
A mass of material able to odge in a vessel and block it.
b.
 Brief description of thromboembolus in the case of heart valve
diseases - an embolus derived from a thrombus, i.e. a bit of a
larger intravascular blood clot that breaks away and travels in
the circulation until it lodges in smaller vessels and blocks it.
In some heart diseases, thrombi form on the heart valves (Vir-
chow's triad applies). Portions of these thrombi may break away
and travel in the circulation. The resulting effects depend on
which side of the heart the valvular thrombi originally formed.
· Valvular thrombosis on the left side of the heart can lead to
emboli in the systemic circulation.
· Valvular thrombosis on the right side of the heart can lead to
emboli in the pulmonary circulation (lungs).
C.
Three examples of other forms of embolus.
Choose from:
· Embolus of tumour cells.
· Parasitic embolus, e.g. heartworm (dirofilaria) larvae in the
lungs of affected dogs.
· Fat emboli, after the fracture of a long bone fractures
· Infective/inflammatory emboli composed of  infectious
agents, necrotic tissue, leucocytes, fibrin circulating from a
site of infection or inflammation; infection may be spread
around the body this way (haematogenous spread).
● Foreign material may follow exposure of the circulatory sys-
eu ueiaoy uaum 'ahuns io uosanui 'nui Ag ua
could potentially enter the bloodstream and travel to another
site, could establish secondary granulomatous inflammation
(foreign body response).
· Fibrocartilage emboli - when the cartilage and fibrous cush-
ion of degenerate vertebral discs enter the blood stream and
lodge somewhere.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
231
· Gas emboli - gas or air bubbles can lodge in the bloodstream
and act as solid obstructions.
6. a. Define 'shock'.
A state of circulatory collapse, resulting in a severe state
of reduced blood perfusion of tissue blood or a mismatch be-
 tween the total blood volume, and the volume of the circulatory
system.
b. Brief outline of the main types of shock according to the way
they develop.
Hypovolaemic shock - shock due to decreased blood vol-
ume, e.g. severe haemorrhage or dehydration, sudden in-
creased permeability ('leakiness') of capillaries, as in fatal in-
fections.
Vasodilation - marked increase in 'size' of the circulatory
system in comparison to the amount of blood it holds, and
therefore lack of effective circulation. Usually occurs in the very
numerous capillaries, which have a huge potential volume, so
when dilated the blood effectively'pools' in the capillary beds.
Cardiogenic shock - acute cardiac failure causes severe
marked decrease in cardiac output because the heart is sud-
denly unable to pump the blood effectively.
c. Five typical clinical signs of shock.
Choose from:
·Cold extremities
· Core temperature high or low depending on cause of shock
· Shivering in early stages
· Heart rate may be increased or may be irregular and/or de-
creased
· Weak peripheral pulse
· Collapsed circulation (it may be hard to find a vein for intra-
venous injections or infusions)
· Respiratory rate may be increased initially but may decrease
if animal loses consciousness
· Pale or discoloured (brick red or even blue) mucous mem-
branes
· Slow capillary refill times
● Lethargy, lack of interest in surroundings, depression (and
these effects may be accompanied or exacerbated by signs
of pain, if shock is due to blood loss after trauma)
· Loss of consciousness
· Muscle weakness
· Decreased urine production
· Decreased blood pressure
232
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
You may have seen or read of other clinical signs of shock
in addition to this list.
Test yourself questions on Chapter 8
1. a. List of four common reversible cell adaptations/changes involv.
ing altered cell growth or size:
i. atrophy
il. hypertrophy
Iil. hyperplasia
iv. metaplasia
b. A simple diagram to illustrate the changes in part 1.a.
You could have got quite creative here or done something
really simple like this diagram:
Atrophy
Hyperplasia
Hypertrophy
Normal cell
c. Define neoplasia and indicate what fundamental way neoplasia
differs from the changes listed in part 1.a.
abueyo algisiaaal-uou e s! eiseldoau zeyn s! suiod Kay aul
and neoplastic cells cannot revert to normal once the stimulus
pue eiseldiady 'Kydouuady 'ydone ay!lun s! s!ll paaouau s!
metaplasia, which are reversible.
You could also have noted that normal cells communicate
with each other and usually grow in a coordinated manner,
stopping division when no more cells are required. Neoplastic
cells, on the other hand, lack this coordination with normal tis-
auueu pallouooun ue ui buipip pue buimoib uo ob pue ans
You could possibly have noted also that the neoplastic cell
loses its normal differentiation.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
233
2.a.
Stages of changes to the genetic make-up of a cellfundamental
to tumour development.
· Initiation - a trigger factor or event that causes irreversible
changes to the genes of a cell (transforming the cell)
· Promotion - a factor or event that causes the transformed
cell to proliferate (forming a tumour)
 Progression - spontaneous occurrence of new changes to
the genes of the offspring of the transformed cell, which
may increase the malignant behaviour of the tumour
 List of groups of carcinogenic factors for domestic animals.
You may have decided to be more specific and name par-
ticular chemicals, or various types of radiation (like ultraviolet
or radioactive radiation), but I have opted to be more general.
However, you answer it, in an exam situation you need to be
sure to include only substances which are scientifically proven
to be associated with cancer development.
· chemicals
· viruses
· radiation
·hormones
·bacteria
· parasites
3. Simple table outlining common differences between benign and
malignant tumours.
Something along the lines of the following table would do:
Benign tumours
Malignant tumours
Tumour more likely to be
Tumour more likely to be rapidly
slow-growing
growing (aggressive)
Tumour discrete - can be relatively
Tumour may have an irregular outline:
easily identified and 'shelled-out' at
hard to identify edges of tumour at
surgery
surgery
No indication of invasion of adjacent
Invasion of adjacent tissues and/or
tissue seen histologically
vessels
Tumour may have a capsule around it
Tumour usually not encapsulated
Do not metastasise
Metastasis possible
Necrosis unlikely
Necrosis within tumour
Cells and nuclei are relatively uniform
Cells and nuclei are non-uniform
Cells look like cells of origin
Tissue of origin may be not
recognisable from the appearance of
the tumour cells
Uniform mitotic figures
Abnormal or irregular mitotic figures
Arrangement of tumour cells may
Tumour usually does not retain
look similar to the normal tissue of
recognisable tissue architecture
origin
234
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
4. a. Metastasis is:
The spread of malignant tumour from its site of origin (pri-
mary tumour) to form a secondary tumour, also called a metas-
tasis.
b.Three means by which tumours metastasise.
Choose from:
 i. haematogenous spread
il. lymphatic spread
ili. serosal spread
 iv. intra-organ spread
5. Short notes to discuss two of the ways a tumour exerts harmful
effects.
Choose two of the following:
Injuuey aq Keu sinoun usjuaq io jueuben 'sseu bujmoua
merely because of their position. So, a tumour in the lungs may
cause coughing or breathlessness, a mass in the stomach may
stimulate vomiting whilst one in the urinary bladder may lead
to inability to urinate. Brain tumours press on the brain as they
grow within the rigid skull.
Bleeding and infection - ulcerated, infected or highly vascular tu-
cause of blood, bacteria or inflammatory cells in sputum, vomit
or urine.
 Pain -tumours may cause pain due to pressure on, or invasion into,
other organs, e.g. invasion of bone by tumour is very painful.
Weight loss - loss of body condition or wasting in animals with
tumours may be secondary to nausea, vomiting or inappetence.
Marked wasting (cachexia) is also a primary effect of tumours
and is due to the tumour-secreting chemical messengers which
increase muscle breakdown (catabolism).
Effects of chemical messengers (other than catabolism) - non-
specific signs such as fever (pyrexia of unknown origin, or PUO)
or anaemia or leukopenia (decreased white blood cell count)
due to inhibition of bone marrow.
increased neutrophils, may occur in tumours which become in-
fected. In some cases the animal's response to infection will be
inhibited by effects of the tumour on the bone marrow. Blood
clotting may also be adversely affected due to bone marrow
inhibition, but also to any effects the tumour may have on liver
function and decrease in clotting factors.
Answers to Test Yourself Questions
235
Inappropriate hormone secretion - many tumour cells retain the
functions of their normal cell of origin, but fail to respond to
normal control mechanisms. Thus, in the case of tumours de-
rived from a hormone-secreting cell of an endocrine organ, for
instance, the cells may secrete inappropriately high levels of hor-
mone. Thus, tumours of the pituitary gland of elderly dogs can
lead to a form of hyperadrenocorticism or Cushing's disease by
secondary over-stimulation of the adrenal cortex.
plastic cells that are not 'functionally active' (i.e. do not produce
hormone). The growing mass of inactive tumour cells presses
on adjacent normal cells in the endocrine organ causing them
to atrophy or die (necrosis). Eventually, the function of the tis-
sue is reduced because the inactive tumour cells take up more
fect). This is at least partially responsible for the complex effects
of Cushing's disease in older horses, thought to be partially due
to pressure of a growing tumour on the overlying area of brain
(the hypothalamus) which regulates body temperature, appetite
and hair shedding.
 6. Discussion of cytology in the diagnosis of neoplasms in veterinary
general practice.
Cytology is a useful early step in diagnosis, being relatively
cheap, easy and non-invasive. Good quality smears are useful for
assessing some cell features and may allow rapid diagnosis or at
least might indicate that further procedures (such as biopsy) are
warranted.
Cytology may also be used in practice to investigate whether
the tumour has spread to another site, e.g. a local lymph node.
smears on glass microscope slides of samples - fine-needle aspi-
rates (FNAs), which may be gently sucked with a syringe (aspirated)
from the middle of the tumour. FNAs may also be made from body
or tissue fluids such as bronchiolar lavage (BAL - washed from the
trachea), urine or peritoneal tap fluids. Finally, a tumour or part of a
tumour may be dabbed on to the glass slide to produce impression
smears oftissues.
All these preparations may be air-dried, stained and examined
under the microscope in the practice laboratory, though the dried
slides may also be sent to a clinical pathologist.
Further Reading
238
Further Reading
There are many books which might be helpful to take you further into
veterinary pathology than this one. Below are a few suggestions, but
do not limit yourself to these if you find you have caught the pathology
j6nq
An Introduction to General Pathology, by Tim D. Spector and John S.
Axford, Churchill Livingstone; 4th edition (1999).
Cell, Tissue and Disease: The Basis of Pathology, by Neville Woolf,
W.B. Saunders; 3rd edition (2000).
Publishing Ltd; 2nd edition (2008).
Introduction to  Veterinary  Pathology.
by Norman F. Cheville.
Wiley-Blackwell; 2nd edition (1999).
Thomson's Special Veterinary Pathology. by M. Donald McGavin,
William W. Carlton, James F. Zachary, Mosby; 3rd revised edition
(2000).
Veterinary Immunology: An Introduction, by lan R. Tizard, Saunders;
8th edition (2008).
Index
abscess, abscessation, 13, 32. 55. 56. 159. 190
antigen binding site, of
accumulation, of substances in cells, 26, 28, 38
antibody/immunoglobin,see alsovariable
acid-base levels of blood, 149
region of antibody (immunoglobulin), 72,
acidosis,149
74
acquired coagulopathy. 138
antigen presenting cells, 78, 79, 81, 83, 85, 86
acquired diseases, 15, 190
antimicrobial factors, of neutrophils, 51 
acquired immune system/response, adaptive
aorta, 116-18, 144
immune system/response, specific immune
apoptosis,191
system/response, 67, 69-84, 190, 210
appetite loss, inappetence, 53, 56, 176, 180
acute inflammation, 42, 43-55, 61, 63, 79, 80,
arterial bleeds, 116
103.190
arteriolar circulation/supply. 116, 117. 148
cardlinal or clinical, signs, 43, 44, 47, 49
arteriole,45,47,116,117,119,129,139
adaptations of cells, 154
artery, arteries, 116,117,119
adenocarcinoma,159,160,190
ascites, 126. 191
adhesion, 55, 56
asthma, 91
acrenal cortex, 177
atrium, atria, ofheart, 116, 120
adrenocorticotropic hormone, ACTH, 15, 109,
atrophy, 38,62,93.154-6,180,191
177
autoimmune cisease,autoimmunity.69,93,94,
aetiologic agent(s), or factors, 12-18, 190
191
aetiology, 12,13
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, AIHA, 93
age or aging. 15, 19, 36-8, 87. 109, 145-56
autolysis, autolyse, 30, 182, 191
alanine aminotransferase, AAT, 31
automated blood analyser, 4
albumin, 50
autonomic nervous system, 149
allantoin,36.37
allergen, 55, 56. 90
B cells/lymphocytes, 70, 72-6, 81, 83, 85, 86,
allergy, allergic reactions, 62, 90, 91, 93, 190
92
amyloid, 36, 37,38
bacteraemia, 191
anaemia, anaemic, 6, 8, 28, 51, 53, 63, 69. 88.
bacterial capsule, 60
93,155,156,176,180,190
bacterium/bacteria, 6, 12-15, 30, 32-5, 44, 50,
anaesthetics,115
51,60,66-9,79,81,104, 109,166,176,
anal sac (adeno)carcinoma, 178, 179
192
anaphylactic shock, anaphylaxis, 91, 190. 191
bandage, or dressing.4, 30, 125, 154
anasarca, 126, 191
basophil, 192
anatomic pathology. 4, 191
bee sting.127
angiogenesis,137,167-9
bends',the.145
annular growth,172
benign tumour, 157, 167, 169-71, 183, 192
anorexia, 53
Bernese mountain dog. 166
antibiotics, 6
bile pigments, 28, 38
antibody, antibodies, see aiso
bile, 28, 36, 37
immunoglobulins, 7.59, 63, 69, 72-8, 81,
biliary tract, 186
83-6, 88-92.114, 183, 191
bilirubin, 38
antibody complexes, 91. 92.191
biochemistry of blood, 87
antibody/immunoglobin classes, 75. 78
biopsy.4,5, 181, 182,192
anticoagulant (rodent poison), 8
birds, 36, 37
antifreeze, 36, 37
bitch, bitches, 87, 156
antigen, antigenicity. 7, 69, 72-83, 85, 86. 90,
Black Death, the. 14
92. 183, 191
bladder, urinary, 36, 37, 38, 155
240
Index
bleeding, see aiso blood in specific situations,
chemical factors, in pathogenesis, 15, 44, 137.
e.g.urine,blood in,32,180
166
blister, blistering, see also vesicle, 93
chemical messengers/mediators, 46, 50, 51, 53,
blood, 87,88, 114, 115, 146, 147,179,181
57,59,61,67,68, 81,82,92,114, 162.
coagulation, clotting, see also coagulation
167.176.180
cascade, haemostasis, 75, 132-7. 177. 180.
chemotherapy. 110
192
cholera outbreak, London, 14
groups,192
cholestasis, 193
transfusions, 69
chronic inflammation, 42, 43, 55, 58-61, 63,
body temperature.177
155,157.166.193
bone, 9, 137,139, 145. 159,174, 176, 178-80
cilia, 67,68
bone marrow, 51, 53, 57, 59, 62, 63, 72, 77, 81,
circulation,blood,57,109,116
88,100,139,145,155,156,159.176, 177.
classification of diseases, 15
180
 clinical pathology. chemical pathology, clinical
brain, 31, 33, 50, 53, 109, 126, 148, 149, 166,
pathologist, 4, 181, 193
176
clone of cells, 75. 157, 158
breathlessness, 93
clotting factors, 132, 133, 139, 177, 180
breed-specific tumours, 166
cloudy swelling. 193
broncho-alveolar lavage, BAL, 181
coagulation cascade, see also blood clotting.
bubonic plague, 14 
haemostasis, blood coagulation, 132-5,
burn(s), 44, 138
193
coagulative necrosis, 30, 33, 38, 193
cachexia, 176.180
coagulopathy,coagulopathie5,138,139,194
calcification,35,37,192
acquired,138
cystrophic, 35, 37, 38, 195
congenital,138
metastatic, 35,37,38, 203
colitis, 43
calcium oxalate, 36, 38
collagen, 103, 194
calcium, 35, 37, 132, 133, 178,179
collagenous, 194
calculi, or liths, 35-8, 155, 157
colliquative necrosis, 31, 33
calor, 44
colostrum, 88,89
cancer,44,157
complement cascade, complement proteins,
canine distemper virus, CDV, 87
75.77.79. 80, 85-7.92
canine genome project, the,166
compression, as cause of ischaemia, 30,128
canine infectious respiratory disease, CIRD, 19,
congenital disease/condition,16. 17, 194
20
conjunctivitis,93
capillary (bed), capillaries, 45-9, 115-21, 146-8,
constipation, 172
167.168
consumption coagulopathy,137,138,194
capsule, fibrous, of tumour, 169, 170
cornified layer, of skin, 67
carbon, 28, 38
corticosteroids, 19, 88
carbon dioxide,116
coughing, with tumours, 176
carcinogen,160,166,192
creatine kinase,CK,31
carcinogenesis16019
crepitus, crepitant feel to tissues, 32, 35. 194
carcinoma, 145, 160, 192
cross-linking of fibrin, 133, 135
cardiac muscle, 100
cruelty (forensic pathology). 8
cardinal or clinical, signs of acute inflammation,
crystalisation, crystal formation, 36-8
43, 44, 47, 49
culture and sensitivity, 6
 cardinal signs of acute inflammation, 43, 44,
Cushing's disease, 15, 177
159
cutaneous histiocytoma, 166, 178
cardliogenic shock, 148, 192
cytokine, 81, 82, 84, 92, 194
cartilage, 159
cytology.6,181,194
caseation necrosis, 31, 34, 38, 193
cytotoxic,79,194
cat(s), 13, 28, 61, 87, 88, 93, 130, 139, 142, 144,
hypersensitivity,92,194
155. 156
T cells, 79, 81-3. 85
catabolic effects of tumours, 176 
cattle, 139, 166
Dalmation dogs, 36, 37
cell(s), 2, 3, 18
deep vein thrombosis, DVT, 141
cycle,161-5
degeneration, cellular, 26, 38, 195
dlifferentiation, 161, 165, 193
degranulation, 46, 48, 50, 52, 55, 56, 61, 90, 91,
proliferation, 161
195
cell-mediated immunity/immune response, 70,
dehydration, 147
81,82.193
delayed type hypersensitivity. 92, 195
cellular degeneration, 26, 38
demodex, 7. 87
cellular exudate, 50, 54
 demolition phase of organisation healing. 101,
cellular phase of acute inflammation, 44, 50, 56,
102
dendritic cells, 70, 78, 79, 83, 85, 86, 195
cellulitis,32,35
denervation, 110
Celsus, 43
cental plaque, dental disease, 35, 37, 155.
cervical cancer,166,181
156
checkpoints, of cell cycle, 163-5
ce-oxygenated blood. 117
Index
241
de-oxyribonucleic acid, DNA, 14, 162-5
erythrocytes, see also red blood cells, 6
depression,149
ethylene glycol, 36, 37
clermal fibroma, 160
evidence, handling of (forensic pathology), 8
dermatitis, 9, 28, 43. 93,
excision margins, 6, 182, 196
developmental abnormalities.16
excisional biopsy, 5, 181, 196
diabetes mellitus, 15, 28, 109
exogenous,28,196
dliagnosis, 181,
external factors and disease, 15
dliarrhoea,4, 61,126
extracellular changes/accumulations, 32, 35, 36,
dlicoumarol, 138
88
diet, 87
extrinsic pathway of blood clotting. 132, 133
differentiation of cells, 100, 161
exudate, 46,49,50, 90, 104, 109, 159,175.
dlipstick for testing urine, 4
176,196
Dirofilaria,heartworm,145
cell ular, 50
disease
fibrinous, 54
acquired,15
haemorrhagic,54
 classification of, 15
mucopurulent, 54
congenital,16.17
necrohaemorrhagic, 54
heredlitary.17
purulent,54
idiopathic, 16, 199
serous, 54
modifiers of development, 16
suppurative,54,55,210
multifactorial, 16, 19, 20 
exudative phase of acute inflammation, 44, 46,
simple,16,18
56
treatment of, 19
eye. 93
vulnerability to, 16, 19
dlisseminated，195
face, 61
intravascular coagulation, DIC, 137, 138, 146,
factorVllI,139
195
faeces, blood in, 172
cdlivision phase of cell cycle, 156 
farm animals, 8
dog(s), 5,36,37,87,93,104, 108,139,145,
fat necrosis, 31, 34, 38
165,166,178,186
fat(s), 28, 31, 67, 68
dolor, 44 
fatty change, 28, 38, 196
come (tumour growth), 169,170
feline immunodeficiency virus, FIV,87,88
craft animals, 31, 34
feline infectious peritonitis, FIP, 59, 61, 87, 91,
drugs. 88, 93
92.138
clry gangrene,32,35,195
feline leukaemia virus, FeELV, 87, 88, 166,
dystrophic calcification,35,37,38,192
181
fever, 50, 53,54, 56,63, 180
ecchymoses, 140. 195
fibrin, 54-6, 103, 104, 132-7. 145, 196
effusion, 195
fibrinogen, 50. 132-7, 196
eggs, ova,162,165.
fibrinolysis, 134-7
electrolytes (salts), 50, 114, 122
fibrinous exudate, 54
electron microscope, 183
fibroblasts, 60, 102
embolism, 128, 142,144,145
fibrocartilage, 145
embolus,142-5,195
fibrosis, fibrous tissue, see also scar, scarring.
fat, 145
scar tissue, 55, 59, 60, 62, 63, 98, 99,
fibrocartilage, 145
101-4, 109,130, 131,159,169,170,
gas, 145
196
infective/inflammatory.145
fine-needle aspirate, FNA, 5, 6. 181
parasitic,145
first intention healing. 104, 106
tumour,145
fleas, 4. 7
endogenous,28,195
flock health, 8
endothelium, encothelial cells, 46, 48,52,90,
food allergies, 91
100,115.119,127.132-5.138,139,146.
food quality and safety (human health), 8
195
foreign material, and chronic inflammation, 57,
endotoxin,141
58,60,61,145
enteritis, 43, 61
foreign' molecules, and immune responses, 67,
environmental factors and disease, 14, 19, 20
68
enzyme(s), 31, 33, 36, 37,46, 54, 62.75, 79, 80.
forensic pathology. veterinary, 8
132. 133
formalin, 5
eosinophil(s)., 55, 56, 61, 62. 91, 101. 195
formalin-fixed tissue, 5, 181, 182
horse,62
formol saline, 5
eosinophilic granuloma complex, EGC, 61,
functio laesa, 44
92
functional changes.24,25,26,61
epicardium, see also pericardlium,174
 functionally (endocrinologically) active tumours,
epidermis,93.100,102-7
177
epithelium, epithelial cells, 62, 67, 68, 93,100,
fungus/fungi. 6, 12, 14, 15, 44, 66
103-7.159.160
erosion, 32,93, 169,171,172, 180, 182,
Galen, 43
196
gallstones,38
242
Index
gangrene,31,35,38,146,196
hepatitis.43
lry,32,35,38,195
herd health, 8
gas,32,35,38,196
hereditary disease or condition, 17, 198
moist, 32, 35, 38, 203
histamine, 46, 48, 198
wet, 32,35,38,213
histiocytoma, 166, 178
gap phases of cell cycle, 162
histiosarcoma, 166
gas gangrene,32,35,38,195
histology. 5, 181
general pathology.9,197
histopathology. 90, 198
genes, 14,16,17,19.197
hormones, 87, 114, 149,155,156, 165,166,
genetic abnormalitie s/mutations, of tumours,
177.180
15,19.157,158,161,165
horse(s), 31, 34, 87, 93, 110, 139, 177, 185
genetic disease/condition, 14,15,197
eosinophil,62
globulins, 50, 63, 87, 197
human health, human diseases, 8, 36, 37, 46.
glucocorticoids, see also corticosteroids, 88
49,88,90,106,141,166,181,186
glycoprotein,105,119,139
human immunodeficiency virus, HIV, AIDS, 88
goats, 93
human papilloma virus, HPV, 106, 181
golden retriever,4,16
humor, 14, 81
gout, articular, renal and visceral, 36-8
humoral immunity/immune response, 70, 81,
gove rnment agency laboratories, 8
82.198
granulation tissue, granulation phase of
hydropericardium, hydrothorax, 126.198
organisation, 101-4, 197
hydropic change, 28, 38
granuloma(s), 59-61, 63, 166, 197
hydrostatic pressure,122,123,125,198
granulomatous inflammation, 58-63, 92, 145,
hygiene, 14, 15, 19, 69
197
hyperadrenocorticism,HAC,15,10,177
growth factors, 109, 114, 162
hyperaemia,46,47,198
growth hormone, 166
hypercalcaemia,178,179
growth-inhibiting factors, of cell cycle.
hyperccagulability, of blood, 141, 198
163-5
hyperplasia, 38,58,59,154-7,198
growth-promoting factors, of cell cycle,
hypersensitivity,hypersensitivities,44,55,56,
163-5
60-62,78,89-93. 148, 198
gum(s), 35, 37
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 142, 144, 155,
gut(s), (intestine), 38,43,55,59,155, 156
156
hypertrophy.38,59,108,154-6,199
haemangioma/haemangiosarcoma, 167
hypoglycaemia.149
haematocrit, 197
hypothalamus,177
haematogenous spread of tumour, 174, 175
hypovolaemia,146,147.199
haematology, 6.51,53, 63, 87, 177, 180, 197
hypovolaemic shock, 146,147,199
haematoma,140,197
hypoxia,132,149
haematopoietic tissue,100, 159
haematoxylin and eosin, H and E (histology
iatrogenic,199
stains). 5
icterus, 199
haemoconcentration,197
idiopathic, disease, 16, 28, 61, 199
haemolysis,198
iliac arteries, 142, 144 
haemopericardium, haemothorax,
immediate hypersensitivity, 90, 199
haemoperitoneum, 140, 198
immune complexes, 92
haemophillia A, 139
immune response (system), 7, 42, 44, 55-7,
haemorrhage, 32, 54, 134, 137-40, 147. 198
59-61, 63, 66-96,166, 172, 173, 178, 183,
haemorrhagic exudate, 54
661
haemosiderin, 28, 38
immunity,19,20,199
haemostasis, 134, 135, 141
immunocompromise,178,199
primary.134,135
immunodeficiency, immunodeficiencies, 66, 84,
secondary, 134, 135
109.199
hair coat, 177
immunogen.immunogenic,69
harmful effects of acute inflammation, 54
immunoglobulin(s). 72-6, 78, 83, 85, 87, 88,
harmful effects of chronic inflammation, 61
199
harness(es), 31, 34
immunoglobin/antibody classes, 75. 78
hay fever, 46.49.90
immunoglobin A, 75. 78
healing
immunoglobin D,78
by first intention or primary union, 104, 106
immunoglobin E. 78
by secondary intention or secondary union,
immunoglobin G, 75. 78
104,107
immunoglobin M, 78
heart, 30, 45, 108, 115-17, 125, 130, 141, 144,
immunology.7,199
148.155.156
immunostaining, immunohistochemistry. 7, 183,
heart disease, heart failure, 142, 148
200
heartworm, Dirofilaria sp.. 145
immunostains, 7
heavy chains, of antibodies/immunoglobins,
immunosuppre ssion, 69, 87, 200 
72-5.78
impression smear, of tumour, 181
heavy metals, 15
incisional biopsy, 5, 181, 200
Helicobacter sp., 166
incubation period, 200
Index
243
infarction, 55, 56, 127-32, 141, 142, 156, 167.
liver, 3, 24, 25, 28, 31, 36, 37,43, 100, 108.
200
131-3.138,155-7.174,175.177.180
focal, 129,130
long-term (chronic) disease(s), 61
global, 129, 130
lungs, 29,36,45, 100,108,115,130-132,138,
infected wound,4
141,145, 149,174-6
infectious agents or organisms, 6. 7. 12. 14, 16,
lymph,120,201
19, 20, 60, 67, 68, 72, 74, 137, 145
lymph nodes, 72, 75, 77, 81, 85, 120, 159, 174,
infectious canine hepatitis virus, ICH, 138
175.182
inflammation, 9, 13, 32, 33, 42, 67, 68, 78, 85.
lymphadenopathy. 202
86, 90, 92, 134, 137, 145, 171, 200
lymphatic spread of tumour, 174, 175
inflammatory border, of infarct, 130, 131
lymphocytes, 55-60, 63, 67-79, 81-8, 92. 101,
inflammatory 0edema, 122, 124
178, 202
inflammatory phase of healing. 101, 102
lymphoid circulation, lymphatic circulation, 49,
initiation (in tumour formation), 160, 161, 166,
115,116,118,120,122,125,172-6
200
lymphoid organs/tissue, 79, 81, 83, 85, 100, 125
innate immune system, 67, 68, 82, 84, 85, 200
lymphoma, lymphoid tumours, 160, 166, 178,
inse ct, 61
179
intercellular junction, 46, 49, 50, 115, 119
lymphopenia,88
internal factors and disease, 15 
lysis and resolution of thrombus, 143
interstitial fluid, 115,118,120,121,167,200
ysosomes, 202
interstitium, 115, 118, 120, 122, 123, 200
intestine, intestinal tract (gut), 36, 43, 55, 59,
macrophages, 55, 57, 59, 60, 63, 67-71. 78, 81,
67,68,78,100,131,132,138,149,159,
83,85-8, 92,101, 102, 141, 178, 179,202
172
malacia, 31,33
intracytoplasmic granules, 46, 48, 51, 57, 61,
malaise,53
62, 84, 90,134,135
malicious harm (forensic pathology). 8
intra-organ spread of tumour,175176
malignant calcification, 35, 37, 38
intra-venous injections,145
malignant melanoma, 160
intrinsic pathway. of blood clotting. 132, 133
malignant tumour, malignancy, 157, 160, 161,
intussusception, 201
167, 169, 171-6, 178, 183-5, 202
invasion (of tumour growth), 169, 171, 182,
mammary adenocarcinoma/tumour, 145, 160,
183, 185, 201
166, 169, 174
irreversible (non-reversible) cell
mammary gland,78,155,156,160
change/damage/injury, 24, 26, 38, 98, 99,
margination, 50,52
154,157,201
margins, of tumours, 169,171, 182
ischaemia, ischaemic necrosis, 44, 55, 56, 108,
mast cells, 45, 46, 48, 49, 55, 56, 77, 80, 90. 91,
127-32, 137, 141, 142, 148, 156, 167, 201
148, 202
isotypes of immunoglobulins, 72, 78,
masticatory myopathy.93
itchy (skin). 4
 maturation phase of healing/organisation, 101,
-itis, 42, 43
102
mediators, chemical, 46, 50, 51, 53, 57, 59, 61,
jaundice,28,69,201
67,68, 114
megakaryocytes, 134, 139
kennel cough. 19
melaena, 140, 202
keratinisation, 201
melanin,28,36
kidney, 30, 35-8, 43, 130, 149
'memory' in immune response, 67, 75, 77, 81,
(renal) failure, 35-7, 100, 108
85
kittens, 88
memory T cells (memory cells), 81, 82, 202
meningitis, 31, 33
labile cells, 99-101, 103, 104, 155, 156, 162,
mesenchymal cells, 159, 160
201
metabolism, metabolic activity/characte ristics
lactation,20,155,156
of tissues, 28, 36, 109, 149
large granular lymphocytes, 84, 201
metaplasia, 38,62. 154-7, 202
larvae, parasites, 145
metastasis, 167,169, 171-6, 180, 182-4, 202
larynx, 127
metastatic calcification, 35, 37, 203
latent period, 201
'met' (metastasis) check, of tumours, 172
lead walking of dogs. 104
microbiology. 6, 87, 203
leakiness of capillaries, 46, 48-50, 56, 115, 118.
micrometastasis,185
124
microscope(s), 7, 14, 29, 62, 176, 178, 181, 182
“left shift', of neutrophils, 51, 53
microtome, 5
lesion(s), 24, 25, 201
mineral, 35-8
lethargy. 149
mineralisation, 35, 37
leucocytes, 6, 44, 50, 52, 145, 201
mink, 36,37
leucopenia,176,180
mitosis, 100, 103, 104, 156, 162, 183, 203
leukaemia,88,201
mitotic figures, 183, 184
light chains, of antibodies/immunoglobins, 72-5
mitotic index, 183
lip. 61
modifiers (in disease development), 16
liquefactive necrosis, 31, 33, 34, 201
modifiers (in tumour formation), 166, 167
liths, or calculi, 35-8, 155, 157
moist gangrene, 32, 35
244
Index
monocytes, 57, 70, 203
osteosarcoma, 9.160.166
mononuclear cells, 59 
oxen,31,34
mosquito, 6 1
oxygen, 28,116,127,132, 167,168
motile, motility of cells, 50, 51, 62
xygen free radicals, 46, 49, 205
muco-cutaneous junctions, 93
oxygenated blood, 116,117
mucopurulent exudate, 54
mucous membranes, 66, 69, 149
pain, 13,43,44, 51, 53, 56, 62, 149, 176, 180
mucus, 6,36,37.67,68, 85
pallor, 93, 130, 131
multifactorial disease, 16, 19, 20, 203
pancreas, 35, 186
multinucleated giant cells, 57-60 
pancreatitis, 31, 34, 37
muscle(s), 31, 62, 93, 100, 131, 132, 149, 154,
pancytopenia,205
156,165.176,180
papillary, of tumour growth, 169, 170
muscular dystrophy. 16
papillomavirus, 106,181
mutation (genetic), 15, 19, 157, 158, 161, 164,
paraffin wax block (in histology). 5
203
paraneoplastic effect/syndrome, 177-80, 205
myalgia, 53
parasite(s), 6, 7, 15, 44, 60-62, 78, 166, 205
mycologist(s), 6
parasitology. 6
parathyroid hormone, 35, 37, 178,179
naive animal, 19
 parathyroid hormone related peptide, PHrP
 native immune system, natural immune system,
(parathyroid-like hormone), 35, 37, 178,
67,68. 82.84-6, 203
179
natural killer cells, 67, 68, 82, 84-6, 203
passive immunity, 88, 89, 205
nausea, 53, 176, 180
patch test, for allergy. 93
necrohaemorrhagic exudate, 54
pathogen(s), 12, 84, 114, 206
necropsy. 4, 8, 203
pathogenesis, 12, 13. 206
necrosis, 26, 30-36,44, 98, 99, 103, 127, 138,
pathogenic factor, 206
148, 167, 170, 171, 177,180, 183, 204
pathognomonic, 206
neoplasia, 9, 88, 157-86, 204
pathologists, vil, 3-10, 174, 181, 182
neoplasm(s). 157-86, 204
pathology. ii, vii, 2, 206
neoplastic cells, 115
pedunculated, of tumour growth, 169, 170
nephritis, 61
pemphigus complex of skin diseases, 93
nerves,100,108,148,155,156
perfusion,206
nervous tissue/system, 108, 109
pericarditis, suppurative, 55, 56
neurogenic shock,148,204
pericardium,55,56
neurones, 100
peritoneal tap, 181
neutropenia, 204
peritoneum, 31, 54-6, 174
neutrophil(s), 13, 50-57, 60, 62, 63, 67, 68, 87.
peritonitis,55
88,92,101,102,104,141,177,180,204
peritonitis, suppurative, 55, 56
neutrophilia, 204
permanent cells, 99, 100, 103, 109, 163, 206
nodular, 204
permeability,f capillaries, see afso vascular
liver regeneration,108,157
permeability, 146, 147
non-granulomatous inflammation, 58,59,63
petechiae,140,206
non-inflammatory cedema, 124, 125
pH, of blood, 149
 non-reversible cell damage, see aiso
phagocytosis, phagocytic cell, phagocytic
irreversible cell damage, 98, 99
cells, 51,57, 58, 62, 67, 68, 70,77,79, 80,
'non-self' and immune response, 69
92, 141, 206
nose, 61
pharmaceutical laboratories, 8
noxious, 204
pharmacological substances, 115
nutrition (role in pathogenesis), 14, 155, 156
phase of DNA production of cell cycle, 162
nutrition (role in wound healing), 109 
physical barriers, in body. 67, 68
physical factors (in pathogenesis), 15
oedema, 90, 120, 122-7, 141, 204
physiologic stresses, 20, 87
dependent,126
pigments, 28,38
generalised,126
pigs, 89, 127
inflammatory,122,124
pinch biopsy, 206
localised, 126
pituitary. 177
 non-inflammatory. 124
plaque (of tumour growth), 169, 170
 pulmonary. 126
plaques, dental, 35, 37.38
oesophagus, 166
plasma, 206
-oma,159,204
cells, 55, 59. 60, 63, 69-71. 74-7, 83, 85, 86.
oncogenesis, 205
88,101,206
oncology.186
proteins, 50, 67, 68, 122, 123, 126, 207
opathy.205
plaster cast, 156
ophthalmoscope, 140
platelets, 50, 114, 132-5, 139, 141, 207
organisation, 55,56, 98, 99, 101-4, 106-9, 130,
pleura,54,55,56,174,
131, 205
pleural adhesions, 55 
smotic activity,122,123
 pleurisy. 207
osmotic pressure, 120, 123, 125, 126
pneumonia,15,55,207
osteoclasts, 178, 179
poison(s), 8, 15, 17
Index
245
 police involvement (forensic pathology). 8
saliva, 35
pollen grains, 90
Salmonella,138
pollution, 28
salt poisoning and brain oedema, 126
portosystemic shunt, 156
salts, see aiso sodium chloride, 50, 114, 122.
pregnancy. 16, 17, 20, 87, 93, 155, 156
123
pressure (in pathogenesis), 15
sarcoma, 159. 160, 166,208
primary immunodeficiency, 84,207
scab, 103-7
primary tumour,169,173-6
scar/scar tissue, see afso fibrosis, fibrous tissue.
primary union,healing by.104,106
fibrovascular tissue, 32, 55, 56, 62, 99, 101,
'priming' of immune cells, 84
102,104-8,130,131,142, 208
 production animals, 8 
sclerosis, 208
prognosis, 87, 160, 165,174, 178, 181, 186,
sebaceous adenoma, 160
207
sebum, 67
progression, of tumour development, 161, 164.
 second intention healing, secondary union, 104,
165
107
 promotion of tumour development, promoters,
secondary immunodeficiency. 87, 209
161, 166
secondary infection, 13, 169
prostate specific antigen, PSA, 186
secondary tumour, 169, 173-6
prostate tumours, 174, 186
segmented or multilobed nuclei, 51, 62
proteases, 50, 51
'self' and immune responses. 13. 69, 72. 93
protective role, of inflammation, 42, 43, 54, 79,
self-trauma/self-harm, 42, 43, 54, 56. 109, 209
85
sensitivity, bacterial (to antibiotics), 6
protein(s), 29, 31, 36, 38, 49, 60, 63, 67, 68, 75,
septic, 209
79-81, 90,93.103, 114
shock, 55,56,146,148, 209
prouc flesh, 110
septicaemia,138,209
pruritus, 91, 207
sequela(e), 32, 209
pulmonary artery. 116, 117
sequestration, 32
embolism,141
serology.7,209
pulmonary vein, 116, 117
serosal spread/seeding of tumour, 174-6
punch biopsy.207
serous exudate, 54
puppy. puppies, 87,88,156
serum, 7,54.56.78,103, 209
purulent exudate, 54 
severe combined immunodeficiency.SCID.87
purulent, 207
'shelling out', of tumours, 169, 170, 182
pus, 6, 13, 32, 54, 207
'shift to the left' of neutrophils, 51. 53
putrefactive, 32, 35,
shivering. in shock, 149
pyo-,208
shock, 91, 145-50, 209
pyogranulomatous, inflammation, 59, 91, 92
cardiogenic,148
pyrexia of unknown origin, PUO, 176,180
clinical signs of, 149
neurogenic,148
quiescent, 208
psychological, 145
septic or toxic, 55,56,146,148,209,211
rabbits, hypothetical!, 17
shunt,156
radiation, 15,44,110, 166
signalment,182
radiographs, 172,181,182
simple disease, 16, 18, 210
reactive, 208
skin,4,9,13,28,36,43,55,56,59,61,66-8,
recanalisation, of thrombus, 142, 208
78,87.91.93.103-7.137.149.159.166
recruitment of leukocytes, 50, 52
'skip' metastases, 174, 175
red blood cells, 6. 28, 50, 52. 53, 54, 63. 93
sludging of capillaries,149
regeneration,of tissues/cells,32,98-101,103,
smallpox, 14 
108,109,130,131,208, 211
snake(s), 35, 37, 138
regenerative capacity, of cells/tissues, 32, 98,
sodium chloride, 123
100, 103
solutes, osmotically active, 123
regression of tumours,178
somatic cells, 162
renal (kidney) failure, 35, 36, 37
space-occupying effect of tumour, 177. 180
repair, 208
special pathology. 9, 210
reproductive tract, 66
sperm,162.165
respiratory rate, in shock, 149
spinal cord,109
respiratory tract,67,68,78,159
spinal injuries, 109
resting phase of cell cycle, 162
spleen, 72,75, 79, 81, 93, 137, 139, 174, 175
retinal haemorrhages, 140
splinters, 60, 61
retroviruses, 166, 208
sputum, blood in, 172.176,180
reversible cell change/damage/injury, 24, 38,
stable cells, 99-101, 103, 155, 156, 162, 210
154, 208
stem cell, 70,82, 100, 101, 103, 210
road traffic accident, RTA, 145, 156
stimuli, harmful, 24, 28, 43, 44
rodenticides, rodent poisons, 8, 138
stomach cancer,166,176
roundworm, in horses, 44
stomach contents (for toxicology), 8
rubor, 44
strongyle infection, in horses, 130
structural changes, 24-6, 61
'sadldlle′ thrombus, cats, 142, 144
sub-cellular, of studly of pathology. 2, 3
246
Index
suckling. 88, 89
urinary bladder, 36,37, 38, 155, 157. 166, 172.
sunlight, 166
176
suppuration,62,210
urinary tract, 66-8, 77
suppurative, exudate, 54, 55, 56, 210
urine,4,6, 8,88, 149,172,176,180, 181
sutures, stitches, 60, 61, 104
urine retention, 172
 sympathetic nervous system, 149
uroliths, 37
syndrome,210
urticaria, 212
systemic,210
useful information for pathologists (when
 effects of acute inflammation, 50, 53, 54
sending tumour biopsies to the labj. 182
pathology. 9, 210
uterus, 16, 17, 84, 155, 156
T cells/lymphocytes, 70, 72, 77-9, 81-6
vaccine, vaccination, 7, 14, 67, 75, 77, 88, 178,
Thelper cells, 74, 79, 81-3, 85, 86, 91, 92
181
tachycardia, 93
valves, of heart, 116,
tattoo inks, 29, 38
valvular thrombosis, 142
terminal differentiation phase of cell cycle, 163
variable regions, of antibodies/immunoglobins,
tertiary or third stage tumours, 172
72-4
testes,186
vascular permeability, see also permeability of 
 Test yourself que stions, on Chapter 1. 10 
capillaries, 46, 48
Test yourself questions, on Chapter 2. 21
vascular phase of acute inflammation, 44,
Test yourself questions, on Chapter 3, 39
56.77
Test yourself questions, on Chapter 4, 64
vasculitis, 54, 56, 92, 128, 138, 212
Test yourself que stions, on Chapter 5, 95
vasoconstriction,128,134,135,212
Test yourself questions, on Chapter 6, 111
vasodilation, 46, 80, 90, 146-8, 213
vector, 213
Test yourself questions, on Chapter 8, 188
vein(s), 116,119,139
thromboembolism, 141, 210
vena cava,116,120
thromboembolus, thromboemboli, 142, 143,
venom,127.138,146.148
210
venous bleeds, 116
thrombosis, 55, 56, 128, 211
venous circulation/outflow or drainage, 49, 116,
thrombus, 131,134,140-142,211
118,148
thymus, 59,72,77. 81
ventricles, of heart,116
tissue processing. 5
venule,116,117,119,167
tissue repair, 211
vertebral dliscs. 145
tissue transplant, 69
vesicle,213
tobacco smoke, 166
veterinary investigation officers, VIOs, 8
torsion, 211
viraemia, 213
toxaemia,211
viral inclusions, 29, 38, 140, 141, 213
toxic shock, 146, 211
Virchow's triad, 213
toxicologist(s), 8
virologist (s). 6
toxicology. 7, 211
virulence,213
toxin, 8,15,24,25,46,49,108,114,138, 146.
virus(es), 6, 12. 14. 15, 29, 44, 66-9, 78, 79, 81,
148, 155, 156,211
84,87,88,93.166.178
trachea, 159,175,176,181
vitamin D toxicity. 35, 37
transformation of cells, 157-9, 161, 162, 165.
vitamin K,132,138,139
166, 169.211
vitamin K deficiency. 138
transuclate,211
volvulus, 213
trauma, 15, 44, 87
vomit, blood in, 172, 176, 180
treatment, 19
vomiting. 176
tuberculosis, 31, 34, 60, 61
von Willebrand factor, VwF, 139
tumor,43,44,159
von Willebrand's disease, 139
tumour(s), 5, 7, 35, 62, 137, 157-86, 211
vulnerability (to disease), 16, 19, 66, 84, 87, 88,
angiogenesis factor, TAF, 167,168
6
cells, 69, 81, 84
growth patterns, 169-72
Warfarin, 138
initiation, 200
water, 50
markers, 183,186, 212
weakness.93
progression,161,164,165
weight loss, wasting. 53, 55, 61, 176, 180
promotion, 161, 166
wet gangrene,32,35
type |hypersensitivity reaction,90,91,212
wheal, 213
type Il hypersensitivity reaction, 91, 92, 212
whelping. 20
type  hypersensitivity reaction, 91, 92, 212
white blood cells, 6, 13, 50, 63, 79, 176, 180
type IV hypersensitivity reaction, 91-3
'white line' of acute inflammation, 45, 46
withers, 31
ulcer, ulceration, 93,137,139, 169, 171, 172,
womb, see aiso uterus, 88
174,175,180, 182, 212
worms (parasitic), 7, 78
ultraviolet light, 15, 32, 166
wound, 4, 103-7, 109, 177
unexpected drug reactions, 9
urates, uric acid, 36
yeasts, 6, 14