Small Animal Regional
Anesthesia and Analgesia
Edited by Luis Campoy and Matt R. Read
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Dedication
To my dearest wife Ewa for being the most understanding and supportive person in the whole wide world
and to my children Kyla and Kian who I love to bits.
LuisCampoy
To my wife, Emma, and my children Grace and Kate for their support and encouragement. There were
many days and nights spent working on this book and without their understanding, this project would not
have been possible. I also extend my gratitude to Ban Tsui, MD and Vincent Chan, MD for opening the
world of regional anesthesia to me and for sharing their enthusiasm for this wonderful specialty. Finally.
I would like to thank my parter in this project, Luis Campoy, for his friendship and tireless efforts in
getting this book to publication. Cheers!
MattRead
Small Animal Regional Anesthesia
and Analgesia
Editors
Luis Campoy, IV CertVA, DipECVAA, MRCVS
Senior Lecturer in Anesthesiology
Section of Anesthesiology and Analgesia
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
Matt R. Read, DVM, MVSc, DACVA
Associate Professor
Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific, Technical
and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial Offices
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 SSQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by
Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1994-5 /2013.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their prod ucts are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
 publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered.
It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
nos aq pios dessd sads e yo saas a anau si ausisse aadxa auo so e
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 d ne ode sin 'soa / isatleue pue eisasaue leuonsan ee les
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1994-5 (hardback : alk. paper)
1. Campoy, Luis, MRCVS. I1. Read, Matt R.
[DNLM: 1. Anesthesia, Conduction-veterinary. 2. Analgesia-methods. 3. Analgesia-veterinary.
2012028811
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
available in electronic books.
Cover design by Jen Miller Designs
Set in 9.5/11.5pt Palatino by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
12013
Contents
Contributors
vii
 6 Peripheral Nerve Stimulators
65
Foreword
ix
Robert M. Raw, Matt R. Read,
Preface
xi
and Luis Campoy
Acknowledgments
xii
7 Utrasound-guided Peripheral
Nerve Blocks
77
Part 1 Considerations for
Olga Seco, Laura Zarucco, and Luis Campoy
Loco-regional Anesthesia
1 History of Regional Anesthesia
3
Part 3 Loco-regional Anesthetic
Kristopher Schroeder
Blocks for Small Animal Patients
87
 2 General Considerations
11
Luis Campoy and Kristopher Schroeder
8 Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics
 and Use of Wound Catheters
89
 3 Patient Preparation
19
Matt R. Read
Luis Campoy and Matt R. Read
9 The Eye
103
 4 Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology
Elizabeth A. Giuliano and Karen P. Walsh
of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts
25
10 The Oral Cavity
MaruelMartin-Flores
119
Margherita Gracis
Part 2 Equipment
41
11 The Thoracic Limb
141
Luis Campoy and Matt R. Read
 5 Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia
and Analgesia
43
12 The Trunk
167
Matt R. Read
Matt R. Read and Carrie A. Schroeder
vi   Contents
13
The Pelvic Limb
199
15 Intravenous Regional Anesthesia
261
Luis Campoy and Stephan Mahler
Francesco Staffieri
141
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia
227
xapul
273
Pablo E. Otero and Luis Campoy
Contributors
Luis Campoy, LV CertVA, DipECVAA, MRCvS
Pablo E. Otero DVM, PhD
Senior Lecturer in Anesthesiology
Head, Division of Anaesthesiology and
Section of Anesthesiology and Analgesia
Pain Management
 Department of Clinical Sciences
 College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Buenos Aires University
Cornell University
Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina
Ithaca, NY, USA
Robert M. Raw, MbChB, MPraxMed, MFGP
Elizabeth A. Giuliano, DVM, MS, DACVO
DA, FCA
Associate Professor
Associate Professor, Anesthesia
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Iowa
University of Missouri
Iowa City, IO, USA
Columbia, MO, USA
Matt R. Read, DVM, MVSc, DACVA
Margherita Gracis, Med Vet, Dipl. AVDC
Associate Professor
Dipl. EVDC
 Department of Comparative Biology and
Clinica Veterinaria San Siro
Experimental Medicine
Milano, Italy
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Calgary
Stephan Mahler, DVM, MA, MSc, PhD
Calgary, AB, Canada
Clinique Veterinaire Pans'Betes
Acigme, France
Carrie A. Schroeder, DVM, DACVA
Adjunct Clinical Instructor-Anesthesia and
Manuel Martin-Flores, MV, DACVA
 Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology
Pain Management
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Clinical Sciences
University of Wisconsin
College of Veterinary Medicine
Madison, WI, USA
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
v1i
vili   Contributors
Kristopher Schroeder, MD
Karen P Walsh BVetMed, DVA, MRCVS, DECVAA
Assistant Professor
 European Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Department of Anesthesiology
Analgesia
School of Medicine and Public Health
Willows Veterinary Centre
University of Wisconsin
Highlands Road
Madison, WI, USA
Shirley
West Midlands, UK
Olga Seco, Licenciada en Veterinaria,MRCVS
Adjunct Assistant Professor
Laura Zarucco, DMV, PhD
Sports Medicine and Imaging, Clinical Studies
 Associate Professor of Surgery
New Bolton Center
 Department of Animal Pathology
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Section of Surgery, Universita' degli Studi di
University of Pernsylvania
Torino
Kennett Square, PA, USA
Facolta' di Medicina Veterinaria
Turin, Italy
Francesco Staffieri, DVM, PhD
Assistant Professor in Veterinary Anesthesia
D.E.O.T. Section of Veterinary Surgery
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Bari "Aldo Moro"
Bari, Italy
Foreword
 I am a medical anesthesiologist. My first meeting
between all of this book's authors and their
with veterinary anesthesiology was in 1997. A
passion for their work and for regional anesthesia.
I hope this book transmits that passion onto the
friend needed an anesthetic for the fitting of a radio
readers.
 transmitter. The veterinarian who did the anes-
 There are many good reasons to perform regional
thetic was Dr. Lynette Bester The falcon-owming
anesthesia on our patients, both medical and
friend next introduced Dr. Bester to me and we
veterinary. The primary outcome is postsurgical
 began an enduring scientific liaison of lecturing
analgesia.
This reduces patient suffering and
and teaching at scientific meetings we respec-
facilitates faster return to normal eating, earlier
tively organized. We developed an anesthetized
mobilization, and swifter general recovery, which
pig workshop as a tool for teaching regional anes-
are in turn additional secondary outcome benefits.
thesia techniques to both medical and veterinary
There are, however, many more secondary out-
anesthesiologists in South Africa.
 come benefits. In human studies, evidence strongly
In 2003 Dr. Bester and I were invited to present a
suggests
that regional anesthesia diminishes
regional anesthesia course in Knoxville Tennessee
chronic pain syndromes, diminishes cancer recur-
at the World Congress of Veterinary Anesthesiology.
rences, reduces surgical infection, and reduces
Attending that WCVA-2003 regional anesthesia
cardiovascular and
pulmonary complications.
course were Drs. Luis Campoy and Matt Read,
The addition of regional anesthesia to a general
both of whom I met for the first time. Luis and
 anesthetic also allows significant anesthetic drug
Matt have told me that the Knoxville WCVA
 dose reduction. Reduced general anesthetic drug
regional anesthesia course was a milestone in
doses allow faster patient recovery from the
their growing passion for regional anesthesia.
 general anesthetic. General anesthesia may seem
Subsequently Luis and I jointly organized a
to be a nontherapeutic specialty that only exists
veterinary regional anesthesia skills course in
to make surgery possible. Regional anesthesia is
Iowa and we lectured together at the regional
different, however, as it offers significant benefits
anesthesia meetings of ISVRA in Italy. It seems a
that endure after the surgery.
few blinks later Luis and Matt were producing
The first book in medicine devoted solely to
this book and honoring me with an invitation to
regional anesthesia was published in 1917 by Victor
contribute a chapter and write this foreword.
Pauchet. Gaston Labat translated Pauchet's book
There is a warm story of professional bonds
Foreword
1953, Daniel Moore took the science further with
promote the use of regional anesthesia in humans
his legendary book titled Regional Block. Moore's
is as valid to promote the use of regional anesthesia
book was continually reprinted for another genera-
in animals.
tion of anesthesiologists. The use of ultrasound
Apart from being the historic book it is, I am
 guidance for peripheral nerve block needle placement
sure this book by Drs. Campoy and Read will
became popular after 2005 and this hugely accelerated
also long remain a definitive text book on veteri-
medical regional anesthesia's growth in popularity.
nary regional anesthesia. The science of veterinary
Veterinary regional anesthesia's  development
is
regional anesthesia will accelerate from now
rurning parallel to medical regional anesthesia
forward as much medical regional anesthesia did
development. The two biggest limiting factors in
after the publication of each book by Pauchet,
 regional anesthesia are lack of technical skill among
Labat, and Moore. The honor of publishing the first
practitioners and ignorance of surgeons on the risks 
veterinary regional anesthesia book will always
and benefits. Education is the solution to both. This
 belong to editors Campoy and Read and their
book will greatly help with that.
writing team.
The growth in public sentiment and concern
for the suffering of animals will also drive the
Robert M. Raw, MD
popularity of regional anesthesia as a form of
Professor of Anesthesia
 pain control for small animals with injuries and
UIniversity of lowa
postsurgical pain. Every reason that exists to
lowa City, lowa, LISA
Preface
Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
with us. This text will hopefully have something
was written with a wide audience in mind. For
for everyone - it can be used as a text with complete
many years, local and regional anesthesia in
reference lists and extensive discussion of different
-  ,i,  aq n pi m s
topics, or as a quick source of information with pro-
 niques that were developed decades ago stil being
 cedural checklists, pictures, and diagrams to assist
used without any particular attention being made
with performance of the various blocks. Our hope
juarap au puuaq ,anuaios, a suoueape oi
is this book will serve as the impetus to standardize
procedures. Over the last 10 years, rapid advances
the various procedures that are used clinically (so
in human regional anesthesia have started to carry
we are all speaking the same language when we
 over into veterinary medicine. Recently, many
talk about these blocks), and will stimulate
studies have been conducted in small animals to
continued interest in this particular subspecialty of
document, describe, and improve local and
 anesthesia and pain management in veterinary
regional anesthetic blocks in our small animal
medicine.
patients.
Although our understanding of regional anes-
The primary goal of this text is to put a large
thesia in small animals still has a long way to go,
body of information in one place for the first time.
we are on the cusp of some exciting new develop-
Interest in regional anesthesia in animals is not
ments that will undoubtedly contribute to better
limited to one particular geographic area; as a
outcomes and improved patient care.
result, we have invited an intermational group of
authors to share their experience and expertise
Luis Campoy and Matt Read
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of 
understanding. Without her, this book would
our coauthors, all of whom had great enthusiasm
never have been completed. We are also grate-
for seeing this project come to fruition. The energy
ful for the help of Ms. Susan Engelken and
and time that they poured into this book is easy
Ms. Carrie Horn at Wiley, Ms. Eilidh McGregor
to see.
for copyediting, Mr. Pascal Raj Francois 
for
We also want to thank the team at Wiley, who
production, and the proofreaders and indexers
provided us with support and mentoring through
who helped in the final stages. Finally, we would
the entire process. We would like to especially
like to acknowledge our colleague, Dr. Bernd
thank Ms. Erica Judisch, commissioning editor at
 Driessen, for initially bringing us together on this
Wiley, for her tireless assistance, patience, and
exciting project.
xili
Part
Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Chapter 1
History of Regional Anesthesia
Chapter 2
General Considerations
Chapter 3
Patient Preparation
Chapter 4
 Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts
History of Regional Anesthesia
Kristopher Schroeder
History
states, and Newton (1642-1727) and Hartley
(1705-1757) described the potential role of nerves
The history of regional anesthesia and pain
in transmitting noxious stimuli from the periphery
management is filled with fabulous stories and
to the brain (Perl 2007). Despite these advances
 great characters. Ancient Egyptians used a variety
in
1knowledge, the Middle
Ages remainedan
of analgesics  including
g hyoscyamine, scopol-
unpleasant period of time in which to require a sur-
amine, opium poppy, beer, juniper, and yeast to
gical procedure when even invasive surgeries were
treat a variety of ailments including "pains within
performed without anesthesia.
the body." Ancient Indian culture used herbal
Early attempts at medicinal pain control typically
medicine and yoga to overcome pain and create
originated from plant material and included opium
internal balance, and the ancient Chinese used
(Papaver somniferum), alcohols, mandrake (Atropa
mandragora), belladonna (Atropa belladonna), and
and treat pain. The ancient Greeks gave the world
marijuana (Cannabis). Freidrich Wilhelm Sertirner
Hippocrates (460-370 BC) who believed in the
(1783-1841)
isolated
1morphinefrom the opium
healing power of nature and focused on a rational
plant in 1803.
.Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) was
approach to diagnosis and treatment rather than
released in 1899 by the Bayer Company and quickly
one based on superstition (Raj 2010).
became the common man's
"go to" therapy for
 Early giants in the field of medicine and philos-
mild to moderate pain relief (Raj 2010).
 ophy were concerned with characterizing and
The natives of Peru are attributed with being the
understanding pain. Early teachings from Aristotle
first to "use" a local anesthetic—the cocoa leaf,
(384-322 Bc) described pain as an emotion that was
kown for both its analgesic and hallucinatory
situated in the heart and it was not until Galen of
properties. During surgical procedures, they obt-
Pergamon (AD 130-201) that people recognized
ained local anesthesia by chewing the leaves of the
that the brain was the organ responsible for pain
plant and allowing the resulting saliva to run into
sensation. Avicenna (AD 980-1037) described how
the fresh incisions. Chewing the leaves of the cocoa
 pain sensation could be altered in various disease
Kiumq a aensse, on pajrodan oste sem jueid
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
4 Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
invigorate the weary and brighten the depressed."
it could both abolish the sensation of taste and
The cocoa plant was also important in the Peruvian
create anesthesia when applied to the tongue. Von
natives' religious and political lives (Keys 1942;
Anrep also injected cocaine subcutaneously under
Fink 1985). The Spaniards who conquered the
the skin of his own arm and discovered that he cre-
native Incan people initially described chewing
ated an area of anesthesia that lasted about 35 min-
cocoa leaves as the "work of the devil," but when
utes. At the same time, others were experimenting
they recognized the profit that could be made, they
with use of cocaine solutions for blocking corneal
legalized it and taxed the revenue from plant sales.
 reflexes in animals and for treating painful diseases
Bernabe Cobo described the first analgesic use
 of the larynx and pharynx (Keys 1942; Deschner
of cocaine in 1653 when he discussed the native
et al. 2007).
Incan practice of using the cocoa leaves to cure a
With the groundwork completed, all that was
toothache. In 1859, Paolo Mantegazza described
peu teum Aidde cn aoauos roy sem papaau mou
Peruvian natives using cocoa leaves for the
been learned about cocaine and apply it to the sur-
treatment of "a furred tongue in the morning, flat-
 gical arena. The development and use of cocaine as
ulence and whitening the teeth." While on a trip to
a local anesthetic agent is primarily attributed to
South America, Scherzer noticed that the leaves
 Karl Koller. While Koller was practicing as a house
numbed the tongue when they were chewed, and
 surgeon at the Vierna General Hospital, his friend
he went on to become the first person to make a
Sigmund Freud happened upon the beneficial
report in the literature about its anesthetic qualities
reports of cocaine and studied its use for curing
(Keys 1942; Deschner et al. 2007).
 patients with morphine addiction (Fink 1985). Koller
 A necessary prerequisite to performing regional
wanted to be accepted into an ophthalmology
 anesthesia was the development of the hypodermic
 training program and was well aware of the search
-iad aq oi Aiagms moe on ogaqsaue [eoidoi e 1oj
uo pao
the eye. Prior to the introduction of
a needle trocar. In 1839, Taylor and Washington
cocaine anesthesia into clinical practice, eye sur-
 began the practice of using hypodermic medication
 gery was nearly impossible to perform, given that
for relief of pain when they punctured the skin
 general anesthesia typically induced coughing and
using lancets followed by injection of morphine
vomiting, consequences to be avoided during eye
solutions using syringes. In 1845, Francis Rynd
 surgery. He had read the reports of cocaine causing
described the potential benefits that could
be
anesthesia of the tongue and had even tried it on
obtained from perineural injections of opioids. In
his own tongue before arriving at the realization
1853, Alexander Wood invented the hollow needle
'aka a oh pandde Aleoidot aq pmos auiesos je
and in that same year Charles Gabriel Pravaz
He first applied topical cocaine to the eye of a frog
attached an improvised hollow needle to a specially
and when the frog did not move in response to
constructed syringe, completing the combination
touching of its cornea, regional anesthesia was
of equipment that we still use today (Raj 2010;
truly born. He reported these findings to the
Deschner et al. 2007).
Ophthalmological  Congress  in  Heidelberg
in
In 1855, Friedrich Gaedcke was the first to isolate
 September 1884, and the world's first surgery per-
the active alkaloid from the cocoa plant, naming it
formed under regional anesthesia was completed
"erythrolyxin." In 1860, Albert Nieman (1834-1861)
 as Koller anesthetized a patient's eye with cocaine
isolated this ingredient in crystalline form (naming
for glaucoma surgery. Dr. Koller's assistant later
 it "cocaine") and reported anesthesia of the tongue
wrote of the discovery:
when it was tasted (Cousins and Bridenbaugh
1988; Deschner et al. 2007). In 1872, Theodor
"We could make a dent in the cornea without the
Aschenbrandt, an Austrian army officer, secretly
slightest awareness of the touch, let alone any
put cocaine into the water of his soldiers and found
unpleasant sensational reaction."
that it improved endurance (Fink 1985). In 1880,
Vasili Konstantinovich Von Anrep (1854-1925)
With that demonstration, the discovery of local
thoroughly studied the pharmacology of cocaine.
anesthesia was complete and cocainization of the
He developed a solution of cocaine and found that 
eye for production of local anesthesia was generally
History of Regional Anesthesia  5
adopted. "I rejoice that I was the first to congratu-
Schleich described how both water and saline had
late Dr. Koller as a benefactor of Mankind," wrote
weak anesthetic properties. Subcutaneous injec-
an assistant of Koller's (Fink 1985; Leonard 1998;
 tions of water were associated with significant pain
 Deschner et al. 2007). Freud referred to his former
so Schleich took the next step and added cocaine to
colleague Koller as "Coca Koller" and Koller
his injectate solution. Using his low-concentration
described Freud ashis "muse" (Fink 1985; Deschner
cocaine solution for subcutaneous infiltration,
et al. 2007).
Schleich was able to perform a variety of peripheral
In 1884, William Halsted (1852-1922) was the
surgical procedures. Two years later, his methods
first to describe cocaine application to accessible
had been widely adopted and were being used in
 peripheral nerves to perform dental blocks, thus
the United States (Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988;
obtaining "conduction"
 anesthesia in peripheral
Deschner et al. 2007).
regions. The mandibular nerve was the first nerve he
In 1897, Braun demonstrated that the toxicity of
blocked. Halsted and Hall also performed a variety
 cocaine was in proportion to its rate of absorption,
of other peripheral nerve blocks on themselves
and recommended the addition of epinephrine to
and medical student "volunteers" (Cousins and
the solution of cocaine in order to decrease its rate
 Bridenbaugh 1988). The next challenge in the evolu-
of absorption and increase the duration of anes-
tion of regional anesthesia was to locate and inject a
 thesia—something anesthetists still commonly per-
form today (Braun 1914).
G.L. Corning, a neurologist, was the first to
August Bier performed the first spinal anesthetics
report an intravenous injection of local anesthetic
 in 1898 when he injected the spinal canals of ani-
with proximal venous occlusion for distal anes-
mals, himself, and an assistant (August Hildebrandt)
thesia. Corning is also credited with inducing the
with a solution of cocaine. Bier described the
first spinal anesthesia in a dog, when he injected
 procedure of spinal anesthesia on six patients and
cocaine into the space between two adjoining spi-
one colleague in a manuscript written in 1899. First,
nous processes in a dog in 1885 and uncovered the
 Bier performed spinal anesthesia with intrathecal
possibilities of spinal anesthesia. He reported that
cocaine on his colleague Hildebrandt. Bier then sub-
the injection of a cocaine solution into the space
jected Hildebrandt to a series of painful insults
between the spinous processes of two inferior
 including making a small skin incision on his thigh,
dorsal vertebrae resulted in anesthesia of the dog's
 applying a burning cigar to his legs, and applying
hind legs without affecting the anterior extremities.
strong blows to his shin with an iron hammer,
He subsequently performed a similar procedure in
jed a uo ued jo uondarad puaedde Aue pnom
a man, resulting in anesthesia to the subject's legs
of Hildebrandt. Bier then went on to describe the
and genitalia (Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988). He
problems associated with experimenting on himself 
later pondered:
and Hildebrandt when he detailed how Hildebrandt
later developed pain in the distribution of his legs
"Whether the method will ever find an appli-
where "sensibility had been tested by crushing and
cation as a substitute for etherization in genito-
heavy blows." Bier also described what we would
urinary or other branches of surgery, further
now recogrize as postdural puncture pain but
experiments alone can show."
attributed it to:
Corning is also credited with the first regional
"...Treating our bodies too lightheartedly.
anesthetic peripheral nerve block after injecting a
 Instead of laying down and resting following the
solution of cocaine around the median cutaneous
lumbar puncture and injection of cocaine, we
antibrachii nerve in 1887 (Fink 1985; Ball and
went about our avocations, drank and smoked
Westhorpe 2003; Deschner et al. 2007).
more than was good for us, and performed our
Carl-Ludwig Schleich (1859-1922) first described
normal work the next day'
a technique for infiltration anesthesia to the
(Wulf 1998)
German Congress of Surgeons in 1892. Previously
in 1869, Pierre Edouard Potain used subcutaneous
Between the time that Bier first performed spinal
injections of water to provide skin anesthesia and
anesthesia and 1910, the techniques must have
Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
become widely adopted, because in 1909-1910,
 anesthetic agent, and, compared to other agents,
Tyrell Gray described performing spinal anesthesia
has less motor blockade and decreased potential
anm shuaed siu ieu pauedxa pue uarpiuo u
for cardiac toxicity (Brown et al. 2010).
a 1mouanon axes jea, on yanoua aqerogon
The use of regional anesthetic techniques in ani-
(zioz umoig) ,ampasoid esiams au jo uogemp
mals started near the turn of the twentieth century
In 1908, August Bier described the first use of
(Lumb and Jones 1973). Cuille and Sendrail induced
intravenous regional anesthesia, the "Bier block"
 subarachnoid anesthesia in horses, catle, and dogs
that still bears his name (van Zundert et al. 2008).
 in France in 1901. Cathelin reported the use of epi-
In 1911, Georg Hirschel described the axillary
dural anesthesia in dogs in 1901, but it took until
brachial
1plexus block and D. Kulenkampff
the 1920s for this technique to be adapted by
described the supraclavicular brachial plexus block
Retzgen, Benesch, and Brook for use in large ani-
(Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988). Louis Gaston
mals. Later, in the 1940s, Farquharson and Formston
Labat (1877-1934) further popularized the use of
developed paravertebral techniques for cattle. By
 regional anesthesia in the United States by author-
the
1960s, local anesthetic techniques were
ing the text Regional Anesthesia: Its Technic and
Clinical Application in 1920. Despite Labat himself
that described their pharmacology and use were
commenting that the text was likely as popular as it
 included in many veterinary textbooks. Many of
the drawings and images that we still use today
carefully illustrated by half-nude women," his text
are based on figures from Wright's
Veterinary
served as the definitive text on regional anesthesia
Anaesthesia and Analgesia (first published in 1941,
for 30 years and clearly helped to expand and
Hall 1966) and Lumb and Jones' Veterinary
advance
the practice of regional anesthesia
Anesthesia (first published in 1973). Today, the sci-
(Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988; Cote et al. 2003).
 ence is catching up to the art, and local and regional
One of the dangers associated with cocaine
anesthetic techniques continue to have a
an ever
regional anesthesia is that the drug has euphoric,
more important role in acute and chronic patient
hallucinogenic, and, ultimately, addictive prop-
management of veterinary species.
erties. Sadly, many of the early names in regional
anesthesia that experimented on themselves devel-
oped addictions to cocaine. Due to these properties,
Peripheral nerve blocks
and with the advances in chemistry and manufac-
turing, alternative local anesthetic molecules were
Although the practice of neuraxial (spinal, epidural)
subsequently developed. Amylocaine was devel-
anesthesia has changed minimally over the years,
oped as an early alternative to cocaine but it was
peripheral nerve blockade has undergone multiple
abandoned when it was found to be an irritant.
shifts in both philosophy and technique. Originally,
Procaine was developed in 1904 and was intro-
correct needle
positioning
  was simply  approxi-
duced into clinical practice in 1905. Procaine very
mated by anesthesiologists who would use their
quickly replaced cocaine in practice but its use was
kmowledge of anatomy to estimate the locations of
limited by its short duration and the potential for it
target nerves. Later, techrigues involved asking the
to produce allergic reactions. Dibucaine (1925) and
 patient to report "paresthesias"—the nerve tingling
tetracaine (1928) were synthesized to create local
 in the distribution of the target nerve to be blocked
 anesthetics of longer duration, but they continued
 after the needle had been inserted close to the target
 raae u qda a 0
potential.
nerve. Anesthesiologists at that time were governed
Lidocaine was developed in the mid-1940s, a revo-
by   the 
words of Moore "No paresthesia,
no
lutionary new amide local anesthetic with decre-
ased potential for allergic reactions. Mepivacaine
back to finalize needle position prior to drug admini-
(1957), bupivacaine (1957), prilocaine (1969), and
stration. Traditional techniques also relied upon the
etidocaine (1972) were all subsequently released
 anesthesiologist sensing palpable and subjective
 into clinical practice. Mepivacaine and bupivacaine
yanon paaaen sapaau ra se ,saoe, ro ,sod,
are still commonly used. Recently, ropivacaine
varlous
fascial
planes,
pue
detecting
arterial
has been developed as another long-acting
local
pulsations transmitted along the length (
of their
History of Regional Anesthesia 
needles as they came in dlose proximity to major
"new gold standard." The advantage of ultrasound
arteries (Dillane and Tsui 2012).
guidance is that variation in individual patient
anatomy no longer negatively affects block success
ao ues Aa ,'uaas, aq ues saarau jagret sy 'saiei
Nerve stimulation
effectively be located with a needle tip prior to
injection of the local anesthetic solution. Compared
 In 1780, Luigi Galvani applied static electricity-
with the use of nerve stimulation alone, ultrasound
charged metal electrodes to frog sciatic nerves and
guidance has been shown to result in a higher rate
showed that electrical stimulation of peripheral
 of successful peripheral nerve blockade, decreased
nerves would result in muscle contractions. In 1850,
block set-up times and longer block durations.
H von Helmolz investigated isolated nerve-muscle
When Orebaugh et al. (2007, 2009) studied the use
specimens. Based on those studies, he formed the
of ultrasound guidance versus nerve stimulation
concept that when an electrical stimulus is applied
for peripheral nerve blockade performed by anes-
to a nerve, a threshold must first be reached before
thesia
residents, they found that ultrasound
an action potential can result in creation of a muscle
guidance resulted in decreased procedure times,
contraction. Georg Perthes first reported the clinical
needle insertions, and inadvertent vascular punc-
use of electrical nerve stimulation for nerve blocks in
tures (Orebaugh et al. 2007, 2009).
1912 in Germany. In 1962, Greenblatt and Denson
A study by Robards et al. (2009) demonstrated
reported their use of a portable nerve stimulator for
that nerve stimulation might not confer the added
nerve localization, and in 1966, battery powered
safety benefits with which it was initially credited.
 portable nerve stimulators first appeared in clinical
In their study using combined ultrasound guidance
practice (Dillane and Tsui 2012). In 1984, specially
and nerve stimulation to perform sciatic nerve
designed needles became available for
electro-
blocks in the popliteal fossa, they found that in
stimulation of nerves. These needles had electrically
4/24 patients a current of 1.5mA (a typical current
insulated shafts but naked metal tips that served as
 used during regional anesthesia) failed to produce
electrodes during nerve stimulation (Ford et al.
a visible motor response even though needles were
1984). This technological development resulted in
placed intraneurally (Robards et al. 2009). Ultra-
sound guidance has the added benefit of being able
blocks. By being able to "find" target nerves through
to visualize vascular or other anatomical structures
visualization of motor responses prior to injection of
that should be avoided during needle placement
local anesthetic solutions, nerve stimulation was
(i.e. pleura, peritoneum, etc.), but its use is limited
reported to increase the chances of successful nerve
by equipment availability and operator skill. In
blockade while at the same time reducing the
theory, the decreased volume of local anesthetic
volume of local anesthetic that was required. There
that is required to block a nerve when ultrasound
was a belief that at certain stimulating currents,
guidance is used should confer added safety to the
 target nerves could be identified before the needle
patient. However, despite all of these reported
tip contacted the nerve itself, thus minimizing the
advantages, in people there is no definitive evi-
risk of patient injury during needle placement and /
-enm Suisn jo auaq Aajes e jnoddns ol aouap
 or injection of thelocal anesthetic. Nerve stimulation
sound guidance versus nerve stimulation, and the
for nerve localization was found to be associated
debate continues over the role of nerve stimulation
with a decreased incidence of nerve trauma and
and ultrasound guidance in the performance of
-saned ou, asenqd a pauion ranaiem pue iua
 regional anesthesia (Chin and Chan 2008; Griffin
thesia, no dysesthesia" (Dillane and Tsui 2012).
and Nicholls 2010).
Ultrasound visualization
Rationale for loco-regional anesthesia
and analgesia
Ultrasound guidance has become popular as a
 nerve localization tool in people, and its use during
Why all of this excitement and interest in the field
regional anesthesia has recently been called the
of regional anesthesia? For many practitioners,
8 Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
regional anesthesia offers the potential to put the
 procedures (Peyton et al. 2003). Thoracic epidural
anatomical knowledge that they have acquired
anesthesia has been demonstrated to have more
throughout the years into practice. The use of
 clear benefits with regard to perioperative cardio-
regional anesthesia is intellectually challenging
vascular (myocardial infarction and dysrhythmias)
and incredibly rewarding. The benefits for your
 and pulmonary (postoperative pulmonary compli-
patients are often quite obvious as you take a
cations, pulmonary infections, and respiratory
patient in excruciating pain and make them com-
failure) events. Thoracic epidural and regional
fortable when they are in the vulnerable postoper-
anesthesia has been associated with faster recovery
ative period.
 of bowel function, improved postoperative rehabil-
The anesthesia literature is filled with studies
itation, improved pain control, decreased opioid
further demonstrating the benefits of regional
requirements, and fewer opioid-related side effects
anesthesia. The list of indications for regional
(Hanna et al. 2009). An exciting frontier of investi-
anesthesia continues to expand as the number of
 gation in the world of regional anesthesia focuses
regional techniques expands or is improved upon
on the ability of nerve blockade to attenuate the
to allow more peripheral techniques to be per-
formed. Pain itself has been demonstrated to have
cally encountered in the perioperative period. This
a number of adverse effects throughout the body.
 may have important implications with regard to
 It impacts the respiratory system by promoting
the incidence of recurrence or metastatic cancer
atelectasis, ventilation-to-perfusion mismatching,
following cancer resection surgery (Exadaktylos
 arterial hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and pneumonia.
et al. 2006).
In the cardiovascular system, pain has been shown
As with all areas of veterinary medicine, local
to produce hypertension, tachycardia, myocardial
and regional anesthetic techniques have evolved
ischemia, and cardiac dysrhythmias. Pain impacts
rapidly over the last 20 years. Veterinarians and
the endocrine system by
 promoting hypergly-
their staff are very interested in techniques that
cemia,
sodium/water
retention, and
protein
contribute to pain management and patient care,
catabolism.
urinary
retention,
 and as a result, the use of local anesthesia is being
cause
decreased clotting ability, impaired coagulation,
"rediscovered" after playing a secondary role in
 and decreased immune function (Stoelting and
 pain management due to the widespread develop-
Miller 2007).
ment and use of opioids and NSAIDs over the last
Decreases in morbidity and mortality, improved
few years. If what physicians have learned about
 postoperative pain control and decreases in periop-
the benefits of local and regional anesthetic tech-
erative complications have been listed as potential
niques has any application to animals (which they
benefits of regional anesthesia in people. A meta-
would be expected to), then we can look forward to
analysis that compared intraoperative neuraxial to
an exciting few years to come!
general
1 anesthesia (141
randomized controlled
trials, 9559 patients) demonstrated that neuraxial
anesthesia was associated with a decrease in
References and further reading
mortality from 2.8% to 1.9% (Rodgers et al. 2000).
A study evaluating the Medicare claims database
Ball C, Westhorpe R (2003) Local Anaesthesia - early
found that when an epidural was used for postop-
nerve blocks. Anaesth Intensive Care 31, 347.
erative analgesia, mortality was reduced at 7 days
Braun H (1914) Local Anesthesia - Its Scientific Basis and
(0.5% vs. 0.8%) and 30 days (2.1% vs. 2.8%) postop-
Practical Use. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
eratively (Wu et al. 2004). Another database anal-
Brown DL, Boezaart AP, Galway UA et al. (2010) Atlas
of Regional Anesthesia (4h edn), Saunders Elsevier,
ysis of 259,037
7patients found that
epidural
anesthesia reduced 30-day mortality from 2.0% to
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
1.7% (Wijeysundera et al. 2008). Despite the exciting
Brown TC (2012) History of pediatric regional anesthesia.
Paediatr Anaesth 22, 3-9.
findings of the above-mentioned studies, other
Chin KJ, Chan V (2008) Ultrasound-guided peripheral
investigations have failed to find mortality benefits
nerve blockade. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 21, 624-631.
and it is likely that mortality benefits truly exist
Cote AV, Vachon CA, Horlocker TT, et al. (2003) From
only for the sickest patients undergoing high-risk
Victor Pauchet to Gaston Labat: the transformation
History of Regional Anesthesia  9
of regional anesthesia from a surgeon's practice to
the time necessary for resident peripheral nerve
the physician anesthesiologist. Anesth Analg 96,
blockade. Reg Anesth Pain Med 32, 448-454.
1193-1200.
OrebaughSL, Williams BA, Vallejo M et al. (2009) Adverse
Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO (1988) Neural blockade in
outcomes associated with stimulator-based peripheral
clinical anesthesia and management of pain (2"d edn),
nerve blocks with versus without ultrasound visuali-
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
zation. Reg Anesth Pain Med 34, 251-255.
Deschner B, Robards C, Somasundaram (2007) The his-
Perl ER (2007) Ideas about pain, a historical view. Nat
tory of local anesthesia. In: Textbook of Regional
Rev Neurosci 8, 71-80.
Anesthesia and Acute Pain Management. Hadzic A
Peyton PJ, Myles PS, Silbert BS,et al. (2003) Perioperative
(ed.) McGraw Hill Medical, New York, NY, USA.
epidural analgesia and outcome after major abdonn-
Pp.3-18.
inal surgery in high-risk patients. Anesth Analg 96,
Dillane D, Tsui B (2012) Is there still a place for the use of
548-554.
nerve stimulation? Paediatr Anaesth 22, 102-108.
Raj PP (2010) The 2009 John J. Bonica Award Lecture: The
Exadaktylos AK, Buggy DJ, Moriarty DC, et al. (2006)
inmpact of managing pain in the practice of medicine
Can anesthetic technique for primary breast cancer
through the ages. Reg Anesth Pain Med 35, 378-385.
surgery affect recurrence or metastasis? Anesthesiology
Robards C, Hadzic A, Somasundaram L, et al. (2009)
105.660-664.
 Intraneural injection with low-current stimulation dur-
Fink RB (1985) Leaves and needles: The introduction of
ing popliteal sciatic nerve block. Anesth Analg 109,
surgical local anesthesia. Anesthesiology 63, 77-83.
673-677.
Ford DJ, Pither C, Raj PP (1984) Comparison of insulated
Rodgers A, Walker N, Schug S, et al. (2000) Reduction of
 and uninsulated needles for locating peripheral nerves
with a peripheral nerve stimulator. Anesth Analg 63,
or spinal anaesthesia: results from overview of ran-
925-928.
domised trials. BMJ 321, 1-12.
Griffin J, Nicholls B (2010) Ultrasound in regional anaes-
Stoelting RK, Miller RD (2007) Basics of Anesthesia
thesia. Anaesthesia 65, 1-12.
(5th edn) Churchill Livingstone/ Elsevier, Philadelphia,
Hall LW (1966) Wright's Veterinary Anaesthesia and
PA, USA.
Analgesia. Bailliere, Tindall & Cassell, London, UK.
Wijeysundera DN, Beattie WS, Austin PC, et al. (2008)
Hanna MN, Murphy JD, Kumar K, et al. (2009) Regional
Epidural anaesthesia and survival after intermediate-
techniques and outcome: what is the evidence? Curr
to-high risk non-cardiac surgery: a population-based
Opin Anaesthesiol 22, 672-677.
cohort study. Lancet 372,562-569.
Keys TE (1942) The development of anesthesia.
Wu CL, Hurley RW, Anderson GF, et al. (2004) Effect of
Anesthesiology 3, 11-23.
postoperative epidural analgesia on morbidity and
Leonard M (1998) Carl Koller: mankind's greatest bene-
mortality following surgery in Medicare patients. Reg
factor? The story of local anesthesia. J Dent Res 77,
Anesth Pain Med 29, 525-533.
535-538.
Wulf HFW (1998) The centenmial of spinal anesthesia.
Lumb WV, Jones EW (1973) Veterinary Anesthesia. Lea &
Anesthesiology 89, 500-506.
Febiger, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
van Zundert A, Helmstadter A, Goerig M, et al. (2008)
Orebaugh SL, Williams BA, Kentor ML, et al. (2007)
Centenmial of Intravenous Regional Anesthesia. Bier's
Ultrasound guidance with nerve stimulation reduces
Block (1908-2008). Reg Anesth Pain Med 33, 483-489.
2
General Considerations
Luis Campoy and Kristopher Schroeder
Loco-regional anesthesia is used extensively in
requires a thorough understanding of the relevant
human medicine to provide intra- and postopera-
 regional anatomy of the new species of interest.
tive pain control. The American Society of Regional
Anesthesia (ASRA) was founded in 1975 and cur-
rently boasts 5000 members in 60 countries. ASRA
Outline of central anatomy
is the largest subspecialty organization in anes-
thesia and currently hosts two separate annual
 For the purposes of local anesthetic classification,
meetings that focus on either acute or chronic pain
the nervous system can be conveniently divided
control. Accredited fellowship programs in chronic
into the central (neuraxial) and peripheral nervous
 pain management have been available for a number
systems. The vertebral canal contains the epidural
of years, and recently, fellowship training
has
space and the intrathecal structures, which include
become available in regional anesthesia and acute
the spinal cord, the meninges, and the cerebrospinal
pain management (Neal
andBaker2006)
fluid (CSF). Two distinct nerve roots emerge
In recent years, loco
anesthesia has also
from each spinal level. The dorsal nerve roots pro-
gained popularity in veterinary
 medicine. With
a
vide afferent information to the spinal cord,
 growing emphasis on improving pain management
whereas the ventral nerve roots provide efferent
for animals, loco-regional anesthetic
procedures
information from the spinal cord to the effector
that were originally described for use in people are
organs in the body.
now being adapted to different animal species with
The anatomic area that is innervated by an
positive results (Campoy et al. 2008;
Figueiredo
individual nerve root is referred to as a "derma-
et al. 2008; Bardell et al. 2010; Mosing
 et al. 2010;
tome."
 Dermatome maps exist and thorough
Zarucco et al. 2010; Watts et al. 2011). However, the
knowledge of this inmervation allows anesthetists
extrapolation and safe use of loco-regional anes
aau sp r rap ede a o
thetic techniques (either neuraxial or peripheral)
dural or intrathecal spaces (Stoelting and Miller
that are designed and reported for
one species
2007; Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988).
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
12  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Structure of a nerve - note that aff nerves contain both myelinated and
unmyelinated sensory and motor fibers (axons)
Axon
Myelin sheath
-Perineurium
Endoneurium
(loose CT)
Endoneurium
Blood
Fascicle
vessels
Blood vessels
Perineurium
(loose CT)
Nervefibers
Fascicle
Epineurium
Schwann
(Dense, tough fibrous CT)
cell nucleus
Axon
Myelin
Node of
ranvier
Figure 2.1
Microanatomy of a peripheral nerve. (From: A. Kizirian. http://antranik.org/wp-content/uploads/201 1/1 0/structure-
of-a-nerve-perineurium-endoneurium-epineurium-perineurium-fascicle-1024x731.jpg. Used with permission.)
Peripheral nerve anatomy and pain
not continuous throughout the peripheral nerve
 and they divide and anastomose with one another
Individuals who perform regional anesthesia
as frequently as every few millimeters (Stoelting
should have a thorough understanding of the
and Miller 2007; Cousins and Bridenbaugh 1988).
microanatomy of peripheral nerves.
Although
The endoneurium is the layer of delicate connective
nerves may appear grossly to be large, distinct
tissue made up of endoneurial cells that encloses
structures, they are actually made up of many
the myelin sheath surrounding each nerve fiber.
components (Figure 2.1). A peripheral nerve is a
structure consisting of nerve fascicles that are held
together by the epineurium, the outermost layer of
Loco-regional anesthetic terminology
connective tissue surrounding a peripheral nerve.
The epineurium not only
holds
sthefascicles
Topical or surface anesthesia
together in a grossly identifiable structure, but
also contains the blood vessels that supply the
Topical or surface anesthesia has great theoret-
peripheral nerve. Individual nerve fascicles with
ical appeal as pain transmission could be halted
in the peripheral nerve are surrounded by the peri-
before it even starts at the site of peripheral
neurium, a multilayered epithelial sheath consist-
 injury. Unfortunately, local anesthetics are not
ing of several layers of perineural cells.
.Each
readily absorbed across the skin surface, and
fascicle contains many individual nerve fibers and
special formulations are needed for them to be
capillary blood vessels. The fascicular bundles are
used in this way.
General Considerations   13
A Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics (EMLA?
consumption, duration of ileus, and duration of
ued aseainap on pasn uaaq seu (sauoied no ea
hospital admission being reported as benefits
for a variety of dermal procedures in people, and
(Ganapathy et al. 2011).
has been studied in cats to minimize pain associ-
ated with jugular puncture (Wagner et al. 2006).
EMLA? is a eutectic mixture of equal quantities
Regional or nerve (plexus) block anesthesia
of lidocaine and prilocaine (2.5% each) and
is
approved for application to intact, non-mucosal
Regional anesthesia is the injection of a local
skin (Kundu and Achar 2002). EMLA? is indicated
anesthetic solution in the vicinity of a peripheral
for dermal anesthesia and is reportedly useful for
nerve to temporarily block sensory and/or motor
preventing  pain  associated 
with
1  peripheral
functions for intraoperative and postoperative pain
intravenous catheter placement, blood sampling,
n je sarau lerandad du are aaui lono
and superficial skin closure in people. When used
be blocked, depending on the region of interest in
correctly, the cream is applied to the skin and it is
the body (see Chapters 9-13).
then covered with an occlusive dressing to facili-
tate absorption of the local anesthetics. Local anes-
thetic efficacy is achieved after approximately
Neuraxial anesthesia
a rae smou oml on dn sisel pue sannuu 09
dressing is removed.
The spinal cord and nerve roots are housed within
Transdermal lidocaine
patches (Lidoderm)
the bony vertebral canal. Epidural (extradural) anes-
were originally developedf
for treating
post-
thesia refers to the administration of a local anes-
herpetic neuralgia pain in people, and their use has
thetic (or other drug) into the epidural space outside
recently been studied in horses (Bidwell et al. 2007).
of the dura, whereas the administration of a drug
The patches contain 5% lidocaine and the penetra-
into the subarachnoid space is known as spinal, sub-
tion of lidocaine into intact skin is sufficient to
arachnoid, or intrathecal anesthesia (see Chapter 14).
produce a local analgesic effect, but is less than the
amount necessary to produce a complete sensory
block. Clinical trials in people have demonstrated
Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA)
that lidocaine patches placed near the site of inci-
ued sjueup pasuonoid annpond ci alqe are uons
Intravenous regional anesthesia involves adminis-
control and can reduce the amount of systemic
tration of a local anesthetic into a peripheral vein
opioids  required  for  postoperative 
analgesia
(see Chapter 15). Prior to drug administration, the
(Saber et al. 2009; Habib et al. 2009).
distal extremity is exsanguinated by elevating the
oi  aepq su e u nl huddem pue qu
quet is then inflated proximal to the surgical site
Local or infiltration anesthesia
and the bandage is removed. The local anesthetic
solution is then injected intravenously. Anesthesia
Local or infiltration anesthesia is an old concept
will soon take place covering an area distal to the
which has gained new followers recently (see
tourniquet. Intravenous regional anesthesia has
Chapter 8). Historically, infiltration of local anes-
 many applications for distal limb surgery of limited
thetics into surgical sites simply involved the one-
duration and, although it was originally described
time injection of the drug into the planned surgical
in 1908, it remains elegantly reliable, quick, and
field. Recently, development and use of wound
simple to perform.
infusion catheters has allowed also for the contin-
uous or intermittent delivery of local anesthetics
Complications
improving patient comfort. Use of these tech-
niques following abdominal procedures has been
With proper training and equipment, complica-
studied in people, with reductions in diaphrag-
tions arising from the use ofloco-regional anesthetic
matic dysfunction, rest pain, dynamic pain, opioid
techniques for pain control are rare. Potential
14  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
complications must be fully understood by the
people there is controversy over whether or not
clinician and strategies to minimize their incidence,
peripheral nerve blocks should be performed
including good record keeping, should be imple-
 under sedation rather than general anesthesia.
mented during each and every nerve block.
Giaufre et al. (1996) reported no complications
A number of studies investigating the complica-
relating to intravascular injection of local anes-
tions associated with regional anesthesia have been
thetic in children following 9396 peripheral nerve
conducted in people (Cazzuffi et al. 1982; Fortuna
blocks, despite the fact that the majority of these
and Fortuna 1989; Auroy et al. 1997; Brull et al.
 procedures were performed under general anes-
2007). Auroy et al. (1997) analyzed the records from
thesia. However, even with recent advances in the
21,278 peripheral nerve blocks to investigate the 
use of ultrasonography during performance of
incidence and characteristics of serious complica-
regional blocks in people, a recent case report by
tions in human patients following a variety of
Loubert et al. (2008) showed that severe adverse
regional anesthetic procedures. The incidence of
toxic effects are still possible as a result of intravas-
complications was as follows:
cular injections. The authors described how even
the slightest amount of pressure applied by the
three cardiac arrests (0.014%);
ultrasound transducer can cause veins to collapse
one death (0.005%);
and vanish from sonographic view. When this
16 seizures (0.075%);
 occurs it is possible to inadvertently inject local
four neurological injuries (0.019%); and
 anesthetic solutions into a vein without knowing.
four radiculopathies (0.019%)
 In veterinary medicine, this controversy becomes
moot—-we are often forced to perform these blocks
The incidence of serious complications in veteri-
 in heavily sedated or anesthetized animals because
nary patients is not known, and as we continue to
our patients do not typically tolerate these blocks
develop these techniques for clinical use, prospec-
being performed while they are awake. As a result,
tive studies should be performed to better identify
 monitoring of patients for neurological or cardio-
the risks to our patients.
vascular signs of local anesthetic toxicity during
Complications of loco-regional anesthetic tech-
and after performance of the regional block is
niques can be broadly categorized as being either
strongly recommended.
systemic toxicities or nerve injuries.
Neurological injuries
Systemic toxicity
In people, the most severe complication of using
The most devastating complication during the
loco-regional analgesic techniques for analgesia is
performance of a peripheral nerve block is the
the risk of permanent neurologic injury. For this
intravascular injection of local anesthetic with
reason, a great deal of research has been dedicated
subsequent signs of systemic toxicity such as
towards minimizing this risk. When it occurs,
muscle twitches, tremors, seizures, tachycardia,
-omau, se suasand uao Amfu aarau [naudad
hypotension, arrhythmias, cardiovascular collapse,
praxia,” with persistent numbness in the affected
and even death (see Chapter 4). Central nervous
area. Fortunately, most of these injuries self-
system symptoms (i.e. muscle twitches, tremors,
resolve and very few have been found to persist
or seizures) usually occur before cardiovascular
beyond a few months. Short-term complications
changes take place (i.e. tachycardia, hypotension,
regarded as being more trivial include: temporary
arrhythmias, cardiovascular
collapse,
cardiac
dysesthesias, localized tenderness, and hematoma
arrest), but these changes are usually only going
formation.
to be observed in awake patients. Under general
 Neurological complications are believed to result
anesthesia, early neurological waming
signs of
from one or more of the following causes:
local anesthetic toxicity are masked by sedatives
 and inhalant anesthetics, and this manifestation of 
 needle/mechanical trauma;
toxicity will often be missed. For this reason, in
 neuronal ischemia;
General Considerations   15
neurotoxicity caused by local anesthetics;
placement in the brachial plexus in pigs. They
 drug error; and
found that the minimum current that is able to
infection.
elicit a motor response was 0.43 mA (0.12-1.8mA)
[median (min-max)], and concluded that a motor
response above 0.5mA does not necessarily pre-
Needle/mechanical trauma
clude performance of an intraneural injection.
Needle or pressure-related damage is the most
The use of a short bevel needle (e.g. 30-45° angle)
common cause of nerve injury following peripheral
may facilitate the identification of tissue planes and
nerve blocks. Following neuraxial (epidural, spinal)
blockade, pressure-related complications can result
(Chambers 1992).
from unrecogmnized hematomas or abscesses, result-
 In order to minimize the chances of an intraneu-
ing in profound neurological deficits.
ral injection, by general convention, if resistance 
 In peripheral nerves, the fascicular bundles are
to injection is experienced, the needle should be
not continuous along the length of a nerve. They
repositioned before further local anesthetic is
divide and anastomose with one another every
injected. Additionally, when using electrolocation,
few millimeters along their course. As a result, if a
the current output of the nerve stimulator should
short segment of a nerve is traumatized
or
be decreased to 0.2mA and the absence of obvious
compressed (i.e. in the case of an intrafascicular
 motor stimulation should be verified. When using
injection of the local anesthetic), the fascicles at
ultrasound to perform the block, as the local anes-
both ends of that segment may no longer corre-
thetic solution is being injected, fluid spread-
spond with one another, leading to conduction
ing
around the nerves should be observed
deficits in the nerve.
("doughnut sign").
There are a number of safety factors that have
The symptoms of a nerve lesion following
been suggested to help reduce the incidence and
performance of a peripheral nerve block usually
severity of peripheral neurological complications:
become apparent within 48 hours of the procedure.
The intensity and duration of the symptoms vary
 monitoring the resistance to injection (injection
with the severity of the injury. In human subjects,
pressure);
 these may vary from a light, intermittent tingling
minimizing the intensity of the stimulating
and numbness to a persistent, painful paresthesia,
current during electrolocation;
neuropathic 
pain, sensory loss, and/or motor
 needle design.
weakness lasting for several monthis or years. In
general, it is safe to say that following peripheral
Kapur et al. (2007) reported the neurological
nerve anesthesia, if sensory and /or motor functions
outcomes following intraneural injections of the
remain depressed beyond the expected duration of
sciatic nerves in anesthetized dogs. They found that
action of the local anesthetic used, potential causes
the worst neurological outcomes were associated
for the neurologic deficits should be investigated.
with high injection pressures (20-38 psi,
~138-
Treatments
 most commonly  prescribed
for
262KPa), whereas intraneural injections that were
paresthesias, neuropathic pain, and other deficits
associated
with
 moderate pressures
(<12psi,
include tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitripty-
Jo uomp paoadxa u au e py (e8
line),
serotonin
1 reuptake inhibitors 
(e.g. parox-
nerve deficits, but no other
r long-term
1 adverse
etine), anticonvulsants (e.g. gabapentin), opioids
effects. All perineural injections (i.e. those that were
(e.g. tramadol), and capsaicin ointment.
performed correctly) were associated with low
injection pressures (<5psi, ~34.5KPa). This report
Neuronal ischemia
sisans (siauoreasan jo dnono s one sao pe)
that injection pressure plays an important role in
Needle trauma to blood vessels that are closely
the severity and duration of nerve injury following
associated with the target nerve may cause an
intra- and perineural injection of local anesthetics.
extra- or intraneural hematoma or edema, leading
Chan et al. (2007) evaluated the minimum stimu-
    s  
lating current associated with intraneural needle
(Chambers 1992).
16  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Neurotoxicity
Local anesthetics and their additives may potentially
regional anesthesia-induced infection is even more
relevant. Even though the incidence of infection in
cause a variety of local reactions. Sodium metabisul-
human subjects is very low (1/1930 to 1/7500 for
fite was formerly added to chloroprocaine, causing
epidural abscess), the outcomes can be catastrophic.
several cases of muda equina syndrome when used
Adherence to strict aseptic technique is therefore
as a spinal injection (Ravindran et al. 1980).
required to minimize the risk of infection
Ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA) added
(Faccenda and Finucane 2001; Aromaa et al. 1997;
 as a preservative to some local anesthetics resulted
Wang et al. 1999).
in severe back pain when these drugs were used
for epidural anesthesia (Fibuch and Opper 1989;
Stevens et al. 1993). Concentrated, hyperbaric lido-
Allergic reactions
caine has been associated with transient neurologic
Allergic reactions to ester local anesthetics are more
symptoms (TNS) when used for spinal anesthesia
common than to amide local anesthetics. Para-
(Schneider et al. 1993). Local anesthetics can also
aminobenzoic acid (PABA) is a metabolite of ester
local anesthetics and is responsible for a large number
included as part of the injectate (Benoit 1978a, b;
of allergic reactions. Many patients will present with
Kytta et al. 1986). When local anesthetic agents are
 an "allergy" to local anesthetics that likely represents
used at the concentrations that are currently used
clinically, they are not known to be neurotoxic
injectate (fainting, tachycardia, etc.). Fortunately, true 
when applied as peripheral nerve blocks (Chambers
 allergies to lidocaine are exceedingly rare in people
1992). This may not be the case when the intra-
and animals. Idiosyncratic reactions to the injection
articular route is used (see Chapter 13).
of local anesthetics have also been reported (Faccenda
and Finucane 2001).
Drug error
To date, there are no reports in the veterinary liter-
Other confounding complications
ature of drug mistakes after attempted peripheral
nerve blocks. Recently, O'Kell and Ambros (2010)
also be associated with confounding factors such
reported the administration of thiopental via the
as tourniquet ischemia, neuropathy due to posi-
epidural route. Correct syringe labeling and imple-
tioning of the patient, or nerve damage following
mentation of "time-outs" are recommended
in
 a  s g  s a u 
 order to minimize the risk of medical mistakes.
1999), no patient had permanent neurologic injury
attributed to the regional anesthetic technique
itself. Interestingly, the only variable that showed
Infection
a significant predictive association with post-
Based on the authors' experiences, infection after
operative nerve injury was tourniquet pressure
injection of local anesthetics is very rare. To date,
greater than 400 mmHg (7.54 psi, 52 kPa).
there are no reports that implicate this mechanism of
injury as a cause of peripheral nerve damage. The
risk of infection following peripheral nerve blocks
Successful regional anesthesia service
still exists, but the consequences are expected to be
less severe than when it follows neuraxial blockade.
The implementation of new techniques for
Two cases of discospondylitis have been reported
providing analgesia and anesthesia can pose
in dogs following attempted neuraxial blockade
multiple obstacles that need to be overcome. The
(Remedios et al. 1996; MacFarlane and Iff 2011).
following are a few pointers to consider that may
 Reports regarding humans can also be found in the
 make practice expansion into this area easier:
literature (Kindler and Seeberger 1996). With the
penetration of the skin with regional anesthesia
 The benefits of regional anesthesia need to be
needles, infection remains a possibility. In an era of
conveyed to the entire team. Pain control, side
General Considerations   17
effect profiles, and studies that convey data
if the block procedure needs to be adjusted.
regarding rehabilitation goals and length of
Detailed records may also be helpful in the event of
hospital stay can be invaluable. Having outcome
an adverse outcome and can help to demonstrate
data from your own institution (pain scores,
 adherence to the accepted standard of care. Records
opioid consumption, opioid related side effect
 can also be useful if a patient returns for a similar
data) can be incredibly helpful when attempting
procedure in the future, and can provide useful
to make the case for regional anesthesia.
information such as needle depth, response to
Therefore, good record keeping is essential.
dose/volume, duration of block, etc. Data that
Clients need to be informed of the potential
should be recorded in the patient's chart include:
benefits of regional anesthesia. They need to
uderstand that although there is certainly a
type of block;
cost and risk associated with regional anes-
drug(s) administered (dose, concentration,
thesia, it is likely that it will be "worth it" in the
volume);
long run if the blocks are able to provide greater
verification of absence of resistance to injection;
comfort to their pets, allowing them to be dis-
verification of aspiration prior to injection;
charged from the clinic more rapidly. The ability
any elicited responses if electrolocation was
to return to normal behavior from anesthesia
used (what was the minimal current?); and
and surgery with decreased pain understand-
if ultrasound was used to assist with the block,
ably has a large amount of appeal. Success with
images can be captured to document the differ-
 a regional anesthesia program begets more
success as clients, clinicians, referring veteri-
following injection, local anesthetic solution
narians, and others hear about the benefits of
surrounding the nerve, etc.).
these local anesthetic interventions.
Basic equipment must be obtained in order to
have a functional block service. Nerve localiza-
References
tion devices (nerve stimulator or ultrasound),
needles, syringes, etc., require capital to acquire
Aromaa U, Lahdensuu M, Cazanitis DA (1997) Severe
but are clearly necessary
complications associated with epidural and spinal
more information).
anesthesia in Finland 1987-1993. A study based on
Start with those techniques that "always work"
patient insurance claims. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 41,
while confidence and trust are being gained.
445-452.
Implementation of regional anesthetic tech-
Auroy Y, Narchi P, Messiah A et al. (1997) Serious compli-
niques requires a group of individuals dedi-
cations related to regional anesthesia: results of a
prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology 87,
cated to pain management and improving the
479-486.
perioperative experience of their
patients.At
 Bardell D, Iff I, Mosing M (2010) A cadaver study com-
least one member of the team needs to con-
 aAtau Aieixeul e uoiad oi sauoeoidde oml Surnd
a  s   a
block in the horse. Equine Vet J 42, 721-725.
for the regional team and push the team to offer
 Benoit PW (1978a) Microscarring in skeletal muscle after 
its services to a wider array of surgical patients.
The team also needs to have a postoperative
J Oral Surg 36, 530-533.
presence in order to evaluate and
1 improve
 Benoit PW (1978b) Reversible skeletal muscle damage
future block performance.
after administration of local anesthetics with and
without epinephrine. J Oral Surg 36, 198-201.
Bidwell LA, Wilson DV, Caron JP (2007) Lack of systemic
Record keeping
absorption of lidocaine from 5% patches placed on
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 443-446.
Brull R, McCartmey CJ, Chan VW et al. (2007) Neurological
Record keeping and patient documentation is a
complications after regional anesthesia: contemporary
requirement of any successful regional anesthetic
estimates of risk. Anesth Analg 104, 965-974.
program. Detailed records can help to determine if
Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Looney AL et al. (2008)
 a given block is successful for a given procedure or
Distribution of a lidocaine-methylene blue solution
1 8  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
staining in brachial plexus, lumbar plexus and sciatic
Supunauins pue
muscle
tissue in rats. Acta
nerve blocks in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 348-354.
Anaesthesiol Scand 30, 625-629.
CazzuffiS, Fugagnoli G,Piva Det al.(1982)Complications
Loubert C, Williams SR, Helie F et al. (2008) Complication
in  subarachnoid
anesthesia 400
cases.
Acta
Anaesthesiologica Italica 33, 367-376.
intravascular injection of local anesthetic. Anes-
Chambers WA (1992) Peripheral nerve damage and
thesiology 108, 759-760.
regional anesthesia. Br J Anaesth 69, 429-430.
MacFarlane PD, Iff I (2011) Discospondylitis in a dog
Chan VW, Brull R, McCartmey CJ et al. (2007) An ultraso-
after attempted extradural injection. Vet Anaesth Analg
nographic and histological study of intraneural injec-
38, 272-273.
tion and electrical stimulation in pigs. Anes Analg 104,
Mosing M, Reich H, Moens Y (2010) Clinical evaluation
1281-1284, tables of contents.
of the anaesthetic sparing effect of brachial plexus
Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO (1988) Neural blockade in
block in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 154-161.
clinical anesthesia and management of pain (2"d edn),
Neal JM, Baker J (2006) Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Medicine after 30 years: a historical perspective. Reg
Faccenda KA, Finucane BT (200l) Complications of
Anesth Pain Med 31, 575-581.
regional anesthesia: Incidence and prevention. Drug
O'Kell AL, Ambros B (2010) Accidental epidural injection
Saf 24, 413-442.
of thiopental in a dog. Can Vet J 51, 305-307.
Fanelli G, Casati A, Garancini P et al. (1999) Nerve stimu-
Ravindran RR, Bond VK, Tasch MD et al. (1980) Prolonged
neural blockade following regional analgesia with
lower limb blockade: failure rate, patient acceptance
2-chloroprocaine. Anesth Analg 95, 447-451.
and neurologic complications. Anesth Analg 88,
Remedios AM, Wagner R, Caulkett NA et al. (1996)
847-852
Epidural abscess and discospondylitis in a dog after
 Fibuch EE, Opper SE (1989) Back pain following epidur-
administration of a lumbosacral epidural analgesic.
ally administered Nesacaine-MPF. Anesth Analg 69,
Can Vet J 37,106-107.
113-115.
Saber AA, Elgamal MH, Rao AJ et al. (2009) Early experi-
Figueiredo JP, Cruz ML, Mendes GM et al. (2008)
Assessment of brachial plexus blockade in chickens by
control after laparoscopic ventral hermia repair. Int
an axillary approach. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 511-518.
JSurg 7,36-38.
Fortuna A, Fortuna ADO (1989) Accidents and complica-
Schmeider M, Ettlin T, Kaufmann M et al. (1993) Transient
tions after regional blocks spinal and epidural
anesthesia. Revista Brasileira de Cirurgia 79, 5-10.
anesthesia with 5% lidocaine. Anesth Analg 76,
Ganapathy S, Brookes J, Bourne R (2011) Local infiltration
1154-1157.
analgesia. Anesthesiology Clin 29,329-342.
Stevens RA, Urmey WF, Urquhart BL et al. (1993) Back
Giaufre E, Dalens B, Gombert A (1996) Epidemiology
pain after epidural anesthesia with chloroprocaine.
and morbidity of regional anesthesia in children: a one-
Anesthesiology 78, 492-497.
year prospective survey of the French-Language
Stoelting RK, Miller RD. (2007) Basics of Anesthesia
Society of Pediatric Anesthesiologists. Anesthesia and
(5th edn) Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier, Philadelphia,
Analgesia 83, 904-912.
PA, USA.
Habib AS, Polascik TJ, Weizer AZ et al. (2009) Lidocaine
Wagner KA, Gibbon KJ, Strom TL et al. (2006) Adverse
effects of EMLA (lidocaine/prilocaine) cream and effi-
bic prostatectomy. Anesth Analg 108, 1950-1953.
cacy for the placement of jugular catheters in hospital-
Kapur E, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F et al. (2007) Neurologic
ized cats. J Feline Med Surg 8, 141-144.
and histologic outcome after intraneural injections of
Wang LP, Hauerberg J, Schmidt JF. (1999) Incidence
lidocaine in canine sciatic nerves.
Acta Anaes-
of spinal epidural abscess after epidural analgesia.
thesiologica Scandinavica 51, 101-107.
 Anesthesiology 91, 1928-1936.
Kindler CH, Seeberger MD (1996) Infectious complica-
Watts AE, Nixon AJ, Reesink HL et al. (2011) Continuous
tions after epidural anesthesia. Anesthesiology 85,
peripheral neural blockade to alleviate signs of experi-
444445.
mentally induced severe forelimb pain in horses. J Am
Kundu S, Achar S (2002) Principles of office anesthesia:
Vet Med Assoc 238, 1032-1039.
Part II. Topical anesthesia. Am Fam Physician 66,
Zarucco L, Driessen B, Scandella M et al. (2010) Sensory
99-102.
Kytta J, Heinonen E, Rosenberg PH et al. (1986) Effects of
forelimb during perineural bupivacaine infusion along
the palmar nerves. Can J Vet Res 74, 305-313.
Patient Preparation
Luis Campoy and Matt R. Read
Sedation and anesthetic requirements
 Oxygen supplementation is recommended in order
 to minimize the chances of drug-induced hypox-
In small animals, to perform the majority of nerve
emia caused by ventilatory depression.
blocks, the patient needs to be sedated or anesthe-
 In order to increase the patient's tolerance to the
tized. Patients should be relaxed, easy to manipu-
procedure, local infiltration with a local anesthetic
late and position, and be either minimally
or
Ae as amioumd au ie (%z-l) aueop se yons
completely unresponsive to needle advancement,
be necessary if the patient is sedated rather thian
electrolocation, and injection.
anesthetized.
To prepare a patient for the procedure, an intra-
 Finally, during and after the injection, the patient
venous catheter should be placed. For sedation,
should be monitored for adverse effects such as
a combination of either  intravenous fentanyl
tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, muscle
(2-5 μg kg-1) or dexmedetomidine (0.5-1μgkg-1)
twitches, tremors, or seizures. Although they are
and propofol (2-4 mgkg-') can be administered.
very rare, local anesthetic systemic toxicities are
Note that the higher doses may be required when
 potentially fatal.
electrolocation is used alone (as higher current out-
puts are used), compared with a combined ultra-
sound /electrolocation-guided technique.
Patient positioning
Knauxo asmd je papuauruosan Aiouons si H
 blood pressure, and electrocardiography are moni-
 Patient positioning is an important aspect of the
 Sumony pue anueonad Sump pano
the
procedure-
—nerves are flexible structures whose
regional anesthetic procedure because of the poten-
locations can vary depending on the patient's
tial for complications that are related to the seda-
position. The approaches that are recommended
tion itself, to the regional anesthetic technique, or
for performing the different nerve blocks may
to the potential side effects or systemic toxicity
or may not be possible depending on the
from the local anesthetic (see Chapter 4 for more
 patient's position. In some instances, patient
 information). In cases where deep sedation is used,
aoalu uo jaga ue aaeq osie Ae luosod
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
19
20  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
migration following injection, as has been
reported in people following psoas compartment
blockade (Mannion 2004). Using described and
-uu on diau osle Aeu Suruosod paziprepus
imize complications.
Aseptic preparation
Recommendations from the United States Agency
for Health Care Policy and Research (1993) may
be extrapolated for our use, and may therefore be
considered appropriate for all regional anesthetic
techniques in veterinary medicine.
Figure 3.1An epidural catheter being placed in a dog. Note
Thorough hand washing is considered to be
most important in the prevention of cross-infec-
sterile technique, including appropriate clipping and skin
tion (Boyce et al. 2002) and should occur before
preparation, and using a fenestrated drape and sterile gloves.
 performing any regional anesthetic technique.
Soap and water remove bacteria but are not
Skin preparation
effective for killing organisms (see Skin prepa-
ration below). Interestingly, higher microbial
Infectious complications may potentially occur with
counts have been identified in health care
workers who do not remove jewelry before
those associated with neuraxial (spinal, epidural)
hand washing (Salisbury et al. 1997).
blockade are usually of greatest concern because of
●
 Sterile surgical gloves should be used and con-
sidered a supplement to, and not a replacement
their potentially devastating sequelae (MacFarlane
and Iff2011) Fortunately, the incidence of such com-
for, hand washing.
plications appears to be relatively low.
Saloojee and Steenhoff (2001) showed that the
use of surgical gowns does not reduce the inci-
dence of infection any lower than the levels
●The migration of skin bacteria through needle
achieved with use of gloves alone.
 puncture sites is considered to be a major source
Evidence that use of face masks will result in
of epidural colonization (Sato et al. 1996).
fewer postoperative wound infections is still
Darchy et al. (1996) reported that infections
distant to an epidural catheter site do not
lacking (Tunevall 1991; Philips et al. 1992).
increase the likelihood of subsequent epidural
infections.
Important components of aseptic technique
(Hebl 2006) (Figures 3.1 and 3.2)
Clipping of the puncture site
 Removal of watches and jewelry;
 pre-procedural hand washing with antiseptic
Clipping the skin is not recommended at any
scrub;
time other than immediately prior to carrying out
 protective barriers;
the block. Brown et al. (1997) showed that sur
sterile gloves;
gical sites clipped prior to induction of anesthesia
appropriate selection and application of skin
Were three times more likely to become infected.
disinfectant;
Additionally, clipping should be done carefully
 proper sterile draping technique;
to minimize clipper rash, nicks, and cuts that
maintenance of a sterile field; and
might contribute to bacterial colonization
appropriate dressing techniques.
(Hamilton et al. 1977).
Patient Preparation  21
(a)
(b)
TegadermFilm
1626W
Figure 3.2 (a) A dog with an epidural catheter placed prior to bilateral stifle surgery. Note the transparent film dressing
(b) used to protect the catheter insertion site.
Skin disinfection
ultimately responsible for the actual antimicrobial
activity. Organic compounds such as blood can
Controversy exists regarding the safest and most
inhibit the antimicrobial effects of iodophors.
appropriate antiseptic solution to use prior to
Adverse reactions to povidone-iodine include
performance of a loco-regional anesthetic tech-
contact dermatitis and impaired wound healing
nique. Characteristics of an "ideal" disinfectant
secondary to its cytotoxic effects on fibroblasts
include:
and keratinocytes (the predominant cell type in
the epidermis).
effectiveness against a wide range of microor-
ganisms;
 immediate onset of efficacy;
Chlorhexidine gluconate
 long-term effect;
Chlorhexidine gluconate acts to disrupt cyto-
 lack of inactivation by organic material (blood,
plasmic membranes and is active against a broad
pus, and body fluids); and
minimal toxic effects to the skin.
bacteria (including certain strains of Staphylococcus
aureus), yeasts, and molds. Chlorhexidine is rapid
Some of the more commonly used solutions include
acting and has superior bactericidal effects that
 povidone iodine or chlorhexidine gluconate with
extend several hours beyond its initial application.
or without isopropyl alcohol.
In addition, its actions are not inhibited by the
presence of organic compoumds at the site of appli-
cation. However, skin irritation and erythema have
Povidone-iodine
been documented with chlorhexidine-based prod-
Povidone-iodine is a specific type of iodophor. It
ucts (Figure 3.5).
destroys microbial protein and DNA and is active
Povidone-iodine and chlorhexidine-based prod-
against a broad spectrum of bacteria and fungi. In
ucts may both be combined with isopropyl alcohol.
order for iodophors to have significant bacteri-
 Isopropyl alcohol is an effective bactericidal agent
cidal activity, two minutes of contact time are
that disorganizes cell membrane lipids and dena-
required to allow for release of free iodine that is
tures cellular proteins.
22   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3 (a) Betadine solution 10% swabstick (povidone iodine). This product can be used for final skin preparation following
use of an antiseptic microbicidal cleanser (i.e. betadine surgical scrub containing povidone iodine and detergent) (b) Skin final
preparation using a betadine solution.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4  (a) An example of chlorhexidine surgical scrub combined with isopropyl alcohol. (b) Skin being prepared with
chlorhexidine surgical scrub.
Antiseptic effects
the efficacy of  alcohol-based  chlorhexidine
Several investigationshave compared the antiseptic
and povidone-iodine solutions for all regional
effects of chlorhexidine and povidone iodine
 anesthetic techniques in 100 patients undergoing
under different conditions. Use of alcoholic
neuraxial blockade. They found that the use
chlorhexidine for cutaneous antisepsis prior to
of chlorhexidine decreased the incidence of
epidural catheter insertion in children reduced
insertion-site-colonization. Darouiche et al. (2010)
the risk of catheter colonization when compared
 conducted a prospective study to investigate the
with the use of aqueous povidone iodine (Kinirons
incidence of surgical site infections in patients
et al. 2001). Krobbuaban et al. (2011) investigated
randomly assigned to undergo skin preparation
Patient Preparation   23
commonly used for skin preparation prior to a
variety of procedures in veterinary patients.
References
Boyce JM, Pittet D, et al (2002) Guideline for Hand
Hygiene in Health-Care Settings: recommendations of
the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA
Hand Hygiene Task Force. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 23, S3-40.
Brown DC, Conzemius MG, Shofer F et al. (1997)
 Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative wound
infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210,
1302-1306.
Figure 3.5 Skin reaction to a cleansing solution in a dog
Darchy B, Forceville X, Bavoux E et al. (1996) Clinical and
following surgical skin preparation prior to stifle surgery.
Image by M.S. Hirshenson.
 in the intensive care unit. Anesthesiology 85, 988-998.
Darouiche RO, Wall MJ, Jr, Itani KM et al. (2010)
Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidone-iodine for sur-
with either chlorhexidine-alcohol or povidone-
gical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med 362, 18-26.
Hamilton HW, Hamilton KR, Lone FJ (1977) Preoperative
iodine. In that study, chlorhexidine-alcohol
 appeared to be superior to povidone-iodine for
hair removal. Can J Surg 20, 269-271,274-265.
Hebl JR (2006) The importance and implications of
prevention of surgical-site infections following
aseptic techniques during regional anesthesia. Reg
clean-contaminated surgery.
Anesth Pain Med 31, 311-323.
Kinirons B, Mimoz O, Lafendi L et al. (2001) Chlorhexidine
Complications
versus povidone iodine in preventing colonization of
continuous epidural catheters in children: a randomized,
The United States Food and Drug Administration
controlled tial. Anesthesiology 94, 239-244.
-on aupxaoro paaondde pan pou su ()
Krobbuaban B, Diregpoke S, Prasan S et al. (2011)
 nate for use before lumbar neuraxial puncture
 Alcohol-based chlorhexidine vs. povidone iodine in
because of the absence of clinical safety evidence.
 reducing skin colonization prior to regional anesthesia
Recently, Sviggum et al. (2012) investigated the
procedures. J Med Assoc Thai 94, 807-812.
MacFarlane PD, Iff I (2011) Discospondylitis in a dog
incidence of neurologic complications associated
 after attempted extradural injection. Vet Anaesth Analg
with spinal anesthesia after chlorhexidine was
38,272-273.
used for skin preparation. In their study, the inci-
Mannion S (2004) Epidural spread depends on the
dence of neurologic complications associated with
approach used for posterior lumbar plexus block. Can
spinal anesthesia following use of chlorhexidine
J Anaesth 51,516-517.
 gluconate was no different, supporting their hypo-
 Philips BJ, Fergusson S, Armstrong P et al. (1992) Surgical
thesis that chlorhexidine gluconate can be used for
face masks are effective in reducing bacterial contami-
skin antisepsis before spinal needle placement
nation caused by dispersal from the upper airway. Br J
without increasing the risk of neurologic complica-
Anaesth 69, 407-408.
tions beyond that attributed to the spinal anes-
Salisbury DM, Hutfilz P, Treen LM et al. (1997) The effect
of rings on microbial load of health care workers'
thetic itself.
Chlorhexidine-based products appear to be the
hands. Am J Infect Control 25, 24-27.
Saloojee H, Steenhoff A (2001) The health professional's
agents of choice for surgical skin preparation due
role in preventing nosocomial infections. Postgrad
to their superior antimicrobial profiles when
Med J 77, 16-19.
compared with iodophor solutions, resulting in
 Sato S, Sakuragi T, Dan K (1996) Human skin flora as a
reductions in skin bacterial levels and surgical site
potential source of epidural abscess. Anesthesiology
infection rates. For this reason, they are very
85,1276-1282.
24   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Sviggum HP, Jacob AK,Arendt KW et al. (2012) Neurologic
 US Department of Health and Human Services Agency
 complications after chlorhexidine antisepsis for spinal
for Health Care Policy and Research. (1993) Acute
 anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med 37, 139-144.
Pain Management: Operative or medical procedures
Tunevall TG (1991) Postoperative wound infections and
and trauma. Clinical Practice Guideline No.1; No.92-
 surgical face masks: a controlled study. World J Surg
0023, 107.
15,383-387.
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology
of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts
Manuel Martin-Flores
Local anesthetics interrupt the generation and
(fast vs. slow acting), and duration of action
propagation of action potentials in neural tissue,
(short vs. long lasting).
resulting in transient loss of sensory, motor, and
All local anesthetics share a common chemical
autonomic functions. This conduction blockade is
structure. A lipophilic unit is linked to a hydro-
limited to the area in proximity to the administration 
philic unit by an intermediate hydrocarbon chain
of the drug, and is completely reversed once the 
au 'dnon ape ue no raisa ue raa suiuon je
agent is removed from the site of action.
 lipophilic group is typically an unsaturated ring
(such as a benzene) and gives local anesthetic mol-
ecules the ability to cross nerve cell membranes
Physicochemical properties
after they are deposited outside the cells. The
of local anesthetics
intermediate chain (either an ester or an amide
 group) affects the synthesis and metabolism of the
Anumber of agents are commonly used for regional
drug. It is the make-up of the intermediate chain
anesthesia techniques, and although they differ in
that serves as the primary basis for local anesthetic
terms of potency, duration of action, risk for tox-
classification.
icity, and chemical structure, they all share the
same mechanism of action: Na+ channel blockade
 Ester local anesthetics (aminoesters) are hydro-
(Table 4.1).
lyzed by the cholinesterase enzyme in the
plasma and liver, with cocaine being the
exception (cocaine undergoes significant liver
Chemical structure and classification
metabolism) (Figure 4.1).
of local anesthetics
 Amidelocal anesthetics (aminoamides) undergo
hepatic metabolism by microsomal enzymes.
A variety of criteria have been used to classify
Compared with ester-linked anesthetics, the
local anesthetic agents, including chemical
metabolism of amide-linked drugs involves
structure (as esters or amides), onset of action
 more steps and takes longer. As a result, toxicity
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
25
26   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Table 4.1F
 Physicochemical properties of the commonly used local anesthetics.
lonization (%)
Partition coefficient 
pKa
(at pH 7.4)
(lipid solubility)
 Protein binding (%)
Relative potency
Esters
Procaine
8.9
26
100
 Chlorprocaine
810
8.7
95
4
Tetracaine
8.5
E6
5822
94
16
Amides
Lidocaine
7.9
76
366
64
4
Mepivacaine
7.6
61
130
77
2
Bupivacaine
8.1
E8
3420
95
8-16
Levobupivacaine
8.1
E8
3420
26
8-16
Ropivacaine
8.1
8
775
94
Adapted from (Hadzic and Vloka 2004).
Properties
The chemical structures of local anesthetics deter-
mine their pharmacological effects (Table 4.2).
H2N
Lipid solubility
 There is a positive correlation between the lipophi-
Figure 4.1
Chemical structure of procaine, an ester local
licity of local anesthetics and their potency. Potency
anesthetic.
relates to the amount of drug that is needed to
induce a
pharmacological effect.  In 
general,
CHg
potency
[n a se as oi p 
number of carbon atoms in the intermediate chain
increases.
Although
1lipid solubility
facilitates
penetration through nerve membranes, it also
NH
 promotes sequestration into lipid-soluble compart-
ments, such as myelin (Gissen et al. 1982). As a
result, lipid-soluble local anesthetics are slowly
N
released from the lipid-soluble compartments to
CH3
C4Hg
which they are bound. Therefore, lipid solubility
not only determines the potency of a drug, but it
Figure 4.2 (
Chemical structure of bupivacaine, an amide
also contributes to the slower onset and longer
local anesthetic.
duration of action of these drugs.
resulting from accumulation of the drug and
 Protein binding
elevation in plasma levels is more likely to occur
when amide agents are used (Figure 4.2).
 Local anesthetic agents that are more lipid soluble
also show a higher degree of protein binding. As
The amino group is commonly a tertiary amine
is the case with many drugs, only the "free"
(NH,-R) and determines the degree of water solu-
(unbound) fraction is available to have a clinical
bility for the local anesthetic. This characteristic
effect. Elimination of agents that have high affinity
allows for molecular dissociation and combination
for proteins is slower than for those with low
with sodium channels.
affinity. The degree of protein binding (mainly to
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts  2
27
Table 4.2 Onset and duration of action of the commonly used local anesthetics.
Clinical use
Onset
Duration (hours)
Esters
Procaine
Spinal (10%)
Fast
0.5-1
Chlorprocaine
PNB (2%)
Fast
0.5-1
Epidural (2%)
Fast
0.5-1
Tetracaine
Topical (2%)
Fast
0.5-1
Spinal (0.5%)
Fast
2-6
Amides
Lidocaine
PNB (1-1.5%)
Fast
1-3
Epidural (1.5-2%)
Fast
1-2
Spinal (1.5-2%)
Fast
0.5-1
Mepivacaine
PNB (1-1.5%)
Fast
2-4
Epidural (1.5-2%)
Fast
1-3
(%Z)leuids
Fast
1-2
Bupivacaine/Levobupivacaine
PNB (0.25-0.5%)
Slow
4-12
Epidural (0.5-0.75%)
Moderate
2-5
Spinal (0.5-0.75%)
Fast
1-4
Ropivacaine
PNB (0.5-1%)
Slow
5-8
Epidural (0.5-1%)
Moderate
2-6
 PN B, peripheral nerve block.
Q-acid glycoprotein and albumin) by local anes-
approximates the pKa of the agent, more of the drug
thetics hasno correlation with the degreeof binding
will be in the unionized form and the onset of action
to the Na+ channel. Furthermore, the interaction
will therefore be faster. The opposite scenario is also
(binding and dissociation) of local anesthetics with
true—an acidic environment will cause weak bases
the Na+ channel is short lived (seconds), regardless
such as local anesthetics to be primarily in their
 of the degree of protein binding of the agent
ionized forms, unable to cross lipid membranes,
(Ulbricht 1981).
thus slowing their onset of action. It should be
noted, however, that onset does not depend solely
on pKa—ease of diffusion through cormective tissue
pKa
 also affects the clinical onset of local anesthetics.
pKa (also called the dissociation constant) is the pH
at which 50% of a drug is present in its ionized
(charged) form and 50% is in its unionized (neutral)
Mode of action
form. The ability of a molecule to cross a cell mem-
brane depends on both the degree of its lipid solu-
Membrane potential
bility and the molecular weight of the drug. As
 unionized molecules are more lipid soluble, they
Like many other cells in the body, a neuron's rest-
 are the ones that will have the ability to cross nerve
ing membrane potential is negative as a result of
 cell membranes. However, once inside the cell, it is 
the disequilibrium of charged ions across its cell
the ionized local anesthetic molecule that binds to
membrane. A membrane protein, the Na+-K+-
the sodium channel to elicit the clinical effect.
ATPase pump, moves K+ into the cell and Nat out
Local anesthetics have pKa values that typically
of the cell in an active process that consumes
range between 8 and 9 (Hadzic and Vloka 2004)
energy
(Butterworth and Strichartz 1990). An
(Table 4.1). As such, local anesthetics are weak
intracellular-to-extracellular gradient is formed,
bases, with two forms co-existing at equilibrium; an
with approximately 30 times more K+ inside the
ionized (charged) form, and an unionized (neutral)
cell
pue
10 times more Na+ outside the cell.
form. If the pH of the local tissue environment
However, due to the selective permeability of the
28   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Action potential
+30
(mV)
 Refractory period
Sodium influx
Voltage
Stimulus threshold
-50
091
Resting potential
 Resting potential
-70
-80
-90
2
3
Time (ms)
Figure 4.3  When the change in voltage is large enough (at least 15 mV) to open the Nat channels on the axon at -60mV, an
action potential is produced. When the Nat channels open, Nat rushes INTO the cell. At the same time, K+ rushes OUT of the
cell. After the action potential is generated, the ions are pumped back to their original concentrations and the resting potential of
the membrane is restored.
membrane, K+ "leaks" out of the cell along its
During the process of repolarization, Nat and K+
concentration gradient, leaving a net negative
channels are reset to their resting state.
charge inside the cell. As a result, the intracellular
Voltage-gated Nat charnels advance through
space is negative relative to the extracellular space,
three different states during the cycle. During the
with the resting membrane potential being approx-
resting state, these channels are closed but can be
imately -60 to -70 mV.
activated. When membrane depolarization acti-
Activation of voltage-gated Na﹢ channels
vates these channels, they undergo a conforma-
necessary for the generation of an action potential
tional change and "open" to allow ion flow across
(Figure 4.3). Mechanical, chemical,
，or
: electrical
the cell membrane. Almost immediately after
stimuli can cause changes in the membrane poten-
they are activated, voltage-gated Nat channels
tial. Resting Na+ channels become activated when
become inactive; that is, they close and cannot be
the membrane potential increases above
-55mV
 activated again until they revert to their resting
(referred to as the cell's "threshold potential"). An
state. This period of time is referred to as the
influx of Na+ ions through these channels results in
"refractory period" of the cell. Voltage-gated Na*
further depolarization of the cell membrane and
channels
are either fully opened or fully
even more voltage-gated Nat channels become
dosed, with no intermediate conductance level
activated through this positive feedback loop.
(Butterworth and Strichartz 1990; Wann 1993).
 Activation of voltage-gated Nat channels is very
After an action potential is successfully gener-
short lived, after only a few milliseconds these
ated, adjacent Nat channels respond in similar
channels again become inactive. The process of
fashion and the impulse is propagated along the
inactivation is also triggered by the depolarization.
nerve cell membrane.
After a slight delay, K+ channels also become
Local anesthetics bind to sodium channels that
activated, leading to an efflux of K+ ions, which
are in their resting/inactive state. When they bind
restores the resting membrane potential of the cell.
to the channel, they prevent activation and, as a
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts  29
result, the large sodium influx associated with
Group C are small, non-myelinated, fibers that 
membrane depolarization is prevented. Because of
carry information about temperature and pain.
this effect, the threshold level of the cell is never
Whereas A8 fibers (above) carry information at
 attained and the action potential is not propagated.
As a result, transmission of the nociceptive impulse
do so more slowly (slow, dull, "second" pain).
is prevented, and no pain is experienced by the
patient.
In 1929, Gasser and Erlanger first described the
ability of a local anesthetic agent to block some
nerve fibers while sparing others, what is now
Selective block
of nerve fibers. They documented that cocaine
The characteristics of nerve fiber size and the
induced a reduction in action potential amplitude
presence or absence of myelin have been shown
more rapidly in smaller, myelinated fibers than in
to correlate with conduction velocity and function.
larger ones. This evidence has been confirmed
Most peripheral nerves that transmit information
many times, and it is now widely accepted that
to the central nervous system are composed of a
 small myelinated fibers (A8) are more susceptible
combination of myelinated and non-myelinated
to local anesthetic blockade than larger, myelin-
cells. These nerve cells can be classified
1into
ated fibers (Aα and Aβ) (Matthews and Rushworth
three groups depending on their diameter and
1957; Franz and Perry 1974; Ford et al. 1984; Gokin
conduction velocity.
et al. 2001). This "size principle" is not, however,
without exceptions: small myelinated B fibers
 Group A are large, myelinated, somatic fibers
have been shown to be less susceptible to blockade
that are responsible for transmitting information
than larger Aβ fibers (Heavner and de Jong 1974).
about touch and pressure (obtained from mech-
In addition, C fibers, which lack myelin but are of
anoreceptors), as well as modulating muscle
0h readde 'siaqu a pue v ueu iajaep raneus e
tone and motor/reflex activity. Specifically, A&
be either as susceptible or less susceptible than
fibers transmit information about nociception
 the myelinated but larger A fibers (Rosenberg
(pain) and temperature.
and Heinonen 1983; Fink and Cairms 1984; Gokin
Group B are small,
myelinated,
autonomic
et al. 2001).
fibers
that
are
involved
in
modulating
The ability
of
different agents to produce
autonomic functions such as altering smooth
differential block varies and is not based entirely
muscle tone in the vascular system.
on the
"size principle." However, experience
Table 4.3
 Summary of nerve fiber characteristics and functions.
Diameter
Conduction
Nerve block
Fiber
(μm)
Myelin
velocity (ms-1)
Innervation
 Function
onset
Aα
6-20
+++
75-120
 Afferent: Spindle
Motor and reflex
proprioceptors
functions
 Efferent: skeletal muscle
5-12
+++
30-75
Afferent: cutaneous
++
mechanoceptors
Touch and pressure
Ay
9-E
++
12-35
Efferent: muscle spindle
Muscle tone
+++
A8
1-5
++
5-30
Afferent: pain and
Fast pain. Touch and
++++
temperature
temperature
B
E>
+
3-15
Efferent: sympathetic
Autonomic
+++++
C
0.2-1.5
0.5-2
 Afferent: pain and
Slow pain, temperature
++++
temperature
30  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
and scientific observations provide evidence of
Bupivacaine has a relatively slow onset of action,
differential blockade. A& and C fibers are com-
but its anesthetic and analgesic effects extend for
monly desensitized before Ao fibers. As a result, a
 a sigrificantly longer time than those of lidocaine
preferential sensory block is possible with minimal
 or mepivacaine. However, it is significantly more
motor block.Bupivacaine(0.125%), levobupivacaine
cardiotoxic than other local anesthetic agents.
(0.125%), and ropivacaine (0.25%) are commonly
Bupivacaine is frequently used for nerve blocks
used in practice as they are more capable of
and neuraxial anesthesia in a wide range of
producing selective blockade in pain fibers than
concentrations (0.125-0.75%), allowing for the
other agents. However, this effect depends not only
development of differential blockade (sensory
on the agent, but also on the dose that is adminis-
without motor block).
tered as larger doses or higher concentrations will
 generally block all nerve fibers that are exposed to
the drug.
Levobupivacaine
Levobupivacaine is a formulation that includes one
Commonly used local anesthetics
of the two enantiomers of bupivacaine, and there-
fore its actions are similar to the standard racemic
Lidocaine
mixture. The main advantage to its use is a mark-
edly reduced risk of cardiotoxicity when compared
Lidocaine is one of the most frequently used local
to use of standard bupivacaine. The onset and
 anesthetics and is considered to be the prototype of
duration of levobupivacaine do not differ from
the aminoamide family of drugs. Lidocaine pro
those of bupivacaine.
vides quick onset and an intermediate duration of
action. It is commonly used for local anesthesia of
Ropivacaine
 peripheral nerves, neuraxial anesthesia, local infil-
tration, intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA), and
Ropivacaine is a long-lasting amide-type of local
even for topical desensitization of mucosa or skin.
anesthetic. Ropivacaine has lower potential for
For surgical anesthesia, concentrations of 1-2% are
inducing cardiovascular and CNS toxicity. At low
commonly used. In addition, lidocaine is used
concentrations (0.25-0.5%), ropivacaine has a
systemically as an intravenous agent for its analgesic,
relatively slow onset similar to bupivacaine. At
 anti-inflammatory, and antiarrhythmic effects.
higher concentrations (0.75%), its onset may be
as fast as that of mepivacaine. At concentrations
above 0.5%, ropivacaine produces sensory blockade
Mepivacaine
similar to that obtained with bupivacaine, but there
is less chance of inducing motor blockade (Hadzic
Mepivacaine is an amide-type of local anesthetic
and Vloka 2004). As a result of these favorable
with an intermediate duration and clinical profile
characteristics, ropivacaine has gained wide
similar to that of lidocaine. Although the onset of
acceptance and is frequently used for conduction
mepivacaine is similar to lidocaine, its duration of
and neuraxial anesthesia.
action is longer. Mepivacaine is commonly used
in concentrations ranging between 1% and 2% for
peripheral nerve blocks, epidural anesthesia, and
Mixtures of local anesthetic agents
local infiltration.
 Local anesthetics are commonly combined prior to
use in order to maximize the desirable characteris-
Bupivacaine
tics of individual drugs. As an example, lidocaine
(for its quick onset) and bupivacaine (for its longer
Since its introduction into clinical practice in the
duration) are commonly mixed in equal parts.
early 1960s, bupivacaine has become one of the
 There are few data available regarding the safety,
most commonly used local anesthetic agents.
 efficacy, or potentially altered pharmacokinetics of
mixing local anesthetics. The onset of a mixture of
longer duration of blockade;
agents may be unpredictable as the resulting pKa of
● increased intensity of blockade;
the mixture is unknowm. In addition, a 50:50 mix-
● reduced absorption of the anesthetic agent due
ture (i.e. lidocaine 2% and bupivacaine 0.5%) will
to local vasoconstriction;
result in half-strength concentrations of both drugs
 decreased surgical bleeding following infiltra-
(new concentrations of lidocaine 1% and bupiva-
tive local anesthesia.
caine 0.25%). It is possible that the lower concentra-
tions of the fast-acting drug and long-lasting drug
It has been found that administration of epi-
will result in a slightly slower onset and a shorter
nephrine alone in the epidural space can cause
duration than either individual agent by itself. This
segmental analgesia. The proposed mechanism is
[enba jo amixn e aram Apnis e u umous sem
by interaction with C, receptors in the spinal cord
parts of chloroprocaine 2% and bupivacaine 0.5%
(Curatolo et al. 1997). The increased intensity of
were administered to rats and produced anesthesia
blockade when epinephrine is added to a local
with characteristics similar to those of chloropro-
anesthetic for  epidural administration may be
caine (Galindo and Witcher 1980). In a study that
therefore be the result of a combination of mecha-
investigated femoral and sciatic peripheral nerve
nisms: local vasoconstriction causing reduced
blocks in people, bupivacaine 0.5%, ropivacaine
uptake of the primary local anesthetic agent into
0.75%, and combinations of equal volumes of bupi-
circulation, and a direct analgesic effect of the epi-
vacaine 0.5% and lidocaine 2%, or ropivacaine
nephrine mediated by these receptors.
0.75% and lidocaine 2% were compared (Cuvillon
The addition of a vasoconstrictor for peripheral
 et al. 2009). Their results showed that when long-
nerve blocks may have potentially detrimental
 acting local anesthetics were mixed with lidocaine,
effects on the perfusion of the vasa nervorum and
the onset of the block was faster but there was a
may have potential for ischemic nerve injury,
decreased duration of action.
especially when the integrity of the nerve or its
 Due to the lack of evidence showing a consistent
circulation has been compromised. Selander et al.
advantage of mixing local anesthetics, a better
(1979) found that when bupivacaine with epineph-
approach is to select a single agent based on its
rine was administered to intact rabbit nerves, it
desired predictable characteristics (such as onset
caused no damage. However, the addition of epi-
time, duration of action, or potential for differential
nephrine worsened injury following intraneural
block) and to use it as appropriate to the patient
injection or destruction of the nerve/blood barrier.
and the procedure.
More recently, Neal (2003) reviewed the existing lit-
erature and found that the potential for epineph-
rine to cause or potentiate nerve injury following
Adjuvants commonly used to enhance
peripheral block is exceedingly low in normal
loco-regional anesthesia and analgesia
patients, where  lower-than-normal peripheral
nerve blood flow is apparently well tolerated.
Adjunct agents are often combined with local anes-
In people, combinations of local anesthetics
thetics for techniques such as neuraxial anesthesia
with epinephrine are often used as "test doses"
 or peripheral nerve blockade. In the case of infiltra-
during epidural anesthesia, especially when epi-
tion anesthesia, vasoconstrictors are frequently
dural catheters are used. In this situation, a small
used. In most cases, these agents do not contribute
volume of the drug combination is administered
to the anesthetic effects of the solution itself, with
into the epidural needle or catheter, and any
the possible exception of opioids.
changes in heart rate are monitored. An immediate
increase in heart rate suggests that the tip of the
Vasoconstrictors
catheter may have been inadvertently placed in an
intravascular location.
Epinephrine has been administered in combination
 As epinephrine can affect hemodynamics, it is
with local anesthetic agents for over a century. The
logical to assume that potential toxic effects from
addition of epinephrine (5μgmL-1, 1:200000) to a
epinephrine will be seen if large doses are acciden-
local anesthetic solution has several benefits:
tally administered intravenously. Toxic effects from
32   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
epinephrine have also been documented in the
inhibitory effects on conduction of nerve
spinal cord and peripheral nerves (Neal 2003).
impulses (Butterworth and Strichartz 1993;
Eisenach et al. 1996). Dexmedetomidine enhances
local anesthetic action via the α, A receptor
Sodium bicarbonate
(Yoshitomi et al. 2008). Brummett et al. (2011)
found that the addition of dexmedetomidine
Although local anesthetic agents are weak bases,
prolonged the duration of ropivacaine by block-
commercial preparations have pH values ranging
Su!
the
hyperpolarization-activated
cation
between 3.9 and 6.7. As the pKa of most local anes-
current.
thetics is close to 8, when they are removed from
the bottle, only a small fraction (~3%) of the drugs
Clinical benefits of the addition of dexmedeto-
midine to long-lasting amide-type local anesthetic
exist in their non-ionized, lipid-soluble form. As
agents have been shown. The addition of dexme-
mentioned previously, it is the lipid-soluble form of
detomidine to ropivacaine administered to sciatic
the drug that has the ability to cross the nerve cell
nerves in rats doubled the duration of the ropiva-
membrane in order to reach the cytoplasm and the
sodium channel on the inside of the cell membrane.
caine blockade (Brummett et al. 2009, 2010). In
addition, when dexmedetomidine was added
In addition, acidic solutions are more painful on
to]
 levobupivacaine, prolonged duration and
injection, an important consideration in awake or
lightly sedated patients. For this reason, some anes-
improved postoperative analgesia were observed
(Esmaoglu et al. 2010). When α, agonists are admin-
thetists will alkalinize their local anesthetic solu-
istered into the epidural space, quality of anes-
tion by mixing it with sodium bicarbonate in order
thesia is improved. In children, the addition of
to increase the pH of the solution and increase the
 dexmedetomidine to bupivacaine prolonged the
fraction of the agent in its non-ionized, lipid-solu-
analgesic duration from five to 16 hours, and from
ble form. Unfortunately, local anesthetic agents
 six to 18 hours in two separate studies (El-Hennawy
cannot be alkalinized to pH values greater than 6-8
et al. 2009; Saadawy et al. 2009). No urinary reten-
otherwise precipitation of the resulting solution
tion was observed, unlike that seen following epi-
will occur. At this level of alkalinization, there is
dural administration of opioids.
 only a modest increase (approximately 10%) in the
fraction of the lipid-soluble form of the drug (Ikuta
et al. 1989; Peterfreund et al. 1989; Milner et al.
Opioids
2000). In one study in people, an alkalinized solu-
tion (pH 6.4) of 0.5% bupivacaine with epinephrine
The addition of opioids to local anesthetics for
was compared to a regular solution of the drug (pH
neuraxial anesthesia is widely practiced. Used in
3.9) for performance of brachial plexus blockade
this way, opioids exert their analgesic actions
(Hilgier 1985). A more rapid onset of action and a
through a variety of supraspinal and spinal mecha-
prolonged duration of sensory effect was reported.
nisms, including attenuation of C fiber-mediated
Recently, Hanna et al. (2009) reported the results of
nociception that is independernt of its spinal actions
a meta-analysis showing that the use of a buffered
solution of local anesthetics in people is associated
(Niv et al. 1995). Morphine, fentanyl, and other opi-
oids are commonly added to local anesthetics in
with decreased pain on injection of the solution
order to enhance epidural analgesia. The addition
when compared to unbuffered solutions.
of opioids results in improved analgesia without
affecting motor blockade. Morphine is the most
0., Adrenoceptor agonists
commonly used epidural opioid in veterinary med-
icine, and is used alone or in combination with
Q, Agonist agents are commonly used to enhance
local anesthetics. Numerous reports have docu-
the analgesia offered through both epidural
uognnos e jo jed se auudiou jo asn au paua
anesthesiaand
peripheral
nerve
blocks.
e a ralzlaoH) ssop u Aempida paraisupe 
Clonidine and dexmedetomidine produce anal-
2005; Kona-Boun et al. 2006; Campoy et al. 2012).
gesia through supraspinal and spinal mecha-
The addition of morphine to lidocaine for epidural
risms (via adrenergic receptors)
and have
 anesthesia in dogs results in prolonged analgesia,
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts  33
without changing the duration of motor blockade
through Na+ blockade. Unfortunately, this effect is
(Almeida et al. 2010). Documentation of the use of
not limited to the target peripheral nerve tissues.
epidural fentanyl in dogs is scarce; however, this
 Once a sufficient plasma concentration of the agent
author routinely administers combinations of bupi-
has been attained, this same mechanism of action is
shop ut eisalleue lempida iog [uejuan pue auienea
responsible for the systemic (whole-body) toxic
for a variety of procedures.
effects of local anesthetics.
Administration of epidural morphine can result
High plasma levels of local anesthetics can occur
 in urine retention. The incidence of urinary reten-
following administration of an overdose or by
tion following epidural opioid administration in
unintentional i
intravascular administration.
Ir
humans ranges between 30% and 60% (Liang et al.
 addition, unanticipated high plasma levels of local
2010; ONeill et al. 2012). Campoy et al. (2012)
anesthetics can be attained if biotransformation
soop au Jo Jieu Aaeuxoidde 1eu paodan
and/or elimination of the drug are slower than
developed urine retention following epidural mor-
usual, as may occur in individuals with hepatic or
phine. In addition, a case report of urinary reten-
renal insufficiencies. In people, the clearance of
tion in a dog has been described (Herperger 1998).
 lidocaine decreased from 10 to 6mLkg-min-1 in
Other opioids such as tramadol and buprenor-
the presence of hepatic disease (Thomson et al.
phine have been used with success via the epi-
1973). When the pharmacokinetic variables of lido-
dural route in arimals (Pypendop et al. 2008;
caine were calculated in dogs after partial hepatec-
Almeida et al. 2010).
tomy and transplantation, the maximal plasma
Although opioids are primarily used for neur-
concentration and area under the curve increased
axial block, some have also been used as adjuncts
by almost 100%, when compared with normal indi-
for peripheral nerve blockade. Buprenorphine has
viduals (Perez-Guille et al. 2011). Decreased bio-
been used as an adjunct to local anesthetics for
transformation of local anesthetics is potentially
peripheral nerve biock and may enhance the
 more problematic when amide local anesthetics are
quality of the nerve block through a local anes-
used for nerve blockade as they have longer and
thetic-like mechanism of action involving Nat
more involved metabolic pathways than do ami-
channel block, a property that other μ agonists do
noesters. In addition to severe liver and renal dis-
not share (Leffler et al. 2012). Addition of buprenor-
ease, heart failure can compromise metabolism and
phine to bupivacaine has been reported to enhance
excretion of local anesthetics and result in elevated
analgesia following sciatic nerve block in people
plasma concentrations (Thomson et al. 1971).
(Candido et al. 2010). Its use in animals has not yet
Local
anesthetic systemic toxicity typically
been reported.
manifests with central nervous system (CNS) and
cardiovascular system (CVS) complications being
the most relevant and commonly recognized
Toxicity of local anesthetics
(Table 4.4).
As with the other agents that are used during anes-
Table 4.4   Clinical signs of local anesthetic toxicity.
thesia, administration of local anesthetics is not
without risk. Techniques used for the provision of
Nystagmus
Muscular twitching
regional anesthesia may impose risks that are
inherent to the technique (i.e. causing damage to a
Tonic-clonic convulsions
Tremors or seizures (increased levels of lactic acid and
nerve during performance of a peripheral nerve
hypoxia may be observed after onset of seizures)
block), but they also carry risks as a result of the
Generalized CNS depression (drowsiness,
toxicity of the agents themselves. It is imperative
unconsciousness, coma)
that the anesthetist understands why these compli-
Hypotension (depressed systolic function, vasodilation,
cations occur, how they manifest, and what to do if
bradycardia, other arrhythmias)
 and when they happen.
ECG changes: widening of the QRS complex, inversion,
As already discussed, local anesthetic agents
bradycardia, ventricular premature complexes,
ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation
a udnau Aq sune ledud ra axa
Death
34   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Central nervous system toxicity
bupivacaine, and ropivacaine. Taken together,
these data suggest that bupivacaine is the most
Toxic effects from local anesthetics can be observed
dangerous local anesthetic in common use: the
in the CNS, the autonomic ganglia, and the neuro-
 toxic dose of bupivacaine is lower than that of other
muscular junction. Central nervous system toxicity
drugs, the early warning signs of toxicity that are
occurs after these lipid-soluble agents cross the
blood brain barrier. With most local anesthetics,
collapse is induced, mortality rates are higher
CNS signs generally manifest before CVS toxicity
when there is an overdose, and mortality occurs
occurs. Local anesthetics can cause depression of
with lower plasma concentrations of the drug.
cortical inhibitory pathways, thereby allowing
When bupivacaine is used, correct dosing must be
ensured, and it should NEVER be used intrave-
ways. This transitional stage of unbalanced excita-
nously (i.e. for IVRA).
tion (i.e. seizure activity) is typically followed by
generalized CNS depression.
Cardiovascular system toxicity
 All local anesthetics have the ability to produce
sleepiness,
light-headedness,
visual
pue
With most local anesthetics (not bupivacaine),
auditory disturbances, and restlessness when
larger doses of local anesthetics are required to pro-
high plasma concentrations result from either
duce sigmns of cardiovascular system (CVS) toxicity
rapid absorption or inadvertent intravascular
than to produce signs of CNS toxicity.
administration of a high dose.
Cardiovascular
signs
are characterized by
Nystagmus and muscular twitching may occur,
depression
of myocardial automaticity and
a
followed by tonic-clonic convulsions.
reduction in the duration of the refractory period.
 Larger doses result in generalized CNS depres-
Therefore,
both
1  myocardial  contractility
pue
sion, including hypoventilation and respiratory
conduction velocity of impulses through the heart
arrest (Groban 2003)
would be expected to be depressed. Coyle et al.
 Increased levels of lactic acid and hypoxia may
(1994) reported the electrocardiographic (ECG) and
be observed after the onset of seizures.
echocardiographic effects of a bupivacaine over-
paedu Aipaxnew panrodan Aaul 'soop ui asop
There are exceptions, especially when there is
systolic function and severe right-sided dilation
an overdose of bupivacaine. With this particular
following a mean total intravenous bupivacaine
drug, cardiac toxicity
usually
 occurs concur-
dose of 14.0±3.3 mgkg-1. ECG changes included
   ss m, a  
widering of the QRS complex, inversion, brady-
of CNS intoxication, without the classic 
dose-
cardia,
 ventricular premature complexes, or 
dependent relationships seen with other drugs
combination of these. As the toxicity progressed,
(Sage et al. 1985). Unlike lidocaine, bupivacaine 
ventricular premature complexes, Wenckebach
can cause arrhythmias at the same doses that
phenomenon, and ventricular tachycardia were
produce seizures, and even at subconvulsive
also observed.
doses (de Jong et al. 1982).
The cardiotoxic effects of local anesthetics dif-
There have been several studies that have inves-
fer from one agent to another. For example, an
tigated the relative toxicity of local anesthetics in
 overdose of lidocaine will result in hypotension
small animals (Feldman et al. 1989, 1991, 1996)
and bradycardia, whereas toxic doses of bupiva-
When administered intravenously, lidocaine, bupi-
caine and ropivacaine produce sudden cardio-
vacaine, and ropivacaine can produce convulsions
vascular collapse or ventricular dysrhythmias
in dogs at 20mgkg-, 4.3 mgkg-, and 4.9 mgkg-1,
that are resistant to treatment. For this reason,
respectively. When two times those doses were
recent research into the cardiotoxicity of the dif-
used, mortality resulted in 33%, 83%, and 17% of
ferent local anesthetics has focused on the more
the dogs following lidocaine, bupivacaine, and
potent, lipid-soluble, and toxic agents such as
ropivacaine. Plasma levels were reported to be
bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, and ropivacaine
47μgmL-, 18 μgmL-,and 11 μg mL- for lidocaine,
(Table 4.5).
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts 35
Table 4.5 Summary of the relative potencies for toxicity of
levobupivacaine, and 50% for bupivacaine, despite
the commonly used local anesthetic agents.
 cardiac massage and advanced life support (Groban
 Relative potency
et al. 2001).
CVS:CNS ratio
for CNS toxicity
for toxicity
Esters
Treatment of CNS and CVS toxicity
Procaine
E'0
3.7
Chlorprocaine
0.3
3.7
Treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicities
Tetracaine
2.0
consists of supportive therapy and pharmacolog-
Amides
1.0
ical treatment of the different clinical signs. More
Lidocaine
7.1
Mepivacaine
1.4
7.1
recently, specific agents have been developed that
Bupivacaine
4.0
2.0
have the ability to chelate local anesthetics in
Levobupivacaine
2.9
2.0
plasma, reducing their circulating concentrations
Ropivacaine
2.9
2.0
and minimizing their side effects.
Arrhythmogenicity
Treatment for CNS toxicity
Provide oxygen;
Prolongation of cardiac conduction is seen in a
 intubate and ventilate if necessary with 100% O2;
dose-dependent fashion when local anesthetics are
administered to animals. This is evidenced by
seizure control:
benzodiazepines (diazepam 0.25-0.5 mg kg-
increases in the PR interval as well as the QRS
duration. Bradycardia and AV blocks result from
IV);
propofol (increments of 1 mg kg-1 IV);
the depression of SA and AV nodal function.
Increasing doses of bupivacaine result in re-entrant
levetiracetam 20mgkg- IV TID.
arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia and
fibrillation. When potent aminoamides are com-
 Treatment for CVS toxicity
pared, the potential for toxicity is highest with
bupivacaine,
lowest
with
ropivacaine,
pue
 Intravenous fluids;
intermediate with levobupivacaine (Groban 2003).
vasopressors:
 phenylephrine (bolus: 0.5-1 μg kg- IV, CRI:
0.2-3 μg kg-1 min-1 IV);
Mechanical activity
vasopressin (bolus: 0.003 ui kg-, CRI: 0.03
 Decreases in blood pressure and increases in left
ui kg-/ h-1);
ventricular
 end-diastolic
 epinephrine (increments of 1 μg kg-);
pressure
reflectthe
myocardial depressant effects of local anesthetics.
 epinephrine is not recommended for
Bupivacaine and levobupivacaine cause decreased
treatment of bupivacaine toxicity. The
myocardial contractility at subconvulsive doses
use of epinephrine may be limited due
when they are administered to sheep (Huang et al.
to the high incidence of serious ventric-
1998). In that study, the frequency of arrhythmias
ular dysrhythmias and lack of effective-
was highest with bupivacaine. In a study with
ness on cardiac index and cardiac
 pentobarbital anesthetized dogs, both lidocaine
relaxation. Amrinone may be used
16mgkg-1 and bupivacaine 4mgkg-1 depressed
instead (Feldman et al. 1991; Groban
hemodynamic function (Bruelle et al. 1996). The
et al. 2001);
doses of lidocaine, bupivacaine, levobupivacaine,
inotropes:
and ropivacaine that induced cardiovascular
dobutamine (CRI 5-10 μg kg-' min-1)
collapse in dogs were 127mgkg-, 22mgkg-1
dopamine (CR1 5-10 μg kg- min-)
27mgkg-′, and 42mgkg-′, respectively (Groban
anticholinergics:
et al. 2001). The mortality rates at these doses were
atropine (0.02-0.05 mg kg-1 IV);
0% for lidocaine, 10% for ropivacaine, 30% for
glycopyrrolate (0.005-0.01 mg kg- IV).
36   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
If there is ventricular fibrillation or sustained
chloroprocaine (Ravindran et al. 1980). It is not
ventricular tachycardia with severe hypotension
kmown whether those cases were the result of direct
(MAP <45 mmHg):
neural toxicity from the local anesthetic or from the
 preservatives that were present in the formulations
cardiac massage;
used. Cauda equina syndrome has also been docu-
bretylium (5-20 mg kg-1 over 1-2min);
mented after repeated doses or infusions of epidur-
magnesium (0.3-0.6 mEqkg- IV over 5 min);
ally administered lidocaine 5% (Schneider et al.
defibrillation (0.5Jkg-') may be considered;
1993). It is speculated that this complication may
"lipid rescue" (Intralipid°) 1 mgkg-1 IV, can be
have occurred due to pooling of the anesthetic
repeated every 5min or administered as a CRI
around the cauda equina, with large concentra-
at 0.25 mLkg- min-1.
tions causing direct neural damage.
aq s ppo s pr e u An
showm for a variety of agents, including lidocaine,
Lipid rescue
mepivacaine, and tetracaine (Takenami et al. 2000,
2005, 2009). In a recent investigation, ropivacaine
Administration of a 20% intravenous lipid emulsion
 proved to be less neurotoxic than levobupivacaine,
(Intralipid?) has been showm to decrease mortality
 procaine, and bupivacaine (Takenami et al. 2012).
from 100% to 0% in rats following bupivacaine tox-
Although all of these agents showed varying
 e i paaaaq si H (8661 1e 1a aqua A
degrees of histological changes (affecting mainly
axons of the dorsal root entry zone), reports of neu-
the lipid-soluble bupivacaine from the aqueous
rological deficits following use of modern local
plasma phase, making it unavailable to tissues
A xo1 anng (o 1e a raqu)
extremely rare.
Was used to induce cardiovascular collapse in dogs.
Following 10 minutes of unsuccessful cardiac
 massage, a 20% lipid emulsion was administered
Other toxic effects of local anesthetics
(bolus of 4 mLkg- followed by 0.5 mLkg ~ min for 10 
minutes). This treatment resulted in 100% survival
Local anesthetic agents can be used by several
in treated dogs, whereas administration of saline
routes, and some toxic effects may be related, at
resulted in 100% mortality (Weinberg et al. 2003).
least in part, to their route of administration and
Since their initial description in the literature, lipid
dlose proximity to certain tissues. Lidocaine and
emulsions have been the subject of multiple investi-
bupivacaine are frequently used in veterinary med-
gations and are now recommended for treatment of
icine to provide analgesia at the site of surgical inci-
local anesthetic induced cardiovascular collapse
sion, whether by local infiltration of the surgical
(RCA guidelines, accessed at www.aagbi.org/ sites/
site or by  intraperitoneal administration for
default/files/la_toxicity_2010_0.pdf).
abdominal surgery. The efficacy of these techniques
 Because propofol can be used to treat seizures and
 is questionable; some reports indicate an analgesic
 it is formulated in 10% lipid solution, many people
effect, whereas others have failed to detect such an
assume that propofol can be used as a replacement
advantage. Furthermore, improved postoperative
for a 20% lipid emulsion. It should be noted that
pain relief in people has been demonstrated for
2 mg kg- of propofol provides only 3% of the dose of
 some surgeries but not for others (Moiniche et al.
lipid that would be administered based on the doses
1998, 1999; Ng et al. 2002). However, an analgesic
of Intralipid that were used in the aforementioned
effect from a combination of intraperitoneal and
studies (Weinberg et al. 2003). Using propofol for
 incisional local anesthetics has been shown in dogs
this purpose is unlikely to have the desired effect.
(Carpenter et al. 2004). Whether the presence of
local anesthetics on the incision could impair
wound healing has also been the focus of research
Neural toxicity
for decades. In vitro evidence has been found
against the use of local anesthetics for incisional
Neurological deficits have been seen in humans
 analgesia: proliferation and differentiation of mes-
following epidural and spinal anesthesia with
enchymal stem cells, which are implicated in
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts  37
wound healing, was impaired when exposed to
toxic effects that result from high plasma levels of
 increasing concentrations of lidocaine, bupiva-
a local anesthetic are misdiagnosed as being a
caine, and ropivacaine (Lucchinetti et al. 2012).
A   
Early studies in rats demonstrated delayed healing
 reactions do occur, they are often limited to causing
five to seven days after lidocaine infiltration at the
minor clinical signs such as skin redness, edema of
site of incision (Morris and Tracey 1977). Similar
the skin, or injection of mucous membranes. It has
results were found when procaine was studied
been estimated that from all of the adverse
(Morris and Appbly 1980). Interestingly, infiltra-
reactions associated with the use of local anesthetics,
tion with sterile water also caused delayed healing
allergic reactions represent less than 1% (Brown
at five days when compared with rats not been
et al. 1981).
infiltrated. When lidocaine and bupivacaine infil-
Aminoester local anesthetics are derivatives of
tration was evaluated in rabbits, no differences
paraminobenzoic acid (PABA). During metabolism,
were found between treated animals and those that
d a pue sishou onam sn asa
were infiltrated with saline (Vasseur et al. 1984).
molecule is produced. For this reason, aminoesters
When studied in guinea pigs, infiltration with 1%
  a n  r r
 lidocaine caused histopathological changes; how-
reactions (Type I; IgE mediated) as a result of
ever, no differences were seen when breaking
potential previous exposure of the patient to
strength was evaluated (Drucker et al. 1998). In a
environmental products containing PABA, such as
recent study, no differences in wound healing were
foodstuffs,
creams,
 sulfonamide a
agents, and
found between lidocaine, bupivacaine, and saline
methylparaben (a preservative) (Finucane 2003).
when tested in rats (Waite et al. 2010).
Type I reactions involve the release of large amounts
There is some controversy regarding the use of
of histamine, serotonin, and leukotrienes from mast
intra-articular administration of local anesthetics in
cells, resulting in profound bronchospasm and
 people. Although there are investigations that favor
vasodilatation, constituting a medical emergency.
this route of administration because of improved
Allergic reactions to aminoamide local anes-
analgesia following surgery, there is concern about
 thetic agents occur much less frequently, although
potential toxic effects, especially in specific joints
reports of these do exist (Brown et al. 1981). In peo-
such as the shoulder. Intra-articular bupivacaine
ple, the most common type of hypersensitivity to
and ropivacaine has been shown to improve patient
local anesthetics is a type IV reaction. Type IV
reactions commonly have a slower onset and are
procedures in both people and dogs (Sammarco
 associated with histamine release that is not medi-
et al. 1996; Hoelzler et al. 2005; Gomez-Cardero and
ated by immunoglobulin. The severity of these
Rodriguez-Merchan 2010; Dobrydnjov et al. 2011).
 reactions can range from a mild contact dermatitis
Other investigators have found either
:weak evi-
 to anaphylactoid shock.
dence to support the use of intra-articular local
The treatment of allergic reactions to local anes
anesthesia (Moiniche et al. 1999), or no advantages
thetics is no different from that of any other type of
at all (Rosen et al. 2010). Several investigations have
allergic reaction and involves:
documented the potential for toxic effects of local
anesthetics on chondrocytes and stem cells (Farkas
oxygen administration;
et al. 2010; Haasters et al. 2011).
securing the airway;
removal of the agent where possible;
administration of epinephrine;
Hypersensitivity reactions
administration of bronchodilators (i.e. alb-
The incidence of serious anaphylactic and anaphy-
uterol);
lactoid reactions during anesthesia in people has
administration of H, (i.e. diphenhydramine)
been estimated to range between 1:3500 and
and H, (i.e. famotidine) blocking agents; and
1:20 000. The majority of these reactions are attrib-
administration of corticosteroids.
uted to the use of muscle relaxants (69%), latex
(12%), and antibiotics (8%) (Hepner and Castells
There is no known cross-sensitivity between
2003). Local anesthetic agents were implicated in
amide and ester local anesthetics; a patient who
less than 3% of the reactions. Most commonly, the
is knowm to be hypersensitive to an aminoester
38   Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
can safely receive an aminoamide agent (and
Coyle DE, Porembka DT, Sehlhorst CS et al. (1994)
vice versa) as long as the alternative drug is
Echocardiographic evaluation of bupivacaine cardio-
preservative-free.
toxicity. Anesth Analg 79, 335-339.
Curatolo M, Petersen-Felix S, Arendt-Nielsen L et al.
(1997) Epidural epinephrine and clonidine: segmental
analgesia and effects on different pain modalities.
References
Anesthesiology 87, 785-794.
Cuvillon P, Nouvellon E, Ripart J et al. (2009) A
 Almeida RM, Escobar A, Maguilnik S (2010) Comparison
 comparison of the pharmacodynamics and pharmaco-
 of analgesia provided by lidocaine, lidocaine-morphine
kinetics of bupivacaine, ropivacaine (with epineph-
or lidocaine-tramadol delivered epidurally in dogs
rine) and their equal volume mixtures with lidocaine
following orchiectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 542-549.
used for femoral and sciatic nerve blocks: a dou-
Brown DT, Beamish D, Wildsmith JA (1981) Allergic
ble-blind
1 randomized study. Anesth Analg 108,
reaction to an amide local anaesthetic. Br J Anaesth 53,
641-649.
435-437.
de
Jong
RH，1
Ronfeld RA, DeRosa RA (1982)
Bruelle P, LeFrant JY, de La Coussaye JE et al. (1996)
Cardiovascular effects of convulsant and supraconvul-
Comparative electrophysiologic and hemodynamic
sant doses of amide local anesthetics. Anesth Analg 61,
effects of several amide local anesthetic drugs in anes-
3-9.
thetized dogs. Anesth Analg 82, 648-656.
Dobrydnjov I, Anderberg C, Olsson C et al. (2011)
Brummett CM, Padda AK, Amodeo FS et al. (2009)
Intraarticular vs. extraarticular ropivacaine infusion
Perineural dexmedetomidine added to ropivacaine
following high-dose local infiltration analgesia after
causes a dose-dependent increase in the duration of
total knee arthroplasty: a randomized double-blind
thermal antinociception in sciatic nerve block in rat.
study. Acta Orthop 82, 692-698.
Anesthesiology 11l, 1111-1119.
Drucker M, Cardenas E, Arizti Pet al. (1998) Experimental
Brummett CM, Amodeo FS, Janda AM et al. (2010)
studies on the effect of lidocaine on wound healing.
 Perineural dexmedetomidine provides an increased
World J Surg 22, 394-397.
duration of analgesia to a thermal stimulus when com-
Eisenach JC, De Kock M, Klimscha W (1996) alpha(2)-
pared with a systemic control in a rat sciatic nerve
adrenergic agonists for regional anesthesia. A clinical
block. Reg Anesth Pain Med 35, 427-431.
review of clonidine (1984-1995). Anesthesiology 85,
Brummett CM, Hong EK, Janda AM et al. (2011)
655-674.
Perineural dexmedetomidine added to ropivacaine for
El-Hennawy AM, Abd-Elwahab AM, Abd-Elmaksoud
o up an sd sn u a anu o
AM et al. (2009) Addition of clonidine or dexmedeto-
midine to bupivacaine prolongs caudal analgesia in
cation current. Anesthesiology 115, 836-843.
children. Br J Anaesth 103, 268-274.
Butterworth JF, Strichartz GR (1990) Molecular mecha-
Esmaoglu A, Yegenoglu F, Akin A et al. (2010)
nisms of local anesthesia: a review. Anesthesiology 72,
Dexmedetomidine added to levobupivacaine pro-
711-734.
longs axillary brachial plexus block. Anesth Analg 111,
Butterworth JF, Strichartz GR (1993) The alpha 2-adren
1548-1551.
ergic agonists clonidine and guanfacine produce tonic
Farkas B, Kvell K, Czompoly T et al. (2010) Increased
and phasic block of conduction in rat sciatic nerve
chondrocyte death after steroid and local anesthetic
fibers. Anesth Analg 76,295-301.
combination. Clin Orthop Relat Res 468, 3112-3120.
Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Ludders JW et al. (2012)
Feldman HS, Arthur GR, Covino BG (1989) Compara tive
Comparison of bupivacaine femoral and sciatic nerve
systemic toxicity of convulsant and supraconvulsant
 block versus bupivacaine and morphine epidural for
doses of intravenous ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and
stifle surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 91-98.
lidocaine in the conscious dog. Anesth Analg 69,
Candido KD, Hennes J, Gonzalez S et al. (2010)
794-801.
-adod ar sd pe sasa auoardng
Feldman HS, Arthur GR, Pitkanen M et al. (1991)
Treatment of acute systemic toxicity after the rapid
infragluteal sciatic nerve block. Anesthesiology 113,
1419-1426.
in the conscious dog. Anesth Analg 73, 373-384.
Carpenter RE, Wilson DV, Evans AT (2004) Evaluation of
Feldman HS, Dvoskin S, Arthur GR et al. (1996)
 intraperitoneal and incisional lidocaine or bupivacaine
 Antinociceptive and motor-blocking efficacy of ropiva-
for analgesia following ovariohysterectomy in the dog.
caine and bupivacaine after epidural administration in
Vet Anaesth Analg 31, 46-52.
the dog. Reg Anesth 21, 318-326.
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology of Local Anesthetics and Adjuncts  39
Fink BR, Cairms AM (1984) Differential slowing and block of 
      
conduction by lidocaine in individual afferent myelinated
brachial plexus block. Reg Anesth 8, 59-61.
and unmyelinated axons. Anesthesiology 60, 111-120.
Hoelzler MG, Harvey RC, Lidbetter DA et al. (2005)
Finucane BT (2003) Allergies to local anesthetics - the real
Comparison of perioperative analgesic protocols for
tuth. Can J Anaesth 50, 869-874.
dogs undergoing tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. Vet
Ford DJ, Raj PP,Singh Pet al. (1984) Differential peripheral
Surg 34, 337-344.
nerve block by local anesthetics in the cat.
Huang YF, Pryor ME, Mather LE et al. (1998)
Anesthesiology 60,28-33.
Cardiovascular and central nervous system effects of
Franz DN, Perry RS (1974) Mechanisms for differential
intravenous levobupivacaine and bupivacaine in
block among single myelinated and non-myelinated
sheep. Anes Analg 86, 797-804.
axons by procaine. J Physiol 236, 193-210.
 Ikuta PT, Raza SM, Durrani Z et al. (1989) pH adjustment 
Galindo A, Witcher T (1980) Mixtures of local anesthetics:
schedule for the amide local anesthetics. Reg Anesth
 bupivacaine-chloroprocaine. Anesth Analg 59, 683-685.
14, 229-235.
Gasser HS, Erlanger J (1929) Role of fiber size in estab-
Kona-Boun JI, Cuvelliez S, Troncy E (2006) Evaluation
lishment of nerve block by pressure and cocaine. Am J
of epidural administration of morphine or morphine
Physio1 88, 581-591.
Gissen AJ, Covino BG, Gregus J (1982) Differential sensi-
premedication with an opioid analgesic and ortho-
tivity of fast and slow fibers in mammalian nerve. III.
pedic surgery in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 229,
Effect of etidocaine and bupivacaine on fast/slow
1103-1112.
fibers. Anesth Analg 61, 570-575.
Leffler A, Frank G, Kistmer K et al. (2012) Local anesthetic-
Gokin AP, Philip B, Strichartz GR (2001) Preferential
like inhibition of voltage-gated Na +channels by the
block of small myelinated sensory and motor fibers by
partial mu-opioid receptor agonist buprenorphine.
lidocaine: in vivo electrophysiology in the rat sciatic
Anesthesiology 116, 1335-1346.
nerve. Anesthesiology 95, 1441-1454.
Liang CC, Chang SD, Wong SY et al. (2010) Effects of
Gomez-Cardero P, Rodriguez-Merchan EC (2010)
-uajan Areuin ururedisod uo eisaaieue aaenadoisod
Postoperative analgesia in TKA: ropivacaine contin-
tion in women undergoing cesarean delivery. J Obstet
uous intraarticular infusion. Clin Orthop Relat Res 468,
Gynaecol Res 36, 991-995.
1242-1247.
Lucchinetti E, Awad AE, Rahman M et al. (2012)
Groban L, Deal DD, Vermon JC et al. (2001) Cardiac resus-
Antiproliferative effects of local anesthetics on mesen-
citation after incremental overdosage with lidocaine,
chymal stem cells: potential implications for tumor
bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, and ropivacaine in
spreading and wound healing. Anesthesiology 116,
anesthetized dogs. Anesth Analg 92, 37-43.
841-856.
Groban L (2003) Central nervous system and cardiac
Matthews PB, Rushworth G (1957) The relative sensi-
effects from long-acting amide local anesthetic toxicity
tivity of muscle nerve fibres to procaine. J Physiol 135,
in the intact animal model. Reg Anes Pain Med 28, 3-11.
263-269.
Haasters F, Polzer H, Prall WC et al. (2011) Bupivacaine,
Milner QJ, Guard BC, Allen JG (2000) Alkalinization of
ropivacaine, and morphine: comparison of toxicity on
amide local anaesthetics by addition of 1% sodium
human hamstring-derived stem/progenitor cells.
bicarbonate solution. Eur J Anaesthesiol 17,38-42
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthosc 19, 2138-2144.
Moiniche S, Mikkelsen S, Wetterslev J et al. (1998) A
Hadzic A, Vloka JD (2004) Peripheral Nerve Blocks.
 qualitative systematic review of incisional local anaes-
Principles and Practice. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,
thesia for postoperative pain relief after abdominal
USA.
operations. Br J Anaesth 81,377-383.
 Harna MN, Elhassan A, Veloso PM et al. (2009) Efficacy
Moiniche S, Mikkelsen S, Wetterslev J et al. (1999) A
 of bicarbonate in decreasing pain on intradermal injec-
systematic review of intra-articular local anesthesia for
tion of local anesthetics. A meta-analysis. Reg Anesth
postoperative pain relief after arthroscopic knee sur-
Pain Med 34, 122-125.
gery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 24, 430-437.
Heavner JE, de Jong RH (1974) Lidocaine blocking con-
Morris T, Tracey J (1977) Lignocaine: its effects on wound
 centrations for B- and C-nerve fibers. Anesthesiology
healing. Br J Surg 64, 902-903.
40,228-233.
 Morris T, Appbly R (1980) Retardation of wound healing
Hepner DL, Castells MC (2003) Anaphylaxis during the
by procaine. Br J Surg 67,391-392.
 perioperative period. Anes Analg 97, 1381-1395.
Neal JM (2003) Effects of epinephrine in local anesthetics
on the central and peripheral nervous systems:
dog following morphine with bupivacaine epidural
Neurotoxicity and neural blood flow. Reg Anesth Pain
analgesia. Can Vet J 39, 650-652.
Med 28, 124-134.
40  Considerations for Loco-regional Anesthesia
Ng A, Swami A, Smith G et al. (2002) The analgesic effects
"(ureu) aureseaidnq jo uonesdde ieidot ro uon
of intraperitoneal and incisional bupivacaine with epi-
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 23, 127-133.
nephrine after total abdominal hysterectomy. Anesth
Schneider M, Ettlin T, Kaufmann M, et al. (1993) Transient
Analg 95, 158-162, table of contents.
neurologic toxicity after hyperbaric subarachnoid anes-
Niv D, Nemirovsky A, Rudick V et al. (1995)
thesia with 5% lidocaine. Anesth Analg 76, 1154-1157.
Antinociception induced by simultaneous intrathecal
Takenami T, Yagishita S,Asato F et al. (2000) Neurotoxicity
and intraperitoneal administration of low doses of
of intrathecally administered tetracaine commences at
morphine. Anesth Analg 80, 886-889.
 pro ieds au ou Aua u sor rasd a
O'Neill P, Duarte F, Ribeiro I et al. (2012) Ropivacaine
Anesth Pain Med 25, 372-379.
contimuous wound infusion versus epidural mor-
Takenami T, Yagishita S, Murase S et al. (2005)
phine for postoperative analgesia after cesarean
Neurotoxicity of intrathecally administered bupiva-
delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg
caine involves the posterior roots/posterior white
114, 179-185.
matter and is milder than lidocaine in rats. Reg Anesth
Perez-Guille BE, Villegas-Alvarez F, Toledo-Lopez A et al.
Pain Med 30, 464472.
(201l) Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine and its metabolite
Takenami T, Yagishita S, Nara Yet al. (2009) Spinal procaine
as a hepatic function marker in dogs. Proceedings of
is less neurotoxic than mepivacaine, prilocaine and bupi-
the Western Pharmacology Society 54, 62-65.
vacaine in rats. Reg Anesth Pain Med 34, 189-195.
Peterfreund RA, Datta S, Ostheimer GW (1989) pH
Takenami T, Wang G, Nara Y et al. (2012) Intrathecally
adjustment of local anesthetic solutions with sodium
administered ropivacaine is less neurotoxic than pro-
bicarbonate: laboratory evaluation of alkalinization
caine, bupivacaine, and levobupivacaine in a rat spinal
and precipitation. Reg Anesth 14, 265-270.
model. Can J Anaesth 59, 456-465.
Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Pascoe PJ et al. (2008) Efects of
Thomson PD, Rowland M, Melmon KL (1971) The
epidurally administered morphine or buprenorphine on
influence of heart failure, liver disease, and renal
the thermal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 69, 983-987.
failure on the disposition of lidocaine in man. Am
Ravindran RR, Bond VK, Tasch MD,Gupta CD, Luerssen
Heart J 82, 417-421.
TG (1980). Prolonged neural blockade following
Thomson PD, Melmon KL, Richardson JA et al. (1973)
regional analgesia with 2-chloroprocaine. Anesth
Lidocaine pharmacokinetics in advanced heart failure,
Analg 95, 447-451.
liver disease, and renal failure in humans. Anm Interm
Rosen AS, Colwell CW, Jr., Pulido PA et al. (2010) A
Med 78, 499-508.
randomized controlled trial of intraarticular ropiva-
Ulbricht W (1981) Kinetics of drug action and equilibrium
caine for pain management inmmediately following
results at the node of Ranvier. Physiol Rev 61, 785-828.
 total knee arthroplasty. HSS J 6, 155-159.
Vasseur PB, Paul HA, Dybdal N et al. (1984) Effects of
Rosenberg PH, Heinonen E (1983) Differential sensitivity
local anesthetics on healing of abdominal wounds in
 of A and C nerve fibres to long-acting amide local
rabbits. Am J Vet Res 45, 2385-2388.
anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth 55, 163-167.
Waite A, Gilliver SC, Masterson GR et al. (2010) Clinically
 Saadawy I, Boker A, Elshahawy MA et al. (2009) Effect of
relevant doses of lidocaine and bupivacaine do not
dexmedetomidine on the characteristics of bupiva-
impair cutaneous wound healing in mice. Br J Anaesth
caine in a caudal block in pediatrics. Acta Anaesthesiol
104,768-773
Scand 53, 251-256.
Wann KT (1993) Neuronal sodium and potassium chan-
Sage DJ, Feldman HS, Arthur RG et al. (1985) The
nels: structure and function. Br J Anaesth 71, 2-14.
Cardiovascular Effects of Convulsant
Doses
of
Weinberg GL, VadeBoncouer T, Ramaraju GA et al. (1998)
Lidocaine and Bupivacaine in the Conscious Dog. Reg
Pretreatment or resuscitation with a lipid infusion
Anes Pain Med 10, 175-183.
shifts the dose-response to bupivacaine-induced asys-
Sammarco JL, Conzenmius MG, Perkowski SZ et al. (1996)
tole in rats. Anesthesiology 88, 1071-1075.
Postoperative analgesia for stifle surgery: a comparison
Weinberg G, Ripper R, Feinstein DL et al. (2003) Lipid
of intra-articular bupivacaine, morphine, or saline. Vet
emulsion infusion rescues dogs from bupivacaine-
Surg 25, 59-69.
induced cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 28,
Selander D, Brattsand R, Lundborg G et al. (1979) Local
198-202.
anaesthetics: Importance of mode of application,
)        
concentration and adrenaline for the appearance of
Dexmedetomidine enhances the local anesthetic action
nerve lesions. An experimental study of axonal degen-
of lidocaine via an alpha-2A adrenoceptor. Anesth
eration and barrier damage after intrefascicular injec-
Analg 107,96-101.
Part2
Equipment
Chapter 5
 Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Chapter 6
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators
Chapter 7  Ultrasound-guided Peripheral Nerve Blocks
Equipment for Loco-regional
Anesthesia and Analgesia
Matt R. Read
Needles
Needle tip design
pue saipaau jo sadi janap Aueu are arau
The shape of a needle's tip can affect the ability
catheters available to veterinarians who plan to
to appreciate the different tissue planes encour-
perform local or regional anesthesia in their prac-
 tered as the needle is advanced during performance
tices. Each type has its own inherent advantages 
of a block.
and disadvantages; however, certain characteris-
Even though  veterinarians  commonly use
tics have been shown to improve utility
and
hypodermic needles for local anesthetic tech-
-uag ane saipaan iajes juaned poedu Aieuaiod
niques such as local infiltration or injection over a
erally selected based on tip desigm, length, gauge,
readily
palpable superficial nerve (i.e. dental
absence or presence of insulation, and dlinician
 blocks), they are not a good choice for performing
preference depending on the size of the patient and
 deeper regional anesthetic blocks such as epidu-
theplanned block.
rals
or
brachial
plexus
blocks.
Hypodermic
Unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer, all
needles are specifically designed for penetration
needles used for local and regional anesthesia are
into tissues with minimal resistance so they have
desigmed for single use. Damaged or bent needles
a 15° bevel and sharp edges, and frequently do
should be immediately discarded as further use
can result in breakage, injury to the patient, or acci-
 of different tissue planes as the needle is advanced
dental needle-stick injury to personnel. No attempt
(Figure 5.1). For this reason, it is often difficult
should be made to straighten or repair a damaged
to
appreciate where the tip of the needle is
needle. The size and length preferences of needles
located when deeper blocks are being performed
described for the different techniques in this book
using
long
hypodermic needles. This potenti-
are those of the authors and should be considered
ally
increases
 the risk of injury to the patient
to be recommendations.
and negatively affects the ability to place the
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
43
44 Equipment
needle tip adjacent to the target nerves. Generally
nerves under direct visualization in anesthetized
speaking,(
only
small
gauge
e(22-30-gauge)
pigs, followed by recovery of the animals and
hypodermic needles should be used for perform-
resection of the nerves 48 hours later. They
 ing superficial nerve blocks as they are less likely
 examined the nerves histologically and the degree
 of nerve injury was scored using a range of 0 (no
(14-20-gauge).
injury) to 4 (severe injury). Their results showed
Several recent studies have investigated the
that there are considerable post-traumatic inflam-
effects of nerve perforation with different types of
mation and structural changes within the dam-
needles (Steinfeldt et al. 2010a, 2010b, 2011). This
aged nerves following perforation by pencil-point,
research involved perforation of brachial plexus
short beveled, and Tuohy needles (Figure 5.2).
There were no differences between the individual
needle types.
The use of blunt, short bevel, or Tuohy needles is
 preferred when multiple tissue planes are going to
be penetrated during performance of a regional
 anesthesia technique, and can potentially lessen
the risk of lacerating important anatomical struc-
 tures such as vessels and nerves. The blunt design
of the needle tip influences the subjective "feel"
 of tissue layers as the needle is advanced, giving
the anesthetist more tactile information about
needle location in the patient. Because blunt
needles provide more resistance during needle
advancement, the anesthetist is more likely to feel
a loss of resistance (as a tactile "pop") as certain
tissue
 planes
are
penetrated
(e.g.
during
Figure 5.1 The tip of an 1 8-gauge hypodermic needle bevel
 performance of epidural anesthesia as the ligamen-
viewed at 25x. Hypodermic needles have a long bevel and
tum flavum is penetrated). When used to perform
sharp edge and are specifically designed for puncturing skin
and adjacent tissues. Note the long bevel (15°) and sharp
regional anesthetic blocks, blunt (30°45° atrau-
cutting edge of this needle.
matic) needle tips (Figure 5.3) are less likely to
(a)
(b)
N
N
N
Figure 5.2  (a) Needle nerve perforation with a short beveled needle tip. Longitudinal microscopic view (200x,
hematoxylin-eosin staining) of the musculocutaneous nerve. N, nerve fascicle; I, inflammatory cells. Score value 2.0. (b) No
no treatment control. Score value 0.0. From Steinfeldt et al. 2010b. Used with permission.
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia   45
Figure 5.3  The tip of a 22-gauge insulated regional anesthesia
Fgure 5.4  A 25-gauge insulated regional anesthesia needle
needle bevel viewed at 25x. Note the short, blunt bevel (30°)
 that was bent during performance of a nerve block.
of this needle compared with the needle tip in Figure 5.1.
intervertebral disk with colonic bacteria likely
penetrate the perineurium, especially if the needle
occurred during spinal needle placement. In that
is advanced perpendicular to the long axis of the
report, a 9cm (3.5 inch) spinal needle was used to
 nerve. For these reasons, blunt needles are popular
 perform epidural anesthesia in a dog. The needle
for use with single injection techniques as well as
was thought to have been advanced through the
with methods that involve placement of indwelling
lumbosacral disk space into the colon prior to being
perineural catheters.
withdrawn. That case report serves to emphasize
that, regardless of the type or length of the needle
used, it is up to the anesthetist to be familiar with
Needle length and gauge
the relevant anatomy for the block, and to be cogni-
zant of the risks and limitations associated with the
Desired needle length depends on the anticipated
 particular regional anesthetic procedure.
depth of the target nerves and the individual
 Smaller gauge needles tend to cause less pain in
patient's characteristics. Although shorter needles
awake patients and potentially carry less risk of
are easier to manipulate during performance of the
tissue trauma, but they are more prone to bending
block, they may be too short to actually reach the
 than larger gauge needles. Small needles may also
targeted depth. Longer needles are more difficult
be more difficult to aspirate and inject through,
to manipulate and to redirect once they are in the
making it more difficult for the anesthetist to appre-
patient, especially if the needle is of a smaller
 ciate resistance to injection and high injection pres-
gauge. It is also very easy to bend small gauge
sures. Usually, small gauge needles (25-gauge,
needles while they are being marnipulated
in
 27-gauge) are used for infiltration anesthesia and
the patient, necessitating their removal
pue
superficial blocks, whereas large gauge needles
initiating the block again with new equipment
(22-gauge, 21-gauge, 19-gauge) are used for deeper
(Figure 5.4).
blocks. Larger gauge needles are less prone to
Excessive needle length may increase the risk of
bending, and their larger size allows for easier
complications associated with the needle being
aspiration and injection, better appreciation of
inadvertently advanced too deeply. One case report
resistance to injection, and the potential to pass an
documented the development of an epidural
 indwelling (perineural) catheter through the needle
abscess and discospondylitis of the lumbosacral
at the target location.
region  following  lumbar  epidural  anesthesia
 A recent study explored the effect of needle size
(Remedios et al. 1996). In that particular case, iatro-
(i t a i) s u  aau uo
 genic contamination of the epidural space and an
o-ua (-61) a  (-) 
46 Equipment
needles were used to perforate the nerves of the
Specialized regional anesthesia needles
brachial plexus in anesthetized pigs. The nerves
were harvested 48 hours later and alterations in
Spinal needles
physical appearance and histological injury (detec-
tion of inflammatory cells, myelin damage, intra-
Spinal needles with varying lengths (1.5, 2.5, 3.5
neural hematoma) were evaluated. Overall, the
inch; 3.8, 6.35, 8.9cm) and diameters (22-gauge,
injury scores were sigmificantly lower in the small
20-gauge) are readily available to veterinarians.
     
Spinal needles are manufactured with close-fiting.
and intraneural hematoma occurred predominantly
in the large-diameter needle group (19-gauge).
Histological signs of inflammation were similar
Amf aaiau ssoo jo Aaaas aui 'sdnono uaamiag
after needle nerve perforation was related to the
diameter of the needle, but inflammation was not.
The authors emphasized that the functional conse-
quences of these findings remain to be determined
in actual patients. They concluded that when given
the choice, and until more information is available,
smaller gauge needles are advisable for peripheral
nerve blocks to minimize the risk of nerve injury in
the case of inadvertent nerve perforation.
The needle sizes and lengths presented in this
textbook represent the preferences of the individual
authors, and should be regarded as guidelines
only. The choice of needle often comes down to
Figure 5.5  The tip of a 22-gauge spinal needle viewed at
the personal preference of the anesthetists based
25x. Note the close-fitting removable stylet that is positioned
on their own experiences and the availability
Of
inside the needle to prevent tissue from entering the lumen of
equipment.
the needle as it is being advanced.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6 (a) A 20-gauge spinal needle is used to perform lumbosacral epidural anesthesia in a dog. The needle stylet has been
removed and the clear needle hub allows the anesthetist to inspect the hub for the presence of blood or cerebrospinal fluid prior
to drug administration. (b) A 20-gauge spinal needle in position for performance of lumbosacral epidural anesthesia in a dog.
The stylet has been removed, and the clear needle hub allows the anesthetist to readily detect the presence of blood prior to drug
administration. In this case, the tip of the spinal needle likely entered a venous sinus on the ventral aspect of the vertebral canal.
No injection was made and the needle was withdrawn and replaced with a new needle.
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia   47
removable stylets that prevent tissue or fluid from
following dural puncture, as, unlike a Quincke-
 entering the needle as it are advanced during
type tip, the pencil-point desigm does not leave a
 performance of a block (Figure 5.5).
large hole in the dura once the needle is withdrawn.
Most spinalneedles have
short-blunt
Or
medium-blunt tips that allow the anesthetist to
geometry, these needles do not puncture skin as
 more easily appreciate when different tissue planes
freely as do conventional Quincke needles. As pen-
are penetrated. Although they are more blunt than
cil-point needles have a blunt tip, they need to be
hypodermic needles, spinal needles still penetrate
tissues easily, so for certain blocks Tuohy needles
that can easily penetrate skin and other tissues to
 a sapaau lds A panaad a
minimize discomfort to awake patients. For this
needle hubs that allow the anesthetist to visually
reason, Sprote and Whitacre spinal needles are
inspect the hub for the presence of blood 
or
used in combined epidural/spinal kits in people.
cerebrospinal fluid prior to drug administration
In this scenario, a Tuohy needle is used to enter
(Figure 5.6).
the epidural space and a Sprotte or Whitacre needle
Spinal needles used in veterinary medicine are
is then used to puncture the dura and complete
usually of the Quincke cutting-type (Figure 5.7).
the block.
They have a sharp cutting point that is useful for
 Sprotte-tip needles are also used for performing
penetrating skin, adipose tissue, and intervertebral
 peripheral nerve blocks in people. They reduce
ligaments, while being blunt enough for the oper-
tissue trauma during needle thrust, and can mini-
ator to appreciate the sequential penetration 
1 of
 mize potential for perineural hematomas. A recent
 different issues as the needle is being advanced.
study compared the degree of histological injury
In people, "pencil-point" needles are commonly
when brachial plexus nerves of anesthetized
-0id qempida / leuids pauquos pue jeurds ioy pasn
pigs were perforated with either short bevel or
cedures (Figure 5.8). There are several different
pencil-point needles under direct visualization
types, including S
Sprotte ("rounder" end)
pue
(Steinfeldt et al. 2010b). That study found that the
[mp-iso saipaau (pua ,panuod, arou) anem
 puncture headache is common in people following
spinal anesthesia using Quincke-type needles.
Pencil-point spinal needles  were subsequently
designed to prevent leakage of cerebrospinal fluid
Figure 5.7  The tip of a Quincke-type 22-gauge spinal needle
Fgure 5.8  Close-up of the tip of a pencil-point (Sprotte)
viewed at 25x. Note the presence of a stylet, as well as the
needle. Note that this needle also has ultrasound reflectors
sharp cutting point that isuseful for penetrating skin, adipose
that are used to increase its visibility when used during an
tissue, and intervertebral ligaments during performance of an
ultrasound-guided nerve block. Image used with permission
epidural block.
of Pajunk GmbM.
48 Equipment
magnitude of nerve injury following needle perfo-
ration was not related to the type of needle. The
authors also found that post-traumatic inflamma-
tion rather than structural damage of nerves was
the only detectable sign of nerve injury after needle
perforation with either type of needle (Figure 5.2).
They concluded that neither type of needle (pencil-
point or short beveled) could be designated as
being less traumatic in the case of needle nerve per-
foration. At this time, these specialized human
spinal products are not commonly used in animals
for epidural or peripheral nerve blocks.
Tuohy needles
Figure 5.10Demonstration of a Tuohy needle being used to
Tuohy needles can be insulated or non-insulated,
advance an epidural catheter. Note how the end of the needle
and are characterized by the presence of a curve at
is curved and directs the catheter away from the long axis of
the needle. This is useful when the catheter is being advanced
the distal tip of the needle (Figure 5.9).
into epidural or perineural spaces.
Tuohy needles are commonly used to perform
single injection techniques, or alternatively, are
used to facilitate placement of indwelling epidural
placed in the patient (Figures 5.10 and 5.11). Better
 Or perineural catheters. The curve at the distal tip of
awareness of depth potentially reduces the risk of
the needle helps to direct and "steer" the catheter in
complications.
 one particular direction along a peripheral nerve or
When used in conjunction with epidural or peri-
into the epidural space (Figure 5.10).
neural catheters (see further discussion on cathe-
Tuohy needles often have 1 cm gradation mark-
ters below), Tuohy needles should have polished
ings along their shafts to allow the anesthetist to
and rounded inner bevels to minimize the risk of
estimate the insertion depth of the needle once it is
shearing as the catheter is being advanced into
the patient. Tuohy needles are not as sharp as
hypodermic or Quincke-type spinal needles, and
as a result, the anesthetist receives more tactile
feedback and is able to better appreciate the pene-
tration of different tissue planes as the needle is
being advanced.
Insulated
 Tuohy needles have a pin-point electrode exposed
 at the leading edge of the atraumatic bevel. These
needles are often used to aid with the placement
of peripheral perineural catheters. Tuohy needles
designed  specifically  for  perineural  catheter
placement are typically manufactured with a pre-
attached hemostasis valve assembly that allows
for pre-mounting of the stimulating catheter
Figure 5.9  The tip of a 19-gauge Tuohy needle viewed at
25x.The edges of the needle are polished and rounded to
before the needle is introduced into the patient.
prevent shearing of a catheter when it is advanced through
Once the target nerve is located using the stimu-
the needle. Note the gentle curve at the distal tip of the
lating needle, while the anesthetist holds the
needle that is used to "direct" a catheter into position.
needle in position, an assistant can aspirate and /or
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia   49
Figure 5.11 Gradations along spinal needles are used to indicate the depth of needle penetration when in situ. Image used with
permission of MILA International Inc.
(a)
(b)
Gel #1
Gel #4
Figure 5.12  (a) and (b) Gel electrophoresis with insulated (Gel #1) and uninsulated (Gel #4) needles without any injectate
anonpuos aliel ayi oi paneduos aniau e anelnws oi pasn ag pinom leui 1# lan u! eaie anonpuos liews ayi alon uasaid 
zone along the entire uninsulated needle shaft in Gel #4. From Tsui et al. 2004. Used with permission.
inject the local anesthetic solution through pre-
without first needing to disconnect the extension
attached extension tubing that is connected tubing or stimulating leads, there is almost
to the valve assembly. As this arrangement allows
 no risk of moving the needle while it is in the
the assistant to sterilely advance the catheter
patient.
50Equipment
Insulated needles
the extreme tip of the needle is much lower
than when a comparably sized insulated needle
Uninsulated needles (e.g. hypodermic and spinal
is used. As current intensity is subsequently dis-
needles) are bare metallic needles. When connected
persed along a larger distance, a higher threshold
to a peripheral nerve stimulator, the stimulating
current is required to stimulate a peripheral
current is released along the entire length of the
nerve when an uninsulated needle is used for a
needle shaft (Figure 5.12).
peripheral nerve block (Ford et al. 1984). More
As a result, uninsulated needles have a much
important, as current is released along the entire
larger conducting area and the current density at
shaft of an uninsulated needle, if the tip of the
(b)
Uninsulated
(a)
Uninsulated
30
20
10
tmA
(mA)
current
d
门
on
curr
Insulated
mulation
Insulated
30
20
10
-1
0
1
Distance from nerve (cm)
Distance from nerve (cm)
Figure 5.13  (a) The needle-to-sciatic nerve distance-stimulation current relationship for an uninsulated needle (top) and
insulated needle (bottom). The lines are individual trials. The Y-axis is the current required to produce a small muscle twitch.
The X-axis is the distance from the tip of the needle to the sciatic nerve. Negative values signify that the tip of the needle is past
the nerve. (From Ford et al. 1984. Used with permission.) (b) The needle-to-saphenous nerve distance-stimulation current
relationship for an uninsulated needle (top) and insulated needle (bottom). The lines are ind ividual trials. The Y-axis is the current 
required to produce a small muscle twitch. The X-axis is the distance from the tip of the needle to the saphenous nerve. Negative
values signify that the tip of the needle is past the nerve. From Ford et al. 1984. Used with permission.
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia  51
needle passes the target nerve during needle
 needle placement. Personal preference of puncture
advancement, it is still possible to stimulate the
force and anticipated ease of passage through
nerve if it is still in close proximity to the needle.
tissues dictates the specific choice of needle (gauge.
One study that investigated the use of insulated
needle tip, length) for different blocks.
versus uninsulated needles for performance of
nerve blocks in cats showed that when uninsulated
needles were used, the greatest degree of nerve
Echogenic needles
stimulation occurred when the needle was 0.5-1 cm
 past the targetnerves. Obviously, ifa local anesthetic
With the growing use of ultrasound to guide needle
solution were injected through the needle at this
placement during performance of loco-regional
location, it would be administered away from the
blocks in people, there have been many recent
nerve and result in a failed nerve block. For this
developments in needle design. An early goal was
reason, success rates are generally lower when
to increase the echogenicity of the needle to allow
uninsulated needles are used, as it is easy to inad-
for easier visualization of the needle when it is
vertently deliver local anesthetic drugs away from
in situ, allowing for accurate placement of the
the target nerve while still getting motor responses
needle tip adjacent to the target nerve. Initially,
to electrical stimulation (Figure 5.13).
different coatings were tested for their reflective
Insulated needles are readily available to veteri-
 properties butit was found that the surface material
narians. These special needles are coated with a thin
did not have a substantial effect on improving
layer ofnon-conducting material (most often Teflon)
needle echogenicity.  Needles  with  roughened
over the entire length of the needle, except for a
tips were also investigated but this alteration
small exposed area at the extreme needle tip. Some
affected the gliding properties of the needle and
insulated needles are only coated on the outside of
did not significantly improve needle visibility.
the needle shaft dowm to the level of the bevel,
The most successful alteration was the addition of
whereas others are coated on both the inside and
"reflectors" to the needles. Several companies now
outside of the needle shaft, except for a small point
produce needles and cannulae that have patterns
at the extreme tip of the needle. When connected to
embedded along the distal end of the needle shaft
 a peripheral nerve stimulator, the current is con-
(Figures 5.8, 5.14, and 5.15).
ducted down the shaft of the metal needle without
These circumferential reflectors convey excel-
 being released into tissues and is therefore concen-
lent visibility of the needle during ultrasound
trated only at the needle tip. Current density is
monitoring, as ultrasound waves are reflected off
 proportional to both the delivered current and the
the needle regardless of its puncture angle and
area of exposed needle. As the current is released
 position relative to the ultrasound beam. Research
only from the tip of an insulated needle, lower
is ongoing and to date, use of these specialized
current intensities are required to stimulate the
needles in animals has not been reported.
target nerves and it is less painful for the patient.
 Insulated needles have been showm to augment the
accuracy of needle placement (Ford et al. 1984)
Injection accessories
When insulated needles are used for peripheral
nerve blocks, low intensity currents (0.2-0.5mA)
It is often helpful to have extension tubing
 can be used to successfully identify target nerves.
pre-attached to the nerve block needle prior to
 Insulated needles come in different configura-
use. This way, anesthetists can rely on their assis-
tions, including both 30° short bevels. Like Tuohy
tants to attach and detach drug-filled syringes,
needles (as discussed above), they often have 1 cm
and to aspirate and inject the local anesthetic solu-
laser-etched depth gradation markings along
the
tion without the anesthetists risking movement of
shaft of the needle to allow for estimation of inser-
the needles as would be the case if they were
tion depth once the needles are placed into 
the
responsible for these manipulations themselves
patient (Figure 5.14).
(Figure 5.16).
Better depth awareness reduces the risk of com
Many
commercially available regional anes
plications and helps to provide quick and accurate
 thesia needles have pre-attached extension tubing
Figure 5.14  Laser etching along an insulated nerve block needle. Note that the number of lines indicates the distance (cm)
from the needle tip. Image used with permission of Pajunk GmbH.
Figure 5.15Ultrasound reflectors on a Tuohy needle. Image used with permission of Pajunk GmbH.
Figure 5.16  An insulated regional nerve block needle is being used to perform a nerve stimulator-guided epidural in a dog.
 Note that the drug-filled syringe is connected to pre-attached extension tubing. The dead space of the tubing and needle have
already been "preloaded" with the injectate solution in order to displace air that might otherwise be injected into the epidural
spaceon injection.
52
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia 53
Figure 5.17  An inline pressure gauge (BSmartim, Concert Medical) can be used to monitor injection pressure during 
pressure being applied to the patient's tissues during injection of the local anesthetic solution.
for this reason, allowing for more efficient working
drug administration is very useful in minimizing
conditions and helping to maintain a sterile envi-
and potentially eliminating this risk factor for
ronment during performance of the blocks.
-xaum ue uaum (tooz te ia sizpeH) Amju juaed
Disposable inline pressure gauges can play an
pectedly high pressure is detected during drug
important role during performance of regional
administration, the anesthetist should immedi-
nerve blockade. These inexpensive pressure moni-
ately stop injecting the drug and reposition the
tors (BSmartTM, Concert Medical) are connected
needle tip as necessary to decrease injection
between the syringe and the extension tubing and
 pressure. This has been theorized to minimize the
provide a continuous measurement of the pressure
potential for performing an intraneural injection
being applied to the local tissues during injection
and causing subsequent nerve injury to the patient.
of the drugs (Figure 5.17).
Kapur et al. (2007) studied neurological out-
comes after intraneural injections of lidocaine into
Catheters for continuous regional
the sciatic nerves of dogs. They found that the
anesthesia
worst neurological outcomes were associated with
high injection pressures (20-38 psi, ~138-262kPa),
Catheters
whereas intraneural injections associated  with
moderate pressures (<12psi, ~82.7kPa) resulted
Continuous delivery of local anesthetic drugs can be
 in blocks with longer than expected durations but
 achieved by use of perineural and epidural catheter
no other adverse effects to the dogs (Figures 5.18
placement. Using these catheters, local anesthetics
and 5.19).
and adjunct medication (e.g. opioids and α, agonists)
 All  perineural injections  were associated
can be delivered continuously by slow infusion or by
with low injection pressures (<5 psi, ~34.5KPa)
intermittent boluses to  provide analgesia  for
(Figure 5.20). Being able to continuously and
extended periods of time to patients with acute
and chronic pain. In the past, nerves were first
Paresis
High pressure intraneural injection (>20 psi)
Low pressure intraneural injection (<1 1 psi)
 Perineural injection
1
5
24
48
2
5
6
Hours
Days
Time
Figure 5.18 Duration of leg paresis after sciatic nerve injection in dogs with lidocaine 20 mg mL-1. 0, no paresis; 1, slight
paresis; 2, moderate paresis; 4,flaccid extremity. Data represent mean ± standard deviation.From Kapur et al. 2007. Used with
permission.
Reflex abnormality
 High pressure intraneural injections (>20 psi)
Low pressure intraneural injections (<20psi)
Perineural injections
6
8
24
48
3
4
6
Hours
Days
Time
Figure 5.19  Duration of reflex abnormality after sciatic nerve injection in dogs with lidocaine 20mg mL-1. 0, no withdrawal to
Intraneural sciatic nerve injection pressures
Perineural sciatic nerve injection pressures
40
30
(!sd)
20
10
34
67
100
133
166
199
232
10192837465564738291100109118
Time (s)
Time (s)
Figure 5.20 Pressure recordings during intraneural (sub-perineural) and perineural (sub-epineural) sciatic nerve injections in
dogs. From Kapur et al. 2007. Used with permission.
54
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia 55
electrolocated using a stimulating needle, and a
sound increases success rates of obtaining success-
ful blocks (Dhir and Ganapathy 2008). Studies are
the needle and secured in place for later use. Although
needed in veterinary medicine to confirm or refute
the technique was simple to perform, it often resulted
these findings in other species.
a ) ,oq Aed, a wn ssans poo u
Catheters (for both epidural and perineural use)
local anesthetic that was initially injected through the
 are often made from Teflon or polyamide nylon to
resist kinking and stretching. As a result, most do not
subsequent doses of the local anesthetic were admin-
require a stylet for advancement during placement.
istered through the indwelling catheter (referred to
 Others are manufactured with an inner springwire
as the "secondary block"). This commonly observed
 coil covered by soft polyamide nylon. These cathe-
issue was described by Mahler and Reece (2007) in a
ters are softer, and, as a result, are less likely to result
case report involving the use of an indwelling
in vessel puncture. Catheters can be closed-tip with
brachial plexus catheter to provide analgesia to a
multiple side ports (fenestrations) or can be of the
dog. In people, the high failure rates associated with
 open-end, uni-port style (Figure 5.21). Fenestrated
secondary blocks using simple catheters led to the
catheters will disperse local anesthetic solutions over
development of stimulating catheters.
r pasn m a aoaa are pue ae raie e
 Similar to insulated needles, stimulating cathe-
 perineural placement. Open-end, uni-port style cath-
ters are coated with a non-conducting material
'puaaneld pempida roy pasn Aoon are srana
along their entire length except for the extreme
 r r  y e aa i s
distal tip. In this way, stimulating catheters can be
so that once they are removed from the patient the
used as soft, flexible insulated needles. Stimulating
 anesthetist can verify the catheter's overall integ-
catheters are useful as they allow delivery of a
rity to be sure that the catheter did not break off
low-level current (<0.5mA) to target
nerves
through the catheter, even after it has been in situ
(Figure 5.10).
for an extended period of time. Being able to stim-
Epidural catheters are usually made of soft poly-
ulate the nerve through the catheter is useful for
amide nylon, are usually 
a p a1-61
confirming that the catheter is still adjacent to the
 designed to be advanced through larger gauge
desired nerves/plexus prior to drug administration.
Tuohy needles. They may have a removable metal
Although placement of a stimulating catheter is
stylet to provide rigidity, or they may have an inner
still considered to be "blind," with good anatom-
springwire coil. In the latter case, the coil is often
ical knowledge and the use of continuous nerve
less tightly wound near the tip, making the distal tip
stimulation to allow for real-time observation of
 softer and atraumatic when it encounters resistance
motor responses as the catheter is advanced, suc-
in the target location. This feature is useful if the
cessful positioning of the catheter near the target
catheter is to be positioned in an awake or lightly
nerves can often be achieved. Recently,
some
sedated patient as it causes minimal discomfort dur-
authors have employed ultrasound to assist with
ing catheter advancement and can reduce the risk of
visualization of the catheter during its placement.
inadvertently pushing the catheter into a venous
In people, it has been reported that the use of ultra-
sinus as it is advanced into the epidural space.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.21B
 Examples of epidural catheter tips. Note the closed-end, stylet, and sideports in (a), and the open-end, coiled guide
wire, and absence of side ports in the lower image (b). Images used with permission of Pajunk GmbH.
56  Equipment
Injecting tube
FixoLong
Filter
StimuLong catheter
Clamping adapter
PlexoLong cannula
Figure 5.22
Contents of a stimulating catheter tray. Image used with permission of Pajunk GmbH.
Continuous peripheral nerve blocking tech-
which is then attached to an antibacterial, low
niques have been shown to be useful in people and
volume filter (Figure 5.24). The antibacterial filter is
animals to provide excellent analgesia, to reduce
usually flat to optimize patient comfort when it is
the incidence of analgesic side effects, and to
bandaged against the skin. The filter is then
improve quality of life. There are several different
attached to an injection port or directly to an
stimulating catheters available on the market, and,
 administration set for drug delivery.
although the author has used many of them in a
As the adhesives that come with most human
clinical setting, no controlled studies have been
products are designed to adhere to a person's bare
performed or reported to date that critically eval-
skin, many of these materials are ineffective for
uate their use in veterinary patients. An example of
use in animals, even when their hair is clipped.
the contents of a stimulating catheter tray is shown
Modifications are often required when human fixa-
in Figure 5.22.
tion devices are adapted for use with veterinary
patients. In addition to securing the connector,
filter, and injection port, the catheter itself needs to
Catheter connectors and anchoring devices
tape, sutures, skin staples, and transparent, sterile,
Catheter connectors and fixation devices are vital
adhesive dressings can all be used in some form to
components of the drug delivery system.
These
secure the catheter at the point that it exits the
 components are responsible for securing the cath-
patient's skin, and to maintain aseptic conditions
eter to the administration equipment
(e.g
 PRN
when the catheter is to be left in position for an
adapter) and for securing the catheter to the patient.
extended period of time (Figure 5.25).
 A common complication with the use of indwelling
Fixation devices are available from most equip-
catheters is the development of an occlusion at the
Kueu ul papniu aq Aeu pue) sianddns jua
end of the catheter where it is connected to the
 peripheral nerve block/epidural catheter kits), but
injection device. As a result, different types of con-
vary in their ability to secure the catheter to the
nectors have been developed for use in people and
clipped skin of veterinary patients. Ideally, the
animals in an attempt to ensure catheter sterility
 anchoring system should manage the catheter and
and security while at the same time preventing
its components (connector, filter, etc.) in a well-
 occlusion of the catheter, which would necessitate
 organized, comfortable way, while also allowing
its removal. Typically, catheters are
attached
the veterinary staff to inspect the puncture site
securely to some sort of connector (Figure 5.23),
through a clear dressing for signs of inflammation
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia 57
Figure 5.23 Example of catheter connectors used to securely attach an epidural or perineural catheter to other components
of the injection system (e.g. filter, PRN adapter). Image used with permission of MILA International Inc.
Figure 5.24 An epidural catheter has been placed in a dog. The catheter is attached securely to a connector (blue and
white piece) that is attached to an anti-bacterial low volume filter (white disk)
or infection (Figure 5.25c). The ideal fixation device (
diffusion catheters refer to these specialized poly-
should prevent contamination of the puncture site  urethane catheters. These catheters have closed
from the environment, minimize risk of skin irrita-
tips and numerous fenestrations (small holes/
tion, and prevent kinking of the catheter.
microports) have been cut at regular intervals
along their distal segments to allow injected solu-
tions to leave the catheter (Figure 5.26).
Wound soaker catheters
This special design allows injected solutions to
be deposited directly into surgical sites or wounds
Several different names, including soaker cathe-
via the length of the catheter that is fenestrated,
ters, wound catheters, fenestrated catheters, and
without preferential flow out of any of the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.25  (a), (b), and (c) An example of a fixation device (Epi-Gard) that can be used to secure an epidural catheter to the
skinof adog
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.26  (a) A polyurethane soaker catheter demonstrating injection of a local anesthetic solution via the different
fenestrations. (b) The same type of catheter viewed at 25x. Note the lateral fenestration (small hole or microport) that has been
cut in the side of the catheter to allow injected local anesthetic to leave the catheter at intervals along its length when it is
positioned into a tissue bed. (a) used with permission of MIl LA International Inc.
58
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia  59
when the patient moves. Additional sutures can be
used to further secure the injection-end of the cath-
eter to the skin. An antibacterial filter can also be
attached if desired. Finally, the catheter should be
Ue on paoaoo ro pod uonoa ue ym padde
infusion line to allow for delivery of local anes-
thetic drugs. A sterile dressing may also be used to
cover the site where the catheter enters the patient.
New techniques for placing wound soaker cath-
eters without the need for surgical exploration
involve the use of "peel-away” introducers. In this
scenario, a peel-away over-the-needle introducer is
placed into a tissue bed while the patient is deeply
sedated or anesthetized. Next, the needle stylet is
removed and the wound soaker catheter
:is
Figure 5.27
A wound diffusion/soaker catheter is placed
advanced out of the distal end of the peel-away
subcutaneously along the sternum of a cat prior to incisiona
Closure following median sternotomy. Note the "suture
introducer into the patient. The catheter is held in
wings" (seen in the upper right corner of the image) that can
place as the peel-away introducer is then removed
be moved along the catheter to a location adjacent to the
from the patient. Finally, the wound soaker cath-
point of entry in the skin. At that location, the wings are
eter is secured to the patient and can be used for
sutured/stapled to the patient for added security.
local anesthetic delivery as described above.
Catheters can be purchased with a range of fen-
individual holes. These catheters are useful for
estrated lengths 5-25cm (2-10 inches) as well as
providing continuous or intermittent delivery of
different sizes (gauges), allowing them to be useful
local anesthetics directly into large wounds or
for a variety of procedures. They are useful for
potentially painful areas that cannot be blocked
intermittent bolus delivery of local anesthesia, or
through other methods of local or regional anes-
they can be attached to a continuous delivery
thesia (Figure 5.27). They are used commonly in
system (see Pumps below).
people, and their use in veterinary medicine is
Wound soaker catheters can be maintained in
increasing (Abelson et al. 2009).
the patient and local anesthetics administered for
Wound soaker catheters are sterile and should be
several days, allowing for prolonged analgesic
placed at the time of surgery. Catheters should
administration postoperatively into the recovery
be placed in the deepest part of the surgical field,
period (Abelson et al. 2009). The site of entry should
adjacent to exposed nerves if possible. Additionally,
be routinely inspected for abnormal signs of
they should be turneled subcutaneously from the
inflammation or infection, and it is recommended
surgical site and exit the wound dorsally (through a
that the patient be monitored for 12-24 hours fol-
separate skin incision) to prevent pooling of the
lowing discontinuation of local anesthetic use to
drug ventrally once the patient returns to a normal
ensure that analgesia is adequate from the other
 body position in recovery. All of the fenestrations
 methods being employed before the catheter itself
should be positioned under the skin to prevent
is removed. Although wound soaker catheters are
leakage of fluid outside of the incision. If needed,
highly effective for providing postoperative anal-
a simple interrupted suture pattern can be used to
 gesia to a variety of patients, they should not be
loosely anchor the catheter within the surgical field
relied on as the only means of analgesia for many
itself prior to skin closure. Many wound soaker
 procedures. Preoperative and intraoperative anal-
catheters come with freely moveable "suture
 gesia must still be provided to the patient as soaker
wings" that can be positioned anywhere along the
catheters are typically placed at the end of the sur-
catheter (Figure 5.27). The wings should be moved
gical procedure. Balanced analgesia using these
 to the part of catheter that leaves the skin. At this
catheters in combination with other types of anal-
location, the wings can be anchored to the skin to
gesic techniques should be considered for optimal
 prevent movement and dislod gment of the catheter
patient care.
60 Equipment
(a)
(b)
2ml/h
(c)
Figure 5.28 Three examples of elastomeric infusion pumps that can be used to deliver local anesthetic solutions slowly over
time to a catheter (e.g. wound soaker catheter, epidural catheter). Note the delivery tubing and flow restrictor (blue) in (a)
(Surefuser A, Nipro). The 2 ml/h pumps in (b) (Singleday Infusor, Baxter) have been prepared with different volumes of local
anesthetic solution in their reservoirs to demonstrate reservoir capacity. The pump in (c) (Elastomeric Pump, MILA International
Inc.) is soft-sided and has a four-layer balloon to maintain its integrity when used in a clinical setting. (c) used with permission of 
MILA International Inc.
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia  61
For more information about the use of wound
soaker catheters, see Chapter 8.
Devices for continuous drug
administration
Elastomeric pumps
Elastomeric pumps are lightweight, portable, dis-
posable pumps that are designed to deliver a
continuous flow of medication over the infusion
period at the nominal flow rate indicated on the
device (Figure 5.28). These pumps are typically
designed for single use only, but there are excep-
tions. There are many sizes and configurations
Figure 5.29  A typical flow restrictor component (blue) and
inline membrane filter (white) of an elastomeric infusion 
available (e.g. 50mL, 100 mL, 250mL), and several
have been found to be useful for delivering drugs
pump (Surefuser A, Nipro) manufactured to deliver 2.1 ml of
solution per hour over 24 hours. It is the flow restrictor that
 to veterinary patients. Different types of elasto-
limits the actual delivery of solution through the tubing and
 meric infusion pumps are available, with differing
this component needs to be maintained at the manufacturer's
reservoir volume and delivery rates that allow the
recommended temperature for optimal performance of the
pumps to infuse at a steady rate over the course of
pump.
Aiaa are sdumd asaul shep uaaas ci dn smoy aay
convenient to use with veterinary patients as they
not the size of the balloon that determines and
do not require a power source (like an electric
maintains a steady flow, but a separate restrictor
-on aq on ynoua teus uao aie au pue ′(dumd
that acts independently from the pressure in the
Aremque iso juad a ch paqoee Aqerog
balloon. Different configurations allow for differ-
pumps are maintained while the patient is still
ent set flow rates, and some newer pumps allow
hospitalized, but as the pumps are designed for
the practitioner to alter the flow rates across a pre-
at-home use in people, they can potentially be sent
determined range using an adjustable dial.
The
home with small animal patients under certain
housing usually has some sort of volume indicator
conditions.
to show roughly how much of the fluid has been
Elastomeric pumps use a balloon as a reservoir
infused.
to store a volume of fluid. The multilayer balloon is
The recoil of the balloon creates pressure that
frequently housed in a rigid plastic container that
is used as driving pressure to force the fluid in the
both protects the balloon from damage and pre-
reservoir out of the pump and down the extension
vents leakage of the drug out of the protective
tubing. These pumps are specifically designed to
housing if the balloon does break. The balloon res-
deliver fluids within 10-15% of the expected
ervoir is connected to a special infusion line or flow
nominal flow rate for the duration of the infusion,
control tube (flow restrictor) that limits the flow of
which is comparable to the accuracy of many
the drug to a predetermined, nonadjustable rate
electronic delivery pumps (Capdevila et al. 2003;
(Figure 5.29).
Dadure et al. 2003; Ilfeld et al. 2003) (Figure 5.30).
Most elastomeric pumps have a built-in mem-
Several factors can affect the rate of infusion:
brane filter in the administration line to eliminate
air, bacteria, and particulate matter from the line
ambient temperature;
(Figure 5.29). When filled, the pump operates with
positioning of the pump relative to the catheter;
a sustained internal pressure, and, although it is
degree of initial filling of the reservoir;
the pressure in the balloon that drives the fluid into
 number of uses of the pump (they are less
the administration line, it is the flow restrictor
accurate if a single-use pump is refilled for
downstream that controls the flow. In this way, it is
 repeated use); and
62Equipment
150
Accufuser plus
temperature and at33°C (Read et al. 2010b). Further
set rate)
-ialap cl sieuue u pawojrad aq on paau saipnis
mine the optimal method of attachment to the
patient to maintain temperature within this
100
Measured flow rate
working range.
The reservoir balloon should ideally be main-
tained at a level approximating the tip of the cath-
50
20-24°℃
eter to which the pump is attached. If the reservoir
。
32°℃
is maintained significantly above the distal end of
■
36°℃
the catheter, delivery of the drug can potentially be
increased due to increased hydrostatic pressure
0
0
10
20
30
40
(Ilfeld et al. 2003).
The volume of local anesthetic used should
Figure 5.30 Performance over time for a portable elasto-
match the particular pump's maximum volume.
meric infusion pump (Accufuser Plus, McKinley Medical).
When lower volumes are used to load the pump.
Shown is the actual infusion rate as a fraction of the set
there is a tendency for the pump to infuse at a
infusion rate. The constant horizontal line represents the
higher than expected rate. This is due to the fact
expected pump rate at 100% of set flow rate. The constant
vertical line represents the expected infusion duration as
that when the balloon is less expanded, pressure
calculated from the set rate and reservoir volume. Data are
increases and infusion rates are subsequently
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. From Ilfeld et al.
increased (based on Laplace's Law).
As
2003. Used with permission.
example, if only 30 mL of a maximum 50 mL are
loaded into a balloon reservoir, the overall infu-
sion rate can be increased by up to 8% over the
decreasing the viscosity of the injectate with
duration of the infusion, compared to a 0%
dilution of the fluid may also alter the delivery
change when the balloon is loaded with the
compared to the rate that is expected.
 expected 50 mL.
Although certain new pumps can reportedly be
These pumps are calibrated to deliver fluids at
refilled several times, the majority of elastomeric
the advertised rate when maintained at 32-34°C.
balloon pumps are desigmed for single use only
When used in people, the flow restrictor is usually
and are disposable. This is because there is a
secured to the patient's skin to maintain a stable
reduction in the internal pressure that the balloon
temperature near 32*C. At higher temperatures
can generate after it has been filled and emptied
(37°C), the infusion rate can increase (up to 10%)
several times. With repeated use, infusion rates
due to changes in the viscosity of the liquid medi-
become unreliable and progressively decrease,
cation and the internal calibration of the flow
with some pumps showing up to an 18% decrease
in expected delivery after the fifth use. Check the
  s q   s s 
manufacturer's recommendations before consid-
28% from the expected rates. A pilot study using
ering using an elastomeric pump more than once.
two commonly available pumps in dogs showed
 The drug-binding properties of the balloon
that accuracy is reliable despite the flow restrictors
reservoir of the specific elastomeric pump should
 of the pumps being maintained against the dogs'
be reviewed before use. In one study, it was
hair coats at intermediate temperatures between
found that when 17 commonly infused drugs
room temperature and 33°C (Read et al. 2010a). In
(including lidocaine and morphine) were diluted
that study, delivery rates increased with increases
in either 0.9% saline or 5% dextrose, clinically
in temperature, and overall delivery was accept-
insignificant levels of the drugs were bound to
able with expected infusion rates being achieved
the material of which the reservoir was made
 s d o  'ad 3oi  o
(Jenke 1994). The authors concluded that the
compared the infusion accuracy of two commonly
reservoirs were essentially inert with respect to
available pumps filled with 1% and 2% lidocaine,
the binding of the particular drugs used in the
there were no clinically sigrificant
tdifferences
study. In another report, local anesthetics were
attributable to the viscosity of the drugs at room
taken up by the balloon materials and their
Equipment for Loco-regional Anesthesia and Analgesia 63
Time (min)
concentrations in the delivered solutions were
30
45
60
deceased between 6% and 14% (Mizogami et al.
H
15
00
2004). Bupivacaine was most strongly adsorbed,
followed by lidocaine, ropivacaine, and mepiva-
[%)
caine (Figure 5.31). Binding increased at a more
alkaline pH (7.4 vs. 6.0), suggesting that local
ion
anesthetics should not be alkalinized prior to use
with an infusion pump. When infusion balloons
 are used to continuously deliver local anesthetics,
the anesthetist should be aware of the possibility
97.5
that the actual concentration of local anesthetic
origir
being delivered by the pump may be lower
ade
than that which is anticipated. The clinical rele-
vance of these findings appears to be minimal
in people when these pumps are used for
postoperative analgesia, but no studies have
been performed in animals to date.
95-
Figure 5.31
 Concentration changes of local anesthetics 
flowing out of infusion balloons injected with their solutions
Battery-powered pumps
of pH 6.0. The effluents were analyzed over time by
high-performance liquid chromatography: lidocaine (●),
 Other portable pumps include battery-powered,
bupivacaine (+), ropivacaine (▲), mepivacaine (). Data are
gas-driven
delivery
sdumd
(Infu-DiskTM)
expressed as mean ± standard error (n =4). *P <0.05 and
** P<0.01; significantly different from initial concentration
(Figure 5.32). These are low cost, single-use, con-
(0min). From Mizogami et al. 2004. Used with permission.
.21ml/hr
M04240602
Expireson
04/24/08
Figure 5.32  Example of a single-use battery-operated infusion pump (lnfu-Diskim) that is designed to deliver 0.21 ml/hr of a
solution. Image used with permission of MILA International Inc.
64 Equipment
(5 or 10 mL). They have nonadjustable flow rates;
of lidocaine in canine sciatic nerves. Acta Anaes-
fluids are delivered continuously with accuracy
thesiologica Scandinavica 51, 101-107.
within 10% of the described label rate. Instead of
Mahler SP, Reece JL (2007) Electrical nerve stimulation to
facilitate placement of an indwelling catheter for
using a balloon to pump the fluids, once activated,
repeated brachial plexus block in a traumatized dog.
these pumps use battery cells to produce a contin-
Vet Anesth Analg 34, 365-370.
uous flow of gas that expands against a diaphragm,
displacing the fluid volume from the pump.
Mizogami M, Tsuchiya H, Takakura K (2004) Local anes-
thetics adsorbed onto infusion balloon. Anesth Analg
Variable flow rates are available, ranging from
99,764-768.
0.03mLh-1 up to 4mLh-. Accuracy is better
Read MR, Mauldin GN, Cahoon LM et al. (2010a) Effect
than± 10%, and up to 98% of the loaded volume is
 of ambient temperature on delivery accuracy of two
delivered. They are compact in size (4-5cm diam-
elastomeric infusion pumps. Proceedings of the 18th
eter, weigh less than 20 g), making them very use-
 Intermational Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
ful for many veterinary patients.
Symposium, San Antonio, TX, USA.
Read MR, Mauldin GN, Lawrence T et al. (2010b) Effect
 of local anesthetic dilution on delivery accuracy of two
References
elastomeric infusion pumps. Proceedings of the 18th
 Intermational Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Symposium, San Antonio, TX, USA.
Abelson AL, McCobb EC, Shaw S et al. (2009) Use of
Remedios AM, Wagner R, Caulkett NA et al. (1996)
wound soaker catheters for the administration of local
Epidural abscess and discospondylitis in a dog after
anesthetic for post-operative analgesia: 56 cases. Vet
administration of a lumbosacral epidural analgesic.
Anaesth Analg 36, 597-602.
Can Vet J 37,106-107.
Capdevila X, Macaire P, Aknin P et al. (2003) Patient-
Steinfeldt T, Nimphius W, Wermer T et al. (2010a)
controlled perineural analgesia after ambulatory
 Nerve injury by needle nerve perforation in regional
 orthopedic surgery: a comparison of electronic versus
anaesthesia: does size matter? Br J Anaesth 104,
elastomeric pumps. Anesth Analg 96, 414-417.
245-253.
Dadure C, Pirat P, Raux O et al. (2003) Perioperative con-
Steinfeldt T, Nimphius W, Wurps M et al. (2010b) Nerve
 tinuous peripheral nerve blocks with disposable infu-
perforation with pencil point or short bevelled needles:
sion pumps in children: a prospective descriptive
histological outcome. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 54,
study. Anesth Analg 97, 687-690.
993-999.
Dhir S, Ganapathy S (2008) Comparative evaluation of
Steinfeldt T, Werner T, Nimphius W et al. (2011)
ultrasound-guided contimuous infraclavicular brachial
Histological analysis after peripheral nerve puncture
plexus block with stimulating catheter and traditional
with pencil-point or tuohy needletip. Anesth Analg
technique: a prospective randomized trial. Acta
112, 465-470.
Anaesthesiolol Scand 52, 1158-1166.
Ford DJ, Pither C, Raj PP (1984) Comparison of insulated
Tsui BCH, Wagner A,Finucane B (2004) Electrophysiologic
effect of injectates on peripheral nerve stimulation. Reg
and uninsulated needles for locating peripheral nerves
Anesth Pain Med 29, 189-193.
with a peripheral nerve stimulator. Anesth Analg 63,
925-928.
Hadzic A, Dilberovic F, Shah S et al. (2004) Combination
Further reading
leads to fascicular injury and neurologic deficits in
dogs. Reg Anesth Pain Med 29, 417-423.
Tsui BCH, Hadzic A (2007a) Peripheral Nerve Stimulators
Ilfeld BM, Morey TE, Enneking FK (2003) Portable infu-
and Electrophysiology of Nerve Stimulation. In:
:isasieue jeuonar snonuuos og pasn sdnd uons
Textbook of Regional Anesthesia and Acute Pain
delivery rate accuracy and consistency. Reg Anesth
Management. Hadzic A (ed.) McGraw Hill Medical,
Pain Med 28, 424432.
New York, NY, USA. pp. 93-104.
Jenke DR (1994) Drug binding by reservoirs in elasto-
Tsui BCH, Hadzic A (2007b) Equipment for peripheral
meric infusion devices. Pharm Res 11, 984-989.
nerve block. In: Textbook of Regional Anesthesia and
Kapur E, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F et al. (2007) Neurologic
Acute Pain Management. Hadzic A (ed.) McGraw Hill
and histologic outcome after intraneural injections
Medical, New York, NY, USA. pp. 307-317.
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators
Robert M. Raw, Matt R. Read, and Luis Campoy
Introduction
Electrophysiology
Portable peripheral nerve stimulators were first
 Electricity is the physical phenomenon of sub-atomic
introduced into human regional anesthesia in the
particles (electrons and protons) that either (1) gather
late 1970s. Nerve stimulators have different designs
depending on the specific purpose for which they
or (2) that flow between two points.
are to be used. In anesthesia, nerve stimulators
are used primarily for neurophysiologic studies,
Gathering of electrons represents energy
monitoring the depth of blockade at the neuromus-
called electrical potential and it is measured in
cular junction following use of non-depolarizing
volts (V).
 muscle relaxants, and for locating nerves of interest
Flow of electrons can be either (a) unidirectional
during loco-regional anesthesia.
(direct current, DC), or back-and-forth (altemating
 In simple terms, a nerve stimulator is a piece of
current, AC) and is measured in amperes (A).
equipment that is used to generate an electric field
in the tissues immediately surrounding a target
The flow of electrons between two points ("elec-
nerve. If the nerve carries motor fibers, the electric
trodes") occurs from the anode (positive) towards
current that is induced by the nerve stimulator
the cathode (negative). Electron movement gener-
will result in depolarization of these nerves, and
ates an associated magnetic field. Conductors
consequently, the muscles that are served by that
within a magnetic field have electron movement
nerve will
lcontract. The visible
contractions
 induced in the conductor; this is known as "induc-
(also known as "twitches") are used to confirm
tive coupling." Therefore, a conductor-carrying
the electrophysiologic end point associated with
current can induce current in a second conductor
correct needle placement. The use of these instru-
if the latter is located within the first conductor's
ments for performing nerve blocks in veterinary
 magmetic field. This induced electron movement
patients is increasing in popularity, as can be noted
only occurs while the magnetic field changes;
by increased use in the published literature.
that is, inductive coupling can only occur with
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
65
66 Equipment
alternating or pulsed currents. The ease, or lack
 across the membrane. Once the potential difference
thereof, with which a conductor allows movement
reaches a threshold voltage (approximately -55mV), it
of electrons to occur is known as resistance (or
causes hundreds of sodium gates in that region of the
impedance) and is measured in ohms (Ω).
 membrane to open briefly. When this occurs, sodium
 Ohm's Law relates current, potential, and resistance
ions flow into the cell, resulting in complete depolar-
as R=V/I, where R=resistance, V=potential, and
ization of the cell membrane. This phenomenon
 I=current. This formula can be manipulated such
further opens more voltage-gated ion charnels in the 
that I=V/R, which explains why a constant resis-
adjacent membrane, and so a wave of depolarization
tance, current, and voltage are directly proportional
to one another (A ~ V).
the cell.
idly at first, allowing sodium ions to flow from
Mechanism of nerve activation
outside to inside, making the inside more positive.
After that, the more slowly increasing potassium
The concentration of sodium ions (Nat)
is
ion permeability allows potassium ions to flow
approximately 10 times higher outside the cell
from
inside
to
outside,
thus returning the
membrane than inside the cell, whereas
the
intracellular potential to its resting value. While
concentration of potassium (K+) ions is approxi-
at rest following activation, the Na*-K+ pump
mately 30 times higher inside the cell than outside.
restores the ion concentrations on either side of the
This creates a potential difference across the cell
cell membrane to their original values (Figure 6.1).
membrane. At rest, this potential in nerve cells
 All neuronal voltage-activated sodium channels
inactivate within several milliseconds during
With appropriate stimulation, sodium rapidly
depolarization, thus another depolarization will be
flows into the cell, reducing the voltage difference
impossible until a substantial fraction of sodium
Action potential
+30
D
Refractory period
(Aw)
Sodium influx
Volt
Stimulus threshold
-50
Resting potential
-60
 Resting potential
-70
-80
06-
0
1
2
3
Time (ms)
Figure 6.1
When the change in voltage is large enough (at least 15 mV) to open the Na+ channels on the axon at -60mV, an
action potential is produced. When the Nat channels open, Na+ rushes INTO the cell. At the same time, K+ rushes OUT of the
cell. After the action potential is generated, the ions are pumped back to their original concentrations and the resting potential of
the membrane is restored.
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators  67
channels is returned to their closed state. This
with two adjacent areas of mild depolarization,
 is referred to as the "refractory period" of the nerve.
called virtual cathodes. In this case, the trans-
The opposite phenomenon to depolarization
membrane potential will be increased and will
is called hyperpolarization. Hyperpolarization
make the cell wall resistant to conducting an
is often caused by efflux of K+ through the K+
action potential.
channels, or influx of Cl- through the Cl- channels.
This potential can be in the order of -80mV.
This explains why the negative (Black) electrode is
used as the "searching" electrode and is connected
to the stimulating needle. It is more likely to cause
Electrostimulation
ization. Nerves need twice the current to respond
Nerve stimulators are used in conjunction with
to an electrical stimulus when the adjacent elec-
special stimulating needles (see Chapter 5 for more
trode is the anode (positive Red lead), than when it
information about insulated needles). When a
is the cathode (negative Black electrode).
stimulating needle approaches a nerve carrying
 One theory about how stimulating electrical cur-
motor fibers, depolarization of the nerve occurs,
rents induce action potentials hypothesizes that
resulting in synchronous contractions in the
 axons act as electrical conductors within a magnetic
effector muscles that are innervated by that nerve.
field that is induced by the electrical current from
There are several factors that determine the
the stimulating needle electrode. The axons thus
stimulus threshold of a nerve:
experience induced-flow of electric charges due to
pulsed electric charge flow from the stimulating
polarity of the electrodes;
needles inducing changing magnetic fields. It is
rheobase of the nerve fiber;
this axonal induced flow of electric charges that
chronaxy of the nerve fiber;
 induces depolarization (or hyperpolarization).
distance of the electrode (needle tip) from the
 Nerves are also selectively stimulated depending
nerve fiber; and
on their size/thickness. Sensitivity to stimulation is
 current density at the electrode-needle tip.
predicted by electrical laws that state that large
diameter axons are more easily excited than
smaller diameter fibers (Basser and Roth 2000). This
 Polarity of stimulating and returning
explains why motor nerves can be stimulated at
electrodes
lower currents than sensory nerves. When a potential
is high enough, all axons will be stimulated.
The potential field has a different influence on the
electrical potential inside and outside the cell mem-
brane, thus affecting the nerve cell's transmem-
Rheobase (mA)
brane potential.
Rheobase is a natural phenomenon and is the
The cathode ("negative" or Black electrode)
minimal electric CURRENT of an infinitely long
causes the closest part of the axon to depolarize.
duration that is required to stimulate a nerve.
If the trans-membrane potential is reduced to a
Further lengthening of duration of this electrical
certain threshold, depolarization will occur and
stimulus does not further reduce the current
an action potential will result (Rosenberg and
required (Figure 6.2).
Greenhow 1978). An action potential will prop-
agate in both directions away from the point of
stimulus. When the axon segment closest to the
Chronaxy (ms)
electrode depolarizes, the two adjacent areas of
the axon undergo mild hyperpolarization
Chronaxy is an arbitrary definition and is the
(called virtual anodes).
minimal DURATION of a stimulus required to
The anode ("positive" or Red electrode) causes
stimulate a nerve fiber at a current of twice the
the closest part of the axon to hyperpolarize
rheobase (Figure 6.2).
68 Equipment
Stimulus
amplitude
Threshold curves, rheobase, chronaxy
4.0
Low speed thin fibers (pain) in blue have
a higher chronaxy than high speed thick
3.5
fibers (motor) in red.
3.0
2002 B. Braun Medical Inc.
http:/ww.bbraunusa.com/stimuplexpens1.html
2.5 -
Pain fibers are lower speed, thinner
High speed 
fibers (As, C) than motor fibers (Aα).
2.0
fiber
Chronaxy
Consequently, their chronaxy is also
different.
1.5
Chronaxy
Rheobase
1.0
Rheobase
0.5
Rheobase
Rheobase
0.25
0.75
1.25
1.75
2.25
2.75
0.5
2.5
 Stiulus duration
1.0
1.5
2.0
t/ms
tc
tc
Figure 65.2 Chronaxy and rheobase are related in the formula I= Ir (1 + C/t), where I=current required to trigger an action
potential, Ir =rheobase, C= chronaxy, and t=duration of the stimulus. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in the Dog.
Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
Distance of the electrode (needle tip)
 Nerve stimulation is best discussed in terms of
from the nerve fiber
tissue potential fields. According to Ohm's Law, for
a constant resistance, the potential fields will be
Coulomb's Law relates to the distance at which an
proportional to the current density. The electrical
electrode will stimulate a nerve. Coulomb's Law
states that E=k (Q/r²), where E =current required,
 () aa e An si rs
K = aconstant, Q= minimal current, and r = distance.
 in the form of a square-shaped impulse (Figure 6.3).
 Using an insulated stimulating needle with a con-
ductive tip (unipolar needles), the electrical current
required to trigger a muscle contraction correlates
Additional concepts associated with the
with the distance of the tip of the needle to the
axon activation process
nerve. Said another way, the closer the needle is to
the nerve, the lower the electrical current that is
Accommodation and habituation denote the
adaptation of the cell to a continuing or repetitive
required to elicit a response.
stimulus. This is characterized by a rise in the
excitation threshold. Facilitation denotes an
Current density in the biological tissues
increase in the excitability of the cell; corre-
spondingly, there is a decrease in the threshold.
, sn  o si  
 Latency denotes the time between application
gradient," and is a measure of the flow of an electric
of a stimulus pulse and the beginning of the
charge. Two factors influence this: distance of the
activation.
electrode from the nerve, and surface area (cross
section area) of the electrode transmitting the
current. Larger electrodes have less potential
Nerve stimulator components
gradient or current density. The current density is
thus the electric current per unit area of cross section,
The main components of a schematic peripheral
(zu v) 1ajaw arenbs 1ad saradure ul pamseau
nerve stimulator are (Figure 6.4):
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators  69
Typical nerve stimulator output is a
 square wave electrical impulse;
- Duration = 100 μs
Stimulus pulse height
- Current = 1 mA
- Voltage = 1 Volt
(current in mA)
- if Resistance = 1 kOhm
D
Stimulus pulse duration in μs
(pulse width)
Typical nerve stimulator electrical impulse
Figure 6.3
Square wave delivered by a peripheral nerve stimulator. The Y-axis represents current (mA) and the X-axis time (μs).
This waveform contains a current increase (upstroke), a plateau (current maintained), and a current decrease (down stroke) back
to baseline (zero). The duration of the plateau is the pulse width.
Display
0.6 mAmp
Current
 control 
12-bit
AT89C52
ADC
 Constant 
Micro-
current
processor
generator
Electronic
4.5-9.0
measurements
Volt
Figure 6.4  Conceptual diagram of a generic nerve stimulator.
power source (batteries);
 micro-controller. Each unit has two separate
on-off switch;
controllers for frequency and duration of the
 current regulator (current control dial);
electric pulse. Each (frequency and pulse width)
 microprocessor unit. This component produces
has certain value loaded into the timers from a
an electric pulse with a specific voltage (height)
table in the program memory:
and duration (width) with a square-shaped
display. This is usually a liquid crystal display
waveform. The oscillator is controlled by
(LCD) to display important information to the
 internal timers within the micro-controller;
user;
70 Equipment
analogue-digital-converter (ADC). For every
pulse, the micro-controller outputs a 12-bit
number corresponding to a selected current
value. An ADC translates the 12-bit number to
 an analogue voltage. That analogue voltage is
0.10-0.10-0.15ms
5mA
used as a reference value for the constant
0.00
SENSe
current generator;
constant current generator. This component
一
-
receives the reference value from the ADC out-
puts an electrical impulse of a set duration and
voltage. The actual delivered current depends
m白
on resistance of the tissues in the patient and
resistance within the stimulator leads; and
electrical measurement unit. This component
continuously measures the actual current that is
being delivered by the nerve stimulator. This
Figure 6.5
 An example of a nerve stimulator (Stimuplex
HNS12, B.Braun Medical Inc.) with LCD display and useful
information is used to determine whether the
indicators including: stimulus duration over three impulses
circuit (nerve stimulator, needle, patient)
lis
(0.1-0.1-0.15 mA), the set current (5 mA), load impedance
intact, to calculate the resistance within the
(kOhm), the actual current that is delivered to the patient
circuit, and to send instructions to the micropro-
(large digits: 0.00mA), and battery strength (lower right).
cessor that will result in constant adjustments in
the output voltage to match the set-current that
has been determined by the operator.
Constant current output
^0.60mA
5m
Modern nerve stimulators used for performing
0.00
SENSe
regional anesthesia blocks in animals and people are
designed to deliver a constant current, regardless of
x--
the variations in electrical impedance encountered
Patient current lower
as the needle tip is advanced through the various
tissues. The units use built-in compensatory mecha-
thanyour setting
nisms to continuously correct for changes in tissue
impedance and therefore adjust voltage output in
order to accurately deliver a constant electrical
current. As a result of this capability, the well-
Figure 6.6Example of a nerve stimulator (Stimuplex
established relationship between the current and
HNS12, B.Braun Medical Inc.) with LCD display that presents
the needle-to-nerve distance is maintained and thus,
a warning message when the delivered current is not the
accuracy of needle placement can be maximized.
same as the set current.
dialed current is not being delivered to the patient
Display
(e.g. if the return electrode/cathode becomes
disconnected from the patient) (Figure 6.6).
Displays can be digital or LCD, and should have an
Other useful indicators on the screen include
easily readable display to show the actual current
(Figures 6.5-6.7):
delivered to the patient (not just the selected
current) to safely and successfully deliver the nerve
stimulus frequency (Hz);
block (Figure 6.5). Additionally, it is desirable to
pulse duration (ms); and
have the capability to warn the operator if the
load impedance (kOhm).
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators   71
Pulse width and frequency
 Different types of nerves (motor, pain) are stimu-
lated at different pulse widths, so nerve stimulators
must be capable of delivering short pulse widths
in the range of 0.05-0.2ms. Across this range of
pulse duration, only large motor fibers (Ao) are
stimulated. This means that the operator can visu-
alize the motor responses associated with nerve
stimulation without causing significant discom-
fort in awake or lightly sedated patients. Sensory/
pain fibers (A8, C) are typically stimulated at
longer pulse durations (>0.2ms); therefore, as
long as the duration of each burst is below 0.2 ms,
pain from the act of nerve stimulation itself should
Figure 6.7  Example of a nerve stimulator (Stimuplex? Dig
 not be experienced by the patient. However, pain
RC, B.Braun Medical Inc.) with a digital display, adjustable
impulse frequency (1-2 Hz), and adjustable current (mA).
and discomfort from needle manipulation must
still be a consideration in awake or lightly sedated
patients.
Controls
 A pulse frequency of 2Hz has been found to be
 most optimal for peripheral nerve location during
Most nerve stimulators have adjustable:
nerve blocks. At this pulse frequency, the operator
can obtain more information about the needle-to-
current (mA);
nerve distance and is less likely to pass by the
impulse frequency (Hz); and
target nerve between consecutive impulses as the
 pulse width/duration (ms).
needle is advanced. When using nerve stimulators
that are only capable of delivering 1Hz, the needle
The settings need to be able to be adjusted
must be advanced very slowly to avoid missing the
-dmba au pue roieiado au Aq Asea pue Aomb
nerve between consecutive pulses.
ment should be designed in such a way as to allow
Technology continues to evolve, and a new
for adjustment of the necessary settings without
stimulating pattern has recently been developed.
breaking sterile technique.
SENSe (Sequential Electrical Nerve Stimulation,
"BBraun") technology reportedly increases the
sensitivity and specificity of using nerve stimula-
Current adjustment
tion to identify target nerves by adding a longer
pulse. This technique utilizes a series of three
A nerve stimulator unit should have an easily
stimulations per second: two short pulses of
adjustable control for current intensity, as this is the
0.1 ms, followed by a third pulse that is 0.15 ms in
parameter that is adjusted during the course of
duration. As the current is maintained constant,
performing a nerve block. Current can be adjusted
 more energy is released with the longer pulse.
using several different methods that include digital
As a result, the longer pulse has the ability to elicit
or analog dials and remote controllers (e.g. foot
a motor response, even when the needle is not
pedals, or "under-the-glove" hand-held remote
located immediately adjacent to the nerve. As a
controllers) (Figure 6.8).
result, the operator will observe one twitch per
Additionally, the nerve stimulator should permit
second during the initial approach. When the
adjustment of threshold current intensity in small
needle advances closer to the nerve, the smaller
increments of 0.01 mA across the clinically useful
 pulses have enough energy to stimulate the target
range of 0.01mA to 0.5mA (Hadzic and Vloka
nerve. When this occurs, the operator will see
2004), allowing for close approximation of the
three consecutive muscle twitches every second.
needle-to-nerve distance.
This new technology is claimed to shorten
72Equipment
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.8 (a), (b), (c) Example of a remote control device for adjusting current delivery during performance of peripheral nerve
blocks (Stimuplex Dig RC, B.Braun Medical Inc.). The ability to control current delivery while remaining sterile is useful when
there is limited assistance for the anesthetist.
the time it takes to identify the target nerves,
being delivered to the patient (Figure 6.6). This
without the need for constant adjustment of
 may occur with disconnection of the electrodes
current during needle placement. If during needle
(anode (-) Black from the needle, cathode (+) Red
manipulation the twitches are lost altogether, the
 from the patient), poor electrical connections (usu-
day on pasn aq uoeueouonemp asmd rasuon
ally between the cathode electrode and patient), or
find the nerve without having to first increase the
battery failure.
current.
Practical approach to peripheral nerve
Disconnection and malfunction indicators
blocks using electrostimulation
An essential feature of any nerve stimulator is the
ability to indicate when the desired current is not
 caused us to challenge some of our long-standing
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators   73
beliefs about nerve blocks, using electrostimulation
75% of the cases, respectively. Furthermore, Chan
 guidance alone for nerve blocks is still acceptable
et al. (2007) evaluated the MSC associated with
practice.
intraneural needle location in pigs. The median 
current required to elicit a motor response in the
roots of the brachial plexus was 0.43mA (0.12-
Minimum stimulating current
1.8mA) (min-max). In 45% of cases a current of
<0.5mA elicited a positive motor contraction,
Minimum stimulating current (MSC) is the lowest
whereas in another 5%, a current >lmA was
current that will induce any degree of muscle con-
necessary. These results were similar to those
traction when the needle is located in its final posi-
obtained by Tsai et al. (2008). Sauter et al. (2007)
tion. Once a muscle twitch is found, the current
conducted an ultrasound-guided human study in
should be slowly dialed down to zero. Then, the
two differentnerves (radial and ulnar) and assessed
current on the nerve stimulator is incrementally
both the MSC at the point of needle-to-nerve
increased until a twitch is again observed. That
contact, and the distances from the nerves at which
current should be recorded as the MSC. In the past,
needles with a preset current started to elicit a
the needle tip was considered to be located intra-
twitch. Threshold levels at needle-to-nerve contact
neurally when the MSC was 0.3mA or less. Based
ranged widely from 0.4 to 4.5mA for the radial
 on new research that uses ultrasound to visualize
nerve and from 0.32 to 2.0mA for the ulnar nerve.
 nerve blocks, this is no longer considered to be the 
 Clearly, the long-held belief of eliciting a twitch
case. Moreover, use of a nerve stimulator alone
between 0.4 and 0.6 mA but not below 0.3 mA, does
cannot determine whether a needle tip is located
 not mean that the needle tip is not intraneural.
extra- or intraneurally. Perlas et al. (2006) studied
The question is "what MSC corresponds to 100%
the sensitivity
of either electrical stimulation
 prevention of block failure?" The answer from
(≤0.5 mA) or paresthesia for nerve localization that
the studies cited above is <0.5 mA. However, that
was assessed concurrently by real-time ultrasonog-
threshold current may still occur when the needle
raphy. Those investigators found that using elec-
 is located intraneurally. In people, extensive clinical
trolocation and paresthesia to detect intraneural
experience and many recent studies report that
needle placement were sensitive in only 38% and
intraneural injections are nearly always harmless.
100%
 Percentage of
 intraneural needles
at minimum stimulating
Percentage of needles
75%
current (MSC)
touching the nerve at
Percentage of
set currents
nerves
responding
50%
with muscle
twitches
25%
2
3
Stimulating current (mAmps)
Figure 6.9 The range of MsC currents that may correspond to the needle being in direct contact with a nerve (and not within it)
is 0.3-4.5 mA. The range of MSC that may occur with intraneurally positioned nerve block needles is 0.1 2-1.9 mA. Note that
these two ranges overlap considerably.
74 Equipment
The incidence of intraneural injections in ani-
 If the nerve is not immediately encountered,
 mals is umknown, but long-term sequelae appear to
carefully and methodically withdraw the
be relatively minor as it is only recently that inves-
 needle to the level of the skin and redirect the
tigators have started to use ultrasound to perform 
needle until the nerve is identified by a
nerve blocks in animals. The vast majority of blocks
muscle twitch.
in veterinary medicine are still performed blindly
 Once a twitch is elicited, in stepwise fashion,
or with use of nerve stimulation, yet few, if any,.
reduce the current and make needle adjust-
complications that would be associated with intra-
ments until a twitch is elicited at a current of
neural injections are seen or have been reported.
0.5 mA or less.
We simply do not know if they occur, but should be
Determine the MSC before injection of local
aware of any signs.
anesthetic. It is possible, once the final position
Interestingly, the very lowest MSCs (especially
is found at 0.5 mA, that the nerve may continue
below 0.3mA) are correlated with the fastest and
to elicit a muscle response at even lower cur-
densest nerve block setups (likely because the inci-
 rents without a needle tip repositioning.
dence of intraneural drug injection is the highest).
Ensure negative blood aspiration to rule out
intravascular needle location.
Slowly inject the local anesthetic solution.
Clinical factors that influence the minimal
 Ensure absence of resistance on injection to rule
current needed to stimulate a nerve
out intraneural needle location.
The twitches will cease once local anesthetic
Diseased neurons usually need higher currents to
solution has been injected. This was long
elicit a stimulus. In people, this commonly occurs
believed to be the result of the injectate displac-
with geriatric patients, patients with diabetic neu-
ing the nerve away from the needle tip (referred
ropathy, or those with end-stage renal failure. MSC
to as a "Raj test"). More recently, this has been
 may need to be increased 10 times in order to elicit
shown to be the result of the local anesthetic
the same responses that would be seen in a normal
 acting as an electrolyte solution that expands
patient. Distal muscle disease due to nonuse or
the conductive area around the stimulating
other reasons may conceal nerve stimulation. The
needle, making the low-level current less effec-
effects of these diseases in animals are unkmow.
tive for stimulating the nerve (Tsui et al. 2004).
Coincident use of neuromuscular blocking
 Once the injection has been made, the patient
drugs will preclude nerve electrolocation until
must be monitored to ensure the absence of
the relaxant effect has worn off.
signs that might suggest development of a local
anesthetic systemic toxicity (see Chapter 4 for
more information).
Practical use of peripheral nerve locators
for local anesthesia
An insulated stimulating needle is advanced towards
Practice tips: needle navigation rules
the expected anatomic position of the relevant
Don't inject after a lateralizing movement.
nerve. When the nerve is exposed to sufficient
current, depolarization of the nerve will occur,
This is a common cause of block failures. Only
inject if the last movement was a penetrative
resulting in a distal muscle twitch (Jalinous 1991;
Hadzic and Vloka 2004).
movement. A lateralizing movement is one
where the needle tip was pushed sideways to
elicit the biggest twitch. Lateralization com-
Step-by-step procedure
presses the tissues between the needle tip and
the closest motor fascicle. The shortened
Start with a current of 1.0-1.5mA at a pulse
electrical distance is sufficient to elicit a muscle
duration of 100-150 μs to survey/scan the area
twitch, but the compressed tissues would rep-
where the nerve is anatomically most likely to
resent a barrier to drug flow. A lateralizing
be encountered.
movement may create a false sense of needle
Peripheral Nerve Stimulators  75
 Changing the direction before reversing makes
therefore recommended to use lateralizing
it impossible to accurately redirect the needle
 movement only to indicate the direction needed
when advancing it again. Typically, when it is
for needle adjustment. Then the needle should
 readvanced, it simply ends up in the exact same
be withdrawn a small distance (1-4 mm) in the
spot or else it overcorrects and brackets the
same direction as it was previously advanced,
nerve. Use careful movements and go slowly.
re-oriented
towards
the new
direction,
Systematically create zones of exclusion that do
and then re-advanced until the twitch is again
not contain the target nerve. That is, when the
elicited. The previously compressed tissues
nerve is not found, reinsert the needle in
will spring back and the twitch can be found
straight lines that are closer together than the
again, making the block more likely to be suc-
nerve's expected width.
cessful.
Don't "torque" the needle. This is done by plac-
Avoid unsteady needles with "unforgiving"
 ing a finger on the needle shaft to force it side-
nerves. Unforgiving blocks are the ones where
ways as it bends. Avoid touching the needle
the nerve has a closely apposed, firm fascial
shaft entirely as this will break the sterility of
compartment sheath, or where it lies tightly
the procedure. If it is desired to move the needle
between two muscles with no loose tissue or
sideways, simply 
withdraw the needle and
fat. Small needle displacement while injecting
redirect it. This also avoids accidentally lateral-
the drug can displace the needle outside of the
 izing and injecting the drug.
fascial compartment in which the nerve lies.
Watch for "wrong" muscle twitches. For exam-
The operator should ensure that the needle
ple, if you know that a more superficial muscle
holding hand is totally stabilized by touching a
has a separate nerve supply, observing a slight
frm immobile surface, like part of the bed, a
twitch in it may suggest that the needle is still
d Apoq ad u Aa Aue no aq
within the superficial muscle and that you still
 area not involved with respiration or movement
have to advance the needle deeper to reach the
of the limb being blocked. Additionally, the
target nerve.
threshold current for unforgiving blocks should
"Investigate" an arc at right angles to the nerve:
be the very lowest current possible (e.g. under
 approach nerves with needles perpendicular to
0.45mA).
the long axis of the nerve. Then make serial
Forgiving nerves lie in wide, capacious
probing insertions to the left and to the right of
fascial envelopes where inaccurate drug
the nerve axis, until the nerve is identified by
 injection or even blind speculative injection
muscle twitches. Make each adjustment of
sufficient drug
will always produce
 needle direction so small that it is impossible to
complete analgesia by the end of the case, if
"step over" the large nerve as you adjust the
 not a fast onset surgical grade block.
needle's direction.
Don't "bracket" the nerve when searching for
it. This means do not make corrections that are
 Nerve stimulation is very useful for performing
too large for the current and nerve size so that
 regional anesthesia in animals, and its use will con-
 redirecting the needle can let it pass on opposite
tinue to be documented with careful practice and
sides of the nerve. When there is total uncer-
considerate research.
tainty of the nerve's location, use higher cur-
rents to increase the electrical width of the
References
needle, and only make wider needle direction
correction in proportion to the higher current
Basser PJ, Roth BJ (2000) New currents in electrical
and anticipated nerve width. This mistake is
 stimulation of excitable tissues. Anmu Rev Biomed Eng
easy to make with deeper nerves since small
2, 377-397.
angle changes in needle direction will result in
Chan VW, Brull R, McCartmey CJ et al. (2007) An ultraso.
 bigger needle tip position changes.
 nographic and histological study of intraneural injection
Always reverse (withdraw) needles in exactly
 and electrical stimulation in pigs. Anesth Analg 104,
the same direction that they were placed.
1281-1284.
76 Equipment
Hadzic A, Vloka JD (2004) Peripheral Nerve Blocks -
Sauter AR, Dodgson MS, Stubhaug A et al. (2007)
Principles and Practice. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,
Utrasound controlled nerve stimulation in the elbow
USA.
region: high currents and short distances needed to
- yo sioadse rensend pue roa (t6) a snou
obtain motor responses. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 51,
netic nerve stimulation. J Clin Neurophysiol 8, 10-25.
942-948.
Perlas A, Niazi A, McCartmey C et al. (2006) The
Tsai TP, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F et al. (2008) Intensity of
sensitivity of motor response to nerve stimulation and
the stinmulating current may not be a reliable indicator
paresthesia for nerve localization as evaluated by
of intraneural needle placement. Reg Anesth Pain Med
ultrasound. Reg Anesth Pain Med 31, 445-450.
33,207-210.
Rosenberg H, Greenhow DE (1978) Peripheral nerve
Tsui BCH, Wagner A,Finucane B (2004) Electrophysiologic
stimulator performance: the influence of output
 effect of injectates on peripheral nerve stimulation. Reg
 polarity and electrode placement. Can Anaesth Soc J
Anesth Pain Med 29, 189-193.
25, 424-426.
Ultrasound-guided Peripheral
Nerve Blocks
Olga Seco, Laura Zarucco, and Luis Campoy
The combination of ultrasound technology and
echogenicity (brightmess) and therefore, once pro-
 electrolocation is gaining popularity among clini-
cessed, in different shades of grey. Structures
cians for performance of regional anesthesia.
with higher water content appear hypoechoic
Ultrasound is useful for real-time visualization of
("blacker") because the sound waves are trans-
the stimulating needle, peripheral nerves, and
mitted through them easily, with litle reflection.
other important anatomic structures
such
as
Bone blocks the wave transmission, as the velocity
vessels, muscles, and fascial planes.
of the sound through bone is markedly different
than in soft tissues, so the strong sigmal returned to
the transducer provides a hyperechoic ("whiter")
Basic ultrasound physics and technology
appearance on the screen.
The wavelength is the distance that the ultra-
Diagnostic ultrasound uses high frequency sound
sound
wave travels during one cycle, and the
waves (in the MHz range) to provide real-time
shorter it is (high frequency), the higher the resolu-
imaging of the different tissues in the body. When
tion of the image. However, high frequency sound
-ozaid jo Aeine ue on patdde st juaims leonala ue
waves are attenuated more than low frequency
electric crystals within the ultrasound transducer,
ones, limiting the depth they can travel into the
mechanical energy in the form of vibration is
tissue. This means that high frequency transducers
generated resulting in ultrasound waves. As the
can generate higher resolution images of more
ultrasound waves move through tissues of differ-
superficial structures. Therefore, increasing resolu-
ent acoustic impedances, they are attenuated,
tion of the image by increasing the frequency of the
reflected, or scattered. Waves reflected back to the
transducer decreases the penetration of the ultra-
transducer are then transformed into an electrical
sound beam. The quality of the ultrasonographic
signal that is processed by the ultrasound machine
image depends on the quality of the ultrasound
to generate an image (Figure 7.1). Depending on
machine and software, the quality of the trans-
the amount of waves returned, different structures
ducer, and the skill of the clinician in imaging
will be displayed with different degrees of
the region.
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
78 Equipment
Display
Processor
contrast
Scan generator
Scan converter
Pulse generator
intensity
Amplifier
gain TGC
Ultrasound pulse 
Echopulse
Ultrasound beam [
Reflecting interface
Figure 7.1S
 Schematic of a basic ultrasound machine. TGC, Time Gain Compensation.
Resolution
Detail resolution
Detail resolution is the ability to image two
Resolution describes the amount of detail in the
separate reflectors as two different echoes. This is
image. It quantifies how close two different lines
determined by the axial and lateral resolution of
can be to each other and still be visibly resolved as
the ultrasound pulses as they travel through
being two separate structures. The resolution of
tissue, as well as the closeness of the two reflec-
nerve images is significantly enhanced with a fea-
 tors. Focusing the beam is the best way to improve
ture called "compound imaging." Compound
lateral resolution. The focus of the ultrasound
imaging is an advanced feature offered by some
aul jo jaaal aut jeul os paisn!pe aq pmous ase
ultrasound units. Multiple lines of crystals on the
target
structures
optimally
 transducer (as opposed to a single line) emit and
visible.
Most
machines allow for the use of one or several focal
receive ultrasound in multiple planes. T
The
zones. The zone of optimal resolution becomes
enhanced data are then electronically recon-
 smaller as the focal zones decrease. The quality of
structed and displayed on the screen.
the images relates to the frequency of the sound
wave, with the higher frequencies giving the best
using the entire frequency teritory supported by
resolution, as the axial resolution improves, but
the transducer; this will produce better penetration
with a limited depth penetration.
and resolution.
The three types of resolution in ultrasound
imaging are:
Contrast resolution
 Contrast resolution (shades of gray) is the ability
detail;
to distinguish between differences in the inten-
contrast; and
sity of an image. It can also influence the detail
temporal.
resolution.
Ultrasound-guided Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
Temporal resolution
Temporal resolution is the ability to distinguish
events that are closely spaced in time. It improves
with a high frame rate.
Doppler effect
The Doppler effect is used to estimate the velocity
of moving reflectors by measuring the frequency
shift of sound waves. Color Doppler velocity
imaging maps the mean velocity to a color
scale. Color Doppler imaging is dependent on
Fgure 7.3  Controls on a portable ultrasound machine.
the angle between the blood flow and the ultra-
sound beam.
A newer color Doppler technology known as
Knobology (Figure 7.3)
"power Doppler" estimates the integrated Doppler
power spectrum. This modality is more sensitive
 Ultrasound settings depend on the machine being
for detecting blood flow than velocity imaging and
is almost independent of the angle between the
used; however, there are some settings that may be
vessel and the ultrasound beam. Power Doppler is
 general to all machines.
not subjected to aliasing artifacts. However, it has
Persistence or temporal averaging
directional information.
Color Doppler is a useful feature that helps to
It takes the weighted average between successive
differentiate vascular from non-vascular struc-
image frames to reduce the ultrasound speckle
tures. It may be useful to distinguish a nerve from
a blood vessel when navigating sensitive anatomy
noise. High levels of persistence are desired to opti-
 mize peripheral nerve imaging.
(Figure 7.2).
Frequency
Scarning is made possible by the piezoelectric
effect, namely that if you apply voltage to a crystal,
it will release sound. The higher the frequency of
these emissions, the greater the resolution and the
worse the penetration. For this reason, when
performing nerve blocks, use the highest frequency
 transducer that allows for imaging of the intended
structures (~9-12MHz).
Depth
This magrifies and reduces workload for near
images. Adjust depth so that the focal point lies in
the centre of the image. It is also important to adjust
Figure 7.2 Use of color Doppler to image the femoral artery
the image depth to optimize the image of the
ope o
structures of interest, finding a balance between
80  Equipment
overview and detail, as the ultrasound image
quality is reduced at large magnifications.
Focus and zoom
Focus adjustment allows maximum information to
be obtained from the area of interest by altering
crystal emission timing. Improved resolution is
seen where the focal points are placed at the region
blows it up.
Figure 7.4 Time gain compensation (TGC) controls on a
Power
portable ultrasound machine.
The power regulates the intensity of the sound
of the reflected surface. Increasing the gain in the
output from the transducer by changing the voltage
deeper field will compensate for the weaker echoes
applied to the piezoelectric crystal in the trans-
returning from these structures. This function is
ducer. The power should be set as low as possible
called time gain compensation (TGC). It is avail-
to obtain a good resolution and avoid artifacts.
able in most ultrasoumd units and enables control
Excessive power decreases resolution; however,
of the gain setting individually for a particular
enough power is needed for the ultrasound to pen-
depth. The purpose of TGC is to increase the gain
etrate the tissues adequately Therefore, it is impor-
 for echoes returning from faraway objects and to
tant to choose a transducer frequency that will
 produce uniform image brightmess throughout the
penetrate to the area of interest without requiring
depth of the display. Some equipment will only
high power settings. The theory of ALARA states
 enable control of a near gain or far gain. It is very
important to set this control properly to obtain
Achievable."
good quality images.
Gain
Artifacts
The gain is related to the amplification of the
Many artifacts are generated during the use of
 returming echoes. Gain amplifies all segments of
diagnostic ultrasound. Some of these artifacts can
the returning signals, but has no effect on trans-
be disruptive when attempting to obtain a diag-
 ducer emission. Most ultrasound units have a gern-
 nostic image, whereas others can be useful.
eral gain control that causes uniform amplification
of all returning echoes and a surface and depth
Contact artifact is the most common artifact. It
gain. Many units also have focal gain controls to
 is defined as loss of acoustic coupling between
amplify echoes differently at certain depths of the
 transducer and skin. Firm and even pressure
image. The optimal gain must be selected to opti-
with the transducer, the use of ultrasound gel
mize the image.
or alcohol between the transducer and the skin,
and elimination of air bubbles between trans-
Time gain compensation (Figure 7.4)
ducer and sterile cover or standoff pad are all
necessary to avoid contact artifact.
The echoes returning from deeper structures are
●Anisotropy is the property of being direction-
weaker than those returning from more superficial
 ally dependent. It describes a different resulting
structures because of increased sound attenuation.
echogenicity of soft tissues, such as nerves,
The echo return time is directly related to the depth
when the angle of the transducer is changed.
Ultrasound-guided Peripheral Nerve Blocks   81
Fascial tissue
Fascial tissues appear as highly echogenic lines
between the less echogenic adjacent tissues (i.e.
schiatic tuber
muscles).
Muscles
Muscle has a heterogeneous striated appearance
consistent with hypoechoic muscle fibers and echo-
genic fascia, connective tissue, and fat. In a short
axis view, muscle presents a marbled appearance.
 In a longitudinal view, muscle appears as homoge-
Figure 7.5 Ultrasound image from a dog. Note the acoustic
neous fine parallel echoes, with the fine echoes pro-
shadowing caused by the ischiatic tuberosity (lower right of
duced by the septa between the more hypoechoic
image). The transducer has been placed transversally in order
muscle bundles. The fascia and connective tissue
to obtain a short axis view of the sciatic nerve between the
greater trochanter and the ischiatic tuberosity.
Muscle appears hypoechoic to tendons because of
a uam oiaau readde Ae saaran
its higher water content.
 transducer is perpendicular to the nerve fiber,
-sn a uaum oroupodq readde uen iq
ducer is angled obliquely (see below).
Blood vessels
Acoustic shadowing. The sound waves are
absorbed, reflected, or refracted as they cross
Vessels appear as fluid-filled circular structures
different tissues, contributing to attenuation
in transverse view, and tubular structures in
of the sound beam. The portion of the ultra-
longitudinal view. Color Doppler is useful to con-
sound beam that is reflected produces the
frm blood flow in the lumen. When the ultra-
ultrasound  image. Acoustic
shadowing
sound transducer is pressed against a tissue,
(depicted as dark areas) is produced distal to
arteries tend to remain "open," 
whereasmore
highly attenuating structures, and acoustic
compliant veins will be compressed and will dis-
enhancement (depicted as lighter areas) is
appear on the screen. This technique is useful
seen distal to tissues with low sound attenua-
when trying to differentiate structures.
tion. Acoustic shadowing occurs as a result of
nearly complete reflection or absorption of the
sound, and is more frequently produced by
gas or bone (Figure 7.5). Acoustic shadowing
Fat
is a useful artifact during performance
of
Fat has an echoic speckly ultrasonographic appear-
nerve blocks as it helps to visualize the reflec-
ance. Fat causes attenuation of the sound wave and
tive needles.
makes imaging difficult.
Ultrasonographic appearance of various
tissues (Figure 7.6)
Bone
Different tissues will be displayed in the ultrasound
The surface of the bone can be visualized with
image in different shades of gray depending on
ultrasound as a very echogeric line casting acoustic
how much they reflect or absorb the ultrasound
shadowing due to total reflection of the ultrasound
beam.
beam.
82 Equipment
Sartorius.m.
transducers (10-15MHz) are more suitable for
 imaging superficial nerves that are less than 5 cm in
depth. Lower frequency transducers (4-7MHz) are
stemoris
needed for imaging deeper structures. Peripheral
nerves are usually visualized with linear array
Caudal
transducers. The highest frequency transducer that
will penetrate to the depth needed for a particular
Examination should be selected, as it will provide
the best image quality.
The resolution of nerve images is sigmificantly
-eaj panueape ue si Suseu pumoduo , suseu
ture in some units. Multiple lines of crystals on the
transducer (opposed to a single line) emit and
Figure 7.6  Ultrasound image at the level of the femoral
receive ultrasound in multiple planes. The enhanced
triangle in a dog. Various tissue echogenicities are observed.
data are then electronically reconstructed and dis-
The femoral nerve (solid white arrow) has a hyperechoic
played on the screen. Color Doppler can also be a
appearance compared with the surrounding tissues.
useful feature that permits the differentiation of
(a: femoral artery; v: femoral vein; solid arrow: femoral
vascular and non-vascular structures. There are
nerve; hollow arrows: fascia iliaca)
many portable compact units currently available
with many of these advanced features that are suit-
Pleura and air
 able for peripheral nerve imaging.
Air reflects most of the ultrasound beam due to the
great difference in acoustic impedance between
Practical approach to ultrasound-guided
soft tissues and air. The normal visceral pleural
peripheral nerve blockade
surface of the lung appears as a hyperechoic line
with distal reverberation artifacts. The visceral
Sound knowledge of the anatomy of the area of
pleural surface can be seen moving against the
interest is critical in order to interpret the ultra-
parietal pleural with respiration.
sound image. When performing peripheral nerve
blocks, it is also important to identify small arteries
or veins that may be located in the vicinity. Nerves
Equipment selection
 arteries have a more anechoic appearance with
A large selection of ultrasound equipment is avail-
thick walls. Power Doppler is a good tool to distin-
able, ranging from small, portable, relatively inex-
 guish between them.
pensive urits, to more sophisticated cart-based
Before performing a block, it is important to
units. When selecting equipment for use in clinical
 purge all the air from the needle/ syringe system as
anesthesia, it is important to be able to obtain good
once the anesthetic solution is injected, even a small
quality images of the nerves of interest. The quality
 amount of air will cause artifacts in the ultrasound
 of the nerve images obtained depends on the quality
image.
of the ultrasound machine, the proper transducer
selection for each individual location, as well as the
clinician's skills. Despite the equipment used, it is
Nerve visualization
critical to be familiar with the anatomy of the area
and to have a good understanding of the unit and
 Using transverse images (short axis) makes identi-
the kmowledge to change the image settings to opti-
fication of nerves easier Peripheral nerves have a
mize the image. In general, the peripheral nerve
round to oval shape with internal hypoechoic nerve
blocks performed in animals can be accomplished
fascicles surrounded by the hyperechoic epineurium
with portable ultrasound systems. High frequency
when imaged in a short axis view (Figure 7.6).
Ultrasound-guided Peripheral Nerve Blocks   83
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7 (a) Sciatic nerve block being performed in a dog. An "in-plane" needling technique is being used whereby the shaft
of the needle is advanced along the long axis of the ultrasound beam. (b) Ultrasound image of the sciatic nerve in a dog (solid
Hny aul jo oupa jeau!l 2ioupajady ayl 'anbiuypat aueld-u, ayl suisn anjau ayi spiemoi papina suiag s! alpaau y (moe
needle (arrows) is visualized as it is advanced towards the nerve.
It is useful to know the course and divisions of
Needle positioning using "inline" or
the target nerves for easier identification.
in-plane" technigue (Figure 7.7a)
Transducer manipulation is also important for
nerve imaging, as nerve echogenicity will increase
 This approach aims to align and move the long axis
or decrease drastically depending on the angle of
of the needle along the long axis of the ultrasound
imaging; that is why nerves sometimes appear
beam. With this approach the full needle tip and
shaft are within the field of view (Figure 7.7b). The
target is positioned away from the side of the
when a strong signal is returned to the transducer.
approaching needle.
For this reason, image quality and structural echo-
genicity are highly dependent on the angle of inci-
dence, which is best at 90° (i.e. beam
is
perpendicular to the target). Even with the most
Needle positioning using "out-of-plane"
sophisticated equipment, a hyperechoic target
technique (Figure 7.8a)
may appear hypoechoic (a phenomenon called
"anisotropy") and may even become invisible
With this approach the needle is positioned per-
when the signal return is poor. Most peripheral
 pendicular to the long axis of the transducer, so it
nerves have an internal fascicular pattern charac-
crosses the plane of imaging as an echogenic
terized by hypoechoic (dark) fascicles surrounded
(bright) dot (Figure 7.8b). The target is usually
by hyperechoic (bright) cormective tissue. This
placed in the center of the field of view. The
fascicular echotexture results in the "honeycomb"
needle tip must be identified (and distinguished
appearance of nerves when imaged on their short
from the needle shaft) when using this technique
axis. Although the genesis of this fascicular
and can be followed by sliding and tilting of the
echotexture pattern is not completely understood,
transducer as the needle is advanced. If the tip of
approximately one-third of the number of fasci-
the needle is in the ultrasound window, the
cles detectable under light microscopy are visible
spread of local anesthetic can be visualized
during ultrasound at 15MHz (Silvestri et al. 1995).
during injection.
84  Equipment
(a)
(b)
pasn suiag si anbuua uau aueld-jo-no, uy p e u paad suiag yog aau papins-punosen u (e) a' anny
whereby the needle is advanced perpendicular to the transducer, crossing the plane of the ultrasound beam. (b) Transverse
ad-j-no, ue usn aau ueaw ay oi papis uiag si apu  asoy e u mne) aau upa au yo ae punosenn
'anjau ueipaw ayi oi leixege iop pjuasoypa ue se (peaymome p!los) alew! s!yi u! paz!lensi s! dli alpaau ayl anbiuypai su!paau
Note the local anesthetic solution surrounding the needle tip (anechoic shadow between the needle and the nerve)
(a)
(b)
Caudal
Cranial
Local anaesthetic
Figure 7.9  (a) Ultrasound image of the brachial plexus of a dog. Note the local anesthetic solution spreading around the
nerve of the brachial plexus deep to the axillary vessels. (a: axillary artery; v: axillary vein; solid arrows: nerves of the brachial
plexus).(b) Local anesthetic solution being injected around the femoral nerve of a dog.
Visualization of local anesthetic
is important to observe as it helps to rule out intra-
administration (Figure 7.9a)
vascular needle placement. Failure to observe the
spread of the local anesthetic may also indicate an
The local anesthetic can be visualized around the
intravascular injection, even in the absence of
nerve as it exits the tip of the needle and spreads as
 blood aspiration, as the pressure applied by the
anechoic (black) shadow (Figure 7.9b). The fluid
 transducer may occlude venous structures making
often forms a ring around the nerve, an observa-
aspiration negative (Robards et al. 2008). If this
uois siu ,uais nonop, au se oi pairajan uon
 dispersion is not observed, the injection should be
Ultrasound-guided Peripheral Nerve Blocks  85
stopped immediately and the needle repositioned.
detected in 17% of patients during ultrasound-
 If the syringe has not been properly purged of air,
guided blocks, but none of the patients devel-
hyperechoic echoes will be visualized within
oped postoperative neurological complications
the fluid.
at follow-up (one week, four to six weeks and end
of study).
Advantages of ultrasound- versus nerve
How is electrolocation combined with
stimulator-guided peripheral nerve blocks
ultrasound-guidance used?
Used in conjunction with electrostimulation, ultra-
Although ultrasound-guidance and electrostimu-
sound-guided techniques offer numerous advan-
lation-guidance are fully useable separately for
tages including:
performing nerve blocks, they are most useful
when combined. With skillful application of ana-
guiding the needle into the correct position
tomic knowledge, peripheral nerve blocks can be
a  Aqaa n ra 
performed successfully using electrostimulation-
success rate of the block when compared with
guidance alone. If ultrasound-guidance is used to
conventional blind or electrolocation tech-
aid location of nerves, the stimulator stillhas a very
rniques (Sandhu et al. 2006; Casati et al. 2007;
useful role to exclude mistakenly injecting tissue
Oberndorfer et al. 2007);
artifacts instead of the nerve, and to also locate an
 minimizing block performance time (Williams
invisible nerve within a visible compartment that is
et al. 2003);
kmown to contain the nerve.
 reducing the need for multiple needle passes,
 The primary tool used to guide the needle to the
helping to reduce tissue damage (Sites et al.
nerve is the ultrasound produced two-dimensional
2006; Sites and Brull 2006);
 image. Tissue structures are identified as being
identifying  flow  when
using
color-flow
either the actual nerve or as containing the unseen
 Doppler, which is useful for confirming blood
nerve.
vessels;
The nerve stimulator is useful for confirming that
navigating
away  from sensitive anatomy,
the visualized structure is actually the nerve and not
thereby reducing the risk of complications such
an artifact suchi as a tendon, a blood vessel, a lymph
as vascular laceration (Gray 2006); and
node, etc. Sometimes only a zone within fascial
 monitoring the perineural spread of local anes-
planes is seen, without an actual nerve being visual-
thetic during the injection.
ized. In this case, the nerve stimulator needle can be
aq pmom se sarau jo auoz at ,arogdxa, ch pasn
Ultrasound guidance for nerve localization
the case where ultrasound is not available.
holds the promise of improving block success and
The paradigm of how the nerve stimulator
decreasing complications. However, current liter-
should be used in combination with ultrasound-
ature still fails to show a significant difference in
guidance is different from when it is used as the
block success rates for surgical anesthesia
bet-
primary tool for locating a nerve. When used
ween electrolocation and ultrasound-guided tech-
together, the nerve stimulator is simply used to
niques (Griffin and Nicholls 2010). Therefore, it
 confirm that a structure is a nerve, rather than being
seems that the use of ultrasound will not always
used to search for the nerve.
 necessarily prevent intraneural injection. As Allan
 m a rso o ,  () e a
ultrasound imaging, set the nerve stimulator's fre-
the question ‘is it prudent to avoid intraneural
quency as slow as possible (1 Hz). This will result in
injection?' to be 'yes', then current evidence would
fewer twitches per second, and will result in less
support using ultrasound guidance over other
disturbance in the ultrasound image. Set the nerve
techniques." However, in a recent study by Liu et
stimulator current to the expected level that will
al. (2011) that reported their experiences with
result in a muscle twitch only if close contact is
257 human patients, intraneural injections were
made between the needle and the nerve (i.e. 0.4 mA).
86  Equipment
Therefore, any twitch that is elicited will be a
Oberndorfer U, Marhofer P, Bosenberg A et al. (2007)
positive response, without any further need to
Utrasonographic guidance for sciatic and femoral
adjust the needle position or the nerve stimulator.
nerve blocks in children. Br J Anaesth 98, 797-801.
At this point, injection of local anesthetic drug can
 Robards C, Clendenen S, Greengrass R (2008) Intravascular
 injection during ultrasound-guided axillary block: neg-
be performed.
ative aspiration can be misleading. Anesth Analg 107,
1754-1755.
Sandhu NS, Bahmiwal CS, Capan LM (2006) Feasibility
References
of an infraclavicular block with a reduced volume of
lidocaine with sonographic guidance. J Ultrasound
 Allan A, Bedforth N, Nicholls B et al. (2011) Comparing
Med 25, 51-56.
ultrasound and nerve stimulation: time to ask the
Silvestri E, Martinoli C, Derchi LE et al. (1995) Echotexture
question? Anaesthesia 66,222-223.
 of peripheral nerves: correlation between US and his-
Casati A, Baciarello M, Di Cianni S et al. (2007) Effects of
tologic findings and criteria to differentiate tendons.
ultrasound guidance on the minimum effective anaes-
Radiology 197,291-296.
 thetic volume required to block the femoral nerve. Br J
Sites BD, Beach ML, Spence BC et al. (2006) Ultrasound
Anaesth 98,823-827.
guidance improves the success rate of a perivascular
Gray AT (2006) Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia:
axillary plexus block. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 50,
current state of the art. Anesthesiology 104, 368-373.
678-684.
Griffin J, Nicholls B (2010) Ultrasound in regional anaes-
Sites BD, Brull R (2006) Ultrasound guidance in peripheral
thesia. Anaesthesia, 65 Suppl 1, 1-12.
regional anesthesia: philosophy, evidence-based medi-
Liu SS, Yadeau JT, Shaw PM et al. (201l) Incidence of
cine, and techmiques. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 19, 630-639.
Williams SR, Chouinard P, Arcand G et al. (2003)
neurological complications with ultrasound-guided
Ultrasound guidance speeds execution and improves
interscalene and supraclavicular nerve blocks.
 the quality of supraclavicular block. Anesth Analg 97,
Anaesthesia 66, 168-174.
1518-1523
Part 3
Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks
for Small Animal Patients
Chapter 8
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of Wound Catheters
Chapter 9
The Eye
Chapter 10
 The Oral Cavity
Chapter 11
The Thoracic Limb
Chapter 12
The Trunk
Chapter 13
The Pelvic Limb
Chapter 14
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia
Chapter 15
 Intravenous Regional Anesthesia
Incisional Infiltration of Local
8
Anesthetics and Use of Wound
Catheters
Matt R. Read
Overview
for decades, over the last 10 years there has been a
resurgence of interest in the use of local anesthetics
 In people and animals, providing effective postop-
at the surgical site. Also, there are many new
erative analgesia is important from the patient's
reports of using tissue infiltration of local anes-
thesia via indwelling catheters as a method for
outcomes. A significant number of human patients
providing prolonged pain relief in the postopera-
experience moderate to severe postoperative pain
tive period.
following surgical procedures (Liu et al. 2006), and
animals would not be expected to be any different.
 Multimodal analgesic techniques are becoming
Incisional infiltration with local
increasingly popular for treating pain in animals.
anesthetics
 Jo Aarea e ul pasn aq uen sanip snausae ei
ways including topical administration into surgical
Wound infiltration involves the injection of a local
wounds ("splash blocks"), infiltration into target
anesthetic directly into the surgical field, and is
tissues ("field blocks"), specific nerve blocks, epi-
 popular in human and veterinary medicine due to
dural administration, and intra-articular injection.
its relative simplicity, safety, and low cost (Moiniche
As has been described elsewhere, local anesthetics
et al. 1998; Carpenter et al. 2004; Savvas et al. 2008).
have their primary analgesic action by preventing
In people, this has been used to provide operative
the generation and transmission of nerve impulses
analgesia since the early 1900s, and, interestingly
by blocking the influx of sodium across the cell
 Eough, the term "balanced anesthesia" was origi-
membrane of nerve axons and inhibiting conduction
 nally used in reference to local infiltration analgesia
of action potentials. Although
1  veterinarians and
m
combination with light general anesthesia
physicians have been using direct injection of local
(Brower and Johnson 2003). This technique is
anesthetics into tissues as the simplest form of
commonly used in people to provide analgesia
analgesia for surgery and other painful procedures
to surgical patients, and includes infiltration,
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
89
90 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
topical administration, or instillation of the local
prior to closure of the linea alba, Carpenter et al.
anesthetic into skin, subcutaneous tissue, fascia,
(2004) randomly administered 0.88mLkg-1 0.9%
muscle, and/or parietal peritoneum (Moiniche
saline, 8.8mgkg-1 2% lidocaine with epinephrine
et al. 1998). Local anesthetics such as lidocaine and
(1:200 000), and 4.4 mgkg- 0.75% bupivacaine into
bupivacaine are used in this way to provide post-
the intraperitoneal space. The lidocaine and bupi-
operative pain control, and have been shown to
vacaine were diluted with saline until an equivalent
reduce pain scores and the need for supplementary
final volume of 0.88mLkg1 was used. They also
analgesics, to extend the time to the patient's first
administered a "splash" block using 2mL of either
request for analgesia, and to reduce the duration of
saline, 2% lidocaine with epinephrine, or 0.75%
hospital stays.
bupivacaine immediately prior to closure of the
In a systematic review, Moiniche et al. (1998)
 skin of each dog. The blinded investigators found
reported the results of 26 randomized, controlled
that  intraperitoneal  and incisional  bupivacaine
trials with data from more than 1200 patients.
provided effective analgesia following ovariohys-
Studies included in their analysis were double-
terectomy in their dogs. More dogs in the control
blinded, randomized comparisons of local anes-
group were given supplemental analgesia than
thesia with either placebo (saline) or nonplacebo
in the bupivacaine group, and bupivacaine dogs
(no treatment). They only included reports that
 had lower pain scores (using visual analog and
examined analgesia following abdominal incisions
composite pain scores) and were less sedate than
and only those that described administration of
control dogs.
incisional local anesthesia. The authors of the
Savvas
al.
(2008) compared saline and
review reported that the location of infiltration
bupivacaine 0.25% (2mgkg') for preoperative or
 played an important role in the success of the inter-
postoperative incisional use. T
 They injected the
vention, and that there was a significant dose-
respective solution in a fan-like fashion both
response relationship observed in these studies,
subcutaneously and intramuscularly at the proposed
with larger doses (highest concentration) of local
incision site, either just before the start of the inci-
anesthetics resulting in the most pronounced pain
sion or at the end of surgery following subcutaneous
relief. They also reported that the beneficial effects
tissue closure (Figure 8.1). They were careful to
of most studies were short-lived (two to seven
 make sure that the entire length of the incision was
hours), and that up to the time of their publication
infiltrated. The study was blinded, and showed that
in 1998, the human literature "provides no support
 preoperative administration of bupivacaine to dogs
for an analgesic effect outlasting the pharmacolog-
resulted in sigrificantly lower pain scores and less
ical effect" of incisional local anesthesia, meaning
frequent use of additional postoperative analgesia
that the postoperative benefits thiat are seen relate
to the expected duration of the particular drug that
none of the preoperative bupivacaine dogs required
is used. Eight of the 26 articles reviewed were
uequivocally negative, meaning that there was no
documented benefit of the incisional use of local
anesthetics.
In
their conclusions,
the
eauthors
stressed the importance of where and how much
local anesthetic is used for these types of local infil-
tration techniques. As one could presume, it mat-
ters what and how much you use, and where you
put it.
. This is undoubtedly true for veterinary
 patients as well.
Recently, three studies have reported the results
 of using incisional infiltration of local anesthesia
for provision of preemptive and 
postoperative
analgesia for a variety of abdominal surgeries in
Figure 8.1F
 Photograph of local infiltration along a
dogs (Carpenter et al. 2004; Savvas et al. 2008;
planned incision site using bupivacaine prior to exploratory
Fitzpatricketal. 2010). Inthefirst study,immediately
laparotomy in a dog.
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of wWound Catheters  91
additional postoperative analgesics, and the authors
c-fos gene expression was measured in the dorsal
concluded that this was a simple, attractive and
horn of the spinal cord. Expression of this gene is
effective technique to reduce postoperative pain for
frequently used in laboratory studies as a marker
at last 24 hours after celiotomy in dogs.
of nociception and a measure of neuronal activity
Most recently, Fitzpatrick et al. (2010) reported
following various painful stimuli. The surviving
the results of a study that used infiltration of local
pigs had blood collected at predetermined times
anesthetics as part of a multimodal approach to
postoperatively for determination of ACTH, cor-
 s   
tisol, C-reactive protein, and interleukin-6 concen-
dogs. They enrolled 92 dogs scheduled for elective
trations. Their results showed that when compared
ovariohysterectomy and randomly assigmed these
 to the saline infiltration group, the sham and local
dogs to one of four different treatment groups:
 anesthetic groups of pigs had no increases in the
expression of c-fos, and the saline infiltration group
infiltration with saline, preoperative infiltration
had dramatic increases in plasma ACTH and cor-
using 2mgkg-~ bupivacaine diluted with saline to a
tisol compared to the other two groups (Figure 8.2).
total volume of 0.8mLkg', or postoperative infil-
 The authors concluded that preoperative incisional
tration using 2mgkg1 bupivacaine diluted with
infiltration of a local anesthetic can have profound
saline to a total volume of 0.8mLkg-1. The respec-
imhibitory effects on spinal nociception and HPA
tive solutions were infiltrated along the superficial
-uosan pue Kiagms Aq pasnen uoneanoe sixe
and deep tissues of the incision site.
 mended the use of directly applied local anesthetics
received morphine in their premedication, hydro-
 during surgery and other traumatic procedures.
morphone at extubation, buprenorphine every six
To date, there have been no published reports of
hours for 24 hours, and carprofen 2.2 mg kg' every
mcisional infiltration of local anesthetics in cats.
12 hours. A blinded observer used a composite
Based on the results from the canine studies
pain scale and a quantitative tool (von Frey fila-
reported above, more research is needed to estab-
ments) to test peri-incisional analgesia up to 24
lish the ideal anatomic location for infiltration, and
hours following surgery The authors found no
the optimal drug choices, doses, and concentra-
significant differences in pain scores, doses of
tions to be used for these types of blocks.
rescue analgesics, and responses to von Frey fila-
ments between the different treatment groups, and
were unable to demonstrate supplemental anal-
Continuous wound infusion with
 gesia from the bupivacaine incisional block in their
local anesthetics
dogs that were receiving multimodal analgesia.
None of the dogs in any of the groups required
Although
1 other regional anesthetic techniques
rescue analgesia, and there was no evidence that
(epidural analgesia, regional nerve blocks) can
incisional bupivacaine increased the incidence of
provide excellent analgesia for surgery and the
complications.
immediate postoperative period, these methods
Lykkegaard et al. (2005) developed a model to
 are sometimes contraindicated or require special-
assess surgical pain and stress in pigs. Using this
ized equipment or extensive technical experience
model, they investigated the use of preoperative
 on the part of the anesthetist. As discussed above,
infiltration of a local anesthetic solution into the
the use of single-injection local anesthetic infiltra-
 abdominal wall of pigs, and measured the effects of
tion is limited by the duration of action of the
this preemptive analgesic intervention on spinal
 particular agent used. A promising new modality is
nociception and activation of the hypothalamic-
the relatively simple technique of placing a multi-
pituitary (HPA) axis. In that study, 10 minutes prior
fenestrated (multiholed) catheter into the surgical
to surgery the skin, muscle, and peritoneum of the
wound at the end of the procedure. This technique
flanks of pigs were either infiltrated with saline or
can
be used to provide analgesia following a
a mixture of lidocaine and bupivacaine. A third
 group of pigs was anesthetized but did not undergo
simple to perform, offers the potential for complete
surgery
Kams ae smoy oml (dnono weus) 
 analgesia, and has the added benefit of permitting
half the pigs from each group were euthanized and
repeated or continuous infusion of local anesthetics
92  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
200
+— Saline
O-LA
+-Sham
150
mL
6d)
ACTH
100
、
30
60
90
120
150
180
Time (min)
(b)
400
+— Saline
O-LA
-Sham
300
30
60
120
150
180
Time (min)
Figure 8.2(
(a) Plasma ACTH concentration in pigs following unilateral laparotomy with (●, n = 5) and without (O, n = 6)
infiltration with local anesthetic. The incision of the skin was started at Time = 0. The sham group (, n = 4) was anesthetized but
without local anesthetic (* P<0.05 and ** P<0.01). (b) Plasma cortisol concentration in pigs following unilateral laparotomy with
(●, n = 5) and without (O, n = 6) infiltration with local anesthetic. The incision of the skin was started at Time = 0. The sham
differences between groups operated with and without local anesthetic (* P<0.05; ** P<0.01; ***P<0.001). From Lykkegaard et al.
2005. Used with permission.
into the wound for a prolonged period of time
anesthetic block (e.g. knowledge of specific nerve
postoperatively. Also, there is the perceived benefit 
anatomy, access to specialized equipment such as
of the operator not needing to be competent in all
nerve stimulators, ultrasound, insulated needles,
of the aspects of performing a ‘typical' regional
etc.). In people, the increasing use of portable
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of Wound Catheters  93
infusion pumps in combination with indwelling
randomized controlled trials were included, and
fenestrated wound soaker catheters has the added
only those that assessed either self-reported visual
-[eue ,auou-ie, Kionemque ue Suaq jo auaq
analog (VAS) scores or opioid consumption were
gesic technique, thus potentially shortening the
included. Surgeons placed the wound catheters at
hospital stay.
the end of surgery, and all trials included control
Wound soaker catheters are small, flexible cath-
 psn aram siaann ou raa aaaum sn
eters that can be positioned in tissues at or near a
catheters were placed and either saline or water
surgicalfieldtoallow forprolonged administration
were infused as placebos. All patients had cathe-
of local anesthetic solutions for analgesia in the
ters in place for >24 hours. Bupivacaine and ropi-
 postoperative period. Clinical investigations of
vacaine (0.25% and 0.5% solutions) were the
this technique in people following a variety of
 primary local anesthetics used for the wound infu-
surgical procedures have demonstrated not only
sions. Local anesthetics were administered an
improved pain control, but also decreased post-
 operative opioid use and its associated side effects
combined, VAS pain scores were reduced consider-
in people such as nausea, vomiting, and urine
ably both at rest and during activity. The need for
retention.
opioid rescue analgesia was decreased in the
wound catheter groups versus the control groups
(44% vs. 66%, respectively). The percentage of
Indications and uses
 patients reporting excellent analgesia was greater
in the continuous local anesthetic groups (43% vs.
Wound soaker catheters can be used for providing
13%). In orthopedic patients, this difference was
postoperative analgesia for a variety of surgical
even more significant, with 92% vs. 27% reporting
procedures. In people, they have been shown to be
excellent analgesia in the local anesthetic versus
highly effective when used in combination with
control 
 groups. Length of hospital stay was
systemically administered analgesic agents as part
reduced by a day in the local anesthetic groups,
of a balanced analgesia plan. In many cases, wound
which was also significant. In 12 of 14 trials
soaker catheters have been showm to be superior to
involving thoracotomy, wound catheter patients
other methods of postoperative analgesic tech-
reported lower pain scores and had lower postop-
niques such as systemically administered opioids
erative opioid use. Ten of 12 general surgery
 and nonsteroidal analgesic drugs.
studies
 (vascular, upper abdominal) reported
lower pain scores and decreased opioid use in
wound catheter patients. Patient satisfaction was
Review of human studies
reported to be better in patients receiving wound
soaker catheters. Thirteen of 16 orthopedic studies
In people, wound soaker catheters are typically
reported substantial analgesic efficacy, either as
placed into surgical incisions at the end of surgery
reduced pain scores or as reduced opioid con-
to provide postoperative analgesia for major
sumption. Pain scores were decreased in 11 of the
 procedures. Their use has been reported following
16 trials through postoperative days two to five.
general surgery (upper abdominal, vascular),
Wound catheters have also been used in women
umdergoing mastectomy procedures (Sidiropoulou
procedures, and orthopedic surgery (Liu et
al.
et al. 2008). Results showed low VAS pain scores
2006; Sidiropoulou et al. 2008; Tirotta et al. 2009).
 and less disability later in the postoperative period
In these instances, catheters are placed in a
(16-24 hours) in patients receiving wound cathe-
variety of locations: subcutaneous, subfascial,
 ters when compared to patients receiving preoper-
intra-articular, periosteal, and peripleural (Liu
ative single-shot thoracic paravertebral blocks.
etal.2006).
There were also less opioid-related side effects in
A large meta-analysis review of 44 clinical trials
the wound soaker catheter patients.
that enrolled a total of 2141 patients looked at the
Continuous wound catheters have also been
effects of wound catheters in clinical pain practice
 tested in pediatric patients undergoing sternot-
in people (Liu et al. 2006). Only prospective,
omy for cardiac procedures (Tirotta et al. 2009).
94  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
A prospective randomized double-blinded study
bulla and received either 0.5% or 0.75% bupiva-
documented lower opioid use over the first 24
caine from an elastomeric pump via the catheter.
hours following surgery in patients receiving
Control dogs received saline infusions via simi-
wound catheters, and an earlier returm to bowel
larly placed catheters. All dogs received morphine
fumction. There were no differences in pain scores
at the time of extubation and at intervals up to
over the study period, and plasma levels of local
four hours depending on their perceived need.
anesthetics remained below the toxic thresholds
Wound catheters were removed after 48 hours.
during the study.
In the study by Wolfe et al., twenty dogs had
 Despite a high level of heterogeneity in terms of
wound catheters placed at the end of their sur-
surgical procedures, location of wound soaker cath-
geries (Figure 8.3). Ten treated dogs received 2%
eters, modes of delivery of the local anesthetic, and
lidocaine infusions (25-50ugkg- min-1) adminis-
the doses and types of the administered local anes-
tered by elastomeric pumps via the wound cathe-
thetics, there are many data that document global
 ters and saline infusions administered intravenous
reductions in pain scores and opioid use, fewer
aues paaranar ssop loruon uan dund aus Aq
opioid-related s
side effects (nausea, vomiting),
via the wound catheters and intravenous mor-
increased patient satisfaction, and a decreased dura-
 phine (0.12mgkg'h-1) infusions by a syringe
tion of hospital stay in patients receiving local anes-
Cn rod paed aram siaae 'sop le u dumd
thetic infusions through wound catheters. There is
surgical wound closure, and the use of local anes-
growing evidence that locally applied local anes-
thesia administered via wound catheters was sub-
thetics can also inhibit inflammatory responses that
sequently compared to the use of systemically
can sensitize nociceptive receptors and contribute
administered morphine that was administered by
to pain and hyperalgesia (Liu et al. 2006; Lykkegaard
either boluses or infusions.
et al. 2005). The incidences of techrical failure (1%),
-p puesnais ou patrodan sapnis asau jo yiog
infection (0.7%), and local anesthetic toxicity (0%)
ferences between their two treatment
 groups.
are extremely low, and the techrique is relatively
Analgesia was considered to be comparable bet-
inexpensive and technically easy to perform.
ween their treatments; however, both studies
 described low inter-observer agreement in terms
Review of veterinary studies
In animals,use of wound catheters has been
reported for procedures such as total ear canal
Fow
ablation, amputation, oncologic surgery, and clo-
restrictor
sure of large wounds (Radlinsky et al. 2005; Wolfe
Filter
et al. 2006; Davis et al. 2007a, 2007b; Abelson
et al. 2009).
Cathete
Total ear canal ablation-bulla
osteotomy in dogs
Two randomized, blinded, controlled studies have
Fill port
evaluated the postoperative analgesic efficacy,
Local anesthetic
degree of sedation, and incidence of complications
(lidocaine)
associated with the use of a continuous ambu-
ON-Qpump
latory infusion of either lidocaine or bupivacaine
following major ear surgery in clinical patients
(Radlinsky et al. 2005; Wolfe et al. 2006). In the
Figure 8.3
Application of a continuous infusion pump
study by Radlinsky et al., 16 dogs were errolled.
for local anesthetic wound infiltration following total ear
At the end of surgery, treated dogs had wound
canal ablation in a dog. From Wolfe et al. 2006. Used with
soaker catheters placed in the tissues lateral to the
 permission,
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of wWound Catheters   95
of pain scoring (Wolfe et al. 2006) and low pain
fewer drug-related complications in the lido-
scores in general (Radlinsky et al. 2005), making
 caine group than those in the morphine group
statistical significance difficult to achieve with(
(e.g. uncontrolled pain, dysphoria, respiratory
the number of dogs enrolled in each of the studies. 
 distress, drug overdose). Wound soaker catheter
Wolfe et al. (2006) reported similar overall pain 
 dogs also received less rescue analgesia than
scores, but dogs in the local anesthetic group
dogs in the morphine group. although this
showed lower levels of sedation than dogs in the
finding was not statistically significant. In the
intravenous morphine group and there were
study by Radlinsky et al. (2005), plasma
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 8.4  (a) An example of how a wound soaker catheter can be used for provision of pain management to a surgical patient.
S! ydeisojoyd aui jo jyal ayl) uoai yuely si! u! pajesol ewuoies e yim jes e jo apis yal padd!o ayi smous ydeisojoud s!y1
cranial, the bottom of the photograph is ventral). Surgical resection with wide margins was planned as part of this cat's treatment.
(b) Photograph of the same cat in surgery. The mass has been excised with wide margins and a wound soaker catheter has been
placed deep into the surgical wound. Superficial tissue layers are being sequentially closed over the catheter. (c) Photograph of
the same cat following surgery. The incision has been closed and the wound soaker catheter has been secured in place by
suturing the moveable wings (upper left) to the skin. The catheter was left in place for five days while the cat was hospitalized to
allow local anesthetic solutions to be administered as part of this cat's multimodal approach to pain management. The cat
recovered uneventfully.
96  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
bupivacaine levels were not detected in any
patients, and the authors concluded that although
their data suggest that the potential for local
anesthetic systemic toxicity is low, their infusion
rates (0.13-0.21 mg kg-'h-1) may have, in fact,
been inadequate for providing additional anal-
gesia beyond that provided by the concurrently
administered doses of morphine. I
Despite
questions still remaining after these studies, in
clinical practice wound soaker catheters are used
commonly for management of pain following
these invasive surgical procedures.
Feline oncologic surgery
Davis et al. (2007a, 2007b) described the use of
wound soaker catheters for providing analgesia
to cats following major oncologic surgeries.
Wound catheters were placed prior to wound
closure, and were used as a component of multi-
modal analgesia in combination with systemically
administered opioids, ketamine, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatories, and α, adrenoreceptor ago-
nists. These authors reported that, compared with
cats not receiving wound catheters, cats receiving
local anesthetic infused through wound catheters
Figure 8.5  Photograph of a dog following right thoracic limb
spent sigmificantly less time in hospital than those
amputation. A wound soaker catheter was placed into the
cats that did not receive a local anesthetic infusion
surgical incision during wound closure, and has been left in
(Davis et al. 2007b). These conclusions were based
 place to provide local analgesia postoperatively
on these cats becoming mobile more quickly
and showing a faster return to having normal
appetite. No increases in postoperative wound
infusions. The authors suggested that those
 infection rates were documented in these reports.
patients that received local anesthetic through
See Figure 8.4 for an example of how wound
wound soaker catheters received less systemically
soaker catheters can be used for provision of
administered opioids than dogs that did not have
 analgesia following oncologic surgery in cats.
wound soaker catheters placed. This resulted in
less sedation and a more rapid return to mobility,
eating, and urination, and led to a shortened period
Amputation
of overall hospitalization for the wound catheter
Abelson et al. (2009) reported their experiences of
patients.
using wound soaker catheters for providing
 analgesia to a variety of surgical patients in a veteri-
au ponad reas-oml e raao lendsoy suoeal Are
Distribution
majority of the cases described in their report were
dogs that underwent amputation of their thoracic
No studies have been conducted in animals to
Or pelvic limbs (46 of 56 cases) (Figure 8.5).
describe the distribution of local anesthetics
 Catheters remained in place between 12 hours and
administered through wound soaker catheters.
three days (mean 1.6 days). Their patients received
Distribution would be expected to depend
on
either bupivacaine administered as intermittent
the volume of local anesthetic administered, the
boluses or lidocaine administered as continuous
 degree of blood flow to adjacent tissues (leading to
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of wWound Catheters  97
(a)
(b)
lated to the dose and volume of the administered
roio
roi2
local anesthetic and more related to the surgical
roi1
procedure itself. In the study by Radlinsky et al.
(2005), plasma levels of bupivacaine were not
detected following local anesthetic administration
into the surgical wound following TECA-BO surgery.
Further research is required to describe the
distribution of local anesthetic drugs that are
administered into different surgical wounds based
on the volume of drug and the positioning of the
wound soaker catheter at the site.
Choice of local anesthetics
Most veterinary references describe using either
bupivacaine as intermittent boluses or lidocaine as
a continuous infusion:
bupivacaine 0.5%, administered at 1mgkg1
every six to eight hours (Davis et al. 2007a;
Abelson et al. 2009).
lidocaine 2%, administered as an infusion at
Figure 8.6  Catheter placement relative to wound spread
area of *mTc-DPTA administered through a triple-orifice
1.5-3 mgkg-'h-1 (Wolfe et al. 2006; Abelson et al.
epidural catheter (a) and a 15-cm multiholed catheter
2009).
(b) placed in the subfascial layers of wounds in human total
hip arthroplasty patients (lateral projections). From Andersen
In people, continuous wound catheters most
et al. 2010. Used with permission.
often infuse a single agent such as a local anesthetic,
although adjunctive medications such as O, adre-
oson) pasn uaaq oste aaey sisiuose roidanarou
systemic absorption),and the degree of dead space
et al. 2008).
associated with the surgical site following wound
To date, definitive studies have not been per-
-oad u pauojrad Apnis aannadsoid e un amsop
formed on veterinary patients to document the
ple, investigators compared the spread of solutions
effect of local anesthetic dose, volume, and drug
that were injected
through
either
triple-orifice
concentration on analgesic efficacy and safety
epidural  catheters  or
r 15-cm multiholed
pumoM
(plasma levels) when administered via wound
catheters (Andersen et al.
2010).
Radioactive-
soaker catheters.
labeled saline was administered
postoperatively
through catheters that were placed in subfascial
layers of wounds following total hip arthroplasty,
Equipment
and wound spread of the saline was recorded with
a double-head gamma camera. The results showed
The catheters discussed in this chapter are referred
that both catheter systems resulted in acceptable
to by many different names including soaker cath-
spread of the injectate through the wounds, but no
eters, wound catheters, fenestrated catheters, and
evaluation of analgesic efficacy was made as no
diffusion catheters. They are typically made of
 local anesthetics were administered (Figure 8.6).
[aas qim dn pason e aae pue auaanod
In the study by Wolfe et al. (2006),
pumom
lateral fenestrations (small holes/microports)
edema and drainage were common complications
along a predetermined length of the distal catheter.
following total ear canal ablation-bulla osteotomy
Their special design allowslocal anesthetic solution
(TECA-BO) surgery, but were thought to be unre-
to be distributed evenly over the entire length of
98  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
fenestrations directly into the surgical site, without
 PRN injection port;
preferential leakage out of the more proximally-
 local anesthetic solution; and
located side ports (Figure 8.7).
infusion system (pump) if continuous delivery
If the catheter is to be placed at the end of surgery,
of the local anesthetic is desired.
the following items are required:
If the catheter is to be placed percutaneously
wound catheter (sterile, without peel-away
without surgery, the follwing are required:
introducer);
appropriate-sized suture;
clippers;
skin preparation solutions;
sterile gloves;
wound catheter
r (sterile, with peel-away
introducer);
 appropriate-sized suture;
 PRN injection port;
 local anesthetic solution; and
 infusion system (pump) if continuous delivery
of the local anesthetic is desired.
Technique
Figure 8.7 Close-up view of the distal end of a wound
soaker catheter. Note the consistent distribution of local
Wound soaker catheters can be placed using an
anesthetic solution through the mu ltiple fenestrations
"open-technique” by the veterinarian at the time of
in the distal end of the catheter. The black mark on the
left side of the catheter indicates to the user where
surgery prior to closure of the surgical site. These
the fenestrations stop. Photograph provided courtesy of
catheters are frequently placed into the surgical
MILA International.
field after a body cavity is closed (Figure 8.8).
(a)
(b)
e u Awojouans ueipaw Sumolloy punom jenjsins e ou! pauosod suiag jajaqien jayeos punom e jo ydeisonoud (e) a'g auna
cat (the cat is in dorsal recumbency with its head to the left of the photograph). Note that the thorax has already been closed and
painoas suiag jaauies jayeos punom e jo ydeioioud (g) aeds einald aui woy jie aieneaa ci paneld uaag sey agni isauo e
along the sternum during incisional closure. The catheter has been positioned along the sternum and is being secured in place by
apposition of the more superficial subcutaneous tissues. Note that the catheter exits the skin through a separate incision and the
wings of the catheter (upper right of photograph) will be used to secure the catheter to the skin to prevent its dislodgement.
Incisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of Wound Catheters  99
If transected nerves are able to be visualized
 There are several different methods of securing
(e.g. following limb amputation), the catheter can
the catheter. Most commercially available catheters
be positioned in close proximity to the nerves,
have suture wings to allow the catheter to be
otherwise the catheter is simply placed into
secured to the patient with suture (Figure 8.4c). As
the wound (Abelson et al. 2009). This placement
the wings are typically made of a soft material,
maximizes the effects of the local anesthetic and
 small gauge (3-0, 4-0) suture can cut through the
facilitates blocking somatic sensation of the inci-
 wings when tightened, so larger sizes of suture
sion and the surrounding muscles that were
(2-0, 0) are often more desirable, depending on the
manipulated during surgery. If needed, simple
patient's size. Many catheters also have a movable
interrupted sutures can be placed around portions
suture wing that can be moved along the catheter
of the catheter in the wound itself in order to main-
to a position immediately adjacent to the percuta-
tain its position in the wound and prevent inadver-
neous site of insertion, making the catheter even
tent dislocation during closure of the surgical site.
more secure than just suturing the permanent
These sutures should only be tightened enough to
suture wings at the distal end of the catheter to the
maintain catheter position during closure of the
patient. Skin adhesives can also be used, as well as
-and ci se juon os aq jou pmous pue 'pa leoiaims
transparent wound dressings that allow the cath-
vent easy withdrawal of the catheter from the
eter and puncture site to be kept clean, while also
wound when its postoperative use is no longer
allowing the practitioner to inspect the area for
necessary.
signs of infection or dislodgement. If intermittent
Alternatively, the wound catheter can be placed
boluses of local anesthetic are to be used, a PRN
into a tissue bed by using a peel-away introducer.
injection port should be attached to the end of the
This technique involves placing a needle with
a
catheter to permit injection of the local anesthetic
peel-away covering into a tissue, withdrawing the
while maintaining aseptic technique.
needle stylet, and advancing the wound catheter
through the introducer into the patient. The peel-
d a wo paaoan ta si ranpou em
Potential complications
and is separated from the wound catheter for its
complete removal. The wound catheter is then
 Overall, the reported incidence of complications
secured to the skin and is left in place for delivery
related to the use of wound soaker catheters is
of local anesthesia to the patient.
relatively low in both the veterinary and the
Once the catheter is in position, a PRN injection
human literature. There are very few reports of
 port or infusion system is then attached to the cath-
major complications that could potentially result
eter to facilitate local anesthetic administration
in patient injury, and most complications follow-
while maintaining strict aseptic technique
ing use of wound soaker catheters are considered
to be minor (Wolfe et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2006; Davis
et al. 2007a; Johnson et al. 2008; Kehlet and
Clinical tips
Kristensen 2009; Abelson et al. 2009). Although
both are relatively uncommon, there are two main
Wound soaker catheters should be used when
types of complications: equipment-related and
analgesia is to be provided for more than a single
drug-related.
day. Most human research shows benefits to the
Equipment-related complications include cath-
patient when continuous infusion or intermittent
eter dislodgement from the site of placement,
doses of local anesthetics are used for an extended
catheter disconnection from the local anesthetic
period of time (>24 hours), as opposed to only
delivery system, catheter occlusion, and catheter
administering a single treatment. As described
breakage. These issues are generally considered to
below, the most common complication with the
be minor and are more of an inconvenience to the
use of wound soaker catheters is dislodgement
veterinary staff than a danger to the patient.
of the catheter. As such, ensuring that the catheter
Drug-related
complications
include
local
is secured well to the patient is of paramount
anesthetic systemic toxicities and are the result of
importance.
rapid absorption of the delivered anesthetic or
100  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
inadvertent overdose of local anesthetic solution.
veterinary teaching hospital (Abelson et al. 2009).
These are also very rare, but are more serious in
The authors found that the most common compli-
terms of potential risk to the patient. Calculating
cation was disconnection of the catheter from the
potentially toxic doses of the local anesthetics to be
delivery system (7.7% of cases), and that this
used, and using doses below these levels can mini-
complication was more common in cases when
mize drug-related complications.
"home-made" soaker catheters that were created
Although the use of wound soaker catheters to
 from red rubber catheters were used as opposed to
deliver analgesia in animals is a relatively new con-
commercially available wound soaker catheters.
cept, the use of indwelling catheters in the epidural
The incidence of wound infections in their hospital
space for repeated administration of analgesics has
was 5.3%, and was similar to the overall infection
been reported previously. In a study of indwelling
rate observed in comparable surgical cases that did
epidural catheter use in dogs (Swalander et al.
not receive wound soaker catheters. One dog in
2000), 64/81 dogs did not experience any complica-
their study developed signs of local anesthetic
tions during the study period. Seventeen dogs had
systemic toxicity. The dog manifested the typical
complications that were considered to be minor,
signs of toxicity (tremors and ataxia) and the signs
with
1catheter dislodgement being
the most
resolved quickly when the lidocaine infusion was
common (16% of all cases). This is similar to the
discontinued.
incidence of catheter dislodgement that occurs
Based on the available literature, in people,
with the use of epidural catheters in people (13%).
the rate of adverse effects and the potential for tox-
Other complications reported in this study included
icity from continuous wound infiltration devices
serosanguinous discharge from the percutaneous
 appears to be very low (Liu et al. 2006; Johnson
punctures
contamination  of 
the bandage
site,
et al. 2008; Kehlet and Kristensen 2009; Tirotta et al.
covering the epidural catheter, filter breakage, and
2009). More than 45 randomized clinical trials
localized dermatitis. All complications were treated
have been performed, with over 4000 patients
with immediate removal of the catheter and close
 reportedly enrolled in these studies. These reports
observation of the puncture site and provision of
have not demonstrated increased wound problems
supportive care as needed. Comparable supportive
(infections, interference with healing) when wound
methods would be indicated in cases of similar
soaker catheters are used to deliver local anes-
 complications with wound soaker catheters in dogs
thetics into the surgical wounds 
postopera-
and cats.
tively (Kehlet and Kristensen 2009; Tirotta et al.
Radlinsky et al. (2005) and Wolfe et al. (
(2006)
 2009). In a large meta-analysis that enrolled a total
reported the use of wound catheters for delivery of
of 2141 patients, there were no cases of local anes-
local analgesia to dogs following total ear canal
thetic toxicity (Liu et al. 2006). The overall infection
ablation procedures (Figure 8.3). In those reports,
 rates were comparable between patient receiving
catheter-related complications were found to be
wound soaker catheters with local anesthetic (0.7%)
uncommon and were considered to be minor. In the
and those in the control groups that received a
study by Wolfe et al., premature catheter removal
catheter with placebo or no catheter at all (1.2%).
occurred in two dogs, inadvertent catheter occlusion
The overall combined incidence of catheter or
by clamping occurred in one dog, and delivery
pump failure was 1.1%.
system disconnection from the catheter occurred in
Sopauo
Overall, complications related to the
method of analgesia were found to be less common
Wound healing
in dogs receiving wound soaker catheters and local
anesthetic infusion than dogs in the other treatment
Local anesthetic infiltration into tissues has been
group that received systemic opioids administered
reported to have variable effects on wound healing.
by an intravenous infusion (25% vs. 60%). Serious
Publications in the 1970s and 1980s reported tissue
complications such as wound infection and dehis-
necrosis at the site of injection, diminished collagen
Xpnis raua ui mooo jou pip ahs ieooms au jo aruan
 synthesis, and delayed wound healing (Drucker
Recently, a retrospective study explored
the
et al.1
1998).
. These studies suggest that there is
clinical use of wound soaker catheters in dogs at a
variability in healing in response to doses and
ncisional Infiltration of Local Anesthetics and Use of wound Catheters 101
concentrations of the local anesthetic agent, the
Two studies that were conducted in rabbits
concurrent use of epinephrine as a vasoconstrictor,
and guinea pigs confirm that local anesthetics do
and the general health of the patient. Disruption of
affect wound healing at the histological level, but
wound healing is reportedly increased in human
ua an ioa po op an e po
patients who are aged, diabetic, obese, and those
strength of healing surgical wounds. Vasseur
with vascular diseases (Brower and Johnson 2003).
et al. (1984) looked at the influence of lidocaine
These authors point out that, in contrast to other
and bupivacaine on the breaking strength and
areas of medical investigation, there is no well-
histopathologic appearance of surgical wounds
defined syndrome of poor wound healing associ-
 on the ventral abdominal midline of rabbits.
ated with local anesthetic infiltration, and that
They investigated the effects of direct infiltration
 most studies that report on the analgesic efficacy of
of the linea alba with saline, 0.5% lidocaine, 2%
this technique do not adequately address wound
lidocaine, or 0.5% bupivacaine following surgical
healing when they determine their observation
closure. They euthanized the rabbits at six, 12,
periods or sample sizes.
and 18 days after surgery, and performed histo-
A review by Brower and Johnson (2003) summa-
pathology and mechanical testing of the har-
rizes what is currently known about the effect of
vested tissue samples. They found that tissues
infiltration anesthesia on wound healing. They
that were previously infiltrated with saline did
found that nine of 12 studies that used in vivo
 not appear to be different from those that were
animal models showed a harmful effect of local
infiltrated with the local anesthetics, and that
anesthetics on wound healing when doses that
there were no differences in breaking strengths
mimic currently used concentrations were used.
between the different groups. Drucker et al.
The drugs can cause inhibition of activation, migra-
(1998) investigated the effects of lidocaine on
tion, and metabolic activity of inflammatory cells,
wound healing in guinea
a pigs. This study
and may have myotoxic effects even if fibroblasts
reported similar results to those of Vasseur et al.
 and other cells involved in wound healing are not
(1984).1
 Following tissue infiltration with 1%
affected. However, most of these i vivo animal
lidocaine or saline, tissue samples harvested
studies only assessed the effects of the local anes-
thetics over a short period of time (less than six
the degree of collagenization, edema, or acute
weeks), and all of the studies used rodents as
and chronic inflammatory processes. The number
research models, not domestic veterinary species.
of collagen fibers was higher in the control
They point out that there are three stages of wound
group, and there was less vascularization in the
healing, and that the majority of mature wound
lidocaine group. However, the mean breaking
strength is not achieved until remodeling occurs
strength was not different between groups, sug-
between six and 12 months after the procedure. If
the third and final stage of wound healing is unaf-
be recognized, the clinically important end point
fected by the prior use of local anesthetics, final
of wound strength was not affected by the tissue
wound strength may not actually be affected in
infiltration of the local anesthetic.
clinical patients. After reviewing the available liter-
 The healing process is complex and involves
ature, Brower and Johnson (2003) concluded that
severalf
factorst
that
taredifficult
t
control
although the exact mechanism of toxicity has not
ncluding pathophysiologic disorders associated
yet been established, local anesthetics may have
with diseased tissues and the presence of external
inhibitory effects on the first two stages of wound
influences such as the use of local anesthetics.
healing (inflammatory and granulation/prolifera-
Although the effects of local anesthetics on wound
tion stages). Further, even though inhibition of
healing are not completely understood, the drugs
wound healing appears to be both time- and con-
and
1 concentrations that are typically used
in
centration-dependent in all of the cases where
(n st u paroan uaaq aau pue) aoead
these effects were tested, until more data are
readde
r to carry minimal risk to the patient.
obtained it would be premature to dismiss infiltra-
 Although the benefits of using local anesthetics for
tion with local anesthetics as a potential analgesic
tissue infiltration or as wound infusions appear to
technique.
outweigh the potential risks in the majority of
102
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
patients, special consideration should be made for
Fitzpatrick CL, Weir HL, Monnet E (2010) Effects of infil-
pom jo t r e ae e shad u
-donsod uo auseidnq ym ans uoisiu aul jo uon
complications.
ovariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 237, 395-401.
Johnson DW, Hatton KW, Flynn JD (2008) Continuous
wound catheters: practical considerations for use.
Summary
Orthopedics 31, 865-867.
Kehlet H, Kristensen BB (2009) Local anesthetics in the
The use of local anesthetics through local infiltra
surgical wound - is the pendulum swinging toward
 tion and wound soaker catheters appears to be a
increased use? Reg Anesth Pain Med 34, 389-390.
relatively safe method for providing analgesia to
Liu SS, Richman JM, Thirlby RC et al. (2006) Efficacy of
surgical wounds, and when appropriate precau
continuous wound catheters delivering local anes-
thetic for postoperative analgesia: a quantitative and
tions are taken by the practitioner (patient selec-
qualitative systematic review of randormized con-
tion, monitoring the surgical and catheter sites for
trolled trials. J Am Coll Surg 203, 914-932.
complications, accurate calculation of drug doses,
Lykkegaard K, Lauritzen B, Tessem L et al. (2005) Local
etc.), this technique should not result in serious
anaesthetics attenuates spinal nociception and HPA-
risks to the patient. Further research is ongoing and
will undoubtedly provide veterinarians with
pigs. Res Vet Sci 79,245-251.
information that can be used to further improve the
Moiniche S, Mikkelsen M, Wetterslev J et al. (1998)
utility and safety of using this promising and effec-
A qualitative systematic review of incisional local
tive analgesic technique.
anaesthesia for postoperative pain relief after abdom-
inal operations. Br J Anaesth 8i, 377-383.
Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Roush JK et al. (2005) Use of a
 continuous, local infusion of bupivacaine for postoper-
References
ative analgesia in dogs undergoing total ear canal abla-
tion. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227, 414419.
Abelson AL, McCobb EC, Shaw S et al. (2009) Use of
Savvas I, Papazoglou LG, Kazakos G et al. (2008)
wound soaker catheters for the administration of local
Incisional block with bupivacaine for analgesia after
anesthetic for post-operative analgesia: 56 cases.
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 597-602.
Sidiropoulou T, Buonomo O, Fabbi E et al. (2008) A pro-
Andersen LO, Kristensen BB, Madsen JL et al. (2010)
 spective comparison of continuous wound infiltration
Wound spread of radiolabeled saline with multi-
versus few-hole catheters. Reg Anesth Pain Med 35)
 block after modified radical mastectomy. Anesth Analg
200-202.
106, 997-1001.
Brower MC, Johnson ME (2003) Adverse effects of local
Swalander DB, Crowe DT, Hittenmiller DH et el. (2000)
anesthetic infiltration on wound healing. Reg Anesth
Complications associated with the use of indwelling
Pain Med 28, 233-240.
epidural catheters in dogs: 81 cases (1996-1999). J Am
Carpenter RE, Wilson DV, Evans AT (2004) Evaluation of
Vet Med Assoc 216, 368-370.
intraperitoneal and incisional lidocaine or bupivacaine
Tirotta CF, Munro HM, Salvaggio J et al. (2009)
for analgesia following ovariohysterectomy in the dog.
Continuous incisional infusion of local anesthetic in
Vet Anaesth Analg 31,46-52
pediatric patients following
 open heart surgery.
Davis KM, Hardie EM, Lascelles BD et al. (2007a) Feline
Paediatr Anaesth 19, 571-576.
fibrosarcoma: perioperative management. Compend
Vasseur PB, Paul HA, Dybdal N et al. (1984) Effects of
Contin Educ Vet 29,712-714,716-720,722-729.
local anesthetics on healing of abdominal wounds in
Davis KM, Hardie EM, MartinFR et al. (2007b) Correlation
rabbits. Am J Vet Res 45, 2385-2388.
between perioperative factors and successful outcome
Wolfe TM, Bateman SW, Cole LK et al. (2006) Evaluation
in fibrosarcoma resection in cats. Vet Rec 161, 199-200.
of a local anesthetic delivery system for the postopera-
Drucker M, Cardenas E, Arizti Pet al. (1998) Experimental
tive analgesic management of canine total ear canal
studies on the effect of lidocaine on wound healing.
ablation - a randomized, controlled, double-blinded
World J Surg 22, 394-398.
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 33, 328-339.
9
Elizabeth A. Giuliano and Karen P. Walsh
Overview
Functional regional nerve anatomy
Local anesthesia, by way of regional eyelid blocks,
The orbit is the conical cavity that contains the
is rarely used for small animal ophthalmic exami-
globe and ocular adnexa (Murphy and Pollock
nations compared with its routine use in horses.
1993). The axis of the orbit varies between differ-
However, local anesthesia can be a useful adjunct
ent skull types. Mesocephalic dogs generally have
to multimodal analgesic surgical planning and
improve  postoperative  analgesia. I
Retrobulbar
from the median and dorsal planes. This is in con-
blocks are routinely used for enucleation or evis-
trast to the skulls of brachycephalic breeds where
ceration/prosthesis surgeries and may be used by
the axis of the orbit can deviate as much as 509
from the median plane. The orbital rim is made
surgery (Accola et al. 2006; Myrna et al. 2010).
up of bone for approximately four-fifths of its cir-
Topical anesthesia is commonly used to facilitate
cumference, with the remaining portion com-
ocular examination in the conscious small animal
pleted by the orbital ligament. This ligament is
patient. Small animal patients typically require
heavy sedation or general anesthesia to perform
typically forms a larger proportion of the orbit's
regional anesthesia safely for both the operator and
circumference in brachycephalic breeds. In dogs,
the patient. Potential side effects should be consid-
the orbit is composed of bone (medial wall and
ered prior to performing local anesthesia. The pos-
part of the orbital roof) and softissue (lateral wall
sible effects on intraocular pressure are of particular
and floor). Within the orbit, various foramina and
concern, as this may affect the overall outcome of
fissures provide an osseous pathway for blood
surgery and treatment. Knowledge of regional
vessels and nerves. The two of greatest impor-
anatomy and physiology is essential to perform
tance with regards to regional analgesia are the
these techniques safely and effectively. Equipment
optic foramen and the orbital fissure (Figure 9.1).
needs are minimal; needles and syringes routinely
The optic canal houses the optic nerve and the
available in small animal practice are sufficient.
internal ophthalmic artery. The oculomotor (III),
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
103
104  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Optic
Orbital fissure
 Rostral alar
Ethmoidal
Figure 9.1[
leool jeqingonal joj uoesol aiewixoidde ayi spidap aipaan 'euweioj si! pue lqgio aujues ayl jo weiseio
yoog ieigadedoinne ue joj uoeol aewixoidde ay sauap ye sewoz jano moe lews uooalu yayisaue
Illustration by Jeanie Welker.
Table 9.1  Orbital foramina and their associated nerves and
Optic nerve
vessels of ophthalmic importance.
The optic nerve (Il) originates ventrolaterally from
 Foramina
Associated nerves and vessels
the posterior pole of the globe and resembles a
central nervous system tract due to its formation
Rostral alar
Maxillary artery and nerve
Orbital fissure
 Oculomotor, ophthalmic, abducens
by centripetal growth of retinal ganglion cells.
and trochlear nerves
 Optic nerve myelin is formed by oligodendroglio-
Optic
 Optic nerve
cytes (central nervous system type). An outer
sheath that is continuous with the dura mater and
an inmer sheath that is continuous with the pia
mater surround the nerve. The space between
trochlear (IV), abducens (VI), and ophthalmic (V)
these two layers contains cerebrospinal fluid as it is
cranial nerves, as well as the external ophthalmic
continuous with the subarachnoid space. Within
artery, enter the orbit via the orbital fissure. In
the orbit, this nerve lies at the center of the orbital
close proximity to these foramina is the rostral
cone, separated from surrounding extraocular
alar foramen carrying the zygomatic nerve,
a
pdo a oq bg ldn  Aq sas
branch of the maxillary nerve, and the maxillary
nerve is slightly longer in length than the mea-
artery (Table 9.1). The ethmoidal foramen allows
sured distance between its point of origin at the
 passage for the external ethmoidal artery and eth-
back of the eye and the optic canal to allow for
moidal nerve.
globe movement.
The Eye  105
Oculomotor nerve
The oculomotor nerve (Ill) enters the orbit via
the orbital fissure. It supplies motor innervation to
the majority of the ocular muscles (dorsal, medial,
Frontal
Lacrimal
and ventral rectus muscles, the ventral oblique,
and the levator palpebrae superioris muscles). The
Infratrochlear
oculomotor nerve also contains pre-ganglionic
parasympathetic fibers that synapse in the ciliary
ganglion and post-ganglionic fibers that innervate
the iris sphincter and ciliary muscles within the
eye. Oculomotor nerve deficits are most commonly
clinically appreciated in cavernous sinus and
Zygomatic
orbital fissure syndromes, in which the oculomotor,
trochlear, and abducens nerves, as well as the max-
illary and ophthalmic branches of the trigeminal
nerve, are affected. Known as complete (i.e. both
internal and external) ophthalmoplegia, this syn-
Figure 9.2Sensation to the eyelids is provided by the
drome typically results in ventrolateral strabismus,
ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the trigeminal nerve
inability to retract the globe, pupillary dilation,
(CN V). The frontal, lacrimal, and infratrochlear nerves arise
from the ophthalmic branch of CN V, whereas the zygomatic
ptosis, and decreased corneal sensation.
nerve arises from the maxillary branch of CNv.The approximate
areas of sensation that would be blocked with each nerve are
indicated in yellow (frontal), blue (infratrochlear), red 
Trochlear nerve
(Zygomatic), and purple (lacrimal). Illustration by Jeanie Welker.
The trochlear nerve (IV) is unique in that it is the
nasociliary nerves. The frontal nerve is sensory to
only cranial nerve to leave the dorsal surface of the
a oh Aieipau pue us pasa raddn a jo isou
brainstem and it is the only nerve in the body in
dorsal midline. The lacrimal nerve is a small branch
which all fibers supply muscles on the contra-lateral
of the ophthalmic nerve and innervates the lacrimal
side of the body. It enters the orbit via the orbital
gland. The nasociliary nerve is the continuation of
fissure lateral to the oculomotor nerve and the only
the ophthalmic nerve into the orbit. As it travels
structure it innervates is the dorsal oblique muscle.
through the orbit, projections form the long ciliary
nerves that enter the globe and are sensory to the
structures of the globe (e.g. choroid, ciliary body, iris,
Trigeminal nerve
cornea, bulbar conjunctiva). Additionally, this por-
tion of the ophthalmic nerve carries sympathetic
The sensory innervation of the eye originates in the
 post-ganglionic fibers that are motor to the dilator
trigeminal nerve (V). It divides into three major
muscle of the pupil. After the long ciliary nerves
branches at the trigeminal ganglion: ophthalmic
leave the nasociliary nerve, it further divides into the
(V,), maxillary (V,), and mandibular (V,). Of these
infratrochlear and ethmoidal nerves. The infratroch-
three branches, only the first two innervate ocular
lear nerve supplies the medial commissure of the
structures (Figure 9.2).
eyelids and the ethmoidal nerve innervates portions
of the nasal mucosa and skin of the muzzle.
Ophthalmic nerve (V)
Maxillary nerve (V)
The ophthalmic nerve provides the major sensory
inmervation to the eye and orbit. At the level of, or
The maxillary nerve is sensory and gives rise to the
slightly rostral to, the orbital fissure, the ophthalmic
Zygomatic, pterygopalatine, and infraorbital nerves.
branch further divides into the frontal, lacrimal, and
The zygomatic branch provides sensory inmervation
06
6 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
gives rise to dorsal and ventral palpebral branches
that innervate the dorsal and ventral portion of the
orbicularis oculi muscle (the major muscle respon-
nfratrochlearn
sible for eyelid closure). The retractor anguli oculi
lateralis and the levator anguli oculi medialis also
Lacrimaln
receive innervation from branches of the zygomatic
and palpebral nerves. Post-ganglionic fibers of
Zygomaticotemporaln
facial nerve origin emanating from the ptergopala-
tine ganglion provide parasympathetic innervation
to the lacrimal gland. Facial nerve injury (or injury
to its palpebral branches) results in an inability to
blink. An inability to close the eyelids can result in
significant compromise to the cornea, as the preoc-
Zygomaticofacial n.
ular tear film cannot be normally distributed. If
Figure 9.3  Innervation to the canine orbit. Illustration by
innervation to the retractor bulbi muscle remains
Jeanie Welker.
unaffected, a patient with facial nerve paralysis
 may be observed to retract the globe and subsequent
to the orbit. It enters the orbit via the rostral alar
'uounqinsip reat ul pie Aeu ,daams, paka pi
 foramen and divides into the zygomaticotemporal
and zygomaticofacial nerves (Figure 9.3). The zygo-
maticotemporal nerve supplies the lateral portion
General considerations
of the upper eyelid and carries parasympathetic
fibers to the lacrimal gland. The zygomaticofacial
The eye, adnexa, and orbit are richly innervated.
nerve supplies the lower eyelid, lateral canthus,
Extensive sensory innervation implies a high
and ventrolateral aspects of the conjunctiva.
 potential for pain with ophthalmic disease and
effective pain management through preemptive
Abducens nerve
opioid administration may lead to these drugs
being withheld due to concerns of pupillary
The abducens nerve (VI) supplies motor innerva-
constriction. Ophthalmology patients are often
tion to the lateral rectus and retractor bulbi mus-
geriatric, and have multiple medical issues that
cles. It enters the orbit via the orbital fissure. Lesions
may preclude the safe administration of NSAIDs.
affecting this nerve will result in medial strabismus,
To effectively treat ophthalmic pain, one should
inability to retract the globe in the orbit, and
have a variety of drugs and delivery options avail-
inability to sweep the third eyelid across the cornea.
able to plan for various ophthalmic procedures and
appropriately address the spectrum of patients'
needs. Regional anesthesia can be an effective
Facial nerve
 adjunctive means to achieve excellent postopera-
tive pain control while minimizing systemic side
The motor function to the eyelids is provided by
 effects. In small animals, regional eyelid blocks are
the facial nerve (VIl) as the auriculopalpebral
not routinely used during the clinical ophthalmic
nerve. The facial nerve (VII) supplies both general
 examination. When used, heavy sedation or gen-
somatic efferent and special visceral efferent inner-
 eral anesthesia is recommended to avoid damaging
vation to portions of the head. Facial nerve inner-
the globe. Prior to administration of any sedative
vation will be discussed in this chapter as it relates
 Or anesthetic agent, the patient's general health
to ocular structures only. At the level of origin of
should be assessed via thorough history taking.
the zygomatic process from the temporal bone, the
 complete physical examination, and performance
auriculopalpebral branch of the facial nerve divides
of ancillary tests. The primary ocular condition
into the rostral auricular branches
pue
must also be considered as this may preclude use
zygomatic branch. In turn, the zygomatic branch
of certain drug combinations.
The Eye  107
Sedation and anesthesia requirements
 General anesthesia is preferred for most patients
undergoing regional anesthesia for ophthalmic pro-
Caution with drugs causing emesis should be
cedures. Adequate pre-anesthetic medication and
exerted particularly when the integrity of the globe
smooth induction of anesthesia is essential for oph-
has been compromised (e.g. corneal perforation or
thalmic patients. Propofol, thiopental, or alfaxalone
a descemetocele). An example of a commonly used
 are common choices for induction, and anesthesia
combination is dexmedetomidine (0.005-0.01 mg
can be maintained with sevoflurane or isoflurane.
kg) and butorphanol (0.1-0.4 mg kg-t).
Phenothiazine agents such as acepromazine
maleate (ACP) often do not produce adequate seda-
Animal positioning
tion to allow manipulation of the eye or periocular
areas. To achieve greater sedation, combining ACP
There is no specific recommendation for patient
with an opioid analgesic can be helpful. The choice
positioning when administering regional anes-
of opioid is dependent on the patient's degree of
thesia to small animal ophthalmic 
patients.
pain as well as opioid availability. Caution should
Positioning is largely based on operator preference
be exercised when using opioids such as morphine,
 and may be dictated by administration timing
as their administration may result in emesis leading
to a sudden increase in intraocular pressure (IOP).
tively). Many ophthalmic procedures require the
Ketamine in combination with dexmedetomidine
eye (specifically the cornea) to be horizontal to the
and an opioid or a benzodiazepine can be used in
surgeon and therefore may require the patient's
cats to produce profound sedation. This anesthetic
neck to be bent at a relatively acute angle. It
plan may allow placement of a local anesthetic
is therefore important to ensure that the airway is
block. Ketamine may increase IOP, thus the decision
protected, especially in the sedated patient. Once
to use this drug should be based on the tempera-
-enopua ,paprens, ro ,paonopurai, 'paziaysae
ment of the patient, the ophthalmic condition, and
cheal tubes can be used to maintain patency of the
the overall health of the cat. Manual restraint of a
dO ul aseaiou 1ajeano e ul 1msa1 Ae jeo 1mo
rate and effort should be carefully monitored.
than appropriate sedative drugs. Examples of
Utilization of capnography and pulse oximetry
appropriate ketamine-based combinations include:
will facilitate early detection of upper airway
obstruction.
 ketamine 3-10 mg kg′, dexmedetomidine 1-5
mcg kg′, butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg kg';
ketamine 3-10 mg kg-′, dexmedetomidine 1-5
Indications for use of ophthal mic
mcg kg-′, buprenorphine 0.02 mg kg-';
local anesthesia
ketamine 5-15 mg kg ′, midazolam 0.2 mg kg′; or
 ketamine 5-15 mg kg-′, diazepam 0.2 mg kg-.
Numerous ophthalmic procedures may be per-
formed with adjunctive local anesthesia. Examples
These combinations can be administered intra-
include:
muscularly (except the combination with diaz-
(ueda
or
intravenously S
Selected
drugs
and
ophthalmic examination (application of topical
dosages will depend on the temperament of the
anesthetic and rarely, an auriculopalpebral block);
patient and the route of administration.
 preoperative analgesia
Opioids alone may not produce adequate che-
enucleation;
mical restraint for adjunctive regional anesthesia. For
evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis;
patients with compromised cardiovascular function,
comeal and /or conjunctival surgery;
a combination of fentanyl and midazolam results in
intraocular surgery where central rotation
 a short duration of sedation and minimal cardiovas-
of the globe is desirable;
cular and respiratory depression. However, this
immobilization of the eyelids to enable
combination can result in panting which may inhibit
 surgery while maintaining a light plane of
anesthesia;
108  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
postoperative analgesia;
adequate lubrication and protection of the cornea
as for preoperative;
for the duration of this block.
infiltration anesthesia following eyelid
surgery.
Anatomic landmarks
The auriculopalpebral nerve travels across the
Zygomatic arch where it divides to form the
Contraindications
Zygomatic and palpebral branches; the latter supply
 motor innervation to the upper and lower eyelids.
As with performance of all loco-regional blocks,
the underlying health of the target tissues should
Unlike the horse, the palpebral branch of the auricu-
be taken into consideration. Large-scale tissue dis-
lopalpebral nerve may not be readily palpable
ruption (e.g. infection) will affect onset and uptake
through the skin; it can be difficult to manually
"feel" this nerve in some dogs (see section on Clinical
of local anesthetic drugs such that there may be an
increased chance of systemic toxicity. Central ner-
tips below). Therefore, local anesthetic is simply
 infiltrated into the clinician-judged appropriate area
vous system toxicity is possible with direct injec-
tion of local anesthetic into the perineural optic
based on careful anatomic review (Roberts et al.
nerve sheath. Needles should not be placed
through potential neoplastic tissue as this may
awake patients, clinicians can test the success of their
block by noting a decreased palpebral reflex roughly
increase potential spread of disease.
five minutes after administration of local anesthetic.
Auriculopalpebral nerve block:
Step by step procedure
motor blockade of the eyelid
Calculate the maximum dose of local anesthetic
for the patient to avoid toxic levels.
This technique can be used to facilitate examina-
usually no more than 0.5-1 mL of local
tion of the eye (but in the authors' experience, is
anesthetic will be required to desensitize the
rarely used in the small animal practice setting for
 palpebral nerve.
this purpose), treatment of spastic entropion, and
●Palpate the zygomatic arch of the patient and
placement of a third eyelid flap (Park et al. 2009).
attempt to palpate the nerve (Figure 9.4).
Equipment
 Sterile 25-27-gauge, 1-inch needle;
1-3 mL syringe; and
local anesthetic.
Technique
The auriculopalpebral nerve supplies the obicularis
oculi, the primary muscle responsible for eyelid
closure.
.In the small animal patient, the
auriculopalpebral nerve block is induced by
inserting a 1.2 cm 25-27-gauge sterile needle
through the skin dorsal to the zygomatic pro-
cess at its caudal one-third and injecting ~0.4 mL
of local anesthetic subcutaneously (Park et al.
Figure 9.4  Digital palpation of the zygomatic arch in a
2009). Eyelid akinesia will disrupt normal tear
feline patient in preparation for administration of an
distribution, thus care should be taken to provide
auriculopalpebral block prior to enucleation surgery.
The Eye 109
Technigue
The frontal nerve, a branch of the ophthalmic
nerve, passes rostrally between the dorsal oblique
and the dorsal rectus muscle. It emerges subcu-
taneously just caudal to the orbital ligament to
terminate by dividing into the supraorbital and
supratrochlear nerves. Collectively, these nerves
supply cutaneous innervation to the lateral two-
thirds of the upper eyelid to the dorsal midline
of the head (Evans and Kitchell 1993). To the
authors’ knowledge, there are no published
reports in the veterinary literature that describe a
technigue for this eyelid block in small animal
patients. This is in stark contrast to equine
Figure 9.5
5 Performance of an auriculopalpebral nerve block
ophthalmology, where the supraorbital foramen
prior to performing entropion repair in a Rottweiler.
is easily palpated and a frontal nerve block is
commonly performed in horses to facilitate the
ophthalmic examination and /or standing eyelid
Locate the lateral canthus.
ed i 'auaadxa sre a u ams
Direct the needle caudally from the lateral can-
tion of the frontal nerve is not possible in the
thus towards the zygomatic arch.
 r  as a   
small animal patient; therefore, local anesthetic is
simply infiltrated into the clinician-judged appro-
infiltrating local anesthetic in a fan-like pattern
across the zygomatic arch (Figure 9.5);
priate area based on careful anatomic review
(Figure 9.6). In general, the authors recommend
typically, the needle is redirected within the
using infiltrative eyelid blocks for regional anes-
fascia without withdrawing it through the
thesia of the upper and/or lower eyelids (see
skin. Aspiration on the syringe prior to infiltra-
Topical anesthesia below).
tion of local anesthetic agent ensures that you
are not in a major vessel. See also Figure 9.1.
Clinical tips
If the patient has thick fur, clipping the area over
the zygomatic arch may facilitate visualization of
this bony landmark and manual palpation of the
nerve. Additionally, adequate comeal lubrication is
imperative, as desiccation due to inadequate tear
film distribution will occur from loss of the normal
blink response. This may lead to corneal erosion or
ulceration.
Frontal nerve (supraorbital foramen)
block: anesthesia of the upper eyelid
Equipment
 Sterile 25-27-gauge, 1-inch needle;
1-3 mL syringe; and
Fgure 9.6 Performance of a frontal nerve block in a feline
local anesthetic.
patient prior to enucleation surgery.
110 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Zygomatic and lacrimal nerve block:
Infratrochlear nerve block: anesthesia
anesthesia of the lateral portions of the
for the medial canthus
upper and lower eyelids
The necessary equipment is the same as for the
Equipment
auriculopalpebral nerve block (see above). These
authors have found no specific recommendations
Sterile 25-27-gauge, 1-inch needle;
for this block in small animals. We recommend
2 mL syringe; and
using infiltrative eyelid blocks for regional anes
local anesthetic.
thesia of the upper and/or lower eyelids when
needed (see Topical anesthesia below).
Technique
Retrobulbar block (RBB): regional
This nerve block consists of injection and diffusion
anesthesia for enucleation, evisceration/
of local anesthetic into the area near the orbital
 prosthesis, and/or intraocular surgery
fissure where the ophthalmic (which gives rise to
the lacrimal nerve), trochlear and zygomatic (via
Equipment
the alar foramen) nerves exit. As the abducens,
oculomotor, and trochlear nerves are all located in
 1.5-inch 22-gauge spinal needle bent to approx-
close proximity, this block produces akinesia of the
imately
 20 degree angle, or a retrobulbar
 globe when these nerves are paralyzed.
needle;
maximum
2mL local anesthetic (calculate
maximum dose per patient and include other
Anatomic landmarks
local blocks being performed); and
 Palpate ventral to the zygomatic process at the
●1-5 mL syringe.
level of the lateral canthus.
Technique and step-by-step proced ure
Step-by-step procedure
The needle should be inserted ventral to the
There are five different techniques described,
Zygomatic process at the level of the lateral can-
including:
thus and approximately 0.5 cm rostral to the
anterior border of the vertical ramus of the
(1)
 Inferior-temporal palpebral RBB
mandible. Note that distances will vary some-
 The lower eyelid hair may be clipped at
what with size and shape of the skull.
the injection site or a transconjunctival
Advance the needle medially to the mandible
approach employed. Routine ophthalmic
in a both mediodorsal and caudal directions.
surgical preparation with dilute povidone-
The target is the orbital fissure. The exact depth to
iodine solution is performed.
which the needle is advanced depends on the
A retrobulbar needle can be used or a 1.5
size and conformation of the small animalpatient.
inch 22-gauge spinal needle can be bent to
 The maximum patient dose should be calcu-
an approximate 20° angle.
lated for the local anesthetic being used, but
Use the lateral canthus and the middle of
it is unlikely that more than 2mL would be
the lower eyelid as landmarks. The needle
necessary.
should be positioned midway between
those two points, along the inferior eyelid
Clinical tips
at the level of the orbital rim (Figure 9.7).
The needle is directed along the floor of the
Akinesia of the globe will occur due to the close
orbit and then redirected dorsally and
proximity of the abducens, oculomotor, and
towards the nose to reach the apex of the
trochlear nerves.
orbit.
The Eye  111
Figure 9.7 Initial approach to the inferior-temporal 
palpebral retrobulbar nerve block in a canine patient.
Figure 9.9  Splash block of the canine orbit after the globe
has been removed.
[2】
 Splash block of the orbit (Figure 9.9)
 Useful with ocular or orbital neoplasia due
to risk of a RBB seeding the tumor to other
tissues.
 After the globe and orbital tissue have been
removed and the orbit has been well flushed,
local anesthetic is deposited into the orbit
and left in-situ for three to five minutes.
Figure 9.8 Illustration showing the approximate intraconal
The surgeon can begin wound closure dur-
needle position when performing an inferior-temporal
retrobulbar nerve block. llustration by Jeanie Welker.
ing this time.
The authors recommend not to subse-
quently flush the orbit after introduction of
A
slight  popping  sensation may 
be
local anesthetic to avoid dilution and pos-
sible alteration of the splash block effects
The needle should then be redirected
and duration.
slightly dorsally and nasally toward the
3]
 Perimandibular technique
orbital apex (Figure 9.8).
1.5 inch 22-gauge spinal needle.
 Aspiration prior to injection is warranted
?
Needle  is positioned  ventral
tothe
 and strongly recommended.
 zygomatic process at the same level as the
Local anesthetic is slowly injected into the
lateral canthus.
orbit.
 Needle is directed medially to the vertical
If sigmificant resistance is encountered,
ramus.
draw back and redirect slightly (as the peri-
As the needle is advanced it travels in a
neural sheath may have been penetrated or
mediodorsal and caudal direction until it
the needle may be abutting the bony orbit).
meets the retrobulbar space.
112 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
【4]
Lateral canthus technique
nontreated eyes, nor were any complications found
1.5 inch 22-gauge spinal needle.
associated with retrobulbar injection (Accola et al.
 Needle is inserted through the conjunctiva
2006). Use of a retrobulbar needle will mitigate the
 at the lateral canthus.
need to bend a spinal needle prior to performing a
 Needle is advanced past the globe toward
retrobulbar block.
the opposite mandibular joint until the
base of the orbit.
[5]
Combined superior-inferior peribulbar tech-
Advantages
nique
1.5 inch 22-gauge spinal needle.
 If bupivacaine or ropivacaine are used, postopera-
Two injections are performed.
tive analgesia will extend for approximately four to
 Needle is inserted halfway between the
six hours. Use of a RBB reduces ocular movement
medial and lateral canthi of the superior
during surgery and will enable the patient to be
and inferior lids between the orbital rim
comfortably maintained under general anesthesia
and globe.
with less inhalational drug concentrations. A RBB
 Needle is advanced until the tip is just
will decrease the need for nondepolarizing muscle
beyond the posterior aspect of the globe.
relaxants and intermittent positive pressure venti-
lation, and further reduce the potential complica-
tions associated with these drugs (Hazra et al.
Comparison of retrobulbar techniques
 2008). The inferior-temporal palpebral technique
A study in 2006 examined three of the five retro-
appears to have minimal morbidity associated
bulbar injection techniques: the inferior-temporal
with its use.
palpebral, perimandibular, and combined supe-
rior-inferior peribulbar techniques described pre-
viously in this chapter (Accola et al. 2006). Targets
Complications
of retrobulbar anesthesia include cranial nerves
II, IV, V, and VI and the ciliary ganglion. The
Failure to direct the needle into the appropriate site
authors concluded that of the three techniques, the
will result in inadequate anesthesia and analgesia
inferior-temporal palpebral was the  preferred
of the area. Other complications that may occur
method for a retrobulbar block in dogs because it
with a RBB include the following:
achieved pupil dilation and central rotation of the
globe, was easiest to perform, and provided thor-
 inadvertent penetration of the globe. This may
 ough coverage of the intraconal retrobulbar space
lead to catastrophic consequences for the eye;
without complications.
however, is unlikely to occur with careful
technique.
 intravascular injection. Failure to aspirate prior
Clinical tips
 to injection may result in local anesthetic injec-
Aspiration before injection of local anesthetic will
tion into the ophthalmic artery.
help decrease the risk of intravascular injection.
●intrathecal injection. If the optic nerve is directly
Assessing the resistance to injection will also
injected, local anesthetic may come into contact
 decrease the chance of intraneural injection. The
with the subarachnoid space due to its close
pressure generated by injection into the optic
association with the meninges. Careful attention 
nerve sheath or intrascleral injection is three to
to the pressure required to inject local anes-
four times that produced by injection into the ret-
thetic is warranted and if the veterinarian
robulbar adipose tissue (i.e. 135 vs. 35 mmHg)
encounters resistance, the needle should be
(Wang et al. 1989).
redirected.
The inferior-temporal palpebral block appears to
retrobulbar hemorrhage, due to puncture of the
yield consistent distribution of injectate and is clin-
vessels around the globe.
ically applicable. No significant difference in intra-
optic nerve damage/extraocular muscle myop-
 Ocular pressure was observed between treated and
athy/other neuropathy, due to penetration of
The Eye 113
the perineural sheath with the needle or toxic
Advantages
effects of the local anesthetic agent.
proptosis and/or subsequent exposure kera-
Low risk of penetrating the globe.
titis. More common when large volumes of
 Provides analgesia to sites of extraocular muscle
local anesthetic are used. Brachycephalic breeds
attachment to globe.
may be predisposed due to shallow orbits.
Technically easy to perform, less training
required.
 Helps to delineate tissue planes prior to enucle-
Peribulbar block: regional anesthesia for
adde leanounfuoqns e Sursn uoe
enucleation surgery
Equipment
Disadvantages
 1 mL syringe;
Complete anesthesia of the globe and periocu
 25-27-gauge needl; and
lar tissues is not achieved.
conjunctival forceps.
Splash block of the optic nerve after removal of
the globe is necessary to provide similar anal-
gesia to that afforded by a RBB.
Technique
A small amount (0.1-0.2 mL per site) of local anes-
Infiltration anesthesia
thesia is injected subconjunctivally at four posi-
tions around the globe to provide regional
Indications
anesthesia to the areas of extraocular muscle
attachment to the globe prior to their transaction
Infiltration of the eyelids can be used as an
during enucleation (subconjunctival approach).
adjunct to any eyelid surgery or enucleation
This technique also helps the practitioner delineate
tissue planes more easily during enucleation. The
surgery. Ophthalmic surgical procedures that
conjunctiva should be genly held with a fine-
may benefit from infiltration anesthesia include
canthoplasty, entropion/ectropion repair, wedge
toothed forceps while the needle is directed
resection, laceration repair, extensive eyelid
subconjunctivally 2 mm from the limbus at the 12,
3, 6 and 9 o'clock positions around the globe
reconstructive procedures (e.g. lip to lid, modified
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure), enucleation
(Figure 9.10).
surgery, or as an adjunct to a retrobulbar block
(Accola et al. 2006). It may also help to decrease
post-surgical entropion by slight eversion of the
eyelids. Smoother recovery from anesthesia
may be seen because of improved postoperative
analgesia.
Local anesthetics used
Longer acting local anesthetics such as bupivacaine
-lsod qeundo roy papuauuosan ane auieseaidon 10
operative pain control. Mepivacaine and lidocaine
have shorter durations of action and are of limited
use in this clinical setting. Epinephrine can be
added to the local anesthetic to increase duration
Figure 9.10Peribulbar block at the 12 o'clock position of
of action but this must be weighed against the
the canine globe during an enucleation surgery.
possible decrease in blood flow.
114 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Equipment
 3-5 mL syringe;
 25-27-gauge needle; and
local anesthetic.
Technique
After surgery has been completed but before anes-
thesia is terminated, local anesthetic can be infil-
trated into the area using a small gauge needle and
syringe. The needle should be inserted into the skin
and subcutaneous tissues adjacent to the wound to
infiltrate local anesthetic. It may be useful to insert
Figure 9.12  Local eyelid infiltration of bupivacaine prior to
the needle to the hub and inject local anesthetic as
enucleation surgery.
the needle is slowly withdrawn. Typically, two to
three different injection sites will be necessary to
sh u paa ramol no raddn ue aeu Aiaienbape
advocate infiltration of the tissues after any
entirety (Figures 9.11 and 9.12).
reconstructive surgery is planned (e.g. entropion/
ectropion repair, Figure 9.11). By contrast, if local
anesthetic with epinephrine is used, injection of the
Clinical tips
eyelid margin prior to their removal in an enucle-
ation procedure willessen the amount of bleeding
 Using too large a syringe will increase the pressure
encoumtered.
required to inject local anesthetic into the subcutis
and may result in inadequate levels of anesthetic
distribution. Similarly, using too large a needle
Advantages and disadvantages
gauge will result in a needle tract that leaks local
anesthetic instead of enabling drug diffusion into
Advantages include improved analgesia in the
the eyelids. Expect the eyelids to swell slightly
with local anesthetic administration, which will
decreased need for opioid analgesia, decreased
distort lid conformation. For this reason, we
sedation, and faster recovery time. A surgical
advantage of infiltrative anesthesia in eyelid
-led st su aaa ,udnne-aeds, sh st ams
ticularly relevant in patients with a strong spastic
component to their entropion that may be exacer
bated from surgical manipulation of the eyelids
and result in sutures rubbing on the cornea and
possible ulceration during recovery from general
 anesthesia. Infiltration of local anesthetic to slightly
evert the eyelids may negate the need to place
additional
tacking
sutures  (Giuliano 2008).
Disadvantages of infiltration anesthesia include
potentials for delayed wound healing and wound
break down. In the authors' opinion, this is rarely
eEncountered when local anesthesia is used once as
Figure 9.11 Local infiltration with bupivacaine at the
 an adjunct for ophthalmic surgery, and the volume
conclusion of a canine entropion surgery just prior to
of drug that is injected is small. As with all loco-
placement of the remaining skin sutures.
 regional anesthesia, care must be taken to ensure
The Eye 115
that toxic systemic doses are avoided. When
Tetracaine
operating on small dogs or cats, if a greater volume
Tetracaine is not commonly used in veterinary
of drug is needed (e.g. when performing an enucle-
ation surgery and a RBB, four-point peritomy
medicine as it often causes marked conjunctival
    r  
hyperemia, chemosis, and pain on application.
Proparacaine is generally recommended as an
plarmed), dilution of the appropriate local anes-
thetic dose is recommended using sterile saline.
alternative (Bartfield et al. 1994). Duration of action
has not been reported in dogs or cats.
Topical anesthesia
Other topical anesthetic agents
Indications
Limited options have been available for treatment
of ocular pain. Topical use of morphine has been
shown to control pain associated with corneal
Topical local anesthesia is routinely used in the
ophthalmic examination to facilitate applanation
wounds in dogs without systemic side effects or
delayed corneal wound healing, but is a controlled
tonometry, comeal and conjunctival scraping or
drug (Stiles et al. 2003). Nalbuphine, a potent
-saue [esidoi 'ieaoua1 Apoq ubianoy pue Ksdonq
synthetic mixed opiate with some analgesic effects
thesia can also be used to supplement analgesia
is a nonscheduled drug and might represent a use-
during corneal-conjunctival surgery.
ful alternative to topical morphine. However, a
pilot study evaluating topical nalbuphine com-
pared with oral tramadol in the treatment of cor-
Drugs used
neal pain in dogs suggests that topical nalbuphine
is not effective for treating cormeal pain (Clark et al.
Proparacaine/proxymetacaine
2011). Five percent diphenhydramine solution has
In clinically normal dogs, a single drop of 0.5%
been shown to have an anesthetic effect when
proparacaine produced cormeal anesthesia for
administered topically to rabbits (Suffridge et al.
 approximately 45 minutes with the maximal effects
2009). No studies have reported its topical oph-
for 15 minutes (Herring et al. 2005). A second drop
thalmic use in dogs or cats.
 applied one minute after initial treatment resulted
in an increase of anesthetic effects to 55 minutes
with maximum effects for 25 minutes. Recovery
Advantages and disadvantages
from topical anesthesia is dose-dependent, with
lower doses having the shortest duration of action
Certain topical anesthetics  will decrease tear
(Polse et al. 1978). An increase in duration of anes-
production and improve drug bioavailability from
thesia may be seen in dogs and cats with decreased
the conjunctival sac (Patton and Robinson 1975).
corneal sensitivity. Decreased corneal sensitivity
Decreased lacrimation  will affect results of
has been associated with diabetes mellitus (Good
Schirmer tear test values for at least 45 minutes
et al. 2003), mesaticephalic and brachycephalic
 and possibly longer after the application of one
skull conformation in dogs, and brachycephalic 
drop of 0.5% proparacaine. Schirmer tear tests
conformation in cats (Blocker and Van Der Woerdt
aimed at evaluating both basal and stimulated
2001). Duration of anesthetic effects on the domestic
tear production should therefore be performed
shorthair feline cornea induced by a single topical
prior to the application of topical anesthetic
application of 0.5% proparacaine ophthalmic solu-
(Hamor et al. 2000). Repeat application of topical
tion is considerably shorter than the reported dura-
anesthetics is toxic to the corneal epithelium and
tion of corneal anesthesia in dogs (Binder and
should not be used therapeutically (Herse and Siu
Herring 2006). One drop of 0.5% proparacaine pro-
1992; Judge et al. 1997; Nam et al. 2006; McGee
duced maximal anesthesia for five minutes and
and Fraunfelder 2007). Sample acquisition for
lasted for approximately 25 minutes (Binder and
culture from the corneoconjunctival area is recom-
Herring 2006).
mended prior to instillation of local anesthetic due
116 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
to their antimicrobial activity. Finally, storage of
Anatomy of the Dog (3d edn.) Evans HE (ed.)W.B.
proparacaine at room temperature for more than
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, PA, USA. pp. 953-987.
two weeks results in a decrease in drug effect;
Giuliano EA (2008) Regional anesthesia as an adjunct for
therefore, refrigeration of opened bottles is recom-
'sz pan uury uoueduoy doi 'shop ut Aiabins pana
51-56.
mended (Stiles et al. 2001).
Good KL, Maggs DJ, Hollingsworth SR et al. (2003)
Cormeal sensitivity in dogs with diabetes mellitus. Am
J Vet Res 64, 7-11.
Specific aspects of loco-regional
Hamor RE, Roberts SM, Severin GA et al. (2000)
anesthesia of the eye in cats
Evaluation of results for Schirmer tear tests conducted
with and without application of a topical anesthetic in
Intravenous administration of lidocaine is com-
clinically normal dogs of 5 breeds. Am J Vet Res 61,
monly considered to be particularly toxic in cats
1422-1425.
because of the potential for myocardial and CNS
Hazra S, De D, Roy B et al. (2008) Use of ketamine, xyla-
depression (Chadwick 1985; Lemke and Dawson
zine, and diazepam anesthesia with retrobulbar block
2000). However, numerous studies evaluating the
toxic effects of lidocaine do not support the cat as
255-259.
Herring IP, Bobofchak MA, Landry MP et al. (2005)
being particularly sensitive to this drug (Pypendop
 Duration of effect and effect of multiple doses of top-
and Ilkiw 2005). Cats are generally of lower body
ical ophthalmic 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride in
weight than most dogs, thus care must be taken to
clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 66, 77-80.
calculate the correct volume of local anesthetic
Herse P, Siu A (1992) Short-term effects of proparacaine
drug that can be safely administered to the feline
on human cormeal thickness. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 70, 740-744.
dose calculation, as with dogs, aseptic technique
Judge AJ, Najafi K, Lee DA et al. (1997) Cormeal endothe-
lial toxicity of topical anesthesia. Ophthalmology 104,
should be used and syringes should be aspirated
before local anesthetic injection to avoid inadver-
1373-1379.
 Lemke KA, Dawson SD (2000) Local and regional anes-
tent intravascular administration.
thesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30, 839-857.
McGee HT, Fraunfelder FW (2007) Toxicities of topical
ophthalmic anesthetics. Expert Opin Drug Saf 6,
References
637-640.
Murphy CJ, Pollock RVS (1993) The Eye. In: Miller's
Anatomy of the Dog (3md edn.) Evans HE (ed.).W.B.
a retrobulbar injection technique for ocular surgery and
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, PA, USA. pp. 1009-1057.
analgesia in dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 229, 220-225.
Myrma KE, Bentley E, Smith LJ (2010) Efectiveness of
Bartfield JM, Holmes TJ, Raccio-Robak N (1994) A
injection of local anesthetic into the retrobulbar space
comparison of proparacaine and tetracaine eye anes-
 for postoperative analgesia following eye enucleation
thetics. Acad Emerg Med 1, 364-367.
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 237, 174-177.
Binder DR, Herring IP (2006) Duration of cormeal
Nam SM, Lee HK, Kim EK et al. (2006) Comparison of
anesthesia following topical administration of 0.5%
cormeal thickness after the instillation of topical anes-
proparacaine hydrochloride solution in clinically
thetics: proparacaine versus oxybuprocaine. Cormea
normal cats. Am J Vet Res 67, 1780-1782.
25.51-54.
Blocker T, Van Der Woerdt A (2001) A comparison of cor-
O'Brien TQ, Clark-Price SC, Evans EE et al. (2010)
neal sensitivity between brachycephalic and Domestic
Infusion of a lipid emulsion to treat lidocaine intoxica-
Short-haired cats. Vet Ophthalmol 4, 127-130.
tion in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 237, 1455-1458.
       
Park SA, Lee I, Lee YL et al. (2009) Combination auriculo-
caine- or bupivacaine-infused cats. Anesthesiology 63,
palpebral nerve block and local anesthesia for
385-390
placement of a nictitating membrane-to-superotempo-
Clark JS, Bentley E, Smith LJ (2011) Evaluation of topical
ral bulbar conjunctiva flap in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
nalbuphine or oral tramadol as analgesics for cormeal
Assoc 45, 164-167.
 ' ouda s iod e :sop u ue
Park SA, Park YW, Son WG et al. (2010) Evaluation of the
Evans HE, Kitchell RL (1993) Cranial nerves and
analgesic effect of intracameral lidocaine hydrochlo-
cutaneous innervation of the head. In: Miller's
The Eye 117
 in healthy dogs undergoing phacoemulsification. Am J
Stiles J, Honda CN, Krohne SG et al. (2003) Effect of
Vet Res 71, 216-222.
topical administration of 1% morphine sulfate solution
Patton TF, Robinson JR (1975) Influence of topical anes-
 on signs of pain and cormeal wound healing in dogs.
thesia on tear dynamics and ocular drug bioavailability
Am J Vet Res 64, 813-818.
in albino rabbits. J Pharm Sci 64, 267-271
Stiles J, Krohne S, Rankin A et al. (2001) The efficacy of
 Polse KA, Keener RJ, Jauregui MJ (1978) Dose-response
 0.5% proparacaine stored at room temperature. Vet
efects of cormeal anesthetics. Am J Optom Physiol Opt
Ophthalmol 4, 205-207.
55, 8-14.
Suffridge PJ, Wiggins MN, Landes RD et al. (2009)
Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE (2005) Assessment of the hemo-
 Diphenhydramine as a topical ocular anesthetic. Can J
dynamic effects of lidocaine administered IV in isoflu-
Ophthalmol 44, 181-184.
rane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 66, 661-668.
Wang BC, Bogart B, Hillman DE et al. (1989) Subarachnoid
Roberts SR, Vierheller RC, Lenmox WJ (1974) Eyes. In:
injection
一
a potential complication of retrobulbar
Canine Surgery (2"d edn.), Archibald J (ed). American
block. Anesthesiology 71, 845-847.
Veterinary Publications, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
10
The Oral Cavity
Margherita Gracis
Overview
are, however, relatively costly and are rarely
available in veterinary practice.
Indications on how to perform "dental anesthesia"
in the dog were published as early as 1928 by Frank
General considerations
(Frank 1928). Local blockade of the nerves serving
the oral cavity and face in the dog and cat requires
Anesthesia requirements
simple equipment and material, readily available
at any veterinary practice, including disposable 1.0
Sedation or general anesthesia is necessary for the
and 2.5mL aspirating syringes and thin, dispos-
 able, stainless steel needles. Needle size can vary
delivery of dental nerve blocks, as most of these
nerves are deeply located and may be difficult to
from 25-gauge to 30-gauge, at 12mm (that we
define as extra short), 25mm (short) or 36mm
reach in the conscious nonsedated patient.
(long) in length. It should be considered that
thinner needles may lead to falsely negative aspi-
Animal positioning
ration tests because of an increased resistance and
are therefore not recommended (Baart and Brand
No special 
l positioning is required  for  the
2009). Multiple-dose vials of anesthetic agents can
administration of nerve blocks of the oral cavity.
 be used. To minimize damage to the thin needle
Normally, the patient's position is dictated by the
used for these blocks, some authors suggest using
planned procedure and /or by personal preference.
separate needles for withdrawal of the local anes-
thetic solution and injection (Woodward 2008).
Local blocks of the oral cavity can also be delivered
Indications and advantages
by using breech-loading, metallic or plastic, dental
cartridge-type, aspirating syringes or computer-
 Procedures for which loco-regional anesthesia may
controlled local anesthetic
delivery
systems
be indicated include dental extractions, periodontal
(Malamed 2004; Baart and Brand 2009); the latter
flap surgery, endodontic procedures, restorative
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
119
120  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
procedures, implant surgery, oronasal fistula and
be withdrawn, and a new needle inserted. The
palatal defect (cleft palate) closure, maxillary and
entire procedure is repeated until negative aspira-
 mandibular fracture repairs, post-traumatic sofft
tion is obtained.
tissue reconstruction, biopsies, and oncologic surgery
Skin may be prepared whenever a transcuta-
with excision of hard (e.g. maxillectomy, mandibu-
 neous approach is used (e.g. maxillary nerve block-
lectomy) and soft tissue (e.g. glossectomy, palatec-
subzygomatic approach). A small area of hair may
tomy). Even dental scaling and polishing may cause
be clipped and the skin prepared before insertion of
a certain degree of discomfort (Gauthier and Gilbert
the needle. Also, if a transmucosal approach is used
2004). The efficacy of two of the most commonly
(e.g. maxillary nerve block-maxillary tuberosity
used oral local blocks, namely the infraorbital and
approach), the oral mucosa in the area may be dis-
the inferior alveolar nerve blocks, has been proven in
infected with a 0.05-0.1% chlorhexidine solution,
halothane-anesthetized dogs (Gross et al. 1997)
and dried before insertion of the needle.
If long-acting local anesthetics are used,
，the
As a general rule, infection or acute inflamma-
effect may last for some time in the postoperative
tion at the injection site will be considered as a
period (the duration of the effect depends on the
technical contraindication.
drug used as well as on other factors), allowing for
a faster, smoother recovery, and continuing the
analgesic effect after the end of the procedure itself.
Choice and dosing of local anesthetics
Local anesthetics currently used in dentistry are of
Contraindications and precautions
the amide-type, and include articaine, bupivacaine,
dibucaine,
etidocaine,]
lidocaine, mepivacaine,
While delivering a local block, a number of precau-
 prilocaine, and ropivacaine. Ester-type anesthetics
tions should be taken, most of which will be dis-
(e.g. procaine and propoxycaine) are seldom, if
cussed in detail in the description of the specific
 ever, used. Local anesthetics are typically classified
technique. Large, blunt, or barbed needles may
 according to their approximate duration of action
injure nerves, vessels, and soft tissue. Whenever
 into drugs with short (lidocaine, mepivacaine, pri-
resistance is felt while advancing a needle in the
locaine), intermediate (articaine) and long (bupiva-
nn oa) uaro e ra aioadsa 'sanss
caine, ropivacaine) duration (Table 10.1).
nerve block, rostral inferior alveolar nerve block),
Most local anesthetic solutions possess some
the needle should be withdrawn slightly and then
degree of vasoactivity (vasodilation) that in turn
advanced slowly at a different angle. If more than
may cause an increase in their absorption rate, a
two attempts are necessary to engage into a
decrease in their duration of effect, and an increase
foramen, the needle should be replaced, as the tip
 in the anesthetic plasma concentration and potential
may be deformed and capable of injuring the soft
for toxicity (Malamed 2004). To offsetthe vasodilatory
tissues. When multiple blocks
are
delivered,
action and therefore prolong their duration of action,
needles should be changed for each injection.
vasoconstrictor drugs (e.g epinephrine) can be
If positive aspiration (the presence of blood into
added to the local anesthetic solution.
the syringe) is seen, then the local anesthetic
 Considering that lidocaine and bupivacaine are
solution should not be injected, the needle should
the most commonly used agents in veterinary den-
Table 10.1 Onset, duration of effect, biotransformation, and excretion of common local anesthetics (Malamed 2004;
Rochette 2005; Baart and Brand 2009).
Onset
 Duration (pulpal
Duration (soft tissue
Agent
(min)
anesthesia) (min)
anesthesia) (min)
Biotransformation
Excretion
Short
Lidocaine 2%
2-3
5-10
60-120
Liver
Kidneys
Mepivacaine 2%
1-2
40
120-180
Liver
Kidneys
Prilocaine 4%
2-4
40-60
120-240
Liver/lungs
Kidneys
Intermediate
 Articaine 4%
1-3
60-75
180-360
Plasma/liver
Kidneys
Long
Bupivacaine 0.5%
6-10
90-180
240-540
Liver
Kidneys
The Oral Cavity  121
eoeuap oaueeidng pue auieop!l jo sasop sixol pue saesop papuauoai paus!gnd uanai jo salduexg Zol ajel
nerve blocks in dogs and cats.
mL per site
Total max dose 
ml per site
Total max dose 
Toxic dose
 Anesthetic agent 
(cat)
(mg kg-') (cat)
(8op)
(mg kg-') (dog)
(mg kg-')
Reference
Bupivacaine 0.5% 0.1-0.3
2
0.1-0.5
2
 Beckman and
Legendre 2002
Bupivacaine
0.25-0.50
0.25-0.5
Lantz 2003
0.25-0.5%
Lidocaine 2%
0.25
2
2-6
Rochette 2005
Bupivacaine 0.5% 0.25
1-2
Up to 1mL in
1-2
Rochette 2005
large dogs 
Lidocaine 2% and 0.2-0.25
1 (of each)
1-3.5 kg:
1-3.5 kg: 1 (of 
Beckman 2006
bupivacaine
of the
0.2-0.25 of
each)
0.5% (1:1)
combined 
the combined
4-50 kg:
solution
solution
decreasing
4-50 kg:
doses from 1
0.25-1.6 of
(of each) to
the combined
0.3 (of each)
solution
Bupivacaine 0.5%
0.1-0.3
1
0.1-0.5
2
4
Reuss-Lamky 2007
Lidocaine 2%
0.1-0.3
2.5
0.1-0.5
5
10
Reuss-Lamky 2007
Bupivacaine 0.5%0.1-0.3
1.5-2
0.1-1.0
1.5-2
3.8 IV (cat),
Lemke 2007
4.3-5.0
(8op) AI
Lidocaine 2%
0.1-0.3
6-8
0.1-1.0 
6-8
12.0 IV (cat),
Lemke 2007
20.8-22.0
IV (dog)
Lidocaine
>
9>
10 (dog).
Carpenter and 
6 (cat)
Marretta 2007
Bupivacaine
<1
<2
'(8op) E
 Carpenter and 
2 (cat)
Marretta 2007
Lidocaine 2%
1-2
Skarda and
 Tranquilli 2007a
Lidocaine 1-2%
0.1-0.3
Skarda and
or bupivacaine
Tranquilli 2007b
0.25-0.5%
Any agent
0.1-0.2
2
0.1-0.4
2
Woodward 2008
tistry and maxillofacial surgery, reported recom-
 0.2-0.8 mL in dogs (or more in very large animals)
 mended doses vary significantly (Table 10.2). Total
(Beckman 2006).
local anesthetic dose should be based on body-
weight and the number of anticipated sites that
need to be blocked. If multiple sites need to be
Maxillary nerve block
blocked, care should be taken to ensure that toxic
 doses are not reached. In smaller patients, when
Functional and clinical anatomy
the calculated volume is too small, the local anes-
thetic solution can be diluted with 0.9% saline
Knowledge of the regional anatomy is indispensable
(Beckman 2006; Reuss-Lamky 2007). On average
if the anesthetist is to place the local anesthetic solu-
0.2-0.25mL are used for each block in cats and
 tion accurately and avoid injuring nearby structures.
122  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Infraorbital n.
Caudal superior alveolar nn.
Middle superior alveolar nn.
Incisivomaxillary n.
Maxillary n.
Rostral superior alveolar nn.
Zygomatic n.
Caudalnasaln.
Major palatine n.
Minor palatine n.
Pterygopalatine n.
External nasal nn.
Internal nasal nn.
Superior labial nn.
Figure 10.1 Distribution of the maxillary nerve and its oral branches in the dog.
The majority of the sensory innervation of the
then courses rostrally on the dorsal surface of the
teeth, bone, and soft tissue of the oral cavity and the
medial pterygoid muscle (Figure 10.1). In the ros-
facial skin is provided by the right and left
tral part of the pterygopalatine fossa it leaves off
trigeminal nerves (V) (Jayne 1898; Evans 
and
the zygomatic and the pterygopalatine nerves and
Kitchell 1993; Dyce and Molenaar 1996; Done et al.
continues as the infraorbital nerve into the maxil-
2009). The motor branch of the trigeminal
.nerve
lary foramen and the infraorbital canal (Figure 10.1).
(the mandibular branch, V) supplies the muscles of
It exits from the infraorbital foramen on the side of
mastication and other muscles of the region. The
the face (Figures 10.1, 10.2a, e, f, and 10.3a, e, f). In
three branches of the sensory root [ophthalmic (V),
its course, the infraorbital nerve gives off the caudal
maxillary (V), and mandibular (V) branches]
superior alveolar, middle superior alveolar, and the
supply the skin of the face and the mucous mem-
 incisivomaxillary nerves (with the rostral superior
branes of eyes, nose, and oral cavity, except for the
alveolar
nerves) to supply the maxillary teeth
pharynx and the base of the tongue. Those struc-
(Figure 10.1). The caudal superior alveolar branches
tures are innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve
 arise from the maxillary nerve in the pterygopala-
(IX) that serves the pharynx and the base of the
tine fossa. They run in a rostroventral direction and
tongue, and the vagus nerve (X) that serves the
enter the alveolar canals via the alveolar foramina
pharynx. These branches come off as the trigeminal
of the maxilla to supply the roots of the molar teeth
  ' g a  sa a
(Figure 10.1). The middle superior alveolar branches
rostromedial aspect of the petrosal bone. The max-
 originate from the infraorbital nerve in the pterygo-
illary branch runs through the round foramen, the
 palatine fossa in cats and within the infraorbital
alar canal, and the rostral alar foramen into the
canal in dogs. They supply the fourth premolar
caudal portion of the pterygopalatine fossa, and
tooth (and possibly the third premolar tooth
The Oral Cavity  123
(a)
(b)
(c)
MMF
CMF
MTu
(d)
IOC
MPF
CP
OF
ZA
MaF
MTu
PB-
VasN
(e)
(f)
CP
ZA
MxF
CP
PB
MMF
CMF
asN
1
(d) Medial side of the left caudal mandible. Dash line: imaginary line between the angular process and the last molar tooth,
useful to locate the mandibular foramen. (e) Lateral view. (f) Rostral view. AP: angular process of the mandible; CMF: caudal
mental foramen; CP: coronoid process of the mandible; IOC: infraorbital canal; IOF: infraorbital foramen; MaF: mandibular
foramen; MMF: middle mental foramen; MPF: major palatine foramen; MTu: maxillary tuberosity; MxF: maxillary foramen; 
in cats) (Figure 10.1) (Godinho and Getty 1975;
apically to the incisive teeth. It leaves off the rostral
Rosenzweig 1993). Just before the infraorbital nerve
exits through the infraorbital foramen, located
tooth in cats and the first three premolar teeth in
dorsal to the distal root of the third premolar tooth
dogs, as well as to the canine tooth and the ipsilat-
(Figures 10.2e and 10.3e), it gives off the incisivo-
 eral incisor teeth both in dogs and cats.
maxillary nerve (Figure 10.1) (Godinho and Getty
The infraorbital nerve, after rurring into the hom-
1975; Gracis 1998, 1999). This nerve enters the inci-
onymous canal, exits from the infraorbital foramen
sivomaxillary canal, and runs rostrally and dorsally
and divides into external and internal nasal branches
in the width of the maxillary bone. At the apex of
 and superior labial branches, supplying the soff
the canine tooth it curves ventrally and medially,
tissues of the rostral portion of the face (Figure 10.1).
124  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
(c)
IOF
MPE
MTu
(d)
MXF
MTL
CF
10C
PB
VOM
IOF
MaF
VasN
(e)
(f)
VOM
IOF.
OF
MXH
ZA
OC
B
MME
MT
P
VasN
Figure 10.3 Feline skull.(a) Dorsoventral view. (b) Palatal surface of the upper jaw. (c) Lateral side of the right rostral mandible.
(d) Medial side of the right caudal mandible. Interrupted line: imaginary line between the angular process and the last molar
tooth, useful to locate the mandibular foramen. (e) Lateral view.(f) Rostral view. AP: angular process of the mandible; CMF:
caudal mental foramen; CP: coronoid process of the mandible; IOC: infraorbital canal; IOF: infraorbital foramen; MaF:
foramen; PB: pterygoid bone; RMF: rostral mental foramen; VasN: vascular notch (mandible); VOM: ventral orbital margin;
ZA: zygomatic arch.
(Figure 10.1). For these reasons, this block is useful
Distribution of local anesthesia
o no woon Aue uo sampaond Sunoad uaum
and analgesia
soft and hard tissues (e.g. maxillectomy proce-
dures) of the ipsilateral maxilla.
By placing an anesthetic solution in the pterygo-
palatine fossa, near the maxillary foramen, it is
 possible to anesthetize all maxillary teeth and asso-
Equipment
ciated soft tissues, including the skin of the nose,
cheek, and upper lip. The palate and the lateral
 Disposable or sterile gloves as needed;
 aspect of the nasal mucosa of the same side (the
local anesthetic solution;
medial aspect is served by the ethmoidal nerve, a
1.0-2.5mL aspirating syringes;
branch of V) are also likely desensitized, as
 25-27-gauge, 25mm long needle (dogs; giant
the pterygopalatine nerve branches from the max-
size dogs may require longer needles); and
illary nerve just before the maxillary foramen
 27-30-gauge, 12mm long needle (cats).
The Oral Cavity 125
Note that the distance between the cutaneous
palate or with a slight medial direction, with the
surface or the mucosal surface and the maxillary
bevel directed rostrally. Depth of insertion varies
nerve is approximately 1.5-2 cm in medium size 
between 5 and 10 mm in cats and up to 25-30 mm
a Auas y 'sies u u I u ssa pue soop
 in dogs, depending on the size of the patient. Once
distance exists between the infraorbital foramen
in place, next to the maxillary nerve area, aspira-
and the pterygopalatine fossa.
tion is performed to avoid inadvertent intravas-
cular injection, and the local anesthetic solution is
injected slowly. In some patients, the correct angle
Technique (Table 10.3)
of insertion of the needle may be difficult to obtain
because of the limited possibility to extend the
Anatomic landmarks
mandible. Bending the needle before introduction
may predispose it to breakage and is therefore not
The maxillary nerve is blocked at its distal end,
recommended. Puncturing the zygomatic salivary
right before it enters the maxillary foramen, in the
gland during this block is possible or even likely.
rostral portion of the pterygopalatine fossa. The
nerve runs close to the maxillary artery medial to
Subzygomatic approach
the zygomatic arch, ventral to the ocular globe,
The maxillary nerve block may also be performed
 dorsomedial to the zygomatic salivary gland, and
using a transcutaneous approach, with insertion of
dorsal to the maxillary tuberosity and the maxil-
the needle between the caudal margin of the max-
lary molar teeth. The deep facial vein can also be
illa and the coronoid process of the mandible,
found in the vicinity (Done et al. 2009), and there-
below the rostroventral border of the zygomatic
fore extreme caution needs to be taken not to
arch (Figure 10.5).
pumcture it.
These structures can be easily palpated on the
side of the face, just below the ocular globe
Step-by-step procedure
(Figures 10.2e, 10.3e, and 10.5). The needle is
inserted perpendicularly to the skin surface and
Three techniques (one intra- and two extraoral
advanced a short distance (dictated by the size of
 approaches) have been described. They all involve
the patient), to reach the pterygopalatine fossa and
blind placement of the anesthetic solution into the
the maxillary nerve. Aspiration is performed to
pterygopalatine fossa:
avoid inadvertent intravascular injection, and the
local anesthetic solution is injected slowly.
Maxillary tuberosity
Subzygomatic
Infraorbital approach
 Infraorbital
A third option for delivering the maxillary nerve
block is through the infraorbital canal itself
Maxillary tuberosity approach
(Figure 10.6).
The first technique, similar to the so-called high
This technique involves insertion of a thin,
au sarmban 'sueumu u pasn yoeoidde Auisoraqni
needle (12 mm long in cats, up to 25-30 mm long in
introduction of the needle intraorally, behind the
dogs) through the skin of the upper lip or the ves-
last molar tooth and the maxillary tuberosity, which
tibular mucosa over the infraorbital foramen,
is the thin caudal margin of the maxilla covering
entering the homonymous canal and exiting from
the roots of the last molar tooth (Figures 10.2a, b, e,
the maxillary foramen, to inject the solution in
10.3a, b, e, and 10.4) (Malamed 2004).
the pterygopalatine fossa, next to the maxillary
With the animal under general anesthesia or
nerve (see also the description of the infraorbital
deeply sedated, and its mouth kept open using a
nerve block). Some authors suggest considering
gag, the operator's nondominant hand is intro-
the medial canthus of the eye as the point of
duced into the patient's mouth and the maxillary
reference for the caudal extent of the infraorbital
tuberosity is palpated. A short needle is then
canal (Woodward 2008). Because of the long dis-
inserted between the operator's finger and the
tance to be covered, however, there may be a high
bone, as perpendicularly as possible to the hard
risk of injuring the neurovascular structures
126
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Table 10.3 Nerve blocks of the oral cavity and corresponding anesthetized nerves and anatomic structures.
Technique
Anesthetized nerves
Anesthetized structures
Maxillary nerve block (high
Maxillary nerve, infraorbital nerve,
lpsilateral maxilla (i.e. teeth, bone and soft
tuberosity approach)
caudal, middle and superior alveolar
tissues), skin of the nose, cheek, upper
dental nerves., incisivomaxillary nerve
lip. Possibty ipsifaterat hard and soft
and rostral superior alveolar dental
palate (pterygopatatine nerve), and nasa?
nerves. Possibty pterygopatatine nerve
mucosa (caudal nasaf nerve)
and caudat nasal nerve
 Maxillary nerve block
Same as above
Same as above
(transcutaneous approach)
Maxillary nerve block [infraorbital
Same as above
Same as above
approach (transcutaneous or
transmucosal)}
 Caudal palatine nerve block 
Pterygopalatine nerve, minor and major
Bone and soft tissue of ipsilateral hard and
(high tuberosity approach)
palatine nerves, accessory palatine
soft palate. Possibty ipsilateraf maxilfa (i.e.
nerve, caudal nasal. Possibty maxilfary
teeth, bone and soft tissues), skin of the
nerve, infraorbitat nerve, caudat, middle
nose, cheek, upper lip (maxiary nerve,
and rostrat superior afveofar dentat
infraorbitat nerve, caudat, midafe and
nerves, incisivomaxiary nerve
rostrat superior atveofar dentat nerves,
incisivomaxilfary nerve).
 Caudal palatine nerve block
Same as above
Same as above
(transcutaneous approach)
Caudal palatine nerve block
Same as above
Same as above
[infraorbital approach
(transcutaneous or
transmucosal}1
Rostral (major) palatine nerve
 Major palatine nerve
Bone and soft tissue of ipsilateral hard
block
palate
Caudal infraorbital nerve block
Infraorbital nerve, middle and rostral
Ipsilateral premolar, canine and incisor
(intraoral approach)
superior alveolar dental nerves,
teeth and associated soft tissues, skin of
incisivomaxil lary nerve, external nasal,
the muzzle and the upper lip
internal nasal and superior labial nerves
Caudal infraorbital nerve block
Same as above
Same as above
(transcutaneous approach)
Rostral infraorbital nerve block
Infraorbital nerve, incisivomaxillary
Ipsilateral third to first premolar teeth,
(intraoral approach)
nerve, rostral superior alveolar dental
 canine and incisor teeth and associated
nerves, external nasal, internal nasal
 soft tissues, skin of the muzzle and the
and superior labial nerves
upper lip
Rostral infraorbital nerve block
Same as above
Same as above
(transcutaneous approach)
Caudal inferior alveolar nerve
Inferior alveolar nerve, caudal, middle
lpsilateral mandibular molar, premolar,
 block (intraoral approach)
and rostral mental nerve, incisive nerve
canine and incisor teeth and associated
Possibty linguat nerve and myrohyoid
labial tissues, rostral lower lip, rostral
nerve
intermandibular tissues. Possibty tissues
lingual to the mandible, ffoor of the
mouth and rostrar two-thirds of the
tongue (linguat nerve), the skin of the
rower lip and cheek, and the cauda?
intermandibutar region (myrohyoid nerve)
Caudal inferior alveolar nerve
Same as above
Same as above
block (transcutaneous
approach)
The Oral Cavity  127
Table 10.3 (conto).
Technique
Anesthetized nerves
Anesthetized structures
Mental nerve block (intraoral
Middle mental nerve
lpsilateral rostral lower lip, rostral
 and transcutaneous approach)
intermandibular tissues
Rostral inferior alveolar nerve
Rostral portion of the inferior alveolar
lpsilateral mandibular first and second
 block (intraoral and 
nerve, middle and rostral mental
 premolar, canine and incisor teeth, and 
 transcutaneous approach)
nerves. Possibty caudat mentaf nerve
labial soft tissues, rostral lower lip, rostral
 intermandibular tissues
Splash block
Terminal nerve endings at the
Soft and hard tissues at the surgical site
injection site
(i.e. alveolus)
Infiltration
Terminal nerve endings at the injection
Bone, soft tissues, apical and pulpal tissues
site and at the apex of the tooth
of a single tooth 
Intraosseous injection
Terminal nerve endings at the injection
Bone, soft tissues, apical and pulpal tissues
site and at the apex of the tooth
of a limited area or a single tooth
Intraseptal injection 
Terminal nerve endings at the injection
Bone, soft tissues, apical and pulpal tissues
site and at the apex of the tooth
of a limited area or a single tooth
Periodontal ligament injection
Terminal nerve endings at the injection
 Bone, soft tissues, apical and pulpal tissues
site and at the apex of the tooth
of a single tooth
Intrapulpal injection
Terminal nerve endings at the
Pulp tissues of a single tooth
injection site
(a)
(b)
 pasn si atis ainpund awes aul '(g) jen ayt pue (e) sop ayi u! (ypeoidde Aisoiagni ysty) ypolg aaau Aiellxen t'ol aunsi
the caudal palatine nerve block (high tuberosity approach).
contained in the infraorbital canal, and other tech-
Clinical tips
niques may be preferable when caudal teeth need
to be anesthetized.
 In the subzygomatic approach, if a needle is intro-
Overinsertion or underinsertion, and
subse-
duced too deeply, the tip may contact the lateral
quently ineffective administration of the anesthetic
side (plate) of the pterygoid bone. Should this
drug, are possible complications with any of the
occur, the needle must be withdrawn for a short
described maxillary nerve block techniques.
distance before injecting the solution.
12 8  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
! auy xapui aul ypeoidde snoauenosuen e suisn (ue) ien ayn pue (tel sop ayi u! yooig aaiau Aiellxe  s'o t auni
placed over the ventral margin of the rostral portion of the zygomatic arch. The needle is inserted in this location, perpendicular
to the skin. The location corresponds roughly to the lateral canthus of the eye. The same puncture site is used in the caudal
palatine nerve block (transcutaneous approach).
The Oral Cavity  129
(b)
(a)
(c)
Nasal
Figure 10.6  Infraorbital nerve block. The infraorbital foramen is on the lateral side of the maxilla, slightly rostroventral to the 
eye, dorsal to the distal root of the maxillary third premolar tooth. The thumb of the free hand is placed on the foramen, and the
needle inserted below it to engage into the foramen itself. (a) Dog (transmucosal approach) (b) and (c) Cat (transcutaneous
anau aujeled jepnen aui pue (ypeoidde lelqioeju!) ypolg ajau Aiel!xew aui joj pasn ane salis anpund awes ayl (ypeoidde
block (infraorbital approach).
Caudal and rostral palatine nerve blocks
tine nerve (Figure 10.1). It enters the nasal cavity
through the sphenopalatine foramen in the ptery-
Functional and clinical anatomy
gopalatine fossa, and supplies the nasal mucosa of
the ventral part of the nasal cavity, maxillary sinus,
The mucosa of the soft and hard palates of each
and palate (Dyce and Molenaar 1996).
side is innervated by the minor, the accessory, and
the major palatine nerves (Evans and Kitchell 1993;
Dyce and Molenaar 1996; Done et al. 2009). The
Distribution of local anesthesia
minor and major palatine nerves arise from the
and analgesia
pterygopalatine nerve, which in turn originates
from the maxillary nerve in the pterygopalatine
fossa (Figure 10.1). The minor palatine nerve runs
gopalatine fossa, which following the human
around the rostral edge of the medial pterygoid
nomenclature, may be called a caudal palatine
muscle and supplies the soft palate. The major pal-
nerve block, both the hard and the soft palatal
atine nerve gives off the accessory palatine nerve,
mucosa (as well as the nasal mucosa) will be desenr-
which innervates the caudal portion of the hard
sitized. The entire ipsilateral maxilla is likely to
palate. Then it enters the palatine canal and exits
be anesthetized, as the anesthetic solution likely
through the major palatine foramen on the oral
diffuses around the maxillary nerve too.
side of the palatine process. The major palatine
If the major palatine nerve is blocked through an
nerve runs rostrally with the major palatine artery
intraoral approach (rostral or major palatine nerve
to supply the mucosa of the hard palate. The caudal
block), only the mucosa of the hard palate of
nasal nerve is the continuation of the pterygopala-
thiat side will be desensitized. This block does not
130  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
provide anesthesia to the dental pulp of the
Maxillary tuberosity approach
maxillary teeth.
The maxillary tuberosity approach is achieved by
A bilateral palatine nerve block may be useful
inserting the needle intraorally through the mucosa
when performing surgical procedures on the palate
 caudal to the last molar and the maxillary tuber
hard and soft tissues.
 osity, as perpendicularly as possible to the hard
palate (Figure 10.4).
Equipment
Subzygomatic approach
Disposable or sterile gloves as needed;
To use an extraoral subzygomatic approach, the
local anesthetic solution;
patient is placed in lateral recumbency and the
1.0-2.5 mL aspirating syringes; and
needle is inserted for a short distance perpendicu-
25-30-gauge, 12-25 mm long needle (depend-
larly to the skin, between the caudal margin of the
ing on patient's size).
maxilla and the coronoid process of the mandible,
ventral to the rostral portion of the zygomatic arch
Note that, as described for the maxillary nerve
(Figure 10.5).
block, the rostral palatine nerve block requires
extra short, small gauge needles.
Infraorbital approach
As previously explained for the maxillary nerve
 block (infraorbital approach), the insertion of the
Technique (Table 10.3)
needle through the infraorbital canal to reach the
pterygopalatine fossa (Figure 10.6) is not advised
because of the high risk of injuring the infraor-
Anatomic landmarks
bital neurovascular structures within the canal.
To provide local anesthesia to the soft and hard
Once the needle is in place, aspiration is per-
 palatal mucosa, the anesthetic solution should be
formed to avoid inadvertent intravascular injec-
inoculated in the pterygopalatine fossa in a loca-
tion, and the local anesthetic solution is injected
tion proximal to where the pterygopalatine nerve
slowly.
leaves the maxillary nerve, using a caudal pala-
tine nerve block. For the rostral or major palatine
Rostral or major palatine approach
nerve block the solution is placed at the major pal-
The hard palatal mucosa can also be desensitized
atine foramen, at the maxillopalatine suture,
by injecting the solution near the major palatine
midway between the palate midline and the
nerve as it exits from the major palatine foramen,
dental arcade, usually at the level of the mesial
using a rostral or major palatine nerve block
roots of the maxillary fourth premolar tooth in
(Figure 10.7)
 cats and the distal root of the same tooth in dogs
To perform this block, the patient should prefer-
(Figures 10.2b and 10.3b), even if some variation
ably be placed in dorsal recumbency and the
 in rostrocaudal position of the foramen is pos-
mouth opened. The needle is then advanced
sible. The foramen cannot be palpated because of
through the palatal mucosa midway between the
the marked thickness of the palatal mucosa.
midpalatal suture and the dental arcade, slightly
Therefore the solution is injected using only the
rostral to the mesial roots of the maxillary fourth
 described anatomic landmarks.
premolar tooth. The needle is angled 30-45°, and
advanced caudally to reach the foramen. The bevel
should be directed towards the bone. With the tip
Step-by-step procedure
of the needle next to the major palatine foramen,
There are four different approaches:
and after negative aspiration, the solution is inocu-
ou saonpoid uonnalul pidei se imois Aiaa paie
 Maxillary tuberosity
tissue pressure (visible as ischemia or whitening of
Subzygomatic
the soft tissues at the injection site), which may
Infraorbital
cause ischemic injury to the palatal soft tissue and
 Rostral or major palatine
cause localized pain when the anesthetic effect
The Oral Cavity   131
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.7  Rostral palatine nerve block. The needle is inserted through the palatine mucosa just rostral to the distal (a, dog)
and mesial (b, cat) roots of the maxillary fourth premolar tooth. The needle is advanced in a caudal direction.
wears off. Therefore, only a small amount of solu-
Infraorbital nerve block
tion should be injected (usually, 0.1 mL of solution
is used in small size animals, and 0.2-0.4 mL in
Functional and clinical anatomy
larger patients).
Clinical tips
The infraorbital nerve is the rostral continuation
of the maxillary nerve (Figure 10.1) (Evans
Because of their limited size, it is difficult (if not
and Kitchell 1993; Dyce and Molenaar 1996; Done
impossible and urmecessary) to insert needles into
 et al. 2009). Within the pterygopalatine fossa, the
the palatine foramen and canal, especially in cats and
maxillary nerve gives off the caudal superior
small dogs. Furthermore, damage to the nerve is a
alveolar nerves and, within the infraorbital canal,
possible complication when inserting a needle in
the middle superior alveolar nerves. These dental
such a restricted location (Baart and Brand 2009)
branches serve the caudal maxillary teeth.
Other techniques used in human patients to
Additionally, just before exiting the infraorbital
achieve anesthesia of specific palatal areas are the
foramen, the infraorbital nerve gives the incisivo-
nasopalatine nerve block (anterior third of the
maxillary nerve that, with its anterior superior
palate), local infiltration of the palate (soft tissues
 alveolar branches, supplies all premolar teeth ros-
in the immediate vicinity of the injection), the
tral to the fourth premolar tooth, as well as the
anterior middle superior alveolar nerve block
canine tooth and the incisor teeth of the ipsilateral
(maxillary incisor, canine and premolar teeth and
maxilla (Figure 10.1). The incisivomaxillary nerve
their gingival and corresponding palatal tissues),
enters the incisivomaxillary canal through an open-
and the palatal approach-anterior superior alve-
 ing located on the medial side of the infraorbital
olar (maxillaryincisor and canine teeth and
canal (Gracis 1998, 1999). In cats, the opening is
(sanssn [euoponad pue [eeled lupuodsanos
dloser to the maxillary foramen than it is to the
(Malamed 2004; Baart and Brand 2009). These have
mfraorbital foramen (Jayne 1898; Rosenzweig
 not been described in veterinary patients, but could
1993). Finally, once out of the infraorbital foramen,
have potential application.
the infraorbital nerve divides into external nasal,
132
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
 internal nasal, and superior labial branches, sup-
where a clear bony ridge (the lateral wall of the
plying the soft tissues of the external nose and
foramen) may be palpated (Figure 10.3a, e, f).
upper lip (Figure 10.1).
Step-by-step procedure
This is a basic level nerve block as the land-
Distribution of Tocal anesthesia
and analgesia
marks are very clear and easy to find, and accu-
rate placement of the solution can be confirmed
a Araanean e un juaaeua jnanos Aq
This block is useful when dental procedures are
foramen. The thumb of the nondominant hand
performed on any maxillary tooth, or when major
is placed on the foramen, and the needle
surgical procedures on the hard and soft tissues of
inserted underneath it to engage into the
the ipsilateral maxilla are performed. The number
foramen itself (Figure 10.6). The depth at which
of teeth and extent of tissue affected by the block
the needle is inserted will determine the
depends on the volume of the injected anesthetic
solution and the location of the needle tip (or the
placement of either a rostral or a caudal infraor-
bital nerve block (note that this difference may
distance at which the needle is inserted into the
be more didactic than practical).
infraorbital canal). It needs to be noted thiat
● In dogs, the long axis of the needle should be
placement of the anesthetic agent outside the infra-
kept parallel to the gingival margin or the palate
orbital foramen will only anesthetize the skin of the
(Figure 10.6a). The canal is only about 1-2cm
muzzle and the upper lip (Woodward 2008).
long (and even shorter in brachycephalic dogs),
so overly long needles are not necessary
(Figure 10.2a, e). If the anesthetic solution is
Equipment
deposited caudal to, or at the level of, the maxil-
lary foramen, the entire ipsilateral dental quad-
 Disposable or sterile gloves as needed;
rant will be anesthetized. If the fourth premolar
 local anesthetic solution;
tooth (or any more mesial tooth) needs to be
 1.0-2.5-mL aspirating syringes; and
anesthetized, the needle should either be inserted
 25-30-gauge needles.
at least midway into the infraorbital canal in
order to achieve a caudal infraorbital nerve block,
Note that needle length is dictated by the size
of the patient and the nerves (teeth) to be anes-
or the amount of solution deposited at the infra-
orbital foramen will need to be large enough to
thetized.
lonadns aipp au yoean pue Aepnen aienon
alveolar nerves (Reuss-Lamky 2007).
Technigue (Table 10.3)
In case any more mesial tooth is to be anesthe-
tized (e.g. from the third premolar tooth to the
first incisor of the same side), a rostral infraor-
Anatomic landmarks
bital nerve block can be performed. A short
The infraorbital foramen is on the lateral side of the
needle may be used as it should just engage
maxilla, rostroventrally to the eye, dorsal to the
into the infraorbital foramen, where the inci-
distal root of the maxillary third premolar tooth
sivomaxillary nerve leaves the infraorbital
(Figures 10.1 and 10.2a, e, f). In dogs, it can nor-
 nerve and before it enters the incisivomaxillary
mally be palpated through the skin or vestibular
canal. Once the needle is in place, aspiration is
mucosa at mid-height of the maxilla. The large
performed to avoid intravascular injection, as
infraorbital neurovascular bundle may also be pal-
positive aspiration may be relatively common.
pated by gently rurning a finger in a dorsoventral
The solution is then slowly injected. Gentle
direction on the lateral surface of the maxilla. Once
pressure should be exerted over the injection
located, it can be followed caudally where it exits
site during the procedure and for 30-60 seconds
from the infraorbital foramen. In cats, the foramen
after withdrawing the syringe to increase the
is just ventral to the ventral margin of the orbit,
volume of solution entering into the canal.
The Oral Cavity 133
Clinical tips
mucosa of the intraosseous part of the external ear
canal (Evans and Kitchell 1993; Dyce and Molenaar
Some authors believe that elevating the head of the
1996; Done et al. 2009). Its major branches are from
patient and maintaining digital pressure over the
caudal to rostral: the masticator nerve (to the ros-
foramen during the administration of a rostral
     r 
tral belly of the digastricus, the masseter, and the
deep temporal muscles), the lateral and medial
caudal migration of the solution into the infraor-
pterygoid nerves (to the homonymous muscles),
bital canal and achieve a caudal block without
the tensor tympani nerve (to the tensor tympani
inserting the needle any further into the canal
muscle of the malleus), the tensor veli palatini
(Reuss-Lamky 2007)
nerve (to the homonymous muscle of the soff
-p h sate uao di raddn iuo au 'sies u
palate), the buccal nerve (to the skin and mucosa of
cult to insert the needle through the vestibular
the cheek), the auricolotemporal nerve (to the
mucosa at the correct angle. For this reason, in this
external acoustic meatus, the tympanic membrane,
species an extraoral transcutaneous approach is
the parotid salivary gland, the pirma, the skin of
 preferred over an intraoral approach (Figure 10.6b,
the side of the face), the inferior alveolar nerve (to
c). The index of the free hand is placed on the ven-
the mandibular teeth, the rostral lip, and the rostral
tral margin of the orbit, and the thumb underneath
 intermandibular region), the mylohyoid nerve (to
it, on the bony prominence made by the junction
of the maxillary process of the zygomatic bone
the rostral belly of the digastricus muscle, the skin
of the lower lip and cheek, the mylohyoideus
and the maxillary bone, where the foramen is
located (Figure 10.6b). A 27-30-gauge, 12mm
muscle, and the caudal intermandibular region),
 needle should be introduced aiming ventrally at
and the lingual nerve (sensory to the rostral two-
thirds of the tongue, the buccal mucosa of the
about 45° angle (Figure 10.6c) and for a very short
isthmus of the fauces, and the sublingual mucosa)
distance (2-3mm) or slightly more in depth in
(Figure 10.8).
case
ea maxillary nerve block (infraorbital
approach) is to be achieved. The infraorbital canal
The mylohyoid nerve and the lingual nerve
may arise directly from the inferior alveolar nerve,
in cats is very short (approximately 4 mm long)
which leaves the mandibular nerve at the level of
(Figure 10.3a, e). Therefore, if the syringe is not
 the pterygopalatine fossa, on the lateral aspect
kept with the correct dorsoventral angle, it is pos-
of the medial pterygoid muscle. The inferior
sible to direct the needle in any direction and
alveolar nerve then runs ventrorostrally, and
injure the ocular globe. Interestingly, the infraor-
enters the mandibular foramen on the medial side
bital canal was found to be double in 12.5% of 250
of the mandibular ramus (Figures 10.2d and
feline skulls in one study, with a smaller dorsal
10.3d). It runs inside the mandibular canal, ventral
and a larger ventral foramen (Jayne 1898). If the
to the roots of the teeth, giving off caudal, middle
size of the foramina makes it difficult to insert the
and rostral mandibular alveolar dental branches
needle, then a maxillary nerve block with either a
(Figure 10.8). Rostrally, it supplies three terminal
maxillary tuberosity or a subzygomatic approach
branches, the caudal, middle, and rostral mental
may be performed instead.
nerves，
exiting
through the
ehomonymous
foramina on the lateral side of the mandible
(Figures 10.2c, e, f, and 10.3c, e, f) and supplying
Caudal inferior alveolar nerve block
the rostrallower lip and therostral intermandibular
region (Figure 10.8).
Functional and clinical anatomy
The mandibular branch (V,) of the trigeminal nerve
Distribution of local anesthesia
(V) is motor to the muscles of mastication and the
and analgesia
mylohyoideus muscle, and sensory to the hard and
soft tissues of the mandible (including the mandib-
Using this technique, any mandibular tooth, rostral
ular teeth, the buccal mucosa, and the lower lip),
lower lip and the rostral intermandibular region
the tongue, part of the skin of the head, and the
will be anesthetized. Desensitization of the soft
134  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Mandibular n.
Masticator n.
Pterygoid n.
Buccal n.
Chorda tympani
Rostral mental n.
Mylohyoid n.
Rostral alveolar nn.
Caudal and middle
Middle mental n.
Lingual n. Inferior alveolar n.
alveolar nn.
Caudal mental n.
Figure 10.8  Distribution of the mandibular nerve and its oral branches in the dog.
tissue and periosteum of the lingual side of the
 midway through an imaginary line drawn between
mandible, floor of the mouth, and rostral two-
the angular process of the mandible and the last
thirds of the tongue may develop as well if the local
molar tooth, from 0.5cm (cats and small dogs) to
anesthetic solution diffuses to the lingual nerve.
 2 cm (large dogs) dorsal to the facial vascular notch,
a slight concavity of the ventral margin of the man-
dibular ramus that isjust rostral to the angular pro-
Equipment
cess (Figures 10.2d, e, and 10.3d, f) (Martinez et al.
 2009). In cats and some dogs the notch may be very
Disposable or sterile gloves as needed;
shallow and difficult to identify. In this case, differ-
local anesthetic solution;
1.0-2.5-mL aspirating syringes;
ent anatomic landmarks can be used to locate the
foramen.
Some authors
suggest
drawing
25-27-gauge, 25 mm long needle (dogs; giant
an
imaginary vertical line from the lateral canthus of
size dogs may require longer needles); and
the eye and the midpoint of the zygomatic arch to
27-30-gauge, 12-16mm long needle (cats).
the ventral aspect of the mandible (Beckman and
 Legendre 2002; Rochette 2005). The puncture site is
Note that, in dogs, a short to long needle may be
used to reach the mandibular foramen, both with
located on the medial aspect of the mandible.
 intraoral and extraoral approaches.
Step-by-step procedure
Technigue (Table 10.3)
 Intraoral and extraoral techniques may be used to
Anatomic landmarks
administer the caudal inferior alveolar nerve block.
The local anesthetic solution should be located
Intraoral approach
next to the mandibular foramen, on the medial side
When an intraoral approach is chosen, the mouth
 of the mandible, ventral to the attachment of the
 of the patient is kept wide open (a mouth gag can
temporalis muscle and rostral to the belly of medial
be used) and the tongue displaced to the contralat-
pterygoid muscle. The foramen can be found
eral side (Figure 10.9).
The Oral Cavity  135
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.9  Caudal inferior alveolar nerve block (intraoral approach) in the dog (a) and the cat (b). The mandibular foramen can
be palpated with a finger of the free hand. The needle is advanced through the mucosa medial to the mandible, at the level of the
engipuew au yoeai oi ssaoid jenue ayi spiemo lepnesouan papap ag pinous aaau aui yoot eow engue jse
foramen.
The mandibular foramen can be palpated with a
the ventral margin of the mandible, at the level of
finger of the nondominant hand. The needle is then the facial vascular notch that is located rostral to the
advanced through the mucosa medial to the man-  angular process (Figures 10.2d, e, 10.3d, e, and
dible, at the level of the last mandibular molar 
10.10). The bevel of the needle is directed toward
tooth. The needle is directed ventrocaudally,
the bony surface and the tip of the needle is slowly
towards the angular proces, between the opera-
advanced medial to the mandible to the mandibular
tor's fingers and the mandibular bone, to reach the
foramen that is still being palpated intraorally. The
mandibular foramen. Negative aspiration should
-enol e ot paianp Aiasiaid aq snu ues dn aipau
be obtained before slowly injecting the anesthetic
tion over the foramen (and nerve). Aspiration is
solution. On palpation, the tissues at the injection
performed to avoid intravascular injection, and the
 site should swell while injecting.
solution is slowly injected. If performed correctly.
swelling of the tissues should be detected through
Extraoral (transcutaneous) approach
intraoral palpation of the injection site.
(Figure 10.10)
The animal is placed in lateral recumbency, with the
Clinical tips
side to be blocked uppermost and the patient's
mouth opened. A mouth gag should be placed to
It is very important to keep the needle next to the
prevent the operator's hand from being bitten if the
mandible and with the bevel directed toward the
patient abruptly closes its mouth. The nondominant
bony surface both with the intraoral and the extra
hand is placed intraorally, between the patient's
oral techniques so the nerve is exposed to the local
tongue and mandible. A finger is advanced ventro-
anesthetic solution.
caudally along the mandible until the foramen can
In cats, the mandibular foramen is very shallow
be palpated at the rostral margin of the medial
and relatively difficult to palpate (Figure 10.3d). It
 pterygoid muscle. Using the dominant hand, the
is therefore particularly important to know and
needle is then advanced medially, perpendicular to
identify the anatomic landmarks.
1 36  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.10  Caudal inferior alveolar nerve block (transcutaneous approach) in the dog (a) and the cat (b). A finger is pushed
aun e 'algipuew aui jo ujbiew jeuan ayi oi Ajeinoipuadiad paasui s! alpaau ayl uaweioj aui uo paeld pue Alepnesoua
level of the vascular notch, rostral to the angular process. The bevel is directed toward the bony surface, and the tip of the needle
advanced medial to the mandible, up to the foramen, under the operator's fingers.
Complications and how to avoid them
u raaosan Sup pue uoqnxa rae Aei
The lingual nerve may originate from the mandib-
humans, bilateral (caudal) inferior alveolar nerve
blocks are discouraged because of the lingual anes-
ular nerve just rostral to the inferior alveolar nerve,
thesia, as patients may self-injure the tongue,
 or directly from it (Figure 10.8). Therefore, it is pos-
 and because they may feel unable to swallow and
sible that with the inferior alveolar nerve block, the
to enunciate well for a certain period of time
lingual nerve, and the chorda tympani (which joins
(Malamed 2004). Some authors suggest positioning
the lingual nerve shortly after it branches from the
small animal patients recovering from anesthesia
mandibular nerve) can be desensitized as well. In
in sternal recumbency, to preclude the tongue
this case, as the lingual nerve conveys tactile and
deviation expected when the patient is in lateral
pain sensation (as well as thermal sensation and
taste) from the rostral two-thirds of the tongue,
recumbency, and therefore avoid lingual trauma
(Beckman 2006). Appropriate assistance during the
self-inflicted chewing injuries may be possible in
recovery period is warranted.
pears. However, this is a rather rare event, possibly
because the lingual motility, regulated by the lin-
 gual muscles that are innervated by the hypoglossal
Middle mental nerve block and rostral
nerve, is maintained. The author has seen postop-
inferior alveolar nerve block
erative, self-inflicted lingual injuries in only three
dogs out of hundreds of dogs and cats to which she
Functional and clinical anatomy
has administered inferior alveolar blocks in the
past 14 years. In all cases, bilateral caudal inferior
The mental nerves leave the inferior alveolar
alveolar nerve blocks had been administered.
nerve in the rostral portion of the mandible, and
Possibly, the solution may have been placed
exit through the caudal, middle, and rostral
improperly and/or have reached not only the lin-
mental foramina, to supply the rostral lower
gual nerve but also the hypoglossal nerve. In fact,
lip and the rostral intermandibular region
the tongue was subjectively considered to be
(Figure 10.8). The foramina are located on the lat-
scarcely movable for a short period of time, imme-
eral aspect of the mandible, ventral to the third
The Oral Cavity  137
premolar tooth, ventral to the mesial root of the 
dible than to the alveolar margin (Figure 10.2c)
second premolar tooth, and ventral to the first 
(Evans and Kitchell 1993; Martinez et al. 2009).
incisor tooth, respectively (Figures 10.2c, e, f, and
Sometimes, the caudal and the middle foramina
10.3c, e, f).
 q  m '    
a oh leaa nosod apaa ue u pao
distal root of the second premolar tooth.
Distribution of local anesthesia
In cats the middle mental foramen is located
and analgesia
equidistant between the third premolar tooth (the
first tooth after the canine tooth in cats) and the
Injecting an anesthetic solution next to the middle
canine tooth, under the lip frenulum, at mid-height
mental foramen (the largest mental foramen in
of the mandible (Figure 10.3c).
both dogs and cats) will block the middle mental
nerve and anesthetize most of the rostral labial soft
Step-by-step procedure
tissues of the lower jaw (Evans and Kitchell 1993;
Dyce and Molenaar 1996; Done et al. 2009). The
 Both the middle mental nerve and rostral inferior
 middle mental nerve block is useful when surgery
alveolar nerve blocks may be administered by
 is performed on the rostral lower lip.
inserting the needle through the skin or the mucosa
However, when it is necessary also to anesthetize
 over the mental foramen (Figure 10.11).
the rostral mandibular teeth, an inferior alveolar
The thumb of the nondominant hand is placed
 nerve block (either caudal or rostral) should be per-
against the lateral aspect of the body of the man-
formed. The mucogingival tissues lingual to the
dible, in the first premolar tooth region in dogs and
 mandible are not anesthetized with either a mental
the canine-third premolar interproximal area in
 or a rostral inferior alveolar nerve block. If this is
cats. It is then glided gently rostrocaudally to iden-
desired, a caudal inferior alveolar nerve block (and
tify the concavity of the middle mental foramen. If
concomitant lingual nerve block) should be per-
lateral radiographs of the rostral mandible are
formed instead.
available, the mental foramen may be located even
more definitively. The finger is kept on the foramen,
and the needle inserted through the skin or the
mucosa of the labial frenulum, advancing it in a
Equipment
caudal, slightly medial direction, to reach the
 Disposable or sterile gloves as needed;
foramen, between the finger and the bony surface.
local anesthetic solution;
The bevel should be kept towards the bone. With
1.0-2.5-mL aspirating syringes; and
the tip of the needle next to the foramen, aspiration
is performed and the solution injected slowly.
25-27-gauge, extra short or short needle.
For the rostral inferior alveolar nerve block, the
Note that if the needle is inserted into the foramen,
needle is inserted for a short distance into the mid-
dle mental foramen and the solution injected
it may be advisable to use a 27-30-gauge needle.
directly into the bony canal after negative aspira-
 tion. Gentle finger pressure is maintained over the
Technigue (Table 10.3)
injection site to ensure maximum caudal diffusion
of the solution into the canal.
Anatomic landmarks
Clinical tips
Normally only the middle mental nerve is blocked,
as the caudal and the rostral nerves are of very
In small sized patients, rostral inferior alveolar
small dimensions. In dogs, the middle mental
nerve block should not be attempted because of the
foramen is located ventral to the mesial root of the
high risk of iatrogenic damage to the middle mental
second premolar tooth, at the level of the canine's
nerve.
root apex, at mid-height of the mandibular body or
Entering the mental foramen for the rostral
  g      
nferior alveolar nerve block may be difficult
138  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Splash block
A "splash block" is the placement of anesthetic
solution directly into a surgical site, such as the
body wall after abdominal surgery, or the ovarian
ligaments during ovariohysterectomy (Table 10.3).
It can also be used in an emptied alveolus after
dental extraction (Woodward 2008) or in the resec-
tion site following mandibulectomy or maxillec-
tomy. The area is gently flushed and dried, and the
anesthetic solution dripped from a syringe. The
analgesic effect occurs by diffusion of the solution
into surrounding tissues (Charlier 2006; Reuss-
Lamky 2007). The use of a splash block requires the
addition of other technigues to achieve preemptive
 analgesia, given that the surgical procedure (dental
extraction) is performed prior to blockade. Splash
blocks may represent an alternative to specific
nerve blocks in case of technical difficulties,
unsuccessful primary blocking technique, contra-
indications to a more specific block, etc.
Infiltration anesthesia
Infiltration anesthesia is achieved by injecting the
anesthetic solution under the oral mucosa, just
above the apex of the tooth of interest (Table 10.3)
(Baart and Brand 2009). The syringe is held parallel
Figure 10.11  Middle mental nerve block and rostral inferior
to the long axis of the tooth, contact with the bone
nerve blocks in the dog. The thumb of the free hand is placed
against the lateral side of the body of the mandible, in the
or periosteum is avoided, and a small amount of
solution is injected slowly using an extra short,
first premolar tooth region in dogs and the canine-third
premolarinterproximal area incats.It isthenmovedgently
 27-gauge needle. In areas of thin cortical bone (e.g.
rostrocaudally to identify the concavity of the middle mental
 rostral mandible and maxilla), the anesthetic agent
foramen. The finger is kept on the foramen, and the needle
will diffuse through the bone and anesthetize the
inserted through the skin or the mucosa of the labial frenulum,
pulp tissues. Deposition of an anesthetic agent on
advancing it in a caudal, slightly medial direction, to reach the
the palatal side of the maxillary teeth (where the
foramen, between the finger and the bony surface. The bevel
distance between the dental apices and the possible
should be kept toward the bone. Transmucosal approach
(upper) and transcutaneous approach (lower).
injection sites may be excessive), and next to the
 mandibular premolar and molar teeth (where the
bone is relatively thick) may be only partially effec-
because of its angle relative to the bony surface,
tive or ineffective.
and the presence of the thick labial frenulum over
it. In middle to large size dogs, the foramen can be
easily palpated underneath or just caudal to the
Intraosseous anesthesia
labial frenulum, whereas in cats and very small
dogs it may be difficult to impossible to detect
 Intraosseous anesthesia is achieved by placing an
(Figure 10.3c). Alternative techniques (e.g. caudal
 anesthetic solution into the bone supporting the
inferior alveolar nerve block) should be used
teeth (Table 10.3). As with infiltration anesthesia, it
instead.
is used when it is necessary to anesthetize a very
The Oral Cavity  139
limited area or just one tooth (bone, soft tissues,
pressure within the periodontal space, with the
and apical and pulpal tissues). This is rarely the
risk of tooth avulsion.
case in small animal patients, and to avoid multiple
injections, local nerve blocks are preferred when-
ever procedures involve larger areas of the mouth.
Intrapulpal injection
Also, as with any other block, it may be ineffective
in case of infection or inflammation at the injection
A local anesthetic solution may be injected directly
site (e.g. periodontal or endodontic （
disease)
into the pulp system of an endodontically compro-
(Rochette 2005).
mised tooth during root canal therapy, before pulp
Possible techniques include the intraosseous
extirpation is performed (Table 10.3) (Malamed
injection, t
the intraseptal injection, and t
the
2004). In humans, the intrapulpal injection is rec-
periodontal ligament injection, also known as the
ommended when other techniques fail to obtain
intraligamentary
injection.
The i
intraosseous
adequate anesthesia of the tooth under treatment,
injection is the deposition of local anesthetic solu-
and if it is preferable to avoid anesthesia of the lips
tion into the interproximal bone between two
and tongue, common after administration of local
adjacent teeth, and is normally achieved with
nerve blocks. The discomfortfelt by human patients
dedicated devices able to perforate the bone. The
during the deposition of the anesthetic is not a
intraseptal injection is the placement of the anes-
concern in deeply anesthetized veterinary dental
thetic solution in the interdental papilla.
.The
patients. For the injection to be effective, a small
periodontal ligament injection requires the use of
amount (0.2-0.3 mL) of anesthetic solution should
an especially dedicated
1  periodontalligament
be slowly injected under pressure into the end-
syringe (capable of generating over two times the
odontic canal using a thin 25-27-gauge needle. The
 pressure of a conventional syringe) with a 27-30-
onset of action is almost immediate, but the dura-
gauge short needle. Small volumes of anesthetic
tion rather short. This technique is likely to be inef-
solution are injected, up to 0.2mL
 per root
fective if the pulpal tissues are considered to be
(Rochette 2005; Woodward 2008). The needle is
 infected (which is common in endodontically com-
inserted through the gingival sulcus, next to the
 promised teeth).
tooth, with the bevel pointing toward the tooth
surface, on the mesial or distal aspect of each
root, until a resistance (the alveolar margin) is
References
felt. Aspiration is not necessary, as intravascular
 Baart JA, Brand HS (2009) Local Anaesthesia in Dentistry.
injection is very unlikely. A significant resistance
should be felt, and ischemia of the soft tissues
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK.
Beckman BW, Legendre L (2002) Regional nerve blocks
should be noted during injection. The solution
diffuses along the periodontal space and into the
for oral surgery in companion animals. Comp Cont Ed
Sm Anim 24, 439442.
marrow spaces of the bone surrounding the teeth,
to the dental apex (Smith and Walton 1983; Tagger
  o   
of surgical and chronic oral pain in dogs and cats. J Vet
et al. 1994). The periodontal ligament injection is
Dent 23, 50-60.
relatively safe for the endodontic and periodontal
Carpenter RE, Marretta SM (2007) Dental patients. In:
tissues, with minimal damage only in the area of
Lumb& Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (4h
needle penetration, as shown by studies per-
edn.) Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA (eds).
formed also in dogs (Fuhs et al. 1983; Roahen and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd., Ames, IA, USA. pp. 993-995.
Marshall 1990; Pertot and Déjou 1992) and cats
Aains reno u puau ued (o)  ra
Proceedings of the 2006 American College of Veterinary
(Lin et al. 1985). However, the periodontal
Surgeons Veterinary Symposium, Washington, USA,
ligament injection should not be used in decid-
pp.575-579.
 uous teeth, as it may cause enamel hypoplasia or
Done SH, Goody PC, Evans SA et al. (2009) Color Atlas of
 hypomineralization of the developing permanent
Veterinary Anatomy. Volume 3. The Dog and Cat (2nd
tooth. Also, if excessive pressure is exerted dur-
edn.). Mosby Elsevier, London, UK.
ing injection or excessive volumes of solution are
 Dyce KM, Molenaar GJ (1996) The Nervous System. In:
  a    a 
Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy. (2nd edn.) Dyce KM,
140  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Sack WO, Wensing CJG (eds). W.B. Saunders Co.,
Lin L, Lapeyrolerie M, Skribner J, et al. (1985) Periodontal
Philadelphia, PA, USA. pp. 259-324.
ligament injection: effects on pulp tissues. J Endod 11,
Evans HE, Kitchell RL (1993) Cranial nerves and cuta-
529-534.
neous innervation of the head. In: Miller's Anatomy of
Malamed SF (2004) Handbook of Local Anesthesia,
the Dog (3rd edn.) Evans HE (ed). W.B. Saunders Co.,
(5th edn.) Elsevier Mosby, Missouri, USA.
Philadelphia, PA, USA.pp. 953-987.
Martinez LA, Gioso MA, Lobos CM, et al. (2009)
Frank ER (1928) Dental anesthesia in the dog. J Am Vet
Localization of the mandibular canal in brachycephalic
Med Assoc 73, 232-233.
dogs using computed tomography. J Vet Dent 26,
Fuhs QM, Walker II1 WA, Gough RW, et al. (1983) The
156-163.
Pertot WJ, Dejou J (1992) Bone and root resorption. Effects
the periodontium in dogs. J Endod 9,411-415.
of the force developed during periodontal ligament
Gauthier O, Gilbert S (2004) Dental care involves painful
injections in dogs. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 74,
surgical procedures that justify preoperative analgesia:
357-365.
a clinical study in dogs. Proceedings of the 13h
Reuss-Lamky H (2007) Administering dental nerve
European Congress of Veterinary Dentistry, Ljubljana,
blocks. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43,298-305.
Slovenia, pp. 51-52.
Roahen JO, Marshall FJ (1990) The effects of periodontal
Godinho HP, Getty R (1975) Peripheral nervous system.
ligament injection on pulpal and periodontal tissues.
In: Sisson and Grossman's The Anatomy of the
JEndod 16,28-33.
Domestic Animals. (5" edn.) Getty R, Rosenbaum CE,
Rochette J (2005) Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia for
Choshal NG, et al. (eds). W.B.S
 Saunders Co.,
Oral and Dental Procedures. Vet Clin North Am Small
Philadelphia, PA, USA. pp. 1686-1699.
Anim Pract 35, 1041-1058.
Gracis M (1998) Radiographic study of the maxillary
Rosenzweig LJ (1993) Anatomy of the Cat Text and
canine tooth in mesaticephalic dogs. J Vet Dent 15,73-78.
Dissection Guide. Complete Customized Version. Wm.
Gracis M (1999) Radiographic study of the maxillary
C. Brown Publ., Dubuque, IA, USA.
canine tooth of four mesaticephalic cats. J Vet Dent 16,
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007a) Local and regional
115-128.
anesthetic and analgesic techmiques: dogs. In: Lumb &
Gross ME, Pope ER, O'Brien D, et al. (1997) Regional
Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (4"m edn.)
anesthesia of the infraorbital and inferior alveolar
Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA (eds). Blackwell
nerves during noninvasive tooth pulp stimulation in
Publishing Ltd., Ames, IA, USA. pp. 561-593.
halothane-anesthetized dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Skarda  RT,
 Tranquilli
WJ
(2007b)
Localand
211, 1403-1405.
regional anesthetic and analgesic techmiques: cats. In:
Jayne H (1898) The face. In: Mammalian Anatomy. A
Lumb & Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
Preparation for Human and Comparative Anatomy.
(4t edn.) Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA
Part I. The Skeleton of the Cat. Its Muscular
(eds). Blackwell Publishing Ltd., Ames, IA, USA.
Attachments, Growth, and Variations Compared with
pPp. 595-603.
the Skeleton of Man. Lippincott, Philadelphia, PA,
Smith GN, Walton RE (1983) Periodontal ligament injec-
USA. pp.319-401.
tion: distribution of injected solutions. Oral Surg 55,
Lantz GC (2003) Regional anesthesia for dentistry and
232-238.
oral surgery. J Vet Dent 20, 181-186.
 Tagger M, Tagger E, Sarmat H (1994) Periodontal ligament
Lemke KA (2007) Pain management I: local and regional
injection: spread of the solution in the dog. J Endod 20,
anaesthetic techniques. In: BSAVA Manual of Canine
283-287.
and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia, (2"d edn.)
Woodward TM (2008) Pain management and regional
Seymour C & Duke-Novakovski T (eds). BSAVA,
anesthesia for the dental patient. Top Companion
Gloucester, UK, pp. 104-114.
Anim Med 23, 106-114.
11
The Thoracic Limb
Luis Campoy and Matt R. Read
Overview
and analgesia to the upper thoracic limb, including
the proximal areas of the shoulder and humerus.
Regional anesthetic techniques for the canine
Campoy et al. (2010) recently described an ultra-
thoracic limb have been practiced for over 50 years.
sound-guided approach that targets the roots of
Sound anatomic knowledge is required to increase
the brachial plexus. This technique provides anes-
the success rate and minimize the possible compli-
thesia of proximal structures including
the
cations associated with these blocks. In the majority
humerus, as well as those that are more distal. The
of dogs, the brachial plexus is formed by the ven-
o pasn aaq se ie uoode leuon
tral branches of the C6, C7, C8, and T1 spinal nerves
performing brachial plexus blocks (at the level of
that exit the spinal column through their respective
intervertebral foramina. The most relevant nerves,
anesthesia to the elbow and structures distal to it
from cranial to caudal, are the suprascapular, sub-
scapular,
axillary,
musculocutaneous,
radial,
 Recently, Mosing et al. (2010) published the results 
 median, and ulnar nerves. The axillary artery and
of their successful clinical use of brachial plexus
vein are also located in the axillary space cranial to
blocks for cats undergoing distal thoracic limb
the first rib (Figures 11.1a, b and 11.2).
orthopedic surgeries.
As many potentially invasive and painful proce-
Single injection is the most frequently used
dures are performed on the thoracic limb, it is
technique. However, the placement of perineural
 important to be able to safely and effectively pro-
 catheters is possible even though it presents the
vide local and regional anesthesia to this part of
additional challenge of preventing early catheter
the body.
The cervical
paravertebral
block
displacement once patients become ambulatory
(Hofmeister et al. 2007; Lemke and Creighton 2008)
(Moens and Caulkett 2000; Mahler and Reece
is a technique that can be used to provide anesthesia
2007).
@2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
141
142 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
nn. cervicales VI,Vll,VIll,
r.ventrales
Supraspinous ligament
Cervical vertebra 6:
transverse process
Ventral projection from transverse
n. thoracis I, r. ventralis
process
m. longus capitis
m. longus colli
a. costocervicalis, r. muscularis
Oesophagus
a. thoracica externa
Costochondral joints, ribs 1 & 2
v. thyroidea caudalis
Left lung, apex of cranial lobe
Right lung, cranial lobe
Costosternal joint, rib I
left lateral view. From Done et al. 2009. Used with permission.
TheThoracic Limb  143
C8
口
Figure 11.2 Dissection of the right axillary area of a dog in dorsal recumbency showing the anatomy of the brachial plexus.
Note the intimate relationship of the brachial plexus roots located immediately dorsal to the axillary vessels. From Campoy et al.
 2010. Used with permission.
General considerations
Animal positioning
Sedation/anesthesia requirements
For a cervical paravertebral or traditional brachial
plexus approach, the patient should be positioned
To prepare the patient for the procedure, an intra-
in lateral recumbency with its legs resting natu-
venous catheter should be placed. For sedation, a
rally, perpendicular to the long axis of the body.
combination of  either
 intravenous
 fentanyl
 The leg to be blocked should be positioned upper-
2-5μgkg′ or dexmedetomidine (0.5μgkg') and
most. For the ultrasound-guided axillary approach,
propofol 2-4 mgkg can be administered. Note
the patient should be positioned in dorsal recum-
that the higher doses of the drugs may be required
bency with its front legs flexed in a natural posi-
 if electrolocation is used by itself, compared with
 tion. Patient positioning is an important aspect of
when it is used in combination with ultrasound-
these procedures, as nerves are flexible structures
guided techniques as higher current outputs are
whose location can vary somewhat depending on
used and patients may be more likely to respond to
 the position of the limbs. Standardized positioning
this stimulus. Oxygen may need to be provided to
helps ensure a good quality block and has the
the patient in order to minimize possible drug-
 potential to minimize complications.
induced hypoxemia caused by drug-induced ven-
tilatory depression and the patient breathing room
Special considerations for 
air. The use of patient monitoring devices during
electrolocation techniques
the procedure is also highly recommended.
Additionally, it may be helpful to use local infiltra-
 Before injecting the local anesthetic solution, it is
tion with a local anesthetic such as lidocaine 1-2%
important to verify that the needle is not posi
at the puncture site if the patient is sedated rather
tioned either intravascularly or intraneurally.
than anesthetized.
Negative blood aspiration should first be
144  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
observed. Additionally, the current output of the
Principal indications
nerve stimulator should be decreased to 0.2 mA
and absence of obvious motor stimulation
Anesthesia or analgesia of the entire thoracic
should be verified. Next, the intensity should be
limb can be provided. A cervical paravertebral or
increased to 0.4mA to re-establish the twitch,
axillary brachial plexus will be necessary for
and the first 1mL of local anesthetic should be
shoulder or humeral
procedures. Procedures
injected. This will cause the motor response to
involving the elbow and or radius and ulna can
cease as the local anesthetic solution will dissi-
be blocked with a brachial plexus (traditional
pate the current by acting as an electrolyte (Tsui
approach), whereas procedures involving the
and Kropelin 2005). It is also imperative to
carpus can be successfully blocked just proximal
 ensure that no resistance is encountered during
to the elbow using a radial, ulnar, median, and
the injection. Intraneural injections are associ-
 musculocutaneous (RUMM) block. Intra-articular
so) sassa a u m p
analgesia can also be used for a variety of proce-
138 kPa) (Kapur et al. 2007). If resistance to injec-
dures and to provide pain relief into the postop-
tion is experienced, the needle should be reposi-
erative period.
 tioned before further local anesthetic is injected.
During and after the block, watch for poten-
tial adverse effects in the patient such as
Principal contraindications/precautions
tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, muscle
twitches, tremors, or seizures. These observa-
The phrenic nerve originates from C5, C6 and C7,
tions might suggest that a local anesthetic
runs along the ventral border of the scalenus
systemic
 toxicity is occurring, necessitating
muscle, and provides motor innervation to the
immediate treatment.
diaphragm. Although it has not been investigated,
bilateral axillary or cervical paravertebral blockade
Special considerations for ultrasound-guided
has the potential to result in diaphragmatic paral-
techniques
 ysis. When brachial plexus blockade is performed
using the traditional approach at the level of the
During injection, watch for fluid 
1tobegin
shoulder, blockade of the phrenic nerve would
spreading around the target nerves. The anes-
  n   a n s
puaodu e se readde m uonnnos oa
patients with respiratory compromise, caution
(black) "cloud" around the nerve, referred to as
should be used even with unilateral blocks at this
( e a srqo) uis unop, a
location.
While injecting, the position of the needle can
 In the axillary space, the axillary artery and vein
be slightly modified to improve diffusion of the
are in close proximity to the caudal aspect of
solution around the nerve roots.
the brachial plexus. The vessels run parallel to the
 For an adequately imaged ultrasound-guided
 nerve roots, following the general direction of the
nerve block, a positive motor response to nerve
nerves.
.The vessels sit immediately ventral to
stimulation does not actually increase the success
the C8 and T1 nerve roots. Understanding the loca-
rate of the block. If an adequate image is obtained,
tion of these vessels relative to the brachial plexus
these blocks are usually effective,
， even in the
 is important for minimizing the possibility of lacer-
absence of a motor response (Beach et al. 2006).
ating t
these structures. During the ultrasound-
Provided the needle is perfectly in plane with
guided technique, the axillary vessels provide a
the transducer, as the local anesthetic is being
key anatomic landmark that can be used during
injected, you should be able to see its dispersion
 needle positioning.
around the nerve. If not, it may 
indicate an
intravascular injection (even if there was no
prior blood aspiration) as the
e pressure applied
Choice of local anesthetics and adjuncts
by the transducer may occlude venous struc-
tures, resulting in a false negative aspiration
Bupivacaine 0.5%, with or without the addition of
test (Robards et al. 2008).
dexmedetomidine (0.5μg mL-'), is most commonly
The Thoracic Limb   145
used by the authors to provide surgical anesthesia.
methylene blue injections using a modification of
Ropivacaine 0.5-0.75%
in combination with
Lemke and Creighton's technique. They compared
dexmedetomidine (0.5μgmL-1) can also be used
use of blind injections (using anatomic land-
with similar results.
marks), electrolocation (to identify the component
nerves), and an ultrasound-guided technique.
A total of 34 adult dogs were enrolled in their
Cervical paravertebral block
study. The low overall success rate of the three
techniques for staining the target nerves and the
The cervical paravertebral block is considered an
high incidence of potentially serious complica-
advanced level technique and was first described
tions (dye-staining of the cervical spinal cord) led
by Lemke and Dawson (2000). In 2007, Hofmeister
the authors to exert a word of caution until further
et al. performed an anatomic study using dog
research is done.
 cadavers and assessed methylene blue staining
following use of a blind technique. They had a
relatively low success rate (only three out of nine
Functional and clinical anatomy
cadavers had successful staining of all four nerve
roots). The following year, Lemke described an
 The primary contributors to the sensory and motor
[elap aiou ul anbjuupal pasiaal pue paiepdn
function of the thoracic limb involve the ventral
(Lemke and Creighton 2008).
branches of the C6, C7, C8, and T1 spinal nerves.
This block may be useful for providing analgesia
 In a very small number of dogs, individual varia-
and muscle relaxation for surgical 
procedures
tion may result in additional contributions from
involving the scapula, shoulder, and brachium
C5 and T2. Spinal nerves have both dorsal and
 including their associated soft tissues. Benefits are
ventral branches (rami). As each nerve exits its
reported to be the ability to successfully achieve
associated intervertebral foramen, it separates
anesthesia of the thoracic limb using simple ana-
into the dorsal and ventral branches. The dorsal
tomic landmarks; the smaller volumes of local
branches of the cervical spinal nerves course
anesthetic solutions that are required to achieve
dorsally and provide sensory innervation to the
 nerve blockade; and the more precise control over
dorsal skin dermatomes.
local anesthetic placement when compared with
There is considerable overlap of sensory input in
performing a traditional axillary brachial plexus
these areas, with each part of the skin receiving
block. When performing a cervical paravertebral
sensory innervation from two or even three contig-
block, the goal is to deposit local anesthetic solu-
uous segments. The ventral branches leave the
tion near the C6 and C7 nerves as they cross the
 intervertebral foramina and course ventrally, join-
cranial and caudal margins of the large ventral
 ing with adjacent nerves and forming connecting
wing of the transverse process of sixth cervical ver-
branches. These connections are exaggerated at
tebra, and near the C8 and T1 nerves as they cross
their area of origin of the thoracic limb, where the
the cranial and caudal margins of the head of the
nerves enter the axillary area through the ventral
first rib before they coalesce at the brachial plexus
border of the scalenus muscle before forming the
(Figure 11.1).
brachial
plexus and its associated peripheral
The cervical paravertebral block is difficult to
branches that serve the limb. The brachial plexus
perform in overweight and obese patients 
as
supplies almost all of the innervation to the struc-
 anatomic landmarks are difficult or impossible to
tures of the thoracic limb, except for a few muscles
palpate. This block should not be performed if the
(trapezius, omotransversarus, brachiocephalicus,
transverse process of the sixthi cervical vertebra
and rhomboideus) and the skin over the dorsal
and the head of the first rib cannot be palpated, as
shoulder region.
these are the major bony landmarks that are used
The phrenic nerve also originates in this general
 to perform the block using this technique (Lemke
area, with contributions from the ventral branches
and Creighton 2008).
of the C5, C6, and C7 spinal nerves (Figure 11.3).
More recently, Rioja et al. (2012) reported the
The fibers that will become the phrenic nerve come
results of a study that evaluated the use of
off proximal to those that will continue ventrally
146 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Head of first rib
T1
Phrenic n.
Lateral process
of C6
CaitOUGA04
Figure 11.3  Anatomic landmarks for performing cervical paravertebral block in the dog. Note the angle of insertion for the
needle at the first three sites (45°) is different from the angle of insertion for the needle at the caudal most site (90°). From
Hofmeister et al. 2007. Used with permission.
and contribute to the formation of the brachial
 syringes/needles; and
plexus. The fibers of the phrenic nerve course
local anesthetic ±adjuvant.
ventral to the scalenus muscle before forming a
trunk that passes medial to the brachial plexus
before entering the mediastinum between the first
Technique
and second ribs.
Patient positioning
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
Distribution of local anesthesia
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
and analgesia
uppermost.
Clip the caudolateral cervical region of the
The cervical paravertebral block is a technique that
affected side from the mid-cervical region to the
can be used to potentially provide anesthesia and
level of the scapula, and from ventral midline to
analgesia to the entire thoracic limb, including
near-dorsal midline.
proximal areas such as the scapula, shoulder joint,
and the humerus and its associated soft tissues.
Anatomic landmarks
The scapula is retracted caudally to allowfor
Equipment
palpation and identification of land marks.
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
 The bony transverse processes of the caudal
with the following equipment:
cervical vertebrae are palpated, and the large
transverse process of C6 is identified.
peripheral nerve stimulator;
The head of the first rib is palpated and
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small
identified.
 dogs, 20-gauge 100mm for medium and large
If one or both of these structures are not
:(ssop
readily identifiable, the block carnot be
 sterile gloves;
performed.
The Thoracic Limb   147
Scapula
Fourth rib
Figure 11.4 A dog cadaver positioned in right lateral recumbency to demonstrate needle positioning for cervical paravertebral
block. The markings indicate the position of the fourth, fifth, and sixth ribs, and the dorsal aspect of the scapula. Note the
dorsal approach of the needle towards the C6 nerve root.
Step-by-step procedure
finger of the dominant hand is used to palpate
medial to the cranial margin of the scapula to
Performafinalsterilepreparation of the
identify the thoracic inlet, the first rib, and the
puncture site.
head of the first rib.
The scapula should be retracted with the non-
After identifying the head of the first rib, the
dominant hand, keeping the dominant hand
needle is slowly advanced in a caudomedial
sterile for palpating the sites for needle placement.
direction until the rib is encountered at this dorsal
The scapula is shifted caudally to expose the
location. The needle is then gently walked off the
 transverse process of C6 and the first rib.
first rib medially at its cranial and caudal margins
The index finger of the dominant hand should
until the C8 and T1 nerves are encountered.
be used to palpate the cranial and caudal mar-
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
gins of the transverse process.
priate range of each of the intended spinal
From a dorsolateral starting point, the needle
nerves, contractions of the associated muscles
should be advanced in a caudal direction until
will be seen (see Table 11.1).
the transverse process is encountered. By
advancing the needle in a caudal direction, the
In each case, decrease the current gradually to
0.4 mA (threshold current) in 0.2mA incre-
 potential for inadvertent epidural or intrathecal
 ments, until the same response can be elicited,
injection through an intervertebral foramen can
repositioning the needle if necessary.
be minimized (Figure 11.4).
The tip of the needle is then gently walked off 
the cranial and caudal margins of the transverse
Lemke's modified approach
process until the ventral branches of the nerves
(Lemke and Creighton 2008)
are encoumtered.
While continuing to retract the scapula cau-
Using Lemke and Dawson's original approach
dally with the nondominant hand, the index
to performing the cervical paravertebral block,
148  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Hofmeister et al. (2007) performed an anatomic
 The bony transverse processes of the caudal
study using canine cadavers to document stain-
 cervical vertebrae are palpated, and the large
ing of target nerves with dye. Nine cadavers were
 transverse process of C6 is identified.
used, ranging from 10-30kg, and body condition 
 The head of the first rib is palpated and
scores were 3/5 or less. A 20-gauge spinal needle
identified.
was used to inject 3-5mL of dilute methylene
 The axillary artery and costochondral junction
blue at the target sites. Dissection was subse-
 of the first rib as secondary landmarks are also
quently performed to confirm accuracy of the
palpated and identified.
injections. A successfully placed injection was
 The ventral branches of C8 and T1 nerves con-
defined as dye staining on the spinal nerve at the
verge along the cranial margin of the first rib
level of the intervertebral foramen. The anatomic
1-2 cm dorsal to the axillary artery and the cos-
landmarks were readily identifiable in all of the
tochondral junction.
 cadavers. Three of the nine cadavers had staining
of all four nerves, whereas the remaining six
Step-by-step procedure
cadavers had staining of three of the four nerves.
The C6 nerve was stained in all of the cadavers,
Perform a final sterile preparation of the
whereas the C7, C8, and T1 nerves were stained
puncture site.
While the scapula is still retracted, the costo-
variably in seven of the nine cadavers. Although
chondral junction of the first rib and the axillary
the dye was not directly on these nerves, it was in
 artery are palpated.
dose proximity. Whether or not a local anesthetic
● The needle is advanced towards a location on
would have diffused across to the nerves in ade-
the rib 1-2cm dorsal to the costochondral
quate amounts to successfully block the nerves in
a clinical patient is not known. No dye staining
junction.
 Local anesthetic is injected along the cranial
of any of the phrenic nerves was observed. The
margin of the first rib at one or two sites.
pleural space was not evaluated to assess whether
 This will successfully block the nerves as they
 interpleural injections were made during approach
 converge, instead of blocking each one individ-
to the C8 and T1 nerves at the location of the first
ually at its point of origin (as the original
rib. Although this study demonstrated the relative
description suggests).
ease of depositing dye solution on the desired
 The recommended volume to be injected is
nerves in canine cadavers, no evaluation of the
1-3 mL per site.
clinical efficacy of this technique could be made.
Since then, Lemke and Creighton (2008) published
a more detailed description of the technique,
Potential complications and how
including a modification (below).
to avoid them
?
With either of these approaches, it is very
Patient positioning
important to identify the thoracic inlet and
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
 avoid inadvertent needle placement within the
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
thoracic cavity.
uppermost.
 Because of the proximal location of the phrenic
Clip the caudolateral neck region of the affected
 nerve to the nerves that we specifically target
side from the mid-cervical region to the level of
for local anesthesia of the limb, it is possible
the scapula, and from ventral midline to near-
to block one or more of the components of
dorsal midline.
the phrenic nerve during local anesthetic
administration. When this occurs, hemidia-
Anatomic landmarks
phragmatic paresis can result.
Moreover,
bilateral paralysis in anesthetized and non-
The scapula is retracted caudally to allow for
anesthetized animals has been reported to
palpation and identification of landmarks.
elicit a compensatory increase in the activity
The Thoracic Limb   149
of
thei
inspiratory
intercostal muscles,
performing this block are not yet documented,
including the parasternal intercostals, the 
the veterinarian should exercise caution when
external intercostals, and the levator costae
performing
this block
in compromised
(Nochomovitz et al. 1981; De Troyer and Kelly
patients and should be prepared to provide
1982; Katagiri et al. 1994). As a result, these
 support as indicated.
muscles shorten more during inspiration, and
At this proximal location, the nerve roots are in
the elevation of the ribs and expansion of the
very close proximity to the vertebral arteries,
ribcage is augmented. Ventilation (ETCO,) is
and as a result if the needle tip is placed too
maintained within reasonable limits with uni-
close to the intervertebral foramen, inadvertent
or bilateral paralysis (De Troyer and Kelly
vascular puncture can occur.
1982; Katagiri et al. 1994). The increase in
Epidural migration of local anesthetic
can
external intercostal and levator costae inspira-
occur (Figure 11.5). In people, a documented
tory activity was commonly greater than
risk of performing paravertebral blocks using
anticipated on the basis of the increased PaCO2
certain techniques is the risk of local anes-
(Brichant and De Troyer 1997).
thetic diffusion from the site of administration
However, even hemiparalysis
6poses adirect
back through the intervertebral  foramen,
detrimental effect on the expansion of both lungs.
resulting in epidural spread of the local anes-
This may explain why ventilation is reduced in
thetic and more widespread side effects. With
 both lung bases in patients with hemidiaphrag-
lumbar paravertebral blocks in people, this
matic paralysis (De Troyer et al. 2009).
complication has been shown to be related to
 It should be remembered that the innervation
the injection
1pressure associated with the
to the diaphragm originates from the ventral
delivery of the local anesthetic (Gadsden et al.
branches of C6, C7, and C8, and the phrenic
2008). Although this rarely results in serious
nerve runs medial to the brachial plexus.
compromise to the patient when a lumbar
Using this technique to achieve successful
injection is made, epidural spread of local
unilateral blockade of sensory and motor
anesthetic in the cervical region could poten-
nerve roots at these proximal sites can poten-
tially result in bilateral phrenic nerve paral-
tially result in blockade of the ipsilateral
ysis
and
other
effects.
Although
this
phrenic nerve and cause hemidiaphragmatic
complication was not seen by Hofmeister et
paralysis. Close monitoring of the anesthe-
al. (2007) in their cadaver study, in the report
tized patient's respiratory function should be
by Rioja et al. (2012), 29-39% of dogs devel-
undertaken, including monitoring of arterial
oped staining of the cervical spinal cord fol-
oxygen saturation (using pulse oximetry or
lowing performance of this block. Unreported
Jo Aoenbape pue (sisAjeue se8 pooiq leliaine
cadaver studies (L. Campoy, unpublished
ventilation (using capnography). One would
data) also observed epidural spread of dye
expect the duration of any such paralysis
when individual cervical spinal nerve roots
 and supportive intervention to be dependent
were stained
using a similar technique
on the particular local anesthetic 
thatwas
(Figure 11.5).
used for the block. Although unilateral and
 In human studies, it is not the close proximity
bilateral diaphragmatic blockade do not appear
to the intervertebral foramen that increases risk
to significantly compromise respiratory
func-
of this complication, but the pressure 
：with
 tion in healthy awake and anesthetized dogs,
which the solution is injected (Gadsden et al.
caution should taken in patients with pre-
2008). Whether or not there is a sigrificant risk
existing
diseases
affecting
pulmonary
in clinical veterinary patients is not known, but,
function. To date, no specific studies have
taken together, these observations and reports
been conducted in veterinary patients to
suggest that proximal injection of local anes-
document the potential negative respiratory
thetics near the cervical intervertebral foramina
effects of bilateral cervical paravertebral bloc-
under increased pressure during this block
kade. Although absolute contraindications to
deserves some attention.
1 50  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Figure 11.5Migration of methylene blue dye into the cervical epidural space adjacent to the C6 and C7 areas following
cervical paravertebral block in a dog cadaver.
Brachial plexus block
along the ventral border of the scalenus muscle.
After the roots cross the axillary space, the plexus
The brachial plexus block is considered an
 divides to form the individual nerves that provide
intermediate level technique. This block has his-
 the sensory and motor innervation to the thoracic
torically been described to provide anesthesia for
limb. The most important nerves, moving from
structures distal to the elbow. However, using
cranial to caudal, are the suprascapular, subscapu-
nerve stimulation to guide the block, investiga-
 lar, axillary, musculocutaneous, radial, median,
tors have been successful blocking structures
 and ulnar nerves. The axillary artery and vein are
from the mid-humerus distally (Futema et al.
also located in the axillary space, immediately
2002), which is consistent with many people's
caudal to the median and ulnar nerves and cranial
clinical experiences.
to the first rib (Figure 11.2).
● The ventral root of C6, with some input from
Functional regional nerve anatomy
 C7, is the main contributor to the suprascapular
nerve.
The brachial plexus of the dog is formed from
 The ventral root of C7, with some input from
the ventral branches of the C6, C7, C8, and T1
 C6, is the main contributor to the musculocuta-
spinal nerves (Figures 11.2 and 11.3). After the roots
neous and subscapular nerves.
emerge through the intertransversarius muscula-
 The ventral root of C8, with some input from T1,
ture, there is an exchange of nerve fibers between
is the main contributor to the radial nerve.
them. The four roots then cross the ventrolateral
 The ventral root of T1, with some input from
border of the scalenus muscle and divide to form
C8, is the main contributor to the median and
the brachial plexus. The phreric nerve also runs
ulnar nerves.
TheThoracic Limb  15
Distribution of local anesthesia and
analgesia (Table 1 1.1)
Table 11.1  Sensory and motor distributions of the nerves of the thoracic limb.
Spinal Nerve
Nerve
Contributions
 Sensory to _
Motor to  muscle
Jendeoseidns
C6, C7
Lateral aspect of scapulohumeral joint
Supraspinatus, infraspinatus,
nerve
subscapularis
Subscapular nerve
C6, C7
Subscapularis
Musculocutaneous
C6, C7
Craniomedial forearm (antebrachium) distal
Coracobrachialis, biceps brachii,
nerve
to elbow
 brachialis
 Axillary nerve
C7, C8
Caudal aspect of scapulohumeral joint capsule,
 Brachiocephalicus, teres major, 
craniolateral aspect of arm (brachium) and 
teres minor, deltoideus
part of forearm (antebrachium)
Radial nerve
C7, C8, T1
Lateral aspect of elbow joint, dorsal aspect of 
Triceps, anconeus, extensor carpi
forearm (antebrachium) and paw
radialis, common and long
digital extensor, extensor carpi
ulnaris, supinator, abductor
pollicus longus, ulnaris lateralis
Median nerve
C8, T1
Medial aspect of elbow joint, medial and
 Flexor carpi radialis, superficial
palmar aspects of forearm (antebrachium)
and deep digital flexors, pronator
Med pue
teres, pronator quadratus
Ulnar nerve
C8, T1
 Caudal aspect of elbow joint, caudolateral 
 Flexor carpi ulnaris, deep digital
aspect of forearm (antebrachium) and paw
flexors
Nerve stimulation-guided brachial plexus
Anatomic landmarks
block (Traditional approach)
The major landmarks for the procedure include:
Scapulo-humeraljoint
Equipment
Acromion
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
Greater tubercle
with the following equipment:
Trachea
peripheral nerve stimulator;
 Jugular vein
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small and
First rib
medium breeds, 21-gauge 100mm for large
The puncture site is located cranial to the acro-
breeds);
mion and medial to the subscapularis muscle
 sterile gloves; and
(Figure 11.7).
 syringes/needles; and
lbcal anesthetic ± adjuvant.
Step-by-step procedure
●Perform a final sterile preparation of the
Technique
puncture site.
Patient positioning
 Use of a sterile drape over the needle puncture
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency
site can be used to prevent needle contamina-
(Figure 11.6).
tion during the procedure.
The leg to be blocked should be placed upper-
Draw an imaginary line between the acromion
-jipuadiad uogisod lemieu e u piau pue jsou
 and the cranial border of the greater tubercle.
ular to the longitudinal axis of the body.
 A second line is drawn perpendicular to the
 Clip the shoulder area.
first, from the cranial border of the acromion.
1 52 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Figure 11.6  Trid imensional animation of the left cervical area of a dog in right lateral recumbency. Note the position of the
acromion, greater tubercle, trachea, jugular vein and first rib relative to the brachial plexus. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks
in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
 Insert the needle and carefully advance it medial
to the scapula in a caudal direction (Figure 11.9).
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
priate range of the musculocutaneous nerve,
contractions of the biceps brachii muscle will
result in flexion of the elbow (Table 11.2).
 Once the twitch is elicited, decrease the current
gradually to 0.4 mA (the threshold current) in
0.2mA increments, until the same motor
Figure 11.7 Needle position for performance of a brachial
response can be elicited, repositioning the
plexus block in a dog using nerve stimulation. The puncture
 needle if necessary.
site is located cranial to the acromion and medial to the
The recommended volume of local anesthetic
subscapularis muscle. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks
solution to be injected is 0.25-0.3mLkg
in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell
(Campoy et al. 2008).
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
Clinical tips
This line provides the direction of needle
The authors commonly use bupivacaine 0.5%
advancement (Mahler and Adogwa 2008)
with or without the addition of dexmedetomi-
(Figure 11.8).
dine (0.5μgmL-1). This combination provides
 To assess the maximum depth of the needle
12-28 hours of blockade. Alternatively, ropiva-
insertion, the first rib is palpated under the
caine 0.75% combined with dexmedetomidine
scapula and a line is drawn to indicate its posi-
(0.5μgmL-1) can be used with similar expected
tion. A second line is drawn along the jugular
results.
vein, extrapolating its course as the vein disap-
 The musculocutaneous nerve (seen as flexion of
pears under the thoracic limb. The intersection
the elbow) is the most cranial nerve within the
of these two lines indicates the caudal aspect of
brachial plexus and in a medium-sized dog, it is
the brachial plexus. The axillary vessels are
approximately 1-2cm deep to the skin. While
located at the caudal edge of this line. To avoid
advancing the needle, if you do not find the
accidental vessel penetration, care must be
appropriate motor response at the anticipated
taken not to advance the needle past this line.
depth, the needle should be carefully repositioned.
TheThoracic Limb  153
(a)
(b)
2
5
Figure 11.8  (a) Anatomic landmarks used to locate the left brachial plexus in a dog. The site of insertion is cranial to the
acromion. The direction of the needle is perpendicular to the line connecting the acromion and the cranial border of the greater
tubercle. The caudal end of the brachial plexus is at the intersection of the first rib and the jugular vein. 1) jugular vein; 2) cranial
Mahler and Adogwa 2008. Used with permission. (b) Landmarks for a brachial plexus block in a dog. Draw an imaginary line
between the acromion and the cranial border of the greater tubercle. A second line is drawn perpendicular to the first, from the
Cranial border of the acromion. This line provides the direction of needle advancement. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks
in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
Extreme caution must be exercised during deep
needle insertions, as the axillary vessels lie in the
caudal aspect of the plexus and any further needle
advancement runs the risk of vascular puncture.
Extension of the elbow (radial nerve response)
is also an acceptable end point. However, note
 s  p     
miss the musculocutaneous nerve, as it lies in a
more cranial position. Additionally, care must
be taken as the axillary vessels lie just ventral to
this position and any further needle advance-
ment runs the risk of vascular puncture.
Figure 11.9  An insulated needle is being used to perform
 a brachial plexus block in a dog.
● Pronation of the extremity (median/ ulnar nerve
response) should not be considered an acceptable
Table 11.2  Motor responses to electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves during brachial plexus block.
Peripheral nerve stimulation 
Muscle response ("twitch")
Region to be blocked
Musculocutaneous nerve
 Contraction of biceps group (flexion and
Medial antebrachium (forearm)
supination of elbow)
Radial nerve
 Contraction of triceps brachi (elbow
Craniolateral aspect of antebrachium (forearm)
extension)
skin of the dorsum and the palmar surfaces
of the paw, except fith digit (also some
median component in the palmar aspect)
Median and ulnar nerve
Contraction of flexor carpi radialis (flexes
Caudal aspect of antebrachium (forearm).
carpus), pronator teres (pronates forearm),.
 palmar surface paw, palmar surface of the
and pronator quadratus (pronates paw)
fifth digit
1 54  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Table 11.3
 Motor responses to electrical stimulation of the
end point. These nerves lie in the most caudal
roots of the brachial plexus.
 part of the brachial plexus. Injection at this loca-
tion will most likely miss the musculocutaneous
Motor response ("twitch") to
Nerve root
and radial nerves. In addition, extreme care must
 electrical stimulation
be taken as the axillary vessels lie just ventral to
C6
Inward rotation of shoulder, outward
this position and any further needle advance-
 rotation of shoulder
ment runs the risk of vascular puncture.
C7
 Contraction of biceps, outward rotation of
Extension, flexion, or rotation of the shoulder
brachium, inward rotation of brachium,
(suprascapular nerve response) should not be
contraction of triceps, extension of carpus
 considered an acceptable end point as this nerve
C8
Contraction of triceps, extension of elbow,
crosses over the scapula, coming into a lateral
carpus and digits
T1
 Flexion of carpus and digits
position. Injections in this location will most
likely missthemajor nerves of thebrachial plexus.
(a)
(b)
Dorsal
Dorsal
Scapula
Injectate
Injectate
/entral
Ventral
(c)
Injectate
Figure 11.10 (a), (b),(c) Computed tomographic (CT) images of a dog. A brachial plexus block has been performed using
lidocaine and iohexol 240 mg iodine mL-1 (10:1 dilution). The arrow indicates the location of contrast enhancement
(hyperattenuation) medial to the scapula at the level of C7.
The Thoracic Limb 155
nerves, which exit the spinal column through their
respective intervertebral foramina. After the roots
emerge through the intertransversarius muscula-
ture, there is an exchange of nerve fibers between
them. The four roots then cross the ventrolateral
border of the scalenus muscle and divide to form
the brachial plexus. The phrenic nerve also runs
along the ventral border of the scalenus muscle.
After the roots cross the axillary space, they form
the individual nerves that provide the sensory and
motor supply to the thoracic limb.
Figure 11.11  This dog has been recovered following
sedation and administration of a brachial plexus block for
The ventral root of C6, with some input from
demonstration purposes. Note the characteristic signs of
 C7, is the main contributor to the suprascapular
radial nerve paralysis in the left thoracic limb.
nerve.
The ventral root of C7, with some input from
Combined ultrasonography/
C6, is the main contributor to the musculocuta-
electrolocation-guided brachial plexus block
neous and subscapular nerves.
The ventral root of C8, with some input from
Advantages
T1, is the main contributor to the radial nerve.
The combination of ultrasound-guidance and elec-
The ventral root of T1, with some input from
trolocation offers the advantages of both anatomic
C8, is the main contributor to the median and
and electrophysiologic confirmation of nerve iden-
ulnar nerves.
tification and needle placement. The stimulating
needle is advanced through the tissue using real-time
The transducer is placed over the axillary region,
-uon ch pasn aq uen pue ouseu sqdensouosenm
in the fossa between the manubrium of the sternum
firm correct needle placement by stimulating the
and the supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula ori-
nerve. Both nerve location techniques require a thor-
 ented in a parasagittal plane (Figure 11.12).
ough understanding of the relevant regional anatomy.
 In the corresponding ultrasound image, in the
near field, the most superficial structure found is
Equipment
 the pectoralis superficiales muscle. Dorsal or deep
High frequency transducer (9-15 MHz);
to it is the pectoralis profundus muscle. Dorsal to
peripheral nerve stimulator;
these muscles and, within the axillary space, are
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small dogs,
the axillary artery and vein. These vessels serve as
important anatomic landmarks for the procedure.
 21-gauge 100 mm for medium and large dogs);
Seen in cross-section, they form what is described
 sterile gloves;
as the "double-bubble" sign (Tran et al. 2008).
syringes/needles;
Surrounding the axillary vessels, are the roots of
 isopropyl alcohol; and
the brachial plexus, visible as four small rounded
local anesthetic ±adjuvant.
hyperechoic structures. The C8 root is located
Technique (Campoy et al. 2010)
immediately dorsal to the axillary artery. Cranial to
the artery, C7 and C6 can be found. T1 is located
Patient positioning
caudal to C8 (Figure 11.13).
 Position the patient in dorsal recumbency with
the thoracic limbs flexed in a natural position.
Step-by-step procedure
 Clip scanning area and puncture site.
If desired, a sterile drape can be placed over the
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy)
needle puncture site to prevent needle contam-
(Figure 11.2)
ination during the procedure.
The brachial plexus in the dog is formed from the
●Using the nondominant hand, place the trans
ventral branches of the C6, C7, C8, and T1 spinal
ducer over the axillary region, in the fossa
156   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
between the manubrium of the sternum and
the supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula
(Figure 11.12).
 Orient the transducer in a parasagittal plane.
Glide, rotate, or tilt the transducer until the axil-
lary vein and artery in cross-section come into
the field of view ("double-bubble" sign). The
vessels will appear as anechoic (black) round
structures and the artery will pulse (Figure 11.13).
Immediately dorsal to these vessels, identify
the rounded hyperechoic root of C8, also seen
in cross-section. In most patients, the anesthe-
tist should also be able to locate the C6, C7, and
T1 roots.
Once C8 has been identified, insert the stimu-
lating needle "in-plane" dorsal to the cranial
edge of the pectoralis muscle and lateral to the
Dog in dorsal recumbency. The transducer is
jugular vein.
Figure 11.12[
placed into the axillary region, in the space between the
Advance the needle in a cranial-to-caudal
manubrium of the sternum and the supraglenoid tubercle of
direction, keeping the needle tip in the field of 
the scapula. The transducer is oriented in a parasagittal plane.
ultrasound view at all times. Aim the needle for
The following landmarks were drawn on the skin: jugular
the area directly dorsal to the axillary artery, in
vein, cranial border of pectorales muscles, medial border of
close proximity to the C8 root. In a study by
brachiocephalicus muscle, and cranial border of sternum.
Campoy et al. (2010), the needle was inserted
The puncture site is indicated with an X. Note that the
stimulating needle is being advanced in a cranial to caudal
2.2 (± 0.3) cm in a craniocaudal direction when
direction in-plane with respect to the ultrasound transducer.
its tip was located immediately dorsal to the
From Campoy et al. 2010. Used with permission.
axillary artery.
Watch for the characteristic contractions of the
triceps brachii muscle, resulting in elbow
extension (Table 11.3).
Caudal
Ventral
Cranial
 As the local anesthetic solution is injected, watch
 Pectorales superficiales
for fluid to begin spreading around the nerves.
The anesthetic solution will appear as a hypo-
Pectorales profundus
echoic cloud around the nerves, ruling out intra-
vascular needle placement (Robards et al. 2008).
 The total volume oflocal anesthetic to be injected
should be approximately 0.15-0.2 mLkg-.
Stirm
Clinical tips
 The final injection volume should be assessed
by monitoring the ultrasound image. If adequate
coverage is obtained before the calculated
Dorsal
volume has been injected, the full dose of local
anesthetic does not need to be administered.
The injection location can be fine-tuned to
Figure 11.13
Ultrasound image of the axillary region. The
target specific roots for certain surgical proce-
stimulating needle (horizontal hyperechoic line) has been
dures. For example, the needle can be reposi-
advanced to a position dorsal to the axillary artery. (v: axillary
vein; a: axillary artery; solid arrows: C6, C7, C8, and T1 nerve
tioned cephalad and ventral to C8 in order to
roots). From Campoy et al. 2010. Used with permission.
block the C7 or C6 roots.
The Thoracic Limb  157
Stimulation of C7 will result in contraction of
the biceps brachii muscle, resulting in elbow
flexion.
Stimulation of C6 will result in contraction of
the supra and infraspinatus muscles, resulting
in shoulder rotation, flexion, or extension.
 I radial nerve responses are obtained, realize
that an injection at this location will most likely
lating needlt
apte
miss the musculocutaneous nerve, as it lies in a
Catheter
more cranial position. Additionally, care must
be taken as the axillary vessels lie just ventral to
this position and any further needle advance-
ment runs the risk of vascular puncture.
 If a median/ulnar response is encountered
Figure 11.14   Components of a stimulating catheter kit that 
(pronation of the limb), extreme care must be
can be used to provide continuous peripheral nerve blockade.
taken. The axillary vessels lie just ventral to this
position and any further needle advancement
runs the risk of vascular puncture. These nerves
 If a nonstimulating catheter is used, look for
lie in the most caudal part of the brachial plexus.
musculocutaneous nerve responses when plac-
 Injection at this point will most likely miss the
ing the needle, then blindly advance the cath-
 musculocutaneous and radial nerves.
eter 4-5 cm.
●The initial bolus of local anesthetic should
 be given through the needle (referred to as a
Continuous brachial plexus block
"primary block") if a nonstimulating catheter is
being used, and through the catheter itself if a
Adequate experience with single-shot techniques
stimulating catheter is used (referred to as a
is necessary to master continuous peripheral nerve
"secondary block").
block technigues. Indwelling catheters have been
 Orient the bevel of needle in the direction that
used for continuous nerve blocks, and their
the catheter will be advanced. Use of a Tuohy
placement has been previously described in dogs
needle makes this easier.
(Moens and Caulkett 2000). Mahler and Reece
Advance the needle with the nerve stimulator
(2007) described the use of electric nerve stimula-
set to 1mA until the appropriate twitches are
tion to aid in correct catheter placement for brachial
elicited.
plexus block in a traumatized dog.
.Catheter
Decrease the nerve stimulator output as the
displacement occurred approximately 1
11 hours
needle tip moves closer to the nerve.
post-placement, and the authors concluded that
Connect the catheter to the nerve stimulator
catheter stabilization is a challenge once the patient
(the muscle twitches should resume).
is mobile again postoperatively.
Advance the catheter 3-5 cm past the needle tip.
If muscle twitches are unchanged, the needle
can be carefully removed and the catheter
Choice of continuous peripheral nerve block
secured in place.
(CPNB) catheters
The catheter can be tunneled subcutaneously
See Chapter 5 for more information (Figure 11.14)
to1
 minimize the chances for dislodgement
(Figure 11.15).
Connect the catheter to a luer adapter.
Placement of and securing CPNB catheters
Connect the adapter to the nerve stimulator
Look for musculocutaneous nerve responses
 and check for appropriate twitches to confirm it
when placing the needle, and radial nerve
is stil in an acceptable position. Prior to
responses when introducing the stimulating
subsequent drug administration, the nerve
catheter.
stimulator can be used to stimulate through the
158   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
of bupivacaine can be used instead of the infu-
sion. In many cases, administration of bupiva-
caine every 8-10 hours appears to provide
adequate analgesia in the postoperative period.
Potential complications and how
to avoid them
Table 11.4  Potential complications of a brachial plexus
block and how to minimize their incidence or severity.
Potential
complication 
How to avoid
Figure 11.15  An indwelling brachial plexus catheter has
Intravascular
Aspirate syringe before injecting.
been placed in a dog following surgery of its left thoracic
injection
! usis inuuanop, 1oy yoo7
limb. This stimulating catheter will be left in place
performing an ultrasound-guided
postoperatively and can be used to "recheck” correct catheter
block.
position prior to drug administration by connecting a nerve
Hemorrhage
Look for musculocutaneous response.
stimulator to the white electrode.
Do not advance needle past the
expected depth at which the
musculocutaneous nerve is
expected to be.
Pneumothorax
Do not advance needle past the level
of first rib.
Lung laceration
Do not advance needle past the level
of first rib.
Cervicothoracic
 Unilateral blockade of the phrenic
("stellate")
nerve may also occur. Potentially
ganglion block
more common in the axillary
with associated
approach (ultrasound-guided 
Horner's
technique), as the injection is
syndrome
made at a more proximal level.
Unilateral blockade does not
appear to compromise ventilatory
function in conscious or
Figure 11.16 The same dog as in Figure 11.15 on
anesthetized dogs (Lemke and
postoperative Day 2. The indwelling brachial plexus catheter
Dawson 2000)
is still in position and has been used to provide intermittent
Nerve irritation
Local anesthetic should never be
local anesthesia to the dog. The catheter was removed on
injected when resistance is
postoperative Day 3 when the dog returned to ambulation
encountered during the injection.
and the catheter migrated from its correct position.
Check for absence of overt muscular
twitch at a current output less than
0.2 mA (this is of special
catheter in order to double-check the catheter's
importance when using only the
location (Figure 11.16).
electrolocation technique).
Perform a Raj test to help rule out
Drug choice and infusion rates of local
intraneural injections.
Local anesthetic should never be
anesthetics
injected when a patient overtly
Initial volume 0.3 mLkg- followed by an infu-
reacts during the injection (if
sion of 0.05-0.07mLkg'h-1 of bupivacaine
patient is sedated rather than
anesthetized).
(0.12-0.25%) with or without dexmedetomidine
Infection
Observe sterile technique.
(0.5 μg mL-'). Alternatively, intermittent boluses
TheThoracic Limb 159
Radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous (RUMM) nerve
blocks in dogs and cats
Functional and clinical anatomy
The radial nerve emerges between the medial and
lateral heads of the triceps and brachialis muscle in
the laterocaudal aspect of the mid-humerus.
The musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar
nerves run adjacent to the brachial artery on the
medial aspect of the limb. There is some separation
Fgure 11.17  A stimulating needle is used to approach the
between the musculocutaneous nerve and median
radial nerve of a dog during performance of a RUMM block.
and ulnar nerves. At the level of the mid-humerus,
these nerves are surrounded by connective tissue
Anatomic landmarks
and fat.
Elbow joint
Greater tubercle of the humerus
Distribution of local anesthesia
 Lateral and medial epicondyles of the humerus
and analgesia
Lateral head of the triceps muscle
Medial head of the triceps muscle
 Brachialis muscle
Blockade of these three nerves will provide anes-
Biceps brachialis muscle
thesia for procedures involving the distal thoracic
Brachial artery
limb, including the carpus and the manus (paw).
 The puncture site for the radial nerve block is on
Equipment
the lateral side of the thoracic limb, between the
long head of the triceps and the brachialis muscle,
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
caudal to the humerus, at the level between the mid-
with the following equipment:
dle and distal thirds of the humerus (Figure 11.18).
The puncture site for the ulnar, median, and
peripheral nerve stimulator;
musculocutaneous nerves is on the medial side of
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm);
the limb. The pulse of the brachial artery can be
sterile gloves;
palpated just proximal to the elbow joint between
 syringes/needles; and
the biceps brachialis and the medial head of the tri-
 local anesthetic ±adjuvant.
ceps. The puncture site will be mid-humerus,
ranial and caudal to the brachial
1artery
(Figure 11.19).
Technigue (Lamont and Lemke 2002;
Trumpatori et al. 2010)
Step-by-step procedure
Patient positioning
●Perform a final sterile preparation of the
puncture site.
Insert the needle and carefully advance it
the leg to be blocked uppermost for the radial
towards the target nerve(s).
nerve block (Figure 11.17), or lowermost for the
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerve
priate range, appropriate contractions will
blocks. The elbow should be held in a flexed
result in extension of the carpus (extensor carpi
position to facilitate palpation and manipula-
twitch) for the radial nerve (Lamont and Lemke
tion of the relevant musculature.
2002), flexion and pronation of the antebra-
Clip the puncture sites.
chium (flexor carpi, pronator teres twitch) for
160  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
Brm
Figure 11.18 (a) Canine thoracic limb; lateral view illustrating the technique for lateral (radial nerve) block. T'm (Lh), lateral
head of the triceps muscle; Brm, brachialis muscle, Rn, radial nerve. From Trumpatori et al. 2010. Used with permission.
(b) Puncture site for the radial nerve is marked between the long head of the triceps and the brachialis muscle, between the
mid- and distal-thirds of the humerus on the lateral aspect of the thoracic limb.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.19 (a) Canine thoracic limb; medial view illustrating the technique for medial (ulnar, musculocutaneous, and median
nerve) block. Bm, biceps brachialis muscle; Un, ulnar nerve; Mscn, musculocutaneous nerve; Mn, median nerve. From
Trumpatori et al. 2010. Used with permission. (b) The puncture site for the median and ulnar nerves is located on the medial
aspect of the thoracic limb, between the biceps and the medial head of the triceps, caudal to the brachial artery.
The Thoracic Limb  161
Humerus
Injectate
Dorsal
Ventral
Figure 11.20 Computed tomographic (CT) image from a dog. A RUMM block has been performed using lidocaine and iohexol
240 mg iodine mL-1 (10:1 dilution). The arrows indicate the location of contrast enhancement (hyperattenuation) on both sides
of the mid-clistal humerus.
the median nerve, or flexion of the forepaw
istration of local anesthetic agents has proven
(flexor carpi) for the ulnar nerve.
effective for knee arthroscopy in people (Reuben
Once the nerves are located (i.e. with a nerve
et al. 2001); however, pain control is more diffi-
stimulator), the local anesthetic is injected.
cult to achieve for shoulder surgery (Singelym
 The recommended volume to be injected for
et al. 2004).
the radial nerve (lateral site) is 0.1mLkg-1
(Trumpatori et al. 2010).
Purpose
The recommended volume to be injected for
the musculocutaneous/median/ulnar nerves
 Provision of perioperative analgesia.
 Provision of pain relief in patients suffering
(medial side) is 0.15 mLkg1 (Trumpatori et al.
2010).
from chronic pain such as advanced osteoar-
thritis.
 As a diagnostic tool to confirm intra-articular
Potential complications (Table 1 1.5)
pain when physical examination and diagnostic
imaging fail to provide conclusive answers
Table 11.5  Potential complications of a RUMm block and
(Van Vynckt et al. 2010).
how to minimize incidence or severity.
Potential complication   How to avoid
Indications
Hematoma
 Avoid repeated approaches.
Indications for intra-articular drug administration
Apply pressure for two to five
include:
minutes.
Intravascular injection
Always aspirate before injecting.
 shoulder or elbow surgical procedures (mainly
arthroscopic procedures);
osteoarthritis; and
Intra-articular elbow and shoulder
 inflammatory arthritis.
joint analgesia
Drugs used
General considerations
Local anesthetics, opioids, steroids, and other adju-
The analgesia provided by intra-articular admin-
vants such as cloridine or dexmedetomidine are the
istration of various drugs in the postoperative
drugs commonly administered for intra-articular
 period is controversial. The intra-arficular admin-
pain relief.
162   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
local anesthetics
lymphocytes, macrophages, and mast cells; this, in
Chu et al (2008) demonstrated in vitro chondro-
turn, reduces phagocytosis, lysosomal enzyme
toxic effects in human and bovine chondrocytes
release, and the release of inflammatory mediators
exposed to 0.5% and 0.25% bupivacaine. A time-
(Snibbe and Gambardella 2005). Steroids such as
dependent reduction in viability, with longer
triamcinolone hexacetonide have been used in
exposure times resulting in higher cytotoxicity
osteoarthritic joints in dogs. Pelletier et al. (1995)
was also observed (Chu et al. 2008).
 presented data showing the protective effect of cor-
Chu et al. (2010) further evaluated these effects
ticosteroid injections on osteoarthritic cartilage
in vivo in 48 Sprague-Dawley rats. They saw up to
lesions not only under prophylactic, but also
 a 50% reduction in chondrocyte density following
therapeutic, conditions.
a single intra-articular injection of 0.5% bupiva-
caine when compared with a control group (saline).
Other adjuvants
The articular surfaces of bupivacaine-injected
Clonidine potentiates morphine analgesia in the
 joints, however, remained intact on gross and his-
animal model as assessed in the mouse tail flick
tological examinations. A variety of factors,
assay (Spaulding et al. 1979). In a study by Reuben
 including joint fluid, bleeding, articular cartilage
and Sklar (2000), the combination of clonidine and
 morphine resulted in decreased postoperative pain
reduced the effective concentration to a level that
and analgesic use for outpatient arthroscopic knee
did not result in observable immediate chondro-
 surgery, as well as an increased analgesic duration 
cyte death. This study shows that the chondrotoxic
compared with use of either drug alone. Intra-
effect of a single intra-articular injection of 0.5%
articular use of clonidine (Reuben and Connelly
bupivacaine is subtle and would be difficult to
1999) or dexmedetomidine (Al-Metwalli et al. 2008)
detect clinically (Chu et al. 2010). Recently, there
 also enhances analgesia following arthroscopic
have been two case series published on this contro-
kmee surgery in people. Autologous adipose-
versial topic (Bailie and Ellenbecker 2009; Anderson
derived mesenchymal stem cell therapy is cur-
et al. 2010).
rently being developed as part of the treatment
 of osteoarthritis in dogs, with promising results
Opioids
(Black et al. 2008).
Since the discovery of opioid receptors on
peripheral nerves and joints (Stein et al. 1989),
several studies have described the analgesic
Distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia
The intra-articular injection of local anesthetic
(61  a ) s u ms 1o A
provides blockade of intra-articular structures
The effectiveness of opiates in inflamed tissues
only, therefore excluding extra-articular struc-
has been explained by a disruption in the peri-
tures such as subcondral bone, extra-articular soft
neurium, allowing for easier access of opioids to
tissue, and skin. As a result, requirements for
neuronal receptors. This may also be associated
supplemental analgesics are not eliminated in
with an unmasking or up-regulation of inactive
cases when open surgical procedures of joints
opiate receptors (Reuben and Sklar 2000). Low
are performed.
doses of intra-articular morphine can signifi-
cantly reduce pain after knee surgery through an
action specific to local opioid receptors that reaches
Equipment
its maximal effect three to six hours after injection
(Stein et al. 1991).
 A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
with the following equipment:
Steroids
 Clinical efficacy has been shown for intra-articular
 sterile gloves;
 injections of steroidsin the treatment of rheumatoid
 syringes; and
arthritis in people (Furtado et al. 2005). Intra-
 hypodermic (stifle joint) or spinal (hip joint)
articular steroids seem to reduce the number of
needles (22- to 23-gauge).
The Thoracic Limb  163
(a)
Figure 11.21 Intra-articular injection of the left elbow joint
(b)
of a dog during surgery Note the presence of synovial fluid in
the needle, confirming correct position prior to drug
administration.
Techniques
Elbow joint analgesia
Anatomic landmarks (Figure 11.21)
Medial epicondyle
Anconeal process
Step-by-step procedure
Figure 11.22(a) Tridimensional animation of the left
Afinger should be placed on the medial epicon-
shoulder of a dog. Note the position of the acromion and 
dyle and the limb is palpated distally until the
greater tubercle. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks
approximate level of the joint is reached.
in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Mealth,
Cornell University,Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.
The puncture site is slightly caudal to this location.
cornell.edu. (b) A 22-gauge needle is being advanced into
 To ensure placement within the joint, a syringe
the scapulohumeral joint of a dog. The anesthetist's index
is attached to the needle and used to aspirate
finger is being used to palpate the acromion, and the thumb
synovial fluid.
is being used to palpate the greater tubercle of the humerus.
 The joint is filled with injectate until moderate
 pressure is felt against the plunger. Overfilling
 may lead to rupture of the joint cavity and loss
The needle should be directed caudally and
of injectate into the peri-articular soft tissues.
medially at a 70° angle from the perpendicular.
If synovial fluid is not easily aspirated, Lactated
Scapulohumeral joint analgesia
Ringer's solution can be injected into the joint.
If the needle is located in the joint, this fluid is
Anatomic landmarks (Figure 11.22a)
easily injected into the joint space.
Greater tubercle
Acromion
References
Step-by-step procedure
 The shoulder is palpated to locate the superior
Al-Metwalli RR, Mowafi HA, Ismail SA et al. (2008) Effect
ridge of the greater tubercle.
The acromion is located and the space
of intra-articular dexmedetomidine on postoperative
craniodistal to its border is palpated.
101, 395-399.
A needle is inserted at the craniocaudal
Anderson SL, Buchko JZ, Taillon MR et al. (2010)
midpoint of the ridge (Figure 11.22b).
Chondrolysis of the glenohumeral joint after infusion
164  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
of bupivacaine through an intra-articular pain pump
lidocaine in canine sciatic nerves. Acta Anaesthesiol
catheter: a report of 18 cases. Arthroscopy 26, 451-461.
Scand 51, 101-107.
Bailie DS, Ellenbecker TS (2009) Severe chondrolysis after
Katagiri M, Young RN, Platt RS et al. (1994) Respiratory
shoulder arthroscopy: a case series. J Shoulder Elbow
muscle compensation for unilateral or bilateral hemi-
Surg 18, 742-747.
 diaphragm paralysis in awake canines. J Appl Physiol
Beach ML,Sites BD, Gallagher JD (2006) Use of a nerve stim-
77, 1972-1982.
ulator does notimprove the efficacy of ultrasound-guided
Lamont LA, Lemke KA (2002) The effects of medetomi
supraclavicular nerve blocks. J Clin Anesth 18, 580-584.
dine on radial nerve blockade with mepivacaine in
Black LL, Gaynor J, Adams C et al. (2008) Effect of
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 62-68.
intraarticular injection of autologous adipose-derived
Lemke KA, Creighton CM (2008) Paravertebral blockade
mesenchymal stem and regenerative cells on clinical
of the brachial plexus in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small
signs of chronic osteoarthritis of the elbow joint in
Anim Pract 38, 1231-1241.
dogs. Vet Ther: Res Appl Vet Med 9, 192-200.
Lemke KA, Dawson SD (2000) Local and regional
 Brichant JF, De Troyer A (1997) On the intercostal muscle
anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30,
 compensation for diaphragmatic paralysis in the dog.
839-857.
JPhysio1 500 (Pt 1),245-253.
Mahler SP, Adogwa AO (2008) Anatomical and experi-
Campoy L, Bezuidenhout AJ, Gleed RD et al. (2010)
mental studies of brachial plexus, sciatic, and femoral
Utrasound-guided approach for axillary brachial
nerve-location using peripheral nerve stimulation in
 plexus, femoral nerve, and sciatic nerve blocks in dogs.
the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 80-89.
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 144-153.
Mahler SP, Reece JL (2007) Electrical nerve stimulation to
Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Looney AL et al. (2008)
facilitate placerment of an indwelling catheter for
Distribution of a lidocaine-methylene blue solution
 repeated brachial plexus block in a traumatized dog.
staining in brachial plexus, lumbar plexus and sciatic
Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 365-370.
nerve blocks in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 348-354.
Moens NM, Caulkett NA (2000) The use of a catheter to
Chu CR, Coyle CH, Chu CT et al. (2010) In vivo effects of
provide brachial plexus block in dogs. Can Vet J 41,
single intra-articular injection of 0.5% bupivacaine on
685-689.
articular cartilage. J Bone Joint Surg Am 92, 599-608.
Mosing M, Reich H, Moens Y (2010) Clinical evaluation
Chu CR, Izzo NJ, Coyle CH et al. (2008) The in vitro
of the anaesthetic sparing effect of brachial plexus
effects of bupivacaine on articular chondrocytes. J Bone
block in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 154-161.
Joint Surg Br 90-B, 814-820.
Nochomovitz ML, Goldman M, Mitra J et al. (1981)
De Troyer A, Kelly S (1982) Chest wall mechanics in dogs
Respiratory responses in reversible diaphragm paral-
with acute diaphragm paralysis. J Appl Physiol 53,
ysis. J Appl Physiol 51, 1150-1156.
373-379.
Pelletier JP, DiBattista JA, Raynauld JP et al. (1995) The in
De Troyer A, Leduc D, Cappello M (2009) Bilateral impact
vivo effects of intraarticular corticosteroid injections on
on the lung of hemidiaphragmatic paralysis in the dog.
cartilage lesions, stromelysin, interleukin-1, and onco-
Respir Physio1 Neurobiol 166, 68-72.
SH Done et al. (2009) Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy.
Lab Invest 72, 578-586.
Volume 3. The Dog and Cat (2"d edn.). Mosby Elsevier,
Reuben SS, Connelly NR (1999) Postoperative analgesia
London, UK.
Furtado RN, Oliveira LM, Natour J (2005) Polyarticular
ticular clonidine. Anesth Analg 88, 729-733.
corticosteroid injection versus systemic administration
 Reuben SS, Sklar J (2000) Pain management in patients
   se  r i 
who undergo outpatient arthroscopic surgery of the
domized controlled study. J Rheumato1 32, 1691-1698.
kmee. J Bone Joint Surg Am 82-A, 1754-1766.
Futema F, Fantoni DT, Auler JOC et al. (2002) A new brachial
 Reuben SS, Sklar J, El-Mansouri M (2001) The preemptive
 plexus techmique in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 29, 133-139.
 analgesic effect of intraarticular bupivacaine and mor-
Gadsden JC, Lindenmuth DM, Hadzic A et al. (2008)
 Lumbar plexus block using high-pressure injection
Anesth Analg 92, 923-926.
leads
tocontralateral
and
epidural
spread.
Rioja E, Sinclair M, Chalmers H et al. (2012) Comparison
Anesthesiology 109, 683-688.
of three techniques for paravertebral brachial plexus
Hofmeister EH, Kent M, Read MR (2007) Paravertebral
blockade in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 190-200.
 block for forelimb anesthesia in the dog - an anatomic
Robards C,(
Clendenen
S, Greengrass
R(2008)
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 139-142.
Kapur E, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F et al. (2007) Neurologic
axillary block: negative aspiration can be misleading.
and histologic outcome after intraneural injections of
Anesth Analg 107, 1754-1755.
The Thoracic Limb   165
Singelyn FJ, Lhotel L, Fabre B (2004) Pain relief after
Tran de QH, Clemente A, Tran DQ et al. (2008) A
arthroscopic shoulder surgery: a comparison of intra-
comparison between ultrasound-guided infraclavi-
articular analgesia, suprascapular nerve block, and
cular block using the "double bubble" sign and neuro-
interscalene brachial plexus block. Anesth Analg 99,
stimulation-guided axillary block. Anesth Analg 107,
589-592.
1075-1078.
Snibbe JC, Gambardella RA (2005) Use of injections for
Trumpatori BJ, Carter JE, Hash J et al. (2010) Evaluation
osteoarthritis in joints and sports activity. Clin Sports
of a midhumeral block of the radial, ulnar, musculocu-
Med 24, 83-91.
 -Teue rog saaau (yoa N) uepau pue snoael
Spaulding TC, Fielding S, Venafro JI et al. (1979)
gesia of the distal aspect of the thoracic limb in dogs.
Antinociceptive activity of clonidine and its potentia-
Vet Surg 39, 785-796.
tion of morphine analgesia. Eur J Pharmacol 58, 19-25.
 Tsui BC, Kropelin B (2005) The electrophysiological effect
Stein C, Comisel K, Haimerl E et al. (1991) Analgesic
 of dextrose 5% in water on single-shot peripheral nerve
effect of intraarticular morphine after arthroscopic
stimulation. Anesth Analg 100, 1837-1839.
knee surgery. N Engl I Med 325, 1123-1126.
Van Vynckt D, Polis I, Verschooten F et al. (2010) A review
of the human and veterinary literature on local
opioid receptors mediating antinociception in inflam-
anaesthetics and their intra-articular use. Relevant
mation. Evidence for involverment of mu, delta and
kappa receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 248, 1269-1275.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 23, 225-230.
12
The Trunk
Matt R. Read and Carrie A. Schroeder
This chapter will discuss the local and regional
trauma and fractured ribs. In many of these situa-
anesthetic approaches to providing analgesia to the
 tions, pain results in restricted ventilation and altered
thorax and the cranial abdomen of dogs and cats.
breathing patterns as the animal is unable to take
There are several different approaches that can be
normal
breaths
without
 experiencing
pain.
used including selective intercostal nerve blocks,
Hypoventilation and postoperative changes resulting
interpleural analgesia,  and thoracic 
epidural
anesthesia (discussed in Chapter 14). Each method
further alterations in respiratory function, including
will be discussed in terms of its clinical utility,
alterations in res
oiratory mechanics such as decrea
technique,
drug selection,
pue
1potential
for
sed compliance,
complications. In addition, a brief discussion of the
work ofbreathin
Ipulmonary reserve,
mspiratory
 and vital capacity. Overall, these
the human medical field will highlight areas for
changes
can lead to ventilation-perfusion mismatch
future consideration and investigation in animals.
Ipue
reduce
ced arterial oxygen tension (Stobie et al.
These techniques include thoracic paravertebral
1995; Dhokarikar et al. 1996).
nerve blocks and transversus abdominis plane
 Regardless of the inciting cause of the thoracic
(TAP) blocks.
tant for providing humane care and promoting
return to normal function. Although many differ-
Overview
ent types of analgesics are available for use
in treating pain in animals, the most effective
Diseases of the thoracic cavity are commonly
 method of analgesia is reducing or eliminating
encountered in veterinary patients. Small animals
the nociceptive input from a painful site via inter-
frequently
undergo
diagnostic
pue
ruption
of
neuronal transmission.
. This is best
therapeutic procedures of the chest and cranial
-supe Aeradiad e Ssn Aq pusdoe
abdomen.
They also present with a variety
of
tered local
l anesthetic; these agents have been
 preexisting painful conditions including thoracic
shown to be some of the most effective for treating
@2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
167
168   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
thoracic pain (Berg and Orton 1986; Flecknell
 patients. Fortunately, these techniques are relatively
et al. 1991; Pascoe and Dyson 1993; Conzemius
 easy to perform and do not impose significant risk
et al. 1994; Stobie et al. 1995). The use of local
to the patient when performed correctly. Thoracic
anesthesia prevents transmission of input from
paravertebral blocks and transversus abdominis
the periphery and reduces central sensitization of
plane (TAP) blocks are relatively new techniques
s n g a a  sm ada a
that are being increasingly used as alternatives for
cord. The use of local anesthesia is essential if
providing thoracic and upper abdominal analgesia
surgery is to be performed humanely in awake or
to selected patients in human medicine. Currently,
sedated patients, and provides a great number of
10 ages oea a ioqe umo si qon pou
benefits to patients under general anesthesia
utility of these techniques in animals and there are
through  multimodal 
1   analgesia
1(Lemke and
limited published reports available in the veteri-
Dawson 2000).
nary literature.
One aspect of thoracic and thoracoabdominal
Although studies of intercostal and interpleural
procedures that has received close attention in
analgesia have historically been performed and
both people and animals is the ability for these
reported in dogs, based on limited interspecies
surgeries to negatively impact the patient's venti-
differences in thoracic innervation, these techniques
latory function. Postoperative pain following
can be used in cats undergoing similar thoracic
 thoracic surgery in humans causes a reduction in
procedures
 with the same expected benefits.
normal tidal ventilation, which can result in the
Bearing this in mind, definitive studies should still
subsequent development of hypoxia.
.Similar
be conducted in cats to uncover and document the
effects have been reported in animals (Flecknell
inevitable species differences that may exist. By
et al. 1991; Conzemius et al. 1994). Several studies
doing so, we can better deliver effective analgesia
have documented the changes associated with
while at the same time balancing risks to feline
lateral or median stermotomy t
thoracotomy in
patients.
dogs, and have shown that even short-term pro-
Each of t
the  regional anesthetic techniques
 cedures in healthy dogs can cause sigmificant and
described here has its own advantages
pue
clinically important changes that can last up to
disadvantages, as well as requirements for technical
24 hours.
These changes include
hypoxemia,
skill to be performed properly to balance patient
hypoventilation, respiratory acidosis,
increased
safety with analgesic efficacy. The specific tech-
work of breathing, decreased lung
 compliance,
niques described below can and should be used in
elevations in A-a gradient, decreased inspiratory
combination with other modes of analgesia to
time, and increases in peak expiratory flow rate
 provide optimal pain relief. Rarely is a single anal-
(Berg and Orton
1986;
Stobie
et
al.
1995,
 gesic technique indicated for use on its own.
Dhokarikar et al. 1996). Although many of these
changes are predictable consequences of general
anesthesia and open-chest procedures,
，others
Regional nerve anatomy
appear to be associated with pain. These changes
can be clinically significant in otherwise healthy
The thoracic and cranial lumbar (L1, L2) spinal
patients, and could become even more important
nerves are responsible for sensory inmervation of
in patients that may not have the ability to com-
the trunk (Dyce et al. 2010). In addition to serving
pensate for alterations in respiratory
function,
the thorax, the ventral branches of the first two
such as those with preexisting pulmonary
or
thoracic spinal nerves (T1 and T2) also supply
cardiac disease.
fibers to the radial, median, and ulnar nerves of the
Of the methods that can be used to provide
brachial plexus and therefore contribute to motor
anesthesia and analgesia to the trunk,
,selective
 and sensory innervation to the thoracic limb. The
intercostal blockade and the infusion (
of
local
ventral branches of remaining thoracic spinal
anesthetics into the interpleural space have been
nerves (T2-T13) contribute to the peripheral nerves
investigated for providing analgesia for thoracic
that run ventrally within the intercostal spaces bet-
ween adjacent ribs. Respective intercostal nerves
into the anesthetic and analgesic plan for these
lie in close proximity to the intercostal arteries and
The Trunk169
Visceral
Lateral
pleura
External
cutaneous
intercostal
nerve branch
muscle
Internal
intercostal
muscle
Interpleural
Posterior
Spinal nerve
Nerve
space
intercostal
Visceral
Artery
Innermost
membrane
 pleura
intercostal
muscle
Cephaiad
Vein
Dorsal
ramus
Sympathetic chain
Fgure 12.1A
Anatomy of the intercostal nerve. From Stromskag and Klevin 1998. Used with permission.
veins thiat course ventrally directly beneath the
Intercostal nerve blocks in dogs and cats
parietal pleura along the caudal aspect of the
associated ribs (Figure 12.1).
General considerations and purpose
Some fibers  supply
motor function to the
intercostal muscles, whereas others detach lateral
Intercostal nerve blockade is relatively easy to
 branches to provide sensory innervation to the skin
achieve in deeply sedated or anesthetized patients.
lying over the lateral and ventral aspects of the
The ribs themselves serve as bony landmarks for
chest wall and abdominal floor. Although
each
performing this regional anesthetic block and,
intercostal space is associated with a specific nerve,
there is significant overlap of sensory dermatomes,
easily palpated. Intercostal nerve blockade can
and as a result, any regional anesthetic technique
 also be performed in surgery, when direct visuali-
used must take this distribution into consideration.
zation of the target nerves is possible during
For example, if a lateral thoracotomy is to be
thoracotomy while the patient still has an open
 performed at the fifth intercostal space, nerves
chest. However, as preemptive local anesthesia
serving the adjacent third, fourth, sixth,
pue
administered before the surgical insult commences
seventh spaces should also be blocked to provide
can offer further benefits to the patient, and as the
complete analgesia to the surgical field (Berg and
landmarks used for a percutaneous approach to
Orton 1986; Thompson and Johnson 1991).
the block are readily palpable in the majority of
170  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Dorsal
ramus
Internal intercostal
membrane
Angle of rib
Gray
ramus
Whiteramus
Posterior
Sympathetic
Intercostal nerve
axillary line
trunk
rib
(ventral ramus)
External
Lateral
N
intercostal
muscle
cutaneous
branch
Intercostalis
intimus muscle
Anterior
 axillary line
Pleural membrane
Anteriorcutaneous
branch
Internal intercostal
muscle
Intercostalis
External
intimus membrane
intercostal
membrane
Figure 12.2 The anatomy of the intercostal space. From Dravid and Paul 2007a. Used with permission.
patients,
preoperativeblockade
 should
be
aspirate before injecting local anesthetic in order to
attempted in most patients before the surgical
verify absence of vascular puncture.
approach is made.
Using intercostal nerve blocks, several investiga-
Each intercostal nerve lies immediately caudal to
tors have been able to document beneficial effects
its associated rib (Figure 12.2), so as long as the rib
for dogs undergoing thoracic surgeries. In canine
can be palpated and approached with a needle, this 
thoracotomy patients, selective intercostal nerve
block can be performed blindly or with the use of
blocks offer the possibility of improved postopera-
nerve stimulation. Ideally, the rib should
be
tive ventilation through analgesia without the risk
approached by a needle placed as dorsally as pos-
of centrally mediated respiratory depression that
sible to effectively block as much of the associated
dermatome as possible. It is important to remember 
administered  opioids.  Following  lateral  thora-
the close association of intercostal vessels with the
cotomy, healthy dogs that received morphine and
intercostal nerves (Figure 12.3). As with all local
oxymorphone showed signs of hypoventilation
and regional blocks, it is extremely important to
with significant elevations in PaCO, and respiratory
The Trunk 171
(a)
(b)
 nn. thoracici, rr. dorsales, rr. cutanei laterales
m. iliocostalis lumborum
Leftlung, caudal lobe exposed
 Diaphragm, central tendon
 in intercostal spaces
 m. obliquus internus abd ominis pars costalis
Left lung, caudal
(basal) border
 Diaphragm, costal part
aa.intercostales dorsales
nn. intercostales Ix, X
 Costodiaphragmatic recess, opened by
removal of intercostal muscles
m. transversus thoracis in
n. intercostalis IX, r. muscularis distalis
interchondral space 6
a. thoracica interna,
a.v. epigastrica cranialis superficialis 
rr. intercostales ventrales
-a.v.epigastrica cranialis
m. pectoralis profundus dexter
Figure 12.3 (a), (b) Caudal ribs, costal arch, intercostal arteries and nerves of a dog: left lateral view. Intercostal arteries and
nerves in intercostal spaces 9, 10, and 11 are displayed after removal of the endothoracic fascia. From Done et al. 2009.
Used with permission.
172
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
acidosis for up to 90 minutes following extubation
tested in this study are not currently used in clinical
(Berg and Orton 1986). Further, the opioid treatment
canine patients for intercostal blocks.
 groups experienced a significant decrease in PaO, as
Intercostal bupivacaine has also been compared
compared with control groups. Dogs that received
with epidural morphine for treatment of postopera-
intercostal blockade with 0.5mL of 0.5% bupiva-
tive pain following lateral thoracotomy in dogs
caine at each intercostal site did not demonstrate
(Pascoe and Dyson 1993). In that study, analgesia for
these alterations in respiratory variables; arterial
breakthrough pain was required in eight of 20 dogs
blood gas tensions, tidal volume, and minute
in the epidural morphine group but only two of
ventilation remained similar to control animals.
 20 dogs in the intercostal bupivacaine group. There
Regardless of the analgesic technique used, all dogs
were no differences in blood gas values with respect
 receiving opioids or intercostal blocks had quiet and
to PaCO, and PaO2, and both parameters were
pain-free recoveries compared with control dogs
 maintained within clinically acceptable ranges.
where no analgesia was provided for postoperative
Based on its local anesthetic mechanism of action,
pain control. In that study, dogs were only moni-
intercostal bupivacaine  should  totally abolish
 nociceptive input from the tissues being supplied by
sions could be drawn in terms of overall duration of
intercostal nerves, but, because thoracotomies
effect of the different treatments. The investigators
 involve multiple anatomic structures (including the
recommended the use of intercostal blocks as an
thoracic limb musculature), it may not totally abol-
alternative to systemically administered opioids for
ish all input from the whole surgical site. To improve
treating pain after lateral thoracotomy because they
 postoperative analgesia, the authors suggested that
are
techrically
easy
perform
pue
provide
intercostal bupivacaine (
could be combined with
other techniques for further enhancing intraopera-
oids, while avoiding the potential for opioid-related
tive and postoperative analgesia.
central respiratory depressive effects.
 In human surgical patients, intercostal blocks
-u sop Aa Sunau Apnis ral e u
with bupivacaine have been shown to signifi-
costal blocks using bupivacaine were shown to
have a detectable beneficial effect for up to 16 hours
with intercostal saline or no intercostal local anes-
following lateral thoracotomy (Flecknell et al.
thetics when administered as either single blocks,
 Susn yoeoidde jepomu e pnis je u '(1661
repeat blocks, or as continuous infusions. In peo-
nalbuphine, a partial opioid agonist, as well as
ple, the use of local anesthesia as repeat blocks or
intercostal bupivacaine (total dose 3.5-4.5mgkg-1)
infusions has also been shown to significantly
administered across five intercostal spaces
was
reduce supplementary analgesic requirements
compared with narcotic-only analgesia with nalbu-
(Joshi et al. 2008). The technique of a continuous
phine. Systemically administered nalbuphine was
extrapleural infusion of local anesthetic for inter-
dosed at regular intervals in both treatment groups.
costal nerve blockade has been described in the
Similar to the previous studies, the intercostal
human literature (Sullivan et al. 1995). This has
blocks and nalbuphine were
found
to
have
the same effect as an intercostal block, exposing
comparable analgesic effects, but there were no
the intercostal nerves to local anesthetic, but can
significant changes in PaCO, in this particular
 provide more continuous or long-term analgesia
Aeuiou aueaiq cl paieadde soop Ie pue Apns
without additional injections in the postoperative
during observation. However, the authors
P!P
 period. Meta-analysis has demonstrated that this
observe an improvement in oxygenation following
technique results in analgesia that is similar to a
nalbuphine administration
 in the
opioid-only
thoracic epidural and superior to systemic nar-
group that was not observed in the intercostal
cotics, with an extremely low incidence (<1%)
 block group until the 16-hour time point. This led
of local anesthetic toxicity (Detterbeck 2005).
the researchers to conclude that the additional
A study comparing extrapleural infusion of bupi-
analgesic was unnecessary in combination with the
vacaine with intravenous pethidine, an opioid
regional
block until 16 hours, the presumed
agonist, found an overall increase in pain scores
duration of the block. It is important to note that
for patients not receiving the block for the first
the relatively high doses of bupivacaine that were
72 hours following surgery.
The Trunk 173
Although no studies have been reported in cats,
and cats, and is the most studied local anesthetic
the use 
 of intercostal blocks for prevention of
for use with these blocks in dogs. Other local
surgical pain from thoracotomy has been used
 anesthetics (lidocaine, mepivacaine, ropivacaine)
extensively in clinical practice for years. Using the
 can also be used to provide anesthesia of varying
same principles used for dogs, this local anesthetic
duration of effect depending on the drug used.
technique can be incorporated into the anesthetic
Intercostal blocks are most often achieved by
and analgesic management of feline patients. It is
blocking four to five consecutive nerves with
important to note that because of the sensitivity of
0.5mL bupivacaine (0.5%) per site in patients
feline patients to local anesthetics, as well as small 
smaller than 10kg, and 0.5-2mL bupivacaine
patient size, it is important to carefully calculate
Sag) axoi ui aeana suaed ui ans ad (%'o)
local anesthetic doses and to dilute the drugs as
and Orton 1986, Flecknell et al. 1991, Thompson
needed to ensure adequate injectate volumes in
and Johnson 1991, Pascoe and Dyson 1993). Single
these small patients.
injection intercostal blockade with bupivacaine is
expected to provide analgesia for up to 12 hours
following the injection. The addition of epineph-
Indications
rine to the local anesthetic has not been shown to
 prolong the duration of blockade but may increase
 Intercostal nerve blocks can be used to provide anal-
the allowable local anesthetic dosage due to a
 gesia for the lateral thoracic wall and its associated
decrease in systemic absorption (Kopacz and
structures. These blocks are useful for providing
Thompson 1998; Hadzic 2007).
short-term analgesia as a component of balanced
 anesthesia for major surgical procedures or for post-
operative analgesia following surgery. They can
Distribution of local anesthesia
also be used in awake patients to provide analgesia
and analgesia
for injuries urrelated to surgery (e.g. single rib
 fractures, flail chest); however, patients may object 
 Intercostal nerve blocks are effective for providing
to the performance of multiple injections and may
regional anesthesia to the lateral chest wall and its
move abruptly, increasing the risk of inadvertent
associated bony and soft tissue structures. Local
pleural, vascular, or pulmonary puncture. As with
anesthetic drugs are administered adjacent to the
many local and regional anesthetic techriques, it is
intercostal nerves behind each rib, and provide
important to choose patients carefully based upon
sensory and motor blockade to the associated
 presentation and disposition, and to incorporate
 judicious use of sedation as appropriate.
dermatomes. To be effective for pain relief, at least
three consecutive nerves should be blocked
Single injection blocks will typically last up to 12
(Thompson and Johnson 1991). In practice, the
hours, depending on the local anesthetic used. As
nerve that serves the intended intercostal space for
described above, potential for continuous inter-
the incision is blocked, along with up to two nerves
costal nerve block exists by using an indwelling
 Tranially and two nerves caudally. In the case of rib
perineural catheter or wound soaker catheter
fractures or flail chest, the nerve immediately
placed along an intercostal thoracotomy incision
caudal to the affected rib is blocked.
(see Chapter 8 for more detail on the use of this
technique). In these situations,
longer-term
 analgesia can be provided by intermittent injections
 or through continuous local anesthetic infusions
Equipment
using a pump.
 Clippers;
sterile gloves;
Local anesthetics used
1.5 inch spinal needle;
syringe for local anesthetic;
The long-acting local anesthetic bupivacaine is
bupivacaine (0.5%); and
most commonly used for intercostal blocks in dogs
solutions for aseptic preparation of skin.
174  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Although hypodermic needles are commonly
the patient may be too overweight for the blind
used in practice, they do potentially pose more risk
approach of the intercostal block technique to
for causing trauma due to their long bevel and
be used safely. Use of nerve stimulation may be
sharp edges when compared with spinal needles.
 indicated for these patients.
Caution should be exercised so as not to overly
Once these bony landmarks are identified, the
traumatize tissues by redirecting the needle repeat-
lateral thorax is clipped as necessary for the
edly while it is in the patient. Small gauge (22-24-
 plarned surgical procedure and aseptically pre-
gauge) needles should be used whenever possible.
 pared. The skin should be prepared for injection
A nerve stimulator and small gauge insulated
across several ribs near the dorsal midline,
needle can also be used for performing intercostal
 including at least two to three ribs on either side
nerve blocks. Visible and palpable muscle twitches
of the anticipated site of the surgical incision
are easily elicited when the tip of the insulated
(usually this is required for the surgical procedure
needle is in close proximity to the intercostal
regardless of the planned analgesic technique).
nerve, confirming needle tip placement prior to
 The anesthetist should sterilely glove and prepare
local anesthetic injection.
a short bevel (1.5 inch) spinal needle (Figure 12.5).
A hypodermic needle can also potentially be
Intercostal block - standard technique
 The patient is placed in lateral recumbency,
with the operative side of the thorax positioned
up (Figure 12.4).
Initially without using sterile technique, the
nondominant hand grasps the thoracic limb
and the scapula is advanced cranially to allow
the anesthetist to palpate and identify the first
rib. The thirteenth rib can alternatively be iden-
tified as the caudal aspect of the costal arch. The
dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic ver-
tebra should also be palpated (when possible
Figure 12.5
5 Photograph of intercostal blockade in a dog.
based on body condition) to identify dorsal
A 22-gauge spinal needle is being used to perform the block.
midline. If these landmarks cannot be palpated,
The nondominant hand is used to palpate the rib immediately
cranial to the nerve to be blocked, and the needle is
advanced slowly through the skin until it contacts the rib
Figure 12.6  Image of intercostal blockade in a dog. The needle
Figure 12.4  Photograph of a dog positioned in left lateral
should be "walked off" the caudal aspect of the rib (illustrated
recumbency. The lateral thorax has been clipped in
in white) in an attempt to deposit the local anesthetic in the area
preparationfor demonstration of intercostal blockade.
of the intercostal nerve (illustrated in yellow).
The Trunk 175
used, but its sharp long bevel does not allow
The needle is initially advanced through the
the operator to appreciate when different tissue
skin onto the lateral aspect of the rib.
planes are penetrated and can cause more 
The needle tip is then gently "walked off" the
damage to the underlying lung if the parietal
rib caudally until it can be advanced medially
immediately caudal to the rib (Figures 12.6
needle approach if the rib is not contacted first.
and 12.7). Caution should be used not to
The rib immediately craniad to the anticipated
advance the tip of the needle beyond the
incision is palpated as far dorsally as possible
depth of the rib. The needle should not pene-
so that its intercostal nerve can be targeted as
trate the parietal pleura and enter the pleural
 proximally as possible.
space.
(a)
Skin
Pleura
Rib
 Intercostal space
Intercostal nerve
Intercostal
veinandartery
(b)
Figure 12.7 (a) and (b) "Walking off" the rib caudally until the tip of the needle enters the intercostal space. From Stromskag
and Klevin 1998. Used with permission.
176  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
The stylet is removed and the needle hub is
inspected for blood. Immediately before attach-
Rib
ing the drug-containing syringe to the needle,
air is aspirated into the syringe to form an air
bubble above the local anesthetic solution
Pleura
adjacent to the plunger The syringe is then
attached to the hub of the needle.
Subpleural space
The anesthetist should now use the syringe to
aspirate, ensuring that the needle tip is not
placed intravascularly in an intercostal artery
or vein (blood would be aspirated) or that the
Fibers of intercostalis
needle tip is placed in the pleural space (air
intimus
would be aspirated).
A small volume of local anesthetic (0.5-1 mL) is
then slowly injected through the needle at the
single site on the caudal aspect of the rib to per-
Internal intercostal
form the block. The small air bubble in the
membrane
syringe above the local anesthetic solution
External intercostal
should not compress more than 50% of its
muscle
starting volume during injection of the local
anesthetic solution. If resistance to injection
Figure 12.8
 The paths taken by fluid injected into the
intercostal space. From Dravid and Paul 2007a. Used with
is being experienced, the air bubble will
permission.
compress, giving the anesthetist a visual as well
as tactile indicator of resistance to injection. If
this occurs, the needle should be repositioned
and the injection reattempted. Following injec-
tion of the local anesthetic, the syringe and
needle are withdrawn together as one unit.
This technique is repeated for the two ribs
cranial and the two ribs caudal to the incision in
order to successfully block the other derma-
tomes that will potentially be involved in the
surgical field (Figure 12.8).
This technigue can also be used with an insu-
lated needle and a peripheral nerve stimulator
(Figure 12.13). A low current of 0.5 mA is used, at
1 or 2 Hz and 0.1 ms stimulus duration.When the
Figure 12.9  Axial computed tomographic (CT) image of a
needle is walked off the caudal aspect of the rib,
dog in lateral recumbency. An intercostal block has been
twitches will be observed along the entire inter-
performed using lidocaine and iohexol 240 mg iodine mL-1
(10:1 dilution). The white arrow demonstrates contrast
costal space as the nerve is stimulated and the
enhancement (hyperattenuation) caudal to the rib in the
intercostal muscles are stimulated to contract. As
region of the intercostal space.
described above, the syringe should first be aspi-
rated for blood or air followed by injection of the
local anesthetic. The twitches will immediately be
ribs are not easily palpated and blind approaches
abolished if the local anesthetic is correctly depos-
would carry more potential risk to the patient
ited adjacent to the target intercostal nerve.
(inadvertent penetration of the pleural space,
Although nerve stimulation can be used to identify
 pneumothorax, intravascular injection) as the anes-
the target intercostal nerves in any patient, its use is
thetist blindly attempts to place the needle without
particularly helpful in overweight animals when
the assistance of palpable landmarks.
The Trunk177
Figure 12.10  Parasagittal multiplanar reformatting from a
Fgure 12.12  Dorsal plane magnetic resonance image (MRI)
computed tomographic (CT) scan of a dog. Intercostal blocks
of a dog in lateral recumbency. intercostal blocks have been
have been performed across several successive intercostal spaces
performed across several successive intercostal spaces using
using lidocaine and iohexol 240 mg iodine mL-1 (10:1 dilution).
lidocaine and gadolinium contrast medium (gadobutrol 1.0
The white arrow demonstrates contrast enhancement
mmol L-1 at 100:1 dilution). The injected solution can be seen
(hyperattenuation) between the ribs in the intercostal spaces.
between the ribs in the intercostal spaces (white arrows),
Figure 12.13  An intercostal block being performed in a
large dog. The dog is positioned in lateral recumbency and a
nerve stimulator and insulated needle is being used to search
for the target nerves to assist with performing the block.
Figure 12.11A
Axial magnetic resonance image (MRl) of a dog
in lateral recumbency. An intercostal block has been performed
using lidocaine and gadolinium contrast medium (gadobutrol
review of the human literature of this techrique did
1.0 mmol L-' at 100:1 dilution). The injected solution can be
not reveal any incidents of local anesthetic toxicity
seen spreading along the intercostal space (white arrow).
(Detterbeck 2005). Inadvertent vascular puncture
due to the close proximity of intercostal nerves to the
intercostal vessels is possible, and is usually detected
Potential complications
when the syringe is aspirated. It is also possible to
inadvertently advance the needle into the thoracic
 Intercostal blocks are relatively easy to perform and,
cavity, and this can usually be detected on aspiration
when administered correctly, carry minimal risk to
of air into the needle. If the pleural space is entered,
the patient. Although absorption of local anesthetic
 an insignificant pneumothorax can result when
from the intercostal space is rapid, systemic toxicity
the stylet is initially withdrawn from the needle.
of local anesthetics should be of little concern as long
 Although the incidence of pneumothorax in veteri-
as proper dosing and injection technique is used. A
 nary patients is not reported, human literature
178  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
reports an overall incidence of 0.07% (Detterbeck
following incision through thoracic dermatomes,
2005). If interpleural needle placement is not detected,
 post-traumatic thoracic pain, and can even be used
the small volume of local anesthetic solution des-
for treating chronic pain disorders of the cranial
tined for an intercostal block will instead be depos-
abdomen, including pancreatitis (Dravid and Paul
ited interpleurally and, as a result, will ultimately be
2007b). In dogs, interpleural administration of local
ineffective for the desired analgesia. A case report of
anesthetics provides good analgesia, improves the
concern describes an intercostal block performed
patient's ventilation, and, when an indwelling cath-
with proper technique at sites between T3 and T7
eter is placed into the pleural space, allows a conve-
resulting in temporary total spinal anesthesia in a
nient method for repeated dosing of analgesics over
human patient (Chaudhri et al. 2009). Inadvertent
time (Thompson and Johnson 1991; Conzemius et al.
injection into a dural cuff extending beyond the inter-
1994; Stobie et al. 1995).
vertebral foramen was the proposed explanation for
 Using this technique, local anesthetic solution is
s non arn s hsan paadx ss
injected into the pleural space between the parietal
se inq suaned uumu u Aisnoiaand paodan uaaq
and visceral pleurae in the thoracic cavity. An
not been reported in veterinary medicine (Benumof
indwelling catheter can be placed percutaneously
and Semenza 1975; Sury and Bingham 1986).
and secured between the visceral and parietal
pleural and injected with local anesthetic solution
as needed for analgesia, or a single dose can be
Interpleural regional analgesia
delivered with a needle or canmnula. Once it is in the
in dog and cat
pleural space, the local anesthetic will be distrib-
uted with the normal movement of the lungs that
General considerations and purpose
occurs with ventilation and patient movement.
 Based on the effects of gravity, it will typically pool
Interpleural analgesia was first described in people
 in a dependent location in the interpleural space so
the early 1980s, and is now recognized as a major
the anesthetist needs to take this consideration into
analgesic technique for people
pue
animals
 account when managing the patient's body posi-
Interpleural administration of local anesthetic solu-
tion following administration of the local anes-
edaadsd d r msnss
thetic (Figure 12.14). If not taken into account, the
3
中┌
中H
2.5
品
0.5-
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time (min)
Figure 12.14A
 Arterial bupivacaine concentrations in halothane-anesthetized dogs after interpleural injection of bupivacaine.
snuiw sl ie h woy juaap Aueusis + s = ui sainui nh ie 3h idaxa 'g = u 'ss + ueaw se passaidxa saniea
aing = h 'ay s'l auieidng = 7 'aes = s 'h'o = at 'ost paoi sausi g lasal so'o ne as ausi
3.0mg kg', and HE = bupivacaine 3.0mg kg- with epinephrine 5pg mL-'. From Kushner et al. 1 995. Used with permission.
TheTrunk 179
local anesthetic solution may be dispersed to an
epidural
space. However, studies have been
area of the interpleural space that is unrelated to
the target nerves, resulting in failure of the anal-
that the analgesic effects of interpleurally adminis-
gesic technique.
tered local anesthetics are not the result of central
When tested in a laboratory setting, this local
or spinal blockade (VadeBoncouer et al. 1990).
anesthetic technique decreases the amplitude and
When administered into the pleural space, bupiva-
increases the latency of evoked potentials trans-
caine does not produce neural blockade of spinal
mittedalongt
the affected intercostal nerves.
cord structures and normal spinal cord action
Predictably, when larger volumes of local anesthetic
potentials are maintained following local anes-
are administered into the interpleural space, the
thetic administration by this route. Blockade of the
resulting intercostal blockade is more widespread
thoracic spinal cord does not occur and should not
and is more pronounced (VadeBoncouer et al.
be a concern for the anesthetist who plans to use
1990). However, the large surface area of the pleura
this technique.
can potentially result in rapid absorption of the
As bupivacaine is readily available to veterinar-
administered local anesthetic solution and high
ians and has the longest duration of action, it has
plasma levels of the local anesthetic can result,
been the most frequently studied local anesthetic
 potentially leading to local anesthetic systemic tox-
used for interpleural administration (Thompson
icity (Kushner et al. 1995) (Figure 12.15). In clinical
and Johnson 1991; Conzemius et al. 1994).
practice, large volumes of local anesthetic are not
 Bupivacaine administered by this route as a single
necessary to produce a desired analgesic response.
 injection has been shown to provide measureable
The toxic dose of the local anesthetic to be used
analgesia for up to 24 hours. When compared
should first be calculated (e.g. 4 mgkg' bupiva-
 with the use of systemically administered opioids
caine in the dog) and can be avoided before any
for providing analgesia to patients following
drug is administered into the pleural space.
thoracic procedures, interpleural bupivacaine has
     sm 
been shown to provide better pain relief with
 gesia might result from diffusion of the local anes-
minimal side effects. In one study that evaluated
thetic across the dorsal parietal pleura into the
the use of 1.5mgkg′ bupivacaine administered
(a)
(b)
ausew jeixy (g youagwnal leanel lsj ui xeioyi s,sop e jo aew! (iaw) ahewi anueuosai 2jausew jeixs (e) 1t'zl aanbi
resonance image (MRl) image of the same dog in right lateral recumbency following interpleural administration of contrast
[enald nuoj ayn ou! (uonp toot ne t-l loww o'l ongope) wnuope pue auiesop!l jo uooalu! leinaldiaui uv uonos
space has been performed. Following administration of the solution, the dog was placed into right lateral recumbency for
10 minutes prior to imaging. The injected solution can be seen spreading along the dependent areas of the pleural space
(white arrows).
180  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
interpleurally to dogs following intercostal thora-
IV every six hours. Dogs that received the inter-
pleural
bupivacaine
hadno
postoperative
superior in dogs treated with interpleural bupiva-
 increases in heart rate and respiratory rate, and
caine (Thompson and Johnson 1991). These dogs
C dn suod a ya  sars ud ram p
had minor decreases in PaO, (that were not
24 hours. They also had higher PaO, and SaO2
considered to be clinically significant) and no
aam anaun inq Aiaaeiadoisod smou xis oi dn
significant changes in pH, PaCO, or BE. Overall,
 no differences in pH or PaCO, between groups.
fewer blood gas alterations occurred in the inter-
The authors concluded that l
both analgesic
pleural bupivacaine group than in the systemic
methods provided effective pain relief, but that
a isa go san un dno ao
dogs receiving interpleural bupivacaine were
the interpleural bupivacaine was found to be
consistently less painful and this technique was
comparable to systemically administered mor-
superior for its effects on maintaining normal
phine or selective intercostal nerve blocks; how-
respiratory function.
ever, a major benefit of interpleural administration
A study in pigs showed only slight changes in
was the relative ease of providing repeated dosing
blood pressure and systemic vascular resistance
to awake patients through the indwelling inter-
following interpleural administration of 2mgkg-1
pleural catheter.
bupivacaine with epinephrine (Stromskag et al.
 Studies of interpleural bupivacaine in human
1990). Two studies have evaluated the cardiovas-
patients echo the efficacy that has been docu-
cular effects and safety of interpleurally adminis-
mented in these veterinary studies. Intermittent
tered bupivacaine in dogs. Kushner et al. (1995)
and continuous administrations of interpleural
investigated two doses (1.5mgkg′ and 3 mgkg-')
bupivacaine
were
compared
with
the
sole
of bupivacaine, with and without epinephrine,
administration of fentanyl on a patient-controlled
using saline as a control. Dogs were maintained in
pump (Demmy et al. 2009). Several patients in a
dorsal recumbency during their study. No differ-
fentanyl-only
group reported
1inadequate
pain
ences in ETCO2, PaO, or pH were detected bet-
control and the overall fentanyl consumption was
ween groups, and mean values for cardiovascular
significantly greater in this group as compared
parameters
were maintained within clinically
with those treated with interpleural bupivacaine.
 acceptable ranges in all dogs in the low dose group.
Another study of human patients compared sev-
However, two of the six dogs in the high dose
eral interpleural treatments with a fentanyl-only
bupivacaine group (3mgkg-') developed clinically
group and the results showed significantly greater
significant hypotension following treatment. One
fentanyl consumption in the fentanyl-only group
of these dogs had respiratory arrest that necessi-
(Karakaya et al. 2004). Interestingly, patients in
tated positive-pressure
 ventilation. No arrhyth-
the interpleural saline group experienced some
mias or signs of local anesthetic systemic toxicity
degree of analgesia as well. The authors hypo-
 occurred in any of the dogs. As one might antici-
thesized that the infused injectate could have
pate, the measured plasma levels of bupivacaine
reduced rubbing between visceral and parietal
were lower in the 1.5mgkg' group than in the
pleura, resulting in reduced pain during patient
 3mgkg′ group, but all plasma levels were below
movement.
reported toxic levels in all of the dogs in this
When compared with systemic opioids, inter-
particular study (Figure 12.15). The authors con-
pleural local anesthesia has several documented
cluded that 1.5mg kg-~ bupivacaine could be safely
benefits. In a study of 26 clinical canine patients
administered interpleurally and would not be
that were presented for intercostal thoracotomy,
expected to produce undesirable hemodynamic
1.5 mgkg' interpleural bupivacaine was admin-
 effects in dogs.
In 2006, Bernard et al. reported the results of
tube (Conzemius et al. 1994). Dogs were placed
a study
 that investigated the cardiovascular
operative side down for 10 minutes after the
effects of interpleural bupivacaine (1.5mgkg-′)
bupivacaine was administered. 
Another
group
combined with lidocaine (1.5mgkg') adminis-
of dogs received buprenorphine
administered
tered
lto
patients with or without an
1open
The Trunk181
 pericardium. They found that cardiac rhythm and
better analgesia, the interpleural bupivacaine
cardiac output were unaffected by local anes-
also had a longer duration of effect after a single
thetic treatment, and that cardiovascular effects
 injection and was still effective 12 hours after sur-
were similar regardless of whether drugs were
gery, long after the systemically administered
administered interpleurally or directly into the
morphine levels were undetectable (after six
pericardial space under direct  visualization
hours). The authors concluded that although all
during thoracotomy. This also suggests that
three techniques provided adequate pain relief in
 interpleural injection is safe in postoperative peri-
the early postoperative period, the interpleural
cardectomy patients.
bupivacaine had a longer duration of action, was
Two studies have investigated the effects
associated with fewer blood gas alterations, and
ofi
interpleural
1bupivacaine
on  respiratory
resulted in an earlier return to normal pulmonary
mechanics and blood gases in healthy dogs fol-
function  in dogs following intercostal thora-
lowing intercostal and median sternotomy thora-
cotomy. The interpleural administration of mor-
cotomy (Stobie et al. 1995; Dhokarikar et al. 1996).
phine did not appear to offer any benefits beyond
In both studies, the local anesthetic technique
that of systemic administration and no real
(1.5mgkg1 0.5% bupivacaine) was compared
benefit for interpleural morphine could be found
with either systemically administered morphine
through this study.
(1.0mgkg IM) or interpleurally administered
 In their median sternotomy study, the investi-
morphine (1.0mgkg' diluted in 20mL saline).
gators found fewer differences between the differ-
ent experimental treatment groups (Dhokarikar
observed in all dogs following their lateral thora-
et al. 1996). The treatments of IM morphine, inter
cotomy procedures. All dogs had some degree of
pleural morphine, or interpleural bupivacaine all
hypoventilation, respiratory acidosis and eleva-
resulted in similar effects on pulmonary function,
tions in their alveolar:arterial (A-a) oxygen gradi-
blood gases, and pain. They suggest that median
ents following discontinuation of anesthesia.
sternotomy may be a more painful procedure and
These alterations reflect the changes that are asso-
that their doses of interpleural local anesthetic
ciated with atelectasis, decreased
1 functional
(1.5 mgkg-1 0.5% bupivacaine) may have been
residual capacity, accumulation of airway secre-
inadequate for the procedure. In addition, the
tions, and collapse/closure of small airways that
bupivacaine was administered through a chest
 occur with general anesthesia and thoracotomy.
tube in the left hemithorax, and the dogs were
even in otherwise healthy research dogs.
The
initially positioned in dorsal recumbency after
authors concluded that more profound changes
administration, so the study does not reflect the
 might occur in patients with underlying clinical
technique
that many veterinarians currently
 disease or in those patients undergoing actual
employ in a clinical setting whereby the patient is
cardiac or pulmonary 1
procedures.
However,
 [ood cn Auaqumnan peuais ul paneld Aaieipa
despite the generalized changes that occurred in
the local anesthetic along the incision. Although
all of their study dogs, PaO, levels were highest
the beneficial effects of using interpleural local
in dogs in the interpleural bupivacaine group
 anesthesia in this particular median sternotomy
(Stobie et al. 1995). The interpleural bupivacaine
study were not as conclusive as the authors hoped
dogs also showed evidence of improved anal-
they would be, interpleural bupivacaine remains
gesia when compared with the systemic
mor-
an important option for providing analgesia to
Arojendsu rasuol e peq Aaui se 'dnora auud
patients in a clinical setting following median
phase in their respiratory cycle, an earlier return
sternotomy.
to their preoperative inspiratory patterns, and an
earlier return to baseline work-of-breathing mea-
 surements. The interpleural bupivacaine dogs
Indications
were subjectively more comfortable, had more
quiet recoveries, and were more alert than the
At currently recommended doses of bupivacaine
morphine-treated dogs. In addition to providing
(1.5mgkg"
,interpleural regional analgesia is a
182
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
relatively safe and highly effective method of
Distribution of local anesthesia
providing thoracic pain relief to patients and
and analgesia
should be high on the list for any practitioner
dealing with these types of patients. Advantages
-ran pun umos aau shop  sanis an
 over intercostal nerve block techniques include
pleurally administered local anesthetics have
ease of administration, the ability to redose easily,
their mechanism of action from gravity-depen-
and the ability to provide analgesia following
dent, multidermatomal blockade of intercostal
median sternotomy. Despite affecting sites of
nerves. When the local anesthetic pools in the
major innervation to the respiratory
ysystem
dependent parts of the pleural space, it diffuses
such as intercostal nerves, phrenic nerve, and
 across the parietal pleura to block the underlying
diaphragm, both interpleural and intercostal
intercostal nerves that course through the area.
techniques have minimal detrimental effects on
Human cadavers injected with dye in the inter-
ventilation or cardiovascular parameters (Berg
pleural space and left in the supine position for
and Orton 1986; Flecknell et al. 1991; Thompson
30 minutes revealed diffuse staining of the chest
and Johnson 1991; Conzemius et al. 1994; Stobie
walls, lung, diaphragm (with a tendency towards
et al. 1995; Dhokarikar et al. 1996; Detterbeck
pooling in the most dependent area), and the
2005; Bernard et al. 2006).
paravertebral region (McKenzie and Mathe 1996).
A local anesthetic will be less effective for anal-
Althought
the
injectate is widely distributed
gesia if a pleural effusion dilutes it or the drug
within the thoracic cavity, the distribution of the
becomes bound to proteins in the effusion. For
nerve blockade corresponds largely to the lower-
these reasons, it is important to aspirate effusions
most part of pleural space where pooling of the
from the thoracic cavity prior to local anesthetic
local anesthetic solution occurs (Riegler et al.
injection if an indwelling chest tube is in use.
1989; VadeBoncouer et al. 1990). This highlights
Flushing the chest tube or interpleural catheter
the need for appropriate patient positioning
with saline should be limited so as to not
following injection of the local anesthetic
further dilute the local anesthetic in the inter-
(Figure 12.14).
pleural space. Interpleural local anesthesia
1is
 As explained above, distribution of interpleural
typically not recommended if the patient is pro-
bupivacaine nerve block is gravity-dependent.
ducing a pleural effusion greater than 1-2 mLkg-1
 Positioning of the patient following interpleural
day'. Alternative analgesia is required in these
 administration of a local anesthetic during recovery
patients, such as intercostal blocks, epidural
is very important, especially if a catheter is being
morphine, or use of systemically administered
used. The patient should be positioned in lateral
analgesics.
(operative side down) or dorsal recumbency to
 allow the local anesthetic to pool near the inter-
costal incision and its associated intercostal nerves.
Following median sternotomy, patients should be
Local anesthetics used
 positioned in sternal recumbency. As the analgesic
effect of interpleural local anesthesia is created by
The long-acting local anesthetic bupivacaine is
 movement and pooling of the local anesthetic
most commonly used for interpleural anesthesia
rather than individual blockade of distinct nerves,
in dogs and cats, and is the most studied local
nerve block created by interpleural bupivacaine
anesthetic for use with these techniques. Other
has been shown to be more widespread than the
local anesthetics (lidocaine, mepivacaine, ropiva-
blockade produced by selective intercostal nerve
caine) can also be used to provide anesthesia of
blocks (Thompson and Johnson 1991). Many peo-
varying duration of effect depending on the drug
ple believe that interpleural local anesthesia is
used. Bupivacaine is typically recommended to
easier to perform than intercostal nerve blockade
be used at a total dose of 1.5-2mgkg′, and can be
and, as there is no risk of inadvertently "missing" a
administered into the interpleural space every
nerve in the operative field, use interpleural local
8-12 hours.
 anesthesia as their preferred method of analgesia
TheTrunk 183
for thoracotomy and other painful procedures
After slowly advancing the needle and catheter
involving the thorax.
through the intercostal space, the pleura will
"(dod, aqedied e ym uao) paeauad aq
The catheter is then gently advanced off the
needle stylet into the interpleural space. The
Equipment
catheter is softer than a needle and carries less
risk of causing trauma to the underlying lung
：
Clippers;
 sterile gloves;
(Figure 12.16b).
The needle stylet should be withdrawn from
over-the-needle catheter (14-20G, 2 inch) or
the catheter, and the saline-filled syringe
other indwelling catheter or chest tube;
attached to the catheter hub. If the catheter is
syringe for local anesthetic;
correctly located in the interpleural space, the
bupivacaine (0.25-0.5%); and
column of saline in the syringe wil slowly
 solutions for aseptic preparation of skin.
 decrease in volume as it is aspirated by the neg-
 ative interpleural pressure (Figure 12.16c).
After confirming that the catheter is positioned
Interpleural analgesia (single injection) -
in the interpleural space, the saline syringe
standard technique
is disconnected from the catheter and the
preloaded syringe with local anesthetic is
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency. The
attached.
patient can be awake, sedated, or anesthetized
 This syringe is first aspirated and evaluated for
(Figure 12.4).
 presence of blood to ensure that the needle tip
A volume of 0.5% bupivacaine should be
is not placed intravascularly.
drawn into a syringe at a calculated dose of
The calculated volume of local anesthetic
1.5mgkg-1 based on the patient's lean/ideal
(1.5mgkg-1 of 0.25-0.5% bupivacaine) is then
body weight.
slowly (over 1-2 minutes) injected through the
Initially without using sterile technique, the
catheter into the pleural space (Figure 12.16d).
anesthetist should palpate the lateral thorax to
Following injection of the local anesthetic, the
identify the seventh through tenth intercostal
catheter is withdrawn and the patient is posi-
spaces.
tioned such that the operative side is down,
 Once these spaces are identified, the lateral thorax
allowing the local anesthetic to pool and block
 is clipped between the sixth and tenth intercostal
the underlying intercostal nerves. Depending
 spaces and the skin is aseptically prepared.
on the local anesthetic used, the patient should
The anesthetist puts on a pair of sterile gloves
be maintained in this recumbency for at least
 and uses an over-the-needle catheter (or other
10 (lidocaine) to 20 minutes (bupivacaine)
appropriate needle or carnula) to perform the
for the full analgesic effect of the drug to be
block (Figure 12.16a). A syringe with 2-3 mL of
appreciated.
saline is attached to the hub of the needle stylet.
For 10-15 minutes following administration of
The needle is initially advanced onto the lateral
the local anesthetic into the pleural space, the
aspect of the seventh or eighth rib at its mid-
patient should be closely monitored for pos-
point. It is then gently "walked off" the cranial
sible complications resulting from systemic
border of the rib until it can be advanced
absorption of the drug itself or from an error in
through the intercostal muscles between the
performing the technique.
ribs. Walking it off the cranial border minimizes
the risk of advancing the catheter through the
Alternatively, an indwelling catheter or chest
region immediately caudal to the rib that con-
tube can be placed into the pleural space at the
tains the intercostal nerve, artery, and vein, and
completion of surgery. In this instance, it should
reduces the chance of damaging these impor-
be well secured to the patient to prevent inad ver-
tant structures.
tent dislocation as the patient recovers from
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 12.16 (a) Photograph of interpleural blockade using an over-the-needle catheter in a dog. A 20-gauge catheter is being
used to perform the block. Initially, the needle stylet/catheter is advanced slowly through the skin until it contacts the rib. After
the rib is identified, the unit is "walked off” the cranial aspect of the rib and slowly advanced through the intercostal muscles
stylet into the pleural space between the lung and the chest wall.(c)The needle stylet isremoved from the catheter and a syringe
is attached. Without applying manual pressure to the plunger, a small amount of fluid may be aspirated into the pleural space
due to negative pressure,confirming proper placement of the catheter.(d) Once correct placement of the catheter is confirmed,
the local anesthetic solution is slowly injected into the pleural space. Following administration of the solution, the patient should
anesthesia. Using an indwelling catheter or chest
tube offers the additional benefit of being able to
 provide additional doses of local anesthetic over
am extended period of several days as necessary
(Figure 12.17).
Potential complications
Pneumothorax
In people, the most common complication of inter-
pleural injections is pneumothorax, with a reported
incidence of 2% (Stromskag et al. 1990; Dravid
and Paul 2007b). An insignificant pneumothorax
develops in every patient as a small volume of air
Figure 12.17  Photograph of a cat with an indwelling chest
is initially aspirated into the pleural space due to
tube in place. Photograph by J.A. Flanders.
TheTrunk185
negative intrathoracic pressure while the interpleu-
venous concentrations of local anesthetic than
ral catheter is placed and capped. This small
higher doses that are administered more slowly
volume of air will be slowly absorbed and is not
(Scott 1975). Dogs receiving a total cumulative IV
considered to be of clinical significance. Lung
dose of 5 mg kg1 bupivacaine over 90 minutes may
trauma is rarely encountered unless the anesthetist
develop seizure activity (Liu et al. 1982, 1983).
is overly aggressive in placing the needle or cath-
 Using bupivacaine at 1.5mg kg-1 interpleurally in
eter, or unless there is underlying pathology of the
dogs has been shown to have minimal adverse
lung. Restricting patient movement through ade-
systemic effects, and should be administered
quate restraint and/or sedation, and use of flexible
slowly through a needle or catheter over 1-2 min-
catheters or Touhy needles rather thian stiff and
utes to minimize the chances for complications
sharp-tipped hypodermic needles can minimize
(Kushner et al. 1995; Bernard et al. 2006). Although
the risk of pneumothorax. Although rare, tension
there are no reports of cardiac toxicity with modest
 pneumothorax should be monitored for, and accu-
 doses of interpleural bupivacaine, the potential
mulated interpleural air can be aspirated through
the indwelling catheter as necessary. All patients
caine is of important note. Patient treatment orders
should be carefully observed following placement
that call for interpleural local anesthetics should be
ae pue anojaq qoq raiaes [emaldiau ue jo
 made especially clear in order to avoid accidental
drug administration.
 intravenous administration.
Catheter dislocation
Diaphragmatic paralysis
Catheter dislocation can occur whenever
ari
Bilateral interpleural catheters have been used in
indwelling catheter is placed at any site in the body.
people to provide analgesia for major thoracoab-
After correctly positioning the catheter in the
dominal procedures and to improve postoperative
pleural space, it should be secured to the patient by
 pulmonary function. However, even though inter-
means of adhesive patches, tissue glue, suture,
pleural administration of local anesthetics provides
and/or bandages.S
Subcutaneous tunneling
 Excellent postoperative analgesia for surgical pro-
interpleural catheters can been used as a further
cedures, care should be taken as phrenic nerve
means to reduce the likelihood of dislodgment or
paresis or paralysis can occur with interpleural
air inadvertently entering the interpleural space
blockade. The phrenic nerve lies under the thin
around the catheter. The use of a c-clamp or other
layer of mediastinal pleura and is the only motor
similar device may reduce the possibility of air
nerve to the diaphragm in the dog. Despite the
 entrainment following inadvertent dislodgment of
apparently excellent safety profile of this block, the
the catheter or the chest tube end pieces.
close proximity to important neural structures such
as the phrenic nerve, recurrent larymgeal nerve, and
sympathetic trunk demands that the practitioner
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity
consider the patient's underlying condition, and
Rapid absorption of the local anesthetic from the
 carefully plan and execute the analgesic techrique.
pleural space has the potential to cause systemic
 In a study that used electromyography to eval-
toxicity that manifests as cardiovascular collapse
uate diaphragmatic function following approxi-
and neurologic signs (see Chapter 4 for more
mately
1.5mgkg'
 interpleural
bupivacaine
information). In most cases, the dose of local anes-
 boluses, seven out of nine dogs experienced some
thetic drug that is tolerated by the patient without
degree of loss of diaphragmatic function on the
manifesting as toxicity depends more on the rate
side of the injection (Kowalski et al. 1992). In that
of administration than on the total dose—even a
study, no attempt was made to direct the drug near
"low" dose of local anesthetic can potentially cause
the phrenic nerves. Dogs that received bilateral
clinical signs of toxicity if it is injected intravascu-
blockade demonstrated paradoxical respirations
larly or absorbed systemically too quickly. Lower
and  generated negative intraabdominal pres-
doses that are infused rapidly by the intravenous
 sures on inspiration, indicating loss of diaphrag-
route produce symptoms of toxicity at lower
matic function. Factors that would explain the
186  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
predisposition to diaphragmatic dysfunction in
Thoracic paravertebral blocks are used to provide
only some of the dogs could not be established. The
 analgesia for procedures of the chest and upper
authors concluded that animals with underlying
abdomen, and have been widely used and reported
phrenic  nerve and  diaphragmatic  dysfunction
for a number of surgical procedures either as an
might be especially susceptible to the respiratory
 adjunct to, or a replacement for, general anesthesia
complications of interpleural local anesthesia. For
 in people. Using this technique, a local anesthetic is
these reasons, veterinary patients with underlying
 deposited adjacent to where the rib articulates with
diseases that result in an increased risk of cardio-
thie vertebra at the location where a spinal nerve
vascular and respiratory complications may be
leaves its associated foramen (Figure 12.18). In
better treated with alternative methods of pain
people, there is a potential space at this location
 relief such as intercostal blocks or systemic opioids.
that contains the intercostal (spinal) nerve, the
dorsal ramus, the rami communicantes, and the
sympathetic chain. Anatomically, the intervertebral
Pain on injection
foramina, vertebral bodies and discs, pleura,
Local anesthetics are commercially available as
transverse processes, costotransverse ligaments,
water-soluble salts, usually as hydrochlorides. This
 and intercostal spaces border the paravertebral
acidity increases the stability of the solution in
space. The thoracic paravertebral space is contin-
terms of shelf life, but decreases the pH to less than
uous with the intercostal space laterally, epidural
6.5. Awake or lightly sedated patients may show
space medially, and the contralateral paravertebral
initial signs of discomfort when the local anesthetic
 space via the perivertebral fascia (Karmakar 2001).
is initially injected into the pleural space and,
It is important to note that as the dura mater may
although this pain is short-lived, can be discon-
extend into the medial aspect of paravertebral
certing to those who observe it (Thompson and
space, there can be a connection with the epidural
Johnson 1991; Conzemius et al. 1994).
space and the potential for epidural spread of local
anesthetic following performance of this block. As
 a result, patients need to be monitored closely after
Other complications
the block is administered, similar to when a thoracic
Other reported but rare complications related to
 epidural has been used (Norum and Breivik 2011).
interpleural blockade with local anesthetics include
A study of thoracic paravertebral injection in
Horner's syndrome, infection, pleural effusion,
human cadavers found a 40% incidence of epidural
and catheter problems such as coiling, kinking, or
spread, all corfined to one vertebral segment
rupture (Stromskag et al. 1990; Thompson and
(Cowie et al. 2010).
Johmson 1991; Bernard et al. 2006).
Placement of local anesthetic within the thoracic
paravertebral space produces unilateral somatic
and sympathetic block suitable for procedures of
New techniques from human medicine
the lateral chest and abdomen (Davies et al. 2006).
Bilateral thoracic paravertebral blockade can also
Thoracic paravertebral blockade
be used for midline and bilateral procedures.
Theoretically, use of bilateral blocks carries a
A paravertebral nerve block involves conduction
greater risk of hypotension due to sympathetic
block of the spinal nerve within the paravertebral
blockade, a greater potential for local anesthetic
space. It was first described in human patients in
toxicity due to the larger volume of drug solution
1905 as a method to provide abdominal analgesia
xerooumaud roy luaod auoiu e pue 'panmban
(Karmakar 
2001). Dense sensory,
motor,
pue
 due to an increased number of injections. However,
sympathetic block can be achieved from injection of
a review of studies in people that utilized bilateral
local anesthetic at this location. In human anesthesia,
thoracic
C paravertebral blockade found overall
thoracic paravertebral blockade following single-
complication rates to be low and of acceptable risk,
shot or continuous infusion of local anesthetics is
and the authors advocated the use of bilateral
 gaining popularity and is now widely used in adults,
paravertebral
1blocksin
appropriate
cases
children, and neonates for surgical analgesia.
(Richardson et al. 2011).
The Trunk187
(a)
Esophagus
Subserous
fascia
Thoracic duct
PLEURA
Azygos
Endothoracic
vein
Descending aorta
Visceral
fascia
Sympathetic chain
parietal
Interpleural
space
Extrapleural
Right
compartment
lung.
Subendothoracic
compartment
Intercostal
nerve
Posterior
primary rami
Superior costotransverse ligament
(b)
Transverse process
Neck of rib
Superior costotransverse ligament
Endothoracic
Lateral costotransverse ligament
fascia
Intertransverseligament
PLEURA
Paraspinalmuscle
Visceral
Parietal ~
Interpleural
space
Lung
Figure 12.18
(a) Anatomy of the thoracic paravertebral space in people. (b) Sagittal section through the thoracic paravertebral
space in people, showing a needle that has been advanced above the transverse process. From Karmakar 2001. Used with
permission.
In general, three techniques for performing
(Hadzic 2007). Using blind techrigues, it has been
the block in human medicine are described: the
reported that the thoracic paravertebral space can
loss-of-resistance technique, the predetermined dis-
 am , a e  pe aq
tance technique, and ultrasound-guided injection
superior costotransverse ligament is traversed
188  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
following posterior approach by a blunt needle, and
based on reduced pain and analgesic use compared
local anesthetic drug can be injected with minimal
with systemic opioids in most procedure-specific
uncertainty of location. Nerve stimulation can also
studies. Investigators have also showm that follow-
be used to assist with localization of the needle tip.
ing elective thoracotomy, use of thoracic paraverte-
Compared with thoracic epidural analgesia with
bral blockade can be further improved by the
local anesthetics, thoracic paravertebral blockade
 addition of a continuous incisional block using a
in people results in comparable or superior anal-
subcutaneous catheter that is placed into the sur-
gesia following thoracotomy, better preservation of
gical wound at the time of surgery. When this cath-
pulmonary function and hemodynamic responses,
eter is infused with local anesthetic, analgesia is
and also has the advantage of being useful in situa-
improved over that obtained by use of thoracic
tions where thoracic epidural may be contraindi-
paravertebral block alone (Garutti et al. 2009).
cated, such as anticoagulant therapy (Coveney
 One study in people documented a 12% failure
et al. 1998; Richardson et al. 1999; Davies et al. 2006;
rate in sensory l
block in patients receiving a
Joshi et al. 2008; Scarci et al. 2010; Pintaric et al.
thoracic paravertebral block (Cheema et al. 2003).
2011). Like epidurals, thoracic paravertebral
Unfortunately, the onset of the block was slow
blockade may lower a patient's opioid needs,
when 0.15-0.3mLkg of 0.5% bupivacaine was
resulting in fewer negative side effects of systemi-
used, and the block required up to 40 minutes for
cally administered opioids such as urinary reten-
full effect. There was no correlation between block
tion, nausea, and vomiting. There also appears to
distribution, injectate volume, and local anesthetic
be greater suppression of sympathetic responses
mass. In addition, these authors found a high level
 to surgery when thoracic paravertebral blockade
of variability in local anesthetic spread. Although
is
compared with epidural anesthesia alone.
there was blockade of three to four segments fol-
Paravertebral blocks completely abolish somato-
lowing a single injection, the spread was unpre-
sensory evoked potentials (a measure of the ner-
dictable and varied between individual patients.
vous system's response to stimuli) at the level of
They concluded that a single injection thoracic
blockade (Richardson et al. 1998). This particular
 paravertebral block produces a safe but unpredict-
feature appears to be unique to paravertebral
 able block. This conclusion was recently echoed by
blocks, and is not shared with epidural blocks.
a human cadaveric study, which found that the
Recently, a large systematic review looked at 74
 spread of injectate following thoracic paravertebral
randomized studies of human thoracotomy pain
injection was highly variable and that epidural
that compared the use of different regional anes-
spread is possible (present in 40% of cadavers
thetic techniques with the use of systemic opioid
injected) and may contribute significantly to anal-
gesia in clinical patients (Cowie et al. 2010).
review found that the most consistently effective
Complications in people are uncommon. Failure
e Aq papiaond sem ued oero roy eisale
rates range between 6.1% and 10% (Karmakar 2001;
thoracic epidural technique combining a local
Naja and Lonnqvist 2001). Complications that
anesthetic with an opioid administered by contin-
have been reported include inadvertent vascular
uous infusion. However, based on the analyzed
puncture (6.8%), hypotension (4%), hematoma
evidence, thoracic paravertebral blockade with a
(2.4%), pain at site of skin puncture (1.3%), signs
local anesthetic that was administered as a bolus
of epidural or intrathecal spread (1%), pleural
followed by a continuous infusion for two to three
puncture (0.8%), and pneumothorax (0.5%). Rare
days was also beneficial and would be recom-
complications include blockade of the ipsilateral
mended. The analgesia from the paravertebral
brachial
plexus with an associated
1Horner's
technique was found to be comparable to thoracic
 syndrome and have been reported to be due to
epidural analgesia (when a local anesthetic was
cranial and/or lateral spread of injectate to areas
used alone), but was associated with fewer side
such as the stellate ganglion, preganglionic fibers,
effects such as pulmonary complications, hypoten-
or alternate pathways such as the Kuntz nerve
sion, nausea, and urinary retention. The authors
(Tenicela and Pollan 1990; Coveney et al. 1998;
also concluded that, if thoracic epidural or paraver-
Renes et al. 2011). A single case of hemidiaphrag-
tebral analgesia were not feasible for any reason,
matic paresis has been reported following injection
intercostal nerve blocks would be recommended
at the level of T2-T3 and was thought to be due to
The Trunk189
spread of injectate to the phrernic nerve at the level of
Palpate the major landmarks for the procedure
the subclavian artery and vein (Renes et al. 2011).
 including the relevant spinous processes of the
The use of a bilateral paravertebral techrique has
target thoracic vertebrae, and the bodies and
been found to approximately double the likelihood
the dorsal angles of the corresponding ribs. The
 of inadvertent vascular puncture and to cause an
puncture site is located in a parasagittal plane
eight-fold increase in pleural puncture and pneumo-
relative to the patient's midline.
thorax when compared with urilateral blocks (Naja
 Perform an aseptic preparation of the skin over-
and Lormqvist 2001). However, a 2011 review of the
lying the intended puncture sites.
If the patient is sedated rather than anesthe-
blockade found a more modest to absent increase in
tized, infiltrate the skin and puncture sites with
risk and recommended the use of bilateral blockade
2% lidocaine to increase patient tolerance to the
as an alternative to thoracic epidural for midline
procedure.
 procedures (Richardson et al. 2011). The overall
Set the nerve stimulator to initially deliver a
complication rates of unilateral and bilateral thoracic
current of 1 mA.
paravertebral blocks are low and considered accept-
 Insert the stimulating needle perpendicular to
 able. As with any regional anesthetic technique, it is
the skin in a dorsoventral direction with a slight
important to monitor patients closely for untoward
medial-lateral orientation. If the tip of the
effects of the block. The incidence of potential com-
needle contacts the vertebral transverse pro-
plications following thoracic paravertebral blockade
cess, the needle should be withdrawn and redi-
 in animals is not yet reported.
rected in a more cranial direction until adequate
Although there is a growing body of evidence to
contraction of the corresponding intercostal
support use of thoracic paravertebral blocks in
muscle is detected.
people, no studies have been published to date that
The stimulation of the ventral roots of thoracic
investigate or report the use of this technique in
spinal
nerves
elicits contractionofthe
animals. This technique is currently under investi-
corresponding intercostal muscle. Contraction
gation in dogs and cats and may prove to be a
of dorsally located epaxial muscles can be
useful alterative to intercostal nerve blocks for
evoked if the dorsal roots of the thoracic spinal
 providing longer-term thoracic analgesia following
nerves are stimulated, and should not be con-
thoracotomy.
The technique described below
fused for true intercostal muscle contractions.
should serve only as a guide for performance of
Contraction of the intercostal muscle may be
this block, and will undoubtedly be adjusted as the
very subtle; therefore it can be useful to palpate
block is used and tested in research and clinical sit-
the corresponding intercostal muscle with the
uations in animals.
nondominant hand while manipulating the
stimulating needle with the dominant hand.
Equipment
When needle location is confirmed, the calcu-
lated volume of local anesthetic (1.5mgkg of
 Clippers;
0.25-0.5% bupivacaine for all of the planned
sterile gloves;
sites) is then slowly injected.
 syringe for local anesthetic;
For 10-15 minutes following administration of
bupivacaine (0.25-0.5%);
 solutions for aseptic preparation of skin;
the local anesthetic into the pleural space, the
patient should be closely monitored for pos-
 peripheral nerve stimulator; and
sible complications resulting from
insulated Tuohy needle (100 mm 20G).
1systemic
absorption of the drug, epidural
 spread, or
from an error in performing the technique.
Technique
 The patient is placed in sternal recumbency. The
An ultrasound-guided approach to thoracic
patient can be awake, sedated, or anesthetized.
paravertebral blocks was first reported in 2010 and
Clip an area over the patient's dorsal midline
this technique has gained in popularity (Marhofer
over the corresponding vertebra to be blocked.
et al. 2010; Bondar et al. 2010). Real-time ultrasound
Clip laterally until the heads of the rib can be
guidance offers the advantage of {
visualizing
easily palpated.
the boundaries of the paravertebral space. This is
190  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
m. obliquus internus
n. costoabdominalis n. lumbali Ill r. ventralis,
a. circumflexa
abdominis, cut edge
(IIX1)
n. ilioin guinalis
epunjoid wn!!
n. lumbalis IV,
r. ventralis,
m. iliccostalis lumborum 
 n. cutaneus femoris lateralis 
m. transversus abdominis,
mm. tercostales externi
caudal border
et interni, cut surfaces
Inguinal ligament
Rib 14
av. femoralis
nn. lumbales I,Il,rr. ventrales,
m. psoas minor, tendon
n. iliohypogastricus cranialis
m. transversus abdominis,
aponeurosis contribution to
external lamina of rectus sheath 
m. transversus abdominis:
pars costalis
ars lumbalis
a.v. profunda femoris
aponeurosis
Prepubic tendon
nn. intercostales X, Xl, XIl
m. pectineus
m. rectus abdominis,
tendinous inscription
. pudenda externa
Diaphragm,
a. epigastrica caudalis, a.v. epigastrica
 a abdominalis In. inguinalis
sternal part
rr. laterales
 caudalis superficialis
caudalis
 su perficialis
Figure 12.19  (a), (b) Transverse abdominal muscle and nerves of the abdominal wall of a dog: left lateral view. The internal
oblique muscle has been cut through longitudinally close to its origin from the thoracolumbar fascia, and from its association
with the inguinal ligament. The internal oblique muscle is reflected ventrally. From Done et al. 2009. Used with permission.
especially important as the pleural space can be
local anesthetic spread can be visualized. Although,
visualized and avoided. As with all ultrasound-
 n  ad s s   c
guided regional blocks, the injecting needle and
for1
ultrasound-guided
1 techniques, there is a
The Trunk 191
theoretical improvement in block speed, onset, effi-
that exist within this potential space (Figures 12.20
cacy, and safety. Due to the large degree of breed
and 12.21).
The block needs to be performed bilaterally if it
ultrasound-guided approach to this block holds
is to be effective for providing analgesia across the
great promise.
patient's midline. Two different approaches have
been described in the literature depending on the
 region of interest: the original posterior approach is
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block
 performed immediately superior to the iliac crest
(at the lumbar "triangle of Petit") and is effective
The TAP block was originally described for use
for procedures below the umbilicus, whereas the
 in people as an alternative method of providing
new anterior subcostal approach is effective for
complete sensory analgesia to the lateral and ante-
procedures above the umbilicus (Barrington et al.
rior abdominal wall (Rafi 2001). It was further
2009; Jankovic et al. 2009) (Figure 12.22). A contrast-
developed and tested by McDonnell and colleagues
(McDonnell et al. 2007a, b, 2008) and there are now
the method of injection significantly impacts the
 many published studies and case reports of its use
 pattern of spread and the area of blockade (Carney
 in people that show the TAP block to be an effective
et al. 2011).
alternative to other techniques such as lower
In people, the TAP block has been used to pro-
thoracic or lumbar epidural, with few side effects
vide dermatomal sensory block of the lower
(Niraj et al. 2009b; O'Cormor and Renfrew 2010). It
thoracic and upper lumbar abdominal afferent
is now one of the most rapidly expanding regional
nerves for a variety of abdominal procedures.
 anesthetic techniques used in people, and it appears
By 2010, seven randomized, double-blinded clinical
to be an important tool in postoperative pain
trials that investigated the effects of a TAP block on
management in human patients undergoing
sur-
 postoperative pain had been reported (McDonnell
gery involving the anterior abdominal wall.
et al. 2007a; Carney et al. 2008; McDonnell et al.
Pain
experienced
1by
patients
umdergoing
2008; El-Dawlatly et al. 2009; Niraj et al. 2009c;
abdominal procedures frequently derives from the
Belavy et al. 2009; Costello et al. 2009). These
abdominal wall incision (McDonnell et al. 2007a, b).
studies included a total of 364 patients. The proce-
Anatomically, the abdominal wall consists of three
dures included bowel resection via midline abdom-
muscle layers: the extemal abdominal oblique, the
mal incision (McDonnell et al. 2007a), Cesarean
 internal abdominal oblique, and the transversus
delivery (McDonnell et al. 2008; Belavy et al. 2009;
abdominis, as well as their associated fascial
 Costello et al. 2009), abdominal hysterectomy via
sheaths. The segmental ventral branches of the
transverse abdominal incision (Carney et al. 2008),
lower thoracic and upper lumbar nerves innervate
-edel pue '(e6ooz le pa [e1in) Kuoioapuadde uado
the skin, muscles, and parietal peritoneum of the
roscopic cholocystectomy with all four ports below
ventral abdominal wall. These branches leave their
the umbilicus (El-Dawlatly et al. 2009).
respective intervertebral foramina and course over
 In four studies the patients received a general
the vertebral transverse process before piercing the
anesthetic in addition to the block (McDornell et al.
musculature of the lateral abdominal wall to run
600   6- 6  a  0
ventrally through the fascial plane between the
Niraj et al. 2009c), whereas patients in the other
internal oblique and transversus abdominis mus-
studies received co-administered spinal anesthesia
cles (Figure 12.19). Cadaveric studies in people
but no general anesthetic (McDormell et al. 2008;
have shown there to be extensive branching and
Costello et al. 2009). In three studies the TAP block
communication of nerves within the fascial plane
was performed bilaterally after induction of anes-
(Rozen et al. 2008). The TAP block involves deposi-
thesia using the blind technique via the triangle of
tion of local anesthetic using either single-shot
Petit (McDormell et al. 2007a; Carney et al. 2008;
needle placement or continuous infiltration via
 McDonnell et al. 2008), whereas in the remaining
catheter placement into the neurofascial plane
studies an ultrasound-guided TAP block was per-
with local anesthetic, effectively blocking
the
formed (El-Dawlatly et al. 2009; Niraj et al. 2009c;
nerves that supply the anterior abdominal wall
Belavy et al. 2009; Costello et al. 2009). Local
192 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
LS - Lumbar spine
LD - Latissimus dorsi
PM-Psoas major
QL - Quadratus lumborum
MM - Multifidus muscle
IL - Longissimus, Iliocostalis
TA - Transversus abdominis
IO - Internal oblique
EO - External oblique
N-50mm blunt tipped needle
ST - Subcutaneous tissue
Ls.:
Skin
Figure 12.20 Line drawing of a transverse section through the abdominal wall at the level of the lumbar triangle of Petit (TOP)
in people. The floor of the triangle is composed, from superficial to deep, of the fascial extensions of external oblique, internal 
oblique, and transversus abdominis, respectively, and the peritoneum. The needle is inserted through the triangle, using the
loss-of-resistance technique. The needle is shown in the transversus abdominis plane, and the fascial layers have separated as a
result of the injection of local anesthetic. From McDonnell et al. 2008. Used with permission.
Transversus
Figure 12.21 Computed tomographic image of the
abdominal wall in a person, 20 minutes after the injection
of iopamidol contrast. The arrow on the right demonstrates
Figure 12.22  Diagram of a transversus abdominis plane
contrast enhancement (high signal) between the internal
(TAP) block being performed in a person. The probe is
oblique and transversus abdominis muscles. The contrast is less
positioned on the anterior abdominal wall immediately
discrete on the left, as some contrast had penetrated through
inferior to the costal margin with needle-probe orientation
the more superficial plane between the external and internal
shown. The hatched area under the probe indicates the
oblique muscles along the needle path at the time of injection.
anticipated spread of injectate following this technique.
From McDonnell et al. 2007b. Used with permission.
 From Barrington et al. 2009. Used with permission.
The Trunk193
anesthetics
used
　included
1 levobupivacaine,
Important information such as the analgesic
bupivacaine, or ropivacaine. In four studies, saline
 duration following single-shot and continuous
dnona lou au u oqand e se paioaui sem
techniques, and the optimal procedure-specific
(Carney et al. 2008; McDonnell et al. 2008; Belavy
volumes and concentrations of local anesthetics
et al. 2009; Costello et al. 2009), whereas in the
remains to be established. A study of the pharma-
other three studies no placebo infiltration was
cokinetics of ropivacaine following TAP block
performed.
revealed a significantly higher concentration in
 In all but one study, the initial 24-hour postoper-
abdominal injection sites as compared with serum
ative morphine consumption by the patients was
(Latzke et al. 2011). Although the local levels were
significantly reduced in those people receiving a
highly variable, this suggests a topical mode of
TAP block. In the one study that did not demon-
action rather than a systemic effect. A preliminary
strate a significant effect on postoperative opioid
study that investigated the use of lidocaine for
requirements, spinal morphine was administered
bilateral TAP blocks showed serum concentra-
 as part of the multimodal approach to analgesia in
tions within or just above the therapeutic range
all of the patients (including the control group)
 for the anti-arrhythmic effects of lidocaine in peo-
(Costello et al. 2009). As a result, pain scores were
ple (Kato et al. 2009). Whether or not there is also
low in all patients so it was difficult to statistically
a systemic component to the analgesia observed
demonstrate analgesic improvement from the TAP
 in patients receiving TAP blocks in addition to the
block.
local analgesic effects of the local anesthetics
A number of published studies have demon-
administered into the neurofascial sheath is not
-    s g  a s
currently known. However, a systemic compo-
cine. A 2011 meta-analysis compared a number of
nent to the analgesic effect is speculated based on
randomized controlled trials that assessed use of
the efficacy of the block with obstetric and gyne-
the TAP block for provision of analgesia for
a
cologic procedures such as Cesarean section and
 sdnono un sampasond deunopqe jo Aanra
hysterectomy. B
Both of these surgical procedures
received the block, a reduction was observed in
overall opioid consumption, and an increase was
addition to abdominal wall pain; a block solely
observed in periods of time until patients requested
providing coverage to the abdominal wall would
additional analgesia (Siddiqui et al. 2011). A differ-
not be expected to have a significant analgesic
ent review of numerous trials found reduced pain
effect (Peterson et al. 2010).
scores in four out of six studies and a decrease in
morphine consumption in six out of seven studies
(Peterson et al. 2010). Placement of indwelling
Use in animals
catheters into the TAP neurofascial
space has
Due to the variability in body wall thickness of the
recently been reported, and can be used to provide
different dog and cat breeds, the blind technique
prolonged analgesia to patients over three to four
of performing the TAP block in small animals is
days (Gucev et al. 2008; Niraj et al. 2009a; Heil et al.
not recommended at this time. The ultrasound-
2010)
guided technique allows for direct visualization of
 Overall, in the studies involving bowel surgery,
the different layers of the body wall, increasing
le saross ued Xwooaiaisy pue Koapuadde
the chances of block success while decreasing
rest and during mobilization were significantly
chances of peritoneal puncture (Figure 12.23).
reduced in patients receiving a TAP block in the
There is a single report of using a TAP block for
early postoperative period (zero to six hours), and
 provision of analgesia in a live animal. In that case
continued for up to 24 hours. Patients suffered less
report, the authors administered a TAP block
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), and
using bupivacaine to a Canadian lynx for addi-
sedation was lower in the TAP patients (Peterson
tional analgesia to facilitate an exploratory lapa-
 et al. 2010). However, a review of the TAP literature
rotomy(
(Schroeder et al. 2010). The authors
suggests that overall evidence for reduced PONV
confirmed correct placement of the local anes-
and sedation in patients following this block is
thetic between the relevant fascial planes using
weak.
ultrasound visualization. They reported that the
194  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
EO
10
Figure 12.23
 Ultrasonographic image obtained in a live dog
demonstrating layers of abdominal wall. Small dots on the
right of image indicate 1 cm depth markers. EO, external 
(b)
abdominal oblique; IO, internal abdominal oblique; TA,
transversus abdominis; P, peritoneal cavity. From Schroeder
et al. 2011. Used with permission.
feline had minimal responses to surgical stimula-
tion, and recovered smoothly following the
procedure with perceived analgesia of eight to ten
hours duration. Although this report represents
the experience of using a TAP block in only a
single patient, it does lend support for further
research to be completed to assess the utility of
using this technique in animals.
 Since the initial case report in a lynx, two cadav-
 eric studies of the block using medium-sized dogs
suggest the significant utility of this block.
Following injection under ultrasound-guidance,
Figure 12.24
(a) Ultrasonographic image obtained in a live
the spread of injectate in the canine cadavers was
patient post-injection of local anesthetic solution (5 ml of 
largely comparable to that of human cadavers
0.125% bupivacaine) into the fascial plane overlying the
(Tran et al. 2009; Schroeder et al. 2011; Bruggink
transversus abdominis. Small dots on right of image indicate
et al. 2011) (Figure 12.24). As adequate coverage of
1 cm depth markers. EO, external abdominal oblique;
the ventral nerve roots of T12-L2 was demon-
IO, internal abdominal oblique; LA, local anesthetic; TA,
transversus abdominis; P, peritoneal cavity. (b) Dissection
strated following injection, one would expect this
of the lateral abdominal wall showing T1 2-L3 spread of 
block to provide adequate coverage for most canine
methylene blue solution following ultrasound-guided TAP
abdominal wall procedures.  Randomized  con-
block in a cadaver. From Schroeder et al. 2011. Used with
trolled trials in dogs as well as other species need to
permission.
be undertaken before further conclusions can be
extension set;
 20 G Tuohy or spinal needle; and
Equipment
bupivacaine (0.5%) diluted accordingly to a
Ultrasound machine with 13-6MHz linear
final volume of 2mLkg-.
 array probe;
:siaddip
Ultrasound-guided technique
skin preparation solution;
sterile gloves;
 The patient is placed in lateral recumbency
syringe for local anesthetic;
with the side to be blocked uppermost.
TheTrunk 195
Clip a generous amount of the lateral body
References
wall to allow for adequate visualization with
the ultrasound probe. The area of interest is
Barrington MJ, Ivanusic JJ, Rozen WM et al. (2009) Spread
found midway between the caudal aspect of
of injectate after ultrasound-guided subcostal trans-
the last rib and iliac crest, at the level of the
versus abdominis plane block: a cadaveric study.
patient's axilla.
Anaesthesia 64, 745-750.
The skin overlying the anticipated pun-
Belavy D, Cowlishaw PJ, Howes M et al. (2009)
 cture site is aseptically prepared for needle
Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block
insertion.
for analgesia after Caesarean delivery. Br J Anaesth
103,726-730.
during performance of the block, the needle
Benumof JL, Semenza J (1975) Total spinal anesthesia fol-
should be attached to the syringe via an
lowing intrathoracic intercostal intercostal nerve
blocks. Anesthesiology 43, 124-125.
extension set.
Berg RJ, Orton EC (1986) Pulmonary function in dogs
 Using a 13-6MHz linear array probe in a
after intercostal thoracotomy: comparison of mor
transverse orientation, the lateral body wall
phine, oxymorphone, and selective intercostal nerve
(approximately 3-7cm dorsal to the patient's
block. Am J Vet Res 47,471-474.
ventral midline depending on patient size)
Bernard F, Kudnig ST, Monnet E (2006) Hemodynamic
midway between the caudal aspect of the last
effects of interpleural lidocaine and bupivacaine
rib and the iliac crest is imaged. A clear image of
combination in anesthetized dogs with and without an
the three muscle layers of the abdominal wall
open pericardium. Vet Surg 35, 252-258.
should be obtained prior to needle insertion
Bondar A, Szucs S, Iohom G (2010) Thoracic paraverte-
(Figure 12.23).
bral blockade. Med Ultrason 12, 223-227.
 Using an in-plane needling approach (to allow
Bruggink SM, Schroeder CA, Baker-Herman TJ et al.
for real-time visualization of the needle's posi-
cranial to caudal spread of local anesthetic solution in
tion), the needle is advanced through the
ultrasound guided transversus abdominis plane blocks
external
pue
intemal
a
abdominal
oblique
in canine cadavers. Proceedings of the American
muscles and into the fascial plane overlying the
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine May
transversus abdominis muscle.
5-8, Las Vegas, NV.
The syringe should be used to aspirate for
Carney J, McDonnell JG, Ochana A et al. (2008) The
blood.
Following
negative
aspiration,
a
transversus abdominis plane block provides effective
small (0.5-1mL) test dose of the local anes-
postoperative
analgesia in patients undergoing
total abdominal hysterectomy. Anesth Analg 107,
thetic is injected into the potential space bet-
2056-2060.
weenthet
transversus abdominis
andthe
Carney J, Finnerty O, Rauf J et al. (2011) Studies on the
internal abdominal oblique muscles. The use
of ultrasound allows for direct visualization
abdominis plane blocks. Anaesthesia 66, 1023-1030.
of local anesthetic spread within the desired
Chaudhri BB, Macfie A, Kirk AJ (2009) Inadvertent total
facial plane (Figure 12.24a). If not observed to
spinal anesthesia after intercostal nerveblockplacement
be in the correct location, the needle is reposi-
during lung resection. Ann Thorac Surg 88, 283-284.
tioned and the test injection is repeated
las
Cheema S, Richardson H, McGurgan P (2003) Factors
necessary.
affecting the spread of bupivacaine in the adult thoracic
 Once the needle is confirmed to be in the correct
paravertebral space. Anaesthesia 58, 684-687.
location within the fascial plane, the remainder
Conzemius MG, Brockman DJ, King LG et al. (1994)
of local anesthetic solution is injected up to a
Analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy: a
clinical trial comparing intravenous buprenorphine
total volume of 1 mLkg-.
and interpleural bupivacaine. Vet Surg 23, 291-298.
 Following performance of the TAP block on one
Costello JF, Moore AR, Wieczorek PM et al. (2009) The
side, the patient is turned over into the other
transversus abdominis plane block, when used as part
lateral recumbency and the procedure
is
 of a multimodal regimen inclusive of intrathecal mor-
repeated using an additional 1mLkg' of the
phine, does not improve analgesia after cesarean
diluted local anesthetic solution.
delivery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 34, 586-589.
196  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Coveney E, Weltz CR, Greengrass R et al. (1998) Use of
Hadzic A (2007) Textbook of Regional Anesthesia and
paravertebral block
anesthesia in the
surgical
Acute Pain Management. McGraw Hill, New York NY.
management of breast cancer: experience in 156 cases.
Heil JW, 1lfeld BM, Loland VJ et al. (2010) Ultrasound-
Anm Surg 227, 496-501.
guided transversus abdominis plane catheters and
Cowie B, McGlade D, Ivanusic J et al. (2010) Ultrasound-
ambulatory perineural infusions for outpatient
guided thoracic paravertebral blockade: a cadaveric
inguinal hermia repair. Reg Anesth Pain Med 35,
study. Anesth Analg 110, 1735-1739.
556-558
Davies RG, Myles PS, Graham JM (2006) A comparison of
Jankovic ZB, du Feu FM, McConnell P (2009) An anatom-
the analgesic efficacy and side effects of paravertebral
ical study of the transversus abdominis plane block:
vs. epidural blockade for thoracotomy - a systematic
location of the lumbar triangle of Petit and adjacent
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Br J
nerves. Anesth Analg 109, 981-985.
Anaesth 96, 418-426.
Joshi GP, Bonnet F, Shah R et al. (2008) A systematic
 Demmy TL, Nwogu C, Solan P et al. (2009) Chest tube
review of randomized trials evaluating regional tech-
niques for postthoracotomy analgesia. Anesth Analg
' ns s u osso e a po
107,1026-1040.
1040-1046
Karakaya D, Baris S, Ozkan F et al. (2004) Analgesic
Detterbeck FC (2005) Efficacy of methods of intercostal
effects of interpleural bupivacaine with fentanyl for
nerve blockade for pain relief after thoracotomy. Ann
 post-thoracotomy pain. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 18,
Thorac Surg. 80, 1550-1559.
461465.
Dhokarikar P, Caywood DD, Stobie D et al. (1996)
   (  
Effects of intramuscular or interpleural admini-
 Anesthesiology 95, 771-780.
stration of morphine and interpleural administra tion
Kato N, Fujiwara Y, Harato M et al. (2009) Serum
concentration of lidocaine after transversus abdominis
have undergone median stermotomy. Am J Vet Res
plane block. J Anesth 23, 298-300.
57, 375-380.
Done SH, Goody PC, Evans SA et al.(2009) Color Atlas of
 thoracic and abdominal surgery. Tech Reg Anesth Pain
Veterinary Anatomy. Volume 3. The Dog and Cat (2nd
Manag 2, 25-29.
edn.). Mosby Elsevier, London, UK.
Kowalski SE, Bradley BD, Greengrass RA et al. (1992)
Dravid RM, Paul RE (2007a) Interpleural block - part 1.
Effects of interpleural bupivacaine (0.5%) on canine
Anaesthesia 62, 1039-1049.
diaphragmatic function. Anesth Analg 75, 400-404.
Dravid RM, Paul RE (2007b) Interpleural block - part 2.
Kushmer LI, Trim CM, Madhusudhan S et al. (1995)
Anaesthesia 62, 1143-1153.
 Evaluation of the hemodynamic effects of interpleural
 Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG (2010) Textbook of
bupivacaine in dogs. Vet Surg 24, 180-187.
Veterinary Anatomy (4th edn). Saunders, St. Louis,
Latzke D， Marhofer P, Kettmer SC et al. (201l)
MO.
 Pharmacokinetics of the local anesthetic ropivacaine
El-Dawlatly AA, Turkistani A, Kettmer SC et al. (2009)
after transversus abdominis plane block in healthy vol-
aueid siuuopqe snsiaasuen papins-punosenin
umteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 68, 419-425.
block: description of
a new techmique
and
Lemke KA, Dawson SD (2000) Local and regional
comparison with conventional systemic analgesia
 anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30,
during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Anaesth 102,
839-857.
763-767.
Liu P, Feldman HS, Covino BMet al. (1982) Acute cardio-
Flecknell PA, Kirk AJB, Liles JH et al. (1991) Post-
vascular toxicity of intravenous amide local anes-
operative analgesia following thoracotomy in the dog:
 thetics in anesthetized ventilated dogs. Anesth Analg
an evaluation of the effects of bupivacaine intercostal
61, 317-322.
nerve block and nalbuphine on respiratory function.
Liu PL, Feldman HS, Giasi R et al. (1983) Comparative
Lab Anim 25, 319-324.
CNS toxicity of lidocaine, etidocaine, bupivacaine, and
Garutti I, Gonzalez-Aragoneses F, Biencinto MT (2009)
tetracaine in awake dogs following rapid intravenous
Thoracic  paravertebral  block 
aftert
thoracotomy:
administration. Anesth Analg 62, 375-379.
comparison of three different approaches. Eur J
Marhofer P, Kettmer SC, Hajbok L et al. (2010) Lateral
Cardiothorac Surg 35, 829-832.
ultrasound-guided paravertebral blockade: an ana-
Gucev G, Yasui GM, Chang TY et al. (2008) Bilateral ultra-
tomical-based description of a new technique. Br J
sound-guided continuous ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric
Anaesth 105, 526-532.
block for pain relief after cesarean delivery. Anesth
McDormell JG, O'Donmell B, Curley G et al. (2007a) The
Analg 106, 1220-1222.
analgesic efficacy of transversus abdominis plane
The Trunk 197
block after
abdominal
surgery:a
prospective
Richardson J, Sabanathan S, Jones J et al. (1999) A pro-
randomized
controlled trial. Anesth
1Analg
104
spective, randomized comparison of preoperative and
193-197.
continuous balanced epidural or paravertebral bupiva-
McDonnell JG, O'Donnell BD, Farrell T et al. (2007b)
 Transversus abdominis plane block: a cadaveric and
and stress responses. Br J Anaesth 83, 387-392.
radiological evaluation. Reg Anesth Pain Med 32,
Richardson J, Lonnqvist PA, Naja Z (201l) Bilateral
399-404.
thoracic paravertebral block: potential and practice. Br
McDonnell JG, Curley G, Carmey J et al. (2008) The anal-
J Anaesth 106, 164-171.
Riegler FX, VadeBoncouer TR, Pelligrino DA (1989)
after cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial.
 Interpleural anesthetics in the dog: differential somatic
Anesth Analg 106, 186-191.
neural blockade. Anesthesiology 71, 744-750.
McKenzie AG, Mathe S (1996) Interpleural local anaes-
Rozen WM, Tran TMN, Ashton MW et al. (2008) Refining
thesia: anatomical basis for mechanism of action. Br J
the course of the thoracolumbar nerves: A new under-
Anaesth 76, 297-299.
standing of the innervation of the anterior abdominal
 Naja Z, Lonnqvist PA (2001) Somatic paravertebral nerve
wall. Clin Anat 21, 325-333.
blockade. Incidence of failed block and complications.
Scarci M, Joshi A, Attia R (2010) In patients undergoing
Anaesthesia 56, 1184-1188.
thoracic surgery is paravertebral block as effective as
Niraj G, Kelkar A, Fox AJ (2009a) Oblique sub-costal
epidural analgesia for pain management? Interact
transversus abdominis plane (TAP) catheters: an
Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 10, 92-96.
-uopqe iaddn xanje eisasieure reinpida ol aaneuiaine
Schroeder CA, Schroeder KM, Johnson RA (2010)
 inal surgery. Anaesthesia 64, 1137-1140.
Transversus abdominis plane block for exploratory
Niraj G, Kelkar A, Fox AJ (2009b) Application of the
laparotomy in a Canadian Lynx (Lyrx caradensis). J Zoo
transversus abdominis plane block in the intensive
Wild Med 41, 338-341.
care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care 37, 650-652.
Schroeder CA, Snyder LBC, Tearmey CC et al. (2011)
Niraj G, Searle A, Mathews M et al. (2009c) Analgesic effi-
 Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block
cacy of ultrasound-guided transversus
abdominis
in the dog: an anatomical evaluation. Vet Anaesth
-sapuadde uado Suosiapun sjuaned u yoonq auend
Analg 38, 267-271.
tomy. Br J Anesth 103, 601-605.
Scott DB (1975) Evaluation of clinical tolerance of local
Norum HM, Breivik H (201l) Learming from the past for
anaesthetic agents. Br J Anaesth 47 suppl, 328-331.
the present: paravertebral blocks for thoracic surgery
Siddiqui MRS, Sajid MS, Uncles DR et al. (2011) A meta-
are not without risk. Eur J Anaesthesio1 28, 544-545.
analysis on the clinical effectiveness of transversus
O'Connor K, Renfrew C (2010) Subcostal transversus
 abdominis plane block. J Clin Anesth 23, 7-14.
abdominis plane block. Anaesthesia 65, 91-92.
Stobie D, Caywood DD, Rozanski EA et al. (1995)
 Pascoe PJ, Dyson DH (1993) Analgesia after lateral thora-
Evaluation of pulmonary function and analgesia in
cotomy in dogs: epidural morphine vs. intercostal
dogs after intercostal thoracotomy and use of mor-
bupivacaine. Vet Surg 22, 141-147.
phine administered intramuscularly or interpleurally
Peterson PL, Mathiesen O, Torup H et al. (2010) The
and bupivacaine administered interpleurally. Am J Vet
transversus abdominis plane block: a valuable option
Res 56, 1098-1109.
for postoperative analgesia? A topical review. Acta
 Stromskag KE and Klevin S (1998) Continuous intercostal
Anaesthesiol Scand 54, 529-534.
and interpleural nerve blockades. Tech Reg Anesth
Pintaric TS, Potocnic I, Hadzic A et al. (2011) Comparison
Pain Manag 2, 79-89.
of continuous thoracic epidural with paravertebral
Stromskag KE, Minor B, Steen PA (1990) Side effects and
block on perioperative analgesia and hemodynamic
complications related to interpleural analgesia: an
update. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 34, 473-477.
Anesth Pain Med 36, 256-60.
Sullivan E, Grannis FW, Ferrell B et al. (1995) Continuous
extrapleural intercostal nerve block with contimuous
via the lumbar triangle. Anaesthesia 56, 1024-1026.
infusion of lidocaine after thoracotomy. A descriptive
Renes SH, van Geffen GJ, Snoeren MM et al. (2011)
pilot study. Chest 108, 1718-1723.
Ipsilateral brachial plexus block and hemidiaphrag-
Sury MR, Bingham RM (1986) Accidental spinal anaes-
matic paresis as adverse effect of a high thoracic para-
thesia following intrathoracic
intercostal nerve
vertebral block. Reg Anesth Pain Med 36, 198-201.
blockade. A case report. Anaesthesia 41, 401-403.
Richardson J, Jones H, Atkinson R (1998) The efect of
Tenicela R, Pollan SB (1990) Paravertebral-peridural
thoracic paravertebral blockade on intercostal somato-
block technique: a unilateral thoracic block. Clin J Pain
sensory evoked potentials. Anesth Analg 87, 373-376.
6, 227-234.
198   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Thompson SE, Johnson JM (1991) Analgesia in dogs after
 guided transversus abdominis plane block: a cadaveric
intercostal thoracotomy: a comparison of morphine,
study. Br J Anaesth 102, 123-127.
selective intercostal nerve block, and interpleural
Vadeboncouer TR, Riegler FX, Pelligrino DA (1990) The
 regional anesthesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg 20, 73-77.
effects of two different volumes of 0.5% bupivacaine in
()    q    11
a canine model of interpleural analgesia. Reg Anesth
 Determination of spread of injectate after ultrasound-
15,67-72.
13
The Pelvic Limb
Luis Campoy and Stephan Mahler
Overview
General considerations
snoanau om q paaa si q nad a
Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks are considered
plexuses (lumbar and sacral) that should both
intermediate level and are easy to master; land-
apraond ci rapno u paoiq Alaiua no Aed aq
 marks are consistent and reliable in most dogs and,
surgical anesthesia and analgesia to the entire
with sufficient practice, these techniques are asso-
pelvic limb. Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks are
ciated with a good success rates. For anesthesia of
considered to be of an intermediate level of diffi-
the entire pelvic limb (including the hemipelvis),
culty, and are minimally invasive, selective, and
the blocks should additionally include the lateral
associated with a low rate of complications. How-
femoral cutaneous nerve (L3-L4 in the majority of
 ever, psoas compartment and dorsal/transgluteal
dogs), and the caudal cutaneous femoral nerve
sciatic nerve blocks are deeper blocks that are
(sacral plexus, S1 mainly; some dogs would have
more challenging to perform and their success
some contribution from L7 and S2).
rates are largely linked to the clinician's
experience.
Like the majority of regional anesthetic tech-
Sedation/anesthesia reguirements
niques, good anatomic knowledge is required to
 increase the success rate and to minimize compli-
To prepare the patient for the procedure, an intra-
cations. Single injection nerve blocks are
the
venous catheter should be placed. For sedation,
most frequently used techniques. The placement
a combination of either  intravenous fentanyl
and continued use of a perineural catheter for a
2-5μg kg′ or dexmedetomidine (0.5-1 μgkg-′) and
)    
lis
propofol 2-4mgkg' can be administered. Note
difficult to achieve in small animals due to the
thiat the higher doses may be required when
lack of patient cooperation as early catheter
electrolocation is used by itself (as higher
displacement may occur once patients become
current outputs are used), compared with a com-
ambulatory.
bined ultrasound /electrolocation-guided technique.
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
661
200  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Supplemental oxygen should be supplied to the
Special considerations for ultrasound-guided
patient in order to minimize hypoxemia caused by
techniques
drug-induced ventilatory depression. The use of
monitoring devices during the procedure is also 
●During injection, watch for fluid to begin
highly recommended. Additionally, local infiltra-
spreading around the nerve. The anesthetic
tion at the puncture site with a local anesthetic such
as lidocaine 2% may be necessary if the patient is
ential ring around the nerve, known as the
sedated rather than anesthetized.
"doughnut sign," ruling out intravascular
needle placement (Robards et al. 2008). While
injecting, the position of the needle can be
Animal positioning
slightly modified to improve diffusion of the
solution around the nerve.
Patient positioning is an important aspect of the
 For an adequately imaged ultrasound-guided
procedure as nerves are flexible structures whose
 nerve block, a positive motor response to nerve
location can vary somewhat depending on the
stimulation does not actually increase the suc-
position of the limb. Standardized positioning
cess rate of the block. If an adequate image is
helps to ensure a good quality block and poten-
obtained, these blocks are usually effective,
tially minimizes complications.
even in the absence of a motor response (Beach
et al. 2006).
 Provided the needle is perfectly in plane with
Special considerations for electrolocation
the transducer, as the local anesthetic is being
techniques
injected, you should be able to see its disper-
 Before injecting the local anesthetic solution, it 
sion around the nerve. If not, it may indicate
is important to verify that the needle is not posi-
an intravascular injection (even in the absence
tioned either intravascularly or intraneurally.
of blood aspiration) as the pressure applied
Negative blood aspiration should be observed.
by the transducer may occlude venous struc-
Additionally, the current output of the nerve
tures making aspiration negative (Robards
stimulator should be decreased to 0.2mA and
et al. 2008).
absence of obvious motor stimulation should be
verified. Then the intensity should be increased
to 0.4 mA to re-establish the twitch, and the first
Indications
1 mL of local anesthetic should be injected. This
should cause the motor response to cease, as the
A wide range of surgical procedures can be per-
injectate displaces the nerve away from the
formed after pelvic limb nerve blocks, including
needle (Raj Test). Bear in mind, however, that a
fracture repairs and articular procedures (femoral
local anesthetic solution can also dissipate the
head
d osteotomies, knee arthroscopy, anterior
current by acting as an electrolyte
(Tsui and
 cruciate ligament repair, tibial plateau leveling
Kropelin 2005). It is also imperative to ensure
osteotomy
(TPLO), tibial tuberosity advance-
that no resistance is encountered during the
ment (TTA), foot and ankle surgery, etc.). A sciatic
injection. Intraneural injections are
 associated
nerve block alone is sufficient to perform surgery
( s1 isdo<) samssand uosa uo m
of the foot and the hock (Singelym et al. 1991).
(Kapur et al. 2007). If resistance to injection is
The sciatic nerve can be blocked in the popliteal
experienced, the needle should be repositioned
area (caudal approach), which avoids unneces-
before further local anesthetic is injected.
sarily proximal motor blockade of the biceps
During and after the block, watch for poten-
femoris, semitendinosus and semimembranosus
tial adverse effects in the patient such
as
muscles. If the surgical procedure involves the
tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, muscle
tibia or the stifle, the femoral nerve should also
twitches, tremors, or seizures.
These might
be included in the block technique (Patel et al.
suggest local anesthetic systemic toxicity, neces-
961  1 1 61  1  96
sitating immediate treatment.
Goranson et al. 1997).
The Pelvic Limb  201
Contraindications/precautions
Psoas compartment (lumbar plexus)
block in the dog
Some contraindications are absolute:
The psoas compartment block is considered an
neuropathies
advanced level technique, mainly because of the
 skin infection at the puncture site
depth of the needle placement and the sensitive
 bleeding disorder or high risk of bleeding
anatomy. This block has relatively higher potential
 kmown adverse reactions to a local anesthetic
for complications and should only be practiced
 after appropriate training. Used in combination
Other situations may increase the risks or
with a sacral plexus or sciatic nerve block, it should
complicate the procedure and constitute relative
provide anesthesia to the entire pelvic limb.
contraindications:
sepsis
Functional and clinical anatomy
fracture or edema that changes the anatomic
landmarks
The lumbar plexus originates in the lumbar spine
deep nerve blocks (lumbar plexus block)
(L3-L6) and is located within the iliopsoas muscle
 are particularly difficult to carry out in obese
compartment. This muscle originates on the trans-
animals (loss of anatomic landmarks, loss of
verse processes of L2 and L3 and attaches along the
ultrasonographic contrast)
ventral and lateral surfaces of the L4 through L7
lumbar vertebrae (Figure 13.1). The lumbar plexus is
formed by the ilioinguinal, lateral femoral cuta-
Choice of local anesthetics and adjuncts
neous, genitofemoral, femoral, and obturator nerves.
This compartment is limited ventrally by the
 In general, a combination of bupivacaine 0.5% and
aponeurosal continuation of the fascia iliaca, thus
dexmedetomidine (0.5μgmL-1) is most commonly
producing a true sheath that allows for diffusion of
used by the authors to provide surgical anesthesia.
local anesthetics around the nerves. As soon as the
Ropivacaine 0.75% in combination with dexme-
roots of the lumbar plexus emerge from the inter-
detomidine (0.5μgmL-') is also used with similar
vertebral foramina, they become embedded in the
results.
iliopsoas muscle. The femoral nerve arises from the
iliopsoas
Figure 13.1 Tridimensional animation of the lumbar area of a dog. The L4, L5, and L6 spinal nerves contribute branches to form
the femoral nerve. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornel
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
202  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Figure 13.2 Left lateral view of a computerized tomography reconstruction of a dog's trunk. Note the vertebral bodies of L5 and
L6, landmarks for a psoas compartment block.
Left kidne?
Figure 13.3 Dorsal view of a computerized tomography reconstruction of a dog's trunk. Note the vertebral bodies of L5 and L6,
landmarks for a psoas compartment block.
cranial part of the lumbar plexus (L4-L6), courses
The abdominal aorta is slightly displaced to the
through the psoas major muscle, and then exits
left by the caudal vena cava. The abdominal aorta
through the femoral canal to the quadriceps femoris
 and vena cava run along in the groove formed by
muscle. The femoral nerve is accompanied by the
the right and the left portions of the iliopsoas muscle.
external iliac artery and vein.
At the level of L7, the abdominal aorta bifurcates
IT Aanexondde wony spuaxa Aaup hal au
 into the right and the left internal iliac and middle
to L3, whereas the right kidney is located a half to
sacral arteries; similarly, the abdominal vena cava
one intervertebral spaces more cranial (T13 to L2),
bifurcates into the common right and left iliac veins.
although their positions (particularly the left
kidney) vary with posture and respiration
(Figure 13.2). The medial edge of the kidneys is
Distribution of local anesthesia
located approximately 1cm from the mid dorsal
and analgesia
line in a medium size dog (Figure 13.3). The dorsal
 aspect of their adipose capsule is related to the
Anesthesia of the hemipelvis, femur, femoro-
quadratus lumborum, psoas, and transversus
tibial joint (partial), skin of the dorsomedial
abdominis muscles.
tarsus and first digit.
The Pelvic Limb  203
In one study (Farny et al. 1994) using a
combination of psoas compartment and sciatic
nerve blocks for lower limb anesthesia in peo-
ple, complete sensory blockade was obtained in
40 out of 45 patients (89%).
The cutaneous area over the greater trochanter
and hip may not be effectively blocked when
using a single injection technique as described
in this chapter. This block often misses the lat-
eral femoral cutaneous nerve (originates in L4
with some contributions from L3 and L5) and
the caudal femoral cutaneous nerve (from the
sacral plexus, S1-S2).
Nerve stimulation-guided psoas
Figure 13.4 Psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block in a
dog. The dog is positioned in lateral recumbency. The needle
compartment block
is advanced in a parasagittal plane at the level of L5, and
should not contact the vertebral body or transverse process
Several authors have described slight variations of
of L5 as it is advanced into the psoas muscle.
the same technique. Portela et al. (2012) described a
 pre-iliac approach to the femoral nerve while still
within the lumbar plexus domain.
Step-by-step procedure
● Perform a final sterile preparation of the
puncture site.
Equipment
 Pre-measure depth using the ventral border of
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
the iliopsoas muscle as a reference.
with the following equipment:
 The stimulating needle should be advanced with
a strictly sagittal orientation with the nerve stim-
peripheral nerve stimulator;
ulator set initially to deliver a current of 1.5 mA.
 insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small dogs,
In the event of contact with the transverse
20-gauge, 100 mm for medium/large dogs);
process of L5, the needle should be "walked
sterile gloves;
puuaq ssed ol se os uonoanp lepneo e u ,o
 syringes and needles; and
the transverse process until contractions of the
+
 local anesthetic ± adjuvant.
quadriceps muscle (anterior motion of the femur,
extension of stifle) show thiat the needle is in
direct vicinity of the L5 lumbar plexus root.
Standard technique (Campoy et al. 2008)
 Decrease the current gradually to 0.8-1mA in
Patient positioning
0.2mA increments, until the same response can
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
be elicited, repositioning needle if necessary
 The limb to be blocked should be positioned
(injecting atlower currents may increase the inci-
uppermost.
dence of epidural migration (Farny et al. 1994).
Clip the area over the dorsal spinous and
transverse processes from L4 to L7.
Clinical tips
●Recommended volume to be injected: 0.4 mLkg-1
Anatomic landmarks
(Campoy et al. 2008). The psoas muscle is
Dorsal spinous processes of L5-L6 and the
relatively loosely compacted, therefore reason-
transverse process of L5 (Figure 13.4), ventral
ably large volumes are required to fill this space
border of the psoas major muscle.
(Figure 13.5).
The puncture site is located parasagittaly (as to
 The authors commonly use bupivacaine 0.5%
clear the vertebral body of L5) to the spinous
combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5μgmL-1).
process of L5.
sou nlia on xis Aaexoidde sapraord s
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.5(a) 3-D reconstructed computed tomographic (CT) image of a dog. A psoas block has been performed using
lidocaine and iohexol 240 mg iodine mL-1 (10:1 dilution). The large arrow demonstrates contrast enhancement (hyperattenuation)
seosd aui sxa l se anau lenowal aui suoie suysen uawanueyua jseuo smoys moe llews ayl 'alosnu seosd aui uyii
muscle and courses caudally towards the limb. (b) Axial magnetic resonance image (MRl) of a dog in right lateral recumbency.
(uonp Irool ne t-l lowwo' l longopes) wniaw iseuos wnulope pue auieop! suisn pawojad uaag sey yoig seosd 
The injected solution can be seen within the psoas muscle compartment (white arrow).
of blockade. Alternatively, ropivacaine 0.75%
combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5 μg mL-1)
can be used with similar results.
 Higher volumes result in more solid, complete,
and faster blockade, but may have a higher risk
of toxicity.
OAs an alternative, the lumbar plexus nerve roots
can be approached and blocked individually
from L4 to L6 (0.2mLkg' divided into three
injection points) (Portela et al. 2008).
Lateral pre-iliac technique
(Portela et al. 2012)
Patient positioning
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency with
the site to be blocked located uppermost and
the leg in a neutral position.
Figure 13.6   Note landmarks on the pre-iliac region. The
 Clip the lateral and middle-dorsal aspect of the
puncture site is located at the intersection of a line running
lumbosacral and gluteal regions.
in a dorsoventral direction at the level of L6 and a second
line running parallel to the spine originated at the most
Cranial point of the iliac crest. Photograph by D.A. Portela.
Anatomic landmarks
●A line should be drawn from the spinous
●A second line should be drawn from the most
process of L6, perpendicular to the spine in a
cranial aspect of the iliac crest parallel to the
dorsoventral direction (Figure 13.6).
spine unti it intersects the first line.
The Pelvic Limb  205
The puncture site is located at the intersection
insulated
Tuohy
needles
(22-18-gauge,
of these two lines.
soq daap rog panrajand ane (urunnn-o
because they are more readily observed ultraso-
Step-by-step procedure
nographically and they are easier to direct
 Perform a final sterile preparation of the
umder ultrasound guidance;
pumcture site.
sterile gloves;
Advance the insulated needle in a caudomedial
syringes and needles;
direction with an inclination of 30-45° angle
isopropyl alcohol; and
through the iliocostalis lumborum muscle with
local anesthetic ± adjuvant.
the nerve stimulator set initially to deliver a
current of 1 mA.
Standard technique
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
priate range of the femoral nerve, contractions
Patient positioning
of the quadriceps muscle will result in stifle
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
extension.
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
uppermost.
Clinical tips
Clip the dorsal area (from L4 to L7).
 Recommended volume to be injected: 0.1 mLkg-'.
With this approach the obturator nerve may
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy)
 also be blocked.
 The iliopsoas muscle is easily visualized using
 Contractions of the iliocostalis lumborum, sartori-
ultrasound (Figure 13.7). The iliopsoas muscle can
ous, gracillis or pectineum muscles should not
be seen by first identifying the sacrum and then
considered to be positive end points.
gliding the transducer cranially, counting along
from L7 to L5. This initial scanning allows the
operator to identify the transverse processes and
Potential complications
vertebral bodies of L7 to L5, acquire longitudinal
The possibility of epidural migration of the
'aeduon seosd al jo sase asaasuenn pue
local anesthetic may be reduced when com-
and determine the distance from the skin to the
pared to a traditional psoas compartment block
iliopsoas muscle (Cannon and Puchalski 2008).
(Portela et al. 2012).
There are no vascular structures in close
Step-by-step procedure
proximity to the nerve, therefore the risk of
Perform a final sterile preparation of the
vascular puncture is reduced.
puncture site.
Glide, rotate, and tilt the transducer until the
 iliopsoas muscle in its short axis can be seen.
Combined ultrasonography (Us)/electrolocation-
Set the peripheral nerve locator to deliver a
guided psoas compartment block
0.4 mA current output at 1-2 Hz.
The major advantage of the ultrasound-guided
Insert the needle from medial to lateral with an
-rado a smoe he si oq puauredus seosd
in-plane approach. This approach helps to min-
ator to estimate the depth of the lumbar plexus
imize injection into the dural sleeves that extend
prior to needle insertion. This evaluation is to
laterally beyond the neural foramina.
prevent deep needle insertions with subsequent
Advance the needle towards the iliopsoas
peritoneal cavity injection leading to possible vena
muscle, keeping the needle tip in the field of
cava, aorta, or kidney lacerations.
ultrasound view at all times.
Watch for the characteristic contractions of the
quadriceps femoris muscle, resulting in stifle
Equipment
extension.
 Low frequency ultrasound transducer (<7MHz)
On injection of the local anesthetic solution,
with sterile sleeve where indicated;
diffusion of the fluid within the psoas muscle
peripheral nerve stimulator;
confirms proper position of the needle tip.
206  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
GeVet
v.cava
medial
latera
VBL5
Figure 13.7  Ultrasound image at the level of L5.
Clinical tips
 Dedicated set for continuous peripheral nerve
 Lumbar and then quadratus muscle twitches
block including a 20-21-gauge, 400-500mm
may be firstly seen as the needle is advanced
catheter.
towards the psoas major muscle due to direct
muscle stimulation.
Placement and securing of CPNB catheters
 Recommended volume to be injected: 0.4 mLkg-1
(Campoy et al. 2008). The psoas muscle is
Using ultrasound, the needle is inserted at a
relatively loosely compacted, therefore reason-
perpendicular angle and advanced until a
ably large volumes are required to fill this space.
quadriceps twitch is obtained at a current
Higher volumes result in more solid, complete,
output of 0.5-1.0 mA.
and faster blockade, but may have a higher risk
 The catheter is advanced a few centimeters past
of toxicity.
the tip of the needle.
While the needle is being withdrawn, the cath-
Continuous psoas compartment block
eter is carefully advanced in order to minimize
catheter displacement.
Unlike many other locations, the psoas compart-
An aspiration test for blood or cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) should be performed.
ment offers the advantage of being an area sur-
 The catheter can be then tunneled subcutane-
rounded by dense connective tissue, allowing an
ously a few centimeters to secure it in place.
indwelling catheter to be firmly held in place by
01 paoeid aq ues Suissanp noi juaiedsuen V
muscles. Furthermore, movements of the pelvic
cover the catheter site.
limb contribute less to displacement of the catheter
than if the catheter was placed adjacent to the
femoral nerve in the femoral triangle.
Drug choice and infusion rates of local
anesthetics
Equipment
 A continuous infusion of local anesthetic via
Same equipment as previously described
a peripheral nerve catheter may be ideal to
including low frequency US transducer and
provide continuous long-term postoperative
 peripheral nerve stimulator.
analgesia.
The Pelvic Limb  207
A bolus of local anesthetic (0.3-0.4mLkg-')
should be administered, followed by contin-
uous infusion. The infusion rate can be set to
deliver 0.05 mLkg-' h-1.
 Drugs commonly used by the authors include:
bupivacaine 0.12-0.25% combined with dex-
medetomidine (0.5 μgmL- of solution); or
ropivacaine 0.2% combined with dexme-
detomidine (0.5 μg mL- of solution).
Monitoring of the continuous psoas
compartment block
Monitor the patient for signs of local anesthetic
systemic toxicity or epidural spread (bilateral
Figure 13.8 Photograph of the lumbar area of a canine
cadaver demonstrating epidural migration of methylene blue
motor deficits).
between lumbar vertebrae 5 and 6 following performance of
a psoas compartment block using 0.4 mL kg-l of dye solution.
Potential complications and how
There is a potential risk of epidural migration of
to avoid them
the injectate and subsequent bilateral nerve
blockade following
psoas compartment blocks
(Figure 13.8). Farny et al. (1994) reported an inci-
Table 13.1F
 Potential complications (adapted from New York
School of Regional Anesthesia, accessed at http:/www.
dence of 9% in people. Our experience shows a
nysora.com/techniques/lumbar_plexus_block/.
comparable incidence of 6% (Campoy et al. 2008).
Using a threshold current of 1 mA and turning the
Complication
How to avoid
patient over on to the blocked side (blocked side
dowm) immediately after blockade have been pos-
Hematoma
Deep needle insertion should be
tulated to reduce the incidence of this complication.
avoided (vena cava, aorta)
Local anesthetic Due to inadvertent intravascular
toxicity
injection during needle manipulation
Other potential complications
Careful and frequent aspiration should
be exerted during the injection
Abdominal vena cava puncture
Avoid injecting the local anesthetic
Aortic puncture
quickly
 Viscus puncture may also be possible
Large volumes of long-acting
Catheter displacement mainly occurs as the
anesthetic should be reconsidered
in geriatrics or patients with hepatic
patient becomes ambulatory and can be mini-
dysfunction
mized with turmeling
Nerve injury
The risk of nerve injury after lumbar
Although Capdevila
paoda1 (s00z) e 1a
plexus block is low
positive cultures in 28% of patients with perineu-
Never inject when high pressure on
ral catheters in which no prophylactic antibiotics
injection is encountered
had been administered,
, the incidence of true
Use a peripheral nerve locator
Hemodynamic
infections was very low (0.07%). Contamination
 Lumbar plexus blockade results in
unilateral sympathetic blockade
is frequently the result of colonization of the skin
consequences
Spread of the local anestheticto the
at the catheter insertion site and subsequent con-
epidural space may result in
tamination of the catheter tip on removal of the
hypotension
catheter (Capdevila et al. 2005). The incidence of
Every patient receiving a lumbar plexus
contamination is not known when prophylactic
 block should be monitored to the
antibiotics are used, as is often the case with
same extent as patients receiving
orthopedic surgery, but it would be expected to
epidural anesthesia
be lower. Appropriate aseptic techniques should
208  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
be used while any indwelling catheter is in place,
Functional and clinical anatomy
and the catheter should be removed if any sigms
of infection are present.
The femoral nerve arises from the cranial portion of
the lumbar plexus and is formed by the ventral
Femoral nerve block
branches of the L4, L5, and L6 spinal nerves. As it con-
tinues distally, it follows a course through the center
The femoral nerve block is considered an inter-
of the iliopsoas muscle. At the distal end of the ilio-
mediate level technique that is easy to master. This
 psoas muscle, the femoral nerve exits the muscle and
block can be applied to a wide range of surgical
courses across the femoral triangle (Figure 13.9). At
procedures, and itis commonly used in combination
this level, it gives rise to the cutaneous and muscular
with a sciatic nerve block to achieve anesthesia of
branches of the saphenous nerve that supply the sar-
the pelvic limb (distal to mid femur).
torious muscle. The femoral triangle is delimited by
(a)
sartorius
iliopsoas
(b)
cranial
proximal
sartoriusm.,caudabelly
distal
rectus femoris m
liopsoasm.
ineusm
auda
Figure 13.9  (a) Tridimensional animation of the left femoral triangle from a ventral position. The image demonstrates that the triangle
is delimited by the iliopsoas muscle proximally, the pectineus muscle caudally, and the sartorius muscle cranially. Within the triangle,
the femoral nerve is located cranial to the femoral artery and vein. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in the Dog. Available
through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu. (b) Dissection of the femoral
triangle of the left pelvic limb of a dog cadaver. The caudal belly of the sartorius muscle has been displaced cranially to allow for
visualization of the femoral nerve. Note the relationsh ip of the femoral vessels, the femoral nerve, and the rectus femoris muscle.
The Pelvic Limb  209
the iliopsoas muscle proximally, the pectineus muscle
may send branches to the anterior attachment of
caudally, and the sartorius muscle cranially. Within
the posterior cruciate ligament. The posterior artic-
the triangle, the femoral nerve is located cranial to the
 ular nerve (PAN) arises from two separate branches:
femoral artery and vein, rurning deep to the caudal
PAN-1 (directly from the tibial nerve) and PAN-2
belly of the sartorius muscle. The lateral circumflex
(from a muscular branch of the tibial nerve). The
vessels originate from the femoral artery and vein.
PAN supplies the posterior and posteromedial
They cross the femoral triangle in a craniocaudal
aspects of the stifle joint. The lateral articular nerve
direction, disappearing between the vastus medialis
(LAN) arises from the common peroneal nerve
and rectus femoris muscles. The femoral nerve then
(CP). It serves the lateral collateral ligament (LCL)
continues distally, entering the quadriceps muscle
and the lateral portion of the stifle joint capsule.
between the vastus medialis and rectus femoris.
Distribution of local anesthesia
and analgesia
Innervation of the stifle (Figure 13.10)
The medial articular nerve (MAN) arises from the
Anesthesia of the femur (mid diaphysis to distal),
saphenous nerve (SN). Occasionally, it receives
femorotibial joint (medial aspect of the femorotib-
supplementary fibers from the obturator and/or
ial joint capsule),  femorotibial  intra-articular
femoral nerves. The MAN supplies the medial,
structures, skin of the dorsomedial tarsus and first
 posterior, and anterior aspects of the stifle, and
digit.
(a)
(b)
SN
PAN-1
MAN
A
PAN-2
PS
LM
IPF
PAN
PA.B
Figure 13.10 (a) Innervation of the stifle, medial view. (b) Innervation of the stifle, lateral view. From O'Connor and Woodbury
1982. Used with permission.
210  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Nerve stimulation-guided femoral
The puncture site is located within the femoral
nerve block
triangle, cranial to the femoral artery.
This technique has been described using two dif-
Step-by-step procedure
ferent approaches and variations (Campoy 2006;
 Perform a final sterile preparation of the
Mahler and Adogwa 2008; Portela et al. 2012).
puncture site.
Insert the stimulating needle cranial to the
Equipment
femoral artery and advance it towards the ilio-
psoas muscle, maintaining a 20-30° angle with
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
the nerve stimulator set initially to deliver a
with the following equipment:
current of 1 mA (Figure 13.13).
 peripheral nerve stimulator;
 The femoral nerve is located directly medial to
insulated needle (22-gauge, 50 mm);
the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle.
sterile gloves;
+
 syringes/needles; and
?
local anesthetic ± adjuvant.
Campoy technique (Campoy 2006)
Patient positioning (Figure 13.11)
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
 uppermost, abducted 90, and extended caudally.
Clip the inguinal area.
Anatomic landmarks (Figure 13.12)
The femoral triangle is delimited by the pectin-
Figure 13.12  The femoral triangle is delimited by the
eus muscle caudally, the sartorius muscle crani-
pectineus muscle caudally, the sartorius muscle cranially, and
the iliopsoas proximally. The femoral nerve is located cranial
ally, and the iliopsoas proximally.
 Locate the femoral artery by palpating the
to the femoral artery and vein. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral
Nerve Blocks in the Dog. Available through Partners in
femoral pulse.
Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
The femoral nerve is located cranial to the
www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
femoral artery.
Figure 13.13  Performance of a left-sided femoral nerve block
Figure 13.11 A dog positioned for femoral nerve block. The
in a dog using a standard technique (Campoy). The stimulating
patient should be placed into lateral recumbency with the limb
needle is inserted cranial to the femoral artery and advanced
to be blocked positioned uppermost, abducted 90°, and
towards the iliopsoas muscle, maintaining a 20-30° angle to
extended caudally. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks
the skin. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in the
in the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Hea Ith, Cornell
Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah. vet.cornell.edu
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu.
The Pelvic Limb  211
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
operator should try to leave the needle
priate range of the femoral nerve, contractions
untouched while appreciating the muscular
of the quadriceps muscle will result in stifle
contractions. Release digital pressure on the
extension.
 needle to avoid the needle being pressed against
Decreasef
the current gradually to 0.4mA
the femoral nerve through the fascia iliaca, con-
(threshold current) in 0.2mA increments, until
firming that the fascia has indeed been punc-
the same response can be elicited, repositioning
tured and that the tip of the needle is in close
needle if necessary.
contact with the nerve.
 The lateral circumflex vessels cross the femoral
Clinical tips
triangle in a craniocaudal direction. If these
 Recommended volume to be injected: 0.1 mLkg
small vessels are inadvertently penetrated dur-
(Figure 13.14).
 ing the procedure, a small hematoma can form.
The authors commonly use bupivacaine 0.5%
 This hematoma may not be obvious externally,.
combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5 μgmL-1).
but the amount of blood may be enough to dis-
 ()    s
sipate the current, causing the loss of a twitch.
[median (min-max)] until analgesia may be
Under these circumstances, if aspiration is neg-
needed after cruciate surgery (Campoy et al.
ative for blood and the injection of a small
2012).  Alternatively, ropivacaine 
0.75%
amount of local anesthetic does not result in
combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5 μgmL-1)
signs of intravascular injection, one can inject
can be used with similar results.
the remainder of the anesthetic.
 No reliable anatomic landmarks could be iden-
 Contractions of the sartorius muscle should not
tified to gauge the depth to which the needle
be considered an acceptable end point. It could
be that the tip of the needle is located too super-
can be felt once the needle has punctured the
ficially and the sartorius muscle is being stimu-
dense, superficial fascia iliaca overlying the
lated directly. In this case, the needle should be
nerve.
advanced further. A second possibility may be
 In a mid-sized breed, such as a Labrador
that a branch of the femoral nerve that supplies
 Retriever, the femoral nerve is located approxi-
this muscle is being stimulated. In this case, the
mately 0.5-1 cm under the skin.
needle also needs to be repositioned until better
 The femoral nerve lies fairly superficial in the
twitches are seen.
femoral triangle and should be approached
carefully to avoid deep needle insertions. The
Clinical pearis
● In some cases, the saphenous nerve leaves the
principal femoral nerve trunk proximally to
the puncture site, therefore, it is possible that
the cutaneous branch may not be anesthetized.
 Ben-David et al. (2004) showed that a sciatic
nerve block is necessary in order to achieve
complete analgesia following total knee arthro-
plasty. However, Allen et al. (1998) reported
thiat the addition of a sciatic nerve block did not
further improve analgesic efficacy i
in proce-
dures involving the knee joint 
in humans.
Weber et al. (2002) reported that 67% of patients
who have had preoperative femoral blocks
required the addition of sciatic blocks post-
operatively.
Figure 13.14  Computed tomographic (CT) image of a dog.
A femoral nerve block has been performed using lidocaine
In the authors' opinions, the need for an addi-
and iohexol 240mg iodine mL- (10:1 dilution). The arrow
tional sciatic nerve block has to do with the
indicates the location of contrast enhancement.
level of irritation/trauma that the common
212  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
peroneal nerve undergoes during surgery.
be blocked downmost and in-plane technique was
Preoperatively, as there is no way to predict
used in those studies. Recently, Echeverry et al.
this, it is our recommendation to always per-
(2011) described a suprainguinal approach.
form a combined sciatic/femoral nerve block
for surgical procedures involving the stifle.
Equipment
High frequency transducer (9-15MHz) with
sterile sleeve when indicated;
Mahler technigue (Mahler and Adogwa 2008)
peripheral nerve stimulator;
Patient positioning
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small
Access to the right femoral nerve is obtained
dogs, 20-gauge 100mm for medium/large
with the dog in lateral recumbency with the leg
dogs);
to beblocked downmost.
sterile gloves;
syringes/needles;
Anatomic landmarks
 isopropyl alcohol; and
The femoral artery is palpated in the femoral tri-
local anesthetic ±adjuvant.
angle as proximal as possible. The puncture site is
located just cranial to the femoral artery, with the
Femoral triangle approach (Campoy et al. 2010)
Patient positioning
needle directed slightly caudally.
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
Step-by-step procedure
uppermost, at a 90° angle, and extended
 Perform a final sterile preparation of the
caudally.
puncture site.
 Clip scanning area and puncture site.
Insert the stimulating needle cranial to the
femoral artery and advance it towards the ilio-
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy) With the
psoas muscle, maintaining a 20-30° angle with
transducer placed over the femoral triangle,
the nerve stimulator set initially to deliver a
perpendicular to the course of the femoral artery, a
current of 1 mA.
short axis view of the femoral vessels and the nerve
The femoral nerve is located directly medial to
is obtained (Figure 13.15). The femoral artery can
the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle.
be visualized in the near field. The artery is a round,
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
hypoechoic, pulsatile structure. The femoral vein is
priate range of the femoral nerve, contractions
rarely seen adjacent to the artery, as it is usually
of the quadriceps muscle will result in stifle
compressed by the pressure that is being exerted
extension.
by the ultrasound transducer The femoral nerve is
Decrease the current gradually to 0.4mA
located cranial and deep to the femoral artery, and
(threshold current) in 0.2mA increments, until
it is visible as a nodular hyperechoic structure
the same response can be elicited, repositioning
directly beneath the thin caudal belly of the
needle if necessary.
sartorius muscle. The rectus femoris muscle can be
 Recommended volume to be injected: 0.1mLkg-1
seen cranial to the nerve. The fascia iliaca sometimes
appears as a hyperechoic line, superficial to the
femoral nerve. The puncture site is located in the
Combined US/electrolocation-guided
proximal and cranial aspect of the thigh (cranial
femoral nerve block
belly of the sartorius muscle) in-plane with the
Several authors have described slightly different
transducer.
variations of this block (Costa-Farre et al. 2011;
Campoy et al. 2010; Echeverry et al. 2010, 2011;
Step-by-step procedure
Shilo et al. 2010). Costa-Farre et al. (2011) used the
Perform a final sterile preparation of the
same patient positioning as described by Campoy
puncture site.
et al. (2010); however, those authors used an out-of-
Glide, rotate, and tilt the transducer until the
plane technique. Echeverry et al. (2010) and Shilo
large pulsatile femoral artery in its short axis
et al. (2010) positioned their patients with the leg to
can be seen (Figure 13.15).
The Pelvic Limb  213
sartorius
caudal
femur
Figure 13.15 Ultrasonographic cross-section (short axis) view of the right femoral triangle of a dog. (a: femoral artery, v: femoral
vein, arrowhead: femoral nerve).
Watch for the characteristic contractions of the
quadriceps femoris muscle, resulting in stifle
extension.
Clinical tips
 Recommended volume to be injected: 0.1 mLkg-
(Costa-Farre et al. 2011; Campoy et al. 2010;
Shilo et al. 2010). However, the final injection
volume should be assessed by monitoring
the ultrasound image—if local anesthetic is
observed to surround the nerve with less than
Figure 13.16Performance of a right-sided femoral nerve
the calculated volume, the full volume does not
block in a dog. The ultrasound transducer is positioned
need to be administered.
to visualize the femoral triangle in short axis in the inguinal
For an adequately imaged ultrasound-guided
area, and the stimulating needle is advanced in-plane
nerve block, a positive motor response to nerve
through the sartorius and rectus femoris muscles towards the
femoral nerve. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in
stimulation does not actually increase the success
the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health,
rate of the block. If an adequate image is obtained,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.
these blocks are usually effective, even in the
cornell.edu.
(900z 1e 1a qoeag) asuodsa1 1ojou e jo asuasqe
Should the needle not be perfectly in plane with
Set the peripheral nerve locator to deliver a
the transducer, it may lead to misinterpretation
0.4 mA current output at 1 or 2 Hz.
of the exact location of the needle tip.
Insert the stimulating needle through the sartorius
and rectus femoris muscles (Figure 13.16).
Potential complications The main potential comp-
Advance the needle towards the femoral nerve,
lication associated with the femoral nerve block is
keeping the needle tip in the field of ultrasound
the potential risk of puncturing the femoral artery,
view at all times.
vein, or the nerve itself.
214   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Table 13.2  Potential complications. (adapted from
(a)
New York School of Regional Anesthesia, accessed at
http://www.nysora.com/peripheral_nerve_blocks/nerve_
stimulator_techniques/31 00-Femoral-Nerve-Block.html).
 Potential
complications
How to avoid
Hematoma
Avoid multiple needle insertions
If thefemoral artery or vein are
inadvertently punctured and a
hematoma develops, apply firm
compression for a minimum of
five minutes or until clotting
OCCurs
Local
 Avoid inadvertent intravascular
 anesthetic
injection with frequent aspiration 
toxicity
of the syringe during the injection.
If ultrasound-guided technique is
used, verify the spread of local
anesthetic around the nerve
(b)
("doughnut sign")
Always look for signs of toxicity
during and after injection such as
tachycardia, hypotension,
arrhythmias, muscle twitches,
tremors, or seizures
Large volumes of long-acting
anesthetic should be avoided in
geriatric patients or patients with
hepatic dysfunction
Nerve injury
Local anesthetic should never be
injected when resistance is
encountered during the injection
Check for absence of overt muscular
twitch at a current output less than
0.2 mA (this is of special importance
when using only the electrolocation
Fgure 13.17 (a) Ultrasonographic cross-section (short
technique)
axis) view of the femoral triangle. (a: external iliac artery.
Perform a Raj test to help rule out
arrowhead: femoral nerve). (b) Performance of a femoral
intraneural injections
nerve block using a ventral suprainguinal approach in a
Local anesthetic should never be
dog (left leg). Under ultrasound-guidance, the stimulating
injected when a patient overtly
needle is advanced from a lateral position towards the
reacts during the injection (if
femoral artery. Image and photograph by A. Agut and
patient is sedated rather than
E. Belda.
anesthetized
Use of peripheral nerve locator and/or 
ultrasound significantly minimizes
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy)
the risk of nerve injury
(Figure 13.17a)
Step-by-step technique
 The transducer is initially positioned perpen-
Ventral suprainguinal approach (Echeverry
dicular to midline, slightly (
cranial to the
et al.2010,2011)
 inguinal nipple.
Patient positioning
From this point, the transducer is glided later-
 Position the patient in dorsal recumbency with
ally until the femoral nerve is identified in its
leg to be blocked moderately extended.
shortaxis.
The Pelvic Limb  215
The transducer is then glided in a cranial
Distribution of local anesthesia
direction, following the femoral nerve.
and analgesia
 The stimulating needle is advanced from a lat-
eral position using an in-plane technique to
The caudal approach to the sciatic
nerve
approach the femoral nerve (Figure 13.17b).
results in anesthesia of the caudolateral aspect
of the stifle (including part of the joint capsule
Clinical tips
and intra-articular structures), tibia, tarsus,
●Recommended volume to be injected is
metatarsus (dorsal/peroneal component and
0.1 mLkg'; however, the final injection volume
plantar/tibial component), and digits (except
should be assessed by monitoring the ultra-
first digit and proximal aspect of second digit).
sound image.
The lateral approach to the sciatic nerve also
results in the block of the muscular branch
and, in turn, the ischiotibial muscles (semitendi-
nosus, semimembranosus, and biceps femoris
Sciatic nerve block
muscles).
The dorsal (transgluteal) approach allows for
This procedure is considered an intermediate level
blockade of the ischiotibial muscles and probably
technique. This block will result in anesthesia of
some of the sensory branches of the coxofemoral
the stifle (partial) and the structures distal to it.
Used in combination with a femoral nerve block,
joint. A paravertebral (paralumbar and parasacral)
approach (L7-S2) results in anesthesia of the
anesthesia of the entire pelvic limb (distal to mid
ischiotrochanteric muscles (intemal obturator,
femur) can be achieved.
 gemelli, quadratus femoris muscles) and the glu-
teal muscles.
It should be noted that as the coxofemoraljoint is
Functional and clinical anatomy
innervated by the femoral nerve, for complete
 anesthesia, in addition to a parasacral approach to
The sciatic nerve is formed by the ventral branches
the sacral plexus, a psoas compartment block may
of the L6, L7, and S1 spinal nerves. The nerve
be necessary for surgeries such as a femoral head
passes between the middle and deep gluteal
osteotomy (FHO).
muscles (gluteus medius and gluteus profundus
muscles) and exits the pelvis through the greater
 sciatic notch. On leaving the pelvic region, the
sciatic nerve lies between the superficial gluteal
Nerve stimulation-guided sciatic
muscle laterally and the gemelli and quadratus
nerve blocks
femoris muscles medially (Figure 13.18a). The
sciatic nerve descends betweern the greater tro-
Several authors have described the blockade of the
chanter and the ischiatic tuberosity. In this region,
sciatic nerve (Campoy et al. 2008; Mahler and
the sciatic nerve gives rise to the muscular
Adogwa 2008; Portela et al. 2010).
branches that supply the caudal thigh muscles
(Figure 13.18b). The caudal gluteal artery and vein
lie caudal to these nerve branches. Immediately
Equipment
distal to the greater trochanter and ischiatic tuber-
osity, the sciatic nerve lies between the biceps
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
femoris muscle laterally and the semimembrano-
with the following equipment:
sus muscle caudal and medially. The sciatic nerve
then divides into its two branches, the tibial nerve
 peripheral nerve stimulator;
medially and the common peroneal nerve later-
insulated needle (22-gauge, 50 mm);
ally. The location of this division is variable and
sterile gloves;
can occur anywhere from the level of the hip joint
syringes and needles; and
to just proximal to the stifle joint.
local anesthetic ± adjuvant.
21 6  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
rficialglutealm.
gemellim
sciaticn.
(b)
Figure 13.18 (a) Tridimensional animation of the sciatic nerve of a dog. The sciatic nerve passes between the middle and deep
gluteal muscles and exits the pelvis through the greater sciatic notch. On leaving the pelvic region, the sciatic nerve lies between
the superficial gluteal muscle laterally and the gemelli and quadratus femoris muscles medially. The sciatic nerve descends
between the greater trochanter and the ischiatic tuberosity. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in the Dog. Available
through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu. (b) Dissection of lateral 
thigh of a canine cadaver showing the sciatic nerve. The biceps femoris muscle has been transected and reflected caudally to
allow for easier visualization of the sciatic nerve and its surrounding structures.
Lateral approach technique (Campoy et al.
Clip the area between the greater trochanter
2008)
and ischiatic tuberosity.
Patient positioning
Anatomic landmarks
Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
 Identify the greater trochanter (GT) and ischi-
The limb to be blocked should be posi-
atic tuberosity (IT).
tioned uppermost and extended in a natural
Draw a line between these two points (GT-IT
position.
line) (Figure 13.19).
The Pelvic Limb  217
These contractions are not the result of true
sciatic nerve stimulation. Do not misinterpret
these contractions as a positive indicator of
sciatic nerve stimulation.
If at any time the needle contacts bone, with-
draw and redirect it.
Once the tip of the needle is correctly advanced
within the appropriate vicinity of the sciatic
nerve, a positive contraction response will be
elicited. A correct positive response to sciatic
nerve stimulation is seen as dorsiflexion or
Figure 13.19   GT-IT line. If the length of this line is divided into
plantar extension of the foot.
thirds, the puncture site is located at a point between the cranial
Decrease the current gradually to O.4mA
and middle thirds. From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in
(threshold current) in 0.2 mA increments, until
the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell
 the same response can be elicited, repositioning
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www.partnersah. vet.cornell.edu.
needle if necessary.
Clinical tips
The recommended volume to be injected is 0.05-
0.1 mLkg ' (Campoy et al. 2008) (Figure 13.21).
The authors commonly use bupivacaine 0.5%
combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5 μgmL-1).
This provides approximately 14 (6-24) hours
[median  (min-max)] until  analgesia may be
-idon Xaaeua (ioz Te a Aodu) papau
vacaine 0.75% combined with dexmedetomidine
(0.5 μgmL-1) can be used with similar results.
Contractions of the biceps femoris muscle
Figure 13.20  Performance of a sciatic nerve block in a
should not be considered an acceptable end
dog using the lateral approach. The index and middle fingers of
the nondominant hand are used to palpate the greater trochanter
point. If the needle tip is still superficial and the
and ischiatic tuberosity. The puncture site is located one-third
of the distance from the greater trochanter (GT) to the ischiatic
tuberosity (IT). From: L. Campoy, Peripheral Nerve Blocks in
the Dog. Available through Partners in Animal Health, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. www. partnersah.vet. cornell.edu.
-aq juiod au ie paieool st ahis amioumd aul ●
ween the cranial and the middle thirds.
Step-by-step procedure
Perform a final sterile preparation of the
puncture site.
Insert the stimulating needle and advance it in
a 45° angle off the skin with the nerve stimu-
lator set initially to deliver a current of 1mA
(Figure 13.20).
As the needle is advanced, contractions of the
Fgure 13.21
1 Axial magnetic resonance image (MRl) of a
dog. A sciatic nerve block has been performed using lidocaine
biceps femoris muscle may be observed. This is
and gadolinium contrast medium (gadobutrol 1.0 mmol L-)
usually associated with direct muscle stimula-
at 100:1 dilution). The injected solution (white arrow) can be
tion as the needle passes through the muscles.
218   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
current output is still 1mA when this response
is observed, it is likely that the biceps femoris
muscle is being directly stimulated. In this sce-
nario, the needle tip is still too superficial and
needs to be further advanced into the tissue.
Contractions of the semimembranosus or semi-
tendinosus muscles should not be considered
an acceptable end point. If stimulation of the
hamstrings (semimembranosus muscle, semi-
tendinosus muscle) is observed without foot
movement, the needle is most likely located too
far caudally. In this situation, the muscular
branches of the sciatic nerve, and not the sciatic
nerve itself, are being stimulated. Injections in
this location miss the main sciatic nerve and
will result in block failure.
Figure 13.22 Performance of a sciatic nerve block in a dog
using the transgluteal approach. A line is drawn connecting
the dorsal iliac spine and the ischiatic tuberosity. Another
Transgluteal approach technique (Mahler
line is drawn perpendicular to the first line, crossing it at
its caudal third. A third line is drawn from the dorsal iliac
and Adogwa 2008)
spine parallel to the long axis of the body, crossing the
The transgluteal approach to the sciatic nerve is an
perpendicular line. The puncture site is located midway
intermediate level technique that is easy to master
between the two intersections.
and carries a low risk of complications. This block
is well suited for those individuals who wish to
Step-by-step procedure
gain experience with nerve blocks. It should ini-
 Insert the needle in a cranial and ventral
tially be practiced in very lean patients as the rele-
direction with the nerve stimulator set initially
vant landmarks are easier to identify.
to deliver a current of 1 mA.
 Contractions of the gluteal muscles are often
Patient positioning
seen and indicate that the needle tip stimulates
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
the caudal gluteal nerve (superficial gluteal
The limb to be blocked should be positioned
muscle) or the muscle fibers (medial and deep
uppermost.
Clip the area from the wing of the ilium to the
gluteal muscles) directly.
Continue advancing the needle towards the
ischiatic tuberosity up to midline.
ischium.
 Once the tip of the needle is within the appro-
Anatomic landmarks
priate vicinity of the sciatic nerve, a positive
Landmarks include the dorsal iliac spine, ischi-
twitch response will be elicited. Watch for con-
atic tuberosity, lumbar dorsal vertebral pro-
tractions of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus,
cesses, and sacrotuberous ligament.
semimembranosus (extension of the hip joint
 Aline is drawn connecting the dorsal iliac spine
and abduction of the limb), gastrocnemius
and the ischiatic tuberosity. Another line is
(extension of the tarsus), digital flexors, and /or
drawn perpendicular to the first line, crossing it 
extensor muscles (flexion and extension of the
between the mid and caudal thirds. A third line
digits).
is drawn from the dorsal iliac spine parallel to
the long axis of the body, crossing the perpen-
dicular line (Figure 13.22).
Clinical tips
The puncture site is located midway between
Landmarks are easily identified in most
the two intersections, just cranial to the sacro-
patients; however, adipose tissue over the glu-
tuberous ligament (through the superficial
teal area obscures the bony prominences in
gluteal muscle)
overweight patients.
The Pelvic Limb  219
The index finger of the nondominant hand
Step-by-step technique
should be placed over the sacrotuberous
 The stimulating needle is advanced until the stim-
ligament and the needle inserted just craniolat-
ulation of the sciatic nerve roots and contractions
eral to it: this precaution avoids inserting the
 of the gastrocnemius muscle or even digital (and/
needle too close to the caudal gluteal vessels
or tarsus) flexion or extension are elicited.
with subsequent accidental puncture.
Clinical tips
Parasacral approach (Portela et al. 2010)
 Recommended
volume to be injected:
0.05 mLkg'.
In this approach the local anesthetic solution is
Portela et al. (2010) obtained successful blocks
injected at the level of the roots of the sacral plexus
 in five out of eight dogs (in the other three dogs
involving the sciatic roots, before the sciatic nerve
 only partial blockade was achieved).
becomes a single large nerve. The sacral plexus pro-
It is possible that a volume of 0.05 mLkg  was
vides the roots for the pudendal nerve, the caudal
not sufficient to satisfactorily reach the L7, S1,
cutaneous femoral nerve, and the gluteal nerves.
and S3 nerve roots. Therefore it was suggested
by those authors that a higher volume might be
Patient positioning
needed in order to improve the success rate of
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency with
this paravertebral sciatic approach.
the leg to be blocked uppermost.
Anatomic landmarks (Figure 13.23)
Combined US/electrolocation-guided
 Spinous processes of L6-L7
sciatic nerve block
Medial sacral crest
 Cranial dorsal iliac crest
Several authors have described different approaches
●Ischiatic tuberosity
to an ultrasound-guided sciatic nerve block (Costa-
Farre et al. 2011; Campoy et al. 2010; Echeverry
A line is drawm between the cranial dorsal iliac
et al. 2010; Shilo et al. 2010). Note that Costa-Farre
crest and the ischiatic tuberosity. This line should
uses an "out-of plane" needling techunique.
be divided into three equal parts.
The puncture site is located at the junction of the
cranial and middle thirds.
Equipment
●High frequency transducer (9-15MHz) with
sterile sleeve when indicated;
peripheral nerve stimulator;
insulated needle (22-gauge 50 mm for small
dogs, 20-gauge 100mm for medium/large
:(sSop
 sterile gloves;
syringes and needles;
 isopropyl alcohol; and
 local anesthetic ± adjuvant.
Technique (Campoy et al. 2010)
Patient positioning
Figure 13.23 Performance of a sciatic nerve block in a dog
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency.
using the parasacral approach. A line is drawn between the
The limb to be blocked should be posi-
cranial dorsal iliac crest and the ischiatic tuberosity and is
 tioned uppermost and extended in a natural
divided into three equal parts. The puncture site is located
at the junction of the cranial and middle thirds. Photograph
position.
by D.A. Portela.
 Clip scarming area and puncture site.
220  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy)
sciatic nerve. Deep (medial) to the biceps femoris
With the transducer oriented in a craniocaudal
are the semimembranosus and adductor muscles.
position over the lateral aspect of the thigh imme-
The semitendinosus muscle is located caudal to the
diately distal to the ischiatic tuberosity, a short axis
 biceps femoris. The sciatic nerve can be seen as a
view of the sciatic nerve is obtained (Figure 13.24).
 small double-discoid hyperechoic structure with
 Using this approach, the biceps femoris muscle is
hypoechoic center, located deep (medial) to the
lateral (closest to the ultrasound probe) to the
biceps femoris and cranial to the semitendinosus
muscle. The needle puncture site is located in the
(a)
caudal aspect of the thigh immediately distal to the
greater trochanter and ischiatic tuberosity, in-plane
with the ultrasound transducer.
Step-by-step technique
cranial
Perform a final sterile
 preparation of the
caudal
puncture site.
Place the transducer over the area immediately
distal to the greater trochanter and ischiatic
tuberosity.
Glide, rotate, and tilt the transducer until the
fascia of the biceps femoris, semimembranosus
and semitendinosus muscles can be seen
(Figure 13.24b).
 Set the peripheral nerve locator to deliver a
0.4 mA current output at 1 or 2Hz.
 Insert the stimulating needle in a caudocranial
(b)
direction, guiding it through the semimembra-
nosus muscle and medial to the fascia of the
biceps femoris muscle (Figure 13.24a).
Advance the needle towards the sciatic nerve,
keeping the needle tip in the field of ultrasound
view at all times.
●Watch for the characteristic twitch pattern:
plantar extension of the foot, corresponding to
stimulation of the tibialis nerve component, or
dorsiflexion of the foot, corresponding to stim-
ulation of the peroneal nerve component.
Clinical tips
Recommended volume to be
injected:
0.05-0.1mLkg-(
(Costa-Farre et al.
2011;
Campoy et al. 2010; Shilo et al. 2010). However,
the final injection volume should be assessed
Figure 13.24  (a) with the nondominant hand, place the
 by monitoring the ultrasound image.
transducer over the area immediately distal to the greater
trochanter and ischiatic tuberosity. Insert the stimulating
needle in a caudocranial direction, guiding it through the
Technigue (Shilo et al. 2010)
semimembranosus muscle and medial to the fascia of the
Patient positioning
biceps femoris muscle towards the sciatic nerve.
(b) Ultrasonographic cross-section (short axis) view of the
sciatic nerve (arrow head) deep to the biceps femoris muscle.
the leg to be blocked uppermost.
The Pelvic Limb  221
Anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy)
Ultrasound
 Using this approach, the sciatic nerve is identi-
beam
fied at the level of the greater trochanter.
llium
The nerve is then followed proximally to the
point where it crosses the ilium, just caudal to
schium
the sacroiliac joint. At this location, the sciatic
nerve is visualized in its short axis as an oval,
hypoechoic structure with a hyperechoic rim
Sciatic
located medial to the ilium and lateral to the
nerve
caudal gluteal artery (Figure 13.25).
Depending on the exact plane of the ultra-
sound transducer, the sciatic nerve may be
Femur
observed coursing ventral to the medial aspect
of the ilium or to lateral aspect of the sacrum
(Figure 13.26).
Step-by-step technique
Perform a  final sterile
preparationofthe
puncture site.
Place the transducer over the area caudal to the
sacroiliac joint (Figure 13.26).
Glide, rotate, and tilt the transducer until a long
Fgure 13.26 Injection technique for ultrasound-guided
sciatic nerve block in the dog (right pelvic limb). Note that
axis view of the sciatic nerve is obtained.
the nerve is visualized in the long axis and an in-plane
Depending on the exact plane of the ultra-
technique is used. From Shilo et al. 2010. Used with
sound transducer, the sciatic nerve may be
permission.
 observed coursing ventral to the medial aspect
of the ilium or to the lateral aspect of the
sacrum (Figure 13.25).
Watch for the characteristic twitch pattern:
Advance
the needle
usingan in-plane
plantar extension of the foot, corresponding to
technique.
stimulation of the tibialis nerve component, or
dorsiflexion of the foot, corresponding to stim-
ulation of the peroneal nerve component.
M7a0d4
Potential complications and how
to avoid them
Opt:Rez
The main potential complication associated with
sciatic nerve block is nerve injury resulting in
ILIU
temporary or permanent foot knuckling. Local
anesthetic should never be injected when resis-
tance is encountered during the injection. Watch
COLON
for the doughnut sign indication, perineural
dispersion of the local anesthetic solution. Look
for signs of nerve swelling or cavitation as the
solution is injected. Local anesthetic should never
Figure 13.25
Ultrasonographic images with color-flow
be injected when a patient overtly reacts during
Doppler in short axis (transverse) plane. Sciatic nerve (arrow)
with the caudal gluteal artery (red) and vein (blue) in an
the injection (if patient is sedated rather than
8kg dog. From Shilo et al. 2010. Used with permission.
anesthetized).
222
2 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Intra-articular analgesia
Toxicity of intra-articular local anesthetics
Recently, attention has been drawn to the possible
General considerations
toxic effects of local anesthetics on chondrocytes.
Bogatch et al. (2010) studied the effects of lidocaine
A strategy for providing pain management follow-
 and bupivacaine on bovine articular chondrocytes
ing joint surgery is the intra-articular (IA) use of
in a suspension culture. Their results suggest
local anesthetics. The technique is commonly per-
potential chemical incompatibility of the drugs
formed for knee and shoulder arthroscopic proce-
producing formation of needle-like crystals in
dures in people (Ballieul et al. 2009), even though
synovial fluid and chondrocyte death. The chon-
there is only weak evidence to suggest effective
drotoxicity of local anesthetics appears to be dose-
reduction of postoperative pain after IAlocal anes-
and time-dependent. Prolonged intra-articular
thesia in human patients undergoing arthroscopic
administration of high concentrations of local
knee surgery (Moiniche et al. 1999). In veterinary
anesthetic solutions may result in adverse clinical
medicine, stifle and coxofemoral joint injections are
effects (chondrolysis) (Karpie and Chu 2007).
Aue Anaod nq 'panad Ao oe
A single IA injection of 0.5% bupivacaine led to
joint can be injected with local anesthetics
reduced chondrocyte density without chondroly-
sis six months after injection (Chu et al. 2010). In
Indications
other studies, a single injection of low-concentra-
tion bupivacaine appears to be safe (Webb and
Indications for IA drug administration include the
 Ghosh 2009). Incidentally, most clinical case reports
provision of perioperative analgesia. Additionally.
of IA complications in people describe chondroly-
IA injections can be used to provide relief in
sis following continuous bupivacaine infusions
patients suffering from chronic pain 
1such
1as
(Anderson et al. 2010). Ropivacaine has been
advanced osteoarthritis.  Intra-articular injection
shown to be less chondrotoxic than bupivacaine
may also be a useful as a diagnostic tool to confirm
(Piper and Kim 2008). Evidence relating to the
 IA pain when physical examination and diagnostic
effects of epinephrine and preservative agents
imaging fail to provide conclusive answers (Van
found in local anesthetic solutions on intra-
Vynckt et al. 2010).
articular surfaces has yet to be elucidated (Webb
and Ghosh 2009).
Choice and dosing of local anesthetics
The drugs most commonly used for diagnostic and
Distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia
[e ls pue ueq u sasodnd snadera
practice include lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupiva-
The IA injection of local anesthetics will provide
caine, or ropivacaine. When injected preopera-
blockade of intra-articular structures only, and anal-
tively, the addition of epinephrine (1:100000) to
gesia of extra-articular structures and the skin will
the local anesthetic solution helps to minimize
not be achieved. Using this technique does not
hemorrhage during the surgical procedure. The
 replace the requirement for supplemental analgesics
addition of buprenorphine (3 μg kg′) or morphine
in cases of open surgical procedures; however, it
(0.1mgkg') to the local anesthetic solution will
may reduce the dose and interval for administrating
extend the total analgesic duration of the intra-
(61 1e 1a A Ad risae luadns
articular block. Intra-articular use of clonidine
(Reuben and Cornelly 1999) or dexmedetomidine
(Al-Metwalli et al. 2008) also enhances analgesia after
Equipment
arthroscopic knee surgery in people. Corticosteroids
(i.e. betamethasone and methylprednisolone) and
A standard regional anesthesia tray is prepared
hyaluronic acid are also used as intra-articular ther-
with the following equipment:
apies in cases of osteoarthritis. Stem cell therapy is
currently being investigated as part of the treatment
sterile gloves;
of osteoarthritis (Black et al. 2008).
 syringes;
The Pelvic Limb 223
hypodermic (stifle joint) or spinal (hip joint)
needles (22-23-gauge); and
local anesthetic ±adjuvant.
Technigue for stifle joint injection
Patient positioning
 Position the patient in dorsal or lateral recum-
bency.
 Injection
 A pillow, towel roll, or large sandbag can
route
aplaoid ot aoeds leaidod au u paeid aq
stability.
 The stifle joint should be in a flexed position.
 Clip the area between the patella and the tibial
tuberosity.
 Perform an initial skin preparation.
Anatomic landmarks
Patella and tibial tuberosity
●Patellar tendon
Figure 13.27 Lateral aspect of the right stifle joint showing the
Step-by step procedure
position and direction for needle placement during intra-
articular injections. The needle is in the midline and would pass
 Perform a final sterile preparation of the
between the femoral epicondyles and menisci if inserted to its
puncture site.
full depth.
Insert the needle lateral to the patellar ligament,
half way between the cranial pole of the patella
and the tibial tuberosity (Figure 13.27).
Once the needle has entered the joint, the hub of
the needle should be observed for presence of
synovial fluid (confirming correct needle posi-
tion). However, absence of synovial fluid (i.e.
 mild or no joint effusion) does not necessarily
rule out correct needle location. In this case, a
 2-3mL syringe is attached to the needle and
 1 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
The syringe is then removed from the needle.
 Look for spontaneous backflow of the local
 anesthetic solution, confirming the correct IA
position of the needle (Luc et al. 2006).
Fgure 13.28P
 Photograph of an intra-articular injection
 Depending on the size of the patient, 1-6 mL of
being performed during surgery of the stile of a dog.
local anesthetic solution is then injected into the
joint. Lack of resistance during injection con-
Intra-articular injection can also be performed
firms correct IA position of the needle tip and
excludes injection into periarticular soft tissue
the surgeon inserts the needle into the articular
'ped jey 10
space under direct view (Figure 13.28).
224  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
1-6mL of local anesthetic solution is injected
excludes injection into periarticular soft tissue
into the joint.
or fat pad.
 As leakage may occur through the suture line
 Intraoperative hip joint injection is not satisfac-
and decrease the total volume of analgesic
 tory as hermetic suture of the joint is difficult to
placed into the joint, an option is to introduce
achieve.
a catheter in the joint during closure of the dif-
ferent layers including fascia, subcutaneous
tissue, and skin. After the surgery is finished,
Complications
the intra-articular injection is performed and
the catheter is pulled out of the joint.
 Intra-articular injections are associated with
very few complications or adverse reactions.
The most obvious concern about IA injections is
Technique for hip joint injection
infection. Strict adherence to sterile technique is
of utmost importance.
 Patient positioning
Serum levels of lidocaine and bupivacaine
obtained after local anesthetic IA injection are
 Position the patient in lateral recumbency with
the coxofemoral joint to be injected located
below toxic levels for both single injection and
continuous irrigation (Weiker et al. 1991).
uppermost.
Failure to inject the drug in the articular cavity.
Adduct the limb slightly (30° of hip flexion)
with the stifle in a neutral position (Saunder
Cartilage or IA ligament laceration.
et al. 2004).
O Clip the area around the greater trochanter.
Clinical tips
Anatomic landmarks
 One method that has been suggested in order
Greater trochanter.
to increase the efficiency of analgesics placed
in the stifle joint involves placing a tourniquet
Step-by-step procedure
above the joint and inflating it to 300mmHg
before the IA injection is performed. The tourni-
 Perform a final sterile preparation of the
quet should be left on for 10 minutes and then
puncture site.
released (Pascoe 2000).
The puncture site is located 5mm cranial and
15mm proximal to the greater trochanter in a
 bop pazis-pru
References
Once the needle has penetrated the joint, the
hub of the needle is observed for evidence of
Al-Metwalli RR, Mowafi HA, IsmailSA et al. (2008) Effect
synovial fluid (this would confirm correct
of intra-articular dexmedetomidine on postoperative
needle positioning). However, absence of symo-
analgesia after arthroscopic knee surgery. Br J Anaesth
vial fluid (i.e. mild or no joint effusion) does not
101, 395399.
rule out correct needle positioning. In this case,
Allen HW, Liu SS, Ware PD et al. (1998) Peripheral nerve
a 2-3 mL syringe is attached to the needle and
blocks improve analgesia after total knee replacement
1 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
surgery. Anaesth Analg 87, 93-97.
The syringe is then removed looking for a
Anderson SL, Buchko JZ, Taillon MR et al. (2010)
spontaneous backflow of local anesthetic solu-
 Chondrolysis of the glenohumeral joint after infusion
 of bupivacaine through an intra-articular pain pump
tion, confirming the correct IA position of the
catheter: a report of 18 cases. Arthroscopy 26, 451-461.
needle (Luc et al. 2006)
Ballieul RJ, Jacobs TF, Herregods S et al. (2009) The peri-
Depending on the size of the patient, 1-6 mL of
operative use of intra-articular local anesthetics: a
local anesthetic solution can be injected into the
review. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 60, 101-108.
joint. Lack of resistance during injection con-
Beach ML, Sites BD, Gallagher JD (2006) Use of a nerve
firms correct IA position of the needle tip and
stimulator does not improve the efficacy of ultrasound-
The Pelvic Limb  225
 guided supraclavicular nerve blocks. J Clin Anesth 18,
Echeverry DF, Laredo FG, Gil F et al. (201l) Ventral ultra-
580-584.
 sound-guided suprainguinal approach to block the
Ben-David B, Schmalenberger K, Chelly JE (2004) Anal-
femoral nerve in the dog. Vet J (Epub ahead of print).
gesia after total knee arthroplasty: is continuous sciatic
 Farny J, Girard M, Drolet P (1994) Posterior approach to
blockade needed in addition to continuous fermoral
the lumbar plexus combined with a sciatic nerve block
blockade? Anesth Analg 98, 747-749.
using lidocaine. Can J Anaesth 41, 486-491.
Black LL, Gaynor J, Adams C et al. (2008) Effect of intra-
Goranson BD, Lang S, Cassidy JD et al. (1997) A
articular injection of autologous adipose-derived mes-
comparison of three regional anaesthesia techniques for
enchymal stem and regenerative cells on clinical signs
outpatient knee arthroscopy. Can J Anaesth 44, 371-376.
of chronic osteoarthritis of the elbow joint in dogs. Vet
Holland T, Jones R, Basford A et al. (2000) An intra-artic-
Ther 9, 192-200.
Bogatch MT, Ferachi DG, Kyle B,et al. (2010) Is chemical
vial joint. Lab Anim 34, 298-300.
incompatibility responsible for chondrocyte death
Kapur E, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F et al. (2007) Neurologic
induced by local anesthetics? Am J Sports Med 38,
and histologic outcome after intraneural injections of
520-526.
lidocaine in canine sciatic nerves. Acta Anaesthesiol
Campoy L (2006) Fundamentals of Regional Anesthesia
Scand 51, 101-107.
Using Nerve Stimulation in the Dog. In: Recent
Karpie JC, Chu CR (2007) Lidocaine exhibits dose- and
Advances in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia:
time-dependent cytotoxic effects on bovine articular
Companion Animals. Gleed RD & Ludders JW (eds).
chondrocytes in vitro. Am J Sports Med 35, 1621-1627.
Intermational Veterinary Information Service (www.
Lintmer S, Shawen S, Lohnes J et al. (1996) Local anes-
ivis.org), Ithaca, NY.
thesia in outpatient knee arthroscopy: a comparison of 
Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Looney AL et al. (2008)
efficacy and cost. Arthroscopy 12,482-488.
Distribution of a lidocaine-methylene blue solution
Luc M, Pham T, Chagnaud C et al. (2006) Placement of
staining in brachial plexus, lumbar plexus and sciatic
intra-articular injection verified by the backflow tech-
nerve blocks in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35,
nique. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 14, 714-716.
348-354.
Mahler SP, Adogwa AO (2008) Anatomical and experi-
Campoy L, Bezuidenhout AJ, Gleed RD et al. (2010)
mental studies of brachial plexus, sciatic, and femoral
 Ultrasound-guided approach for axillary brachial
nerve-location using peripheral nerve stimulation in
plexus, femoral nerve, and sciatic nerve blocks in dogs.
the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 80-89.
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 144-153.
Moiniche S, Mikkelsen S, Wetterslev J et al. (1999) A
Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Ludders JW et al. (2012)
systematic review of intra-articular local anesthesia for
Comparison of bupivacaine femoral and sciatic nerve
block versus bupivacaine and morphine epidural for
gery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 24, 430-437.
stifle surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 91-98.
O'Connor BL, Woodbury P (1982) The primary artic-
Cannon MS, Puchalski SM (2008) Ultrasonographic eval-
ular nerves to the dog knee. Jourmal of Anatomy 134,
uation of normal canine iliopsoas muscle. Vet Radiol
563-572
Ultrasound 49, 378-382.
Pascoe PJ (2000) Opioid Analgesics. Vet Clin North Am
Capdevila X, Pirat P, Bringuier S et al. (2005) Continuous
Small Anim Pract 30, 757-772.
 peripheral nerve blocks in hospital wards after ortho-
Patel NJ, Flashburg MH, Paskin S et al. (1986) A regional
aul jo siseue aaoadsad auasunu e :ains sipad
anesthetic technique compared to general anesthesia for
quality of postoperative analgesia and complications
outpatient knee arthroscopy Anesth Analg 65, 185-187.
in 1,416 patients. Anesthesiology 103, 1035-1045.
Piper SL, Kim HT (2008) Comparison of ropivacaine and
Chu CR, Coyle CH, Chu CT et al. (2010) In vivo effects of
bupivacaine toxicity in human articular chondrocytes.
single intra-articular injection of 0.5% bupivacaine on
 J Bone Joint Surg Am 90, 986-991.
articular cartilage. J Bone Joint Surg Am 92, 599-608.
 Portela D, Melanie P, Briganti A et al. (2008) Nerve stimu-
Costa-Farre C, Blanch XS, Cruz JI et al. (2011) Ultrasound
lator-guided paravertebral lumbar plexus anaesthesia
 guidance for the performance of sciatic and saphenous
in dogs. Vet Res Comms 32 Suppl 1, S307-310.
nerve blocks in dogs. Vet J 187,221-224.
Portela DA, Otero PE, Tarragona L et al. (2010) Combined
Day TK, Pepper WT, Tobias TA et al. (1995) Comparison
 paravertebral plexus block and parasacral sciatic block
of intra-articular and epidural morphine for anal-
in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 531-541.
gesia following stifle arthrotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 24,
Portela DA, Otero PE, Briganti A et al. (2012) Femoral
522-530.
nerve block: a novel psoas compartment lateral
Echeverry DF, Gil F, Laredo F et al. (2010) Ultrasound-
pre-iliac approach in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg. Jul 6.
guided block of the sciatic and femoral nerves in dogs:
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2995.2012.00765.x. [Epub ahead of
a descriptive study. Vet J 186, 210-215.
print].
226  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Reuben SS, Connelly NR (1999) Postoperative analgesia
Tsui BC, Kropelin B (2005) The electrophysiological
effect of dextrose 5% in water on single-shot
ticular clonidine. Anesth Analg 88, 729-733.
peripheral nerve stimulation. Anesth Analg 100,
Robards C, Clendenen S, Greengrass R (2008) Intra-
1837-1839.
vascular injection during ultrasound-guided axillary
Van Vynckt D, Polis I, Verschooten F et al. (2010) A review
block: negative aspiration can be misleading. Anesth
of the human and veterinary literature on local anaes-
Analg 107, 1754-1755.
thetics and their intra-articular use. Relevant infor-
Saunder WB, Hulse DA, Schulz KS (2004) Evaluation of
 mation for lameness diagnosis in the dog. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 23,225-230.
coxofemoral arthroscopy: a cadaver study. Vet Comp
Webb ST, Ghosh S (2009) Intra-articular bupivacaine:
Orthop Traumatol 17, 184-188.
potentially chondrotoxic? Br J Anaesth 102,439-441.
Shilo Y, Pascoe PJ, Cissell D et al. (2010) Ultrasound-
Weber A, Fourmier R, Van Gessel E et al. (2002) Sciatic
guided nerve blocks of the pelvic limb in dogs. Vet
nerve block and the improvement of femoral nerve
Anaesth Analg 37, 460-470.
block analgesia after total knee replacement. Eur J
Singelyn FJ, Gouvermeur JM, Grimbomot BF (1991)
Anaesthesiol 19, 834-836.
Popliteal sciatic nerve block aided by a nerve stimu-
Weiker GG, Kuivila TE, Pippinger CE (1991) Serum lido-
lator: a reliable technique for foot and ankle surgery.
caine and bupivacaine levels in local technique knee
Reg Anesth 16, 278-281.
arthroscopy. Am J Sports Med 19, 499-502.
14
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia
Pablo E. Otero and Luis Campoy
Overview
20 coccygeal (caudal) vertebrae. The three sacral
vertebrae are fused into a single unit to form the
The administration of agents with analgesic
sacrum. The cervical, thoracic, and lumbar verte-
properties via the epidural or spinal routes has
brae represent approximately 27%, 37%, and 29%
a uu apad cn sr  n pasn ua
of the total spinal length respectively, whereas the
tive localized anesthesia and analgesia to small
sacrum only accounts for 7% of the total spinal
animal patients. "Epidural" (extradural) anesthesia
length (Fletcher and Kitchell 1966; Evans and
involves administration of a local anesthetic (or
Miller 1993).
other drug) into the epidural space (outside the
The vertebral canal extends from the foramen
dura), whereas the administration of the drug into
magnum on the back of the skull to the sixth coccy-
"'Teuds, se umoux sI aneds prouuoereqns au
 geal vertebra. The canal is elliptical in cross-section,
"subarachnoid," or "intrathecal" anesthesia. Drug
      
access to the site of action is largely dependent on
supraspinous ligament attaches to the apices of
the drug's physical and chemical properties and its
the dorsal spinous processes and extends from the
interaction with the different membranes that
thoracic to the coccygeal segments. The interspi-
cover and protect the nervous tissue. Sound ana
nous ligaments connect adjacent spinous processes
tomic knowledge and an understanding of the
along their entire height from top to bottom.
effects of drug selection are essential for the safe
The vertebral canal consists of the epidural space
implementation of these techniques.
and intrathecal structures that include the spinal
cord, the meninges, and the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) (Figures 14.1, 14.2, and 14.3). The dorsal
Anatomy of the spine
longitudinal ligament is attached to the vertebrae
and the intervertebral disks and forms the floor of
Dogs and cats have seven cervical vertebrae, 13
the vertebral canal. This ligament widens where it
thoracic vertebrae, seven lumbar vertebrae, three
is in contact with the intervertebral disks. The roof
sacral vertebrae, and up to
approximately
of the vertebral canal is formed by individual
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
227
228   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Pia mater
Vertebral
bone
Dura mater
 Spinal cord
Epidural space
lliacwing
Nerveroot
Nerveroot
Arachnoid membrane
Duralsac
Ca uda equina
Figure 14.1  Dorsal view (coronal section) of the lumbar spine of a dog.
Interarcuate ligament
Epidural space
Vertebral bone
Dura mater
(sacrum)
Spinal cord
Dural sac
Epidural fat
Figure 14.2  Lateral view (sagittal section) of the lumbar spine of a dog.
vertebral laminae and the interarcuate ligament
The spinal cord courses through the vertebral
 ,  s   o
 canal from the brain to the caudal lumbar region
"yellow ligament") which widens at the level of the
(Figure 14.4). Caudally, the spinal cord tapers into a
intervertebral spaces. The sides of the vertebral
conical structure called the conus medullaris. In
canal are formed by intervertebral pedicles and
large breed dogs, the conus medullaris typically
foramina.
extends only as far as the sixth or seventh lumbar
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  229
Figure 14.3Transverse view (axial section) of a dog spine at the level of L5
Figure 14.4  Lateral radiograph of a dog in lateral recumbency. The overlay shows the spinal cord (red) with filum terminale,
subarachnoid space (yellow) and dura mater (black outline). The epidural space is shown as blue.
vertebrae, whereas in small breed dogs and cats it
 artery lies along the surface of the ventral fissure of
continues caudally to the level of the lumbosacral
the spinal cord and supplies oxygenated blood to
space. At birth the spinal cord extends even further
the gray and white matter of the spinal cord. Paired
caudally, often to the level of the sacrum.
dorsolateral spinal arteries rum along each side of
The spinal cord is supplied by three arteries that
the cord near the furrow from which the dorsal
extend along its entire length. The ventral spinal
roots of the spinal nerves arise. Venous circulation
230  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
within the vertebral canal comprises an internal
 as the first sacral segment (Figure 14.4). This is why
vertebral venous plexus that runs along the floor of
m ,dei-lam, e as on uoon anou ynu si 1!
the canal, draining blood from the structures inside
performing epidural anesthesia  in cats-even 
a
the vertebral canal (Figure 14.3).
needle that is correctly located at the lumbosacral
space can puncture the dural sac, allowing CSF to
enter the needle and be detected in the needle hub.
The epidural space and the meninges
This may also occur in small breed dogs and should
be a consideration prior to performance of the
The meringes consist of three layers of tissue that
block. The anesthetist should anticipate the possi-
surround the brain and spinal cord (Figure 14.1). A
bility of this event occurring and should have a
main function of the meninges and the CSF
plan to deal with dural puncture if and when it
contained within them is to protect the central ner-
does occur in some patients.
 vous system. The pia mater is the innermost mem-
The cauda equina comprises a bundle of nerve
brane and is firmly attached to the spinal cord
fibers formed by the roots of the sacrum and caudal
itself. The arachnoid membrane is the middle layer
 segments and is located within and caudal to the
 and is adhered on its outermost surface to the dura
dural sac, around the filum terminale. In dogs, the
mater. Cerebrospinal fluid is contained within the
 cauda equina is located within the epidural space
subarachnoid space that exists between the pia
at the level of the sacrum and the tail and comprises
mater and the arachnoid membrane. The subarach-
spinal nerve roots cov ered by individual meningeal
noid space is a trabecular mesh that separates the
sheaths (Figure 14.1) (Evans and Miller 1993)
arachnoid
membrane from the
pia
mater
je aneds jenuaiod au st ,aoeds [empida, au
(Figure 14.3). The fluid-filled subarachnoid space
is located between the dura mater and the wall of
extends beyond the last segment of spinal cord and
the vertebral canal (Figure 14.3). It contains adipose
is called the lumbar cistern (Figure 14.4). The dura
and connective tissues as well as the internal
mater is the outermost layer of tissue and continues
vertebral venous plexus. The epidural space is typ-
caudally past the termination of the spinal cord to
ically larger at the level of the lumbosacral space as
form a structure referred to as the dural
1sac
the dural sac tapers off in this area. As the lumbosa-
(Figure 14.2). As the dura mater continues even
cral intervertebral space and the epidural space are
further caudally, it tapers down to form a thin
both largest at this location, epidural anesthesia is
tubular ligament referred to as the filum durae
typically performed in dogs and cats at this loca-
matris spinalis. This structure covers the filum ter-
tion as it gives the anesthetist the greatest chance of
minale (glial and ependymal cells that originate
performing a successful block.
from the spinal cord) and continues into the second
 or third coccygeal vertebra (Evans and Miller 1993).
The dura mater (dura mater spinalis) is closely
Medulla spinalis and nerve roots
adhered to the arachnoid membrane (Figure 14.1).
Together, they form a cylindrical tube with lateral
Dorsal and ventral rootlets emerge bilaterally from
extensions that accompany the spinal nerves as
each vertebral segment of the spinal cord. These
they exit the vertebral canal through their respec-
rootlets bind together to form the dorsal and
tive intervertebral foramina. Each nerve root (ven-
ventral nerve roots. The dorsal and ventral roots
tral and dorsal branches) that emerges from the
progress
towards
the intervertebralf
foramen
spinal cord is initially covered by an extension of
  n a   m e 
 the meninges (dura mater and arachnoid mem-
corresponding spinal nerve. The length of each
brane) which will blend with connective tissues to
 root, from its source in a specific medullar segment
form what will later become the sheaths of the
to the exit through the corresponding interverte-
 peripheral nerves (Evans and Miller 1993).
 bral foramen, is variable and depends on the spinal
The dural sac can be inadvertently punctured
region in which it is located. From T1 caudally,
 during performance of epidural anesthesia.
In
 spinal nerves exit the vertebral canal through inter-
dogs, the dural sac typically ends at the level of
vertebral foramina located caudal to the named
L6-L7, whereas in cats it can extend caudally as far
vertebra (Fletcher and Kitchell 1966). After leaving
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  231
the vertebral canal, spinal nerves divide into a
sufficient to spread up to the level of L3. The
dorsal branch, a ventral branch, and a ramus
abdominal wall and peritoneum are innervated by
communicans that will join the ganglia of the
spinal nerves arising from T11 to L3 (Evans and
sympathetic trunk.
Miller 1993). Therefore, to obtain complete blockade
of the abdominal wall, the local anesthetic solution
must be able to spread from the site of injection
Physiology of somatic and autonomic
up to the level of T11. This is an important
blockade
consideration when considering which drugs to
use and at what volume to use them.
Somatic blockade
Distribution of regional anesthesia
Site of action of local anesthetics
and analgesia
The principal site of action for local anesthetics that
The cranial migration of a solution administered in
are administered by the epidural route is the nerve
root (Figures 14.5 and 14.6). The spinal roots
the epidural space is related to the injected volume
of local anesthetic solution. Anesthetics adminis-
become blocked when they are bathed by the local
tered at the level of the lumbosacral space are
anesthetic solution, as the local anesthetic diffuses
along a concentration gradient through the differ-
distributed in caudal, cranial, and lateral directions
within the vertebral canal (Figure 14.6). As one
ent nerve structures (Liu and Bernards 2002;
would expect, lumbosacral  injection requires
Bernards et al. 2003a, b).
The pelvic limb is supplied by spinal nerves aris-
proportionately greater volumes of solution in
ing from L3 to S1 (lumbosacral plexus). To obtain
segmental blockade that achieves sensory and
P
motor block of the entire pelvic limb, local anes-
thetics must be administered at a volume that is
P
A
Fgure 14.6  Axial computed tomographic (CT) image of the 
lumbar spine of a dog. An epidural injection of iohexol
(240mg iodine mL-') has been performed. There is contrast
enhancement (white) bilaterally within the intervertebral
foramina. The black area dorsal to the spinal cord represents
Figure 14.5 Axial computed tomographic (CT) image of the
air that was inadvertently injected into the epidural space
lumbar spine of a dog. An epidural injection of iohexol (240mg
during administration of the iohexol solution. Every effort
iodine mL-) has been performed. Note the presence of contrast
should be made to avoid injecting air into the epidural space
enhancement (white) bilaterally within the intervertebral
as it can direct the local anesthetic solution away from its
foramina and exiting the canal with the spinal nerves.
target sites (the spinal nerves)
232
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
order to achieve the same level of blockade when
Many studies have compared the effects of equal
compared with injections that are performed at
doses of local anesthetics in solutions with differ-
lumbar spaces crarial to L7. This is due to the loss 
 eEnt concentrations. In people, when the same total
of local anesthetic through the lateral sacral
drug mass is administered epidurally in different
foramina (Burn et al. 1973; Park et al. 1980), and the
 concentrations and volumes, it produces a similar
fact that there is a relatively larger volume of
degree of sensory blockade (Duggan et al. 1988;
vertebral canal to fill with drug solution. Solutions 
Nakayama et al. 2002). This has also been observed
injected at intervertebral spaces cranial to L7 tend
in dogs following the epidural administration of
to flow in a predominantly cephalad (cranial)
various local anesthetics at different concentrations
direction (Vas et al 2003; Freire et al. 2010), whereas
and volumes (Duke et al. 2000; Otero et al. 2007).
this may not be the case when the traditional L7-S1
There appears to be a minimum volume needed to
site is used.
achieve epidural blockade. Below this volume, the
There are many factors that can affect the spread
concentration of local anesthetic does not appear to
of solutions that are administered into the epidural
have an effect on the degree of nerve blockade.
space:
However, once this minimum volume is reached, a
greater concentration of local anesthetic will
volume and concentration of drug (Lee et al.
 increase the analgesic efficacy and duration of the
2004a; Duke et al. 2000);
block. This also holds true when drugs are injected
speed and pressure during injection (Iff et al.
in the CSF, whereby the total drug mass injected
2007);
determines the extent of the effects.
site of injection (Visser et al. 2008);
direction of the needle bevel (Visser et al. 2008);
Speed and pressure of epidural injection
position of the animal (Gorgi et al. 2006);
When epidural administration of drugs is performed
size and permeability of the intervertebral
quickly and with higher injection pressures, the
foramina (Bromage 1962);
solutions will travel further cranially. Care should be
 amount of fat in the epidural space (Lee et al.
taken to administer the drug solution slowly over
2004b; Lundblad et al. 2011);
1-2 minutes, and if any resistance to injection is
size of the associated venous and lymphatic
Encountered, the injection should be stopped and the
plexus (Park et al. 1980);
needle repositioned. An easy way of determining
age and physical condition (Bromage 1962); and
injection pressure is to aspirate a small air bubble
baricity and specific  gravity
of the injected
(1-3 mL) into the syringe that contains the injectate.
solution.
 Before connecting the syringe to the needle, the air
bubble is made to sit next to the plunger by adjusting
Volume and concentration
the orientation of the syringe (Figure 14.7). Once it is
The cranial (cephalad) migration of a solution that
cornected to the needle, as the solution is slowly
is administered in the epidural space increases as
injected, the air bubble should not compress more
the injected volume increases. This observation has
than 50% of its starting volume. If the bubble does
been described in several species (Johnson et al.
compress, it suggests that resistance to injection is
1996; Lopez et al. 1997; Lee et al. 2004a; Lansdowne
being experienced, and the injection should be
a 0107 1 a 3111 900 1 1a 1810 900 1 13
stopped. After the drug solution has been completely
a sufficient volume of drug is used to reach
la
injected, it is imperative not to inject any of the air
particular location (dermatome), the intensity and
duration of the resulting block depends 
on the
concentration of the local anesthetic that is admin-
Site of injection
istered (Gomez de Segura et al. 2009; Duke et al.
With a given injection volume, the more cranial the
2000; Otero et al. 2007). As a result, if the local anes-
site of injection, the further forward the solution
thetic solution is diluted too much with other
will migrate. This needs to be taken into account if
agents (i.e. opioids, saline), the resulting block will
 injections are not made at the lumbosacral space,
not be as profound. This is often referred to as a
from which most recommended drug volumes
'patchyblock."
from the literature are assumed to be administered.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  233
Amount of fatty tissue in the epidural space
 In children, it has been suggested that a difference
in the amount of epidural fat may explain why a
standardized volume of injectate travels further
cranially in neonates and infants than it does in tod-
dlers. A similar effect is thought to occur in animals.
Size of the associated venous
and lymphaticplexus
When epidural venous and lymphatic vessels
become engorged, the epidural space will be
become relatively smaller, and it can be anticipated
that a calculated volume of solution will travel
further cranially. This is one consideration when
Figure 14.7  A cat has been positioned in sternal
 performing epidural anesthesia in female patients
recumbency and a spinal needle placed at the lumbosacral
when changes in their regional blood flow that
intervertebral space. Prior to drug administration, an air
bubble has been drawn into the syringe and positioned
occur with pregnancy affect the degree of disten-
adjacent to the plunger. Once the syringe is connected to the
tion of the venous plexus. Engorgement of epi-
needle, the air bubble will be used to assess resistance to
dural veins from increased intra-abdominal
injection. During injection, if the air bubble undergoes
 pressure has often been implied as the mechanism
compression, resistance is being detected and the injection
for this phenomenon. Furthermore, animal studies
should be stopped.
Jo jasuo a Kuand mp su umous aa
nerve conduction blockade by local anesthetic is
faster and the resulting blockade is more intense
Direction of the needle bevel
The direction of the needle bevel determines, to a
1994; Otero et al. 2003). Flanagan et al. (1987)
minor extent, the direction that the injectate will
related these observations to increased proges-
travel. This is most relevant when a Tuohy needle
 d   a
is used. For example, if the needle bevel is aimed
 patients with pyometra have been found to have
caudally, the injectate will be more directed cau-
similar progesterone levels to patients in the final
dally. This is not usually an issue when regular
stages of gestation (Bigliardi et al. 2004). Given
 spinal needles are used.
these observations, pregnant animals typically
require lower volumes of epidurally administered
Position of the animal
local anesthetics to achieve a given level of epi-
If the patient is positioned on a flat surface/table
dural anesthesia.
with its head down (also called the "Trendelenburg
position"), the injectate will tend to migrate crani-
Age and physical condition
ally due to the effects of gravity. This observation
Older patients require relatively lower doses of
should be remembered in cases where a calculated
local anesthetics. With aging, the dura mater
volume of local anesthetic is administered, fol-
becomes more permeable to local anesthetics due
au m pauonisod suaq haned au Aq pamon
 to a progressive increase in the size and number of
head and front of the body lower than the hind end
 arachnoid villi. This provides a greater area through
(e.g. for perineal surgeries). In those patients, the
which local anesthetics can diffuse into the sub-
degree of nerve blockade may be greater than
arachnoid space (Shanta and Evans 1972). It has
anticipated, and the side effects of local anesthetic
also been proposed that a progressive decrease in
administration (vasodilation, intercostal nerve
the number of myelinated fibers in nerves and a
 s 'panaxa u raiea aq e (apeo
 general deterioration of nerve sheaths allows local
be easily avoided by decreasing the volume of local
amesthetics to penetrate nerve roots more readily
anesthetic to be administered.
(Bromage 1962; Dorfman and Bosley 1979).
234
4 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Baricity and specific gravity
following systemic absorption of the drugs from
the epidural space. The typical cardiovascular
Table 14.1 [
 Density of different injectate combinations.
effects that follow epidural administration of local
 Solution
Density (gmL-)
Baricity
anesthetics include vasodilation in the affected der-
matomes with resultant hypotension, and more
Normal saline 
0666'0
0.98980
rarely, bradycardia.
5% Dextrose
1.0130
1.00297
The degree of sympathetic nerve blockade
0.5% Bupivacaine
0.99950
0.98961
caused by spinal or epidural anesthesia is directly
0.5% Bupivacaine
1.00085
0.99094
related to the anatomic extent of the block. In peo-
with 5% dextrose
 ple, sympathetic nerves located two to six derma-
0.5% Bupivacaine
1.01678
1.00671
with 8% dextrose
tomes further cranial than the level of the sensory
Fentanyl
65666'0
69686'0
block may become blocked following spinal or epi-
 dural anesthesia (Brull and Greene 1991; Veering
Adapted from Hallworth et al. 2002.
 and Cousins 2000). This observation may explain
why vasodilation and hypotension are seen so
When drugs are administered spinally (into the
commonly following epidural anesthesia in small 
CSF), there is mixing with CSF.
.The
"specific
animals as well. Fibers in the sympathetic chain
gravity" of a solution is the ratio of the density of
arise from the T1 to L4 segments of the spinal cord.
the solution when compared with the density of
Sympathetic fibers maintain a background level of
water. The "baricity” of a solution is the ratio of the 
vascular tone on arteries and veins throughout the
density of a solution when compared with the
 body. Blocking spinal nerves arising between T5
density of CSF. The density of^CSF has been
 and L3 will result in vasodilation, pooling of blood
reported to be approximately 1.010 (1.005-1.017)
in venous circulation, and subsequent decreased
 g mL-l in dogs and 1.010 (1.005-1.021) g mL-l in cats
venous return (preload) to the heart. This will
(Mosing et al. 2006). As a general rule, drug formu-
effectively
 decrease cardiac output and may
lations with densities >1.010 are considered to be
 manifest as systemic hypotension. Usually, these
hyperbaric to CSF (Table 14.1). Hyperbaric solu-
effects are predictable, minor, and pose no risk to
tions will "sink" within the CSF,
 promoting
cardiovascularly stable patients. When hypoten-
blockade of areas located dowmmost and will tend
sion occurs, administration of intravenous fluids
to travel along the spine following
gravity.
for volume expansion can easily be instituted.
Hypobaric solutions will tend to float within the
Based on these cardiovascular effects, epidural
CSF therefore promoting blockade of areas located
administration  of local  anesthetics 
should
be
uppermost.
Isobaric solutions are 
distributed
 avoided in patients with uncorrected hypovolemia
homogeneously within the CSF
and
remain
and hypotension as these effects can potentially
suspended in solution regardless of the patient's
worsen their condition.
position (Faust et al. 2003).
The cardiac accelerator nerve fibers that inner-
These considerations are only applicable to the
vate the heart arise from the T1 to T4 segments of
spinal administration of solutions and do not have
the spinal cord and stimulate increases in heart
any
：bearing
on spread
following
epidural
rate and inotropy in response to decreases in
 administration of drugs (the majority of cases for
 arterial blood pressure. In cases where local anes-
small animal patients).
thetic solutions are administered across the T1 to
 T4 levels (e.g. inadvertent cranial spread, use of a
Autonomic blockade
thoracic epidural catheter), heart rate and cardiac
contractility may be decreased when sympathetic
 outflow from these segments is blocked. If a patient
Cardiovascular
Experiences cardiovascular  collapse 
(extreme
The negative cardiovascular effects of spinal and
hypotension without manifesting an increase in
epidural anesthesia are usually the result of pre-
heart rate), this mechanism must be considered
 ganglionic sympathetic blockade, although there
and appropriate supportive actions should be
may also be some contribution from other effects
taken immediately.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia235
 Single-shot epidurals are limited in their dura-
Metabolism and hormones
tion of effect by the pharmacology of the drugs that
Surgical trauma typically produces a localized
 are used. In many cases, prolonged durations of
inflammatory response, a systemic neuroendo-
 analgesic effect are desirable, especially for severely
crine response, and activation of somatic and vis-
injured patients or for those patients that are under-
ceral afferent nerve fibers. In people, epidural
 going extensive surgical procedures. Similar to
anesthesia has been shown to inhibit surgically
their use in people, indwelling catheters are useful
induced signs of stress, including the increases in
for providing repeated or long-term epidural anes-
plasma levels of cortisol, aldosterone, renin, epi-
thesia and analgesia to veterinary patients. Many
nephrine, and norepinephrine that are typically
 epidural catheter products are available to veteri-
seen (Covino and Scott 1985). Blockade up to the
narians, and the methods used to place them in
level of T11 can potentially block the adrenal path-
 patients have been well described, along with their
benefits (see below).
responses. Almeida et al. (2007) reported that
plasma norepinephrine concentrations (but not
cortisol) decreased after epidural administration of
Contraindications/precautions
bupivacaine, fentanyl-bupivacaine, and sufentanil-
bupivacaine. Sibanda et al. (2006) reported a signi-
There are several absolute contraindications, as
ficant decrease in cortisol levels after epidural
well as some relative contraindications, that need
administration of a bupivacaine-morphine solu-
to be remembered prior to administration of epi-
tion. In a study involving dogs, no changes in
dural or spinal anesthesia to small animal patiernts.
plasma cortisol concentration  were observed
following epidural administration of 2% lidocaine
● Epidural anesthesia is contraindicated in patients
(Simeonova et al. 2008).
with bleeding disorders (thrombocytopenia,
coagulation disorders) due to their increased
risk of hemorrhage. As the small epidural ves-
Indications and contraindications
sels and sinuses reside within the vertebral canal,
if the spinal needle inadvertently lacerates a
Indications
small vessel during performance of the epidural
block, the bleeding would be non-compressible
Epidural anesthesia for small animal patients is
and may result in an epidural or subarachnoid
typically administered by a single injection via the
hematoma and subsequent spinal compression
lumbosacral intervertebral space, and can be used
and neurological deficits. In patients with clinical
to provide anesthesia and analgesia for surgical,
bleeding disorders, epidural anesthesia should
medical, or diagnostic procedures caudal to the
be avoided.
patient's umbilicus. Most commonly, the technique
Epidural anesthesia using a local anesthetic
is used to provide analgesia for surgery of the
should be avoided in patients with uncorrected
pelvis, pelvic limbs, perineal procedures, and some
hypovolemia and hypotension. This is due to
caudal abdominal procedures. Recently, the use of
the increased risk of hypotension following
epidural anesthesia for blockade of thoracic seg-
sympathetic nerve blockade, as local anesthetics
ments in dogs has been reported (Oliveira et al.
administered into the epidural space will not
2009). Additionally, epidural analgesia can be used
only block pain and motor fibers, but also
as method of providing postoperative pain relief
sympathetic fibers. Even in normal patients,
for variable periods of time, whether as a single
local anesthetics will cause some degree of
injection or through use of an indwelling epidural
hypotension by inducing vasodilation in the
catheter.  For example, lumbosacral
epidural
blocked dermatomes. In cases where a patient is
administration of morphine to dogs and cats can
already hypovolemic and hypotensive, these
reduce the requirements for analgesics during the
effects will be more profound and the patient
aossed) smou t oh dn roy potad aaneradoisod
will be unable to control its vasomotor tone in
and Dyson 1993; Troncy et al. 2002).
the blocked areas. This is only a concern when
236   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
local anesthetics are used, and other agents
of the agents used, their use may make it diffi-
such as opioids may still be used safely in these
cult to determine if the continued presence of
patients to provide analgesia without causing
deficits are the result of preexisting disease or
motor or sympathetic blockade.
are complications from the epidural.
Epidural anesthesia should be avoided in
patients with documented infections or neo-
plasia at the site of lumbosacral injection. If
General considerations
infection or tumor cells are introduced into the
vertebral canal, there may be catastrophic
Sedation and anesthesia reguirements
neurologic consequences. Alternative routes of
epidural anesthesia (e.g. sacrococcygeal route)
To prepare the patient for the procedure, an
may be considered, but most often, alternative
intravenous catheter should be placed.
analgesic protocols are used instead.
 In most cases, patients are fully anesthetized
It has been suggested that epidural anesthesia
and maintained on an inhalant anesthetic deliv-
using a local anesthetic should not be recom-
ered with oxygen.
mended for patients with left ventricular out-
 Alternatively, sedation can be used. For seda-
flow obstruction (e.g. valvular aortic stenosis,
tion, a combination of either intravenous
hypertrophic subaortic stenosis, mitral stenosis)
fentanyl
1(2-5μgkg-') or dexmedetomidine
 as compensatory increases in cardiac output in
(0.5μgkg') and propofol 2-3mgkg can be
response to drug-induced vasodilation and
pau a uaxo 'sasn asa u paraisupe
hypotension may be limited in these patients.
to be supplied to the patient to minimize pos-
However, Ho et al. (2008) published successful
sible drug-induced
ventilatory
depression
 epidural anesthesia management of 1947 peo-
leading to hypoxemia. Additionally, local infil-
ple with diagnosed aortic stenosis.
tration with a local anesthetic such as lidocaine
Neuroaxial anesthesia in the presence of sepsis
 2% may be necessary at the puncture site and in
or bacteremia may predispose patients to hema-
the supra- and interspinous ligaments if the
togenous spread of the infection into the epi-
patient is sedated rather than anesthetized.
dural/spinal space. This would likely only
 In either case, the use of monitoring devices
occur if a vessel in the epidural space were lac-
such as ECG, pulse oximetry,
poolq pue 
erated and hemorrhage occurred 
1imtothe
pressure monitoring during the procedure is
vertebral canal. This consideration is controver-
also highly recommended.
sial, and is considered by some authors to be a
relative contraindication as the overall risk of
 bleeding is low when an epidural is performed
Animal positioning
properly.
Congenital or traumatic anatomic abnormal-
Patient positioning is an important aspect of the
ities may represent a relative contraindication
procedure.
 Standardized
d positioning helps to
due to the potential increase in technical diffi-
improve the quality of the block and to minimize
culty when performing the block. If the ana-
the risk
for
complications.
The lumbosacral
tomic landmarks are not able to be identified
pe saop ur uojrad o Asea Aieruuoai st uoeodde
with confidence, epidural anesthesia should
cats due to the relatively wide intervertebral space
not be performed.
 at L7-S1, regardless of the patient position selected
 Preexisting neurologic deficits in the area to be
(Valverde 2008)
blocked are a contraindication to performing
To perform an epidural injection, the animal may
epidural anesthesia (or any local and regional
be placed in either sternal or lateral recumbency,
anesthetic technique). If a patient has deficits
depending on the patient's medical condition and
that need to be monitored for resolution or to
the clinician's preference (Figures 14.8, 14.9, and
determine
 prognosis, epidural
anesthesia
14.10). In a study carried out on canine cadavers
should not be performed. Despite the relatively
 following epidural injection of new methylene blue
short-lived (less than 24 hours) effects of most
solution, cephalad migration was greater when
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  237
Figure 14.8  A dog has been placed into sternal recumbency.
Fgure 14.10 A cat is positioned in sternal recumbency prior
The lumbosacral area has been clipped and surgically
to administration of epidural anesthesia.
 prepared. The anesthetist's index and middle fingers are placed 
on the midline at the lubosacral intervertebral space (L7-S1).
Figure 14.11A Pug has been positioned in sternal
recumbency with its pelvic limbs pulled forward (kyphosis).
opening up its lumbosacral space prior to administration of
epidural anesthesia.
Figure 14.9  A dog has been positioned in lateral
recumbency and the hair over the lumbosacral area has been
clipped prior to epidural administration of local anesthesia.
dogs were positioned in lateral recumbency than
when they were in stemal recumbency (Gorgi et al.
2006). However, no differences were observed in
the number of stained nerve roots on either side of
the epidural canal.
Sternal recumbency
 Many people perform lumbosacral anesthesia in
Figure 14.12 A Pug has been positioned in sternal
recumbency with its pelvic limbs extended backwards. This
dogs and cats with their patients positioned in
will result in narrowing of its lumbosacral intervertebral
sternal recumbency. The spine is often easier to
space, making performance of a lumbosacral epidural more
palpate when the patient is positioned in sternal
difficult than when the positioning in Figure 14.11 is used.
238   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
recumbency,
especially
inobese
animals
Methods for locating the epidural space
(Figure 14.8). Puggioni et al. (2006) showed that
the interarcuate space was widest when animals
were placed in sternal recumbency with the spine
Several methods have been developed for con-
firming needle placement in the epidural space
flexed in a kyphotic position (legs pulled forward
 including: loss of resistance, use of a "hanging
rather than extended behind
dthe patient)
drop," and electrostimulation. Although in many
(Figures 14.11 and 14.12). However, if alternative
cases the aid of electronic devices (plethysmog-
approaches are used (e.g. thoracolumbar puncture
between T13 and L6), sternal positioning may
 raphy, electrolocation) may increase the degree of
make the procedure more difficult. For this reason,
certainty regarding the correct positioning of the
use of sternal recumbency is not widely advocated
needle, no method can replace the need for
knowledge of anatomy and the training of the clini-
for punctures above L6.
cian to safely and correctly perform the technique.
Lateral recumbency
Loss of resistance (LOR)
Until the tip of the needle is correctly located in the
lumbosacral anesthesia in dogs and cats with
 epidural space, resistance to injection of air or fluid
their patients positioned in lateral recumbency
 is felt while the needle is advanced through the lig-
(Figure 14.13). In lateral recumbency the spine
aments (Figures 14.14 and 14.15). If pressure is
can be either in a neutral position or flexed.
dod, e 'auas aut jo aumid aut oh padde suiaq
In some cases, lateral recumbency is preferred
and a sudden loss of resistance to injection are usu-
over sternal recumbency as it is easier to position
 ally appreciated when the needle punctures the
a patient that has pelvic or femoral fractures
 ligamentum flavum and enters the epidural space.
in lateral recumbency. In some cases, it can be 
A false positive (LOR but incorrect needle
more difficult to palpate the dorsal midline of 
placement) may result if the needle is located
 overweight patients when they are positioned in
within fat. It is also possible to obtain a false nega-
lateral recumbency.
ay  (oT ou 1q luaad ioao) aa
Figure 14.14   A loss of resistance (LOR) syringe is used to
identify the epidural space in a dog. As the needle is slowly
Figure 14.13  A dog has been positioned in lateral recum-
advanced, slight pressure is applied to the plunger of the
bency and the hair over the lumbosacral area has been
LOR syringe. In most cases, the anesthetist will appreciate a
clipped prior to epidural administration of local anesthesia.
sudden loss of resistance on the syringe when the needle has
A nerve stimulator is being used to assist with identifying the
entered the epidural space. No further air should be
epidural space prior to drug administration.
injected.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  239
material (blood clots, fat, periostium, skin) fills the
may expand the volume of existing bubbles and
 needle shaft and causes obstruction.
interfere with filling of the epidural space by local
If air is used for the LOR technique, a very
anesthetics or contrast material.
small volume should be injected as investigators
have showm that when air is used to test for the
LOR (0.3mLkg'), there can be uneven cranial
Hanging drop
distribution of the solution and occasional
In dogs, pressure within the epidural space has
compression of the spinal cord (Iseri et al. 2010).
been reported to vary between -6 and 15 mmHg (Iff
In people, air is no longer used to test needle loca-
et al. 2007), suggesting that epidural pressure may
tion following placement due to the risk of inject-
be influenced by anatomic and individual differ-
ing air into the CSF and having it migrate up the
ences. In most cases, if a drop of saline or local
spinal cord and into the brain. Stevens et al. (1989)
anesthetic solution is placed in the hub of the
 suggested that injection of large volumes of epi-
needle, as the needle penetrates the epidural space
it will usually be aspirated into the space due to
N,O is used as part of the anesthetic or when
the subatmospheric pressure within the vertebral
performing diagnostic peridurography as NO
canal (Figure 14.16). This technique only works if
the animal is positioned in sternal recumbency.
Naganobu and Hagio (2007) reported positive
a jo no uaas ui dorp aus e jo udse
dogs when the epidural space was entered with the
 animal in sternal recumbency, and 100% false neg-
atives when the technique was performed with the
 technique is useful in medium to large breed dogs,
but is less reliable in smaller dogs and cats where
negative pressure within the epidural space does
 not consistently result in positive aspiration.
Figure 14.15  A local anesthetic solution is being administered
to a cat. Once the syringe is connected to the needle, an air
Electrolocation
 bubble is used to assess resistance to injection. During
injection, if the air bubble undergoes compression, resistance
Electrolocation can be used to perform epidural anes-
is being detected and the injection should be stopped.
thesia with the patient positioned in either lateral or
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.16 (a) A needle has been placed into the epidural space of a cat. After inspection for blood and cerebrospinal fluid,
several drops of a local anesthetic solution are injected into the hub of the needle. (b) Epidural anesthesia being performed in a
 Pug. Several drops of local anesthetic solution have been injected into the hub of the needle and are being slowly aspirated into
the epidural space which is under negative pressure.This is a positive "hanging-drop" test and confirms correct needle
placement. The remainder of the drug solution should be slowly injected to complete the block.
240  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
extension set;
local anesthetic ±adjuvant;
sterile gloves; and
 fenestrated sterile drapes.
In addition to the materials listed above for
single-shot epidural injections, if a catheter is to be
placed into the epidural space, the following is also
required:
 epidural catheter kit;
bacterial filter; and
鲁
 light dressing material.
Lumbosacral approach to the
Figure 14.17  A nerve stimulator is being used to assist with
epidural space
u unsupe np o rd aeds npda au sua
a dog positioned in sternal recumbency.
Anatomic landmarks
dorsal recumbency (Figures 14.13 and 14.17). The
 Several approaches to the epidural space can be
current that is necessary to elicit motor responses
used in small animal patients. Usually, "lumbosa-
decreases as the needle approaches the spinal nerve
cral" anesthesia is performed, and the needle is
roots or enters the intrathecal space. Several studies
placed in the epidural space between the L7 and S1
have demonstrated that each layer of the spinal cord
vertebrae. This is the easiest location to perform the
requires a different threshold current to elicit a motor
technique, and is the one most commonly described
response (Tsui et al. 1999, 2004, 2005; Tsui and
for dogs and cats. Alternative approaches can also
Kropelin 2005). In dogs, the electric threshold to elicit
be used depending on the particular situation. In
hind limb and /or tail twitches when the lumbosacral
some cases, single-shot blocks and placement of
approach is used to identify the epidural space is
epidural catheters can be achieved in lumbar
approximately 0.3mA at a pulse width of 0.1ms
regions cranial to L6. Recently, sacrococcygeal
(Read 2005, 2007; Garcia-Pereira et al. 2010). However,
when approaches other than the lumbosacral inter-
 reported for use in cats (O'Hearn and Wright, 2011).
vertebral space are used (e.g. more cranial locations),
 In any case, epidural anesthesia can be achieved
these values may be different as the dura mater is pre-
with a combination of drugs, but the location and
sernt. Usually no twitches will be seen until the needle
volume of drug solution should be considered
penetrates into the epidural space. At that time,
relative to the desired effects.
twitches in the pelvic limb and tail will be observed
grossly, and stimulating currents will be <1 mA.
Step-by-step procedure (single-shot)
Lumbosacral approach
Epidural anesthesia in dogs and cats
 The patient is positioned in lateral or sternal
(preferable) recumbency.
Equipment
The puncture site is located between the spi-
nous processes of L7 and S1 (medial sacral crest)
Clippers;
on the dorsal midline of the patient (Figure 14.8).
skin preparation solutions;
 The patient's hair should be clipped over the
Tuohy needle (22-18-gauge) or spinal needle
plarmed site and the skin should be prepared
(22-20-gauge). Surface markings at 1 cm inter-
according to accepted standards (see Chapter 3).
vals along the needle are useful;
The needle is inserted perpendicular to the skin
loss of resistance (glass or plastic) syringe;
on the dorsal midline, caudal to the spinous
syringes and needles;
process of L7.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  241
Figure 14.18 Winged Tuohy needle. Note that the index
Fgure 14.19 Wingless Tuohy needle. Note that the index
fingers and thumbs of both hands hold the wings of the
finger and thumb of the dominant hand hold the needle hub,
needle, and the middle fingers are held in an extended
and the index finger and thumb of the nondominant hand 
position to stabilize the needle shaft as the needle is
sabilize the needle shaft as the needle is advanced.
advanced.
 If during any of these manipulations the needle
comes into contact with bony structures, it
Winged needles should be handled with the
should be withdrawn slightly and redirected
 index fingers and thumbs of both hands holding 
the wings and with the tips of the middle fin-
the needle off the adjacent bones will help to
 gers held in an extended position to keep the
identify the intervertebral space. Movements
needle shaft stable (Figure 14.18).
should be gentle and controlled so as to mini-
Wingless needles should be handled with the
mize the risks of causing tissue trauma.
index finger and thumb of the dominant hand
After the epidural space is correctly identified,
holding the needle hub. The index finger and
the LOR syringe should be disconnected and
thumb of the nondominant hand can be used to
the needle hub should be checked for the
palpate the anatomic landmarks or to hold the
presence of CSF or blood (Figure 14.20). If either
needle shaft if necessary (Figure 14.19)
fluid is observed, the needle should be removed
The needle is advanced through the skin and
from the patient and the procedure should be
into the subcutaneous tissue. Usually there is
repeated from the beginning.
no palpable resistance to needle advancement
If desired, an extension set can be attched to the
in these tissues.
needle to make drug administration easier
 The needle is then advanced through the inter-
(Figure 14.21).
spinous ligament until it is thought to be
Once it is determined that injection can be
embedded in the ligament. Resistance will be
safely made, READ THE LABEL ON THE
appreciated by the anesthetist as the needle
SYRINGE TO ENSURE THAT THE CORRECT
penetrates this ligament.
SOLUTION IS BEING USED, and inject the
At this point, if the LOR technique is to be used,
 anesthetic solution slowly over 1-2 minutes.
the needle stylet is removed. A syringe filled
Alternatively, the needle can be advanced
with air or fluid is then connected to the needle.
through the skin, through the interspinous
Slight pressure is applied on the plunger of the
ligament, and into the epidural space without
syringe while the needle is advanced further
connecting a LOR syringe. In this case, once a
(Figure 14.14).
"pop" is appreciated as the needle penetrates
The needle is then advanced slowly until
a
the ligamentum flavum, the stylet of the needle
sudden loss of resistance is felt and the epidural
is removed and the hub is inspected for the
space is entered.
presence of blood or CSF. If it is safe to proceed,
242   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
several drops of injectate or saline are injected
into the needle hub (Figure 14.16a). If the tip of
the needle is correctly located in the epidural
space, the fluid will usually be aspirated into
the needle. As mentioned above, if the patient is
in lateral recumbency this technigue cannot be
used for confirming epidural needle placement.
During and after the injection, watch for poten-
tial adverse effects in the patient such as pain
(in sedated animals), tachycardia, hypoten-
sion, arrhythmias, muscle twitches, tremors, or
seizures.
ns sioaa asraape asnen e ooalu pide
as an irregular block or excessive cephalad pro-
gression of the solution administered.
 In sedated patients, it is recommended to warm
the solution to body temperature in order to
reduce discomfort during administration.
 There should be no resistance to injection into
the epidural space.
Excess pressure in the epidural space has been
considered a possible cause of damage to the
nervous tissue (Torske and Dyson 2000).
As the dural sac extends further caudally in cats,
Figure 14.20Blood is detected in the hub of a needle that
the anesthetist should concentrate on stopping
has been placed into the vertebral canal of a dog. This
needle advancement as soon as the epidural space
suggests that the tip of the needle has inadvertently
is entered. Penetration of the dura mater is almost
penetrated a venous sinus on the ventral aspect of the
inevitable if the needle tip is advanced further into
vertebral canal. The needle should be withdrawn and a
new needle used to repeat the epidural technique.
the vertebral canal. When the needle enters the epi-
dural space, it is common to observe a slight flick-
ing movement of the tail, movement of the hind
limbs, or twitching of the skin over the area of the
lumbosacral intervertebral space. This is due to
stimulation of the spinal cord or fibers of the cauda
equina. No adverse effects have been obsereved as
a result of this.
Interlumbar approach
 In adult animals, the presence of the spinal cord
 and dural sac makes the epidural space relatively
smaller in the segments cranial to L5. For this
reason, performing epidural puncture at levels
other than the lumbosacral space should only be
performed when sufficient experience has been
acquired. In order to access the epidural space in
Figure 14.21  An extension set can be attached to the
the lumbar segments cranial to L6, a paramedian
epidural needle, allowing the anesthetic solution to be
injected with less risk of inadvertently moving the needle in
approach must be used. Using this technique, the
the patient when the syringe is connected and the solution is
needle enters the epidural space at a more oblique
administered.
angle than that which is used for the standard
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia   243
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.22 (a) Lateral view of a dog skeleton. A Tuohy needle has been advanced into the intervertebral space between L1
and L2. (b) Dorsal view of a dog skeleton. A Tuohy needle has been advanced into the intervertebral space between L1 and L2
dorsal midline approach, reducing the possibility
cess of Cd1, and advanced until it enters the
of damaging the structures contained in the spinal
epidural space (Figure 14.23).
canal (Figure 14.22).
Because of the limited amount of epaxial muscu-
lature and the normal thinning of the ligamentum
Identify the dorsocaudal edge of the spinous
flavum caudal to the lumbosacral space, there is
process caudal to the selected puncture site.
minimal resistance to needle advancement.
Insert the needle lateral to midline.
●LOR technique is the most widely recom-
Advance the needle until it contacts the
mended for this approach.
vertebral lamina.
The needle should be redirected cranially (±45°)
Epidural catheter placement
and medially (±15°), advancing it past the
EquipmentIn addition to the materials used to
cranial articular process into the intervertebral
perform epidural injection (listed above), the
space until it penetrates the ligamentum fla-
vum and enters the epidural space.
following is required:
LOR is the most widely recommended tech-
epidural catheter kit (including a Tuohy needle);
nique for this approach.
bacterial filter;
extension set;
Sacrococcygeal/intercoccygeal approach
syringe;
A
midline approach
is
recommended
 elastomeric pump/syringe driver; and
(Zimmerman and Smith 2003; O'Hearn and
light dressing material.
Wright 2011).
With the animal in sternal or lateral recum-
Patient positioning
bency, the intercoccygeal articulation between
●Same as for single-shot injection, with sternal
Cd1 and Cd2 is identified by palpating the
recumbency preferred over lateral recumbency.
corresponding spinous processes.
Moving the tail up and down helps to identify
Anatomiclandmarks
the articulation between Cd1 and Cd2 by cre-
●Same as for single-shot injection.
ating a palpable depression.
A 22-gauge needle is inserted from the dorsal
Step-by-step procedure
midline at a 45° angle to the skin surface
It is advisable to broaden the sterile field and
(directed cranially), caudal to the spinous pro-
to use sterile drapes so that inadvertent
244  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.23
(a) Dorsal view of a dog skeleton. A spinal needle has been advanced into an intercoccygeal space. (b) Lateral
view of a dog skeleton. A spinal needle has been advanced into an intercoccygeal space.
is already in situ. Once this measurement is
taken, the catheter should be carefully removed
from the needle and the stylet replaced into the
needle for use.
 If the patient is sedated rather than anesthe-
tized, infiltrate the puncture site as well as the
supra- and interspinous ligaments with 2%
lidocaine to increase patient tolerance to the
procedure.
Place the Tuohy needle into the epidural space
using standard techniques (described above).
Make sure to direct the needle bevel (curve)
cranially to assist with placement of the cath-
Figure 14.24  An epidural catheter is being placed in a dog
eter. Once it is in place, tipping the needle hub
in sternal recumbency. Note that the catheter is coiled and is
caudally will further facilitate catheter exit from
held by the nondominant hand in order to prevent it from
the needle tip and will assist with its advance-
falling outside the sterile area and becoming contaminated.
ment into the epidural space.
 After confirming correct needle placement
contamination of the catheter does not
(using LOR, hanging-drop, etc.), a small volume
occur during handling  and  manipulation
of the initial dose of local anesthetic is injected
(Figure 14.24).
through the needle into the epidural space. This
The epidural tray should be opened sterilely
will facilitate insertion and advancement of the
 and all of its component parts identified. The
catheter.
stylet of the Tuohy needle should be removed
 An adapter can be attached to the needle hub
and the catheter advanced into the needle. This
(threading aid) to provide rigidity to the
ensures that it will pass into the needle when
catheter.
the needle is in the patient. The markings on the
While the needle is held firmly in position using
catheter should be used to identify when
the nondominant hand, the catheter is coiled
the catheter is near the tip of the needle, giving
and held by the dominant hand to prevent
the anesthetist more information about how far
it from falling outside the sterile area
to advance the catheter into the needle when it
(Figure 14.24).
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  245
Fgure 14.26  Securing an epidural catheter. Subcutaneous
tunneling of the catheter several centimeters away from its
Figure 14.25 An epidural catheter is being placed in a dog
point of entry provides stable fixation while at the same time
in sternal recumbency. After the catheter is in position, the
minimizing potential catheter site contamination.
needle must be removed over the catheter. As the needle is
withdrawn, the anesthetist should hold the catheter at its point
of entry to prevent its inadvertent removal with the needle.
The needle stylet is removed and the epidural
catheter is threaded through the needle, paying
attention to the previously identified depth
markings on the catheter. Once the catheter is
determined to be at the needle tip, slight
pressure is sometimes required to advance the
catheter around the "corner” of the Tuohy
needle. At this point, the second distance marker
on the catheter will be visible at the needle hub.
 The catheter should be advanced out of the
needle several centimeters to the desired level
of the blockade.
●Once the catheter is advanced into the epidural
space to the desired level, the needle can be
Fgure 14.27 Following negative aspiration for blood or
cerebrospinal fluid, the local anesthetic solution can be
carefully withdrawn over the catheter. To with-
draw the needle, the catheter is held at its point
administered. Note the use of a pre-primed bacterial filter
located between the syringe and the epidural catheter.
of entry between the thumb and index fingers,
while the needle is removed (Figure 14.25).
The catheter should now be secured in place.
Next, a bacterial filter is connected to the adapter
Subcutaneous tunneling of the catheter several
(Figure 14.27). To avoid excessive amounts of air
centimeters away from its point of entry pro-
being injected into the epidural space, the filter
vides additional fixation while at the same time
should be primed with the local anesthetic solu-
minimizing the potential for catheter site con-
tion before connecting it to the adapter.
tamination (Figure 14.26).
 The catheter can now be secured in place using
 After confirming the absence of spontaneous
one of a variety of transparent dressings and
flow of CSF or blood from the catheter by
adhesive devices (Figure 14.28).
holding the end of the catheter in a dependent
● Following a negative aspiration, the remainder
position, an adapter is attached to the end of the
of the initial bolus of local anesthetic can be
catheter. An aspiration test for CSF or blood is
administered into the epidural space through
attempted with a 3 mL syringe.
the catheter.
246  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
response will always be the factors that define
the correct positioning of the catheter.
Catheter remova!
When the catheter is no longer needed, it can be
removed. To do this, all adhesives and securing
devices should be removed and the catheter gently
pulled out of the patient by grasping the catheter
close to its point of entry into the skin. It is recom-
mended to maintain sterility as the catheter is
removed, in case the catheter tip needs to be sub-
mitted for culture purposes. Once the catheter
is completely removed, its integrity should be
inspected. The distal tip of the catheter should
be positively identified, otherwise there is a risk that
Figure 14.28  An epidural catheter has been secured in
the catheter has broken off and remains in the patient.
place in a dog. Note the adhesive bandage used at the site of
entry, as well as howthe filter has been attached to the dog
with the use of skin staples.
Injection volume
Two main methods are used for determining the
The method used for placing catheters in the
volume of drugs to be administered epidurally:
epidural space in cats is similar to that used in dogs
body weight and spinal length.
(described above). However, the incidence of inad-
vertent intrathecal placement of the catheter in this
Body weight
species is high, reaching 27% in some reports
The typical doses that are recommended for epi-
(Hansen 2001). For this reason, great care must be
 dural anesthesia in dogs and cats are presented in
taken to ensure the absence of CSF. It seems impor-
Tables 14.2, 14.3, and 14.4. Most sources recommend
tant that the needle should be inserted at an angle
a total final volume of 0.2mLkg 1 (1 mL 5kg-') body
 of about 30° to the skin and advanced carefully in
weight to achieve blockade up to the level of L1. This
 order to detect resistance in the ligamentum flavum.
volume is useful for procedures involving the caudal
Some authors report that the placement of epidural
abdomen, pelvic limbs, and perineal areas. If proce-
catheters in cats results in high failure rates. Even
dures are limited to the pelvic limbs, lower volumes
when using a 20-gauge Tuohy needle and
a
may be used (approximately 1mL 7kg-'). Even
24-gauge blunt-tipped catheter, Dobromylskyj et al.
lower volumes are required for procedures of the tail
(2000) were unable to place epidural catheters in
and perineal area (approximately 1 mL 10kg-1).
cats without accessing the subarachnoid space.
Spinal length
Clinical tips
When spinal column length is used to calculate the
If resistance to catheter advancement is encoun-
volume to be injected, total vertebral column length
tered, the catheter and needle should be with-
(Loc) is measured from the occipital condyle to
drawmn as a single unit. The catheter should never
the first coccygeal vertebra. Given the relationship
be removed with the needle left in place due to
between cephalad progression of solutions instilled
the risk of shearing the catheter at the needle
in the epidural space and the Loe, this can be used
bevel and having it break off in the patient.
as an alternative method for calculation of the
Resistance to injection through the catheter is
volume of local anesthetic solution to be adminis-
normally greater than when injecting through a
 tered for breeds with abnormal spinal lengths
needle.
(dachhounds) or abnormally obese patients (Otero
Correct positioning of the catheter can be con-
et al. 2009). To calculate the volume to be injected in
firmed by ultrasound (Chawathe et al. 2003;
terms of the Lo, Otero et al. (2009) developed a
Galante 2011), radiography, or fluoroscopy.
normogram in which the extension of the block is
However, clinical efficacy and the patient's
expressed as a percentage (%) of the patient's total
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia247
Table 14.2[
 Doses (mLkg-) for local anesthetics in dogs.
Drug
 Puncture site
Dermatome
Volume (mL kg-')
Reference
 Bupivacaine 0.25%
Lumbosacral
L3
0.2
Freire et al. 2010
Bupivacaine 0.5%
Lumbosacral
Adequate for ovariohysterectomy*
0.36
Almeida et al. 2007
Bupivacaine 0.25%
Lumbosacral
T9
0.4
Freire et al. 2010
*The ovaries are supplied by the sympathetic chain via the hypogastric nerves (T10-L1).
Table 14.3[
Doses (mL kg') for local anesthetics in cats.
Sna
 Puncture site
Dermatome
Volume (mLkg-1)
Reference
Methylene blue solution
Lumbosacral
L1-L2
0.2
Lee et al. 2004a
Methylene blue solution
Lumbosacral
T7
0.3
Lee et al. 2004a
 Methylene blue solution
Lumbosacral
T6-T10
0.4
Lee et al. 2004a
Table 14.4[
Doses (mgkg-') for opioids and α-2 adrenoreceptor agonists used for epidural analgesia.
Dose*
Onset
Duration
Drug
(mgkg-)
(min)
(h)
Reference
Morphine
0.1
30-60
6-24
Valverde et al. 1989a
Meperidine (pethidine)
2
2
0.5-1
Amarpal et al. 2003
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.1
20-40
7-10 
Torske et al. 1999
Fentanyl
0.01-0.005
15-20
3-5
Naganobu et al. 2004
 Sufentanil
0.0007-0.001
10-15
1-4
Almeida et al. 2007
 Methadone
E'0
30-40
8-12
Leibetseder et al. 2006
Butorphanol
0.25
10-20
3-4
Troncy et al. 1996
 Buprenorphine 
0.005
60
16-24
Smith and Yu 2001
Xylazine
0.02-0.25
20-30
2-5
Soares et al. 2004
Medetomidine
0.005-0.01
20-30
2-6
Branson et al. 1993
Dexmedetomidine
0.001-0.002
20-30
4-6
Sabbe et al. 1994
Morphine + xylazine
0.1 + 0.02
30-60
5-10
Keegan et al. 1995
20-30
 Morphine + medetomidine
0.1 + 0.005
30-60
10-20
Pacharinsak et al. 2003
20-30
Morphine + bupivacaine 0.5%
0.1+1.0
10-15
16-24
Kona-Boun et al. 2006
Morphine infusion
0.3 mgkg-1 24h-1
Otero 2004
Morphine + bupivacaine 0.5%
0.3 mgkg-1 24h-1 +
一
Otero 2004
 0.75 mg kg-1 24h-1
Morphine + ketamine S (+)
0.05 + 0.5
30-60
8-12
Acosta et al. 2005
5-10
* Final volume injected into the epidural space 0.22 mL kg-'. Volume completed with 0.9% saline or local anesthetic.
248 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
15.0 
14.0
70%%0f L
13.0
65%
12.0 
60%
11.0 
10.0
55%
9.0
50%
(w)
8.0
45%
7.0
6.0
40%
5.0
35%
4.0
30%
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Occipito-coccygeal length (cm)
Figure 14.29[
 Diagram of the relationship between dose (volume of injectate, ml), measured occipito-coccygeal distance (cm),
and the desired spread of contrast medium (% L。e>for lumbosacral epidural anesthesia in sedated dogs that were positioned in
sternal recumbency. Hash marks represent extrapolated values that were outside the limits of the data obtained in this study.
From Otero et al. 2009.
Lo (Figure 14.29). Their normogram was devel-
Drug choices and dosing
oped using ropivacaine in combination with a
Pharmacology
radiographic contrast agent (iohexol). Studies
Local anesthetics, opioids, and α-agonists, or
using other local anesthetics show that when the
combinations of these agents are the drug classes
physical characteristics of the solution injected into
most commonly used for epidural anesthesia
the epidural space remain similar, the behavior
in small animals. The choice of drug combination
of the spread is consistent (Kim et al. 1998; Vas
depends on the desired action (sensory only vs.
et al. 2003).
sensory and motor block) and the desired duration
The epidural anesthetic volume is calculated
as mL cm Lα-l:
of action. The method of administration should also
be considered as single-shot injections generally
require higher drug concentrations and doses in
m pareduoo sioaa paouonond ueiqo cn rapro
 0.1 mLcm Lo-t will block 55-60% of the Lo
CC
those that are used with continuous infusions.
 In general, lipid solubility regulates the bioavail-
ability of different agents at their respective sites of
If this method is being used, position the patient
action. In addition, the shorter the distance traveled
in sternal recumbency during the epidural injection
by the drug until it reaches its site of action, the
and keep it in this position for at least five minutes
lower the amount of nontarget tissues in which
following the injection. When performing the block,
it must be dissolved (connective, fatty tissue, and
the needle bevel should be directed cranially.
blood vessel walls). Consequently, the onset of
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  249
Table 14.5Onset time of local anesthetics following epidural administration.
Agent
Onset (min)
Reference
Lidocaine
5
Cruz et al. 1997
Mepivacaine
10
Cruz et al. 1997
 Bupivacaine, levobupivacaine,
10-20
Feldman et al. 1996; Gomez de Segura et al.
and ropivacaine
2009; Duke et al. 2000; Otero et al. 2007
Table 14.6[
 Duration of motor blockade following epidural administration of local anesthetics in the dog.
SnIa
Duration (min)
Reference
Lidocaine 2%
120
Cruz et al. 1997
4.4mgkg-1
Bupivacaine 0.75%
160
Feldman and Covino 1988; Cruz et al. 1997
0.14 mg kg-
Ropivacaine 0.75%
100
Feldman and Covino 1988
0.14mgkg
Levobupivacaine 0.5%
180
Gomez de Segura et al. 2009
1 mgkg-
Levobupivacaine 0.75%
360
Gomez de Segura et al. 2009
1 mgkg
Table 14.7[
 Duration of sensory blockade following epidural
lipid solubility (Bernards 2004);
administration of local anesthetics in the dog.
systemic  absorption through 
1the epidural
vascular network (Emanuelsson et al. 1997);
Duration
Drug
(min)
Reference
binding to nerve cell proteins;
local vasodilator/ vasoconstrictor effects of each
0.75% Ropivacaine
140
Duke et al. 2000
agent (ropivacaine is the only local anesthetic
0.22 mg kg-1
with intrinsic vasoconstrictor effect) (Nakamura
0.5% Ropivacaine
115
Duke et al. 2000
et al. 1993);
0.22 mg kg-1
the addition of epinephrine increases the
0.75% Bupivacaine
145
Duke et al. 2000
duration of action of these compounds by
0.22 mg kg-1
0.5% Bupivacaine
140
Duke et al. 2000
between 40% and 60%, most probably by
0.22 mg kg-1
decreasing vascular absorption. This effect is
less effective with longer acting agents such as
bupivacaine and ropivacaine (Duke et al.
action for drugs administered by the spinal route
will be shorter than that of the same drugs when
2000).
 administered by the epidural route.
The duration of nerve blockade depends on the
For epidural analgesics such as opioids whose
physical characteristics of  the local anesthetic
ou lesrop) a n a st tne jo as u
itself, the addition of adjuvants, and other factors.
of the spine), the main determinants of onset,
The main determinants of block duration include:
therapeutic duration, and efficacy are:
type of local anesthetic: short, intermediate,
the partition coefficient in the CSF—a measure
long duration (Tables 14.6 and 14.7);
of water solubility and the fraction of drug that
concentration and volume administered—higher
stays in the CSF as opposed to diffusion into the
concentrations and larger volumes will produce
spinal cord;
a longer duration of action (Duke 2000; Gomez
its dispersion along the neuroaxis (Bernards
de Segura et al. 2009; Freire et al. 2010);
2004).
250  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Large variations in the duration of analgesia
Ie la louedue Aq paodan sem uoneaiasqo
havebeen reported after theepidural administration
(2007)
after
epidural
administration
of
of opioids. A direct correlation exists between the
dexmedetomidine (1.5, 3, and 6μgkg-′) in dogs
degree of lipid solubility of the various agents and
 anesthetized with isoflurane. The combination of
the average duration of sensory analgesia (Bernards
Q,-agonists and opioids has been studied in dogs
et al. 2003a). Agents with greater lipid solubility
(Vesal et al. 1996; Pacharinsak et al. 2003) and in
(fentanyl, butorphanol, methadone) exit the CSF
cats (Steagall et al. 2009). A recent study by Konakci
at the site of action more readily and have shorted
et al. (2008) reported that epidural administration
durations of effect. This results in "segmental"
of preservative-free dexmedetomidine to rabbits
blockade that is concentrated in close proximity
 may produce spinal neurotoxicity characterized by
to
the site of administration (Bernards 2004).
demyelinization of the oligodendrocytes in the
Conversely, agents such as morphine that are less
white matter. These effects have not been reported
lipid soluble (more hydrophilic) remain dissolved
 in other species.
in the CSF for longer periods of time. This increases
Ketamine is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
their bioavailability relative to the site of action, in
spinal cord receptor antagonist and
linhibits
addition to providing a more extensive distribution
the excitatory effects of the endogenous agonist
of sensory analgesia. This explains why lumbosa-
(glutamate), thereby reducing hypersensitization
cral  epidural  administration  of  morphine 
in
dogs and cats (0.1mgkg') reduces anesthetic
ketamine is associated with minimal hemody-
requirements during
g the perioperative period
namic effects during isoflurane anesthesia (Martin
(Valverde et al. 1989a, 1991; Golder et al. 1998) and
et al. 1997; Duque M et al. 2004). Epidural
analgesics during the postoperative period up to a
administration (0.6mgkg') of ketamine or S(+)
maximum of 24 hours (Pascoe and Dyson 1993;
ketamine has been shown to reduce post-incisional
Troncy et al. 2002). When morphine is dissolved
hyperalgesia in dogs, with the duration of the
in saline to a final volume of 0.3mLkg', it can
effect being longer for the racemic compound (720
provide analgesia to structures as far cranial as
vs. 90 minutes, respectively) (Duque M et al. 2004).
the thoracic wall and thoracic limbs (Pascoe and
-ia a m peose siaa saiss op a u
Dyson 1993; Troncy et al. 2002).
dural administration of ketamine (0.6-2.5 mg kg-')
α-Adrenergic agonists mimic the effects of
include hind limb incoordination or paralysis,
descending antinociceptive fibers that originate
salivation, and nystagmus (Martin et al. 1997;
in the brainstem. It has been suggested that when
Hamilton et al. 2005).
combined with a local anesthetic solution, they
enhance the activity of the local anesthetic by
Continuous delivery through catheters
means of their vasoconstrictive activity,
direct
A
main
objective
of
 providing
continuous
inhibition of impulse conduction, or blockade of
epidural administration of analgesics is the provi-
the hyperpolarization-activated cation (I) current
sion of analgesia. The analgesics most frequently
(Eisenach et al. 1996; Brummett et al. 2008;
used by the authors for continuous epidural
Yoshitomi et al. 2008). However, epidural adminis-
 anesthesia are bupivacaine (0.125-0.25%) or ropi-
tration of
C-agonists usually results in dose-
vacaine (0.2%) combined with fentanyl (1-2 μg mL-
dependent systemic effects as a result of systemic
1 of solution). The recommended infusion rate
absorption including; sedation, supraspinal anal-
through the catheter is 0.02-0.05mLkg'h-1. If
gesia, bradycardia, atrioventricular
the analgesia is not found to be adequate, the
blocks, peripheral vasoconstriction, and vomiting
volume of the subsequent injections is increased
(Vesal et al. 1996; Soares et al. 2004). When admin-
while maintaining the original concentrations. If
istered via the epidural route, Q-agonists reduce
thie extension of blockade is found to be excessive,
the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
the volume is subsequently reduced. If signs of
inhalation anesthetics. Soares et al. (2004) showed
muscular weakness appear, the concentration is
that epidural administration of xylazine (0.1, 0.2)
reduced while maintaining the same volume. If
and 0.3mgkg') in the dog decreased the MAC,
signs of
deep sedation appear, the dose of the
ISC
in a dose-dependent manner and the
same
opioid is reduced.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  251
Clinical tips
syringes and needles;
 From the lumbosacral space, catheters may be
local anesthetic ±adjuvant;
advanced to the level of the spinal column
sterile gloves; and
that will provide optimal analgesic benefit for the
 sterile fenestrated drapes.
patient (L, to T,). Unless otherwise indicated, it is
recommended not to advance the catheter more
than a few centimeters (three to four interverte-
Patient positioning
bral spaces) in order to avoid complications such
as perforation of the dura mater or a blood vessel,
The patient is placed in the chosen recumbency,
lateralization of the catheter through an interver-
seeking to maintain the longitudinal axis of the
tebral foramen, or curling of the catheter within
spine parallel to the table.
the epidural space.
The use of a cradle allows flexing the spine
The patient's bladder should be frequently
to facilitate the paramedian approach of the
assessed for size and for the ability to be emptied.
lumbar spaces when the animal is placed in
Check the catheter site regularly for signs of
sternal recumbency.
kinking or contamination.
Anatomic landmarks
Spinal (intrathecal) anesthesia
and analgesia
The landmarks are the same as for an
 interlumbar approach to an epidural technique
Although it is used less frequently in veterinary
(Figure 14.30a).
medicine, spinal injection offers certain advantages
 over the epidural approach:
Step-by-step procedure
correct needle placement is more objective due
to presence of CSF;
Identify the cranial aspect of the spinous
onset of anesthesia is more rapid;
process caudal to the selected puncture site.
 anesthesia is more profound;
The spinal needle is introduced through the
the level and lateralization of the anesthesia can
skin barely lateral to the spinous process until
be "controlled" by using solutions of varying bar-
it contacts the lamina.
icity and by altering the patient's body position.
The needle is then advanced in a cranioventral
orientation and towards midline at a 30° to 60°
It should be noted that the risk of serious
angle until the intervertebral space is identified.
complications (e.g. cardiac arrest, neurologic injury,
Once the needle has punctured the dura, a
radiculopathy) following spinal injections in people
"pop" may be felt (may be accompanied by
has been reported to be significantly higher when
jerking of the pelvic limbs). The needle stylet
compared with epidural injections (Aldrete 2003).
is then removed and the needle hub is inspected
for the presence of CSF (Figure 14.31).
The syringe withlocal anesthetic is then attached
Equipment
and after gentle aspiration to check for the
presence ofblood, the solution is slowly injected.
 Clippers;
Position the patient according to side to be
skin preparation solutions;
blocked and baricity of the injectate.
 spinal needles
small  dogs
and cats: 38mm (1.5 inch),
Injection volume
22-gauge;
large dogs: 63 mm (2.5 inch), 22-gauge;
 As a general rule, we suggest the use of
obese large or giant breed dogs: 88mm
hyperbaric solutions to supplement general
(3.5 inch), 22-gauge or 20-gauge;
 anesthesia for thoraco-abdominal surgery.
252 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.30  (a) Lateral view of a dog skeleton. A spinal needle has been advanced into the intervertebral space between L5
"ualays sop e jo mai lesioa (g) bop e ui eisayisaue euids wioyad oi pasn ag pinom jeyi uoieool aui ynewpuel oi gl pue
A spinal needle has been advanced into the intervertebral space between L5 and L6 to landmark the location that would be used
to perform spinal anesthesia in a dog.
Clinical tips
 Due to the broad range of CSF baricity in dogs
raawoienan e 'pa1isap J! '(9ooz '1e 1a so
can be used to measure the specific gravity of
the CSF for comparison with the specific gravity
of the solution to be injected, helping to predict
the drug's behavior.
If morphine is used, hypobaric solution is
recommended, even if thoraco-abdominal
pain is to be treated.
The use of isobaric solution for thoraco-
abdominal surgery is associated with a high
rate of failure (Sarotti et al. 2011).
Figure 14.31  A spinal needle has been placed in a
Potential complications of neuraxial
subarachnoid (intrathecal) location. Note the cerebrospinal
anesthesia and how to avoid them
fluid that fills the needle hub.
Complicationsrelatedwithneuraxialblocks
The suggested dose is 0.05mLkg-1 of 0.5%
can range from simple technique failure to life-
hyperbaric (heavy) bupivacaine.
threatening issues.
Following an intrathecal injection, the dog
should be maintained for five minutes in a
10° head-down position.
 For pelvic and pelvic limb surgery, isobaric
Complications related to the technique
solution of 0.5% bupivacaine may be used.
Accidental drug administration
A suggested dose of 0.05mLkg-1 will result
in a block up to L3 dermatome.
O'Kell and Ambros (2010) reported on the
When morphine is added to the local anesthetic
inadvertent administration of thiopental via the
solution the suggested dose is 0.01-0.03 mg kg
epidural route. Correct syringe labelling and
(Novello et al. 2008).
implementation of "time-outs" are strongly
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  253
recommended to prevent this type of operator-
Complications related to use of local
error from occurring.
anesthetic solutions
Neural damage/neurotoxicity
Hypotension/bradycardia
Appropriate technique and equipment should
As described earlier, sympathetic outflow from
be used to minimize tissue trauma. Formulations
the spine is distributed from T4 to L3. Blocking
containing phenol, formaldehyde, benzetonium
spinal nerves between T5 and L3 will cause vasodi-
chloride, chlorbutanol, disodium EDTA, methyl-
lation of the splanchnic circulation, pooling of
paraben, sodium metabisulfite, and sodium bisul-
blood, and decreased venous return to the heart
fite have been historically attributed to neurotoxic
leading to systemic hypotension. Hypotension
effects without conclusive evidence to support
caused by epidural administration of local anes-
these conclusions. Current research is lacking.
thetic solutions can be profound (Iff and Moens
Until more information is known, the use
of
2008; Bosmans et al. 201la, b; Sarotti et al. 2011).
preservative-free, "for epidural
use"-approved
Administration of intravenous fluids prior to an
solutions would seem prudent.
epidural injection may be indicated to minimize
hypotension, particularly if the patient is dehy-
drated or hypovolemic prior to neuroaxial anes-
Infections
thesia. However, Bosmans et al. (2011b) reported
the lack of effectiveness of intravenous fluids
Failure to follow aseptic techniques can result
in bacteria being introduced from the patient,
for preventing a decrease in blood pressure prior
clinician's skin, or from contaminated injectates
to epidural administration of local anesthetics.
Vasopressors and anticholinergic drugs can also
or materials. During extradural anesthesia it is
possible to puncture blood vessels leading to local
be used as appropriate.
hemorrhage and hematoma formation. In the
medical literature, it has been hypothesized that
Inadvertent subarachnoid/spinal
these areas of hemorrhage provide ideal locations
or subdural injection
for bacteria to seed after hematogenous spread
(Grewal et al. 2006), especially in immunocom-
Positive CSF aspiration implies a subarachnoid
promised patients. In the veterinary literature,
(intrathecal/spinal) needle location. The incidence
MacFarlane and Iff (2011) described a case of
of inadvertent intrathecal injection in the dog has
discospondylitis in a dog after attempted epidural
been reported (Blass and Shires 1986; Kona-Boun
anesthesia. Remedios et al. (1996) also reported a
et al. 2003; Savvas et al. 2006). Inadvertent dural
case of epidural abscessation with associated
 puncture and subsequent intrathecal injection in
discospondylitis post-epidural injection in a dog.
the cat is high, reaching 27% in some reports
Strict adherence to best practice and standard of
(Hansen 2001); it is therefore recommended to
care in terms of skin preparation (see Chapter 3
check for absence of CSF and deliver a test dose
for more information) and technique is recom-
before delivering the full dose to rule out intra-
mended.
thecal or subdural needle insertion.
Unintended injection at any of these levels may
carry serious consequences such as total spinal
Delayed hair growth
anesthesia or death. It is therefore recommended to
Delayed hair growth in the area where the patient
deliver a test dose (0.1mL) and wait at least one
paodan uaaq seu [empida aul roy paddio sem
minute before delivering the full dose to rule out
with a low incidence (Valverde et al. 1989b;
intrathecal or subdural needle insertion.
Herperger 1998). However, a recent report on
dogs concluded that a direct correlation between
Inadvertent intravascular injection
drugs injected epidurally and delayed hair growth
and pruritus could not be shown (Kalchofner
When the needle is located in an intravascular
et al. 2009).
location such as the ventral venous plexus, positive
254   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
blood aspiration or passive blood flow may occur.
brainstem and circulatory insufficiency at the
Unintended intravascular injection may carry
respiratory center (Brown 2005);
serious consequences such as severe local anes-
 cardiac arrest may occur due to hypotension
thetic toxicity or death. Additionally, uncontrolled 
 and hypoxemia;
hemorrhage at this level may cause compression
 other symptoms may include thoracic limb
of cauda equina and or dural sac.
weakness, loss of consciousness, and pupillary
dilatation.
Horner's syndrome
Complications related to opioids
Horner's syndrome can be observed if local anes-
thetic reaches cervical dermatomes. The incidence
is low and generally associated with inadvertent
There are several
reports in the
veterinary
 literature of the specific side effects of epidural
intrathecal or subdural injections. This syndrome is
 administration of opioids, including:
reversible and is characterized by palpebral ptosis,
miosis, and enophthalmus.
pruritus (Burford and Corley 2006; Haifjema
Bosmans et al. (2009) reported Horner's
and Gibson 2001);
syndrome in one dog following lumbosacral
urinary retention (Herperger 1998; Kona-Boun
administration of ropivacaine 0.75% 0.22mLkg
et al. 2003);
 nausea, vomiting (Mathis et al. 2011).
Respiratory depression
There are no reports that mention respiratory
Total spinal
depression as a frequent complication following the
Total spinal is a local anesthetic-induced depres-
administration of opioids used at suggested doses
sion of the cervical spinal cord and the brainstem.
and intervals. This complication would appear to
It may follow excessive spread of an intrathecal
be more of a concern in people than in animals.
injection of local anesthetic, or inadvertent spinal
With respect to urinary retention, cystometric
injection of an epidural dose of local anesthetic.
studies show that canine detrusor muscle relaxes
Savvas et al. (2006) reported a case with a possible
and bladder capacity increases after epidural
total spinal after attempted epidural injection.
injection of morphine. The likely mechanism for
Bosmans et al. (2011b) also reported a fatal case
these  effects
isinterruption　of 
sacral
after an attempted epidural administration of
parasympathetic outflow (Rawal et al. 1983). The
local anesthetic in a dog with possible total spinal
consequence is that some dogs require urethral
and death. Symptoms include:
catheterization or intermittent manual bladder
 expression following neuroaxial administration of
hypotension due to
0venous and arterial
morphine (Rawal et al. 1983). All dogs should be
vasodilation resulting in a reduced venous
monitored over the first 24-48 hours following
return, cardiac output, and systemic vascular
epidural morphine and treated symptomatically
resistance. It should be treated with volume
as needed.
expansion and vasopressors;
bradycardia. It should be treated with anticho-
linergic agents (e.g. atropine, glycopyrrolate),
Potential complications associated with
or B-adrenergic agonists;
continuous epidural administration
difficulty in breathing. Respiratory depression
can occur in extensive epidural or spinal
Swalander et al. (2000) reported an incidence for
anesthesia, and is mostly attributed to inter-
catheters left in place for up to seven days of:
costal nerve blockade as opposed to phrenic
 nerve paralysis (Oliveira et al. 2009). Sudden
dislodgement of the catheter (16%);
respiratory arrest is usually caused by hypo-
inflammation (2.4%);
perfusion of the respiratory centers in the
contamination at the catheter site (2.4%).
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  255
Bromage PR (1962) Exaggerated spread of epidural
References
analgesia in arteriosclerotic patients. Dosage in rela-
tion to biological and chronological ageing. Br Med J 2,
Acosta AD, Gomar C, Correa-Natalini C et al. (2005)
1634-1638.
Analgesic effects of epidurally administered levogyral
 Brown DL (2005) Spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia.
ketamine alone or in combination with morphine on
In: Miller's Anesthesia (6th edn). Miller RD (ed.).
-apun shop ui ued aaneradonsod pue aaneiador
Elsevier Churchill Livingston, Philadelphia, USA.
going ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res 66, 54-61.
Pp.1653-1683.
Aldrete JA (2003) Neurologic deficits and arachnoiditis
 Brull SJ, Greene NM (1991) Zones of differential sensory
following neuroaxial anesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol
 block during extradural anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 66,
Scand 47,3-12.
651-655.
Almeida TF, Fantoni DT, Mastrocinque S et al. (2007)
Brummett CM, Norat MA, Palmisano JM et al. (2008)
Epidural anesthesia with bupivacaine, bupivacaine
Perineural  administration of  dexmedetomidine  in
and fentanyl, or bupivacaine and sufentanil during
combination with bupivacaine enhances sensory and
-sauoteao iog togodand jo uonensuupe shouaanu
 motor blockade in sciatic nerve block without inducing
terectomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 230, 45-51.
neurotoxicity in rat. Anesthesiology 109, 502-511.
Amarpal, Aithal HP, Kinjavdekar Pet al. (2003) Interaction
Burford JH, Corley KT (2006) Morphine-associated
between epidurally administered ketamine and
pruritus after single exradural administration in a
 pethidine in dogs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin
horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 33, 193-198.
Med 50, 254-258.
Burn JM, Guyer PB, Langdon L (1973) The spread of
Bernards CM, Shen DD, Sterling ES et al. (2003a)
As  s rea a o pa s
Epidural, cerebrospinal fluid, and plasma pharmacoki-
using epidurograms in patients with the lumbosciatic
 netics of epidural opioids (part 1): differences among
syndrome. Br J Anaesth 45, 338-345.
opioids. Anesthesiology 99, 455-465.
Campagmol D, Teixeira Neto FJ, Giordano T et al. (2007)
Bermards CM (2004) Recent insights into the pharma-
Effects of epidural administration of dexmedetomi-
cokinetics of spinal opioids and the relevance to opioid
dine on the minimum alveolar concentration of
selection. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 17, 441447.
isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 68, 1308-1318.
Bermards CM, Shen DD, Sterling ES et al. (2003b)
Chawathe MS, Jones RM, Gildersleve CD et al. (2003)
Epidural, cerebrospinal fluid, and plasma pharmacoki-
Detection of epidural catheters with ultrasound in
netics of epidural opioids (part 2): effect of epinephrine.
children. Paediatr Anaesth 13, 681-684.
Anesthesiology 99,466-475.
Covino BG, Scott DB (1985). In: Handbook of Epidural
Bigliardi E, Parmigiani E, Cavirani S et al. (2004)
Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Covino BG, Scott DB (eds).
Ultrasonography   and
1 cysticl
hyperplasia-pyometra
Schultz Medical Information ApS, Denmark.
complex in the bitch. Reprod Domest Anim 39, 136-140.
Cruz ML, Luna SP, Clark RM, et al. (1997) Epidural
Blass CE, Shires PK (1986) Respiratory
paralysis
anaesthesia using lignocaine, bupivacaine or a mixture
secondary to epidural anesthesia in a dog. J Am Vet
of lignocaine and bupivacaine in dogs. J Vet Anaesth
Med Assoc 189, 315-316.
24,30-32.
Bosmans T, Schauvliege S, Gasthuys F et al. (201la)
Datta S, Lambert DH, Gregus J et al. (1983) Differential
Cardiovascular effects of epidural administration of
sensitivities of mammalian nerve fibers during
methadone, ropivacaine 0.75% and their combination
pregnancy. Anesth Analg 62, 1070-1072.
 in isoflurane anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
Dobromylskyj P, Flecknell PA, Lascelles BD, et al. (2000)
38, 146-157.
Management of postoperative and other acute pain.
Bosmans T, Schauvliege S, Gasthuys F et al. (2011b)
In: Pain management in animals. Flecknell PA,
Influence of a preload of hydroxyethylstarch 6% on the
Waterman-Pearson A (eds.), WB Saunders, London,
cardiovascular effects of epidural administration of
UK, 81-145.
ropivacaine 0.75% in anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Dorfman LJ, Bosley TM (1979) Age-related changes in
Analg 38, 494-504.
peripheral and central nerve conduction in man.
Bosmans T, Schauvliege S, Gasthuys F et al. (2009)
Neurology 29, 38-44.
Transient unilateral Hormer's syndrome after epidural
 Duggan J, Bowler GM, MeClure JH et al. (1988) Extradural
ropivacaine in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 401-406.
block with bupivacaine: influence of dose, volume,
Branson KR, Ko JC, Tranquilli WJ et al. (1993) Duration
concentration and patient characteristics. Br J Anaesth
of analgesia induced by epidurally administered
61,324-331.
morphine and medetomidine in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Duke T, Caulkett NA, Ball SD, et al. (2000) Comparative
Ther 16, 369-372.
analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects of bupivacaine
256   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
and ropivacaine in the epidural space of the conscious
Gorgi AA, Hofmeister EH, Higginbotham MJ et al. (2006)
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 27, 13-21.
 Effect of body position on cranial migration of epidur-
Duque M JC, Valadao CA, Farias A et al. (2004)
ally injected methylene blue in recumbent dogs. Am J
Pre-emptive epidural ketamine or S(+)-ketamine in
Vet Res 67,219-221.
Xps ardos e :ssop u ued reuonsiu-isod
Grewal S, Hocking G, Wildsmith JAW (2006) Epidural
Vet Surg 33, 361-367.
abscesses. Br J Anaesth 96, 292-302.
Eisenach JC, De Kock M, Klimscha W (1996) Alpha(2)-
Haitjema H, Gibson KT (200l) Severe pruritus associated
adrenergic agonists for regional anesthesia. A clinical
with epidural morphine and detomidine in a horse.
review of clonidine (1984-1995). Anesthesiology 85,
Aus Vet J 79,248-250.
655-674.
Hallworth SP, Fermando R, Stocks GM (2002) Predicting
Emanuelsson BM, Persson J, Alm C et al. (1997) Systemic
the density of bupivacaine and bupivacaine-opioid
absorption and block after epidural injection 
of
combinations. Anesth Analg 94, 1621-1624.
Hansen BD (2001) Epidural catheter analgesia in dogs
1309-1317
and cats: Technique and review of 182 cases (1991-
Evans HE, Miller ME (1993) Miller's anatomy of the dog.
 1999). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 11, 95-103.
(3rd edn), W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Herperger LJ (1998) Postoperative urinary retention in a
Faust A, Fourmier R, Van Gessel E et al. (2003) Isobaric
dog following morphine with bupivacaine epidural
versus hypobaric spinal bupivacaine for total hip
analgesia.Can Vet J39,650-652.
arthroplasty in the lateral position. Anesth Analg 97,
Ho MC, Beathe JC, Sharrock NE (2008) Hypotensive
589-594.
epidural anesthesia in patients with aortic stenosis
Feldman1
HS,
Covino
BG(1988)
Comparative
udergoing total hip replacement. Reg Anesth Pain
motor-blocking effects of bupivacaine and ropivacaine,
Med 33, 129-133.
 a new amino amide local anesthetic, in the rat and dog.
 Iff I, Moens Y, Schatzmann U (2007) Use of pressure
Anesth Analg 67, 1047-1052.
waves to confirm the correct placement of epidural
Feldman HS, Dvoskin S, Arthur GR et al. (1996)
needles in dogs. Vet Rec 161, 22-25.
Antinociceptive and motor-blocking efficacy of ropiv a-
Iff I, Moens Y (2008) Two cases of bradyarrhythmia
caine and bupivacaine after epidural administration
and hypotension after extradural injections in dogs.
in the dog. Reg Anesth Pain Med 21, 318-326.
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 265-269.
Flanagan HL, Datta S, Lambert DH et al. (1987) Effect
Iseri T, Nishimura R, Nagahama S et al. (2010) Epidural
 of pregnancy on bupivacaine-induced conduction 
spread of iohexol following the use of air or saline in the
blockade in the isolated rabbit vagus nerve. Anesth
loss of resistance' test. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 526-530.
Analg 66, 123-126.
Johnson RA, Lopez MJ, Hendrickson DA et al. (1996)
Fletcher TF, Kitchell RL (1966) Anatomical studies on
Cephalad distribution of three differing volumes of
the spinal cord segments of the dog. Am J Vet Res 27,
new methylene blue injected into the epidural space
1759-1767
in adult goats. Vet Surg 25, 448-451.
FreireCD, Torres ML,Fantoni DT et al. (2010) Bupivacaine
Kalchofner KS, Schweizer M, Ringer SK, et al. (2009)
0.25% and methylene blue spread with epidural
 Incidence of delayed hair growth and pruritus after
anesthesia in dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 63-69.
epidural anaesthesia in dogs. Proceedings of the 10h
Galante D (2011) Ultrasound detection of epidural
World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia Glasgow
catheters in pediatric patients. Reg Anesth Pain Med
(Scotland), 124.
36,205-206.
Kaneko M, Saito Y, Kirihara Y et al. (1994) Pregnancy
Garcia-Pereira FL, Hauptman J, Shih AC, et al. (2010)
enhances the antinociceptive effects of extradural
Evaluation of electric neurostimulation to confirm
lignocaine in the rat. Br J Anaesth 72, 657-661.
Keegan RD, Greene SA, Weil AB (1995) Cardiovascular
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 71, 157-160.
effects of epidurally administered morphine and
Golder FJ, Pascoe PJ, Bailey CS, et al. (1998) The effects
a xylazine-morphine combination in isoflurane-
of epidural morphine on the minimum alveolar
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 56, 496-500.
concentration of isoflurane in cats. J Vet Anaesth 25,
-inpida jo uiaed Supeaids (s66l) 's aaT ' utT ' u
52-56.
ally administered contrast medium in rabbits. Acta
Gomez de Segura I, Menafro A, Garcia-Fermandez P
Anaesthesiol Scand 42, 1092-1095.
et al. (2009) Analgesic and motor-blocking action
Kona-Boun JJ, Pibarot P, Quesnel A (2003) Myoclonus
 of epidurally administered levobupivacaine or bupi-
and
urinary
retention
1following
subarachnoid
vacaine in the conscious dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 36,
'  s i o e   ad
485-494.
257-264.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  257
Kona-Boun JJ, Cuvelliez S, Troncy E (2006) Evaluation of
morphine and fentanyl in dogs anesthetized with
epidural administration of morphine or morphine
sevoflurane. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224, 67-70.
and bupivacaine for postoperative analgesia after
Nakamura K, Toda H, Kakuyama M et al. (1993) Direct
vascular effect of ropivacaine in femoral artery and
surgery in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 229, 1103-1112.
vein of the dog. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 37,269-273.
Konakci S, Adanir T, Yilmaz G et al. (2008) The efficacy
Nakayama M, Yamamoto J, Ichinose H et al. (2002) Effects
and neurotoxicity of dexmedetomidine administered
of volume and concentration of lidocaine on epidural
via the epidural route. Eur J Anaesthesiol 25, 403 409.
anaesthesia in pregnant females. Eur J Anaesthesiol 19,
Lansdowne JL, Kerr CL, Boure LP et al. (2005) Epidural
808-811.
migration of new methylene blue in 0.9% sodium
Novello L, Corletto F, Rabozzi R et al. (2008) Sparing
chloride solution or 2% mepivacaine solution follow-
effect of a low dose of intrathecal morphine on fentanyl
[eog u aoeds teasoooia ist au out uooal bu
cadavers and anesthetized foals undergoing laparos-
clinical investigation in dogs. Vet Surg 37, 153-160.
copy. Am J Vet Res 66, 1324-1329.
O'Hearm AK, Wright BD (201l) Coccygeal epidural
Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K et al. (2004a) Distribution
with local anesthetic for catheterization and pain
of new methylene blue injected into the lumbosacral
management in the treatment of feline urethral
epidural space in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 31, 190-194.
obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 21, 50-52.
Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K et al. (2004b) Eliminating
O'Kell AL, Ambros B (2010) Accidental epidural injection
the effect of epidural fat during dorsolumbar epidural
of thiopental in a dog. Can Vet J 51, 305-307.
analgesia in cattle. Vet Anaesth Analg 31, 86-89.
Oliveira G, Vivan M, Diasj B, et al. (2009) Evaluation of
 Leibetseder EN, Mosing M, Jones RS (2006) A comparison
the extension and cardiorespiratory effects of thoracic
 of extradural and intravenous methadone on intraop-
epidural anesthesia in dogs. Proceedings of the 10h
erative isoflurane and postoperative analgesia require-
World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia Glasgow
ments in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 33, 128-136.
(Scotland), 140.
Liu SS, Bermards CM (2002) Exploring the epidural trail.
Otero P. (2004) Administraci6n epidural de analgesicos.
Regional anesthesia and pain medicine 27, 122-124.
In: Dolor. Evaluaci6n y tratamiento en pequenios
Lopez MJ, Johnson R, Hendrickson DA et al. (1997)
animals. Otero P (ed.), Intermedica, Argentina 333-336.
Craniad migration of differing doses of new methylene
[Spanish]
blue injected into the epidural space after death of
Otero P, Tarragona L, Ceballos M, et al. (2009) Epidural
cephalic spread of a local anesthetic in dogs: a
Lundblad M, Lonnqvist PA, Eksborg S et al. (2011)
mathematical model using
the column length.
Segmental distribution of high-volume caudal anes-
Proceedings of the 10um World Congress of Veterinary
thesia in neonates, infants, and toddlers as assessed
Anaesthesia Glasgow (Scotland), 125.
by ultrasonography. Paediatr Anaesth 21, 121-127.
Otero P, Tarragona L, Guerrero G, et al. (2003) Utilizacion
 MacFarlane PD, Iff I (2011) Discospondylitis in a dog
de la ropivacaina al 0,2% por via epidural en dosis
after attempted extradural injection. Vet Anaesth Analg
inica en caninos. In: Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias
38, 272-273.
UBA 5, 55-64. [Spanish]
Martin DD, Tranquilli WJ, Olson WA et al. (1997)
Otero P, Tarragona L, Waxman Dova S (2007) Effects of
Hemodynamic effects of epidural ketamine in isoflu-
epidurally administered ropivacaine at three different
rane-anesthetized dogs. Vet Surg 26, 505-509.
concentrations in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 69
Mathis A, Lee K, Alibhai HI (2011) The use of maropitant
(Abstract).
to prevent vomitinginduced by epiduraladministration
Pacharinsak C, Greene SA, Keegan RD et al. (2003)
of preservative free morphine through an epidural
Postoperative analgesia in dogs receiving epidural
catheter in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 516-517.
 morphine plus medetomidine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
Mosing M, Leschnik M, Iff I (2006) Specific gravity of
26, 71-77.
yiim uosireduos :sies pue saop ut piniu teudsoiqanan
Park WY, Massengale M, Kim SI et al. (1980) Age and the
different anaesthetic drug solutions. Vet Reg Anaesth
spread of local anesthetic solutions in the epidural
Pain Med 4, 28-29.
space. Anesth Analg 59, 768-771.
Naganobu K, Hagio M (2007) The effect of body position
Pascoe PJ, Dyson DH (1993) Analgesia after lateral thora-
on the 'hanging drop' method for identifying the extra-
cotomy in dogs. Epidural morphine vs. intercostal
dural space in anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
bupivacaine. Vet Surg 22, 141-147.
34, 59-62.
 Puggioni A, Amett R, Clegg T et al. (2006) Influence of 
Naganobu K, Maeda N, Miyamoto T et al. (2004)
 patient positioning on the 15-16 mid-laminar distance.
Cardiorespiratory effects of epidural administration of
Vet Radio1 Ultrasound 47, 449-452.
258   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Rawal N, Mollefors K, Axelsson K et al. (1983) An
Stevens R, Mikat-Stevens M, Van Clief M et al. (1989)
 experimental study of urodynamic effects of epidural
 Deliberate epidural air injection in dogs: a radiographic
morphine and of naloxone reversal. Anesth Analg 62,
study. Reg Anesth 14, 180-182.
641-647.
Swalander DB, Crowe DT, Hittenmiller DH et al. (2000)
Read MR (2005) Confirmation of epidural needle
Complications associated with the use of indwelling
placementusingnerve stimulationin dogs. Proceedings
epidural catheters in dogs: 81 cases (1996-1999). J Am
of the 29m Annual Meeting of the American College of
Vet Med Assoc 216, 368-370.
Veterinary Anesthesiologists, Phoenix, AZ, USA. Vet
Torske KE, Dyson DH (2000) Epidural analgesia and
Anaesth Analg 32, 236-248.
anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30,
Read MR (2007) Confirmation of epidural needle
859-874.
placement using
nerve
 stimulation
dogs.
Torske KE, Dyson DH, Conlon PD(1999)Cardiovascular
Proceedings of the IVAPM/OMVQ/FMV Unified
effects of epidurally administered oxymorphone and
Against Pain Congress, Montreal, QC.
-    
Remedios AM, Wagner R, Caulkett NA et al. (1996)
thane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 60, 194-200.
Epidural abscess and discospondylitis in a dog after
Troncy E, Cuvelliez SG, Blais D (1996) Evaluation of
administration of a lumbosacral epidural analgesic.
 analgesia and cardiorespiratory effects of epidurally
Can Vet J 37, 106-107.
administered butorphanol in isoflurane-anesthetized
Sabbe MB, Penning JP, Ozaki GT et al. (1994) Spinal
dogs. Am J Vet Res 57,1478-1482.
and systemic action of the alpha 2 receptor ago-
Troncy E, Junot S, Keroack S et al. (2002) Results of
nist dexmedetomidine in dogs. Antinociception
 preemptive epidural administration of morphine with
 and carbon dioxide response. Anesthesiology 80,
 or without bupivacaine in dogs and cats undergoing
1057-1072.
 surgery: 265 cases (1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Saroti D, Rabozzi R, Corletto F (2011) Effcacy and side
221,666-672.
effects of intraoperative analgesia with intrathecal
Tsui BC, Gupta S, Finucane B (1999) Detection of
bupivacaine and levobupivacaine: a retrospective
subarachnoid and  intravascular epidural catheter
study in 82 dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 240-251.
placement. Can J Anaesth 46,675-678.
Savvas I, Anagnostou T, Papazoglou LG et al. (2006)
Tsui BC, Wagner A, Cave D et al. (2004) Threshold current
Successful resuscitation from cardiac arrest associated
 for an insulated epidural needle in pediatric patients.
with extradural lidocaine in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
Anesth Analg 99, 694-696.
33,175-178
Tsui BC, Kropelin B (2005) The electrophysiological
Shanta TR, Evans JA (1972) The relationship of epidural
effect of dextrose 5% in water on single-shot peripheral
anesthesia to neural membranes and arachnoid villi.
nerve stimulation. Anesth Analg 100, 1837-1839.
Anesthesiology 37, 543-57.
Tsui BC, Kropelin B, Ganapathy S et al. (2005) Dextrose
Sibanda S, Hughes JM, Pawson PE et al. (2006) The
5%in water:f
fluidmedium for maintaining
effects of preoperative extradural bupivacaine and
electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves during
Suorapn shop ui asuodsar ssas a uo auydio
stimulating catheter placement. Acta Anaesthesiol
femoro-tibial joint surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 33,
Scand 49, 1562-1565.
246-257.
Valverde A, Dyson DH, McDonell WN (1989a) Epidural
Simeonova GP, Slavov E, Usunov R et al. (2008) Increased
morphine reduces halothane MAC in the dog. Can J
apoptosis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
Anaesth 36, 629-632.
Ul eisauisaue teinpida pue terauas Suinp (onad)
Valverde A, Dyson DH, McDonell WN, et al. (1989b) Use
dogs. Vet Res Commun 32, 619-626.
 of epidural morphine in the dog for pain relief. Vet
Smith LJ, Yu JK (2001) A comparison of epidural
Comp Orth Traumatol 2, 55-58.
buprenorphine with epidural morphine for post-
Valverde A, Dyson DH, Cockshutt JR et al. (1991)
operative analgesia following stifle surgery in dogs.
Comparison of the hemodynamic effects of halothane
Vet Anaesth Analg 28, 87-96.
alone and halothane combined
1with epidurally
Soares JH, Ascoli FO, Gremiao ID et al. (2004) Isoflurane
administered morphine for anesthesia in ventilated
sparing action of epidurally administered xylazine
dogs. Am J Vet Res 52, 505-509.
hydrochloride in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 65,
Valverde A (2008) Epidural analgesia and anesthesia
854-859.
in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Steagall PV, Millette V, Mantovani FB et al. (2009)
38, 1205-1230.
 Antinociceptive effects of epidural buprenorphine or
Vas L, Kulkarmi V, Mali M, et al. (2003) Spread of
medetomidine, or the combination, in conscious cats.
radioopaque dye in the epidural space in infants.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 32, 477-484.
Paediatr Anaesth 13, 233-43.
Epidural and Spinal Anesthesia  259
Veering BT, Cousins MJ (2000) Cardiovascular and
Feeney DA, Evers TT, Hardy RM, et al. (1996) Computed
pulmonary effects of epidural anaesthesia. Anaesth
tomography of the normal canine lumbosacral spine
Intensive Care 28, 620-635.
UltrasoundA morphologic perspective. Vet Radiol. 37,
Vesal N, Cribb PH, Frketic M (1996) Postoperative
399411,
analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects in dogs of
Golder FJ, Pascoe PJ, Bailey CS,et al. (1998) The effects of
oxymorphone administered epidurally and intra-
epidural morphine on the minimum alveolar
muscularly, and medetomidine administered epidur
concentration of isoflurane in cats. J Vet Anaesth 25,
ally: a comparative clinical study. Vet Surg
25
52-56.
361-369.
Hamilton SM, Johnston SA, Broadstone RV (2005)
Visser WA, Lee RA, Gielen MJ (2008) Factors affecting
Evaluation of analgesia provided by the administration
the distribution of neural blockade by local anesthetics
in epidural anesthesia and a comparison of lumbar
synovitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 30-39.
versus thoracic epidural anesthesia. Anesth Analg 107,
Konakci S, Adanir T, Yilmaz G et al. (2008) The efficacy
708-721.
and neurotoxicity of dexmedetomidine administered
Yoshitomi T, Kohjitani A, Maeda S et al. (2008)
via the 
epidural route. Eur J Anaesthesiol 25,
 Dexmedetomidine enhances the local anesthetic action
403-409.
of lidocaine via an alpha-2A adrenoceptor. Anesth
Nakamura K, Toda H, Kakuyama M et al. (1993) Direct
Analg 107,96-101.
vascular effect of ropivacaine in femoral artery
Zimmerman D, Smith JA (2003) Anesthesia case of the
and vein of the dog. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 37,
month. Can an epidural block still be performed in this
269-273.
dog? J Am Vet Med Assoc 223, 619-622.
 Sielenkamper AW, Van Aken H (2003) Thoracic epidural
anesthesia: more than just anesthesia/analgesia.
Anesthesiology 99, 523-525.
Further reading
Steagall PV, Millette V, Mantovani FB et al. (2009)
 Antinociceptive effects of epidural buprenorphine or
Bermards  CM (2004) Recent insights  into  the
medetomidine, or the combination, in conscious cats.
 pharmacokinetics of spinal opioids and the relevance to
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 32, 477-484.
opioid selection. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 17, 441-447.
Torske KE, Dyson DH, Conlon PD (1999) Cardiovascular
Campagnol D, Teixeira Neto FJ, Giordano T et al. (2007)
effects of epidurally administered oxymorphone and
Effects of epidural administration of dexmedetomi-
an oxymorphone-bupivacaine combination in halo-
dine on the minimum alveolar concentration of
thane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 60, 194-200.
isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 68, 1308-1318.
Valverde A, Dyson DH, Cockshutt JR et al. (1991)
Carli F, Kehlet H (2005) Continuous epidural analgesia
Comparison of the hemodynamic effects of halothane
for colonic surgery--but what about the future? Reg
alone and halothane combined with epidurally admin-
Anesth Pain Med 30, 140-142.
istered morphine for anesthesia in ventilated dogs.
Duque M JC, Valadao CA, Farias A et al. (2004)
Am J Vet Res 52, 505-509.
 Pre-emptive epidural ketamine or S(+)-ketamine in
Vesal N, Cribb PH, Frketic M (1996) Postoperative anal-
gesic and cardiopulmonary effects in dogs of oxymor-
Vet Surg 33, 361-367.
phone administered epidurally and intramuscularly,
Emanuelsson BM, Persson J, Alm C et al. (1997) Systemic
and medetomidine administered epidurally: a com-
absorption and block after epidural injection
J01
parative clinical study. Vet Surg 25, 361-369.
ropivacaine in healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology 87,
Williams JP (2002) Thoracic epidural anesthesia for
1309-1317.
cardiac surgery. Can J Anaesth 49, R1-R6.
15
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia
Francesco Staffieri
Rationale for IVRA
that used lidocaine as the local anesthetic (Holmes
1963). This new technique increased the popularity
Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA) is a tech-
 of IVRA for use in people, and it soon became one
nique that can be used to provide intraoperative
of the most popular regional anesthetic techniques
analgesia for surgical procedures lasting less than
in the USA (Brill et al. 2004). One survey showed
90 minutes that involve the distal extremities
that 86% of human anesthesiologists in North
(Davis and McConachie 1998). In some sedated
America regularly perform Bier's blocks in their
animals, IVRA can be used as the sole anesthetic
practices (Henderson et al. 1997).
techmique for the procedure. However, in most
For whatever reason, IVRA has never enjoyed
veterinary patients, IVRA is used to provide the
the same popularity in small animal veterinary
analgesic component of a balanced (multimodal)
medicine and there are relatively few reports of its
 general anesthetic protocol.
use in the published literature. Veterinary reports
The mechanism of analgesia with IVRA is
typically relate to the use of IVRA in ruminants for
relatively straightforward: a tourniquet is applied to
standing surgical procedures of the claws (Elmore
the limb proximal to the surgical site and a local
1980; Estill 1977; Jones and Prentice 1974; Manohar
anesthetic is injected intravenously distal to the
et al. 1971; Prentice et al. 1974) and in small animals
tourniquet. The technique was first described in
rapum soop ul anbruupal pisasieue joum!pe ue se
people in 1908 by a German surgeon, August Bier;
general anesthesia (DeMarzo et al. 2008; Duke
hence the techrique is frequently referred to as a
2000; Kushmer et al. 2002; Novello 2003; Staffieri
"Bier block" (Bier 1908, 1910). Bier reported that the
intravenous administration of pilocarpine produced
Studies conducted in people and dogs have dem-
complete loss of sensation and muscle paralysis,
onstrated that IVRA provides comparable levels of
and that this technique could be used to provide
 intraoperative analgesia for surgical procedures of
anesthesia for amputation of the upper extremity.
the distal thoracic limb when compared with
In 1963, Holmes published the results of a series
brachial plexus blocks (Chan et al. 2001; Staffieri
 of cases in which he used a simplified technique
et al. 2010).
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
261
262
 Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
in dogs and cats it is usually used in combination
with general anesthesia or deep sedation.
Intravenous regional anesthesia can be used to
facilitate a variety of small animal surgical proce-
dures, including:
foreign body removal;
digit amputation;
ostectomy/osteotomy of the distal radius or
ulna;
fracture repair;
Figure 15.1  Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a
wound suturing;
dog undergoing amputation of its second digit. IVRA has
 pancarpal arthrodesis;
already been performed, and a tourniquet has been applied
tarsal arthrodesis;
proximally on the limb. Note the lack of bleeding associated
mass removal.
with the surgery.
 The main advantages of IVRA are its relative
Contraindications/precautions
simplicity, reliability, and consistency as an anal-
gesic technique for selected surgical procedures.
Infection: if there is infection of the tissues at
Additionally, as the technique involves the use of a
the planned site of the block, IVRA should not
tourniquet applied proximal to the surgical site,
be used. Placement of an intravenous catheter
blood loss during the procedure is minimized
(for the injection of the local anesthetic solu-
(Figure 15.1). This is often seen as an advantage
tion) in a contaminated area could lead to
since visualization of the operative tissues
is
systemic spread of the infection, and the
enhanced. The main limitations of IVRA are the
changes in tissue pH that occur with infection
restriction on the duration of the planned procedure
can potentially influence the efficacy of the local
and the lack of prolonged postoperative analgesia
anesthetic solution (Davis and McConachie
following release of the tourniquet.
1998; Novello 2003).
●Patients with clinically important nodal
arrhythmias: there is a relative contraindication
Indications
K Ka se suaed asa u vI jo asn o1
potentially be more susceptible to the cardio-
Intravenous regional anesthesia is a loco-regional
toxic effects of systemically administered local
anesthetic technique that can be used to provide
anesthetics (Choyce and Peng 2002; Novello
analgesia and anesthesia for short surgical proce-
2003). However, this concern would likely only
dures involving the distal extremities (distal to the
be an issue for the patient if the entire adminis-
elbow and the hock). Prolonged application of a
tered dose of the local anesthetic were inadver-
 tourniquet must be avoided due to the potential for
tently delivered into systemic circulation (e.g.
tissue ischemia underneath and distal to the tourni-
s e j ro (anbnumon juaadou ue rapn
quet, and the ischemic pain that is associated with
overdose of the local anesthetic were adminis-
the compression of these tissues (Davis and
tered (e.g. incorrect volume of local anesthetic
McConachie 1998). In people, IVRA is commonly
was used). Using the techniques, doses, and
used in combination with light sedation as an anes-
volumes of local anesthetic solution described
thetic technique to facilitate both elective and
below, this complication is unlikely. Further,
emergency procedures (Davis and McConachie
patients with cardiac disease typically benefit
1998; Farrell et al. 1985). As most hospitalized small
from the use of a regional anesthetic technique
 animal patients do not tolerate the level of handling
as it lowers the requirements for the major anes-
that is required for performance of this anesthetic
thetics being used concurrently, lessening the
techrique when they are awake, when IVRA is used
systemic side effects of those drugs.
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia  263
IVRA; however, those data are from a small
Choice (and dosing) of local
number of human patients and the routine
anesthetics and adjuncts
clinical use of ropivacaine for IVRA in veteri-
nary patients should first be supported by
Lidocaine: lidocaine neat is the only local
animal studies.
anesthetic promoted for use with IVRA in the
  as aq s  a ra
In people, several adjunct drugs have been tested
range of dosages (2.5-5mgkg ′) and concentra-
for use in combination with local anesthetics in an
tions (0.25-2%) (DeMarzo et al. 2008; Duke
attempt to reduce the severity of tourniquet pain, to
2000; Kushner et al. 2002; Novello 2003; Staffieri
improve the quality of the nerve blockade, and to
et al. 2010; Webb et al. 1999). In dogs and cats,
prolong the duration of postoperative analgesia
the author uses a dilute lidocaine neat solution
(Choyce and Peng 2002). Opioids such as meperi-
(0.5%) at a total dose of 3mgkg (for a total
dine, fentanyl, morphine, and tramadol have been
injected volume of 0.6mLkg'). As there is
added to lidocaine without any significant benefi-
always the possibility of inadvertent systemic
cial effects. Ketamine has been reported to offer
administration of the injected solution (Kushner
 minimal analgesic benefits and it can cause halluci-
et al. 2002), the lidocaine used should not con-
nations in some human patients after the tourni-
tain epinephrine or any preservatives.
quet is released following the procedure (Choyce
o pasn si arenod aomg u so
and Peng 2002). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
 IVRA, but this drug is no longer licensed in the
drugs appear to be the most effective drugs for
USA for this use as it has been linked to the
complication of methemoglobinemia in people
tolerance during IVRA. Ketorolac and tenoxicam
(Brill et al. 2004; Turan et al. 2002).
have been combined with lidocaine and prilocaine
Bupivacaine: on first consideration, bupivacaine
for IVRA in people (Choyce and Peng 2002; Reuben
might seem to be an attractive drug for IVRA
et al. 1995). α,-Adrenergic agonists such as cloni-
because of its prolonged duration of analgesic
dine appear to prolong a patient's tolerance to the
action when compared with lidocaine and the
 pain resulting from tourniquet application and can
familiarity that most people have with its use
improve postoperative analgesia when added to
for other regional anesthetic blocks. However,
lidocaine for IVRA in people (Reuben et al. 1999).
 bupivacaine is much more cardiotoxic than lido-
The addition of 0.5 μgkg-1 of dexmedetomidine to
caine and has a very narrow therapeutic index
0.5% lidocaine reduced the severity of intraopera-
between the dose that is required for its local
tive tourniquet pain and prolonged postoperative
anesthetic effects and the dose that results in
analgesia when compared with the use of lidocaine
systemic toxicity (Feldman et al. 1989). When
alone (Memis et al. 2004). Alkalinization of the solu-
used for IVRA, bupivacaine has been associated
tion with bicarbonate, alteration of the temperature
with  severe complications  including
death
of the solution, and addition of potassium to the
(Moore 1984; William et al. 1992). For this very
solution have all been investigated and show
important reason, BUPIVACAINE SHOULD
little benefit to the patient or to the anesthetist
NEVER BE USED FOR IVRA.
(Choyce and Peng 2002). In the veterinary literature,
 Ropivacaine: recently, studies have evaluated
there are no reports of using adjuncts to local anes-
the efficacy of ropivacaine (0.2-0.25%) for IVRA
thetics for IVRA in either small or large animals.
 in people (Asik et al. 2009; Hartmannsgruber
 et al. 1999). The use of this drug results in a longer
duration of analgesic action after release of the
Distribution of local anesthesia
 tourniquet when compared with lidocaine, and
it is associated with fewer cardiovascular and
Atkinson (1969) demonstrated that the placement
central nervous system complications when
of a small tourniquet around a finger before block-
compared with bupivacaine. These encour-
ing the hand with the intravenous injection of a
aging results suggest that ropivacaine could be
local anesthetic prevented anesthesia of the affected
considered as an alternative to lidocaine for
finger. The results of Atkinson's experiment led to
264  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
the theory of a peripheral mechanism of action of
intravenous catheters of appropriate sizes for
the local anesthetic on nerve endings. Peripheral
the patient;
nerve endings in the extremities are nourished by
 sterile gloves;
small blood vessels (referred to as the vasa nervo-
 appropriate syringes and needles;
rum). Injection of a local anesthetic solution into
local anesthetic solution±desired adjumct: a
the venous system will result in diffusion of the
typical volume for dogs and cats is 0.6mLkg-1
local anesthetic from these small vessels into the
of lidocaine neat that has been diluted to 0.5%
nerve endings themselves, with the subsequent
(5mgmL-);
development of anesthesia (Lillie et al. 1984). As 
esmarch bandage or a similar elastic bandage:
blood vessels and nerves are typically found in
this bandage will be used to exsanguinate the
close proximity in the extremities, following intra-
extremity distal to the planned location of the
venous injection the local anesthetic spreads from
tourniquet. The author almost exclusively uses
the vessels into the nearby tissues to reach the
Vetrap? bandage material to exsanguinate the
nerve trunks (Lillie et al. 1984). Finally, mechanical
limb because of its ready availability, ease of
compression of nerves and local tissue ischemia
use, low cost, and the fact that it is unlikely to
can also contribute to the loss of sensation in the
traumatize the leg in patients with injured tis-
extremity that occurs within 30 minutes of tourni-
sues (e.g. fractures, open wounds); and
quet application (Casale et al. 1992). Most likely, it 
 tourniquet: the tourniquet plays critical roles in
is a combination of all these mechanisms that con-
both the successful performance of the IVRA
tribute to the anesthetic effects of IVRA (Rosenberg
block and the overall safety of the procedure. If
1985). Overall, the local anesthetic action on
the tourniquet does not effectively prevent
peripheral nerve endings appears to be responsible
arterial blood flow from entering the distal
for the immediate onset of analgesia, and blockade
limb or does not effectively prevent the injected
 of the larger peripheral nerves occurs after the local
local anesthetic from entering the systemic
anesthetic spreads from the vessels into the adja-
circulation, complications can occur (Hoffmann
cent tissues (Lillie et al. 1984).
 et al. 1995). There are two main types of tourni-
 Intravenous regional anesthesia results in anes-
quets: nonpneumatic tourniquets that are made
thesia of the entire extremity distal to the tourni-
of rubber or elasticized doth, and pneumatic
quet. Human patients report "pins and needles" in
tourniquets that have cuffs that are inflated
the extremity within five minutes of the local anes-
with a compressed gas or by manual inflation.
thetic solution being administered (Davis and
McConachie 1998). The onset of anesthesia and
Nonpneumatic rubber tourniquets are com-
 muscle paralysis appears to begin distally and pro-
monly used for IVRA in small animals because
gress proximally; thus the local anesthetic should
they easily accommodate for different anatomic
be injected as far distally as possible in the limb to
locations (i.e. front leg or hind leg) and the varia-
be blocked (Skarda 2007). Following release of
tions in the size, circumference, and the shape of
the tourniquet at the end of the procedure, the
the legs that exist across the different types of small
analgesic effects of lidocaine persist for up to 30
animal patients seen in practice. The main disad-
minutes (Davis and McConachie 1998; DeMarzo et
vantages of using nonpneumatic tourniquets are
al. 2008; Staffieri et al. 2010).
the high
1 pressures that are potentially applied to
the underlying tissues, and the inability to measure
these pressures. As a result, when using nonpneu-
Equipment
 matic tourniquets for IVRA, patients usually expe-
rience more pain from tourniquet-related ischemia
The following equipment should be available to
 and there is an increased risk of tissue damage.
the anesthetist:
Protecting the area where the tourniquet will be
placed with soft padding can help in the preven-
clippers;
tion of compressive tissue damage (Novello 2003),
solutions for aseptic skin preparation prior to
 and the upper limits must be strictly adhered to for
intravenous catheterization;
the duration of tourniquet application.
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia  265
Pneumatic tourniquets are available with both
single- or double-cuff configurations. All pneu-
matic tourniquets that are used for IVRA should
 have a pressure gauge (manometer) that indicates
the pressure in the tourniquet cuff bladder In some
cases, an automatic pressure control system regu-
lates the pressure in the cuff bladder over time
in order to maintain a constant predetermined
 pressure that is set by the operator (McEwen 2009).
 An inexpensive alternative is to use a simple blood
pressure cuff used in combination with a sphyg-
momanometer as pneumatic tourniquet.
The
sphygmomanometer is used to inflate the blood
pressure cuff and to monitor the pressure in the
cuff over time. The pressure level in the cuff must
be frequently monitored over the course of the
Figure 15.2  Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a dog
scheduled for pancarpal arthrodesis. Note that an intravenous
 procedure and the cuff's level of inflation must be
catheter has been placed in the more distal part of the limb and
adjusted as needed to maintain adequate pressure.
it has been well secured with tape.
Before use, the cuff should first be tested for leaks.
Obviously, only intact cuffs should be used as tour-
niquets for IVRA.
palpable with a pen. Following exsanguination
of the limb and application of the tourniquet,
the absence of the pulse at this location will
Step-by-step procedure for
verify proper application of the tourniquet.
the thoracic fimb
Identify the lower occlusion pressure: if a pneu-
matic tourniquet is to be employed, it is useful
Clip: clip the limb as needed for the surgery
to determine the lower occlusion pressure
and for intravenous catheter placement. If a
(LOP) for the cuff. This measurement corre-
pneumatic tourniquet is to be used, also con-
sponds to the lowest pressure in the cuff that
sider clipping the area where the tourniquet
will prevent arterial flow distal to the tourni-
will be placed on the limb to allow for closer
quet (i.e. the level at which no arterial pulses
contact of the cuff with the leg.
are able to be detected distal to the cuff) (Wilson
 IV catheterization: using standard aseptic tech-
and Lyon 1989). In human patients, itis common
nique, catheterize a distal vein in the limb. For a
practice to place a pulse oximeter probe on a
better distribution of the local anesthetic it is
finger in order to confirm the absence of digital
important to catheterize the vein in the more
perfusion once the cuff is inflated. This tech-
distal part of the limb. The venous valves would
nique is not always applicable in veterinary
impair the distribution of the anesthetic solu-
patients; however, placement of a Doppler
tion in case of a proximal injection site (Skarda
ultrasonic probe over the palmar artery is a rea-
2007) (Figure 15.2). The catheter should be
sonable alternative. The LOP will not only be
capped with a PRN adapter (or similar device)
different between patients, but it can also vary
 and temporarily secured with tape in order to
over time over the course of an individual
avoid its dislocation during exsanguination of
patient's anesthetic. The LOP is indirectly
the limb.
affected by factors that affect arterial blood
 Identify a peripheral pulse: palpate a distally
 pressure, as well as by mechanical factors (limb
located arterial pulse. One example is the palmar
movement, cuff size, cuff design, and cuff posi-
artery that is found distal to the carpal pad in
tion). The baseline LOP should be recorded on
the metacarpal region on the palmar aspect
the patient's record, as the cuff pressure will
of the paw. When a pulse is located, it is helpful
need to be maintained well above this level
to mark the area where the pulse is readily
during the procedure.
266  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
Exsanguination: if blood flow into the distal
limb is not stopped, it will dilute the adminis-
tered local anesthetic and will negatively
impact the diffusion of the local anesthetic
solution out of the vessel into nerve endings
and peripheral nerve fibers. This can lead to
incomplete nerve blockade, especially if low
initial concentrations of local anesthetic solu-
tions are used. When exsanguinating the limb,
the leg can be initially elevated for three to
five minutes to allow for passive venous
drainage. Following this step, an elastic ban-
Figure 15.4P
 Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a dog.
dage (e.g. Esmarch or Vetrap°) should be
The pneumatic cuff has been inflated by a sphygmomanom-
paddenm aq pmous aepueq aul pandde
 eter and is well above the LOP of the patient (approximately
concentrically around the limb starting from
300 mmHg).
careful not to dislodge the IV catheter that
was previously placed. It is helpful to stretch
the bandage slightly before applying the next
turn in order to maintain a tight wrap on the
limb (Figure 15.3).
 Tourniquet application: The tourniquet is then
applied to the limb. If a pneumatic tourniquet is
used, the cuff should be inflated to a pressure
50-100 mmHg above the previously measured
LOP (Figure 15.4). In the case of a nonpneu-
matic rubber tourniquet, the band should be
placed above the elastic wrap that was used for
Figure 15.5  Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a dog.
exsanguination and secured tightly to prevent
The pneumatic tourniquet has been inflated and the elastic
bandage has been removed.
its inad vertent release (Figure 15.3). The time
that the tourniquet is applied should be
recorded on the patient's anesthetic chart. The
remaining procedures (completion of IVRA,
preparation for surgery, surgery) should be
limited to 90 minutes from the time that the
tourniquet was applied in order to avoid
complications from prolonged ischemia and
compression of tissues under the tourniquet.
 Bandage removal: once the tourniquet is in
place and secure, the elastic bandage that was
used to exsanguinate the limb should be care-
fully removed (Figure 15.5). As with its applica-
tion, take care to avoid dislodging the
Figure 15.3 Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a dog.
intravenous catheter as the bandage is being
Vetrap has been wrapped around the entire limb and has
been used to exsanguinate the limb prior to administration of 
unwrapped.
IVRA. A non-pneumatic tourniquet has been applied distally
Confirm absence of peripheral pulse: before
and secured with a surgical clamp.
local anesthetic administration, the absence
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia  267
140-
120
100-
6H
80
(mm
60
P
40
20
1
Figure 15.6Photograph of the distal thoracic limb of a dog.
60
120
180
240
300
A dilute solution of 0.5% lidocaine neat is slowly being
Time (s)
injected over 2-3 minutes.
B
End
S
Aisnonaand aun e asnd laqdad e jo
Fgure 15.7 Venous pressures (VP) for the upper and lower
limbs of people during 120 seconds of injection and during
documented location should be confirmed
through palpation or use of a Doppler ultra-
1 80 seconds after the end of injection (mean ± SD). B= Before
exsanguination, S = start of injection, End = end of injection.
sonic monitor.
*P<0.05. (From: AC Hoffmann et al. (1995). Used with
 Injection: the local anesthetic solution should
permission.)
be slowly injected over two to three minutes
(Figure 15.6). Avoid high injection pressures
during injection of the solution, as large
increases in venous pressure can lead to leak-
from the surgical site should also be evaluated
age of the local anesthetic under the tourniquet
as no assessment of hemostasis can be made
 into systemic circulation (Figure 15.7). During
during the surgical procedure while the tourni-
injection, the area where the catheter penetrates
quet was in use and occluded arterial blood
the skin should be checked for evidence of
flow to the distal limb.
extravascular injection. The time of local anes-
thetic administration should be recorded on
the patient's anesthetic chart, and the patient
Step-by-step procedure for
should be observed for several minutes for
the pelvic limb
signs of systemic toxicity.
 Catheter removal: following injection of the cal-
The technigue is similar when the block is used for
culated volume of the local anesthetic solution,
 procedures involving the distal pelvic limb of small
the catheter can be removed if necessary to
 animals. In people, due to anatomic differences in
facilitate the surgery.
limb size, it is reported that a larger volume of local
 Tourniquet removal at the end of the surgery:
anesthetic solution is required for lower extremity
At the end of the procedure the tourniquet can
procedures when compared with those of the
be removed. If a pneumatic tourniquet was
upper extremity. In dogs and cats, the author has
used, the cuff should be deflated slowly
to
had good results using the same calculated volume
allow blood flow to return to the distal limb.
.If
of 0.6mLkg'of lidocaine 0.5% that was described
a nonpneumatic tourniquet was used, it should
previously for the thoracic limb. A major difference
be slowly released in similar fashion so that
between performing IVRA for the thoracic limb
arterial flow does not immediately return to
versus the pelvic limb in small animals is that
normal levels over only a few seconds. Bleeding
exsanguination of the pelvic limb is sometimes
268   Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
more challenging due to the shape of the limb.
aq jou Aeu uognnos onasaue jesol ounea
Otherwise, the same steps that were described
required to obtain complete blockade and the cath-
above for the thoracic limb should be followed
eter can simply be removed.
when performing IVRA for the pelvic limb.
It is recommended to have a short acting anal-
gesic drug (e.g. fentanyl or alfentanil) available that
can be administered intravenously in case the block
Clinical tips for performing IVRA
is not sufficient for the procedure and the patient
responds to surgical stimulation.
The size of the catheter that is used for the injection
If a pneumatic tourniquet (e.g. blood pressure
of the local anesthetic should be small in order to
cuff and sphygmomanometer) is being used, cuff
reduce the potential for oozing when the catheter is
 pressure and arterial blood pressure must be mon-
removed following administration of the anes-
itored together every few minutes. The tourniquet
thetic solution. The author typically uses 25-gauge
Cl Aiessasau se paisnipe aq isnu amssaid jmo
or 22-gauge catheters, regardless of patient size.
maintain its pressure 50-100mmHg above the
The location of the planned surgical procedure is
measured systolic arterial pressure to prevent
 a major determinant of the location of the tourni-
blood from entering the limb under the tourniquet.
quet. In case of surgery on the paw (e.g. digit
 Even when performed correctly, leakage of local
amputation, foreign body removal), the tourniquet
 anesthetic under the cuff is possible, so correct dos-
can be placed around the antebrachium, whereas
ing is imperative to ensure patient safety (Hoffman
when surgery on the carpus or the distal antebra-
et al. 1995; Kushner et al. 2002).
chium is planned, the tourniquet should be placed
Postoperative nerve injury has been linked to
at a more proximal location above the elbow.
tourniquet pressures
greater
than
400mmHg
If it is still possible to palpate
a peripheral
(52 kPa, 7.54 psi) (Fanelli et al. 1999). In cases where
pulse after exsanguination and tourniquet appli-
 tourniquet pressure can be measured (when using
cation, no injection of local anesthetic should be
a pneumatic tourniquet), do not apply pressures
made. Instead, the tourniquet should be removed,
 greater than 400 mmHg.
blood flow to the limb should be allowed to
 In order to increase safety during the period
recover for several minutes, and
lthe entire
when the tourniquet is released, it is recom-
process repeated. Never proceed with the block
mended to use a "step release" procedure. The
if an arterial pulse is detected. This indicates
tourniquet (or cuff pressure) is released for a
that high-pressure pulsatile arterial blood is still
short period of time (20-30 seconds), followed by
entering the distal limb, while venous blood is
reapplication to again limit arterial and venous
likely not leaving it. If left uncorrected, the limb
blood flow to the distal limb. The tourniguet is
-lams pue eapa doqaaap Aiaaissanoid pmom
left in place for several minutes, followed again
ing over the course of the procedure and other
by release. These steps are repeated several times
complications might occur.
,aseaan das, au Susn sanuu 0i- 1aao
Inject the local anesthetic solution slowly. If all of
method of tourniquet removal has been shown
the previous steps were performed correctly, the
to reduce the overall wash out of the local
injection should be easy to complete. If resistance
anesthetic into the systemic circulation and there-
to injection is experienced, stop the injection and
fore potential for systemic toxicity (Davis and
investigate reasons for this unexpected observa-
McConachie 1998).
tion. DO NOT CONTINUE TO INJECT WITH
The duration of the block is dependent on the
INCREASED PRESSURE. If the local anesthetic is
continued presence of the tourniquet. There are
two main factors that influence how long the tour-
pressure, venous pressure can increase and cause
niquet can remain in place: the risk of compressive
leakage of the anesthetic into the circulation, poten-
and ischemic injury to the underlying tissues, and
tially leading to systemic toxicity (Figure 15.7). If
the occurrence of tourniquet-related pain. In human
no obvious reasons for the increased resistance to
 medicine, 90 minutes is considered to be the upper
injection are detected, wait for several minutes and
limit for the use of a tourniquet with IVRA in order
verify the onset of the anesthesia. Depending on
 to avoid major ischemic damage to the underlying
the volume already administered to that point, the
tissues. Although similar studies have not been
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia  269
 performed in animals, this recommendation should
tourniquet. Use of a double-cuff tourniquet appears
 also be followed in veterinary practice.
to be the most effective.
 Ischemic pain resulting from the use of the tour-
Using this technique, IVRA is performed as
niquet is one of the major complications reported
described above with the proximal cuff inflated ini-
in human patients and can interfere with the overall
tially. As the procedure progresses and the patient
success of the procedure. Several techniques have
begins to show signs of tourniquet pain (usually
been investigated in people in an attempt to limit
detected as sympathetic responses that are unre-
this debilitating side effect: the co-administration
sponsive to systemic analgesic treatments), the sec-
of adjuncts with the local anesthetic solution, the
ond cuff (the more distal of the two) is inflated and
infiltration of the skin under the tourniquet with a
the proximal cuff is deflated. In this way, the distal
local anesthetic solution, the administration
of
cuff compresses an area of tissue that has already
systemic analgesic/hypnotic drugs (e.g. opioids,
been blocked by the local anesthetic, and ischemia
benzodiazepines), and the use of a double cuff
under the proximal cuff is relieved. When this
Table 15.1 P
 Potential complications of intravenous regional anesthesia and steps to prevent them from occurring.
Potential complication 
Avoidance strategies
Ischemia and nerve
● Limit the use of IVRA techniques and application of the tourniquet to a maximum of 90 min.
injury
If the procedure is expected to take longer than this upper limit, alternative techniques
should be used and the IVRA technique should be discontinued or avoided altogether
 Monitor tourniquet pressure and maintain cuff pressure less than 400 mmHg
Local anesthetic
 This complication is usually due to an overdose of the local anesthetic being.
systemic toxicity
administered, and/or the tourniquet was incompetent and allowed leakage of local
anesthetic into systemic circulation
To prevent a toxic dose from being administered, calculate the correct dose of the
lidocaine neat to be used (e.g. <5 mg kg-)
To prevent leakage under the tourniquet: 1) ensure that the tourniquet is reliable and that
the appropriate pressure is maintained throughout the procedure (i.e. 50-100 mmHg
above the lower occlusion pressure (LOP) for the patient), and 2) slowly inject the local
anesthetic to avoid causing a rapid increase in venous pressure in the distal limb
 At the end of the procedure, gradually release the tourniquet with two or more inflation--
deflation cycles in order to minimize high systemic levels of the local anesthetic at the
 end of the procedure
 NEVER USE BUPIVACAINE FOR IVRA
Hematoma
Use a small gauge IV catheter (22-gauge, 25-gauge) for injection of the local anesthetic
When a superficial vein is punctured during an unsuccessful initial attempt at placing
the IV catheter, apply firm pressure on the puncture site for 2-3 min to ensure hemostasis
Engorgement of the
This usually occurs if the tourniquet is applied incorrectly
extremity
In this situation, although the tourniquet prevents venous outflow, arterial flow into the
distal limb is not adequately occluded
 It is important to ensure that the tourniquet is fully functional and that the arterial pulse
is absent prior to proceeding with the procedure
If a blood pressure cuff is being used as a tourniquet, it should be inflated 50-100 mmHg
above the systolic arterial pressure of the patient 
 The cuff pressure and the patient's arterial blood pressure must both be monitored
frequently throughout the procedure
Suaied ayl j! lanal leu! si woy pasnipe ag oi peau Aew anssaid uoelju! yno ayl
arterial blood pressure increases during the procedure (i.e. in response to stimulation or
tourniquet pain)
Ecchymosis and
 Padding can be used under the tourniquet as needed in some patients to limit local
subcutaneous
 damage to tissues when the tourniquet is applied
hemorrhage where the
tourniquet is placed
270  Loco-regional Anesthetic Blocks for Small Animal Patients
method is used, the patient's vital signs stabilize
thesia, and axillary block for outpatient hand surgery:
and they appear to be more comfortable.
clinical outcome and cost analysis. Anesth Analg 93,
At the end of the procedure, the tourniquet is
1181-1184.
released and any remaining local anesthetic in the
Choyce A, Peng P (2002) A systematic review of adjuncts
venous system of the distal limb is free to be deliv-
for intravenous regional anesthesia for surgical proce-
dures. Can J Anaesth 49, 32-45.
ered to the systemic circulation when blood flow is
Davis KJ and McConachie L (1998) Intravenous regional
re-established. For this reason, it is important to
anaesthesia. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 9,261-264.
closely monitor the patient for signs of cardiovas-
DeMarzo C, Staffieri F, DeMonte V, et al. (2008)
cular instability (hypotension, bradyarrhythmias)
Intravenous regional anesthesia: evaluation of the
 over the next 10-15 minutes in order to recogmize
analgesic efficacy during pancarpal arthrodesis in
the signs of potential systemic toxicity.
dogs. Proceeding of the XV meeting of the Italian
When lidocaine is used, sensation of the blocked
Society of Veterinary Surgery (SICV), 10-12 June, Porto
area will typically return within 15-30 minutes once
Cesareo (LE), Italy.
the tourniguet is released. For this reason, itis impor-
Duke T (2000) Local and regional anesthetic and anal-
gesic techniques in the dog and cat: Part II. Infiltration
and nerve blocks. Can Vet J 41,949-952.
analgesics to the patient prior to tourniquet removal.
Elmore RG (1980) Food-animal regional anesthesia:
bovine blocks: intravenous limb block. Vet Med Small
Anim Clin 75, 1835-1836.
Potential complications and how
Estill CT (1977) Intravenous local analgesia of the bovine
to avoid them
lower leg. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 72, 1499-1502.
Fanelli G, Casati A, Garancini P et al. (1999) Nerve stimu-
In a regional anesthesia study involving 3996
human patients (Fanelli et al. 1999), the only vari-
lower limb blockade: failure rate, patient acceptance,
 able that showed a significant predictive association
and neurologic complications. Study Group
uO
with postoperative nerve injury was tourniquet
Regional Anesthesia. Anesth Analg 88, 847-852.
pressure greater than 400mmHg (52kPa, 7.54 psi).
Farrell RG, Swanson SL, Walter JR (1985) Safe and effec-
Whenever possible, cuff pressures should be moni-
tive IV regional anesthesia for use in the emergency
tored and maintained in a reasonable range (see
department. Ann Emerg Med 14, 288-292.
Feldman HS, Arthur GR, Covino BG (1989) Comparative
section on Clinical tips for more information)
systemic toxicity of convulsant and supraconvulsant
doses of intravenous ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and lido-
caine in the conscious dog. Anesth Analg 69, 794-801.
References
 Hartmannsgruber MW, Silverman DG, Halaszynski TM,
et al. (1999) Comparison of ropivacaine 0.2% and
Asik I, Kocum AI, Goktug A, et al. (2009) Comparison of
lidocaine 0.5% for intravenous regional anesthesia in
ropivacaine 0.2% and 0.25% with lidocaine 0.5% for intra-
volunteers. Anesth Analg 89, 727-731.
venous regional anesthesia. J Clin Anesth 21, 401407.
Henderson CL, Warriner CB, McEwen JA, et al. (1997)
Atkinson DI (1969) The mode of action of intravenous
A North American survey of intravenous regional
regional anesthetics. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 85, 858-863.
36, 131-134.
Hoffmann AC, van Gessel E, Gamulin Z, et al. (1995)
 Bier A (1908) Ueber einen neuen Weg Lokalanasthesia an
Quantitative evaluation of tourmiquet leak during i.v.
den gliedmassen zu Erzeugen. Verch Dtsch Ges Chir
regional anaesthesia of the upper and lower limbs in
37,204-214.
human volunteers. Br J Anaesth 75, 269-273.
 Bier A (1910) On local anaesthesia, with special reference
Holmes CM (1963) Intravenous regional analgesia. Ause-
to vein anaesthesia. Edinburgh Med J 5, 103-123.
ful method of producing analgesia of the limbs. Lancet
Brill S, Middleton W, Brill G et al. (2004) Bier's block; 100
2, 245-247.
years old and still going strong! Acta Anaesthesiol
Jones RS, Prentice DE (1974) Some observations of intra-
Scand 48, 117-122.
venous anaesthesia of the bovine foot. Assn Vet
Casale R, Glynn C, Buonocore M (1992) The role of
Anaesth Gr Brit Irl Proc 5, 13-17.
ischaemia in the analgesia which follows Bier's block
 Kushmer LI, Fan B, Shofer FS (2002) Intravenous regional
techmique. Pain 50, 169-175.
anesthesia in isoflurane anesthetized cats: lidocaine
Chan VW, Peng PW, Kaszas Z, et al. (2001) A comparative
plasma concentrations and cardiovascular effects. Vet
study of general anesthesia, intravenous regional anes-
Anesth Analg 29, 140-149.
Intravenous Regional Anesthesia  271
Lillie PE, Glynn CJ, Fenwick DG (1984) Site of action of
Rosenberg PH, Heavner JE (1985) Multiple and comple-
intravenous regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology 61,
mentary mechanisms produce analgesia during intra-
507-510.
venous regionalanesthesia.
Anesthesiology 62,
Manohar M, Kumar R, Tyagi RP (1971) Studies on intra-
840-842.
 venous retrograde regional anaesthesia of the forelimb
Skarda RT (2007) Local and regional anesthetic and anal-
in buffalo calves. Br Vet J 127, 401-407.
gesic techniques: dogs. In: Lumb & Jones' Veterinary
McEwen JA (2009). Tourmiquet Overview. www.toumi
Anesthesia (4" edn.). Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC,
quets.org/tourmiquet_overview.php
Grimm KA (eds). Blackwell Publishing Ltd., Ames, IA.
Memis D, Turan A, Karamanlioglu B, et al. (2004) Adding
Pp.573-574.
 dexmedetomidine to lidocaine for intravenous regional
Staffieri F, DeMarzoC,GrimaldiD,et al.(2010)Comparison
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 98, 835-840.
of intraoperative analgesia provided by intravenous
Moore DC (1984) Bupivacaine toxicity and Bier block: the
 regional anaesthesia or brachial plexus block for pancar-
 drug, the technique, or the anesthetist. Anesthesiology
 pal arthrodesis in dogs. Proceedings of the AVA spring
61, 782.
Meeting, Cambridge 29-31 March 2010.
 Novello L (2003) Anestesia venosa retrograda (AVR): teo-
Turan A, Karamanlyoglu B, Memis D, et al. (2002)
ria. Veterinary Regional Anaesth Pain Med 1, 15-17.
 Intravenous regional anesthesia using prilocaine and
Prentice DE, Wyn-Jones GW, Jones RS, et al. (1974)
neostigmine. Anesth Analg 95, 1419-1422.
Intravenous regional anaesthesia of the bovine foot.
Webb AA, Cantwell SL, Duke T, et al. (1999) Intravenous
Vet Rec 94, 293-295.
regional anesthesia (Bier block) in a dog. Can Vet J 40,
Reuben SS, Steinberg RB, Kreitzer JM, et al. (1995)
419421.
Intravenous regional anesthesia using lidocaine and
William BJ, Archibald D, Rao GDJ, et al. (1992) Regional
ketorolac. Anesth Analg 81, 110-113.
intravenous anesthesia with bupivacaine hydrochlo-
Reuben SS, Steinberg RB, Klatt JL, et al. (1999) Intravenous
ride in dogs. Cheiron 21, 153-154.
regional anesthesia using lidocaine and clonidine.
Wilson JK, Lyon GD (1989) Bier block tourmiquet pressure.
Anesthesiology 91, 654-658.
Anesth Analg 68, 823-824.
ndex
Page numbers followed by f denote figures; page numbers followed by t denote tables.
Abdomen. See Trunk, anesthesia of
Anatomy
Abdominal wall, nerves of, 190f
nervous system, 11-12
Abducens nerve, 106
 peripheral nerve, 12, 12f
Accidental drug administration, as epidural
Animal positioning, 19-20. See also
anesthesia complication, 252-253
specific procedures
Acepromazine, for ophthalmic procedures, 107
for epidural anesthesia, 236-238, 237f-238f
Acoustic shadowing, 81, 81f
lateral recumbancy, 238, 238f
ACTH, 91, 92f
sternal recumbancy, 237-238, 237f
Action potential, 28-29,28f, 66, 66f
for eye loco-regional anesthesia, 107
Adjuncts, in intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
for oral cavity nerve blocks, 119
Air, ultrasound appearance of, 82
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 200
Allergic reactions, 16, 37-38
for electrolocation techniques, 200
 Q, adrenergic agonists
for ultrasound-guided techniques, 200
 as adjunct in intravenous regional
for spinal anesthesia, 251
anesthesia, 263
for thoracic limb anesthesia, 143-144
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 250
electrolocation techniques, 143-144
as local anesthetic adjuvant, 32
ultrasound-guided techniques, 144
Alveolar nerve. See Inferior alveolar nerve block
Anisotropy, 80-81, 83
American Society of Regional Anesthesia
Aristotle, 3
(ASRA), 11
Arrhythmias
Amputation, wound soaker catheter
 arrhythmogenicity of local anesthetics, 35
use in, 96, 96f
as complication in intravenous regional
Amylocaine, 6
anesthesia, 262
Analogue-digital-converter (ADC), 70
Articaine, 120t
@ 2013 ISUP, a division of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
273
274  Index
Aschenbrandt, Theodor, 4
technique, 151-154, 152f-154f, 153t, 154t
Aseptic preparation, 20, 20f, 21f
anatomic landmarks, 151, 152f, 153f
Aseptic technique, components of, 20
motor responses to nerve root
Auriculopalpebral nerve, anatomy of, 106
stimulation, 154t
Auriculopalpebral nerve block, 108-109,
 motor responses to peripheral nerve
108f, 109f
stimulation, 153t
anatomic landmarks, 108
patient positioning, 151, 152f
clinical tips, 109
step-by-step procedure, 151-152
equipment, 108
Bradycardia, as epidural anesthesia
location for, 104f
complication,253
step-by-step procedure, 108-109
Bupivacaine
technique, 108-109
chemical structure of, 26f
Autonomic blockade
density of, 234t
cardiovascular, 234
described, 30
epidural anesthesia, 234-235
development of, 6
metabolism and hormones, 235
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 249t, 250
Avicenna, 3
for extrapleural infusion, 172
Axillary artery and vein, 141, 144, 153, 154, 157
intercostal use, 172, 173
Axillary nerve, 151t
for interpleural analgesia, 178f 179-182, 183
Axon activation, 68
for intra-articular analgesia, 222
for intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
Baricity, 234, 234f
onset and duration of action, 27t
Bier, August, 5-6, 261
for oral nerve blocks, 121, 121t
Bier block, 6, 261
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 201, 222
 Blood pressure, in epidural anesthesia, 253
physicochemical properties of, 26t
 Blood vessels, ultrasound appearance of, 81
properties of, 120
 Bone, ultrasound appearance of, 81
selective blockade by, 30
Brachial plexus block, 150-158
for thoracic limb anesthesia, 144-145, 152, 158
combined ultrasonography/
toxicity of, 34, 35, 35f
electrolocation-guided, 155-157
in wound catheter use, 97
advantages, 155
Buprenorphine, 33
clinical tips, 156-157
for epidural analgesia, 247t
equipment, 155
for pelvic limb intra-articular analgesia, 222
technique,155-157,156f
 Butorphanol
anatomic landmarks (ultrasound
for epidural analgesia, 247t
anatomy), 155
for ophthalmic procedures, 107
 patient positioning, 155
step-by-step procedure, 155-156, 156f
Cardiac accelerator nerve fibers, 234
complications,158t
Cardiovascular system
continuous peripheral nerve block (CPNB),
spinal and epidural anesthesia effects on, 234
157-158, 157f, 158f
toxicity of local anesthetics, 34, 35-36, 35f
catheter placement and securing, 157-158
Catheters, 53-61
157f, 158f
connectors, 56, 57f
drug choice and infusion rate, 158
for continuous regional anesthesia, 53-56
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia, 151t
epidural,55,55f
functional regional nerve anatomy, 150 
fixation (anchoring) devices, 56-57, 57f, 58f
 nerve stimulation-guided (traditional
stimulating, 55-56, 56f
approach), 151-154
use in epidural anesthesia, 243-246, 244f-246f
clinical tips, 152-154
wound soaker, 57,58f 59, 59f, 60f,93-100
equipment, 151
Cauda equina, 228f, 230
Index275
Cauda equina symdrome, 16, 36
Complications, 13-16. See also Toxicity; specific
Caudal inferior alveolar nerve block, 126t,
procedures
133-136
allergic reactions, 16, 37-38
clinical tips, 135
ncidence of, 14
complications, 136
nfection, 16, 253, 262
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
 neurological injuries, 13-16
133-134
drug error, 16
equipment, 134
needle/mechanical trauma, 15, 43-44, 174
functional and clinical anatomy, 133
neuronal ischemia, 15
technique, 134-135, 135f, 136f
neurotoxicity, 16, 36, 253
extraoral (transcutaneous) approach, 126t,
systemic toxicity, 14, 185
135, 136f
Conductors, 65
mtraoral approach, 126t, 134-135, 135f
 Constant current generator, 70
Central nervous system toxicity of local
 Continuous peripheral nerve block (CPNB)
anesthetics, 34, 35, 35t
brachial plexus block, 157-158, 157f, 158f
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 230
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
Cervical paravertebral block, 145-149
206-207
complications, 148-149, 150f
 Continuous wound infusion with local
distribution of local anesthesia and
anesthetics, 91-93
analgesia, 146
Contrast resolution, 78
equipment, 146
Coming, G.L., 5
functional and clinical anatomy, 145-146, 146f
 Corticosteroids, for pelvic limb intra-articular
Lemke's modified approach, 147-148
analgesia, 222
anatomic landmarks, 148
Coulomb's Law, 68
patient positioning, 148
Current density in biological tissues, 68
step-by-step procedure, 148
overview, 145
Dental anesthesia. See Oral cavity, nerve
techmique, 146-147,147f
blocks for
anatomic landmarks, 146,146f, 147f
Depolarization, 28-29, 66-67
patient positioning, 146
Dermatome, 11
step-by-step procedure, 147
Detail resolution, 78
Chlorhexidine gluconate
Dexmedetomidine
complications, 21, 23, 23f
dosage for sedation, 19
use of, 21, 22-23, 22f
for epidural analgesia, 247t
Chlorprocaine
for intra-articular analgesia, 222
onset and duration of action, 27t
for intra-articular elbow and shoulder joint
 physicochemical properties of, 26t
analgesia, 162
toxicity of, 35t
as local anesthetic adjuvant, 32
Chondrolysis, 222
for ophthalmic procedures, 107
Chronaxy, 67, 68f
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 199, 201, 222
 Clipping of the puncture site, 20
Diaphragmatic paralysis/paresis, 144, 148-149,
Clonidine
185-186
 for intra-articular elbow and shoulder joint
Dibucaine, 6
analgesia, 162
Diffusion catheters. See Wound soaker catheters
for pelvic limb intra-articular analgesia, 222
Diphenhydramine, for topical anesthesia
Cobo, Bernabe, 4
of eye, 115
Cocaine, 4-6
Disinfectant
Cocoa leaf, 3-4
chlorhexidine gluconate, 21, 22-23, 22f, 23f
Color Doppler, 79, 79f
components of "ideal," 21
Common peroneal nerve, 209, 209f
povidine-iodine, 21, 22-23, 22f
276Index
Distribution of local anesthesia, with intravenous
age and physical condition, 233
regional anesthesia, 263-264
baricity and specific gravity, 234, 234t
Documentation, 17
direction of needle bevel, 233
Doppler effect, 79, 79f
fatty tissue in epidural space, 233
Double-bubble sign, 155, 156
position of animal,233
Doughnut sign, 84, 144
site of injection, 232
Drug error, 16
size of venous and lymphatic plexus, 233
Dural sac, 230
 speed and pressure of injection, 232, 233f
Dura mater, 230
volume and concentration, 232
doses
Echogenic needles, 51, 52f
local anesthetics, 247f
EDTA (ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid),
opioids and 0, adrenergic agonists, 247f
neurotoxicity and, 16
drug choices, 248-251
Elastic bandage, 264, 266
continuous delivery through catheters, 250-251
Elastomeric pumps, 60f, 61-63, 61f, 62f
pharmacology, 248-250,249f
Ebow joint analgesia, 161-163, 163f
equipment,240
Electrodes, of peripheral nerve stimulator, 67
ndications, 235
Electrolocation of epidural space, 239-240, 240f
injection volume,246-248,247t,248f
Electrophysiology, 65-66
body weight and, 246, 247t
EMLA (Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics), 13
spinal length and, 246-248, 248f
Endoneurium, 12, 12f
locating epidural space, methods for, 238-240,
Enucleation
238f-240f
 peribulbar block for, 113, 113f
lumbar approach, 242-243, 243f
retrobulbar block for, 110-113, 111f
lumbosacral approach, 240-242, 241f, 242f
Epidural anesthesia, 227-254
morbidity and mortality decreases with
anatomic landmarks, 240
use of, 8
animal positioning, 236-238, 237f-238f
morphine use, 32-33
lateral recumbancy, 238, 238f
sacrococcygeal approach, 243, 244f
sternal recumbancy, 237-238, 237f
sedation and anesthesia requirements, 236
autonomic blockade, 234-235
somatic blockade, 231-234
catheter placement, 243-246, 244f-246f
Epidural catheters, 55, 55f
catheter removal, 246
Epidural space, 229f, 230
complications, 252-254
fatty tissue in, 233
accidental drug administration, 252-253
methods for locating, 238-240, 238f-240f
of continuous administration, 254
electrolocation, 239-240, 240f
delayed hair growth, 253
hanging drop, 239, 239f
Horner's syndrome, 254
loss of resistance (LOR), 238-239,238f-239f
hypotention/bradycardia, 253
Epinephrine
 inadvertent intravascular injection, 253-254
as local anesthetic adjuvant, 32
 inadvertent subarachnoid/ spinal or subdural
for local anesthetic toxicity, 35
injection, 253
neurotoxicity and, 16
infections, 253
Epineurium, 12, 12f
of local anesthetics, 253-254
Equipment, 43-64. See also specific equipment items;
neural damage/neurotoxicity, 253
specific items; specific procedures
of opioids, 254
battery-powered pumps, 63-64, 63f
 respiratory depression, 254
catheters, 53-61
contraindications/precautions, 235-236
elastomeric pumps, 60f, 61-63, 61f, 62f
defined, 227
injection accessories, 51, 52f, 53, 53f
distribution of anesthetics, factors affecting,
for intravenous regional anesthesia, 264-265
232-234
needles, 43-51
Index277
peripheral nerve stimulators, 65-75
topical anesthesia, 115-116
ultrasound, 79-80, 80f, 82
advantages/disadvantages, 115-116
Ethmoidal foramen, 104, 104f
drugs used, 115
Ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA),
 Zygomatic and lacrimal nerve block, 110
neurotoxicity and, 16
Etidocaine, 6
Face masks, 20
Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics
Facial nerve
(EMLA), 13
anatomy of, 106
Exsanguination, 266
paralysis, 106
Extension tubing, 51, 52f, 53
Facial tissue, ultrasound appearance of, 81
Eye, 103-116
Fat, ultrasound appearance of, 81
auriculopalpebral nerve block, 108-109, 108f,
Fatty tissue in epidural space, 233
109f
 Feline oncologic surgery, wound soaker catheter
anatomic landmarks, 108
use in, 95f, 96
dinical tips, 109
Femoral nerve block, 208-215
equipment, 108
combined ultrasonography electrolocation-
step-by-step procedure, 108-109
guided,212-215,213f,214f
technique, 108-109
equipment, 212
frontal nerve block, 109, 109f
femoral triangle approach, 212-213, 213f
infiltration anesthesia, 113-115, 114f
ventral suprainguinal approach, 214-215
infratrochlear nerve block, 110
complications, 213, 214t
loco-regional anesthesia, 106-116
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
animal positioning, 107
209
in cats, 116
fumctional and clinical anatomy, 208-209, 208f,
 contraindications for, 108
209f
 general considerations, 106-109
nerve stimulation-guided, 210-215, 210f-211f
indications for, 107-108
Campoy technique, 210-212
sedation and anesthesia requirements, 107
anatomic landmarks, 210, 210f
peribulbar block, 113, 113f
clinical tips/pearls, 211-212
901 9901 901-01 Xue a1au 1eu1331
patient positioning, 210, 210f
abducens nerve, 106
step-by-step procedure, 210-211, 210f, 211f
 auriculopalpebral nerve, 106
equipment, 210
facial nerve, 106
 Mahler technique, 212
frontal nerve, 105, 105f, 106f
Fenestrated catheters. See Wound soaker catheters
 nfraorbital nerve, 105
Fentanyl
infratrochlear nerve, 105, 105f, 106f
dosage for sedation, 19
lacrimal nerve, 105, 105f, 106f
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 250
maxillary nerve, 105-106, 105f
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 199
 nasociliary nerve, 105
Field block, 89
oculomotor nerve, 105
Freud, Sigmund, 4, 5
 ophthalmic nerve, 105, 105f
Frontal nerve, anatomy of, 105, 105f, 106f
 optic nerve, 104
Frontal nerve block, 109, 109f
 oribital foramina, 103-104, 104f 104f
pterygopalatine nerve, 105
Gaedcke, Friedrich, 4
trigeminal nerve, 105-106, 105f
Galen of Pergamon, 3
 trochlear nerve, 105
Galvani, Luigi, 7
zygomatic nerve, 105-106, 105f
Gauge, needle, 45-46
zygomaticofacial nerve, 106, 106f
General anesthesia, for ophthalmic procedures,
Zygomaticotemporal nerve, 106, 106f
107
retrobulbar block, 103, 104f, 110-113, 111f
Gray, Tyrell, 6
278Index
Hair growth, delayed as epidural anesthesia
Infraorbital foramen, 123, 132
complication, 253
 Infraorbital nerve, anatomy of, 105, 122-123, 122f
Halsted, William, 5
Infraorbital nerve block, 126t, 129f, 131-133
Hand washing, 20
dinical tips, 133
Hanging drop technique for locating epidural
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia, 132
space, 239, 239f
equipment, 132
Hartley, 3
functional and clinical anatomy, 131-132
Hip joint, intra-articular injection of, 224
technique, 126t, 132-133
Hirschel, Georg, 6
Infratrochlear nerve, anatomy of, 105, 105f, 106f
History of regional anesthesia, 3-8
Infratrochlear nerve block, 110
Horner's syndrome, 254
 Infusion pumps. See Pumps
Hyperpolarization, 67
Injection accessories, 51, 52f, 53, 53f
Hypersensitivity reactions, with local
Injection pressure, 53, 53f, 54f
anesthetics, 37-38
epidural injection, 232, 233f
Hypodermic needles, 4, 43-44, 44f. See also Needles
Inline pressure gauge, 53, 53f
Hypotention, as epidural anesthesia
Insulated needles, 45f, 48-49, 49f, 50-51, 50f, 52f
complication, 253
Intercostal nerve, anatomy of, 168-169, 169f, 171f
Hypothalamic-pituitary (HPA) axis, 91
 Intercostal nerve blocks, 169-178
anatomy and, 170, 170f, 171f, 172
Incisional infiltration of local anesthetics, 89-102, 90f
complications, 177-178
choice of anesthetic, 97
distribution of local anesthesia, 173
clinical tips for, 99
equipment, 173-174
complications, 99-100
ndications, 173
continuous wound infusion, 91-93
local anesthetics used, 173
distribution of anesthetic, 96-97, 97f
overview, 169-173
wound soaker catheters, 93-100
technique, 174-176, 174f-177f
Infection, 16
 Intercostal space, anatomy of, 170, 170f
as epidural anesthesia complication, 253
Intercostal vessels, 168-169, 171f
with intravenous regional anesthesia, 262
Interpleural regional anesthesia, 178-186
Inferior alveolar nerve block
complications, 184-186
caudal, 126t, 133-136
catheter dislocation, 185
clinical tips, 135
diaphragmatic paralysis, 185-186
complications, 136
local anesthetic systemic toxicity, 185
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
pain on injection, 186
133-134
pneumothorax, 184-185
equipment, 134
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
functional and clinical anatomy, 133
182-183
techmique, 134-135, 135f, 136f
equipment, 183
rostral, 127t, 136-138, 138f
indications, 181-182
anatomic landmarks, 137
local anesthetics used, 182
clinical tips, 137-138
overview, 178-181
 distribution of local anesthesia and
technique, 183-184, 184f
analgesia, 137
Intra-articular analgesia
equipment, 137
for elbow and shoulder joints, 161-163
functional and clinical anatomy, 136-137
distribution of local anesthesia and
technique, 137, 138f
analgesia, 162
Infiltration anesthesia
drugs used, 161-162
described, 13
donidine,162
eye, 113-115, 114f
local anesthetics, 162
oral cavity, 127t, 138
opioids, 162
Infraorbital canal, 122
steroids, 162
Index279
equipment,162
Lateral articular nerve, stifle, 209, 209f
ndications, 161
Levobupivacaine
purpose, 161
described, 30
techniques, 163, 163f
for epidural analgesia, 249t
for pelvic limb, 222-224
onset and duration of action, 27t
choice and dosing of local anesthetics, 222
physicochemical properties of, 26t
dinical tips, 224
selective blockade by, 30
complications,224
toxicity of, 35, 35t
distribution of local anesthesia and
Lidocaine
analgesia, 222
described, 30
equipment,222-223
development of, 6
hip joint injection, 224
for epidural analgesia, 249t
ndications, 222
for intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
stifle joint injection,
,223-224,223f
onset and duration of action, 27t
toxicity issues, 222
for oral nerve blocks, 121, 121f
Intraligamentary injection, 127t, 139
for pelvic limb intra-articular analgesia, 222
 Intraneural injection, 15
physicochemical properties of, 26t
Intraosseous anesthesia, oral cavity, 127t, 138-139
properties of, 120t
 Intrapulpal injection, 127t, 139
toxicity, 34, 35, 35t
Intraseptal injection, 127t, 139
in cats, 116
Intrathecal anesthesia, 251-252
neurotoxicity, 16
 Intravascular injection
transdermal patches, 13
 inadvertent as epidural anesthesia complication,
in wound catheter use, 97
253-254
Lingual nerve, 133, 136
 Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA), 261-270
Lipid rescue, 36
choice/dosing of local anesthetics, 263
Lipid solubility, of local anesthetics, 26, 26t
clinical tips for, 268-270
Local anesthetics
complications, 269t, 270
adjuvants to, 31-33
contraindications/precautions, 262
Q, adrenergic agonists, 32
defined, 13
opioids, 32-33
distribution of local anesthesia, 263-264
sodium bicarbonate, 32
equipment, 264-265
vasoconstrictors, 31-32
indications, 262
chemical structure and classification,
rationale for, 261-262
25-26, 26f
step-by-step procedure
common, 30-31
for pelvic limb, 267-268
continuous wound infusion with, 91-93
for thoracic limb, 265-267,265f-267f
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 249, 249f
 Ischemia, neuronal, 15
extrapleural infusion with, 172
 Ischemic pain, 269
for eye infiltration anesthesia, 113-115
 IV catheterization, for intravenous regional
incisional infiltration, 89-102, 90f
anesthesia, 265
for intercostal nerve blocks, 173
IVRA. See Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA)
for interpleural regional anesthesia, 178, 182
for intra-articular elbow and shoulder joint
Ketamine
analgesia, 162
 as adjunct in intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
mixtures of, 30-31
for epidural analgesia, 250
mode of action, 27-30
for ophthalmic procedures, 107
 onset and duration of action, 27t
Koller, Karl, 4-5
for oral nerve blocks, 120-121, 120t, 122t
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 201
Labat, Louis Gaston, 6
physicochemical properties of, 25-27, 26t
Lacrimal nerve, 105, 105f, 106f
lipid solubility, 26, 26t
280Index
Local anesthetics (cont'd)
Meninges, 230
pKa (dissociation constant), 26t, 27
Mental nerve. See Middle mental nerve block
protein binding, 26-27, 26t
Meperidine, for epidural analgesia, 247t
selective/differential blocks, 29-30
Mepivacaine
toxicity, 33-38
described, 30
cardiovascular system, 34, 35-36, 35t
development of, 6
central nervous system, 34, 35, 35t
for epidural analgesia, 249t
clinical signs, 33f
 onset and duration of action, 27t
hypersensitivity reactions, 37-38
physicochemical properties of, 26t
in intra-articular injections, 222
properties of, 120t
lipid rescue, 36
toxicity of, 35t
neurotoxicity, 36
Methadone, for epidural analgesia, 247t
systemic,185
Methylene blue solution, for epidural
treatment for, 35-36
analgesia, 247t
wound healing, 36-37, 100-102
Microprocessor, of nerve stimulator, 69
for trunk anesthesia, 173, 182
Middle mental nerve block, 127t, 136-138, 138f
ultrasound visualization of administration,
anatomic landmarks, 137
84-85, 84f
dlinical tips, 137-138
Loco-regional anesthesia and analgesia
distribution of local anesthesia and
equipment for, 43-64
analgesia, 137
rationale for, 7-8
equipment, 137
Loco-regional anesthetic terminology, 12-13
functional and clinical anatomy, 136-137
Loss of resistance (LOR), technique for locating
technique, 137, 138f
epidural space, 238-239, 238f-239f
Minimum stimulating current, 73-74, 73f
Lower occlusion pressure, 265
Morphine
Lumbar plexus biock. See Psoas compartment
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 250
(lumbar plexus) block
epidural use, 32-33
as local anesthetic adjuvant, 32-33
Mandibular foramen, 134, 135, 135f
for pelvic limb intra-articular analgesia, 222
Mandibular nerve, 133, 134f
for topical anesthesia of eye, 115
Mantegazza, Paolo, 4
Muscles, ultrasound appearance of, 81
Maxillary nerve
Musculocutaneous nerve, 151t, 152, 153t, 157, 159,
anatomy of, 105-106, 105f
160f, 161
distribution and branches of, 122-123, 122f
Mylohyoid nerve, 133
Maxillary nerve block, 121-128, 126t, 127f-129f
clinical tips, 127
Nat-K+ pump, 27, 66
distribution of local anesthesia and
Nalbuphine
analgesia, 124
for topical anesthesia of eye, 115
equipment, 124
for trunk analgesia, 172
functional and clinical anatomy, 121-123
Nasociliary nerve, 105
technique,125, 127,127f, 128f
Needles, 43-51
anatomic landmarks, 125
blunt, 44-45
 infraorbital approach, 125, 127, 129f
echogenic, 51, 52f
 maxillary tuberosity approach, 125, 127f
gauge, 45-46
subzygomatic approach, 125, 128f
hypodermic, 4, 43-44, 44f
Medetomidine, for epidural analgesia, 247t
injection accessories for, 51, 52f, 53, 53f
Medial articular nerve, stifle, 209, 209f
insulated 4, 8-49,45f, 49f,50-51, 50f 52f
Median nerve, 151t, 153t, 157, 159, 160f, 161
length, 45-46
Medulla spinalis, 230
pencil-point, 47, 47f
Membrane potential, 27-29, 28f
peripheral nerve stimulator, 74-75
Index281
Quincke, 47
Nerve stimulators. See Peripheral nerve
spinal, 46-48, 46f, 47f, 49f
stimulators
Sprotte, 47, 47f
Neuraxial anesthesia
tip design, 43
complications of, 252-254
trauma from, 15, 43-44, 174
defined, 13
Tuohy, 44, 47, 48-49, 48f, 52f
Neuronal ischemia, 15
Nerve activation, mechanism of, 66-67, 66f
Neurotoxicity, 16
Nerve block. See also Peripheral nerve block;
 as epidural anesthesia complication, 253
specific nerves; specific procedures
of local anesthetics, 36
auriculopalpebral, 108-109, 108f, 109f
Newton, Isaac, 3
brachial plexus block, 150-158
Nieman, Albert, 4
caudal and rostral palatine nerve blocks,
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as adjunct
129-131
in intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
caudal inferior alveolar nerve block, 126t,
133-136
Oculomotor nerve, 105
cervical paravertebral block, 145-149
Ohm's Law, 66, 68
defined, 13
Ophthalmic nerve, 105, 105f
femoral, 208-215
Opioids
infraorbital, 126t, 129f 131-133
after thoracotomy, 170, 172
 infratrochlear, 110
for epidural analgesia, 247t, 249-250
intercostal, 169-178
for intra-articular elbow and shoulder joint
maxillary, 121-128, 126t, 127f-129f
 analgesia, 162
middle mental, 127t, 136-138, 138f
 as intravenous regional anesthesia
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
adjunct, 263
201-208
as local anesthetic adjuvant, 32-33
radial, median, musculocutaneous, and ulnar
for ophthalmic procedures, 107
(RUMM), 159-161
Optic foramen, 103-104, 104f, 104t
rostral inferior alveolar, 127t, 136-138, 138f
Optic nerve, 104
sciatic,215-221
Oral cavity, nerve blocks for, 119-139
thoracic paravertebral blockade, 186-191, 187f
caudal and rostral palatine nerve blocks,
transverse abdominis (TAP) block, 191-195
129-131
Zygomatic and lacrimal, 110
clinical tips, 131
Nerve fibers
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
characteristics and functions, 29f
129-130
classification, 29
equipment, 130
selective/differential blocks, 29-30
functional and clinical anatomy, 129
Nerve injury
technique, 130-131, 131f
as epidural anesthesia complication, 253
caudal inferior alveolar nerve block, 126t,
 injection pressure and, 53, 54f
133-136
from needles, 44, 44f, 45, 46
clinical tips, 135
from tourniquets, 268, 270
complications, 136
Nerve roots, 230-231
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
Nerve stimulation, history of, 7
133-134
Nerve stimulation-guided blocks
equipment, 134
brachial plexus block, 151-154
functional and clinical anatomy, 133
femoral nerve block, 210-215, 210f-211f
technique, 134-135, 135f, 136f
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
equipment, 119
203-205, 203f,204f
 general considerations, 119-121
sciatic nerve block, 215-219, 217f-219f
anesthesia requirements, 119
thoracic paravertebral blockade, 189
animal positioning, 119
282Index
Oral cavity, nerve blocks for (cont'd)
technique, 130-131, 131f
choice and dosing of local anesthetics,
 anatomic landmarks, 130
120-121, 120t, 122
infraorbital approach, 130
contraindications/precautions, 120
maxillary tuberosity approach, 130
 indications/advantages, 119-120
infiltration anesthesia, 127t, 138
131f
imfraorbital nerve block,126t,131-133
subzygomatic approach, 130
clinical tips, 133
Palpebral nerves, 106
distribution of local anesthesia and
Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), 16
analgesia, 132
 Patient positioning. See Animal positioning
equipment, 132
Patient preparation
functional and clinical anatomy, 131-132
aseptic preparation, 20
technique, 126t, 132-133
positioning, 19-20
intraosseous anesthesia, 127t, 138-139
sedation and anesthetic requirements, 19
 intrapulpal injection, 127t, 139
skin preparation, 20-23
maxillary nerve block, 121-128, 126t, 127f-129f
 Pelvic limb, regional anesthetic techniques for,
distribution of local anesthesia and
199-224
analgesia, 124
femoral nerve block, 208-215
equipment, 124
 combined ultrasonography electrolocation-
functional and clinical anatomy, 121-123
guided, 212-215, 2i3f 214f
techmique, 125, 127, 127f, 128f
complications, 213, 214t
middle mental nerve block and rostral inferior
distribution of local anesthesia and
alveolar nerve block, 127t, 136-138, 138f
 analgesia, 209
clinical tips, 137-138
functional and clinical anatomy, 208-209,
distribution of local anesthesia and
208f, 209f
analgesia, 137
nerve stimulation-guided, 210-215, 210f-211f
equipment, 137
general considerations, 199-201
functional and clinical anatomy, 136-137
 animal positioning, 200
technique, 137, 138f
choice of local anesthetics and adjuncts, 201
splash block, 127t, 138
contraindications/precautions, 201
table of, 126t-127t
indications, 200
Orbital fissure, 103-104, 104f, 104f
sedation/anesthesia requirements, 199-200
Oribital foramina, 103-104, 104f, 104t
intra-articular analgesia, 222-224
Oxymorphone, for epidural analgesia, 247t
choice and dosing of local anesthetics, 222
clinical tips, 224
PABA (para-aminobenzoic acid), 16
complications, 224
Pain
distribution of local anesthesia and
abdominal, 191
analgesia, 222
adverse effects of, 8
equipment, 222-223
ischemic, 269
hip joint injection, 224
peripheral nerve anatomy and, 12
indications, 222
thoracic, 167-168
stifle joint injection, 223-224, 223f
 Pain management, history of, 3-8
toxicity issues, 222
 Palatine nerve blocks, caudal and rostral, 129-131
intravenous regional anesthesia, 267-268
clinical tips, 131
overview, 199
 distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
129-130
201-208
equipment, 130
combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
 functional and clinical anatomy, 129
guided, 205-206, 206f
Index283
complications, 207-208, 207t, 208f
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
continuous, 206-207
203-205,203f, 204f
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
sciatic nerve block, 215-219, 217f-219f
202-203
thoracic paravertebral blockade, 189
fumctional and clinical anatomy, 201-202,
procedure for use, 74
201f,202f
stimulus threshold of nerve, factors influencing,
nerve stimulation-guided, 203-205, 203f, 204f
67-68, 68f
sciatic nerve block, 215-221
Perthes, Georg, 7
combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
Phenothiazines, for ophthalmic procedures, 107
guided, 219-221,219f-221f
Phrenic nerve, 144, 145-146, 148, 150
complications, 221
 Physicochemical properties of local anesthetics,
distribution of local anesthesia and
25-27,26t
analgesia, 215
Pia mater, 230
functional and clinical anatomy, 215, 216f
pKa (dissociation constant), of local anesthetics,
nerve stimulation-guided, 215-219, 217f-219f
26t, 27
Pencil-point spinal needles, 47, 47f
 Pleura, ultrasound appearance of, 82
Peribulbar block, 113, 113f
 Pneumothorax, as interpleural regional anesthesia
Perineurium, 12, 12f
complication, 184-185
 Periodontal ligament, 139
 Positioning. See Animal positioning
Peripheral nerve, anatomy of, 12, 12f
Posterior articular nerve, stifle, 209, 209f
 Peripheral nerve block. See also Nerve block;
Potassium (K+) channels, 28
specific blocks
Potential gradient, 68
history of, 6-7
Povidone-iodine, 21, 22-23, 22f
needle trauma, 15
Pravaz, Charles Gabriel, 4
nerve stimulator-guided, 85
 Pressure gauges, inline, 53, 53f
ultrasound-guided,77-86,82-85,83f,84f
Prilocaine
electrolocation combined with, 85-86
development of, 6
"im-plane" technique needle positioning,
properties of, 120t
83,83f
Procaine
nerve stimulator-guided compared, 85
chemical structure of, 26f
nerve visualization, 82-83
development of, 6
"out-of-plane" technique needle positioning,
onset and duration of action, 27t
83,84f
physicochemical properties of, 26t
visualization of local anesthetic
toxicity of, 35t
administration, 84-85, 84f
 Proparacaine, for topical anesthesia of eye, 115
Peripheral nerve stimulators, 65-75
Propofol
components, 68-72, 69f-72f
dosage for sedation, 19
constant current output, 70
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 199
controls, 71-72
Protein binding, of local anesthetics, 26-27, 26t
current adjustment, 71, 72f
 Proxymetacaine, for topical anesthesia of eye, 115
disconnection and malfunction indicators, 72
 Psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block, 201-208
display, 70, 70f, 71f
combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
 pulse width/frequency, 71-72
guided, 205-206, 206f
for epidural space location, 240f
anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy),
minimum stimulating current, 73-74, 73f
205,206f
needle navigation rules, 74-75
clinical tips, 206
 nerve stimulation-guided blocks
equipment, 205
brachial plexus block, 151-154
patient positioning, 205
femoral nerve block, 210-215, 210f-211f
step-by-step procedure, 205
284Index
Psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block (cort'd)
combined superior-inferior peribulbar, 112
complications, 207-208, 207t, 208f
inferior-temporal palpebral, 110-111, 111f
continuous, 206-207
lateral canthus, 112
catheter placement and securing, 206
 perimandibular, 111
drug choice and infusion rate, 206-207
splash block, 111, 111f
equipment, 206
uses for, 103
monitoring, 207
Rheobase, 67, 68f
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
Ropivacaine
202-203
described,30
functional and clinical anatomy, 201-202,
development of, 6
201f, 202f
for epidural analgesia, 249t, 250
nerve stimulation-guided, 203-205, 203f, 204f
for intravenous regional anesthesia, 263
equipment, 203
onset and duration of action, 27t
lateral pre-iliac technique, 204-205, 204f
for pelvic limb anesthesia, 201
standard technique, 203-204,203f, 204f
for pelvic limb intra-articular analgesia, 222
Pterygopalatine fossa, 122, 124, 125, 129, 130
physicochemical properties of, 26t
Pterygopalatine nerve
selective blockade by, 30
anatomy of, 105, 122f
for thoracic limb anesthesia, 145
block of, 129
toxicity of, 34, 35, 35t
Pumps
Rostral alar foramen, 104, 104f, 104t, 106
battery-powered, 63-64, 63f
 Rostral auricular nerves, 106
elastomeric, 60f, 61-63, 61f, 62f
Rostral inferior alveolar nerve block, 127t,
136-138,138f
Quinicke-type needles, 47, 47f
anatomic landmarks, 137
dinical tips, 137-138
Radial, median, musculocutaneous, and ulnar
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia, 137
(RUMM) nerve blocks, 159-161
equipment, 137
complications, 161f
functional and clinical anatomy, 136-137
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia, 159
technique, 137, 138f
equipment, 159
 RUMM. See Radial, median, musculocutaneous,
functional and clinical anatomy, 159
and ulnar (RUMM) nerve blocks
techmique, 159-161, 159f-161f
Rynd, Francis, 4
anatomic landmark, 159, 160f
patient positioning, 159, 159f
Saphenous nerve, 209, 209f
Radial nerve, 151t, 153t, 157, 159, 159f, 161
Scapulohumeral joint analgesia, 161-163, 163f
 Radial nerve paralysis, 155f
Schirmer tear test, 115
 Record keeping. 17
Schleich, Carl-Ludwig, 55
Regional anesthesia. See also specific procedures
Sciatic nerve block, 215-221
defined, 13
combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
history of, 3-8
guided, 219-221,219f-221f
pointers for successful service, 16-17
anatomic landmarks (ultrasound anatomy),
Respiratory depression, as epidural anesthesia
220, 220f,221, 221f
complication, 254
equipment, 219
Retrobulbar block (RBB)
 patient positioning, 219, 220
advantages, 112
technique (Campoy), 219-220, 220f
clinical tips, 112
technique (Shilo), 220-221, 221f
complications, 112-113
complications, 221
equipment, 110
distribution of local anesthesia and
injection location, 104f, 110, 111, 111f, 112
analgesia, 215
techniques, 110-112
fumctional and clinical anatomy, 215, 216f
Index285
nerve stimulation-guided, 215-219, 217f-219f
Spinal nerves, trunk anesthesia/analgesia
lateral approach techmique, 216-218, 217f
and,168
Spine, anatomy of, 227-231, 228f,229f
 transgluteal approach technique, 218-219,
epidural space, 230
218f
medulla spinalis and nerve roots, 230-231
Sedation, 19. See also specific procedures
meninges, 230
SENSe (Sequential Electrical Nerve Stimulation,
Splash block, 89, 90
"BBraun") technology, 71
oral cavity, 127t, 138
Sertirner, Freidrich Wilhelm, 3
orbit, 111, 111f
Shoulder joint analgesia, 161-163, 163f
Sprotte spinal needles, 47, 47f
"Size principle," 29
Steroids, for pelvic limb intra-articular
Skin disinfectant, 21-23, 22f
analgesia, 222
Skin preparation, 20-23
Stifle joint
clipping of puncture site, 20
mnervation of, 209, 209f
disinfection,21-23,22f
mtra-articular injection, 223-224, 223f
Skull
Stimulus threshold of a nerve, 67
canine,123f
 Subarachnoid injection, inadvertent as epidural
feline, 124f
 anesthesia complication, 253
 Soaker catheters. See Wound soaker catheters
Subarachnoid space, 229f, 230
Sodium bicarbonate, as local anesthetic
 Subdural injection, inadvertent as epidural
adjuvant, 32
 anesthesia complication, 253
Sodium (Nat) channels, 28, 28f
Subscapular nerve, 151t
Sodium metabisulfite, neurotoxicity and, 16
Sufentanil, for epidural analgesia, 247t
Sodium-potassium (Na+-K+) pump, 27, 66
 Supraorbital foramen, 109
Somatic blockade
Suprascapular nerve, 151t, 154
distribution of regional anesthesia and
Surgical gloves, 20
analgesia, 231-234
Surgical gowns, 20
age and physical condition, 233
Systemic toxicity, 14
baricity and specific gravity, 234, 234t
direction of needle bevel, 233
TAP block. See Transverse abdominis
fatty tissue in epidural space, 233
(TAP) block
position of animal, 233
Tear production, decreased, 115
site of injection, 232
 Temporal resolution, 79
size of venous and lymphatic plexus, 233
 Terminology, loco-regional anesthetic, 12-13
speed and pressure of injection, 232, 233f
Tetracaine
volume and concentration, 232
development of, 6
epidural anesthesia, 231-234
onset and duration of action, 27t
site of action of local anesthetics, 231, 231f
physicochemical properties of, 26t
Specific gravity, 234, 234f
for topical anesthesia of eye, 115
Spinal anesthesia, 251-252
toxicity of, 35t
anatomic landmarks, 251, 252f
Thoracic limb, regional anesthetic techniques of,
clinical tips, 252
141-163
defined, 227
anatomy, 142f, 143f
equipment, 251
brachial plexus block, 150-158
history of, 5-6
combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
injection volume, 251-252
guided, 155-157
patient positioning, 251
advantages, 155
step-by-step procedure, 251, 252f
clinical tips, 156-157
Spinal cord, 228-229, 228f, 229f
equipment, 155
Spinal needles, 46-48, 46f, 47f, 49f
technique,155-157,156f
286Index
Thoracic limb, regional anesthetic techniques of 
equipment, 159
(cont'd)
functional and clinical anatomy, 159
complications, 158t
technique, 159-161, 159f-161f
continuous peripheral nerve block (CPNB),
sensory and motor nerve distribution, 151t
157-158, 157f, 158f
Thoracic paravertebral blockade, 186-191, 187f
catheter placement and securing, 157-158,
equipment, 189
157f, 158f
overview, 186-189
drug choice and infusion rate, 158
technique, 189, 191
distribution of local anesthesia and
Thoracic paravertebral space, anatomy of, 187f
analgesia, 151t
Thoracotomy, analgesia for, 168, 170, 172-173
functional regional nerve anatomy, 150
Thorax. See Trunk, anesthesia of
nerve stimulation-guided (traditional
Topical anesthesia
approach), 151
described, 12-143
dinical tips, 152-154
eye, 115-116
equipment, 151
advantages/disadvantages, 115-116
technique, 151-154, 152f-154f, 153t, 154t
drugs used, 115
cervical paravertebral block, 145-149
Total ear canal ablation-bulla osteotomy in dogs,
complications, 148-149, 150f
94-96,94f
 distribution of local anesthesia and
Total spinal, 254
analgesia, 146
Tourniquet, 264-265
equipment, 146
application to thoracic limb, 266
functional and clinical anatomy, 145-146,
mjury from use of, 268-269, 270
146f
nonpneumatic, 264
 Lemke's modified approach, 147-148
pneumatic, 265, 266f,268
overview, 145
pressure, 270
technique, 146-147, 147f
release, 270
general considerations, 143-145
removal, 267,268
animal positioning, 143-144
Toxicity
choice of local anesthetics and adjuncts,
local anesthetics, 33-38, 33t,36t, 185
144-145
neurotoxicity, 16, 36, 253
contraindications/precautions, 144
systemic, 14, 185
indications, 144
in wound catheter use, 100
sedation/anesthesia requirements, 143
Transdermal lidocaine patches, 13
intra-articular elbow and shoulder joint
Transverse abdominis (TAP) block, 191-195
analgesia, 161-163
equipment, 194
distribution of local anesthesia and
ultrasound-guided technique, 194-195
analgesia, 162
use in animals, 193-195, 194f
drugs used, 161-162
use in people, 191, 192f, 193
equipment,162
Trigeminal nerve, 105-106, 105f, 122
indications, 161
Trochlear nerve, 105
purpose, 161
Trunk, anesthesia of, 167-195
techniques, 163, 163f
intercostal nerve blocks, 169-178
 intravenous regional anesthesia, 265-267,
anatomy and, 170, 170f, 171f, 172
265f-267f
complications, 177-178
overview, 141
distribution of local anesthesia, 173
radial, median, musculocutaneous, and ulnar
equipment, 173-174
(RUMM) nerve blocks, 159-161
indications, 173
complications, 161f
local anesthetics used, 173
distribution of local anesthesia and
overview, 169-173
analgesia, 159
technique, 174-176, 174f-177f
Index287
 interpleural regional anesthesia, 178-186
 physics and technology, 77-79
complications, 184-186
Doppler effect, 79, 79f
distribution of local anesthesia and analgesia,
resolution, 78-79
182-183
schematic of basic machine, 78f
equipment, 183
resolution, 78-79
ndications, 181-182
compound imaging, 78, 82
local anesthetics used, 182
contrast, 78
overview, 178-181
detail, 78
technique, 183-184, 184f
spectrum imaging. 78
overview, 167-168
temporal, 79
 regional nerve anatomy, 168-169, 169f
settings/controls, 79-80, 79f, 80f
thoracic paravertebral blockade, 186-191, 187f
depth, 79-80
equipment, 189
focus and zoom, 80
overview, 186-189
frequency, 79
technique, 189,191
gain, 80
transverse abdominis (TAP) block, 191-195
 persistence or temporal averaging, 79
equipment,194
power, 80
ultrasound-guided technique, 194-195
time gain compensation, 80, 80f
use in animals, 193-195, 194f
tissue appearance, 81-82
use in people, 191, 192f, 193
blood vessels, 81
Tuohy needles, 44, 47, 48-49, 48f, 52f
bone, 81
facial tissue, 81
Ulnar nerve, 151t, 153t, 157, 159, 160f,161
fat, 81
Ultrasound
muscles, 81
artifacts, 80-81
pleura and air, 82
acoustic shadowing, 81, 81f
Urine retention, 33
 anisotropy, 80-81
contact, 80
Vasoconstrictors, as local anesthetic
 combined ultrasonography/electrolocation-
adjuvant, 31-32
guided blocks
Vertebrae, 227
brachial plexus block, 155-157
Vertebral canal, 227-228, 230
femoral nerve block, 212-215, 213f, 214f
Von Anrep, Vasili Konstantinovich, 4
 psoas compartment (lumbar plexus) block,
205-206,206f
Wavelength, 77
sciatic nerve block, 219-221, 219f-221f
"Wet tap," 230
echogenic needles and, 51, 52f
Whitacre spinal needles, 47
equipment selection, 82
Wood, Alexander, 4
 guided peripheral nerve blockade, 82-85, 83f, 84f
Wound healing, local anesthetic effect
electrolocation combined with, 85-86
on, 36-37,100-102
"in-plane" technique needle positioning, 83, 83f
Wound soaker catheters, 57, 58f, 59, 59f, 60f,
 nerve stimulator-guided compared, 85
93-100
nerve visualization, 82-83
choice of local anesthetics, 97
"out-of-plane" technique needle positioning,
dinical tips for use, 99
83,84f
complications of use, 99-100
visualization of local anesthetic
described, 97-98, 98f
administration, 84-85, 84f
distribution of local anesthetics, 96-97, 96f
guided techniques, 7
equipment required for placement of, 98
 thoracic paravertebral blockade, 189, 191
human studies, 93-94
transverse abdominis (TAP) block, 194-195
placement technique, 98-99, 98f
history of, 7
veterinary studies, 94-96
288 Index
Wound soaker catheters (cont'd)
 Zygomatic and lacrimal nerve
amputation, 96, 96f
block, 110
feline oncologic surgery, 95f, 96
Zygomatic branch of facial nerve, 106
 total ear canal ablation-bulla osteotomy
Zygomatic nerve, 105-106, 105f
in dogs, 94-96, 94f
Zygomaticofacial nerve, 106, 106f
Zygomaticotemporal nerve,
Xylazine, for epidural analgesia, 247t
106, 106f
Keep up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
 on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALwAYS respect your e-mail
WILEY
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
exchange your e-mail address to any
outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
www.wiley.com/email