ESSENTIALS OF
Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Kirk N.Gelatt
SECOND EDITION
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
ESSENTIALS OF
Veterinary
Ophthalmology
SECONDEDITION
ESSENTIALS OF
Veterinary
Ophthalmology
SECOND EDITION
Edited by
Kirk N. Gelatt
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
Distinguished Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences 
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Kirk N. Gelatt, VMD, Dipl ACVO, is Distinguished Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology in the Depart-
ment of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
Dr. Gelatt is past President of the American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists and the American Society of
            
Bourgelatt International Award from the British Small Animal Veterinary Association, American Kennel Club
Career Achievement Award, and Mark L. Morris Lifetime Achievement Award.
02008 Blackwell Publishing
All rights reserved
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 500l4, USA
Orders: 1-800-862-6657
Offhce: 1-515-292-0140
Fax: 1-515-292-3348
Web site: www.blackwellprofessional.com
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
 Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specihc clients,
is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 0l923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license
by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The lee code for users of the Transactional Reporting
Service is ISBN-13: 978-0-7817-8559-4/2008.
First edition, O200l Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins
Second edition, @2008 Blackwell Publishing
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Essentials of veterinary ophthalmology / edited by Kirk N. Gelatt. - 2nd ed.
p.cm.
Rev. ed. of: Essentials of veterinary ophthalmology / Kirk N. Gelatt. @2000
ISBN 978-0-7817-8559-4 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary ophthalmology-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Gelatt, Kirk N. II. Gelatt, Kirk N. Essentials of
veterinary ophthalmology
[DNLM: 1. Eye Diseases-veterinary-Handbooks. SF 891 E78 2008]
SF891.G46 2008
636.089'77-dc22
2007039588
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientihc research, understanding, and discussion only
and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specihc method, diagnosis,
or treatment by practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specihically disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of ftmess for a particular purpose. In view of
ongoing research, equipment modifcations, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant low of
information relatingto the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the
information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other
siapeay sueand pue suuem pappe io pue aesn jo uoeui o sunsu au ui sueu Aue su
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Websiteis referred to in this
work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher
endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further,
readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements
for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
The last digit is the print number:987654321
CONTENTS
Preface
ix
Section 2: Diseases and Surgery of the
Acknowledgments
Xi
Nasolacrimal System (Bruce H. Grahn and
Lynne 5. Sandmeyer)
89
Chapter 1
Chapter 5
Ophthalmic Examination and
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Diagnostics
3
Conjunctiva and Nictitating Membrane
Section 1: The Eye Examination and
Diagnostic Procedures (Franck J. Ollivier,
(Diane V. H. Hendrix)
97
Caryn E. Plummer, and Kathleen P.
Barrie)
Chapter 6
3
Section 2: Ocular Imaging (Maria E.
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Kallberg)
22
Cornea and Sclera (Brian C. Gilger with
Section 3: Diagnostic Ultrasonography
contributions by Franck J. Ollivier and
(Ursula M. Dietrich)
26
Ellison Bentley)
119
Section 4: Electrodiagnostic Evaluation of
Vision (Bjorn Ekesten)
29
Chapter 7
Chapter 2
The Canine Glaucomas (Kirk N. Gelatt,
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Dennis E. Brooks, and Maria E.
Orbit (Bernhard M. Spiess)
Kallberg)
155
35
Chapter 3
Chapter 8
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Eyelid (Frans C. Stades and Kirk N.
Anterior Uvea (Diane V. H.
Gelatt)
53
Hendrix)
189
Chapter -
Chapter 9
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Tear and Nasolacrimal Systems
79
Lens
217
Section 1: Diseases and Surgery of the
Section 1: Diseases of the Canine Lens and
Lacrimal Secretory System (Elizabeth A.
Cataract Formation (Michael G. Davidson
Giuliano and Cecil P. Moore)
79
and Susan R. Nelms)
217
vi/CONTENTS
Section 2: Surgery of the Canine Lens
Chapter 16
(David A. Wilkie and Carmen M. H.
Ocular Manifestations of Systemic
Colitz)
234
Disease (Cheryl L. Cullen and
Aubrey A. Webb)
463
Chapter 10
Section 1: The Dog
463
Diseases and Surgery of the Canine
Section 2: The Cat
500
Posterior Segment
245
Section 3:TheHorse
525
Section 1: Diseases and Surgery of the
Section 4: Food Animals
535
Canine Vitreous (Michael H. Boeve and
Frans C. Stades)
245
Section 2: Diseases of the Canine Ocular
Appendix A: Adrenergics in Veterinary
Fundus (Kristina Narfstrom and Simon
Ophthalmology
551
Petersen-Jones)
251
Section 3: Surgery of the Canine Posterior
Appendix B: Artificial Tear
Segment (Samuel J. Vainisi, Joseph C.
Substitutes for Veterinary
Wolfer, and Patricia J. Smith)
281
Ophthalmology
553
Section 4: Diseases and Surgery of the
Canine Optic Nerve (Dennis E.
Appendix C: Topical and Local
Brooks)
284
Anesthetics for Veterinary
Ophthalmology
555
Chapter 1l
Appendix D: Antibiotics for Veterinary
Feline Ophthalmology (Jean Stiles and
Ophthalmology
557
Wendy M. Townsend)
293
Appendix E: Antiviral Drugs for
Chapter 12
Veterinary Ophthalmology (to Treat
FHV-1 Ocular Infections)
559
Equine Ophthalmology (Dennis E.
Brooks and Andrew G.
Appendix F: Antifungals for Veterinary
Matthews)
331
Ophthalmology
561
Chapter 13
Appendix G: Carbonic Anhydrase
Inhibitors (CAl) for the Dog
563
Food and Fiber-Producing Animal
Ophthalmology (Wendy M.
Appendix H: Corticosteroids in
Townsend)
379
Veterinary Ophthalmology
565
Chapter 14
Appendix I: Nonsteroidal Anti-
Laboratory and Exotic Animal
inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) in
Veterinary Ophthalmology
Ophthalmology (from Laboratory
567
Animal Ophthalmology by David L.
Williams, and Exotic Anima!
Appendix J: Hyperosmotics for
Ophthalmology by Thomas J.
Veterinary Ophthalmology
569
Kern)
419
Appendix K: Miotics in the Dog and
Cat
571
Chapter 15
Comparative Neuro-Ophthalmology
Appendix L: Available Mydriatics or
(Merav H. Shamir and Ron
Pupil Dilating Agents in Veterinary
Ofri)
445
Ophthalmology
573
CONTENTS/V11
Appendix M: Topical Prostaglandins for
Appendix Q: Breed-Related Eye Disease
Veterinary Ophthalmology
in the Horse
591
(Information is for Dog Only)
577
Appendix R: Inherited Eye Diseases in
Appendix N: Other Ophthalmic
Food Animals
593
Drugs
579
Glossary
595
Appendix O: Inherited Eye Diseases in
the Dog
581
Index
601
 Appendix P: Inherited Eye Diseases in
the Cat
589
PREFACE
The fourth edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology, released in March 2007, serves as
the eminent clinical and visual science text and reference in the world in this feld
and has been referred to as the "gold standard" and the "blue bible." The previous
 three editions (published in 1981, 1991, and 1999) of Veterinary Ophthalmology had
both blue and gold covers. The fourth edition was expanded from 1,5o0 pages to
1,800 pages and divided into two volumes to accommodate the continued expansion
in knowledge and progression of this discipline.
The starting information base essential for a veterinary medical student and most
practitioners is addressed in Essentials of Veterinary Ophthalmology. In this clinical
reference the most frequently encountered eye diseases of domestic animals are pre-
sented along with their treatment. This convenient pocket book also provides the
critical information for a busy general, small animal, or equine practitioner seeking
rapid advice for a patient waiting in the examination room or in the stall. When there
is more time, and if the reader seeks additional information on an ophthalmic
consulted
This second edition of the Essentials of Veterinary Ophthalmology continues to
focus on presenting information for introductory veterinary ophthalmology courses.
 It also contains additional information presented in advanced small animal and equine
ophthalmology elective courses in many veterinary medical colleges, as well as serving
general, small animal, and equine practitioners as their primary veterinary ophthal-
mology reference. The primary objective of this second edition remains the diagnosis
of the most common eye diseases and their clinical management. Additional details
on the pathogenesis, pathology, and other aspects of these diseases are available from
Veterinary Ophthalmology or other texts.
Only the clinical relevant chapters from the fourth edition have been distilled into
this Essentials. A few details on the anatomy and physiology for each chapter have
been incorporated to assist in the diagnosis, medical therapy and surgery, and clinical
management of these patients. As ophthalmic diseases can easily be photographed
and are very educational, an increased number of illustrations in this pocket reference
are in color, facilitating transfer of this information to the clinical patient. Algorithms
have been included when possible to speed the clinical problem-solving process. As
this is a clinical companion text for quick consultations, only selected recent references
are included; for the complete list of references (often in the hundreds) on any subject
the reader can consult the fourth edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology (listed as a
 i a r   s p (  r ai s
they represent the "silver bullets" or vital information on the more frequently encoun-
tered ophthalmic diseases.
ix
X/PREFACE
Therapeutic agents, recommended dosages, and possible side effects are contained
important inherited eye conditions of the dog, cat, horse, and food animals are also
included in the appendices. Ophthalmology has a unique vocabulary, and this often
impedes the teaching of veterinary ophthalmology. As a result, a brief glossary is
a u ana iou psn sprm oo a sun pn
ophthalmology, often with some adaptation to animals.
a yn oi p uu ad on sam   ar ar
to learn new methods to facilitate the instruction of veterinary ophthalmology. The
complete benefits of this second edition of the Essentials are achieved when this text
is carried and consulted in the clinical environment—either in the clinical service or
hospital, or in the practice vehicle.
If you have suggestions to improve the Essentials, by all means, please feel free to
contact me with your comments. As learning for veterinarians is a life- and career-long
process, the Essentials may be your first contact with veterinary ophthalmology. I
hope you benefit and build from this essential foundation of clinical veterinary
ophthalmology.
Kirk N. Gelatt
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Selected chapters from the fourth edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology (2007) were
used in the preparation of chapters for the second edition of the Essentials. These
chapters and their authors include the following:
Chapter 9: Ophthalmic Examination and Diagnostics:
 Part l: The Eye Examination and Diagnostic Procedures (Franck J. Ollivier, Caryn
E. Plummer, and Kathleen P. Barrie)
Part 2: Ocular Imaging (Maria E. Kallberg)
Part 3: Diagnostic Ultrasonography (Ursula M. Dietrich)
Part 4: Electrodiagnostic Evaluation of Vision (Bjorn Ekesten)
Chapter 10: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Orbit (Bernhard M. Spiess)
Chapter ll: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Eyelid (Frans C. Stades and Kirk N.
Gelatt)
Chapter 12: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Nasolacrimal System (Bruce H. Grahn
and Lynne S. Sandmeyer)
Chapter 13: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Lacrimal Secretory System (Elizabeth
A. Giuliano and Cecil P. Moore)
Chapter 14: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Conjunctiva and Nictitating Mem-
brane (Diane V. H. Hendrix)
Chapter l5: Diseases of the Canine Cornea and Sclera (Brian C. Gilger with special
contributions by Franck J. Ollivier and Ellison Bentley)
Chapter l6: The Canine Glaucomas (Kirk N. Gelatt, Dennis E. Brooks, and Maria E
Kallberg)
Chapter 17: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Anterior Uvea (Diane V. H.
Hendrix)
Chapter 18: Diseases of the Canine Lens and Cataract Formation (Michael G. Davidson
and Susan R. Nelms)
Chapter 19: Surgery of the Lens (David A. Wilkie and Carmen M. H. Colitz)
Chapter 20: Diseases and Surgery of the Canine Vitreous (Michael H. Boeve and Frans
C. Stades)
 Chapter 2l: Diseases of the Canine Ocular Fundus (Kristina Narfstrom and Simon
Petersen-Jones)
Chapter 22: Surgery of the Canine Posterior Segment (Samuel J. Vainisi, Joseph C
Wolfer, and Patricia J. Smith)
Chapter 23: Diseases of the Canine Optic Nerve (Dennis E. Brooks)
Chapter 24: Feline Ophthalmology (Jean Stiles and Wendy M. Townsend)
Chapter 25: Equine Ophthalmology (Dennis E. Brooks and Andrew G. Matthews)
Chapter 26: Food and Fiber-Producing Animal Ophthalmology (Wendy M.
Townsend)
xi
xii / ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Chapter 27: Laboratory Animal Ophthalmology (David L. Williams)
Chapter 28: Exotic Animal Ophthalmology (Thomas J. Kern)
Chapter 29: Comparative Neuro-ophthalmology (Merav H. Shamir and Ron Ofri)
Chapter 30: Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease (Cheryl L. Cullen and Aubrey
A.Webb)
ESSENTIALS OF
Veterinary
Ophthalmology
SECOND EDITION
Chapter 1
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION AND
DIAGNOSTICS
Section l: Franck J. Ollivier, Caryn E. Plummer, and Kathleen P. Barrie
Section 2: Maria E. Kallberg
Section 3: Ursula M. Dietrich
Section 4: Bjorm Ekesten
SECTION 1: THE EYE
EXAMINATION AND
Box 1.1.1. General Health Core
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Questions for Ophthalmic Patients
Because most ocular structures can be visu-
General vaccination and medical history
 Other animals in the home
alized either directly or indirectly, a thor-
 Any recent change in weight, eating habits, person-
ough ophthalmic examination can provide a
ality, etc.
rapid and accurate diagnosis for many oph-
 Past and current systemic and topical medications
thalmic diseases. Furthermore, the eye lends
itself to numerous simple and efficient diag-
nostic procedures, many of which can be
performed during a routine examination.
 The primary complaints from the owners
This chapter describes examination techniques,
are usually among the following: ocular dis-
diagnostic procedures, and modalities available
charge, ocular color changes, pain, an
to veterinarians.
opacity, pupillary changes, decreased vision
or blindness, and an enlargement of the eye.
 Obvious historical concerns include character-
Anamensis/History
ization, onset, progression, and duration of the
primary ocular complaint. The role of concur-
When combined with a veterinarian's observa-
rent diseases or secondary complaints should
tions, a thorough history will support and,
not be underestimated.
often, determine the appropriate course
Specific questions about the animal's vision
action. Therefore the general medical history
should be directed to the owners to answer,
should not be minimized, but it does not need
and the veterinarian must be cautious to avoid
to be exhaustive (Box l.l.1)
"leading" his or her clients (Box l.1.2)
3
4 / EsSENTIALS OF VetERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
Box 1.1.2. Questions That Focus
Box 1.1.3. Recommended Drugs
on Patients with Ophthalmic
and Dosages for Sedation of
Disease(s) and Visual Problems
Ophthalmic Patients
Vision during dark and light illuminations:
Cats: Ketamine, 1 to 5 mg/kg IV, and Valium, 0.22
Visual problems at night (nyctalopia) may indi-
to 0.44 mg/kg Iv
cate rod involvement of the retina.
Dogs: Ketamine, 5.5 mg/kg IV. and Valium
Daytime visual  problems  (hemeralopia)  may
signal cone photoreceptor disease
0.28 mg/kg IV: or tiletamine/zolazepam, 6.6 to
9.9 mg/kg: or acepromazine, 0.025 to 0.200 mg/
Vision with moving and stationary objects
kg Iv, IM, or SC: and torbugesic, 0.2 to 0.4 mg/
 Diseases of the central retina rmay produce loss
kg IV. IM. or SC. for prolonged sedation
of central vision (stationary objects).
Acepromazine causes nictitans protrusion, and
Diseases of the peripheral retina may cause loss
torbugesic induces miosis
of peripheral vision (moving objects)
Horse: Xylazine (0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg IV) is usually
Client's impressions of overt ophthalmic clinical
adequate for most examinations.
abnormality (duration, sequence and type of signs.
For the more invasive diagnostic tests use a
etc.):
higher dose of xyazine (1.1 mg/kg Iv) or even
 Does the patient sleep a lot?
detomidine, 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV or IM.
Can the animal negotiate stairs?
Torbugesic, 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg IV. may be
Current systemic and topical medications.
added for painful procedures such as cormeal
scrapings or conjunctival biopsies.
Rabbits: Xylazine, 2 to 5 mg/kg IM
Nonhuman primates: Ketamine, 5 to 40 mg/kg
Initial Examination
IM.
A complete ophthalmic examination starts
Horses may be examined in stocks or stalls,
with a thorough history of the patient's
 cattle in chutes or stanchions, and other large
health status, medical conditions, and hus-
animals with appropriate restraint that is safe
bandry, followed by examination of the ani-
for both animal and examiner; in some cases.
mal's  attitude and
demeanor, overall
 this means general anesthesia.
symmetry and body condition, and ability to
navigate in an unfamiliar environment. The
initial portion of the ophthalmic examination
Restraint
should be performed from a distance. This may
provide some insight into the patient's general
The best method of restraint for any given
health and visual acuity.
situation varies with the species involved,
The basic equipment necessary to perform
the individual's temperament, and the
a proper ocular examination includes
desired effect. Generally, however, the best
bright, focal light source (a Finoff transillu-
restraint for the ophthalmic examination is
minator is ideal), Schirmer tear test strips,
the least amount possible. Methods of
a variety of ocular stains, a topical anes-
restraint include manual, mechanical, and
 thetic, a mydriatic agent, eye wash, sterile
chemical (Box l.1.3). The health of the animal,
culture swabs, forceps, surgical blades, glass
extent and duration of the ophthalmic examina-
slides, cannulas for nasolacrimal duct irriga-
tion, and needs of the client must be considered
tions, and some form of ophthalmoscope for
before a method is chosen, and the client should
examination of the fundus.
be informed of any potential risk, especially if
The variety of animals that present for ocular
sedation or general anesthesia is necessary for
examination necessitates a variety of examina-
completion of the ocular examination.
tion facilities to accommodate the different
Most dogs and cats only require manual
animal species. Small animals can usually be
restraint for ophthalmic examinations. Frac-
examined on a table in a closed room; large
tious animals, however, may require additional
animals require more specialized facilities.
restraint. Muzzles can be employed with aggres-
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSTICS/5
sive or fearful dogs, but fractious cats are
examine their eyes, especially if they are afflicted
more diffcult to restrain (towels or cat bags
with a painful disease process or if the structural
recommended)
integrity of the globe (usually the cornea) is
Chemical restraint greatly facilitates a com-
compromised. There are three main points at
plete ophthalmic examination of the horse.
which the auriculopalpebral or palpebral nerves
Xylazine, 0.3-0.4 mg/kg intravenously,
1S
can be blocked in the horse (Fig. 1.1.1): (1) The
usually adequate for examination. If more inva-
first is just anterior to the base of the ear where
sive diagnostic or treatment procedures are to
the auriculopalpebral nerve emerges from the
be performed, such as corneal scrapings or con-
parotid salivary gland and becomes subcutane-
 junctival biopsies or placement of a subpalpe-
ous on the lateral aspect of the coronoid process;
bral lavage system, most animals will require
(2) just lateral to the highest point of the caudal
the more potent detomidine with or without
zygomatic arch where the palpebral nerve can
the addition of butorphanol, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg
 a   a rn , a
intravenously. Difficult horses should be
border of the bone; and (3) where the palpebral
restrained in stocks, and a twitch may be used
nerve lies on the zygomatic arch caudal to the
in conjunction with chemical restraint during
bony process of the frontal bone.
the examination.
Akinesia may be achieved in a similar fashion
Dairy cattle can usually be adequately
among cattle. The auriculopalpebral nerve can
restrained in a stanchion, with the head pulled
sometimes be palpated as it passes over a pal-
laterally by an assistant using a nose lead. Beef
pable notch in the zygomatic arch at the level
cattle may be more difficult to restrain, and
of the temporomandibular joint. If the nerve
be necessary. Sheep and goats can usually be
restrained manually with the help of an assis-
tant. Goats can be examined standing, and
sheep can be examined seated on their rumps
to avoid excessive movements. Llamas and
alpacas may need to be supported in a chute
or a sling. Rodents, rabbits, birds, and small
exotics can usually be restrained manually.
Nonhuman primates can be similarly restrained
in special devices or seats, and ketamine, 5-
40 mg/kg intramuscularly, may be used for
additional restraint.
Akinesia
The orbicularis oculi muscle closes the
eyelids and, thus, can impair or even prevent
ocular examination, especially in large
animals. Akinesia of this muscle is routine
in the horse, occasionally required in cattle,
but only rarely performed in small animals.
Eyelid akinesia may be performed for routine
eye examination,
 diagnostic
procedures
Fig. I.1.l. The auriculopalpebral nerve block in a
(e.g., corneal cytology, electroretinography
horse facilitates examination of the eye and is crucial
[ERG]), treatments (e.g., subconjunctival
when the cornea is fragile and near perforation. These
injections), and to augment anesthesia
fgures illustrate the proximal placement of the block
during surgery. Most horses will require an
with the needle, while the arrows mark alternative
auriculopalpebral block in order to fully
locations that will elicit a similar response.
6 / ESSENTIALS OF VetERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
cannot be palpated, anesthetic may be injected
tions must precede others to avoid inter-
subcutaneously along the zygomatic arch, start-
ference or complications. lf indications
ing at the supraorbital process and continuing
for microbiological sampling are present,
approximately 3.75 cm caudally.
samples are taken on moistened sterile
In the dog, the auriculopalpebral nerve can
swabs before instillation of any diagnostic
be found and blocked along the most lateral
drugs (stains, mydriatics, local anesthetics),
part of the zygomatic arch, at the midpoint of
as they contain preservatives that may
the caudal third of the bone. Alternatively, ter-
prevent the bacterial growth. If a keratocon-
minal palpebral nerve fibers may be blocked as
junctivitis sicca is suspected to be the primary
they pass over the orbital rim.
cause of the corneal condition, the Schirmer
tear test can also be indicated and should also
be early in the ophthalmic examination: it must
Regionai Anesthesia/Anaigesia
be performed before excessive ocular manipu-
lation and instillation of any ophthalmic solu-
Sensation to the eyelids is provided by the oph-
thalmic and maxillary divisions of the trigemi-
tions or ointments. The pupillary light reflexes
nal nerve (i.e., cranial nerve V). In the horse,
should be evaluated before mydriatics or miotics
are used. Similarly, measurement of intraocular
cow, and dog, the frontal nerve innervates most
of the central upper lid, the lacrimal nerve
pressure (IOP) should precede instillation of
mydriatics. The eye lends itself to examination
innervates the lateral upper lid, the zygomatic
from the anterior (superficial) structures to the
nerve innervates most of the lateral lower lid,
posterior (deep) tissues, examining lids, orbital
and the infratrochlear nerve innervates the
structures, conjunctiva and nictitating mem-
medial canthus. Anesthesia of these nerves is
brane, cornea, and sclera, anterior chamber and
occasionally necessary for eyelid and conjunc-
iris, lens, vitreous, and retina. An orderly, well-
tival biopsies and for subpalpebral lavage place-
planned examination saves time and facilitates
ment, especially in the horse (Fig. 1.1.2)
both the diagnosis and treatment of ocular
disease.
A bright and focal source of light such as a
Ophthalmic Examination
Finoff transilluminator will be directed at
The eye examination must be complete,
various angles, using direct illumination and
retroillumination techniques, and may be
organized, and conducted in a timely
used in conjunction with magnification to
manner. In addition certain tests or observa-
examine the eye. Additional equipment needed
to perform a more accurate examination of
the adnexa and anterior segment (slit-lamp
biomicroscope) or the posterior segment (direct
and indirect ophthalmoscope) is described
later.
Distance Examination and
Assessment of the Vision
The ophthalmic examination begins with an
indirect assessment of vision and comfort, can
be performed in an adequate illumination,
Fig. 1.1.2. The supraorbital nerve block is
prior to tranquilization and/or nerve blocks if
performed at the level of the supraorbital foramen
necessary for the following steps of the exami-
(directly within the foramen if possible, in the region
nation. How does the animal navigate in an
if not) and is useful for anesthesia of the upper
unfamiliar environment? Does it rub or paw at
eyelid.
its eyes?
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/ 7
The distance evaluation will assess the size
The palpebral reflex or blink reflex should
(i.e.，
any1
microphthalmia/macrophthalmia,
be tested in animals that fail to blink com-
buphthalmia/phthisis bulbi) and the position of
pletely. The medial or lateral canthus (or
the globe (i.e., any enophthalmos/exophthal-
both) is gently touched, which normally will
mos), as well as the direction of the globes
stimulate a blink reflex. If cranial nerves V
(i.e, any strabismus) and their movement (i.e.,
(afferent way, i.e., trigeminal nerve) or VII
any nystagmus). Any ocular discharge, ptosis,
(efferent way, i.e., facial nerve) are not func-
swelling. or muscle atrophy should also be
tioning or the eyelids are physically unable to
noted. It is important to examine each eye suc-
close (e.g., buphthalmia), the animal may not
cessively and to assess ocular and adnexal
blink completely.
structures for symmetry. Evaluation of ocular
The pupils should be observed for asym-
      
metry (i.e., anisocoria) in both light and dark
animal's head from side to side. Normal sacca-
settings. The examiner may more accurately
dic and optokinetic movements are noted as
assess pupil asymmetry by looking through
 the eyes move back and forth in synchronicity.
a direct ophthalmoscope from a distance of
with the fast phase occurring in the direction
 35 feet. The ophthalmoscope is set at zero or
of head movement. Abnormalities may suggest
a positive diopter setting, and the examiner
extraocular muscle, nerve, orbital, or central-
observes the patient's pupils while directing the
nervous-system disease.
light source toward the bridge of the patient's
Vision, which requires functioning
of
nose. The pupillary light reflex (PLR) can
both the central and peripheral ophthalmic
then be tested using a focal light source. This
systems, may be roughly assessed with a
subcortical reflex requires functioning of the
menace test. The menace test evaluates the
retina, cranial nerves I1 (afferent way, i.e.,
optic nerve (afferent way, i.e., cranial nerve
optic nerve) and 111 (efferent way, i.e., para-
Il) and the facial and abducens nerve (effer-
sympathetic fibers along the oculomotor
ent way, i.e., cranial nerves V1l and V1). It's
nerve), midbrain, and iris sphincter muscle,
performed by making a menacing gesture with
which explains why cortically blind animals
the hand toward the eye, taking care not to
can have a normal PLR. Both direct and con-
touch the vibrissae or cause excessive air cur-
sensual (i.e., constriction of the contralateral
rents, which may induce a false-positive result.
pupil) PLRs should be tested. Because all optic 
 If the animal can see, it should blink or move
nerve fibers decussate at the optic chiasm in
its head away from the stimulus. The menace
nonmammalian vertebrates, these animals are
response is a cortical reflex that is acquired and
not expected to have a true consensual PLR. The
therefore some normal young animals, particu-
"swinging flashlight" technique is a modifica-
larly puppies, kittens, and foals, may not dem-
tion of the PLR test. A focal light source is
onstrate a positive menace response. The
passed repeatedly from one eye to the other,
response to a menace is also inconsistent in
which normally stimulates the pupil under
birds. If a patient does not cooperate for the
direct illumination to constrict slightly more
menace test, which is a problem common in
than the contralateral pupil. A unilateral lesion
the cat, a cotton ball may be thrown across the
of the retina or a prechiasmal optic nerve will
animal's line of sight. Multiple attempts may be
often result in a pupil that constricts when the
required to attract the animal's attention,
fellow eye is illuminated but that, subsequently,.
however, which may desensitize the animal to
dilates when illuminated directly.
the stimulus.
The “dazzle" reflex is a subcortical reflex
The visual placing can also be performed in
that requires functioning of the retina and
small animals to test motor function and mental
cranial nerves I1 (afferent way, i.e., optic
status. The animal is held in space and
nerve) and Vll (efferent way, i.e., facial
supported under the chest and head while
nerve). A bright, focal light source must be
approaching a flat surface such as a table. The
used, particularly in animals with lesions
normal response is to extend and raise the legs
obstructing the visual axis. Blinking or squint-
in anticipation of standing on the surface.
ing represents a normal response.
8/ EsSEnTIALS OF VEtERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
In animals suspected of blindness, an
phy, biopsy, and orbitotomy. Eyelids should
obstacle course or "maze test" may be lsed
then be examined for position, movement,
to determine clinical vision. Gray foam cylin-
and conformation as well as lid dermato-
ders are used to create a maze in the examina-
logic lesions. The eyelids should be manu-
tion room through which the patient must
ally everted to examine the conjunctival
navigate. In the absence of such equipment,
surfaces as well as the external surfaces and
chairs, tables, and garbage cans will suffice. The
eyelid margins for evidence of abnormal eye-
test should be performed in both light and dim
lashes or hair (trichiasis, distichiasis, ectopic
illuminations, thereby allowing the animal time
ciliae), foreign bodies, tumors, or infections.
to adjust to the darkness, and obstacles may be
The eyelids differ between species to a consid-
readjusted to avoid memorization.
erable extent. The eyelids normally follow the
curvature of the cornea, with the Meibomian
gland openings exposed and the palpebral con-
Tear Tests and Microbiological
junctiva unexposed. Many species are suscep-
Sampling
tible to eyelid and eyelash abnormalities. If the
eyelid margin is rolled either outward (i.e.,
At this point, or even before some of the afore-
ectropion) or inward (i.e., entropion), discom-
mentioned tests, the Schirmer tear test should
fort, epiphora, conjunctivitis, and even keratitis
d, a e ia ra,   a
may develop.
mic Diagnostic Procedures" section). Excessive
The nictitating membrane S
should
1 be
manipulation of the eye and orbit before tear
observed for the conjunctival appearance on
testing may prematurely stimulate reflex tearing.
the palpebral (outer) and bulbar (inner)
which could falsely elevate the tear test values
surfaces, its protrusion, any abnormal masses
as well as the instillation of any diagnostic eye
(tumors, granulomas, proptosis of the nictitat-
drops (stains, mydriatics, local anesthetics). If
ing membrane gland), foreign bodies, or ever-
a microbiological culture is indicated for any
sion of the cartilage. Manual retropulsion of the
conjunctival and/or corneal condition, it should
globe will cause protrusion of the nictitating
be performed before the Schirmer test and
membrane to facilitate examination of the ante-
before the instillation of any diagnostic eye
rior surface of the membrane and the leading
drops.
edge that is usually pigmented. Topical tetra-
Adnexa and anterior segment examination is
caine or proparacaine is instilled, and the
performed before pupil dilation. The orbit itself
nictitating membrane is protracted with Van
is then evaluated by observation, palpation of
Graefe's forceps (Fig. 1.1.3)
the bony orbital rim, retropulsion of the globe
The nasolacrimal system is then assessed
through a closed eyelid, and manipulation of
 and any excessive tearing or hypofunction of
the mandible. As the coronoid process of the
the tear secretion is noted. The excessive
mandible ramus impinges on the lateral orbit,
tearing can be due to a partial or complete
jaw manipulation may reveal pain or resistance
obstruction of the drainage apparatus or an
associated with orbital infections, neoplasia,
increased lacrimation due to ocular irrita-
and trauma. In such instances, the roof of the
tion and uveitis. The drainage apparatus is
mouth should be examined for any abnormali-
evaluated by noticing the presence of abnormal
ties, with particular focus on the soft palate
discharge (i.e., epiphora, crusty, mucoid or
caudal to the last upper molar on the affected
 mucopurulent discharge) and by examining the
side. The eyeball itself is observed for any
dorsal and ventral lacrimal puncta.
change in symmetry, size, position, direction,
Patency of this apparatus is tested by
and movements.
placing fluorescein dye in each eye and then
 Diagnostic procedures for the orbit/globe
observing its passage at the nares. If an
may include survey radiography, orbital
obstruction of the nasolacrimal drainage
arteriography and venography, special radio-
apparatus is suspected, a nasolacrimal flush
graphic contrast procedures (i.e., air and
can be performed to determine the type and
radiopaque materials), B-scan ultrasonogra-
degree of obstruction. In cases of infection,
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/9
is a small, irregular nodule located in the medial
canthus, is larger in ungulates than in carni-
vores, and it may also be a common site of
squamous cell carcinoma. Additional tests for
conjunctival diseases include culture, cytology,
biopsy, immunofluorescent antibody (IFA)
tests, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
tests (mainly for detection of feline herpesvi-
rus). Scrapings for IFA tests should be obtained
before administration of fluorescein dye,
because the(
dye will yield false-positive
results.
The cornea is then examined. Most mam-
malian corneas are oval, with a horizontal
diameter larger than the vertical diameter.
The normal cornea is an avascular, nonpig-
mented, nonkeratinized, transparent smooth,
Fig. I.1.3. Examination of the bulbar surface of the
shining, and flat structure. The presence of
nictitating membrane is performed after instillation of
surface irregularities (growth or defects),
a topical anesthetic and using thumb forceps (Von
blood vessels, pigment, or other opacities
Graele's forceps).
indicates disease. Corneal integrity is most
readily evaluated with fluorescein dye.
Corneal sensation may be demonstrated by
obstruction, or both, debris may be collected
touching the cornea gently with a thin wisp of
for culture and cytology. Contrast radiography
cotton while holding open the eyelids. When
(i.e., dacryocystorhinography) may also be
  n   a  
useful in cases of chronic obstruction or sus-
response, the normal corneal reflex is retraction
pected neoplasia.
of the globe, with protraction of the nictitating
The quality and quantity of the tear secretion
membrane. This corneal reflex tests cranial
may be indirectly assessed by the observation
nerves V (afferent way, i.e., trigeminal nerve)
of the normal preocular tear film (PTF): (1)
and VI and VlI (efferent way, i.e., abducens and
aqueous tear deficiencies may be identified via
facial nerves)
the Schirmer tear test, (2) mucin deficiencies
o,   os d
by tear breakup times; and (3) lipid-based dis-
mic Diagnostic Procedures" section) may be
orders are produced primarily by the meibo-
useful in characterizing the microscopic details
mian glands, and deficiencies may occur with
and exact depth of corneal lesions. Specular
inflammations and congenital defects of the
microscopy may elucidate the cellular abnor-
eyelid margins. An additional test used to detect
malities and densities of the corneal endothe-
tear film abnormalities is the rose Bengal dye
lium. Additional tests for corneal disease
or Lissamine green dye test (see the section
include culture, cytology, Schirmer tear test,
"External Ophthalmic Stains"), which primarily
 and rose Bengal/Lyssamine green stains.
evaluates the integrity of the mucin layer of the
The anterior chamber is observed for its
preocular tear flm.
transparency and its depth. The anterior
The palpebral, bulbar, and nictitating mem-
chamber depth shows more variation in
brane conjunctiva should be examined for evi-
exotic species than in domestic animals,
dence of inflammation (hyperemia, chemosis,
which is partly a reflection of the size and
symblepharon), trauma, foreign bodies, aber-
shape of the lens. A slit beam, as may be found
rant cilia (palpebral surface), petechiae, lym-
 on many direct ophthalmoscopes, pen lights,
phoid follicles, and abnormal growths (tumors).
and slit-lamp biomicroscopes, may be useful in
The conjunctiva can be used to assess the pres-
evaluating the depth of the anterior chamber.
ence of icterus or anemia. The caruncle, which
The aqueous humor of the anterior chamber
I0/EssentIAlS OF VeteRinARY OpHthAlmOLOGY
 should be transparent, and aqueous flare can
mented epithelium of the iris (i.e., granula
be detected with a slit beam. In a dark room, a
iridica or corpora nigra), which protrude
slit or tiny circular beam is focused on the
along the dorsal and ventral pupillary
 cornea and viewed from an angle perpendicular
margins. Further diagnostic procedures in-
to the beam. Normal aqueous humor (l0-
clude
transillumination,  retroillumination,
50 mg/l dL protein) is clear; however, with
gonioscopy, ultrasonography, brush cytology.
uveal inflammation aqueous becomes cloudy
 and biopsy.
(protein content can reach 5-7 g/dL, some-
times termed "plasmoid aqueous"). Under these
Intraocuiar Pressure Measurement
conditions, both protein and cells suspended
and Pupil Dilation
in the aqueous humor reflect the focused beam.
thus creating the “Tyndall effect."
Before administration of mydriatics, all animals
If the anterior chamber cannot be visual
presented for ophthalmic examination should
ized because of corneal opacification, B-scan
have the IOP evaluated by instrumental tonom-
ultrasonography may prove to be useful for
etry. IOP is usually measured with the
evaluating chamber depth and consistency.
TonoPen tonometer; recently the Rebound
Aqueous paracentesis, which is described in
tonometer has also been reported in veteri-
the "Ophthalmic Diagnostic Procedures"
nary ophthalmology.
section, may provide useful information via
In the absence of glaucoma, pupils are
culture, serology, or cytology. Laser cell fluo-
chemically dilated. Tropicamide (1%) is pre-
rophotometry, a recently developed diagnostic
ferred in most mammals because of its rapid
technique, can also measure protein and cellu-
onset (10-20 minutes) and relatively short
lar debris levels in the aqueous humor.
duration (6-8 hours in dogs and 8-12 hours
Because of the presence of the scleral
in horses). Atropine (l%) is preferred in
shelf, the canine iridocorneal angle and
the rat, and tubocurare derivatives such as
opening of the ciliary cleft cannot be visual-
ized without special lenses or by the use of
vecuronium (0.5% in raptors) must be used in
nonmammalian vertebrates because of the pres-
an indirect ophthalmoscope. The @
direct
ence of striated muscle fibers in the pupillary
goniolens and indirect gonioprism allow
observation of the filtration angle for con-
sphincter muscle.
 genital defects, abnormal narrowing, periph-
eral anterior synechiae, extension of iris or
Anterior Segment Examination after
limbal neoplasms, and foreign bodies. The
Pupil Dilation: Lens Examination
gonioscopy instruments and techniques are
described later; recently available ultrasonic
The lens is evaluated for its position, size,
biomicroscopy using probes from 40- to 60-
shape, surface irregularities, and transpar-
MHZ permits high-resolution imaging of the
ency with both direct illumination and ret-
entire aqueous outflow pathway.
roillumination. There is tremendous variation
The iris is evaluated for color, consis-
in size and shape of the lens in different species.
tency, pupillary membranes strands, pupil
A slit beam is often useful in characterizing
size, and pupil shape and stability. Multiple
cataracts. While directing the beam onto the
colors within an iris may occur congenitally,
lens and looking from an oblique angle, the
as with heterochromia irides, or may
be
examiner observes a cross-section of that lens.
acquired, as with chronic inflammation or
Cataracts should be classified both anatomi-
neoplasia. Blue irises occur in some lightly
cally and by stage of maturity. When using the
pigmented breeds, whereas albino animals have 
slit-lamp biomicroscope, higher magnifications
pink to white irises.
may help to distinguish lens imperfections
The pupil is round in dogs, a vertical slit
from true cataractous changes. Other methods
in cats, and a horizontal ellipse in horses
of lens evaluation include both A- and B-scan
and cattle. Most ungulate species have
ultrasonography and 
1magneticresonance
nodular extensions of the posterior pig-
imaging
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/ I I
Posterior Segment Examination
can also be used to evaluate the iridocorneal
angle and ciliary cleft, pars plana, and ocular
The vitreous humor is normally a clear and
fundus.
homogenous gel that fills the space between the
A binocular microscope with an external,
 posterior axial lens capsule, posterior chamber.
pivoting, and adjustable light source forms the
and ocular fundus. Vitreal disorders include
basic design of the slit-lamp biomicroscope
opacities within the vitreous. Abnormalities of
(Fig. 1.1.4). The strong white focal light can be
the anterior vitreous may be observed with
modified by a series of diaphragms and filters
direct illumination and slit-lamp biomicros-
that adjust the light shape (diffuse or focused,
copy. Ultrasonic examination of the vitreous
i.e., beam), the light intensity, the light-beam
may prove to be useful if direct visualization is
width, length, orientation, and the color (cobalt
impaired. Another diagnostic procedure, vitre-
blue or red free).
ous paracentesis (i.e., hyalocentesis), is particu-
larly useful with inflammatory lesions of the
Direct Ophthaimoscopy
vitreous space and is discussed in the “Oph-
thalmic Diagnostic Procedures" section.
Ophthalmoscopy is a difficult, but very
Successful examination of the ocular fundus
important, procedure for the clinician to
requires intimate knowledge of the normal
 master. With diligence and practice, prac-
variations within each species. Structures or
tice, practice, this technique can be mastered
areas to be evaluated include the optic nerve
head (i.e., optic disc or optic papilla: shape,
and will give the veterinarian yet another
tool with which to examine and investigate
color, and topography), retinal vasculature
the patient and its problems. The direct oph-
(number and size), tapetal fundus in species
with a tapetum (reflectivity, pigmentation,
thalmoscope consists of a power source with
several light selections (Table l.l.l) and a
depigmentation, hemorrhage, exudates), and
coaxial optical system. Light is directed via a
 nontapetal fundus. Diagnostic procedures to
mirror or prism into the patient's eye and then
evaluate the ocular fundus include both
reflected back through a lens in the ophthalmo-
direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy, slit-
scope to the examiner. Direct ophthalmoscopes
lamp biomicroscopy with the Hruby lens,
 take advantage of the refractive power of the
fluorescein angiography, ERG (i.e., flash and
patient's cornea and lens. Therefore, refractive
pattern), ultrasonography, biopsy, scanning
errors in both the patient and examiner affect
laser tomography, and optical coherence
the ability to focus on the ocular fundus. The
tomography. Direct and indirect ophthal-
resultant image is real, erect, and magnifed
 moscopy are the primary means to visualize
several times above normal depending on the
and evaluate the ocular fundus.
species being evaluated (Table 1.1.2).
Ophthalmic Diagnostic
Procedures
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscopy
Slit-lamp biomicroscopy permits improved
direct visualization of surface lesions of the
eyelids, conjunctiva, sclera, and iris; and it
is a vital diagnostic instrument for the vet-
erinary ophthalmologist. It enables the exam-
  a     
subtle lesions of the cornea, anterior chamber,
lens, and anterior vitreous. When combined
Fig. I.l.4. Use of the portable binocular Kowa
with special lenses, the slit-lamp biomicroscope
SL15 slit-lamp biomicroscope in a dog
I2/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
Table 1.1.1. Light Beam Selections for Direct
Ophthalmoscopy.
Srmall spot
Use with pin-point pupil
 Medium spot
 Use with pupil in a darkened roorm
Large spot
 Use in a pupil dilated by mnydriatics
Red-free light
To evaluate retinal vessels and the
 nerve fiber layer
Graticule
Gnid (often of sixteen squares) to
estimate size of fundic lesions
 Slit beam
To estimate fundic
elevations/depressions
Fig. I.1.5. For direct ophthalmoscopy performed in
a dog, the examiner uses the right eye to examine the
patient's right eye and the left eye to examine the
Table 1.1.2. Fundus Magnification with Direct
patient's left eye. One must be quite close to the
Ophthalmoscopy in Animalsa.
patient to have the optimal view of the Fundus.
Anima!
Fundus
mm Equivalent
Magnification per
Diopter Change
approximately 0.5-0.75 m. Once the fundic
19.5
0.22
reflex is identifed, the examiner moves toward
17.2
0.28
the patient to a point approximately 2-3 cm
Dog
from the eye (Fig. 1.1.5).
Cow
10.6
0.74
A circular dial on the direct ophthalmoscope
Horse
7.9
1.33
holds a series of concave and convex lenses that
Sheep
13.9
0.43
can be rotated through the viewing aperture. A
Rabbit
25.3
0.13
separate dial or switch adjusts the size, shape.
aChange in millimeters with 1-D change in focus by
and color of the light beam. Distances between
direct ophthalmoscopy.
the normal retina and the surface of such
Modified from Murphy CJ, Howland HC. The optics of
abnormalities can be estimated by changing the
dioptric power of the ophthalmoscope. For
699-607
example, if the retina is in focus at O diopters
(D), and the surface of a lesion is in focus at
+ 3 D (green or black), the lesion is elevated. If
To perform direct ophthalmoscopy, animals
the surface of the lesion is in focus at - 3 D
must be either reasonably cooperative or ade-
(red), however, it is depressed. The size of the
quately restrained. Most small animals can be
circular spot of white light should be adjusted
restrained on the examination table by an assis.
tant, while some fractious animals or large
 a n ai hn si a o
reflections from the corneal surface. The advan-
animals require some measure of sedation and/
 tages of direct ophthalmoscopy are summarized
or an auriculopalpebral nerve block to facilitate
 in Box 1.1.4. The recently introduced panop-
the examination. Before examination, the pupils
tic
ophthalmoscope
(Welch-Allen) is
are usually dilated with a short-acting mydri-
a
hybrid of the direct and indirect types offer-
atic such as 0.5-1% tropicamide (or 1% atro-
ing a lower magnification and larger area of
pine in the rat). The fundi of large animals such
observation (Fig. 1.l.6).
as the horse can be visualized without dilation;
however, mydriasis will ensure a thorough
Indirect Ophthaimoscopy
examination.
Following adequate mydriasis, the examiner
places the direct ophthalmoscope snuggly
Indirect ophthalmoscopy, in contrast to
against his or her brow and identifies the
direct ophthalmoscopy, allows the clinician
patient's fundic reflex from a distance
of
to view a larger portion of the fundus (larger
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANo DIAGNOSTICS/ I3
Box 1.1.4. Advantages and
Box 1.1.5. Advantages and
Limitations of Direct
Limitations of Indirect
Ophthalmoscopy
Ophthalmoscopy
Advantages:
 Greater magnification 
Advantages:I
 Larger (and often safer) working
Can be performed through a small
 distance frorm the patient
pupil
Larger field of view 
Availability of options such as the
Stereopsis
slit and graticule
Can use with some comeal/lens
Ability to alter the dioptric power
translucency
 of the ophthalmoscope
Limitations:
A dilated pupil is necessary
Lirnitations:
A small field of view
 More difficult to master
Short working distance between
Lower magnification
examiner and patient
Lack of stereopsis
Difficulty in examining the
peripheral fundus
Eye movements can be distracting
Greater distortion when the cormea
and lens are not transparent
field of view) at one time and to do so from
a larger and safer working distance from the
patient (Box 1.l.5 and Figs.l.l.7A and B).
The image generated with indirect ophthal-
moscopy may be a bit confusing to the novice
examiner as it is inverted and reversed
(upside down and backward). Nevertheless
the convenience of this technique has made it
the standard diagnostic for the veterinary oph-
thalmogist. The direct and indirect methods
often complement each other nicely, particu-
Fig. 1.1.7. In bilateral indirect ophthalmoscopy in a
dog (A), this method of fundoscopy allows the
examiner to look at the fundus from a distance and
beneht from the advantage of stereopsis, or depth
perception. The view of the Fundus will be inverted
 and reversed, but it gives a good overview or survey
view of the back of the eye. (B) Monocular indirect
ophthalmoscopy with a transillimunator in a horse.
Fig. I.1.6. Use of a panoptic ophthalmoscope in a
This method gives a similar view to that obtained
dog. This instrument is a good compromise between
the direct and indirect methods of ophthalmoscopy.
with the indirect headset but without the stereopsis.
The image obtained is real (neither inverted nor
reversed) and intermediate in magnification between
the two.
I4/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
larly if a lesion is detected with the indirect
method and then examined more closely, at
 greater magnification, with the direct method.
There are many different lenses available for
use with indirect ophthalmoscopy ranging in
diopter strength from + 5.5 to + 90 D. The
choice of a lens will vary depending on the
amount of magnification and size of the feld of
view desired, the amount of stereopsis desired,
and the size of the patient's pupil
Corneoconjunctival Cuiture
Culture  and sensitivity testing provide
Fig. I.1.8. Corneoconjunctival culture in a horse.
useful information for the diagnosis and
Both corneal and conjunctival cultures should be
determination of appropriate antimicrobial
obtained early in the ophthalmic examination, before
therapy in many corneal and conjunctival
administration of topical solutions or ointments. Care
diseases. They should be obtained very care-
should be taken not to contaminate the sample by
fully from any deep and progressive corneal
inadvertently touching the eyelid margins, hair, skin,
ulcers, particularly melting ulcers. Cultures
and other nearby structures. The swab is then placed
 may also be taken from purulent or granuloma-
in transport broth for shipping or is inoculated either
tous conjunctival lesions or from animals with
directly onto or into the appropriate culture medium
chronic conjunctivitis that do not respond to
and incubated for isolation and organism
therapy. Additionally, mycoplasmal or chla-
identihcation.
mydial cultures (or both) may be desirable in
certain species with conjunctivitis, including
the cat, cow, sheep, goat, and pig.
Both corneal and conjunctival
cytology is indicated include deep melting,
cultures
or progressive corneal ulcers; corneal or
should be obtained early in the ophthalmic
conjunctival abscesses; chronic or severe
examination, before administration of topical
keratitis/conjunctivitis; keratitis/conjuncti-
solutions or ointments (Fig. 1.1.8). To obtain
a culture, the eyelids are gently retracted, and
vitis that does not respond to therapy; and
proliferative masses of the cornea, conjunc-
a sterile moistened swab is passed back and
forth on the area of the cornea or the conjunc-
tiva, and nictitating membrane. The ideal
corneal and/or conjunctival sample provides a
tiva to be cultured. Care should be taken not
monolayer of cells, adequate number of cells.
to contaminate the sample by inadvertently
and unaltered cell structure.
touching the eyelid margins, hair, skin, and
Instruments for collecting cytologic samples
other nearby structures. The swab is then
include cotton or Dacron swabs, cytobrushes,
placed in transport broth for shipping or is
spatulas (Kimura platinum spatula), and even
inoculated either directly onto or into the
the blunt end of a scalpel blade (Figs. l.l.9A
appropriate culture medium and incubated for
through D). Impression cytology may also be
isolation and organism identification and
susceptibility testing.
used for sample collection. Most of the collec-
tion  described hereafter requires  topical
anesthesia (i.e., 0.5% tetracaine or 0.5% pro-
Corneoconjunctival Cytology
paracaine), and care must be taken to avoid
ocular trauma.
Cytology is used either alone or in combina-
Subsequent to collection, slides can be fixed
tion with culture techniques to provide rapid
with heat, acetone, special cytologic fixative
results that may influence the immediate
 sprays, or some combination thereof. If possi-
course of therapy. Conditions for which
ble, several slides containing adequate sample
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/ 15
二
D
Fig. I.l.9. For corneoconjunctival cytology, scrapings are obtained using the Kimura platinum spatula
) sds (a) sayso pu () aeia naeeg e jo pa a aa (a) qes ue e ()
spatula, Bard-Parker blades, and chemistry measuring spatulas) provide a more precise method of
collecting cells from specifc areas, and greater numbers of deeper cells can be obtained. The blunt end of
a scalpel blade Functions similarly to the spatula but with a slightly greater incidence of trauma. The
cotton or Dacron swab provides the least traumatic method of retrieving exfoliative samples, and the
cytobrush provides superior diagnostic samples
volume should be prepared to permit the use
be performed prior to application of other
of different stains, ifindicated. Staining methods
ocular medications or stains. The standard
most commonly used include the Gram stain
test strip is a 5 × 35 mm No. 41 flter paper
and various Romanowsky-type stains (e.g.
 strip, and the references values listed below
Dif-Quick, Wright-Giemsa).
have been determined with the standard strip.
Test strips are bent at the notch, preferably
while the strip is still in its packing to avoid
Tear Tests
absorption of oils from the examiner's skin. The
folded end is inserted in the lower conjunctival
Deficiencies in aqueous tear production (i.e.,
fornix, in contact with the cornea, near the
keratoconjunctivitis sicca or “dry eye") have
junction of the middle and temporal thirds of
been recognized for several decades as a fre-
the eyelids, where it should remain for l minute
quent cause of corneal and conjunctival lesions 
(Figs. l.1.l0A and B). Tears are measured from
in both humans and animals. Several tests aid
the fold in millimeters per minute, immediately
in the diagnosis of “dry eye," the most
at removal. The values obtained in the second
common of which is the Schirmer tear test.
eye are apparently not affected by the stimula-
This test is performed on most small animals
tion of basal secretion in the first eye. This test
with use of minimal restraint and should
(STT I), performed without any topical anes-
16/ESSENTIALS OF VeTERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
A Schirmer I tear test (STT II) can be per-
formed similarly except that the cornea and
conjunctiva are topically anesthetized. The STT
II estimates only basal tear secretion, eliminat-
ing any contribution from reflex tears. For the
STT I1, the lower conjunctival fornix is gently
dried with a cotton-tipped applicator l minute
after the instillation of the topical anesthetic,
and the test strip is inserted as previously
described. Mean wetting in clinically normal
A
canine eyes includes 3.8 ± 2.7 mm/min, 11.66
± 6.1 mm/min, and 13.95 ± 4.40 mm/min.
Schirmer II results in clinically normal cats
 Ad q  i  
of the Schirmer I results.
The phenol red thread tear test has also been
described as an accurate assessment of tear pro-
duction in both humans and animals. The
thread is 75 mm in length, with a 3 mm inden-
tation at one end. The folded end is placed in
the lower conjunctival fornix for 15 seconds.
As the slightly alkaline tears wick along the
B
thread, a color change from pale yellow to
orange occurs. Mean length of absorption for
Fig. I.1.l0. Schirmer tear test (STT) in a dog (A)
this test is 34.15 ± 4.45 and 23.04 ± 2.23 mm
and a horse (B). This test is performed on most small
per 15 seconds in the dog and the cat,
animals with use of minimal restraint and should be
respectively.
performed prior to application of other ocular
Tear breakup times using topical fluorescein
medications or stains. The standard test strip is a
to diagnose abnormalities of the lipid or mucin
5 × 35 mm No. 41 flter paper strip.
layer of the preocular tear film are discussed in
the next section.
thetic, measures the trigeminal/facial reflex
tearing in addition to the basal secretion.
Externaf Ophthaimic Stains
 Reported means for the normal canine Schirmer
I tear test vary from 18.64 ± 4.47 mm/min to
External ophthalmic stains facilitate the
23.90 ± 5.12 mm/min. The reported mean
diagnosis of corneal, conjunctival, lacrimal,
value for the feline Schirmer I tear test varies
and nasolacrimal diseases. Stains commonly
from 14.3± 4.7 mm/min, to 16.92 ± 5.73 mm
used in veterinary ophthalmology include
min. Normal Schirmer tear test values in the
sodium fluorescein and rose Bengal dyes.
rabbit are 5.30 ± 2.96 mm/min. In the dog.
Lissamine green has found limited use in
values less than l0 mm/min are suspicious if
 oo   
combined with clinical signs of keratoconjunc-
Alcian blue, methylene blue, and Trypan blue
tivitis sicca, and values less than 5 mm/min are
have been used experimentally (Table l.l.3).
considered to be diagnostic. Low Schirmer tear
Fluorescein dye is used to detect corneal and
        
conjunctival defects, aqueous humor leakage
preted in light of clinical signs, because clini-
with the Seidel test, and PTF defciencies
cally normal cats can have values as low as
 a  (s   )
5 mm/min. Equine tear production is often
breakup time (TBUT), and to assess the naso-
copious and may overwhelm commercial strips
lacrimal duct patency. It has also been used in
in less than a l minute period.
measurement of IOP with the Goldmann,
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSTICS/ I 7
Table 1.1.3. Topical Stains for Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Stain
indications
Huorescein
Intercellular spaces
 Corneal ulcers, and nasolacrimal patency
Rose Bengal
Mucin covering cells
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and mucus degenerating
cormeal and conjunctival cells
Acian blue
Mucus
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and conjunctivitis
anjq ued
Mucus
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and conjunctivitis
Dead and degenerating cells
Methylene blue
Mucu5
Dead and degenerating cells
Perkins, Draeger, and Halberg applanation
quently distributed across the corneal and con-
tonometers, and in determination of aqueous
 a  n  
humor flow rates by fluorophotometry.
paper strip and the cornea can deposit excess
Sodium fluorescein is a weak, dibasic acid
stain, which may be misinterpreted as a corneal
of the xanthene group that is detectable in solu-
defect. Gently flushing the eye after staining
tion at concentrations as low as l ppm.
Its
will remove any excess fluorescein and simplify
absorption spectrum peaks at 490 nm (i.e.,
the diagnosis of both corneal and conjunctival
blue light). Sodium fluorescein converts almost
lesions.
100% of absorbed light to emitted fluorescent
The TBUT is a noninvasive ocular diagnostic
light with a peak wavelength of 520 nm (i.e.,
test that may be used to support a presumptive
green light). Fluorescence is most intense at
diagnosis of a qualitative tear abnormality: it is
alkaline pH; at acid pH, sodium fluorescein
a measure of the stability of the precorneal tear
appears yellow or orange. Fluorescein is avail-
film that involves recording the time it takes for
able as a 0.5-2.0% alkaline solution, or as an
the fluorescein dye, and hence the tear film, to
impregnated paper strip. In small animals, the
dissociate from the corneal surface. Abnormali-
paper strip is moistened with sterile 0.9% saline
ties of the mucin and/or lipid layers in precor-
or ocular flush and touched to the dorsal bulbar
neal tear film can thus be evaluated using
conjunctiva. For topical use in horses, the strips
TBUT. To perform this test, 1-2% fluorescein
are preferred to the solution, to ensure sterility.
is applied to the eye, the animal is allowed to
Contaminated solutions readily grow bacteria
blink, and the lids are then maintained in the
such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Commonly
open position until the fluorescent tear film
used preservatives such as benzalkonium chlo-
begins to disassociate: the dry spot will appear
ride and chlorobutanol are inactivated by fluo-
as a dark, round spot in the fluorescent tear
rescein. In large animals, it is convenient to
film. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy using a cobalt-
immerse the paper strip in 0.5 ml of 0.9%
blue filter facilitates this procedure. In the dog.
sterile saline or eye flush within a syringe and
the average normal time between the first blink
needle-less hub, and use this to gently squirt
and development of the first dry spot is approx-
the cornea
imately 20 seconds (19.7 ± 5 seconds). In cats,
The most common use of sodium fluores-
Cullen et al. 2005 recently estimated the average
cein is the detection of corneal and conjunc-
TBUT to be 16.7 ± 4.5 secs. In horses, Harling
tival epithelial defects. All red, inflamed, or
found the tear breakup time to be over 13
painful eyes should be routinely stained with
seconds.
fluorescein, including eyes with suspected
Patency of the nasolacrimal apparatus is
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) that may be
tested by applying sodium fluorescein to the
associated with corneal ulceration. After the
eye and timing the passage of fluorescein
instillation of the fluorescein on the bulbar con-
through the system to the external nares
junctiva, the eyelids are then closed, or the
(i.e., the Jones test). Each side is tested, and
patient is allowed to blink. The stain is subse-
passage
times are compared. Fluorescein
I8/EssentIAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
normally traverses the nasolacrimal apparatus
   o  
within 5 minutes in the dog and cat, and in less
restrained, and resistant animals may require
than l0 minutes in the horse. False-negative
heavy sedation or even light, general anesthe-
results may also occur in brachycephalic breeds,
sia. Cats may also require general anesthesia
in which the stain drains caudally into the
(e.g., ketamine), because their lacrimal puncta
nasopharynx rather than through the external
are small and difficult to cannulate. Cattle can
nares. Examination of the caudal tongue and
be placed in a chute or stanchion, their heads
pharynx with blue light can confirm passage in
pulled laterally with a nose lead
these animals.
Following one or more instillations of topical
Rose Bengal (i.e., tetra-chloro-tetra-iodo-
anesthetic, the upper and lower lacrimal puncta
fluorescein) is available as an impregnated
are identified near the medial canthus, l to
paper strip and a solution. The solution can be
2 mm bulbar to the eyelid margins (Fig. 1.1.11).
irritating, but use of the 0.5% or lower concen-
The lacrimal puncta are oval in the dog. cow,
trations versus the 1.0% solution appears to
and horse, and they are round in the cat. In
minimize this irritation. In animals, rose
some animals, a small amount of pigment along
Bengal is used to assist diagnosis of PTF
the margins of the lacrimal puncta facilitates
disorders (KCS or mucin deficiency), and
identification. With the upper lid everted to
superficial corneal epithelial abnormalities.
 expose the upper lacrimal punctum, a cannula
or blunt-tipped hypodermic needle (in the
Nasolacrimal Fiush
Nasolacrimal flush is the injection of normal
saline solution or ocular flush through the
nasolacrimal drainage apparatus either
orthograde (i.e., from the eyelid puncta) or
retrograde (i.e., from the distal nare's
ope ning). Indications include chronic epiph-
ora or mucopurulent ocular discharge com-
bined with delayed or absent fluorescein
passage from the eye to the external nares
(i.e., negative Jones test).
These lacrimal puncta are located 2 to 5 mm
Fig. 1.1.ll. Nasolacrimal Hlush in a dog. In the dog
lateral of the nasal canthus and l to 3 mm
and cat, nasolacrimal lush is performed orthograde
bulbar to the eyelid margins in the canine. In
because of the difhculty in identifying the distal
some animals, pigment around the margin of
opening of the nasolacrimal duct. Following one or
the opening facilitates localization. The rabbit
more instillations of topical anesthetic, the upper and
lacks a superior punctum, and the pig lacks an
lower lacrimal puncta are identifed near the medial
inferior punctum. In addition, the entire naso-
canthus, l to 2 mm bulbar to the eyelid margins
lacrimal apparatus is absent in aquatic, lower
laddn ayi asodxa oi paluaa P!l 1addn ayl 4nM
vertebrates including fsh, amphibians, and
lacrimal punctum, a cannula or blunt-tipped
chelonians. The lacrimal sac, which is located
hypodermic needle (22-23 gauge) is gently inserted
subcutaneously just ventral to the medial
in a medial direction. Sterile saline is then slowly
canthus, may become infected (i.e., dacryocys-
injected until it lows from the lower lacrimal
titis) and swollen. The nasolacrimal duct itself
pue iaddn ayl jo Kouajed sausilqeisa s!ul wniound
lower lacrimal puncta, upper and lower canaliculi,
may similarly become obstructed, especially as
and lacrimal sac. Pressure is then applied to occlude
it passes through the bony maxilla, where there
the lower punctum, and 2-10 mL of sterile saline or
is little room for dilation.
ocular flush is injected through the nasolacrimal duct
In the dog, cat, and cattle, nasolacrimal flush
Care must be taken to hold the muzzle down during
is performed orthograde because of the diff.
this procedure; otherwise, the flush may drain
culty in identifying the distal opening of the
caudally into the nasopharynx.
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/ 19
cow, 20-21 gauge; in the dog, 22-23 gauge; in
short polyethylene tube is inserted proximally
the cat, 24-25 gauge) is gently inserted in a
after its tip has been coated with lidocaine gel
medial direction. Sterile saline is then slowly
(4-6 French urinary catheter, tomcat catheter,
injected until it flows from the lower lacrimal
or 5 Fr feeding tube). Approximately 10-15 mL
punctum. This establishes patency of the upper
of sterile saline is injected; fluid should be
and lower lacrimal puncta, upper and lower
observed to drain from the upper and lower
       
lacrimal puncta.
mal punctum is imperforate, a small bleb rises
under the conjunctiva in that area. Pressure is
then applied to occlude the lower punctum,
Tonometry
and 2-l0 mL of sterile saline or ocular flush is
injected through the nasolacrimal duct. Resis-
Tonometry is the indirect measurement or
tance to passage (or failure of passage) is noted.
estimation of intraocular pressure or tension.
- a  n a a s a 
 It is an essential diagnostic procedure during
lected for cytology and possible culture. Care
the eye examination in animals, particularly
must be taken to hold the muzzle down during
of any eye that is red or painful or has focal
this procedure; otherwise, the flush may drain
or diffuse corneal edema, mydriasis, orbital
caudally into the nasopharynx.
trauma, a lens luxation, or a history of glau-
 In the standing horse, a retrograde naso-
coma, either of the eye of interest or the
lacrimal flush is usually performed (Fig.
fellow eye. Tonometry may be performed via
1.1.l2). The animal is placed in stocks, and
digital palpation, indentation, or applanation
a lower lip twitch is applied. Many horses
techniques and is relatively quick and simple
also require sedation with xylazine or deto-
and provides crucial information to the clini-
midine for adequate restraint. The distal
cian. It is a noninvasive procedure that allows
opening of the nasolacrimal duct is usually
the examiner to evaluate intraocular pressure
visible at the ventral mucocutaneous junction
(either hypertension or hypotension) and to
of the external nares. Topical anesthetic oint-
intermittently monitor glaucomatous eyes for
ment is applied around this opening. and a
 progression or response to therapy. The proce-
dure can be performed with minimal dis-
comfort to the patient, and the results can
significantly determine prognosis and guide
decisions regarding treatment regimens.
The normal IOP of most animals is usually
somewhere between 15 and 25 mmHg due to
the conservation between species (Table 1.1.4).
Generally, the difference in IOP between fellow
eyes should be less than 8 mmHg.
Applanation tonometers measure the force
required to flatten, or applanate, a constant area
of cornea, or by measuring the surface area
flattened by a predetermined force. Available
applanation tonometers include the Goldmann,
Fig. 1.1.12. Nasolacrimal lush in a horse. In the
Draeger, Perkins, Halberg, Maklakoff, Mackay-
standing horse, a retrograde nasolacrimal flush is
Marg, TonoPen, TonoVet, and pneumatono-
usually performed. The distal opening of the
graph tonometers. The TonoPen is the most
nasolacrimal duct is usually visible at the ventral
widely used form in veterinary ophthalmology
mucocutaneous junction of the external nares and
because of its ease of use and portability (Figs.
cannulated with a 4-6 French urinary catheter,
tomcat catheter, or 5 Fr feeding tube. Approximately
1.1.13A and B).
10-15 mL of sterile saline is injected; fluid should be
The TonoPen is an l8 x 2 cm, handheld,
observed to drain from the upper and lower lacrimal
battery-operated instrument that functions
puncta.
similarly to the Mackay-Marg tonometer.
 20/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Table 1.1.4. Range of Intraocular Pressure
in Animals.
Species
Tonometer
IOP Results
Mean / SD
Dog
Mackay-Marg
15.7 / 4.2
TonoPen
16.7 / 4.0
Mackay-Marg
17.8 / 0.9 PM
21.5 / 0.8 AM
Mackay-Marg
22.6 / 4.0
TonoPen
19.7 / 5.6
Rabbit
 Pneumatonograph
19.5 / 1.84
17.9 / 2.11
Horse
Mackay-Marg
25.5 / 4.0*
Mackay-Marg
28.6 / 4.8
TonoPen
29.6 / 6.2
Mackay-Marg
17.1 / 3.9 (OS)
18.4 / 2.2 (OD)
Mackay-Marg
23.5 / 6.1
TonoPen
23.3 / 6.9
Mackay-Marg
23.5 / 4.5
Mackay-Marg
20.6 / 4.7
Cow
Mackay-Marg
29.5 / 5.0
23.4 / 5.9
Raptors
Hawk5
TonoPen
20.6 / 3.4
Fig. I.1.13. Applanation tonometry in a dog (A)
Eagle
21.5 / 3.0
and a horse (B) using the TonoPen tonometer
Owl
10.8 / 3.6
is quite accurate in the normal range of IOPs,
The footplate of the instrument contains the
but tends to overestimate IOP in the low range
plunger, which achieves applanation of the
 and underestimate IOP in the high range in
cornea and is covered by a disposable latex
dogs, cats, and humans.
membrane that functions to protect the sen-
The TonoVet is the latest model of tonom-
sitive plunger and to prevent disease trans-
eter to be produced and distributed to the
mission. Light tapping of the instrument on
veterinary market. It utilizes a novel induc-
the central two-thirds of the cornea perpen-
tion-impaction method to determine lOP,
dicular to the point of contact will produce
essentially measuring rebound action of the
accurate readings. Recoil of the ceramic plunger 
magnetic probe as it contacts the eye and
following corneal contact produces a signal that
bounces back. It has the advantage of not
is amplified, digitized, and passed through a
requiring topical anesthesia prior to its use;
single-chip microprocessor. IOP measurements 
however, it must be held upright during mea-
are displayed on a liquid-crystal screen. Prior
 surement, which may make its use difficult in
to use of the TonoPen, topical anesthetic is
instilled into the eye, and
recalcitrant or recumbent patients. Preliminary
1 the
eyelids
are
retracted. The probe tip is used to gently and
studies report that its accuracy is comparable
repeatedly contact the central cornea without
to that of the TonoPen.
indenting it. Brief clicks indicate when indi-
vidual readings have been recorded and a sus-
Gonioscopy
tained tone indicates when a mean IOP has
been calculated. The mean IOP is then dis-
Gonioscopy is the examination of the irido
played along with the coeffcient of variance
corneal angle (ICA), or filtration angle, and
(i.e., 5%, 10%, 20%, 0r > 20%). The TonoPen
the opening of the ciliary cleft of the eye.
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/ 2I
Examination of this region is crucial for
ciliary cleft are systematically evaluated, with
evaluating the aqueous outflow pathways
special attention given to width, pectinate liga-
and also for insight into the pathogenesis of
 ment conformation, inner and outer pigment
a glaucomatous state. The angle should be
zones, and uveoscleral trabecular meshwork
examined for width (open, closed, or narrow);
(Fig. 1.1.15)
 presence and character of the pectinate liga-
ments, which traverse the space between the
Anterior Chamber Paracentesis
cornea and the base of the iris; presence of
synechia (especially peripheral anterior syn-
The aqueous humor that occupies the anterior
echia), peripheral iris cysts, foreign bodies,
 chamber may be quite easily sampled for diag-
neoplasia, granulomas, traumatic iridal dialyses
 nostic or therapeutic purposes. Depending on
or other injuries; and anterior segment
the temperament and the overall health status
colobomas.
of the patient, the procedure can be performed
The ICA of most animals, including humans,
either with sedation and topical anesthesia or
cannot be directly visualized because the scleral
under short-acting general anesthesia.
shelf obscures the view. In order to appreciate
：The
bulbar conjunctiva should be cleaned prior to
the angle, a contact lens must be placed on the
the sampling with a dilute (5%) betadine solu-
cornea to bend light in such a way that it exits
tion and then rinsed with normal saline. After
the cornea toward the observer. Direct gonio-
placement of an eyelid speculum, the bulbar
lenses allow the examiner to look across the
conjunctiva is grasped with small forceps near
anterior chamber to the opposite iridocorneal
the site of entry and a small needle (25-30
angle segment. The image perceived with direct
aa e ui dn paaq si m pasi si (ana 
gonioscopy is magnified and real, but it is dif-
twisting, drilling motion through the clear
ficult to examine the entire 360° of the angle.
cornea near the limbus or the subconjunctival
Most small animals can be examined with
limbus parallel and anterior to the iris (Figs.
only topical anesthetic. After the lens is in
1.1.l6A and B). It is important to visualize the
place, a light source is utilized to illuminate the
tip of the needle during insertion and centesis
ICA (Fig. l.1.l4). A portable slit-lamp biomi-
croscope is ideal for providing magnification
-nads aun uim adooso ue inq 'sisdoaias pue
lum removed is satisfactory. A gonioscopy solu-
tion or gel (1.0-2.5% methylcellulose solution)
is positioned between the lens and corneal
surface. The entire iridocorneal angle and
Fig. I.l.15. The normal ICA seen by gonioscopy
using a Franklin goniolens. Note the pectinate
ligament and inner and outer pigmented layers. In
Fig. I.l.l4. The direct Franklin goniolens in place
this hgure, the cornea appears in the dorsal aspect
on a canine cornea.
and the iris below the angle.
22/ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
definitive diagnosis for posterior segment dis-
eases or endophthalmitis. Samples taken
from the vitreal chamber can be submitted for
cytology, culture and sensitivity, protein mea-
surement, specific antibody titers (e.g., toxo-
plasmosis, leptospirosis), or PCR
SECTION 2: OCULAR IMAGING
Imaging is essential in the diagnosis and
clinical management of a wide variety of dis-
Fig. 1.1.16. Aqueous centesis in a dog. After
eases involving the face, eye, orbit, and
cleansing with a dilute betadine solution and the
brain. Improvements in both imaging hard-
application of a topical anesthetic agent (A), 30-gauge
ware and software have made possible accu-
needle is introduced through the limbus and beneath
rate visualization of the anatomic detail of
the bulbar conjunctiva into the anterior chamber (B)
the eye to a degree previously available only
at such an angle as to avoid contact with both the iris
and interior cornea.
dissection, histopathology, and laboratory
evaluation. The ability to reconstruct multidi-
mensional views of the globe and orbit and to
so as to avoid puncturing either the iris or the
lens capsule. if a syringe is attached to the
areas from a variety of views provide imaging
needle, a small
snoanbe jo unoue
1S
techniques important to the ophthalmologist's
aspirated.
ability to make accurate diagnoses. They also
Aqueous humor centesis may be performed
for the purpose of acquiring a sample for micro-
have contributed to improved patient care.
Optimal examination of the ocular tissues
biologic culture or cytology, especially in cases
requires familiarity with the anatomy and
 of infectious anterior uveitis or intraocular neo-
pathology of the visual system as well as
plasia. Aqueous may also be submitted for
knowledge of the various imaging techniques
protein measurement, antibody titers (e.g., Lep-
available. Recent advances in ophthalmology
tospira spp., Ioxoplasma gondii), or PCR analy-
sis for minute quantities of DNA from infectious
imaging have concentrated on the noninvasive
methods and improved resolution to histologic
agents. While in most instances this procedure
is safe, it does carry with it a certain amount of
levels.
risk, especially if it is being performed in eyes
with opaque corneas or marked iris bombe.
Radiography
Potential  complications  for this procedure
include hyphema, lens capsule rupture with
Radiographic examination of the skull can
subsequent phacoclastic uveitis, endothelial
damage and corneal edema, anterior uveitis,
be used to evaluate the animal patient with
endophthalmitis, choroidal hemorrhage and
ocular or orbital disease. The skull is one of
edema, and glaucoma (secondary to the previ-
the most complex and specialized parts of
the skeleton, and there is considerable varia-
ously mentioned complications)
tion in normal anatomy both between and
within species. Radiography is useful in
Vitreous Paracentesis
those diseases associated with bony destruc-
tion of the nasal cavity and orbit and in
Vitreous paracentesis, also referred to as hyalo-
orbital fractures (Figs. l.2.lA, B, and C).
centesis, is the aspiration of material from
Plain-film and computed radiographs also
the vitreous chamber. This procedure, when
demonstrate opacification of normally radiolu-
properly performed and utilized, can provide a
cent structures, such as the sinus cavities and
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINATION AND D1AGNOSTICS/ 23
Fig. 1.2.1. A. Traumatic corneal perforation with anterior chamber hemorrhage in a dog. B. Lateral skull
radiograph with a Flieringa ring placed on the cornea of the traumatized eye indicates muliple metallic pellets.
C. Ventrodorsal view indicates metallic foreign bodies close to the globe but does not localize them to an
intraocular location
retrobulbar space. Soft tissue swelling and areas
of hemorrhage can be demonstrated following
ocular trauma. Radiographs can aid in localiz-
ing foreign bodies depending on the size and
composition of the foreign body. Highly malig-
nant primary orbital tumors and invasive meta-
static neoplasms may result in bony wall
destruction; sinus or nasopharyngeal tumors
may expand or erode bone and invade the
Orbit.
Special Radiographic Techniques
Exophthalmos is the most important indica-
Fig. 1.2.2. Dacryocystorhinogram of a young horse
tion for zygomatic sialography. The entire
nasolacrimal drainage apparatus can be
with bilateral nasolacrimal duct atresia. The last 4 cm
of the ducts are moderately dilated in a blind end
outlined through dacryocystorhinography,
with fmbriated margins. Arrows indicate the blind
thereby revealing dilatation and osteolysis
end of the distal dilated nasolacrimal duct (yellow);
associated with chronic inflammation and
nasolacrimal duct within the turbates (red); and
exposing both the site and extent of nasolac-
proximal restricted nasolacrimal duct within its
rimal duct obstructions (Fig. 1.2.2). It can
intraosseous portion (blue)
 24 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
also reveal lacrimal sac dilatation and osteolysis
 for teaching purposes, and for publication.
associated with dacryocystitis, thus helping to
In addition, many veterinarians appreciate
differentiate this condition from maxillary
the value of photographs for consultation,
sinusitis and carnassial tooth root abscesses. In
 discussion purposes, client relations and
addition, nasal neoplasms that obstruct
or
education, and professional development.
deviate the nasolacrimal duct can be delineated
An impressive arsenal of cameras is available
with this procedure, whereas those that invade
for external photography, and the choices are
the nasolacrimal duct may lead to spillage of
often limited only by the operator's level of
contrast material into the nasal cavity.
photographic knowledge and the cost of the
equipment. Several cameras are available for
digital imaging of the ocular adnexa and ante-
CT and MR Imaging
rior segment.
Computed tomography (CT) has improved
 the diagnosis and management of ocular and
Fundus Photography
orbital diseases. The anatomy of the orbit is
an ideal subject for CT, though use of CT in
Fundus photography has proved to be invalu-
this area has been somewhat upstaged by
able in the documentation of posterior
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The rela-
segment diseases among animals, thus con-
tively dense nerves, globe, and extraocular
tributing significantly to the advancement of
muscles, which are surrounded by lucent
veterinary ophthalmology. Additional uses
orbital fat and encased in dense bone, provide
of the fundus camera, particularly the hand-
a tissue of high contrasts for CT, which pro-
held models, include photography of the
vides anatomic detail of orbital bone, soft tissue,
iridocorneal angle and ciliary cleft, iris, pos-
and foreign bodies superior to that of radiogra-
terior chamber, lens, and vitreous.
phy. CT also provides much better visualiza-
Both table-mounted and handheld fundus
tion of bony orbital structures than MRI. CT is
cameras are available as well as 35 mm film
used in the analysis of orbital trauma, optic
and digital models (Figs. 1.2.3A and B). As
neuritis, orbital infection and cellulitis, and
the digital models become more popular,
orbital neoplasia. It provides a high-contrast
their costs may decrease, increasing their
view of the optic nerve relative to the orbital fat
availability to veterinary ophthalmologists.
and bony orbit.
Direct digital acquisition of images using an
In comparison with CT, MRI has several
electronic camera offers several advantages
advantages and disadvantages. Advantages
over conventional photography. Digital table-
include absence of ionizing radiation; supe-
mounted cameras are available from Canon,
rior soft tissue contrast, which yields
Kowa, Topcon, Optos, CMT Medical Technol-
detailed soft tissue anatomy and highlight
ogies, and Zeiss; and digital handheld fundus
areas of pathologic findings; and direct mul-
cameras have been developed (Model NM-
tiplanar imaging that does not require
200D, Nidek; Kowa Genesis-D; and RetCcam
changes in position of the patient or gantry.
II). I
DiLoreto and co-workers 1992 have
Some disadvantages include longer acquisi-
described a new method of fundus photogra-
tion times and poorer spatial resolution.
phy in small laboratory animals using a 2.2
Volk Panretinal lens held in apposition to a
Topcon TRC SOFT fundus camera lens via a
Photography
homemade metal sleeve.
Fundus videography creates continuous,
External Photography
dynamic images that can be replayed immedi-
ately after recording. Fundus videography is
Most ophthalmic lesions are easily photo-
 particularly useful in fluorescein angiography,
graphed. Lesions can be documented to
allowing real-time analysis of the phases of vas-
evaluate progression, response to therapy,
cular filling. A scanning digital video ophthal-
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINATION ANo DIAGNOSTICS/ 25
Fig. 1.2.3. The Kowa Genesis-D fundus camera. A. Camera and base. B.
Fundus photography in a dog.
tification of NFL thickness has been investi-
GmbH, Wien, Austria.
gated as a means of detecting and following
glaucomatous damage. The nerve fber analyz-
ers Gdx variable corneal compensator (VCC)
Retinal Imaging
(Laser Diagnostic Technologies, San Diego, CA)
and Retina Thickness Analyzer (RTA) II (Talia
Confocal Scanning Laser
     
Ophthaimoscopy/Tomography
polarimeters that use form birefringence to
measure NFL thickness.
The confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope
(CSLO) has been developed for the diagno-
sis and monitoring of optic nerve head
Opticaf Coherence Tomography
(ONH) changes in human glaucoma, because
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an
it provides true, three-dimensional optical
imaging technology that can obtain micron-
sections of the ONH. Confocal optics assure
resolution cross-sectional or tomographic
that only a thin “slice" of optic nerve tissue
is in focus on the image plane; thus, high-
images of the eye. OCT is analogous to A-
resolution tomographic optic nerve images
mode ultrasonography, except that optical
or light tissue reflectivity rather than acous-
      
tic tissue reflectivity is used. Optical imaging
changes in optic disc topography may
be
techniques function by measuring the time
important for detecting damage and monitor-
delay when light is reflected from various intra-
ing change in glaucoma. The lateral and axial
ocular structures, and these techniques have
resolutions with CSLO are 20 and 300 μm,
higher spatial resolution than ultrasound (10-
respectively. Available instruments include the
Rodenstock CSLO and Heidelberg Retinal
20 μm versus 150 μm). OcT uses short pulses
(10-'s seconds) of coherent (i.e., same phase)
Tomograph (HRT).
light to perform high-resolution measurements
and imaging of the ocular microanatomy. Most
Nerve Fiber Anafyzer
tissue layers of the retina and optic nerve.
 including the NFL, inner nuclear layer, photo-
A reduction in thickness of the nerve fiber layer
receptor layer, retinal pigment epithelium
(NFL) caused by retinal ganglion cell death
(RPE), optic cup, and choriocapillaris, can be
may precede visual-field loss in glaucoma.
imaged in the dog and rabbit. The OCT can
Because these axons are readily evident and less
also be used to accurately image the cornea,
compacted in the NFL than in the ONH, quan-
iridocorneal angle, lens, and anterior segment
26/EsSentIAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
Corneal Imaging
Color Doppler OCT
Pachymetry and Specular Microscopy
Color Doppler optical coherence tomography
(CDOCT) is a functional application of OCT
Central corneal thickness (CCT) is a sensitive
and is the first technique to simultaneously
indicator of the state of deturgescence of the
record, with micron-scale resolution, the depth,
cornea and a wide range of disorders that may
diameter, flow rate, and flow dynamics of blood
affect the anterior segment in general or the
vessels within the living retina. The CDOCT
cornea in particular. Optical pachymeter,
provides superior axial resolution and depth
optical slit-lamp. ultrasound, and specular
localization. It also decreases the spatial resolu-
microscopy pachymetry are used to measure
 tion to approximately 10-20 μm resulting in a
corneal thickness.
higher signal-to-noise ratio than confocal detec-
tion alone
A practical algorithm for ocular imaging in
Blood Flow Assessment
veterinary medicine is as follows: B-scan ultra-
 sonography is the initial imaging modality
Fluorescein Angiography
to assess intraocular abnormalities and the
immediate retrobulbar space. Ultrasound Bio-
Fluorescein angiography has been used both
microscopy (UBM) has the best resolution for
clinically and experimentally to characterize
examination of the anterior segment. CT is the
normal and abnormal vascular conditions of
most appropriate imaging modality to evaluate
the human and animal fundus and has also
orbital trauma and neoplastic involvement of
been adapted to evaluate the iris vasculature
the orbit. MR imaging is helpful in orbital mass
in both humans and animals. Sodium fluores-
localization and identification. Plain-film and
cein (described earlier) is a weak acid that
computed radiography is more often used in
maximally fluoresces in response to light at a
veterinary medicine than CT and MR imaging
wavelength of 485 nm, emitting light with a
to examine orbital and nasal cavity disease. For
peak wavelength of 530 nm. In blood, 60-80%
disorders affecting the chiasmal and retrochias-
of fluorescein is protein-bound, mainly
mal pathways, MR imaging is the modality of
to
albumin, thus limiting the amount of free fluo-
choice. OCT and CSLO are beneficial in serial
rescein available for excitation. The absorption
-Bodo Ten pue aarau ondo au jo uouexa
and emission spectra of the dye are altered in
raphy in dogs with glaucoma.
whole blood, with an optimum excitation point
at 485 nm and peak emission at 530 nm. Other
SECTION 3: DIAGNOSTIC
dyes available for angiography include indocya-
nine green (peak absorption, 790 nm; peak
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
emission, 820 nm), pyranine (peak absorption,
455 nm; peak emission, 520 nm), and rhoda-
Physics and Basic Principles
mine (peak absorption, 555 nm: peak emis-
Ultrasonography is a noninvasive imaging
sion, 585 nm).
technique that is used for the qualitative and
quantitative evaluation of intraocular and
Laser Flowmetry
orbital lesions. It is a safe and rapid method,
relatively easy to learn, and can be per-
Laser Doppler techniques are used to measure
formed in an awake animal. Ultrasonogra-
blood velocity or blood flow. Laser Doppler
phy is indicated in eyes with opaque ocular
velocimetry (LDV) measures the maximum
media when an ophthalmic examination can
blood cell velocity present in larger retinal
no longer be performed (corneal edema,
vessels. The velocity is calculated from an anal-
hyphema, cataract, vitreous hemorrhage),
ysis of Doppler shifts observed in light scattered
and in eyes with ocular trauma or suspected
by moving red blood cells.
orbital disease. Other indications involve bio-
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINATION ANo D1AGNOSTICS/ 27
metric measurements ofintraocular and orbital
second, allowing visualization of movement
structures and determination of axial eye length
during the scanning process (Fig. 1.3.1l). B-
for artificial lens power calculations
scan ultrasonography is the most commonly
Ultrasound frequencies used in ocular
used echographic method for evaluation of
diagnostics usually
range from
7.5
to
intraocular and orbital lesions in veterinary
 50 MHz. Depth of sound wave penetration
ophthalmology. A standard 10 MHz transducer
in tissue is directly proportional to the wave-
with a focal range of 3-4 cm is the most suit-
length. For example, the ultrasound waves of
able ophthalmic transducer, allowing visualiza-
a low-frequency 7.5 MHz ultrasound trans-
tion of anterior and posterior segment
ducer provide poor ocular near-feld visualiza-
abnormalities, as well as orbital lesions.
tion, but better tissue penetration, and are most
useful for examination of the orbit and retro-
High-Frequency Ultrasound
bulbar area. High-frequency ultrasound waves
Biomicroscopy (UBM)
(20-50 MHz) only penetrate a few millimeters
into tissue and, therefore, allow excellent
This high-frequency 
ultrasound imaging
imaging of the anteriorly located structures of
technique is similar to conventional B-scan
the eye.
ultrasonography but uses frequencies be-
tween 50 and 100 MHz. Tissue resolution is
A-mode
 s o e  
pared with a l0 MHz probe and allows dis-
A-mode (amplitude modulation) is the origi-
crimination of structures as small as 50 μm.
nal of all ultrasound methods. Echoes
The trade-off for the higher resolution is a
received by the transducer are displayed
decreased tissue penetration of only 4-
one-dimensionally and time-dependent as
5 mm. Ocular imaging of the cornea, sclera,
vertical spikes (amplitudes) from a baseline.
anterior chamber, iris, iridocorneal angle, and
The height of the spike reflects the intensity of
ciliary processes is comparable to a low-power
the echo. The distance between individual
histopathologic section (Figs. 1.3.2 and 1.3.3).
spikes depends on the time required for the
The layers of the cornea (epithelium, stroma,
ultrasound waves to reach a given acoustic
Descemet's membrane, and endothelium) can
interface and for their echo to return to the
be easily differentiated.
transducer. Spacing of spikes on the horizontal
baseline also reflects the spatial distribution of
Color Doppler Ultrasound
the structures being examined.
Whereas B-mode may yield information
Color Doppler imaging (CDl) combines con-
about the topography of an ocular or orbital
ventional B-mode ultrasound with a color
lesion, the vector A-scan may provide objective
 Doppler instrument and allows the simulta-
information on a lesion's character and size.
neous evaluation of vascular velocity pat-
Also, ocular measurements can be performed
terns. Doppler color flow imaging allows
with the B-mode guided vector A-scan and
visualization of blood vessels and their flow
were shown to be as accurate as measurements
 performed with a biometric A-mode probe.
characteristics within the eye and orbit. The
best resolution is achieved for evaluation of
blood vessels > 2o0 μm in diameter. By defi-
B-mode
nition, blood flow toward the transducer is
coded in red, and blood flow away from the
In B-mode (brightness modulation) ultra-
transducer is colored in blue. Spectral analysis
sound, echoes are displayed two-dimension-
can be used to quantify the velocity of the
ally as light dots of different intensity and
blood flow. The velocity waveform of an artery
brightness on the screen. Most B-mode
has a high peak systolic velocity (PSV) and a
transducers are real-time sector scanners
low end diastolic velocity (EDV). The resistive
with a very fast frame rate of l0-60 frames/
index (Rl) or Pourcelot ratio is a measurement
TIME:
2:58p..
EYE:
right
FREEZE
MODE:
norm
GAIN:
58.9
dB
CURVE:0
二（Main）
FHELP
F2
NAMES
F3
EYE
F4
MODE
F5
GAIN
F6
VECT
F7DGC
F8MENU
F9RANGE
F10FREEZE
10
20
30
40
Fig. I.3.l. Normal B-mode/vector A-scan echogram of a canine eye. The integrated
vector A-scan is displayed on the bottom half of the screen. Echoes on B-mode
appear as bright lines or dots of different intensity on B-mode and as vertical spikes
from a horizontal baseline on the A-scan vector. In axial vertical direction (white
pue -g uo oypa buouis e sasnpoud ansde sual lojaisod ayn (Aesiop sjulod iayieul
A-mode. The strong posterior eye wall echo contrasts against the acoustically empty
vitreous. (Modihed with permission from Dietrich U. Ultrasonographic examination
of the eyes of dogs with cataracts using the combined B-mode/vector A-scan system
Inaugural dissertation, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Minchen, Germany, 1996.)
AC
Fig. 1.3.2. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (50 MHz) of an iris cyst (arrow) in a Boston
Terrier. The cyst is behind the iris, has no internal reflectivity, and is surrounded by
a thin cyst wall. S = sclera; C = cornea; ICA = iridocorneal angle; I = iris; AC =
anterior chamber; and L = lens. (Courtesy of the University of Georgia and the
University of Munich.)
28
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINAT1ON AND D1AGNOSTICS/ 29
cortex in virtually any animal species. Unlike
psychophysics, which establishes relation-
ships between the physical properties
of stimuli and the subjective sensations
they produce, electrodiagnostic tests mea-
sure the electrical potentials generated in
various parts of the visual system. There-
AO
fore, electrodiagnostic testing should not
be considered as being a measure of vision
per se.
The electroretinogram (ERG) is still the
most widely used electrodiagnostic test in
veterinary ophthalmology. The ERG is a
complex response of different cells within
the retina, which is often used to diagnose
outer retinal disease. The visual evoked
potential (VEP), which is a cortical response,
Fig. 1.3.3. Utrasound biomicroscopic image
is less commonly tested. VEPs are particularly
(50 MHz) of a normal canine eye. Epithelium (E) and
helpful in diagnosing visual impairment of
Descemet's membrane (D) provide strong echoes at
postretinal origin. Other available diagnostics
the interfaces with air or aqueous humor. The corneal
procedures include the pattern electroretino-
stroma (S) shows weaker echogenicity. Other areas
gram (PERG); the multifocal ERG (MF-ERG),
identihed on this picture include limbal/scleral region
which is a technique for recording local cone
(LS), anterior chamber (AC), and iris (I). The anterior
region of the lens (L) and the highly rellective
ERGs in multiple areas in the central part of the
anterior lens capsule (ALC) can further be
retina; and the electro-oculogram (EOG), which
demonstrated. (Courtesy of the University of Georgia
is used to assess the function of the retinal
and the University of Munich.)
pigment epithelium in human patients. Com-
bining different electrodiagnostic tests is a pow-
erful way to both assess function and localize
where in the visual system the dysfunction
to interpret the shape of the waveform or a
occurs.
vessel and can be calculated as follows: RI =
(PSV - EDV)/PSV.
The RI ranges from 0 to 100%, with 0%
The Fiash Electroretinogram (FERG)
representing no resistance and 100% repre-
senting high resistance. A high RI correlates
The ERG provides an opportunity to assess
with increased distal vascular resistance and
the function of a part of the central nervous
decreased perfusion. Although CDl is fre.
system, the retina, which can easily be visu-
quently performed in humans, this technique
alized by, for instance, using an ophthalmo-
has some limitations for the use in veterinary
scope. It is an electrical mass response of the
practice, as sedation or anesthesia is routinely
retina to light stimulation, which reflects the
required.
function and integrity of the photoreceptors
and the retinal cell layers they contact, the
inner nuclear layer, and, if a special record-
SECTION 4:
ing technique is used, the retinal pigment
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC
epithelium. The electrical responses of the dif-
EVALUATION OF VISION
ferent cell types are superimposed in the ERG,
which makes the interpretation of the results
Electrodiagnostic testing provides unique,
more challenging
noninvasive opportunities to probe the
Abrupt changes in retinal illumination
visual system from the retina to the visual
cause recordable, transient electrical changes
30/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
OP
b-wave
a-wave
Fig. 1.4.1. A dark-adapted canine electroretinogram
in response to a brief, bright flash. Both rod and cone
photoreceptors drive this response.
that are named the a-wave, the subsequent
positive peak the b-wave (Fig. 1.4.1), and
the late, prolonged positive component the
c-wave. In veterinary ophthalmology, the ERG
has been used to diagnose patients with
acquired or inherited retinal diseases, assess
retinal function in patients with opaque ocular
media, such as cataracts, and exclude an outer
retinal component in patients with ganglion
cell or postretinal dysfunction. The ERG pro-
Fig. I.4.2. (A) The JET electrode is a monopolar
vides more objective results than ophthal-
corneal contact lens electrode that can be used in
moscopy and characterizes the function of
many species, such as the cat and dog. The platinum
needle electrode is a reliable, easy to use,
specific cell types in the retina. Furthermore,
the ERG usually allows much earlier diag-
 subcutaneous electrode. (B) The gold-foil electrode
can be used as active electrode for recording the
nosis than an ophthalmoscopic or behavioral
equine ERG. The plastic foil is bent over the canthus
examination.
of the lower eyelid so the gold coated side touches
the corneal surface
Equipment for Recording and Light
Stimulation
lens electrodes give significantly higher ERG
The electrical changes produced by light
amplitudes than active, subcutaneous elec-
stimulation of the retina are usually recorded
trodes. In addition, a contact lens electrode
using an active electrode touching the
prevents the cornea from drying out during the
cornea; a reference (passive) electrode either
recording.
in contact with the eyelid margin (as in
The electrical signals generated by the retina
bipolar contact lens electrodes) or subcuta-
are small in amplitude (often less than 10- mV
neously approximately 2 cm aboral to the
and certainly less than 10° mV) and need to be
lateral canthus; and a ground electrode
-doid aq oi sau toi Aianeuxoidde padue 
normally placed in an indifferent location,
 erly visualized. Signal averaging will reduce the
such as the top portion of the skull. Corneal
impact of noise on the ERG signal and band-
contact lens electrodes, such as the Burian-
pass flters will attenuate frequencies that do
Allen (bipolar) or JET electrodes (monopolar)
not contribute substantially to the ERG. Now,
are safe, reliable, and easy to use in the cat
computerized data acquisition systems are most
and dog (Fig. 1.4.2A) and the gold-foil elec-
commonly used. A light stimulus, such as a
trode for the horse (Fig. l.4.2B). Contact
strobe flash or a light-emitting diode (LED), or
OPHTHALMIC EXAMINATION ANO DIAGNOSTICS/3 I
in implicit times for both rod- and cone-driven
responses of the FERG.
Separation of Rod and Cone Function
The rod system is designed for detecting
minimum amounts of light in the dark of the
night, whereas the cone system operates
under bright light conditions. Rods and
cones contribute their signals to the FERG
independently. Taking advantage of the
inherent, physiological differences of the
Fig. l.4.3. Both the stimulus and background light
two systems allows separation of rod- and
intensities need to be measured to ensure that the
cone-driven responses in a number of ways
same amount of light is delivered to the patient's eye.
(Fig. 1.4.4 and Table 1.4.1).
The detector of the photometer is positioned at the
level of the eye of a patient. A xenon flash and a
Visuai Evoked Potentiais (VEPs)
halogen bulb, used for steady adapting light, are built
into the aluminum housing on top of this Full-held
(Ganzleld) stimulator.
The VEP is a cortical response elicited by a
visual stimulus, such as a flash (flash-VEP,
 FVEP) or a contrast-reversing pattern (pattern-
VEP, PVEP). Multifocal VEP is a technique
preferably a full-field (ganzfeld in German)
developed to obtain independent response
dome with built-in photostimulator and adapt
from multiple areas of the visual field simulta-
ing (background) light source, which mini-
 neously, which requires considerable patient
 mizes the problemofuneven retinalillumination,
cooperation and sophisticated equipment. In
is recommended (Fig. 1.4.3). A xenon strobe
primates, it is clear that responses driven by the
flash, a halogen, tungsten, or xenon arc lamp
central visual field dominate the VEP, but in
lower mammals, there is evidence that the VEP
fitted with a mechanical shutter, or LEDs can
provide an appropriate light stimulus in the
primarily reflects cortical responses generated
full-field dome. The duration of the stimulus
by stimulation of the most cone-rich retinal
should not exceed 5 ms. Proper shielding of
 area, the area centralis. Methods for recording
the equipment and, if necessary, putting the
the VEP have been reported in several species,
patient inside a Faraday's cage will improve
including the cat, dog, horse, cattle, and small
the ERG. As miotic pupils can reduce the
ruminants. There are considerable differences
both between and within species in these
amount of light reaching the retina, topical
mydriatics should be instilled ahead of the ERG
reports. A canine VEP can be recorded from
so the pupils are fully dilated throughout the
 subcutaneous electrodes overlying the cortex in
response to flash or pattern reversal.
examination.
The FERG can readily be recorded in con-
scious, cooperative human patients. However,
Clinical Application of
most animals are less eager to perform well
Electrodiagnostic Testing
during a full recording session. Therefore,
 general anesthesia is recommended for more
In clinical electrophysiology, correlating
comprehensive ERG testing, in order to main-
electrodiagnostic findings to clinical find-
tain proper fixation and stable position of elec-
ings and history is essential. Electrodiagnos-
rodes, as well as to minimize movement
tic tests can provide information about the
artifacts and patient stress. However,
the
location of a lesion in the visual system and
most common effects of general anesthesia are
often more specific information regarding
decreases in response amplitudes and increases
what type of cells is involved.
20μV
a
20 ms
b)
C
Fig. I.4.4. Four ERG responses from a normal dog. Line a is a mixed, dark-adapted
rod-cone response. The small positive delection just below the letter is a stimulus
artifact, which shows when a brief, white flash (3.0 cd/m²/s) is delivered. The
response has a conspicuous, negative a-wave followed by the large, positive b-wave.
au jo yead auI (moine uado) sdo maj e ane qi buipuanse aun uo pasodadns
b-wave is bipartite where the later peak reflects the slower rod b-wave (black arrow).
ye anm wp e oi asuodsan u ta uaa-pou Kuiem pandepe-iep e smous q au
(0.03 cd/m'/s). Notice that there is no obvious a-wave and that the implicit time of the
2 ol asuodsan auon e smous o au anem-e ul yead ualp-pol aui on leus sl anem-q
bright, white lash (3.0 cd/m2/s) presented on a rod-saturating background (40 cd/
m). The amplitude is considerably smaller than that of the dark-adapted responses,
alm ‘nuaiiq e oi asuodsai auon e s! p aull uaas aq ueo aaem-q e pue -e ue yoq inq
flickering stimulus (30 Hz) in the presence of the steady, adapting light.
Table 1.4.1. A Summary of the Canine ERG Protocol Recommended by the ECvO for Detection
of Generalized, Retinal Dystrophies.
Time
Stimulus
Number
Stimulus
Background
Bandpass
Responses
(minutes)
(cd/m²/s)
ofStimuli
Frequency
Light
Filter (Hz)
Mainly
Averaged
(Hz)
(cd/m)
Driven by
(n)
1
0.02-0.03. white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
spou
4
0.02-0.03, white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤1 to ≥300
rods
8
0.02-0.03, white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
rods
12
0.02-0.03, white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
rods
16
0.02-0.03, white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
rods
20
0.02-0.03, white
≤4
0.5
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
rods
25*
2-3, white
1
0.1
0 (darkness)
≤ 1 to ≥300
rods and cones
Optional
2-3, white
0.1
0 (darkness)
70-100 to
rod- and cone-
≥ 300
driven OPs
+ 10
2-3, white
≥4
4.9 or 5.1
30-40
≤ 1 to ≥ 300 
cones
+15*
 2-3, white 
≥16*
31
30-40
≤ 1 to ≥ 300 
sauoo
Note: Numbers marked with an * represent the author's suggestions, because they are not provided in the pub-
lished guidelines. The cone-driven responses should be performed after 10 minutes of light adaptation. Hence,
 pauunt sem sub! punoubypeq anum aut aouis passed aney pinoys teyt sainuju jo iaqunu aut satesipu! ubis + aul
 on. The last column indicates the type of photoreceptors mainly driving the response, but the ERGs certainly reflect
the function of more types of retinal cells, as discussed in the text.
32
OPHTHALM1C EXAMINAT1ON ANo D1AGNOSTICS/33
References
TonoVet rebound tonometer in dogs and horses
Proceedings of the Am College of Vet Ophthalmol
Section 1
(abstract) 2004:8
Michau TM. Equine ocular examination: basic and
advanced diagnostic techniques. In: Gilger BC,
Bauer GA, Spiess BM, Lutz H. Exfoliative cytology
ed. Equine ophthalmology. St. Louis: Elsevier
 of conjunctiva and cornea in domestic animals: a
Saunders, 2005. 1-62
comparison of four collecting techniques. Vet
Miller PE, Pickett JP. Comparison of the human and
Comp Ophthal 1996;6:181-186.
canine Schiotz tonometry conversion tables in
Blocker T, van der Woerdt A. A comparison of
clinically normal dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
corneal sensitivity between brachycephalic and
1992;201:1021-1025.
Domestic Short-haired cats. Vet Ophthalmol
Morales RJ. Corneal diagnostic procedures. Clinical
2004:127-130.
Tech in Small Anim Pract 2003;18:145-151
Collins BK, Gross ME, Moore CP, Branson KR. Phys-
Murphy CJ, Howland JC. Optics of comparative
iological, pharmacological, and practical consid-
ophthalmoscopy. Transactions of the Sixteenth
erations for anesthesia of domestic animals with
Annual Scientihic Program of the Collge of Vet-
eye diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;
erinary Ophthalmologists, 1985;16:132-157
207:220-230
Ollivier FJ,Plummer CE,Barrie KP. Ophthalmic
Cooley PL. Normal equine ocular anatomy and eye
examination and diagnostic procedures, section
examination. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
1. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology,
1992;8:427-449
4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 438-483
Cullen CL, Lim C, Sykes J. Tear Flm breakup times
Priehs DR, Gum GG, Whitley RD, Moore LE. Evalu-
in young healthy cats before and after anesthesia.
ation of three applanation tonometers in dogs.
Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:159-165
Am J Vet Res 1990;51:1547-1550.
Davis JL, Stewart T, Brazik E, Gilger BC. The effect
Stiles J, Buyukmichi NC, Farver TB. Tonometry of
of topical administration of atropine sulfate on the
normal eyes in raptors. Am J Vet Res 1994;55:
normal equine pupil: influence of age, breed and
477-479.
gender. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:329-332.
Whitley RD, Moore CP. Ocular diagnostic and
Dziezyc J, Millichamp NJ, Smith WB. Comparison
 therapeutic techniques in food animals. Vet Clin
[ sasou pue saop ul shanawouon uoneueldde jo
North
Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;20l:430-433.
575.
Feenstra RPG, Tseng CG. What is actually stained
Wilkie DA. Ophthalmic procedures and surgery in
by rose Bengal? Arch Ophthalmol 1992;110:
the standing horse. Vet Clin North Am Equine
984-993.
Pract 1991;7:535-547
Gelatt KN. Diagnostic procedures in comparative
Wyman M, Gilger B, Mueller P, Norris K. Clinical
ophthalmology, 2nd ed. South Bend, IN: Am
evaluation of a new Schirmer tear test in the dog.
Anim Hosp Assoc, 1974
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1995;5:211-214
Harling DE. Epiphora and lacrimal system dysfunc-
tion in the horse. Equine Practice 1988;10:
27-38.
Section 2
Hazel SJ, Thrall MA, Severin GA, Lauerman LH,
Lavach JD. Laboratory evaluation of aqueous
Brooks DE, Kallberg ME,Komaromy AM, Ollivier
humor in the healthy dog, cat, horse, and cow.
FJ, Lambrou GN. Optic nerve head neuroretinal
Am J Vet Res 1985;46:657-659
rim blood low differences in monkeys with laser-
Hirsh SG, Kaswan RL. A comparative study of
induced glaucoma.
Vet Ophthalmol 2005
Schirmer tear test strips in dogs. Vet Comp Oph-
Mar-Apr;8(2):113-119.
thalmol 1995;5:215-217.
 Dennis R Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
 Kaps S, Richter M, Spiess BM. Corneal esthesiometry
investigation of orbital disease in small animals. J
in the healthy horse. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:
Small Anim Pract 2000;4l:145-155.
151-155.
DiLoreto D Jr, Grover DA, del Cerro C, del Cerro
Keller RL, Hendrix DV. Bacterial isolates and anti-
M. A new procedure for fundus photography
and luorescein angiography in small laboratory
ulcerative keratitis (1993-2004). Equine Vet J
     
2005;37:207-211
3-9.
Knollinger AM, La Croix NC, Barrett PM, Miller PE.
Kallberg ME Ophthalmic examination and diagnos-
A clinical and manometric evaluation of the
tic procedures, section 2. In: Gelatt KN, ed.
34 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA:
Gelatt KN, Cure TH, Guffy MM, Jessen C. Dacryo-
Blackwell, 2007. 484-506.
cystorhinography in the dog and cat. J Small
Rosolen SG, 
Saint-Macary
G,
Gautier
V,
Anim Pract 1972;13:381-397.
LeGargasson J-F. Ocular fundus images with con-
Gelatt-Nicholson KJ, Gelatt KN, MacKay EO, et al.
focal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in the dog,
 Doppler imaging of the ophthalmic vasculature
monkey and minipig. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:
of the normal dog: blood velocity measurements
41-45.
and reproducibility. Vet Ophthalmol 1999;2:87-
Rosolen SG, Saint-Macary G, Gautier V, LeGargasson
96.
 J-F. SLO angiography: arterio-venous
sFlling
Latimer CA, Wyman M, Diesem CD, Burt JK. Radio-
times in monkey and minipig. Vet Ophthalmol
graphic and gross anatomy of the nasolacrimal
2002;5(1):19-22
duct of the horse. Am J Vet Res 1984;45:451-
458.
 Mason DR, Lamb CR, McLellan GJ. Ultrasonographic
Section 3
Findings in 50 dogs with retrobulbar disease. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 200l;27:3757-3762
Aubin ML, Powell CC, Gionfriddo JR, Fails AD
Penninck D, Daniel GB, Brawer R, Tidwell AS
Utrasound biomicroscopy of the feline anterior
Cross-sectional imaging techniques in veterinary
segment. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:15-17
ophthalmology. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 200l;
Bayon A, Tovar MC, Fernandez MJ, Agut A. Ocular
16:22-39.
complications of persistent hyperplastic primary
Williams DL. Lens morphometry determined by
vitreous in three dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4
B-mode ultrasonography of the normal and
35-40.
cataractous canine lens. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:
Bentley E, Miller PE, Diehl KA. Use of high-
91-95.
resolution ultrasound as a diagnostic tool in vet-
erinary ophthalmology. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003;223:1617-1622.
Section 4
Dennis R Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
investigation of orbital disease in small animals. J
Ekesten B. Ophthalmic examination and diagnostic
Sm Anim Pract 2000;4l:145-155
procedures, section 4. In: Gelatt, KN,ed. Veteri-
 Dietrich U. Ophthalmic examination and diagnostic
nary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
procedures, section 3. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veteri-
2007. 520-535
nary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
Komaromy AM, Andrew SE, Sapp Jr HL, Brooks DE,
2007. 507-519
Dawson WW. Flash electroretinography in stand-
 Dietrich U. Ultrasonographic examination of the
ing horses using the DTL microfiber electrode.
eyes of dogs with cataracts using the combined
Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:27-33
B-mode/vector A-scan system. Inaugural disserta-
Komaromy AM, Brooks DE, Dawson WW, Kallberg
tion, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen,
M, Ollivier FJ, Ofri R. Technical issues in electro-
Germany, 1996.
diagnostic recording. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;
 Dietrich U, Moore PA. Clinical application
lof
5:85-91
ultrasound biomicroscopy in veterinary oph-
Narfstrom K, Ekesten B, Rosolen SG, Spiess BM,
thalmology (abstract). Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:
Percicot, Ofri R. Guidelines for clinical electroreti-
292
nography in the dog. Doc Ophthalmol 2002;
Gelatt KJ, Gelatt KN, Mackay E, et al. Comparative
105:83-92
Doppler imaging of the ophthalmic vasculature in
Rosolen SG, Rigaudiere F, Lachapelle P. A practical
normal Beagles and Beagles with inherited primary
method to obtain reproducible binocular electro-
open angle glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 1999;2:97-
retinograms in dogs. Doc Ophthalmol 2002;
105.
105:93-103
Chapter 2
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE ORBIT
Bernhard M. Spiess
 Orbital diseases are not uncommon in the dog.
the extraocular muscles. Orbital fascia permits
The differences in the orbital anatomy in the
ocular movements (mobility) and retropulsion
different breeds of dogs can predispose particu-
of the globe into the deeper orbit, but also
lar breeds to certain ophthalmic diseases. For
permits the extension of infectious and neo-
instance, the deep and large orbits of the giant
plastic processes within the orbit.
and large breeds can predispose them to enoph-
thalmia, entropion, and chronic conjunctivitis.
The shallow orbit of the brachycephalics pre-
Differential Diagnosis of
disposes these breeds to lagophthalmia, corneal
Exophthalmos and
exposure, and proptosis. The adjacent sinuses,
Enophthalmos
nasal cavity, mouth, and teeth roots make the
orbit susceptible to disease processes extending
Orbital diseases result in altered orbital
from any of these cavities through the relatively
volume, impaired function of orbital struc-
 thin bony wall.
tures, or both. Hence, orbital diseases are
The canine orbit varies markedly among the
traditionally divided into those presenting
250+ breeds of dogs in both size and depth.
as exophthalmia (very prominent eye) or
Orbital bones include the frontal, lacrimal,
enophthalmia (the globe is recessed within
maxilla, sphenoid, temporal, zygomatic, and
the orbit). Other clinical signs of orbital
sometimes the palatine; orbital formina include
diseases include reduced ocular motility,
rostral alar, ethmoidal, optic, and orbital fissure.
strabismus, abnormal globe position, aniso-
The orbital rim in dogs is incomplete with the
coria, blindness, congestion of episcleral
frontal, lacrimal, and zygomatic bones con-
vessels, and increased or reduced tear
nected laterally by the supraorbital ligament.
production.
This results in an incomplete bony orbital wall
The most frequent causes of exophthal-
laterally (in contrast to primates), which permits
mia include traumatic proptosis, orbital cel-
direct palpation and entry into the lateral orbital
lulites, orbital neoplasia, and myositis of the
tissues and accommodates the very large
masticatory and extraocular muscles (Table
opening of the mouth. The orbitale fascia spans
2.1). The causes of enophthalmia are divided
the orbital space and is divided into the peri-
into these disorders with smaller-than-
orbita (including the septum orbital connecting
normal globes (e.g., microphthalmia and
the orbital rim and the tarsal plate of the
phthisis bulbus) and those disorders with a
eyelids), Tenon's capsule (encapsulating the
normal-size globe that is less prominent
posterior globe), and the fascial sheaths of
within the orbit (Table 2.2).
35
36/EsSentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Table 2.1. The Differential Diagnosis of Exophthalmos in the Dog.
Clinicat Signs/Findings
Cellulitis
Neoplasia
Masticatory Myositis
Local pain
Present
 Absent
Variable
Onset
Rapid (few days)
Usually slow (mos)
1-2 weeks
Lids
Swollen
Normal
 Focal muscle swelling
Conjunctiva
Inflamed
Engorged vessels
Engorged vessels
Nictitating membrane
Inflamed/protruded
 Protrusion
 Protrusion
 Pain opening mouth
 Present
Usually no pain
Present
Globe motility
Impaired
 Usually normal
Impaired
Retropulse globe
Difficult
Variable; difficult with large
Difficult
masses
Caudal to last molar tooth
Swelling
Possible swelling
No lesion
Complete blood count
Leukocytosis with
Usually normal
Eosinophilia
neurophilia
Table 2.2. Differential Diagnosis of Enophthalmos in the Dog.
Globe Size
Clinical Findings/Diagnostic Procedures
Small globe
 Microphthalmos
Small globe since birth. Small commea, but usually clear.
Often with concurrent ocular abnormalities. More often in certain breeds and those with
the Merling gene. Often bilateral. Impairs development of the orbit (orbital asymmetry).
Intraocular pressure usually low normal (< 10 mm Hg)
Fhthisis bulbus
Usually in adults. History of ocular trauma, intraocular surgery, glaucoma, or intraocular
inflarmmation. Cornea usually not clear with edema, scarring. and linear Descemet's
membrane folds. Cataract formation and retinal detachment concument. Intraocular
pressure usually < 5 mm Hg.
Nommal size globe
 Pain secondary to entropion, distichiasis, conjunctivitis, comeal ulceration, anterior uveitis,
etc
Hormer's syndrome. Look for miosis, ptosis, and nictitans protrusion.
Loss of orbital tissues (usually adipose tissue).
Fibrosis of orbital tissues (secondary to proptosis, cellulitis, orbital surgery)
Dehydration and emaciation
Ancillary Diagnostic Tests
be palpated by retropulsion of the globe. In
mesaticephalic and dolichocephalic breeds,
Although the front of the orbit can be examined
the globe can be displaced to variable distance;
to some extent, the majority of the orbit requires
but in brachycephalic breeds retropulsion is
general physical, ophthalmic, and neuro-oph-
 negligible. With orbital tumors retropulsion
thalmic examinations (Table 2.3). The degree
of the globe will be restricted or impossible,
of exophthalmos or enophthalmos can be semi-
and with
orbital inflammation it is often
quantifed by determining the position of the
painful.
axial cornea relative to the orbital ligament and
The oral cavity is inspected with orbital
to the other eye using the Luedde or Hertel
disease, because disease processes from the oral
exophthalmometer
       i
The orbital contents can be inspected
and its contents; diseases of these structures
and palpated behind the orbital ligament and
may also invade the orbit and be presented as
from the oral cavity through the pterygoid
ophthalmic disease. Auscultation of the orbit
muscle. The immediate retrobulbar tissues can
 may be useful for rare cases of pulsating or
DiSEASEs AND SuRGeRY OF THE CANiNE OReIt/37
Table 2.3. Diagnostic Procedures for Orbital Disease.
Technique
Indications
 Palpation
Orally and caudal of lateral orbital ligament
Lwedde or Hertel exophthalmometer
Measures cormea to lateral ligament distance
Retropulsion of globe
Orbital mass/inflarnrnation may prevent.
Limited in brachycephalics
Inspection caudal to last molar tooth
 Inflarnmations/neoplasms may protrude
Auscultation of orbit
Arteriovenous fistula/varix
Table 2.4. Imaging Procedures for Orbital Diseases.
Method
Indications
 Pain radiography
Proliferative or destructive osseous lesions and radiodense foreign
materials
 Pneumo-orbitography
Soft tissue masses
 Orbital arteriography and venography
Vascular abnommalities/deviations
Optic nerve thecography
Intraorbital optic nerve abnormalities
Sialography
Abnormalities of zygomatic salivary gland
 Orbital ultrasonography (B-scan)
Soft tissue abnormalities/foreign bodies
Color Doppler imaging
 Orbital and ophthalmic blood flow parameters
Guide needle biopsies
Computed tomography (CT)
Osseous and soft tissue diseases, optic nerve, foreign bodies
Intraocular tissues
Magnetic resonance (MR)
Most intraocular and orbital soft tissues outlined
intermittent exophthalmos associated with
Congenital Anomalies of the
arteriovenous fistula or varix.
Orbit and Globe
Diagnostic imaging is the most useful proce-
dure for orbital diseases, and often includes
Anophthaimos/Microphthaimos
more than one method (Table 2.4). Plain radi-
ography can detect proliferative or destructive
Complete absence of the eye, or anophthalmos,
osseous lesions and radiodense foreign materi-
is very rare. In most cases, some remnants of
als. Contrast radiography of orbital tissues,
ocular tissue can be identifed histologically.
such as pneumo-orbitography, orbitography,
True microphthalmia is the most frequent
orbital arteriography, venography, optic nerve
form, with an abnormally small globe and
thecography, and sialography, used in the
various other ocular anomalies involving the
1970-1990s have been replaced by the gener-
cornea, lens, uvea, vitreous, and retina. The
ally noninvasive techniques using orbital ultra-
third form of microphthalmia is a small but
sonography, color Doppler imaging, computed
otherwise normal
globe
(nanophthalmia),
tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance
which is also very rare.
(MR). Often the most frequent imaging proce-
In microphthalmia, vision may be normal
dure is orbital ultrasonography, sometimes
reduced, or absent. Since both eyes are affected
combined with fine-needle biopsy through the
to variable extents, often one eye has vision.
oral cavity, bulbar conjunctiva, or through the
It may be more frequent in certain breeds. In
skin lateral to the orbital ligament.
the Doberman Pinscher, microphthalmia is
38/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
associated with anterior segment dysplasia and
Vascuiar Anomalies
retinal dysplasia, but a mode of inheritance has
not been reported. Congenital cataracts and
Orbital varices and arteriovenous fistulas are
microphthalmia are recessively inherited in the
very rare orbital anomalies with few reported
Miniature Schnauzer, and microphthalmia in
cases. Varices can be congenital as well as
the red and blue merle Australian Shepherd
acquired. Affected dogs usually present with a
dog is also recessively inherited (Fig. 2.1). In
nonpainful exophthalmos that was pulsating or
the Australian Shepherd, microphthalmia
is
intermittent. Arteriovenous fstulas are identi-
associated with equatorial staphylomas, persis-
Aq (nn, e 'a) inn ss e m pay
tent pupillary membranes, and retinal dysplasia
auscultation of the orbital area, but this is not
and detachments. Collies and Shetland Sheep-
the case with a varix. Diagnosis of these vascu-
dogs with Collie Eye Anomaly often exhibit
lar anomalies is made on the basis of clinical
variable degrees of microphthalmia. Microph-
signs and results of diagnostic imaging. Treat-
thalmia has also been reported in the Beagle,
ment is diffcult in all cases, and the prognosis
Akita, Chow Chow, Cavalier King Charles
is grave because of massive hemorrhage during
Spaniel, Irish Wolfhound, and in a number of
attempted repair and the occasional need to
other breeds of dogs.
resort to exenteration.
Orbital Cysts
An unusual case of a retrobulbar dermoid cyst
has been described in a Dachshund. The cyst
was removed by orbitotomy, and it contained
a yellowish, viscous fluid and long black hair.
Orbital cysts of neural tissue associated with
profound microphthalmia have recently been
described in the dog.
Acquired Orbital Diseases
Inflammatory Lesions: Orbita!
Cellulitis/Abscess
Orbital inflammatory diseases are rather
common in the dog. One series of seventeen
cases involved thirteen dogs and four cats
with a mean age of 4 years. The large breeds
and hunting breeds may be affected more
 frequently. Affected dogs present with acute
and usually unilateral exophthalmos, pro-
trusion of the nictitating membrane, and
conjunctival serous to mucopurulent dis-
charge (Figs. 2.2A through C). Palpation of
 the globe and periorbital area and opening
the mouth are extremely painful. The globe
may be normal and normotensive, episcleral
Fig. 2.1. Bilateral microphthalmia in an Australian
Shepherd puppy with homozygous merling
vessels may be congested due to stasis of venous
(extensively white coat). Iridal heterochromia and
blood flow, and with exophthalmia, corneal
iridal malformation of the pupil are also present.
edema and even ulceration and uveitis may
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Oreit/39
Fig. 2.2. A. Orbital abscess of 3 days duration in a Pointer. Note the marked
unilateral orbital swelling, exophthalmos, protrusion of the nictitating membrane,
chemosis, and hyperemia of the conjunctiva. B. Surgical drainage caudal to the
upper molar tooth in the same dog. A hermostat (the jaws are closed) has been
inserted through a small incision in the buccal mucosa and into the posterior orbit.
C. Ultrasonography of an orbital abscess (large hypoechoic area posterior to the
globe) in a 10-year-old mixed-breed dog.
occur. A yellowish-white welling of the oral
The cause is often an enigma, but foreign
mucosa may be behind the last ipsilateral molar
material, porcupine quills, and hematoge-
tooth. Affected dogs are usually febrile and
nous infection as well as the direct invasion
inappetent. A white blood cell count will reveal
by organisms from the oral cavity, sinuses,
neutrophilia.
or tooth roots occur. In five of fourteen cases,
40/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHtHalmoLoGY
13Dez04
TIs0.1MI0.43
C8-5Standard
14:00:58
Bild2344.0cm
Skala3
170dB/C5
2DOpt:FSCT
Persist aus
SonoCTo
206c
OD
C
Fig. 2.2. Continued.
Table 2.5. Treatment of Orbital Cellulitis in the Dog.
Drainage
Incise the oral mucosa behind the last upper molar tooth. Insert closed hemostat, then
slightly opened and withdrawn. Blood and purulent matenial usually drain from the
affected orbit. Area richly supplied by blood vessels and nerves, but complications are
rarely encountered (damage to the optic nerve and ciliary nerves).
Irrigation
 Irnigation of the retrobulbar area controversial. Irigation with crystalline penicilin has been
beneficial.
Systernic
Use broad-spectrum antibiotics pending culture/sensitivity results. Administer antibiotics for
5-7 days.
 Hot packs
Promote healing
Topical antibiotics
Reduce conjunctival inflammation and lubricate the cormea.
Pasteurella sp. has been cultured from orbital
drawn, after which blood and purulent material
abscesses. Infections ofthezygomatic gland may
usually drains from the affected orbit. Compli-
present as orbital cellulitis or abscess,
， and a
cations are rarely encountered and include
swollen secretory duct may be seen lateral to the
damage to the optic nerve and ciliary nerves,
second molar tooth. Fungal organisms and para-
and variable hemorrhage.
sites are rarely identified. Retrobulbar abscesses
Irrigation of the retrobulbar area is a contro-
are best diagnosed by ultrasonography
versial issue with diffuse orbital cellulitis (rather
The first and most important step in treat-
than a focal orbital abscess). Exacerbation of
ing an orbital abscess is drainage through
the exophthalmos and spreading of infectious
the oral mucosa behind the last upper molar
organisms have been possibilities, but orbital
tooth (Table 2.5). After the mucosa is incised
irrigation with crystalline penicillin has been
with a #l5 Bard Parker blade, a closed hemo-
beneficial.
stat is slowly advanced through the pterygoid
Systemic antibiotic therapy using high levels
muscle and then slightly opened and with-
of broad-spectrum antibiotics is usually indi-
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE OReIT /41
cated pending the results of bacterial culture
and sensitivity testing. Often clinical response
is obvious within 24-48 hours. Hot packs are
beneficial and well tolerated by most dogs.
The globe itself must be treated symptomati-
cally. In cases of lagophthalmos, lubrication of
the ocular surface is important. In most cases,
application of an antibiotic ointment three to
four times daily is usually sufficient. However
if the exophthalmos impairs the blink reflex
and causes corneal disease, a temporary tarsor-
rhaphy may be necessary. Soft food should be
offered until the globe is back to its normal
Fig. 2.3. Distended excretory duct resulting from
position. The prognosis is usually very good
adenitis of the zygomatic salivary gland.
with resolution of the clinical signs within 1
week. If foreign material is retained in the orbit,
recurrences are to be expected.
result. Polymyositis involving only extraocular
      
Salivary Retention Cysts and
Retriever, Hovawart, Great Dane, and Moun-
tain crosses in Switzerland
Mucoceles
Eosinophilic myositis of the muscles of
 Leakage of saliva from the zygomatic sali-
mastication (temporal, masseter, and ptery-
vary gland or its excretory duct causes
goid) affects young German Shepherds and
Weimaraners, Labrador Retrievers, and
orbital inflammation, tissue fibrosis, exoph-
Golden Retrievers. These dogs present with
thalmos with other signs of inflammation,
an acute disease, fever, anorexia, and limited
and pain. The clinical signs of retention
and painful jaw movements. Because of tem-
cysts and mucoceles are those of a fluctuat-
poral muscle involvement bilateral exoph-
ing swelling within the dorsolateral, ventro-
thalmos, protrusion of the nictitating
medial, dorsal, or ventral
l conjunctival
membrane, and congestion of episcleral
tissues, or in the oral cavity.
vessels result (Fig. 2.4). Swelling of the tem-
Mucoceles may result from trauma to the
head, with or without skull fractures, and
poral and pterygoid muscles are responsible for
displacing the globe in eosinophilic myositis.
inflammation and ulceration of the oral mucosa.
A distended excretory duct of the zygomatic
The masseter muscle is also swollen and painful
Without treatment, inflammatory episodes run
gland sometimes can be seen in the oral mucosa
for 1-3 weeks. Fibrosis of the muscles of mas-
(Fig. 2.3).
tication can result over time and with repeated
 The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical
signs and orbital ultrasonography, and aspira-
episodes of inflammation cause muscle atrophy.
tion of a yellowish and slightly tenacious fluid
enophthalmos, simultaneous ocular movement,
and jaw movements. In some cases, muscle
with variable amounts of blood is typical. If the
atrophy occurs without clinically detectable
cyst can be totally drained, the exophthalmos
 will disappear immediately. Mucoceles are best
antecedent inflammation. Severe enophthalmos
causes secondary entropion; protrusion of the
treated by surgical excision of the cyst and asso-
nictitating membrane may impair vision.
ciated gland.
The cause of myositis involving those
muscles of mastication is not clear, but an
Myositis
immune-mediated mechanism is suspected.
 In a series of fourteen biopsy specimens from
Because of the absence of a bony orbital wall
dogs with myositis of the muscles of mastica-
laterally, swelling, exophthalmia, or atrophy of
tion, twelve had immune complexes limited to
the muscles of mastication with enophthalmia
type 2M fibers, whereas thirteen of sixteen sera
42/ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
and Mountain crosses in Switzerland. The
disease occurs in young dogs as an acute
onset of mild to moderate exophthalmos
with a fixed globe (Figs. 2.5A and B). Females
may be affected most often. Optic neuritis
and subsequent blindness have been described
in association with acute eosinophilic myositis
and fibrosis of the extraocular muscles causes
mild enophthalmos and strabismus. In contrast
to Grave's disease in humans, extraocular poly-
myositis is not associated with either hyper- or
hypothyroidism. Swollen extraocular muscles
can be observed on ultrasonography, CT,
and MR imaging as well as by muscle
biopsy.
Treatment ofbothconditionsis similar, con-
sisting of high levels of anti-inflammatories
or azathioprine. In the acute stage, myositis
responds well to immunosuppressive doses of
oral corticosteroids over 3-4 weeks. Azathio-
prine can be given at a dose of 1-2 mg/kg body
weight for 10-14 days and then tapered off.
In chronic cases, advanced muscle atrophy
and fibrosis, however, cannot be influenced
medically. Silicone or glass beads have been
Fig. 2.4. Eosinophilic myositis in a German
implanted into the orbit to correct the enoph-
Shepherd. Note the marked swelling of the
thalmos, but migration of these implants has
masticatory muscles and bilateral exophthalmos,
been a major problem in both humans and
which is more marked in the right eye
animals. The prognosis is guarded. The recur-
rence rate has traditionally been reported to be
quite low, but more recent reports suggest
samples had detectable antibodies against type
otherwise.
 2M fibers. Immunoblot assays revealed that the
antibodies were most often directed against a
185-K protein, myosin heavy chain, and a band
Orbital Neoplasms
 that appeared to be LC2-M (myosin light-chain
2-masticatory)
Orbital neoplasms occur in older animals
Dogs with eosinophilic myositis often show
(mean age 9.5 years) but can develop in
a leukocytosis with marked peripheral eosino-
young animals as well. Primary tumors (60
philia. In acute myositis, serum levels of cre-
70%) arise from any orbital tissue, and sec-
atine phosphokinase may be elevated, and
ondary neoplasms (30-40%) either invade
biopsy of the temporal muscle is usually diag-
the orbit from adjacent structures or metas-
nostic. Histopathologic examination will reveal
tasize from distant sites (Table 2.6).
 degeneration of muscle fbers (temporal muscle
Orbital tumors usually present with
biopsy is often used) as well as neutrophilic and
slowly progressive, unilateral exophthal-
eosinophilic infiltration. Autoantibodies against
mos, with variable displacement of the globe
type 2M myofibers can be identified in frozen
(Figs. 2.6A-D). Tumors arising in the rostral
sections. In some cases, circulating antibodies
part of the orbit may cause enophthalmos and
can be detected as well.
protrusion of the nictitating membrane. Bilat-
Extraocular polymyositis occurs in the
eral orbital neoplasms appear to be extremely
Golden Retriever, Hovawart, Great Dane,
rare.
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Oreit/43
DDOGGEW2J
24Jan03
TIw0.1MI0.4
C8-5SmP/Obll
12:07:17
Bild3274.0cm
Skala3
150dB/K5
Persistmittl
BFmitl
2D-OptAufl
0.63cm
2.69cm
2.54cm
B
OS HOR
Fig. 2.5. A. Exophthalmia and fxed globes in an 8-month-old Golden Retriever
with bilateral extraocular polymyositis. B. Ultrasonography of the swollen rectus
muscles in a 5-year-old Great Dane with extraocular polymyositis.
Neoplasms are not initially painful, and
kinds of tumors occur (Table 2.6). Diagnos-
retropulsion of the globe is decreased or
tics include orbital ultrasonography, but CT
impossible. An indentation of the caudal pole
and MR imaging, if available, are preferred
of the globe may be seen during ophthalmos-
to define neoplasm margins. After localization
copy, and also can be visualized during ultra-
of the lesion, a fine-needle aspirate is obtained
sonography. Vision is usually retained, even
to determine tumor type. The general physical
in cases of longstanding orbital neoplasms.
examination and search for possible metastasis,
however, tumors arising from the 
optic
including chest radiography, are part of a
nerve or its meninges cause blindness at an
routine workup.
early stage.
Many orbital neoplasms are discovered in an
Orbital tumors are mostly primary (60-
advanced stage, in which temporization or
70%) and malignant (90%). As expected, all
euthanasia are the only options. Localized neo-
44 /ESSEntIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
Table 2.6. Reported Orbital Neoplasms in the Dog.
Tumor type
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3
Series 4
 Adenoma
Adenocarcinoma'
8
3
13
5
Fibrohistiocytoma
2
Fibroma/fibrosarcoma
2
2
6
Hemangiosarcoma
 Leimyoma
Liposarcoma
Lymphoma²
2
Malignant choristoma (pituitary)
Malignant melanoma
3
Mast cell sarcoma
4
E
Meningioma
3
 Neurofibrosarcoma
 Osteoma/chondroma
Osteogenic sarcoma
G
b
2
Retinoblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Sarcoma?
1
Sq cell carcincoma
Othera
Totals
25
23
44
13
'ncludes sinus, nasal cavity, lacrimal, salivary zygomatic, and nictitans origin: Zincludes lymposarcoma, myelopro-
liferative; "includes reticulum, undifferentiated;: and 4includes pseudotumor.
Series 1 (Gross S. Aguirre G, Harvey C. Tumors involving the orbit of the dog. Proceedings of the tenth annual
Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 1979:229-240: Series 2 (Kern TJ. Orbital neoplasia in 23 dogs. JAVMA 1985:186:489-
-jadsonan e :shop ui eiseidoau pehqio jo awoino pue suawnean sisoubeia Ny meia 'Haa xupuan) e sauas lat
tive study of 44 cases. J Small Anim Pract 2000;41:105-108); and Series 4 (Attali-Soussay K, Jegou JP. Clerc B.
Retrobulbar tumors in dogs and cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:19-27
plasms without evident distant metastasis may
Traumatic Lesions
be surgically removed while preserving the
globe and, possibly, the animal's vision. If pres-
Orbital Hematoma
ervation of the globe is not possible, exentera-
tion of the globe or radical orbitectomy must
Orbital hematomas usually result from road
be considered. Surgical management of orbital
accidents; therefore, such hematomas are
neoplasia can be combined with radiation, che-
accompanied by other head and eye injuries.
motherapy, or both.
With
skin
1 lacerations, and (
often skull
In most cases, the prognosis is guarded
fractures,
these
 patients
present
with
at best. Most dogs with orbital neoplasms
marked
exophthalmos,
subconjunctival
are euthanized shortly after
 diagnosis.
hemorrhage, lagophthalmos, and secondary
With early diagnosis and surgical therapy,
xerophthalmia (Fig. 2.7).
however, the survival time can increase to
The eye must be protected and maintained
several months to years.
moist during the physical examinations and
C
COLLIEW10
30Sep03
TIs0.2MI0.6
C8-5Standard
15:20:20
Bild2344.9cm
Skala3
150dB/K4
Persistniedr
BFmittl
2D-Opt:Aufl
OD
MED
Fig. 2.6. A. Orbital neoplasm (adenocarcinoma) in a Beagle displacing the globe forward and dorsally. The
mass is in the medial and ventral orbit. B. Orbital neoplasm (meningioma) in a dog with unilateral
exophthalmia, protrusion of the nictitating membrane, and episcleral congestion. C. Orbital neoplasm
(adneocarcinoma) in a pointer with exophthalmos and dorsal swelling of the orbit. D. Ultrasonography of an
orbital neoplasm (meningioma) in a l0-year-old Collie. The mass immediately posterior to the globe has
indented its posterior pole.
45
46/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
cavity of such dogs during expiration and air is
pressed into the orbit via the nasolacrimal duct.
Fractures of the paranasal sinuses may also
cause orbital emphysema.
The soft swelling of orbital emphysema often
reveals crepitus when palpated. If clinical signs
are equivocal, plain radiographs will show air
in the orbit and, at the same time, may dem-
onstrate orbital fractures. Orbital emphysema
resolves spontaneously in most cases. If the
emphysema persists after enucleation, the
proximal end of the nasolacrimal duct must be
Fig. 2.7. Exophthalmos and orbital hemorrhage
with intraocular hemorrhage in a Pug following
identified and ligated
trauma with a baseball bat. Prognosis is poor and
phthisis is likely.
Proptosis
Proptosis results from a sudden, forward
diagnostics. Ultrasonography of the globe is
 indicated when hyphema prevents examination
displacement of the globe with simultaneous
of the posterior segment. Contusions of the
entrapment of the eyelids behind the equator.
This entrapment prohibits spontaneous
globe are often associated with lens luxation,
vitreal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment.
repositioning of the globe (Figs. 2.8A and
B). Proptosis is usually the result of some
In severe cases, scleral ruptures, usually extend-
traumatic incident; the trauma may be
ing from the lamina cribrosa, may occur as
minimal in brachycephalic breeds. In one
well.
series of twenty-nine dogs, fourteen were
 In cases of extensive scleral rupture, enucle-
brachycephalic breeds.  In dolichocephalic
ation is usually the only treatment option.
breeds, greater trauma is necessary to cause
proptosis.
contusions. To prevent serious exposure kera-
Proptosis of the globe is a true ophthal-
titis, a third eyelid flap or a temporary tarsor-
mic emergency, one which requires rapid
rhaphy is indicated. Topical and systemic
assessment of the situation as well as imme-
antibiotic therapy should be instituted. Corti-
diate medical and surgical therapy. Even if
costeroids should be given systemically and
vision cannot be preserved, the globes can often
topically if the corneal epithelium is intact.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may
pue Aea Aq sasodnd oaso roy paeais aa
correct management.
increase the risk of further hemorrhages. Hot
While the diagnosis of proptosis is rela-
 compresses are beneficial if tolerated by the
tively easy, the determination of the progno-
animal
sis as well as the appropriate medical and
With the addition of severe intraocular hem-
surgical management is more difficult (Table
orrhage to orbital hemorrhage, the prognosis
for vision is usually grave and phthisis bulbi a
2.7). Generally, the prognosis for vision is
guarded to poor (20%) except in the brachy-
common sequel.
cephalics (50-70%). As an approximation,
s uaa1 5aqo pasidid jo %o7 Aquo
Orbital Emphysema
functional vision.
 Proptosed eyes should be repositioned
Orbital emphysema is usually a complica-
under general anesthesia as soon as possible
tion of enucleation, but it may also result
(Table 2.8). Until anesthesia is induced, pro-
from fractures of the frontal sinus. Brachy-
ptosed globes must be kept moist with an anti
cephalic dogs appear to be predisposed. This
biotic ointment. The globe is cleansed with
may result from increased pressure in the nasal
NaCl solution, and the eyelids are engaged with
DiSEASEs ANo SuRGERY Of THe CaNiNe ORBIt /47
Fig. 2.8. A. Proptosis of the left globe in a mixed-breed dog. B. The same eye
after placement of a temporary tarsorrhaphy. Note the marked orbital swelling
and pressure under the complete temporary tarsorrhaphy.
Table 2.7. Recommended Treatments and Prognosis for Traumatic Proptosis in Dogs.
Qinicat Sign
Possible Prognosis
Treatment
 Positive direct pupil reflex
Guarded to good
Replacerment
 Medial rectus muscle avulsion
Guarded
Monitor/reattach
2 or more rectus m. avulsions
 Poor
Enucleation
Cormeal/scleral rupture(s)
 Guarded to poor
Repair/enucleation
 Massive intraocular hermorrhage
Poor
Repair/possible enucleation later
Optic nerve transection
Poor
Enucleation
Table 2.8. Treatment Steps for Proptosed Globes.
Keep moist with an antibiotic ointment
Cleanse with NaCl solution
Engage eyelids with strabismus hooks and pull lids over the globe
Lateral canthotomy may be needed to increase palpebral fissure
Termporary tarsomhaphy with two to three horizontal mattress sutures with stents (4-0 to 2-0 monofilament
loj snyrueo leipaw pe bujuado ews aeal panban Aensn ane aaiy io oml leaiew (ainns algeaiosgeuou
medications
Systernic antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy is instituted for 7-10 days.
Topical therapy includes atropine sulfate and antibiotic drops.
Warm compresses are applied twice daily
strabismus hooks and pulled both up and away
using two or three horizontal mattress 4-0 to
from the globe. Gentle pressure will cause the
 2-0 (depending on the size of the animal)
globe to settle back into the orbit. A lateral
monoflament nonabsorbable sutures and
canthotomy may be necessary. As the orbital
stents.
hemorrhage and tissue swelling prevent the eye
Systemic antibioticand corticosteroid therapy
from returning to an absolutely normal posi-
(used when no corneal disease is present) is
tion, a temporary tarsorrhaphy must be done
instituted for 7-l0 days. Topical therapy
48/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
includes atropine sulfate and antibiotic drops.
Foreign bodies may enter the orbit from the
Warm compresses are applied twice daily
oral cavity, lateral orbital wall, or through the
Depending on the amount of orbital swelling
conjunctival sac. Most foreign bodies are not
and degree of exophthalmos, sutures
are
recognized on plain radiographs, but gunshot
removed one at a time (generally startingat 7-10
 pellets are easily demonstrated. Wooden foreign
days), starting medially, on subsequent visits.
bodies are difficult to visualize with conven-
Premature suture removal will be associated
tional diagnostic imaging techniques. Dogs
with the onset of corneal ulcerations because of
 present with chronic purulent ocular discharge.
the lagophthalmia and impaired blink reflex.
Surgical exploration may reveal a fistulous
Long-term sequelae of proptosis include
tract, along which foreign material may be
blindness, strabismus,
lagophthalmos,
retrieved.
sensory deficit of the cornea, keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca, exposure keratitis, glaucoma,
Miscellaneous Lesions
and phthisis bulbi. Exotropia is a common
sequel due to avulsion of the medial rectus
Orbital Fat Prolapse
muscle, the shortest of the four rectus
muscles.
Prolapse of orbital fat is uncommon in dogs;
only a few cases have been described. The cause
Orbital Fractures
of orbital fat prolapse in the dog, however, is
unknown, but probably involves herniation of
Fractures of orbital bones are not uncom-
orbital fat through the septum orbitale. The
mon after head trauma. The frontal, tempo-
 prolapsed fat presents as conjunctival swelling
ral, and zygomatic bones are most commonly
in the dorsolateral quadrant of the eye. Inflam-
involved, and clinical signs include exoph-
 matory reactions or ocular discharge are lacking.
thalmos or enophthalmos, strabismus, retro-
The diagnosis can be made on the basis of fine-
bulbar and periocular hemorrhage, pain,
 needle aspirates of adipose tissue. If necessary.
lacrimation, and facial asymmetry. Fractures
 orbital fat prolapse can be treated surgically, by
involving the paranasal sinuses may cause
excision of the prolapsed fatty tissue and sutur-
orbital or subcutaneous emphysema with
ing the conjunctiva to the episcleral tissue to
crepitus.
prevent further prolapse.
 Plain radiography and ultrasonography
should aid in making a definitive diagnosis.
Animals with orbital fractures should be kept
Surgery of the Globe
and the Orbit
quiet to prevent further swelling and hemor-
rhage, and cold compresses and systemic anti-
inflammatory drugs as well as local and systemic
The orbital surgeries include: (l) enucle-
antibiotics should be administered. Small, non-
ation (removal of the globe by frontal or
displaced fractures stabilize spontaneously and
lateral approach, or by transpalpebral tech-
do not require surgical reduction and fixation;
nique); (2) exenteration (removal of the
large and unstable fractures may require inter-
entire orbital tissues); (3) evisceration
 nal fixation.
(removal of the intraocular tissues) with or
without prosthesis; and (4) orbitotomy
Orbital Foreign Bodies/Shotgun
(lateral, dorsolateral, and frontal) with and
without zygomatic arch removal.
Injuries
Orbital foreign bodies and gunshot injuries
Enucleation
often present as acute inflammatory dis-
eases. The point of entry for both foreign
Enucleation is the most common orbital
bodies and gunshot pellets is not easily
surgery performed in the dog. Removal of
identified.
the globe is indicated for blind, enlarged,
DiSeases Ano SuRGery Of the Canine Okeit /49
painful eyes (e.g., uncontrollable glaucoma,
The  transpalpebral approach is used
endophthalmitis, severe ocular trauma with
more frequently in large animals, but occa-
hemorrhage, and intraocular tumors not
sionally in the dog with severe corneal
amenable to other forms of surgical or
disease. The advantage of this technique is
medical treatment.
the lack of communication between the
For all orbital surgeries, the periorbital skin
ocular surface and orbital contents. The
and eyelids are clipped, shaved, and prepared
eyelids are sutured or clamped together, and
for aseptic surgery in a routine manner. The
two eliptical incisions approximately 5 mm
ocular surface and conjunctival sac are copi-
behind the lid margins are joined near the
ously flushed with sterile saline solution; a half-
medial and lateral canthus. Deep dissection will
strength povidone-iodine solution can also be
eventually identify the bulbar conjunctiva;
used as part of the chemical preparation of the
further dissection and removal of the globe is
eye for surgery.
the same procedure as that for the subconjunc-
The most commonly lsed surgical tech-
tival approach.
nique in the dog is the subconjunctival
 The most common postoperative complica-
approach (Figs. 2.9 A through G). The main
tion is hemorrhage within the first few hours
objectives are to remove the globe, nictitat-
 after surgery, which results in swelling of the
ing membrane, and lid margins while leaving
surgical site and serous discharge from the
as much soft tissue as possible to minimize
suture line. Cold compresses, pressure ban-
the postoperative orbital depression. Postop-
dages, or both, as well as sedation of the patient,
erative care is symptomatic, and sutures are
are usually suffcient to control hemorrhage.
removed after 10-14 days.
Warm compresses applied to the orbit during
A
D
G
E
Fig. 2.9. Enucleation by subconjunctival approach. A. A lateral canthotomy can facilitate exposure of the
globe. B. The bulbar conjunctiva is incised approximately 5 mm posterior to the limbus over the entire
circumference of the globe. C. Sharp and blunt dissection close to the sclera will reveal the extraocular muscle
insertions. Extraocular muscles are severed close to their scleral attachments, and the remaining retractor muscle
fbers and optic nerve are clamped with a curved hemostat and then cut with scissors. D. The orbit is packed
with a gauze sponge and the nictitating membrane resected. E. The lid margins are excised approximately 5 mm
posterior to the mucocutaneous junction. F. The conjunctiva is closed with absorbable suture material in a
continuous pattern. G. The lids are closed with simple interrupted sutures
S0/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
the days following surgery will help to reduce
used today. The size of the implant is selected
swelling.
according to the size of the orbital space to be
Draining fistulas from the orbit can result
filled; the diameters vary in dogs between 12
from incomplete removal of the caruncle at the
and 28 mm. These implants are placed into the
medial canthus or of the remaining secretory
orbit after removal of the globe and nictitating
tissue (e.g, conjunctival goblet cells, third
membrane, and after hemostasis has been
eyelid gland) within the orbit. Postoperative
achieved. To improve the cosmetic appearance
orbital infection is a rare complication.
and avoid rotation of the implant, the anterior
brachycephalic breeds, orbital emphysema may
quarter of the sphere is removed using scalpel
also be a complication of enucleation.
blades until a flat, anterior surface with rounded
edges is achieved. The prosthesis is then placed
in the orbit, and the wound is closed in a
Exenteration
routine manner. This reduces orbital depres-
Exenteration involves removal of the con-
sion commonly seen after enucleation.
Postoperative care is the same as for enucle-
junctiva, periorbita, extraocular muscles,
ation and exenteration. Possible complications
and globe. In case of an orbital tumor, exen-
include wound dehiscence, extrusion of the
teration may be extended to involve all
implant, traumatic dislocation and rotation of
orbital contents. A transpalpebral approach is
the implant, orbital seroma, and infection.
usually used. Because of the amount of orbital
tissues excised, orbital depression is more
 marked following exenteration than following
Evisceration and fmplantation of the
    r and e n
Intrascferaf Prosthesis
anchored to the orbital rim to avoid this
unsightly depression.
Unless they are phthisic or microphthalmic,
blind and painful eyes without septic endo-
Orbital Prosthesis
phthalmitis or intraocular neoplasms and
end-stage glaucoma may be salvaged by evis-
To improve the cosmetic appearance after
ceration and implantation of an intrascleral
enucleation or exenteration, silicone
or
silicone prosthesis. Blind eyes with aseptic
methyl methacrylate spheres may
be
uveitis and beginning phthisis bulbi can
implanted. Prolene mesh may also be sutured
equally be fitted with an intrascleral pros-
to the periosteum of the orbital rim (Fig.
thesis to prevent further shrinkage of the
2.10). Silicone spheres are most commonly
globe and secondary adnexal problems.
Evisceration involves removal of all intraoc-
ular contents, leaving only the fbrous tunic,
and then flling the cavity with an appropriate-
size silicone sphere. The diameter of the sili-
cone sphere should be equal to the horizontal
diameter of the opposite healthy cornea or l--
2 mm larger
Complications, including regrowth of
unidentified intraocular neoplasms, scleral
wound dehiscence, and postoperative intra-
scleral infections, have been reported to
occur in 10% of cases. In earlier reports,
d  asbid e sm aiu i
Fig. 2.10. Placement of a prolene mesh following
tation of a prosthesis; however, recently such
devices have been used to salvage globes with
exenteration to reduce the postoperative depression
The mesh is apposed to the periosteum of the orbital
corneal lacerations. In addition, intraocular
rim.
neoplasms have to be carefully ruled out prior
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE OReIT/51
and the zygomatic arch deflected ventrally after
osteotomy. Possible complications of lateral
orbitotomies include hemorrhage, transient
lagophthalmos, postoperative swelling and
infection, enophthalmos, and strabismus.
Selected References
Attali-Soussay K, Jegou JP, Clerc B. Retrobulbar
tumors in dogs and cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthal-
Fig. 2.ll. Postoperative appearance after bilateral
mol 2001;4:19-27.
evisceration and placement of intrascleral silicone
Brightman A, Magrane WG, Huff RW, Helper LC.
spheres for end-stage glaucoma and buphthalmia in a
Intraocular prosthesis in the dog. J Am Anim
Beagle. The dog is free of pain and no longer requires
Hosp Assoc 1977;13:481-485
topical medications.
Carpenter JL, Schmidt GM, Moore FM, Albert DM,
Abrams KL, Elner VM. Canine bilateral extra-
ocular polymyositis. Vet Pathol 1989;26:510-
512.
to evisceration and implantation of a silicone
Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA, van der Woerdt
prosthesis. A report of nine cases with intraocu-
A, McLaughlin SA. Traumatic ocular proptoses in
lar neoplasia suggests, however, that such
dogs and cats—84 cases (1980-1993). J Am Vet
tumors may not be an absolute contraindica-
Med Assoc 1995;206:1186-1190.
tion to placement of an intrascleral prosthesis.
Hendrix DVH, Gelatt KN. Diagnosis, treatment and
The cosmetic results are usually acceptable. In
outcome of orbital neoplasia in dogs: a retrospec-
a retrospective study, most clients were satis-
tive study of 44 cases. J Small Anim Pract 2000;
fed with the result (Fig. 2.11).
41:105-108
Kern TJ. Orbital neoplasia in 23 dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1985;186:489-491
Orbitotomy
Martin C.
Augenkrankheiten
bei Hund und
Katze, lst ed. Vol. 1. Hannover, Germany: M &
Exploratory orbitotomy is indicated to eval-
H Schaper, 1995.
uate and biopsy space-occupying lesions.
Millichamp N, Spencer CP. Orbital varix in a dog. J
Several approaches to the orbit are possible,
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:56-60.
OBrien MG, et al. Total and partial orbitectomy for
depending on localization of the lesion. A
the treatment of periorbital tumors in 24 dogs and
 transconjunctival approach will provide access
6 cats: a retrospective study. Vet Surg 1996;25:
to lesions anterior to the equator of the globe
471-479.
A wider access to the orbit is gained through a
 Ruehli M, Spiess BM. Retrobulbar space-occupying
lateral approach, with transsection of the lateral
lesions in dogs and cats: clinical signs and diag-
orbital ligament. If deep orbital structures such
nostic work-up. Tierarztl Prax 1995;23:306-
ast
the zygomatic salivary gland must be
312.
accessed, a portion of the zygomatic arch can
Ruehli MB, Spiess BM. Treatment of orbital abscesses
be removed with a rongeur.
and phlegmon in dogs and cats. Tierarztl Prax
Removal of localized orbital neoplasms
1995;23:398-401
usually requires a more radical approach. Ade-
Shelton GD, Cardinet GHd, Bandman E. Canine
masticatory muscle disorders: a study of 29 cases.
quate access to the ventral and caudal aspects
of the orbit can be gained by lateral orbitotomy
Muscle Nerve 1987;10:753-766
Slatter DH, Abdelbaki Y. Lateral orbitotomy by
with resection of the zygomatic arch. This tech-
zygomatic arch resection in the dog. J Am Vet
nique has been used to remove orbital tumors
Med Assoc 1979;175:1179-1182
and, at the same time, retain both the globe
Spiess BM. Diseases and surgery of the canine orbit.
and vision. In a recent modification of this
In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th 
technique, the orbital ligament is transected
ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 539-562
52/EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinAry OpHthalmoLOGY
Spiess BM, Ruhli MB, Bauer GA. Therapy of orbital
Walde I, Hittmair K, Henninger W, Czedik-
neoplasms in small animals. Tierarztl Prax 1995;
Eysenberg T. Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a
23:509-514.
dachshund. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;7:239-
Spiess B, Williams MM. Protruding eye. In: Binning-
244
ton A, Cockshutt JR, eds. Decision making in
Decker, 1988. 164-165.
Chapter 3
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE
CANINE EYELID
Frans C. Stades and Kirk N. Gelatt
Introduction
Structure and Function
The primary function of the eyelids is the
The eyelids are composed of (from superfi-
protection of the globe. The eyelids cover
cial to deep): skin, palpebral conjunctiva,
the orbit and globe and surround the palpe-
collagen, muscle, and glandular tissue (Fig.
bral fissure. When the palpebral fissure is fully
3.1). They can be divided into the larger and
open in the normal adult dog and the eye is
 2-5 mm longer more mobile upper eyelid, and
looking forward, the eyelid margins contact
the lower eyelid. The circular muscle surround-
and cover the dorsal and ventral external limbi,
ing and closing the palpebral fissure is the
and expose slightly the lateral limbus and sclera
orbicularis oculi. When the orbicularis oculi
and medially the nictitating membrane. Eyelid
contracts, a narrow horizontal slit results, with
diseases in dogs are frequent, of considerable
the palpebral fissure moving slightly medially
significance, and represent an important part of
because of the stronger medial canthal ligament
the practitioner's and ophthalmologist's oph-
attached to
the medial periosteum and the
thalmic patient load.
weaker retractor anguli lateralis muscle plus a
Eyelid diseases are traditionally divided
lateral palpebr:
I ligament in the lateral canthus.
into  congenital-developmental
 and here-
This motion moves the precorneal film medi
ditary, trauma,
inflammatory,
immune
ally for entry into the lower and upper lacrimal
mediated
and
others,
and
neoplastic
puncta and exit to the nose. This lateral weak
disorders. Clinical management of most of
ligament r
may contribute to lateral canthal
the eyelid diseases, except for the inflamma-
eyelid distortion, particularly in mesocephalic
tory, immune-mediated,
and
neoplastic
breeds, and often less successful surgeries.
types, is surgical.
The average length of the palpebral fissure
Most of the small animal eyelid surgical pro
when stretched by calipers is approximately
cedures have been modified from techniques
33 mm in most medium to large breeds of
reported in man. Important anatomical differ-
dogs. In breeds with a distinct lack of corneal
ences between man and the dog are the pres
contact of the lower lid to the globe and ectro-
ence of only a thin fibrous tarsus in dogs (in
pion, the palpebral fissure length often mea-
man this layer consists on a rigid tarsal plate).
sures 39 + mm. The levator palpebrae superioris
and the very poorly developed lateral canthal
(innervated by the oculomotor nerve), levator
el e ioy siunooe youm sop au ui suaue
anguli oculi medialis (Muller's muscle), and
number of lid deformities in dogs).
 Other superfcial facial muscles open the upper
53
54 /ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OFHTHALMOLOGY
This groove is also an important surgical
junction that divides the lid into skin-
orbicularus oculi—and tarsus—palpebral
conjunctiva. When the lids are manually
everted to show the palpebral conjunctival
Y
surface of the lid margin, the meibomian glands
can be visualized below the palpebral conjunc-
tiva, and appear as 3-4 mm long. whitish-
yellow lines running perpendicular to the
margin. Just outside the groove are the even
smaller orifices of the glands of Zeis and Moll
(modified sweat glands).
The eyelids of man are quite similar to
those in dogs with one major difference; the
tarsal layer consists of a distinct cartilagi-
nous plate that provides rigid internal
support for the eyelids. In domestic animals
the tarsal plate consists of a much thinner
and more flexible fibrous tarsus, and to
maintain its shape the eyelids must rest on
the corneal surface.
Sensation of the lateral two-thirds of the
upper eyelids is provided by the trigeminal
nerve. The medial canthus and medial aspects
of the upper eyelids are also served by the
Fig. 3.l. Cross-section through the canine eyelid:
largest branch of the ophthalmic branch of
1. eyelash-like hair on the lateral part of the upper
the trigeminal (ffth) nerve. The sensation for
eyelid; 2. Zeis/Moll glands; 3. meibomian gland;
4. goblet cells within the conjunctiva; 5. fornix;
the entire lower eyelid is provided by the max-
illary division of the trigeminal nerve.
6. bulbar (scleral) conjunctiva; 7. nictitating
The palpebral branch of the facial (VI1)
membrane; 8. orbicularis oculi m., and 9. tarsal plate
(layer)
nerve innervates the majority of the muscles
(e.g., orbicularis oculi) that control the pal-
eyelid, while the malaris muscle opens the
pebral fissure size, except for the levator
lower eyelid. The eyelids have thin and pliable
palpebral superioris muscle, which is inner-
skin, covered with fne and short hairs. The
vated by the oculomotor (lll) cranial nerve.
borderline of lid hair in the upper lid (l mm)
The levator anguli oculi medialis is under sym-
and lower lid (2 mm) is from the free lid margin
pathetic control. Loss of sympathetic innerva-
and only the upper lids contain cilia or eye-
tion results in a ptosis of the medial upper lid.
lashes, usually in two or four irregular rows
The blood supply to the eyelids primarily
These cilia are usually the same color as the
 originates from the medial and lateral palpebral
adjacent eyelid hair coat. Sometimes long tactile
arteries. Additional blood supply to the lateral
hairs (pili supraorbitales or vibrissae) appear as
canthus and upper and lower eyelid is derived
a tuft along the dorsal medial orbital margin.
from branches from the external ethmoidal
The junction of the lid hair and pigmentation
artery. The medial aspects of the canine eyelids
just before the lid margins is an important site
 are also supplied by branches of the malaris
for lid surgeries.
artery, a branch of the infraorbital artery, which
The lid margins (margo intermarginales)
     
 are generally pigmented and they are hair-
transverse facial arteries, and branches of the
less. Thirty to forty orifices of the meibo-
external ophthalmic artery. Limited blood
mian glands open into the free lid margin in
supply to the lids originates from the deeper
a fine groove, also named the “grey line."
orbital blood vessels
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE EYELID/55
The lymphatic drainage from the eyelids
microscope lights are essential during the
converges at the medial and lateral canthal
surgery.
areas. Lymphatic drainage is mainly to the
parotid lymph node. Some of the same areas
Basic Surgicai Instruments
drain to the mandibular lymph nodes. As a
result, both lymph nodes need to be examined
These may include wire lid speculum, stan-
if regional metastases from eyelid neoplasia is
dard teeth (l x 2 teeth) and serrated thumb
suspected
forceps, calipers, chalazion or eyelid clamp,
standard strabismus or curved scissors,
Beaver scalpel handle, and a Castroviejo or
Principles of Lid Surgery
similar needle holder. Cutting by rounded
scalpel blade easily causes folding, and a pointed
Preparation of the Operative Field
scalpel blade from the inside to the outside
provides a more precise incision. Cutting by
The lid skin is usually shaved or clipped by
scissors can cause tissue crushing and nonper-
very small hair clippers, and 1:50 aqueous (not
pendicular incision edges.
alcohol) povidone solution is used to disinfect
the conjunctival and lid surfaces. If the stan-
Suture Material and Wound
dard alcohol-based surgical povidone iodine
Apposition
solution is used, extra care should be taken not
to allow iodine to contact the eye (the alcohol
For eye (lid) surgery atraumatic needles are
will cause sloughing of the corneal and con-
always used. To avoid direct suture contact
junctival epithelium). The conjunctival sac and
with the cornea, many prefer soft material such
the skin are then rinsed copiously with hand-
as silk (4-0) but early removal (prior to 14
warm saline.
days) is recommended. For diffcult-to-handle
animals, absorbable material, for example,
Positioning
polyglactin 910 or polyglycol acid, can be used.
thus omitting the need for stitch removal. If
For lid surgery, the lid fissure has to be posi-
 there is a higher risk of infection, monoflament
tioned more or less horizontally with the dog's
nylon is used (blepharoplasties 6-0). Wound
body in either lateral or dorsal recumbency.
edges must be closed very precisely. Suture
 ends are left long, thus allowing easy removal.
The positioning of the head is best carried out
by using a vacuum pillow
Special attention is necessary to appose the
edges of eyelid margin defects using either two
0l anbjuuoal g-aingy e io/pue saimins jo siakel
Draping
perfectly align the margin.
  o   s rno 
Hemostasis
eye, or disposable drapes with a hole cut during
surgery, can be used for eye surgery. The drapes
Hemostasis is usually achieved by direct pres-
 u uisui sdu ami aq paxy aq au 
sure. Excessive hemorrhage can also be stopped
drapes during surgery can influence the shape
by (bipolar) electrocoagulationor; for smaller
of the lid fissure or position of the eye and
vessels, special ophthalmic (battery) disposable
should be avoided.
microcautery units are available.
Magnification Equipment and Light
Cryosurgery
Good magnification (2.5-5x) is sufficient in
 In cryosurgery, the destructive effect of freez-
most cases. Powerful, well-focused operating
ing the intracellular water ruptures the cell
lights, a head-mounted light, or operating
membrane in unwanted tissues. In general, two
56/EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinAry OpHthALmoLOGY
cycles of rapid freezing and slow, spontaneous
The anomaly only occurs infrequently, and
thawing are used. The tissues are frozen to at
is usually bilateral. Conjunctivitis or oph-
least -25°C by the use of carbon dioxide or
thalmia neonatorum can develop under
nitrous oxide. Cryosurgery may be of use for
these sealed eyelids and is characterized by
the destruction of hair follicles, the destruction
bulging of these closed eyelids from the
of reactive granulation, or several types of neo-
accumulated exudates and a bead of puru-
plasia. The main advantage of cryosurgery is
lent material at the medial canthus (Fig.
the relative simplicity and repeatability of the
3.2). The often staphylococcal keratoconjunc-
method. Potential disadvantages are severe
tivitis may result from an intra-uterine infection
postoperative swelling, discoloration,
，which
or from the dam's genital tract during partum.
may be definitive, and the unwanted loss of
The bacteria enter the conjunctival sac, pre-
normal tissue.
sumably via the patent opening in the medial
canthus or the nasolacrimal system. Advanced
Postoperative Care
cases can result in corneal perforation and
panophthalmitis.
During recovery from general anesthesia or at
a later time, with uncontrolled movements the
Therapy
patient may loosen or lose stitches or, worse.
tissues. Routine use of an Elizabethan or E-
Treatment consists of gently massaging the
collar may prevent such complications. Topical
fissure cautiously until it opens, mechanical
antibiotic-corticosteroids are applied q6h and
spreading with mosquito forceps in the
continued until suture removal.
spontaneous first opening, or an incision
at the medial canthus. Care is required to
Congenital and/or Presumed
follow the normal line of separation between
the two lid margins accurately, using
Hereditary Structural
Abnormalities
Stevens scissors and avoiding any contact
with the cornea. The conjunctival sac can
Ankyloblepharon-Physiologic
be cultured to isolate bacteria and establish
antibiotic sensitivity. All debris is carefully
The canine palpebral fissure is sealed at
removed using sterile saline or a l:50
povidone-iodine aqueous solution, and the
birth to protect continued eye development.
The bridge of tissue in the palpebral fissure
eye is thoroughly examined. Broad-spectrum
between the already developed margins of
the eyelid normally regresses 10-l4 days
postpartum.
Premature opening of the palpebral fissure
iy ansodxa ue Aq pauedoooe Ainsn 5
conjunctivitis; severe corneal ulceration, globe
perforation, and uveitis are possible complica-
tions. Wetting ointments or gels must be used
to protect the ocular surfaces. Temporary tar-
sorrhaphy with long and adjustable sutures
may be necessary in severe cases, particularly if
the palpebral fissure opens within the first few
days postpartum.
Ankylobfepharon-Pathofogic
Fig. 3.2. Pathologic ankyloblepharon. Delayed
eyelid opening in a Shetland Sheepdog puppy has
Ankyloblepharon is delayed or complete
resulted in ophthalmic neonatorum with pus
failure of opening of the palpebral fissure.
extruding from the medial canthus
DiSEASEs ANo SuRGeRY Of THe CaNiNe EYELiD/57
topical antibiotic is applied q6h to q4h to
        '
resolve the condition.
canthus. Genetic predisposition exists in the
German Shepherd, Dalmatian, and St. Bernard,
Prognosis
with the latter breed demonstrating a familial
relationship between lower eyelid coloboma
The prognosis is favorable. There are no known
and dermoid formation. An island or fold of
means of preventing this condition.
skin often disrupts the lid margin and is con-
tinuous with the conjunctiva. The fissure length
Eyelid Aplasia or Coloboma
itself is sufficient in most cases. Blinking is
abnormal and hairs generally grow toward the
 cornea, causing chronic iritation and resulting
In aplasia palpebrae or lid agenesis the lid
in edema, vascularization, and pigmentation.
margin and the lid itself are completely or
partly undeveloped. This rare anomaly is
congenital, possibly hereditary, usually
Therapy
bilateral, and in the canine affecting the
lateral part of the lower eyelid; the condition
Treatment consists of removal of the abnor
is more frequent in cats. As in cats, other
mal parts of the eyelid and conjunctiva and
ophthalmic abnormalities may be present in
especially the hair follicles in the involved
the dog, and therapy is similar (see chapter 1l,
area.
"Feline Ophthalmology").
Distichiasis and Conjunctival
Dermoids and Dysplasia Paipebrae
Ectopic Cilia
Dermoids or choristomas of the lids are
 Distichiasis refers to single or multiple hairs
ectopic and abnormally developed islands of
arising from the free lid margin. They usually
skin in or at the margin of the eyelid, fre-
quently associated with some dysplastic
arise single or with two or more hairs from
deformities of the adjacent conjunctiva (Fig.
the meibomian duct openings with the
follicle(s) 4-6 mm behind the margin of the
3.3). They are rare, possibly hereditary, anom-
lid. The meibomian glands are modified hair
follicles, and distichia develop from undifferen-
tiated gland tissue. Both lids can be affected,
and often the condition is bilateral.
"Soft" distichia, directed away from the
cornea, have limited clinical significance;
however, stiff distichia that rub the cornea
can irritate and cause injury. Clinical signs
range from mild (increased lacrimation, bleph-
arospasm, and epiphora) to severe (corneal vas-
cularization, pigmentation, corneal ulcers, and
secondary entropion).
Distichiasis is considered to be inherited,
and predisposed breeds (1995-2000; 27,087
purebred dogs) include the American (69%)
    
Springer Spaniel (48%) and Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel (24%), Flat-Coated Retriever
(31%), Boxer, English Bulldog, Havanese,
Fig. 3.3. Dermoid or choristoma affecting the lateral
Shetland Sheepdog (25%), Shih 
Tzu,
canthus and lateral lower eyelid in a 6-month-old
Pekingese,  Tibetan Terrier  and Spaniel
Golden Retriever
Dachshund, Poodle, and Jack Russell Terrier.
58/ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Distichia may be difficult to detect without
but spare the adjacent eyelid tissue. Excessive
magnifying glasses and strong, focal illumina-
temperatures below -30°C will easily produce
tion. A common sign of distichiasis is the mucin
necrosis and eyelid distortion; the use of ther-
that adheres to the hairs, revealing their pres-
mocouple needles may ensure that tissue
ence. Distichia are usually the same color as
temperature does not fall below -25°C. The
adjacent hair of the lids.
immediate postoperative effect is considerable
swelling of the cryosurgery site, sometimes so
much that blinking is impaired. Preoperative
Therapy
systemic nonsteroidals or postoperative topical
treatment with corticosteroid-antibiotic eye
The simplest treatment is manual epilation
ointment is helpful. The swelling usually lasts
by rounded tip epilation forceps at regular
intervals (4-5 weeks). Manual epilation may
no more than 2-4 days. Depigmentation of the
frozen areas occurs within 72 hours. Repig-
also be used to confirm that the clinical
mentation usually takes up to 6 months to
signs are related to the distichia.
complete. Permanent depigmentation, scarring.
For permanent treatment of distichiasis
and distortion are possible complications.
the hair follicle is destroyed, removed,
or redirected.
The methods vary from
diathermy-electro-epilation to electrocau-
Ectopic Cilia
tery,
high-frequency
radio-hyperthermia,
electrolysis, cryotherapy, partial resection
Dogs with distichiasis more frequently also
of the distal tarsal plate, eyelid splitting,
have ectopic cilia in the dorsal conjunctiva
transpalpebral conjunctival dissection, and
The cilia emerge through the palpebral con-
Celsus-Hotz repositioning, but all have some
 junctiva and impinge directly on the cornea,
limitations (Table 3.1; Figs. 3.4A and B).
often causing severe corneal irritation and
Cryosurgery in most countries is the most
 bleparospasm. They are usually pigmented
 popular technique. It is performed through the
in the same color as the rest of the hairs of
conjunctival surface directly over to the follicle
the dog and located in a small pigmented
(3-4 mm behind the free margin of the lid).
spot of mid-dorsal palebral conjunctiva. Pre-
The lid margin is stabilized and everted, using
disposed breeds, also predisposed for distichia-
a Von Graefe forceps or Desmarres eyelid
sis, are the Flat-Coated Retriever, Pekingese,
clamp. A double freeze-thaw
1cycle
using
Shih Tzu, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Boxer,
(nitrous oxide) specific probes produces
a
English Bulldog. Poodle, and Jack Russell
-25°C freeze, which can destroy the follicles
Terrier.
Table 3.1. Methods to Treat Distichiasis in the Dog.
Method
indications/Results
Mechanical epilation
For few distichia; regrowth cormmon (- 4wks)
Celsus-Hotz resection
 Produces mild ectropion and rotates the distichia frorm the
conjunctival and/or cormeal surface(s)
 Electrolysis 
Limited to few distichia
 Diatherrny/electrocautery
Limited to few distichia
Eyelid splits
More difficult/for few distichia
Partial resection of the distal tarsal plate
More difficult/for few distichia
Transpalpebral conjunctival dissection 
More difficult/for few distichia
Cryotherapy
 More swelling postfreezing: lid margin depigrmentation usually
temporary
Diseases Ano SuRGeRy OF the Canine EYeliD/59
eyelid clamp, and the ectopic cilia and follicles
removed by “en bloc" excision, or destroyed by
cryosurgery. After-treatment consists of topical
antibiotic ointment q6h for 7 days.
Entropion
B
Entropion is the inversion of all or part of
the margin of the eyelid such that the outer
lid skin contacts the conjunctival and/or
corneal surfaces. The degree of entropion is
considered to be mild (margin tilted about
45°), moderate (tilted by about 90°), or
severe (turned inward by about 180°). Entro-
pion may be lateral, medial, angular, or total.
Pl naddn 1o/pue ramoi au iae Aeu pue
Entropion can be divided into categories.
primary, as congenital/developmental entro-
pion; secondary or acquired as spastic; and
A
cicatricial entropion. Entropion may result
from a difference in tension between the orbi-
cularis oculi muscle and the malaris muscle
(lower lid entropion), and influenced by mul-
tiple conditions such as the length of the lid
fissure, conformation of the skull, the orbital
anatomy, gender, and the amount and folds of
the facial skin around the eyes.
Epidemiology
 Primary, congenital, or developmental entro-
pion is a common condition in purebred
dogs (Figs. 3.5A and B). In most cases it is
Fig. 3.4. Therapy for canine distichiasis. A.
because of a hereditary defect, but the
Destruction of a single hair follicle by battery-
 powered needle epilator via opening of the gland (A),
genetic basis is not well understood. Specific
breeds demonstrate entropion often affect-
or by electrocautery (cutting) via the conjunctiva-
tarsal plate (B). B. Cryodestruction of multiple
ing the same sites (Box 3.l). In some breeds,
distichia.
for example, Shar Pei and Chow Chow, the
g Aeau) uoidonua pa raddn pue ramo
except for the medial canthus) can be present
as early as at 2-6 weeks of age. In the other
Single or multiple cilia emerge approxi-
breeds onset of entropion is often at 4-7 months
mately 4mm behind the free lid margin. The
of age.
condition is usually in the young dog, may be
Entropion may be secondary or acquired,
accompanied by acute intense blepharospasm
due to severe (corneal) pain as in primary
and lacrimation, and may resemble a foreign
corneal ulceration, due to loss of lid support by
body. The position of the corneal defect can
the eye (e.g., in microphthalmos, phthisis bulbi,
pinpoint the position of the cilia in the corre-
or muscle atrophy secondary to chronic myo-
sponding conjunctiva. To treat the lid is everted
sitis), or following conjunctival and skin scar-
by Von Graefe's forceps, a chalazion, or an
ring (cicatricial entropion)
60/ESSENTIALS OF VEtERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
Clinical Signs
The inverted position of the outer lid margin
against the conjunctiva, nictitating mem-
brane, and cornea can result in irritation,
excessive lacrimation, mucopurulent dis-
charge, and blepharospasm. There is con-
junctival hyperemia, vascularity, and signs of
cornea irritation that range from edema, vas-
cularization, granulation, pigmentation, and
even ulceration. Moreover, self-trauma in an
attempt to relieve pain will contribute to the
overall damage and can lead to a vicious cycle
that worsens the amount of entropion.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, history,
and breed. The patient should be observed
without restraint, tranquilization, or topical
anesthesia to determine the degree of entro-
pion. An entropion test can be performed by
Fig. 3.5. A. Upper lid entropion in a Bloodhound
retracting a small skin fold, approximately
with loose facial folds. B. Medial and lower lid
10 mm below the lower lid margin, to deter-
entropion in an English Bulldog.
mine the amount of entropion. This should
be corrected by a single blink, and its persis-
tence indicates (habitual) entropion. The instil-
lation of a topical anesthetic is another
diagnostic method to differentiate the struc-
Box 3.1. Site of Entropion in
tural component (that portion corrected by
Selected Breeds
surgery) from the secondary spastic or pain
contribution of the entropion.
Position of Entropion
Breeds Affected
Entire lower lid (lid
Chow-Chow, Shar Pei,
often shorter)
Bouvier des Fandres.
Therapy
Rottweiler
Lateral lower lid
Hunting breeds; German
In mild entropion the cornea may be pro-
 Pointer, Labrador
 Retriever, Golden 
tected by a topical lubricant. It is usually
Retriever
best to postpone surgical correction until the
Lateral lower lid and
Great Dane, St. Bermard.
head has grown to full size (1.5-2 years of
lateral canthus (lid
Leonberger
age). However, with conjunctival and corneal
may be too long)
disease, surgical intervention is indicated.
Upper lid
Bloodhound, Chow-
Chow, Shar Pei, and
older English Cocker
Spaniel and Basset
Entropion in Puppies
Hound
Medial lower lid
Toy and Miniature
Tacking Lids or Stay-Sutures
Poodle, Pekingese,
Pug. Shih Tzu, English
 In very young puppies (mainly Shar Pei and
Bulldog. and Cavalier
Chow Chow) less than 12 weeks old (when
King Charles Spaniel
the anesthesia risk is relatively high), with
DiSEAsEs AND SuRGeRY OF THe CaNiNe EYeliD/61
severe
entropion 
 temporary
retraction
entropion; it can also be used as an alternate
sutures ("tacking") are often beneficial. Two
Bunos ul poqau suoei, au ol anpaoid
to four 4-0 to 5-0 nonabsorbable tacking
 puppies (especially when entropion recurs after
simple interrupted or vertical mattress
tacking). In this procedure double-ended 4-0
sutures are placed adjacent to the involved
absorbable suture is positioned from the deep
lid margin. These “bites" are about 5 mm long
fornix to exit externally 1-2 mm from the eyelid
 to ensure adequate retraction and tissue holding
margin, immediately everting the lid margin
occur. Often the sutures are left long to permit
and entropion. The tension by the sutures can
multiple adjustments. When the sutures are
be varied to effect normalcy or slight ectropion.
removed (4-6 weeks) or lost, the surrounding
This is a recently reported procedure for the
"scar tunnel" will remain, thus still causing cor-
dog and appears promising.
recting traction on the lid margin. After
"tacking" the entropion often does not require
further correction; if entropion persists surgery
Surgical Procedures for Entropion
may be necessary.
The tacking procedure is also indicated in
There are a large number of surgical
adult dogs to treat spastic entropion, or to
methods and variations to correct entropion
prevent secondary trichiasis-entropion of the
(Table 3.2). Each procedure has different
upper lid to the lower lid, after lower lid entro-
indications, success rates, and possible
pion correction.
complications.
Complicated entropion cases (combinations
Quikert-Rathbun Procedure
of upper and lower lid entropion, medial entro-
pion, and lateral canthal entropion) may require
The Quickert-Rathbun technique uses fornix-
more than one type of surgical procedure and
based sutures in young dogs with lower lid
even multiple surgeries.
Table 3.2. Surgical Procedures for Canine Entropion.
Surgical Procedure
Type of Entropion Treated
Eyelid "tacking"
Puppy entropion; holds lid open to avoid conjunctival and/or cormeal
contact (pain)
Quikert-Rathbun
Puppies: young dogs with lower entropion
Celsus-Hotz
Most cases of entropion involving lower, upper, medial, and lateral
canthus. Can be easily modified
Wyman pedicle
For central lower entropion. Pedidle used with Celsus-Hotz modification
"Y" to "V" plasty (Wharton-Jones)
Mild central lower entropion
Celsus-Hotz modified
For medial entropion and secondary epiphora in toy and small breeds. A
variable size triangle of skin excised. Altematives—cryotherapy or
electrocautery and secondary fibrosis
Arrowhead
Modified Celsus-Hotz for lateral canthal entropion. Can be modified for
micro- and macroblepharon
Wyman lateral canthoplasty
For upper entropion and lower ectropion combined with lateral canthal
entropion in large and giant breeds. Celsus-Hotz combined with
myopedicle for new lateral canthus stability
Robertson's
Lateral lower lid and canthal entropion in large and giant breeds.
Transection of the lateral canthal ligament in lower lid
Lateral canthoplasty for lateral canthal entropion and macroblepharon in
large and giant breeds. Shortens both eyelids
62/EsSentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Celsus-Hotz (Hotz Celsus)
Box 3.2. Key Components of the
This procedure and its modifications are the
Hotz-Celsus Procedure for
basic surgical techniques for the treatment
Entropion in the Dog
of most types of entropion at this time. They
provide consistent and beneficial results.
1. Slight undercorrection as postoperative wound
The guidelines for the basic procedure are
contraction will further evert the eyelid margin
 2. Initial skin incision parallel to and 2-3 mm from
summarized in Box 3.2. During the initial
the eyelid margin (just enough for sutures).
exam, the degree (in mm) of entropion is deter-
3. Section of skin and orbiculanis oculi m. excised
mined, and amount of skin-orbiculus oculi m.
approximates entropion defect and can vary
to excise determined
markedly based on the extent of entropion
The first incision is 2-2.5 mm from and par-
4. Excision of the section of skin and orbicularis oculi
m. by scissors or scalpel. Partial excision of the
allel to the margin of the lid (where the pig-
 muscle thickness is essential, especially in large
mentation of the skin ceases and the first eyelid
and giant breeds (with thick lids). Do not pene-
hair begins), and extends at least l mm medial
trate the tarsal layer and palpebral conjunctiva.
and lateral beyond the affected part of the lid
5. Initial suture placement starts in middle of the
(Figs. 3.6A through E). To facilitate the skin-
wound to ensure accurate coaption of the differ-
ent lengths of upper and lower skin incisions.
orbiculus oculi m. incision by scalpel, the lid
6. Anticipate some postoperative lid swelling. Treat
may be stretched by closed forceps in the lateral
topically with antibiotics and corticosteroids to
canthus and a finger tip adjacent to the area of
"control" swelling. If cormeal ulcer is present,
entropion, an entropion clamp, or held taunt
avoid topical steroids. To avoid self-trauma,
 and the eye protected by a Jaeger lid plate. If
maintain Elizabethan collar until allid sutures are
removed (usually 10-12 days postoperative)
the first incision is too close to the margin,
A
B
E
Fig. 3.6. A. Celsus-Hotz procedure for the correction of severe lower lid entropion with corneal ulceration. B.
Skin incision is 2.5 mm or less along the lid margin (enough to permit sutures). C. Alter completing the lower
lalews io o-s pandniaul alduis 'q siossins io ladiess kq pasioxa s! uoaas pl aun 'uoisioul alosnu-uiys
nonabsorbable sutures are positioned radially to accommodate the different lengths of the upper and lower skin
incisions. E. The hnal appearance of the entropion correction.
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANiNE EYELiD/63
there will not be enough tissue for suturing.
edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology (2007)
and there is a greater possibility of the sutures
pp. 576-583.
touching the cornea. The second and longer
incision, at the same depth, addresses the
 Postoperative Management
amount and position of the entropion and
resultant correction.
After-care consists of applying topical anti-
If the first incision is too far from the margin,
biotic ointment q6h for 10-14 days. Topical
the lid will not evert sufficiently and the result
steroids (hydrocortisone) can be used to
will be less than anticipated. Overcorrection
reduce lid swelling provided no corneal
may cause ectropion, which may result in addi-
ulcer is present. Systemic antibiotics may be
tional surgery. Therefore, estimating correctly
indicated in lateral canthoplasty techniques
the amount of tissue to be removed is most
when surgical time and trauma are more
important.
excessive. If corneal ulceration is present,
Once both skin and orbiculus-oculi m. inci-
appropriate mediations are instilled.
sions are finished and ends connected, the
 For the entire postoperative period and until
section is excised with a scalpel or with scis-
all lid sutures are removed, a protective
sors, including a superficial strip of the orbicu-
Elizabethan or E-collar is recommended to
laris muscle. The palpebral conjunctival sac
prevent self-trauma and wound dehiscence.
should not be perforated. After removal, the
Sutures are removed l0 (especially silk) to 14
remaining lid margin should conform to the
(monofilament, nonabsorbable) days after
corneal surface and not intend to invert. Hem-
surgery.
orrhage is usually minor and occurs from the
lateral and medial ends of the incisions. Tem-
porary clamping of the larger blood vessels by
Complications
hemostats or digital pressure is usually suff-
cient. Thermocautery or ligatures of these
The primary purpose of these procedures
is a functional, nonirritating eyelid, with a
bleeders is usually avoided.
secondary goal of cosmetically acceptable.
The wound is closed with interrupted
Complications with all these procedures are
sutures of suture material that will effectively
re-appose the wound edges and should not
over- or undercorrection and undesired scar
 formation, leading to extensive and compli-
exceed 5-0 (nonabsorbable, e.g., silk, or absorb-
cated repair surgery.
able, mono- or polyfilament, with a fine round-
The large and giant breeds of dogs with
body needle with or without a micropoint).
entropion and enophthalmia present additional
The sutures are placed at intervals of not more
challenges because the globe-lower eyelid
than 2 mm and somewhat radially to accom-
modate the different lengths of apposing
contact is often absent and entropion repair is
less predictable. The breeds with excessive
incisions. Continuous sutures are not recom-
forehead skin folds can complicate entropion
mended because of the risk of dehiscence of the
surgery and require concurrent excision of
entire wound when it is rubbed. The edges of
large amounts of the forehead skin.
the wound should be joined together carefully
so that no parts of the edge remain visible.
Some postoperative swelling of the conjunctiva
Other Methods
is expected.
Other nonsurgical techniques have been used
to treat entropion but have been replaced
Other Entropion Surgeries
by the more predicable surgery procedures.
They include electrocautery; subcutaneous
There are several modifications of the Celsus-
injections of antibiotics, paraffn, mineral
Hotz procedure that further improve its useful-
oil, and silicones, which have been used to
ness and success rates. For details of these
provide (temporary) eyelid margin eversion;
procedures, the reader can consult the fourth
and cryotherapy.
64 /ESSEntiALS OF VetERiNARY OpHThALmOLOGY
Ectropion and Oversized Palpebral
openings of the meibomian glands are visible
Fissure (Macro- or Euryblepharon)
in the free margin); often a "diamond" or
"pagoda"-shaped fissure; red, swollen, and
Ectropion is an eversion of the lid margin of
folded conjunctiva, resulting in increased
usually the lower eyelid, but cicatricial ever-
tear and mucus production; and purulent
sion of the upper lid may occur. In dogs it is
exudate. There is often slight enophthalmos,
usually accompanied by an oversized palpe-
thus increasing the distance between the lid
bral fissure, and the often excessively long
margin and the globe. When the animal is more
lower lid does not touch the cornea (Fig. 3.7).
active than usual, as at dog shows or on the
When the affected palpebral fissure
is
veterinarian's examination table, or grasped by
stretched by calipers, the lid margin of the
nape of the neck, the ectropion/oversized pal-
oversized fissure is distinctly longer (stret-
ched 5-15 mm) than the normal 33-35 mm.
With ectropion, the lids, blink reflex, and
tears cannot perform their normal function of
Therapy
cleaning. shielding, and lubricating the eye.
The conjunctiva becomes chronically inflamed
If the defect is slight, no treatment is required
as a result of its permanent exposure to air,
apart from irrigating the eyes upon returning
dust, bacteria, and stagnant tears.
 from walks and applying a neutral, lubricating
Breeds of dogs frequently affected with lower
ophthalmic ointment or solution, particularly
lid ectropion include the Bloodhound,
St.
in young dogs whose heads have not yet
Bernard, Great Dane, Newfoundland, Mastiff,
reached adult size. Surgical correction of
and several spaniel and French hunting breeds.
ectropion is recommended when chronic or
In more severe cases (e.g., Bloodhound, St.
severe secondary ophthalmic disease results
Bernard, Leonberger, Clumber Spaniel), when
 and is medically refractory to continued topical
the middle portion of the lid is everted, there
therapy.
is often some inversion near both canthi, or
Unless
unusually severe, correction is
laterally there is distinct entropion.
delayed until the dog reaches adult size or
about 2 or 2.5 years, when the skull is full size
Clinical Signs
and orbital fat is present. Surgery should
attempt to provide a relatively normal lower
eyelid length and an adequate apposition to the
Signsof
ectropion/oversized
1palpebral
cornea. Overcorrection should be avoided, as
fissure are an everted lower lid margin (the
entropion may result and can cause potentially
more damage to the cornea and conjunctiva.
The methods vary from influencing the lower
lid position to shortening of the lid fissure
fitting to the actual size of the globe and repo-
sitioning the lateral canthus. In most dogs there
is a combination of ectropion and an oversized
lid fissure, and the different ectropion surgical
procedures primarily shorten and strengthen
the lid. Most surgical procedures for ectropion/
macroblepharon involve the lateral lower eyelid
and canthus. Moreover, the lid excision is better
performed at the lateral canthus to avoid the
development of a possible irritating notch in
Fig. 3.7. The “diamond-shaped eye" with marked
the middle of the eyelids. Procedures to treat
lower entropion and macroblepharon in a Clumber
primary ectropion but not shorten the lids
Spaniel. There is also a notch or kink in the central
are listed in Table 3.3. These procedures are
lower lid and secondary conjunctivitis.
indicated infrequently.
Diseases Ano SuRGery Of the Canine Eyelid/65
Table 3.3. Surgical Procedures for Primary
An example of these procedures is the
Ectropion.
Kihnt-Szymanowski Blaskovic's modifica-
tion by Smith, reported in the veterinary lit-
Local palpebral conjunctival excision
erature by Munger and Carter. In ‘this
"V" to "Y" (wwharton-Jones)
procedure, reported in 1938, the lower lid is
Homologous/prosthetic lateral canthal ligament
shortened, and splitting of the lid margin is
replacement (myopedicles or suture)
avoided (Figs. 3.8A through D). The lid
margin and tarsal plate stay intact. The
double layered, staggered wound preventing
leakage and wound dehiscence, starts below
Table 3.4. Surgical Procedures to Reduce
 Palpebral Fissure Size by Shortening Upper
the lid margin. Smith's modification placed the
upper skin incision closer to the lid margin.
and/or Lower Eyelids.
Lateral reduction canthoplasty or lateral full-thickness
 permanent tarsorrhaphy
Macroblepharon-Ectropion
 Medial reduction canthoplasty
Correction, Reducing Both Lower and
Roberts-Jensen pocket technigue for medial canthus
Upper Lid Length
best in brachycephalic breeds
Modified Roberts-Jensen pocket technique for lateral
Because the medial canthus is relatively
canthus
fixed and complicated by the presence of the
Modified Fuchs lateral canthoplasty
lacrimal ducts and the nictitating membrane,
Wyman and Kaswan lateral canthoplasty
surgical procedures just to change the size
of the palpebral fissure often involve the
Lateral canthoplasty (Bedford): a modification of the
lateral canthus. Surgical reduction of the
Kuhnt-Szymmanowski procedure
medial canthus and reduction in the palpe-
 Gutbrod and Tietz procedure: shortens lower lid and
bral fissure size is usually restricted to the
lateral canthus
smaller breeds, such as the Pekingese and
Bigelbach procedure: for upper and lower lid
Shih Tzu, with a combination of medial
shortening. and lateral lower entropion
entropion, nasal folds, and caruncle trichia-
Grussendorf procedure: shortening both upper and
sis. In these breeds the palpebral fissure mea-
lower lids and stabilization (suture) of lateral canthu5
sures some mm more than the average 33 mm,
Stades (Diabolo procedure): shortens upper and
thus easily allowing the globe to luxate, but
lower lids and lateral canthus
preventing spontaneous repositioning. There-
fore slight lid shortening, combined with a can-
thoplasty, in the medial canthus is indicated
Ectropion-Macroblepharon Correction
(see also the section "Permanent Lateral Palpe-
Procedures Shortening the Lower Lid
bral Fissure Reduction Plasty").
Margin
The lateral canthus is most accessible,
but surgical sites in this area are more apt
In most instances of ectropion, the lower
to atrophy with time. The lack of stability
P!l namoi pue raddn a io uareu pana
and the increased movements of the lateral
margins are oversized and methods for reduc-
canthal region may also complicate these
ing this, either around the defect in the margin
surgical procedures by causing greater short-
Or at the lateral canthus, yield the best results
term stress on the suture line and long-term
(Table 3.4). These methods require much more
tension of the apposed eyelid tissues. For
judgment on the part of the surgeon. Scars
both the medial and lateral canthoplasty
from previous faulty operations may compli-
procedures the goal is to reduce the stretched
cate future surgeries. Before surgery the lid
palpebral fissure to 33-35 mm, and to provide
fissure is stretched and measured by calipers.
some overlap of the tissues of upper and
The fissure should be shortened to approxi-
lower eyelids, thereby enhancing its strength
mately 33-35 mm.
(Table 3.5)
66/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
A
B
Fig. 3.8. The Kuhnt-Szymanowski modifed procedure, as reported by Munger and
Carter in the dog. A. The skin incision is 2-2.5 mm below the lid margin and
extends 5-l0 mm beyond the lateral canthus. B. A half-thickness central wedge of
tarsus-conjunctiva is excised. The width of the wedge is sufhicient to shorten the
lower lid. C. The skin flap is dissected from the deeper tissues and a similar size
wedge excised from its lateral edge. D. Both wedges and skin flap are closed and
klaioadsan saunns aqeqiosqeuou pue alqeqiosqe 0-g on 0-s kq pasodde
Table 3.5. Histogenic Classification and
average lid fissure measures 33-35 mm. The
 Frequency of Eyelid Tumors in Dogs.
fissure can be shortened over the surplus dis-
tance. The lateral free outer lid margin and the
Sebaceous adenoma
28.7-60%
tarsal plate including the meibomian glands of
Squamous papilloma
10.6-17.3%
 both upper and lower lids are removed over the
Sebaceous adenocarcinoma
2.0-15.3%
measured distance. Closure is more secure if
the conjunctiva is sutured separately. The
Benign melanoma
12.9-17.6%
 Malignant melanoma
2.8-7.9%
method is the most simple, but it misses the
double-layered, staggering wound, preventing
Histiocytoma
1.6-3.5%
leakage and wound dehiscence. The tension on
Mastocytoma
1-2.5%
the apposed tissues may induce some long-
Basal cell carcinoma
1.2-2.5%
term atrophy of the surgical union area. The
Squamous cell carcinoma
1-2%
procedure is possible, but less desirable in the
1-5%
medial canthus.
 All others
Permanent Lateral Palpebral Fissure
Simple Permanent Lateral Palpebral
Reduction Plasty (Modified Roberts-Jensen
Fissure Reduction Tarsorrhaphy
Pocket Procedure)
In general the stretched lid fissure in macro-
The original procedure by Jensen (l979)
blepharon-ectropion measures over 40 mm. An
was described for the medial canthus; it may
DiSEASEs AND SuRGERY OF THE CANiNe EYELiD/67
also be employed for the lateral canthus.
The procedure used in the medial canthus
A
results in loss of the upper lacrimal punctum,
which does not result in epiphora (Fig. 3.9A
through C). It has the advantage of concur
rent correction of medial lower entropion
and protection from nasal folds in the
brachycephalic breeds.
Postoperative Treatment
Therapy after ectropion-oversized lid fissure
procedures consists of applying topical antibi-
otic ointment (more lubricating) q6h for 10-14
days. Systemic antibiotics may be indicated for
the extensive procedures. An Elizabethan collar
is used routinely to prevent the patient from
rubbing the surgical site and producing local
B
irritation and even suture loss. The sutures are
removed 10-l4 days after surgery. The end
result can only be judged after cicatrization,
about 6-8 weeks after surgery.
Microblepharon or
Blepharophimosis/Stenosis
An abnormally small or narrowed palpebral
fissure—that is, microblepharon, blepharo-
phimosis, or blepharostenosis—occurs in
miniature breeds like the Miniature Pinscher
and Shetland Sheepdog, but also in larger
breeds such as the English Bull Terrier,
Chow Chow, Kerry Blue Terrier, and both
Rough and Smooth Collies. In microblepha-
ron, the globe is usually of normal size, but it
C
may accompany microphthalmos. The stretched
palpebral fissure, measured by calipers, is
Fig. 3.9. The Roberts-Jensen pocket technique
(permanent medial tarsorrhaphy). A. The upper lid
margin is excised, which includes the upper lacrimal
punctum and canaliculus. Length of this area
approximates the amount of lid shortening and
reduction in palpebral hssure size. B. A flap of upper
conjunctiva-tarsus is constructed and anchored by a
single suture in a “pocket" within the medial lower
lid. C. The medial upper and lower lid wounds are
apposed by simple interrupted nonabsorbable sutures
and the new medial canthus by a Fig. 3.8 suture.
68/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
usually 5-l0 mm shorter then the normal
daily, adhering the hairs together, but this alone
fellow eye or the normal eye of a sibling. Micro-
 seldom resolves the problem.
/pue rddn Aq panudooe uao si uouda
Removal of the upper part or all of the nasal
or lower lid entropion; however, when the lid
folds is possible, but usually is not sufficient
fissure is surgically lengthened in these patients,
to deal with the other deformities in these
the entropion often disappears without further
breeds. Medial canthoplasty (see the section
specific correction.
  e  
tion Plasty") or other medial canthoplasties are
Therapy
indicated.
Correction is achieved by a lateral augmen-
Upper Eyelid Trichiasis
tation canthoplasty that increases the func-
tional length of the palpebral fissure. A 5- to
In this condition the eyelash hairs of the lateral
10-mm long lateral canthotomy is created using
upper eyelid or hairs on skin folds above the
tenotomy scissors. Two small arrowhead skin
eyes, in combination with upper eye lid entro-
resections will achieve a more gradual transi-
pion, irritate the eye. These hairs droop over
,  an ma a n uo
the eyes, irritating the lower conjunctiva and
the cornea. Particularly in breeds such as, for
Trichiasis
example, the Bloodhound, Chow Chow, and
Shar Pei (and less severelyin the elderly English
Trichiasis is the presence of normally located
Cocker Spaniel), these hairs may cause corneal
but abnormally directed hairs that irritate the
disease. The condition is often worsened by the
globe and/or conjunctiva. The chronic corneal
excessive "heavy" folds of frontal skin.
irritation results in extra lacrimation, blepharo-
spasm, tear-stained lids and canthi, corneal
Therapy
lesions (vascularization, pigmentation and
sometimes ulcerations), and mucopurulent
In cases of minor irritation the cornea may be
conjunctival discharge. Trichiasis associated
protected by an indifferent topical ointment,
with (1) nasal folds; (2) upper eyelids,
oil, or petrolatum ql2h to q6h, but this alone
usually dorsolaterally; (3) combined with
seldom resolves the problem. Radical excision
entropion in the same area; and (4) the car-
 of the upper lid skin, including the irritating.
uncle; all of these conditions may be treated
eyelash-like hairs, and forced healing by sec-
surgically.
ondary granulation (Stades method) is most
useful in these cases. The Stades “forced
Nasal Fold Trichiasis
granulation" technique is an excellent proce-
dure for most of these patients (Figs. 3.10A
Breeds such as the Pekingese, Shih Tzu, and
through D).
Lhaso Apso often have medial entropion, car-
The brow-sling procedures as well as exci-
uncle trichiasis, a slightly oversized lid fissure,
 sion of large areas of the frontal skin can be
and lagophthalmos, which predispose 
to
 successful in those breeds in which excessive
corneal pigmentation and, in more severe cases,
skin folds are distorting the eyelid function.
corneal ulceration
The removal of upper and dorsolateral folds or
frontal skin takes away the pressure on the lids
Therapy
and canthi but has less effect on the lid margin
itself.
 In cases of minor corneal disease, therapy can
be started with antibiotic and lubricating oint-
Caruncle Trichiasis
ments, q6h. If the corneal defects have healed
after l0 days, the cornea may be protected by
The caruncle normally has some short soft hairs
oil or a neutral ointment two to four times
directing outward nasally. In brachycephalic
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE EYELiD /69
A
C
D
trichiasis. B. A piece of skin (up to 25 mm) is excised starting just beyond the lid
margin and extending upward, and then removed. C. The wound is partially closed
by apposing the upper incision to 4-5 mm from the upper lid margin by three to
hve simple interrupted absorbable sutures. D. Final wound closure is by a
continuous suture. The postoperative fbrous, associated with the secondary
granulation, everts the upper lid margin.
breeds with exophthalmia, such as the Peking-
Lid Trauma
ese, Shih Tzu, and Lhaso Apso with exophthal
mic eyes, the caruncle hairs may irritate the
Eyelid lacerations are frequent in young
globe, resulting in medial, limbal pigmentation
 small dogs and usually require surgical
of the cornea and even epiphora. In rare cases,
repair. Eyelid lacerations may be divided
1 n dn mo su a a jo a
 into partial and full-thickness, marginal and
15 mm length and irritate the cornea. For
nonmarginal, and may include the lacrimal
therapy in the brachycephalic breeds see "Nasal
canaliculi.  Eyelids and conjunctival  sac
Fold Trichiasis." Although the caruncle can be
wounds are often right-angled. As eyelids
excised or destroyed by cryotherapy or electro-
are highly vascular, they will usually bleed
cautery, caruncle abnormalities are usually
heavily. The extensive vascularity also pro-
addressed by medial canthoplasty (which also
tects against tissue ischemia and necrosis. If
corrects additional abnormalities).
the lid edge is transected, the defect will enlarge
spontaneously in the lid via contraction of the
orbicularis oculi muscle.
Trichomegaly
Wounds in the eyelid should therefore
always be sutured directly, even if they are
Trichomegaly refers to abnormally elongated
more than 8 hours old. Hair along the wound
eyelid cilia and is most commonly observed in
edges can be clipped. Both the wound in the
American Cocker Spaniels. It has no clinical
lid and the conjunctival sac must be very thor-
significance as long as the hairs do not reach
oughly irrigated. A water pick is an excellent
the conjunctiva or cornea.
method of providing irrigation and wound
70/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
debridement. Mechanical wound debridement
After-Care
should be kept to a minimum.Loose parts
(over l mm), especially of lid margin, should
After surgical repair, the after-care consists of
not be excised but used to fill the defect. Re-
topical antibiotic ointment onto the eye and
apposition of severely traumatized eyelids
 any wounds. Often systemic antibiotics are also
usually yields better postoperative results than
administered
the excision of still attached but lacerated lid
tissues and subsequent reconstructive blepha-
roplastic surgical procedures.
Ptosis
Sutures at the eyelid margin should have
their knots external to the free rim of the lid
 Ptosis is the drooping of the upper eye lid. It
margin to avoid contact with the cornea; often
may be a consequence of disorders of the third
the figure-8 suture is used. Two layers of
nerve or from sympathetic innervation as, for
da a an r s a  s
example, in the Horner syndrome. The cause
palpebral conjunctiva and tarsus can be closed
of the lagophthalmos should be determined
by simple continuous 6-0 to 8-0 absorbable
and, if possible, treated.
suture. Knots should be avoided or placed
beneath the conjunctiva. The skin, together
with the orbicularis oculi muscle, is closed
Lagophthalmos
using simple interrupted nonabsorbable, 5-0
to 6-0 monoflament sutures. Absorbable
Lagophthalmos is an inability to close the
material is used in aggressive or anesthesia risk
pu Areoduai Au su i :ianandoo spa
patients.
permanent causes. Lagophthalmos should be
treated medically as a keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Lacerations of the Lid Edge Inciuding
or by temporary tarsorrhaphy (see later) until
the Lacrimal Canalicuius
the cause of the lagophthalmos is found and, if
possible, cured. If it is evident that temporary
Lacerations of the medial canthus are rare.
therapy is not sufficient, the lid fissure can be
They are usually in the lower lid and accompa-
,     
nied by laceration of the lower canaliculus.
manent Lateral Palpebral Fissure Reduction
Their repair is presented in chapter 4 ("Diseases 
Plasty"). Medical stimulation of tear formation
 and Surgery of the Canine Tear and Nasolacri-
may also be helpful.
mal Systems").
Inflammations
Lacerations with Loss of Tissue
Eyelid inflammations may be restricted to
When there is loss of tissue at the margin of the
one eye or both, or may be involved with a
 a      
generalized dermatological disease.  They
If reconstructive blepharoplasty cannot be pre-
may involve only certain glands of the eyelids
formed directly, one to two tension sutures
or involve the entire lid surfaces (Figs. 3.11A
should be inserted. Cutting into the tissue by
through D).
the sutures should be prevented by the use of
pieces of silicone or infusion tube. If possible,
a blepharoplasty should be performed directly.
Generalized Blepharitis
The house-inverted triangle method is appro-
priate for closure of a small but deeper
Blepharitis covers a number of inflammatory
defect. Broad, shallow defects should be cor-
conditions of the eyelid, often with the
rected by an H-plasty. Even larger defects
primary cause being masked to some extent
can be closed by rotating, sliding. Z, or other
by possible secondary complication. The
blepharoplasties.
inflammation may be focal or diffuse with
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANiNE EYELiD/ 71
Fig. 3.ll. Examples of lid infections. A. Chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in an adult dog. B. Eyelid
 pyogranulomas of the upper lid and lateral canthus in a Miniature Poodle. C. Superhcial blepharitis
associated with demodex infestation in a puppy. D. Internal hordeolum or infection of the meibomian
glands of the lower eyelid in a 3-year-old American Cocker Spaniel.
variable involvement of all four eyelids or
Bacterial Blepharitis
one or both eyes. As the eyelids are highly
vascular structures, hyperemia and edema are
 In puppies a purulent blepharitis occurs as
usually marked.
part of juvenile pyoderma or puppy “stran-
 Pain is indicated by blepharospasm, exces-
gles." The entire skin of the head may be
sive lacrimation with epiphora, which may be
involved with multiple abscesses usually
worsened by self-induced trauma. In addition
caused by Staphylococci spp., although some
there may be exudate, evidence of self-trauma,
abcesses are sterile. Pain and complicating
alopecia, erosion, and scaliness. Chronic inflam-
self-trauma to the face may require an Elizabe-
mation can lead to eyelid distortion with both
than collar. High levels of systemic antibiotics
entropion and ectropion resulting from cicatrix
usually resolve the condition and should be
formation and secondary corneal and conjunc-
based on culture and sensitivity. Topical broad-
tival diseases. The causes for generalized
spectrum antibiotics are used to help lubricate
blepharitis include bacteria, parasites (espe-
and protect the cornea.
cially demodex and scabies), leishmania,
Staphylococci  and
streptococci
dds
fungi, flies, and ticks.
are most commonly involved in bacterial
72/ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
blepharitis in adult patients. Bacterial bleph-
acterized by hyperemia, alopecia, and pruri-
aritis may be presented as a diffuse superficial
tus and often complicated by secondary
lid inflammation, pyogranulomas of the lid
bacterial infection and self-trauma. Demodex
subcutaneous tissues, and meibomianitis (dis-
canis is considered to be a normal inhabitant
cussed below). Acute diffuse blepharitis is char-
of hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and sweat
acterized by hyperemia, lid swelling. and
glands, and disease may develop only when
crusting. Over several weeks ulceration of the
large numbers of the parasite are present in the
eyelid skin and margins, alopecia, and fbrosis
presence of immunosuppression or possible
with the development of entropion, ectropion,
inherited T cell deficiency. In young dogs the
or a combination of both develop. Abscessation
disease tends to be restricted to the face, and
and impaction of the meibomian glands may
eyelid involvement is commonplace. Spontane-
also occur. Systemic and topical ophthalmic
ous regression is expected, but topical rotenone
antibiotics (applied directly to the eyelid skin)
ointment or isofluorophate ophthalmic oint-
based on culture and sensitivity are most
ment can be used seemingly to good effect. In
effective.
older dogs a more generalized disease is seen
Staphylococcalinfections may also involve
 that often proves resistant to treatment. Sarcop-
the deeper lids and present as single to
      
often multiple pyogranulomas. Diagnosis is
pruritus, several parts of the body being classi-
    
cally involved in addition to the eyelids. Treat-
microabscesses. Pyogranuloma blepharitis is
ment routinely involves the use of sulphur
treated by systemic and intralesional antibiot-
dips, while amitraz is currently proving to be
ics. As staphylococcal toxins may have a nec-
very effective as a potential first-line therapy.
rotizing effect, topical corticosteroids may be
Cuterebra infestation has been reported in
beneficial. Autogenous vaccine can be effective
 the conjunctiva of a puppy. Cuterebra spp..
in chronic and seemingly resistant staphylococ-
order Diptera, family Cuterebridae is a larva of
cal infections.
the rabbit or rodent bot fly. Larva involving the
lid probably enter the conjunctiva or lid surface;
wounds can facilitate penetration. Larva require
Mycotic Blepharitis
about 4 weeks to develop with black cuticular
spines, often within a thick-walled abscess and
Blepharomycosis is uncommon, but infec-
tion with Microsporum and Trichophyton
an identifying entry hole. Eventually the larva
pupate and exit the host. Presence of a drainage
 spp. is seen as part of a generalized problem
tract should alert the client as to the possibility
in young dogs. Expanding alopecia, scaling,
and hyperemia are the clinical features, and
of cuterebra infestation. Therapy is larva
diagnosis is confirmed by  staining
removal and topical and systemic antibiotics.
gskin
scrapings with either Grams or Giemsa stain
or culturing the organisms on Sabouraud's
agar. Effective antifungal therapy may include
Leishmania Blepharitis
povidone-iodine scrubs together with topical
Systemic leishmaniasis, a chronic and poten-
miconazole nitrate or clotrimazole creams for
tially fatal disease, is endemic in countries
superficial infection, but care should be taken
to avoid corneal contact. Persistent and deep-
around the Mediterranean Sea, as well as
seated infection may be treated by additionally
in India and Central and South America. In
the Mediterranean region the protozoan,
using systemic griseofulvin or occasionally oral
Leishmania infantum, is carried by the sand
ketoconazole.
 flies (Phlebotomus spp.). The clinical signs of
leishmaniasis are quite variable, but the
Parasitic Blepharitis
eyelids are frequently involved. In one report
one-fourth of all leishmania cases had ocular
Both demodectic and sarcoptic mange can
 or periocular disease. The eyelid lesions may
include the eyelids, the lesions being char-
vary from a dry dermatitis with alopecia, diffuse
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE EYELiD/ 73
blepharedema, and cutaneous ulcerations, to
medial canthal blepharitis may be concurrent
discrete nodular granuloma formations. Diag-
with pannus (chronic superficial keratitis) and
nosis is by cytology, histopathology, serology.
the immune-mediated plasma cell infltration
or polymerase chain reaction testing. Anti-
(plasmocytoma) of the nictitating membrane.
leishmania therapy includes subcutaneous N-
In the long-haired Dachshund medial canthal
methylglucamine antimoniate (80 mg/kg daily
blepharitis may occur concurrent with the
for a minimum of 30 days) and allopurinol
superficial punctate keratitis. The condition is
orally at 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for 6-12
usually bilateral
months. Local treatment often includes antibi-
Biopsy reveals both lymphocytic and plasma
otics and corticosteroids.
cell infiltration; sebaceous glandular hyperpla-
sia may also be present. The condition usually
responds to topical ophthalmic antibiotics
Immune-Mediated Blepharitis
and corticosteroids.
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) or uveoder-
Several autoimmune and immune-mediated
matological syndrome is another immune-
phenomena can involve the canine eyelid,
mediated disease that can affect the eyelids
either in isolation or in association with sys-
and can be presented to veterinary ophthal-
temic clinical features, but fortunately they
mologists. Often the loss of pigmentation of
are rare diseases. The pemphigus group
of
the nose and eyelids is the primary clinical
vesiculobullous epidermal diseases can involve
sign recognized by the owner and is the
mucocutaneous junctions, with inflammation
basis for the initial examination. Breed pre-
and ulceration of eyelid tissue being commonly
disposition may be important; affected breeds
seen. In both pemphigus foliaceus, which is
include Akita, Siberian Husky, Golden Retriever,
more common, and pemphigus erythematosus,
Samoyed, Rottweiler, Chow Chow, Shetland
the facial lesions usually involve the eyelids.
Sheepdog, and others. As the uveal component
Pemphigus vulgaris is the most severe type of
of VKH dominates the ophthalmic disease clini-
pemphigus, with involvement of the oral cavity.
cally, and the eyelid signs are a minor aspect,
nail beds, and skin in addition to ulcerative
the reader should consult the canine anterior
lesions of the eyelids, lips, external nares, and
uveal chapter (chapter 8) for additional details
ears. In all types of pemphigus the lesions seen
are the result of autoantibody production against
Chalazion
the intercellular matrix of the epidermis, but in
bullous pemphigoid it is autoantibody produc-
Chalazion refers to a firm, nonpainful swell-
tion against the epidermal basement membrane
ing of the meibomian gland, due to liberated
that is responsible for clinical signs indistin-
secretion, resulting in chronic inflammation
guishable from pemphigus vulgaris. These
and granulomatous reaction. The inflamma-
autoantibodies cause separation of the cornified
tion may predispose for a staphylococcal
from the uncornified epithelial cell layers. The
infection and thus hordeolum formation.
 treatment of this disease complex requires long-
Treatment is by scalpel incision along the gran-
term systemic and topical corticosteroid therapy
uloma with curettage. The incision should be
with additional immune suppression through
allowed to heal by secondary intention. Topical
the use of cyclophosphamide or azathioprine
antibiotic ointment is administered for 7-10
for refractory cases. Occasionally the cicatricial
days after curettage.
entropion from these diseases may require cor-
rective blepharoplasty.
Medial canthal ulcerative blepharitis rep-
Hordeolum or Stye
resents a juxtapalpebral disorder, usually
affecting the medial canthus. Breeds most
An external hordeolum or stye is due to
often affected include the German Shepherd.
suppurative infection of the Zeis or Moll
long-haired Dachshund, and the Toy and
glands, and manifests itself as either a single
Miniature Poodle. In German Shepherds the
or
multiple abscess formation along the
74 /ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
anterior aspect of the eyelid margin. External
 in older dogs more frequently, and may or may
hordeolum affects mainly young dogs; an
not be associated with meibomian tumor for-
individual dog may exhibit these lesions over
mation. They can cause local corneal irritation.
several weeks. Affected lids are usually swollen
Therapy consists of manual rupture and topical
and painful; focal abscesses occur on the eyelid
antibiotics-steroids for 5-7 days.
surface. Treatment consists of hot compresses
An allergic blepharitis is usually character-
and topical and systemic antibiotics. During
ized by an acute onset edema and hyperemia.
therapy, these abscesses usually rupture. Focal
and may be due to local exposure to a contact
abscesses can be opened by scalpel incision
allergen or occur as part of a generalized
along the swelling with curettage.
response. Swelling of the eyelids and muzzle
will be seen following insect bites (ants, ticks,
Focal Blepharitis/Blepharitis
fleas) and as postvaccinal reaction. Topically
Adenomatosa/Meibomianitis/Externa!
applied drugs may be responsible for contact
Hordeolum
allergy, with neomycin being most commonly
involved. Seasonal or nonseasonal reaction to
Meibomianitis refers to inflammation of the
environmental allergens is seen in atopy, in
meibomian glands; either or both eyelids
which there is an inherited predisposition to
can be involved, and the condition may be
immunoglobin E antibody production. Several
uni- or bilateral. The lids are usually swollen,
breeds are involved, with the West Highland
1 blepharospasm.
White Terrier demonstrating high incidence.
somewhat painful
with
Eversion of the affected eyelid permits direct
Clinical signs are manifest in young dogs usually
observation of the swollen and often enlarged
from the age of l year, and periocular hyper-
meibomian glands. Pressure on the inflamed
emia, facial pruritus, and conjunctivitis are
glands often causes expression of exudate from
commonplace. Identification of the specifc
the gland's ducts along the eyelid margin. With
allergen
and
desensitization  are
rarely
persistent meibomianitis, bacterial culture and
possible, with treatment relying upon the use
cytology may guide the optimal choice of
of topical and systemic corticosteroids and
topical and systemic antibiotics. Chronic mei-
antihistamines.
bomianitis may result in thickened and fibrotic
Food allergies and systemic drug reactions
eyelids with either entropion or ectropion that
can cause periocular dermatitis and blepharitis,
may require surgical correction. Chronic mei-
with the avoidance of the allergen or the cessa-
bomianitis can also result in reduction of loss
tion of the drug therapy being the obvious lines
of the lipid layer of the precorneal film and a
of treatment.
qualitative tear deficiency that has normal levels
of aqueous tear formation (as measured by the
Schirmer's tear test) but an accelerated tear
Eyelid Masses and Neoplasia
breakup time (TBUT) with topical fluorescein.
 Treatment includes application of hot com-
Inflammatory Masses
presses, the possible manual expression of the
lesions under topical analgesia, and the use of
Inflammatory masses or pseudotumors of
both topical and systemic antibiotics. Topical
the eyelids are infrequent in dogs and tend
and sometimes systemic broad-spectrum anti-
to occur in certain breeds. Histocytoses of
biotics and corticosteroids are administered for
the Bernese Mountain Dog is a systemic and
14-21 days.
familial disorder that affects males more
often than females. The condition also occurs
in the Rottweiler, Golden Retriever, Labra-
Other Eyelid Diseases
dor Retriever, and Flat-Coated Retriever.
This disease is manifest in two different forms
Marginal meibomian cysts are single to multi-
(1) a generally slow cutaneous form; and (2) an
ple small cystic structures that may develop
aggressive or malignant cutaneous with even-
along the eyelid margin. These cysts may occur
     
Diseases Ano SuRGery Of the Canine Eyelid/ 75
nodes, spleen, and bone marrow. The eyelids
iature Poodle, Labrador Retriever, and Golden
are often involved and present as recurrent to
Retriever are overrepresented.
chronic nodules, papules, or plaques of upper
The largest group of neoplasia arising
and lower eyelids. Their surface may be alope-
from the meibomian glands is the adenomas
cic to ulcerated, and progressive recurrences
and adenocarcinomas (Fig. 3.12). These
tend to be more severe. Biopsy of the masses is
tumors are first noticed erupting though the
usually diagnostic. This disease is unfortunately
eyelid margin or the palpebral conjunctiva
progressive and fatal
just behind the eyelid margin. They may be
Nodular fasciitis occurs rarely in the dog
pink or varying degrees of pigmentation, and
and may be most frequent in the Collie and
may appear as multiple lobes. With exposure,
Collie-type breeds. In the Collie the condi-
advanced meibomian adenomas or adenocarci-
tion affects the eyelids, conjunctiva, epi-
nomas may ulcerate and even hemorrhage. They
sclera, and peripheral cornea. Microscopically
can cause local irritation resulting in blepharo-
the lesions are characterized as a subcutaneous
spasm, 
epiphora,conjunctival
hyperemia,
mass with abundant fibroblasts, variable ground
corneal vascularization, and pigmentation.
substance, and fber formation. Inflammatory
Lid melanomas are the second largest
cells consist of lymphocytes and mononuclear
 group of tumors and appear as two distinct
cells with occasional giant cells. Therapy con-
types. One type arises from the eyelid skin
sists of surgical excision, cryotherapy, and
and is usually a single or multiple pigmented
for dogs heavier than lo kg oral administra-
mass, which can usually be excised with low
tion of niacinamide (500 mg) and tetracy-
recurrence rates. The second type arises from
cline (500 mg q8h) with therapy gradually
the pigmented eyelid margin and tends to
tapered.
expand to both directions. These tumors are
more aggressive locally and their removal
involves the eyelid margin, which must then be
Lid Neoplasia
restored.  Recommended therapy for these
tumors is excisional surgical biopsy followed by
The dog eyelids exhibit a large numbers of
cryosurgery.
different neoplasms that are fortunately, for
Fibromas and fibrosarcomas are less
the most part, locally minimally invasive
prevalent but can be locally invasive. They
and respond to fairly conservative surgical
appear as gradually enlarging subcutaneous
procedures. Distinct metastasis from eyelid
masses. Histiocytomas affect mainly young
neoplasms in dogs has not been reported.
dogs, appearing often as rapidly prolifera-
Eyelid tumors must be distinguished from
tive masses. These same tumors may also
conjunctival neoplasms, which tend to be
locally invasive and often recur after attempts
of surgical excision.
At least two reports on canine eyelid neo-
plasms have been published and indicate
similar results (see Table 3.5). Benign neo-
plasms outnumber malignant tumors by a ratio
of 3:1. The epithelial tumors outnumber the
mesenchymal tumors by a ratio of about 5: 1.
Most eyelid tumors occur primarily in dogs
over l0 years of age, and no gender predisposi-
 tion has been reported. The upper lid is affected
slightly more often (40%) than the lower lid
(30%). Breeds reported with increased preva-
Fig. 3.12. Meibomian adenocarcinoma of the upper
lence of lid tumors include the Beagle, Siberian
eyelid of an aged Brittany Spaniel. Note the tumor is
Husky, and English Setter in one report, while
primarily on the palpebral (deep) surface of the
Bedford in England reports the Toy and Min-
eyelid.
76/ESSENTIALS OF VetERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
spontaneously regress over a few weeks. Papil-
movement to increase the size of the resultant
lomas represent about 10-20% of the lid
palpebral fissure. When 60-90% of the eyelid is
tumors, and if combined with oral papilloma-
involved with neoplasia, additional, more exten-
tosis affect young dogs. These tumors may have
sive blepharoplastic procedures are available
a viral origin, but autogenous vaccines have
and presented in the next section.
been of limited value. These lid tumors often
regress with time and are removed only when
tumor-induced corneal contact and irritation
Reconstructive Blepharoplasty
result. Surgical excision followed by cryosur-
gery decreases recurrence.
Reconstructive blepharoplasty includes the
Therapies for the canine lid tumors
different surgeries to restore the lids after
include surgical excision, cryosurgery, or a
extensive defects following congenital defects
combination of both. Most veterinary oph-
or abnormalities, trauma, or the removal of
thalmologists prefer surgery. H
Recurrence
scar tissues and neoplasia. The limits of these
rates afer surgery (15%) and cryosurgery
surgeries depend on the skill and imagina-
(1l%) were not significantly different in one
tion of the surgeon. The basic blepharoplas-
study, but the time for recurrence after surgery
tic procedures include sliding skin and
was 28.3 months compared to 7.4 months after
pedicle
grafts, tarsoconjunctival grafts,
cryosurgery.
pedicle skin or skin and muscle grafts, full-
Surgical procedures depend on the size
thickness eyelid grafts (also called bucket-
and site of the eyelid mass. In general eyelid
handle or Cutler-Beard technique), and
neoplasias are best removed early, when the
full-thick grafts from the upper to lower lid.
resultant surgical defect is smallest. Larger
All of these procedures, with occasional modif-
masses result in more extensive defects that
cations, are applicable to all animal species.
require greater reconstruction. Lid masses
removed at surgery should be examined by his-
Sliding Skin and Myocutaneous
topathology, and the surgical edges closely
Grafts
examined for the possible tumor. Masses that
involve the medial canthus and/or lacrimal
When eyelid surgical defects approach one-
puncta can be excised, but with greater
third or more of the eyelid length, rotation skin
difficulty.
 grafts, sliding-outer lid margin (Landolt), and
 Both cryotherapy and carbon dioxide laser
the rotation skin graft (Mustarde procedure)
 au r pda aq K d
may be used to close the defect.
tumors.
 Depending on the lid laxity, eyelid masses
involving up to 25% of the eyelid length may
Sliding "Z" Plasty
be excised by scalpel or scissors as a wedge
of full-thickness lid shaped either as a “"v"
A modified sliding myocutaneous graft for the
or a four-sided defect. Closure is by one or
us a si sne ae a e pa raddn 
two layers. The four-sided wedge technique
“Z”
plasty. In this procedure after "en bloc"
offers the advantage of accommodating a larger
excision of the neoplasm involving the lateral
aspects of the upper eyelid, incisions including
surgical approach, and all of the muscle-skin
sutures share equally in the wound tension and
skin and some orbicularis oculi muscles are
made in the form of triangles, which are then
prevent an obvious notch postoperatively. As
in the simple "v" wedge technique, closure is
excised
in one or two layers. Depending on the affected
lid laxity after these wedge procedures, a per-
Tarsoconjunctival Grafts/Whole
manent relief lateral canthotomy may be
Lid Grafts
necessary.
When the surgical defect approaches or
Transconjunctival grafts are similar to the
exceeds 50% of the upper eyelid, a semicircular
sliding skin grafts but are the deep aspects of
skin flap can be constructed to permit medial
the lid. Combinations of the sliding skin and
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE EYELiD/ 77
tarsoconjunctival grafts include the entire lid
time, or indefinitively. Partial permanent tar-
thickness and most often involve transplanta-
sorrhaphies are indicated to treat long-term
tion of part of the upper lid to lower lid defects.
ocular disorders, such as neuroparalytic kerati-
This procedure is referred to as the bucket-
tis, neurotropic keratitis, lagophthalmia, and
handle or Beard-Cutler technique.
chronic proptosis and exposure keratitis. Com-
plete permanent tarsorrhaphies are part of the
enucleation and exenteration procedures after
Miscellaneous Eyelid
removal of the eye and the orbital contents.
Procedures
Temporary Tarsorrhaphy
In tarsorrhaphy procedures portions of or
the entire eyelids are apposed, either tempo-
The partial temporary tarsorrhaphy is used fre-
rarily or permanently. In the partial proce-
quently after conjunctival and corneal surgery
dures only part (medial, central, or lateral)
to reduce the eyelid trauma to the surgical site
of the palpebral fissure is closed, thereby
and provide some contact and pressure to fresh
permitting vision by the patient, daily inspec-
 grafts or to keep contact lenses in place. A
tions by the veterinarian, and topical medi-
temporary tarsorrhaphyis performed by placing
cation of the eye or keeping the eye in its
one to three horizontal mattress sutures (4-0
orbit. If the indication was luxation of the
or 5-0, cutting, micropoint, or round-body
globe in brachycephalic breeds such as the
needle), on the required area, using. for
Pekingese, after opening a medial canthoplasty
 example, silicone or infusion tubing to prevent
(tarsorrhaphy) must be considered as a preven-
the suture from cutting into the skin (Figs.
tive measure against recurrence.
3.13A and B). The mattress sutures are used to
 In permanent tarsorrhaphy procedures,
close the lid fissure. Sutures placed too far
parts of or the entire eyelid margins of the
outside can cause entropion. Sutures placed
upper and lower eyelids are excised, grow
Ba, ue u insai Aeu eaounjuoo au yano
together, and remain sealed for a longer
slicing" effect to the cornea. Depending on the
B
A
pasoo Aeoduan si anssy [enqadied au v Kydeyuosien reodual t'e 
by two to three 4-0 to 5-0 interrupted mattress sutures and stents (infusion tubing;
rubber band). B. The sutures are placed half-thickness to avoid corneal contact, and
left long (to accommodate lid swelling and possible adjustments).
78/ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
ophthalmic disease, part to all of the sutures are
 Johnson BW, Gerding PA, McLaughlin SA, Helper
removed from several days to a few weeks or
 LC, Szajerski ME, Cormany KA. Non-surgical cor-
after a normal blink is established.
rection of entropion in Shar Pei puppies. Vet Med
1988:83:482-483
 Lewin G. Eyelid reconstruction in seven dogs using
Permanent Tarsorrhaphy
a split eyelid flap. J Sm Anim Pract 2003;44:246-
251
 In permanent tarsorrhaphy procedures, parts of
McCallum P, Welser J. Coronal rhytidectomy in
or the entire eyelid margins of the upper and
conjunction with deep plane walking sutures,
lower eyelids are excised and, after apposition
modified Hotz-Celsus and lateral canthoplasty
pue rauaon mona spaka, aui 'sanns Aq
procedure in a dog with excessive brow droop.
for
Vet Ophthalmol 2004;5:376-379
remain
sealed
longer
time,
or
Munger RJ, Carter JD. A further modifcation of the
indefinitively.
Khunt-Szymanowski procedure for correction of
atonic entropion in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Postoperative Care and Complications
1984;20:651-656.
Pellicane CP, Meek LA, Brooks DE, Miller TR. Eyelid
after Tarsorrhaphy
reconstruction in five dogs by the semicircular
flap technique. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;4:
The most frequent complications immediately
93-103.
after temporary tarsorrhaphy techniques are
Robertson BF, Roberts SM. Latent canthus entropion
variable swelling of the eyelids and suture
in the dog. l: Comparative anatomic studies. Vet
contact with the cornea. Thus such patients
Comp Ophthalmol 1995;5:162-169.
should be examined daily or every other day.
Robertson BF, Roberts SM. Lateral canthus entro-
If the sutures become too tight, local eyelid
pion in the dog. 2: Surgical correction. Results
necrosis and irritation result. If the sutures
and follow-up from 21 cases (1991-1994). Vet
become too loose, “egg slicing" suture contact
Comp Ophthalmol 1995;5:162-169.
Stades FC. A new method for surgical correction
to the cornea may occur. Routine use of a pro-
of upper eyelid trichiasis-entropion. Operation
tective E-collar postoperatively in small animals
method. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;23:603-
is important and effectively prevents self-trauma
606.
to the surgical site.
Stades FC, Boeve MH. Surgical correction of upper
eyelid trichiasis-entropion: results and follow-up
in 55 eyes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;23
Selected References
607-610.
Stades FC, Boeve MH, van der Woerdt A. Palpebral
Bedford PGC. Surgical correction of facial droop in
hissure length in the dog and cat. Prog Vet Comp
the English Cocker Spaniel. J Small Anim Pract
Ophthalmol 1992;2:155-161
1990;31:255
Stades FC, Gelatt KN. Diseases and surgery of the
Bedford PGC. Technique of lateral canthoplasty for
canine eyelids. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary oph-
the correction of macropalpebral fissure in the
 thalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007.
dog. J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:117-121
563-617.
 Bigelbach A. A combined tarsorrhaphy-canthoplasty
Van der Woerdt A. Adnexal surgery in dogs and
technique for the repair of entropion and
cats.Vet Ophthalmol 2004:7:284-290
ectropion. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;6:220-
Wheeler CA, Severin GA. Cryosurgical epilation for
224
the treatment of distichiasis in the dog and cat. J
 Esson D. A modification of the Mustarde technique
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:877-884
for the surgical repair of a large feline eyelid colo-
Williams DL. Entropion correction by formix-based
boma. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:159-160.
suture placerment: use of the Quickert-Rathbun
Gelatt KN, Gelatt JP. Small animal ophthalmic
technique in ten dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2004
surgery. Oxford: Butterworth-Hienmann, 2001.
7:343-347
74-124
Willis M, Martin C, Stiles J, Kirschner S. Brow sus-
Gwin RM. Selected blepharoplastic procedures of
pension for treatment of ptosis and entropion in
the canine eyelid. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 1980;
dogs with redundant facial skin folds. J Am Vet
2:267-272
Med Assoc 1999;214:660-662
Chapter 4
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR
AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS
Section l: Elizabeth A. Giuliano and Cecil P. Moore
Section 2: Bruce H. Grahn and Lynne S. Sandmeyer
SECTION 1: DISEASES AND
avascular cornea, lubricant between the lids
SURGERY OF THE LACRIMAL
and ocular surface, source of protective
SECRETORY SYSTEM
antimicrobial proteins, and removal of
 debris and exfoliated cells through drainage.
This chapter focuses on diseases and surgery
 The PTF consists of three layers, the lipid,
of the canine lacrimal secretory or tear and
aqueous, and mucin components, which
the nasolacrimal drainage systems. The diag-
appear intricately mingled (Fig. 4.1). Past
nostic procedures for detecting or confirm-
accepted measurements have estimated PTF
ing tear deficiencies as wellas the nasolacrimal
thickness at 7-10 μm. The lipid layer, secreted
drainage system are presented. Tear abnor-
by the tarsal or meibomian glands, provides a
malities are among the most common causes
thin, oily component to the PTF, which retards
of canine ocular surface disease. The medical
evaporation and promotes a stable, even spread
and surgical procedures applicable to treatment
of tears over the cornea. Meibomian glands,
of tear-deficient ocular surface diseases are
which are about 20-40 holocrine, modified
discussed.
sebaceous glands arranged linearly within the
The nasolacrimal duct system of the dog
dense connective tissues (tarsal plate) of the
is similar to that of most domestic animals,
eyelid margin, secrete a mixture of wax mono-
a thin-walled conduit that drains the tear
esters, sterol esters, hydrocarbons, triglycer.
film from the eye into the nasal passages.
ides, diglycerides, free sterols (i.e., cholesterol),
The  clinical  manifestations  for 
free faty acids, and polar lipids (including
congenital,
developmental, and acquired nasolacrimal dis-
phospholipids).
eases and the appropriate medical and surgical
The aqueous component of canine tears is
management of each disorder are described
secreted by lacrimal glands of the orbit and
nictitating membrane. The aqueous portion of
the PTF is 98.2% water and 1.8% solids (i.e.,
Formation and Dynamics
mostly proteins) and consists of water, electro-
of Tear Components
lytes, glucose, urea, surface-active polymers,
glycoproteins, and tear proteins. Aqueous tear
The functions of the precorneal tear film
serves most of the avascular cornea's metabolic
(PTF) include primary oxygen source to the
needs by supplying glucose, electrolytes,
79
80/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
the main lacrimal glands to reflex tear secretion
are somewhat variable, but the lacrimal gland
C
is the main source.
The chemical mediators of lacrimal gland
secretion are cholinergic agonists, released from
parasympathetic nerves, and norepinephrine,
released from sympathetic nerves, located
in both the cornea and conjunctiva. These
neurotransmitters activate signal transduction
pathways affecting the acinar cells, duct cells,
and blood vessels of the lacrimal gland leading
to secretion. Estrogen effects on the lacrimal
gland remain controversial.
Mucus, the third component to the PTF, is
composed of mucin, immunoglobulins, urea.
salts, glucose, leukocytes, cellular debris, and
enzymes. The mucus layer helps to provide a
smooth refractive surface over the cornea,
lubricates the cornea and conjunctiva, and
anchors the aqueous layer to the corneal
epithelium, thereby preventing shear forces,
bacterial adherence, and desiccation. The
mucin layer is produced mainly by the
conjunctival goblet cells, concentrated in
the fornices.
D
Pathogenesis of Tear
Film Disease
Fig. 4.l. Anatomic location of the tear secretory
tissues: A. Meibomian glands within the tarsal plate
Abnormalities in either the quantity or
B. Conjunctival goblet cells. C. Orbital lacrimal gland.
quality of any tear component (lipid,
and D. Nictitating membrane gland. (Courtesy of
aqueous, mucus) may alter tear fluid dynam-
G. Constantinescu.)
ics and compromise tear function. Hyperto
nicity and dehydration of conjunctival and
corneal epithelia are initial pathophysiologic
 Oxygen, and water to the superfcial cornea;
events associated with tear deficiency. Lack
lubricates the cornea, conjunctiva, and nictitat-
of appropriate lubrication results in fric-
ing membrane; removes metabolites such as
tional irritation of the ocular surface by the
carbon dioxide and lactic acid; and flushes
eyelids and third eyelid. In tear-deficient
 away particulate debris and bacteria from the
patients, microorganisms more readily colo-
ocular surface
nize affected eyes, thereby resulting in
The lacrimal glands of the orbit and the nic-
increased incidence of ocular surface infec-
titating membrane are tubuloacinar and histo-
tions. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), or
logically similar. Three to five ductules from the
dry eye, is the clinical condition associated
orbital lacrimal gland open into the dorsolateral
with lacrimal gland hyposecretion. Insufficient
conjunctival fornix, whereas the nictitans gland
 aqueous fluid production is considered to be
delivers aqueous tears onto the corneal sur-
synonymous with quantitative tear deficiency.
face through multiple ducts opening between
Abnormalities or deficiencies of tear compo-
lymphoid follicles on the posterocentral third
nents other than aqueous fluid are considered
eyelid. The individual contributions by each of
here to be qualitative disorders.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/81
Box 4.1. Breeds at Highest Risk
Box 4.2. Causes of Kcs in the Dog
for Kcs
Imrn une-mediateddacryoadenitis/dacryoadenopathy.
English Bulldogs
Canine distemper virus.
WWest Highland Wwhite Terriers
Chronic blepharoconjunctivitis.
Pugs
Congenital acinar  hypoplasia (ie., congenital
Yorkshire Terriers
alacrima)
Amenican Cocker Spaniels
Drug-induced
 KCS—may   occur  in  the  dog
Pekingese
following:
Miniature Schnauzers
Short-term:
English Springer Spaniels
Topical and general anesthetics
Topical and systemic atropine
Long-term:
Systemic sulfonamide therapy (phenazopyri-
dine, sulfadiazine, sulfasalazine.
PLE
Quantitative Tear Deficiency
trimethoprim-sulfonamide combinations)
Nonsteroidals (EtodolacTM).
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is  a common
Removal   of  nictitans  gland   and/or  corrected
nictitans gland prolapse.
ocular disease in the dog. It is characterized
Uncorrected nictitans gland prolapse
 by aqueous tear deficiency resulting in desic-
Traumatic or inflammatory orbital diseases
cation and inflammation of the conjunctiva
Loss of parasympathetic innervation to  lacrimal
and cornea, ocular pain, progressive corneal
glands (cranial nerve Vll).
disease, and reduced vision. In one report,
Loss of sensory innervation (i.e., sensation) to the
the incidence of KCs in canine patients, as
ocular surface (cranial nerve V).
Local irradiation of head neoplasms.
presented to the North American Veterinary
Systemic metabolic diseases (hypothyroidism, dia-
Medical Colleges, is approximately 1% (i.e.,
betes mellitus, and Cushing's disease)
nine to twelve cases per thousand admis-
sions) and concentrated in certain breeds
(Box 4.1).
Chinicaf Findings in Kcs
Causes of Aqueous Tear Deficiency
Clinical signs of KCS vary depending on the
duration of onset and the extent of dryness.
Absence or reduction of lacrimal secretions
In the acute severe form of KCS tear forma-
may result from a single disease process or a
tion abruptly
ceases, and the eye becomes
combination of conditions affecting the orbital
 acutely painful with axial progressive corneal
lacrimal and nictitans glands (Box 4.2). Con-
ulceration with keratomalacia, which may
genital acinar hypoplasia (i.e., congenital
advance to descemetocele formation with
alacrima) is recognized as a breed-related cause
resultant
 staphyloma and
iris
  prolapse.
in miniature breeds and is often unilateral.
However, in most cases, the onset of KCS is
Drug-induced KCS may be either short term
more gradual and characterized by a pro-
(hours) or long term. While many systemically
gressive conjunctivitis with subtle corneal
administered sulfonamides have been recog-
vascularization and pigmentation (Figs. 4.2
nized to cause KCs in dogs for many years,
and 4.3).
orneal ulceration is infrequent. The
other drugs (such as certain nonsteroidals)
earlydisease
se responds to topical antibiotic-cor-
have been recently associated with KCS
in
ticosteroid combination but rapidly recurs once
dogs. When these drugs are administered,
topical medications are stopped.
Eventually,
the Schirmer tear test should be performed
the ocular surface becomes lackluster, the con-
 periodically. While the list of possible causes of
junctiva appears to be extremely hyperemic,
KCS is extensive, an immune-mediated dac
persistent t
tenacious mucopurulent ocular
ryoadentitis may cause the greatest percentage
discharge
 occurs, and the diagnosis is more
of KCs in dogs.
obvious. With progressive disease, the level of
82/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
nonaqueous precorneal film KCS. The STT
is the important diagnostic for quantifying
aqueous tear production.
Two topical ophthalmic stains are used in
KCS. Rose Bengal stain will detect devitalized
cells, subtle epithelial defects on either the
conjunctiva or corneal surfaces, and adherent
mucus tags. Fluorescein stain detects concur-
rent corneal ulceration and may also be used to
evaluate tear breakup time (TBUT).
Schirmer tear tests may be done either
without (i.e., STT 1) or with (i.e., STT I1) use
of topical anesthetic. STT I measures the
Fig. 4.2. Canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Note the
ability of the eye to produce reflex tears in
intense conjunctival hyperemia, thick mucopurulent
addition to basal secretions and is the most
discharge, and chronic keratitis characteristic of
commonly performed test, whereas STT 11
subacute or chronic aqueous tear dehciency.
estimates only basal tear secretions. The
STT 11 values are about 50% less than the
STT 1 levels in normal dogs. Variation in
absorbency among tear test strips, body weight,
and daily and weekly fluctuations occur with
the STT I. In the clinical seting, STT I readings
in dogs are generally interpreted as follows:
≥ 15 mm/min = normal production
11-14 mm/min = early or subclinical KCS
6-10 mm/min = moderate or mild KCS
≤ 5 mm/min = severe KCS
The systemic evaluation of patients with
KCS should include examination for possible
associated systemic diseases (e.g., hypothyroid-
ism), assessment of eyelid function and blink
reflexes, and, in selected cases, ocular surface
cultures and cytology.
Fig. 4.3. Pigmentary keratitis is a common
manifestation of advanced canine keratoconjunctivitis
Qualitative Abnormalities
sicca. With drug-induced normal tear levels, a
 signihcant amount of pigmentation can resolve.
Sometimes patients present with the history
and clinical signs of KCS but normal STT levels
discomfort intensifies, thus resulting in persis-
These patients may have a qualitative tear defi-
tent blepharospasm.
ciency with abnormality of either the lipid or
the mucin tear components.
Diagnosis of Aqueous Tear Deficiency
Causes of Qualitative
Diagnostics for KCs, in addition to typical
Tear Deficiencies
clinical signs, include the Schirmer tear test
(STT) and phenol red-thread tear test, posi-
Disorders of the tarsal or meibomian glands
tive ocular staining using vital stains, and
may result in abnormal secretions and subse-
reduced quantitative tear readings for the
J aei pidi leoyadns aul jo uondnsp iuanb
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/83
the tear flm. The resultant loss of the normal
Though the cause for these infiltrates is often
oily covering may allow premature dispersion
not determined, both infectious and immune-
of the aqueous layer. Abnormal lipids may also
mediated mechanisms have been hypothesized
be directly toxic to surface cells. Diseases of
as well as severe cicatrization following diffuse
the meibomian glands are often manifested as
ulcerative conjunctival disease. Experimentally
inflammation of the mucocutaneous junction,
induced vitamin A deficiency results in squa-
which is referred to as marginal blepharitis.
mous metaplasia of the conjunctiva and loss of
Marginal blepharitis, blepharoconjunctivitis,
conjunctival goblet cells.
and meibomianitis are commonly caused by
suppurative bacterial infections (i.e., Staphylo-
coccus sp.). Yeast organisms, including Candida
Clinical Findings in Qualitative
and Malassezia sp., may also cause infectious
Tear Abnormalities
blepharitis, and may occur after chronic admin-
istration of  topical antibiotic-corticosteroid
Dogs with acute meibomianitis typically have
combinations.
swollen eyelid margins, with slight “pointing"
Dogswith
generalized seborrhea may
of the meibomian openings. Affected openings
produce abnormal meibomian lipids. By affect-
may be plugged with dried or discolored
ing the mucocutaneous junctions, autoimmune
meibum. Formation of lipid granulomas and
diseases such as lupus erythematosus and
multiple chalazia may frictionally irritate the
bullous pemphigoid may affect the eyelid
eye and complicate any tear flm abnormality
margins and meibomian secretions. Deficiency
present. In some cases of chronic meibomiani-
of meibomian secretion resulting from malde-
tis, superficial keratitis is also present. Clinical
velopmental of the meibomian glands is another
possibility.
subtle, with faint localized or geographic epi-
 Insuffcient production of preocular mucin
-d   s   
also results in loss of tear flm stability, with
 tate areas of roughened epithelium that may or
subsequent corneal desiccation (Fig. 4.4).
may not retain fluorescein stain, as well as fine
Chronic, diffuse conjunctival inflammatory cell
and superficial perilimbal vascular infltrates.
infltrates may reduce or eliminate goblet cells.
 Frictional effects from roughened eyelid margins
may also affect the corneal epithelium.
Loss of conjunctival goblet cells results in
an unstable tear film, as manifested by rapid
breakup of the preocular tear flm, lackluster
appearance of the ocular surface, and corneal
desiccation. Mucin deficiency is characterized
clinically   as  chronic keratoconjunctivitis,
corneal ulceration, and absence of appreciable
ocular discharge in the presence of adequate
SST I measurements.
Diagnosis of Qualitative
Tear Deficiencies
Fig. 4.4. Keratoconjunctivitis associated with
preocular tear flm mucin dehciency. Note the
Making the diagnosis of lipid tear abnor-
thickened and hyperemic conjunctiva, lackluster
malities depends on findings from a detailed
corneal surface, axial corneal stromal ulceration, and
examination using a focused light and a mag-
vascularized and edematous cornea. (Reprinted with
permission from Moore CP, Collier LL. Ocular
nifying source. A slit-lamp biomicroscope is
surface disease associated with loss of conjunctival
recommended, though binocular magnifying
goblet cells in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
loupes and a separate focal light source
1990;26:458-466.)
(e.g., a Finoff transilluminator) may be used.
84 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Attention is focused on the appearance of the
may also be confirmed by the results of con
eyelid margins and meibomian glands
Swollen, rounded eyelid margins indicate
 goblet cells.
acute or subacute marginal blepharitis. Hyper-
emia of the mucocutaneous junction, with dry,
crusty, porphyrin-stained exudates on the lid
Treatment of Tear
margins, is also indicative of marginal blepha-
Film Deficiencies
ritis. Any elevated, focal, beige subconjunctival
masses typical of chalazia should be noted.
Medical Treatment
Following administration of a topical anes-
thetic solution, gentle manipulation of the
Medical therapy is the primary means of
eyelid margin using blunt-tipped forceps with
treating tear-deficient ocular surface disease
shallow serrations will allow inspection of secre-
(Box 4.3). Specific treatment regimens are
tions expressed from the meibomian glands.
tailored to individual patients and are in-
Normal meibomian lipid is a clear viscous oil,
fluenced by the underlying pathogenesis,
similar in appearance to vegetable cooking oil.
disease severity, and owner's ability to
Abnormal meibomian secretions are typically
comply with recommended treatment sched-
thick, opaque, and may appear to be inspis-
ules. Treatment generally consists of some
sated, with a cream-cheese consistency.
combination of the following:
The clinical diagnosis of canine ocular
1. Tear stimulation
mucin deficiency may be supported by the
2. Tear replacement
measurements of the TBUT (Fig. 4.5). Tear
3. Topical antimicrobial agents
film breakup time is performed by instilling
4. Mucinolysis
one drop of fluorescein stain into the eye, then
5. Anti-inflammatory therapy
manually holding the eyelids open. The time is
recorded from the last blink to the appearance
of the frst dry spot, which appears as a dark
Lacrimostimulants
area in the yellow-green fluorescent film. A
cobalt-blue filter should be used when viewing
Lacrimostimulants, which are drugs admin-
the cornea. The normal TBUT in dogs should
istered to promote tear secretion, include
be 20 seconds or longer. In animals affected
two categories of therapeutic agents: cholin-
with mucin deficiency, however, TBUT usually
ergics and immunomodulators.
occurs in less than 5 seconds. The diagnosis
Box 4.3. Selected Drugs for the
Treatment of Canine Kcs
Topical antimicrobial agents
Mucinolytics
Anti-inflammatory therapy (avoid in acute KCS)
Lacrimominics (see appendix B):
For  aqueous deficiency:  Methylcellulose  and
 polyviny based preparations
For lipid deficiency: Dextran and viscoelastic
based preparations
 For mucin deficiency: Lanolin, petrolatum and
mineral oil based preparations
Fig. 4.5. The tear breakup time (TBUT) measures
Lacrimostirmulants
the time (in seconds) for the beginning of tear
 Immunomodulating: Topical cyclosporine (0.02-
2%). tacrolimus (0.03-0.2%). and pimecro
dissipation (or dry spots) of the precorneal tear hlm
limus (1%)
(as observed with topical fluorescein, cobalt light,
 Cholinergic: Oral pilocarpine
and some magnification)
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/85
Cholinergic Agents
Most cases of canine KCS are presumed
immune mediated. CsA has been the primary
The lacrimal gland is innervated by both
treatment for KCs in the dog for over
the
parasympathetic
and
sympathetic
a decade (and has recently been approved
branches of the autonomic nervous system.
for topical use in people with dry eye). Before
The parasympathetic innervation of the
the commercial availability of CsA for ophthal-
lacrimal gland has enabled cholinergic drugs
mic use, l-2% oil-based solutions were com-
(i.e., pilocarpine) to be used either orally
pounded from 10% oral CsA solution using a
or topically to stimulate tear secretions
vegetable oil (i.e., olive or corn oil) solvent.
in select cases. The use of pilocarpine for
Currently, the 0.2% commercial ointment
dry eye is indicated in cases of KCS resulting
(OptimmuneTM; Schering-Plough) is prescribed.
from parasympathetic denervation of the lacri-
To stimulate tear production, topical CsA is
mal glands and will only be effective if some
 generally recommended ql2h and sometimes
functional lacrimal gland remains. Oral admin-
in stubborn cases q8h. Benefits may not become
istration has consisted of applying 1-2% oph-
evident for several weeks. Dogs with STT values
thalmic solution to the food; a safe initial oral
of O-l mm/min have an approximately 50%
dosage is one drop of 2% topical pilocarpine
chance of responding to topical CsA with
per 10 kg of body weight twice daily. The dose
increased tear secretion; dogs with pretreat-
may be increased by one-drop increments at
ment STT values of 2 mm/min or greater have
each dosing until signs of systemic toxicity
a more than 80% chance of improved tear pro-
develop (i.e., salivation, vomiting, diarrhea,
duction. Long-term therapy is recommended.
cardiac arrhythmias). The dose should then be
Topical 2% cyclosporine in dogs has been
lowered to the previously tolerated dose.
shown to cause a suppression of lymphocyte
Topical dilute pilocarpine (0.125% or 0.25%)
 proliferation after l-3 months of use.
applied directly to the eyes has been recom-
Other calcineurin inhibitors such as tacro-
mended, but recent studies suggest limited to
limus have been effective for canine KCS.
no effect.
Tacrolimus, reportedly ten to a hundred
times more potent in vitro than CsA, is being
prescribed with increasing frequency by vet-
Immunomodulating Agents Cyclosporine A
erinary ophthalmologists at doses of 0.03-
0.02% tacrolimus in aqueous or oil-based
Immunomodulating agents cyclosporine A
 suspensions, as well as ointment form.
(CsA), a derivative of the fungus Tolypocla-
Pimecrolimus, an ascomycin derivative in a
dium inflatum, and tacrolimus (formally FK
topical 1% oil-based formulation, reportedly
506), a macrolide antibiotic produced by
has promising results in canine KCS.
Streptomyces tsukubaensis, are both T-cell acti-
vation inhibitors initially developed for their
systemic uses in preventing graft rejection
Tear Substitutes (Lacrimomimetics)
after organ transplantation. The ability of CsA
to stimulate tear production in the dog is well
Tear substitutes contain ingredients, or
documented and both immuno-modulating
combinations of ingredients, to replace defi-
and tear-stimulating properties appear
to
ciencies in one or more of the three primary
account for the dramatic responses observed in
tear components (i.e., aqueous, mucin,
many affected dogs after topical application.
lipid). Many ophthalmic solutions and
T-suppressor cells normally predominate in
ointments are commercially available for
the lacrimal gland, but in immune-mediated
tear replacement therapy (see appendix B).
KCS, T-helper cells become the prevalent T
Aqueous tear replacement agents are initially
lymphocytes. Therefore, it is believed that by
applied four to six times daily to affected eyes
inhibiting T-helper cells in KCS, CsA allows the
 and are generally used concurrently with other
T-suppressor cells to sustain normal lacrimal
topical
 therapeutic agents. Although more
function.
frequent applications (i.e., q l or 2 hours) are
86/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
often desirable, this treatment regime is rarely
may be applied topically two to four times
possible or practical for the pet owner to accom-
daily.
plish. Despite their limitations, lacrimomi
metics are also warranted in the treatment
Anti-Inflammatory Therapy
of qualitative tear film abnormalities and as an
adjunct to lacrimostimulant therapy for quan-
Anti-inflammatory therapy may be a valu-
titative tear film deficiencies.
able adjunct to other medical therapy in
Methylcellulose products  are commonly
used as aqueous tear substitutes. Viscous lubri-
improving clinical signs of KCs. Topical cor-
cants enhance ocular surface wettability and
ticosteroids are commonly administered to
have extended contact time with the ocular
minimize conjunctivitis, to alleviate discom-
fort, and to reduce corneal opacities associ-
surface. Linear polymers such as dextran and
polyvinylpyrrolidone (povidone) have mucino-
ated with chronic keratitis. Triple-antibiotic
mimetic properties. Polymers have been com-
ointment in combination with mild corticoste-
bined with buffered solutions of substituted
roids is often beneficial (see appendix
cellulose esters to form preparations
H). Caution must be exercised, however,
for
treating deficiencies of both the aqueous
when administering topical corticosteroids,
because their use may significantly compli-
and mucin components of the preocular tear
film. Viscoelastic substances with mucinomi-
cate healing of an ulcerated cornea.
metic properties include sodium hyaluronate,
chondroitin sulfate, and 1-2% methylcellulose
Miscelfaneous Considerations
preparations.
Lanolin, petrolatum, and mineral
oil
Aqueous tear deficiency cases of acute KCS may
common bases for ophthalmic lubricating
present with corneal stromal ulceration requir-
ointments, mimic the function of naturally
 ing aggressive medical or surgical therapy (or
occurring meibomian lipids by preventing
both). As these corneal ulcers are often very
evaporation, thus preserving existing tears.
slow to heal, and for cases of deep stromal
ulceration or descemetocele formation, recon-
Antibacterials
structive corneal surgery (i.e., conjunctival
grafting) may be necessary to stabilize the
Antibiotics with broad-spectrum activity,
cornea and to stimulate fbrovascular resolu-
such as triple-antibiotic ointment or solu-
tion of the ulceration.
tion, are commonly administered to control
secondary bacterial infections that occur in
Special Considerations in Qualitative
KCS cases because of inadequate cleansing
Tear Deficiencies
of the ocular surface. Frequency of treatment
is usually q8h to q6h. In cases of persistent
Specific treatment oflipid tear abnormalities
mucopurulent discharge, bacterial culture and
depends on the particular meibomian disor-
sensitivity testing as well as fungal culture
should be performed.
der. In acute and chronic meibomianitis,
aerobic bacterial cultures of expressed secre-
tions may be indicated. Antibiotics should be
Mucinolytic-Anticolfagenase Agents
selected on the basis of antibacterial suscepti-
bility testing results. Bacterial meibomianitis
Good ocular hygiene (i.e., frequent cleansing of
should be treated with both topical and sys-
discharges) is essential to minimize the accu-
temic antibiotics. Chronic bacterial meibomi-
mulation of debris with degradative enzymes
 anitisisoften recurrentand requires intermittent,
that contribute to ocular surface inflammation
intensive treatments or continuous, low-level
and ulceration. To facilitate removal of copious
 maintenance therapy; topical application of an
exudates and mucoid debris that may accom-
antibiotic ointment two to three times daily
pany KCS, a 5-10% solution of acetylcysteine
may be indicated as long-term maintenance
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/87
therapy in some cases. In such cases, gentle
markedly declined. Nonetheless, the few dogs
 periodic expression of meibomian material may
with persistent absolute sicca (STT, O mm/min)
be necessary.
after a few months of medical treatment remain
Surgical curettage of chalazia is indicated to
candidates for PDT.
permit resolution of focal granulomas. Lipid
substitutes, that is, petrolatum, mineral oil, and
Preoperative Considerations
liquid lanolin, lubricate the ocular surface,
which is especially beneficial during treatment
Dogs with KCS may occasionally have xerosto-
 of conjunctival granulomas.
mia, and these animals are not candidates for
Treatment for mucin-deficient keratocon-
PDT surgery. Testing flow of salivary fluid from
junctivitis consists of topical mucin replace-
the parotid duct is easily done by administering
ments (i.e., mucinomimetics), symptomatic
a bitter substance (e.g., one drop of ophthalmic
treatment of corneal ulcers if present, and
 atropine solution) to the tongue and observing
topical anti-inflammatory therapy in selected
for salivary flow from the papilla.
cases. Topical mucinomimetics (see appendix
The parotid gland is located at the junction
B) should be applied at q6h to q4h. The more
of the head and neck, near the base of the ear
viscous lubricants mimic mucin by enhancing
canal (Fig. 4.6). The main duct is formed by
ocular surface wettability and
providing
 the convergence of two or three small branches
extended contact time with the epithelial sur-
arising from the ventral anterior border of the
faces. Topical anti-inflammatory therapy as
gland and uniting over the masseter muscle.
well as cyclosporine may be beneficial to stimu-
   a  s s
late mucin production and assist in the goblet
extends subcutaneously over the surface of the
cell recovery.
masseter muscle, courses forward across the
face, and opens into the buccal cavity at a single
Surgical Treatment of
a  p p r a i
Tear Deficiencies
a on jensoi pue qoon reouid raddn qno
zygomatic papilla.
Surgical procedures indicated for treatment
For surgery, the oral cavity is flushed and
of selected KCS cases are parotid duct trans-
swabbed with betadine solution diluted (l : 10)
 position (PDT), which provides saliva as a
and the parotid duct is cannulated by placing
substitute for tears, and permanent partial
a monofilament nylon suture (0-0 to 2-0) in the
 tarsorrhaphy, which reduces exposure and
papilla and duct. Either of two approaches (i.e..
enhances blinking. Nasolacrimal puncta occlu-
closed [oral] or open [lateral]) may be used
sion is commonly used in humans as a tear-
when performing PDT surgery. Both approaches
conserving procedure by blocking tear drainage
appear to be equally effective, and the choice
and has recently been reported in the treatment
of an open versus closed PDT procedure is
of canine KCs but requires some level of tear
simply one of surgeon's preference. The open
formation. Replacement of the nictitans gland
PDT
procedure was the original technique
(versus gland removal) is also regarded as a
described by Lavingnette in 1966 and involves
preventative surgical procedure for canine
exposing the parotid duct through a facial skin
KCS.
incision.
Parotid Duct Transposition
Complications, Seguelae, and
Postoperative Considerations
From the mid-1960s to mid-1980s, before CsA
was available, this surgery was also being per-
Twisting, laceration, or trauma to the parotid
formed successfully in dogs affected with KCS
duct may occur with either the closed or the
nonresponsive to available medical therapy.
open PDT procedure. Causes for delayed
Following the introduction of CsA in 1987, the
failure in PDT surgery include retraction of
percentage of KCS cases treated by PDT has
the papilla into the subcutaneous space
88/ESSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.6. Parotid duct transposition of medically refractory canine
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Note the parotid gland and path of its duct across the
mandibule as well as the new path to the ventrolateral conjunctival fornix (dotted
line). Insert: Apposition of the papilla of the distal parotid duct to the ventrolateral
conjunctival fornix using simple interrupted 7-0 polyglactin 910 sutures. (Courtesy
of G. Constantinescu.)
with fibrous closure of the conjunctival
opening, occlusion of the duct by sialoliths,
and acute or chronic sialoadenitis. Saliva
contains a higher concentration of mineral
as compared to tears, and owners should be
alerted that mineral deposits can develop
on the cornea and eyelid margins (Fig. 4.7).
Should this occur, a chelating solution con-
taining l-2% EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraace-
tic acid) in artificial tears may be applied
topically two to three times daily to aid in
control of the mineral precipitates. Continued
 use of topical CsA or similar agent also appears
to be helpful in reducing irritation from
Fig. 4.7. Mineral precipitates after parotid duct
mineral deposits, probably by virtue of its
transposition in a Yorkshire Terrier. The precipitates
lubricant, mucinogenic, and anti-inflammatory
are on the cornea and eyelid surfaces.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/89
properties. An overabundance of salivary secre-
lateral nasal fold and the maxillary process.
tions may result in facial wetting and discol-
The ectodermal cords grow toward the nasal
oration, which can be objectionable to some
cavity and the eye, and eventually, they
owners, especially in light-coated dogs. In rare
extend from the eyelid to the inferior nasal
cases, overproduction may prompt consider-
passage. The upper end of this cord develops
 p i     jo g
two buds, which grow into the upper and lower
surgery.
eyelid near the medial canthus and develop
into the superior and inferior canaliculi and
puncta. The cord becomes a duct through a
Cysts and Neoplasms of the
process of canalization and normally is patent
Lacrimal Secretory System
at birth.
Cysts involving lacrimal tissue, though uncom-
mon, have been reported and may originate
Anatomy and Physiology
from either the orbital or the nictitans glands.
Depending on the site of origin, cysts may
The superior and inferior puncta are oval to
distend the conjunctiva and protrude into the
palpebral fissure, expand within the orbit and
 mately 1 mm x 0.3 mm, with their long axis
cause displacement of the globe, or both. Pos-
parallel to the lid margin They are located
sible causes include developmental defects,
on the palpebral conjunctiva at the edge of
blunt trauma, foreign-body injury, or inflam-
the upper and lower eyelids 2-5 mm from
mation affecting the ducts
the medial canthus (Fig. 4.8). The canaliculi
Although lacrimal neoplasms are also
are approximately 4-7 mm in length and
uncommon in the dog. primary adenomas and
0.5-1.0 mm in diameter. They extend through
adenocarcinomas of the orbital and nictitans
glands occur. These tumors tend to be locally
invasive and have a guarded prognosis. Orbital
exenteration with adjunctive irradiation or
(a)
chemotherapy may be indicated for cases of
adenocarcinoma of the orbital lacrimal gland.
SECTION 2: DISEASES AND
SURGERY OF THE
NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEM
Introduction
The nasolacrimal duct system of the dog is
similar to that of most domestic animals. It is a
aso acrnal
thin-walled conduit that drains the tear film
Nasa
from the eye into the nasal passages, and dis-
eases generally involve interruptions of tear
passage to the nose.
(b)
Embryology
Fig. 4.8. Gross anatomy of the canine nasolacrimal
 The nasolacrimal duct system develops from
duct system. Note the relationship of the eyelids,
surface ectoderm within the nasolacrimal
lacrimal puncta, canaliculi, lacrimal sac, and
groove (i.e., furrow), which separates the
nasolacrimal duct.
90/EssentiAlS OF VeterinarY OpHthAlmOloGY
the orbicularis oculi muscle, and they join
the eye to the nasal passages. Evaporation,
together ventral to the medial canthus to form
which varies with environmental conditions,
the lacrimal sac, which lies within a slight
removes a significant portion (approximately
depression (i.e., the lacrimal fossa) in the lacri-
25%) of tears from the ocular surface before
mal bone.The nasolacrimal duct originates
drainage can occur. Most (60%) of the tear
from the base of the lacrimal sac and is
volume is normally drained through the infe-
constricted as it traverses the lacrimal bone;
rior puncta and canaliculi. Tears flow ventrally
this narrowing is important in retention of
in response to gravity, and they are pulled into
foreign bodies and development of dacryo-
the canaliculi during eyelid closure because of
cystitis in the dog. The duct then passes
reduced intracanalicular pressure as well as
through a canal on the medial surface of the
capillary action; a siphon effect from the lacri-
maxillary bone, and it ends in a nasal punctum.
mal sac pulls tears through the canaliculi and
The nasal puncta are usually located in the
duct.
ventral lateral nasal meatus, opening approx-
imately l cm inside the external nares. In
approximately 50% of dogs, the nasolacrimal
Clinical Manifestations of
duct has a second opening in the oral mucosa
Nasolacrimal Disease
of the central hard palate, behind the incisors
at the level of the canine teeth.
 Disorders of the nasolacrimal duct system in
the dog may be congenital, developmental,
or acquired, and they are limited to a lack of
Physiology
patency or inflammation (Box 4.4). The clin-
ical manifestations of nasolacrimal system
The sole purpose of the nasolacrimal duct
disease include epiphora; mucopurulent
system is to drain tears from the surface of
punctal, conjunctival, and nasal discharge;
Box 4.4. Strategy and Procedures for Diagnosis and Treatment of
Nasolacrimal (Drainage) Diseases*
Tear overflow at medial canthus
个
个
Epiphora
Lacrimation
(Schirmer tear test 10-25 mm/min)
(pain generated) (Schirmer tear test values: 30 mm/min)
个
个
 Fluorescein passage
Huorescein passage to nares
Absent at nares: Nasolacrimal flush
Examine eyelids (entropion, distichia, etc.)
个
 Examine conjunctiva, cormea, and intraocular tissues.
If negative: Lacnimal punctum atresia
个
Surgery
Treat primary disorder
If positive:
Medial lower entropion
Lacrimal punctum obstruction (inflammatory)
Lacrimal micropunctum/displacement
Dacryocystitis
Nasolacrimal duct obstruction
Treatment of inciting condition
* Character of the ocular discharge is mainly serous or seromucus. If the ocular disharge is mucopurulent or
purulent, see chapter 5.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/91
swelling of the ventral medial canthal region;
punctal foreign bodies; and draining fistula
in the medial canthal region. Epiphora devel-
ops secondary to obstructions of tear flow
through the nasolacrimal duct system or to
an overproduction of tears (i.e., lacrimation,
usually secondary to ocular irritation and
pain, in which the tear volume overwhelms
the normal drainage system). Mucopurulent
 punctal and ocular discharge conjunctivitis and
draining fistulas from the duct system may
develop secondary to nasolacrimal sac inflam-
mation (i.e., dacryocystitis)
Diagnostic Procedures
Diagnostics for the nasolacrimal system
include Schirmer tear test, cytology and
microbial culture, fluorescein dye passage
test, normograde punctal and canalicular
cannulation and lavage, nasal punctal can-
nulation and retrograde flushing, and several
imaging procedures (dacryocystorhinogra-
Fig. 4.9. For the nasolacrimal lush, a 24-gauge
phy, ultrasonography, computed tomogra-
intravenous catheter can be inserted into the ventral
phy [CT], magnetic resonance
imaging
(lower) punctum in the dog (A). Alternatively, the
[MRI], and lacrimal scintigraphy).
24-gauge nasolacrimal needle can be used (B)
Fluorescein Dye Passage
eye wash is injected while observing the contra-
 Fluorescein dye passage is the primary test
lateral punctum. When fluid passes through the
opposite punctum, it is gently occluded with
of patency. It involves placing liquid fluores-
fnger pressure, and continued injection into a
cein dye on the cornea and conjunctiva, and
normal nasolacrimal duct system will produce
after several (3-5) minutes have elapsed,
eye wash at the nostrils or induce swallowing
both the nasal area and pharynx are exam-
as the solution flows into the pharynx. Retro-
ined with cobalt-filtered or ultraviolet light
to confrm dye passage and duct patency.
grade nasolacrimal duct flushing is performed
when a normograde flush is not successful. In
Unfortunately,f
false-negative results occur,
most dogs, general anesthesia is required before
especially in the brachycephalic breeds, and a
normograde nasolacrimal duct flush is fre-
cannulation of the nasal punctum and retro-
 grade flushing can be completed. The nasolac-
quently required to confirm patency.
rimal duct punctum is located at the junction
of the floor and lateral wall of the nare. A curved
Nasolacrimal Flushing
mosquito forcep introduced through the specu-
lum and into the nasal lacrimal puncta and
- r r 5 t 
mal cannula is preplaced on a 3-mL syringe
of a flamed rounded 5-0 nylon suture tip held
containing a commercial eye wash, and a drop
with a second mosquito forcep, which directs
of topical anesthetic is applied to the conjunc-
the suture retrograde up through the nasolacri-
tiva (Figs. 4.9A and B). The punctum and cana-
mal duct, out through the ventral canaliculus
liculus are cannulated, and a small volume of
and eyelid puncta.
92/ESSEnTIALs OF VEtERiNARY OpHThALmOLOGY
Imaging Examinations
nasolacrimal duct flushing. Superior punctal
atresia is asymptomatic and is diagnosed
Lateral and ventrodorsal open-mouth nasal
incidentally. When inferior punctal atresia
radiographs are useful in evaluation of the
is present, epiphora is usually present in
nasal bones along which the nasolacrimal
puppies. Nasolacrimal flushing through the
duct passes. The nasolacrimal ducts
are
upper punctum will cause the conjunctiva over
vulnerable to traumatic laceration,erosion,or
the lower canaliculus to bulge (Figs. 4.l0A, B,
compression by infectious processes or nasal
and C). Ventral punctal atresia is treated by
tumors. Results of dacryocystorhinography can
linear, circular, or x-shaped surgical excision of
confirm nasolacrimal duct patency. This radio-
graphic contrast study involves injection of
approximately l ml of a viscous, radiopaque
dye through the cannulated canaliculi. Radio-
 graphs are obtained as the dye passes through
the nasolacrimal duct system. Perforations or
blockages of the nasolacrimal duct are readily
detected on these images.
Advanced imaging studies (i.e., ultraso-
nography, CT, MRI, and scintigraphy) are
also useful to confrm compression and
occlusion of the nasolacrimal duct system. In
addition, they are useful to determine the extent
of primary disease in the nose and orbit
Congenital Diseases
Congenital anomalies of the nasolacrimal
duct system include punctal atresia and
micropuncta, canalicular and nasal lacrimal
duct atresia, misplacement of the punctum
and canaliculus,displacementofthe punctum
secondary to medial ventral entropion, dac-
ryops, and canaliculops. Because of the impor-
tance of tear drainage though the lower punctum
and canaliculus, most clinical punctal and cana-
B
licular disorders involve the lower structures
Lacrimal Punctai Atresia
Punctal atresia is the most frequently diag-
nosed congenital anomaly. It can affect the
superior, inferior, or both puncta, and it may
be either unilateral or bilateral. It occurs in
C
numerous breeds and is commonly seen in
Fig. 4.10. For ventral lacrimal punctal aplasia, the
American Cocker Spaniels, Bedlington Terriers,
nasolacrimal flush is performed through the superior
Golden Retrievers, Miniature and Toy Poodles,
(upper) lacrimal punctum. Upon initial Hlush, the
and Samoyeds
conjuctiva over the punctal atresia balloons (A). The
The diagnosis is confirmed by direct
ballooning conjunctiva is excised by scissors (B) to
observation and normograde or retrograde
reestablish punctal function (C)
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/93
the ballooning conjunctiva. The affected eye is
dog. In this report, canalicular patency was
then treated with topical antibiotic and cortico-
restored by surgical removal of the cyst.
steroid solutions q6h until reexamination in
approximately 7 days; if the punctum is patent
Congenital Nasolacrimal
 and epiphora nolonger present, further therapy
Duct Obstructions
is not required. If the punctum has closed or
significantly narrowed, it should be enlarged by
The nasolacrimal duct in the dog has been
the 1-2-3 snip technique or with a punctal
reported to be occluded by dacryops. They
dilator. An indwelling silastic tube can be posi-
were treated by surgical exploration of the nasal
tioned in the enlarged puncta, canaliculi, and
cavity, curettage, and cyst drainage.
nasolacrimal duct for approximately 2l days to
ensure patency.
Developmental Disorders
Micropunctum
Reported inherited nasolacrimal duct anoma-
lies are limited to puncta atresia in Bedlington
 Incomplete development (i.e., micropunctum)
Terriers (discussed previously). Many brachy-
or strictures of the ventral punctum causing
cephalic and toy dogs have epiphora related to
epiphora may be enlarged with a punctal
multiple anomalies of the medial canthal region
dilator or the l-2-3 snip technique and
and inferior puncta (Fig. 4.ll). The inferior
catheterization.
puncta and canaliculi are commonly displaced
inward and ventrally by a subtle, medioventral
Atresia of the Canaliculus,
    sn  
Nasolacrimal Sac, and
into the cornea and partially obstructs the
Nasolacrimai Duct
puncta and narrows the canalicular lumen.
This displacement is integral to the tear-stain-
Atresias of the canaliculus, nasolacrimal sac, or
ing syndrome commonly seen in the toy and
duct are rare.
brachycephalic breeds. The puncta are usually
Therapeutic options are limited to "bypass"
normal in these dogs, and the clinical signs
surgery, and they include conjunctival rhinos-
tomy, conjunctival-maxillary sinusotomy, or
conjunctival buccostomy, which attempt to
create a permanent fistula from the conjunctiva
to the nasal turbinates, maxillary sinus, or
mouth, respectively.
Congenital Puncta and Canaliculi
Mispiacement
Congenital puncta and canaliculi misplacement
 is often asymptomatic in dogs. When chronic
epiphora is present and relates to the position
of the ventral punctum, surgical repositioning
is indicated.
Congenitaf Canaficufi Obstruction
Epiphora secondary to compression of the can-
Fig. 4.1l. Tear-staining syndrome in the Miniature
aliculi by a congenital cyst of canalicular origin
Poodle. The clinical manifestation was bilateral tear
(i.e., canaliculops) has been reported in the
staining of the medial canthi and epiphora.
94 /ESSENTIALS OF VeTERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
relate to multiple factors, including displace-
nasolacrimal duct, however, should be treated
ment of the ventral puncta and compression of
with conjunctival rhinostomy,  conjunctival-
the canaliculi by the medioventral entropion.
maxillary sinusotomy, or conjunctival buccos-
In addition, tight medial canthal ligaments
tomy (Figs. 4.12A, B, and C)
displace the medial canthus ventrally and, in
combination with medial canthal trichiasis
Dacryocystitis and Foreign Bodies
and eyelid trichiasis, exacerbate tear spillage in
these dogs. Oral tetracycline and metronidazole
Clinical manifestations of dacryocystitis and
have been reported as a therapy for poodle
nasolacrimal duct foreign bodies include
epiphora, although neither have any apprecia-
epiphora, purulent conjunctival discharge,
ble effect on tear production or excretion but
punctal foreign bodies, and draining skin
seem to reduce staining. The treatment of
fistulas ventral to the medial canthus. Dac-
choice for this condition is a Hotz-Celsus repair
ryocystitis in the dog usually develops sec-
of the medial ventral entropion, or preferably a
 ondary to foreign bodies that lodge in the
bilateral medial canthal plasty to correct the
nasolacrimal sac (Figs. 4.13A and B). These
caruncular trichiasis and tight medial canthal
ligaments.
 therapy. Foreign bodies may be flushed from
 the nasolacrimal duct system by retrograde or
normograde lavages or they may be removed
Acquired Diseases
via adacryocystotomy
Acquired nasolacrimal disorders of the dog
include traumatic lacerations, dacryocystitis
and obstruction with foreign bodies, and inva-
sion or compression by neoplasms.
Maxllary slnu
Lacerations
asalcavi
Facial trauma may result in lacerations of
the puncta, canaliculi, medial canthus, and
eyelids. Lacerations of the canaliculi are
diagnosed with direct observation and the
DLccal cav
bubble test (cannulation of both puncta and
injection of air; the resultant bubbling allows
the surgeon to detect and cannulate the lac-
erated canalicular ends with a silastic tube).
The lacerated eyelid surfaces are then repaired
by microsurgical apposition of the tissues
around the cannulated duct. The eye is treated
C
with topical antibiotic solutions four times a
day until the cannula is removed (at approxi-
Fig. 4.12. Conjunctival rhinostomy. A. Conjunctival
mately 3 weeks).
rhinostomy is performed by drilling a hole into the
Fractures of the maxillary or lacrimal bones
nasal cavity with a Steinmann pin and Jacob's chuck.
 B. Conjunctival maxillary sinustomy is performed by
may compress or lacerate the nasolacrimal duct
drilling a hole into the maxillary sinus from the
or canaliculi as well. Plain radiography and
medial canthus. C. Conjunctival buccostomy is
dacryocystorhinography are required to confrm
performed by blunt dissection Irom the medial
the diagnoses. Lacerated nasolacrimal ducts
canthus to the oral cavity. For all three nasolacrimal
often form permanent fistula intranasal at the
bypass surgeries, a custom-made cannula is inserted
point of laceration. Extensive trauma or steno-
into the new hstula and maintained by sutures to the
sis that results in epiphora and a nonpatent
medial canthus for several weeks
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE TEAR AND NASOLACRIMAL SYSTEMS/95
Fig. 4.13. Acute dacryocystitis in the dog (A) secondary to a superior (upper)
 punctal and canalicular foreign body, and (B) foreign body in the nasolacrimal
sac with resultant dacryostitis and hstula formation. Note the foreign body in
the upper canaliculus, mucopurulent exudates, and secondary conjunctivitis.
Neoplasia of the Nasolacrimai Duct
eye disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:220-
230
Primary neoplasia of the nasolacrimal duct is
Covitz D, Hunziker J, Koch SA. Conjunctivorhinos-
tomy: a surgical method for the control of epiph-
rare in all species. Tumors of nasal turbinates
and the maxillary sinus, however, may com-
ora in the dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1977;171:251-255.
press or invade the nasolacrimal ducts and
Gelatt KN, Peiffer RL, Erickson JL, Gum GG. Evalu-
spread into the orbit via the nasolacrimal
ation of tear formation in the dog, using a modi-
foramen and cause epiphora, mucopurulent or
fication of the Schirmer tear test. J Am Vet Med
 serosanguineous ocular and nasal discharge.
Assoc 1975;166:368-370.
and masses ventral to the medial canthus. Nasal
Giuliano EA. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
 neoplasia is a therapeutic challenge, and various
in veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North Am:
surgical, medical, and radiation therapies have
Small Anim Pract 2004;34:707-723.
been reported.
Giuliano EA, Moore CP, Phillips TE. Morphological
evidence of M cells in healthy canine conjunctiva-
associated lymphoid tissue. Graefes Arch Clin
Selected References
Exp Ophthalmol 2002;240:220-226.
Grahn BH, Storey ES. Lacrimostimulants and lacri-
Berdoulay A, English RV, Nadelstein B. Effect of
momimetics. Vet Clin North Am: Small Anim
uo uoisuadsns snoanbe snwousen %zo'o lenidol
Pract 2004;34:739-753
tear production in dogs with keratoconjunctivitis
Kaswan RL, Salisbury MA. A new perspective on
sicca. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:225-232
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Treatment with
Berger S, Scagliotti R, Lund EM. A quantitative study
ophthalmic cyclosporine. Vet Clin North Am:
of the effects of Tribrissen on canine tear produc-
Small Anim Pract 1990;20:583-613
tion. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995;31:236-241.
Kern TJ, Erb HN, Schaedler JM, Dougherty EP. Scan-
Bryan BM, Slatter DH. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
ning electron microscopy of experimental kerato-
induced by phenazopyridine in dogs. Arch Oph-
conjunctivitis sicca in dogs: cornea and bulbar
thalmol 1973;90:310-311
conjunctiva. Vet Pathol 1988;25:468-474.
Collins BK, Grosse ME, Moore CP, Branson KR
Lavach JD, Severin GA, Roberts SM. Dacryocystitis
Physiologic, pharmacologic, and practical consid-
in dogs: a review of twenty-two cases. J Am Anim
erations for anesthesia of domestic animals with
Hosp Assoc 1984;20:463-467.
96/EssentIAlS OF VererinarY OpHthAlmOLOGY
Lavingnette AN. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog
Nell B, Walde I, Billich A, Vit P, Meingassner JG
treated by transposition of the parotid salivary
The effect of topical pimecrolimus on keratocon-
duct. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1966;148:778-786
junctivitis sicca and chronic superficial keratitis
 Lussier B, Carrier M. Surgical treatment of recurrent
in dogs: results from an exploratory study. Vet
dacryocystitis secondary to cystic dilatation of the
Ophthalmol 2005;8:39-46
nasolacrimal duct in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Petersen-Jones SM. Quantification of conjunctival
Assoc 2004;40:216-219.
sac bacteria in normal dogs and those suffering
Moore CP. Immunomodulating agents. Vet Clin
from keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vet Comp Oph-
North Am: Small Anim Pract 2004;34:725-737.
thalmol 1997;7:29-35
Moore CP, Collier LL. Ocular surface disease associ-
Salisbury MA, Kaswan RL, Ward DA, et al. Topical
ated with loss of conjunctival goblet cells in dogs
application of cyclosporine in the management of
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;26:458-465
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. J Am Anim
Moore CP, Frappier B. Density and distribution of
Hosp Assoc 1990;26:269-274
canine third eyelid excretory ducts: effects of two
Sansom J, Barnett KC, Neumann W, Schulte-
surgical techniques. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;
Neumann A, Clerc B, Jegou JP, de Haas V, Wein-
4:258-264
garten A. Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Moore CP, McHugh JB, Thorne JG, Phillips TE.
in dogs with cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment:
 Effect of cyclosporine on conjunctival mucin in a
a European clinical held trial. Vet Rec 1995;137:
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca model. Invest
504-507.
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 200l;42:653-659
Severin GA. Nasolacrimal duct catheterization in the
Morgan RV, Abrams KL. Topical administration of
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1972;8:13-16.
cyclosporine for treatment of keratoconjunctivitis
 Stiles J. Warning of an adverse effect of etodolac. J
sicca in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199l;199:
Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:503
1043-1046.
Williams DL. Use of punctal occlusion in the treat-
Morgan RV, Duddy JM, McClug K. Prolapse of the
ment of canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca. J Small
gland of the third eyelid in dogs. A retrospective
Anim Pract 2002;43:478-481
study of 89 cases (1980-1990). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 1993;29:56-60.
Chapter 5
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE
CONJUNCTIVA AND NICTITATING MEMBRANE
Diane V. H. Hendrix
Conjunctiva
lium. Medially, the conjunctiva covers both the
palpebral and bulbar surfaces of the nictitating
The canine conjunctiva is associated with
membrane (NM). Redundancy of the conjunc-
few primary infections but many disorders
tiva at the fornices allows ocular movement.
secondary to many adnexal and bulbar
The substantia propria of the palpebral con-
diseases due to its exposure and close prox-
junctiva is tightly adhered to the tarsus and,
imity to ocular structures. The cause can
therefore, is not freely movable. The bulbar
often be determined solely on the basis of a
conjunctiva, however, is freely movable, except
history and complete ophthalmic examina-
near the limbus. As the bulbar conjunctiva
tion. When the cause is not obvious after a
approaches the limbus, it fuses to Tenon's
complete examination, the conjunctiva is easily
capsule. This lack of adhesion between the
 accessible for cytology or biopsy.
bulbar conjunctiva and the deeper tissues
facilitates use of the conjunctiva in many
Functional Anatomy and Physiology
surgical procedures and as a site to inject
medications.
The conjunctiva plays a role in tear dynam-
ics, immunologic protection of the eye,
Microscopic Anatomy
ocular movement, and corneal healing. A
mucous membrane, the conjunctiva lines the
Histologically, the conjunctiva is composed
inside of the eyelids, starting at the eyelid
of the outer nonkeratinized, stratified squa-
margin and extending deep toward the orbit to
 mous epithelium and an underlying substan-
create a fornix, at which it reverses direction
tia propria. The substantia propria is divided
and extends over the globe to the limbus. These
into superficial and deep layers. The superficial
three major areas are referred to as the palpe-
layer contains many lymphoid nodules, which
bral conjunctiva, the fornix (i.e., “cul de sac"),
are the major components of the conjunc-
and the bulbar conjunctiva, respectively. The
tiva-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT). The
palpebral conjunctiva is continuous with the
purpose of CALT is to receive antigen and to
epidermis of the eyelid, just as the bulbar con-
present it to circulating mononuclear cells. The
junctiva is continuous with the corneal epithe-
lymphatics that drain this area represent the
97
98/EsSentiAlS Of VeterinAry OpHthalmoLOGY
only lymphatic drainage of the eye. The deeper
Normal Bacterial and Fungal Flora
layer of the substantia propria is fbrous and
contains the conjunctival vessels and nerves.
Bacteria can be cultured from the conjuncti-
While the nictitating membrane of the dog
val sac in 46-90% of normal dogs. Gram-
shows evidence of M cells, they have not been
positive aerobes are the most commonly
observed in the remaining conjunctiva.
cultured, with Staphylococcus sp., Bacillus
Goblet cells are also present in the
epi
sp., Corynebacterium sp., and Streptococcus
thelial layer of the conjunctiva. These cells
sp. predominating. Gram-negative bacteria
produce a gel-like mucin, which forms the
have been recovered from the conjunctival
deepest of the three layers of the preocular
sac in 7-8% of normal dogs. Anaerobes are
(i.e., precorneal) tear film. This mucin pro-
rarely isolated. The normal flora appears to vary
tects the ocular surface by trapping both
with the season and the breed of dog. While
debris and bacteria and by providing
a
fungi are rare, the most commonly cultured
medium for adherence of immunoglobulins
are Cladosporium oxysporum and Curvularia
(i.e., immunoglobulin A) and microbicidal
lunata.
lysozymes. The areas of highest goblet cell
density in the dog are the lower nasal fornix,
Normal Cytology
lower middle fornix, and lower nasal tarsal
region. Goblet cells are essentially absent from
the upper and lower bulbar areas.
Cytologic examination of scrapings from
normal conjunctiva reveals sheets of epi-
thelial cells with large, round, homogeneous
Vascuiar Supply and Innervation
nuclei and abundant cytoplasm. Keratinized
epithelial cells are uncommon. Bacteria are
The vascular supply of the conjunctiva is
occasionally seen, and leukocytes are rare
extensive. Branches of the dorsal and ventral
(Table 5.1)
palpebral and malar arteries, as well as terminal
branches from the anterior ciliary arteries,
 provide the conjunctiva with its blood supply.
General Response to Disease
 Bui au jo sauuq aq papd s u
ciliary, zygomaticofacial, zygomaticotemporal.
The conjunctiva responds to insults with a
infratrochlear, and frontal nerves.
limited number of mechanisms. Chemosis,
Table 5.1. Summary of Cytology in Conjunctivitis.
Cause
Conjunctival Celis
Inflammatory Cells
Mucin
Organisms
 Normal
few nonkeratinized sheets
few neutrophils
little
few bacteria
 Bacterial
more nonkeratinized
mainly neutrophils
moderate
frequent
keratinized—later
Viral-distermper
early—more nonkeratinized
 mainly lyphocytes
moderate
possible
inclusion bodies
late—more keratinized
mainly neutrophils
heavy
usually no
inclusions
 Parasitic
more keratinized
mainly eosinophils &
moderate
possible
lymphocytes
Thelezia
 Fungal
mainly neutrophils
variable
Allergy
variable
mainly eosinophils, plasma 
little
cells, & lyrnphocytes
Keratoconjunctivitis
 keratinization
neutrophils goblet cells
variable
variable
sicca
pigment cells
bacteria
 DiSEASES ANC SuRGeRY Of THE CaNINE CoNJUNCtIvA AND NICTITtATiNG MEMBRANE/99
hyperemia, and cellular exudation charac-
associated with ciliary flush form a branching
terize acute conjunctivitis. The loose arrange-
network near the limbus, their other character-
ment of the conjunctival stroma permits
istics are similar to those seen with episcleral
extensive edema to develop rapidly after trauma
vessels. Because many ocular diseases can cause
Or exposure to allergens or toxins, and the vast
a “red eye," a complete ophthalmic examina-
blood supply as well as the lymphoid tissue
     o 
allow acute development of hyperemia and a
clinical sign is present. Trauma, allergic or bac-
cellular response.
terial conjunctivitis, mechanical irritants, con-
In chronic inflammations multinucleated
junctival parasites, orbital inflammation, and
giant cells are seen as a nonspecific change
other ocular and systemic infectious agents can
with multiple conjunctivitises. The normally
cause conjunctivitis. Conjunctival ulceration,
nonkeratinized epithelial cells may become
while uncommon in dogs, can occur secondary
keratinized secondary to prolonged exposure of
to different kinds of trauma including alkali
the conjunctiva associated with ectropion and
burns.
lagophthalmos; keratinization may also occur
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), vitamin
Infectious Conjunctivitis
A defciency, and following irradiation. Goblet
cell proliferation occurs with KCS, chronic con-
Infectious
conjunctivitis
indicates
 junctivitis, and vitamin A deficiency.
the
association with specific pathogens and is
Conjunctival flora is altered in dogs with
uncommon in the dog. Secondary conjuncti-
ulcerative keratitis. Bacteria are more likely
vitis is much more frequent in the dog, and
to be isolated from the conjunctiva of dogs
is
often associated with KCS and eyelid
with ulcerative keratitis than dogs with
abnormalities.
healthy eyes. Malassezia pachydermatitis, a
Examination of patients with conjunctivitis
lipophilic yeast that is most commonly asso-
should include the Schirmer tear test, applica-
ciated with otitis and dermatitis, was found
tion of topical fluorescein and even rose Bengal
to be present in 23% of eyes with corneal
ulceration and only 3% of healthy eyes. The
stains to evaluate corneoconjunctival surfaces,
and  a complete ophthalmic  examination.
increased number of bacteria and yeast could
Culture and cytology are often reserved for
be due to decreased ocular defenses, increased
unusually severe, medically refractory, and
phospholipids secondary to  inflammation,
chronic cases (Fig. 5.1).
or decreased concentration of tear lysozyme
from increased tear production secondary to
ulceration.
Bacterial Conjunctivitis
Ocular redness, which can result from con-
junctival hyperemia or episcleral congestion,
Primary bacterial conjunctivitis is an uncom-
can occur with many diseases, including ab-
mon disease in the dog. In most cases, bacte-
normal eyelid conformation, abnormal cilia,
rial conjunctivitis develops secondary to
corneal disease, KCS, anterior uveitis, glau-
eyelid abnormalities or KCS. Bacterial con-
coma, orbital disease, and toxic or septic shock.
junctivitis is usually caused by Staphylococ-
Conjunctival hyperemia should be differenti-
Cus sp. and other Gram-positive organisms.
ated from episcleral injection and ciliary flush,
Cytologic examination of conjunctival scrap-
which occur with glaucoma and anterior
ings from dogs with conjunctivitis can help to
uveitis, respectively. Generally, the conjuncti-
confirm the diagnosis (see Table 5.l). Neutro-
val vessels have a smaller diameter, a branch-
phils with few mononuclear cells, many bacte-
ing pattern, blanch quickly with topical
ria, and degenerating epithelial cells are present
application of 1-2% epinephrine, and are
in acute infections. In chronic disease, neutro-
mobile. Episcleral vessels have a larger
phils remain the predominant cell type, but
diameter, do not branch, do not blanch
there are many more mononuclear cells. Degen-
quickly with topical application of epineph-
erate or keratinized epithelial cells are seen,
rine, and are not mobile. While the vessels
with the presence of bacteria being variable.
Conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis,
and exudate
Schirmer tear test
Reduced levels (<10 mm/min)
Normal or elevated levels (≥20 mm/min)
→
Suspect keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Stain with fluorescein (observe any
cornea or conjunctiva retention and
nasolacrimal passage)
Treat: artificial tears, antibiotics,
corticosteroids, and cyclosporine
Periodic examinations
Nasolacrimal passage
No nasolacrimal passage
▼
Evaluate eyelids (entropion,
Nasolacrimal flush
distichia, ectropion, and so on)
Evaluate cornea, and inner eye
Evaluate globe position
Treat antibiotics/
(enophthalmia, and so on)
corticosteroids
Re-examination
▼
Evaluate conjunctival surfaces and exudates
Surfaces: Diffuse hyperemia (bacterial and
viral causes)
Focal hyperemia (foreign body)
Pigmentation (any chronic inflammation,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca)
Follicles (chronic inflammation, allergic, and 
parasitic causes)
Exudates: Serous to mucus (allergic; limited to
no bacterial involvement)
Mucus(earlykeratoconjunctivitis sicca,early
 bacterial involvement)
Mucopurulent (bacterial involvement)
Purulent (bacterial involvement)
4
Conjunctival cytology (see Table 5-1)
▼
 Eliminate any predisposing disorder
Treat any primary conjunctivitis
Fig. 5.l. Clinical strategy for the diagnosis and treatment of conjunctivitis in the dog.
100
DiSEAses ANo SuRGERY OF The CaNine CoNJunCtivA ANo NICtitAtinG MeMBRane/ I01
Generally, a complete ophthalmic examination,
cells after 6 days of infection and are seen more
appropriate ancillary tests such as cytology as
frequently in cells acquired from the nictitans.
well as culture and sensitivity, and appropriate
 In general, however, these inclusions are scarce
treatment (usually consisting
ofbroad-
and infrequently seen.
spectrum ophthalmic antibiotics in solution
or ointment) lead to a rapid response. Pending
Fungal Conjunctivitis
culture results, topical chloramphenicol,
erythromycin or bacitracin, neomycin, and
 Fungal conjunctivitis is very rare in the dog.
polymyxin B can be used for Gram-positive
Infection with Blastomyces dermatitidis can
bacterial conjunctivitis and  tobramycin,
cause nodule formation in the inferior conjunc-
gentamicin, or topical bacitracin, neomycin,
tiva. The diagnosis can be made on the basis of
and polymyxin B can be used for bacterial
conjunctivitis  caused  by  Gram-negative
temic itraconazole may resolve the condition
bacteria.
Rickettsial Conjunctivitis
Viral Conjunctivitis
Infection with Rickettsia rickettsii is fre-
Canine distemper virus is associated with
quently associated with ocular lesions of the
conjunctivitis, chorioretinitis, 1
KCS, and
conjunctiva, uvea, and retina. Evidence of
optic neuritis. Conjunctivitis generally occurs
with the rhinitis and tracheobronchitis that
conjunctivitis usually begins with onset of fever
accompanies the initial febrile episode (Fig.
and includes conjunctival hyperemia, chemo-
5.2). A mucopurulent discharge is often present.
sis, petechial hemorrhages, and a mucopuru-
lent to purulent ocular discharge. Canine
Initially, 1
 mononuclear  cells
are seen
on
cytology.
ehrlichiosis can cause conjunctival hyperemia,
 Distemper viral antigens can be detected
serous ocular discharge, conjunctival hemor-
rhages, anterior uveitis, and retinal hemor-
using direct immunofluorescence and poly-
rhages (Fig. 5.3).
merase chain reaction (PCR). It takes 6-9
days after exposure for the virus to reach the
epithelial cells and then the virus levels
Parasitic Conjunctivitis
decrease with antibody formation. Distem-
per antigens can be detected in conjunctival
Ocular thelaziasis occurs in the western
smears on days 7-35 in experimentally
United States, Europe, and southeast Asia.
infected dogs. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
Thelazia is a nematode that can be found
      
under the nictitating membrane and in the
Fig. 5.2. Conjunctivitis in a dog with canine
Fig. 5.3. Conjunctivitis and hyphema associated
distemper.
with canine ehrlichiosis
I02 /EsSentIAlS OF VeteRinARY OpHthAlmOLOGY
conjunctival sac and lacrimal duct of dogs
allergic response. Finding one eosinophil on
Both Thelazia callipaeda and Thelazia cali-
cytologic examination of a conjunctival scrap-
forniensis infect the dog. The milky-white
 ing is considered to be diagnostic for an allergic
worms are approximately 10-14 mm long. The
 process. Plasma cells and lymphocytes, however,
adult nematodes live under the eyelids
or
 are more commonly seen with allergic responses
behind the nictitans. The parasitic infection
in the dog.
causes a unilateral or bilateral purulent con-
Avoidance of the offending allergen, hypo-
junctivitis with blepharospasm, epiphora,
sensitization, and pharmacologic modifcation
conjunctivitis, keratitis, and intense lacrimal
of the clinical signs are the primary forms of
secretion. Topical moxidectin (1% aqueous
treatment. Intermittent use of a topical ophthal-
solution) and tetramisole (0.5% solution), spot-
mic corticosteroid may be necessary to relieve
on imidaclopride (l0%) and moxidectin
clinical signs; alternate-day treatment with sys-
(2.5%), and physical removal of the nematodes
temic corticosteroids initiated for the skin
 are reported to be effective treatments.
disease may also relieve the ocular signs.
Intense chemosis and blepharedema may
Noninfectious Conjunctivitis
occur as an immediate-type reaction mediated
by histamine and immunoglobulin E after food
Allergic Conjunctivitis
absorption, drug administration, and ant, bee
wasp, or hornet stings as well as spider bites.
The chemosis is often bilateral, and the actual
Allergic conjunctivitis occurs frequently in the
Xi st (ioas ue Aq pasn jn) en jo ea
dog and is often a component of atopic derma-
identified and may be distant from the eyes.
titis. Atopy is classified as a type I hypersensi-
These cases usually respond rapidly to intrave-
tivity reaction. The most common allergens are
nous or intramuscular corticosteroids and
pollens, dust, and bacterial toxins. The con-
topical corticosteroid ophthalmic ointments
junctiva is usually hyperemic and chemotic,
administered three to four times daily. In my
and the dog is intensely pruritic and may rub
experience, the chemosis frequently resolves
the eyes, thus causing further blepharedema
after parenteral administration of one dose
(Fig. 5.4). A serous ocular discharge is often
of a short-acting corticosteroid and an
present. With chronic stimulation, conjunctival
follicles develop. History, physical examina-
antihistamine.
tion, and intradermal skin testing are used to
make the diagnosis of atopy in the dog. Results
Follicular Conjunctivitis
of cytology and histopathology performed on
conjunctival scrapings and biopsy specimens,
Follicular conjunctivitis develops secondary
respectively, can suggest the presence of an
to chronic antigenic stimulation. There is no
evidence to link follicle formation to a viral
or bacterial cause. Semitransparent follicles
form primarily on the bulbar surface of the
nictitans, but they may also form elsewhere on
the conjunctiva (Fig. 5.5). The follicles on the
bulbar surface of the nictitans that are present
seen, and they can be significantly larger as well.
Frequently, hyperemia of the conjunctiva and a
mucoid ocular discharge are present concur-
rently. This condition occurs most frequently in
e jo suuo g1 ueu aunon saop
The diagnosis is made on the basis of char-
Fig. 5.4. Allergic conjunctivitis in a dog. Note the
acteristic clinical signs. Cytologic results of
conjunctival hyperemia and mucoid discharge.
conjunctival scrapings will confirm the diagno-
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CONJUNCTIVA AND N1CTITATING MEMBRANE/ I03
Fig. 5.6. Ligneous conjunctivitis in a Doberman
Fig. 5.5. Follicular conjunctivitis involving the
bulbar conjunctiva and posterior (bulbar) surface of
Pinscher.
the nictitating membrane.
such as a conjunctival scraping or biopsy,
should be performed.
sis by revealing the lymphoid nature of the
follicles. Most cases respond to treatment with
saline irrigation and symptomatic use of oph-
Conjunctivitis Associated with
thalmic corticosteroid ointments. Irrigation
Tear Deficiencies
appears to play a large role in decreasing fol-
licular formation, especially in dogs with deep
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is a frequent cause
fornices exposed to large amounts of vegetative
of conjunctivitis in the dog, and it is the
matter. Nonresponsive cases can be treated by
most common cause of secondary bacterial
mechanically debriding the follicles using a
conjunctivitis. Thus, the Schirmer tear test
dry Dacron swab or dry surgical gauze under
should be performed on all dogs with con-
topical anesthesia. Follicles should not be
junctivitis. Cytologic examination of con-
sharply excised with a blade or cauterized by
junctival scrapings from dogs with chronic
copper sulfate crystals, because the lymphoid
KCS is summarized in Table 5.l. Treatment
tissue is critical to the ocular defense system,
of KCS with cyclosporine has been shown to
and these therapies may destroy normal cells.
result in greater intraepithelial mucin quantities
in vivo and to promote goblet cell differentia-
tion in vitro. Treatment with cyclosporine,
Contact Hypersensitivity
tacrolimus, or pimecrolimus decreases the con-
junctival inflammation and mucous discharge
Ophthalmic medications can occasionally
associated with KCS.
lead to contact hypersensitivity reactions,
which are exhibited by blepharitis and con-
Loss of conjunctival goblet cells can lead to
keratoconjunctivitis and keratitis with absence
junctivitis. Neomycin, thimerosal, and ben-
of ocular discharge. These dogs have adequate
zalkonium chloride are the most likely drugs
aqueous tear production but shortened tear
involved. Commercial topical pilocarpine (pH
film breakup times (see chapter 4).
4-5) is irritating to the conjunctiva and fre
mosis. The skin ventral to the medial canthus
Ligneous Conjunctivitis
may become swollen, hyperemic, and eventu-
ally excoriate. Initially, a serous discharge may
 Ligneous conjunctivitis has been reported in
be present, which becomes purulent if the con-
Doberman Pinschers; signs include thick-
junctiva is secondarily infected with bacteria.
ened, 1
hyperemic, palpebral conjunctivae
Diagnosis and treatment involve cessation
with
1proliferative, opaque membranes;
of all medications for l week. If negligible
often there is concurrent systemic illness
 improvement occurs, further diagnostic studies,
(Fig. 5.6). Histopathologically, the affected
I04 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
conjunctiva has a thick, amorphous, eosino
been found. The Weimaraner breed may be
philic, hyaline-like material in the substantia
predisposed. Combined excision and cryo-
propria, with a moderate mononuclear infl-
therapy appears to be the most effective
trate. Treatment with azathioprine has been
treatment
used in one dog and appeared to be effective.
Papillomatosis occurs on the palpebral
and bulbar conjunctivae as well as the nicti
tans; primarily younger dogs are affected.
Conjunctivai Masses
Excision appears to be curative.
 Dermoids are benign congenital masses
Melanomas,
squamous
scell
lcarcinomas,
of ectodermal and mesodermal origin usually
angioendotheliomatosis, mast cell tumors,
affecting the lateral limbal region, but they
hemangiomas, l
hemangiosarcomas,angio-
can also involve the cornea, sclera, conjunc-
keratomas, papillomas, lymphosarcomas,
tiva, eyelid, or nictitans (Fig. 5.8). Frequently,
and histiocytomas all may affect the canine
conjunctiva (Figs. 5.7A through D). These
their presence is not appreciated until long.
coarse hair extends from the surface and causes
tumors occur infrequently and, in contrast
irritation.
Histopathologically.  the  tumor
to lid tumors, tend to be malignant. Melano-
resembles normal skin, and excision is
mas of the conjunctiva most commonly involve
the nictitans, but they have also been reported
curative.
 to originate from the upper palpebral conjunc-
tiva. These tumors tend to be malignant, and
Nonneopiastic Conjunctivaf Masses
recurrences and metastasis are common. No
correlations between mitotic index and likeli-
Nonneoplastic conjunctival masses can be
hood of local recurrence or metastasis have
inflammatory nodules, displaced orbital fat, or
B
Fig. 5.7. Neoplastic masses of the canine conjunctiva. A. Limbal melanoma. B. Limbal squamous cell
carcinoma. C. Limbal hemangiosarcoma. D. Lymphoma.
DisEAses ANo SuRGeRY OF The CaNiNe CoNJUnCTIva ANo N1CTitAtiNG MEMeRaNe/ I05
Fig. 5.8. Conjunctival dermoid with hair at the
temporal aspect of the globe.
 Specific inflammatory diseases of the
cysts.
sclera, including episcleritis and scleritis, cause
conjunctival hyperemia and swelling but are
described in chapter 6.
B
Inffammatory Masses
Fig. 5.9. Inflammatory mass beneath the
 Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis,
conjunctiva in a dog. Histologically they may be
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (A), fbrous
fibrous histiocytoma, and recurrent prolif-
histocytoma, recurrent proliferative
erative keratoconjunctivitis are thought to
keratoconjunctivitis (Collie), or nodular fascitis (B).
represent very similar diseases, or even an
identical disease syndrome. Collies appear
to be predisposed. This group of nonneo-
plastic diseases primarily  affecting
the
Subconjunctival FatProlapse
cornea, limbus, episclera, and nictitans often
presents as a subconjunctival mass (Figs.
Subconjunctival prolapse of orbital fat is seen
5.9A and B). Histopathologically, the lesions
as a nonpainful movable pink mass at the
are primarily granulomatous, with lympho-
limbus. Cytologic examination reveals multiple
cytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, fbroblasts, and
lipid droplets and few mononuclear cells. Sur-
reticulin formation. The lesions tend to recur
gical removal is curative.
when excised, but excision with cryotherapy is
reported to be a successful mode of therapy.
Medically, azathioprine, with or without topical
Parasitic Granulomas
corticosteroids, can be used to induce resolu-
tion of the lesions.
Onchocerciasis causes bean-size masses in
Ocular nodular fasciitis, which may be a
the conjunctiva, nictitans, and sclera. The
different disease syndrome, usually causes sub-
surface of the masses is generally irregular
conjunctival, scleral, corneal, nictitans, limbal,
with nodular thickenings due to the coiled
and eyelid masses. Histopathologically, fibro-
adult worms. Other common ophthalmic
blasts and abundant reticulin formation are the
manifestations are periorbital swelling, exoph-
primary changes, with lesser numbers of lym-
thalmos, excessive lacrimation, discharge, dis-
phocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes occur-
 comfort, photophobia, conjunctival congestion,
ring as well. Excision of the lesions, even when
protrusion of nictitating membranes, gra-
incomplete, appears to be curative.
nuloma formation, localized corneal edema,
I06/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
anterior uveitis, and posterior uveitis. Histo-
pathologically, a pyogranulomatous or granu-
lomatous reaction with eosinophils is associated
with the adult worms. Lymphoplasmacytic
uveitis, pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes,
and evidence of secondary glaucoma are also
       s
females and the surrounding tissues and can be
isolated from skin biopsy specimens. Surgical
removal is curative
Cysts
Multiple causes of cyst formation in the con-
junctiva have been described, but all occur only
rarely in the dog. Conjunctival epithelial inclu-
sion cysts, cystic neoplasms, parasitic cysts,
lacrimal cysts (i.e., dacryops), orbital cysts with
conjunctival fistula formation, and cysts of the
canaliculi can occur. Lacrimal gland cysts
appear as a fluctuant mass within the orbit
dorsolateral to the globe. Treatment depends
on the lesion.
Fig. 5.10. Subconjunctival hemorrhage in the dog
secondary to trauma (A) and thrombocytopenia (B).
Conjunctival Hemorrhages
Conjunctival and subconjunctival hemor-
Orbital Disease
rhages occur commonly in the dog and most
frequently result from trauma (Figs. 5.10A
The conjunctiva is frequently affected by orbital
and B). When this condition is caused by
disease. The redundancy and elasticity of the
trauma, no treatment is necessary if the
conjunctiva allows it to be the path of least
remaining ophthalmic and physical exami-
resistance; therefore, it may be the frst tissue
nations are normal. If there is no history or
to show swelling or displacement.
evidence of trauma, one must consider a
coagulopathy or vasculitis as the possible
cause. Specifically, conjunctival hemorrhage
Anatomic Abnormalities
von Willebrand factor deficiency.
Conjunctival disease can develop secondary
to anatomic defects that cause inadequate
tear drainage, chronic exposure, and other
Foreign Bodies
changes
Physical irritation caused by foreign bodies
 lodged within the conjunctiva or nictitating
Medial Canthal Pocket Syndrome
membrane can cause a severe reaction,
including blepharospasm, mucoid discharge,
Medial canthal pocket syndrome is a phrase
hyperemia, and corneal ulceration. Grass
that describes the chronic conjunctivitis
awns and other plant material are the most
 occurring in dogs with deep orbits, enoph-
common culprits. Most foreign bodies can be
thalmia, narrow skulls, slight entropion, and
removed with forceps after use of a topical oph-
 inadequate tear drainage. It has been reported
thalmic anesthetic.
in the Afghan Hound, Doberman Pinscher,
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CONJUNCTIVA AND N1CTITATING MEMBRANE/ I07
Golden Retriever, Gordon Setter, Great Dane,
conjunctival manifestations will be mentioned
Great Pyrenees, Ibizan Hound,
Labrador
      
Retriever, Newfoundland, Standard Poodle,
Examples include leishmaniasis (Leishmania
Rottweiler, Samoyed, and Weimaraner. Selec-
infantum), Leptospira kirschneri serovar grip-
tive breeding for the specific head shape has
potyphosa,
Babesia gibsoni, and Listeria
made these dogs slightly enophthalmic, which
monocytogenes.
creates a “pocket" in the ventral conjunctival
Severe anemia can cause pallor of the con-
fornix that collects dust, dirt, and other foreign
junctiva and other mucous membranes as
material. The resultant clinical signs include
well as lightness of the retinal vessels. Poly-
 persistent conjunctival and nictitans hyperemia
cythemia can cause “brick red" mucous
as well as a slight mucoid discharge. The con-
membranes. Clotting deficiencies can cause
junctivitis occurs secondary to the irritation
 periocular hemorrhages but more commonly
and poor tear drainage, and it is poorly
cause intraocular hemorrhages. Jaundice is
responsive to medical therapy.
most easily seen in the dog in the mucous
membranes, sclera, and skin.
Medial Aberrant Dermis
(Caruncular Trichiasis)
Effects of Radiation
Aberrant dermis derived from the facial
 Because of the close proximity of the globe and
skin may continue past the intermarginal
adnexa to the nasal and paranasal sinuses, the
 space in the medial canthus and be present
globe is frequently within the feld of irradia-
on the conjunctiva and caruncle. When this
 tion used in treatment of sinus and nasal cavity
occurs, irritation from the hair, which can
neoplasia. Mild to severe conjunctivitis is the
 grow very long, can cause keratitis, epiph-
most frequently occurring early ocular comp-
ora, or both. The condition has been
lication; this conjunctivitis is usually poorly
observed in the Pekingese, Shih Tzu, and
responsive to medical therapy because the
Lhasa Apso. Surgical treatment with 
the
direct effects of radiation are on the basal epi-
medial pocket canthoplasty or removal
of
thelial stem cell layer. KCS can occur as an early
the aberrant dermis using conjunctiva and the
or a late complication; therefore, Schirmer tear
medial palpebral ligament for closure can be
tests should be performed on all dogs that
done. Cryotherapy can also be used to destroy
develop conjunctivitis as a complication of
the hair follicles, but depigmentation of the
radiation therapy.
caruncle can result
Surgical Procedures
Conjunctival Manifestations
of Systemic Disease
The conjunctiva is an invaluable tissue to
ophthalmic surgeons. Because of its redun-
Many systemic diseases cause conjunctival
dancy and rather loose bulbar adhesions, the
manifestations. Some diseases may cause a
bulbar conjunctiva can be easily resected
primary conjunctivitis, such as canine dis-
and relocated. Conjunctival biopsy specimens
temper, while others cause anterior uveitis,
can be easily and quickly obtained and are an
which leads to a ciliary flush or episcleral
effective diagnostic modality in patients with
injection that is often misinterpreted as con-
chronic conjunctivitis or conjunctival masses
junctivitis. Because intraocular disease can
Conjunctival grafts created by incising the
lead to blindness, and because the diagnosis of
conjunctiva and relocating a part of it to the
anterior uveitis aids in narrowing the list of
cornea are used to deliver a focal blood
differential diagnoses in a dog with systemic
 supply to an otherwise avascular cornea in
disease, any dog with a reddened conjunctiva
the face of progressive infection or deep
should have a complete ophthalmic examina-
corneal defects (see chapter 6). Conjunctival
     
 grafts can be used alone for the treatment of
I08 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
deep ulcers or can be used to cover tectonic
corneal grafts and porcine small intestinal
submucosa for the repair of full-thickness
corneal defects.
Conjunctival Autografts
to the Cornea
Conjunctival autografts are used to treat
deep corneal ulcers for several reasons.
They preserve corneal and ocular integrity,
replace lost corneal tissue, and supply vas-
cularization. Many types of grafts have been
described. Selection of the conjunctival graft
in a clinical situation depends on the ulcer
size, depth, and position; the presence of
infection; the surgeon's abilities; and the avail-
able instrumentation. Available grafts include:
island,
pedicle bulbar,  tarsoconjunctival
pedicle, bridge, advancement or hood (180%).
and complete bulbar or Gundersen (360°).
The pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft is the
most frequently used procedure (Figs. 5.1lA
Fig. 5.1ll. Use of the pedicle bulbar conjunctival
and B). These procedures are described in
graft for a small paracental full-thickness corneal
chapter 6.
ulcer with iris prolapse (A). The pedicle gralt is
created from the dorsolateral bulbar conjunctiva and
apposed with simple interrupted absorbable 7-0
Necessary Instrumentation and Surgical
sutures to the debrided ulcer bed (B)
Fundamentals
Specialized ophthalmic instrumentation  is
Nictitating Membrane
necessary to perform conjunctival grafting
procedures. A surgical pack containing an
The nictitating membrane, which is also
eyelid speculum, Stevens tenotomy scissors,
called the membrana nictitans, third eyelid,
Colibri forceps or tying forceps with 1 x 2
 or haw, is a thin sheet of tissue found in the
teeth for fixation, and ophthalmic needle
medial canthus of most domestic animal
holders are the minimal necessary instru-
species. The primary purpose of the NM
ments. Generally, 5-0 to 8-0 polyglactin 910
is physical protection of the cornea. It also
suture is used, with smaller suture being more
 contributes significantly to the normal tear pro-
satisfactory. Magnification with a head loupe or 
duction. The NM is affected by a number of
- ou oi aajaid si adoosou uado
inflammatory and neoplastic conditions as well
nification for corneal procedures.
as anatomical malformations that require surgi-
cal correction.
Corneoconjunctival Transposition
Anatomy, Histology, and Function
This graft is most frequently used with axial
corneal lesions, because there is less scar tissue
The basic shape of the canine NM is defined
associated with the transplanted corneal tissue
by a T-shaped piece of hyaline cartilage (Fig.
than with a conjunctival pedicle graft. This pro-
5.12). The "arm" of the T parallels the free
cedure is described in chapter 6.
margin of the NM, and the "shaft" is perpen-
DisEases ANo SuRGERY OF The CaNine ConJunCtivA ANo N1CtitAtinG MeMBRane/ I09
dicular to the free edge. The cartilage is of
fed in the canine NM gland, with the function
hyaline material with some elastic fibers. The
of the Harder's gland presumably having been
ventral extent of the shaft originates from the
incorporated into the NM gland in dogs. The
periorbital connective tissue associated with
 NM gland contributes a significant proportion
the inferonasal aspect of the globe.
of the aqueous tear film as measured by the
The base of the NM is intimately associated
Schirmer 1 and 2 tear tests.
with the fasciae of the ocular musculature, and
The NM also provides immunologic support
conjunctiva covers the anterior and posterior
to the ocular surface. IgA positive plasma cells
surfaces of the NM. Numerous lymphoid aggre-
are located near the surface of the conjunctival
gates populate the posterior subconjunctiva of
epithelium of both sides of the NM and within
the NM, and goblet cells are found between the
the connective tissue stroma of the nictitating
lymphatic nodules and epithelium. The NM of
gland. Recently Guiliano et al. found evidence
dogs lacks inherent musculature; its movement
that supports that tissue on the NM tissue is
is accomplished passively when the globe is
analogoustomucosa-associatedlymphoid
retracted, which displaces orbital fat that pushes
tissue (MALT) described in other locations in
the NM across the cornea. The NM sweeps over
the body.
the cornea from inferonasal to superotemporal
direction.
Anomalous, Congenital, and
Histochemical studies have shown that in
Developmental Disorders
the canine NM gland, the tubular cells are
primarily serous, the acinar cells are primar-
Bent Cartilage
ily mucus, and the principal mucous
secretory product is sialomucin. The ductu-
 Eversion of the shaft of the NM cartilage
lar secretion is apocrine, and the acinar secre-
is a commonly occurring anomaly in large
tion is merocrine. Lipid-secreting acini similar
breeds and may be hereditary in German
to those in the Harder's gland have been identi-
Shorthaired Pointers. The everted cartilage
 appears as an anterior folding of the leading
edge of the NM with exposure of the poste-
rior aspect (Fig. 5.13). The result is chronic
conjunctivitis and ocular discharge. The
most popular surgical correction is the
simple excision of the folded portion of
the NM cartilage.
Fig. 5.12. Normal canine NM. The free edge is
 parallel to the arm (arrow) of the cartilage and
perpendicular to the shalt (arrowhead) of the
cartilage. The anterior and posterior surfaces are both
covered with conjunctiva, and the ventrum of the
shalt is surrounded by the NM gland. (Used with
Fig. 5.13. Eversion of the cartilage of the NM in a
permission. @1997 University of Tennessee College
Saint Bernard. Note the bulbar (deep) surface of the
of Veterinary Medicine.)
leading edge of the nictitans is exposed.
IIO/EssentiAlS OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
Prolapse of the Gland
incidence of KCS later in life than dogs that
were not treated or had the prolapsed gland
Prolapse of the NM gland (or "cherry eye") is
excised.
the most common primary disorder of the
NM. The pathogenesis of this disorder has
Surgical Repositioning
not been determined; however, it may result
from weakness in the connective tissue
As the importance of the NM gland in tear
attachment between the NM ventrum and the
production became apparent, surgical reposi-
periorbital tissues. This weakness allows the
tioning of the gland became widely recom-
gland, which normally is located ventrally, to
mended rather than partial excision of the
flip up dorsally to protrude above the leading
prolapsed gland. There are many modifica-
edge of the NM, where it then becomes enlarged
tions of repositioning techniques; these
and inflamed from chronic exposure. Prolapse
 techniques can be divided into those methods
of the NM gland can be either unilateral or bilat-
eral, and it generally occurs before 2 years of age.
that anchor the gland (Fig. 5.l5A through
Prolapse of the NM gland is common in the
American Cocker Spaniel, Lhasa Apso, Peking-
ese, Beagle, and English Bulldog. The prolapsed
gland appears as a smooth red mass protruding
from behind the leading edge of the nictitating
membrane (Fig. 5.14). Pet owners frequently
 presume it is a neoplasm. Ifuncorrected, chronic
conjunctivitis and ocular discharge occur.
The reduction in tear production seen
with excised glands or glands surgically
repositioned was not clinically important
in a 6-month study; however, a long-term
study showed that dogs treated with surgi-
Fig. 5.14. Prolapse of the gland of the NM (*cherry
cal replacement of the gland had a lower
eye").
Fig. 5.15. Different methods for repositioning the NM gland using anchoring techniques.
A. The dotted line depicts the suture path of the original anchoring technique of Blogg. Following a posterior
conjunctival incision, a suture of 3-0 polyglycolic acid is placed into the deep episcleral tissues on the
inleronasal aspect of the globe. The suture is then passed through the ventral aspect of the gland and pulled
tight, thus retracting the gland. The solid line depicts the suture path of Gross's modifcation of Blogg's
anchoring technique. This procedure is similar, except the gland is anchored with 5-0 chromic gut to the sclera
instead of to the episcleral tissues. B. Anchoring technique of Albert et al., originally described in the cat. A
perilimbal incision is made in the bulbar conjunctiva 4 mm from the inferonasal limbus, and the episcleral
tissues are dissected away, thus exposing the inferior oblique muscle. A second conjunctival incision is made
perpendicular to the hrst, thus exposing the gland (let). A 5-0 silk suture is passed through the ventrum of the
gland and then through the tendinous origin of the muscle, thus tucking the gland into its natural position
(right). C. Orbital rim anchoring technique of Kaswan and Martin. An incision parallel to the orbital rim is
made in the anterior conjunctiva near the ventrum of the NM, and nonabsorbable, 4-0 monofilament suture
material is inserted into the medial extent of the resulting conjunctival pocket and directed toward the orbital
rim. A blind bite is taken into the periosteal tissues and directed out of the pocket at its lateral extent; this bite
can also be taken from lateral to medial. Adequate purchase into the periosteal tissues should be conhrmed by
frmly tugging at the suture before proceeding. A purse string is then placed around the gland by reinserting
the suture at each exit point, and the suture is pulled tight, thus anchoring the gland to the orbital rim. The
conjunctiva can either be left open or closed with 6-0 polyglactin 9l0 suture material in a simple continuous
pattern. D. In the Stanley and Kaswan modifhcation of the Kaswan and Martin anchoring technique, the
approach to the orbital rim is facilitated by an incision into the inferior lid near the rim; otherwise, these
techniques are similar. (Used with permission. @l997 University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine.)
B
Orbital
Orbital
rim
rim
Erd
End 2
Begin
C
D
111
I12/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
D) and those methods that create a pocket
 muscle, or using the anterior approach the peri-
    )   
osteum of the ventral orbital rim.
anchoring techniques the prolapsed gland is
The choice of repositioning technique is a
sutured to either the inferior episcleral tissue,
 matter of personal preference. The pocket tech-
inferior sclera, the origin of the ventral oblique
niques of Moore and Morgan may be the easiest
A
B
C
Fig. 5.l6. Different methods for repositioning the NM gland using the pocket technique
A. In the Twitchell technique, an incision is made into the anterior conjunctiva, and a pocket is created by
dissection of subconjunctival tissues (let). The gland is then reduced into the pocket and sutured anteriorly
with 5-0 absorbable suture material (right). B. Moore described resection of the posterior conjunctiva from over
the prolapsed gland and then imbrication of it with two simple interrupted sutures of 7-0 absorbable suture
material. A later modification did not involve conjunctival resection (but suggested light scarification) and used
a single purse string suture. C. In the Morgan pocket technique, parallel incisions are made into the posterior
conjunctiva dorsal and ventral to the prolapsed gland. The gland is reduced into the pocket, and the pocket is
closed with a simple continuous suture of 5-0 or 6-0 polyglycolic acid or polyglactin 9l0 material, securing the
knot on the anterior surface. Suturing should begin and end 1-2 mm from the ends of the incision to prevent
cyst formation because of the entrapment of tears within the pocket. At the end of the suture run, another run
Kiessanau jou s! s!un jnq sainjns aun leaouos oi uoauip ansoddo ayn u! paeld aq Aeu uamed Bulusny e Buisn
and may result in an increased suture reaction. (Used with permission. @l997 University of Tennessee College
of Veterinary Medicine.)
DiSEASES ANo SuRGERY Of THE CaNINe CONJUNCTIvA ANo N1CtITAtiNG MeMBRANE/ I I3
to learn, but the anchoring techniques, once
mastered, are simple and quick to perform.
Tear production following both anchoring and
pocket techniques, however, is superior to that
following gland excision, and neither posterior
-lnp A1axa pue N au jo Aooud1o 10
ules. Results of one study demonstrated a sig-
 e     
technique as compared to an anchoring tech-
nique, but others have reported reprolapse
rates of 4% and 0% following anchoring tech-
niques. Cysts can form after the pocket tech-
nique is done if the elliptical incisions are
connected, which then prevents tears from
escaping. Creation of a stoma allows the tears
to escape. When properly performed, all tech-
niques result in a cosmetically acceptable
outcome. Because of the importance of the NM
gland on tear production, however, most oph-
 thalmologists agree that prolapsed NM glands
should be replaced rather than excised. Even
so, it should not be assumed that retention of
the gland guarantees that dry eye will not
Fig. 5.17. Adenocarcinoma (A) and
develop, especially considering that many of
hemangiosarcoma (B) of the NM in the dog.
the breeds that commonly develop prolapsed
NM glands are also predisposed to KCS
cell carcinomas, mastocytomas, papillomas,
Protrusion
hemangiomas, hemangiosarcomas, angiokera-
tomas, and lymphosarcoma occur (Figs. 5.17A
Primary
protrusion of the NM without
and B). Adenocarcinomas, papillomas and
prolapse of the gland can occur in several
 malignant melanomas appear to be the most
large breeds. Though principally a cosmetic
common types. Local recurrence after resec-
problem, the protrusion sometimes causes
tion and confirmed metastasis may occur, with
conjunctivitis and epiphora. The NM can be
adenocarcinomas
6or malignant melanomas
shortened surgically to return it to a more
being the most commonly recurring or metas-
normal position.
tasizing tumors.
Protrusion can also occur secondary to
enophthalmos, microphthalmos, and space-
Inflammations
occupying retrobulbar lesions. If the primary
problem can be resolved, the NM often
Nodular Granulomatous
returns to its normal position. Protrusion
Episclerokeratitis
may also occur in Horner's syndrome, dysau-
tonomia, cannabis intoxication, tetanus, and
Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis is
rabies.
an inflammatory disease that most com-
monly arises from the temporal limbus
Neoplasia
junction, but it may involve the NM as
well. Collies are predisposed. Clinically, the
Neoplasia of the NM is uncommon in the dog.
affected NM is hyperemic, depigmented.
but melanomas, adenocarcinomas, squamous
and edematous, with multiple, smooth,
II4 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
tubular-shaped thickenings involving the
junctival,
or systemiccorticosteroids
palpebral surfaces. On histopathology, these
Topical 0.2% cyclosporine ointment, 1.25-
lesions show a chronic granulomatous inflam-
1.50% cyclosporine drops, and 1% pimecro-
 matory response. The disease process is gener-
limus are also effective.
ally controllable with use of prednisone and
azathioprine.
ldiopathic Granulomatous Disease
Ocular Nodular Fasciitis
Idiopathic sterile granulomatous disease mani-
fests as multiple masses on the conjunctiva,
Ocular nodular fasciitis most commonly affects
eyelids, NM, and skin. On histopathologic
the sclera, episclera, and corneal stroma, but it
examination,
granulomatous inflammation
has also been reported to involve the NM. Its
with large epithelioid cells, plasma cells, and
treatment is similar to nodular granulomatous
lymphocytes is seen. Treatment with L-aspara-
episclerokeratitis.
ginase, prednisone, or azathioprine has showed
some efficacy. Treatment with tetracycline or
Plasma Cell Infitrationl"plasmoma"
doxycycline and niacinamide has also been
recommended.
Plasma cell infiltration of the NM, or “plas-
moma,” can cause thickening, depigmenta-
Follicular Conjunctivitis
tion, and follicle formation (Fig. 5.18).
Pannus (i.e., chronic superficial keratitis) is
Follicular  conjunctivitis most frequently
often associated with this condition. German
involves the bulbar aspect of the NM, but
Shepherds appear to be predisposed, and plas-
the follicles can be present anywhere on the
moma has bilateral potential in the Belgian
conjunctiva. A small area of lymphoid follicles
Sheepdog, Borzoi, Doberman Pinscher, English
is normally present on the bulbar side of the
Springer Spaniel, and German Shepherd
NM, closely associated with the NM gland.
breeds.
With follicular conjunctivitis, the follicles are
Histopathology reveals a subconjunctival
more numerous and larger than normal in size.
epithelial inflammatory infltrate consisting pri-
and conjunctival hyperemia as well as a mucoid
marily of plasma cells, with fewer lymphocytes
discharge commonly are present. (See the
and stromal pigmentary incontinence. Treat-
"Conjunctiva" section of this chapter for more
ment generally consists of topical, subcon-
information and treatment.)
Trauma, Reconstruction, and
Foreign Bodies
Trauma to the medial canthal area may result
in lacerations of the NM. Small lesions heal
spontaneously, but larger lesions should be
sutured with 6-0 braided absorbable suture
material, taking care not to leave sutures or
knots where they could abrade the cornea.
Foreign bodies lodged either within or
behind the NM can cause persistent ventro-
medial corneal ulceration as well as inflam-
mation of the NM (Fig. 5.l9). Other
Fig. 5.18. Plasma cell infiltration of the NM
frequently observed clinical signs are epiph-
(sometimes termed “plasmoma") in a German
ora, blepharospasm, protrusion of the NM,
Shepherd. Central corneal lipidosis is also present
and severe discomfort. The foreign bodies,
DisEAses ANo SuRGeRY OF The CaNiNe CoNJUnCTIva ANo N1CTitAtiNG MEMeRANe/ I I5
Fig. 5.19. Foreign body behind the nictitating
membrane. The end of a grass awn is seen protruding
Fig. 5.20. NM-to-superior-lid flap. Two to three
from behind the structure. A superhcial corneal ulcer
horizontal mattress sutures of 3-0 monoflament
is present. Excoriation of the eyelids was
nonabsorbable material are placed between the ree
self-inflicted
edge of the NM and the lateral aspect of the superior
lid. The lid sutures should be placed well within the
superior cul-de-sac, and the NM sutures should be
approximately 2 mm from the free edge,
which usually are grass awns, seeds, or other
incorporating cartilage into the center suture.
plant material, usually are loosely embedded
Alternatively, a single mattress suture can be placed
and can be removed using thumb forceps fol-
between the superior lid and the midpoint of the
lowing instillation of a topical anesthetic. Gen-
cartilage shaft. (Used with permission. @1997
University of Tennessee College of Veterinary
erally, topical ophthalmic antibiotic should be
Medicine.)
used after removal of the foreign body, and
antibiotics are definitely indicated if corneal
ulceration is present.
rior conjunctival fornix. If the NM margin is
Nictitating Membrane Fiaps
too far from the cul-de-sac, corneal injury from
sutures is likely. Alternatively, the NM margin
The NM can be used as a corneal shield in
can be sutured to the superotemporal epi-
select cases of corneal ulceration. These NM
scleral tissue. Care must be taken to place the
"flaps" aid in the healing of midstromal
sutures deeply enough to ensure that the NM
ulcers, iatrogenic ulcers created by lamellar
is held securely, but not placed so deeply as to
keratectomy in brachycephalic animals, and,
perforate the globe. The advantage of this tech-
in particular, refractory indolent ulcers.
nique is that the flap moves in concert with the
They have also been used in conjunction
globe.
with frozen lamellar corneal grafts to protect
 Complications of NM flaps include necrosis
the graft from blinking movements and
of the upper lid if sutures are placed too tightly
to help maintain pressure on the graft's
 the  NM-to-superior-lid technique and
surface.
inadvertent penetration of the globe in the NM-
to-episclera technique. The sutures are gener-
Nictitating Membrane Flaps
ally left in place for 2-3 weeks, but with the
NM-to-episclera technique, sutures may pull
Two types of flaps have been described. In
free prematurely. It should be remembered
the most widely advocated technique, the
these flaps obscure visualization of the cornea
free margin of the NM is sutured to the tem-
and intraocular structures. These flaps also do
poral aspect of the superior eyelid (Fig.
not deliver a blood supply, or give as much
5.20). The surgeon must be careful to seat the
 support as a conjunctival pedicle graft; they
NM margin as deeply as possible in the supe-
also may inhibit topical medications from
II6/EssentiAls OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmoLOGY
reaching the cornea. To allow visualization of
20 cases and molecular characterization of the
the cornea, the suture ends can be left long.
parasite and its Wolbachia endosymbiont.Vet
so that the flap can be released and retied. In
Parasitol 2003;118:151-155
my opinion, NM flaps should be avoided in
Latimer CA, Wyman M, Szymanski C, Winston SM.
Azathioprine in the management of ibrous histio-
cases of infected ulcers, collagenolytic ulcers,
cytoma in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
and descemetoceles.
1983;19:155-158
Mane MC, Vives MA, Barrera R, Bascuas JA. Results
and histological development of various surgical
Selected References
techniques for correcting eversion of the third
Bianciardi P, Otranto D. Treatment of dog thelazio-
425.
sis caused by Thelazia callipaeda (Spirurida,
Moore CP. Imbrication technique for replacement of
Thelazidae) using a topical formulation of imida-
prolapsed third eyelid gland. In: Bojrab MJ, ed.
cloprid 10% and moxidectin 2.5%. Vet Parasitol
Current techniques in small animal surgery. Phil-
2005;129:89-93.
adelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1990. 126-128.
Collins BK, Collier LL, Miller MA, Linton LL. Bio-
Moore CP, Collier LL. Ocular surface disease
     
associated with loss of conjunctival goblet cells
canine conjunctival melanoma. Prog Vet Comp
in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;26:458-
Ophthalmol 1993;3:135-140
466.
Constantinescu GM, McClure RC. Anatomy of the
Moore CP, Wilsman NJ, Nordheim EV, Majors LJ,
orbital fasciae and third eyelid in dogs. Am J Vet
Collier LL. Density and distribution of canine
Res 1990;51:260-263.
conjunctival goblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Davidson MG, Breitschwerdt EB, Nasisse MP,
Sci 1987;28:1925-1932
Roberts SM. Ocular manifestations of Rocky
Morgan RV, Duddy JM, McClurg K. Prolapse of the
Mountain spotted fever in dogs. J Am Vet Med
gland of the third eyelid in dogs: a retrospective
Assoc 1989;194:777-781
study of 89 cases (1980 to 1990). J Am Anim
Dugan SJ, Ketring KL, Severin GA, Render JA.
Hosp Assoc 1993;29:56-60.
Variant nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis 
Paulsen ME, Lavach JD, Snyder SP, Severin
in four dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;
GA, Fichenbaum JD. Nodular granulomatous
29:403-409.
episclerokeratitis in dogs: 19
cases (l973-
Gerding PA,
McLaughlin SA,
Troop
MW
1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:1581-
Pathogenic
bacteria
and
fungi
associated
1587.
with external ocular diseases in dogs: l3l cases
Peiffer Jr. RL, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM. Tarsoconjunc-
(1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;193:242-
tival pedicle grafts for deep corneal ulceration in
244.
the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Giuliano EA, Moore CP, Phillips TE. Morphological
1977;13:387-391
evidence of M cells in healthy canine conjunctiva-
Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG. Ocular and peri-
associated lymphoid tissue. Graefes Arch Clin
ocular manifestations of leishmaniasis in dogs:
Exp Ophthalmol 2002;240:220-226.
105 cases (1993-1998). Vet Ophthalmol 2000;
Glaze MB. Ocular allergy. Semin Vet Med Surg
3:35-41.
(Small Anim) 1991;6:296-302
Ramsey DT, Ketring KL, Glaze MB, Render JA.
Hakanson NE, Merideth RE. Conjunctival pedicle
 Ligneous conjunctivitis in four Doberman Pin-
grafting in the treatment of corneal ulcers in the
schers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1996;32:439-
dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;
447
23:641-648.
Read RA. Treatment of canine nictitans plasmacytic
Hendrix DVH. Canine conjunctiva and nictitating
conjunctivitis with 0.2 percent cyclosporine oint-
membrane. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthal-
ment. J Small Anim Pract 1995;36:50-56.
Scagliotti
RH.
 Tarsoconjunctival  island
1graft
662-689
for the treatment of deep corneal ulcers, desce-
Kaswan RL, Martin CL. Surgical correction of third
metocels, and perforations in 35 dogs and 6 cats.
eyelid prolapse in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 1988;3:69-
1985;186:83
76.
Komnenou A, Egyed Z, Sreter T, Eberhard ML.
Stanley RG, Kaswan RL.
Modification of the
Canine onchocercosis in Greece: report of further
orbital rim anchorage method for surgical
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CONJUNCTIVA ANO N1CTITATING MEMBRANE/ I 1 7
replacement of the gland of the third eyelid in
toconjunctivitis in five dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1412-
1989;195:354-357.
1414.
Wilcock B, Peiffer RJ. Adenocarcinoma of the gland
Wheeler CA, Blanchard GL, Davidson HJ. Cryosur-
of the third eyelid in seven dogs. J Am Vet Med
 gery for treatment of recurrent proliferative kera-
Assoc 1988;193:1549-1550.
Chapter 6
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE
CORNEA AND SCLERA
Brian C. Gilger with contributions by Franck J. Ollivier and Ellison Bentley
The cornea, unique portion of the outer
the transition zone. The canine cornea con-
fibrous tunic of the eye, is transparent and
sists of the corneal epithelium externally,
serves a major refractive function while
the corneal stroma, Descemet's membrane,
 maintaining a tough, physical, and imperme-
and corneal endothelial cells (Fig. 6.1).
able barrier between the eye and the envi-
Descemet's membrane is the basement
ronment. Translucency of the cornea enables
membrane for the endothelial cells; it
it to refract light but still allow sufficient
becomes thicker with age. Canine endothe-
quantity and quality of light into the eye to
lial cells are hexagonally shaped and in
form an image on the retina. Although the
adults the cell density is about 2,500 cells/
cornea is exposed to environmental hazards, it
mm². However, in old dogs, the endothelial
maintains its outer surface by continual replace-
cells enlarge and decrease in number with
     i  
age. Mean corneal thickness, which is related
preocular tear flm on its surface. Normally
to the number of endothelial cells, can be
transparent, diseases of the cornea may lead to
measured by ultrasonic pachymetry; central
opacification and loss of vision. As the anterior
corneal thickness is about 562 ± 6.2 μm and
 and exposed tissue of the eye, corneal disease
the peripheral cornea is thicker. In neonatal
is usually detected by direct observation. For-
puppies, there is a decrease in corneal thick-
tunately, most corneal diseases are amenable to
ness until approximately 6 weeks of age, then
medical or surgical therapy. This chapter
it increases with age until approximately 30
provides an overview of corneal and scleral
weeks.
disorders and surgery in the dog.
The corneal stroma, which accounts for
the majority of the corneal thickness,
consists primarily of collagen fibrils,
Corneal Anatomy and
keratinocytes, nerves, and glycosaminogly-
Pathophysiology
cans. Corneal collagen fibrils exist in broad
belts called lamellae that run approximately
Review of Corneal Anatomy
parallel to the corneal surface. Keratin
sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, and dermatan
The fibrous tunic of the canine eye consists
sulfate are the predominant glycosaminogly-
of the sclera and cornea with the limbus as
cans in the cornea.
119
I20/EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmOLOGY
Corneal Clarity
Tearfim
The normal canine cornea is transparent
(corneal deturgescence) because of the
 absence of blood vessels and pigment, non-
keratinized anterior surface epithelium,
lattice organization, and the small dia-
meter of the collagen fibrils. The collagen
fibrils, with a uniform diameter of 25 nm,
make up the corneal stroma and are com-
prised of parallel arrays of long collagen
molecules held together by intermolecular
bonds. Recent studies also indicate the propor-
tion of the stroma occupied by hydrated
collagen fbrils may also be a major factor in
clarity.
The opaque sclera is composed of colla-
Fig. 6.l. The canine cornea consists of the corneal
gen fibrils with various diameters ranging
epithelium externally, the corneal stroma, Descemet's
from 25-230 nm. The collagen fibrils form
membrane, and corneal endothelial cells.
bundles, vary in width and thickness,
intertwine with each other, and branch
extensively.
The corneal endothelium uses a physio
logic pump to remove and transport fluid
Innervation of the canine cornea is from
into the anterior chamber. In this way, the
branches of the trigeminal nerve {i.e., cranial
corneal endothelium regulates hydration of the
nerve V) via an average of ll.5 large "trunks"
corneal stromal collagen matrix, which pro-
that enter the midstromal region circumferen-
vides mechanical strength.
tially at the limbus. These trunks course radi-
ally to the central cornea, forming anterior and
posterior nerve plexi in the anterior stroma.
Corneal Healing
Subepithelial plexus formation and extensions
into the basal epithelium with free nerve
endings extending to the epithelial wing layers
Corneal healing is summarized in Table 6.1.
Corneal epithelial healing is rather fast,
occur. This nerve distribution may explain, in
while stromal regeneration requires weeks.
e sr  ns  d
more painful than those involving the deep
Both basement membranes of the epithelium
and the endothelium (Descement's mem-
stromal.
brane) require active production by these
Corneal sensitivity, or corneal touch
cells. The endothelium is dependent on the
threshold (the minimum stimulation of the
age of the dog, with limited to no regenera-
corneal surface by a Cochet-Bonnet aesthe-
tion in older dogs.
siometer to elicit a blink reflex), was highest
in dogs with dolichocephalic skull types,
compared to dogs with mesaticephalic or
brachycephalic (which had the least sensi-
Repair of Full-Thickness Corneal
tive cornea) skull types. In general, the
Laceration or Perforation
central corneal region was most sensitive,
followed by the nasal, temporal, dorsal, then
Healing of a full-thickness corneal laceration
ventral corneal regions. Dogs with diabetes
 may be divided into approximately six phases
mellitus have reduced corneal sensitivity in all
(Table 6.2) and depends on all of the different
corneal regions.
corneal layers.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I21
Table 6.1. The Dynamics of Corneal Healing after Corneal Ulceration.
Tissue
Healing Starts
Time to Replace
Clinical Monitoring
 Epithelium
1 hr
48-72 hrs
Very faint retention of fluorescein (necell layer)
14 days
No fluorescein retention (multiple layers)
Cormeal epithelial
Several weeks
Firm bond—epithelium cannot be dislodged
basement membrane
Cormeal stroma
1-2 days
Days to week5
Stromal replacerment requires local fibroblasts;
occasional vasculature.
Occurs under the healing epithelium
 Descemet's membrane
Regeneration depends on the endothelium-
limited to very young anirmals 
Endothelium
Regeneration in only young animals
Table 6.2. Phases for the Healing of Full-Thickness Corneal Lacerations.
1. In the development of a full-thickness cormeal wound, mechanical factors, the fibrin plug. and cormeal
sabpa punom ayt sioeuos jowny snoanbe paweju! aut ui uabouugy yay/ Aeineu inooo ewapa jewoins
fibrin forms a plug that may seal the wound and act as a scaffold for the fibroblastic reparative processes.
2. Thirty minutes to 5 hours later, the leukocytic or polymorphonuclear leukocytes migrate into the cormeal
wound. They arrive via conjunctival blood vessels and the tears as well as within the aqueous humor, and
with chronicity. from the perilimbal blood vessels.
3. This epithelial phase appears to begin after 1 hour of injury. By the process of sliding and mitosis, the
epithelium begins to cover the anterior part of the wound during this phase. This seems to be an important
moderator for healing of the underlying stroma.
4. This fibroblastic phase begins after 12 hours. Fibroblasts are formed mainly from keratocytes and, initially.
peyt sllao neanuouow wong woy ose Aew siselaoiaiy ubiew punom aun ot isasoo saooieiay aun wo
'abieiua sseigoigy aul siassaa ieaad wong sdeyad io 'sieat aun woy eaon aun ot pateibu ae
multiply. and form an active fibroblastic tissue that elaborates collagen and ground substance composed of
glycosaminoglycans.
 5. This endothelial phase of corneal healing begins 24 hours after the injury. The endotheliurn appears to heal
mainly by endothelial sliding or amitotic multiplication. The endothelial cells produce a new Descemet's
membrane after a few weeks
6. This last phase begins 7 days after injury. Cellularity in the comea slowly diminishes, and nuclei in the fibers
reorient themselves parallel to the comeal surface. The fibroblastic tissue decreases in size and becomes less
cellular, and a thin scar is formed. Comeal incisions heal to sufficient tensile strength for sutures to be
removed in 19 days.
Role of Proteases in Corneal Wound
matory cells, and lacrimal glands. Multiple
Healing (by Franck J. Ollivier)
autocrine and paracrine interactions occur
between epithelial cells and activated stromal
When the cornea is injured, multiple systems
fibroblast, and the exocrine actions of factors
are activated, which produces a series of
secreted by lacrimal gland cell into the precor-
complex and coordinated cellular processes
neal tear film (PTF). Since the cornea is in close
that ultimately result in a healed corneal
contact with the preocular tear film and the
wound. Healing of corneal wounds is an
aqueous fluid, the various kinds of proteinases,
exceptionally complex process involving the
proteinase inhibitors, growth factors, and cyto-
integrated actions of multiple proteinases,
kines in the tear flm and aqueous most likely
growth factors, and cytokines produced by
play an important role in the turnover of the
epithelial cells, stromal keratocytes, inflam-
corneal cells and wound healing of the cornea.
I22 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
Proteinases and Proteinase Inhibitors
Proteolytic Activity in the PTF of Healthy
and Diseased Corneas
There are natural proteinase inhibitors
that are present in the PTF and in the
In severely damaged corneas, proteinase
cornea such as αl-proteinase inhibitor, α2-
activities in the tear film were significantly
macroglobulin, and some tissue inhibitors
increased, suggesting that elevation of tear
of MMPs (TIMPs) simultaneously with the
film proteinases is part of a fundamental
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), thus
response of the mammalian eye to corneal
preventing excessive degradation of normal
injury. If infection is present, the proteinases
healthy tissue. Disorders occur when there
secreted by infectious organisms are also
is an imbalance between proteinases and pro-
responsible for the severe corneal damage that
teinase inhibitors in favor of the proteinases,
is associated with the disease
therefore causing pathological degradation of
stromal collagen and proteoglycans in the
Corneai Pigmentation
cornea (Fig. 6.2)
Corneal pigmentation is most commonly
Major Proteinases for the Cornea
associated with chronic inflammation and
and Their Origin
 irritation. Corneal pigmentation is found in
disorders such as chronic superficial kerati-
Microorganisms, inflammatory cells, corneal
tis (CsK) (i.e., pannus) in the German Shep-
epithelial cells, and fibroblasts produce and
herd; the pigmentary keratitis syndrome
release proteolytic enzymes; they are called
in brachycephalic breeds, which may be a
endogenous proteinases. If infection 
is
pigmentary or epithelial dystrophy; kerato-
present, the proteinases secreted by infec-
conjunctivitis sicca; and chronic ulcerative
keratitis.
proteinases.
For example,
Pseudomonas
Congenital corneal melanosis or pigmenta-
deruginosa produces two MMPs (alkaline
tion occurs infrequently in the dog. Corneal
protease, elastase), and Aspergillus spp. and
 pigmentation results from migration of melano-
Fusarium spp. produce serine proteinases.
      
 In a study of nonhealing corneal ulcers in dogs.
tissues. Melanin pigment within macrophages
MMP-2 and MMP-9 were found at the level of
and fibroblasts may also occur in the dog.
the epithelium.
Other signs of active keratitis, such as corneal
vascularization, stromal inflammatory cell infl-
tration, and 
granulation tissue formation,
usually accompany pigment cel migration.
Melanocytic pigment becomes deposited in the
basal epithelial cells of the cornea and the ante-
rior stromal tissue. Another less common source
 of corneal pigmentation is anterior synechiae
 and the adherence of anterior uveal cysts to the
cornea.
Corneal Edema
Corneal edema or swelling (i.e., corneal
overhydration) may result from imbibition
of fluid by the epithelium or stroma. Altera-
tions in endothelial cells result in the cornea
Fig. 6.2. “Melting" corneal ulcer in a dog.
(Photograph courtesy of Dr. Franck Ollivier.)
edematous.
The endothelium maintains
DisEases Ano SuRGerY Of the Canine CoRneA Ano Sclera/ I23
corneal deturgescence by an energy-dependent
Megalocornea
sodium potassium transport pump as well as
from tight cellular junctions known as zonula
 Megalocornea is a cornea of greater than normal
occludens between endothelial cells. Tradition-
size, normal being approximately 16-18 mm in
ally, corneal edema has been regarded simply
horizontal diameter. This is a rare, congenital
as increased corneal water content that results
anomaly in the dog and usually concurrent
in increased thickness, increased scattering of
with congenital glaucoma and buphthalmus (or
light, and decreased transparency; however,
megalophthalmos).
corneal edema also involves loss of stromal gly-
cosaminoglycans and water uptake.
Dermoids
Corneal edema in the dog may be associ
ated with a variety of causes, including
endothelial dystrophy, age-related degenera-
A dermoid is a choristoma, which is normal
cells or tissues in an abnormal, unnatural
tion, endothelial damage associated with
position. Dermoids most commonly occur at
persistent pupillary membranes, mechanical
the temporal limbus; can involve the eyelids,
trauma, toxic reactions, anterior uveitis,
endothelitis, glaucoma, neovasculariza-
conjunctiva, and/or cornea; and are often
detected in puppies several weeks of age
tion, and superficial or deep ulceration
(Fig. 6.3).
(Fig. 6.4). These lesions contain keratinized
epithelium, hair, blood vessels, fbrous tissue,
fat, nerves, glands, and smooth muscle, and
Developmental Abnormalities
they may also contain cartilage. Dermoids are
best treated by surgical removal, and if on
and Congenital Diseases
the cornea, the procedure of choice is most
Microcornea
commonly a superficial keratectomy (see
next section).
Microcornea is a small cornea in an otherwise
normal eye. It is rare and predisposed
Superficial Keratectomy
breeds such as the Collie, Miniature and Toy
Poodle, Miniature Schnauzer, Old English
As mentioned, the most common surgical
Sheepdog. and Saint Bernard. Affected
procedure for removal of a corneal dermoid
corneas have horizontal diameters less than
is superficial keratectomy. Other superficial
12 mm. Microcornea is more often encoun-
corneal lesions amenable to superficial kera-
tered with microphthalmia and other congeni-
tal anomalies.
Fig. 6.3. Diffuse corneal edema.
Fig. 6.4. Corneal dermoid in a young Saint Bernard
I24 /EssentiAls OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmoLOGY
tectomy include indolent ulcers, corneal
(e.g., an operating microscope) as well as spe-
neoplasms, sequestrums, foreign bodies,
cialized instrumentation is essential to perform
corneal abscesses, bacterial and fungal kera-
the surgery, and specialized surgical instru-
titis (usually in conjunction with a conjunc-
mentation (e.g, micrometer diamond knife,
tival graft or flap), and crystalline corneal
corneal trephine, corneal dissector) facilitates
degeneration.
the removal of corneal tissue and may improve
The specific procedure or method for the
the clinical outcome.
superficial keratectomy is determined by the
There are two common methods to perform
type of lesion and its depth (most often
 a superficial keratectomy. In the first method,
using biomicroscopy). If t
the resulting
the Complete Incision Keratectomy, an initial
corneal wound extends from one-half to
corneal incision is made that surrounds com-
three-quarter corneal thickness, use of a
pletely the lesion to be removed (Fig. 6.5). The
conjunctival pedicle flap is warranted 
to
incision needs to be at appropriate depth to
protect the cornea, to help prevent perfora-
allow complete removal of the lesion. It is
tion, and to promote healing. Because corneal
made using a corneal trephine, diamond knife,
stromal tissue may not completely regenerate,
or microsurgical blade. The initial incision can
the number of superficial keratectomies that
be round, square, or triangular. After the initial
can be performed at the same site is generally
incision is made, the edge of the tissue to be
limited to two or three.
removed is grasped with a forceps, and a
Superficial keratectomy is most commonly
corneal dissector (e.g., Martinez corneal dissec-
performed in veterinary medicine using tradi-
tor, Beaver No. 64 microsurgical blade, iris
tional surgical instruments (Box 6.l); however,
spatula) is introduced and held parallel to the
it can be performed using carbon dioxide or
cornea. The dissector is used to separate the
excimer laser ablation. Use of magnification
corneal lamella without penetrating deeper
than the original incision. The cornea is then
separated until the opposite incision line is
Box 6.1: Basic Corneal
reached.
Microsurgical Instruments
In the second type of superficial keratec-
tomy, the Partial Incision Keratectomy, a small
Magnifying loupes, X4-X6
corneal incision is made adjacent to the lesion
Colibri cormeal forceps: 0.3-mm teeth with tying
that is to be removed. This initial incision is
platform
made at the appropriate depth but only wide
Bishop-Harmon forceps:0.3- or 0.8-mm teeth
 enough to allow insertion of the lamellar sepa-
Needle-holder:
rating device (e.g., Martinez corneal dissector,
Barraquer
Beaver No. 64 microsurgical blade, iris spatula)
Curved, without lock device
to be inserted
wWestcott tenotorny scissors or
 Following keratectomy, the cornea is treated
 Stevens tenotomy scissors—curved
Eyelid speculum
much like a corneal ulcer with topical broad-
 Barraquer
spectrum antibiotics to prevent infection and
Beaver blade handle
with topical atropine to decrease ciliary spasm
Irrigating cannula
and discomfort. A potentially devastating com-
23-gauge
plication after keratectomy is corneal perfora-
Other Surgical Equipment
tion, which generally results from infection at
Suture material
the surgical site. The potential for infection is
7-0 Vicryl or Dexon
Ophthalmic spatula needle 
exacerbated by deep, extensive keratectomies
6-0 monofilament: nylon, surgilene, prolene,
but is largely preventable by use of conjunctival
flaps or other supportive surgeries. Frequent
etc.
Beaver blades: No. 63. 64. and 65
reevaluations after surgery (with monitoring of
Ilrrigating solution
healing by use of fluorescein dye application)
Balanced salt solution ophthalmic or lactated Ring
and use of topical antibiotics should prevent
 er's solution
most postsurgical complications.
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY Of THe CANiNe CoRNEA ANo SCLERa/ I25
D
Fig. 6.5. Complete incision superhicial keratectomy. A. The initial corneal incision,
which may be round, square, or triangular, should completely surround the lesion
to be removed and can be made using a corneal trephine, diamond knife, or
microsurgical blade. B and C. After the initial incision is made, the edge of the tissue
to be removed is grasped by a forceps, and a corneal dissector (e.g., Martinez
corneal dissector, Beaver No. 64 microsurgical blade, iris spatula) is introduced and
held parallel to the cornea. The dissector is used to separate the corneal lamella
without penetrating deeper than the original incision. The cornea is then separated
until the opposite incision line, or limbus, is reached. D. Scissors may be needed to
connect the dissection to the opposite incision or to remove the corneal tissue from
the limbus.
Congenital Corneal Opacities
with indistinct borders; (2) macula is a mod-
erately dense opacity with a circumscribed
Corneal opacities are commonly classified
border; and lastly (3) leukoma is a dense,
by the degree of opacity and are described
white opacity. When iris tissue adheres to the
as (1) nebula is a minor, diffuse, hazy opacity
posterior surface of the cornea beneath an area
I26/EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmOLOGY
of corneal opacity, the condition is described
area of the opacity; larger, more diffuse opaci-
as an adherent leukoma.
ties can affect Descemet's membrane and result
Infantile corneal dystrophy is a congenital,
from generalized stromal edema.
subepithelial, geographic corneal opacity that
These PPM-associated leukomas may be a
is nonhereditary, transient, and observed in
component of various anterior segment dys-
puppies younger than 10 weeks. This type of
genesis that are poorly described, in general, in
noninflammatory corneal deposit occurs
in
dogs (Peter's anomaly in man). Axenfeld-Rieger
many breeds of dogs but most commonly in
syndrome is another anterior chamber cleavage
Bichon Frise, Collie, English Springer Spaniel,
syndrome described in humans, characterized
Miniature Poodle, Shetland Sheepdog. and
by the presence of iris strands adherent to
Yorkshire Terrier puppies. One or multiple
cornea, iris hypoplasia, focal iris atrophy, cor-
zones may be affected. The condition slowly
ectopia, and ectropion uveae. Glaucoma may
resolves, and in most cases, it is absent by
develop in approximately 50% of patients.
12-16 weeks of age. There is no interference
with functional vision, and treatment
is
Limbal Colobomas and Staphyiomas
unnecessary.
Colobomas or staphylomas of the limbus or
Corneal Opacities with Persistent
sclera are rare in the dog. They appear as a
Pupillary Membranes
raised, tan, gray, or blue mass covered with
conjunctiva. Congenital, noninflammatory col-
Persistent
 pupillary
membranes
(PPMs)
obomas and staphylomas of the limbus or sclera
occur in many breeds and are discussed in
 occur most commonly in homozygous merled
detail in chapter 8. Persistent pupillary
with excessive white hair coats in miniature
tissue strands arising from the collarette and
Dachshunds, Collies, and other breeds. In the
 the minor iridal circle may persist in puppies
Australian Shepherd these defects are associ-
 2-4 months of age but usually disappear by
ated with multiple ocular anomalies.
6 months. Corneal lesions, that is, adherent
leukomas, can be associated with adherence
 of persistent pupillary membranes (Fig.
Inflammatory Keratopathies
6.6). Both focal and diffuse corneal opacities
occur, but the former is more frequent. Small
Corneal diseases may be categorized into
focal opacities of the cornea have thickening
inflammatory and noninflammatory causes.
and distortion of Descemet's membrane in the
 Inflammatory corneal disorders can be further
classified into ulcerative and nonulcerative
keratitis.
Uicerative Keratitis
Corneal ulceration, or ulcerative keratitis, is
one of the most common ocular diseases in
the dog. A corneal ulcer is present when
there is a break in the corneal epithelium
that exposes the underlying corneal stroma.
Clinically, this generally results in lacrima-
tion, blepharospasm, photophobia, conjunc-
tival hyperemia, corneal edema, and possibly
Fig. 6.6. Persistent pupillary membranes that
miosis and aqueous flare, and is determined
extend from the collarette area of the iris to the
by the retention of topically applied fluores-
 posterior aspect of the endothelium resulting in
cein dye by the corneal stroma (Fig. 6.7).
multiple small deep corneal opacities
Uncomplicated superficial ulcers usually heal
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/I27
rapidly, with minimal scar formation. Compli-
infected, or progressive corneal ulcers
cated deep ulcers, such as those with microbial
should undergo aerobic bacterial and fungal
infection, however, may lead to impaired vision
culture and sensitivity tests, and a cytologic
because of corneal scarring or, when corneal
examination of the cornea should also be
perforation occurs, to anterior synechia forma-
performed. These diagnostic procedures will
tion. Severe ulcerative keratitis may lead to loss
of the eye because of endophthalmitis, glau-
surgery.
coma, phthisis bulbi, or a combination of these
(Table 6.3)
Uicerative Keratitis-Depth of
Corneal ulcers are classified by the depth
Corneal Invoivement
of corneal involvement (i.e., superficial,
deep stromal, and descemetocele) and by
Corneali
ulcers, classified by the depth
their underlying cause (bacterial, fungal,
of corneal involvement, include superficial
trauma, immune-mediated, indolent, etc.).
corneal ulcers, stromal corneal ulcers, des-
The frst step in treating all corneal ulcers
cemetoceles, and perforations.
involves searching for and removing the incit.
ing cause, which may be eyelid abnormalities
(e.g.. masses, lagophthalmos, distichiasis,
Superficial Corneal Ulcers
ectopic cilia), foreign bodies, repeated trauma,
and  keratoconjunctivitis   sicca.
Chronic,
Superficial corneal ulcers are further classi-
fied as uncomplicated, progressive, or refrac-
tory. For successful management of ulcerative
keratitis, one should identify and remove
the cause of the ulcer, determine the stage
and severity of the ulcer, and select an
appropriate therapeutic modality. Identify-
ing the cause or contributing factors requires a
thorough ocular examination (contributing
factors may include eyelash abnormalities,
eyelid structure and function, and preocular
tear film disorders). Uncomplicated superficial
ulcers usually resolve with topical antibiotic
therapy applied three to four times daily to
 prevent bacterial infection. A combination oph-
thalmic preparation of neomycin, bacitracin,
Fig. 6.7. The diagnosis of a corneal ulcer is made
and polymixin B is frequently a good antimi-
based on the retention of topically applied fluorescein
crobial selection. Stimulation of the abundant
dye by the corneal stroma.
pain receptors in the cornea by ulceration
Table 6.3. Types of Corneal Ulcerations in the Dog.
Qinical Diagnosis
Corneal Layers Lost
Outcome
Superficial ulcer
 Epitheliur/baserment mermbrane (BM) variable 
Uncormplicated/progressive
Cormeal erosion
 Epithelium/BM
Refractory/recurrent
Shallow ulcer
 Epitheliur/BM/1/4-1/3 strorma
Uncormplicated/progressive
Moderate ulcer
 Epithelium/BM/2 stroma
Uncormplicated/progressive
Deep
 Epitheliurm/BM/2/3-3/4 stroma
Uncomplicated/progressive
Descemetocele
Epithelium/BM/stroma
Cormplicated/progressive
lnis prolapse
Epithelium/BM/stroma/Descemet's membrane/endothelium
Complicated/progressive
I28 /EssentiAlS Of VeterinarY OpHthaAlmoloGY
results in a neurogenic reflex anterior uveitis
segments ofbasement membrane on the surface
that results in miosis of the pupil, iris hyper-
of the exposed stroma. Scanning and transmis-
emia, and increased protein levels in the
sion electron microscopy confrmed the loss of
aqueous humor (i.e., anterior uveitis). There-
basement membrane. A distinctive stromal
fore, a mydriatic agent (1% atropine or 1.0%
change consisting of a thin, superficial, hyalin-
zib oi ttb ioidoi pandde si (apiuidon
ized acellular zone is common and composed
(or to effect) or twice daily to control ciliary
of collagen fibrils admixed with an ill-defned
muscle spasm and the associated ocular dis-
amorphous or fne fibrillar material. The success
comfort associated with the secondary uveitis.
rates of treatments such as anterior stromal
puncture and keratectomy that alter the abnor-
mation and should be minimized. The ulcer
mal stroma suggest these stromal abnormalities
usually resolves in 2-6 days; if not, it should
play a critical role, suggesting that perhaps the
be reevaluated for an undetected, underlying
superficial stromal hyalinized zone is a barrier
cause or contributing factor.
to reformation of normal adhesion complexes
and basement membrane.
Spontaneous Chronic Corneal Epithelial
Defects (by Ellison Bentley)
DIAGNOSIS
Spontaneous  chronic corneal epithelial
A spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
defects (SCCEDs) in dogs are chronic epi-
defect should be considered in any middle
thelial erosions that fail to resolve through
aged dog with an erosion that has not healed
normal wound healing processes. Terms
in 1-2 weeks. Studies of SCCED report an
used to describe this entity include indolent
average age of 8-9 years. Underlying causes
erosions or ulcers, canine recurrent ero-
for delayed wound healing can include mechan-
sions, refractory corneal ulcers, Boxer ulcers,
ical trauma (typically from lid abnormalities
nonhealing erosions, persistent corneal ero-
such as masses, entropion, and lagophthalmia),
sions, recurrent epithelial erosions and idio
foreign bodies, infection, tear flm abnormali-
pathic persistent corneal erosions. Although
ties, exposure from poor conformation, paraly-
originally referred to as Boxer ulcers due to a
sis of lids, neurotrophic keratitis, exophthalmia
predilection for Boxer dogs, subsequent larger
or buphthalmia, or corneal edema leading to
studies document occurrence in almost every
bullous keratopathy.
breed. It is likely that the initiating event in
SCCEDs have a typical clinical appear-
dogs is also superficial trauma. Left untreated
ance that aids in diagnosis (Fig. 6.8). A ring
or improperly treated, SCCEDs can persist for
of loose epithelium surrounds a SCCED,
months to even over a year.
resulting in a diffuse ring of less intense
Events that may contribute to this condi-
fluorescein staining around the defect as
tion include an ill-defined basement mem-
fluorescein diffuses underneath the poorly
brane withassociated basalcell abnormalities,
attached epithelium. A SCCED is always
a
 decrease in hemidesmosomes
s(study
superficial, with no stromal loss. Defects are
limited to only Boxer dogs). The underlying
often in the axial or paraxial cornea, although
adjacent epithelium can be poorly attached
 any portion of the cornea may be affected.
to the underlying corneal stroma and exhibit
Varying degrees of vascularization occur in
dysmaturation (loss of the normal epithelial
SCCED, with studies reporting 58% to 64% of
architecture). A variable amount of stromal
lesions exhibiting neovascularization. Periph-
fbroplasia, vascularization, and leukocytic
eral lesions are more likely to vascularize while
infltrate occurs. Components of the basement
central lesions may persist for months with no
membrane and adhesion complexes, including
vascular response at all. The degree of pain
laminin, collagen IV and collagen VIl, may
 demonstrated by blepharospasm varies tremen-
reveal either no basement membrane or adhe-
dously between patients, but tends to decrease
sion complexes, or only small discontinuous
with chronicity.
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CANiNE CoRNEA AND SCLERA/ I29
Box 6.2: Clinical Management
of Corneal Erosions
Drugs reported to facilitate healing of cormeal ero-
 sions: (1) polysulfated glycosaminoglycans: (2) apro-
tinin: (3) epidermal growth factor: (4) Substance P
alone and combined with insulin-like growth factor;
(5) chondroitin sufate combined with antibiotics;
(6) fibronectin: (7) autogenous serum: (8) doxycy-
cline and tetracycline.
Recommended approach for "first-time" patients
1. Topical broad-spectrurm antibiotics (some are
mildly epitheliotoxic; administer at low fre-
quency-i.e., two to four times daily)
Fig. 6.8. Topical fluorescein stain may be used to
2.
 Topical 1 % atropine is indicated as a cycloplegic
outline a refractory corneal ulcer. In this case,
for acute ocular pain, usually for 3-5 days.
fluorescein is visible beneath the edge in nonadherent
3.
 Debidement of the nonadherent epithelium
epithelium.
layto 'siopepidde paddn-uonoo Ap buisn
devices to remove loose cormeal epithelia include
dull scalpel blade, a dull spatula (e.g.. platinum
Kimura spatula, iris spatula). or a fine-toothed
Clients should be instructed that multiple
forceps. After topically anesthetizing the cormea.
treatments are sometimes required to resolve
all loose epithelium is removed, usually to a
these lesions, and that lesions may recur in the
point 1-2 mm beyond the margin of fluorescein 
same eye or the contralateral eye. After base-
stain retention. Hence, it is not uncommon to
 ment membrane loss through keratectomy.
have a large area of abnormal epithelium and to
 adhesion complexes do not regain their normal
greaty increase the ulcer's size by debridement.
Debnidement may need to be repeated at 7- to
density for over a year in normal animals, so it
14-day intervals, but the amount of loose epi-
is very likely that adhesion is abnormal in these
thelium should decrease with each removal a5
 animals for long periods afer apparent clinical
the ulcer heals.
resolution.
For
refractory
cases
(aftertwoorthree
debridements)
1.
 Debnidement followed with either the grid and
TREATMENT
punctate keratotomy recommended.
2.
 Nictitans flaps. cormeal contact lenses, collagen
A number of treatment options exist for the
 shields made from porcine scleral collagen, and
treatment of SCCEDs. With all treatments,
cyanoacrylate  tissue   adhesives  are   other
prophylactic antibiotics should be adminis-
possibilities.
tered ql2h to q8h to prevent infection in a
de-epithelialized cornea. The exact treat-
ments chosen are dependent on clinician
and client preference, as no controlled clini-
and grid keratotomy) in the affected cornea
cal trials for the treatment of SCCEDs have
is another often employed therapy for the
been performed to assist in evidence-based
treatment of SCCEDs, and are used most
decisions. A wide variety of medical thera-
frequently after one or two debridements
pies have been utilized in the therapy of
have failed to stimulate ulcer resolution. To
SCCED (Box 6.2). Debridement is the most
perform anterior stromal puncture or any
 common form of therapy, used alone and
variant thereof, a 25-gauge needle is grasped
combined with other therapies (Fig. 6.9).
with a hemostat so that the tip of the needle is
Making small punctures or linear scratches
barely exposed. This allows better control
(punctate keratotomy, anterior 
stromal
of the depth of penetration. A commercially
puncture, multiple punctate keratotomy,
available needle with a small bend in the
multifocal superficial punctate keratotomy,
tip to control depth is also available. After
130/EsSENTIAlS OF VEtERiNARY OpHTHAlmOLOGY
superficial keratectomy results in rapid resolu-
tion, it is not always recommended as the first
line of therapy due to the need for general
anesthesia, increased cost, and the increased
likelihood of corneal scarring.
Recently, thermal cautery has been reported
for this disorder. However, this procedure has
the potential to result in increased scarring if
not performed carefully, so it is generally
reserved for diffcult cases that have not
responded to previous therapies. Cyanoacrylate
tissue adhesive has also been reported as a
Fig. 6.9. Photograph of epithelial debridement of an
treatment for nonhealing erosions; mean time
SCCED in a 9-year-old Golden Retriever. One cotton-
was 3.4 weeks (range 2-8 weeks)
tipped applicator is used to remove loose epithelium,
while a second cotton-tipped applicator is used to
prevent prolapse of the third eyelid.
Stromal Corneal Ulcers
Ulcerative keratitis extending into the
administration of topical anesthesia, the epithe-
corneal stroma at variable depths usually
lium may or may not be debrided prior to per-
involves a secondary microbial  infection
forming the procedure. In an anterior stromal
that initiates the stromal destruction. Hence,
puncture (ASP) or punctate keratotomy, mul-
any visible defect in the corneal surface sug-
tiple small punctures are placed 0.5-1.0 mm
gests stromal involvement (Fig. 6.1l), and
apart over the entire affected cornea and extend-
requires fluorescein for definitive diagnosis.
ing 0.5-l mm into the normal surrounding
Therefore, any ulcer with a suspected
cornea. In a grid keratotomy, small lines 
6are
stromal defect should have a culture with
placed in a crosshatched pattern across
the
antimicrobial sensitivity and corneal scrap-
surface of the cornea, again extending approxi-
ings for cytologic examination performed to
mately l mm into unaffected surrounding
determine the underlying cause, due to the
cornea (Fig. 6.10). ASP or grid keratotomy can
high likelihood of microbial infection, prior
be repeated at 7- to 14-day intervals.
to instillation of fluorescein or other topical
Multiple uncontrolled studies examined
substances. These diagnostic tests are per-
success rates after these procedures, and
formed first to maximize growth of the organ-
found success rates ranging from 68% using
isms on culture and to not alter surface
ASP to 87% using a grid keratotomy. Com-
organisms or cell types.
bining success rates from these various
Stromal ulcers may be divided further
studies leads to a success rate of approxi-
into progressive and nonprogressive types.
mately 80%. Again, a contact lens or third
Nonprogressive deep ulcers can be managed
eyelid
flap may be used after
：these
medically successfully, similar to superficial
procedures.
ulcers, with treatment directed by the results
Superficial keratectomy can also be used for
of culture and sensitivity testing. Surgical
the treatment of SCCEDs. By removing the
intervention is indicated in deep corneal
abnormal superficial layer of stroma, this tech-
ulceration (i.e., when depth of the corneal
nique allows reformation of normal epithelial
lesion is 50% of the corneal thickness or
adhesion complexes. Unlike the other proce-
deeper) or when the stromal ulcer proves
dures, the success rate is consistently l00%
refactory to topical medical therapy. Surgical
across studies, with healing resulting in a rela-
procedures most commonly employed in these
tively short time period. This implies that
cases include conjunctival, amniotic membrane
the stromal alterations are a critical part of
(or other body membrane), corneal, and syn-
the pathophysiology of this disease. Although
thetic or bioengineered grafts.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I31
B
Fig. 6.10. Grid keratotomy for an indolent ulcer. A. Alter application of a topical
anesthetic, a 25-gauge needle is used to lightly scratch the surface of the debrided 
indolent ulcer. A diamond knife, set at a depth of 0.2-0.3 mm, may be used in place
of a hypodermic needle. B. Horizontal and vertical scratches are made, forming a
grid pattern, with the scratches extending slightly into the normal epithelium. The
scratches should be spaced about l mm apart.
Progressive deep stromal ulcers in the dog
stromal meltingis present, intensive topical anti-
 are pote ntially vision- and globe-threatening,
biotic therapy (every 1-2 hours) is indicated,
and therapy must be aggressive. Antibiotic
 and the antibiotic should have a spectrum that
selection is frequently made on the basis of
 includes Gram-negative rods such as Pseudomo-
cytology, cultures, and sensitivity test results.
 nas sp. Antibiotics of choice are tobramycin or a
Topical 1% atropine is administered to
fluorinated quinolone, such as ciprofloxacin or
minimize the discomfort from ciliary muscle
moxifloxacin. Topical anticollagenase/antipro-
spasm and to prevent synechiae formation. If
 teinase preparations are also recommended.
132 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Corneal Tissue Adhesives
a 27- to 30-gauge needle; and prevention of
blinking for 15-60 seconds while the cyanoac-
Corneal tissue adhesives, such as isobutyl
rylate solidifies. Care must be taken to apply a
cyanoacrylate, have been used in treatment
minimal amount of adhesive.
of deep stromal ulcers, descemetoceles,
Tissue adhesives may help to decrease
small perforations, and refractory corneal
stromal necrosis, and they may also have
ulcers in the dog (Fig. 6.12). Proper applica-
an antibacterial effect. Topical antibiotics are
tion of the tissue adhesive involves topical
required after placement of the glue and should
anesthesia (if general anesthesia is not used);
be chosen on the basis of cytologic and culture
debridement of the defect (as necessary); drying
results. Once the lesion reepithelializes, the
of the site with a cotton-tipped swab, cellulose
glue is usually extruded from the corneal lesion.
sponge, or a warm-air (i.e., hair) dryer; applica-
Corneal gluing is generally not recommended
tion of a thin layer of tissue adhesive through
for  corneal  perforations or  descemetoceles
because of possible ocular toxicity.
Conjunctival Grafts
The surgical procedure most commonly
used for chronic, infected, or progressive
corneal ulcers is a conjunctival flap or graft.
Conjunctival flaps provide corneal support,
provide fibrovascular tissue to fill the corneal
defects, and bring a blood supply (as well
as blood-associated immune components,
systemic antibiotics, and natural anticollage-
nases [e.g., Q-macroglobulin]) to the lesion.
Because partial conjunctival flaps cover only a
small area of the normal cornea, the clinician
can visualize much of the cornea and anterior
Fig. 6.ll. Central, deep stromal corneal ulcer in a
chamber, which in turn allows continuous
brachycephalic dog.
examination of these structures to monitor
ulcer progression and possible anterior uveitis.
Having only a small portion of the cornea
covered may also allow the animal to continue
to be visual. Older techniques, such as the third
eyelid flap, do not provide a blood supply or
fibrovascular tissues to the ulcer, make it essen-
tially impossible to monitor disease progres-
sion, and cover normal cornea. Furthermore,
third eyelid flaps impede the penetration of
topical medications and retain inflammatory
exudate adjacent to the lesion.
The different types of conjunctival grafts
include the total or 360° conjunctival, the
bridge or bipedicle, the hood, and the pedicle
 graft; the latter three procedures are used
most commonly. Conjunctival grafts consist of
Fig. 6.12. Treatment of a mid-stromal corneal ulcer
thin conjunctival tissue transposed onto the
with topical application of cyanoacrylate tissue
cornea to cover the lesion. Conjunctival grafts
adhesive.
are generally harvested from adjacent bulbar
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I33
conjunctiva; however, the tarsal conjunctiva
HOOD (18O°) CONJUNCTIVAL GRAFT
(i.e., tarsoconjunctival grafts) can also be used
The disadvantage of a tarsoconjunctival graft is
The hood, or 180°, graftis indicated for periph
that the eyelid is mobile and some tension can
eral corneal lesions. The conjunctiva adjacent
a jo nuaou Aq de au on padde aq
to the lesion is cut from the limbus and under-
eyelids, thereby leading to a higher rate of
mined, and the graft is then advanced to cover
dehiscence. The bulbar conjunctival flap moves
the lesion and sutured in place, generally with
with the eye; thus, no tension is applied to the
two or four simple interrupted sutures.
flap itself. With all types of conjunctival flaps
that are sutured to the ulcer's edge, the corneal
 graft bed and ulcer must be properly prepared.
PEDICLE CONJUNCTIVAL GRAFT
  a a r q ii 
prepared by debriding the lesion, thereby
The pedicle or rotational graft is probably
removing loose epithelium and devitalized
the most useful and versatile conjunctival
corneal tissue. Great care should be taken to
graft, and is employed most frequently by
 prevent corneal perforation during this debride-
veterinary ophthalmologists. The base of the
ment. Conjunctival grafts will not adhere to
pedicle graft should be directed toward the
intact corneal epithelium, and corneal epithe-
area of the limbus nearest to the lesion. Once
lium to conjunctival graft epithelium contact
the location of the base is determined, a site
prevents epithelial migration under the con-
1.0-l.5 cm temporal to the base is located,
junctival graft possibly leading to dehiscence.
 i  i  is a a l 
(Fig. 6.14). A small slit is cut in the conjunctiva
perpendicular to the limbus, and through this
BRIDGE OR BIPEDICLE GRAFT
slit, the entire conjunctival graft site is under-
mined using blunt dissection. The underlying
The bridge or bipedicle graft is a linear graft
fibrous tissue (i.e., Tenon's capsule) should be
attached to the conjunctiva at two sites (Fig.
freed from the overlying conjunctiva so that the
6.13). This graft is generally indicated in long.
conjunctiva appears transparent. Next, two
    s  
parallel cuts are made to create a strip of con-
tions that require conjunctival graft covering
junctiva, which is rotated to cover the corneal
after direct suturing. or in ulcers that may
lesion. The graft is then sutured to the debrided
require additional vascularization, such as some
corneal ulcer edge with simple interrupted
central corneal lesions. These grafts are begun
sutures of 7-0 to 9-0 polyglactin 910 or nylon.
by incising the conjunctiva from the limbus for
The sutures are placed frst at the distal end of
approximately 180° both adjacent and parallel
 the graft and then 1.0-1.5 mm apart. To prevent
to the linear corneal lesion. This area is exten-
disruption of the blood supply, sutures are not
sively undermined, and the underlying fibrous
placed within the pedicle portion of the graft
tissue is removed. A second conjunctival inci-
or at the proximal portion of the lesion. The
sion is made 5-8 mm peripheral and parallel to
graft-harvest site on the bulbar conjunctiva
 the original conjunctival incision, thus creating
may be closed using a simple continuous suture
a “bridge" of conjunctiva. This bridge is then
of 7-0 to 9-0 polyglactin 910.
advanced over the lesion and sutured using
Conjunctival grafts will adhere to the corneal
simple interrupted sutures in the cornea around
lesion and epithelialization surrounding the
the lesion. The original graft-harvesting site is
graft, but they will not adhere underneath the
closed by apposing the remaining conjunctiva
 graft where there is normal corneal epithelium
with a simple continuous suture.
(Fig. 6.15). Three to 8 weeks after placement
The advantage of this procedure is that it
of the graft, the blood supply should be inter-
provides exquisite blood supply from both
rupted by cutting the base of the graft at the
ends of the graft to long, linear lesions of the
limbus. This can usually be performed with use
cornea, and does not require graft apposition
of topical anesthesia and Stevens tenotomy
to the ulcer edge by sutures.
scissors. Eliminating the blood supply will
B
Fig. 6.13. Bridge or bipedicle conjunctival graft/flap. A. The conjunctiva is excised
from the limbus for approximately l80° both adjacent and parallel to the linear
corneal lesion. This area is extensively undermined, and the underlying fbrous
tissue is removed. A second conjunctival incision is made 5-8 mm peripheral and
 parallel to the original conjunctival incision, thus creating a bridge of conjunctiva. B
and C. The bridge is advanced over the lesion and then sutured, using simple
interrupted sutures into the cornea around the lesion. D. The original graft-
harvesting site is closed by opposing the remaining conjunctiva with a simple
continuous suture.
134
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I35
C
Fig. 6.l4. Pedicle conjunctival gralt. A. The base of the pedicle lap should be
directed toward the area of the limbus nearest to the lesion. Once the location of the
base is determined, a site l.0-l.5 cm temporal to the base is located, at which the
lap will be initiated. Through a small slit in the conjunctiva, the entire conjunctival
lap site is undermined using blunt dissection. Two parallel cuts are then made to
corneal lesion. The flap is sutured to the cornea with simple interrupted sutures of
7-0 to 9-0 polyglactin 9l0 or nylon. C. The sutures are placed frst at the distal end
of the flap and then 1.0-l.5 mm apart.
allow the conjunctival graft to recede and lessen
severed from the outset. These grafts are essen-
the resulting corneal scar.
tially a transplant of conjunctival tissue to the
cornea, and their use has been described in
[SLAND CONJUNCTIVAL GRAFT
deep corneal lesions or corneal perforations
The donor site can be in the tarsal or bulbar
A conjunctival free island graft is a modified
conjunctiva. The conjunctiva is undermined
conjunctival graft in which the blood supply is
and excised from the donor site and then
136 /EsSENtIALS OF VeteRiNArY OpHtHALmoOLOGY
Use of Amniotic Membranes
Amniotic membranes have been described
for treatment of corneas with large areas
of keratomalacia and bullous keratopathy.
Amniotic membranes have also been used as
grafting material after full-thickness kera-
totomy, both experimentally and clinically.
Benefits of amnion include its antifibrotic,
anti-angiogenic, antiprotease, and anti-
inflammatory properties as well as the
potential for less corneal scarring.
Fig. 6.15. Postoperative appearance of a
conjunctival pedicle graft to treat a deep corneal ulcer
in the dog eye.
Use of Small Intestinal Submucosa
Membrane
Porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS)
transposed to cover the corneal lesion. It is
grafts have been reported in dogs with
important that the epithelial site remains exter-
corneal ulcers. This material is available
nal (upright) to allow proper attachment of the
 commercially and does not require any prep-
graft to the lesion. Several simple interrupted
aration. They act as a scaffold for corneal
or a combination of simple interrupted and
repair as well as providing critical tetonic
continuous sutures are used to secure the graft
support to the weakened cornea. Available
to the cornea. The graft is usually revascular-
in both sheets and discs, the lyophilized and
ized within 3-5 days depending on the amount
sterile porcine SIS is ready for use. These
of corneal vasculature present near the lesion
 grafts may also be combined with conjunc-
before surgery. The advantages of the free island
 tival grafts for additional support.
 grafting procedure are that tissue is readily
available; a watertight, 360° closure can be
made; and the graft does not require trimming
Descemetoceles and Full-Thickness
after surgery, as do conjunctival flaps that
Corneal Perforations
require excision of their blood supply afer
surgery (i.e., conjunctival pedicle or bridge
A descemetocele is a deep corneal defect in
flaps), however, often more sutures are neces-
which the corneal epithelium and stroma are
sary to position the graft.
completely destroyed, leaving a lesion lined
The most common complication from any
only by Descemet's membrane and corneal
type of conjunctival grafting procedure is
endothelium (Fig. 6.l6). Descemet's mem-
dehiscence of the graft from the corneal
brane, a tough, elastic membrane, when
lesion. This may occur because the corneal
exposed can easily rupture. Once this final
lesion is still progressing (i.e., worsening),
barrier is breached, a full-thickness lesion
inadequate debridement, and damaging the
 occurs, aqueous humor is lost, and iris prolapse
cornea at the points where sutures secure
occurs. Contamination of the anterior chamber
the graft. Excessive tension on the graft
or
also occurs after rupture of Descemet's mem-
allowing a signifcant portion of the fbrous
brane, which may lead to endophthalmitis and
Tenon's capsule to remain attached to the graft
a much poorer prognosis for saving the eye as
may result in premature dehiscence of the graft.
well as for vision. Descemetoceles and full-
Proper suture placement in healthy cornea
thickness corneal perforations can develop from
using a thin, conjunctival graft and concurrent,
the progression of deep corneal ulcers or from
appropriate medical therapy will
greatly
trauma.
However, all deep corneal lesions
decrease complications following conjunctival
should be considered infected, and preopera-
graft surgery.
tive bacterial and fungal culture and sensitivity
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I37
tism and poor visual outcome after surgery.
Tissue adhesives are not recommended for use
in descemetoceles, because during polymeriza-
tion of the glue after application, heat is gener-
ated, which may cause perforation of Descemet's
membrane.
Corneoscleral or Corneoconjunctival
Transposition
Corneoscleral or corneoconjunctival trans-
Fig. 6.l6. Paracentral corneal descemetocele in a
position is a type of autogenous corneo-
dog. Note the clear base of the ulcer.
 scleral graft that uses a sliding pedicle of
cornea and attached sclera (or conjunctiva)
 to repair corneal defects. It is indicated in
 central, deep, or perforated corneal lesions
tests should always be performed along with
with sufficient peripheral healthy cornea
that can be used for the grafting procedure.
direct medical therapy after surgery.
This procedure may decrease corneal scarring
Because of the fragile nature of descemeto-
and allow a clearer postoperative cornea than
celes as well as the potential for infection and
intraocular inflammatory damage with perfora-
that seen after conjunctival and some other
corneal grafts. A disadvantage, however, is that
tions, repair of the lesions should be considered
a surgical emergency. Before surgery, the pos-
 corneoscleral transposition uses normal, healthy
terior segment of the affected eye should be
corneal tissue that may become infected once
positioned in the “active” ulcer.
assessed (or attempted) by direct observation,
pupillary light and dazzle reflexes, and ocular
ultrasonography to help determine the progno-
Postoperative Treatment after Conjunctival
sis for vision. With corneal perforations and
and Other Iypes of Grafts
ultrasonography, it is important that the ultra-
sound coupling gel does not get into the wound
Postoperative management of corneoscleral/
or anterior chamber, which may cause addi-
conjunctival transposition and conjunctival
tional inflammation (use sterile methocellu-
grafts is quite similar. Topical antibiotics,
lose-based coupling gel).
which are chosen on the basis of culture,
Most descemetoceles can be repaired suc-
sensitivity, and cytologic results, and medi-
cessfully using conjunctival grafts (described
cations to control postoperative uveitis and
earlier), frozen canine tetonic grafts, and SIS
pain (e.g., topical atropine, systemic nonste-
grafts. In full-thickness corneal defects, con-
roidal
 anti-inflammatory medications,
or
junctival tissue may not have adequate struc-
both) should be used. The conjunctival and
tural integrity and strength to maintain
a
scleral sliding grafts are well adhered to the
watertight seal and a formed anterior chamber
cornea and cannot be trimmed, as is typically
after surgery. Use of cornea or another material
done with conjunctival flaps.
having more structural integrity than conjunc.
tival tissue may help to overcome some of these
problems. The difficulty is finding a source of
Autogenous Lamellar Corneal Grafts
these tissues.
Direct suturing of the perforation or desce
Autogenous lamellar corneal grafts are indi-
metocele is rarely possible but may be attempted
catedincorneas withdescemetoceles, stromal
in small lesions (< 1l mm) with firm, healthy
abscesses, and perforated ulcers. These grafts
corneal margins. Direct suturing of larger
use adjacent corneal tissue slid to cover the
lesions may cause significant corneal astigma-
corneal defect. Advantages of this procedure
I38 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmolOGY
are that autografts are used, thus minimizing
graft rejection; that tissue is usually readily
available; and that a clear cornea may result
after surgery. The main disadvantage of this
procedure is that an area of normal cornea is
weakened. As the opportunity to use this graff
is very infrequent, it is rarely used.
Fresh or Cryopreserved Corneal Grafts
Without conveniently available sources of
fresh healthy corneas for grafts, cryopre-
Fig. 6.17. Horizontal full-thickness corneal
served and frozen sclera and cornea tissue
laceration with uveal prolapse and hyphema in a dog
have been used to treat corneal descemeto-
celes and perforations. Fresh scleral and
corneal tissue was collected aseptically at
6.17). Incarcerated yet viable iris tissue should
euthanasia of donor animals, placed in anti-
be repositioned in the anterior chamber when
biotic solution containing neomycin and
possible; iris tissue that has been prolapsed for
bacitracin, and stored at a temperature of
longer than 6-8 hours should be amputated
-30°C for up to 12 months. When needed,
with electrocautery. The anterior chamber is
the tissue is thawed in sterile, warm water or at
irrigated with BSS or lactated Ringer's solution,
room temperature. The grafts are cut and placed
and the lens is carefully inspected (as described
over descemetoceles or perforations, and they
earlier). Viscoelastic substances can be used to
are sutured into place with simple interrupted
reinflate the anterior chamber and to keep it
 sutures. In one report, 84% resulted in vision,
formed while suturing the cornea. Removal of
despite vascularization and scarring of the graft.
the viscoelastic substances by irrigation is rec-
Xenologous transplants were associated with
ommended before placement of the final suture,
more complications and vision loss in one
however, to prevent ocular hypertension fol-
study.
lowing surgery.
Appropriate suture material for corneal lac-
erations includes 7-0 to 10-0 absorbable or
Full-Thickness Corneal Lacerations
nonabsorbable suture. Several suture patterns
have been described for corneal wounds, and
Surgical repair of most corneal lacerations is
each has advantages and disadvantages. Simple
best achieved when proper instrumentation,
interrupted, simple continuous or running.
magnification, andsuture materials are used. Care-
shoelace, and others have been described.
ful thorough preoperative evaluation and the
Sutures should be tied in a manner that achieves
selection of appropriate surgical procedure(s)
apposition of the tissue. Following closure of
 are essential for success. The extent of ocular
the cornea, the anterior chamber is re-formed
trauma must be determined before repairing
with BSS via a limbal injection using a 27- to
 the cornea, and in many cases, this can be dif
30-gauge needle. After wound closure, sterile
ficult. A complete ophthalmic examination,
fluorescein dye may be applied to the wound
consensual pupillary light and dazzle reflexes
to ensure proper wound closure and to detect
and ocular ultrasonography are indicated. It is
leaks (i.e., Seidel test).
important the ultrasound coupling gel not enter
into the wound or anterior chamber. If the lens
capsule is ruptured, significant lens-induced
Ulcerative Keratitis-Cause of
uveitis and cataractogenesis may occur and lens
Corneal Disease
removal is indicated.
Full-thickness corneal lacerations may Or
Corneal ulcers are also classified by their under.
may not have incarcerated uveal tissue (Fig.
lying cause. Common causes of ulcerative kera-
DisEases ANo SuRGerY Of The Canine CoRneA ANo ScleRa/ I39
titis (ranked from most to less frequent) include
suspected a local keratectomy with a conjunc-
bacterial and fungal infections, melting (pro-
tival graft is used
teinase) corneal ulcers, and chemical burns.
Melting Ulcers (Collagenase and Protease
Bacterial Corneal Ulcers
Associated Ulcers)
Most corneal ulcers are traumatic in origin,
 Melting ulcers with progressive stromal dis-
however, opportunistic infections by bacte-
solution are not a specific group; rather,
ria from the conjunctival sac and lid margins
 they are a complicating component of corneal
are common. Bacteria isolated from canine
ulcers. The damaged corneal cells as well as
eyes with external disease include Staphylo-
microorganisms produce proteases and col-
coccus spp. (39%), Streptococcus spp. (25%),
lagenases to aid in removal of devitalized
Pseudomonas spp. (9.4%), Escherichia coli 
cells and debris from the cornea, but if in
(4.7%), Corynebacterium spp. (3.9%), and
excess these proteinases contribute to the
Bacillus cereus (2.4%). Diagnosis of bacterial
 progressive breakdown and rapid “melting"
infection of corneal ulcers is made on the basis
of the corneal stroma (Fig. 6.18).
of cytologic examination as well as culture and
Acute ulcerative keratitis with progressive
sensitivity testing of corneal samples. Use of
melting requires vigorous topical t
therapy.
both microbial culture and cytologic evaluation
Appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics and
atropine are applied (see discussion above).
use of both maximizes identification of infec-
However, successful management of melting
tious keratitis. Cultures should be obtained
ulcers also includes controlling infection and
before the application of topical anesthetics,
reducing the impact of collagenase and other
and the eyelid margins and facial hair must
proteases on the cornea.
be avoided to minimize contamination of the
culture.
Control of Proteolytic Activity in the
Treatment of Ulcerated Corneas
Mycotic Keratitis
(by Franck J. Ollivier)
Mycotic keratitis is considered to be rare in
Controlling the proteolytic activity in the tear
the dog. Aspergillus sp. are the most common
film is an important objective of the treatment
isolates in cases of fungal keratitis. Alter-
naria,Acremonium, Cephalosporium, Candida,
Curvularia, Pseudallescheria, and Scedospo-
rium sp. have also been associated with
mycotic keratitis in the dog. Often fungal
keratitis in dogs is associated with an embed-
ded organic foreign body. Mycotic keratitis
may be ulcerative or nonulcerative. Lesions
associated with Candida sp. are often raised,
yellowish-white or grayish-white plaques Or
ulcerated lesions. Infections with Aspergillus
sp. are usually ulcerative in nature, with exten-
sive stromal inflammation and melting. Results
of exfoliative cytologic examination, microbial
fungal cultures, and histopathologic examina-
tion of keratectomy specimens are diagnostic.
( xdde aas) see  pio
are often combined with topical broad-spec-
Fig. 6.18. Melting corneal ulcer in a dog treated
trum antibiotic therapy; if a foreign body is
with topical corticosteroids after cataract surgery.
I40 /EssentiAlS OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
of corneal ulcers. Protease inhibitors may
stance. In dogs it produces intense necrotizing
reduce the progression of stromal ulcers,
keratitis, blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and ante-
speed epithelial healing, and 
Iminimize
rior uveitis. Treatment for mace exposure
corneal scarring, and include autologous
should be the same as for other chemical
serum, N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), disodium
irritants.
ethylene-diaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA),
Treatment for chemical burns of the cornea
tetracyclines (oxytetracycline, doxycycline),
should start with copious irritation. Sterile
and newer compounds such as thiol agents
physiologic saline reduces further damage to
including ilomostat (Box 6.3). In general,
the eye, but if this is not available, then cold
proteinase inhibitors should be instilled in the
tap water should be used. The goal is to dilute
eye every l-2 hours until healing is underway.
the chemical and remove particulate matter.
indicated by a reduction in pain, a static or
Irrigation should continue for 30 minutes, or
contracting ulcer and smoothing of the epithe-
until the ocular surface pH returns to a normal
lial margin. Thereafter the application
1 can be
level. Once irrigation is completed, assessment
reduced to every four to six times a day.
of the cornea and eye can be done. Treatment
with anti-collagenase medications, topical anti-
biotics, mydriatics, systemic tetracycline, and
Chemical-lnduced Corneal Ulceration
systemic steroidal or nonsteroidal medication
are recommended. In cases of deep ulceration
       s 
dog. However, in any dog with acute severe
or perforation, emergency conjunctival or
amniotic membrane grafts may need to be per-
blepharospasm with severe corneal opacity, a
chemical burn should be considered. There are
formed to preserve the eye. Prognosis for vision
is guarded in these dogs.
two general types of chemical burns to the
cornea, acidic and alkali. Clinical signs for
either type include edema, opacity, loss of
Nonuicerative Keratitis
corneal epithelium, pain, and rapid dissolution
of the corneal stroma. Later, there is severe
Pigmentary Keratitis (Superficial
corneal ulceration and anterior uveitis. Alkali
Pigmentary Keratitis)
burns tend to be much more severe. Chemical
mace has the active ingredient chloroacetophe-
 Pigmentary keratitis develops secondary to
none, a severe lacrimation and irritating sub-
chronic corneal irritation in the dog (Fig.
Box 6.3: Anti-Proteolvtic Agents for Topical Treatment of Melting Ulcers
punoduoy
Concentration Used inhibitory Activity
Inhibitory Mechanism
Tetracyclines (Doxycycline.
0.1% *
MMPs inhibitor
Chelating agent (Ca and Zn)
oxtetracycline)
N-acety-cystein (NAC)
5-10%
MMPs inhibitor
 Chelating agent (Ca and Zn)
disodium ethylene-
0.2%**
MM Ps inhibitor
Chelating agent (Ca and Zn)
 diamminetetra-acetic acid
(EDTA)
 Ilomostast (Galardin TM)
0.1%
MMPs inhibitor
Chelating agent (ca and Zn)
Serum (α.2-macroglobulin 
Undiluted***
MMPs and serine
Various Entrapment of the
and α1-proteinase
proteases inhibitor
protease
inhibitor)
0. 1-proteinase inhibitor
0.1%
Serine protease inhibitor
Entrapment of the protease
MMPs require Ca and Zn as cofactor and stabilizing ion, respectively. *Note that doxycycline can also be
eiiawwos e oi laem aas jo ius jo uomape ayn Ag apew Aiseexx (ais 'by/bw ol) Aeio paiasiuwpe
blood collection tube. ***Serum stored in the refrigerator can be used up to 5-7 days. It should then be dis-
carded because of the nisk of bacterial contamination.
DisEases Ano SuRGerY Of the Canine CoRneA Ano Sclera/ I41
6.19). Pigment production occurs in the
corneal scarring. Topical cyclosporine, tacro-
corneal epithelium and subepithelial, super-
limus, and corticosteroids (e.g., predniso-
ficial stroma. Pigmentation is frequently
line and dexamethasone) are frequently
associated with chronic keratitis and, in some
used in treatment of pigmentary keratitis;
cases, vascularization of the cornea. The most
their use should be carefully monitored
common causes of pigmentary keratitis
as these
corneas are  predisposed1
to
include chronic irritation from distichiasis,
ulceration.
districhiasis, lagophthalmia, and nasal fold
trichiasis.Other causes of chronic irritation
include eyelid position abnormalities such as
Chronic Superficial Keratitis (Pannus)
entropion and ectropion, and chronic exposure
because of macropalpebral fissures, which
Chronic superficial keratitis (German Shep-
occurs in many brachycephalic breeds. Treat-
herd Pannus, Uberreiter's syndrome, and
ment, in general, is directed at halting the pro-
degenerative pannus) is a progressive, bilat-
gression of pigmentation and correcting the
 eral, inflammatory, and potentially blinding
inciting cause. Correction of entropion or
disease of the canine cornea. Clinically,
ectropion, removal of abnormal lashes and
pannus is manifested initially at the tempo-
aberrant dermis, and possible partial removal
ral or inferior temporal limbus as a red, vas-
of nasal folds usually prevents additional pig-
cularized, conjunctival lesion (Fig. 6.20).
mentation. In brachycephalic breeds, a combi-
Early in the disease, vascularization and pig-
nation of surgical procedures, which usually
mentation occur at the temporal cornea and
include removal of aberrant dermis in the
progress centrally; as the disease progresses, it
medial canthus, correction of lower medial
spreads as a fleshy, well-vascularized lesion
eyelid entropion, and lateral or medial cantho-
toward the central cornea. A white crystalline
plasty, will often prevent the disease from pro-
-        
gressing. Tear production should be evaluated
        
frequently in these animals because keratocon-
front of the leading edge of the lesion and
junctivitis sicca is a common cause of diffuse
advancing blood vessels. With time, corneal
pigmentary keratitis. Surgical removal of pig-
neovascularization also begins at the nasal
mentary keratitis has been suggested, if the
limbus and extends centrally. As with many
inciting causes have been corrected, however,
corneal diseases involving superficial vascular-
there is frequent recurrence of the pigment and
ization, limbal melanocytic pigment invasion
Fig. 6.20. Chronic superhcial keratitis in a German
Fig. 6.19. Pigmentary keratitis in a dog after
 Shepherd. The superhicial cornea is both infltrated
chronic keratitis.
and vascularized
I42 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
occurs. The superior portion of the cornea
Histopathologic Features of CSK
   r  s 
disease. Eventually, the entire cornea may
CSK appears as a superficial corneal vascular-
become vascularized, pigmented, and scarred
ization, with infltration of granulation tissue
Some dogs with CSK also develop concurrent
into the superficial corneal stroma. The invad-
thickening and pigmentation of the palpebral
ing fibrovascular tissue is accompanied by
surface of the nictitating membrane.
lymphocytes and plasma cells. Generally, the
The German Shepherd and greyhound
corneal epithelium remains intact, but migra-
breeds are most commonly affected with
tion of pigment-laden cells (i.e., corneal mela-
CSK, but it can occur in any breed (Table
nosis) commonly accompanies the fibrovascular
6.4). Both the incidence and severity increase
inflammatory infltrate invading the anterior
at higher altitudes (> 4,0oo feet). CSK in
stroma. Infiltrating CD4+ lymphocytes are
dogs from lower elevations, such as those in the
the predominant cell types CsK, suggesting
southeastern United States, tend to respond
an immune-mediated pathogenesis. Immu-
more favorably and with less intensive topical
nohistochemical staining for immunoglobulin
corticosteroid therapy than animals with the
noted in the superficial conjunctival stroma
disease living at higher elevations, such as those
near the limbus and, in a some specimens in
in the Rocky Mountain areas. The age of onset
the superficial corneal stroma but not in the
and breed of the affected animal are also of
epithelium suggests that the pathogenesis of
prognostic value in this condition; the disease
CSK differs from immune mediated skin dis-
in German Shepherds affected at a fairly young
eases, such as pemphigus.
age (i.e., 1-5 years) is usually rapidly progres-
sive and severe. Those dogs first affected later
in life (i.e., 4-6 years) exhibit less severe disease
Cause
which progresses more slowly. The Greyhound
tends to be affected at younger ages, usually
Although the cause of CsK in the dog has not
less than 2 or 3 years, but exhibits relatively
been established, the condition may be an
immune-mediated disease, and usuallyresponds
mild lesions.
to steroids. Clinical observations indicate CSK
can be usually controlled by topical administra-
tion of corticosteroids, cyclosporine, or both.
Table 6.4. Breed Predisposition to Chronic
Superficial Keratitis (Pannus).
 Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis
Breed
Age of Onset (y)
Airedale Terrier
1-2
Signalment and clinical appearance of the
Australian Kelpie
lesions are usually sufficient to allow a diagno-
 Belgian Sheepdog
2-5
sis of CSK. CSK must be distinguished from
pigmentary keratitis due to other causes (e.g..
 Belgian Tervuren
2-5
chronic irritation), keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
Border Collie
and corneal granulation tissue resulting from
shop ae
vascular healing of corneal wounds.
Dachshund
2-4
 Dalmatian 
2-3
Treatment
English Springer Spaniel
1-3
Gemman Shepherd Dog
1-6
Chronic superficial keratitis can usually be con-
Greyhound
2-5
 Miniature Pinscher
7-8
methods, but it cannot be cured. Owners
should be advised of the need for lifelong
 Pointer
2-4
therapy to control this disease, and that both
Siberian Husky
1-3
severity and prognosis depend on many factors,
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CaNINe CORNEA AND SCLERa/ I43
including age of onset, altitude, and geographic
cornea. In dogs, neurotropic keratitis most
location. Vision can usually be preserved with
often follows orbital trauma or with cavern-
medical therapy alone in areas of low to medium
ous sinus syndrome. This disease leaves the
elevation (i.e., < 4,000 feet) and in cases of mild
cornea susceptible to injury and decreases
lesions occurring in middle-aged and older
reflex tearing. Clinical features early in the
dogs. At higher elevations, however, additional
disease process may include a roughened
therapy is frequently required. Initial therapy
corneal surface, rose bengal positive staining.
usually consists of topical corticosteroid
decreased tear breakup time, and punctate flu-
ointments or solutions (i.e., 0.l% dexameth-
orescein dye retention (Mackie classification
asone or l.0% prednisolone) three to four
stage l). A Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer can be
times daily for 3-4 weeks, which is follow-
used to assess corneal sensitivity and assist with
ing by a reduced maintenance schedule.
early diagnosis. With increased severity ± chro-
Animals on long-term corticosteroids should
nicity, there may develop a superficial corneal
be monitored by the owner and the vete-
ulcer surrounded by a rim of loose epithelium,
rinarian for ocular infection or corneal
corneal edema, and a secondary anterior uveitis
ulceration.
(Mackie classification stage 2). In some cases,
Topical cyclosporine (0.2-1.0%), with or
the disease can progress to corneal melting and
without concomitant dexamethasone, has
perforation (Mackie classification stage 3)
been used effectively in cases of CSK, and
A complete neurologic workup including
0.2% cyclosporine ophthalmic ointment
cranial nerve examination should be performed
applied to affected corneas twice daily has
to locate the underlying abnormality for the
been shown to be as effective as treatment
neurotrophic keratitis. Treatment should be
with topical dexamethasone at ameliorating
aimed at the underlying cause for neurotrophic
clinical signs. Pimecrolimus (1%) given topi-
keratitis.
cally three times a day also can result in
Neuroparalytic keratitis from loss of eyelid
total or moderate regression. In some cases,
movement often results in severe exposure
however, subconjunctival injection of cortico-
ulcerative keratitis and possible loss of vision.
steroids in addition to topical therapy may also
During the early stages of these diseases, epi-
be necessary to control the disease. Application
 thelial degeneration and stromal edema occur.
of beta radiation (i.e., strontium 9o) has also
As the condition advances, there is corneal
been reported. Superficial keratectomy may be
drying, vascularization, and opacification. The
required for severe cases, in which blindness
ulcerative keratitis may progress to corneal per-
has resulted from pigmentation of the central
foration. Treatment is often symptomatic. Tem-
cornea, but recurrence should be expected
porary tarsorrhaphies may prevent corneal
and repeat keratectomies may need to be
trauma and drying. If there is no response in
performed.
2-3 weeks, a temporary tarsorrhaphy with
suturing of the eyelids for up to 6 months to 1
year may be used.
Neurogenic Keratitis
Two forms of neurogenic keratitis can occur:
Corneal Abscessation
neurotrophic keratitis, which is associated
with lack of sensory innervation; and neuro-
A corneal abscess is an accumulation of inflam-
paralytic keratitis, which results from lack of
matory cell debris in the superficial or deep
motor innervation to the orbicularis oculi
stroma. Affected eyes are intensely painful and
muscle of the eyelids, usually combined
have a distinct, raised, yellow-white corneal
with facial paralysis.
stromal opacity. Abscesses must be differenti-
Neurotrophic keratitis is a form of chronic
ated from a corneal epithelial inclusion cyst,
keratopathy and poor corneal healing result-
which is generally not painful (see below). The
ing from damage to the trigeminal nerve,
abscess may be sterile or contain an infectious
which provides sensory innervation to the
agent. Corneal stromal abscessation seems rare
I44 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
in the dog but frequent in horses. Corneal
Noninflammatory
scrapings are obtained for bacterial and fungal
Keratopathies
culture and sensitivity tests and for cytologic
examination. Therapy consists of topical anti-
Crystalline Corneal Opacities
microbials and atropine. Curettage or keratec-
 tomy followed by placement of a conjunctival
There are three main groups of corneal lesions
graft is highly effective.
that appear clinically with crystalline corneal
opacities. Many of the clinical features are
similar in these diseases, although the underly-
Superficial Punctate Keratitis
ing cause of the opacity differs (Table 6.5).
These groups include the corneal dystrophies
Superficial punctate keratitis may be a ulcer-
(inherited), lipid keratopathy (often second-
ative or nonulcerative type of immune-
ary), and corneal degeneration (usually unilat-
mediated keratitis but previously has been
grouped with the corneal dystrophies. It is
seen most commonly in the Longhaired
Dachshund and Shetland Sheepdog. Clini
Table 6.5. Breeds of Dogs Reported with
cally, it is diffuse, bilateral, symmetric,
Corneal Dystrophies.
superficial corneal opacities that may or may
Afghan Hound
not be ulcerated. When ulcerated, the dog
Airedale Terrier
demonstrates signs of discomfort (e.g., epiph-
Alaskan Malarmute
 ora and blepharospasm). These lesions are
American Cocker Spaniel
recurrent and progress to involve the entire
cornea (diffuse cloudiness), pigmentation, and
Beagle
vision loss. The pathogenesis is thought to be
Bearded Collie
immune-mediated, but ultraviolet radiation
Bichon Frise
may exacerbate the disease. Treatment consists
 Boston Terrier
of the use of topical cyclosporine indefinitely.
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
and  topical  antibiotics
when
 there
is
Chihuahua
ulceration.
Collie (Rough)
Dachshund
Florida Keratopathy
 English Toy Spaniel
Gemman Shepherd
Corneal opacities (Florida keratopathy, Florida
Golden Retriever
spots, and Florida fungus) apparently unique
ltalian Greyhound
to tropical and subtropical climates have
been reported in the dog. Multifocal, round.
Lhasa Ap50
 gray to gray-white, fluffy, cotton like opacities
Mastiff
of varying size are commonly seen in the
Miniature Pinscher
corneal stroma of these species. Clinically, this
Norwich Terrier
disease is characterized by anterior stromal
Permbroke Welsh Corgi
opacities of variable sizes. The corneal lesion
 Pointer
is visible as a large, light-scattering opacity.
with a dense center and a less dense periphery.
Poodle (Miniature)
These opacities occur at varying levels through-
Samoyed
out the corneal stroma; however, most appear
 Shetland Sheepdog
in the anterior stroma. The condition appears
Siberian Husky
to be self-limiting and does not seem to
Weimaraner
respond to topical corticosteroids and antifun-
gal drugs.
Whippet
DISEASES AND SuRGERY OF THe CANiNE CoRNEA AND SCLERa/ I45
eral). In general, corneal dystrophies are
central or paracentral cornea (Figs. 6.21A
bilateral and inherited (i.e., observed in spe-
through C). The condition is bilateral and
cific breeds), lipid keratopathy is associated
often appears as nearly symmetric lesions. The
with systemic lipid abnormalities (e.g,
corneal dystrophies reported in several breeds
hypothyroidism, Cushing's disease, etc.),
appear to exhibit fairly consistent clinical
and degeneration is secondary to a localized
lesions (Table 6.5)
ocular inflammatory process. These groups
Corneal dystrophy may affect the corneal
are not mutually exclusive and may have com-
epithelium, stroma, or endothelium. In
ponents of others, especially development of
 general, corneal dystrophies do not respond
degeneration with chronicity.
to topical medical treatment and  topical
anti-inflammatory medications may exacer-
bate the lesion. However, low fat diets, such
Corneal Dystrophies
as Hill's W/D may prevent the progression
of the disease. The lesions can, however,
A corneal dystrophy is any primary, bilat-
be removed by keratectomy if the opacity is
eral, inherited disorder of the cornea not
obstructing vision significantly. However, it is
accompanied by corneal inflammation or
likely that the opacities will recur following
systemic disease. Most corneal dystrophies
 keratectomy, therefore, for dystrophies, surgery
 in the dog appear clinically as gray-white or 
is only recommended as a last resort measure
silver, crystalline or metallic opacities in the
 in dogs with significant visual deficit.
C
Fig. 6.21. Examples of the inherited corneal dystrophies in the dog. A. Corneal lipid dystrophy in an
aged dog. B. Crystalline corneal dystrophy in the Siberian Husky. C. Bullous keratopathy in a dog with
endothelial dystrophy
I46 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Breed-Predisposed Corneal Dystrophy
lipoproteinemia resulting from hypothyroidism
(i.e., thyroid atrophy and lymphocytic thyroid
Several forms of corneal dystrophy occur in
itis), and corneal lipidosis has been reported in
specific breeds (Table 6.5). These include
a dog with bilateral thyroid carcinoma.
     
Treatment of these underlying systemic
Husky, Shetland Sheepdog. Cavalier King
disorders and feeding of a low-fat diet
Charles Spaniel, Airedale Terrier, and Rough
(e.g., Hill's W/D) may prevent the corneal
Collie. Posterior polymorphous dystrophy has
opacities from progressing and in some
been described in the American Cocker Spaniel,
cases allow them to fade. Topical anti-
and endothelial corneal dystrophy has been
inflammatory medications may exacerbate
observed in the Boston Terrier, Chihuahua, and
the lesion. The lesions can, however, be
Dachshund
removed by keratectomy if the opacity is
obstructing vision significantly. However, it
is likely that the opacities will recur; therefore,
Lipid Keratopathy
surgery is only recommended as a last resort
measure in dogs with significant visual deficit.
Lipid keratopathy in the dog has been asso-
ciated with systemic lipid abnormalities,
such as hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, diabe-
Corneal Degeneration
tes mellitus, spontaneous hyperlipoprote-
inemia, and postprandial (overindulgence)
Corneal degenerations are crystalline corneal
plasma lipid elevations. Lipid keratopathy
opacities secondary to pathologic changes
is characterized by peripheral and central
within the cornea, and are often unilateral.
corneal crystalline opacities. Clinically, lipid
Degenerations can consist of lipid, choles-
keratopathy can be unilateral or bilateral and
terol or calcium and are preceded by kerati-
the corneas are nonvascularized, especially
tis, vascularization, and possibly melanosis.
early in the disease process, however corneal
Corneal degeneration can occur in chronic
 degeneration commonly occurs with chronicity
corneal dystrophy or lipid keratopathy. Vascu-
and this is associated with vascularization.
larization is the hallmark clinical feature of
 There is usually a clear peripheral perilimbal
corneal degeneration, not typically seen in
zone. All dogs with lipid keratopathy should
pauaaios aq pue ayoid unias pidil e onapun
thy. Clinically, corneal degeneration has a
for thyroid function, pancreatitis (i.e., serum
highly variable appearance. Lesions may be
lipase and amylase), and diabetes mellitus (i.e.
 dense white, grayish-white, and crystalline,
fasting blood glucose). Most serum lipid pro-
with well-demarcated borders and can occur in
files include measurements of serum choles.
any area of the cornea, but generally they are
terol, serum triglycerides, serum total lipids,
axial or paraxial. Epithelial disruption with vas-
and lipoprotein electrophoresis. In some cases,
cularization is common, and cholesterol and
ae spidsudsoud pe srasa praisanuo nias
calcium deposits occur as the degeneration
useful as well. Deposition of lipid into the
progresses. Histologically, the epithelium is of
cornea is thought to be by perilimbal blood
variable thickness, ranging from an increased
number of cell layers in some areas to a total
not likely a source because in one study the
absence in others. In the stroma, there is fre-
lipid levels of tears in a dog with lipid keratopa-
quently a distinctive subepithelial band of fine,
thy were normal. Hyperlipoproteinemia, espe-
 granular calcium deposits, which stains black
cially high HDL, promotes lipid keratopathy
with Von Kossa's stain. Needle-shaped clefts in
and possibly worsens after steroidal and estro-
the anterior stroma represent cholesterol. Small
gen therapy.
vacuoles in frozen and fixed cryostat sections
Corneal lipidosis (arcus lipoides corneae)
are sudanophilic.
has been reported in the German Shepherd
Calcium degeneration may occur second-
Dog. Lipidosis has been associated with hyper-
ary to systemic disease or may be spontane-
DiSEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I47
ous (i.e., associated with local inflammation).
tive. Many ophthalmologists now use 1%
Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyper-
disodium EDTA topically, but the efficacy is
adrenocorticism, uremia, and hypervitamin-
unknown. In cases of corneal cholesterolosis,
osis D all may potentially be accompanied
dietary restriction of cholesterol, dietary addi-
by secondary corneal calcification. Calcium
tives to reduce cholesterol (e.g., flax seed oil,
degeneration appears punctate, bright white,
oat bran, niacin), and cholesterol-lowering
irregular, and is usually superficial, while lipids
drugs may be effective.
may be present throughout the cornea. Other
Surgical removal of corneal degeneration via
ocular diseases may produce secondary spon-
keratectomy may be considered if the lesion is
taneous calcareous degeneration such as corneal
progressive and vision is compromised. Because
scars, uveitis, and phthisis bulbi. Fatty degen
corneal degeneration may progress from corneal
eration and hyaline degeneration may precede
dystrophy or lipid keratopathy, underlying
or accompany corneal calcification (e.g., Norre's
disease in humans)
and treated, otherwise the opacity may recur
Localized inflammation or injury may pre-
 after surgery. As mentioned above, dogs with
cipitate in situ lipid formation by fibroblasts
and keratinocytes. Alternatively, vasculariza-
cal removal of the calcium, and some times
tion of the cornea or anterior segment inflam-
conjunctival grafting, for healing of chronic
mation may allow hematogenous lipid to be
corneal ulcers.
deposited in the cornea. With inflammation,
cells die, become necrotic, and liberate crystal
line and noncrystalline lipids. Presence of lipid,
Noncrystalline Cornea Opacities
especially noncrystalline and esterified choles-
terol, causes additional inflammation, and sub-
Corneal Endothelial Dystrophy
sequently further degeneration of the cornea.
These lesions are cleared by vascularization,
Endothelial cell dystrophy is a disease of
attraction of macrophages, and phagocytosis of
spontaneous, progressive corneal edema
 the lesion. Therefore, corticosteroid therapy
resulting from abnormal dystrophic endo-
should be avoided in corneal degeneration,
thelial cells. In the dog, this condition is
because this therapy will decrease vasculariza-
most prevalent in the Boston Terrier, Chi-
tion, macrophage function, and subsequently
huahua, and Dachshund. It is also more
resolution of the lesion. However, keratectomy
frequent in females. The age of onset in the
may be considered if the lesion is progressive
Boston Terrier ranges from 5 to 9 years
and if vision is compromised. Keratectomy may
(mean age, 7.5 years); the age of onset in the
decrease or stop this cycle of cell death and
Chihuahua ranges from 6 to 13 years (mean
lipid deposition by removing the necrotic
age, 9.5 years). Canine endothelial cell dystro-
tissue.
phy may represent a disease process similar to.
and possibly an animal model of, Fuch's dys-
 trophy in humans. Treatment options are pri-
Therapy of Corneal Degeneration/Band
marily palliative, or a penetrating keratoplasty
Keratopathy
is recommended.
In dogs, on examination, the corneal opacity
When degeneration is progressive, interferes
has a bluish-white appearance, with a lack of
with functional vision, causes discomfort, or
-  r a 
prevents epithelization of a corneal ulcer,
emia. The initial lesion, corneal edema, is
removal of the calcium may be required,
located temporally and progresses slowly, over
several months to a few years, to involve the
of topical chelating agents (e.g., 1% sodium
entire cornea.
        
Palliative therapy is most commonly used
corneal calcification, topical disodium EDTA
for endothelial dystrophy. Most dogs maintain
(0.40-l.38%) in artificial tears may be effec-
limited vision with this disease, and only
I48 /EssentiAls OF VereRinAry OpHthAlmoLOGY
develop morbidity when corneal ulcers develop
dog. Post-TKP medications include the topical
following rupture of epithelial bullae. These
administration of antibiotics, topical mydriatic/
ulcers are managed using topical broad-
cycloplegic and an oral nonsteroidal anti-
spectrum antibiotics and occasionally, topical
inflammatory medication prescribed for pain
hyperosmotic medications (e.g, 5% sodium
management. The only definitive treatment
chloride), which may decrease the extent of
for endothelial dystrophy is by replacing the
epithelial bullae formation, but significant
endothelial cells via a homologous full-thick-
corneal clearing does not occur. Ocular irrita-
ness corneal transplant.
tion and lacrimation, which may cause drug
dilution and reduce corneal contact time, from
Surgery for Corneal Opacities
hyperosmotic preparations also limit their
usefulness.
Several nonulcerative corneal opacities lead to
 Dogs with persistent bullous keratopathy
vision decrease or loss. These include lipid
and nonhealing corneal ulcers as a result of
corneal degenerations, pigmentary keratitis.
endothelial dystrophy (or degeneration—see
earlier in chapter) may benefit from a proce-
stromal abscesses, corneal edema, corneal scar-
ring, corneal neoplasms, limbal melanomas,
dure called a thermokeratoplasty (TKP), or
and calcifc keratopathy. Lesions involving
Salaras procedure. In TKP, the use of multi-
the superficial stroma or epithelium may be
ple, focal points of superficial thermal cautery
managed with superficial keratectomy, using
(Fig. 6.22) applied in a circular fashion to the
either a traditional surgical method or an
exposed corneal stroma results in contraction
excimer laser (discussed earlier). Deep
of the anterior stromal collagen fibers. The goal
 or full-thickness lesions, such as corneal
is to develop mild superficial stromal contrac-
or limbal neoplasms (i.e., squamous cell
ture and opacity, and not a focal burn, with the
carcinoma, limbal or epibulbar melanoma),
use of minimal probe temperatures. The result-
usually require a full-thickness excision and
ing subepithelial scar tissue acts as a partial
 grafting procedure. There are several proce-
barrier to the flow of fluid through the cornea.
dures to repair full-thickness corneal or scleral
and helps to reduce the buildup of fluid that
defects, and these include lamellar kerato-
results in epithelial bullae. The procedure is
plasties (i.e., corneoscleral transposition and
performed in a tranquilized or anesthetized
autogenous lamellar grafts), tectonic frozen
corneal or scleral grafts, use of synthetic or
bioengineers materials, and penetrating kerato-
plasty using fresh, viable corneal tissue.
Corneoscleral Masses
and Neoplasms
Corneal, limbal, and corneoscleral masses, in
general, are rare in dogs. Masses may include
nonneoplastic cysts, abscesses, inflammatory
 disorders (e.g., nodular granulomatous episcle-
ritis), and neoplasms such as squamous cell
carcinoma, melanoma, papilloma, and lym-
phoma (Figs. 6.23A through D).
Fig. 6.22. Thermokeratoplasty (thermal cautery)
uses multiple, focal points of superhicial thermal
Corneaf Epithefiaf Incfusion Cysts
cautery. The goal is to develop mild superhcial
stromal contracture and opacity, and not a focal
Cyst formation in the canine cornea may
burn, with the use of minimal probe temperatures
involve any of the four layers. Epithelial
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CoRNEA AND SCLERA/ I49
Fig. 6.23. Examples of corneal/limbal masses in the dog. A. Corneal lymphosarcoma in a dog
 u eoula jeqmi q op e ui emouay leao pue jequ  op e ui emoded jeao 
lelt eye before surgical removal.
inclusion cysts occur as benign, raised, soli-
sia (carcinoma in situ), because the basement
tary, white to pink corneal masses. These
membrane is intact. Primary corneal squamous
are typically chronic and nonpainful. Inclu-
cell carcinoma appears as a raised, multilobu-
sion cysts are usually unilateral and a trau-
lated, pink to white mass. The corneoscleral
matic origin is suspected. Treatment consists
 limbus may also be involved. In one group of
of a complete superficial keratectomy, with
brachycephalic dogs, all with history of chronic
or without conjunctival or other grafting
pigmentary kevatitis, central squamous cell car-
(depends on the depth of the resulting lesion
cinoma was observed.
after excision). Definitive diagnosis is made
by histopathology, where a cyst is observed
Papillomas
that is lined by nonkeratinizing squamous
epithelium.
Papillomas (i.e., viral papillomas) appear to
be the most common primary corneal tumor
Sguamous Celf Carcinoma
in the young dog, and they resemble the
papillomatous growths in the mouth and
Primary corneal squamous cell carcinoma
eyelids. Most papillomas respond well to
occurs in the dog when the neoplastic mass
excision by superficial keratectomy. Recur-
arises directly from the cornea. This neoplasm
rence may be decreased by cryosurgery
is classified as a corneal intraepithelial neopla-
using a double freeze-thaw cycle after the
I50/EssentiAls OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
mass has been removed by superficial
Treatment of Limbal Melanoma
keratectomy.
Treatments of limbal melanomas include
lamellar or full-thickness excision and
Corneaf Lymphosarcoma
replacement with grafting procedures (e.g.,
fresh or frozen homologous corneoscleral
Lymphosarcoma may invade the cornea resem-
 graft, third-eyelid graft, synthetic implants,
bling a pink, to white cellular infltrate. These
porcine small intestinal submucosa), cryo-
lesions may be intrastromal, scleral, or epi-
therapy, and laser photocoagulation.
 scleral in location and usually are not painful
Partial
1and
full-thickness,
corneoscleral
unless the corneal becomes ulcerated. Corneal
grafts have been used to maintain a functional
lymphosarcoma is associated with advanced
eye in younger dogs with progressive limbal
 systemic lymphosarcoma, and the presence of
melanomas.
Grafts of nictitating membrane
ocular involvement suggests a grade 5 stage of
cartilage with overlying conjunctiva, synthetic
disease. The prognosis for these dogs is poor
 grafts, frozen normal corneal tissue, and porcine
and treatment is directed at chemotherapy for
small intestinal submucosa have been used suc-
the systemic lymphosarcoma.
cessfully to replace corneal and scleral defects
after the removal of limbal melanomas. An
Nd:YAG or diode laser can be used to treat
Other Corneaf Neopfasms
limbal melanoma.
Several other tumors have been reported in the
canine cornea, including hemangiomas, hem-
Scleral Diseases
angiosarcomas, and adenocarcinoma.
A number of specific inflammatory responses
Limbal Melanomas
affect the episclera and sclera of the dog. Many
of these are thought to be immune-mediated
Limbal
or
epibulbar
melanomas
are
and most are relatively uncommon, compared
typically benign neoplasms, but they may
to corneal diseases.
invade the cornea. These tumors are usually
pigmented, but occasionally, they may
Episcieritis
be nonpigmented (i.e., amelanotic), smooth
lesions. Limbal melanomas occur in two
 Episcleritis in the dog may be divided into
age groups among dogs. In the younger
 primary and secondary types. In the dog, the
group (i.e., 2-4 years), the tumors are inva-
primary form can be further subdivided into
sive, with a history of rapid growth. In the
simple episcleritis and nodular granuloma-
older group (i.e., 8-ll years), the tumors
tous episcleritis (NGE). Simple episcleritis
are stationary or found incidentally
on
is seen infrequently, and it is not associated
physical examination. The dorsolateral quad-
with systemic disease. It is usually responsive
rant is usually the site of origination, and the
German Shepherd and  Labrador Retriever
cases, is self-limiting. Secondary episcleritis
appear to be predisposed. Primary limbal mel-
 may result from diffuse, severe ocular disorders
anomas must be differentiated from external
such as panophthalmitis, chronic glaucoma, or
extension of intraocular melanomas. Compete
ocular trauma.
intraocular examination, gonioscopy and high-
resolution ultrasonography can be performed
to differentiate between primary intraocular
Nodular Granulomatous Episcleritis
tumors and those originating from the sclera.
In older dogs with nonprogressive limbal
The veterinary literature includes several
masses, periodic surveillance appears to be
accounts of episcleral disorders at the limbus
adequate.
resembling corneoscleral fibrous histiocytoma
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I51
in humans. Several different names have been
count and serum biochemical panels are
ascribed to this disorder, including nodular
obtained before starting azathioprine treatment.
fascitis, fibrous histiocytoma, proliferative ker-
Toxic effects of azathioprine include gastroin-
atoconjunctivitis, limbal granuloma, pseudotu-
testinal toxicosis {i.e., vomiting and bloody
mor, and Collie granuloma. When these cases
diarrhea), hepatotoxicosis, and myelosuppres-
are reviewed, however, it appears that most
sion. Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and
have a similar basic inflammatory process, and
alanine transaminase activities are present in
a morphologic description of NGE seems to be
acute hepatic necrosis.
most appropriate.
Azathioprine for NGE is usually adminis-
Ocular findings in NGE include multiple,
tered orally at 1.5-2.0 mg/kg once daily for 3-
elevated, fleshy masses or a single mass
10 days, and then at 0.75-1.00 mg/kg once
arising at the limbus and infiltrating the
daily for 10-15 days (193). Many dogs can be
adjacent corneal stroma (Fig. 6.24). Nictitat-
kept in remission with 1-2 mg/kg once every
ing membrane involvement is common, and
3-7 days for 1-8 months (then discontinued).
there is a breed predisposition in the Collie,
   a   
Cocker Spaniel, and Shetland Sheepdog.
conjunction with steroids initially, but then a
The lesions tend to be bilateral in the Collie
sole treatment to help prevent recurrence once
and to recur following therapy.
the mass has resolved.
Histopathologic features of NGE are consis-
Other therapies described include intra-
tent with those of chronic granulomatous
lesional
 or subconjunctival injections
of
inflammation. The predominant cell types are
corticosteroids, or cryotherapy. A more recent
histiocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. Epi-
treatment protocol for dogs heavier than 10 kg
thelioid cell accumulations, fibroblastic cells,
involves oral administration of niacinamide,
abundant reticulin fiber formation, and neovas-
500 mg, and tetracycline, 500 mg, three times
cularization with perivascular polymorphonu-
daily. Once improvement occurs, administra-
clear inflammatory cell infltration also occur.
tion is continued at once or twice daily.
Generally, NGE tends to be benign, with
good response to oral azathioprine treat-
ment in conjunction with topical adminis-
Scleritis
tration of corticosteroids. In the past, local
surgical excision by lamellar keratectomy,
Inflammatory diseases of the sclera {i.e., scleri-
intralesional corticosteroid injections, and
tis) can be divided into nonnecrotizing
beta irradiation (7,500 rads per surgical
granulomatous
  scleritis  and
necrotizing
site) have been used. Baseline complete blood
granulomatous scleritis. Dogs with scleritis
usually present with pink-tan-colored sector
lesions arising near, but posterior to, the
limbus. There may be some adjacent corneal
pain, photophobia, and excessive lacrimation.
In some cases, keratitis, anterior uveitis, or
both may be present because the scleral inflam-
mation extends into these adjacent tissues.
Anterior uveitis, when present, is nongranulo-
matous. The scleral lesions may, or may not,
be associated with systemic collagen diseases.
Ophthalmoscopically, fundus lesions may be
seen if there is posterior scleral involvement.
Fundus observations are facilitated when the
cornea, lens, and ocular media are clear. Active
Fig. 6.24. Lateral limbal nodular granulomatous
 posterior segment involvement is characterized
episclerokeratitis in an American Cocker Spaniel.
by focal or regional areas of retinochoroidal
I52 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
degeneration,
with preretinal and
1vitreal
 Eichenbaum JD, Lavach JD, Gould DH, Seuerin GA,
exudates.
Paulsen ME, Jones RL. Immunohistochemical
staining patterns of canine eyes affected with
chronic superhicial keratitis. Am J Vet Res l986;
References
47:19521955.
Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA. Recurrent corneal ero-
sions and epithelial dystrophy in the Boxer dog.
Abrams GA, Bentley E, Nealey PF, Murphy CJ. Elec-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982;18:453-460.
tron microscopy of the canine corneal basement
Gerding PA, McLaughlin SA, Troop MW. Patho-
membranes. Cells Tissues Organs 2002;170:251-
genic bacteria and fungi associated with extermal
257
Arndt C, Reese S, Kostlin R. Preservation of canine
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;193:242-244.
and feline corneoscleral tissue in Optisol GS. Vet
Gilger BC, Ollivier FJ, Bentley E. Diseases of the
Ophthalmol 2001;4:175-182
canine cornea and sclera. In: Gelatt K, ed. Veteri-
Barros PS, Safatle AM, Godoy CA, Souza MS, Barros
nary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
LF, Brooks DE. Amniotic membrane transplanta-
2007. 690-752
tion for the reconstruction of the ocular surface
Gilger BC, Whitley RD, McLaughlin SA, Wright JC
in three cases. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:189-
Drane JW. Canine corneal thickness measured by
192
ultrasonic pachymetry. Am J Vet Res 1991;52:
Bentley E. Spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
1570-1572
defects in dogs: a review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Good KL, Maggs DJ, Hollingsworth SR, Scagliotti
2005;41:158-165.
RH, Nelson RW. Corneal sensitivity in dogs
Bentley E, Campbell S, Woo HM, Murphy CJ. The
with diabetes mellitus. Am J Vet Res 2003;64:
effect of chronic corneal epithelial debridement
7-11.
on epithelial and stromal morphology in dogs.
Gratzek AT, Calvert CA, Martin CL, Kaswan RL
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:2136-2142.
Corneal edema in dogs treated with tocainide.
Bentley E, Murphy CJ. Thermal cautery of the cornea
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;3:47.
for treatment of spontaneous chronic corneal epi-
Gwin RM, Lerner I, Warren K, Gum G. Decrease in
thelial defects in dogs and horses. J Am Vet Med
canine corneal endothelial cell density and corneal
Assoc 2004;224:250-253
thickness as a function of age. Invest Ophthalmol
Bistner S, Rubin LF, Roberts S. A review of persistent
Vis Sci 1982;22:267-271
pupillary membrane in the Basenji dog. J Am
Hacker DV. Frozen corneal grafts in dogs and cats:
Anim Hosp Assoc 197l;7:143-151
a report of 19 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 Bromberg NM. Cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive for
1991;27:387-398.
treatment of refractory corneal ulceration. Vet
Kirschner SE. Persistent corneal ulcers. What to do
Ophthalmol 2002;5:55-60
when ulcers won't heal. Vet Clin North Am Small
Brooks DE, Ollivier FJ. Matrix metalloproteinase
Anim Pract 1990;20:627-642
inhibition in corneal ulceration. Vet Clin North
Kirschner SE, Niyo Y, Betts DM. Idiopathic persis-
Am Small Anim Pract 2004;34:611-622
tent corneal erosions. Clinical and pathological
Bussieres M, Krohne SG, Stiles J, Townsend WM.
fndings in 18 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
The use of porcine small intestinal submucosa for
1989;25:84-90
the repair of full-thickness corneal defects in
Marlar AB, Miller PE, Canton DD, Scagliotti R,
dogs, cats and horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;5:
Murphy CJ. Canine keratomycosis: a report of
352-359.
eight cases and literature review. J Am Animal
Champagne ES, Munger RJ. Multiple punctate kera-
Hosp Ass0c 1994;30:331-340
totomy for the treatment of recurrent epithelial
 Martin CL. Canine epibulbar melanomas and their
erosions in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:
management. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 198l;17:
213-216.
83-90.
Cooley PL, Dice PF. Corneal dystrophy in the dog
Martin CL, Dice PF. Corneal endothelial dystrophy
and cat. Vet Clin North Am 1990;20:681-692.
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982;18:
327-336.
dog. Histochemical and ultrastructural study.
Morgan R, Abrams K. A comparison of six different
Cormea 1988;7:149-161.
therapies for
persistent corneal erosions in
Crispin SM. Ocular manifestations of hyperlipopro-
dogs and cats. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;4:
teinemia. J Small Anim Pract 1993;34:500-506.
38-43
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE CORNEA AND SCLERA/ I53
Murphy CJ, Marfurt CF, McDermott A, Bentley E,
and cats: 15 cases (1989-1993). J Am Vet Med
Abrams GA, Reid TW, Campbell S. Spontaneous
Ass0c 1996;208:891-894
chronic corneal epithelial defects (SCCED) in
Watte CM, Elks E, Moore DL, McLellan GJ. Clinical
dogs: clinical features, innervation, and effect of
experience with butyl-2-cyanoacrylate adhesive
topical SP, with or without IGF-l. Invest Oph-
in the management of canine and feline corneal
thalmol Vis Sci 200l;42:2252-2261.
disease. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:319-326
Roberts SR. Superhicial indolent ulcer of the cornea
Williams DL. Histological and immunocytochemical
in Boxer Dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1965;6:111-
analysis of canine chronic superficial keratitis.
115.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (Suppl) 1994;35:
 Scagliotti RH. Tarsoconjunctival island graft for the
2016S.
treatment of deep corneal ulcers, descemetoceles,
Williams DL, Hoey AJ, Smitherman PJ. The use of
and perforations in 35 dogs and 6 cats. Semin Vet
topical cyclosporine and dexamethasone in the
Med Surg 1988;3:69-76.
treatment of canine chronic superficial keratitis: a
Sullivan TC, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, Glover TL
comparison of therapeutic effects. Vet Rec
Photocoagulation of limbal melanoma in dogs
1995;137:635-639.
Chapter 7
THE CANINE GLAUCOMAS
Kirk N. Gelatt, Dennis E. Brooks, and Maria E. Kallberg
The definition of glaucoma in the dog has
in the canine glaucomas. The mechanisms and
changed over the past one-half century, reflect-
time intervals involved in increasing IOP may
ing our better understanding of this disease
differ between the open and narrow-closed
 group. The glaucomas are actually a collec-
angle types. High IOP, compromised vascular
tion of related diseases caused by a variety
supply to the optic nerve head, and weakened
of different yet overlapping factors that
lamina cribrosa structural support all play a
 result in an optic neuropathy or the progres-
role in glaucomatous optic nerve damage in
sive death of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs)
the dog.
and their axons. In animals an elevated
The effects of increased intraocular pressure
intraocular pressure (IOP) remains the prin-
on the different tissues of the canine eye are
cipal risk factor.
summarized in Table 7.l. The adverse impact
of elevated IOP may vary with the rapidity of
 the increase, the highest levels of the elevation,
Clinical and Pathologic Effects
and duration of the elevation.
of Elevated lop
All glaucomas are diseases of change and
Diagnostics
consist of five stages: (l) An initial event
usually involving the aqueous humor outflow
The three basic procedures for the diagnosis
pathways, (2) physical changes causing
and clinical management of glaucomatous
aqueous humor outflow obstruction,（
(3)
patients are tonometry, gonioscopy, and
elevated lOP that is too high for normal
ophthalmoscopy. However, recently intro-
optic nerve axoplasmic flow and blood flow,
 duced high resolution imaging procedures,
(4) RGC dysfunction with resulting optic
such as 20-60 MHz ultrasonography and
nerve degeneration and atrophy, and (5)
optical coherence tomography (OCT), can
visual-field loss and blindness. Elevated IOP
noninvasively observe the trabecular mesh-
as well as IOP-independent alterations such as
work and sclerociliary cleft, and ocular
excitotoxic amino acids, defects in the optic
fundus, and offer the best in vivo methods
nerve head (ONH) microcirculation, and extra-
to document early changes in the anterior
cellular matrix (ECM) abnormalities of the
chamber angle and sclerociliary cleft, and in
ONH may also contribute to optic nerve damage
the retina and optic nerve head.
155
I56/EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
Table 7.1. Clinical Effects of Elevated Intraocular Pressure (IOP).
Ocular Tissue
Changes in Glaucoma
Globe size
Enlargement from stretching of cormea and sclera; termed hycrophthaimos,
buphthaimia, megaiogiobus, and macrophthaimia. Occurs rapidly in puppies
Cormea
Becomes thicker because of stromal edema. Eventually corneal endothelial cell
death occurs
Focal, linear breaks in Descermet's mermbrane (i.e., Haab's striae). Exposure
keratitis later.
Sclera and lamina cribrosa
Sclera is stretched and becomes thinner. Areas of sclera through which the
nerves and blood vessels penetrate may form large staphylomas. Scleral lamina
cribrosa is distorted and compressed posteriorly.
Iris
Mydriasis in most types of glaucoma. With time, the iridal stroma becomes thin,
and the sphincter muscle becomes atrophied.
Ciliary body
Gradual degeneration with atrophy of the pars plicata and individual ciliary
processes
Anterior chamber angle
Open- and narrow- or closed-angle glaucoma. Secondary changes in the
iridocormeal angle and ciliary cleft of the dog invariably involve progressive
narrowing. and eventual closure, of the iridocormeal angle and collapse of the
cilliary cleft
 Choroid and tapetum
Depends on rapidity of onset, duration, and level of the IOP elevation. Areas of
cellulosum
 chorioretinal ischermia and degeneration in the ischemic zones. Tapetal changes
include degeneration and thinning.
Lens
Cataract formation and changes in the lens position within the patella fossa
(frorm primary zonular disease or secondary to globe enlargement)
Vitreous
Liquefaction and formation of vitreal cortical strands
Retina and optic nerve head
Progressive degeneration. Large-diameter optic nerve axons appear particularly
sensitive. The inner retinal layers, especially the RGC and nerve fiber layers, a5
well as the ONH appear to be very sensitive to IOP. and degenerate.
Tonometry
5.5 mmHg, and 12.9 ± 2.7 mmHg (all with
TonoPen) and 10.8 ± 3.1 mmHg (TonoVet).
Reliable tonometry is essential for optimal
Tonometry in the outpatient clinic provides
clinical management of canine glaucomas. Of
  md as  ro 'osds,  u
available tonometers, only applanation and
 measurement of IOP, because IOP is a biologic
rebound tonometers, are recommended in
variable. Diurnal variations in IOP have also
veterinary ophthalmology. Models currently
 been documented in the dog, with higher levels
used include the TonoPen-Vet (Medtronic,
in the early morning and the lowest readings in
Jacksonville, FL), pneumatonograph model
the early evening and may be the most informa-
30 (Medtronic), and TonoVet (Vedco, St
tive clinically. In the normal dog, these diurnal
Joseph, MO). With use of only topical anesthe-
q u t exde ds su
sia and the dog loosely restrained in a sitting or
in the dog with untreated primary open angle
standing position, applanation tonometry can
glaucoma (POAG), the diurnal variations may
be performed with the instrument held hori-
span 6-10 mmHg. Also important is the IOP
zontal and the tonometer tip perpendicular to
difference between fellow eyes. Tonometry is a
the central cornea. Several reproducible read-
critical procedure in both the diagnosis and
ings with consistent IOP measurements should
clinical management of canine glaucomas. In
be obtained. Normal lOP for the dog has been
early primary narrow angle glaucoma, peroidic
estimated at 16.7 ± 4.0 mmHg, 18.7 ±
 tonometry may have limited usefulness, but the
THe CANiNe GLauCOmAS/ I57
diurnal IOP curves need to be defned in these
dogs and may be more informative.
ment dysplasia.
Gonioscopy observations include: Width of
iridocorneal angle; depth of the sclerociliary
Gonioscopy
opening and cleft; length and diameter of pecti-
Gonioscopy is the diagnostic examination
ate ligaments; any abnormalities—most often
pectinate ligament dysplasia; size of dysplastic
of the iridocorneal angle and opening of the
areas, the number of flow holes; by quadrant
ciliary cleft (i.e., the filtration angle). The
or degrees. Ekesten in his study of the
uveal trabeculae are located immediately
Samoyed primary narrow-closed angle glau-
posterior to the pectinate ligaments and can
coma proposed a grading scheme to classify
be visualized directly at gonioscopy. While
the width of the iridocorneal angle and
only the opening of the ciliary cleft is visu-
alized at gonioscopy, the entire cleft can be
sclerociliary cleft, which is shown graphi-
cally (Fig. 7.1).
imaged at high resolution ultrasonography
and ultrasound biomicroscopy. Serial goni-
oscopy in glaucoma patients is most informa-
Ophthaimoscopy
tive.
Gonioscopy permits  classification
glaucoma on the basis of the iridocorneal angle
The  third diagnostic
procedure 1
recom-
and sclerociliary cleft morphology (i.e., open,
 me nded in clinical management of the canine
narrow, and closed fltration angles and sclero-
glaucomatous patient is a combination of
ciliary clefts). Both direct and indirect gonio-
direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy.T
The
 scopic lensed are used, with the former type
optic nerve head neuroretinal rim and cup
of lenses most popular. The high resolution
 should be evaluated for evidence of thinning
ultrasonography (20 MHz), biomicroscopic
 and enlargement, respectively. The red-free
ultrasonography (50-60 MHz), and OCT
flter of the direct ophthalmoscope, which
permit imaging the entire iridocorneal angle
results in a green light source, permits examina-
and sclerociliary cleft. Gonioscopic fndings
 tion of the retinal nerve fiber layer for nerve fiber
must be compared with tonometric results and
bundle defects as well as examination of the
clinical findings, as gonioscopy
does
not
neuroretinal rim. The myelinated axons of the
directly correlate to level of IOP or aqueous
canine ONH prevent easy detection of neuro-
humor outflow, but permits (
detection
of
etinal rim narrowing and cup enlargement in
narrow  iridocorneal  angles  and  restricted
early glaucoma (Figs. 7.2A through C)
Fig. 7.l. Grading by gonioscopy and a schematic of the iridocorneal angle and opening of the sclerociliary
clelt from (left to right) closed; very narrow; narrow; open (or normal), and more open than normal.
(Photograph courtesy of Edward MacKay.)
I58 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OpHTHALMOLOGY
A
Fig. 7.2. Optic nerve heads in three Beagles. A. Normal optic disc. B. Optic disc in early hypertension
with electrophysiological evidence of glaucoma. C. Optic disc in a moderate stage of primary open-angle
glaucoma with enlargement of the optic cup.
High-Resolution Uitrasonography and
the 20 MHz (high-resolution ultrasonogra-
Uitrasound Biomicroscopy
phy—HRUS) and 6O MHz (ultrasound biomi-
Classification of the canine glaucomas based
(UBM) to 80 (HRUS) μm. The OCT not reported
on histopathogical  examinations of end-
 in dogs may be easier to use and has resolutions
stage glaucomas are of limited value and
 that approach 10 μm. The high resolution
may indicate errorous assumptions. With
ultrasonography (20 MHz) and ultrasound bio-
these noninvasive imaging procedures,
 microscopy (50-60 MHz) image the canine iri-
examination of the anterior chamber and
docorneal angle, pectinate ligaments and
outflow pathways can equal routine histol-
 sclerociliary cleft (Figs. 7.3A and B). The digital
ogy resolutions and can be performed in the
 images can be stored, evaluated and quantified
early stages of the diseases (and before enu-
by software scanning programs. Although it
cleation is possible). The 10-12 MHz clinical
 may be a few years before these imaging pro-
ultrasonography has 300-400 μm resolution;
cedures become commonplace in the clinical
THe CANINe GLAUCOMAS/ I59
management of the canine glaucomas, we
  o   o
      
predisposing abnormalities (especially in the
standing and treatment of the glaucomas.
     s
changes that occur during globe enlargement
during hypertension. Ultrasonic studies of
Tonography
primary glaucoma in Samoyeds suggest a
narrow- or closed-angle glaucoma pathogen-
Tonography is tonometry expanded over 2-4
esis with a narrowed anterior chamber but
minutes, and it permits quantification of the
 IOP-sensitive component of the aqueous humor
increased thickness of the axial lens and vit-
outflow. Tonography in humans has a long-
reous body. These same findings also occur
in human primary angle-closure glaucoma
term history in the diagnosis and investigation
(PCAG) in people.
of glaucoma, and these results have confirmed
 Color Doppler imaging can noninvasively
that nearly all the different types of human
estimate blood flow parameters in the orbital
glaucoma (the sole exception being the rare
 and ocular tissues. These blood flow parame-
hypersecretion glaucoma) result from impair-
 ment of the aqueous humor outflow; this pro-
ters have been reported in normal dogs, and
cedure is still not routine for the canine
abnormal levels have been detected in POAG
in the Beagle. Blood flow changes in the
glaucomas.(
 Gonioscopic and histopathologic
different breeds with PCAG have not been
findings may suggest an aqueous humor outflow
impairment, but only tonography can quantify
reported.
this abnormality. Combined with fluoropho-
tometry, tonography can reveal, in relative
Pattern and Flash
terms, both the conventional (i.e., pressure
Electroretinography, and Vision-
sensitive/corneoscleral trabecular outflow) and
unconventional (i.e., pressure insensitive/
Evoked Potential
uveoscleral outflow) components of the differ-
Electrophysiology studies have received limited
ent canine glaucomas. Conventional or trabec-
attention in the canine glaucomas, however
ular outflow in the normal dog as measured by
there are reports on normal eyes with abruptly
pneumatonography
ranges from 0.30
土
increased intraocular pressure and pattern
0.15 μL/min per mmHg. 0.28 ± 0.09 μL/min
ERGs in POAG in the Beagles. There has also
per mmHg. and 0.35 ± 0.129 μL/min per
been limited numbers of studies in man.
mmHg. In the POAGs, the Schiotz and pneu-
Nevertheless since vision field testing is not
-peia suauainseau ojudeouo ydeigouoeu
ually decline as the trabecular disease progresses.
available, pattern electroretinography (PERG),
multifocal, 
and
flashelectroretinography
Drugs such as parasympathomimetics improve
(FERG) with different color of light stimuli,
pue mono lounu snoanbe juouaau
particularly blue, may be useful.
increase tonographic measurements in both
Following pattern stimulation of the retina,
normal dogs and dogs with POAG. Drugs that
lower IOP by decreasing the rate of aqueous
the pattern ERG originates from the RGCs of
the inner retina. This in contrast to the flash
humor production or increasing the rate of
ERG, in which the signals are primarily associ-
uveoscleral (i.e., nonconventional) aqueous
ated with the rods and cones (see chapter l).
humor outflow do not produce significant
 Because the glaucomas initially injure preferen-
changes in the tonographic measurements
tially the peripheral RGCs, the pattern ERG is
evolving as an important diagnostic procedure
A- and B-Scan Uitrasonography
to evaluate the inner retinal layers and assess
the level of RGC damage. Pattern ERGs in the
A-scan ultrasonography has been used to
Beagle with primary open angle glaucoma indi-
measure the anteroposterior globe, depth of the
cated differences between the central and
anterior chamber, lens thickness, and antero-
peripheral retina suggesting greater peripheral
posterior dimension of the vitreous body in
 retinal ganglion cell damage.
PL一
CC
ACC
B
Fig. 7.3. A. High resolution or ultrasound biomicroscopy of the iridocorneal angle
ym laus iayoo ueag ue g pure sop leou e u nala Ae pue
iridocorneal angle closure and collapse of the ciliary cleft (C—cornea; S——sclera; I—
iris; PL—pectinate ligament; CC—ciliary clelt; and A—iridocorneal angle). (Courtesy
of Ursula Dietrich, 2005.)
160
THe CANINe GLAUCOMAS/ I61
The flash ERG probably has limited value in
Spaniel (5.52%), Basset Hound (5.44%),
assessing functional status of the inner retina
Chow Chow (4.70%), Shar-Pei (4.40%),
during the early stages of glaucoma and at
Boston Terrier (2.88%), Wire Fox Terrier
lower elevations of IOP, but this concept needs
(2.28%), Norwegian Elkhound (1.98%),
further exploration as the entire canine retina
Siberian Husky (l.88%), Cairn Terrier
may be affected in acute hypertension with very
(1.82%), and Miniature Poodle (l.68%).
high intraocular pressures.
Gender effect varied among breeds by
decade, and in some breeds females were
more often affected (i.e., American Cocker
Provocative Tests
Spaniel, F
Basset Hound, Cairn Terrier,
Provocative tests are used to evaluate an eye
English Cocker Spaniel, Jack Russell Terrier,
Norwegian Elkhound, Samoyed, and Sibe-
and its predisposition to both open- and
rian Husky). A similar effect occurs in man
narrow-angle glaucomas. Provocative tests may
not be indicated for the individual patient, but
with narrow-closed angle glaucoma in which
they may be employed by veterinary ophthal-
females are affected most often. Age of pre-
sentation with these glaucomas varied by breed,
mologists and vision scientists investigating the
pathogenesis of glaucoma or screening IOP-
but was generally between 4 and 10 years of
age. Of the top twenty-seven breeds identified
reducing drugs. The common tests for the
during 1994-2002, only seven breeds with
POAGs include the water provocative test and
possible inherited glaucoma have been investi-
the steroid provocative test. The provocative
tests for the open-, narrow-, or closed-angle
gated and reported in the literature.
The prevalence of the secondary glauco-
glaucoma (PCAG) include the mydriatic drug
mas in the dog in North America from
test and the darkroom test. Their use is still
 experimental in dogs.
1964 to 2002 also varied by decade: 0.25%
(1964-1973); 0.46% (1974-1983); 0.79%
(1984-1993); and 0.80% (1994-2002). The
Epidemiology of Primary and
secondary glaucomas investigated was not
Secondary Glaucomas in the
inclusive and focused those associated cata-
Dog in North America
ractformation,lensluxation,cataractsurgery,
uveitis of unknown cause, hyphema of
Martin in 1977 first reported the prevalence of
unknown cause, and intraocular neoplasia.
the canine glaucomas as 0.5% using the Veteri-
To ensure these patients had secondary glau-
nary Medical Data Base and the Canine Eye
coma, the preexisting condition, for example,
Registry Foundation lists a large number of pre-
cataract, lens luxation, etc, was diagnosed prior
disposed breeds. The prevalence of the primary
to the onset of the ocular hypertension. The
or breed-related glaucomas and secondary
secondary glaucomas associated with cataract
glaucomas in dogs presented to the veterinary
formation and lens-induced uveitis represented
     s
 81% of the total secondary glaucomas.
been gradually increasing. Prevalence for the
Hence, the combined prevalence of the
breed-related or primary types increased
primary or breed related and the secondary
from 0.29% (1964-1973), 0.46% (1974-
glaucomas in the dog during the past decade
1983), 0.76% (1984-1993), to 0.89% (1994-
is 1.7%, which is comparable to the reported
2002). Predisposed breeds varied by decade,
1-2% worldwide prevalence of the glauco-
but the American Cocker Spaniel, Basset
mas in man.
Hound, Wire Fox Terrier, and Boston Terrier
were constantly high throughout l964
through 2002. During the last decade 27
Classification of the Glaucomas
breeds were presented with glaucoma above
the baseline of mixed breed dogs (0.71%);
Canine glaucomas may be classified on the
the breeds with the highest prevalence
basis of the possible cause, the gonioscopic
during 1994-2002 were American Cocker
appearance of the filtration angle (i.e., open/
I62 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
dation of adjacent pectinate ligaments into
Box 7.1. Types of Glaucoma in
broad sheets (initially termed mesodermal
Dogs
dysgenesis), is common in the dog, and often
described in many primary narrow or closed
Primary glaucomas
angle glaucomas. Pectinate ligament dyspla-
Open/normal angle (acute/chronic)
sia may also signal an underlying disease (or
Narrow/closed angle (acute/chronic)
diseases) of the trabecular meshwork and
Secondary glaucomas
extracellular matrix, as suggested by the
Uveitis
results of histologic examination of the
Lens luxations
Bouvier des Flandres glaucoma, in which
lntumescent cataract
Phakolytic/phacoclastic uveitis
deposits of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-
Hyphema 
positive material occurred concurrent with
Intraocular neoplasia
the pectinate ligament dysplasia. In the sec-
Aphakic
ondary glaucomas, the increase in IOP is
Malignant/ciliary block
Melanocytic/pigrmentary proliferation
associated with some known antecedent or
Giant retinal tears (Schwartz-Matsuno syndrome)
concurrent ocular disease that physically
Anterior chamber silicone oil
obstructs the aqueous outflow pathways. In
Postoperative ocular hypertension
the congenital glaucomas, the increased IOP is
Congenital glaucoma
associated with often multiple anterior segment
Pectinate ligament dysplasia
 anomalies and the elevation in IOP develops
Goniodysgenesis
soon after birth.
Classification of the canine glaucomas by
duration (i.e.， acute, subacute, chronic) is
useful clinically. Such classification may be
narrow/closed iridocorneal angle and open/
misleading, however, regarding the amount of
narrow/collapsed ciliary cleft), and the dura-
 damage present. Corneal edema, conjunctivitis,
tion or stage of the disease (Box 7.l). Because
and a dilated pupil may be the frst clinical
no single classification scheme is totally satis-
signs of glaucoma noticed by a pet owner or
factory, combinations of all three schemes typi-
veterinarian. Because an IOP in excess of
cally are used. There have been recent
40 mmHg is necessary for corneal endothelial
suggestions that the classification schemes of
dysfunction to develop. these eyes may not
animal
glaucomas have limited usefulness
truly be at an early or acute stage of the disease
because of microanatomic differences in the
at presentation. Glaucoma in one eye, with only
outflow pathways between primates and the
slight elevation in IOP, is often not noticed by
dog: however, alternate schemes have not
the owner; hence, most dogs are not presented
emerged nor recommended
to a veterinarian until extensive damage or even
The glaucoma classification scheme based
blindness is present in the first eye with the
on possible cause includes the primary glau-
primary glaucomas. In fact, about 50% of the
comas, secondary glaucomas, and congenital
- al o d sa r p
glaucomas. In the primary glaucomas, the IOP
narian are already blind!
elevation develops without concurrent ocular
diseases, is hereditary in many canine breeds,
and has a bilateral potential for development.
Clinical Signs
Primary glaucomas may result from abnor-
mal biochemical metabolism of the trabecu-
Clinical signs of the glaucomas depend on the
lar cells of the outflow system (as in primary
stage of disease and, to some extent, on the type
 open angle glaucoma) or the physical effects
of glaucoma. Clinical signs are also directly
of pupillary blockage and changes in the
related to the level and duration of the eleva-
iridocorneal angle and sclerociliary cleft (as
tion in IOP (Table 7.2). The stage of glau-
in primary narrow-closed angle glaucoma).
 coma may be asymmetric in the same dog.
Pectinate ligament dysplasia or the consoli-
with one eye at advanced stages of disease
THE CANiNE GLAUCOMAS/ I63
Table 7.2. Clinical Signs of Glaucoma in the Dog.
Stage of Glaucoma
Clinical Signs
Early
May be asymptomatic; slight mydriasis; mild but transient comeal edema; variable
episcleral congestion; normal ONH appearance; IOPs of approximately 20-30 mmHg:
visual.
Mild/moderate
Variable mydriasis, episcleral congestion, variable degrees of cormeal edera/striae, slight
buphthalmia, early lens subluxation, variable retinal and optic disk changes, and loPs of
30-40 mm Hg: vision to visual impairment.
Advanced
 Persistent nydriasis, corneal edera with comeal striae, peripheral anterior synechiae
and angle closure, buphthalmia, lens displacement from the patella fossa, cortical
cataract formation, vitreous degeneration and syneresis, extensive retinal and optic disk
degeneration, and IOPs of more than 40-50 mmHg: intermittent visual impairment to
total blin dness.
 and the other apparently normal or at very
DNA and Aqueous Humor
early stages. In the earliest phase of the
Protein Studies
primary open-angle and narrow-angle glau-
coma in the dog, the disease is usually insid-
The gene myocilin was first reported associ-
ious, and the eyes are asymptomatic.
ated with POAG in man by Stone et al. in
1997. This mutation (GLClA; mutations in
Inheritance and DNA Studies
trabecular meshwork-induced glucocortcoid
of the Canine Glaucomas
response protein or TIGR) was linked to the
 increase in IOP in juvenile primary open angle
Inherited open- and narrow-angle glaucomas
glaucoma in man (and now additional forms of
occur bilaterally in purebred dogs. Although
 POAG), an additional five myocilin mutations
the primary glaucomas have been reported
have been associated with glaucoma in man
in at least forty-five breeds in the United
and include: GLClB (in chromosome 2 with
States (Table 7.3), very few breeds have
higher incidence in low-tension glaucoma pop-
been investigated to date. Primary open-angle
ulation);
: GLClC (in adults with late-onset
glaucoma in the Beagle is inherited as an auto-
POAG
and
typical
glaucoma
findings);
somal recessive trait. Genetic investigations of
GLCID
and
GLClE (mapped
to
8q23
glaucoma in the American Cocker Spaniel and
   s doo 
Basset Hound have heretofore failed to estab-
chromosome7q35-q36 and adult onset POAG).
lish the inheritance of this condition in these
breeds. Primary glaucomas in
the
Welsh
with at least 4-8% of the primary open angle
Springer Spaniel and Great Dane appear to be
glaucomas in man and now include both early
inherited as a dominant trait, with variable
and late onset forms of this disease complex.
expression.
The myocilin gene appears highly con-
 Breeds of dogs having secondary glaucoma
served evolutionarily; in addition to its iden-
associated with luxation of the lens include,
tification in man, the myocilin gene has been
most commonly, the Smooth and Wire-Haired
reported in nonhuman primates, rabbit,
Fox Terriers, Sealyham Terrier, Border Collie,
bovine, dog, and mice. Most of the mutations
Tibetan Terrier, Cairn Terrier, Welsh Corgi.
in man with POAG are localized in the olfacto-
and Jack Russell Terrier. Other breeds are also
medin domain of the gene. The protein, myo-
affected. However, the association of the lens
cilin, was first reported in 1997 by Polansky
displacement and onset of glaucoma in these
et al. and termed TIGR (trabecular meshwork-
induced
 glucocorticoid protein). It was a
the facility of aqueous humor outflow, as mea
 secreted protein from human trabecular mesh
sured by pneumatonography.
1S
lower
than
normal before lens displacement is diagnosed
cocorticoids. Myocilin, as a secreted 55-57 kDa
I64 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
 Table 7.3. Breeds with Primary Glaucomas.
tions and effects of myocilin have not been
determined but MYOC mRNA is induced by
Breeds Predisposed
stress, HO2, mechanical stretch, and steroid
Akita
Italian Greyhound
treatment
Alaskan Malamute
Lakeland Terrier
The inherited POAG in Beagles has been
 Basset Hound
Maltese
reported with an accumulation of glycosami-
Beagle
Miniature Pinscher
noglycans and perhaps other glycoproteins
have been identified as the source of the
Border Collie
Miniature Schnauzer
increased resistance to aqueous humor
Boston Terrier
Norfolk Terrier
outflow. The protein, myocilin, was detected
Bouvier des Flandres
Norwegian Elkhound
in the aqueous humor of normal laboratory
 Brittany Spaniel
Norwich Terrier
quality Beagles, and in POAG in the Beagles
Caim Terrier
Poodle—-Toy/Miniature
aqueous humor levels were increased. As
 Cardigan Welsh Corgi
Samoyed
POAG progressed in these Beagles, the
Chihuahua
Scottish Terrier
aqueous humor myocilin levels increased
further. Myocilin was also localized in the
 American Cocker Spaniel
Sealyharn Terrier
normal and glaucomatous Beagle trabecular
 Dachshund
Shih Tzu
meshwork and nonpigmented ciliary body epi-
 Dalmatian
Siberian Husky
thelium. As with the aqueous myocilin levels,
Dandie Dinmont Temier
Skye Terrier
the glaucoma animals had increased amounts
English Cocker Spaniel
Smooth Fox Terrier
of myocilin in these tissues and it increased
further in the older glaucomatous dogs.
 English Springer Spaniel
Tibetan Terrier
 Gemman Shepherd
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Aqueous humor levels of myocilin of most
primary glaucomas in other purebred dogs
Giant Schnauzer
Welsh Terrier
and secondary glaucomas are also increased
Greyhound
West Highland vWhite
when compared to the aqueous humor from
Terrier
primary cataractous and diabetic cataracts
Irish Setter
Wire Fox Terrier
of different breeds of a large number of
dogs. Other proteins, including CD-44, are
Types of Glaucomas Reported:
Cosed Angle
also increased in the aqueous humor as
Open Angle
well as several of the ocular tissues. Muta-
Beagle
Akitaa
tions in the canine myocilin gene have not
Great Danea
American Cocker Spaniel
been reported.
Keeshound
Basset Hounde
Norwegian Elkhound
English Cocker Spaniel
Primary and Breed-Predisposed
Poodle (Miniature/Toy)
English Springer Spaniel
Canine Glaucomas
Samoyed
Flat Coated Retriever
Siberian Huskya
Golden Retriever
The primary glaucomas in the dog are
Poodles (Miniature/Toy)
divided into open-angle and the narrow- or
Samoyed
closed-angle glaucomas. In the veterinary
medical literature, the association of abnor-
Shar Peia
malities of the pectinate ligaments (often
Welsh Springer Spaniel
termed goniodysgenesis) and the angle-
Pectinate ligarnent dysplasia.
closure glaucomas in the dog appears to be
more than coincidence.
glycoprotein, forms dimers and multimers. In
the eye, myocilin is expressed in high amounts 
Pectinate Ligament Dysplasia
in the trabecular meshwork, sclera, ciliary body
and iris; low amounts have been detected in the
In clinical studies of American and English
retina and optic nerve in man. All of the func-
Cocker Spaniels as well as of the Basset Hound
THe CANiNe GLAuCOmAS/ I65
narrow iridocorneal angles and sclerociliary
Spaniel, Samoyed, and perhaps the Siberian
clefts were common findings, and in the latter
Husky.
breed, dysplasia of the pectinate ligaments
was noted. In the United States, primary glau-
coma in the American Cocker Spaniel appears
Effect of Age
 as a narrow-angle/angle-closure type, without
significant amounts of pectinate ligament
Age appears to be an important risk factor, and
dysplasia. In the Samoyed breed in Sweden,
affected the time for presentation of the most
narrow iridocorneal angle width has been
of the glaucomas in the purebred dog. This,
recently related to the development of glau-
however, may be misleading, as in the Beagle
coma. Dysplasia of the pectinate ligaments
with POAG ocular hypertension starts in dogs
(i.e., solid sheets of pectinate ligaments;
between 12 and 18 months of age, but overt
initially
termed
mesodermal
remnants)
clinical signs of glaucoma, that is, early globe
appears to be common in some breeds, but
enlargement, mydriasis, and other signs, are
it has not been directly related to 
often delayed until 4-6 years of age. In those
an
increased resistance to the outflow
JO
breeds of the primary narrow-angle glaucomas,
aqueous humor. The pectinate ligaments
the time course appears abbreviated but may
appear to provide the basal support (i.e.,
span several months. In the majority of breeds
anchor or pillar) for the iris to the posterior
 the glaucomas are presented most often in
cornea and the opening of the sclerociliary
dogs at an average age of about 6 years old,
cleft, and may affect the opening of the
except in the Siberian Husky, Samoyed, and
sclerociliary cleft.
Welsh Springer Spaniel, which may be
younger.
Breed Predisposition
Clinical Stages of the
Using
VMDBdata from1964t
through
Primary Glaucomas
2002, during the last observation period
(1994-2002), twenty-two different breeds
Both POAG and PACG have different clini-
had l% or higher prevalence of the glaucomas.
cal stages or phases based on the level of
The highest prevalence of glaucomas in
IOP elevation and the duration of the ocular
1994-2002 by breed included American
hypertension. In the breeds with POAG the
Cocker Spaniel (5.52%);）
Basset
Hound
increase in IOP is gradual and progressive,
(5.44%); Chow Chow (4.70%); Boston Terrier
 and the clinical signs develop from barely
(2.88%);Wire FoxTerrier(2.28%); Norwegian
noticeable to advanced (Table 7.2). In the
Elkhound (1.98%); Siberian Husky (1.88%);
early and moderate stages of the disease IOP is
Cairn Terrier (l.82%); and Miniature Poodle
 e  t pe s um a
(1.68%)
is mydriasis, variable corneal edema and epi-
scleral congestion. Vision is present. The dog's
 eye is not appreciated as abnormal and the dog
Effect of Gender
 is not presented to the veterinarian.
As POAG advances and the IOP climbs
The effect of gender appears important in
further, globe enlargement (megaloglobus/
man with narrow-closed angle primary glau-
buphthalmos) and lens instability results from
coma with the female affected much more
the damage to the zonules. Episcleral conges-
frequently especially in the Asian race. Does
 tion, corneal edema, mydriasis, lens sublux-
the effect of gender also occur in the dog?
ation or total luxation, optic disc and retinal
Differences in the ratios of males vs females
 degeneration, and blindness result. Lens insta-
for the glaucomas by gender appear in the
 bility leads to more variable IOP, with frequent
American Cocker Spaniel, Basset Hound,
pupillary blockage by lens and/or vitreous
Cairn Terrier, Chow Chow, English Cocker
 abrupt high IOP (50-60 mmHg) occur. Often
I66/EssentiAls OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmoLOGY
this is when the dog is first presented to the
pressure-lowing drugs. Clinically the differ-
veterinary ophthalmologist
ent stages of PACG can be divided into
The clinical stages or phases of the PACG
latent or predromal; intermittent glaucoma;
dogs is different and characterized by abrupt
"acute" congestive or high pressure glau-
increases in lOP, which are initially tran-
coma; postcongestive; and chronic glaucoma
sient and self-controlled, but eventually the
as proposed by Miller (Table 7.4). Each stage
elevation in IOP persists and necessitates
of the PACG has certain clinical characteristics
presentation to the veterinary ophthalmolo-
that can determine the stage of PACG and serve
gist. These abrupt IOP changes are appar-
as a guide for therapy. As the acute congestive
ently the result of pupillary blockage to
stage of PACG is usually the first stage pre-
aqueous humor from posterior chamber to
sented to the veterinarian; it is not surprising
anterior chamber, and the forward displace-
nearly 50% of these eyes are blind and medical
ment of the basal iris with narrowing to
therapy of this stage has limited success and for
closure of the iridocorneal angle and cleft.
a short duration.
These abrupt increases in IOP initially are in
the 30+ mmHg range but as the angle narrow-
ing and closure advance, the increase can reach
Glaucoma in the American
50+ mmHg and produce clinical signs that
Cocker Spaniel
merit presentation to the veterinarian. Eventu-
ally (sometimes within days) this appositional
Prevalence of the glaucomas in the American
narrowing and closure of the iridocorneal angle
Cocker Spaniel (ACS) for the last decade is
and sclerociliary cleft develops peripheral ante-
5.52% (the highest for any breed in North
rior synchiae “zipping" the outflow pathways
 America). The mean age of affected animals
close and rending the glaucoma refractory to
was 6.33 ± 1.46 years and the ratio of males
Table 7.4. The Stages of Primary Angle-Closure Glaucoma in the Dog.
Stage
History
1OP at
AC Depth
Gonioscopy
HRUS
Clinical Signs
Exam
Latent
Breed
 Normal
Shallow
Narrow;
Sigmoidal iridal 
 None; watch for
predisposed
occludable
configuration
 progression; consider
prophylactic therapy 
Intermittent
 Transient
 Normal
Shallow
Narrow to
Ciliary cleft
Bouts of partial
(subacute)
 cormeal
nearly
narrow/closed
mydriasis and cormeal
edema
closed;
ederma; other
appositional
gaucoma signs
variable: prophylactic
therapy
Congestive
Possible
Elevated;
Shallow
Closed;
Cleft closed
High IOP with
(acute)
previous
marked
appositional
mnydriasis; cormeal
"attacks"
to PAS
edema; episcleral
congestion; other
signs
Postcongestive
 Glaucoma
 Normal
Shallow
Closed with
Cleft closed
Normmal to low IOP
history
 PAS
due to decreased AH
production; signs of
glaucoma
Chronic
Glaucoma
Increased 
 Shallow
Closed with
Cleft closed
Buphthalmia; other
history
PAS
signs of glaucoma;
optic disc and retinal
degeneration;
blindness
The Canine Glaucomas/ I67
to females is 1l:2. Narrow-angle glaucoma in
becomes bilateral within several months. Goni-
the ACS continues to be the most frequent
oscopy of the ACS with ocular hypertension
primary glaucoma presented to U.s. veteri-
usually reveals a narrow to closed iridocorneal
nary ophthalmologists.
angle and reduced ciliary clefts; as the glau-
The usual history of PCAG or narrow-angle
coma progresses, angle closure and ciliary cleft
glaucoma in the ACS contains few classic clini-
collapse with peripheral anterior synechial for-
cal signs of glaucoma, but occasional histories
 mation are common. More recently, pectinate
report the presence of conjunctival hyperemia
ligament dysplasia in the ACS has also been
and even transient corneal edema. Most affected
reported, but it does not appear to occur fre-
dogs present with either classic clinical signs of
quently in our experience.
unilateral, acute congestive glaucoma of a few
Changes of the ocular fundus in the ACS
days' duration or with chronic, advanced glau-
 may not correlate well with the duration and
coma with buphthalmia, lens changes, retinal
magnitude of the elevated IOP because the
and ONH degeneration, and blindness (Figs.
wide difference in the levels of elevated IOP. It
7.4A and B and Fig. 7.5). Often, the condition
 is not unusual for an ACS to present with a very
high IOP (70-80 mmHg) and a history of signs
of glaucoma being present for less than l week,
yet after lowering the IOP toless than 20 mmHg.
the dog does not recover its vision. The optic
nerve and retina may initially appear to be
normal, although some vascular attenuation
may be present. With the IOP maintained
within the normal range after these acute
increases, additional retinal and ONH degen-
eration may become apparent within a few
weeks.
Glaucoma in the Basset Hound
Affected Basset Hounds with glaucoma are 6.3
± 1.30 years of age at frst presentation for
glaucoma, and prevalence in North America
is high (5.44% for 1994-2002). While the
mean age of glaucomatous Bassets is about the
B
Fig. 7.4. Narrow-angle and cleft glaucoma in an
American Cocker Spaniel. A. Both corneal edema and
 striae are present, and the IOP is 52 mmHg. B.
Fig. 7.5. Advanced iridocorneal angle and cleft
Gonioscopy reveals a closed iridocorneal angle and
closure in an American Cocker Spaniel. The globe is
cleft.
enlarged and lens subluxated dorsally
I68 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OpHTHALMOLOGY
same for other breeds, the disease can affect
quite a range of different ages.
Prevalence of glaucoma in the Basset
Hound appears to increase with age. From
1994 to 2002, the glaucoma prevalence was
0.47% (2-6 months old); 0.37% (6-12 months
old); 0.36% (1-2 years old); 4.19% (2-4 years
old); 6.74% (4-7 years old); 6.95% (7-10
years); and 6.81% (10-15 years old). The mean
± SD age of initial presentation with glaucoma
in the Basset Hound was 6.33 ± 1.30 years
old.
Narrow- and closed-angle glaucoma with
pectinate ligament dysplasia (i.e., mesoder-
mal dysgenesis) was documented in Basset
Hounds during the late 1960s. In these
reports, 63% of Basset Hounds had some degree
of pectinate ligament dysplasia, but fewer than
3% had glaucoma. Serial gonioscopy of some
glaucomatous Basset Hounds suggests gradual
increasing in the extent of pectinate ligament
dysplasia with aging, suggesting possible for-
mation of peripheral anterior synechiae. This
form of glaucoma usually presents as a unilat-
eral, acute, congestive, closed-angle glaucoma
or as chronic, narrow-angle-closure glaucoma
B
with buphthalmia and eventual blindness (Figs.
7.6A and B). Anterior uveitis, with at least some
Fig. 7.6: A. Basset Hound with bilateral advanced
of the corneal edema related to this inflamma-
glaucoma. B. At gonioscopy, large, persistent
tion, is present, which is unusual among breed-
mesodermal bands, rather than the distinct,
related canine glaucomas.
individual pectinate ligaments, are often visible. With
extensive involvement, flow holes are present in these
dysplastic pectinate ligaments. Because iridocyclitis is
Glaucoma in the Beagle
often present, these pectinate ligament anomalies
must be differentiated from progressive, peripheral
The prevalence of glaucoma in the Beagle is
anterior synechiation of the aqueous outflow
fairly consistent for the past 20 years (1.01%
pathways in this type of glaucoma.
[1984-1993] and 1.10% [1994-2002]).
Beagle glaucoma is presented clinically in
middle and older dogs; the mean ± SD age
and lens subluxation develop. The increase
of initial presentation with glaucoma was
in lOP and decline in facility of outflow, as
6.24 ± 1.31 years old.
measured by Schiotz tonography, pneuma-
Inherited POAG in Beagles was first reported
tonography, and constant-pressure perfu-
in 197l; it is not known if other forms of glau-
sion of the anterior chamber, develop slowly.
comas occur in the breed. Affected animals
In affected dogs, the pneumatonographic
have open iridocorneal angles, with iridocor-
outflow declines from 0.19 ± 0.07 μL/min per
neal angle closure and ciliary cleft collapse as
mmHg (3-6 months of age) to 0.07 ± 0.05 μL/
the globe enlarges (Fig. 7.7). The ocular hyper-
min mmHg (43-48 months of age)
tension begins between l and 2 years of age,
The iridocorneal angle and sclerociliary
but becomes first noticeable by owners when
cleft are initially open and devoid of any
secondary globe enlargement, mydriasis,
abnormalities (Fig. 7.8). Results of serial A-
THe CANiNe GLAuCOmAS/ I69
Zonulay
Subluxation?
NS
Lisinseition
Luxation
Narrow
Normal
of Clet
B
(3H
46
43
4
ury
38
[ts
36
4
32
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
1.04
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
Age in Months
Fig. 7.7. Progression of primary open-angle glaucoma in a Beagle with monitoring
of IOP (applanation tonometry), aqueous humor resistance to outflow (C;
tonography), position of the lens, appearance of the iridocorneal angle and ciliary
clelt (gonioscopy), and A-scan ultrasonography (axial globe length). With globe
s se am se as  r pue aue i as suaaea
luxation with zonulary disinsertion occur
scan ultrasonography indicate the increased
IOP produces slight enlargement (1-2 mm)
of the axial length of the globe, which in
turn results in lens subluxation and narrow-
ing of the iridocorneal angle and sclerocili-
ary cleft in dogs between 1 and 4 years of
age. Lens removal prior to the onset of ocular
hypertension in Beagles bred for POAG did not
delay the onset of glaucoma. Eventual iridocor-
neal angle and sclerociliary cleft closure result
in animals as high as 4-6 years of age. Primary
open-angle glaucoma is inherited in Beagles as
an autosomal recessive trait.
 Results of light microscopic examinations of
 the aqueous outflow indicate no abnormalities
in the animals affected early in life. At trans-
Fig. 7.8. Gonioscopic view of the normal appearing
mission-electron microscopy (TEM), how-
iridocorneal angle and opening of the ciliary clelt in a
ever, abnormalities were first detected in
 Beagle with early primary open-angle glaucoma.
12-month-old dogs. Clustered basement
I70/EssentiAls OF VereRinary OpHthAlmoLOGY
membrane-like  material
was
scattered
addition to pectinate ligament dysplasia and
throughout the outer corneoscleral trabecu-
narrow iridocorneal angle and ciliary cleft, his-
 lar meshwork. Elastinlike fbers appeared to
topathology of the affected secondary pectinate
be more numerous and to be arranged less
ligaments and trabecular meshwork contained
regularly than those in normal dogs, and small
significant amounts of PAS material, which may
clusters of serrated, opaque rods were present
also affect aqueous humor outflow.
within the cytoplasm of the trabecular cells
within the corneoscleral meshwork. In the
Giaucoma in the Chow Chow
more advanced stages of the disease, these
changes were more extensive and generalized
In the Chow Chow breed, the frst report of
within the corneoscleral meshwork. The tra-
glaucoma in this breed consisted of eighteen
beculae became more compressed and disorga-
glaucomatous animals (thirteen females and
nized, with the concomitant accumulation of
five males) with a mean ± SD of 6.2 ±2.2 years
extracellular materials. Histochemical localiza-
 of age on first presentation for glaucoma. In the
tion of the glycosaminoglycans within the cor-
North American survey affected dogs were 6.45
neoscleral beams and juxtacanalicular zone in
± 1.07 years on first presentation for glaucoma.
glaucomatous dogs indicate the amount of
During nearly 40 years in North America
chondroitin sulfate decreases as the disease
glaucoma was diagnosed in the Chow Chow
advances, and a glycosaminoglycan hyaluroni-
not infrequently, that is, 2.05% in 1984-
dase-resistant material develops. The protein
1993 and 4.70% in 1994-2002. Primary glau-
myocilin in the aqueous humor of normal
coma in the Chow Chow has been associated
laboratory quality Beagles, and in POAG in
with iridocorneal angle closure and limited
the Beagles myocilin aqueous humor levels
pectinate ligament dysplasia. Most animals pre-
were also increased. As POAG progressed in
sented with bilateral, acute congestive glau-
these Beagles, the aqueous humor myocilin
coma. Results of gonioscopy, when possible.
levels increased further.
revealed narrow to closed iridocorneal angles,
with short, stout pectinate ligaments.
Giaucoma in the Boston Terrier
Glaucoma in the English
The prevalence of glaucoma is also increas-
Cocker Spaniel
ing in the Boston Terrier, ranging from
0.97% (1964-1973), 1.82% (1974-1983).
Glaucoma in the English Cocker Spaniel
2.60% (1984-1993), to 2.88% (1994-2002).
Glaucoma presents in the middle and pre-
may be more common in the United
dominately old age Boston Terrier (7.02 ±
Kingdom, and the single report included
sixteen glaucomatous dogs with a mean age
1.24 years). There is no clinical report on glau-
of 9.8 years old. The prevalence of glaucoma
coma in this breed to date.
in the English Cocker Spaniel in North America
was fairly constant (l.16% in 1974-1983;
Giaucoma in the Bouvier des Fiandres
1.59% in 1984-1993; and 1.35% in 1994-
2002), and primarily affects middle and older
In the Bouvier des Flandres, two reports of
dogs. For the English Cocker Spaniel (n = 37)
pectinate ligament dysplasia and narrow
in North America the prevalence of the glauco-
angle glaucoma were based on dogs in The
matous dogs by age group for 1994-2002,
Netherlands, where the breed is the most
were 0% (2-6 months old); 0% (6-12 months
frequently affected purebred dog with glau-
old); 2% (1-2 years old); 0% (2-4 years old);
coma. In America the Bouvier des Flandres is
0.66% (4-7 years old); 1.44% (7-10 years);
a relatively new breed of dog, and the number
and 3.36% (10-15 years old). The mean ± SD
of glaucomatous animals in the North Ameri-
age of initial presentation with glaucoma in the
can survey report was limited to 23 animals
English Cocker Spaniel was 6.83 ± 1.34 years
[mean ± SD age of 5.43 ± 1.70 years old]. In
old. Bedford reported both narrow and closed
THe CANINE GLAUCOMAS/ I71
iridocorneal angles and clefts as well as pecti-
narrow to closed iridocorneal angles with
nate ligament dysplasia in this breed
pectinate ligament dysplasia. The estimated
heritability of the degree of goniodysgenesis
was 0.52, and there was a significant relation-
Glaucoma in the English
ship between the angle abnormalities in the
Springer Spaniel
parents and their offspring. Anterior chamber
depth of < 3.7 mm was also a predictor of
The prevalence of primary glaucoma in this
glaucoma. If both parents had extensive gonio-
breed in North America is low (0.48%
dysgenesis (< 70%), the occurrence of glau-
[1974-l983]); but the condition has been
coma was estimated at < 4/l,0oo. Hence,
reported in Norway. While narrowing of the
shallow anterior chambers and extensive pecti-
iridocorneal angle in the hypertensive dogs
  t rde iss n 
seemed somewhat constant, the degree of pec-
factors in this breed.
tinate ligament dysplasia was more variable
with affected dogs generally more severely
affected, and more frequent in older dogs.
Glaucoma in the Poodle-
Similar age-related changes in pectinate liga-
Toy/Miniature
 ment dysplasia have been observed in the Basset
Hound; could this be synechial narrowing and
Glaucoma is frequent in North America Min-
eventual angle closure?
iature Poodles but has not been studied.
Although the prevalence is about 1% (1.49%
in 1984-1993, and 1.68% in 1994-2002;
Giaucoma in the Fiat
and Toy Poodle: 1.06% in 1984-1993, and
Coated Retriever
1.20% in 1994-2002), the popularity of this
breed results in large numbers of glaucoma-
Primary glaucoma also affects Flat-Coated
tous animals. Although the prevalence appears
Retrievers from England, but the condition has
low, the popularity of these breeds results in
not been reported among those from the United
larger number of glaucomatous animals. Glau-
States. Flat-Coated Retrievers with the more
coma is slow to develop with affected dogs first
extensive forms of pectinate ligament dysplasia
diagnosed at 4-7 years old (0.42%); and then
are predisposed to glaucoma. In one study.
a slow increase occurred (7-10 years [2.0%];
sixteen had glaucoma (62.5-100.0% of the iri-
2.37% [10-15 years old]; and 3.78% [15+
docorneal circumference affected), and eleven
years old]). The mean ± SD age of initial pre-
were normotensive (62.5-87.5% of the circum-
sentation with glaucoma in the Miniature
ference affected). The onset of glaucoma was
Poodles was 7.31 ± 1.23 years old
proposed as corneal endothelial basement
membrane deposition within the ciliary cleft,
or as gradual closure of the compromised cleft
Giaucoma in the
Norwegian Eikhound
from lenticular enlargement with aging, but no
histopathologic results were described.
The prevalence of glaucoma in the Norwe-
gian Elkhound in North America is 1.98%
Glaucoma in the Great Dane
(1994-2002). Primary open-angle glaucoma
was originally described in twenty-nine Nor-
Primary angle-closure glaucoma occurs in
wegian Elkhounds from Norway. The fifteen
Great Danes from England, with a ratio of
glaucomatous dogs (one female and fourteen
females to males of about 2:1. Most dogs
males) ranged in age from 3.9 to 13.0 years
presented with unilateral acute congestive
(median age, 6.6 years). The iridocorneal
glaucoma, with 3- to 24-month intervals
 angle and ciliary cleft appeared normal in early
between binocular involvement. Gonioscopy
 affected dogs, with IOPs ranging from upper
of the initially affected eyes, as well as of
20s to the 30s (mmHg). Pectinate ligament dys-
the opposite, normotensive eyes, revealed
plasia was not observed, though occasional
172 /EssEnTIAlS Of VeteRiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
"stout" pectinate fbers were noted, with some
cleft, however, was wider in dogs that were
narrowing of the ciliary cleft opening. The
more distantly related to the dogs with primary
ciliary cleft gradually closed as the glaucoma
angle-closure glaucoma than in those dogs
advanced, and the IOP progressively increased
more closely related. The heritability of the
Synechial closure of the ciliary cleft occurred in
relative depth of the ciliary cleft opening was
the advanced cases. Lens subluxation and total
estimated at 56%
lens luxation, buphthalmos and Haab's striae,
Ultrasonic measurements of the fellow
and ONH atrophy and retinal degeneration
eyes of unilateral glaucomatous Samoyeds
occurred late in the disease, with subsequent
revealed a longer axial length; a more shallow
loss of vision. An additional retrospective his-
anterior chamber; a thicker, more forward
topathologic study of nine clinically normal
positioned lens; and a longer (anteroposte-
and twenty-two glaucoma eyes showed open-
rior) vitreous body, which are the most
angle and closed cleft glaucoma with pectinate
frequent observations for primary narrow-
ligament dysplasia (two normal and eighteen
closed angle glaucoma in man. The glauco-
glaucoma eyes), ciliary cleft abnormalities
matous eyes all
had  closed iridocorneal
(hypoplasia or collapse), and linear deposition
angles. The classical hypothesis concerning
of PAS-positive basement material within the
pathogenesis of narrow-angle glaucoma is a
uveal trabecular meshwork (in only nineteen
relative pupil block of aqueous humor passage
glaucoma eyes). TEM demonstrated thickening
through the pupil, which is caused by the
of uveal trabecular beams by poorly staining
a isue sl au Aq pandde uoisai naieaa
large collagen fbrils and irregular deposition of
central lens or, in Samoyeds, by the more ante-
excess basement material. Affected dogs were
riorly positioned lens. Increased resistance to
5.5-8 years old and there were seven males,
the escape of aqueous humor into the pupil
two females, and gender was unknown for
from behind the iris results in the more forward
three animals. This breed also exhibits primary
displacement of the basal iris, which could
 s in iq ' n a  o
be associated with a more narrow opening of
been studied in detail
the ciliary cleft. Over time, the outflow path-
ways become progressively more compromised
and, eventually, close by peripheral synechiae
Giaucoma in the Samoyed
formation.
In the Samoyed, the first report of narrow
Glaucoma in the Shar-Pei
angle/angle closure glaucoma in this breed
was in Europe and included l2 glaucoma-
A relatively new breed to North America, the
tous animals (mean age ± SD: 6.6 ± 2.8
Shar-Pei  exhibits primary or breed-related
years). In North America the prevalence is
glaucoma (1.53% in 1984-1993, and 4.40% in
relatively stable (1.43% in 1974-1983;
1994-2002) in later life. The breed has also
1.57% in 1984-1993; and 1.59% in 1994-
been reported with hereditary lens luxation and
2002). In the Samoyed breed, glaucoma is pre-
how these two breed-related diseases inter-
sented in middle and older dogs, and the mean
relate remains to be defined. Male : female ratios
± SD age of initial presentation with glaucoma
were about the same.
was 6.16 ± 1.39 years old.
Narrow- or closed-angle glaucoma
in
Samoyed breed has been investigated clinically
Giaucoma in the Siberian Husky
in Sweden. Results of gonioscopy indicated
 pectinate ligament dysplasia to varying degrees,
The prevalence of glaucoma in the Siberian
and the opening of the ciliary clef (as measured
Husky (1.13% in 1984-1993, and 1.88% in
 from goniophotographs) declined with age.
1994-2002) reflects the increased popular
There was no significant correlation between
ity of the breed in North America. Pectinate
IOP and degree of pectinate ligament dysplasia
ligament dysplasia and progressive narrow-
of these animals. The opening of the ciliary
ing of the iridocorneal angle have been
THe CaNine GLauCOmas/ I73
related to this form of ocular hypertension.
impairment of aqueous humor outflow. Both
Nell et al. reported that pectinate ligament dys-
the medical and surgical management of sec-
plasia in this breed may be inherited but the
ondary glaucomas in the dog has been over-
mode of inheritance could not be ascertained.
shadowed by those of the primary glaucomas.
She also reported the pectinate ligament dys-
Clinical management of these secondary
plasia was observed more frequently in the
glaucomas is often more clear-cut, because
female and in blue irides. Glaucoma in this
the cause of the increased lOP can usually
breed affects mainly young and middle age
be ascertained, and the prognosis for the
dogs; the mean ± SD age of initial presentation
glaucoma progression ascertained.
with glaucoma was 5.27 ± 1.64 years old
Medical or surgical treatment of the second-
ary glaucomas is directed toward removing
the cause of the elevated IOP (Box 7.2). There
Glaucoma in the Weish
may be additional or secondary changes (e.g.-
Springer Spaniel
     
application of the standard glaucoma fltering
Twenty-eight cases of primary angle closure
or cyclodestructive procedures. The most fre-
have been reported in Welsh Springer Spaniels
quent cause of secondary glaucoma in the dog
from England. Females were affected more fre-
is lens displacement, which is demonstrated
quently than males (ratio, 4.2: 1). Age of onset
 as subluxation, anterior luxation, or posterior
ranged from 10 weeks to 10 years (mean age.
luxation. Uveitis and intraocular tumors are
2 years and 9 months). Four dogs were affected
before l year of age. Time from the onset of
glaucoma in the first eye to that in the second
eye ranged from 6 days to 3 years. Clinical signs
were either those of acute congestive glaucoma
with pain, dilated and unresponsive pupils,
Box 7.2. Treatments for the
episcleral congestion, corneal edema, and IOP
Secondary Glaucomas in Dogs
as high as 80-100 mmHg, or those of chronic
angle-closure glaucoma with enlarged globes,
Anterior uveitis:
Haab's striae, lens subluxation and cataract for-
 Peripheral anterior synechiae
mation, and advanced retinal and ONH degen-
Pupillary obstruction
erations. Gonioscopy of the affected dogs
Iris bombe
Medical:
 corticosteroids,
nonsteroidal
I   anti-
revealed eyes with regions of narrow and
inflarmatory agents, mydriatics
regions of closed iridocorneal angles and ciliary
Surgical: coreoplasty. iridencleisis
clefts, as well as other eyes with the angles
Lens-associated:
totally closed. This form of glaucoma was famil-
Cataract
Surgical: Lens removal
ial, and the mode of inheritance appeared to be
Displacement: anterior luxation, subluxation,
dominant. Selected matings, however, were not
posterior luxation
performed. The affected animals with the par-
Surgical: Lens removal, other
tially open and closed angles were thought to
Intraocular neoplasms
be heterozygous, and those with the eyes having
Surgical: iridocyclectomy. enucleation
completely closed angles were thought to be
Hyphema
 Surgical: aspirate/tissue-plasminogen activator
homozygous. The defect may show variable
Melanocytic
expression as well.
Surgical: anterior chamber shunts, enucleation
Aphakic (angle/pupil obstruction)
Surgical:
coreoplasty/iriden cleisis.
anterior
vitrectomy
Secondary Glaucomas
 Malignant
 Surgical: anterior vitrectomy
The secondary glaucomas consist of diseases
Silicone oil
Surgical: aspirate oil/vitreous
with increased 1OP, open to closed iridocor-
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
neal angles and ciliary clefts, and detectable
I74 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmOLOGY
also associated with secondary glaucoma in
the dog.
Box 7.3. Inherited and Breed
Predisposition to Lens Luxation in
Dogs
The Lens and the Giaucomas
inherited
Breed Predisposed
Removal of the lens, though not commonly
considered to be a surgical procedure for
Border Collie
Australian Collie
Cairn Terrier
Basset Hound
treatment of glaucoma, may be necessary in
Jack Russell Temier
Beagle
treatment of many canine lens-induced glau-
Lakeland Terrier
Chihuahua
comas. Lens removal may be indicated for
Manchester Temier
German Shepherd
secondary glaucomas associated with lens-
Miniature Bull Terrier
Greyhound
induced uveitis and cataract resorption,
Norfolk Terrier
Miniature Poodle
Norwich Terrier
Miniature Schnauzer
intumescent cataracts, anterior and poste-
Scottish Terrier
Norwegian Elkhound
rior lens luxations, and subluxations. When
Skye Terrier
Spaniel Breeds
the lens is displaced from its patella fossa in a
Sealyham Terrier
Pernbroke Welsh Corgi
glaucomatous eye, maintenance of IOP within
Smoothhaired Fox Terrier
WWelsh Terrier
WWest Highland Wwhite
Toy Poodle 
normal limits by surgical, medical, or some
combination of these treatments may be impos-
Terrier
Toy Terrier
Tibetan Terrier
sible without lens removal
Wwirehaired Fox Terrier
Subluxated Lenses and Anterior and
Posterior Lens Luxations
America survey, affected dogs were older
(mean ± SD age 6.56 ± 0.93 years old). In a
Lens luxations are the most frequent cause
study in England on lens luxation in dogs,
of secondary glaucoma in the dog, but they
Curtis and Barnett reported the terrier breeds
also occur secondary to buphthalmia in the
with lens luxation were younger; in their report
primary glaucomas. Enlargement of the globe
of 100 dogs,f
fifty-seven were Jack Russell
causes progressive stretching of the zonules,
Terriers with a mean age of 4.7 years old. The
     
primary lens luxations occurred in dogs
the equatorial lens capsule, or infrequently,
between 3 and 5 years old, while the secondary
   n n  
lens luxations occurred in dogs over 8 years
ciliary body. In the dog with bilateral buphthal-
old.
mia and lens subluxation/luxation, it may be
The glaucoma may be associated with irido-
impossible to determine if the lens luxations are
cyclitis from microtrauma between the unstable
primary or secondary; the breed, age of onset,
lens and iris, with resultant increases of aqueous
and presence or absence of cataract develop-
humor fibrin, proteins, and inflammatory cells,
ment may aid in making this determination.
which can themselves interfere with aqueous
Total luxation with normal-sized globes is more
drainage, and it also may aid in formation of
common in primary luxation syndromes, with
pre-iridal fibropupillary membranes as well as
subluxations more commonly caused by the
anterior and posterior synechiae, which further
buphthalmia from glaucoma. Lens luxations in
compromise aqueous humor drainage.
terriers are common (Box 7.3; Figs. 7.9 A and
Anterior lens movement can mechanically
B), and these dogs may present with either
impair passage of aqueous humor through
unilateral or bilateral and acute or chronic sec-
the pupil, thereby causing increased poste-
ondary glaucoma.
rior chamber pressure, which in turn causes
In the Wirehaired Fox Terrier,Formston
anterior ballooning of the peripheral iris and
first associated lens luxation to the glau-
reduction in the area of the iridocorneal
coma in 90 animals with a mean ±SD age of
angle outflow pathways. Such movement of
4.96 ± 1.43 years of age. None of the dogs
the iris also contributes to formation of perma-
were less than 3 years old. In the North
nent peripheral anterior synechiae and poste-
The Canine Gaucomas/ I75
rior synechia, which cause a condition known
as iris bombe
The completely luxated lens can remain in
the patella fossa, luxate into the anterior
chamber, or move posteriorly through the torn
anterior vitreal face and into the vitreous. One
report suggests that ocular hypertension occurs
in 73% of canine eyes with anterior lens luxa-
tions, in 43% of those with subluxations, and in
38% of those with posterior lens luxations. With
anterior displacement of the lens from the patella
fossa, vitreous adhering to the posterior lens
capsule may occlude the pupil, thereby prevent-
 ing pupillary flow of aqueous humor and bal-
looning the base of the iris, which in turn causes
A
iridocorneal angle and sclerociliary cleft closure.
This type of iris bombe often masks the basal
iridal and filtration angle changes; miotics
should be avoided in this condition.
With posterior or vitreal luxation of the
lens, the torn anterior vitreal membrane
allows both liquid and formed (i.e., gel) vit-
reous access into the pupil and the anterior
chamber. Formed vitreous may cause pupil-
lary blockage and secondary glaucoma. It can
also adhere to the posterior cornea and irido-
corneal angle. Blockage of the iridocorneal
angle with formed vitreous suffcient to increase
IOP is infrequent, but blockage of the pupil
from vitreous suffcient to increase IOP is more
common
Lens subluxation is first apparent with a
B
variable size aphakic crescent. With loss of
the zonulary support, the lens becomes
Fig. 7.9. Lens luxations in the dog may produce
unstable (phakodenesis) as well as the iris
secondary glaucomas, especially in terriers, or
(iridodenesis). The vitreous may protrude
lens luxation may develop secondary to globe
through the aphakic crescent to variable
enlargement. A. In lens subluxation, the cause of the
amounts. Possible mechanisms that these
ocular hypertension is less obvious. Intermittent
unstable lenses may produce ocular hyperten-
pupillary obstructions of aqueous humor passage by
the unstable lens and formed anterior vitreous,
sion include microtrauma and iridocyclitis,
chronic iridocyclitis, and progressive iridocorneal
peripheral anterior and posterior synechiae,
angle and ciliary cleft closure, however, appear to be
formation of pre-iridal and iridocorneal angle
important. B. In anterior lens luxation, the ocular
inflammatory membranes, pupillary blockage
hypertension appears to arise either from pupillary
of aqueous humor flow, vitreous pupillary
obstruction by the cortical vitreous still adherent to
 blockage, and other factors.
the posterior lens capsule, from compression of the
Early removal of displaced lenses, particu-
iridocorneal angle and ciliary cleft by the basal iris, or
larly in terriers, has the highest possibly of
from a combination of both.
success for retention of vision and preven-
tion of secondary glaucoma. The primary
objective of lens extraction is to prevent
secondary glaucoma, to diminish inflamma-
I76/EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmOLOGY
tion, or to treat the secondary glaucoma.
and the intracapsular lensectomy for luxated
Delayed medical or surgical treatment of
lens in the dog, aphakic and pseudophakic
eyes with displaced lenses can result in sec-
glaucomas are becoming more frequent. In
ondary glaucoma. Surgical removal of sublux-
 one report, the incidence of aphakic glauco-
ated lenses, anterior luxated lenses, and the
mas after cataract surgery was estimated to
posterior luxated (i.e., intravitreal) lenses is
be 3%. In another study, in which extracap-
accomplished by the extracapsular, phacoemul-
sular cataract extractions were used, aphakic
sification, or intracapsular techniques (see
glaucomas developed in 20% of the eyes. Of
chapter 9).
these glaucomas, approximately 30% devel-
oped during the first 6 months after surgery;
Phacomorphic Glaucoma and
the remaining 70% developed later. These
Intumescent Cataract
studies also suggest periodic re-examination
after cataract surgery to dogs to monitor, in
The intumescent (i.e., swollen) cataract has
part, IOP
been associated with an acute pupillary
Aphakic glaucomas probably represent mul-
block, phacomorphic glaucoma in the dog.
tiple etiologies, with the two most frequent
being occlusion of the pupil from inflammatory
This phenomenon occurs most frequently in
the dog with diabetic cataracts. These cata-
membranes and closure of the iridocorneal
racts may also develop capsular tears.
angle and ciliary cleft by formation of pre-iridal
fbrin membranes and peripheral anterior syn-
echia and occurs several weeks to months after
Phacolytic Gfaucoma/Resorbing
cataract removal (Fig. 7.10). The aphakic glau-
Hypermature Cataracts and Lens-
comas that occur secondary to pupillary block-
Induced Uveitis
age in the dog are usually characterized by a
small pupil that is either adhered to itself or is
Rupture of the lens capsule from ocular
obstructed by a membrane consisting of orga-
trauma and lens-induced uveitis from resorb-
nized fibrin, inflammatory cells and fbrous
ing hypermature cataracts can cause the
tissue, anterior capsule remnants, posterior
phacolytic form of open-angle glaucoma in
capsule, the anterior vitreous, or any combina-
the dog. If the lens-induced uveitis is not care-
fully monitored and controlled medically, the
filtration angle caneventuallybecomeobstructed
with inflammatory cells, protein-rich aqueous
humor, fbrin, and macrophages flled with
lenslike material. With chronic lens-induced
uveitis, formation of anterior and posterior syn-
echia, peripheral anterior synechia, and iris
bombe may cause this phacolytic form of sec-
ondary glaucoma. The definitive treatment for
phacolytic glaucoma is cataract extraction to
 eliminate the source of the lens protein obstruct-
ing the aqueous outflow pathways. Medical
therapy with β-blockers, carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors (CAIs), and hyperosmotic agents is
useful for reducing IOP in preparation for
Fig. 7.10. Aphakic glaucomas may develop
surgery.
secondary to pupillary occlusion from annular
posterior synechiae (iris to iris, iris to lens capsular/
anterior vitreous adhesions, or both), thus resulting
The Aphakic Glaucomas
in iris bombe, as in this eye. Alternatively, they may
develop secondary to angle obstruction with
With the increased frequency of extracapsu-
 inflammatory debris and peripheral anterior
lar and phacoemulsification cataract surgery
 synechiation.
THe CANiNe GLauCOmaS/ I77
tion of these, and occur within the frst few
several factors. Results of computer-aided mor-
weeks after lens removal. There is usually iris
phologic analysis indicated the increased IOP
bombe as well. The occluded pupil may be
immediately after surgery may result from a
depressed and, sometimes, barely visible
significant reduction in the ciliary cleft cross-
because of the iris bombe that bulges into the
sectional area and width
central and peripheral anterior chamber. IOP,
Results of both of these studies confirm the
as measured by applanation tonometry, is
value of postoperative tonometric monitoring
usually raised to 30 or 40 mmHg, with a higher
in the dogs undergoing cataract and lens
IOP posterior to the iris.
removal. If the IOP exceeds "safe limits," topical
If the pupillary obstruction is acute (< 72
Or systemic CAIs (or both) or β-blockers (or
hours), intensive medical therapy consisting of
some combination of these) are recommended,
0.1% scopolamine combined with 10% phen-
because they reduce the rate of aqueous humor
ylephrine, topical and systemic corticosteroids,
formation but do not affect pupil size or
topical and systemic nonsteroids, and systemic
increase the amount of iridocyclitis. Carbachol
CAIs can be attempted. Intravenous mannitol
injected intracamerally during cataract surgery
can be administered rapidly to reduce IOP, but
has been reported to prevent postoperative
its effects may be muted from increased perme-
hypertension in the dogs. When IOP exceeds
ability of the blood-aqueous barrier because of
 40 mmHg and is refractory to topical therapy
the iridocyclitis. Intracameral tissue-plasmino-
and IV mannitol, anterior chamber paracente-
gen activator (TPA), 25-50μg. can readily
sis may be necessary.
assist in resolution of fbrin occlusion of the
pupil of less than 2 weeks duration.
 If pupillary flow of aqueous humor is not
Malignant Glaucoma
possible, the occluded pupil can be opened by
(Aqueous Misdirection)
discission with a sharp blade or hypodermic
needle, laser iridotomy, iridectomy, or iriden-
Malignant glaucoma is a variation of pupil-
cleisis. Our preference is usually the latter
lary block aphakic glaucoma, and it may
procedure.
develop  after extracapsular/phacoemulsifi-
cation, intracapsular cataract, or lens extrac-
tion surgery. The pupil is usually of medium
Acute Postoperative Hypertension
size and is obstructed with inflammatory
membranes, combined with either the pos-
 Increases in IOP during the immediate post-
terior lens capsule and anterior vitreous face
 operative period after cataract removal have
(with extracapsular/phacoemulsification) or
been recognized for several years in dogs. In
the organized anterior vitreal face or mem-
dogs, the incidence of postoperative hyper-
brane. Rather than remaining in the enlarged
tension of 25 mmHg or greater was 49%, of
posterior chamber behind the iris bombe, the
30 mmHg or greater was 34%, of 40 mmHg
aqueous humor is either mis- or redirected into
or greater was 20%, and of 50 mmHg or
the vitreous body through a tear in its anterior
greater was 6%. The average onset for post-
face. As aqueous humor formation continues
operative hypertension of 25 mmHg
or
and the IOP rises, the aqueous humor is now
 greater was 4.9 hours. The incidence of post-
misdirected into the vitreous body, thereby
operative hypertension was not affected by
pushing the organized or formed vitreous
either  extracapsular or phacoemulsification
further into the occluded pupil.
techniques; however, those eyes operated on by
This is a surgical condition in which the
phacoemulsification demonstrated a more rapid
impermeable pupillary membranes are removed
increase in IOP (mean, 3.9 hours) than those
      s 
eyes operated on by extracapsular techniques
vitrectomy is performed. Once these impedi-
(mean, 8.4 hours)
ments are removed, pupillary flow of aqueous
The cause of postoperative hypertension is
humor is reestablished. Because peripheral
not specifically known, but it may result from
anterior synechia may develop quickly with
I78/EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmolOGY
this disorder, however, an iridencleisis is
another consideration.
Traumatic Giaucomas
Traumatic glaucomas, which occur second-
ary to blunt and penetrating trauma, are
infrequent in the dog. Complete acute
hyphema in the dog is usually associated
with uveal inflammation and low lOP;
 chronic or repeated intraocular hemorrhage
in the dog is more apt to increase IOP. Trau-
Fig. 7.ll. Secondary glaucoma from angle closure
matic glaucomas in the dog are usually associ-
and formation of extensive peripheral anterior
ated with intense iridocyclitis and are best
synechiae and pre-iridal rubeosis in an Akita with
 e   
uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada.
of the inflammation, prevention of peripheral
syndrome).
anterior synechia, and control of the IOP (with
 CAIs). If peripheral anterior synechia develops,
medical therapy becomes ineffective, and some
recently discovered chronic uveitis in Golden
type of antiglaucoma surgical procedure is indi-
Retrievers occurs as chronic intraocular inflam-
cated. Intracameral TPA may be used to assist
 mations; major complications of both diseases
in resolution of anterior chamber fibrin follow-
are glaucoma. Clinical signs of uveitic glau-
ing hyphema; however, this may cause more
 coma are a combination of iridocyclitis and
hemorrhage if blood clots dissolve from
either acute or chronic glaucoma.
the TPA.
The treatment of uveitic glaucomas occur-
ring secondary to peripheral anterior syn-
echia in phakic eyes is targeted at the
Uveitic Glaucomas
underlying uveitis and at controlling the
 IOP; thus, retinal and ONH damage are min-
The iridocyclitides are a frequent group of
imized. High levels of topical and systemic
intraocular diseases in the dog, and develop-
corticosteroids and nonsteroidals are indicated.
ment of inflammatory glaucomas with these
Because neither miosis nor mydriasis is desired
conditions is a serious complication. The
inflammatory glaucomas may 
 develop with
tently move the inflamed iris and pupil and to
either acute intense iridocyclitis, associated
discourage formation of posterior synechiae.
with pupillary occlusion and iris bombe;
Topical and systemic antibiotics may also be
with obstruction of the filtration angle with
indicated if an infectious process is present.
inflammatory cells, fibrin, and 
cellular
Topical and systemic CAIs are administered to.
debris; or more commonly with chronic iri-
hopefully, maintain the IOP within normal
docyclitis, usually from peripheral anterior
limits. Surgical treatments, such as laser cyclo-
synechia but infrequently from annular pos-
 photocoagulation and anterior chamber shunts,
terior synechia and iris bombe (Fig. 7.ll).
The most frequent cause of secondary glau-
may also be attempted
coma in the dog in North America is associated
with cataract-induced uveitis. The iridocycliti-
Melanocytic Glaucoma
des may be associated with localized ocular
 diseases (e.g., corneal perforation, iris prolapse,
Originally described as pigmentary glau-
iris bombe) or many systemic infectious dis-
coma in the Cairn Terrier, the term melano-
eases (see chapter l6). Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
cytic glaucoma now seems to be more
syndrome, or uveodermatologic syndrome,
appropriate. In the dog, the pigmentation
occurs in several Arctic breeds of dogs, and a
appears to relate primarily to the uveal
THe CANiNe GLauCOmAS/ I79
melanocytes and melanophages, eventually
cysts (may arise from the posterior iris and/
obstructing aqueous humor outflow. Glau-
or ciliary body) were histopathologically
coma in this breed in North America has a
lined by thin or thick epithelium, contained
prevalence of 1.33% (1984-1993) and 1.82%
hyaluronic acid in some cases, and had evi-
(1994-2002).
dence of inflammation. The cysts may cause
This unique glaucoma affects middle-aged
glaucoma by compressing the iridocorneal
to older Cairn Terriers, and it may affect one
angle and ciliary cleft or by releasing their
or both eyes (Fig. 7.l2). It has also been
own contents to cause angle closure by
reported in the Boxer and Labrador Retriever.
mechanical and inflammatory means. A sec-
In these eyes large aggregations of melanocytes
ondary glaucoma in the Great Dane dog is
and melanophages occur within the filtration
similar but not identical to the disease in the
angle, episcleral and subconjunctival tissues,
Golden Retrievers.
 tapetal ocular fundus, and even in the menin-
ges about the ONH.
Intraocuiar Neoplasms and Giaucoma
Onset of the chronic glaucoma appears to be
slow and to be associated with the accumula-
The most frequently
occurring primary
tion of pigmented cells within the fltration
intraocular neoplasms in the dog are mela-
angle and scleral venous plexus. Medical and
nomas and adenomas/adenocarcinomas of
surgical treatment of this secondary glaucoma
has not been successful in the long term,
the ciliary body and iris. Not infrequently,
the presenting clinical sign of these anterior
because the proliferating melanocytes and mel-
segment tumors is glaucoma, iridocyclitis,
anophages eventually obstruct any surgical
hyphema, or some combination of these
anterior chamber bypass.
(Fig. 7.13). Metastatic intraocular neoplasms,
which are most often adenocarcinomas, also
Pigment Exfoliation Glaucoma
frequently involve the iris and ciliary body.
Lymphoma/lymphosarcoma may also affect the
An angle closure/occlusion secondary glau-
anterior uvea. Glaucomas secondary to these
coma has been associated with pigment
neoplasms usually result from direct infltration
exfoliation and iris and ciliary body cysts in
of the filtration angle, obstruction of the angle
by tumor-associated  inflammatory products
affected dogs is 7.6 years. The anterior uveal
Fig. 7.13. Advanced secondary glaucoma associated
with an anterior uveal melanoma. With these types of
Fig. 7.12. Glaucoma in the Cairn Terrier associated
glaucoma, the aqueous humor outflow pathways may
with melanocytosis of the ocular tissues. Note the
be obstructed by the tumor, inflammatory debris
 protruding pigmented areas beneath the bulbar
from iridocyclitis (perhaps secondary to tumor
conjunctiva
necrosis), hyphema, and pre-iridal rubeosis.
I80 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OFHTHALmOLOGY
and peripheral anterior synechiae, or from sec-
of these giant tears prevents further anterior
ondary pre-iridal membrane formation. Rapidly
movement of the outer segments and lowers
growing neoplasms often produce glaucoma,
the IOP.
and tumor-related necrosis may produce a sec-
ondary iridocyclitis
In the clinical management of these patients,
Congenital Glaucomas
 gonioscopy, indirect ophthalmoscopy of the
 peripheral ocular fundus, and ultrasonography
Extensive goniodysgenesis/trabecular malde-
are used to carefully define the borders of the
velopment is rare in the dog. When present,
neoplasm. A systemic medical workup is per-
       '
formed to rule-out any metastases. Most of
it occurs as an isolated defect or with other
these tumor-induced glaucomas are usually
systemic anomalies. When present, elevations
treated with enucleation, but local iridocyclec-
of IOP occur early in the puppy's life (usually
tomy, either with or without scleral grafts, may
3-6 months of age), and the primary com-
successfully remove the smaller neoplasms and
plaint is one of rapid and, often, dramatic
preserve vision.
globe enlargement (Fig. 7.14). Histopathologic
results of the few globes available with canine
congenital glaucomas have revealed multiple
Glaucomas Secondary to Silicone
anterior segment and aqueous humor pathol-
Oil and Rhegmatogenous
ogy abnormalities, including the trabecular
Retinal Detachments
meshwork.
New glaucomas recently reported or observed
in the dog are those occurring secondary to
Medical and Surgical
silicone oil in the anterior chamber and second-
Treatment of the
ary to rhegmatogenous retinal detachments.
Canine Glaucomas
Silicone oil is used in the repair of canine retinal
detachments to tamponade the detached retina
The choice of medical, surgical, or most fre-
      
quently, a combination of both modalities is
lium. Shifting of the oil from the vitreous into
based on the absence or presence of vision at
the anterior chamber, which occurs frequently
initial presentation; interest and ability of the
in both aphakes and pseudophakes, increases
owner to treat the glaucoma; the projected
the IOP by physically obstructing most of the
costs; and the temperment of the patient.
aqueous outflow pathways. Treatment consists
ofremoving the oil from the anterior
chamber.
Nonrhegmatogenous retinal detachments in
the dog are usually associated with normal or
low IOP (i.e., ocular hypotony), presumably
resulting from increased uveoscleral aqueous
humor  outflow.  Canine
rhegmatogenous
detachments, however, especially in those dogs
with giant retinal tears, may release rod and
cone outer segment fragments into the subreti-
nal fluids and vitreous, which eventually enter
the anterior chamber. This cellular debris accu-
mulates in the aqueous humor outflow path-
ways and elevates the IOP. Rod and cone outer
segments may be demonstrated in the aqueous
Fig. 7.l4. Advanced congenital glaucoma in a 10-
humor at trabecular meshwork. Reattachment
week-old Dalmatian. The cause was not determined
THe CANINE GLAUCOMAS/ I81
Medical Therapy for fOP Control
coma is a most important aspect, because surgi-
cal procedures often still require concurrent
Treatment of the different types of canine glau-
medical  therapy.
Medical therapy for the
coma has, as the paramount purpose, mainte-
narrow- and closed-angle glaucomas is usually
nance of vision and IOP within the normal
short term when employed alone, because
range after the condition has been diagnosed
eventually, the outflow becomes so impaired
and prevention of further damage to the optic
that drug-associated changes in formation and
nerve and retina. Unfortunately, most canine
outflow are inadequate. After anterior chamber
glaucomatous patients present with the condi-
bypass surgeries, l
however, some medical
tion at an advanced stage in at least one eye.
therapy may be necessary to maintain the IOP
and the therapeutic goal may simply be a pain-
at less than 20 mmHg
free eye that requires little to no medical care.
Results of some clinical studies suggest
No single treatment regimen for canine
that the earlier in the glaucoma process the
glaucoma is possible because of the many
surgery is performed, the higher the long-
different types of glaucoma (Box 7.4). In the
term success rate at controlling lOP and
secondary glaucomas, the initiating cause is
maintenance of vision for as long as possi-
identified and, if possible, either removed or
ble. Medical therapy for the glaucomas can
 suppressed. Medical treatment of canine glau-
also be quite expensive; additional informa-
tion on these drugs may be found in appen-
dices A (adrenergics), G (carbonic anhydrase
Box 7.4. 10P Control
inhibitors), J (hyperosmotics), K (miotics),
and M (prostaglandins).
initial Medical Contro!
Medical treatment of the primary glaucomas
V mannitol (1-2g/kg IV)
often includes short-term administration of a
Miotics (2% pilocarpine q12h-q8h)
single drug, or combination of drugs, to main-
Adrenergics or beta-blockers (q24h-q12h)
tain the IOP within normal limits and the long-
Prostaglandins (q24h-q12h)
term administration of combinations of drugs
Neuroprotective drugs-future
to supplement the available filtering surgeries
Short-Term Contro!
Miotics (2% pilocarpine q12h-q8h)
and cyclodestructive procedures. Prophylactic
Adrenergics or beta-blockers (q24h-q12h)
 treatment of fellow eyes in dogs presenting with
CAls (topical dorsolamide or brinzolamide—q12h-
unilateral primary glaucoma appears to delay
q8h; or systermic rmnethazolarnide 1-5mg/kg per
the onset of glaucoma in these eyes for several
day PO q12h in two divided doses)
months or longer. Medical treatment of PACG
Prostaglandins  
(latanoprost,
travoprost.
PLe
in man is less rewarding and the same observa-
bimatoprost—q12h-q24h)
Neuroprotective drugs—future
tion occurs in the dog; vision is often impaired
Surgery/laser
or lost on the initial presentation to the oph-
Long-Term Contro!
thalmologist! In one report 17.8% of the PACG
Surgery/laser cyclophotocoagulation
human patients were blind in the initial affected
Supplement with medical control
eye and 59% had best-corrected vision worse
Miotics (2% pilocarpine q12h-q8h)
than 6/9
Prostaglandins (latanoprost, travoprost, and
Medical therapy of the canine glaucomas
bimatoprost—q12h-q24h)
has changed during the past 40+ years,
Adrenergics or beta-blockers (q12h-q12h)
CAls (topical dorsolamide or brinzolamide
based on the introduction of new drugs and
q12h-q8h; or systemic methazolamide
availability of older drugs. In the l960-
1-5mg/kg PO q12h in two divided
1970s drugs for the canine glaucomas were
doses)
most commonly miotics (pilocarpine and
Neuroprotective drugs-future
demacarium) and systemic carbonic anhy-
*See appendices A. G, J. K. and M for additional
rase inhibitors; in the l980s the beta
information on doses, ocular effects. and side
blockers were added; and in the l990s
effects.
topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and
I82 /ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
topical prostaglandins became available. The
humor formation and increasing uveoscleral
availability of systemic carbonic anhydrase
outflow. In the dog brimonidine lowers IOP
inhibitors and the long-acting anticholinestase
only slightly and must be combined with other
miotics has been limited because of poor
ocular hypotensive agents. See appendix A for
 demand in human ophthalmology.
additional information.
Parasympathomimetics
Hyperosmotic Agents
Parasympathomimetics or miotics are used in
Hyperosmotic agents are used systemically
most types of the canine glaucomas, except for
in short-term treatment of acute glaucoma in
those associated with severe inflammations of
the dog and before surgical procedures for
 the anterior segment (see appendix K). They
glaucoma. Systemic hyperosmotic agents
are frequently combined with CAls and β-
 commonly used include intravenous manni-
adrenergic antagonists in long-term medical
tol and oral glycerol. With increased blood
treatment of the primary glaucomas. Choliner-
osmolarity, water is removed from the aqueous
gic miotics produce pupillary constriction,
humor and the vitreous body, thus reducing
ciliary musculature contraction, and increased
the IOP and the volume of the vitreous body.
outflow facility of the aqueous humor through
 Integrity of the blood-aqueous barrier is impor-
the trabecular meshwork. Miotics also produce
 tant for these drugs to be effective; presence of
vasodilation of the blood vessels of the con-
 an iridocyclitis may reduce their ocular hypo-
junctiva, iris, intrascleral plexuses, and aqueous
tensive effects. Mannitol is administered intra-
veins. Miotics can reactivate latent iritis, inten-
venously at a dose of 1.0-l.5 g/kg. Ocular
sify concurrent iritis, and increase the protein
hypotension
becomes
evident within
30
content of the aqueous humor. The two most
minutes and lasts for at least 5 hours. The dura-
frequently used miotics in the dog include pilo-
tion of effect relates to rapidity of the injection
 carpine and demecarium bromide. See appen-
and the dose. Glycerol is administered orally at
dix K for additional information.
a dose of l-2 g/kg: it is unpalatable and, occa-
sionally, produces emesis in the dog.
Adrenergics (β-Blockers
Hyperosmotic agents are primarily used to
reduce IOP rapidly in acute congestive glau-
and α-Agonists)
 coma, and usually combined with other topical
drugs. If the ocular hypotensive effects are not
Adrenergic agents lower IOP in the dog, but
evident with a few hours in potentially visual
they must be combined with other drugs to
eyes, anterior chamber paracentesis and removal
achieve the greatest decreases. Early reports of
of 0.1 ml aqueous humor is performed to assist
β-antagonists such as timolol, betaxolol, and
the hyperosmotic and topical therapy. For
levobunolol provided inconsistent results in
additional information see appendix J.
lowering the IOP in normal dogs, and different
opinions still exist about the efficacy of these
drugs in canine glaucoma patients. Dose-
Systemic and Topical Carbonic
response studies with both normotensive and
Anhydrase Inhibitors
glaucomatous Beagles have been reported. We
frequently use the commercially available 0.5%
Systemic CAIs are useful in the treatment of all
timolol maleate ql2h in our canine glaucoma
types of glaucoma in the dog. These agents
patients.
include
acetazolamide,
ethoxyzolamide,
The β2-adrenergic agonist 0.5% apracloni-
dichlorphenamide and methazolamide (the
dine was evaluated in normal dogs and pro-
latter is used more frequently based on avail-
duced mydriasis with inconsistent decreases in
ability). CAls reduce active aqueous humor
IOP. Heart rate was also reduced in some dogs.
formation by inhibiting the carbonic anhydrase
Brimonidine tartrate (0.2%) is another β2-
enzymatic processes within the nonpigmented
agonist that lowers IOP by reducing aqueous
ciliary body epithelium. There is no effect on
THe CaNine GLauCOmaS/ I83
the outflow facility. In the dog, CAIs reduce the
Antifibrin and Cytotoxic Drugs
IOP by 20-30%. The maximal effect usually
occurs 4-8 hours after oral administration, and
Intracameral injections of TPA, 25-50 μg. will
the ocular hypotensive effects of these drugs do
quickly dissolve fbrin of less than 10-14 days
duration within the anterior chamber and pupil
To avoid severe systemic complications
(see chapter 8). The value of TPA in the differ-
in man, topical dorzolamide and brinzol-
ent filtering and anterior chamber shunt sur-
amide became available. For maximal 1OP
 geries for removing fibrin obstructions is
reduction and inhibition of carbonic anhy-
unequaled, and TPA represents a major advance
drase within the nonpigmented ciliary body
in the success of these surgeries.
epithelium, topical dorzolamide is adminis-
Cytotoxic antifbrosing drugs such as mito-
tered q8h. Low doses of systemic CAI may be
mycin C and 5-fluorouracil may maintain the
used to supplement topical instillations of
rs a d    
dorzolamide to ensure maximum reductions
of subconjunctival aqueous outflow blebs adja-
ofIOP.For additionali
information
see
cent to gonioimplants. Mitomycin, 0.2-0.4 mg/
appendix G.
mL, is administered for 5 minutes intraopera-
tively to the episcleral surgical site via a surgical
 cellulose sponge, then the area is profusely irri-
Prostaglandins
 gated. The conjunctival edges of the surgical
wounds should not be touched with mitomy-
Prostaglandins (PGs) have been studied for
cin, and high doses of mitomycin may diffuse
nearly thirty years for their roles in ocular
through the sclera and lower the rate of aqueous
inflammations, but only recently was it dis-
humor formation by affecting the ciliary body.
covered that very low concentrations of
 For additional information see appendix N.
these drugs applied topically to the eye
lowered intraocular pressure. This class of
drugs can profoundly lower IOP in the dog.
Neuroprotection and
Onset of drug action is usually signaled by
Neuroregeneration
miosis. The PGs seem to lower IOP by
increasing the uveoscleral or unconventional
Neuroprotection includes the protection of
aqueous humor outflow, although there is
intact, healthy RGC from secondary degenera-
tonographic evidence that trabecular or con-
tion, and prolonged survival of healthy RGC
ventional outflow may be also increased in
bodies with injured axons. Excitatory amino
some species. PGF also produces miosis in
acid antagonists, agents that improve mitochon-
dogs that is of shorter duration than the decline
drial function, glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate
in IOP, which may change the trabecular or
(NMDA)-receptor antagonists such as dextro-
conventional aqueous humor outflow. Both
methorphan and memantine that block NMDA
PGA and PGF analogs lower IOP in dogs. These
receptors but do not affect non-NMDA recep-
drugs include: 0.005% latanoprost; 0.004%
tors, NOS inhibitors, oxygen free radical scaven-
travoprost; and 0.03% bimatoprost. Unopros-
 gers, neurotrophic factors such as brain-derived
tone isopropyl, available as either a 0.12% or
neurotrophic factor, apoptosis inhibitors, and
0.15% solution, lowers IOP and induces miosis
calcium channel blockers may provide protec-
in both normal and glaucoma dogs but these
tion against glutamate-mediated toxicityofRGCs
effects are of less magnitude and duration than
under the ischemic conditions of the retina and
the other 3 PGFs.
ONH in glaucomatous dogs. Neuroprotective
Ocular side effects after chronic administra-
 treatment of the optic neuropathy of glaucoma
tion of latanoprost in man, nonhuman primates 
may include compounds that neutralize the
and pigmented rabbits include increased iridal
 mediators of glutamate damage and that upregu-
pigmentation, hypertrichosis and pigmentation
late cell-survival regulatory genes (e.g., bcl-2) or
of the eyelashes. For additional information see
downregulate genes that promote apoptosis
appendix M.
(e.g., bax) as well as IOP reduction therapy.
I84 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
Patient Selection for
valves. Recent reports with higher success
Glaucoma Surgery
rates  used
gonioshunts combined
with
either diode
laser cyclophotocoagulation or
The optimal canine candidates for antiglau-
cryothermy.
coma surgery are visual patients with early
glaucoma, no iridocyclitis or lens sublux-
ation, and normal-appearing optic discs.
Surgical Procedure and Results for
Patients with vision and lOP that is increas-
Anterior Chamber Shunts
ing despite maximum levels of medical
therapy are also good candidates. Surgical
The surgical procedures for gonioimplants is
treatments for advanced glaucomas not under
about the same for all of the episcleral devices
adequate medical control and often without the
(and summarized in Figs. 7.l5A though E).
possibility of restoration of vision require dif-
The success rate for anterior chamber shunts
ferent strategies.
has progressly improved with the refinement in
the gonioimplant, surgical procedure, and
postoperative clinical management.
Available Surgical Procedures
Surgical procedures for treatment of the
Cyclodestructive Techniques
primary glaucomas in the dog are divided
into two types: those that construct alter-
Several noninvasive cyclodestructive proce-
nate pathways of drainage within or to the
dures have been developed to treat the different
 outside of the eye, and those that decrease
primary glaucomas in small animals by decreas-
the formation rate of aqueous humor
ing aqueous humor formation through partial
destroying part of the ciliary body. Proce-
destruction of the ciliary body processes. Exces-
dures to increase aqueous humor outflow
sive heat, as with diathermy or lasers, or extreme
include iridencleisis, corneoscleral trephina-
cold, as with cryotherapy, is directed through
tion, cyclodialysis, combined iridencleisis and
the overlying sclera to the ciliary body pro-
cyclodialysis, posterior sclerectomy, and ante-
cesses. Proper positioning of the cryo and laser
rior chamber shunts (i.e., gonioimplants).
probes is critical; these probes must be directly
Techniques to reduce aqueous humor forma-
over the ciliary body processes. In the dog, this
tion by partial destruction of the ciliary body
area is approximately 5 mm from the limbus in
 include cyclocryothermy, cyclodiathermy, and
the dorsal aspects of the globe. With globe
transscleral cyclophotocoagulation. The most
enlargement, the ciliary processes of the pars
frequently used procedures are anterior
plicata may shift an additional 0.5-1.0 mm pos-
chamber shunts (i.e., gonioimplants), and
teriorly. Cyclodestructive procedures require
destruction of the ciliary body processes by
some functional aqueous humor outflow to
cryothermy or laser photocoagulation. For
have an optimal IOP-reducing effect, because
enlarged blind and buphthalmic glaucomatous
 only partial destruction of the ciliary body will
eyes with corneal exposure and repeated central
allow some level of minimal aqueous humor
corneal ulcerations, intrascleral
prosthesis,
formation, which will continue to result in an
intravitreal gentamycin or
enucleation
iS
increased IOP. Transscleral cyclophotocoagula-
recommended.
tion is the most frequently used procedure with
visual eyes receiving contact diode laser cyclo-
photocoagulation at l.2 W per site at a dura-
Anterior Chamber
tion of 1.2 seconds with thirty-five sites (twenty
Shunts (Gonioimplants)
dorsal and fifteen ventral), for a total of 50 J
per eye (Fig. 7.16). The energy is delivered 3-
Glaucoma shunts reported in dogs include
to 4-mm posterior to the limbus. More energy
the Krupin-Denver valve, modified (i.e., non-
can be delivered in eyes that are permanently
valved) Joseph implant, and the Ahmed
blind.
D
E
 i  ss a   an e  rs si d  i' 
dorsolateral or dorsomedial quadrant is approached by scissor dissection under a fornix-based
conjunctival lap. A space adequate to accommodate the episcleral base of the shunt between the dorsal
rectus muscle and either the medial or lateral rectus muscle is prepared. B. The anterior chamber shunt
must be primed with balanced salt solution before implantation. C. The anterior chamber shunt is
positioned between the adjacent rectus muscles and, with some implants, under the rectus muscles. It is
secured with simple interrupted nonabsorbable sutures. D. After limbal puncture with a 20-to 22-gauge
hypodermic needle and creation of the proper length and beveled end for the tube, the silicone tubing is
autogenous or homologous sclera to protect the overlying bulbar conjunctiva. E. Postoperative view shows
the proper position of the anterior chamber shunt tubing within the anterior chamber. (Modihed from 
ophthalmic surgery. Vol 2: corneal and intraocular procedures. Oxford: Elsevier Science, 1995. 117-l61.)
185
186 /ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Brooks DE, Garcia GA, Dreyer EB, Zurakowski D,
Franco-Bourland RE. Vitreous body glutamate
concentration in dogs with glaucoma. Am J Vet
Res 1997;58:864-867
Cook C, Davidson M, Brinkmann M, Priehs D,
Abrams K, Nasisse M. Diode laser transscleral
cyclophotocoagulation for the treatment of glau-
coma in dogs: results of six and twelve months
ollow-up. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;7:148-
154.
Corcoran KA, Koch SA, Peiffer RL. Primary glau-
coma in the Chow Chow. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
1994;4:193-197
Fig. 7.16. Multiple sites of laser
Cottrell BD, Barnett KC. Primary glaucoma in the
cyclophotocoagulation in a dog (arrows). With the
Welsh Springer Spaniel. J Small Anim Pract
contact diode laser, cyclophotocoagulation is 1.2 W
1988:29:185-199.
per site for 1.2 seconds, with 35 being sites treated
Curtis R, Barnett, KC. Primary lens luxation in the
(20 dorsal and 15 ventral) for a total of 50 J per eye.
dog. J Sm Anim Prart 1980;21:657-668.
Ekesten B. Correlation of intraocular distances to the
iridocorneal angle in Samoyeds with special refer-
ence to angle-closure glaucoma. Prog Vet Comp
Treatment of End-Stage
Ophthalmol 1993;3:67-73.
Primary Giaucomas
Ekesten B, Bjerkas E, Kongsengen K, Narfstrom K.
Primary glaucoma in the Norwegian Elkhound.
Because of the limited success of both medical
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;7:14-18.
and surgical therapies for primary glaucoma in
Garcia GA, Brooks DE, Gelatt KN, Kubilis PS, Gil F,
the dog, salvage procedures to prevent ocular
Whitley RD. Evaluation of valved and nonvalved
pain, to reduce the enlarged and blind globe to
gonioimplants in 83 eyes of 65 dogs with glau-
near-normal size, and to provide a cosmetically
coma. Anim Eye Res 1998;17:9-16
acceptable eye may be necessary. These proce-
Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, Kallberg ME. Canine glauco-
mas. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmol-
dures include pharmacologic destruction of
ogy, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell 2007.
the ciliary body with intravitreal injection of
753-811.
 gentamicin; intrascleral or intraocular pros-
Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, Miller TR, Smith PJ, Sapienza
thesis, in which a silicone ball is placed in
JS, Pellicane CP. Issues in ophthalmic therapy:
an eviscerated globe; and enucleation (i.e.,
the development of anterior chamber shunts
surgical removal of the globe).
for the clinical management of the canine glauco-
mas. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1992;2:59-
64.
References
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO. Changes in intraocular pres-
sure associated with topical dorzolamide and oral
Barnett KC, Mason IK. Primary 
glaucoma in the
methazolamide in glaucomatous dogs. Vet Oph-
Great Dane.
Trans Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol
thalmol 2001;4:61-67
1993;24:112
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO. Effect of different dose
Bedford PGC. The clinical and pathological features
schedules of latanoprost on intraocular pressure
of canine glaucoma. Vet Rec 1980;107:53-58
and pupil size in the glaucomatous Beagle. Vet
Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE, Kubilis PS, Andrew
Ophthalmol 2001;4:283-288.
SE, Strubbe DT, Whigham HM. Development of
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO. Prevalence of the breed-
glaucoma after cataract surgery in dogs: 220 cases
related glaucomas in pure-bred dogs in North
America. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:97-111
1780-1786.
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO. Secondary glaucomas in the
Bjerkas E, Ekesten B, Farstad W. Pectinate ligament
dog in North America. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:
dysplasia and narrowing of the iridocorneal angle
245-259.
associated with glaucoma in the English Springer
Gelatt, KN, 
MacKay FO, Kallberg ME, et al
Spaniel. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:49-54.
Aqueous humor myocilin in dogs with glaucoma
THe CaNine GLaucOmas/ I87
and cataract (abstract). Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:
Ofri R, Dawson WW, Gelatt KN. Visual resolution
439.
in normal and glaucomatous dogs determined by
Gelatt KN, Miyabayashi T, Gelatt-Nicholson KJ, and
pattern electroretinogram. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
Mackay EO. Progressive changes in ophthalmic
1993;3:111-116
blood velocities in Beagles with primary open
Polansky JR, Fauss DJ, Chen P et al. Cellular phar-
angle glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:77-
macology and molecular biology of the trabecular
84.
meshwork inducible glucocorticoid response
Gum GG, Metzger KJ, Gelatt KN. The tonographic
(TIGR) gene product. Ophthalmologic 1997;211:
effects of pilocarpine and pilocarpine-epinephrine
126-139
in normal Beagles and Beagles with inherited
Read RA, Wood JL, Laklani KH. Pectinate ligament
glaucoma. J Small Anim Pract 1993;34:112-
dysplasia and glaucoma in Flat Coated Retrievers.
116.
I. Objectives, technique, and results of survey. Vet
Kallberg ME, Brooks DE, Garcia-Sanchez GA,
Ophthalmol 1998;1:85-90.
Komaromy AM, Szabo NJ, Tian L. Endothelin 1
Samuelson DA, Gum GG, Gelatt KN. Ultrastructural
levels in the aqueous humor of dogs with glau-
changes in the aqueous outlow apparatus of
coma. J Glaucoma 2002;1l:105-109.
Beagles with inherited glaucoma. Invest Ophthal-
Lannek EB, Miller PE. Development of glaucoma
mol Vis Sci 1989;30:550-561.
after phacoemulsification for removal of cataracts
Sapienza JS, Domenech FJS, Prades-Sapienza A.
in dogs: 22 cases (1987-1997). J Am Vet Med
Golden retriever uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999)
Assoc. 2001;218:70-76.
Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3:241-246
MacKay FO, Hart H, Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA
-     a  s
 Esson EW, Sherwood MB. Aqueous humor and
trabecular meshwork myocilin in normal and
Ahmed gonioimplantation in dogs with primary
primary open angle glaucoma Beagles. Vet Oph-
glaucoma: 51 cases (1996-2004). Vet Ophthal-
thalmol (abstract) 2004;7:453
mol 2005;8:121-127
Martin CL.Glaucoma. Am Anim Hosp Assoc Proc
Smith PJ, Brooks DE, Lazarus JA, Kubilis PS, Gelatt
1977;44:301-303.
KN. Ocular hypertension following cataract
Miller PE, Poulsen GL, Nork TM, Galbreath EJ,
surgery in dogs: 139 cases (1992-1993). J Am Vet
 Dubielzig RR. Photoreceptor cell death by apop-
Med Assoc 1996;209:105-111.
tosis in spontaneous acute glaucoma in dogs.
Smith PJ, Mames RN, Samuelson DA, Lewis PA,
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1997;38:163
Brooks DE. Photoreceptor outer segments in
Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ, Swanson JF, Her-
aqueous humor of a dog with rhegmatogenous
rmann MK. The efficacy of topical antiglaucoma
retinal detachment and glaucoma. J Am Vet Med
    d ui 
Assoc 1997;21l:1254-1256.
dogs: a multicenter clinical trial. J Am Anim Hosp
Smith RIE, Peiffer RL, Wilcock BP. Some aspects of
Assoc 2000;36:431-438.
the pathology of canine glaucoma. Vet Comp
Nell B, Walde I, Stur I. Kammerwinkelbefunde bei
Ophthalmol 1993;3:16-28.
Siberian Huskies im Hinblick auf Glaukompradis-
Wood JLN, Lakhani KH, Mason IK, Barnett KC
position.Keintierpraxis 1993;38:353-362.
Relationship of the degree of goniodysgenesis
Ofri R, Dawson WW, Foli K, Gelatt KN. Chronic
and other ocular measurements to glaucoma
ocular hypertension alters local retinal respon-
in Great Danes. Am J Vet Res 200l;62:1493-
siveness. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:502-508
1499.
Chapter 8
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE
CANINE ANTERIOR UVEA
Diane V. H. Hendrix
Introduction
Iris and ciliary Body
Morphology
The uvea, as the middle tunic of the eye,
includes the iris, ciliary body and choroid.
The iris is divided histologically into: ante-
The anterior uvea refers to the iris and
rior border layer, iridal stroma, sphincter
ciliary body; and the posterior uvea is the
and dilator (myoepithelial cells) muscles,
choroid, which in the dog contains the
and the posterior epithelium. Iris color
tapetum cellulosum. The ciliary body is con-
depends on melanocytes within the stroma
tiguous with the choroid at its posterior
 as well as the pigmented posterior epithe-
aspect. The iris, because of the pupil, is
lium. The iridal sphincter, which is primarily
responsible for regulating light entering the
innervated by parasympathetic fbers from the
globe, and it is also important for normal
ciliary ganglion, consists of unstriated muscle
esthetics. The ciliary body is responsible for
fbers arranged around the pupil. The iris
aqueous production and lens accommo-
dilator muscles consist of a single layer of
dation, and its sclerociliary cleft permits
unstriated muscle fbers or highly developed
aqueous humor exit from the anterior
pigmented myoepithelium that are innervated
chamber.
primarily by sympathetic fibers. This layer con-
The anterior uvea is also the site of the
tinues to the ciliary body becoming the inner
 blood-aqueous barrier, which normally pre-
pigmented epithelial layer. The pigmented iris
vents large, high-molecular-weight
proteins
epithelium forms the posterior layer of the iris
from entering the aqueous humor. The rich
 and continues posteriorly as the nonpigmented
 blood supply and immunosensitivity of the
ciliary body epithelium. The iridal blood supply
anterior uvea make it the source for most of the
 is obtained from the long posterior ciliary arter-
inflammatory responses in the eye.
ies (located at 9:00 and 3:00 positions), and
This chapter focuses on diseases that pri-
within the iris from the annular major arterial
marily involve the iris and ciliary body, but
circle (located in base of iris about 50% and in
because the anterior uvea is contiguous with
the anterior ciliary body about 50%), radial
the choroid (or posterior uvea), several of
arteries from this circle toward the pupil, and
the diseases may concurrently affect the pos-
a variable minor arterial circle (seen clinically
terior ocular segment.
as the collarette area).
189
190 /EsSENTiALS OF VEtERiNARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
The ciliary body is divided macroscopi-
n  n nd a p i a
cally into the cnterior pars plicata (corona
and abnormalities in its size, shape, color or
ciliaris) and posterior pars plana. The ante-
 responsiveness may indicate ocular or neuro-
rior outer part of the ciliary body also forms
logic disease. Other diagnostics to evaluate
the ciliary cleft and filtration angle (dis-
the anterior uvea include gonioscopy, ultra-
cussed in chapter 7). The anterior pars plicata
sonography, anterior chamber cytology and
consists of seventy to l00 ciliary processes,
culture, brush cytology, and biopsy.
which are highly vascular and pigmented struc-
 Diseases such as anterior uveitis, glaucoma,
tures covered with the inner nonpigmented
retinal detachment and degeneration, and
(primary source of the active component of
lesions along the afferent and efferent pupillary
aqueous humor production) and outer pig-
pathways can alter the pupil size and function.
mented epithelia (which continues anteriorly
Inflammation of the anterior uvea, termed
with the iridal dilator muscle layer and poste-
cnterior uveitis, is very common with both
riorly with the retinal pigment epithelial layer).
ocular and systemic diseases and may cause
The pars plana is the posterior smooth portion
intense intraocular pain, alter pupillary
of the ciliary body that bridges the ciliary pro-
function, and lead to blindness. Intraocular
cesses anteriorly and the peripheral termination
neoplasia is not unusual in dogs and varies
of the anterior retina (ora ciliaris retinae) pos-
in its appearance. In addition to inflamma-
teriorly. The width of the pars plana is impor-
tory and neoplastic disorders, developmen-
tant clinically (7-8 mm from thelimbus dorsally
tal, degenerative, and traumatic disorders
and laterally but only 4 mm ventrally and medi-
can all affect the anterior uvea.
ally in the dog). Through the pars plana, entry
to the vitreous, as with vitreal paracentesis, can
be performed without causing a hole in the
Developmental Conditions
retina and possible retinal detachment. The
main body supply to the ciliary body is the long
Developmental abnormalities of the canine
anterior uvea include (l) orders of incomplete
posterior ciliary arteries.
Hence the ciliary body produces
the
development (e.g., coloboma), maldevelop-
aqueous humor (which nourishes
and
ment (e.g., anterior segment dysgenesis); and
removes metabolic byproducts  from 
the
(2) incomplete regression of embryonal tissues
anterior lens, inner surfaces of the iris, and
(e.g., persistent pupillary membranes [PPMs])
 Most anterior uveal anomalies in the dog occur
posterior cornea), develops intraocular pres-
sure (by the resistance to aqueous humor
sporadically, but some are heritable. Because
outflow through the filtration angle), and
normal ocular embryogenesis depends on initial
effects accommodation (via changes
 development of the pigmented layers of the
in
zonular tension to the lens equator and
eye, several congenital defects relate directly
capsules).
to ocular color dilution and specifically to the
The anterior uvea is also the site of the blood-
merling gene. However, there is considerable
aqueous barrier, which normally prevents large.
variation of anterior uveal pigmentation in
high-molecular-weight proteins from entering
normal dogs, which accounts for the marked
differences in eye color both within and among
the intraocular fluid. Changes in this blood-
aqueous barrier cause increases in protein levels,
breeds.
seen clinically as "aqueous flare.
Color Variants
Diagnostics
Suba/binism
A complete ophthalmic examination, espe-
 Subalbinism refers to dilution of ocular pig-
cially with the use of magnification such as
mentation. This is in contrast to complete albi-
slit-lamp biomicroscopy, can reveal much
nism in which the eye lacks all pigment.
information in an eye with uveal disease.
Subalbinism is seen as a blue iris with a red
Diseases Ano SurGery OF The Canine Anterior Uvea/ I91
fundus reflex. The neuroectodermal layer of the
merle
gene (e.g.,Australian Shepherds,
iris has normal pigmentation; however, the
Great Danes, Collies, and Dachshunds). The
overlying stroma lacks pigment. These animals
most severe ocular anomalies occur in homo-
have a nonpigmented fundus, which allows the
zygous merles with excessive white hair coat
visualization of choroidal vessels. Presence of a
involving the head region. Affected animals
tapetum is variable. Complete albinism, which
also have varying degrees of congenital deaf-
results in a translucent iris with visible iris
ness. Anterior uveal manifestations of the
vessels that gives a reddish hue to the iris
merling gene may include heterochromia irides,
stroma, has not been reported in the dog
iris hypoplasia, a black-rimmed pupil from
 prominent iridal pigmented epithelium, and an
eccentric pupil (i.e., corectopia). Both typical
Heterochromia fridis
and atypical iris colobomata and mild to severe
PPMs are also common findings in merle
Heterochromia iridis refers to different
dogs.
colors within one iris or between fellow
irides. In the heterochromic eye, the iris is
Anomalies caused by the merle gene have
been studied most extensively in the Austra-
characterized by at least two distinct, solidly
lian Shepherd. Multiple ocular anomalies
colored areas or by differently colored
including microphthalmia, irregular pupils,
patches or spots (Fig. 8.1). Alternatively, each
iris may be a different color. Lay terms for this
cataracts, equatorial staphylomas, retinal
condition include “watch eye" or “china eye.
dysplasia, and retinal degeneration occur as
an autosomal recessive trait in this breed.
Heterochromia iridis may be the sole mani-
Severity of ocular lesions correlates with the
festation of ocular color dilution in several
amount of white in the hair coat. While
breeds, including the Old English Sheep Dog.
the ocular disease is recessively inherited,
Siberian Husky, American Fox Hound, Ameri-
the inheritance of merling appears to be
can Cocker Spaniel, Malamute, and Shih Tzu.
Apart from the variation in appearance,
dominant.
simple
 heterochromia
iridis
has
no
significance.
Persistent Pupillary Membranes
Iridal Changes Associated
The pupillary membrane is a primitive meso-
with Merling
dermal tissue present during fetal development
that forms a layer on the anterior face of the
Multiple ocular anomalies including iris
iris. This membrane consists of fine blood
anomalies occur in breeds affected by the
vessels and connective tissue. Normally the
central vascular arcades regress first beginning
during the sixth week of canine ocular devel-
opment. The peripheral arcades that have their
origins at the collarette of the iris regress last.
This process continues through the fnal 3
weeks of fetal development and into the imme-
diate postnatal period. In most puppies, the
pupillary membranes completely atrophy by
6 weeks after birth. The rate of pupillary
membrane dissolution varies, however, and
it may not be complete for several months.
Incomplete resorption of embryonal vascula-
ture and mesenchymal tissues results in
retained iris strands in both juvenile and adult
Fig. 8.1. Heterochromia iridis. Note the distinct,
dogs. These uveal remnants, which are
colored areas of iris.
termed persistent pupillary membranes, or
I92 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
PPMs, attach at the collarette region of the
origin of a synechia is the pupillary margin.
iris and usually retain the color of the adja-
PPMs within the width of the iris are seen most
cent iris.
easily when the pupil is constricted
Persistent pupillary membranes occur com-
Heritable, clinically significant PPMs
monly in the dog and are usually an incidental
occur in the Basenji. The incidence of PPMs
finding. Iris-to-iris strands that bridge over the
in this breed is high and the severity varies
iris surface or cross the pupil and remnants
considerably. Examination for PPMs should
with a single iris attachment that occur as small,
be performed before pharmacologic dilation
free-floating tags are benign. Forms of PPMs
of the pupils. The most common manifesta-
that can result in significant ocular opacifi-
tion is small iris-to-iris PPM remnants. The
cation are: iris-to-cornea strands and iris-to-
more severe form of PPM in the Basenji mani-
lens strands. Resultant corneal or lenticular
fests as cobweb-like strands of iridal tissue that
opacities may compromise vision. Because
cross the pupil opening. with or without
contact of the pupillary membrane with the
attachments to the cornea or lens. In severe
lens and cornea is not normal, it may be more
cases, corneal opacities are present primarily
correct to classify pupillary membranes that
axially or periaxially secondary to disruption of
the endothelium by the PPM attachment.
persistent. PPMs may be present either unilat-
Corneal opacities vary in size from discrete
erally or bilaterally and different forms may be
white dots to long linear or broad circular
seen in the same dog.Leukomas can result from
opacities. Slit lamp biomicroscopy reveals
multifocal attachments of PPMs to the endothe-
     
lial surface of the cornea. The opacities occur
membrane, and the deep corneal stroma can
secondary to corneal edema, fbroplasia, and
also be affected. Multiple membranes inserting
changes in Descemet's membrane. The corneal
on the central or paracentral lens capsule may
 opacities may remain as the only sign of PPMs.
result in multifocal or diffuse anterior polar
PPMs may also extend from the collarette to
cataracts
the anterior lens capsule resulting in capsu-
Familial PPMs occur in the Pembroke Welsh
lar opacities or anterior polar subcapsular
Corgi, Chow Chow, and Mastiff breeds; using
cataracts (Fig. 8.2).
affected animals for breeding is not recom-
PPMs can be differentiated from anterior
mended. PPMs and congenital cataracts of
or posterior synechia by observing that the
varying densities occur in the English Cocker
origin of a PPM is the iris collarette and the
Spaniels. PPMs, cataracts, entropion, wander-
ing nystagmus, microphthalmia and multifocal
retinal folds have been observed in a closely
inbred line of Chow Chows. Generalized
corneal opacities resulting from PPMs have
been observed in the Irish Setter.
Therapy is rarely needed for PPMs.
Therapy may be beneficial in severely
affected eyes, but the number of options is
limited. In cases of diffuse corneal opacities
with considerable corneal edema, topical instil-
lation of a hyperosmotic agent (i.e., 5% NaCl
ointment) may be used. Unlike other types
of axial opacities in which topical mydriatic
Fig. 8.2. Persistent pupillary membranes are present
 therapy (i.e., 1% atropine) may improve vision,
in this Rottweiler puppy. The membranes extend
mydriasis is not recommended for PPM-
rom the iris collarette to the lens, creating a circular
associated opacities, as pharmacologic dilation
opacity on the anterior lens capsule; previously they
may induce tension on the membrane attach-
extended to the cornea, and an endothelial/deep
ments thereby aggravating the corneal or lens
stromal opacity remains.
lesions.
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CANINE ANTERIOR UvEA/ I93
Surgically, the membranes attached to the
multiple colobomata in the iris body without
cornea can be excised after entering the anterior
associated pupillary musculature; (3) dyscoria
chamber and phacoemulsification can be done
-an abnormally shaped pupil; (4) corectopia
for an extensive anterior capsular or subcapsu-
a pupil that is in an anomalous position; and
lar cataract. A potential danger of surgical
(5) microcoria—congenital miosis resulting
     n s
from absence of the dilator muscle.
vascularized; electrocautery to sever mem-
branes may be used to minimize hemorrhage.
Laser surgery offers a noninvasive alternative
Miscellaneous Congenital
that may also reduce hemorrhage.
Abnormalities
Abnormal, lightly pigmented irides occur in
Aplasia/Hypoplasia
Beagles with hereditary tapetal degeneration.
The melanosomes in the iris stroma and choroid
Aniridia, iris hypoplasia, and iris coloboma all
of affected dogs are fewer in number than those
refer to incomplete iris development. Aniridia
found in the irides of unaffected Beagles. The
is a total absence of iris tissue, and it is extremely
iris and ciliary body pigmented epithelium
rare in the dog. Partial-thickness hypoplasia
contain melanosome organelles but no normal
(i.e., incomplete iris coloboma) is a defect of
melanosomes. In addition the melanin deposi-
one or more, but not all, layers of the iris. In
 tion is patchy and irregular. The condition may
cases of full-thickness hypoplasia, complete iris
coloboma, the ciliary body processes, zonules,
result from a defect in synthesis of the matrix
component of melanosomes resulting in absent
and equator of the lens can be visualized. A
or abnormal deposition of melanin and initiate
complete iris coloboma is a result of localized
autophagy of these organelles.
developmental failure of all layers of the iris.
Congenital uveal cysts can occur alone or in
These colobomata may be at the pupillary
conjunction with other ocular anomalies. Addi-
margin (i.e., notch coloboma), at the base of
the iris (e.g., iridodiastasis), or within the iris
tionally, congenital cysts may not be observed
body (i.e., pseudopolycoria). Typical colobo-
until the dog is older making the diagnosis of
"congenital" questionable.
mata that are present in the ventral aspect of
the iris occur secondary to failure of closure of
    s
that a limited proliferative or secretory activity
 the optic fissure. Colobomata in other locations
of the epithelial cells may occur. Cysts may be
are referred to as “atypical" colobomata and
located caudal to the iris in association with the
may be due to primary abnormalities in the
outer layer of the optic cup.
ciliary body or the posterior epithelium of the
iris, at the pupillary margin or free in the ante-
Iris coloboma is a common feature of
rior chamber or vitreous. Histopathologically.
ocular merling and heterochromic irides in
the cysts are simply composed of heavily pig-
the Australian Shepherd breed, and these
mented pigment epithelial cells.
colobomas are often atypical and only partial
thickness affecting primarily the iridal
Anterior segment dysgenesis, which is
an anterior chamber cleavage anomaly syn-
stroma.
drome, has been described in Doberman
puppies. Affected eyes are blind and are
Other Congenital Pupillary
characterized clinically by variable microph-
Abnormalities
thalmia and opaque corneas. Malformation of
mesodermal, ectodermal and neuroectodermal
Several  congenital  pupillary  abnormalities
tissues is involved. A primary defect in forma-
appear rare in dogs and may occur as sporadic
tion of the neuroectodermal optic cup is sus-
abnormalities or may occur in conjunction with
 pected as the cause. Anterior segment dysgenesis
previously described anomalies. They include
is characterized histopathologically by a thinned
(1) polycoriawith more than one pupil with
corneal
epithelium  and
stroma,
 absent
associated musculature; (2) pseudopolycoria-
Descemet'smembraneand
 endothelium,
I94 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
nondifferentiated anterior uveal tissue with
Secondary Iris Atrophy
lack of iridocorneal angle differentiation, and
unencapsulated globules of lens material. Occa-
Glaucoma and chronic uveitis may cause degen-
sionally rudimentary iris leaflets or elongated
erative changes in the iris resembling those of
ciliary processes are observed. Posterior segment
senile iris atrophy.
anomalies include hyperplastic primary vitre-
ous, hyaloid artery remnants, retinal dysplasia,
and retinal detachments. The mode of inheri-
Uveaf Cysts
tance in Doberman Pinschers is thought to be
autosomal recessive.
Uveal cysts are frequently seen in dogs and
they may either arise from the posterior pig-
mented epithelium of the iris or from the
Degenerative Iridal Changes
inner ciliary body epithelium and therefore,
are neuroectodermal in origin.The cysts can
Senile Iris Atrophy
be congenital or acquired. They occur most
commonly in Golden Retrievers, Labrador
Spontaneous progressive thinning of the
Retrievers, and Boston Terriers.
 stroma or pupillary margin of the iris is a
Cysts may arise from the pupillary margin,
common finding in older dogs. Though it
the posterior iris face, or the pars plicata of the
may occur in any breed, the Toy and Minia-
ciliary body. Examination through a dilated
ture Poodle, Miniature Schnauzer and Chi-
pupil may facilitate visualization of cysts in the
huahua appear to have a high incidence of
posterior chamber. Potential sequelae of larger
 this condition. The pupillary margin devel-
cysts include vision impairment, corneal endo-
 ops a scalloped, moth-eaten appearance (Fig.
thelial opacities, pigmentation of the anterior
8.3). In these animals, atrophy of the pupillary
lens capsule, mechanical interference with iris
muscles often results in dyscoria and may lead
function, and aqueous outflow obstruction
to reduced or absent pupillary light responses,
with secondary ocular hypertension and cata-
and increased light sensitivity.
ract formation.
Senile iris atrophy may also initially manifest
Uveal cysts are usually benign and are
as a subtle color change: the natural iris color
incidental findings in the dog. Iridal or ciliary
fades, and foci of hyperpigmentation may be
cysts can be unilateral or bilateral, single or
noted as stroma is lost and pigmented epithe-
multiple, variably sized and spherical, oval, or
lium exposed. Additional thinning may result
elongated dark or translucent masses. Uveal
in loss of pigmented epithelial layers and full-
cysts are usually brown or black, though pale
thickness defects. There is no treatment.
brown or yellow may be seen. They are often
found free-floating within the anterior chamber
Or attached in the posterior chamber. Rarely
dislodged uveal cysts can move into the vitre-
ous if the vitreous is degenerated and/or
detached. In most cases uveal cysts do not
obstruct vision or cause lens or corneal
opacities.
Uveal cysts are usually diagnosed based on
the clinical 
 appearance described above.
However, the most definitive diagnostic test is
performed by transilluminating the cysts with
a bright light source. Cysts should transillumi-
nate whereas neoplastic masses will not transil-
luminate. This test may not be reliable for very
Fig. 8.3. Iris atrophy at the pupillary margin of the
small cysts or cysts that are not within the pupil
iris is present in this geriatric dog.
making it difficult to generate a tapetal reflec
Diseases Ano SurGery Of The Canine Anterior Uvea/ I95
tion through the cyst. Ocular ultrasound can
be used in questionable cases.
Uveal cysts are usually considered to be
benign; however, recently, reports describ-
ing a possible association with cysts and
glaucoma in both the Great Dane and the
Golden Retriever breeds have emerged. In
Great Danes with ciliary body cysts there were
multiple cysts in the anterior and posterior
chambers, and glaucoma. The cysts are variable
in size, very poorly pigmented and usually
transparent. The entire posterior chamber is
Fig. 8.4. Multifocal areas of pigment are present on
filled with cysts that may push the iris forward.
the anterior capsule of this Golden Retriever with
Histopathologically, multiple stacked cysts are
breed-related anterior uveitis.
seen in the area of the pars plicata and between
the iris and ciliary body. The cysts originate
from the ciliary body epithelium and are lined
       e 
anterior synechia, and posterior synechia are all
common.
melanin granules and are irregularly periodic
Clinically, over half of the Golden Retrievers
acid Schiff-positive material. Commonly, a pre-
had evidence of uveitis in the affected eye and
iridal fibrovascular membrane covers the drain-
many of the dogs had uveitis in both eyes;
age angle and the anterior surface of the iris.
however, only one-half of the eyes had histo-
The mechanism of glaucoma is thought to be
pathologic evidence of uveitis. The clinical
anterior displacement of the iris with narrow-
appearance of uveitis may be due to protein
ing of the angle with a possible contribution by
and cellular material in the aqueous due to
the pre-iridal fbrovascular membrane. Evi-
escape of cyst contents that is not seen as
dence suggests that both glaucoma and ciliary
inflammation
histologically. The lack of
body cysts are inherited in the Great Dane.
histopathologic evidence of uveitis may also
In 20o0, Sapienza et al. reported clinical
be due to treatment with steroids prior to
findings describing a new syndrome
in
Golden Retrievers referred to as pigmentary
enucleation.
Glaucoma therapies usually fail to be effica-
uveitis. The most frequent early clinical sign
 of this disease is pigment on the anterior
cious in this syndrome, and it appears that
iridociliary cysts are associated with the devel-
lens capsule in a radial orientation or mul-
opment of glaucoma in the Golden Retriever
tifocal areas associated with or without
breed. It is not known whether the cysts are a
uveal cysts (Fig. 8.4). Other clinical signs
direct cause of the uveitis or if the uveitis is the
include blood-filled uveal cysts, spider web-
cause of the cysts.
like fibrinous debris in the anterior chamber,
and posterior synechia. Secondary glaucoma
and cataract formation occurred in about
Uveal Cyst Remova!
50% of the eyes. This disease is usually
bilateral.
 Because most uveal cysts are benign and gener-
Common histopathologic features include
ally do not interfere with vision; cysts usually
thin-walled iridociliary cysts and glaucoma.
do not require treatment. However, attached or
The cysts are lined with attenuated cuboidal
free-floating uveal cysts that occlude the pupil
epithelium and they fill most of the posterior
and compromise vision or multiple pigmented
chamber. Some cysts are thick walled. Occa-
cysts that may lead to angle closure may be
sionally there are solid cellular proliferations.
aspirated with a small-gauge needle or deflated
 Iris bombe, pre-iridal fbrovascular membranes.
with a laser. Surgical removal or aspiration of
hemorrhage, cellular membranes on the ante-
the cysts may prevent progressive angle closure
rior lens surface, retinal detachment, peripheral
when identified and treated early.
196 /EsSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Uveal Inflammation
uveitis, uveitis associated with noninfectious
systemic diseases, and uveitis of unknown eti-
Uveitis occurs commonly in conjunction
ology (Box 8.l). More recently others have
with many intraocular and systemic dis-
created a systematic group of questions in an
eases. Uveitis refers to inflammation of the
attempt to narrow the differential diagnoses.
lveal tissue, which is composed of the iris,
These questions address the following: chronic-
the ciliary body, and choroid. Uveitis is
ity, nature of the inflammation (i.e., granulo-
common because of the highly vascular
matous or nongranulomatous), unilateral or
nature of the tissue, its immunosensitivity,
bilateral location, location of the inflammation,
and its close proximity to other structures.
patient demographics, associated clinical signs,
Similarly to inflammation elsewhere in the
signs on physical examination, and response
body, inflammation in the uvea consists of
 to previous therapy. While uveitis should be
three basic events: increased blood supply,
 approached in a systematic fashion, the large
 augmented vessel permeability, and white
number of idiopathic cases decreases the use-
blood cell migration to the injury site. Ante-
fulness of classification schemes.
rior uveitis refers to inflammation of the iris
Many etiologies for uveitis exist in all
and ciliary body; posterior uveitis refers to
animal species. Most simply, cases can be
inflammation of the choroid, and panuveitis
divided into exogenous and endogenous
 refers to inflammation of all three portions
causes. Exogenous causes arise from outside
of the uvea. More specifically, iritis and
the eye and most commonly involve trauma
cyclitis may be used to describe inflamma-
but also include radiation exposure and
tion of the iris and ciliary body, respectively.
chemical injuries. Trauma also includes sur-
Anterior uveitis is the term most commonly used
gical procedures and both perforating and
as differentiating between iritis and cyclitis
nonperforating injuries with or without sec-
clinically is very difficult and usually both
ondary infection. Endogenous causes origi-
tissues are inflamed simultaneously. Posterior
nate from within the eye, spread from
uveitis, or choroiditis, can occur independently
bloodstream  or spread from  contiguous
from anterior uveitis. A more advanced
structures. Endogenous causes account for
condition, which is termed endophthalmitis, is
most cases of uveitis and include infectious,
inflammation involving all ocular tunices, the
neoplastic, toxic, metabolic, or autoimmune
ocular cavities and adjacent structures. Pan-
diseases. Immune-mediated and autoim-
ophthalmitis is inflammation involving all
mune disease is the most rapidly growing
 tunics of the eye, and it may also result in signs
group of diseases responsible for endoge-
of orbital disease.
nous uveitis. Several endogenous antigens
have been found to be associated with uveitis
including retinal-S antigen, melanin, lens, and
Etiopathogenesis of Uveitis
corneal proteins. Unfortunately the cause and
effect relationship is not always well under-
Uveitis can occur independently of disease
stood. Idiopathic uveitis is the most common
in other ocular structures or it can occur
diagnosis (about 47%) given to dogs with
secondary to lens, corneal, or scleral disease,
anterior uveitis, because of the difficulty
or secondary to neoplasia or infectious dis-
determing the possible cause. Other causes
eases. Elucidating the etiology of uveitis
in this study found infectious disease (l8%),
in the dog can be very diffcult. However,
neoplasia (25%) and uveodermatologic syn-
because uveitis can lead to blindness or be a
drome or a vaccine reaction (l0%) were
sign of a potentially fatal disease, attempting
diagnosed in l0% of the dogs. The more
to define the etiology is always warranted.
commonly recognized causes of uveitis in
Historically, classification schemes have been
the dog are listed in Box 8.l. The different
devised to categorize uveitis into uveitis with
cellular and chemical events that occur in
an infectious element, uveitis with an immune-
uveitis are discussed in detail in the fourth
mediated component, toxic uveitis, traumatic
edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology. Knowledge
Box 8.1. Diseases Proved or Suspected of Causing Uveitis in the Dog
Aigal
Prototheca sp.
Bacteria!
Brucella canis
Borrelia burgdorferi (j.e., Lyme disease)
Leptospira sp.
Septicemia of any cause
Funga!
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Coccidioides immitis
Cyptococcus neoformans
Histopiasma capsulatum?
 Other mycoses
immune-mediated
Cataracts (lens-induced uveitis)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Immune-mediated vasculitis
Lens trauma (phacodastic uveitis)
Uveodermatologic syndrome (similar to Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada in humans)
Metabolic
 Diabetes melitus (particularly diabetic cataract-induced uveitis)
Hyperlipidemia
Systemic hypertension
Miscellaneous
Coagulopathies
 Deep necrotizing or nonnecrotizing scleritis
Drug-induced (particularly miotic agents)
Idiopathic
Idiopathic uveitis and exudative retinal detachment
 Pigmentary uveitis in the Golden Retriever
Radiation therapy
Trauma
Toxemia of many causes (e.g. pyometra)
Ulcerative keratitis (any cause)
Miscellaneous Parasitic
Ophthalmomyiasis intema posterior (Diptera sp.)
Ocular filariasis (Dirofiania immitis)
Ocular larval migrans (Toxocara and Balisascaris sp.)
Neoplastic and Paraneoplastic Disorders
Histiocytic proliferative disease
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (formerly reticulosis)
Primary (melanoma) and secondary neoplasms (lyphosarcoma most common)
Protozoan
Leishmania donovani
Toxopiasma gondii
Rickettsial
Ehrlichia canis or platys
Rickettsia rickettsii
Vira!
( aa-anig. luooeaisod bupnpuy uosajui snouapa
Distemper virus
Herpes virus
Rabies
197
I98 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
of these events often permits windows for ther-
also be a secondary component of other
apeutic intervention.
ocular diseases, such as corneal ulceration
and glaucoma, demonstrating the need for a
complete ophthalmic examination. The clini-
Clinicai Manifestations and Diagnosis
cal signs of uveitis are listed in Table 8.1. The
Anterior uveitis can manifest with many
complications of both acute and chronic uveitis
clinical signs (Fig. 8.5). Some of these signs
(Figs. 8.6 and 8.7) are also summarized; in
general, chronic uveitis has a higher frequency
are specific for uveitis, such as aqueous flare
of serious complications.
and hypopyon, while others are general
ocular responses such as blepharospasm
and ocular hyperemia. Anterior uveitis can
Fig. 8.6. Effects of chronic iridocyclitis in the dog:
irregular and hxed pupil, numerous posterior
synechiae, loss of iridal pigmentation, focal
Fig. 8.5. Ciliary flush, diffuse conjunctival
pigmentation proliferation, and foci of iridal tissue
hyperemia, and miosis in a dog with iridocyclitis.
adhered to the anterior lens capsule.
Table 8.1. Clinical Signs of Uveitis.
Anterior Uveitis
Posterior Uveitis
Adverse Sequelae
 Aqueous flare
Choroidal effusion
Cataract
 Ciliary flush
 Decreased vision
Deep cormeal vacularization
 Conjunctival hyperemia
Granulomas
Ectropion uvea
Comeal edema
Optic neuritis
Endophthalmitis
 Decreased intra-ocular pressure
 Retinal separation 
Panophthalmitis
Retinal hemorrhage
Iris atrophy
Decreased vision
Vitreous opacities
Lens luxation
Hyphema
Phthisis bulbi
Hypopyon
 Rubeosis iridis (or preiridal fibro-vascular membrane)
Iris color change (usually darker)
Iris swelling
Keratic precipitates
Sedluded pupil and iris bombe
Miosis
Pain
Glaucoma
Secondary
Diseases Ano SurGery OF The Canine Anterior Uvea/ I99
essary to rule in or rule out etiologies. Referral
to textbooks on internal medicine and infec-
tious diseases are recommended for detailed
discussions of specifc disorders, diagnostics
and systemic treatment. The reader is also
referred to chapter 16.
Lens-induced Uveitis
Lens-induced uveitis (LIU) is a common
complication of cataract in the dog. Histori-
cally, LIU was associated with hypermature
Fig. 8.7. Chronic iridocyclitis, annular posterior
cataracts, but studies using fluorophotome-
 synechiae, and iris bombe in a dog.
try, laser flaremetry, and tonometry have
shown that dogs with all stages of cataracts
have evidence of at least subclinical uveitis.
 It is currently thought that small amounts of
Therapy for Anterior Uveitis
lens protein escape the normal lens and induce
T cell tolerance. Increased immune system
Topical  anti-inflammatory  therapy  should
be instituted immediately after the diagnosis
exposure to lens crystallins by lens trauma,
of anterior uveitis is made, even in those
spontaneous lens resorption, or cataract extrac-
tion may overwhelm this tolerance and induce
patients with suspected systemic disease.
Failure to initiate therapy early in the disease
an intraocular or systemic cell-mediated and/or
humoral immune response.
process in uveitis may result in many adverse
Two distinct types of LIU occur: (l) pha-
sequelae, including synechiae formation, cata-
colytic uveitis occurs when soluble lens
ract, secondary glaucoma, endophthalmitis,
 protein leaks through an intact lens capsule
and phthisis bulbi (Table 8.2). Topical therapy
in rapidly developing or hypermature cata-
alone may suffce for mild anterior uveitis,
racts; and (2) phacolytic LIU in young dogs
but for severe anterior uveitis, posterior
after the onset of cataract. LIU must be rec-
lveitis, and systemic disease, systemic
ognized and treated prior to cataract surgery.
therapy as dictated by the primary disease
 is also indicated. Long-term therapy for uveitis
Long-term success rates of cataract surgery in
dogs with LIU may be lower than dogs without
requires careful patient monitoring as these
LIU. Granulomatous LIU also occurs in dogs
drugs have both benefits as well as adverse
effects [see appendices D (antibiotics),
with an intact lens capsule, but usually occurs
F
 in older dogs with rapidly progressing cataracts
(antifungals), H (steroids), I (nonsteroidals-
or longstanding cataracts. These eyes have
NSAIDS), and L (mydriatics)]
severe uveitis often with large keratic precipi-
 tates and are less responsive to therapy.
Uveal Manifestations of
Phacoclastic uveitis occurs after lens
Selected Diseases
capsule rupture, which causes sudden expo-
sure of intact lens protein in amounts suffi-
The following discussion summarizes selected
cient to overwhelm the normal low-dose T
diseases that are documented causes of uveitis,
cell tolerance to lens proteins. There may be
often bilateral, in the dog. A complete ophthal-
a history of recent ocular trauma. Clinically.
mic and physical examination is necessary in
 there is evidence of corneal penetration, varying
all cases of uveitis. Many ophthalmic and sys-
degrees of anterior uveitis, and exudate or hem-
temic diseases can lead to uveitis and results
orrhage in the anterior chamber. Usually the
from ocular and physical examinations in con-
corneal wound has sealed and the anterior
junction with ancillary diagnostic tests are nec-
chamber has reformed. Capsular rents are often
Table 8.2. Recommended Therapy for Anterior Uveitis in the Dog.
Drug
Dose
Effects/Limitations/Comments
Corticosteroids.
Topical:
1% prednisolone or dexarmethasone
 4-6 x daily
Suppress uveal inflammation; decrease
aqueous flare.
Systemic (parenteral/PO):
Avoid with the mmycosis and cormeal ulcers
Caution or avoid with diabetes
mellitus
 Prednisolone
0.5-1.0 mg/kg/BID
Subconjunctival:
Avoid in potential surgical sites
Triamcinolone acetonide,
5-10 mg
methylprednisolone,
betamethasone, or
dexamethasone
NSAIDS:
Indomethacin, flurbiprofen,
2-4 x daily
suprofen, or diclofenac
Systemic:
May be used either alone or in conjunction
 Flunixin meglumine
0.25 mg/kg for up to
with systemic corticosteroids. Potential for
5 days, or 0.5 mg/kg
gastrointestinal complications
for up to 3 days, 0r
0.25 to 1.00 mg/kg
as single IV dose
Carprofen
 2 mng/kg orally BID-TID
Hepatotoxicity has been recognized
particularly in the Labrador Retriever
Immmunosuppressives:
Azathioprine
nitial dosage is 2 mg/kg
 Frequent blood and platelet counts as well as
per day for 3 to
liver enzyme determninations because of
5 days, then taper
potential hepatotoxic and rnyelosuppressive
based on response.
effects of this drug
Antimicrobiais.
Often combined with corticosteroids.
 Broad spectrum
Systemic:
Amoxicillin, trimethoprim/
Chosen based on antibacterial activity and
sulfadiazine, cephalosporin, and 
ability to penetrate blood-aqueous barrier
chloramphenicol
Mydriatics-cycloplegics:
 Dilate and provide pupil mobility to decrease
Atropine (1%)
2-6 × daily
posterior synechiae. Decrease "ocular'
pain. Stabilize the blood-aqueous barrier.
Contraindicated by elevated IOPs. Side
effects with atropine include decreased
tear production
0.3% scopolamine/ 10%
To effect
Very strong
phenylephrine
mydriatic combination to break fibrous
adhesions and dilate pupils that
are unresponsive to atropine
200
DiSEASEs AND SuRGERY Of ThE CaNiNe ANteRiOR UvEa/201
difficult to detect, but overlying fbrinous 
or
ment of ocular disease. Dermatologic findings
inflammatory cellular material is suggestive of
usually include vitiligo of the facial mucocuta-
capsular disruption. With chronicity, the peri-
neous junctions, nasal planum, scrotum, and
lenticular fibroplasia causes formation
footpads; however, generalized vitiligo may
of
posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma
occur.
leading to loss of the eye. Lensectomy using
Histopathologically, the primary ocular
phacoemulsification is the ideal therapy for lens
change is a granulomatous panuveitis with
rupture in the dog.
prominent perivascular lymphoid aggregates
and melanophages. The anterior chamber
often contains many lymphocytes and plasma
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
cells. Retinal detachment, destruction of the
retinal pigmented epithelium, subretinal neo-
Uveodermatologic syndrome, or Vogt-Koy-
vascularization, choroidal scarring and signs
anagi-Harada-like syndrome, is a disease of
consistent with secondary glaucoma are also
dogs that causes anterior uveitis, chorioreti-
seen frequently. Pigment-containing macro-
 nitis, poliosis, and vitiligo. The syndrome in
phages and melanophages are a prominent
dogs was initially termed Vogt-Koyanagi-
feature. Histopathologic examination of the
Harada-like syndrome because of similarities
skin reveals interface dermatitis with a primar-
to a disease in humans known as Vogt-Koy-
ily lichenoid pattern. Large histiocytic cells,
anagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome. The term
plasma cells, melanophages and small mono-
uveodermatologic syndrome (UDS) has also been
nuclear cells are characteristic.
adopted to further separate the disease in dogs
Immunosuppressive drugs are the main-
from that in humans due to the absence of
 stay of therapy for UDs. Standard therapy
neurological signs in dogs. First reported in two
for anterior uveitis with topical steroids and
Akitas in Japan in 1977, this disease has been
atropine (if the intraocular pressure is not
reported in manybreeds, for example, Samoyed.
elevated) is initiated. Oral prednisone at
Siberian Husky, Shetland Sheepdog, Golden
immunosuppressive doses is also used. Gen-
Retriever, Irish Setter, Old English Sheepdog.
erally there is a relatively rapid response to
Saint Bernard, Australian Shepherd, Brazilian
therapy. Unfortunately, many dogs have
Fila dog, Dachshund, Basset Hound, and Chow
recurrence of clinical signs if the dose of oral
Chow. The disease is often presented to the
prednisone is decreased, but have the unde-
veterinarian because of the ophthalmic
sirable side effects of weight gain, polyuria,
lesions.
and polydipsia if they are continued. There-
The pathogenesis of UDS is not completely
fore, other immunosuppressive drugs, such
understood. Experimentally, Akita dogs have
as azothioprine, are often combined with
been immunized with tyrosinase related
corticosteroids in the long-term treatment of
 protein, an enzyme involved in melanin forma-
UDS. However, even with appropriate therapy.
tion that is expressed specifcally in melano-
secondary glaucoma is a common sequela.
cytes. The Akitas developed clinical and
histologic signs consistent with UDS confrm-
ing the similarities between the canine and
Pigmentary Uveitis in Golden
human diseases. UDS appears to affect primar-
Retrievers
ily young adult dogs (mean age: 3 years)
Ocular findings may include bilateral
Pigmentary uveitis (pigment exfoliation
anterior uveitis or panuveitis, iris or choroi-
uveitis) is a disease seen primarily in the
dal depigmentation, bullous retinal detach-
Golden Retriever. It is not associated with
ment, and blindness (Figs. 8.8A and B).
any systemic disease. The ocular disease
Cataract, extensive posterior synechiae,
may be unilateral initially, but it often
iris bombe, and secondary glaucoma with
becomes bilateral. Pigment dispersion in
buphthalmos occur with chronicity. Derma-
the anterior chamber and uveal cyst forma-
tologic changes usually follow the develop-
tion appear to be important in disease
202 /ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
A
Fig. 8.8. Akitas with uveodermatologic syndrome. A. Note the loss of pigmentation or vitiligo of the
with multiple areas of retinal pigment epithelium and choroidal depigmentation.
progression (see Fig 8.4). The iris appears
but could be important in the onset of glau-
dark and thickened, and pigment clumps are
 coma. Even with standard uveitis therapy
noted on the anterior lens capsule in a radial
and treatment of secondary glaucoma, the
orientation or in multifocal areas. Pigment
prognosis for long-term vision is guarded
cells and aqueous flare are noted in the anterior
with this disease.
    s  
blood-filled uveal cysts, spider web-like fibrin-
 ous debris in the anterior chamber, and poste-
Mycoses-Associated Uveitis
rior synechia. Sequelae to chronic pigmentary
uveitis include posterior synechiae, postin-
Disseminated mycotic infections with ocular
flammatory cataract and glaucoma.
involvement are relatively common among
dogs living in endemic areas. Even though
the majority of Golden Retrievers with uveitis
 mycotic infections typically involve multiple
and secondary glaucoma. The cysts were
body systems, ocular disease is often
thought to be important in the pathogenesis of
the owner's presenting complaint. Common
the glaucoma. The exact role of the exfoliated
systemic mycoses include blastomycosis,
uveal pigment, first observed clinically on the
coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and
surface of the anterior lens capsule, is unknown
cryptococcosis.  Less  frequently occurring
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/203
mycotic infections are aspergillus and candidia-
identification of organisms is facilitated by
sis. Inhalation is believed to be the primary
special stains, such as Gomori's methenamine-
route of infection for all the major systemic
silver, periodic acid-Schiff, and mucicarmine.
mycoses, with later hematogenous spread to
The preferred systemic therapy for each
the eye. Direct animal-to-animal, or animal-to-
type of mycosis varies (Table 8.3). Eyes that
human infection, is rare. Ocular involvement
are potentially visual should be treated topi-
may be unilateral or bilateral and infections of
cally with corticosteroids and atropine if
the paranasal sinus, orbit, and optic nerve may
hypotensive or normotensive, but a painful,
affect the eye secondarily.
blind eye is best enucleated. Histopathologic
The diagnosis is made on the basis of
evaluation of the enucleated globe may facil-
concurrent clinical signs that vary between
itate making the diagnosis as well. The spe-
 mycotic organisms, identification of organ-
cific systemic antifungals are summarized in
isms in ocular or other tissue aspirates, or
chapter 16 (also see appendix F).
the results of fungal culture, histopathologic
examination, or various serologic
tests
Parasitic Diseases
(see chapter 16). The typical histopathologic
pattern for all mycoses is granulomatous
Ocular Nematodiasis
or
 pyogranulomatous  inflammation
chara-
cterized by variable numbers of neutrophils,
Intraocular nematodiasis is reported infre-
lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes,
,and
quently in domestic animals. Ocular nema-
occasionally, epithelioid cells. Histopathologic
todiasis includes two distinct conditions,
Table 8.3. Diagnosis and Treatment of the Systemic Mycoses and Uveitis in the Dog.
Mycosis
Uvea Affected
Diagnosis
Treatment
Bastomyces dermatiticis
 Anterior/postenior
Vitreous aspirates
traconazole (5 mg/kg).
Serologic tests:
orally twice a day for the 1st
a6 e6e
2 weeks, followed by once-a-day
inmmunodiffusion-
administration.
specificity—90%.
Parenteral amphotericin B
Cross-reactivity with
somewhat effective; potential
H. capsulatum.
renal toxicity
Ketoconazole (can also combine
with amphotericin) 10 mg/kg per
day to 30 mg/kg PO per day
Coccidfioidfes immitis
Mainly posterior
Serology diagnosis: tube
 Oral ketoconazole at a dosage
 precipitin (IgM antibody
of 10 mg/kg two tirmes a day.
levels) both appear and
disappear early.
Complerment fixation (IgG
antibody. which persists
longer). Titer of 1 :8 or
greater is considered to
be suspicious; titer of
1: 16 or greater-
disseminated disease.
Cyptococcus neoformans  Mainly posterior
Identification or culture
Systemic amphotenicin B and 
organism in ocular or
flucytosine—efficacy unknown.
CSF fluid; latex
agglutination test.
Histoplasma capsulatum
Mainly posterior
Cytologic identification
Amphotericin and
or culture organism.
ketoconazole.
Serology problermatic. but
complement fixation used
 204 /EsSEeNTiALS OF VETERINARY OFHTHALmOLOGY
namely ocular filariasis and ocular larval
ing membranes, granuloma formation, and
migrans. Ocular filariasis due to aberrant
localized corneal edema. Histopathologically, a
migration ofimmature Diroflaria immitis occurs
pyogranulomatous or granulomatous reaction
in dogs and man. The condition occurs in dogs
with eosinophils is associated with the adult
with and without concurrent microflaremia.
worms. Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis, pre-iridal
Uveitis and mild to severe corneal opacity are
fibrovascular membranes and evidence of sec-
the predominant signs. Uveitis is commonly
ondary glaucoma are also seen. There is debate
attributed to direct mechanical trauma or reac-
as to whether the organism is Onchocerca liena-
tion to metabolic waste products of the para-
lis or Onchocerca lupi. Surgical removal and
site. In one case, it was speculated that
antiparastic therapy are indicated.
antigen-antibody complex formation was an
additional factor in the uveitis when severe
Ophthalmomyiasis
corneal scarring and pigmentation occurred
after removal of the parasite. Typically, one
Ophthalmomyiasis refers to aberrant ocular
5- to 10-cm filaria is seen undulating in
migration of fly larvae, most commonly of
the anterior chamber; it may migrate freely
the order Diptera, including the sheep nasal
between the anterior and posterior cham-
botfly (Oestrus ovis) and the cattle warble
bers and vitreous. Light stimulation may
(Hypoderma bovis). Both intraocular and
increase motility of the flaria and, subse-
extraocular disease occur in domestic
quently, discomfort to the patient. The prog-
animals, but the intraocular disease ophthal-
nosis is favorable with anti-inflammatory
momyiasis interna posterior (OiP) has been
therapy and manual removal of the filaria.
reported most often in dogs, cats, and man.
Presurgical adulticide therapy is not advised,
As the name implies, OIP is primarily a disease
as a severe inflammatory reaction to the dead
 of the posterior segment. The characteristic
filaria may cause intractable uveitis. Microflari-
lesion is roadmap-like subretinal tracts that
cide administration caused increased activity of
may be active or inactive. Active disease may
the flaria and transient exacerbation of clinical
be associated with uveitis, retinal detachment,
signs in one case.
and hemorrhage. The larva may be visible in
Angiostrongylus vasorum, a metastrongylid
active infections; larvae have been identified in
nematode that infects the pulmonary artery and
the anterior segment with concurrent uveitis.
right ventricle, has also been found in the ante-
 Inactive infections require no therapy, whereas
rior chamber of dogs. This parasite is primarily
anti-inflammatory therapy is indicated in active
found in Europe.
 disease. Organophosphates may be adminis-
Ocular larval migrans (OLM) generally refers
tered in an attempt to kill the larva, but a dead
to aberrant ocular migration of Ioxocara spp.:
larva may exacerbate inflammation. The larva
I. canis is suspected to be the most commonly
may be removed via vitreoretinal surgery and
involved. I. canis is of public health signif-
may also spontaneously depart.
cance, as the nematode causes OLM and vis-
ceral larval migrans (VLM) in children. In dogs
Protozoal Diseases
and man, OLM due to Ioxocara spp. is charac-
terized by inflammation primarily of the retina
Leishmaniasis
and vitreous. Ophthalmoscopy reveals areas of
hyperreflectivity, hyperpigmentation and vas-
Visceral leishmaniasis is most commonly
cular attenuation.
caused by the flagellate organism Leishmt-
Onchocerciasis primarily causes pea- to
nia infantum. The disease is endemic along
bean-sized inflammatory masses in the con-
the Mediterranean shore and in parts of east
junctiva, nictitans, and sclera. However, it may
Africa, India, and Central and South America.
 also cause anterior and posterior uveitis, peri-
Reports suggest that there are now endemic
orbital swelling, exophthalmos, excessive lacri-
areas in the United States. This is not sur-
mation, discharge, discomfort, photophobia,
prising since domestic and wild members of
conjunctival congestion, protrusion of nictitat-
Canidae serve as reservoir hosts and the inter-
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/205
mediate host, a sandfly (Phlebotomus spp.), is
Rickettsial Diseases
also found in this country.
Ocular findings range from blepharitis,
Ehrlichiosis
kerato-conju nctivitis, uveitis, rubeosis iridis,
and retinitis to endophthalmitis. Ocular
Ehrlichia canis is an obligate intracellular
disease may be the only clinical abnormal-
parasite transmitted by the brown dog tick,
ity. The anterior segment is usually more
Rhipicephalus sanguineus. Pronounced clini-
severely involved than the posterior segment.
cal and laboratory abnormalities often occur
Additional  signs include lymphadenopathy,
with E. canis infections and may include fever,
splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, renal failure,
lymphadenopathy, anemia, leukopenia, throm-
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and varying der-
bocytopenia, monoclonal or polyclonal gam-
matologic conditions.
mopathy, neurologic signs, and generalized
Histopathologically, vasculitis and intense
bleeding tendencies. Anterior uveitis is the
inflammatory zones with lymphocyte infiltrates,
most consistent ocular finding (Fig. 8.9).
plasma cells and macrophages with amastigote
Additional findings may include conjuncti-
forms of Leishmania are seen in the ciliary pro-
vitis, conjunctival or iridal petechiations,
cesses, ciliary body, limbus and lacrimal duct.
corneal
opacity, panuveitis often with
Treatment usually consists of pentavalent anti-
hyphema, diffuse retinitis or vasculitis,
monials and/or allopurinol. However,
the
 retinal detachment or hemorrhage, papill-
organisms are rarely completely eliminated.
edema, and optic neuritis. The ocular
and the clinical response to therapy is variable,
hemorrhage associated with ehrlichiosis is
and relapses are common.
thought to be related to thrombocytopenia,
platelet dysfunction, or hyperviscosity.
Diagnosis is made based on clinical signs,
Toxoplasmosis
hematologic abnormalities, and serologic
Ioxoplasma gondi is a protozoan obligate intra-
testing. Serologic diagnosis is by indirect IFA
cellular parasite that affects most warm-blooded
testing. Doxycycline and several other antibiot-
ics are used for systemic therapy.
animals. The cat is considered the only defni-
tive host and is therefore integral to transmis-
 sion of the disease. Dogs may be infected by
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
ingesting sporulated oocysts from cat excreta,
ingestion of tissue cysts in infected meats,
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF) is an
ingestion of a transport host, or congenital
acute and infectious disease caused by Rick-
transmissions. Infection is usually sub-clinical
ettsia rickettsii and transmitted by ticks of
Clinical signs may include neuromuscular,
the Dermacentor spp. Vasculitis is the primary
respiratory, gastrointestinal, or ocular disease.
Ocular toxoplasmosis, reported infrequently
in dogs, includes anterior uveitis, retinocho-
roiditis, and vitritis. Additional fndings may
include optic neuritis and extraocular myositis.
Diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis is by clinical
signs, serologic testing. and histopathologic
examination. Clindamycin is the drug of choice
for treating toxoplasmosis.
Other Protozoal Diseases
Other causes of anterior uveitis in the dog
include Neospora caninum, and Irypanosoma
Fig. 8.9. Hyphema associated with iridocyclitis and
evansi.
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in a dog.
 206 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
lesion caused initially by direct infection of the
cells. Infection is by penetration of the organ-
vascular endothelium and perithelial smooth
isms through mucous membranes. Ocular
muscle, and later by immunologic phenomena.
signs may occur in ~ 14% of dogs with brucel-
Common clinical signs include fever, neuro-
losis.
.The more common ocular findings
logic dysfunction, polyarthritis, thrombocyto-
include: endophthalmitis, chronic uveitis,
penia, nonregenerative anemia, and ocular
hyphema, and chorioretinitis. Diagnosis is
disease.
made using the slide agglutination test in com-
Ocular lesions, commonly observed in
bination with the agar-gel immunodiffusion
 dogs, include anterior segment findings with
test or by positive culture. Antimicrobial
subconjunctival hemorrhage, iris stromal
therapy can be complicated and needs to be
petechiations, anterior uveitis, and hyphema.
continued long term due to the intracellular
Posterior segment findings include retinitis
nature of the organism. Because of the zoo-
characterized by perivasculitis, focal areas
notic potential of brucellosis and the difficulty
of edema, and petechiation. Because ocular
in eradicating the organism, euthanasia may
disease may be confined to the retina, oph-
be elected
thalmoscopy should always be done in dogs
Bartonella vinsonii (berkhoffit) is one sub-
with suspected RMSF.
species of a group of intraerythrocytic bac-
Confirmation of the diagnosis of RMSF is
teria most likely transmitted by the brown
made by a demonstration of rising serum
dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus. Ophthal-
IFA titers. A single titer is nondiagnostic.
mic signs include anterior uveitis, chorio-
Doxycycline, tetracycline, chloramphenicol,
retinitis, hyphema and retinal detachment.
enrofloxacin, and trovafloxacin are all effec-
Diagnosis is based on serologic testing. Mul-
tive systemic therapies. E. platys infection
tiple antibiotics have been used in the treat-
rarely causes anterior uveitis
ment of this disease.
Leptospirosis is caused by a spirochete, a
Viral Diseases
filamentous bacteria, belonging to Leptospira
sp., which includes many species and
 Infectious Canine Hepatitis
serovars. Ocular lesions are infrequenly seen
but may include anterior uveitis. The lepto-
 Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) is caused by
spira organisms may be cultured from the
 aqueous humor of some dogs.
 the canine adenovirus type-1 (CAV-1). Natural
infection is most common in unvaccinated dogs
less than l year of age, and occurs in countries
where puppy immunization is not routine.
Algal Disease
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis and sec-
 (aa ani, pan-os) eaa paoo Apu
Prototheca zopfi and Prototheca wickerhamii
-Aoai sop J %o7 Aaieixoidde u poda
are algae that lack chlorophyll and are known
ering from natural ICH infection. Persistent
pathogens in dogs and other animals. The
corneal edema, secondary glaucoma, and
primary clinical sign is usually hemorrhagic
phthisis bulbi are possible sequelae of severe
diarrhea; however, dogs may present with
keratouveitis.
blindness as the initial complaint. Ocular
The keratouveitis, which occurred infre
signs may include anterior uveitis, second-
quently (0.4%) as a postvaccinal reaction with
ary glaucoma, chorioretinitis and retinal
CAV-l, is essentially medical history as
the
detachment. Vitreal aspirates may be diag-
vaccine was eventually changed to CAV-2.
nostic on cytology or culture. Prototheca sp.
are extracellular, round to oval organisms with
Bacterial Disease
thin, unstained walls. Larger cells may contain
endospores. Therapy with itraconazole has
Brucella canis is an aerobic, Gram-negative,
been attempted, but has been unsuccessful
coccobacillus that can survive in mononuclear
long term.
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/207
Miscelfaneous
toconjunctivitis sicca. Uveitis may also occur
alone or secondary to intraocular bleeding from
Hyperlipidemia
thrombocytopenia.
Dogs with hyperlipidemia due to elevations
in either cholesterol or triglycerides may
Anterior Uveitis Secondary to Corneal
have associated ocular abnormalities. Lipid-
and Scleral Disease
laden aqueous humor was discussed briefly
under the "“Uveal Inflammation" section as
Anterior uveitis occurs commonly secondary
to corneal ulceration. Necrotizing scleritis,
occasionally occurring with anterior uveitis.
Lipoproteins of dogs range in size from 50 to
however, may cause anterior uveitis, vitritis.
350 A in diameter. However, the iridal vascular
subretinal masses, tapetal degeneration, hem-
endothelium and nonpigmented ciliary body
orrhage and edema.
epithelium normally prevent particles greater
than 40 A from entering the aqueous humor.
Breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier (i.e..
Uveal Trauma
anterior uveitis) concurrent with hyperlipid-
emia may result in lipid-laden
1aqueous.
Ocular trauma may result in clinical signs
Lipid-laden aqueous and lipemia retinalis are
that vary from mild miosis to marked dis-
likely to resolve with resolution of the primary
ruption of the cornea or sclera. Blunt trauma
disorder.
often manifests with flare, fibrin or hyphema,
corneal edema or iridial dialysis, but rarely
Hyperviscosity Syndrome
hypopyon. With sharp trauma or extremely
blunt trauma,f
fibrin,
，hemorrhage,
severe
Monoclonal gammopathy associated with
 lveal prolapse and perforation of the cornea
or sclera can be seen. Uveal prolapse occurs
lymphoproliferative disorders may result in
hyperviscosity syndrome (HVS). HVS causes
with globe rupture because the sudden decom-
clinical signs referable to multiple
organ
outflow forces the iris into the wound, plugging
systems including the cardiac, renal, hemo-
static, ocular, and central nervous systems.
it. In all cases of trauma, careful direct examina-
tion with necessary additional diagnostics (such
 In the dog, HVS associated with increased
serum concentrations of IgG, IgM, and IgA
 as ultrasonography) should be done to deter-
are reported. Ocular anterior segment find-
mine
extent
of ocular and
periocular
 ings have included conjunctival hyperemia,
damage.(
CT
and MRI may be beneficial in
corneal edema, hyphema, and secondary
assessing trauma especially when intraocular
glaucoma, all of which are likely related to
foreign bodies are suspected (Fig. 8.10). Care
should be taken with MRI as metallic foreign
concurrent anterior uveitis. However, ocular
findings are most often referable to the poste-
bodies can incite additional damage.
rior segment and may include retinal vascular
dilatation, tortuosity, or
microaneurysms,
Emergency Management of
retinal hemorrhage, retinal detachment, cho-
Acute Ocular Trauma
rioretinitis, and papilledema.
Cases of acute ocular trauma are emergen-
Sulfonamide Hypersensitivity
cies (Box 8.2). If debris, exudates, or hemor-
rhage are present, they should be gently
Multiple clinical abnormalities have been
 irrigated from the ocular surface with warm,
 described in dogs with sulfonamide hypersen-
physiologic saline solution (without preser-
sitivity.General signs include fever, arthropa-
vative). If possible, one should determine
thy, blood dyscrasias, glomerulonephropathy.
whether a laceration or rupture of the globe
hepatopathy skin eruption, retinitis and kera-
is present.
208 /ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Treatment of Biunt Injuries
Intense pressure exerted on the globe during
blunt trauma may result in vector forces reflect-
ing off the posterior sclera and transferring
anteriorly, causing a "blow out" rupture of the
perilimbal cornea or anterior sclera. Some
causes of blunt injuries are impacts by golf balls
and baseball bats; commonly the owner is not
aware that the dog is in such close proximity
when the accident occurs. Acute traumatic
uveitis or hyphema from blunt injury is treated
similarly to other causes of anterior uveitis and
hyphema (see the sections "Uveal Inflamma-
tion" and “Hyphema"). A ruptured globe result-
ing from blunt trauma is handled similarly to
Fig. 8.l0. Corneal perforation, corneal edema, and
iridocyclitis in a dog secondary to buckshot. At
cases of penetrating corneal trauma with uveal
prolapse. The prognosis following severe blunt
ultrasonography, the lens was noted to have also
been traversed by the buckshot.
trauma to an eye is guarded to grave.
Treatment of Penetrating Injuries
Xeu aqog aul jo saniound ino pue u, jeoot
Box 8.2. Emergency Management
cause minimal damage to the cornea and may
of Acute Ocular Trauma
seal spontaneously. Penetrating corneal injuries
that seal spontaneously are treated with topical
1. Restrain the patient carefully and admminister
and systemic antibiotics and topical NSAIDs.
sedatives if necessary to examine the eye and
Topical corticosteroids are not applied until the
associated tissues.
corneal epithelium has healed. Systemic antibi-
2. Gently irrigate the ocular surface with warm
physiologic saline solution (without preservative)
otics are administered for a minimum of 10
to remove debnis or exudates if present.
 days. In the absence of an intraocular foreign
3. Determine whether laceration or rupture of the
body, the primary concerns after such injuries
globe has occurred. and if either one is present.
are focal anterior or posterior synechiae, lens
attempt to determine its extent. Any globe with
puncture with phacoclastic uveitis, traumatic
hyphema is suspect!
4. If the globe is intact, apply topical anesthetic
cataract, secondary glaucoma, and infectious
solution and inspect the ocular surfaces, includ-
endophthalmitis
ing the conjunctival formices and both sides of
Most penetrating injuries of the globe result
the nictitating membrane, for foreign bodies
 in uveal prolapse, which appears as a protrusion
5. If the globe is ruptured, determine whether sur-
of darkly pigmented tissue through the cornea
gical repair is feasible or if enucleation or implan-
tation of an intraocular prosthesis should be
Or sclera. A grayish, fibrinous membrane typi-
advised. This detemmination is made on the basis
cally covers the prolapsed uvea. Sometimes the
of the extent of intraocular damage, the likeli-
uvea abuts the penetrating wound and exudes
hood of preserving vision, and cosmetic con-
fibrin creating a mass of fbrin on the surface
cerms. Ultrasonography may be necessary.
of the cornea. A shallow or absent anterior
6. Administer systemic antibiotics.
 7. Temporary tarsonhaphy may be used to protect
chamber, pupil loss, and hyphema may also be
the eye when transport of the animal to a vet-
present. Traumatic uveal prolapse requires sur-
a4t 1o patedipnue sl isibolowieyrydo Aeua
gical repair that involves replacement or ampu-
animal's general condition (e.g. concurrent
tation of the prolapsed uvea.
head or chest trauma) necessitates stabilizing
 The prognosis after uveal prolapse repair
the patient.
varies depending on the time between injury
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/209
and treatment, the extent of injury, concur-
Hyphema
rent infection, presence of a pupil opening.,
 patency of the iridocorneal angle, and integ-
Hyphema, or blood in the anterior chamber,
rity of other intraocular structures (e.g., the
occurs when uveal or retinal vessels are
lens and retina).
damaged or abnormally formed (Fig. 8.11).
Hemorrhage may occur from trauma (either
Traumatic Uveitis with Lens Rupture
endogenous or exogenous), clotting abnor-
malities, vasculitis or hyperviscosity. There
are multiple causes of hyphema in the dog
Lens capsule rupture is most commonly
caused by a penetrating foreign body or a cat
(Box 8.3). It is important to establish whether
claw injury and may lead to phacoclastic
posterior
segment damage
accompanies
hyphema as this will determine the prognosis.
uveitis. Lens capsule rupture may lead to the
release of lens cortex into the anterior
Hemorrhage from damaged choroidal, or retinal
chamber. This may precipitate fulminating
vessels frequently moves anteriorly through
endophthalmitis. There may be a history of
to the pupil to manifest as hyphema. Vitreous.
recent ocular trauma; however, lens penetra-
retinal, or choroidal hemorrhages or retinal
detachment indicates severe intraocular disease
tion is rarely suspected. Usually the corneal
and a poor visual prognosis. Also the cause of
wound has sealed and the anterior chamber has
hyphema influences whether blood clots in the
reformed by the time of examination. Capsular
rents are often difficult to detect, but overlying
anterior chamber. If the hyphema is secondary
fibrinous or inflammatory cellular material is
to a blood dyscrasia resulting in clotting abnor-
suggestive of capsular disruption.
mality, then the hyphema is unlikely to clot.
 Medical therapy of phacoclastic uveitis
However, hyphema occurring secondary to
 needs to be aggressive with the use of topical
trauma or iridocyclitis will usually clot. Hemor-
and immunosuppressive doses of systemic
rhage resulting from neoplastic or congenital
steroids and topical atropine. Unfortunately,
ocular diseases is often recurrent, and the
 medical therapy is often inadequate 
hyphema in these cases may be clotted or
and
endophthalmitis or secondary
unclotted and may form layers within the ante-
glaucoma
commonly
develops. Lensectomy
rior chamber. A complete ophthalmic examina-
using
phacoemulsification is the ideal therapy for
tion including fluorescein stain and intraocular
 pressures is indicated for all cases of hyphema.
lens rupture in the dog, but it must be done
 early in the disease process. Very small rents 
A complete physical exam in association with
a diagnostic evaluation, including appropriate
may seal spontaneously and result in only a
focal cataract.
laboratory tests, may be indicated to rule out
Intraocular Foreign Bodies
Intraocular foreign bodies (lOFB) are rela-
tively rare in dogs and characterized by a
range of clinical signs. The variability of pre-
senting signs results from the type, size,
location, and point of entry of the foreign
material, and to the severity of the initial
trauma. Foreign bodies can cause mechanical
damage, endophthalmitis, and direct toxicity
depending upon the composition of the IOFB.
Method of removal of IOFBs varies upon the
location, depth, size, composition of the foreign
Fig. 8.1l. Complete and nonclotted hyphema
body, extent of associated tissue damage, and
associated with glaucoma and retinal detachment in a
the amount of uveal inflammation.
Boston Terrier.
210 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
very effective in the treatment of hyphema
Box 8.3. Causes of Hyphema
when large clots of blood and fibrin are present
in the Dog
in the anterior chamber or the IOP is elevated
secondary to fibrin blocking the iridocorneal
Uveitis
angle. An injection of TPA into the anterior
Multiple causes
chamber can lead to rapid dissolution of the
Trauma
 Blunt or penetrating
clot. TPA is most effective when injected within
Neoplasia
72 hours of clot formation, but it may also be
 Primary ocular or systemnic
effective in dissolving clots of longer duration.
Systemic hypertension
The recommended dosage for intracameral
Multiple causes
injection is 0.1 mL of a 25 μg/100 μL solution.
 Coagulation factor abnormalities
TPA should not be injected if recurrent bleed-
Von willebrand
 Dicoumarin toxicity
 ing is likely; however, the risk of rebleeding is
Liver disease
low due to clot specificity.
 Disserminated intravascular coagulation
Platelet disorders
Thrombocytopenia
Benign Iridal Proliferations
Thrombopathia
Hyperviscosity syndrome
 Multiple myeloma
Pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes develop
Congenital anomalies
secondary to chronic ocular disease such
 Collie eye anomaly
as glaucoma, intraocular neoplasia, endo-
Vitreoretinal dysplasia
phthalmitis, and retinal detachment. The
 Persistent hyaloid artery
Neovascularization
clinical term for this condition is rubeosis
Iris or retinal
iridis. Clinically, a haphazard array of very
Chronic glaucoma
small vessels is seen on the iridal surface.
These vessels can extend over the lens or
pectinate ligaments and the aqueous humor
outflow pathways. These vessels are differenti-
systemic disease in animals with atraumatic
ated from dilated iridal vessels by the haphaz-
hyphema (see chapter 16). In many cases of
ard organization as compared to the radial
hyphema, the most informative ancillary diag-
orientation of the normal iridal vessels. Pre-
nostic procedure is ocular ultrasonography.
iridal fibrovascular membranes are always
Hyphema is usually treated empirically,
preceded by ocular disease.
with corticosteroid and mydriatic therapy
 Diffuse iris hyperpigmentation can occur
and enforced rest. Confining the animal's
with chronic anterior uveitis. Iris freckles
 janb e u ooi ls 10 a e 0i A1
may coalesce to cause diffuse pigmentation
may minimize the possibility of recurrent hem-
and this may occur bilaterally.
 orrhage. Assuming no contraindications, topical
Abnormal ocular pigment deposition and
dexamethasone or prednisolone acetate and
glaucoma (pigmentary glaucoma) has been
systemic prednisone (if deemed appropriate
described primarily in Cairn terriers, but
after completing diagnostics) are used to reduce
also in the Boxer and Labrador Retriever.
and control intraocular inflammation and to
The disease appears to be familial and tends
reduce the incidence of rebleeding. Topical and
to occur in older dogs. Clinically, hyperpig-
systemic corticosteroids are administered,
mentation involves the iris, ciliary body,
usually on a tapering schedule, for 10-21 days.
choroid, and filtration angle. Often the
NSAIDs as used in the treatment of uveitis are
 iris appears thickened. Additionally patchy
not used—or are used very cautiously because
 pigment deposition around the perilimbal zone
of their interference with platelet function and
of the sclera and signs of secondary glaucoma
the possibility of persistent or recurrent bleed-
are seen. These dogs are generally poorly
ing. Tissue-plasminogen activator (TPA) (Acti-
responsive to therapy long term. Histopatho-
vase; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA) is
logic studies suggest the melanin containing
Diseases Ano SurGery OF the Canine Anterior Uvea/2I I
whether the masses are unilateral or bilateral,
singular or multiple, raised or flat and station-
ary or changing in appearance.
Melanocytic neoplasia (i.e., melanoma) is
the most common primary intraocular neo-
plasm in the dog, and it occurs in the dog
more frequently than in other domestic
animals.
Canine uveal melanomas are
divided into melanocytomas and (malignant)
melanomas. The term melnocytoma refers
to benign anterior uveal melanomas, limbal
Fig. 8.12. Multiple iris nevi are present in the iris
melanomas  and
1choroidal melanomas.
of this German Shepherd mix.
Benign melanocytomas are differentiated from
(malignant) melanoma by nuclear pleomor-
phism, nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and mitotic
cells are melanophages and not melanocytes.
index. The tumors are considered malignant if
The etiology is not known.
cellular morphology includes prominent nucle-
Nonneoplastic areas of hyperpigmentation
oli, a nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio >l, and >2
are frequently observed on the canine iris. Iris
 mitotic figures per 10 high-power feld.
freckles, benign melanosis, or pigment cell
Intraocular melanocytic tumors are most
clusters are terms used to describe benign
common in older dogs with a mean age of
hyperplasia or increased pigmentation of
around 9 years, but an age range of 2 months
normal melanocytes (Fig. 8.12). These clus-
to 17 years has been reported in one large
ters of cells are located in the superficial
study. While German Shepherds and Retriev-
iridal stroma and do not tend to distort
ers are the more commonly affected breeds
the normal iris architecture but may be
reported in studies, population statistics
raised occasionally. An iris nevus is a pro-
have not been done to determine if breed
liferation of melanocytes that forms a well
is a risk factor. Inherited iris melanoma
circumscribed  slightly elevated mass
on
has been reported in a family of Labrador
the iris face. These tend to occur
in
Retrievers, but the diagnosis was made on
young dogs. Nevi may undergo malignant
the basis of clinical examination with no
transformation.
histopathologic confirmation.
Owners may first observe a color change
or mass effect in the dog's eye or the changes
Anterior Uveal Tumors
 may go unnoticed until secondary uveitis or
glaucoma develops and the eye becomes
Intraocular tumors are relatively uncommon
inflamed or enlarged (Figs. 8.13A and B).
in the dog. The tumors may be primary or
Melanomas in dogs tend to produce nodular
secondary from metastatic disease or local
 growth rather than diffuse infiltration as is
invasion. The great majority of primary
 seen in cats and humans. Iris thickening, an
intraocular tumors have their origin in the
irregular pupil, blindness and ocular pain are
anterior uvea. While distant metastasis from
the most common clinical signs. Pigmentation
primary intraocular tumors is rare, local
is variable, and amelanotic melanomas can
tissue destruction and secondary glaucoma
occur but are rare. Additionally, keratitis, ante-
occur commonly. Tumors must be differenti-
rior uveitis, hyphema, secondary glaucoma,
ated from other intraocular masses including
buphthalmos, and retinal detachment may be
iris cysts, granulomatous lesions and staphylo-
observed.
mas. Tumors must also be considered in any
 Diagnosis is usually made by clinical exami-
eye with secondary glaucoma or opaque media.
nation. Ultrasound may be used on larger
Diagnosis is based on findings from complete
 masses to help differentiate between cysts and
ophthalmic and physical examinations and
tumors and will help determine the extent of
212 /EsSENTIAlS OF VEtERiNARY OFHTHALmOLOGY
14:91:45
082
10.3M
11.口
B
Fig. 8.I3. Melanocytic neoplasia is present in the dorsal temporal aspect of the iris
(A). The tumor has increased the thickness of the iris. (B) By ultrasonography a large
tumor (malignant melanoma) is seen as an area of increased echogenicity in the area
of the ciliary body
growth of the tumor. Gonioscopy may facilitate
Iridociliary Epithelial Tumors
differentiating between uveal and limbal mela-
nocytomas. It is important to rule out metasta-
 Iridociliary epithelial tumors are the second
sis from a distant site by doing a thorough
most common primary intraocular tumor in
physical examination that includes examining
the dog, and arise from either the pigmented
the oral cavity and foot pads.
or nonpigmented epithelial cells of the iris
 Malignant melanomas comprise 20% of
or ciliary body. Iridociliary epithelial tumors
intraocular melanocytic tumors. Malignant
are more common in middle-aged to older
tumors tend to be less pigmented. Metasta-
dogs (mean age, 9.0 years). Iridociliary epi-
sis, although rare, occurs hematogenously.
thelial tumors appear clinically as segmental
Dogs with malignant melanoma have shorter
or nonsegmental, solid or papillary, and
survival times than unaffected dogs and
invasive or noninvasive (Fig. 8.14). The inci-
dogs with melanocytomas. The metastatic
dences of adenoma (i.e., benign) and adeno-
rate for uveal melanomas in dogs has been
carcinoma (i.e., potentially malignant) are
reported to be 4% and 10%.
approximately equal, and these tumors com-
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/213
bined are suggested to have an incidence
ernous hemangioma of the iris, a ciliary body
 approximately half that of uveal melanoma.
hemangioma has also been reported, and iridal
Distant metastasis of ciliary body adenocarci-
hemangiosarcoma. Ocular osteosarcomas are
noma has been reported; however, metastasis
extremely rare.
appears to be highly unusual.
Spindle cell tumors of the anterior uveal
The clinical presentation may appear
tract of dogs present as nodular nonpig-
similar to that of melanoma, and distinguish-
mented masses of the anterior uvea. The
ing between the two may be difficult. The
majority of dogs have blue irides and the
tumors may extend through the pupil, invade
Siberian Husky is overrepresented
the iris, or do both. Adenomas are more
often limited to the ciliary body, whereas
Secondary Neoplasms
adenocarcinomas are typically more inva-
sive, may extend through the iris base or
 Neoplasms may metastasize hematogenously
pupil, and may metastasize.
to the eye from local or distant sites, or they
may invade the eye by local extension from
Medulloepitheliomas
the ocular adnexa, cornea, orbit, paranasal
sinuses, or nasal cavity. Hematogenous
Medulloepitheliomas arise from the primi-
spread accounts for most secondary neo-
tive medullary epithelium, or inner layer of 
plasms, and of these, intraocular lymphosar-
the optic cup, before differentiation into
coma is the most common in the dog (Fig.
adult tissues and are therefore classified
8.15). Hemangiosarcoma has been suggested
as congenital tumors. These tumors are
to be the second most common metastatic neo-
reported rarely in dogs. Medulloepithelio-
plasm to the eye. Additional metastatic neo-
 mas occur in young dogs. Usually a white or
plasms include cutaneous and oral melanoma,
 gray-white mass is present in the pupil or
hemangiosarcoma,
malignant
 histiocytosis,
extending through the iris. Secondary glau-
seminoma, transmissible venereal tumor, tran-
coma may be the presenting complaint. Tumors
sitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder,
typically arise from the ciliary body. Treatment
as well as the urethra, neurogenic sarcoma,
is enucleation.
rhabdomyosarcoma, anaplastic fibrosarcoma,
pheochromocytoma, and adenocarcinoma of
mammary gland, thyroid gland, parotid sali-
Miscelfaneous Primary Neopfasms
vary gland, adrenal gland (presumed), and of
nasal, renal, and pancreatic origin.
 Reports of additional primary intraocular neo
plasms are extremely rare. Cases include a cav-
Fig. 8.15. The misshapen iris in this dog is due to
iridal lymphoma. At presentation the dog had cells
Fig. 8.l4. A ciliary body adenoma can be visualized
and aqueous lare in the anterior chamber, but they
 posterior to the lens in this Labrador Retriever.
resolved with topical prednisolone acetate.
 214 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Diagnosis of and Therapy
ment of glaucoma refractory to medical
for Uveal Neoplasms
therapy.
Uveal neoplasms may present as masses or ante-
Intraocular Surgery and Uveitis
rior uveitis. Unilateral disease is more sugges-
tive of a primary neoplasm, whereas bilateral
All intraocular procedures incite some degree
disease is suggestive of secondary or metastatic
of anterior uveitis. Eyes with active uveitis at
neoplasia. A complete physical examination,
the time of surgery already have a compro-
serum biochemical profle, as well as thoracic
mised blood-ocular barrier and immunologi-
and, possibly, abdominal radiography and
cally primed tissues and are more likely to
ultrasound are indicated when an intraocular
Aparaaas pue Aipidei eunen peoilins oi puodsa
neoplasm is detected or suspected to determine
When possible, intraocular surgery should be
the presence of metastatic disease.
      
Treatment of an intraocular neoplasm is
commonly applies to eyes with hypermature
based on many factors including the type of
cataracts and lens induced uveitis. Indications
neoplasia, the overall health of the globe and
for surgery on inflamed eyes include: annular
the dog, the presence of metastatic disease,
posterior synechiae, with pupillary seclusion
and the financial constraints of the owner.
and impending (or present) iris bombe; and
Treatment options may include tempori-
phacoclastic uveitis caused by rupture of the
zation, local excision, enucleation, orbital
lens capsule, with release of lens protein into
exenteration, and possibly, euthanasia if
the anterior or posterior chambers.
metastatic disease is present. Removal of a
mass localized to the iris and not invading the
filtration angle may be attempted by iridec-
Mass Removaf Procedures
tomy. Masses that involve the iris and ciliary
Sector Iridectomy
body can be excised via iridocyclectomy (see
the section "Uveal Surgery"). Transscleral laser
ablation and surgical excision of iris or ciliary
Localized masses of the iris may be removed by
body adenocarcinoma combined with chemo-
sector iridectomy. This procedure is optimal for
 therapy using 5-fluorouracil have been reported
removing well-defined focal lesions of the iris
that are located axially to the major iris blood
once in the literature. In addition, the Nd : YAG
vessels. The procedure is initiated by making a
laser has been used successfully for ablation of
melanomas localized to the iris. From a practi-
clear corneal incision adjacent to the iridec.
cal standpoint, therapy in most instances is
tomy site. The incision is usually 90-l80°
limited to enucleation or exenteration. The
After filling the anterior chamber with visco-
curative potential of enucleation and the likeli-
elastic, the iris is retracted into the incision
hood of inciting metastasis by performing such
using a blunt iris hook. The iris, on both sides
of the mass, is incised with iris scissors or
 surgery, however, remain controversial.
cautery. The base is then incised. While there
is limited hemorrhage with the radial incisions,
Uveal Surgery
more hemorrhage may occur with the base
incision because of the major arteriolar circle
Uveal surgery is indicated most commonly
that is present in the iris in 50% of dogs. The
in the treatment of intraocular neoplasms
iridectomy results in a keyhole-shaped pupil.
and in treatment of pupillary abnormalities
secondary to inflammation. Surgery of the
Iridocyclectomy
uvea has been described using local exci-
sion, cryosurgery or laser therapy. Two
A sector iridocyclectomy may be indicated
other indications for surgery of the anterior
when the ciliary body is involved in an anterior
uvea are the repair of globe perforations
uveal tumor. The surgery involves removing a
with prolapsed uveal tissue and the treat-
portion of the iris and ciliary body. The ideal
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Anterior Uvea/215
candidate has an uninvolved iridocorneal angle
through the pupil is not possible due to exten-
and a well defined lesion confined to the ante-
sive posterior synechia. By creating holes in the
rior uvea
iris peripheral to the synechiae, aqueous flow
can bypass the normal route through the pupil
Laser Photocoagulation
The aqueous can flow directly from the poste-
of Iris Melanoma
      
thickness iris is incised with iris scissors or
Diode laser photocoagulation may be used in
laser.
the treatment of presumed iris melanoma in
dogs. Selection criteria should include lesions
that are isolated to the iris with no evidence of
References
complicating factors. The diode laser delivery
system may be used in a continuous mode with
Bistner SI, Rubin LF, Roberts SR A review of per-
either an operating microscope adapter or a
sistent pupillary membranes in the Basenji dog. J
laser indirect ophthalmoscope with a 20 diopter
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 197l;7:143-157
lens. Visualization of the lesion allows one to
Clerc B. Surgery and chemotherapy for the treat-
assess the surface changes including shrinkage,
ment of adenocarcinoma of the iris and the ciliary
surface disruption, and release of pigment cells
body in five dogs. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;
6:265-270
into the aqueous humor. Treatment is discon-
Collins BK, Collier LL, Johnson GS, et al. Familial
tinued when no further shrinkage is observed
cataracts and concurrent ocular anomalies in
and the surface changes are noted over the
Chow Chows. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;200:
entire lesion. Common postoperative fndings
1485-1491
include pigment dispersion on the anterior lens
Cook CS, Lannon A. Inherited iris melanoma in
capsule, dyscoria, and diffuse iris hyperpig-
 Labrador Retriever dogs. Trans Am Coll Vet Oph-
mentation. In most cases the lesion is flattened
thalmol 1997;28:106.
 and reduced in diameter, but persists.
Crispin SM. Uveitis in the dog and cat. J Small Anim
Pract 1988;29:429-447
Deehr AJ, Dubielzig RR A histopathological study
Sphincterotomy, Synechiotomy.
of iridociliary cysts and glaucoma in Golden
Pupil Iridotomy
Retrievers. Vet Ophthalmol 1998;1:153-158.
Dubielzig RR. Ocular neoplasia in small animals.
Occasionally, intraoperative mydriasis is inad-
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1990;20:
equate to allow lens delivery during cataract
837-848
 surgery or miosis occurs immediately after lens
Dubielzig RR, et al. Choroidal melanomas in dogs
 removal. In those cases, iridotomy of the pupil-
Vet Pathol 1985;22:582-585
lary sphincter (also termed sphincterotomy) may
Gelatt KN, Gelatt JP. Small animal ophthalmic
be necessary. This is done by incising l-3 mm
surgery: practical techniques for the veterinarian
Philadelphia: Butterworth Heinemann, 2001.
of the pupil margin, usually at 2-4 positions in
286-335
quadrants, with iris scissors or electrocautery.
Gelatt KN, MacKay EO. Secondary glaucomas in the
Limited hemorrhage and fbrin formation will
dog in North America. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:
follow.
245-259.
Pupillary membranotomy refers to a pupil
Gemensky-Metzler AJ, Willkie DA, Cook CS. The use
iridotomy used in treatment of postoperative
of semiconductor diode laser for deflation and
pupillary membranes. The procedure carries a
coagulation of anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats
success rate of about 5o% as many failures
and horses: a report of 20 cases. Vet Ophthalmol
result from reformation of the membranes.
2004;7:360-368
Gerding PA, Essex-Sorlie D, Vasaune S, Yack R. Use
of tissue plasminogen activator for intraocular
fridotomy
fbrinolysis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992;53:
894-896.
Iridotomies are used for the creation of an alter-
Hakanson N, Forrester SD. Uveitis in the dog and
native pathway for aqueous flow when flow
cat. Vet Clin North Am 1990;20:715-735
 216 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Hendrix DV, Rohrbach BW, Bochsler PN, English
105 cases (1993-1998). Vet Ophthalmol 2000;31
RV. Comparison of histologic lesions of endo-
35-41
phthalmitis induced by Blasiomyres dermatitidis in
Sapienza JS, Simo FJ, Prados-Sapienza A. Golden
untreated and treated dogs: 36 cases (1986-2001).
Retriever uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999). Vet Oph-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:1317-1322
thalmol 2000;3:241-246.
Hendrix DV, Ward DA, Barnhill MA. Effects of anti-
Strande A, Nicolaissen B, Bjerkas I. Persistent pupil-
inflammatory drugs and preservatives on mor-
lary membrane and congenital cataract in a litter
phologic characteristics and migration of canine
 of English Cocker Spaniels. J Small Anim Pract
corneal epithelial cells in tissue culture. Vet Oph-
1988;29:257-260
thalmol 2002;5:127-135.
Swanson JF. Ocular
manifestations of systemic
Hendrix DVH. Diseases and surgery of the canine
 disease in the dog and cat: recent developments.
anterior uvea. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary oph-
Vet Clin North Am 1990;20:849-867
thalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007.
Van der Woerdt A, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG. Lens-
812-858.
induced uveitis in dogs: 151l cases (1985-1990).
Krohne SG, Henderson NM, Richardson RC, et al.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;20l:921-926
Prevalence of ocular involvement in dogs with
Ward DA. Comparative efficacy of topically applied
multicentric lymphosarcoma: prospective evalua-
flurbiprofen, diclofenac, tolmetin, and suprofen
tion of 94 cases. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;4:
for the treatment of experimentally induced
127-135.
blood-aqueous barrier disruption in dogs. Am J
Massa KL, Gilger BC, Miller TL, Davidson MG
Vet Res 1996;57:875-878
Causes of uveitis in dogs: 102 cases (1989-2000)
Ward DA, Ferguson DC, Ward SL, et al. Compari-
Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:93-98.
 son of the blood-aqueous barrier stabilizing effects
Michau TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Gilger BC, Davidson
of steroidal and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
MG. Bartonella vinsonii subspecies berkhoffi as a
agents in the dog. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
possible cause of anterior uveitis and choroiditis
1992;2:117-124.
in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:299-304
Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL. Morphology and behavior
Miller PE, Dubielzig RR. Ocular tumors. In: Withrow
of primary ocular melanomas in 9l dogs. Vet
SJ, MacEwen EG, eds. Small animal clinical oncol-
Pathol 1986;23:418-424
 Ogy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2001.
Wilcock BP, Peiffer RL. The pathology of lens-
Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J. Mediators of ocular
induced uveitis in dogs. Vet Pathol 1987;24:
 inflammation. Prog Comp Vet Ophthalmol 1991;
549-553.
1:41-58.
Wilkie DA. Control of ocular inflammation. Vet Clin
Morgan RV.
.Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in
North Am 1990;20:693-713
humans and dogs. Comp Cont Educ 1989;1l:
Yamaki K, Takiyama N, Itho N, Mizuki N, Seiya M,
1211-1218.
Sinsuke W, Hayakawa K, Kotani T. Experimen-
Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG. Ocular and peri-
tally induced Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease in
 ocular manifestations of leishmaniasis in dogs:
two Akita dogs. Exp Eye Res 2005;80:273-280.
Chapter 9
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF
THE CANINE LENS
Section l: Michael G. Davidson and Susan R. Nelms
Section 2: David A. Wilkie and Carmen M. H. Colitz
SECTION 1: DISEASES 0F
volume of approximately 0.5 ml, an antero-
THE CANINE LENS AND
posterior thickness of 7 mm, and an equato-
CATARACT FORMATION
rial diameter of l0 mm. The lens consists of
a zonulary support system, an external capsule
Introduction
comprised of basement membranes, and cells
that include lens epithelia and differentiated
Lens disorders are classified into a small list
lens fibers. The elastic lens capsules are divided
of those affecting embryologic development,
into anterior, equatorial and posterior; the
transparency, and correct position within
thickness of these capsules varies from 48.5 μm
the eye. Despite a simplistic anatomic struc-
(anterior polar), 7.6 μm (equatorial), to 3.8 μm
ture, the lens has a highly refined and elegant
(posterior).
series of biochemical processes that function
correctly throughout the life of the animal to
maintain clarity. Loss of transparency is an
Diagnostics for Examination
almost invariable common denominator of
of the Lens
all lens diseases. Because of the high preva-
lence of heritable lens disorders in dogs,
The lens is best examined and its periphery
cataract formation is among
the
most
examined after  complete drug-induced
common of all intraocular diseases and a
mydriasis. As the lens can be directly visual-
leading cause of vision loss in this species.
ized, both direct and retroillumination are
useful. Some magnification (typically with
the slit-lamp biomicroscope) permits exami-
Lens Morphology
nation of the entire structure in detail. With
a slit beam of light directed at the lens, and
The normal canine crystalline lens is a soft,
viewed at an angle to the light, the different
avascular, transparent, and highed struc-
layers of the lens can be examined. Other
tured tissue with a primary purpose of
 methods of lens examination include both A-
refraction of incoming light rays to a point
and B-scan ultrasonography and magnetic reso-
source on the retina. The canine lens has a
nance imaging (MRI).
217
218 /EsSENtiAlS OF VetERiNArY OgHtHALmOLOGY
Congenital and Developmental
region, is a rare congenital defect in dogs.
Abnormalities
Colobomas may be either typical (6:00 posi-
tion) or atypical (other location), and may be
The lens is formed by surface ectoderm and
associated with colobomas of the uvea. The
during its embryologic development a vascular
anomaly is thought to arise from a localized
envelope surrounds it. Anomalous develop-
zonular defect, although an overt lens zonule
ment may occur in the lens cells and capsule
defect may not be apparent with atypical
or may be a result of abnormalities of the
colobomas
surrounding tissues. Congenital lens abnor-
malities may be caused by genetic or exoge-
nous factors, and because proper development
Lenticonus/Lentigiobus
of the lens is crucial in the orchestration of
intraocular embryogenesis, eyes with lens
Congenital deformity of the axial (or polar),
anomalies often also exhibit multiple ocular
anterior or posterior lens surface may result
defects.
in a circumscribed cone-like (lenticonus)
 or spherical (lentiglobus) protrusion of vari-
Aphakia
able size. Posterior lenticonus is the most
common form and involves protrusion of the
Congenital absence of the lens is extremely rare
posterior cortex and capsular regions into
in the dog, and occurs through failure of contact
the vitreous body. The defect is thought to
occur at the time of primary lens fiber elonga-
of the optic vesicle with the surface ectoderm
during a critical inductive period of embryo-
sop un uonisal jo c7 Aep Apanexoidde 'uon
genesis, and subsequent failure of lens placode
The condition may be unilateral or bilateral,
formation. Several Saint Bernard puppies with
and often occurs in conjunction with other
ocular anomalies, including congenital cataract,
aphakia, multiple ocular defects (microphthal-
mia, retinal dysplasia, absence of anterior
persistent hyaloid vasculature, microphthal-
mia, retinal dysplasia, and optic nerve hypopla-
chamber, and acorea) and internal hydrocepha-
lus have been reported, and a genetic basis has
sia. Rarely, cases may show rupture of the lens
been proposed.
capsule with extrusion of lens cortical material
into the vitreous, with varying degrees of sec-
ondary inflammation. Biomicroscopic exami-
Microphakia
nation generally reveals an intact posterior lens
capsule extending deep into the vitreous com-
Congenital microphakia, an abnormally small
monly with varying degrees of cataractous
lens, may result from optic vesicle derangement
changes. Lenticonus internum occurs when the
during formation of the neural plate. Micropha-
lens nucleus is abnormally shaped and extends
kia has been associated with multiple ocular
into the posterior cortex.
defects in the Beagle and Doberman Pin-
     
scher, with congenital cataract and microph-
the Miniature Schnauzer, Doberman Pinscher,
thalmia in the Miniature Schnauzer, and with
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Old English
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in a
Sheepdog, Mastiff, Golden Retriever, Akita,
Spanish Pacard. Congenitally displaced lenses
Bouvier de Flandres, Bloodhound, and Shih
may be small and spherophakic (small, spheri-
Tzu. Posterior lenticonus occurs in l9% of
cally shaped lens), possibly from an abnormal
Miniature Schnauzers with congenital cata-
embryonic lens/zonule relationship.
ract and microphthalmia, with 1% more
severely affected with lentiglobus. Lentico
Coloboma
nus occurs in conjunction with persistent
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/persis-
Coloboma, a shortened segment of the lens
tent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHTVL/
fibers that appears biomicroscopically as a
PHPV) in Doberman Pinschers. Anterior len-
notch or flattened area in the lens equatorial
ticonus has been reported in Bull Terriers
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/219
with a hereditary nephritis resulting from a
glomerular capillary basement membrane
defect.
Congenitaf Lens Luxation
A congenital lens luxation associated with
microphakia has been described in a Brittany
Spaniel puppy. Scanning electron microscopy
demonstrated a lack of zonular fragments
attached to the equator.
Embyronic Vascular Abnormalities
The vascular supply of the lens, present
during prenatal development, is comprised
of the anterior and posterior tunica vascu-
losa lentis. The anterior portion is formed
Fig. 9.1. Persistent pupillary membranes and
by a pupillary membrane extending from the
anterior capsular and cortical cataract formation in an
iris, and the posterior portion is derived
Old English Sheepdog puppy
from the intravitreal hyaloid vascular system.
Atrophy of the hyaloid vascular system in
the dog begins by day 45 of gestation; the
anterior pupillary membrane remains until
approximately 14 days following birth.
Persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) is a
common congenital ocular anomaly seen spo-
radically in many breeds, presumably as a non-
hereditary trait. Other breeds with a higher
prevalence or more severe manifestations of
PPMs, most notably the Basenji, likely have a
hereditary predisposition. Persistent pupillary
membrane arises from the iris collarette and
may extend to the anterior lens capsule causing
varying degrees of focal or multifocal lenticular
Fig. 9.2. Multifocal punctuate pigment deposition
opacities (Fig. 9.1). Other ocular disorders
on the axial anterior lens capsule in a Scottish
associated with PPM include congenital cata-
Terrier. These pigment deposits are presumably
ract and microphthalmia, anterior capsular and
remnants of the pupillary membrane.
subcapsular cataract
Multiple, punctate pigmented foci on the
central anterior lens capsule are a common
inflammation. These pigment foci (often
incidental finding in many breeds of dogs
termed "iris nests") are common in Cairn Terrier
examined with critical biomicroscopy (Fig.
and Dachshund breeds, and rarely cause clini-
9.2). These pigmented foci are presumed to
cally apparent visual disturbances.
represent remnants of the pupillary mem-
PHTVL/PHPV, the most severe lesion
brane and may be
distinguished 
from
associated with abnormal development of
pigment deposition from acquired posterior
the embryonic intraocular vasculature, is a
synechia secondary to inflammation by gen-
congenital eye anomaly leading to cataract
erally being axial, punctate, and unassoci-
in most cases (Fig. 9.3). Several affected
ated with other evidence of intraocular
breeds have reported. Frequent occurrence
220 /ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
extraction with anterior vitrectomy and exci
sion of the hyaloid artery surgery has been rec-
ommended for cases of bilateral PHTVL/PHPV
causing blindness.
 Successful  extracapsular
cataract extraction by phacoemulsification with
rolental plaque and placement of an intraocular
lens (IOL) implant has been reported
Muitiple Ocular Anomalies with Lens
Abnormalities
Fig. 9.3. Persistent hyaloid artery with posterior
capsular and cortical cataract in a mixed-breed dog.
Australian Shepherds that are homozygous
Note the patent hyaloid artery system.
for the merle gene develop congenital ocular
anomalies, including microphthalmia, micro-
cornea, colobomas of the iris, retina, choroid
was noted in the Doberman in the Nether-
and/or sclera, retinal dysplasia with or
lands, where the clinical aspects of the
without detachment and cataract. This syn-
entity in 90 closely related Dobermans was
drome is referred to as Merle Ocular Dysgenesis
described. The grades of PHTVL/PHPV based
and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
on morphologic severity include (1) Grade 1:
      
Retrolental fibrovascular pigmented dots alone;
progression is variable. Abnormal retinal
(2) Grade 2: Dots in combination with retro-
pigment epithelium development, noted as
lental tissue proliferation attached to posterior
early as day 30 of gestation, is the reported
lens capsule; (3) Grade 3: Plaque in combina-
cause of the ocular colobomas. Avoiding breed-
tion with persistent parts of the hyaloid (TVL)
ing of two merle animals can reduce the inci-
vascular system; (4) Grade 4: Plaque with len-
dence of this condition.
ticonus posterior; (5) Grade 5: Combination of
Congenital cataract with concurrent ocular
 grades 3 and 4; and (6) Grade 6: Combinations 
anomalies havebeen described inacloselyinbred
of former grades associated with lens coloboma,
line of Chow Chow dogs as well as in other
microphakia, and retrolental clots of pigment
breeds. Clinical appearance of the Chow Chow
or free blood. The hereditary basis for
cataract was variable, ranging from incipient
PHTVL/PHPV in the Doberman in the Neth-
nuclear or capsular lesions to advanced cortical
erlands and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier in
opacity. The lens nucleus was most consistently
Great Britain is most likely incomplete auto-
affected. Concurrent anomalies included wan-
somal dominant. PHTVL has been reported in
dering nystagmus, entropion, microphthalmia,
8.4% of 122 German Pinschers evaluated in
PPM, and multiple retinal folds.
Finland, and the mode of inheritance
is
Congenital lens abnormalities with heredi-
suspected to be either autosomal recessive or
tary retinal dysplasia occur in the Bedlington
incomplete dominant.
Terrier, Sealyham Terrier, Labrador Retriever
The diagnosis of PHTVL/PHPV is based on
and English Springer Spaniel. In the Labrador
history, clinical examination with complete
Retriever, appendicular skeletal growth retar-
mydriasis, and exclusion of other causes of leu-
 dation, persistent hyaloid remnants, and rheg-
kocoria. Ocular ultrasonography can be used to
matogenous retinal
detachment may also
 H  i  o
be present. In the Beagle, Akita, Old English
color Doppler imaging can confrm the pres-
 Sheepdog, and Bloodhound cataract, microph-
ence or absence of blood flow in the retina and
thalmia, retinal dysplasia and other ocular
lens, and assess the likelihood of surgical com-
defects have been reported. Short-limbed
plications. Surgical success rates for restoration
dwarfism is inherited in the Samoyed breed as
of vision have historically been low, and in the
 an autosomal recessive trait. Anterior and pos-
pre-phacoemusification era, intracapsular lens
terior cortical cataracts, vitreal liquefaction,
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/221
hyaloid remnants and retinal detachment are
organelles and cell nuclei in lens fibers, small
the associated ocular defects.
spatial fluctuations of the refractive index of
cytoplasm, and highly organized lattice arrange-
Congenital Cataract
ment of fiber cells. The fluctuations in cytoplas-
mic refractive index are small compared with
Lens growth disruption during primary fiber
the wavelength of light, such that light scatter-
formation results in fetal nuclear or central
ing through the lens is minimized. The spatial
cataract that is generally
fluctuations depend on the molecular weight of
/nonprogressive,
although involvement of the adjacent anterior
lens crystallins, the concentrations and volume
fraction of intracellular proteins, and the orga-
and posterior cortical regions may concurrently
be seen. Congenital cataracts are inherited
nization of proteins within the cytoplasm
These factors in turn are influenced by cyto-
in the Miniature Schnauzer, Boston Terrier,
Old English Sheepdog, Welsh
1 Springer
plasmic hydration, ionic strength, and other
Spaniel, and West Highland White Terrier
specialized metabolic functions within the lens.
breeds (Table 9.l; Figs. 9.4A and B). In addi-
Early events in cataractogenesis, resulting in
tion, congenital cataracts may be of maternal
nontransparency or light scattering, are caused
origin resulting from toxic or infectious agent
by alterations in one or more of these factors.
When cataracts are evident clinically, and
exposure in utero.
certainly with moderate to advanced cata-
racts, gross and irreversible alterations in
Pathophysiologic Changes
lens metabolism have occurred from a series
Associated with Cataract
of events related to protein content of the
lens, metabolic pumps, ionic concentrations,
Transparency within the lens is maintained by
and antioxidant activity. Studies of Miniature
a number of complex factors, including a low
 Schnauzer dogs suggest several common bio-
cytoplasm density from a lack of intracellular
chemical consequences of cataracts in the
Table 9.1. Inherited Cataracts in the Dog.
Breed
Documented inheritance
Age of Onset
Initial Anatomic Localization
 Afghan Hound
Autosormal recessive
6-12 mos
Equatorial/posterior cortex
American Cocker Spaniel
Autosomal recessive/
souI +9
Posterior/anterior cortex
Polygenic
Bichon Frise
Autosomal recessive
2-8 yrs
Anterior/posterior cortex
 Boston Terrier
Autosomal recessive
Congenital
 Posterior sutures/nuclear
Autosomal recessive
SIK +E
Equatorial/anterior cortex
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
Incorplete dominant
1+ yr5
Nuclear/cortex
 Entelbucher Mountain Dog
Autosomal recessive
1-2 yrs
Posterior cortex
German Shepherd
Incomplete dominant
8+ wk5
Posterior sutures/cortex
Golden Retriever
Incomplete dorminant
sOWI +9
Posterior subcapsular (triangular)
Labrador Retriever
Incomplete dominant
sowI +
 Posterior subcapsular (triangular)
 Miniature Schnauzer
Autosomal recessive
Congenital 
Nuclear/posterior cortex
Autosomal recessive
SoWI +9
Posterior cortex
Norwegian Buhund
Autosomal dominant
Congenital
Fetal nucleus
Old English Sheepdog
Autosormal recessive
Congenital
Nuclear/cortex
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Autosomal recessive
sow +9
Posterior sutures/cortex
Standard Poodle
Autosormal recessive
1+ yrs 
Equatorial cortex
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Autosomal recessive
 Congenital
Nuclear/posterior cortex
West Highland Wwhite Temier
Autosormal recessive
Congenital
Posterior sutures
222 /EsSENtIALS OF VEtERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
diminished, including decreased levels of
reduced and oxidized glutathione, vitamins C
and E, and superoxide dismutase. An increase
in the level of disulfide bonds occurs. These
pathologic alterations cascade as the cataract
matures and hydrolytic and proteolytic enzyme
activity increase, and cell membrane rupture is
associated with irreversible damage, loss of low
molecular weight proteins, and an increase in
water content. Further degradation of proteins
into amino acids and polypeptides allows small
products of proteolysis to diffuse from the lens.
The loss of water and nitrogenous material may
cause the lens to shrink as with a hypermature
cataract.
Histopathologic Changes
Associated with Cataracts
Specific capsular, epithelial, cortical, and lens
nuclear morphologic abnormalities are com-
monly seen with light microscopy in many
types of cataract. Both the anterior and poste-
rior capsules may become thinned with an
intumescent lens, and the lens capsule may be
wrinkled with an advanced hypermature cata-
ract. Lens capsule perforation or rupture usually
B
causes the edges to curl, and an associated
inflammatory response with intralenticular leu-
kocytes is often seen. Lens epithelial abnor-
Fig. 9.4. Congenital cataract formation in a
Miniature Schnauzer puppy A. Frontal appearance
malities include the formation of bladder or
showing primarly nuclear involvement. B. Slit lamp
"Wedl" cells, which are balloon like, swollen
biomicroscopic appearance showing the cataract
lens epithelial cells. Migration of lens epithelial
involvement as viewed sagittally.
past their normal point of termination in the
lens bow, and along the posterior capsule, may
occur and these cells may have either a spindle
advanced state. Cataracts are associated with an
or bladder cell appearance. Another similar
increase in high molecular weight, insoluble
 type of epithelial proliferation, with hyperplasia
proteins (albuminoids) that normally comprise
and fbrous metaplasia, forming multilayered
15% of the proteins of the lens, and a decrease
spindle-shaped epithelial cells, may also occur
in the relative amount of soluble proteins (crys-
beneath the anterior capsule from a variety of
tallins). Specific types of cataracts may be asso-
insults; the subjacent cortex may also show
ciated with a shift in the relative concentrations
microscopic cataracts changes. With advanced
of lens crystallin proteins. Cataracts are also
cell wall degradation, larger clefts and pockets
often associated with a decreased activity of the
of these degenerative proteins may be seen as
lens epithelial Na-K ATPase pump. which in
 small eosinophilic aggregates or Morgagnian
turn may cause an increase in sodium and
 globules. Hypermature cataracts may be associ-
calcium and a decrease in potassium content
ated with characteristic microscopic features,
within the lens. Oxygen consumption and ATP
including advanced liquefaction and loss of
production decrease and antioxidant activity is
cortical and sometimes nuclear lens contents,
DisEases ANo SuRGeRY Of The CaNine LeNs/223
wrinkling of the lens capsule, dystrophic calci-
study in the United Kingdom found a C50
fcation, and the formation of multifocal, sub-
(age at which the prevalence of nuclear scle-
capsular plaques.
rosis was 50%) for all dogs studied to be 9.6
± 2.6 years. The change in the optical proper-
ties of the compressed lens fbers cause light
Classification of Canine
scattering. imparting a clinically apparent
Cataracts
whitish-blue appearance on diffuse illumina-
tion. With retroillumination, a tapetal or fundic
A myriad of classification schemes can be
reflection is still visible, and the outline or zone
used for canine cataracts, some of which are
of the lens nucleus may be apparent. Fundu-
useful for denoting etiology, likely course or
scopic examination is still possible through
progression, associated visual deficits, and
the affected lens, although with advanced scle-
likelihood of concurrent ocular disorders
rosis, fine ophthalmoscopic detail is variably
such as lens-induced uveitis. Commonly
obscured
used schemes include those associated
with an etiology (numerous specific causes
described later), age of onset of the cataract
Clinical and Biomicroscopic
(congenital-infantile, juvenile, senile), loca-
Features of Canine Cataract
tion of incipient stages of the cataract within
the lens (capsular, subcapsular, zonular,
 Incipient and immature cataracts may be grossly
cortical, nuclear, sutorial, axial, equatorial),
characterized by retroillumination of the lens
appearance of the cataract (e.g., spike or
with an external light source held at an arm's
wedge-shaped, spoke, cuneiform, sunflower,
distance from the patient and following phar-
stellate, punctate, purverulent, etc.), and
macological mydriasis, noting the degree of
stage of progression of the cataract (incipi-
obstruction by the cataract of the tapetal or
ent, immature, mature, hypermature). Of all
fundic (in atapetal dogs) reflection. This proce-
the means of classification, the stage of cataract
dure is also used to distinguish nuclear sclero-
development is perhaps most useful and most
sis from cataract. Incipient and immature
widely used for canine cataract (Table 9.2 and
cataracts appear brown to black when viewed
Figs. 9.5A through E).
against a tapetal background or red reflex, due
to obstruction of the reflected light. Immature
and more advanced cataracts are recognized
Nuclear or Lenticular Sclerosis
clinically as leukoria with a whitish to blue
appearance to the lens with diffuse illumination
A consistent finding in dogs greater than 7
using an unfocused light source. Complete
years of age, this senescent change in the
cataracts are characterized by an inability to
lens occurs from progressive lens fiber for-
elicit a fundic or tapetal reflection with retroil-
mation and internal compression of older
lumination or with ophthalmoscopy. Hyper-
lens fibers, especially in the lens nucleus. A
mature cataracts often exhibit an increase in
Table 9.2. Classification of Canine Cataracts Based on Maturity.
Type
Area involved
Tapetal Reffection
Vision
Incipient
10-15% involved; cortices and/or sutures
 Present
Present
Immature
Normal and opaque areas. lntumescent (swollen)
Present
Present
Mature
Entire lens involved. Intumescent (swollen)
Obscured
Absent
Hyperm ature
Reduced overall size. Very advanced
Usually obscured
 Usually absent
Often present
Variable
224 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLoGY
A
D
B
E
Fig. 9.5. The different clinical appearances of cataract maturity. A. Incipient, posterior cortical Y-suture-
associated cataract as seen with direct retroillumination using the tapetal reflection. B. Immature cataract
a5 seen with direct retroillumination using the tapetal reflection. Note the prominent cataractous change
jenen aaduos io ainu e jo aueieadde jeidk  sainns- leon oaisod pue ioaue au suoe
as seen with diffuse illumination. Note the separation of lens fbers and the formation of a cleft along the
anterior Y-suture. D. Hypermature cataract as seen with diffuse illumination. Note the glistening, refractile
appearance to the lens material. E. Hypermature cataract as seen with direct focal illumination, with the
optical section passed from right to left. Note the increased relucency and glistening refractile property of
 some lens fibers, with the focal pockets of liquefed lens material appearing as areas of decreased
relucency.
anterior chamber depth and evidence of lens-
using a parallelepiped or optical section,
induced uveitis, small refractile crystals and
 appears as a series of opalescent blocks of light,
subcapsular plaques.
produced by the surface of zones of discontinu-
The normal biomicroscopic appearance of
ity from the internal lens architecture. These
the canine lens with direct focal illumination
 zones include the convex surfaces of the ante-
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/225
rior capsule, anterior cortex, anterior adult
ders that might cause cataract formation,
mucleus, anterior fetal nucleus, and anterior
suggest that in most of the other breeds,
embryonal nucleus; similar concave zones are
these cataracts likely also have a heritable
produced by the posterior situated counter-
basis. As of 2005, the Genetics Committee of
parts of these areas. Y-suture regions are seen
the American College of Veterinary Ophthal-
as fine white lines within the light block, and
mologists had documented 145 breeds of dogs
may have a central dark zone with high mag-
(inclusive of those in Table 9.l) in which a
nification, and are visible near the anterior
heritable basis for cataract is suspected or
and posterior capsules (a replication of the Y-
proven. In a study of prevalence of breed-
sutures is sometimes visible at the nuclear/
related cataract in North America, ffty-nine
cortical junction of the zone of discontinuity).
breeds of dogs had prevalence greater than the
On the vitreal aspect of the posterior capsule,
control population (mixed-breed/hybrid dogs
Mittendorf's dot and a white, relucent circular
with a 1.6l% prevalence). Smooth Fox Terrier,
white line representing the anterior extent of
Havanese, Bichon Frise, Boston Terrier, Minia-
Cloquet's canal (arcuate line of Vogt) are gener-
ture Poodle, Silky Terrier and Toy Poodle had
ally visible.
the highest prevalence of 10-12%, while the
With high magnification biomicroscopy, the
Boston Terrier, Miniature Poodle, American
experienced examiner is able to detect subtle,
Cocker Spaniel, Standard Poodle, and Minia-
microscopic flaws, common in the canine lens,
ture Schnauzer had the highest numbers of
which should not necessarily be construed as
cases with cataract (5-12%). Heritable cataracts
clinically important. Reports of studies in young
in dogs may additionally be classified accord-
Beagle dogs suggest minor lens imperfections
ing to whether they are heritable isolated (cata-
are commonly detected by biomicroscopy and
ract alone), heritable with multiple ocular
include fine particulate opacities or vacuoles in
the lens cortex, peripheral capsular opacities,
Anomalies with Lens Abnormalities"), or heri-
linear Y-suture opacities  or prominent
table associated (associated with another phe-
Y-sutures, posterior capsular opacities from
notypically apparent genetic disorder such as
hyaloid artery remnants, a distinct zone of sep-
chondrodysplasia)
aration between the lens cortex and adult
nucleus, minute granules, sheen, and optical
discontinuity and striations. They presumably
Clinical and Morphologic
represent imperfections in lens development,
Features of Heritable Cataracts
do not interfere with vision, and typically do
not progress to clinically relevant cataract.
The clinical and morphologic features of heri-
table cataracts have been described for many
breeds of dogs. It should be noted that the
Cataract with a Heritable or
phenotypic expression of heritable cataract in
Presumed Heritable Basis
dogs, most notably age of onset and progres-
sion, can vary within a breed, and the expres-
Cataract occurring in young to middle-aged,
sion may be influenced by other modifying
pure breed dogs comprise the most common
genes or environmental factors (see Table 9.1
type of cataract seen clinically in veterinary
and Box 9.1).
medicine (Box 9.l). Only in a minority of
affected breeds have a heritable basis and
mode of transmission been conclusively
Cataracts Associated with
established (see Table 9.l). However, the
Systemic Disease
frequent characteristic anatomic localization
and appearance of the lens opacity in the
Diabetes Mellitus and Galactosemia
initial stages, characteristic age of onset and
course of progression, bilateral nature, and
Diabetes mellitus is commonly 2
associa-
absence of other demonstrable ocular disor-
ted with rapidly developing, bilaterally
 226 /EsSentiAlS Of VeterinAry OpHthalmoLoGY
Box 9.1. Breeds Predisposed to Cataracts (lnheritance Suspected)*
Affenpinscher
Dalm atian
Norfolk Terrier
Airdale Terrier
Doberman Pinscher
 North American Shepherd
Akbach
Doque de Bordeaux
Norwegian Elkhound
Akita
English Cocker Spaniel
Norwich Terrier
Alaskan Malamute
English Setter
 Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
American Eskimo Dog
 English Springer Spaniel
Retriever
American Staffordshire Terrier
English Toy Spaniel
Papillon
American WWater Spaniel
Field Spaniel
Pekingese
Australian Cattle Dog
Finnish Spitz
Pembroke Wwelsh Corgi
Australian Shepherd 
Flat-Coated Retriever
Pharoah Hound
Basenji
 French Bulldog
Pointer
 Basset Griffon Vendeen. Petite
Gemman Pinscher
 Polski Owczarek Nizzinny
Basset Hound
Gemman Shorthaired Pointer
Pomeranian
Beagle
Gemman Wwirehaired Pointer
Poodle (Toy and Miniature)
Bearded Collie
Giant Schnauzer
 Portuguese Water dog
Bedlington Terrier
Glen of Imal Terrier
Pug
 Belgian Malinois
Gordon Setter
Puli
 Belgian Sheepdog
Great Dane
Pyrenean Shepherd
 Belgian Tervuren 
Great Pyrenees
Rat Terrier
 Bermese Mountain Dog
 Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
Rhodesian Ridgeback
 Black and Tan Coonhound
Havanese
Rottweiler
Bloodhound
lbizan Hound
Saint Bermard
Border Collie
Irish Setter
Saluki
Border Terrier
Irish Terrier
Samoyed
Borzoi
Irish vWater Spaniel
Schipperke
 Bouvier des Flandres
Irish Wolfhound
Scottish Deerhound
Boxer
ltalian Greyhound
Scottish Terrier
 Boykin Spaniel
Jack Russell Terrier
Sealyham Terrier
 Brittany Spaniel
Japanese Chin
Shetland Sheepdog
 Brussels Griffon
Keeshond
Shiba lnu
 Bull Mastiff
Kemy Blue Terrier
Shih Tzu
 Bull Terrier
Komodor
Siberian Husky
Bulldog (English)
Kuvasc
Silky Terrier
Cairn Terrier
Lakeland Terrier
Smooth Fox Terrier
Canaan
Leonberger
Soft-Coated Wvheaten Terrier
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Lhasa Ap50
Spinone Italiano
Chihuahua
Lowchen
Standard Schnauzer
Chinese Crested
Maltese
Tibetan Spaniel
Chinese Shar Pei
Manchester Terrier
Tibetan Terrier
Chow Chow
Mastiff 
Vizsla
Clumber Spaniel
Miki
Whippet
Collie
Miniature Pinscher
Wvire Fox Terrier
Coonhound
 Neapolitan Mastiff
Wweimeraner
Curly Coated Retriever
Newfoundland
WWelsh Terrier
Dachshund
Norbottenspets
Yorkshire Terrier
*Data from ocular disorders presumed to be inherited in purebred dogs. American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmologists, Purdue University. 1996; and Rubin LF. Inherited eye disease in purebred dogs. Baltimore;
Wwilliams & wwilkins. 1989
symmetric cataract formation in dogs from
hexokinase pathways becomes saturated,
well-characterized alterations in lens meta-
causing
shunting
towards an alternate
bolic pathways. With elevated blood glucose
energy pathway involving the enzyme aldose
levels, lens levels of glucose increase and
reductase (AR). Aldose reductase activity in
anerobic metabolism of glucose by 1
the
diabetic cataracts is increased due to increased
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/227
amounts of AR rather than increased enzyme
170th day after diagnosis of diabetes mellitus,
activation. By utilizing NADPH, AR reduces
while 75% and 80% of the population devel-
the aldehyde form of glucose to sorbitol,
oped cataracts by 370 days and 470 days,
which is further oxidized to fructose by NAD-
 respectively. Canine diabetic cataracts are often
dependent sorbitol dehydrogenase. Accumula-
 so rapidly progressive and osmotically active
tion of sorbitol (a polyol or sugar alcohol)
that intumescence of the lens and phacolytic
results, which does not readily diffuse across
uveitis commonly ensues. Spontaneous lens
the lens capsule. Water from the aqueous
capsule rupture, usually equatorial, and subse-
humor is imbibed into the lens due to osmotic
quent varying degrees of phacoclastic uveitis
forces, causing lens architectural changes,
have also been identified in dogs with diabetic
including fber swelling and rupture, vacuole
cataract
formation, and clinically evident cataract. The
dog is highly susceptible to diabetic cataract
and it has been assumed this may relate to
Hypocaicemia
the diffculty in controlling diabetes in this
Hypocalcemia, most commonly caused by renal
species and resulting chronic hyperglycemia.
 failure or primary or secondary hypoparathy-
However, one study in 23 diabetic dogs failed
to identify a relationship between the develop-
roidism, may be associated with characteristic
cataracts in dogs manifested by a multifocal,
ment of cataract and the corresponding level
of hyperglycemia.
punctate opacities or coalescing lamellar corti-
Cataracts are one of the most prevalent and
cal opacities that are bilaterally symmetric
Treatment of hypocalcemic disease state may
important complications of canine diabetes
mellitus, with one retrospective study (with
be generally expected to stop progression, but
relatively few animals), citing a 68% prevalence
not reverse existing lens opacities.
rate (Fig. 9.6). Cataract formation starts in the
lens equator, and then extends into both ante-
Hypercupremia
rior and posterior cortices. A study evaluating
incidence and estimated median time to cata-
A characteristic, sunflower-shaped anterior
ract formation in 200 dogs found that half of
subcapsular cataract is seen in 17% of humans
the population had developed cataracts by the
suffering from Wilson's disease, a genetic dis-
order of copper metabolism, as well as other
disorders causing derangement of copper
metabolism. A familial copper storage disorder
similar to Wilson's disease has been described
in Bedlington and West Highland White Terri-
ers, but cataracts have not been described in
these animals.
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
A single case report of cataracts (and concur-
rent keratitis) associated with congenital tyro-
sinemia in a German Shepherd has been
reported. The pathogenesis of the associated
cataract is not known.
Bilateral cataract and lens luxation, with the
cataract likely occurring secondary to a lens
Fig. 9.6. Incipient equatorial cataracts in a dog with
luxation from zonular defects, was documented
diabetes mellitus. Note the lens vacuoles, which are
in a dog with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a hered-
characteristic of early cataractous changes in diabetes
itary connective tissue disease.
228 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmoLoGY
Cataracts Associated with
opacities are characterized by the formation of
Medications and other
equatorial and posterior cortical vacuoles, Y-
Toxic Substances
suture changes, and a diffuse increase in relu-
cency to the posterior subcapsular region. The
A number of environmental toxins and phar-
cataracts are often progressive, eventually
macologic agents administered systemically
involving the entire lens. Degenerative rod
have been reported to produce cataracts in dogs
outer segments may release water-soluble dial-
(Box 9.2). Many of these agents have minor
dehydes from peroxidation of photoreceptor
clinical significance, as they are typically pro-
lipid membranes that may diffuse through the
duced during toxicologic studies, where the
vitreous
and
lbe toxic to lens cellular
test compounds are administered chronically
membranes.
and in high dosages. Toxic cataracts may ini-
lens, depending on the toxic principal, but
Cataracts Associated with
often begin in either the anterior and posterior
Dietary Deficiencies
cortical region near the equator (in the area of
lens fiber elongation), or the Y-suture regions,
A specific syndrome of neonatal cataracts is
and are often associated with lens vacuole
sporadically seen in puppies fed an oral milk
formation.
replacement product. In mongrel pups exper-
The most clinically relevant type of cataract
imentally fed milk replacements, the opaci-
presumed to be toxic in nature is that associ-
ties began in the third week of life, and a
ated with progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) or
biomicroscopically visible brown colored
other types of retinal degeneration. Cataracts
lamellar zone that separate the anterior and
 are commonly seen in dogs with moderate to
posterior nuclear/cortical junctions is seen.
advanced stages of PRA, often obscuring oph-
This zone progressed to a dense white peri-
thalmoscopic detail of the fundus. For example,
nuclear opacity. Other changes included a
one report found a prevalence of progressive
feathered appearance to the Y-sutures and a
-u u %os Axdde jo Adon jn
transient extra line of dysjunction in the anterior
iature Poodles screened electrodiagnostically
and posterior cortex. The opacities are often
for cataract surgery. The Labrador Retriever
mild and non-vision threatening, and often
 and Miniature and Toy Poodle are the breeds
become less prominent or even resolve with age.
in which cataractous lens changes have been
although more advanced cataractous changes
persist into adulthood and may necessitate sur-
retinal degeneration although many breeds are
gical removal. Arginine deficiency at a critical
affected clinically. In earlier stages, these lens
stage in neonatal lens development has been
proposed as a likely cause from observations
made in arginine supplemented wolf pups.
As the opacities appear to be most common
Box 9.2. Drug-lnduced Cataracts
and pronounced in pups totally deprived of
in Dogs
dam's milk, or deprived during the first week
of life, a suggested preventative effort, if practi-
Diazoxide (antihypertensive agent)
cal, would be to attempt at least limited nursing
Phenylpiperazine (antihypertensive agents).
of the pups during this time, supplemented
Hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhi-
with a high quality milk replacement.
bitors (cholesterol-lowening drugs)
Sulfonylurea glimepiride (a hypoglycemic agent).
Pefloxacin (a quinolone)
Dinitrophenol (anthelmintic agent).
Injury to the Lens
DNCA (a fungicide)
Progesterone-based oral contraceptives.
Mild blunt injury to the globe rarely causes
Ketoconazole
injury to the lens. Moderate force blunt injury
Dimmethy sulfoxide (DMSO).
may result in posterior displacement of the iris,
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/229
causing anterior capsular deposition of pigment
but some larger rents seal spontaneously
from the posterior iris epithelium, sometimes
without clinically important consequences.
in the shape of the pupillary aperture. Contu-
Lens removal has been recommended with lens
sion to the lens from blunt injury may result in
capsule rents > 1.5 mm, and if substantial corti-
cataracts from resulting “contrecoup" or ocular
cal cataract is present. Lens capsule tears with
compressive forces causing damage to the lens
only minor underlying damage to the cortex
epithelia, and rupture and disruption of spacing
may be carefully monitored for progression of
of lens fiber membranes in the underlying
cataract and phacoclastic uveitis.
cortex. Traumatic cataracts may sometime ini-
Lens penetration with a metallic foreign
tially manifest along the anterior and posterior
body would be expected to result in at least a
lens sutures, producing a stellate shape. In
focal cataract, and more commonly, diffuse
general, fairly pronounced blunt trauma is nec-
opacification from substantial disruption of
essary to induce cataracts; other signs of ocular
       
injury are often concurrently present.
intraocular metallic foreign bodies not pene-
 Penetrating ocular injury that perforates the
trating the lens but within the eye is dependent
anterior lens capsule would be expected to
on inertness, position, and size of the foreign 
invariably cause focal to diffuse cataract forma-
body. Lead, gold, silver, glass and rubber are
tion. Traumatic anterior lens capsule disrup-
also relatively inert within the eye; however,
tion is seen most commonly in young animals
copper, zinc and brass foreign bodies have
from cat claw wounds or dog bites (Fig. 9.7),
moderate oxidizing potential and often cause
although a variety of other sources of pene-
panophthalmitis, and iron and steel are most
 trating injury are possible. Smallrents in the
damaging. causing severe inflammatory reac-
lens capsule may spontaneously seal through
tion and secondary cataract (siderosis lentis).
fibrous metaplasia of lens epithelia assisted
Intralenticular iron foreign bodies cause sider-
by exudate from the uveal tract, leaving only
 otic deposition, resulting in slowly progressive,
a focal residual cataract. Rents larger than
focal red-brown or rusty appearing lens
1.5 mm often cause progressive opacifica-
opacities.
tion of the lens, and in the dog are often
    
associated with severe phacoclastic lveitis,
mation has been reported in a 3-year-old dog
which result in vision threatening sequela,
after biting an electric cord, and the authors
have examined a dog with progressive cataracts
following lightning strike.
Cataracts are a chronic complication of
exposure of the eye to ionizing radiation of
varying forms, most commonly seen clinically
following radiotherapy of neoplasms in the
head region, in which the eye is in the radiation
field. Cataract was a common late (> 6 months)
finding in dogs given 36-67.5 Gy in fraction-
ated doses given over 4 weeks using a 6 MV
linear accelerator. Cataracts were reported in
28% of the eyes with complications following
megavoltage irradiations, and 10.2% of the eyes
following orthovoltage (cobalt source), gener-
ally 6-12 months following therapy. The likeli-
Fig. 9.7. Focal anterior lens capsule perforation in a
hood of development of cataracts following
young puppy associated with a cat-claw wound as
radiotherapy is related to degree of exposure of
seen with direct focal illumination, with the
parallelepiped passed from right to left. Note the
the eye to the radiation beam and the dose. The
extrusion of lens material above the capsular surface,
threshold dose for cataractogenesis in man is
cortical cataract, and focal pigment deposition on the
between 500 and 1,000 rad. The pathogenesis
capsule.
relates to the effect on mitosis and subsequent
230 /Essentials Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
degenerative changes of the radiation on the
 related cataracts is often slow, requiring many
equatorial lens epithelial and formation of
months to several years to result in demon-
newly synthesized lens fibers, resulting in an
strable vision loss. The pathogenesis of age-
initial cataract that involves the equatorial, and
related cataracts in dogs is unknown.
anterior and posterior subcapsular regions.
Cataract Resulting from
Age-Related Cataracts
Inflammations and Lens-
Associated Inflammation
Cataracts are commonly seen in the aged
dog, and are often classified as "senile" or
The lens responds in a nonspecific fashion
“age-related" if no other antecedent cause is
by development of a cataract to contiguous
apparent. The age of onset at which a cata-
inflammation (uveitis) from any cause. Syn-
ract should be considered age related is arbi-
echia formation to the anterior lens capsule,
trary and breed-related. For example, the
with or without proliferation of fibrovascu-
authors generally use an age of 6 years for
lar membranes onto the lens surface, may
large breed dogs and 10 years for small
result. The location of inflammatory cata-
breeds when applying this classification.
racts is most commonly anterior subcapsu-
While the clinical appearance and rate of pro-
lar or equatorial. Cataract secondary to
gression of age related cataracts can vary, they
inflammation generally only occurs with mod-
often are seen initially as an increase in relu-
erate to severe, or chronic uveitis; cataract
cency and punctate to linear opacification in
attributable to chronic inflammation was found
the adult nucleus of the lens, generally occur-
in 37% of 142 Golden Retrievers with chronic,
ring concurrent with and following dense
idiopathic uveitis.
nuclear sclerosis (Fig. 9.8). Cortical cataractous
A common form of lens-associated uveitis,
changes, often in a wedge or spoke pattern,
occurring in conjunction with resorbing,
may also occur to varying extents, either con-
typically hypermature cataracts, has been
current with or separate from nuclear cataracts.
termed phacolytic uveitis. The histologic
The rate of progression of these classic age-
features for a mild, lymphocytic-plasmocytic
iridocyclitis is similar to many types of idio-
pathic uveitis seen in dogs. The prevalence
of this usually mild uveitis has been reported
to be as high as 7l% in dogs screened for
cataract surgery. The prevalence of subclinical
blood ocular barrier disruption in dogs with
hypermature cataracts may be even higher.
A more severe form of phacolytic uveitis, also
termed granulomatous lens induced uveitis, is
sometimes encountered in dogs with hyperma-
ture cataracts. In humans, phacolytic glaucoma
occurs with hypermature cataracts, reportedly
from soluble lens proteins being phagocytized
by macrophages, resulting in obstruction of
aqueous humor outflow.
Phacoclastic uveitis occurs in dogs with
traumatic rupture of the lens capsule. Histo-
Fig. 9.8. Typical age-related cataract in a 15-year-
logic study of advanced cases of lens capsule
rupture has documented  varying degrees
old Poodle seen with direct illumination and a diffuse
light source. Note the dense nuclear sclerosis and
and types of inflammation (suppurative to
nuclear cataract, with multifocal punctuate opacities
lymphocytic plasmocytic), intralenticular neu-
in the cortices.
 trophils, and prominent fbroplasia (presum-
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/231
ably from the lens epithelia). The condition
Complications of Untreated
usually responds poorly to anti-inflammatory
Cataracts in Dogs
therapy. Spontaneous lens capsule rupture,
sa a   re Ann
 Should cataract surgery not be performed,
of associated phacoclastic uveitis, have been
many canine cataracts will progress, and
identified in diabetic dogs with intumescent
may result in leakage of lens proteins and
cataract.
subsequent lens induced uveitis requiring
continued medical treatment. Leakage of
lens material stimulates anterior uveitis.
Nonsurgical clinical
Young dogs are more likely to develop an
Consideration for Canine
inflammatory reaction that is difficult to
Cataracts
control with medical treatment. The magni-
tude and duration of cataract resorption is
Visual Consequences of Cataracts
highly variable in the dog. Seventy-two to
75% of cataracts causing lens-induced uveitis
Relatively little is known regarding the visual
have visible evidence of resorption.
consequences of cataracts in dogs, and this is
The most common complications of lens-
relevant when counseling an owner on surgical
induced uveitis include glaucoma and phthisis
therapy for cataracts, that is, cataract removal
bulbi. An increased frequency of vitreal degen-
is generally recommended when demonstrable
eration and retinal detachment has also been
visual deficits are apparent. Clinically evident
observed in eyes with hypermature cataract.
visual deficits associated with canine cataracts
vary greatly with the astuteness of the owner
and with individual dogs and their level and
Clinical Management of
type of activity, and acuity of other special
the Blind Dog
senses, such as hearing and smell. Often, clini-
cally apparent changes in behavior associated
Appropriate client education  concerning
with diminished vision are not detected by the
management of the visually impaired or
owner until the cataract is 40-50% complete,
blind dog becomes an important role for the
and usually not unless both lenses are affected.
clinician. Although most blind dogs develop
Axial cataract would be expected to be associ-
permanent behavioral changes and are
ated with earlier and more profound visual
limited functionally, blind dogs can cope
deficits. Interestingly, some dogs with cataracts
within their environment and can function
appear to have, and are reported by the owners
 acceptably as pets. Common behavior changes
to have, more visual difficulty in daylight vs.
noted in blind dogs include a tendency to stay
dim lighting (perhaps from a larger pupillary
closer to the owner and a more cautious
diameter in dim light), while other owners
approach to the environment. Obvious safety
report the opposite behavior, with more diff-
precautions that should be taken by owners of
culty in scoptopic conditions. Motion detec-
a blind dog include adequate fencing or con-
tion, as in a response to a menacing gesture
tainment of the dog when outdoors, minimal
during an ophthalmologic examination, is often
movement of furniture within the home and
retained until the cataract is near complete.
limited access to stairs, decks or pools.
Importantly, even advanced cataracts are not de
facto associated with pupillary light reflex
abnormalities (from absence of light transmis-
Medical Treatment of Cataracts
sion to the photoreceptors). The consequences
of advanced lenticular or nuclear sclerosis
A variety of therapeutic agents that claim to
in dogs is also poorly defined. Generally,
prevent, delay, or reverse cataracts are cur-
even advanced sclerotic changes seemingly
rently available and have been studied in
do not interfere with functional vision in the
both man and the dog. None has been shown
dog.
to be conclusively effective in man. Studies
232 /EssentiAls OoF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmoLOGY
in dogs have not been controlled, are highly
 to the lens or into the vitreous (pupillary block
subjective and do not account for lens
  s  o
resorption. Therapy with topical or systemic
vitreous are often seen in the anterior chamber
selenium-vitamin E,:
 superoxide dismutase,
and iridocorneal angle and this may theoreti-
carnosine (a dipeptite antioxidant), N-acetyl-
cally cause mechanical obstruction to aqueous
carnosine (the prodrug of carnosine), and zinc
outflow (Fig. 9.l0). An anterior luxation into
citrate have been advocated for canine cata-
the anterior chamber may result in physical
racts, although none have been proven effica-
contact between the lens capsule and corneal
cious in controlled studies.
endothelium, causing transient or permanent
corneal edema. Secondary uveitis often accom-
Dislocation of the
Crystalline Lens
 Dislocation of the lens from its normal posi-
tion within the patellar fossa is referred to
as subluxation (subtotal dislocation) or lux-
ation (total dislocation), and is related to a
pathologic alteration in the ciliary zonules
from abnormal development, degeneration,
rupture, tearing, or a combination of these
factors. Associated clinical findings are
varied according to the severity and cause
(Box 9.3). In addition to changes that accom-
pany any antecedent cause, the pathophysio-
logic changes that accompany lens dislocation
Fig. 9.9. Anterior lens luxation in a 4-year-old Jack
are numerous and influenced to a large extent
Russell Terrier as seen with direct focal illumination
by the direction of displacement. Subluxation
using a parallelepiped passed from left to right. Note
or anterior luxation often culminates in second-
the asymmetry, decreased anterior chamber depth,
ary glaucoma from several possible mechanisms
and dorsal aphakic crescent.
(Fig. 9.9). An anterior shift in the lens and/or
vitreal face may occlude the flow of aqueous
humor from the posterior chamber through the
pupil, causing diversion of aqueous posterior
Box 9.3. Clinical Findings of
Lens Luxation
Increased lens mobility (phacodonesis or tremor of
the lens with globe movement)
lridodonesis (iridal movements due to lack of lens
stabillity)
Asymmetry in the anterior chamber depth (usually
Fig. 9.10. Lens subluxation viewed with direct focal
due to lens tilting)
juau uoj passed padidalaleed e Buisn uoeuunl!
Appearance of lens equator and ciliary zonules rem-
to left. The margin of the lens is visible as an aphakic
nants (aphakic crescent)
crescent, and early cortical cataract formation is
Degenerative white vitreal strands displaced or pro.
present. Vitreal fbers, which have displaced into the
lapsed into the anterior chamber
Lens luxation into antenior chamber or vitreou5.
anterior chamber, are seen as fne strands with
increased relucency.
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/233
panies lens dislocation, especially anterior luxa-
years for the Shar Pei. In the Tibetan Terrier
tion, presumably from abnormal physical
and Shar Pei breeds, pedigree and other genetic
contact of the lens or vitreous with anterior
analysis strongly suggest primary luxation is
uveal structures, or other undefined changes in
inherited as a simple autosomal recessive trait.
the milieu of the intraocular spaces.
There is evidence to suggest the pathogenesis
Complete posterior luxation of the lens into
of primary lens displacement relates to an
the vitreous is more innocuous than anterior
 inherited defect in the suspensory apparatus or
luxation, and the complications of glaucoma,
ciliary zonules of the lens.
uveitis, or corneal edema are less prevalent
Lens displacement may be associated
(Fig. 9.ll). Syneresis is necessary for the lens
with glaucoma in a still incompletely defined
to fully luxate posteriorly, and therefore
fashion. Lens luxation often occurs second-
mechanical obstruction glaucoma is uncom-
ary to chronic glaucoma and enlargement of
mon. Tractional retinal detachment may occur
the globe, and is presumably related to pro-
from changes in the vitreous or direct contact
 gressive stretching and rupture of zonules.
of the lens capsule with the retinal surface.
However, the coexistence of increased intraoc-
Additionally, because the fully luxated lens
ular pressure, subluxation of the lens, and an
often freely moves between the posterior and
apparent normal globe size in some dogs on
 anterior segments of the eye, surgical removal
initial clinical presentation sometimes makes
of the posteriorly luxated lens is often still
determination of the primary or antecedent
indicated.
disease difficult.
Lens dislocation has been classified
Lens displacement in the absence of other
according to different schemas, most com-
ocular disease may also occur in older aged
monly as congenital, primary, secondary, or
dogs (> 10 years of age), comprising various
traumatic. Primary lens dislocations occur in
terrier and non-terrier breeds. Older aged
the terrier breeds (most notably Sealyham, Jack
mixed breed and non-terrier breeds presum-
Russell, Wire-Haired Fox, and Miniature Bull
ably develop lens displacement from undefined
Terrier), terrier crosses, the Tibetan Terrier
mechanisms that may reflect age related degen-
(reportedly not a true terrier breed), and Shar
erative process occurring in the zonules and/or
Pei. Other breeds more sporadically reported
anterior vitreous and vitreal base.
include the Border Collie, German Shepherd,
Zonulolysis and lens displacement can theo-
and certain spaniel breeds. Lens displacement
retically result from any contiguous inflamma-
is documented most commonly in 3- to 6-year-
 tory process, although uveitis appears to be a
old dogs, with the mean age reported to be 4.5
rare cause of lens luxation in dogs. Lens sub-
years in terriers and terrier crosses, and 4.9
luxation is common in conjunction with hyper-
mature cataracts. Zonular instability and/or an
aphakic crescent is often present at the time of
surgical removal of the hypermature cataract.
Associated lens induced inflammation may also
contribute.
Although lens luxation was historically sug-
 gested to commonly result from blunt trauma
to the globe, this premise has not been substan-
tiated with retrospective case studies.
Clinical evaluation of the patient with
lens luxation should include critical oph-
thalmic examination for any primary cause.
Because primary or inherited displacement
is almost invariably a bilateral disorder, the
Fig. 9.ll. Posterior lens luxation associated with
contralateral eye should be evaluated biomi-
buphthalmia. Note the dorsal aphakic crescent and
croscopically following mydriasis for evi-
ad vanced nuclear sclerosis.
dence of lens instability, or signs compatible
234 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
with subluxation. Gonioscopy should also
temperament (administration of postopera-
routinely be performed, especially if ocular
tive medication and exercise restriction are
hypertension is documented, in both the
essential) to a successful outcome.
affected (if possible) and unaffected eye, to
Cataract surgery is an elective procedure as
attempt to determine any causal relationship.
many animals will adapt well to vision loss. It
The treatment for dislocated lenses is most
must be remembered, however, that if the
commonly and appropriately surgical removal
owner elects not to perform cataract surgery.
through an intracapsular lens extraction,
the patient must be monitored long-term for
with or without sulcus IOL placement (see
lens-induced complications such as LIU, sec-
"Surgery of the Canine Lens" section). If surgi-
ondary glaucoma, retinal detachment, and lens
cal treatment is not possible, subluxated and
luxation. Cataract surgery is indicated in
animals with a decrease in vision associated
managed conservatively with long-term topical
with the cataract or in animals with a pro-
miotic therapy (e.g.. phospholine iodide
or
gressive cataract for which vision loss is
latanoprost). The rationale for this approach
imminent.
is to maintain the lens in the posterior
Prior to surgery a complete ophthalmic
chamber, or vitreous, and prevent forward
examination should be performed. Menace
migration, where complications such as pupil-
response, direct and consensual pupillary
lary block glaucoma or corneal edema are
light reflexes, and intraocular pressure (lOP)
more common.
should be evaluated. The cornea is exam-
ined for opacities that may interfere with
visualization of the intraocular structures
SECTION 2: SURGERY 0F
intraoperatively. The lens opacity is charac-
THE CANINE LENS
 terized with respect to stage and location of
cataract and the lens is examined for evi-
Cataract Surgery
dence of lens resorption, capsular fibrosis or
plaques, capsular wrinkling, or lens instabil-
Cataract surgery has changed dramatically
ity. If possible, the fundus should be examined
in recent years with regards to surgical
by indirect ophthalmoscopy. Retinal vascula-
technique, ocular pharmacology and the
ture, reflectivity and the optic nerve are assessed
availability of anti-inflammatory agents, vis-
if possible, and the retina evaluated for a pos-
coelastic agents, phacoemulsification, and
sible detachment. Gonioscopy is performed at
 the discretion of the surgeon. Additional diag-
the most recent advancement, intraocular
nostic examination should include either
lens implantation for dogs. Preoperative use
-uu Kiqisod pue Xudeigouosenn ueos-g
of anti-inflammatory agents, preoperative
and intraoperative mydriasis, proper patient
resolution ultrasound (HRUS, 2O mHz), or
positioning, appropriate use of magnifica-
ultrasound biomicroscopy(UBM, 50-100 mHz)
tion, and use of viscoelastics and nondepo-
to evaluate for vitreal degeneration/asteroid
larizing neuromuscular blockade are
all
hyalosis, retinal detachment, posterior lentico-
recent steps that will minimize complica-
nus, PHPV/PHTVL, axial length of the lens and
tions and increase the likelihood of success-
globe and presence of spontaneous lens capsule
ful surgery.
rupture. A quantitative flash electroretinogram
(ERG) should be performed to determine retinal
function and evaluate for the possibility of
Patient Selection
PRA.
Finally, the breed of dog must be consid-
 Proper patient selection is essential to maxi-
ered. Postoperative complications such as
mize a successful surgical outcome. Impor-
retinal detachment and glaucoma vary by
tant parameters include: a complete history
breed with certain breeds, for example,
and systemic examination; a complete vision
Bichon Frise and Shih Tzu, at increased risk,
history and ophthalmic examination; patient
 and a prophylactic transscleral retinopexy
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/235
(PTR) may be performed prior to cataract
surgery to decrease the risk of postoperative
retinal detachment.
The decisions of whether to perform cataract
surgery and whether the procedure is to be
performed on one or both eyes are matters of
individual preference by the surgeon, and they
reflect a balance between anticipated vision
improvement versus the risk of substantial
postoperative complications.
 Retrospective
studies on outcomes after phacoemulsification
have documented a statistically higher success
rate with immature cataracts compared with
those of mature and hypermature cataracts.
Long-standing cataracts are often associated
with LIU, capsular plaques, and zonular insta-
bility, all of which increase intraoperative and
Fig. 9.12. 20 MHz ultrasound. The lens is
 postoperative complications and decrease visual
cataractous and intumescent, and a posterior-
outcome.
equatorial lens capsule rupture is present.
Preoperative Complications
with a cat claw. In general, if the capsular
Prior to cataract surgery, ocular changes may
tear exceeds 1.5 mm, removal of the lens is
have occurred associated with the cataract that
may result in a change in surgical technique or
recommended.
postoperative outcome. Such changes often
occur as a result of stage and duration of the
Lens-induced Uveitis
cataract, age of the patient, and LIU.
Lens-induced or phacolytic uveitis is com-
monly seen in dogs with cataracts, with one
Spontaneous Lens Capsule Rupture
study suggesting a prevalence as high as
71%. Another study suggested all stages of
Spontaneous lens capsule rupture has been
cataract have LIU. In general, pretreatment 
described in association with diabetes mel-
with topical and/or systemic anti-inflamma-
litus and rapidly progressive cataracts.
.It
tory therapy for a period of a few days fol-
would appear, therefore, that the more rapid
lowed by phacoemulsification is the most
the onset and progression of cataracts in
these dogs may be associated with spontane-
appropriate means to manage LIU and avoid
long-term sequellae.
ous capsular rupture. Cataracts associated
with diabetes mellitus have a significant osmotic
component that results in rapid intumesence of
Flevated IOP
the lens. Clinically, most ruptures occurred
equatorially, but posterior capsule ruptures
IOP is typically low to normal in most cata-
were also observed (Fig. 9.l2). Aggressive
ractous eyes. A high normal to elevated 1OP
anti-inflammatory  therapy combined  with
 suggests impending or current glaucoma.
rapid surgical intervention is indicated in
The glaucoma may be primary or secondary
these dogs. Postoperatively these eyes often
in origin. While prognosis in these eyes is
have chronic uveitis and require long-term
decreased, it may be possible to improve the
anti-inflammatory therapy.
outcome with concurrent diode endolaser
Lens capsule rupture may also occur in asso-
cyclophotoablation, provided retinal function
ciation with penetrating trauma such as seen
is acceptable based on ERG.
236 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthalmolOGY
Other
reader should consult the fourth edition of Vet-
erinary Ophthalmology or another comprehen-
Additional preoperative concerns may include
sive text
congenital intraocular anomalies, lens sub-
The patient is positioned with the operated
luxation/luxation, synechia, corneal opacities,
eye facing up and the eyelids parallel to the
vitreal degeneration, partial retinal detachment.
floor. The patient and head are immobilized
or other abnormalities that may interfere with
and a vacuum pillow around the head will help
surgical success intra- or postoperatively. The
to stabilize and maintain head position. The
presence of such abnormalities may require
patient should be routinely clipped and pre-
adjustment of surgical technique.
pared for surgery according to the surgeon's
preference. A lateral canthotomy may be per-
Surgical Equipment
formed to increase exposure to the surgical
field, but is often unnecessary in most brachy-
Cataract surgery success depends on sur-
cephalic and mesocephalic breeds. It is advised
 geon's skill and appropriate pre- and post-
when performing intracapsular lens extraction
operative therapy, but is also heavily
or suturing of an IOL. A stay suture or sutures
dependant on the use of appropriate instru-
may be placed in the bulbar conjunctiva to
mentation. Microsurgical instrumentation,
manipulate the globe but may not be necessary
surgical microscopes, phacoemulsification
when1
 neuromuscular blocking agents are
machines, automated irrigation/aspiration
used.
machines, and vitrectomy capabilities are
A clear corneal or limbus-based incision
considered standard of care. In addition,
is most common for the approach to the
many surgeons choose to administer nondepo-
canine lens; there are both advantages and
larizing neuromuscular blocking agents to par-
limitations with this approach (Fig. 9.13).
alyze the patient during surgery, which may
Virtually all veterinary ophthalmic surgeons
require the use of ventilators and additional
will perform phacoemulsification, with an
monitoring equipment.
associated small corneal incision. The length
of the incision depends on the technique of
choice to remove the lens and whether an IOL
Preoperative Therapy
will be implanted, and if so what type of IOL.
Phacoemulsification requires a  2.8-3.2 mm
While all cataract surgeons agree on the
entry wound to accommodate a coaxial phaco-
goals of preoperative therapy, no surgeons
emulsification tip and infusion sleeve. If a
agree completely on how best to achieve
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)IOL  is
these goals, which drugs to use, and the
implanted, the wound will subsequently be
route and frequency of preoperative therapy.
The overall presurgical goals are to achieve
mydriasis for surgical exposure, suppress
ocular inflammation, and minimize ocular
microbial flora. Drugs administered include
broad-spectrum topical antibiotics, topical cor-
ticosteroids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories
(NSAIDs) (suppress inflammation and prevent
miosis), mydriatics (topical 1% atropine or
tropicamide), or sometimes 0.1-0.5 ml of
intracameral 1: 10,000 epinephrine.
Surgical Approach
Fig. 9.13. An anterior-limbal incision is made such
In this text the general principles of cataract
that the anterior edge of the incision is corneal and
surgery are presented; for additional details the
the posterior edge scleral.
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CANiNe LeNS/237
enlarged to 7.0-8.0 mm. The introduction of
foldable acrylic IOLs and the use of injection
cartridges for these IOLs has decreased the
corneal incision to 3.2-4.0 mm. The wound is
constructed in a two-plane incision to facilitate
watertight closure.
Use of Intraoperative
Medications/Devices
Following entry into the anterior chamber,
aqueous humor will leak out of the wound and
the anterior chamber will collapse. Epineph-
Fig. 9.14. A correctly made anterior CTCC
rine 1: 10,0o0 can be placed intracamerally
using a cannula to facilitate mydriasis and
vasoconstriction of the anterior uveal vascu-
Phacoemuisification
lature. This is followed by injection of a
viscoelastic material to re-inflate and main-
Hydrodissection
tain the anterior chamber. A variety of visco-
elastic materials
s are available, containing
Hydrodissection is advocated by many oph-
hyaluronic acid, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose
thalmologists to loosen the lens and allow
(HPMC), chondroitin sulfate, polyacrylamide,
manipulation required for the technique of
or some combination thereof.
two-handed phacoemulsification. Hydrodissec-
tion is designed to loosen the lens from the lens
Capsuforrhexis/Capsufectomy
capsule allowing the lens to be freely rotated
within the capsular bag to facilitate its fragmen-
Before 1985, most surgeons would remove the
tation. This technique is not advised for one-
lens capsule with a cystotome or a bent hypo-
handed phacoemulsification as the lens will be
dermic needle, in what is referred to as the
too unstable to fragment efficiently without a
"can-opener" capsulectomy. As the popularity
lens-capsule adhesion.
of “in-the-bag" 1OL implantation grew, so
did the need for a capsulectomy of the appro-
Fluidics
priate size to prevent IOL luxation and with
smooth margins to prevent radial tears. The
Fluidics are the principles that govern the
capsulorrhexis, or continuous tear curvilin-
inflow and outflow of fluid to and from the eye.
ear capsulorhexis (CTCC), was developed
The fluid dynamics of phacoemulsification take
for these reasons (Fig. 9.14). The CTCC is
place in a closed system consisting of the irriga-
initiated using a needle, cystotome or Vannas
tion bottle and line, anterior and posterior
scissors near the 12:00 position. If scissors are
chambers, aspiration line and pump. Fluidics
used, the incision is more controlled and the
affect the efficiency of the phacoemulsification
capsulorhexis can be extended in both the left
handpiece
 and
irrigation/aspiration (I/A)
and right directions. Utrata capsulorhexis
procedure.
forceps are then used to complete the CTCC
removing a circular portion of the axial anterior
lens capsule. The size of the capsulorrhexis
Handpiece
should be approximately l mm smaller than
the diameter of the IOL optic to be implanted.
The phacoemulsification handpiece is designed
The advantage of a CTCC is that it can with-
to convert electrical energy into mechanical
stand tension without tearing. thereby mini-
energy and in doing so, emulsify the lens. Most
mizing the risk of a radial tear.
modern phacoemulsification handpieces are
238 /EsSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
piezoelectric and do this using ceramic discs
nucleus is rotated, and the cuts are repeated to
that vibrate at a specific frequency. Piezoelec-
allow the lens to be removed sections at a
tric handpieces are lightweight and can be
time.
autoclaved. The frequency of the handpiece
varies from 27,000 to 60,000 cycles per second
Two-Handed Phacoemuisification
(kHz). The optimal frequency is between
35,000 and 45,000 cycles/second. There are a
The standard concept of two-handed phaco-
variety of needle tips to choose from with angu-
emulsification uses a second instrument to
lations of 0, 15, 30, and 45°
manipulate, stabilize, divide, chop or rotate the
lens. The second instrument is inserted through
Techniques
a 1 mm incision 70° away from the initial inci-
 sion to the side of the surgeon's nondominant
The surgeon must remember duration of
 -i  r   
surgery, volume of irrigating fluid, amount and
nique is that it allows the surgeon more options
time of ultrasound energy used, turbulence and
to crack and divide the lens.
chamber bounce or collapse of the anterior
chamber are all traumatic to the eye and associ-
Divide and Conquer
ated with intraoperative and postoperative
complications. The surgeon must be efficient,
removing the lens, implanting the IOL and
popularized by Gimbel in man. Initially, the
exiting the eye as quickly and atraumatically as
lens is sculpted to form either a deep central
possible.
crater (hard nuclei) or a deep trough (moder-
ately hard nuclei). The trough should be cut to
Basic Technique
70-90% of the depth of the nucleus and the
width should be twice as wide as the phaco.
Phacoemulsification is the accepted method
emulsification tip. The nuclear rim is then frac-
tured by inserting the phacoemulsification tip
of choice for cataract surgery in veterinary
and lens manipulator deep into the groove.
ophthalmology. For most cataract surgeons,
the basic technique is one-handed, coaxial
endocapsular  phacoemulsification
with
Chip and Flip
automated I/A followed by implantation of a
PMMA or foldable acrylic 1OL.
Theoriginal chip-and-flip method was described
by Fine in 1991 in man. In this technique, both
hydrodissection and hydrodelineation are per-
One-Handed Phacoemuisification
formed so that the hard central nucleus and the
epinucleus can be removed separately, the
Following CTCC the phaco handpiece is intro-
rationale being that the softer epinucleus will
duced into the anterior chamber. Since there is
protect the posterior capsule during fragmenta-
only one instrument in the eye, hydrodissec-
tion of the hard nucleus.
tion is not performed relying instead on the
lens-capsule adhesion to stabilize the lens as
the phacoemulsification needle engages the
Phaco Chop
cortex and nucleus. There are three phases to
the one-handed technique, central sculpting.
The technique of phaco chop was first pre-
nuclear rotation and removal of residual central
sented in 1993 by Kunihiro Nagahara. It has
and deep nucleus.
undergone several variations since then and has
The classic“divide-and-conquer” technique
recently been modified for the dog. Instead of
was intended as a two-handed procedure, but
the typical nucleus rotator, the second instru-
it can be modifed for a one-handed technique
ment for this procedure is a chopper with a 90°
in which pie-shaped lens sections are cut, the
 angled 1-2 mm tip for humans that is modified
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/239
to 4 mm for use in the dog. The length of the
chopper tip should be approximately 50% of
the axial lens thickness.
Irrigation/Aspiration
 Following removal of the nucleus, all the resid-
ual cortical material must be aspirated. Com-
plete cortical removal lessens postoperative
inflammation, after-cataract formation, IOL
decentration, and capsular sac distortion and
folding. The technique of cortical removal is
best performed using an automated I/A hand-
 piece. The I/A handpiece may be straight, bent
or curved to allow for removal of the sub-inci-
sional cortex.
IOL Design/Material
The first modern IOL was implanted in humans
by Harold Ridley in 1949. Since then much has
change with respect to IOL design, construc-
H
tion material and location of implantation. The
most common biomaterials used in IOL con-
Fig. 9.15. A. The PMMA IOL with mild capsular
struction are PMMA, acrylic (hydrophilic
fibrosis 3 years postoperatively. B. An acrylic (Acri.
and hydrophobic), silicone, and hydrogels
Tec Inc.) IOL 1 year postoperatively. The IOL and
lens capsules remain clear
(Figs. 9.l5A and B). The current standard
canine IOL is implanted in the capsular bag
and made of either PMMA or acrylic materi-
als. Implantation of silicone IOLs has also
approximately 8 mm to facilitate implantation
of a 7 mm optic. This is accomplished using
been described in the dog. The average canine
lens diameter is approximately 12 mm, and a
corneal section scissors. The PMMA IOL is
15-17 mm haptic length is most commonly
grasped using Shepherd IOL forceps or other
used for single-piece PMMA canine IOLs and
similar type forceps. The haptics are oriented
12-l4 mm for acrylic IOLs, with the actual
at 6:00 and 12:00 sweeping counterclockwise
length depending on individual surgeon pre-
with the IOL forceps passing over the 12:00
ference, size of the eye implanted, and degree
haptic to grasp the optic. The ventral haptic
of memory of the haptics. Most canine IOL
and optic are advanced through the corneal
 optics are 7 mm in diameter with a power of
incision and the anterior capsulorrhexis into
 the lens capsular bag. The surgeon must visual-
4l diopters.
ize the ventral haptic and flatten the angle of
insertion as it enters the capsular bag to avoid
Basic IoL Implantation
traumatizing the posterior lens capsule. The
optic is advanced to the midpoint of the cap-
Following I/A of residual cortical material and
sulorrhexis. The implantation can be completed
lens capsule polishing. the capsular bag and
using an IOL manipulator to dial the lens in a
anterior chamber are distended using viscoelas-
clockwise direction that will bring the dorsal
tic to provide space for implantation of the IOL.
haptic into the lens capsular bag. The IOL is
If a PMMA IOL is to be implanted, the 3.2 mm
centered in the visual axis and the haptics
corneal incision will need to be enlarged to
should be placed at 3:00 and 9:00.
240 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
If a foldable acrylic IOL is to be implanted,
has a variety of tools and techniques at his/her
this can be done using an injection cartridge or
disposal that will aid in the management of
with IOL folding forceps. A foldable IOL can be
intraoperative complications. Some intraopera-
implanted through a smaller incision of approx-
tive complications can be anticipated based on
imately 3.5-4 mm, smaller if the injection car-
the preoperative examination. These include
tridge is used. Insertion is completed with a lens
anterior capsular fbrosis, vitreous in the ante-
manipulator. The use of foldable IOLs has the
rior chamber, lens instability, synechia, PHPV/
advantage of a smaller incision, ability to implant
PHTVL, or other such preexisting conditions.
an IOL in instances of capsular tears, expanding
Other  complications  include  intraoperative
vitreous and some instances of zonular instabil-
miosis, intraoperative iris prolapse, intraopera-
ity. In addition, use of sharp edge acrylic IOLs
tive hemorrhage; capsulotomy (CTCC) too
may result in decreased PCO.
small, development of radial anterior capsular
tears, posterior capsular tears, opacities of the
anterior and posterior capsule, capsular insta-
Wound Closure
bility and zonular dehiscence, cavitation and
the formation of bubbles, expanding vitreous
The goals of wound closure are to achieve a
syndrome, and displaced and/or dislocated lens
water-tight closure with minimal astigmatism
fragments. Each of these complications has
and suture reaction using the smallest suture
several strategies to resolve the condition.
that is strong enough to ensure a successful
closure. Most surgeons use 8-0 to l0-0 suture,
with 9-0 most commonly used. Nonabsorbable
Postoperative Complications of
polypropylene type suture or polygalactin 910
Phacoemuisification and
are most commonly chosen. A simple or double
IOL Implantation
continuous pattern are most common with the
latter preferred for its increased wound strength
Immediate Postoperative
and decreased astigmatism.
Complications
Immediate complications following surgery
Outcome
include wound dehiscence, surgery-induced
corneal astigmatism, corneal ulceration, corneal
With the use of phacoemulsification, both
 edema and endothelial decompensation, post-
short-term and long-term outcomes for canine
   ro o
cataract surgery have significantly improved
or vitreal hemorrhage, lens induced uveitis,
over recent decades. While the outcomes for
and acute endophthalmitis. There are several
canine cataract surgery have improved (90-
strategies to address these complications.
95% or greater), depending on the stage of
the cataract, diligent long-term monitoring
 of postoperative patients is essential. Retinal
Long-Term Postoperative
Complications
detachment, secondary glaucoma,
PCO,
uveitis and other complications may occur
months to years following cataract surgery.
These complications develop weeks to months,
The postoperative outcome appears to
even years, following cataract surgery in the
be
similar in unilateral versus bilateral lensectomy
dog, and adversely affect its long-term success.
by ECCE in one study and in diabetic com-
They include: infectious endophthalmitis,
pared with nondiabetic dogs in another study.
posterior capsular opacification (PCO), second-
ary glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Other
infrequent complications following phacoemul-
Intraoperative Compfications
sification are corneal stromal abscess forma-
tion, and corneal epithelial inclusion cysts.
Intraoperative complications are, of course,
There are several strategies to address these
best avoided, but should they occur the surgeon
complications.
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/241
Surgery for Lens Instability
a cohesive, high viscosity viscoelastic to float
the lens by filling from underneath the lens.
There is considerable diversity of opinion
Once the lens is in the anterior chamber it can
be removed in an intracapsular fashion accord-
ing when unstable lenses should be removed,
ing to the surgeon's preferred method. These
and some individuals avoid surgical inter-
patients are at high risk for retinal detachment
vention for as long as possible. Recent
and postoperative glaucoma.
studies, however, have revealed that the
 prognosis for vision after intracapsular lens
Surgical Management of Anterior
extraction is poor if glaucoma is present at
Lens Luxations
surgery. The mechanisms by which unstable
lenses cause glaucoma have not been identi-
Preoperative Medications
fied, but some believe this begins early in
the course of lens instability and then rapidly
A similar preoperative medical plan to that of
become irreversible. As a result, it has been
phacoemulsification is used by most veterinary
advocated that unstable lenses should
be removed as soon as the instability is
ophthalmologists, with the exception of the
mydriatic. A strong mydriatic such as atropine
detected.
may cause the lens to drop into the vitreous
chamber; weaker mydriatics, such as 10%
Medical Management of Posterior
phenylephrine or 1% tropicamide or intra-
cameral 1:10,000 epinephrine, may be used
Lens or Cataract Luxations
instead.
Surgical removal of a posteriorly luxated lens is
a more difficult endeavor than anteriorlyluxated
Standard Surgical Approach
lenses due to the requirement for floating the
lens anteriorly for its extraction. Many veteri-
The traditional approach to an intracapsular
nary ophthalmologists use topical prostaglan-
lens extraction (ICLE) has not substantially
din analogs (Xalatan, Travatan, Lumigan) as a
changed in the past decade. If a sulcus IOL
therapeutic approach in managing posterior 
will be sutured, the surgeon should mark the
luxations without surgery. The prostaglandin
sclera where the needles will be exiting/enter-
 analogs, especially0.005% latanoprost (Xalatan,
ing the globe. A 160 degree, two-thirds depth,
Pfizer), cause potent miosis in dogs along with
corneal groove is made with a No. 64 Beaver
excellent antiglaucoma effects. In addition, if at
blade
e or a sapphire blade. The anterior
the time of surgery the anteriorly luxated lens
chamber is entered with a No. 65 Beaver blade
has dropped into the vitreous chamber, some
or a keratome. Viscoelastic material should be
surgeons will abort surgery and give Xalatan to
injected to protect the corneal endothelium
cause miosis, then maintain the patient with
and to vault the anterior chamber. Do not
this medication twice daily indefinitely. Long-
overinflate the anterior chamber as this will
term evaluation of this medical approach to
displace the lens posteriorly. Viscoelastic
posterior lens luxations has not been critically
  a a  a o 
evaluated.
prevent posterior displacement. Right and left
Surgical management of a posterior luxated
corneal section scissors are then used to extend
lens is difficult and may be controversial. The
the incision. If a few zonules are still adhered
a e uoad oi panedad aq isn uolns
to the lens, they are broken down with an IOL
tomy to remove the vitreous overlying the lens
dialer.
to allow room for the lens to be elevated. This
Extraction of the lens may involve one of
is required when the vitreous is semi-solid or
several techniques. Many ophthalmologists use
in strands, but may not be needed if the vitre-
a cryoprobe to extract the lens. Before the
ous is completely liquified. The lens can then
cryoprobe is attached, the anterior surface of
be elevated into the anterior chamber by using
the lens should be free of vitreous. A 2-mm,
242 /EsSENTIALS OF VetERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
curved nitrous oxide cataract probe is used to
Prophylactic Endoscopic
engage the anterodorsal aspect of the lens. A
Cyclophotocoagulation to Prevent
3-4 mm inch diameter ice ball is made, and
Secondary Glaucoma
the lens is slowly extracted from the globe.
Other methods use a lens loupe to deliver the
 Diode endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation glau-
viscoelastic-coated lens, or float the lens from
coma surgery is the newest approach being
the anterior chamber with viscoelastic mate-
used to manage or prevent secondary glaucoma
rial. Care must be taken with the vitreal attach-
in dogs and cats. The procedure can be per-
ment to the posterior lens capsule by the
formed alone or just after lensectomy or phaco-
hyaloideocapsular ligament. Once the lens has
emulsification, extending the surgery time by
been removed from the globe, the incision
an average of l0 minutes. Average settings used
should be closed. Any vitreous in the incision
by Bras et al. were 0.4 mW (0.25-0.5 mW)
must be removed by manual or automated vit-
with continuous duration.
rectomy or by visco-displacement of the vitre-
ous. Closure of the incision should begin at
Intraoperative Complications
the 12:00 position. The closure can be in a
continuous or double continuous pattern using
Intraoperative complications of ICLE/ICCE
monofilament 9-0 polygalactin 910 in two sec-
include fbrin accumulation, hemorrhage, and
tions, one to the left and the other to the right
vitreous expansion with or without presenta-
of 12:00.
tion. Treatment of these complications
is
available in the fourth edition of Veterinary
Can Unstable Lenses Undergo
Ophthalmology.
Phacoemulsification?
Postoperative Complications
Gelatt has suggested performing two-handed
phacoemulsification in cases of severe to total
Long-term postoperative complications  of
 surgery for lens instability are not vastly differ-
from the traditional 160° incision necessary for
ent from those following phacoemulsification,
ICLE. The lens capsule can then be removed
however, the larger incision, longer surgical
via the smallincision, again leaving the vitreous
duration, and increased incidence of uveitis
face intact, if possible
-drn asal ii sued asa asodsipad ke
cations. These include refractive errors, inci-
Sulcus IOL Fixation
sion dehiscence, secondary glaucoma, and
retinal detachment, with the latter two compli-
The standard ab interno and ab externo
cations the most serious. Clinical management
approaches to suturing an IOL into the ciliary
of these complications is available in the fourth
edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology
sulcus have not changed substantially. The
location where the suture will exit or enter the
sclera is marked, depending on whether an ab
References
interno or ab externo approach is used, respec-
tively. Until now, only nonfoldable PMMA
IOLs that have an eyelet in the haptic for attach-
Bagley LH, Lavach JD. Comparison of postoperative
ing the suture have been used for this purpose.
phacoemulsification results in dogs with and
These lenses are specific for the technique of
without diabetes mellitus: 153 cases (1991-1992).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1165-1169.
sutured IOLs and differ in size and design from
Bjerkas E, Bergsjo T. Hereditary cataract in the Rott-
the standard endocapsular IOL. While most
surgeons use two-point fixation to fix the lens,
1:7-10.
 this does not prevent lens rotation around these
Boeve M, Stades F,van der Linde-Sipman J, Vrensen
two-points and for this reason a three-point
G. Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
fixation should be considered.
and primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in the dog:
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Lens/243
a comparative review. Prog Vet Comp Ophthal-
Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, Jamieson VE, English
mol 1993;2:163-172.
RV, Olivero DK. Phacoemulsification and intra-
Bras ID, Robbin T, Wyman M, et al. Diode
ocular lens implantation in dogs: a study of tech-
endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation  in  canine
nique in 158 dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
and feline glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:
1990;1:225-232
449.
Nasisse MP, Glover TL. Surgery for lens instability.
da Costa P, Merideth R, Sigler R Cataracts in dogs
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1997;27:
after long-term ketoconazole therapy. Vet Comp
1175-1192
Ophthalmol 1996;6:176-180.
Smith PJ, Brooks DE, Lazarus JA, Kubilis PS, Gelatt
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, Rusnak IM, Corbett WT
KN. Ocular hypertension following cataract
English RV. Success rates of unilateral vs. bilateral
surgery in dogs: 139 cases (1992-1993).J Am Vet
cataract extraction in dogs. Vet Surg 1990;19:
Med Assoc 1996;209:105-111
232-236
Speiss BM, Bollinger J, Ruhli MB. Radio-frequency
Miller P, Murphy C. Vision in dogs. J Am Vet Med
anterior capsulotomy to facilitate phacoemulsifi-
Assoc 1995;207:1623-1634
cation and intraocular lens implantation. Vet
Miller PE, Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR, Murphy CJ.
Comp Ophthalmol 1996;6:233-236.
Mechanismsof acute intraocular pressure increases
van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M, Davidson M. Lens-
after phacoemulsification lens extraction in dogs.
induced uveitis in dogs: 15l cases (1985-1990)
Am J Vet Res 1997;58:1159-1165
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;20:921-926.
Chapter 10
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE
POSTERIOR SEGMENT
Section l: Michael H. Boevé and Frans C. Stades
Section 2: Kristina Narfstrom and Simon Petersen-Jones
Section 3: Samuel J. Vainisi, Joseph C. Wolfer, and Patricia J. Smith
Section 4: Dennis E. Brooks
SECTION 1: DISEASES
the definitive or secondary vitreous develops
AND SURGERY OF THE
around it. After formation of the lens vesicle
CANINE VITREOUS
the hyaloid artery, which is of mesodermal
origin, penetrates into the primary (or primi-
Introduction
tive) vitreous through the optic fissure, and
 grows toward the posterior pole of the lens. The
The vitreous, “"vitreous body," or “corpus
hyaloid artery branches, generally into three
vitreum" is a transparent, elastic hydrogel
main trunks, which subsequently develop
 o  xo  
into a vascular network around the primitive
volume of the canine globe. Posteriorly and
lens, forming the tunica vasculosa lentis. In
at the lateral sides, the vitreous is bordered
the dog, the hyaloid system is at its maximal
by the retina and the optic disc. Anteriorly,
development by day 45. At this stage the
the vitreous is bordered by the posterior
hyaloid system has developed into an elabo-
lens capsule, posterior chamber, and the
rate vascular network. After approximately
Zinn's zonules (i.e., fossa patellaris).
day 45, however, the hyaloid system starts
to regress, and between the second and the
fourth week after birth, the entire vitreal
Development
vascular system has degenerated. Eventually.
only a small, short, usually corkscrew-shaped.
     t  
rudimentary string of the hyaloid artery remains.
becomes separated from the surface ectoderm
the Mittendorfs dot, which is attached retrolen
from which it originated, and the ectodermal
tally to the posterior lens capsule just ventral to
and mesodermal fibrillar material extends into
the posterior pole between the two ventral
the space between the lens vesicle and pre-
suture lines. After regression of the latter, a
sumptive retina, thus forming the primitive
channel-like structure (i.e., Cloquet's channel)
vitreous cells. Later, the primitive vitreous is
remains, but this structure is only barely observ-
concentrated centrally, in the optic cup, while
able in normal canine eyes.
245
 246 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Morphology
anterior part. The slit-lamp microscope can
also be used to examine the posterior vitreous
The vitreous forms one of the refractive
using the Hruby lens. A direct ophthalmoscope
media of the eye, and it provides the
may be used as previously described in the
necessary pressure to hold the neuroretina
section discussing focal light. By decreasing the
properly positioned against the pigment epi-
distance between the light source and the eye,
thelium. Approximately l% of the vitreous con-
direct illumination of vitreal structures will
sists of a network of polygonal, hydrated fbrils
increase, thus enabling better visualization of
of hyaluronic acid and collagen (type II, with a
their morphology.
helical structure of α(Il)). Only few cells are
Ultrasonography, using a high-resolution
present, that is, hyalocytes, which originated
ultrasound machine, is a highly useful and
from blood macrophages, are mainly located
noninvasive means of vitreal examination.
peripherally, near the ciliary body. The remain-
Only dense vitreal opacities, however, will
ing 99% of the vitreous consists of water
be visualized during a B-mode scan. Use of
The outer limits of the vitreous do not consist
color-flow-doppler may be useful to indicate
of membranes; rather, they consist of conden-
blood flow in suspected structures. Com-
sations of fibrils that are firmly attached to the
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic reso-
ora ciliaris retinae and the pars plana ciliaris.
nance imaging (MRl) may also contribute to
 The anterior portion of the vitreous is strongly
the evaluation of vitreal diseases.
attached to the posterior lens capsule, which
has given rise to the confusing term hyaloido-
Hyalocentesis
capsular ligament (i.e., Weiger's ligament,
Egger's line). The vitreous is also attached to
In diagnostic vitreal paracentesis (i.e., hya-
the region of the ora ciliaris retinae and to the
locentesis), a small amount of liquid vitre-
prepapillary area.
ous is aspirated for analysis, most often
cytologic
culture. Hyalocentesis is performed after
Diagnostic Procedures
instillation of a short-acting mydriatic agent,
preferably under general anesthesia, and
For clinical evaluation of the vitreous, the
after antiseptic pretreatment of the conjunc-
pupil should be dilated using a short-acting
tival sac. A 22- to 26-gauge (0.70-0.45 mm)
mydriatic agent, such as tropicamide. The
needle is used to penetrate the sclera; needle
eye is both illuminated and inspected from
penetration is limited to the anterior or medial
a distance (- 40-60 cm). The light source
region of the pars plana ciliaris (Fig. 10.1). The
should be powerful and focal, such as a pen-
corresponding external sites in medium-sized
light of good quality, a direct ophthalmo-
mesocephalic dogs are 7 mm (i.e., superotem-
scope, or an otoscope. This allows any vitreal
poral quadrant), 6 mm (i.e., inferotemporal
opacities or condensations to be visualized by
quadrant.), 5 mm (i.e., inferonasal quadrant),
indirect illumination (i.e., by light reflected
 and 4-5 mm (i.e., superonasal quadrant) pos-
from the tapetal fundus [tapetum lucidum]).
 terior to the limbus. Needle penetration through
Because opacities will either partly or com-
the pars plicata ciliaris will result in consider-
pletely block the reflected light, they will be
 able intraocular hemorrhage, whereas penetra-
seen as dark structures against a bright tapetal
tion posterior to the pars plana ciliaris will
reflectivity. Movement of vitreal structures fol-
cause punctures of the retina.
lowing motions of the globe or lagging behind
ocular motions may be determined more easily
in this way.
Therapeutic Procedures
A slit-lamp microscope is a highly useful
and necessary tool for examination of the
Because the vitreous is avascular in adult dogs.
vitreous, even though such inspection using
penetration
1 of  systemically  administrated
a slit-lamp microscope will be limited to the
   'sa    n s
Diseases Ano Surgery Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/247
blood-aqueous barrier is compromised acces-
be performed manually, using microsurgical
sibility of the vitreous for drugs increases. Sys-
cellulose sponges or vitreous forceps, or it can
temic administration of drugs is of limited use
be performed automatedly
in reaching the vitreous medically, and the
In pars plana posterior vitrectomy, part of
most effective route is by intraocular injection.
the vitreous is removed using an automated
However posterior segement tissues tolerate
vitrectome. The surgical entrance is where the
rather low doses and volumes.
dorsolateral sclera is positioned over the pars
Surgical treatment is necessary when the
plana ciliaris. This procedure is commonly
vitreous is displaced within the pupil during
included in surgical treatment of complicated
anterior segment surgeries and in the treat-
retinal detachment and vitreal traction bands
ment of retinal detachments. Additional
(see section 3 of this chapter).
details on vitreous surgery are provided in
section 3 of this chapter. Vitrectomy (anterior)
Vitreal Diseases
ation or protrusion occurs during anterior
Developmental Disorders
segment surgery. Another indication for vitrec-
tomy is during vitreoretinal surgery for the
Developmental disorders form a group of rela-
treatment of retinal detachments and vitreal
tively rare ophthalmic anomalies. Usually, these
traction bands. Anterior vitrectomy is indicated
anomalies are part of syndromes associated
when formed vitreous protrudes into the pupil
with persisting intraocular vasculature or with
or the anterior chamber during anterior segment
other ocular developmental disorders, such
surgery. Anterior vitrectomy is generally per-
as microphthalmia, Collie Eye Anomaly (CEA),
formed through an already-existing corneal or
and retinal dysplasia.
corneoscleral incision or, seldomly, through a
traumatic perforation. Anterior vitrectomy can
Persistent Hyaloid Artery (PHA)
The anomaly PHA results from failure of part
or all of the hyaloid artery to regress (Fig. 10.2).
Fig. 10.1. Hyalocentesis. The point of insertion of a.
22- to 26-gauge needle (0.70-0.45 mm), 5-7 mm
Fig. 10.2. Posterior hyaloid artery in a Golden
posterior to the limbus, depending on the ocular
Retriever. The hyaloid artery is visible as a white
quadrant and globe size as determined by calipers or
string (arrow). The optic disc in this patient had the
ultr asonography, is of utmost importance.
shape of a Bergmeister's papilla.
 248 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
The artery may persist as a string (in some
Doberman and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
cases containing blood) situated in the vitre-
PHTVL/PHPV generally occurs bilaterally, is
ous space, between the optic disc and the
inherited (probably because of an incom-
lens. In PHA, only a small, dense, white,
plete dominant gene in the Doberman) and,
connective-tissue string usually
remains
hence, has a higher prevalence in these
adhered to the posterior lens capsule. The
breeds compared with that in others. Signs
optic disc may have a conical shape (i.e.,
range from very small, retrolentally positioned
Bergmeister's papilla), and during ocular
fbrovascular dots that represent minor rem-
movements, PHA structures lag slightly
nants of the tunica vasculosa lentis vasculature
behind and, thus, may show a "waving"
to glial tissue, lenticonus, intralental or retro-
motion. PHA alone rarely requires surgical
lental pigment or hemorrhage, lental coloboma,
treatment. If the associated cataract formation
microphakia, or spherophakia, with or without
leads to visual impairment, however, surgery
microphthalmia (Fig. 10.3)
may be indicated. In these cases, the risk of
In severely affected blind eyes, cataract
      
surgery with fenestration of the posterior
cases of cataract alone, because in PHA-related
capsule and transection of the hyaloid artery, if
cataracts, central fenestration of the posterior
applicable, combined with anterior vitrectomy
lens capsule and anterior vitrectomy
are
may be indicated. The prognosis for surgery in
indicated.
severely affected cases of PHTVL/PHPV is less
favorable than that in routine cataract surgery
because of the higher complication risks
Persistent Tunica Vasculosa Lentis
In persistent tunica vasculosa lentis, there
Other Anomalies
are fine, white, strand-like deformities (i.e.,
"spider web"), or parts of vascular struc-
The vitreous may be involved in diseases of its
tures, attached to the posterior lens capsule
bordering structures as well. In CEA, a partial
(i.e., persistent tunica vasculosa lentis pos-
terior). These structures are the remainder
of the tunica vasculosa lentis (posterior),
retrolentally connected to, or "printed" on,
the posterior lens capsule. These structures
 generally have no clinical significance, and they
may be observed incidentally during routine
ophthalmic examinations.
Persistent Hyperplastic Tunica
Vasculosa Lentis/Persistent
Hyperplastic Primary Vitreous
(PHTVL/PHPV)
In this group of apparently rare and generally
unilateral disorders, parts of the hyaloid system
and primitive vitreous have become hyperplas-
tic during early fetal development, combined
with a subsequently incomplete regression.
Fig. 10.3. Clinical picture of the right eye of a
PHTVL/PHPV and its development have
2-month-old (age approximate) Doberman Pinscher
been studied extensively in the Doberman.
with PHTVL/PHPV. Note the presence of elongated
The clinical relevance of this condition is
ciliary processes at the 12:00 to 2:00 positions
its association with cataract formation
(yellow arrows), microphakia, and cataract (blue
and, hence, visual impairment. In both the
arrow). (Courtesy of J. S. Van der Linde-Sipman.)
Diseases Ano SurGerY Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/249
failure of vitreal development, which is only
detachments. In older animals, further degen-
recognizable with use of a slit-lamp micro-
eration of the vitreous can lead to liquefaction,
scope, has been described. Vitreal syneresis,
in which case the opacities have a greater
vascular anomalies, hemorrhages, and retinal
tendency to lag behind ocular movements or
detachment may also be found in CEA.
whirl up.
In the focal and geographic forms of
retinal dysplasia, the retina folds slightly
into the vitreous. In severe forms of retinal
Syneresis
dysplasia, as has been described for the Bed-
Syneresis is a degenerative breakdown of
lington and Yorkshire Terrier and in the Lab.
the vitreous gel that separates its liquid from
rador Retriever (in combination with skeletal
its solid components, thus resulting in liq-
abnormalities), the retina is partly or totally
uefaction and development of fluid-filled
detached and dislocated into the vitreal space.
cavities within the vitreous. This breakdown
may occur with age, but it can also be the
Acguired Disorders
result of inflammatory reactions or unknown
causes. Syneresis may predispose to retinal
Trauma
detachment.
Penetrating trauma, such as caused by air-
rifle or shotgun pellets, easily causes floaters 
Vitreous Floaters
of blood in the vitreous. The penetration
Vitreous floaters, muscae volitantes, or “flying
tunnel is usually marked by prolapsed lens
flies" are larger flakes or streaks in the vitreous
material, blood residues, traction bands, and
 other scars, and the foreign body itself may
that may lag behind ocular movements. Vitre-
ous floaters are uncommon and rarely require
still be present in the vitreous. Less often,
blunt trauma causes vitreal hemorrhage.
surgical treatment.
Depending on the severity of the concurrent
uveitis, therapy in such patients consists of
Asteroid Hyalosis
topical  antimicrobial  treatment/prophylaxis,
mydriatics/cycloplegics (e.g, 1% atropine)
Asteroid hyalosis is characterized by many
and dexamethasone (four to six times daily),
small and possibly slightly pigmented parti-
as well as systemic prophylactic antimicrobial
cles (i.e.,
"asteroid bodies" from 0.03-
andextensive anti-inflammatory
treatment
0.10 mm in diameter) consisting of calcium
(e.g., corticosteroids
s or nonsteroidal anti-
or phospholipids in the vitreous of one or
inflammatory drugs).
both eyes (Fig. 10.4). These particles move
Degenerative Vitreal Disorders
and Reactions
The term vitreous degeneration is used to
indicate vitreous changes that are consistent
with its breakdown; signs may comprise
liquefaction
(syneresis) and（
 opacities
(floaters, asteroid hyalosis, and synchysis
scintillans). Primary vitreous degeneration has
been recognized recently and affects many
breeds including Brussels Griffon, Chihuahua,
Chinese crested, Havanese, Italian Greyhound,
Lowchen, Papillon, Shih Tzu, and Whippet.
This condition may predispose to retinal
Fig. 10.4. Asteroid hyalosis in a dog.
250 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
both during and following movements of the
bances, even if the inflammatory reaction can
globe, but they also return to their initial
be controlled.
position. They generally have no distinct influ-
ence on vision by their presence alone.
Cysts
Synchysis Scintillans
Cysts, most likely originating from the pig-
mented epithelial layer of the iris, or the non-
Synchysis scintillans is characterized by
pigmented epithelial layer of the ciliary body.
numerous cholesterol particles in a more or
may extend into the vitreous. These cysts are
less liquefied vitreous. Especially after eye
much less common than anterior chamber
movement, they can resemble a snow flurry
uveal cysts.
behind the lens, and against bright light,
they may cause dazzling. The abnormality is
Parasites
rare and seldomly causes recognizable prob-
lems in dogs.
Migrating larvae of Diroflaria immitis, Ioxocara
canis, the larvae of flies (i.e., ophthalmomyiasis
interna), and Echinococcus sp. may penetrate
Vitreal Inflammations
the vitreous. Dead or living intraocular para-
sites may cause local irritation, uveitis, or cyst
Because the adult vitreous has no intrinsic vas-
formation. Killing intraocular diroflaria by
culature or nerve supply, the possibilities of
reaction to noxae are limited. Hence, inflam-
medication is sometimes possible; however,
the intraocular presence of a dead parasite
mation of the vitreous itself (i.e., hyalitis,
generally induces severe immunogenic uveitis,
vitritis) will almost always be secondary
to
with possible subsequent  endophthalmitis.
inflammatory reactions of adjacent structures
Therefore, if the parasite can be reached without
Floaters of hemorrhagic or other exudate
in the vitreous, especially if diffuse
 an unacceptable risk, surgical removal is to be
or
bilateral, often result from exudative uveitis,
preferred.
(chorio)retinitis, or optic neuritis. Vitreal exu-
dates may also be secondary to perforating.
Neoplastic Disease
iatrogenic, or blunt trauma, to retinal detach-
     
 Intraocular neoplasms generally arise from the
diseases (e.g. lymphosarcoma, malignant
uvea and may occupy part, or almost all, of
histiocytosis).
the vitreous space. Neoplasms may be primary,
Free blood in the vitreous is relatively
metastatic, or systemic/multicentric. Depend-
uncommon. Hemorrhage may result from
ing on the location, a vitreal tumor may cause
congenital anomalies, such as the persis-
displacement of the vitreous and lens as well as
tence of fetal vasculature (e.g., PHA,
posterior uveitis and retinal detachment.
PHTVL/PHPV), CEA, trauma, infection, or
Tumors located in the vitreal space generally
systemic diseases (e.g., coagulopathies, sys-
appear as a retrolental mass of grayish, red, or
temic hypertension, neoplasms). Blood in
darkly pigmented tissue, often containing
the vitreous has been described to have a
wildly arranged vasculature. Patients suspected
destructive effect on the gel structure: vitreous
of having intravitreal neoplasms should be
adjacent to a hemorrhage is prone to liquefac-
examined clinically by diagnostic hyalocentesis
tion. The arrival of macrophages induces an
and diagnostic imaging techniques (i.e., ultra-
inflammatory reaction, which results in forma-
sonography, CT, MRI), and they should be
tion of vitreal fbrinous membranes and trac-
    
Auons asma, jo sisouoid au 'spueq uon
and prognosis depend on the underlying cause,
depends on the underlying cause. Small
 the range and locations of the affected areas,
amounts of blood or exudate may be resorbed,
and the existence of related neoplasms in other
but larger amounts usually cause visual distur-
parts of the body.
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE POSTERIOR SEGMENT/251
The Vitreous in Relation to
SECTION 2: DISEASES OF THE
Other Ophthalmic Disorders
CANINE OCULAR FUNDUS
Lens Luxation
Methods of Examination
The lens may dislocate when its suspension
The ocular fundus is examined with various
system is compromised by degeneration or
direct and indirect diagnostic methods. Several
rupture of the Zinn's zonular fibers. The zonular
methods are routinely used clinically, while
fibers may have developed abnormally or have
others are more investigative.
degenerated; in exceptional situations, they can
rupture from external trauma. Because of its
Behavioral Testing
volume and the strong attachment of the pos-
terior lens capsule to the vitreous, a dislocated
Careful questioning of the owner is usually
lens will dislocate (part of) the vitreous as well.
an important source of information about a
Subsequently, vitreous may prolapse or herni-
dog's visual performance; however, this
ate in the pupil, thus impairing. or even block-
information may be incomplete or invalid.
Observing the dog's behavior in an unfamil-
 surface of the lens and the anterior surface of
iar environment is a valuable and necessary
the iris (if the lens has become dislocated into
complement to the history. A simple maze, in
the anterior chamber) or, at the level of the
which several buckets can be used as obstacles,
drainage angle, causing secondary glaucoma in
can be set up in a room unfamiliar to the dog.
all cases. The earliest recognizable sign of a lens
The dog's ability to negotiate the obstacle course
 luxation is the presence of slight vitreous pro-
will add information on the dog's visual capac-
trusions, which are recognizable on slit-lamp
ity. The dog's performance should be tested in
microscopy as thin, white clouds along the
both daylight conditions and dim light to assess
pupil margin.
photopic and scotopic vision. Furthermore, the
dog should be tested with both eyes uncovered.
but also with each eye covered in turn to
Retinal Detachment
enhance detection of unilateral visual impair-
A retinal detachment may occupy part, or
ment. Vision may also be assessed from the
dog's response to falling objects that do not
 almost all, of the vitreous space. A small retinal
create a noise or current of air (e.g., small
detachment is observed as an indistinctly bor
 dered, grayish-blue fold of the retina. Large
cotton balls). The balls can be dropped both
in front of the dog and to the sides to get
detachments look more like grayish-blue to
red, parachute-shaped,
an
 impression of central and peripheral
.vascularized
1 bullae
positioned either directly behind the posterior
vision.
The results should be interpreted
lens capsule or deeper in the vitreous. Depend-
with some caution, however, because of patient
indifference.
ing on the type of detachment, the optic disk
may be obscured.
In retinal detachments, the outer layer of
the neuroretina (i.e., photoreceptors) and the
Testing of Reflexes
pigment epithelium have separated.
..Retinal
detachments of vitreal origin may develop
The pupillary light reflex (PLR) requires a
because of vitreal traction bands (e.g., after per-
functional retina, but also depends
son
forating trauma or lens luxation), by dissolu-
postretinal transmission of signals. Loss of
tion of the vitreous (i.e., syneresis), or as a
the PLRs is not a definite sign of retinal
complication following vitreal surgery or hya-
dysfunction, or even loss of vision. The
locentesis. Surgical techniques to reattach
direct and indirect PLRs are routinely tested
the retina are described later in this chapter
in mesopic conditions using a strong focal
(section 3).
light.
252 /ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
The menace response (i.e., the reaction to a
 ate disease processes in which the vasculature
sudden, threatening object coming into the
of the eye is involved, such as vascular anoma-
near feld of view) may also be used to assess
 lies, posterior segment neoplasms, hyper-
vision. This cortical response requires both a
tension, retinal detachment, inflammatory
functional sensory pathway from the photore-
processes, diabetic retinopathy, and degenera-
ceptors to the visual cortex and an intact motor
tive processes. The procedure is performed
pathway, including the facial nerve. Blinking
either in sedated, anesthetized, or wake dogs,
and, possibly, withdrawal of the head is the
depending on the preference and need of the
normal response.
examiner. Fluorescein sodium solution (FL)
(Fluoresceine lo%; Faure, France) is given as
an intravenous bolus into the cephalic vein.
Structuraf Visualization of the Fundus
Fundus photography is then performed using
a standard fundus camera connected to a power
Ophthaimoscopy
back unit to allow for quick recycling of the
black-and-white or color film. Excitation and
 Direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy are
barrier filters are used in the camera.
both used in veterinary ophthalmology to
visualize the fundus. The ophthalmoscopic
examination is performed in a darkened
New Noninvasive fmaging Procedures
room using short-acting mydriatics, such as
0.5-l.0% tropicamide. The two techniques
Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO) is a
have both advantages and limitations that
diagnostic imaging technique that has been
often complement each other (see chapter
developed recently for very precise and
1). Direct ophthalmoscopy is mainly used to
detailed fundus visualization. Lasers of differ-
examine the central parts of the fundus, espe-
ent wavelengths are used that allow the exam-
cially the region of the optic nerve head, but it
iner to obtain information about specifc tissues
is considered inadequate to examine the periph-
and layers due to their reflection and trans-
eral fundus of domestic animals
mission characteristics (like ultrasonography)
Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) gives
high resolution cross sectional images of
Ultrasongraphy
optical reflectivity. It is based on the principle
of low-coherence interferometry where dis-
Ultrasonography is a valuable aid in detect-
tance information concerning various ocular
ing and monitoring pathologic conditions in
structures is extracted from time delays of
the canine posterior segment. In patients
reflected signals. The technique is mainly used
with unclear media (e.g., dense cataracts,
for evaluation of retinal layers in disease pro-
intraocular hemorrhage), ultrasonography
cesses but can also be used in the anterior
can be used to detect, for example, a detached
segment including the iridocorneal angle.
retina or posterior segment neoplasm. Fur-
thermore, ultrasonography can be used to study
space-occupying conditions that are diffcult to
Functionaf Testing of the Retina
examine because of their location (e.g., neo-
plasms in the choroid close to the ciliary body).
Electroretinography
B-mode is generally preferred to A-mode ultra-
sonography because of its versatility and more
When the retina is stimulated by light, a
easily interpreted images.
diffuse electrical response is generated by
neuronal and nonneuronal cells that can be
recorded as the electroretinogram (ERG).
Angiography
The ERG is an objective, functional test of
the retina and is critically dependent on the
Angiography is a helpful adjunct in the diagno-
function of the photoreceptors (i.e., the rods
sis of retinal diseases. It is mainly used to evalu-
and cones). It has a characteristic waveform
SZ /1N3W03S 8O18315Od 3NINO 3H1 3O A83D8NS 0N 53S3510
that varies depending on several factors, but
mology, the VEP is a test of the central visual
mostly on the type of stimuli used (see chapter
function, but also of the optic nerve and the
1, section 4).
higher visual tracts and visual cortex. It is
The ERG is recorded by using an active
useful in blind patients with normal ophthal-
contact lens electrode, a reference and a ground
mic examination results and a normal ERG
electrode, and the results displayed on an oscil-
loscope, ink-writer, or computer screen. The
DNA-Based Tests for Retinal
flash ERG is used in two broad applications.
Dystrophies
The frst is to test whether a standard stimulus
elicits an ERG response. This method is useful
With the sequencing of the canine genome
in assessing retinal activity when the fundus is
and advances in techniques to allow the
obscured (e.g., before cataract surgery) and in
mapping and identification of gene muta-
the differential diagnosis of retinal disease when
ophthalmoscopic lesions are absent. The second
numbers of hereditary retinal diseases are
is to specifically test rod and cone function in
 being identified. This has led to the growing
conjunction with research into retinal disease
availability of DNA-based tests for canine
processes and in the early diagnosis of heredi-
retinal diseases (Table 10.1). The commer-
tary retinal degenerations and dystrophies
cially available tests for the progressive retinal
degenerations can be accessed online (www.
Pattern ERG
optigen.com). Each DNA-based test is specific
for that particular genetic mutation. A simple
The pattern ERG (PERG) measures a retinal
DNA sample (e.g. from a blood sample or
response to a phase-reversing pattern stimu-
cheek brushing) is all that is actually required
lus that maintains a constant overall mean
for the DNA-based tests.
luminance. The response is an electrical
 potential thought to derive from the retinal
ganglion cells and the neighboring inner
The Normal Ocular Fundus
retinal structures. The PERG has been shown
to be abnormal in human patients with estab-
The canine ocular fundus is a challenge for the
lished glaucoma, and a significant decrease in
examiner because of its enormous variation in
PERG amplitudes has been found in early cases
 normal ophthalmoscopic appearance in the dif-
of glaucoma in humans. Further investigations
ferent breeds and iris and coat colors (Figs.
have also been performed in both humans and
10.5A through F). The appearance of the
dogs with suspected and early glaucoma. In
normal canine fundus also varies according to
addition, PERG amplitudes correlate 
with
age, with obvious color changes usually occur-
visual field indices. Canine visual acuity was
ring during the first 3-4 months of life. It is
studied using evoked retinal and cortical feld
essential that the extent of variation in the
potentials by pattern stimulation, and canine
normal fundus be recognized and understood
acuity was 0.2-0.4 times those reported for
before making the diagnosis of any pathologic
primates.
condition of this structure. In most dogs, as in
most domestic mammals, the fundus can be
subdivided into a tapetal and a nontapetal zone.
Visually Evoked Potentiais
 The tapetal fundus may occasionally be absent
in the dog.
The visually evoked cortical potential (VEP), or
visually evoked response, is a gross electrical
signal generated at the occipital cortex in
TapetalFundus
response to visual stimulation. These responses
are of small amplitude (l-40 microvolts) and
The combination of the tapetum lucidum
are extremely sensitive to stimulus changes (see
 and an absence of pigment in the overlying
chapter 1, section 4). In veterinary ophthal-
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is the
Table 10.1. A list of DNA-based Tests for Hereditary Retinal and Neurodegenerative
Diseases in the Dog.
Breed
Disease
Gene
Type of Test
Retina:
American Cocker Spaniel
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome g
Mutation detection
 American Eskirno Dog
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9*
Mutation detection
 Australian Cattle Dog
arPRA - prco
Gene on chromosome 9e
Mutation detection
Australian Shepherd
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 37Φ
Mutation detection
Australian Stumpy Tail
arPRA - prco
Gene on chromosome 99
Mutation detection 
Cattle Dog
Border Collie
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 37Φ
Mutation detection
 Briard
retinal dystrophy
RPE65
Mutation detection
csnb/canine LCA
Bull Mastiff
adPRA
rhodopsin
Mutation detection
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
arPRA - rcd3
PDE6A
Mutation detection 
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9*
Mutation detection
Chinese Crested
arPRA - prco
Gene on chromosome 9e
Mutation detection 
English Cocker Spaniels
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9e
Mutation detection
Entlebucher Sennenhund
arPRA- prco
Gene on chromosome 9*
Mutation detection 
(Swiss Mountain Dog)
Finnish Lapphund
 arPRA- prcd
Gene on chrormosome ge
 Mutation detection
Gemman Shorthaired Pointer
CD
CNGB3
Mutation detection 
lrish Setter
arPRA - rcd1
PDE6B
Mutation detection 
Labrador Retriever
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9*
Mutation detection
Lancashire Heeler
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 374
Mutation detection
Miniature Poodle
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9*
Mutation detection 
Miniature Schnauzer"
arPRA - type A
Phosducin
Mutation detection 
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome g
Mutation detection
Retriever
Old English Mastiff
adPRA
hodopsin
Mutation detection
 Portuguese Water Dog
arPRA - prco
Gene on chrormosome 9*
Mutation detection 
Rough Collie
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 37*
Mutation detection
Sarnoyed
xIPRA
RPGR*
Mutation detection
Shetland Sheepdog
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 37Φ
Mutation detection 
 Siberian Husky
xIPRA
RPGR*
 Mutation detection 
Sloughi
arPRA
PDE6B
Mutation detection
Smooth Collie
CEA-CH
Gene on chromosome 37*
Mutation detection 
Toy Poodle
arPRA - prcd
Gene on chromosome 9Φ
Mutation detection
Brain and retina:
 American Bulldog
NCL
CTSD
Mutation detection
Border Collie
NCL
CLN5
Mutation detection
 English Setter
NCL
CLN8
Mutation detection
254
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE POSTERIOR SEGMENT/ 255
Table 10.1. Continued
 From Table 21.1 of the 4th edition of Veterinary Ophthaimology (2007). Additional and current information may
be available from www.optigen.com
ΦMutant gene has been discovered but not published at time of writing
prcd = progressive rod cone degeneration
arPRA = autosomal recessive progressive retinal atrophy
CEA-CH = choroidal hypoplasia manifestation of Collie eye anomaly
csnb = congenital stationary night blindness
canine LCA = canine Leber's congenital amaurosis
adPRA = autosomal dominant progressive retinal atrophy
rcd3 = rod cone dysplasia type 3
PDE6A = gene encoding the alpha subunit of rod cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase
CD = cone degeneration (achromatopsia)
CNGB3 = cyclic nucleotide-gated channel beta-subunit gene
rco 1 = rod cone dysplasia type 1
PDE6B = gene encoding the beta subunit of rod cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase
 xIPRA = X-linked progressive retinal atrophy
# = an additional form of PRA exists in this breed
RPGR = RP GTPase regulator
* = mutations in RPGR in Siberian Husky and Samoyed are different
NCL = Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
CLN5 & 8 = respective genes encoding for NCL
CTSD = cathepsin D gene
anatomic basis for the tapetal fundus. The
Nontapetal Fundus
tapetal fundus forms an almost triangular
area, with a horizontal base, in the dorsal
 The nontapetal fundus comprises the largest
half of the fundus. The area is usually
area of the ocular fundus in the dog. The
brightly and beautifully colored and reflec
 junction between the tapetal and nontapetal
tive. The size of the tapetal fundus varies exten-
fundus exhibits a continuous variation, from
sively; it is often poorly developed in the toy
a distinct line of demarcation to a gradual
breeds (e.g., Papillons). In dogs with a merle
 transition with scattered foci of tapetal cells.
coat color (e.g., blue merle Collies, Shetland
The nontapetal fundus has a nonreflective,
Sheepdogs, and related breeds), the tapetal
usually dark or grayish brown to black color.
fundus is absent. Occasionally, the tapetal
 Sometimes, the nontapetal fundus adjacent to
fundus may also be missing in other dogs, and
 the tapetal fundus may appear paler and more
in this case, the entire fundus resembles the
brown compared with the darker, ventral
nontapetal zone (i.e., dark, dull, and nonreflec-
region. In the dog (regardless of the breed) with
tive). The palette of the tapetal fundus includes
a brown, chocolate, or liver coat color associ-
hues of yellow, orange, green, and blue. Often,
ated with a paler brown iris, the nontapetal
more than one color is present. A common
fundus is less heavily pigmented and will
combination (e.g., in retrievers and spaniels) is
appear paler brown or reddish-brown. In the
a mainly yellow tapetal fundus, with a transi-
dog with a subalbinotic fundus, parts of the
tion to green and, finally, blue at the junction
nontapetal fundus will be unpigmented, thus
with the nontapetal fundus. The tapetal fundus
 showing the choroidal vessels overlying the
has a light or dark blue color in young pups up
white sclera. Absence of pigment in the entire
to the age of 5-7 weeks. Afterward, the color
nontapetal region is common (e.g., in blue
becomes adultlike.
merle Collies).
B
C
256
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE POSTERIOR SEGMENT/257
Optic Nerve Head
may be more tortuous than the venules. The
main veins (usually three or four in number)
The canine optic nerve head, or the optic
are obviously larger and darker red in color
disc or papilla, also exhibits a wide range
than the arterioles. They end in the usually
of normal variations in ophthalmoscopic
incomplete venous circle on the top of the optic
appearance. It is located in the center of
nerve head but may, in part, be covered by the
the fundus, sometimes in the nontapetal
optic nerve head tissue. Several smaller venules
fundus and sometimes in the tapetal region,
coalesce with the major veins, thereby building
depending on the extension of the latter.
a branching tree of vessels over the optic fundus.
The extent of myelinization affects the size
The area centralis is an indistinctly bordered
of the optic nerve head. Therefore, in young
do ai on n pue rans s ea
 pups, where the myelinization is incomplete.
nerve head, which is devoid of blood vessels
the optic nerve head is smaller than that in the
but encircled by fine branches.
adult dog
The shape of the optic nerve head may be
Development of the Canine Fundus
round, oval, triangular, or polygonal, and
sometimes, the disk edge may be clearly
The difference between the immature ocular
indented. In the center of the optic nerve head.
fundus of a young pup and the fully devel-
a minute, round depression is usually seen,
 oped, functional fundus of an adult dog
which is the physiologic cup. The physiologic
is strilking. The process of development
cup, which usually appears grayish in color,
includes both a successive series of mor-
represents the origin of the hyaloid vasculature.
phologic events and a functional maturation
The color of the optic nerve head varies from
of the retina. It is normally impossible to
pinkish-white to deep pink, depending on the
 examine the ocular fundus in pups younger
extent of visible vasculature. The vessels climb
than 2 weeks, because the eyelids remain
the optic nerve head, and an usually incom-
closed and the ocular media, especially the
plete venous circle is seen on its top.
cornea, are not sufficiently clear. When the
eyelids open and ophthalmoscopic examina-
Retina/ Vasculature
tion can be performed, there is no discernible
difference between the tapetal and nontapetal
The vascular architecture of the canine
 fundus. The tapetal fundus then takes on a lilac
fundus is classified as holangiotic. The vas-
to blue coloration, which becomes more intense
culature consists of arterioles and venules
with increasing age. Afer approximately 7-8
located at the surface of the retina. The arte-
weeks, the tapetal fundus becomes more granu-
rioles (usually fifteen to twenty in number)
lar in appearance. The bluish, immature tapetal
radiate away from their origin close to the
fundus then becomes more brightly colored
periphery of the optic nerve head. They
over time, until a tapetal fundus of adult struc-
ture and coloration is developed at approxi-
the vessels transporting venous blood, and they
mately 3-4 months of age.
Fig. I0.5. Normal appearance of the Fundus in different canine breeds. A. A 4-year-old Beagle with a large,
mainly yellow tapetal area and a relatively large, round disc at the border of the tapetal and nontapetal areas. B.
A l-year-old Briard with a large and yellow-to-orange tapetal fundus and a disc at the border of the tapetal and
nontapetal fundus. C. A 6-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with a thin and sparse tapetal fundus. The
uneven borders of the optic disc are caused by pronounced myelination. D. A submelanotic right eye in a 1-
year-old Papillon. The regular striation of the choroidal vessels is seen against the white sclera, and there are no
tapetal cells. The nontapetal Fundus is pigmented. The ellw eye had an orange-yellow normal tapetal and a
pigmented nontapetal fundus. E. A 4-year-old liver-colored Labrador Retriever with a light-brownish coloration
of the entire fundus. No tapetal cells are visible. F. A 7-week-old Collie pup with an immature, blue-colored
Fundus.
258 /EssEntiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
Retinal differentiation  and
maturation
The prevalence of CEA is extremely high
(mainly of the photoreceptors) in dogs is
in Rough and Smooth Collies and Shetland
complete by 7-8 weeks of age. At the end of
Sheepdogs throughout the world. Recent
this period, the retina, as monitored by ERG
studies report a frequency of 64% among
and both light and electron microscopy, is
Collies in England, 50+% in Sweden, and 41%
adultlike.
in Norway. In Shetland Sheepdogs, the preva-
lence may be high but varies in different coun-
tries. The incidence of CEA in Border Collies is
Developmental Anomalies
low; in the Lancashire Heeler the incidence was
reported as 13.7%.
Colfie Eye Anomaiy
Clinical Findings
CEA is a congenital ocular syndrome involv-
ing defects of the posterior vascular and
Clinical findings in CEA include a high degree
fbrous tunics of the eye. CEA is bilateral
of pleomorphism (Table 10.2). In a single litter,
and has no sex predisposition. There is no
there is often great variation in the severity of the
difference in frequency related to coat color,
changes and there may be variation between the
type of coat, or presence of the merling gene.
eyes of an affected individual. Choroidal hypo-
CEA affects the Collie types of dog, that is,
plasia is considered the diagnostic lesion
Rough and Smooth Collies, Shetland Sheep-
for CEA and is always bilateral, though the
dogs, Australian Shepherds, and Border
extent of the lesion may vary between eyes
Collies, but has also been described in the
(Figs. 10.6 and 10.7). The CEA syndrome is
Lancaster Heeler and recently discovered in
best diagnosed in pups at 6-7 weeks of age.
the Nova Scotia Duck Trolling Dog. The
hereditary trait for the disorder was estab-
Histopathologic Findings
lished and a simple autosomal recessive
inheritance. Recently further genetic studies
In dogs with choroidal hypoplasia, there is
were reported that established the primary CEA
a marked thinning of the choroid in the area,
phenotype, choroidal hypoplasia, to segregate
with a decrease in melanocytes and hypopla-
as an autosomal recessive trait with
1  nearly
sia or an absence of tapetal cells. The colo-
100% penetrance. Linkage mapping of the
bomas may originate embryologically from
primary CEA locus was shown to a 3.9-cM
deformities in the primitive epithelial papilla
region of canine chromosome 37.
or from defects in the fetal fissure. Posterior
Table 10.2. Ophthalmoscopic Findings in Collie Eye Anomaly.
Lesion
Appearance
Choroidal hypoplasia
Bilateral, pale to white area lateral (temporal) or dorsolateral (superotemporal) of the
optic nerve head, variable size; can be asymmetrical; difficult to detect in merle/
subalbinoid dogs. Best to examine puppies 6-7 weeks old. Can pigment and appear
normal later (Go-Normals).
Posterior colobomas
Involve the optic disc (i.e., papillary colobomas) or adjacent area (i.e., peripapillary
colobomas). Also called pits or posterior scleral ectasia. Appear as gray or pink
indentations; vary from shallow depressions to more extensive excavations or "holes"
eiseidodAy lepioioyp yim sana aun jo %oe-o1 ul inooo Ae yndap ul 0 oe o1 dn
Retinal detachmment
Partial or complete; uni- or bilateral; in 5-10% of the CEA eyes. Appear clinically as
nonfixation of the eyes, a tendency of nystagmus, or even strabismus in affected pups
Affect both pups and adults. Most arise adjacent to the optic disc and extend toward
the peripheral fundus, often with subretinal, intraretinal, or preretinal hermorrhages.
Intraocular hyphema
Occurs in 5% or less of CEA eyes, often with colobomatous defects and retinal
detachments
Diseases Ano SuRGerY Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/259
is a congenital defect, the incidence of CEA
has remained high throughout the world.
There are several reasons for this, including
both problems with diagnosis as well as
resentment from owners and breeders at
adhering to strict recommendations that
might eliminate a large part of their breeding
potential. A mutation detection test has been
developed and is commercially available. In
breeds in which CEA is infrequent, breeding of
affected animals or those that have produced
affected offspring is not recommended.
Merie Ocuiar Dysgenesis (MOD)
 The Australian Shepherd dog is affected by
multiple ocular anomalies. Affected dogs
Fig. 10.6. Collie eye anomaly with choroidal
hypoplasia temporal to the optic disc in a 2-year-old
may show microphthalmia to varying extent
Shetland Sheepdog.
and varying size of the globes. The defect is
associated with microcornea of an irregular
shape and, infrequently, with mineralization of
the anterior corneal stroma. Affected dogs also
exhibit heterochromia irides with dyscoria and
corectopia with an oval pupil, in which the
long axis is vertical. The hypoplastic irides
permit transillumination and respond poorly to
mydriatics. Cataracts occur in 60% of affected
dogs with microphthalmia and colobomas. In
54% of affected Australian Shepherds, large
equatorial staphylomas occur. Large staphylo-
mas may extend from the ora serrata to the
optic disc. Retinal vasculature in the staphylo-
mas may be markedly reduced or even absent.
 In 50% of cases, complete retinal detachment
Occurs, and approximately 30% of the detach-
 ments have intraocular hemorrhage.
Fig. 10.7. Collie eye anomaly with a large,
 Microphthalmia with colobomas in Austra-
irregularly oval optic nerve head with a pronounced
lian Shepherds is inherited as an autosomal
optic nerve coloboma in a Collie. Note the position
recessive trait with incomplete penetrance.
of the blood vessel as it approaches the coloboma.
Affected dogs are homozygous merles and have
excessively white hair coats. A similar syndrome
ectatic areas may originate from orbital cysts,
has been observed in merled breeds including
which result from a primary defect in the neu-
Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs, and Harlequin
 roectoderm when the optic fissure is closing.
Great Danes. Breeding of merled parents (blue
merle or red merle) should be avoided.
Problems in Diagnosis, Interpretation,
and Contro!
Retinal Dysplasia
Though the hereditary pattern for CEA is a
Retinal dysplasia is an anomalous differen-
simple autosomal recessive and the disorder
tiation of the retina accompanied by a
 260 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
proliferation of one or more of its constitu-
form, with complete retinal detachment,
ent elements and characterized histopatho-
remains lnaltered in most cases, but com-
logically by linear folding of the sensory
plications including vitreal hemorrhage,
retina and formation of rosettes composed
cataracts,and s
 secondary glaucoma may
of variable numbers of neuronal retinal cells
arise.
Since retinal dysplasia is a defect of
around a central lumen. The defect is associ-
retinal differentiation, lesions are mainly con-
ated with several spontaneously occurring and
 genital in nature. Early screening of dogs at 6-8
experimentally induced disorders of the devel-
weeks has been encouraged for breeds in which
oping eye in dogs and may be associated with
the defect is prevalent. A second examination
systemic abnormalities, or they can be a primary
was recommended to be performed between
ocular defect, either as a single defect or together
6 months and l year of age on breeds affected
with other lesions such as microphthalmos
with the geographic form of retinal dysplasia.
or colobomatous defects. Causes of retinal
dysplasia include viral infections, vitamin A
deficiency, x-ray irradiation, certain drugs, and
intrauterine trauma. Hereditary aberration,
however, appears to be the most important
etiologic factor.
Clinical Signs
Clinically, the lesions of retinal dysplasia
are unilateral or bilateral and may be grossly
divided into three different types or forms
(Table 10.3). Clinically, most lesions in retinal
dysplasia do not appear to change with time.
 The least severe type (i.e., focal or multifocal
retinal dysplasia) usually remains unaltered
(Figs. 10.8 and 10.9). In a few cases, however,
the lesions become less obvious, and some
Fig. 10.8. Midperipheral tapetal fundus in a 4-year-
folds may disappear. At the same time, the area
old Springer Spaniel with severe multifocal retinal
around others, especially if the lesions are
dysplasia. The lesions, which were bilateral, had
numerous, may become more demarcated,
progressed since ophthalmic examination l year
m s sans pue siods paidadu w
previously and were now causing visual impairment.
as hyperreflective areas in the vicinity of the
Note the hyperreflective central parts of some of the
dysplastic lesions (Fig. 10.9). The most severe
dysplastic lesions, indicating neuroretinal thinning.
Table 10.3. Ophthalmoscopic Findings in Retinal Dysplasia.
Type
Ophthaimoscopic Findings
Focal or multifocal
 Retinal folds and rosettes are seen as areas of reduced tapetal reflectivity, appearing
as gray or green dots or linear, V, or Y streaks. Occur anywhere in the tapetal
region but most often central and usually above the optic disc. May appear
elevated, distorting the course of the overlying vessels. Retinal folds in the
nontapetal fundus appear as gray or white linear or irregular streaks
Geographic
Appear as an irregular or horseshoe-shaped area, most often in the central tapetal
fundus. May include focal retinal thinning and elevation. Usually hyperreflective area 
with variable pigmentation.
Cormplete w/detachrent
Usually a completely detached neural retina floating in the vitreous, attached
around the optic nerve head.
DiSEAsEs ANo SuRGERY Of THe CaNiNe PosteRiOr SeGmENt/261
unilateral or bilateral PHPV. The PHPV changes
are usually associated with small white poste-
rior lens capsule plaques, manifested as a
central posterior lens capsule ring. This is
usually accompanied by a white primary vitre-
ous mass that extends to the Bergermeisters
papilla on the optic disc. Lenticonus or dis-
rupted posterior lens capsules are usually not
found in this syndrome and axial length and
size of the eye is normal
Induced Retinal Dysplasia
Infection with canine adenovirus has been
shown to cause retinal dysplasia. Another
 infectious agent causing retinal dysplasia is
Fig. 10.9. Unilateral geographic retinal dysplasia in
canine herpes virus. Experimental studies
a l-year-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Severe
have demonstrated that severe ocular inflam-
horseshoe-shaped funduscopic changes are seen in
mation with subsequent retinal dysplasia
the central tapetal fundus.
and associated ocular anomalies can be
induced in neonatal pups. Oral, nasal, and
intraperitoneal inoculation at 1-4 days postna-
Breed Incidence and Inheritance
tal caused panuveitis and systemic signs of
infection.
Spontaneous retinal dysplasia occurs in several
Irradiated newborn puppies also exhibit
breeds (Table 10.4).
retinal rosette formation. The rosettes were
 It is not uncommon to find retinal dysplasia
either few or numerous, and they involved both
in conjunction with other severe ocular defects
tapetal and nontapetal fundus.
and in some breeds, retinal dysplasia has been
described in combination with other nonocular
defects, such as in the Samoyed and the Labra-
Problems in Diagnosis, Interpretation,
dor Retriever (oculo-skeletal dysplasia)
and Control
The clinical appearance of retinal dysplasia
Inherited Retinal Dysplasia and
is often similar regardless of the cause.
Persistent Hyperpiastic
Among the breeds in which the defect has
Primary Vitreous
 been recognized to be inherited, certain
characteristic features, such as the central,
A clinical syndrome of congenital retinal
mainly tapetal location of the folds and
dysplasia and persistent primary vitreous
rosettes are evident, which simplifies mak-
has recently been described in the Miniature
ing the diagnosis. Lesions associated with
 Schnauzer dog and test-breedings suggest a
external insults, such as intrauterine infection
simple autosomal inheritance. In affected
or irradiation, may cause problems in clinical
dogs the retinal dysplasia is usually general-
diagnostics.
ized and involve the temporal and nasal
retina most severely and is most extensive
dorsal to the optic disc (Fig. 10.10). The
Serous Retinopathy/Retinaf Pigment
retina is noticeably thickened in the dysplastic
Epithelial Dysplasia
areas, evident by ophthalmoscopy in young
puppies or it is detached. Concurrently with
A unique inherited multifocal serous reti-
the dysplastic retina many dogs also show mild
nopathy has been described in the Great
Table 10.4. Breeds of Dogs Affected with Retinal Dysplasia.
Breed (Mode of inheritance)
Type of RD
Other Abnormalities
Akita
Complete
Microphthalmia, cataract, posterior lenticonus
American Cocker Spaniel (AR)
Multifocal
None
Multifocal
Microphthalmia, cataracts, persistent pupillary membranes
Australian Shepherd dog
Complete
Iridal heterochromia, cataracts; staphylomas; retinal
(AR incomplete penetrance)
 detachrents
(any breed with homozygous merling)
Beagle
Multifocal
Microphthalmia
Bedlington Terrier (AR)
Complete
Microphthalmmia, cataracts, retinal detachments
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Geographic
Microphthalmia, cataracts, posterior lenticous
Chow Chow
Complete
Severe ocular defects
 Doberman Pinscher (AR)
Complete
Microphthalmia, anterior segrnent dysplasia, aphakia,
 hyperplastic primary vitreous
English Springer Spaniel (AR)
Geographic
Microphthalmia; cataracts; retinal detachments
Golden Retriever
Geographic
None
Labrador Retriever
Multifocal
None
Geographic
None
(AR)
Complete
Microphthalmia, cataracts, intraocular hemorrhage
(AD)
Complete
Cataracts; retarded growth of the radius, ulna, and tibia;
separated hypoplastic anconeal and coronoid processes; hip
dysplasia; delayed development of the epiphysis
Rottweiler
Multifocal
None
Sealyham Terrier (AR)
Complete
 Microphthalmia, cataracts, retinal detachments
Sarnoyed
Complete
 Microphthalmia, cataracts, hyaloid artery persistence, and
 skeletal defects like the Labrador Retriever
Yorkshire Terrier
Multifocal
None
AR = autosomal recessive trait, and AD = autosomal dominant trait with variable penetrance.
C
A. There are posterior lenticular opacities, mainly manifested by a lens capsular ring, with some centrally
located opacities. B. White primary vitreous stands are present and a persistent hyaloid vessel extends to the
(Courtesy of Bruce Grahn.)
262
Diseases Ano Surgery Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/263
Pyrenees dog.  Ophthalmoscopical lesions
Inherited Retinal and
have been described as multifocal, gray to
Tapetal Dystrophies
tan fundic patches that vary in size from
barely visible to some lesions that are larger
All cellular layers of the retina are potentially
than the optic disc (Fig. l0.ll). Lesions
susceptible to hereditary abnormalities. Most of
start to develop at approximately ll weeks
these, however, relate to the parts that are
of age, usually they are sparse, but develop
physiologically the most complex: the layers of
bilaterally in the peripheral tapetal fundus,
the photoreceptors and the RPE. In the dog.
around the optic discs, and occasionally
there is a broad range and diversity of inherited
under the major veins inferior to the optic
retinal diseases that affect these structures.
disc. The peripapillary lesions, observed as
serous retinal detachments, develop within a
few hours but remain the same size for years,
Ciassification of Canine
while the peripheral lesions develop gradually
Retinal Degenerations
over years, and appear to increase slowly in size
 and number until the age of 20 weeks. The
Canine retinal
 degenerations  primarily
pathogenesis of the defect is as of yet unre-
affect the photoreceptors, RPE, or both.
solved. The lesions do not appear to be con-
Since the first well-documented report of an
 genital, but are detected suddenly in young
inherited retinal degeneration in a Gordon
 puppies. The sudden development of the serous
Setter from Sweden by Magnusson, many
lesions and focal detachments support the
breeds have been found to be affected by
theory that lesions develop secondarily to focal
hereditary retinal degenerations. To these
secretion of defective RPE cells. This indicates
conditions, the general term progressive
that this retinopathy of Great Pyrenees dogs
retinal atrophy, or PRA, has been applied.
may be due to a focal dysplasia of specific RPE
Throughout the years, clinicians have divided
cells. The defect is inherited, most probably as
-do aui uo huipuadp sadai omi oui aid
a simple recessive trait
moscopic appearance of the fundus lesions:
 generalized PRA, and central PRA (CPRA). In
generalized PRA, there is generalized hyper-
reflectivity of the retina at the end stage of
the disease, thereby indicating a generalized
atrophy of the neural retinal structures and
clinical blindness. In CPRA, there are mul-
tifocal accumulations of pigment within the
retina, and encircling these changes are
areas of hyperreflectivity at the end stage.
The latter disorder is due to a primary defect
in the RPE, and does not always lead to blind-
ness. During the last few decades, PRA has
been subdivided further, into more specific
diseases at the cellular level and also at the
molecular level, and gene symbols are used
to differentiate these disorders (see Table
10.1). The term CPRA has been replaced by
the term retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
(RPED).
It has been possible to subdivide PRA grossly
Fig. 10.ll. RPE dysplasia in a young Great
into developmental and degenerative diseases:
Pyrenees dog. Note the serous retinal detachment
around the optic nerve head and the multiple circular
(1) The developmental class represents a genet-
tan Fundic patches in the tapetal fundus. (Courtesy of
ically distinct disorder expressed cytologically
Bruce Grahn.)
during the postnatal period, when the visual
 264 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
cells are beginning to differentiate, that is, dys-
(i.e., nyctalopia or night blindness), since it
plasia of the rod or cone photoreceptors (or
is most often the rods that are affected first
both). The dysplasias develop before the retina
in PRA. The reduced visual capacity in
is adult-like (approximately 8 weeks of age in
darkness may often be observed by visual
the dog). There is severe structural alterations
testing.
of the rod or cone photoreceptor cells, and the
The ophthalmoscopic changes for PRA
rate of progression and loss of photoreceptors
are summarized in Table l0.5, and divided
is often rapid. (2) In contrast, the degenerative
into early, moderate, and advanced changes
diseases represent defects in which photore-
(Figs. 10.12A through C). Secondary cataract
ceptor cells degenerate after having differenti-
is almost always present at advanced stages of
ated mainly in a normal way. These diseases
disease. The initial changes tend to occur in the
-   a   a 
 a   o 
poral and topographic factors. One form of
opacification. Often, irregular radiations are
primary photoreceptor degeneration (rod cone
seen emanating from the posterior pole of the
degeneration, prcd) has been known to some-
lens and extending to involve the equatorial
times be allelic in several breeds of dog, and
cortex and, later, the entire lens. Mature cata-
very recently the underlying mutation has been
racts, especially in certain breeds, makes the
identified. Within the photoreceptor dysplasia
evaluation of retinal function using ERG of
and degeneration groups, the diseases are sub-
utmost importance before cataract surgery in
divided still further according to the type of
order to rule out retinal degeneration.
cell primarily affected (e.g, rod-cone dysplasia
of Irish Setters, cone degeneration of Alaskan
Malamutes).
Early Onset Photoreceptor
Degenerations in the
Clinicai Signs of PRA
PRA Complex
Clinical manifestations of PRA are often remark.
Photoreceptor Dysplasias
ably similar, no matter the type of disorder
present at the cellular level. PRA is always bilat-
The characteristics for the retinal photore-
eral, and almost always leads to blindness. The
ceptor dysplasias in the dog are summa-
most common clinical sign of early disease
rized in Table 10.6. Rod-cone dysplasia
is impaired vision in dim light and darkness
type 1 (rcdl), initially described in the
Table 10.5. Ophthalmoscopic Changes in Progressive Retinal Atrophy.
Stage of the
Ophthaimoscopic Changes
Disease
Early
Slight change in tapetal reflectivity or hyporeflectivity is often seen, such as a grayish
 discoloration mainly in the penipheral tapetal fundus. A slight vascular attenuation and beading
 of retinal vessels in the midperipheral and peripheral parts of the tapetal fundus may be
observed
Moderate
Color changes in the tapetal fundus become more marked and generalized, as does the
vascular attenuation. Increased reflectivity. or hyperreflectivity. of the tapetal fundus, which is
loeiuawbid ayn ul aseainap zubis snpuny leradet eiayduadpiw ayt u! payiew jsow Aensn
of the nontapetal fundus. Optic nerve head changes include early loss of myelin, disc changes
in shape to circular, reduced number and calipers of blood vessels. Eary optic disc atrophy
Advanced
Hyperreflectivity progresses to involve allthe tapetal fundus. Continued loss of the
pigmentation of the nontapetal fundus. Marked decrease in the retinal vasculature with
preservation of only the large and central blood vessels until late in the disease. Ghost vessels
peripherally. Optic disc pallor, loss of mmyelin, and reduction in the disk size.
C9Z /1N3W035 80183150d 3NINO 3H1 30 A8308N5 0NV 535351Q
B
Fig. 10.12. Advanced prcd in a 7-year-old Miniature Poodle. A. Central part of the fundus, with severe
vascular attenuation and a grayish tapetal discoloration. B. Midperipheral Fundus, with hyperreflectivity
and discoloration in the peripheral part. C. Periphery of the tapetal fundus, with a marked striation. The
 contours of the choroidal vascular pattern are observed underlying the atrophic neural retina.
Irish Setter, but also found in the Irish Red
a recessively inherited, early onset retinal
and White Setter, is an early onset reces-
degeneration. PRA in the Cardigan Welsh
sively inherited disease. It is characterized by
      
arrested differentiation of visual cells resulting
causal mutation has been reported to be a l
from a nonsense mutation in the beta subunit
base-pair deletion in codon 6l6 of PDE6A. A
of cyclic guanosine-monophosphate (cGMP)
recessively inherited form of retinal dysplasia
metabolism. The disease is a PDE6B mutation
was described in the Norwegian Elkhound
and there is a mutation based test available for
 many years ago. Early retinal degeneration is
rcdl for both Irish Setter and Sloughi (www.
another recessively inherited condition in the
optigen.com).  Rod-cone  dysplasia  type  2
 Norwegian Elkhound that has been described
(rcd2) has been described in the Collie and is
more recently than rod dysplasia. Photorecep-
 266 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Table 10.6. Characteristics of the Retinal Photoreceptor Dysplasias in the Dog.
Breed
Primary Defect
Mode of
Diagnosis by
Diagnosis by ERG
inheritance
Ophthalmoscopy
and Changes
 Alaskan
Cone degeneration
AR
No changes
6 wks; Cone:- : rod:Normal
Malarmute
 Belgian
Rod-cone dysplasia
Unknown
11 wks
4wks: Cone:- : rod:-
Shepherd
Collie
Rod-cone dysplasia
AR
16 wk5
6 wks; Cone:↓; rod:-
Irish Setter
Rod-cone dysplasia
AR
16 wk5
6 wks; Cone:↓; rod:-
Miniature
Rod-cone dysplasia
AR
1.55 yrs
6 wks; Cone:↓; rod:↓
Schnauzer
 Norwegian
Rod dysplasia
AR
11.5 yrs
6 wks: Cone:N/↓: rod:-
Elkhound
Norwegian 
 Early rod degeneration
AR
9 mos-1 yr
 5 wks: A-wave dominates
 Elkhound
↑:pou :↑:auo
 Pit Bull Terrier 
Cone-rod dystrophy
Unknown
sow 9-
wks: Cone:-: rod ↓
Shorthaired
Cone-rod dystrophy
AR suspected
3 yrs
5 wks: Cone:-; rod ↓
Dachshund
Longhaired
Cone-rod dystrophy
Unknown
soW 9
6 wks: Cone:↓; rod: Normal
Dachshund
AR = Autosomal recessive trait
tor dysplasia of Miniature Schnauzers is an
Late-Onset Retinal
unusual disease of the photoreceptors that
Degenerations in the
through pedigree analysis and test mating has
PRA Complex
been shown to be inherited as an autosomal
recessive trait. The disease is unusual in that
Progressive Rod Cone Degeneration
it has a slow clinical progression when assessed
with behavioral testing and ophthalmoscopy.
The classical type of PRA that is termed
When judged with histopathology and ERG,
progressive rod cone degeneration (prcd) has
however, it is an early onset disorder. The
an autosomal recessive inheritance. In June
mutation responsible for photoreceptor dys-
2005, Optigen LLC (www.optigen.com)
plasia in the Miniature Schnauzer is designated
announced that the gene causing canine
as Type A PRA. There is a mutation based test
prcd had been identified, although at the
available for the disorder.
time of this writing the actual genetic muta-
tion for prcd had not been published. Prcd
Cone-Rod Dystrophy
has been known for some time to be an
allelic condition in several breeds of dog
The cone-rod dystrophies are a heterogeneous
with late-onset PRA (Table l0.7).
group of inherited retinal degenerative disor-
The optigen web site lists the following breeds
ders naturally occurring in man and in dog.
as having prcd: Miniature and Toy Poodle,
The diseases are characterized by simultaneous
American and English Cocker Spaniel, Labrador
involvement of cone and rod photoreceptors,
Retriever, Portuguese Water Dog, American
the former being more severely affected than
Eskimo Dog. Entlebucher Mountain dog.
the latter, initially. So far, the disorder has been
Australian Cattle dog, Australian Stumpy Tail
described in only a few breeds of dog, includ-
Cattle Dog. Chesapeake Bay Retriever, Nova
ing the Pit Bull Terrier, Shorthaired Dachshund,
Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever and the Chinese
and Longhaired Dachshund
Crested dog. Probably more dog breeds will be
DiSEases ANo SuRGerY Of the CaNine PoSteriOr SeGment /267
Table 10.7. Characteristics of the Retinal Photoreceptor Degenerations in the Dog.
Breed
Primary defect
Mode of
Diagnosis by
Diagnosis by ERG
inheritance
Ophthaimoscopy
and Changes
Akita
 Not established
AR
13 yrs
1.5-2 yrs: Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
American Cocker
 Rod-cone degeneration
AR
2.53 yr5
↑↑:pou :↑:auo) sow6
Spaniel
 English Cocker
Rod-cone degeneration
AR
3-8 yrs
2-3 yrs: Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
Labrador
Rod-cone degeneration
AR
3-6 yrs
1.5 yrs: Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
Retriever
 Miniature Long-
Unknown
AR
soWg
↑:pou :↑:auo) :sou t
Haired 
Dachshund
 Papillon
Unknown
AR
1.5-5 yrs
9mos-1.5 yr: Cone:↓:rod:↓↓
Portuguese Water
 Rod-cone degeneration
AR
3-6 yr5
1.5 yrs; Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
6o0
Siberian Husky
Unknown
X-linked
2 yrs
1 yr; Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
Tibetan Spaniel 
Unknown
AR
3-5 yr5
1.5 yr: Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
Tibetan Terrier
Unknown
AR
1.01.5 yrs
10 mos: Cone:↓; rod:↓↓
Toy & Miniature
Rod-cone degeneration
AR
3-5 yr5
9mos; Cone:↓: rod:↓↓
 Poodle
added to this list in the near future. A genetic
distribution of the disease in the retina. Cross-
mutation based test is available for prcd.
breeding experiments with prcd-affected Min-
iature Poodles and retinal-degenerate English
Prcd in the Miniature and Toy Poodle
and American Cocker Spaniels have, however,
shown that the gene mutation in each is at the
In the Toy and Miniature Poodles structural
     
and functional abnormalities in prcd do not
iels affected dogs become night blind at 3-5
become evident until after the visual cells
years of age. There is a successive reduction of
have developed normally
visual capacity in daylight as well, and within
The frequency of prcd in Poodles has
1-2 years, the dogs are blind. Secondary cata-
been high over the years, and it still appears
racts are prevalent, often from the moderately
to be rather high. The prevalence among Min-
advanced stage. Progressive rod-cone degener-
iature Poodles examined in Sweden during a
ation has been a significant world-wide problem
2l-year period was 7% (statistics from the
among Labrador Retrievers and, especially.
Swedish Kennel Club, January 1, 1997). For
from the Nordic countries for more than 25
clinical fndings see Table 10.5
years. In the Tibetan Terrier dog, PRA was first
There is a variation in age of onset, rate of
described in Sweden and later in England. In
progression and topographic changes in the
the Tibetan Spaniel cases of PRA have been
retina between (and within) breeds that suffer
found in several countries, including England,
from prcd. This is likely to eventually prove to
 Sweden, Norway, and the United States, and
be due, at least in part, to background genetics
the clinical findings were described. Ophthal-
(presence of modifying loci)
moscopic signs have been recorded from the
 In purebred English Cocker Spaniels, prcd
age of 3-5 years. Thereafter, affected dogs lose
differs phenotypically from that in poodles
vision rather quickly, and they are severely
deodoi ul pue uoisaoid jo aei u1 qoq
visually impaired after another year.
 268 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
In Akitas progressive retinal atrophy has
PRA in Other Breeds as of Yet
been described as a variable disease regarding
Not Characterized
frst appearance and type of initial clinical
symptoms. In this recessively inherited disease,
Progressive retinal atrophy has been described
night blindness occurs between l and 3 years
in more than loo different canine breeds. The
of age, with complete blindness developing
disease in all of these has not been reported in
between 3 and 5 years of age. Progressive retinal
detail in the scientific literature.
atrophy has also been described in the Papillon
breed of dog. In a study of 707 dogs 5% were
affected with a generalized retinal degenerative
Other Generalized
disease. The disease appears to be inherited by
Retinopathies
an autosomal recessive gene, has a late onset,
and undergoes a slow progression of clinical
Early Retinopathy
signs. Clinically affected dogs seldom show
evidence of severe visual impairment, even at
In the Bernese Mountain Dog an early onset
a late stage of disease.
retinal degeneration has been described. The
 In the English Springer Spaniel recessively
 disease can be detected by ophthalmoscopy
and behavioral studies at approximately one
been described also although the disease
year of age. Then a juxta-papillary tapetal
appears clinically somewhat different from
hyperreflective horizontal zone parallel to the
classical PRA. The disease is of late onset and
junction between tapetal and nontapetal regions
slowly progressive.
develops. There is a concomitant decrease in
ERG b-wave amplitudes in affected dogs com-
pared to normals. The progression of clinical
X-linked Progressive Retinal Atrophy
changes is slow. The hereditary characteristics
of the retinopathy of Bernese Mountain Dogs
Hereditary retinal degeneration in Siberian
have not been elucidated
Huskies has been described. There seemed
to be an excess of affected male dogs
with the disorder, and further studies,
Cone Degeneration
including test-breeding schemes, showed
A recessively inherited disease has been
there was an X-linked transmission for
described in Alaskan Malamutes that specifi-
the disease. Clinical signs of X-linked retinal
cally affects the cones and causes congenital
degeneration include initial night blindness
hemeralopia or day blindness. In humans
and early ophthalmoscopic signs of the retinal
the comparable disease is termed achroma-
degeneration, usually observed at 2-4 years of
topsia, characterized by specific functional
age. A mutation-based DNA test is available
and structural abnormalities limited to cone
for XLPRAl.
photoreceptors. Clinically, behavioral signs
in affected dogs are usually apparent at 8-10
Dominant Progressive
weeks of age. The hemeralopic dog shows
Retinal Atrophy
severe loss of vision in daylight and in
high levels of artificial illumination, but it
In the Old English Mastiff and in Bull Mastiff
becomes less insecure when taken into dim
 dogs a specific retinal disease unlike those
lighting conditions. Recovery of vision takes
previously described has recently
been
several minutes, though loss of vision on return-
found. This was shown to follow a dominant
 ing to bright light is immediate. The behavioral
pattern and the defect found is the first
signs remain unaltered throughout life, and
opsin mutation described for dogs. The gene
night vision is never abnormal. No funduscopic
defect is a T4R mutation, indicating a differ-
changes are observed at any stage of disease,
ent cause of PRA than previously described
and the pupillary light reflexes are normal in
in other breeds of dog.
both dim and bright light. The ERG of an
 DisEASEs ANc SuRGeRY OF THE CAN1NE PoSTERiOR SeGMENt/269
affected dog reveals normal rod function but an
prevalent in England. Breeds reported affected
absence of cone responses. Cone dystrophy
include Labrador and Golden Retrievers, Border
has also been reported in the German Short-
Collies, Rough and Smooth Collies, Shetland
haired Pointer and in the Miniature Poodle.
Sheepdogs, English Cocker Spaniels, English
It has been found that the disease in the
Springer Spaniels, Chesapeake Bay Retrievers,
German Shorthaired Pointer is allelic with
-  a  's  's 
the Alaskan Malamute cone degeneration,
quency of the disorder was reported; between
and thus caused by the same mutation. The
30 and 40%
clinical condition has also been described in
 It has been suggested that CPRA/RPED in
three single cases: in a Rhodesian Ridgeback-
Labrador Retrievers is inherited as a domi-
cross, an Australian Cattle dog. and
a
nant trait with variable penetrance; a reces-
Chihuahua
sive mode of inheritance was thought to be
likely in the Briard, but this has not been
proved. It is possible that a genetic predis-
Unclassified Photoreceptor Dysplasia
position in an individual breed can be modi-
fied by environmental factors. Important in
A condition that was described as a form of
this context is that lesions similar to CPRA/
photoreceptor dysplasia has been described in
RPED have been produced in dogs fed diets
Belgian Shepherds, in which there is already
deficient in vitamin E, an antioxidant that
complete blindness at 8 weeks in the absence
of ophthalmoscopic changes. By ll weeks,
retards the intracellular accumulation of
 there is a multifocal pattern of retinal folding
lipofuscin pigment. Naturally acquired reti-
or thickening.
nopathy resulting from vitamin E deficiency
has also been described in the dog. The simi-
     r
RPE Autofluorescent Incfusion
deficiency may explain its unique geographic
Epitheliopathy/Retinal Pigment
distribution.
Epithelial Dystrophy
The ophthalmoscopic changes described
earlier are often found before any signs of visual
The term central progressive retinal atrophy,
impairment in the dog (Fig. 10.13). With pro-
or CPRA, has been used for a group of condi-
 gression of the disease, pigmented lesions
tions with ophthalmoscopic changes that
coalesce into widely spaced, irregular patches,
can be characterized by an accumulation of
 intersperced with hyperreflective areas in the
irregular foci or light-brown pigment spots
tapetal fundus. End-stage atrophy includes a
in the central tapetal fundus. Over time,
more generalized hyperreflectivity, with sparse
these foci increase in size and become dis-
amounts of pigmented foci or striae (or both),
tributed throughout the tapetal zone. At this
with the latter findings not always being obvious
stage, there are also atrophic changes, such as
to the examiner. ERG is not diagnostic for
hyperreflectivity around the pigment foci that
CPRA, but there is a reduction in ERG ampli-
indicate atrophy of the overlying neural retina.
tudes with disease progression.
The nontapetal fundus shows similar foci, with
The behavioral signs of CPRA/RPED are
hyperpigmentation and depigmented areas in
typical. Visual impairment usually is not
between.
found until a moderately advanced stage.
Originally, CPRA was used to differentiate
Then, because of the relative sparing of the
the condition from generalized PRA; however
peripheral as opposed to the central retina,
it has been clear for many years that the RPE is
peripheral vision is retained until late in the
 primarily affected, with secondary effects on
disease. Vision tends to improve at low light
the neural retina. For those breeds in which the
levels. Also, vision may appear normal for
condition has been established microscopically.
moving and distant objects but impaired for
the term retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy, Or
stationary and nearby objects. Not all
RPED, is preferred. RPED has been recognized
affected dogs become blind. Secondary cata-
world-wide and appeared for many years most
racts are often seen at the advanced stage.
270 /EsSENtIAlS OF VeteriNArY OpHthALmOLOGY
disease varied with the breed and appeared to
result from peroxidation of the rod outer
segment lipids.
Hereditary Retinal Dystrophy/Lipid
Retinopathy/RPE65 Null Mutation/
Canine LCA
In the Briard dog an interesting retinal dystro-
phy (with many names) has been described.
The hereditary, clinical and morphological
characteristics of the disease were elucidated
in groups of inbred and out-crossed dogs in
Sweden. Initially the disease was described as
congenital stationary night blindness, since it
affected Briards from birth, affected dogs had
Fig. 10.13. RPED in a 5-year-old German
nonrecordable rod ERGs and no funduscopic
Shepherd. Note the generalized pigmented spots,
changes were observed until the dogs were 2-3
generalized hyperreflectivity, and severe vascular
years. Further clinical and morphologic studies
attenuation at this advanced stage. (Courtesy of
showed that there was a progressive compo-
Dr. Claudio Peruccio, Dept. of Pathology, University
nent in the disorder. Both the neural retina and
of Torino, Italy.)
the RPE were affected by a retinal degenerative
    
In Briards, an extremely high frequency of
The hereditary and clinical characteristics
the disease was found in a 5-year survey. Almost
were elucidated, initially through test breeding
one-third of dogs examined that were older
 and the study of seven generations of dogs.
than 18 months old were clinically affected. In
In- and outbreedings as well as backcrossing
this breed, the typical pigmentary changes were
showed an autosomal recessive pattern of
first seen toward the periphery of the tapetal
inheritance, but there was a variable expression
fundus, temporal to the optic disc, before
spreading to involve the entire tapetal zone.
congenitally night blind, whereas daylight
Investigations into the blood biochemistry
vision could vary from near normal to more or
of both normal and affected Briards in the
less severely impaired. A rapid, horizontal nys-
United Kingdom have shown a hyperlipidemia
tagmus was seen in most (but not all) affected
characterized by increased plasma cholesterol
pups and it was obvious in some of the animals
but normal triglyceride concentrations. There
that they were congenitally day and night blind.
was no significant difference in plasma choles-
Ophthalmoscopically, the fundus appearance
terol concentrations between affected and
sm ae jo sieak 2 Ajaneuixoidde oi dn saop u
ophthalmoscopically normal dogs. The absence
normal. With progression, a subtle alteration in
of obvious metabolic derangements associ-
tapetal sheen was seen in affected dogs, and in
ated with hypercholesterolemia appeared to
certain individuals, whitish-gray spots were
indicate that Briards in the United Kingdom
observed in the central and midperipheral non-
had a primary abnormality in cholesterol
tapetal fundus, spreading peripherally with
metabolism.
increasing age. A generalized, slight attenuation
Morphologic studies showed that the earliest
of the retinal vasculature was prevalent in older
recognizable lesions in RPED occur in the RPE.
affected dogs. There was no clinically observ-
The cells become hypertrophied and accumu-
able increase in visual impairment with time
late a light-brown granular material in the cyto-
 among affected dogs, however. Dogs that were
plasm. Biochemical studies of affected retinas
mainly night-blind at birth stayed visual in day-
showed that the pigment accumulating in the
light for another 6-7 years.
DiSEASES ANo SURGERY OF THE CAN1NE PoSTERIOR SEGMENT/271
The ERGs of young affected dogs differed
sions were abolished or reduced in the area of
markedly from those of normal age-matched
the subretinal injection. Further studies by
dogs. Morphologically, the RPE showed large
both groups have shown long-term visual
inclusion bodies in the central and midperiph-
improvement.
eral tapetal regions of the fundus as early as 3.5
months of age. These inclusions increased in
-  ad p p rn
Neuronaf Ceroid Lipofuscinosis
ing age.
Cases with similar clinical and morphologic
The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
characteristics were described in the United
 are a group of recessively inherited progres-
States and in France, and termed lipid retino-
sive neurodegenerative diseases that are
pathy in the United States. Levels of plasma
characterized by brain and retinal atrophy
arachidonic acid were found to be elevated
and associated with selective necrosis of
twofold in affected American Briards.
In
neurons. The term ceroid lipofuscinosis is
Swedish Briards, plasma lipids as well as
derived from the histochemical and fluores-
 pigment epithelial and neuroretinal lipids were
cent  properties of accumulated  pigment
analyzed but no difference between lipids in
that resembles those of the lipopigments
plasma and the RPE were found between
ceroid and lipofuscin, which are common
affected and normal Briards, however. For the
to these diseases. They are also linked to
neural retina, affected dogs had relatively more
brain atrophy, a defect not found to the
phosphatidylethanolamine  and
phosphati-
same degree in other lysosomal storage dis-
dylinositol, and less phosphatidylcholine, than
eases. NCLs have been described in several
normal dogs. The studies showed that the
dog breeds, including the English Setter,
Briard retinal dystrophy appeared to include a
Dalmatian, Border Collie, Tibetan Terrier,
defect in retinal polyunsaturated fatty acid
American Bulldog, Miniature Schnauzer, Polish
metabolism. Through candidate gene analysis
Owczarek Nizinny, and others (for reviews
the defect in Swedish Briards was discovered to
on the disease in various breeds see www.
be a 4 base-pair deletion in the RPE65 gene.
caninegeneticdiseases.net). A common clinical
Clinical signs of the defect in affected Briard
manifestation in both humans and dogs is
dogs had close similarities to the human coun-
blindness, which occurs with a broad spectrum
terpart, Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA).
of neurologic abnormalities caused by the accu-
Gene therapy is a promising treatment
mulation of autofluorescent lipopigments in
modality, feasible when the specific mutation
neurons and in some other cells. With some
is known. Diseases of the eye are prime candi-
exceptions, the blindness is usually cortical in
dates for this form of therapy. A proof-of-
origin, because photoreceptor function and
concept study was performed by Acland and
structure are generally preserved. There are
collaborators, 2001, treating 3 dogs affected
some exceptions, however. In the Tibetan
with the retinal dystrophy with a corrective
Terrier, night blindness may occur in middle
 gene construct. Subretinal injections were per-
aged animals, while the more severe neurologic
formed using a recombinant adeno-associated
abnormalities are not observed until later in
virus (AAV) carrying normal dog RPE65. Vision
life. In the Polish Owczarek Nizinny (PON),
was improved in eyes treated subretinally dem-
visual dysfunction and funduscopic alterations
onstrated by ERG recordings, and transmission
occur early in life, often between 1 and 2 years
of the retinal activity was shown by pupillom-
of age, while neurological changes become
etry. An independent research group performed
apparent in middle-aged dogs. In the Miniature
similar experiments in twelve affected dogs and
Schnauzer, blindness was described to develop
demonstrated, not only that vision and ERG
quickly, over a 3-month period, between the
amplitudes were improved in all treated dogs.
nu Aq e 's t- jo 
already 4-6 weeks after the subretinal injec-
signs. In affected English Setter dogs, retinal
tions, but also that there were morphological
function is normal at a time when neurologic
abnormalities are present.
272 /Essentials Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Mucopolysaccharide Storage Diseases
further investigations such as chest radiographs
and abdominal ultrasound should be consid-
In both humans and animals, mucopolysac-
ered. In addition to routine laboratory investi-
charide storage diseases (MPS) are caused by
gations such as a complete blood count, serum
the inherited deficiency of lysosomal enzymes,
and they represent generalized, multisystemic
titers to specifc infectious agents may be
abnormalities, of which ocular lesions are but
indicated. Sensitive polymerase chain reaction
one component. The lysosomal enzymes par-
 p id  e i  ()
DNA of pathogens in samples have been, and
Morphologic studies have shown accumulation
are being, developed. In certain instances, aspi-
of intracellular inclusions in secondary lyso-
rates (e.g., from lymph nodes, aqueous humor,
 somes in the enzyme-deficient RPE. In the dog.
vitreous, subretinal fluid etc.) may be obtained
MPS VI and VII have been described
and subjected to a variety of tests including
cytology, culture, and PCR amplification. Diag-
Hereditary Tapetal Degeneration
nostic testing should be fully utilized in an
attempt to identify the etiology of the inflam-
An autosomal, recessively inherited tapetal
mation; particularly as the use of nonspecific
abnormality of laboratory Beagles has been
anti-inflammatory medications (such as sys-
described. Affected dogs have a light, uniform
temic
choroidal pigmentation, which precludes visu-
idiopathic or immune-mediated inflammation,
alization of the choroidal vessels. Morphologi-
may be contraindicated in certain infectious
cally, there are normal numbers of tapetal cells
diseases. For additional information on specific
at birth. With time, however, there is progres-
diseases, consult chapter 16.
sive degeneration of the tapetal cell layer. Even
so, the retinal structure and function remain
Chorioretinitis
normal.
Chorioretinitis may have various causes,
including several infectious diseases, neo-
Inflammations and Infections
plasia, foreign bodies, and trauma (Box
Affecting the Ocular Fundus
10.l). Infectious agents may be restricted to
Inflammatory lesions of the ocular fundus
are not uncommon in the dog. Retinal
involvement, however, is usually secondary
Box 10.1. Causes of chorioretinitisi
to disease processes extending from the
Retinochoroiditis in the Dog
choroid or, sometimes, the vitreous, whereas
primary retinal inflammation (i.e., retinitis)
Virus: Canine distemper morbillivirus; canine Her-
is uncommon. The terms chorioretinitis (i.e.
 pesvirus; and Mokola Virus.
starting in the choroid) and retinochoroiditis
Rickettsia: Canine Ehrichia canis;: Rickettsia rickettsii
(Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever): and Bartonella
(i.e., initially involving the retina) indicate
vinsonil.
the primary site and direction of spread
Mycotic  diseases:
 Acremonium sp., Aspergillus
when both the choroid and retina are
fumigatus.
Blastomyces   dermatitidis.
Histo-
involved. There may also be concurrent
plasma capsulatum. Cryptococcus neoformans.
involvement of the anterior uvea (see chapter
Coccidiodes immitis, Geotrichum candidum, and
Pseudallescheria boydii.
16) as in panuveitis (inflammation of the entire
Algal disease: Achlorophyllic alga Prototheca.
uveal tract), endophthalmitis (inflammation of
Protozoal Diseases: Toxoplasma gondli: Neospora
the internal structures of the eye) and panoph-
caninum; and Leishmania donovani
thalmitis (inflammation of the entire eyeball).
Parasitic diseases: Toxocara canis: Angiostrongyius
The inflammatory process may accompany a
vasorum and order Diptera
systemic disease and a full physical examina-
Immune-mediated:
Uveodermatologic/Vogt-Koy-
anagi-Harada Syndrome
tion is an essential part of the workup, and
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CAN1NE POSTERiOR SEGMENT/273
the eye, but signs in the ocular fundus may
and lesions at different stages may be observed
also be part of, or secondary to, a systemic
both within one eye and between the eyes of
infection. In many instances the exact cause of
an individual dog (Table l0.8). In different
 the inflammatory process cannot be identifed.
 geographic areas of several countries, specific
The appearance of the lesions in the fundus
systemic mycosis occur and can affect the eye
may give some guidance as to the etiology.
(Fig. 10.16)
but this is seldom specific. Sampling from the
choroid and retina presents certain difficulties
Choroiditis
and can be associated with undesired complica-
tions. Vitreous paracentesis to obtain material
Choroiditis (or posterior uveitis), which is
for cytology and culture can be informative.
an inflammation strictly confined to the
but is usually reserved for patients presenting
choroid, without involvement of the anterior
with severe posterior-segment inflammatory
uvea or retina, appears to be an uncom-
disease.
mon condition. Ophthalmoscopically, non-
An active inflammation in the retina, with or
granulomatous choroiditis in the tapetal
without involvement of the choroid, results in
fundus can cause loss of tapetal reflec-
a number of ophthalmoscopic signs, which
tivity or changes in tapetal color. In the
may vary according to both the severity and the
stage of the disease process (Figs. 10.14 and
nontapetal fundus, areas of increased red-
ness can be observed. Subretinal accumula-
10.15). Inflammatory lesions may be unilateral
tion of fluid can cause elevation of the overly-
or bilateral, and they are usually irregular in
 ing retina. Retinal blood vessels should not
shape. In contrast to the appearance of inher-
show signs of active inflammation (e.g., peri-
ited retinal dystrophies, inflammatory lesions
of the fundus are rarely bilaterally symmetrical,
vascular infiltrates) when only the choroid is
inflamed.
Fig. 10.15. Inactive chorioretinitis next to the optic
Fig. I0.14. Inflammatory changes in the neural
nerve head. There is retinal thinning in the area of
retina of the tapetal fundus are often seen as
tapetal hyperrellectivity with a pigmented center due
asymmetrical, grayish discolorations, as in this
to pigment proliferation by the retinal pigment
3-year-old Curly Coated Retriever.
epithelium.
 274 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Table 10.8. Ophthalmoscopic Changes in Chorioretinitis.
Stage of
Tapetal Changes
Nontapetal Changes
inflammation
Acute (active)
Indistinct grayish/brownish areas; VWhite,
Grayish to white areas; Wwhite, perivascular
perivascular opacities; Lesion margins-
opacities; Lesions margins—irregular
irregular (fuzzy): Lesion often raised
(fuzzy): Lesion often raised
Chronic (inactive)
Irregular, hyperreflective areas with a distinct 
Distinctly bordered, depigrmented areas;
(sharp) border; May be pigmented; Blood
Blood vessels attenuation; Variable
vessel attenuation
pigment proliferation
B
Fig. 10.16. Blastomycosis in a 2-year-old West Highland White Terrier. A. The initial presentation with retinal
detachment and the appearance of a subretinal granuloma. B. Alter 3 months of systemic itraconazole, the retina.
has reattached with depigmentation of the area.
Specific Retinopathies
tion may reveal anterior or posterior uveitis (or
both) and serous retinal detachment. The
Uveodermatologic/Vogt-Koyanagi
uveitis is usually granulomatous, with cellular 
Harada Syndrome
infltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells, epithe-
lioid cells, and macrophages containingingested
The uveodermatologic, or Vogt-Koyanagi-
melanocytes. The histopathology is consistent
Harada (VKH), syndrome of humans encom-
with antimelanocyte autoimmunity, however,
passes a variety of clinical signs, including
 and the breed incidence, such as in Akitas, sug-
uveitis, chorioretinitis, skin depigmentation
 gests the involvement of genetic factors.
.A
(i.e., vitiligo), loss of hair pigment (i.e., polio-
similar disease was induced experimentally in
sis), and various neurologic signs. The disease
two Akitas by immunizing them to tyrosine
has been reported in the dog as an immune-
related protein 1.
mediated syndrome resembling VKH
in
humans. Several cases have been reported in
Sudden Acquired Retinal
Akitas, though numerous other breeds have
Degeneration Syndrome
been affected as well. In the dog. cases may
present with a history of sudden blindness or
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syn-
with chronic uveitis leading to secondary glau-
drome (SARDS) is a retinal disorder of
coma. Dermatologic changes include vitilitgo
unknown cause that results in a sudden and
and poliosis affecting the periocular skin, lips
permanent blindness in affected adult dogs.
and muzzle most frequently. Ocular examina-
There is currently no treatment for this
Diseases Ano SurGerY Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/275
disorder. Clinical signs are characterized by
closantel (antihelmintic); and thiram (general
a sudden loss of vision, usually within days
 purpose pesticide).
or 1-2 weeks. Most affected dogs show
pupillary dilatation and unresponsive pupils,
although some may retain a pupillary light
Retinopathy Induced by Light
and Oxygen
reflex. Typically there is an absence of oph-
thalmoscopic fundus abnormalities at the
There is a well-established association between
early stage, although occasionally areas of
high light intensity and retinotoxicity. Photo-
mild retinal edema may be noted. The main
toxicity in the rat model has been extensively
diagnostic technique to distinguish between
studied. Illumination of the canine fundus with
SARDS and central causes of sudden-onset
light from an indirect ophthalmoscope for 20
vision loss is electroretinography. In SARDS
minutes may be sufficient to cause ophthalmo-
the ERG is nonrecordable while with central
scopically visible changes. Prolonged exposure
causes of blindness the ERG is relatively
results in areas of increased granularity in the
normal. It appears that all breeds, including
tapetal fundus, which is followed by retinal
cross-breeds, may be affected, often in middle
 pigmentation and increased tapetal refectivity.
age. After several weeks to months, slowly
The nontapetal fundus, however, is virtually
progressive funduscopic alterations may be
unaffected, thereby showing the protective
  r    
effect of pigmentation.
retinal degenerative process.
Exposure to high oxygen tensions produces
Affected dogs are usually healthy, but
selective damage to the visual cells in the dog.
many have a history of weight gain, poly-
Oxygen administration has been strongly linked
uria, polydipsia, and polyphagia. There are
with human retinopathy of prematurity, and
often clinical signs and initial laboratory
there is evidence that light exposure may play
blood work such as elevated serum alkaline
a role in its pathogenesis.
phosphatase, serum amino transferase,
serum cholesterol, or serum bilirubin levels
suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism.
Retinopathy Induced by Radiation
Radiation-induced ocular injury secondary to
Retinal Toxicities
treatment of nasal cancer occurs in both humans
and animals. In a clinical and histopathologic
Drug-Induced Retinotoxicity
study, immediate changes such as blepharitis
and keratoconjunctivitis were found. At 3-6
Some compounds can directly cause retinal
months posttreatment (i.e., 36.0-67.5 Gy in
damage by damaging neuroretinal or RPE cells
fractionated doses given over 4 weeks using a
      
6-mV linear accelerator), however, a degenera-
tory reactions that lead to focal or more gener-
tive angiopathy of retinal vessels appeared,
alized cell death. Assessment of retinal integrity
with multifocal retinal hemorrhage and mild,
is an essential component in ocular safety eval-
diffuse retinal degeneration, first affecting the
uations. Drug-induced retinopathies are usually
outer retinal layers but then progressing inward.
characterized by bilateral symmetry. There is
At 1-2 years posttreatment, there was a moder-
usually a relationship between the duration
ate retinal degeneration, with swelling and loss
of the administration of a toxic compound,
of ganglion cells and, subsequently, optic nerve
the dosage, and the onset of clinical signs.
axonal degeneration. Thus, structures of the
Retinotoxic compounds reported  include
canine eye are sufficiently sensitive that even
experimental vasodilating drugs; ethambutol
relatively low total doses of radiation cause sig-
(antitubercular drug); diphenylthiocarbazone
nificant long-term injury.
(Dithizone);  hydroxypyridinethione
(zinc-
A study of the ocular effects of intravenous
chelating drug); quinine; rafoxanide; chloro-
radium in Beagles showed that the radium
quine (antimalaria drug); azalide (antibiotic);
was retained within the tapetum and induced
 276 /Essentials Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
varying degrees of tapetal degeneration. How-
A spectrum of funduscopic changes, which
ever, the major changes involved the anterior
varied in severity with increasing age, was
uvea and consisted of the development of mela-
found. Results of clinical as well as laboratory
notic plaques and melanomas.
investigations showed the retinopathy resem-
bled CPRA/RPED. McLellan et al. measured
Q-tocopherol levels (the  predominant
Retinopathies of Nutritional
vitamin E homologue in the retina and RPE)
and General Disease Processes
in fifteen dogs (including eleven English
Cocker Spaniels) with clinical signs of
Vitamin A Deficiency
CPRA/RPED and twenty-eight clinically
normal dogs. All eleven CPRA/RPED-affected
Systemic vitamin A deficiency is characterized
English Cocker Spaniels had very low plasma
       
0-tocopherol levels and very low ratios of
dog. systemic diseases causing impaired fat
plasma o-tocopherol to cholesterol and tri-
absorption could result in vitamin A deficiency.
glycerides compared to normal controls.
but this clinical situation is extremely rare.
This suggests that in the English Cocker Spaniel
at least, CPRA/RPED may be due to a familial
primary vitamin E deficiency not related to
Vitamin E Deficiency
dietary insuffciency or evidence of any gastro-
intestinal malabsorption syndrome.  Apha-
Vitamin E is an antioxidant with an impor-
tocopherol deficient English Cocker Spaniels
tant function in maintaining cell membrane
showed neurological dysfunction in addition
stability by preventing lipid peroxidation.
to fundus changes. Although the dogs had not
A deficiency in vitamin E may result in
been fed a diet low in vitamin E, dietary supple-
pathologic changes in the muscle, CNS,
mentation with vitamin E was reported to halt
reproductive tract, and retina. Experimental
the progression of neurological changes and
studies that produced vitamin E deficiency
resulted in an improvement of the neurological
have been performed in puppies by Riis et
signs and in exercise tolerance. It did not,
al. Ophthalmoscopic signs of disease devel-
however, appear to alter the ocular changes
oped early and were described as a mottled
that had already developed.
tapetal fundus appearance, particularly cen-
trally, with numerous discrete yellow-brown
foci. Over time, the central fundus became
Nutritional Supplementation
hyperreflective, and there was an attenua-
tion of the retinal vessels. The ERG was
Several nutritional supplementation studies in
nonrecordable at 4 months of age. Histo-
man have attempted to determine positive
pathologically, an accumulation of autofluo-
effects on vision, or slowing the clinical course
rescent pigment within the RPE cells was
of retinal diseases. To date none have been
observed and, at later stages, within migrating
reported in man.
cells in all retinal layers. Photoreceptor damage
occurred in areas overlying affected regions of
 the pigment epithelium. Afer 6 months of age.
Vascular Disease Processes
 there was complete atrophy of the photorecep-
tor layer.
The retinal vasculature is well-suited to direct,
The obvious similarities between vitamin
noninvasive examination. Systemic disease as
 E deficiency and hereditary CPRA/RPED
well as local ocular pathology can produce
suggest some common etiologic factor, and
observable changes in both retinal and choroi-
recent reports have substantiated this sug-
dal vessels.(
Often, the position of the
gestion. Davidson et al. described retinopa-
hemorrhage(s) relative to the different layers of
thy from vitamin E deficiency in a group of
 the retina has specific funduscopic appearances
sixteen Walker Hounds and in two Beagles.
(Table 10.9). In addition to blood constituent
DISEASES AND SURGERY OF THE CANINE POSTERIOR SEGMENT/277
Table 10.9. Ophthalmoscopic Localization of Vitreal and Retinal Hemorrhages.
Ophthaimic Appearance
Anatomic Site of Hemorrhage
Discrete, round hemorrhage
Within the retinal layers
Hame-shaped hemorrhage
Within the nerve fiber layer
Indistinct borders diffuse, dull-red hemomhage
Subretinal hemorrhage
Keelboat-shaped hemorrhage membrane
Bleeding from the superficial retinal vessels into the space
between the inner limiting of the retina and the posterior
hyaloid
analysis, blood flow and blood pressure mea-
surements, and coagulation studies, specific
ophthalmic methods of examination for sus-
pected vascular diseases include ophthalmos-
copy and fluorescein angiography. A short
description of funduscopic lesions associated
with systemic hypertension, hyperviscosity.
and hyperlipidemia is given here; for a more
comprehensive discussion on these disorders,
see chapter 16.
Systemic Hypertension
 Dogs with experimentally induced hyper-
 tension exhibit retinal hemorrhage, retinal
Fig. 10.17. Hyperviscosity due to polycythemia.
detachment, and arteriolar changes. In cases
has resulted in retinal vasculature dilation and a
of  spontaneous  systemic  hypertension,
preretinal hemorrthage.
visual disturbance is often the initial presen-
tation. The most common ocular findings in
clinical cases are posterior segment hemor-
Diabetic Retinopathy
rhage (retinal, preretinal, and vitreal), retinal
detachment and in some cases hyphema.
Though diabetic retinopathy occurs in the
dog, the extent and severity of the retinal
lesions are milder compared with those that
Hyperviscosity Syndromes
can develop in diabetic humans. In the dog.
the ocular lesions include anomalies of the
In dogs with hyperviscosity syndromes, for
retinal vasculature and cataract formation,
example with multiple myelomas or polycythe
as they do in humans. Cataract formation,
mia, distended and tortuous retinal blood
on the other hand, is an early finding in the
vessels are seen in conjunction with sacculation
dog, and it is often the reason for a patient
of venules, retinal hemorrhage and in severe
with diabetes to be presented for the first
cases retinal edema, retinal detachment and
time. In the dog with diabetes, background
papilledema (Fig. 10.17).
retinopathy occurs, but not the proliferative
changes that develop in humans. A retrospec-
Hyperlipidemia
tive study of 52 diabetic dogs and 174 nondia-
betic dogs that had undergone cataract surgery
Hyperlipidemia may impart a milky pink col-
 found retinal hemorrhages or microaneuysms
oration to retinal vessels, which is most easily
in 21% of the diabetic dogs and in only 1
observed in the nontapetal fundus.
(0.6%) of the 174 nondiabetics. The mean time
278 /EsSENtIAlS Of VeteriNArY OpHthALmOLOGY
from the onset of diabetes to the diagnosis of
Secondary Retinal
diabetic retinopathy was 1.4 years (range 0.5-
Degenerations
3.2 years).
Glaucoma
Retinopathies with Immunologic
Glaucoma can lead to retinal degeneration,
Diseases
particularly as a result of the high IOPs that
are common in many primary canine glauco-
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia
mas. In acute stages the retina may appear
normal ophthalmoscopically or show areas
Immune-mediatedthrombocytopenia
is
of edema. When there is severe retinal
a
clinical(
disease characterized
by
anemia,
damage retinal degeneration becomes appar-
hemorrhage, and low platelet counts. The pre-
ent surprisingly rapidly; sometimes this may
senting sign is often petechiation and ecchy.
appear as more severe zones of retinal thin-
mosis of the gingiva or conjunctiva, and both
ning radiating out from the optic nerve head.
hyphema and retinal hemorrhage are common
Cupping and atrophy of the optic nerve head
findings. Treatment consists of controlling
also(
develops. Histopathological studies of
the hemorrhage; blood transfusion may be nec-
eyes removed because of primary narrow angle
essary in severe cases. Systemic corticosteroid
glaucoma show that essentially all retinal layers
treatment, 1l-2 mg/kg per day, is used for
are affected and that the progression of retinal
several weeks and then tapered to a low-main-
changes occurs rapidly. Within one day of the
tenance dose.
onset of glaucoma necrosis of retinal ganglion
cells has developed and is followed by the
induction of apoptosis of cells in the ganglion
cell layer as well as the inner and outer nuclear
Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
layers. There is release of taurine and glutamate
from photoreceptors possibly secondary to
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is an autoim-
ischemic damage. Other changes include partial
mune disease of both humans and the dog
 Or panretinal necrosis, hypertrophy of the RPE,
Presenting clinical signs are acute to chronic
disorganization of retinal layers, and severe
anemia, and ophthalmoscopically, the retinal
retinal atrophy. Changes in the retina of dogs
vessels are light red and difficult to follow
with glaucoma associated retinopathy that have
because of the blood disorder. Treatment is
less severe IOP increases than typically seen in
systemic corticosteroids, 2-4 mg/kg for 2 weeks
and then decreasing to maintenance levels.
narrow angle glaucoma, are likely to be more
slowly progressive.
Supportive therapy is often indicated for the
anemia.
Retinal Detachments
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Various pathologic conditions of the eye
can cause focal, multifocal, or total retinal
Systemic lupus erythematosus is a multisystem
detachment. The neuroretina is usually sep-
disorder with immunologic abnormalities
arated from the underlying RPE, which
related to autoantibodies in both the blood and
implies a disruption of the intimate and
the lesions of the body. There is a genetic pre-
essential (but structurally weak) association
disposition for the disease, and genetic pro-
between the outer segments of the photore-
cesses may initiate the systemic problem.
ceptors and the RPE. This loss of structural
Ocular lesions include hemorrhages and serous
integrity is associated with a loss of function
retinal detachments. Recommended treatment
and secondary retinal degeneration in the
is the same as that for autoimmune hemolytic
affected area. Thus, a focal retinal detach-
anemia.
ment affecting a minor area will usually not
Diseases Ano SurGery Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/279
result in clinically detectable impairment of
Recently reported as a steroid responsive
vision, whereas detachment of the entire
retinal detachment, the affected dogs typically
retina is a blinding condition. Detachments
present with a history of an acute-onset loss of
involving large areas of the retina may result in
vision. The detachments are bilateral nonrheg-
tearing of the peripheral retina as the multilay-
matogenous and in some cases vitreal hemor-
ered neurosensory retina becomes thinner at
rhage may develop. Andrew et al. recorded a
the periphery to continue as the nonpigmented
series of twenty-two cases in which German
ciliary body epithelium at the ora ciliaris retinae.
Shepherd crosses (6/22), German Shepherds
The complete tearing of the peripheral retina is
(3/22), and Labrador crosses (2/22) were
often termed disinsertion, or dialysis.
 overrepresented.
Ophthalmoscopy reveals an anterior dis-
Treatment of the retinal detachments
placement of the retinal surface and the
depends on the presence of a detectable under-
 retinal blood vessels. Large volumes of sub-
lying disease and both the cause and the extent
retinal fluid can cause segments of the retina
of the detached area.
to balloon anteriorly, even extending to the
posterior surface of the lens in extreme
cases. When there is anterior displacement of
Peripheral Cycstoid Retinal
the detached retina it can often be readily
Degeneration
viewed directly through the pupil with a focal
light source. If there is a total detachment with
This is a common incidental finding in older
dialysis, the retina will hang in folds from the
dogs. The peripheral retina adjacent to the ora
optic nerve head where it remains attached due
ciliaris retinae undergoes a cystic change leading
to the ganglion cell axons converging from
to the appearance of multiple cystic structures
the retina to form the optic nerve. The retina
that protrude into the vitreous.
resembles a grayish-colored curtain hanging in
the vitreous. The exposed tapetum will appear
hyperreflective because there is no overlying
Retinoschisis
retina. In other instances of retinal detachment
holes or tears in the retina may be seen and the
Retinoschisis is a splitting of retinal layers that
exposed choroid and RPE can appear very clear
occurs in humans as either an inherited disor-
through the retinal defect, particularly if there
der or an acquired condition. The splitting of
is not a great deal of cellular infltration. The
-   sd   
presence of retinal tears of holes is important
ment and the inherited form can impair vision.
in making decisions about management (see
A histological diagnosis of secondary retinos-
the next section) so the detached retina should
chisis was reported in an 8-month-old English
be examined carefully for the presence of tears
Springer Spaniel with retinal detachment and
or holes. Hendrix et al. reported that in twenty-
glaucoma.
three of forty-six dogs (sixty-two eyes) with
retinal detachment these were associated with
lenticular disease. In 23% of the eyes, the
Neoplastic and Proliferative
detachment occurred after extracapsular cata-
Conditions
ract extraction. Retinal detachments secondary
 to cataract surgery are generally believed to be
Granuiomatous Meningoencephalitis
rhegmatogenous, though the cause of these
(Reticulosis)
neuroretinal tears is difficult to determine.
Other causes of retinal detachment included
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) is
panuveitis, infectious disease (including bacte-
an idiopathic, nonsuppurative, inflammatory
rial, rickettsial, and mycotic infections), sys-
disease of the CNS that can affect the eye.
temic hypertension, trauma, and congenital
The disseminated form of GME has been previ-
ocular disease. Retinal tears were seen in 26%
ously described as inflammatory or granuloma-
of the eyes and traction bands in 5%
tous reticulosis, whereas the focal form was
 280 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
previously described as neoplastic reticulosis.
GME is characterized by the proliferation of
reticuloendothelial elements and lymphoplastic
infltrates of the CNS vessels. The cellular reac-
tion of the intracranial vasculature apparently
may be shared by the blood vessels of the pos-
terior segment of the eye and the anterior uvea.
Sporadic cases of canine ocular involvement
have been reported from different parts of the
world.
Ocular signs may develop before CNS
abnormalities. The disease is usually bilat-
eral, but the extent of involvement varies.
Papillitis and peripapillary edema have
been reported to be the single ophthalmo-
scopic sign in blind patients. Infiltration of
the uveal tract has been reported to cause
uveitis, and retinal detachment may be found
Fig. 10.18. Pigmented retinal and choroidal
secondary to choroidal involvement. Sec-
neoplasm in a middle-age Border Collie in
ondary glaucoma caused by obstructed
conjunction with generalized retinal atrophy
flow of aqueous humor through the pupil
(Courtesy of Ellen Bjerkas.)
by posterior synechiae or exudates has been
reported as well as glaucoma secondary
to obliteration of the aqueous outflow
path ways.
Vision may be improved temporarily in dogs
presenting with papillitis through treatment
segment, optic nerve, or extraocular tissues, or
with corticosteroids. The prognosis for vision,
by metastasis from a more remote site. Clinical
however, and even for long-term survival, is
signs usually develop late in the disease, thus
considered to be very poor.
delaying both detection and diagnosis. Signs
may include intraocular hemorrhage, uveitis,
glaucoma, and blindness. With metastatic
Primary Tumors
tumors, systemic signs may be present and
the ocular findings incidental. Reported meta-
Primary tumors of the retina, choroid, and
static tumors (which also affected the anterior
optic disc are very rare in the dog. Types
segment) include mammary gland adeno-
reported include astrocytoma, medulloepithe-
lioma, possible retinoblastoma, and choroidal
carcinomas, thyroid adenocarcinoma, renal
adenocarcinoma, malignant melanoma, hem-
melanoma. Choroidal melanomas are generally
angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neurogenic
 described as darkly pigmented masses arising
sarcoma, and pheochromocytomas.
from the choroid underlying the tapetum
Malignant lymphoma, usually affecting both
lucidum, most typically adjacent to or near
eyes, seems to be the most common secondary
the optic disc (Fig. 10.18). Clinical signs
intraocular tumor. Ocular involvement has
include posterior segment mass, retinal detach-
been reported to be the second most consistent
ment, vitreal hemorrhage, and secondary
presenting sign (after lymphadenopathy) in
glaucoma.
dogs affected with multicentric lymphoma.
Involvement of the choroid and the retina is
Secondary Tumors
noticed infrequently, but signs from the poste-
rior segment may sometimes be masked by the
Tumors may involve the posterior segment by
more frequently observed changes in the ante-
extension from a primary focus in the anterior
rior segment.
DiSEAsEs ANo SuRGeRY OF THE CaNiNe PoSteRiOr SEGmENt/281
SECTION 3: SURGERY OF THE
CANINE POSTERIOR SEGMENT
During the past decade, an increasing number
of veterinary ophthalmologists entered an
area of ophthalmology that for many years
eluded them: posterior segment surgery.
Previously, posterior segment surgery was
performed mainly for procedures such as
vitreocentesis for diagnostic procedures,
vitreous injections for endophthalmitis,
 anterior vitrectomy associated with PHPV,
or retrieval of intravitreal lens fragments.
Types of Retinal Detachments
Fig. 10.19. Retinal dialysis after cataract surgery in
 Retinal detachment (RD) is the separation of
a dog eye with prior lens-induced uveitis. (Reprinted
From Vainisi SJ, Wolfer JC. Canine retinal surgery.
the neurosensory retina from the underlying
Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:291-306.)
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). An RD
can be either rhegmatogenous (RRD) or non-
rhegmatogenous (non-RRD). In an RRD,
fluid from the vitreous cavity enters the sub-
Non-RRDs are classified as serous or trac-
retinal space through a break in the retina.
tional. A serous non-RRD occurs without a
An RRD can be either primary or secondary.
break in the retinal tissue and results from
Primary RRDs are spontaneous and are not
fluid accumulation in the subretinal space
the result of trauma, inflammation, surgery,
between the photoreceptors and the RPE.
 or other specific ocular disorder. Primary
Serous non-RRDs are further specified as
RRDs are preceded by alteration or degenera-
either inflammatory or exudative, although
tion of the vitreous, which predisposes the
this distinction is now clouded by the
retina to detachment. The most common type
fact that permeability factors that lead to
of primary RRD is retinal dialysis or giant retinal
exudation below the retina may possess
tear, seen frequently in the Shih Tzu. In this
pro-inflammatory
influences
heretofore
breed the retinal dialysis or giant retinal tear is
unknown. Tractional non-RRD occurs when
thought to occur after vigorous head shaking
there is a pulling force (band or membrane) in
and is predisposed to by vitreal syneresis or
the vitreous that forces the retina to separate
liquefaction. The neurosensory retina tears
from the RPE.
 a  d a  
or near the ora ciliaris retinae. Another form of
primary RRD occurs in instances of optic nerve
Prophylactic Retinopexy
coloboma where there is a separation of the
retinal layers at the junction of coloboma and
Although there has been an increasing
normal retina, which allows fluid from the vit-
awareness that prophylactic treatment of
reous space to enter the subretinal space. This
normal fellow eyes in cases of spontaneous
phenomenon has been documented in CEA.
RD may be beneficial, it still remains a con-
Other types of primary RRDs include atrophic
troversial issue. One such study compared
retinal holes or tears. Secondary RRDs are the
treatment versus no treatment in the Bichon
result of trauma, glaucoma, lens surgery, or
Frise with cataracts associated with lens-
surgery involving the ciliary body or ora ciliaris
induced uveitis. Although the study con-
retinae, the most prominent of these being cata-
sisted of only
fifty-seven dogs, it was
ract surgery (Fig. 10.19).
statistically  significant  that prophylactic
 282 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
treatment is beneficial. Of the thirty-nine
retina. The breaks are closed by bringing the
dogs that received prior laser photocoagulation
edge of the tear in contact with the underly-
retinopexy before surgery, RRD developed in
ing pigment epithelium and choroid. This is
five dogs (12%). In eighteen dogs that did not
accomplished by indenting the sclera, thus
receive treatment, ten dogs (55%) experienced
moving the choroid and pigment epithelium
RRD.
in contact with the torn or detached retina.
 Because retinal detachments occur frequently
The retinal break is then sealed by creating a
with luxated lenses or luxated lens surgery, we
chorioretinal scar. Scleral buckles are not com-
recommend retinopexy before surgery if possi-
monly used in canine retinal surgery, but have
ble or shortly afterward. In dogs with vitreous
been reported.
degeneration, especially certain breeds (Shih
Tzu, Boston Terrier, Jack Russell Terrier, Italian
Greyhound, Yorkshire Terrier, and Poodle),
Pneumatic Retinopexy
there is a risk of developing giant retinal tears
at the peripheral aspect of the retina, especially
Pneumatic retinopexy involves the trans-
if the dog violently shakes its head while playing
scleral injection of gas into the vitreous
with toys. Retinopexy can be performed with
cavity, combined with cryosurgery or laser
either cryosurgery or laser (Fig. 10.20).
retinopexy followed by positioning of the
gas tamponade over the retinal break until
a chorioretinal adhesion occurs. The tech-
Surgical Procedures for
nique was introduced as an alternative
Treatment of Retinal
surgery to scleral buckling for retinal tears
Detachment
no larger than one clock hour located in the
superior half of the peripheral retina. The
Scleral Buckling
most common gases used for PR are sulfur
hexafluoride (SF) or octofluoropropane (C,Fs)
The objectives of scleral buckling surgery
The gases are nontoxic to the retina and have
are to close and seal all retinal breaks and
 different expansile properties as well as length
relieve sufficient vitreous traction on the
of duration in the eye.
Fig. 10.20. A. Retinal hole in a dog eye. B. Barrier laser retinopexy of the same eye. (Reprinted from Vainisi
SJ, Woller JC. Canine retinal surgery. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:291-306.)
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CAN1NE POSTERiOR SEGMENT/ 283
Vitrectomy for Giant Retinal Tears
Most RRDs seen in the canine are giant tears.
These are circumferential breaks of 9o° (three
clock hours) or more.
Criteria for Vitrectomy
The duration of the RD is important in predict-
ing any anticipated return of vision. In humans,
determining the duration of the detachment is
not a problem, but in animals we have no way
of ascertaining the duration. In humans, if a
Fig. 10.21. The canine eye ready for 25-gauge
return of 20/20 visual acuity is to be achieved,
sutureless vitrectomy, infusion tube and working
the retina must be reattached within 7-9 days.
ports in place.
 In dogs it has been observed that if the retina
is reattached within 4 weeks, there is a rea-
sonable chance of return of some functional
For small tears or dialysis (< 9o°), once vitreous
vision. Obviously, the sooner the repair, the
strands are removed, the retina may fall back
better the odds of good vision. This is prob-
to its normal position, and one can proceed to
ably typical of most spontaneous RRDs in
endolaser
the dog: the superior retina detaches first,
 coagulation. As previously men-
then the inferior retina. ERGs have not been
tioned,
more than 75% of canine retinal
surgeries involve tears over 270°; therefore,
reliable indicators in determining cases suit-
perfluorocarbons will be needed to flatten and
able for surgery.
hold the retina in position. The eye is now
ready for endolaser photocoagulation. Either
Vitreoretinal Surgical Technigue
diode or argon lasers work well for laser reti-
 nopexy. Laser should be applied around all
The patient is prepared as for cataract surgery,
holes and tears as well as minimal scatter in all
in dorsal recumbency with the head slightly
four quadrants. For larger tears, silicone oil has
deviated. Sufficient globe exposure for a three-
been more helpful in preventing retinal slip-
port vitrectomy can be difficult in many canine
page than has air. We prefer a PFCL-silicone
patients; therefore, an attempt should be made
oil exchange for all large tears.
to proptose the globe. A three-port vitrectomy
The nasal and temporal ports are closed first
is the routine approach to the vitreous cavity
 with 7-0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) sutures using
(Fig. 10.21). The ports will penetrate the pars
a three-throw pattern; then the infusion port
plana and thus will be placed 5-7 mm from
is closed with either a similar pattern or the
the limbus. A 180° conjunctival peritomy 6 mm
fgure-8 pattern previously discussed. The con-
posterior to the limbus, reflected anteriorly.
junctiva is closed with 7-0 polyglactin or catgut
exposes the sclera, the intrascleral
venous
sutures and the globe repositioned. After the
plexus, and the anterior ciliary vein. With the
canthotomy is closed, a subconjunctival antibi-
vitreous cavity illuminated, vitreous is removed
otic is given and two temporary tarsorrhaphy
in small pieces. Once the vitreous has been
sutures are applied. The tarsorrhaphy sutures
removed, the retina can be gently manipulated
should be left in place for l week. These sutures
using the tip of the light pipe and the vitrec-
are especially necessary in brachiocephalic
tomy probe. (
Occasionally a 360° RD will be
breeds with exophthalmic eyes, as corneal ero-
rotated at the optic disc and require gentle rota-
sions secondary to exposure are common.
tion before attempting to flatten with perfluo-
Additional
information
on
vitroretinal
rocarbons. As the retina is manipulated, one
 surgery can be found in the fourth edition of
often will uncover retinal holes or radial tears.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, pages 1026-1058.
 284 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Success of Retinal Detachment
composed principally of the axons of retinal
Repair
ganglion cells (RGC). Retinal ganglion cell
axons project without synapses from the
Clinical RRD
retinal nerve fiber layer through the optic
chiasm and the optic tracts to either the
Successful reattachment of the retina does
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), the supe-
not necessarily imply visual success.
In
rior colliculus, the hypothalamus, or to the
dogs, if their retinas are reattached within 4
pretectal nucleus and other midbrain centers.
weeks, have a reasonable chance of achiev-
The optic nerve consists of four different
ing some functional vision. We are referring
regions: (l) the tntraocular optic nerve
to blind animals with giant tears, which are
includes the retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
often 360°. We lse the number 4 weeks
layer; (2) the nerve fiber layer (NFL); (3) the
arbitrarily, as we have no way of definitely
optic nerve head (ONH) or optic disc; and
knowing how long a dog's retina has been
(4) the intralaminar region within the sclera.
detaching. In those animals with RRDs sec-
Posterior to the globe the optic nerve consists
ondary to vitreous degeneration (50% of
of the intraorbital optic nerve, the intracanalicu-
cases), if operated on early (4 weeks), the
lar optic nerve (within the optic canal), and the
slrgeries are anatomically successful 90
small intracranial optic nerve that merges into
95% of the time, with a visual success rate
the optic chiasm. The optic nerves become the
of 85% (Fig. 22.34). For more complicated
optic tracts between the optic chiasm and the
cases, such as those secondary to retinal
LGN, and the optic radiations between the
dysplasia, occasionally seen with PVR or
LGN and visual cortex (VC).
those secondary to cataract surgery
or
trauma, the anatomic success rate is closer
Intraocufar Optic Nerve
to 80%, with a 70% visual success.
Retinal Ganglion Cells
Gene Therapy
The region of highest RGC density, smallest
RGC dendritic fields, and greatest visual
There is significant interest in the development
acuity in afoveate animals is the area centra-
 of gene therapy to treat inherited retinal disease
lis. The area centralis in dogs is a horizon-
in humans and some of the most significant
tally oriented band of densely packed RGC
research has been in the canine species. It is
("the visual streak") located in the central
conceivable that in the next decade, we will
retina immediately dorsal and temporal to
treat dogs affected with inherited retinal disor-
the optic disc. The lowest concentration of
ders via gene therapy. Already we have seen the
RGC in humans and dogs is found in the
successful treatment of a canine model of a
 peripheral retina.
human blindness, Leber congenital amaurosis.
Recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors
(rAAV) mediate sustained gene expression in
Optic Nerve Head
both photoreceptors and RPE cells.
The prelaminar optic nerve is known as the
optic disc, ONH or optic papilla, and is sur-
SECTION 4: DISEASES AND
rounded by the white, peripapillary scleral
SURGERY OF THE CANINE
ring of Elschnig. Myelin extends anterior to
OPTIC NERVE
the canine lamina cribrosa to cover the
surface of the optic disc and continues into
Introduction
the NFL beyond the edge of the scleral canal
such that the shape of the dog optic disc
The optic nerve is not truly a cranial nerve
 may be circular, triangular or irregular. The
but a white matter tract of the diencephalon
canine ONH is white to pink in color with a
Diseases Ano SuRGery Of the Canine Posterior SeGment/285
dark central spot being the physiological pit.
Congenital Optic Neuropathies
a remnant of the hyaloid artery. In general
larger optic discs contain more nerve fibers
Micropapilla/Optic Nerve Hypoplasia/
than smaller discs. The intrapapillary region of
Optic Nerve Aplasia
the ONH is the area inside Bruch's membrane
at the scleral canal, and consists of the neuro-
Small optic discs are associated with small
retinal rim and the optic cup. The optic cup is
 numbers of RGCs and may have a range of
defined on the basis of contour being where the
vision-related clinical signs. If the number of
axons make their 9o° turn to exit the eye. The
axons is so low that visual and PLR deficits
only part of the true optic cup observed in dogs
 are present, the condition is termed optic
with heavily myelinated optic discs is the
nerve hypoplasia. Micropapilla, or a slightly
physiologic pit.
small optic disc, may result in normal PLR
and vision yet truly be a partial optic nerve
hypoplasia with subtle visual deficits.
Clinical Examination of the
Hypoplasia of the optic disc may be uni-
Optic Nerve
lateral or bilateral, marked or minimal, and
associated with either near normal or
Diagnostics for examination of the optic
reduced visual function. In the dog, this con-
nerve head include direct and indirect oph-
dition may occur alone, or it may accompany
thalmoscopy, fluorescein angiography, and
 other ocular malformations. The hypoplastic
imaging the optic nerve using confocal laser
canine optic disc is small and gray, with no
scanning methods (Heidelberg retinal tomo-
myelinated fibers on the disc surface (Fig.
graph), optical coherence tomography, thin-
10.22). The appearance of the retina and retinal
section, contrast-enhanced CT, and MRI.
 o    si ss 
large in relation to the small optic disc size. The
Uitrasonography
PLR is abnormal and the pupil dilated in dogs
with optic nerve hypoplasia. The heritability of
Real-time, B-scan ultrasonography units emit
optic nerve hypoplasia is reported to be reces-
focused sound waves to produce a two-dimen-
sive, dominant, and undefined in Miniature
sional cross-section of tissue, and they are most
useful in evaluating intraocular and orbital
disease. Ultrasonic scan heads of 7.5 or
10.0 MHZ provide the best resolution of ocular
tissues. This technique allows visualization
of the optic nerve; differentiation of solid,
soft-tissue masses versus cystic orbital
masses; determination of the size of various
globe or orbital components; and localiza-
tion of foreign bodies. Color-flow Doppler
imaging combines conventional B-mode
ultrasonography with Doppler flow analysis
to evaluate the orbital vascular structures.
Visuai-Evoked Potential
The VEP is an electrical signal generated by the
occipital cortex in response to visual stimuli,
and it is used to evaluate optic nerve function.
Fig. 10.22. Unilateral optic nerve hypoplasia in a
The VEP can be used to distinguish vision loss
Dachshund puppy that was associated with a hxed,
from retinal or optic nerve dysfunction.
dilated pupil and blindness.
 286 /EssentialS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
and Toy Poodles. Optic nerve hypoplasia
Irish Setters, Labrador as well as Golden Retriev.
may be seen in Rough Collies, Shelties,
ers, Whippets, Samoyeds, Malamutes, Beagles,
Saint Bernards, Beagles, Miniature Schnauzers,
Bernese Mountain Dogs, Flat-Coated Retriev-
American Cocker Spaniels, Dachshunds, Irish
ers, and German Shepherds.
Setters, German Shepherds, Standard Poodles,
Tibetan Spaniels, Soft-Coated Wheaten Terri-
Pseudopapilledema
ers, Skye Terriers, Kerry Blue Terriers, Labra-
dor Retrievers, Old English Sheepdogs, Pharaoh
Anomalous elevation of the ONH may
Hounds, Afghans, Borzois, Collies, English
resemble disc swelling caused by elevated
Springer Spaniels, Golden Retrievers, Grey-
 intracranial pressure (i.e., noninflammatory
hounds, Italian Greyhounds, Keeshonds, and
 papilledema) and may be a cause for alarm
Shih Tzus.
 and misdirected diagnostic procedures. In
In contrast, the PLR and pupils are normal
the dog, pseudopapilledema most commonly
in dogs with micropapilla. Micropapilla is
results from excessive myelination of optic
found in Belgian Sheepdogs, Belgian Tervuren,
nerve axons beyond the anterior lamina
Dachshunds, Irish Wolfhounds, Tibetan Span-
cribrosa. Pseudopapilledema is reported in
iels, Miniature Schnauzers, Norfolk Terriers,
Curly Coated Retrievers, Miniature Poodles,
Old English Sheepdogs, Shih Tzus, Gordon
Setters, Great Pyrenees, Irish Setters, Labrador
English Toy Spaniels, German Shepherds, and
Retrievers, Pulis, Shelties, Beagles, Collies,
Golden Retrievers.
Flat-Coated Retrievers, German Shepherds
Miniature Poodles, and Soft-Coated Wheaten
Terriers.
Acquired Optic Nerve Diseases
Complete absence of RGCs and the optic
nerve is termed optic nerve aplasia. No retinal
Disorders of the prechiasmal visual path-
vessels will be present with optic nerve aplasia.
ways are a diagnostic challenge. Optic nerve
Bilateral optic nerve aplasia is very rare and
disorders may be caused by inflammation,
been reported in the Beagle, a mixed-breed
cellular infiltration, ischemia, infection, and
dog, and Irish Wolfhound.
mechanical compression. In the dog, abrupt
onset of vision loss with a normal-appearing
ONH is highly suggestive of sudden acquired
Optic Nerve Colobomas
retinal degeneration syndrome or of retro-
bulbar optic neuritis. Slowly progressive
Optic nerve colobomas are congenital mal-
loss of vision is typical of neoplastic com-
formations of the ONH and peripapillary
pression or infltration of the prechiasmal
retina that enlarge or distort the ONH cir-
optic nerve.
cumference. They may appear as enlarged
discs with a deep excavation, or as slightly
enlarged, irregular discs containing deep
Differentiai Diagnosis of the
pits within the borders of the nerve head.
"Swollen Dise"
Slightly enlarged physiologic pits in collies with
choroidal hypoplasia may actually be shallow
Active or passive edematous swelling of the
colobomas
optic disc provides nonspecifc evidence for
Colobomas of the optic nerve in Collies are
distal optic nerve dysfunction. Papilledema, or
caused by faulty closure or fusion (or both) of
disc swelling because of increased intracra-
the embryonic ventral (i.e., fetal) fissure of the
nial pressure, must be differentiated from
optic stalk and cup: peripapillary colobomas
the
“swollen disc” of pseudopapilledema
originate from orbital cysts. Colobomas are also
and optic neuritis. In its early stage, true
found in Australian Shepherds, Shelties, Basen-
papilledema does not affect vision, but optic
jis, American as well as English Cocker Span-
neuritis is associated with acute loss of
iels, Norfolk Terriers, Huskies, Tibetan Spaniels,
vision and diminished PLR. Disc edema can
DiSEASES AND SuRGERY OF THE CAN1NE POSTERiOR SEGMENT/287
accompany glaucoma, uveitis, or postoperative
hypotony. Primary and metastatic ONH tumors
(e.g., meningioma, glioma) may cause a"swollen
disc,” and disc tumors may have hemorrhagic
elevation of the disc and peripapillary retina
as well as drastic reduction of vision. Orbital
mass lesions characteristically produce propto-
sis, but they may also present as very chronic,
unilateral disc edema, with insidiously advanc-
ing field loss. Neuroimaging techniques such as
MRI can aid differentiation of the causes of
'swollen disc".
Papilledema of Raised Intracranial
Pressure
Fig. 10.23. Optic neuritis caused by reticulosis
appears as a swollen, hyperemic disc with indistinct
The term papilledema is reserved for passive,
 margins. There is no apparent physiologic cup.
noninflammatory disc swelling associated with
increased intracranial pressure. Papilledema is
almost always bilateral and is not associated
margins (Fig. 10.23). Electroretinography is
with visual defcits, at least in those develop-
normal with optic neuritis, but VEPs are
reduced. Causes of optic neuritis in the dog
dog, brain tumors are associated with
include(
 distemper, tick-borne encephalitis
papilledema.
virus, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplas-
mosis, ehrlichiosis, and toxoplasmosis. Idio-
pathic causes, trauma, toxins, vitamin A
Inffammatory Optic Neuropathies
defciency, orbital abscesses/cellulitis, optic
nerve and orbital neoplasia, and reticulosis may
Optic neuritis is more of a clinical syndrome
 also cause optic neuritis in the dog. Corticoste-
than a single disease. It includes (l) idio-
roids are used systemically in hope of favorably
pathic, neoplastic, immune-mediated, and
influencing visual recuperation, but there is no
infective causes of optic neuritis; (2) inflam-
substantive evidence that eventual visual func-
matory diseases that contiguously involve
tion is affected by therapy. The prognosis for
the optic nerves of the adjacent paranasal
vision in cases of optic neuritis is poor.
sinuses, retina, brain and meninges, and
orbit; and (3) granulomatous and neoplastic
Reticulosis and Granulomatous
infiltration syndromes such as reticulosis.
Optic neuritis must be distinguished from pap-
Meningoencephalitis
illedema and pseudopapilledema. Optic neuri-
 tis is generally idiopathic in the dog.
The term reticulosis is confusing but gener-
ally refers to a group of neoplastic and idio-
pathic inflammatory diseases of the CNS
Optic Neuritis
including GME. It actually more specifically
 refers to neoplastic CNS disease processes
 Inflammation of the canine optic nerve may
with a pronounced inflammatory cell com-
be either unilateral or bilateral. The optic
ponent. Proliferation of the reticulohistio-
papilla and retrobulbar optic nerve may be
cytic elements of the central nervous system
affected. Clinical signs of blindness appear
can cause papillitis, optic neuritis, retino-
suddenly, and the pupils are fixed and
choroiditis, choroiditis, iridocyclitis, and
dilated. The optic disc appears to be swollen 
retinal detachments. Sudden blindness in
and edematous, with blurring of the disc
both eyes with fixed, dilated pupils is a
288 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmoloGY
common presentation. Other neurologic signs
of a neural cell, the RGC. Most of these diseases
may be present as well. The ONH can be hyper-
result in or are associated with increased IOP
emic and swollen, though retrobulbar forms of
High IOP, a compromised vascular supply to
reticulosis have been noted in the dog. Systemi-
the ONH, amino acid excitotoxicity, a less
cally administered corticosteroids remain the
compliant or stiff lamina cribrosa, and neu-
standard of therapy and are generally effective
rotrophin deprivation all play a role in glau-
in the early stages of GME and reticulosis.
comatous optic nerve damage. Large diameter
Vision is at least temporarily restored in many
optic nerve axons appear particularly sensi-
cases. Cytosine arabanoside and procarbazine
tive to the elevated IOP and other inciting
have also been utilized for therapy. Discontinu-
factors found in the canine glaucomas.
ation of therapy is rarely achieved
References
Contiguous fnflammations
Section 1
The optic nerve may be secondarily affected by
various inflammatory or neoplastic lesions of
Boeve MH, Stades FC. Diseases and surgery of the
adjacent tissues, including the uvea, retina.
canine vitreous. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
sclera, orbit, paranasal sinuses, and meninges.
ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
2007. 932-943
Boeve MH, Stades FC, van der Linde-Sipman JS,
Traumatic Optic Neuropathies
Vrensen GFJM. Persistent hyperplastic tunica vas-
culosa lentis and primary vitreous in the dog: a
All portions of the optic nerve {i.e., intraocular
comparative review. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
intraorbital, intracanalicular, intracranial) are
1992;2:163-172.
susceptible to injury, and traumatic proptosis
Boeve MH, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Stades FC
and orbital fractures are common problems in
 Early morphogenesis of persistent hyperplastic
the dog.
tunica vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous. The
dog as an ontogenetical model. Invest Ophthal-
mol Vis Sci 1988;29:1076-1086
Boeve MH, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Stades FC.
Optic Nerve Tumors
Early morphogenesis of the canine lens, hyaloid
system, and vitreous body. Anat Rec 1988;220:
Optic nerve tumors in the dog are rare and
435-441
may present with exophthalmos alone or with
Gelatt KN, Gelatt JP. Handbook of small animal
exophthalmos and a unilateral or bilateral pap-
ophthalmic surgery. Vol. 2. New York: Pergamon,
illedema and subsequent optic neuritis. Primary
1995. 217-218
optic nerve tumors reported in the dog include
Smith PJ, Pennea L, MacKay EO, Mames RN. Iden
teratoid medulloepithelioma, ganglioglioma,
tification of sclerotomy sites for posterior segment
and meningioma. Squamous cell carcinomas,
surgery in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;
nasal tumors, and orbital tumors may affect the
7:180-189.
Stades FC, Boeve MH, van der Brom WE, van der
optic nerve.
Linde-Sipman JS. The incidence of PHTVL/PHPV
in Doberman and the results of breeding rules.
Vet Q 1991;13:24-29.
The Glaucomas, RGC, and the
Venter IJ, van der Lugt J, van Rensburg IBJ, Petrick
Optic Nerve
SW. Multiple congenital eye anomalies in Blood-
hound puppies. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;6:
Glaucoma is the final common pathway of a
9-13.
group of diseases with decreased RGC sensitiv-
ity and function, RGC death and ONH cup
Section 2
enlargement, an incremental reduction in visual
felds, and blindness. Glaucomas are neurode-
Acland GM, Aguirre GD, Bennett J, Aleman TS,
generative diseases as they result in the death
Cideciyan AV, Bennicelli J, Dejneka NS, Pearce-
DisEases Ano SuRGerY Of the CaNine Posterior SeGment/289
Kelling SE, Maguire AM, Palcewski K, Hauswirth
Clements PJM, Gregory CY, Peterson-Jones SM,
WW, Jacobson SG. 2005. Long-term restoration
Sargan DR, Bhattacharya SS. Confirmation of the
of rod and cone vision by single dose rAAV-medi-
rod cGMP phosphodiesterase beta subunit (PDEb)
ated gene transfer to the retina in a canine model
nonsense mutation in affected rcdl Irish Setters
of childhood blindness. Mol Ther 2005;12:
in the U.K. and development of a diagnostic test.
1072-1082.
Curr Eye Res 1993;12:861-866
Acland GM, Aguirre GD, Ray J, Zhang Q, Aleman
Curtis R, Barnett KC. Progressive retinal atrophy in
TS, Cideciyan AV, Pearce-Kelling SE, Anand V,
Miniature Longhaired Dachshund dogs. Br Vet J
Zeng Y, Maguire AM, Jacobson SG, Hauswirth
1993;149:71-85
WW, Bennett J. Gene therapy restores vision in a
Da Costa PD, Merideth RE, Sigler RL. Cataracts in
canine model of childhood blindness. Nat Genet
dogs after long-term ketoconazole therapy. Vet
2001;28:92-95.
Comp Ophthalmol 1996;6:176-180.
Acland GM, Blanton SH, Hershhield B, Aguirre G.
Davidson EM, Breitschwerdt EB, Walker DH, et al.
XLPRA: a canine retinal degeneration inherited
Vascular permeability and coagulation during
as an X-linked trait. Am J Med Genet 1994;
Rickettsia rickettsi infection in dogs. Am J Vet Res
52:27-33
1990;51:165-170.
Anderson RE, Maude MB, Alvarez RA, Acland GM,
Dekomien G, Runte M, Godde R, Epplen JT.
Aguirre GD.
 Plasma lipid abnormalities in
Generalized
1 progressive retinal atrophy
of
the Miniature Poodle
with
1progressive rod-
Sloughi dogs is due to an 8-bp insertion in exon
cone degeneration. Exp Eye Res 1991;52:349-
21 of the PDE6B gene. Cytogenet Cell Genet
355.
2000;90:261-267
Andrew SE, Abrams KL, Brooks DE, Kubilis PS.
Dekomien G, Runte M, Godde R at al. Generalized
Clinical features of steroid responsive retinal
progressive retinal atrophy of Sloughi dogs is due
detachments in twentytwo dogs. Vet Comp Oph-
to an 8-bp insertion in exon 2l of the PDE6B
thalmol 1997;7:82-87
gene. Cytogenet Cell Genet 2000;90:261-267.
Bjerkas E. Collie eye anomaly in the rough collie in
Farber D, Danciger JS, Aguirre G. The beta subunit
Norway. J Small Anim Pract 1991;32:82-92.
of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase is deficient in
Bloom JD, Hamor RE, Gerding PA Jr. Ocular
canine rod-cone dysplasia 1. Neuron 1992;9:
blastomycosis in dogs: 73 cases, 108 eyes, 1985-
349-356
1993. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;209:1271-
Ford M, Bragadottir R, Rakoczy PE, Narfstrom K.
1274.
Gene transfer in the RPE65 null mutation dog:
Breitschwerdt EB, Davidson MG, Aucoin DP, et al.
relationship between construct volume, visual
Efficacy of chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin, and
behavior and electroretinographic (ERG) results.
tetracycline for treatment of experimental Rocky
Doc Ophthalmol 2003;107:79-86.
Mountain spotted fever in dogs. Antimicrob
Grahn B, Storey ES, McMillan C. Inherited retinal
Agents Chemother 1991;35:2375-2381
dysplasia and persistent hyperplastic primary vit-
Brooks DE, Legendre AM, Gum GG, Laratta LJ,
reous in Miniature Schnauzer dogs. Vet Ophthal-
Abrams KL, Morgan RV. The treatment of canine
mol 2004;7:151-158.
ocular blastomycosis with systemically adminis-
Grahn BH, Cullen CL.
 Retinopathy of Great
tered itraconazole. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
Pyrenees dogs: fluorescein angiography, light
1991;1:263-268.
microscopy and transmitting and scanning elec-
Carrig CB, Sponenberg DP, Schmidt GM, Tvedten
tron microscopy. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:191-
HW. Inheritance of associated ocular and skeletal
199
dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers. J Am Vet Med
Hakansson N, Narfstrom K. Progressive retinal
Assoc 1988;193:1269-1272
atrophy in Papillon dogs in Sweden. A clinical
Chandieu G, Molon-Noblot S. Early retinopathy
 survey. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1995;5:83-87
in the Bernese Mountain dog in France: prelimi-
Hendrix DV, Nasisse MP, Cowen P, Davidson MG.
nary observations. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:175-
Clinical signs, concurrent diseases, and risk
184.
factors associated with retinal detachment in
Cideciyan AV, Jacobson SG, Aleman TS, Gu D,
dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1993;3:87-91
Pearce-Kelling SE, Sumaroka A, Acland GM,
Hurn SD, Hardman C, Stanley RG. Day-blindness in
Aguirre GD.
0. In vivo dynamics of retinal injury
three dogs: clinical and electroretinographic Fnd-
 and repair in the rhodopsin mutant dog model of
ings. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:127-130.
human retinitis pigmentosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci
Huss BT, Collier LL, Collins BK, Pittman LL Jr,
USA 2005;102:5233-5238.
Aronson E, Rottinghaus AA. Polyarthropathy and
 290 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
chorioretinitis with retinal detachment in a dog
McLellan GJ, Richelle M, Elks R, Lybaert P, Bedford
with systemic histoplasmosis. J Am Anim Hosp
PGC. Vitamin E deficiency in canine retinal
Assoc 1994;30:217-224.
epithelial dystrophy (RPED) results of the oral
Jacobson SG, Aleman TS, Cideciyan AV, Sumaroka
vitamin E tolerance test in clinically normal dogs
A, Schwartz SB, Windsor EAM, Traboulsi EI,
and in RPED affected cocker spaniels. WSAVA
Heon E, Pittler SJ, Milam AH, Maguire AM, Pal-
Congress, Birmingham, UK, 1997.
cewski K, Stone EM, Bennett J. Identifying pho-
Melville SA, Wilson CL, Chiang CS, Studdert VP,
toreceptors in blind eyes caused by RPE65
Lingaas F, Wilton AN. A mutation in the canine
mutations: Prerequisite for human gene therapy
CLN5 causes neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in
success. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:
Border Collie dogs. Genomics 2005;86:287-
6177-6182.
294
Katz ML, Khan S, Awano T, Shahid SA, Siakotos AN,
Michau TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Gilger BC, Davidson
Johnson GS. A mutation in the CLN8 gene
MG. Bartonella vinsonii subspecies berkhofh
in English Setter dogs with neuronal ceroid-
as a possible cause of anterior uveitis and
lipofuscinosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
choroiditis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:
2005;327:541-547
299-304.
 Kemp CM, Jacobson SG. Rhodopsin levels in the
 Miller PE, Murphy CJ. Vision in dogs. J Am Vet Med
central retinas of normal Miniature Poodles and
Assoc 1995;207:1623-1634.
those with progressive rod-cone degeneration.
Narfstrom K, Andersson B-E, Andreasson S, Gouras
Exp Eye Res 1992;54:947-956.
 P. Clinical electroretinography in the dog with
Kijas JW, Cideciyan AV, Aleman TS, Pianta MJ,
 ganzfeld stimulation: a practical method of exam-
Pearce-Kelling SE, Miller BJ, Jacobson SG, Aguirre
ining rod and cone function. Doc Ophthalmol
GD, Acland GM. Naturally occurring rhodopsin
1995;90:279-290.
mutation in the dog causes retinal dysfunction
Narfstrom K, Ekesten B, Rosolen SG, Spiess BM,
and degeneration mimicking human dominant
Percicot CL, Ofri R. Guidelines for clinical elec-
retinitis pigmentosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
troretinography in the dog. Doc Ophthalmol
2002;99:6328-6333
2002;105:83-92
Landry MP, Herring IP, Panciera DL. Funduscopic
Narfstrom K, Katz ML, Bragadottir R, Seeliger MS
Findings following cataract extraction by means of
Boulanger A, Redmond TM, Caro L, Lai C-M,
phacoemulsification in diabetic dogs: 52 cases
Rakoczy PE. Functional and structural recovery of
(1993-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:
the retina after gene therapy in the RPE65 null
709-716.
mutation dog. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;
Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT. Ocular signs of canine
44:1663-1672
monocytic ehrlichiosis: a retrospective study in
Narfstrom K, Katz ML, Ford M, Redmond TM,
dogs from Barcelona, Spain. Vet Ophthalmol
Rakoczy E, Bragadottir R In vivo gene therapy in
2005;8:387-393.
young and adult RPE65 -/- dogs produces long-
Lowe JK, Kukekova AV, Kirkness EF, Langlois
term visual improvement. J Heredity 2003;94:
MC, Aguirre GD, Acland GM,
Ostrander
31-37.
EA. Linkage mapping of the primary disease
Narfstrom K, Petersen-Jones S. Diseases of the canine
locus for collie eye anomaly. Genomics 2003;
 Ocular fundus. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary oph-
82:86-95
thalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007.
McLellan GJ, Elks R, Lybaert P, Watte C, Moore DL
944-1025
Bedford PG. Vitamin E dehiciency in dogs with
O'Toole D,
Roberts S, Nunamaker C. Sudden
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet Rer
acquired retinal degeneration ("silent retina
2002;151:663-667
syndrome") in two dogs. Vet Rec 1992;130:
McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Mayhew IG, Elks R,
157-161.
Lybaert P, Watte C, Bedford PG. Clinical and
Panciera RJ, Ewing SA, Confer AW. Ocular histopa-
pathological observations in English Cocker
thology of Ehrlichial infections in the dog. Vet
Spaniels with primary metabolic vitamin E defi-
Pathol 2001;38:43-46
ciency and retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy.
Panzan CQ, Guven D, Weiland JD, Lakhanpal
Vet Rec 2003;153:287-292
RR, Javaheri M, de Juan E, Humayon MS.
McLellan GJ, Elks R, Lybaert P, Watte C, Moore DL
2004. Retinal thickness in normal and RDCl
Bedford PG. Vitamin E deficiency in dogs with
dogs using optical coherence tomography.
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet Rec
Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 2004;35:485-
2002;151:663-667
493.
I6Z/1N3W03S aOI831SOd 3NIN> 3H1 sO A83DaNS ON 53S351O
 Parshall C, Wyman M, Nitroy S, Acland G, Aguirre
surgery in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
G. Photoreceptor dysplasia: an inherited progres-
1997;7:180-191
sive retinal atrophy of Miniature Schnauzer dogs.
Vainisi SJ. Retinal detachments. In: Riis R, ed. Small
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1991;1:187-203
animal ophthalmology secrets. New York: Hanley
Petersen-Jones SM, Entz DD. An improved DNA-
& Belfus, 2002. 268-274
based test for detection of the codon 6l6 muta-
Vainisi SJ, Packo KH. Management of giant retinal
tion in the alpha cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase
tears in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:
gene that causes progressive retinal atrophy in
491-495
the Cardigan Welsh Corgi. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;
Vainisi SJ, Packo K, Schmidt GM. Retinal detach-
5:103-106
ments in the Shih Tzu. Proc 25th Am College Vet
Ray K, Baldwin V, Acland G, Aguirre G. Molecular
Opthalmol 1990;25:115.
diagnostic tests for ascertainment of genotype at
Vainisi SJ, Peyman G, Wolf D, West S. Treatment of
the rod cone dysplasia l (rcdl) locus in Irish
serous retinal detachments associated with
setters. Curr Eye Res 1995;14:243-247
optic disk pits in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Ray K, Baldwin V, Acland G, Blanton S, Aguirre G
1989;195:1233-1236
Co-segregation of codon 807 mutation of the rod
Vainisi SJ, Wolfer JC. Canine retinal surgery. Vet
cGMP phosphodiesterase beta gene (PDEb) in
Ophthalmol 2004;7:291-306
rcdl. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:
Vainisi SJ, WolferJC, Smith PJ. Surgery of the canine
4291-4299.
posterior segment. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
Riis R, Sheffy BE, Loew E, Kern TJ, Smith JS. Vitamin
ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
E deficiency retinopathy in dogs. Am J Vet Res
2007. 1026-1058
1981;42:74-86.
Weber M, Rabinowitz J, Provost N, et al. Recombi-
Rosolen SG, Saint-MacAry G. Ocular fundus imaging
nant adeno-associated virus serotype 4 mediates
with confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in
unique and exclusive long-term transduction of
the dog, monkey and minipig. Vet Ophthalmol
retinal pigment epithelium in rat, dog and non-
2001;4:41-45
human primate after subretinal delivery. Mol Ther
 Sidjanin DJ, Lowe JK, McElwee JL, Milne BS, Phippen
2003;7:774-781
TM, Sargan DR, Aguirre GD, Acland GM,
Ostrander EA. Canine CNGB3 mutations estab-
lish cone degeneration as orthologous to the
Section 4
human achromatopsia locus ACHM3. Hum Mol
Genet 2002;1l:1823-1833.
Brooks DE. Diseases of the canine optic nerve. In:
Storey ES, Grahn BH, Alcorn J. Multifocal chorio-
Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed.
retinal lesions in Borzoi dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1059-1092.
2005;8:337-347
Brooks DE, Garcia GA, Dreyer EB, Zurakowski D,
Wallin-Hakansson B, Wallin-Hakansson N, Hed-
Franco-Bourland RE. Glutamate is elevated in the
hammar A. Collie eye anomaly in the rough collie
vitreous body of dogs with glaucoma. Am J Vet
in Sweden: genetic transmission and influence on
Res 1997;58:864-867
offspring vitality. J Small Anim Pract 2000;41:
Brooks DE, Legendre AM. The treatment of canine
254-258
ocular blastomycosis with systemically adminis-
Wallin-Hakansson B, Wallin-Hakansson N, Hed-
tered itraconazole. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
hammar A. Influence of selective breeding on the
1991;1:263-266
prevalence of choroiretinal dysplasia and colo-
Brooks DE, Strubbe D, Kubilis P, et al. Histomor-
boma in the rough collie in Sweden. J Small Anim
phometry of the optic nerves of normal dogs and
Pract 2000;41:56-59.
dogs with hereditary glaucoma. Exp Eye Res
1995;60:71-89.
Gelatt KN, Gelatt KJ, MacKay FO, Brooks DE
Section 3
Newell SM. Color doppler imaging in normal and
glaucomatous dogs. Proc Am Coll Vet Ophthal-
Hendrix DV, Nasisse MP, Cowen P, Davidson MG
mol Santa Fe, NM, 1997:14-15
Clinical signs, concurrent diseases, and risk factors
Mauldin EA, Deehr AJ, Hertzke D, Dubielzig RR
associated with retinal detachment in dogs. Prog
Canine orbital meningiomas: a review of 22 cases.
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1993;3:87-91.
Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3(1):11-16.
Smith PJ, Pennea L, MacKay EO, Mames RN. Iden-
Miller PE, Poulsen Gl, Nork TM, Galbreath EJ,
tification of sclerotomy sites for posterior segment
 Dubelzig RR. Photoreceptor cell death by apopto-
 292 /EsSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OFHTHALMOLOGY
sis in spontaneous acute glaucoma in dogs. Invest
 Paulsen ME, Severin GA, LeCouteur RA, Young S.
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1997;38:S163
Primary optic nerve meningioma in a dog. J Am
Nuhsbaum MT, Powell CC, Gionfriddo JR, Cuddon
Anim Hosp Assoc 1989;25:147-152.
PA. Treatment of granulomatous meningoen-
Schmid V, Murisier N. Color doppler imaging of the
cephalitis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5,1:
orbit in the dog. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;
29-33.
6:35-44.
Ofri R, Dawson WW, Foli K, Gelatt K. Chronic
Stadtbaumer K, Leschnik MW, Nell B. Tick-borne
ocular hypertension alters local retinal respon-
encephalitis virus as a possible cause of optic neul-
siveness. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:502-508
ritis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7,4:271-277.
Chapter ll
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
Jean Stiles and Wendy M. Townsend
With the increase in the feline pet population
All cats with eyelid colobomas should be
in the United States, presence of feline-only
carefully examined by slit-lamp biomicroscopy
veterinary hospitals, and longer life span, feline
and ophthalmoscopy, because intraocular
ophthalmic patients continue to increase
anomalies, including are persistent pupillary
The feline eye exhibits several unique dis-
membranes, choroidal and optic nerve colobo-
eases such as corneal sequestra, herpetic
mas and rarely retinal dysplasia are observed.
keratoconjunctivitis, and eosinophilic kera-
Treatment is surgical reconstruction of the
toconjunctivitis not seen in the canine
defective upper eyelid and lid margin to
patient. Inherited ophthalmic disorders are
prevent corneal irritation from the exposure,
relatively infrequent but infectious diseases
entropion, and trichiasis.
affecting the eye are common in cats.
Several surgical procedures have been
described to correct eyelid agenesis. The size of
the defect is an important consideration when
Diseases of the Eyelids
selecting a method for reconstruction. Correc-
tive procedures include direct closure com-
Congenital and Developmenta!
bined with a lateral canthotomy; a pedicle of
Eyelid Disorders
skin, orbicularis oculi muscle, and tarsus is
rotated from the lower eyelid to the upper
Eyelid colobomas (eyelid agenesis) are
eyelid defect (Roberts and Bistner procedure;
usually bilateral and occur primarily along
Fig. 1l.2); and Dziezyc and Millichamp modi-
the lateral portion of the upper lids (Fig.
fed this technique by creating a conjunctival
11.1). Eyelid agenesis has been reported
 pedicle from the anterior surface of the nictitat-
in the domestic shorthair, Persian, and
ing membrane to the upper eyelid to ensure
Burmese. Also reported in the snow leopard
adequate conjunctival lining of the posterior
and Texas cougar (Felis concolor), eyelid
surface of the graft. Other techniques include
colobomas are generally accompanied by
sliding skin grafts; Z-plasty skin flaps; semicir-
exposure keratitis, corneal vascularization,
cular skin grafts; the Cutler-Beard or bucket
epithelial hyperplasia, and ulceration attrib-
handle technique; a modification of the
utable to inadequate eyelid function. Kera-
Mustarde cross-lid technique using the full-
toconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) may be present
 thickness lower eyelid to reconstruct the upper
as well.
293
294 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
+
Fig. ll.l. Extensive upper eyelid agenesis involving
the lateral two-thirds of the upper eyelid as well as
the lateral canthus in an adult domestic shorthair cat.
Fig. ll.2. Modifcation of the Roberts technique for
Note the corneal vascularization and fbrosis from the
repair of upper eyelid agenesis in the cat. After
marked trichiasis and corneal exposure
separating the conjunctiva from the remaining upper
eyelid, a myocutaneous lap is prepared by making
Paka iaddn ay woj ww s-t suoisiou! lalleied
iapqns jo uooafu 1o :ea dil iaddn ue ym
margin. The lower skin graft is then dissected free
and rotated dorsally to become the new upper eyelid.
mal collagen to replace the eyelid stroma com-
The skin is closed with simple interrupted sutures
bined with a modified Stades technique to
of 5-0 to 6-0 nylon, and the dorsal conjunctiva is
remove misdirected hairs. The overall objec-
attached to the new eyelid with 6-0 to 7-0 vicryl
tives of these surgical techniques are to provide
sutures in a continuous pattern. Alternatively,
a cosmetic upper eyelid, a functional dorsolat-
conjunctiva from the lower fornix may be transposed
eral lid, and corneal protection. The main dis-
to the upper eyelid in a similar fashion to the skin
advantage of the lower lid rotational flap is that
lap. (Reprinted with permission Irom Nasisse MP
trichiasis may occur, because hair from the new
Feline ophthalmology In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
upper lid tends to project toward the cornea;
ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger,
treatment is by cryoepilation, redirecting the
1991. 529-575.)
cilia by repeated applications of petrolatum, or
everting the new lid margin through a modified
orbital fat and muscle. Cicatricial entropion has
Hotz-Celsus procedure very close to the lid
been suggested to be the most common cause
margin.
of feline entropion. Entropion may also occur
 Structural defects of the feline adnexa occur
secondary to painful ocular diseases that induce
uncommonly. Cats are occasionally presented
chronic blepharospasm. The modified Hotz-
with traumatic eyelid lacerations usually attrib-
Celsus technique (see chapter 3) is the proce-
utable to fighting. Eyelash diseases are rare in
dure of choice for correcting all forms of feline
the cat, though an ectopic cilium has been
entropion, and it can readily be modified for
described in a Siamese cat. Unless cicatricial in
each patient's abnormality.
 origin, ectropion appears to be nearly nonexis-
tent; entropion (usually of the lower lid) is
probably the most common acquired structural
Focal and Diffuse Blepharitis
defect of the feline adnexa. Primary entropion
occurs most frequently in Persian and other
While rare, localized demodecosis, a para-
brachycephalic breeds.
sitic skin disease in the cat, may occur
Older cats may develop entropion in asso.
around the eyes, and on the face and neck
ciation with enophthalmos due to atrophy of
(Fig. ll.3). The causative agents are Demodex
FELiNE OPHtHALmOLOGY/295
and, to a lesser extent, by M. gypseum and
Irichophyton mentagrophytes, may involve
the eyelids. Lesions are circular, oval, or
irregularly shaped areas of alopecia, typi-
cally accompanied by folliculitis. The diag-
nosis is made on the basis of fungal culture
and microscopic evaluation. Treatment of
localized dermatophytosis is topical application
of an azole antifungal agent, such as l-2%
miconazole, 1% clotrimazole, 2% enilconazole,
2% ketoconazole, or 4% thiabendazole. In the
generalized form, systemic therapy with griseo-
fulvinor itraconazole is recommended. A recent
Fig. ll.3. Periocular demodicosis characterized by
report suggests terbinafine orally may also be
alopecia, skin ulceration, and crusting in a 13-year-
effective. Care must be taken to protect the
old domestic shorthair cat. (Reprinted with
globe from irritating dermatologic com-
permission from Ketring KL, Glaze MB. Atlas of feline
pounds by frst applying a protective coat of
ophthalmology. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning
petrolatum-based ophthalmic ointment.
Systems, 1994.)
Myiasis is the intradermal and subdermal
migration of fly larva. In the cat, Cuterebra
sp. is a cause of eyelid myiasis. The condi-
cati and a Demodex gatoi. The condition is
tion is easily recognized by the presence of
characterized by periocular alopecia, ery-
a fistulous opening. Treatment is careful
thema, scaling, crusts, and usually pruritus
extraction of the larva after enlarging the
if caused by D. gatoi. The diagnosis is made
opening. Care should be taken not to crush
on the basis of identifying the mites in scrap-
the larva in the process or incompletely
ings from the affected skin. Localized lesions
remove the larva, because a severe inflamma-
may resolve spontaneously without treatment.
tory response may follow.
Topical therapy with rotenone ointment or
Blepharitis in the cat may have a variety of
0.025% amitraz solution (do not use in diabetic
other causes, including inappropriate ocular
cats) is reportedly effective. The treatment of
instillation of gentamicin otic solution and
choice for D. gatoi is 2% lime sulfur dips once
eosinophilic plaques that responded rapidly to
a week for at least four treatments or past nega-
systemic corticosteroid therapy. Autoimmune
tive skin scrapings.
diseases that involve the feline eyelids include
Feline scabies is a rare, highly contagious
pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus erythemato-
and pruritic disease caused by Notoedres cati.
sus, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Lesions begin on the pinna of the ear, but they
quickly progress to involve the eyelids, face,
and neck. The lesions are partly alopecic, and
Cystic Lesions
excoriation because of self-inflicted trauma is
common. The diagnosis is made on the basis of
Single to multiple soft, smooth, round, fluid-
identifying the mite in skin scrapings. Tradi-
filled, 2-10 mm diameter, nonpainful cysts
tional treatment involves dipping the cat in an
located in the skin surrounding the medial
effective parasiticide, such as lime-sulphur
canthus have been reported in five Persians
every 7 days. Alternative therapies include iver-
and one Himalayan cat. The cyst fluid ranges
mectin 0.2 mg/kg per os or subcutaneously
from translucent to brown in color. The lesions
twice two weeks apart or doramectin 0.2 mg/kg
have been termed apocrine hidrocystomas or
subcutaneously once. Topical application of
cystic adenomas of the apocrine sweat glands
selamectin may also be effective.
due to their histopathologic similarity
to
Feline dermatophytosis, which is most
the
apocrine
 hidrocystomas  observed
in
commonly caused by Microsporum canis
human eyelids. Therapeutic options include
 296 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
observation, drainage, or surgical excision
cats than dogs. In a series of eighty-five cats,
of the cysts.
squamous cell carcinoma affected 65%, and
in another group of thirty-six cats, it affected
36% (Table ll.l). The prevalence of eyelid
Nodufar Lesions
neoplasia increases with advancing age, but no
sex or breed correlations have been found
Although leishmaniasis is rare in cats, the cuta-
Lid squamous cell carcinomas appear as a
neous form with nodular or ulcerative derma-
slightly raised or depressed ulcerative
titis has been reported in Texas, Mediterranean
lesions, often with a crusted surface, either
countries, Asia, and South America. Diagnosis
on or adjacent to the eyelid margin (Fig.
can be made on cytologic examination
of
11.4). There is a conspicuous predilection
fne-needle aspirates, detection of antibodies
for white cats. The lesion is characterized his-
by indirect fluorescent antibody testing.
or
topathologically by irregular chords or clumps
polymerase chain reaction testing for Leishma-
of epithelial cells, which migrate downward
nia. Treatment with allopurinol has been
disrupt the epithelial basement membrane, and
described.
invade adjacent tissue. Keratin pearls are a char-
acteristic but inconsistent feature. Metastasis
Eyelid Neoplasia
does not occur until late in the disease, but local
invasion can be extensive and regional lymph
Only 1.5-2.0% of cats are presented for
nodes eventually involved. The prognosis has
treatment of eyelid neoplasms at veterinary
been suggested to correlate with the histopatho-
hospitals; lid tumors are less common in
 logic degree of cellular differentiation.
Table 11.1. Reported Eyelid Neoplasms in the Cat.
Tumor Type
Veterinary Medical Data (%)
Purdue Comp Oncology (%)
Squamous cell carcinoma
65
36.1
Fibrosarcoma
5
8.3
Lymphosarcoma
11.1
 Undetermined
5
 Adenocarcinoma
3.5
Adenoma/sebaceous
3.5
8.3
Adenoma/cystadenoma
Mastocytoma
3.5
11.1
 Basal cell carcinoma
2.3
5.6
Carcinoma (unspecified)
2.3
Fibroma
2.3
Hemangiosarcoma
2.3
Melanoma
2.3
8.4
Hemangioma
Neurofibroma
1
Trichoepithelioma
1
 Squamous papilloma
8.3
Histocytoma
2.8
 Total
100
100
FeliNE OpHthAlmOLoGY/ 297
Fig. Il.5. A peripheral nerve sheath tumor
distorting the lower eyelid of a middle aged domestic
Fig. ll.4. Ulcerative lesions along the lower eyelid
shorthair cat.
margin and at the medial canthus are typical of
adnexal squamous cell carcinoma in this 9-year-old
white domestic shorthair.
they often involve the eyelids. In older cats,
are dermal and subcutaneously situated, often
Squamous cell carcinomas are amenable
alopecic with an ulcerated surface. They are
to several forms of therapy. Wide surgical
excision is often curative, but grafting pro-
fibroblasts interspersed among bundles of col-
cedures (the bridge-flap technique and lip-
lagen fbers. Recommended therapy is wide
to-lid subdermal plexus flaps) are usually
surgical excision, and the prognosis correlates
necessary to fill the lid defect. The primary
with the mitotic index. In younger cats, multi-
limitation of surgical therapy for squamous cell
centric fibrosarcomas are caused by the feline
carcinoma is the difficulty in visually identify.
sarcoma virus (FeSV), which is a mutant of the
ing the exact margins of the tumor. Squamous
feline leukemia virus (FeLV).Cats with FeSV-
cell  carcinomas are often radiosensitive,
，SO
induced fibrosarcomas are FeLV-positive,
either teletherapy or brachytherapy may be
thus indicating a grave prognosis regardless
used. Cryosurgery is an effective and inexpen-
of therapy.
sive option as well, and hyperthermia is effec-
Peripheral
nerve sheath tumors (a.k.a
tive for superficial lesions.
schwannoma,
neurilemmoma,
 neurogenic
Basal cell carcinoma (i.e., basal cell epi-
sarcoma, neurofbroma, or neurofibrosarcoma)
thelioma) is a common dermal neoplasm in
are infrequently seen in the periocular region
the cat, and though it has no particular site
(Fig. ll.5). Local aggressive recurrence is
predilection, it can affect the eyelids. Basal
common and wide surgical excision combined
cell tumors are generally benign, and sur-
with enucleation or exenteration may be
gical excision and cryotherapy are often
indicated
effective.
Mast cell tumors are also common dermal
neoplasms in the cat and can occasionally
Diseases of the Nasolacrimal
affect the eyelids. The tumors appear as single
and Tear Systems
or multiple dermal masses and may be raised,
ulcerated, well or poorly circumscribed, and
Nasolacrimal and tear diseases are infre
may be dermal, epidermal, or subcutaneous in
quent in domestic cats. Epiphora is occa-
location. Most cutaneous mastocytomas are
sionally seen, most often as a conformational
benign, and treatment consists of excision or
condition in brachycephalic breeds or sec-
 systemic corticosteroid therapy.
ondary to symblepharon  formation and
Non-vaccine-associated fibrosarcomas are
resultant punctal occlusion. Surgical correc-
also common on the head of the cat, and
tion can be attempted by conjunctivorhinos
298 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
 tomy. Congenitally imperforate lacrimal puncta
which medical therapy is either impractical or
are uncommon in the cat and can be surgically
unsuccessful
opened (see chapter 4). Dacryocystitis is like-
Cullen et al. reported an association between
wise rare in the cat.
ulcerative keratitis and qualitative tear film
Though uncommon, KCS is the most
abnormalities in some cats. The cats presented
important lacrimal disease in the cat. The
with indolent corneal ulcers or corneal seques-
actual causes, however, have been poorly
 tra and demonstrated normal aqueous tear pro-
defined. Hypothetically, neurogenic KCS
duction with a decreased tear break-up time
may occur secondary to diseases disrupting
(2.5 and 2.3 seconds for the right and left eyes)
parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal
The normal tear flm breakup time in young
glands. Most cases of feline KCS occur sec-
healthy cats is 12-21 seconds.
ondary to chronic blepharoconjunctivitis, at
least some of which appear in turn to be
secondary to recurrent or chronic FHV-1
Diseases of the Third Eyelid
infection. Experimentally, transient KCS has
been seen in cats with chronic FHV infection.
The third eyelid in normal cats has very limited
The diagnosis of feline KCS is made on the
exposure but can become visible if grossly
basis of compatible clinical signs in conjunc-
thickened or swollen, as in neoplastic or inflam-
tion with decreased Schirmer tear test values.
matory conditions affecting the third eyelid.
As in the dog. less than 5 mm of wetting is
considered to be diagnostic (mean normal
Horner's Syndrome
feline weing. 17 mm), though many cats will
have no clinical signs associated with such low
Horner's syndrome occurs when the sympa-
values.
thetic innervation to the eye is disrupted.
Feline KCS is characterized by conjuncti-
 Features of feline Horner's syndrome include
val hyperemia, mild and diffuse corneal
elevation of the third eyelid, miosis, ptosis
opacification resulting from epithelial hyper-
and enophthalmos (Fig. 1l.6). Third eyelid
plasia, and rarely, corneal vascularization
elevation and miosis are the most consistent
and pigmentation as well as conjunctival
features of Horner's syndrome in the cat.
discharge. In acute cases, epithelial ulcer-
Reported causes of Horner's syndrome in the
ation is also seen.
Treatment of feline KCS differs little from
that of canine KCs. The foremost consider-
ation is to correct, if possible, any underly-
ing cause. Palliative relief is achieved by
 application of artificial tears as needed (four
times a day to hourly) and topical antibiotics to
prevent bacterial infection. Pilocarpine may be
uonnos %0s 0-57'0 jo sdo1p om1 1o auo) pa5n
mixed in the food), but the patient should be
monitored for any adverse systemic effects.
Topical cyclosporine is the current therapy of
choice for the treatment of canine KCs. While
its efficacy in feline KCS has not been estab-
lished, ocular complications are uncommon
except for demonstrated conjunctival hyper-
sensitivities. Cats tolerate the ointment formu-
lation of cyclosporine better than the oil
formulation.
 Parotid duct transposition has been described
Fig. 1l.6. Horner's syndrome in a cat. (Courtesy of
in the cat and is reserved for those cases in
Kathy James.)
FeLiNE OpHTHAlmOlOcY/299
cat include nasopharyngeal polyps, surgical
treatment of nasopharyngeal polyps, ear canal
ablation, bulla osteotomy, percutaneous radio-
frequency heat or chemical ablation of thyroid
tissue, squamous cell carcinoma, acute inter-
vertebral disc extrusion, trauma to the head,
neck, or chest wall, mediastinal or spinal neo-
plasia, otitis media, cleaning of the external ear
canal, neck surgery, skull fractures, brachial
plexus root avulsion, and catheterization of the
common carotid artery.
Fig. 1l.7. Prolapsed gland of the third eyelid in a
Bilateral Third Eyelid Protrusion
young Burmese cat.
Bilateral third eyelid protrusion  without
 other ocular abnormalities is fairly common
in cats. The condition may be associated
the third eyelid have occurred along with pro-
with systemic illness or dehydration, or in
lapsed gland in the Burmese cat. Surgical cor-
older cats with loss of orbital fat and muscle
rection to reposition the gland in cats is
mass.It may also occur in cats that have or
indicated and appears to be equally successful
recently have had diarrhea sometimes with
to the procedure in dogs.
positive fecal isolation of an agent that
resembled toravirus. Treatment is not indi-
cated and the condition generally resolves
Diseases of the Conjunctiva
within several weeks.
Conjunctivitis is probably the most common
feline ophthalmic disease, although the exact
Neoplasia
cause may be difficult to determine in many
cats, particularly in the chronic state.
Neoplasia of the third eyelid appears to be
uncommon in cats. Reported neoplasms
Herpesvirus
affecting the third eyelid include mast cell
tumor, hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and
Feline herpesvirus-l (FHV-l) is a major
adenocarcinoma. Lymphoma arising from the
 nobs uas uaaq oe su Paa pi
cause of conjunctivitis in both kittens and
adult cats. Infection with FHV-1 is common,
carcinoma of the third eyelid appears to be
and the virus is widespread among cat popu-
most often associated with extension from the
eyelids. Any mass of the third eyelid warrants
lations. Primary (first exposure) FHV-1
a biopsy. Depending on the nature of the neo-
disease usually occurs in kittens and is char-
acterized by malaise, fever, sneezing or
 plasia, excision of the mass alone or excision of
the entire third eyelid should be performed
coughing, rhinitis and nasal discharge, as
well as conjunctivitis with ocular discharge.
The virus is spread from cat to cat either by
Prolapsed Gland
direct contact or by aerosolization of virus.
FHV-l infects the epithelial surfaces of the
Prolapse of the lacrimal gland of the third
respiratory tract and conjunctiva and, to a lesser
eyelid is uncommon in cats compared to
degree, the corneal epithelium.
dogs. It has been most often reported in the
Conjunctivitis is characterized by hyper-
Burmese cat (Fig. ll.7), although Persian
emia, blepharospasm, chemosis, and ocular
and domestic short haired cats have also
discharge (Fig. ll.8). In some cats conjunc-
been affected. Deformations of the cartilage of
tivitis is severe and includes ulcerations of
300 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
severe discomfort, hyperemia, chemosis and
serous to purulent ocular discharge.
Establishing an accurate diagnosis of
FHV-l as a cause of conjunctivitis in adult
cats has been problematic (Table ll.2). In
any cat with conjunctivitis, a conjunctival
scraping or brushing and cytology is war-
ranted. Because of the difficulty in establishing
a definitive diagnosis of FHV-l as the cause of
conjunctivitis in many cats, presumption of
cause may be based on clinical signs (particu-
Fig. Il.8. Herpesvirus conjunctivitis in an adult
larly recurrent episodes of conjunctivitis, or the
cat. Note the chemosis and conjunctival hyperemia
presence of respiratory signs), cytologic find-
ings, and response to treatment. Therapy for
herpesvirus ocular disease is discussed in the
later section on cornea.
the conjunctival surface. Fibrinous and cel-
lular exudates may be marked on the con-
junctival surface. Ulcerated areas in the
Chiamydophila
conjunctiva will form adhesions to one another
and to ulcerated corneal lesions very quickly.
Chlamydophila felis (formerly Chlamydia
These areas will become permanent adhesions
psittaci), which is an obligate intracellular
(symblepharon) if not broken down quickly
bacterium, is a common pathogen of cats,
and repeatedly. This most commonly occurs
primarily causing conjunctivitis. The organ-
during a severe primary infection, and is less
ism can also infect the gastrointestinal tract and
likely to occur in older cats with recurrent her-
respiratory system, but clinical signs associated
pesvirus conjunctivitis. Severe symblepharon is
with these systems are often mild or absent.
very difficult to resolve surgically, therefore,
The incubation period is approximately 3-5
every effort should be made to prevent sym-
days.
blepharon from occurring.
The acute phase of C. felis infection results
Neonatal ophthalmia may be caused by
in conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, serous
FHV-l, either from maternal transmission to
ocular discharge, and blepharospasm. Mild
the kitten or infection shortly after birth.
nasal discharge and sneezing may also occur.
 Primary exposure to FHV-l typically occurs
Conjunctivitis is often unilateral initially,
in kittens, especially during the age range of
then progresses to involve the second eye
8-l2 weeks when maternal antibodies are
during the next few days. Ocular disease is
waning. Immunity from vaccination against
produced by lytic cellular damage during
FHV-l is incomplete and temporary, whether
the release of C. felis elementary bodies. If
parenteral  or intranasal
vaccination
iS
untreated, infection with C. felis can produce
administered.
chronic conjunctivitis. Asymptomatic carrier
Once cats are infected with FHV-l they
states can exist, which may be significant in
become latent carriers. Though cats can be
spreading
the organism within the cat
reinfected with FHV-l despite previous
population.
infection or vaccination, recurrent conjunc-
The diagnosis can be established on the
tivitis is most likely to be associated with
basis of finding the characteristic inclusion
recrudescence of latent virus. The virus has
body within the conjunctival epithelial cell
been documented to establish latency in the
cytoplasm (Fig. 1l.9) or a positive FA test
trigeminal ganglia and travel back to the eye via
from a conjunctival scraping. Inclusion bodies
anterograde axonal transport.  Clinical signs
are present in conjunctival cells from the third
may range from transient episodes of mild con-
      
junctival hyperemia with no discomfort, to
numbers over the next 2 weeks, making this an
FELiNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/301
Table 11.2. Laboratory Diagnosis of FHV-1 in Cats.
Test
Advantages/Limitations
 Conjunctival cytology
Limited value, except in prirmary FHV-1 conjunctival infections. Intranuclear
inclusion bodies of FHV-1 appear with primary FHv-1 infections but are not
identifiable with the Wright-Giemsa cytology stain.
IFA testing
Commonly used to confirm FHV-1 infection with FHV-1. Uses the indirect
method where the cytologic specimen is reacted with a nonconjugated
polyclonal antibody. Detects a vaniety of IFA reactions but lacks of sensitivity.
Virus isolation
uosaju! l-Ahe jo sisoubeip ioy piepueis plob, ayn laag sey uonelos! snun
Used in the research laboratory. but results markedly influenced by delayed
handling. variable refrigeration, and repeated thawing. Less useful as well as
insensitive for chronic FHV-1 infections.
Antigen-capture immunoassays
Herpesvirus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELiSA) test employs a solid
phase on which a capture antibody (either mono- or polydlonal) is bound. Not
available to date for FHV-1
Serology
Serum-neutralizing titer has not been useful clinically in diagnosis of FHV-1
infection. In chronic, low-grade infections, serum-neutralizing titers tend to
become stable rather than to increase. FHv-1 titers are often low after
 primary infections and vaccinations, and serurm-neutralizing titers in
reactivation of latent and recrudescent infections may rise.
 Polymerase chain reaction
 PCR permits small amounts of DNA to be arnplified exponentially and
detected. For FHV-1, a segment of DNA is armplified by the thymidine kinase
adns Asea ag ot sieadde uonaap l-ahe ioy dod jo Ansuas aul auan
to that of other available techniques. PCR was 80% more sensitive than viral
 isolation at detecting virus shedding in conjunctival swabs from asymptomatic
cats. The high sensitivity of PCR for FHV-1 has caused some difficulties with
its interpretation in clinical patients.
unreliable method of diagnosis. Serum anti
body titers detected using indirect immunoflu-
orescence correlate well with recent infection.
Most cats (> 95%) infected with C. felis have
titers > 32, compared with < 10% of uninfected
cats. More recently polymerase chain reaction
S   a   )
chlamydial DNA.
Through the use of a top-down PCR strat-
egy. a new chlamydial agent was recently
detected in 39% of 226 conjunctival samples
from cats in Switzerland with conjunctivitis or
keratitis, and 23% of thirty samples from
healthy cats. The organism had a genetic
sequence that was very close to that of Neochla-
mydia hartmannellae, an endosymbiont of the
amoeba Hartmannella vermiformis.
.Studies
Fig. 1l.9. Cytologic preparation from a conjunctival
scraping from a cat with conjunctivitis. Chlamydophila
utilizing the PCR test have documented co-
felis inclusion bodies are present with several
infections with FHV-l and C. felis.
epithelial cells. (Wright's stain, original magnihcation
Chlamydial organisms are sensitive to
× 1,000.)
tetracyclines,
erythromycin,
rifampin,
302 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
fluoroquinolones, and azithromycin. Topical
The diagnosis of mycoplasmosis can be
administration of tetracycline four times
established on the basis of culturing the organ-
daily to both eyes for l-2 weeks after resolu-
ism on special media or finding the character-
tion of conjunctivitis is sufficient in many
istic, small coccoid inclusions within the
cats, however this will not clear the gastro-
cytoplasm of the epithelial cells. A PCR test
intestinal tract of infection. In another study
 specific for M. felis has also been developed
in which experimentally infected cats were
and found to be highly specific and sensi-
treated with 5 mg/kg of oral doxycycline twice
tive. Mycoplasma organisms are sensitive
daily for 3 weeks, clinical signs improved
to
many
routinely
used
ophthalmic
within 3 days of commencing therapy. In feline
antibiotics.
research colonies chlamydiosis was effectively
cleared using systemic doxycycline alone for 3
Bordetellosis
weeks at a dose of 5 mg/kg ql2 hour. Doxycy-
cline at 10 mg/kg once daily for 7, 14, or in
The bacterium Bordetella bronchiseptica has
some cases even 2l days, did not ensure elimi-
been documented as a respiratory tract patho-
nation of the organism. At least 28 days of
gen of cats. Although clinical disease is more
doxycycline at 10 mg/kg/day was needed to
common in dogs, cats in shelters, catteries, and
clear all cats.
research facilities were more likely to be affected
Vaccination with a live chlamydial vaccine
than cats in pet homes in one study. In both
provides the best clinical protection against
naturally occurring disease and experimental
infection. When challenged by the conjunc-
infection, B. bronchiseptica caused sneezing.
tival and nasal routes, vaccinated cats devel-
 coughing. nasal discharge and conjunctivitis
oped milder ocular and upper respiratory
with ocular discharge.
tract signs compared with those in unvacci-
nated cats.
Neonatal Conjunctivitis
Calicivirus
Neonatal conjunctivitis is a syndrome of acute
Feline calicivirus (FCV), which is a single
conjunctival inflammation in neonatal kittens.
stranded RNA virus, is primarily a respiratory
Copious ocular discharge, which is usually
mucopurulent, is the consistent finding. If
tract pathogen of cats, but it also may cause oral
infection develops before resolution of physio-
ulcers and polyarthritis. Compared with FHV-
logic ankyloblepharon at 10-14 days of age,
1, FCV has a low pathogenicity for the conjunc-
the eyelids take on a characteristic, distended
tiva, though it can cause conjunctivitis. Most
appearance. The causes of neonatal conjuncti-
cats recover spontaneously from FCV infection,
vitis include most of the agents discussed earlier
although some cats remain chronically infected
and shed the virus continuously.
as well as bacterial pathogens. The problem
Adau jdo raje adud saosa Ansn
with broad-spectrum antibiotics. If the eyelid
Mycopfasma
margins are adhered, the palpebral fissure
should be opened by inserting the blade of a
Mycoplasmas are the smallest free-living
small scissor into the medial canthus and then
organisms, and they are classified as prokary-
sliding the blade laterally. If the kitten is
Otes. Mycoplasma felis, M. gatae, and M. argi-
younger than 10-14 days, tear production and
nini have all been isolated from both sick
the blink reflex may be inadequate when the
and healthy cats. The role of Mycoplasma
ankyloblepharon is opened. In these patients,
sp. as a cause of conjunctivitis in the cat
topical antibiotics, artificial tears, and even
has been unclear, because the organism
temporary, incomplete closure of the eyelids
has been isolated from the eyes of normal
may be indicated. In severe cases symblepha-
cats as well as from those of cats with
ron and corneal scarring may be sequelae of
conjunctivitis.
neonatal conjunctivitis.
Feline Ophthalmolocy/303
Lipogranulomatous Conjunctivitis
plasma cells, mast cells and macrophages.
Similar to eosinophilic keratitis, this condi-
A form of conjunctivitis has been described
tion usually responds favorably to topical
in cats in which lesions are present in the
corticosteroid therapy. The administration of
palpebral conjunctivae adjacent to the eyelid
oral megesterol acetate is highly effective for
margins. The lesions are nonulcerated white
eosinophilic conjunctivitis or keratitis at a dose
nodules within the conjunctiva (Fig. 1l.10).
of 0.5 mg/kg/day initially, then tapering to
The nodules may be solitary or in clusters.
every other day and eventually to weekly
The condition is often bilateral and may involve
administration. This drug, however, carries
the upper eyelids only, or both upper and lower
potentially serious side effects, including diabe-
eyelids. Most affected cats are middle aged to
tes mellitus, adrenocortical suppression, behav-
older (mean ll years), and the domestic short
ior changes, and mammary hyperplasia and
or long hair breed was the most represented.
neoplasia.
In most cases, the presenting problems were
those of irritation resulting in blepharospasm
Parasitic Conjunctivitis
and ocular discharge. The histopathologic fea-
tures include macrophages and multinucleated
Feline conjunctivitis has been associated with
 giant cells containing lipid. Treatment consists
the nematode Ihelazia californiensis. Clinical
of surgical resection of the nodular lesions with
signs are mild conjunctival hyperemia and
complete resolution of ocular irritation.
ocular discharge; the parasite is easily removed
from the conjunctival fornix with forceps. Simi-
Eosinophilic Conjunctivitis
larly Cuterebra species may gain entry to the
subconjunctival tissues and induce a marked
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis occurs in cats
inflammatory response (Fig. 1l.11).
with or without keratitis. The underlying
cause of this disease remains undetermined.
Neoplasia
Histologically, the conjunctiva was infil-
trated
1with eosinophils, lymphocytes,
Melanoma
Conjunctival melanoma has been reported
in the cat, though it does not appear to
be common. Surgical resection may be
Fig. 1l.10. Lipogranulomatous nodules extending
the entire length of the upper lid of a l6-year-old
Fig. Il.ll. Cat with marked conjunctivitis,
domestic shorthair cat. There is associated
chemosis, and ocular discharge. A Cuterebra larva can
conjunctivitis. (Courtesy of Robert Read.)
be seen in the ventromedial palpebral conjunctiva.
304 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
incomplete and enucleation subsequently
(present in the aqueous humor). Hence if
required due to tumor recurrence; even then
partial or  full-thickness keratoplasty is
widespread metastase can result. It would
attempted in the cat, donor corneas must be
 appear that feline conjunctival melanomas have
carefully evaluated.
the potential to be aggressive in their behavior,
The prevalence
of conjunctival
1and
so that early detection and surgical intervention
corneal surface bacterial flora is lower in the
are indicated.
cat than in other domestic species. Organ-
isms isolated commonly from normal cats
include  Staphylococcus  epidermidis
and
Lymphoma
Mycoplasma sp. The prevalence of fungal flora
in the cat also appears to be low.
A single case report describes bilateral palpe-
bral conjunctival masses in a l3-year-old cat
without other signs of disease. The masses were
Herpesvirus Keratitis
 excised, and based on immunohistochemistry.
B-cell lymphoma was diagnosed.
Corneal ulceration is the second most
common ocular manifestation of FHV-1
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
infection, following primary and recurrent
conjunctivitis. In most cases with corneal
Squamous cell carcinoma has not been reported
involvement, conjunctivitis is also present.
as a primary conjunctival tumor in cats.
Ulceration occurs with the spread of FHV-l
     
to the corneal epithelium, with ulcers typi-
eyelid margins of cats and invades the palpebral
cally confined to the epithelial layer unless
conjunctiva and third eyelid as it progresses
secondary bacterial infection causes pro-
(see previous eyelid section).
gression into the stroma (Fig. 1l.12A). While
early corneal ulcers may have the classic den-
dritic or branching form, they quickly develop
Diseases of the Cornea
into larger areas of epithelial loss, making this
the most common clinically evident sign.
The Normal Cornea
Corneal ulcers secondary to FHV-l, which
are typically very painful, may heal sponta-
The feline cornea matures over the first 1-2
neously, or may become chronic indolent
years of life, changing in curvature and
ulcers even with antiviral therapy. Chronic
thickness. The central corneal thickness of
ulcers usually incite a corneal vascular
9-week-old kittens was 0.38 mm, that of 16-
response, typically a superficial yet dense
week-old kittens was 0.55 mm, and that of
ingrowth of vessels from the limbus to the
cats 67 weeks of age was 0.57 mm. Corneal
ulcer.s
Stromal keratitis is a secondary
sensitivity has been reported for domestic
immune-mediated inflammatory reaction to
shorthaired cats and brachycephalic cats. The
the presence of virus within the epithelium
mean corneal touch threshold (gm/mm?) for
or within the stroma itself (Fig. 1l.l2B). It
the central cornea of domestic shorthaired cats
is evidenced by inflammatory cell infltrates
was approximately 1.7, while the peripheral
and haziness within the corneal stroma, usually
cornea was 5. Values for brachycephalic cats
accompanied by deep stromal vascularization.
were 4 and 6.2, respectively, indicating
a
Stromal keratitis is more likely to develop
diminished corneal sensitivity in the brachyce-
if   
cats receive topical or subconjunctival
phalic cat relative to the shorthaired cat
corticosteroids.
The feline cornea has been shown
to
Cats treated with topical corticosteroids
potentially harbor pathogenic viruses even
for nonherpetic disease may be at risk of
when it is clinically normal appearing. These
developing corneal ulcers from activation of
viruses include FeLV, FHV-l DNA and pos-
latent herpesvirus. Up to 50% of clinically
sibly the feline immunodeficiency virus
normal cats have FHV-1 DNA in the cornea,
FELINE OpHTHAlmOLOcY/305
Fig. Il.13. A history of recurrent herpetic
ulceration preceded development of a dark-brown
sequestrum in the axial cornea of this 3-year-old
domestic shorthair. The adjacent cornea appears
normal.
may be a faint amber or brown color to the
exposed stroma (Fig. 1l.13). As the affected
cornea undergoes a necrotic process it takes on
a darker brown to black color
 Once a sequestrum develops within an
Fig. ll.12. The effects of FHV-l on the feline
ulcer bed, healing of the epithelium is
cornea. A. Outline of a geographic herpetic corneal
unlikely. The vascular response to a seques-
erosion can be seen in the central cornea of this 7-
trum is often more （
month-old domestic shorthair, and B. Stromal
 dramatic than the
keratitis in the cat. Note the generalized stromal
response incited by an ulcer alone. Typi-
 opacification.
cally, cats remain as painful or more so with
the onset of sequestration as they were with
a corneal ulcer.
and the use of topical corticosteroids in
many cats seems to allow the virus to acti-
Therapy for Herpesvirus
vate and cause clinical disease.
Ocular Disease
Corneal sequestra represent areas  of 
corneal stromal necrosis and may develop
Treatment of recurrent FHV-l ocular disease
secondary to chronic corneal ulceration from
may, or may not, be required. Many cats with
FHV-l. Although the exact mechanism of
transient conjunctivitis recover spontane-
sequestra formation is unknown, cats with
ously and need no therapy. Cats with ocular
ulcers that fail to heal for several weeks are
 pain associated with herpesvirus, moderate
at high risk for the development of sequestra
to severe conjunctivitis, or corneal ulcers
within the exposed corneal stroma. Likewise,
should be treated specifically with antiviral
agents (see appendix E). Kittens with primary
costeroids are more likely to develop corneal
disease and moderate to severe conjunctivitis
-AHe jo uonaoe ynoiu Aiaissod tsanbas
and those with corneal ulcers should be treated
1. The first evidence of sequestra development
with specific antiviral therapy.
306 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Past studies have shown FHV-l to be sus-
Seguestra
ceptible to the following antiviral agents,
which are listed in order of decreasing effect:
Corneal sequestration is a common disorder
trifluridine, idoxuridine, vidarabine, bro-
in the cat, particularly in the Persian and
movinyldeoxyuridine and acyclovir; how
Himalayan breeds. Sequestra may occur after
ever, currently, only trifluridine is available
chronic corneal ulcers or keratitis caused by
as a commercial ophthalmic preparation.
infection with FHV-l, or by corneal irritation
Fortunately these other agents such as idoxuri-
from entropion or trichiasis (see Fig. 1l.13).
dine and vidarabine can be compounded into
 It may also appear as a primary stromal
ophthalmic preparations. Traditionally topical
disease in Persians and Himalayans. The con-
  e is a aa s 
dition is characterized by an area of corneal
times daily as they are all virostatic agents. In
degeneration with an amber (early) or brown-
more recent in vitro studies cidofovir, ganciclo-
to-black discoloration, which was suggested to
vir and penciclovir all showed some effective-
be from melanin particles based on absorbance
ness against FHV-l. Cidofovir especially has
spectra and optical microscopy. The lesions
promise, as it has been shown to be highly
vary from sequestra of l-2 mm diameter to
effective at reducing FHV-1 replication.
those occupying more than half the cornea.
Treatment of cats with FHV-l corneal
Vascularization may be intense or absent, and
ulcers should include debridement
to
 ocular pain ranges from none to marked.
remove loose epithelium and reduce the
The necrotic cornea can be surgically
number of viral particles. Grid keratotomies
removed by keratectomy. If superficial, no
should not be performed in cats due to the
graft may be required. If the keratectomy is
increased likelihood of causing corneal
 deep, a graft will be necessary. Conjunctival
sequestra to form. The decision of whether
grafts may help to prevent recurrence. Alter-
to use an anti-inflammatory agent in cats with
natively, a corneoconjunctival transposition
herpesvirus ocular disease remains a difficult
can be performed following the keratectomy.
one in many cases. Particularly in adult cats
Porcine small intestinal submucosa graft
with chronic conjunctivitis, antiviral agents
material has also been used in feline corneas
alone may not bring about resolution of clini-
following keratectomy for sequestra with
cal disease. The authors' choice is to use anti-
good cosmetic results reported.
viral therapy initially, without anti-inflammatory
agents and assess the response after about 2
weeks.
EosinophilicProliferative Keratitis
Recombinant interferon has been used in
cats with herpesvirus-related ocular disease,
Domestic cats experience a form of prolifer-
though studies to document its effectiveness
 ative eosinophilic keratitis that appears to
have been limited. Treatment with 5o0 mg
be unique. The condition has been termed
twice daily of oral L-lysine has been shown
eosinophilic keratitis in the past. More
o
lessen the severity of herpesvirus
recently, however, a more inclusive term,
conjunctivitis in an experimental model
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis, has been
in adult cats, although the overall duration
proposed.
of disease did not differ from untreated
The clinical presentation varies some-
cats. The mechanism of action of lysine
is
what, but the typical lesion is a proliferative,
thought to be competitive inhibition 
J0
white to pink, edematous, irregular, and vas-
arginine (an essential amino acid
for
cularized ingrowth of tissue that most com-
herpesviruses) uptake by the virus and
monly originates from the nasal or temporal
subsequent reduction in the formation of
limbus, peripheral cornea, and adjacent
viral proteins. Lysine should be administered
bulbar conjunctiva (Figs. ll.l4A and B).
with food to prevent gastric upset. The recom-
The nictitating membrane may be affected
mended dosage for kittens is 250 mg twice
as well, and with chronicity, t
the entire
daily.
cornea may become affected. The condition
FelinE OpHthalmoloGy/307
Feline proliferative keratoconjunctivitis
usually responds dramatically to topical
therapy with 0.1% dexamethasone or 1%
prednisolone acetate. Treatment should be
initiated at a frequency of at least four times
daily and then reduced after several weeks
to maintenance therapy of one or two times
daily. Megestrol acetate is also effective at an
oral dose of 5 mg daily for 5 days, which is
reduced to 5 mg every other day for 7 days and
then 5 mg weekly for maintenance. Megestrol,
however, is not recommended as the initial
choice of therapy because ofits potential serious
systemic side effects (see section on eosino-
philic conjunctivitis)
Corneai Dystrophies
and Degenerations
Corneal dystrophy is defined as a primary.
inherited corneal disease. It typically arises
early in life, is bilateral and prefereentially
affects the central cornea. Feline corneal dis-
eases that conform to this definition are rare,
but a syndrome of progressive stromal edema
without endothelial disease has been described
in the Manx cat and may affect other breeds as
well. The pathogenesis of the edema has not
B
been determined
Corneal degenerations are the extracellular
Fig. ll.14. A. Early eosinophilic-proliferative
deposition of lipid and, less commonly, calcium
keratitis in a 6-year-old Himalayan cat. Note the
in the corneal stroma secondary to some other
raised pink vascular mass arising from the
disease. Corneal degenerations are uncommon
dorsolateral limbus. B. Focal white plaques, cellular
in filtrates, stromal edema, and superhcial
in the cat, but several cases of lipid degenera-
vascularization characterize the lesions of eosinophilic
tion have been described
keratitis, as seen in the temporal cornea of this young
Corneal cloudiness is a prominent feature in
domestic shorthair.
cats with mucopolysaccharidosis types I and VI.
The cloudiness appears to be a result of altered
stromal structure, including abnormal spacing.
 size and arrangement of collagen fibrils.
is more often unilateral but bilateral involve-
ment may occur.
Histopathologically, proliferative keratitis is
Acute Bulfous Keratopathy
a chronic granulomatous inflammatory disease
characterized by an inflammatory cell infltrate
Acute bullous keratopathy in the cat is char-
of neutrophils, plasma cells, lymphocytes,
acterized clinically by rapid formation of
eosinophils, mast cells and occasionally histio-
corneal edema, large bullous lesions in the
cytes. Hematologic evaluation may reveal
 cornea, corneal melting and sometimes per-
eosinophilia, although in most cases this does
foration. The entire process can occur in as
not occur. The conjunctiva may be affected
little as 24 hours (Fig. 11.15). This condi-
without corneal involvement.
tion, although uncommon, probably occurs
308 /ESSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
Fig. ll.l5. Acute bullous keratopathy in a cat. The
entire cornea is edematous with a large central bulla
where the cornea is very thin and close to
per foration.
Fig. 1l.16. Multiple superhcial opacities with the
anterior corneal stroma of a cat with “Florida spots."
more frequently than the one case series
presented in the literature suggests. All
"fleshy" in appearance. Histopathologically, the
corneas were variably edematous, with either
lesions contained neutrophils, mononuclear
focal edema or involvement of the entire cornea
inflammatory cells, and organisms containing
with iris prolapse. Treatment consisted of con-
histiocytes. The histopathologic appearance
junctival grafts, enucleation, and attempts to
was considered to be similar to that seen in the
tamponade with nictitans flaps and complete
skin of cats with "feline leprosy."
tarsorrhaphy.
Bacterial Keratitis
Florida Keratopathy ("Florida Spots")
Bacterial keratitis in the cat, like other
An asymptomatic corneal disease referred to as
animals, is initiated by a traumatic disrup-
"Florida spots" is recognized in the dog and cat
tion of the corneal epithelium, which allows
in the southeastern United States and the Carib-
bacteria to gain access to the underlying
bean, but it also occurs among horses and birds.
stroma. Epithelial ulcers caused by FHV-l,
a common occurrence in cats, may become
white opacities within the anterior stroma (Fig.
infected with bacteria and progress
to
11.16). The lesions vary in diameter from l to
stromal ulcers or perforations. Traumatic
8 mm and are typically multiple and usually
injuries may also inoculate bacteria into the
bilateral. No other abnormalities are present,
cornea, or allow endogenous ocular flora to
and the condition usually is either slowly pro-
become opportunistic pathogens. The use of
gressive or nonprogressive. The cause remains
topical corticosteroids in cats with apparently
unknown. Topical antibiotics and corticoste-
normal corneas may lead to activation of local
roids do not usually lead to resolution.
herpesvirus, with resulting corneal ulceration.
The clinical signs, diagnostic approach, and
treatment of feline bacterial keratitis are similar
Acid-Fast Bacilli Keratopathy
to those in the dog (see chapter 6).
One report described keratopathy in two cats
in the northwestern United States that was also
Corneaf Neopfasia and Dermoids
characterized histopathologically by acid-fast
bacilli. In this report, however, the corneal
A proliferative stromal lesion diagnosed as
lesions were progressive and described as
fibrous histiocytoma has been described in a
FelinE OpHthAlmoLoGY/309
Diseases of the Anterior Uvea
Congenital and Developmental
Disorders
The Siamese and Blue frides
The Siamese breed has blue irides, conver-
gent strabismus or esotropia, and nystag-
mlls.
Siamese cats also demonstrate
decreased stereopsis compared with normal
cats. The neuroanatomic abnormalities pro-
ducing these abnormalities in the Siamese
include a decrease in the number of
 uncrossed retinogeniculate projections, an
 increase in the number of crossed retinoge-
 niculate projections, and a disruption in the
Fig. ll.17. Dermoid arising from the ventral
normal pattern of geniculate lamination. All
limbus in a Siamese kitten.
of the neurons that project abnormally exist in
an area of the retina 20°-25° in width immedi-
 ately temporal to the area centralis. The primary
difference seen in Siamese cats, with the degree
of involvement varying between individuals, is
an increase in the number of ganglion cells that
project contralaterally. While the abnormal
domestic shorthaired cat. Like its counterpart
projections route to the correct position in the
in the dog, the lesion began at the temporal
lateral geniculate nuclei, they go by way of the
limbus and was characterized histopathologi-
wrong side. Therefore the cat sometimes
cally by the presence of lymphocytes, plasma
receives contradictory information because it
cells, and histiocytes as well as by active fbro-
has come from the wrong eye. This causes dis-
plasia. Keratectomy was curative.
 ruption of the visual field and causes a portion
Neoplasms affecting the feline cornea and
of the visual field to be inverted.
sclera are rare. Squamous cell carcinomas can
These cats compensate by either suppressing
potentially invade the fbrous tunic of the eye
a portion of the temporal visual field input to
       
the visual cortex (termed the "Midwest cat") or
nomas appear to be the most common primary
by rewiring the projections from the lateral
tumors affecting the sclera and cornea and have
geniculate nuclei to the visual cortex to re-
been reported to have the same clinical behav-
create an orderly representation of the per-
ior as those in the dog. The tumors arise in the
ceived world (termed the “Boston cat"). Using
superficial sclera, are slow-growing and mini-
either approach, the ipsilateral cortex only re-
mally invasive, and can be treated conserva-
ceives monocular input. Therefore all Siamese
tively with surgical resection and cryosurgery
cats lack binocular vision.
or laser photocoagulation.
Esotropia (convergent strabismus) may
Ocular dermoids occur infrequently in the
result from the abnormal visual perception and
cat (Fig. 1l.17). Corneal dermoids have been
an effort by the brain to create a complete visual
described in the domestic shorthair, Burmese,
feld. The esotropia develops during the third
and Birman breeds. Lateral limbal dermoids,
month of age. Surgical correction of the stra-
with prolapse of the nictitans gland, occur in
bismus does not correct the problem because
Burmese cats. Complete excision of corneal
 the cat depends on the abnormal eye position
dermoids by lamellar keratectomy is the treat-
to maximize visual acuity. A nystagmus is often
ment of choice.
310/EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
present as well and probably results from the
contradictory information perceived at the
mesencephalon (rostral colliculus and rostral
tectum).
Blue Irides and Other Diseases
Blue irides, deafness, and white coat color
occur as a dominantly inherited condition in
domestic cats with complete penetrance in
the production of white fur, incomplete pen-
etrance of deafness, and incomplete domi-
nance in the production of the blue iris. The
condition is similar, but not analogous, to
Waardenburg's syndrome in humans.
Fig. 1l.18. Multiple iris-to-cornea persistent
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an autosomal
pupillary membranes with resultant leukoma in a 6-
recessive disease in Persian cats characterized
month-old Maine Coon cat.
by partial oculocutaneous albinism, a bleeding
tendency, and increased susceptibility to infec-
tion. Affected cats have lightly colored irides
long-term mydriatics or surgical or laser tran
(pale yellow-green), reduced pigmentation of
section may be used
the nontapetal fundi, and often, congenital
Partial anterior segment cleavage syndrome
cataracts. The diagnosis is made on the basis of
identifying compatible clinical signs and dem-
occurs in the cat as well. It appears as a broad
onstrating enlarged melanin granules in hair
adherence of the iris to the posterior cornea.
 shafts examined with light microscopy.
with loss of the anterior chamber, focal corneal
edema, and a distorted pupil. The globe is often
microphthalmic, but other anomalies are
Congenitaf Iris Abnormaiities
usually absent. The condition is nonprogessive,
and treatment is not indicated. The cause of the
Congenital iris and ciliary body cysts are occa-
condition is unknown.
 sionally seen in the cat, and they are identifed
by their spherical shape, tendency to be attached
Acguired fris Abnormalities
at the pupillary margin, and translucency when
illuminated with a focal light source. Iris cysts
Degenerations
their surgical removal has been described
Iridal 
degenerations occur in the cat less
Iridal colobomas result if a portion of the
frequently than in the dog. In old cats, the
uvea fails to develop normally and are rare in
iridal stroma may thin and permit partial
cats. Iridal colobomas are most often part of the
transillumination with an intense light source
colobomatous syndrome in cats with eyelid
Iridal degenerations may be focal, and some
agenesis.
color changes may be evident. The cause is
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs) are
unknown.
rare in the cat, appear not to be inherited, and
may occur in eyes that are otherwise normal or
that have multiple ocular anomalies. PPMs
Acquired Cysts
consist of thin, translucent to heavily pigmented
tissues extending from the iridal collarette to
Iridal and ciliary cysts in the cat are also
other areas of the iris, posterior cornea, or ante-
acquired. They are usually pigmented,
rior lens capsule (Fig. 1l.l8). Most PPMs
 transilluminate with an intense light source,
require no treatment, but medical therapy with
and generally are attached to the posterior
FELiNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/31 I
aspect of the pupillary margin or the poste-
Clinical Signs
rior iris. Iridal cysts may be confused with
early melanomas. The cysts may be thick-
The clinical signs of feline anterior uveitis
walled and therefore may not readily
are numerous. Possible clinical signs include
transilluminate. Treatment is not usually
decreased vision, blepharospasm, conjuncti-
necessary. However if the cyst is large enough
val
1 hyperemia, ciliary flush, nictitating
to produce other ocular problems, noninvasive
membrane protrusion, corneal edema, cir-
deflation with a semiconductor diode laser can
cumlimbal corneal vascularization, aqueous
be performed.
flare, fibrin within the anterior chamber,
hypopyon, hyphema, keratic precipitates,
iridal hyperemia, iridal nodules, iris color
Anterior Uveitis
change, miosis, decreased intraocular pres-
sure, cellular infltrates in the anterior
Anterior uveitis, with or without chorioreti-
vitreous, and variable posterior segment
nitis, is one of the most frequent and signifi-
involvement (Figs. 1l.19A, B, and C).
cant ophthalmic disorders in domestic cats.
 In chronic cases one may also note posterior
Both the direct and secondary effects of
synechiae, cataract, lens subluxation/uxation,
anterior uveitis may be destructive to the
secondary glaucoma, and rubeosis iridis. None
eye and maintenance of vision. Cats with
of the clinical signs are pathognomonic for spe-
serious, and often fatal, systemic diseases
cific causes of feline anterior uveitis. However,
may first be presented to the veterinarian for
some clinical signs occur more frequently with
the ophthalmic signs of anterior uveitis.
certain etiologies and are listed in the following
 During clinical evaluation of all feline uveitis
discussion.
patients a complete history and vaccination
 status must be obtained, and a thorough physi-
cal examination, complete blood count, serum
Causes of Anterior Uveitis
biochemistry, and urinalysis should be per-
formed. Other diagnostic tests are discussed
The causes of anterior and posterior uveitis
under the specific causes of feline uveitis (Table
in the cat are summarized in Box ll.l. In
11.3). For additional information, the reader is
recent reports, approximately 38-70% of
referred to the systemic diseases with ophthal-
affected cats have had concurrent systemic
mic manifestations (chapter 16)
diseases.
Table 11.3. Laboratory Tests for Feline Anterior Uveitides.
Disease
Laboratory Tests
FIV
ELISA test detect antibodies to FIV as early as 2 weeks. Aqueous cytology—plasrmacytes and
lymphocytes.
FIP
Coronavirus antibody titers tend to cross-react (FIP test only a guide). Pleural or peritoneal
effusions—straw-colored, high in fibrin and specific gravity. Hyperproteinemia (polyclonal
gamrmopathy in 50% of cats with effusive FIP and 70% of cats with noneffusive FIP). Aqueou5
cytology—fibrin, red blood cells, monocytes, and neutrophils.
FeLV
FeVL titers, bone marrow aspiration, lymph node biopsy. and direct biopsy of intraocular
Abnormal or atypical lymphocytes are infrequent
Toxoplasmosis
Organisms in the uveal tissues, and measurement of imrmunoglobulin (lg) G and lgM
antibodies. ELISA test (lgM antibodies) greater than 1 :256 is considered to be suggestive. PCR
(B1 gene) tests for Toxopiasma gonoii—specific lgM and lgG in both serum and aqueous
humor sarples.
Mycotic
Heratology. clinical chemistries, and aqueous and vitreous paracentesis. Lymph node and
bone marrow aspirations (histoplasmosis). CSF aspirates for cryptococcosis.
312 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
Box 11.1. Causes of Uveitis in Cats.
Trauma
 Blunt trauma
Penetrating wound
infectious
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIv)
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
Toxopiasma gondli
Bartonella henselae
Cryptococcus neoformans
Histopiasma capsulatum
Coccidioides immitis
Candida aibicans
Neoplastic
Diffuse iridal melanoma
Primary ocular sarcomas
Primary ciliary body adenomas and
adenocarcinomas
Metastatic uveal neoplasms (mainly
adenocarcinomas)
Lens
Cataract-induced
Lens luxations
Miscellaneous
Periarteritis
Ophthalmomyiasis
Idiopathic (Chronic lymphplasmacytic)
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
Infection with feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV) causes chronic immunosuppression in
the cat and a mild to moderately severe,
chronic uveitis. The ocular inflammation
Fig. ll.19. Examples of anterior uveitis in the cat
may be caused by direct viral damage or by
A. Anterior uveitis in a 2-year-old domestic shorthair
allowing opportunistic infections of the eye.
with feline infectious peritonitis. Note the character
Coinfection with Toxoplasma gondit increases
of the inflammatory exudate within the anterior
the possibility of ocular disease. Keratic pre-
chamber adhering to the posterior cornea. B.
cipitates tend to be uncommon and few in
Extensive keratic precipitates, conjunctival hyperemia,
number when present. Aqueous cytology reveals
and rubeosis iridis in a l0-year-old domestic
variable amounts of plasmacytes and lympho-
shorthair cat with FIV and large-form Haemobartonella
felis. C. A large ibrin clot obscures three-quarters of
cytes. While cellular infltrates in the anterior
the anterior chamber in a 4-month-old domestic
vitreous (i.e., pars planitis) occur often with
shorthair kitten seropositive to both FIV and FeLV
FIV, other evidence of posterior segment disease
is infrequent. With chronic FIV infection, for-
mation of posterior synechiae, cortical cata-
racts, and secondary glaucoma are likely.
Ocular lymphosarcoma may also be associ-
ated with FIV infection and is a poor prog-
nostic indicator for survival.
FelinE OpHthalmOloGy/313
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
hemorrhage, retinal detachments, and optic
neuritis. “Mutton fat" keratic precipitates are
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), which is
often seen, as are iridal nodules. Obvious white-
caused by a coronavirus, produces a chronic
to-pink masses both within the anterior
and progressive anorexia, depression, weight
chamber and adherent to the anterior iridal
loss, fluctuating fever, debility, and variable
surface are usually associated with FeLV
peritoneal and thoracic involvement. Ante-
The FeLV-induced anterior uveitis may
rior uveitis may develop with or without
progress to either diffuse inflammation of all
concurrent systemic signs. Ocular manifes-
intraocular tissues or frank tumor forma-
tations are more common in the noneffusive
tion. If a peripheral blood ELISA antigen
form of the disease. Survival after the onset
test is positive, an immunofluorescent anti-
of clinical signs is usually less than 2 months
body test can be performed to confirm infec-
in effusive cases, whereas noneffusive cases
tion or the ELISA can be repeated in 3-4
have a more chronic disease course.
months.
Clinical signs result due to granuloma for-
mation, immune complex deposition, and pyo-
Toxoplasma gondii
granulomatous vasculitis. The vasculitis results
in breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier and
fibrin exudation into the anterior chamber from
Ocular lesions are common in animals with
uveal blood vessels. Feline infectious peritonitis
toxoplasmosis as the eye is a target organ.
In cats, I. gondii more commonly causes
may also cause a pyogranulomatous chorioreti-
anterior uveitis, but also produces posterior
nitis and retinal vasculitis with clinically evident
perivascular cuffng, exudative retinal detach-
segment disease (i.e., granulomatous chorio-
 retinitis, retinal vasculitis). The diagnosis of
ments, and optic neuritis. Due to the granulo-
matous nature of the inflammatory response.
toxoplasmosis is made either on the basis of
keratic precipitates 
demonstrating organisms in the uveal tissues or
“muttonfat"k
tend
to
 measurement of immunoglobulin (Ig) G and
occur.
IgM antibodies.
In eyes with FlP, the inflammatory condi-
tion often gradually progresses to involve
the entire inner eye (i.e., panuveitis/panoph-
Bartonella henselae
thalmitis), with diffuse and severe corneal
edema, marked anterior uveitis, marked cel-
B. henselae is the causative agent of cat scratch
lular infiltration of the vitreous (i.e., vitre-
disease in humans. Transmitted by the flea
itis), chorioretinitis, and
1 inflammatory
Ctenocephalides felis, Bartonella infection is
retinal detachments. Immunosuppressive
common in cats. In both naturally and experi-
and anti-inflammatory agents provide pallia-
mentally infected cats, Bartonella has been
tive therapy.
detected in aqueous humor and may be a cause
of anterior uveitis. The western blot analysis
 and/or PCR may be used for diagnosis.
Feline Leukemia Virus
The feline leukemia virus complex causes
Systemic Fungal Infection
both direct and indirect (i.e., lymphosar-
coma-related) uveitis in the cat. Ophthalmic
Granulomatous anterior
uveitis, often
involvement from FeLV can range from
with concurrent chorioretinitis, may be
orbital masses, eyelid masses, subconjuncti-
associated with feline cryptococcosis, histo-
val and nictitating membrane masses, ante-
plasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioido-
rior chamber and anterior uveal tumors
mycosis. The ocular involvement with these
(i.e., lymphosarcomas), iridocyclitis with or
organisms seems to be hematogenous, except
without hypopyon, secondary glaucoma,
 in cryptococcosis, in which extension from
chorioretinitis, chorioretinal masses, retinal
the central nervous system and optic nerve
3I4 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
is also possible. The diagnosis of mycotic
in a cat. Clinical signs were blepharospasm as
uveitides is made on the basis of a complete
well as inflammatory cells, fbrin, and blood in
physical examination, hematology, and clin-
the anterior chamber. The eye eventually
ical chemistries. Aqueous and vitreous para-
required enucleation.
centesis may be used dependingon the principal
involvement (i.e., anterior or posterior segment).
Traumatic Anterior Uveitis
Lymph node and bone marrow aspirates may
also be indicated for histoplasmosis, and cere-
Anterior uveitis may follow both blunt and
brospinal fluid collection may be indicated for
penetrating ocular trauma. Clinical signs
 the diagnosis of cryptococcosis. The preferred
include those of acute anterior uveitis plus
treatment for ocular fungal infections is fluco-
hyphema, with the hyphema having variable
nazole as it penetrates the eye and brain well.
amounts of fbrin. With a more intense ante-
rior uveitis and additional fibrin, exit of the
Experimental Sarcoma Viral Uveitis
erythrocytes may be delayed. With limited
blunt injury, the hyphema usually clears within
An oncogenic RNA virus, FeSV is thought to
a few days. With considerable blunt trauma,
have evolved by mutation from FeLV. The virus
the trauma or resultant anterior uveitis may
is responsible for causing spontaneous tumor
produce damage to the iris, lens luxation, and
formation in naturally infected cats. Experi-
cataract formation.
mental
 subcutaneous
injection,
however,
Penetrating ocular injuries may affect the
induces a syndrome of anterior uveitis.
 cornea, lens, and posterior segment. When the
lens and posterior segment cannot be visualized
Periarteritis and Uveitis
at slit-lamp biomicroscopy and ophthalmos-
copy, ultrasonography is indicated. Treatment
Periarteritis is a rare disease of the cat in which
of traumatic uveitis is similar to that for other
medium and small arteries undergo fbrinoid
types of uveitis. Corticosteroids such as pred-
necrosis. The cause of the disease is unknown,
nisolone acetate or dexamethasone are used to
but a hypersensitivity response to collagen is
control the anterior uveitis and to minimize
suspected. Ocular manifestations of periarteri-
formation of fibrin. Systemic antibiotics should
tis nodosa in cats include anterior uveitis,
be administered if infection is suspected. Addi-
cyclitic membrane formation, choroiditis, and
tionally the use of broad spectrum topical anti-
exudative retinal detachment. Lesions were also
biotics that penetrate the cornea well should
seen in the kidneys, lungs, and spleen. The
 also be utilized. Systemic anti-inflammatory
 diagnosis of periarteritis nodosa is usually made
agents such as meloxicam should also be given.
at necropsy.
If hyphema is present, the use of tropicamide to
move the pupil may help prevent synechia. If
intravitreal hemorrhage occurs, however, exit of
Ophthalmomyiasis
blood from the vitreous may require several
months. If the lens capsule is penetrated, lens
Ophthalmomyiasis is also rare in the cat
removal should be performed soon after the
The condition most commonly manifests as
injury to prevent ongoing lens-induced uveitis.
the migration of parasites both in and around
the sensory retina, and most affected cats
are asymptomatic. Cuterebra larvae have
Lens-induced Anterior Uveitis
been described as causing uveitis in cats, in
which the clinical signs were ocular pain,
Lens-induced anterior uveitis in the cat may be
aqueous flare, anterior chamber fibin and
associated with cataract formation, hyperma-
corneal edema. Often surgical removal of the
ture cataracts, perforation of the lens capsule,
larva is attempted.
and lens luxation. Perforation of the lens capsule
Invasion of the globe by a nematode of the
       
family Metastrongylidae has also been described
claws or foreign bodies
FeliNE OpHtHAlmOLoGY/315
Lens-induced uveitis related to cataract
plications usually relate directly to the duration
formation in the cat is usually less intense
and cause of the uveal inflammation. Glaucoma
than its counterpart in the dog. Feline cata-
may result from peripheral anterior synechiae,
ract surgery has received limited attention
 iridocorneal angle and sclerociliary cleft closure,
in the veterinary literature, but the large
complete posterior synechiae with iris bombe,
cornea, prominent eye, and less intense
S    
postoperative anterior uveitis in the cat
which may cover the iris, ciliary body, and
results in success rates equal to, and even
aqueous humor outflow pathways as well as the
exceeding, those achieved in the dog.
pupil.
Idiopathic Uveitis
Anterior Uveal Neoplasia
Many cats are presented for chronic uveitis,
 Both primary and secondary uveal neoplasms
which remains idiopathic despite evaluations
occur in the cat. Early diagnosis in the cat is
for infectious or neoplastic diseases. These cats
vital, because primary malignant neoplasms
tend to be middle aged to older and may have
one or both eyes affected. These cats generally
are locally invasive and have a high metasta-
 do not exhibit overt pain and the condition
staic potential. Feline intraocular neoplasms
may be advanced before the animals are pre-
tend to involve the anterior uvea, whereas
 posterior uveal involvement is less common.
sented. Typically the uveitis must be managed
Anterior uveal tumors generally affect cats
long term and enucleation for glaucoma is not
older than 10 years. No breed or sex predis-
an uncommon eventuality.
position has been reported.
Therapy for Uveitis
Diffuse fridal Melanoma
The nonspecific therapy for feline anterior
The diffuse iridal melanoma of the cat appears
uveitides includes mydriatics, topical (and
as progressive pigmentation of the iris, which
occasionally systemic) corticosteroids,and
occurs over months to several years (Fig.
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (Table
11.20). The pigmentation may develop simul-
11.4).
taneously in several areas on the anterior
iridal surface. Generally, both the extent and
Ophthaimic Complications
amount of pigmentation increase with time.
Changes in pupil shape and mobility may
Several complications from anterior and poste-
result as the iris becomes thicker. Glaucoma
rior uveitis may develop in the cat. These com-
secondary to tumor infiltration of the
Table 11.4. Therapy for the Feline Uveitides.
Drugs
Recommendations
Mydriatics
 Use 1 % atropine ointrnent (less chance of salivation than solution). Administer to effect and
maintain mydriasis
Corticosteroids
Topical (and occasionally systemic) 1 % prednisolone or 0.1 % dexamethasone. Monitor
loneinp pue Aouanbany isn!pe ol ainssaid jeinooenu! pue alely snoanbe
NSAIDS
Can partially substitute for corticosteroids.
 Antibiotics
For 7. gondii clindamycin (25 mg/kg daily in divided oral doses), with and without
corticosteroids. Combination reported to improve the therapeutic response (86.7% with the
corticosteroid-clindamycin combination versus 42.9% with corticosteroids alone)
Antifungals
For cryptococcosis and histoplasmosis, ketoconazole, 10 mg/kg given orally twice per day.
3I6/EsSENTIALS OF VeteriNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
amount and size of pigmented areas, any
pigmented mass within the iridocorneal
angle and sclerociliary cleft at gonioscopy,
changes in the pupillary shape and mobility,
and elevations in intraocular pressure.
Feline Ocular Sarcomas
Feline ocular sarcomas are the second most
common primary intraocular tumor (diffuse
iridal melanomas being the most frequent)
Fig. 1l.20. Iris melanoma in a 14-year-old
and are highly malignant neoplasms. Ocular
domestic longhair cat. The iris has multiple large
trauma seems to be the inciting event.
raised areas of hyperpigmentation; secondary
Affected cats range in age from 7 to 15 years;
glaucoma is also present.
time from trauma to detection of tumor aver-
 ages 5 years. Risk factors include trauma to
the lens, chronic uveitis, and perhaps, intra-
iridocorneal angle indicates the condition is
 ocular surgery, and intravitreal gentamicin
advanced. These tumors have also presented
injections to destroy the ciliary body for
clinically as amelanotic melanomas. Metastasis
advanced glaucoma.
may be noted as late as l-3 years after enucle-
Presenting clinical signs include chronic
ation and usually involves the liver and lungs.
 uveitis, glaucoma, intraocular hemorrhage,
The metastatic rate may be as high as 63%,
and possible single or multiple, white-to-
but metastasis is not always noted until death
pink masses. Because cartilage and bone for-
occurs. One study suggested a association
mation
may occur within this tumor,
between anterior uveal melanoma and FeLV/
ultrasonography and radiography may be
FeSV infection. However, a subsequent study
helpful. Early enucleation, with exentera-
failed to confirm that association.
tion of the orbit, is recommended because
Several investigators have attempted
involvement of the optic nerve and regional
 develop clinical and histopathologic parameters
lymph nodes, and distant metastasis occurs.
to assist clinicians in treatment of these patients.
After diagnosis and surgical removal of affected
A grave prognosis in one report was based on
 globes, most cats will unfortunately die from
histopathologic findings including a high mitotic
neoplasm-related causes within several months.
index, full-thickness iris involvement, and the
Histopathologic fndings range from granula-
presence of tumor cells in the scleral venous
tion tissue, fbrosarcoma, and osteosarcoma to
plexus. Another report correlated histopatho-
an anaplastic spindle cell sarcoma. The tumor
logic findings with survival times in affected
has been postulated to arise from a malignant
cats. Cats with the tumor confined to the iris and
transformation of lens epithelium. Clinical
cats with moderate spread, which included
assessment of these patients provides a con-
diffuse iridal involvement (spread into the irido-
vincing argument for early removal of nonvi-
corneal angle, with and without glaucoma), had
sual
globes
with severe trauma, absolute
survival times similar to those in the control
glaucoma, chronic uveitis, and phthisis bulbi.
group. Cats with advanced melanoma consist-
ing of aggressive infltration of the iris, its pos-
terior epithelium, and the ciliary body, however,
Primary Ciliary Body Neoplasms
had shortened survival times, and the cause of
death almost always suggested metastatic
Primary ciliary body adenomas and adenocar-
disease. Therefore, a dilemma exists for vet-
cinomas are uncommon in the cat. They appear
erinarians as to deciding when removal of the
as nonpigmented masses within the pupil or at
eye will benefit the patient. Enucleation may
the iris root that originate from the ciliary pars
be justified on the basis of increases in the
plicata, and they often produce secondary glau-
FeLiNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/31 7
coma. They are usually slow-growing and
seldom penetrate the sclera. Once the diagnosis
is established, enucleation is recommended
Metastatic Uveal Neoplasms
Lymphosarcoma is the most frequent meta-
static intraocular tumor in cats. The anterior
uveal involvement occurs in nearly all globes
as an anterior uveitis, an intraocular mass,
or a combination of both (Figs. 1l.2lA and
B). Typically, there is a pink-to-white mass
in the anterior chamber or within the ante-
A
rior uvea. Lymphosarcoma in cats may be
associated with FeLV or FIV, however the
disease also occurs in uninfected cats. In
some FeLV-positive cats without other clini-
cal signs, a “D" or “reverse D" pupil may
signal the disease.
The diagnosis of ocular lymphosarcoma is
based on examination of cells. Intraocular
biopsy of the anterior uvea is not usually indi-
cated, but aqueous humor cytology is frequently
diagnostic.
Lymphosarcoma affecting ophthalmic tissues
is generally considered to be a manifestation of
multicentric disease. Therefore, systemic che-
motherapy is recommended. Topical or sub-
conjunctival corticosteroids (or both)
can
temporarily reduce the size of the intraocular
Fig. ll.21. A. Early uveal infiltration in ocular
mass. Treatment of the secondary glaucoma is
lymphosarcoma alters the color and contour of the
usually medical and consists of topical carbonic
temporal iris in this adult domestic shorthair. A large
anhydrase inhibitors and topical β-antagonists
fbrin clot occupies the nasal anterior chamber as
(e.g., 0.5% timolol).
well. B. Iris swelling and posterior synechiae distort
Other metastatic neoplasms in the cat may
the shape of the pupil and a fbrin clot obscures the
involve the uveal tract. Adenocarcinomas of a
iris surface in this 7-year-old domestic shorthair with
mammary and uterine origin, metastatic hem-
advanced ocular lymphosarcoma. Serology for FeLV
angiosarcoma, and most frequently intraocular
was positive. (Reprinted with permission from
squamous cell carcinomas from various sites
Ketring KL, Glaze MB. Atlas of feline ophthalmology
have been reported. Anterior uveal involve-
Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems, 1994.)
ment usually presents as masses of the ciliary
body. The choroidal masses produce retinal
hemorrhages and detachments.
appear to be secondary. Several different
types of glaucoma occur in the cat, but there
Glaucoma
are surprisingly few clinical and histopatho
logic reports in the literature. As with dogs.
Etiology
most cats with glaucoma are presented late in
the disease, and the initial events that induced
The prevalence of glaucoma in the cat is less
the glaucoma may be masked by secondary
than in the dog, and most feline glaucomas
changes.
318 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
The different types of feline glaucoma are
additional report, Burmese cats were reported
summarized in Box ll.2. Congenital glauco-
to have narrow or closed angle glaucoma.
mas may be either unilateral or bilateral and
The gonioscopic appearance of the normal
occur because of developmental abnormalities
feline iridocorneal angle and ciliary cleft reveals
of the aqueous humor outflow pathways (Fig.
long, slender, and slightly branching pectinate
11.22)
ligaments that are usually the same color as the
 Primary glaucoma appears to be rare in
iris and a pigmented trabecular meshwork
the cat, but has been reported in the Siamese,
Most cases of feline glaucoma are second-
Persian, European shorthair and Burmese.
ary and due to either anterior uveitis or
In most cats with primary glaucoma, the
intra-ocular neoplasia. In two separate his-
iridocorneal angle is open. However, a recent
topathologic studies, the majority of glau-
case report describes a group of closely
coma cases occurred secondary to chronic,
related Siamese with congenital glaucoma
idiopathic, lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis;
due to pectinate ligament dysplasia. In an
other less frequent causes were feline infec-
tious peritonitis, iridal melanoma, FeLV-
associated lymphosarcoma, trauma, and
lens-induced uveitis.
Box 11.2. Types of the Glaucomas
Intraocular neoplasia is the other predomi-
in the Cat.
nant cause of secondary feline glaucoma; the
diffuse iridal melanoma presents the highest
Primary glaucomas
risk. The second most common neoplasia to
Open/normal angle, with and without collapsed
cause glaucoma is lymphosarcoma.
cleft (Siamese breed)
Other, less common causes of feline second-
Narrow/closed angle (chronic)
ary glaucoma include corneal perforation with
Secondary glaucomas
anterior synechia (and subsequent angle and
Uveitic (chronic anterior uveitis)
cleft closure) and traumatic lenticular rupture.
Lens luxations (trauma/age)
Phakolytic/phacoclastic uveitis (lens perforation)
The severe inflammation after corneal and lens
Hyphema (rare)
perforations may induce pupillary seclusion
Intraocular
neoplasia
(primary/secondary
due to annular posterior synechiae. The cat's
neoplasms)
vertical, slit-shape pupil appears to be more
Congenital glaucomas
difficult to occlude except in cases of severe
Secondary to outflow anomalies
inflammation.
Anterior lens luxation may cause feline
secondary glaucoma by obstructing aqueous
outflow. As the feline anterior chamber
depth is greater than that of dogs, glaucoma
secondary to anterior lens luxation is less
common in the cat as compared to the dog.
Lens luxations are common in cats with
advanced glaucoma and buphthalmia (Fig.
11.23). Buphthalmos due to chronic glaucoma
may contribute to zonular disinsertion and lens
instability resulting in an anterior lens luxation
Therefore determining whether the lens luxa-
tion or the glaucoma was the primary event is
often not possible.
Recently, glaucoma due to aqueous humor
misdirection,  
sometimes termed malignant
Fig. ll.22. Bilateral congenital glaucoma in an 8-
glaucoma, has been described in the cat. The
week-old domestic shorthair kitten. Note the marked
buphthalmia.
aqueous humor posteriorly into the vitreal
FeliNE OpHtHALmOLoGY/319
can elevate intraocular pressure in normal
cats. If lens luxation or rupture is the cause,
lens extraction is beneficial.
Ocular antihypertensive medical therapy is
generally indicated only when the underlying
cause is correctable or manageable, and when
there is a possibility of preserving vision.
Medical therapeutic options for the cat include
systemic and topical carbonic anhydrase inhib-
itors and topical β-blockers. Systemic carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors such as methazolamide
may be used to decrease aqueous production
Fig. ll.23. Anterior lens luxation and glaucoma in
and thereby decrease IOP; however, cats may
an aged domestic shorthair.
experience more systemic side effects with the
systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors includ-
ing decreased appetite, vomiting, and lethargy.
cavity through small breaks in the hyaloid near
Fortunately, topical carbonic anhydrase
the vitreous base.
inhibitors (i.e.,dorzolamide and brinzol-
amide; see appendix G) are effective in the
cat and can be combined with the beta
Clinical Signs
blockers.
The topical β-blockers most commonly used
Making the diagnosis of feline glaucoma is
in veterinary ophthalmology are betaxolol and
the same as in other animal species, but the
timolol. Unfortunately there are no reports on
clinical signs may be more subtle, and there-
the effcacy of betaxolol in feline glaucoma
fore easily overlooked. In one study the
patients. When timolol maleate 0.5% was
most common complaints and clinical signs
administered to normotensive cats the IOP was
were cataract, corneal edema, mydriasis,
decreased by 22% and has been suggested to
buphthalmos, "cloudy eye," and blindness.
be the best medication for glaucoma therapy in
Cats often do not develop the conspicuous
cats. A significant miosis was also induced
corneal edema that occurs in dogs. In acute
The newest drugs for the treatment of the
glaucoma, pupillary dilatation is the most
glaucomas in man and dog, including latano-
common finding and may be the only sign
observed. Buphthalmia, exposure keratitis with
prost, bimatoprost, and unoprostone isopro-
pyl have had no effect on the IOP of normal
vascularization, and lens luxation (usually sub-
cats. This lack of effect may be due to the
luxation and anterior luxation) are common
fact that decreases in IOP in cats appear to
sequelae to chronic intraocular hypertension.
be mediated through prostanoid E and D
receptors (rather than the F receptor).
Treatment
When medical therapy fails to control IOP,
surgical options may be considered. In globes
Therapy for feline glaucoma is generally
that still retain vision, cyclocryotherapy and
applied using the same guidelines used in
cyclophotocoagulation are surgical options to
other species. The foremost consideration is
decrease production of aqueous humor. Enu-
to correct, when possible, the underlying
cleation is indicated in blind, painful, or buph.
cause. Glaucoma secondary to idiopathic
thalmic eyes and is the procedure of choice for
liveitis is sometimes effectively treated using
eyes with intraocular neoplasia or bacterial
aggressive anti-inflammatory therapy with
infection. An orbital prosthesis can be placed
topical and subconjunctival corticosteroids
for improved cosmesis. However, use of methyl
(described earlier). These corticosteroids
methacrylate as an orbital prosthesis is not rec-
offer both benefits and limitations, however,
ommended in cats, as 40% of cats in one study
because long-term topical dexamethasone
experienced complications.
320 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Diseases of the Lens and
Cataracts are also frequently sequelae to lens
Cataract Formation
luxation in the cat. These cataracts occur as
diffuse, subcapsular cortical opacities, presum-
Congenital Cataracts and
ably resulting from inability of the luxated lens
Lens Anomalies
to maintain normal metabolic function.
The most common cause of secondary
Multiple ocular defects rarely occur in the cat,
feline cataracts is anterior segment inflam-
but the few reported cases have all included
mation. Any type of uveitis may be associ-
some form of lenticular abnormality.
ated with cataract formation, but chronic
Congenital cataracts are uncommon in
uveitis is the condition that most often
domestic cats (Fig. 1l.24). Congenital cata-
leads to cataract formation (Fig. ll.25).
racts have been described in Persian, Birman,
Cataracts due to uveitis are typically slow to
Himalayan, and British shorthaired kittens.
progress, begin in the cortex and may be associ-
Congenital cataracts have also been described
ated with posterior synechiae, rubeosis iridis,
as a frequent manifestation of the Chediak-
 and pre-iridal and pupillary inflammatory
Higashi syndrome in the cat.
membranes.
Several types of metabolic/toxic cataracts
have been reported in the cat. Kittens fed a
Primary and Secondary
commercially available kitten milk replacer
Cataract Formation
developed cataracts consisting of diffuse
anterior and posterior lens opacification and
Primary and inherited cataracts are rare in the
vacuolation of the posterior "Y"-sutures.
cat, and to date, all reported feline cataracts
Theoretically, the feline lens should respond
presumed to be hereditary are congenital. Most
to elevated blood glucose levels by cataract for-
cataracts in the cat are secondary and may be
mation, but diabetic cataracts are uncommon.
divided into those associated with trauma,
When they do occur, feline diabetic cataracts
anterior uveitis, glaucoma, and lens luxations.
have been described as progressing more slowly
Traumatic cataracts are relatively common
than canine diabetic cataracts.
in the cat and are often sequelae to perforating
 ocular injury, particularly from cat claws. Trau-
matic cataracts generally are slowly progressive
 or nonprogressive.
Fig. ll.25. Subtle iridal vascular congestion and a
small fbrin clot are testaments to the chronic, low-
Fig. 11.24. Congenital posterior subcapsular
grade anterior uveitis that preceded cataract
cortical cataract in a 6-month-old Himalayan kitten
development in this adult domestic shorthair
FELINE OPHTHALMOLOGY/321
Individual care reports have documented
 pattern is holangiotic, with three major pairs
secondary cataracts associated with nutrition;
of cilioretinal arterioles and larger venules
secondary hyperparathyroidism and hypocal-
 that emerge near the optic nerve head periph-
cemia; hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia;
ery. The tapetal fundus appears to be more
and following topical 0.l% dexamethasone.
consistent in the cat than in the dog, appear-
ing as a highly reflective, usually yellow-
green triangular area in the dorsal fundus
Lens Luxation
(Fig. 1l.26). Partial-to-complete lack of the
Feline lens luxations are most commonly
tapetal fundus occasionally occurs in blue-
eyed cats. The "area centralis," which is an
associated with chronic uveitis and glau-
area of high cone concentrations, is located
coma (see Fig. 1l.23). They are less fre-
approximately 3-mm lateral to the optic
quently
associated
with
trauma.
The
mechanism appears to be zonular damage.
nerve head. Conus or peripapillary hyperre-
flective areas as well as pigmented areas
Siamese cats were over-represented, as were
immediately adjacent to the optic disc are
male cats. Complications of lens luxation in
not uncommon. The nontapetal fundus is
the cat are direct corneal endothelial cell
 damage, secondary glaucoma, and persistent
usually heavily pigmented, appearing as a
dark brown area surrounding the tapetal
uveal inflammation. As the feline anterior
fundus. In color-dilute cats, the nontapetal
chamber depth is greater than that of dogs.
fundus is less pigmented focally or diffusely,
glaucoma due to anterior lens luxation is less
thereby permiting the deeper choroidal vascu-
common. Treatment is by intracapsular lens
extraction and the prognosis depends on the
lature to be visualized ophthalmoscopically
duration and the underlying cause. In one
The optic nerve head or optic disc is typically
study, 89.5% of the cats undergoing lentec-
situated in the tapetal fundus; it is small, circu-
lar, nonmyelinated, and somewhat grey. Occa-
tomy benefited from the procedure.
 Primary lens luxations generally have an
sionally, myelination of the nerve fiber layer
excellent prognosis after surgery. The prog-
may occur about the optic disc and is consid-
ered a variation of normal
nosis in other types is less favorable, but 
lens luxation secondary to idiopathic uveitis
can be successfully
  treated surgically
if
 attentive therapy for the underlying uveitis
 is concurrently provided.
Cataract Surgery and Lensectomy
Feline cataract surgery is performed in a fashion
identical to that of canine cataract surgery, but
reports of clinical operative series are not avail-
able in the literature.
Diseases of the
Posterior Segment
The posterior segment includes the vitreous,
ocular fundus, and optic nerve. The ocular
fundus in the cat is divided into (l) tapetal
fundus; (2) nontapetal fundus; (3) optic
Fig. Il.26. Normal feline ocular fundus with the
nerve head or optic disc; and lastly, (4)
dorsal tapetal fundus, optic disc with the tapetal
retinal vasculature. The feline vascular
fundus, and ventral pigmented nontapetal fundus.
322 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Vitreous
ciated with intrauterine or early neonatal
intraocular viral infection. Retinal dysplasia
Congenital and Developmenta!
has also been reported in feline coloboma-
Disorders
tous syndrome. When injected intraocularly
or systemically (i.e., intraperitoneal) to fetal
 Persistent hyaloid arteries appear to be rare in
or neonatal kittens, FeLV produces retinal
the cat, with only two reports.
dysplasia. Impaired development of retinal,
cerebral, and cerebellar tissues has been
associated with perinatal feline panleukopenia
Acquired Disorders
infection. Genetic retinal dysplasia, common in
the dog, has not been well documented in
Vitreal infltrates of inflammatory and red blood
cats.
cells may occur. Inflammatory cell infltrates
Bilateral optic nerve aplasia has been
typically will occur in cases of severe anterior
described in a domestic longhaired kitten. The
uveitis or posterior uveitis, particularly pars
absence of optic nerves and tracts was con-
planitis. Accumulation of inflammatory cells on
firmed  histopathologically.  and associated
the posterior lens capsule and within the ante-
ocular defects included absence of the ganglion
rior vitreous, often termed snowbanking or
cell layer and presence of rosettes in the periph-
snowballing, is frequently noted with pars
eral retina.
planitis.
Vitreal hemorrhage is the condition most
likely to be encountered clinically. Hemorrhage
Nutritional Retinal Degeneration
may be due to inflammation, trauma, neopla-
(Taurine Deficiency)
sia, clotting disorders, systemic hypertension,
and severe anemia.
Taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid
Asteroid hyalosis occurs less frequently in
essential to cats, because they have limited
cats than dogs, but is occasionally seen
in
ability to synthesize it from cysteine, which
 aq r i si ri oi e a
is a precursor amino acid for most animal
or bilateral. A case of ophthalmomyiasis interna
species. Taurine is stored in the liver, but
was reported with the larva was present within
the highest tissue concentrations are found
the vitreous body.
in the heart muscle and retina, where espe-
cially high concentrations are found in the
Retina and Choroid
photoreceptor cells. A dietary taurine level
of 500-750 ppm has been suggested as being
Congenital, Developmental, and
necessary to prevent retinal disease. The
Acquired Disorders
function of taurine is not fully understood, but
it has been speculated to act as a neurotrans-
Focal retinal, choroidal, and optic disc colobo-
mitter and to have a protective influence on cell
mas are rare in the cat. These defects usually
membranes.
The retinopathies known as nutritional
occur in association with the colobomatous
syndrome in cats with eyelid agenesis.
retinal degeneration and feline central retinal
degeneration (FCRD) appear to be identical
and associated with inadequate levels of dietary
Retinal Dysplasia
taurine. The ophthalmoscopic appearance of
taurine deficiency retinopathy is considered
Retinal dysplasia is loosely defined as anoma
to be pathognomonic, and five progressive
lous retinal development, with resultant aber-
stages have been described. The earliest
rant organization of retinal elements to form
lesion, or stage l, is increased granularity of
rosettes, folds, and gliosis. The causes of
the area centralis. Stage 2 is defned as an
retinal dysplasia are numerous, but in the
ellipsoidal, hyperreflective lesion. In stage 3, a
cat, the condition has most often been asso-
second hyperreflective lesion becomes visible
FelinE OpHthalmoLoGy/323
nasal to the optic papilla. The two lesions even-
show mydriasis and nystagmus, which is
tually coalesce to form a large, band-shaped
variable, intermittent, and often rapid. The
area of hyperreflectivity dorsal to the optic
first ophthalmoscopically visible lesions
papilla, or stage 4. Stage 5 is generalized retinal
consist of tapetal dullness and loss of
degeneration, with attenuation or loss of retinal
detail, present by 8-12 weeks of age. Pro-
vessels. The ophthalmoscopically visible retinal
 gression of the disease is fairly rapid and
lesions have been shown to have decreased
is evidenced by tapetal hyperreflectivity,
rhodopsin levels.
loss of pigmentation in the nontapetal
Dietary deficiency of taurine results in
fundus, and retinal vascular attenuation.
selective depletion of plasma and retinal
The disease is very advanced by l year of age.
amino acid levels within 5 weeks. Electro-
The rods and cones are equally affected, and
physiologic studies have revealed an increase
disorganized outer segments as well as diminu-
in cone implicit times, thus indicating that
tive inner segments can be detected as early as
cone photoreceptors are initially affected.
14 days of age.
After l0 weeks of dietary deficiency, the ampli-
tudes of both rod and cone electroretinograms
Rod-Cone Degeneration in the
are decreased. Ophthalmoscopic signs of retinal
disease become apparent between 3 and 
Abyssinian
7
months, with complete retinal degeneration
 The second form of feline progressive retinal
becoming apparent by 9 months. Because
degeneration (rod-cone degeneration) also
taurine deficiency has been linked to feline
affects the Abyssinian breed. The disease
cardiomyopathy, cardiac function should be
does not begin until 1.5-2.0 years of age,
evaluated in all cats affected with these oph-
then progresses to complete degeneration
thalmoscopic abnormalities.
over the next 2-4 years. The mode of inheri-
tance is autosomal recessive. Recent studies
Inherited Rod-Cone Dysplasia
report that Abyssinian cats heterozygous for
and Degenerations
the disease can be identified by their abnor-
mal dark-adapted electroretinograms, even
With the exception of those disorders having a
though their fundi appear normal ophthal-
nutritional basis, retinal degenerations
are
moscopically (Fig. 1l.27).
relatively rare in the cat.
Photoreceptor
degeneration, which is characterized oph-
 thalmoscopically by tapetal hyperreflectivity
and vascular attenuation, was described
in several related Persian cats, with a sus-
pected autosomal recessive mode of inheri-
tance (1973); more recently a breeding
colony of Persian cats was established and
an early-onset, autosomal recessive, progres-
sive retinal atrophy was confirmed (2005).
The earliest clinical sign was reduced pupillary
light reflex that could be noted at age 2-3
weeks. By l6 weeks retinal degeneration was
complete.
Fig. ll.27. Ocular fundus of the late stage of
Rod-Cone Dyspiasia in the Abyssinian
inherited rod-cone degeneration in a 6-year-old
Abyssinian cat. Note the marked hyperreflectivity and
An autosomal dominant rod-cone dysplasia
grayish discoloration of the tapetal fundus and
has been described in the Abyssinian breed.
attenuated retinal vasculature. (Courtesy of Kristina
Affected kittens as young as 4 weeks may
Narfstrom.)
324 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Drug-Associated Retinal Toxicity
toxicity lead to bone marrow suppression and
death in one cat. The cat also presented with
The most significant ocular drug toxicity
mydriasis and vision impairment. On histologic
issue to be recently identified in cats is enro-
examination of the retinas, the photoreceptors
floxacin-associated
retinal
 degeneration.
were found to have generalized loss of distinc-
Beginning in 1997 the enrofloxacin label dosing
tion, but definitive degeneration was not
was changed from the previous recommenda-
documented.
tion of 2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours, to a flxible
dose ranging from 5 to 20 mg/kg as a split or
Infiammation
single dose. Very soon afterward cases of acute
and severe retinal degeneration and blindness
Chorioretinitis refers to inflammatory con-
began to be seen in cats receiving enrofloxacin
ditions that arise in the choroid and extend
(Fig. 1l.28). Histopathologically the retinas of
into the retina. Retinochoroiditis refers to
one cat were found to have diffuse degenera-
inflammations that originate in the retina
tion, particularly of the outer nuclear and pho-
and eventually involve the choroid, though
l p audoad se lm e 'sa roda
the former is more common. Active chorio-
retinal pigment epithelium. In most cases seen
retinal inflammations are characterized oph-
to date, the blindness has been permanent,
thalmoscopically by edema, hemorrhages,
although a few cats have retained some vision.
inflammatory or neoplastic cell infiltration,
One of the remarkable findings of this toxicity
is the rapidity with which the retina degener-
mycotic and parasitic granulomas, and exll-
dates or transudates. Chorioretinitis that has
ates. Although enrofloxacin has been the
abated leaves scars, which appear ophthalmo-
compound most identified with feline retinal
scopically as areas of hyperreflectivity, with or
degeneration, all of the fluoroquinolones
without pigment deposition in the tapetal
must be considered potentially retinotoxic.
fundus, and areas of depigmentation or pigment
Concurrent administration of methylnitro-
clumping in the nontapetal fundus.
sourea (a carcinogen) and ketamine hydrochlo-
Viral chorioretinitis in the cat has been
ride caused severe retinal degeneration in cats.
 associated with feline infectious peritonitis
while administration of methylnitrosourea
virus, feline immunodeficiency virus and
alone did not damage the retina. Griseofulvin
feline leukemia virus. Fungal chorioretinitis
has been associated with cryptococcosis,
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioido-
mycosis, and candidiasis. The protozoal
agent Toxoplasma gondi is a documented
cause of chorioretinitis in cats. It has most
often been confirmed in cats with systemic
illness due to toxoplasmosis, or in experimen-
tally infected cats.
 Feline chorioretinitis and retinal detachment
has been associated with tuberculous Mycobac-
terium bovis, as well as the nontuberculous
agent Mycobacterium simiae. Parasitic infections
such as dipteran larvae may cause chorioretini-
tis as the parasite migrates within or under the
retina.
Fig. 11.28. Fundus photograph of early
enrofloxacin retinal toxicity in a cat. Note the altered
Hypertensive Retinopathy
tapetal reflectivity extending temporally from the
optic disc. (Photograph courtesy of Michael
Systemic  hypertension  is   a relatively
Davidson.)
common disease of aged cats and has most
FEliNE OPHtHALmOLoGY/325
consistently been associated with chronic
tension. There is the potential in some
renal failure and less frequently hyperthy-
animals for blindness to be reversible if sys-
roidism. Primary hypertension in cats may
temic hypertensioncan be quickly controlled.
exist, but at this time remains undefined.
Bullous retinal detachments can resolve if the
Most hypertensive cats are at least l0 years old,
underlying effusion is controlled. Return of
often older, and acute blindness is the most
vision in all cases is dependent upon the degree
common reason for presentation. Other pre-
of damage the retina has undergone. The calcium
senting signs may be those of renal failure,
channel blocker amlodipine has been used very
hyperthyroidism or neurologic signs secondary
successfully in cats at a dose of 0.625 mg to
to cerebrovascular accidents (hemorrhage,
1.25 mg orally once daily, and has become the
infarct, arteriolar spasm),
drug of choice for hypertensive cats.
The eye, due to its small caliber vessels, is a
target organ for hypertensive damage. Clini-
Lipemia Retinalis
cally, the ocular manifestations of systemic
hypertension can be severe and include
retinal arterial tortuosity, intra-retinal hem
The term lipemia retinalis describes the ophthal-
orrhage, pre-retinal hemorrhage, sub-retinal
moscopic visibility of lipids or lipoproteins (or
both) in retinal blood vessels. The condition is
hemorrhage, retinal edema and focal bullae,
retinal detachment, retinal degeneration,
of diagnostic significance only, because an ele-
hyphema and secondary glaucoma (Fig.
     i o P
 strated to adversely affect retinal tissue. Lipemia
11.29). Frequently the first indication of sys-
retinalis occurs infrequently in the cat but
temic hypertension is what appears to be an
has been experimentally induced in neonatal
acutely blind animal
kittens by parenteral administration of large
Any cat over l0 years of age should have a
doses of methylprednisolone. Lipemia retinalis
fundic exam performed as well as blood pres-
sure measurement at least once per year. Cats
also occurs in cats secondary to primary, famil-
ial hypercholesterolemia.
with renal disease or hyperthyroidism should
have these tests performed at diagnosis and
subsequently as the disease is managed.
Anemic Retinopathy
Treatment of hypertensive retinopathy
includes controlling the underlying disease
Retinal hemorrhages were documented  in
processes and treating the systemic hyper-
anemic cats, some of which were also thrombo-
cytopenic. Hemorrhages occured at all depths
in the retina and with equal frequency in both
the tapetal and nontapetal fundus. The mecha-
nism of retinal hemorrhage formation is thought
to be anemia-induced hypoxia of retinal vessels.
Anemic retinopathy occurs in a high perce nt-
age of cats with hemoglobin levels of less
than 5 g/dL, and the condition is aggravated
by concurrent thrombocytopenia.
Diabetic Retinopathy
A case of presumed diabetic retinopathy has
been described in cats but appears rare. Retinal
Fig. 1l.29. Ocular manifestations of systemic
and vitreal hemorrhages as well as retinal
hypertension in an aged domestic shorthair cat. Note
detachments were the prominent ophthalmo-
the intraretinal and preretinal hemorrhages and the
scopic changes, and microaneurysms were
large focal retinal detachment.
present as well.
326 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Hyperviscosity Retinopathy
Posterior Segment Neoplasia
The retina of the domestic cat is sensitive to the
Posterior segment neopasia is rare in cats. An
effects of increased serum hyperviscosity. The
astrocytoma of retinal origin has been described
prevalence of such diseases, however, appears
 in one cat. The presenting signs were leukoco-
to be low. Ocular changes have been described
ria with a vascularized mass visible within the
in a cat with serum hyperviscosity syndrome
pupil. Histopathologically, the tumor infltrated
caused by an IgG-secreting myeloma
the optic nerve head, choroid, and vitreous
humor.
Ophthaimomyiasis Interna Posterior
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
In ophthalmomyiasis interna, there is intraocu-
lar migration of parasites, with the suffix
Storage disorders are a group of progressive.
inherited diseases caused by the deficiency of a
'posterior"
added
to
indicate
posterior
specific lysosomal enzyme. Disease ultimately
segment involvement. Five such cases, all
with strikingly similar clinical findings, have
results from abnormal accumulation of the
deficient enzyme's substrate within lysosomes
been described  in  asymptomatic domestic
of affected cells. Lysosomal storage diseases
cats. Ophthalmoscopic examination reveals
reported to have ophthalmic manifestations are
multiple, criss-crossing, curvilinear tracks in
mucopolysaccharidosis I and IV, GM- and
the sensory retina. The tracks are of uniform
GM2-gangliosidosis, and mannosidosis (see
width, have distinct margins, and occur in
Table 16.1.1)
both the tapetal and nontapetal fundus. No
larvae from feline cases of ophthalmomyiasis
interna posterior have been recovered for
Diseases of the Optic Nerve
speciation, but their clinical appearance sug-
gests they belong to the order Diptera, which
Congenital and Developmental
includes the parasites thought to cause most
Disorders
human cases.
Surgical
intervention,
either
parasite
Colobomas of the optic disc and peripapillary
extraction or laser coagulation, may also be
 attempted. Use of larvicidal therapy is contro-
region are rare in cats. Optic disc colobomas
may occur in association with eyelid agenesis
versial when the parasite is within the eye.
as well as other developmental anomalies.
however, because of the potential for increased
Optic disc aplasia has been reported in a cat
and uncontrolled inflammatory response to
 the dead parasite.
in which the retinal vasculature, nerve fber
layer, ganglion cell layer, optic nerves, and
optic tract also failed to develop. Optic nerve
aplasia may also occur if kittens are exposed
Retinal Foids and Detachments
to weekly doses of 500-1,000 mg of griseo-
fulvin during the first half of 
gestation;
Retinal folds may occur as congenital lesions
additional
abnormalities include
cyclopia
but are also recognized in the cat as a secondary
anophthalmia, rudimentary optic tracts, and
response to other ocular diseases. The causes
 numerous central nervous system and skeletal
of retinal folding are variable. Folds may occur
abnormalities.
secondary to retinal detachment or as a sequela
Optic disc
hypoplasia may also occur.
to intraocular inflammation. Retinal detach-
The visual deficits depend upon the extent
ment or separation of the sensory and epithelial
of the defect. Histologically fewer retinal
retina in the cat has been described in associa-
nerve fbers and ganglion cells are present.
tion with a wide variety of ophthalmic and
Aplasia and hypoplasia of the optic nerve are
systemic abnormalities.
uncommon.
FELiNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/327
Acquired Disorders
tiple ocular tissues, which may include the
eyelid, iris, optic nerve, and sclera
Optic Neuritis
Griseofuivin Teratogenesis
 Inflammation of the optic nerve may have a
variety of causes in the cat. Viral, parasitic, and
The cat is particularly sensitive to the terato-
fungal infections can all cause optic neuritis. Of
 genic effects of griseofulvin. When given to cats
the viral diseases, feline infectious peritonitis is
a p  oo'1-o j 3p Aam  1
most likely to affect the central nervous system
frst half of gestation, griseofulvin produces
and the optic nerve. Associated ocular signs
ocular defects consisting of cyclopia, anoph-
may include anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis,
thalmia, and optic nerve aplasia. Extraocular
perivascular cuffing, and retinal detachment.
defects include numerous central nervous
Of the systemic fungal infections, Cryptococcus
system and skeletal abnormalities.
neoformans is the most frequently recognized
systemic fungal infection in cats.
Acquired Disorders
Optic Nerve Atrophy
Traumatic Proptosis
Atrophy of the optic nerve is the sequelae to
any process that damages the retinal ganglion
Proptosis of the globe is a serious disease in
cells or their axons. Examples of such causes
the cat, because to occur, it requires consid-
include injury to the optic nerve during trau-
erable trauma to the orbit and head and is
matic ocular proptosis, traction-related damage
associated with concurrent facial fractures
to the optic nerve at the level of the optic
and optic nerve damage (Fig. 1l.30). In one
chiasm during enucleation of the contralateral
series of traumatic proptosis among l8 cats,
eye, or previous episodes of optic
neuritis
no eyes regained vision. In 90% of the
Chronic glaucoma and retinal degeneration will
affected cats, facial bone fractures, hyphema,
also result in optic nerve atrophy.
corneal perforation, and ocular desiccation
were common.
Neoplasia
Orbital Inflammations
Primary neoplasia of the feline optic nerve is
rare. Lymphoma is the most common second-
The feline orbit has relatively limited space
ary feline intracranial neoplasm and has been
compared with that in other domestic species.
detected within cranial nerves.
Traumatic
ocular sarcoma has a propensity for growth into
and along the optic nerve, often into the brain,
resulting in death.
Diseases of the Orbit
Congenital and Developmental
Disorders
Multiple abnormalities or colobomas of the eye
and associated ophthalmic structures occur in
the domestic cat. In one report, the breeds rep-
resented included the domestic shorthair and
Fig. 11.30. Proptosis of the globe and mandibular
 Persian. The condition is characterized by con-
Iracture in a 2-year-old domestic shorthair alter being
 genital colobomatous defects in single or mul
struck by a car.
328 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Hence, space-occupying orbital inflammations
approximately two-thirds of the neoplasms
and neoplasms, early in the onset of disease,
were epithelial in origin, with squamous cell
will produce exophthalmos, deviation of the
carcinomas being the most frequent type.
globe (usually exotropia or esotropia), and pro-
Approximately fifteen different types of orbital
trusion of the nictitating membrane. Orbital
tumors have been reported in the cat, including
surgeries (e.g., explorations, enucleation, glau-
coma filtration) are also more difficult to perform
osteoma, and fibrosarcoma. Orbital lymphosar-
because of the limited peribulbar space.
coma may occur either unilaterally or bilater-
Orbital cellulitis and abscessation occur
ally in the cat. Depending on the tissue of origin
infrequently in the cat but are usually amenable
and the invasiveness of an orbital tumor, thera-
to traditional therapy (see chapter 4). Bilateral
peutic options may include surgery (orbitotomy
orbital cellulitis and exophthalmos caused by
with tumor resection or exenteration), radia-
Penicillium sp. has been described in a domestic
 tion therapy and chemotherapy.
cat, and originated in the paranasal sinuses.
Another reported cause is aspergillosis.
A 13-year-old cat with a l-week history of
Enucieation
periorbital swelling and exophthalmos had a
Enucleation or exenteration in the cat must
predominantly eosinophilic inflammatory cell
be approached with more caution than the
infiltrate in the orbital tissue that was biopsied.
same surgical procedure in the dog, due to
The cat was treated with oral prednisolone in a
the higher risk for damage to the optic
tapering dose over 4 weeks and had no recur-
chiasm. The feline optic nerve is short and
rence in a two year follow-up time. Orbital
lacks the same degree of S-curve present in
    a o s 
 associated with frontal sinus penetration.
the dog. Traction placed on the globe during
enucleation may lead to optic chiasm damage
An idiopathic sclerosing orbital disease has
 and blindness in the fellow eye.
been recently described in seven cats (six
domestic shorthaired and one Persian) in one
case series, and one domestic shorthaired cat in
a single case report. The features of the condi-
References
tion are similar to those of sclerosing orbital
pseudotumor in humans. In affected cats, the
Allgoewer I, Schaffer EH, et al. Feline eosinophilic
onset of the disease is insidious with progres-
conjunctivitis. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:69-74.
Andrew SE, Tou S, Brooks DE. Corneoconjunctival
sion over weeks to months. Orbital tissues and
transposition for the treatment of feline corneal
eyelids become fixed in place by fibrous tissue.
sequestra: a retrospective study of 17 cases
In all of the described cats the condition became
(1990-1998). Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:107-111
bilateral. Treatment provided included oral
Barnett KC, Crispin SM. Feline ophthalmology.
corticosteroids, oral antibiotics, and radiation
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998.
therapy in one cat. Additionally three cats
Beaumont SL, Maggs DJ, Clarke HE. Effcts of
received surgical therapy, including entropion
bovine lactoferrin on in vitro replication of feline
repair and temporary tarsorrhaphy. In all cases
herpesvirus. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:245-250.
response to treatment was poor. Six of the eight
Billson FM, Miller-Michau T, Mould JR, et al. Idio-
cats were euthanized; one cat later died from
pathic sclerosing orbital pseudotumor in 7 cats.
chronic renal failure, and one cat had bilateral
Vet Ophthalmol 2006;9:45-52
exenteration performed
Blocker T, van der Woerdt A. A comparison of
corneal sensitivity between brachycephalic and
domestic short-haired cats. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;
4:127-130.
Orbital Neoplasia
Blocker T, van der Woerdt A. The feline glaucomas:
82 cases (1995-1999). Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4
Approximately 90% of feline orbital neo-
81-85.
plasms are malignant, and such neoplasms
Brightman AH, Ogilvie GK, Tompkins M. Ocular
are usually of epithelial origin. In one series,
disease in FeLV-positive cats: ll cases (l981-
FelinE OpHthAlmoloGy/329
1986). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 199l;1981
proptoses in dogs and cats: 84 cases (1980-1993)
1049-1051
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995;206:1186-1190.
Cantaloube B, Raymond-Letron I, et al. Multiple
Gilger BC, McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD, et al. Orbital
eyelid apocrine hidrocystomas in two Persian
neoplasms in cats: 2l cases (1974-1990). J Am
cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:121-125.
Vet Med Assoc 1992;20l:1083-1086.
Corcoran KA, Peiffer RL, Koch SA. Histopathologic
Glaze MB. Congenital and hereditary ocular abnor-
features of feline ocular lymphosarcoma: 49 cases
malities in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
2005;20:74-82.
41.
Glover TL, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG. Acute bullous
 Crispin SM, Mould JR. Systemic hypertensive disease
keratopathy in the cat. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
and the feline fundus.Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:
1994;4:66-70.
131-140.
       a 
Cullen CL, Lim C, et al. Tear film breakup times in
and conjunctival goblet cell assessment of cats
young healthy cats before and after anesthesia.
with corneal sequestra. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;
Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:159-165
8:167-170
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, English RV, Wilcock
Hampson ECGM, Smith RIE, et al. Primary glau-
BP, Jamieson V. Feline anterior uveitis: a study
coma in Burmese cats. Aust Vet J 2002;80:
 9     5  
672-680.
77-83.
Henik RA, Synder PS, Volk LM. Treatment of sys-
Dubielzig RR, Hawkins KL, Toy KA, Rosebury WS,
- aie aq s un uu oi
Mazur M, Jasper TG. Morphological features of
ate. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;33:226-234.
Feline ocular sarcomas in 10 cats: light micros-
Herring IP, Troy GC, Toth TE, et al. Feline leukemia
copy, ulrastructure, and immunohistochemistry.
virus detection in corneal tissues of cats by poly-
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;4:7-13
merase chain reaction and immunohistochemis-
 Duncan DE, Peiffer RL. Morphology and prognostic
try. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:119-126.
indicators of anterior melanomas in cats. Prog Vet
Hoffman A, Blocker T, et al. Feline periocular
Comp Ophthalmol 1991;1:25-32.
peripheral nerve sheath tumor: A case series. Vet
Ekesten B, Narfstrom K. Abnormal dark-adapted
Ophthalmol 2005;8:153-158
 is e a    
Hyman JA, Vaegan MA, Lei B, Narfstrom KL. Elec-
ited rod-cone degeneration. Vet Ophthalmol
trophysiologic differentiation of homozygous and
2004;7:63-67.
heterozygous Abyssinian-crossbred cats with late-
 Espinola MB, Lilenbaum W. Prevalence of bacteria
onset hereditary retinal degeneration. Am J Vet
in the conjunctival sac and on the eyelid margin
Res 2005;66:1914-1921
of clinically normal cats. J Small Animal Pract
 Kerlin RL, Dubielzig RR Lipogranulomatous con-
1996;37:364-366.
junctivitis in cats. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
Esson D. A modification of the mustarde techni-
1997;7:177-179
que for the surgical repair of a large feline
LaCroix NC, van der Woerdt A, Olivero DK
eyelid coloboma. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:159-
Nonhealing corneal ulcers in cats: 29 cases
160.
(1991-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;218:
Featherstone HJ, Franklin VJ, Sansom J. Feline
733-735
corneal sequestrum: laboratory analysis of ocular
Lappin MR, Burney DP, Dow SW, Potter TA. Poly-
samples
from
12
cats.
Vet
 Ophthalmol
merase chain reaction for the detection of Toxo-
2004;7:229-238
plasma gondii in aqueous humor of cats. Am J Vet
Featherstone HJ, Sansom J. Feline corneal sequestra:
Res 1996;57:1589-1593
a review of 64 cases (80 eyes) from 1993-2000)
Maggs DJ, Nasisse MP, Kass PH. Efficacy of oral
Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:213-227
supplementation with L-lysine in cats latently
Featherstone HJ, Sansom J, Heinrich CL. The use of
infected with feline herpesvirus. Am J Vet Res
porcine small intestinal submucosa in ten cases of
2003;64:37-42
feline corneal disease. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:
Martin CL, Stiles J, Willis M. Feline colobomatous
147-153.
syndrome.
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;7:
Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al.
39-43.
Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration in
McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD, Gilger BC, Wright JC.
cats. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:99-106.
Eyelid neoplasia in cats: a review of demographic
Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA, van der Woerdt
data (1979-1989). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
A, McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD. Traumatic ocular
1993;29:63-67
330 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
McLellan G, Betts D, et al. Congenital glaucoma in
tion, virus isolation, and luorescent antibody
the Siamese cat—a new spontaneously occurring
testing for identifying feline herpesvirus in cats
animal model for glaucoma research. 35th Annual
with conjunctivitis. Am J Vet Res 1997;58:804-
Meeting of the American College of Vet Ophthal-
807.
mol, Washington, DC, 2004.
Stiles J, Townsend WM. Feline ophthalmology. In:
Morgan RV, Abrams KL, Kern TJ. Feline eosino-
Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed.
philic keratitis: a retrospective study of 54 cases
Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1095-1164.
(1989-1994). Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;
Stiles J, Townsend WM, Rogers QR, et al. Effect of
6:131-134.
oral administration of L-lysine on conjunctivitis
Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Stevens JB, English EV,
caused by feline herpesvirus in cats. Am J Vet Res
Davidson MG. Clinical and laboratory hndings
2002;63:99-103.
in chronic conjunctivitis in cats: 9l cases (1983-
Stiles J, Townsend W, et al. Use of a caudal auricular
1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:834-837.
axial pattern flap in three cats and one dog fol-
Nuyttens J, Simoens P. Morphologic study of the
lowing orbital  exenteration. Vet Ophthalmol
musculature of the third eyelid of the cat (Felis
2003;6:121-126.
catus) Lab Anim Sci 1995;45:561-563
Townsend WM, Stiles J, Guptill-Yoran L, et al.
Olivero DK, Ris RC, Dutton AG, Murphy CJ, Nasisse
Development of a reverse transcriptase-poly-
MP, Davidson MG. Feline lens displacement: a
merase chain reaction assay to detect feline her-
retrospective analysis of 345 cases. Prog Vet Comp
pesvirus-l latency associated transcripts in the
Ophthalmol 1991;1:239-244
trigeminal ganglia and corneas of cats that did not
Peiffer RL, Wilcock BP. Histopathological study of
have clinical signs of ocular disease. Am J Vet Res
uveitis in cats: 139 cases (1978-1988). J Am Vet
2004;65:314-319.
Med Assoc 1991;198:135-138.
Weigler BJ, Babinaeu CA, Sherry B, Nasisse M. A
 Read RA, Lucas J. Lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis:
polymerase chain reaction for studies involving
clinical findings from 21 eyes in 13 cats. Vet Oph-
the epidemiology and pathogenesis of feline her-
thalmol 2001;4:93-98.
pesvirus type 1. Vet Rec 1997;140:335-338
Remillard RL, Pickett JP, Thatcher CD, Davenport
Wiebe V, Hamilton P. Fluoroquinolone-induced
LJ. Comparison of kittens fed queen's milk with
retinal degeneration in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
those fed milk replacers. Am J Vet Res 1993;54:
2002;221:1568-1572.
901-907.
Wilcock B, Peiffer RL, Davidson MG. The causes of
Stiles J. Treatment of cats with ocular disease attrib-
glaucoma in cats. Vet Pathol 1990;27:35-40.
utable to herpesvirus infection: 17 cases (1983-
Wolfer J. Correction of eyelid coloboma in four
1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:599-603
cats using subdermal collagen and a modihed
Stiles J, McDermott M, Willis M, Roberts W, Greene
stades technique. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;4:269-
C. Comparison of nested polymerase chain reac-
272.
Chapter 12
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY
Dennis E. Brooks and Andrew G. Matthews
Equine Vision
change in lens shape. Studies of color percep-
tion indicate horses possess dichromatic
The domesticated equidae in the developed
vision utilizing two populations of cones,
world have largely moved from their role as
allowing perception of green/yellow and
working draught animals towards ridden use,
blue/grey, though not of reds.
primarilyfor pleasure, competition and working
purposes, a role in which vision is likely to be
Assessment of Vision in Horses
of paramount importance. The horse thus
requires vision adapted for an arrhythmically
There is at present no means of objectively
photic (diurnal and nocturnal) lifestyle that
 assessing vision or visual disability in the
occurs at the expense of visual acuity and color
horse that is not overtly blind. The use of
perception. The horizontally elliptical pupil
close menace responses has traditionally
in equidae allows for scanning of a wide arc
been accepted as a fair estimate of whether
of horizon. Globe position in adult horses
a horse can “see" or not, both amongst lay
allows horizontal monocular visual fields of
 individuals and veterinary surgeons. Other
approximately 146° and a frontal binocular
tests include 
：obstacle course testing
of
field of 65-80°, creating a panoramic visual
horses, with or without unilaterally blind-
field of some 350°. This is most extreme
folding
the
animal, and a careful and
when the animal's head is down in grazing
systematic
ophthalmic examination.
Veteri-
position. Blind spots occur behind the tail
narians should be
cautious when giving opin-
and immediately anterior to the interocular
ions on the functional consequences of ocular
space. Binocular vision in horses occurs
pathology
 and should probably avoid giving
when the head is elevated and the face aimed
opinions of the nature of "this horse is suitable
towards the object of interest. Visual acuity
Jo jaal siul Jo ap e Aq Auo uapp1 aq 01
in horses has been variably estimated to lie
experience
and
only in
these
ambient
between 20/30 and 20/60 on the Snellen
conditions.
scale, and is tied to the macular areas, with
significant peripheral drop off. Acuity has
been estimated to improve as objects are ele-
Examination of the Equine Eye
vated up to 70 cm from ground level. Accom-
modation is believed to be limited to ± 2
Adequate restraint is important when evaluat-
diopters, and is likely to be achieved by ante-
ing the equine eye. The pain in diseased eyes
rior translocation of the lens rather than by
may be so intense that examining or manipulat-
331
332 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
ing the orbit and globe is difficult. The eyelids
fundus is usually dark brown in neonates.
may also be so swollen that the globe cannot
 Partial albinism will result in a lack of pigmen-
be examined. The eyelids should never be
() nda id p al u u
forced open, however, because expulsion of
of the nontapetal region and resulting visual-
intraocular contents can occur through
a
ization of the choroidal vasculature.
full-thickness corneal or scleral laceration.
Topically applied anesthetics, supraorbital
Microphthaimos
sensory and auriculopalpebral motor nerve
blocks, a nose or ear twitch, and intravenous
 Microphthalmos is a congenital globe condi-
sedation facilitate examination of the injured
tion in which the globe axial length is less
equine eye, and the fluorescein dye test
than two standard deviations below the
should be an integral part of every ocular
mean length (Fig. 12.1). Microphthalmos is
examination in the horse. General anesthesia
common in foals and may be either unilat-
is rarely necessary to perform a thorough oph-
 eral or bilateral. Thoroughbreds appear to
thalmic examination, but it is defnitely required
be at increased risk. Microphthalmos may be
for the meticulous repair of many injuries to
spontaneous and idiopathic, or it may be
the eye and periocular region.
secondary to uterine infection or drug toxic-
 ity. Microphthalmos can be an isolated finding.
or it can be associated with other ocular abnor-
Ocular Problems in the Equine
Neonate
malities, such as cataracts and retinal dysplasia.
The microphthalmic eyes of most foals are
blind. A small palpebral fissure and promi-
Ocular disorders of the equine neonate may
nence of the nictitans may be noted in affected
be congenital, inherited,
oracquired.
foals.
Normal embryogenesis of the foal eye
results in a fully developed globe and
adnexa at birth. Low tear secretion, reduced
Orbit
corneal sensitivity, lack of menace reflex
during the first 4-14 days postpartum, and
Development of the bony equine orbit is influ-
lagophthalmos may be found in neonates.
enced by globe development. Asymmetry of the
The pupillary light reflexes are normal at
face because of an underdeveloped bony orbit
birth. An oval pupil in the neonatal foal
can be associated with congenital microphthal-
responds to light by constricting to the
mos or phthisis bulbi resulting from severe
adult pupil shape. Hyaloid artery remnants
globe trauma in a very young foal.
in foals may contain blood for several hours
  as a i  
months of age. Lens "Y" sutures are often
prominent in foals and should not be mis-
taken for a cataract. Variations of the normal
equine neonatal fundus are numerous, and
primarily relate to coat color. The foal tapetal
fundus is usually blue to blue-green, with
small dots and end-on views of choroidal cap-
illaries or “Stars of Winslow" distributed in a
uniform pattern. Color-dilute neonates may
have light yellow zones of tapetal color with
dn ou u ro 'om j s, P
with resultant exposure of the choroidal vas-
culature thereby creating a red fundic reflec
tion. White horses may have the entire tapetal
Fig. 12.1. Protrusion of the nictitans is evident in
region appearing yellow.
 The nontapetal
this microphthalmic Thoroughbred foal
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/333
Strabismus
Eyelid Disease
Strabismus refers to a deviation in alignment of
Blepharitis
one globe in relation to the other globe. It may
be constant or intermittent amblyopia. The two
Dermatophytosis, dermatophilus, and staphy-
eyes may be crossed (esotropia), out-turned
lococcal folliculitis can cause the blepharitis or
(exotropia), or deviated up vertically (hypero-
eyelid inflammation of foals. Alopecia, excoria-
pia) (Fig. 12.2), or deviated down vertically
tion, and depigmentation are associated with
(hypotropia)
fly-bite blepharitis in foals. Trauma, fre and
Binocular vision is an acquired reflex that
excessive head rubbing are associated with
normally develops early in life. Foals with con-
blepharitis in foals and adult horses (Fig.
 genital or early onset strabismus do not receive
12.3).
the essential visual retinal stimulation for devel-
opment of binocular vision and thus lack true
Vitiligo
stereopsis.
Congenital strabismus (i.e., hyperopia)
：been
Arabian Foaling Syndrome, Juvenile Arabian
and dorsomedial strabismus have
Leukoderma, Vitiligo of Arabians, or “Arabian
reported in Appaloosa foals with equine
Pinky Syndrome" is a cutaneous depigmenta-
congenital stationary night blindness. Hyper-
tion condition affecting the head and body of
opia associated with congenital cataracts
 may resolve following surgical removal
grey Arabian horses 6-24 months of age. Anda-
lof
lusians and Saddlebreds are also affected. There
the cataract. Esotropia (cross-eyed)
is
common to Saddlebreds, and is reported in
is no actual hair loss. Lesions may undergo
mules with an incidence of 0.5%. Surgical
cyclic  depigmentation  and  repigmentation.
This condition may be autoimmune and inher-
correction of strabismus by rectus muscle
ited. Adult Arabian mares may develop it during
transposition is infrequently performed by
pregnancy.
veterinary ophthalmologists.
Entropion/Ectropion
Entropion is inversion of the margin of the
lower or upper eyelids. It may occur in foals as
a primary anatomic condition, or be secondary
to the enophthalmos resulting from microph-
Fig. 12.2. Hyperopia in a foal with a mature
cataract. The strabismus resolved after successful
Fig. 12.3. Blepharitis with lid swelling, skin
ca.taract surgery.
ulcerations, and hair loss following a hre.
334 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
thalmos, and prematurity/dysmaturity. Severe
ing the eyelid margins to prevent trichiasis
lid scarring following eyelid trauma can cause
and exposure-induced ulcerative keratitis is
entropion. Rolling in of the eyelid margin rarely
critical. Excision of lacerated pedicles of
occurs from dehydration or malnutrition in
eyelid marginal tissue should be avoided.
foals. Entropion is generally in the lower eyelid
Wounds should be gently cleansed with 1:50
only, although entropion may affect the upper
eyelid only in Miniature Horses. Ocular pain
may exacerbate the degree of anatomic entro-
pion to cause spastic entropion.
The entropion may result in increased
lacrimation, blepharospasm, conjunctivitis,
or corneal ulceration from the rubbing of
eyelid margin hairs (Figs. 12.4A and B).
Treatment in young foals is to evert the
eyelid margin with temporary, nonabsorb-
able sutures in a vertical mattress pattern
(4-0 silk) or with surgical staples until the
causative mechanism has resolved. Perma-
nent reconstructive entropion surgeries
should be reserved for larger, older foals,
because the facial growth rate in the younger
foals as the animal matures can affect the
surgical results.
 Ectropion is eversion of the lower or upper
eyelid margins and generally follows scarring of
the eyelids from severe trauma or burns. It is
more rare than entropion.
Eyelid Trauma
Traumatic eyelid lacerations and forehead
trauma can occur in foals and adults (Figs.
12.5A and B). Upper eyelid lesions are more
serious than lower eyelid injuries, because
Fig. 12.4. A. Severe lower lid entropion in a foal. B.
upper eyelid movement distributes tear film
The entropion was repaired with sutures. A corneal
to prevent exposure keratitis. Thus, preserv-
ulcer was present.
Fig. 12.5. An eyelid laceration of the upper margin (A) is sutured without debridement (B)
EQUiNe OpHthALmoLoGY/335
povidone-iodine solution, and systemic antibi-
the irrigating solution to exit the nasal puncta
otics should be administered. Two-layer closure
 during flushing of the proximal nasolacrimal
of skin-orbicularis muscle and tarsoconjuncti-
system through the palpebral lacrimal puncta,
val layers is recommended to maximize healing
 and distention of the floor of the nasal vestibule
and return to function.
in response to irrigation. Creation of a new
proximal or distal opening and duct by catheter
instillation is indicated for puncta atresia.
Dermoids
Tubing (#5 French) will need to be placed in
the nasolacrimal system for several weeks to
Dermoids (i.e., choristomas) of the eyelids
allow epithelialization of the new duct and
nictitans, cornea, and conjunctiva occur in
foals. Corneal and conjunctival dermoids
puncta and resolution of the dacryocystitis.
may look like aberrant dark pigmentation
when associated with a lack of hair follicle
Heterochromia fridis
development. Treatment depends on loca-
tion. Superficial to deep keratectomy is indi-
Heterochromia iridis is variation in the
cated forcornealdermoids and blepharoplasty
normal, dark-brown iridal color. It may be a
for eyelid dermoids to remove the dermoid
combination of white and blue iris color
before the hairs can grow. Limbal dermoids
with brown corpora nigra (i.e., "wall eye"),
 have been noted with iridal hypoplasia and
 or it may be a white iridal color with brown
cataracts in Quarter Horses.
corpora nigra (i.e., "china eye"). Heterochro-
mia iridis is common to Appaloosa, palo-
Dacryocystitis and Nasolacrimal
mino, chestnut, grey, spotted, and white
System Atresia
horses. The fundus of foals with heterochro-
mia iridis may display subalbinotic qualities
Dacryocystitis is inflammation of the tear
 of nontapetal hypopigmentation and tapetal
hypoplasia. Occasionally, eyes with hetero-
drainage system and specifically the nasolac-
rimal sac. Infection is common in chronic
chromia iridis will demonstrate additional
 ocular abnormalities.
cases. It is treated by flushing of the tear
drainage system and systemic antibiotics.
Eyelid puncta atresia, nasolacrimal duct
Aniridia
agenesis, and nasal puncta atresia must be
differentiated  from acquired obstruction
Aniridia, or complete absence of the iris, has
causing dacryocystitis of the nasolacrimal
been reported with congenital cataracts in
drainage system. The clinical signs are a
Thoroughbreds, and alone in Quarter horses,
copious unilateral or bilateral, chronic mucoid
and Belgians. In spite of the terminology, total
and, eventually, mucopurulent ocular dis-
aniridia is rare with the base of the iris present
charge. Culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing
in most cases. Aniridia in foals is usually bilat-
of the discharge and irrigated material are
eral and associated with a pupil so dilated that
highly recommended. Contrast dacryocystorhi-
the lens equator and ciliary processes are
nography with 4-6 mL of radiopaque solution
visible.
may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis
(Figs. 12.6A and B). Eyelid puncta atresia may
be noted visually at the medial canthus, or a
Iridal Hypoplasia
distention of the conjunctiva may be noticed
over the atretic puncta after irrigation of the
Iridal hypoplasia is a congenital underdevelop-
nasolacrimal system from the nasal puncta. A
ment and thinning of the iris stroma. In iridal
diagnosis of atresia of the nasal puncta may be
hypoplasia of heterochromic eyes, the affected
presumed by noting the lack of a distal opening
thin region of iris stroma may appear cyst-like
to the nasolacrimal duct within the mucocuta-
if it balloons into the anterior chamber from the
neous junction at the medial nares, failure of
higher pressure of the posterior chamber. It is
Fig. 12.6. A. Normal dacrycystorhinogram from a horse indicating duct patency.
 B. Swollen and distal blockage of dye is present in the horse; the condition resolved
with catheterization surgery.
336
EQuNE OpHtHAlmOLOGY/337
common in Appaloosas and eyes with hetero-
The Foal Lens
chromia iridis (Figs. 12.7A and B)
Lens sutures are easily apparent in many foals.
The anterior suture has a variable confguration
Persistent Pupillary Membranes
in shape, with the posterior suture varying in
shape from "Y," sawhorse, to stellate patterns.
 Persistent pupillary membranes are remnants
of the anterior tunica vasculosa lentis. They
The anterior sutures are diffcult to visualize in
appear as strands of iridal tissue arising from
Thoroughbreds, but they are easier to identify
in Standardbred and Saddlebred foals.
the mid-iris collarette and, in most cases,
passing to attach to the iris, though attachment
to the lens or cornea is possible. Nonprogres-
Hyaloid Artery Remnants
sive corneal opacity results if the persistent
pupillary membrane adheres to the cornea, or
Hyaloid artery apparatus consists of the hyaloid
a focal cataract can result if it adheres to the
auequau Arelldnd roaisod, a pue Arare
lens. These membranes generally regress to
(posterior tunical vasculosa lentis). Remnants of
some extent over the first 6-12 months of life,
some segment of this apparatus are apparent to
and they require no treatment.
some degree in both eyes of -80% of Thor-
oughbred neonates less than 4 days old. Hyaloid
artery remnants may attach to the posterior lens
capsule as Mittendorg's dot, or appear as a
white structure on the surface of the optic disc
as Bergmeister's papilla. The hyaloid artery was
complete in over 60% of Thoroughbred foals
less than 4 days old. It was perfused with blood
in about a third of the eyes at birth, and became
nonperfused at 48 hours postpartum. Persis-
tence of any part of the hyaloid artery system
does not generally cause problems, although
small posterior axial cataracts can form in some
eyes (Fig. 12.8).
B
Fig. 12.7. A. Iris hypoplasia dorsally causes a cystic
bulging of the iris stroma in a Welsh pony. B. Iris
Fig. 12.8. A remnant of the tunica vasculosa lentis
 hypoplasia includes corpora nigra hypoplasia in the
remains perfused on the posterior lens capsule of this
horse.
yearling.
338 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Congenital Lens Luxation
pneumonia, because sight-threatening postop-
erative endophthalmitis may result 7-l0 days
Because of defective zonule formation, the lens
 after surgery if the condition is not detected
may luxate to an anterior or posterior position
and treated preoperatively.
in foals. Iridodonesis, shallow or deep anterior 
The most common technique for remov-
chambers, and aphakic crescents may
be
ing congenital cataracts in foals is phaco-
present, and cataract formation may also be
emulsification. Recent advances in the
noticed. Posterior luxation does not necessitate
surgical technique have increased the success
surgical intervention, but anterior movement
rate in foals to nearly 80%. The surgical
usually requires removal of the lens to prevent
success rate is highest in those foals less
pain, keratopathy, iridocyclitis, and secondary
 than 6 months of age. Aphakic foals should
glaucoma.
be quite far-sighted postoperatively, but the
amount of vision after successful cataract
surgery in adult horses and in foals is function-
Cataracts
ally normal.
Cataracts are a frequent congenital ocular
defect in foals (Fig. 12.9). Most are bilateral.
Conjunctivitis and Subconjunctival
Heritable, traumatic, nutritional, and postin-
Hemorrhage
 flammatory etiologies have been proposed,
and a dominant mode of inheritance has
Conjunctivitis may be caused by environmental
been reported in Belgian as well as in Thor-
irritants (e.g., hay, sand, dirt, ammonia, pollen,
oughbred horses. Morgan horses have non-
ash) is common among neonates, with recum-
progressive, nuclear, bilaterally symmetrical
 bent foals being especially at risk. Conjunctival
cataracts that do not seriously interfere with
inflammation  secondary  to pneumonia  is
vision. Cataracts and lens luxation are asso-
usually found among older foals (i.e., l-6
ciated with anterior segment dysgenesis in
months of age). Etiologic agents include adeno-
the Rocky Mountain Horse.
virus, equine herpesvirus (EHV)-1, equine viral
Healthy foals with cataracts, visual impair-
arteritis, influenza virus, Streptococcus equi sub-
ment, the personality to tolerate administration 
species equi (strangles), Rhodococcus, and Acti-
of topical therapy, and without uveitis are can-
 nobacillus sp. Conjunctival cytology and culture
didates for cataract surgery. Foals should also
can be useful in making the diagnosis of infec-
    a  
 tious conjunctivitis. Therapy begins by flushing
tious systemic diseases, such as Rhodococcus
the conjunctival sacs to remove any underlying
irritant. Patency of the nasolacrimal duct should
be established, because duct obstructions can
exacerbate conjunctivitis. Broad-spectrum anti-
biotic ophthalmic solutions or eye lubricants
are used as indicated, and corticosteroid oph-
thalmic preparations are useful if no corneal
ulcer is present.
 Subconjunctival or episcleral hemorrhages
can result from birth trauma, generally resolve
in 7-10 days, and require no treatment. Epi-
scleral hemorrhages are also associated with
neonatal maladjustment syndrome in foals.
Uicerative Keratitis in Foais
Fig. 12.9. A very immature cataract is present
Absence of the corneal epithelium and varying
bilaterally in a foal
amounts of stroma is a corneal abrasion or
EQUiNe OpHthALmoLoGY/339
ulcer. The diagnosis of a corneal ulcer is made
polymyxin, bacitracin and neomycin, tobramy-
on the basis of application and retention of
cin, gentamicin or ciprofloxacin for Gram-neg-
fluorescein dye on the cornea. Neonatal foals,
 ative bacteria, and cefazolin for Gram-positive
and especially those under intensive care,
 bacteria. Topical itraconazole, fluconazole, and
should be monitored daily for corneal ulcers.
natamycin have been used successfully against
Foals with corneal ulcerations generally will
fungal ulcers in foals. Anterior uveitis in foals
experience only mild pain and exhibit slight
with corneal ulcers should be treated with both
blepharospasm and tearing.
topical atropine and systemic nonsteroidal anti-
Although many types of ulcers in foals are
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Foals receiving
sterile, bacterial and fungal infection should
topical atropine should be carefully watched
still be considered a strong possibility in
for symptoms of colic. Autogenous serum from
every foal with a corneal ulcer (Fig. 12.l0).
the foal or its mare may also be quite effective
A superficial corneal ulcer that does not
in arresting corneal melting when administered
improve rapidly in 24-48 hours, rough ulcer
topically every hour. Other antiprotease drugs
margins, increasing stromal opacification,
include 5-l0% acetylcysteine, and 0.17%
deepening of the ulcer, and difficulty main-
dipotassium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
taining mydriasis are often signs of ulcer
     ()
infection. It is strongly recommended that
 strength, deep corneal ulcers that threaten per-
corneal swab cultures and corneal scrapings for
 foration may require placement of a conjuncti-
cytology be obtained to initiate appropriate
val flap.
medical therapy (see chapter l sections on cor-
neoconjunctival culture and cytology). Medical
therapy, albeit tempered by judicious use of
Noninfectious Persistent Cornea!
adjunctive surgical procedures, almost always
Erosions in Neonates
comprises the major portion of ulcer control in
foals. Bacterial and fungal growth must be
Very
slow-healing. persistent, superficial
halted and the microbes rendered nonviable.
corneal ulcers are commonly encountered in
Anterior uveitis must be controlled to prevent
recumbent, neonatal, or premature foals. Foals
blinding sequelae. Superficial ulcers can be
with these indolent ulcers or persistent erosions
treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics such as
manifest little evidence of ocular pain, the
corneal erosions fail to vascularize, and the
ulcers exhibit little evidence for epithelial
migration and healing. These ulcers are nonin-
fectious initially, with most having a noticeable
       
Diminished corneal sensitivity and low tear
production in these foals may be associated
with the delayed corneal healing of these super-
ficial ulcers. The cause of this keratopathy
among foals is unknown, but reduced sensory
innervation and an epithelial basement mem-
brane dystrophy are possible causes for this
delayed corneal healing.
Therapy is directed at treating the underly-
ing cause (if it can be identified), removing
abnormal epithelium, and promoting adhesion
of the epithelium to its basement membrane
and the stroma. Antibiotic solutions are indi-
cated to prevent infection. The triple antibiotic
Fig. 12.10. A melting ulcer in a foal stained with
solutions are very good to utilize, while solu-
fluorescein dye.
tions containing gentamicin should be avoided
340 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
as they can retard corneal healing. Superficial
guarded in foals. The owner should be edu-
punctate or grid keratotomy may also be neces-
cated immediately about the potentially severe
sary in foals to speed healing in superficial
nature of this disease and the possibility of
refractory ulcers (see chapter 6)
vision loss.
Contact lenses and collagen shields are avail-
able in sizes suitable for foals (diameter, 26-
Equine Neonatai Glaucoma
32 mm), and they can serve as corneal bandages
to aid the healing of superficial ulcers by speed-
Congenital glaucoma has been reported in foals
ing epithelial cell migration. Nictitans flaps and
 and to be associated with developmental anom-
temporary tarsorrhaphies can provide physical
alies of the iridocorneal angle (i.e., goniodys-
support to an ulcer and protect the cornea from
genesis). No particular breed predisposition
contamination and environmental exposure.
-ou aunba un sne i paodai uaaq s
Eye masks that cover the ulcerated eye are rec-
nates. Glaucoma can be a sequela to anterior
ommended to diminish environmental dust
uveitis in foals. Clinical signs of early glaucoma
and fly exposure and to reduce the risk of
include generalized corneal edema, closed iri-
damage from the foal rubbing its eye.
docorneal angle, deep linear branching corneal
band opacities, lens luxations, optic nerve
 cupping, and a fixed, dilated pupil. The linear 
Iridocyclitis in Neonates
corneal band opacities are a consistent feature
of equine glaucoma, and histopathologically
Systemic disease can cause blinding iridocy-
represent thin areas of Descemet's membrane.
clitis in foals; therefore, attempts to diag-
Buphthalmia will occur if the IOP remains ele-
nose the cause early and to treatitaggressively
vated. Surgical therapy for equine glaucoma is
are imperative. The iridocyclitis may
be
immune-mediated, with sterile hypopyon,
directed toward reducing the production of
 aqueous humor by damaging the ciliary body
or result from direct invasion of an organism
with nitrous oxide (i.e., cyclocryotherapy) or
that creates an infectious endophthalmitis.
laser energy (i.e., cyclophotocoagulation).
Organisms associated with equine anterior
Surgery has the best potential for preserving
uveitis are Salmonella sp., Rhodococcus equi,
vision in glaucomatous eyes if the glaucoma is
Escherichia coli,Streptococcus equi subspecies
detected early.
equi, Actinobacillus equuli, adenovirus, and
equine viral arteritis. Clinical signs include lac-
rimation, blepharospasm, corneal edema, con-
Diseases of the Retina/Optic Nerve in
junctival hyperemia, ciliary injection, aqueous 
Equine Neonates
flare, hyphema, fibrin, and hypopyon.
It is imperative to immediately employ a
Hypoxic ischemic endcephalopathy (HIE) or
fluorescein dye test to differentiate a painful eye
neonatal maladjustment syndrome (NMS) is
with anterior uveitis caused by ulcerative kera-
commonly associated with small and round
titis from an eye with anterior uveitis and no
retinal hemorrhages, hemorrhages on the optic
corneal ulcer or abscess. One should evaluate
disk, pupil asymmetry, corneal edema, and
the fundus for evidence of active or inactive
ulcerative keratitis. Hemorrhages associated
chorioretinitis either before the onset of therapy
with HIE disappear in several days if the foal
or later.
survives.
The major goals in treatment of foals with
Retinal hemorrhages are also found in ~16%
 anterior uveitis are to preserve vision and to
of normal Thoroughbred foals less than 4 days
decrease pain. Treatment includes systemic
 old. They generally resolve in 7-10 days with
antibiotics and NSAIDs as well as topically
no effects on vision. Dystocia with elevated
administered mydriatic/cycloplegics, antibiot-
intracranial pressure, and ischemia/hypoxia are
ics, and corticosteroids (see appendices D, F.
possible causes
H, I, and L). Depending on the cause, the
Retinal dysplasia is an in utero developmen-
overall prognosis for anterior uveitis is usually
tal or postinflammatory problem of the retina
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY/341
in which the sensory retina is "folded" to form
Optic nerve hypoplasia and optic nerve
rosettes of neural tissue. Retinal dysplasia in
atrophy are diagnosed on the basis of direct
foals is generally bilateral, not heritable, and
ophthalmoscopy in foals and may be secondary
often associated with other congenital ocular
 to developmental or inflammatory processes.
problems
Foals with optic nerve hypoplasia display
Retinal detachments may be either unilateral
smaller-than-normal discs, have slow pupillary
or bilateral, and they can be associated with
light reflexes (PLRs), and depending on the
other ocular abnormalities (Fig. 12.1l). The
degree of hypoplasia, may retain some vision.
detached retina can be observed through the
dilated pupil as a floating veil of opaque tissue
in the vitreous. Congenital, inflammatory, and
Equine Orbit
traumatic causes have been reported.
Chorioretinitis may be noticed in foals born
The adult equine orbit is 62.1 mm in width.
to mares suffering from respiratory and other
59.4 mm in height and 98.3 mm in depth. The
systemic diseases during late gestation. Peri-
 globe of the equine eye is larger in the horizon-
papillary, small, circular lesions with a hyper-
tal (48.4 mm) than the vertical (47.6 mm)
pigmented center and a depigmented peripheral
 diameter. The mean anterior to posterior diam-
ring characterize these chorioretinal scars.
eter is 43.7 mm. The volume of the equine
Congenital  stationary night blindness of
globe ranges between 45.0 and 50.9 ml.
Appaloosas and Quarter horses has been
reported in the United States. The fundus
Orbital Diseases
appears to be normal, with characteristic, a-
wave-dominant electroretinographic patterns
Orbital disease processes can occur within
confirming the diagnosis. A defect in neural
the extraocular muscle cone (i.e., intra-
 transmission between the photoreceptor layers
conal), between the muscle cone and perior-
and the bipolar cells is suspected. Microphthal-
bital sheath, or external to the periorbital
mia, strabismus, and nystagmus may be present
sheath (i.e., subperiosteal). Infectious, trau-
also.
matic, inflammatory, or neoplastic disease
processes involving the eyelids, paranasal
sinuses, tooth roots, guttural pouch, or nasal
cavity may extend into the orbit, thereby
causing
 exophthalmus or strabismus (or
both).
Orbital disease processes can also result in
exophthalmos because of space-occupying
orbital lesions, or enophthalmos if the volume
of the orbital contents decrease because of mal-
nutrition or pathology (Figs. 12.12A and B)
Diagnostic Procedures
Making the diagnosis of orbital disease can
require special diagnostic procedures in addi-
tion to a complete ophthalmic examination
(Table 12.1).
Retrobuibar Nerve Biocks
Fig. 12.ll. The retina is detached and torn and
appears as a convoluted opaque membrane in this
Orbital or retrobulbar anesthesia can reduce
foal.
eye and third eyelid movement, and decrease
342 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
corneal sensation for short ophthalmic proce-
dures such as eyelid laceration repair, nictitans
removal, corneal foreign body removal, intra-
ocular injections or aqueocentesis, or iris cyst
      rn
under general anesthesia. Retrobulbar nerve
blocks can reduce the depth of general anesthe-
sia required for enucleation surgery. Two tech-
niques are possible. A 22-gauge 2.5-in spinal
needle is inserted through the surgically
prepped skin of the orbital fossa just caudal to
the posterior aspect of the bony dorsal orbital
rim. The needle is advanced until it reaches the
retrobulbar muscle cone. This can be detected
by slight dorsal movement of the eye. Once
positioned, 10-12 ml of 2% lidocaine is injected
into the orbit. Slight exophthalmos will occur.
A second method involves placing the needle
     
caine will take effect in 5 minutes and last 1-2
hours.
Surgicai Technigues
There are two basic approaches to enucle-
ation in the horse: the transpalpebral tech-
nique, and the subconjunctival technique.
The transpalpebral technique is most useful
in cases of severe corneal infection and of
真
conjunctival,
nictitating membrane
or
 corneal neoplasia, but it does leave a larger
Fig. 12.12. A. Exophthalmos in the lelt eye from an
orbital soft-tissue defect than the subcon-
orbital tumor. B. Enophthalmos following an orbital
junctival technique.  The subconjunctival
fracture.
approach is quicker and associated with less
hemorrhage. It should be used when a cos-
metic shell is to be placed to maintain the
Table 12.1. Diagnostic Procedures for Diseases of the Equine Orbit.
Technique
Indications/Limitations
Radiography
Increased soft-tissue densities and lytic bone changes are associated with neoplasia and
 Special contrast procedures may enhance.
CT and MR imaging
Limited access. Size of animal important (foals, ponies, and small horses). Aspiration of
fluid. Usually requires anesthesia; provides culture, cytology, and histopathology or
biopsy.
Ultrasonography
Noninvasive, painless procedure that can both qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate
various ocular and orbital abnommalities. Helps in the differentiation of solid, soft-tissue
masses versus cystic orbital masses, deterrmination of the size of various globe or orbital
'algissod s! saipog ubjaioy jo sadh Auew jo uoezenol pue sjuauodwoo
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/343
integrity of the lid margin. Orbital silicone
usually be excised and the wound sutured to
prosthetic implants may be placed with either
 prevent recurrent herniation.
method (see chapter 2)
The complete bony orbital rim of the horse
protects against traumatic globe proptosis, but
Orbital Diseases
this problem still occasionally occurs after
orbital injuries. The proptosed globe should be
evaluated for globe integrity, hyphema, pupil
Inflammatory，
infectious, and neoplastic
diseases of the sinuses and guttural pouch,
size, corneal dessication, and ocular venostasis
resulting from eyelid entrapment of the globe.
teeth problems, foreign bodies, and trauma
The equine eye tolerates little disruption of its
can result in orbital cellulitis or abscess for-
intraocular blood supply, and severe intraocu-
mation (or both). Orbital cellulitis is mani-
lar hemorrhage usually results in phthisis bulbi
fested by blepharedema, swelling of the
The proptosed globe should be replaced into
supraorbital fossa, exophthalmos, orbital
the orbit with the horse under general anesthe-
pain, epiphora, and nictitans protrusion,
sia. A temporary tarsorrhaphy will protect the
and it can damage the globe and optic nerve
cornea, and topically applied antibiotics and
within a short time. Treatment should be
aggressive and immediate. Topically and
atropine as well as systemically administered
NSAIDs and antibiotics will decrease the swell-
systemically  administered  broad-spectrum
ing and minimize the risk of infection.
antibiotics are always indicated. Fluid-filled
Fractures of the orbital bones may manifest
swellings should be aspirated and specimens
by asymmetry of the globes or face, epistaxis,
submitted for microbiologic culture and
cytology.
exophthalmos, proptosis, eyelid and conjuncti-
val swelling, depression or concavity of the
 Reported tumors of the equine orbit include
periorbital region, crepitus, and sometimes,
 most tumor types. Progressive exophthalmos,
pain on periorbital palpation. Damage to the
orbital swelling, blindness, strabismus, aniso-
coria, and behavioral abnormalities are reported
intraosseous nasolacrimal duct, globe, optic
nerve, paranasal sinuses, or some combination
symptoms in horses with orbital tumors. In
of these can also occur. Periorbital fractures
 Europe, hydatid cysts have been reported in the
should be repaired quickly, because fibrous
orbit.
union of the fractured pieces begins within 1
Orbital fat may herniate through weakened
episcleral fascia or from trauma, thereby causing
week after the injury, thus making elevation
lobular, subconjunctival masses that mimic
and realignment difficult.
tumors (Fig. 12.13). The affected tissue can
Diseases and Surgery of the
Eyelids
Entropion is an inward rolling of the eyelid
margin. It can be a primary anatomic problem
in foals, or it can be rarely secondary to dehy-
dration and weight loss in “downer foals."
 Entropion may be cicatricial from previous
eyelid trauma, or it may be acquired or spastic
secondary to chronic, irreversible ocular irrita-
tion causing spasms of the orbicularis oculi
muscle. Clinical signs include epiphora, bleph-
 arospasm, conjunctivitis, and ulcerative kerati-
tis, but these signs may vary with the extent of
the entropion. For optimal results, surgical
Fig. 12.13. Orbital fat prolapse causes nictitans
techniques
should
always
undercorrect
 protrusion in a yearling
slightly.
344 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Eyelid lacerations are common in the
horse. Damage to the upper eyelid is more
significant, however, because most lid move-
ment occurs in the upper eyelid. Medial
canthal lacerations may result in damage to
the nasolacrimal canaliculi. Lid lacerations
may be accompanied by orbital cellulitis,
 periorbital fractures, and minor-to-severe
corneal ulceration.
 Careful examination of the globe for corneal
integrity, anterior chamber clarity and depth,
and scleral continuity is essential. Eyelid lacera-
tions must be repaired quickly to avoid lid
infection, reduce eyelid edema, and minimize
scarring of the lid as well as corneal dessication
and ulceration. Failure to repair a laceration, or
amputation of a torn eyelid pedicle rather than
a surgical repair, can result in exposure-induced
corneal ulceration
Squamous Celf Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most
common tumor of the eye and adnexa in the
horse (Figs. 12.l4A, B, and C). The cause
may be related to the ultraviolet component
of solar radiation, periocular pigmentation,
B
and an increased susceptibility to carcino-
genesis. There is an increased prevalence of
ocular/adnexal SCC, presumably resulting
from increased exposure to ultraviolet radia-
tion with increasing altitude, longitude, and
mean annual solar radiation. Prevalence
rates in the horse increase with age, with
one report listing the mean age at diagnosis
as 1l.1 ± 0.39 years. In a study from Colo-
rado, Belgians, Clydesdales, and other draft
horses had a high prevalence of ocular SCC,
 followed by Appaloosas and Paints, with the
C
lowest prevalence found in Arabians, Thor-
Fig. 12.14. A. Squamous cell carcinoma lesion on
oughbreds, and Quarter Horses. Haflingers
lower medial lid margin. B. Large squamous cell 
are also predisposed to SCC. White, gray-
[eaounfuon pue pil lamol  pl laddn jo euouioien
white, and palomino hair colors predispose
squamous cell carcinoma in a Paint horse. The horse
to ocular SCC, with a lower prevalence
was affected bilaterally.
among horses having bay, brown, and black
hair coats.
The eyelids, nictitans, conjunctiva, and
animal's purpose, available equipment, and
limbus are commonly affected. The diagno-
the owner's financial constraints. Untreated
sis is made on the basis of biopsy results.
ocular SCC can invade local soft tissues, the
Treatment depends on tumor location, tumor
bony orbit, sinuses, and brain, and it can metas-
size, extent of invasion, vision status, the
tasize to the regional lymph nodes, salivary
EQUINe OPHTHALmOLoGY/345
glands, and thorax. Tumor recurrence is highest
Thoroughbreds have the highest incidence
in the eyelid or nictitans SCC
with Standardbreds and Lippizaners being
Surgery can vary from local excision of
sarcoid resistant. Histopathologically, sarcoids
small focal ocular SCC lesions, or enucle-
are characterized by epidermal hyperplasia and
ation of the globe and large amounts of sur-
dermal fibroplasia, with pegs of hyperkeratotic
rounding periocular skin with partial orbital
epithelium extending into the depths of the
rim resection and mesh skin excisions for
dermal lesions.
large SCC lesions. Surgery should be fol-
Treatment is surgical resection of necrotic
lowed by radiation therapy, cryotherapy,
tissue and adjunct immunotherapy with the
radiofrequency hyperthermia, or intrale-
immunostimulant, BCG-attenuated Myco-
sional chemotherapy. Treatment may be sur-
bacterium bovis cell wall in oil. Surgical de-
gical resection alone if adequate margins can be
bulking alone has a high recurrence rate, but
attained, though combinations of surgical deb-
success rates approach 100% if debulking is
uking and adjunct therapy are best for large
combined with BCG. Using a 25-gauge needle,
SCC. Immunotherapy with bacille Calmette-
 1 mL of BCG for each cm? of tumor is injected
Guerin (BCG) cell wall extract has been
into the lesion. The sarcoid should be satu-
used successfully for large SCC in the horse
rated, especially around the border. Therapy is
(1 ml extract/cm? tumor). We have used che-
repeated every 2-4 weeks for as many as six
motherapy with intralesional, slow-release cis-
injections, and it may cause a mild-to-severe
platin and obtained effective results, with or
inflammatory tissue reaction. Anaphylaxis may
occur but can be minimized with pretreatment
orbital SCC. The l-year relapse-free rates for
of flunixin meglumine, l.1 mg/kg intrave-
SCC treated with cisplatin approach 90%.
nously, and systemic corticosteroids. Cryother-
apy, hyperthermia, carbon dioxide laser
excision, and radiation therapy can also be
Sarcoids
effective treatment.
Sarcoids are solitary or multiple tumors of
Melanoma
the eyelids and periocular region in the
horse (Fig. 12.15). Clinical types include
 Eyelid melanomas are found in gray horses,
occult, hyperkeratotic fibropapilloma (i.e.,
with Arabians and Percherons also having
verrucous), nodular types A and B, fibro-
blastic types A and B, and mixed forms. The
increased risk. Melanomas may be single or
fibroblastic form is very locally aggressive,
multiple, and treatment is surgical excision and
and intervention can convert the verrucous
cryotherapy. They may recur.
to the fibroblastic form. Sarcoids are gener-
ally found in horses younger than 7 years.
Other Lid Tumors
Quarter Horses, Appaloosas, Arabians, and
       
cell tumor, hemangioma, papillomas and
lymphosarcoma.
Blepharitis
Primary bacterial blepharitis is uncommon in
     
foreign bodies, subpalpebral lavage systems,
and
1bony sequestra are noticed, and
dermatophytosis.
Habronemiasis is a common cause of
Fig. 12.15. Large nodular sarcoid of the upper lid
equine granulomas of the eyelids, conjunc-
346 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
tiva, lacrimal caruncle, medial canthus, and
tiva becomes inflamed during infectious and
nictitans. Nonhealing, elevated, and ulcer-
noninfectious diseases of the lids, cornea, sclera,
ated periocular granulomas with fistulous
anterior uvea, nasolacrimal system, and orbit
tracts and a yellow, caseous exudate having
(Table 12.2)
gritty foci of necrotic mineralized tissue are
found on horses during the warm weather
months. House and stable flies both serve as
Diseases of the Nictitating
vectors. Dying microfilariae are believed
Membrane
lto
incite immune  hypersensitivity.  Scrapings
reveal numerous eosinophils, mast cells,
 The most common neoplasm of the equine nic-
polymorphonuclear  cells
(PMNs),
and
titans is SCC. The diagnosis is confirmed on the
plasma cells. Topical therapy for solitary,
basis of biopsy results, and treatment is surgical
focal lesions consists of a mixture contain-
resection of the nictitans combined with cryo-
ing 135 g of nitrofurazone ointment, 30 ml
 therapy or chemotherapy.
of 90% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 30 mL
 Protrusion of the nictitans is usually a sign
of 0.2% dexamethasone, and 30 mL of 12.3%
of pain. The eye should be examined for con-
oral trichlorfon solution.Multifocal lesions
junctivitis, corneal ulcers, or anterior uveitis
should be treated with ivermectin (200 g/kg
(Box 12.1)
orally). Intralesional corticosteroid injection
(i.e., triamcinolone) and systemic corticoste-
roids can reduce the size of granulomas.
Table 12.2. Conjunctivitis and Systemic
The spiruroid nematode Thelazia lacrimalis
Diseases in the Horse.
is a commensal parasite that inhabits the con-
Neonate
Neonatal mmaladjustment syndrome.
  s g   
neonatal septicemia, and immune-
horse (Fig. 12.16). Most horses are asymptom-
 mediated hemolytic anemia.
atic, but signs can include mild lid swelling.
Adult
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, lymphosarcoma,
conjunctivitis, superficial keratitis, and dacryo-
multiple myelorma, infection with
cystitis. Demodex may cause meibomianitis, lid
Moraxella equi or Streptococcus equi
alopecia, and papulopustular dermatitis in the
leptospirosis, EHV-4, adenovirus, equine
horse.
infectious anemia, equine viral arteritis.
influenza type Az. polyneuritis equi,
equine protozoal myeloencephalitis.
vestibular disease syndrome, African
Diseases of the Conjunctiva
Horse sickness, and epizootic
lymphangitis.
Conjunctivitis is a nonspecific indicator of
ocular inflammation (Fig. 12.17). The conjunc-
Fig. 12.l6. Thelazia worms caused conjunctivitis
Fig. 12.17. Eosinophilic conjunctivitis in this horse
and blepharitis in this horse.
responded to topical corticosteroids.
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/347
is not known. The number of equine endo-
Box 12.1: Conditions Producing
thelial cells decreases with age.
Protrusion of the Nictitans
Pathogenesis of Eguine Infectious
Pain: Usually from conjunctivitis, cormeal ulcers, or
antenor uveitis.
Corneal Disease in Horses
Tetanus.
Inflammation because of bacteria. trauma, para
The environment of the horse is such that the
sites, and tumors.
conjunctiva and cornea are constantly exposed
Enophthalmos because of pain, microphthalmos
to bacteria and fungi. The conjunctival micro-
and phthisis bulbi
bial flora of the horse varies, however, depend-
Protrusion of orbital fat
Hormer's syndrome (see chapter 15)
ing on the age of the horse, season and the
Hyperkalermic.
 periodic paralysis. and  foreign
 geographic area. Many bacterial and fungal
bodies.
organisms normally found in the equine con-
junctival flora are potential ocular pathogens.
Fusarium and Aspergillus sp. are both common
causes of ulcerative fungal keratitis among
Corneal Disease in Horses
horses in the United States. Young horses
appear at risk of Gram-negative and fungal
Uicerative Keratitis
infections. Gram-negative bacteria known to be
associated with equine corneal ulcers include
Introduction
 Pseudomonas sp. and assorted coliform bacteria.
Staphylococcus. Listeria, and Streptococcus sp.
The cornea consists of the outermost tear film
and other Gram-positive bacteria can cause
and epithelium, the middle stroma, and the
infectious equine keratitis. Mixed bacterial and
innermost endothelium. The mucin dominated
fungal infections can also be present.
precorneal tear flm of the horse contains
IgA, IgM, IgG, and IgT, urea, connective
Clinical History and Appearance of
tissue growth factor, and various classes of
Ulcerative Keratitis
proteases.
Infection should be considered likely in
Equine Corneal
every equine corneal ulcer. Fungal involve-
Microanatomy/Physiology
 ment should be suspected if there is a history
of corneal injury with vegetative material or
The total thickness of the equine cornea is
if a corneal ulcer has received prolonged
0.8-l.0 mm. The thickness of the sclera at
antibiotic or corticosteroid therapy (or both)
the horse equator is 0.53 ± 0.0l microns.
with either slight or no improvement. Many
 The normal equine corneal epithelium con-
early cases of equine ulcerative keratitis ini-
sists of 8-10 cell layers and is -60 μm thick.
tially present as minor corneal epithelial
The thickest corneal layer (~700 μm thick in
ulcers or infiltrates, with slight pain, blepha-
the horse), the stroma, is composed of a
rospasm, epiphora, and photophobia (Figs.
three-dimensional mosaic of interconnected
12.l8A and B). At frst, anterior uveitis and
keratocytes in an extracellular matrix (ECM)
corneal vascularization may not be clinically
of proteoglycans, and small diameter colla-
pronounced. Both superficial and deep corneal
gen fibrils. The endothelium (7 μm) of the
vascularization as well as painful uveitis may
horse cornea is a cellular monolayer with a
occur. Extensive intrastromal lesions, vascular-
thick collagenous basement membrane (Des-
ization, conjunctival injection, and corneal
cemet's membrane; 14-2l μm thick). The
edema may then become evident. Corneal col-
density of horse endothelial cells is 3,155
cells/mm?. The mitotic potential of the horse
gelatinous, gray opacity to the margins or
corneal endothelium is probably limited but
central regions (or both) of an ulcer (Figs.
348 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Fig. 12.19. A. Melting ulcer in a horse. B. Severe
corneal edema and cellular invasion of the ulcer ll
days later.
Fig. 12.18. A. Superhcial ulcer with epithelial lip in
a pony. (Courtesy of Derek Knottenbelt.) B. Rose
Bengal dye also stains the stroma in the ulcer due to
corneal stromal degeneration or melting and
absences of the tear flm. (Courtesy of Derek
perforation. Cytologic examination and micro-
Knottenbelt.)
biologic cultures of deep or rapidly progressing
ulcers are imperative.
12.19A and B). Deep penetration of the stroma
to Descemet's membrane with corneal perfora-
Diagnostic Techniques
tion is a possible sequela to all equine corneal
ulcers cases.
Most cases can be diagnosed on the basis of
standard laboratory techniques. Fluorescein
Abrasions/Uicers
      
Corneal cultures should be obtained first,
Small corneal abrasions and ulcers are
then followed by corneal scrapings for cytol-
detected through oblique transillumination
ogy. Vigorous corneal scrapings at the edge and
and fluorescein dye retention. The eye may
base of the lesion to detect bacteria and deep
be cloudy, red, and painful. Staphylococcus,
hyphal elements can be obtained with the
Streptococcus, and Pseudomonas are frequent
blunt, handle end of a sterile scalpel blade and
bacterial corneal pathogens of the horse.
topical anesthesia.
Fusarium and Aspergilus sp. are frequent
Staining with fluorescein dye for detection
fungal pathogens of the equine cornea. Tear-
of epithelial defects followed by staining with
film neutrophils are associated with release of
Rose Bengal dye to evaluate the stability of the
highly destructive protease and collagenase
precorneal tear film is critical in the horse (see
enzymes, which in the horse can result in rapid
Figs. 12.18A and B)
EQuine OphthalmoLoGy/349
二
Fig. 12.20. Placement of the subpalpebral system to medicate a horse's eye. A. The supraorbital nerve
block is performed, thereby providing local anesthesia and akinesia to the central upper eyelid. B. A 12-
gauge hypodermic needle (without its hub) is carefully inserted under the upper eyelid and through the
upper conjunctival fornix and the entire lid. C. The subpalpebral system is threaded into the needle, and
the needle is exited through the lid leaving the subpalpebral system in place (with the footplate in the
conjunctival fornix). D. Sutures and/or medical white tape are used to secure the subpalpebral system to
the upper forehead and mane. Ophthalmic solutions are periodically injected (using a l-3 ml syringe)
through the tubing.
Therapeutic Methods
cious use of adjunctive surgical procedures.
This intensive pharmacologic attack should
Horses with corneal ulcers are often in pain,
satisfy the therapeutic objectives of ulcer ster-
and topical treatment is usually difficult. In a
 ilization, reduction in tear flm protease activ-
fractious horse or one with a painful eye
 ity, and uveitis diminuation, and be modified
needing frequent therapy, subpalpebral or
according to its efficacy (Table 12.3). Treat-
nasolacrimal lavage treatment systems are
ment frequently needs to be sustained for weeks
employed. Various techniques have been
or, occasionally, even months. Repopulation of
described, but we prefer to use a length of
bacteria and fungi can occur during and after
silicone tubing with a single hole and foot-
the administration of topical antibiotics in the
plate positioned in the superior palpebral
horse.
fornix (Figs. 12.20A through D). The ventral
palpebral fornix can also be used.
Adjunctive Surgical Therapy
Medical Therapy
Not infrequently during clinical treatment of
corneal ulcers in the horse, surgery is necessary
Medical therapy always comprises a major
to augment the medical treatments. Surgeries
thrust of ulcer control, albeit tempered by judi-
include (l) keratectomy to excise necrotic
350 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Table 12.3. Suggested Treatment of Corneal Ulcers in the Horse.
Class of Drugs
Recommendations
Antibacterials
Appropriate antibiotics, such as chlorarnphenicol, gentarmicin, ciprofloxacin, or
tobramycin ophthalmic solutions, may be used topically to treat bacterial ulcers.
Amikacin, 10 mg/ml, may also be used topically. Apply topically or with
subpalpebral system.
Antifungals
Topical: Miconazole (1 %): natamycin
Systemic (infrequent and expensive): Ketoconazole, 30 mg/kg orally once or twice a
day (in 0.2-N Hcl): Fluconazole, 4 mg/kg orally once a day: Thiabendazole, 44 mg/kg
orally once a day: Itraconazole, 3 mg/kg orally twice a day.
Control of Uveitis
Systernic phenylbutazone or flunixin can be used orally or parenterally at anti-
inflarmmatory dosages.
Topical anticholinergics
Help stabilie blood-aqueous barrier; relaxation of the ciliary muscles (ciliary spasm).
(e.g. 1-2% atropine)
pupillary dilatation (maintains visual axis), and minimize development of synechiae.
Horses on topical atropine should be watched closely for symptoms of colic and
rnydriasis of the fellow eye.
Prevent
Collagenolysis
juaniad ual shep s Aana wnias mau Ag paoeiday wnas snouaboine jeoidoi
acetylcysteine or O.05% potassium EDTA can also be administered until stromal
liquefaction dirninishes.
Adjunctive Surgery
 To augment medical therapy.
Keratectomy
To remove necrotic tissue by keratectomy speeds healing. minimizes scarring. and
decreases the stirulus for iridocyclitis.
Conjunctival Grafts
For deep. melting. and large cormeal ulcers, descemetoceles, and perforated cormeal
ulcers both with and without iris prolapse. Conjunctival flaps are best mobilized
from the bulbar conjunctiva
Nictitating
Provide more support to a diseased cormea than does a termporary, cormplete
tarsorrhaphy.
Membrane Flaps
Corticosteroid therapy by all routes is generally contraindicated.
Inappropriate Therapy
tissue; and (2) conjunctival grafts or flaps for
 yb mo oi pu ss pa a o
deep, melting, and large corneal ulcers, desce-
adherence to the stroma.
metoceles, and perforated corneal ulcers both
with and without iris prolapse (see chapter 6
on the canine cornea for details). Conjunctival
Nictitating Membrane Flaps
flaps are best mobilized from the bulbar con-
junctiva (Figs. 12.2lA and B). Conjunctival
Nictitating membrane flaps provide more
flaps can be transposed and sutured onto the
support to a diseased cornea than does a tem-
cornea to provide suffcient tissue to strengthen
porary,
 complete tarsorrhaphy. Nictitating
most weakened corneas, but they are not as
membrane flaps are used to cover and protect a
strong as corneal grafts. Conjunctival autografts
weakened cornea, but they are not usually a
contain limbal stem cells, blood vessels, and
source of tissues for that cornea. Nictitating flaps
lymphatics, thus offering significant antibacte-
are recommended for superficial corneal dis-
rial, antifungal, antiviral, antiprotease,
， and
eases, including corneal erosions, neuropara-
anticollagenase effects. Temporary tarsorrha-
lytic and neurotropic keratitis, temporary
phies are performed concurrently with con-
exposure keratitis, and superficial corneal ulcers,
junctival grafts to minimize blinking movements
and to reinforce a bulbar conjunctival graft.
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/351
steroids (or both) may predispose the equine
cornea to fungal infection. Fungal organisms
are ubiquitous in the equine environment,
but geographic  differences undoubtedly
exist to account for variation among particu-
lar fungal species in specific regions.
Keratomycosis manifests clinically in the
horse as an ulcerative keratitis, an intersti-
tial keratitis known as stromal abscessation,
and iris prolapse. Stromal abscesses can result
from stromal inoculation with bacteria or fungi
through a small or large corneal epithelial
defect. The organisms become encapsulated in
the corneal stroma after reepithelialization of
the corneal ulcer over the infection site. Iris
prolapse is defined as corneal, limbal, or scleral
perforation (or some combination of the three),
with iris protrusion through the wound after
trauma or deep ulceration.
Therapy for ulcerative keratitis, iris pro-
lapse, and stromal abscess varies, with all
cases of iris prolapse requiring surgical
repair and most cases of deep stromal
abscess requiring penetrating keratoplasty.
Vision after keratomycosis in the horse may be
B
retained in as few as 50% of eyes, with nearly
half the eyes with ulcerative keratomycosis
Fig. 12.21. A. Melting ulcer with hypopyon and
miosis. B. Conjunctival flap resolved the ulcer. The
reported to become blind, require enucleation,
flap remains in place 5 months later
or both. In our opinion, this high failure rate is
caused by a lack of aggressive surgical therapy
early in the disease, when ulcerative keratomy-
cosis is most effectively treated.
Enucleation
Septate flamentous fungi include several
species common to the equine eye (e.g., Fusar-
Panophthalmitis after perforation through a
stromal ulcer has a grave prognosis. Whether
um, Aspergillus, Penicillium). Chitin, which is a
structural polysaccharide, is a cell wall compo-
 Or not treatment is applied, phthisis bulbi likely
will result after a chronically painful course;
nent of fungal hyphae that is absent in verte-
therefore, to spare the unfortunate horse this
brate systems. The plasma membrane of fungal
hyphae, interior to the cell wall, contains ergos-
chronic discomfort, enucleation is the humane
terol, which is a cell membrane sterol frequently
alternative. Histopathologic examination of the
targeted by antifungal agents.
globe is recommended.
In Gainesville, Florida, the conjunctiva in
95% of normal horses were found to have
Equine Uicerative Keratomycosis
fungal flora that included Aspergillus, Peni-
cillium, Alternaria, Cladosporium sp., or
Fungi are normal inhabitants of the equine
some combination of the four.
conjunctival microflora, but they can become
 The pathogenesis of ulcerative fungal
pathogenic after corneal injury. Tear film
keratitis commonly begins with corneal
instability predisposes to fungal attachment
trauma that results in an epithelial defect
and infection. Treatment of corneal ulcer-
and stromal invasion by the commensal
ation with topical antimicrobials or cortico-
fungal organism, or seeding of fungi from a
352 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
foreign body of plant origin. Clinical signs
not responding to medical treatment, or
include miosis, blepharospasm, epiphora,
worsen despite medical treatment. Surgeries
and photophobia. Ulcers infected with fungi
for
keratomycosis include  conjunctival
range from “dry” appearing fluorescein neg-
pedicle grafts, bridge grafts, hood grafts,
ative, Rose Bengal positive keratitis, to
island grafts, and full-thickness penetrating
weakly fluorescein staining minor corneal
keratoplasty.
epithelial abrasions/erosions, to superficial
thick fungal plaques, to extremely deep,
Corneai Foreign Bodies
severe interstitial keratitis.
The diagnosis of keratomycosis is made on
Corneal foreign bodies may be made of various
the basis of fnding fungal hyphae, mold, or
materials, and may be superficial, deep, or even
yeast by at least one of the following: (l) cytol-
perforate the cornea. Superfcial foreign bodies
ogy or PCR examination of a corneal scraping:
will leave an ulcer that requires medical therapy
(2)culture of the corneal lesion; and/or (3)sur-
 once removed, while full-thickness foreign
gical histopathologic examination of a keratec-
bodies will require suturing of the corneal
tomy specimen.
wound.
Treatment must be directed against the
fungi as well as against the corneal and
intraocular inflammatory responses ↑
that
Corneal Lacerations/Perforations
occur after fungal replication and hyphal
death. Dead fungi incite keratitis and attract
Corneal lacerations in the horse are always
leukocytes. The levels of ophthalmic antifungal
accompanied by varying degrees of iridocy-
drugs in the cornea needed to achieve fungi-
clitis. Medical therapy should be sufficient
cidal effects are so difficult to obtain that many
for superficial, nonperforating lacerations.
such agents, including miconazole, are gener-
Full-thickness
Scorneal perforations are
ally considered to exhibit fungistatic activity
usually associated with iris prolapse, a
only, even though loss of corneal epithelium
shallow anterior chamber, hypotony, and
results in increased corneal and aqueous con-
hyphema. If the corneal lesion extends to
centrations. Long duration of antifungal drug
the limbus, the sclera should also be care-
exposure is required for complete fungal
fully checked for perforation, because the
destruction and resolution of clinical signs
sclera can be obscured by conjunctival che-
(Table 12.4)
mosis and hemorrhage. Failure to detect such
 Combined medical and surgical therapy
a scleral tear results in chronic hypotony and
is indicated if ulcers are extremely deep, are
atrophy of the globe (i.e., phthisis bulbus)
Table 12.4. Antifungal Drugs for the Horse.
Antifungal Drugs
Topicat Fonmutation and Frequency
Systemic Dose
Natamycin
5%:QID
Not available
Miconazole
1%: QID
 Anaphylactic reactions
Itraconazole
1% with 30% DMSO: QID
3 mg/kg PO BID
Fluconazole
0.2%;QID
Ketoconazole
30 mg/kg PO SID
 Amphotericin B
0.15%: QID
Voniconazole
1%
4 mg/kg PO SID
Chlorhexidine
0.1% solution
Povidone iodine solution
2%: BID
Silver sulfadiazine
Dermatologic cream 1%; BID
*5 mg/kg PO BID x 7 days. then 5 mg/kg PO SID
EQUiNe OpHthaLmoLocY/353
Both small and large corneal perforations
from topically administered antimicrobial
should be repaired surgically. Complications
 medications. The micropuncture hypothesis
include infection, iris prolapse, anterior syn-
does not, however, explain clustering of cases
echiae, cataract formation, and persistent irido-
of stromal abscesses to a specific farm or loca-
cyclitis. Both small and large corneal or scleral
tion, or cycles of cases at certain times of the
full-thickness defects can result in phthisis
year. It does not explain the cases of stromal
bulbi if left untreated.
abscesses in related animals.
The diagnosis of stromal abscessation is
made on the basis of a focal, yellow-white,
Iris Prolapse in the Horse
stromal infiltrate with associated corneal
Corneal perforation with iris prolapse may
edema (Figs. 12.22A through D). Recurrent
stromal abscesses may be orange. Single or
be a sequela of traumatic insult to the globe
multiple abscesses may be present. A mild-
or orbit as well as of infectious and nonin-
fectious diseases of the cornea. Iris prolapse
to-fulminating iridocyclitis occurs second-
in the horse most frequently occurs after
ary to what initially appears to be a
relatively benign corneal @
disease, thus
acute ocular trauma, particularly sharp and
causing severe pain and, possibly, blind-
perforating corneal injuries or blunt inju-
ries causing rupture of the cornea, limbus,
ness. Corneal vascularization is variable at
presentation and may obscure observation of
or sclera. Corneal perforation can also occur
the precise location of the abscess. Fluorescein
secondary to rapid enzymatic degradation
dye retention is either negative or positive over
of stromal collagen and ground substance
   a     
caused  by infectious  and  noninfectious
corneal lesion.
uilcerative
keratitis.
The
prognosis
for
Stromal abscesses are generally thought to
horses with perforating corneal lacerations
have a poor therapeutic outcome. Vasculariza-
is generally considered to be guarded,
tion can heal most abscesses but the process
depending on the size, location, and mecha-
may take months. Abscesses projecting into
nism of injury. Perforating lacerations caused
the anterior chamber will not vascularize
by sharp injuries are generally associated with
Some investigators have suggested that medical
 a better prognosis than those caused by blunt
therapy for stromal abscesses may be more
or missile injuries. In horses with traumatic
appropriate than surgical therapy. If significant
iris prolapse, corneal wound lengths of 15 mm
or less were indicative of a positive visual
improvement in the signs associated with a
outcome; wound lengths of greater t
stromal abscess does not occur within the first
than
48-72 hours of intense and appropriate
15 mm resulted in either blindness, phthisis
medical therapy, surgery can improve results
bulbi, or enucleation.
 and reduce the duration of medical therapy.
Deep lamellar and penetrating keratoplasties
Corneal Stromal Abscess
are used in eyes with abscesses near Descemet's
membrane and in eyes with rupture of the
Corneal stromal abscess in the horse can be
abscess into the anterior chamber. Keratec-
a vision-threatening sequela to apparently
tomy specimens may also be the only way to
minor superficial corneal ulceration, or from
obtain a defnitive etiologic diagnosis via
a injection of organisms or foreign material
culture, histology, or PCR to institute proper
via micropuncture through the epithelium
antimicrobial
therapy.（
Corneal
stromal
into the stroma. A corneal abscess may
 abscesses can be infected by bacteria or fungi.
develop after epithelial cells adjacent to a
or they can be sterile. Placing a conjunctival
small epithelial defect or puncture divide
pedicle graft over a deep lamellar keratectomy
and migrate over the puncture wound to seal
site rapidly restores the physical integrity
infectious agents or foreign bodies in the
of t
the cornea by supplying fibrovascular
stroma. This reepithelialization forms a
tissue to fill in the stromal defect, and it deliv-
barrier that protects the bacteria or fungi
ers a focal, direct blood supply. Stromal
354 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
二
Fig. I2.22. Examples of corneal stromal abscesses. A. Axial deep stromal abscess with multifocal
satellite abscesses and edema are present in this warmblood. B. Multiple recurrent, orange, deep stromal
 abscesses and hypopyon are present in this eye. Vascularization is superhcial to the abscesses. C. Deep
stromal abscess is nearly covered by highly perfused superhicial vessels. D. Intraoperative photograph of a
PK surgery reveals extensive stromal vascularization and the abscess projecting into the anterior chamber
abscesses do not completely heal until they
material is harvested preferentially from fresh
become vascularized
equine cadaver eyes (i.e., within 24 hours of
death).
Penetrating Keratoplasty for Deep
Corneal Stromal Abscesses
Split Thickness Penetrating
Keratoplasties
Penetrating keratoplasty (PK) involves full-
thickness removal and replacement of a portion
The superficial cornea may be vascularized, but
of the cornea. Corneal transplantation
is
is otherwise normal in deep stromal abscesses.
performed to restore vision (i.e., optical), to
As a result, the anterior corneal tissues includ-
control medically refractory corneal disease
ing epithelium and most of the stroma can be
(i.e., therapeutic), and to reestablish structural
left intact for deep stromal abscess surgery. The
integrity of the eye (i.e., tectonic). Partial-thick-
inherent philosophy of split thickness or lamel-
ness lamellar corneal transplantations in the
lar surgery is to replace only the diseased
horse have been reported for cosmetic and for
portion of the cornea, leaving the normal tissue
tectonic/therapeutic reasons. Donor corneal
intact.
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/355
Posterior Lamellar Keratoplasty
"immune-mediated keratitis" (IMMK) to iden-
tify the group of diseases.
 Posterior lamellar keratoplasty (PLK) is recom-
mended for deep stromal abscesses in the
Chronic Superficial Keratitis
central cornea that are 8 mm or less, and have
a clear overlying anterior stroma. The PLK is
This disease is characterized by an insidious
associated with a shorter surgery and treatment
onset, with affected eyes showing only slight to
time than the PK. Medical therapy postopera-
moderate discomfort. The disease may involve
tively includes topical atropine, cyclosporine A.
 the cornea under the upper, and less frequently
autogenous serum, antifungals and antibiotics,
the third eyelid and the paracentral region.
and systemic antibiotics and nonsteroidal
There is prominent subepithelial arborizing
anti-inflammatories.
vascularization from the limbus, perivascular
epithelial edema and superficial stromal cell
Deep Lamellar Endothelial
infiltrate. Tear production is normal and no
Keratoplasty
fluorescein uptake occurs. The apposing palpe-
bral conjunctiva is moderately hyperemic.
Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty (DELK)
The disease is initially unilateral but the con-
is recommended for deep stromal abscesses in
tralateral eye may become affected with time.
the peripheral cornea that are 6 mm or less.
Topical treatment with Cyclosporine A (CsA)
and have a clear overlying anterior stroma. It
twice daily usually results in clearing of the
avoids the superficial incisions and suturing
cornea in 7-10 days in short standing cases.
of the central cornea. The DLEK transfers
Long standing cases may require constant CsA
healthy endothelium while preserving
the
       
corneal surface integrity. A fully intact epithe-
may or may not be clinical benefit from topical
lium with no corneal sutures is present
corticosteroids; and successful resolution may
postoperatively.
 p   r o
junctival grafting.
Nonulcerative Keratopathies
Chronic Deep Keratitis
This is a heterogeneous group of corneal dis-
eases, many of which appear to be unique to
This is an episodic keratitis recurring at irregu-
equidae. The diseases are characterized
by
lar intervals of up to several years. There is
some or all of the following clinical features:
frequently history of initiating ocular trauma
vascularization and edema at various
 levels
and the disease may derive from a local adap-
within the cornea, a varying intensity, distribu-
tive response to autoantigen in an immuno-
tion and depth of cellular response, and the
competent cornea. In the acute or active phase
absence of overt uveal inflammatory pathology.
of the disease there is an extensive and dense
Among this group of diseases are relatively
 deep stromal edema and fbrovascular response,
rarely recognized entities such as pannus and
with isolated blood vessels encroaching on the
episclerokeratitis, which show significant clini-
affected stroma at various levels. Despite the
cal similarity to the diseases in other species.
dramatic appearance of affected eyes the disease
Both eosinophillic keratitis and the superficial
is associated with no ocular pain. However,
ulcerating keratitis putatively atributed to per-
subepithelial bullae may form and rupture to
sistent EHV-2 infection may also be classed as
create superficial erosions, causing transient
nonulcerative keratides. The etiologies of the
ocular discomfort.
In the quiescent or inactive phase of the
that most, if not all, are driven to some degree
disease there is a modest diffuse stromal fbro-
by derangement of the normally inert immuno
sis with some superficial vascularization
Acute episodes of the disease will eventually
et al have proposed the use of the generic term
subside without treatment in most cases. While
356 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
the therapeutic benefit of topical corticosteroids
is very limited, topical cyclosporine A twice
daily results in significant suppression of the
acute corneal reaction and clearing of the cornea
within l0-l4 days in most cases. However,
long-term treatment may need to be maintained
at a reduced frequency for a protracted period
to prevent disease recrudescence.
Endotheliitis
This is characterized by a unilateral central
edema and deep vascularization. In all cases
there is no obvious etiology, although endothe-
lial immunoreactivity to a persistent, possibly
viral, heteroantigen may be involved. The
disease is usually of sudden onset, and affected
Fig. 12.23. Limbal nonulcerative keratopathy
eyes are nonpainful. There is a deep, diffuse
resembles stromal abscesses clinically but differs
histologically and in response to therapy.
fibrocellular opacity and stromal edema in the
central cornea, which may evolve rapidly into
corneal hydrops.  Isolated arborizing blood
vessels encroach upon the affected area at the
level of the posterior stroma or endothelium.
Treatment consists of topically administered
In some cases, dense clumps of cells may be
corticosteroids, cyclosporin A, and/or beta
evident adherent to the endothelium in the
radiation therapy, plus systemic NSAIDs and
region of the terminal vessel. In long standing
corticosteroids. Enucleation from inability to
cases stromal mineralization can occur.
control pain is often the result.
Epithelial Keratopathy
Burdock Pappus Bristle Keratopathy
This is a unilateral disease affecting horses of
 Persistent corneal ulceration caused by burdock
any age. It differs from the preceding diseases
        
pappus bristle foreign bodies embedded in the
disease, although in other aspects it meets the
conjunctiva are common among horses in the
clinical criteria of nonulcerative keratitis. There
northeastern United States. Conjunctivalec-
is a diffuse, central, superficial corneal opacity,
tomy of the bristle foreign body and surround-
usually associated with a very slight blepharo-
ing tissue is recommended.
spasm and discomfort. Topical 0.1% dexa-
methasone results in rapid corneal clearing in
Corneal Dystrophy
most cases, and the disease has not been
observed to recur after successful treatment.
Corneal dystrophies, in general, are primary
biochemical abnormalities, typically associated
Nonulcerative Keratouveitis
with bilateral, symmetrical, and progressive
opacities, and that are frequently inherited.
Nonulcerative keratouveitis is an unusual
There is no associated inflammation or vascu-
corneal disease in the horse that is character-
 larization. Unilateral and bilateral progressive
ized by a nonulcerated, fleshy, stromal infiltrate
 dystrophic-like stromal opacities are encoun-
involving the limbus (Fig. 12.23). This may be
an immune-mediated disease.
rarely, and there is no treatment.
EQuine Ophthalmolocy/357
Radiation-induced Keratopathy
in horses; they generally take the form of a
superficial keratitis of varying severity, often
Progressive stromal edema with bullous kera-
complicated by intermittent shallow ulceration
topathy and nonresponsive geographic
and
or epithelial sloughing, vascularization and pig-
punctate ulceration have been recorded
as
mentation, and arise as a consequence of abnor-
delayed sequelae of beta and high dose gamma
mal production, distribution, break up or loss
irradiation therapy respectively of limbal SCC
of the preocular tear film. In the horse, evapo-
and periorbital fbrosarcoma. Such cases are
rative keratopathies are synonymous with
rare and may in part reflect problems with
exposure keratopathies.
computed radiation doseage and corneal expo-
Treatment in these cases involves the regular
sure resulting from postoperative lid fbrosis
application of ocular lubricants or artificial
and decreased corneal sensitivity. Treatment is
tears. Temporary tarsorrhaphy or bandage
symptomatic.
contact lenses may be used to protect the cornea
in selected cases. In all cases the primary cause
should be identifed and where possible
Corneal Seguestrum
corrected.
Corneal sequestrum is a very rarely reported
KCS, caused by a deficiency in the aqueous
complication of chronic keratitis. One report
portion of the preocular tear film, occurs rela-
tively rarely in the horse and is most frequently
described refractory chronic superficial ero-
sions in three horses associated with seques-
neurogenic, associated with traumatic injury to
 trum formation. The presenting shallow erosive
the parasympathetic nerve supply to the lacri-
lesions were fluorescein negative, had an opal-
mal gland. I
Diagnosis is based upon clinical
signs, and is conformed by Schirmer tear testing
escent surface appearance, and were variably
vascularized with peripheral foci of mineraliza-
(STT). STTl (basal and reflex tear production)
tion. Management of such cases involves
results in normal horses vary widely and mean
keratectomy to remove the sequestrum and
values from 12.7 mm/min to 24.8 mm/min are
 subsequent treatment of the resulting corneal
reported. Treatment generally involves the long
defect.
term use of corneal lubricants and tear replace-
ment products every 2-6 hours. Surgical trans-
position of the parotid salivary duct to the
Corneal Staphyloma
medial canthus is possible.
Corneal staphyloma is present where an area of
scarred and vascularized cornea with adherent
Recurrent Erosion (Chronic Superficial
anterior uveal tissue or lens protrudes forward
Uiceration)
into the palpebral fissure. Perforating injuries
of the cornea, eg. perforated ulcer, commonly
 Indolent or nonhealing superficial erosions
seal with anteriorly prolapsed iris, which, left
or ulcers are characterized by decreased
untreated, may generate a proliferation of orga-
adhesion of healing corneal epithelial cells
nized fbrous tissue that subsequently bridge
to basement membrane and are relatively
and close the corneal defect. This repair tissue
common in the horse. There is no age pre-
bulges anteriorly under the influence of aqueous
dilection, and foals may be affected. Typi-
pressure producing a cone of dense, fbrovas-
cally the lesions are sterile and there is no
cular tissue, which in some cases may become
contributing abnormality of the eyelids or
heavily pigmented.
palpebral conjunctiva. Affected eyes show
only moderate discomfort and lacrimation,
Evaporative and Tear-Deficient
and there is an area of discrete, static shallow
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
ulceration with typically redundant nonad-
herent epithelial margins and a narrow zone
There are two types of keratoconjunctivitis
of peripheral stromal edema. Fluorescein
sicca (KCS) or “dry eye" syndrome recognized
uptake may be muted by a basal cell overlay
358 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
and some degree of vascularization occurs
 gested. Clinically there is dense and nonpainful
in only around one third of cases.
stromal edema and turgidity, generally of rapid
Debridement of the redundant epithelial
onset and typically beginning in the mid ventral
margins and base is the initial treatment of
cornea and progressing to involve the entire
choice. Where initial debridement fails, grid
cornea. Subepithelial bullae (bullous keratopa-
keratotomy, superficial lamellar keratectomy
thy) may form and may rupture or be abraided
and conjunctival grafting are further treat-
by lid action, resulting in shallow erosions that
ment options. The prognosis in all cases is
cause low-grade ocular discomfort.
guarded since nonhealing erosions are poten-
Conventional treatment is based upon the
tially recurrent, and continued dehiscence of the
use of topical nonproprietary hyperosmotic
  a   
preparations (7.5% saline, 10% glycerin or 5%
 mechanical action of the eyelids and/or poor tear
hypertonic saline ointment); thermokerato-
film stability may be diffcult to overcome.
plasty may be considered in cases refractory to
medical treatment. The prognosis in all cases is
Corneal Mineralization and Caicific
and even where corneal clearing begins it may
Band Keratopathy
not continue to completion.
Subepithelial  mineralization  is  occasionally
observed in association  with keratitis
6and
Linear Keratopathy
uveitis. Calcific band keratopathy refers specif-
cally to the deposition of calcium salts at the
Nonedematous striate lesions with well-defined,
level of the epithelial basement membrane and
parallel refractile margins are occasionally
anterior stroma that is an occasional finding in
      
chronic equine recurrent uveitis. The specific
Descemet's membrane in normotensive and
cause of the mineralization is unknown. Modest
calcified deposits may resolve spontaneously
these striae are single and nonbranching.
following treatment of the primary uveitis.
although multiple branching lesions may be
Spontaneous resolution may be promoted by
observed. The striae are uniformly l-2 mm in
topical instillation of 13.8% EDTA solution to
width throughout their length. Clinically similar
decrease calcium levels in the tear film, although
 striate lesions are seen in chronically hyperten-
epithelial dehiscence and ulceration may be a
sive eyes, and in corneas following blunt
 possible problem.
trauma. The cause of the lesions in otherwise
Local mineralization of superficial ulceration
normal eyes is unknown.
is occasionally seen in the horse, and in most
cases will resolve as the lesion heals. Mineral-
Viral Keratitis
ization of the central or anterior stroma can
occur as an uncommon sequel to chronic or
Support for EHV-2 viral keratitis includes
recurrent keratitis arising from various causes.
reports where EHV-2 was isolated from
corneal biopsies taken from foals with focal
Idiopathic Primary Edema (Bullous
superficial keratitis and conjunctivitis in
Keratopathy)
Europe; several foal eyes with keratocon-
junctivitis and respiratory disease in Austra-
This is a rare, usually unilateral, condition
lia; and in many other reports world-wide.
believed to arise from a functional abnormality
Two types of corneal lesion are recog-
in the endothelium, resulting in the net ingress
nized in foals; in type one, the lesions appear
       
as fine, irregular, fluorescein positive epithe-
quent stromal overhydration. A specific etiol-
lial fissures with contiguous anterior stromal
ogy has not been identified in the horse,
edema. Rarely, these fissures may coalesce
although primary dystrophic-like disease or
resulting in a dendritic-like lesion, and in
immune mediated degeneration has been sug-
some instances may form a shallow geo-
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY/359
graphic ulcer; and in type two, the lesions
erate to severe ocular pain accompanies the
appear as multiple focal fluorescein positive
acute disease. Conjunctival hyperemia, chemo-
superficial ulcers, less than 0.5 mm in diam-
sis and a yellow or white caseous mucoid
eter, with perilesional anterior stromal
discharge occur. Dacryoadenitis and KCS in
edema. Some ulcers will heal spontaneously
association with the corneal lesions can also
leaving a combination of ulcerated and nonul-
occur.
cerated anterior stromal opacities. Vasculariza-
Corneal scrapings show an intense eosino-
tion does not occur in either case.
phil response with some plasma cells, mast
Both presentations respond rapidly
to
cells and PMNs. The cause is unknown, but
topical 0.5-l% idoxuridine (IDU) solution
may involve hypersensitivity to a putative
applied every 2 hours until the eye is pain
extraneous heteroantigen.
free and re-epithelialization is evident.
Topical corticosteroids are generally effec-
Topical diclofenac has weak antiviral prop-
tive, but their use may need to be continued
erties and is beneficial in some horses with
for 9-10 weeks or longer to achieve resolution
suspected viral keratitis. Clinical experience
of the lesions. Debridement of the necrotic
indicates that 1% trifluridine solution is gener-
 od a a  m ni
ally effective in treating equine viral keratitis,
most cases.
and that 3% acyclovir ointment is unreliable in
its therapeutic effective.
The most common manifestation of EHV-2
The Lens
keratitis in adult horses is sporadic multifocal
The horse lens measures 17-22 mm in diam-
subepithelial punctate opacities. These stain
variably with fluorescein but stain positive
eter, has an axial length of 12-15 mm, a
volume of 2.5-3.0 ml, and a power of 14.88
with rose Bengal. Superfcial vascularization is
associated with the opacities. Affected horses
diopters. The anterior, posterior and equato-
exhibit persistent moderate ocular
rial capsules measure 9l, 14, and 20 μm
pain,
although uveitis is not a common feature of the
thick, respectively. The horse lens consists
of about 6,0o0 layers of perfectly clear living
disease. Topical 0.5% idoxuridine and 1% tri-
fluridine are conventionally used in treating
cells or fibers. These lens fibers are -8-
affected eyes with varying success. Topical
10 μm in diameter.
NSAIDs (e.g., diclofenac) and serum have been
used with varying success. Systemic NSAIDs
Congenitaf Noncataractous
and topical atropine sulfate may be used to
Abnormalities of the Lens
 manage concurrent uveitis where this is present.
The prognosis is guarded as recurrence may be
Ectopia lentis is a rare anomaly caused by
a problem.
failure of the lens vesicle to enter the optic cup
during early embryogenesis. The result is the
development of disordered lens tissue in a
Eosinophilic Keratitis
shallow anterior chamber, appearing clinically
as dense and generalized anterior segment
Eosinophilic keratitis is a condition noted in
opacification.
the warmer temperate climates of the United
Coloboma of the lens, a notch-like disconti-
States that is characterized by single or multiple
nuity in the peripheral outline of the lens prob-
shallow ulcers covered by dense white or gelati-
ably arising from a primary absence of zonule
nous necrotic plaques loosely attached to the
fbers, has been reported as an isolated abnor-
underlying stroma. Typically the ulcers appear
mality in otherwise normal eyes. Coloboma of
initially in the perilimbal cornea and extend
the lens, lenticonus and microphakia have been
peripherally, although the geographic appear-
recorded in association with complex microph-
ance of the lesions is highly variable. Vascular-
thalmos in foals.
ization of the anterior stroma accompanies the
Congenital subluxation of both lenses has
focal ulceration, and may be very intense. Mod-
been reported in an Arab cross foal with no
360 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
other ocular abnormalities. Cataract and lens
 example, some post-uveitic cataracts. Morgag-
luxation are components of "anterior segment
 nian cataract, a hypermature cataract where the
dysgenesis syndrome" in Rocky Mountain
nucleus “sinks" within the liquefied cortex, has
horses.
been described in the horse, but is probably
extremely rare. A fundamental and practical
division of equine cataracts by etiogenesis can
Lens Luxation and Subluxation
be made into acquired or secondary cataracts,
and developmental cataracts.
Specific primary luxation of the lenses in adult
horses has not been documented. However,
acquired anterior or posterior luxation and
Heritability of Eguine Cataracts
subluxation of the lens occur relatively fre-
quently in the horse. It is encountered as a
The heritability of developmental cataracts in
sequel to ocular trauma and panuveitis, and,
horses has not been widely studied. Neverthe-
less frequently, in cases of glaucoma. Luxated
less several breeds have been reported (appen-
lenses invariably become cataractous, and int-
dix Q)
racapsular or phacoemulsification lens extrac-
tion may be possible in selected instances.
Nuclear Scierosis
However, since intraocular damage of sufficient
severity to result in lens luxation would also be
Nuclear sclerosis describes the altered
expected to cause significant visual impairment
refractivity of the central lens in occurring
or frank blindness, evisceration and implanta-
in older animals, caused by progressive com-
tion of an intrascleral silicone prosthesis is an
pression of the nucleus by enveloping sec-
option in blind eyes.
ondary fibers as part of normal lens growth.
However, increased definition of the nuclear-
Cataracts
cortical junction on retroillumination is a
common observation in horses over l8 years
Loss of optical homogeneity of the lens
old. The nucleus remains largely optically
results from derangement of its highly orga-
clear in these animals, although in very old
nized cytosystem and alteration in the refrac-
animals central brunescence of the nucleus
tive index of the cytosol. Intraocular
may be an occasional finding.
inflammatory disease is a potent cause of
cataracts in all species, and is the most
Concentric Cortical Lamination
common cause of cataracts in the horse.
The optically clear lens cortex in mature horses
may have a pronounced concentric laminar
Ciassification of Equine Cataracts
structure, the resulting refractive anomaly
having an “onion ring" appearance on distant
As in other species, equine cataracts may be
direct ophthalmoscopy. The cause is related to
variously classified according to their anatomic
u j s  u a j   
location within the lens, their physical appear-
 apparent clinical significance and is not a pre-
ance, their presumptive etiogenesis, or stage of
cursor of cataract.
     o
mise in this species is a classification based
upon a combination of anatomic location,
Senile Cataract
appearance and etiogenesis. The majority of
equine cataracts are nonprogressive, and clas-
 Slowly progressive cataracts are very com-
sification of equine cataract according to stage
monly observed in horses aged more than 18
of progression, that is, incipient (implying pro-
years. These are generally accepted to be
 gression), immature, mature and hypermature,
age-dependent "senile" cataracts. Typically,
is appropriate only in a very few cases, for
early senile cataract in the horse appears as
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY/361
microvesiculation in the area of the poste-
Acguired or Secondary Cataracts
rior sutures. More overt, optically dense
condensations around the posterior sutures,
Acquired or secondary cataractogenesis is
along with perinuclear and focal cortical
initiated and driven by influences arising
cataracts are observed in older animals.
outside the lens. These include ocular or sys-
These cataracts are usually bilateral but are not
temic disease, and well documented extrinsic
necessarily symmetrical.
factors such as UV light, ionizing and micro-
Senile cataracts are reported to be associated
wave radiation, and ingested toxins. In most
with visual impediment in more extensively
cases these cataracts are potentially progres-
affected horses, particularly in dim lighting
sive depending upon the persistence or
conditions. However as senile retinopathy is
recurrence of the primary insult.
almost invariably present in these eyes, any
The major cause of secondary cataracts in
visual
disability is probably a cumulative
the horse is unquestionably uveitis, encom-
effect.
passing traumatic and infectious uveitis, and
the heterogeneous group of presumptively
immunogenic diseases described as equine
Extralenticuiar Opacities
recurrent uveitis (ERU) (Figs. 12.24A and B
and 12.25). Several different morphological
These are not cataracts but are nonprogressive,
forms of cataract are typically associated with
congenital retrolental opacities derived from
intraocular inflammatory disease, and more
the tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL) and vascular
than one form may be recognized in any one
framework of the iridopupillary membrane,
and are likely to contain vascular, pigmentary,
and connective tissue elements. They include
both Mittendorfs Dot and the more extensive
fine fibrillar opacities commonly found adher-
ent to the axial and ventral posterior lens
capsule
Persistent  hyperplastic primary  vitreous
(PHPV), resulting in a dense and extensive pos-
a horse, but is extremely rare. Persistent pupil-
lary membranes (PPMs) are, in general, rela-
tively common in the horse, but only rarely do
 'si rae a oi uo js oi pxi a
these instances dense capsular opacities are
usually present at the point of insertion.
Anterior epicapsular pigment deposits are
relatively common in the horse. These range
   sn s, s 
and irregular masses, and probably result from
anomalous or overextended contact of the iri-
dopupillary membrane with the lens capsule
They may occur in isolation or can be associ-
ated with other abnormalities suggestive of
minor anterior segment dysgenesis, for
B
example, focal corneal opacity or iris colo-
boma. Usually there is no associated anterior
Fig. 12.24. A. Posterior cortical vesicles in the lens
capsular opacification,  although contiguous
of a Thoroughbred stallion with active ERU. B.
      
 Smaller posterior cortical lens vesicles in a uveitic
animal ages.
eye.
362 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
being used by some surgeons to manage ERU.
In Europe the incidence of this complication
has been reported to be 34%, while in Florida
an incidence of 46% has been reported.
Subluxation of the lens with complete cata-
ract formation may be present in some cases of
glaucoma, usually in the absence of clinical
evidence of overt uveitis. In some of these cases
it is possible the luxation may be a primary
event.
Fig. 12.25. Immature cortical cataract in an
Developmental Cataracts
Appaloosa with ERU
Capsulolenticular cataracts may be unilat-
eral or bilateral and are nonprogressive.
They are seldom, if ever, associated with
eye, depending on the extent and severity of
compromised vision in the horse. Anterior
the inflammatory disease.
polar cataracts are congenital cataracts and
Typically in cases of anterior uveitis or
have two distinct forms in the horse. The
iridocyclitis there are focal anterior capsular
more common is a focal circular or elliptical
and subcapsular cataracts, occasionally asso-
cataract associated with minor aberrations
ciated with posterior synechiae. Toward the
in refraction in the anterior cortex. Posterior
axial lens these cataracts may have a plaque-like
polar cataract is a relatively rare congenital
 appearance due to fbrous metaplasia and pro-
cataract, typically having a stellate configura-
liferation of epithelial cells, and radial cleft-like
tion associated with radial extensions into the
extensions into the subcapsular cortex may be
subcapsular cortex.
present.
Lenticular cataracts, with the exception of
"Whiplash" injury can result in a nonpro-
embryonic nuclear cataracts, are usually bilat-
gressive, dense, posterior axial "Y" confgured
 eral but are not necessarily symmetrical. They
capsular cataract, which may arise from dehis-
 may be grouped into four types: (l) zonal;
cence of the cortical vitreous attachments from
(2) embryonic nuclear cataracts; (3) fetal
the posterior capsule.
nuclear cataracts; and (4) perinuclear or lamel-
Posterior uveitis or chorioretinitis may occa-
lar cataracts are the most commonly encoun-
sionally be associated with extensive diffuse
tered developmental cataracts. They appear as
and irregular posterior capsular and subcapsu-
spherical or oblate opacities located on the
lar cataracts.
periphery of the adult nucleus. The nucleus
Post-panuveitic cataracts vary from a com-
and surrounding cortex are usually optically
bination of the anterior and posterior subcap-
clear.
However f
focal opalescent opacities
sular cataracts to complete cataracts. The latter
are commonly found in the anterior cortex,
 '     
and within the cataract the suture pattern is
may rapidly progress from incipient to imma-
usually accentuated. These cataracts develop
ture, mature and hypermature cataracts. With
in early postnatal life, and in general are
maturity these cataracts develop a typical
nonprogressive.
yellow-green coloration. Circumferential peri-
Equatorial cataracts are nonprogressive
equatorial vacuolation is also seen in cases of
disruptions in the optical homogeneity of
nonrhegmatogenous complete retinal detach-
the periequatorial cortex, and are associated
ment, possibly reflecting ciliary body insult at
with crenellation or irregularity of the lens
the level of the ora serrata. Progressive cataract
 surface. The shape of the equine pupil renders
development is a recognized sequela of the
these opacities more prominent nasally and
anterior core vitrectomy procedure currently
temporally
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/363
Sutural cataracts may be congenital
or
appear postnatally. They are potentially pro-
 gressive, but any progression is likely to be very
slow.
Axial cataracts evolve in a relatively precise
geometric confguration around the axis of the
lens, and are identified using descriptive termi-
nology. Floriform cataracts are nonprogressive,
   , 
posterior perinuclear cortex.
Complete congenital cataracts present as dense
and uniform opacifications of the nucleus and
cortex. Vision is severely compromised. These
cataracts are frequently associated with other
ocular
 abnormalities,
a foal.
most
commonly
microphthalmos.
Postoperative Vision
Cataract Surgery
Most reliable reports of vision after success-
Most veterinary ophthalmologists recommend
ful cataract surgery in the horse indicate
surgical removal of cataracts in foals younger
that vision is functionally normal. From an
than 6 months if the foal is healthy, no uveitis
optical standpoint, the aphakic eye should
or other ocular problems are present, and the
 be quite far-sighted or hyperopic postopera-
foal's personality will tolerate aggressive topical
tively and, in one study, was +9.94 diopters
 therapy and handling; adults with visual impair-
(D). Images close to the eye should be
ment because of cataracts are also candidates
blurry and appear to be magnified. Such loss
for surgery. Surgery in foals is easier, however,
of accommodation could be severely debilitat-
because the globe size is small enough that
 ing to some horses. Theoretically, intraocular
 standard cataract surgical equipment is of a
lenses
s could improve postoperative  visual
satisfactory size, general anesthesia is less of a
outcome; an intraocular lens with a refractive
risk, and foals heal very quickly after cataract
power of 25 D resulted in +8-D hyperopia at
surgery. Early return of vision is paramount in
retinoscopy i
in one study of pseudophakic
foals for development of the higher visual
horses.
centers.
Therapy for cataracts is necessarily surgical,
but some degree of spontaneous cataract resorp-
Equine Glaucoma
tion may occur with hypermature cataracts.
Patient selection and diagnostics are similar to
The glaucomas are a group of diseases resulting
small animals (see chapter 9). Phacoemulsifi-
from reductions in aqueous humor outflow
cation is the preferred extracapsular cataract
that cause an IOP increase above that which is
extraction technique for the horse (Fig.
compatible with normal function of the retina
12.26). Immature, mature, and hypermature
and optic nerve. True glaucoma was thought to
equine cataracts have been successfully
be a variant of ERU, and an uncommon ocular
removed with this technique. Subluxated, or
problem in horses. The suspected low preva
partially luxated lenses may also be success-
lence of glaucoma in the horse is surprising
fully removed in horses using phacoemulsi-
(0.07% in the United States). Equine glaucoma
fication. Complications of cataract surgery
is not easily recognized in the early stages of
in the foal and adult horse are similar to
the disease due to the subtle nature of the clini-
those in small animals.
cal signs.
364 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Types of Equine Glaucoma
Equine glaucoma may not be easily recog-
nized in the early stages of the disease due
The glaucomas of horses are frequently cat-
to the subtle nature of the clinical signs
egorized into primary, secondary and con-
(Figs. 12.27, 12.28, and 12.29). There is
genital types. Primary glaucomas have a
generally a low index of suspicion of glau-
bilateral and heritable potential, possess no
coma in horses with eye problems, the pupils
overt ocular abnormality to account for the
are often only slightly dilated, and overt dis-
increase in lOP, and have not been conclu-
comfort is uncommon. Afferent pupillary
sively reported in the horse. The secondary
light reflex deficits, linear band opacities,
glaucomas in horses have an identifiable
mild corneal edema, decreased vision, lens
cause such as iridocyclitis, lens luxation and
luxations, mild iridocyclitis, and optic nerve
intraocular neoplasia. Iris and ciliary body
atrophy/cupping may also be found in eyes
neoplasms can obstruct aqueous humor
of horses with glaucoma
outflow to cause secondary glaucoma. Con-
Congenital glaucoma of foals may be bilat-
genital glaucoma is reported in foals due to
eral. Corneal edema, corneal stria, mild buph-
developmental anomalies of the iridocorneal
thalmos, lens luxation, lens coloboma, absent
angle (goniodysgenesis).
corpora nigra, iris hypoplasia, retinal degenera-
 tion and optic nerve cupping may be found.
Glaucoma in the horse results in early
Risk Factors for Progression of Equine
peripheral retinal and optic nerve damage with
Glaucoma
Horses with active or quiescent uveitis, aged
horses (>15 years old), and Appaloosas are
at increased risk for the development of
glaucoma. Glaucoma has also been reported
in several breeds (appendix Q).
Pathogenesis of IoP Elevation
Physical obstruction of the aqueous humor
outflow pathways can occur by contraction
of  pre-iridal  postinflammatory  membranes,
Fig. 12.27. A lens luxation is associated with
clogging of the ICA with inflammatory debris,
glaucoma in this horse
and posterior synechia causing pupillary
block, iris bombe, and trabecular compression
and angle closure. Anterior lens luxation
a un u sdde aded pa p
in Appaloosas and Rocky Mountain Horse
and may obstruct the pupil or the iridocorneal
angle.
Diagnosis and Clinicaf Signs
The diagnosis of equine glaucoma is made with
the documentation of elevated IOP, and the
presence of clinical signs specific to glaucoma.
Fig. 12.28. Incomplete corneal edema and dilated
The IOP in glaucomatous horses and horses
 Jo doI ue pue euosnel yim [eoj e u! l!dnd 
with ERU does not remain consistently elevated
50 mmHg. Laser cyclophotoablation was unsuccessful
as large diurnal fluctuations in IOP can occur.
at reducing the IOP.
EQUNE OpHTHALMOLOGY/365
therapy in early cases of equine glaucoma is
usually good, but the long-term prognosis for
maintaining vision with medical therapy alone
is guarded. Partial vision may be retained for
extended periods despite dramatically high
IOP, however, in some horses. Glaucoma is
particularly aggressive and difficult to control
in the Appaloosa. Iridocyclitis must be vigor-
ously suppressed if present.
The beta adrenergic blocker timolol maleate
(0.5%) can decrease the IOP in the normal
horse eye by 17% (4.2 mmHg) if administered
topically BID. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
dorzolamide (2%) alone or in combination
with timolol maleate is effective in lowering
IOP by 10% (2 mmHg) if administered topi-
cally BID in horses. Once a day use actually
increased IOP in horses. Acetazolamide (2-
Fig. 12.29. Atrophy of the optic nerve head due to
glaucoma. The reticular pattern in the central cup
3 mg/kg PO BID to QID), dichlorphenamide
(1 mg/kg BID), and methazolamide (0.25 mg/
region of the optic disc is the lamina cribrosa. The
lamina is exposed when the optic nerve axons are
kg)  are systemically administered carbonic
lost.
anhydrase inhibitors utilized for short term IOP
reduction in horses. Prostaglandin analogues
are a new class of ocular hypotensive drug that
progression to generalized retinal and optic
has been developed for treatment of glaucoma
nerve atrophy. The horse eye seems to tolerate
in humans. Latanoprost (0.005%) lowers IOP
elevations in IOP that would quickly blind a
by 1 mmHg in geldings (5%) and 3 mmHg in
dog: however, blindness is the end result
mares (17%), but its side effects include con-
junctival hyperemia, epiphora and blepharo-
spasm limit its use.
Hypertensive Iridocyclitis
Atropine has been recommended as possible
therapy for equine glaucoma, however, atro-
Classis iridocyclitis in ERU is associated with
pine (1%) once a day had no effect on IOP but
hypotony due to decreased production of
caused mydriasis. Atropine administered BID
aqueous humor by the ciliary body and
caused an 11% reduction in IOP in treated eyes
increased absorption of aqueous humor by the
of ten horses, and an increase in IOP in one
iris, ciliary body, and trabecular meshworks. It
horse.
appears that some cases of"glaucoma" in horses 
Anti-inflammatory  therapy consisting  of
are actually eyes with iridocyclitis (ERU) that
 are in a phase of ocular hypertension or ele-
topically administered corticosteroids such as
vated IOP. This might explain the cases of
prednisolone acetate, and systemically admin-
"glaucoma" that resolve with therapy and
istered NSAIDs such as phenylbutazone and
flunixin meglumine are beneficial in the control
 appear to have no effect on vision.
of the iridocyclitis inducing the elevation in
IOP.
Medicaf Treatment
Medical management of equine glaucoma
Surgicaf Treatment
follows the same general guidelines as that of
other species, with the aims of therapy being
When medical therapy is inadequate, surgery
reducing IOP and suppressing the iridocyclitis.
should be utilized to control IOP and pre-
The initial response to IOP reducing medical
serve vision in the horse with glaucoma. The
366 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
surgical options for a visual eye include tran-
scleral laser cyclophotoablation, and gonio
implant filtration procedures in the visual
equine glaucoma patient. Cyclocryoablation,
ciliary body ablation, intrascleral prostheses
and enucleation are indicated for blind, chroni-
cally painful, and buphthalmic eyes.
Noninflammatory Uveal
Problems
Anterior Segment Dysgenesis
Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) is asso-
ciated with the silver dapple gene in the
Fig. 12.30. Cystic corpora nigra may cause vision
horse. Breeds affected include the Shetland
problems in the horse.
pony,Miniature
horses, Rocky Moun-
tain Horse (RMH), Kentucky Mountain
Saddle Horse, Mountain Pleasure Horse,
Inffammatory Uveaf Disease: Uveitis
Morgan Horse, Bashkir-Curly Horse, Nara-
ganssett Pacer, and Haflinger. Chocolate
Uveitis in the horse may arise from a number
coat color and flaxen mane and tail color are
of known causes. Blunt or perforating trauma,
associated with the ASD.Anterior segment
including surgical trauma, to the globe will
dysgenesis is best described in the RMH where
result in a uveitis of varying severity depending
it appears to be a codominant trait. Hypoplasia
upon the severity of the initiating insult. More
of the corpora nigra and iris, and temporal iris
 specifically, direct trauma to the lens capsule
and ciliary body cysts are found in the hetero-
can cause phacoclastic uveitis that results from
-o seu anis snozouu ai HN snoskz
leakage of lens proteins into the fluid media of
genital miosis with the pupil frequently
 the eye. Some bacteria are recognized as uveito.
nonresponsive to mydriatic drugs, deep ante-
genic pathogens in the horse, including Salmo-
rior chamber, macrocornea, ciliary body and
nella, Strep equi. var equi, Borrelia burgdorferi
retinal cysts, cataract. lens luxation, RPE streaks
and Rhodococcus equi. These organisms pre-
and retinal dysplasia/detachment. (see Fig.
sumptively arrive in the eye during the course
16.3.1 in Chapter 16)
of systemic disease, although whether the
resulting uveitis is a consequence of direct bac-
Enlarged Corpora Nigra and Iris Cysts
terial action or of immune mediated injury
driven by the microbial heteroantigen is
Iridal cysts are hollow structures of the corpora
unknown. Uveitis is a complication of Gram-
nigra or pupillary margin that transilluminate
 negative septicemia in neonatal foals, and the
with focal light sources, contain a viscous,
organism may be recovered from the affected
opaque fluid, and are more prominent follow-
eyes. Mycobacterium avium has been recorded
 ing mydriasis. Iridal cysts may be free floating
 as a cause of bilateral granulomatous uveitis in
(Fig. 12.30). They are embryonic remnants of
 a horse. Iritis has been described in foals during
the optic vesicle. Large corpora nigra and iridal
the course of a field outbreak of EHV-l. In this
cysts may interfere with vision to cause erratic
same outbreak, cyclitis was recorded postmor-
behavior, and rarely the headshaking syn-
tem in affected mares. A mild bilateral iritis or
drome. They may be successfully deflated with
iridocyclitis has been reported in association
transcorneal Nd:YAG, argon or diode laser
with equine influenza virus infection. Uveitis
treatment. Iris cysts must be differentiated from
has been reported in cases of malignant lym-
solid iris melanomas.
phoma and in metastatic thyroid carcinoma.
EQuine Ophthalmolocy/367
Congenital uveitis, possibly due to in utero
cific cytotoxic T cell activity. Impairment of
infection, is a rare occurrence and may be asso-
ACAID and the other protective mechanisms
ciated with mature complete cataract in the
exposes the uvea to the possibility of immune
neonatal foal
mediated insult. The well documented associa-
Uveitis commonly accompanies corneal
 tion of the onset of ERU with initial exposure
trauma, corneal ulceration and some nonulcer-
to certain Leptospira serovariants, notably L
ative keratopathies. In some cases, the uveitis
interrogans var pomona, suggests these organ-
may be sufficiently severe or intractable as to
       
become a major determinant of unsuccessful
instances of the disease. The association of ERU
resolution of the primary corneal disease.
with leptospires and, possibly, other microbial
Horses are commonly presented with
1an
 pathogens may be based upon antigenic homol-
apparently endogenous uveitis, generally and
ogy between microbial peptides, potentially
by common usage referred to as ERU. ERU is
uveitogenic intraocular autoantigens, and
synonymous with the now obsolete terms
MHCI+ peptides.
rdo d, r ass ,
Endogenous uveitis encompasses a heteroge-
Breed Susceptibility to ERU
neous group of presumptively immune-medi-
ated, nongranulomatous diseases, and may
ERU susceptibility has long been suspected to
present as anterior uveitis, panuveitis, or cho-
rioditis. These diseases can affect any age, type,
have a heritable component. This may be linked
 to equine leukocyte antigen (ELA) haplotypes
or sex of horse and are a potential cause of
influencing the occurrence and expression of.
blindness in affected animals. Both eyes can be
but not directly causing, autoimmune intraocu-
affected, although not necessarily simultane-
lar inflammatory disease. A strong association
ously, and the diseases are potentially but not
with the MHCl haplotype ELA-A9 with ERU
inevitably recurrent. It is likely that ERU, that
in German Warmblood horses has been
is, where the inflammatory pathology is actu-
identified. In the USA a breed predilection
ally or predictably recurrent, is pathophysio-
to the development of the disease and to the
 o     
severity of clinical expression of the disease
endogenous uveitides in the horse. The mor-
is recognized in Appaloosa horses. There is
bidity of ERU shows significant geographic dif-
an 80% chance that ERU will develop on
ferences, with a prevalence of 8-25% among
both eyes in susceptible Appaloosas, while
horses in the US and up to 30% among horses
 only 20% bilateral potential in nonAppalo0-
in Central Europe. The disease is relatively
sas with ERU. A susceptibility allele for ERU
uncommon in the UK, with a prevalence of
exists in the Appaloosa with ERU in the
0.09% reported in 1963. It is probable that the
MHC region. The UMOll microsatellite had a
etiology of the disease varies in different locali-
higher frequency of the 182 allele, and the mic-
ties, which may explain in part the significant
rosatellite EqMHCl had a higher frequency of
geographic differences in prevalence of the
the 206 allele in Appaloosas with ERU
disease.
Leptospires and ERU
Immunopathoglogica/ Considerations
in Endogenous Uveitis, Including ERU
The association between anterior uveitis
and leptospirosis was first made in Germany
Anterior chamber associated immune deviation
in 1947, to be followed by several similar
(ACAID) represents a series of precise immu-
reports from various parts of the world. In
nological responses to intraocular antigen chal-
the USA, UK and Europe, several studies
lenge, resulting both in locally impaired
have demonstrated serological linkage of L
expression of delayed type hypersensitivity
 tnterrogans serovariants other than pomona
(DTH) and suppression of C3' fxing antibody
with some cases of equine uveitis, includ-
production, but without affecting antigen spe-
ing: australis var bratislava, autumnalis
368 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
var autumnalis, and sejroe vars sejroe and
saxkoebing.
Clinical Signs of ERU
Horses with ERU will display increased lacri-
mation, blepharospasm, and photophobia to
e o na e sa  sp 
to cause much pain. Subtle amounts of corneal
edema, conjunctival hyperemia, and ciliary
injection will be present initially, and these can
become prominent as the condition progresses.
Aqueous flare, hyphema, intraocular fbrin, and
hypopyon may be observed with a bright,
focused light or slit beam. Miosis is usually a
prominent sign in horses with ERU and can
result in a misshapen pupil and posterior syn-
echiae. Delayed or failed pharmacologic mydri-
asis is common when uveitis is active. The IOP
is generally low, but ERU may be associated
with intermittent and acute elevations. Aqueous
flare may be the most sensitive indicator of
uveitis activity. The irides may darken in color.
The corpora nigra may atrophy. Fibrin and iris
pigment may be deposited on the anterior lens
capsule. Cataract formation may occur if the
Fig. 12.3l. A. Fibrin completely flls the anterior
inflammation does not subside quickly (Figs.
chamber of this horse with ERU. B. Posterior
12.31A and B and 12.32)
synechiae and vitreal yellowing are present in this
Severe anterior segment inflammation often
Appaloosa with ERU
prevents an adequate fundoscopic examination
of the acutely affected eye, however, one should
evaluate the fundus for evidence of active, or
inactive, chorioretinitis. Choroiditis may be
associated with leakage of plasma or blood
from choroidal and retinal blood vessels,
thereby resulting in focal or diffuse, nontapetal,
exudative retinal detachments. Retinal vascular
congestion can occur as well.
Corneal vascularization, permanent corneal
edema, synechiation, cataract formation, and
iris depigmentation or hyperpigmentation can
result in chronic cases. Secondary glaucoma
leading to chronic hypotony and phthisis bulbi
can also occur. In addition, vitreous liquefac-
tion as well as retinal degeneration indicated by
depigmentation in the nontapetal fundus can
result. Irreversible blindness is a common
Fig. 12.32. Large scars from ERU-induced
sequela to ERU and results from cataract forma-
chorioretinitis are present despite no detectable loss
tion or severe chorioretinitis.
of vision.
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/369
Laboratory Testing
suppress herd outbreaks of leptospiral ERU,
but their routine use as a preventive for ERU is
Laboratory testing to assess the horse with
controversial
ERU can include serum biochemical pro-
files, complete blood counts may detect
Prognosis for ERU
 major organ abnormalities or active systemic
infection (or both); conjunctival biopsies for
Recurrence of anterior uveitis caused by
examination  for  Onchocerca microfilaria;
immunologic mechanisms is the hallmark of
and serologic testing for Leptospirosis sp.
ERU. The continued presence of inciting
Results of serology can also be diffcult to
organisms or antigens in the eye or repeated
interpret, because many horses have "positive"
exposure to inciting antigens may be respon-
titers without evidence of ocular or systemic
sible for repeat attacks. Sensitized lympho-
disease. Leptospiral titers for pomona, bratislava,
cytes or other immune-competent cells or
and autumnalis should be requested in the
 specific antibodies may also remain in the uveal
United States; a positive titer for serovars at
tract to cause repeat attacks of uveitis. Antigen-
dilutions of l:400 or greater are of clinical
antibody complexes with complement can lead
importance. A higher titer in the aqueous
to corneal, endothelial, and lens damage. In
humor than in the serum is indicative of anti
[endsoidal e shioddns pue uononpoid Xpoq
addition, autoimmune complexes may form
against antigens similar to ocular tissue
cause for the uveitis.
antigens.
 Serology for Leptospira pomona can be pre-
Medical and Surgical Treatments
dictive of developing blindness in horses.
for ERU
Appaloosas with ERU positive to Leptospirosis
became blind in all affected eyes while Appa-
Medical and surgical therapy may be necessary
loosas with ERU negative to Leptopirosis
Jo juauean jo so 1oeu aui ng iean 01
became blind in 72% of eyes. Non-Appaloosas
ERU are to preserve vision, to decrease pain,
with ERU positive to Leptospirosis became
and to prevent or minimize the recurrence of
blind in 51% of affected eyes while non-Appa-
uveitis. Specific prevention and therapy are
loosas with ERU negative to Leptopirosis
often difficult, however, because the cause
became blind in 34% of eyes. Overall, the prog-
often is not identified. Treatment should be
nosis for a horse with ERU is usually poor.
aggressive and prompt to maintain transpar-
Treatment can be both time-consuming and
ency of the ocular structures. Therapy can last
expensive, but it is worth attempting to save
for weeks or months and should not be stopped
the horse's vision as long as possible.
abruptly, or there may be recurrence (Table
12.5)
Endophthaimitis
Long-Term ERU Management
Severe endophthalmitis in the horse may result
from septicemia, orbital cellulitis, eyelid
Reducing exposure to potential
antigens
abscesses, intraocular surgery, corneal perfora-
 through appropriate parasite control programs.
tions, ruptured descemetoceles or ulcers, lens
eliminating environmental contact with cattle
capsule rupture, or entrapped vitreal foreign
and wildlife, excluding horses from ponds and
bodies. It may be of a septic or a sterile nature.
swampy areas, limiting rodent access to horse
Culture of aqueous and vitreous aspirates is
feed, decreasing the incidence of bacterial and
imperative for making the correct etiologic
viral respiratory and systemic infections, and
diagnosis. Possible therapies include: 200 μg of
aq lle ueo Kiddns paay Kienb e buuiuu
 gentamicin injected intravitreally (Gram-nega-
beneficial in reducing ERU. Multivalent bovine
tive organisms), 2.2 μg of intravitreally cefazo-
and porcine leptospiral vaccines have also been
lin (Gram-positive infections); or 0.l mg of
used to treat intractable cases of ERU and to
intravenous miconazole or fluconazole (fungal
370 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteriNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
Table 12.5. Treatment of Equine Recurrent Uveitis (ERU).
Active/Acute ERU
Corticosteroids
Adrminister topically (every 4-6 hours): prednisolone acetate (1 %) or dexamethasone (0. 1 %)
Subconjunctival injections (methylprednisolone acetate, 40 mg every 1-3 weeks, or triamcinolone acetonide
(40 mmg every 1-3 weeks)
Systemic—orally. intrammuscularly. or intravenously. Systemic steroids may be beneficial in severe, refractory cases
 of ERU, but they do pose sorme risk of inducing larninitis and should be used with caution.
NSAIDs:
Adrminister topically (flurbiprofen, indomethacin, diclofenamic acid, or suprofen 4-6 times daily)
Systemically (flunixin meglummine, 0.25-1.0 mg/kg orally twice a day: phenylbutazone, 1 g intravenously or orally
twice per day: or aspirin, 25 mg/kg orally twice per day)
Mydriatics:
Decrease potential of the formation of synechiae by inducing mydriasis, and they alleviate some of the pain of
ERU by relieving ciliary body muscle spasms. Atropine (1-3%) or tropicamide (1 %) is instilled to effect and 
maintains mydriasis. Gut motility should be strictly monitored by abdominal auscultation and observing signs
of abdominal pain when using topically administered atropine in both adult horses and foals. Should gut
motility decrease during treatment with topical atropine, either discontinue the drug or change to the
(% l) auidone pue (g z) ammydauayd paaisiupe Aiidon jo uonemigwo v apweidon bue-laoys
can also be used to obtain maximum dilation in the inflamed eye with ERU. Topically administered
phenylephrine does not achieve mydriasis when used alone in the horse; however, it does not cause
cycloplegia. Injectable atropine can be administered subconjunctivally for a repository effect (5-10 mg per
injection) in difficult-to-manage horses but gut motility must be monitored closely
Antibiotics:
Systermically or topically administered; should be broad-spectrum and appropriate for the geographic location of
the patient. The efficacy of antibiotic treatment for horses with positive titers for leptospirosis remains
speculative (streptomycin may be a good choice). Penicillin and tetracycline at high dosages may be
beneficial during acute leptospiral infections.
Chronic/inactive ERU
Long-term topical/systermic corticosteroids/NSAIDS.
Pars plana vitrectomy in horses with ERU has been used successfully to remove vitreal debris to improve vision,
., sypee , jo Aouanbaiy aonpanl pue 'subis pesuo aut jo uoissanboid Aeiap
organisms); vitrectomy; and enucleation for
magnified view of the fundus in the horse,
painful blind globes. The prognosis for vision
with a lateral magnification of x 7.9 and an
and globe survival is very poor.
axial magnification of x 8.4. The retinal vas-
culature is classified as paurangiotic with
50-80, small-diameter retinal arterioles and
Posterior Segment Diseases
venules arising from the edge of the disc and
extending only a short distance from the
The normal appearance of the equine fundus
optic nerve head.
requires considerable practice for correct inter-
The fundus is divided into dorsal tapetal and
pretation, because there is much normal varia-
ventral nontapetal regions. The nontapetal
tion (Figs. 12.33A through D). Most lesions of
region is usually brown to dark brown in color
the fundus are identified near and below the
because of melanin in the RPE, but this pigment
optic nerve head, and typically involve hyper-
may be absent depending on the coat and iris
pigmentation or depigmentation. Examination
coloration. The tapetal fundus is usually yellow
in a dark area with mydriasis using tropicamide
to blue to blue-green in brown horses, but
is recommended for the best examination. The
variation can occur, again, with the horse's coat
direct ophthalmoscope provides the most
 or iris color. Palomino and chestnuts have a
EQUINE OPHTHALMOLOGY/371
B
A
D
Fig. I2.33. The different ophthalmoscopic appearances of the normal equine ocular fundus. A.
Subalbinotic normal fundus in a Paint horse. B. Normal fundus appearance of horse that is blind for
unknown reasons. C. Tapetal thinning and little pigment in the nontapetum can be normal in light-
colored horses. D. Normal Fundic appearance of a dark-colored horse. Small spots in the tapetum are
capillaries called the “Stars of Winslow". Some choroidal nevi are present dorsal to the optic disc
 penetrating the tapetum. They may appear dark
nontapetum. Color diluents, subalbinotic or 
 or red. Light gray colored linear striations may
albinotic coat-colored horses, or horses with
be seen extending horizontally from the optic
heterochromia iridis or blue irides may have no
 disc and are myelinated axons in the nerve fiber
tapetum, areas of tapetal thinning. or lack of
layer.
pigment in the nontapetal retina such that cho-
The optic nerve head, or optic disc, is oval
roidal vessel patterns can be observed. Small
 to round in the horse, and it is located slightly
dots ("Stars of Winslow") distributed in a
 temporal, in the inferior quadrant of the non-
uniform pattern throughout the tapetal fundus
 tapetal fundus. It is somewhat pink to orange
represent end-on views of choroidal capillaries
in color. The cup-to-disc ratio in the horse is
372 /EsSENtIAlS Of VeteRiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
quite large, averaging 0.6l. Exposure of the
Vitreal filaments are very commonly observed
lamina cribrosa increases with age.
in adult horses, and probably derive from con-
Congenital alterations of the
 densation of normal vitreal fibrils. They appear
equine
ocular fundus are uncommon and were pre-
as fne, translucent vermiform inclusions in the
sented in the first section of this chapter.
area of the vitreous base or may be adherent to
Atypical retinal colobomas have been noted,
the posterior lens capsule. Less frequently iso-
both singly or in groups, in the tapetal and
lated filament-like inclusions may be seen in
nontapetal fundic regions. Retinal dysplasia
the central vitreous.
or folds within the retinal layers, peripheral
retinal cysts, and optic nerve hypoplasia
have been reported in foals, and chorioreti-
Diseases of the Vitreous
nitis in foals born to mares with respiratory
disease in late gestation has been noted.
Primary acquired disease of the avascular vitre-
ous is probably extremely rare, and most
Disorders of the Vitreous
observed pathologies are secondary to disease
of the peripheral structures, principally poste-
rior uveitis. Posterior uveitis may result from
During ophthalmoscopic examination, poor
ocular trauma, endophthalmitis, optic neuritis
cohesion of the vitreal gel structure, giving the
Or may be associated with ERU. Posttraumatic
clinical impression of vitreous liquification, is
ischemia of the posterior segment can result in
a commonly observed phenomenon in other-
significant shedding of cell and glial debris into
wise equine normal eyes. This may derive from
dilution of the uniformly low
the vitreous body.
progressive
Inflammatory change typically presents as a
density vitreous hydrogel as part of normal
generalized and diffuse yellowing of the vitreal
 postnatal development.
body, probably reflecting the presence of
Liquification of the equine vitreous is usually
 inflammatory proteins, andis a common fnding
recognized by the presence of inclusions of
in ERU. Discrete areas of opacity, usually within
varying configuration and optical density whose
the posterior vitreous, are occasionally observed
movement is provoked by ocular saccades. The
in association with peripapillary chorioretinop-
effect on vision of these intravitreal inclusions
athy. Postinflammatory opacities in the vitreous
is not known, and although very few affected
horses exhibit any overt visual deficit, highly
generally resolve over a protracted period once
the primary disease is controlled. However, in
mobile peripheral "floaters" may affect behavior 
some cases the vitreal opacification may be
in some horses.
permanent
 Intravitreal hemorrhage originates from the
Anomalies of the Vitreous
retinal, choroidal or ciliary vasculature and will
usually be the result of direct trauma to the
These are a range of intravitreal inclusions
globe or posterior uveitis, or rarely posterior
probably arising due to aberrant pre- and
segment neoplasms, for example, medulloepi-
postnatal development. They may be fetal vas-
thelioma. Blood appears to be removed very
cular remnants or shed cellular debris, or may
slowly from the equine vitreous, and organiz-
be condensations of normal adult structures.
ing hemorrhage can be the cause of vitreoreti-
They are a very common finding. with some
nal detachments Postinflammatory adhesions
85% of horses reported to be affected. In each
within the vitreal cortex or cyclitic membranes
case they are non progressive and have no
in the anterior vitreous create traction and
pathological association. Persistent primary
dehiscence of the underlying retina along the
Vitreous is an uncommon fnding in the horse
plane of the subretinal space.
and appears as an optically dense membra-
Synchesis scintillans is an uncommon con-
nous or tubular structure attached to the pos-
    n  
terior lens capsule or, unusually, to the center
crystals, float freely within the apparently liq-
of the optic disc
a pun ino las Aipider 'snoan pyn
EQuine OpHthAlmOLocy/373
influence of gravity. Some crystals may be
adherent to intravitreal membranes or tracts.
Asteroid hyalosis is a very rare finding in old
horses, and appears as relatively large and
regular whitish or refractile focal inclusions
enmeshed in the vitreous gel structure. Typi-
cally these inclusions remain suspended in the
intermediate vitreous and do not settle out,
although some movement is provoked by
ocular saccades.
Chorioretinitis
The RPE and choroid are intimately related
anatomically. Chorioretinitis manifests in
A
equine eyes as focal "bullet-hole lesions,"
diffuse chorioretinal lesions, nontapetal
"horizontal band" lesions, and peripapillary
chorioretinal scars (Figs. 12.34A and B).
Viral-mediated infarction (EHV-1) of the
choroid results in RPE depigmentation at
the periphery of the infarct and RPE hyper-
 trophy at the central region.
Diffuse chorioretinallesions are less common,
and they manifest as circular, band-shaped, or
vermiform lesions in the tapetum or nontape-
tum. Tapetal lesions are rare and associated
with tapetal hyperreflectivity, and the more
common nontapetal lesions are associated with
RPE depigmentation and hyperpigmentation.
Widespread retinal or choroidal inflammation
(or both), choroidal infarction, massive blood
B
loss, or severe head trauma may induce these
lesions. Varying degrees of optic nerve degen-
Fig. 12.34. A. Peripapillary chorioretinopathy in a
eration and atrophy may be present as well.
horse eye can increase the size of the horse's blind
Toxoplasmosis, leptospirosis, and the Eastern,
spot or scotoma. B. Large chorioretinal scarring in
Western, and Venezualan equine encephaliti-
this horse would dramatically increase the size of the
des may cause chorioretinitis.
normal scotoma caused by the optic disc.
"Horizontal band" lesions in the nontapetum
occur one to two optic disc diameters ventral
to the optic nerve head, where they radiate
across the posterior pole from the nasal ora
ciliaris retinae to the temporal ora. They are
inactive peripapillary scars in visual eyes during
associated with visual deficits or complete
purchase examinations can be confusing regard-
blindness, and they may be a result of vascular
ing their significance. If no anterior segment 
infarction. There is no treatment.
lesions are associated with the scars, ERU can
Active peripapillary chorioretinitis is associ-
probably be removed from consideration as a
ated with ERU and may result in focal "bullet-
cause of the retinal lesions. Many horses have
hole" lesions or larger "butterfly"-shaped lesions
small to large peripapillary scars, with no visual
adjacent to the optic nerve head. Identifying
deficits or evidence of ERU
374 /Essentials Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Progressive Retinal Atrophy
progressive or acute blindness in the horse.
Exudative and traction detachments are also
Progressive retinal atrophy in the horse is
found. Total retinal detachments are seen clini-
uncommon, but it is observed in Thorough-
cally as free-floating, undulating, opaque veils
breds. Clinical signs include progressive visual
Overlying the optic disc. Retinal detachments
impairment, multifocal depigmented areas with
 are a complication of the posterior segment
hyperpigmented centers primarily in the non-
inflammation of ERU, head trauma, or perforat-
tapetal fundus, nyctalopia early in the disease,
ing globe wounds, and they may be secondary
and optic atrophy late in disease
to tumors.
Congenital Stationary Night
Optic Nerve Hypoplasia
Biindness
Optic nerve hypoplasia in the horse is charac-
Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB)
terized by varying degrees of visual impairment
is found in the Appaloosa breed. Congenital
(up to total blindness), mydriasis with slow to
stationary night blindness had a prevalence of
absent PLRs, small and pale optic discs with
25% in one study. It is also noted, however, in
absent optic disc vessels, and posterior depres-
Thoroughbreds, Paso Finos, and Standard-
 sido pas aq o odo a jo us
breds. The clinical and diagnosis of this condi-
 cause is a congenital lack of retinal ganglion cell
tion are presented under an earlier section on
development or excessive destruction of embry-
the neonate.
 onic ganglion cells.
Equine Motor Neuron Disease
Optic Nerve Atrophy
Retinopathy
Optic nerve atrophy in the horse occurs sec-
 Retinal pigment epithelial cell accumulation
ondary to inflammation in optic neuritis and
of a substance with characteristics of ceroid
ERU, and from noninflammatory causes such
lipofuscin is found associated with the neu-
as trauma, glaucoma, toxicity, and blood loss.
rodegenerative condition, Equine Motor
Neuron Disease (EMND). A mosaic pattern
Traumatic Optic Neuropathy
 of dark to yellow brown pigmentation in the
tapetal fundus of affected horses is noticed
Stretching of the optic nerve from blunt head
 associated with a horizontal band of pigmen-
trauma can cause blindness in horses (Fig.
tation at the tapetal-nontapetal junction
12.35). The optic disc becomes pale and the
 Consistent evidence of vitamin E deficiency
 pupils dilated. There is no therapy.
(< 1.799 microg/ml) in horses with EMND
suggests that the RPE, retinal and spinal
 lesions are a result of oxidative injury asso-
Proliferative Optic Neuropathy and
ciated with a deficiency of nutritionally
Posterior Segment Neoplasia
derived antioxidants. Supplementation with
6.000 IU vitamin E per day in horses with
Proliferative optic neuropathy (PON) is a con-
EMND may stabilize the neurologic signs, but
dition found primarily in older horses. It is
characterized by a slowly enlarging, white mass
it is not known if this will affect the RPE and
retinal changes.
protruding from the optic disc and into the
vitreous, with minimal effect on vision (Fig.
12.36). This lesion is unilateral and, histopath-
Retinaf Detachments
ologically, resembles a schwannoma with pro-
liferating lipid laden glial cells. There is no
Retinal detachment, or separation of the sensory
therapy for PON. Astrocytomas, medulloepi
retina from the RPE,is associated with slowly
theliomas in young horses, choroidal melano-
EQUNE OpHTHALMOLOGY/375
blindness, and it is a bilateral condition. The
optic discs are swollen, and retinal as well as
optic disc hemorrhages may be present. The
cause is not known but may be infectous
Ischemic Optic Neuropathy
Used for treatment of epistaxis caused by gut-
tural pouch mycosis, ischemic optic neuropa-
thy resulting from arterial occlusion of the
internal carotid, external carotid, and greater
palatine arteries can result in sudden, irrevers-
ible blindness to the eye on the surgically oper-
ated side. Possibly, only the maxillary artery
should be occluded on each side of the lesion,
but the risk of ischemia to the optic nerve
remains. Optic nerve head congestion, disc
Fig. 12.35. Posttraumatic extrusion of optic nerve
axonal contents is present as white fuzzy opacities.
pallor, and extrusion of axon contents into the
The lamina cribrosa is easily seen, indicating axonal
nerve fiber layer are prominent lesions. Optic
los5.
nerve atrophy occurs in 2-4 weeks. Severe
blood loss and thromboembolic disease may
cause bilateral blindness in horses, though the
exact mechanism for this is not understood
Headshaking
Idiopathic headshaking. or head-tossing.
behavior in horses is recognized as uncontrol-
lable, persistent or intermittent, seasonal or
nonseasonal, spontaneous and frequently
repetitive vertical, horizontal or rotatory move-
ments of the head. These signs occur with such
violence that the horses are dangerous to them-
selves and riders. Rubbing of the face, head
pressing. and holding the head low are also
seen. It is not a vice, neurosis or behavioral
problem, and clinical signs suggest that there
are areas of the face, nose or nasal cavity acting
Fig. 12.36. Proliferative optic neuropathy in a 20-
 as sensory trigger zones. The role of light in this
 year-old Thoroughbred mare.
behavior in some horses was assessed by blind-
folding the horses, placing them in darkened
environments, or placing eye masks over their
mas, and lymphoma are reported in the
eyes. Photic headshaking behavior improved
 posterior segment of horses.
significantly when the amount of light striking
their eyes in some horses was diminished. A
Exudative Optic Neuritis
nasal occlusal mask may be used to reduce
clinical signs in some horses with idiopathic
Exudative optic neuritis is found in older
headshaking behavior. Otitis media/interna
horses. It manifests as sudden onset of total
from mites, premaxillary bone cysts, maxillary
376 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
osteomas, guttural pouch disease, upper respi-
Beard WL, Wilkie DA. Partial orbital rim resection,
ratory tract disease, bit and tack problems, and
mesh skin expansion, and second intention
dental as well as ocular diseases such as iris
healing combined with enucleation or exentera-
cysts must also be ruled out as a cause. The
tion for extensive periocular tumors in horses. Vet
mechanism for photic headshaking in the horse
Ophthalmol 2002;5:23-28
Bosch G, Klein WR. Superhicial keratectomy and
may be a form of optic-trigeminal nerve sum-
cryosurgery as therapy for limbal neoplasms in 13
mation, in which optic nerve stimulation pro-
horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:241-246.
duces referred sensation to the nasal cavity. A
Brooks DE. Equine stromal and endothelial kera-
favorable response to oral cyproheptadine,
topathies:
medical management of
stromal
which is an antihistamine serotonin antagonist
abscesses, eosinophilic keratitis, calcific band
given at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg twice daily, occurs
keratopathy, striate band opacities, and endothe-
in most horses, and melatonin therapy may also
litis in the horse. Curr Tech Eq Pract 2005;
be beneficial. The antiepileptic drug carbam-
4:21-28.
azepine can help others (10 mg/kg PO q6h, or
 Brooks DE. Inflammatory stromal keratopathies:
29 mg/kg PO q12h)
medical management of stromal keratomalacia,
stromal abscesses, eosinophilic keratitis, and band
keratopathy in the horse. Vet Clin N Am: Eq Pract
Breed-Related Eye Disorders
2004;20:345-360
Brooks DE. Ocular emergencies and trauma. In:
Auer JA, ed. Equine surgery. Philadelphia: WB
Several horse breeds are predisposed to various
Saunders, 1992. 666-672.
ocular conditions (appendix Q)
Brooks DE. Ophthalmology for the equine practitio-
ner. Jackson, WY: Teton New Media, 2002
 Brooks DE. Phacoemulsification cataract surgery
Geriatric Horse Eye Probfems
in the horse. Curr Techn Eq Pract 2005;4:
11-20.
Ophthalmic disease increases with age in
Brooks DE, Andrew SE, Biros DJ, Denis HM, Cutler
horses and ponies. Horses greater than 15
TJ, Strubbe DT, Gelatt KN. Ulcerative keratitis
years of age had ocular lesions in almost
caused by beta-hemolytic Streptococcus equi in
8l% of the animals in one study. Retinal
1l horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3:121-126
degeneration or senile retinopathy
was
Brooks DE, Matthews AG. Equine ophthalmology.
found in -50%, vitreal degeneration in 46%,
In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th
cataracts in 19.3%, and PON in 2.4%. Old
ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1165-1274
horses will develop some reduction in visual
Cutler TJ. Corneal epithelial disease. Vet Clin N Am:
Eq Pract 2004;20:319-344
acuity and loss of color vision from lenticu-
 lar sclerosis. Visual problems were noted in
Cutler TJ. Ophthalmic Findings in the geriatric horse.
Vet Clin N Am: Eq Pract 2002;18:545-574
8.4%
Davis JL, Stewart T, Brazik E, Gilger BC. The effect
of topical administration of atropine sulfate on the
normal equine pupil: influence of age, breed and
References
gender. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:329-332.
 Dugan SJ, Curtis CR, Roberts SM, Severin GA. Epi-
Andrew SE, Brooks DE, Biros DJ, Denis HM, Cutler
demiologic study of ocular/adnexal squamous cell
TJ, Gelatt KN. Posterior lamellar keratoplasty for
carcinoma in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
treatment of deep stromal abscesses in nine
1991;198:251-256
horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3:99-103
Dwyer A, Crockett RS, Kalsow CM. Association of
Andrew SE, Brooks DE, Smith PJ, Gelatt KN,
leptospiral seroreactivity and breed with uveitis
Chmielewski NT, Whittaker C. Equine ulcerative
and blindness in horses: 372 cases (1986-1993)
keratomycosis: visual outcome and ocular sur-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:1327-1331
vival in 39 cases (1987-1996). Eq Vet J
Dwyer A, Gilger BC. Equine recurrent uveitis. In:
1998;30:109-116
Gilger BC, ed. Equine ophthalmology. St. Louis:
Andrew SE, Willis AM. Diseases of the cornea and
Elsevier Saunders,2005. 285-322
sclera. In Gilger BC, ed. Equine ophthalmology.
Dziezyc J, Millichamp NJ, Keller CB. Use of phaco-
St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005. 157-252
fragmentation for cataract removal in horses: 12
EQUNE OPHTHALMOLOGY/377
cases (1985-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc
(1986-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:
1991;198: 1774-1778.
928-933.
Gilger BC, Malok E, Stewart T, et al. Long-term
Mosunic CB, Moore PA, Carmicheal KP, Chandler
effect on the equine eye of an intravitreal device
MJ, Vidyashankar A, Zhao Y, Roberts RE, Dietrich
used for sustained release of cyclosporine A. Vet
UM. Effects of treatment with and without adju-
Ophthalmol 2000;3:105-110
vant radiation therapy on recurrence of ocular
Gilger BC, Michau TM, Salmon JH. Immune-medi-
and adnexal squamous cell carcinoma in horses:
ated keratitis in horses: 19 cases (1998-2004).
157 cases (1985-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:233-239.
2004;225:1733-1738
Gilger BC, Michau TM. Equine recurrent uveitis:
Ollivier FJ. Medical and surgical management of
new methods of management. Vet Clin N Am:
 melting corneal ulcers exhibiting hyperproteinase
Equine Pract 2004;20:417-427
activity in the horse. Curr Tech Eq Pract 2005;
Hendrix DV. Equine ocular squamous cell carci-
4:50-71
noma. Curr Tech Eq Pract 2005;4:87-94.
Ollivier FJ, Brooks DE, Van Setten GB, Schultz GS,
Hendrix DV, Brooks DE, Smith PJ, et al. Corneal
Gelatt KN, Stevens GR, Blalock TD, Andrew SE,
stromal abscesses in the horse: a review of 24
Komaromy AM, Lassaline ME, Kallberg ME,
cases. Eq Vet J 1995;27:440-447.
Cutler TJ. Profiles of matrix metalloproteinase
Kaps S, Richter M, Spiess BM. Corneal esthesiometry
activity in equine tear luid during corneal healing
in the healthy horse. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:
in 10 horses with ulcerative keratitis. Vet Oph-
151-155.
thalmol 2004;6:397-406
Keller RL, Hendrix DV. Bacterial isolates and anti-
 Plummer CE. Equine eyelid disease. Curr Techn Eq
microbial susceptibilities in equine bacterial
Pract 2005;4:95-105
    
Rameriz S, Tucker RL. Ophthalmic imaging. Vet
2005;37:207-211
Clin N Am: Eq Pract 2004;20:441-457
King TC, Priehs DR, Gum GG, Miller TR. Therapeul-
Roberts SM. Equine vision and optics. Vet Clin
tic management of ocular squamous cell carci-
North Am: Eq Pract 1992;8:451-457.
noma in the horse: 43 cases (1979-1989). Eq Vet
Rohrbach BW, Ward DA, Hendrix DV, Cawrse-Foss
J 1991;23:449-452
M, Moyers TD. Effect of vaccination against lep-
Knottenbelt DC, Kelly DF. The diagnosis and treat-
tospirosis on the frequency, days to recurrence
ment of periorbital sarcoid in the horse: 445 cases
and progression of disease in horses with equine
from 1974 to 1999. Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3:
recurrent uveitis. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:171-
169-191.
179.
Matthews AG. The lens and cataracts. Vet Clin N
   i    
Am: Eq Pract 2004;20:393-415.
Denis HM. Changes in antibiotic resistance
Matthews AG, Crispin SM, Parker J. The equine
in equine bacterial ulcerative keratitis (l991-
fundus Il: normal anatomical variants and colo-
2000): 65 horses.Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:309-
bomata. Eq Vet J Suppl 1990;10:50-54.
313
Michau TM. Equine ocular examination: basic and
Scotty NC, Cutler TJ, Brooks DE, Ferrell E. Diagnos-
advanced diagnostic techniques. In Gilger BC, ed.
tic ultrasonography of equine lens and posterior
Equine ophthalmology. St. Louis: Elsevier Saun-
 segment abnormalities. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:
ders, 2005;1-62
127-139.
Michau TM, Gilger BC. Cosmetic globe surgery in
Theon AP, Pascoe JR, Carlson GP, Krag DN. Intra-
        
tumoral chemotherapy with cisplatin in oily
467-484.
emulsion in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Michau TM, Schwabenton B, Davidson MG, Gilger
1993;202:261-267
BC. Superficial, nonhealing corneal ulcers in
Turner AG. Ocular conditions of neonatal foals. Vet
horses: 23 cases (1989-2003). Vet Ophthalmol
Clin N Am: Eq Pract 2004;20:429-440
2003;6:291-297
Werry H, Gerhards H. The surgical therapy of
Miller TR, Brooks DE, Smith PJ, Sapienza JS. Equine
equine recurrent uveitis. Tierarzil Prax 1992;20:
glaucoma: clinical findings and response to treat-
178-186.
ment in 14 horses. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
Wollanke B, Rorhbach BW, Gerhards H. Serum and
1995;5:170-182
vitreous humour antibody titres in and isolation
Moore CP, Collins BK, Fales WH. Antibacterial sus-
of Leptospira interrogans from horses with recur-
ceptibility patterns for microbial isolates associ-
rent uveitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;219:
ated with infectious keratitis in horses: 63 cases
795-800.
Chapter 13
FOOD AND FIBER-PRODUCING
ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Wendy M. Townsend
beef cattle, but the exact etiology was not
cattle, sheep, goats, camelids, and pigs. This
known.
Congenital anophthalmia with
chapter covers the available literature
by
caudal vertebral anomalies such as wedge
species. For each species, the congenital and
vertebra, hemivertebra, and sagittal cleft
acquired abnormalities of each ocular region
vertebra has been reported in ten Japanese
are discussed. Ocular manifestations of sys-
Brown cattle. Vestiges of ocular remnants were
temic disease are covered in chapter 16.
reported, albeit dysplastic or hypoplastic (or
both), thus implying these cattle actually had
microphthalmia rather than true anophthalmia.
Congenital blindness with multiple ocular
Bovine
anomalies, including iris and lens defects,
retinal detachments, and retinal dysplasia, has
The Orbit and Globe
also been reported in cattle, with a recessive
and dominant inheritance, with variable expres-
Congenital Globe Abnormalities and
sion, being postulated.
Blindness
Several infectious agents have been asso-
ciated with congenital ophthalmic anoma-
Microphthalmia is usually combined with other
lies in food animals. The most common
ocular defects including corneal opacities, cata-
maternal infection causing multiple ophthal-
racts, aniridia, corectopia, persistent pupillary
mic defects in cattle is bovine viral diarrhea
membranes, thickening or ossification of the
(see chapter 16).
choroid, and various retinal abnormalities,
such as gliosis, folds, and rosette formation as
well as retinal nonattachment and detachment
Abnormalities of Globe Position and
(Fig. 13.l). Congenital globe abnormalities
Movement
are often linked genetically with abnormali-
ties in other body systems. Congenital
Abnormalities in globe position in cattle are
anophthalmia/microphthalmia
syndrome
usually bilateral and convergent (i.e., esotro-
with malformations of the posterior verte-
pia), but they can also be unilateral or bilateral
bral column was reported in 26 dairy and
and divergent (i.e., exotropia). Bilateral Con-
379
380 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
Fig. I3.1. Severe microphthalmia in an Angus-
Hereford cross-calf.
Fig. 13.2. Marked bilateral exophthalmos due to
retrobulbar fat deposition in a l-month-old Holstein 
bull calf treated with dexamethasone as part of a
vergent Strabismus with Exophthalmia
metabolic study
(BCSE) is an autosomal recessive defect in
 Jersey and, perhaps, Shorthorn cattle. In the
Retrobulbar Space-Occupying Lesions
German Brown Swiss breed, a gene model
with additively acting genes best explained
Unilateral strabismus or exophthalmia (or both)
the relationship of affected animals with
usually results from space-occupying orbital
BCSE within six pedigrees (lo7 animals). In
lesions due to inflammation or neoplasia.
two other studies of German Brown Swiss
However, other anatomic defects have been
cattle, a dominant autosomal gene model gave
implicated. An Ayrshire calf was described with
the best fit. On the basis of histopathologic
exophthalmos and an orbital  arteriovenous
results, a defect in the motor nucleus of the
fistula. Calves administered daily dexametha-
abducent nerve might be responsible for the
sone injections developed exophthalmos due to
symptoms of BCSE
increased deposition of retrobulbar adipose
Esotropia also occurs in Holstein and Ayr-
shire cattle. Exophthalmia and esotropia prog-
tissue (Fig. 13.2). The prognosis for exophthal-
mos depends on the etiologic diagnosis.
ress until  the animal reaches maturity.
Nystagmus may be present, and vision is com-
promised. A neurologic component to the
Orbital Neoplasia
disease may be present as well.
In some cases, the strabismus may be
In cattle, lymphosarcoma affecting the retro-
associated  with  a generalized  systemic
bulbar tissues is the most frequent cause of
infection. Bilateral dorsomedial strabismus
exophthalmos, with and without strabismus.
iss
suggestive of polioencephalomalacia
The complete physical examination may
(PEM). Affected calves are usually blind and
reveal lymphadenopathy, cardiac arrhyth-
exhibit opisthotonus. Ipsilateral neurologic
mia, and melena, as well as uterine and renal
signs in association with a medial strabis-
masses. Cases of primary ocular lymphoma
mus are suggestive of listeriosis. The inflam-
have been reported without retrobulbar exten-
mation of the brainstem impinges on the
sion. Specific serologic tests are available to
abducens nucleus, resulting in medial strabis-
help confirm the diagnosis. Treatment is usually
mus through loss of function of the lateral
palliative, because most cattle with orbital lym-
rectus muscle.
phosarcoma die within 6 months.
FOOD AND FIBER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/381
Other retrobulbar orbital neoplasms that
dis bull. The masses were located in the dorso
have been reported include metastatic squa-
medial episcleral space, were slightly lobulated
mous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.
 in appearance, and were freely movable under
These tumors appeared to originate from the
 the bulbar conjunctiva.
nasopharynx and extended into the nasal cavity.
Bilateral exophthalmos, epiphora, third-
In both cases,  Horner's syndrome
was
eyelid prolapse, and bulbar subconjunctival
present.
emphysema developed after tracheostomy in a
3-month-old Simmental bull calf. Crepitation
was detected during palpation of the eyelids
Orbital Inflammation
and retropulsion of the globes. Treatment
was symptomatic, and the calf recovered
 Inflammatory orbital disease is common in
completely.
cattle and involves orbital and peri-orbital
tissue. Trauma, puncture wounds of the
The Eyelids
eyelids or conjunctiva, foreign-body migra-
tion from the mouth to the retrobulbar
space, actinobacillosis, and panophthalmitis
Entropion and Lid Defects
are potential causes. Associated systemic signs
may include pyrexia, anorexia, temporoman-
Entropion is rare, but it has been reported in
dibular pain, exophthalmos and associated
the Simmental breed. Spastic and cicatricial
 sequelae, and leukocytosis. Treatment involves
entropion are more common than congenital
identifying the underlying cause, hot packing
entropion. Surgical intervention usually con-
the area, drainage and lavage of any nidi of
sists of a modifed Hotz-Celsus procedure.
infection, possibly topical and systemic antibi-
otics, and if panophthalmitis is present,
Ectropion
enucleation.
Exophthalmos and orbital inflammation
Ectropion is less dangerous to the eye, but it
 may be sequelae to chronic frontal sinusitis
can produce chronic keratitis, conjunctivitis,
in cattle. Treatment consisted of trephina-
keratoconjunctivitis, epiphora,  and 
1tear
tion, drainage, and lavage of the sinus
staining as well as scalding of the eyelids. Ectro-
cavity.
pion may result from developmental, cicatri-
cial, trauma, neurologic, and postoperative
Nystagmus
causes.
In cattle, nystagmus may be either congeni-
Eyelid Trauma
tal or acquired. A congenital rapid pendular
nystagmus, which is usually horizontal, is
Lacerations are the most common traumatic
observed  in  Holstein-Friesians  especially
injury to the eyelids, but they are infrequent
and in other breeds as well. Clinical vision is
among food animals.
not significantly affected, and the animals are
affected for life. Other causes include brain
Blepharitis
tumors and abscesses; intoxication by chemi-
cals, plants, and heavy metals; cerebral anemia
and vascular disease; and congenital or early
Bacterial
postnatal blindness.
Dermatophilosis (i.e., rain scald) is caused by
Dermatophilus congolensis, a Gram-positive,
Other Orbital Diseases
aerobic, filamentous bacterium. The distal
extremities, muzzle, and dorsum are usually
Bilateral episcleral prolapse of orbital fat has
 o peaids  ln nq ' pa
been reported in a l0-month-old Santa Gertru-
entire face. Treatment consists of providing a
382 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
dry environment and bathing with iodine or
Photosensitization
chlorhexidine shampoos. In severe cases
penicillin (20,000 IU/kg) with or without strep-
Direct solar irritation (i.e., sunburn) may occur
tomycin (l0 mg/kg) intramuscularly for 3-5
in food animals with little periocular pigmenta-
days or one intramuscular injection of long
tion, but acute periocular dermatitis is more
acting oxytetracycline (20 mg/kg) may be
likely the result of photosensitization. The
necessary.
causative photodynamic agents may be ingested
preformed (i.e., primary photosensitization),
be products of abnormal metabolism, or be
Mycotic
normal metabolic products that accumulate in
Candida albicans has been implicated as a cause
tissues because of faulty excretion through the
liver. Photodynamic agents include hypericin
of optical eczema in Jersey cattle. Irichophyton
sp. can affect all food-producing animals.
in Hypericum perforatum (i.e., St. John's wort),
fagopyrin of Polygonum fagopyrum (i.e., buck-
Despite the self-limiting nature of dermatophy-
wheat), and perloline from Lolium perenne (i.e.,
tosis, treatment is recommended to limit any
perennial ryegrass); miscellaneous 
further infection of unaffected animals and
agents
include phenothiazine sulfoxide from pheno-
humans. Topical and s
 systemic fungicidal
thiazine, rose Bengal, and acridine dyes. Ery-
agents, iodine shampoos, improved nutrition,
and dry environs all may assist in eliminating
thema, edema, pruritus, necrosis, and sloughing
 of nonpigmented skin characterize both primary
the disease.
and secondary forms of photosensitization.
Treatment involves removing the affected
Ectoparasites
animal from sunlight, preventing ingestion of
toxic material, and administration of laxatives.
Sarcoptic mange is caused by Sarcoptes scabiei.
In secondary photosensitization, treatment of
with a subspecies specific for each host species.
 the underlying disease is recommended, but
This host specificity is not complete, however,
death of the animal may still result.
and transference from one host species
to
another can occur. The first clinical signs may
The Nasolacrimal System
include facial dermatitis, with thick, crusty,
wrinkled, and denuded areas around the face
The tear-producing glands in food animals
and eyelids. The disease is uncommon in the
rarely have any primary abnormality. Epiphora
United States and is reportable. Treatment of
is the most common abnormality, and usually
all affected and contact animals is indicated.
secondary to irritative ocular disease causing
Topical application of, or dipping with, lime
increased tear production, rather than to defects
sulfur, trichlorphon (0.2%), fenchlorphos,
in tear outflow.
phosmet (20%), amitraz (0.1%), and couma-
phos (0.l%) have been recommended. Iver-
mectin (0.2 mg/kg)
）may be administered
Developmental Anomalies
subcutaneously to cattle.
Demodex sp. are host specifc. The adult
 Ectopic lacrimal gland tissue has been reported
mites invade hair follicles and sebaceous glands
in the globes of cattle, with variable infltration
of the face, limbs, and back, which then become
into the surrounding structures. Adenomatous
distended with mites and inflammatory mate-
tissue may be found within the ectopic lacrimal
rial. Secondary bacterial invasion of these
 gland as well.
lesions will result in formation of pustules and
 Congenital anomalies of the nasolacrimal
abscesses. Pustules may be seen around the
 system are rare in food animals. Supernumer-
eyes, and pruritus may be present. The disease
 ary openings of the nasolacrimal drainage
tends to be generalized in cattle. Acaricidal
 apparatus occur in catle. The openings on the
treatments may be used; however, self-resolu-
face varied in distance from the medial canthus
tion has been reported
but all the openings connected in the proximal
FOOD AND F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/383
third of the nasolacrimal duct. Dacryocystorhi-
nography performed on affected cattle revealed
the nasolacrimal duct had dorsal and ventral
branches proximally, with anomalous openings
to the face from the dorsal branch.
A chronic unilateral epiphora was repaired
successfully in a l-year-old Holstein bull by
conjunctivorhinostomy.  Dysplastic  lacrimal
puncta were also treated surgically in a 6-week-
old, mixed-breed calf by medial canthoplasty
and widening of the puncta.
The Conjunctiva and Cornea
Fig. 13.3. A large dermoid involving the cornea,
bulbar conjunctiva, and bulbar aspect of the
The conjunctiva and cornea are major sites
nictitating membrane in a 4-month-old Angus
for ophthalmic diseases in food-producing
cross-calf.
animals, with profound economic effects. In
cattle, infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
and squamous cell carcinomas are the pre-
dominant conditions affecting the conjunc-
autosomal recessive trait. The incidence is
tiva and cornea.
higher in females than in males, but the disease
is rare and has been recorded in Shorthorn,
Holstein, Black and White Danish, Jamaica Red
Congenital Anomalies
and Black cattle, and Ayrshires. The metabolic
defect probably results from abnormal synthe-
Dermoid
sis of heme due to enzymatic insufficiency
 during conversion of pyrrol groups to series 3
Dermoids occur principally in cattle, but
porphyrins.
they can occur in other food animal species
 Protoporphyria is a less common, milder
as well. Of 229 ocular defects in cattle
disease than porphyria and is thought to be
reported in one study, dermoids accounted
inherited in cattle. In this disease, there is defi-
for four. The defect in Herefords is geneti-
cient activity of the enzyme ferrochalase.
cally transferred, with characteristics
of
thereby resulting in excessive synthesis of
autosomal recessive and polygenic inheri-
protoporphyrin.
tance. In cattle, the site predilection of
Ocular clinical signs related to abnormal
ocular dermoids is, in decreasing order, the
porphyrin metabolism result from photosensi-
limbus, third eyelid, canthus, eyelid, and
tization. These signs include photophobia,
conjunctiva (Fig. 13.3). Dermoids rarely
edema, inflammation, and necrosis of the
appear bilaterally, except in certain lines of
Hereford cattle. Surgical removal is recom-
sists of maintaining the affected animals
mended if vision is impaired or the eye is
indoors.
painful.
Inherited Corneal Disease
Congenital Porphyria and Protoporphyria
Most cases of corneal edema seen in food
Inherited defects of porphyrin metabolism in
animals are secondary and primary endothelial
cattle and swine are characterized by excessive
disease is extremely rare in food animals. An
deposition of porphyrin isomers in the tissues.
 autosomal recessive corneal disease of Holsteins
Congenital porphyria is similar to Gunther's
and other cattle has been reported with bilat-
porphyria in humans and is inherited as an
eral corneal edema either at or soon after birth
384 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
The condition is not amenable to treatment,
or bilaterally within 12 to 36 hours after treat-
and affected animals should not be used for
ment. This is followed by edema in the parts of
breeding.
the cornea exposed to light. Photophobia,
blepharospasm, and keratitis may subsequently
occur, and eyelid edema has also been reported.
Corneal Disease Secondary to
Treatment for the condition is symptomatic,
Systemic Infection
but affected animals may show no clinical signs
or even recover spontaneously if access to sun-
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (Fig. 13.4),
light is restricted, especially for 12-36 hours
malignant catarrhal fever, and other systemic
after treatment.
infections  may  cause  l
keratoconjunctivitis.
Please see chapter 16.
Parasitic Keratoconjunctivitis
Phenothiazine fnduced Corneal
Disease
Thelazia spp.
Phenothiazine is used as a prophylactic in the
The pathogenic significance of Thelazia spp. is
control of manure-breeding insects and as an
not known, but some thelazial conjunctivitis
anthelmintic in livestock. Corneal edema and
may be mistakenly attributed to bacterial infec-
keratitis have been associated with phenothi-
tion. In North America and Europe, Ihelazid
azine toxicity, but this is a condition seen
 spp. are regarded as being non to mildly patho-
mainly in calves and, to a lesser extent, in pigs
genic. In contrast, more severe disease, and
and goats. Most ophthalmic cases result from a
even blindness, has been reported in other
high dose of phenothiazine, but low daily doses
countries.
may produce ophthalmic disease as well.
Thelazia spp. nematodes are small, slender.
Beginning with lacrimation, clinical signs of
white worms. The males are 7-l3 mm in
phenothiazine toxicity may occur unilaterally
length, and the females are 12-18 mm. They
occur in the conjunctival sac and nasolacrimal
tear film. Ihelazia. rhodesi, I. gulosa, I. shrjabini.
and I. lacrymalis affect cattle. Mixed infections
of two or more genera of parasites have also
been reported. Significant numbers of normal
cattle may be infected. The prevalence of the
parasite may be in excess of 20%, and seasonal
variations occur
In North America, unilateral, chronic, fol-
licular or mucoid conjunctivitis is most
common, with irregularities in the lining of the
nictitans gland ducts. Other clinical signs
include profuse epiphora, photophobia, and
ulcerative keratitis. Face flies, especially Musca
autumnalis, act as biologic vectors and transfer
the larvae to the eyes while feeding. The diag-
nosis is usually made postmortem on the basis
 of identifying the parasite in the conjunctival
Fig. 13.4. Extensive corneal edema and iritis
associated with experimentally induced infectious
sac or nasolacrimal duct. Antemortem diagno-
sis can be made by careful gross examination
bovine rhinotracheitis and viral diarrheal-mucosal
disease complex in a calf. (Reprinted with permission
of the whole lacrimal apparatus or by demon-
from Gelatt KN. Congenital ophthalmic anomalies in
stration of fully embryonated eggs, larvae, or
cattle. Mod Vet Pract 1976;57:105-109.)
immature worms using specialized techniques.
FOOD ANo F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/385
Often, the clinical diagnosis is made when the
first possible report of IBK appeared in
eye is being manipulated for unrelated diagnos-
1888. In 1936, the primary pathologic nature
tic or surgical procedures. Treatment modali-
of the causative organism was proposed, and in
ties include simple lavage; mechanical removal
1952, Barner concluded that the keratitis was
after topical anesthesia; administration of
caused by M. bovis.
levamisole (5 mg/kg orally or 1% solution topi-
cally) or fenbendazole; and topical administra-
Economic Impact
tion of ivermectin or echothiophate iodide
Subcutaneous ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) is 100%
effective against I. shrjabini and more than 99%
Both regional and national surveys have docu-
effective against I. rhodesi.
mented the economic impact of IBK. Financial
losses resulting from decreased weight gain,
decreased milk production, and treatment
Infectious Keratoconjunctivitides
costs have been estimated to be $150 million
 in the United States. The decreases in weight
 Infectious keratoconjunctivitis in food animals
gain can range from 8 to 18 kg. Less tangible
represents an important group of diseases, not
economic losses can also occur, such as a
only from an economic standpoint but also for
loss of value in show or breeding stock,
the well being of the affected animals.
weight loss and injury from handling animals
for treatment, and lost productivity during
Chlamydial Keratoconjunctivitis
time devoted to treatment.
Chlamydiae have been isolated from cattle with
Incidence
conjunctivitis. Two recent case reports describe
incidents of recurrent bilateral keratoconjunc-
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis occurs
tivitis in three different cattle herds. The cases
worldwide. IBK (l.1% infection rate) was the
were quite persistent and responded poorly to
second most prevalent condition affecting
 antibiotic treatment. Chlamydophila spp. DNA
unweaned beef calves over 3 weeks of age.
was detected in conjunctival swabs by PCR
 In the same report, IBK (1.3% infection rate)
was the most prevalent condition affecting
Mycoplasmal Keratoconjunctivitis
all beef heifers and cows. In studies at the
UC Davis field station in Browns Valley,
Mycoplasma bovoculi has been reported in the
California the yearly prevalence of IBK in
microflora of normal cattle and to be associated
yearling calves ranges from 57 to 98%.
with ocular disease.Herd outbreaks with con-
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
junctivitis and epiphora resulting from M.
occurs primarily during the summer months,
bovoculi and Ureaplasma sp. have been reported.
though winter outbreaks occur. This seasonal
Younger cattle are more frequently infected
fluctuation may result from the increased pres-
with Mycoplasma sp. (62.5%) than older cattle
ence of hemolytic M. bovis, the fly population,
(19.4%).
and solar radiation during the summer
months.
Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
Etiology
History
While M. bovis, a Gram-negative bacillus, is
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK),
considered to be the cause of IBK, other
also known as pink-eye, contagious ophthal-
microbial agents have also been implicated.
mia, and New Forest disease, has received
 However, M. bovis is the only organism for
considerable attention because of its world-
which Koch's postulates have been satisfied.
wide distribution and economic impact. The
Other infective agents that may play a role in
386 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
development of IBK include IBR virus, Myco-
with fomites, and mechanical vectors such as
plasma sp., Thelazia sp., B. ovis, and Listeria
flies. The face fly (Musca autumnalis) is consid-
monocytogenes. Concurrent infection with IBR
ered to be the most important vector. Without
causes more severe clinical signs than with IBK
flies, transmission of IBK throughout a herd
may be slow.
lated to play an ancillary role in IBK
Predisposing Factors
Morphology of Moraxella Bovis
The sex of an animal is not a significant factor
The morphology of M. bovis colonies is
in development of the disease. All breeds may
either rough or smooth. Clinical cases of
be affected, but breed-related differences in
IBK are associated with the rough type,
susceptibility occur. Bos indicus breeds are
which have cell-surface pili, autoagglutinate
more resistant than Bos taurus breeds, and
in distilled water, stain with crystal violet,
Herefords as well as Hereford-crossbreeds
and hemagglutinate. M. bovis colonies are easy
appear to have a much higher susceptibility,
to identify, do not require complex growth
as do Murray Greys.
media, and may be identified by characteristic
The age of cattle affects the persistence
growth patterns:β
β-hemolytic variants
are
and severity of infection with M. bovis.
usually associated with clinical disease.
Younger cattle, less than 2 years, consis-
Electron microscopy has revealed
that
 tently have an increased risk and severity of
bacteria from rough colonies of M. bovis are
clinical disease compared to older cattle,
piliated and able to cause disease, whereas
even though large numbers of older animals
those from smooth colonies are nonpiliated
are infected. The mechanism of increased
and nonpathogenic. Spontaneous transfor-
resistance among older cattle is unknown.
mation of the rough to the smooth colony
Previous contact with M. bovis and sub-
type also occurs. The capsular pili promote
 sequent development of antibodies may be
cellular adhesion and enhance the ability to
responsible.
overcome host defenses and maintain an estab-
On the basis of long-term field studies, a
lished infection. As a general rule, the piliated,
 good correlation exists between the annual
hemolytic form is found in acute cases of IBK,
peak incidence of IBK and annual peak levels
and proportionately more nonpiliated and non-
of UV radiation. UV radiation also causes
hemolytic isolates are recovered from convales-
degeneration of corneal epithelium  and
cent and clinically normal carrier cattle
enhances M. bovis-induced keratitis in mice.
Increased UV radiation also assists in the
transformation of M. bovis from nonhemo-
Transmission
lytic to hemolytic strains.
The number of face flies present correlates
The source of infection is usually a new
well with infection rate and the number of new
animal or a carrier animal within the herd.
isolates. Once the number of flies exceeds ten
M. bovis can typically be found on the con-
per animal, IBK spreads from one herd to
junctivae and in the nasal secretions of cattle
another. Cattle housed indoors have a higher
without any signs or history of infection.
infection rate of longer duration, but milder
Nonhemolytic M. bovis may reside in a herd
clinical disease, compared with those housed
over the winter months and not cause clini-
outdoors.
cal signs. However, with the onset of spring
and increased ultraviolet (UV) radiation there
can be a reversion to the pathogenic, hemolytic
Pathogenesis
form, with subsequent infection of susceptible
calves.
In clinical outbreaks of IBK, M. bovis can be
M. bovis is transmitted by animal handlers,
isolated from most affected cattle. The initial
direct contact with infected animals, contact
corneal lesions probably result from bacte-
FOOD AND F1BER-PROoUCiNG ANIMAL OFHTHALMOLOGY/387
rial cytotoxicity, whereas advanced lesions
may be associated with bacterial/host inflam
matory interaction. While M. bovis does not
produce collagenase, the pathophysiology of
IBK is likely associated with collagenase
release from damaged epithelial cells, fibro-
blasts, and neutrophils.
Numerous neutrophils surround the corneal
lesions and may contain phagocytosed organ-
isms. M. bovis has a marked cytotoxicity for
bovine neutrophils and corneal epithelial cells.
Clinical Signs
In 75% of cases, ocular involvement is unilat-
eral, but subsequent bilateral involvement is
frequent. Affected animals are reluctant to
compete for food, milk production is reduced.
and weight gain is suppressed, usually in direct
relation to the severity of the lesion. In young
cattle, the disease process is usually more
severe than in older cattle. The earliest signs
are varying degrees of epiphora, blepharo-
spasm, and photophobia; conjunctival hyper-
emia and chemosis also occur. Often, this
stage may be missed clinically because of an
inability
to carefully observe affected
animals.
Within 24-48 hours after the onset of
clinical signs, the axial cornea may develop
small epithelial defects. Small corneal vesi-
cles may precede ulceration. A small, pale,
yellow-to-white raised abscess may appear
Fig. 13.5. A. Early, faint luorescein retention by a
near the center of the cornea, and over the
central cornea affected with infectious bovine
following 24-48 hours, the corneal opacity
keratoconjunctivitis. B. Large, central corneal ulcer
 may increase in size or slough, thus leaving
surrounded by cellular inhiltrate associated with
a shallow, round-to-oval, superficial ulcer
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis.
with perilesional edema (Figs. 13.5A and B)
During the next few days, the corneal ulcer
may expand and deepen.
There is marked, circumlimbal conjuncti-
vascularization surrounds the well-delin-
val  vascular hyperemia and initiation of
eated corneal ulcer. As the vascularization
superficial corneal vascularization. Blepha-
reaches the ulceration, the corneal opacity
rospasm, mild-to-moderate aqueous flare,
clears from the periphery toward the center.
and iridocyclitis are present. The conjuncti-
The ulcer epithelializes, and the facet gradu-
val exudate becomes mucopurulent, with
ally reduces by stromal regeneration leaving
matting of the eyelashes. Vascularization of
a slightly raised, dense scar. In 2-3 weeks,
the cornea proceeds rapidly toward the
corneal healing is well advanced, and in 1-2
primary central lesion. By 7-9 days postin-
months, only a faint, localized, central
fection, an area of inflammation and corneal
corneal opacity may remain.
388 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
The keratoconjunctivitis may result in sec-
handled, beef practices may opt for long-
ondary iridocyclitis, hypopyon, synechiae, and
lasting parenteral 
medications such as
even panophthalmitis. Occasionally, perfora-
oxytetracycline.
tion of the corneal ulcer results in iris prolapse,
Other medical treatments for IBK include
in which case blindness may result. The eye
atropine and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
may also become buphthalmic (from secondary
drugs. Some reports detail use of corticoste-
glaucoma) or phthisical.
roids in IBK-affected eyes without any detri-
mental effect, but the possibility of potentiating
collagenases and prolonging healing times must
Medical Treatment
be considered. Therefore, corticosteroids are
best avoided in IBK
Therapy for IBK is recommended to relieve
The duration of the carrier stage (i.e., a
pain and maintain productivity. Combined
normal eye with hemolytic M. bovis) is reduced
parenteral (20 mg/kg) and oral (alfalfa
by two injections of long-acting oxytetracycline
pellets containing lg/0.45 kg of pellet admin-
at 20 mg/kg each. Regardless of the therapy
istered daily for 10 days at a dosage of 2 g/
chosen, additional treatment steps should be
calf/day) administration of oxytetracycline
taken to control the herd infection and mini-
appears to be an effective method of reduc-
mize the economic effects. Critical factors
ing the severity of herd outbreaks of IBK.
include use of insecticides to control face flies,
-leanl 0l rojadns aq 0i sieadde aukoennaxo
segregation of affected animals, personal disin-
ment of affected animals with procaine penicil-
fection between treatments of affected and non-
lin G as calves treated with oxytetracycline had
infected animals, and frequent mowing of
fewer recurrences and less shedding of M. bovis.
pastures.
Parenteral oxytetracycline is effective, even
with relatively low tear drug concentrations,
Surgical Treatment
because the concentrations are maintained
above the MIC for a prolonged period of time.
Nictitating membrane flaps and complete
Oxytetracycline is selectively distributed to
temporary tarsorrhaphies have been used in
the conjunctiva and lacrimal gland. This
treatment of deep and perforated corneal
treatment option is particularly appealing as
ulcers in IBK. There are, however, no pub-
long-acting  oxytetracycline
formulations
lished, controlled studies assessing the ben-
(LA-20o1M and Bio-Mycin 20oTM) are cur-
efits ofthird-eyelid flaps. Often O-or 1-chromic
rently the only products approved for treat-
gut sutures are used in beef animals so that
ment of IBK in the United States. While
suture removal is avoided.
parenteral long-acting oxytetracycline for-
mulations can be used in lactating dairy
cattle, the oxytetracycline containing alfalfa
Vaccination
 pellets cannot. Other treatment options require
extra-label drug use in food animals, which is
Several vaccines for M. bovis, including live
very carefully regulated by the United States
or formalin-killed cells, ribosomes, pili, and
Food and Drug Administration. Therefore,
cytolysin have been tested. Early vaccines
other treatment options should only be used if
 provided only limited protection, and unfor-
 Oxytetracycline has been shown ineffective.
tunately the recent vaccines appear to be
The treatment selected is influenced by
only slightly more efficacious. Passive immu-
the management practice of the affected
nity from vaccinated animals may occur.
animals. Dairy operations usually have daily
Calves of vaccinated cows or calves fed colos-
access to the animals, but milk-withdrawal
trum from vaccinated animals show reduced
times become important issues. Dairy opera-
incidence of IBK, reduced severity of clinical
tions therefore may chose procaine penicil-
signs, and delay in onset of clinical signs. Vac-
lin because of the short milk-withdrawal
cination with homologous strains reduces the
times. As beef cattle are infrequently
incidence and severity of disease, whereas het-
FoOc ANc F1BER-PRoouCiNG ANimaL OpHThAlmOLOGy/389
erologous strain vaccines against IBK have
demned if the lesion has involved bone;
limited success. Pilus-antigen vaccines have
spread to any other structure, regardless of
demonstrated a significant level of protection;
the extent of the primary tumor; or if associ-
ribosomal vaccines are not effective.
ated with emaciation or evidence of second-
After outbreaks of IBK, antihemolysin anti-
ary changes. Carcasses of animals affected to a
bodies can be found in all cattle, even those
lesser degree may be passed for human food
without a history of clinical IBK. These antihe-
only after removal and condemnation of the
molysin antibodies will react with all strains of
head, including the tongue, provided the
M. bovis.
carcass is otherwise normal. Any animal pre-
 In herds severely affected by IBK, vaccina-
sented for slaughter where an eye has been
tion may be worthwhile. Current recommenda-
surgically removed is subject to detailed post-
tions are to vaccinate 6 weeks before onset of
mortem inspection.
the expected disease season. Calves should be
vaccinated at 21-30 days of age, with a second
vaccination occurring 2l days later. This should
Incidence
be at least 2l days before the fly season.
 In the general cattle population of the United
States, the incidence of OSCC varies from
Neoplasia of the Conjunctiva and
0.8 to 5.0%. In the Netherlands the inci-
Cornea
dence is 0.04%, as determined from exami-
nations of 35,000 animals. In some breeds,
Of the food-animal species, cattle are most
the incidence may be much higher.
affected by ocular and periocular neoplasia.
The most common neoplasia is ocular squa-
mous cell carcinoma (OsCC). In one study
Geographic Distribution
of 95 ocular tumor types in cattle, ninety-one
cases were either OSCC (eighty-four cases) or
Bovine OSCC occurs worldwide, but there is
papillomas (seven cases). The other conjuncti-
an association between the occurrence of OsCC
val tumors were eyelid lymphomas (three cases)
and an increased level of solar radiation.
and adenocarcinoma (one case). OsCC has
considerable economic impact, particularly
from the loss of older breeding animals.
Signalment
The onset of OsCC is age-related, with older
Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma
cattle having a significantly greater risk. The
tumors are uncommon in cattle younger
In 2002, OSCC/epithelioma was the third
than 5 years, and they are rare in cattle
leading cause (9.7%) of carcass condemna-
younger than 3 years. The average age of
tion at U.S. Department of Agriculture-
cattle with OsCC is 8.l years.
inspected slaughterhouses. OSCC is second
In a herd of pedigreed Simmental cattle.
only to lymphosarcoma in causing economic
12% had OsCC at 3 years of age, and this per-
loss from condemnation or reduction in
centage increased to 50% at 7 years.
salvage value and a shortened productive
The incidence of OSCC is significantly
life span. OsCC is estimated to cause annual
higher in Bos taurus than in Bos indicus
losses of $20 million in the United States
breeds. Ayrshires are the most susceptible
alone. Cattle are condemned at slaughter
dairy breed and have a corresponding predi-
when an eye has been destroyed or obscured
lection for SCC of the vulva.
by cancerous tissue, when there is any lesion
The sites of OSCC may be single or mul-
with extensive infection, discharge, foul
tiple, unilateral or bilateral. Of ninety-three
odor, and dead tissue, or if the animal is
tumors recorded in the eyes of forty-six adult
emaciated. Carcasses of animals with the
Simmental cattle, twenty-two cattle had a single
eye or surrounding area affected are con-
tumor, ffteen had two tumors, four had three
390 /EsSEeNTiALS OF VeTeRINARY OgHTHALmOLOGY
tumors, four had four tumors, and one had
age. Cattle with high nutritional levels have an
nine tumors. Both eyes were affected in 35% of
occurrence of OsCC of 14%, whereas cattle on
cattle. This contrasts with a herd of 523 Frie-
lower feed intakes have an occurrence of 1.5%.
sians, in which 1.4% were affected with OSCC
Animals on a high nutritional plane also have
and only single tumors were present.
increased severity and number of tumors and
reduced 5-year survival rates compared with
that in animals at a low level of nutrition.
Genetic Predisposition
 There is considerable evidence suggestive of
Clinical Signs
a genetic basis for OSCC such as variable
morbidity rates among various breeds of
Approximately 75% of OSCC and precursor
cattle, lines of sires, and increased rates in
lesions affect the bulbar conjunctiva and
the progeny of affected compared with that
cornea, and of these, 90% involve the limbus
of unaffected parents. Lesion development is 
and 10% the cornea (Figs. 13.6A through D).
not heritable directly, but the genetic effect on
The remaining 25% of OSCC lesions are dis-
 e di sap und rna
tributed in the palpebral conjunctiva, nicti-
extent the degree to which the eye
iS
tating membrane, and eyelids. Limbal lesions
susceptible.
occur more frequently on the horizontal than
Corneoscleral (i.e., limbal) and bulbar
in the vertical meridian, which could result
conjunctival pigment have a local inhibitory
from greater exposure to irritation by foreign
effect on the development of OsCC. Eyelid
matter and sunlight. Bovine OSCC has a char-
and corneoscleral pigmentation are related
both phenotypically and genetically. Cor-
acteristic progression through a series of
benign stages and then, possibly, to a malig-
neoconjunctival pigment has a heritability of
nant stage. On the globe and third eyelid,
0.53.
the initial lesion is a plaque. Plaques may
progress to a papilloma, then to a noninva-
Etiology of osCC
sive carcinoma (i.e., carcinoma in situ), and
finally, to an invasive carcinoma. In the
A specific carcinogen has not been identifed.
eyelids, however, extensive keratosis (i.e.,
A number of factors including age, gender,
keratoma) may occur, particularly near the
breed, periocular and corneoscleral pigmenta-
mucocutaneous junction. This keratosis may
tion, exposure to sunlight, viral infection, and
appear as a cutaneous horn and be the pre-
nutrition likely contribute to development of
cursor to carcinoma formation. The kera-
OSCC
totic lesions are moistened by tears, collect
Viral cofactors have been suggested in the
debris, and become brown. They can be
etiology of OsCC, but there is no definite evi-
easily removed leaving a bleeding surface.
dence. IBR virus has been isolated from ocular
 A plaque is a small area of hyperplastic
carcinoma and one of its precursor lesions,
epithelium. Plaques may be single or multi-
  so  aa 
ple, raised, of various shapes, and found in
DoSo Jo sad  u paraqo kunsisu
the conjunctiva following the curvature of
lesions. It is not known whether IBR virus has
the limbus. Their surfaces are smooth or
 a predilection for the epithelial tissue in ocular
irregular, and their consistency may be firm
tumors.
(because of keratinization). Plaques are
The role of bovine papilloma virus (BPV) in
opaque and grayish-white. Papillomas are
 ae      
distributed similar to plaques, and they may
of papilloma virus-specific antibodies nor of
 be thrown up into fronds. They have a con-
DNA hybridization assays for all six known
nective tissue core with multiple hard, spine-
like projections of variable size, and they
ciation with OSCC. Nutritional status affects
 may be sessile or pedunculated. Papillomas
the development of OsCC from 6 to 9 years of
often merge with underlying plaques.
FOOc ANo F1BEr-PrOouCiNG ANimaL OpHTHALmOLOGy/391
B
Fig. I3.6. A. Limbal gray-white plaque in a Holstein cow. B. Invasive limbal squamous cell carcinoma
in a mature Hereford cow. C. Carcinoma in situ of the lower eyelid in an aged Hereford cow. D.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the nictitating membrane in a Holstein cow.
Carcinoma in situ arises directly from
Metastatic Potential
plaques, and is characterized microscopi-
cally as the stage before the neoplastic cells
Systemic metastases occur late in OsCC;
have penetrated the lamina propria of the
however, local invasion may be particularly
epithelium. Grossly, they resemble papillo-
aggressive. As the carcinomas penetrate the
mas and exhibit no invasive tendencies.
lamina propria, they extend "fingers" of neo-
 Invasive carcinomas are generally large and
plastic cells into the surrounding tissues. To
protrude through the palpebral fissure.
some extent, the consistency and nature of that
They can invade the anterior chamber and,
tissue will determine the progression of the
eventually, infiltrate the entire globe. Car-
tumor. Limbal OSCC shows less inward inva-
cinomas arising from the nictitating mem-
 sion, resulting from resistance of the stroma,
brane commonly replace this structure,
 Descemet's membrane, and the sclera. However,
seldom invade the cartilage, but may infil-
the anterior chamber of the eye may still be
trate the medial orbit. Secondary changes,
involved, and in one series, intraocular exten-
such as necrosis, ulceration, hemorrhage,
sion was reported in 67 (14%) of 471 carcino-
and inflammatory cell infiltration, appear 
 mas. The posterior segment is rarely affected.
in more
than 40% of the invasive
 A greater percentage of systemic metas-
carcinomas.
tases occurs from tumors of the lid and
392 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
nictitating membrane. Metastases
often
finances allow, complete blood counts and
involve the regional lymph nodes and orbital
serum biochemistry profles are also suggested.
bones. Intracranial metastasis, probably
by
Orbital radiography may be useful in determin-
extension through the foramen orbitorotun-
ing bony involvement; dorsal oblique radiogra-
dum, has been reported, and intracranial inva-
phy provides the most useful information. Bony
sion via the cranial nerves (i.e., optic nerve and
involvement carries a very guarded prognosis.
ophthalmic branch of trigeminal) has been
When deciding on treatment strategies, it
documented. S
Systemic metastasis usually
is important to realize that not all precancer-
occurs via the parotid lymph node to the
ous lesions progress. In one herd study, 52%
regional lymph nodes, including the atlantal,
exhibited precursor lesions (e.g., plaque,
retropharyngeal, submaxillary, mandibular,
papilloma, keratosis) of OsCC. Of these
and cervical nodes. Metastases can affect the
lesions, approximately one-third to 50%
lungs, heart, pleura, liver, kidney, and bron-
regressed spontaneously and disappeared.
chial as well as mediastinal lymph nodes.
If treatment is undertaken, the options
include
surgical excision ± adjunctive
therapy, cryotherapy, hyperthermia, immu-
Diagnosis: Cytologic Examination
notherapy, radiation therapy, and possibly,
chemotherapy. The most common method
Cytology should not be used as an alterna-
of treatment is surgery, and when combined
tive to histopathology, although a strong
with other treatment modalities, the success
correlation exists between cytologic and his-
rates are quite good.
topathologic diagnoses. High rates of agree-
ment (86.5%) between the two diagnostic
modalities have been reported.
SURGERY
Diagnosis: Histopathology
The different surgical procedures for bovine
SCC are summarized in Table l3.l. In addi-
Most periocular and ocular neoplasia in cattle
tion, salvage procedures are used to either cure
is OSCC, but other tumor types have also been
 Or prolong an animal's life, which may be desir-
reported. Therefore, biopsies (often excisional)
able for pregnant cows or for bulls to allow
with adjunctive therapy are strongly recom-
semen collection. Enucleation may be per-
mended. Lesional characteristics and surgical
formed via subconjunctival or transpalpebral
margins may then be evaluated.
approaches (see chapter 2 for details). The
latter procedure is frequently used in cattle
with extensive neoplasia of the globe, eyelids,
Treatment
nictitating membrane, or conjunctiva. Exen-
teration is usually a progression from a
Before therapeutic intervention, the extent of
transpalpebral enucleation
the lesion should be evaluated. Topical anes-
Eyelid and orbital surgery are performed
thesia and a lubricated, gloved hand are usually
most frequently in standing cattle, and
suffcient to palpate the orbital rim. OSCC
regional anesthesia for most ocular surgeries
extends firm tendrils, which can be followed to
in food animals may be achieved with either
their most invasive extent. A thorough physical
a Peterson nerve block or a "four-point"
examination concentrating on possible sites of
block of the orbit. However, though rare, it is
metastasis is essential. Extensive systemic
important to inform clients that apnea and
invasion may preclude further treatment
occasionally death may occur 8-9 minutes after
because of financial and prognostic reasons.
 performing a Peterson nerve block. This may
Examination at slaughter revealed that 5%
result from injection of the anesthetic agent
of animals had metastatic lesions. Animals
directly into a blood vessel, which can be
with invasive OSCC have an even higher
avoided by aspirating first, or injection into the
level of metastasis (ll%). If indicated and
dural sheath.
FoOo ANo F1Ber-PrOouCinc Animal OpHtHalmOLoGy/393
Table 13.1. Surgical Recommendations for Bovine Ocular Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OscC).
OSCC Site
Surgery Possibilities
Prognosis/Success Rates
Orbit/intraocular
Enucleation/exteneration
Guarded/30-40%
Orbit/intraocular
Exteneration or block resection *
Guarded/80-90%
 Eyelids
H-plasty (best for lower lid)
Fair/about 70-80%
Medial canthus
Exteneration/block resection
 Poor/unknown
Nictitans (localized)
 Local excision
Fair/good/known **
Nictitans (extensive)
Total excision of nictitans/exteneration
Fair/unknown **
Conjunctiva (bulbar)
Local excision/cryotherapy/Electrocautery/hyperthermia
Good/unknown
Limbus/cornea
Local excision/cryotherapy/Electrocautery/hyperthermia
Good/unknown
*Block resection includes rermoval of retropharyngeal lymph node, mandibular salivary gland, and parotid salivary
gand/subparotid lymph node with the transpalpebral enucleation procedure
**Nictitans SCC can invade the medial orbit.
The Peterson nerve block is a retrobulbar
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
injection that blocks the optic, oculomotor,
trochlear, abducens, and ophthalmic
as
Past studies indicate that selective breeding
well as maxillary branches of the trige-
can be employed toward control of OsCC
minal nerve. Lack of pupillary constriction
Animals should be selected with increased
indicates successful application of this block,
amounts of lid and corneoconjunctival
in which a slightly curved, 10 cm, 18-gauge
pigment, but the latter pigmentation is not
needle is inserted at the caudal angle between
 fully expressed until 5 years of age. Selection
the supraorbital process and the zygomatic
on the basis of eyelid margin pigmentation
arch. The needle is advanced in a slightly
alone leads to only a slight reduction in the
ventral direction to the pterygopalatine fossa
incidence of OsCC because the eyelids are sites
and the foramen orbitorotundum; complica-
only for approximately 10% of these tumors.
tions may be avoided if the needle is not
In purebred herds, offspring of affected
advanced to the bony floor of the pterygopala-
animals should be culled. Bulls with a history
tine fossa. Aspiration is then performed, and
of OsCC should not be used as a herd sire.
 approximately 15-20 mL of lidocaine (2%) is
injected.
Alternatively, a “four-point" block may
Giaucoma
achieve suffcient anesthesia. In this block, a
6-cm needle is inserted transconjunctivally
Glaucoma is an optic neuropathy usually
adjacent to the globe at the 12:00, 3:00, 6:00,
associated with elevated intraocular pres-
and 9:00 positions, and 5-10 mL of lidocaine
sure. The incidence of glaucoma in cattle is
are injected at each site. Possible complications
less than 1%. In India, three cows (0.23%) in
include orbital hemorrhage, penetration of the
a herd of 1,302 animals had glaucoma, and in
globe, damage to the optic nerve, and injection
Italy, one case was found among 500 Friesian
of local anesthetic into the optic nerve
dairy cows examined. Congenital, hereditary
meninges.
and secondary glaucomas (from inflammatory
Akinesia of the eyelids is obtained by an
or neoplastic processes) have been reported.
auriculopalpebral nerve block. Local anesthetic
Steroid-induced ocular hypertension has been
is injected subcutaneously 5-7 cm caudal to
-dde aq sap oe um panond Ausisu
the supraorbital process, where the nerve
cation of prednisolone acetate three times daily
crosses the zygomatic arch. Eyelid anesthesia is
to the eyes of normal cows. Perforated corneal
achieved with local anesthetic infiltration
ulcers, especially from IBK, may result in globe
394 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Fig. 13.7. Buphthalmos in a 9-year-old Friesian
cow that has perilimbal, localized corneal striae with
branches (black arrows), subluxated hypermature
cataract (L) with tearing of the zonules (Z), and a
wide, aphakic crescent (*). (Reprinted with
permission from Mertel L, Cammarata G, Magni R,
Brooks D, Samuelson D. Clinical and pathologic
study of a cow with chronic glaucoma. Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 1996;6:18-26.)
rupture, iris prolapse, and synechiae, which
may also result in glaucoma.
Clinical signs in cattle with glaucoma depend
on the cause of the condition. Cattle with
primary glaucoma show nonpainful and
enlarged globes, little or no episcleral injection,
mild corneal edema, corneal vascularization
and striae, a pupil poorly responsive to light
stimulation, lens subluxation, and fundus
abnormalities (Fig. 13.7). Successful treatment
Fig. 13.8. A. Iridal heterochromia in an albino beel
Shorthorn calf. Clinically, the central iris is pink, and
of glaucoma in cattle has not been reported.
the peripheral iris is white. B. Tricolored
heterochromic iris (brown [A], blue [B], and white
The Uveal Tract
[C]) of a Herelord bull with dominant albinism.
Congenital Disorders of the Anterior
Uvea
Heterochromia irides may be unilateral or
bilateral, complete or partial. Iridal pigmen-
Congenital disorders of the anterior uvea in
food animals are not, for the most part, clini-
tation may vary between white, light pink,
blue, gray, and brown (Fig. 13.8A). Hetero-
cally significant. Such anomalies include per-
chromia irides may be associated with other
sistent pupillary membranes, heterochromia,
ocular anomalies (e.g., tapetal hypoplasia
aniridia and iris hypoplasia, polycoria, cysts,
and colobomas of the fundus). Dominant and
pigment nevi, and colobomas.
recessive forms of inheritance have been
reported.
Heterochromia Irides
Among cattle, heterochromia irides has
been reported in various breeds, including
In cattle, heterochromia iridis represented
Ayrshires, Holsteins, Angus, Brown Swiss,
almost lo% of ocular defects in one study.
 and Guernseys. In most cases, vision is unaf-
FOOC ANc F1BER-PROouCiNG ANImAL OpHTHALMOLOGY/395
fected; however, photophobia and nystag-
rior capsular cataracts, retinal hemorrhages,
mus have been reported. Cattle may also
chorioretinitis, and papillitis
have typical optic nerve colobomas that
were always bilateral, but not always
Uveal Tumors
symmetrical.
Herefords and Ayrshires were overrepre-
sented, but this may reflect the popularity of
Primary tumors of the anterior and posterior
the breeds at the time. In Guernseys, there is a
uvea in food animals are rare. Sarcomas and
suggestion that the condition is inherited reces-
ciliary body epitheliomas occur in cattle. A con-
genital intraocular melanoma has also been
sively. Heterochromia irides with incomplete
 reported in a Charolais cross-calf as well.
albinism are inherited as an autosomal domi-
Secondary intraocular tumors of the uveal
nant trait with variable expressivity in Here-
fords (Fig. 13.8B). The cattle are usually totally
tract can occur by extension from the orbit,
white, though some have patches of pigmenta-
conjunctiva, and cornea. The sclera is resistant
tion on the shoulder and hip. Most irides have
to external invasion, but it may be breached by
squamous cell carcinomas. One study reported
a white periphery and a medium-blue center,
penetration of the globe in 67 (14%) of 471
but a few exhibit distinct zones of blue, white,
and tan. Ocular fundus anomalies including
cases of OsCC in cattle. Intraocular lymphosar-
coma is rare but has been reported.
typical optic disc colobomas are also present.
Iris Abnormalities
The Lens
An autosomal recessive, hereditary iridal defect
Cataracts in food animals are rarely reported.
has been observed in Jersey calves as part of
Among food animals, cataracts have been clas-
multiple eye defects. Affected animals may
sified on the basis of etiopathogenesis. Con-
show bilateral aniridia or iridal hypoplasia in
genital cataracts (with or without associated
association with microphakia, cataracts, and
ocular anomalies), secondary cataracts, and
ectopia lentis. The calves exhibit visual impair-
cataracts of
unknown origin have been
ment and even blindness.
described
Inffammation of the Uvea
Congenital Cataracts
Uveitis does not suggest a causative diagnosis
Congenital cataracts have been reported in
in and of itself, but represents nonspecifc
cattle. Congenital bilateral cataracts are
ocular pathologic processes derived
from
autosomal recessively inherited in several
inflammatory mediators. The associations of
breeds of cattle, including the Jersey, Here-
uveitides with systemic diseases are numerous
ford, and Holstein-Friesian. The cataracts
(see chapter 16, section 4). Specific etiologies
are usually mature when the calves are 4-ll
of uveitis include neonatal infections; bacte-
months of age. Congenital, nuclear, nonpro-
rial septicemia associated with severe mas-
 gressive cataracts have also been reported in
titis, metritis or traumatic reticuloperitonitis;
cattle.
malignant catarrhal fever; tuberculosis; IBK;
Other ocular abnormalities in association
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis; lep-
with cataracts have been described in the
tospirosis; toxoplasmosis; listeriosis; para-
Hereford, Holstein-Friesian, Jersey, and
sitic migration (Setaria digitata); toxins such
Shorthorn breeds. Multiple ocular anoma-
as lead; poisonous plants such as Dryopteris
lies including cataracts have been attributed
filixmas; and lymphoma. In one outbreak of
to a dominant inherited trait in a herd of
idiopathic uveitis in a herd of forty-four milking
cows bred with a Hereford bull. The ocular
Holsteins, 18% were affected with lesions that
defects in Holstein-Friesian cattle are lens
included aqueous flare, hyphema, iritis, ante-
luxation, buphthalmia, retinal detachment,
396 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
and occasional lens rupture. Aniridia, micro-
phakia, lens luxation, and cataracts occurred in
Jersey calves as an autosomal recessive trait in
one study and as a dominant gene in another.
Hydrocephalus in association with ocular
defects including cataracts occurred in Short-
horn calves with a suspected dominant inheri-
tance. Microphthalmia and cataracts with
retinal lesions may be seen in calves exposed to
bovine viral diarrhea in utero at days 76 to 150
of gestation (see section 4 of chapter 16).
Acguired and Secondary Cataracts
Secondary cataracts occur as sequelae to an
inflammatory episode. One typically notes 
 ocular changes compatible with a previous
inflammatory episode, such as posterior
synechiae, pigment deposition on the lens,
Fig. 13.9. Punctate cortical cataract of
and possibly, secondary glaucoma.
undetermined cause in a Hereford bull.(Reprinted
Most infectious systemic diseases have the
with permission from Gelatt KN. Cataracts in cattle. J
capacity to affect the uveal tract and cause sec-
Am Vet Med Assoc 1971;159:195-200.)
ondary cataracts. These diseases include IBK,
malignant catarrhal fever, and IBR virus. A
hematogenously disseminated infection with
vious reports are favorable regarding the success
Rhizopus sp. that resulted in endophthalmitis
of cataract extraction in cattle.
and cataracts has been reported.
Cataracts, goiter, and inferility have been
The Ocular Fundi
reported as a result of an exclusive diet of Leu-
caena leucocephala. The toxic component was
Ophthaimoscopic Examination
suspected to be mimosine, which may lead
 to formation of insoluble protein aggregates
within the lens. Radiation-induced cataracts
Fundic examination is facilitated by adminis-
tration of 0.5% tropicamide topically, though
have been seen in some cattle. The cataracts
incomplete mydriasis occurs in cattle. Maximum
typically begin at the posterior pole and may
subsequently involve the entire lens. Hereford
mydriasis within l hour resulted with 1% and
3% atropine and with 0.25% scopolamine.
cows were exposed to between 200 and 600
Phenylephrine (l0%) caused either no or
rads of cobalt-60 gamma radiation at 15-20
limited mydriasis. With adequate restraint of
months of age, and 6.7% developed cataracts.
the animal's head and mydriasis, both direct
In some cataract cases, the cause remains
and indirect ophthalmoscopy are easily per-
unknown (Fig. 13.9).
formed in food animals, because eye move-
ments are limited.
Treatment of Cataracts
Like most domestic ruminants, the retina
of the cow is holangiotic (Figs. 13.10A and
Cataract surgery has been successfully per-
B). Three, and occasionally four, major
formed in food animals. The decision to perform
venules drain the retina, and these are
surgery will be governed by economic factors,
accompanied by paralleling arterioles. The
 general health of the animal, presence of coex-
superior arteriole and venule may twist
isting ocular disease, technical expertise of the
about each other. Additional arterioles radiate
individual and intended use of the animal. Pre-
from the optic disc; from the major vessels
FOOC ANc F1BER-PROCUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/397
The tapetal fundus varies from yellow to
bluish-purple, and it is uniformly stippled
by end-on capillaries (i.e., “Stars
of
Winslow"). The reflective material of the
bovine tapetum is a large array of extracel-
lular collagen fibrils arranged in lamellae of
varying thickness. Pigment occurs com-
monly in the tapetal fundus, especially in
the dorsomedial quadrant. The average size
of the bovine tapetal fundus is 55.8 by 32.2 by
39.6 mm. It follows the general shape of a right
triangle with a horizontal base that traverses
 just superior to the optic disc.
The nontapetal fundus is generally a
uniform shade of brown, and there is little
variation with the coat color or breed. The
A
optic disc is always located at the junctional
area of the nontapetal and the tapetal fundi,
usually within the nontapetal fundus just
below the junction.
The optic disc is in the shape of a hori-
zontally flattened oval. In most, the tempo-
ral portion is located nearer to the tapetal
fundus than is the nasal portion. Myeliniza-
tion of the optic nerve fibers normally stops
at the lamina cribrosa. Myelin may occa-
sionally continue onto the retina for a short
distance, however, and appear as white fiber
bundles with featherlike margins protrud-
ing from the optic disc. The average size of
the optic disc in cattle is 4.2 mm horizontally
and 2.9 mm vertically. The size of the disc,
however, is directly proportional to the ani-
mal's size. The largest disc occurs in adult bulls
B
and the smallest disc in newborn calves. The
mature bull has a disc more circular in shape,
Fig. I3.l0. A. Normal bovine ocular fundus. The
with margins more indistinct than those in the
optic disc is predominantly in the nontapetal Fundus.
cows.
The large, primary blood vessels emerge from the
The optic disc varies in color. In general, the
surface of the optic disc. B. The ocular Fundus of an
young animal (< 6 months) has a white to
albino Shorthorn calf. The tapetal fundus is light
salmon-pink disc with distinct margins. Older
yellow clinically. The absence of pigmentation in the
 animals may have discs of orange, gray, tan, or
nontapetal fundus allows underlying choroidal
various combinations. The most common disc
vasculature and white sclera to be observed
coloration in adult animals is an orange center
with a grayish-brown periphery. The orange
secondary and tertiary branches may arise. The
central zone contains the vessels, and the
vessels also project far more vitread than in
darker, grayish outer zone is the sheath of the
most other domestic species. Increased tortuos-
optic nerve. Hyaloid remnants frequently pro-
ity of many, or all, retinal vessels may occur,
trude from the center of the optic disc into the
and the tortuosity may be bilateral. Inflamma-
vitreous body, appearing as gray, translucent
tory signs are usually absent.
protuberances (i.e., Bergmeister's papilla)
398 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
In addition to the primary pairs of vessels
that emerge from the disc, fifteen to twenty
other vessels cross the margins of the disc
These small arterioles and venules emerge from
the disc in a radiating fashion, and disappear
from view approximately 0.5 to 1.0 disc diam-
eters from the optic disc. An "area striata,
the bovine equivalent of the "area centralis,"
consists of a band-shaped area running hori
zontally above the disc in the lower part of
the tapetal fundus.
Congenital Disorders
Congenital fundus abnormalities are unusual,
but they may mimic acquired lesions.
Fig. 13.ll. Typical coloboma of the optic disc and
Ocular Albinism
nontapetal fundus. The multiple-depth defect is
traversed by a large venule and a smaller arteriole
Complete albinism is rare, but it has been
documented in cattle. More commonly, a
partial albinism (i.e., subalbinism)
is
markedly in size and depth (i.e., from one-
described. In one study of congenital ocular
quarter to 5 disc diameters wide and 1-6 D
defects in calves, complete
albinism
deep). Vision in cattle affected with colobomas
accounted for 5% of defects and incomplete
may vary depending on the extent of the colo-
albinism for 38%.
bomatous change.
In cattle, complete albinism is character-
 Typical colobomas of the optic disc occur
ized by pink skin and a lack of pigment in
in Charolais cattle, and are bilateral and
the muzzle, eyelids, iris, and choroid.
often small, though not symmetrical, and are
Affected animals have clinically normal
 generally restricted to the posterior segment.
vision. However, they may have variable
The effect of the ocular defect on vision
amounts of photophobia, and nystagmus
ranges from slight to severe. In some extreme
may be present as well. Ophthalmoscopic
cases, calves have been born blind with
examination reveals a normal, yellow tapetal
 grossly affected eyes. The pattern of inheri-
fundus but no pigment in the nontapetal
tance for typical colobomas in Charolais
fundus. Retinal blood vessels are superimposed
 cattle is suggestive of a dominant mode, but
on the underlying choroidal blood vessels (see
test breedings are indicative of a polygenetic
Fig 13.10B).
inheritance.
Colobomatous Malformations
Congenital Vascular Anomalies
Colobomas of the choroid are common
Remnants of the hyaloid vessel appear as a
among cattle. Various estimates indicate a
white, irregular tube extending from the optic
prevalence rate of 1-2%. Typical colobomas
disc to the posterior pole of the lens.
of the optic disc occur in the dominant form
A persistent hyaloid artery has been found
of incomplete albinism among Hereford
in 54% of calves aged 6 weeks or less. Some
cattle (Fig. 13.1l). In this syndrome, the colo-
hyaloid vestige can nearly always be found. In
bomas are always bilateral, but they are not
 older cattle, 80% of animals may still have
necessarily symmetrical. The colobomas vary
some remnant of the hyaloid
FOOD ANo F1BEr-PrOouCiNG ANimaL OpHtHaLmOLoGy/399
 Retinal Dysplasia
of forage material. Ocular defects usually are
only one of several systemic signs in such cases
One must differentiate the inherited forms
Chronic inflammatory diseases may also result
of dysplasia from those resulting from intra-
in degenerative retinal disease. Possible geneti-
uterine infection with infectious agents such
cally based retinal degenerations have also been
as bovine virus diarrhea (BVD). On histo-
reported in cattle
pathologic sections, the retinal rosette is
diagnostic of retinal  dysplasia.  Multiple
Possible Hereditary Retinal Degeneration
inherited ocular anomalies, including retinal
dysplasia and internal hydrocephalus, have
A condition similar to canine progressive retinal
been reported in Shorthorn cattle. Data col-
atrophy occurs in cattle. A familial occurrence,
lected were consistent with either recessive or
implying a possible genetic link, has been sug-
incomplete penetrant dominant mode of inher-
gested, but not proven. Clinical signs initially
itance. The retinas were not only dysplastic
include pupils that are poorly responsive to
they were often detached.
light stimulation and nyctalopia with subse-
quent blindness. Fundus examination is typical
Osteopetrosis-Induced Ocular Fundus
of retinal degeneration.
Disease
Osteopetrosis in cattle is a generalized skel-
Vitamin A Deficiency
etal disease characterized by the absence of
bone cavities because of defective bone
Vitamin A is essential for rhodopsin regenera-
remodeling. The disease is expressed as an
tion, normal bone maturation and remodeling.
autosomal recessive trait. Clinical signs
and normal epithelial function. Vitamin A def-
resulting from this condition include fragile
ciency may cause blindness, abnormal bone
bones, brachygnathia, hypoplastic forami-
growth, abnormal epithelial function, and
nae, and various neurologic defects (e.g.,
embryologic maldevelopment (Fig. 13.12)
blindness). Most animals are premature at
birth and are stillborn. The disease has been
described only among North American Black
Angus cattle. The ocular complications of
osteopetrosis include defects in the retina and
optic nerve.
Inffammations of the Ocular Fundus
Various infectious agents have been implicated
as causing posterior segment inflammatory
changes in food animals. Cattle have been
reported to be affected by neonatal septice-
mic infections (Escherichia and Pasteurella
sp.), thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
(Histophilus somni, formerly Hemophilus
somnus), rabies and other viral causes, toxo-
plasmosis, tuberculosis, and listeriosis. See
chapter 16, section 4 for detailed descriptions.
Degeneration of the Ocufar Fundus
Most documented retinal degenerations in food
Fig. 13.12. Papilledema and retinal degeneration
animals are acquired and arise from ingestion
secondary to avitaminosis A in a yearling Angus steer
400 /EssentiAlS OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
This topic is covered in detail in section 4 of
Locoweed Poisoning
chapter 16.
Poisoning with locoweed (Astragalus and Oxy-
tropus spp.) causes retinal degeneration in
Retrobulbar Neuropathy and Retinal
cattle, sheep, and other species.
Degeneration
Other Toxic Plants
Ingestion of Dryopteris felixmas (i.e., male
fern) is associated with vision loss due to
Several other plant species may also cause neu-
retrobulbar optic nerve disease. Bilateral
rologic disease with visual impairment, and in
blindness is the main presenting sign, but
some cases, blindness precedes death. Water
weakness, malaise, and constipation can
hemlock (Cicuta sp.) causes an acute syndrome
also occur. In severely affected animals.
associated with sudden death. A new, fatal
optic nerve atrophy occurs, with subsequent
mycotoxicosis of cattle has been recognized in
retinal degeneration. Fundoscopy reveals
Australia, and feeding trials have demonstrated
hemorrhage on or about the optic disc and
 a previously unknown mycotoxic species of
various amounts of papilledema. Chronically
Corallocytostroma that grows on Mitchell grass
affected animals exhibit blindness, optic nerve
(Astrebla sp.). The disease is colloquially called
atrophy, attenuated retinal vasculature, and
"black soil blindness." The onset of blindness
 tapetal degeneration.
and rapid progression to death are the main
clinical features of this disease.
Kochia scoparia (Mexican fireweed, summer
Hypothiaminosis
cypress, burning bush) can produce blindness 
and nystagmus. Darling pea (Swainsonia galegi-
Polioencephalomalacia,
or
cerebrocortical
folia) causes signs similar to those of locoweed
necrosis, is often caused by thiamine deficiency.
in cattle and sheep.
PEM is most commonly seen in young feedlot
cattle on low fber, high concentrate rations.
Under these dietary conditions rumenal con-
Inherited Lysosomal Storage Diseases
centrations of thiamine are decreased. Inges-
tion of thiaminase-containing plants, such as
A variety of inherited lysosomal storage dis-
bracken fern (Pteris aquilina), can cause second-
eases with ophthalmic implications have been
ary thiamine deficiencies.
reported including GM-gangliosidosis (i.e.,
leukodystrophy in Holstein cattle), GM,-gan-
The basic lesion of PEM is necrosis of the
gliosidosis (i.e., lipodystrophy in Angus and
cerebrocortical neurons, with associated
beefmaster cattle), and mannosidosis. The
perineuronal and pericapillary edema. Neu-
rologic signs are associated with increased
inherited lysosomal storage diseases for cattle
cerebrospinal fluid pressure and neuronal
are summarized in Table l6.l.1.
necrosis; impaired vision may be an early
sign. The blindness is cortical, but ocular
Optic Nerve Diseases
signs of papilledema and decreased pupil-
lary light reflexes may occur. ERGs remain
A primary demyelinating disorder of young
normal, but visual-evoked potentials are abnor-
Limousin cross-calves has been described
mal. Bilateral dorsomedial strabismus may be
Approximately 1 month after birth, affected
 present as well.
animals showed signs of blindness, nystagmus,
Treatment consists of thiamine hydrochlo-
rotation of the eyes, opisthotonus, hyperpro-
ride (6-10 mg/kg) either intramuscularly or
traction of the forelegs, and in one case, sei-
intravenously every eight hours. Corticoste-
zures. A genetic association was considered to
roids may benefit cases early in the course of
be likely.
disease. Recovery may be slow, and decreased
Papilledema is a descriptive term for nonin
vision or blindness may persist.
flammatory swelling of the optic disc caused by
FOOD AND F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/401
various conditions. It may signal increased
 intracranial pressure. In cale and sheep. pap-
illedema is commonly encountered. Causes
may be vitamin A deficiency (see Fig. 13.12)
acquired and congenital hydrocephalus, space-
Occupying brain lesions, meningitis, encephali-
tis, and hexachlorophene toxicity.
Papilledema is usually bilateral. The optic
disc margins appear to be hazy, and the physi-
ologic depression is lost. The disc becomes
thickened and swollen and appears to be
grayish-white with striations. The retinal veins
 and arteries show a distinct bend as they pass
down over the edge of the disc and onto the
retina. The retinal venules may be dilated and
engorged peripherally, and hidden centrally
within the swollen disc. Many more fine veins
are visible. The arterioles are a brighter red
and more threadlike than the congested
Fig. 13.13. Synophthalmos in a lamb. (Courtesy of
venules. If the cerebrospinal fluid pressure
D Wilkie.)
remains elevated, the optic nerve and disc will
atrophy.
ricum include skunk cabbage, western helibore,
false helibore, and wild corn.
Sheep and Goats
Sheep embryos are highly susceptible to the
teratogenic agent in V. californicum when the
The Orbit and Globe
plant is eaten by the ewe on gestational day 14.
 In cases of cyclopia, this timing corresponds to
Congenital Globe Abnormalities and
the period of gastrulation and formation of the
Blindness
neural plate, before separation of the optic
fields. All embryonic deaths occurred in ewes
In a study of congenital malformations in
with severe clinical signs of poisoning. The
the eyes of sheep, microphthalmia with mul-
dose of V. californicum that had a teratogenic
tiple cysts was observed. The most common
effect was less than that necessary to cause
maternal infection causing multiple ophthal-
clinical signs of poisoning in the ewes.
mic defects in offspring is blue
 tongue
Other teratogenic effects arising from inges-
disease in sheep (see chapter 16).
tion of V. californicum include distortion of the
facial bones, fusion of the cerebral hemispheres.
absence of the pituitary gland, hydrocephalus,
Teratogenic Agents
cyclopia, and anophthalmia.
Veratrum Californicum
Apholate
Among domestic animals, the best-docu-
mented teratogenic ocular defects have been
Congenital orbital anomalies in sheep have
those associated with ingestion of Veratrum
been associated with a polyfunctional alkylat-
californicum in sheep. Various globe abnor-
ing agent, apholate, which is used as an insect
malities, such as anophthalmia, cyclopia,
chemosterilant. The congenital anomalies con-
and synophthalmia, may be induced in lambs
sisted of anophthalmia, absence of orbital cavi-
by the maternal ingestion of V. californicum
ties, and defective formation of cranial and
(Fig. 13.13). The common names of V. califor-
facial bones.
402 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Selenium
Selenium
has been credited historically
with causing "blind staggers" in livestock and
 being a teratogenic agent. Reported necropsy
findings attributed to ewes grazing on selenif-
erous
pastures
include
microphthalmia
with multiple cysts; corneal, lens, and iris
deficits; and colobomas of various structures
When one examines the original data, how-
ever, many inconsistencies and false conclu-
sions are discovered. Furthermore, some of the
reported selenium values are not compatible
with current guidelines for acute toxicity.
Thus, it has now been speculated that many
sulfur-related PEM.
Other possible causes of "blind staggers"
Fig. 13.14. Lower entropion and secondary
have included malignant catarrhal fever, the
keratitis in a lamb.
polyhydroxyindolizidine alkaloid swainsonine,
chronic laminitis, parasitism, thromboembolic
meningoencephalitis, lead poisoning, and star-
vation. The cause of the congenital ocular
and a variety of techniques are possible.
defects may actually have been maternal inges-
Mechanical eversion using two or three metal
tionof
V.
californicum or some
other
wound clips adjacent to the eyelid margin, or
teratogen.
vertical mattress sutures may be used. When
many lambs are involved, the staples or sutures
are allowed to slough several weeks later.
The Eyelids
Tissue glue has been used in other species to
create an effect similar to that achieved using
Entropion
a vertical mattress suture, and subcutaneous
injections of minor irritants (e.g., l-2 mL of
Congenital entropion is relatively frequent
   o  
in small domestic ruminants and usually
tissue swelling thus created corrects the entro-
affects the lower lid. A combination of orbi-
pion, and subsequent fibrosis helps to prevent
cularis oculi muscle spasticity and globe
recurrence. If only a few lambs are affected by
retraction by the retractor bulbi muscle
severe entropion and corneal disease, or if
encourages additional eyelid inversion. The
highly valuable individual animals are affected,
incidence of congenital entropion in sheep
a modifed Hotz-Celsus technique is effective.
varies markedly between flocks; documented
Affected lambs should not be retained for
reports range from 1.0 to 80.0%. Entropion
breeding.
in sheep is thought to be inherited as a poly-
genic trait.
 Initial clinical signs are frequently bilateral,
Ectropion
and they may be seen in lambs 2-3 days
old. With uncontrolled progression of disease,
Congenital ectropion is rare, but it has been
an initial, serous epiphora may become muco-
recorded in Piebald sheep. Affected animals
purulent. Secondary corneal ulceration and
exhibit a gross deformity or notching of the
vascularization, keratouveitis, and endophthal-
upper eyelid with entropion at either side.
mitis may develop as well (Fig. 13.14). Treat-
Surgical intervention is recommended when
ment involves eversion of the affected eyelid,
secondary ophthalmic disease results.
FOOD AND F1BER-PRODUCiNG ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/403
Eyelid Colobomas
the same subgroup. Sheep and goat pox
(Capripoxviruses) may have morbidity rates
Upper eyelid colobomas have been seen in
of up to 70%, and the mortality rate may
 some rare breeds such as Hebridean, Manz
reach 50%. The first ocular signs are circular,
Loghtan, and Jacob sheep. The defect is seen in
hyperemic maculae of the eyelids, which then
association with the four horn gene.
progress to firm papules elevated above the
surrounding tissue. Contagious viral pustular
dermatitis (contagious ecthyma, sore mouth,
Blepharitis
orf) is a Parapoxvirus causing a sequence of
papules, vesicles, pustules, and scabs on the
Bacterial
eyelids, lips, muzzles, and nostrils of sheep and
 goats, but it does not usually cause systemic
Pyogranulomatous cutaneous nodules with
illness. Ovine ulcerative dermatosis virus (lip
associated draining tracts may occur on the face
and leg ulcer) is an unclassified pox virus
of sheep and goats following cutaneous punc-
similar to contagious ecthyma, but the former
tures and secondary infection with Actinobacil-
-     si s
lus lignieresii. Eyelid edema and facial swelling
tive rather than proliferative, as with conta-
 are observed with "bighead" disease in sheep.
gious ecthyma. Specific treatment is neither
in which blepharoedema may develop second-
necessary nor effective in uncomplicated cases,
 ary to anaerobic infection with C. novyi. Sec-
but symptomatic treatment is advised. The
ondary keratitis and conjunctivitis may develop
potential for zoonotic infection does exist. Vac-
because of a resulting lagophthalmos. Derma-
cinations are available for contagious ecthyma,
tophilosis (rain scald or lumpy wool) occurs as
sheep pox, and goat pox.
in cattle.
Bluetongue virus is an acute, nonconta-
gious orbivirus spread by Culicoides vari-
ipennis
midges.The virus may
Mycotic
cause
blepharitis and conjunctivitis in sheep, and
Irichophyton sp. (usually verrucosum) can affect
it occasionally affects cattle. The most
all food-producing animals. Sheep and goats
notable change, however, is retinal dysplasia
- ds s  o a o 
in lambs born to infected ewes.
matomycoses occur most commonly in goats
Papillomatosis is caused by a DNA virus that
may affect the eyelids of sheep, with a predilec-
and may result in crusty areas of periocular and
tion for young animals up to 5 years of age.
facial alopecia. Owners should be made aware
 Papillomas are usually benign, self-limiting.
of the zoonotic potential. The disease may
and may have an associated blepharitis. Surgi-
resolve spontaneously within 4-5 weeks in an
individual animal, but it may persist in a flock
cal removal of the papillomas may serve to
for some months. Topical and systemic fungi-
potentiate the immune system to the virus.
cidal agents, iodine shampoos, improved nutri-
tion, and dry environs all may
assist in
Ectoparasites
eliminating the disease. Vaccination of newly
infected herds shows potential as a prophylac-
tic measure
Sarcoptic mange is caused by Sarcoptes scabiei,
with a subspecies specific for each host species.
The lesions become widespread except in
Viral
sheep, in which they are restricted to the haired
skin of the face and eyelids (see bovine section).
Viral diseases implicated in eyelid disease
The disease is reportable in the United States.
include pox viruses, orbivirus, and papil-
Quarantine and treatment of all affected and
loma virus. The pox viruses are species spe-
contact animals are indicated. Treatment with
cific under natural conditions; however,
moxidectin at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg given twice
multiple antigens are shared by members of
    s ii 
404 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
cutaneously at a dose of0.2 mg/kg both provide
The Conjunctiva and Cornea
satistfactory results.
Demodex caprae is a mite that can inhabit
Infectious Keratoconjunctivitides
hair follicles in goats. Pustules form around the
mites causing skin lumps on the head, neck,
Decreased twinning rates in ewes, increased
and shoulders. The diagnosis is made by micro-
cases of pregnancy toxemia, starvation, weight
scopically identifying the cigar-shaped mite.
loss, 1
 blind ewes trampling offspring. and
Demodectic mange is generally not harmful
decreased economic return have all been attrib-
and treatment is usually not necessary.
uted to infectious keratoconjunctivitis. Numer-
Keds (Melophagus ovinus), lice (Bovicola and
ous infectious agents have been implicated as
Linognathus spp.), and ticks may cause pruritus
well, and the terms pink-eye, heather blindness,
and self-trauma. Periocular involvement is sec-
or blight, are therefore used somewhat broadly.
ondary to self-trauma and results in mild con-
The causative agents producing the clinical sign
junctivitis and blepharitis. Drugs
such
aS
of keratoconjunctivitis in small ruminants are
coumaphos, diazinon (do not use on goats),
probably varied, with no one organism consis-
fenvalerate, malathion, methoxychlor, and per-
tently being responsible.
methrin may be used to control infestations
Endoparasites
Chlamydial Keratoconjunctivitis
Chlamydophila pecorum (formerly a serotype
Elaeophorosis (sore head) is a disease of
of Chlamydia psittici) is an important cause
sheep caused by Elaeophora schneideri, an
of keratoconjunctivitis in sheep and goats
intraarterial parasite of deer, elk, and domes.
and polyarthritis in sheep. C. pecorum is
tic sheep. The horseflies Hybomitra and
introduced into a flock by affected animals
Tabanus spp. are the intermediate hosts.
 often with mild infection. Transmission can
Local inflammation due to migration of
occur between sheep and goats. Direct
Elaeophora microfilaria may cause severe
contact is the most important method of
facial
dermatitis,
keratoconjunctivitis,
transmission.
uveitis, chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, and
Chlamydiae are obligate, intracellular bacte-
central nervous system disease. The skin
ria. They have a unique development cycle
lesions involve the face and are pruritic, alo-
involving two morphologic forms: the elemen-
pecic,
ulcerated, and
encrusted.
Adult
tary body, and the reticulate body, and the
animals are more often affected in the winter
latter are sensitive to antibiotics.
months. The demonstration of microfilariae in
C. pecorum is associated with an infectious
biopsy specimens is diagnostic, and treatment
keratoconjunctivitis in sheep that occurs world-
 is symptomatic for the secondary ocular lesions.
wide.
Outbreaks usually occur during the
Treatment of the parasite may cause death
lambing season, when ewes and lambs are con-
by occlusion of the carotid arteries in heavily
fined with maximal contact and stress. Carrier
parasitized
 animals.
Treatment
options
animals may be reservoirs for the disease. The
include piperazine, (
 diethylcarbamazine, and
pathogenesis is probably multifactorial, with
stibophen.
immune status of the animal, secondary infec-
tion, and other factors all playing a role. Experi-
Photosensitization
mental transmission has been successfully
performed to naive animals through inocula-
Direct solar irritation (i.e., sunburn) may occur
tion of infective lacrimal fluids into the lacrimal
in food animals with litle periocular pigmenta-
sac. In the clinical setting, immunity appears to
tion, but acute periocular dermatitis is more
be of short duration, because animals may be
likely the result of photosensitization. See the
infected repeatedly.
bovine section of this chapter for further
 In experimental conditions, clinical signs
information.
begin within 4 days of infection and initially
FOOD ANO F1BER-PROCUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/405
include epiphora, chemosis, and conjuncti-
an initial hyperemia of the palpebral and
val hyperemia. By ll days postinfection, the
conjunctival vessels, serous lacrimation,
serous conjunctival exudates become more
and blepharospasm (Figs. 13.15A, B, and
purulent with associated blepharospasm.
C). Keratitis with superficial and deep vas-
Lymphoid follicles begin to develop by 23
cularization may also develop. In more
days postinfection, but they can also develop
advanced cases in sheep a mucopurulent
as early as 6 days after inoculation with C.
conjunctivitis, occasional follicular conjunc-
pecorum and Branhamella ovis. Approxi-
tivitis, iritis with hypopyon, and corneal
mately lo% of patients develop interstitial
ulceration occur.
Phthisis bulbi rarely
keratitis one week after the initial signs
results, and 
the disease usually lasts
develop with deep vascularization and
between l and 4 weeks. Older sheep are
edema of the cornea. As corneal ulceration
generally more severely affected. Goats do
is uncommon, permanent scarring of the
not usually develop corneal ulcers or hypo-
cornea is infrequent.
pyon, but permanent corneal opacity and
A diagnosis is most easily obtained from
blindness may result.
 scrapings of infected conjunctival epithelial
The diagnosis of infection with Myco-
cells early in the course of disease. New methy-
plasma sp. is made on the basis of clinical
lene blue, Wright's, or Giemsa stains show the
signs and results of conjunctival cytology,
typical cytoplasmic inclusions in infected cells.
culture, and serology. Cytologic prepara-
Failure to culture Chlamydiae in the latter part
tions can be stained with Giemsa stain,
of the disease process does not necessarily pre-
carbol basic fuchsin stain of Gimenez, or
clude Chlamydophila sp. as the initial causative
Gram's stain. In acute mycoplasmal kerato-
agent. The currently available ELISA kits are
conjunctivitis, large numbers of neutrophils,
manufactured for identification of C. trachoma-
but no plasma cells, are seen. Intracytoplasmic
tis and have not been evaluated for diagnosis of
coccobacillary and ring-shaped bodies may be
C.pecorum.
observed in epithelial cells with Mycoplasma sp.
The most effective treatment is a single
infection. The organism can also be cultured,
intramuscular injection of long-lasting oxy-
provided that special nutrient requirements 
tetracycline (20 mg/kg). Daily
：feeding
of
and incubation methods are used. Serology.
150-200 mg of tetracycline/head to lambs
including complement fxation, indirect hem-
and kids reduces the incidence and severity
agglutination, and enzyme-linked immunosor-
J0
disease. Intramuscular injection
bent assays (ELISA) tests, may be used in
tylosin or topical application of tetracycline
making the diagnosis.
ophthalmic ointment provides satisfactory
Mild infections are often self-limiting, but
results.
antibiotic therapy can shorten the course of
disease and is indicated in severe cases.
Treatment may not eliminate M. conjuncti-
Mycoplasmal Keratoconjunctivitis
vae, however, and it may promote a carrier
state. Oxytetracycline, applied either topi-
Mycoplasma sp. have been associated with
cally or intramuscularly (20 mg/kg), is the
conjunctivitis in sheep and goats both clini-
drug of choice. Minimal inhibitory concentra-
cally and experimentally. Subclinical carrier
tions and minimal mycoplasmacidal concentra-
states of Mycoplasma sp. exist as well. The
tions of various antibiotics suggest that tylosin,
respective conjunctival isolates for sheep
streptomycin, and chlortetracycline are also
and goats were M. mycoides var ovis and
efficacious.
M. conjunctivae var capri. Concurrent pres-
Immunity to subsequent infection may be
ence of B. ovis, Escherichia coli, and Staphy-
possible. Transient local and systemic antibody
lococcus aureus may enhance the severity of
responses to M. conjunctivae occur among
keratoconjunctivitis.
s a u p si a adxi
There may be a slight variation in clini-
of goats in spontaneous outbreaks. The role of
cal signs between sheep and goats. There is
local or systemic immunity is not known;
406 /ESSENTIALS OF VetER1NARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. I3.15. A. Early stage of keratoconjunctivitis associated with mycoplasma infection in a goat.
Predominant early clinical signs are hyperemia of the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva and epiphora. B.
jo jasuo aqn ae skep oi- Alaneixoidde uoaaju euseldonku ym paeiosse saunuosonea
clinical signs. Note the focal corneal abscesses and neovascularization. C. Advanced keratoconjunctivitis
01 passaisoid sey aseas!p ayn 'ases s!ui ul reo sunok e ul uoau euseldosu ym panejsosse
 extensive corneal abscessation and panophthalmitis.
however, they may be involved in the recovery
 junctivitis in sheep, with approximately 25%
from the disease.
exhibiting blepharospasm, conjunctivitis,
Diseases concurrent with mycoplasma
keratitis, and pannus. Treatment with subcon-
conjunctivitis include mastitis, pleuropneu-
 junctival oxytetracycline was successful.
monia, and arthritis in sheep and goats. M.
agalactiae has been associated with mastitis,
Branhamella Keratoconjunctivitis
arthritis, and conjunctivitis, with pregnant
animals being more severely affected than
Cases of keratoconjunctivitis in sheep and goats
nonpregnant animals. Acholeplasma oculi
have been attributed to B. ovis (formerly known
has been implicated as a cause of keratocon-
as Neisseria ovis), either alone or in combination
FOOD ANo F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/407
with other microorganisms. The role of Bran-
with Besnoitia sp. Besnoitiosis, which is associ-
pauosanb si uloed Areud e se ds rau
ated with alopecia, infertility, and abortion, is
as it may be normal conjunctival flora. Both
widespread in Africa and the Middle East.
smooth and rough types of B. ovis have experi-
mentally induced conjunctivitis, either alone
Miscellaneous Conjunctival
Or together with M. conjunctivae and C.
pecorum. In association with M. conjunctivae,
Abnormafities
B. ovis contributes to the severity of the
Locoweed poisoning may cause keratoconjunc-
keratoconjunctivitis.
tivitis sicca in sheep.
Parasitic Keratoconjunctivitis
Phenothiazine Associated Corneal
Disease
Oestrus ovis
Corneal edema and keratitis have been associ
Oestrus ovis may cause conjunctivitis if
 larvae invade the ocular mucous membranes.
ated with phenothiazine toxicity, but this is a
The adult flies deposit eggs around the
condition seen mainly in calves and, to a lesser
extent, in pigs and goats. See the bovine section
mucous membranes of the face. When the
eggs hatch, the larvae migrate to the nasal
of this chapter for further information.
cavity, turbinates, and the maxillary and
 frontal sinuses. Larvae may progress to the
Neoplasia of the Conjunctiva and
nasolacrimal duct and eye. The larvae are
Cornea
large (2.5 cm), spiny, and cause irritation
Secondary infection, epiphora, and conjunc-
Ocufar Squamous Celf Carcinoma
tivitis may result. The larvae mature within
several weeks to months and then return to the
While uncommon, OsCC had been reported in
nostril, where they drop or are sneezed onto
sheep. In 2005, spontaneous OSCC in twin
the ground to pupate.
goats was reported.
Treatment usually
involves physical
 removal of larvae and systemic organophos-
The Uveal Tract
phates. The only drug labeled for control of
sheep nasal bots in the United States is
Ivomec Sheep Drench (0.08% ivermectin),
Iris Abnormalities
which may be administered only to sheep at
0.2 mg/kg. Treatment is best performed in the
Defects in iris anatomy, termed essential iris
 fall months, when the larvae are small.
atrophy, have been described among purebred
Shropshire sheep in Pennsylvania. Affected
animals are normal at birth, but by l.0 to 1.5
Thelazia sp.
years of age, may be affected with full-thickness
holes in the iris stroma. The corpora nigra is
Thelazia californiensis occurs in sheep, deer, and
rudimentary or absent, and animals are affected
other species. See the bovine section of this
bilaterally but not symmetrically.
chapter for further information.
Inflammation of the Uvea
Other Parasites
In sheep and goats, neonatal pyosepticemia
Irypanosoma sp. are reported to cause blepha-
listeriosis, mycoplasma, toxoplasmosis, elaeoph-
ritis, conjunctivitis, and keratitis in sheep and
 orosis, thiamine deficiency, trypanosomiasis,
goats. Conjunctival cysts may be seen in the
blunt trauma, retroviral, and toxic causes have
bulbar conjunctiva of sheep and goats infected
been reported for uveitis (see chapter 16).
408 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Uveal Tumors
The optic disc is rounder than in sheep and
cattle, and it frequently is situated totally
While primary tumors of the anterior and pos-
within the tapetal fundus. A pigment ring
terior uvea are rare, a malignant melanoma and
 often surrounds the optic disc as well (Fig.
iridociliary adenoma in sheep has also been
13.17).
 reported.
The Lens
Congenital Cataracts
Congenital cataracts have been reported in
sheep, but they are rare in goats. Congenital
nuclear cataracts have been observed in sheep
and goats.
Acguired Cataracts
Inflammatory cataracts result from lenticular
trauma or from severe uveitis. The nematode
Elaeophora schneideri has induced cataracts
among domestic sheep in the western U.s. Dia-
betes mellitus has been implicated as the cause
of cataracts in ram lambs.
The Ocular Fundi
Fig. 13.l6. Normal ovine ocular fundus. The
kidney-shaped optic disc is at the junction of the
tapetal and nontapetal fundi.
Ophthalmoscopic Examination
Sheep
The ocular fundi of cattle and sheep are
quite  similar ophthalmoscopically  and
the primary difference is the shape of
the optic nerve head. The retina of the
sheep is holangiotic (Fig. 13.16). In sheep
the optic disc has a “kidney" shape.
Myelinization of the optic nerve fibers nor-
mally stops at the lamina cribrosa. Small
ruminants have stereoscopic vision, at least in
middle- and long-distance vision but not in
near-vision.
Goats
The ocular fundus of the goat is somewhat
different from that of cattle and sheep. The
Fig. 13.17. Normal caprine ocular fundus. The
retinal blood vessels are more numerous,
round optic disc is at the junction of the tapetal and
and five to eight primary venules often occur.
nontapetal fundi
FOOD AND F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OFHTHALMOLOGY/409
Ocular Albinism
Wolfer and Grahn, two kid goats born of half-
sisters bred by the same buck were born blind
Complete albinism is rare, but it has been
Clinically posterior segment abnormalities were
documented in Icelandic sheep, with albino
the only significant lesions, and these consisted
animals occurring among both white and
of generalized tapetal hyperreflectivity and
nonwhite strains. Affected animals have
retinal vascular attenuation. Both kids had a
visual deficits in bright light, and albino
searching nystagmus.
lambs with a normal twin are often deserted
by the dam in open country. The albino con-
dition in sheep totally inhibits the formation of
Stypandra glauca Intoxication
both eumelanin and pheomelanin. The condi-
In sheep and goats, a syndrome of retrobulbar
tion is autosomal recessive and is assumed to
be a mutation at the C locus. In Suffolk sheep
optic neuropathy and retinal degeneration
albinism is an autosomal recessive trait due to
occurs after ingestion of Stypandra glauca (i.e.,
blind grass). Field evidence suggests that S.
the cmar (albino marrabel) gene on the C locus
that encodes a defective tyrosinase.
glauca is toxic in the flowering stage. Affected
 animals may die after an acute illness with signs
of neurologic disturbances, or they may survive
Retinal Dysplasia
but remain permanently blind. Funduscopy
shows  multifocal  tapetal  and  peripapillary
One must differentiate inherited retinal dyspla-
hyperpigmented foci interspersed with other
sia from dysplastic changes resulting from intra-
areas of tapetal hyperreflectivity. Optic nerve
uterine infection. Infectious agents, particularly
atrophy may be present as well. The pathogen-
bluetongue in sheep, have been implicated as
esis of the optic neuropathy may relate to acute
causing retinal dysplasia (see chapter 16)
swelling of the optic nerve because of myelin
edema, thereby resulting in compression and
Inffammation of the Ocufar Fundus
irreversible injury to the optic nerve within the
bony optic canal. Stypandrol may be directly
Various infectious agents have been implicated
retinotoxic as well.
as causing posterior segment inflammatory
changes in food animals. Small domestic
Hypothiaminosis
ruminants have been reported to have pos-
terior segment changes related to bacterial
PEM, or cerebrocortical necrosis, may be caused
and parasitic causes (mycoplasmosis, liste-
by thiamine deficiency. The disease is espe-
riosis, elaeophorosis, trypanosomiasis, and
cially common in goats fed a sudden excess of
toxoplasmosis) and viral causes (bluetongue
carbohydrates. Affected animals display blind-
and scrapie; see section 4 of chapter 16).
ness, ataxia, depression, opisthotonus, nystag-
mus, convulsions, coma, and can die of
Degeneration of the Ocular Fundus
respiratory failure. See the bovine section of
this chapter for more information.
Abnormalities in outer retinal or visual cortex
function may be assessed, when feasible, by
Pteris aquilinum-Induced Retinal
electrodiagnostic means. Normal values for the
ERG and visual-evoked potentials have been
Degeneration
reported for sheep.
Pteris aquilinum (i.e., bracken fern, brake fern
hog brake) has been associated with a progres-
Retinal Degeneration in Toggenburg Goats
sive retinal degeneration (PRD) of the outer
layers in sheep. Affected animals have variously
Retinal degeneration has been reported in
Toggenburg goats. In the cases reported by
"clear blind," or simply “glass eyed"; this
4I 0 /EsSEnTIAlS Of VeteRiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
terminology has arisen on the basis of the
 associated with visual impairment. Darling pea
abnormal shine of the affected eyes in semi-
(Swainsonia galegifolia) causes signs similar to
      
those of locoweed in cattle and sheep.
in sheep grazing bracken (P. aquilinum), and it
has been reproduced experimentally by feeding
Other Ocular Toxins
a concentrate ration containing 5o% dried
bracken at 1 kg/day for up to 63 weeks. Ptaqui-
Toxins other than those involving plants may
loside, which is a norsesquiterpine glucoside of
cause retinal and optic nerve disease as well.
the illudane type, is a bracken carcinogen and
Antiparasitic drugs such as hexachlorophene
the principal causative agent of PRD
and rafoxanide may cause optic nerve pathol-
The disease is limited to certain areas, includ-
 Ogy. The toxic effects include degeneration and
ing northern England, Scotland, and possibly,
gliosis of the central nervous system, retina,
Wales. In flocks grazing bracken-laden fields
 and optic nerve, resulting in blindness and
up to 25.6% of sheep may have PRD. Clinically,
even death.
the sheep are permanently blind (Fig. 13.18).
Inherited Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Locoweed Poisoning
As in cattle, poisoning with locoweed (Astraga-
implications include GM-gangliosidosis (i.e.
lus and Oxytropus spp.) causes retinal degenera-
leukodystrophy in Suffolk sheep), GM-gan-
tion in sheep. See the bovine section of this
gliosidosis (i.e., lipodystrophy in sheep), man
chapter for further information
nosidosis in Anglo-Nubian goats, and ceroid
lipofuscinosis in South Hampshire sheep in
New Zealand. The inherited lysosomal storage
Other Toxic Plants
diseases are summarized in chapter l6 (Table
Sarcostemma sp. cause neurologic disease
16.1.1).
among sheep in Africa, and they may also be
Central Blindness
     
include pregnancy toxemia, central nervous
system abscesses, Iaenia multiceps (Coenurus
cerebralis) cysts, polioencephalomalacia, liste-
riosis, and lead poisoning. Additional informa-
tion can be found in chapter 16.
Camelids
The four South American camelid species
covered in this section are llamas (Lama
glama), alpacas (Lama pacos), guanacos
(Lama guanacoe), and vicunas (Vicugna
vicugna). While the species are closely
related, the extent to which their anatomies,
susceptibilities to disease, and hereditary
problems differ is unknown. Ocular disease
Fig. 13.18. Advanced retinal degeneration (brighi
is a significant problem for camelids. In a
blindness) in a ewe secondary to toxic effects of
search of the VMDB, 6% of llamas examined
bracken Pteris aguilina. (Courtesy of K. C. Barnett.)
had signs of ocular disease.
FOOD AND FIBER-PROCUCING ANIMAL OFHTHALMOLOGY/41 1
The Orbit and Globe
Aquired obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct
has also been observed in llamas. Dacryocystitis
Trauma is a frequent cause of injury to the
is most often caused by a foreign body, such as
orbit and globe. Orbital infections, proptosis 
 a grass awn, entering through the nasolacrimal
of the globe, and globe rupture have been
punctum. Cannulation and flushing of the
 reported. Often these injuries are secondary to
nasolacrimal duct, and instillation of antibiotics
severe facial injury. Enucleation is performed
after obtaining material for routine culture and
as in other species.
sensitivity, are often curative.
The Eyelids
The Conjunctiva and Cornea
Normal Anatomy
Corneal disease, greater than 4l% of ocular
 lesions, is the most common ocular problem
A large number of long eyelashes are present
reported in llamas. More than half of the
along the upper and lower eyelids, as well as
corneal lesions are due to ulcerative
three sets of long. prominent vibrissae. There
keratitis.
are no Meibomian gland duct openings along
the eyelid margin. The lipid layer of the tear
Normal Appearance and
film is probably secreted from sebaceous glands
Microbiological Flora
on the lacrimal caruncle as has been demon-
strated in camels.
The conjunctiva is often pigmented. A dark,
deeply pigmented band, 2-3 mm in width is
Congenital Anomalies
present along the limbus. The normal flora
of the camelid conjunctival sac spans a
Few congenital eyelid problems occur. However,
wide range of bacterial and fungal species.
entropion, trichiasis, eyelid cysts, ectropion,
The most frequent bacterial isolates were Staph-
and eyelid hypogenesis have all been reported.
ylococcus epidermidis and Pseudomonas spp.
Mycoplasma spp. have not been isolated. Fungal
spores were present in 53% of conjunctival
Blepharitis
swabs obtained in the winter and 56% of
those obtained in the summer. Aspergillus
The most common eyelid problem reported
was the most common fungal isolate with
 among camelids is blepharitis. Blepharitis
nine different species represented. Fusarium
is usually due to bacterial infection with
 spp. and eight other genera of fungi were also
concurrent bacterial conjunctivitis.
The
isolated.
blepharitis may also be associated
with
generalized dermatitis. Treatment
with
proper antibiotic therapy as determined by
Congenital Abnormalities
routine culture and sensitivity testing
is
usually curative.
Corneal and conjunctival dermoids occur in
camelids. Congenital conjunctival cysts have
been reported infrequently in neonates. Corneal
The Nasofacrimal System
dystrophies, degeneration, and edema are also
listed as occurring in the literature, but again
Congenital abnormalities of the nasolacri-
with little information presented. A case of
 mal system appear to be relatively common
bilateral cornea edema and unilateral cataract
among the camelids. Congenital nasolacri-
with a lens coloboma has been reported in a
mal duct or punctual atresia has been
 guanaco. Bilateral corneal edema was also
reported to the VMDB in six llamas (3% of
 reported in her offspring, suggesting an inher-
llamas examined).
ited condition.
412 /EssEntiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
Acquired Abnormalities
Glaucoma
Bacterial Keratoconjunctivitis
The range of normal intraocular pressures, as
measured by applanation tonometry, in llamas
In cases of bacterial conjunctivitis, isolates
and alpacas is 16.96 ± 3.51 mmHg and 13.10
include Klebsiella pneumoniae, Bacteroides
+
0.35 mmHg for llamas, and 16.14 ±
spp, Moraxella spp., and Streptococcus spp.
3.74 mmHg and 14.85 ± 0.45 mmHg for
Routine culture and sensitivity are recom-
alpacas.
mended in cases of conjunctivitis to assist
Glaucoma appears to be rare in camelids.
in selection of appropriate antibiotics. Cases
In the VMDB only two cases were reported
of purulent and follicular conjunctivitis have
and they were both secondary to uveitis.
been reported in llamas, alpacas, and guanacos
Goniodysgenesis has been reported in a guanaco
in  Germany.  Chlamydial  conjunctivitis 
has
with corneal edema, normal intraocular pres-
been diagnosed once.
sures, and a unilateral cataract and lens
There are no known reports of M. bovis
coloboma.
occurring within camelids
sor anycases
of primary bacterial invasion of an intact
Uveal Tract
corneal epithelium. Treatment of ulcerative
keratitis in camelids is similar to that of other
Normal Appearance
species.
Iris pigmentation varies in intensity from very
dark to light brown to completely nonpig-
Parasitic Keratoconjunctivitis
mented (Fig. 13.19). The pupil is horizontal
with its long axis oriented horizontally. A large
Thelazia californiensis has been detected within
the  conjunctival fornices and nasolacrimal
pupillary rough, composed of vertically folded
layers of posterior iridal epithelium, is present
ducts of llamas. Excessive lacrimation and mild
along the dorsal and ventral aspects of the
conjunctivitis are often the only clinical signs.
See the bovine section of this chapter for more
pupillary margin.
information.
Congenital Abnormalities
Traumatic Keratoconjunctivitis
 Persistent pupillary membranes are common
amongst camelids. In neonates one may
Corneal lacerations, corneal foreign bodies,
often see thin, gray, fbrous strands span-
and corneal stromal abscesses have all
been reported in llamas. Corneal trauma
also frequently occurs secondary to recum-
bency due to tick paralysis, meningeal worm
infection (Parelaphostrongylus tenuis), or
specticemia due to failure of passive
transfer.
Neoplasia of the Conjunctiva and Cornea
There are no published reports of squamous
cell carcinoma in llamas. This may be because
most camelids have conjunctival pigmentation.
Episcleral melanomas have been described in
Fig. 13.19. Heterochromia iridis in a light gray
two llamas.
llama. Note the prominent pupillary rough.
FOOD AND F1BER-PRODUCING ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/413
ning one to two folds of the pupillary rough.
There are two reported cases of llamas with
blue irides that also had an associated deaf-
ness similar to the deafness associated with
blue eye color in cats (see chapter 1l).
Acquired Abnormalities
Anterior uveitis is the second most common
ocular condition, and was reported in 18%
of cases in the VMDB. Uveitis is typically
seen in association with chorioretinitis or
panophthalmitis. Possible causes include
Fig. 13.20. Posterior cortical cataract in an ll-year-
neonatal septicemia, juvenile llama immu-
old female llama. The cataract did not appear to
nodeficiency syndrome, severe ulcerative
impair vision.
keratitis, trauma, and equine herpesvirus-l.
Treatment consists of resolving the underly-
ing cause and symptomatic therapy 
to
control inflammation.
the successful removal of bilateral mature cata-
racts associated with PHPV/PHTVL in a 9-
month-old llama. Phacoemsulsification was
Neoplasia
performed on the right eye initially and more
than 3 weeks later on the left eye.
s ai a on siadde sidou rn
camelids. A single case report exists of an intra-
ocular melanoma in a 2-year-old female alpaca
Posterior Segment
that presented with mild buphthalmos and two
large pigmented masses arising from the dorsal
Normal Appearance
and ventral iris that extended to cause an adher
ent leukoma. Enucleation was performed with
The camelid fundus lacks a tapetum. The
placement of a silicone orbital prosthesis
appearance is highly reflective due to the
presence of a prominent Bruch's membrane.
Lens
The retinal vascular pattern is similar to that
of cattle with three to five pair of vessels
Abnormalities
originating from the optic disc. Along the
horizontal vessels, myelinated nerve fibers
Cataracts are the most frequent lenticular
are often present for several disc diameters.
Fundic pigmentation varies according to coat
abnormality (Fig. 13.20). Many are congeni-
tal and heritability is suspected. In a group
color. Animals with light coat colors have very
of vicunas at the Zoological Gardens of Hanover,
little fundic pigmentation; the optic disc is
the cataracts were thought to be inherited as an
round to oval and well myelinated with distinct
borders (Fig. 13.2l). Animals with red, black,
autosomal recessive trait. Other individual case
reports have been reported.
or brown coats have completely pigmented
fundi with pigment extending onto the surface
of the optic disc and obscuring the disc margins.
Cataract Surgery
Animals that are light tan or gray with white
markings  have nonpigmented areas of
 Initially poor outcomes were described for all
various shapes and sizes in the dorsal portion
attempts at cataract surgeries in camelids with
of the ocular fundi. The nonpigmented areas
severe,intractable corneal edema was frequently
vary in size from 2 optic disc diameters to
encountered. Recently a case report described
the entire dorsal half of the ocular fundus.
4I4/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
veitis in these cases was never identifed
Trauma and spontaneous retinal detachment
have been reported as well. Central blindness
may be seen due to meningitis (usually due to
infection with the meningeal worm Parela-
phostrongylus tenuis), cerebrocortical edema, or
toxoplasmosis.
Neoplasia
A 1-year-old female llama with a complete
retinal detachment and a light tan subretinal
Fig. 13.21. Subalbinotic fundus of a 2-month-old
exudate that nearly abutted the posterior lens
llama. Note the presence of the large Bergmeister's
capsule was diagnosed by histopathologic
papilla.
examination as medulloepithelioma. One case
of a medulloepithelioma in a camelid was listed
in the VMDB. Another case of a retinoblastoma
was reported in a 6-year-old, gravid, female
Congenital Abnormalities
llama with a six month history of epiphora,
buphthalmos, and vision loss. Enucleation
Colobomas are reported with some frequency
was performed with placement of an orbital
in camelids. Although none of the lesions have
silicone prosthesis. Histopathologic examina-
been proven to be heritable, breeding these
tion revealed a retinal tumor the authors believe
animals is not recommended.
was consistent with a retinoblastoma.
Acquired Abnormalities
Pigs
Equine herpesvirus-l (EHV-l) infection can
cause severe posterior segment disease in
The Orbit and Globe
camelids. The disease is acquired by contact
with members of the family Equidae. Affected
Congenital Globe Abnormalities and
animals develop neurologic signs including
Blindness
a head tilt, nystagmus, and paralysis as well
as vitritis, chorioretinitis, retinal vasculitis,
In a study of 319 congenitally malformed
and optic neuritis. Affected animals may
pigs, 653 distinct malformations occurred.
become permanently blind.
Among these pigs, sixteen had cyclopia,
Aspergillosis has been implicated as the
thirteen anophthalmia, and seven microph-
cause of chorioretinitis and severe neurologic
thalmia. Genetic studies were not reported,
signs in a wild caught llama housed at a zoo in
but 92% of the anophthalmic defects were
Wisconsin. Blindness, head tilt, and intermit-
associated with other malformations.
tent circling were the initial clinical signs.
Maternal vitamin A deficiency has been
Toxoplasmosis may be a cause of chorioreti-
linked with anophthalmia, microphthalmia,
nitis in camelids. During an abortion storm, a
macrophthalmia, retinal dysplasia, and other
nonaborting blind llama was found to have a
ocular abnormalities in piglets. The severity
very high toxoplasmosis serologic antibody
varies between litters, between littermates, and
titer. The llama had lesions consistent with
even between eyes in the same animal. Microph-
chronic panophthalmitis.
thalmia is the most common abnormality. Con-
Fowler has described panuveitis preceded
genital microphthalmos is seen in Yorkshire
by respiratory or gastro-intestinal disease in
pigs and is thought to be inherited as an auto-
llamas. However, the exact cause of the panu-
somal recessive trait
The Eyelids
Congenital Porphyria and Protoporphyria
Entropion
Inherited defects of porphyrin metabolism have
been reported in swine. In pigs, the inheritance
The popularity of the pot-bellied pig has
is uncertain, but it may result from one or more
resulted in an increased number of entro-
dominant genes. See the bovine section of this
 pion cases being seen by veterinary ophthal-
chapter for more details.
mologists. The large amount of subcutaneous
fat in the forehead and periocular region of
Neoplasia of the Conjunctiva and Cornea
this breed, as well as the enophthalmos, con-
tributes to the development of entropion.
 Primary tumors of any site, including the eye.
Surgical intervention is usually required,
are rare in swine (incidence, 0.64%).
and successful use of a modified Hotz-Celsus
procedure has been reported. A modifed
brow sling. using either mersilene mesh
The Uveai Tract
or
polyester suture coated with polybutilate, is
effective in some cases. Postoperative control
Congenital Disorders of the Anterior
of the animal's weight is important for long-
Uvea
term success of the surgery.
Congenital disorders include persistent pupil-
Blepharitis
lary membranes, heterochromia, aniridia and
iris hypoplasia, polycoria, cysts, pigment nevi.
Dermatophilosis is very rare in swine, but
and colobomas. In one study, these defects, and
specifically persistent pupillary membranes.
affected pigs can have a generalized crusting
dermatitis. Dermatophytosis is also rare in
were found in 66.1% of 7- to 12-month-old
Yucatan micropigs.
     
Heterochromia irides occur in miniature
nanum.
 Swine pox may cause lesions on the eyelids,
swine (Fig. 13.22). There is a higher inci-
dence of heterochromia irides in white min-
 a   
to
iature pigs (38.3%) compared with that in
those seen elsewhere on the body. Infection
miniature pigs having a variety of coat colors
with E. coli may cause severe eyelid edema,
chemosis, conjunctival inflammation,
and
exophthalmos.
Infectious Keratoconjunctivitis
Pseudorabies causes a mild conjunctivitis in
affected swine. Hog cholera produces a severe
conjunctivitis. Pigs with chlamydial keratocon-
junctivitis (Chlamydia suis) showed a combina-
tion of conjunctivitis and keratoconjunctivitis,
with or without mucopurulent rhinitis.
Acquired Corneal Diseases
Phenothiazine
Phenothiazine has caused corneal edema and
keratitis in pigs. See the bovine section of this
Fig. 13.22. Heterochromia irides (clinically blue
chapter for more details.
and white) in a white miniature pig.
4I6/EssentiAls OF VeteRinary OpHthAlmOLOGY
(15.8%). The abnormality is inherited as an
mented animals, the background is gray to
autosomal recessive trait with variable
brown. More commonly, partial albinism (i.e.,
expressivity.
subalbinism) is described.
Infflammation of the Uvea
Colobomatous Maiformations
The associations of uveitides with systemic dis-
In swine, there are few reports of colobomas. In
eases are numerous (see chapter 16, section 4).
one report of 112 Yucatan micropigs from 7 to
Causes include hog cholera, Glasser's disease,
12 months of age, an optic disc abnormality
and erysipelas.
suggestive of a coloboma was found in one
female. Families of swine have also been reported
to have optic atrophy with multiple ocular
The Lens
anomalies, including scleral staphylomas,
hydrophthalmos, retinal and choroidal atrophy,
Congenital Cataracts
retinal calcification, and microphthalmia, all of
which are possibly hereditary anomalies.
Congenital cataracts have been reported. In
 Yucatan micropigs. posterior cortical pinpoint
opacities were seen in 20.5% of 7- to 12-month-
Congenital Vascular Anomalies
old animals.
In Yucatan micropigs. hyaloid remnants
(82.1%) and pupillary membrane remnants
Acguired and Secondary Cataracts
(66.1%) were the most frequently reported
ophthalmic findings. Persistence of the hyaloid
Bilateral
cortical
opacities have
been
described in mature sows fed hygromycin B.
remnants even occurs in some micropigs older
The amount of cataract formation varied
than 33 months
from small posterior polar opacities to
mature cataracts. Development of cataracts
Infammation of the Ocuiar Fundus
may have depended on the age of the pigs at
the onset of suppleme ntation. Approximately
Most fundus abnormalities induced by systemic
30% of sows older than 2.5 years were affected.
diseases are discussed in chapter l6. Chorio-
 Radiation induced cataracts have also been seen
retinal lesions may result from pseudora-
in swine. Starvation and riboflavin deficiencies
bies, hog cholera, listeriosis, toxoplasmosis,
have been described as causing
 incomplete
Glasser's
disease，
ocular
cysticercosis,
cataracts. Vietnamese pot-bellied
l pigs
have
Teschen encephalitis and swine erysipelas.
juvenile cataracts that are thought to be
inherited.
Degeneration of the Ocular Fundus
The Ocular Fundi
Amaranthus retroflexus (redroot pigweed) and
Chenopodium albuim (lambsquarters) cause
Ophthaimoscopic Examination
neurologic signs and decreased vision in pigs.
Arsanilic acid toxicity may result in blindness
The pig ocular fundus lacks a tapetum. The
 among pigs. Arsanilic acid is used therapeuti-
disc is horizontal and sharply defined, with
cally for swine dysentery and as a growth stim-
eight to ten arterioles, three to four of which
ulant. The pupillary light reflexes are absent,
are more prominent. The vessels branch
and  ophthalmoscopic  examination reveals
dichotomously, and a single artery and vein
 bilateral optic disc atrophy, which is character-
accompany each other. Vessels may bulge
ized by pallor, well-defined margins, and nar-
internally into the vitreous body. In white
rowed retinal arterioles. The ERG is normal in
pigs, the fundus is pink; in heavily pig-
blind pigs, but visual-evoked potentials are not
recordable or are abnormal compared with
Fowler M. Medicine and Surgery of South American
those in normal animals.
Camelids. Ames: Iowa State University Press,
1989:317-321
George LW, Borrowman AJ, Angelos JA. Effective-
References
ness of a cytolysin-enriched vaccine for protection
of cattle against infectious bovine keratoconjunc-
tivitis. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:136-142
Allen LJ, George LW, Willits NH. Effect of penicillin
Gerometta R, Podos SM, Candia OA, et al. Steroid-
 or penicillin and dexamethasone in cattle with
induced ocular hypertension in normal cattle.
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis. J Am Vet
Arch Ophthalmol 2004;122:1492-1497.
Med Assoc 1995;206:1200-1203.
Gionfriddo JR Update on llama medicine. Ophthal-
Anderson DE, Badzioch M. Association between
mology. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
an snouenbs uenno pue uoeien uelos
1994;10:371-382
carcinoma in cattle. Am J Vet Res 1991;52:784-
Gionfriddo JR, Blair M. Congenital cataracts and
788.
persistent hyaloid vasculature in a llama (Lama
Aubin ML, Gionfriddo JR, Mama KR, Powell CC
glama). Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:65-70.
Analysis of aqueous humor obtained from normal
Gionfriddo JR, Gionfriddo JP, Krohne SG. Ocular
eyes of llamas and alpacas. Am J Vet Res
diseases of llamas: 194 cases (1980-1993). J Am
2001;62:1060-1062.
Vet Med Assoc 1997;210:1784-1787
Baker S, Bashiruddin J, Ayling R, Nicholas R. Molec-
Gionfriddo JR, Melgarejo T, Morrison EA, Alinovi
ular detection of Mycoplasma conjunctivae in
CA, Asem EK, Krohne SG. Comparison of tear
English sheep affected by infectious keratocon-
proteins of llamas and cattle. Am J Vet Res
junctivitis. Vet Rec 2001;148:240-241.
2000;61:1289-1293.
Brown MH, et al. Identification of lactoferrin in
Hosie BD, Greig A. Role of oxytetracycline dihydrate
bovine tears and its in vitro effect on Moraxella
in the treatment of mycoplasma associated ovine
bovis. Am J Vet Res 1996;57:1369-1372
keratoconjunctivitis in lambs. Br Vet J 1995;151:
 Brown MH, et al. Infectious bovine keratoconjunc-
83-88.
tivitis—a review. J Vet Intern Med 1996;12:259-
Leipold HW. Congenital ocular defects in food pro-
266.
ducing animals. Vet Clin North Am Large Anim
Carvalho T, Vala H, Pinto C, Pinho M, Peleteiro MC
Pract 1984;6:577-595
Immunohistochemical studies of epithelial cell
Lepper AW, et al. The protective efficacy of cloned
proliferation and p53 mutation in bovine ocular
Moraxella bovis pili in monovalent and multiva-
squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Path 2005;42:
lent vaccine formulations against experimentally
66-73.
induced  infectious 
keratoconjunctivitis.
Vet
 Dagnall GJ. Experimental infection of the conjunc-
Microbiol 1995;45:129-138.
tival sac of lambs with Mycoplasma conjunctivae.
Lepper AW, et al. The protective efficacy of pili
Br Vet J 1993;149:429-435
from different strains of Moraxella bovis within
Dagnall GJ. The role of Branhamella ovis, Mycoplasma
the same serogroup against infectious bovine
conjuncivae and Chlamydia psittaci in conjunctivi-
keratoconjunctivitis. Vet Microbiol 1992;32:177-
tis of sheep. Br Vet J 1994;150:65-71.
187.
Distl O, Scheider A. An uncommon eye defect in
Levisohn S, Garazi S, Gerchman I, Brenner J. Diag-
Highland cattle: divergent unilateral strabismus.
nosis of a mixed mycoplasma infection associated
Dtsch Tierarztliche Wochenschr 1994;101:202-
with a severe outbreak of bovine pinkeye in young
203.
calves. J Vet Diagn Invest 2004;16:579-581
Distl O, Wenninger A, Krausslich H. Inheritance of
Marrion RM, Riley LK. Detection of cell detachment
convergent strabismus with exophthalmos in
activity induced by Moraxella bovis. Am J Vet Res
cattle. Dtsch Tierarztliche Wochenschr 199l;98:
2000;61:1145-1149.
354-356
Mertel L, et al. Clinical and pathologic study of a
Dueger EL, George LW, Angelos JA, et al. Efficacy
cow with chronic glaucoma. Vet Comp Ophthal-
of a long-acting formulation of ceftiofur crystal-
mol 1996;6:18-26.
line-free acid for the treatment of naturally occur-
Moritomo Y, et al. Congenital anophthalmia with
ring infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis. Am J
caudal vertebral anomalies in Japanese Brown
Vet Res 2004;65:1185-1188.
Cattle. J Vet Med Sci 1995;57:693-696.
Egwu GO. Ovine infectious keratoconjunctivitis: an
Nuhsbaum MT, Gionfriddo JR, Powell CC, Aubin
update. Vet Bull 199l;6l:547-559
ML. Intraocular pressure in normal llamas (Lama
4I8 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
glama) and alpacas (Lama pacos). Vet Ophthal-
responsive polioencephalomalacia or suspected
mol 2000;3:31-34.
listeriosis. Am J Vet Res 1990;5l:1513-1517
Odorfer G. Occurrence and frequency of eye dis-
Townsend WM.  Food animal ophthalmology
eases among cattle in Austria. Wien Tierarztliche
In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology,
Monatsschr 1995;82:170.
4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1275-
O'Toole D, et al. Selenium induced Ablind staggers
1335.
and related myths. A commentary on the extent
Townsend WM, Renninger M, Stiles J, Townsend JR,
of historical livestock losses attributed to selenosis
Krohne SG. Dexamethasone induced exophthal-
on Western U.S. rangelands. Vet Pathol 1996;33:
mos in a group of Holstein calves. Vet Ophthal-
104-116.
mol 2003;6:265-268.
Otter A, Twomey DF, Rowe NS, et al. Suspected
Ward JL, Rebhun WC. Chronic frontal sinusitis in
chlamydial keratoconjunctivitis in British cattle.
dairy cattle: 12 cases (1978-1989). J Am Vet Med
Vet Rec 2003;152:787-788
Assoc 1992;201:326-328
 Pearce SG, Kerr CL, Boure LP, Thompson K, Dobson
Willis AM, Anderson DE, Gemensky AJ, Wilkie DA,
H. Comparison of the retrobulbar and Peterson
Silveira F. Evaluation of intraocular pressure in
nerve block techniques via magnetic resonance
eyes of clinically normal llamas and alpacas. Am
imaging in bovine cadavers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
J Vet Res 2000;6l:1542-1544.
2003;223:852-855.
Wilsmore AJ, Dagnall GJ, Woodland RM. Experi-
Raoofi A, Mardjanmehr SH, Ghamsari SM, Abdol-
mental conjunctival infection of lambs with a
lahpour G. Iridociliary epithelial adenoma in a
strain of Chlamydia psitaci isolated from the eyes
sheep. Vet Rec 2004;155:641-642
of a sheep naturally affected with keratoconjunc-
 Ruehl WW, et al. Infection rates, disease frequency,
tivitis. Vet Rec 1990;127:229-231
pilin gene rearrangement, and pilin expression in
Yamada K, Ishihara K, Yasutomi I, et al. Extracranial
calves innoculated with Moraxella bovis pilin-
meningioma in a dairy cow. Vet Rec 2005;156:
specihc isogenic variants. Am J Vet Res 1993;54:
652-653
248-253.
Zielinski GC, Piscitelli HG, Perez-Monti H, Stobbs
Ruehl WW, et al. Q-pili enhance the attachment of
LA, Zimmermann AG. Efficacy of different dosage
Moraxella bovis to bovine corneas in vitro. Mol
levels and administration routes of tilmicosin in a
Microbiol 1993;7:285-288.
natural outbreak of infectious bovine keratocon-
Strain GM, et al. Visual-evoked potentials and elec-
junctivitis (pinkeye). Vet Therap 2002;3:196-
troretinograms in ruminants with thiamine-
205.
Chapter 14
LABORATORY AND EXOTIC ANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGY
From Laboratory Animal Ophthalmology, by David L. Williams, and
Exotic Animal Ophthalmology, by Thomas J. Kern
This chapter presents the most common oph-
exceptionally diffcult to achieve. Indirect oph-
thalmic diseases of the nontraditional pets that
 may present for veterinary care and sections are
morphs and primates and can, with practice.
derived from the fourth edition chapters on
be mastered in rodents. Some prefer a 90-D
laboratory animal ophthalmology (David L.
lens used in conjunction with a table-mounted
Williams) and exotic animal ophthalmology
slit lamp; others use a 28-D lens and an indirect
(Thomas J. Kern). Zoo animals are infrequently
headpiece for preference. Still others find a 2.2
presented to the practicing veterinarians, and
panretinal lens to be useful in the latter context.
  Ads Aq r  u ae pi
Mydriasis using tropicamide greatly facilitates
ZOO animal veterinarians. In Great Britain the
fundoscopy, with a 1% solution being used in
rabbit is the third most commonly owned pet
nonhuman primates and a 0.5% solution being
after the dog and cat, and this chapter reflects
used in rodents and lagomorphs. Even at 1%,
this trend in pet ownership. Thorough eye
however, this agent is not particularly effica-
examinations and the standard ophthalmic
cious in pigmented rodents, among which
diagnostics can be modifed for the nontradi-
mydriasis is difficult. In this group, 10% phen-
tional species, and adequate restraint is critical
 ylephrine used in conjunction with a parasym-
while protecting the animal patient from
 patholytic may be useful.
harm.
General Features of the Rodent
Examination Techniques
Eye
The small size of laboratory rodent eyes renders
In rodents, tears are formed by several
ophthalmoscopic examination more difficult in
glands, which are different in each species.
this species than in dogs or cats. Slit-lamp bio-
The rat and mouse have an intraorbital tear
microscopy of the adnexa, cornea, and anterior
gland, an extraorbital tear gland, and a
segment is relatively straightforward, whereas
Harderian gland; the latter is associated with
fundoscopy can be difficult, especially in pig-
the nictitating membrane but is clearly not
mented strains, among which mydriasis is
the nictitans gland as seen in the dog. The
419
420 /EssentiAls OF VereRinAry OpHthAlmoLOGY
guinea pig has a large intraorbital gland occu-
rabbit discussed below. Even with radical
pying the lateral and anteroventral aspects of
orbital exenteration and meticulous antibi-
the orbit, whereas the extensive zygomatic sali-
otic coverage, these cases often recur, with
vary gland of the same species is posteromedial
euthanasia then being the only option.
and superior in the orbit. The rabbit has four
glands: the lacrimal, intraorbital, Harderian,
and nictitans. The Mongolian gerbil has both a
Conjunctivitis and Systemic Disease
nictitans and a Harderian gland.
in Rodents
Many laboratory rodents, but particularly
rats, exhibit red crusting around their eyes
Inflammation of the conjunctiva can occur
in cases of ocular irritation, upper respira-
as one of the signs of more severe disease
 tory tract infection, and general stress (Fig.
affecting the whole eye, may relate to upper
14.1). Porphyrin pigmented and lipid-laden
respiratory tract infections, or be a sole clin-
tears are produced in normal amounts by
ical sign. Both in rats and mice, the most
the Harderian glands in several rodent
common cause of conjunctivitis unrelated to
species. In the laboratory rat, however, excess
intraocular signs is mycoplasmal respiratory
 tear production with characteristic red deposits
disease, though other agents can also be
involved. Numerous infectious agents may be
on the periorbital fur, nose, and paws after
wiping the eyes are regularly seen. Diseases
isolated from the conjunctival sac of affected
such as mycoplasmosis and sialodacryoade-
animals. Interpreting these bacteriologic fnd-
ntitis, nutritional deficiencies, and other
ings is diffcult, however, because there is little
physiologic stresses are factors that may
evidence to show that any of these organisms
cause chromodacryorrhea.
is causing the conjunctival inflammation.
During some outbreaks of conjunctivitis, as
many as 50% of stock may be affected soon
Orbital Space-Occupying Lesions
 after weaning in conditions of poor ventilation
or other stressors.
Retrobulbar space-occupying lesions will result
in exophthalmos in any species. Exophthalmos
has been reported in species as diverse as a
The Rat
ground squirrel with a Harderian gland adeno-
carcinoma and ferrets with orbital involvement
of multifocal lymphoma. A more commonly
Perhaps the most devastating adnexal
disease in rats in both its acute and chronic
occurring condition is orbital cellulitis and
form is sialodacryoadenitis (SDA) virus
retrobulbar abscessation most commonly
infection. This coronavirus infection in rats
associated with Pasteurella multocida in the
causes ocular irritation with conjunctivitis
and periorbital swelling, which are followed
by sneezing, edematous cervical swelling,
and enlarged lymph nodes and salivary
glands. This can be a highly contagious,
though self-limiting, disease in rat colonies.
The disease itself is usually self-limiting within
1 week, whereas resolution of the secondary
signs may take as long as l month. The diag-
nosis can be made on the basis of observing the
classic pathognomonic signs, but detection of
coronavirus antigen or serologic testing of
animals are also possible.
Another common problem, this time with a
Fig. I4.1. Chromodacryorhea in a rat. (Courtesy of
noninfectious etiology, is microphthalmos.
L. Bauck.)
Microphthalmos also occurs sporadically as an
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGy/421
incidental finding in many rat and mouse lines
either of these structures. Keratoconjunctivitis
Colobomatous microphthalmos has been iden-
may cause corneal perforations if severe. Some
tifed as a dominantly inherited trait in rabbits,
of these perforations are also associated with
rats, and mice, but it may also be associated
bacteria, such as Staphylococcus or Streptococcus
with several nutritional deficiencies, including
sp.
vitamin A, vitamin E, pantothenic acid, niacin,
 In the rat, cataracts may occur spontane-
and zinc.
ously, both congenitally and in aging animals.
Corneal opacification is relatively common
These reports concerned the Sprague-Dawley
in rodents, perhaps more so in mice than
rat, but other rat strains, from the albino
rats, yet Sprague-Dawley and F344 rats have
Sherman to the F344 strain, are also affected.
been reported as having subepithelial min-
In rats with retinal dystrophy or degeneration,
eralization in 5-15% of males and 6-10% of
cataracts occur secondarily, probably because
females between 7 and 26 weeks of age. This
of the release of various posterior segment met-
mineralization was reported in some rats to
abolic byproducts.
manifest as fine, basophilic granules at the epi-
Abnormalities of the fundus may be divided
theliostromal interface, whereas in others, a
into congenital lesions, inherited retinal dystro-
phies,
chorioretinal  inflammatory  lesions,
thelial stroma or the epithelium itself.
acquired retinal degenerations, and retinal
Several causes of corneal inflammation exist
detachments. Most congenital lesions of the
in this species; therefore, recognition of the
rodent fundus are either abnormalities of the
lesion is important. Opacities in the nasal part
retinal and hyaloid vasculature or coloboma-
of the cornea are common among rats, and
tous defects of the retina or optic disc. These
while they may relate to anterior segment
vessels regress over the next few months, but
inflammation; they can also relate to orbital
during this period, considerable vitreal hemor-
gland inflammation. More severe keratitis can
rhage may occur. Unless very marked, these
also occur with, and is probably caused by,
hemorrhages resolve, leaving litle in the way
reduced tear secretion, although as noted earlier
of a remnant.
evaluation of tear production is rarely under-
The rat has comparatively fewer examples
taken in these rodents.
of hereditary retinal dystrophy or degenera-
Exposure keratopathy in rodents can mani-
tion than does the mouse. The Royal College
fest as interpalpebral corneal ulceration after
of Surgeons (RCS) rat with its retinal epithe-
prolonged anesthesia, especially with xylazine
lial dystrophy is one such example, as is the
and ketamine, during which the lids are held
Osburne-Mendel
ratwithits
retinal
open (unless they are taped shut). Alternatively,
degeneration.
an ocular surface protectant lubricant, such as
Laboratory rodents are used as models
the lanolin-based,tear-replacement ointment
for several retinal degenerations, but they
lacrilube or the carbomer-based Viscotears, can
are also sensitive to the toxic effects of light
be used to prevent ulceration.
on the retina. The lesions caused by light-
Glaucoma and buphthalmos have also been
induced retinal degeneration can be severe
noted in rodents such as the rat. In many cases
and obscure other lesions; they can also
in the rat, it results from a set of persistent
cause blindness. Now that the condition is
pupillary membranes causing pupil-block glau-
well-known, the most common causes are
coma or from peripheral anterior synechiae
malfunctions in light-timing switches caused
causing angle-closure glaucoma.
by mechanical faults or human error.
Lesions of the anterior uvea in rodents can
for the most part, be divided into congenital
anomalies and those associated with inflamma-
The Mouse
tory disease. The former include keratolenticu-
lar adhesions, as discussed earlier, and the
A superb overview of the mouse eye from both
persistence of the pupillary vasculature. Syn-
 s   
echiae from the iritis may cause opacities in
been provided by Richard Smith in his 2002
422 /EssEntIAlS Of VeteriNarY OpHthALmOLoGY
magnum opus. Even pet mice, originating as
The Rabbit
they often do from laboratory strains, may be
affected by genetic traits, many of these being
The rabbit has been widely used in ophthalmic
congenital in nature.
research for many years, for both drug and
As in the rat abnormalities in globe devel
chemical testing using the Draize test, and has
opment are relatively frequently seen
in
become a common pet in many countries. In
mice and many associate with a specific
the UK, the third most commonly encountered
defect either in lens development or in pig-
pet in small animal practice is the rabbit.
mentation. One large survey revealed the inci-
There are important anatomical consider-
dence of this condition as being from l to
ations in the rabbit, such as the retrobulbar
almost 10% over nine different congenic strains
venous plexus, vital to note during enucleation.
of C57BL mice. Several reports have also docu-
Performing this surgery transconjunctivally
mented microphthalmos with associated kera-
se Buuuan pun Aqdiedsun uu ran
tolenticular adhesion similar to that seen with
close as possible to the globe during dissection,
Peters' anomaly in humans and in fetal alcohol
obviates this problem in the vast majority of
syndrome.
cases. Adnexal and ocular surface disease make
up the majority of problems seen in this species
but cataract and iritis also occur.
Corneal Dystrophies
 In rabbits, it is important to distinguish
conjunctivitis from dacryocystitis. Purulent
Spontaneously occurring corneal lesions
ocular discharge with conjunctival hyper-
occur among nine strains of mice, including
emia often relates not just to conjunctivitis
BDF1, B6C3F1, and C57BL/6. Corneal dys-
but also to nasolacrimal duct and lacrimal
trophies in the C3H/He and DBA/2 mice
sac infections. The diagnosis of infective
were characterized by a deposition of
conjunctivitis and dacryocystitis must be
basophilic material  i
in the subepithelial
approached on the basis of understanding
stroma, with subsequent vascularization
the normal bacterial flora of the conjunctival
and leukocyte infiltration. ICR-n/n mice
sac. In a recent survey of conjunctival flora
showed neutrophil and lymphocyte infltration
in rabbits with conjunctivitis and dacryocys-
as well as vascularization in the stroma with-
titis, Pasteurella was not the most commonly
out basophilic deposition, whereas ICR and
isolated species: bacteria were islolated from
ICR-n/l mice showed no such lesions. CD-1
78% of swabs with Staphylococcal species
and CF-l mouse strains exhibit a dystrophy
found in 42% of isolates while Pasteurella
seen as a characteristic elliptical corneal
species were only detected in 12%.
opacity. Dyscoria and other abnormalities in
Blepharitis in the rabbit may be associ-
pupil shape among young rodents and espe-
ated with Treponema cuniculi, which is the
cially in mice are considered by some to be
agent of rabbit syphilis (i.e., a condition
colobomatous lesions, but one reliable report
transmitted to the neonates by the genitally
suggests that ventrally displaced, eccentric
infected dam). The diagnosis here is made
pupils are associated with inflammatory iridal
on the basis of identifying the spirochaete
changes.
on conjunctival-scrape cytology. Treatment
 Inherited retinal dystrophies and degen-
is
three injections of penicillin G
at
erations occur in mice, and the rd gene, for
40,000 IU/kg given at 7-day intervals. Con-
instance, is seen in C57BL/6J, CBA, C3H,
sidering that prolonged beta-lactam antibiosis
and various outbred albino mouse strains.
can cause fatal dysenteribiosis in rabbits and
Within a few months after birth, the outer
rodents, this treatment should be given with
retinal layers degenerate, thus leaving the
care, and it should be stopped if any diarrhea
retinal pigment epithelium adjacent to the
is noted.
inner nuclear layer. In several strains, a
Conjunctival disease in the rabbit can be
similar, if not identical, condition is known
caused by viral as well as bacterial agents. The
as the "rodless retina."
ocular signs of myxomatosis are a complex
LABORATORY AND EXOTIC ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/423
mixture of dermal, virally induced signs and
secondary infections because of a reduced
immune response. The myxoma virus may
cause inflammatory and edematous lesions of
the lids and conjunctiva as well as of the mouth.
anus, and genitals. Different strains of the virus
may cause a variety of presentations as may
infection in vaccinated as opposed to naive
animals. In the acute form, death may super-
vene before any obvious ocular signs occur.
Alternatively, conjunctival hyperemia may be
the only sign before death. In the more common
subacute to chronic form, conjunctival hyper-
emia progresses to chemosis, with a copious
ocular exudate. Edematous and, often, exuda-
Fig. 14.2. Purulent discharge in a rabbit with
tive lesions around the face and anogenital area
dacryocystitis.
are pathognomonic of the disease. The pro-
found white ocular exudate in the disease may
be caused by Pasteurella multocida dacryoadeni-
 in the rabbit is more often than not dacryocys-
tis in all cases, because the pathogenesis of this
       i
disease involves profound immunosuppression
shown by expressing purulent material from
and, often, subsequent multifocal infection
the nasolacrimal punctum with pressure just
with Pasteurella sp. In vaccinated animals these
ventral to the punctum or by cannulation of the
acute signs are not seen but rather myxomas,
nasolacrimal canaliculus, and flushing with
either on the lids or elsewhere. The diagnosis
sterile saline. Where excess conjunctivitis
is made on the basis of clinical signs and micro-
obscures the single punctum and renders ante-
scopic examination of inclusion bodies in
riorgrade cannulation impossible, retrograde
mucosal scrapings or histopathologic samples.
flushing may be attempted through the nasal
Understanding the anatomic relationship
opening of the nasolacrimal duct.
between the nasolacrimal duct, orbit, and
Epiphora and dacryocystitis result from the
roots of the upper incisor and molar arcades
close apposition of the nasolacrimal duct to
is important regarding oculodental disease,
the incisor and molar roots. Malocclusion of
particularly in lagomorphs and hystrico-
the molar arcades in particular results in retro-
morph rodents such as the chinchilla. The
pulsion of the tooth into the weakened maxil-
rabbit is unusual in having only one naso-
lary bone, with subsequent nasolacrimal
lacrimal punctum, with a nasolacrimal duct
occlusion; incisor malocclusion can, perhaps
that follows a tortuous route through the
more commonly, produce this same result.
lacrimal and maxillary bones. Sudden duct
Dacryocystorhinography  shows  the  marked
narrowing results in specific sites at which
dilatation of such infected ducts resulting in the
material can collect and cause obstruction with
continuous copious purulent discharge seen in
backflow of purulent material giving the char-
such eyes.
acteristic appearance of dacryocystitis in this
Culture of nasolacrimal flushes from
species (Fig. 14.2). Chronic epiphora can cause
affected rabbits by Marini et al. showed a
severe nasofacial dermatitis.
wide range of organisms, including Neisseria
The duct passes close to the roots of both
sp., Moraxella sp., Bordetella sp., Streptococ-
 the premolar and incisor teeth, and this apposi-
cus viridans, Oligella urethralis, and Pseudo-
tion is important in development of duct
monas sp. Note, however, these animals were
obstruction when associated with dental disease
 affected by epiphora rather than by dacryocys-
or maxillary osseous change secondary to nutri-
titis. The same organisms were found in naso-
 tional hyperparathyroidism. What appears on
lacrimal flushes from unaffected rabbits as
frst examination to be purulent conjunctivitis
well.
424 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
Treatment of dacryocystitis in the rabbit
unknown, the substantial vascularization asso-
is by cannulation of the single nasolacrimal
ciated with them would make removal and haz-
punctum and flushing of the duct. If cannula-
ardous procedure. Neoplasia of the Harderian
tion from the ocular punctum is diffcult, can-
gland may present as acute exophthalmos as
nulation of the duct opening at the nasal meatus
well as bilateral adenocarcinoma of the super-
ficial gland of the third eyelid presenting with
 at its nasal end renders this procedure difficult.
third eyelid protrusion.
The proximal end of the nasolacrimal duct can
Entropion, which is relatively commonly
also be difficult to visualize in a rabbit in which
seen in rabbits, is a condition rarely of suf-
dacryocystitis has extended to produce a florid
ficient interest to warrant reporting in the
conjunctivitis. Pressing on the lower eyelid will
literature, but the few reports that have
often manifest the duct as a pair of lighter pink
 appeared confirm this lesion can be severe
lips “pouting" through the darker red, inflamed
and is only corrected by surgery. Staphylo-
conjunctiva with evacuation of purulent mate-
coccal blepharitis, in which the infection and
rial through the punctum. In most cases, can-
inflammation is confined to the lids and does
nulation and flushing of the duct with a drug
not involve conjunctiva, nasolacrimal system or
 such as ofloxacin or gentamicin will resolve the
orbit is unusual, but can occur and is best
problem but this may need to be repeated
treated with warm water compresses and sys-
several times before resolution is achieved. The
temic antibiosis (Fig. 14.3)
use of continual fluoroquinolone antibiosis
An unusual, and apparently unique,
again has its risks but may be a medium term
abnormality in rabbits is an aberrant over-
solution.
growth of conjunctiva, thereby producing a
Pasteurella is also often associated with
type of ankyloblepharon (Fig. 14.4). The
retrobulbar abscessation in this species,
condition, however, can also occur de novo
often linked to a tooth root abscess. Orbital
in adult animals. Other terms used to
exenteration is the only option in such cases,
describe the anomaly are pseudopterygium
with the additional use of antibiotic-impreg-
and conjunctival centripetalization.
nated methacrylate beads being useful in
The fold of conjunctival tissue arises from
some circumstances.
the limbus, is nonadherent to the palpebral
The rabbit orbit is unusual for two clinically
corneal, and may appear as a thin annulus
important reasons. First the substantial orbital
or cover a considerable portion of the cornea
vascular rete is important to note especially
(Fig. 14.4). Personal communications from
when planning surgery such as enucleation.
other ophthalmologists are suggestive that sur-
Disruption of this vascular structure can lead
gical removal results only in reformation of the
to fatal exsanguination on enucleation, an
aberrant tissue, whereas suturing the fold to the
 outcome avoided by a transconjunctival surgery.
remaining as close to the sclera of the globe
as possible and thus retaining the rete with
the extraocular muscles as preserved orbital
structures. Occlusion of venous return by
the jugular veins resulting from an anterior
thoracic mass such as a lymphoma, can lead
to a persistent exophthalmos associated with
stress.
The other orbital features of note are the four
orbital glands, which may be encountered
when prolapsed in the same manner as the
prolapsed gland of the nictitating membrane in
dogs. Replacement of these prolapsed glands is
in all probability mandatory, for although the
s au q panpond sinan po uoodod
Fig. 14.3. Staphylococcal blepharitis in a rabbit
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OPHtHAlmOLOGY/425
Fig. I4.5. Hereditary glaucoma in a New Zealand
white rabbit.
23 mmHg), but after 1-3 months of age, the
Fig. 14.4. Conjunctival overgrowth in a rabbit.
pressure rises to between 26 and 48 mmHg.
Histopathologic features of these glaucoma-
tous eyes have been well-documented, as
sclera or using topical cyclosporine postsurgi-
has gonioscopic evaluation, which has
cally is a more effective method of preventing
revealed goniodysgenesis involving the pec-
visual impairment. The cause of this condition
tinate ligaments and trabecular meshwork
is unknown.
among affected eyes. The eyes become buph-
Corneal disease is commonly seen in
thalmic, with cloudy corneas, but whereas
rabbits. Lipid keratopathy has been docu-
vision is lost at this stage, the eyes do not
mented in rabbits fed cholesterol-rich diets
appear to be painful, probably because of
specifically designed to produce atheroma-
the increase in size accompanying the raised
tous lesions for research purposes. It has
pressure. Over a period of several months,
also been documented in rabbits fed a l0%
pressure returns to either normal or near-
fish meal maintenance diet and in one pet
normal, which is associated with ciliary
rabbit fed a predominantly milk-based diet.
 body degeneration. The bu gene is a recessive
Corneal epithelial dystrophy in the rabbit
 trait that is also semilethal, with heterozygotes
has been reported as a peripheral lesion histo-
giving birth to small litters of unthrifty pups.
pathologically characterized by areas of epithe-
The New Zealand white rabbit is considered to
lial thinning adjacent to areas of epithelial cell
be the predominant lagomorph strain with the
hyperplasia. Another report described a plaque-
bu/bu trait, but other white strains of pet rabbit
 like, paracentral, granular stippling in Ameri-
also demonstrate glaucoma.
can Dutch belted rabbits characterized
Inflammatory lesions with vasculariza-
tion in the rabbit iris are often lens-induced
     
uveitis (Fig. 14.6). The lenticular changes
seen in epithelial basement membrane dystro-
causing this uveitis are linked to capsular
phy or Reis-Buckler's dystrophy among humans.
rupture caused by intralenticular infection
Persistent and recidivistic corneal epithelial
by
 the protozoan Encephalitozoa cuniculi.
        
Given the lens-induced nature of this inflam-
and Corgi dog breeds also occurs in the
mation, treatment is lens removal, predomi-
rabbit.
nantly by phacoemulsification, with concurrent
Hereditary glaucoma in the New Zealand
topical anti-inflammatory medication.
white rabbit has been recognized since the
Anterior uveitis may also be associated with
1960s (Fig. 14.5). Neonatal bu/bu homozy-
Pasteurella sp. and characterized by episcleral
gotes have normal intraocular pressure (15-
congestion, miosis, and hypopyon. Anterior
426 /ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 14.6. Inflammatory lesion in a rabbit iris
involving white material associated with cataract in
an Encephalitozoan-positive rabbit, likely to be a case
of lens-induced phacoelastic uveitis.
chamber paracentesis may provide a diagnostic
sample.
Cataracts occur in rabbits (Figs. 14.7A and
B). Congenital cataracts have been documented
in a litter of rabbits, and in this case, the len-
ticular opacities were nuclear in most cases,
B
with persistent pupillary membranes in some
affected animals as well. New Zealand White
Fig. 14.7. A. Rapidly developing mature cataract in
and New Zealand White x New Zealand Red
diabetic rabbit. B. Familial posterior polar
rabbits were affected by cataract in one recent
subcapsular cataract in l-year-old rabbit.
study of nearly one thousand animals. Cata-
racts may also occur in diabetic animals, in
older rabbits or as incidental noninherited or
elinated nerve fibers traversing the retina in
familial lens opacities in younger animals.
a horizontal plane from the optic disc (Fig.
The rabbit lens is also affected by the
14.8). Optic disc cupping is seen in glau-
microsporidial    parasite   Encephalitozoan
coma in the rabbit, although it can be diffi-
cuniculi, which is transmitted vertically and,
cult to differentiate from the deep
thus, presumably enters the lens during its
physiological cups, which can be part of
formation. Given the parasite invades tissue
normal variation in this species.
by the agency of a fine, sporoplasmic dis-
charge tube, intralenticular introduction is
unlikely in the adult, which has a lens
The Guinea Pig
capsule thickness of 50-70 μm Therefore,
lens involvement is presumed to occur in
There is very little work published on ocular
utero. E. cuniculi would appear to be overtly
disease in this species, even though it has a high
cataractogenic only infrequently, but it has the
 prevalence. Congenital defects ranging from
subclinical effect of rupturing the lens capsule,
those as severe as clinical anophthalmos to mild
which presents as lens-induced uveitis.
 posterior polar subcapsular cataract are seen in
The fundus of the rabbit is merangiotic in
 a significant proportion of guinea pigs, particu-
nature with a band of blood vessels and myl-
larly those of Roan × Roan matings. Congenital
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGy/427
 Individual cases of entropion in other species
such as guinea pigs have been reported as well,
as have posttraumatic lid defects.
So-called “"fatty eye" involves excess lipid
deposition in the inferior conjunctiva and is
particularly seen in animals being fed to put on
weight prior to showing. “Flesh eye," on the
other hand, involves a smaller pink-colored
mass in the medial canthus and is probably
analogous to prolapsed nictitating membrane.
Bony spicules surrounded by a fibrous
envelope have been reported in the ciliary
body of guinea pigs. These lesions have been
termed osseous choristomas and heterotopic
bone formations. The condition of hetero
topic bony metaplasia and calcification
occurs in healthy tissue and is regularly seen
Fig. I4.8. Merangiotic fundus of a normal albino
among guinea pigs in various nonocular
rabbit.
sites.
As noted above cataracts are commonly
seen in guinea pigs; 18% of outbred animals
cataracts have been reported in a litter of guinea
in our study were affected, while inherited
pigs also affected with urogenital abnormalities
cataracts have been reported in the Nl3
after treatment of pregnant sows with the anti-
strain of guinea pigs. Lens opacities in these
biotic Tylan.
animals are caused by a single splice-site
Ocular surface defects in young animals may
mutation in the zeta-crystallin gene. The
be caused by trichiasis in Texel animals where
guinea pig has an anangiotic retina.
the coat is composed of short bristly hairs that
can easily abrade the eye in the first few days
of life in these precocious young. Breeders use
The Chinchilla
Vaseline to encourage periocular hairs to be
directed away from the ocular surface but even
The scientific literature yields little regarding
so corneal ulceration and edema can still occur.
diseases of the chinchilla eye. The chinchilla
Dermoids have been reported several times in
has a shallow orbit, a rudimentary nictitating
 guinea pigs, both standard and hairless.
membrane, a large cornea, a densely pigmented
Conjunctivitis among guinea pigs has
iris with a vertical slit pupil, and an anangiotic
been regularly associated with Chlamydia
fundus with variable vascularization of the
psittaci. Some animals have only slight red-
optic disc.
dening of the eyelid margins, whereas others
have thick, purulent exudate. Infection in
young animals is characterized by inclusion
The Ferret
bodies in conjunctival epithelial cells with
leukocytic infiltrates, but in many cases, it
Ocular disease occurs infrequently in pet
resolves spontaneously in l month.
ferrets. Congenital ocular disease in this
Guinea pigs also develop a particularly
species is rare, although persistent hyaloid
severe keratoconjunctivitis when infected
artery, tunica vasculosa lentis and hyperplastic
with Listeria monocytogenes, which is an
primary vitreous has been reported. Ferrets
organism producing only mild disease in
are affected by conjunctivitis associated
other rodents, rabbits, and nonhuman pri-
with human influenza and canine distemper,
mates. Other infectious causes of conjuncti-
together with systemic mycobacteriosis and
vitis in guinea pigs include salmonellosis.
salmonellosis.
428 /EssENTIAlS Of VeteRiNArY OpHtHAlmOLoGY
The depth of the orbit in a ferret renders
typical globe shape is a flattened ellipse with a
detection of an orbital space-occupying lesion
short anteroposterior axis because of corneal
difficult until it has reached a considerable size.
flattening. but some deep-sea dwelling teleosts
Microphthalmos has been reported among
have tubular-shaped globes and a few cave-
ferrets in with an autosomal dominant
dwelling or bottom-dwelling species have ves-
inheritance and concurrent cataract and
tigial blind eyes (Fig. 14.9). Having the same
retinal dysplasia.
refractive index as water, the cornea serves no
Cataracts occur in ferrets. They manifest
refractive function in water. Corneal anatomy
a continuum of lens changes, from fine, mul-
follows the mammalian pattern, except that it is
tifocal punctate lens opacities through corti-
relatively thicker and the epithelium is the layer
cal change to complete, mature cataracts.
primarily responsible for maintaining corneal
The second group showed cataracts associated
hydration. Corneal thickness is generally greater
with microphthalmos and, in some cases,
in freshwater than marine fish. Corneal irides-
unusual PAS-positive material in the lens
 s  n   
capsule. Lens luxations have been reported in
to function to shade the globe and reduce glare.
ferrets as primary lens dislocations or as sec-
At its periphery the corneal endothelium thick-
ondary to chronic cataract. Removal is taxing
ens to form the annular ligament, which fills the
because of the small size of the globe but since
iridocorneal angle as it reflects on to the anterior
glaucoma can supervene it is considered neces-
peripheral iris. Anteriorly the sclera contains a
sary. The small size of the globe also renders
circumferential ring of cartilage, variably sup-
phacoemulsification for cataract difficult but
plemented by scleral ossicles. The argentea is an
irrigation-aspiration techniques can be used
outer layer of guanine-containing cells in the
with a smaller diameter handpiece.
choroid that continues over the anterior iris,
Ferrets have a holangiotic retina with a
contributing with the iris pigments to the color
reflective tapetum. Retinal degeneration is
and iridescence of the iris. A cellular tapetum
believed to be common in the ferret with
lucidum is present within or beneath the retinal
inherited atrophy and degeneration associ-
pigment epithelium in some species. The cho-
ated with taurine deficiency in this obligate
roidal gland is a well-developed vascular plexus
carnivore noted in review but not reported
present within the choroid of many species at
in the primary literature.
the posterior pole, where it wraps around the
optic nerve and communicates with an acces-
sory gill (pseudobranch). Its functions presum-
Fish
ably include nutrition and local temperature
regulation. Indirect ophthalmoscopy has been
Ophthaimic Anatomy
used to document the fundus morphology of
several fish species.
Most modern fish belong to the class of teleosts
The ciliary body is rudimentary, when
(bony fishes); the others are elasmobranchs
present. Ciliary processes are absent. Complete
(cartilaginous fishes). Most fish lack eyelids
separation of aqueous and vitreous is not
(except elasmobranchs). The presence of a
present and the mechanisms of aqueous pro-
membrane covering the cornea or folds of tissue
duction and loss are poorly understood. The
around the eyes is common. In teleosts the orbit
pupil is generally round or pear-shaped; the iris
is bony and enclosed; some species have a
is thin and with few exceptions, immobile. The
tenacular ligament that anchors the globe to the
 sphincter and dilator muscles are rudimentary
orbit. Elasmobranchs possess an optic pedicle,
or absent except in elasmobranchs. The large
a cartilaginous process connecting the cranium
spherical lens is supported by the zonule and
to the posterior pole of the globe. Extraocular
a dorsal suspensory ligament; it consists of a
muscles are present, allowing independent
hyaline lens capsule surrounding lens epithe-
ocular movement, although targeting is usually
lium, cortex and nucleus. The anterior surface
effected by positioning of the body. A binocular
nearly touches the corneal endothelium,
feld of vision exists for many species. The
    
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGY/429
choroid
tensor chorioidae
scleral cartilage
conjunctiva
choroidal
annular
ora
gland
ligament
suspensory
ligament
cornea
retina
argentea
of choroid
lens
vitreal
vessels
sclera
optic nerve
falciformprocess
retractor lentis
epichorioidal lymph spacc
Fig. 14.9. The teleost eye (diagrammatic).
fish lens has the highest refractive index of all
species' visual ecology. Two protective mecha-
vertebrates (-l.69) and the refractive index
nisms have evolved to shield photoreceptors
gradients within it essentially eliminate chro-
from excessive light promoted by the immobile
matic and spherical aberration in the image
pupil  2
and lack of eyelids (retinomotor
presented to the retina. A posterior muscle, the
responses). Photoreceptors may contract or
retractor lentis, is present in teleosts; it arises
elongate between pigmented processes
of
  s    
pigment epithelial cells or alternatively pigment
retina and inserts anterior to the lens equator
may migrate along the apical processes of
on the ventral lens capsule. The suspensory
pigment epithelium.
ligament/retractor mechanism allows changing
the lens position within the pupil as well as
alteration of the lens-retina distance. Predatory
Ophthaimic Examination
fish in general have well-developed accommo-
dation whereas bottom feeders have little or no
Ocular examination of fish in water is of
accommodative range. An anterior muscle, the
necessity limited to gross observation. Close
protractor lentis is present in some elasmo-
examination is facilitated by aerial examina-
branchs. Anatomic variation in retinal structure
tion, often under anesthesia. Gross examina-
'sisixa Alojoqdou pue adki rondaoanonoud pu
tion of the external eye and anterior segment
Both rods and cones are typically present;
may be performed with a focal light source
diurnal species have cone-dominated retinas,
and magnification or by slit lamp biomicros-
deep sea and nocturnal species have rod-domi-
copy. Sample collection for culture and cytol-
nated retinas, with gradations dictated by
ogy of the cornea and lid folds may be done as
430 /EssentiAls oF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmoLOGY
for other vertebrates as can fluorescein staining
in red drum and channel catfish. Deficiencies
to demonstrate corneal ulceration. Applanation
of riboflavin, thiamine, vitamin A, methionine
tonometry may be performed only in species
and cystine, tryptophan, and zinc produce cat-
with large eyes (Tono-Pen, Mentor, [Norwell,
aract. Excess calcium and phosphorus fed to
MA]; Tono-Vet, Tiolat Oy, Helsinki, Finland
juvenile chinook salmon produced cataract.
[Colonial Medical Medical Supply, Franconia,
Metabolic disturbances in fish may cause
Aq aissod aq Ae uonuxa snpung (IHN
exophthalmos, a common sign in certain
aerial examination using indirect ophthalmos-
infections as well. Gas bubble disease of
copy and a 60 D condensing lens.
marine and freshwater fish is a noninfec-
tious, physically induced process caused by
uncompensated hyperbaric pressure of total
Ophthaimic Diseases
dissolved gases. When pressure compensa-
tion is inadequate the dissolved gases may
The ocular disorders of fish result from
form emboli and tissue emphysema. When
infectious diseases, nutritional deficiencies,
gas bubbles develop behind the globe,
trauma, metabolic disorders, degenerations,
exophthalmos, frequently dramatic 
and
neoplasia, and teratogenic and spontaneous
occasionally resulting in total proptosis with
malformations.
loss of the eye, results. Intraocular gas
Infectious agents include parasites, bacteria,
bubble accumulation causes a variety of
fungi, and viruses. Parasites include ciliated
pathologic changes, including panophthal-
protozoans (Ichthyophthirius, Cryptocaryon,
mitis, synechia formation, and cataract.
Tetrahymena); myxosporidians (the prolifera-
Degenerations of the lens and retina in fish
tive kidney disease agent; Myxosoma heteros-
occur for some of the same reasons as in
pora; Henneguya; Myxobilatus; Sphaerospora,
mammals and associated with a few unusual
Myxobilus); trematodes (Diplostomum spp. and
circumstances.
related genera); crustaceans (copepods, Lernaea
spp., Argulus spp.); cestodes (Gilquinia squali),
and microsporidia (Glugea).
Amphibians
A broad spectrum of pathogenic bacteria
infect both marine and freshwater fish. Bac-
Ophthaimic Anatomy
terial septicemia commonly results in intra-
ocular involvement. Staphylococcus aureus,
The anatomy of amphibian eyes varies with
group B streptococci, Aeromonas, Pseudo-
order (anuran versus urodele) and stage of
monas and Vibrio have been documented.
development (larval versus adult). The eyes of
Mycobacterial infections and infection with
larval amphibians resemble teleost fishes.
Nocardia and Flavobacterium cause granulo-
Those of urodeles (tailed amphibians) are
matous endophthalmitis
poorly developed compared to anurans. The
Viralinfections with endothelialtropism
au (speoi pue shon) suenue [earel jo saka
(e.g., rhabdoviruses) may cause uveitis. At least
poorly developed eyelids; in adults, the upper
three epizootic salmonid virus diseases (infec-
lid is immobile and associated with the lower
tious pancreatic necrosis, infectious hemato-
lid a false nictitating membrane is formed by
poietic
necrosis, and viral hemorrhagic
an elastic translucent fold of conjunctiva in the
septicemia) have exophthalmos as a character-
lower fornix. When the globe is retracted it
istic sign. Mycotic ocular disorders of fish
passively covers the eye; this retraction facili-
include corneal infections, orbital cellulitis, and
     
endophthalmitis. Corneal infection with Sapro-
the thin membrane separating the orbit and
legnia usually accompanies multifocal integu-
pharynx, forcing food down the throat. There
mentary mycosis of marine and freshwater
is no orbital septum separating the two orbits.
fish.
Superior eyelid glands and a Harderian gland
Nutritional ocular disorders have been
 are present. The puncta and nasolacrimal duct
extensively described in salmonids and recently
are present. The retractor bulbi is the most
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGy/431
important extraocular muscle, which retracts
dorsal and ventral ciliary sinuses. The iris is
the globe and aids in swallowing. The globe is
     
spherical with hyaline cartilage in the inner
stromal pigments; a metallic sheen is associ-
sclera from the posterior pole as far as the
ated with the presence of guanine crystals.
equator (Fig. 14.10). Other anurans lack carti-
Myoepithelial sphincter and dilator muscles
lage or have a ring of bones within the sclera.
 are present. Iridal arteries have an irregular
Urodeles lack scleral cartilage. The adult cornea
pattern and communicate with deeper veins.
has the mammalian pattern, but larval anurans
Pupillary excursions are present but limited.
have a duplex cornea with a dermal portion
Resting pupil size and shape are remarkably
separated from the sclera. A triangular ciliary
variable but it is spherical when dilated. The
 body is present with hypertrophied folds dor-
avascular retina derives its blood supply from
sally and ventrally that extend to the pupillary
the vascular choroid alone in urodeles and
border to form pupillary nodules. Two pro-
from both the choroid and a membrana vascu-
tractor lentis muscles arise from the peripheral
 losa retinae in the vitreous on the retinal surface
cornea to insert on the ciliary folds; contraction
 in anurans. The choroid contains a choriocap-
causes zonular tension, which moves the lens
illaris but no tapetum, but cells may contain
forward to effect accommodation for distance
 guanine crystals of carotenoid pigments. The
vision. The lens in tadpoles is spherical and
optic disc is circular or elongated. The retina
near the cornea; in adult frogs it is somewhat
contains at least four types of photoreceptors
flattened and positioned more posteriorly,
types based on visual pigments in the rods and
leaving a visible anterior chamber. The urodele
cones. Oil droplets are present at the distal end
lens is large and the anterior chamber is
of the ellipsoid of some cones. Anuran photo-
shallow. Urodeles lack ciliary folds and the
receptors have been the subject of extensive
dorsal protractor lentis muscle. The aqueous is
research involving photochemistry, renewal,
drained through an iridocorneal angle into
and electrophysiology.
scleral cartilage
pupillary nodule
choroid
cornea
retina
apticnerve
lens
20nUe
membrana
vasculosa retinae
protractor.
lentis muscle
ciliary
sclera
venous sinus
hyloid vein
tensor choroideae
Fig. 14.10. The amphibian eye (diagrammatic)
432 /EsSEntIALS OF VetERiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
Ophthaimic Diseases
animals have been fed several different
diets.
Considerable research
interest has been
directed toward amphibian retinal and central
visual pathway physiology, retinal injury, and
Reptiles
lens injury and repair. However, reports of
 spontaneous ocular diseases of amphibians are
Ophthalmic Anatomy
scarce. Severe panophthalmitis and otitis
interna were reported in a large group of
Four of the five orders within the class Reptilia
recently imported fire-bellied toads (Bombina
have anatomically similar eyes: lizards, chelo.
orientalis). Corneal stromal infiltrates, scle-
nians, crocodilians, and the tuatara. The ffth
ritis, hyphema, hypopyon, i
iridocyclitis,
order, snakes, lost the prototype reptilian ana-
cataract, and chorioretinitis were promi-
tomical pattern during a fossorial period in
nent. Opisthotonus, circling, head tilt, and
their evolution, only to reevolve eyes with
loss of righting reflexes were associated
certain differences from other reptiles. Fea-
with otitis interna. Several bacteria were
tures of the external eye and adnexa have great
cultured from affected eyes and normal
clinical significance. In most reptiles, except
viscera, including Aeromonas hydrophila,
snakes and certain ablepharine skinks, the
Citrobacter freundii, Providencia alcalifa-
upper and lower eyelids are well-developed,
ciens, Klebsiella oxytoca, and an unidenti-
the lower being the more mobile. Crocodilians
fied oxidase-positive Gram-negative bacilli,
auI P naddn aul ul snsiei Auoq e ssassod
resistant to tetracycline. Both Aeromonas
eyelids of chameleons are constricted around
hydrophila and Citrobacter freundii have been
the cornea and move with the very mobile
implicated as causes of red-leg septicemia in
globe. In some lizards of the families Lacerti-
    
dae, Scincidae, and Ieidae, the lower lid is vari-
toads with oxytetracycline (26 mg/liter of
ably transparent. Snakes and ablepharine
water) was not effective but may have pre-
geckos and skinks possess a spectacle cov-
vented infection in normal toads.
ering the cornea, developed from fused
Corneal opacities in amphibians have
eyelids and separated from the cornea by
several potential causes. The most exten-
an epithelial-lined subspectacular space.
sively reported and investigated disorder is
This tertiary spectacle contains an exten-
lipid keratopathy. Originally discovered in
sive vascular network, optically transparent
Cuban tree frogs (Osteopilus septentrionalis),
but demonstrable by microsilicone injec-
it has since been identified in species of
tion. The anterior layers of the spectacle are
captive hylid, leptodactylid, and ranid frogs
shed during normal ecdysis with the rest of
either as a corneal and hepatic lesion or as
the skin. Prior to ecdysis the spectacle
part of a generalized xanthomatosis affect-
becomes cloudy due to thickening and
ing brain, some viscera, peripheral nerves,
breakdown of skin layers, with accumula-
periarticular soft tissues, and digital pads.
tion of fluid between the new surface layer
Hypercholesterolemia has been noted
in
of the spectacle and the old. The spectacle
animals with disseminated xanthomatosis.
is transparent immediately before its surface
Clinically, dense white stromal opacities are
is shed. During the period the spectacle is
seen often raised with corneal thickening
cloudy, the animal is blind; many species
and surface epithelial irregularity. Biochem-
become more irritable and aggressive during
ical analysis of affected corneas and livers
this period. The spectacle is impervious to
showed elevated levels of cholesterol esters.
topically applied medications; thus, topical
Affected frogs have all been females, many
ocular therapy is ineffective. The ocular
with massive egg development, suggesting
surface in reptiles is bathed by fluids
that excessive lipid mobilization associated
secreted by lacrimal (except snakes) and
with oogenesis may play a role. Dietary fat
Harderian glands. The latter are large in
has been suggested as a factor, but affected
chelonians, especially in marine species;
LABORatOrY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGy/433
the lacrimal gland functions as an extrare-
oped in chelonians. Accommodation in most
nal site of salt excretion. The nasolacrimal
reptiles occurs by pressure exerted by the
duct, absent in chelonians, drains from the
ciliary body, mediated by the ciliary muscle,
medial canthus to the roof of the mouth to
against the lens equator to increase anteropos-
emerge at the base of or behind the vom-
        
eronasal organ.
meleons (Chamaeleo dilepis) have a negative
Anatomic features of the globe that distin-
refractive power, unlike other vertebrate eyes,
 guish reptiles include poorly developed rectus
and are capable of very rapid accommodation
muscles (except in lizards), well-developed
Peoiq A1a pue (puooas 1ad siaidoip 0g 01 dn)
retractor bulbi muscle (except in snakes),
accommodative range (up to 45 diopters)
limited rotational movements (except in cha-
 o r sae ss sn 
meleons) (Fig. l4.ll). Hyaline cartilage is
forward movement of the lens accomplished
present in the sclera of lizards and chelonians
indirectly by increased pressure on the vitre-
from the equator to the posterior pole, with
ous applied by the ciliary muscle. Refractive
scleral ossicles extending to the limbus anteri-
and anatomic studies of crocodilians suggest
orly from the equator. These form a sclerocor-
    l    
neal sulcus, giving shape to the anterior
severely defocussed underwater, where other
segment and apposing the ciliary body to the
ad r ado aq isn s oss
lens equator, which provides leverage for
location.
action of the ciliary muscle. Snakes lack both
The iridocorneal angle resembles the mam-
scleral ossicles and cartilage and crocodilians
lack scleral ossicles. The soft pliable lens of
young growing American alligators (Alligator
crocodilians and lizards has an equatorial pad,
mississippiensis) mean intraocular pressure mea-
which is absent in snakes and poorly devel-
sured by applanation tonometry (Tono-Pen II,
scieral cartilage
seleral ossicle
choroid
ciliary muscle.
retina
iris
vitreous
sclera
fovea
lens
conus
cornea
papillaris
opticnerve
Fig. I4.ll. The lacertilian eye (diagrammatic)
434 /EsSEntIALS OF VEtERiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
Oculab, Glendale, CA) was approximately
Ophthaimic Diseases
16 mmHg (range 5-35 mmHg)and
was
inversely correlated to body length and pre-
The reported ocular disorders of reptiles
sumably age. Gender differences were not iden-
include malformations, infections, nutritional
tified. Normal IOP values have been reported
disorders,
degenerations, neoplasia,  
and
for yellow-footed tortoises (Geochelone denticu-
trauma.
lata), red-footed tortoises (G. carbonaria), and
juvenile loggerhead turtles. Iris color, pupil
shape, and uveal vascular pattern in reptiles are
Ocufar Maiformations
variable. Ciliary processes are present in all rep-
Malformationsinclude anophthalmos,microph-
tiles except lizards. Both ciliary and iris sphinc-
ter muscles are striated; thus, mydriasis is not
thalmos, cyclopia, exophthalmos, and corneal
achieved by parasympatholytic drugs. Mydria-
and pupillary defects.
sis can be achieved by general anesthesia or by
intracameral injection of curariform drugs.
Infections
Topical application of the same drugs rarely
effect mydriasis.
Viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic infec-
The avascular retina is supplied by the
tions have been reported as causes of ocular
choroid in all reptiles. All have a choriocap-
disease in reptiles. Herpesvirus infection in
illaris and during ocular development a tran-
mariculture-raised green sea turtles (Chelo-
sient intravitreal hyaloid vascular system. In
nia mydas) between 56 days and 12 months
lizards this is complemented by a vascular
 of age caused extensive proliferative ulcer-
conus papillaris derived from the hyaloid
 ative skin lesions frequently involving the
vasculature; it projects from the optic nerve
eyelids (gray patch disease and fibropapil-
head into the vitreous, in some species as
lomatosis).
Intranuclear inclusions were
far as the posterior pole of the lens. In alliga-
noted histologically
tors, turtles and tortoises, the retina is totally
dependent on the choriocapillaris after the
hyaloid system regresses; the alligator does
Bacterial Infections
have a conus that regresses. Snakes possess a
conus during ocular development l
but
it
Bacterial infections have been associated with
regresses in most. In a few (e.g., vipers) the
several ocular disorders. Bacterial blepharitis
conus persists. In all snakes a permanent pre-
with
1abscess formation occur commonly.
retinal vascular meshwork develops from the
Abscesses are usually focal and contain inspis-
embryological hyaloid. In one colubrid (Iarbo-
sated pus. Both Gram-negative (E. coli, Pseudo-
phis), this meshwork subsequently becomes an
monas) and acid-fast organisms have been
a      
incriminated
and few mammals. In crocodilians guanine
Subspectacular abscesses develop unilat-
crystals in the retinal pigment epithelium form
erally or bilaterally secondary to ascending
a retinal tapetum. The relative proportion of
infection from the oral cavity through the
rod and cone photoreceptor varies among rep-
nasolacrimal duct or from penetrating inju-
tiles, probably correlated with their relative
ries to the spectacle or from systemic infec-
diurnality and nocturnality. A fovea is present
tions. Clinical signs include distension of
in lizards. The distal end of the ellipsoid of
the spectacle to cause apparent buphthal-
lizards, but not snakes, contains oil droplets
mos or exophthalmos and cloudiness. White
Chelonians have predominantly cones; croco-
or yellow exudate is often visible below the
dilians have predominantly rods, as well as a
spectacle. Therapy is directed at establish-
few cones without oil droplets. Retinal response
ing drainage by careful excision of a 30E
to dark and light adaptation by cone contrac-
wedge of inferior spectacle, culture and
tion and pigment epithelial migration is minimal
cytology of the expressed exudate for anti-
in reptiles.
biotic sensitivity testing, and flushing of the
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLOGy/435
space with antibiotic solutions. Bacterial iso-
Fungal Infections
lates have included Pseudomonas and Proteus
spp, and Providencia rettgeri.
Fungal infections may cause superficial or deep
Blockage of the nasolacrimal duct occurs
ocular disease. Fungal infections of the skin
in snakes associated with congenital malfor-
  s      
mation,i
inflammation associated
with
eyelids in snakes and chelonians. Correction of
necrotic stomatitis and subspectacular infec-
environmental deficiencies may be adequate
tions, and pressure from nearby tumors and
treatment; snakes may then shed infected skin
granulomas (Fig. 14.12). Sometimes termed
with the next ecdysis. Snakes can be soaked in
pseudobuphthalmos, congenital and some
dilute chlorhexidine (0.26 ml/liter of water) for
other cases may resolve without treatment.
1-2 hours daily.
If spontaneous resolution does not occur in
a reasonable period, drainage by partial
excision of the spectacle to establish drain-
Parasitic Infections
age is indicated as for subspectacular
Parasites occasionally cause ocular disease
abscess. Recurrence is possible, but figures
documenting the risk have not been
Leeches (Ozobranchus spp.) have been noted
  s s  j  a 
reported.
culture. Local removal followed by topical
Panophthalmitis, generalized inflammation
 of the eye usually associated with infection,
antibiotic therapy resolves the condition. Oxy-
develops in reptiles secondary to perforating
 spururid and flarid nematodes have been found
injuries and infections of the ocular surface and
and manually removed from the conjunctival
 sacs of lizards and turtles. In captive snakes
by hematogenous distribution with bacteremia/
mites are commonly found (Ophionyssus spp.
septicemia. Hypopyon may be extensive and
 and others) attached to the scales at the margin
periocular swelling may be dramatic. Any bac-
of the spectacle. Mites can be treated using a
teria may be responsible; among others, Staph-
one-inch dichlorvos strip suspended in a perfo-
ylococcus has been isolated from a tortoise.
rated container in the cage for 2-3 days fol-
Enucleation may be the most expedient and
humane treatment for reptiles without systemic
 lowed by cage disinfection and repeat treatment
infections. Performed similarly to the proce-
14 days later. Alternatively, covering the animal
dure in mammals, reptile enucleations may
with a thin film of olive oil (to asphyxiate the
mites) or spraying with a pyrethroid (NOT
present the challenge of adequate closure
of
skin over the orbital defect. Sliding skin grafts
 pyrethrin) mite spray have been recommended
may be necessary.
as safer than organophosphate treatment.
Neoplasia
Fibromas, fbropapillomas, and fbrosarcomas
develop on the integument of green sea turtles
as part of a proliferative connective tissue
response to the eggs of the trematode Laraedius
laraedi, which lodge in small vessels of the skin
and conjunctiva after hematogenous release
from the parasite. Tumors may involve eyelids
 and conjunctiva.
Lenticular Degenerations
Fig. 14.12. Python snake with distension of
Lenticular degeneration  with opacification,
subspectacular space due to nasolacrimal duct
obstruction from necrotic stomatitis
cataract, occurs sporadically in reptiles.
436/Essentials OF VereRinary OphthAlmoloGY
especially snakes and tortoises probably for
most of the same reasons mammals are afflicted.
Cataract in very aged captive specimens has
been noted. Secondary cataracts caused by
uveitis or perforating injuries are common.
Retained Spectacles
 Retained spectacles in snakes present a chal-
lenge to manage. The causes of retained
spectacles include generalized integumen-
tary disease, dry environment, local injury
Fig. I4.13. Young red-eared slider with
to the spectacle, mite or tick infestation, and
blepharoconjunctivitis due to hypovitaminosis A.
systemic illness. Over several ecdysis cycles,
a thick layer of old spectacles accumulates.
Spectacle opacification may render the snake
trout pellets supplemented with cod liver oil
blind in one or both eyes and unable or
initially can reverse the problem. Later, paren-
unwilling to feed. Conservative management
teral vitamin A (1,000-5,000 IU; Aquasol-
is often effective and is safest, consisting of
A-USV Pharmaceutical, New York, NY) is
increasing humidity in the environment by
misting or soaking the snake and allowing
recommended weekly until resolution. Topical
antibiotic ointment is recommended to control
natural shedding during the next cycle. If
bacterial infection.
unsuccessful or if the spectacle has been
previously damaged and unlikely to be shed,
application of acetylcysteine (Mucomyst;
Birds
Mead  Johnson  Pharmaceutical  1
Division,
Evansville, IN) to the spectacle may loosen
Ophthalmic Anatomy
it enough to allow atraumatic removal with
forceps. Extreme care must be taken to avoid
corneal injury.
Upper and lower eyelid and membrana nic-
titans are present. The lower lid is more
mobile than the upper, usually containing a
Vitamin A Deficiency
fibroelastic tarsal plate. The nictitans is well
developed, actively mobile, nearly transpar-
Hypovitaminosis A is commonly recognized
ent, thin, and covered by a papillary layer of
in chelonians. Most frequent in aquatic
epithelium. Drawn from the nasal canthus,
 species, especially rapidly growing young
the nictitans is moved by contracture of the
turtles fed diets of meat and insects, the
pyramidalis muscle that originates from the
deficiency causes squamous metaplasia of
posterior pole sclera where it loops through
the orbital glands and their ducts. The
a sling formed by the quadratus muscle;
glands increase in size as desquamated cells
both are innervated by cranial nerve VI.
block their ducts. The eyelids become
Both muscles may be derived from the croc-
edematous   and   blepharoconjunctivitis
odilian retractor bulbi muscles otherwise
ensues. The palpebral f
fissure becomes
absent in birds. The oblique and rectus muscles
closed and secondary bacterial conjunctivi-
are thin and relatively poorly developed. Mei-
tis and keratitis are common (Fig. l4.l3).
bomian glands are also absent. The lacrimal
Concomitantly, squamous metaplasia of renal,
gland is located inferotemporal to the globe and
pancreatic, gastrointestinal, and respiratory
 a Harderian gland is found adjacent to the pos-
epithelia progress to fatal consequence. In the
terior sclera near the base of the nictitans but
early stages of the disease while animals are
 not part of it. Two lacrimal puncta drain lacri-
still eating. a change of diet to commercial
mal secretions into a nasolacrimal duct and
LABORatOrY Ano ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHalmOLoGy/437
thence to the nasal cavity. The orbit is incom-
segment. The cornea has the same layers as in
plete, large, and open; it can be evaluated
mammals. The iris contains striated sphincter
radiographically.
and dilator muscles and myoepithelium and
The globe is very large relative to body size
smooth muscle, and its stroma harbors several
(Fig. 14.14). The posterior segment is rela-
pigments responsible for variable iris color-
tively much larger than the anterior segment.
ation. The circular pupil is subject to influence
Three basic shapes are typical: (1) flat, with a
from retinal stimulation as well as voluntary
short anteroposterior axis, and a flat or partly
control. Iris vascularization is similar to lizards.
concave ciliary region (intermediate segment)
The iridocorneal angle is well developed and
in the center of which the cornea protrudes,
drained by two annular channels. The lens is
with a hemispheric posterior segment; the
soft, pliable and of variable shape-spherical
most common shape; (2) globose, in which
in nocturnal species, flattened anteriorly in
the ciliary region protrudes further from the
some diurnal species. An equatorial annular
posterior segment while remaining somewhat
pad formed of modified lens fibers is present
concave; present in many diurnal birds needing
and may be very prominent. Between the
high resolution distance vision (e.g., crows,
central body of the lens and the annular
insectivorous wing-feeders, diurnal raptors);
pad is a fluid-filled cleft or lenticular space.
and(3) tubular (owl) in which the concave
Though not serving a direct optical role, the
intermediate segment is elongated anteropos-
annular pad serves an important function in
teriorly, forming a tube before joining the pos-
accommodation and may have a nutritive role
terior segment at a sharp angle. The shape of
 in lens metabolism. Its size is generally related
the globe is formed and maintained by hyaline
to the accommodative range of the lens, which
cartilage in the sclera of the posterior segment
varies with species. Except in diving birds the
and by 10-l8 scleral ossicles (sometimes
pad is largest in birds with the widest range
pneumatic) in the sclera of the intermediate
of accommodation, (e.g., diurnal birds of prey.
scleral carrilage
scleral ossicles
sclea
ciliary cleft
cnoroid
annularpad
lens
pecten
uptie nerve
cornea
retina
muscle of Crampton
Briick's muscle
lenucular ligament
Fig. I4.14. The raptor eye (diagrammatic)
438 /EssentiAls OF VeteRinAry OpHthAlmOLOGY
other fast-flying species). The smallest are
Ophthaimic Examination
present in nocturnal species with small accom-
modative ranges. Accommodation in birds
Clinical examination of avian eyes utilizes the
involves changes in corneal curvature,
same instrumentation and diagnostic tech-
anterior movement of the lens, and lens
niques as in mammals, albeit with modification
deformation. Lens power is increased by
dictated by the size of the eye and physiological
contraction of the striated meridional ciliary
characteristics of the iris.
muscles-Brucke's muscle posteriorly a
and
Avian responses to the eye-related reflexes
Crampton's muscle anteriorly (which inserts
differ from mammals in some respects. Palpe-
on the peripheral cornea) move the ciliary
bral response is present with the lower lid cov-
body axially, compressing the lens 
by
 ering the globe more extensively than the upper
exerting pressure on the annular pad.
lid; membrana nictitans excursions are promi-
Crampton's muscle contraction may flatten
nent. Menace responses seem inconsistent even
the peripheral cornea. In the chicken and
in birds with evidently normal vision; thus,
pigeon, changes in corneal curvature account
 absent menace response has little diagnostic
for half or more of the 15-17 D accommoda-
significance. Avoidance behavior is a more reli-
tive range of the eye. In one investigation of
able indicator of vision than menace reflex.
avian accommodation, the accommodative
Because retractor bulbi muscles are absent in
range of ffteen species of owls was 0.7 D to
birds (replaced by the quadratus and pyrami-
greater than l0 D. Lower-visual field myopia
 dalis muscles that subserve membrana nictitans
present in some birds (chickens, pigeons,
motility) globe retraction is not a feature of
quail) but absent in raptors allows them to
eye-related reflex responses. The corneal reflex
keep the ground in focus while performing
is present, r
 manifested by blinking, nictitans
other tasks. Aquatic birds, in which the corneal
excursion,
and avoidance behavior. Direct
accommodative mechanisms are neutralized
pupillary light reflex is present. Its assessment
under water, have accommodative ranges up
is often problematic owing to presumptive vol-
to 50 D. In chickens, pigeons, and kestrels,
untary control of the striated components of
the ciliary muscle fbers predominate in the
the iris musculature and the emotional state of
anterior muscle fber groups suggesting an
 the bird. Slight intermittent dynamic anisocoria
emphasis on corneal accommodation whereas
may be normal. Because of complete decussa-
in the hooded merganser, the majority of
tion of optic nerve fibers, consensual pupillary
fbers are in the internal and posterior muscle
 light responses are not expected in birds. Arte-
fiber groups suggest that lenticular accommo-
factual consensual responses may be induced
dation predominates. The numerous ciliary
by inadvertent stimulation of the retina of the
processes are tightly fused to the equatorial
fellow eye during elicitation of the direct pupil-
lens capsule.
lary response through the posterior pole of the
The retina is avascular and atapetal but
stimulated eye and the thin interosseus septum
has a well-developed choroid and pecten.
separating the two orbits.
The pecten is a highly vascular pigmented
 Posterior segment examination in birds
structure of greatly variable size extending
is confounded by difficulty in achieving
into the vitreous from and obscuring exami-
mydriasis. Parasympatholytic agents are
nation of the optic nerve head. The pecten
ineffective because of the complex muscu-
probably has a primary nutritive function
lar arrangement of the iris. Predominantly
but has been credited with over thirty pos-
striated in nature, the iris muscles may be
sible functions. Considerable variation is pho-
partially paralyzed by neuromuscular para-
 toreceptor type and density exist. Some species
lyzing agents. Topical application of tubocu-
are afoveate (most domestic species), others are
rarine (3 mg of tubocurarine powder per ml of
monofoveate, and some are bifoveate (hum-
0.025%
6benzalkonium chloride solution)
mingbirds, some raptors, and passerines). Some
instilled three to four times over 20 minutes
avian species possess ultraviolet vision, the
resulted in partial mydriasis in some species
function of which is uncertain.
but not others.
LABORAtORY ANo ExOtiC ANimAL OpHtHAlmOLoGy/439
Ophthaimic Diseases
ated with no clinical signs or conjunctivitis
These include the spirurids Ceratospira and
Avian ocular disorders may be generally albeit
Oxyspirura species in psittacines, mynahs,
imperfectly categorized as malformations,
and domestic and wild birds; the nematodes
inflammations, infections, degenerations, neo-
Thelazia species in a Senegal parrot, a
plasia, nutritional disorders, and traumatic
captive oriental white stork (Circonia boyci-
injuries.
ana), and a Setaria in passerines; and the
trematode Philophthalmus gralli in ostriches,
waterfowl, and other species. Treatment
Developmental Malformations
varies depending on the parasite and avian
species.
Developmental
malformations
have
been
reported infrequently. In one series of ocular
anomalies in sixteen raptors, the most common
Degenerations
lesion was microphthalmia.
Crystalline corneal degeneration of unknown
Ophthaimic Inflammations and
cause was found at necropsy in 8.7% of birds
Infections
at a quarantine station, most commonly in
cockatiels, budgerigars, ringnecked parakeets,
Amazon parrots, and Gouldian finches.
Ocular inflammation in birds originates
from infections, both primary ocular and
Lenticular degeneration with cataract devel-
systemic diseases; nonseptic inflammation,
opment has been commonly noted in domestic,
including presumptively immune-mediated
captive, and wild birds. Phacoemulsification
has been performed on raptors and macaws.
 processes; and traumatic injuries.
Bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, trema-
In most instances, intracameral injection of a
todes, and nematodes cause ocular disease in
curariform drug prior to surgery facilitated
birds. Avian poxvirus is responsible for the
mydriasis.
large majority of reported viral infections
Retinal degenerations in birds occur as
involving birds' eyes. A wide variety of species
inherited, postinflammatory, and posttraumatic
have been affected, including raptors, conures,
conditions. Hereditary retinal degeneration in
 mynahs, Amazon parrots, racing pigeons, bob.
Rhode Island Red chickens appears to follow
photoreceptor dysplasia. Retinal degenerations
white quail, peacocks, exotic pheasants, a whis-
ling swan, and canaries. Proliferative multifocal
due to inflammation or trauma are focal to
keratoconjunctivitis is the characteristic lesion;
multifocal, sometimes extensive enough to
cause blindness.
      
 sequelae to resolution of the lesions. Therapy
of pox lesions is directed toward prevention of
Neoplasia
secondary bacterial infection (by administra-
tion of topical and systemic antibiotics) and
Neoplasia involving the avian eye and adnexa
careful attention to hygiene (daily eyewash);
seem relatively uncommon. Marek's disease of
vitamin A administration (10,000-25,000 IU
chickens is the most common cause. Eyelid
per 300 g body weight weekly by intramuscu-
and conjunctival neoplasia has been rarely
lar injection）H
has also been empirically
reported.
recommended.
 In chickens, cataracts and iridocyclitis have
been associated with avian encephalomyelitis
Vitamin A Deficiency
infection. Marek's disease causes iridocyclitis
and secondary cataract.
Hypovitaminosis A, a common subclinical con-
Parasitic diseases occasionally cause avian
dition in cage birds, may predispose them to
ocular disease. Parasites are sometimes
diseases of the mucous membranes (e.g., kera-
found under the membrana nictitans, associ-
titis, conjunctivitis). Clinical deficiency may be
440 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
manifest as swollen eyelids due to conjunctival
removal. In owls, their very large tubular eyes
hyperkeratosis, mimicking pox lesions. Paren-
may be more easily enucleated if the auricular
teral and dietary vitamin A supplementation is
skin fold bordering the external ear is tran-
effective.
sected. During enucleation, special care must
be taken to avoid traction on the optic nerve?
Trauma
the fellow optic nerve can be avulsed easily due
 to its close proximity.
Traumatic ocular injury is frequent in
raptors and wild passerine birds (Fig. 14.15).
Mammals
 Injuries are often not confined to the eye and
 ocular injuries may be complex, involving
The class Mammalia is comprised of three sub-
external eye, anterior and/or posterior seg-
classes: placental mammals (the largest), mono-
ments. Even bony scleral ossicles are subject
tremes, and marsupials. Among the fteen
to injury and fracture. Perhaps because of
orders of placental mammals considerable
their relatively large eye size, fundus evalu-
diversity exists in normal anatomy, but in
ation is relatively easy in raptors; a high
general the eye conforms to the prototypical
prevalence of posterior segment injuries has
pattern.
been found, including retinal edema, tears,
Ocular examination in exotic mammals
 and detachment; intravitreal hemorrhage,
often requires manual restraint or chemical
especially surrounding the pecten; and per-
immobilization. Many, if not most, ocular
foration of the posterior segment. Secondary
disorders that afflict domestic carnivores
glaucoma occasionally results; globe enlarge-
and herbivores at least occasionally involve
ment, if present, is usually subtle, insofar as the
exotic species. In addition, husbandry and
rigid sclera probably limits the extent of buph-
management practices play a direct role in the
thalmos development.
development of ocular disease in some species
 a  a  s  
(e.g, marine mammal). Delivery of effective
lateral or a transaural approach. In some birds,
 therapy is often difficult and inconsistent, often
incision and collapse of the globe facilitates its
requiring inventive compromises.
Because of the large number of zoo mammals,
only examples of ophthalmic diseases will be
presented. More additional information, the
reader should consult the fourth edition of Vet-
Animal Ophthalmology").
Ophthaimic Malformations
The brain of a white tiger with strabismus
showed abnormal lamination of the lateral
geniculate nucleus similar to abnormalities
noted in other animals with reduced
pigmentation. Mink affected with Chediak-
Higashi syndrome have paleirides,photophobia,
and hypopigment atapetal fundi. An autosomal
recessive disorder, it is manifest in several
mammalian species as partial oculocutaneous
Fig. I4.15. Ocular fundus of great horned owl
albinism. Multiple ocular colobomas (eyelid,
subjected to head trauma. Intravitreal hemorrhage
optic nerve) and retinal dysplasia of probable
from the pecten overlies a large area of retinal edema
genetic origin have been reported in captive
and detachment
snow leopards on two continents. Eyelid agen-
LABORATORY AND ExOTIC ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY/441
esis was surgically corrected in a Geoffroy's cat
The filarid Elaeophora schneideri may
and a cougar. Congenital cataracts in two
cause unilateral or bilateral chorioretinitis
clouded leopards have been successfully
in elk. A vascular parasite, the nematode
removed by phacoemulsification.
infects and occludes the large arteries of the
head and neck, resulting in ischemic necro-
sis of the brain, eyes, and other tissues of
Ophthaimic Inflammations and
the head. Calves and yearlings are most
Infections
commonly affected. Blindness occurs with or
without neurologic deficits and may be second-
Most reported ocular inflammatory disorders
ary to ocular or central nervous system lesions
have been infectious. A few were not. Kerato-
or both. Retinal and optic nerve atrophy may
conjunctivitis has been reported in both
be visible ophthalmoscopically through toni-
wild and captive koalas in Australia due to
cally dilated pupils.
Chlamydia psittaci. Experimental and natu-
rally occurring infections follow a similar
course.Acute unilateral or bilateral infec-
Cataract Formation
tion may affect up to 30% of wild popula-
tions, most commonly in the summer
The causes of cataract include congenital defects
months. Serous ocular discharge, conjuncti-
(see above), advanced age, trauma, nutritional
val injection, and blepharospasm are fol-
deficiencies and imbalances, inherited defects
lowed by chemosis with eyelid eversion. By
of the lens, metabolic disorders and environ-
3 weeks after infection corneal neovasculariza-
mental effects. Cataracts of suspected nutri-
tion is evident and may progress to vision
tional origin in timber wolf pups were
impairment. Diagnosis is effected by culture of
ascribed to deficiency or imbalance of argi-
the organism or positive specific immunofluo-
nine. Posterior subcapsular sutural opacifi-
rescence of epithelial cells collected by con-
cation developed first in pups fed the
junctival or urogenital swab
commercial milk replacement diet from 9 to
Infectious keratoconjunctivitis of wild
10 days of age. Anterior cortical cataract fol-
ungulates has many of the same causes as in
lowed. By 2.5 weeks on the diet generalized
domestic cattle, sheep, and goats. An epizo-
cataract had developed. When the milk
otic of chlamydial keratoconjunctivitis that
replacement was discontinued in favor of
affected 60% of bighorn sheep in Yellow-
commercial dog food, the lens opacities par-
stone National Park resulted in significant
tially regressed, leaving perinuclear opaci-
mortality. Keratoconjunctivitis in wild mule
ties. Arginine deficiency was suspected after
deer was associated with infection with
dietary experiments with succeeding litters
chlamydia, Moraxella spp., and Thelazia
of wolves. An age susceptibility to cataracto-
californiensis.
genesis was demonstrated; pups receiving the
Keratitis in reindeer in Scandinavia has
deficient diet from 5 days of age were more
been extensively investigated. The clinical
severely affected than those receiving it after 12
signs appear identical to infectious bovine
days of age.
keratoconjunctivitis  in  North America.
Galactosemic cataracts have been reported
Summer epizootics occur in forest herds.
to occur in kangaroos, wallabies, wombats,
Microbiologic evaluation has documented
Australian possums, and cus cus. Affected
the presence of Neisseria ovis, Colesiota-like
animals have been orphaned or hand-reared
organisms, and other bacteria but the defini-
for other reasons and have received cow's
tive causative agent has not been conclu-
milk. These neonatal marsupials progress
sively determined.
through a monogastric phase of gastrointes-
Wallabies appear to be very susceptible
tinal development to a polygastric (rumi-
to toxoplasmosis. Uveitis has been noted in
nant) form of adult digestive system. Prior
captive wallabies, associated with cataract, mild
to maturity they may be variably deficient in
retinitis, and focal outer retinal degeneration.
either galactokinase or galactose-l-phos-
442 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
phate uridyl transferase, which limits con-
surgical repair and postoperative care are often
version of galactose in cow's milk to lactose.
significant challenges.
Dulcitol accumulation in the lens causes an
osmotic cataract. These nutritional cataracts
may be prevented by feeding proprietary
References
milk substitutes designed for human infants
with inherited galactosemia that lack galac-
Abou-Madi N, Kern TJ. Squamous cell carcinoma
tose and lactose. Surgical lensectomy has
associated with a periorbital mass in a veiled cha-
been generally unsuccessful because most
meleon (Chamaeleo calyptratus). Vet Ophthalmol
affected animals have vitreous opacified by
2002;5(3):217-220
Allgoewer I, Gobel T, Stockhaus C, et al. Dacryops
an unidentified material.
in a red-eared slider (Chrysemys scripia elegans):
case report. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5(3):231-
Diseases of the Ocular Fundus
234
Andrew SE. Corneal diseases in rabbits. Vet Clin N
Central retinal degeneration typical of taurine
Am: Exotic Anim Pract 2002;5:341-356
deficiency in the domestic cat was reported in
 Barnett KC, Lewis JCM. Multiple ocular colobomas
a white Bengal tiger in the United States and
in the snow leopard (Uncia unria). Vet Ophthal-
mol 2002;5(3):197-199
three unrelated cheetahsin Israel.Serum taurine
Bauck L. Ophthalmic conditions in pet rabbits and
level was lower in the white tiger compared
rodents. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989;1l:
to other orange tigers, but not low enough
258-268.
compared to domestic cats with 
central
 Bellhorn R. Laboratory animal ophthalmology.
retinal degeneration to account for the tiger's
In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 2nd
retinopathy.
ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1991. 656-
679.
Besch-Williford DL. Biology and medicine of the
Neoplasia
ferret. Vet Clin North Am 1987;17:1155-1183.
Bjerkas E, Holst JC, Bjerkas I, et al. Osmotic cataract
Neoplasia seems uncommon in exotic species
causes reduced vision in wild Atlantic salmon
and generally reported as individual  case
postsmolts. Dis Aquat Organ 2003;55:151-159.
reports. An example is an extensive corneal
Brooks DE. Avian cataracts. In: Murphy CJ, Paul-
squamous cell carcinoma in a 5 year old cheetah
Murphy J, eds. Seminars in avian and exotic pet
that was managed by exenteration; the animal
medicine—ophthalmology
Philadelphia:
WB
was free of local recurrence and radiographic
Saunders, 1997:131-137.
Brooks DE, McCracken MD, Collins BR. Heterotopic
evidence of thoracic metastasis one year later.
bone formation in the ciliary body of an aged
guinea pig. Lab Anim Sci 1991;40:88-90.
Nutritional Disorders
Burling K, Murphy CJ, Curiel JS, Koblick P, Bellhorn
RW. Anatomy of the rabbit nasolacrimal duct and
its clinical implications. Prog Vet Comp Ophthal-
Nutritional disorders have been rarely impli
cated in ocular disorders of exotic species.
mol 1991;1:33-40.
Chittick B, Harms C. Intraocular pressure of juvenile
Bilateral ocular lipidosis occurred in a 2-year-
loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) held in
      e  
different positions. Vet Rec 2001;149(19):587-
months. The rabbit is highly susceptible to
589
systemic manifestations of high dietary choles-
Coke RL, Couillard NK. Ocular biology and diseases
terol. Ocular lipidosis and aortic atherosclerosis
of Old World chameleons. Vet Clin N Am Exot
are readily induced by dietary manipulation.
Anim Pract 2002;5(2):275-285
Colitz CM, Lewbart G, Davidson MG. Phacoemulsi-
Fication in an adult Savannah monitor lizard. Vet
Trauma
Ophthalmol 2003;5(3):207-209.
Cooley PL. Phacoemulsification in a clouded leopard
Traumatic injury is no doubt a frequent cause
(Neofelis nebulosa). Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:113-
of ocular disease in nondomestic animals, and
117.
LABORAtORY ANo ExOTIC ANimaL OPHtHALmOLOGY/443
Cutler TJ. Bilateral eyelid agenesis repair in a captive
Lipsitz L, Ramsey DT, Render JA, Bursian SJ, Auel-
Texas cougar. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:143-148.
rich RJ. Persistent fetal intraocular vasculature in
Donnelly TM. Pink mass on the dorsomedial aspect
the European ferret (Mustela putorius): clinical
of a rabbit's eye: cherry eye or prolapse of the
and histological aspects. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:
deep gland of the nictating membrane. Lab Anim
29-33.
(NY) 2002;31:23-24
Loerzel SM,Smith PJ, Howe A,et al.Vecuronium
Dupont C, Carrier M, Gauvin J. Bilateral precorneal
bromide, phenylephrine and atropine combina-
membranous occlusion in a dwarf rabbit. J Small
tions as mydriatics in juvenile double-crested cor-
Exotic Anim Med 1995;3:41-44
morants (Phalacarocorax auritus). Vet Ophthalmol
Ersdal C, Midtlyng PJ, Jarp J. An epidemiological
2002;5:149-154
study of cataracts in seawater farmed Atlantic
Marini RP, Foltz CJ, Kersten D, Batchelder M, Kaser
salmon Salmo salar. Dis Aquat Organ 2001;
W, Li X. Microbiologic, radiographic and ana-
45(3):229-236
tomic study of the nasolacrimal duct apparatus in
Ferguson HW, Hawkins L, MacPhee DD, et al. Cho-
the rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus). Lab Anim Sci
roiditis and cataracts in Atlantic salmon (Salmo
1996;46:656-662
 salar L) recovering from subzero water tempera-
Miller PE. Ferret ophthalmology. Semin Avian Exotic
tures. Vet Rec 2004;155(11):333-334
Pet Med 1997;6:146-151
Fox JG, Pearson RC, Gorham JR. Viral and chla-
Miller PE, Dubielzig RR. Autosomal dominant
mydial diseases. In: Fox JG, ed. Biology and dis-
microphthalmia, cataract and retinal dysplasia in
 eases of the ferret. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger,
a laboratory colony of ferrets. Invest Ophthalmol
1988.
Vis Sci 1995;36:S64
Gionfriddo JR, Blair M. Congenital cataracts and
Miller PE, Marlar AB, Dubiezig RR. Cataracts in a
persistent hyaloid vasculature in a llama (Lama
laboratory colony of ferrets. Lab Anim Sci
glama). Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:65-70
1993;43:562-568
Good KL. Ocular disorders of pet ferrets. Vet
Millichamp NJ. Management of ocular disease in
Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2002;5:325-
exotic species. In: Murphy CJ, Paul-Murphy J,
339.
eds. Seminars in avian and exotic pet medicine.
Hatfield JR, Samuelson DA, Lewis PA, et al. Struc-
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1997:152-159
ture and presumptive function of the iridocorneal
Moore CP, Dubielzig R, Glaza SM. Anterior corneal
angle of the West Indian manatee (Irichehus
dystrophy of American Dutch belted rabbits: bio-
manaius), short-Finned pilot whale (Globicephala
microscopic and histopathological findings. Vet
marorhynchus), hippopotamus (Hippopoiamus
Pathol 1987;24:28-33
amphibius), and African elephant (Loxodonta afri-
Munger RJ, Langevin N, Podval J. Spontaneous cata-
cana). Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6(1):35-43
racts in laboratory rabbits. Vet Ophthalmol 2002
Kelly TR, Walton W, Nadelstein B, et al. Phacoemul-
5:177-181
sification of bilateral cataracts in a loggerhead sea
Murphy CJ, Brooks DE, Kern TJ, et al. Enucleation
turtle (Caretta caretta). Vet Rec 2005;156(24):
in birds of prey. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:
774.
1234
Kempster RC, Hall JS, Hirst LW, et al. Ocular
Nielsen JN, Carlton WW. Colobomatous microph-
response of the koala (Phascolarcios cinereus) to
thalmos in a New Zealand White rabbit, arising
infection with Chlamydia psittaci. Vet Comp Oph-
from a colony with suspected vitamin E defi-
thalmol 1996;6:14-17.
ciency. Lab Anim Sci 1995;45:320-322.
Kern TJ. Exotic animal ophthalmology. In: Gelatt
Ofri R, Horowitz IH, Levison M, et al. Intraocular
KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames,
pressure and tear production in captive eland and
IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1370-1405
fallow deer. J Wildl Dis 2001;37(2):387-390
Kern TJ. Rabbit and rodent ophthalmology. Sem
Ofri R, Horowitz IH, Raz D, et al. Intraocular pres-
Avian Exotic Pet Med 1997;6:138-145.
sure and tear production in five herbivorous wild-
 Kern TJ, Paul-Murphy J, Murphy CJ, et al. Disorders
life species. Vet Rec 2002;15l:265-268
of the third eyelid in birds: 17 cases. J Avian Med
Ramer JC, Paul-Murphy J, Brunson D, et al. Effects
Surg 1996;10: 12-18
of mydriatic agents in cockatoos, African gray
Knepper PA, McLane DG, Goossens W, Van Der
parrots, and Blue-fronted Amazon parrots. J Am
Hoek T, Higbee RG. Ultrastructural alterations
Vet Med Assoc 1996;208:227
in the aqueous outflow pathway of adult
Rubin LF. Ocular abnormalities in rats and mice: a
buphthalmic rabbits. Exp Eye Res 1991;52:523-
survey of commonly occurring conditions. Anim
533
Eye Res 1986;5:15-30.
444 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Sarogluy M, Yucel R, Aktas M. Granulomatous con-
Wagner F, Beinecke A, Fehr M, Brunkhorst N,
junctivitis in an ostrich.Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:
Mischke R, Gruber AD. Recurrent bilateral exoph-
337-339
thalmos associated with metastatic thymic carci-
Saunders IZ. Ophthalmic pathology in rats and
noma in a pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 2005
mice. In: Cotchin E, Roe FJC, eds. Pathology of
46:393-397.
laboratory rats and mice. Oxford: Blackwell Sci-
Wilcock BP, Dukes TW. The eye. In: Ferguson HW,
entific Publications, 1967. 349-371.
ed. Systemic pathology of Fish. Ames, IA: Iowa
Selmi AL, Mendes GM, MacManus C. Tonometry in
State University Press, 1989. 168
adult yellow-footed tortoises (Geochelone denticu-
Williams DL. Laboratory animal ophthalmology. In:
[ata). Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6(4):305-307
Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed.
Selmi AL, Mendes GM, McManus C, et al. Intraocu-
Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007. 1336-1369.
lar pressure determination in clinically normal
Williams DL. Ophthalmology. In: Mader DR, ed.
red-footed tortoise (Geochelone carbonaria). J Zoo
Reptile medicine and surgery. Philadelphia: WB
Wildl Med 2002;33(1):58-61.
Saunders, 1996. 175-184.
Shilton CM, Smith DA, Crawshaw G], et al. Corneal
Williams DL, Flach E. Symblepharon with aberrant
lipid deposition in Cuban tree frogs (Osteopilus
protrusion of the nictitating membrane in the
septentrionalis) and its relationship to serum lipids:
snowy owl (Nyctea scandiara). Vet Ophthalmol
an experimental study. J Zoo Wildl Med 2001;
2003;6:11-13.
32(3):305-319.
Williams DL, Simpson VR, Flindall A. Retinal dys-
Smith R, John SWM, Nishina PM, Sunderberg JP.
plasia in wild otters (Luxtra lura). Vet Rec 2004)
Systematic evaluation of the mouse eye: anatomy,
155:52-56.
pathology and biomethods. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Williams DL, Whitaker BR. The amphibian eye—a
Press, 2000.
6  14 l   
Van Herck H, Baumans V, Van der Craats NR,
18-28.
Stafleu FR, Beynen AC. Histological changes in
Willis AM, Anderson DE, Gemensky AJ, et al. Evalu-
the orbital region of rats after orbital bleeding. Lab
ation of intraocular pressure in eyes of clinically
Anim 1992;26:53-58.
normal llamas and alpacas. Am J Vet Res 2000;
Volopich S, Gruber A, Hassan J, Hittmair KM,
61(12):1542-1544
Schwendenwein I, Nell B. Malignant B-cell lym-
Wolfer J, Grahn B, Wilcock B, Percy D. Phacoclastic
phoma of the Harder's gland in a rabbit. Vet Oph-
lveitis in the rabbit. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
thalmol 2005;8:259-263
1993;3:92-97
Chapter 15
COMPARATIVE NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY
Merav H. Shamir and Ron Ofri
Many complex neurologic pathways
and
pupillary light reflex (PLR) is the best known
systems are involved in the innervation of the
and most widely used in clinical practice
eye, its associated structures, and the process
(Fig 15.l). The afferent pathway of the PLR
of vision. The "marriage" of neurology and oph-
runs through the optic nerve to the optic
thalmology permits patients exposure to the
chiasm, where most of the axons cross over to
best of each clinical specialty, as the inter-rela-
the contralateral side, through both optic tracts,
tionships of the CNS and visual system are
and over the lateral geniculate nuclei, to synapse
ascertained.
ventrally at the pretectal nuclei (PTN). These
 Lesion localization is an essential step in
nuclei, which form the frst synapse of this
the diagnosis of neurological and neuro-
pathway, are located in the transition zone
ophthalmological diseases, and available
between the diencephalon and the midbrain
diagnostics can provide a fairly precise indi-
Axons from each PTN relay to both the left
cation of the location of the lesion, and
and the right parasympathetic nuclei of
whether it is focal, multifocal or diffuse can
the oculomotor nerve (CN 111); however, the
be determined.
majority of axons will cross over (at the
This chapter is based on localization of the
caudal commissure) and synapse in the con-
lesion responsible for the different clinical syn-
tralateral parasympathetic nucleus. This
dromes that affect both the nervous and visual
parasympathetic nucleus, known as the
systems. For additional information, the reader
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, is located in the
should consult the fourth edition of Veterinary
tegmentum of the midbrain. Because each
Ophthalmology, chapter 29.
PTN relays to both Edinger Westphal nuclei,
both the right and the left pupils will con-
Neuro-Ophthalmic Reflexes
strict in response to light stimulation of
either eye. The constriction that occurs in the
Anatomical Basis of the Pupillary
stimulated eye is known as the direct PLR and
Light Reflex
the constriction of the contralateral, unstimu-
lated eye is called the consensual (or indirect)
Only 80% of the optic tract axons synapse
 PLR. Since the afferent PLR pathway contains
in the LGN. The remaining axons do not
two levels of fiber crossings, first at the optic
reach the LGN, and do not contribute to the
chiasm and later after exiting the PTN, in most
conscious perception of vision. Rather, these
species the direct PLR is stronger than the
axons form the afferent components
of
indirect one. More precisely, the direct PLR is
various ophthalmic reflexes, of which the
stronger in those species that have more than
445
446 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoloGY
Binocular Overlap
LEFT
RIGHT
VISUAL
VISUAL
FIELD
FIELD
Iris DilatoMuscla
Ir sConsirictor Muscle
Postganglion:c Parasynpaletic
pticNen
Neuran
Ciliary Ganglian
PreganglionicParasympathelicNeuron
Posgarglionic
Sympathetic Neuron
Oplic Tract
Parasympathelic Nucleus of the Third
Nerve (Edinger-Wesiphal Nucleus)
Laleral Genicu ate Body
Cranial Corvical Ganglion
Prcgaurglionic Sy:rpethetic_
Optic Radiations
Neuron
relectal NLcleus
CaudalCorrmissure
Lateral
Tectotegmen.ospinal
System
Visual Cortex
Thoracic Spinal
Fig. 15.1. Neural pathways for vision and control of pupillary behavior. The
unequal distribution of optic fbers at the optic chiasm and caudal commissure
differentiates PLRs of domestic animals from those of primates and humans.
Regarding the new neuroanatomy of the EW nucleus, the anteromedian nucleus
extending rostrally from the EW nucleus and the ventral tegmental area bordering
the descending root of the oculomotor nerve are the newly identifed sources of the
parasympathetic fibers going to the ciliary ganglion. The EW nucleus is the origin of
the neurons to the spinal cord and the cerebellar cortex and nuclei.
50% decussation at the optic chiasm. This is
into one eye to pass through and stimulate
because it is assumed that the same percentage
the contralateral retina, resulting in a pseu-
of fbers that cross over at the optic chiasm
doindirect PLR.
cross again between the pretectal nucleus and
the parasympathetic Edinger-Westphal nucleus
at the tegmentum.
Anatomicai Basis of the Dazzle Reflex
In species such as birds where all the
optic nerve fibers cross over, there is no
Another test available to evaluate part of the
consensual PLR. However, in some of the
visual pathway is the dazzle reflex. This
bird species, a thin interorbital septum sepa-
is a subcortical reflex that manifests as a
rating the two eyes may allow light shined
bilateral, partial eyelid blink in response to
COMPARATIVE NeURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY/447
a bright light shined in one eye at a time This
their first synapse in the LGN of the thala-
will induce a rapid, incomplete eyelid closure
mus. The LGN neurons relay the signal
ipsilaterally unless the facial nerve to the
through the optic radiation to the visual
eyelid is diseased. It willalso produce closure
cortex in the occipital lobe to enable visual
of the contralateral eye, though this reflex is
perception (see Fig. 15.1). Hence, this cortical
always less extensive than the closure in the
response that requires the entire peripheral and
stimulated eye. On occasion, a contralateral
central visual pathways, as well as the visual
closure may not be produced at all.
cortex and the facial nucleus of cranial nerve
Though the anatomical path of the dazzle
VII, to be intact for the response to occur.
reflex has not been elucidated in animals, evi-
dence from the human literature suggests that
Anatomical Basis of Vestibular Eye
it is present when the optic nerve is intact to
Movements and Giobe Position
the level of the midbrain, and particularly to
reflex centers in the rostral colliculi and/or the
The vestibular system is responsible for
supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. The
detecting movements of the head, as well as
reflex also requires association fibers between
changes in the position of the head in rela-
these nuclei to the facial nuclei in the medulla.
tion to gravity, and to relay this information
as well as intact facial nerves. Controversy still
to different sites and nuclei of the central
exists regarding whether the dazzle reflex
nervous system (CNS). This information will
derives from a cortical arc or a subcortical
then be used to elicit the proper responses of
connection.
various body organs, including the eyes, to the
The dazzle reflex is particularly useful
changes in head position. The physiological
when the pupils can not be observed to eval-
requirement for vestibular eye movement is
uate the PLR (e.g., in cases of severe corneal
derived from the fact that the sense of vision
edema, iridal atrophy, or hyphema). However,
performs optimally  when images are held
as the exact anatomical pathway of this reflex
steady on the retina.
has not been described, this test can not be
The vestibular system includes a peripheral
used as an only tool for localizing subcortical
and a central part. The central vestibular system
lesions in the visual pathway.
consists of the vestibular nuclei located in the
medulla, and the floculonodular lobe of the
Visual Relays to Other Nuclei of the
cerebellum, which inputs and outputs vestibu-
lar information through the caudal cerebellar
Brain Stem
peduncle. The peripheral component of the
As noted, 20% of the optic tract axons bypass
vestibular system is comprised of the inner ear
the lateral geniculate nucleus. While many
organ and the vestibular nerve (part of cranial
of these form the afferent component of the
nerve VIII).
PLR, others enter the left or right rostral
Innervation of the Eye and Its
colliculi. The rostral colliculus thus consti-
Accessory Organs
 tutes an important nucleus, responsible for
coordinating eye and head movement in
The nerve supply of the eye comes from six
response to visual stimuli, and relay to the
different cranial nerves, not counting the optic
ascending reticular formation.
nerve (cranial nerve II). Some of these innervate
the eye itself, while others innervate the acces-
The Anatomical Basis of the Menace
sory structures of the eye.
Response
Innervation of the Extraocular
Most of the optic nerve axons are dedicated to
Muscles
relaying the visual signal generated by the retina
to the cerebral cortex. After crossing over in
There are four pairs of somatic efferent nuclei
the optic chiasm, the optic tract axons form
arranged in line along the brain stem. Three of
448 /EsSEnTIALS OF VetERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
these somatic efferent nuclei innervate the stri-
orbital cone. Therefore, contraction of the
ated extraocular muscles of the eye (which are
dorsal rectus muscle, for example, would not
derived from the embryonic head myotomes),
only pull the eye dorsally, but will also rotate
and one gives rise to the hypoglossal nerve sup-
it slightly medially. To overcome this deviation,
plying the muscles of the tongue.
none of the extraocular muscles ever act singly.
The most rostral pair of motor nuclei is
The role of the retractor bulbi muscle is to
that of the oculomotor nerve. These motor
retract the eye upon contraction.
nuclei are embedded deep in the tegmentum
of the midbrain, exit the base of the brain-
stem, and enter the orbit through the orbital
Sympathetic Innervation of the Eye
fissure. After entering the orbit, it sends
branches to the ventral oblique and to the
The sympathetic innervation of the eye con-
dorsal, medial and ventral rectus muscles,
sists of a central and a peripheral compo-
but it also innervates the superior levator
nent, and innervates the smooth muscles of
palpebral muscle, and provides parasympa-
the periorbita, Miller's muscles of the upper
thetic innervation to the iris and ciliary body
and lower eyelids and the dilator muscle of
(thus controlling pupillary constriction and
the iris. The central component originates at
lens accommodation, respectively).
the caudal nuclei of the hypothalamus. Its fibers
The trochlear nerve (cranial nerve IV) is the
run along the cervical spinal cord through tec-
        
totegmentospinal tracts, to synapse on the pre-
cross over to the contralateral side. Within the
 ganglionic cell bodies located in the middle (or
tegmentum of the midbrain, motor nucleus
intermediate) horn of the gray column of the
of the trochlear nerve exits from the dorsal
first three thoracic spinal cord segments. Axons
surface of the brain stem, and eventually
 of these preganglionic cells join the ventral
enters the orbit through the orbital fissure
roots of these three spinal segments to exit the
to innervate the dorsal oblique muscle.
spinal cord as part of the three respective seg-
The motor nuclei of the abducent nerve
mental spinal nerves. This exit point marks the
lies just ventral to the floor of the fourth
end of the central component, and beginning
ventricle, in the rostral part of the medulla
of the peripheral component, of the sympa-
oblongata. The nerve then enters the orbit
thetic system of the eye. As each spinal nerve
through the orbital fissure, together with
exits the vertebral column, fibers of its respec-
cranial nerves Ill and IV, and innervates the
tive preganglionic sympathetic neurons leave
lateral rectus and the retractor
bulbi
the main peripheral nerve through the ramus
muscles.
communicans, to join the thoracic sympathetic
Most mammals (with the notable exception
 trunk. The sympathetic axons originating from
of primates) have seven extraocular musclesi
these three spinal segments join together as
four recti, two obliques, and a retractor. With
 they pass through (without synapsing) the cer-
the exception of the ventral oblique muscle
vicothoracic and middle cervical ganglia. The
(which originates from a depression in the ven-
fbers continue cranially in the cervical sympa-
tromedial wall of the orbit), all of the extraocu-
thetic trunk as part of the vagosympathetic
lar muscles originate at the vicinity of the orbital
trunk of the neck
apex (i.e., the annulus of Zinn) and insert ante-
The peripheral part of the autonomic nervous
riorly to the equator. While the basic function
 system is composed of two neurons. The first
of the four rectus muscles is to rotate the
neuron has its cell body located within the
eye in the direction implied by their name,
central nervous system, either in one of the
movement of the eye is much more complex
cranial nerves nuclei or in the gray matter of
than the origins and insertions of individual
the spinal cord. Axons of this neuron will
muscles suggest. This is because the rectus
synapse in a peripheral ganglion, and therefore
muscles arise slightly medioventrally to the
the first neuron is also called the preganglionic
exact orbital apex. As a result, the visual axis
neuron. The cell body of the second neuron is
of the eye does not coincide with the axis of the
located in the peripheral ganglion and its axons
CompArative Neuro-OpHtHalmoloGy/449
travel all the way to the target organs; this
of the face, including those responsible for
second neuron is therefore called the postgan-
eye closure. The lateral portion of this general
glionic neuron.
somatic efferent column is divided into 3 motor
The peripheral parasympathetic innerva-
nuclei: the trigeminal, the facial and the nucleus
tion to the eye and its accessory organs is
ambiguus. The frst two innervate the striated
delivered by two cranial nerves, the oculo-
masticatory and mimetic muscles through the
motor (11l) and facial (Vl1) nerves. Cranial
trigeminal and facial nerves, respectively. The
nerve Ill innervates the iridal constrictor
nucleus ambiguus innervates the laryngeal and
muscle and cranial nerve Vll supplies the
pharyngeal muscles through the glossopharyn-
tear production glands of the eye. Obviously.
 geal and the vagus nerves.
both of these nerves have other ocular func-
The facial nerve exits the brain stem together
tions {i.e., innervating some of the extraocular
with the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve
and eyelid muscles, respectively); however,
VIII) at the lateral extremity of the trapezoid
these are somatic efferent functions, and do not
body, and the two nerves run within a common
constitute part of the autonomic nervous
meningeal sheath to the internal acoustic
system.
meatus of the petrous temporal bone. Here the
A lesion to the sympathetic innervation of
two nerves part and the facial nerve enters the
the eye can be located anywhere from the
facial  canal  t
that leads to the stilomastoid
hypothalamus, along the tectotegmentospi-
foramen. Through this foramen the nerve exits
nal pathway of the spinal cord, through the
the petrous temporal bone, to emerge at the
cervical sympathetic trunk in the neck and
surface of the skull. The main trunk turns
all the way to the eye. Such a lesion will
around the mandible, gives off the dorsal and
affect all of the smooth muscles innervated
ventral buccal branches, and continues as the
by the sympathetic system. The periorbital
auriculopalpebral nerve. The auriculopalpebral
muscles counteract the action of the retrac-
nerve crosses the zygomatic arch, heading for
tor bulbi muscle. Therefore, their denervation
 the space between the upper eyelid and the ear.
will result in eye ball retraction and enophthal-
There, the nerve divides into two branches, the
mus, leading to a slight narrowing of the pal-
rostral auricular and zygomatic branches. The
pebral fssure. The palpebral fissure will be
Zygomatic branch terminates in nerves that
further narrowed by the relaxation of the
 supply the orbicularis oculi, retractor anguli
mo pu naddn al j sasn sa yo
oculi lateralis and retractor anguli oculi
eyelids. This drooping is more noticeable in the
medialis muscles, which are responsible for
upper eyelid, and is called ptosis. Protrusion of
the blinking response.
the third eyelid will also occur and will be more
 Elevation of the upper eyelid is controlled
noticeable in the cat, as in this species some of
by the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve 111),
the sympathetic axons terminate in the smooth
which provides a branch that innervates the
muscle of the nictitans. Since the smooth
 levator palpebral superior muscle.
muscles that dilate the iris counteract the action
Sympathetic tone also plays a role in
of the iridal sphincter reduced sympathetic
eyelid opening, and contributes to the
tone to these muscles will always result in
 anterior position of the eye within the orbit.
miotic pupil, due to parasympathetic stimula-
This is evident, as sympathetic denervation
tion by the oculomotor nerve.
results in ptosis of the upper eyelid and
enophthalmos.
Efferent Innervation to the Eyelids
Innervation of the Lacrimal Glands
Somatic nerve fibers coming from the motor
component of the facial nerve (cranial nerve
The preganglionic parasympathetic neurons
VI1) originate in the facial part of the general
responsible for lacrimal secretion originate
somatic efferent column of the brain stem.
from the parasympathetic nucleus of the
These fibers innervate the mimetic muscles
facial nerve (i.e., the rostral salivatory
450 /ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
nucleus) in the rostral portion of the medulla
system innervates the iris sphincter muscle,
oblongata. The lacrimal gland's preganglionic
while the sympathetic system innervates the iris
parasympathetic fibers run as part of the facial
dilator muscle. However, this is probably an
nerve through the facial canal of the petrous
oversimplification of the autonomic control of
temporal bone. The facial nerve exits the canal
the pupil. Studies done over the years have
via a sharp convexity (genu) where it carries the
demonstrated that the iris sphincter and dilator
geniculate ganglion. At this point, the parasym-
muscles receive reciprocal innervation by both
pathetic fibers (which will innervate the secre-
the sympathetic and the parasympathetic
tions of the lacrimal gland) leave the main
systems. The combined and synergistic func-
trunk of the facial as the greater petrosal nerve.
tioning of both the sympathetic and the para-
This (parasympathetic) nerve is joined by post-
sympathetic autonomic systems on the iris
 ganglionic sympathetic fbers from the cervical
sphincter and dilator muscles influence not
ganglion, and together form an autonomic
only the final pupillary size, but also determine
nerve, called the nerve of the pterygoid canal.
the rate of pupil dilation and constriction.
which contains preganglionic parasympathetic,
There are differences in the anatomy of
postganglionic sympathetic and sensory (i.e.,
the canine and feline short ciliary nerves.
visceral afferent fibers and special visceral affer-
Two short ciliary nerves arise from the
ent fibers) nerve fbers. Sensory innervation to
ciliary ganglion in the cat. The lateral one is
the lacrimal gland is provided by the lacrimal
referred to as the malar nerve, whereas the
nerve, the frst branch of the ophthalmic nerve
medial nerve is also called nasal. The malar
after it enters the orbit through the orbital
nerve innervates the lateral half of the iridal
fissure (see the section “Sensory (Afferent)
sphincter muscle, and the nasal nerve inner-
Innervation of the Eye and Accessory Organs'
vates the medial half of the sphincter. There-
below).
fore, parasympathetic denervation in the dog
will cause pupillary dilation, while in the cat
lesions to either the nasal or the malar short
Innervation of the fris
ciliary nerves will result in sphincter hemiple-
lldnd padeus C-pasiaaai 1o padeus-a e pue e
Two groups of antagonistic muscles within
respectively (Figs. 15.2A through C)
the iris control the pupillary size, shape and
reaction to light. One is the dilator muscle,
which consists of smooth muscle fibers dis-
Innervation of the Ciliary Body and
tributed radially throughout the iris. The
Lenticuiar Accommodation
other is the iridal sphincter, a circular
smooth muscle, with its fibers forming a
The ciliary body forms a ring along the inner
ring around the pupillary margin. Tradition-
wall of the globe, extending from the iris ante-
ally, it has been stated that the parasympathetic
riorly to the ora serrata posteriorly, and is frmly
一
Fig. 15.2. Feline hemidilated pupil. A. Experimental transection of the right malar short ciliary nerve, causing
a reversed-D pupil. B. Clinical lesion of left malar nerve, causing a D pupil. C. A reversed-D pupil in a clinical
case. (Part B courtesy of L. Campbell.)
COMPARATIvE NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY/451
attached to the sclera at the scleral spur. The
cells in the facial nerve nucleus. As a result of
larger mass of the mammalian ciliary body is a
activation of this reflex arc, sensory stimula-
smooth muscle that is arranged in three
tion of the cornea leads to closure of the
bundles: longitudinal, radial and circular,
eyelids and an increase in tear production.
though the proportion of these three bundles
The mandibular branch is the only branch
changes between species, and one to two of the
that contains both trigeminal sensory and motor
bundles may be altogether absent in some
fbers, providing motoric innervation to the
species. The ciliary body is innervated by a
masticatory muscles, and sensory innervation
plexus of myelinated and nonmyelinated
to the mouth, lower face and ear. The ophthal-
fibers that are branches from the long and
mic and maxillary branches, which are both
short ciliary nerves. Parasympathetic fbers
purely sensory at this level, provide sensory
originating in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus of
innervation to the eye and its accessory struc-
the third cranial nerve enter the orbit and
tures. Upon entering the orbit, the ophthalmic
synapse at the ciliary ganglion. Postsynaptic
nerve (i.e., the ophthalmic branch of the tri-
fibers exit the ganglion and enter the globe
 geminal nerve) divides into three branches, the
within the short ciliary nerves to form extensive
frontal, lacrimal, and nasociliary nerves. The lac-
plexuses within the ciliary muscles.
       
The sensory innervation to the iris, ciliary
orbit, and gives branches to the lacrimal gland,
body, choroid, sclera and cornea is also
to the upper eyelid and and to the skin in the
provided by the short and long ciliary
lateral canthal region of the eye. The frontal
nerves.
nerve innervates the upper eyelid, the forehead
The purpose of the relaxation and contrac-
and the mucosa of the frontal sinus. The naso-
tion of the ciliary muscle is to change the refrac-
ciliary branch is the first division to enter the
tive power of the lens, in order to bring the
orbit, where it gives origin to a sensory root,
images of objects at different distances into
which passes through the ciliary ganglion to
focus on the retina. This is accomplished
contribute to the short ciliary nerves. Later on,
through two antagonistic processes. Accommo-
the nasociliary nerve reaches the medial side
dation (in mammals) is an active process of
of the optic nerve and gives off two to three
ciliary muscle contraction that increases the
branches that form the long ciliary nerves. The
refractive power of the lens following para-
3a aul jo ioadse niod al aeauad r
sympathetic stimulation. Disaccommodation
to innervate the cornea and iris, and conduct
(in mammals) is a process of ciliary muscle
somatosensory innervation from the ciliary
relaxation that decreases the refractive
body, trabecular meshwork and sclera. The
power of the lens following sympathetic
third division of the nasociliary nerve is the
stimulation. Accommodation is used to bring
infratrochlear nerve, which provides sensory
nearby objects into focus, while disaccommo-
innervation to the skin and conjunctiva in the
dation is used to bring distant objects into
medial canthal region (as well as parts of the
focus.
frontal sinus mucosa)
The largest division of the trigeminal nerve
is the maxillary nerve, which provides sensory
Sensory (Afferent) Innervation of the
Eye and Accessory Organs
nasopharynx. The first branch of the maxillary
nerve, the zygomatic nerve, detaches within the
The trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) is the
pterygoidpalatine fossa and enters the orbit
main sensory nerve to the face. Its ophthalmic
through the rostral alar foramen (also known
and maxillary divisions are those that provide
as the round foramen). In ruminants, the orbital
sensory innervation to the eye and its accessory
fissure and the rostral alar combined to form
organs. For example, neurons in the trigeminal
the foramen orbitorotundum. The zygomatic
nucleus receive sensory stimulation from the
nerve provides the afferent limbs of the pal-
cornea through cells in the trigeminal ganglion,
pebral reflexes that stimulate the orbicularis
and produce a reflex response by stimulating
oculi to blink when the lids (sensory to the
452 /EssentiAlS OoF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
cornea is by the long ciliary branch of the
nasociliary nerve) are touched. This is done
Box 15.1. Components of the
through its two terminal branches, the zygo-
Neuro-Ophthalmic Examination
maticofacial branch, that innervates the skin and
conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, and the zygo-
History: General medical, neurologic disturbances,
vision  (day/night/near/far/stationary  objects/
maticotemporal branch that innervates the skin
moving objects). Medications. Evidence of pain.
and conjunctiva of the lower eyelid.
Pupil evaluation: Symmetry: pupillary light reflex
and  swinging  flashlight/cover-uncover;  dark
adaptation test.
Innervation of the Cornea
Evaluate eye movements: Range of eye movements;
vestibulo-ocular reflex; saccadic movements; eye
The cornea is highly sensitive to touch and
alignment.
painful stimuli. Branches of the long ciliary
Evaluate eyelid movement: Corneal blink reflex;
 dazzle reflex; menace response.
nerves enter the corneal stroma in a radial
Eyeball retraction response (ERR) and third-eyelid 
manner from the sclera, episclera and con-
protrusion sign
junctiva. Once within the stroma all myelin-
Estimate vision: Photopic and scotopic obstacle
ated fibers lose their myelin sheaths, and
course; electroretinography:  visual evoked
form an unmyelinated sensory nerve plexus.
response; visual cliff: visual placing reaction;
This plexus provides the cornea with the
visual fields
densest three-dimensional network of sensory
nerves in the body. Corneal touch threshold
positioning, and in pupillary, eyelid, or globe
(CTT) in measured by the Cochet-Bonnet
movement.
esthesiometer and by the amount of stimuli
required to elicit the corneal blink reflex.
Humans possess the greatest corneal sensitivity
Postretinal Blindness
and lowest CTT, and are followed, in order of
decreasing sensitivity, by the cat, rabbit, and
Postretinal blindness can be caused by a
dog. In the dog it has been demonstrated that
 disease process anywhere along the afferent
the central cornea is the most sensitive region,
visual pathway. Absence of PLR in a blind
followed by the nasal and temporal cornea and
eye implies that the lesion is in the optic
this same pattern exists in humans.
nerve, chiasm or rostral part of the optic
tract; if present there may be more caudal
lesions, including those of the lateral genicu-
Neuro-Ophthalmic Examination
late nucleus, optic radiation, and the visual
cortex.
Using the information from the neuro-ophthal-
mic anatomy introduction, lesions of specific
Optic Nerve Diseases Causing
areas can result in clinical signs that can assist
Blindness
in the determination of the site lesion, possible
causes, prognosis and therapies. The different
Optic neuropathy can be caused by degenera-
components of this examination are summa-
tive, ischemic, inflammatory or compressive
rized in Box 15.1.
conditions. Ophthalmic examination of the
fundus and optic disc followed by ERG can
help differentiate primary retinal from optic
Differential Diagnosis of
nerve disease, as the signal is extinguished or
Neuro-Ophthalmological
normal, respectively. The most common, and
Syndromes
important, optic nerve disease is optic neuritis;
infectious causes of optic nerve inflammation
This section describes the differential diagnosis
include viral (distemper, tick-borne encephali-
for each of these deficits, that is, the diseases
tis virus), fungal (cryptococcsis), protozoal
that can cause abnormalities in vision, in globe
(toxoplasmosis), and bacterial diseases. Nonin-
COMPARATIve NEurO-OpHTHAlmOLOGY/453
fectious causes of optic neuritis include
gland. These tumors may compress the optic
granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME).
chiasm, and cause visual field deficits. Com-
meningitis, neoplasia, trauma, or an abscess in
 promised vision will usually only be noticed
CNS regions where the optic nerve passes (espe-
very late in the development of the mass.
cially at the optic chiasm). In most cases, no
Tumors of the pituitary gland are more com-
primary cause of inflammation can be deter-
monly associated with endocrinological abnor-
mined, and the disease is defined as idiopathic.
malities than with motor dysfunction or other
The clinical signs of optic neuritis are
neurological deficits.
usually a fixed, dilated pupil. The disease is
usually bilateral and acute, so most patients
Diseases of the Optic Tracts Causing
will present with sudden onset blindness.
The optic disc may appear normal or
Blindness
inflammed (e.g., edematous, hemorrhagic)
The most common bilateral optic tract
depending on which part of the nerve is
disease is demyelination, resulting in atten-
involved. If the rostral part of the optic nerve is
involved, papilledema and vascular congestion
uation of neuronal transmission. Demyelin-
of the optic disc are seen on examination of the
ation of the optic tract is usually caused by
fundus. Atrophy of the optic disc is noticed as
degenerative or inflammatory (infectious)
diseases.A common cause is canine dis-
the disease resolves. Inflammation of more
 temper virus, which was found to have a
caudal parts of the nerve may present with a
predilection for causing disease in both
normal-looking disc. Treatment of optic neu-
ritis is based on identifying and treating the
optic tracts simultaneously. Demyelination
primary cause. Systemic steroids should be
may also be observed in globoid cell
administered if no systemic cause is found.
leukodystrophy.
Neoplastic diseases may also affect the optic
nerve. Tumors, such as lymphosarcoma, can
Diseases of the Lateral Geniculate
infiltrate any part of the visual pathway and can
Nucleus Causing Blindness
present as a unilateral or bilateral visual deficit
(depending on the exact site of infiltration).
The lateral geniculate nucleus may be affected
Compression of the optic nerve by a tumor will
by diseases of the thalamus. If the lesion is
cause papilledema, followed by atrophy of the
restricted to the lateral geniculate nucleus itself,
optic disc. GME, a suspected immune mediated
normal PLR is expected. If the thalamic disease
inflammatory process, can present with clinical
process is more diffuse and involves the rostral
signs similar to a neoplastic disease. Granulo-
part of the optic tract, the PLR may be sluggish
matous lesions can infltrate or compress the
or absent. Any multifocal or diffuse brain
optic nerve and also cause atrophy or swelling
disease may involve the thalamus and the LGN
of the optic disc.
d  Ads NT a nae i sisra
Hypovitaminosis A in calves causes abnor-
erentially are rare.
mal bone growth and narrowing of the optic
foramen, resulting in secondary compres-
sion of the optic nerve. This produces initial
Diseases of the Optic Radiation and
papilledema, with subsequent retinal degen-
Visual Cortex Causing Blindness
eration. The disease is more common in
cattle than in companion animals.
Diffuse cerebral disease is usually mani-
fested as absent or reduced voluntary move-
ments of the limbs, altered postural reactions
Diseases of the Optic Chiasm Causing
and noticeable changes in the behavior and
Blindness
mental status of the patient. These signs
have little value in helping the clinician
The most common optic chiasm disease
localize the lesion, but should direct his/her
causing blindness is tumors of the pituitary
attention to the area of the forebrain. Possi-
454 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
ble causes are space-occupying lesions, hem-
Other tumors in the neck, such as thyroid
orrhage, or edema.
carcinoma or neurofibroma that will incor-
Hydrocephalus is defined as an excessive
porate the vagosympathetic trunk, will also
accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in
cause Horner's syndrome without any other
the lateral ventricles or subarachnoid space.
neurological signs (Table 15.1).
The disease may be congenital, developmental
or acquired (due to any infectious, inflamma-
Horner's Syndrome Presenting with
tory, or neoplastic disease processes in the
Additional Neurological Deficits
brain). As the optic radiations constitute the
caudal part of the internal capsule, they may be
Disease affecting the first three thoracic spinal
affected by the pressure elevation, thus causing
cord segments will usually cause compromised
visual impairment. The pressure elevation also
gait, with proprioception defcits of the hind
causes compression of the primary visual cortex
limbs. If the damage is severe enough, or cen-
in the occipital lobes, thus further contributing
tered at the lateral horn of the grey matter in
to the visual deficits. A more common ocular
these segments, then Horner's syndrome will
manifestation of congenital hydrocephalus is
be observed at the same side as the lesion.
probably bilateral ventrolateral strabismus
Acute injuries that are characteristic of this
(sunset eyes) caused by orbital skull malfor-
 region include trauma, infarction and fbrocar-
mations. On rare occasions, congenital
 tilagenous embolism. Progressive disease may
hydrocephalus will also cause papilledema.
be caused by neoplasia.
Common metabolic causes of cortical blind-
In dogs and cats, diseases restricted to the
ness include hypoglycemia, hepatic encepha-
middle ear will cause Horner's syndrome that
lopathy, uremic encephalopathy and hypoxia.
is not associated with additional neurological
Inflammation of the cerebral cortex will also
deficits. However, most of these diseases are
result in cortical blindness. Granulomatous
infectious, and therefore spread to the inner
meningoencephalitis is a common inflamma-
ear, causing otitis media and interna. Involve-
tory disease of the CNS in the dog. Another
ment of the inner ear and the surrounding
common inflammatory disease of the cortex
petrosal bone will affect the vestibular and
that is prevalent in small breed dogs is necrotiz-
facial nerve. Therefore, the patient will present
ing meningoencephalitis (NME). In Pugs and
with Horner's syndrome, combined with ves-
Maltese dogs, the disease affects mainly the
tibular signs and facial nerve paralysis.
cerebral hemispheres, while in the Yorkshire
In the horse, the cranial cervical ganglion
Terrier the brain stem is also affected. Clinical
is located in the wall of the guttural pouch,
signs are compatible with forebrain dysfunc-
below Cl, and therefore it is affected by
tion, and include seizures, circling, obtunda-
diseases of the pouch (Fig. 15.3). Aspergil-
tion, head pressing and visual deficits with
losis and streptococcus infections of the
normal PLR
In cattle, infarction of the cerebral white
pouch may cause Horner's syndrome com-
bined with laryngeal and facial paresis.
matter by septic vasculitis and thrombosis may
be caused by Hemophilus somnus. The resulting
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis (TME)
Differential Diagnosis of Abnormal
may cause visual deficits.
Vestibuiar Eye Movements
(Pathological Nystagmus)
Horner's Syndrome with No Other
Abnormal vestibular eye movements are caused
Neurological Deficits
by disease processes affecting the vestibular
organ of the inner ear, the vestibular nerve or
Lymphosarcoma involving the cranial tho-
the cranial nerve nuclei innervating the extra-
racic or caudal cervical sympathetic trunk,
ocular muscles (cranial nerves IIl, IV, and VI)
or any tumor involving lymph nodes at the
Abnormal vestibular eye movements are more
thoracic inlet, can cause Horner's syndrome.
commonly caused by the former rather than the
COMPARATIVE NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY/455
Table 15.1. Clinical Signs of Horner's Syndrome in Animals.
Qinical Signs
Further Explanations
shop pue stey
Miosis (ipsilateral)
For preganglionic lesions, the chance for recovery of pupillary function is better than that
with postganglionic lesions. Recovery should not be expected beyond 6 months. Lesions
 Anisocoria
Degree of anisocoria varies depending on background illumination. Anisocoria becomes
'loeujwn! buseaisu! ynm juaedde ssal pue ssauyiep ul paounouoid anou
Sympathetic ptosis
Sympathetic ptosis results from a loss of sympathetic supply to Muller's muscle, which is
a smooth muscle of the eyelids. A topical sympathomimetic will transiently resolve a
 syrmpathetic ptosis, but it will have no effect on ptosis of other causes.
Narrowed palpebral
Sympathetic ptosis of the upper eyelid, either alone or in conjunction with reverse ptosis
fissure
(i.e., elevation of the lower eyelid frorm decreased sympathetic supply to Miller's muscle
in the lower eyelid), creates a narrowed palpebral fissure, which in turn often creates an
impression of enophthalmos when, in fact, there is none.
 Enophthalmos
Result of oculosympathetic denervation and subsequent relaxation of the orbital smooth
musdles that encircle and are part of the periorbita
Protrusion of TE
Protrusion of the nictitans of the third eyelid results from denervation of the two smooth
muscles of the third eyelid (i.e., medial and ventral smooth muscles of the third eyelid).
 at least in the cat.
Horses
In addition to the clinical signs seen in dogs and cats, regional sweating and
hyperthermia (head and neck)
Cattle
In addition to those clinical signs seen in dogs and cats, vascular engorgement of the
 pinna, hyperthermia of the face and head, and absence of sweating on the planum
nasale
latter. In other words, they are usually caused
by peripheral, rather than central, lesions. The
most common peripheral diseases causing
pathological nystagmus are those of the middle/
inner ear.
 Pendular nystagmus has been reported as an
 inherited problem in several species. In Siamese
and white cats with abnormal crossover pat-
terns of the optic nerve fbers often have pen-
dular nystagmus, combined with medial
strabismus, but normal vestibular eye move-
ments. Pendular nystagmus has also been
reported to be inherited in some breeds of dairy
cows, and a familial problem in Ayrshire
bulls.
Cavernous Sinus Syndrome and
Fig. I5.3. Horner's syndrome in a horse. Note the
Orbital Fissure Syndromes
regional sweating above the orbit.
In the dog. cat and horse, the oculomotor,
trochlear and abducent cranial nerves, as well
as the mandibular and ophthalmic branches of
the trigeminal nerve, course together through
456 /EsSENTIALS OF VEtERiNARY OpHTHALmOLOGY
the lateral aspect of the cavernous sinus, on the
 of the lesion. One study showed that space-
floor of the middle cranial fossa, before enter-
occupying tumors are the cause in the dog.
ing the orbit through the orbital fissure (in
whereas in the cat both neoplastic and inflam-
cattle, the nerves enter the orbit through the
matory causes were found
 orbitorotundum). Therefore, in these species,
lesions in these locations, causing an orbital
Differential Diagnosis of Diseases
fissure syndrome or a cavernous sinus syn-
Causing Strabismus
drome, will present with clinical signs com-
patible with dysfunction of all of these
Strabismus in which one or both eyes turn
nerves. Collectively, these signs are called
medially toward the nose is called esotropia or
complete (internal and external) ophthalmo-
convergent strabismus. Strabismus in which
plegia (Fig. 15.4). External ophthalmoplegia
one or both eyes are directed laterally is called
includes ipsilateral ptosis, an inability to
exotropia, or divergent strabismus. Strabismus
retract the eye, and lateral strabismus with
may be caused by lesions to the nuclei or cranial
an inability to rotate the globe dorsally, ven-
nerves innervating the extraocular muscles, by
trally or medially. Internal ophthalmoplegia
vestibular lesions, or by pathologies affecting
resulting from a lesion to the oculomotor
the extraocular muscles or orbit
nerve providing parasympathetic innerva-
As noted earlier, congenital strabismus,
tion of the iridal sphincter will cause a
usually esotropic, occurs in Siamese and Hima-
dilated pupil that does not constrict upon
layan cats, caused by a higher proportion of
direct or indirect (from the unaffected eye)
retinal ganglion cells that cross over and project
light stimulation; however, stimulating the
to the contralateral thalamus and visual cortex
affected eye will cause consensual constric-
(Fig. 15.5). The condition is believed to be
tion in the unaffected eye. Because of the
related to the color genes controlling pigmenta-
involvement of the trigeminal nerve, both syn-
tion of the eye and hair coat, as melanin is
dromes are also characterized by decreased
essential for the correct routing of optic nerve
corneal sensation, and the animal may present
fbers from the ganglion cells to the LGN during
with decreased or absent corneal blink reflex,
embryonic development. The esotropia is an
and possible neuroparalytic keratitis. Com-
attempt by the animal to compensate for the
puted tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
abnormal visual input resulting from the
imaging (MRI) used to visualize the intracranial
misrouting of the optic nerve axons. The stra-
structures, however, can determine the location
bismus is frequently accompanied by pendular
nystagmus.
Fig. 15.4. Cavernous sinus syndrome in the right
Fig. 15.5. A Siamese cat with bilateral unequal
side of a Pinscher dog. Clinical signs included
esotropia. Note that the corneal reflex (light spot) on
ipsilateral mydriasis, ophthalmoplegia, and atrophy of
each corneal surface is not in the same position,
the masticatory muscles
indicating unequal turning.
COmPARATIvE NEURO-OpHTHALmOLOGY/457
Foals may be afflicted with neonatal stra-
may result in strabismus, due to tearing of
bismus, in this case a ventromedial devia-
some of the extraocular muscles
tion that slowly disappears by the time they
The extraocular muscles are also involved
are weaned. Due to the strabismus, the
in a progressive juvenile esotropia that is
animal
1 presents with excess
"scleral
seen in Shar Pei dogs (Figs. 15.6A through
showing" of the lateral portion of the sclera,
C). This is a disease of unknown origin,
and the horizontal pupil is slanted, with the
which causes fibrosis of the medial rectus
temporal half raised and the nasal half
and dorsal oblique muscles. The condition
depressed; the range of eye movement is
can be unilateral but generally is bilateral,
restricted in neonates as well. All these find-
and there does not seem to be a gender pref-
ings may relate to immaturity of their visual
erence. The progressive nature of this condi-
pathways. Congenital, bilateral esotropia has
tion usually ceases by 2 years of age, though
also been reported in an inbred line of pack
loss of vision (due to severe esotropia) may
mules with a history of visual problems includ-
occulr.
ing stumbling over trail rocks and roots. The
vision dysfunction most likely represented dif-
ficulty with stereopsis. A heritable strabismus
Differential Diagnosis of Eyelid
is also described in Jersey, Holstein, Brown
Abnormalities (including Third Eyelid)
Swiss, and Shorthorn cattle. This condition
presents as bilateral esotropia and exophthal-
Eyelid position and/or function abnormalities
mous in animals older than 6 months. Vision
may be caused by diseases affecting either the
is diminished, because the affected individuals
facial nerve or the sympathetic innervation to
have difficulty negotiating an unfamiliar envi-
the eye, and by abnormalities in the orbit.
ronment. The nature of the inheritance is not
Twitching and spasms of the eyelids and
known. Strabismus in ruminants has also been
other facial muscles may represent early signs
described in cases of polioencephalomalacia
oflesions such as meningitis, neuritis or trauma
Strabismus may also be the result of diseases
involving the facial nerve. Facial nerve paralysis
involving the globe. Space-occupying masses,
due to brainstem lesions in the medulla, where
whether intraorbital or periorbital, may press
the nucleus of the facial nerve is located, will
on the globe and cause its deviation eye in the
result in uni- or bilateral facial muscles paresis
orbit. Another “mechanical" cause of strabis-
or paralysis. Lesions in this area are typically
mus is diseases and pathologies of the extraocu-
characterized by an inability to close the eyelids
lar muscles. Traumatic prolapse of the globe
and dropping of the ear and lip (Fig. 15.7). In
Fig. I5.6. Shar Pei strabismus (fbrosing esotropia). A. The anterior segment is not visible in the right eye of
this l-year-old Shar Pei. The right is also turned slightly downward. B. The progressive bilateral esotropia in this
dog was so severe that it resulted in complete blindness. C. Only the lateral portion of the anterior segment of
the left eye is visible.
458 /ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OpHTHALMOLOGY
 Drooping of the upper eyelid due to mechani-
cal and anatomical factors that do not
involve the innervation to the eyelids is called
pseudoptosis.
Neurological Diseases
Affecting the Eye or Vision
Many of the neurological diseases and abnor-
malities may also affect the eye, its associated
structures or the visual pathways. Therefore,
these patients may present, in addition to their
neurological signs, with blindness, pupillary
abnormalities, abnormal vestibular eye move-
ments or strabismus.
Fig. 15.7. Facial nerve paralysis in an American
Cocker Spaniel. Note the widened palpebral fssure
Granufomatous Meningoencephafitis
 and the illusion of proptosis.
GME is a common inflammatory disease of
the CNS known to occur in dogs and horses;
more chronic cases and when the lesion is uni-
it is an extremely rare disease in cats. Oph-
lateral, the muzzle is pulled in the contralateral
thalmologic manifestations include uveitis,
direction. Bilateral facial paralysis will result in
optic neuritis and visual deficits due to for-
profound dysphagia in the horse. Keratocon-
mation of granulomas anywhere along the
junctivits sicca may develop in cases of com-
visual tract.
plete and permanent facial paralysis due to
The underlying cause of the disease remains
lesions at this site.
unclear, but an autoimmune disorder of delayed
The most common cause for facial paraly-
type hypersensitivity reaction is suspected. The
sis in small animals is otitis interna and
third classic form of GME is the ocular syn-
media. This disease is also common in food
drome. Frequently this syndrome will begin as
animals, but not in the horse. Clinical signs
acute blindness; the subsequent appearance of
will mainly be of vestibular disease, includ-
additional, more characteristic, neurological
ing ataxia, circling and ventral strabismus
 defcits, may lead to a tentative diagnosis of
and nystagmus. Damage to the facial nerve in
GME. The acute blindness is attributed to
these cases is caused by the extension of the
optic neuritis, and is characterized by dilated
inflammatory process to the facial nerve as it
pupils, and absence of PLR's and menace
passes through the petrosal bone. The involve-
response.In more chronic cases, the inflam-
ment of the facial nerve will result in lack of
mation will cause optic nerve atrophy, and
blinking and reduced tear production in the
the optic disc will appear smaller with gray
affected eye.
discoloration. Severe anterior and posterior
Ptosis, or drooping of the upper eyelid, may
uveitis may also occur, and retinal detach-
result from neurological abnormalities or be
ment and petechial hemorrhage may
be
secondary to mechanical and structural factors
noted during funduscopic examination.
involving the orbit. Neurological dysfunctions
A diagnosis of GME should be considered
that may result in ptosis include injury to the
based on clinical signs and patient signalment.
oculomotor nerve (oculomotor ptosis), lack of
An appropriate diagnostic plan will include
sympathetic innervation of the Muller's muscles
CSF analysis and advanced imaging techniques.
(i.e., sympathetic ptosis) and myopathic injury
However, a definitive antemortem diagnosis
to the skeletal or smooth muscles of the eyelids
can only be made by a CT-guided biopsy of
ComPArAtive Neuro-OpHtHalmoLoGy/459
 masses recognized in the forebrain, and histo-
 acteristic history and clinical findings, followed
pathological confrmation. Classically the CSF
by CSF analysis, advanced imaging techniques
will show mononuclear pleocytosis with ele-
and PCR where available.
vated protein
Corticosteroids (1-2 mg/kg q25h or q12)
Fungal Encephalitis
remain the accepted treatment for GME.
This dose is later tapered over 4 months or
A large number of fungal organisms may invade
more, until a minimal dose, with no recur-
the CNS and affect the eye or the visual path-
ring clinical signs, is reached. Complete ces-
ways. Cryptococus neoformans is by far the
sation of steroid treatment is not recommended
in cases of GME. Treatment with systemic
most common fungal agent infecting the CNS
in both dog and cats; it has also been occasion-
cyclosporine has also been advocated. The
ally reported in horses. Other mycotic agents
prognosis of GME is generally poor to grave,
(i.e., Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces dermatiti-
with the reported survival time varying
dis, Histoplasma spp., Aspergillus spp., and
according to the form of the disease.
pheohyphomycoses such as Cladosporidium
spp.) are rare causes of meningoencephalitis,
Canine Distemper
seldom reported in small animals (see chapter
16).
Canine distemper virus is the most common
viral disease of dogs and other canines. Ocular
Storage Diseases
signs of CDV include diseases of the conjunc-
tiva, posterior uvea and visual pathways. The
Lysosomal storage diseases are a large group of
epitheliotropism of the virus may cause con-
diseases characterized by accumulation of met-
junctivitis with serous to mucopurulent dis-
abolic susbtrates within cells. These are genetic
charge. Inflammation of the lacrimal gland will
disorders, in which an enzymatic deficiency
cause decreased tear production, and clinical
causes accumulation of that enzyme's substrate
signs of keratoconjunctivitis sicca. In the pos-
within neurons and glial cells, as well as in
terior segment, multifocal, nongranulomatous
other cells in the body. The consequent accu-
chorioretinitis may be diagnosed. The disease
may progress to cause diffuse retinal atrophy
mulation of undigested metabolites in lyso-
somes leads to polysystemic dysfunction,
and optic nerve atrophy. CDV may affect the
including progressive neurologic deterioration,
visual pathways through inflammation and/or
mental retardation, abdominal organomegaly,
demyelinization.
blindness, and early death. In addition to accu-
mulation, the enzymatic abnormality may cause
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
a direct metabolic disturbance. Two types of
lysosomal storage diseases are known to affect
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) meningoen-
 the nervous system. These are neuronal storage
cephalitis is the most common inflammatory
diseases, in which the substrate accumulates in
disorder of the nervous system in cats, and in
neurons, and leukodystrophies, in which a pro-
fact some call the dry form of FIp “the brain
gressive destruction of myelin occurs. Blind-
and eye form". One-quarter to one-third of the
ness may be one of the signs associated with
cats with the noneffusive form of FIP will suffer
lysosomal storage disorders, particularly GM-
from neurological abnormalities, and some of
and GM,-gangliosidosis, globoid cell leukodys-
them will only have mild to no systemic disease.
trophy, fucosidosis, and ceroid lipofuscinosis
Central nervous system signs are variable, as
(see appendices P [cat] and R [food animals],
involvement of the CNS may be diffuse, multi-
and Table 16.1.1). The blindness is most com-
focal, or localized. Ophthalmic lesions also are
monly central and therefore presents with
common in neurological (noneffusive)
normal pupillary light reflexes, though retinal
Antemortem diagnosis of FIP infectious
blindness, due to the manifestation of the dis-
meningoencephalitis relies on combining char-
order any retinal neurons, also occurs.
460 /EsSENTIALS Of VeteRiNArY OpHTHALmOLOGY
Neurogenic Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
denervation  hypersensitivity  that  occurs
following postganglionic lesions makes the
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is a progressive
tear glands very responsive to direct-acting
inflammation of the cornea and conjunctiva
parasympathomimetic  (
drugs.
Treatment
caused by deficient tear production. Lesions
with oral or topical pilocarpine is advocated
 anywhere along the efferent path, including
in these cases.
the parasympathetic nucleus of the facial
 nerve, the main trunk of the nerve, genicu-
late ganglion, major petrosal nerve, the
Dysautonomia
 nerve of the pterygoid canal, the pterygo-
palatine ganglion, or the postganglionic
 Dysautonomia is an idiopathic disease causing
parasympathetic fibers, will reduce
tear
a diffuse degenerative polyneuropathy of the
production and result in neurogenic kerato-
 autonomic nervous system without any appar-
conjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Lesions to
the
ent cause. Degeneration and loss of neuronal
preganglionic parasympathetic fibers may
be
cell bodies occurs both in the sympathetic and
caused by otitis (media or interna) or by petro-
parasympathetic ganglions, middle horn of the
sitis (i.e., inflammation of the petrous temporal
spinal cord gray matter, and the parasympa-
bone). In such cases, the reduced tear produc-
thetic nuclei of the brain stem. The disease is
tion may be accompanied by signs of facial
more common in the cat, where it is also known
 paralysis and Horner's syndrome if the adjacent
as Key-Gaskell syndrome, but has also been
facial nerve motor neurons or sympathetic
reported in the dog.
fibers are involved. Neurogenic KCS may also
Most cases of canine and feline dysautono-
present without signs of facial paralysis if the
mia were reported in young patients, although
major petrosal nerve is damaged distal to the
animals of any age can be affected. Clinical
 geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve.
signs develop usually within 48 hours in cats
 Preganglionic parasympathetic denervation
and two weeks in dogs, and are consistent with
can also occur due to erosive lesions involving
loss of parasympathetic function. The typical
the floor of the middle fossa of the skull, and
 ocular signs are mydriasis with absent pupillary
affecting the major petrosal nerve. In such
light reflexes, protrusion of the third eyelid and
cases, the trigeminal nerve may frequently
reduced tear production. Other, nonophthal-
be involved, and the KCs will be accompa-
mic clinical signs include bradycardia, dry
nied by facial anesthesia and xeromycteria
mucous membranes, and signs of gastrointesti-
(i.e., dry nasal mucosa)
nal and urinary system involvement.
Lesions involving the pre- and postgangli-
A tentative diagnosis may be made based on
onic parasympathetic fbers, as
well
the
the characteristic presentation of autonomic
 pterygopalatine ganglion itself, result from dis-
dysfunction. This can be helped by pharmaco-
eases affecting the pterygopalatine fossa.
.. Causes
logical tests of the urinary system, skin and
include periorbital myositis or cellulitis (fre-
eye. The pharmacological testing of the iris
quently caused by maxillary dental disease), or
 sphincter uses topical application of diluted
drainage of dental abscesses. Once again, such
(0.05-0.1%) pilocarpine. The resulting miosis
indicates a denervation hypersensitivity of the
anesthesia and xeromycteria. Postganglionic
iridal sphincter, and is seen in about 85% of
parasympathetic lesions are most commonly
the cases.
caused by orbital trauma. As the postganglionic
The cause of dysautonomia is unknown. The
fibers course together with the zygomatic nerve
disease was frst reported in cats, and is more
(the first branch of the maxillary division of the
common in this species. Reports in dogs were
trigeminal nerve), periocular anesthesia may
anecdotal until recently, when the disease was
also occur.
reported to occur in clusters of dogs living in
Obviously, cases of neurogenic KCS are
Missouri and Kansas.
 unlikely to respond to immunomodulating
Prognosis for recovery is grave. No treat-
drugs such as cyclosporine. However, the
       
COMPARATIve NEURO-OPHTHALMOLOGY/461
spontaneous recovery is only rarely reported in
demonstrated in food treated with sulphites
cats.
dog food that has been cooked or cat food
containing. Neurological manifestations in both
Nutritional Deficiencies
dogs and cats are primarily of vestibular ataxia,
strabismus and abnormal eye movements, as
the lesion is commonly found at the brain stem
Thiamine (Vitamin B1) Deficiency
rather than the cerebral cortex.
Thiamine Deficiency in Ruminants
Vitamin A Deficiency
Excessive amounts of thiaminase in the
rumen produce acute thiamine deficiency,
Vitamin A deficiency is known to cause
causing acute polioencephalomalacia, char-
visual impairment in many domestic animal
acterized by cerebral necrosis and edema.
species, including cattle, pigs and horses.
Signs related to the acute cerebral edema
The visual deficits result from two different
include blindness, ataxia, tremors, and
pathophysiological mechanisms, the first
opistothonus; these are followed by convul-
affecting retinal function and the second
sions, recumbency and coma. Dorsomedial
affecting the visual pathways.
strabismus is a characteristic sign, but
 If the hypovitaminosis A is chronic, retinal
 PLR's are usually normal, unless the edema
degeneration and complete blindness may
is severe enough to cause herniation and
occur. This condition has been reported in
compression of the oculomotor nerves or
young horses and cattle. The diagnosis is based
the midbrain.
 on analysis of vitamin A levels in the food and
 Thiamine-responsive polioencephalomalacia
the plasma.
is most commonly seen in calves 6-12 months
Hypovitaminosis also affects bone growth,
of age, and in lambs and kids 2-6 months 
as the vitamin is essential to the maintenance
of age; it is less common, but may occur, in
of the balance between osteoblasts and osteo-
older ruminants. Several thiaminase-producing
clasts, a process that is crucial to the normal
microorganisms have been isolated in the
remodeling of the growing bone. The altered
rumen, and have been shown to proliferate in
balance in calves causes abnormal thickening
animals receiving a high carbohydrate diet.
 of growing bones, including those of the skull
Thiamine is an important co-factor, enabling
anda
around the optic canal, resulting in
acetyl-co-A to enter the citric acid cycle in the
compression of the optic nerve. F
Fundic
mitochondria, which is the main aerobic energy
examination reveals pale tapetum, papilledema,
 production process in the cell.
indistinct disk margins and tortuous retinal
Diagnosis is based on anamnesis and clinical
blood vessels. Retinal detachment and subreti-
characteristics. Blood pyruvate and lactate con-
nal hemorrhages were also. Optic nerve injury
centrations may be elevated and erythrocyte
and ischemia may further lead to anterograde
thiamine-depended transketolase  activity
Wallerian degeneration in the optic chiasm and
abnormal. The response to thiamine adminis-
the optic tracts. In both calves and adult cattle
tration is a good diagnostic, and therapeutic,
suffering from hypovitaminosis A, papilledema
tool.
may also be caused by abnormalities in CSF
absorption.
Thiamine Deficiency in Dogs and Cats
References
Thiamine defciency is a rare cause of neuro-
logical dysfunction in dogs and cats, and is
Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, Davidson M, Hamil-
ton H, Jandeck C, Ward D, Wolfer J, Shelton GD
      
Extraocular muscle myositis and restrictive stra-
attributed to anorexia or malnutrition, though
bismus in 10 dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2000;3:
recently low thiamine levels have also been
21-26.
462 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Barrett PM, Scagliotti RH, Merideth RE, Jackson PA,
Narfstrom K, Ekesten B, Rosolen SG, Spiess BM,
Alarcon FA. Absolute corneal sensitivity and
Percicot CL, Ofri R. Guidelines for clinical elec-
corneal trigeminal nerve anatomy in normal dogs
troretinography in dog. Doc Ophthalmol 2002;
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1991;1:245-254.
105:83-92
Chan-Ling T. Sensitivity and neural organization of
Odom JV, Bromberg NM, Dawson WW. Canine
the cat cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
visual acuity: retinal and cortical field potentials
1989;30:1075-1082
evoked by pattern stimulation. Am J Physiol
Collins BK, O'Brien D.Autonomic dysfunction of
1983;245:R637-R641
the eye. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
Ofri R. Clinical electrophysiology in veterinary oph-
1990;5:24-36
 a y nusad ised ao 
Cooper ML, Pettigrew JD. The retinothalamic path-
Ophthalmol 2002;104:5-16.
ways in Siamese cats. J Comp Neurol i979;
O'Neill EJ, Merrett D, Boyd J. (
Granulomatous
187:313-348
meningencephalomyelitis in dogs: a review. Irish
De Lahunta A, Cummings JF. Neuro-ophththalmo-
Vet J 2005;58:86-92
logic lesions as a cause of visual dehicit in dogs
Parker AJ, Cusick PK, Park RD, Small E. Hemifacial
spasms in a dog. Vet Rec 1973;93:514-516.
994-1011.
Powell CC, Martin CL. Distribution of cholinergic
Green SL, Cochrane SM, Smith-Maxie L. Horner's
and adrenergic nerve hiber in the lacrimal
syndrome in ten horses. Can Vet J 1992;33:330-
glands of dogs. Am J Vet Res 1989;50:2084-
333
2088.
Hacker DV. Crocodile tears syndrome in a domestic
Roberts SR, Vainisi SJ. Hemifacial spasm in dogs. J
cat: case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;
Am Vet Med Assoc 1967;150:381-385
26:245-246.
Shamir MH, Ofri R. Comparative neuro-ophthalmo-
Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Niethield JC. Dysautono-
logy. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary ophthalmol-
mia in dogs: 65 cases (1993-2000). J Am Vet Med
ogy, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2007:1406-
Assoc 2002;220:633-639.
1469.
Kern TJ, Aromando MC, Erh HN. Horner's syn-
Simoens P, Lauwers H, DeMuelenare C, Muylle
drome in dogs and cats: 100 cases (1975-1985).
C, Steenhaut M. Horner's syndrome in the
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;195:369-373
horse: a clinical, experimental and morphological
Kern TJ, Erb HN. Facial neuropathy in dogs and
study. Equine Vet J Suppl 1990;10:62-65.
cats: 95 cases (1975-1985). J Am Vet Med Asso0
Stadtbaumer K, Leschnik MW, Nell B. Tick-borne
1987;191:1604-1609
encephalitis virus as a possible cause of optic
Lane JG, Mair TS. Observations on headshaking in
neuritis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:271-
the horse. Equine Vet J 1987;19:331-336.
277.
Madigan JE, Kortz G, Murphy C, Rodger L. Photic
Strain G, Claxton M, Olcott B. Visual-evoked poten-
headshaking in the horses: 7 cases. Equine Vet J
tials and electroretinograms in ruminants with
1995;27:306-311
thiamine-responsive polioencephalomalacia or
Martin CL, Kaswan R, Chapman W. Four cases of
suspected listeriosis. Am J Vet Res 1990;5l:
traumatic optic nerve blindness in the horse.
1513-1517.
Equine Vet J 1986;18:133-137
Thibos LN, Levick WR, Morstyn R. Ocular pigmen-
 Miller PE, Murphy CJ. Vision in dogs. J Am Vet Med
tation in white and Siamese cats. Invest Ophthal-
Ass0c 1995;207:16231634.
mol Vis Sci 1980;19:475-486.
Chapter 16
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Cheryl L. Cullen and Aubrey A. Webb
SECTION 1: THE D0G
alphabetically arranged according to the
mechanism and/or cause of the systemic
Ocular examination of animals with systemic
disease (cardiovascular; hematologic; idio-
disease is an essential diagnostic component of
pathic; immune-mediated; infectious; meta-
a complete physical examination that can help
bolic; neoplastic-central nervous system versus
reduce the list of probable differential diagno-
systemic; nutritional; toxicities)
ses and can assist in organizing such a differ-
ential diagnostic list. Diseases affecting the
vascular and nervous systems are particu-
Congenital
larly prone to ocular manifestation. Inspec-
tion of the uvea and retina, and optic disc of
Coat Color-Related
the animal through the transparent cornea
Diseases/Conditions
and lens permit evaluation of both the
peripheral vasculature and central nervous
Complete albinism (complete lack of pigmenta-
system, respectively. Since the rate of ocular
tion) or partial or localized albinism (an absence
blood flow is very high, there is increased
or reduction in the degree of pigmentation) is
likelihood that the uveal and retinal vascu-
associated with not only the phenotypic appear-
lature will be exposed to, and possibly
      5  p 
entrap, hematogenously spread neoplastic
 also associated with conditions affecting the ear
cells and/or infectious organisms. In this
and eye. Inherited sensorineural deafness
chapter, ocular manifestations of systemic
and ocular abnormalities have been linked
disease include any disorder not of primary
to coat color genes in many breeds of dogs.
ocular origin that manifests as ocular clinical
Hearing loss related to coat color in dogs
signs. These diseases have been categorized
typically results from cochleosaccular degen-
according to species (dog—sectionl; cat-
eration and can be associated with the
section 2; horse——section 3; and food animals-
absence of pigment within the stria vascu-
section 4) and stage of onset (congenital;
laris of the cochlea. Coat color is often asso-
developmental; or acquired), and have been
ciated, not only with deafness, but also with
463
464 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
heterochromia irides, blue irides, and lack
Dwarfism (Skeleta!
of retinal pigment. Coat color genetics soon
Dysplasia—Osteochondrodysplasia)
becomes complicated when one considers all of
the combinations and permutations of coat
Osteochondrodysplasias are characterized by
colors seen in the numerous breeds of dogs that
abnormalities in growth and development of
have been developed. A positive correlation
bone, cartilage or both. These forms of skeletal
between inherited sensorineural deafness and
dysplasia occur in several breeds of dogs. A
blue irides has been reported in the Dalmatian,
syndrome of short appe ndages with a normal
     
axial skeleton (i.e., short-limbed dwarfism)
This association has a relevant clinical impact
and ocular lesions, so called ocular-skeletal
given that approximately 30% of Dalmatians in
dysplasia, has been recorded as being inher-
the United States are unilaterally or bilaterally
ited in the Labrador Retriever and the
deaf (blue eyes permitted in breed standard)
Samoyed.
while the incidence of deafness in Dalmations
This syndrome in the Labrador Retriever is
from Europe is lower (blue eyes not allowed in
 recessive for the skeletal lesions and incomplete
breed standard). The mode of inheritance of
dominant trait for the ocular lesions. Skeletal
inherited sensorineural deafness associated
changes consist of the following: short limbs
with white coat colors still remains elusive
with the forelimbs being more affected than the
The M- or merle-gene has both a domi-
hindlimbs; prominent elbows and carpi; paws
nant (M) and recessive (m) allele and is
deviated laterally; shortening and bowing of the
associated with deafness and ocular abnor-
radius and ulna; hyperextended hindlimbs;
malities. Breeds affected with the dominant
short and wide tubular bones with thin cortices
merle gene include Collies, Shetland Sheep-
 and flattened and flared metaphyses; delayed
dogs, Great Danes, and long-haired Dachs-
 development of epiphyses; large and misshapen
hunds; heterozygote (Mm; merle colored)
epiphyses and cuboidal bones; abnormal
animals may be predisposed to unilateral or
elbows including un-united anconeal and coro-
bilateral inner ear defects resulting in deaf-
noid processes; and hip dysplasia (Fig. 16.1.1)
ness. Dogs homozygous for the dominant
Ocular lesions associated with this syndrome in
merle allele (MM; typically have more white
the Labrador Retriever vary from mild (e.g.
than heterozygotes, or may be completely
retinal folds) to blinding (e.g., retinal detach-
white) are typically deaf, blind with microph-
ment), and often occur in field-trial lines. In
thalmic eyes, and may be sterile.
general, those animals manifesting skeletal dys-
The merle Australian Shepherd has been
plasia have more severe ocular lesions, but the
studied in detail,and the mode of inheritance
for the ocular lesions is a recessive trait with
incomplete penetrance. The embryogenesis of
 the ocular defects stems from a primary abnor-
mality of the retinal pigment epithelium or
outer layer of the optic cup. Ocular lesions
described in these dogs include microph-
thalmia of varying degrees, persistent pupil-
lary membranes, iridal colobomas, dyscoria,
corectopia, corneal epithelial dysplasia,
scleral staphylomas, goniodysgenesis, cata-
racts, lenticular colobomas, choroidal colo-
bomas,
choroidal
hypoplasia, retinal
dysplasia, retinal detachments, and retinal
fibrosis.
Pituitary and adrenal cysts as well as con-
genital cardiac anomalies may also be observed
Fig. I6.1.1. Short-limbed dwarhsm in a Labrador
inconsistently in the Australian Shepherd
Retriever.
OCULAr MAN1FeStAtiOns OF SYstem1C D1seasE/465
affected litter may have a spectrum of mild to
as well. The mode of inheritance of this syn-
severe lesions. To date, whether two distinct
drome in the dog is autosomal dominant. If the
 genetic forms of retinal dysplasia exist in the
complete syndrome is manifest, ocular lesions
Labrador Retriever (i.e., one linked with skele-
may occur. Dogs with the complete syndrome
tal dysplasia and one distinct from this syn-
have ocular lesions consisting of lax eyelids,
drome) remains unresolved.  Heterozygous
corneal edema, thin sclera, cataracts, bilateral
animals may, or may not, have retinal lesions.
lens luxation, and diffuse cortical cataracts.
However, heterozygous individuals usually
manifest with focal or geographic retinal dys-
Hydrocephalus
plasia, which is typically observed as hyperre-
flective areas having pigment clumping dorsal
Congenital hydrocephalus is common in some
to the optic disc. Animals with focal retinal
breeds of dogs, with the toy and brachycephalic
lesions may exhibit a loss of central vision as
breeds at higher risk of the disease. The most
evidenced by failing to mark downed birds or
common cause of congenital hydrocephalus
stationary handlers. Milder degrees of retinal
is a primary congenital stenosis or aplasia of
manifestation may have smaller, branching
ther
retinal folds and be located in other fundic
with fused rostral colliculi.  Congential
regions. Animals may be presented as puppies
hydrocephalus may produce enlargemnt of
with retinal detachments, or such detachments
the calvarium, failure of closure of the suture
may occur during the frst 2-3 years of life.
lines of the skull and persistent open fonta-
Emphasis has been placed clinically on the
nelle. Affected puppies show behavioral
retinal dysplasia. Homozygous dogs inconsis-
 changes, ataxia, seizures and ventrolateral
tently exhibit a variety of ocular lesions, includ-
strabismus (Fig. 16.1.2).
ing those of axial myopia, superficial corneal
opacities, varying degrees of cataract formation,
prominent hyaloid artery remnants, tapetal
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
hypoplasia, and alterations in optic nerve color
and size.
Many lysosomal storage diseases have been
The Samoyed syndrome of ocular-skeletal
identified in dogs. These inborn errors of
dysplasia is postulated to be an autosomal,
metabolism are, however, relatively rare dis-
simple recessive trait. Skeletal lesions in this
eases that have received a disproportionate
breed consist of: short forelimbs; premature
closure of ulnar growth plates; bowed radii;
varus deformity of elbows; valgus deformity of
carpi; and domed forehead. Ocular lesions in 
this breed consist of focal cortical cataracts,
multifocal retinal dysplasia, retinal detach-
ments, prominent hyaloid remnants, and red
tapetal fractures or fissures. Retinal detachment
usually occurs during the first 6 months of life,
and it may occur in retinas with no obvious
lesions of dysplasia.
Ehlers-Danios Syndrome
Fig. 16.1.2. Congenital hydrocephalus in a toy
Busnd si waie aui saa jasuns, yi paa
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or cutaneous asthe-
the globes ventrolaterally. (Reprinted with permission
nia, has been reported in the dog. It is a con-
from Martin CL. Ocular manifestations of systemic
 genital, inherited syndrome involving collagen,
disease. Part l: The dog. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
and it is characterized by fragile and easily torn
ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
skin. Some animals have excessive joint laxity
Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1401-1448.)
466 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
amount of investigation, because they represent
of
Pennsylvania,  http://w3.vet.upenn.edu/
potential animal models for human syndromes.
research/centers/penngen/; Healthgene Corpo-
Storage diseases are characterized by an accu
ration, Toronto, ON, http://168.144.153.107/
mulation of metabolic by-products within lyso-
contact.asp; Genetic Services, Animal Health
somes, the cellular organelles that degrade
Trust, Lanwades Park, Kentford, Newmarket,
complex macromolecules. The substrates for
Suffolk, http://www.aht.org.uk/sci_diag_disc_
catabolism within lysosomes include glycopro-
genetics_dna.html#canine).
teins, mucopolysaccharides, oligosaccharides
proteins, and sphingolipids (Table l6.1.1)
Antemortem diagnosis of a lysosomal storage
Acquired
disease can be confirmed by lysosomal enzyme
analysis (e.g.. Lysosomal Disease Testing
Cardiovascular Diseases
Laboratory, Jefferson Medical Center, Philadel-
phia, PA, http://www.jefferson.edu/lysolab/
Cerebrovascular Accidents
index.cfm) or with genetic testing for specific
canine lysosomal storage diseases (PennGen,
Cerebrovascular accidents occur much less fre.
Department of Clinical Studies, University
quently in dogs than in people, however with
Table 16.1.1. Lysosomal Storage Diseases in the Dog. Cat, and Food Animals.
Disease
Breeds affected
Dog:
Gangliosidoses
Gmi: Alaskan Husky. English Springer Spaniel., Portugese Water Dog. Shiba Inus
Gm2: Japanese Spaniel, German Shorthair Pointer, Golden Retriever
Fucosidosis
 English Springer Spaniel
 Mucopolysaccharidosis
Plott Hound
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Cairn Terrier and West Highland White Terrier
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
English Setter, Australian Blue Heeler, Chihuahua, Border Collie, Saluki, Tibetan
Terrier, Dachshund, Dalmatian, Miniature Schnauzer, American Cocker Spaniel
Tyrosinemia
Cat:
GM-gangliosidosis
Domestic shorthair, Siamese, Korat
GMz-gangliosidosis
Domestic shorthair, Korat
-mannosidosis
 Persian, Domestic shorthair, Dormestic longhair
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
Domestic shorthair
Mucopolysaccharidosis IV
Siamese
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI
Siamese
Mucopolysaccharidosis VII
Domestic shorthair
Mucolipidosis Il
Cat
Sphingomycelin lipidosis
Cat
Food Animals:
GM,-gangliosidosis 
Cattle and sheep
GMz-gangliosidosis
Yorkshire pigs
αx-mannosidosis
 Angus, Galloway, and Murray Gray cattle and Nubian goats
α-mannosidosis
Saler cattle and Nubian goats
Globoid cell leukodystrophy.
Sheep
 or Krabbe's disease
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Devon cattle, Hampshire sheep. and goats
OCuLAr MaN1feStAtiOns OF SYstem1C DiSEase/467
increasing  access
tomagneticresonance
systemic hypertension include anterior segment
imaging, cerbrovascular disease in dogs is being
and vitreous hemorrhage, uveitis, and glau-
recognized more frequently. Cerebrovascular
coma. Hypertension should therefore be ruled
accidents, or strokes, can be the result of cere-
out when presented with intraocular hemor-
bral hemorrhage (hemorrhagic stroke) from
rhage or bullous retinal detachment of unknown
systemic hypertension, coagulopathies,
or
origin.
trauma. Regardless of the cause of the cerebro-
The goals of antihypertensive therapy include
vascular accident, ocular manifestations
of
lowering blood pressure and slowing progres-
impaired brain function may manifest and will
sion of target organ damage caused by chronic
vary according to the neuroanatomic location
hypertension. The current first-line antihyper-
of the cerebrovascular accident. Because cere-
tensive agents of choice in the dog are angio-
brovascular accidents are acute, clinical signs
 tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or calcium
are acute ± progressive in nature. Ophthalmic
channel blockers (usually amlodipine)
manifestations of cerebrovascular disease may
occur at the time of the cerebrovascular acci-
Hematologic Diseases
dent or develop shortly thereafter.
Anemia
Hypertension
Anemia is the reduction in red blood cells per
volume of whole blood. Anemia is classified as
Systemic arterial blood pressure is the product
regenerative
(has a normal bone marrow
of cardiac output (CO) (CO = heart rate ×
response to erythropoietin, e.g., usually occurs
stroke volume) and total peripheral resistance.
with blood loss or hemolytic disease), or non-
When hypertension is associated with 
an
regenerative (the normal reticulocyte response
underlying causative disease, it is called sec-
is lacking). Severe anemia often manifests sys-
ondary hypertension, which is most frequent in
temically as varying palor of mucous mem-
veterinary patients. Primary hypertension is
branes, cool mucous membranes, tachycardia,
hypertension resulting from unknown reasons.
polypnea, weakness, as well as signs specific to
  e ,   
the underlying primary condition. Conjuncti-
blood pressure for dogs was reported to be
val palor is even used as an indicator of anemia
between 160 and 180 mmHg. Renal damage in
due to gastrointestinal parasitism in sheep and
-ss uim 5sanoid 01 paloda uaaq seu saop
 goats. Ocular manifestations of severe anemia
tolic blood pressures in this range, however.
 include pale retinal vasculature, varying degrees
Consequently, systemic hypertension has been
defined as a calm animal having repeatable sys-
in t
tapetal refectivity. Retinal hemorrhages
tolic blood pressure measurements greater than
are more likely to be observed, however,
160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure
q n f o  a p
measurements greater than lo0 mmHg
thrombocytopenia.
Hypertension-induced (hypertensive) ret-
inopathy has been described, not uncom-
monly, in the dog. Secondary hypertension
Hyperlipidemia
is now recognized as being a common com-
plication of renal disease (60-80%
of
Hyperlipidemia refers to an elevation in
cases), hyperadrenocorticism (59-86%
of
plasma concentrations of cholesterol and/or
cases), pheochromocytoma (> 50% of cases),
triglycerides, and arises due to a disturbance
primary aldosteronism, hypothyroidism,
in plasma lipoprotein metabolism. Because
and hyperthyroidism. Ocular lesions associ-
 triglycerides are transported in the blood by
ated with canine hypertension include tortuous
various proteins, the term hyperlipoprotein-
retinal vessels, variable-sized retinal and pre-
emia is often used. Pathologic elevations in
retinal hemorrhages, papilledema, variable
plasma lipids and lipoproteins are classified
degrees of retinal detachment, and
1  tapetal
as primary (i.e., familial or genetic origin)
reflectivity changes. Potential complications of
 or secondary (i.e., develop as a consequence
468 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
of an underlying disease). Primary hyperlip-
Hyperviscosity Syndrome
idemia/hypercholesterolemia has been described
in various breeds including the Beagle, Briard,
Hyperviscosity syndrome comprises single
Collie, Miniature Schnauzer, and Shetland
or multiple clinicopathologic abnormalities
Sheepdog. Hyperlipidemia is also seen in
resulting from increased serum viscosity. The
variety of systemic diseases including hypo-
 severity of hyperviscosity syndrome is linked
thyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadreno-
to
 the size, shape, type, and concentration
corticism, pancreatitis, and renal (e.g.,
of large molecules (e.g., imunoglobulins [Igl)
nephrotic syndrome) as well as hepatic
in
the
bloodstream （gA, IgG,or
IgM
(e.g., cholestasis) diseases. Common dis-
macroglobulinemia)
eases associated with secondary hypercho-
The underlying cause is usually a malig-
lesterolemia in the dog are hypothyroidism,
nancy, such as lymphoma, chronic lympho-
diabetes mellitus and pancreatitis.
cytic leukemia, plasmacytoma, or multiple
 Depending on the quantity and class of
myeloma, but infectious diseases such as
elevated lipoprotein and the status of the
ehrlichiosis may also produce the syndrome.
blood-aqueous barrier, hyperlipidemia may
Hemorrhage may occur from multiple causes,
produce ocular lesions. Visible lipemia in
such as sludging of blood in small vessels, inef-
the dog is produced by elevations of triglyc-
fective delivery of oxygen and nutrients to
eride levels, and it can be detected in the
vessel walls, hypertension, coagulation abnor-
ocular vessels of the conjunctiva and retina
malities as a result of elevated protein levels
(i.e., lipemia retinalis) as pink, engorged
interfering with clotting factors and platelet
vessels. Hyperlipidemia may also manifest
function, and thrombocytopenia
with lipids in the anterior chamber.
The ocular lesions most frequently noted
Hyperlipidemia characterized by elevated
include dilated, tortuous retinal vessels, which
cholesterol levels may result in corneal lipidosis
may(
develop kinking or "box carring." or
with varying patterns. A rapid, rather diffuse,
venous dilatation and sacculation; papilledema;
     s
retinal hemorrhages; intraretinal cysts; and
been observed in association with elevated cho-
bullous retinal detachments. Anterior segment
lesterol levels in hypothyroid dogs. Animals
complications such as anterior uveitis and glau-
with lipid keratopathy or depositions of super-
coma may develop as well.
ficial plaque-like lesions associated with vascu-
larization often have elevated cholesterol levels.
fcterus
Certain breeds, such as the Shetland Sheepdog
Icterus or jaundice is a condition characterized
arcs near the limbus have been consistently
by hyperbilirubinemia and deposition of bile
associated with elevated cholesterol and/or tri-
pigments in the skin, sclera, and mucous mem-
glyceride levels.
branes causing them to appear a shade of
Detailed dietary and medical histories, as
yellow. The sclera is the classic location for
well as a clinical workup, may determine the
detection of icterus given its relative lack of
cause of the hyperlipidemia. The complete sys-
pigmentation, however blue irides may turn
temic workup may include 12- to l6-hour,
 green and yellow hues may be imparted on the
fasted blood samples for complete blood count,
 tapetal fundus.
serum biochemistry profle, urinalysis, and
serum triglycerides; cholesterol, ±T4 is advised.
Treatment and prognosis is variable depending
Intravenous Fluid Overload
on the underlying cause of the hyperlipidemia.
Interestingly,
however,  corneal
lipidosis
Ophthalmologists performing consultations for
observed in primary hypercholesterolemia in
internists may note bullous retinal detachments
Collies has been successfully treated by admin-
associated with isotonic fluid administration to
istering
 short-chain
fructo-oligosaccharide
patients having varying degrees of renal com-
supplementation.
promise. This condition begins with multiple,
OCULAr MAN1FeStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1SEAsE/469
small, subretinal bullae forming in both eyes.
novirus), and fungal and bacterial organisms
The small bullae coalesce to form larger detach-
(e.g., candida, histoplasma, Leptospira spp.).
ments, and eventually, they progress to total
Thrombocytopenia is also seen in association
retinal detachments associated with a clear sub-
with (1) many forms of neoplasia including
retinal fluid. Retinal hemorrhages are absent,
lymphoma, leukemia, and multiple myeloma;
and affected animals have normal blood pres-
or (2) medications that impair platelet produc-
sure. Correction of the underlying renal
tion, or cause secondary immune destruction
problem or decreasing the fluid intake will
of the platelets (e.g., chloramphenicol, azathio-
cause the fluid to be reabsorbed and the retinas
prine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin). It may
to reattach, even though retinal folds may
also develop as an idiopathic or primary
persist. The exact pathogenesis is unknown,
immune-mediated condition
but leakage of solutes into the choroidal extra-
Thrombopathies are blood coagulation dis-
cellular space with drawing of fluid into the
orders as a result of platelet dysfunction and
interstitium is postulated
are either acquired or inherited. Disease pro-
cesses associated with thrombopathies include
anemia, DIC, liver failure, and uremia. Regard-
Polycythemia
less of the origin, both thrombocytopenia and
thrombopathies are rather frequent causes of
 Polycythemia is classified as relative or absolute
ocular and periocular hemorrhage.
(primary and secondary forms). Relative poly-
The presence of bleeding signs at a given
cythemia is an increased packed cell volume
platelet level varies between individuals, but
with normal red blood cell (RBC) mass occur-
ring as a result of a reduction in plasma volume
platelet counts are usually less than 5o,000
cells/μul when ocular petechiae form. Petechiae
 as may arise from external losses of body fluids
in the ocular fundus are often present without
(e.g., diarrhea; burns).
visible petechiae in the skin and other mucous
Polycythemia may manifest as dark, ruddy
membranes. Therapy is directed at the underly-
colored conjunctival and retinal blood vessels
ing cause, and if bleeding signs are severe,
that are dilated and tortuous. In addition, bilat-
transfusion of fresh whole blood or platelet-
eral anterior uveitis with concurrent unilateral
chorioretinitis has been described in a dog with
rich plasma is indicated.
polycythemia vera. Treatment varies according
to the cause of the polycythemia. If left
fdiopathic Systemic Diseases
untreated, however, retinal detachment and
ocular hemorrhage may occur with persistent
Canine fdiopathic Granulomatous
polycythemia.
Disease
Idiopathic granulomatous disease in the dog is
Thrombocytopenia and
considered to be immune-mediated because of
Thrombopathies
the absence of any demonstrable infectious
agent and because favorable responses to immu-
Thrombocytopeniaresults from either decreased
nosuppressive doses of corticosteroids or other
platelet production, increased removal, seques-
immunosuppressive drugs have been reported.
tration, or any combination of these. The most
Syndromes of sterile granulomatous inflamma-
common causes of thrombocytopenia include
 tion are poorly defined and relatively rare.
infectious diseases, neoplasia, drug-induced
reactions, and immune-mediated disease. In
Dysautonomia
tious thrombocytopenia in dogs include
arthropod-borne agents (e.g., babesia, borrelia,
Canine dysautonomia is an idiopathic disease
Cytauxzoon, Diroflaria spp., Ehrlichia spp..
resulting from a generalized loss of autonomic
leishmania, rickettsia), viral agents (e.g., canine
function. Dogs affected are typically young
distemper virus, herpesvirus, parvovirus, ade-
adults of medium to large physical stature that
470 /Essentials Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
typically live in rural areas. It is important to
The disease is typically seen in young
note, however, animals ranging in age from 5
small breeds, although any breed or age of
weeks to 15 years of age and of a variety of
dog may be affected. GME is characterized
breeds can be affected. Canine dysautonomia
typically by neurologic signs suggestive of
has been reported in Europe and the United
multifocal central nervous system (CNS)
States (most prevalent in dogs living in the
lesions that, at least temporarily, are respon-
midwestern United States).
sive to systemic corticosteroids or other
Affected dogs present with an acute (days)
immunosuppressive therapies. In the ocular
or subacute (2-3 weeks) history of clinical
form, GME may involve the optic nerves,
signs referable to loss of autonomic (sympa-
thus producing a syndrome of acute blind-
thetic and parasympathetic) function. Common
ness, papilledema, retinal and peripapillary
nonocular clinical signs include regurgitation,
hemorrhages, and occasionally, extension
vomiting. diarrhea, anorexia, weight loss, dry
into the globe, which in turn produces retinal
mucous membranes, and purulent nasal dis-
detachments and retinal infiltrates. Confine-
charge. Dogs may present with limited clinical
ment to the retrobulbar optic nerves may limit
signs that progress to involve more signs of
Ocular lesions to blindness and dilated pupils.
autonomic failure during the course of the
A defnitive antemortem diagnosis is diff-
disease.
cult to make, but multifocal CNS deficits,
Ocular signs include ocular discharge, pro-
increased cerebrospinal fluid protein levels,
truding third eyelid, mydriasis, and a reduction
pleocytosis with mononuclear cells, and a
in Schirmer tear test values. Ocular pharmaco-
response to corticosteroids are suggestive.
logic testing with topical 0.05% pilocarpine in
Treatment involves aggressive use of immu-
dogs with mydriatic pupils, and signalment,
nosuppressive corticosteroids
with
history and clinical signs consistent with
without radiation therapy or immunosup-
dysautonomia provides useful  information
 pression using cytosine arabinoside or cyclo-
supporting a diagnosis of（
dysautonomia.
sporine-A. Prognosis for survival varies from
Degeneration has been reported in a variety of
weeks to 3 years, but regardless, clinical
autonomic ganglia including the cranial cervi-
signs progress and dogs will succumb to the
cal and ciliary ganglia. At least 85% of dogs
disease.
affected with dysautonomia succumb to the
disease and are euthanized.
Sudden Acquired Retina!
Degeneration Syndrome
Granulomatous Meningoencephalitis
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
(SARDS) is an idiopathic blinding condition
is an idiopathic nonsuppurative meningoen-
consisting of acute blindness in the absence of
cephalomyelitis in dogs. Histopathologi-
funduscopic disease (early in disease), and clin-
cally, GME is characterized by perivascular
ical signs suggestive of an underlying metabolic
cuffing with mononuclear cells. One study
disease. SARDS has been recognized among
has demonstrated that perivascular cuffs were
dogs in the United States for over two decades,
composed of a heterogeneous population of
but the cause of SARDS remains unknown. Pre-
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class-
liminary investigations into excitotoxins (e.g-
II antigen-positive macrophages and mainly
glutamate) have found increased levels in the
CD3 antigen-positive lymphocytes, supporting
vitreous of affected animals, but the significance
a hypothesis of T cell-mediated, delayed type
of this is unknown.
hypersensitivity of an organ-specifc autoim-
Animals affected with SARDS have sys-
mune disease. Proposed pathogeneses for GME
temic signs and altered clinicopathological
have included a primary immune-mediated
test results in 40-60% of patients. Animals
phenomenon, pre-cancerous form of lym-
are characteristically presented with acute
phoma, and various infectious etiologies.
blindness and a normal to near-normal
OCULAR MAN1FeStAtIOnS OF SYSteM1C DiSEASE/471
ocular fundus. Because of the acute onset,
Immune-Mediated Diseases
most dogs are quite disoriented. In most
patients, vision loss occurs over the course
Dermatologic Diseases
of 1-2 weeks, and nyctalopia may be
observed. The mean age of affliction is 8.5-
Immune-mediated and allergic skin diseases
10 years. The syndrome occurs predominantly
often produce a facial dermatitis involving the
in neutered females, in both pure and mixed
eyelids and conjunctiva. Immune-mediated
breeds, and with a predisposition for Dachs-
skin diseases are divided into two main catego-
hunds. A seasonal incidence has been reported
ries: primary autoimmune diseases, in which
as well, with 46% of cases occurring in Decem-
the disease results from an attack against self-
ber and January.
antigens, and secondary immune-mediated
Many affected dogs have polyuria (PU),
disease, in which the disease results from exog-
polydipsia (PD) (28-36% of cases), and
enous material inducing autoimmune disease.
polyphagia (39%), as well as a history of
The pemphigus complex consists of five
weight gain (57%). Laboratory values are
autoimmune skin diseases: (l) pemphigus vul-
variable, but lymphopenia (30% of cases),
garis, (2) pemphigus vegetans, (3) pemphigus
lymphopenia with neutrophilia (21%), and
foliaceus, (4) pemphigus erythematosus, and
abnormal biochemical profiles (68%) may be
(5)  bullous  pemphigoid.
1.The pemphigus
present. Elevated levels of alkaline phospha-
complex is characterized by autoantibodies
tase (30-40% of cases) and cholesterol (42%)
directed against intercellular substances. In
are the most common biochemical changes.
most cases, facial lesions involve the mucocu-
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimu-
taneous regions and are characterized by pus-
lation or a low-dose dexamethasone suppres-
tules and vesicles that eventually rupture,
sion test may be abnormal. Overall, 12-17% of
thereby leaving erosions and ulcers, crusting.
patients have adrenal profle changes compati-
scaling, and hypopigmentation.
ble with those of Cushing's disease, but these
Allergic dermatitis and urticaria may arise as
changes may be adaptations to other diseases
a result of flea or food allrgies, atopy, drug
as well.
reactions, or insect bites. Allergic reactions to
Ophthalmoscopic changes during
the
systemic or topical drugs or drug eruptions
acute stages are very minimal, with mild
often involve the mucocutaneous and cutane-
retinal vascular attenuation or variability in
ous regions of the head.
retinal vascular caliber and mild changes in
The pattern of skin lesions may be sugges-
tapetal reflectivity. After several weeks to
tive of the diagnosis, but a specific diagnosis of
months, more advanced retinal vascular
the immune-mediated disease is made on the
attenuation  and  tapetal  hyperreflectivity
basis of patient history, skin biopsy with histo-
become apparent. The funduscopic appear-
 pathologic and immunofluorescent testing, and
ance in chronic SARDS is similar to that of
autoantibody tests (e.g., the antinuclear anti-
inherited retinal degeneration.
body [ANA] and lupus erythematosis [LE],
The electroretinogram (ERG) response is
preparations for systemic and discoid lupus
extinguished  with  SARDS. Histopathologic
erythematosus). Intradermal skin tests may
changes have been infrequently reported, but
 find specific antigens to which the atopic patient
cases of early SARDS have a diffuse loss of
is sensitive.
photoreceptor outer segments, with more
subtle changes in swelling of the dendritic pro-
cesses and cell bodies in the amacrine, bipolar,
Juvenile Pyoderma/Cellulitis (Puppy
and ganglion cells.
Strangles)
To date, no therapy has stopped the pro-
gression of this disease or reversed the
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis
blindness. Most dogs still make acceptable
(i.e., pyoderma/cellulitis) and lymphadeni-
Buaq ol lm isnipe Kau papaoid siad asnou
tis is a syndrome of dogs that usually mani-
blind.
fests in animals less than 8 months of age.
472 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
have an immune-mediated component. The
Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever, Gordon
salivary and thyroid glands are two of the
Setter, and Lhasa Apso. Acute pyoderma
glands that are often involved (in 20% of cases
affecting mainly the head manifests as pus-
each) concurrently with involvement of the lac-
tules, which then fistulate and drain, thereby
rimal glands. Anecdotally, KCS often improves
creating a moist, crusty lesion of the pinna,
when other systemic problems in the animal
muzzle, and periocular skin. Though the
improve.
lesions appear to be induced by bacteria,
A  presumptive  diagnosis of  suspected
they are actually sterile and cannot be trans-
immune-mediated KCS is made on the basis of
mitted. A bacterial hypersensitivity has been
Schirmer tear test results, breed predisposition,
postulated to explain the response to cortico-
lack of any history of sulfa administration, or
steroids and the explosive course of the disease.
third-eyelid gland excision, and perhaps,
During the early stages, a puppy may be pre-
involvement of other systems.
sented with only eyelid pustules, but within a
Recommended treatment is the use of a
few days, the pyoderma may extend to the ears
topical immunosuppressive agent such as
and nose. Regional lymph nodes, particularly
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or pimecrolimus, as
the mandibular lymph nodes, become mark-
needed.
edly enlarged, and a severe otitis externa is
typical as well. Occasionally. puppies will
develop a more generalized pyoderma.
Myasthenia Gravis
Immunosuppressive doses of systemic
corticosteroids, tapered following 3-4 weeks
Myasthenia gravis, a disease affecting the neu-
after resolution of the clinical signs, and sys-
romuscular junction, is either congenital or
temic broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat the
acquired. Acquired myasthenia gravis is the
secondary bacterial pyoderma, are indicated.
most common form of myasthenia gravis
Some clinicians prefer treatment with antibiot-
occuring in dogs. The acquired condition
ics for a few days before initiating corticoste-
develops due to an autoimmune destruction of
roids. Nursing care, consisting of gentle
ACHRs, which may occur as an autoimmune
cleansing or soaking of the skin lesions, may
condition affecting only the AChR (most
also be attempted. With appropriate therapy.
common), affecting part of another autoim-
prognosis is excellent.
mune condition (e.g, hypothyroidism), or
resulting as part of a paraneoplastic syndrome
(e.g., thymoma).
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
Animals with acquired myasthenia gravis
can present with either generalized or focal
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) is character-
clinical signs. Those animals with generalized
ized by a decrease in the aqueous tear film
myasthenia gravis will have generalized appen-
(measured by Schirmer's tear test l) beyond
dicular muscle paresis (weakness) that worsens
that which is compatible with conjunctival and
with prolonged exercise, may have megaesoph-
corneal health. KCs in the dog has several
agus and resultant regurgitation ± aspiration
causes, but one of the most common underly-
pneumonia, and spinal and cranial nerve
ing causes appears to be a multiglandular
reflexes that weaken with repeated testing.
inflammatory destruction that is most likely
Approximately 43% of dogs with myasthenia
immune mediated. Evidence of immune-medi-
gravis will have focalized clinical signs in the
ated glandular inflammation is provided by the
absence of appendicular muscle weakness.
presence of circulating autoantibodies (i.e.,
With respect to the eye, a paretic menace
rheumatoid factor [RF] and/or ANA) in a sig-
response and/or palpebral reflex may be the
      
predominant clinical sign(s).
A tentative diagnosis of acquired myasthenia
pathology, and the presence of a variety of
gravis is made based on consistent clinical signs
other diseases in 40% of KCS patients that may
combined with immediate short-term improve-
OCuLar MaN1FeStAtiOns OF System1C Disease/473
ment in muscular strength (e.g., improved pal-
Masticatory Myositis and Extraocular
pebral reflex) following the administration of
Myositis
the short-acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor,
edrophonium hydrochloride (Tensilon). All
Masticatory myositis (masseter, temporalis,
presumptive cases of acquired myasthenia
pterygoid muscles) and extraocular myositis
gravis should be confirmed by demonstrating
 are two forms of focal inflammatory myopa-
the presence of circulating muscular AChR
thies. Masticatory myositis typically affects
autoantibodies (see the Comparative Neuro-
 young to middle-aged adult dogs and predomi-
muscular Laboratory at http://medicine.ucsd.
nantly medium to large breeds. Masticatory
edu/vet_neuromuscular/ for testing details).
myositis may occur concurrently with other
The mainstay of therapy for acquired myasthe-
immune-mediated diseases including myasthe-
nia gravis is the administration of anticholines-
nia gravis.
terase drugs.
Signs include spasm of the masticatory
muscles and difficulty in opening the mouth,
pain on palpation of the muscles, muscle
Myositides
swelling, or muscle atrophy. Muscular
atrophy is a more common clinical sign (72%
Dermatomyositis
of cases) than muscle swelling (l4% of cases)
and is likely due to the chronicity of the
Dermatomyositis is an idiopathic, hereditary
disease at presentation of most cases. Ocular
condition resulting from a suspected immune-
signs have been documented in 45% of cases
mediated  inflammation  involving 
skeletal
and are variable depending on the chronicity
muscle, skin and vasculature. Dogs are typi-
of the disease. Ocular manifestations of
cally affected at a young age (< 6 months of
acute masticatory myositis include exoph-
age). The disease is typically described in
thalmos and prolapse of the third eyelid due
Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs. Other breeds
to swelling of the pterygoid muscle, and pos-
affected include the American Cocker Spaniel,
sible
optic
nerve tension/compression
Jack Russell Terrier, Samoyed, and Welsh
causing blindness. In cases of chronic mas-
Corgi. The condition is thought to be inherited
ticatory myositis enophthalmos has been
as an autosomal dominant condition with
reported. Signs are usually, but not invariably.
incomplete penetrance in the Collie. Recently.
bilateral. Clinical signs, ± peripheral eosino-
dermatomyositis in the Shetland Sheepdog has
philia, ± elevated levels of serum creatinine
been linked to a microsatellite marker, FH35 70,
kinase, ± abnormal electromyograms (EMGs),
on chromosome 35.
± presence of circulating antibodies for type 2M
Dermatologic lesions are seen around the
fibers, and positive muscle immunohistochem-
face (especially the periocular region), digits,
istry for antibodies against type 2M fibers are
footpads, and tail. Characteristic dermatologic
used to provide a diagnosis of masticatory
fndings include alopecia, vesicles, ulceration,
myositis.
erythema, scaling and crusting. Clinical signs
Immunosuppressive doses of systemic corti-
of myositis occur after the development of the
costeroids (prednisone 1-2 mg/kg PO BID) for
skin lesions and include dysphagia, mega-
a minimum of one month before tapering are
esophagus, generalized weakness, stiff gait, and
recommended at any stage of the disease. Prog-
muscle atrophy. A diagnosis of dermatomyo-
nosis is good for dogs treated appropriately
sitis is made based on appropriate history.
with immunosuppressive dosages of corticoste-
clinical signs and demonstration of histopatho-
roids, although some dogs may require life-
logical fndings that are consistent with the
long therapy with these drugs.
disease. Treatment of dermatomyositis is aimed
The second form of focal inflammatory
 at reducing skin exposure to sun and prevent-
myositis is extraocular myositis. Extraocu-
ing trauma to the skin. Treatment of dermato-
lar myositis involves only the extraocular
myositis also includes the use of oral vitamin E
 muscles and affects predominantly young
or fatty acid supplements.
large-breed dogs. Bilateral exophthalmos is
474 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
the predominant clinical sign in the acute
Uveodermatologic Syndrome (Vogt-
form of the disease. Chronic extraocular
Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrome)
myositis can result in restrictive strabismus
and is due to chronic fibrosis of the extra-
Vogt-Koyanagi1
Harada (VKH)
syndrome
ocular muscles (Fig. 16.l.3).
describes an idiopathic condition in humans
As opposed to masticatory myositis, circu-
characterized by uveitis, poliosis, vitiligo, ±
lating antibodies to type 2M muscle fbers are
changes in hearing ability, and meningitis. A
not present. Inflammatory infltrate of affected
similar syndrome is recognized in the dog.
muscles include lymphocytes and macrophages
except that meningitis is rarely reported, hence
and fbrosis may be present depending on the
the terms uveodermatologic or VKH-like syn-
chronicity of the disease. Immunosuppressive
drome have been applied. The most recent
corticosteroid therapy is indicated in cases of
hypothesis regarding the etiology of the condi-
extraocular myositis (as for masticatory myosi-
tion is that it results from an immune-mediated
tis). Adjunctive corrective strabismus surgery
destruction of melanocytes. First described in
     n   
the Akita, the condition has also been reported
ocular myositis where the disease
isin
in the Australian Shepherd, Beagle, Brazilian
remission.
Fila, Chow Chow, Dachshund， Golden
 Retriever, Irish Setter, Old English Sheepdog.
 Saint Bernard, Samoyed, Shetland Sheepdog.
and Siberian Husky.
Patients are presented for a complaint of
sudden blindness or gradual vision loss. Ocular
lesions vary from bilateral anterior uveitis to
 severe panuveitis. Bullous retinal detachments
may occur, and secondary cataracts and glau-
coma are common. The iris and retinal pigment
epithelium develop progressive depigmenta-
tion. As the depigmentation progresses, the
tapetal fundus becomes hyperreflective, and
retinal vascular attenuation as well as optic
nerve atrophy may develop (Fig. 16.1.4).
Dermal and hair depigmentation (vitiligo and
poliosis, respectively) develop either gradually
or rapidly, and they may be ulcerative in nature.
The lesions are usually restricted to the face,
involving the eyelids, nasal planum, and lips,
but the scrotum and footpads are other areas
of possible dermal involvement.
At present, there is no specific diagnostic test
for uveodermatologic syndrome. The diagnosis
B
is made on the basis of clinical signs and histo-
pathologic examination of skin biopsies, which
Fig. 16.1.3. Extraocular myositis. A. Golden
show lichenoid dermatitis, histiocytes, and
Retriever, l-year-old male, with left ventral
small mononuclear cells as well as giant cell
strabismus at initial presentation. B. Close-up of the
infltrations. The level of melanin in the epider-
left eye, only sclera visible due to severe globe
mis and hair follicles is decreased. Enucleated
deviation. (Reprinted with permission from Allgoewer
eyes have a marked panuveal infltrate of mac-
I, Blair M, Basher I, Davidson M, Hamilton H,
rophages, plasma cells, and lymphocytes.
Jandeck C, Ward D, Wolfer J, Shelton GD
Extraocular muscle myositis and restrictive strabismus
 The prognosis for dogs affected with uveo-
in 10 dogs. Veterinary Ophthalmology
 dermatologic syndrome is guarded, and therapy
2000;3:21-26.)
should be considered to be life-long. Relapses
Ocular Manifestations Of Systemic Disease/475
may result in varying degrees of focal chorio-
retinal lesions consisting of hemorrhage or exu-
dates (or both), which often go unnoted.
 Further, bacterial infection of the CNS, causing
 a meningitis or meningoencephalitis, can result
in ocular signs that are related to the region of
the brain involved. Importantly, bacterial men-
ingitis/meningoencephalitis of dogs and cats
typically results from local extension or pene-
tration of the CNS by bacterial organisms, while
bacterial   meningitis/meningoencephalitis
1S
typically due to hematogenous spread of bacte-
ria in large animal species.
Bartonellosis
Fig. 16.1.4. Multifocal, depigmented lesions in the
Canine bartonellosis results from infection with
nontapetal fundus of a dog with Vogt-Koyanagi-
 the Gram-negative, intracellular bacilli or coc-
Harada syndrome. (Reprinted with permission from
cobacilli bacterium, Bartonella spp. There are
Martin CL. Ocular manifestations of systemic disease.
numerous species of Bartonella. Bartonella
Part l: The dog. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
henselae (causative agent of cat scratch disease),
ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
B. vinsoni (berkhoffi), B. clarridgeiae, and B. eliz-
Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1401-1448.)
  i  r   
occurring disease in dogs and B. vinsonii (berk-
hoffi) appears to be an important species to
 are frequent if therapy is stopped or tapered.
 Because of the immunosuppressive therapy.
sion of Bartonella spp. is thought to be an
periodic rechecks as well as blood and liver
 important mode of infection in dogs, as serore-
evaluations are necessary.1
Initial therapy
activity for bartonella exposure is often found
involves immunosuppressive doses of oral
concurrently with other tick-borne infectious
prednisone ± azathioprine or cyclophospha-
agents.
mide. Azathioprine has a lag period of 3-5
 Clinical presentation is variable but anterior
weeks before it becomes effective; thus, taper-
uveitis, hyphema, retinal detachment due to
ing of corticosteroids should not be attempted
systemic hypertension, and choroiditis (Fig.
before this period. Maintenance therapy may
16.1.5).
Treatment of canine bartonellosis
require one or both drugs at a markedly reduced
consists of systemic antimicrobial therapy
dose. Topical corticosteroids may be used for
including the macrolides (e.g., azithromycin),
anterior segment lesions.
fluoroquinolones (e.g., enrofloxacin), and dox-
ycycline (recommended to be used at high
dosages—10 mg/kg ql2h for 4-6 weeks).
Infectious Diseases
Bacteria!
Borreliosis (Lyme Disease)
Any sporadic bacteremia may result in seeding
Lyme disease, or borreliosis, is a tick-borne
of the uveal tract and create various degrees of
spirochetosis produced by Borrelia burgdorferi,
inflammation, but only a few bacterial syn-
P     
dromes are relatively consistent regarding
humans and dogs worldwide. Borrelia organ-
isms, like most spirochetes, are small, cork-
mia from bacterial infections involving other
 screw-shaped, motile microaerophilic bacteria
organ systems (e.g., periodontitis or pyometra)
of the order Spirochaetales. B. burgdorferi is
476 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteriNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
endemic areas, and on the basis of response to
antibiotic  therapy. Various  antimicrobials
including tetracyclines, some cephalosporins
(e.g., ceftriaxone), and macrolides are useful for
treating borreliosis. Doxycycline is one of the
first-line antimicrobials of choice. It is presently
advised that animals with borreliosis be treated
for at least 30 days and in cases of chronic bor-
reliosis, experimental evidence indicates that
longer term therapy would be needed.
Fig. l6.l.5. Bartonellosis in a dog. Fundus
Botulism
photograph demonstrating multifocal, gray,
hyporeflective areas in the tapetal fundus. (Reprinted
 Botulism results from the neurotoxin produced
with permission Irom Michau TM, Breitschwerdt EB
by Clostridium botulinum.Clostridium botulinum
Gilger BC, Davidson MG. Bartonella vinsonii
is a Gram-positive, spore-forming, saprophytic,
subspecies berkhoff as a possible cause of anterior
anaerobic, rod-shaped bacterium. There are
uveitis and choroiditis in a dog. Veterinary
eight subtypes (A-Ca, Cb-G) of C. botulinum
Ophthalmology 2003;6:299-304.)
and they are differentiated from each other
based upon the type of neurotoxin they
produce. Dogs have been only affected with C.
transmitted primarily by ticks of the Ixodes sp..
botulinum types C and D.
but Amblyomma americanum has also been asso-
Clinical signs develop following ingestion of
ciated with outbreaks. Once inside the host,
 the bacterium in contaminated food including
 these organisms rarely spread hematogenously,
carrion and raw meat. After ingestion of con-
but rather use their flagella to move through
taminated meat, the toxin, botulinal toxin, is
connective tissue.
absorbed in the gut and prevents the release of
In l32 seropositive dogs, five had a
acetylcholine at cholinergic synapses. Conse-
primary complaint of ocular lesions. Ocular
quently, clinical signs are suggestive of skeletal
lesions were undoubtedly1
under-repre-
muscular weakness and autonomic dysfunc-
sented, however, because of the study design
tion. Signs include symmetrical ascending limb
and the difficulty in making a definitive diag-
 paresis leading to paralysis, depressed or absent
nosis of borreliosis. Documented ocular
tendon reflexes, abnormal motor responses
lesions included conjunctivitis, corneal
 during cranial nerve testing, and excessive sali-
edema, anterior uveitis, retinal petechia,
vation. Ocular signs that manifest include
chorioretinitis, and retinal detachment.
mydriasis due to loss of parasympathetic/sym-
Numerous problems exist regarding anti-
pathetic balance on the iris. Definitive diagno-
body testing for borreliosis because there is no
 sis is made based on finding the toxin, through
current standardization for antigen prepara-
use of the neutralization test in mice, in the
tions, techniques, or interpretations across dif-
food, vomitus, feces or serum. Treatment con-
ferent laboratories. Hence, other confrmatory
 sists of supportive care and antitoxin adminis-
tests must be performed including the Western
tration (to prevent further binding of toxin).
blot assay or the new C6 enzyme-linked immu-
 Prognosis is variable and is dependent upon the
nosorbent assay (ELISA). PCR for B. burgdorferi
severity of the disease and whether secondary
can be conducted on skin, synovia, and con-
complications (e.g., pneumonia) occur.
nective tissue samples.
A presumptive diagnosis of borreliosis can
be made on the basis of compatible signs
Brucellosis
(usually lameness, joint pain, pyrexia, and
lymphadenopathy of lymph nodes of the limbs),
The etiologic agent of canine brucellosis is Bru-
ruling out other causes of systemic disease in
cella canis, which is a zoonotic aerobic, Gram-
OCULAR MAN1FeStAT1ONS OF SYSteM1C D1SEASE/477
negative coccobacillus. B. canis naturally infects
brucellosis. Serological testing for brucellosis is
dogs by penetrating mucous membranes such
problematic. Nevertheless, serological testing is
as occurs via coitus. Aside from venereal trans-
the most commonly used diagnostic technique
mission, Brucella spp. can be transmitted via
for the diagnosis of brucellosis. The preferred
fomites such as cages or equipment. Following
in-hospital screening procedure is the 2-mer-
 penetration of mucous membranes, bacteremia
captoethanol rapid slide agglutination test (ME-
ensues. Brucella sp. are intracellular bacteria
RSAT) (D-Tec CB; Synbiotics, San Diego, CA).
that persist for extended periods in mononu-
False negative results are rare. In addition, a
clear phagocytes and produce a prolonged
PCR test identifying Brucella spp. relevant to
bacteremia.
humans has been developed with potential
Brucella canis has been isolated from the eye
application in dogs.
and is recognized as a cause of uveitis in both
Before treatment is recommended, the zoo-
experimental and naturally occurring brucello-
notic potential and difficulty in clearing the
sis. Infected dogs are often times not systemi-
organism from the animal should be carefully
cally ill. Because of the insidious nature of
explained to the owner. Because brucella can
the systemic disease, infected dogs are often
be harbored in reproductive organs, neutering
      
of intact affected animals should be encouraged
systemic signs (approximately 14% of all
to decrease any risk of transmission to humans.
brucellosis cases have endophthalmic uveitis,
A variety of systemic antibiotic regimens have
chronic uveitis, hyphema, chorioretinitis,
been employed, but relapses are common. A
and posterior synechia) (Fig. 16.1.6). Ocular
treatment regimen of oral tetracycline HCl,
inflammation associated with ocular brucellosis
30 mg/kg given twice a day for 1 month, and
is typically chronic and slowly progressive.
intramuscular streptomycin, 20 mg/kg once a
Bacteriological isolation of the microorgan-
day for the frst 2 weeks, resulted in an appar-
ism is the only means of definitively diagnosing
ent cure rate of 94%.
Currently, there is no effective vaccine
against brucellosis. Furthermore, control of
       
task and involves quarantine of the entire
kennel, and prompt elimination of infected
animals.
Leptospirosis
The causative agent of canine leptospirosis is
Leptospira interrogans sensu lato. Predominant
serovars responsible for causing clinical disease
in dogs include,canicola, icterohemorrhagiae,
 grippotyphosa, pomona, and bratislava. It appears,
however, that the disease causing serovars,
namely grippotyphosa, pomona, and bratislava,
Fig. 16.1.6. Indirect ophthalmoscopic view of the
are becoming more prevalent. Direct transmis-
right fundus in a dog with Brucella canis-induced
sion can occur through contact with infected
ocular inflammation. Multifocal hyperreflective areas
urine, bites, ingestion of infected material, and
in the dorsolateral aspect of the tapetum consistent
contact with contaminated water.
with inactive chorioretinitis are evident. (Reprinted
After infection, the organism multiplies and
with permission from Vinayak A, Greene CE, Moore
bacteremia ensues. Leptospires sequester in
PA, Powell-Johnson G. Clinical resolution of Brucella
canis-induced ocular inlammation in a dog. Journal
various organs, particularly kidneys, liver,
of the American Veterinary Medical Association
spleen, central nervous system and the eyes.
2004;224:1804-1809.)
 Involvement of a particular organ results in
478 /EsSEntiAlS OF VeteRinArY OgHtHAlmOLOGY
expected clinical signs including acute renal or
       
hepatic failure/dysfunction. Nevertheless, in
protrusion of the third eyelid and enophthal-
the acute phase of infection, conjunctivitis,
mus resulting from globe retraction due to the
scleritis, and anterior uveitis may present in
hypertonicity of the extraocular muscles
concert with other systemic signs.
Diagnosis is made based upon consistent
Diagnosis of leptospirosis is dependent on
physical examination findings (presence of a
consistent clinical signs and detection of anti-
wound) and clinical signs. Treatment is aimed
bodies using the microscopic agglutination test
at administering tetanus antitoxin and penicil-
(MAT) or ELISA and/or evidence of the pres-
 lin-G and/or metronidazole to prevent binding
ence of the organism in urine using darkfeld
of any unbound toxin and to destroy any
microscopy, or by visualizing the organism in
remaining bacteria, respectively. Tetanus anti-
histological preparations, directly culturing the
toxin therapy should be done only after intra-
organism or by detecting organismal DNA
dermal testing with this antitoxin as there is a
using PCR. Treatment of leptospirosis
is
strong likelihood of anaphylaxis following sys-
directed at (l) eliminating the bacteremia by
temic administration. Supportive care and
initially using penicillins, specifically ampicillin
wound management are also indicated. Prog-
and amoxicillin, and (2) eliminating the carrier
 nosis is variable depending upon the severity
state by administering tetracyclines. Prognosis
of the clinical signs and secondary complica-
for complete recovery is variable depending on
tions (e.g, aspiration pneumonia).
the severity of renal injury and development of
complications such as disseminated intravascu-
Mycotic
lar coagulation.
Acremoniosis
Tetanus
Acremoniosis is a systemic mycotic infection
caused by Acremonium spp. Systemic signs in
Tetanus is caused by the neurotoxin produced
the dog were similar of disseminated aspergil-
by the bacterium Clostridium tetani. C. tetani is
losis. Clinical signs include various general
a motile, Gram-positive, nonencapsulated,
malaise, weight loss and anorexia, lymphomeg-
anaerobic, rod-shaped, spore-forming bacte-
aly, neurological signs (depending on the neu-
rium. Dogs and cats are naturally resistant
roanatomic focus of the principle pathologic
 ad   o 
as
process) and various ocular signs. Ophthalmo-
humans and horses. Clinical signs of tetanus
logic signs include chemosis, corneal edema,
develop when spores of C. tetani enter the body
anterior uveitis, focal chorioretinitis, and
through skin wounds or during surgical proce-
bullous retinal detachments.
dures. Spores become vegetative and a toxin,
Diagnosis is made based on detection of the
tetanospasmin, retrogradely migrates along
 organism on histopathological examination of
axons of motor nerves to the central nervous
tissues and by culturing the organism from
system.
tissues and urine. Treatment is similar to that
Clinical signs may be localized or general-
for systemic aspergillosis, and, as such, sup-
ized. In the localized form increases in stiff-
portive therapy combined with systemic itra-
ness of specific muscle groups or a given
conazole administration is utilized. Because of
limb may be noted (more common in cats
the relative paucity of cases of acremoniosis,
than dogs). In the generalized form, affected
prognosis is diffcult to determine.
dogs  will initially have a characteristic
smiling/sneering appearance (risus sardoni-
cus) and a stiff gait that may progress to
Aspergillosis
megaesophagus ± hiatal hernia, complete
rigid paralysis with the appearance of peri-
Aspergillosis is caused by the flamentous
odic generalized convulsive-type behavior.
fungus Aspergillus spp. Aspergillus spp. are con-
Respiratory compromise may result in death.
sidered ubiquitous in the environment, and
OCULAr MaN1FESTAtIONs OF SYsteMIC DiSEASE/479
animals are infected opportunistically after
of blastomycosis, presumably because of
inhaling Aspergillus spores.  Infection with
outdoor exposure. The group at highest risk is
Aspergillus spp. is either localized or dissemi-
usually reported to be 2- to 4-year-old intact
nated. Localized aspergillosis involves coloni-
male dogs. Breeds including Bluetick Coon-
zation of the respiratory sinuses and nasal
hounds, Treeing-Walker Coonhounds, Point-
mucosa. Secondary CNS involvement may
ers, and Weimaraners have been reported to
result from erosion of the cribriform plate.
have the highest risk of B. dermatitidis
Disseminated infection occurs typically
infection.
in the immunocompromised patient  and
 Blastomycosis is not a contagious or zoo-
involves a whole host of organ systems,
notic disease but has been transmitted to a
although history of respiratory involvement
person through an accidental needle-stick.
is not typically documented. It occurs most
Typically, blastomycosis develops following the
frequently in German Shepherd dogs perhaps
inhalation of organismal spores. After inhala-
because of an inherited impairment in their
tion of the infective conidia by the host, these
immune system.
infective spores become phagocytized by alveo-
The most common clinical signs relate to
lar macrophages and transform from the myce-
multiple organ system involvement, 2
and
lial phase to the yeast phase. The common B.
include general malaise, pyrexia, anorexia and
dermatitidis-infected organs in dogs are the
weight loss, and bone pain. Other signs are
skin, eyes, bones, lymph nodes, subcutaneous
attributed to involvement of the liver, kidneys,
tissues, prostate, brain, and testicles.
CNS, and eyes. Disseminated aspergillosis
Clinical signs in dogs with blastomycosis
has been reported to cause panuveitis, cho-
vary significantly due to the multisystemic
rioretinitis, exudative retinal detachments,
nature of the disease. Nonspecific signs of
and endophthalmitis. Diagnosis is made
anorexia, lethargy, depression, fever, weight
based on identification and culture of urine
loss, and cachexia are common. Pulmonary
sediment, serum, synovial fluid, vitreous,
signs are seen in 43-88% of dogs affected
lymph node, or intervertebral disc centesis
with blastomycosis, ranging from mild respi-
specimens. Treatment is directed at eliminat-
ratory distress during physical exertion to
ing the organism by administering amphoteri-
severe dyspnea at rest. Nearly 60% of dogs
cin B, itraconazole, or fluconazole intravenously.
with blastomycosis develop lymphadenopa-
Long-term therapy with oral azoles may be
thy, while cutaneous lesions are reported in
required. Regardless, the prognosis for recov-
approximately 30% of affected dogs. Ocular
ery from disseminated aspergillosis is very
involvement has been reported in as many
poor.
as 48% of dogs with blastomycosis. Ocular
signs have been reported as the sole indica-
tor of B. dermatitidis infection in up to 3.0%
Blastomycosis
of diagnosed cases. Approximately 50% of the
ocular lesions caused by B. dermatitidis are
Blastomycosis is a systemic mycotic infection
bilateral. For prognostic purposes, the ocular
caused by the dimorphic fungus, Blastomyces
lesions have been divided into anterior
dermatitidis. B. dermatitidis is a thick-walled
segment only (5-30%), anterior and poste-
yeast that reproduces by budding in infected
rior segment lesions (endophthalmitis, 26--
tissues (i.e., yeast phase), and in nature, is most
72%), and posterior segment (22-43%).
likely a soil saprophyte that produces infective
The initial lesion may be a pyogranuloma-
spores called conidia (i.e., mycelial phase). The
 tous choroiditis arising as a result of hematog-
tissue budding yeast form is 5-20 μm in size,
enous spread of the B. dermatitidis to the
with a thick, double-contoured wall. B. derma-
choroid, thereby producing a pyogranuloma-
titidis is endemic in North America, India, and
       
Africa.
Progression of the choroiditis produces an
Young. large breed sporting dogs and
extension into the subretinal space and focal
hounds living near water are at increased risk
subretinal granulomas, which in turn may
480 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
progress to exudative retinal detachments.
Coccidiodomycosis (Valley Fever; San
Severe anterior uveitis, accompanied by sec-
Joaquin Valley Fever)
ondary glaucoma, is indicative of endophthal-
mitis even if the posterior segment cannot be
Coccidiodomycosis, caused by the dimorphic
visualized. Additional ocular lesions of canine
fungus Coccidioides immitis, is found in sandy,
blastomycosis are optic neuritis, retinal and
alkaline soils of the dry regions of the south-
vitreal hemorrhages, and orbital cellulitis.
western United States, western Mexico, and
Granulomatous chorioretinitis  occurring
 Central and South America. Cocidiodes spp.
concurrently with systemic signs is suggestive
produce mycelia during seasonal rainfall. As
of B. dermatitidis infection. Thoracic radio-
the soil dries, arthrospores develop and become
graphic assessment is often very useful in the
airborne under dry and windy conditions. The
diagnostic evaluation of a dog with suspected
major route of Coccidiodes spp. infection is via
blastomycosis. In particular, 70% of canine
inhalation.
cases demonstrate an interstitial pulmonary
Coccidiodomycosis may produce a wide
pattern on thoracic radiographs including clas-
variety of clinical diseases, depending on the
sical nodular (41% of cases), diffuse (24%) or
immunocompetence of the host, ranging from
broncho- (5%) interstitial patterns. Definitive
a mild, subclinical respiratory disease to a
diagnosis of this disease is made by identifica-
severe multisystemic disseminated disease. In
tion of the B. dermatitidis organism via cytology.
the lung. the arthrospores transform into their
histopathology, or fungal culture.
parasitic form, spherules, which gradually
Therapy for systemic mycoses, no matter
enlarge to 200 μum in diameter. These spherules
what etiology, is a financial
dilemma.
contain endospores that, when released follow-
Therapy becomes prohibitively expensive
ing rupture of the spherule at maturity, form
for many owners because most of the
new endosporulating spherules. Dissemination
affected dogs are large breeds, therapy
Anu wm sop jo %7t oi dn u 1noo Xeu
may be very protracted, and long-term
Occurring coccidioidomycosis. Preferred sites
imidazole medications are very costly.
for dissemination are the bones, joints,
Currently,
itraconazole is
considered
central nervous system, pericardium, lymph
the drug of choice for the treatment of
nodes, and eyes. The exact incidence of
blastomycosis. Blastomycosis can be clinically
ocular lesions in dogs with coccidioidomy-
cured in 2
approximately upto80%
of
cosis is unknown, but in one study, 42% of
appropriately treated dogs. Relapse occurs in
patients with ocular lesions had no systemic
-  n J  Ae
clinical signs, and 80% of the ocular lesions
rence may occur from months to years follow-
were unilateral. Clinical ocular manifesta-
ing the cessation of therapy. Therapeutic
tions were most frequent in the anterior
success rates for ocular blastomycosis have
segment, but they were also difficult to clas-
been reported to be 42% with oral itracon-
sify because of use of the redundant terms
azole, 5 mg/kg twice a day for 60 days, and
of iritis, uveitis, and chorioretinitis. Ocular
40% with a protocol of amphotericin B, 0.5-
signs included keratitis in 49%, anterior
1.0 mg/kg intravenously every 48 hours for a
uveitis in 43% and glaucoma in 3l% of
cumulative dose of 4-6 mg/kg, and ketocon-
cases.
azole, 10-20 mg/kg every 24 hours for 30-90
A granulomatous uveitis, either unilateral or
days. The majority of dogs with anterior
bilateral, in a dog from an endemic area with
segment disease (65%) have the affected eye
corresponding clinical signs is suggestive of
enucleated. While eyes of dogs with posterior
coccidioidomycosis. However, it should be
segment disease have an increased likelihood
noted that nearly half of the patients with ocular
(76%) of recovering. Treatment of anterior
lesions do not have overt systemic signs. Cul-
segment lesions is nonspecific involving the
turing Coccidiodes spp. is discouraged because
use of topical atropine, and prostaglandin
of the highly contagious nature of the mycelial
inhibitors. Enucleation is also indicated for
phase. Serologic testing, consisting of precipitin
blind, painful eyes.
and complement fixation (CF) tests, are avail-
OCULAR MaN1FeStAT1ONS Of SYSteM1C D1SEASE /481
able if the organism is not found in tissue
specimens.
Treatment
tof  coccidioidomycosis
is
similar to that for other systemic mycoses
(i.e., extended azole therapy or amphoteri-
cin B, or these drugs used in combination or
in succession). Response to treatment may
also be monitored by evaluating radiographs of
the lesions in the thorax and bone (if involved).
Relapses are common.
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus neo-
formans or Cryptococcus gattii (previously C.
neoformans var. gatti). C. neoformans is associ-
Fig. 16.1.7. Labrador Retriever with tetraparesis
ated with high nitrogen containing environ-
ments such as avian feces or soil enriched with
and cryptococcus in the cerebrospinal fluid. Optic
 neuritis and multiple retinal hemorrhages are present,
avian feces. In infected tissue, and often when
and a granuloma adjacent to the disc is obscured by
cultured using standard laboratory conditions,
a hemorrhage. Vasculitis is evident, with multiple
C. neoformans is a variably sized yeast-like
hemorrhages, perivascular infltrate around smaller
organism (3.5-7 μm), which typically contains
vessels, and marked hyperemia. (Reprinted with
a thick capsule.
permission from Martin CL. Ocular manifestations of
Cryptococcosis has been described in a
systemic disease. Part l: The dog. In: Gelatt KN, ed.
variety of mammals as well as in humans.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Importantly, cryptococcosis is not contagious
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 140i-1448.)
and inhalation of the yeast-like organism is the
likely mode of infection and dissemination
occurs through hematological spread. The pre-
Identification of the causative agent permits
dominant signs of cryptococcosis vary with the
confirmation of the diagnosis of cryptococcosis.
affected species, immune status of the patient,
Ocular lesions are suggestive of mycotic cho-
and perhaps, the strain of organism.
rioretinitis, and vitreous or subretinal fluid cen-
Canine cryptococcosis  is uncommonly
tesis, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tap (in
reported in comparison to other systemic
CNS-infected cases) will usually reveal the
mycotic infections such as blastomycosis and in
causative organism on cytological assessment.
comparison to feline cryptococcosis. Clinical
Histopathological evaluation of infected tissues
manifestations of canine cryptococcosis
 is also helpful for definitive diagnosis. The thin
pertain mainly to CNS involvement, and
wall and large capsule of Cryptococcus allow
ocular, upper respiratory, or cutaneous
ready differentiation from Blastomyces. Crypto-
lesions. Twenty to 40% of dogs with crypto-
coccal organisms can also be readily cultured
coccosis have ocular and/or periorbital
on Sabouraud's agar from infected tissue, CSF,
involvement. The most common ocular
exudate, blood, urine, and joint fluid. Alterna-
lesion of cryptococcosis is granulomatous to
tively, the latex agglutination test for C. neofor-
pyogranulomatous chorioretinitis with or
mans is an antigen test against a cryptococcal
without exudative retinal detachment. Direct
capsular antigen.
and/or indirect ophthalmoscopic examina-
Treatment of cryptococcosis involves subcu-
tion may also reveal retinal hemorrhage (Fig.
taneous, diluted amphotericin B in combina-
16.1.7) or chorioretinal scarring. The degree
tion with oral flucytosine (especially helpful for
of cellular reaction inside the eye varies from
treating CNS-infected cases) or azole therapy.
a mild chorioretinitis to panophthalmitis.
Fluconazole is recommended for cases of ocular
482 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Or CNS cryptococcosus. Therapy should be
monitored both by clinical improvement and
potentially the gastrointestinal tract, then the
by monitoring C. neoformans antigen titers.
organism disseminates via monocytes if the
Therapy should be continued until titers have
exposure is overwhelming or the host is
dropped to l:l0 or less. The prognosis
is
immunocompromised.
guarded in most affected dogs because 
Most infections are probably subclinical
increased likelihood of CNS involvement.
respiratory infections. Clinical signs include
pyrexia, inappetance and weight loss, general
Dermatophytosis
malaise, and coughing. With respect to ocular
signs, the choroid appears to be the target.
Pyogranulomatous inflammation extending
 Dermatophytosis, or cutaneous infections with
into the subretinal space producing focal or
fungi, are usually caused by Microsporum canis,
M. gypseum,Irichophyton mentagrophytes,
coalescing lesions and retinal detachment
or
 some combination of these. Young animals are
has been observed. Optic neuritis and ante-
rior uveitis may also occur. Histoplasmosis-
more frequently affected by dermatophytosis.
induced granulomatous chorioretinitis is similar
Because dermatophytes are a cause of facial
dermatitis, they frequently involve the eyelids,
in appearance, ophthalmoscopically, to chorio-
retinal lesions associated with other causes of
typically producing a dry, crusty, periocular
systemic mycoses. Unlike other mycotic infec-
alopecia. The condition is diagnosed on the
tions, H. capsulatum organisms are relatively
basis of direct microscopic examination of skin
few in number and are small (2-4 μm in diam-
 scrapings from lesions, Wood's light examina-
eter), round to oval, intracellular (typically
 tion, or more frequently, direct fungal culturing
within phagocytic cells of the mononuclear
with dermatophyte test medium
phagocyte system) yeast cells. H. capsulatum
Therapy, if necessary, is oral griseofulvin for
organisms may, therefore, require enhance-
4-6 weeks and environmental decontamina-
ment with Gomori methenamine-silver (GMS)
tion. When treating facial dermatophytes with
 one of a variety of antifungal shampoos, it is
staining to visualize them and establish the
diagnosis. Cytological and biopsy specimens of
important to avoid geting these cleansing
infected tissues may establish the diagnosis.
agents in the animal's eyes.
Culture of the organism can be performed by
plating biological fluid, including cerebrospinal
Histoplasmosis
fluid, on Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Serologic
diagnosis of histoplasmosis using an agar-gel
Histoplasmosis is caused by a dimorphic
immunodiffusion (AGID) test is 80% sensitive
fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum, which exists in
and almost 100% specific. A negative test result
various river bottoms as a mycelial-phase, soil
does not rule out the disease, however, and a
saprophyte. Although widespread in North and
positive test result may only indicate previous
South America, endemic areas are in the Ohio,
exposure in endemic areas.
Missouri, and Mississippi river valleys. The life
Dogs with ocular lesions typically do not
cycle of H. capsulatum is similar to that of Blas-
respond to antifungal therapy. Long-term
tomyces and Coccidioides spp., with a mycelial
therapy and a propensity for relapse are
phase in the soil that produces conidia, which
characteristic.
once in the pulmonary system convert to a
budding yeast phase. Histoplasma organisms
can then be disseminated via hematogenous or
Parasitic—Dipteric Larvae
lymphatic spread.
Histoplasmosis has been observed com-
Ophthalmomyiasis
monly in dogs and cats. Experimentally, ocular
lesions have been identified in 66% of dogs
Ophthalmomyiasis interna has beenobserved
and occurred preferentially in the anterior
in the dog and the cat, and refers to the
choroid, iris, ciliary body, and sclera. Histo-
intraocular migration of fly (Diptera) larvae.
OCULaR MaN1FeStAt1Ons Of SYSteM1C D1SeasE /483
The three forms are named according to
the pulmonary arteries and right heart of dogs
location of the larvae and include (l) oph-
and wild carnivores in parts of Europe, Africa,
thalmomyiasis externa, where the larvae are
Asia, and recently Canada. Dogs are infected by
found in the orbital and extraocular tissues;
eating intermediate hosts such as snails and
(2) ophthalmomyiasis interna anterior,
slugs. Migrating larvae may become aberrant
where the larvae are found in the anterior
and may be found in the eye. Severe granulo-
chamber of the eye; and (3) ophthalmomy-
matous uveitis and secondary glaucoma have
iasis interna posterior, where larvae are
been observed with chronic involvement. A.
found in the posterior segment of the eye.
vasorum infection may also manifest in acute
The point of entry of the fly larvae is
       
unknown but it is postulated that fly larvae
chamber.
cross the conjunctival surfaces. Ophthalmomy-
Standard
1 therapy for infection  with A.
iasis may be presented in the acute stages if an
vasorum is oral levamisole. Treatment with
anterior uveitis is produced, but more com-
other anthelminthics such as ivermectin or fen-
monly, the syndrome is noted as an incidental
bendazole are reported. Recently, oral milbe-
finding in the chronic stages. The characteristic
mycin oxime has been demonstrated to relieve
ophthalmoscopic lesions are wandering, curvi-
clinical signs and prevent fecal shedding of
    r  
larvae.
associated with retinal and preretinal hemor-
rhages in the acute stage. If the larva is observed
it is typically photosensitive, moving away from
Dirofilariasis (Canine Heartworm Disease)
a strong light.
Direct visualization of the larvae in either the
Diroflariasis, canine heartworm infection,
anterior or the posterior segment of the eye
caused by Diroflaria immitis, is the most com-
occurs, but more commonly, the finding is of
monly reported intraocular nematode among
typical wandering tracts in the ocular fundus.
dogs in North America. Dirofilarisis infects
Only acute cases warrant therapy, and topical
numerous species of canids, cats, ferrets, sea
Or systemic corticosteroids are indicated
lions and humans.
depending on the location of the lesion (or
Ocular involvement with D. immitis is
lesions). If the larva is present, laser energy may
postulated to arise as a result of aberrant
be attempted to kill the larva, even though it is
migration of fourth-stage larvae from the
 not pigmented. Physical removal of the larva
subconjunctival space into the eye, with
from the anterior chamber and vitreous space
subsequent development to immature adults
has also been performed. Systemic organo-
 or fifth-stage larvae. Approximately half of
phosphates have been used as well to treat oph-
these infected dogs do not have microfilare-
thalmomyiasis  interna,  but because
the
mia or are occult. All ocular involvement was
condition spontaneously improves in most
unilateral. The worm was in the anterior
instances, the efficacy of this treatment is
chamber in 20 of the 2l cases, but it may also
unknown. Killing the larva may incite more
be found in the vitreous. Anterior uveitis and
intraocular inflammation, however, and waiting
corneal edema were consistent ocular manifes-
for spontaneous departure of the larva from the
tations, and ocular discomfort was exacerbated
eye may be prudent.
by examination of the affected eye with a light,
which stimulated parasitic movement. The
uveitis and corneal edema are postulated to be
Parasitic-Nematodes
associated with mechanical trauma from the
worm, toxic metabolic byproducts from the
Angiostrongylosis (Heartworm of France;
worm, or an immune reaction to the worm.
French Heartworm)
The diagnosis of intraocular diroflariasis is
established by fnding the worm, usually
Angiostrongylosis is caused by the nematode
 present in the anterior chamber of dogs in areas
Angiostrongylus vasorum. A. vasorum inhabits
endemic for heartworm (Fig. 16.1.8). Therapy
484 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNArY OPHTHALmOLOGY
onchocerciasis is characterized by conjunctivi-
tis, chemosis, and periorbital swelling. In some
cases, parts of the parasite are observed on the
conjunctival surface or other periocular tissues
In chronic cases, parasite-containing granulo-
matous nodules are found in various parts of
the eye and periocular tissues. Nodules are his-
topathologically characterized by being highly
vascular, containing parasites and are com-
posed of eosinophils, plasma cells, histiocytes,
and fibroblasts.
Fig. 16.1.8. Heartworm flaria within the anterior
Diagnosis is made based on consistent clini-
chamber of a dog's eye. (Reprinted with permission
cal examination findings and, in acute cases, by
[rom Carastro SM, Dugan SJ, Paul AJ. Intraocular
identifying the presence of worm fragments on
diroflariasis in dogs. Compendium on Continuing
 the conjunctiva or in periocular tissues. Therapy
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
for ocular onchocerciasis involves, in part, sur-
1992;14:209-217.)
gical removal of the granulomatous nodules
and other tissues containing the worm. Admin-
istration of antimicrobials effective against the
has involved removal of the D. immitis worm
endosymbiont (tetracyclines) may be useful at
eliminating the parasite. Antiparasitic agents
through a limbal incision, and has been suc-
such as ivermectin and diethylcarbamazine are
cessful in 90% of patients so treated. The most
not effective against adult worms but are effec-
commonly reported ocular complication is
tive against dirofilaria.
corneal edema that was persistent in only four
of twenty-one cases of intraocular diroflariasis.
Anterior uveitis, in cases of intraocular dirofla-
Strongylidiasis (Hookworms)
riasis, should be treated with topical corticoste-
roids and atropine.
 Strongylidiasis is caused by the aberrant migra-
tion of strongyles (order Strongylida). The most
common routes of infection of a common
Onchocerciasis (Onchocercosis)
strongyle of dogs, Ancyclostoma sp., is through
ingestion of larvae or direct penetration of
Ocular onchocerciasis is caused by the nema-
larvae through intact skin.
tode, Onchocerca spp, but the exact species
Affected dogs have granulomatous endo-
causing canine ocular onchoceriasis is specula-
phthalmitis and secondary glaucoma and on
tive and concensus has yet to be reached. Larval
histopathologic examination of the affected eye,
maturation is thought to occur in black flies
revealed an adult Strongylida worm in the pos-
(Simulium) or gnats/midges (Culicoides),. the
terior chamber, Ancylostoma caninum (although
intermediate hosts. Larvae are then transmitted
Uncinaria sp. could not be ruled out).
to the defnitive host (dog in this case) via
blood feeding of the insect. The parasites then
mature, mate, and produce microflariae that
Toxocariasis (Roundworm Ascarids)
are ingested by the intermediate host, and so
on. To date, canine ocular onchocerciasis has
Toxocariasis is caused by the nematode, Ioxo-
only been reported in dogs from Germany.
cara canis. I. canis is an extremely common
Greece, Hungary, and the Western United
roundworm or ascarid of the dog. Migrating
States. The majority of these cases have origi-
juvenile I. canis can cause hepatic, pulmonary,
nated from Greece.
 and, less commonly, ocular damage.
Clinically, there are two forms of ocular
Both visceral and ocular larval migrans as a
onchocerciasis,namely 2
acute and chronic
result of I. canis pose a public health problem.
ocular onchocerciasis. In acute cases, ocular
Ocular larval migrans is migration of nema
OCULAr MAN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1SEAsE/485
tode larvae through the eye. Aberrant migra-
Sarcoptic Acariosis (Sarcoptic Mange,
tion of I. canis to the canine eye has been
Canine Scabies)
described as an incidental finding manifesting
as small (one-fourth to one-sixth disc diame-
Sarcoptic mange is caused by the mite Sarcoptes
ter), solitary focal granulomas in the posterior
scabiei var. canis. Adult mites mate on the
segment in four dogs. Attempts at therapy for
surface of the skin and the female mite burrows
I. canis-associated ocular larval migrans have
into the skin laying eggs as she moves. The eggs
not been reported in dogs. However, preven-
hatch and larvae burrow onto the surface of the
tion by adequately cooking the meat fed to
skin where they mature. Sarcoptes can be tran-
dogs. good kennel hygiene, and routine
mitted from dogs to people and vice-versa. Sar-
deworming should keep the worm burden
coptes mites can survive off of the host at room
down and, thus, minimize the occurrence of
temperature for up to 6 days. Therefore, the
this condition.
environment in which an affected animal was
housed should be cleaned and a period of time
should elapse prior to exposing other animals
Parasitic—Mites
to the environment.
Clinical signs of sarcoptic mange include
Demodicosis
intense pruritis, alopecia, and reddish papulo-
crustus eruptions of infected areas. Commonly
Canine demodicosis is caused by the parasitic
affected sites include the ventral ears, abdomen,
mite Demodex canis. Demodex spp. live as com-
chest and legs. Although in severe cases the
mensals in the skin of most mammals, includ-
entire body, including periocular regions, can
ing dogs. Most species of Demodex, including
be affected
the D. canis mite, spend their entire life cycle
 Diagnosis of sarcoptic mange is dependent
in the hair follicles and sebaceous glands of
upon visualizing the mite, eggs, or mite feces
their host, while a few species are found within
via microscopic examination of skin scrapings.
the epidermis. Demodex mites, present in small
It should be noted, however, that skin scrap-
numbers, are part of the normal skin fauna.
ings are often times negative in affected animals.
Generalized demodicosis is either juvenile-
Treatment of sarcoptic mange involves the use
onset or adult-onset. Localized demodicosis
of amitraz (monoamine oxidase inhibitor), or
typically develops in young dogs (3-6 months
fipronil (GABA-receptor inhibitor), or avermec-
of age), starting preferentially around the eyes,
tin drugs {i.e., ivermectin, milbemycin oxime.
lips, and forelegs. Skin lesions are typically
moxidectin, selamectin)
circumscribed, dry, scaly, and hairless. Most
are nonpruritic, but bacterial infection and
self-trauma may create moist, erythematous
Parasitic-Protozoa!
lesions.
Skin scrapings are the main method of estab-
He patozoonosis
lishing a diagnosis, and the mites are typically
easy to find. Dogs with normal immune systems
Hepatozoonosis in dogs is a tick-borne disease
will typically have self-limiting local demodico-
caused by the protozoans Hepatozoon canis and
sis (generally resolves in 6-8 weeks, with or
H. americanum. Hepatozoonosis has a world-
without therapy), but the lesions should be
wide distribution. H. americanum is transmitted
observed for progression to generalization.
by the gulf coast tick (Amblyomma maculatum),
Treatment of canine demodicosis involves the
while the H. canis is transmitted by the brown
use of amitraz dips and/or oral ivermectin or
dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineous). Unlike
milbemycin administration. Use of avermectin
most tick-borne diseases where infection results
drugs should be limited to animals lacking
from the bite of an infected tick, infection of a
mutation for the P-glycoprotein gene (MDRl)
dog with Hepatozoon spp. occurs following
(see “Ivermectin" in the “Systemic Toxicities'
ingestion of an infected tick. After ingestion,
section below).
 sporozoites of Hepatozoon spp. infect phago-
486 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
cytic leukocytes, endothelial cells and the bone
develop clinical disease, usually before 5 years
marrow.
of age. The incubation period may be a few
Infection with H. canis results in somewhat
months to between 3 and 4 years.
less severe clinical signs compared to animals
Leishmania spp. cause cutaneous, muco-
infected with H. americanum. H. americanum
cutaneous, and visceral diseases. Ocular
infection manifests as a febrile disease, with
manifestations of leishmaniasis occur in up
generalized emaciation, inappetance, stiff gait,
to 8l% of dogs with the disease and consist
bilateral mucopurulent ocular discharge, and
of blepharitis, simple or granulomatous
severe  generalized  hyperesthesia  especially
conjunctivitis, scleritis, superficial or deep
along the epaxial musculature. In a series of
keratitis, anterior uveitis (Fig. 16.l.9), kera-
twenty-two dogs, chronic, mucopurulent ocular
toconjunctivitis sicca, and secondary glau-
discharge was present in 77% of cases. On
coma; signs are typically bilateral. The
ocular examination, KCS was present in 36%
anterior vitreous may have an inflammatory
of cases, retinal scars in l4% of cases, papill-
reaction, but the posterior choroid and retina
edema in one dog. and active uveitis in one
are usually spared. The inflammation is mono-
dog. Clinical signs of hepatozoonosis may be
       
intermittent and recurrent.
histiocytes.
Definitive diagnosis of hepatozoonosis is
Clinically, the condition is suspected on the
made upon identifying the organism in circu-
basis of chronic debilitation, facial and pinnal
lating leukocytes or muscle biopsy specimens.
exfoliative dermatitis, and a history of visiting
The sensitivity and specificity of using serum
an endemic area. The diagnosis is confirmed on
antibodies (via ELISA) to diagnose hepatozo-
the basis of fnding the organisms (i.e., amasti-
onosis were 93% and 96%, respectively.
gotes), which are round to oval and 2.5-5.0 μm
There is no therapy to effectively eliminate
by 1.5-2.0 μm in size, in bone marrow aspi-
H. americanum or H. canis from the body of
rates, lymph node aspirates, or skin impression
infected dogs. A recent retrospective study has
smears stained with Wright's or Giemsa stains.
demonstrated that a 14 day treatment regimen
Other means of identifying the Leishmania
with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (15 mg/kg PO
organism include histopathologic or immuno-
q12h), clindamycin (10 mg/kg PO q8h), and
peroxidase evaluation of cutaneous or organ
pyrimethamine (0.25 mg/kg PO q24h) demon-
strated favorable response for only 6 months.
Leishmaniasis
Leishmania spp. are diphasic protozoal parasites
that infect a wide range of vertebrates, includ-
ing dogs and humans. Dogs and other are
primary reservoirs of Leishmania spp., and
sandflies (Phlebotomus spp. or Lutzomyia spp.)
are the vectors. Leishmania infantum is the
species responsible for endemic leishmania-
sis in dogs from Greece, Spain, Portugal,
Turkey, parts of Africa, Central and South
Fig. l6.1.9. Anterior uveitis characterized by the
America, and India. Leishmaniasis caused
formation of multifocal, gray nodules in the iris
 stroma. In this case, the uveitis developed following
by Leishmania donovani has been reported in
initiation of systemic antiprotozoal therapy. Note also
the United States and is considered endemic
the blepharitis with meibomanitis. (Reprinted with
in Oklahoma, Texas, and Ohio.
permission from Pena MT, Roura X, Davidson MG.
As previously mentioned, transmission to
Ocular and periocular manifestations of leishmaniasis
vertebrates is via bites from infected sandflies.
in dogs: 105 cases [1993-1998]. Veterinary
Approximately 90% of infected dogs ultimately
Ophthalmology 2000;3:35-41.)
OCuLar Man1Festations OF System1C Disease/487
biopsy specimens, PCR performed on antico-
can pass I. gondi oocysts in their feces after the
agulated blood, or bone marrow or lymph node
ingestion of infected feline feces.
aspirates, or culture inoculation of hamsters.
Ocular disease associated with I. gondii
Serologic tests are available that use ELISA and
is more commonly observed in cats than in
indirect fluorescent antibody testing.
dogs, and, in the dog, it is usually not associ-
Leishmania spp. are difficult to eliminate
ated with systemic manifestations of the
from the body and recurrences are common.
 disease. The reported ocular lesions (in order
A variety of drugs have been used for the
of decreasing frequency) were a mononuclear
treatment of leishmaniasis, and the current
anterior uveitis (thirty-five of sixty dogs), reti-
recommendation is the use of meglumine
nitis (twenty-seven of sixty), choroiditis (eigh-
antimoniate (lo0 mg/kg) daily for at least
teen of sixty), extraocular myositis (twelve of
34 weeks combined  with  allopurinol.
sixty), scleritis (three of sixty), and optic neu-
The prognosis for dogs with leishmaniasis
ritis (three of sixty). Systemic disease in dogs
is
variable. Relapses are common
with
with I. gondii is relatively rare, but when it
leishmaniasis.
occurs, it is usually associated with other dis-
eases, such as canine distemper virus, or with
other systemic, debilitating or immunocom-
Neosporosis
promising states.
A definitive diagnosis of toxoplasmosis can
Neosporosis is caused by the coccidian proto-
be made if the organism is detected in tissue.
zoan Neospora caninum. The organism is mor-
A diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is usually made
phologically：
similar to Toxoplasma gondii.
on the basis of serologic tests using an ELISA
Canine neosporosis has been reported in many
for I. gondii-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) M
countries worldwide. Dogs are both the defni-
tive and intermediate hosts of this protozoan.
and IgG. Paired serum samples at 2- to 3-week
intervals are preferred for determining rising
Clinical disease is most often reflective of neu-
romuscular disease in dogs; however, but other
titers or seroconversion from IgM to IgG titers.
However, I. gondi-specific antibodies can be
clinical signs of polymyositis, myocarditis, hep-
atitis, and dermatitis may manifest following
detected not only in the blood of clinically ill
dogs, but also in normal dogs.
Neospora infection. Puppies either die or are
euthanized because of neurologic signs, but
Toxoplasmosis may be a self-limiting disease
that does not require therapy, but if systemic
ocular lesions are present in most cases consist-
signs or active intraocular inflammation is
ing of a retinitis with extension into the choroid
present, systemic therapy is usually advised.
(i.e., retinochoroiditis). A mild anterior uveitis
Oral clindamycin, 25 mg/kg every 12 hours for
and extraocular myositis may occur as well.
 Definitive diagnosis is made based upon
21-30 days, and topical corticosteroids as well
identifying the organism in cerebrospinal fluid.
as atropine are recommended for ocular surface
and anterior uveal inflammation. Clindamycin
tissue, or feces using routine cytological/histo-
and oral corticosteroids are recommended for
pathological techniques. An indirect fluores-
cent antibody test can help differentiate N.
posterior uveal inflammation. Toxplasmosis is
a significant zoonotic disease. Clinical signs of
caninum from I. gondi. Therapy is similar to
 toxoplasmosis may develop in the fetus of preg-
that for toxoplasmosis. The prognosis is grave
for dogs with severe neosporosis-induced neu-
nant mothers experiencing a primary I. gondii
infection.
rologic disease.
Toxoplasmosis
Trypanosomiasis
Toxoplasmosis is caused by the protozoan
Trypanosomiasis is caused by the hemopara-
Ioxoplasma gondii. Because cats are definitive
sitic protozoan of the genus Irypanosoma.
hosts, they are the only species that can shed
Transmission of Irypanosoma infection is by
Oocysts. It should be noted, however, that dogs
the tsetse fly; however, dogs may also become
488/EsSEntIALS OF VEtERiNARY OpHtHALmOLOGY
infected with the disease by ingesting Irypano-
topenia. The disease follows a cyclical course.
soma-infected meat.
Specifically, platelet counts decline dramati-
Common clinical manfestations of trypano-
cally within a few days of A. platys infection,
somiasis in dogs include weakness, anorexia.
and then they rise within a few days, thereby
emaciation, and fever, and the ocular associated
following a cyclical course at 1- to 2-week
signs with I. venezuelense included blepharitis,
intervals. A. platys has been described as pro-
conjunctivitis, keratitis, and endophthalmitis in
ducing uveitis in a dog, but the syndrome
a dog. I. brucei infections in the dog and cat
was mild and improved rapidly.
frequently  produce  corneal  opacification,
Diagnosis of A. platys depends upon observ-
blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and keratitis.
ing the organism within platelets, detecting
The diagnosis of trypanosomiasis is made by
serum antibodies for the organism or by detect-
identification of the organism on evaluation of
ing the presence of organismal DNA via PCR.
blood smears or lymph node aspirates. Other
Treatment is aimed at eliminating the bacte-
methods such as indirect fluorescent antibody
ria by using doxycycline as the frst drug of
(IFA) and ELISA, and PCR may also be used to
choice. Topical ocular therapy for an underly-
diagnose the disease. In cases of anterior
ing uveitis includes use of topical corticoste-
segment ocular disease, aqueous centesis may
roids and atropine. Clinical improvement is
demonstrate the trypanosomes.
typically noted within 24-48 hours after com-
Drugs used in canine trypanosomiasis
 mencement of antimicrobial therapy.
include diminizine (infected with I. evansii)
and nifurtimox (infected with I. cruzi [Chagas
disease]). Prognosis for animals with trypano-
Canine Ehrlichiosis
somiasis is considered poor. Infection with Iry-
panosoma is life-long.
Canine ehrlichiosis is a tick-borne disease
produced by Ehrlichia canis, E. chaffeensis,
E. ewingii, E. equii, Anaplasma platys (for-
Rickettsial Diseases
merly E. platys), A. phagocytophila (formerly
Members of the bacterial order Rickettsiales are
E. phagocytophila), and Neorickettsia risticii
(formerly E. risticit). The distribution of
the cause of numerous conditions in numerous
 species of vertebrates. Rickettsial diseases are
canine ehrlichiosis is related, in part, to the
geographical distribution of ticks that act as
transmitted via an arthropod, typically fleas or
ticks. Two common groups of diseases still
vectors for these bacteria. In particular, E.
considered rickettsial diseases in veterinary
canis is transmitted by the brown dog tick,
Rhipicephalus sanguineous, while transmission of
medicine include (l) rickettsioses caused by
E. chaffeensis and E. ewingi is via the lone star
bacteria of the genus Rickettsia, and (2)
tick, Amblyomma americanum. Animals may be
ehrlichioses and anaplasmoses caused by
bacteria in the family Anaplasmataceae.
co-infected with more than one rickettsial
agent.
Canine ehrlichiosis is divided into an acute
Canine Cyclic Thrombocytopenia
disease phase (2-4 weeks), a subclinical phase
(months to years), and a chronic disease phase.
Canine cyclic thrombocytopenia is caused by
Ocular signs may be present in all stages, but
Anaplasma platys (formerly Ehrlichia platys), a
animals are not usually presented for diagnosis
bacterial organism that strictly replicates in
until the chronic stage. The prevalence of
platelets and is not considered zoonotic. A tick
ocular lesions in canine ehrlichiosis has
vector is the presumed mode of transmission of
been reported as 10-37%; when present,
A. platys. A. platys is distributed in the south-
such ocular lesions can produce devastating
eastern United States, southern Europe (Greece,
ocular disease that is typically bilateral. It
Italy, France), and South America.
has recently been reported that approximately
A. platys replicates within platelets, resulting
18% of the cases of uveitis in North Carolina
in diminished platelet survival and thrombocy-
are the result of some infectious etiology and
OCular Man1Festations Of SystemiC D1sease/489
nearly 4o% of them were associated with E.
rium, is the causative agent of Rocky Mountain
canis.
Spotted Fever (RMSF). Rodents and other small
The ocular lesions themselves result from
mammals serve as reservoirs for R. rickettsii. R.
either a platelet deficiency or, more com-
rickettsii is transmitted by ticks; the vector
monly, a vasculitis (or both). Massive orbital
and reservoir ticks are Dermacentor andersoni
and ocular hemorrhages have been observed,
(Rocky Mountain wood tick), D. variabilis
but more commonly, a uveitis with hemor-
(American dog tick), Amblyomma americanum
rhagic overtones is the basic lesion (Fig.
(Lone
star tick), Amblyomma cajennense
16.1.lo). Retinal hemorrhages are common,
(Cayenne tick), Rhipicephalus sanguineus (brown
and retinal detachments may be observed,
dog tick), and Haemaphysalis leporispalustrus
either from massive subretinal hemorrhage
(rabbit tick).
or from exudates.
Incubation time varies from 2 to 14 days
Diagnosis of ehrlichiosis involves the direct
following infection via a tick bite, and R. rick-
visualization of morulae in peripheral blood
ettsii invades small blood vessels and subse-
smears (only been found in 11% of dogs with
quently replicates in endothelial cells, thereby
chronic ehrlichiosis), detection of E. canis anti-
damaging these cells and causing vasculitis and
bodies, or PCR amplification of Ehrlichia spp.
activation of primary and secondary hemostasis
DNA.
systems. Systemic signs of RMSF include fever
The mainstay of therapy for canine ehrlichio-
within 4-5 days of tick attachment. Hemor-
sis includes the administration of doxycycline
rhages (i.e., petechiae and echymoses) occur
or tetracycline. The short-term prognosis for
commonly and are often seen on mucous mem-
ehrlichiosis in dogs is typically good during the
branes including those surrounding the eye.
acute phase or mild chronic phase of the disease;
Common clinicopathologic findings include
however, long-term prognosis of chronic canine
thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, hypoalbu-
ehrlichiosis is variable to grave.
minemia, and proteinuria.
Ocular and neurologic involvement is
common with R rickettsia infection, and
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
clinical findings are consistently due to vas-
Rickettsia rickettsii, a small
1  coccobacillary,
culitis. Signs of conjunctivitis, chemosis,
petechiae of the conjunctiva, iris and retina,
Gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacte-
hyphema, mild anterior uveitis, retinal
edema, and retinal vasculitis are common.
Diagnosis of RMSF is made based upon con-
sistent history, clinical and hematological fnd
ings consistent with RMSF, and identifying R.
rickettsii through immunofluorescent testing
(tissue), presence of circulating antibodies, or
by identifying organism DNA using PCR. A
four-fold increase in circulating IgG, from acute
to convalescent (≥ 3 weeks apart) measure-
ments, is diagnostic for recent infection. If the
disease is suspected, trial therapy with tetracy-
clines or chloramphenicol is warranted until
test results are available. Response to therapy is
Fig. 16.1.10. Photograph of the left eye of a 5-
usually rapid and may be used in establishing
year-old, male, mixed-breed dog with monocytic
ehrlichiosis. Note the conjunctival hyperemia,
a presumptive diagnosis. The inflammatory
lesion of the anterior ocular segment should be
rubeosis iridis, and iridal hemorrhages. (Reprinted 
with permission from Leiva M, Naranjo C, Pena MT
treated with topical corticosteroids and atro-
Ocular signs of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis: a
pine. The ocular lesions of RMSF usually resolve
retrospective study in dogs from Barcelona, Spain.
quickly  with therapy.  Immunity  following
Veterinary Ophthalmology 2005;8:387-393.)
infection with R. rickettsi is long lasting and
490 /EssentiAls OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmoLOGY
provides
protection
against
subsequent
reinfection.
Vira!
Canine Distemper
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is caused by an
enveloped, single-stranded RNA Morbillivirus
in the Paramyxoviridae family and infects a
wide variety of families of animals including
Canidae (e.g., dogs), Procyonidae (e.g, rac-
coons), Ursidae (e.g, bears), Mustelidae (e.g.
ferrets, skunks), and Hyaenidae (e.g., hyaena).
The virus is spread mainly by inhalation of
A
viral particles in aerosolized respiratory or
other infected secretions such as urine. Wide-
spread vaccination of dogs has markedly
decreased the incidence of typical disease, and
dromes characterized more by neurologic signs
than catarrhal signs of pneumonia and gastro-
 enteritis. Clinical signs of CDV will vary with
the strain of virus, immunity, and age of the
host.
Acute ocular signs of CDV are usually
associated with a bilateral conjunctivitis
with serous ocular discharge that progresses
to mucopurulent in nature. The cornea has
not been described as being a target for the
virus unless a lacrimal adenitis or dehydration
B
has resulted in a marked reduction in tear pro-
duction (i.e., KCS). The CDV may produce
Fig. 16.1.1l. A. Distemper-induced, multifocal
an inflammatory reaction in the lacrimal
white lesions deep to the retinal vessels. Most lesions
gland characterized by mononuclear and
are active, as evidenced by hazy borders, and do not
neutrophilic  inflammatory  infiltration 
las
displace the vessels. B. Acute blindness in a dog with
well as by marked degenerative changes in
distemper associated with papillitis. Note the
the glandular tissue. Corneal ulceration is
elevated, hyperemic optic disc. A slight vitreal haze
often profound with the development
of
interferes with detail. (Reprinted with permission
multiple descemetoceles with or without
from Martin CL. Ocular manifestations of systemic
disease. Part l: The dog. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
corneal perforations in one or both eyes.
KCS usually resolves in 4-8 weeks if the
ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
animal recovers from the systemic infec-
Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1401-1448.)
tion. Another mechanism for corneal involve-
ment is distemper encephalitis producing ffth
cranial
nerve  palsy{i.e.，1
neurotrophic
 In one study, dogs with neurologic forms of
keratitis)
CDV had a 4l% overall prevalence of cho-
CDV often produces a multifocal, non-
rioretinal lesions; in contrast, 83% of dogs
granulomatous chorioretinitis, which is
with chronic leukoencephalopathy syn-
usually an incidental finding (Fig. 16.1.1lA).
dromes had chorioretinal lesions. These
OCULAR MAN1FEStAtIOnS OF SYSteM1C DiSEASE/491
lesions are typically multifocal, and they are
Herpesviruses
reportedly more frequent in the peripheral to
midperipheral nontapetal fundus. Lesions in
Canine Herpesvirus
both the tapetal and nontapetal areas are typi-
cally circular to oval in shape and often become
Canine herpesvirus is an enveloped, double-
confluent with adjacent lesions, thus producing
stranded DNA virus of the Alpha-herpesvirdae
a scalloped pattern
family and infects all canids. Transmission of
The most dramatic clinical ocular problem
the virus can occur in utero or during parturi-
associated with CDV is optic neuritis, which
tion. Puppies make contact with the virus in
is characterized by an acute onset of bilat-
infectious secretions on passing through the
eral blindness and mydriasis. If inflammation
birth canal of an infected bitch or may contract
extends rostrally to the optic disc/papilla, oph-
viral infection from contact with other infected
thalmoscopic signs of peripapillary hemor-
puppies.
rhages and edema, retinal vascular congestion,
Canine herpesvirus is almost exclusively a
 and elevation of the papilla are observed (Fig.
disease of the neonate, in which it is usually
16.1.1lB). If the optic neuritis remains retro-
 fatal. Puppies dying of herpesvirus infection
bulbar, however, the diagnosis is made on the
have been reported to have bilateral panuve-
basis of exclusion (i.e., blind eyes with dilated
itis with keratitis, synechiae, cataracts,
pupils and normal retinal function as tested by
retinal necrosis and disorganization, retinal
ERG). Distemper-associated blindness also may
atrophy and dysplasia, and optic neuritis as
occur with inflammation of the optic tracts,
well as atrophy.
lateral geniculate nucleus, optic radiation, or
Diagnosis of canine herpesvirus is by iden-
occipital cortex.
tifying clinical signs suggestive of the disease in
Ocular signs are suggestive of, but not defin-
young puppies combined with necropsylesions.
itive for, CDV. Acute lesions of chorioretinitis
Definitive confirmation of canine herpsvirus
usually correlate well with concurrent systemic
involves identification of virus, viral antigen, or
disease, but chorioretinal scars may not. CDV
viral DNA by transmitting electron microscopy,
inclusions may be identified in infected mono-
immunohistochemical methods, or PCR of
cytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, or red blood
infected tissues, respectively.
cells during evaluation of a stained peripheral
blood smear. Alternatively, positive immuno-
fluorescence by detection of viral antigen from
Pseudorabies
conjunctival swabs/scrapings or blood smears,
using methods such as fluorescent antibody
Pseudorabies is caused by an enveloped,
(FA) testing may be helpful in diagnosing CDV
double-stranded DNA virus of the Alpha-her-
early in the course of systemic disease (5-21
pesvirdae family. This virus is capable of infect-
days postinoculation), but negative findings are
ing a variety of animals, including the cat, cow,
inconclusive. Recently, reverse-transcriptase
dog. and pig. Pigs are the main reservoirs of
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays
pseudorabies. Most infected dogs have a history
have been shown to be both sensitive and spe-
of ingestion of infected raw pork
cific for detection of experimentally induced
Ocular mainfestations of this disease have
CDV
been attributed to neurologic lesions, and
Treatment is mainly symptomatic. Con-
include blindness, miosis, mydriasis, anisoco-
junctivitis and decreased tear production
ria, abnormal pupillary light reflexes, ptosis,
are treated with topical antibiotics and lubri-
facial paralysis, and epiphora.
cants. Acute optic neuritis is treated with
Presumptive diagnosis of pseudorabies is
systemic anti-inflammatory dosages of glu-
made based on clinical signs and history of the
cocorticoids if other signs of CDV are absent.
dog having been exposed to pigs or infected
Vaccination is the key to preventing CDV. The
raw pork. The definitive diagnosis of pseudo-
 prognosis for dogs with neurologic disease is
rabies is confirmed based on identification of
considered guarded to poor.
the virus by in-situ hybridization, immunohis-
492 /EssentiAlS OF VereRinArY OpHthAlmoLOGY
tochemistry, or PCR of infected brain or tonsil.
Tentative CAV-l infection is diagnosed on
Therapy for canine patients infected with pseu-
the basis of the typical ocular lesions combined
dorabies is supportive, but most dogs do not
with a history of recent vaccination or illness
survive the infection.
(i.e., acute hepatic disease in a dog with poor
vaccination) in a puppy or young (< 2 years of
age) dog. Definitive diagnosis is made based
Infectious Canine Hepatitis (Canine
upon immunohistochemistry for CAV-1 and
Adenovirus Type-l)
detection of viral DNA using PCR in infected
tissue.
Canine adenovirus type-1 (CAV-l), a nonen-
Therapy of CAV-l is symptomatic and
veloped, double-stranded DNA virus in the
similar to that for other forms of nonseptic
Adenoviridae family, is the causative agent of
anterior uveitis. Specifically, therapy includes
infectious canine hepatitis (ICH). ICH produces
topical corticosteroids, atropine, prostaglandin
clinical disease in dogs, foxes, and bears. CAV-
inhibitors, and perhaps, hypertonic salt solu-
1 may produce ocular lesions of anterior
tion or ointment.
uveitis and corneal edema and has been esti-
mated to produce ocular lesions in approxi-
mately 20% of dogs during the recovery
Papillomavirus
 phase of a natural infection. More troubling
Papillomaviruses are nonenveloped, double-
was the modified-live strains of CAV-1 used in
stranded DNA viruses in the family Papilloma-
vaccine production that were also capable of
viridae. Two forms of papillomaviruses (oral
producing ocular lesions, with an estimated
form and conjunctival form) are associated
prevalence of 0.4% or less. The universal use
with causing papillomas involving the canine
 of canine adenovirus type-2 (CAV-2) for immu-
eye and adnexa.
nization against ICH, however, has all but
Oral papillomas, which are usually found in
eliminated this complication of vaccination.
young animals, result from infection with a
The ocular lesions, whether resulting from
canine oral papillomavirus (COPV), and the
natural infection or induced by vaccine, are
solitary skin lesions of older animals result
considered to be due to an immune-complex,
 from infection with a cutaneous papilloma-pro-
Arthus, reaction that occurs l0-2l days after
ducing virus. COPV may, in addition to causing
vaccination or in the recovery stage of natural
infection. The ocular reaction is bilateral in
oral papillomas, produce lesions on the eyelids,
conjunctiva, and cornea. Despite spontaneous
about 30% of cases with corneal stromal edema
regression of most viral papillomas, the ocular
the most visible lesion. A marked hypotony
forms may not. Ocular viral papillomas have
combined with altered corneal rigidity may
been reported in dogs as old as 9 years of
result in keratoconus. The conjunctiva and epi-
age. Lesions are characteristically peduncu-
sclera are usually hyperemic, and though the
lated and have a cauliflower-like surface.
corneal edema may obscure deeper examina-
 Most lesions in older animals are solitary,
tion, anterior uveitis may manifest, with iris
but multiple lesions may develop as well.
texture changes, plasmoid aqueous, and miosis.
 Physical irritation from the lesion may preclude
Most reactions occur in young animals that
observation and awaiting its spontaneous
have endothelial regenerative capabilities, so
regression. Excision should involve minimal
the corneal edema is usually transient, taking
handling of the papilloma, wide excision (if
from a few days to between 2 and 3 weeks to
possible), and, perhaps, cryotherapy at the base
clear; however, in some instances, the edema is
of the lesion.
either permanent or may require several months
to clear. Glaucoma, which is the most signifi-
cant ocular sequela of CAV-l, usually results in
Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus
blindness, because it is masked during the early
stages by the preexisting corneal edema and
Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is a
conjunctival hyperemia.
single-stranded, enveloped RNA virus belong-
OCULAr MAN1FeStAtiOns OF SYstem1C D1seAse/493
ing to the genus Flavivirus. TBEV is seen in
while approximately 80% of the affected popu-
Europe and Asia. The virus is transmitted to
 oe  s  
humans and animals via the bite of an infected
months.
tick (Ixodes ricinus—central Europe; Ixodes per-
Increased blood sugar (either glucose or
sulcatusUral, Siberia, Far East). Clinical signs
galactose) results in diffusion of increased
develop after 5-9 days following infection with
       
the virus.
 energy pathway of the lens is anaerobic glycoly.
Clinical signs are representative of the neu-
       
ropathologic changes seen in the CNS and
pathway is hexokinase, which is in limited
include pyrexia, general malaise, seizures, tet-
supply. When there is an increased supply of
raparesis, anisocoria, and neck or back pain.
sugar, it becomes shunted to the sorbitol
TBEV has been reported as a possible cause of
pathway, which normally supplies only 5% of
optic neuritis in one dog. Diagnosis of TBEV is
the glucose metabolism. Aldose reductase is the
made based on measuring acute and convales-
frst enzyme in this pathway, which forms
cent serum and CSF IgG for TBEV using an
polyols {i.e., sorbitol with glucose; dulcitol
ELISA or by using immunohistochemistry on
with galactose) that do not diffuse through the
CNS tissue. Treatment of dogs with TBEV
cell membranes as well and, thus, accumulate
infection is purely supportive as there is no
in the lens. This results in an osmotic gradient
virucidal therapy for the disease. Prognosis is
that draws water into the lens, which in turn
variable depending on the clinical form of the
results in swelling of lens fibers and opacifica-
disease.
tion of the lens. Sorbitol is slowly metabolized
to fructose, which can slowly diffuse across
cellular membranes, whereas dulcitol is not
Metabolic Diseases
further metabolized, thereby resulting in more
rapid changes.
Diabetes Mellitus
Cataractous changes are initially observed
as vacuoles in the equatorial cortex that
Diabetes mellitus is the most common disor-
extend into the anterior and posterior cortex.
der of the endocrine pancreas in dogs, result-
The cortical sutures may be accentuated as
ing from an absolute or relative insulin
well (Fig. 16.1.12). The process progresses
deficiency due to deficient insulin secretion by
rapidly to complete cortical opacification of
the f-cells of the islets of Langerhans. Ocular
the lens, and the sutures are often either
manifestations of diabetes mellitus in dogs
include cataract formation, corneal endo-
thelial cell loss, corneal endothelial pleo-
morphism and polymegathism, and retinal
vascular damage such as microaneurysms.
Recently, reduced corneal sensitivity, and
significantly
altered
keratoconjunctival
parameters have also been reported in dia-
betic dogs.
The most common ocular manifestation
of diabetes mellitus in the dog is cataract
formation. The young dog is very suscepti-
ble. Cataracts were present at the initial
examination of almost 60% of spontaneous
canine diabetics, whereas no cataracts were
noted in a series of thirty cats. Recently, a
study reported that 75% of the canine popula-
Fig. 16.1.12. Immature cortical cataracts in a
tion diagnosed with diabetes mellitus devel-
mixed-breed dog with diabetes mellitus. Note the
oped cataracts by approximately 12 months
accentuated anterior and posterior cortical sutures
494 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHtHalmoLoGY
fractured or widened because of water
temic
hypertension. Hyperlipidemia may
imbibition.
produce lipemia retinalis or lipids in the
The cells of the corneal endothelium in dia-
aqueous. An association with KCs has also
betic dogs, when examined with specular
been observed in a series of cushinoid dogs, in
microscopy, have more pleomorphism and a
which about 20% of the cushinoid dogs had
wider variation in size. These changes directly
KCS (though the Schirmer tear test was not
relate to the degree of diabetic control, but the
routinely performed) and one-fifth of these
significance of this in the dog has not been
dogs had corneal ulcers. The corneal ulcers
documented
were typically deep, chronic, and often, the
Early diabetic retinopathy, which is charac-
presenting complaint. Tear production and
terized by microaneurysms, has been demon-
ulcerations often improved with mitotane (o,p.
strated in both spontaneous and experimental
DDD) therapy and remission of the hyperadre-
diabetes as well as in the galactosemic canine
nocorticism. In general, high endogenous cor-
model. Diabetic retinopathy takes approxi-
ticosteroid levels are thought to aggravate the
mately 3-5 years to develop, and almost invari-
healing of corneal ulcers rather than to cause
ably in this period, cataracts will develop that
ulcers, but spontaneous ulceration has been
obscure this change. Although proliferative dia-
observed when relapse of the hyperadrenocor-
betic retinopathy has not been reported in the
ticism occurs. The incidence of cataracts may
dog, retinal alterations of venous dilation, tor-
relate more to complications of diabetes melli-
tuosity and sacculation, microaneurysm, retinal
tus than to elevated levels of corticosteroids
hemorrhages, color and reflection changes
Any nonhealing corneal stromal ulcer or
in the tapetum, and exudates have been
sterile progressive corneal ulcer should prompt
reported.
consideration  of  endogenous  predisposing
Cataract surgery is the only available
factors, of which elevated corticosteroid levels
therapy for diabetes-induced cataract forma-
(either endogenous or exogenous in origin)
tion in dogs. The success rate in diabetic
should be kept in mind. In most instances,
animals is approximately the same as that
clinical signs of Cushing's syndrome will be
for cataract extraction in nondiabetic dogs.
evident. Readers are advised to consult a current
internal medicine textbook for a detailed dis-
cussion on the diagnosis of and therapy for
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
hyperadrenocorticism.
Syndrome)
Hyperadrenocorticism, or Cushing's syndrome,
Hypothyroidism
is one of the most common endocrinopathies
Hypothyroidism develops as a result of
ologically divided into three forms: (l) pitu-
decreased production of thyroxine (T4) and tri-
itary-dependent  hyperadrenocorticism;
(2)
iodothyronine (T) by the thyroid gland. Hypo-
hyperadrenocorticism from functional adreno-
thyroidism is a common naturally occurring
cortical tumors; and (3) iatrogenic hyperadre-
 disease in dogs, with reported prevalence rates
nocorticism. Affected dogs are typically 6 years
of 0.2-0.8%. The mean age of dogs diagnosed
of age or older. The clinical and laboratory
with hypothyroidism is 7 years. There is a clini-
findings associated with canine Cushing's syn-
cal association between hypothyroidism and a
drome are mainly attributable to chronic glu-
variety of ocular lesions, though experimental
cocorticoid excess and, to a much lesser degree,
dogs that were made hypothyroid for 9 months
overproduction of adrenal androgens.
did not develop any ophthalmic lesions. As
Hyperadrenocorticism has been associ-
 many as 20% of dogs with hypothyroidism
ated with ocular lesions of progressive
have been reported to have KCs. The asso-
corneal ulceration, nonhealing corneal ulcer-
ciation between KCS and hypothyroidism
ation, corneal calcification, cataracts, lipemia
has been thought to be one of multiglandu-
retinalis, and lesions associated with sys-
lar, immune-mediated inflammation. The
OCULAr MAN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1SEAsE/495
lack of decreased Schirmer tear test values in
dL. The cause of the hypocalcemia can be
experimental hypothyroidism, however, sup-
determined with renal function tests,radiogra-
ports an indirect association rather than hypo-
phy, and parathyroid hormone assays.
thyroidism per se. Because hypothyroidism
Hypocalcemia in the dog has been associ-
results in vascular disease characterized by ath-
ated with focal punctate to linear opacities in
erosclerosis, the association with retinal lesions
the anterior and posterior cortices of the lens
of hypertension and arteriosclerosis is not sur-
The lenticular opacities may occur at diffrent
prising, nor is it consistent. Hypertensive retinal
levels in the cortex, and they may reflect differ-
changes of retinal hemorrhages and, less fre-
ent episodes of hypocalcemia. The degree and
quently, bullous retinal detachments may be
duration of hypocalcemia necessary to produce
observed. The retinal vasculature may provide
cataracts is unknown, but the appearance of the
evidence of arteriosclerosis, with straight,
cataracts is quite suggestive of hypocalcemia.
narrow vessels that, when advanced, become
Treatment of hypocalcemia involves correc-
tion of the underlying disease, if possible, and
hypothyroidism may manifest as lipemia reti-
calcium supplementation with vitamin D,, D3,
nalis, corneal lipid degeneration, and lipids in
or dihydrotachysterol. Additional focal cata-
the aqueous humor. Corneal lipid deposits
racts may manifest for a period after correction
with hypothyroidism may take various forms
of the hypocalcemia, and the existing lenticular
 as well, from diffuse and rapidly developing
opacities will remain.
opacities at all levels of the cornea to the char-
acteristic, peripheral arcus lesion adjacent to
the limbus.
Neoplasia-Central Nervous System
The gold standard for the diagnosis of canine
hypothyroidism is made on the basis of com-
Intracranial neoplasia, whether primary or
paring resting T4 levels with those occurring
secondary, often produces ocular and/or
after administration of thyrotrophin-stimulat-
orbital signs. All animals with a suspected
 ing hormone. Because of the limited availability
space-occupying CNS lesion should undergo
of thyrotrophin-stimulating homone, however,
 ophthalmoscopy to determine whether pap-
diagnosis of hypothyroidism is made based
illedema, optic neuritis, or optic nerve
upon consistent clinical signs in association
atrophy is/are present.
with measuring serum levels of total thyroxine,
The ophthalmic signs associated with intra-
canine thyroid stimulating hormone, and free
cranial neoplasia are highly variable and dogs
thyroxine.
may present with signs as subtle as internal
ophthalmoparesis as the predominant clinical
sign or with ophthalmic signs associated with
fonic Disturbances
abnormalities of multiple cranial nerves and
abnormal changes in mentation and/or gait.
Hypocalcemia
Intracranial neoplasia frequently produces
visual deficits and papilledema in association
Hypocalcemia in dogs may be caused by several
with neurologic signs. Because of the great
conditions   including  hypoparathyroidism,
variation in myelination of the canine papilla/
postparturient hypocalcemia, acute or chronic
optic disc, early papilledema is diffcult to
renal failure, acute pancreatitis, vitamin D tox-
detect unless it is asymmetrical or there is a
icity, severe nutritional secondary hyperpara-
definite rim of peripapillary edema. Intracranial
thyroidism (rare in dogs fed diets containing
tumors may also produce blindness, which
low calcium-to-phosphorus ratios), and intes-
may be acute in nature. Diffuse or multifocal
tinal malabsorption syndromes, among others.
disease may produce blindness by involving
Neurologic signs of restlessness, muscle fascic-
multiple sites in the visual pathways and, as a
ulations, and tonic-clonic seizures occur with a
result, produce other neurologic deficits as
total serum calcium level of 6-7 mg/dL or a
well. A solitary mass involving the optic chiasm
serum ionized calcium level ofless than 2.5 mg/
may produce blindness without obvious neu-
496 /EssentiAlS OF VeteRinArY OpHthAlmOLOGY
rologic signs. Tumors at the base of the brain
A variety of mechanisms may cause retinal
in the middle cranial or rostral fossa may be
hemorrhages, but the cause is often not obvious
varied, but pituitary carcinomas that are non-
The retinal hemorrhages associated with lym-
functional, optic nerve gliomas, and meningio-
phosarcoma may be multifactorial and may not
mas are likely candidates for optic chiasmal
necessarily represent leukemic invasion, but
involvement. Papilledema was not a feature of
uveitis represents tumor invasion of the eye. A
these lesions, perhaps because of their rela-
relatively rare syndrome involving rapidly ful-
tively small size. Clinically, blindness is often
minating lymphosarcoma in young dogs, with
acute. In reality, it is progressive, and partial
dramatic orbital and ocular involvement has
visual deficits are not generally noted by owners.
been observed. The orbital involvement pro-
Because blindness is accompanied by afferent
pupillary defects with a normal ocular fundus,
sis, and exposure keratitis.
the syndrome must be differentiated from
Lymphadenopathy combined with endoge-
SARDS using ERG. Early diagnosis and aggres-
nous bilateral uveitis or hemorrhages should
sive therapy may result in the return of some
prompt fine-needle aspirations of enlarged
vision.
lymph nodes or other affected organs to confirm
the diagnosis of lymphosarcoma cytologically.
For current therapeutic options, the reader
NeoplasiaSystemic
should consult appropriate internal medicine
textbooks
 for  lymphosarcoma  protocols.
Lymphosarcoma
Lesions affecting the anterior segment of the
eye, however, do respond to conventional ante-
Lymphosarcoma is the most common sec-
rior uveitis therapy using topical corticoste-
ondary intraocular neoplasia of dogs, and it
roids. The intraocular pressure should be
usually affects both eyes. In most cases, sys-
monitored, and glaucoma should be treated if
temic involvement is obvious at the physical
it develops.
examination, but ocular disease may be the
presenting complaint. Very rarely, the sys-
temic disease is occult and the ocular lesion is
Other Metastases
the primary clinical sign. In one large prospec-
tive study, 37% of cases of lymphosarcoma
Though relatively rare, a variety of carcinomas
had ocular lesions. Of these ocular lesions,
and sarcomas have been described as metasta-
49% were anterior uveitis, 9% posterior
sizing to the eye and orbit. Bilateral ocular
uveitis, 14% panuveitis, 23% retinal hemor-
involvement may occur, because most tumors
rhages only, and 6% adnexal diseases. Most
spread via a hematogenous route. The typical
animals with ocular lesions were in the
site of ocular metastasis is the uveal tract, and,
advanced stages of lymphoma (i.e., stage V),
specifically, the ciliary body. The neoplasms
and 78% of the cases with leukemia involved
may be masked by intraocular hemorrhage,
inflammation, and glaucoma; thus, intraocular
ondary glaucoma as a presenting feature,
neoplasia, whether primary or secondary,
though previous authors have noted this as
should be included in the differential diagnosis
being a common complication of intraocular
of undetermined spontaneous intraocular hem-
lymphosarcoma. This may represent the differ-
orrhage or secondary glaucoma. Systemic and/
ence between ocular lesions detected following
or neoplastic processes involving the eye
presentation of a case for ocular complaints and
include intravascular lymphoma; hemangiosar-
those found prospectively by screening patients
coma; malignant melanoma; adenocarcinoma
with lymphosarcoma. Regardless, lymphosar-
of the pancreas, mammary, salivary, sweat, and
coma with ocular involvement equates to
thyroid glands; squamous cell carcinoma; tran-
advanced disease and translates to a shorter
sitional carcinoma; mastocytoma; and canine
survival period for the dog.
transmissible venereal tumor.
OCuLAr MaN1FeStAtiOns OF SYStem1C D1seAse/497
Nutritional Disorders
occurring clinical syndrome. The earliest sign
of such deficiency in young dogs, however, is
Milk Replacer-induced Disease
vestibular disease, but blindness may also be an
early manifesting sign.
Cataract formation has been recognized in
 puppies and a variety of other species fed
Vitamin E Deficiency
commercial or homemade orphan milk for-
mulas. Levels of arginine have been found
The antioxidant action of vitamin E limits
to be deficient in canine and feline formulas,
lipid peroxidation and production of free
and supplementation has prevented cata-
radicals, which are very damaging to cellular
racts in wolf cubs, puppies, and kittens.
constituents. The major sites of oxidant
Various attempts to correct commercial milk
damage are the membranes of subcellular
formulas, however, still result in cataract
organelles. Phospholipids are a significant
formation. In order to develop nutrition-
structural component of the photoreceptors,
related cataracts, milk-replacer diet must be
and normal shedding and phagocytosis by the
ingested during the first week postpartum, and
lenticular changes will be noted by 3 weeks.
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) produces a
peroxidized lipoprotein or lipofuscin from the
 Lenticular changes begin as vacuolar changes
lysosomes in the cell. Lipofuscin is a yellow-
separating the anterior and posterior cortices
brown, autofluorescent pigment.
from the nucleus and outlining the sutures. At
Ocular consequences of vitamin E defi-
 5 weeks following milk-replacer supplementa-
ciency in the dog have been described in both
tion, a lenticular opacity remains as a white,
clinical and research animals. Systemic lesions
posterior subcapsular opacity. With growth,
consist of muscular and testicular degenera-
this opacity occupies the fetal nucleus and
tion, reproductive problems, hemolytic anemia.
appears as a spheroidal or ring-shaped fetal
and weak and dying puppies. Ocular lesions 
nuclear opacity. In exotic or wild animals, len-
in both clinical and research animals occur
ticular opacities have been more complete.
only with prolonged deficiency, and they
appearing as a diffuse, anterior subcapsular
consist of cataracts, decreased vision to
cortical opacity and producing at least a tem-
blindness, and retinal degeneration (see
porary blindness. The history of milk replacer
chapter 10). In one report, the ERG response
supplementation, normal ocular examination
was extinguished after 3 months of deficiency.
in parents of affected dogs, and location of the
though the animals were not blind at this time
- a iss s o 
The condition is thought to be a primary met-
tional source of the cataract.
abolic vitamin E deficiency inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait in English Cocker
Vitamin A Deficiency
Spaniels.
Vitamin A (retinol), a fat-soluble vitamin, is
Zinc Deficiency
derived from its precursors (carotenoids),
which are found in plants. With regards to the
Zinc deficiency may result from either reduced
importance of vitamin A in the ocular system,
intestinal absorption or by consuming a diet
vitamin A (retinol) is stored and transformed
deficient in zinc. Zinc deficiency has been
into retinal, which is translocated between the
implicated in dogs with dermatitis character-
retinal pigment epithelium and the photore-
ized by dry, scaly skin, erythema, alopecia, and
ceptors. Within the photoreceptors, retinal
change in hair coloration. Young, adult Alaskan
combines with opsin (a protein) to form the
Malamutes and Siberian Huskies are predis.
visual pigment rhodopsin. Vitamin A deficiency
posed to zinc-responsive dermatosis. The dis-
has been produced experimentally in young
tribution of cutaneous lesions caused by zinc
Aeinieu e aq ol 1eadde iou saop 11 inq 's3op
deficiency involves periocular and perioral
498 /EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinAry OpHthALmoLOGY
regions, mucocutaneous junctions, and pres-
Toxicities
sure points. Diagnosis of zinc-responsive der-
matosis is made based upon consistent clinical
The different reported toxicities that may
signs, histopathological examination of skin
involve the ophthalmic tissues are summarized
lesions, and response to oral zinc supplementa-
in Table 16.1.2. Ocular toxicities from systemic
tion. Most dogs respond favorably to oral zinc
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine is probably the most
supplementation.
common and significant in the dog, and the
Table 16.1.2. Ocular Toxicities in the Dog.
Drug
Ocular Manifestations
Ketoconazole
 Possible cataract formation with long-term adninistration in young and large
breeds of dogs.
Trimethoprin-sulfadiazine
Given systemicall. KCS developed in 4-15% of dogs: over 63% of animals on the
loonpoid ieat ul aseainap aul sbupean isat leat lawups paseaioap aney bnp
may occur in a matter of a few days after sulfa therapy is initiated, and 50% will
develop it within 30 days.
Phenazopyridine
A urinary analgesic. Within 7-10 days after doses of 25 mg/kg in the dog. the STT
decreased below 10 mm/min, and signs of KCS developed. Lacrimal glands
develop a grossly visible, brown-black discoloration within 48 hours of drug
administration
Hypolipidemic compounds
 Cornpounds of the hydroxyrmethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitor group
einsdesgns ioansod se ubaq spoeieie bop aua u spoeieie aonpoid aeu
equatorial opacities
vermectin
Observed after gross overdosing. usually when large-anirnal anthelmintic
preparations are used. The Collie and related breeds may develop toxicosis with
as little as 220 μg/kg. Depending on the dose, CNS signs, such as muscle
fasciculations, ataxia, and stupor, may be present. Blindness may occur without
marked CNS signs, and this is usually accompanied by pupillary dilation
Ophthalmoscopic findings are papillederma aind retinal ederma with folds. Residual
pigment disruption may be visible in the nontapetal fundus with recovery. Vision
loy alalle 1-aa aun jo puawssassy sep ol-z ui Aaon ynm eiodat s! ssol
increased ivermectin sensitivity is possible.
Disophenol
An old injectable anthelmintic for ancylostomiasis during the 1970s
the recommended parenteral dose. The onset of cataracts is within 24-36 hours
Aleixe buissanboid uayt lojenba ayt pe bujuujbag uoisal jejonoeA e Aesidkt s! pue
both anteriorly and posteriorly, in the superficial cortex. In most cases, resolution
occurs within 3-7 days.
Tocainide
An oral, anti-arrhythmic agent. In Doberman Pinschers with cardiomyopathies at
recommended doses for more than 2 months, a bilateral, progressive cormeal
edema developed in some animals that was irreversible
Amiodarone
A class Ill anti-arhythmic drug associated with cormeal opacities.
Coumarin poisoning
Signs manifest with ocular or orbital hemorrhages. Source is usually rodenticides
lonizing radiation
Complication rates between 76% and 84%. Approximately 45-59% were sight-
threatening or chronic in nature. Conjunctivitis (35% of cases);: signs of
keratoconjunctivitis, KCS, and ulcerative keratitis were more common (64-78%);
anterior uveitis (8-10%); cataract formation was delayed for 1.0-9.6 months (11-
26%); and multifocal retinal hemorrhages were delayed from 1 to 6 months and
present in 19% of the patients. Additional late-onset lesions noted at
histopathology. but not clinically, were retinal atrophy and tapetal atrophy
Electricity
Bectric shocks and lightning strikes may produce cataracts that manifest months
later. Cataracts are more likely to be produced by electrical shocks to the head.
OCULAr MAN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1SEAsE/499
most common effect is decreased tear produc-
Systemic Histiocytosis
tion and the resultant KCS.
Systemic histiocytosis is a familial disease
of Bernese Mountain Dogs and also occurs
Miscellaneous Diseases
 less frequently in other breeds. As opposed
to malignant histiocytosis (disseminated histio-
Aigal Diseases
cytic sarcoma), systemic histiocytosis is consid-
ered a nonneoplastic, generalized histiocytic
Protothecosis is a rare disease in humans and a
proliferative disease that causes prominent skin
variety of animals caused by a colorless, ubiq-
lesions identical to those reported with cutane-
uitous, saprophytic alga of the genus Proto-
ous histiocytosis, however, ocular and nasal
theca. Prototheca spp. have a wide geographic
mucous membranes, and other organs such as
distribution and are found in soil, water,
 the lungs, bone marrow, and peripheral lymph
sewage, and some vegetable matter. Three
nodes may also be frequently affected. Young
species have been recognized, but only P.
to middle-aged dogs (2-8 years of age) are
wickerhamii and P. zophi are known to be
mainly affected by this disease
pathogens.
Systemic histiocytosis is characterized histo-
The disease is not considered to be transmis-
sible, and a decrease in cell-mediated immunity
tion of large histiocytes, and variable numbers
may be responsible for the disease itself. Large
of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils.
breeds of dogs may be overrepresented, and
Systemic signs vary but include anorexia,
 ≥ 50% of animals with protothecosis may have
depression, weight loss, cutaneous nodules,
ocular involvement. Most ocular syndromes are
and
 nasal
infiltration.  Ocular
lesions
associated with systemic signs, but in some
occurred in three of six affected animals,
instances, the systemic signs are occult. Tissues
manifesting as 
eyelid masses, episcleral
most commonly affected include the eyes,
masses, exophthalmos, corneal edema, ante-
digestive tract, kidney, heart, and brain. His-
rior and posterior uveitis, retinal detach-
topathologic lesions may be characterized by
ment, and glaucoma.
minimal inflammation of a mononuclear 
to
 d   n
pyogranulomatous nature. Ocular
lesions
differentiate cutaneous and systemic histiocyto-
include a granulomatous, posterior uveitis
sis from malignant histiocytosis. Specifically,
or panuveitis that is often bilateral and
cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis stain posi-
blinding. Exudative retinal detachments are
tively for Thy-l (CD90) and CD4 markers for
the usual cause for blindness.
dermal dendritic cells and activated antigen
A definitive diagnosis is usually made on the
presenting cells, respectively. Malignant histio-
basis of finding the organism in ocular aspi-
cytosis, however, does not stain for CD4 and
rates, tissue exudates, excretions {i.e., urine
inconsistently stains for Thy-l. Further, the
sediment), or biopsy specimens. Because colitis
clinical behavior and response of systemic his-
is one of the more common systemic signs, any
 tiocytosis to immunosuppressive therapy with
dog with a history of hemorrhagic diarrhea and
 agents that profoundly inhibit T cell activation
ocular lesions should be considered to be a
have solidified the concept of disorderly
candidate for protothecosis. The organism can
immune regulation resulting from defective
be cultured on Sabouraud's dextrose media and
 interaction of dendritic antigen presenting cells
speciated by sugar and alcohol assimilation,
and T cells
electron microscopy, and indirect fluorescent
Systemic histiocytosis is a progressive disease
antibodies. Because of the rarity and sporadic
that may wax and wane, especially early in the
nature of this disease, it is hard to evaluate
course of the disease, but typically necessitates
therapeutic protocols. The most commonly
ns Adnrau aaissanddnsounuu snonuu
attempted therapy has been amphotericin B, an
as corticosteroids. Immunosuppressive doses
imidazole antifungal drug, or both. Prognosis
of systemic cyclosporine A or leflunomide,
for dogs with protothecosis is grave.
both potent inhibitors of T cell activation, are
500 /EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinary OpHthalmoLOGY
often warranted to treat intractable cases of sys-
the critical factor resulting in misrouting of
temic histiocytosis. However, in severe cases,
many of the projections of the retina to the
lesions may become persistent and fail to
brain, the nature of the projection error,
respond to therapy.
and the developmental consequences of the
relay of the misrouted retinal inputs to the
visual cortex. Specifically, Siamese cats
SECTION 2: THE CAT
have reduced ipsilateral retinal projections
since many axons originating in the tempo-
Congenital
ral retina, which normally project ipsilater-
ally, project contralaterally in Siamese
Coat
cats. As a consequence, each lateral genicu-
Color-Related Diseases/Conditions
late nucleus contains an abnormally greater
representation of the ipsilateral visual
White Coat Color, Blue Irides, and
field. Convergent strabismus 
withor
without involuntary horizontal or rotary
Deafness
nystagmus results of this retinogeniculate
Domestic cats with white coat color and blue
misdirection.
irides have been reported to have a dominantly
inherited deafness characterized by alterations
to the membranous labyrinth and bony modio-
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
lus. The syndrome results from an autoso-
mal dominant gene, W, that is fully dominant
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is an auto-
with complete penetrance in producing
somal recessive disorder of cats (Persian breed)
white fur, with incomplete penetrance of
and other species. In cats, CHS is characterized
deafness, and is incompletely dominant in
by partial oculocutaneous albinism, increased
producing blue irides. The blue iris is also
susceptibility to infections, and bleeding ten-
conditioned by other genes that produce
dencies. Ocular manifestations of CHS in cats
high degrees of white spotting that are allelic
include photophobia, pale irides, hypopigmen-
to gene W and by other independent genes.
tation of the nontapetal fundus, tapetal degen-
Importantly, therefore, not all blue-eyed
eration, cataracts ranging from incipient
white cats are deaf while white cats with
posterior suture-line associated to mature cata-
nonblue irides may also be deaf. However, in
racts, and spontaneous nystagmus. The ocular
one study, white cats with bilateral blue eyes
hypopigmentation in affected cats is thought to
were more frequently deaf than were hetero-
result from fusion of premelanosomes with
chromic white cats, which in turn were more
lysosomes, with resultant destruction of the
frequently deaf than were white cats with bilat-
premelanosomes. Abnormal retinal projections
eral "brown" eyes.
to the lateral geniculate nucleus (similar to
       
found in CHS-affected cats, thus accounting for
Visual System Anomalies and Forms
 the nystagmus.
of Aibinism
The Siamese cat demonstrates a form of
Ehlers-Danios Syndrome
partial albinism with retinal hypopigmenta-
tion. This breed possesses a mutant allele
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or cutaneous asthe-
of the albino series at the C locus (chch)
nia, occurs in the cat. It is a congenital, inher-
with reduced ocular pigmentation including
ited syndrome involving collagen, and it is
a lack of stromal pigmentation of the iris or
characterized by fragile, hyperextensible, and
choroid, and a reduction in pigment of the
easily torn skin. The mode of inheritance of
iridal and retinal pigment epithelia. The
this syndrome in the cat is autosomal domi-
retinal hypopigmentation in these cats is
nant. Ocular manifestations of Ehler's Danlos
OCULAR MAN1FEStATIOnS OF SYStEM1C DiSEASE/501
syndrome in the cat are linked to excessive
AChRs. There is no breed or sex predisposition
laxity of the eyelid skin and include entropion
for feline congenital myasthenia gravis, and
with secondary blepharospasm and keratocon-
 clinical disease generally manifests in 3- to 4-
junctivitis. Diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syn-
month-old cats. Clinical signs associated with
drome is made based upon a clinical syndrome
congenital myasthenia gravis include general-
of skin hyperextensibility, clinical signs associ-
ized muscle weakness that worsens with exer-
ated with skin fragility including easily torn
cise, dysphagia and/or regurgitation, changes in
skin, and skin histopathology (routine histo-
voice, and head ventroflexion. Diagnosis of
pathology with Masson-trichome staining and
congenital myasthenia gravis requires detailed
ultrastructural examination). Determination of
histopathological,   immunohistopathological,
skin  hyperextensibility can  be objectively
and ultrastructural examination of skeletal
assessed by calculating  the extensibility
muscle neuromuscular junctions. Oral anti
index.
cholinesterase therapy (e.g., pyridostigmine
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is incurable and
bromide) should be attempted in cases of con-
affected cats should not be used for breeding.
firmed myasthenia gravis.
Therapy for affected cats is directed at prevent-
ing skin lacerations {i.e., declawing fore- and
hind-paws).
Myotonia
Myotonia is characterized by muscle spasm and
Hydrocephalus
stiffness as the result of continued active con-
traction of a muscle following cessation of vol-
The most common cause of congenital hydro-
untary effort. Primary congenital myotonia has
cephalus is a primary congenital stenosis or
recently been described in the cat and an auto-
aplasia of the mesencephalic aqueduct associ-
somal recessive mode of inheritance is sus-
ated with fused rostral colliculi. Mesencephalic
pected. The clinical signs associated with myo-
aqueductal stenosis has been reported in
tonia in cats include a stiff awkward gait,
kittens following in utero exposure to gris-
generalized muscle hypertrophy, and, when
eofulvin, and following transplacental infec-
startled, affected kittens may stiffen, fall into
tion with
1feline panleukopenia
virus.
lateral recumbency and develop spasms of the
Congenital  hydrocephalus  may produce
facial muscles and eyelids.
enlargement of the calvarium and failure of
closure of the suture lines of the skull. Con-
sequently, affected kittens may have dome-
Quadriplegia and Amblyopia
shaped heads and a persistently open
fontanelle. Clinical signs of hydrocephalus
A syndrome of decreased vision with nystag-
include behavioral changes, ataxia, compul-
mus, ataxia, and tremors has been described
sive circling, and seizures. Ventrolateral
in the cat and may be inherited as a postna-
strabismus is a common ocular manifesta-
tally lethal, autosomal recessive trait. Most
tion of congenital hydrocephalus due, in
animals, however, are unable to stand at birth,
part, to enlargement of the calavarium with
though walking movements are made that
subsequent impingement on the orbits from
  as, e   
the dorsolateral aspects.
 prone. Vision is difficult to evaluate in a very
young animal, but those affected lack fixation
responses as well as menace responses and
Myasthenia Gravis
dazzle reflexes. The pupillary light reflexes are
normal. The ocular fundus is normal on fundic
Myasthenia gravis is a disease affecting the neu-
examination as well. Central nervous system
romuscular junction. Congenital myasthenia
lesions include degeneration and necrosis of
gravis has been reported in two cats, and is
the cerebellar cortex, with severe loss of Pur-
most likely caused by an inherited depletion of
kinje cells.
502 /EsSentiAlS OF VeteRinary OpHtHaLmoLoGY
Developmental
Systemic hypertension  is a relatively
common disease of older cats, and it has
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
most consistently been associated with
chronic renal failure and hyperthyroidism.
Many lysosomal storage diseases have been
A recent study reported that 20/l03 cats
      
(19.4%) with chronic renal failure were
nately for cat owners these inborn errors of
hypertensive, and other conditions included
metabolism are rare. Most lysosomal storage
diabetes mellitus, primary aldosteronism,
diseases, with known mode of inheritance, are
chronic anemia, and high salt diet
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. When
 Ocular manifestations of systemic hyperten-
homozygous, the syndromes are usually severe,
sion can be severe and lead to blindness. The
thus resulting in neurologic disease and, even-
consequence of ocular vascular hypertensive
tually, death. The eyes in most affected animals
changes is an initial vascular constriction in the
have histopathologic lesions, but clinical oph-
retinal arterioles in response to increased blood
thalmic lesions may not be visible. Antemortem
pressure; when sustained, it results in occlu-
diagnosis of a lysosomal storage disease can be
sion and ischemic necrosis of the vessel walls,
confirmed by lysosomal enzyme analysis (e.g.-
with resultant increased vascular permeability.
Lysosomal Disease Testing Laboratory, Jeffer-
Serous retinal exudates, hemorrhages, and
son Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, http://
edema also result. Choroidal vascular changes
www.jefferson.edu/ysolab/index.cfm)
result in subretinal fluid and retinal detach-
ment. Hence, the ocular lesions associated
with feline hypertension include retinal
hemorrhages, retinal detachments, retinal
Acquired
edema, retinoschisis, varying degrees of
 retinal degeneration, and papilledema (Figs.
Cardiovascular Diseases
16.2.lA and B). The fundus abnormalities in
feline hypertension can be separated into (1)
Hypertension
hypertensive retinopathy; (2) hypertensive
choroidopathy, which involves retinal
Systemic arterial blood pressure is the product
detachments; and (3) hypertensive optic
of cardiac output (CO) (CO = heart rate X
neuropathy, which includes papilledema
stroke volume) and total peripheral resistance.
and optic atrophy. Potential complications of
When hypertension is associated with an
systemic hypertesion include anterior segment
underlying causative disease it is called sec-
and vitreous hemorrhage, uveitis, and glau-
ondary hypertension. Hypertension in vet-
coma. Hypertension should therefore be ruled
erinary patients
is typically
secondary
out when presented with intraocular hemor-
hypertension, however, primary (essential)
rhage or bullous retinal detachment of unknown
hypertension has been described, although
origin in older cats. Hypertensive cats have
less commonly, in cats. Systemic hyperten-
been shown recently to have a greater prevelance
sion is defined as a calm animal having
of retinal lesions (48%) compared to normo-
repeatable systolic blood pressures measure-
tensive cats (3%). In addition, cats with reti-
ments greater than 160 mmHg and/or dia-
nopathies had higher blood pressure (262 ±
stolic blood pressure measurements greater
34 mmHg) than hypertensive cats without
than 100 mmHg. Measurement of blood pres-
retinal lesions (221 ± 34 mmHg)
sure in the cat is most easily accomplished in a
The goals of antihypertensive therapy include
clinical setting by indirect measurement using
lowering blood pressure and slowing the pro-
an oscillometric or ultrasonic detection device.
Aq pasn ap uo 1a1en Jo uisa
Cats aged ll years of age and older have been
chronic hypertension, which requires good
noted to have significantly higher systolic, dia-
client compliance. If an underlying cause of the
stolic and mean arterial, and pulse pressures
 hypertension has been identifed, the primary
than cats under ll years of age.
condition should be addressed. Antihyperten-
OCuLar MaN1FeStAtiOns OF SYstem1C Disease/503
and is now considered a mainstay of therapy
for feline hypertension.
Hypertensive retinopathy in many cats is a
slow, insidious process. Vision may be spared
if the process is identified and controlled before
severe ocular disease develops. Consequently,
cats with diseases such as chronic renal failure
and hyperthyroidism should be screened for
systemic hypertension.
Periarteritis Nodosa
 Periarteritis nodosa, an infrequently reported
disease in the cat, is characterized by fibrinoid
necrosis of the media, adventitia, and endothe-
lium of both small- and medium-sized arteries.
Eventually,
the involved vessels become
obstructed and nonfunctional, and tissues sup-
plied by these vessels become ischemic. Ocular
lesions of periarteritis nodosa have included
unilateral iritis, panuveitis with infltration of
lymphocytes and plasma cells, hyalin necrosis
of the ciliary processes, fbrinous exudates
present in the ocular chambers, cyclitic mem-
branes and retinal detachments. In humans,
periarteritis nodosa is now accepted to be an
immune complex-mediated vasculitis. In the
cat, the diagnosis has usually been made on the
B
basis of necropsy findings.
Fig. 16.2.1. A. Fundus photograph of a geriatric
cat with systemic hypertension. Note the multifocal
Hematologic Diseases
intraretinal and subretinal hemorrhages, and the
peripapillary and dorsal tapetal retinal detachments.
Anemia
B. Domestic shorthair, 8 years, M(n). Hypertensive
ocular disease (right eye illustrated, both eyes
Anemia is the reduction in red blood cells per
affected). Mean systolic blood pressure, 183 mmHg
volume of whole blood. Anemia is classified as
Pigmentary disturbance and retinal degeneration in
chronic hypertensive disease presenting initially with
regenerative or nonregenerative. Severe anemia
bullous serous detachments. (Reprinted with
often manifests systemically as pale mucous
permission from Crispin SM, Mould JR. Systemic
membranes, cool mucous membranes, tachy-
hypertensive disease and the feline Fundus. Veterinary
cardia, polypnea, weakness, as well as signs
Ophthalmology 2001;4:131-140.)
specific to the underlying primary condi-
tion. Ocular manifestations of severe anemia
include pale retinal vasculature, varying
sive agents used in the cat include β-blockers
degrees of retinal hemorrhage, and subtle
 such as propranolol or atenolol; diuretics such
changes in tapetal reflectivity. Retinal hemor-
as spironolactone/thiazide, furosemide, and
rhages are more likely to be observed, however,
hydrochlorothiazide; and angiotensin-convert-
and are more dramatic if accompanied by
ing enzymes such as captopril. Amlodipine, a
   o
calcium channel blocker, has been shown to
rhages are typical and may reabsorb quickly
be an effective antihypertensive agent in cats
with correction of the anemia, but pigmentary
504 /EsSentiAlS OF VeteRinary OpHtHalmoLoGY
disturbances may be a residual retinal altera-
ides, and arises due to a disturbance in plasma
tion. In one study of twenty-six cats with
lipoprotein
metabolism.
Hyperlipidemia
anemia and hemoglobin values of less than
occurs in cats from including postprandial
5 g/dL, twenty cats had retinal hemorrhages.
hyperlipidemia, (
diabetes mellitus, exoge-
Causes of anemia in these cats included
nous corticosteroid administration, meges-
Mycoplasma haemofelis (previously Haemo-
trol
acetate
administration,nephrotic
bartonella felis) infection, thrombocytope-
syndrome,
lipoprotein lipase deficiency,
nia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, aplastic
idiopathic
hyperchylomicronemia,  and
anemia, lymphosarcoma, and bleeding duo-
familial ]
hyperchylomicronemia.
Familial
denal ulcer; some of the cats in this study
hyperlipidemia in cats arises due to production
likely were infected with the FeLV, which
of an inactive lipoprotein lipase resulting in a
was not widely known at the time. Though
fasting chylomicronemia with a slight increase
noted only infrequently in the literature, cats
in very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL). If
with FeLV infections and profound anemia
lipemia persists in a fasted blood sample, serum
commonly have retinal hemorrhages. Ehrlichi-
triglyceride and cholesterol levels should be
osis and anaplasmosis have also been associ-
measured. In addition, lipoprotein electropho-
ated with thrombocytopenia and anemia in
resis and ultracentrifugation to determine lipo-
cats.
protein fractions can be performed.
Lipemia retinalis has infrequently l
been
described as an ocular manifestation of hyper-
Thrombocytopenia and
 lipidemia in cats results in pale or pink appear-
Thrombopathies
ing retinal vessels. In both cats and dogs, it is
the large, triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (e.g.
Thrombocytopenia is an acquired hemostatic
 low-density lipoproteins) that produce a visible
defect of cats. The most common causes of
lipemia. Hyperlipidemia may also manifest
thrombocytopenia include infectious diseases
with lipids in the anterior chamber. A prereq-
(e.g., arthropod-borne agents including Babesia,
Cytauxzoon, Ehrlichia spp., viral agents [e.g..
uisite for gaining access to the anterior chamber
feline immunodeficiency virus, panleukopenia
by the large, lipid-laden molecules is alteration
virus], and fungal and bacterial organisms [e.g..
of
the blood-aqueous barrier, presumably
resulting from preexisting uveitis. The syn-
histoplasmosis]), neoplasia, drug-induced reac-
drome is usually unilateral, which would argue
tions, and immune-mediated disease.
against hyperlipidemia inciting uveitis.
Thrombopathies are blood coagulation dis-
Persistent lipemia was induced in kittens
orders resulting from platelet dysfunction.
with high-dose parenteral methylprednisolone,
Disease processes associated with thrombopa-
 and a primary inherited/familial hyperchylomi-
thies include anemia, DIC, liver failure, and
cronemia has been described, as has idiopathic
uremia. Regardless of the origin, both throm-
bocytopenia and thrombopathies are rather
hyperchylomicronemia. The inherited disorder
is accompanied by skin masses that, histopath-
-au rnooad pue rnoo jo sasnn nba
orrhage. The presence of bleeding signs vary
ologically, were characteristic of lipogranulo-
mas. Feeding a low-fat diet controls the clinical
between individuals, but platelet counts are
signs.
usually less than 50,000 cells/μul. Petechiae in
the ocular fundus are often present without
visible petechiae in the skin and other mucous
Hyperviscosity Syndrome
membranes. Therapy is directed at the underly-
ing cause.
Hyperviscosity syndrome comprises single or
multiple clinicopathologic abnormalities result-
Hyperlipidemia
ing from increased serum viscosity. The sever-
ity of hyperviscosity syndrome is linked to
Hyperlipidemia refers to an elevation in plasma
the size, shape, type, and concentration of
concentrations of cholesterol and/or triglycer-
large molecules (e.g., imunoglobulins [Igl)
OCULAr MANIFEStAtIOnS OF SYStem1C DiSEAsE/505
in the bloodstream. The underlying cause is
neurologic recovery following cardiopulmo
usually a malignancy, such as lymphoma,
nary arrest, however.
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, plasmacy-
toma, or multiple myeloma. Hyperviscosity
Icterus
syndrome in cats has most frequently been
associated with multiple myeloma, in which
Icterus or jaundice is characterized by hyper-
a certain class of immunoglobulin is pro-
bilirubinemia and deposition of bile pigments
duced in excess.
in the skin, sclera, and mucous membranes
Clinical signs are variable, but they often
causing them to appear a shade of yellow. Jaun-
include listlessness, pale mucous membranes,
dice typically becomes present when serum
neurologic signs, and lameness. Ocular mani-
bilirubin concentrations are greater than five-
festations are common and include retinal
 to tenfold above “normal" reference range. The
hemorrhages, dilated and tortuous retinal
sclera is the classic location for detection of
vessels, retinal detachment, perivascular
icterus given its relative lack of pigmentation.
effusion, papilledema, and retinal degenera-
The yellow appearance of icterus may be
tion. Diagnosis of hyperviscosity syndrome is
based demonstrating the hyperproteinemia
detected in the intraocular structures as well
(e.g., blue irides may turn green)
with serum electrophoresis and immunoelec-
trophoresis, to detect a mono- or poly-clonal
spike and to categorize the type of gammopa-
Polycythemia
thy. A detailed medical workup is necessary to
determine the cause of the hyperproteinemia.
Polycythemia is classifed as relative or absolute
Treatment is aimed at defining and treating the
(primary and secondary forms). Relative poly.
underlying disease process, if possible. Reduc-
cythemia is an increased packed cell volume
ing serum viscosity by plasmapheresis is some-
with normal RBC mass occurring as a result of
times helpful as well.
a reduction in plasma volume as may arise from
external losses of body fluids (e.g., diarrhea;
burns).
Hypoxia
 Absolute polycythemia is an increase in total
RBC mass, and it may be classified as either
Hypoxia most commonly occurs during
primary or secondary (appropriate and inap-
anesthetic episodes, and it may relate to
propriate).
Absolute primary polycythemia
apnea, cardiopulmonary f
failure, improper
(i.e., polycythemia vera) has been described in
intubation, overdose of anesthetic agent,
cats and is an absolute increase in erythropoie-
 failure of anesthetic equipment, paralysis of
sis without an increase in erythropoietin.
the muscles of respiration, and severe sys-
Absolute secondary appropriate polycythe-
temic hypotension. Neurons are more sensi-
mia occurs as a consequence of persistent
tive to hypoxia than other support tissues, and
hypoxia, and is seen in animals with conditions
neuronal tissue affected by severe and pro-
such as congenital cardiac defects causing right-
longed hypoxia ± reperfusion will undergo
to-left shunting of blood. Causes of absolute
severe cellular metabolic dysfunction leading to
apoptosis and ischemic necrosis.
diseases that result in the production of eryth-
Clinical signs of cerebral hypoxia include
ropoietin or that cause local hypoxia and trigger
blindness, stupor or coma, paralysis with
erythropoietin synthesis including malignan-
decerebrate rigidity, seizures, and deafness.
cies and renal disease (e.g., renal neoplasia),
 Pupillary light reflexes, however, are gener-
respectively
ally normal. These signs may be either par-
Polycythemia may manifest as dark, ruddy
tially or wholly reversible after a period of
colored conjunctival and retinal blood vessels
days to months. Therapy for systemic and
that are dilated and tortuous. Treatment varies
cerebral hypoxia depend upon the etiology.
according to the cause of the polycythemia. If
Glucocorticoids are not thought to improve
left untreated, however, retinal detachment and
506 /EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinary OpHthalmoLoGY
ocular hemorrhage may occur with persistent
However, a definitive diagnosis of dysauto-
polycythemia.
nomia is rarely made antemortem as it involves
the histopathologic examination of autonomic
ganglia. Histopathologic examination of affected
Idiopathic Systemic Diseases
cats has shown widespread reduction of
Dysautonomia (Key-Gaskell or Dilated
pathetic autonomic ganglia, inconsistent neu-
Pupil Syndrome)
ronal degeneration, and increased numbers of
nonneuronal nuclei. The prognosis for cats
Feline dysautonomia, which is also known as
with dysautonomia must be viewed as being
Key-Gaskell or dilated pupil syndrome, was
guarded to poor, though some cats have been
first reported in England in 1982. The disease,
 maintained long term on supportive therapy or
which produces widespread autonomic nervous
have even recovered after a prolonged period.
system dysfunction, has since been reported in
many cats throughout Europe, but the number
Ischemic Encephalopathy
of documented cases in the United States
remains small. The cause of dysautonomia has
Ischemic encephalopathy occurs when the
not been determined
arterial supply to part of the brain is dis-
Common systemic signs of feline dysau-
rupted. A portion of one side of the cere-
tonomia include general malaise, dehydra-
 brum supplied by the middle cerebral artery
tion,  reduced 
appetitie
or  anorexia,
is most often involved, thereby resulting in
dysphagia, vomiting or regurgitation, xeros-
necrosis. The cause is unknown in most
toma, bradycardia, urinary bladder disten-
cases, however, there is some evidence that
tion, and constipation. Ocular signs that
Cuterebra infection may play a role in some
have been reported most consistently include
cases. In the cat, the condition manifests by a
dilated unresponsive pupils, decreased tear
sudden onset of behavior change, seizures,
production, and protruding nictitating mem-
 ataxia, and motor deficits. Visual deficits may
branes. Vision is unaffected, and photopho-
bia is variable.
accompany other neurologic signs and are
usually cortical in origin.
Pharmacologic testing with ocular auto-
Treatment involves supportive care with
nomic stimulants can aid in establishing the
diagnosis of feline dysautonomia. Results of
ring over days to weeks. Alterations in behavior
these tests are based on denervation supersen-
and seizures may persist, and repeated episodes
sitivity. As such, the dysautonomic eye will
respond to dilute concentrations of drugs that
may occur
will not affect a normal eye. Pilocarpine, which
is a direct-acting parasympathomimetic agent,
Nictitating Membrane Protrusion
at a concentration of 0.l% will produce con-
striction of the pupil. Epinephrine, which is a
Idiopathic bilateral protrusion of the feline
direct-acting sympathomimetic agent, at a con-
nictitating membranes is a common, poorly
centration of 1:l0,0o0 will induce retraction
understood ophthalmic disorder. Retraction
of a prolapsed third eyelid. Ecothiophate iodide,
of the nictitating membranes following
which is an irreversible cholinesterase inhibi-
instillation of topical adrenergic drugs, in
tor, at a concentration of 0.06% will reportedly
affected cats, is suggestive of a loss of sym-
cause miosis in a normal cat but have no effect
pathetic innervation such as that seen in
on a dysautonomic pupil. The same response
Horner's syndrome; however, other ophthal-
has been seen with physostigmine, which is a
mic signs of Horner's syndrome are absent.
reversible cholinesterase inhibitor, at a concen-
Cats with this syndrome have normal intraocu-
tration of 0.25%. The fnding of decreased
lar structures, and vision is unaffected unless
urinary catecholamines can also support the
the nictitating membranes protrude to the
diagnosis of dysautonomia.
extent that they cover the pupil.
OCULAR MaN1FeStAtiOns OF SYSteM1C DiSEAsE/507
Affected cats often have concurrent watery
roidism is extremely rare, and has not been
diarrhea that precedes nictitating membrane
associated with feline myasthenia gravis,
protrusion. Some cats may have diarrhea for
however, myasthenia gravis was described in
weeks. Many cats, however, recover from the
five cats receiving treatment for hyperthyroid-
diarrhea quickly, yet will still have nictitating
ism with methimazole. Abysinians, including
membrane protrusion. A Tora-like virus has
Somalis, are at highest risk for myasthenia
been isolated from the feces of several affected
gravis, thereby suggesting a hereditary basis for
cats in England
this autoimmune condition.
The prognosis for this condition is good.
Animals with acquired myasthenia gravis
The diarrhea and nictitating membrane pro-
present with either generalized or focal clinical
trusion are self-limiting, although clinical
signs including (l)
 generalized  weakness
signs may be long-lasting. Therapy is not
without megaesophagus (28.6% of affected
indicated, but if the nictitating membrane
cats), and (2) generalized weakness associated
protrusion is severe, a topical adrenergic
with a cranial mediastinal mass (25.7% of
agent may be helpful.
affected cats). Cats with the focal form of myas-
thenia gravis may present with dropped jaw,
regurgitation and/or dysphagia, and/or change
Immune-Mediated Diseases
in character of vocalization because of mega-
esophagus and pharyngeal or laryngeal paresis,
Dermatologic Diseases
respectively. With respect to the eye, a dimin-
ished or lack of palpebral reflex may be the
Several immune-mediated skin diseases may
affect the eyelids of cats, usually accompanying
predominant clinical sign.
other head lesions and with variable lesions on
Important features regarding acquired myas-
the rest of the body. These include pemphigus
thenia gravis in cats include the increased fre-
foliaceous, pemphigus erythematosus, pemphi-
quency with which thymomas are diagnosed in
affected cats (19-25.7%) compared to dogs
gus vulgaris, food hypersensitivity, and feline
(3.4%), and the possibility of methimazole-
atopy. However, pemphigus foliaceous is the
induced myasthenia gravis in hyperthyroid cats
most common immune-mediated dermatologic
condition affecting the feline eyelid. Biopsy is
that develop weakness following commence-
ment of this therapy.
necessary to establish the diagnosis of pemphi-
gus complex diseases. Food hypersensitivity
Diagnosis of acquired myasthenia gravis in
cats is based on demonstarting circulating anti-
may be diagnosed on the basis of food elimina-
tion trials, whereas atopy may be best diag-
      
nosed on the basis of skin testing. Treatment is
acquired myasthenia gravis includes anticho-
linesterase and immunosuppressive agents,
aimed at the underlying disease process, but it
nutritional and possibly respiratory support,
often  includes anti-inflammatory 
therapy,
and antibiotics for aspiration pneumonia due
either topically or systemically, as well
to regurgitation.
Myasthenia Gravis
Sjogren's-like Syndrome
Myasthenia gravis is a disease affecting the neu-
romuscular junction, and the acquired form is
Sjogren's syndrome is a condition in humans,
the most common in cats. The acquired condi-
affecting mainly women, characterized by
tion develops due to an autoimmune destruc-
xerophthalmia and xerostomia as a result of
tion of ACHRs, which may occur as an
lymphocytic infiltration and destruction of exo-
 autoimmune condition affecting only the AChR
crine glands, also affects the cat.
(most common), part of another autoimmune
The presenting clinical signs in one cat
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism), or resulting
included dysphagia and weight loss, mild
as part of a paraneoplastic syndrome (e.g..
enlargement of all salivary glands, and ocular
thymoma). In cats, naturally occuring hypothy-
signs including blepharospasm and conjuncti-
508 /EsSENtIAlS OF VEtERINARY OgHTHALmOLOGY
val  hyperemia. Diagnostic testing revealed
henselae is common with 55-81% of cats being
Schirmer tear test (STT) values of O mm/minute
seropositive for the bacterium, however, many
for both eyes, and a lack of salivation in response
infected cats do not show clinical signs. Barton-
to atropine placed on the cat's tongue. Over
ella spp. are typically vector borne (cat and dog
time, the affected cat also developed corneal
fleas and, less commonly, dog and deer ticks)
ulceration, and a corneal sequestrum despite
with the vector varying according to the species
    
of Bartonella
tion and administration of pilocarpine solution
Systemic manifestations of bartonellosis in
(gradually increased from 2-6%) on the food
 cats include fever, lymphadenopathy, lethargy.
with some improvements in tear production
anorexia, central nervous system disorders,
and salivation noted
urologic diseases, and endocarditis. Ocular
The diagnosis of Sjogren's-like syndrome
lesions associated with CSD in humans include
was made based on the clinical signs of xeroph-
Parinaud's oculoglandular syndrome as mani-
thalmia and xerostomia, combined with histo-
fested by regional lymphadenopathy and uni-
logic diagnosis of lymphocytic sialoadenitis.
lateral ocular redness, epiphora, and ulceration
Treatment of Sjogren's syndrome in humans is
of the bulbar conjunctiva. Recently, uveitis in
primarily symptomatic. The most common
cats has been reported to be associated with
treatment is pilocarpine, a direct-acting para-
Bartonella spp. Additional ocular diseases asso-
sympathomimetic that stimulates tear produc-
ciated with Bartonella in cats include blephari-
tion and salivation.
tis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, and chorioretinitis.
Bartonella-infected cats may also show concur-
rent inflammatory disease including gingivitis,
Infectious Diseases
stomatitis, dermatitis, gastroenteritis, and upper
Bacterial
respiratory disease that may or may not be
linked to Bartonella infection.
Bartonella spp. are slow growing
Any bacteremia may result in seeding of the
and
extremely difficult to culture. As such, the diag-
uveal tract and create various degrees of inflam-
mation, but only a few bacterial syndromes are
nosis of Bartonella-associated ocular diseases in
cats is often based on eliminating other causes,
relatively consistent regarding involvement of
positive serology for Bartonella, response to
the eye. Sporadically, bacteremia arising from
bacterial  infections  involving other
therapy, reduction in Bartonella antibody titers
organ
following therapy, and, in certain cases, lym-
systems (e.g, periodontitis or endodentic
phocytic-plasmacytic uveitis diagnosed histo-
disease) may result in varying degrees of focal
     
chorioretinal lesions consisting of hemorrhage
Bartonella-associated feline uveitis has also been
orexudates (or both), which often
g
reported following positive serology for Barton-
unnoted.
ella, and detection of Bartonella antibodies and
DNA (i.e., via PCR) in samples of aqueous
Bartonellosis
humor.
Treatment of bartonellosis in cats involves
Bartonella spp. are fastidious, hemotropic,
the use of systemic antibiotics such as azithro-
short, pleomorphic, Gram-negative rod-shaped
mycin or doxycycline.
bacteria identified in a wide range of domestic
and wild animals. Bartonella henselae, the caus-
ative agent for human “cat scratch disease"
Chlamydophilosis
(CSD), is the prototypic Bartonella disease,
which was originally recognized in humans in
Chlamydophilosis is caused by Gram-negative,
1889. Domestic cats are important reservoir
obligate intracellular bacteria of the genus Chla-
hosts for the following five Bartonella spp.: B.
mydophila. Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly
henselae,B.clarridgeiae,B.elizabethae,B.koe-
Chlamydia psittaci) primarily infects birds
hlerae, and B. weissii. In cats, infection with B
and is a common pathogen of cats (formerly
OCULAr MaN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C DiSEAsE/509
Chlamydia psittaci var. felis), although the
mates of < 5% in studies using PCR in com-
strain affecting cats has been recently
parison to prevalence estimates of non-C. felis
renamed Chlamydophila felis. The pathogen-
chlamydial infection in asymptomatic cats of
esis of chlamydophilosis in cats remains largely
20%
unknown, although C. felis appears to have a
C. felis is considered to be a zoonotic agent.
predilection  toward conjunctival epithelial
Transmission of this agent from cats to humans
cells. Chlamydophilosis is naturally transmit-
has been recently reported in an HIV-positive
ted by direct contact with other infected cats,
man with chronic conjunctivitis. Traditionally,
aerosols,and by fomites. The incubation period
the diagnosis of chlamydophilosis has been
is approximately 3-5 days.
established by using a variety of ELISA antigen
C. felis is endemic in house cats world-
kits with varying sensitivities (25-80%) and
wide, mainly causing acute and chronic con-
 specificities (80-90%) or using cel culture, the
junctivitis. The organism can also infect the
"gold standard" for the diagnosis of chlamydial
respiratory tract causing rhinitis and respi-
infection. The examination of Giemsa-stained
ratory problems, and it has been isolated
conjunctival smears may be helpful in lending
from the gastrointestinal and reproductive
support for a diagnosis of chlamydophilosis
tracts of cats. Recently, chlamydophilosis has
(Fig. 16.2.2), however, inclusions are typically
been associated with lameness in experimen-
only detectable during early infection, and in
tally infected cats.
 some cases not at all. Most recently, PCR assays
The acute phase of C. felis infection results
have become available for the diagnosis of C.
in conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, serous
felis. These PCR assays are typically more rapid
ocular discharge, and blepharospasm. Mild
 and sensitive, and less expensive than tradi-
nasal discharge and sneezing may also occur in
 r   n  
some cats. Conjunctivitis is often unilateral ini-
culture.
tially, and then progresses to involve the con-
Chlamydial organisms are sensitive to
tralateral eye during the next few days.
tetracyclines, erythromycin, rifampin, fluo
If untreated, infection with C. felis
can
roquinolones, and azithromycin. Topical
produce chronic conjunctivitis. Asymptomatic
administration of tetracycline three to four
carrier states can exist, and are likely significant
P        
 in spreading the organism within a population.
Persistence of the organism in the genital and
gastrointestinal systems also may contribute to
the spread of chlamydophilosis.
C. felis infection, unlike chlamydial infec-
tions in other species, is rarely associated with
keratitis in cats, and concurrent infection with
feline herpesvirus-type l should be suspected.
Recently, other non-C. felis chlamydiae, includ-
ing Neochlamydia hartmannellae, were detected
in cats with ocular disease.
Chlamydophilosis may be complicated by
co-infection with other microorganisms includ-
ing Mycoplasma spp., Bordetella bronchiseptica,
feline calicivirus, feline herpesvirus-type l, and
Fig. 16.2.2. Conjunctival scraping from a cat
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
demonstrating Chlarydophila felis (formerly
Natural exposure of cats to C. felis, as evalu-
Chlamydia psittaci) inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm
ated by serum antibody titers, appears to vary.
of epithelial cells. (Reprinted with permission from
The prevalence of seropositive cats in England
Stiles J. Ocular manifestations of systemic disease
has ranged from 9% among healthy cats to 69%
Part 2: The cat. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
in those with conjunctivitis. The prevalence of
ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
C. felis in asymptomatic cats is low with esti-
Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1448-1473.)
5I0 /EsSentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
resolution of conjunctivitis is sufficient in some
Mycoplasmosis
cats. However, given that chlamydophilosis
may be systemic, topical therapy alone may be
Mycoplasma spp. are the smallest free-living
ineffective in certain cats. Oral administration
organisms, and they are classifed as prokary-
of tetracycline or doxycycline may be necessary
otes. Mycoplasma felis, M. gatae, and M. arginini
to treat refractory infections, and may also be
have all been isolated from both sick and
necessary to clear the gastrointestinal tract of
healthy cats. The role of Mycoplasma spp. as
latent infection.
a cause of conjunctivitis in the cat has
Both humoral and cell-mediated immu
been controversial because the organism has
nity appear necessary for the resolution of
been isolated from the eyes of normal cats
chlamydophilosis. Both modified live and
as well as f
from those of cats with
inactivated cell culture vaccines for C. felis
conjunctivitis
have been used in the United States. Vacci-
Most Mycoplasma spp. that normally inhabit
nation with a live chlamydial vaccine pro-
the upper respiratory tract have been isolated
vides the best clinical protection.
 at necropsy from the lungs of cats with pneu-
monia, but they are not normally present in the
lungs of normal cats. Because these organisms
Mycobacteriosis
have only been shown experimentally to cause
conjunctivitis in kittens, an altered or immature
Mycobacteria are aerobic, non-spore-forming.
immune system may also be a factor in allowing
nonmotile, acid-fast staining bacteria. Mycobac-
establishment of disease.
teria have been associated with causing tuber
     s
culosis characterized by internal tubercular
established on the basis of culturing the organ-
granulomas, leprosy characterized cutaneous
ism on special media or finding the character-
nodules, or progressive subcutaneous inflam-
istic, small coccoid inclusions within the
mation. The incidence of mycobacterial infec-
cytoplasm of the epithelial cells. Mycoplasma
tions in the cat has decreased dramatically since
spp.are sensitive to many routinely used oph-
the decline in bovine tuberculosis (Mycobacte-
thalmic antibiotics.
rium bovis) and pasteurization of milk, although
new cases still occur. Feline mycobacteriosis
has been reported to be caused by Mycobacte-
Tetanus
rium bovis, M. tuberculosis, M. simiae, M
 genavense, and M. avium. Ocular lesions involve
Tetanus is caused by the neurotoxin produced
primarily the posterior segment and include
by the bacterium Clostridium tetani. C. tetani is
retinal hemorrhage, retinal detachment, and
a
 motile, Gram-positive, nonencapsulated,
granulomatous choroiditis associated with large
anaerobic, rod-shaped, spore-forming bacte-
numbers of tubercle organisms within the
rium. Dogs and cats are naturally resistant
eye.
when compared to other species such as
A presumptive diagnosis of mycobacterial
humans and horses. The localized form is
infection can be made on the basis of identify-
described more commonly in cats compared to
ing acid-fast bacilli from aspiration samples or
dogs as a result of an inherent inability of the
tissue sections using special stains such as
toxin to penetrate and bind to nervous tissue.
Ziehl-Neelsen or Kinyoun stains. Culture of the
In the generalized form, affected cats may have
organism is required for speciation, but few
a stiff gait, an outstretched or dorsally curled
laboratories are equipped to grow these agents.
tail, or be recumbent with profound rigidity of
PCR tests are also available for Mycobacterium
the limbs. A characteristic smiling/sneering
'dds
appearance (risus sardonicus) may be seen in
Treatment of cats with mycobacterial infec-
affected cats as a result of spasm of the facial
tions requires long-term combination therapy.
muscles causing a drawing back of the lips, and
and perhaps even life-long therapy. Zoonotic
 a wrinkling of the forehead. Respiratory com-
potential should also be considered.
promise may result in death.
OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SYStEM1C DiSEASE/S1 1
Ocular signs seen in a tetanic animal include
and in situ hybridization for the organism are
protrusion of the third eyelid and enophthal-
becoming important in the clinical diagnosis of
mus resulting from globe retraction due to the
blastomycosis.
hypertonicity of the extraocular muscles
Few cases in the literature include treatment
Diagnosis is made based upon consistent
for blastomycosis in cats. Two cats have been
physical examination findings (presence of a
successfully treated, however, one with a com-
wound) and clinical signs. Treatment is aimed
bination of amphotericin B and ketoconazole
at administering tetanus antitoxin (usually
and one with ketoconazole alone. Three other
unnecessary in localized forms of tetanus) and
cats with advanced disease died despite
penicillin-G and/or metronidazole to prevent
attempted treatment with amphotericin B. Itra-
binding of any unbound toxin and to destroy
conazole has also been recommended for treat-
any remaining bacteria, respectively. Tetanus
ment of blastomycosis in the cat at the same
antitoxin therapy should be done only after
dose as that used for cryptococcosis.
intradermal testing with this antitoxin as there
is a strong likelihood of anaphylaxis following
Candidiasis
 systemic administration. Symptomatic therapy
with muscle relaxants such as diazepam may or
Candida albicans is a dimorphic fungus that
may not be helpful in protracted cases. Sup-
may cause either localized or generalized
 portive care and wound management are also
indicated. Prognosis is variable depending
within wounds or mucosal surfaces is the first
upon the severity of the clinical signs and sec-
step in the spread of infection, and it generally
ondary complications.
occurs in immunosuppressed or debilitated
cats. Panuveitis resulting from candidiasis has
been reported in the cat.
Mycotic
Blastomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Blastomycosis is a systemic mycotic infection
Coccidioidomycosis is caused by the dimor-
caused by the dimorphic fungus, Blastomyces
phic fungus Coccidioides immitis. The organism
dermatitidis, which is a thick-walled yeast that
is found in sandy, alkaline soils of the dry
reproduces by budding in infected tissues (i.e..
regions of the southwestern United States,
yeast phase), and in nature, is most likely a soil
western Mexico, and Central and South
saprophyte that produces infective spores called
America. The major route of Coccidioides spp.
conidia (i.e., mycelial phase). The tissue
infection is via inhalation. In a retrospective
 budding yeast form is 5-20 μm in size, with a
study of forty-eight cats, 19% had ocular
thick, double-contoured wall. B. dermatitidis is
signs that, though not described in detail,
   a    
included retinal detachments, uveitis, and
States, Canada, Europe, Mexico, Latin America,
iritis. The most common systemic signs of
and Africa. Typically, blastomycosis develops
systemic coccidioidomycosis in cats are skin
following the inhalation of organismal spores,
lesions,
respiratory
disease, and bone
sp u si u  ssa s p
lesions.
Reported ocular lesions in cats include
The most reliable means of diagnosis is iden-
retinal detachment, pyogranulomatous cho-
tification of the organism from fluid or tissue
rioretinitis, and panophthalmitis. The poste-
aspirates. In the above mentioned study, thirty-
rior segment of the globe is more commonly
nine of these forty-eight cats were evaluated
affected that the anterior segment. A diagno-
with serologic tests (agar-gel immunodiffusion
sis of blastomycosis is made based upon
or complement fixating antibody titers), and all
cytologic identification of the organism. A
were positive at some point in the course of
positive agar-gel immunodiffusion test is con-
their disease. Forty-four of these cats were
sidered to be highly suggestive of disease. PCR
treated, forty with ketoconazole and four with
512 /EsSentiAlS Of VeteRinary OpHthalmoLoGY
fluconazole and itraconazole. Thirty-two cats
clinical disease becomes inapparent. Flucon-
became asymptomatic, though relapses were
azole, 50 mg given orally every 12 hours, has
common in cats treated with ketoconazole
also been used successfully and without side
effects in cats with cryptococcosis.
Cryptococcosis
Dermatophytosis (Ringworm)
Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus neo-
Dermatophytosis, or ringworm, is a cutaneous
formans or Cryptococcus gattii (previously C.
infection with fungi, and in the cat, it may be
neoformans var. gatti). Birds such as pigeons are
considered to be significant vectors of Crypto-
caused by one of several species of Microsporum
or
Irichophyton. The most common species
coccus spp. In infected tissue, and often when
affecting the cat is M. canis. Lesions, which are
cultured using standard laboratory conditions,
characterized by alopecia with or without
C. neoformans is a variably sized yeast-like
scales, most commonly affect the head, pinnae,
 Organism (3.5-7 μm) that typically contains a
and paws, but they may also involve the eyelids,
thick capsule.
typically producing a dry, crusty, periocular
C. neoformans is the most commonly
alopecia.
reported feline mycotic infection with fre-
The condition is diagnosed on the basis of
quent sites of disease including the nasal
 direct microscopic examination of skin scrap-
passages, skin, and central nervous system.
ings from lesions, Wood's light examination, or
Chorioretinitis with granulomatous inflam-
more frequently, direct fungal culturing of the
mation and retinal detachments, anterior
 affected hair and scales with dermatophyte test
uveitis, and exophthalmos have been
medium. Treatment includes clipping the hair
reported, and optic neuritis may also occur,
in the affected region, which is followed by
particularly if the central nervous system is
topical (i.e., lyme sulfur, enilconazole, or
involved.
 miconazole) or systemic (i.e., griseofulvin, itra-
Diagnosis of cryptococcosis is made on the
conazole, terbinafine) antifungal therapy that
basis of cytologic identification of the organism
aspirated from affected tissue. Antigen can be
continues until two to four negative cultures
identified in serum by latex cryptococcal agglu-
timepoints.
tination kits, and serum antigen titers can be
used to monitor the response to therapy. Cats
with cryptococcosis have been successfully
Histoplasmosis
treated with itraconazole, which seems to
cause less side effects than ketoconazole or
Histoplasmosis is caused by a dimorphic
amphotericin B in this species. The recom-
fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum, which exists in
mended dose for itraconazole in the cat is
various river bottoms as a mycelial-phase, soil
5 mg/kg every 12 hours, and the drug is well
saprophyte. Though quite widespread in North
tolerated by most cats
and South America, endemic areas are in the
Anorexia and hepatic toxicosis can occur,
Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi river valleys.
however, and blood chemistry profles should
Histoplasma organisms are disseminated via
be monitored. The capsules can be opened and
hematogenous or lymphatic spread.
placed on canned cat food, because ingestion
Cats in endemic areas commonly have
with a fatty meal enhances intestinal absorption
asymptomatic pulmonary infections but may
 of the drug. Therapy should be continued for 
develop disseminated disease when the
at least l month after the resolution of clinical
organism extends beyond the lungs. Common
disease, but also until a decrease in antigen titer
sites of infection in disseminated disease
by at least two orders of magnitude has been
include bone, skin, and visceral organs.
demonstrated and, preferably, until serum
Ocular lesions include granulomatous cho-
antigen is undetectable. This may mean that
rioretinitis, anterior uveitis, retinal detach-
cats remain on itraconazole for months after
ment, and optic neuritis.
OCuLar MaN1FeStAtiOns OF SYstem1C Disease/513
A diagnosis of histoplasmosis is made based
itraconazole and fluconazole or intraconazole
upon cytologic identification of the fungal
and terbinafine, terbinafine, sodium iodide, or
organism and culture of the organism. Positive
ketoconazole. In one study, treatment duration
serological tests can also be supportive of the
 =  m o    
diagnosis; however, many cats with dissemi-
weeks). Adverse treatment effects were seen in
nated histoplasmosis have negative serologic
40.5% of cats treated with sodium iodide and
tests.
13.7% of cats receiving the other treatment
Cats with histoplasmosis have been success-
regimes.
fully treated with itraconazole without adverse
effect during treatment. In one study, eight cats
were reportedly cured of histoplasmosis with
ParasiticDipteric Larvae
use of itraconazole, though two cats relapsed
and required additional therapy.
Ophthalmomyiasis Interna/Externa
Ophthalmomyiasis interna refers to the
Sporotrichosis
intraocular migration of fly (Diptera) larvae
and has been observed in the cat. The syn-
Sporotrichosis is caused by the dimorphic
drome is quite characteristic, but it is uncom-
fungus, Sporothrix schenckii, which exists in soil
mon to determine the type of fly larvae
rich in decaying organic matter. The organism
present. The point of entry is unknown but
is endemic worldwide, and grows as a mold at
postulated to be across mucous membrane-
25-30°C and as a yeast at 37°C. Sporotrichosis
lined sites such as the conjunctival surfaces,
typically develops from direct cutaneous inocu-
oral cavity, nasal cavity, skin, or other body
lation of the fungus through contact with soil
orifice or wound. The syndrome may be pre-
or plants, or, less commonly, via inhalation of
sented in the acute stages if an anterior
infective conidia.Despite its worldwide distri-
uveitis is produced, but usually the syn-
bution, feline sporotrichosis is reported 
to
drome is noted as an incidental finding in
occur only sporadically but is an important
the chronic stages with the characteristic
zoonosis responsible for causing human epi-
ophthalmoscopic lesions as wandering, cur-
demics in some instances. In naturally occur-
vilinear tracts that frequently intersect and
ring infections, S. schenckii primarily affects
are associated with retinal and preretinal
younger intact male cats (< 4 years of age).
hemorrhages in the acute stage.
Cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions included
 If the larva is present, laser energy may be
focal crusted areas, subcutaneous nodules that
 attempted to kill the larva, even though it is not
eventually drained purulent material, exudative
pigmented.
Systemic organophosphates have
ulcers, and large regions of necrosis exposing
been used as well, but because the condition
underlying muscle and bone. Sporotrichosis
spontaneously improves in most instances, its
 prefentially affects the face, neck, and extremi-
efficacy is unknown. Killing the larva may
ties. Systemic signs were present in 57.1% of
 incite more inflammation, however, and waiting
cats, and included poor body condition,
for spontaneous departure may be prudent.
anorexia, vomiting, and, most frequently, respi-
Two cases of an intracameral Cuterebra spp.
ratory signs such as sneezing and dyspnea.
larvae in cats have also been reported. Ophthal-
Diagnosis of sporotrichosis involves isola-
momyiasis interna in which the Cuterebra spp.
tion or demonstration of the causative agent, S.
was found in the vitreous slightly lateral to the
schenkii from affected tissues (e.g., nasal or oral
optic nerve (Figs. 16.2.3A and B). The larva
swabs, secretions from cutaneous lesions) via
was demonstrated histologically as were coagu-
mycologic culture, histopathologic examina-
lation necrosis and hemorrhage of the optic
tion of a skin biopsy, or via detecting organis-
nerve,1
retina and choroid,  and anterior
mal DNA using PCR
uveitis.
Cats with sporotrichosis have been success-
Ophthalmomyiasis externa refers to the
fully treated with itraconazole, combinations of
extraocular migration of fly larvae. Migration of
5I4 /ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Parasitic—Mites
Demodicosis
An uncommon disease, feline demodicosis
results from three species of mites: Demodex
cati, D. gatoi, and a third species of Demodex
that has not yet been named. Affected animals
typically have a concurrent medical condition.
Lesions usually affect the eyelids, periocular
area, head, and neck. They are variably pruritic,
and they are characterized by alopecia, ery-
thema, crusting. and scaling. The diagnosis of
demodicosis is established on the basis of cuta-
neous scrapings of the lesion(s) and identifica-
tion of the mite.
Notoedric Mange
The causative agent of feline scabies is Notoed-
res cati, but cats may also be infected with the
mite that causes canine scabies, Sarcoptes scabiei
var. canis. Importantly, feline mange is zoonotic
and owners of affected cats may become
infected. Typically, lesions begin around the
medial edge of the ear pinna, then progress to
involve the upper ear, face, eyelids, and neck.
B
Intense pruritus is characteristic.
Diagnosis is confirmed on the basis of cuta-
Fig. 16.2.3. A. Cuterebriasis in a cat. Fundus
neous scrapings of the lesion(s), which are
photograph of the organism in the vitreous with
examined under low-level light at 10 × magni-
vitreal hemorrhage overlying the optic disc. The black
fication for the small mite. Treatment should
cuticular spines can be observed. B. The gross
include clipping of all hair and application of a
specimen of the globe demonstrating the Cuterebra
3% lime-sulfur solution every seventh day until
larva in the vitreous. (Reprinted with permission
the lesions have resolved. All other cats on the
Irom Wyman M, Starkey R, Weisbrode S, Filko D,
premises must be treated as well.
Grandstaff R, Ferrebee E. Ophthalmomyiasis linterna
posterior] of the posterior segment and central
nervous system myiasis: Cuterebra spp. in a cat.
Parasitic—Protozoa!
Veterinary Ophthalmology 2005;8:77-80.)
Leishmaniasis
Leishmania spp. are diphasic protozoal parasites
Cuterebra spp. larvae in the subcutaneous
that infect a wide range of vertebrates, includ-
tissues of the cat is common, and the eyelids
ing dogs, cats, and humans. Dogs are consid-
or conjunctiva may be affected. In addition,
ered important primary reservoirs of Leishmania
Cuterebra have been found within the feline
 spp., and sandflies (Phlebotomus spp. or Lutzo-
orbit. Removal of the larva is indicated. Care
myia spp.) are the vectors. Naturally occurring
must be taken not to crush the larva, however,
leishmaniasis has traditionally been uncom-
because a severe inflammatory response may
monly recognized in cats but has been
occur.
increasingly reported in the last decade.
OCULAr MANIFEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C DiSEAsE/515
Feline leishmaniasis is generally caused by
I. gondii has a worldwide distribution. Cats are
different Leishmania spp. than those affect-
both definitive and intermediate hosts of T.
ing dogs including: L. mexicana in Texas, L.
gondif. Because cats are definitive hosts,
major in Egypt, and L. (Viannia) panamensis
they are the only species that can shed
in Brazil.
 oocysts, which in turn are infective to other
Leishmania spp. cause cutaneous, mucocuta-
species.
neous, and visceral diseases. Visceral forms of
Ocular disease associated with T. gondii
leishmaniasis are not typically described in
is more commonly observed in cats than in
cats, although reports of leishmania-induced
dogs, and, in the cat, it is commonly associ-
cutaneous lesions have been more commonly
ated
1with systemic disease
including
described. Cutaneous lesions are variable
anorexia, fever, hepatitis, myositis, pneumo-
but typically involve an ulcerative dermatitis
nia, gastrointestinal signs, and neurological
on the face, pinnae, neck, thorax, and bony
signs. Clinical feline toxoplasmosis may also
 protuberances. In addition, generalized alope-
manifest initially as cutaneous nodules. T.
cia and scaling, and cutaneous nodules on the
gondii has been implicated as being a major
head and extremities have been reported. An
contributor to feline uveitis, yet its role in
affected cat had bilateral meltingulcerative kera-
causing anterior uveitis in an otherwise
titis, exudative panuveitis and secondary glau-
asymptomatic cat is unclear. The uveitis
coma, diabetes mellitus, and macrophages with
may be anterior, posterior, or both (Figs.
intracytoplasmic Leishmania detected cytologi-
16.2.4A and B). However, chorioretinitis is the
cally on bone marrow aspirates. Leishmaniasis
most common ocular manifestation.In addi-
has also been reported in cats with co-infections
tion, optic neuritis has also been reported in
with FeLV and/or FIV, and in one cat with con-
affected cats. In a histopathologic study of a
current pemphigus foliaceus.
hundred cats with confirmed toxoplasmosis,
The diagnosis of feline leishmaniasis may be
twenty-two had ocular involvement, with the
difficult since serology and serum protein elec-
ciliary body being the most severely affected
trophoresis patterns are usually less specifc
portion of the uvea. The particular strain of I.
than in affected dogs. The diagnosis if confirmed
gondi may also be important in the develop-
 on the basis of fnding the organisms (i.e., amas-
ment of ocular disease. Most recently, I. gondii
tigotes), which are round to oval and 2.5-5.0 μum
DNA has been detected in four of nine corneal
by 1.5-2.0 μum in size, in bone marrow aspi-
sequestra specimens submitted for PCR; the
rates, lymph node aspirates, or skin impression
organism was not detected histologically or
smears stained with Wright's or Giemsa stains.
ultrastructurally in any of the affected keratec-
Other means of identifying the leishmania
tomy samples.
organism include histopathologic or immuno-
Uveitis secondary to toxoplasmosis may
peroxidase evaluation of cutaneous or organ
result from rapid replication of tachyzoites
biopsy specimens, PCR performed on anticoag-
within ocular tissue or from deposition of
ulated blood, or bone marrow or lymph node
immune complexes within uveal tissue. Intra-
aspirates, or culture inoculation of hamsters.
ocular production of antibodies specific for
Serologic tests are available that use ELISA and
I. gondi has been documented, and the organ-
indirect fluorescent antibody testing.
ism has been identified within the uveal
Leishmania spp. are diffcult to eliminate
tract by histopathology and in the aqueous
from the body and recurrences are common.
humor by PCR. Stressors that may relate to
Due to the limited number of reported cases of
reactivation include co-infection with agents
feline leishmaniasis,treatment is not clearly
such FIV or with immunosuppressive doses of
defined.
corticosteroids
Diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis in an oth-
Toxoplasmosis
erwise asymptomatic cat is diffcult, and histo-
logic demonstration of the parasite is the sole
Toxoplasmosis is caused by the obligate intra-
definitive means of confirmation. The diagnosis
cellular protozoal parasite, Toxoplasma gondii.
of toxoplasmosis-related uveitis is, however,
5I6/ESSENTIALS OF VetERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
body may rise more slowly and remain elevated
in cats for years after exposure to I. gondii.
Detection of I. gondii-specific antibodies in
aqueous humor may aid in establishing an
accurate diagnosis.
Current treatment recommendations for cats
with toxoplasmosis-induced uveitis include
oral clindamycin hydrochloride, 12.5 mg/kg
twice daily for 21-30 days, in addition to treat-
ment with a topical corticosteroid, such as 1%
prednisolone acetate every 6 hours, and atro-
pine (as needed to maintain mydriasis). Despite
treatment with clindamycin, uveitis in cats with
positive I. gondii-serum antibody titers may be
chronic or recurring. and long-term use of
A
topical prednisolone acetate may be needed to
control the uveitis.
Toxoplasmosis is a significant zoonotic
disease. Clinical signs of toxoplasmosis may
develop in the fetus of pregnant mothers expe-
riencing a primary I. gondii infection.
Trypanosomiasis
Irypanosoma brucei, which is a parasitic, flagel-
B
late protozoa, is the cause of sleeping sickness.
J rau e on ood  ose si 
Fig. 16.2.4. A. Anterior uveitis with keratic
species. Experimental infection of cats with I.
precipitates in a cat with positive serum antibody
titers for Toxoplasma gondii. (Reprinted with
brucei leads to marked anterior uveitis and for-
mation of ciliary epithelial cysts containing the
permission from Stiles J. Ocular manifestations of
systemic disease. Part 2: The cat. In: Gelatt KN,ed
organism. Trypanosomes have also been found
Veterinary ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
free within the anterior chamber.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1448-1473.)
B. Fundus photograph of a cat with naturally
Vira!
occurring, histologically confrmed, generalized
toxoplasmosis. Multifocal chorioretinitis is present.
(Reprinted with permission Irom Davidson MG,
Calicivirus
English RV. Feline ocular toxoplasmosis. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 1998;1:71-80.)
Feline calicivirus (FCV), a picornavirus, is
primarily a respiratory tract pathogen of cats
but may cause oral ulcers and polyarthritis.
Compared with feline herpesvirus-type 1
generally established on the basis of a positive
(FHV-l), FCV has a low pathogenicity for
serum I. gondii-antibody titer, though poly-
the conjunctiva, though it can cause
merase chain reaction tests to identify I. gondii
conjunctivitis.
DNA in biologic samples have also been devel-
Cats may be asymptomatic while shedding
oped. Laboratory tests that measure both I.
FCV in ocular and nasal discharges, saliva, and
gondi-specific IgM and IgG are most helpful,
feces. The diagnosis of FCV can be made using
because levels of the IgM class of antibody rise
laboratory techniques such as virus isolation,
and fall over approximately 3-4 months after
immunofluorescence (IF), and PCR assay. Most
  s      
recently, a novel nested PCR (nPCR) assay for
OCULAR MAN1FESTATIONs OF SYSteMIC DiSEASE/51 7
the detection of FCV DNA has been developed
ble. Many cats with FIP have low antibody
and was determined to be more sensitive than
titers, and fluctuating or high titers may, in fact,
both virus isolation and RT-PCR in the diagno-
be more likely among cats with chronic re-
sis of FCV
exposure to FECV in the environment.
Vaccination with standard inactivated triva-
A recent study documented that the utility
lent vaccine including FCV has been correlated
of the serum albumin to globulin ratio to diag-
with resistance to infection and clinical
nose FIP was greater than the utility of serum
disease.
total protein and gamma-globulin concentra-
 tions, especially when performed on effusions.
Tests using PCR to identify coronaviruses have
Feline Coronavirus (Feline Infectious
been developed, but still cannot differentiate
Peritonitis)
between FIP virus and FECV. However, RT-
PCR conducted on effusion samples was accu-
Feline coronavirus infection in cats may lead to
rate in diagnosing FIP in five cats with
no clinical disease, enteric disease, or feline
histologically confirmed FIP and was negative
infectious peritonitis (FIP), which is a dissemi-
in the cat with a different disease.
nated pyogranulomatous vasculitis. FIP repli-
There is no effective treatment at present
cates within macrophages resulting in the
for FIP. Elimination of FIP from a cattery is
deposition of virus-laden macrophages within
only possible by total elimination of endemic
the endothelium of small blood vessels. FIP is
FECV infection. The most important method
a fatal arthus-type immune reaction of cats to
for reducing FECV is the elimination of chronic
infection with the virus. A recent study evaluat-
FECV shedders. Treatment of ocular disease is
ing the prevalence of FIP in individual breeds
symptomatic and includes use of topical, sub-
reported increased risk of development of
conjunctival, or systemic corticosteroids as well
disease in Abyssinians, Bengals, Birmans, Hima-
 as topical atropine. Temporary amelioration of
layans, Ragdolls, and Rexes.
ocular disease may occur, but such disease will
FIP most commonly occurs in young cats,
usually rebound in a short period of time.
and it may manifest by an effusive or wet
form of the disease, which includes fibrin-
rich fluid within the abdominal and perito-
Feline Herpesvirus-Type 1
neal cavities, or as a noneffusive or dry form
of the disease. Ocular and neural lesions are
FHV-l, a double-stranded DNA virus and a
more likely to be present with the noneffu-
member of the Alpha-herpesvirus subfamily,
sive form. The most common ocular mani-
is highly species-specific. Infection with
festation of FIP is bilateral granulomatous
FHV-l is common, and the virus is wide-
anterior uveitis, often with large, mutton-fat
spread among cat populations. Studies have
keratic precipitates and a fibrinous exudate
estimated that over 9o% of cats are seroposi-
into the anterior chamber. Chorioretinitis is
tive to the virus with as much as 8o% of
also frequently observed, and a pyogranulo-
infected cats remaining latently infected on
matous exudate sheathing the retinal vessels
a life-long basis, and with approximately
may be present as well. Additional findings
 45% of these latently infected cats shedding
may include retinal hemorrhages, detach-
virus throughout life. The virus is spread from
ments, and optic neuritis.
cat to cat either by direct contact, fomites, or
Current evidence is indicative that the FIP
by aerosolization of virus. FHV-l infects the
virus develops as a simple mutation of feline
epithelial surfaces of the respiratory tract and
enteric corona virus (FECV) during primary
conjunctiva and, to a lesser degree, the corneal
infection. In many cases, the definitive diagno-
epithelium, thereby causing necrosis of these
sis of FIP antemortem is diffcult. Confrming
tissues as the virus replicates and invades the
a diagnosis of FIP infection based upon the
adjacent cells. The virus then ascends by axons
measurement of several variables within serum,
of sensory neurons to the trigeminal ganglion
including serum coronavirus titers, is impossi-
to establish life-long latency. Cats may there-
5I8 /EsSENtIAlS OF VEtERiNArY OgHTHALlmOLOGY
fore develop chronic or recurrent ocular disease
Corneal sequestration is a common disorder
associated with FHV-1
in the cat, particularly in the Persian and Hima-
FHV-l produces disease via at least two
layan breeds. The cause in many cats remains
mechanisms. The first mechanism involves
undetermined, but sequestra may occur after
cytolytic infection during active viral repli-
chronic corneal ulcers or keratitis caused by
cation. Cell rupture can occur during primary
infection with FHV-l.
FHV-l infection or following viral reactiva-
Establishing an accurate diagnosis of FHV-
tion from latency. FHV-l infection can also
1-related ocular disease in adult cats without
induce disease via a second mechanism,
respiratory tract disease has been problematic
immune-mediated inflammation.
(see Table 1l.2). FHV-1 has also been shown
S     
to infect feline intraocular tissues and may be
produces upper respiratory and ocular dis-
associated with uveitis in some cats. In particu-
eases, and is characterized by malaise, fever,
lar, twenty-two of forty-four cats with idio-
inappetence, sneezing or coughing, and nasal
pathic uveitis and eleven of twenty-nine cats
as well as ocular discharge. Polymorphonu-
with toxoplasma-associated uveitis had evi-
clear cell infltrate is marked and results in
dence of intraocular FHV-1 antibody produc-
 purulent ocular and nasal discharge, even if
tion, while twelve cats had FHV-1 DNA detected
secondary bacterial infection is not present.
 u m jo 'rou snon ai u
Primary respiratory tract and conjunctival
uveitis.
FHV-1 infection usually lasts for 10-14 days
Treatment of recurrent FHV-l ocular
and resolves spontaneously, but the course can
disease may, or may not, be required (Table
be variable
16.2.2). Many cats with transient conjuncti-
Clinical ophthalmic manifestations
vitis recover spontaneously and need no
FHV-l cytolytic infection are numerous
therapy. The combined results of two in vitro
(Table l6.2.l). Conjunctivitis, whether uni-
studies have shown FHV-l to be susceptible to
lateral or bilateral, is probably the most
 the following antiviral agents (listed in order of
common FHV-l-related ocular disorder in
decreasing effect): (1) trifluridine, (2) idoxuri-
adult cats without active respiratory disease,
 dine = ganciclovir, (3) cidofovir ≈ penciclovir,
though some of these cats will have concur-
(4) vidarabine, (5) bromovinyldeoxyuridine,
rent sneezing or other mild signs of respira-
and (6) acyclovir = foscarnet
tory tract infection. Corneal ulcers, whether
Treatment with oral lysine has been of
dendritic or geographic, are thus a common
some benefit among humans in accelerating
manifestation of cytolytically induced FHV-
recovery from herpes simplex infection and
1 ocular disease usually accompanied by
 in suppressing recurrence. An in vitro study
conjunctivitis.
has shown lysine to be effective at reducing
Table 16.2.1. Ophthalmic Diseases Associated with FHV-1 in the Cat.
Condition
Clinicat Signs
 Neonatal ophthalmia 
Kittens less than 10-14 days and before normal eyelids opening.
Primary conjunctivitis
Hyperemia, blepharospasm, chemosis, and ocular discharge
Recurrent conjunctivitis
Adults, usually 1-2 years or older; after stress.
KCS
 Persistent mucopurulent exudates; lower Schirmer tear test values. Superficial keratitis
with vascularization
Comeal ulceration
Dendritic or geographic comeal ulcer; stromal keratitis (deep cormeal vascularization),
edema, and cellular infiltrates.
 Comeal sequestration
Focal area of degeneration with a brown-to-black discoloration; variable corneal
vascularization and pain
Symblepharon
Adherence of bulbar/palpebral conjunctiva to cormea
OCULAr MaNIFeStAtiOns OF SYStem1C DiSEAsE/519
Table 16.2.2. Treatment of FHv-1 Ophthalmic Diseases in the Cat.
Condition
Recommended Therapy
 Rrimary infection
Respiratory tract—systemic, broad-spectrum antibiotics; subcutaneous fluids; cleansing
of nasal and ocular discharge
Conjunctivitis
Broad-spectrum, topical ophthalmic antibiotic(s)
Recurrent conjunctivitis
Topical broad-spectrum antibiotics; other drugs under evaluation: Recombinant
interferon (natural oral human interferon at a dose of 5 and 25 IU); oral lysine (100-
500 mg of lysine, given once or twice daily—watch for gastric upset).
Cormeal ulcerations
Debridement and an ophthalmic antiviral (trifluridine, idoxuridine, or vidarabine)
Comeal sequestra
Surgically removed by keratectomy. and placerment of a conjunctival or
cormeoconjunctival graft.
KCS
Topical 0.2% cyclosporine ointment in addition to antiviral therapy
FHV-l synthesis, in conjunction with low
white infltrates presumed to be inflammatory
arginine levels, by antagonizing the avail-
cells.
ability of arginine, an essential amino acid
 In a study of fifty-four clinically ill cats sero.
used for viral synthesis. Recent clinical studies
positive for antibody to FIV, nineteen had
reveal that oral lysine is safe, and reduces both
ocular disease, and 76% of these nineteen were
the severity of conjunctivitis in cats with
also positive for I. gondii-specific serum anti-
primary FHV-l infection and the ocular viral
bodies. Anterior uveitis and chorioretinitis were
shedding rate in FHV-l latently infected cats.
 the most common ocular fndings.
Current recommendations for lysine adminis-
The diagnosis of FIV infection has
tration in cats are 500 mg PO twice daily (1)
depended upon the use of positive antibody
during active FHV-1 disease and (2) as a long-
results in ELISA, western blot, or IFA tests.
term prophylactic treatmentin cats with chronic
This has made it difficult to reliably assess the
recurrent herpes viral episodes.
FIV infection status of cats using current sero-
logical tests because the antibodies produced in
response to vaccination against FIV are indis-
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
tinguishable from those used to diagnose FIV
infection. As a result, various PCR assays have
FIV is a lentivirus. The transmission of FIV is
been developed for the diagnosis of FIV infec-
most likely via bites between animals. However,
tion. Unfortunately, currently marketed PCR
FIV has been detected in semen from acutely
 assays for the detection of FIV vary significantly
and chronically infected male cats, indicating
 in accuracy with sensitivities reportedly ranging
that FIV may also potentially be transmitted to
from 41% to 93%, and false-positive results
queens via infected semen. Earlier in the course
 being higher in FIV-vaccinated than unvacci-
of disease, FIV infection results in progressive
nated cats.
loss of CD4+ T-helper cells, followed by deple-
Treatment of uveitis in cats with both FIV
tion of CD8+ T cells in the advanced stages of
and toxoplasmosis should be the same as
the disease. The virus causes ocular lesions
that for toxoplasmosis. Cats with uveitis
via (l) direct damage of ocular tissues, (2)
associated only with FIV, however, should
inciting secondary immune phenomena,
be treated with a topical corticosteroid, such
and/or (3) by promoting opportunistic
as prednisolone acetate 1%, and atropine 1%
ocular infections. In a study of nine cats
(as the uveitis dictates). Some cats may also
with naturally occurring FIV infection, all cats
benefit from oral prednisolone, and long-term
had ocular disease, with anterior uveitis being
use of topical prednisolone acetate may be
the most frequent clinical diagnosis. In addi-
needed to control the anterior uveitis. Response
tion, pars planitis was seen in four of these
of pars planitis to oral and topical predniso
nine cats, being evidenced by anterior vitreal
lone, however, is often poor.
520 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Feline Leukemia Virus
fected. These cats are positive for FeLV but may
have no other clinical signs when the anisocoria
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)is a retrovirus that
is noted. C-type viral particles have been identi-
replicates in many epithelial tissues. Transmis-
fed in the ciliary ganglia and short ciliary
sion of FeLV is primarily through saliva. FeLV
nerves of these cats, however, which is sugges-
infection eventually results in malignant trans-
tive that the leukemia virus has invaded these
formation or cytopathic depletion of specific
nerves. The prognosis for long-term survival in
lymphocytic/hematopoietic cell lines. Infection
these cats is poor.
 Am a ui al as i se ih 
In one experimental study, kittens were
ocular disease, with primarily the exception of
infected with FeLV either systemically in utero
its role in lymphosarcoma. The uveal tract is a
       
common site for metastasis of neoplastic lym-
oped retinal dysplasia and diffuse uveitis. FeLV
phocytes, probably via hematogenous spread.
may also induce anemia that could result in
Cats with ocular lymphosarcoma may
secondary retinal hemorrhages.
present initially with signs of mild uveitis,
 Recent studies have investigated the role of
including miosis, aqueous flare and keratic
FeLV/FeSV in the tumorigenesis of feline uveal
precipitates, or subtle iridal masses. As the
melanomas and ocular sarcomas. FeLV anti-
disease progresses, the iris becomes greatly
 gens and proviral DNA have also been detected
thickened and distorted with the infiltration
in normal corneal tissues from FeLV-infected
of tumor cells (Fig. 16.2.5), and glaucoma is
cats, suggesting the importance of screening
a common sequela as tumor cells infiltrate
potential feline corneal donors for FeLV.
the iridocorneal angle. Aqueous centesis
may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis,
Feline Panleukopenia Virus
because neoplastic lymphocytes exfoliate
into the aqueous humor.
 Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) is a parvovi-
Anisocoria or dyscoria may also arise due to
neurological effects of FeLV on the ciliary
rus. Transmission of FPV occurs most com-
monly by direct contact with infected cats or
 ganglia and short ciliary nerves of affected cats.
their excretions (e.g., feces, urine, saliva, and
In particular, spastic pupil syndrome, involving
vomitus). Fleas may also transmit FPV from
a static anisocoria during dark adaptation, has
infected to susceptible cats. As well, the virus
been reported in FeLV-positive cats. Anisocoria
may be spread by contact with fomites, such as
may have been noted by the patient's owner
food bowls, litter pans, bedding, and cages.
over time, alternating with periods of normal
Kittens infected with FPV during gesta-
pupil behavior. Other ophthalmic abnormali-
tion or shortly after birth develop cerebellar
ties are absent, however, and vision is unaf-
hypoplasia and retinal dysplasia. Mesence-
phalic aqueductal ste nosis has been reported
in kittens following transplacental infection
with FPV. The cerebellar disease becomes
apparent at approximately 3-4 weeks of age
(i.e., when the kittens begin walking). Hyper-
dysplasia, which is characterized by thinning of
neural tissue, loss of normal architecture, and
rosette formation, has also been reported in a
naturally infected kitten.
Feline Sarcoma Virus
Fig. 16.2.5. Early intraocular lymphosarcoma in a
2-year-old cat. Note the pink raised iniltrate of cells
Feline sarcoma virus (FeSV) is a naturally
in the dorsolateral iris.
occurring. replication-defective, acute, trans-
OCULAR MAN1FEStAtIOnS OF SYSteM1C DiSEASE/52 1
forming FeLV that has incorporated one of
reductase is low in comparison to that of
several cellular oncogenes. In experimental
dogs. Younger cats (< 4 years of age) do
models, injection of the virus into the feline
however, have elevated levels of aldose reduc-
anterior chamber has resulted in formation of
 n s i 'sn  i 
malignant uveal melanomas. Subcutaneous
is rarely reported in younger cats, feline dia-
injection of FeSV leads to fulminant anterior
betic cataracts are uncommon. Diabetic reti-
uveitis in the cat, and limbal fibrosarcomas
  o  i   a
have also been produced at the site of such
developed diabetes mellitus following long-
injection. The role of FeSV in naturally occur-
term treatment with megestrol acetate for der-
ring feline uveitis is unknown.
matologic disease.
Rabies
Hyperthyroidism
Rabies continues to be one of the most feared
Hyperthyroidism is the most common endo-
zoonotic diseases in the world. Clinically, rabies
crine disease of the cat. Feline hyperthyroidism
infection can be divided into three phases: (1)
usually develops as a result of functional ade-
prodromal, (2) furious, and (3) paralytic. In its 
nomatous hyperplasia, or less commonly
early stages, rabies in cats can be diffcult to
adenoma, of one or both thyroid lobules.
diagnose. In one study, the main signs of rabies 
Hyperthyroidism causes systemic hyperten-
in cats reported by veterinarians included
sion in cats, which in turn causes hyperten-
changes in behavior, gait abnormality, wound
sive retinopathy (see “Hypertension”’ section
or injury within the past 6 months, and an
above).
unusual look in the eyes, while the most fre-
quently reported signs by owners included
fonic Disturbances
aggressiveness, gait abnormality, and, once
again, an unusual look in the eyes.
Hypocalcemia
Metabolic Diseases
Hypocalcemia in cats may be caused by several
conditions
　including
 hypoparathyroidism,
Diabetes Mellitus
postparturient hypocalcemia, acute or chronic
renal failure, acute pancreatitis, vitamin D
Diabetes mellitus is a relatively common
toxicity, severe nutritional secondary hyper-
endocrine disorder of cats. It has been esti-
 parathyroidism, and following surgical thyroid-
mated that one in four hundred cats are
ectomy, among others. Neurologic signs of
affected by diabetes mellitus. Two clinically
restlessness, muscle fasciculations, and tonic-
recognized forms of diabetes mellitus
clonic seizures occur with a total serum calcium
exist in cats: insulin-dependent diabetes
 level of 6-7 mg/dL or a serum ionized calcium
mellitus (IDDM) type I, and non-insulin-
level of less than 2.5 mg/dL
dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) type
The cause of the hypocalcemia can be deter-
I1. The most common form of feline diabetes
mined using a combination of renal function
mellitus is type II diabetes mellitus, although
tests, radiography, and parathyroid hormone
many cats are insulin dependent upon initial
assays. Hypocalcemia in the cat has been docu-
diagnosis
mented clinically to be associated with focal
The most common ocular manifestation
punctate to linear opacities in the anterior and
of diabetes mellitus in the dog is cataracts
posterior cortices of the lens. The lenticular
but the cat seems relatively resistant to dia-
opacities may occur at different levels in
betic cataract formation. No cataracts were
the cortex, and they may reflect different epi-
noted in a series of thirty cats. Older cats
sodes of hypocalcemia. The degree and dura-
may not be susceptible to diabetic cataracts
tion of hypocalcemia necessary to produce
since the level of intralenticular aldose
cataracts is unknown, but the characteristic
522 /ESSENTIALS OF VEtERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
 appearance of the cataracts is quite suggestive
study reported ffty-five cases of extraskeletal
of hypocalcemia.
osteosarcoma (EsOs), four of which were
Treatment of hypocalcemia involves correc-
orbital. Squamous cell carcinoma has also been
tion of the underlying disease, if possible, and
reported to invade intraocular structures, either
calcium supplementation with vitamin D, D3,
by direct extension from the head or via hema-
or dihydrotachysterol.
togenous spread from a more distant site.
Ocular manifestations of multiple myeloma in
cats are also reported.
Neopfasia-Centraf Nervous System
Blindness associated with intracranial neo-
Nutritional Disorders
plasia has been reported in cats. Cases
include a pituitary carcinoma that encroached
Milk Replacer-induced Disease
on the optic chiasm and meningiomas. Clini-
cal signs ranged from unilateral visual deficits,
Cataracts have been reported in growing
blindness, dilated pupils, positional nystagmus,
kittens fed a commercial milk-replacer diet.
and anisocoria.
The low serum arginine concentration in
these kittens was thought to relate to the
diet and, possibly, to the cataract formation.
Neoplasia—Systemic
A study of growing kittens documented cata-
ract development in kittens fed diets containing
Lymphosarcoma
less than 3.0 g of histidine per kilogram of body
weight.
Only a few reports of feline systemic neoplasia
with ocular metastases have appeared in the
Taurine Deficiency
literature. The most common disease of this
nature is probably lymphosarcoma. In a retro-
spective study of forty-nine cats with lym-
Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD) was
phosarcoma confirmed at histopathology,
first described by Bellhorn et al. in 1970 and
1974. The lesion was characterized as a focus
ocular manifestations of disease preceded
of outer retinal layer degeneration in the area
systemic disease in most cases. The uveal
centralis. In the mid-1980s, taurine deficiency
tract was involved in all eyes, and nodular
iris lesions were the most common manifes-
was determined to be a cause of dilated cardio-
tation, being present in thirty-five of fifty
myopathy in the cat. Subsequently, cat food
companies increased the levels of taurine in
eyes. Survival ranged from O days to 31 months,
with a mean survival of 14 months. Aggressive
commercial, processed cat foods, and the cases
of FCRD significantly declined, and are now
treatment of cats with ocular lymphosarcoma
using topical corticosteroids, such as 1% pred-
rare except in zoo maintained wild cats.
Typical lesions of taurine deficiency begin
nisolone acetate, as well as using systemic
therapy with corticosteriods or other chemo-
with a granular appearance, which pro-
therapeutic protocols is indicated.
gresses to a hyperreflective focus in the area
centralis. A nasal focus of degeneration
may develop next, extending to a horizontal
Other Metastases
streak on both sides of the optic disc. Further
degeneration also occurs, eventually encom-
Adenocarcinomas reported to metastasize to
passing the entire retina, but there is no
the feline eye, have as their site of origin the
predictable
time
frame
forlesion
lung, mammary tissue, uterus, and dissemi-
progression.
nated adenocarcinoma of undetermined origin.
Taurine is essential for photoreceptor sur-
Recently, four cases of feline pulmonary carci-
vival, and it is highly concentrated in the inner
noma have been reported to metastasize to the
and outer segments. Possible functions of
posterior segment of the eye. One retrospective
taurine in the retina include protection of the
OCULAr MaN1feStAtions OF SysteMiC D1SEasE/523
photoreceptors from light and chemical damage,
favorably to parenterally administered vitamin
regulation of calcium ion transport, and regula-
 B complex preparations containing 50-75 mg
tion of signal transduction.
of thiamine per dose every 8 hours.
Cats with area centralis lesions have
demonstrable deficits in visual acuity, but in
a normal home environment, these cats
Systemic Toxicities
usually do not have discernible problems.
The finding of an area centralis lesion does
Antimicrobials
not indicate current taurine deficiency,
because the lesions will remain for the life
Fluoroquinolones
of the cat. Measurement of plasma taurine
levels is the best way to determine a deficient
Enrofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic,
animal. Plasma levels of 20 nmol/mL are criti-
has recently been associated with a rare
cally low; to be safe, cats with values of less
adverse ophthalmic reaction causing an
than 40 nmol/mL should be switched to a dif-
acute, typically irreversible, retinal degen-
ferent diet, one that is known to support higher
eration in cats (Figs. 16.2.6A through C). In
plasma taurine levels. Because commercial cat
addition, this reaction has reportedly been seen
foods today contain much more taurine than
with other fluoroquinolones. Affected cats
they did l0 years ago, active cases of taurine
develop signs of partial, temporary, or total
deficiency are likely to occur in cats fed inap-
blindness. The reported estimated incidence of
propriate diets or in those with intestinal dis-
this adverse reaction is 1 in 122,4l4 treated
eases that alter proper nutrient absorption.
cats or 0.0008%. Affected cats had variable
medical ailments for which enrofloxacin was
administered including lymphoma and pancre-
Thiamine Deficiency
atitis, otitis, urinary tract disorders, dermatitis,
bowel perforation, diarrhea, and upper respira-
Thiamine deficiency may occur in cats eating
tory infection. Cats in this study generally
large amounts of raw fish, which contains thi-
presented with signs of mydriasis and acute
aminases, or in cats eating processed commer-
blindness. All cats had generalized retinal
cial foods in which thiamine has been destroyed
degeneration, and vision only returned in a
by heat processing and not replaced adequately.
few cases. Five of seventeen affected cats
Thiamine deficiency has also been reported in
underwent electroretinography, which revealed
cats being fed commercial food containing
no observable responses in any case. Histologi-
sulfur dioxide as a food preservative. Further,
cal assessment of two affected globes showed
cats with severe gastrointestinal disease may
mainly outer retinal degeneration as evidenced
not absorb suffcient amounts of thiamine
by a diffuse loss of the photoreceptor and outer
Clinical signs of thiamine deficiency include
nuclear layers, and hypertrophy and prolifera-
initial inappetence and occasional vomiting.
tion of the retinal pigment epithelium.
 followed by pupillary dilatation without visual
Adherence to the manufacturer's current
deficits, ataxia, and ventroflexion of the head
recommendation for enrofloxacin dosage in
and neck. A fnal and irreversible stage of thia-
cats of 5 mg/kg PO q24h is advisable. It is,
mine deficiency is characterized by a progres-
however, unclear as to whether a dosage of
sion of clinical signs culminating
to
a
5 mg/kg PO q24h is safe in geriatric cats, espe-
semicomatose state, which is characterized by
cially those with renal or hepatic dysfunction,
crying, opisthotonos, and extensor rigidity.
as safety studies performed by the manufac-
The diagnosis can be made on the basis of
turer were conducted in young healthy cats.
dietary history, clinical signs, and measurement
Safety studies evaluating the incidence of
of thiamine concentration in food as well as in
retinal dgeneration with orbifloxacin, another
blood. Normal blood thiamine levels for cats
veterinary-labeled fluoroquinolone, revealed a
are approximately 32 μg/dL. Before develop-
dose- and concentration-dependent adverse
ment of a comatose state, cats will respond
ophthalmic reaction, with cats receiving higher
524 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
 doses of the medication developing focal retinal
tions; and (3) avoiding UVA light during active
degeneration.
treatment may also be beneficial
The manner in which the fluoroquinolones
induce retinal degeneration in cats remains
Griseofulvin
unknown. Current recommendations to help
decrease the risk of retinal degeneration in
Griseofulvin is a fungistatic agent used in cats
some cats receiving enrofloxacin include (l)
using split dosing (i.e., 2.5 mg/kg PO q12h) on
genic in the cat. Ocular anomalies reported in
exact body weight; (2) avoiding rapid intrave-
affected offspring of cats having received gris-
nous infusions of the drug and drug interac-
eofulvin in the first half of gestation include
cyclopia, anophthalmia, optic nerve aplasia,
and rudimentary optic tracts.
lvermectin
Ivermectin is a broad-spectrum anthelmintic
that has been used in cats for the treatment of
ear mites and notoedric mange. Ivermectin
toxicosis has been reported mainly in kittens,
but also occurs in adult cats. Signs of toxicosis
typically become apparent within 1-12 hours
of administration of the ivermectin and include
alterred behavior, lethargy, weakness, ataxia,
recumbency, coma, and death. Ocular manifes-
tations of feline ivermectin toxicosis include
apparent blindness, and alterations in pupil
size including mydriasis and miosis.
Ethylene Glyco!
 Ethylene glycol intoxication is a common cause
of poisoning in small animals, including cats.
B
Fig. 16.2.6. Acute retinal degeneration in a 15-
year-old, male castrated cat alter 196 days of
enrofloxacin administration. A. Tapetal changes
characterized by loss of retinal vessels, focal increased
tapetal rellectivity, and large gold to rust-colored foci
scattered throughout the tapetal Fundus. B. Pigment
loss and clumping within the nontapetal fundus.
(Reproduced with permission from Gelatt KN, van
der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, Andrew SE, Brooks DE,
Biros DJ, Denis HM, Cutler IJ. Enrofloxacin-
associated retinal degeneration in cats. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 2001;4:99-106.) C. Fundus
photograph from a mature Domestic shorthair cat
following 5 days of enrofloxacin therapy. Note the
tapetal granularity, focal tapetal hyperrellectivity, and
moderate generalized retinal vessel attenuation.
OCULAr MAN1FeStAtiOns OF SYStem1C DiSEAsE/525
The lethal dose of 95% ethylene glycol in cats
SECTION 3: THE HORSE
is 1.4 ml/kg. A single report in the literature
describes a cat with acute renal failure second-
Congenital
ary to ethylene glycol intoxication. This cat
developed bilateral retinal detachments and
Coat Color-Related
edema, which was thought (but not confirmed)
Diseases/Conditions
to be secondary to oxalate crystals within the
retina.
Complete albinism (complete lack of pigmenta-
tion) or partial or localized albinism (an absence
or reduction in the degree of pigmentation) is
lonizing Radiation
associated with not only the phenotypic appear-
ance of an animal's coat and skin color but is
The most common source of ionizing radiation
also associated with conditions affecting the eye
 induced ocular lesions is from radiation therapy
and other organ systems.
for neoplasms of the head. Three of sixteen cats
In horses, coat color is oftentimes associ-
undergoing irradiation for nasal or paran-
ated with iris color and heterochromia irides.
asal neoplasia developed chronic ocular
It is not uncommon to see Paint horses with
conditions.
one blue eye and one darkly pigmented eye
or with two blue eyes. A condition known
as lethal white foal syndrome (an equine
Megestrol Acetate
model of Hirschsprung Disease in humans)
is seen in white, typically blue-eyed foals
Megestrol acetate is a synthetic derivative of
with typically two overo-colored parents. In
progesterone. It is generally used in the treat-
this instance, these foals are born with two
ment of dermatologic disorders, and has been
copies (homozygous) of a mutated endothelin-
used to treat proliferative (eosinophilic) kerato-
B receptor gene. Endothelin-3, a ligand for the
conjunctivitis in cats. Two cats treated with
endothelin-B receptor, is a signalling molecule
long-term megestrol acetate for dermatologic
important in the maturation and migration of
disease developed diabetes mellitus and dia-
neural crest cells. Consequently, foals afflicted
betic retinopathy. Both cats had bilateral retinal
with lethal white foal syndrome are not only
hemorrhage and retinal detachment, and in one
white with blue eyes but also have aganglionic
cat, microaneurysms were seen. Cessation of
colon resulting in gastrointestinal motility dys-
the drug resulted in resolution of the retinal
function and may also be deaf. Lethal white foal
hemorrhages, but the cats were blind because
-    n n 
of retinal detachment, retinal degeneration, or
sive trait and therefore both parents of affected
cataract.
foals are carriers of the affected gene. Specifi-
cally, coat colors associated with heterozygotes
for the endothelin receptor-B mutation include
Tissue Plasminogen Activator
frame overo, highly white calico overo, and
frame blend overo. Heterozygous animals with
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is a
tobiano, sabino, minimally white calico overo,
thrombolytic enzyme available for  clinical
splashed white overo, nonframe overo, and
use in facilitating clot dissolution. In veteri-
breeding-stock solid coat colors may also exist,
nary ophthalmology, intracameral injection of
however. Hence not all white foals of Paint
tPA is most common. However, a recent
horse breeding with blue eyes will be homozy-
experimental study reported a dose-dependent
gous for the endothelin-B receptor gene muta-
retinal toxicity in feline eyes having received
tion, and consequently will not have lethal
intravitreal injections of commercial tPA. Spe-
white foal syndrome. Fortunately a genetic
cifically, eyes receiving doses of tPA greater
test has been developed to screen for carrier
than 50 μg/0.l ml had fundus pigmentary
animals or to test white blue-eyed foals
changes.
and thereby reduce the prevalence of this
526 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
condition in the American Paint horse popu-
16.3.1B and C), congenital miosis, ciliary
lation and prevent the premature euthanasia
cysts, and retinal dysplasia. Meanwhile, only
of white, blue-eyed foals (Animal Genetics
12%,6%,and 4% of horses with chocolate-
Incorporated  [http://www.horsetesting.com/
colored coat with flaxen mane and tail, chest-
LWO.htm]: Veterinary Genetics Laboratory.
nut-colored coat, or some other coat color,
University of California at Davis [http://www.
respectively, had multiple ocular abnormalities.
vgl.ucdavis.edu/]).
Also, Rocky Mountain horses with white manes
Another condition thought to be related,
and tails are more likely to have multiple ocular
in part, to coat color includes congenital sta-
abnormalities compared to animals with non-
tionary night blindness (CSNB) in Appa-
white manes and tails. It has been hypothesized
loosa horses. Specifically, it is thought that
that a genetic mutation occurring at the Silver
the leopard spotted coat is an important
Dapple locus is responsible, in part, for the
phenotype in Appaloosa horses with CsNB.
multiple ocular abnormalities seen in Rocky
Proposed genes important in determining
Mountain horses.
the characteristic coat color of Appaloosa
horses have been identified on equine chro-
mosome l and include the pink eyed dilu-
tion gene and the transient receptor potential
cation channel subfamily M, member 1
(TRPM1)
Congenital ocular abnormalities observed
in Rocky Mountain horses are also, in part,
related to coat color. Mane and tail color was
found to be associated with the presence of
multiple ocular abnormalities. Specifically,
45% of Rocky Mountain horses with choco-
late-colored coats with white manes and
tails (Fig. l6.3.lA) had multiple ocular
abnormalities including megalocornea (Figs.
Fig. I6.3.1. A. Photograph of a Rocky Mountain
Horse with a chocolate coat color and a white mane
and tail. Ophthalmic lesions appear to be more
common in this breed of horse with this coat
coloration.(Courtesy of D. Ramsey.) B. Photograph of
B
the eye of a Rocky Mountain Horse with congenital
miosis and megalocornea. Abnormalities include a
miotic pupil, stromal hypoplasia with a Hlattened,
circumferentially oriented granula iridica at the
pupillary ruff, visible sphincter pupillae muscle, and
absence of a discernable collarette. Radially oriented
deep stromal strands of iris tissue extend from the
pupillary ruff toward the ciliary zone of the iris. C.
Photograph of a normal iris of an age- and gender-
matched Rocky Mountain Horse. (Reprinted with
permission from Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA,
Cook CS, Latimer CA. Congenital ocular
abnormalities of Rocky Mountain Horses. Veterinary
Ophthalmology 1999;2:47-59.)
OCULAR MAN1FEStAt1ONS OF SYSteM1C D15EASE/527
Griseofulvin Teratogenicity
bined B and T lymphocyte deficiency) and lack
of lymphocytes in lymph nodes and the spleen,
Griseofulvin is a commonly used antifungal
subsequent lack of immunoglobulin synthesis,
agent used especially for dermatomycosis. It
and thymic hypoplasia. The condition is inher-
can readily cross placental membranes and has
ited as an autosomal recessive trait in purebred
been associated with microphthalmia, brachyg-
and part-bred Arabian foals with as many as
nathia superior (shortened maxilla), and pala-
25% of Arabian horses being carriers. The prev-
tocheiloschisis (cleft lip and palate) in a foal
        
born to a dam that was administered griseoful-
 Arabian descent. Affected foals may survive as
vin at 48 days of gestation.
long as 4 months provided they have developed
passive immunity from ingesting the dam's
colostrum. Clinical signs include general
Hereditary Equine Regional Dermal
malaize, serous to mucupurulent nasal and/or
Asthenia (Cutaneous Asthenia,
ocular discharge, coughing, and diarrhea, and
Dermatosparaxis, Ehlers-Danlos
 are nonresponsive to antimicrobial therapy.
Syndrome, Hyperelastosis Cutis)
Affected foals may have uveitis secondary to
sepsis or other disseminated opportunistic
Hereditary equine regional dermal asthenia
pathogens. Diagnosis is made based on measur-
(HERDA) has been reported most commonly in
ing serum immunoglobulin levels and detect-
 purebred and partbred Quarter horses although
 i  sid e 
it has been reported sporadically in other breeds.
grave.
In quarter horses, HERDA is a congenital disor-
der of collagen inherited as an autosomal reces-
sive trait that is characterized by fragile and
Developmental
easily torn skin with slow-healing wounds.
There is no gender predilection and HERDA is
Immunoglobulin-M Deficiency
inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder in
Quarter horses. Horses with HERDA have a
Deficiency of immunoglobulin (Ig) M is
regional distribution of friable and hyperelastic
common in all breeds of horse, especially Ara-
skin. Specifically, seroma or hemotoma forma-
bians and Quarter horses. It may occur as a
tion, open wounds or sloughing skin, hyperex-
primary genetic disorder or as a result of immu-
tensible skin that does not return to regular
nosuppression. Most commonly, foals will
position following skin tent, and scars may be
 present at 4-8 months of age with respiratory
seen along the dorsum, gluteal region, neck, and
tract infection or enteritis. As opposed to severe
lateral thorax and/or abdomen. With respect to
combined immunodeficiency, foals with IgM
the eye, similar lesions may be noted around the
deficiency will have a normal blood lympho-
face including the eyelids. A diagnosis of HERDA
cyte count (both B and T cells) but will have
is made based upon a clinical syndrome of
reduced or absent serum IgM concentrations.
regional skin hyperextensibility, clinical signs
Affected foals may have uveitis resulting from
associated with skin fragility including easily
 this inherited immunodeficiency.
torn skin, and skin histopathology and ultra-
structural examination. HERDAis incurable and
because of its hereditary nature owners should
Acquired
be advised to not use affected horses for breed-
ing and that the parents of the affected animal
Hematologic Diseases
are heterozygous for the trait.
Anemia
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Anemia is the reduction in red blood cells per
Severe combined immunodeficiency is a condi
volume of whole blood. Severe anemia often
tion that manifests as lymphopenia (both com-
manifests systemically as varying palor of
528 /EsSENtiAlS OF VEtERiNArY OpHtHALmOLOGY
mucous membranes including the conjunctiva.
Dystocia
cool mucous membranes, tachycardia, polyp-
nea, weakness, as well as signs specifc to the
Although not a systemic disease, dystocia is
underlying primary condition.
related, in part, to the physical stature of the
foal. A study examining the prevalence of
Icterus (Jaundice)
retinal hemorrhages in Thoroughbred foals
found that approximately 16% of foals had
either unilateral or bilateral retinal hemor-
Icterus or jaundice is a condition characterized
rhages occurring in the tapetal fundus or at
by hyperbilirubinemia and deposition of bile
 the optic disc. Thoroughbred foals weighing
pigments in the skin, sclera, and mucous mem-
 greater than 5l kilograms as well as pro-
longed second-stage parturition are more
yellow. The causes of icterus in the horse are
likely to have retinal hemorrhage.
numerous and include any condition where
hyperbilirubinemia results. The conjunctiva is
 the classiclocation for detection of icterus given
Idiopathic Systemic Diseases
its relative lack of pigmentation. The yellow
appearance of icterus may be detected in the
Dysautonomia (Eguine Grass
intraocular structures as well (e.g., blue irides
Sickness)
may turn green and yellow hues may be
imparted on the tapetum).
Equine dysautonomia, commonly known as
equine grass sickness, has been defined as a
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis (Alloimmune
"fatal dysautonomia of horses associated with
Hemolytic Anemia of Foais
severe neuronal damage, especially in affected
Isoimmune Hemolytic Anemia of
autonomic ganglia". The cause of equine dys-
Foais)
autonomia remains unknown, although 
a
variety of theories exist. Recently favored
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is an acquired immune-
hypotheses include (l) overgrowth of Clos-
mediated phenomenon observed in foals. This
tridium botulinum type C within the gastroin-
condition is considered the most common
testinal tract, and (2) ingestion of cyanogenic
cause of icterus in neonatal foals. The condition
producing plants. The highest incidence of
results from the ingestion of colostrum contain-
equine dysautonomia is in Scotland but has
ing antibodies directed at the antigenically dis-
been reported elsewhere in Europe and in
tinct foal's red blood cells (inherited from sire).
South America.
The dam typically develops these antibodies
Clinical signs associated with equine dysau-
following exposure to the specifc red blood
tonomia are related to degeneration of auto-
cell antigen during a previous pregnancy or
 nomic ganglia and the enteric nervous system
blood transfusion or via transplacental expo-
including pharyngeal and esophageal dysfunc-
sure of fetal red blood cell antigen during preg-
tion, colic, sweating, tachycardia, and dry nasal
nancy. Affected foals develop clinical signs
mucosa.
. The most consistent ocular manifesta-
including general malaize, tachypnea, tachycar-
tion of equine dysautonomia is ptosis.
dia, mucous membrane palor, and icterus.
Presumptive diagnosis of equine dysautono-
Ocular signs include conjunctival palor and
 mia is made based on consistent clinical signs,
jaundice, and hemorrhages affecting the con-
geographic location of the animal, and time of
junctiva and sclera. Hyphema may also result.
year. Recently, it has been demonstrated that
Diagnosis of neonatal isoerythrolysis is made
horses with equine dysautonomia and ptosis
based upon consistent clinical signs and hemo-
have a positive response to ocular administra-
lytic crossmatch between the dam's serum or
tion of topical 0.5% phenylephrine compared
colostrum with the foal's red blood cells. Treat-
to horses not afflicted with equine dysautono-
ment is aimed at providing supportive care and
mia. Therapy is aimed at supportive and inten-
transfusing compatible blood
sive nursing care. Prognosis is poor to grave.
OCULAr MAN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1SEASE/529
Eguine Motor Neuron Disease
out other causes of headshaking including otitis
   o  
Equine motor neuron disease is an idiopathic
cyproheptadine, an antihistamine and seroto-
-  ps  p u
nergic antagonist, has successfully eliminated
stem motor neuron loss and degeneration.
headshaking in five of seven treated horses in
Equine motor neuron disease can be observed
one study, but the exact mechanism of its
in horses of any breed, age or gender and has
apparent clinical effcacy is unknown.
been reported in North America and Europe.
Clinical signs are typically attributed to muscu-
Immune-Mediated Diseases
lar weakness (paresis) and lower motor neuron
disease. Affected animals will often have a
Dermatologic Diseases
short-strided gait and will have muscular fas-
ciculations that worsen following exercise. In
The pemphigus group of dermatoses are
more severe cases, horses are unable to stand.
immune-mediated  diseases  characterized by
With regards to ophthalmic signs, horses
vesiculobullous skin lesions. Pemphigus folia-
with equine motor neuron disease may have
ceus is a rare immune-mediated skin disease
fundic changes characterized by a honey-
occuring in a variety of species including the
comb  pattern  of  yellow/brown  pigment
horse. Although rare, pemphigus folicacious is 
within the tapetal fundus similar to that
the most common autoimmune skin disease
seen in dogs with vitamin E deficiency. This
occurring in the horse. There are no breed or
yellow/brown pigment has been identified as
 sex predilections for developing pemphigus
accumulation of ceroid/lipofuscin. In some
folicacious in horses. Lesions are typically
instances, pupillary light reflexes may be
observed on the head (including palpebrae),
abnormal.
limbs, and ventrum, and they are characterized
Although the etiology of this condition is
initially by vesicles, erosions, epidermal collar-
unknown, serum vitamin E levels are not
ettes, scaling and crusting.
uncommonly reduced. Diagnosis of equine
 Diagnosis of pemphigus foliacious is made
motor neuron disease is made based on con-
based upon characteristic clinical and dermato-
sistent clinical findings, reduced serum
histopathological findings. Direct immunofluo-
vitamin E concentration, and electromyogra-
rescence testing reveals diffuse intercellular
phy and muscular histopathology consistent
deposition of immunoglobulin and, occasion-
with denervation. There is no effective therapy
 ally, complement within the epidermis. Therapy
for this condition and prognosis is grave in
requires
6 immunosuppression, usually with
most instances.
high doses of oral glucocorticoids possibly
combined with chrysotherapy (therapy with
Photic Headshaking
gold compounds) or azathioprine. Use of high-
dose glucocorticoids in such horses carries the
risk of inducing laminitis.
 Photic headshaking is a condition characterized
 Other members of the pemphigoid derma-
clinically by excessive and possibly violent
toses, such as bullous pemphigoid and sys-
 movement of the head in the vertical, horizon-
tal or rotary directions. The underlying patho-
temic lupus erythematosus, and other are rare
in the horse.
physiology of photic headshaking in horses
remains unknown.  Photic headshaking
is
thought to be similar to photic sneezing in
Infectious Diseases
humans. Specifically, photic headshaking is
often times stimulated by exposure to bright
Dermatophytosis (Ringworm)
light and the behavior improves when ocular
exposure to light is diminished.
Dermatophytosis is a mycotic skin infection,
Diagnosis of photic headshaking is made
and in the horse, it may be caused by Micros-
based upon consistent history and by ruling-
porum equinum, M. gypseum, Irichophyton
530 /EsSENTIALS OF VeteRiNARY OPHTHALmOLOGY
equinum, I.mentagrophytes, I. verrucosum,and
louse) and Werneckiella equi (previously Dam-
I. quinkeanum. A higher incidence of dermato-
linia equi) (biting louse). The primary clinical
phytosis is seen in hot, humid climates. Lesions
sign seen in cases of pediculosis includes an
are characterized by alopecia, with or without
intense pruritus accompanied by an excoriated
crusts and often with a brownish color, and
and dull or scaly coat, including the hair on the
 they may affect any part of the body, including
face and periocular regions. Diagnosis of pedic-
the head and eyelids. Pruritus and pain vary
ulosis is made based upon consistent clinical
from none to intense
signs and demonstrating louse eggs that are
Diagnosis of dermatophytosis is made based
attached to the hair coat. Treatment should be
upon positively culturing the etiologic fungus.
two applications of water-based insecticides at
2-week intervals or, for W. equi infestations
specimens may also identify dermatophytes.
spot-on formulation of imidacloprid has been
 Dermatophytosis in the horse is generally self-
shown to be highly efficacious
limiting, and may not require treatment. Topical
therapy with 2% lime sulfur, 3% captan, or
Sarcoptic Mange
0.5% sodium hypochlorite, however, may
hasten resolution of skin lesions.
Sarcoptic mange, which is a highly contagious
disease caused by Sarcoptes scabei, is uncom-
Parasitic—Lice and Mites
mon in the horse, but it does occur. Scabies
lesions are characterized by crusty alopecic
Demodicosis
areas, which are sometimes excoriated, and
intense pruritus. In the horse, lesions generally
Demodex equi and D. caballi have both been
begin on the head, including the eyelids, and
reported as causing dermatologic disease in this
then spread caudally. The diagnosis is estab-
species, though not with the frequency of
lished on the basis of identifying the mite in
demodicosis in some other species. Demodex
skin scrapings. Affected horses may be treated
spp. live as commensals in the skin of most
- s'o jo sudde d ro Kds m
mammals, including horses. Most species of
thion, 0.03% lindane, 0.06% coumaphos, 0.5%
Demodex, including D. equi and D. caballi, spend
methoxychlor, or 2% lime sulfur. Use of sys-
their entire life cycle in the hair follicles and
temic ivermectin may also be effective.
sebaceous glands of their host, while a few
 species are found within the epidermis. Demodex
 mites, present in small numbers, are part of the
Trombiculiasis (Chiggers)
normal skin fauna. Consequently pathologic
sequela of these mites probably relates in some
Trombiculiasis refers to an infestation with the
way to immunocompromise. The diagnosis is
larvae of mites of the family Irombiculidae
established on the basis of identifying the mite
(Chiggers). Chiggers (harvest mites) are most
in deep skin scrapings obtained after firmly
commonly found on horses housed on open
 squeezing the affected areas. Therapy for equine
pasture or that have been ridden in the woods.
demodicosis includes the administration of sys-
Diagnosis is made based upon consistent history
temic ivermectin.
and clinical findings. The disease is self-limit-
ing, though one application of 2% to 5% lime
sulfur may be helpful.
Pediculosis
Pediculosis, or louse infestation, occurs in
Parasitic—Nematodes
horses particularly during the winter months,
when the hair coat is long and crowded barn
Dirofilariasis
conditions may favor spread of the condition.
Important species contributing to disease in
Intraocular migration of Diroflaria immitis
horses include Haematopinus asini (sucking
probably occurs less frequently in the horse
OCULAR MAN1FESTATIONs OF SYSTeMIC DiSEASE/531
than it does in carnivores. There is one report
sis. Larvae may not be identifed histopatho-
of successful surgical removal of the nematode
logically. In fact, nematode larvae are only
from the anterior chamber of a horse.
present in 44-50% of biopsy specimens.
Therapy is aimed at destroying the nemato-
dal larvae by administering systemic doses
Habronemiasis (Habronemiosis, Summer
of ivermectin. Debulking large nodules may
Sores, Swamp Cancer)
be necessary. Further, topical or systemic
anti-inflammatory drugs may be used to
Habronemiasis is a parasitic disease caused
control inflammatory responses to dead and
by the aberrant migration by larvae of the
dying larvae.
nematodes Habronema muscae, H. majus,
and Draschia megastoma. Habronemiasis is
Halicephalobus Deletrix (syn. Micronema
seen in tropical and temperate climates
Deletrix)
world-wide. These nematodes normally are
found within the stomach of horses. Flies,
Halicephalobus deletrix is a free-living nematode
including Musca domestica (house fly) and
that resides in organic material, i
including
Stomoxys calcitrans (stable fly), are used as
manure, that may act as a facultative parasite in
the intermediate host. Larvae are passed in
both horses and people. Specifically, Halicepha-
the feces and are consumed by maggots of the
lobus can cause severe pathology of a variety of
intermediate host. When the adult fly emerges,
the third-stage larvae (L3) within the fly are
systems including the CNS, musculoskeletal
system, respiratory system, renal system, and
infective, and horses become infected by ingest-
ing the fly or the L3 larvae that have been
the eyes. Clinical signs will vary with the system
being affected. With respect to ocular lesions,
deposited near the mouth of the horse. Habro-
clinical signs may include blindness, chorio-
nema or Draschia larvae may be deposited on
retinitis, optic neuritis, and uveitis.
wounds or near the eye, and larval migration
through these tissues results in a granuloma-
 tous inflammatory response.
Onchocerciasis (Onchocercosis)
Habronemiasis is commonly seen in
youngand
 middle-aged
adult
horses,
Onchoceriasis is a parasitic disease that
although any age may be affected. There is
affects a variety of species including horses.
 no gender predilection for developing habrone-
In horses, onchocerciasis causing clinically
miasis. Pale-colored horses (e.g, gray, palo-
relevant ocular signs is caused by Oncho-
mino) appear more likely to be affected and this
cerca cervicalis. Onchocerca larvae are trans-
may be due to flies being attracted to light than
mitted to animals by infected gnats/midges
dark colors.
or black flies (Culicoides or Simulium spp.,
Lesions are typically concurrent with the fly
respectively). Following infection, larvae
season and may regress with cold weather only
migrate to the nuchal ligament where they
to resume when the weather becomes warm
develop into adult worms. The adult worms
again. Lesions may affect the conjunctiva or
persist and produce microflaria that migrate to
the periocular area, and the papules have a
various subcutaneous sites where the interme-
raised, irregular, yellow (i.e., "sulphur gran-
diate host (midges/gnats and blackflies) can
ules") appearance. Affected tissue tends to
     n 
bleed easily, and pruritus and self-trauma
It is the migrating microflariae, not the adult
may be evident.
worms, that cause disease in the horse.
Diagnosis of cutaneous habronemiasis is
The prevalence of O. cervicalis microf-
made based upon consitent clinical signs and
lariae among United States' horses appears
histopathologically consistent features observed
to be high (these studies reported prior to
in biopsy specimens. Specifically, granuloma-
the introduction of ivermectin). On the basis
tous inflammatory infltrate with eosinophils
of skin biopsy fndings, prevalence rates of
and mast cells is seen, along with collagenoly-
approximately 50% to 77% have been reported
532 /EsSENtIALS OF VeteRiNArY OpHTHALmOLOGY
in horses from the western, midwestern, and
present with signs of orbital disease. Treatment
southeastern United States. The most common
is aimed at enucleation and surgical excision of
sites of ocular microflariae are the conjunctiva
the hydatid cyst in the case of blind eyes.
and eyelids, followed by cornea/sclera and the
intraocular structures or aqueous humor.
Rickettsial Diseases
As eluded to already, ocular manifestations
of onchocerciasis include anterior and posterior
uveitis, peripapillary chorioretinitis, keratitis,
Members of the bacterial order Rickettsiales are
keratoconjunctivitis, and lateral conjunctival
the cause of numerous conditions in numerous
vitiligo. Diagnosis of onchocerciasis is made
species of vertebrates.
based upon microscopically identifying the
nematode in biopsy specimens of affected
Ehrlichiosis (Equine Granulocytic
tissues including conjunctiva or skin.
Ehrlichiosis, Equine Anaplasmosis)
Treatment of onchocerciasis has been
most effective with systemically adminis-
Equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis is caused by
tered ivermectin (o.2 mg/kg) or moxidectin
the rickettsial organism Anaplasma phagocyto-
(0.4 mg/kg). It is important to note, however
    
that there is no efficacious therapy
1 for
horses have general malaize, and are pyrexic.
destroying the adult nuchal ligament-resid-
anorexic, and icteric (can be observed periocu-
ing nematodes. Further, concurrent treatment
larly).
 Limb edema, mucosal petechiation
of ocular signs should be implemented
to
(including conjunctiva), and ataxia are also
control ocular inflammatory responses because
observed. Animals are also thrombocytopenic
dead and dying microflaria may exacerbate
and leukopenic. Ocular manifestations of
ocular disease.
equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis include those
already mentioned and uveitis.
Setariasis
Diagnosis of equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis
 is made based upon consistent clinical fndings.
Setaria spp. are nematodes of the superfamily
identifying the organism within the cytoplasm
filarioidea and consequently, are transmitted to
of granulocytic leukocytes (neutrophils and
their hosts by blood-feeding insects. Like Diro-
eosinophils), detecting DNA within the blood of
flaria spp., Setaria spp. can be found within 
affected animals, and demonstrating circulating
circulating blood by examining blood smears.
anti-Anaplasma antibodies. Therapy is aimed at
S. digitata and S. equina are the species known
-in ln aq s a u
to migrate to the equine eye. Successful surgical
racyclines. Prognosis is good in uncomplicated
removal of S. digitata from the anterior chamber
cases of equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis.
of a horse has been reported.
West Nile Virus
Parasitic—Protozoa!
West Nile virus (WNV) is single-stranded RNA
Parasitic—Tapeworms
virus of the family Flaviviridae that is main-
tained in the environment by a bird-mosquito
Echinococcus granulosus (Hydatid Disease)
relationship. Birds are the reservoir host while
mosquitos transmit the virus to a variety of
Equine hydatid disease, is caused by infection
animal species, including birds, horses, cats,
with the tapeworm Echinococcus granulosus sub-
dogs, bats, alligators, and humans.
species equinus. Hydatid disease is relatively
There does not appear to be any breed or
common in the horse, but reports of ocular
 gender predilection for developing the disease.
hydatid disease are uncommon. With respect
The disease typically affects young adult horses,
to ocular disease, hydatid cysts have been
although any age of horse can have a clinically
reported in the equine orbit and these animals
     
OCULAR MAN1FESTAT1ONS OF SYSTeM1C D1SEASE/533
include ataxia, paresis, generalized muscle fas-
involves medically managing the disease by
ciculations, pyrexia, hyperesthesia, general
administering dopamine agonists, such a per-
malaize, lip droop, bruxism, circling. and
golide, or serotonin antagonists such as cypro-
animals may be recumbent. With regards to
hepatdine. Secondary complications, including
ophthalmic manifestations of WNV infec-
susceptibility to various infections, are more
tion, horses may be blind, have facial nerve
likely in some horses with PPID.
paralysis, mild keratitis of undetermined
cause, and have protrusion of the third
Neopfasia-Centraf Nervous System
eyelid.
Diagnosis of WNV infection is made based
There are few reports of intracranial neoplasms
upon determining IgM concentrations in the
serum and/or cerebrospinal fluid, amplifying
with ophthalmic manifestations in the horse. A
WNV DNA using PCR, or isolating the virus.
pituitary mass in one aged horse resulted in
Therapy for WNV infection involves supportive
blindness caused by degeneration of the optic
care and by administering systemic anti-inflam-
nerves, optic chiasm, and optic tracts up to the
matory drugs to reduce cerebral edema. Progno-
lateral geniculate bodies. Another horse with a
sisis variable. Older horses, horses not vaccinated
large intracerebral mass diagnosed as a micro-
glioma had metastasis of the tumor to both
for WNV, and horses that are recumbent are
eyes, with neoplastic cells being found within
more likely to succumb to the disease.
the vitreous humor and retina.
Metabolic Diseases
Neoplasia—Systemic
Pituitary Pars Intermedia Dysfunction
Lymphosarcoma
(Equine Cushing's Disease)
Lymphosarcoma is the most common systemic
 Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID) is
neoplastic disease affecting the equine eye, but
a condition seen in geriatric equids. Recently.
 ss  so a a  aa a
it has been shown that hyperplasia of the pars
quently than in the dog or the cat. Reported
intermedia likely results from loss of inhibition
ocular manifestations of equine lymphosarcoma
by neuronal degeneration of dopaminergic
include eyelid swelling, third eyelid masses,
neurons. Approximately 0.001-0.5% of horses,
uveitis, chemosis and conjunctivitis, corneo-
Aq paie aq oi pansa are se Kue jo
scleral masses, and orbital lymphosarcoma.
PPID.
Clinical signs of PPID in equids include gen-
eralized muscle wasting. hirsutism, hyperhi-
Nutritional Disorders
drosis, impaired wound healing (may increase
susceptibility to nonresponsive ulcerative kera-
Thiamine Deficiency
titis), laminitis, and polyuria/polydypsia. With
respect to ocular manifestations of equine PPID,
Thiamine deficiency occurs in horses primarily
bulging to the supraorbital fat pad may occur
because of the ingestion of plants containing
(due to presumed disease-related fat redistribu-
the catabolic thiamine enzyme, thiaminase.
tion) and blindness (with or without concur-
Plants such as bracken fern (Pteridium acquili-
rent neurological signs) may also develop in
num) and horse tails (Equisetum arvense) contain
cases of optic nerve compression due to the
thiaminases, and equine thiamine deficiencies
hyperplastic pars intermedia of the pituitary.
have been attributed to chronic ingestion of
Diagnosis of PPID is made based upon con-
these particular plants. Clinical signs of thia-
sitent historical and clinical findings combined
mine deficiency in the horse include ataxia,
with positive results of a dexamethasone sup-
blindness, bradycardia, heart block, muscle fas-
pression test or by demonstrating elevated
ciculations, weight loss, diarrhea, and hypo-
serum ACTH. Treatment of equine PPID
thermia of the extremities.
534 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoLoGY
Diagnosis of thiamine deficiency is made
Fusarium moniliforme, fumonisin. F. moniliforme
based upon demonstrating exposure to thiami-
is found in moldy corn. The disease has been
nase-containing plants and demonstrating low
 reported worldwide, and it results in liquefac-
serum thiamine or by response to therapy.
tion necrosis of the white matter of one or both
Therapy includes removal of access to thiami-
 cerebral hemispheres. Clinical signs appear
nases and parenteral treatment with thiamine.
suddenly and may affect a group of horses if all
Clinical signs, including blindness, are revers-
are fed from the same food source. Signs include
ible if the animal is not in the late stages of
depression, ataxia, recumbency, central blind-
deficiency.
ness (with or without abnormal pupillary light
reflexes), head pressing, circling, seizures, or
Vitamin A Deficiency
frantic running behavior.
Diagnosis is made antemortem based upon
Early signs of vitamin A deficiency include
identifying clinical signs consistent with EL and
reduced feed intake and growth rate; a dull and
by identifying a chronic exposure of the affected
brittle, long haircoat; and in foals, an increased
horse to moldy corn. Hepatic encephalopathy
incidence of respiratory and diarrheal diseases.
is clinically indistinguishable from leukoen-
A diagnosis of vitamin A defciency, in the
cephalomalacia. Field corn has been most com-
horse, is suspected in horses with excessive
monlyimplicatedin this disease, but commercial
tearing and night blindness. Ocular lesions and
feed rations may also be sources of F. monili-
night blindness occur only if vitamin A def-
forme. Aside from supportive therapy, there is
ciency is severe and long-standing. Complete
no treatment for EL. Prognosis for horses
blindness from retinal degeneration eventually
affected with EL is commonly grave.
occurs if the horse remains on a vitamin A-
deficient diet; at that point, the pupils will be
Plants
dilated and unresponsive to light.
Diagnosis of vitamin A deficiency is made
Numerous plants may be toxic to the horse,
based upon documenting low levels of serum
and may produce ocular signs including mydri-
retinol and by using the relative dose response
test. Horses consuming good-quality, green
asis, cortical blindness, retinal and optic nerve
degeneration. The reader should consult the
pasture grasses and hay are unlikely to suffer
fourth edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology
from vitamin A deficiency. Therapy is aimed at
(Table 30.3.1) for the complete list.
providing adequate levels of vitamin A in the
diet.
Misceffaneous Diseases
Toxicities
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis
Electricity
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HyPP) is a
Electric shocks and lightning strikes
6can
condition resulting from an abnormality of
produce direct ocular sequelae and also cause
skeletal muscle sodium channel alpha-subunit
injury to the central nervous system (may man-
and is inherited as an autosomal dominant con-
ifest as blindness, papilledema, cranial nerve
dition. It has been shown that descendents of
palsies). The horse is rarely affected.
the Quarter horse stallion named “Impressive"
are affected by this condition. Consequently.
Funga!
HyPP should be considered in Quarter horse-
crosses and breeds of horses with Quarter horse
 Fusarium Moniliforme (Blind Staggers,
lineage (e.g., American Paint horses and Appa-
Moldy Corn Disease, Equine
loosas) with consistent clinical signs. The clini-
Leukoencephalomalacia)
cal consequence of persistent sodium channel
inactivation is intermittent episodes of muscu-
Equine leukoencephalomalacia (EL)is a disease
lar fasciculation and weakness that often times
caused by the ingestion of a toxin, produced by
result in recumbency. Ocular manifestations of
OCuLar Man1Festations OF System1C Disease/535
HyPP include third eyelid protrusion second-
although rare in cattle, has been reported
ary to retraction of the globe. Definitive diag-
in several breeds including Swiss Brown
nosis of HyPPis made based upon demonstrating
“Braunvieh” in Europe, a Guernsey and
the genetic defect (see the following genetic
Shorthorns in the United States, and Mur-
testing laboratories: Veterinary Genetics Labo-
boden in Austria. Inheritance of complete
ratory, University of California at Davis, http://
albinism in these breeds appears to be
www.vgl.ucdavis.edu/; Animal Genetics Incor-
recessive. Clinical and ophthalmoscopic
porated, http://www.horsetesting.com/HYPP.
manifestations of complete albinism in
htm; Healthgene Corporation, http://168.144.
cattle include white coat, photophobia,
153.107/vdl/vets/ganimals/).
blepharospasm, nystagmus, and nonpig-
mented irides and ciliary processes.
In contrast, forms of dominant incom-
Temperohyoid Osteoarthropathy
plete albinism have been reported in cattle
in which the coat color of these animals is
Temperohyoid osteoarthropathy is a condition
white with occasional pigmented spots over
that involves the bony proliferation of the bones
the body. The irides of cattle with incom-
of the temporohyoid joint, namely the stylohy-
plete albinism vary from white to blue to
oid and petrous temporal bones. Temporohy-
 grey with occasional brown sectors. In addi-
oid osteoarthropathy is commonly associated
tion, tapetal hypoplasia and optic disc colo-
with facial (CN VII) and vestibulocochlear (CN
bomas are commonly noted
VIII) nerve dysfunction. Horses with this con-
dition may also exhibit head shaking, hyperes-
thesia of the ears, and avoidance of bit
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
placement. Ocularly, temperohyoid osteoar-
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an autosomal
thropathy commonly manifests secondarily
through involvement of the parasympathetic
recessive disorder described in cattle, cats,
fibers of cranial nerve Vll (neurogenic kerato-
minks, and mice. Animals have a partial oculo-
conjunctivitis sicca), cranial nerve VII (facial
cutaneous albinism, an increased susceptibility
nerve paralysis), and the vestibular layrinth
to infection, a tendency for prolonged bleeding.
and/or vestibulocochlear nerve (signs of periph-
and enlarged cytoplasmic granules in most, but
eral vestibular disease). Therapy of temperohy-
not all, granule-containing cels. Ocular mani-
oid
 osteoarthropathy  involves appropriate
festations of CHS include photophobia, light or
antimicrobial therapy. Prophylactic partial sty-
pale irides, pale tapetal fundus, and fundic
lohyoidostectomy is used in some instances.
hypopigmentation. The corpora nigra in
affected cattle are also absent.
SECTION 4: FOOD ANIMALS
Ehlers-Danios Syndrome
(Dermatosparaxis, Hyperelastosis
Congenital
Cutis, Cutaneous Asthenia)
Coat
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or cutaneous asthe-
Color-Related Diseases/Conditions
nia, has been reported in sheep and cattle. It is
a congenital, inherited syndrome involving col-
Complete or Incomplete Albinism
lagen, and it is characterized by fragile and
easily torn skin. Some animals have excessive
Complete albinism (complete lack of pigmen-
joint laxity as well. The mode of inheritance of
tation) or incomplete or partial albinism (an
this syndrome in both sheep and cattle is auto-
absence or reduction in the degree of pigmen-
somal recessive. If the complete syndrome is
tation) is associated with not only the pheno-
manifest, ocular lesions may occur. Recently, a
typic appearance of an animal's coat and skin
variant form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome has
color but is also associated with conditions
been reported in a Holstein calf consisting of a
affecting
the eye. Complete
albinism,
 genetic defect of the core protein of dermatan
536 /EssentiAls Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
sulfate proteoglycan, which caused the func-
Acquired
tional abnormality in cutaneous tissues.
Hematologic Diseases
Hydrocephalus
Anemia
Hydrocephalus refers to increased amount of
Anemia is the reduction in red blood cells per
cerebrospinal fluid within the cranial vault.
volume of whole blood. Severe anemia often
Bovine hydrocephalus is a commonly encoun
manifests systemically as varying palor of
tered congenital defect for which concurrent
mucous membranes, cool mucous membranes,
ocular lesions are rarely reported. In Short-
tachycardia, polypnea, weakness, as well as
horn calves, multiple ocular animalies
signs specific to the underlying primary condi-
including microphthalmia, cataracts, retinal
tion. Conjunctival palor is even used as an indi-
detachment, retinal dysplasia, optic nerve,
cator ofanemia due to gastrointestinal parasitism
optic chiasm and optic tract hypoplasia, per-
in sheep and goats. Ocular manifestations of
sistent pupillary membranes, and vitreous
severe anemia include pale retinal vasculature,
hemorrhage have been associated  with
varying degrees of retinal hemorrhage, and
hydrocephalus. The cause has not been
subtle changes in tapetal reflectivity.
determined, but it has been postulated to be
genetic.
icterus
Developmental
Icterus or jaundice is a condition characterized
by hyperbilirubinemia and deposition of bile
pigments in the skin, sclera, and mucous mem-
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
branes causing them to appear a shade of
yellow. The sclera is the classic location for
Lysosomal storage diseases have been identi-
detection of icterus given its relative lack of
fed in cattle and sheep, and occasionally in
pigmentation. The yellow appearance of icterus
goats. These inborn errors of metabolism are
may be detected in the intraocular structures as
relatively rare diseases, but may serve as animal
well (e.g., blue irides may turn green and yellow
models for human syndromes. Storage diseases
hues may be imparted on the tapetum).
are characterized by an accumulation
of
metabolic by-products within lysosomes, the
cellular organelles that degrade complex mac-
Polycythemia
romolecules. The substrates for catabolism
within lysosomes include glycoproteins, muco-
Polycythemia is classifed as relative or absolute
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, proteins,
(primary and secondary forms). Relative poly-
and sphingolipids. Storage diseases result from
cythemia is an increased packed cell volume
a deficiency in a specifc catabolic enzyme
(PCV) with normal RBC mass occurring as a
(i.e., acid hydrolases), which allows the enzyme
result of a reduction in plasma volume as may
substrate to accumulate in the lysosomes
 arise from external losses of body fluids (e.g
within cells. Consequently, lysosomal storage
diarrhea; burns).
diseases are subclassified as the glycoproteino-
Absolute polycythemia is an increase in total
ses, mucopolysaccharidoses, oligosaccharido-
RBC mass, and it may be classifed as either
ses, proteinoses, and the sphingolipidoses.
 primary or secondary (appropriate and inap-
Most lysosomal storage diseases, with known
propriate). Absolute secondary polycythemia
mode of inheritance, are inherited as an auto-
 results from altered erythropoietin homeostasis
somal recessive trait. The eyes in most patients
 and is described as being appropriate or inap-
have histopathologic lesions, but clinical oph-
propriate.  Absolute  secondary  appropriate
thalmic lesions may not be visible (see Table
polycythemia occurs as a consequence of per-
16.1.1).
sistent hypoxia, and is seen in animals with
OCULAr MAN1FeStAt1ONS OF SYSteM1C D15EASE/537
conditions such as congenital cardiac defects
bovine uveitis are compatible with uveitis and
causing right-to-left shunting of blood, and
in addition, chorioretinal edema and hemor-
certain forms of chronic pulmonary disease.
rhage may be noted. Therapy for this condi-
The most prominent ocular manifestations of
tion is aimed at ameliorating intraocular
polycythemia reported in animals include
inflammation.
engorged and tortuous, dark, ruddy colored
conjunctival and retinal blood vessels. In addi-
Immune-Mediated Diseases
tion, varying degrees of papilledema, retinal
hemorrhage, and occlusion of the retinal veins
caused by increased blood viscosity may occur.
Allergic Conjunctivitis
 A heifer with absolute secondary appropriate
Allergic conjunctivitis has been reported in
polycythemia resulting from congenital cardiac
food animals. Allergic conjunctivitis is medi-
disease developed hyphema and vitreous hem-
orrhage later in the course of the disease. Treat-
ated by immunoglobulin-E (IgE) and subse
quent activation of histamine receptors by mast
ment varies according to the cause of the
cell
 degranulation. Exuberant lacrimation,
polycythemia
ocular pruritis, and hyperemic and edematous
conjunctiva are common clinical signs of aller-
Thrombocytopenia and
gic conjunctivitis. Allergic conjunctivitis has
Thrombopathies
been described in a herd of cattle, and in veal
calves being fattened with cow's milk or milk
Thrombocytopeniaresults from either decreased
replacer. Allergic conjunctivitis is typically
production, increased removal, sequestration,
diagnosed in food animals after excluding all
or any combination of these. The most
other causes. Treatment is aimed at identifying
common causes of thrombocytopenia in food
 and removing the inciting allergen.
animals include infectious diseases, immune-
mediated disease, and drug-related or toxin-
related causes. In particular, the numerous
Infectious Diseases
thrombocytopenia in food animals include
Several bacterial and viral diseases in food
bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) virus, Iheileria
animals may also involve the ophthalmic tissues
annulata, Babesia bovis, and classical swine fever
and result in specific clinical signs. These ocular
(CSF)
signs combined with the systemic signs can
Thrombopathies are blood coagulation dis-
often assist in the establishment of a clinical
orders as a result of platelet dysfunction and
dignosis (Table 16.4.l; Fig. 16.4.1 and Figs.
 are either acquired or inherited. Disease pro-
16.4.2A and B).
cesses associated with thrombopathies may
include anemia, DIC, liver failure, and uremia.
Mycotic
Inherited thrombopathies are seen in cattle
affected with Chediak-Higashi syndrome Or
Dermatophytosis
may be inherited as a primary disorder in Sim-
mental and Japanese black cattle.
Dermatophytosis, or clinically relevant cutane-
ous infections with fungi, are usually caused by
ldiopathic Diseases
the following dermatophytes: Irichophyton ver-
rucosum (bovids, goats, and sheep), I. ovis
Idiopathic Bovine Uveitis (Bovine-
(sheep), Microsporum nanum (pigs), M. canis
Specific Ophthalmia)
(pigs), and I. metagrophytes (pigs). Importantly,
dermatophytosis is contagious and zoonotic. In
An idiopathic uveitis affecting cattle has been
cattle, goats, and sheep facial involvement is
described and the cause of this condition
common and may manifest as dry, crusty peri-
remains elusive. Clinical signs of idiopathic
Ocular alopecic and nonpruriticlesions. Lesions
538 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OphthalmoloGY
Table 16.4.1. Ophthalmic Manifestations of Selected Infectious Diseases in Food Animals.
Disease
Systemic and Ophthaimic Signs
Diagnosis
Bovine Rhinotracheitis (cattle)
Rhinotracheitis, conjunctivitis/keratitis,
Virus isolation; fluorescent
infectious pustular vulvovaginitis, and abortion.antibody
Raised, red to white plaques of lymphocyte
follicles; nonulcerative keratitis; and anterior
uveitis.
Bovine Viral Diarrhea (cattle.
In uterine infection—cataracts,retinal
Virus isolation, "sandwich"
sheep. and goats)
 degeneration,retinal dysplasia, optic neuritis.
ELISA
microphthalmia. Also cerebellar hypoplasia
and micoencephaly.
Malignant Catarrhal Fever
Head-and-eye variation; commeal edema;
Ahojoyedos!H
(cattle and pigs)
antenior uveitis; panophthalmitis.
Bluetongue (cattle and sheep)
Cattle—severe conjunctivitis accompanied by
Histopathology. PCR
mucosal lesions, laminitis, and edema of the
lips.
 Sheep—deformed larmbs, brain deformities,
and choroiditis and retinitis, with retinal
necrosis and retinal dysplasia.
Scrapie (sheep and goats)
Sheep and goats—multifocal, round tapetal
Histopathology
lesions; focal retinal detachrnents resulting
from subretinal accumulations of lipid.
Blue Eye Disease (pigs)
Central nervous syster disorders, reproductive
Virus isolation and
failure, corneal ederma, blindness, with dilated
 hemagglutination-inhibition
pupils and nystagmmus. Conjunctivitis.
tests
Hog Cholera (pigs)
Anterior uveitis, focal choroiditis, retinitis, and
optic neuritis with time.
Pseudorabies (pigs)
Acute blindness, depression, head pressing.
and death.
Chlarydophilosis (cattle,
In cattle, including polyarthritis, polyserositis,
Cytology: culture
sheep and goats)
keratoconjunctivitis, pneumonia, and 
encephalomyelitis.
Lambs and kids-polyarthritis; conjunctivitis,
petechial hemorrhages, epiphora and
mucopurulent exudation, and conjunctival
bymphoid follicular proliferation. Peripheral
cormeal edema and neovascularization
Thromboembolic
Peracute to chronic septicemia of yearling
Histopathology (fibrinopurulent 
meningoencephalitis (cattle)
cattle. Blindness, strabisrnus, and nystagmus;
meningitis and multifocal
retinal hermorrhages and focal exudates
hemorrhagic necrosis of the
associated with end-arterioles.; focal retinal
brain)
detachments, and modest papilledema.
Tuberculosis (cattle and pigs)
Anterior and posterior uveitis; subretinal
Cytology and culture
exudation and retinal detachrment;
endophthalmitis.
Listeriosis (cattle and pigs)
Invokvement of the brainstem with facial
 Culture and histopathology
nerve paralysis
Neonatal septicemias (cattle.
Polyarthritis, umbilical infections, and
Streptococcus sp.. Echerichia
pigs, sheep and goats)
diarrheal signs may sporadically involve the
coll. Cornybacteriu m
eye. Anterior and posterior uveitis;
pyogenes, Salmonela sp., and
endophthalmitis
Pasteurella sp. usually cultured.
OCULAr MAN1FeStAtiOns OF SYStem1C D1SEAsE/539
Fig. 16.4.1. Chlamydial conjunctivitis in a young
goat. Conjunctival inclusion bodies were present on
conjunctival scrapings, and the condition responded
well to treatment with topical tetracycline. Note the
peripheral keratitis. (Reprinted with permission from
Martin CL. Ocular manifestations of systemic disease.
Part 4: Food animals. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 1999. 1492-1504.)
B
Fig. 16.4.2. Malignant catarrhal fever in a cow. A.
may be localized or generalized and involve the
 Note the conjunctival and scleral injection, marked
limbal-based corneal edema, and signs of uveitis
periocular skin. The disease is typically self-
limiting
including miotic pupil. (Courtesy of R. Hamor.) B.
and
1animals
are
immune
Note the extremely miotic pupil, iris texture changes,
reinfection.
 and intracameral hbrin. (Courtesy of R. Hamor.)
Diagnosis of dermatophytosis is made based
upon consistent clinical signs typically affecting
more than one animal in a group, microscopi-
cally identifying the organism on skin scrap-
fungi, such as Rhizopus, occur most commonly
ings, and positively culturing the organism
in  immunocompromised  animals.  In adult
 from skin scrapings on an appropriate culture
cattle, systemic mycoses typically arise due to
medium (causing a “positive” color change in
pulmonary or alimentary invasion. A calf with
the culture media). Therapy is typically not
disseminated F
Rhizopus  infection  has been
implemented in food animals because of the
described with bilateral ocular lesions includ-
 expense incurred by treating a group of animals.
ing endophthalmitis and intumescent imma-
 In valuable individuals, however, appropriate
ture cataracts.
antifungal drugs (e.g., griseofulvin) are admin-
istered and animals can be bathed in appropri-
Parasitic-Metazoans
ate antifungal shampoos.
Cysticercosis
Disseminated Rhizopus
Cysticercosis is a zoonotic disease caused by
Rhizopus is an opportunistic fungus. Although
the larval form of Iaenia solium (pork tape-
rare, systemic infections with opportunistic
worm). Among thirty-nine abattoir swine diag-
540 /EsSentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHtHalmoLoGY
nosed with cysticercosis, seventeen had orbital
maniasis has been described in sheep from
cysts, and two had ocular cysts. The parasite
South Africa. Clinical signs included severe
stimulates a fibrous sheath, which is formed by
swelling and diffuse cutaneous thickening and
the host, that initially does not have inflamma-
crusty exudate of one pinna, and small cutane-
tory cells.
 ous crusts around the external nares, upper lip.
muzzle, lateral aspects of the face, as well as the
Setariasis
eyes.
Adult Setaria digitata are found free within the
Neosporosis
abdominal cavity of many ungulates including
cattle and sheep. The larvae of Setaria spp. can
Neospora caninum is a protozoal parasite, having
migrate into the CNS and eye of animals such
structural and biological similarities to Ioxo-
as sheep and goats and cause serious disease
plasma gondii, that can infect livestock. Neospo.
rosis can be transmitted vertically and
ParasiticMites
horizontally in cattle, sheep, and goats. N.
caninum-infected calves may be born under-
weight with neurological signs including inabil-
Demodicosis
ity to rise, ataxia, and loss of conscious
Demodex spp. live as commensals in the skin of
proprioception. Ocular manifestations of neo-
 sporosis in affected calves, such as exophthal-
most mammals. In cattle, demodicosis is caused
 mia or an asymetrical appearance of the eyes,
by a burrowing mite, Demodex bovis, that lives
 may also be observed.
in the hair follicles. The clinical signs associated
with D. bovis typically include tiny to egg-sized
nodules, containing mites in a purulent mate-
Sarcocystosis
rial, with generalized distribution over the fore-
limbs and withers. Demodecosis may also affect
Sarcocystosis is caused by tissue cyst-forming
the eyelids. Diffuse, frm swellings beneath
coccidia, Sarcocystis spp. Cattle are intermedi-
both eyes, causing disfigurement of the ventral
ate hosts. Sarcocystosis has been reported in
eyelids.
the ocular musculature of cattle in India infected
with Sarcocystis cruzi, with a prevalence of
Parasitic—Protozoa!
71.5%. The affected ocular musculature con-
tained a heavy concentration of cysts, and
Besnoitiosis
appeared to be the preferred site for the devel-
opment of sarcocystosis.
Besnoitiosis, elephant skin disease, is a rela-
tively common disease of cattle caused by the
Parasitic-Flagellates
protozoan parasite Besnoitia besnoiti. The infec-
tion may be clinically inapparent, or, in its
severe form, it manifests as two sequential
Trypanosomiasis
stages: (l) the acute stage characterized by fever
African trypanosomes cause sleeping sickness
and anasarca, and orchitis in bulls, and (2) the
chronic stage as evidenced by scleroderma, alo-
Sleeping sickness is caused by Irypanosoma
pecia, and hyperkeratosis of the eyelids
brucei, an extracellular eukaryotic flagellate
parasite. Livestock trypanosoniasis is caused by
Leishmaniasis
closely related Irypanosoma spp., and mainly
affects animals in sub-Saharan Africa where the
Leishmania spp. are diphasic protozoal parasites
tsetse fly vector is common, but also occurs in
that infect a wide range of vertebrates, mainly
Asia and South America. Experimental I. brucei
dogs and humans. The cutaneous form of leish-
infection in sheep has produced an initial bilat-
OCULAR MAN1FEStATIONS OF SYStEM1C DiSEASE/54 1
eral epiphora, photophobia, and mucous exu-
light reflexes. Recommended treatment for par-
dation; ocular lesions were more likely to
ae snan idd si sisrd s
develop the longer the animals survived.
with a calcium solution.
Prions
Hypomagnesemia (Grass Tetany)
Scrapie
Hypomagnesemia results from a primary dietary
deficiency of magnesium. Hypomagnesemia is
Scrapie is a neurodegenerative disease of the
a highly fatal condition of ruminants. Clinical
group of tranmissible spongiform encepha-
 signs in lactating cows affected with grass tetany
lopathies (TSEs) affecting sheep and goats.
(i.e., occurs mainly in winter and spring when
Sheep are regarded as the natural reservoir for
 grasses that are low in magnesium comprise the
scrapie. The incubation period is typically
diet) include anorexia, hyperexcitability, muscle
between 2.5 and 3.5 years. According to the
fasciculations, head and neck tremors, followed
prion hypothesis, which explains most of the
by poorly coordinated gait and lateral recum-
biological features pertaining to the scrapie
 bency. Ocular manifestations of grass tetany
agent, scrapie lesions are triggered by the con-
 include nystagmus and a rapid, snapping eyelid
version of the cellular prion protein (PrP) into
retraction.
the abnormal isoform (Prp) resulting in its
 Prevention of hypomagnesemia involves
pathological accumulation. Scrapie produces
both continuous provision of adequate levels of
progressive neurological signs, the lesions of
 dietary magnesium and improving absorption
which consist mainly of vacuoles within the
of this essential mineral by the ruminal
nervous system, and eventual death. Ocular
epithelium.
 manifestations of scrapie infection of sheep
and goats include multifocal, round tapetal
Neoplasia—Systemic
lesions that can be as large as the optic
disc. These fundic lesions are typical enough
to be suggestive of the diagnosis when com-
Lymphosarcoma
bined with chronic, progressive neurologic
Bovine lymphosarcoma occurs as a sporadic or
disease. There is no effective treatment for
an adult form. The adult, or enzootic, form is
scrapie.
the most common neoplastic disease of cattle
usually affecting cattle greater than 4 years of
Metabolic Diseases
age. However, cattle as young as 2 years of age
may also be affected. Adult lymphosarcoma is
fonic Disturbances
typically associated with bovine leukemia
virus (BLV) infection. The disease is very
Hypocalcemia (Bovine Parturient Paresis,
rare in cattle uninfected with BLV. Cattle
Milk Fever)
sometimes experience a syndrome of orbital
involvement  with lymphosarcoma
that
Bovine parturient paresis is a complex meta-
results in a progressive, bilateral or unilat-
bolic disorder resulting in an acute to peracute
eral exophthalmos. The resultant exposure
flaccid paralysis and/or somnolence of lactating
keratitis may be severe, but intraocular
dairy cows that usually occurs at the onset of
involvement is rare.
lactation. The hypocalcemia arises due to a
A general physical examination will usually
rapid increase in milk production and subse-
find lymphadenopathy or other organ involve-
quent acute depletion of serum ionized calcium.
ment and, thus, fine-needle aspiration or biopsy
Clinical signs include depression, anorexia, an
of the affected tissues is warranted. A complete
inability of the animal to stand, tachycardia,
 blood count demonstrating lymphocytosis and
gastrointestinal stasis, and ocular g
signs of
a positive BLV agar-gel immunodiffusion test
mydriasis with absent or sluggish pupillary
are also supportive of the diagnosis
542 /EssentiAlS OF Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Other-Metastases
 one kid, and one steer) with thiamine-respon-
sive PEM indicated the ERG in these animals
A strain of miniature Sinclair swine has a high
was normal but the VEP was abnormal
incidence (54%) of congenital cutaneous mela-
nomas. As the animals mature, further tumor
development occurs, until approximately 85%
Vitamin A Deficiency
of the animals have melanomas. The tumors
may metastasize, but most animals have
Vitamin A deficiency has been studied exten-
 spontaneous regression of both primary and
sively among cattle, both in spontaneous
secondary tumors, which is accompanied by
cases and with experimental induction. In
depigmentation (80%).
young, growing animals, vitamin A defi-
Depigmentation occurs not only at the tumor
ciency produces clinical signs when the
site but in other melanin-containing structures,
vitamin A levels fall to less than 20 μg/dL of
such as skin, hair, and eyes. Though intraocular
plasma and less than 2 μg/g of liver. A sexual
melanomas have not been described, the depig-
predilection for males has been noted in two
 mentation of the uveal tract results in an inflam-
clinical reports. A lag period of 3-12 months 
matory cascade that often produces blindness.
       
 Ocular depigmentation is usually detectable by
A deficiency are noted, and these effects depend
4-5 weeks of age.
on age of onset, degree of deficiency, and the
amount of liver stores.
Animals younger than 6 months of age are
Nutritional Disorders
more susceptible and more likely to have
blindness as a presenting sign because of
Polioencephalomalacia
sphenoid bone overgrowth constricting the
(Cerebrocortica/ Necrosis)
optic nerve. Blindness, with or without con-
vulsions, is the first outward sign noted in
Polioencephalomalacia (PEM) is a disorder of
most cases among young, growing animals.
the central nervous system of ruminants that
On critical examination of animals, night
results in necrosis of the cortical gray matter.
blindness, the first clinical sign noted in experi-
PEM has a worldwide distribution. There are
mentally affected animals, may be noted, but it
several causes of PEM including altered thia-
is unlikely to be noted under typical husbandry
mine (vitamin B) status caused by such factors
conditions. Blindness is accompanied by fixed,
as excessive ruminal consumption of thiamine
 dilated pupils, and on ophthalmoscopy, papill-
by bacterial thiaminases, and ingestion of plants
edema will be present (Figures 16.4.3A and B).
with thiaminolytic activity, among others.
Papilledema occurs well before blindness in
However, PEM may also be induced by other
 both adult- and young-onset defciencies, and
neural metabolic disturbances such as water
presumably results from increased CsF pres-
deprivation-sodium ion toxicosis, lead poison-
sure, which develops from fibrosis and thicken-
ing, and high sulfur intake.
ing of the dura mater that, in turn, results in
Early clinical signs of PEM in affected
decreased absorption of the CSF by the arach-
animals include anorexia, incoordination,
noid villi. Increased CSF pressure is the first
muscle tremors, holding the head in an erect
change noted with vitamin A deficiency.
position, and appearing blind. As PEM pro-
Causes of blindness will vary with age of
gresses, animals develop blindness, head-
onset for the deficiency. Blindness may result
pressing, dorsomedial strabismus, miosis,
from retinal degeneration at all ages or constric-
variable nystagmus, excitement, facial twitch-
 tion and ischemic necrosis of the optic nerve at
 ing, repetitive chewing, and recumbency and
the optic foramen in growing animals. Eventu-
opisthotonos. Death usually arises following
ally, optic nerve atrophy develops. Day blind-
3-4 days if the affected animal is not treated
ness has not been reversible, but night blindness
Electrodiagnostic visual testing ([ERG and
 Or papilledema detected before blindness occurs
visual-evoked potential [VEP]) in three lambs,
has been responsive to therapy.
OCuLar MaN1FeStAtiOns OF SYstem1C Disease/543
understood), epiphora, nystagmus, and corneal
ulceration.
Recently, 25% of calves born to heifers that
experienced  prolonged  hypovitaminosis  A
during pregnancy had several congenital ocular
abnormalities  including   microphthalmos,
ocular dermoids covering the external surfaces
of the eyes, and single chambered globes each
lacking a uveal tract, lens (i.e., aphakia), and
aqueous humor.
Concurrent systemic signs will vary depend-
ing on the source of nutrition, duration of the
deficiency, and age of the affected animal. In
general, severe vitamin A deficiency will be
accompanied by unthriftiness, diarrhea, poor
A
 growth, decreased appetite, and pneumonia.
The pathogenesis of the optic nerve lesions
associated with vitamin A deficiency in calves
has been extensively studied. In calves made
deficient for vitamin A from 35 days onward
and examined at 5.5-6 months of age, the optic
foramen of the sphenoid bone became deformed
 into a narrow, horizontal aperture. Optic nerve
changes result mainly from ischemic necrosis,
but in some instances when vascularity is main-
tained, the optic nerve pathology is subtle and
may result from retinal degeneration.
The clinical signs, history, and ophthalmo-
scopic signs are very suggestive of hypovita-
minosis A. If vitamin supplementation has not
B
been instituted, plasma blood levels ofless than
Fig. 16.4.3. A. Normal fundus appearance of a
20 μg/dL of vitamin A will confrm the diagno-
Friesian calf. Note the presence of the conus
sis. Vision will not be restored in calves that are
vestigialis, the obvious difference between arteries
day blind, but animals with vision and papill-
and veins, and the color and clear outline of the optic
edema as well as older animals may benefit
disc. B. Papilledema due to vitamin A dehciency in a
from parenteral administration of vitamin A at
calf of comparable age and breed. Note the size of the
440 IU/kg.
disc, the indistinct and raised border, and the small
Vitamin A deficiency in pregnant sows has,
flame-shaped hemorrhage at ll:00. (Courtesy of K.
both
1experimentally and clinically, been
Barnett.)
responsible for a high incidence of varying
degrees of microphthalmos and blindness in
piglets. In extreme cases, anophthalmia was
Papillary and peripapillary hemorrhages
present as well.
as well as disruption of pigment in the non-
tapetal region may occur. Retinal degenera-
tion primarily occurs in the nontapetal
Systemic Toxicities
region. Tapetal color alterations have not been
noted in experimental or in clinical reports
Food animals are subject to the adverse effects
until late in the deficiency. Additional ocular
of poisonous plants, which may be encoun
lesions that have been attributed to vitamin A
tered in their environment as well as selected
deficiency include exophthalmos (origin not
compounds or drugs (Table 16.4.2).
544 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHtHalmoLoGY
Table 16.4.2. Selected Systemic Toxicities in Food Animals with Ophthalmic Manifestations.
Plant
Clinical Signs
 Male fern poisoning
Dryopteris Fiix Mas consumption by cattle causes lethargy. constipation, and
 blindness. Acutely blind cattle—dilated pupils, papillederma, retinal and
preretinal hemorrhages.
Bracken fem poisoning
Ingestion of Ptericium aquilinum in chronic, low-level amounts causes Bright
loeiauabap leuay (sale pue puebue) aey pue daays buowe ssaupug
with blindness including retinal vascular attenuation, tapetal hyperreflectivity.
and optic nerve atrophy.
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum
In sheep and cattle causes blindness, paresis, and paralysis
Coumarin poisoning
Sweet-clover poisoning in cattle, sheep, pigs, and horses. Hermorrhages are
either limited or predominantly located in the eye and orbit.
Veratrum poisoning
Cyclopia in lambs may be produced by ingestion of veratrum califormicum or
skunk cabbage in pregnant ewes on day 14 of gestation. The teratogen
cyclopamine is found in the green leaves, stems, and especially the roots. The
incidence of anomalies may be as high as 25%
Locoweed poisoning
Ingestion of locoweed by cattle and sheep may produce ocular signs of
blindness and a "dull" eye.
Phenothiazine toxicity
Cattle on a low plane of nutrition may develop diffuse cormeal ederma via
exposure to sunlight within 24 hours after being dosed with phenothiazine
(dewommer). Ulceration may develop secondary to the edema, and recovery may
occur in a week (if the animal is restricted indoors) or be prolonged for 2-3
months (if the animal is kept on the pasture).
Hygromycin B
Hygrormycin B, an aminoglycoside antibiotic, fed at 13.2 gm per 1,000 kg of 
feed, for 14 months on continuous feed or with elevated levels of hygromycin B
(10-11 months) develops cataracts. The opacities begin as axial, posterior
subcapsular opacities and then progress to complete cortical cataracts.
Arsanilic acid
 Arsanilic acid is used in swine both as a growth stirnulant and as a therapy for
swine dysentery. Arsanilic acid poisoning has occurred from long-term
administration, errors in feed formulation, or when water has been restricted.
Clinical signs of blindness and pupillary dilation occur with toxicity. and
additional signs of ataxia, torticollis, and paralysis may develop as well.
Miscelfaneous Diseases
denced by an absent menace response, and
three calves showed nystagmus
Electricity
Electric shocks and lightning strikes
6can
lonizing Radiation
produce direct ocular sequelae and also cause
   s n a  
The ocular effects of ionizing radiation are
ifest as blindness, papilledema, cranial nerve
similar regardless of the source. Both the ocular
 palsies). Electric shocks and lightning strikes of
 effect(s) and the time to develop ocular disease
a severe nature may produce cataracts that
depend on the dose, age of the animal, and the
manifest months later. Cataracts are more likely
Jo Apnis uai-suoi e un papnis guaq saioads 
to be produced by electrical shocks to the head.
burros, swine, and cattle receiving gamma and
Recently, a herd of Holstein-Friesian cattle
mixed neutron-gamma radiation, both the
experienced lightning strike while kept on
swine and the burros were resistant to radia-
pasture. Following the lightning strike, eight of
tion-induced cataracts, but the cattle were
the eighteen cattle had an unsteady, swinging
about as equally susceptible as humans. The
gait, nine calves had visual impairment as evi-
most common source of ionizing radiation-
OCULAr MAN1FEStAtiOnS OF SYStem1C D1sEasE/545
induced ocular lesions is radiation therapy for
Gelatt KN, Chrisman CL, Samuelson DA, Shell LG
neoplasms of the head.
Ocular and systemic aspergillosis in a dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:427-431.
Gilmour MA, Morgan RV, Moore FM. Masticatory
References
myopathy in the dog: a retrospective study of 18
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:300-306
Gratzek AT, Calvert CA, Martin CL, Kaswan
Section 1
RL. Corneal edema in dogs treated with tocainide.
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1993;3:47-51
Adamo FP, O'Brien RT. Use of cyclosporine to
Greibrokk T. Hereditary deafness in the dalmatian:
treat granulomatous meningoencephalitis in
relationship to eye and coat color. J Am Anim
three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:1211-
Hosp Assoc 1994;30:170-176
1216.
Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Nietfeld JC. Dysautonomia
Bagley LH, Lavach JD. Comparison of postoperative
in dogs: 65 cases (1993-2000). J Am Vet Med
phacoemulsification results in dogs with and
Assoc 2002;220:633-639
without diabetes mellitus: 153 cases(1991-1992).
Hendrix DV, Rohrbach BW, Bochsler PN, English
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1165-1169
RV. Comparison of histologic lesions of endo-
Berger SL, Scagliotti RH, Lund EM. A quantitative
phthalmitis induced by Blastomyces dermatiidis in
study of the effects of tribrissen on canine tear
untreated and treated dogs: 36 cases(1986-2001).
production. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995;31:
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:1317-1322
236-241
Hendrix DVH, Gelatt KN, Smith PJ. Ophthalmic
Bloom JD, Hamor RE, Gerding PA. Ocular blasto-
disease as the presenting complaint in five dogs
mycosis in dogs: 73 cases, 108 eyes (1985-1993).
with multiple myeloma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;209:1271-1274
1998;34:121-128.
Carastro SM, Dugan SJ, Paul AJ. Intraocular dirofila-
Hopkins KD, Marcella KL, Strecker AE. Ivermectin
riasis in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
toxicosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;
1992;14:209-212
197:93-94
Collier LL, Collins KB. Excision and cryosurgical
Huss BT, Collier LL, Collins BK, Pittman LL, Aronson
ablation of severe periocular papillomatosis in
E. Polyarthropathy and chorioretinitis with retinal
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:881-
detachment in a dog with systemic histoplasmo-
885
sis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1994;30:217-224.
Cullen CL and Webb AA. Ocular manifestations of
Jamieson VE, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, English
systemic disease. Part 1. The dog. In: Gelatt KN
RV. Ocular complications following cobalt 60
ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA:
radiotherapy of neoplasms in the canine head
Blackwell, 2007. 1470-1537
region. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 199l;27:51-55.
Davidson MG, Breitschwerdt ED, Walker DH, et al
Jolly RD, Palmer DN. The neuronal ceroid-
Vascular permeability and coagulation during
lipofuscinoses (Batten disease): comparative
Rickettsia rickettsii infection in dogs. Am J Vet Res
aspects. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiology 1995;
1990;51:165-170.
21:50-60.
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, Breitschwerdt EB, et al.
Katz ML, Narfstrom K, Johnson GS, O'Brien DP
Acute blindnessassociated with intracranial tumors
Assessment of retinal function and characteriza-
in dogs and cats: eight cases(1984-1989). J Am Vet
tion of lysosomal storage body accumulation in
Med Assoc 1991;199:755-758
the retinas and brains of Tibetan Terriers with
 Diehl KJ, Roberts SM. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:
dogs associated with sulfonamide therapy: 16
67-76.
cases (1980-1990). Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
King MC, Grose RM, Startup G. Angiostrongylus
1991;1:276-282
vasorum in the anterior chamber of a dog's eye. J
Evans J, Katz ML, Levesque D, Shelton GD, De
Small Animal Pract 1994;35:326-328.
Lahunta A, O'Brien D. A variant form of neuronal
Komnenou A, Eberhard ML, Kaldrymidou E, Tsalie
ceroid lipofuscinosis in American Bulldogs. J Vet
E, Dessiris A. Subconjunctival filariasis due to
Intern Med 2005;19:44-51.
Onchocerca sp. in dogs; report of 23 cases in
Evans J, Levesque D, Shelton GD. Canine inlamma-
Greece. Vet Ophthalmol 2002:5;119-126.
tory myopathies: a clinicopathologic review of
Komnenou A, Egyed Z, Sreter T, Eberhard ML.
200 cases. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:679-
Canine onchocercosis in Greece: report of further
691
20 cases and molecular characterization of the
546 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
parasite and its Wolbachia endosymbiont. Vet
Swanson JF. Ocular manifestations of systemic
Parasitol 2003;118:151-155
disease in the dog and cat. Vet Clin North Am
Krohne SG, Henderson NM, Richardson RC, Vestre
Small Anim Pract 1990;20:849-867
WA. Prevalence of ocular involvement in dogs
Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T, Wilkie DA,
with multicentric lymphoma: prospective evalua-
Fenner WR. A retrospective study of cavernous
tion of 94 cases. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;41
sinus syndrome in 4 dogs and 8 cats. J Vet Intern
127-134.
Med 1996;10:65-71
Lester SJ, Kenyon JM. Use of allopurinol to treat
Thomas W, Sorjonen D, Steiss J. A retrospective
visceral leishmaniosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med
evaluation of 38 cases of canine distemper
Assoc 1996;209:615-617
encephalomyelitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Massa KL, Gilger BC, Miller TL, Davidson MG.
1993;29:129-133.
Causes of uveitis in dogs: 102 cases (1989-2000),
Van der Woerdt A, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG
Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:93-98
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration in the dog?
Mattson A, Roberts SM. Clinical features suggesting
clinical and laboratory hindings in 36 cases. Prog
hyperadrenocorticisim associated with sudden
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1991;1:11-18
acquired retinal degeneration syndrome in a dog.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:199-202
McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Mayhew IG, Elks R,
Section 2
Lybaert P, Watte C, Bedford PG. Clinical and
pathological observations in  English Cocker
Alroy J, Bachrach A, Thalhammer JG, et al. Clinical,
Spaniels with primary metabolic vitamin E defi-
neurophysiological, biochemical and morpholog-
ical features of eyes in Persian cats with manno-
Vet Rec 2003;153:287-292
sidosis. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol
McLellan GJ, Ellks R, Lybaert P, Watte C, Moore DL
Pathol 1991;60:173-180.
Bedford PG. Vitamin E dehiciency in dogs with
Bromel C, Sykes JE. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy. Vet Rec
treatment of blastomycosis in dogs and cats. Clin
2002;151:663-667
Tech Sm Anim Pract 2005;20:233-239.
Michau TM, Breitschwerdt EB, Gilger BC, Davidson
Bromel C, Sykes JE. Histoplasmosis in dogs and
MG. Bartonella vinsonii subspecies berkhoff as a
cats. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 2005;20:227-
possible cause of anterior uveitis and choroiditis
232
in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:299-304.
Chavkin MJ, Lappin MR, Powell CC, et al. Seroepi-
Nell B, Angerer M, Walde I. Fetthaltiges kammer-
demiologic and clinical observations of 93 cases
wasser und uveitis als okulare manifestation einer
of uveitis in cats. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
hyperlipidamie infolge primarer hypothyreose bei
1992;2:29-36.
einem hund. Wien Tierarztl Mschr 1995;82:
Corcoran KA, Peiffer RL, Koch SA. Histopathologic
122-129
features of feline ocular lymphosarcoma: 49 cases
Paul TA, Ward DA. Clinical features, etiologies and
(1978-1992). Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1995;5:
outcomes of hyphema in dogs: a retrospective
35-41.
Crispin SM, Mould JR Systemic hypertensive disease
358-359
and the feline fundus. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:
Rudmann DG, Coolman BR, Perez CM, Glickman
131-140.
LT. Evaluation of risk factors for blastomycosis in
Cullen CL and Webb AA. Ocular manifestations of
dogs: 857 cases (1980-1990). J Am Vet Med
Systemic disease. Part 2. The cat. In: Gelatt KN
Assoc 1992;201:1754-1759
ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA:
Sansom J, Barnett KC, Blunden AS, Smith KC,
Blackwell, 2007. 1538-1587.
Turner S, Waters L. Canine conjunctival papil-
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, Breitschwerdt EB, et al.
loma: a review of five cases. J Small Animal Pract
Acute blindness associated with intracranial
1996;37:84-86
tumors in dogs and cats: eight cases (1984-1989).
Scherlie PH, Smedes SL, Feltz T, Dougherty SA, Riis
J Am Vet Med Assoc 199l;199:755-758
RC. Ocular manifestation of systemic histiocytosis
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, English RV, et al. Feline
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:1229-
anterior uveitis: a study of 53 cases. J Am Anim
1232.
Hosp Assoc 199l;27:77-83.
Skelly BJ, Franklin RJ. Recognition and diagnosis of
Dean R, Harley R, Helps C, Caney S, Gruffydd-Jones
lysosomal storage diseases in the cat and dog. J
T. Use of quantitative real-time PCR to monitor
Vet Intern Med 2002;16:133-141
the response of Chlamydophila felis infection to
OCULAR MaN1FeStAtiOnS OF SYSteM1C DiSEASE/547
doxycycline treatment. J Clin Microbiol 2005;43:
Lappin MR, Burney DP, Hill SA, et al. Detection of
1858-1864
Toxoplasma gondii-specific IgA in the aqueous
English RV, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, et al. Intra-
humor of cats. Am J Vet Res 1995;56:774-
ocular disease associated with feline immunode-
778.
ficiency virus infection in cats. J Am Vet Med
Leiva M, Lloret A, Pena T, Roura X. Therapy of
Assoc 1990;196:1116-1119.
ocular and visceral leishmaniasis in a cat. Vet
Forrester SD, Greco DS, Relford RL. Serum hyper-
Ophthalmol 2005;8:71-75.
 r   o
Leon A, Levick WR, Sarossy MG. Lesion topography
myeloma in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
and new histological features in feline taurine
1992;200:79-82
deficiency retinopathy. Exp Eye Res 1995;61:
Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, Andrew
731-741.
SE, Brooks DE, Biros DJ, Denis HM, Cutler TJ.
Lewis DT, Foil CS, Hosgood G. Epidemiology and
Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration in
clinical features of dermatophytosis in dogs and
cats. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:99-106.
cats at Louisiana State University: 198l-l990.
Greek JS. Feline pemphigus foliaceous: a retrospec-
Vet Dermatol 1991;2:53-58
tive study of 23 cases. Proc Am Acad Vet Derma-
Lim CC, Cullen CL. Schirmer tear test values and
tol 1993;9:27-28
tear film break-up times in cats with conjunctivi-
Gunn-Moore DA, Werrett G, Harbout DA, et al.
tis. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:305-310.
 Prevalence of Chlamydia psittaci antibodies in
Maggs DJ. Update on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
healthy pet cats in Britain. Vet Rec 1995;136:
treatment of feline herpesvirus type l. Clin Tech
366-367
Sm Anim Pract 2005;20:94-101
Gwin RM, Merideth R, Martin CL, et al. Ophthal-
Maggs DJ, Clarke HE. In vitro efficacy of ganciclovir,
 momyiasis interna posterior in two cats and a dog.
cidofovir, penciclovir, foscarnet, idoxuridine, and
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:481-486.
acyclovir against feline herpesvirus type-l. Am J
Haesebrouck F, Devriese LA, van Rijssen B, et al.
Vet Res 2004;65:399-403.
Incidence and significance of isolation of Myco-
Maggs DJ, Collins BK, Thorne JG, Nasisse MP.
plasma felis from conjunctival swabs of cats. Vet
Effects of L-lysine and L-arginine on in vitro rep-
Microbiol 1991;26:95-101
lication of feline herpesvirus type-l. Am J Vet Res
Hartmann K, Binder C, Hirschberger J, Cole D, Rei-
2000;61:1474-1478.
nacher M, Schroo S, Frost J, Egberink H, Lutz H,
Maggs DJ, Nasisse MP, Kass PH. Efficacy of oral
Hermanns W. Comparison of different tests to
supplementation with L-lysine in (
cats lately
diagnose feline infectious peritonitis. J Vet Intern
infected with feline herpesvirus. Am J Vet Res
Med 2003;17:781-790
2003;64:37-42
Henik RA, Snyder PS, Volk LM. Treatment of
Nasisse MP, English RV, Tompkins MB, et al. Immu-
systemic hypertension in cats with amlodipine
nologic, histologic, and virologic features of her-
besylate. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;33:226-
pesvirus-induced stromal keratitis in cats. Am J
334.
Vet Res 1995;56:51-55.
Hill SL, MR, Carman J, et al. Comparison of
Nasisse MP, Guy JS, Stevens JB, et al. Clinical and
methods for estimation of Toxoplasma gondii-
laboratory hindings in chronic conjunctivitis in
specific antibody production in the aqueous
cats: 9l cases (1983-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
humor of cats. Am J Vet Res 1995;56:1181-
1993;203:834-837.
1187.
Olivero DK, Ris RC, Dutton AG, et al. Feline lens
Holland CT. Horner's syndrome and ipsilateral
displacement. A retrospective analysis of 345
 s  s i  a 
cases. Prog
g Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1991;l:
Pract 1996;37:442-446
239-244
Huss BT, Miller MA, Corwin RM, et al. Fatal cerebral
 Rand JS, Marshall RD. Diabetes mellitus in cats. Vet
coenurosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Clin N Am: Sm Anim Pract 2005;35:211-224
1994;205:69-71
Sansom J, Barnett KC, Dunn KA, et al. Ocular disease
Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, Gilger BC,
Davidson MG. Acute vision loss after general
Anim Pract 1994;35:604-611
anesthesia in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 200l;4:
 Shell LG. Feline ischemic encephalopathy (cerebral
155-158
infarct). Fel Pract 1996;24:32-33.
Ketring KL, Zuckerman EE, Hardy WD,Jr. Bartonella.
Stiles J. Treatment of cats with ocular disease attrib-
a new etiological agent of feline ocular disease. J Am
utable to herpesvirus infection: 17 cases (1983-
Anim Hosp Assoc 2004;40:6-12
1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:599-603
548 /EssentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
Stiles J, McDermott M, Bigsby D, et al. Use of nested
Glaze MB, Gossett KA, McCoy DJ, et al. A case of
polymerase chain reaction to identify feline her-
equine adnexal lymphosarcoma. Eq Vet J Suppl
pesvirus in ocular tissue from clinically normal
1990;10:83-84
cats and cats with corneal sequestra or conjuncti-
Green SL, Cochrane SM, Smith-Maxie L. Horner's
vitis. Am J Vet Res 1997;58:338-342.
syndrome in ten horses. Can Vet J 1992;33:
Stiles J, Prade R, Greene C. Detection of Toxoplasma
330-333.
gondi in feline and canine biological samples by
Hardy J, Robertson JT, Wilkie DA. Ischemic optic
use of the polymerase chain reaction. Am J Vet
 neuropathy and blindness after arterial occlusion
Res 1996;57:264-267
for treatment of guttural pouch mycosis in two
 Symonds HW, McWilliams P, Thompson H, et al. A
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;196:1631-
cluster of cases of feline dysautonomia (Key-
1634.
Gaskell syndrome) in a closed colony of cats. Vet
 Kershaw O, von Oppen T, Glitz F, Deegen E, Ludwig
Rec 1995;136:353-355
H, Borchers K. Detection of equine herpesvirus
Volopich S, Benetka V, Schwendenwein I, Mostl K,
  s ( 
Sommerfeld-Stur I, Nell B. Cytological Findings
tis. Virus Res 200l;80:93-99
and feline herpesvirus DNA and Chlamydophila
Matz K, Gerhards H, Heider HJ, et al. Bilateral blind-
felis antigen detection rates in normal cats and cats
ness after injury in a riding horse. Tierarztl Prax
with conjunctival and corneal lesions. Vet Oph-
1993;21:225-232.
thalmol 2005;8:25-32
Miller TR, Gaskin JM, Whitley RD, et al. Herpetic
Williams DL, Fitzmaurice T, Lay L, Forster K,
keratitis in a horse. Eq Vet J Suppl 1990;10:
Hefford J, Budge C, Blackmore K, Robinson JC,
15-17.
Field HF. Efhcacy of antiviral agents in feline her-
Munroe G. Survey of retinal haemorrhages in neo-
petic keratitis: results of an in vitro study. Curr
natal Thoroughbred foals. Vet Rec 2000;146:
Eye Res 2004;29:215-218.
95-101
Wyman M, Starkey R, Weisbrode S, Filko D, Grand-
 Parker JL, White KK. Lyme borreliosis in cattle and
staff R, Ferrebee E. Ophthalmomyiasis (interna
horses: a review of the literature. Cornell Vet
posterior) of the posterior segment and central
1992;82:253-274.
nervous system myiasis: Cuterebra spp. in a cat.
Patel JR, Heldens J. Equine herpesviruses l (EHV-1)
Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:77-80
 s ()  
immunoprophylaxis: a brief review. Vet J 2005;
170:14-23
Section 3
Pusterla N, Watson JL, Wilson WD, Affolter VK,
Spier SJ. Cutaneous and ocular habronemiasis in
Alexander CS, Keller H. Etiology and occurrence of
horses: 63 cases (1988-2002). J Am Vet Med
periodic eye inflammation of horses in the area of
Assoc 2003;222:978-982.
Berlin. Tierarztl Prax 1990;18:623-627
Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA, Cook CS, Latimer
Collinson PN, O'Rielly JL, Ficorilli N, et al. Isolation
CA. Congenital ocular abnormalities of Rocky
Mountain horses. Vet Ophthalmol 1999;2:47-59
pesvirus 2) from foals with keratoconjunctivitis. J
Rebhun WC, Del Piero F. Ocular lesions in horses
Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:329-331
with lymphosarcoma: 2l cases (1977-1997). J
Cullen CL, Webb AA.Ocular manifestations of sys-
Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;212:852-854.
temic disease. Part 3. The horse. In: Gelatt KN ed
Reppas GP, Hodgson DR, McClintock SA, et al.
Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA:
Trauma-induced blindness in two horses. Aust
Blackwell, 2007. 1588-1616
Vet J 1995;72:270-272
Cutler TJ. Ophthalmic findings in the geriatric horse.
Santschi EM, Vrotsos PD, Purdy AK, Mickelson JR.
Vet Clin N Am: Eq Pract 2002;18:545-574
Incidence of the endothelin receptor B mutation
Dwyer AE, Crockett RS, Kalsow CM. Association
that causes lethal white foal syndrome in white-
   as sl 
patterned horses. Am J Vet Res 200l;62:97-
uveitis and blindness in horses: 372 cases (1986-
103.
1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:1327-
Shanks G, Tabak P, Begg AP, et al. An outbreak of
1331
acute  leukoencephalomalacia associated
with
Fenger CK, Granstrom DE, Langermeier JL, et al.
fumonsin intoxication in three horses. Aust Eq
Epizootic of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
Vet 1995;13:17-18.
on a farm. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;210:923-
Simoens P, Lauwers H, DeMuelenare C, et al. Horn-
927
er's syndrome in the horse: a clinical, experimen-
OCuLar MaN1FestAtions Of SystemiC D1sease/549
tal and morphological study. Eq Vet J Suppl
lightning strike in a herd of Holstein-Friesian
1990;10:62-65.
cattle.Vet Rec 2004;154:402-404
Timoney JF. Strangles. Vet Clin North Am Eq Pract
Cullen CL, Webb AA. Ocular manifestations of sys-
1993;9:365-374
temic disease. Part 4. Food animals. In: Gelatt KN
Timoney PJ, McCollum WH. The epidemiology of
ed. Veterinary ophthalmology, 4th ed. Ames, IA:
equine viral arteritis. Vet Clin North Am Eq Pract
Blackwell, 2007. 1617-1643.
1993;9:295-309.
Erdogan HM, Cetinkaya B, Green LE, Cripps PJ,
Verhulst D, Barnett KC, Mayhew IG. Equine motor
Morgan KL. Prevalence, incidence, signs and
neuron diseases and retinal degeneration. Eq Vet
treatment of clinical listeriosis in dairy cattle in
Ed 2001;13:59-61.
England. Vet Rec 2001;149:289-293.
Wilson WD. Equine influenza. Vet Clin North Am
Levisohn S, Garazi S, Gerchman I, Brenner J. Diag-
Eq Pract 1993;9:257-282
nosis of a mixed mycoplasma infection associated
calves. J Vet Diag Invest 2004;16:579-581
Section 4
Van der Lugt J, Olivier J, Jordaan P. Status spongio-
sis, optic neuropathy, and retinal degeneration in
Boeve MH, Huijben R, Grinwis G, Djajadiningrat-
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum poisoning in sheep
Laanen SC. Visual impairment after suspected
and a goat. Vet Pathol 1996;33:495-502.
Appendix A
ADRENERGICS IN VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Adrenergics:
glaucoma drugs to decrease IOP to normal
levels. Timolol in cats produces miosis. Gener-
Topical
ally instilled 2-3 times daily. Caution in very
Causes conjunctival vasoconstriction; lowers
small dogs and cats with cardiovascular and
IOP a few mmHg: and has additive effects with
pulmonary diseases.
the parasympatholytic mydriatics. Used in
Horner's syndrome to determine the site of
Timolol (0.25-0.5%)—β- and β2- receptor
sympathetic denervation. Occasionally causes
antagonist.
irritation.
Betaxolol(0.5%)
 β-receptor antagonist.
Levobunolol
(0.5%)—β and
β-receptor
Epinephrine (1-2%) 1-2 times daily.
antagonist.
p s 7I ( Io) auauda idi
 Metipranolol
(0.6%)—nonselective
B
Systemic (IV)
antagonist.
1:1,000 to 1:10,000 in irrigating solution
(usually lactated Ringer's solution) during ante-
Alpha Agonists:
rior segment surgery for mydriasis and to assist
Apraclonidne
(0.5%)—0-agonist. In dogs
in blood clotting. Caution with halothane
causes mydriasis, variable decline in IOP, and
anesthesia.
variable decrease in heart rate. In cats causes
miosis, vomiting, decreased IOP, and decreased
Beta-Blockers (Beta Antagonists):
heart rate, and is not recommended for clinical
BH s Aq sop pue sieo ul dOI simo
use.
and usually combined with other topical anti-
551
Appendix B
ARTIFICIAL TEAR SUBSTITUTES FOR
VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Product
Viscosity Agents/
Preservative
Source
Concentration(s)
Polyvinyl Alcohol Solutions
AKWVA Tears
PVA 1.40%
BAC, EDTA
Akorn
Artificial Tears
PVA 1.40%
BAC, EDTA
Generic (many)
 Dry Eye5
PVA 1.40%
BAC, EDTA
Bausch & Lomb
 Liquifilm Forte
PVA 3%
Thimerosal, EDTA
Allergan
Liquifilrn Tears
PVA 1.40%
Chlorobutanol
Allergan
Ocu-tears PF
PVA 0.10%
None
Ocumed
Cellulose-Based Solutions
Cellufresh
CMC 0.50%
None
Allergan
Celluvisc
CMC 1%
None
 Allergan
Comfort Tears
HEC
BAC, EDTA
 Barmes-Hinds
 Isopto Alkaline
HPMC 1%
BAC, EDTA
Alcon
Isopto Tears Plain
HPMC 0.50%
BAC, EDTA
Alcon
Murocel
MC 1%
Methylparaben
Bausch & Lomb
 Propylparaben
Refresh Plus
CMC 0.50%
None
Allergan
TearGard 
HPMC 0.50%
Sorbic acid, EDTA
Med Tech
Polymer Combinations
 Adsorbotear
HEC 0.40%, Povidone 1.67%,
Thimerosal, EDTA
Alcon
Adsorbobase
Aqua Site
PEG-400 0.20%, DEX 0.10%
EDTA
Ciba
Bion Tears
DEX 0.10%. HPMC 0.30%
None
Alcon
Lacril
HPMC 0.50%. GEL 0.01%. PSB
Chlorobutanol
Allergan
Lubrifair Solution
DEX-70, HPMC
None
 Pharmafair
Lubri Tears
HPMC 0.50%. DEX 0.10%
BAC, EDTA
Bausch & Lomb
 Murine Eye Lubricant
PVA 1.40%. Povidone 0.60%
BAC, EDTA
RO55
Moisture Drops
HPMC 0.50%, DEX 0.10%. Povidone
BAC, EDTA
Bausch & Lomb
0.10%, Glycerin 0.20%
Nature's Tears
HPMC 0.40%.DEX
BAC. EDTA
Rugby
Refresh
PVA 1.40%. Povidone 0.60%
None
Allergan
Tears Naturale
HPMC 0.30%. DEX 0.10%
BAC, EDTA
Alcon
Tears Naturale Il
HPMC 0.30%, DEX-70 0.10%
POLYQUAD, EDTA
Alcon
Tears Naturale Free
HPMC 0.30%. DEX 0.10%
None
Alcon
 Tears Plus
PVA 1.40%. Povidone 0.60%
Chlorobutanol
Allergan
Tears Renewed
HPMC 0.30%. DEX-70 0.10%
BAC. EDTA
Akorn
Vasoclastic Products
Hylashield
Hylan 0.15%
None
I-Med
Hylashield Nite
Hylan 0.40%
None
I-Med
553
554 /EsSEntIALS OF VeteRiNARY OpHtHALmOLOGY
Product
Viscosity Agents/
Preservative
Source
Concentration(s)
Glycerin Products
Dry Eye Therapy
Glycerin 0.30%
None
Bausch & Lomb
Eye-Lube-A
Glycerin 0.25%
BAC. EDTA
Optoptics
Ointments
AKVWA Tears Ointrment 
White petrolatum, MO
None
 Akom
Dry Eyes
White petrolatum, MO
None
Bausch & Lomb
Duolube
White petrolatum 80%, MO 20%
None
Bausch & Lomb
 Duratears Naturale
White petrolatum, lanolin, MO
None
Alcon
Hypo Tears 
White petrolatum 85%, lanolin, MO 15%
None
lolab
Lacri-Lube
White petrolatum 55%, lanolin, MO
Chlorobutanol
Allergan
41.50%
Lacri-Lube NP
White petrolatum 55%, lanolin, MO
None
Allergan
42.50%
Lacri-Lube S.O.P.
White petrolatum 55%, MO 41.50%. 2%
Chlorobutanol
 Allergan
 nonionic lanolin derivatives
Lipotears
White petrolatum, MO
None
Coopervision
Lubri Tears
White petrolatum, lanolin, MO
Chlorobutanol
Bausch & Lomb
Ocutube
White petrolatum
Methylparaben
Ocumed
 Paralube
White petrolatum, lanolin 2%, MO
None
Fourgera
Refresh PM
White petrolatum 56.80%, lanolin, MO
None
 Allergan
41.50%
BAC = benzalkonium chloride 
CMC = carboxyrmethyl cellulose
DEX = dextran
EDTA = ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
GEL = gelatin
HEC = hydroxyethy cellulose
HPMC = hydroxypropyl methylcelulose 
MC = methylcellulose
MO = mineral oil
PEG = polyethylene glycol
POLYQUAD = polyquaternium-1
PSB = polysorbate 80
PVA = polyvinyl alcohol
* Percentage composition given where information available
Appendix C
TOPICAL AND LOCAL ANESTHETICS FOR
VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Topical: Administer l-2 drops/eye. Repeat
Local/injectable: Used for auricuopalpebral
instillations not recommended.
(l ml [small animals] to 5ml [horse and cow])
and retrobulbar nerve blocks (20-30ml for
 Produce surface anesthesia of the conjunctiva
horse and cow).
and cornea within l0-20 seconds and for a
duration of 15-20 minutes. Multiple drops
The addition of 1:200,000 epinephrine pro-
may increase duration but not depth within
longs anesthetics' action. The addition of
the eye tissues. Less effective in inflamed
hyaluronidase (15,000 IU/100 mL) increases
 eyes probably because of edema.
local tissue
infiltration by the local
May cause local irritation and corneal epithelial
anesthetic.
toxicity, and may reduce tear production by
Lidocaine
up to 50%. Generally avoid before bacterial
Mepivacaine
culturing of the cornea and conjunctiva. Use
only for diagnostics.
Bupivacaine (longer acting)
Tetracaine (0.5%). More irritating (usually
Proparacaine (0.5%)
555
Appendix D
ANTIBIOTICS FOR VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
A. Frequently used topical antibiotics:*
Chloramphenicol (avoid in food animals)
Ciprofloxacin
 Fusidic acid
Gentamycin 
Neomycin-Polymyxin B- Gramicidin combinations
Neomycin- Polymyxin b- Bacitracin
Terramycin (often used in cats for Chiamydia sp. and Mycoplasma sp.)
 Tobramycin
* Availability may vary by country.
Administered 2 to 12 times daily. depending on the ophthalmic disease.
B. Selection on initial antibiotics on the basis of smear morphology.
Grams' Stain
Suggested Antibiotics
!0 +5
Topical 500 U/g bacitracin, 0.5% chloramphenicol, 0.3% gentamicin, or 0.3% ciprofloxacin
Subconjunctival cefazolin or cephaloridine (100 mg)
G+ Rods
Topical 0.5% chloramphenicol, 1.4% gentamcin or 1.4% tobramycin, 0.5% erythromycin
Subconjunctival gentaimicin (20-40 mg)
o -5
Topical penicillin G (100,000 U/ml), 0.3% ciprofloxacin, or 500 U/g bacitracin
G- Rods
Topical 1.0%- 1.4% gentamicin, 1.4% tobramycin, 0.3% ciprofloxacin, 0.3% norfloxacin, 0r
0.3% ofloxacin
Subconjunctival gentamicin or tobramycin (20 to 40 mg)
557
558 /ESSENTIALS OF VeteRINARY OPHtHALmOLOGY
C. Concentrated or Fortified Antibiotics for Topical Ophthalmic Use.'
Antibiotic'
Concentrations of Commercial
Concentrations of Formulated
Shelf-Life
EyeSolutions
EyeSolutions
Amikacin
N/A2
10 mg/mL
sAep OE
Carbenicillin
N/A
4-8 mg/mL
sAep E
Cefazolin
N/A
50 mg/mL 
4 days
Gentamicin
14 mg/mL
30 days
I Used primarily for infected cormeal ulceration5.
2 N/A, drug not available in an ophthalmic formulation.
D. Suggested Dosages of Subconjunctival Antibiotics.*
Antibiotic
Dosage(mg)
 Amikacin
25-125
Ampicillin 
50-100
Carbenicillin
100
Cephalotin
100
Cefazolin
100
Gentamicin
10-40
Methicillin 
20-100
Tobramycin
20-40
Vancomycin
25
*Inject only once or twice into the dorsal bulbar subconjunctival tissues. Limmit volume of injection to 0.25 ml to
0.5 ml/site.
Appendix E
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS FOR VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY (TO TREAT FHV-1 OCULAR
INFECTIONS)
Drug*
Manufacturer
Vehicle
Mechanism of Action
Recommended
Dosage
Topical Drugs:
Must be compounded 0.1% Ointment
 Competes with thymidine
Ointment -5 tirmes
for incorporation into
daily
viral DNA, producing a
2.5% Solution
defective genome
Every 2 hours
Adenine 
Must be compounded
 3.0% Ointment Inhibits viral DNA
 5 times daily
arabinoside
polymerase
Trifluorothymidine 
 Burroughs Wellcome
1.0% Solution
Competes for
Hourly the first day.
(trifluridine)
incorporation into viral
then reducing to 5
DNA to inhibit viral
times daily
mRNA
Anunos Aq Aien Aeu Aqeee bnu 
559
Appendix F
ANTIFUNGALS FOR VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Agent
Dose
Spectrum (sp.)
TOPICAL:
 Natamycin
Topical: 5% suspension
Fusarium
Candida
Aspergillus
Cephalosporium
Penicillium
Miconazole
Topical: 1 % (IV) solution
Candida
Subconjunctival injection,
Aspergillus
5-10 mg
Fusanium
Mucor
Penicillium
 Nystatin 
Topical:ointment( 100,000 mg)
Aspergillus
Candida
Ketaconazole
Topical: 2% solution
Candida
Amphotericin B
Topical: 2.5-10.0 mg/mL in 5% dextrose solution
Candida
Subconjunctival: 750 mg/mL in dextrose every other day
Blastomyces
Coccidioides
Histoplasma
Flucytosine
Topical: 1% solution
Candida
Cryptococcus
Topical antifungal agents are generally fungiostatic and are administered 6 to 8 times daily for several weeks.
Also see chapter 12 (Equine Ophthalmology)
SYSTEMIC:
Horse: Generally administered for 4 to 6 weeks and very expensive. Efficacy undetermined.
Ketoconazole, 30 mg/kg orally once or twice a day.
Fluconazole, 4 mg/kg orally, once a day.
Thiabendazole, 44 mg/kg orally once a day. and
traconazole, 3 mg/kg orally twice a day.
Dog:
Generally administered for several months; recurrences are not infrequent.
Amphotericin-B, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV every 48 hrs for a cumulative dose of 4-6 mg/kg
traconazole, 5 mg/kg orally twice per day for 5 days, then once daily for approximately 90 days.
561
Appendix G
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS (CAI) FOR
THE DOG
RecommendedDosage
Effects on intraocular Pressure (hours)
Mean Onset
Maximum
Decrease
Duration
Systemic (mg/kg):
Single dose studies:
 Acetazolamide
10
19
8+
Dichlophenamide
5
1
8
15
+8
10
3
24
8
Ethoxzolamide
5
7
5
17
8
7.5
2
20
8+
Methazolamide
5
6
28
8+
7.5
29
8+
Topical: 2-3x daily
Dorzolamide (2%)
Brinzolamide (1%)
Recommended clinical doses for the dog:
azolamide (10-25 mg/kg) lowers IOP for 5+
Acetazolamide: 10 mg/kg 2-3 times daily;
hours.
Dichlorphenamide: 2-5 mg/kg 2-3 times
daily;
Topical CAIs have generally replaced systemic
Methazolamide: 2.5-5 mg/kg 2-3 times daily;
CAls in man, because of serious side effects.
Ethoxzolamide:
4.0-7.5 mg/kg
2-3
times
The topical CAls seem as effective as the sys-
daily.
temic forms when instilled 2 or 3 times daily.
In dogs and cats the topical CAIs are adminis-
Cats seem not to tolerate the systemic CAIs
tered 2 to 3 times daily. Controlled studies are
long-term. In the cat dichlorphenamide (0.5-
limited, but three administrations daily seem
2.0 mg/kg) reduces IOP for 4+ hours, and acet-
most effective.
563
Appendix H
CORTICOSTEROIDS IN VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
A. Topical corticosteroids.
Dogs: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg orally once daily (anti
inflammatory dose); 2.2 mg/kg orally once
Eyelid/nasolacrimal/conjunctival diseases: 2.5 %
daily (immunosuppressant);
hydrocortisone and 0.25-0.5% predniso-
Cats: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg orally once daily (anti-
lone recommended. Use often as antibiotic/
corticosteroid combinations. Administer 2
daily (immunosuppressant);
to 4 times daily.
Horse: 0.5-l.0 mg/kg orally or IM once
Cornea/iris/ciliary   body (
diseases:
Generally
daily.
 stronger steroids and those with good corneal
penetration recommended: 1% predniso-
B. Depot Glucocorticoids for Subconjuncti-
lone; 0.1% dexamethasone; and 0.1% beta-
val Administration. Generally used for severe
methasone. Administer 4 to 6 times daily.
-  '   
Retina/choroid/optic nerve diseases: Systemic
tis, and scleritis. Only one injection recom-
 route most important. Prednisolone usually
mended weekly or biweekly.
used:
bnud
Dosage (mg per eye)
Cats
Small & Medium Dogs
Large Dogs
Horses
Methylprednisolone acetate
4
4-8
8-12
40
Triamcinolone acetonide 
4
4-8
8-12
40
Betamethasone sodium phosphate plus acetate
0.75
0.75-1.5
2
15
Dexamethasone acetate
0.75
0.75-1.5
2
15
565
Appendix 1
NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS
(NSAIDS) IN VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Route/agent*
indications/use
Topical:
0.03 % flurbiprofen
Indications- to prevent synthesis of prostaglandins
0.1% diclofenac
and breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier. To prevent
1.0% indomethacin
 and maintain miosis after anterior charmber during
 0.5% ketorolacromethamine
paracentesis and intraocular surgery. Can slow or prevent
1.0% suprofen
cormeal vascularization.
Systemic:
 flunixin megumine
Dog only: 0O.2 mg/kg IV irmmediately before cataract surgery.
Horse: 0.25-1.0 mg/kg orally twice a day
carprofen
Dog only: 0.5 mg/kg 2 tines daily orally
phenylbutazone
Horse only. 1 g IV or orally twice a day.
 aspirin
Horse only: 25 mg/kg orally twice a day.
*Availability may vary by country
567
Appendix J
HYPEROSMOTICS FOR VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Topical: To decrease temporarilycorneal
postadministration and lasts for at least
edema; often irritating. Usually administer two
to four times daily or to effect.
5.5 hrs. Considerable diuresis may result.
Caution or avoid in older patients with car-
 2-5% NaCl ointment
diovascular diseases.
2-5% NaCl solution
Glycerin: 1-2 gm/kg PO. In the dog the IOP
40% glucose solution
begins to decline l.0 hr postingestion and
100% anhydrous glycerin ointment
remains low for lo hours. Frequently vomit-
ing postadministration (solution's taste, tem-
Systemic: To lower intraocular pressure and
perature, and dose are important). Avoid in
reduce the size of the vitreous body.* Usually
diabetic patients as will increase blood
administered only once or twice.
glucose levels. Limited diuresis.
Mannitol: 1-2 gm/kg IV over 10-20 minutes.
In the dog the IOP begins to decrease 0.5 hr
*Effect on IOP and vitreous body with osmotic agents is less in inflamed eyes (because of altered
blood-aqueous barrier).
569
Appendix K
MIOTICS IN THE DOG AND CAT
Miotics'
Miosis
1OP
Single Dose
Fime of
Duration
Minimum
Time of
Duration
Mean 1OP
Effects2
Onset
Pupil Size
Onset
Decreases
Dogs
Pilocarpine
 45 Minutes
>6 Hours
1.5mm
3 Hours
>6 Hours
5-10mmHg
Solution
1% 3
Filocarpine
30 Minutes
>6 Hours
1.0mm
1 Hour
>6 Hours
 5-15mmHg
Solution
2%3
Filocarpine
30 Minutes
>6 Hours
1.0mm
 45 Minutes
>6 Hours
5-15mmHg
Solution
4% 3
Filocarpine
30 Minutes
16 Hours
2.0-5.0mm
1 Hour
24 Hours
4-8mmHg
Gel 4%
Pilocarpine
1 Hour
>8 Hours
2.0mm
1 Hour
>8 Hours
18-22 mmHg
2%&
 Epinephrine
1%
 Pilocarpine
 45 Minutes
>8 Hours
1.5mm
1 Hour
>8 Hours
18-22 mrmHg
4%&
 Epinephrine
1%
Carbachol
15 Minutes
>8 Hours
1.5 mm
45 Minutes
>8 Hours
2-4mmHg
Solution
1.5%
Carbachol
15 Minutes
>8 Hours
1.0-1.5mm
15 Minutes
>8 Hours
 5-7mmHg
Solution3%
 Demecarium
1 Hour
49-55 Hours
0.5mm
1 Hour
49-51 Hours
9-13mmHg
Bromide
0.125%
Demecarium
1 Hour
53-77 Hours
0.5 mm
1 Hour
55 Hours
10-20mmHg
Bromide
0.25%
Echothiophate
1 Hour
49-51 Hours
0.5mm
1 Hour
25-49 Hours
10-13mmHg
lodide
0.125%
Echothiophate
1 Hour
53-55 Hours
0.5 mm
1 Hour
51-53 Hours
10-13 mmHg
lodide 0.25%
571
572/ESSENTIALS OF VETERINARY OFHTHALMOLOGY
Miotics'
Miosis
10P
Single Dose
Time of
Duration
Minimum
Time of
Duration
Mean 1OP
Effects2
Onset
Pupil Size
Onset
Decrease'
Cats
Pilocarpine
30 Minutes
>12 Hours
4.5mm
2 Hours
>12 Hours
DHWWE-Z
Solution 2% *
Auno Aq Ae Ae snp asau jo Aee
2 Clinical dose of these drugs may vary, and is based on the extent of the IOp is lowered, butfor topical pilocarpine
and carbachol is usually 2 to 3 times daily and for demecarium and echothiophate is usually 1 to 2 times daily
3Causes irritation, i.e. conjunctival hyperemia, blepharospasm, tearing. and mild aqueous flare, which appears 
related to the pH of the commerical solutions.
4 Reduction in intraocular pressure (IOP) in both mmHg and % varies depending on the type of glaucorma and level
of IOP before drug administration.
Appendix L
AVAILABLE MYDRIATICS OR PUPIL DILATING
AGENTS IN VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY1
A. The dog:
Time until
Drug'
Maximum
Duration (Hours)
Extent of Dilation
Dilation (Hours)
Parasympatholytics
1% Atropine2
1.0
96-120
Maximal
4% Atropine2
0.75
96-120
Maximal
0.25% Scopolamine3
0.75
96-120
 Maximal
1% Cyclopentolate
0.75
60
Maximal
1% Tropicamide4
0.5
12
Maximal
2% Homatropine
0.75
48
Moderate
5% Homatropine
0.75
48
Moderate
Sympathomimetics
10% Phenylephrines
2.0
12-18
Maximal
0.1% Epinephrine
None
1% Epinephrine
1.0
6
 Maximal
2% Epinephrine
0.75
6
Moderate
1 Generally adrninistered 2 to 4 tirmes daily, but best to effect (onset and duration of mydriasis) to reduce the po5-
sibility of adverse effects
2Topical atropine because of its bitter taste may induce salivation in puppies and smaller sizes of adult dogs (usually
Occurs very soon after drug solution administration). Topical atropine may also reduce the rate of tear forrmation
sounfuosoieiay Aieiodwal anpu! ueo uoonpoid ieat leuibiew ynm shop u! pue 'shop jewmou ul %os Ao
 sicca. Hence, measurerment of tear forrmation by the Schirmner's tear test during topical atropine therapy is recom-
mended. A substitute drug is 1 % tropicamide.
3Scopolamine (0.25%) combined with 10% phenylephrine is a very strong mydriatic combination and is used to
aeiuoauis joansod (uoeinp yaam l ueu ssal Aensn) juasan umop yeain
4 1 % tropicamide is the recommended mydriatic for the routine eye exarnination (because of its rapid onset and
short duration of mydraisis). Its bitter taste can cause occasional salivation in puppies. Incomplete or slow onset
of mmydriasis after 1 % tropicamide often suggests anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis.
$ Phenylephrine (10%) is a very weak mydriatic in the dog. But it is additive in promoting rnydraisis with many
other of the parasympatholytic mydriatics in inflamed eyes. It is also used as the 2.5% solution in the determina-
tion of sympathetic denervation in Hormer's syndrome
573
574 /EsSentiAlS Of Veterinary OpHthalmoLoGY
B. The cat. l.2
Time until
Drug
Maximum
Duration (Hours)
Extent of Dilation
Dilation (Hours)
Parasympatholytics
1% Atropine?
1.0
60
Maximal
4% Atropine
0.5
144
Maximal
1% Cyclopentolate
0.5
66
 Maximal
2% Cyclopentolate
0.5
108
 Maximal
0.5% Tropicamide
0.75
8-9
Maximal
1% Tropicamide4
0.75
8-9
Maximal
 2% Homatropine
0.75
7
Moderate
Sympathomimetics
10% Phenylephrines
None
2% Epinephrine
None
Parasympathotytic/sympathomimeticcombinations
1% Atropine/10% phenylephrine
1.0
120
Maximal
1% Cyclopentolate/10% phenylephrine
0.5
108
 Maxiral
2% Homatropine/10% phenylephrine
1.0
24
Moderate
1 Mydriatics (mainly 1% atropine ointment) are administered 2 to 4 times daily in cats with anterior uveitis. Once
pupillary dilation occurs, the frequency of atropine may be reduced to once daily or once every other day.
2The different colors of the cat's iris probably affect the onset and duration of mydriatics. The blue irides may be 
more sensitive with a more rapid onset and shorter duration (due to drug's affinity to melanin).
3 Ophthalmic solutions of atropine commonly induce salivation in cats (because of its bitter taste and its passage
down the nasolacrimal system and contact with the cat's tongue). Hence, 1% atropine ointrment is usually
recommended.
4 Tropicamide (1%) is recommended for mydriasis for the routine ophthalmic examination. Slow or incomplete
mydriasis suggests anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis.
5.6 Both (2.5% and 10%) phenylephrine and (1-2%) epinephrine are weak nydriatics in cats but are additive to
the parasympatholytic mydriatics. They are also used in the diagnosis of Homer's syndrome and for bilateral nicti-
 tating mernbrane protrusions in young cats.
C. The cow:'
Time until
Drug
Maximum
Dilation(Hours)
Extent of Dilation
Duration (Hours)
Parasympatholytics
1% Atropine2
0.75
24
Moderate
3% Atropine
2
168
Maximal
0.25% Scopolamine
2
144
Maximal
1% Cyclopentolate
12
48
Moderate
2% Cyclopentolate
12
96
Maximal
0.5% Tropicamide
3
E
Moderate
1% Tropicamide?
3
8
Moderate
2% Homatropine
2
48
Moderate
Sympathomimetics
10% Phenylephrine4
None
Parasympatholytic/sympathomimeticcombinations
1% Atropine/10% phenylephrine
2
24
Moderate
1Mydriatics (usually 1% atropine solution or ointrnent) are adrninistered 2-4 tirmes daily or to effect (maintain
mydriasis)
2 1 % atropine is the preferred mydriatic for anterior uveitis in cattle (because of its costs and availability)
3 1% tropicamide is recormmended for nydriasis for the routine ophthalmic examination in cattle, because of its
short onset and brief duration of action
4 10% phenylephrine is a very weak mydriatic in cattle, but is additive to the parasympatholytic agents. It is also
used in the diagnosis of Homer's syndrome.
APPEN01xL/575
D. The horse.
Time until
Drug
Time until Maximum
Duration (Hours)
Extent ofDilation
Dilation (Hours)
Parasympatholytics
1% Atropine2
10
132
Maxirmal
3% Atropine
12
264
 Maximal
0.25% Scopolamine?
4
108
Maxirmal
1% Cyclopentolate
12
96
 Maximal
2% Cyclopentolate
12
120
 Maxiral
0.5% Tropicamide
1
 Maximal
1% Tropicamide4
5
12
Maxirmal
2% Homatropine
E
8
Moderate
Sympathomimetics
10% Phenylephrine
None
Parasympatholytic/sympathomimetic combinations
1% Atropine/10% phenylephrine
84
 Maximal
1 Mydriatics are used frequently in horses because of anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis. They are usually adrninistered
2 to 4 times daily. but best used to effect (to maintain mydriasis).
 2Of the domestic species, the horse appears most sensitive to topical mydriatics, especially 1% atropine (they may
reduce gut motility and even colic). Hence, daily monitoring of fecal output, gut sounds, and mydriasis of the
saod leunsanuionse papuaoai s! (uodliosqe oass io uoep Aednd io aa moa io asodco
can cause cassation of topical atropine use! Topical atropine in foals may produce acute salivation (due to its bitter
taste, passage down the nasolacrimal system, and contact with the foal's tongue)
3Scopolanine (0.25%) combined with 10% phenylephrine is a very strong mydriatic cormbination for the horse.
It may be instilled hourly for 4 to 6 times to attempt to break down posterior synechiae (less than 1 to 2 weeks
duration). Generally this intense treatment period is attempted only once. Monitoring of the Gl tract function is a
must!
 4 1% tropicamide is recormmended for the routine ophthalmic exarmination because of its rapid onset and short
duration of mydriasis.
E. Birds.*
Agent
Recommendations
D-tubocurarine
Topical instillation of solution of 3 mg tubocurarine powder per 1 ml of NaCl
solution with 0.025% benzalkonium chloride 3 to 4 times over 20 minute5.
Vecuronium bromide
E joy satnuiw sl Aana sdoip z se uanb jwybw t) sjansay u! siseipAw saonpoid
instillations to only one eye (concern about systemic absorption if both eyes dilated)
Ketamine and xylazine
IM short-acting anesthetic combination produces variable mydriasis. Ketamine (10-
15 mg/kg) and xylazine (1-2 mg/kg)
*Birds have striated iridal rmuscles that control pupil size; paralysis of these muscles by neuroparalytic drugs pro-
duces mydriasis.
The serious complications of these drugs are
unilateral instillation and less systemic drug
variable effects on the systemic musculature
absorption). Hence, often only one eye receives
(eyelid paralysis; limb and neck paralysis;
these drugs. See pp 1383-1384 in the fourth
breathing problems). Dilation of both eyes has
edition for additional information.
a greater chance of inducing side effects (than
Appendix M
TOPICAL PROSTAGLANDINS FOR VETERINARY
OPHTHALMOLOGY (INFORMATION IS FOR DOG
ONLY*)
Drug
Time of Instillation
Miosis (hrs)
Intraocular pressure decline (hrs)
Latanoprost (0.005%)
AM
2-8+
2-8+
PM
12-20+
12-20+
AM&PM
2-22+
2-22+
Travoprost (0.004%)
AM
2-8+
2-8+
PM
12-20+
12-20+
AM&PM
2-22+
2-22+
Bimatoprost (0.03%)
AM
2-8+
2-8+
PM
12-20+
12-20+
AM&PM
2-22+
2-22+
Unoprostone (0.15%)
AM
2-8+
2-8+
PM
2-20+
12-20+
AM&PM
2-22+
2-22+
aam (Apns bujuow) we ayn ioy siuawainseaw dol pue lidnd sapns ajbeag snoiewoonejb woy s! eieox
yhnoiyn puosas ayn uo stuawainseau weg ayn latje palmsu! ypuejbeisoid ynm wdt pue wdz 'uoou 'weol'weg
5 days. Pupil and Iop measurements for the pm (aftermoon study) were the same times but drug instillations were
woy Wdg pue Wvg ie palmnsu! sem upuejbeisoid 'Apns Aiep aoiml ay los 't Aep yonoyn 1 Aep woiy wdg e
days 2 through 5 (day 5 received only 8AM instillation)
Twice daily instillations of prostaglandins were most successful in lowering lOP with the less diurnal variations daily
in the dog. Unoprostone is less effective than the other three prostaglandins and should be instilled twice daily.
Based on current reports, topical prostaglandins are not recommended for the horse and cat.
577
Appendix N
OTHER OPHTHALMIC DRUGS
Drug
Indications/use
1. Stains:
Huorescein: Solution and impregnated paper strip. Use for cormeal ulcers; nasolacrimal patency.
Used to measure tear film breakup times (BUT).
10% solution (IV) for fluorescein angiography and blood-aqueous barrier studies.
Rose Bengal: Solution and impregnated paper strip. Used to identify damaged cormeal and conjunctival
epithelium. In cats for feline herpesvirus micro-ulcers; and dogs for early keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
2 Viscoelastics: Highly viscous fluids that are injected during intraocular surgery to physically separate tissues;
facilitate sliding of intraocular lens (IOL): inflate the anterior chamber for phacoemulsification, anterior
and posterior capsulorhexis, and during repair of full-thickness cormeal lacerations with inis prolapse
Agents include: sodium hyaluronate, sodium chondroitin sulfate combined with sodium hyaluronate.
and hydroxypropylrnethylcellulose.
3. Antifibrin fomation: Use heparin 1-2 IU/mL in irrigating solution (usually lactated Ringer's solution) to
Aabins einsoenu buunp jaqueyo iouanue au u uoewoy uug!y aauu
4. Fibrinolysis: 25-40 μg tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). When injected, causes fibrinolysis in the
anterior chamber. Fibrin must be recent (up to 10-14 days). Use for hypopyon, hyphema, and early
nooo Aew spaalg-an uanan Aan si buoip j asn jou oa spueis uug aaeiado-isod
 5. Tissue (butylcyanoacrylate) glue. Used to treat corneal ulcerations. For success 1) carefully debride all non-
viable corneal tissue; 2) stabilize eye and dry ulcer site with cotton swabs and/or hair dryer; 3) carefully
lal (t pue (iaAel yp!yn e Aldde jou op) alpaau pjuuapodAy b-oe e buisn anjb jo laAel uun AiaA e peaics
the glue completely dry to prevent accidental contact with the eyelids. Dried glue will slough
spontaneously in 7-14 days.
6. Ethylenediamine tetra-acetate (EDTA). Used to chelate calcium. Probably does not penetrate the intact
cormeal epithelium. Use as 0.1-1.0% solution or ointment.
7. Anti-fibrotics: Chermotherapeutic drugs used intra- and post-operatively after glaucoma surgeries to prevent
dosure of filtering tissues and stents. Includes: 0.2-0.4 mg mitomycin (applied by surgical sponges
drectly to the surgical site), and 5-fluorouracil or 5-Fu injections (total
dose of 20-40 mg by subconjunctival injection).
579
Appendix O
INHERITED EYE DISEASES IN THE DOG
581
me
svndro
sibo
Microphthaimi
Defe
odermator
Defec
5
er
Eye
Wictitans
Cornea!
Eyelid
nes
 Afghan Hound 
Airedale Temier
Akita
Alaskan Malarmute
American 
Staffordshire Terrier
Australian Cattle
Dog?
Australian Shepherd
Basenji
Basset Griffon
Vendeen, Petite
Basset Hound
Beaglee
Bearded Collie
Bedlington Terrier
Belgian Malinois
 Belgian Sheepdog
Belgian Tervuren 
Bermese Mountain
Dog
Bichon Frise
Bloodhound
Border Collie
Borzoi
Boston Terrier
Bouvier Des Flandres
Boxer
Briardd
Brittany
Brussels Griffon
Bulldog (English)
V
 Bullmn astiff
√
Caim Terrier
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
√
Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel
582
RPE Dystrophy (CPRA)e
Lenticular
Retinal Degeneration
loboma, ± Retina!
Optic Nerve Defects'
Luxation
Detachment
583
me
svndro
5
yibo
cts2
Defe
Defec
5
Microphth
er
10
Eye
001
+
Cornea!
Eyelid
Wictita
口
Ga
 Chesapeake Bay Retriever
√
Chihuahua
Chinese Shar Pei
Chow Chow
Clumber Spaniel
Cocker Spaniel
(American)
Collie
√
Curly-Coated Retriever
Dachshund
Dalrnatiana
V
 Doberman Pinscher
J
English Cocker Spaniel
English Springer Spaniel
√
English Toy Spaniel
Field Spaniel 
Flat-Coated Retriever
V
Gemman Shepherd 
?
Genman Shorthaired 
Pointer 
Golden Retriever
Gordon Setter
Great Dane
J
√
Greyhound
Havanese
Irish Setter 
V
lrish Wolfhound
Italian Greyhound
Jack Russell Terrier
Japanese Chin
Labrador Retriever
Lakeland Terrier
Lhasa Apso
Lowchen 
Mastiff
√
Miniature Bull Terrier
584
RPE Dystrophy (CPRA)a
Retina
Retinal Degeneratior
Optic Nerve Defects?
Retinal Dysplasia'
Luxation
loboma, ±
Detachment
V
V
V
585
me
svndro
5
yibo
cts2
Microphthaimi
Defe
Defec
5
er
10
Eye
Wictitans
+
Cornea!
Eyelid
口
Ga
Miniature Pinscher
Miniature Schnauzer
Newfoundland
Norbottenspets
Norwegian Elkhound
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
V
Retriever
 Old English Sheepdog
Papillon 
Pekingese
Permbroke Welsh Corgi
V
Poodle (all)
√
Portuguese Water Dog
Pug
√
Rottweiler
Saint Bermard
V
Samoyed
V
J
Scottish Tenrier
Sealyharn Terrier
Shetland Sheepdog
√
Shih Tzu 
Siberian Husky
J
Smooth Fox Terrier
Soft-Coated Wheaten
Terrier
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
J
(English)
 Standard Schnauzer
Tibetan Spaniel
Tibetan Temier
Weimaraner
Welsh Springer Spaniel
V
West Highland Wwhite
J
Terrier
Whippet
Wire Fox Terrier
Yorkshire Terrier
586
RPE Dystrophy (CPRA)
Retina!
Retinal Degeneration
Optic Nerve Defects?
Luxation
loboma, ±
Detachment
V
√
√
V
V
√
587
Australian Shepherd- & Dalrmatian-specific disorder: ceroid lipofuscinosis
'Beagle-specific disorder: tapetal degeneration
Bedlington Terrier-specific disorder: irmperforate lacrimal punctum
dBriard-specific disorder: congenital stationary night blindness 
* Golden Retriever-specific disorders: iris cysts, pigmentary uveitis
' Includes: ciliated caruncle, distichiasis, ectopic cilia, ectropion, macroplepharon, & entropion
2 Includes: eversion/prolapse of 3rd eyelid gland
3Includes: comeal dystrophy—endothelial, endothelial erosion, stromal, & posterior polymorphou5
4 Includes: persistent pupillary membranes, persistent hyaloid artery, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PH PV)
& persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis (PHTVL)
 Includes: retinal dysplasia: folds, geographic, & detatched
Includes: retinal atrophy—generalized & rod/cone dysplasia type 2 (rcd2), retinal degeneration, day blindnes5
/ Includes: optic nerve—coloboma & hypoplasia
8Includes: retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy or central progressive retinal atrophy
588
Appendix P
INHERITED EYE DISEASES IN THE CAT
Breed
Ophthaimic Disease
 Abyssinian
Early onset progressive retinal atrophy, late-onset progresive retinal atrophy
Birman
 Derrmoids, cataracts
Burmese
Dermoids, congenital nictitans gland enlargernent
Hirnalayan
Epiphora, cataracts
Korat
GM,- and GMz-gangliosidosis
Persian
Multiple ocular anomalies, epiphora, entropion, iridal heterochroria, cataracts, retinal atrophy.
α-mannosidase
Shorthair
Multiple ocular anomalies, demmoids, cataracts, GM,- and GMz-gangliosidosis, c-mannosidosis.
mucopolysaccharidosis 1
Siarmese
 Esotropia, nystagmus, iridal heterochromia, glaucoma, GM-gangliosidosis, mucopolysaccharidosis
VI
589
Appendix Q
BREED-RELATED EYE DISEASE IN THE HORSE
Appaloosa
Paso Fino
Congenital stationary night blindness
 Congenital stationary night blindness
Congenital cataracts
Glaucoma
Glaucoma
American Saddlebred
ERU
Cataracts
 Optic disc colobomas
Esotropia
SCC
 Aggressive keratomycosis
Arabian
Warmbloods
Congenital cataracts
Glaucoma
Vitiligo
ERU
 Atropine sensitivity
Rocky Mountain Horse (chocolate coat color
 Belgian draf horse
most often affected)
 Aniridia and secondary cataracts
 Anterior segment dysgenesis: collectively the
SCC
cornea, iris, and ciliary body lesions are
Morgan
termed anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD)
Cataracts: nuclear, bilateral, symmetrical, and
Congenital miosis, and corpora nigra and iris
nonprogressive
hypoplasia
Macrocornea
Quarter Horse
Ciliary body cysts (temporal)
Congenital cataracts
Cataract, lens luxation
 Entropion
Retinal dysplasia, retinal detachment
Thoroughbred
Miniature Horses
Congenital cataracts
Upper lid entropion
Microphthalmia associated with multiple ocular
Connemara Pony
defects
 Retinal dysplasia associated with retinal detach-
Anterior segment dysgenesis
ments in some cases
Mules
Entropion
Aggressive sarcoid
Color-dilute breeds
Misplaced nasolacrimal puncta
 Iridal hypoplasia (photophobia)
 Strabismus
SCC
Haflinger
SCC predisposed
Standardbred
Retinal detachments
Lippizzaners
Congenital stationary night blindness
Sarcoid resistant
591
Appendix R
INHERITED EYE DISEASES IN FOOD ANIMALS
Cattle:
 Aberdeen Angus
Osteopetrosis, mannosidosis
Ayrshire
Heterochromia iridis, porphyria, nystagmus
Beef Master
Neuronal lipodystrophy
Brown Swiss
Supermumerary lacrimal drainage openings. multiple ocular anomalies
Charolais
Posterior segment/optic disc colobomata
Devon
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
Guemsey
Heterochromia iridis, multiple ocular anomalies, nystagmus
Hereford
Iridal heterochromia, optic disc coloboma with incomplete albinism, dermoids,
cataracts, retinal dysplasia and hydrocephalus, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, squamous
cell carcinoma
 Holstein-Friesian
Cataracts, gangliosidosis, heterochromia iridis, nystagmus, cormeal edema, porphyria
glaucoma
Jersey
Strabismus, cataracts, multiple ocular anomalies, nystagmus
Shorthom
Cormeal edema, strabismus, exophthalmia, cataracts, retinal dysplasia and
hydrocephalus, ponphryia, glycogen storage disease-type Il
Sheep:
 Many breeds
Entropion, upper eyelid coloboma
Corriedale
Il adkt saseasip abeiois laboskqb 'll adk aseasip abeiois apisoigaiasosni
South Hampshire
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
New Zealand Rormney
Cataracts
Swine:
 Breeds with white hair
Heterochroria irides
Sinclair mniniature
Cutaneous melanomas/uveitis
Yorkshire
Cerebrospinal lipodystrophy, glucocerebroside storage disease
593
GLOSSARY
1. Common ophthalmic roots:
10. Aphakia—absence of the lens.
1. blepharo—lid
1l. Aphakic crescent—area of the pupil
2. cor—pupil
not covered by a luxated or displaced
3. cyclo—ciliary body
lens.
4. dacryo—tears
12. Aqueous flare—aqueous humor with
5. hyal—vitreous
increased levels of proteins. Best dem-
 6. hyp—anterior chamber 
-id ueaq l looj e q pesu
7. iridoiris
jected across the anterior chamber or
8. kerato—cornea
by a commercial laser flaremeter
9. ophthalmo—globe or eye
13. Asteroid
1 hyalosisCalcium
lipid
10. papilla—optic disc
bodies/opacities  suspended  in  the
11. phako/phacolens
vitreous.
14. Bergmeister's papilla—remnants of
II1. Common words
 posterior hyaloid artery appearing as
1. Ablation—-Removal of globe or part of
 small white projection from the center
the eye (as destruction of the ciliary
of the optic disk's surface.
body)
15. Bernard—Horner Syndrome
(com-
2. Ablepharon—-Partial or complete con-
monly called Horner's syndrome)
 genital absence of the eyelids.
ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos, and
3. Accommodation—Changes
in
the
protrusion of the nictitating mem-
shape (and power) of the lens for
brane (also regional sweating in the
seeing near objects. Limited in the
horse).
domestic species.
16. Biomicroscopy—Microscopic exami-
4. Amaurosis—Total loss of vision.
nation
of
the
various
ocular
5. Amblyopia—Reduced or partial loss
structures
of sight without detectable lesions in
17.
 Blepharitis-
-Inflammation
of
the
 the eye and optic nerve.
eyelids. May be diffuse or focal
6. Aniridia—Iris is absent clinicallyl
18.
 Blepharospasm-
-Contractions of the
some remnants may be demonstrated
orbicularis oculi muscles
histologically.
19. Blepharostenosis
 (blepharophimo-
7. Anisocoria—unequal pupils.
sis)—Inability to open the palpebral
8. Ankyloblepharon—Adhesion of the
fissure to a normal extent; smaller
eyelids to each other. Physiologic in
than normal palpebral fissure
kittens and puppies for the frst 10 to
20. Buphthalmos  (hydrophthalmia
Or
14 days
9. Anophthalmia—Congenital  absence
globe.
of the globes. Usuallya severe hypopla-
21. Canaliculus—Connects the lacrimal
sia of the globe (i.e. microphthalmia)
punctum to the nasolacrimal sac.
595
596/GLOSSARY
22. Canthotomy-incision of either the
38. Corectopia—Off-center pupil.
lateral or medial canthus.
39. Coreoplasty—Construction of a new
23. Caruncle—small mass often covered
pupil.
with hair at the medial canthus in
40. Corneal dystrophy—Bilateral inher-
front of nictitating membrane.
ited corneal disease characterized
24. Cataract—Opacity of the lens and its
by the deposition of materials, usual-
capsules.
lipid substances.
 Distinguish
25. Chalazion-
Chronic and often granu-
from the unilateral corneal degenera-
lomatous inflammation of the tarsal or
tion, secondary to other corneal
Meibomian glands.
diseases.
26. Chemosis—Edema of the conjunc-
41. Corpora nigrum/nigra—More recent
tiva.
term—granula  i
iridica.
 Pigmented
27. Choroid—Posterior uvea; consists of
irregular mass on the dorsal and occa-
pigmented cells, blood vessels, and in
sionally the ventral pupillary margin
some animal species a special layer in
of the iris in herbivores
the dorsal
fundus,
the
tapetum
42. Cul-de-sac-Junction of the palpebral
lucidum [T. cellulosum (carnivores)
and bulbar conjunctiva; also termed
or T. fibrosum (herbivores)].
fornix.
28. Choroiditis—inflammation
of
the
43. Cryoextraction—Removal of the lens
choroid.
with ultra-cold devices
29. Ciliary body—part of the 
anterior
44. Cyclitis—Inflammation of the ciliary
uvea; primary source of 2
body.
aqueous
humor.
45. Cyclocryothermy—Application
of
30. Ciliary
flush—Hyperemia
of
the
ultra-cold probe on the
sclera to
bulbar conjunctiva usually associated
destroy the ciliary body epithelium
with intraocular inflammations.
and
reduce
aqueous
humor
31. Cilium/cilia—another
name
for
formation.
eyelash (s).
46. Cyclodialysis—surgical fistula from
32. Coloboma—a defect of the eye. Com-
anterior chamber beneath the iris and
monly divided into typical (6 o'clock
ciliary body to exit thorough the
position)  and
atypical
(allother
sclera.
positions).
47. Cycloplegia
-Usually
drug-induced
33. Conjunctiva—Mucous
membrane
paralysis of the ciliary body and the
connecting eyelid margin to limbus
resultant loss of accommodation.
of the globe. Divided into: palpebral,
48. Dacryoadenitis—Inflammation of the
fornix (or cul-de-sac), and bulbar.
lacrimal gland.
34. Conjunctivorhinostomy—surgically
 49. Dacryocystitis—Inflammation of the
created fistula between the medial
nasolacrimal sac.
conjunctival fornix and the nasal
50. Dacryocystorhinography—Radi-
cavity as an alternate drainage route
opaque studies of the nasolacrimal
for tears.
apparatus.
35. Conjunctivobuccostomy—surgically
51. Dermoid—Congenital mass involving
created fistula for the passage of tears
the eyelids, conjunctiva, nictitating
from the ventral conjunctival fornix to
membrane, and/or cornea consisting
the mouth.
of normal skin and its components.
36. Consensual
1 pupillary reflex—Con-
Sometimes called choristoma.
striction of the pupil when the
52.1
 Descemetocele—A deep corneal ulcer
opposite eye (retina) is stimulated.
characterized by exposure and possi-
Sometimes called the indirect pupil-
ble protrusion of Descemet's mem-
lary response.
brane. Does not stain with topical
37. Corectasia—Dilation of pupil
fluorescein.
GLOSSARY/597
53. Dialysis—Retinal tear at the ora cilia.
73. Exenteration—Removal of all con-
ris retinae with separation of the
tents from the orbit
neurosensory retina from the retinal
74. Exophthalmos—Protrusion
the
pigment epithelium.
globe; eyelids can usually still func-
 54. Diathermy—Application of heat to
tion and cover the cornea.
various parts of the eye (especially the
75. External hordeolum (stye)—Inflam-
ciliary body)
mation and frequent abscessation of
 55. Diopter—Refracting power of a lens
the glands of Zeis and Moll.
whose focus in one meter (D = 1/1
76. Exotropia—Divergent strabismus.
meter).
77. “Flare"Increase in protein levels in
56. Discission-
Incision
of a structure,
the aqueous humor with a positive
usually the anterior
capsule of the
Tyndel phenomenon.
lens.
78. Fluorescein—Resorcinol-phthalein:
57. Distichiasis—Presence
of abnormal
Water-soluble compound that yields
eyelashes (cilia)
a bright green fluorescence. Used
58.
 Dyscoria—Irregular pupil.
for  detection  of corneal ulcers;
59. Ectasia—Protrusion of the cornea or
chorioretinal circulation time; inte-
sclera.
grity of the blood-aqueous barrier;
60. Ectopic lentis—Luxation or displace-
and patency of the nasolacrimal
ment of the lens.
apparatus.
61. Ectropion—Outward folding of the
79. Glands
of Moll—apocrine 
(sweat)
eyelid and its margin.
glands
near
the
eyelid
margin.
62. Electroretinography—Recording
of
When  inflamed-stye
(or
external
retinal electrical potentials
gener-
hordeolum)
ated
arapid
change
in
80. Glands of Zeiss—sebaceous glands of
illumination.
the eyelid margins. When inflamed-
stye (or external hordeolum)
tion. Image focused on the retina with
81. Glaucoma—Abnormal
increase
in
the eye at rest.
intraocular
pressure
and
optic
64. Endophthalmitis-
s—Inflammation
of
neuropathy.
the globe
involving
the
inner
82. Gonioscopy—Examination
of
the
structures
anterior chamber angle (iridocorneal
65.Enophthalmos-
-Recession
of
the
angle and sclerociliary cleft) using a
globe in the orbit.
 special contact lens.
66.
 Entropion—Infolding
of the eyelid
 83. Granula iridica—Pigmented mass of
and its margin.
 the edge of the upper and lower pupil
67. Enucleation—Surgical removal of the
in herbivores.
globe.
 84. Haws—Lay term for the nictitating
68.
 Epilation—manual removal by forceps
membrane.
of cilia (eyelashes).
85. Hemeralopia—Day-blindness.
69. Epiphora—Overflow of tears onto the
86. Heterochromia iridis—Two or more
medial canthus or eyelid margin. May
colors in an iris, or between 2 irides
signal overproduction and/or inade-
in an individual.
quate drainage.
87. Hordeolum
(Internal)
-also
called
70. Equine Recurrent Uveitis—recurrent
chalazion.
Inflammation
of
the
(or chronic) iridocyclochoroiditis of
Meibomian
gland; an
abscess
or
horses.
granuloma.
External
hordeolum-
71. Esotropia—Convergent strabismus.
inflammation of the glands of Moll
72. Evisceration—Removal of structures
and Zeiss (also called stye).
of the eye leaving only the sclera or
88. Horner's
syndrome:
Sympathetic
cornea and sclera.
denervation of the eye and orbit.
598/GLOSSARY
Clinical signs include: miosis, nictitat-
humor. Associated with focal or
ing membrane protrusion, enophthal-
annular posterior synechiae.
mos, ptosis, and in some animal
103. Iritis—Inflammation of the iris.
species regional vascular hyperemia
104. Keratectomy——Excision(usuallysuper-
 and sweating.
ficial) of the cornea.
89. Hyaloid—vitreous.
105. Keratitis—Inflammation
of
the
90. Hydrophthalmos—congential
lglobe
cornea.
enlargement. A dated term-buphthal-
106. Keratocentesis-
—Puncture
of
the
mos preferred.
cornea
 and
removal
of
aqueous
91. Hyperopia—Farsightedness-
humor.
Objects seen distinctly when at a dis-
107. Keratoconus(anterior)
-Conicalante-
 tance. Image is not in focus at the level
rior protrusion of the center of the
of the retina (actually in focus behind
cornea.
the retina)
108. Keratoglobus-
-Enlarged
cornea,
92. Hyphema—Hemorrhage in the ante-
usually with buphthalmos.
rior chamber.
109.
Keratoplasty-
Corneal grafts. Divided
93. Hypopyon—Pus
in
the
 anterior
into lamellar (superficial) and com-
chamber.
plete (full thickness).
94. Hypotony—
-Abnormally low intraoc-
110. Krause's glands—Accessory lacrimal
ular pressure. IOP is usually less than
glands of the upper and lower con-
5 mm Hg.
junctiva fornix.
95. Iridectomy-
-Excision
of
the
iris.
11l. Lacrimation—Used clinically to imply
Divided in to: basal, peripheral and
excessive rates of tear formation.
sphincterectomy.
112. Lagophthalmos—Inability to close
96. Iridencleisis—a surgical
procedure
the palpebral fissure; mainly the
used to treat glaucoma consisting of a
inability of the upper eyelid to close.
pillar of iris through a scleral incision
113. Lenticular——Lens.
(creating a 'wick').
114. Lenticulodenesis—Instability of the
97. Iridocorneal angle—The angle created
lens associated with zonulary loss.
by the iris and cornea. In nonprimate
115. Leukoma—a dense corneal scar.
mammals the angle composed of
116. Limbus—The
transitional
zone
the basal iris, ciliary body (ciliary
between the cornea and sclera. Some-
cleft), and the sclera. Also termed
times called the "blue zone.
anterior chamber angle and/or fltra-
117. Luxation—Dislocation of a struc-
tion angle.
ture—in ophthalmology, term is used
98. Iridocyclitis—Inflammation
of  iris
for the globe (proptosis), and disloca-
and ciliary body. Also called, anterior
tion of the lens.
uveitis.
118. Manometry—Measurement
directly
99. Iridodonesis—Tremulousness of the
of intraocular pressure
by
 needle
iris usually associated with lens insta-
inserted into the anterior chamber or
bility, intraocular lens (IO), or a small
vitreous body.
lens. Observed with lens luxation,
119. Megalocornea—Enlarged
cornea,
aphakia, hypermature cataracts, and
usually with buphthalmos.
cataract resorption.
120. Microcornea—Small or hypoplastic
100. Iridoplegia—Pupillary
dilation and
cornea.
paralysis
ofthe
iridal
 sphincter
121.
 Microphakia—Abnormally small lens.
muscles.
122. Microphthalmia—Abnormally small
101. Iridotomy—-Incision of the iris.
eye.
102. Iris bombe—Focal or
generalized
123.
Miosis-
Contraction of the pupil.
bulging of the iris, indicating impair-
124.
 Miotic—Drug that causes constriction
ment of pupillary passage of aqueous
of the pupil. Two types available:
GLOSSARY/599
direct (parasympathomimetic) and
146. Persistent pupillary membrane—Con-
indirect (anticholinesterase)
genital remnants of the prenatal pupil-
125. Mittendorfs dot—Hyaloid vascular
lary vascular membrane that extend
remnant at lens posterior pole.
from the collarette region of the iris to
126. Morgagnian cataract—Type of hyper-
the cornea, lens, or other areas of the
mature cataract with liquified cortex
iris.
and solid nucleus.
147. Phacodonesis—Instability of the lens
127. Motility—Movement of the globe
usually secondary to the loss of zonu-
128. Mydriatic—Drug that produces dila-
lary attachments.
tion of the pupil. Two types: parasym-
148. Photophobia—Increased sensitivity to
patholytic and sympathomimetic
light.
129. Myopia—Nearsightedness.
Objects
149. Photopic—Under light or bright illu-
seen distinctly when close. Image is
mination conditions, as with photopic
not in focus at the level of the retina
vision or electroretinography.
(actually in focus in front of the
150. Phthisis bulbus—Atrophy of the globe
retina).
with low intraocular pressure, usually
130. Nevus—Focal pigmented area in the
associated
with
trauma
and
iris, choroid, etc.
inflammation.
131. Nyctalopia—Night-blindness
151. Polycoria—Two or more pupils in an
132. Nystagmus—Oscillation of the globe.
eye. False (no sphincter muscle) and
133. OD—The right (oculus dexter) eye.
true types (with sphincter muscle).
134. Ophthalmia neonatorum—Conjunc-
Differentiate from iris atrophy.
tivitis in the neonate with physiologic
152. Proptosis—Forward displacement of
ankyloblepharon (in kittens and
the globe out of the orbit.
pups).
153. Provocative  tests
(corticosteroid;
135. Ophthalmoplegia: Paralysis
of the
water; mydriatic and dark-room)
extraocular muscles. Divided into:
Procedures to demonstrate tendency
internal and external types.
toward glaucoma in an eye.
136. Ophthalmoscopy—Examination
of
154. Pterygium—Invasion of the cornea by
the ocular fundus by an ophthalmo-
the bulbar conjunctiva. Not docu-
scope (direct and indirect methods).
mented in animals.
137. OsThe left (oculus sinister) eye.
155. Ptosis—Drooping
of
the
upper
138. OU—Both eyes (oculi unitas)
eyelid.
139. Pannus—Invasion of the cornea with
156. Pupil—Opening in the central iris.
subepithelial neovascularization and
157. Rose
 Bengal—Topical
ophthalmic
pigmentation.
stain used to outline dead and degen-
140. Panophthalmitis—Inflammation
of
erating
corneal and
conjunctival
the globe involving all layers of the
cells.
globe.
158. Rubeosis
iridis—Neovascularization
141. Papilla—Another term for the optic
of the iris, with frequent involvement
nerve head (or disc).
of the anterior chamber angle, pupil,
142. Papilledema—Edema of the optic disc
anterior surface of the lens, and ciliary
or papilla.
body processes.
143. Papillitis—Inflammation of the optic
159. Sclerotomy—Incision of the sclera.
disc or papilla.
160. Scleritis—Inflamation of the sclera.
144. Periodic ophthalmia—Older term for
161.:
Scotopic—dark conditions, as with
equine recurrent uveitis.
vision or electroretinography.
145.
 Peripheral anterior synechia (PAS)
162.
Spherophakia—round  or spherical
Inflammatory attachments of the basal
shaped lens.
iris and the peripheral posterior
163. Sicca—dryness.
cornea.
164. Squint—Strabismus.
600/GLOSSARY
165. Staphyloma—Protrusion of the cornea
176. Tear film breakup (BUT): The devel-
and/or sclera lined with uveal tissue.
opment of dry spots (measured in
May be congenital, traumatic, and/or
seconds)in the tear film, as observed
surgical
by biomicroscopy with the preocular
166. Strabismus—(heterotropia).
Visual
film stained with fluorescein.
axes of the eyes are not parallel.
177. Tenon's capsule—Fascia bulbus
Common types (l) S. convergens-
178. TonographyContinuous
measure-
internal squint, and (2) S. divergens-
ment of intraocular pressure to esti-
external squint.
mate
pressure-sensitive
aqueous
167. Striate—keratopathy—Irregularlinear
humor outflow (in μl/
mm Hg/
lines in the cornea usually associated
minute).
with glaucoma (breaks) and phthisis
179. Tonometry—Measurement of intra-
bulbi (folds), and changes in Des-
ocular pressure. Divided into indenta-
cemet's membrane
tion, and applanation.
168. Stye—Inflammations of the glands of
180. Transillumination—Passage
oflight
Moll and Zeiss.
through tissues. May facilitate solid
169. Subluxation—Associated with partial
and hollow tissue masses.
loss of the lens zonule; partial lens
     
displacement.
eye; as in entropion or nasal fold
170. Symblepharon—Adhesion
of
the
trichiasis.
eyelid or both eyelids to the conjunc-
182. Uvea—Iris, ciliary body and choroid.
tiva, and/or cornea.
Anterior uvea—Iris and ciliary body.
17l. Synechia—Adhesions of the iris to
Posterior uvea—Choroid
cornea (anterior synechia), iris to lens
183. Uveitis—Inflammation of the uvea
(posterior synechia), and in the irido-
tract.Anterior uveitis-inflammation of
corneal angle (peripheral
 anterior
the iritis and ciliary body; posterior
synechia).
uveitis-inflammation of the choroid.
172. Syneresis—Liquefaction
of
the
Panuveitis-inflammation of the iris,
vitreous.
ciliary body, and choroid.
173. Synchysis scintillans-
Liquified vitre-
184. Vibrissae: Large tachile hair about the
ous with cholesterol crystals.
eyelids and face of large animals.
174. Tapetum lucidum—A special reflec-
185. Wolfring—Accessory lacrimal gland
tive layer within the dorsal choroid
of the dorsal palpebral conjunctiva.
providing
additionalreflection
l of
186. Xerophthalmia—Same as keratocon-
light
 permitting
double
retinal
junctivitis sicca or xerosis. Dryness of
stimulation of the retina.T. cellulosum
the cornea and conjunctiva
in
carnivores;
T.
fibrosum
in
187. Zonules—Suspensory ligaments con-
herbivores.
necting the lens periphery (equator)
175. Tarsorrhaphy—Temporary
(by
to the ciliary body
sutures) or permanent
 apposition
188. Zonulolysis—Enzymatic (alpha chy-
of part (partial) or all (complete)
motrypsin) or surgical transection of
eyelids.
the lens zonules.
INDEX
Page numbers in italirs denote hgures; those followed by a “t” denote tables; those followed by a “b" denote
boxes.
A
Adenocarcinoma
Alaskan Malamute
Abducent nerve, 448
ciliary body, feline,
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Abscess
316-317
glaucoma, 163t
corneal
eyelid, canine, 75, 75
retinal dysplasia, 266t
canine, 143-144
nictitating membrane, canine,
 Albinism
equine, 353-355, 354
113
bovine, 398, 535
orbital
orbital, canine, 45
canine, 463
canine, 38-41,39, 40
Adenoma
equine, 332,525
feline, 328
ciliary body
feline, 500
rabbits, 424
canine, 213, 213
sheep, 409
reptiles, 434-435
feline, 316-317
Alcian blue, 17t
Abyssinian cat
eyelid, canine, 75
Aldose reductase, 226-227
myasthenia gravis, 507
Adrenergics, 182, 551
Algal disease, 206, 499
rod-cone degeneration, 323,
Afghan Hound
 Allergic blepharitis, 74
323
cataract, 22lt
Allergic conjunctivitis
rod-cone dysplasia, 323
corneal dystrophy, 144t
canine, 102,102
Accommodation
medial canthal pocket
food animals, 537
birds, 438
syndrome, 106
Allopurinol, for leishmaniasis,
 description, 451
Airedale Terrier
487
reptiles, 433
chronic superficial keratitis
Alpaca, 5. See also Camelids
 Acetazolamide, for equine
142t
Alpha agonists, 551
glaucoma, 365
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Amblyopia, 501
Acetylcysteine
Akinesia, eyelid, 5, 5-6,6
American Bulldog, neuronal
for corneal ulcer, 339
Akita
ceroid lipofuscinoses
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
glaucoma, 163t, 178
(NCL), 271
86
microphthalmia, 38
American Cocker Spaniel
for retained spectacles, 436
posterior lenticonus, 218
cataract, 22lt, 225
Acholeplasma oculi, 406
retinal degeneration, 267t,
cherry eye, 110
 Acid-fast bacilli keratopathy, 308
268
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Acremoniosis, 478
retinal dysplasia, 262t
dermatomyositis, 473
Actinobacillus lignieresi, 403
uveodermatologic syndrome,
distichiasis, 57
Acute bullous keratopathy, feline,
201, 202, 474
facial nerve paralysis, 458
307-308, 308
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
glaucoma, 160,16l,163,
Acyclovir, for feline herpesvirus,
(VKH) syndrome,
163t, 164, 165
518
73
166-167, 167
601
602/INDEx
American Cocker Spaniel (cont.)
Anophthalmia
neoplasia, 315-317, 316, 317
heterochromia iridis, 191
canine, 37
uveitis, 311-315, 31lt, 312,
KCS, 81b
cattle, 379
312b, 315t
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
sheep, 401
Anterior uveitis. See also Uveitis
nodular granulomatous
Anterior chamber
camelid, 413
episcleritis, 151, 151
examination, 9-10
canine, 196-207
retinal degeneration, 267, 267t
paracentesis, 21-22, 22
algal disease, 206
retinal dysplasia, 262t
Anterior chamber shunt, 184,
bacterial diseases, 206
American Fox Hound,
185
clinical signs, 198, 198,
heterochromia iridis,
Anterior segment dysgenesis
198t, 199
191
(ASD)
etiopathogenesis, 196, 197b,
Amiodarone toxicity, 498t
canine, 193-194
198
Amitraz, 485
equine, 366
hyperlipidemia, 207
Amlodipine, for hypertension,
 Anterior segment examination,
hyperviscosity syndrome,
467, 503
10
207
Amniotic membranes, as graft
Anterior stromal puncture (ASP),
lens-induced, 199, 201
material, 136
130
mycoses-associated,
A-mode (amplitude modulation)
Anterior uvea, canine, 189-215
202-203, 203t
ultrasound, 27, 159
anatomy,189-190
parasitic diseases, 203-204
Amphibians
degenerative iridal changes,
pigmentary in Golden
ophthalmic anatomy,
194, 194-195, 195
Retriever, 201-202
430-431, 431
iris atrophy, 194
protozoal diseases,
ophthalmic disease, 432
uveal cysts, 194-195
204-205
Amphotericin B
developmental conditions,
rickettsial diseases, 205,
for aspergillosis, 479
190-194
205-206
for blastomycosis, 511
aplasia/hypoplasia, 193
secondary, 207
for coccidioidomycosis, 481
color variants, 190-191, 191
sulfonamide
for cryptococcosis, 481
persistent pupillary
hypersensitivity, 207
dosage and spectrum, 561
membranes, 191-193,
surgery and, 214
equine use, 352t
192
therapy, 199, 200t
Analgesia, regional, 6
pupil abnormalities, 193
traumatic, 209
Anaplasmosis, 488, 532
diagnostics, 190
uveodermatologic syndrome,
Andalusian, vitiligo in, 333
hyphema, 209, 209-210, 210b
201, 202
Anemia
iridial proliferations, benign,
viral diseases, 206
canine, 467
210-211, 211
equine, 362
equine,527-528
surgery, 214-215
feline, 311-315, 31lt, 312,
feline, 503-504
trauma, 207-209, 208
312b, 315t
food animals, 536
blunt injuries, 208
clinical signs, 31l, 312
Anemic retinopathy, 325
emergency management,
complications, 315
Anesthesia, regional, 6
208, 209b
feline immunodeficiency
Anesthetics, topical and local,
foreign bodies, 209
virus (FIV), 312
555
penetrating injuries,
feline infectious peritonitis
Angiography, 26, 252
208-209
(FIP), 313
Angiostrongylosis, 204, 483
uveitis, 209
feline leukemia virus
Angus cattle, iridial
tumors, 211-214, 212, 213
(FeLV), 313
heterochromia in, 394
uveitis, 196-207
fungal, 313-314
Aniridia, equine, 335
Anterior uvea, feline, 309-317
idiopathic, 315
Anisocoria, 7
acquired iris abnormalities,
laboratory tests, 31lt
Ankyloblepharon
310-311
lens-induced, 314-315
canine, 56, 56-57
congenital/developmental
ophthalmomyiasis, 314
rabbit, 424
disorders, 309-310,310
 periarteritis, 314
InDex/603
sarcoma virus, 314
Aqueous humor
microphthalmia, 38, 38
therapy, 315, 315t
assessment of, 9-10
retinal dysplasia, 262t
Toxoplasma gondi, 313, 515,
centesis, 21-22, 22
uveodermatologic syndrome,
516
 protein studies in glaucoma,
201, 474
trauma, 314
164
Autogenous lamellar corneal
rabbit, 425-426
Arabian
grafts, 137-138
Antibiotics. See also specific
immunoglobulin-M deficiency,
Autograft, conjunctival, 108,
diseases
527
108
for equine corneal ulcers, 350t
sarcoid, 345
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
for equine recurrent uveitis
vitiligo, 333
canine retinopathy and
(ERU), 370t
Arabian Foaling Syndrome, 333
278
for juvenile pyoderma, 472
Area centralis, 32l, 523
Ayrshire cattle
for KCS, 86
Area striata, 398
esotropia, 379
for orbital cellulitis/abscess,
Arginine dehciency, 228, 441
iridial heterochromia, 394,
40-41, 40t
Arrowhead procedure, 6lt
395
selection, 557
Arsanilic acid, 416, 544t
Azathioprine
subconjunctival, 558
Arteriovenous fstula, 38
for anterior uveitis, 200t
topical, 557
Artificial tear substitutes,
for myositis, 42
Antifibrotics, 579
553-554
for nodular granulomatous
Antifungal agents. See also
ASD. See Anterior segment
episcleritis, 151
specijfic diseases; specifc
dysgenes
（ASD)
for pemphigus, 529
drugs
ASP (anterior stromal
puncture)
for uveodermatologic
dosage and spectrum, 561
130
syndrome, 475
for equine corneal ulcers,
Aspergillosis
Azithromycin, for bartonellosis,
350t
camelid, 414
508
for the horse, 352t
canine, 139, 478-479
 Anti-inflammatory therapy, for
mycotic keratitis, 139
B
KCS, 86
Asteroid hyalosis, 249, 249-250,
 Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG),
Antimicrobials
322
345
for anterior uveitis, 200t
Atopy, 102
Bacterial diseases. See also
toxicity, feline, 523-524
Atresia, nasolacrimal system,
specific agents; specific
Antiviral drugs, dosages of, 59
92-93
diseases
Aphakia, canine, 218
Atropine
blepharitis, 71, 71-72
Aphakic glaucoma, 176,
for anterior uveitis, 200t
canine, 206, 475-478
176-177
for equine glaucoma, 365
conjunctivitis, 99,101
Apholate, 401
for mydriasis in cattle, 396
corneal ulcers, 139
Aplasia, 57, 193
for mydriasis in rat, 10
feline, 308, 508-511
Appaloosa
Auriculopalpebral nerve, 449
keratoconjunctivitis, in
 congenital stationary night
Auriculopalpebral nerve block, 5,
camelids, 412
blindness (CSNB), 374,
5-6
reptiles, 434-435, 435
526
Australian Cattledog, cone
Bartonellosis
equine recurrent uveitis (ERU),
degeneration in, 269
canine, 206,475, 476
367, 368
Australian Kelpie, chronic
feline, 313, 508
glaucoma, 364
 superficial keratitis in,
Basal cell carcinoma, feline
heterochromia iridis, 335
142t
eyelid, 296t, 297
night blindness, 341
Australian Shepherd
Basenji, persistent pupillary
sarcoid, 345
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258
membranes in, 192,
squamous cell carcinoma, 344,
limbal coloboma, 126
219
344-345
merle gene, 19l, 464
Bashkir-Curly Horse, anterior
Applanation tonometers, 19, 20
Merle Ocular Dysgenesis, 220,
 segment dysgenesis in,
Apraclonidine, 551
259
366
604 /INDEx
Basset Hound
 Beta-blockers (beta antagonists),
immune-mediated blepharitis,
entropion, 60b
319, 365, 551
73
glaucoma, 161,163,163t,
Betamethasone, for anterior
leishmania blepharitis, 72-73
164, 165, 167-168,
uveitis, 200t
mycotic blepharitis, 72
168
Betaxolol, 319, 551
parasitic blepharitis, 72
uveodermatologic syndrome,
Bichon Frise
rabbits, 422,424, 424
201
cataract, 22lt, 225
reptiles, 434
Beagle
corneal dystrophy, 144t
sheep and goats, 403-404
cherry eye, 110
infantile corneal dystrophy,
swine, 415
corneal dystrophy, 144t
126
 Blepharitis adenomatosa, 74
eyelid tumors, 75
Bighead disease in sheep, 403
Blepharophimosis, 67-68
glaucoma, 158, 159,163t,
 Bighorn sheep, chlamydial
 Blepharoplasty, reconstructive,
164, 165, 168-170,
keratoconjunctivitis in,
76-77
169
441
Blepharostenosis, 67-68
hyperlipidemia, 468
Bilateral convergent strabismus
Blindness
intrascleral prosthesis, 51
with exophthalmia
central
microphthalmia, 38
(BCSE), 379-380
camelid, 414
optic nerve heads, 158
Bimatoprost, 577
sheep and goats, 410
orbital neoplasm, 45
Bipedicle graft, 133, 134
clinical management of the 
retinal dysplasia, 2621
Birds
blind dog, 231
tapetal degeneration, 193
mydriatic agents, 575
congenital, bovine, 379
uveodermatologic syndrome,
 ophthalmic anatomy,
differential diagnosis for
474
436-437, 437
postretinal, 452-454
Beard-Cutler technique, 77
 ophthalmic diseases,
optic chiasm disease, 453
 Bearded Collie, corneal
439-440
 optic nerve disease,
dystrophy in, 144t
degenerations, 439
452-453
Bedlington Terrier
inflammations and
 optic radiation disease,
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
infections, 439
453-454
retinal dysplasia, 220, 249,
malformations, 439
optic tract disease, 453
262t
neoplasia, 439
obstacle course (maze test) for,
Wilson's disease, 227
trauma, 440
8
Belgian horse
vitamin A dehiciency,
Blind staggers, 402, 534
aniridia, 335
439-440
Blink reflex, 7, 120
cataracts, 338
ophthalmic examination, 438
Blood low assessment, 26
squamous cell carcinoma, 344,
Birman cat, corneal dermoids in,
Bloodhound
344-345
309
ectropion, 64
Belgian Sheepdog, chronic
Black soil blindness, 400
entropion, 60,60b
superficial keratitis in,
Blastomycosis
posterior lenticonus, 218
142t
canine, 101, 203t, 274,
trichiasis, 68
 Belgian Shepherd
479-480
Blood supply
photoreceptor dysplasia, 269
feline, 313, 511
conjunctiva, 98
retinal dysplasia, 266t
Blepharedema, 102
eyelid, 54
Belgian Tervuren, chronic
 Blepharitis
Blue eye disease, 538t
superficial keratitis in,
allergic, 74
Blue iris, 464, 500
142t
bacterial blepharitis, 71-72
Bluetongue, 401, 403, 409, 538t
Bergmeister's papilla, 337
bovine, 381-382
BLV (bovine leukemia virus), 541
 Bernese Mountain Dog
camelid, 411
B-mode (brightness modulation)
histocytoses, 74
equine, 333, 333, 345-346
ultrasound, 27,28
retinopathy, 268
feline, 294-295, 295
Border Collie
systemic,499
focal, 74
chronic superhcial keratitis,
Besnoitiosis, 407, 540
generalized blepharitis, 70-71
142t
INDEx/605
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258
Bridge graft, 133, 134
Camelids, 410-414
glaucoma, 163,163t
Brimonidine tartrate, for
cataracts, 413, 413
lens dislocation, 233
glaucoma, 182
conjunctiva and cornea,
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
Brinzolamide, 183, 319
411-412
(NCL), 271
 Brittany Spaniel
eyelids, 411
retinal neoplasia, 280
glaucoma, 163t
glaucoma,412
Bordetella bronchiseptica, 302
meibomian adenocarcinoma, 75
incidence of ocular disease,
Borreliosis (Lyme disease),
 Bromovinyldeoxyuridine, for
410
475-476
Feline herpesvirus, 518
nasolacrimal system, 411
Boston Terrier
Brown Swiss cattle
orbit and globe, 411
cataract, 22lt, 225
iridial heterochromia, 394
posterior segment, 413-414
corneal dystrophy, 144t
strabismus, 457
uveal tract, 412, 412-413
 corneal endothelial dystrophy
Brucellosis, canine, 206,
Canaliculi obstruction, 93
147
476-477, 477
Candidiasis
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 165,
Bruch's membrane, 413
feline, 511
170
Brussels Griffon, vitreous
mycotic keratitis, 139
retinal tears, 282
degeneration in, 249
Canine adenovirus type-1
uveal cyst, 194
B-scan ultrasonography, 159
(CAV-1), 206, 492
Botulism, 476
Buccostomy, conjunctival, 94
Canine cyclic thrombocytopenia,
 Bouvier des Flandres
Bucket-handle technique, 77
488
entropion, 60b
 Bullmastiff, retinal degeneration
Canine disorders. See Dogs;
glaucoma, 162,163t, 170
in, 268
sperific anatomical areas;
posterior lenticonus,
 Bullous keratopathy
specijfic diseases
218
equine, 358
Canine distemper virus (CDV),
Bovine disorders. See Cattle;
feline, 307-308, 308
101, 101,453,459,
specijfic anatomical areas;
 Bullous pemphigoid, 471
490, 490-491
specifc diseases
Bull Terrier, anterior lenticonus
Canine ehrlichiosis, 488-489,
Bovine leukemia virus (BLV),
in, 218-219
489
541
Buphthalmos, rat, 421
Canine herpesvirus, 491
Bovine papilloma virus (BPV),
 Burdock pappus bristle
Canine idiopathic granulomatous
390
keratopathy, 356
disease, 469
Bovine parturient paresis, 541
Burmese cat
Canine oral papillomavirus
Bovine rhinotracheitis, 538t
corneal dermoids, 309
(COPV), 492
Bovine-specihc ophthalmia, 537
eyelid agenesis, 293
Caprine disorders. See Goats;
Bovine viral diarrhea (BVD), 537,
prolapsed gland of third
specific anatomical areas;
538t
eyelid, 299,299
specijfic diseases
Boxer
 Butorphanol, 5
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
distichiasis, 57
BVD (bovine viral diarrhea), 537,
dosage, 563
ectopic cilia, 58
538t
for glaucoma, 182-183, 319,
glaucoma, 179,210
365
BPV (bovine papilloma virus),
C
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
390
Cairn Terrier
glaucoma,163t
Bracken fern poisoning, 544t
glaucoma, 16l, 163, 163t,
progressive retinal atrophy,
Branhamella keratoconjunctivitis,
165, 178-179, 179
265
in sheep and goats,
pigmentary glaucoma, 210
Cardiovascular diseases
406-407
Calcific band keratopathy,
canine, 466-467
Brazilian Fila, uveodermatologic
equine, 358
feline, 502-503
syndrome in,201,474
Calcium degeneration, corneal,
Carprofen, for anterior uveitis,
Briard
146-147
200t
hyperlipidemia, 468
CALT (conjunctiva-associated
Caruncle, 9, 50
RPED,269-270
lymphoid tissue), 97
Caruncle trichiasis, 68-69, 107
606/INDEX
Cataract
histophysiologic changes,
lipogranulomatous
bovine, 395-396, 396
222-223
conjunctivitis,303,
camelid, 413, 413
lens luxation, 232, 232-234,
303
canine (see Cataract, canine)
232b, 233
mycoplasma, 302
clouded leopards, 441
maturity, phases of, 224
neonatal conjunctivitis, 302
equine, 360-363
medical treatment, 231-232
neoplasia, 303-304
acquired/secondary,
milk replacer-induced,
 parasitic conjunctivitis, 303,
361-362, 362
497
303
classification, 360
pathophysiologic changes,
corneal diseases, 304-309
congenital, 338, 338
221-222
 acid-fast bacilli keratopathy,
developmental, 362-363
surgery, 234-235
308
senile, 360-361
capsulorrhexis/
acute bullous keratopathy,
surgery,363, 363
capsulectomy, 237,
307-308, 308
examination of, 10
237
bacterial keratitis, 308
exotic mammals, 441-442
complications, 240
corneal degeneration, 307
Feline, 320, 320-321, 522
intraoperative medications/
corneal dystrophy, 307
ferret, 428
devices, 237
dermoids, 309, 309
galactosemic, 441-442
patient selection, 234-235
eosinophilic-proliferative
glaucoma and, 176
phacoemulsification, 236,
keratitis, 306-307, 307
guinea pig, 427
237-239
Florida keratopathy, 308,
intumescent, 176
preoperative complications,
308
rabbit, 426, 426
235-236
herpesvirus keratitis,
rat, 421
preoperative therapy, 236
304-306, 305
reptiles, 435-436
surgical approach, 236,
neoplasia, 308-309
resorhing hypermature, 176
236-237
sequestra, 305, 306
sheep and goats, 408
surgical equipment, 236
eyelid diseases, 293-297
surgery, equine, 363, 363
wound closure, 240
blepharitis, 294-295, 295
swine, 416
visual consequences, 231
 congenital disorders,
wolf, 441
Cats. See also sperific breeds
293-294, 294
Cataract, canine
anterior uveal diseases,
cystic lesions, 295-296
breed predisposition, 583,
309-317
neoplasia, 296-297, 296t,
585, 587
 acquired iris abnormalities,
297
causes
310-311
nodular lesions, 296
age-related, 230
Feline ophthalmology,
anterior uveitis,
dietary deficiency, 228
311-315, 311t,
293-328
drug-induced, 228, 228b
312, 312b, 315t
fundus magnification with
heredity, 225, 226t
 congenital/developmental
direct ophthalmoscopy,
inflammation, 230
disorders, 309-310,
12t
injury to lens, 228-230,
310
glaucoma, 317-319
229
neoplasia, 315-317,316,
clinical signs, 319
systemic disease, 225-227,
317
etiology, 317-318
227
conjunctival diseases, 299-304
treatment, 319
clinical and biomicroscopic
Bordetella bronchiseptica,
types, 318, 318-319, 319
features,223-225,
302
Horner's syndrome, 455t
224
calicivirus, 302
inherited eye diseases, 589
complications of untreated
Chlamydophila felis,
 intraocular pressure (IOP)
231
300-302, 301
range, 20t
congenital, 220, 221, 221t,
eosinophilic conjunctivitis,
lens
222
303
cataracts, 320, 320-321
diabetes mellitus and, 493,
herpesvirus, 299-300, 300,
 congenital anomalies, 320
493-494
301t
luxation, 321
InDex/607
mydriatic agents, 574
keratoconjunctivitis,
in flammation, 381
nasolacrimal and tear diseases,
384-389, 387
neoplasia, 380-381
297-298
neoplasia, 389-393, 391,
nystagmus, 381
nasolacrimal flush, 18-19
393t
restraint, 5
optic nerve diseases, 326-327
phenothiazine-induced,
Rhizopus infection, 539
orbit diseases, 327, 327-328
384
sarcocystosis, 540
posterior segment diseases,
secondary, 384, 384
 strabismus, 457
321-326
demodicosis, 382, 540
systemic diseases, 535-545
neoplasia, 326
dermatophytosis, 537-538
thromboembolic
retinal disorders, 322-326
electric shocks, 544
 meningoencephalitis,
vitreal disorders, 322
eyelid diseases, 381-382
538t
restraint/sedation, 4-5, 4b
blepharitis, 381-382
tuberculosis, 538t
retinal disorders, 322-326
ectropion, 381
lveal diseases, 394,
anemia retinopathy, 325
entropion, 381
394-395
chorioretinitis, 324
trauma, 381
congenital, 394, 394-395
diabetic retinopathy, 325
fundic disorders
tumors, 395
drug-associated toxicity,
congenital, 398, 398-399
lveitis, 395
324, 324
degeneration, 399, 399-400
Cattle dogs, chronic superficial
dysplasia, 322
inflammation, 399
keratitis in, 142t
hypertensive retinopathy,
fundic examination,
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
324-325, 325
396-398, 397
corneal dystrophy, 144t
hyperviscosity retinopathy,
fundus magnification
distichiasis, 57
326
with direct
ectopic cilia, 58
lipemia retinalis, 325
 ophthalmoscopy,
entropion, 60b
neoplasia,327
12t
microphthalmia, 38
nutritional retinal
glaucoma, 393-394, 394
posterior lenticonus, 218
degeneration, 322-323
Horner's syndrome, 455t
retinal dysplasia, 261, 262t
ophthalmomyiasis, 326
hypocalcemia, 541
Cavernous sinus syndrome,
retinal folds/detachment, 326
hypomagnesemia, 541
455-456, 456
rod-cone dysplasia, 323
inherited eye diseases,
CCT (central corneal thickness),
Schirmer tear test, 16
383-384, 593
26
strabismus, 456
intraocular pressure (IOP)
CDI (color Doppler imaging),
systemic diseases, 500-525
range, 20t
27, 29, 159
tear breakup time, 17
listeriosis, 538t
CDOCT (color Doppler optical
thiamine defciency, 461
malignant catarrhal fever,
coherence
third eyelid diseases, 298,
538t, 539
tomography), 26
298-299, 299
mydriatic agents, 574
CDV. See Canine distemper
Cat scratch disease (CSD), 508
nasolacrimal flush, 18-19
virus (CDV)
Cattle, 379-401. See also Food
nasolacrimal system anomalies,
CEA. See Collie Eye Anomaly
animals; sperific breeds
382-383
(CEA)
besnoitiosis, 540
neonatal septicemia, 538t
Cefazolin, for endophthalmitis,
bluetongue, 401, 538t
neosporosis, 540
369
bovine rhinotracheitis, 538t
optic nerve diseases, 400-401
Cellulitis
bovine viral diarrhea (BVD)
orbital diseases, 379-381, 380
canine orbit, 36t, 38-41, 40t
537, 538t
congenital, 379
equine,343
cataracts, 395-396, 396
exophthalmos, 380, 380,
feline orbit, 328
chlamydophilosis, 538t
381
Celsus-Hotz procedure, 6lt, 62,
conjunctival and corneal
globe position and
62-63, 62b
diseases, 383-393
movement
Centesis, aqueous, 2l-22, 22
congenital, 383, 383
 abnormalities,
Central corneal thickness
inherited, 383-384
379-380
(CCT), 26
608/INDEx
Central progressive retinal
Chlamydophilosis, 508-510,
Clostridium botulinum,476
atrophy (CPRA), 263.
509, 538t
Clostridium tetani, 478,
269-270
Chlorhexidine, 352t
510-511
Ceratospira, 439
Cholinergic agents, as
Clouded leopards, cataracts in,
Cerebral hypoxia, 505
lacrostimulants, 84b,
441
Cerebrocortical necrosis, 542
85
Clumber Spaniel
Cerebrovascular accidents
Chondroitin sulfate, 86
ectropion, 64, 64
canine, 466-467
Chorioretinitis
macroblepharon, 64
Chalazion, 73
camelid, 414
Clydesdale, squamous cell 
Chameleons. See Reptiles
canine, 272-273, 273, 273b,
carcinoma in,344,
Charolais cattle, coloboma in,
274t, 490
344-345
865
elk, 441
Coat color-related diseases/
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
equine, 341, 362, 373, 373
conditions
cattle, 535
feline, 324
canine, 463-464
feline, 310, 500
Toxoplasma gondi, 515
equine, 525-526, 526
mink, 440
Choristoma, 57, 57
feline, 500
Cheetah, squamous cell
Choroidal hypoplasia, canine
food animals, 535
carcinoma in,442
breed predisposition, 583,
Coccidioidomycosis
Chelonians. See Reptiles
585, 587
canine, 203t
Chemical-induced corneal
in Collie Eye Anomaly, 258t,
feline, 313, 511-512
ulceration, 140
259
Coccidioidomycosis, canine,
Chemosis, 102
Choroiditis, canine, 273
480-481
Cherry eye, 110, 1l10-112,
Chow Chow
Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer,
112-113
cataract, 220
143, 452
Chesapeake Bay Retriever,
entropion, 59, 60, 60b
Cocker Spaniel. See American
cataract in, 221t
glaucoma, 16l, 165,170
Cocker Spaniel;
Chiggers, 530
microblepharon, 67
English Cocker
Chihuahua
microphthalmia, 38
Spaniel
cone degeneration, 269
persistent pupillary
Collagen, corneal, 119, 120
corneal dystrophy, 144t
membranes, 192
Collagen shields, 340
corneal endothelial dystrophy
retinal dysplasia, 2621
Collie
147
trichiasis, 68
dermatomyositis, 473
glaucoma, 163t
uveodermatologic syndrome,
hyperlipidemia, 468
senile iris atrophy, 194
201, 474
 infantile corneal dystrophy,
vitreous degeneration, 249
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
126
Chinchilla, 427
syndrome, 73
limbal coloboma, 126
Chinese Crested, vitreous
Chromodacryorrhea, 420, 420
 meningioma, 45
degeneration in, 249
Chronic superficial keratitis,
merle gene, 191
Chlamydial conjunctivitis, goat,
122, 141, 141-143,
microphthalmia, 38
539
142t, 582, 584,
nodular fasciitis, 75
Chlamydial keratoconjunctivitis
586
nodular granulomatous
bovine, 385
Cidofovir, 306, 518
episcleritis,
sheep and goats, 404-405
Cilia, ectopic, 58-59
150-151, 151
swine, 415
Ciliary body
nodular granulomatous
Chlamydia psittaci
adenoma, 213, 213
episclerokeratitis,
bighorn sheep, 441
innervation, 450-451
113-114
guinea pig, 427
morphology, 190
optic nerve coloboma, 286
koalas, 441
neoplasm, feline, 316-317
recurrent proliferative
mule deer, 441
Ciliary nerves, 450, 450,451
keratoconjunctivitis,
Chlamydophila felis, 300-302,
Clindamycin, for toxoplasmosis,
105, 105
301, 508-510, 509
487, 516
rod-cone dysplasia, 265, 266t
INDex/609
Collie Eye Anomaly (CEA)
microcornea, 123
food animal
clinical hndings, 258, 258t,
opacities, 125-126
systemic diseases, 535-536
259
persistent pupillary
Congenital glaucoma, 162, 162b,
histopathology, 258-259
membranes, 126, 126
180, 180
microphthalmia, 38
eyelid disease, 56-69
Congenital stationary night
prevalence, 258
lens disorders, 218-221
blindness (CSNB), 341,
vitreal abnormalities, 249
aphakia, 218
374, 526
Coloboma
cataract, 220, 221, 221t
Conjunctiva, canine, 97-108
camelid, 414
coloboma, 218
anatomic abnormalities,
canine breed predisposition,
lenticonus/lentiglobus,
106-107
583, 585, 587
218-219
anatomy, 97-98
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258t, 259
luxation, 219
conjunctivitis
eyelid
microphakia, 218
allergic, 102,102
canine,57
vascular abnormalities,
bacterial, 99, 101
feline, 293
embryonic, 219,
 contact hypersensitivity,
sheep, 403
219-220, 220
103
fundic, bovine, 398,398
nasolacrimal system, 92-94
follicular, 102-103, 103
iridal, feline, 310
atresias, 92-93
fungal, 101
lens
canaliculi obstruction,
infectious, 99-102, 100
canine, 218
93
ligneous, 103, 103-104
equine,359
 developmental disorders,
noninfectious, 102-104
limbal, canine, 126
93-94
parasitic, 101-102
optic disc, feline, 326
duct obstruction, 93
rickettsial, 101, 101
optic nerve, canine,286
lacrimal punctal atresia,
strategy for diagnosis and
snow leopard, 440
92, 92-93
treatment, 100
swine, 416
micropunctum, 93
tear-deficiency associated,
Color Doppler imaging (CDI),
 misplacement of
103
27, 29, 159
canaliculi and puncta,
viral, 101, 101
Color Doppler optical coherence
93
cytology, 98, 98t
tomography (CDOCT),
orbital cysts, 38
foreign bodies, 106
26
orbital disease, 37-38
hemorrhage, 106, 106
Computed tomography (CT), 24,
 anophthalmos/
innervation, 98
342t
microphthalmos,
masses
Cone-rod dystrophy, 266, 266t
37-38, 38
cysts, 106
Cones
orbital cysts, 38
dermoid,104,105
degeneration, 268-269
vascular anomalies, 38
inllammatory, 105, 105
electrodiagnostic testing, 31,
vascular anomalies, 38
neoplastic, 104, 104
32, 32t
cattle
nonneoplastic, 104-106
Confocal scanning laser
conjunctival and corneal
parasitic granuloma,
ophthalmoscope
diseases, 383, 383
105-106
(CSLO), 25
fundic disorders, 398,
subconjunctival fat prolapse,
Congenital disease
398-399
105
canine
orbital diseases, 379
normal flora, 98
 anophthalmos/
lveal diseases, 394,
radiation effects, 107
microphthalmos,
394-395
response to disease, 98-99
37-38, 38
feline
surgical procedures,
corneal diseases, 123-126
 anterior uveal diseases,
107-108, 108
colobomas and
309-310, 310
vascular supply, 98
staphylomas, 126
eyelid diseases, 293-294,
 Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid
dermoids, 123, 123
294
tissue (CALT), 97
megalocornea, 123
lens, 320
Conjunctival buccostomy, 94, 94
610/INDEX
Conjunctival centripetalization,
noninfectious, 102-104
edema, 122-123
424
parasitic, 101-102
healing, 120-122, 121t
Conjunctival disease
rickettsial, 10l, 101
pigmentation, 122
bovine, 383-393
 strategy for diagnosis and
surgery
camelid, 411-412
treatment, 100
 autogenous lamellar corneal
canine (see Conjunctiva,
tear-deficiency associated,
grafts, 137-138
canine)
103
conjunctival graft,
feline, 299-304
viral, 101, 101
132-133, 134, 135,
Bordetella bronchisepica, 302
cattle keratoconjunctivitis,
135-136, 136
calicivirus, 302
384-389, 387
corneoscleral or
Chlamydophila felis,
equine, 338, 346, 346, 346t
corneoconjunctival
300-302, 301
feline, 299-304
transposition, 137
eosinophilic conjunctivitis,
Bordetella bronchisepiica,
for Full-thickness lacerations,
303
302
138
herpesvirus, 299-300, 300,
calicivirus, 302
grid keratotomy, 130, 131
301t
Chlamydophila felis,
microsurgical instruments,
lipogranulomatous
300-302, 301
124b
conjunctivitis, 303,
eosinophilic conjunctivitis,
for opacities, 148, 148
303
303
porcine small intestinal
mycoplasma, 302
herpesvirus, 299-300, 300,
submucosa grafts, 136
neonatal conjunctivitis, 302
301t
superficial keratectomy,
neoplasia, 303-304
lipogranulomatous
123-124, 125
parasitic conjunctivitis, 303,
conjunctivitis, 303,303
Cormeal degeneration
303
mycoplasma, 302
birds, 439
rabbits, 422
neonatal conjunctivitis, 302
canine, 146-147
sheep and goats, 404-407,
neoplasia, 303-304
feline, 307
406
parasitic conjunctivitis, 303,
Corneal diseases
Conjunctival examination, 9
303
bovine, 383-393
Conjunctival lap, equine, 350,
ferret, 427
camelid, 411-412
351
follicular, 114
equine,347-359
Conjunctival grafts, 132-136
guinea pig, 427
corneal dystrophy, 356
bridge (bipedicle), 133, 134
rabbit, 422
corneal sequestrum, 357
bulbar, 132-133
rodents, 420
eosinophilic keratitis, 359
complications, 136
Contact hypersensitivity, 103
foreign bodies, 352
hood (180%), 133
Contact lenses, 340
idiopathic primary edema,
island, 135-136
Contagious ecthyma, 403
358
pedicle, 133, 135, 135, 136
Contagious viral pustular
iris prolapse, 353
postoperative treatment, 137
dermatitis, 403
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
tarsal, 133
Continuous tear curvilinear
(KCS), 357
Conjunctival maxillary
capsulorhexis (CTCC),
lacerations/perforations,
sinustomy, 94, 94
237, 237
352-353
Conjunctival rhinostomy, 94, 94
COPV (canine oral
linear keratopathy, 358
Conjunctivitis
papillomavirus), 492
mineralization, 358
canine
Cornea
nonulcerative keratopathies,
allergic, 102, 102
examination,9
355-356, 356
bacterial, 99, 101
innervation of, 452
radiation-induced
contact hypersensitivity, 103
Cornea, canine
keratopathy, 357
follicular, 102-103, 103
anatomy, 119-120, 120
stromal abscess,
fungal, 101
clarity, 120
353-355, 354
infectious, 99-102, 100
disease (see Corneal diseases,
 superficial erosion,
ligneous, 103, 103-104
canine)
357-358
INDex/611
ulcerative keratitis, 347-351,
neoplasia, 149, 149-150
Corpora nigra, equine cystic,
348, 350t, 351
noninflammatory keratopathy,
366, 366
ulcerative keratomycosis,
144-148
Corticosteroids
351-352, 352t
corneal degeneration,
for anterior uveitis, 200t
viral keratitis, 358-359
146-147
for chronic superhicial keratitis,
Feline, 304-309
corneal dystrophy, 144t,
143
acid-fast bacilli keratopathy
145, 145-146
dosages, 565
308
 corneal endothelial
for equine recurrent uveitis
acute bullous keratopathy
dystrophy, 147-148
(ERU), 370t
307-308, 308
crystalline corneal opacities,
for Feline immunodeficiency
bacterial keratitis, 308
144-147, 144t, 145
virus (FIV), 519
corneal degeneration, 307
lipid keratopathy, 146
for granulomatous
corneal dystrophy, 307
noncrystalline corneal
meningoencephalitis,
dermoids, 309,309
opacities, 147-148
459, 470
eosinophilic-proliferative
Corneal dystrophy
for juvenile pyoderma, 472
keratitis, 306-307, 307
canine, 144t, 145, 145-146,
for KCS, 86
Florida keratopathy, 308,
582, 584, 586
for masticatory myositis, 473
308
equine, 356
subconjunctival, 565
herpesvirus keratitis,
feline, 307
topical, 565
304-306, 305
mouse, 422
for toxoplasmosis, 487
neoplasia, 308-309
rabbit, 425
for uveodermatologic
sequestra, 305, 306
Corneal endothelial dystrophy,
syndrome, 475
rabbit, 425
147-148
Coumarin poisoning, 498t,
sheep and goats, 404-407, 406
 Corneal erosions, equine,
544t
Corneal diseases, canine
339-340
Cow. See Cattle
 congenital/developmental,
Corneal imaging, 26
CPRA (central progressive retinal
123-126
Corneal mineralization, equine,
atrophy),263,
 colobomas and staphylomas,
358
269-270
126
Corneal opacification, rat, 421
Crampton's muscle, 438
dermoids, 123, 123
Corneal rellex, 9, 438
Crocodilians. See Reptiles
megalocornea,123
Corneal stromal abscess, equine,
Cryosurgery
microcornea, 123
353-355, 354
description, 55-56
opacities, 125-126
Corneal tissue adhesives, 132,
for distichiasis, 58, 58t, 59
persistent pupillary
132
Cryptococcosis
membranes, 126, 126
Corneal touch threshold (CTT),
canine, 203t, 481, 481-482
epithelial inclusion cysts,
452
feline, 313-314, 327, 512
148-149
Corneal ulcer. See also Ulcerative
CSD (cat scratch disease), 508
inflammatory keratopathy,
keratitis
CSLO (confocal scanning laser
126-144
canine, 121t, 122,494
ophthalmoscope), 25
abscessation, 143-144
equine,339,339,348,
CSNB. See Congenital stationary
chronic superficial keratitis
348-351, 351
night blindness
(pannus), 141,
feline, 304,305
(CSNB)
141-143, 142t
melting, 339, 348, 351
CICC (continuous tear
 Florida keratopathy, 144
Corneoconjunctival culture, 14,
curvilinear
neurogenic keratitis,
14
capsulorhexis), 237,
143
Corneoconjunctival cytology,
237
pigmentary keratitis,
14-15, 15
CTT (corneal touch threshold),
140-141, 141
Corneoconjunctival transposition,
452
superhcial punctate keratitis,
108, 137
Culture
144
Corneoscleral transposition,
corneoconjunctival,14,14
ulcerative keratitis, 126-140
137
microbiological, 8
612/INDEX
Curly Coated Retriever
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Dermatomycoses, in sheep and
chorioretinitis, 273
corneal endothelial dystrophy,
goats, 403
pseudopapilledema, 286
147
Dermatomyositis, canine,
Cushing's disease, equine, 533
distichiasis, 57
473
Cutaneous asthenia
glaucoma, 163t
Dermatophilosis
canine, 465
juvenile pyoderma, 472
bovine, 381-382
feline, 500-521
limbal coloboma, 126
swine, 415
sheep and cattle, 535-536
medial canthus blepharitis,
 Dermatophytosis
Cuterebra,72,295,303,303,314,
73
bovine, 382
506, 513-514, 514
merle gene, 191
canine, 482
Cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive,
optic nerve hypoplasia, 285
equine,529-530
130, 132, 132
orbital cyst, 38
feline, 295, 512
Cyclodestructive techniques,
retinal degeneration, 267t
food animals, 537, 539
184, 186
retinal dysplasia, 266t
swine, 415
Cyclophosphamide, for
 superficial punctate keratitis,
Dermoid
uveodermatologic
144
bovine, 383, 383
syndrome, 475
uveodermatologic syndrome,
camelid, 411
Cyclophotocoagulation, 184, 186,
201, 474
canine, 57,57, 104, 105, 123,
319
Dacron swab, 14, 15
123
Cyclosporine
 Dacryocystitis
equine,335
for chronic superficial keratitis,
canine, 94, 95
Feline corneal, 309, 309
143
equine, 335
guinea pig, 427
for KCS, 298
rabbit, 422-424, 423
Descemetoceles, 136-137, 137
for keratitis, 355, 356
Dacryocystorhinography, 9, 23,
Descemet's membrane, 1l9, 120,
as lacrostimulant, 84b, 85
23,92,335,336,
120, 136-137
for nodular granulomatous
423
Dexamethasone
episcleritis, 151
Dalmatian
for anterior uveitis, 200t
for Sjogren's-like syndrome,
chronic superhcial keratitis,
for chronic superhicial keratitis,
508
142t
143
Cyst
deafness, 464
for Feline proliferative
conjunctival
dermoids, 57
keratoconjunctivitis,
camelid, 411
glaucoma, 163t
307
canine, 106
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
 Diabetes mellitus
sheep and goats, 407
(NCL), 271
canine, 493, 493-494
corneal epithelial inclusion,
Dandie Dinmont Terrier,
cataracts and, 225-227, 227
148-149
glaucoma in, 163t
feline, 521
Feline eyelid, 295-296
Dazzle rellex, 7, 446-447
 Diabetic retinopathy
hydatid, 532
Deafness, 463-464, 500
canine,277-278, 494
iris, feline, 310-311
 Deep lamellar endothelial
feline, 325, 521
meibomian, 74
keratoplasty (DELK),
 Diagnostic procedures,
orbital, 38
355
11-22
uveal, canine, 193, 194-195
 Demodicosis
 anterior chamber paracentesis,
vitreal, canine, 250
bovine, 382,540
21-22, 22
Cysticercosis, 539-540
canine, 72, 485
corneoconjunctival culture, 14,
Cytobrush, 14, 15
equine, 530
14
Cytology, corneoconjunctival,
feline, 294-295, 295, 514
 corneoconjunctival cytology,
14-15, 15
goat, 404
14-15, 15
Demyelination, 453
direct ophthalmoscopy, ll-12,
D
Dermatologic diseases
12, 12t, 13b
Dachshund
canine, 471-475
electrodiagnostic testing,
chronic superficial keratitis,
equine, 529
29-32, 30, 32, 32t
142t
feline, 507
external stains, 16-18, 17t
INDex/613
gonioscopy, 20-21, 21
Dogs. See also sperific breeds;
eyelid diseases, 53-78
imaging, 22-26
specific disorders
breed predisposition, 582,
indirect ophthalmoscopy,
anterior chamber centesis,
584, 586
12-14, 13, 13b
22
 congenital/inherited
nasolacrimal flush, 18, 18-19,
anterior uvea, 189-215
abnormalities, 56-69
19
anatomy,189-190
inflammation, 70-74,
slit-lamp biomicroscopy, 1l,
degenerative iridal changes,
71
11
194, 194-195, 195
lagophthalmos, 70
tear tests, 15-16, 16
 developmental conditions,
neoplasia, 75-76
tonometry, 19-20, 20,20t
190-194
ptosis, 70
ultrasound, 26-29
diagnostics, 190
surgery, 55-56, 76-78, 77
vitreous paracentesis, 22
hyphema, 209, 209-210,
trauma, 69-70
Diathermy-electro-epilation, 58,
210b
fundus, normal
58t
iridial proliferations, benign,
development of, 257-258
 Dichlorphenamide, for equine
210-211, 211
magnihcation with direct
glaucoma, 365
surgery, 214-215
ophthalmoscopy, 12t
Diclofenac, for anterior uveitis,
trauma, 207-209, 208
nontapetal fundus, 255, 256
200t
tumors, 211-214, 212,
 optic nerve head, 257
Dilated pupil syndrome, 506
213
retinal vasculature, 257
 Diminizine, for trypanosomiasis,
uveitis, 196-207
tapetal fundus, 253, 255,
488
conjunctiva, 97-108
256
Dipivalyl epinephrine, 551
anatomic abnormalities,
glaucoma, 155-186
 Dipotassium ethylenediamine-
106-107
age, effect of, 165
tetraacetic acid
anatomy, 97-98
breed-predisposed, 163t,
(EDTA), for corneal
conjunctivitis, 99-104
164-165, 166-173,
ulcer, 339
cytology, 98, 98t
582, 584, 586
Direct ophthalmoscopy, 1l-12,
foreign bodies, 106
classi hcation, 161-1625,
12, 12t, 13b
hemorrhage, 106, 106
162b
Dirofilariasis
innervation, 98
clinical effects of elevate
canine, 204, 483-484, 484
masses, 104-106
IOP, 155, 156t
equine,530-531
normal lora, 98
clinical signs, 162-163,
Disaccommodation, 451
radiation effects, 107
165-166, 165t
Disodium ethylene-diaminetetra-
response to disease, 98-99
congenital, 162, 162b, 180,
acetic acid (EDTA), for
surgical procedures,
180
melting ulcers, 140,
107-108, 108
diagnostics, 155-161
140b
vascular supply, 98
DNA studies, 163-164
Disophenol toxicity, 498t
cornea, 119-150
epidemiology, 161
Distichiasis, canine, 57-58, 58t,
anatomy,119-120, 120
gender, effect of, 165
59
clarity, 120
inheritance, 163-164, 163b
 DNA-based tests for retinal
diseases
optic nerve and, 288
dystrophies, 253,
 congenital/developmental,
pigmentary, 210
254t-255t
123-126
primary, 161-162, 162b,
Doberman Pinscher
 epithelial inclusion cysts,
164-173
anterior segment dysgenesis,
148-149
 primary angle-closed
193-194
inflammatory keratopathy,
(PACG), 163t,
ligneous conjunctivitis, 103,
126-144
165-167, 166t, 181
103
neoplasia, 149, 149-150
 primary open angle (POAG),
medial canthal pocket
 noninlammatory
156, 158, 159, 163t,
syndrome, 106
keratopathy, 144-148
164, 165, 168-169
PHTVL/PHPV, 218, 220, 248
edema, 122-123
retinal degeneration, 278
posterior lenticonus, 218
healing, 120-122, 121t
secondary, 161-162, 162b,
retinal dysplasia, 262t
pigmentation, 122
173-180, 174b
614/INDEX
Dogs (cont.)
prolapse of gland (cherry
Draping, for lid surgery, 55
stages of primary, 165-166,
eye), 110,110-112,
Drugs. See also sperific drugs
166t
112-113
adrenergics, 551
treatment, 173b, 180-186,
repositioning gland, 110,
antibiotics, 557-558
181b, 185, 186
111-112, 112-113
antifbrotics, 579
Horner's syndrome, 455t
trauma, 114
antifungals, 561
inherited eye diseases,
orbit
antivirals, 559
581-588
anatomy, 35
artificial tear substitutes,
intraocular pressure (IOP)
diseases, 35-48
553-554
range, 20t
acquired diseases, 38-48
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
lacrimal secretory system,
 congenital anomalies,
(CAIs), 563
79-89
37-38
corticosteroids, 565
anatomy, 80
diagnostic tests, 36-37,
fibrinolytics, 579
cysts, 89
37t
hyperosmotics, 569
diseases and surgery of,
differential diagnosis, 35,
miotics, 571-572
79-89
36t
mydriatics, 53-575
neoplasms, 89
enophthalmos, 35, 36t
nonsteroidal anti-inlammatory
lens disorders
exophthalmos, 35, 36t
drugs (NSAIDs), 567
cataracts, 220-234
surgery, 48-51
prostaglandins, 577
 congenital/developmental,
posterior segment, 245-288
stains, 579
218-221
optic nerve,284-288
tissue glue, 579
luxation, 174-176, 174b,
retinal diseases, 258-270
topical and local anesthetics,
219, 232, 232-234,
surgery, 281-284
555
232b, 233, 583, 585,
vitreous, 245-251
viscoelastics, 579
587
restraint/sedation, 4-5, 4b
Dry eye. See Keratoconjunctivitis
surgery, 234-242
retinal disorders, 258-270
sicca (KCS)
mydriatic agents, 573
Schirmer tear test, 16, 16
Dryopteris felixmas, 400
nasolacrimal lush, 18,
scleral diseases
Dwarfism, 220, 464-465
18-19
episcleritis, 150-151, 151
Dysautonomia
nasolacrimal system, 89-95
scleritis, 151-152
canine, 469-470
acquired diseases, 94-95
strabismus, 457, 457
description, 460-461
anatomy, 89, 89-90
systemic disease, 463-500
equine,528
clinical manifestations of
tear breakup time, 17
feline, 506
disease, 90-91, 90b
thiamine defciency, 461
Dysplasia palpebrae, 57
congenital diseases, 92-94
tonometry, 20
Dystocia, equine, 528
diagnostic procedures,
vitreous, 245-251
91-92
Domestic shorthair
E
embryology, 89
anterior uveitis,312
Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid
physiology, 90
cataract, 320
disease), 532
nictitating membrane,
corneal dermoids, 309
Ectopic cilia, 58-59
108-116
eyelid agenesis, 293, 294
Ectopic lentis, equine, 359
anatomy, 108-109, 109
glaucoma, 318, 319
Ectropion
bent cartilage, 109
hypertensive retinopathy,
bovine, 381
 breed predisposition for
325
clinical signs, 64, 64
disorders, 582, 584,
Dorzolamide, 183, 319, 365
description, 64
586
Doxycycline
equine, 334
foreign bodies, 1l4-115,
for Anaplasma, 488
sheep, 402
115
for bartonellosis, 508
therapy, 64-67, 65t, 66, 67
inllammation, 113-114,
for chlamydophilosis, 510
Edema, corneal, 122-123
114
for ehrlichiosis, 489
Edinger-Westphal nucleus, 446,
neoplasia, 1l3, 113
for melting ulcers, 140, 140b
446, 451
INDex/615
Edrophonium hydrochloride,
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 164,
in puppies, 60-61
473
165, 170-171
Quikert-Rathburn
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
persistent pupillary
 procedure, 61
canine, 227,465
membranes, 192
tacking lids (stay-sutures),
cataracts and, 227
retinal degeneration, 267, 267t
60-61, 61t
feline, 500-521
trichiasis, 68
Enucleation
sheep and cattle, 535-536
English Setter
birds, 440
Ehrlichiosis
deafness, 464
canine, 48-50, 49
canine, 205, 488-489, 489
eyelid tumors, 75
equine, 342,351
equine,532
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
feline, 328
Elaeophora schneideri, 408, 441
(NCL), 271
llama, 414
Elaeophorosis (sore head), in
 English Springer Spaniel
reptiles, 435
sheep, 404
chronic superficial keratitis,
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis
ELA (equine leukocyte antigen)
142t
equine,346
haplotypes, 367
glaucoma, 163t, 171
feline, 303
Electric shocks
infantile corneal dystrophy
Eosinophilic keratitis, equine,
cataracts from, 498t
126
359
cattle, 544
KCS, 81b
Eosinophilic myositis, 41-42, 42
equine,534
pseudopapilledema, 286
Eosinophilic-proliferative
Electrodiagnostic testing, 29-30,
retinal degeneration, 268
keratitis, in cats,
30,32, 32t
retinal dysplasia, 220, 262t
306-307, 307
 Electroretinography (ERG),
English Toy Spaniel
Epilation, 58, 58t, 59
29-31, 30, 32, 32t,
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Epinephrine, 551
159, 161, 252-253,
pseudopapilledema, 286
Epiphora
471
 Enophthalmos
bovine, 382-383
EL (equine leukoencephalomala-
differential diagnosis, 35, 36t
canine, 93, 93-94
cia), 534
equine,342
feline, 297
Elk, chorioretinitis in, 441
Enrofloxacin toxicity, feline, 324,
rabbit, 423
EMND (Equine Motor Neuron
324, 523-524, 524
Episcleritis, canine, 150-15l, 151
Disease), 374, 529
 Entelbucher Mountain Dog,
Epithelial keratopathy, equine,
Emphysema, orbital, 46
cataract in, 221t
356
Encephalitozoa cuniculi, 425-426
Entropion
Equine anaplasmosis, 532
Encephalopathy, ischemic, 506
bovine, 381
Equine disorders. See Horses;
 Endophthalmitis
canine
sperific anatomical areas;
definition, 196
clinical signs, 60
specijfic diseases
equine,369-370
description, 59
Equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis,
Endothelial cell dystrophy,
diagnosis, 60
532
147-148
epidemiology, 59,60, 60b
Equine grass sickness, 528
Endothelitis, equine, 356
site of, 60b
Equine herpesvirus-1 (EHV-1) in
English Bulldog
therapy, 61-63, 61t
camelids, 414
cherry eye, 110
equine, 333-334, 334, 343
Equine herpesvirus-2 (EHV-2)
distichiasis, 57
feline, 294
keratitis, 358-359
ectopic cilia, 58
rabbit, 424
Equine leukocyte antigen (ELA)
entropion, 60,60b
sheep, 402, 402
haplotypes, 367
KCS, 81b
swine, 415
 Equine leukoencephalomalacia
English Bull Terrier,
therapy, 61-63, 61t
(EL), 534
microblepharon in, 67
Celsus-Hotz procedure, 6lt,
 Equine Motor Neuron Disease
English Cocker Spaniel
62, 62-63, 62b
(EMND), 374, 529
deafness, 464
complications, 63
Equine ophthalmology,
distichiasis, 57
postoperative management,
331-376. See also
entropion, 60b
63
Horses
616/INDEx
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU),
Exotropia, 48, 456
ankyloblepharon, 56, 56-57
367-369
External ophthalmic stains,
aplasia, 57
breed susceptibility, 367
16-18, 17t
coloboma, 57
cataracts, 361, 361-362
Extraocular muscles, innervation
dermoids, 57, 57
clinical signs, 368
of, 447-448
distichiasis, 57-58, 58t, 59
 geographic differences in
Extraocular myositis, 473-474,
dysplasia palpebrae, 57
prevalence, 367
474
ectopic cilia, 58-59
immunopathology, 367
Extraocular polymyositis, 41,
ectropion, 64-67
iridocyclitis, 365
42
entropion, 59-63,60,61t,
laboratory testing, 369
Eyelid
62, 62b
leptospirosis and, 367-368,
akinesia, 5, 5-6,6
microblepharon, 67-68
369
canine
trichiasis, 68-69, 69
prognosis,369
diseases, 56-76
trichomegaly, 69
treatment, 37t, 369
structure and function,
inflammation, 70-74, 71
Equine ulcerative keratomycosis,
53-55, 54
bacterial blepharitis, 71-72
351-352, 352t
surgery, 55-56, 76-78
chalazion, 73
ERG. See Electroretinography
efferent innervation to, 449
 generalized blepharitis,
(ERG)
examination, 8
70-71
ERU. See Equine recurrent uveitis
Eyelid agenesis, feline,
hordeolum (stye), 73-74
(ERU)
293-294, 294
immune-mediated
Esotropia
Eyelid diseases
blepharitis, 73
cattle, 379
bovine, 381-382
inflammatory masses,
differential diagnosis,
camelid, 411
74-75
456-457
canine (see Eyelid diseases,
leishmania blepharitis,
equine, 333
canine)
72-73
feline, 309
differential diagnosis,
meibomianitis, 74
Ethylenediamine tetra-acetate
457-458
mycotic blepharitis, 72
(EDTA), 140, 140b,
equine, 333, 333-335, 334,
 parasitic blepharitis, 72
339, 579
343-346, 344, 345
lagophthalmos, 70
Ethylene glycol intoxication,
blepharitis, 345-346, 346
neoplasia, 75-76
524-525
entropion, 343
ptosis, 70
Evisceration, 50-51, 51
lacerations, 344
surgery, 55-56, 76-78, 77
Exenteration
melanoma, 345
cryosurgery, 55-56
canine, 50
sarcoids, 345, 345
draping, 55
feline, 328
squamous cell carcinoma,
hemostasis, 55
Exophthalmos
344, 344-345
instruments, 55
bovine, 380, 380, 381
feline, 293-297
magnification equipment
differential diagnosis, 35, 36t
blepharitis, 294-295, 295
and light, 55
equine, 342, 342
 congenital disorders,
positioning, 55
Fish, 430
293-294, 294
postoperative care,56
Exotic animals. See also
cystic lesions, 295-296
preparation of operative
 Laboratory animals
neoplasia, 296-297, 296t,
feld, 55
amphibians, 430-432, 431
297
reconstructive
birds, 436-440, 437, 440
nodular lesions, 296
blepharoplasty, 76-77
chinchilla, 427
sheep, 402, 402-404
suture material, 55
ferret, 427-428
swine, 415
tarsorrhaphy, 77, 77-78
fsh, 428-430, 429
Eyelid diseases, canine, 53-78
wound apposition, 55
mammals, 440-442
breed predisposition, 582,
trauma, 69-70
reptiles, 432-436, 433, 435,
584, 586
Eye movements, differential
436
congenital/inherited
diagnosis of abnormal,
restraint, 5
abnormalities, 56-69
454-455
Inoex/617
Fibroma, 75
Foal. See also Horses, neonatal
A
Facial nerve paralysis, 457-458,
Fibrosarcoma
ocular problems
458
canine, 75
lens sutures, 337
Facial (VIl) nerve, 449
eyelid, feline, 296t, 297
ocular problems, 332-341
Fatty eye, guinea pig, 427
Fibrous histiocytoma, 105, 105
(See also Equine
Feline calicivirus (FCV), 302,
Filtration angle. See Iridocorneal
ophthalmology)
516-517
angle
Follicular conjunctivitis,
Feline central retinal
FIP. See Feline infectious
102-103, 103, 114
 degeneration (FCRD),
peritonitis (FIP)
Food animals, 379-417. See also
322-323, 522-523
Fish
specifir speries
Feline coronavirus, 517. See also
 ophthalmic anatomy,
inherited eye diseases, 593
Feline infectious
428-429, 429
systemic diseases, 535-545
 peritonitis (FIP)
ophthalmic diseases, 430
congenital, 535-536
Feline disorders. See Cats; sperijfic
ophthalmic examination,
developmental, 536
anatomical areas; specijfc
429-430
electric shocks, 544
diseases
 FIV (feline immunodeficiency
hematologic, 536-537
Feline enteric corona virus
virus), 31lt, 312, 519
idiopathic, 537
(FRCV), 517
 Flash electroretinography
immune-mediated, 537
Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1)
(FERG), 29, 31, 159,
infections, 537, 538t, 539,
conjunctivitis,298,299-300,
161
539-541
300
Flat-Coated Retriever
ionizing radiation,
diagnosis, 518
distichiasis, 57
544-545
diseases associated with, 518,
ectopic cilia, 58
metabolic, 541
518t
glaucoma, 163t, 171
neoplasia, 541-542
incidence, 517
histocytoses, 74
nutritional disorders,
keratitis, 304-306, 305
 Flesh eye, guinea pig, 427
542-543, 543
laboratory diagnosis, 301t
Floater, vitreous, 249
toxicities, 543, 544t
neonatal ophthalmia, 300
Florida keratopathy (Florida
Food hypersensitivity, 507
spread, 517-518
spots), 144, 308, 308
 Foreign body
therapy for, 305-306
Fluconazole
conjunctival, 106
treatment, 518-519,519t
for aspergillosis, 479
equine corneal, 352
Feline immunodeficiency virus
for coccidioidomycosis, 512
lens injury, 229
(FIV), 311t, 312, 519
for cryptococcosis, 48l, 512
nasolacrimal duct, 94
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),
equine use, 352t
nictitating membrane,
311t, 313, 459, 517
Flucytosine
114-115, 115
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
for cryptococcosis, 481
orbital, 48
311t, 313, 520
dosage and spectrum, 561
Four-point block, 392-393
 Feline ophthalmology, 293-328.
Flunixin meglumine, for anterior
FPV (feline panleukopenia virus),
See also Cats
uveitis, 200t
520
 Feline panleukopenia virus
 Fluorescein angiography, 26
Fracture, orbital
(FPV), 520
Fluorescein dye, 8, 16-18, 17t,
canine, 48
Feline sarcoma virus (FeSV)
82, 579
equine,343
314, 520-521
 passage test for nasolacrimal
 FRCV (feline enteric corona
FeLV (feline leukemia virus),
patency, 91
virus), 517
311t, 313, 520
ulcer diagnosis, 126, 127, 129,
Frontal nerve, 451
FERG. See Flash
348
Full-held (Ganzfeld) stimulator,
electroretinography
 Fluoroquinolone toxicity, feline,
31, 31
(FERG)
523-524
 Fundic examination
Ferret, 427-428
5-luorouracil, 183, 579
angiography, 252
FeSV (feline sarcoma virus), 314,
Flurbiprofen, for anterior uveitis,
behavioral testing, 251
520-521
200t
description, 11
618/INDEx
Fundic examination (cont.)
glaucoma, 163t
clinical effects of elevate IOP,
ophthalmoscopy, 252
intraocular melanoma, 211
155, 156t
optical coherence tomography
iris nevi, 211
clinical signs, 162-163,
(OCT), 252
lens dislocation, 233
165-166, 165t
rellex testing, 251-252
limbal melanoma, 150
diagnostics, 155-161
scanning laser ophthalmoscopy
medial canthus blepharitis, 73
electrophysiology studies,
(SLO), 252
plasmoma, 114
159, 161
ultrasonography, 252
pseudopapilledema, 286
gonioscopy, 157, 158
Fundus
RPED, 270
ophthalmoscopy, 157, 159
camelids, 413, 414
tyrosinemia, 227
provocative tests, 161
diseases in sheep and goats,
German Shorthaired Pointer
tonography, 157-159
409-410
cone degeneration, 269
tonometry, 156-157
normal canine
nictitating membrane cartilage
ultrasound, 157,159, 160
development of, 257-258
eversion, 109
DNA studies, 163-164
nontapetal fundus, 255,
German Warmblood horse,
epidemiology, 161
256
equine recurrent uveitis
gender, effect of, 165
optic nerve head, 257
(ERU) in, 367
inheritance, 163-164, 163b
retinal vasculature, 257
Giant Schnauzer, glaucoma in,
optic nerve and, 288
tapetal fundus,253,255,
163t
pigmentary, 210
256
Glaucoma
retinal degeneration, 278
normal equine, 370-372, 371
bovine, 393-394, 394
secondary, 173-180
normal feline, 321, 321
camelid, 412
aphakic glaucoma, 176,
Fundus photography, 24-25, 25
canine (see Glaucoma, canine)
176-177
Fungi
equine, 363-366
intraocular neoplasia, 179,
encephalitis, 459
diagnosis and clinical signs,
179-180
fungal conjunctivitis, 101
364, 364-365, 365
lens luxations, 174-176,
reptiles, 435
medical treatment, 365
174b, 175
systemic infection, 313-314
neonatal, 340
malignant glaucoma,
toxicity, equine, 534
pathogenesis, 364
177-178
Fusarium moniliforme,534
risk factors for progression,
melanocytic glaucoma,
364
178-179, 179
G
surgical treatment,
phacomorphic glaucoma,
Ganciclovir, 306
365-366
176
Gas bubble disease, 430
types, 364
pigment exfoliation
Gene therapy, 284
feline, 317-319
glaucoma,179
Gentamicin, for endophthalmitis,
clinical signs, 319
rhegmatogenous retinal
369
congenital, 318, 318
detachments, 180
German Brown Swiss
etiology, 317-318
silicone oil and, 180
bilateral convergent strabismus
primary, 318, 318b
traumatic glaucoma, 178
with exophthalmia
secondary, 317, 318, 318b
treatments, 173b
(BCSE), 379-380
treatment, 319
uveitic glaucoma, 178
German Shepherd
types, 318, 318-319, 319
stages of primary, 165-166,
cataract, 221t
rabbit, 425, 425
166t
chronic superficial keratitis,
rat, 421
treatment, 180-186
122, 141, 141-142,
Glaucoma, canine
medical, 181-183, 181b
142t
age, effect of, 165
for secondary glaucomas,
corneal dystrophy, 144t
breed-predisposed, 163t,
173b
corneal lipidosis, 146
164-165, 166-173,
surgery, 184, 185, 186, 186
dermoids, 57
582, 584, 586
types
entropion, 60b
classiication, 161-1625,
congenital, 162, 162b, 180,
eosinophilic myositis, 41, 42
162b
180
INDex/619
primary, 161-162, 162b,
medial canthal pocket
Great Pyrenees
164-173
syndrome, 107
medial canthal pocket
primary angle-closed
persistent hyaloid artery, 247
syndrome, 107
(PACG), 163t,
 pigmentary uveitis in,
retinal pigment epithelial
165-167, 166t, 181
201-202
dysplasia, 261, 263,
primary closed angle
polymyositis, 41, 42, 43
263
(PCAG), 161
posterior lenticonus, 218
Greyhound
 primary open angle (POAG),
pseudopapilledema, 286
chronic superficial keratitis,
156, 158, 159, 163t,
retinal dysplasia, 2621
142, 142t
164, 165, 168-169
uveal cyst, 194, 195
glaucoma, 163t
secondary, 161-162, 162b,
lveitis, 178
Grey line, 54
173-180, 174b
Uveodermatologic syndrome,
Grid keratotomy, 130, 131
 Globe position, anatomical basis
201, 474
Griseofulvin
of, 447
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
for dermatophytosis, 482
Glucocorticoids, for pemphigus,
syndrome,73
teratogenicity in cats, 327
529
Goniodysgenesis
teratogenicity in horses, 527
Glycerol, for glaucoma, 182
canine, 164
toxicity in cats, 524
Goats. See also Food animals
guanaco, 412
Guanaco. See Camelids
anemia, 536
Gonioimplant, 184
Guernsey cattle, iridial
blepharitis, 403-404
Gonioscopy
heterochromia, 394,
bovine viral diarrhea (BVD),
description, 20-21, 21
395
538t
glaucoma diagnosis, 157, 158
Guinea pig, 426-427
cataracts, 408
Gordon Setter
Gunshot injury, 48
chlamydial conjunctivitis, 539
juvenile pyoderma, 472
Guthrod-Tietz procedure,
chlamydophilosis, 538t
medial canthal pocket
61t
conjunctival and corneal
syndrome, 107
diseases, 404-407, 406,
Graft
H
539
conjunctival, 107-108, 108
Habronemiasis, 345, 531
dermatophytosis, 537-538
corneal, 132-138
Haematopinus asini, 530
fundic diseases, 409-410
myocutaneous, 76
Hallinger
neonatal septicemia, 538t
sliding skin, 76
anterior segment dysgenesis,
neosporosis, 540
tarsoconjunctival, 76-77
366
ophthalmoscopic examination,
Granulomatous
squamous cell carcinoma, 344,
408, 408
meningoencephalitis
344-345
restraint, 5
(GME),470
Halicephalobus deletrix, 531
scrapie, 538t, 541
canine, 279-280, 287-288
Harderian gland, 109, 419, 420,
setariasis, 540
calse, 458
424, 430, 432
lveitis, 407
diagnosis, 458-459
Havanese
Goblet cells, conjunctival, 98
treatment, 459
cataract, 225
Golden Retriever
Grass tetany, 541
distichiasis, 57
cataract, 221t
Great Dane
vitreous degeneration, 249
corneal dystrophy, 144t
ectropion,64
Headshaking, equine,
dermoid or choristoma, 57
entropion, 60b
375-376, 529
entropion, 60b
glaucoma, 163, 163t, 17l, 179
Heartworm disease, canine, 483-
eosinophilic myositis, 41
medial canthal pocket
484, 484
extraocular myositis, 474
syndrome, 107
Helichrysum argyrosphaerum, 544t
eyelid tumors, 75
merle gene, 191
Hemangioma, canine corneal,
glaucoma, 163t, 179
polymyositis, 41, 42
149
histocytoses, 74
uveal cysts, 195
Hemangiosarcoma
juvenile pyoderma, 472
Greater petrosal nerve, 450
conjunctiva, 104
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
Great horned owl, 440
nictitating membrane, 113
620/INDEx
Hematologic diseases
Hog cholera, 415, 538t
ulcerative keratitis, 347-
canine, 467-469
Holstein cattle
351, 348, 350t, 351
equine,527-528
corneal disease, 383
ulcerative keratomycosis,
feline, 503-506
esotropia, 379
351-352, 352t
food animals, 536-537
iridial heterochromia, 394
viral keratitis, 358-359
Hematoma, canine orbital, 44,
strabismus, 457
corneal microanatomy/
46
Holstein-Friesian cattle
physiology, 347
Hemophilus somntus, 454
congenital nystagmus,
corneoconjunctival culture, 14
Hemorrhage
381
corpora nigra cysts, 366, 366
conjunctival, 106, 106
Hood (180%) conjunctival graft,
dacryocystorhinogram, 23
equine intravitreal, 372
133
endophthalmitis, 369-370
feline vitreal, 322
Hookworm,484
examination, 331-332
Hemostasis, for eyelid surgery,
Hordeolum, 73-74
eyelid diseases, 343-346
55
Horizontal band lesions, equine,
blepharitis, 345-346, 346
Heparin, 579
373
entropion, 343
Hepatozoonosis, 485-486
Horner's syndrome
lacerations, 344
 Hereditary equine regional
clinical signs, 454, 4551
melanoma, 345
dermal asthenia
feline, 298, 298-299
sarcoids, 345, 345
(HERDA), 527
Horses, 331-376. See also specifc
squamous cell carcinoma,
Hereford cattle
breeds
344, 344-345
albinism, 398
breed-related disorders, 376,
fundus magnification with
infectious bovine
591
direct ophthalmoscopy,
keratoconjunctivitis
cataracts, 360-363
12t
(IBK), 386
acquired/secondary,
geriatric problems, 376
iridial heterochromia, 394,
361-362, 362
glaucoma, 363-366
395
classihcation, 360
 diagnosis and clinical signs,
Herpesvirus. See sperifir viruses
developmental, 362-363
364, 364-365, 365
Heterochromia iridis
senile, 360-361
medical treatment, 365
canine, 191, 191
surgery, 363,363
pathogenesis, 364
cattle, 394-395
conjunctivitis, 346, 346, 346t
risk factors for progression,
equine, 335
corneal diseases, 347-359
364
llama, 412
corneal dystrophy, 356
surgical treatment, 365-366
swine, 415, 415-416
corneal sequestrum, 357
types,364
Heterotopic bone formations,
eosinophilic keratitis, 359
head shaking, 375-376
guinea pig, 427
foreign bodies, 352
Horner's syndrome, 455, 455t
Hexafluoride, 282
idiopathic primary edema,
intraocular pressure (IOP)
HIE (hypoxic ischemic
358
range, 20t
encephalopathy), 340
iris prolapse, 353
iridal cysts, 366
High-resolution ultrasonography,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
lens abnormalities, 359-360
157, 160
(KCS), 357
lens luxation/subluxation, 338,
Himalayan cat
lacerations/perforations,
360
cataract, 320
352-353
mydriatic agents, 575
corneal sequestration, 306
linear keratopathy, 358
nasolacrimal lush, 19, 19
eosinophilic-proliferative
mineralization, 358
 neonatal ocular problems,
keratitis, in cats, 307
 nonulcerative keratopathies,
332-341
strabismus, 456
355-356, 356
aniridia, 335
Histiocytoma, 75-76
radiation-induced
blepharitis, 333,333
Histiocytosis, 74-75, 499-500
keratopathy, 357
cataracts, 338, 338
Histoplasmosis
stromal abscess,
conjunctivitis,338
canine, 203t, 482
353-355, 354
corneal erosions, 339-340
feline, 313-314, 512-513
superficial erosion, 357-358
dacryocystitis, 335
INDex/621
dermoids, 334
strabismus, 457
Hypoaplasia, canine, 193
 entropion/ectropion,
systemic disease, 525-535
Hypocalcemia
333-334, 334
tear breakup time, 17
canine, 227,495
eyelid diseases, 333,
tonometry, 20
cattle, 541
333-335, 334
uveitis, 366-369, 368, 370t
feline, 521-522
glauicoma, 340
vision, 331
Hypolipidemic compounds, 498t
hemorrhage,
Hotz Celsus procedure, 6lt, 62,
Hypomagnesemia, 541
subconjunctival, 338
62-63, 62b
Hypothiaminosis
heterochromia iridis, 335
Hotz-Celsus technique, 294
bovine, 400
hyaloid artery remnants,
Hovawart, polymyositis in, 41,
sheep and goats, 409
337, 337
42
Hypothyroidism, canine,
iridal hypoplasia, 335, 337,
Hyalocentesis, 22, 246, 247
494-495
337
Hyaloid artery
Hypovitaminosis A. See Vitamin A
iridocyclitis, 340
development, 245
deficiency
lacerations, eyelid, 334,
remnants
Hypoxia, 505
334-335
equine,332,337,337
Hypoxic ischemic
lens luxation, 338
swine, 416
encephalopathy (HIE),
microphthalmos, 332,332
Hydatid disease, equine, 532
340
nasolacrimal system atresia,
Hydrocephalus
335
canine,465,465
I
optic nerve disorders, 341
cattle, 536
Ibizan Hound, medial canthal
orbit development, 332
description, 454
pocket syndrome in,
persistent pupillary
feline, 501
107
membranes, 337
Hygromycin B, 544t
IBK. See Infectious bovine
retinal disorders, 340-341,
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
keratoconjunctivitis
341
syndrome), canine,
(IBK)
strabismus, 333, 333
494
ICH. See Infectious canine
ulcerative keratitis,
Hypercholesterolemia, 432
hepatitis (ICH)
338-339, 339
Hypercupremia, 227
ICLE (intracapsular lens
vitiligo, 333
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
extraction),241-242
orbit
(HyPP), 534-535
Icterus
 anatomy, 341
Hyperlipidemia
canine,468
diagnostic procedures, 341,
canine, 207, 277,467-468
equine,528
342t
feline, 504
feline, 505
diseases, 341, 342, 343
Hyperopia, equine, 333, 333
food animal, 536
surgical techniques,
Hyperosmotic agents, 182, 569
 Idiopathic primary edema,
342-343
Hypertension
equine,358
posterior segment diseases,
canine, 277,467
Idoxuridine, 306, 359, 518
370-375
feline, 502-503
 Ilomostat, for melting ulcers,
chorioretinitis, 373, 373
postoperative, 177
140, 140b
congenital stationary night
Hypertensive iridocyclitis,
Imaging. See Ocular imaging
blindness (CSNB), 374
equine, 365
Imidacloprid, for pediculosis, 530
 optic nerve disorders,
Hypertensive retinopathy,
 Immune-mediated diseases
374-375, 375
324-325, 325,467,
canine, 73, 278, 471-475
 progressive retinal atrophy,
503
equine,529
374
Hyperthyroidism, feline, 521
feline, 507-508
retinal detachments, 374
Hyperviscosity syndrome
food animals, 537
vitreous disorders,
canine, 207,277,277,468
 Immunoglobulin-M dehciency,
372-373
feline, 326, 504-505
equine, 527
restraint/sedation, 4b, 5
Hyphema, canine, 209,
Immunomodulating agents, as
Schirmer tear test, 16, 16
209-210, 210b
lacrostimulants, 84b, 85
622/INDEx
 Inborn errors of metabolism,
Interferon, 306
Iridal lymphoma, 213
cataracts and, 227
Intracapsular lens extraction
Iridectomy, sector, 214
Inclusion cysts, corneal, 148-149
(ICLE), 241-242
 Iridociliary epithelial tumor,
Indirect ophthalmoscopy, 12-14
 Intraocular foreign bodies
canine, 212-213
Indomethacin, for anterior
(IOFB), 209
Iridocorneal angle, gonioscopy,
uveitis, 200t
Intraocular hyphema, in Collie
20-21, 21
Infectious bovine
Eye Anomaly, 258t
Iridocyclectomy, 214-215
keratoconjunctivitis
 Intraocular lens (IOL)
Iridocyclitis
(IBK), 385-389
design/material, 239, 239
canine,178,198,199,205
clinical signs, 387,
implantation, 239-240
equine, 340, 362, 365
387-388
sulcus IOL fixation, 242
Iridotomy, 215
economic impact, 385
surgical approach, 236-237
Iris
etiology, 385-386
Intraocular pressure (IOP). See
atrophy, canine, 194, 194
history, 385
also Glaucoma
benign iridal proliferations,
incidence, 385
in cataractous eyes, 235
210-211, 211
medical treatment, 388
clinical effects of elevated,
blue, 464, 500
morphology of Moraxella bovis,
155, 156t
examination, 10
386
measurement, 6, 10
feline
pathogenesis, 386-387
medical therapy, 181-183
 acquired abnormalities,
predisposing factors, 386
adrenergics, 182
310-311
surgical treatment, 388
antihbrin drugs, 183
blue, conditions associated
transmission, 386
carbonic anhydrase
with, 309-310
vaccination, 388-389
inhibitors, 182-183
 congenital abnormalities,
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis,
cytotoxic drugs, 183
310, 310
384, 384
hyperosmotic agents, 182
neoplasia, 315-316, 316
 Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH),
neuroprotection/
hyperpigmentation, 210-211
206, 492
neuroregeneration,
innervation, 450
 Infectious diseases. See also
183
melanoma, 211, 212, 215
specifc diseases
overview,181-182, 181b
morphology, 189
canine, 475-493
 parasympathomimetics, 182
nevus, 21l, 211
equine, 529-533
prostaglandins, 183
prolapse in the horse, 353
feline, 508-521
postoperative hypertension,
Irish Setter
food animals, 537, 538t, 539,
177
glaucoma, 163t
539-541
range, 19-20, 20, 20t
rod-cone dysplasia, 265, 266t
 In flammation
surgery for glaucoma, 184,
Uveodermatologic syndrome,
eyelid, 70-74, 71
185, 186, 186
201, 474
orbital
 Intravenous luid overload,
Irish Wolfhound, microphthalmia
canine, 38-41, 39,40,40t
canine, 468-469
in,38
feline, 327-328
IOFB (intraocular foreign
 Ischemic encephalopathy, 506
Infratrochlear nerve, 451
bodies), 209
 Island conjunctival graft,
Innervation
IOL. See Intraocular lens (IOL)
135-136
canine cornea, 120
Ionic disturbances
 Italian Greyhound
ciliary body, 450-451
canine, 495
corneal dystrophy, 144t
conjunctiva, 98
feline, 521-522
glaucoma, 163t
extraocular muscles, 447-448
food animals, 541
retinal tears, 282
eyelid, 449
Ionizing radiation, 498t, 525,
vitreous degeneration, 249
iris, 450, 450
544-545
Itraconazole
lacrimal glands, 449-450
IOP. See Intraocular pressure
for aspergillosis, 479
parasympathetic, 449
(IOP)
for blastomycosis, 480
sensory (afferent), 451-452
Iridal hypoplasia, equine,
for coccidioidomycosis, 512
sympathetic, 448-449
335-336
for cryptococcosis, 512
INDex/623
equine use, 352t
eosinophilic, 359
clinical fndings, 81-82, 82
for histoplasmosis, 513
ulcerative, 347-351, 348,
diagnosis, 82
for sporotrichosis, 513
350t, 351
treatment, 84-89,84b
Ivermectin
viral, 358-359
antibiotics, 86
for demodicosis, 485,530
feline
 anti-inflammatory agents,
for habronemiasis, 531
bacterial, 308
98
for Oesirus ovis, 407
eosinophilic-proliferative,
lacrimomimetics (tear
for onchocerciasis, 532
306-307, 307
substitutes), 84b,
for sarcoptic mange, 382
herpesvirus, 304-306, 305
85-86
toxicity, 498t, 524
reindeer, 441
lacrostimulants, 84-85,
Keratoconjunctivitis
84b
bovine, 384-389
mucinolytic-anticollagenase
Jack Russell Terrier
chlamydial, 385
agents, 86
dermatomyositis, 473
infectious bovine
mucinomimetics, 87
distichiasis, 57
keratoconjunctivitis
parotid duct transposition,
ectopic cilia, 58
(IBK), 385-389
87-89, 88
glaucoma, 16l,163
clinical signs, 387,
Keratomycosis, equine ulcerative,
lens dislocation, 233
387-388
351-352, 352t
retinal tears, 282
economic impact, 385
 Keratoplasty, equine
Japanese Brown cattle,
etiology, 385-386
 deep lamellar endothelial
anophthalmia in, 379
history, 385
(DELK), 355
Jersey cattle
incidence, 385
penetrating (PK), 354, 354
bilateral convergent strabismus
medical treatment, 388
posterior lamellar (PLK), 355
with exophthalmia
morphology of Moraxella
split thickness penetrating,
(BCSE), 379-380
bovis, 386
354-355
iris abnormalities, 395
pathogenesis, 386-387
Keratotomy, grid, 130, 131
strabismus, 457
predisposing factors, 386
Kerry Blue Terrier,
surgical treatment, 388
microblepharon in, 67
K
transmission, 386
Ketamine, 4b, 5
KCS. See Keratoconjunctivitis
vaccination, 388-389
Ketoconazole
sicca (KCS)
mycoplasmal, 385
for blastomycosis, 511
Keeshound, glaucoma in, 163t
parasitic, 384-385
for coccidioidomycosis,
Kentucky Mountain Saddle
camelid, 412
511-512
Horse, anterior segment
guinea pig, 427
dosage and spectrum, 561
dysgenesis in, 366
koalas, 441
equine use, 352t
Keratectomy, superhcial,
mule deer, 441
toxicity,498t
123-124, 125
swine, 415
Key-Gaskell syndrome, 506
Keratitis
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
Kimura platinum spatula, 14, 15
canine
canine, 81-82, 472
Koalas, keratoconjunctivitis in,
chronic superficial keratitis
breed predisposition, 81b,
441
(pannus), 141,
582, 584, 586
Kuhnt-Szymanowski modifed
141-143, 142t
conjunctivitis from, 103
 procedure, for
neurogenic keratitis, 143
description, 80, 472
ectropion, 65, 66
pigmentary keratitis,
equine,357
140-141, 141
feline, 298
L
superhcial punctate keratitis,
fluorescein staining, 17
Laboratory animals
144
mucin deficiency and, 83, 83
chinchilla, 427
ulcerative keratitis, 126-140
neurogenic, 460
examination techniques, 419
equine
quantitative deficiency, 81-82
ferret, 427-428
chronic deep, 355-356
 breed predisposition, 81b
guinea pig, 426-427
chronic superficial, 355
causes, 8l, 81b
mouse, 421-422
624/INDEx
Laboratory animals (cont.)
Lacrimomimetics, 84b, 85-86
Lens disorders, canine
rabbit, 422-426, 423, 424,
Lacrimostimulants, 84-85,
cataracts, 220-234
425, 426, 427
84b
 congenital/developmental,
rat, 420, 420-421
 Lagophthalmos, 70
218-221
rodent eye, general features of,
Lakeland Terrier, glaucoma in,
aphakia, 218
419-420
163t
cataract, 220, 221, 221t
Labrador Retriever
Lancaster Heeler, Collie Eye
coloboma, 218
cataract, 221t
Anomaly in, 258
lenticonus/lentiglobus,
ciliary body adenoma, 213
Laradius laraedii, 435
218-219
dwarfism, 464, 464-465
 Laser Doppler velocimetry
luxation, 219
entropion, 60b
(LDV), 26
microphakia, 218
eosinophilic myositis, 41
Laser flowmetry, 26
vascular abnormalities,
eyelid tumors, 75
Laser photocoagulation, 215
embryonic, 219,
glaucoma, 179
Latanoprost, 365, 577
219-220, 220
histocytoses, 74
Lateral geniculate nucleus, 445,
luxation, 174-176, 174b,
iris melanoma, 211
447, 453
219, 232, 232-234,
juvenile pyoderma, 472
Leishmaniasis
232b, 233, 583, 585,
limbal melanoma, 150
blepharitis, 72-73
587
medial canthal pocket
canine, 72-73, 204-205, 486,
surgery,234-242
syndrome, 107
486-487
Lens-induced uveitis (LIU)
pigmentary glaucoma, 210
feline, 296, 514-515
canine, 199, 201
pseudopapilledema, 286
sheep, 540
feline, 314-315
retinal degeneration, 267, 267t
Lens
Lenticonus, 218-219
retinal dysplasia, 220, 249,
canine
Lenticular degeneration
262t
examination of, 217
birds, 439
RPED, 269
morphology, 217
reptiles, 435-436
uveal cyst, 194
surgery for instability,
Lentiglobus, 218
Laceration
241-242
Leonberger
equine corneal, 352-353
concentric cortical lamination,
ectropion, 64
eyelid
360
entropion, 60b
bovine, 381
examination, 10
Leptospirosis
canine, 69-70
feline
canine, 206,477-478
equine, 334, 334-335, 344
cataracts, 320, 320-321
equine, 367-368, 369
full-thickness corneal, 138,
congenital anomalies, 320
Lethal white foal syndrome,
138
luxation, 318, 319, 321
525-526
nasolacrimal system, 94
luxation
Leucaena leucocephala, 396
Lacrimal glands, innervation,
canine, 174-176,174b,
Leukoma, 125-126
449-450
219, 232, 232-234,
Levamisole, for angiostrongylosis,
Lacrimal nerve, 451
232b, 233, 583, 585,
483
Lacrimal puncta, 8, 18, 18-19,
587
 Levator anguli oculi medialis
19
equine, 338, 360,364
(Muller's muscle), 53,
Lacrimal punctal atresia, 92,
feline, 321
54
92-93
feline glaucoma and, 318,
Levator palpebrae superioris, 53
 Lacrimal secretory system,
319
Levobunolol, 551
canine, 79-89. See also
glaucoma and, 174-176,
 Lhaso Apso
Tears
174b
caruncle trichiasis, 69
anatomy, 80
vitreal prolapse and, 251
cherry eye, 110
cysts, 89
nuclear sclerosis, 360
corneal dystrophy, 144t
diseases and surgery of,
subluxation, 175-176
juvenile pyoderma, 472
79-89
Lens capsule rupture, 209,
medial aberrant dermis, 107
neoplasms, 89
235
nasal fold trichiasis, 68
INDEx/625
Ligneous conjunctivitis, 103,
Lymphosarcoma
Mannitol, for glaucoma, 182
103-104
bovine, 541
Margo intermarginales, 54
Limbal melanoma, canine, 149,
corneal, canine, 149, 150
Mast cell tumor, feline eyelid,
150
equine,533
296t, 297
Lime-sulfur solution, for
feline, 317, 520, 520, 522
Masticatory myositis, 36t, 41-42,
notoedric mange, 514 
Horner's syndrome from,
473-474
Linear keratopathy, equine, 358
454
Mastiff
Lipemia, 504
orbital, in cattle, 380
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Lipemia retinalis, 325
systemic,canine,496
ectropion, 64
Lipid keratopathy
uveal, canine, 213
 persistent pupillary
canine,146
uveal, feline, 317
membranes, 192
rabbit, 425
Lysine, 306
posterior lenticonus, 218
Lipidosis
Lysosomal storage diseases
retinal degeneration, 268
corneal, 146
bovine, 400, 536
Matrix metalloproteinases
rabbit, 442
canine, 465-466, 466t
(MMPs), 122
Lipid retinopathy, 270-271
effect on vision, 459
Maxillary nerve, 451
Lipid tear abnormalities, 82-84,
feline, 326, 502
Maxillary sinustomy,
86-87
sheep and goats, 410, 536
conjunctival,94
Lipofuscin, 497
Maze test, 8
Lipogranulomatous
M
 Medial aberrant dermis, 107
conjunctivitis, in cats,
Macroblepharon, 64, 64-67
 Medial canthal pocket syndrome,
303, 303
Macula, 125
106-107
Listeriosis, 427, 538t
 Magnetic resonance imaging
Medulloepithelioma, 213, 414
LIU. See Lens-induced uveitis
(MRI), 24, 342t
Megalocornea, canine, 123
(LIU)
Maine Coon, persistent pupillary
Megestrol acetate
Lizards. See Reptiles
membranes (PPMs) in,
for feline proliferative
Llama, 410-414
310
keratoconjunctivitis,
cataracts, 413, 413
Major petrosal nerve, 460
307
 conjunctiva and cornea,
Malamute, heterochromia iridis
toxicity, 525
411-412
in, 191
Meglumine antimonate, for
eyelids, 411
Malaris muscle, 54
leishmaniasis, 487
glaucoma, 412
Malar nerve, 450, 450
Meibomian glands
incidence of ocular disease,
Malassezia pachydermatitis, 99
anatomy, 54, 54
410
Male fern poisoning, 544t
Cyst, 74
nasolacrimal system, 411
Malignant catarrhal fever, 538t,
distichiasis and, 57
 orbit and globe, 411
539
neoplasia, 75, 75
posterior segment, 413-414
Malignant glaucoma, 178-179,
tear deficiencies and, 82-84
restraint, 5
179
Meibomianitis, 74, 83,86
uveal tract, 412, 412-413
Maltese, glaucoma in, 163t
Melanocytic glaucoma, 178-179.
L-lysine, 306
MALT (mucosa-associated
179
Locoweed poisoning, 400, 407,
lymphoid tissue),
Melanocytoma, 2ll-212
410,544t
109
Melanoma
Lowchen, vitreous degeneration
Mammals, exotic
conjunctival
in,249
cataracts, 441-442
canine, 104
Lyme disease, 475-476
malformations, 440-441
feline, 303-304
Lymphatic drainage, eyelid, 55
neoplasia, 442
corneal, feline, 309
Lymphoma
nutritional disorders, 442
eyelid
conjunctiva
ocular examination, 440
canine, 75
canine, 104
retinal degeneration, 442
equine,345
Feline, 304
trauma, 442
glaucoma and, 179, 179
third eyelid, feline, 299
Mandibular branch, 451
iridal, feline, 315-316, 316
626/INDEx
Melanoma (cont.)
Microsporum canis, 295, 482,
persistent hyperplastic primary
iris, 215
512, 537
vitreous, 26l, 262
limbal, canine, 149, 150
Microsporum equinum, 529
posterior lenticonus, 218
nictitating membrane, 113
Microsporum gypseum, 482, 529
retinal dysplasia, 26l, 262.
swine, 542
Microsporum nanum,415,537
266, 266t
lveal, canine, 21l-212
Milbemycin, 485
senile iris atrophy, 194
Melanosis, corneal, 122
Milk fever, 541
Mink, Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Melting ulcers, 139, 139
Milk replacer-induced disease,
in, 440
 Menace response
497, 522
Miotics, 571-572
anatomical basis of the, 447
Mineralization, equine corneal,
Mites. See specijfic species
birds, 438
358
Mitomycin, 183, 579
testing canine, 252
Miniature Bull Terrier, lens
 Mitotane,494
Menace test, 7
dislocation in, 233
Mittendorfs Dot, 245, 337, 361
Meningioma, 45
Miniature Horse
MMPs (matrix
Merle gene, 191, 220, 464
anterior segment dysgenesis,
metalloproteinases),
Merle Ocular Dysgenesis, 220,
366
122
259
entropion, 334
Moldy corn disease, 534
Metabolic diseases
Miniature Pinscher
Moon blindness. See Equine
canine, 493-495
chronic superhcial keratitis,
recurrent uveitis
equine, 533
142t
(ERU)
feline, 521-522
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Moraxella bovis, 385-389
Fish, 430
glaucoma, 163t
Morgan horse
food animals, 541
microblepharon, 67
anterior segment dysgenesis,
Methazolamide, for glaucoma,
Miniature Poodle
366
365
cataract, 225
cataracts, 338
Methylcellulose, 86
cone degeneration, 269
Mountain Pleasure Horse,
Methylene blue, 17t
corneal dystrophy, 144t
anterior segment
Methylprednisolone, for anterior
entropion, 60b
dysgenesis in, 366
uveitis, 200t
eyelid tumors, 75
Mouse, 421-422
 Metipranolol, 551
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 165,
Moxidectin
Miconazole
171
for onchocerciasis, 532
dosage and spectrum, 561
infantile corneal dystrophy,
for sarcoptic mange, 403
equine use, 352t
126
Mucin dehciency, 83, 83-84
Microbiological culture, 8
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
Mucinolytic-anticollagenase
Microblepharon, 67-68
medial canthus blepharitis, 73
agents, 86
Microcornea, canine, 123
progressive retinal atrophy,
Mucinomimetics, 87
Micropapilla, canine, 285,
265
Mucoceles, 4l, 41
286
progressive rod-cone
Mucopolysaccharide storage
Microphakia, canine, 218
 degeneration, 267,
disease, canine, 272
Microphthalmia
267t
Mucopolysaccharidosis, feline,
canine, 36t, 37-38, 38, 582,
pseudopapilledema, 286
307, 326
584, 586
senile iris atrophy, 194
Mucosa-associated lymphoid
cattle, 379, 380
 tear-staining syndrome, 93
tissue (MALT), 109
equine, 332, 332
Miniature Schnauzer
Murboden, albinism in, 535
ferret, 428
cataract, 22lt, 222, 225
Murray Grey cattle, infectious
rat, 420-421
glaucoma, 163t
bovine
sheep, 401, 402
hyperlipidemia, 468
keratoconjunctivitis
swine, 414
KCS, 81b
(IBK) in, 386
Micropunctum, 93
microphthalmia, 38
Myasthenia gravis
Microsporum, in sheep and goats,
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
canine, 472-473
403
(NCL), 271
feline, 501, 507
INDex/627
Mycobacteriosis, feline, 295,
Nasolacrimal flush
Neonatal maladjustment
510
canine, 91,91
syndrome, 340
Mycoplasmosis
description, 18, 18-19, 19
 Neonatal septicemia, 538t
feline, 302, 510
rabbit, 423-424
Neoplasia
keratoconjunctivitis
Nasolacrimal systerm
birds, 439
bovine, 385
assessment of, 8
camelid, 412, 413, 414
sheep and goats, 405-406
atresia, equine, 335
central nervous system
respiratory disease, in rodents,
bovine disorders, 382
canine, 495-496
420
camelid, 411
equine, 533
Mycotic diseases
canine (see Nasolacrimal
feline, 522
blepharitis, 72
system, canine)
conjunctival
canine, 72, 478-482
feline, 297-298
camelid, 412
feline, 511-513
testing patency of, 17-18
feline, 303-304
food animals, 537, 539
Nasolacrimal system, canine,
corneal
keratitis, 139
56-68
camelid, 412
lveitis, canine, 202-203,
acquired diseases, 94-95
canine, 149, 149-150
203t
dacryocystitis, 94, 95
feline, 309
Mydriasis
foreign bodies, 94 
differential diagnosis, canine,
birds, 438
laceration, 94
36t
for direct ophthalmoscopy, 12
neoplasia, 95
exotic mammals, 442
for ophthalmic examination, 10
anatomy, 89, 89-90
eyelid
Mydriatics
 clinical manifestations of
canine, 75
birds, 575
disease, 90-91, 90b
equine, 344, 344-345
cat, 574
congenital diseases, 92-94
Feline, 296-297, 296t, 297
cow, 574
atresias, 92-93
glaucoma and, 179-180
dog, 573
canaliculi obstruction, 93
Horner's syndrome from, 454
for equine recurrent uveitis
 developmental disorders,
nasolacrimal duct, 95
(ERU),370t
93-94
nictitating membrane, 113,
horse, 575
duct obstruction, 93
113
Myiasis, 295
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92,
optic nerve,453
Myocilin gene, 163-164
92-93
canine, 288
Myositis
micropunctum, 93
feline, 327
canine, 36t, 41-42
 misplacement of canaliculi
 orbital
dermatomyositis, 473
and puncta, 93
canine, 42-44,44t,45
extraocular, 473-474
diagnostic procedures, 91-92
cattle, 380-381
masticatory muscle, 473-474
 luorescein dye passage, 91
feline, 328
Myotonia, feline, 501
imaging, 92
 posterior segment, feline, 326
Myxomatosis, 422-423
nasolacrimal flushing, 91,
reptiles, 435
91
retinal, canine, 280, 280
N
embryology, 89
swine, 415
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), for
physiology, 90
systemic
melting ulcers, 140,
Natamycin
canine, 496
140b
dosage and spectrum, 561
equine,533
Naraganssett Pacer, anterior
equine use,352t
feline, 522
segment dysgenesis in,
NCL (neuronal ceroid
food animal, 541-542
366
lipofuscinoses), 271
third eyelid, feline, 299
Nasal nerve, 450
Nebula, 125
uveal
Nasociliary nerve, 451
Neisseria ovis, 441
cattle, 395-396, 396
 Nasolacrimal duct obstruction
Nematodes, canine, 203-204,
feline, 315-317,316, 317
canine, 93
483-485, 484
sheep, 408
reptiles, 435, 435
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, 528
vitreal, canine, 250
628/INDEx
Neosporosis, 205, 487, 540
 Nonrhegmatogenous retinal
 computed tomography, 24
Nerve fiber layer (NFL)
detachment, 180
corneal, 26
thickness, 25
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
magnetic resonance imaging,
Neurogenic keratitis, canine, 143
drugs (NSAIDs), 370t,
24
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
567
nasolacrimal system, 92
(NCL), 271
Nontapetal fundus, canine, 255,
photography, 24-25, 25
 Neuro-ophthalmic examination,
256
radiography, 22-24,23
452, 452b
Nonulcerative keratouveitis,
retinal, 25
Neuro-ophthalmic relexes, 445-
equine, 356,356
Ocular larval migrans (OLM),
447, 446
Norfolk Terrier, glaucoma in, 163t
204
Neuro-ophthalmological
 Norwegian Elkhound
Ocular movements, evaluation
syndromes, differential
cataract, 221t
of, 7
diagnosis of, 452-458
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 165,
Ocular nodular fasciitis, 105,
Newfoundland
171-172
114
ectropion, 64
retinal dysplasia, 265,266t
Ocular squamous cell carcinoma
medial canthal pocket
Norwich Terrier
(OSCC),389-393,
syndrome, 107
corneal dystrophy, 144t
393t
Nictitating membrane, 108-116
glaucoma, 163t
clinical signs, 390-391, 391
anatomy, 108-109, 109
Notoedres cati, 295, 514
cytology, 392
canine disorders
Nova Scotia Duck Trolling Dog.
etiology, 390
bent cartilage, 109
Collie Eye Anomaly in,
genetic predisposition, 390
canine breed predisposition,
258
geographic distribution, 389
582,584,586
 NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-
histopathology, 392
foreign bodies, 114-115, 115 
inflammatory drugs),
incidence, 389
inflammation, 113-114, 114
370t, 567
metastasis, 391-392
neoplasia, 1l3, 113
Nuclear sclerosis
sheep, 407
prolapse of gland (cherry
canine, 223, 231
signalment, 389-390
eye),110, 110-112,
equine,360
treatment, 392-3936,393t
112-113
Nutritional disorders
Oculomotor nerve, 54, 448, 449
trauma,114
canine, 497-498
Oestrus ovis, 407
equine disease, 346, 347b
equine, 533-534
OIP (ophthalmomyiasis interna
examination, 8, 9
exotic mammals, 442
posterior), 204, 326
nictitating membrane Hlaps,
feline, 522-523
Old English Sheep Dog
115, 115-116
food animals, 542-543
cataract, 221t
protrusion, in cats, 506-507
 Nutritional retinal degeneration,
heterochromia iridis, 191
repositioning gland, 110, 111-
322-323
persistent pupillary
112, 112-113
Nystagmus
membranes, 219
Nictitating membrane flap
bovine, 381
posterior lenticonus, 218
canine, 115, 115-116
pathological, 454-455
uveodermatologic syndrome,
equine,350
pendular, 455
201, 474
Nifurtimox, for trypanosomiasis,
Nystatin, 561
OLM (ocular larval migrans), 204
488
Onchocerciasis
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-
0
canine, 105-106, 204, 484
receptor, 183
 Obstacle course, 8
equine, 531-532
Nodular fascitis, 75
Octofluoropropane, 282
Opacity, corneal
Nodular granulomatous
OCT (Optical Coherence
amphibians, 432
episcleritis,
Tomography), 25, 252
canine, 125-126, 144-148,
150-151, 151
Ocular imaging, 22-26
145
Nodular granulomatous
blood low assessment, 26
Ophthalmic examination, 3-32
episclerokeratitis, 105,
canine fundus, 252
anamnesis/history,3, 36, 46
105, 113-114
canine orbital disease, 37, 37t
 anterior segment, 10
INDex/629
diagnostic procedures, 1l-22
Optic disc hypoplasia, feline, 326
exudative, 375
anterior chamber
Optic nerve, canine
feline, 327
paracentesis, 21-22,22
anatomy,284-285
Toxoplasma gondi, 515
corneoconjunctival culture,
clinical examination, 285
Optic radiation, diseases of,
14, 14
disorders, 285-288
453-454
corneoconjunctival cytology,
optic nerve head, 284-285
Optic tract disease, 453
14-15, 15
retinal ganglion cells, 284
 Orbicularis oculi muscle
 direct ophthalmoscopy, 11-
Optic nerve disorders
 akinesia of, 5-6
12, 12, 12t, 13b
bovine, 400-401
contraction of, 53
external stains, 16-18, 17t
canine
excision in Celsus-Hotz
gonioscopy, 20-21,21
aplasia, 285, 286
procedure, 62-63
indirect ophthalmoscopy,
breed predisposition, 583,
Orbit
12-14, 13, 13b
585, 587
canine
nasolacrimal flush, 18, 18-
coloboma, 286
anatomy, 35
19, 19
differential diagnosis,
diseases, 35-48
slit-lamp biomicroscopy, 11,
286-287
surgery, 48-51
11
hypoplasia, 285,285-286
examination, 8
tear tests, 15-16, 16
micropapilla, 285, 286
Orbital cyst, 38
tonometry,19-20, 20,20t
optic neuritis, 287
 Orbital diseases
vitreous paracentesis, 22
papilledema, 286-287
bovine, 379-381, 380
distance examination, 6-8
pseudopapilledema, 286
canine (see Orbital diseases,
equine, 331-332
reticulosis and
canine)
initial examination, 4-6
 granulomatous
equine, 341, 342, 343
akinesia, 5-6, 5b, 6b
meningoencephalitis,
Feline, 327, 327-328
regional anesthesia/
287-288
sheep, 401-402
analgesia, 6, 6b
trauma, 288
Orbital diseases, canine, 35-51
restraint, 4-5, 4b
tumors, 288
acquired diseases, 38-48
mydriasis for, 10
diseases causing blindness,
emphysema, 46
posterior segment, 11
452-453
foreign bodies, 48
protocol, 6-11
equine, 374-375
fracture, 48
vision assessment, 6-8
atrophy,374
hematoma, 44,46
Ophthalmic nerve, 451
exudative neuritis, 375
inflammatory lesions, 38-
Ophthalmomyiasis
hypoplasia, 374
41, 39, 40,40t
canine, 204, 482-483
ischemic neuropathy, 375
mucoceles, 4l, 41
exterma, 513-514
proliferative optic
myositis, 41-42, 42, 43
feline, 314, 513-514
neuropathy (PON)
neoplasia, 42-44, 44t, 45
interna, 513
374-375, 375
 prolapse of orbital fat,
 Ophthalmomyiasis interna
traumatic neuropathy, 374,
48
posterior (OIP), 204,
375
proptosis, 46-48, 47, 47t
326
feline, 326-327
salivary retention cysts, 41
Ophthalmoplegia
hypoplasia
traumatic lesions, 44-48
external, 456
canine, 285,285-286
congenital anomalies, 37-38
internal, 456
equine,341
 anophthalmos/
Ophthalmoscopy, for glaucoma
Optic nerve head
microphthalmos,
diagnosis, 157, 159
 confocal scanning laser
37-38, 38
 Optical Coherence Tomography
ophthalmoscopy and,
orbital cysts, 38
(OCT), 25, 252
25
vascular anomalies, 38
Optic chiasm disease, 453
normal canine, 257,284-285
diagnostic tests, 36-37, 37t
Optic disc, feline, 321
Optic neuritis
differential diagnosis, 35, 36t
Optic disc aplasia, feline, 326
canine, 287,287, 491
enophthalmos, 35, 36t
Optic disc coloboma, feline, 326
cases, 452-453
exophthalmos, 35, 36t
630/INDEx
Orbital diseases, canine (cont.)
 Palpebral reflex, 7
 Pectinate ligament dysplasia,
surgery, 48-51
 Pannus. See Chronic superficial
162, 164
enucleation, 48-50, 49
keratitis
Pedicle conjunctival graft, 133
evisceration, 50-51, 51
Panophthalmitis
135, 135, 136
exenteration, 50
amphibians, 432
Pediculosis, equine, 530
orbitotomy, 51
equine, 351
Pekingese
 prosthesis implantation, 50,
reptiles, 435
caruncle trichiasis, 69
50-51, 51
Panoptic ophthalmoscope, 12, 13
cherry eye, 110
 Orbital fat prolapse
 Papilledema
distichiasis, 57
canine, 48
bovine, 400-401, 542
ectopic cilia, 58
equine,343,343
canine, 286-287
ectropion, 65
Orbital fissure syndromes,
 Papilloma
entropion, 60b
455-456
bovine, 390
KCS, 81b
 Orbitotomy, 51
canine, 76, 149, 149-150, 492
medial aberrant dermis, 107
Orf, 403
conjunctival, 104
nasal fold trichiasis, 68
 OSCC. See Ocular squamous cell
cormeal, 149, 149-150
PEM. See Polioencephalomalacia
carcinoma (OsCC)
nictitating membrane, 113
(PEM)
Osteochondrodysplasia,
sheep, 403
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi
464-465
 Papillon
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Osteopetrosis-induced ocular
retinal degeneration, 267t
persistent pupillary
fundus disease, 399
vitreous degeneration, 249
membranes, 192
Ovine disorders. See Sheep;
Paracentesis
Pemphigus erythematosus, 73,
specific anatomical areas;
anterior chamber, 21-22, 22
471, 507
specific diseases
vitreal, 22, 246, 247
 Pemphigus foliaceous, 73, 471,
Ovine ulcerative dermatosis
Parasitic diseases
507, 529
virus, 403
birds, 439
Pemphigus vegetans, 471
Oxygen, retinopathy from, 275
blepharitis, 72
Pemphigus vulgaris, 73, 471,
Oxyspirura, 439
canine, 482-488
507
Oxytetracycline
conjunctivitis
Penciclovir, 306
for chlamydial
canine, 101-102
Pendular nystagmus, 455
keratoconjunctivitis in
feline, 303,303
Penetrating keratoplasty, for deep
sheep and goats, 405
granuloma, 105-106
corneal stromal abscess,
for dermatophilosis, 382
reptiles, 435
354, 354
for infectious bovine
Parasympathetic innervation, 449
 Penicillin, for dermatophilosis,
keratoconjunctivitis
 Parasympthomimetics, for
382
(IBK), 388
glaucoma, 182
 PERG (pattern
for melting ulcers, 140, 140b
Parotid duct transposition (PDT)
electroretinography),
for mycoplasmal
canine, 87-89, 88
159, 253
keratoconjunctivitis in
feline, 298
Periarteritis, feline, 314
sheep and goats,
 Partial anterior segment cleavage
Periarteritis nodosa, 503
405-406, 406
syndrome, 310
 Periodic ophthalmia. See Equine
Paso Finos, congenital stationary
recurrent uveitis
night blindness (CSNB)
(ERU)
Pachymetry, 26
in,374
 Peripheral cycstoid retinal
Paint horse
Pasteurella
degeneration, 279
eyelid tumor, 344,344
canine, 40
 Peripheral nerve sheath tumors,
lethal white foal syndrome,
rabbits, 422-425
feline, 297,297
525-526
Pattern electroretinography
Persian cat
 Palpebral branch of the facial
(PERG), 159, 253
Chediak-Higashi syndrome,
(VII) nerve, 54
PDT. See Parotid duct
310, 500
Palpebral fissure, length of, 53
transposition (PDT)
corneal sequestration, 306
INDex/631
entropion, 294
equine, 363, 363
malignant catarrhal fever, 538t
eyelid agenesis, 293
for lens rupture, 209
melanoma, 542
 Persistent hyaloid artery (PHA)
Phacolytic glaucoma, 176
neonatal septicemia, 538t
bovine, 398
Phacomorphic glaucoma, 176
ophthalmoscopic examination,
canine, 247, 247-248
Phenazopyridine toxicity, 498t
416
 Persistent hyperplastic primary
 Phenol red-thread tear test, 16,
orbit and globe, 414
vitreous (PHPV), 261,
82
pseudorabies, 538t
262, 361
 Phenothiazine-associated corneal
tuberculosis, 538t
Persistent hyperplastic tunica
disease
uveal tract, 415, 415-416
vasculosa lentis/
bovine, 384
Pilocarpine, 84b, 85, 298, 508
persistent hyperplastic
sheep and goats, 407
Pimecrolimus, for chronic
primary vitreous
swine, 415
superficial keratitis,
(PHTVL/PHPV), 218,
 Phenothiazine toxicity, 544t
143
219-220, 248
 Phenylephrine
Pit Bull Terrier, retinal dysplasia
 Persistent primary vitreous,
for anterior uveitis, 200t
in, 266t
equine,372
for mydriasis in cattle, 396
Pituitary gland tumor, 453
Persistent pupillary membranes
Philophthalmus gralli,439
 Pituitary pars intermedia
(PPMs)
 Photic headshaking, equine,
dysfunction (PPID),
camelid, 412
529
533
canine, 126, 126, 191-193,
 Photocoagulation, 215
Plants, toxic/poisonous, 534,
192, 219, 219, 583,
Photography
543, 544t
585, 587
external, 24
Plasma cell infltration of the
equine, 337, 361
fundus, 24-25, 25
NM, 114, 114
feline, 310,310
 Photosensitization
Plasmoma, 1l4, 114
rabbit, 426
bovine, 382
PLR. See Pupillary light reflex
swine, 416
sheep and goats, 404
(PLR)
Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis,
PHPV (persistent hyperplastic
POAG (primary open angle
248
primary vitreous), 261,
glaucoma), 156, 158,
Peterson nerve block, 392-393
262, 361
159, 166
PHA. See Persistent hyaloid
Phthisis bulbi, 36t, 46, 48, 50
Pointer
artery (PHA)
PHTVL/PHPV (persistent
chronic superhcial keratitis,
Phacoclastic uveitis, 199, 209
hyperplastic tunica
142t
 Phacoemulsification
vasculosa lentis/
corneal dystrophy, 144t
camelid, 413
persistent hyperplastic
orbital abscess, 39
canine
primary vitreous), 218,
Polioencephalomalacia
complication, 240
219-220, 248
(PEM)
luidics, 237
Pigmentary keratitis, canine, 122,
bovine, 379,400
handpiece, 237
140-141, 141
food animal, 542
hydrodissection, 237
Pigmentation, corneal, 122
thiamine-responsive, 461
irrigation/aspiration, 239
Pigs, 414-417
Polish Owczarek Nizinny,
outcome, 240
blue eye disease, 538t
neuronal ceroid
surgical approach, 236
cataracts, 416
lipofuscinoses (NCL)
techniques
conjunctival and corneal
in, 271
basic, 238
diseases, 415
 Polycythemia
chip-and-lip, 238
cysticercosis, 539-540
canine, 469
divide-and-conquer,
dermatophytosis, 537-538
feline, 505-506
238
eyelids, 415
food animal, 536-537
one-handed, 238
fundus, 416-417
Polymyositis, 41-42
phaco chop, 238-239
hog cholera, 538t
PON (proliferative optic
two-handed, 238
inherited eye diseases, 593
 neuropathy), equine,
wound closure, 240
listeriosis, 538t
371-375, 375
632/INDEx
Poodle
for feline immunodeficiency
Prostaglandins, 183, 577
cataract, 230
virus (FIV), 519
Prosthesis, orbital, 50, 50-51,
distichiasis, 57
 Prednisolone acetate
51
ectopic cilia, 58
for feline proliferative
Protease inhibitors, 140
retinal tears, 282
keratoconjuncti vitis,
Proteinases
 Poodle epiphora, 94
307
 corneal healing and,
Porcine small intestinal
for toxoplasmosis uveitis,
121-122
submucosa (SIS) grafts,
516
melting ulcers and, 139
136
Preocular tear film (PTF), 9
 Protoporphyria
Porphyria
Pretectal nuclei, 445
bovine, 383
bovine, 383
Primary open angle glaucoma
swine, 415
swine, 415
(POAG), 156, 158,
Protothecosis, 206, 499
Portuguese Water Dog, retinal
159, 166
Pseudomonas, 17,131
degeneration in, 267t
 Progressive retinal atrophy
 Pseudopapilledema, 286
 Posterior lamellar keratoplasty
(PRA)
 Pseudopterygium, 424
(PLK), equine, 355
classification of, 263-264
Pseudoptosis, 458
Posterior segment
clinical signs, 264, 264t, 265
Pseudorabies, 415, 491-492,
canine, 245-288
cone-rod dystrophy, 266,
538t
optic nerve, 284-288
266t
Pieris aquilinum, retinal
retinal diseases, 258-270
dominant, 268
degeneration from,
surgery, 281-284
early onset, 264-266
409-410, 410
vitreous, 245-251
equine, 374
Ptosis
equine diseases, 370-375
late onset, 266-268
canine,70
examination, 11
photoreceptor dysplasia,
causes, 458
feline
264-266, 266t
defined, 449
components, 321, 321
progressive rod-cone
 PTR (prophylactic transcleral
diseases, 321-326
degeneration (PRCD),
retinopexy),234-235
neoplasia, 326
265, 266-267
Pug
retinal disorders,
rod-cone dysplasia, 264-266,
entropion, 60b
322-326
266t
KCS, 81b
vitreal disorders, 322
X-linked, 268
 orbital hematoma, 46
Posterior uveitis, equine, 372
Progressive rod cone
 Puncta and canaliculi
Povidone iodine solution, 352t
degeneration (PRCD),
misplacement, 93
Pox virus, of sheep and goats,
265, 266-267
Punctal atresia, 92-93
403
 Prolapse of orbital fat
Punctate keratotomy, 130
 PPID (pituitary pars intermedia
bovine, 381
Pupil
dysfunction), 533
canine, 48
 canine congenital
 PPMs. See Persistent pupillary
Proliferative optic neuropathy
abnormalities, 193
membranes (PPMs)
(PON), equine,
examination, 10
PRA. See Progressive retinal
371-375, 375
iridotomy, 215
atrophy (PRA)
Proparacaine, 555
Pupillary light reflex (PLR), 6,
PRCD (progressive rod cone
 Prophylactic transscleral
7
degeneration), 265,
retinopexy (PTR),
anatomical basis of,
266-267
234-235
445-446, 446
Precorneal tear film (PTF)
Proptosis
birds, 438
components of, 79-80
canine, 46-48,47, 47t
in equine neonates, 332
proteinases in, 12l-122
equine,343
testing canine, 251
Prednisolone
feline, 327,327
Puppy strangles, 71, 471-472
for anterior uveitis, 200t
Prostaglandin analogues, for
Pyoderma, juvenile, 71,
for chronic superficial keratitis,
equine glaucoma,
471-472
143
365
Pyogranuloma blepharitis, 72
INDex/633
Q
vitamin A deficiency, 436,
lipemia retinalis, 325
Quadriplegia, 501
436
neoplasia, 327
Quarter Horse
ophthalmic anatomy,
nutritional retinal
aniridia, 335
432-434, 433
degeneration, 322-323
dermoid, 335
ophthalmic disease, 434-436
ophthalmomyiasis, 326
hereditary equine regional
Restraint, for ophthalmic
retinal folds/detachment,
dermal asthenia
examination,4-5, 4b
326
(HERDA), 527
Retained spectacles, in reptiles,
rod-cone dysplasia, 323
 hyperkalemic periodic
436
inherited dystrophies
paralysis (HyPP), 534
Reticulosis, 279-280, 287-288
 classi fication of
immunoglobulin-M deficiency,
Retina, functional testing of,
 degenerations,
527
252-253
263-264
night blindness, 341
 Retinal degeneration
progressive retinal atrophy
sarcoid,345
birds, 439
(PRA), 263-268
Quikert-Rathbun procedure, 6l,
canine, 583, 585, 587
Retinal disorders, canine,
61t
ferret, 428
258-270
sheep and goats, 409-410
detachment, 278-279
R
tiger, 442
surgery for, 281-284
Rabbit, 422-426, 423-427
Retinal detachment
types, 281
fundus magnification
canine, 251, 278-279
developmental, 258-263
with direct
breed predisposition, 583
Collie Eye Anomaly (CEA),
 ophthalmoscopy, 12t
585, 587
258-259, 259
intraocular pressure (IOP)
in Collie Eye Anomaly,
merle ocular dysgenesis
range, 20t
258t
(MOD), 259
lipidosis, 442
rhegmatogenous, 180, 281,
retinal dysplasia,
restraint, 5
282, 283, 284
259-261, 260, 260t,
Rabies, feline, 521
surgery
261, 262
Radiation
pneumatic retinopexy,282
retinal pigment epithelial
conjunctival effects, 107
prophylactic retinopexy,
dystrophy (RPED),
keratopathy, equine, 357
281-282, 282
261, 263, 263
retinopathy, canine, 275-276
scleral buckling, 282
DNA-based tests, 253,
Radiography, 22-24, 23, 342t
success, 284
254t-255t
Raptors, intraocular pressure 
vitrectomy,283,283
gene therapy, 284
(IOP) range, 20t
equine, 341, 341, 374
glaucoma-associated, 278
Recurrent erosion, in horses,
feline, 326
 granulomatous meningoen-
357-358
 Retinal disorders
cephalitis, 279-280
Recurrent proliferative
camelid, 414
inflammation, 272-275
keratoconjunctivitis,
canine (see Retinal disorders,
chorioretinitis, 272-273,
105, 105
canine)
273, 273b, 274t
 Red-eared slider, blepharocon-
equine,370-375
choroiditis, 273
junctivitis, 436
Feline, 322-326
 sudden acquired retinal
Regional anesthesia/analgesia, 6
anemia retinopathy, 325
Reindeer, keratitis in, 441
chorioretinitis, 324
(SARDS), 274-275
Reptiles
diabetic retinopathy, 325
 liveodermatologic syndrome,
ophthalmic diseases
drug-associated toxicity,
274
infections, 434-435, 435
324, 324
inherited dystrophies
lenticular degenerations,
dysplasia, 322
cone degeneration,
435-436
hypertensive retinopathy,
268-269
malformations, 434
324-325, 325
lipid retinopathy, 270-271
neoplasia, 435
hyperviscosity retinopathy,
mucopolysaccharide storage
retained spectacles, 436
326
diseases, 272
634/INDEx
neuronal ceroid
Retinal imaging, 25
 orbital space-occupying
lipofuscinosis, 271
 Retinal pigment epithelial
lesions, 420
RPED, 261, 263, 263,
dysplasia (RPED), 261,
restraint, 5
269-270, 270
263, 263
Rods
tapetal degeneration, 272
Retinal pigment epithelium
electrodiagnostic testing, 31,
neoplasia, 280, 280
(RPE), 253
32, 32t
peripheral cycstoid retinal
 Retinal vasculature, canine,
rod-cone dysplasia
degeneration, 279
257
canine, 246-266, 266t
progressive retinal atrophy
Retinoblastoma, 414
feline, 323
(PRA)
Retinol, 497
Rose Bengal stain, 17t, 18, 82,
classification of, 263-264
Retinopathy, diabetic, 277-278,
348, 579
clinical signs, 264, 264t,
325, 494, 521
Rottweiler
265
Retinopexy
entropion, 60b
cone-rod dystrophy, 266,
pneumatic, 282
histocytoses, 74
266t
prophylactic, 281-282, 282
medial canthal pocket
dominant, 268
Retinoschisis, 279
syndrome, 107
early onset, 264-266
Retrobulbar nerve blocks,
persistent pupillary
late onset, 266-268
equine,341-342
membranes, 192
 photoreceptor dysplasia,
Retropulsion of the globe, 36
retinal dysplasia, 262t
264-266, 266t
Rhinostomy, conjunctival, 94
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
 progressive rod-cone
Rhizopus, 539
syndrome, 73
degeneration (PRCD),
Rhodesian Ridgeback, cone
Rough Collie
265, 266-267
degeneration in, 269
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258
rod-cone dysplasia,
Rhodopsin, 497
corneal dystrophy, 144t
264-266, 266t
Rickettsial diseases
microblepharon, 67
X-linked, 268
canine, 101, 101,205-206,
Roundworm, canine, 484-485
retinoschisis, 279
488-490, 489
RPED (retinal pigment epithelial
toxicity
equine, 532
dysplasia), 261, 263,
drug-induced, 275
Ricketisia rickettsii, 10l, 489
263
light- and oxygen-induced,
Ringworm. See Dermatophytosis
RPE65 gene, 271
275
Roberts-Jensen pocket technique,
RPE (retinal pigment epithelium),
radiation-induced,
for ectropion, 66-67,
253
275-276
67
Rubeosis iridis, 210
vascular diseases, 276-278,
Robertson's procedure, 6lt
277, 277t
Rocky Mountain Horse
S
vitamin A defhiciency, 276
anterior segment dysgenesis,
Saddlebred
vitamin E deficiency, 276
366
esotropia, 333
 Retinal dysplasia
cataracts, 338
vitiligo, 333
bovine, 399
coat color, abnormalities
Salaras procedure, 148
canine, 259-261, 260, 260t,
associated with, 526
Salivary retention cyst, 41
261, 583, 585, 587
526
Samoyed
equine,340-341
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
corneal dystrophy, 144t
feline, 322
(RMSF), 205, 205-206
dermatomyositis, 473
sheep, 409
489-490
dwarfism, 220
 Retinal epithelial dystrophy, rat,
Rod-cone degeneration, feline,
glaucoma, 157, 159, 161,
421
323, 323
163t, 164, 165, 172
Retinal fold, 326
Rodents. See also sperifc species
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs),
conjunctivitis, 420
medial canthal pocket
155, 159, 284
examination techniques, 419
syndrome, 107
Retinal hemorrhages, equine,
general features of eye,
ocular-skeletal dysplasia,
340
419-420
465
INDex/635
retinal dysplasia, 262t
Senile iris atrophy, canine, 194,
restraint, 5
uveodermatologic syndrome,
194
scrapie, 538t, 541
201, 474
Sequestrum, corneal
setariasis, 540
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
equine,357
trypanosomiasis, 540-541
syndrome, 73
feline, 305, 306
uveal diseases, 407-408
Saprolegnia,430
Serous retinopathy, canine, 261,
Shetland pony, anterior
Sarcocystosis, 540
263
segment dysgenesis
Sarcoid, equine, 345, 345
Setariasis, 439, 532, 540
in, 366
Sarcoma, feline ocular, 316
 Severe combined
Shetland Sheepdog
 Sarcoptic mange
immunodefciency,
ankyloblepharon, 56
bovine, 382
equine,527
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258,
canine, 72,485
Shar Pei
259
equine,530
entropion, 59, 60, 60b
corneal dystrophy, 144t
feline, 514
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 172
dermatomyositis, 473
sheep and goats, 403-404
lens dislocation, 233
distichiasis, 57
SARDS (sudden acquired retinal
strabismus, 457, 457
hyperlipidemia, 468
degeneration
trichiasis, 68
infantile corneal dystrophy,
syndrome), 274-275
Sheep. See also Food animals
126
 Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy
anemia, 536
microblepharon, 67
(SLO), 252
bluetongue, 538t
microphthalmia, 38
SCCEDs (spontaneous chronic
bovine viral diarrhea (BVD),
nodular granulomatous
 corneal epithelial
538t
episcleritis,
defects), 128-130,
cataracts, 408
150-151, 151
130
chlamydophilosis, 538t
superhcial punctate keratitis,
Schirmer tear test, 6, 8, 15-16,
 conjunctival and corneal
144
16
diseases, 404-407
uveodermatologic syndrome,
Schirmer tear test (STT)
keratoconjunctivitis,
201, 474
equine,357
404-407
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
KCS diagnosis, 82
neoplasia, 407
syndrome,73
range in dogs, 82
 phenothiazine-associated,
Shih Tzu
Scleral buckling, 282
407
caruncle trichiasis, 69
 Scleral diseases, canine
dermatophytosis, 537-538
distichiasis, 57
episcleritis, 150-151, 151
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 535
ectopic cilia, 58
scleritis, 151-152
eyelid diseases, 402-404
ectropion, 65
Scleritis, canine, 151-152
blepharitis, 403-404
entropion, 60b
Scopolamine
colobomas, 403
glaucoma, 163t
for anterior uveitis, 200t
ectropion, 402
heterochromia iridis, 191
for mydriasis in cattle, 396
entropion,402,402
medial aberrant dermis, 107
Scottish Terrier
fundic diseases, 409-410
nasal fold trichiasis, 68
glaucoma, 163t
fundus magnification with
posterior lenticonus, 218
lens pigment deposits, 219
direct ophthalmoscopy,
retinal tears, 282
Scrapie, 538t, 541
12t
vitreous degeneration, 249
SDA (sialodacryoadenitis) virus,
inherited eye diseases, 593
Shorthorn cattle
420
leishmaniasis, 540
albinism, 535
Sealyham Terrier
lysosomal storage diseases,
bilateral convergent
glaucoma, 163, 163t
536
strabismus with
lens dislocation, 233
neonatal septicemia, 538t
exophthalmia (BCSE),
retinal dysplasia, 220, 262t
neosporosis, 540
379-380
Selenium,402
ophthalmoscopic examination,
hydrocephalus, 536
Senile cataract, equine,
408, 408
iridial heterochromia, 394
360-361
orbital diseases, 401, 401-402
strabismus, 457
636/INDEx
Sialodacryoadenitis (SDA) virus,
Snow leopard, coloboma in,
Staphylococcal blepharitis
420
440
canine, 71, 71-72
Siamese cat
Sodium hyaluronate, 86
rabbit, 424, 424
corneal dermoid, 309
Somalis, myasthenia gravis in,
Staphylococcal conjunctivitis, 99
ectopic cilia, 294
507
Staphyloma
esotropia, 456, 456
Sorbitol, cataracts and, 227
canine, 126
lack of binocular vision in,
Sore mouth, 403
equine,357
309
Spatula, 14, 15
Stars of Winslow, 332, 37l, 371,
partial albinism, 500
Specular microscopy, 26
397
 retinal hypopigmentation,
Sphincterotomy, 215
Strabismus
500
Spontaneous chronic corneal
convergent, 456
Siberian Husky
epithelial defects
differential diagnosis,
chronic superhcial keratitis,
(SCCEDs),
456-457
142t
128-130, 130
divergent, 456
corneal dystrophy, 144t
Sporotrichosis, feline, 513
equine,333,333
eyelid tumors, 75
Springer Spaniel, retinal
Siamese cat, 309
glaucoma, 16l, 163t, 165,
dysplasia in, 260
white tiger, 440
172-173
Squamous cell carcinoma
Streptomycin, for
heterochromia iridis, 191
cheetah, 442
dermatophilosis, 382
retinal degeneration, 267t,
conjunctival
Strongylidiasis, canine, 484
268
canine, 104
STT. See Schirmer tear test
uveodermatologic syndrome,
feline, 304
(STT)
201, 474
corneal
Stye, 73-74
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
canine, 149
Stypandra glauca intoxication,
syndrome,73
feline, 309
409
Silicone oil, 180
eyelid
Subalbinism, canine, 190-191
Silky Terrier, cataract in,
equine, 344, 344-345
 Subconjunctival approach, for
225
feline,296-297,296t,297
enucleation, 49, 49
Silver sulfadiazine, 352t
third eyelid, feline, 299
 Subconjunctival fat prolapse,
Sjogren's-like syndrome, in
St. Bernard
105
felines, 507-508
dermoids, 57
 Subconjunctival hemorrhage,
Skeletal dysplasia, 464-465
ectropion, 64
equine, 338
Skye Terrier, glaucoma in,
entropion, 60b
Subpalpebral lavage treatment
163t
nictitating mermbrane cartilage
system, 349,349
Sliding “Z" plasty, 76
eversion,109
Sudden acquired retinal
Slit-lamp biomicroscopy
uveodermatologic syndrome,
degeneration syndrome
anterior chamber examination,
201, 474
(SARDS), 274-275,
9-10
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
470-471
description, 1l, 11
cataract, 221t
Sulfonamide hypersensitivity,
vitreous examination, 246
PHTVL/PHPV, 220, 248
207
SLO (scanning laser
Stains, external ophthalmic, 16-
Summer sores, 531
ophthalmoscopy),
18, 17t
Superficial keratectomy,
252
Standardbred, congenital
123-124, 125, 130
Smooth Collie
stationary night
Superficial pigmentary keratitis,
Collie Eye Anomaly, 258
blindness (CSNB) in,
canine, 140-141, 141
microblepharon, 67
374
Superficial punctate keratitis,
Smooth Fox Terrier
Standard Poodle
canine, 144
cataract, 225
cataract, 22lt, 225
Supraorbital nerve block, 6, 6
glaucoma, 163,163t
medial canthal pocket
Suprofen, for anterior uveitis,
Snakes. See Reptiles
syndrome, 107
200t
InDex/637
Surgery
Taenia solium, 539-540
lacrimomimetics (tear
canine orbit, 48-51
Tapetal degeneration, hereditary
substitutes), 84b,
enucleation, 48-50, 49
canine, 272
85-86
evisceration, 50-51, 51
Tapetal fundus, canine, 253,
lacrostimulants, 84-85,
exenteration, 50
255, 256, 321, 321
84b
orbitotomy, 51
Tarsal plate, 54
mucinolytic-anticollagenase
 prosthesis implantation, 50,
Tarsoconjunctival graft, 76-77
agents, 86
50-51, 51
Tarsorrhaphy
mucinomimetics, 87
conjunctiva, 107-108, 108
permanent, 78
 parotid duct transposition,
eyelid
permanent medial, 67
87-89, 88
ectropion, 64-67,65t,66,67
postoperative care and
Tear-staining syndrome, 93
entropion, 61-63, 61t, 62,
complications, 78
Tear substitutes, 84b, 85-86
62b
simple permanent lateral
Tear test, 15-16, 16
reconstructive
palpebral fissure
Temperohyoid osteoarthropathy,
blepharoplasty, 76-77
reduction, 66
535
surgical principles, 55-56
temporary,77,77-78
Teratogenic agents, in sheep,
tarsorrhaphy, 77, 77-78
Taurine deficiency,322-323,
401-402
tumor removal, 76
522-523
Tetanus, 478, 510-511
parotid duct transposition,
TBEV (tick-borne encephalitis
Tetracaine, 555
87-89, 88
virus), 492-493
Tetracycline
Suture material, for eyelid
Tear breakup time (TBUT)
for chlamydial
surgery, 55
description, 16, 17
keratoconjunctivitis in
Swamp cancer, 531
feline, 298
sheep and goats, 405
Swine. See Pigs
mucin deficiency and, 84, 84
for chlamydophilosis,
Swiss Brown cattle, albinism in,
Tears
509-510
535
anatomy of secretory tissues
for ehrlichiosis, 489
Sympathetic innervation of the
80
for melting ulcers, 140, 140b
eye, 448-449
components of precorneal tear
Thelazia
Synchysis scintillans
film (PTF), 79-80
birds, 439
canine,250
conjunctivitis associated with
bovine, 384-385
equine,372-373
tear deficiencies, 103
camelid, 412
Synechiotomy, 215
diseases in cats, 297-298
canine, 101-102
Syneresis, 249
evaluation of, 8-9
equine, 346,346
Synophthalmos, 401, 401
pathogenesis of tear flm
feline, 303
System histiocytosis, 499-500
disease, 80
sheep, 407
Systemic disease, ocular
qualitative abnormalities,
Thermokeratoplasty (TKP), 148,
manifestations of,
82-84
148
463-545. See also
causes, 82-83
Thiamine deficiency
specijfic diseases
clinical findings, 83
canine, 461
canine, 463-500
diagnosis, 83-84, 84
equine,533-534
equine, 525-535
quantitative deficiency, 81-82
feline, 461, 523
feline, 107, 500-525
breed predisposition, 81b
in ruminants, 461
food animal, 535-545
causes, 81, 81b
Third eyelid disease, in cats, 298,
Systemic lupus erythematosus,
clinical Fndings, 81-82, 82
298-299, 299
canine retinopathy and,
diagnosis, 82
Thoroughbred
278
treatment of tear film
aniridia, 335
dehiciencies, 84-89,
cataracts, 338
T
84b
congenital stationary night
Tacrolimus, as lacrostimulants,
antibiotics, 86
blindness (CSNB),
84b, 85
anti-inflammatory agents, 86
374
638/INDEX
Thoroughbred (cont.)
TonoVet, 20
Treponema cuniculi,422
microphthalmos, 332, 332
Toxicity
Triamcinolone acetonide, for
retinal hemorrhages, 340
bovine, 400
anterior uveitis, 200t
sarcoid, 345
canine, 275-276, 498-499,
Trichiasis
Thrombocytopenia
498t
canine, 68-69,69
canine, 469
cataracts and, 228, 228b
caruncle, 68-69, 107
canine cyclic, 488
equine,534
guinea pig, 427
feline, 504
feline, 523-525
nasal fold, 68
food animal, 537
food animals, 543, 544t
upper eyelid, 68
Thromboembolic meningoen-
sheep and goats, 401-402,
Trichomegaly, 69
cephalitis, 538t
409-410
Trichophyton, in sheep and goats,
Thrombopathy
Toxocariasis, 484-485
403
canine, 469
Toxoplasmosis
Irichophyton equinum,529-530
feline, 504
camelid, 414
Trichophyton meniagrophytes,295,
food animal, 537
canine, 205, 487
482, 530, 537
Tibetan Spaniel
feline, 311t, 313, 515-516,
Trichophyton ovis, 537
distichiasis, 57
516
Trichophyion quinkeanum,530
retinal degeneration, 267,
wallaby, 441
Irichophyton verrucosum,530,
267t
Toy Poodle
537
Tibetan Terrier
cataract, 225
Triluridine
distichiasis, 57
entropion, 60b
for equine viral keratitis, 359
glaucoma, 163, 163t
eyelid tumors, 75
for feline herpesvirus, 306,
lens dislocation, 233
glaucoma, 163t, 171
518
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
lacrimal punctal atresia, 92
Trigerminal nerve, 54, 451, 456,
(NCL), 271
medial canthus blepharitis,
460
retinal degeneration, 267,
73
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
267t
progressive rod-cone
toxicity, 498t
Tick-borne encephalitis virus
degeneration, 267,
Trochlear nerve, 448
(TBEV), 492-493
267t
Trombiculiasis (chiggers), 530
Tiger
senile iris atrophy, 194
Tropicamide, 10, 396
retinal degeneration in, 442
TPA (tissue plasminogen
Trypan blue, 17t
strabismus in white, 440
activator), 183, 525,
Trypanosomiasis
Timolol, 182, 319, 365, 551
579
canine, 205, 487-488
Tissue (butylcyanoacrylate)
Transient receptor potential
feline, 516
glue, 579
cation channel
livestock, 540-541
Tissue inhibitors of MMPs
 subfamily M, member
sheep and goats, 407
(TIMPs), 122
1 (TRPM1), 526
TSE (transmissible spongiform
Tissue plasminogen activator
Transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy), 541
(tPA), 183, 525,
encephalopathy (TSE),
Tuberculosis, 538t
579
541
Tubocurarine, for mydriasis in
TKP (thermokeratoplasty), 148,
Transpalpebral approach, for
birds, 438
148
enucleation, 49
Tunica vasculosa lentis (TVL),
Tocainide toxicity, 498t
Trauma, 0cular, 207-209, 208
245, 248, 361
Toggenburg goats, 409
 blunt injuries, 208
Turtles. See Reptiles
Tonography, 157
emergency management, 208,
Type 2M myofibers, 41-42,
Tonometry
209b
473-474
canine, 156-157
foreign bodies, 209
Tyrosinemia, 227
description, 19-20,20
penetrating injuries,
intraocular pressure (IOP)
208-209
U
range, 20t
uiveitis, 209
UBM. See Ultrasound
TonoPen, 19-20, 20, 20t
Travoprost, 577
biomicroscopy (UBM)
INDex/639
Ucerative keratitis
Uveitic glaucoma, 178
 periarteritis, 314
canine, 126-140
Uveitis. See also Anterior uveitis
sarcoma virus, 314
bacterial, 139
bovine, 395, 537
therapy, 315, 315t
chemical-induced, 140
camelid, 413
Toxoplasma gondi, 313, 515,
descemetoceles, 136-137,
canine, 196-207
516
137
algal disease, 206
trauma, 314
diagnosis, 126, 127,128-129
bacterial diseases, 206
rabbit, 425-426
lacerations, full-thickness,
clinical signs, 198, 198,
sheep and goats, 407
138, 138
198t, 199
swine, 416
management of erosions,
etiopathogenesis, 196, 197b,
Uveodermatological syndrome,
129b
198
73,201, 202,274,
melting ulcers, 139, 140b
hyperlipidemia, 207
474-475, 475, 582,
mycotic, 139
hyperviscosity syndrome,
584, 586
stromal corneal ulcer,
207
127-128
lens-induced, 178,199,
V
superhcial corneal ulcer,
201, 235
Varices, 38
127-128
mycoses-associated, 202-
Vascular anomalies, canine, 38
types of ulcers, 127, 127t
203, 203t
Vecuronium, 10
equine, 347-351
parasitic diseases, 203-204
VEP (visual-evoked potential),
clinical history and
phacoclastic, 230-231
31, 253, 285
appearance, 347-348,
phacolytic, 235
Veratrum poisoning, 5441
348
 pigmentary in Golden
Vestibular eye movement,
diagnostic techniques, 348
Retriever, 201-202
anatomical basis of,
treatment, 349, 349-351,
protozoal diseases, 204-205
447
350t, 351
rickettsial diseases, 205,
Vestibular nerve, 447
in foals, 338-339, 339
205-206
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 449
Ultrasound, 26-29
secondary, 207
Vicuna. See Camelids
A-mode, 27, 159
sulfonamide
Vidarabine, 306, 518
B-mode, 27,28, 159
hypersensitivity, 207
Videography, of Fundus, 24-25
canine, 252, 285
surgery and, 214
Viral conjunctivitis, 10l, 101
color doppler, 27, 29
therapy, 199, 200t
Viral diseases. See also specijfic
equine,342t
traumatic, 209
agents; sperifc diseases
glaucoma diagnosis, 157, 160
uveodermatologic syndrome,
canine, 206, 490-493
high-frequency ultrasound
201, 202
feline, 516-521
biomicroscopy (UBM),
viral diseases, 206
Visceral larval migrans (VLM)
27, 28, 29
equine, 366-369, 368, 370t
204
high-resolution, 157, 160
feline, 311-315
Viscoelastics, 579
indications for use, 26-27
causes, 31l, 312b
Vision
optic nerve, canine,285
clinical signs, 31l, 312
assessment in horses, 331
principles of, 27
complications, 315
behavioral testing, canine, 251
 Ultrasound biomicroscopy
feline immunodehiciency
disease affecting
(UBM), 26, 27, 28, 29,
virus (FIV), 312
canine distemper, 459
157, 160
feline infectious peritonitis
dysautonomia, 460-461
Unoprostone, 577
(FIP), 313
feline infectious peritonitis
Uveal cyst, canine, 194-195, 195
feline leukemia virus
(FIP), 459
Uveal disease
(FeLV), 313
fungal encephalitis, 459
cattle, 394, 394-395
fungal, 313-314
granulomatous meningoen-
congenital, 394, 394-395
idiopathic, 315
cephalitis, 458-459
tumors, 395
laboratory tests, 31lt
neurogenic
lveitis, 395
lens-induced, 314-315
keratoconjunctivitis
sheep and goats, 407-408
 ophthalmomyiasis, 314
sicca, 460
640/INDEx
Vision (cont.)
neoplasia, 250
cataract, 22lt
storage diseases, 459
parasites, 250
glaucoma, 163t
thiamine dehiciency, 461
persistent hyaloid artery
KCS, 81b
vitamin A dehiciency, 461
(PHA), 247, 247-248
Wilson's disease, 227
equine, 331
persistent tunica vasculosa
West Nile virus (WNV),
neural pathways for, 446
lentis, 248
532-533
Visual-evoked potential (VEP),
PHTVL/PHVL, 248, 248
Whippet
31, 253, 285
synchysis scintillans, 250
 corneal dystrophy, 144t
Visual placing, 7
syneresis, 249
vitreous degeneration, 249
Vitamin A deficiency
trauma, 249
Wilson's disease, 227
birds, 439-440
morphology, 246
Wire Fox Terrier
bovine, 399,399,453
retinal detachment into, 251
glaucoma, 16l, 163, 163t,
canine, 276, 497
therapeutic procedures,
165
 description, 461
246-247
lens dislocation, 233
equine, 534
Vitreous paracentesis, 22
Wolf, cataracts in, 441
food animals, 542-543, 543
VKH. See Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
Wyman lateral canthoplasty
reptiles, 436, 436
(VKH) syndrome
 procedure, 6lt
swine, 414
VLM (visceral larval migrans),
Wyman pedicle, 6lt
Vitamin E deficiency
204
canine, 497
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
X
retinopathy, canine, 276
syndrome, 73, 201,
Xanthomatosis, 432
Vitiligo, 333
202, 274, 474-475,
X-linked progressive retinal
Vitrectomy,247,283,283
475
atrophy, 268
Vitreous
Voriconazole, 352t
Xylazine, 4b, 5
canine (See Vitreous, canine)
equine disorders, 372-373
W
Y
Feline disorders, 322
Wallabies, toxoplasmosis in, 441
Yorkshire Terrier
humor, assessment of, 1l
Weimaraner
infantile corneal dystrophy,
Vitreous, canine, 245-251
corneal dystrophy, 144t
126
development, 245
eosinophilic myositis, 41
KCS, 81b 
diagnostic procedures, 246,247
medial canthal pocket
parotid duct transposition, 88
diseases, 247-251
syndrome, 107
retinal dysplasia, 249, 262t
asteroid hyalosis, 249,
Welsh Corgi
retinal tears, 282
249-250
dermatomyositis, 473
Y to V plasty (Wharton-Jones),
CEA (Collie Eye Anomaly),
glaucoma, 163
61t
248-249
Welsh Springer Spaniel
cysts, 250
cataract, 221t
degenerative, 249-250, 583,
distichiasis, 57
 Zeis/Moll glands
585, 587
glaucoma, 163, 163t, 173
anatomy, 54
developmental, 247-249
Welsh Terrier, glaucoma in, 163t
hordeolum (stye), 73-74
dislocation with lens
Werneckiela equi,530
Zinc defciency, canine, 497-498
luxation, 251
West Highland White Terrier
Zygomatic nerve, 451
floaters, 249
allergic blepharitis, 74
Zygomaticofacial branch, 452
inflammation, 250
blastomycosis, 274
Zygomaticotemporal branch, 452